ESSAYS, MORAL, POLITICAL, AND LITERARY
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/essaysmoral01humeuoft): edited with preliminary dissertations and notes by T. H. Green and T. H. Grose, vol. I (London: Longmans, Green, 1898). All the essays complete, with the index.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ESSAYS


MORAL,  POLITICAL,  AND  LITERARY


BY DAVID  HUME

\  v  v


EDITED, WITH PRELIMINARY DISSERTATIONS AND NOTES, BT

T.  H.  GREEN  AND  T.  H.  GROSE

LATH  FEM/JW  AND  TUTOR  OF  BALUOL  FELLOW  AND  TUTOR  OF  QDKES'8

COLLEGE,  OXFORD  COLLEGE,  OXFORD


IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL.  I.


,.
NEW IMPRESSION J


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW,  ^LONDON

NEW  YORK AND BOMBAY

1898


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE

First  printed  January  1875.

Reprinted  September  1882;  January  1839;

July  1898.


.  \


ADVERTISEMENT.

MOST  of  the  principles,  and  reasonings,  contained  in  this
volume,  were  published  in  a  work  in  three  volumes,  called
A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  :  A  work  which  the  Author  had
projected  before  he  left  College,  and  which  he  wrote  and
published  not  long  after.  But  not  finding  it  successful,  he
was  sensible  of  his  error  in  going  to  the  press  too  early,  and
he  cast  the  whole  anew  in  the  following  pieces,  where  some
negligences  in  his  former  reasoning  and  more  in  the  expres
sion,  are,  he  hopes,  corrected.  Yet  several  writers,  who  have
honoured  the  Author's  Philosophy  with  answers,  have  taken
care  to  direct  all  their  batteries  against  the  juvenile  work,
which  the  Author  never  acknowledged,  and  have  affected  to
triumph  in  any  advantages,  which,  they  imagined,  they  had
obtained  over  it :  A  practice  very  contrary  to  all  rules  of
candour  and  fair-dealing,  and  a  strong  instance  of  those
polemical  artifices,  which  a  bigotted  zeal  thinks  itself  author
ised  to  employ.  Henceforth,  the  Author  desires,  that  the
following  Pieces  may  alone  be  regarded  as  containing  his
philosophical  sentiments  and  principles.1

1  [For  the  history  of  this  Advertisement,  which  was  first  published  in  the  second
»olume  of  tho  posthumous  Edition  of  1777,  see  Vol.  III.  p.  38. —  Ed.]


CONTENTS


OF


THE FIRST VOLUME.


Mr  OWN  LIFE ..........

LETTER  FROM  ADAM  SMITH,  LL.D.,  TO  WILLIAM  STRAHAN,  ESQ.
HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS ........

LIST  OF  EDITIONS ......


PAOK

1

9

15

85


PART  I.

ESSAY

I.  Of  the  Delicacy  of  Taste  and  Passion .....

II.  Of  the  Liberty  of  the  Press .......

HI.  That  Politics  may  be  reduced  to  a  Science £  .

iV.  Of  the  First  Principles  of  Government .....

V.  Of  the  Origin  of  Government ......

VI.  On  the  Independency  of  Parliament  ......

VIL  Whether  the  British  Government  inclines  more  to  Absolute
Monarch}',  or  to  a  Republic ......

XVI1I.  Of  Parties  "in  General ........

x  IX.  Of  the  Parties  of  Great  Britain ......

X.  Of  Superstition  and  Enthusiasm . . . . . .

Al.  Of  the  Dignity  or  Meanness  of  Human  Nature .
XII.  Of  Civil  Liberty .....  ...

XIII.  Of  Eloquence .........

XIV.  Of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  Arts  and  Sciences . . .
XV.  The  Epicurean .........

XVI.  The  Stoic ..........

XVII.  The  Platonist .........

XVIII.  The  Sceptic ..........

XIX.  Of  Polygamy  and  Divorces  .......

XX.  Of  Simplicity  and  Refinement  in  Writing

XXI.  Of  National  Characters .......

XXII.  Of  Tragedy ..........

XXIII.  Of  the  Standard  of  Taste


PAGE

91
94

98
109


117


Vlll  CONTENTS OF THE FHiST VOLUME.


PART  II.

RSSAT

I.  Of  Commerce

II.  Of  Refinement  in  the  Arts  .

III.  Of  Money

IV.  Of 'Interest . . . .
V.  Of  the  Balance  of  Trade

VI.  Of  the  Jealousy  of  Trade .
VII.  Of  the  Balance  of  Power
VIII.  Of  Taxes ....'.

IX.  Of  Public  Credit .
X.  Of  Some  Remarkable  Customs .

XI.  Of  the  Populousness  of  Ancient  Nations
XII.  Of  the  Original  Contract .

XIII.  Of  Passive  Obedience  .

XIV.  Of  the  Coalition  of  Parties
XV.  Of  the  Protestant  Succession  .

XVI.  Idea  of  a  Perfect  Commonwealth


MY  OWN  LIFE.1


IT  is  difficult  for  a  man  to  speak  long  of  himself  without
vanity ;  therefore,  I  shall  be  short.  It  may  be  thought  an
instance  of  vanity  that  I  pretend  at  all  to  write  my  life ;  but
this  Narrative  shall  contain  little  more  than  the  History  of
my  Writings ;  as,  indeed,  almost  all  my  life  has  been  spent
in  literary  pursuits  and  occupations.  The  first  success  of
most  of  my  writings  was  not  such  as  to  be  an  object  of
vanity.

I  was  born  the  26th  of  April  1711,  old  style,  at  Edinburgh.
I  was  of  a  good  family,  both  by  father  and  mother:  my
father's  family  is  a  branch  of  the  Earl  of  Home's,  or  Hume's ;
and  my  ancestors  had  been  proprietors  of  the  estate,  which
my  brother  possesses,  for  several  generations.  My  mother
was  daughter  of  Sir  David  Falconer,  President  of  the  College
of  Justice :  the  title  of  Lord  Halkerton  came  by  succession
to  her  brother.

My  family,  however,  was  not  rich,  and  being  myself  a
younger  brother,  my  patrimony,  according  to  the  mode  of
my  country,  was  of  course  very  slender.  My  father,  who
passed  for  a  man  of  parts,  died  when  I  was  an  infant,  leaving
me,  with  an  elder  brother  and  a  sister,  under  the  care  of  our
mother,  a  woman  of  singular  merit,  who,  though  young  and
handsome,  devoted  herself  entirely  to  the  rearing  and  edu
cating  of  her  children.  I  passed  through  the  ordinary  course
of  education  with  success,  and  was  seized  very  early  with  a
passion  for  literature,  which  has  been  the  ruling  passion  of
my  life,  and  the  great  source  of  my  enjoyments.  My  studious

1  [For  the  circumstances  attending  the  publication  of  this  autobiography,  see  p.  80.
— ED.]

VOL.  III.  B


2  MY OWN  LIFE.

disposition,  my  sobriety,  and  my  industry,  gave  my  family  a
notion  that  the  law  was  a  proper  profession  for  me  ;  but  I
found  an  unsurmountable  aversion  to  every  thing  but  the
pursuits  of  philosophy  and  general  learning  ;  and  while  they
fancied  I  was  poring  upon  Voet  and  Vinnius,  Cicero  and
Virgil  were  the  authors  which  I  was  secretly  devouring.

My  very  slender  fortune,  however,  being  unsuitable  to  this
plan  of  life,  and  my  health  being  a  iittle  broken  by  my  ardent
application,  I  was  tempted,  or  rather  forced,  to  make  a  very
feeble  trial  for  entering  into  a  more  active  scene  of  life.  In
1734,  I  went  to  Bristol,  with  some  recommendations  to
eminent  merchants,  but  in  a  few  months  found  that  scene
totally  unsuitable  to  me.  I  went  over  to  France,  with  a  view
of  prosecuting  my  studies  in  a  country  retreat ;  and  I  there
laid  that  plan  of  life,  which  I  have  steadily  and  successfully
pursued.  I  resolved  to  make  a  very  rigid  frugality  supply
my  deficiency  of  fortune,  to  maintain  unimpaired  my  inde
pendency,  and  to  regard  every  object  as  contemptible,  except
the  improvement  of  my  talents  in  literature.

During  my  retreat  in  France,  first  at  Reims,  but  chiefly  at
La  Fleche,  in  Anjou,  I  composed  my  Treatise  of  Human
Nature.  After  passing  three  years  very  agreeably  in  that
country,  I  came  over  to  London  in  1737.  In  the  end  of
1738,1  I  published  my  Treatise,  and  immediately  went  down
to  my  mother  and  my  brother,  who  lived  at  his  country
house,  and  was  employing  himself  very  judiciously  and  suc
cessfully  in  the  improvement  of  his  fortune.

Never  literary  attempt  was  more  unfortunate  than  my
Treatise  of  Human  Nature.  It  fell  dead-lorn  from  the  press,
without  reaching  such  distinction,  as  even  to  excite  a  murmur
among  the  zealots.  But  being  naturally  of  a  cheerful  and
sanguine  temper,  I  very  soon  recovered  the  blow,  and  prose
cuted  with  great  ardour  my  studies  in  the  country.  In  1 742  2
I  printed  at  Edinburgh  the  first  part  of  my  Essays  :  the  work
was  favourably  received,  and  soon  made  me  entirely  forget
iny  former  disappointment.  I  continued  with  my  mother
and  brother  in  the  country,  and  in  that  time  recovered  the
knowledge  of  the  Greek  language,  which  I  had  too  much
neglected  in  my  early  youth.

In  1 745, 1  received  a  letter  from  the  Marquis  of  Annandale,
inviting  me  to  come  and  live  with  him  in  England ;  I  found

1  [Vols.  i.  and  ii.,  in  1739. Vol.  iii.iu  1740.— EH.] 2  [Vol.  i.  in  1741.— ED.]


MY OWN LIFE.  3

also,  that  the  friends  and  family  of  that  young  nobleman
were  desirous  of  putting  him  under  my  care  and  direction,
for  the  state  of  his  mind  and  health  required  it.  I  lived  with
him  a  twelvemonth.  My  appointments  during  that  time
made  a  considerable  accession  to  my  small  fortune.  I  then
received  an  invitation  from  General  St.  Clair  to  attend  him
as  a  secretary  to  his  expedition,  which  was  at  first  meant
against  Canada,  but  ended  in  an  incursion  on  the  coast  of

O  '

France.  Next  year,  to  wit,  1747,  I  received  an  invitation
from  the  General  to  attend  him  in  the  same  station  in  his
military  embassy  to  the  courts  of  Vienna  and  Turin.  I  then
wore  the  uniform  of  an  officer,  and  was  introduced  at  these
courts  as  aide-de-camp  to  the  general,  along  with  Sir  Harry
Erskine  and  Captain  Grant,  now  General  Grant.  These  two
years  were  almost  the  only  interruptions  which  my  studies
have  received  during  the  course  of  my  life :  I  passed  them
agreeably  and  in  good  company;  and  my  appointments,  with
my  frugality,  had  made  me  reach  a  fortune,  which  I  called
independent,  though  most  of  my  friends  were  inclined  to
smile  when  I  said  so  ;  in  short,  I  was  now  master  of  near  a
thousand  pounds.

I  had  always  entertained  a  notion,  that  my  want  of  success
in  publishing  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  had  proceeded
more  from  the  manner  than  the  matter,  and  that  I  had  been
guilty  of  a  very  usual  indiscretion,  in  going  to  the  press  too
early.  I,  therefore,  cast  the  first  part  of  that  work  anew  in
the  Enquiry  concerning  Human  Understanding,  which  was
published  while  1  was  at  Turin.1  But  this  piece  was  at  first
little  more  successful  than  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature.
On  my  return  from  Italy,  I  had  the  mortification  to  find  all
England  in  a  ferment,  on  account  of  Dr.  Middleton's  Free
Enquiry,  while  my  performance  was  entirely  overlooked  and
neglected.  A  new  edition,  which  had  been  published  at
London,  of  my  Essays,  moral  and  political,  met  not  with  a
much  better  reception.2

Such  is  the  force  of  natural  temper,  that  these  disappoint
ments  made  little  or  110  impression  on  me.  I  went  down  in
1749,  and  lived  two  years  with  my  brother  at  his  country
house,  for  my  mother  was  now  dead.  I  there  composed  the
second  part  of  my  Essays,  which  I  called  Political  Discourses,
and  also  my  Enquiry  concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals,

1  [In  April,  before  starting  for  Turin.— ED.]  2  [In  November.— E»J

B  2


4  MY  OWN  LIFE.

which  is  another  part  of  my  treatise  that  I  cast  anew.
Meanwhile,  my  bookseller,  A.  Millar,  informed  me,  that  my
former  publications  (all  bu&  the  unfortunate  Treatise)  were
haginning  to  be  the  subject  of  conversation  ;  that  the  sale  of
them  was  gradually  increasing,  and  that  new  editions  were
demanded.  Answers  by  Reverends,  and  Right  Reverends,
came  out  two  or  three  in  a  year ;  and  I  found,  by  Dr.  War-
burton's  railing,  that  the  books  were  beginning  to  be  esteemed
in  good  company.  However,  I  had  fixed  a  resolution,  which
I  inflexibly  maintained,  never  to  reply  to  anybody ;  and  not
being  very  irascible  in  my  temper,  I  have  easily  kept  myself
clear  of  all  literary  squabbles.  These  symptoms  of  a  rising
reputation  gave  me  encouragement,  as  I  was  ever  more  dis
posed  to  see  the  favourable  than  unfavourable  side  of
things ;  a  turn  of  mind  which  it  is  more  happy  to  possess,
than  to  be  born  to  an  estate  of  ten  thousand  a  year.

In  1751,  I  removed  from  the  country  to  the  town,  the  true
scene  for  a  man  of  letters.  In  1752,  were  published  at  Edin
burgh,  where  I  then  lived,  my  Political  Discourses,  the  only
work  of  mine  that  was  successful  on  the  first  publication.
It  was  well  received  abroad  and  at  home.  In  the  same  year1
was  published  at  London,  my  Enquiry  concerning  the  Prin
ciples  of  Morals  ;  which,  in  my  own  opinion  (who  ought  not
to  judge  on  that  subject),  is  of  all  my  writings,  historical,
philosophical,  or  literary,  incomparably  the  best.  It  came
unnoticed  and  unobserved  into  the  world.

In  1752,  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  chose  me  their  Librarian,
an  office  from  which  I  received  little  or  no  emolument,  but
which  gave  me  the  command  of  a  large  library.  I  then
formed  the  plan  of  writing  the  History  of  England ;  but  being
frightened  with  the  notion  of  continuing  a  narrative  through
a  period  of  1 700  years,  I  commenced  with  the  accession  of
the  House  of  Stuart,  an  epoch  when,  I  thought,  the  misre
presentations  of  faction  began  chiefly  to  take  place.  I  was,  I
own,  sanguine  in  my  expectations  of  the  success  of  this  work.
I  thought  that  I  was  the  only  historian,  that  had  at  once
neglected  present  power,  interest,  and  authority,  and  the  cry
of  popular  prejudices  ;  and  as  the  subject  was  suited  to  every
capacity,  I  expected  proportional  applause.  But  miserable
was  my  disappointment :  I  was  assailed  by  one  cry  of  re
proach,  disapprobation,  and  even  detestation  ;  English,  Scotch,
1  [Li  1751.— ED.]


tyY OWN LIFE.  5

and  Irish,  Whig  and  Tory,  churchman  and  sectary,  free
thinker  and  religionist,  patriot  and  courtier,  united  in  their
rage  against  the  man,  who  had  presumed  to  shed  a  generous
tear  for  the  fate  of  Charles  I.  and  the  Earl  of  Strafford ;  and
after  the  first  ebullitions  of  their  fury  were  over,  what  was
still  more  mortifying,  the  book  seemed  to  sink  into  oblivion.
Mr.  Millar  told  me,  that  in  a  twelvemonth  he  sold  only  forty-
five  copies  of  it.  I  scarcely,  indeed,  heard  of  one  man  in  the
three  kingdoms,  considerable  for  rank  or  letters,  that  could
endure  the  book.  I  must  only  except  the  primate  of  England,
Dr.  Herring,  and  the  primate  of  Ireland,  Dr.  Stone,  which
seem  two  odd  exceptions.  These  dignified  prelates  separately
sent  me  messages  not  to  be  discouraged.

I  was,  however,  I  confess,  discouraged ;  and  had  not  the
war  been  at  that  time  breaking  out  between  France  and
England,  I  had  certainly  retired  to  some  provincial  town
of  the  former  kingdom,  have  changed  my  name,  and  never
more  have  returned  to  my  native  country.  But  as  this
scheme  was  not  now  practicable,  and  the  subsequent  volume
was  considerably  advanced,  I  resolved  to  pick  up  courage
and  to  persevere.

In  this  interval,1  I  published  at  London  my  Natural  His
tory  of  Eeligion,  along  with  some  other  small  pieces  :  its
public  entry  was  rather  obscure,  except  only  that  Dr.  Hurd
wrote  a  pamphlet  against  it,  with  all  the  illiberal  petulance,
arrogance,  and  scurrility  which  distinguish  the  Warburtonian
school.  This  pamphlet  gave  me  some  consolation  for  the
otherwise  indifferent  reception  of  my  performance.1

In  1756,  two  years  after  the  fall  of  the  first  volume,  was
published  the  second  volume  of  my  History,  containing  the
period  from  the  death  of  Charles  I.  till  the  Eevolution.  This
performance  happened  to  give  less  displeasure  to  the  Whigs,
and  was  better  received.  It  not  only  rose  itself,  but  helped
to  buoy  up  its  unfortunate  brother.

But  though  I  had  been  taught  by  experience,  that  the
Whig  party  were  in  possession  of  bestowing  all  places,  both
in  the  state  and  in  literature,  I  was  so  little  inclined  to  yield
to  their  senseless  clamour,  that  in  about  a  hundred  altera
tions,  which  farther  study,  reading,  or  reflection  engaged  me
to  make  in  the  reigns  of  the  first  two  Stuarts,  I  have  made
all  of  them  invariably  to  the  Tory  side.  It  is  ridiculous  to

'  In  1757.  2  [Sou  p.  62.-Eo.]


6  MY OWN LIFE.

consider  the  English  constitution  before  that  period  as  a
regular  plan  of  liberty.

In  1759,  I  published  my  History  of  the  House  of  Tudor.
The  clamour  against  this  performance  was  almost  equal  to
that  against  the  History  of  the  two  first  Stuarts.  The  reign
of  Elizabeth  was  particularly  obnoxious.  But  I  was  now
callous  against  the  impressions  of  public  folly,  and  continued
very  peaceably  and  contentedly  in  my  retreat  at  Edinburgh,
to  finish,  in  two  volumes,  the  more  early  part  of  the  English
History,  which  I  gave  to  the  public  in  1761,  with  toler
able,  and  but  tolerable  success.

But,  notwithstanding  this  variety  of  winds  and  seasons,  to
which  my  writings  had  been  exposed,  they  had  still  been
making  such  advances,  that  the  copy-money  given  me  by
the  booksellers,  much  exceeded  any  thing  formerly  known  in
England  ;  I  was  become  not  only  independent,  but  opulent.
I  retired  to  my  native  country  of  Scotland,  determined  never
more  to  set  my  foot  out  of  it ;  and  retaining  the  satisfaction
of  never  having  preferred  a  request  to  one  great  man,  or  even
making  advances  of  friendship  to  any  of  them.  As  I  was
now  turned  of  fifty,  I  thought  of  passing  all  the  rest  of  my
life  in  this  philosophical  manner,  when  I  received,  in  1703,
an  invitation  from  the  Earl  of  Hertford,  with  whom  I  was
not  in  the  least  acquainted,  to  attend  him  on  his  embassy  to
Pails,  with  a  near  prospect  of  being  appointed  secretary  to
the  embassy ;  and,  in  the  meanwhile,  of  performing  the
functions  of  that  office.  This  offer,  however  inviting,  I  at
first  declined,  both  because  I  was  reluctant  to  begin  connexions
with  the  great,  and  because  I  was  afraid  that  the  civi
lities  and  gay  company  of  Paris,  would  prove  disagreeable  to
a  person  of  my  age  and  humour :  but  on  his  lordship's  re
peating  the  invitation,  I  accepted  of  it.  I  have  every  reason,
both  of  pleasure  and  interest,  to  think  myself  happy  in  my
connexions  with  that  nobleman,  as  well  as  afterwards  with
his  brother,  General  Conway.

Those  who  have  not  seen  the  strange  effects  of  modes,
will  never  imagine  the  reception  I  met  with  at  Paris,  from
men  and  women  of  all  ranks  and  stations.  The  more  I
resiled  fron  their  excessive  civilities,  the  more  I  was  loaded
with  them.  There  is,  however,  a  real  satisfaction  in  living  at
Paris,  from  the  great  number  of  sensible,  knowing,  and
polite  company  with  which  that  city  abounds  above  all


MY OWN LIFE.  7

places  in  the  universe.  I  thought  once  of  settling  there  for
life.

I  was  appointed  secretary  to  the  embassy  ;  and  in  summer
1765,  Lord  Hertford'  left  me,  being  appointed  Lord  Lieute
nant  of  Ireland.  I  was  charge  d'affaires  till  the  arrival  of
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  towards  the  end  of  the  year.  In  the
beginning  of  1766,  I  left  Paris,  and  next  summer  went  to
Edinburgh,  with  the  same  view  as  formerly,  of  burying
myself  in  a  philosophical  retreat.  I  returned  to  that  place,
not  richer,  but  with  much  more  money,  and  a  much  larger
income,  by  means  of  Lord  Hertford's  friendship,  than  I  left
it;  and  I  was  desirous  of  trying  what  superfluity  could
produce,  as  I  had  formerly  made  an  experiment  of  a  compe
tency.  But  in  1767, 1  received  from  Mr.  Con  way  an  invita
tion  to  be  Under-secretary ;  and  this  invitation,  both  the
character  of  the  person,  and  my  connexions  with  Lord  Hert
ford,  prevented  me  from  declining.  I  returned  to  Edinburgh
in  1769,  very  opulent  (for  I  possessed  a  revenue  of  1,OOOZ.  a
year),  healthy,  and  though  somewhat  stricken  in  years,  with
the  prospect  of  enjoying  long  my  ease,  and  of  seeing  the
increase  of  my  reputation.

In  spring  1775,  I  was  struck  with  a  disorder  in  my  bowels,
which  at  first  gave  me  no  alarm,  but  has  since,  as  I  appre
hend  it,  become  mortal  and  incurable.  I  now  reckon  upon
a  speedy  dissolution.  I  have  suffered  very  little  pain  from
my  disorder ;  and  what  is  more  strange,  have,  notwithstand
ing  the  great  decline  of  my  person,  never  suffered  a  moment's
abatement  of  my  spirits  ;  insomuch,  that  were  I  to  name
the  period  of  my  life,  which  I  should  most  choose  to  pass
over  again,  I  might  be  tempted  to  point  to  this  latter  period.
I  possess  the  same  ardour  as  ever  in  study,  and  the  same
gaiety  in  company.  I  consider,  besides,  that  a  man  of
sixty-five,  by  dying,  cuts  off  only  a  few  years  of  infirmities  ;
and  though  I  see  many  symptoms  of  my  literary  reputation's
breaking  out  at  last  with  additional  lustre,  I  knew  ih at  I
could  have  but  few  years  to  enjoy  it.  It  is  difficult  to  be
more  detached  from  life  than  I  am  at  present.

To  conclude  historically  with  my  own  character.  I  am,
or  rather  was  (for  that  is  the  style  I  must  now  use  in  speak
ing  of  myself,  which  emboldens  me  the  more  to  speak  my  sen
timents)  ;  I  was,  I  say,  a  man  of  mild  dispositions,  of  command
of  temper,  of  an  open,  social,  and  cheerful  humour,  capable  of


8  MY  OWN  LIFE.

attachment,  but  little  susceptible  of  enmity,  and  of  great
moderation  in  all  my  passions.  Even  niy  love  of  literary
fame,  my  ruling  passion,  never  soured  my  temper,  notwith
standing  my  frequent  disappointments.  My  company  was
not  unacceptable  to  the  young  and  careless,  as  well  as  to  the
studious  and  literary ;  and  as  I  took  a  particular  pleasure  in
the  company  of  modest  women,  I  had  no  reason  to  be  dis
pleased  with  the  reception  I  met  with  from  them.  In  a
word,  though  most  men  anywise  eminent,  have  found  reason
to  complain  of  calumny,  I  never  was  touched,  or  even  at
tacked  by  her  baleful  tooth :  and  though,  I  wantonly  exposed
myself  to  the  rage  of  both  civil  and  religious  factions,  they
seemed  to  be  disarmed  in  my  behalf  of  their  wonted  fury.
My  friends  never  had  occasion  to  vindicate  any  one  circum
stance  of  my  character  and  conduct :  not  but  that  the  zea
lots,  we  may  well  suppose,  would  have  been  glad  to  invent
and  propagate  any  story  to  my  disadvantage,  but  they  could
never  find  any  which  they  thought  would  wear  the  face  of
probability.  I  cannot  say  there  is  no  vanity  in  making  this
funeral  oration  of  myself,  but  I  hope  it  is  not  a  misplaced
one ;  and  this  is  a  matter  of  fact  which  is  easily  cleared  and
ascertained.

APEIL  18,  1776.


LETTER FKOM  ADAM  SMITH,  LL.D.,

TO

WILLIAM  STEAHAN,  ESQ.1


Kirkaldy,  Fifeshire,  Nov.  9,  1776.

DEAR  SIB,— It  is  with  a  real,  though  a  very  melancholy
pleasure,  that  I  sit  down  to  give  you  some  account  of  the
behaviour  of  our  late  excellent  friend,  Mr.  Hume,  during  his
last  illness.

Though,  in  his  own  judgment,  his  disease  was  mortal  and
incurable,  yet  he  allowed  himself  to  be  prevailed  upon,  by
the  entreaty  of  his  friends,  to  try  what  might  be  the  effects
of  a  long  journey.  A  few  days  before  he  set  out,  he  wrote
that  account  of  his  own  life,  which,  together  with  his  other
papers,  he  has  left  to  your  care.  My  account,  therefore,  shall
begin  where  his  ends.

He  set  out  for  London  towards  the  end  of  April,  and  at
Morpeth  met  with  Mr.  John  Home  and  myself,  who  had  both
come  down  from  London  on  purpose  to  see  him,  expecting
to  have  found  him  at  Edinburgh.  Mr.  Home  returned  with
him,  and  attended  him  during  the  whole  of  his  stay  in  Eng
land,  with  that  care  and  attention  which  might  be  expected
from  a  temper  so  perfectly  friendly  and  affectionate.  As  I
had  written  to  my  mother  that  she  might  expect  me  in  Sco^
land,  I  was  under  the  necessity  of  continuing  my  journey.
His  disease  seemed  to  yield  to  exercise  and  change  of  air
and  when  he  arrived  in  London,  he  was  apparently  in  much
better  health  than  when  he  left  Edinburgh.  He  was  advise*

«  [For  the  circumstances  attending  the  publication  cf  this  letter,  see  p.  80.-ED.]


jO  LETTER  FROM

to  go  to  Bath  to  drink  the  waters,  which  appeared  for  some
time  to  have  so  good  an  effect  upon  him,  that  even  he  him
self  began  to  entertain,  what  he  was  not  apt  to  do,  a  better
opinion  of  his  own  health.  His  symptoms,  however,  soon  re
turned  with  their  usual  violence,  and  from  that  moment  he
gave  up  all  thoughts  of  recovery,  but  submitted  with  the
utmost  cheerfulness,  and  the  most  perfect  complacency
and  resignation.  Upon  his  return  to  Edinburgh,  though  he
found  himself  much  weaker,  yet  his  cheerfulness  never
abated,  and  he  continued  to  divert  himself,  as  usual,  with
correcting  his  own  works  for  a  new  edition,  with  reading
books  of  amusement,  with  the  conversatk/n  of  his  friends ;
and,  sometimes  in  the  evening,  with  a  party  at  his  favourite
game  of  whist.  His  cheerfulness  was  so  great,  his  conver
sation  and  amusements  run  so  much  in  their  usual  strain,
that,  notwithstanding  all  bad  symptoms,  many  people  could
not  believe  he  was  dying.  *  I  shall  tell  your  friend,  Colonel
Eduiondstone,'  said  Doctor  Dundas  to  him  one  day,  '  that  I
left  you  much  better,  and  in  a  fair  way  of  recovery.'  '  Doc
tor,'  said  he,  '  as  I  believe  you  would  not  chuse  to  tell  any
thing  but  the  truth,  you  had  better  tell  him,  that  I  am
dying  as  fast  as  my  enemies,  if  I  have  any,  could  wish,  and
as  easily  and  cheerfully  as  my  best  friends  could  desire.'
Colonel  Edmoiidstone  soon  afterwards  came  to  see  him,  and
take  leave  of  him ;  and  on  his  way  home,  he  could  not  for
bear  writing  him  a  letter  bidding  him  once  more  an  eternal
adieu,  and  applying  to  him,  as  to  a  dying  man,  the  beautiful
French  verses  in  which  the  Abbe  Chaulieu,  in  expectation  of
his  own  death,  laments  his  approaching  separation  from  his
friend,  the  Marquis  de  la  Fare.  Mr.  Hume's  magnanimity
and  firmness  were  such,  that  his  most  affectionate  friends
knew,  that  they  hazarded  nothing  in  talking  or  writing  to
him  as  to  a  dying  man,  and  that  so  far  from  being  hurt  by
this  frankness,  he  was  rather  pleased  and  nattered  by  it.  I
happened  to  come  into  his  room  while  he  was  reading  this
letter,  which  he  had  just  received,  and  which  he  immediately
showed  me.  I  told  him,  that  though  I  was  sensible  how
very  much  he  was  weakened,  and  that  appearances  were  in
many  respects  very  bad,  yet  his  cheerfulness  was  still  so
great,  the  spirit  of  life  seemed  still  to  be  so  very  strong  in
him,  that  I  could  not  help  entertaining  some  faint  hopes.
lie  answered,  'Your  hopes  are  groundless.  An  habitu;il


DR. ADAM SMITH.  11

diarrhoea  of  more  than  a  year's  standing,  would  be  a  very
bad  disease  at  any  age  :  at  my  age  it  is  a  mortal  one.  When
I  lie  down  in  the  evening,  I  feel  myself  weaker  than  whec
I  rose  in  the  morning ;  and  when  I  rise  in  the  morning,
weaker  than  when  I  lay  down  in  the  evening.  I  am  sensible,
besides,  that  some  of  my  vital  parts  are  affected,  so  that  I
must  soon  die.'  '  Well,'  said  I,  '  if  it  must  be  so,  you  have
at  least  the  satisfaction  of  leaving  all  your  friends,  your
brother's  family  in  particular,  in  great  prosperity.'  He  said
that  he  felt  that  satisfaction  so  sensibly,  that  when  he  was
reading,  a  few  days  before,  Lucian's  Dialogues  of  the  Dead,
among  all  the  excuses  which  are  alleged  to  Charon  for  not
entering  readily  into  his  boat,  he  could  not  find  one  that
fitted  him  ;  he  had  no  house  to  finish,  he  had  no  daughter
to  provide  for,  he  had  no  enemies  upon  whom  he  wished  to
revenge  himself.  '  I  could  not  well  imagine,'  said  he,  '  what
excuse  I  could  make  to  Charon  in  order  to  obtain  a  little  delay.
I  have  done  every  thing  of  consequence  which  I  ever  meant  to
do  ;  and  I  could  at  no  time  expect  to  leave  my  relations  and
friends  in  a  better  situation  than  that  in  which  I  am  now
likely  to  leave  them  ;  I,  therefore,  have  all  reason  to  die  con
tented.'  He  then  diverted  himself  with  inventing  several
jocular  excuses,  which  he  supposed  he  might  make  to  Charon,
and  with  imagining  the  very  surly  answers  which  it  might
suit  the  character  of  Charon  to  return  to  them.  *  Upon  fur
ther  consideration,'  said  he,  '  I  thought  I  might  say  to  him,
Good  Charon,  I  have  been  correcting  my  works  for  a  new
edition.  Allow  me  a  little  time,  that  I  may  see  how  the
Public  receives  the  alterations.'  But  Charon  would  answer,
'  When  you  have  seen  the  effect  of  these,  you  will  be  for
making  other  alterations.  There  will  be  no  end  of  such
excuses ;  so,  honest  friend,  please  step  into  the  boat.'  But
I  might  still  urge,  '  Have  a  little  patience,  good  Charon ;  I
have  been  endeavouring  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  Public.  If  I
live  a  few  years  longer,  I  may  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing
the  downfall  of  some  of  the  prevailing  systems  of  super
stition.'  But  Charon  would  then  lose  all  temper  and  decency.
'  You  loitering  rogue,  that  will  not  happen  these  many  hun
dred  years.  Do  you  fancy  I  will  grant  you  a  lease  for  so
long  a  term?  Get  into  the  boat  this  instant,  you  lazy
loitering  rogue.'

But,  though  Mr.  Hume  always  talked  of  his  approaching


12  LETTER  FROM

dissolution  with  great  cheerfulness,  he  never  affected  to  make
any  parade  of  his  magnanimity.  He  never  mentioned  the
subject  but  when  the  conversation  naturally  lead  to  it,  and
never  dwelt  longer  upon  it  than  the  course  of  the  conversa
tion  happened  to  require  :  it  was  a  subject  indeed  which
occurred  pretty  frequently,  in  consequence  of  the  inquiries
which  his  friends,  who  came  to  see  him,  naturally  made  con
cerning  the  state  of  his  health.  The  conversation  which  I
mentioned  above,  and  which  passed  on  Thursday  the  8th  of
August,  was  the  last,  except  one,  that  I  ever  had  with  him.
He  had  now  become  so  very  weak,  that  the  company  of  his
most  intimate  friends  fatigued  him ;  for  his  cheerfulness  was
still  so  great,  his  complaisance  and  social  disposition  were
still  so  entire,  that  when  any  friend  was  with  him,  he  could
not  help  talking  more,  and  with  greater  exertion,  than  suited
the  weakness  of  his  body.  At  his  own  desire,  therefore,  I
agreed  to  leave  Edinburgh,  where  I  was  staying  partly  upon
his  account,  and  returned  to  my  mother's  house  here,  at
Kirkaldy,  upon  condition  that  he  would  send  for  me  when
ever  he  wished  to  see  me  ;  the  physician  who  saw  him  most
frequently,  Dr.  Black,  undertaking,  in  the  mean  time,  to
write  me  occasionally  an  account  of  the  state  of  his  health.

On  the  22d  of  August,  the  Doctor  wrote  me  the  following
letter :

*  Since  my  last,  Mr.  Hume  has  passed  his  time  pretty
easily,  but  is  much  weaker.  He  sits  up,  goes  down  stairs
once  a  day,  and  amuses  himself  with  reading,  but  seldom  sees
anybody.  He  finds  that  even  the  conversation  of  his  most
intimate  friends  fatigues  and  oppresses  him ;  and  it  is  happy
that  he  does  not  need  it,  for  he  is  quite  free  from  anxiety,
impatience,  or  low  spirits,  and  passes  his  time  very  well  with
the  assistance  of  amusing  books.'

I  received  the  day  after  a  letter  from  Mr.  Hume  himself,
of  which  the  following  is  an  extract.

'Edinburgh,  23d  August,  1776.

'  MY  DEAREST  FRIEND, — I  am  obliged  to  make  use  of  my
nephew's  hand  in  writing  to  you,  as  I  do  not  rise  to-day.
*##***###

'  I  go  very  fast  to  decline,  and  last  night  had  a  small  fever,
which  I  hoped  might  put  a  quicker  period  to  this  tedious  ill
ness,  but  unluckily  it  has,  in  a  great  measure,  gone  off.  I


DR. ADAM SMITH.  13

cannot  submit  to  your  coming  over  here  on  my  account,  as  it
is  possible  for  me  to  see  you  so  small  a  part  of  the  day,  but
Doctor  Black  can  better  inform  you  concerning  the  degree  of
strength  which  may  from  time  to  time  remain  with  me.
Adieu,'  etc.

Three  days  after  I  received  the  following  letter  from  Doctor
Black.

'Edinburgh,  Monday,  26th  August,  1776.

*  DEAR,  SIR, — Yesterday,  about  four  o'clock  afternoon,  Mr.
Hume  expired.  The  near  approach  of  his  death  became
evident  in  the  night  between  Thursday  and  Friday,  when
his  disease  became  excessive,  and  soon  weakened  him  so
much,  that  he  could  no  longer  rise  out  of  his  bed.  He  con
tinued  to  the  last  perfectly  sensible,  and  free  from  much  pain
or  feelings  of  distress.  He  never  dropped  the  smallest  ex
pression  of  impatience  ;  but  when  he  had  occasion  to  speak
to  the  people  about  him,  always  did  it  with  affection  and
tenderness.  I  thought  it  improper  to  write  to  bring  you
over,  especially  as  I  heard  that  he  had  dictated  a  letter  to
you  desiring  you  not  to  come.  When  he  became  very  weak,
it  cost  him  an  effort  to  speak,  and  he  died  in  such  a  happy
composure  of  mind,  that  nothing  could  exceed  it.'

Thus  died  our  most  excellent,  and  never  to  be  forgotten
friend ;  concerning  whose  philosophical  opinions  men  will,  no
doubt,  judge  variously,  every  one  approving,  or  condemning
them,  according  as  they  happen  to  coincide  or  disagree  with
his  own  ;  but  concerning  whose  character  and  conduct  there
can  scarce  be  a  difference  of  opinion.  His  temper,  indeed,
seemed  to  be  more  happily  balanced,  if  I  may  be  allowed  such
an  expression,  than  that  perhaps  of  any  other  man  I  have
ever  known.  Even  in  the  lowest  state  of  his  fortune,  his
great  and  necessary  frugality  never  hindered  him  from  exer
cising,  upon  proper  occasions,  acts  both  of  charity  and  gene
rosity.  It  was  a  frugality,  founded,  not  upon  avarice,  but
upon  the  love  of  independency.  The  extreme  gentleness  of
his  nature  never  weakened  either  the  firmness  of  his  mind
or  the  steadiness  of  his  resolutions.  His  constant  pleasantry
was  the  genuine  effusion  of  good-nature  and  good-humour,
tempered  with  delicacy  and  modesty,  and  without  even  the
slightest  tincture  of  malignity,  so  frequently  the  disagreeable
source  of  what  is  called  wit  in  other  men.  It  never  was  the


14  LETTER  FROM DR.  ADAM SMITH.

meaning  of  his  raillery  to  mortify ;  and  therefore,  far  from
offending,  it  seldom  failed  to  please  and  delight,  even  those
who  were  the  objects  of  it.  To  his  friends,  who  were  fre
quently  the  objects  of  it,  there  was  not  perhaps  any  one  of  all
his  great  and  amiable  qualities,  which  contributed  more  to
endear  his  conversation.  And  that  gaiety  of  temper,  so
agreeable  in  society,  but  which  is  so  often  accompanied  with
frivolous  and  superficial  qualities,  was  in  him  certainly  at
tended  with  the  most  severe  application,  the  most  extensive
learning,  the  greatest  depth  of  thought,  and  a  capacity  in
every  respect  the  most  comprehensive.  Upon  the  whole,  I
have  always  considered  him,  both  in  his  lifetime  and  since
his  death,  as  approaching  as  nearly  to  the  idea  of  a  perfectly
wise  and  virtuous  man,  as  perhaps  the  nature  of  human
frailty  will  permit.

I  ever  am,  dear  Sir,

Most  affectionately  your's,

ADAM  SMITH.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.


HUME  has  told  us  in  bis  autobiography,  that  very  early  in
life  he  was  seized  with  a  passion  for  literature  :  an  expression
which,  strong  as  it  is,  does  not  err  on  the  side  of  exaggera
tion.  From  the  time  of  leaving  school,  he  seems  to  have
been  absorbed  in  literary  pursuits  and  ambitions.  He  was
incessantly  engaged  in  working  at  questions  suggested  by
the  writings  of  Locke  and  Berkeley.  He  came  to  believe
that  he  had  discovered  new  truths ;  and  he  dreamed  of  a
general  recognition  of  his  genius.  Mingling  with  these
ambitious  aspirations,  there  was  a  set  purpose  to  curb  an
irritable,  excited  temper,  and  to  realize  the  calm  elevation
of  the  philosopher.

In  the  hope  of  achieving  these  results,  he  declined  to  train
himself  for  the  law  or  for  business.  His  income,  though
small,  was  sufficient  for  the  time  ;  and  he  expected  that  his
writings  would  bring  wealth  as  well  as  fame.

The  following  letter1  to  his  friend  Michael  Eamsay,  written
shortly  after  his  seventeenth  birthday,  is  the  earliest  record
which  we  possess,  and  it  gives  a  picture,  equally  graphic  and
astonishing,  of  his  boyhood.

•July  4,  1727.

'  DB  M.— I  received  all  the  books  you  writ  of;  and  your
Milton  among  the  rest.  When  I  saw  it,  I  perceived  there
was  a  difference  betwixt  preaching  and  practising;  you
accuse  me  of  niceness,  and  yet  practise  it  most  egregiously
yourself.  What  was  the  necessity  of  sending  your  Milton,
which  I  knew  you  were  so  fond  of?  Why,  I  lent  your's  and
can't  get  it.  But  would  you  not,  in  the  same  manner,  have

'  Life  and  Correspondence  of  David  Hume.  By  John  Hill  Burton,  Esq.,  Advo
cate.  Vol.  i.,  p.  12.


16  HISTORY OF THE  EDITIONS.

lent  your  own  ?  Yes.  Then,  why  this  ceremony  and  good
breeding  ?  I  write  all  this  to  show  you  how  easily  any  action
may  be  brought  to  bear  the  countenance  of  a  fault.  You  may
justify  yourself  very  well,  by  saying  it  was  kindness  ;  and  I
am  satisfied  with  it,  and  thank  you  for  it.  So,  in  the  same
manner,  I  may  justify  myself  from  your  reproofs.  You  say
that  I  would  not  send  in  my  papers,  because  they  were  not
polished  nor  brought  to  any  form  :  which  you  say  is  nicety.
But  was  it  not  reasonable  ?  Would  you  have  me  send  in  my
loose  incorrect  thoughts  ?  Were  such  worth  the  transcribing  ?
All  the  progress  that  I  made  is  but  drawing  the  outlines,  on
loose  bits  of  paper :  here  a  hint  of  a  passion  ;  there  a  phe
nomenon  in  the  mind  accounted  for  :  in  another  the  alteration
of  these  accounts  ;  sometimes  a  remark  upon  an  author  I
have  been  reading ;  and  none  of  them  worth  to  any  body,
and  I  believe  scarce  to  myself.  The  only  design  I  had  of
mentioning  any  of  them  at  all,  was  to  see  what  you  would
have  said  of  your  own,  whether  they  were  of  the  same  kind,
and  if  you  would  send  any ;  and  I  have  got  my  end,  for  you
have  ffiven  a  most  satisfactory  reason  for  not  communicating
them,  by  promising  they  shall  be  told  viva  voce — a  much
better  way  indeed,  and  in  which  I  promise  myself  much
satisfaction  ;  for  the  free  conversation  of  a  friend  is  what  I
would  prefer  to  any  entertainment.  Just  now  I  am  entirely
confined  to  myself  and  library  for  diversion  since  we  parted.

ea  sola  voluptus,

Solamenque  mail —

And  indeed  to  me  they  are  not  a  small  one  :  for  I  take  no
more  of  them  than  I  please ;  for  I  hate  task-reading,  and  I
diversify  them  at  pleasure — sometimes  a  philosopher,  some
times  a  poet — which  change  is  not  unpleasant  nor  disservice-
able  neither ;  for  what  will  more  surely  engrave  upon  my
mind  a  Tusculan  disputation  of  Cicero's  De  ^gritudine
Lenienda,  than  an  eclogue  or  georgick  of  Yirgil's  ?  The
philosopher's  wise  man  and  the  poet's  husbandman  agree  in
peace  of  mind,  in  a  liberty  and  independency  on  fortune,  and
contempt  of  riches,  power,  and  glory.  Every  thing  is  placid
and  quiet  in  both  :  nothing  perturbed  or  disordered.

At  sccura  qnies,  et  nescia  fallere  vita

Speluncfe,  yivique  laci ;  at  frigida  Tempe,
Mugitusque  bourn,  mollesque  sub  arbore  somni

Non  aLsiut.


HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.  17

*  These  lines  will,  in  my  opinion,  come  nothing  short  of
the  instruction  of  the  finest  sentence  in  Cicero :  and  is  more
to  me,  as  Yirgil's  life  is  more  the  subject  of  my  ambition,
being  what  I  can  apprehend  to  be  more  within  my  power.  For
the  perfectly  wise  man,  that  outbraves  fortune,  is  surely
greater  than  the  husbandman  who  slips  by  her  ;  and,  indeed,
this  pastoral  and  saturriian  happiness  I  have  in  a  great  mea
sure  come  at  just  now.  I  live  like  a  king,  pretty  much  bv
myself,  neither  full  of  action  nor  perturbation, — molles  somnos.
This  state,  however,  I  can  foresee  is  not  to  be  relied  on.  My
peace  of  mind  is  not  sufficiently  confirmed  by  philosophy  to
withstand  the  blows  of  fortune.  This  greatness  and  elevation
of  soul  is  to  be  found  only  in  study  and  contemplation — this
can  alone  teach  us  to  look  down  on  human  accidents.  You
must  allow  [me]  to  talk  thus,  like  a  philosopher :  'tis  a  sub
ject  I  think  much  on,  and  could  talk  all  day  long  of.  But  I
know  I  must  not  trouble  you.  Wherefore  I  wisely  practise
my  rules,  which  prescribe  to  check  our  appetite  ;  and,  for  a
mortification,  shall  descend  from  these  superior  regions  to
low  and  ordinary  life ;  and  so  far  as  to  tell  you,  that  John
has  bought  a  horse  :  he  thinks  it  neither  cheap  nor  dear.  It
cost  six  guineas,  but  will  be  sold  cheaper  against  winter,
which  he  is  not  resolved  on  as  yet.  It  has  no  fault,  but
bogles  a  little.  It  is  tolerably  well  favoured,  and  paces  natu
rally.  Mamma  bids  me  tell  you,  that  Sir  John  Home  is  not
going  to  town  ;  but  he  saw  Eccles  in  the  country,  who  says
he  will  do  nothing  in  that  affair,  for  he  is  only  taking  off  old
adjudications,  so  it  is  needless  to  let  him  see  the  papers.  He
desires  you  would  trouble  yourself  to  inquire  about  the  Earle's
affairs,  and  advise  us  what  to  do  in  this  affair.

'  If  it  were  not  breaking  the  formal  rule  of  connexions  I
have  prescribed  myself  in  this  letter — and  it  did  not  seem
'unnatural  to  raise  myself  from  so  low  affairs  as  horses  and
papers,  to  so  high  and  elevate  things  as  books  and  study — I
would  tell  you  that  I  read  some  of  Longinus  already,  and
that  I  am  mightily  delighted  with  him.  I  think  he  does
really  answer  the  character  of  being  the  great  sublime  he
describes.  He  delivers  his  precepts  with  such  force,  as  if  he
were  enchanted  with  the  subject ;  and  is  himself  an  author
that  may  be  cited  for  an  example  to  his  own  rules,  by  any
one  who  shall  be  so  adventurous  as  to  write  upon  his  sub
ject.'

VOL.  in.  0


18  HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.

Thus  he  was  occupied  for  four  years :  devouring  books,
cross-examining  the  English  metaphysicians,  and  jotting
down  his  desultory  doubts  and  criticisms.  So  he  describes
himself  in  a  letter  of  a  later  date  :

'  'Tis  not  long  ago  that  I  burned  an  old  manuscript  book,
wrote  before  I  was  twenty,  which  contained,  page  after  page,
the  gradual  progress  of  my  thoughts  on  that  head.  It  began
with  an  anxious  search  after  arguments,  to  confirm  the  com
mon  opinion ;  doubts  stole  in,  dissipated,  returned ;  were
again  dissipated,  returned  again ;  and  it  was  a  perpetual
struggle  of  a  restless  imagination  against  inclination,  perhaps
against  reason.'  l

At  last  his  health  was  a  little  broken.  He  appears  to  have
suffered  from  torpidity  of  liver,  caused  by  sedentary  occu
pations  and  poor  food.  In  a  letter2  to  a  physician,  never
despatched,  but  found  by  Mr.  Burton  among  the  papers  in
the  possession  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  Hume
describes  minutely  his  manner  of  life,  his  hopes  and  his  fears.
The  letter  appears  to  have  been  written  in  1734,  when  he
was  twenty-three  years  of  age  :  and,  with  the  exception  of
the  medical  details,  it  is  here  printed  in  full.

*  SIR, —  Not  being  acquainted  with  this  handwriting,  you
will  probably  look  to  the  bottom  to  find  the  subscription,  and
not  finding  any,  will  certainly  wonder  at  this  strange  method
of  addressing  you.  I  must  here  in  the  beginning  beg  you
to  excuse  it,  and,  to  persuade  you  to  read  what  follows
with  some  attention,  must  tell  you,  that  this  gives  you
an  opportunity  to  do  a  very  good-natured  action,  which  I
believe  is  the  most  powerful  argument  I  can  use.  I  need  not
tell  you,  that  I  am  your  countryman,  a  Scotsman  ;  for  with
out  any  such  tie,  I  dare  rely  upon  your  humanity  even  to  a
perfect  stranger,  such  as  I  am.  The  favour  I  beg  of  you  is
your  advice,  and  the  reason  why  I  address  myself  in  particular
to  you,  need  not  be  told, — as  one  must  be  a  skilful  physician,
a  man  of  letters,  of  wit,  of  good  sense,  and  of  great  humanity,
to  give  me  a  satisfying  answer.  I  wish  fame  had  pointed  out
to  me  more  persons,  in  whom  these  qualities  are  united,  in
order  to  have  kept  me  some  time  in  suspense.  This  I  say
in  the  sincerity  of  my  heart,  and  without  any  intention  of

1  March  10, 1751. Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  332. The  immediate  reference  is  to  the
argument  of  Cleanthes,  in  the  '  Dialogues  Concerning  Natural  Religion.'
*  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  30.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  19

making  a  compliment ;  for  though  it  may  seem  necessary,
that,  in  the  beginning  of  so  unusual  a  letter,  I  should  say
some  fine  things,  to  bespeak  your  good  opinion,  and  remove
any  prejudices  you  may  conceive  at  it,  yet  such  an  endeavour
to  be  witty,  would  ill  suit  with  the  present  condition  of  my
mind ;  which,  I  must  confess,  is  not  without  anxiety  con
cerning  the  judgment  you  will  form  of  me.  Trusting,  how
ever,  to  your  candour  and  generosity,  I  shall,  without  further
preface,  proceed  to  open  up  to  you  the  present  condition  of
my  health,  and  to  do  that  the  more  effectually,  shall  give  you
a  kind  of  history  of  my  life,  after  which  you  will  easily  learn
why  I  keep  my  name  a  secret.

'  You  must  know  then  that,  from  my  earliest  infancy,  I
found  always  a  strong  inclination  to  books  and  letters.  As
our  college  education  in  Scotland,  extending  little  further
than  the  languages,  ends  commonly  when  we  are  about  four
teen  or  fifteen  years  of  age,  I  was  after  that  left  to  my  own
choice  in  my  reading,  and  found  it  incline  me  almost  equally
to  books  of  reasoning  and  philosophy,  and  to  poetry  and  the
polite  authors.  Every  one  who  is  acquainted  either  with  the
philosophers  or  critics,  knows  that  there  is  nothing  yet  estab
lished  in  either  of  these  two  sciences,  and  that  they  contain
little  more  than  endless  disputes,  even  in  the  most  funda
mental  articles.  Upon  examination  of  these,  I  found  a
certain  boldness  of  temper  growing  in  me,  which  was  not
inclined  to  submit  to  any  authority  in  these  subjects,  but  led
me  to  seek  out  some  new  medium,  by  which  truth  might  be
established.  After  much  study  and  reflection  on  this,  at
last,  when  I  was  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  there  seemed
to  be  opened  up  to  me  a  new  scene  of  thought,  which  trans
ported  me  beyond  measure,  and  made  me,  with  an  ardour
natural  to  young  men,  throw  up  every  other  pleasure  or
business  to  apply  entirely  to  it.  The  law,  which  was  the
business  I  designed  to  follow,  appeared  nauseous  to  me,  and
I  could  think  of  no  other  way  of  pushing  my  fortune  in  the
world,  but  that  of  a  scholar  and  philosopher.  I  was  infinitely
happy  in  this  course  of  life  for  some  months ;  till  at  last,
about  the  beginning  of  September,  1729,  all  my  ardour
seemed  in  a  moment  to  be  extinguished,  and  I  could  no  longer
raise  my  mind  to  that  pitch,  which  formerly  gave  me  such
excessive  pleasure.  I  felt  no  uneasiness  or  want  of  spirits,
when  I  laid  aside  my  book ;  and  therefore  never  imagined

c  2


20  HISTORY OF  THE EDITIONS.

there  was  any  bodily  distemper  in  the  case,  but  that  my
coldness  proceeded  from  a  laziness  of  temper,  which  must  be
overcome  by  redoubling  my  application.  In  this  condition  I
remained  for  nine  months,  very  uneasy  to  myself,  as  you  may
well  imagine,  but  without  growing  any  worse,  which  was  a
miracle.  There  was  another  particular,  which  contributed,
more  than  any  thing,  to  waste  my  spirits  and  bring  on  me
this  distemper,  which  was,  that  having  read  many  books  of
morality,  such  as  Cicero,  Seneca,  and  Plutarch,  and  being
smit  with  their  beautiful  representations  of  virtue  and  phi
losophy,  T  undertook  the  improvement  of  my  temper  and
will,  along  with  my  reason  and  understanding.  I  was  con
tinually  fortifying  myself  with  reflections  against  death,  and
poverty,  and  shame,  and  pain,  and  all  the  other  calamities  of
life.  These  no  doubt  are  exceeding  useful,  when  joined  with
an  active  life,  because  the  occasion  being  presented  along
with  the  reflection,  works  it  into  the  soul,  and  makes  it  take
a  deep  impression ;  but  in  solitude  they  serve  to  little  other
purpose,  than  to  waste  the  spirits,  the  force  of  the  mind
meeting  with  no  resistance,  but  wasting  itself  in  the  air,  like
our  arm  when  it  misses  its  aim.  This,  however,  I  did  not
learn  but  by  experience,  and  till  I  had  already  ruined  my
health,  though  I  was  not  sensible  of  it.  *  *  *

'  Though  I  was  sorry  to  find  myself  engaged  with  so
tedious  a  distemper,  yet  the  knowledge  of  it  set  me  very
much  at  ease,  by  satisfying  me  that  my  former  coldness  pro
ceeded  not  from  any  defect  of  temper  or  genius,  but  from  a
disease  to  which  any  one  may  be  subject.  I  now  began  to
take  some  indulgence  to  myself;  studied  moderately,  and
only  when  I  found  my  spirits  at  their  highest  pitch,  leaving
off  before  I  was  weary,  and  trifling  away  the  rest  of  my  time
in  the  best  manner  I  could.  In  this  way,  I  lived  with  satis
faction  enough  ;  and  on  my  return  to  town  next  winter  found
my  spirits  very  much  recruited,  so  that,  though  they  sank
under  me  in  the  higher  flights  of  genius,  yet  I  was  able  to
make  considerable  progress  in  my  former  designs.  I  was
very  regular  in  my  diet  and  way  of  life  from  the  beginning,
and  all  that  winter  made  it  a  constant  rule  to  ride  twice  or
thrice  a-week,  and  walk  every  day.  For  these  reasons  I  ex
pected,  when  I  returned  to  the  country,  and  could  renew  my
exercise  with  less  interruption,  that  I  would  perfectly  recover.
But  in  this  I  was  much  mistaken.  *  *  *


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  21

'  Thus  I  have  given  you  a  full  account  of  the  condition  of
my  body ;  and  without  staying  to  ask  pardon,  as  I  ought  to
do,  for  so  tedious  a  story,  shall  explain  to  you  how  my  mind
stood  all  this  time,  which  on  every  occasion,  especially  in  this
distemper,  have  a  very  near  connexion  together.  Having
now  time  and  leisure  to  cool  my  inflamed  imagination,  I
began  to  consider  seriously  how  I  should  proceed  in  my  phi
losophical  inquiries.  I  found  that  the  moral  philosophy
transmitted  to  us  by  antiquity  laboured  under  the  same  in
convenience  that  has  been  found  in  their  natural  philosophy,
of  being  entirely  hypothetical,  and  depending  more  upon
invention  than  experience  :  every  one  consulted  his  fancy  in
erecting  schemes  of  virtue  and  of  happiness,  without  regarding
human  nature,  upon  which  every  moral  conclusion  must
depend.  This,  therefore,  I  resolved  to  make  my  principal
study,  and  the  source  from  which  I  would  derive  every  truth
in  criticism  as  well  as  morality.  I  believe  it  is  a  certain  fact,
that  most  of  the  philosophers  who  have  gone  before  us,  have
been  overthrown  by  the  greatness  of  their  genius,  and  that
little  more  is  required  to  make  a  man  succeed  in  this  study,
than  to  throw  off  all  prejudices  either  for  his  own  opinions
or  for  those  of  others.  At  least  this  is  all  I  have  to  depend
on  for  the  truth  of  my  reasonings,  which  I  have  multiplied
to  such  a  degree,  that  within  these  three  years,  I  find  I  have
scribbled  many  a  quire  of  paper,  in  which  there  is  nothing
contained  but  my  own  inventions.  This,  with  the  reading
most  of  the  celebrated  books  in  Latin,  French,  and  English,
and  acquiring  the  Italian,  you  may  think  a  sufficient  business
for  one  in  perfect  health,  and  so  it  would  had  it  been  done  to
any  purpose  ;  but  my  disease  was  a  cruel  encumbrance  on
me.  I  found  that  I  was  not  able  to  follow  out  any  train  of
thought,  by  one  continued  stretch  of  view,  but  by  repeated
interruptions,  and  by  refreshing  my  eye  from  time  to  time
upon  other  objects.  Yet  with  this  inconvenience  1  have
collected  the  rude  materials  for  many  volumes ;  but  in  re
ducing  these  to  words,  when  one  must  bring  the  idea  he
comprehended  in  gross,  nearer  to  him,  so  as  to  contemplate
its  minutest  parts,  and  keep  it  steadily  in  his  eye,  so  as  to
copy  these  parts  in  order, — this  I  found  impracticable  for  me,
nor  were  my  spirits  equal  to  so  severe  an  employment.  Here
lay  my  greatest  calamity.  I  had  no  hopes  of  delivering  my
opinions  with  such  elegance  and  neatness,  as  to  draw  to  me


22  HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.

the  attention  of  the  world,  and  I  would  rather  live  and  die
in  obscurity  than  produce  them  maimed  and  imperfect.

'  Such  a  miserable  disappointment  I  scarce  ever  remember
to  have  heard  of.  The  small  distance  betwixt  me  and  perfect
health  makes  me  the  more  uneasy  in  my  present  situation.
It  is  a  weakness  rather  than  a  lowness  of  spirits  which
troubles  me,  and  there  seems  to  be  as  great  a  difference
betwixt  my  distemper  and  common  vapours,  as  betwixt
vapours  and  madness.  I  have  noticed  in  the  writings  of  the
French  mystics,  and  in  those  of  our  fanatics  here,  that  when
they  give  a  history  of  the  situation  of  their  souls,  they  men
tion  a  coldness  and  desertion  of  the  spirit,  which  frequently
returns ;  and  some  of  them,  at  the  beginning,  have  been
tormented  with  it  many  years.  As  this  kind  of  devotion
depends  entirely  on  the  force  of  passion,  and  consequently  of
the  animal  spirits,  I  have  often  thought  that  their  case  and
mine  were  pretty  parallel,  and  that  their  rapturous  admira
tions  might  discompose  the  fabric  of  the  nerves  and  brain,  as
much  as  profound  reflections,  and  that  warmth  or  enthusiasm
which  is  inseparable  from  them.

'  However  this  may  be,  I  have  not  come  out  of  the  cloud
so  well  as  they  commonly  tell  us  they  have  done,  or  rather
began  to  despair  of  ever  recovering.  To  keep  myself  from
being  melancholy  on  so  dismal  a  prospect,  my  only  security
was  in  peevish  reflections  on  the  vanity  of  the  world  and  of
all  human  glory ;  which,  however  just  sentiments  they  may
be  esteemed,  I  have  found  can  never  be  sincere,  except  in
those  who  are  possessed  of  them.  Being  sensible  that  all
my  philosophy  would  never  make  me  contented  in  my  present
situation,  I  began  to  rouse  up  myself ;  and  being  encouraged
by  instances  of  recovery  from  worse  degrees  of  this  distemper,
as  well  as  by  the  assurances  of  my  physicians,  I  began  to
think  of  something  more  effectual  than  I  had  hitherto  tried.
I  found,  that  as  there  are  two  things  very  bad  for  this  dis
temper,  study  and  idleness,  so  there  are  two  things  very  good,
business  and  diversion ;  and  that  my  whole  time  was  spent
betwixt  the  bad,  with  little  or  no  share  of  the  good.  For
this  reason  I  resolved  to  seek  out  a  more  active  life,  and
though  I  could  not  quit  my  pretensions  in  learning  but  with
my  last  breath,  to  lay  them  aside  for  some  time,  in  order  the
more  effectually  to  resume  them.  Upon  examination,  I  found
my  choice  confined  to  two  kinds  of  life,  that  of  a  travelling


HISTORY OF  THE EDITIONS.  23

governor,  and  that  of  a  merchant.  The  first,  besides  that  it
is  in  some  respects  an  idle  life,  was,  I  found,  unfit  for  me ;
and  that  because  from  a  sedentary  and  retired  way  of  living
from  a  bashful  temper,  and  from  a  narrow  fortune,  I  had  been
little  accustomed  to  general  companies,  and  had  not  confidence
and  knowledge  enough  of  the  world  to  push  my  fortune,  or
(to  be  serviceable  in  that  way.  I  therefore  fixed  my  choice
upon  a  merchant ;  and  having  got  recommendation  to  a  con
siderable  trader  in  Bristol,  I  am  just  now  hastening  thither,
with  a  resolution  to  forget  myself,  and  every  thing  that  is
past,  to  engage  myself,  as  far  as  is  possible,  in  that  course  of
life,  and  to  toss  about  the  world,  from  the  one  pole  to  the
other,  till  I  leave  this  distemper  behind  me.'

In  consequence  of  this  indisposition,  his  friends  induced
him  to  enter  a  merchant's  office  at  Bristol;  but  after  a  brief
trial  he  returned  to  his  favourite  pursuits,  and  crossing  to
France,  and  settling  '  first  at  Reims,  but  chiefly  at  La  Fleche
in  Anjou,'  he  occupied  three  years  in  collecting  the  passages
in  his  manuscripts  which  dealt  with  the  philosophies  of  Locke
and  Berkeley,  and  in  preparing  them  for  the  press.  Towards
the  close  of  1737  he  left  France,  and  came  to  London,  to
negotiate  for  the  publication  of  two  volumes  of  a  '  Treatise
of  Human  Nature.'  The  following  letters  to  Henry  Home,
afterwards  Lord  Kames,  deserve  to  be  quoted:  —

'London,  December  2,  1737.

4  DEAR  SIR, — I  am  sorry  I  am  not  able  to  satisfy  your
curiosity  by  giving  you  some  general  notion  of  the  plan  upon
which  I  proceed.  But  my  opinions  are  so  new,  and  even
some  terms  that  I  am  obliged  to  make  use  of,  that  I  could
not  propose,  by  any  abridgment,  to  give  my  system  an  air  of
likelihood,  or  so  much  as  make  it  intelligible.  It  is  a  thing
I  have  in  vain  attempted  already,  at  a  gentleman's  request  in
this  place,  who  thought  it  would  help  him  to  comprehend  and
judge  of  my  notions,  if  he  saw  them  all  at  once  before  him.
I  have  had  a  greater  desire  of  communicating  to  you  the
plan  of  the  whole,  that  I  believe  it  will  not  appear  in  public
before  the  beginning  of  next  winter.  For,  besides  that  it
would  be  difficult  to  have  it  printed  before  the  rising  of  the
parliament,  I  must  confess  I  am  not  ill  pleased  with  a  little
delay,  that  it  may  appear  with  as  few  imperfections  as  pos
sible.  I  have  been  here  near  three  months,  always  within  a


24  HISTORY OF  THE  EDITIONS.

•week  of  agreeing  with  my  printers  ;  and  you  may  imagine  I
did  not  forget  the  work  itself  during  that  time,  where  I  began
to  feel  some  passages  weaker  for  the  style  and  diction  than
I  could  have  wished.  The  nearness  and  greatness  of  the
event  roused  up  my  attention,  and  made  me  more  difficult  to
please,  than  when  I  was  alone  in  perfect  tranquillity  in  France.
But  here  I  must  tell  you  one  of  my  foibles.  I  have  a  great
inclination  to  go  down  to  Scotland  this  spring  to  see  my
friends ;  and  have  your  advice  concerning  my  philosophical
discoveries  ;  but  cannot  overcome  a  certain  shame-facedness
I  have  to  appear  among  you  at  my  years,  without  having  yet
a  settlement,  or  so  much  as  attempted  any.  How  happens  it
that  we  philosophers  cannot  as  heartily  despise  the  world  as
it  despises  us  ?  I  think  in  my  conscience  the  contempt  were
as  well  founded  on  our  side  as  on  the  other.  *  *  *

'  Your  thoughts  and  mine  agree  with  respect  to  Dr.  Butler,
and  I  would  be  glad  to  be  introduced  to  him.  I  am  at  pre
sent  castrating  my  work,  that  is,  cutting  off  its  nobler  parts  ;
that  is,  endeavouring  it  shall  give  as  little  offenc*3  as  possible,
before  which,  I  could  not  pretend  to  put  it  into  the  Doctor's
hands.  This  is  a  piece  of  cowardice,  for  which  I  blame  myself,
though  I  believe  none  of  my  friends  will  blame  me.  But  I
was  resolved  not  to  be  an  enthusiast  in  philosophy,  while  I
was  blaming  other  enthusiasms.'  l

Again,  on  March  4,  1738,  he  writes  :—

'  I  shall  not  trouble  you  with  any  formal  compliments  or
thanks,  which  would  be  but  an  ill  return  for  the  kindness
you  have  done  me  in  writing  in  my  behalf,  to  one  you  are  so
little  acquainted  with  as  Dr.  Butler;  and,  I  am  afraid,
stretching  the  truth  in  favour  of  a  friend.  I  have  called
upon  the  Doctor,  with  a  design  of  delivering  him  your  letter,
but  find  he  is  at  present  in  the  country.  I  am  a  little  anxious
to  have  the  Doctor's  opinion.  My  own  I  dare  not  trust  to  ;
both  because  it  concerns  myself,  and  because  it  is  so  variable,
that  I  know  not  how  to  fix  it.  Sometimes  it  elevates  me
above  the  clouds ;  at  other  times,  it  depresses  me  with  doubts
and  fears ;  so  that,  whatever  be  my  success,  I  cannot  be
entirely  disappointed.  Somebody  has  told  me  that  you  might
perhaps  be  in  London  this  spring.  I  should  esteem  this  a
very  lucky  event ;  and  notwithstanding  all  the  pleasures  of
1  Life.  Vol.  i.,  p.  62.


HISTORY OF  THE  EDITIONS.  25

the  town,  I  would  certainly  engage  you  to  pass  some  philo
sophical  evenings  with  me,  and  either  correct  my  judgment,
where  you  differ  from  me,  or  confirm  it  where  we  agree.  I
believe  I  have  some  need  of  the  one,  as  well  as  the  other ;
and  though  the  propensity  to  diffidence  be  an  error  on  the
better  side,  yet  'tis  an  error,  and  dangerous  as  well  as  dis
agreeable."

On  September  26,  1738,  he  sold  the  copyright  of  the  two
volumes  for  50Z.  to  John  Noone,  of  Cheapside,  and  they  ap
peared  in  January  1739,  with  the  following  advertisement: —

'ADVERTISEMENT.

*  MY  design  in  the  present  Work  is  sufficiently  explained
in  the  Introduction.  The  reader  must  only  observe,  that  all
the  subjects  I  have  there  planned  out  to  myself  are  not  treated
in  these  two  volumes.  The  subjects  of  the  Understanding
and  Passions  make  a  complete  chain  of  reasoning  by  them
selves  ;  and  I  was  willing  to  take  advantage  of  this  natural
division,  in  order  to  try  the  taste  of  the  Public.  If  I  have
the  good  fortune  to  meet  with  success,  I  shall  proceed  to  the
examination  of  Morals,  Politics,  and  Criticism,  which  will
complete  this  Treatise  of  Human  Nature.  The  approbation
of  the  Public  I  consider  as  the  greatest  reward  of  my  labours;
but  am  determined  to  regard  its  judgment,  whatever  it  be,  as
my  best  instruction.'

On  February  13,  he  wrote  to  H.  Home : —

*  SIR, — I  thought  to  have  wrote  this  from  a  place  nearer
you  than  London,  but  have  been  detained  here  by  contrary
winds,  which  have  kept  all  Berwick  ships  from  sailing.  'Tis
now  a  fortnight  since  my  book  was  published ;  and,  besides
many  other  considerations,  I  thought  it  would  contribute
very  much  to  my  tranquillity,  and  might  spare  me  many  mor
tifications,  to  be  in  the  country  while  the  success  of  the  work
was  doubtful.  I  am  afraid  'twill  remain  so  very  long.  Those
who  are  accustomed  to  reflect  on  such  abstract  subjects,  are
commonly  full  of  prejudices ;  and  those  who  are  unprejudiced
are  unacquainted  with  metaphysical  reasonings.  My  prin
ciples  are  also  so  remote  from  all  the  vulgar  sentiments  on
the  subject,  that  were  they  to  take  place,  they  would  produce
almost  a  total  alteration  in  philosophy  ;  and  you  know,  revo
lutions  of  this  kind  are  not  easily  brought  about.  I  am

1  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  64.


26  HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.

young  enough  to  see  what  will  become  of  the  matter ;  but
am  apprehensive  lest  the  chief  reward  I  shall  have  for  some
time  will  be  the  pleasure  of  studying  on  such  important  sub
jects,  and  the  approbation  of  a  few  judges.  Among  the  rest,
you  may  believe  I  aspire  to  your  approbation ;  and  next  to
that,  to  your  free  censure  and  criticism.  I  shall  present  you
with  a  copy  as  soon  as  I  come  to  Scotland ;  and  hope  your
curiosity,  as  well  as  friendship,  will  make  you  take  the  pains
of  perusing  it.

'  If  you  know  anybody  that  is  a  judge,  you  would  do  me
a  sensible  pleasure  in  engaging  him  to  a  serious  perusal  of
the  book.  'Tis  so  rare  to  meet  with  one  that  will  take  pains
on  a  book,  that  does  not  come  recommended  by  some  great
name  or  authority,  that  I  must  confess  I  am  as  fond  of
meeting  with  such  a  one  as  if  I  were  sure  of  his  approbation.
I  am,  however,  so  doubtful  in  that  particular,  that  I  have
endeavoured  all  I  could  to  conceal  my  name;  though  I
believe  I  have  not  been  so  cautious  in  this  respect  as  I  ought
to  have  been.

'  I  have  sent  the  Bishop  of  Bristol  a  copy,  but  could  not
wait  on  him  with  your  letter  alter  he  had  arrived  at  that
dignity.  At  least  I  thought  it  would  be  to  no  purpose  after
I  began  the  printing.  You'll  excuse  the  frailty  of  an  author
in  writing  so  long  a  letter  about  nothing  but  his  own  per
formances.  Authors  have  this  privilege  in  common  with
lovers ;  and  founded  on  the  same  reason,  that  they  are  both
besotted  with  a  blind  fondness  of  their  object.  I  have  been
upon  my  guard  against  this  frailty  ;  but  perhaps  this  has
rather  turned  to  my  prejudice.  The  reflection  on  our  caution
is  apt  to  give  us  a  more  implicit  confidence  afterwards,  when
we  come  to  form  a  judgment.' '

About  the  same  time,  he  wrote  to  Michael  Ramsay.

'  As  to  myself,  no  alteration  has  happened  to  my  fortune :
nor  have  I  taken  the  least  step  towards  it.  I  hope  things
will  be  riper  next  winter ;  and  I  would  not  aim  at  any  thing
till  I  could  judge  of  my  success  in  my  grand  undertaking,
and  see  upon  what  footing  I  shall  stand  in  the  world.  I  am
afraid,  however,  that  I  shall  not  have  any  great  success  of  a
sudden.  Such  performances  make  their  way  very  heavily  at
first,  when  they  are  not  recommended  by  any  great  name  or
authority.' 2

1 Life Vol.  i..  p.  10,).  -  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  107.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  27

The  next  letter  is  dated  June  1,  and  is  addressed  to
H.  Home.

'  DEAR  SIR, — You  see  I  am  better  than  my  word,  having
sent  you  two  papers  instead  of  one.  I  have  hints  for  two  or
three  more,  which  I  shall  execute  at  my  leisure.  I  am  not
much  in  the  humour  of  such  compositions  at  present,  having
received  news  from  London  of  the  success  of  my  Philosophy,
which  is  but  indifferent,  if  I  may  judge  by  the  sale  of  the
book,  and  if  I  may  believe  my  bookseller.  I  am  now  out  of
humour  with  myself;  but  doubt  not,  in  a  little  time,  to  be
only  out  of  humour  with  the  world,  like  other  unsuccessful
authors.  After  all,  I  am  sensible  of  my  folly  in  entertaining
any  discontent,  much  more  despair,  upon  this  account,  since
I  could  not  expect  any  better  from  such  abstract  reasoning ;
nor,  indeed,  did  I  promise  myself  much  better.  My  fondness
for  what  I  imagined  new  discoveries,  made  me  overlook  all
common  rules  of  prudence;  and,  having  enjoyed  the  usual
satisfaction  of  projectors,  'tis  but  just  I  should  meet  with
their  disappointments.  However,  as  'tis  observed  with  such
sort  of  people,  one  project  generally  succeeds  another,  I
doubt  not  but  in  a  day  or  two  I  shall  be  as  easy  as  ever,  in
hopes  that  truth  will  prevail  at  last  over  the  indifference  and
opposition  of  the  world.

'  You  see  I  might  at  present  subscribe  myself  your  most
humble  servant  with  great  propriety  :  but,  notwithstanding,
shall  presume  to  call  myself  your  most  affectionate  friend  as
well  as  humble  servant.' *

Nevertheless,  he  would  not  abandon  hope,  and  busied
himself  with  preparing  a  third  volume  for  the  press.  This
he  submitted  to  Francis  Hutcheson,  then  Professor  of  Moral
Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.  On  receiring
Hutcheson's  comments,  he  replied  as  follows  : —

•Ninewells,  17th  Sept.,  1739.

'  SIE, — I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  reflections  on
my  papers.  I  have  perused  them  with  care,  and  find  they
will  be  of  use  to  me.  You  have  mistaken  my  meaning  in
some  passages,  which,  upon  examination,  I  have  found  to
proceed  from  some  ambiguity  or  defect  in  my  expression.

'  What  affected  me  most  in  your  remarks,  is  your  observ
ing  that  there  wants  a  certain  warmth  in  the  cause  of  virtue,

O

1  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  108.


28  HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.

which  you  think  all  good  men  would  relish,  and  could  not
displease  amidst  abstract  inquiries.  I  must  own  this  has  not
happened  by  chance,  but  is  the  effect  of  a  reasoning  either
good  or  bad.  There  are  different  ways  of  examining  the
mind,  as  well  as  the  body.  One  may  consider  it  either  as  an
anatomist  or  as  a  painter :  either  to  discover  its  most  secret
springs  and  principles,  or  to  describe  the  grace  and  beauty
of  its  actions.  I  imagine  it  impossible  to  conjoin  these  two
views.  Where  you  pull  off  the  skin,  and  display  all  the
minute  parts,  there  appears  something  trivial,  even  in  the
noblest  attitudes  and  most  vigorous  actions  ;  nor  can  you
ever  render  the  object  graceful  or  engaging,  but  by  clothing
the  parts  again  with  skin  and  flesh,  and  presenting  only  their
bare  outside.  An  anatomist,  however,  can  give  very  good
advice  to  a  painter  or  statuary.  And,  in  like  manner,  I  am
persuaded  that  a  metaphysician  may  be  very  helpful  to  a
moralist,  though  I  cannot  easily  conceive  these  two  characters
united  in  the  same  work.  Any  warm  sentiment  of  morals,
I  am  afraid,  would  have  the  air  of  declamation  amidst  abstract
reasonings,  and  would  be  esteemed  contrary  to  good  taste.
And  though  I  am  much  more  ambitious  of  being  esteemed  a
friend  to  virtue  than  a  writer  of  taste,  yet  I  must  always  carry
the  latter  in  my  eye,  otherwise  I  must  despair  of  ever  being
serviceable  to  virtue.  I  hope  these  reasons  will  satisfy  you ;
though  at  the  same  time  I  intend  to  make  a  new  trial,  if  it
be  possible  to  make  the  moralist  and  metaphysician  agree  a
little  better.

'  I  cannot  agree  to  your  sense  of  natural.  'Tis  founded  on
final  causes,  which  is  a  consideration  that  appears  to  me
pretty  uncertain  and  unphilosophical.  For,  pray,  what  is  the
end  of  man  P  Is  he  created  for  happiness,  or  for  virtue  ?  for
this  life,  or  for  the  next  ?  for  himself,  or  for  his  Maker  ?
Your  definition  of  natural  depends  upon  solving  these  ques
tions,  which  are  endless,  and  quite  wide  of  nry  purpose.  T
have  never  called  justice  unnatural,  but  only  artificial.
"  Atque  ipsa  utilitas,  justi  prope  mater  et  cequi,"  says  one  of
the  best  moralists  of  antiquity.  Grotius  and  Puffendorf,  to
be  consistent,  must  assert  the  same.

'  Whether  natural  abilities  be  virtue,  is  a  dispute  of  words.
I  think  I  follow  the  common  use  of  language  ;  virtus  signified
chiefly  courage  among  the  Romans.  I  was  just  now  reading
this  character  of  Alexander  VI.  in  Guicciardin.  "In  Ales-


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  29

sandro  sesto  fu  solertia  et  sagacita  singulare  :  consiglio
eccellente,  efficacia  a  persuadere  maravigliosa,  et  a  tutte  le
faccende  gravi,  sollicitudine,  et  destrezza  incredibile.  Ma
erano  queste  virtu  avanzate  di  grande  intervallo  da  vitii."
Were  benevolence  the  only  virtue,  no  characters  could  be
mixed,  but  would  depend  entirely  on  their  degrees  of  benevo
lence.  Upon  the  whole,  I  desire  to  take  my  catalogue  of
virtues  from  "  Cicero's  Offices,"  not  from  "  The  Whole  Duty  of
Man."  I  had  indeed  the  former  book  in  my  eye  in  all  my
reasonings.

'  I  have  many  other  reflections  to  communicate  to  you  ;
but  it  would  be  troublesome.  I  shall  therefore  conclude  with
telling  you,  that  I  intend  to  follow  your  advice  in  altering
most  of  those  passages  you  have  remarked  as  defective  in
point  of  prudence :  though,  I  must  own,  I  think  you  a  little
too  delicate.  Except  a  man  be  in  orders,  or  be  immediately
concerned  in  the  instruction  of  youth,  I  do  not  think  his
character  depends  upon  his  philosophical  speculations,  as  the
world  is  now  modelled ;  and  a  little  liberty  seems  requisite
to  bring  into  the  public  notice  a  book  that  is  calculated  for
few  readers.  I  hope  you  will  allow  me  the  freedom  of  con
sulting  you  when  I  am  in  any  difficulty,  and  believe  me,  &c.

'  P.S. — I  cannot  forbear  recommending  another  thing  to
your  consideration.  Actions  are  not  virtuous  nor  vicious,  but
only  so  far  as  they  are  proofs  of  certain  qualities  or  durable
principles  in  the  mind.  This  is  a  point  I  should  have
established  more  expressly  than  I  have  done.  Now,  I  desire
you  to  consider  if  there  be  any  quality  that  is  virtuous,  with
out  having  a  tendency  either  to  the  public  good  or  to  the
good  of  the  person  who  possesses  it.  If  there  be  none  with
out  these  tendencies,  we  may  conclude  that  their  merit  is
derived  from  sympathy.  I  desire  you  would  only  consider  the
tendencies  of  qualities,  not  their  actual  operations,  which
depend  on  chance.  Brutus  riveted  the  chains  of  Rome  faster
by  his  opposition ;  but  the  natural  tendency  of  his  noble
dispositions  —  his  public  spirit  and  magnanimity  —  was  to
establish  her  liberty.

'  You  are  a  great  admirer  of  Cicero  as  well  as  I  am.  Please
to  review  the  fourth  book  De  Finibus  Bonorum  et  Malorum :
where  you  find  him  prove  against  the  Stoics,  that  if  there  be
no  other  goods  but  virtue,  'tis  impossible  there  can  be  any
virtue,  because  the  mind  would  then  want  all  motives  to


30  HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS

begin  its  actions  upon ;  and  'tis  on  the  goodness  or  badness
of  the  motives  that  the  virtue  of  the  action  depends.  This
proves,  that  to  every  virtuous  action  there  must  be  a  motive
or  impelling  passion  distinct  from  the  virtue,  and  that  virtue
can  never  be  the  sole  motive  to  any  action.  You  do  not
assent  to  this  :  though  I  think  there  is  no  proposition  more
certain  or  important.  I  must  own  my  proofs  were  not  dis
tinct  enough  and  must  be  altered.  You  see  with  what  re
luctance  I  part  with  you,  though  I  believe  it  is  time  I  should
ask  your  pardon  for  so  much  trouble.' l

When  this  volume  was  ready,  Hume  changed  his  publisher.
Although,  as  Mr.  Burton  observes,  50L  was  a  fair  sum  '  for
an  edition  of  a  new  metaphysical  work,  by  an  unknown  and
young  author,  born  and  brought  up  in  a  remote  part  of  the
empire,'  and  although  Noone  reported  that  the  book  did  not
sell,  Hume  was  suspicious,  and,  looking  back  upon  it  as  a
bad  bargain,  availed  himself  of  Hutcheson's  good  offices  to
obtain  an  introduction  to  Thomas  Longman.  Upon  this
subject  he  wrote  to  Hutcheson, —

'  16th  March,  1710.

'  DEAR  SIR, — I  must  trouble  you  to  write  that  letter  you
was  so  kind  as  to  offer  to  Longman  the  bookseller.  I  con
cluded  somewhat  of  a  liasty  bargain  with  my  bookseller,
from  indolence  and  an  aversion  to  bargaining :  as  also  because
I  was  told  that  few  or  no  booksellers  would  engage  for  one
edition  with  a  new  author.  I  was  also  determined  to  keep
my  name  a  secret  for  some  time,  though  I  find  I  have  failed
in  that  point.  I  sold  one  edition  of  these  two  volumes  for
fifty  guineas,  and  also  engaged  myself  heedlessly  in  a  clause,
which  may  prove  troublesome,  viz.  that  upon  printing  a
second  edition  I  shall  take  all  the  copies  remaining  upon
hand  at  the  bookseller's  price  at  the  time.  'Tis  in  order  to
have  some  check  upon  my  bookseller,  that  I  would  willingly
engage  with  another  :  and  I  doubt  not  but  your  recommen
dation  would  be  very  serviceable  to  me,  even  though  you  be
not  personally  acquainted  with  him.

'  I  wait  with  some  impatience  for  a  second  edition,  princi
pally  on  account  of  alterations  I  intend  to  make  in  my  per
formance.  This  is  an  advantage  that  we  authors  possess
since  the  invention  of  printing,  and  renders  the  nonum
prematur  in  annum  not  so  necessary  to  us  as  to  the  ancients.
1  Life.  Vol.  i.,  p.  112.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  31

Without  it  I  should  have  been  guilty  of  a  very  great  temerity,
to  publish  at  my  years  so  many  novelties  in  so  delicate  a  part
of  philosophy ;  and  at  any  rate,  I  am  afraid  that  I  must
plead  as  my  excuse  that  very  circumstance  of  youth  which
may  be  urged  against  me.  I  assure  you,  that  without  run
ning  any  of  the  heights  of  scepticism,  I  am  apt  in  a  cool
hour  to  suspect,  in  general,  that  most  of  my  reasonings  will
be  more  useful  by  furnishing  hints  and  exciting  people's
curiosity,  than  as  containing  any  principles  that  will  augment
the  stock  of  knowledge,  that  must  pass  to  future  ages.  I
wish  I  could  discover  more  fully  the  particulars  wherein  I
have  failed.  I  admire  so  much  the  candour  I  have  observed
in  Mr.  Locke,  yourself,  and  a  very  few  more,  that  I  would  be
extremely  ambitious  of  imitating  it,  by  frankly  confessing
my  errors.  If  I  do  not  imitate  it,  it  must  proceed  neither
from  my  being  free  from  errors  nor  want  of  inclination,  but
from  my  real  unaffected  ignorance.  I  shall  consider  more
carefully  all  the  particulars  you  mention  to  me  :  though  with
regard  to  abstract  ideas,  'tis  with  difficulty  I  can  entertain  a
doubt  on  that  head,  notwithstanding  your  authority.  Our
conversation  together  has  furnished  me  a  hint,  with  which
I  shall  augment  the  second  edition.  'Tis  this — the  word
simple  idea  is  an  abstract  term,  comprehending  different  in
dividuals  that  are  similar.  Yet  the  point  of  their  similarity,
from  the  very  nature  of  such  ideas,  is  not  distinct  nor  sepa
rable  from  the  rest.  Is  not  this  a  proof,  among  many  others,
that  there  may  be  a  similarity  without  any  possible  separation
oven  in  thought?

'  I  must  consult  you  in  a  point  of  prudence.  I  have  con
cluded  a  reasoning  with  these  two  sentences  :  "  When  you
pronounce  any  action  or  character  to  be  vicious,  you  mean
nothing  but  that,  from  the  particular  constitution  of  your
nature,  you  have  a  feeling  or  sentiment  of  blame  from  the
contemplation  of  it.  Vice  and  virtue,  therefore,  may  be
compared  to  sounds,  colours,  heat,  and  cold,  which,  according
to  modern  philosophy,  are  not  qualities  in  objects,  but  per
ceptions  in  the  mind.  And  this  discovery  in  morals,  like  that
other  in  physics,  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  mighty  advancement
of  the  speculative  sciences,  though  like  that  too  it  has  little
or  no  influence  on  practice.' !

1  'See  this  passage  in  the  "Treatise  of where  it  appears  with  no  other  varia-
ITuman  Nature,"  Book  iii.  Part  i.  sect.  1. tion  than  the  substitution  of  the  word


32  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

c  Is  not  this  laid  a  little  too  strong  ?  I  desire  your  opinion
of  it,  though  I  cannot  entirely  promise  to  conform  myself  to
it.  I  wish  from  my  heart  I  could  avoid  concluding,  that
since  morality,  according  to  your  opinion,  as  well  as  mine,
is  determined  merely  by  sentiment,  it  regards  only  human
nature  and  human  life.  This  has  been  often  urged  against
you,  and  the  consequences  are  very  momentous.  If  you  make
any  alterations  in  your  performances,  I  can  assure  you,  there
are  many  who  desire  you  would  more  fully  consider  this  point,
if  you  think  that  the  truth  lies  on  the  popular  side.  Other
wise  common  prudence,  your  character,  and  situation,  forbid
you  [to]  touch  upon  it.  If  morality  were  determined  by
reason,  that  is  the  same  to  all  rational  beings ;  but  nothing
but  experience  can  assure  us  that  the  sentiments  are  the
same.  What  experience  have  we  with  regard  to  superior
beings  ?  How  can  we  ascribe  to  them  any  sentiments  at  all  'P
They  have  implanted  those  sentiments  in  us  for  the  conduct
of  life  like  our  bodily  sensations,  which  they  possess  not
themselves.  I  expect  no  answer  to  these  difficulties  in  the
compass  of  a  letter.  'Tis  enough  if  you  have  patience  to
read  so  long  a  letter  as  this.'  l

Mr.  Longman  published  the  volume;  on  what  terms,  is  not
known.

The  following  advertisement  was  prefixed  to  it : —

'  I  think  it  proper  to  inform  the  public,  that  tho'  this  be  a
third  volume  of  the  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  yet  'tis  in
some  measure  independent  of  the  other  two,  and  requires  not
that  the  reader  shou'd  enter  into  all  the  abstract  reasonings
contain'd  in  them,  I  am  hopeful  it  may  be  understood  by
ordinary  readers,  with  as  little  attention  as  is  tisually  given
to  any  books  of  reasoning.  It  must  only  be  observ'd,  that  I
continue  to  make  use  of  the  terms,  impressioiis  and  ideas,  in
the  same  sense  as  formerly;  and  that  by  impressions  I  mean
our  stronger  perceptions,  such  as  our  sensations,  affections
and  sentiments ;  and  by  ideas  the  fainter  perceptions,  or  the
copies  of  these  in  the  memory  and  imagination,'

In  the  letter  to  Hutcheson  last  quoted,  it  will  be  noticed
that  Hume  still  anticipated  a  second  edition.  But  although

"  considerable,"  for  mighty.  It  thus  ap- as  to  induce  the  author  materially  to
ppars  that  whatever  remarks  Hutcheson alter  it.' — Mr.  BURTON.
made  on  the  passage,  they  were  not  such

1  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  117


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  33

his  hopes  were  not  quenched,  a  tone  of  disappointment  can  be
detected  in  the  third  volume.  In  1739,  he  had  spoken  fa
vourably  of  the  attention  paid  to  Philosophy  in  England.
*  Reckoning  from  Thales  to  Socrates,  the  space  of  time  is
nearly  equal  to  that  betwixt  my  Lord  Bacon  and  some  late
philosophers  in  England,  (Mr.  Locke,  my  Lord  Shaftsbury,
Dr.  Mandeville,  Mr.  Hutchinson,  Dr.  Butler,  &c.),  who  have
begun  to  put  the  science  of  man  on  a  new  footing,  and  have
engaged  the  attention,  and  excited  the  curiosity  of  the  public.
So  true  it  is,  that  however  other  nations  may  rival  us  in
poetry,  and  excel  us  in  some  other  agreeable  arts,  the  im
provements  in  reason  and  philosophy  can  only  be  owing  to  a
land  of  toleration  and  of  liberty.' l  t  We  now  proceed  to
explain  the  nature  of  personal  identity,  which  has  become
so  great  a  question  in  philosophy,  especially  of  late  years,  in
England,  where  all  the  abstruser  sciences  are  studied  with
a  peculiar  ardour  and  application.'  3  But  in  the  third  volume
he  wrote :  '  Without  this  advantage,  I  never  should  have
ventured  upon  a  third  volume  of  such  abstruse  philosophy,
in  an  age  wherein  the  greatest  part  of  men  seem  agreed  to
convert  reading  into  an  amusement  and  to  reject  every  thing
that  requires  any  considerable  degree  of  attention  to  be  com
prehended.'3  And,  further,  it  may  be  observed  that  the
Advertisement  attempts  to  dissociate  this  volume  from  the
preceding  ones,  and  to  secure  for  it  a  wider  audience.

Before  long  his  hopes  were  finally  dashed  to  the  ground.
As  he  says  in  his  autobiography,  'Never  literary  attempt
was  more  unfortunate  than  my  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature."
It  fell  dead-born  from  the  press,  without  reaching  such  dis
tinction  as  even  to  excite  a  murmur  among  the  zealots.'  The
last  statement  admits  of  a  trifling  correction.  In  a  letter4  to
Uutcheson  dated  March  4,  1740,  he  says  :—

'  My  bookseller  has  sent  to  Mr.  Smith*  a  copy  of  my  book,
which  I  hope  he  has  received,  as  well  as  your  letter.  I  have
not  yet  heard  what  he  has  done  with  the  abstract ;  perhaps
you  have.  I  have  got  it  printed  in  London,  but  not  in  The
Works  of  the  Learned,  there  having  been  an  article  with
regard  to  my  book,  somewhat  abusive,  printed  in  that  work,
before  I  sent  up  the  abstract.'6

1  Vol.  i.,  p.  308.  *  Mr.  Burton  believes  that  this  was

2  Vol.  i.,  p.  539.  Adam  Smith.

3  Vol.  ii..  p.  234.  6  MS.  R.S.E.  Of  this abstract the

4  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  116.  Editor  has  discovered  no  trace.

VOL.  III.  D


34  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

The  review  in  question,  one  of  the  longest  in  this  magazine,
consists  of  two  notices  in  the  numbers  for  November  and
December,  1 739,  occupying  in  all  51  pages.  The  object  of  the
reviewer  is  not  to  discuss  the  argument  of  the  book,  but  to
give  a  synopsis  of  its  contents,  a.nd,  as  far  as  possible,  to  leave
the  author  to  speak  for  himself  in  lengthy  quotations,  which,
however,  are  accompanied  by  an  ironical  comment.  At  the
outset  the  reviewer  remarks  upon  the  most  prominent  blemish
in  style.  '  This  work  abounds  throughout  with  Egotisms.  The
Author  could  scarcely  use  that  Form  of  Speech  more  fre
quently,  if  he  had  written  his  own  Memoirs.'

He  is  delighted,  as  might  be  expected,  with  the  passage  in
which  mistaken  reasoning  is  explained  by  the  blunders  of
the  animal  spirits  in  rummaging  among  the  cells  of  the
brain.  The  melancholy  confessions  of  the  Conclusion  of  the
Fourth  Part  of  Book  I.  receive  a  fair  share  of  compassion :
and  the  article  ends  with  the  following  paragraphs :

'  I  will  take  Leave  of  our  Author  while  he  is  in  this  chear-
ful  Mood,  in  this  agreeable  Situation ;  for,  by  looking  forward,
I  perceive  him  extremely  ready  to  relapse  into  profound
Meditations  on  incomprehensible  Subjects,  and  so  into  Scep
ticism,  Chagrin,  and  all  that  gloomy  frightful  Train  of  Ideas
from  whence  he  is  but  this  Moment  emerged.  Whether  I
shall  wait  upon  him  any  more,  and  venture  with  him  into
those  immense  Depths  of  Philosophy  which  he  launches  into
in  his  second  Volume,  I  am  not  yet  determined.  Perhaps  I
have  already  and  sufficiently  answered  the  End  of  this  Article,
which  is  to  make  the  Treatise  it  refers  to  more  generally
known  than  I  think  it  has  been ;  to  bring  it,  as  far  as  I  am
able,  into  the  Observation  of  the  Learned,  who  are  the  proper
Judges  of  its  Contents,  who  will  give  a  Sanction  to  its  Doc
trines,  where  they  are  true  and  useful,  and  who  have  Autho
rity  to  correct  the  Mistakes  where  they  are  of  a  different
Nature  ;  and  lastly,  to  hint  to  the  ingenious  Writer,  whoever
he  is,  some  Particulars  in  his  Performance,  that  may  require
a  very  serious  Reconsideration.  It  bears  indeed  incontes
table  Marks  of  a  great  Capacity,  of  a  soaring  Genius,  but
young,  and  not  yet  thoroughly  practised.  The  Subject  is
vast  and  noble  as  any  that  can  exercise  the  Understanding ;
but  it  requires  a  very  mature  Judgment  to  handle  it  as  be
comes  its  Dignity  and  Importance;  the  utmost  Prudence,
Tenderness  and  Delicacy,  are  requisite  to  this  desirable  Issue.
Time  and  Use  may  ripen  these  Qualities  in  our  Author ;  and


HISTORY OF  THE  EDITIONS.  35

we  shall  probably  have  Eeason  to  consider  this,  compared
with  his  later  Productions,  in  the  same  Light  as  we  view
the  Juvenile  Works  of  Milton,  or  the  first  Manner  oc  a
Raphael,  to  other  celebrated  Painters.'

Two  passages  in  the  article  may  be  quoted,  as  illustrating
the  repute  in  which  Locke  and  Berkeley  were  held  at  the  time.

'  A  man,  who  has  never  had  the  Pleasure  of  reading  Mr.
Locke's  incomparable  Essay,  will  peruse  our  Author  with
much  less  Disgust,  than  those  can  who  have  been  used  to  the
irresistible  Eeasoning  and  wonderful  Perspicuity  of  that  ad
mirable  Writer.'  ....

'It  is  above  twenty  Years  since  I  looked  over  that  Piece  of
Dr.  Berkeley's,  which  contains  this  most  precious  discovery,1
and,  if  I  remember  right,  that  Gentleman  himself  boasts  of
some  mighty  Advantages  that  would  accrue  from  it  to  the
Commonwealth  of  Learning.  The  Acquisition  of  Science
was  to  become  exceeding  easy,  and  several  Difficulties,  that
were  used  grievously  to  perplex  Mathematicians  and  Meta
physicians,  were  to  sink  before  it :  In  short,  it  was  to  do
such  Feats  in  behalf  of  Knowledge,  as  no  Principle  beside
was  able  to  perform.  But  notwithstanding  all  these  Benefits
that  were  to  accompany  it,  I  do  not  find  it  has  met  with  any
favourable  Reception  among  the  Literati ;  or  that  many
Persons  of  Ability  and  Penetration  are  become  Disciples :
Its  Fortune  may  now  perhaps  be  more  prosperous  under  the
Auspices  of  its  new  Patron,  who,  we  see,  undertakes  to  raise
it  above  all  Opposition.'

The  intention  to  return  to  the  subject  was  never  fulfilled
by  the  reviewer :  neither  the  second  nor  the  third  volume  is
mentioned  in  the  History  of  the  Works  of  the  Learned.
With  the  exception  of  this  criticism  the  Treatise  was  unno
ticed,  and  Hume  believed  that  the  labour  of  his  life  had  been
thrown  away.  This  was  the  severest  blow  that  Hume  ever
experienced,  and  its  history  supplies  the  clue  to  the  develop
ment  of  his  ch  aracter.

Henceforth,  by  a  natural  revulsion  of  sentiment,  he  re
garded  the  Treatise  with  aversion.  This  feeling  was  strength
ened  by  a  growing  dislike  to  the  many  faults  of  style  which
disfigure  it.  The  abundant  Scotticisms2  became  more  and

•Berkeley's doctrine of Abstract  "  I  wonder  (said  Johnson)  that  he  should

General  Ideas.  find  them."  ' — Boswell. The  collection

2  '  I  told  him  that  David  Hume  had  of  Scotticisms  is  printed  in  Vol.  iv.
made  a  short  collection  of  Scotticisms.

D  2


80  HISTORY OF  THE EDITIONS.

more  repugnant  to  a  writer,  who  ardently  desired  to  be  mis
taken  for  an  Englishman  in  grammar  and  diction.  The
constant  repetition  of  such  egotisms  as  *  I  think'  and  'I  am
convinc'd'  disgusted  a  critic,  who  fastidiously  weighed  every
phrase  of  his  Essays  as  they  passed  through  successive
editions.  The  fragmentary  nature  of  the  argument :  the
lack  of  literary  finish :  the  traces  of  a  recluse,  who  had  mixed
little  in  society :  the  dogmatic  tone  of  the  argument :  the
dry,  a  priori  mode  of  reasoning :  the  close  adherence  to  the
lines  marked  out  by  Locke  and  Berkeley,  owing  to  which
the  Treatise  can  hardly  stand  alone :  a  certain  want  of  cohe
rence  between  the  various  trains  of  thought :  all  these  were
further  considerations  which  tended  to  inflame  a  bitter  sense
of  mortification.  Few  men  of  letters  have  been  at  heart  so
vain  and  greedy  of  fame  as  was  Hume.  In  all  other  respects
he  learned  to  school  his  temper;  but  his  appetite  for  ap
plause  was  insatiable,  and  even  his  publisher  had  on  occasion
to  rebuke  the  philosopher.

Of  his  feelings  at  the  time  we  possess  no  record ;  but  the
following  letter,  written  long  afterwards,  exhibits  his  maturer
judgment.

*  I  believe  the  Philosophical  Essays  contain  every  thing  of
consequence  relating  to  the  understanding,  which  you  would
meet  with  in  the  Treatise ;  and  I  give  you  my  advice  against
reading the latter. By  shortening  and simplifying  the
questions, I really render them much more complete.
Addo  dum  minuo. The  philosophical  principles  are  the  same
in  both ;  but  I  was  carried  away  by  the  heat  of  youth  and
invention  to  publish  too  precipitately. — So  vast  an  under
taking,  planned  before  I  was  one-and-twenty,  and  composed
before  twenty-five,  must  necessarily  be  very  defective. I
have  repented  my  haste  a  hundred,  and  a  hundred  times.'1

Another  letter  may  be  quoted  ;  to  whom  written,  and  when,
is  not  known :  Mr.  Burton  conjectures,  at  an  advanced  period
of  life.

*  That  you  may  see  I  would  no  way  scruple  of  owning  my
mistakes  in  argument,  I  shall  acknowledge  (what  is  infinitely
more  material)  a  very  great  mistake  in  conduct,  viz.  my  pub
lishing  at  all  the  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,"  a  book  which
pretended  to  innovate  in  all  the  sublimest  paths  of  philosophy,
and  which  I  composed  before  1  was  five-and-twenty ; above

1  Letter  to  Gilbert  Elliot  of  Minto,  1751. Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  337.


HISTORY OF  THE EDITIONS.  37

all,  the  positive  air  which  prevails  in  that  book,  and  which
may  be  imputed  to  the  ardour  of  youth,  so  much  displeases
Tie,  that  I  have  not  patience  to  review  it.  But  what  success
the  same  doctrines,  better  illustrated  and  expressed,  may
meet  with,  adhuc  sub  judice  Us  est.  The  arguments  have  been
laid  before  the  world,  and  by  some  philosophical  minds  have
been  attended  to.  I  am  willing  to  be  instructed  by  the
public  ;  though  human  life  is  so  shcrt,  that  I  despair  of  ever
seeing  the  decision.  I  wish  I  had  always  confined-  myself  to
the  more  easy  parts  of  erudition ;  but  you  will  excuse  me
from  submitting  to  a  proverbial  decision,  let  it  even  be  in
Greek.' l

From  these  extracts  it  appears  that  the  Treatise  was  writtei
between  one-and-twenty  and  five-and-twenty.  In  the  Ad
vertisement  to  the  posthumous  edition  of  his  Essays,  he
published  the  statement,  that  it  was  projected  before  he  left
college,  and  written  and  published  '  not  long  after.'  There
is  some  difficulty  in  these  dates.  Hume  entered  the  Univer
sity  of  Edinburgh  in  1723,  when  he  was  nearly  twelve
years  of  age.  There  is  no  direct  evidence  as  to  the  time
when  he  '  left  college.'  Mr.  Burton  says,  '  We  find  him
speaking  of  having  received  the  usual  college  education  of
Scotland,  which  terminates  when  the  student  is  fourteen  or
fifteen  years  old.'2  In  a  letter  already  quoted  (p.  19)  Hume
has  spoken  as  if  this  had  been  his  own  case.  If  so,  he  left
college,  at  latest,  early  in  1727,  and  as  the  Treatise  was
published  in  1739,  the  interval  was  not  a  short  one.  It  ap
pears  probable  that  Hume  confounded  the  date  of  leaving
college  with  the  year  in  which,  as  the  same  letter  informs
us,  he  first  discovered  a  'new  medium,  by  which  truth  might
be  established.'  This  happened  in  1729,  when  he  was
eighteen  ;  the  next  eight  years  were  occupied  in  elaborating
the  discovery,  and  the  work  was  definitely  finished  in  1 736,
before  he  '  was  five-and-twenty,'  and  a  year  before  he  quitted
La.  Fleche.

It  was  in  the  Advertisement  from  which  this  statement
has  been  quoted,  that  Hume  expressed  his  desire,  that  the
Treatise  might  no  longer  be  regarded  as  expressing  his
sentiments.  It  runs  as  follows  :

'  Most  of  the  principles,  and  reasonings,  contained  in  this
volume,  were  published  in  a  work  in  three  volumes,  called
A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature :  A  work  which  the  Author

1 Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  98.  2  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  10.


38  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

had  projected  before  he  left  College,  and  which  he  wrote  and
published  not  long  after.  But  not  finding  it  successful,  he
was  sensible  of  his  error  in  going  to  the  press  too  early,  and
he  cast  the  whole  anew  in  the  following  pieces,  where  some
negligences  in  his  former  reasoning  and  more  in  the  expres
sion,  are,  he  hopes,  corrected.  Yet  several  writers,  who  have
honoured  the  Author's  Philosophy  with  answers,  have  taken
care  to  direct  all  their  batteries  against  that  juvenile  work,
which  the  Author  never  acknowledged,  and  have  affected  to
triumph  in  any  advantages,  which,  they  imagined,  they  had
obtained  over  it :  A  practice  very  contrary  to  all  rules  of
candour  and  fair-dealing,  and  a  strong  instance  of  those
polemical  artifices,  which  a  bigotted  zeal  thinks  itself  autho
rised  to  employ.  Henceforth,  the  Author  desires,  that  the
following  Pieces  may  alone  be  regarded  as  containing  his
philosophical  sentiments  and  principles.'

This  Advertisement  was  first  printed  by  way  of  preface  to
the  posthumous  and  authoritative  edition  of  1777.  One
blunder  has  already  been  examined.  Another  occurs  in  the
assertion,  that  the  whole  had  been  cast  anew  in  the  In
quiries.  Without  going  into  details,  we  may  mention  that
Vol.  'i.,  Part  II.,  Of  the  Ideas  of  Space  and  Time,  was
indeed  re- written,  but  the  monograph  never  appeared ;  and
that  Part  IV.  of  the  same  volume,  in  many  respects  the  most
interesting  portion  of  the  Treatise,  was  never  resumed.

In  the  Life  of  Hume  Mr.  Burton  appears,  if  not  to  have
made  a  mistake  about  this  Advertisement,  at  least  to  have
written  what  is  calculated  to  mislead.  Speaking  of  the
publication  of  the  Inquiry  concerning  the  Human  Under
standing  in  1748,  he  says  : '  He  now  desired  that  the  "Treatise
of  Human  Nature  "  should  be  treated  as  a  work  blotted  out
of  literature,  and  that  the  "  Inquiry"  should  be  substituted  in
its  place.  In  the  subsequent  editions  of  the  latter  work,  he
complained  that  this  had  not  been  complied  with ;  that  the
world  still  looked  at  those  forbidden  volumes  of  which  he  had
dictated  the  suppression.' l  The  only  reference  to  the  Treatise
in  Hume's  writings  is  that  in  the  Advertisement  to  the  post
humous  edition,  which  has  just  been  quoted.

But  we  quite  agree  with  Mr.  Burton,  that  it  is  impossible
*  to  detach  this  book  from  general  literature.'  In  deference
to  Hume's  wishes,  an  author  should  always  remind  his

1  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  273.


HISTORY  OF THE EDITIONS.  39

audience,  if  they  require  the  warning,  that  the  Treatise  does
not  represent  Hume's  later  sentiments ;  and  to  those  who
are  interested  in  the  biographies  of  philosophers,  this  episode
is  interesting.  But  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  consign  such  a
book  to  oblivion  out  of  respect  to  its  author's  change  of
feeling.  By  so  doing,  we  should  wilfully  ignore  some  of  the
acutest  speculations  of  one  of  our  acutest  thinkers  ;  and
those,  too,  on  points  which  are  not  discussed  in  any  of  his
subsequent  writings.  We  should  miss  the  instructive  lesson
which  is  gained  by  observing  how  closely  the  course  of  hi*
speculations  was  determined  for  him  by  Locke  and  Berkeley
We  should  lose  the  key  to  much  philosophy,  both  Scotch  and
German.

It  would  not  appear  requisite  to  say  much  on  this  head,
but  that  men  of  mark,  like  Professor  Fowler  and  Mr.  Hunt,
appear  to  pride  themselves  on  ignorance  of  the  Treatise.
The  former  says  ('  Inductive  Logic,'  p.  24)  :  *  In  quoting
or  referring  to  Hume,  I  have  employed  only  his  Essays.
Many  writers  persist  in  making  references  to  his  Treatise  of
Human  Nature,  a  work  whi^li  he  himself  repudiated,  as
containing  an  immature  expression  of  his  opinions.  In  the
Advertisement  to  his  Essays,  he  desires  that  "the  follow
ing  pieces  may  alone  be  regarded  as  containing  the  author's
sentiments  and  principles."  Mr.  Hunt  is  more  violent
('  Contemporary  Review,'  May  1869  ;  p.  79) :  '  Hume's  first
publication  was  the  "  Treatise  of  Human  Nature."  As  this
work  was  afterwards  disowned  by  its  author,  we  need  not
do  more  than  mention  it.  Its  place  was  supplied  by  the
"  Essays,"  in  which  the  chief  questions  were  treated  with
more  accuracy  and  clearness,  while  many  of  the  more  intri
cate  and  ingenious  but  less  important  reasonings  were
omitted.'  After  this  one  is  prepared  to  learn  that  Professor
Fowler  never  quotes  the  .ZEneid  as  Virgil's,  and  that  Mr.  Hunt
never  quotes  it  at  all.  l

It  might,  perhaps,  have  been  expected  that  Hume's  resi
dence  in  France  would  have  exercised  a  perceptible  influence
upon  the  reasonings  of  the  Treatise.  Yet  it  is  not  too  much
to  say,  that,  with  a  few  unimportant  exceptions,  there  is  no
trace  of  it.  The  writer  was  little  acquainted  with,  and  is

1  From Mr.  Hunt's  estimate  of  the  hint that the advertiscmen-  was  the

relative  merits  of  the  Treatise  and  the  posthumous utterance of a splenetic

Essays,  we presume  to differ in toto.  invalid.
Professor Fowler's  readers receive  no


40  HISTOEY  OF  THE EDITIONS.

little  interested  in,  any  foreign  school  of  philosophy.  His
knowledge  of  Spinoza  was  derived  from  Bayle's  dictionary.
Twice  he  gives  a  direct  reference  to  '  Malbranch.'  He  refers
in  one  paragraph  to  the  Port  Royal  Logic,  whence,  too,  he
borrows  the  instance  of  the  chiliagon.  There  is  no  trace  of  a
direct  knowledge  of  Des  Cartes.  The  only  French  writer,
besides,  whom  he  quotes  for  other  than  ornamental  purposes,
is  Malezieu,  and  this  reference,  no  doubt,  owes  its  origin  to
Hume's  residence  at  La  Fleche.  At  least,  the  '  Elements  de
Geometric  de  M.  le  due  de  Bourgoyne'  does  not  seem  to
have  been  generally  known  in  England ;  and  at  the  present
day  no  copy  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  British  Museum,  or  in
Bodley's  Library.  In  short,  the  Treatise  from  beginning  to
end  is  the  work  of  a  solitary  Scotchman,  who  has  devoted
himself  to  the  critical  study  of  Locke  and  Berkeley.  That
he  lived  for  three  years  in  France,  was  an  accident  which  has
left  no  trace  either  in  the  tone  or  in  the  matter  of  his  book.

In  style,  however,  so  far  as  the  structure  of  sentences  is
concerned,  no  doubt  he  was  already  influenced  by  the  litera
ture  of  France.1  The  style  of  the  Treatise  is  indeed  immature,
but  it  reveals  the  tendencies  which  were  ripened  by  inces
sant  labour,  until  Hume  became  the  one  master  of  philosophic
English.

Whatever  disappointment  had  fallen  to  Hume's  share,  so
active  and  sanguine  a  mind  could  not  lie  quiet.  In  1741
he  published  anonymously  a  volume  of  '  Essays,  Moral  and
Political ;'  which  ran  into  a  *  Second  Edition,  Corrected,'  in
the  following  year,  when  also  a  second  volume  was  added.

Unlike  the  ill-starred  Treatise  this  venture  was  success
ful.  Hume  himself  says  in  his  Autobiography  :  *  In  1742  I
printed  at  Edinburgh  the  first  part  of  my  Essays :  the  work
was  favourably  received,  and  soon  made  me  entirely  forget
my  former  disappointment.'  And  in  a  letter  to  Henry  Home,
dated  June  13,  1742,  he  adds  : 2  '  The  Essays  are  all  sold  in
London,  as  I  am  informed  by  two  letters  from  English
gentlemen  of  my  acquaintance.  There  is  a  demand  for

1  'The  conversation  now  turned  upon  allow that the English language is

Mr.  David  Hume's style. Johnson :  established, he is wrong. My  name

"  "Why,  sir,  his  style  is  not  English  ;  the  might  originally  have  been  Nicholson,

structure of  his sentences is  French.  as  well  as  Johnson,  but  were  you  to  call

Now  the  French  structure  and  the  Eng-  me  Nicholson,  you  would  call me  very

lish structure may,  in the  nature of  absurdly." '— Boswell.

things, be  equally  good. But if  you  •  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  143.


HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.  41

them ;  and,  as  one  of  them  tells  me,  Innys,  the  great  book
seller  in  Paul's  Churchyard,  wonders  there  is  not  a  new
edition,  for  that  he  cannot  find  copies  for  his  customers.  I
am  also  told  that  Dr.  Butler  has  everywhere  recommended
them ;  so  that  I  hope  they  will  have  some  success.  They
may  prove  like  dung  with  marl,  and  bring  forward  the  rest
of  my  Philosophy,  which  is  of  a  more  durable,  though  of  a
harder  and  more  stubborn  nature.  You  see  I  can  talk  to  you
in  your  own  style.'  It  appears  that  Hume  was  recovering
from  his  disappointment,  and  was  gratified  to  have  won  the
ear  of  Bp.  Butler,  whose  judgment  on  the  '  Treatise '  he
had  been  so  anxious  to  obtain.

But  how  were  these  Essays  to  bring  forward  the  rest  of
his  Philosophy?  Like  the  Treatise,  they  were  published
anonymously:  in  the  Advertisement  he  assumed  the  cha
racter  of  an  author  who  is  making  his  first  appearance.
There  is  no  evidence  to  decide  this  question :  but  the  conjec
ture  is  almost  certain,  that  he  had  already  determined  to
abandon  the  Treatise,  and  to  reproduce  portions  of  it  in  a
more  popular  form.

The  Preface  to  the  original  volume  of  Essays,  runs  as
follows : —

'  Most  of  these  ESSAYS  were  wrote  with  a  View  of  being  pub
lished  as  WEEKLY-PAPERS,  and  were  intended  to  comprehend
the  Designs  both  of  the  SPECTATORS  &  CRAFTSMEN.  But
having  dropt  that  Undertaking,  partly  from  LAZINESS,  partly
from  WANT  of  LEISURE,  and  being  willing  to  make  Trial  of
my  Talents  for  Writing,  before  I  ventur'd  upon  any  more
serious  Compositions,  I  was  induced  to  communicate  these
Trifles  to  the  Judgment  of  the  Public.  Like  most  new
Authors,  I  must  confess,  I  feel  some  Anxiety  concerning  the
Success  of  my  Work:  But  one  Thing  makes  me  more
secure;  That  the  READER  may  condemn  my  Abilities,  but
must  approve  of  my  Moderation  and  Impartiality  in  my
Method  of  handling  POLITICAL  SUBJECTS  :  And  as  long  as
my  Moral  Character  is  in  Safety,  I  can,  with  less  Anxiety,
abandon  my  Learning  and  Capacity  to  the  most  severe  Cen
sure  and  Examination.  Public  Spirit,  methinks,  shou'd  engage
us  to  love  the  Public,  and  to  bear  an  equal  Affection  to  all
our  Country- Men  ;  not  to  hate  one  Half  of  them,  under  Pre
text  of  loving  the  Whole.  This  PARTY-RAGE  I  have  endea-
vour'd  to  repress,  as  far  as  possible ;  and  I  hope  this  Design


42  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

will  be  acceptable  to  the  moderate  of  both  Parties ;  at  the
same  Time,  that,  perhaps,  it  may  displease  the  Bigots  of  both.

*  The  EEADEE  must  not  look  for  any  Connexion  among
these  Essays,  but  must  consider  each  of  them  as  a  Work
apart.  This  is  an  Indulgence  that  is  given  to  all  ESSAY-
WRITERS,  and  is  an  equal  Ease  both  to  WRITER  and  Eeader,
by  freeing  them  from  any  tiresome  stretch  of  Attention  or
Application.'

The  volume  contains  15  Essays: —

1.  Of  the  Delicacy  of  Taste  and  Reason.

2.  Of  the  Liberty  of  the  Press.

3.  Of  Impudence  and  Modesty.

4.  That  Politics  may  be  reduc'd  to  a  Science.

5.  Of  the  first  Principles  of  Government*

6.  Of  Love  and  Marriage.

7.  Of  the  Study  of  History.

8.  Of  the  Independency  of  Parliament.

9.  Whether the  British  Government inclines more  to

Absolute  Monarchy  or  to  a  Republic.

10.  Of  Parties  in  general.

11.  Of  the  Parties  of  Gt.  Britain.

12.  Of  Superstition  and  Enthusiasm.

13.  Of  Avarice.

14.  Of  the  Dignity  of  Human  Nature.

15.  Of  Liberty  and  Despotism.

The  corrections  in  the  second  edition  are  few  and  unim
portant,  chiefly  concerning  unguarded  statements  on  points
of  Roman  History.  The  Second  Volume,  which  is  not
referred  to  in  the  title-page  of  either  edition  of  the  First,
contains  12  Essays:—

1.  Of  Essay  Writing.

2.  Of  Eloquence.

3.  Of  Moral  Prejudices.

4.  Of  the  Middle  Station  of  Life.

5.  Of  the  Rise  and  Process  of  Arts  and  Sciences.

6.  The  Epicurean.

7.  The  Stoic.

8.  The  Platonist.

9.  The  Sceptic.

10.  Of  Polygamy  and  Divorces.

11.  Of  Simplicity  and  Refinement.

12.  A  Character  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  43

The  first  Essay  in  the  second  volume,  Of  Essay  Writing,
(which  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  vol.  iv.),  was  certainly
written,  when  the  author  designed,  as  he  says  in  the  Adver
tisement,  to  publish  his  Essays  in  a  series  of  weekly  papers,
to  which  it  would  have  served  as  an  introduction.  Lamenting
that  the  Learned  and  the  ^Conversible  Worlds  have  been
estranged  of  late,  he  proposes  to  act  as  an  Ambassador
between  them,  and  to  reside  at  the  Court  of  the  latter,  where
it  will  be  his  mission  to  communicate  the  latest  news  of  the
Learned  World.  He  begins  therefore  by  paying  his  respects
to  the  fair  sex,  who  constitute  the  Sovereignty  of  the  King
dom,  and  invites  them  to  imitate  the  example  of  Parisian
Society  by  assuming  the  high  functions  of  criticism  and
frowning  down  those  barbarous  eccentricities  which  disfigure
English  Literature.  As  he  says  elsewhere  :  *  The  elegance
and  propriety  of  style  have  been  very  much  neglected  among
us.  We  have  no  dictionary  of  our  language,  and  scarcely  a
tolerable  grammar.  The  first  polite  prose  we  have,  was  writ
by  a  man  who  is  still  alive.'1  In  this  Essay  he  expresses
himself  confident,  that  if  the  Ladies  only  threw  off  a  false
shame,  they  might  do  much  to  ameliorate  this  state  of
things,  there  being  only  one  branch  of  literature  in  which
their  judgment  is  to  be  distrusted,  i.e.  books  of  gallantry
and  devotion,  '  which  they  commonly  affect  as  high  flown  as
possible.'  It  was  no  doubt  with  the  design  of  conciliating
his  fair  critics,  that  Hume  included  several  papers  on  lighter
subjects,  such  as  Love  and  Marriage,  Impudence  and  Modesty,
&c.,  which  can  hardly  have  been  much  to  their  writer's  taste,
and  which  mingle  strangely  with  a  series  of  discussions  on
the  British  Constitution.  Nor  were  they  successful ;  that
the  challenge  was  taken  up  by  a  coterie  of  ladies,  who  con
demned  his  efforts,  appears  from  a  letter  to  William  Mure
of  Caldwell.

'  With  my  humble  compliments  to  the  ladies,  and  tell
them,  I  should  endeavour  to  satisfy  them,  if  they  would  name
the  subject  of  the  essay  they  desire.  For  my  part,  I  know
not  a  better  subject  than  themselves ;  if  it  were  not,  that  being
accused  of  being  unintelligible  in  some  of  my  writings,  I
should  be  extremely  in  danger  of  falling  into  that  fault,  when
I  should  treat  of  a  subject  so  little  to  be  understood  as
women.  I  would,  therefore,  rather  have  them  assign  me  the

1  Essay  lii Dean  Swift.


44  HISTORY OF  TILE  EDITIONS.

deiform  fund  of  the  soul,  the  passive  unions  of  nothing  with
nothing,  or  any  other  of  those  mystical  points,  which  I
would  endeavour  to  clear  up,  and  render  perspicuous  to  the
meanest  readers.'1

With  this  Essay  six  others  may  be  classed,  apparently
designed  to  attract  the  attention  of  ladies,  and  marked  by
the  mannerisms  of  what  was  then  a  fashionable  literature.
The  paper  '  Of  Moral  Prejudices '  contains  the  character  ot'
an  imaginary  Eugenius,  and  a  narrative  of  French  gallantry.,
which  a  purer  taste  rejected.  That  on  the  'Middle  Station  of
Life '  cannot  have  cost  much  pains,  and  abounds  in  expres
sions  of  personal  opinion. '  These  three  were  never  reprinted.
The  next  to  go  were  those  on  '  Impudence,'  on  l  Love
and  Marriage,'  and  on  the  '  Study  of  History,'  lingering,
however,  to  the  Edition  of  1764 :  that  they  survived  so  long,
is,  perhaps,  surprising.  Lastly,  the  '  Essay  on  Avarice '  was
dropt  in  the  Edition  of  1770.

The  *  Political  Essays  '  are  the  most  valuable  part  of  these
two  volumes.  It  is  probable  that  portions  of  them  existed
in  manuscript,  before  the  publication  of  the  Treatise,  and
that  in  printing  them  Hume  was  redeeming  his  conditional
promise,  made  in  the  Advertisement  to  the  first  volume  ol
the  '  Treatise,'  to  '  proceed  to  the  examination  of  Morals,
Politics,  and  Criticism.'  Of  Morals  he  had  treated  in  the
volume  of  1740;  the  Essays  of  1741-2  handle  political,  and,
to  some  extent,  critical  questions.

The  Political  Essays  do  not  attempt  to  found  a  system :
they  are  entirely  special  in  their  character,  dealing  with  the
topics  of  the  day.  It  is  true  that  Hume  enriches  them  with
brief  discussions  of  political  principles,  and  with  a  copious
fund  of  historical  illustration.  But  these  episodes  were
conventional,  suiting  the  fashion  of  an  age  which  delighted
in  references  to  the  statesmanship  of  Athens  and  Rome,  and
to  the  fortunes  of  Venice  and  Poland.  What  is  peculiar
to  the  author,  will  be  found  in  his  treatment  of  the  debated
questions  of  the  Freedom  of  the  Press,  the  Independency  of
Parliament,  and  the  nature  of  Parties.  In  this  choice  of  sub
jects  he  followed  the  *  Craftsman ' ;  and  the  best  illustration  of
these  papers  is  to  be  found  in  the  numbers  of  that  journal.
They  frequently  read  like  a  running  criticism  upon  the  argu
ments  of  the  '  Craftsman,'  and  even  particular  phrases  and
Latin  quotations  are  borrowed  thence.  But  their  passionless

1  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  159.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  45

moderation  contrasts  strongly  with  the  savage  invectives  of
*  Mist's  Journal '  and  the  { Craftsman,'  and  must  have  re
commended  itself  to  Dr.  Butler  quite  apart  from  the  pene
trating  insight  which  divides  so  sharply  the  contemporaneous
questions  of  politics.

Of  this  group  of  Essays  perhaps  the  best  remembered  is
the  Character  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  Of  this  Hume  said  in
the  Advertisement :

*  The  character  of  SIR  EGBERT  WALPOLE  was  drawn  some
months  ago,  when  that  Great  MAN  was  in  the  Zenith  of  his
Power.  I  must  confess,  that,  at  present,  when  he  seems  to
be  upon  the  Decline,  I  am  inclin'd  to  think  more  favourably
of  him,  and  to  suspect,  that  the  Antipathy,  which  every  true
born  Briton  naturally  bears  to  Ministers  of  State,  inspir'd
me  with  some  Prejudice  against  him.  The  impartial
EEADER,  if  any  such  there  be ;  or  Posterity,  if  such  a  Trifle
can  reach  them,  will  be  best  able  to  correct  any  Mistakes
in  this  Particular.'

In  the  edition  of  1748,  this  Essay  was  degraded  to  the
rank  of  a  foot-note,  and  appended  to  the  paper  headed  '  That
Politics  may  be  reduced  to  a  Science.'  The  Advertisement
having  disappeared,  it  was  prefaced  as  follows  :  '  What  our
author's  opinion  was  of  the  famous  minister  here  pointed
at,  may  be  learned  from  that  essay,  printed  in  the  former
editions,' — it  only  so  occurs  in  Edition  C — 'under  the  title  of
A  Character  of  Sir  EGBERT  WALPOLE.  It  was  as  follows.'
The  Essay  will  be  found  in  vol.  iv.  '  The  author  is
pleased  to  find,  that  after  animosities  are  laid,  and  calumny
has  ceased,  the  whole  nation  almost  have  returned  to  the
same  moderate  sentiments  with  regard  to  this  great  man,  if
they  are  not  rather  become  more  favourable  to  him,  by  a  very
natural  transition,  from  one  extreme  to  another.  The
author  would  not  oppose  those  humane  sentiments  towards
the  dead ;  though  he  cannot  forbear  observing  that  the  not
paying  more  of  our  public  debts  was,  as  hinted  in  this
character,  a  great,  and  the  only  great  error  in  that  long
administration.'  In  1770,  the  whole  was  omitted.

After  these  may  be  placed  a  group  of  Essays,  on  which  the
author  had  expended  more  than  ordinary  care,  ornamenting
them  with  florid  imagery,  and  polishing  the  sentences  with
such  precision,  that  the  subsequent  editions  made  scarcely
an  alteration  in  their  language.  Of  these  he  says  in  the
Advertisement :  '  'Tis  proper  to  inform  the  EEADER,  that,  in


46  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

those  ESSAYS,  intitled,  the  Epicurean,  Stoic,  &c.,  a  certaiu
Character  is  personated ;  and  therefore,  no  Offence  ought  to
be  taken  at  any  Sentiments  contain'd  in  them.'  Offence  is
not  likely  to  be  taken ;  but  the  question  has  been  mooted,
whether  any  one  of  them  gives  evidence  of  a  bias  in  the.
author's  mind.  Mr.  Burton  decides  in  favour  of  '  The  Stoic ' ;
'The  reader  expects  to  find  an  attempt  to  draw  his  own
picture  in  "  The  Sceptic,"  but  it  is  not  to  be  found  there
The  sceptic  of  the  essays  is  not  a  man  analyzing  the  prin
ciples  of  knowledge,  to  find  wherein  they  consist,  but  one
who  is  dissatisfied  with  rules  of  morality,  and  who,  examining
the  current  codes  one  after  another,  tosses  them  aside  as  un
satisfactory.  It  is  into  "The  Stoic"  that  the  writer  has
thrown  most  of  his  heart  and  sympathy ;  and  it  is  in  that
sketch  that,  though  probably  without  intention,  some  of  the
features  of  his  own  character  are  portrayed.  There  are
passages  which  have  considerable  unison  of  tone  with  those
autobiographical  documents  already  quoted,  in  which  he
describes  himself  as  having  laboured  to  subdue  the  rebellious
passions,  to  reduce  the  mind  to  a  regulated  system,  to  drive
from  it  the  influence  of  petty  impressions, — to  hold  one  great
object  of  life  in  view,  and  to  sacrifice  before  that  object
whatever  stood  in  the  way  of  his  firmly  settled  purpose.'1  It
is  true  that  there  are  sentences  in  '  The  Stoic '  which  justify
this  statement.  It  is  also  true  that  the  opening  paragraphs
of  '  The  Sceptic  '  do  not  represent  Hume's  habitual  state  of
mind.  On  reviewing  the  Treatise  and  the  Inquiries,  a  re
markable  difference  will  be  found  between  his  treatment  of
metaphysical  and  of  moral  questions.  In  discussing  the
former,  he  is  uniformly  sceptical;  in  discussing  the  latter,  he
assumes  an  opposite  attitude,  and  becomes  dogmatic  in  his
enunciations.  He  not  merely  dissents  from  those  who  deny
the  reality  of  moral  distinctions ;  he  brands  them  with  the
character  of  disingenuous  disputants.  The  same  impatience
breaks  out  when  he  considers  the  fashionable  belief  which
resolved  all  the  virtues  into  modes  of  self-love.  So  far,  then,
as  '  The  Sceptic '  tosses  aside  the  current  codes  as  unsatis
factory,  without  substituting  a  better  system,  it  is  written
in  character,  and  the  author  is  not  chargeable  with  its  sen
timents.  It  may  be  added  that  a  strong  tendency  to  mate
rialistic  explanations  pervades  these  portions,  whereas  in

J  Life Vol.  i.,  p.  142.


HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.  47

'  The  Treatise '  Hume  only  resorts  to  that  hypothesis  when
he  is  driven  to  extremities.  But  after  allowance  has  been
made  for  these  points  of  divergence  from  his  usual  methods,
it  cannot  fail  to  be  remarked,  that  whereas  in  the  companion
Essays  Hume  adopted  a  high-flown  style  which  is  unique  in
his  writings,  in  *  The  Sceptic  '  he  returns  to  that  sober  and
quiet  English,  which  was  not  more  in  accordance  with  the
immediate  occasion,  than  with  his  habitual  tone  of  thought.
The  practical  maxims  for  the  rule  of  life  agree  as  closely
with  his  biography  as  the  scattered  sentences  in  '  The  Stoic.'
The  pungent  criticism  of  Pope's  argument  expressed  briefly
what  he  wrote  at  large  in  his  Inquiry  concerning  the  Prin
ciples  of  Morals  ;  and  lastly,  whereas  '  The  Stoic,'  *  The  Pla-
tonist,'  and  '  The  Epicurean  '  are  dismissed  without  comment,
a  note  is  added  to  *  The  Sceptic '  for  the  express  purpose  of
setting  out  the  whole  truth,  in  which  the  preceding  para
graphs  are  only  corrected  because  they  are  incomplete.

For  three  years  Hume  continued  to  reside  in  Edinburgh,
and  made  an  attempt  to  succeed  Dr.  Pringle  in  the  chair  of
Ethics  and  Pneumatic  Philosophy.  Then,  in  1745,  he  ac
cepted  an  engagement  to  act  as  tutor  to  the  Marquis  of
Annandale,  an  irritable  invalid,  '  who  was,'  according  to  an
expression  used  by  Sir  James  Johnstone,  when  writing  to
Hume,  '  charmed  with  something  contained  in  his  Essays.'
The  narrative  of  the  disputes  and  intrigues  which  finally
drove  Hume  away  in  April  '46,  will  be  found  in  Mr.  Burton's
'  Life  of  Hume.'  In  the  same  year  he  went  as  secretary  with
General  St.  Clair  on  an  expedition  which  sailed  from  Ply
mouth  September  14,  to  attack  Port  L'Orient,  and  was
appointed  Judge  Advocate  of  all  the  forces  under  command.
On  their  return,  he  passed  a  few  months  at  Mnewells,  and
then,  in  February,  1748,  accepted  an  invitation  from  General
St.  Clair  again  to  accompany  him  as  secretary  on  a  diplo
matic  mission  to  the  court  of  Turin,  which  lasted  till  the  end
of  the  year.

But  during  the  quiet  time  which  preceded  his  engagements
with  General  St.  Clair,  Hume  had  not  been  idle.  From  ex
pressions  dropt  in  his  correspondence  it  appears  that  as  early
as  1746  he  had  formed  the  project  of  writing  history.  For
the  present  these  plans  were  allowed  to  stand  over.  But
during  the  year  1748  two  works  appeared,  of  which  he  thus
speaks  in  a  letter  to  H.  Home,  February  0  :


48  HISTORY OF  THE EDITIONS.

4 1  leave  here  two  works  going  on :  a  new  edition  of  my
Essays,  all  of  which  you  have  seen,  except  one,  "Of  the
Protestant  Succession,"  where  I  treat  that  subject  as  coolly
and  indifferently  as  I  would  the  dispute  between  Csesar  and
Pompey.  The  conclusion  shows  me  a  Whig,  but  a  very
sceptical  one.  Some  people  would  frighten  me  with  the
consequences  that  may  attend  this  candour,  considering  my
present  station ;  but  I  own  I  cannot  apprehend  any  thing.

*  The  other  work  is  the  "  Philosophical  Essays,"  which  you
dissuaded  me  from  printing.  I  won't  justify  the  prudence
of  this  step,  any  other  way  than  by  expressing  my  indifference
about  all  the  consequences  that  may  follow.'1

It  will  be  convenient  to  consider  the  new  edition  first,  which
is  advertised  in  the  '  Gentleman's  Magazine '  for  November,
1748,  about  the  date  of  Hume's  return  from  Turin.  This
reprint  was  the  first  of  his  publications  that  bore  the  Author's
name.  According  to  the  autobiography  the  sale  was  in
different.  Few  changes  had  been  made.  As  has  already
been  said,  the  character  of  Sir  R.  Walpole  was  now  given  as
a  foot-note ;  and  three  papers,  Of  Essay  Writing,  Of  Moral
Prejudices,  and  Of  the  Middle  Station  of  Life  were  omitted.
In  their  place  three  new  Essays  were  inserted.

Those  on  Original  Contract  and  on  Passive  Obedience
pursue  the  same  vein  of  political  inquiry  which  had  been  so
successfully  worked  in  the  first  edition.  They  are  distin
guished  by  the  same  tone  of  impartial  criticism,  and  apply
the  same  principles :  but  this  judicial  attitude  causes  less
surprise  where  the  controversy  is  one  that  had  ceased  to  rage,
and  that  occupied  but  a  secondary  place  in  public  debate.

The  Essay  'Of  the  Protestant  Succession,'  which  was  spoken
of  in  the  last  extract  from  his  correspondence,  was  not
printed.  It  was  held  over  until  the  publication  of  his  Poli
tical  Discourses  in  1752,  where  it  appeared  incongruously
enough.  The  result  disappointed  his  fears.  In  a  letter  to
Dr.  Clephane,  dated  February  4,  1752,  he  says  :

'  About  a  fortnight  before,  I  had  published  a  Discourse
of  the  Protestant  Succession,  wherein  I  had  very  liberally
abused  both  Whigs  and  Tories  ;  yet  I  enjoyed  the  favour  of
both  parties.'2

The  third  Essay,  which  was  now  printed  for  the  first  time,
'  Of  National  Characters,'  is  of  some  interest,  because  it

>  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  239.  ^  Life. Vol.  i.,  p.  372.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  40

directly  enters  upon  a  topic  which  is  rarely  mentioned  in
Hume's  philosophical  writings,  although  they  frequently  sug
gest  it.  In  it  he  examined  the  influence  of  physical  condi
tions  on  the  temper  and  genius  of  men :  but  although  he
was  always  delighted  to  point  out  the  extravagant  variations
in  moral  customs  and  religious  observances  which  exist
among  neighbouring  races,  he  distinctly  asserted  on  thin
occasion  that  '  physical  causes  have  110  discernible  operation
on  the  human  mind :'  and  that  '  if  we  run  over  the  globe,  or
revolve  the  annals  of  history,  we  shall  discern  everywhere
signs  of  a  sympathy  or  contagion  of  manners,  none  of  the
influence  of  air  and  climate  : '  and  the  only  exceptions  to  this
statement  are  the  jealous  love  of  southern  climates  and  the
propensity  of  northern  races  to  drinking.

In  the  April  of  the  same  year,  before  starting  for  Turin,
he  had  published  '  Philosophical  Essays  concerning  Human
Understanding  by  the  Author  of  The  Essays  Moral  and  Poli
tical,' — a  new  edition  of  which  appeared,  as  we  have  seen,  with
the  author's  name  in  the  following  November.  There  is  no
preface  or  advertisement  to  these  Essays.  It  is  a  rare  book,
not  to  be  found  in  the  British  Museum,  the  Bodleian,  or  the
Advocates'  Library.  This  then  was  the  first  instalment  of
his  design  to  recast  the  unfortunate  Treatise  piece  by  piece.
Of  this  he  says  in  his  Autobiography  :

*  I  had  always  entertained  a  notion,  that  my  want  of  suc
cess  in  publishing  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  had  pro
ceeded  more  from  the  manner  than  the  matter,  and  that  I
had  been  guilty  of  a  very  usual  indiscretion,  in  going  to  the
press  too  early.  I,  therefore,  cast  the  first  part  of  that  work
anew  in  the  Enquiry  concerning  Human  Understanding,
which  was  published  while  I  was  at  Turin.' — Here  his  me
mory  failed  him. — *  But  this  piece  was  at  first  little  more
successful  than  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature.  On  my
return  from  Italy,  I  had  the  mortification  to  find  all  England
in  a  ferment,  on  account  of  Dr.  Middleton's  Free  Enquiry,
while  my  performance  was  entirely  overlooked  and  neglected.'

The  rarity  of  the  book  confirms  these  statements ;  but
there  are  circumstances  which  indicate  that,  although  the
work  was  neglected  at  first,  it  began  to  sell  before  long,
assisted,  perhaps,  by  the  revelation  of  the  author's  name  in
November.  In  a  letter  dated  April  18,  1750,  Hume  says:
*  You'll  scarcely  believe  what  I  am  going  to  tell  you ;  but  it

VOL. III.  E


HO  HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.

is  literally  true. Millar  had  printed  off,  some  months  ago,  a
new  edition  of  certain  philosophical  essays,  but  he  tells  me
very  gravely  that  he  has  delayed  publishing  because  of  the
earthquakes.'1  In  his  Autobiography, he  says  further:  'Mean
while,  my  bookseller,  A.  Millar,  informed  me  that  my  former
publications  (all  but  the  unfortunate  Treatise)  were  begin-
nino-  to  be  the  subject  of  conversation  ;  that  the  sale  of  them
was  gradually  increasing,  and  that  new  editions  were  de
manded. Answers  by  Eeverends  and  Eight  Reverends,  came
out  two  or  three  in  a  year  ;  and  I  fownd,  by  Dr.  Warburton's
railing,  that  the  books  were  beginning  to  be  esteemed  in
o-ood  company.' A  specimen  of '  Dr.  Warburton's  railing'  is
given by  Bishop  Kurd  :  '  In  a  letter  of  September  28,  of
that  year  (1 749),  to  a  friend  at  Cambridge,  he  says,  "  I  am
tempted  to  have  a  stroke  at  Hume  in  parting. He  is  the
author  of  a  little  book  called  Philosophical  Essays :  In  one
part  of  which  he  argues  against  the  being  of  a  GOD,  and  in
another  (very  needlessly,  you  will  say)  against  the  possibility
of  miracles. He  has  crowned  the  liberty  of  the  press. And
yet  he  has  a  considerable  post  under  the  government. I  have
a  great  mind  to  do  justice  on  his  arguments  against  mira
cles,  which  I  think  might  be  done  in  few  words. But  does
he  deserve  this  notice  ? Is  he  known  amongst  you  ? Pray,
answer  me  these  questions. For  if  his  own  weight  keeps
him  down,  I  should  be  sorry  to  contribute  to  his  advance
ment  to  anyplace,  but  the  pillory." No  encouraging  answer,
I  suppose,  was  returned  to  this  letter ;  and  so  the  author  of
the  Essays  escaped  for  this  time.'  2

A  *  few  words '  from  the  *  arguments  against  miracles '  ap
pear  among  Warburton's  Unfinished  Papers,  p.  311.

The  Essay  on  Miracles  has  a  history  of  its  own.  In  a
letter  to  Principal  Campbell,  dated  February  7,  1762,  Hume
gives  an  account  of  the  circumstances  which  first  led  him  to
that  train  of  thought.

'  It  may  perhaps  amuse  you  to  learn  the  first  hint,  which
suggested  to  me  that  argument  which  you  have  so  strenuously
attacked.  I  was  walking  in  the  cloisters  of  the  Jesuits'
College  of  La  Fleche,  a  town  in  which  I  passed  two  years  of
my  youth,  and  engaged  in  a  conversation  with  a  Jesuit  of
some  parts  and  learning,  who  was  relating  to  me,  and  urging
some  nonsensical  miracle  performed  lately  in  their  convent,
when  I  was  tempted  to  dispute  against  him ;  and  as  my  head

Life,  vol.  i.  p.  300.  2  llurd's  Life  of  Warlurton.


HISTORY OF  THE EDITIONS.  r,l

was  full  of  the  topics  of  my  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,
which  I  was  at  that  time  composing,  this  argument  imme
diately  occurred  to  me,  and  I  thought  it  very  much  gravelled
my  companion  ;  but  at  last  he  observed  to  me,  that  it  was
impossible  for  that  argument  to  have  any  solidity,  because  it
operated  equally  against  the  Gospel  as  the  Catholic  miracles  ;
—which  observation  I  thought  proper  to  admit  as  a  sufficient
answer.  I  believe  you  will  allow,  that  the  freedom  at  least
of  this  reasoning  makes  it  somewhat  extraordinary  to  have
been  the  produce  of  a  convent  of  Jesuits,  though  perhaps
you  may  think  the  sophistry  of  it  savours  plainly  of  the
place  of  its  birth.' '

Again  in  the  letter  to  H.  Home  of  December  2, 1737,  from
which  an  extract  has  already  been  given,2  he  says  further  :

*  Having  a  franked  letter,  I  was  resolved  to  make  use  of
it ;  and  accordingly  enclose  some  "  Reasonings  concerning
Miracles,"  which  I  once  thought  of  publishing  with  the  rest,
but  which  I  am  afraid  will  give  too  much  offence,  even  as  the
world  is  disposed  at  present.  There  is  something  in  the  turn
of  thought,  and  a  good  deal  in  the  turn  of  expression,  which
will  not  perhaps  appear  so  proper,  for  want  of  knowing  the
context :  but  the  force  of  the  argument  you'll  be  judge  of,  as
it  stands.  Tell  me  your  thoughts  of  it.  Is  not  the  style  too
diffuse  ?  though,  as  that  was  a  popular  argument,  I  have
spread  it  out  much  more  than  the  other  parts  of  the  work.
1  beg  of  you  to  show  it  to  nobody,  except  to  Mr.  Hamilton,
if  he  pleases  ;  and  let  me  know  at  your  leisure  that  you  have
received  it,  read  it,  and  burnt  it.' 3

The  second  edition  of  the  Philosophical  Essays,  which  had
been  delayed  by  the  earthquakes,  appeared  in  1751,  and  bore
the  author's  name  on  the  title-page.  Few  changes  were
made.  Section  xi.  now  received  the  heading  Of  a  Parti
cular  Providence  and  of  a  Future  State,  having  previously
been  called  Of  the  Practical  Consequences  of  Natural  Re
ligion.

These two editions contain the unguarded statement,

*  upon  the  whole,  then,  it  appears,  that  no  testimony  for  any
kind  of  miracle  can  ever  amount  to  a  probability,  much  less
to  a  proof.' For  the  words  in  italics  he  subsequently  wrote,

*  has  ever  amounted.'

In  the  December  of  the  same  year  he  published  an  En-

1  Life,  rol.  i.  p.  57.  2  Ibid.  p.  18.  3  Ibid.  p.  63,

B  -2


52  HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.

quiry  concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals :  *  which  in  my
own  opinion  (who  ought  not  to  judge  on  that  subject)  is  of
all  my  writings,  historical,  philosophical,  or  literary,  incom
parably  the  best.  It  came  unnoticed  and  unobserved  into
the  world.'

The  Dialogue  which  is  contained  in  this  volume,  was  a
very  favourite  piece  with  its  author.  In  a  letter  to  Gilbert
Elliot  (February  10,  1751),  he  says:

*  About  six  week  ago,  I  gave  our  friend,  Jack  Stuart,  the
trouble  of  delivering  you  a  letter,  and  some  papers  enclosed,
which  I  was  desirous  to  submit  to  your  criticism  and  exami
nation.  I  say  not  this  by  way  of  compliment  and  ceremonial,
but  seriously  and  in  good  earnest:  it  is  pretty  usual  for
people  to  be  pleased  with  their  own  performance,  especially
in  the  heat  of  composition  ;  but  I  have  scarcely  wrote  a.ny
thing  more  whimsical,  or  whose  merit  I  am  more  diffident
of.'1

Elliot's  reply  may  be  quoted  as  an  additional  illustration  of
the  difference  in  Hume's  handling  of  ethical  questions.

'  I  have  read  over  your  Dialogue,  with  all  the  application
1  am  master  of.  Though  I  have  never  looked  into  any  thing
of  your  writing,  which  did  not  either  entertain  or  instruct
me  ;  yet,  I  must  freely  own  to  you,  that  I  have  received  from
this  last  piece  an  additional  satisfaction,  and  what  indeed  I
have  a  thousand  times  wished  for  in  some  of  your  other  per
formances.  In  the  first  part  of  this  work,  you  have  given
full  scope  to  the  native  bent  of  your  genius.  The  ancients
and  moderns,  how  opposite  soever  in  other  respects,  equally
combine  in  favour  of  the  most  unbounded  scepticism.  Prin
ciples,  customs,  and  manners,  the  most  contradictory,  all
seemingly  lead  to  the  same  end ;  and  agreeably  to  your
laudable  practice,  the  poor  reader  is  left  in  the  most  dis
consolate  state  of  doubt  and  uncertainty.  When  I  had  got
thus  far,  what  do  you  think  were  ray  sentiments  ?  I  will  not
be  so  candid  as  to  tell  you  ;  but  how  agreeable  was  my  sur
prise,  when  I  found  you  had  led  me  into  this  maze,  with  no
other  view,  than  to  point  out  to  me  more  clearly  the  direct
road.  Why  can't  you  always  write  in  this  manner  ?  Indulge
yourself  as  much  as  you  will  in  starting  difficulties,  arid  per
plexing  received  opinions  :  but  let  us  be  convinced  at  length,
that  you  have  not  less  ability  to  establish  true  principles,
than  subtlety  to  detect  false  ones.  This  unphilosophical,  or,

1  Life,  vol.  i.  p G21.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  53

if  you  will,  this  lazy  disposition  of  mine,  you  are  at  liberty
to  treat  as  you  think  proper ;  yet  I  am  110  enemy  to  free  en
quiry,  and  I  would  gladly  flatter  myself,  no  slave  to  prejudice
or  authority.  I  admit  also  that  there  is  no  writing  or  talking
of  any  subject  that  is  of  importance  enough  to  become  the
object  of  reasoning,  without  having  recourse  to  some  degree
of  subtlety  or  refinement.  The  only  question  is,  where  to
stop, — how  far  we  can  go,  and  why  no  farther.  To  this
question  I  should  be  extremely  happy  to  receive  a  satisfactory
answer.  I  can't  tell  if  I  shall  rightly  express  what  I  have
just  now  in  my  mind  :  but  I  often  imagine  to  myself,  that  1
perceive  within  me  a  certain  instinctive  feeling,  which  shoves*
away  at  once  all  subtle  refinements,  and  tells  me  with  autho
rity,  that  these  air-built  notions  are  inconsistent  with  life
and  experience,  and,  by  consequence,  cannot  be  true  or  solid.
From  this  I  am  led  to  think,  that  the  speculative  principles
of  our  nature  ought  to  go  hand  in  hand  with  the  practical
ones  ;  and,  for  my  own  part,  when  the  former  are  so  far
pushed,  as  to  leave  the  latter  quite  out  of  sight,  I  am  always
apt  to  suspect  that  we  have  transgressed  our  limits.  If  it
should  be  asked — how  far  will  these  practical  principles  go  ?
I  can  only  answer,  that  the  former  difficulty  will  recur,  unless
it  be  found  that  there  is  something  in  the  intellectual  part  of
our  nature,  resembling  the  moral  sentiment  in  the  moral
part  of  our  nature,  which  determines  this,  as  it  were,  in
stinctively.  Very  possibly  I  have  wrote  nonsense.  However,
this  notion  first  occurred  to  me  at  London,  in  conversation
with  a  man  of  some  depth  of  thinking ;  and  talking  of  it
since  to  your  friend  H.  Home,  he  seems  to  entertain  some
notions  nearly  of  the  same  kind,  and  to  have  pushed  them
much  farther.

'  This  is  but  an  idle  digression,  so  I  return  to  the  Dialogue.

'With  regard  to  the  composition  in  general,  I  have  nothing
to  observe,  as  it  appears  to  me  to  be  conducted  with  the
greatest  propriety,  and  the  artifice  in  the  beginning  occasions,
I  think,  a  very  agreeable  surprise.  I  don't  know,  if,  in  the
account  of  the  modern  manners,  you  [had]  an  eye  to
Bruyere's  introduction  to  his  translation  of  Theophrastes.
If  you  had  not,  as  he  has  a  thought  handled  pretty  much  in
that  manner,  perhaps  looking  into  it  might  furnish  some
farther  hints  to  embellish  that  part  of  your  work.'  l

1  Lite,  vol.  i.  p.  323.


04  HISTORY OF  THE  EDITIONS.

Hume  replies :

*  Your  notion  of  correcting  subtlety  of  sentiment,  is  cer
tainly  very  just  with  regard  to  morals,  which  depend  upon
sentiment ;  and  in  politics  and  natural  philosophy,  what
ever  conclusion  is  contrary  to  certain  matters  of  fact,  must
certainly  be  wrong,  and  there  must  some  error  lie  somewhere
in  the  argument,  whether  we  be  able  to  show  it  or  not.  But
in  metaphysics  or  theology,  I  cannot  see  how  either  of
these  plain  and  obvious  standards  of  truth  can  have  place.
Nothing  there  can  correct  bad  reasoning  but  good  reasoning,
and  sophistry  must  be  opposed  by  syllogisms.  About  seventy
or  eighty  years  ago,  I  obseiTe,  a  principle  like  that  which
you  advance  prevailed  very  much  in  France  among  some
philosophers  and  beaux  esprits.  The  occasion  of  it  was  this :
The  famous  Mons.  Nicole  of  the  Port  Royal,  in  his  Perpetuite
de  la  Foi,  pushed  the  Protestants  very  hard  upon  the  im
possibility  of  the  people's  reaching  a  conviction  of  their
religion  by  the  way  of  private  judgment ;  which  required  so
many  disquisitions,  reasonings,  researches,  eruditions,  im
partiality,  and  penetration,  as  not  one  in  a  hundred  even
among  men  of  education,  is  capable  of.  Mons.  Claude  and
the  Protestants  answered  him,  not  by  solving  his  difficulties
(which  seems  impossible),  but  by  retorting  them  (which  is
very  easy) .  They  showed  that  to  reach  the  way  of  authority
which  the  Catholics  insist  on,  as  long  a  train  of  acute  rea
soning,  and  as  great  erudition,  was  requisite,  as  would  be
sufficient  for  a  Protestant.  We  must  first  prove  all  the
truths  of  natural  religion,  the  foundation  of  morals,  the
divine  authority  of  the  Scripture,  the  deference  which  it
commands  to  the  church,  the  tradition  of  the  church,  &c.
The  comparison  of  these  controversial  writings  begot  an  idea
in  some,  that  it  was  neither  by  reasoning  nor  authority  we
learn  our  religion,  but  by  sentiment :  and  certainly  this  were
a  very  convenient  way,  and  what  a  philosopher  would  be  very
well  pleased  to  comply  with,  if  he  could  distinguish  sentiment
from  education.  But  to  all  appearance  the  sentiment  of
Stockholm,  Geneva,  Rome  ancient  and  modern,  Athens  and
Memphis,  have  the  same  characters ;  and  no  sensible  man
can  implicitly  assent  to  any  of  them,  but  from  the  general
principle,  that  as  the  truth  in  these  subjects  is  beyond  hum  an
capacity,  and  that  as  for  one's  own  ease  he  must  adopt  some
tenets,  tli ere  is  most  satisfaction  and  convenience  in  holding


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  55

to  the  Catholicism  we  have  been  first  taught.  Now  this  I
have  nothing  to  say  against.  I  have  only  to  observe,  that
such  a  conduct  is  founded  on  the  most  universal  and  deter
mined  scepticism,  joined  to  a  little  indolence ;  for  more
curiosity  and  research  gives  a  direct  opposite  turn  from  the
same  principles.' }

During  the  same  period  Hume  composed  the  '  Dialogues
concerning  Natural  Religion,'  of  which  Mr.  Burton  says :

'  The  manuscript  of  this  work  is  full  of  emendation?1  and
corrections  ;  and  while  the  sentiments  appear  to  be  substan
tially  the  same  as  when  they  were  first  set  down,  the  alterations
in  the  method  of  announcing  them  are  a  register  of  the
improvements  in  their  author's  style,  for  a  period  apparently
of  twenty-seven  years.  Here  at  least  he  could  not  plead  the
excuse  of  youth  and  indiscretion.  The  work,  penned  in  the
full  vigour  of  his  faculties,  comes  to  us  with  the  sanction  of
his  mature  years,  and  his  approval  when  he  was  within  sight
of  the  grave.  Whatever  sentiments,  therefore,  in  this  work,
may  be  justly  found  to  excite  censure,  carry  with  them  a
reproach  from  which  their  author's  name  cannot  escape.' 2

Hume's  friends  prevailed  on  him  not  to  publish  the  Dia
logues,  fearing  that  the  odium  under  which  he  laboured,
would  be  fanned  to  a  flame,  and  the  prospects  of  the  author
materially  injured.  In  a  letter  to  Elliot,  dated  March  ]  2,
1 763,  he  complains :  '  Is  it  not  hard  and  tyrannical  in  you,
more  hard  and  tyrannical  than  any  act  of  the  Stuarts,  not  to
allow  me  to  publish  my  Dialogues  ?  Pray,  do  you  not  think
that  a  proper  dedication  may  atone  for  what  is  exceptionable
in  them  ?  I  am  become  of  my  friend  Oorbyn  Morrice's  mind,
who  says,  that  he  writes  all  his  books  for  the  sake  of  the
dedications.' 3  Such  caution  was  unnecessary,  when  Hume
settled  down  to  pass  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  ease  and
comfort  at  Edinburgh,  enjoying  an  abundant  income,  and
surrounded  by  a  society  of  affectionate  friends,  familiar  with
his  tenets  and  not  likely. to  be  estranged  by  any  new  publi
cation  of  them.  Yet  the  Dialogues  remained  in  manuscript.
The  history  of  their  posthumous  publication  will  be  found
at  p.  77.

These  four  years  must  have  been  the  busiest  period  of
Hume's  lifetime.  Not  content  with  preparing  the  new  edition
of  the  Essay  on  the  Human  Understanding,  and  writing

1  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  oL'-j.  -  Ibid.  p.  32$.  '•'  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  140.


50  HISTORY OF  THE  EDITIONS.

the  companion  treatise  on  Moral  Philosophy,  and  with  com
pleting1  the  Dialogues,  he  was  all  the  while,  as  his  corre
spondence  shows,  actively  employed  upon  the  Political
Discourses,  which  were  published  in  February  1752:  'the
only  work  of  mine  that  was  successful  on  the  first  publica
tion.'  A  reprint  appeared  before  the  close  of  the  year.

After  remarking  on  the  value  and  fame  of  these  essays,
Mr.  Burton  proceeds  to  say :

*  The  "  Political  Discourses "  introduced  Hume  to  the
literature  of  the  continent.  The  works  of  Quesnay,  Riviere,
Mirabeau,  Eaynal,  and  Turgot,  had  not  yet  appeared,  but  the
public  mind  of  France  had  been  opened  for  novel  doctrines
by  the  bold  appeal  of  Vauban,  and  by  the  curious  and
original  enquiries  of  Montesquieu.  The  Discourses  appear
to  have  been  first  translated  by  Eleazer  Mauvillon,  a  native
of  Provence,  and  private  secretary  to  Frederic  Augustus,
King  of  Poland,  who  published  his  translation  in  1753.
Another,  and  better  known  translation,  by  the  Abbe  Le
Blanc,  was  published  in  1754.'1

Perhaps,  however,  the  Essay  which  is  best  known  at  the
present  day,  is  that  on  the  Populousness  of  Ancient  Na
tions  :  no  inadequate  monument  of  the  author's  reading
and  judgment.  The  first  mention  of  it  in  his  correspondence
occurs  in  the  letter  to  Dr.  Clephane,  April  18,  1750  :

'  You  would  perhaps  ask,  how  I  employ  my  time  in  this
leisure  and  solitude,  and  what  are  my  occupations  ?  Pray,
do  you  expect  I  should  convey  to  you  an  encyclopedia,  in  the
compass  of  a  letter?  The  last  thing  I  took  my  hand  from
was  a  very  learned,  elaborate  discourse,  concerning  the  popu-
lousness  of  antiquity ;  not  altogether  in  opposition  to  Vossius
and  Montesquieu,  who  exaggerate  that  affair  infinitely  :  but,
starting  some  doubts,  and  scruples,  and  difficulties,  suffi
cient  to  make  us  suspend  our  judgment  on  that  head.
Amongst  other  topics,  it  fell  in  my  way  to  consider  the
greatness  of  ancient  Rome ;  and  in  looking  over  the  discourse,
I  find  the  following  period.  "  If  we  may  judge  by  the
younger  Pliny's  account  of  his  house,  and  by  the  plans  of
ancient  buildings  in  Dr.  Mead's  collection,  the  men  of  quality
had  very  spacious  palaces,  and  their  buildings  were  like  the
Chinese  houses,  where  each  apartment  is  separate  from  the
rest,  and  rises  no  higher  than  a  single  story."  Pray,  on

1  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  365.


HISTOIIY OF THE EDITIONS.  r,7

what  authority  are  those  plans  founded?  If  I  remember
right,  I  was  told  they  were  discovered  on  the  walls  of  thf»
baths,  and  other  subterraneous  buildings.  Is  this  the  proper
method  of  citing  them  ?  If  you  have  occasion  to  communi
cate  this  to  Dr.  Mead,  I  beg  that  my  sincere  respects  may  be
joined.' '

On  February  18,  1751,  he  enquires  again  :

*  When  I  take  a  second  perusal  of  your  letter,  I  find  you
resemble  the  Papists,  who  deal  much  in  penitence,  but  neglect
extremely  les  bonnes  ceuvres.  I  asked  you  a  question  with
regard  to  the  plans  of  ancient  buildings  in  Dr.  Mead's  col
lection.  Pray,  are  they  authentic  enough  to  be  cited  in  a
discourse  of  erudition  and  reasoning?  have  they  never  been
published  in  any  collection  ?  and  what  are  the  proper  terms
in  which  I  ought  to  cite  them  ?  I  know  }TOU  are  a  great  pro
ficient  in  the  virtu,  and  consequently  can  resolve  my  doubts.
This  word  I  suppose  you  pretend  to  speak  with  an  J^e),  which
I  own  is  an  improvement :  but  admitting  your  orthography,
yon  must  naturally  have  a  desire  of  doing  a  good-natured
action,  and  instructing  the  ignorant.' 2

In  the  Essay  Bartoli's  name  appears,  not  Dr.  Mead's.

On  February  19,  1751,  he  writes  to  Elliot :

'  I  have  amused  myself  lately  with  an  essay  or  dissertation
on  the  populousness  of  antiquity,  which  led  me  into  many
disquisitions  concerning  both  the  public  and  domestic  life  of
the  ancients.  Having  read  over  almost  all  the  classics  both
Greek  and  Latin,  since  I  formed  that  plan,  I  have  extracted
what  served  most  to  my  purpose.  But  I  have  not  a  Strabo,
and  know  not  where  to  get  one  in  this  neighbourhood.  He
is  an  author  I  never  read.  I  know  your  library — I  mean  the
Advocates' — is  scrupulous  of  lending  classics ;  but  perhaps
that  difficulty  may  be  got  over.  I  should  be  much  obliged
to  you,  if  you  could  procure  me  the  loan  of  a  copy,  either  in
the  original  language  or  even  in  a  good  translation.' 3

Later  on  he  returns  Strabo,  whom  he  has  '  found  very
judicious  and  useful.'

The  Essay  was  accompanied  by  the  following  note  :

'  An  eminent  clergyman  in  Edinburgh,  having  wrote,  some
years  ago,  a  discourse  on  the  same  question  with  this,  of  the
populousness  of  antient  nations,  was  pleas'd  lately  to  com
municate  it  to  the  author.  It  maintain'd  the  opposite  side

1  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  297.  *  Ibid.  p.  316.  3  Ibid.  p.  326.


f;8  HISTOltY OF  THE EDITIONS.

of  the  argument,  to  what  is  here  insisted  on,  and  contained
much  erudition  and  good  reasoning.  The  author  acknow
ledges  to  have  borrow'd,  with  some  variations,  from  that  dis
course,  two  computations,  that  with  regard  to  the  number  of
inhabitants  in  Belgium,  and  that  with  regard  to  those  in
Epirus.  If  this  learned  gentleman  be  prevail'd  on  to  publish
his  dissertation,  it  will  serve  to  give  great  light  into  the  pre
sent  question,  the  most  curious  and  important  of  all  ques
tions  of  erudition.'

Dr.  Wallace  accepted  the  invitation,  and  published  his
discourse  the  year  following  anonymously:  ' A  dissertation
on  the  numbers  of  mankind  in  antient  and  modern  times  ;
with  an  appendix  containing  observations  on  the  same  sub
ject,  and  remarks  on  Mr.  Hume's  discourse  on  the  populous-
ness  of  antient  nations.'  Hence  in  the  editions  from  1  756  to
1 768  another  note  was  substituted  for  the  preceding  :

*  An  ingenious  writer  has  honoured  this  discourse  with  an
answer,  full  of  politeness,  erudition,  and  good  sense.  So
learned  a  refutation  would  have  made  the  author  suspect,
that  his  reasonings  were  entirely  overthrown,  had  he  not
used  the  precaution,  from  the  beginning,  to  keep  himself  on
the  sceptical  side ;  and  having  taken  this  advantage  of  the
ground,  he  was  enabled,  tho'  with  much  inferior  forces,  to
preserve  himself  from  a  total  defeat.  That  Eeverend  gentle
man  will  always  find,  where  his  antagonist  is  so  entrenched,
that  it  will  be  difficult  to  force  him.  VAEEO,  in  such  a  situa
tion,  could  defend  himself  against  HANNIBAL,  PHAENACES
against  (LfcSAE.  The  author,  however,  very  willingly  acknow
ledges,  that  his  antagonist  has  detected  many  mistakes  both
in  his  authorities  and  reasonings  ;  and  it  was  owing  entirely
to  that  gentleman's  indulgence,  that  many  more  errors  were
not  remarked.  In  this  edition,  advantage  has  been  taken  of
his  learned  animadversions,  and  the  Essay  has  been  rendered
less  imperfect  than  formerly.'

Nevertheless,  the  corrections  introduced  at  Dr.  Wallace's
suggestion  are  very  few,  and  the  vast  majority  of  the  '  anim
adversions'  were  passed  over  in  silence.  A  misquotation
from  Livy  was  omitted  : '  a  paragraph  was  inserted  quoting
Justin2 ;  a  new  note  was  given  to  strengthen  the  argument
about  Thebes  :3  and  a  trifling  correction  was  introduced  in  a

1  Page  386.  2  Page  42,3.  J  Page  42U.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  :,9

reference  to  Diodorus.1  Perhaps  this  list  exhausts  the  altera
tions  which  were  due  to  Dr.  Wallace.2

The  circumstances  under  which  the  paper,  Of  the  Protest
ant  Succession,  was  inserted  in  this  volume,  have  already
been  detailed.3

In  1752  Hume  was  appointed  Keeper  of  the  Advocates'
Library.  This  position,  giving  him  '  the  command  of  a  large
library,'  finally  determined  him  to  gratify  his  long  cherished
design  of  writing  history,  and  from  this  time  he  almost
abandoned  philosophy.  The  first  volume  of  the  History  of
Great  Britain,  containing  the  reigns  of  James  I.  and
Charles  I.,  appeared  in  the  autumn  of  1754.  Previously,
however,  he  had  collected  the  varied  labours  of  thirteen  years
in  a  uniform  edition,  in  four  volumes ;  the  first  three  being
published  in  1753,  and  the  fourth  in  1754.  In  a  letter  to
Adam  Smith,  September  24,  1752,  he  says:

'  I  am  just  now  diverted  for  a  moment,  by  correcting  my
"  Essays  Moral  and  Political,"  for  a  new  edition.  If  any
thing  occur  to  you  to  be  inserted  or  retrenched,  I  shall  bo
obliged  to  you  for  the  hint.  In  case  you  should  not  have  the
last  edition  by  you,  I  shall  send  you  a  copy  of  it.  In  that
edition  I  was  engaged  to  act  contrary  to  my  judgment,  in
retaining  the  sixth  and  seventh  Essays,  which  I  had  resolved
to  throw  OTit,  as  too  frivolous  for  the  rest,  arid  not  very  agree
able  neither,  even  in  that  trifling  manner  :  but  Millar,  my
bookseller,  made  such  protestations  against  it,  and  told  me
how  much  he  had  heard  them  praised  by  the  best  judges,
that  the  bowels  of  a  parent  melted,  and  I  preserved  them
alive.' 4

For  the  second  time  Hume  relented  ;  no  change  was  made
in  the  list  of  contents,  but  the  numerous  notes  added  in  this
edition,  abounding  in  references  to  Greek  and  Latin  litera
ture,  show  how  well  he  used  the  Advocates'  Library.

About  this  period  Hume  began  a  translation  of  Plutarch's
Lives,  but  soon  laid  it  aside.  He  declined  an  invitation
from  Millar  to  edit  a  newspaper  in  London.  In  1756  the
second  volume  of  the  History  brought  down  the  narrative
to  the  Ee volution.

1  Page  424.  was  taken  of  the  objection.

2  He  also  objected,  that  lie  could  not  3  Vol.  i.p.  449.
find  the  passage  referred  to  i u  Isoe/rates'  4  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  375.
Panegyric  (note  6,  p.  390),  but  no  notice


60  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

In  1755  Hume  wrote  to  Millar:

*  I  give  you  a  great  many  tha.nks  for  thinking  of  me  in
your  project  of  a  weekly  paper.  I  approve  very  much  of  the
design,  as  you  explain  it  to  me  ;  and  there  is  nobody  I  would
more  willingly  engage  with.  But,  as  I  have  another  work  in
hand,  which  requires  great  labour  and  care  to  finish,  I  cannot
think  of  entering  on  a  new  undertaking,  till  I  have  brought
this  to  a  conclusion.  Your  scheme  would  require  me  imme
diately  to  remove  to  London  ;  and  I  live  here,  at  present,  in
great  tranquillity,  with  all  my  books  around  me;  and  I  can
not  think  of  changing  while  I  have  so  great  a  work  in  hand
as  the  finishing  of  my  History.

'  There  are  four  short  Dissertations,  which  I  have  kept
some  years  by  me,  in  order  to  polish  them  as  much  as  pos
sible.  One  of  them  is  that  which  Allan  Ramsay  mentioned
to  you.  Another,  of  the  Passions  ;  a  third,  of  Tragedy ;  a
fourth,  some  Considerations  previous  to  Geometry  and
Natural  Philosophy.  The  whole,  I  think,  would  make  a
volume,  a  fourth  less  than  my  Inquiry,  as  nearly  as  I  can
calculate  ;  but  it  would  be  proper  to  print  it  in  a  larger  type,
i  n  order  to  bring  it  to  the  same  size  and  price.  I  would  have
it  published  about  the  new  year ;  and  I  offer  you  the  pro
perty  for  fifty  guineas,  payable  at  the  publication.  You  may
judge,  by  my  being  so  moderate  in  my  demands,  that  I  do
not  propose  to  make  any  words  about  the  bargain.  It  would
be  more  convenient  for  me  to  print  here,  especially  one  of  the
Dissertations,  where  there  is  a  good  deal  of  literature  ;  but,
as  the  manuscript  is  distinct  and  accurate,  it  would  not  be
impossible  for  me  to  correct  it,  though  printed  at  London.
I  leave  it  to  your  choice  ;  though  I  believe  that  it  might  be
as  cheaply  and  conveniently  and  safely  executed  here.
However,  the  matter  is  pretty  near  indifferent  to  me.' l

The  volume  was  not  completed  until  early  in  1757,  when
it  appeared  with  the  following  title  '  Four  Dissertions.  1.
The  Natural  History  of  Religion.  2.  Of  the  Passions.  3.
Of  Tragedy.  4.  Of  the  Standard  of  Taste.  By  David  Hume,
Esq.'

From  this  list  of  contents  '  the  Considerations  previous  to
Geometry  and  Natural  Philosophy '  will  be  missed  :  they
were  never  published.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  they
embodied  Part  II.  Book  I.  of  the  Treatise.  Why  they  were
withdrawn,  we  can  only  conjecture :  perhaps  the  author
1  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  421.


HISTORY 07 THE EDITIONS.  Gl

despaired  of  the  subject  being  popular.  The  dissertation
on  the  Passions  is  a  series  of  extracts  verbatim  from  the
second  volume  of  the  Treatise.  The  Natural  History  of
Religion  is  no  doubt  the  Dissertation,  '  where  there  is  a
good  deal  of  literature, — which  Allan  Ramsay  mentioned  to
you.'  The  periphrasis  under  which  Hume  alludes  to  it,
was  probably  due  to  his  presentiment  that  its  arguments
would  be  offensive  to  many  readers.

Dr.  Warburton  saw  a  copy  of  the  book,  before  it  was  pub
lished,  and  wrote  to  Millar,  asking  for  its  suppression.1

'February  7,  1757.

*  SIK, — I  supposed  you  would  be  glad  to  know  what  sort  of
book  it  is  which  you  are  about  to  publish  with  Hume's  name
and  yours  to  it. The  design  of  the  first  essay  is  the  very
same  with  all  Lord  Bolingbroke's,  to  establish  naturalism,  a
species  of  atheism,  instead  of  religion  ;  and  he  employs  one
of  Bolingbroke's  capital  arguments  for  it. All  the  difference
is,  it  is  without  Bolingbroke's  abusive  language.

'  All  the  good  his  mutilation  and  fitting  it  up  for  the  public
has  done,  is  only  to  add  to  its  other  follies  that  of  contra
diction.  He  is  establishing  atheism ;  and  in  one  single
line  of  a  long  essay  professes  to  believe  Christianity.  All
this  I  shall  show  in  a  very  few  words  011  a  proper  occasion.

'  In  the  mean  time,  if  you  think  you  have  not  money
enough,  and  can  satisfy  your  conscience,  you  will  do  well  to
publish  it ;  for  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  sale  among  a.  people
so  feverish,  that  to-day  they  burn  with  superstition,  and  to
morrow  freeze  with  atheism.  Bat  the  day  of  the  publication
and  the  fast  day  will  be  an  admirable  contrast  to  one  another.

*  I  dare  say  you  knew  nothing  of  the  contents  ; but  the
caution  of  poor  Mr.  K.  was admirable  011  a  like  occasion
with  this  very  man,  Hiime. He  wrote  to  Mr.  K.  to  offer
him  a  copy,  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  religion,  as  he  said.
Mr.  K.  replied,  that  might  be  ;  but  as  he  had  given  great
offence,  and  he  (Mr.  K.)  was  himself  no  judge  of  these  mat
ters,  he  desired  to  be  excused.

*  You  have  often  told  me  of  this  man's  moral  virtues. He
may  have  many,  for  aught  I  know  ;  but  let  me  observe  to
you,  there  are  vices  of  the  mind  as  well  as  of  the  body ;  and  I
think  a  wickeder  mind,  and  more  obstinately  bent  on  public
mischief,  I  never  knew.  W.  W.'

Of  this  book  Hume  says  in  his  Autobiography  :

1  "Warburton's  Unpublished  Papers,  p.  309.


62  HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.

*  In  this  interval,  I  published  at  London  my  Natural
History  of  Religion,  along  with  some  other  small  pieces  :  its
public  entry  was  rather  obscure,  except  only  tlmt  Dr.  Hurd
wrote  a  pamphlet  against  it,  with  all  the  illiberal  petulance,
arrogance,  and  scurrility,  which  distinguish  the  Warbur-
tonian  school.  This  pamphlet  gave  me  some  consolation  for
the  otherwise  indifferent  reception  of  my  performance.'

The  pamphlet  in  question,  which  was  anonymous  and
dedicated  to  Warburton,  was  the  joint  product  of  Warburton
and  Hurd.  The  latter  tells  the  narrative  of  their  pious
fraud  with  great  simplicity  :

'  This  book  came  out  early  in  1757,  and  falling  into  the
hands  of  Dr.  Warburton,  provoked  him,  by  its  uncommon
licentiousness,  to  enter  on  the  margin,  as  he  went  along,
such  remarks  as  occurred  to  him ;  and  when  that  was  too
narrow  to  contain  them  all,  he  put  down  the  rest  on  loose
scraps  of  paper,  which  he  stuck  between  the  leaves.  In  this
state  the  book  was  shown  to  me  (as  I  chanced  at  that  time  to
be  in  London  with  the  author)  merely  as  matter  of  curiosity,
and  to  give  me  an  idea  of  the  contents,  how  mischievous  and
extravagant  they  were.  He  had  then  written  remarks  on
about  two-thirds  of  the  volume :  And  I  liked  them  so  well,
that  I  advised  him,  by  all  means,  to  carry  them  on  through  the
remaining  parts  of  it,  and  then  to  fit  them  up,  in  what  way
he  thought  best,  for  public  use,  which  I.  told  him  they  very
well  deserved.  He  put  by  this  proposal  slightly ;  but,  when
I  pressed  him  again  on  this  head,  some  time  after,  in  a
letter  from  Cambridge,  he  wrote  me  the  following  answer:
"  As  to  Hume,  I  had  laid  it  aside  ever  since  you  were  here.
I  will  now,  however,  finish  my  skeleton.  It  will  be  hardly
that.  If  then  you  think  anything  can  be  made  of  it,  and
will  give  yourself  the  trouble,  we  may  perhaps  between  us
do  a  little  good,  which  I  dare  say,  we  shall  both  think  will
be  worth  a  little  pains.  If  I  have  any  force  in  the  first  rude
beating  out  the  mass,  you  are  best  able  to  give  it  the  ele
gance  of  form  and  splendour  of  polish.  This  will  answer
my  purpose,  to  labour  together  in  a  joint  work  to  do  a  little
good.  I  will  tell  you  fairly,  it  is  no  more  the  thing  it  should
be,  than  the  Dantzick  iron  at  the  forge  is  the  gilt  and  painted
ware  at  Birmingham.  It  will  make  no  more  than  a  pam
phlet;  but  you  shall  take  your  own  time,  and  make  it  your
summer's  amusement,  if  you  will.  I  propose  .it  bear  some-


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  03

thing  like  this  title — '  Remarks  on  Mr.  Hume's  late  Essay,
called,  The  Natural  History  of  Religion,  by  a,  Gentleman
of  Cambridge,  in  a  Letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Warburton.' — I
propose  the  address  should  be  with  the  dryness  and  reserve
of  a  stranger,  who  likes  the  method  of  the  Letters  on  Boling-
broke's  philosophy,  and  follows  it  here,  against  the  same
sort  of  wrjter,  inculcating  the  same  impiety,  Naturalism,
and  employing  the  same  kind  of  arguments.  The  address
will  remove  it  from  me;  the  author,  a  Gentleman  of
Cambridge,  from  you  ;  and  the  secrecy  of  printing,  from  us
both."  I  saw  by  this  letter,  he  was  not  disposed  to  take
much  trouble  about  the  thing.  Accordingly  his  papers  were
soon  after  sent  down  to  me  at  Cambridge,  pretty  much
in  the  state  I  had  seen  them  in  at  London,  so  far  as  thev
then  went,  only  with  additional  entries  in  the  latter  part  of
the  book.  However,  in  this  careless  detached  form,  I
thought  his  observations  too  good  to  be  lost.  And  the  hint
of  the  Address  suggested  the  means  of  preserving  them,
without  any  injury  to  his  reputation,  and  indeed  without
much  labour  to  myself.  Having,  therefore,  transcribed  the
Remarks,  with  little  alteration,  I  only  wrote  a  short  intro
duction  and  conclusion,  merely  to  colour  the  proposed
fiction,  and  in  this  form,  sent  them  to  the  press.  When
Dr.  Warburton  saw  the  pamphlet,  he  said,  I  should  have
done  much  more,  and  worked  up  his  hasty  remarks  in  my
own  way.  He  doubted,  also,  whether  the  contrivance,  as  I
had  managed  it,  would  not  be  seen  through.  But  in  this
he  was  mistaken ;  for  the  disguise,  as  thin  as  it  was,  an
swered  its  purpose  in  keeping  the  real  author  out  of  sight.
Mr.  Hume  in  particular  (understanding,  I  suppose,  from  his
bookseller,  who  was  also  mine,  that  the  manuscript  came
from  me)  was  the  first  to  fall  into  the  trap.  He  was  much
hurt,  and  no  wonder,  by  so  lively  an  attack  upon  him,  and
could  not  help  confessing  it  in  what  he  calls  his  own  Life ;
in  which  he  has  thought  fit  to  honour  me  with  greater
marks  of  his  resentment,  than  any  other  of  the  writers
against  him  :  nay  the  spiteful  man  goes  so  far  as  to  upbraid
me  with  being  a  follower  (indeed,  a  closer,  in  this  instance,
than  he  apprehended)  of  the  Warbnrtonian  school.  This  idle
story  would  not  have  been  worth  the  telling,  but  for  the
reason  already  given,  That  I  could  not,  in  justice  to  the
author,  take  the  merit  of  so  fine  a  work  to  myself.  And  yet


64  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

in  disclaiming  it,  the  reader  sees,  I  make  but  an  awkward
figure,  as  being  obliged  to  open  the  secret  of  our  little
stratagem,  in  which  the  grace  of  it  mainly  consists.' l

The  *  thin  disguise '  was  more  than  suspected  by  Hume ,
who  wrote  to  Millar,  September  3,  1757.

'  Apropos  to  anger ;  I  am  positively  assured,  that  Dr.
Warburton  wrote  that  letter  to  himself,  which  you  sent  me  ;
and  indeed  the  style  discovers  him  sufficiently.  I  should  answer
him ;  but  he  attacks  so  small  a  corner  of  my  building,  that
I  can  abandon  it  without  drawing  great  consequences  after  it.
If  he  would  come  into  the  field  and  dispute  concerning  the
principal  topics  of  my  philosophy,  I  should  probably  accept
the  challenge :  at  present  nothing  could  tempt  me  to  take
the  pen  in  hand  but  anger,  of  which  I  feel  myself  incapable,
even  upon  this  provocation

*  I  should  not  be  displeased  that  you  read  to  Dr.  War-
burton,  the  paragraph  in  the  first  page  of  my  letter,  with
regard  to  himself.  The  hopes  of  getting  an  answer,  might
probably  engage  him  to  give  us  something  farther  of  the
same  kind  ;  which,  at  least,  saves  you  the  expense  of  adver
tising.  I  see  the  doctor  likes  a  literary  squabble.' 2

At  the  time  when  the  Dissertations  were  printing,  Hume
was  in  ecstasies  over  the  merit  of  '  Douglas,'  and  wrote  a
Dedication  to  Home.  But  before  the  volume  appeared,  he
withdrew  it  for  fear  of  injuring  Home's  prospects  in  the
Kirk.  Shortly  afterwards  Home  resigned  his  living,  and
Hume  directed  that  the  Dedication  should  be  restored.  It
is  found  in  some  copies,  and  not  in  others.  Hume's  corre
spondence  contains  the  following  passages  on  the  subject :

To  Adam  Smith.

'  The  dedication  to  John  Home,  you  have  probably  seen ;
for  I  find  it  has  been  inserted  in  some  of  the  weekly  papers,
both  here  and  in  London.  Some  of  my  friends  thought  it
was  indiscreet  in  me  to  make  myself  responsible  to  the  public,
for  the  productions  of  another.  But  the  author  had  lain
under  such  singular  and  unaccountable  obstructions  in  his
road  to  fame,  that  I  thought  it  incumbent  on  his  well-wishers
to  go  as  much  out  of  the  common  road  to  assist  him.  I
believe  the  composition  of  the  dedication  will  be  esteemed
very  prudent,  and  not  inelegant.' 3

'  Himl's  Lif<  of  Warburton.  -  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  35.  s  Ibid.  p.  17.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  66


To  Andrew  Millar.

1  The  dedication  of  my  Dissertations  to  Mr.  Hume  was
shown  to  some  of  his  friends  here,  men  of  very  good  sense,
who  were  seized  with  an  apprehension  that  it  would  hurt  that
party  in  the  church,  with  which  he  had  always  been  con
nected,  and  would  involve  him,  and  them  of  consequence,  in
the  suspicion  of  infidelity.  Neither  he  nor  I  were  in  the
least  affected  with  their  panic  ;  but  to  satisfy  them,  we  agreed
to  stand  by  the  arbitration  of  one  person,  of  great  rank  and
of  known  prudence ;  and  I  promised  them  to  write  to  you  to
suspend  the  publication  for  one  post,  in  case  you  should  have
resolved  fco  publish  it  presently.  Next  post  you  shall  be  sure
to  hear  from  me ;  and  if  we  be  obliged  to  suppress  it,  you'll
be  pleased  to  place  the  charges  of  print  and  paper  to  my
account.' 1

To  William  Mure.

'  PraJ>  whether  do  you  pity  or  blame  me  most,  with  regard
to  this  dedication  of  my  Dissertations  to  my  friend,  the  poet  ?
I  am  sure  I  never  executed  any  thing  which  was  either  more
elegant  in  the  composition,  or  more  generous  in  the  intention  ;
yet  such  an  alarm  seized  some  fools  here,  (men  of  very  good
sense,  but  fools  in  that  particular,)  that  they  assailed  both
him  and  me  with  the  utmost  violence ;  and  engaged  us  to
change  our  intention.  I  wrote  to  Millar  to  suppress  that
dedication ;  two  posts  after,  I  retracted  that  order.  Can
any  thing  be  more  unlucky  than  that,  in  the  interval  of  these
four  days,  he  should  have  opened  his  sale,  and  disposed  of
eight  hundred  copies,  without  that  dedication,  whence,  I
imagined,  my  friend  would  reap  some  advantage,  and  myself
so  much  honour  ?  I  have  not  been  so  heartily  vexed  at  any
accident  of  a  long  time.  However,  I  have  insisted  that  the
dedication  shall  still  be  published.' 2

The  Preface,  which  was  not  reprinted,  runs  thus :

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Hume,  Author  of ( Douglas, a  Tragedy.

*  MY  DEAR  SIR, — It  was  the  practice  of  the  antients  to  ad
dress  their  compositions  only  to  friends  and  equals,  and  to
render  their  dedications  monuments  of  regard  and  affection,

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  18.  2Ibid.  p.  21.

VOL.  III.  F


00  HISTORY OF  THE  EDITIONS.

not  of  servility  and  flattery.  In  those  days  of  ingenuous  and
candid  liberty,  a  dedication  did  honour  to  the  person  to
whom  it  was  addressed,  without  degrading  the  author.  If
any  partiality  appeared  towards  the  patron,  it  was  at  least
the  partiality  of  friendship  and  affection.

'  Another  instance  of  true  liberty,  of  which  antient  times
can  alone  afford  us  an  example,  is  the  liberty  of  thought,
which  engaged  men  of  letters,  however  different  in  their
abstract  opinions,  to  maintain  a  mutual  friendship  and  re
gard;  and  never  to  quarrel  about  principles,  while  they
agreed  in  inclinations  and  manners.  Science  was  often  the
subject  of  disputation,  never  of  animosity.  Cicero,  an  aca
demic,  addressed  his  philosophical  treatises,  sometimes  to
Brutus,  a  stoic ;  sometimes  to  Atticus,  an  epicurean.

'  I  have  been  seized  with  a  strong  desire  of  renewing  these
laudable  practices  of  antiquity,  by  addressing  the  following
dissertations  to  you,  my  good  friend :  For  such  I  will  ever
call  and  esteem  you,  notwithstanding  the  opposition,  which
prevails  between  us,  with  regard  to  many  of  our  speculative
tenets.  These  differences  of  opinion  I  have  only  found  to
enliven  our  conversation ;  while  our  common  passion  for
science  and  letters  served  as  a  cement  to  our  friendship.  I
still  admired  your  genius,  even  when  I  imagined,  that  you
lay  under  the  influence  of  prejudice ;  and  you  sometimes
told  me,  that  you  excused  my  errors,  on  account  of  the
candor  and  sincerity,  which,  you  thought,  accompanied  them.

*  But  to  tell  truth,  it  is  less  my  admiration  of  your  fine
genius,  which  has  engaged  me  to  make  this  address  to  you,
than  my  esteem  of  your  character  and  my  affection  to  your
person. That  generosity  of  mind  which  ever  accompanies
you ;  that  cordiality  of  friendship,  that  spirited  honour  and
integrity,  have  long  interested  me  strongly  in  your  behalf,
and  have  made  me  desirous,  that  a  monument  of  our  mutual
amity  should  be  publicly  erected,  and,  if  possible,  be  preserved
to  posterity.

*  I  own  too,  that  I  have  the  ambition  to  be  the  first  who
shall  in  public  express  his  admiration  of  your  noble  tragedy  of
DOUGLAS  ;  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  pathetic  pieces,
that  was  ever  exhibited  on  any  theatre. Should  I  give  it
the  preference  to  the  Merope  of  Maffei,  and  to  that  of  Vol
taire,  which  it  resembles  in  its  subject ;  should  I  affirm,  that  it
contained  more  fire  and  spirit  than  the  former,  more  tender-


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  67

ness  and  simplicity  than  the  latter ;  I  might  be  accused  of
partiality :  And  how  could  I  entirely  acquit  myself,  after  the
professions  of  friendship,  which  I  have  made  you  ?  But  the
unfeigned  tears  which  flowed  from  every  eye,  in  the  numerous
representations  which  were  made  of  it  on  this  theatre  ;  the
unparalleled  command,  which  you  appeared  to  have  over
every  affection  of  the  human  breast :  These  are  incontestible
proofs,  that  you  possess  the  true  theatric  genius  of  Shakespear
and  Otway,  refined  from  the  unhappy  barbarism  of  the  one,
and  licentiousness  of  the  other.

My  enemies,  you  know,  and,  I  own,  even  sometimes  my
friends,  have  reproached  me  with  the  love  of  paradoxes  and
singular  opinions ;  and  I  expect  to  be  exposed  to  the  same
imputation,  on  account  of  the  character  which  I  have  here
given  of  your  DOUGLAS.  I  shall  be  told,  no  doubt,  that  I  had
artfully  chosen  the  only  time,  when  this  high  esteem  of  that
piece  could  be  regarded  as  a  paradox,  to  wit,  before  its  publi
cation;  and  that  not  being  able  to  contradict  in  this  particular
the  sentiments  of  the  public,  I  have,  at  least,  resolved  to  go
before  them.  But  I  shall  be  amply  compensated  for  all  these
pleasantries,  if  you  accept  this  testimony  of  my  regard,  and
believe  me  to  be,  with  the  greatest  sincerity,
*  Dear  Sir,

'  Your  most  affectionate  Friend,

and  humble  Servant,

*  DAVID  HUME.

'  EDINBTJEGH  :  3  January,  1757.'


The  history  of  this  volume  is  not  yet  concluded.  It  is
now  proved  that  Hume  originally  intended  to  include  in  it
Essays  on  Suicide  and  on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  and
that  they  were  already  in  print,  when  he  yielded  to  his  dis
like  to  stirring  a  nest  of  hornets,  and  sent  orders  for  them  to
be  expunged.

He  was  extremely  anxious  that  no  copy  containing  these
Essays  should  remain  in  existence :  what  then  was  his
annoyance  on  finding  that  Wilkes  was  possessed  of  one  ?  He
writes  to  Millar,  April  23,  1764  :

'  I  never  see  Mr.  Wilkes  here  but  at  chapel,  where  he  is
a  most  regular,  and  devout,  and  edifying,  and  pious  attendant ;
I  take  him  to  be  entirely  regenerate.  He  told  me  last  Sunday,

F 2


68  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

that  you  had  given  him  a  copy  of  my  Dissertations,  with  the
two  which  I  had  suppressed ;  and  that  he,  foreseeing  danger,
from  the  sale  of  his  library,  had  wrote  to  you  to  find  out  thai
copy,  and  to  tear  out  the  two  obnoxious  dissertations.  Pray
how  stands  that  fact  ?  It  was  imprudent  in  you  to  intrust
him  with  that  copy  :  it  was  very  prudent  in  him  to  use  that
precaution.  Yet  I  do  not  naturally  suspect  you  of  impru
dence,  nor  him  of  prudence.  I  must  hear  a  little  farther
before  I  pronounce.'1

Millar  replied :

*  I  take  Mr.  Wilkes  to  be  the  same  man  he  was, — acting
a  part.  He  has  forgot  the  story  of  the  two  dissertations.
The  fact  is,  upon  importunity,  I  lent  to  him.  the  only  copy  I
preserved,  and  for  years  never  could  recollect  he  had  it,  till
his  books  came  to  be  sold ;  upon  this  I  went  immediately  to
the  gentleman  that  directed  the  sale,  told  him  the  fact,  and
reclaimed  the  two  dissertations  which  were  my  property.
Mr.  Coates,  who  was  the  person,  immediately  delivered  me
the  volume  ;  and  so  soon  as  I  got  home,  I  tore  them  out  and
burnt  them,  that  I  might  not  lend  them  to  any  for  the  future.
Two  days  after,  Mr.  Coates  sent  me  a  note  for  the  volume,  as
Mr.  Wilkes  had  desired  it  should  be  sent  to  him  at  Paris ;  I
returned  the  volume,  but  told  him  the  two  dissertations,  I  had
torn  out  of  the  volume  and  burnt,  being  my  property.  This
is  the  truth  of  the  matter,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  It
was  certainly  imprudent  for  me  to  lend  them  to  him.' 2

It  was  no  secret,  however,  that  some  Essays  had  been  sup
pressed.  The  volume  itself  preserves  the  traces  of  mutilation,
and  Dr.  Warburton,  in  his  letter  to  Millar,  alluded  to  it.  So
too  Dr.  Home,  in  his  letter  to  Adam  Smith,  dated  1777,
enquired,  '  when  the  great  work  of  benevolence  and  charity,
of  wisdom  and  virtue,  shall  be  crowned  by  the  publication  of
a  treatise  designed  to  prove  the  SOUL'S  MORTALITY,  and
another  to  justify  and  recommend  SELF-MURDER  ;  for
which,  without  doubt,  the  present  and  every  future  age
will  bless  the  name  of  the  gentle  and  amiable  author.'  Prom
the  'Gentleman's  Magazine'  for  July  1777,  it  appears  that
rumour  had  magnified  the  number  and  the  wickedness  of
the  Essays  :  the  reviewer  speaks  of  '  the  tracts  in  defence  of
suicide,  adultery,  &c.,  whose  publication,  if  we  are  rightly
informed,  authority  has  hitherto  prevented.'  A  correspondent

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  202.  2 Ibid.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  69

in  the  same  number  (p.  326)  instances  suicide  and  adultery
as  two  virtues  that  are  praiseworthy  according  to  Hume's
system :  and  he  proceeds  to  say :  '  If  report  says  true,  and
sometimes  it  does,  the  Essay  on  Suicide  has  been  published,
and  was  suppressed  by  public  authority.  A  great  legacy  wa«
left  to  an  eminent  bookseller  to  publish  it  again,  and,  on  his
refusal,  was  offered  to  others ;  and  when  the  more  generous
of  the  trade  in  Britain  refused  to  give  birth  to  such  a  na
tional  evil,  it  was  dispatched  into  Holland,  to  return  hither,
again,  and  scatter  its  pestilential  influence  over  the  fellow-
subjects  and  fellow- citizens  of  the  good,  the  humane,  the
social  Mr.  Hume.'  The  story  of  the  legacy  is  evidently  due
to  a  confusion  of  the  '  tracts  '  with  the  Dialogues  concerning
Natural  Eeligion,  for  the  publication  of  which  Hume  had
provided  in  his  will,  but  which  had  not  yet  appeared.  The
statement  that  the  '  tracts'  had  once  been  published,  and
were  suppressed  by  public  authority,  is  no  doubt  an  error,
although  it  is  repeated  with  great  circumstantiality  in  the
'  Gentleman's  Magazine '  for  August  1784:  p.  607.  'These
Essays,  it  is  well  known,  were  printed  and  advertised  by
Mr.  Millar,  with  some  others  by  Mr.  Hume,  near  thirty  years
ago ;  but  before  the  day  of  publication,  being  intimidated  by
threats  of  a  prosecution,  the  bookseller  called  in  some  copies
that  he  had  dispersed,  cancelled  the  two  Essays,  and  (with
difficulty)  prevailed  011  Mr.  Hume  to  substitute  some  others
less  obnoxious.'  This  story  does  not  appear  to  be  consistent
with  Hume's  mention  of  the  suppression  in  his  letter  to  Millar  j
and  nothing  in  '  the  Life  of  Hume '  renders  it  probable.

In  1784  a  book  was  published  with  the  following  title-
page  :  '  Essays  on  Suicide  and  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,
ascribed  to  the  late  David  Hume,  Esq.  Never  before
published.  With  EEMAKKS,  intended  as  an  Antidote  to  the
Poison  contained  in  these  Performances,  by  the  Editor;  To
which  is  added,  Two  letters  on  Suicide,  from  Eosseau's
Eloisa.  London :  Printed  for  M.  Smith  ;  and  sold  by  the
Booksellers  in  Piccadilly,  Fleet  Street,  and  Paternoster  Eow.
1783.  Price  3s.  6d.  sewed.'

The  Editor's  Preface  runs  as  follows  :

'  These  two  Essays  on  Suicide  and  the  Immortality  of  the
Soul,  though  not  published  in  any  edition  of  his  works,  are
generally  attributed  to  the  late  ingenious  Mr.  Hume.

'  The  well-known  contempt  of  this  eminent  philosopher  for


70  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

the  common  convictions  of  mankind,  raised  an  apprehension
of  the  contents  from  the  very  title  of  these  pieces.  But  the
celebrity  of  the  author's  name,  renders  them,  notwithstand
ing,  in  some  degree  objects  of  great  curiosity.

*  Owing  to  this  circumstance,  a  few  copies  have  been  clan
destinely  circulated,  at  a  large  price,  for  some  time,  but
without  any  comment.  The  very  mystery  attending  this
mode  of  selling  them,  made  them  more  an  object  of  request
than  they  would  otherwise  have  been.

'  The  present  publication  comes  abroad  under  no  such  re
straint,  and  possesses  very  superior  advantages.  The  Notes
annexed  are  intended  to  expose  the  sophistry  contained  in
the  original  Essays,  and  may  show  how  little  we  have  to  fear
from  the  adversaries  of  these  great  truths,  from  the  pitiful
figure  which  even  Mr.  Hume  makes  in  thus  violently  ex
hausting  his  last  strength  in  an  abortive  attempt  to  traduce
or  discredit  them.

'  The  two  very  masterly  Letters  from  the  Eloisa  of  Eos-
seau  on  the  subject  of  8uicide,  have  been  much  celebrated,
and  we  hope  will  be  considered  as  materially  increasing  the
value  of  this  curious  collection.

'  The  admirers  of  Mr.  Hume  will  be  pleased  with  seeing  the
remains  of  a  favourite  author  rescued  in  this  manner  from
that  oblivion,  to  which  the  prejudices  of  his  countrymen  had,
in  all  appearance,  consigned  them ;  and  even  the  religious
part  of  mankind  have  some  reason  of  triumph,  from  the
striking  instance  here  given  of  truth's  superiority  to  error,
even  when  error  has  all  the  advantage  of  an  elegant  genius,
and  a  great  literary  reputation  to  recommend  it.5

The  third  paragraph  probably  alludes  to  copies  of  the  origi
nal  proof-sheets ;  but  the  statement  of  the  title-page,  that
the  Essays  had  not  previously  been  printed,  is  untrue.  They
had  been  published  in  1777,  without  the  printer's  name.  A
copy  in  the  British  Museum  has  for  title-page :  '  Two
Essays.  London.  M.DCC.LXVII.  Price  Five  Shillings.'
There  is  no  preface,  note,  or  comment.  The  Essays  are
word  for  word  the  same  with  those  of  1 784.  It  is  possible
that  this  is  the  Edition,  printed  in  Holland,  to  which  the
writer  in  the  '  Gentleman's  Magazine '  referred  :  but,  if  so,  he
had  not  seen  the  book,  for  he  only  knows  the  subject  of  one
of  the  Essays.

These  '  tracts,'  as  they  appear  in  these  two  editions,  had


HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.  71

generally  been  accepted  as  genuine,  partly  on  the  evidence
of  style,  and  partly  because  of  the  silence  of  Hume's  friends,
who  were  challenged  to  disavow  them.  But  no  direct  evi
dence  was  known  to  exist,  until  the  Advocates'  Library
became  possessed  of  a  bound  copy  of  proof-sheets  of  the  origi
nal  volume ;  corrected,  it  appears,  by  Hume,  and  containing  one
of  the  Essays  in  question.  The  book  has  the  following  note :
'  This  book  contains  a  piece  of  Mr.  D.  Hume's,  of  which
there  is,  I  believe,  but  another  copy  existing.  Having  printed
the  volume  as  it  here  stands,  Mr.  Hume  was  advised  by  a
friend,  to  suppress  the  Dissertation  upon  Suicide ;  which
he  accordingly  did.  A  copy,  however,  had  somehow  got  into
the  hands  of  Mr.  Muirhead,  a  man  of  letters,  who  had  made
a  very  valuable  collection  of  books.  Mr.  Hume,  after  the
death  of  Mr.  Muirhead,  employed  me  to  beg  that  copy  from
his  nephew,  who  very  politely  delivered  it  up.  Upon  thi&
Mr.  Hume  gave  me  leave  to  keep  the  present  copy,  which  he
had  lent  me :  I  promising  not  to  show  it  to  any  body.

'A.  E.'

These  are  believed  to  be  the  initials  of  Allan  Ramsay.
There  is  no  title-page  ;  but  at  the  beginning  there  is  written,
perhaps  in  Hume's  handwriting :  '  Five  Dissertations,  to
wit,  The  Natural  History  of  Religion.  Of  the  Passions.  Of
Tragedy.  Of  Suicide.  Of  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul.'
In  this  copy  the  Essay  on  Suicide  has  been  cut  out ;  but
the  companion  Essay  remains  in  its  entirety.  Allan  Ram
say's  note  informs  us,  that  it  was  the  former  of  these  which
Hume's  friend  called  in  question  : — and  his  phrase  confirms
the  belief  that  the  writers  in  the  t  Gentleman's  Magazine  '
blundered  in  stating  that  the  book  was  published  and  sup
pressed  by  public  authority;  but  he  leaves  it  doubtful
whether  the  copy,  when  Hume  gave  it  him,  contained  both
Essays,  or  not ;  and  when  and  by  whom  the  Dissertation  on
Suicide  was  cut  out.  However  this  may  be,  as  the  Essay
on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul  in  this  copy  is  identical
with  that  which  was  published  under  the  same  title,  first  in
1777,  and  then  again  in  1783,  there  can  be  no  reasonable
doubt  that  the  Essay  on  Suicide,  which  was  printed  with
it  on  both  occasions,  is  also  genuine.

As  has  been  said,  the  '  Four  Dissertations '  is  a  volume,
which  shows  signs  of  mutilation :  and,  in  brief,  its  history


72  HISTOEY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

seems  to  have  been  this,  (i.)  The  Dissertations  on  Geometry,
on  the  Natural  History  of  Religion,  on  Tragedy,  and
on  the  Passions  were  in  manuscript  in  1755.  (ii.)  The
first  of  these  never  went  to  the  press,  (iii.)  Between  1755  and
1757  Hume  wrote  the  two  Essays  on  Suicide  and  on  the
Immortality  of  the  Soul,  (iv.)  The  five  remaining  Disser
tations  were  then  printed  in  the  above  order,  the  first  three
occupying  200  pages,  and  ending  with  the  fourth  sheet
of  signature  K.  The  Essay  on  Suicide  began  on  K  5 ;
and  was  followed  by  the  Essay  on  the  Immortality  of  the
Soul.  (v.)  First,  the  Essay  on  Suicide  was  cut  out  ;
leaving  the  next  Essay  to  begin  in  Allan  Kamsay's  copy  at
L  4.  Afterwards,  this  was  also  destroyed,  and,  to  make  a
volume  of  decent  size,  a  new  Dissertation,  On  the  Standard
of  Taste,  was  written,  and  printed  on  a  new  signature,  L ;
so  that  K  4  to  6  appear  as  mutilated  strips  of  leaves.  The
ten  missing  sheets  in  Eamsay's  copy  would  exactly  accom
modate  the  Essay  on  Suicide.

In  1758  the  Four  Dissertations  were  combined  with  the
rest  of  Hume's  literary  works,  and  published  in  a  quarto
edition  of  one  volume,  with  the  title-page,  '  Essays  and
Treatises  on  several  Subjects,  by  David  Hume,  Esq. ;  a  new
edition  : '  and  with  the  following  Advertisement :  '  Some
Alterations  are  made  on  the  Titles  of  the  Treatises,  contained
in  the  following  Yolume.  What  in  former  Editions  was
called  Essays  Moral  and  Political,  is  here  entitled  Essays,
Moral,  Political  and  Literary,  Part  I.  The  Political  Dis
courses  form  the  second  Part.  What  in  former  Editions
was  called,  Philosophical  Essays  concerning  Human  Under
standing  is  here  entitled  An  Enquiry  concerning  Human
Understanding.  The  Four  Dissertations  lately  published
are  dispersed  thro'  different  Parts  of  this  Volume.'  None  of
the  contents  of  the  previous  editions  were  omitted,  with  the
exception  of  the  Dedication  to  John  Home ;  but  after  the
book  had  been  printed  and  paged,  two  new  Essays  were
bound  up  with  it,  arriving  too  late  to  be  inserted  in  the  list
of  contents.  These  are  the  papers  on  the  Jealousy  of
Trade  and  on  the  Coalition  of  Parties.  This  was  the
first  edition  that  added  an  Index,  '  which  cost  him  more
trouble  than  he  was  aware  of  when  he  began  it.'  *

From  this  time  the  editions  assume  a  settled  shape,  and

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  36.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  73

may  be  enumerated  briefly.  In  1760  they  were  published  in
four  volumes,  duodecimo  :  in  1764,  in  two  volumes,  octavo  ;
when  the  three  Essays  on  Impudence  and  Modesty,  on
Love  and  Marriage,  and  on  the  Study  of  History,  whose
fate  had  long  been  trembling  on  the  balance,  were  omitted ;
and  Section  VI.  Part  I.  of  the  Enquiry  concerning  the
Principles  of  Morals  was  degraded  to  the  Appendix,  where
it  appeared  with,  the  heading,  Of  some  Verbal  Disputes.
In  1768,  there  was  a  quarto  edition  of  two  volumes,  with  a
portrait  of  the  Author  by  Donaldson.  In  1770,  the  edition
consisted  of  four  volumes,  octavo  ;  the  Essay  on  Avarice  was
omitted ;  and  the  whole  of  the  contents  had  been  carefully
revised,  so  that  this  ranks  with  the  edition  of  1 754  as  con
taining  more  important  changes  than  any  of  the  interme
diate  ones.  Finally,  in  1777  appeared  the  posthumous  and
authoritative  edition,  in  which  there  were  few  changes  of
expression :  on  the  other  hand,  a  new  Essay,  on  the  Origin
of  Government,  and  the  famous  Advertisement,  which  has
been  quoted  at  page  37,  were  added  :  and  what  had  hitherto
been  Section  II.  Part  I.  of  the  Enquiry  concerning  the  Prin
ciples  of  Morals  was  transferred  to  the  Appendix  with  the
title,  Of  Self  Love.

It  has  already  been  observed  that  Hume  bestowed  extra
ordinary  pains  upon  preparing  the  various  editions  of  his
Essays  for  the  press,  and  a  few  of  the  changes  have  been
noted.  It  may  be  interesting  to  review  briefly  the  variations
of  sentiment  which  come  to  the  surface.  In  politics,  for
instance,  as  he  grew  older,  he  became  a  confirmed  opponent
of  the  Whigs,  and  the  successive  editions  of  his  History  were
marked  by  an  eifort  to  be  rid  of  '  the  plaguy  prejudices  of
Whiggism,' l  which  shows  itself  particularly  in  the  narrative
of  the  seventeenth  century.  The  Essays  were  from  time  to
time  modified  in  the  same  direction.  In  Editions  A  to  P  the
second  Essay,  '  Of  the  Liberty  of  the  Press,'  contained  a  long
discussion  of  the  question,  '  Whether  the  unlimited  exercise
of  this  liberty  be  advantageous  or  prejudicial  to  the  public;'
and  decided  strongly  in  the  former  sense :  Edition  Q,  in
1770,  dropt  the  discussion.  This,  however,  is  the  strongest
instance :  most  of  the  other  omissions  or  corrections,  so  far
as  concerned  English  politics,  were  due  to  the  fact,  that  the
public  had  ceased  to  discuss  such  points  as  Instructions,  and

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  144.


74  HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.

that  impartial  observation  on  the  history  and  conduct  of  the
Court  and  Country  Parties  was  obsolete.

The  study  of  English  History  appears  to  have  occasioned
but  few  alterations  in  statements  of  fact :  the  clearest  being
on  the  first  page  of  '  The  Balance  of  Trade,'1  where  Editions
N  and  0  vary  with  the  progress  of  his  *  History.'  The
course  of  contemporary  politics  relieved  him  of  the  fear  that
Europe  would  be  swallowed  up  by  enormous  monarchies;4
ind  in  1770  he  omitted  passages  which  boasted  of  England
as  the  bulwark  against  French  aggression.3  As  regards  the
Eoman  Catholic  religion,  and  indeed  religion  generally,  he
softened  or  withdrew  offensive  expressions,  though  the  gene
ral  tenor  of  his  sentiments  remained  unchanged,  and  in  1770
he  added  a  paragraph  on  the  doctrine  of  the  Intention  of
the  Priest,  characterizing  it  as  positive,  arrogant,  and  dog
matical.4  There  is  a  marked  change  in  his  opinion  of  Lord
Bolingbroke,  who,  up  to  1 748,  was  instanced  as  '  a  culti
vated  genius  for  oratory:'  the  citation  was  changed  in  the
next  edition,  when  also  praise  of  his  oratory  was  modified  in
another  passage.6  At  the  same  time  he  omitted  an  invective
against  Dr.  Swift,  as  an  author,  '  who  has  more  humour  than
knowledge,  more  taste  than  judgment,  and  more  spleen,
prejudice,  and  passion  than  any  of  these  qualities:'  however
to  the  last  he  was  called  the  first  Englishman  to  write  polite
prose.6  Rapiii  had  a  sudden  downfall  in  his  good  graces.
In  the  edition  of  1752  he  is  styled  'the  most  judicious  of
historians;'  Edition  K  in  1754 — the  year  in  which  the  first
volume  of  the  History  of  the  Stuarts  was  published — censures
his  '  usual  malignity  and  partiality.' 7

The  general  development  of  style  may  easily  be  seen,  by
comparing  either  the  Treatise  or  the  Essays  which  only  ap
peared  in  Edition  A  with  the  language  of  the  text,  as  he
finally  left  it.  A  few  words  and  phrases  deserve  special
notice.  For  some  years  he  invariably  wrote  Britain,  not
Great  Britain.  '  Something  of  the  Misanthrope  ' 8  was  struck
out  in  1770.  From  1742  to  1748  he  wrote,  '  to  the  (Estrum
or  Verve  of  the  poets:'9  from  1754  to  1768  it  is  their
'(Estrum  or  native  enthusiasm:'  in  1770  the  barbarous

1  Vol.  iii.  p.  331.  s  Vol. ii.  pp.  170,  173.

2  Vol.  iii.  p.  355.  6  Vol. ii.  pp.  332,  Io9.
s  Vol.  iii.  pp.  353,  476.  '  Vol. ii.  p.  473.

4  In  a  note  to  the  Enquiry  Concerning  8  Vol. ii.  p.  151.

the  Principles  of  Morals,  sec.  iii.  9  Vol.  iii.  p.  197.


HISTOKY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  75

word  disappeared.  In  1 748  he  replaced  '  Gaiete  de  Coeur '
by  *  gaiety  of  heart.'1  Up  to  1754  he  apologized  for  speak
ing  of  the  absurd  naivety  of  Sancho  Panza,  '  a  word  which  I
have  borrow'd  from  the  French,  and  which  is  wanted  in  our
language:'2  in  1758  the  apology  was  thought  unnecessary.
Lastly,  we  may  notice  that  in  1770  he  dropt  the  obsolete
phrase,  '  the  stated  clubs  at  the  inns.'3

On  reviewing  the  history  of  Hume's  literary  and  philoso
phical  works,  we  are  at  once  struck  by  the  suddenness  with
which  his  labours  in  philosophy  came  to  an  end.  The  Trea
tise  on  Human  Nature  was  written  when  he  was  five-and-
twenty  :  that  is,  in  the  beginning  of  1736  ;  it  was  published
in  1739-40,  and  after  that  date  he  wrote  little  that  was  new.
The  Essay  on  Miracles  was  already  drafted  in  manuscript.
The  Enquiries  are  for  the  most  part  popular  reproductions.
Even  a  large  portion  of  the  Essays  appears  to  have  been
written  before  1739.  The  only  additions  which  philosophy
received  from  Hume,  are  to  be  found  in  the  Natural  History
of  Eeligion  and  the  Dialogues  concerning  Natural  Eeligion  :
the  latter  were  written  before  1751,  and  the  former  '  he  had
kept  some  years  by  him '  in  1 755.  To  be  brief :  Hume's  con
tributions  to  metaphysics  were  written  by  1736,  when  he  was
five-and-twenty :  his  contribution  to  the  philosophy  of  reli
gion,  by  1 750,  when  he  was  thirty-nine :  and  after  this  date
he  added  nothing.

Various  theories  have  been  invented  to  account  for  this.
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  negative  character  of  Hume's
speculation  reacted  upon  their  author,  chilling  the  earnest
spirit  of  enquiry  which  had  composed  the  Treatise,  and  re
conciling  him  to  lazy  acquiescence.  It  is  said  that  indiffer
ence  of  this  sort  explains  the  candour  and  impartiality  with
which  Hume  treated  the  political  disputes  of  his  day.  The
same  supposition  has  been  adduced  to  explain  the  habitual
irony  with  which  he  wrote  on  religious  topics.  Mr.  Hunt,
following  the  late  Professor  Maurice,  adopts  language  to  a
similar  effect.

'  The  title  generally  applied  to  Hume  is  that  of  Sceptic,
and  this  both  in  philosophy  and  religion.  He  follows  expe
rience  till  he  finds  there  is  something  beyond  experience.
Then  he  either  acknowledges  that  we  must  fall  back  upon
natural  instincts,  and  trust  to  reason,  such  as  it  is,  or  he
1  Vol.  iii.  p.  230.  2  Vol.  iii.  p.  240.  *  Vol.  iii.  p.  320.


76  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

gives  way  to  despair,  and  with  an  easy  indifference  flings  the
problem  aside  as  insoluble,  bidding  us  be  content  with  our
ignorance,  for  all  is  an  enigma,  a  riddle,  and  a  mystery.
These  two  states  of  mind  are  clearly  distinguishable  in  Hume.
They  are  both  called  Scepticism,  yet  they  are  so  different
that  the  one  leads  to  inquiry,  the  other  to  indolence.  The
one  was  a  quality  of  his  own  keen  intellect,  the  other  was
learned  in  France.' l  Had  this  evil  scepticism  been  attributed
to  the  effect  of  French  literature,  the  charge  would  have  been
more  difficult  to  prove  or  disprove  :  worded  as  it  is,  it  throws
a  burden  of  proof  upon  Mr.  Hunt.  He  has  already  promised
that  he  will  not  refer  to  the  Treatise  ;  his  allusion,  therefore,
is  to  the  Enquiry  concerning  the  Human  Understanding,
which  was  published  eleven  years  after  Hume's  return  from
France.  Neither  the  Treatise  nor  the  Essays  which  followed
are  characterised  by  indolent  scepticism ;  the  malady,  there
fore,  was  latent  for  these  eleven  years.

A  more  commonplace  explanation  may  be  suggested.
Hume  had  brought  his  criticism  of  the  rhilosophy  of  experi
ence  to  a  point,  where,  as  he  saw  clearly,  negation  had  done
its  work,  and  either  he  must  leave  the  subject,  or  else  attempt
a  reconstruction.  For  the  latter  Hume  certainly  lacked  the
disposition,  and  probably  the  ability  :  few  philosophers  have
been  at  once  critical  and  constructive.  He  turned  to  the
philosophy  of  religion,  a  subject  which  throughout  his  life
exercised  a  strong  fascination  upon  him;  but  his  friends
would  not  suffer  him  to  publish  his  maturest  questionings.
Meanwhile  an  early  taste  for  politics  and  history  was  grow
ing  upon  him.  His  discussion  of  political  questions  gained
the  praise  of  Bishop  Butler :  the  Political  Discourses  ran
into  a  second  edition  within  the  year.  Yet  he  retained  a
firm  belief  in  the  value  of  his  metaphysical  speculations  :  he
was  willing  to  explain  points  here  and  there  in  letters  to
personal  friends,  and  he  was  determined  that  at  least  some
portion  of  his  discoveries  should  win  the  ear  of  the  public.
It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  was  by  no  means
rich ;  that  from  early  life  he  had  looked  to  his  pen  to  win  a
competency :  and  that  on  various  occasions  he  showed  a
Scotch  tenacity  in  the  pursuit  of  money.  On  reviewing  the
Treatise,  he  must  have  seen  that  the  general  result  gave  him
a  vantage-ground  from  which  he  could  ply  the  wreapons  of
1  Contemporary  Review,  May,  1869  ;  p.  80.


HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.  77

scepticism  and  irony  in  a  novel  and  popular  fashion ;  but
that  if  he  maintained  the  earnest  spirit  of  his  youth,  he  must
be  content  to  remain  unread.  He  selected  for  '  recasting '
precisely  those  portions  which  lent  themselves  to  this  manner,
and  which  were  likely  to  excite  public  attention.  To  this
day,  although  his  fame  is  established,  few  students  of  philo
sophy  turn  to  the  Treatise.

The  candour  of  the  political  Essays  is  also  capable  of
explanation  from  his  life  and  character.  Naturally  of  a
sensitive,  irritable  disposition,  the  ideal  which  he  set  before
himself,  was  all  that  was  dignified  and  judicial.

The  following  narrative  of  the  circumstances  attending  the
posthumous  publication  of  the  Dialogues  concerning  Natural
Eeligion  is  borrowed  from  Mr.  Burton  :—

'  He  appointed  Smith  his  literary  executor,  in  the  fol
lowing  terms  :  "  To  my  friend  Dr.  Adam  Smith,  late  Pro
fessor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  Glasgow,  I  leave  all  my
manuscripts  without  exception,  desiring  him  to  publish  my
'  Dialogues  on  Natural  Eeligion,'  which  are  comprehended  in
this  present  bequest ;  but  to  publish  no  other  papers  which
he  suspects  not  to  have  been  written  within  these  five  years,
but  to  destroy  them  all  at  his  leisure.  And  I  even  leave  him
full  power  over  all  my  papers,  except  the  Dialogues  above
mentioned;  and  though  I  can  trust  to  that  intimate  and
sincere  friendship,  which  has  ever  subsisted  between  us,  for
his  faithful  execution  of  this  part  of  my  will,  yet,  as  a  small
recompense  of  his  pains  in  correcting  and  publishing  this
work,  I  leave  him  two  hundred  pounds,  to  be  paid  imme
diately  after  the  publication  of  it." l  .  .  .  .

'  Previous  to  his  journey  to  Bath,  Hume  appears  to  have
informed  Smith  of  the  desire  expressed  in  his  will,  that  he
should  undertake  the  publication  of  the  "  Dialogues  on
Natural  Eeligion."  The  intimation  was  probably  verbal,  as
it  does  not  form  part  of  any  letter  among  Hume's  papers.
Elliot  was  opposed  to  the  publication  of  this  work.  Blair
pleaded  strongly  for  its  suppression;  and  Smith,  who  had
made  up  his  mind  that  he  would  not  edit  the  work,  seems  to
have  desired  that  the  testamentary  injunction  laid  on  him
might  be  revoked.  Hume,  however,  before  his  death,  took
effectual  steps  to  guard  against  its  suppression.

*  Thus,  after  having  good-naturedly  abstained,  for  nearly

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  489.


78  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

thirty  years,  from  the  publication  of  a  work,  which  might
give  pain  and  umbrage  to  his  dearest  friends  ;  at  the  close  of
life,  and  when  the  lapse  of  time  since  it  was  written  might
have  been  supposed  to  render  him  indifferent  to  its  fate, —
because  there  appeared  some  danger  of  its  final  suppression,
he  took  decided  and  well-pondered  steps  to  avert  from  it  this
fate.  Such  was  the  character  of  the  man !

Hume  to  Adam  Smith.

"London,  May  3,  1776

*  "  M*Y  DEAE  FRIEND, — I  send  you  enclosed  an  ostensible
letter,  conformably  to  your  desire. I  think,  however,  your
scruples  groundless. Was  Mallet  any  wise hurt by  his
publication  of  Lord  Bolingbroke  ? He  received  an  office
afterwards  from  the  present  king  and  Lord  Bute,  the  most
prudish  men  in  the  world  ; and  he  always  justified  himself
by  his  sacred  regard  to  the  will  of  a  dead  friend. At  the
same  time,  I  own  that  your  scruples  have  a  specious  appear
ance. But  my  opinion  is,  that  if  upon  my  death  you  deter
mine  never  to  publish  these  papers,  you  should  leave  them
sealed  up  with  my  brother  and  family,  with  some  inscription
that  you  reserve  to  yourself  the  power  of reclaiming  them
whenever  you  think  proper. If  I  live  a  few  years  longer,  I
shall  publish  them myself. I  consider  an  observation  of
Kochefoucault,  that  a  wind,  though  it  extinguishes  a  candle,
blows  up  a  fire  "l

'The  "ostensible  lettter"  which  was  to  serve  as  Smith's
justification,  if  he  should  decline  to  follow  the  injunctions  of
the  will,  is  as  follows : —

'"London,  May  3,  1776.

*  "  MY  DEAR  SIR, — After  reflecting  more  maturely  on  that
article of  my  will  by  which  I  left  you  the  disposal  of  all
my papers, with a  request that you should  publish  my
'  Dialogues concerning Natural Religion,'  I  have  become
sensible  that,  both  on  account  of  the  nature  of  the  work,
and  of  your  situation,  it  may  be  improper  to  hurry  on  that
publication. I  therefore  take  the  present  opportunity  of
qualifying  that  friendly  request. I  am  content  to  leave  it
entirely  to  your  discretion,  at  what  time  you  will  publish
that  piece,  or  whether  you  will  publish  it  at  all.

' "  Tou  will  find  among  my  papers  a  very  inoffensive  piece,

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  491.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  79

called  '  ray  own  Life,'  which  I  composed  a  few  days  before  I
left  Edinburgh ;  when  I  thought,  as  did  all  my  friends,  that
my  life  was  despaired  of.  There  can  be  no  objection,  that
the  small  piece  should  be  sent  to  Messrs.  Strahan  and  Cadell,
and  the  proprietors  of  my  other  works,  to  be  prefixed  to  any
future  edition  of  them."

'  Smith  did  not  absolutely  refuse  to  edit  the  "  Dialogues,"
but  Hume  saw  pretty  clearly  that  it  was  a  task  that  would
not  be  performed  by  him.  That  he  was  correct  in  this  sup
position,  appears  by  a  letter  from  Smith  to  Strahan  after
Hume's  death,  where  he  says  :

f "  I  once  had  persuaded  him  to  leave  it  entirely  to  my  dis
cretion  either  to  publish  them  at  what  time  I  thought  proper,
or  not  to  publish  them  at  all.  Had  he  continued  of  this
mind,  the  manuscript  should  have  been  most  carefully  pre
served,  and  upon  my  decease  restored  to  his  family ;  but  it
never  should  have  been  published  in  my  lifetime.  When  you
have  read  it,  you  will  perhaps  think  it  not  unreasonable  to
consult  some  prudent  friend  about  what  you  ought  to  do."

'  By  a  codicil  to  his  will,  dated  7th  August,  he  thus  altered
the  arrangement  referred  to  in  these  letters.  "  In  my
later  will  and  disposition,  I  made  some  destinations  with
regard  to  my  manuscripts  :  All  these  I  now  retract,  and  leave
my  manuscripts  to  the  care  of  Mr.  William  Strahan  of
London,  member  of  Parliament,  trusting  to  the  friendship
that  has  long  subsisted  between  us,  for  his  careful  and  faithful
execution  of  my  intentions.  I  desire  that  my  '  Dialogues
concerning  Natural  Religion'  may  be  printed  and  published,
any  time  within  two  years  after  my  death."  .  .  .

*  There  is  then  a  new  paragraph  appended  as  follows  :

'  "  I  do  ordain  that  if  my  '  Dialogues,'  from  whatever  cause,
be  not  published  within  two  years  and  a  half  after  my  death,
as  also  the  account  of  my  life,  the  property  shall  return  to
my  nephew,  David,  whose  duty  in  publishing  them,  as  the
last  request  of  his  uncle,  must  be  approved  of  by  all  the
world."

'  Both  Hume  and  Smith  seem  to  have  thought  that  Strahan
would  undertake  the  publication  as  a  mere  matter  of  business.
But  this  book,  like  the  little  hunchback  in  the  "Arabian
Nights,"  was  a  commodity  which  every  one  seemed  anxious
to  transfer  to  his  neighbour.  Strahan  declined  to  undertake


80  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS.

the  task,  and  the  "  Dialogues"  did  not  appear  until  1779,
when  they  were  published  by  their  author's  nephew.' l

The  title-page  consists  simply  of  the  words  '  Dialogues
concerning  Natural  Beligion,  by  David  Hume,  Esq.,'  and
bears  no  publisher's  name.

The  book  is  noticed  in  'The  Gentleman's  Magazine,'
October,  1779.  Although,  perhaps,  the  most  finished  of  its
author's  productions,  it  has  not  excited  general  attention ;
there  seems  to  be  a  deep-seated  reluctance  to  discuss  such
fundamental  questions.

The  larger  toleration,  which  characterises  the  present  age,
makes  it,  perhaps,  difficult  to  understand  why  Adam  Smith
was  so  reluctant  to  put  the  book  through  the  press  for  his
friend.  Unhappily,  it  is  too  certain,  that,  if  he  desired
peace,  he  was  prudent  in  declining  to  do  so.  A  storm  of
obloquy  burst  upon  him  for  his  share  in  publishing  Hume's
autobiography  and  for  the  letter  which  accompanied  it.
The  autobiography  in  question,  dated  April  18,  1776 — Hume
lied  August  25 — appeared  in  1777,  as  '  The  Life  of  David
Hume,  Esq.  Written  by  himself.  Price  Is.  6d.  London  :
Printed  for  W.  Strahan ;  and  T.  Cadell  in  the  Strand.'  The
Preface  runs  as  follows  : — '  Mr.  Hume,  a  few  months  before
his  death,  wrote  the  following  short  account  of  his  own
Life ;  and,  in  a  codicil  to  his  will,  desired  that  it  might
be  prefixed  to  the  next  edition  of  his  Works.  That  edi
tion  cannot  be  published  for  a  considerable  time.2  The
Editor,3  in  the  mean  while,  in  order  to  serve  the  pur
chasers  of  the  former  editions ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to
gratify  the  impatience  of  the  public  curiosity ;  has  thought
proper  to  publish  it  separately,  without  altering  even  the
title  or  superscription,  which  was  written  in  Mr.  Hume's
own  hand  on  the  cover  of  the  manuscript.'

The  Autobiography  and  Letter  are  printed  at  the  beginning
of  this  volume.  Adam  Smith  was  promptly  taken  to  task.  In
the  same  year  was  written  'A  Letter  to  Adam  Smith,  LL.D.
on  the  Life,  Death,  and  Philosophy  of  his  friend  David
Hume,  Esq.  By  One  of  the  People  called  Christians.

Ibant  obscuri,  sola  sub  nocte,  per  umbram,
Perque  domos  Ditis  vacuas,  et  inania  regna.'

In  the  Advertisement  the  author  declines  to  give  his  name,

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  pp.  491-495.  same  year.

2  Nevertheless it appeared iu  the  3  Adam  Smith.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  81

which  can  have  no  bearing  on  the  argument ;  and,  as  his
book  costs  only  a  shilling,  deprecates  the  anger  of  those
readers  who  will  disagree  with  him ;  while  he  entreats  the
friends  of  Religion,  in  so  critical  a  time,  to  speak  well  of  it.
But  for  a  desire  to  be  anonymous,  he  would  have  prefixed
his  portrait,  with  an  effort  to  wear  as  happy  an  expression  as
Hume  himself.  The  letter  begins  :  '  Sir, — You  have  been
lately  employed  in  embalming  a  philosopher ;  his  body,  I
believe  I  must  say;  for  concerning  the  other  part  of  him,
neither  you  nor  he  seem  to  have  entertained  an  idea,  sleeping
or  waking.  Else,  it  surely  might  have  claimed  a  little  of
your  care  and  attention  ;  and  one  would  think,  the  belief  of
the  soul's  existence  and  immortality  could  do  no  harm,  if  it
did  no  good,  in  a  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments.  But  every  gen
tleman  understands  his  own  business  best.'  After  asserting
that  his  own  good  humour  and  literary  tastes  are  such  as  to
make  him  an  impartial  judge,  he  proceeds  to  state  his  point;
that  since  the  social  qualities  of  David,  however  amiable,  by
no  means  prevented  him  from  being  guilty  of  the  atrocious
wickedness  of  diffusing  atheism  through  the  land,  it  was  a
scandal  for  Doctor  Smith  to  pronounce  him  one  who  ap
proached  as  nearly  to  the  idea  of  a  perfectly  wise  and  virtuous
man,  as  perhaps  the  nature  of  human  frailty  will  permit.
The  letter,  which  is  devoid  of  argument,  repeats  this  point
from  time  to  time  with  a  variety  of  scurrilous  jests  and
coarse  comparisons.  It  places  Hume  in  the  same  category
with  John  the  Painter,  who  may  have  played  whist  well,  in
spite  of  an  odd  fancy  of  firing  all  the  dockyards  in  the  king
dom.  Returning  to  the  charge,  it  says  that  only  on  athe
istical  principles  is  it  right  in  our  last  hours  to  read  Lucian,
to  play  at  whist,  to  droll  upon  Charon  and  his  boat,  to  die  as
foolish  and  insensible,  as  much  like  our  brother  philosophers,
the  calves  of  the  field,  and  the  asses  of  the  desert,  as  we  can,
for  the  life  of  us.  Still  further  to  illustrate  so  shocking  a
death -bed,  the  *  drollery '  is  paraphrased  as  follows  :  '  LORD,
T  have  only  one  reason  why  1  should  wish  to  live.  Suffer
me  so  to  do,  I  most  humbly  beseech  Thee,  yet  a  little  while,
till  mine  eyes  shall  behold  the  success  of  my  undertaking  to
overthrow,  by  my  metaphysics,  the  faith  which  thy  SON
descended  from  heaven  to  plant,  and  to  root  out  the  know
ledge  and  the  love  of  thee  from  the  earth.'

After  reprobating  the  inhumanity  of  an  author  who  could

VOL. III.  G


82  HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.

impugn  the  comfortable  doctrines  of  the  Christian  Faith,
Bishop  Home  insinuates  that  Hume  was  by  no  means  so  in
sensible  to  attack  as  his  Life  pretends,  asking  if  there  was
not  an  author — meaning  Beattie ;  he  has  already  assured  Dr.
Smith  that  his  own  name  does  not  begin  with  B. — whose
name  could  not  be  mentioned  to  Hume,  or  else  he  would
*  fly  out  into  a  transport  of  passion  and  swearing '  ?

Waxing  hot  with  indignation  at  Smith's  approval  of
Hume's  manner  of  death,  the  Bishop  tells  him  that  he  who
can  behold  with  complacency  such  a  mischievous  life,  so  evil  a
death,  may  smile  over  Babylon  in  ruins,  esteem  the  earth
quake  which  destroyed  Lisbon  an  agreeable  occurrence,  and
congratulate  the  hardened  Pharaoh  on  his  overthrow  in  the
Red  Sea.  Drollery  in  such  circumstances  is  neither  more
nor  less  than

Moody  Madnoes,  laughing  "wild,
Amid  severest  woe.

Would  we  know  the  baneful  and  pestilential  influences  of
false  philosophy  on  the  human  heart,  we  need  only  con
template  them  in  this  most  deplorable  instance  of  Mr.  Hume.

That  this  '  drolling  upon  Charon  and  his  boat '  gave  dire
offence,  appears  also  from  a  sermon  of  John  Wesley's  :  '

*  Did  that  right  honourable  wretch,  compared  to  whom
Sir  E —  -  was  a  saint,  know  the  heart  of  man, — he  that  so
earnestly  advised  his  own  son,  "  never  to  speak  the  truth,  to
lie  or  dissemble  as  often  as  he  speaks,  to  wear  a  mask  con
tinually  ?  "  that  earnestly  counselled  him,  "  not  to  debauch
single  women,"  (because  some  inconveniences  might  follow),
"  but  always  married  women  ?  "  Would  one  imagine  this
grovelling  animal  ever  had  a  wife  or  a  married  daughter  of

his  own  ? O  rare  Lord  C ! Did  ever  man  so  well  deserve,

though  he  was  a  Peer  of  the  realm,  to  die  by  the  side  of
Newgate  ?  Or  did  ever  book  so  well  deserve  to  be  burned
by  the  common  hangman,  as  his  Letters  ?  Did  Mr.  David
Hume,  lower,  if  possible,  than  either  of  the  former,  know  the
heart  of  man  ?  No  more  than  a  worm  or  a  beetle  does.
After  "  playing  so  idly  with  the  darts  of  death,"  do  you  now
find  it  a  laughing  matter  ?  What  think  you  now  of  Charon  ?
Has  he  ferried  you  over  Styx  ?  At  length  he  has  taught  you
to  know  a  little  of  your  own  heart !  At  length  you  know,  it
is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  ! '

1  No.  123. Preached  at  Halifax,  April  21.  1790. On  the  Deceitfulness  of  the
Human  Heart.


HISTORY OF THE EDITIONS.  3:3

One  or  two  passages  may  be  cited  from  Boswell  in  further
illustration  of  the  bitter  feeling  with  which  Hume's  death
was  expected.  '  When  we  were  alone,  I  introduced  the  sub
ject  of  death,  and  endeavoured  to  maintain  that  the  fear  of
it  might  be  got  over.  I  told  him  that  David  Hume  said  to
me,  he  was  no  more  uneasy  to  think  he  should  not  be  after
his  life,  than  that  he  had  not  been  before  he  began  to  exist.
Johnson :  "  Sir,  if  he  really  thinks  so,  his  perceptions  aro
disturbed  ;  he  is  mad  :  if  he  does  not  think  so,  he  lies.  He
may  tell  you,  he  holds  his  finger  in  the  flame  of  a  candle,
without  feeling  pain ;  would  you  believe  him  ?  When  he
dies,  he  at  least  gives  up  all  he  has."  Boswell :  "  Foote,  Sir,
told  me,  that  when  he  was  very  ill  he  was  not  afraid  to  die  ?  "
Johnson :  "  It  is  not  true,  Sir.  Hold  a  pistol  to  Foote's
breast,  or  to  Hume's  breast,  and  threaten  to  kill  them,  and
you'll  see  how  they  behave."  ...  Letter  from  Boswell
to  Johnson :  '  Without  doubt  you  have  read  what  is  called
"  The  Life  of  David  Hume,"  written  by  himself,  with  the
letter  from  Dr.  Adam  Smith  subjoined  to  it.  Is  not  this  an
age  of  daring  effrontery  ?  My  friend  Mr.  Anderson,  Pro
fessor  of  Natural  Philosophy  at  Glasgow,  at  whose  house  you
and  I  supped,  and  to  whose  care  Mr.  Windham,  of  Norfolk,
was  intrusted  at  that  University,  paid  me  a  visit  lately  ;  and
after  we  had  talked  with  indignation  and  contempt  of  the
poisonous  productions  with  which  this  age  is  infested,  he
said  there  was  now  an  excellent  opportunity  for  Dr.  Johnson
to  step  forth.  I  agreed  with  him  that  you  might  knock
Hume's  and  Smith's  heads  together,  and  make  vain  and
ostentatious  infidelity  exceedingly  ridiculous.  Would  it  not
be  worth  your  while  to  crush  such  noxious  weeds  in  the
moral  garden  ? '  .  .  .  'I  mentioned  to  Dr.  Johnson,  that
David  Hume's  persisting  in  his  infidelity,  when  he  was  dying,
shocked  me  much.  Johnson  :  "  Why  should  it  shock  you,
Sir  ?  Hume  owned  he  had  never  read  the  New  Testament
with  attention.  Here  then  was  a  man  who  had  been  at  no
pains  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  religion,  and  had  con
tinually  turned  his  mind  the  other  way.  It  was  not  to  be
expected  that  the  prospect  of  death  would  alter  his  way  of
thinking,  unless  God  should  send  an  angel  to  set  him  right."
I  said,  I  had  reason  to  believe  that  the  thought  of  annihila
tion  gave  Hume  no  pain .  Johnson :  "  It  was  not  so,  Sir.
He  had  a  vanity  in  being  thought  easy.  It  is  more  probable

G 2


84  HISTORY  OF  THE EDITIONS.

that  he  should  assume  an  appearance  of  ease,  than  so  very
improbable  a  thing  should  be,  as  a  man  not  afraid  of  going
(as,  in  spite  of  his  delusive  theory,  he  cannot  be  sure  but  he
may  go)  into  an  unknown  state,  and  not  being  uneasy  at
leaving  all  he  knew.  And  you  are  to  consider,  that  upon  his
own  principle  of  annihilation  he  had  no  motive  to  speak  the
truth." '

According  to  the  author  of  the  *  Supplement  to  the  Life  of
David  Hume '  (1777),  it  was  thought  necessary  that  his  grave
should  be  watched  by  two  men  for  eight  nights,  and  the
droppings  of  grease  from  their  lanterns  were  long  visible  on
the  tomb.

In  this  Edition  the  text  of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature
has  been  followed  in  all  its  curiosities  of  spelling  and
punctuation.  In  the  Essays  the  posthumous  edition  of  1777
has  been  reprinted;  the  variations  of  earlier  editions  are
given  in  the  notes,  which  in  all  cases  adopt  the  latest  text.
The  Essays,  which  did  not  survive,  will  be  found  at  the  end
of  Yol.  IV.  Many  thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  Burton,  both  for
personal  kindness,  and  for  permission  to  make  free  use  of  his
'  Life  of  Hume.'

T.  H.  GROSE.

QUEEN'S  COLLEGE:  Feb.  2,  1874.


85


LIST  OF  EDITIONS.


Essays  Moral  and  Political. —

Tros  Rutulusve  fitat,  nullo  discrhnine  halebo. — VIRG.  :
Edinburgh : Printed by R.  FLEMING and A.  ALISON,  for  A.
KINCAID, Bookseller, and sold at his  shop above the Cross.
MDCCXLI. One vol. octavo. 2s. 6d. Gent. Mag., March
1742. Brit.  Mus.  and  Bodl. Edition  A.

The Second  Edition, Corrected. MDCCXLII. Brit. Mus.  Edi
tion  B.

Essays  Moral  and  Political— Volume  II.  MDCCXLII.  Brit.  Mua>
Edition  C.

Essays  Moral  and  Political. — By  David  HUME,  Esq.  The  Third
Edition,  Corrected  with  Additions.  London :  Printed  for  A.
MILLAR,  over  against  Catharine  Street,  in  the  Strand,  and  A.
KINCAID  in  Edinburgh.  MDCCXLVIII.  One  vol.  octavo.
3s.  Gent.  Mag.,  Nov.  1748.  Bodl.  Edition  D.

Philosophical  Essays  concerning  Human  Understanding. — By  the
Author  of  the  Essays  Moral  and  Political.  London  :  A.  MILLAR.
MDCCXLVIII.  One  vol.  octavo.  3s.  Gent.  Mag.,  April
1748.  (The  only  copy  the  Editor  has  seen  is  in  Mr.  Burton's
possession.)  Edition  E.

Ditto.  The  Second  Edition,  with  Additions  and  Corrections.  By
Mr.  HUME,  Author  of  the  Essays  Moral  and  Political.  London :
Printed  for  M.  COOPER,  at  the  Globe  in  Paternoster  Eow.
MDCCLI.  Bodl.  Edition  F.

An  Enquiry  concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals. — By  DAVID  HUME,
Esq.  London  :  A.  MILLAR.  1751.  One  vol.  octavo.  3s.  Bodl.
Edition  G.

Political  Discourses. — By  DAVID  HUME,  Esq.  Edinburgh  :  Printed  by
E.  FLEMING,  for  A.  KINCAID  and  A.  DONALDSON.  MDCCL1I.
One  vol.  octavo.  Gent.  Mag.  Feb.  1742.  Bodl.  Edition  H.

Ditto. The  Second  Edition. Bodl. Edition  I.

Essays  and  Treatises  on  Several  Subjects. — By  DAVID  HUME,  Esq. ;  in
Four  Volumes.  London :  A.  MILLAR.  Edinburgh :  A.  KIN
CAID  and  A.  DONALDSON.  MDCCLIII-IV.  Octavo.  Edition  K.


80  LIST OF EDITIONS.

Four  Dissertations.  I.  The  Natural  History  of  Religion.  II.  Oj  the
Passion*.  III.  Of  Tragedy.  IV.  Of  the  Stantltrd.of  Taste.— By
DAVID  HUME,  Esq.  London :  A.  MILLAR.  MDCCLVII.  One
vol.  octavo.  3s.  Gent.  Mag.,  Feb.  1757.  Bodl.  Edition  L.

First  Proof  of  the  Above.  No  Title-page:  but  in  (?)  Hume's
handwriting— Five  Dissertations,  to  wit,  The  Natural  History
of  Religion :  Of  the  Passions  :  Of  Tragedy :  Of  Suicide  :
Of  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul.  In  the  Advocates1  Library,
Edinburgh.

Essays  and  Treatises  on  Several  Subjects.— By  DAVID  HUME,  Esq.
A  New  Edition.  London:  A.  MILLAR.  Edinburgh:  A.  KINCAID
and  A.  DONALDSON.  MDCCLV1II.  Brit.  Mus.  Edition  M.

Ditto,  MDCCLX. Four  vols.  duodecimo. Brit.  Mus. Edition  N.

Ditto,  MDCCLXIV. Two  vols.  octavo. Brit.  Mus. Edition  O.

Ditto.  London  :  Printed  for  A.  MILLAR,  A.  KINCAID,  J.  BELL,  and  A.
DONALDSON,  in  Edinburgh.  And  sold  by  T.  CAPKLL,  in  the  Strand.
MDCCLXVIII.  Two  vols.  quarto.  Brit.  Mus.  Edition  P.

Ditto.  Printed  for  T.  CADELL,  (Successor  to  Mr.  MILLAR),  in  the
Strand;  and  A.  KINCAID  and  A.  DONALDSON,  at  Edinburgh.
MDCCLXX.  Four  vols.  octavo.  Brit.  Mus.  Edition  Q.

Ditto,  Printed  for  T.  CADELL,  in  the  Strand ;  and  W.  DONALDSON
and  W.  CREECH,  at  Edinburgh.  MDCCLXXVII.  2  vols.  octavo.
Brit.  Mus.  and  Bodl.  Edition  R.

Two  Essays.— London. MDCCLXVII. Price  Five  Shillings. (On
Suicide  and  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul.)

Dialogues concerning Natural Religion. — By DAVID HUME, Esq.

1779.
This  list exhausts  the  Editions : all  have  been  collated  by  the

present  Editor.


ESSAYS


AND


TREATISES

O N

SEVERAL SUBJECTS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

By DAVID HUME, Esq;
VOL. I.

CONTAINING-

ESSAYS, MORAL, POLITICAL, and LITERARY.
A NEW EDITION.


LONDON:

Printed for T. C  A  D  E  L  L, in the Strand: and

A.  DONALDSON,  and  W.  CEEECH,  at  Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXVI1.


ESSAYS,

MORAL, POLITICAL,


AND


LITERARY.


PART V


•PUBLISHED  in  1742.  [This  Note  was  added  in  Ed.  M,  1758  J,


VOL  I.  B


ESSAYS.


PART  I.

ESSAY  L — Of  the  Delicacy  of  Taste  and  Passion.

SOME  People  are  subject  to  a  certain  delicacy  of  passion,
which  makes  them  extremely  sensible  to  all  the  accidents  of
life,  and  gives  them  a  lively  joy  upon  every  prosperous  event,  as
well  as  a  piercing  grief,  when  they  meet  with  misfortunes  and
adversity.  Favours  and  good  offices  easily  engage  their  friend
ship;  while  the  smallest  injury  provokes  their  resentment.
Any  honour  or  mark  of  distinction  elevates  them  above  mea
sure  ;  but  they  are  as  sensibly  touched  with  contempt.  People
of  this  character  have,  no  doubt,  more  lively  enjoyments,  as
well  as  more  pungent  sorrows,  than  men  of  cool  and  sedate
tempers  :  But,  I  believe,  when  every  thing  is  balanced,  there
is  no  one,  who  would  not  rather  be  of  the  latter  character,
were  he  entirely  master  of  his  own  disposition.  Good  or  ill
fortune  is  very  little  at  our  disposal :  And  when  a  person,
that  has  this  sensibility  of  temper,  meets  with  any  misfortune,
his  sorrow  or  resentment  takes  entire  possession  of  him,  and
deprives  him  of  all  relish  in  the  common  occurrences  of  life  ;
the  right  enjoyment  of  which  forms  the  chief  part  of  our
happiness.  Great  pleasures  are  much  less  frequent  than
great  pains ;  so  that  a  sensible  temper  must  meet  with  fewer
trials  in  the  former  way  than  in  the  latter.  Not  to  mention,
that  men  of  such  lively  passions  are  apt  to  be  transported
beyond  all  bounds  of  prudence  and  discretion,  and  to  take
false  steps  in  the  conduct  of  life,  which  are  often  irre
trievable.

There  is  a  delicacy  of  taste  observable  in  some  men,  which


flo  ESSAY I.

very  inucli  resembles  this  delicacy  of  passion,  and  produces
the  same  sensibility  to  beauty  and  deformity  of  every  kind,
as  that  does  to  prosperity  and  adversity,  obligations  and
injuries.  When  you  present  a  poem  or  a  picture  to  a  man
possessed  of  this  talent,  the  delicacy  of  his  feeling  makes
him  be  sensibly  touched  with  every  part  of  it ;  nor  are  the
masterly  strokes  perceived  with  more  exquisite  relish  and
satisfaction,  than  the  negligences  or  absurdities  with  disgust
and  uneasiness.  A.  polite  and  judicious  conversation  affords
him  the  highest  entertainment ;  rudeness  or  impertinence  is
as  great  a  punishment  to  him.  In  short,  delicacy  of  taste
has  the  same  eifect  as  delicacy  of  passion  :  It  enlarges  the
sphere  both  of  our  happiness  and  misery,  and  makes  us
sensible  to  pains  as  well  as  pleasures,  which  escape  the  rest
of  mankind.

I  believe,  however,  every  one  will  agree  with  me,  that,
notwithstanding  this  resemblance,  delicacy  of  taste  is  as
much  to  be  desired  and  cultivated  as  delicacy  of  passion  is  to
be  lamented,  and  to  be  remedied,  if  possible.  The  good  or
ill  accidents  of  life  are  very  little  at  our  disposal ;  but  we  are
pretty  much  masters  what  books  we  shall  read,  what  diver
sions  we  shall  partake  of,  and  what  company  we  shall  keep.
Philosophers  have  endeavoured  to  render  happiness  entirely
independent  of  every  thing  external.  That  degree  of  per
fection  is  impossible  to  be  attained :  But  every  wise  man  will
endeavour  to  place  his  happiness  on  such  objects  chiefly  as
depend  upon  himself:  and  that  is  not  to  be  attained  so  much
by  any  other  means  as  by  this  delicacy  of  sentiment.  When
a  man  is  possessed  of  that  talent,  he  is  more  happy  by
what  pleases  his  taste,  than  by  what  gratifies  his  appe
tites,  and  receives  more  enjoyment  from  a  poem  or  a  piece
of  reasoning  than  the  most  expensive  luxury  can  afford.1

Whatever  connexion  there  may  be  originally  between
these  two  species  of  delicacy,  I  am  persuaded,  that  nothing
is  so  proper  to  cure  us  of  this  delicacy  of  passion,  as  the
cultivating  of  that  higher  and  more  refined  taste,  which

1  [How  far  delicacy  of  taste,  and  that  the  ornaments  of  life,  of  dress,  equipage,

of  passion, are  connected together  in  and  the  ordinary  decencies  of  behaviour,

the  original  frame  of  the  mind,  it is  Any  excellency  in  these  hits  their  taste

hard  to  determine. To  me  there  appears  much  sooner  than  ours  ;  and  when  you

a  very  considerable  connexion  between  please  their  taste,  yoii  soon  engage  their

them. For  we  may  observe  that  women,  affections. — Editions  A  to  Q;  the  latter

vho  have  more  delicate  passions  than  omits  the  last  sentence.]
men,  have  also  a  more  delicate  taste  of


DELICACY OF TASTE.  93

enables  us  to  judge  of  the  characters  of  men,  of  compositions
of  genius,  and  of  the  productions  of  the  nobler  arts.  A.
greater  or  less  relish  for  those  obvious  beauties,  which  strike
the  senses,  depends  entirely  upon  the  greater  or  less  sensibi
lity  of  the  temper :  But  with  regard  to  the  sciences  and
liberal  arts,  a  fine  taste  is,  in  some  measure,  the  same  with
strong  sense,  or  at  least  depends  so  much  upon  it,  that  they
are  inseparable.  In  order  to  judge  aright  of  a  composition
of  genius,  there  are  so  many  views  to  be  taken  in,  so  many
circumstances  to  be  compared,  and  such  a  knowledge  of
human  nature  requisite,  that  no  man,  who  is  not  possessed
of  the  soundest  judgment,  will  ever  make  a  tolerable  critic
in  such  performances.  And  this  is  a  new  reason  for  culti
vating  a  relish  in  the  liberal  arts.  Our  judgment  will
strengthen  by  this  exercise  :  We  shall  form  juster  notions
of  life :  Many  things,  which  please  or  afflict  others,  will
appear  to  us  too  frivolous  to  engage  our  attention  :  And  we
shall  lose  by  degrees  that  sensibility  and  delicacy  of  passion,
which  is  so  incommodious.

But  perhaps  I  have  gone  too  far  in  saying,  that  a  culti
vated  taste  for  the  polite  arts  extinguishes  the  passions,  and
renders  us  indifferent  to  those  objects,  which  are  so  fondly
pursued  by  the  rest  of  mankind.  On  farther  reflection,  I  find,
that  it  rather  improves  our  sensibility  for  all  the  tender  and
agreeable  passions ;  at  the  same  time  that  it  renders  the
mind  incapable  of  the  rougher  and  more  boisterous  emotions.

Ingenuas  didicisse  fiddlier  artes,
Emollit  mores,  ncc  sinit  esseferos.

For  this,  I  think  there  may  be  assigned  two  very  natural
reasons.  In  the  first  place,  nothing  is  so  improving  to  the
temper  as  the  study  of  the  beauties,  either  of  poetry,  elo
quence,  music,  or  painting.  They  give  a  certain  elegance  of
sentiment  to  which  the  rest  of  mankind  are  strangers.  The
emotions  which  they  excite  are  soft  and  tender.  They  draw
off  the  mind  from  the  hurry  of  business  and  interest ;
cherish  reflection ;  dispose  to  tranquillity ;  and  produce  an
agreeable  melancholy,  which,  of  all  dispositions  of  the  mind,
is  the  best  suited  to  love  and  friendship.

In  the  second  place,  a  delicacy  of  taste  is  favourable  to
love  and  friendship,  by  confining  our  choice  to  few  people,
and  making  us  indifferent  to  the  company  and  conversation


94  ESSAY  I.

of  the  greater  part  of  men.  You  will  seldom  find,  that  mere
men  of  the  world,  whatever  strong  sense  they  may  he  en
dowed  with,  are  very  nice  in  distinguishing  characters,  or  in
marking  those  insensible  differences  and  gradations,  which
make  one  man  preferable  to  another.  Any  one,  that  has
competent  sense,  is  sufficient  for  their  entertainment :  They
talk  to  him,  of  their  pleasure  and  affairs,  with  the  same
frankness  that  they  would  to  another  ;  and  finding  many,
who  are  fit  to  supply  his  place,  they  never  feel  any  vacancy
or  want  in  his  absence.  But  to  make  use  of  the  allusion  ot
a  celebrated  French1  author,  the  judgment  may  be  compared
to  a  clock  or  watch,  where  the  most  ordinary  machine  is
sufficient  to  tell  the  hours ;  but  the  most  elaborate  alone
<:an  point  out  the  minutes  and  seconds,  and  distinguish  the
smallest  differences  of  time.  One  that  has  well  digested  his
knowledge  both  of  books  and  men,  has  little  enjoyment  but
in  the  company  of  a  few  select  companions.  He  feels  too
sensibly,  how  much  all  the  rest  of  mankind  fall  short  of  the
notions  which  he  has  entertained.  And,  his  affections  beino-

*  O

thus  confined  within  a  narrow  circle,  no  wonder  he  carries
them  further,  than  if  they  were  more  general  and  undistin
guished.  The  gaiety  and  frolic  of  a  bottle  companion
improves  with  him  into  a  solid  friendship  :  And  the  ardours
of  a  youthful  appetite  become  an  elegant  passion.


ESSAY  II.— Of  the  Liberty  of  the  Press.

NOTHING  is  more  apt  to  surprize  a  foreigner,  than  the  ex
treme  liberty,  which  we  enjoy  in  this  country,  of  communi
cating  whatever  we  please  to  the  public,  and  of  openly
censuring  every  measure,  entered  into  by  the  king  or  his
ministers.  If  the  administration  resolve  upon  war,  it  is
affirmed,  that,  either  wilfully  or  ignorantly,  they  mistake
the  interests  of  the  nation,  and  that  peace,  in  the  present
situation  of  affairs,  is  infinitely  preferable.  If  the  passion
of  the  ministers  lie  towards  peace,  our  political  writers
breathe  nothing  but  war  and  devastation,  and  represent  the
pacific  conduct  of  the  government  as  mean  and  pusillanimous.
As  this  liberty  is  not  indulged  in  any  other  government,
either  republican  or  monarchical ;  in  HOLLAND  and  VENICE,

1  Mons.  FONTENKI.LK,  Pluralite  des  Mondcs. Soir.  6.


LIBERTY OF THE PRESS.  95

more  than  in  FRANCE  or  SPAIN  ;  it  ma_y  /ery  naturally  give
occasion  to  a  question,  How  it  happens  that  GREAT  BRITAIN
alone  enjoys  this  peculiar  privilege  ?  '

The  reason,  why  the  laws  indulge  us  in  such  a  liberty
seems  to  be  derived  from  our  mixed  form  of  government,
which  is  neither  wholly  monarchical,  nor  wholly  republican.
It  will  be  found,  if  I  mistake  not,  a  true  observation  in
politics,  that  the  two  extremes  in  government,  liberty  and
slavery,  commonly  approach  nearest  to  each  other ;  and
that,  as  you  depart  from  the  extremes,  and  mix  a  little
of  monarchy  with  liberty,  the  government  becomes  always
the  more  free ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  when  you  mix  a  little
of  liberty  with  monarchy,  the  yoke  becomes  always  the  more
grievous  and  intolerable.2  In  a  government,  such  as  that  of
FRANCE,  which  is  absolute,  and  where  law,  custom,  and
religion  concur,  all  of  them,  to  make  people  fully  satisfied
with  their  condition,  the  monarch  cannot  entertain  any
jealousy  against  his  subjects,  and  therefore  is  apt  to  indulge
them  in  great  liberties  both  of  speech  and  action.  In  a
government  altogether  republican,  such  as  that  of  HOLLAND^
where  there  is  no  magistrate  so  eminent  as  to  give  jealousy
to  the  state,  there  is  no  danger  in  intrusting  the  magistrates
with  large  discretionary  powers ;  and  though  many  ad'
vantages  result  from  such  powers,  in  preserving  peace  and
order,  yet  they  lay  a  considerable  restraint  on  men's  actions,
and  make  every  private  citizen  pay  a  great  respect  to  the
government.  Thus  it  seems  evident,  that  the  two  extremes
of  absolute  monarchy  and  of  a  republic,  approach  near  to
each  other  in  some  material  circumstances.  In  the  first,  the
magistrate  has  no  jealousy  of  the  people  :  in  the  second,  the
people  have  none  of  the  magistrate  :  Which  want  of  jealousy
begets  a  mutual  confidence  and  trust  in  both  cases,  and  pro
duces  a  species  of  liberty  in  monarchies,  and  of  arbitrary
power  in  republics.

To  justify  the  other  part  of  the  foregoing  observation,
that,  in  every  government,  the  means  are  most  wide  of  each
other,  and  that  the  mixtures  of  monarchy  and  liberty  render
the  yoke  more  easy  or  more  grievous ;  I  must  take  notice  of
a  remark  in  TACITUS  with  regard  to  the  ROMANS  under  the

1  [And  whether  the  unlimited  exercise  2  [I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  my-

of  this  liberty  be  advantageous  or  pre- self. — Editions  D  to  P.]
judicial  to  the  public  ?—  Editions  A  to  P.]


96  ESSAY  H.

emperors,  that  they  neither  could  bear  total  slavery  nor  total
liberty,  Nee  totam  servitutem,  nee  totam  libertatem  pati  possunt.
This  remark  a  celebrated  poet  has  translated  and  applied  to
the  ENGLISH,  in  his  lively  description  of  queen  ELIZABETH'S
policy  and  government,

Etfit  aimer  sonjoug  a  FAnglois  indompte,
Qui  ne  pent  ni  servir,  ni  vivre  en  liberte.

HKXEIADE,  liv.  1.

According  to  these  remarks,  we  are  to  consider  the  ROMAN
government  under  the  emperors  as  a  mixture  of  despotism
and  liberty,  where  the  despotism  prevailed  ;  and  the  ENGLISH
government  as  a  mixture  of  the  same  kind,  where  the  liberty
predominates.  The  consequences  are  conformable  to  the
foregoing  observation ;  and  such  as  may  be  expected  from
those  mixed  forms  of  government,  which  beget  a  mutual
watchfulness  and  jealousy.  The  ROMAN  emperors  were,
many  of  them,  the  most  frightful  tyrants  that  ever  disgraced
human  nature;  and  it  is  evident,  that  their  cruelty  was
chiefly  excited  by  their  jealousy.,  and  by  their  observing  that
all  the  great  men  of  ROME  bore  with  impatience  the  dominion
of  a  family,  which,  but  a  little  before,  was  110  wise  superior
to  their  own.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the  republican  part  of
the  government  prevails  in  ENGLAND,  though  with  a  great
mixture  of  monarchy,  it  is  obliged,  for  its  own  preservation,
to  maintain  a  watchful  jealousy  over  the  magistrates,  to  re
move  all  discretionary  powers,  and  to  secure  every  one's  life
and  fortune  by  general  and  inflexible  laws.  No  action  must
be  deemed  a  crime  but  what  the  law  has  plainly  determined
to  be  such  :  No  crime  must  be  imputed  to  a  man  but  from
a  legal  proof  before  his  judges  ;  and  even  these  judges  must
be  his  fellow-subjects,  who  are  obliged,  by  their  own  in
terest,  to  have  a  watchful  eye  over  the  encroachments  and
violence  of  the  ministers.  From  these  causes  it  proceeds,
that  there  is  as  much  liberty,  and,  even,  perhaps,  licentious
ness  in  GREAT  BRITAIN,  as  there  were  formerly  slavery  and
tyranny  in  ROME.

These  principles  account  for  the  great  liberty  of  the  press
in  these  kingdoms,  beyond  what  is  indulged  in  any  other
government.  '  It  is  apprehended,  that  arbitrary  power  would
steal  in  upon  us,  were  we  not  careful  to  prevent  its  progress,

!  ['Tis  sufficiently  known. — Editions  A  to  P.]


LIBERTY OF THE PRESS.


97


and  were  there  not  an.  easy  method  of  conveying  the  alarm
from  one  end  of  the  kingdom  to  the  other.  The  spirit  of
the  people  must  frequently  be  rouzed,  in  order  to  curb  the
ambition  of  the  court ;  and  the  dread  of  rouzing  this  spirit
must  be  employed  to  prevent  that  ambition.  Nothing  so
effectual  to  this  purpose  as  the  liberty  of  the  press,  by  which
all  the  learning,  wit,  and  genius  of  the  nation  may  be  em
ployed  on  the  side  of  freedom,  and  every  one  be  animated  to
its  defence.  As  long,  therefore,  as  the  republican  part  of
our  government  can  maintain  itself  against  the  monarchical,
it  will  naturally  be  careful  to  keep  the  press  open,  as  of  im
portance  to  its  own  preservation.

1  It  must  however  be  allowed,  that  the  unbounded  liberty


1  [Edition  Q  omits  the  concluding
sentence.  Editions  A  to  P  have  in  place
of  it  the  following  : —

Since  therefore  that  liberty  is  so
essential  to  the  support  of  our  mixed
government ;  this  sufficiently  decides
the  second  question.  Whether  such  a
liberty  be  advantageous  or  prejudicial;
there  being  nothing  of  greater  impor
tance  in  every  state  than  the  preserva
tion  of  the  ancient  government,  especi
ally  if  it  be  a  free  one.  But  I  would
fiiin  go  a  step  farther,  and  assert,  that
this  liberty  is  attended  with  so  few
inconveniencies,  that  it  may  be  claimed
as  the  common  right  of  mankind,  and
ought  to  be  indulged  them  almost  in
every  government :  except  the  ecclesi
astical,  to  which  indeed  it  would  prove
fatal.  We  need  not  dread  from  this
liberty  any  such  ill  consequences  as
followed  from  the  harangues  of  the
popular  demagogues  of  ATHKNS  and
tribunes  of  BOJIE.  A  man  reads  a  book
or  pamphlet  alone  and  coolly.  There
is  none  present  from  whom  he  can
catch  the  passion  by  contagion.  He  is
not  hurried  away  by  the  force  and
energy  of  action.  And  should  he  be
wrought  up  to  ever  so  seditious  a
humour,  there  is  no  violent  resolution
presented  to  him,  by  which  he  can  im
mediately  vent  his  passion. \The  liberty
of  the  press,  therefore,  however  abused,
can  scarce  ever  excite  popular  tumults
or  rebellion.  And  as  to  those  murmurs
or  secret  discontents  it  may  occasion,
'tis  better  they  should  get  vent  in  words,
that  they  may  come  to  the  knowledge  of
the  magistrate  before  it  be  too  late,  in
order  to  his  providing  a  remedy  against

VOL.  III.  H


them.  Mankind,  it  is  true,  have  always
a  greater  propension  to  believe  what
is  said  to  the  disadvantage  of  their
governors,  than  the  contrary  ;  but  thia
inclination  is  inseparable  from  them,
whether  they  have  liberty  or  not.  A
whisper  may  fly  as  quick,  and  be  as
pernicious  as  a  pamphlet.  Nay,  it  will
be  more  pernicious,  where  men  are  not
accustomed  to  think  freely,  or  distin
guish  between  truth  and  falshood.

It  has  also  been  found,  as  the  expe
rience  of  mankind  increases,  that  the
people  are  no  such  dangerous  monster  as
they  have  been  represented,  and  that  it
is  in  every  respect  better  to  guide  them,
like  rational  creatures,  than  to  lead  or
drive  them,  like  brute  beasts.  Before
the  United  Provinces  set  the  example,
toleration  was  deemed  incompatible
with  good  government ;  and  it  was
thought  impossible,  that  a  number  of
religious  sects  could  live  together  in
harmony  and  peace,  and  have  all  of
them  an  equal  affection  to  their  common
country,  and  to  each  other.  ENGLAND
has  set  a  like  example  of  civil  liberty ;
and  though  this  liberty  seems  to  occa
sion  some  small  ferment  at  present,  it
has  not  as  yet  produced  any  pernicious
effects ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  men,
being  every  day  more  accustomed  to
the  free  discussion  of  public  affairs,
•will  improve  in  the  judgment  of  them,
and  be  with  greater  difficulty  seduced
by  every  idle  rumour  and  popular
clamour.

It  is  a  very  comfortable  reflection  to
the  lovers  of  liberty,  that  this  peculiar
privilege  of  BRITAIN  is  of  a  kind  that
cannot  easily  be  wrested  from  us,  but


98  ESSAY III.


of  the  press,  though  it  be  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to
propose  a  suitable  remedy  for  it,  is  one  of  the  evils,  attend
ing  those  mixt  forms  of  government.


ESSAY  III. — That  Politics  may  be  reduced  to  a  Science.

IT  is  a  question  with  several,  whether  there  be  any  essential
difference  between  one  form  of  government  and  another?
and,  whether  every  form  may  not  become  good  or  bad,  ac
cording  as  it  is  well  or  ill  administered  ? 1  Were  it  once
admitted,  that  all  governments  are  alike,  and  that  the  only
difference  consists  in  the  character  and  conduct  of  the
governors,  most  political  disputes  would  be  at  an  end,  and  all
Zeal  for  one  constitution  above  another,  must  be  esteemed
mere  bigotry  and  folly.  But,  though  a  friend  to  moderation,
I  cannot  forbear  condemning  this  sentiment,  and  should  be
sorry  to  think,  that  human  affairs  admit  of  no  greater
stability,  than  what  they  receive  from  the  casual  humours
and  characters  of  particular  men.

It  is  true ;  those  who  maintain,  that  the  goodness  of
all  government  consists  in  the  goodness  of  the  adminis
tration,  may  cite  some  particular  instances  in  history,
where  the  very  same  government,  in  different  hands,  has
varied  suddenly  into  the  two  opposite  extremes  of  good  and
bad.  Compare  the  FRENCH  government  under  HENRY  III.
and  under  HENRY  IV.  Oppression,  levity,  artifice  on  the
part  of  the  rulers;  faction,  sedition,  treachery,  rebellion,
disloyalty  on  the  part  of  the  subjects :  These  compose
the  character  of  the  former  miserable  ssra.  But  when  the
patriot  and  heroic  prince,  who  succeeded,  was  once  firmly
seated  on  the  throne,  the  government,  the  people,  every

must  last  as  long  as  our  government  upon  the  press,  or  the  giving  to  the
remains,  in  any  degree,  free  and  inde-  court  very  large  discretionary  powers
pendent.  It  is  seldom,  that  liberty  of  to  punish  whatever  displeases  them,
any  kind  is  lost  all  at  once.  Slavery  But  these  concessions  would  be  such  a
has  so  frightful  an  aspect  to  men  ac-  bare-faced  violation  of  liberty,  that
customed  to  freedom,  that  it  must  steal  they  will  probably  be  the  last  efforts  of
upon  them  by  degrees,  and  must  dis-  a  despotic  government.  We  may  con-
guise  itself  in  a  thousand  shapes,  in  elude,  that  the  liberty  of  Britain  is  gone
order  to  be  received.  But,  if  the  liberty  for  ever  when  these  attempts  shall
of  the  press  ever  be  lost,  it  must  be  lost  succeed.]

at  once. The general laws against  '  For  forms  of  government let  fools

sedition  and  libelling  are  at  present  as  contest,

strong  as  they  possibly  can  be  made.  Whateer  is  best  administered  is  best.

Nothing  can  impose  a  farther  restraint,  ESSAY  ox  MAN,  Book  3.

but  either  the  chipping  an  IMPRIMATUR


POLITICS A SCIENCE.  9G

thing  seemed  to  be  totally  changed ;  and  all  from  the  dif
ference  of  the  temper  and  conduct  of  these  two  sovereigns.1
Instances  of  this  kind  may  be  multiplied,  almost  without
number,  iron  ancient  as  well  as  modern  history,  foreign  as
well  as  domestic.

But  here  it  may  be  proper  to  make  a  distinction.  All  abso
lute  governments2  must  very  much  depend  on  the  administra
tion  ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  great  inconveniences  attending
that  form  of  government.  But  a  republican  and  free  govern
ment  would  be  an  obvious  absurdity,  if  the  particular  checks
and  controuls,  provided  by  the  constitution,  had  really  no
influence,  and  made  it  not  the  interest,  even  of  bad  men,  to
act  for  the  public  good.  Such  is  the  intention  of  these
forms  of  government,  and  such  is  their  real  effect,  where
they  are  wisely  constituted  :  As  on  the  other  hand,  they  are
the  source  of  all  disorder,  and  of  the  blackest  crimes,  where
either  skill  or  honesty  has  been  wanting  in  their  original
frame  and  institution.

So  great  is  the  force  of  laws,  and  of  particular  forms  of
government,  and  so  little  dependence  have  they  on  the
humours  and  tempers  of  men,  that  consequences  almost  as
general  and  certain  may  sometimes  be  deduced  from  them,
as  any  which  the  mathematical  sciences  afford  us.

The  constitution  of  the  ROMAN  republic  gave  the  whole
legislative  power  to  the  people,  without  allowing  a  nega
tive  voice  either  to  the  nobility  or  consuls.  This  unbounded
power  they  possessed  in  a  collective,  not  in  a  representative
body.  The  consequences  were :  When  the  people,  by  suc
cess  and  conquest,  had  become  very  numerous,  and  had
spread  themselves  to  a  great  distance  from  the  capital,  the
city-tribes,  though  the  most  contemptible,  carried  almost
every  vote :  They  were,  therefore,  most  cajoled  by  every  one
that  affected  popularity  :  They  were  supported  in  idleness
by  the  general  distribution  of  corn,  and  by  particular  bribes,
which  they  received  from  almost  every  candidate :  By  this
means,  they  became  every  day  more  licentious,  and  the

1  [Editions  A  to  P  insert  the  follow-  2  [Editions  A  to  Q  insert :  And  such,

ing: — An  equal  difference  of  a  contrary  in  a  great  measure,  was  that  of  ENG-

kind.  may  be  found  on  comparing  the  LAND,  till  the  middle  of  the  last  cen-

reigns  of  ELIZABETH  and  JAMES,  at  least  tury,  notwithstanding  the  numerous

with  regard  to  foreign  affirirs.  panegyrics  on  ancient  ENGLISH  liberty.

They  omit  the  words  '  foreign  as  well  Editions  A  and  B  stop  at  the  word

as  domestic '  in  the  next  sentence.]  century.']


H  2


100  ESSAY  III.

CAMPUS  MAETIUS  was  a  perpetual  scene  of  tumult  and  sedi
tion:  Armed  slaves  were  introduced  among  these  rascally
citizens;  so  that  the  whole  government  fell  into  anarchy,
and  the  greatest  happiness,  which  the  BOMANS  could  look
for,  was  the  despotic  power  of  the  (LESARS.  Such  are  the
effects  of  democracy  without  a  representative.

A  Nobility  may  possess  the  whole,  or  any  part  of  the  legis
lative  power  of  a  state,  in  two  different  ways.  Either  every
nobleman  shares  the  power  as  part  of  the  whole  body,  or  tho
whole  body  enjoys  the  power  as  composed  of  parts,  which
have  each  a  distinct  power  and  authority.  The  VENETIAN
aristocracy  is  an  instance  of  the  first  kind  of  government :
The  POLISH  of  the  second.  In  the  VENETIAN  government
the  whole  body  of  nobility  possesses  the  whole  power,  and  no
nobleman  has  any  authority  which  he  receives  not  from  the
whole.  In  the  POLISH  government  every  nobleman,  by  means
of  his  fiefs,  has  a  distinct  hereditary  authority  over  his  vas
sals,  and  the  whole  body  has  no  authority  but  what  it  re
ceives  from  the  concurrence  of  its  parts.  The  different
operations  and  tendencies  of  these  two  species  of  government
might  be  made  apparent  even  a  priori.  A  VENETIAN  nobility
is  preferable  to  a  POLISH,  let  the  humours  and  education  of
men  be  ever  so  much  varied.  A  nobility,  who  possess  their
power  in  common,  will  preserve  peace  and  order,  both  among
themselves,  and  their  subjects ;  and  no  member  can  have
authority  enough  to  controul  the  laws  for  a  moment.  The
nobles  will  preserve  their  authority  over  the  people,  but
without  any  grievous  tyranny,  or  any  breach  of  private  pro
perty  ;  because  such  a  tyrannical  government  promotes  not
the  interests  of  the  whole  body,  however  it  may  that  of  some
individuals.  There  will  be  a  distinction  of  rank  between  the
nobility  and  people,  but  this  will  be  the  only  distinction  in
the  state.  The  whole  nobility  will  form  one  body,  and  the
whole  people  another,  without  any  of  those  private  feuds  and
animosities,  which  spread  ruin  and  desolation  every  where.
It  is  easy  to  see  the  disadvantages  of  a  POLISH  nobility  in
every  one  of  these  particulars.

It  is  possible  so  to  constitute  a  free  government,  as  that
a  single  person,  call  him  -doge,  prince,  or  king,  shall  possess
a  large  share  of  power,  and  shall  form  a  proper  balance  or
counterpoise  to  the  other  parts  of  the  legislature.  This
chief  magistrate  may  be  either  elective  or  hereditary ;  and


POLITICS  A  SCIENCE.  101

though  the  former  institution  may,  to  a  superficial  view,
appear  the  most  advantageous  ;  yet  a  more  accurate  inspec
tion  will  discover  in  it  greater  inconveniencies  than  in  the
latter,  and  such  as  are  founded  on  causes  and  principles
eternal  and  immutable.  The  filling  of  the  throne,  in  such  a
government,  is  a  point  of  too  great  and  too  general  interest,
"not  to  divide  the  whole  people  into  factions  :  Whence  a  civil
war,  the  greatest  of  ills,  may  be  apprehended,  almost  with
certainty,  upon  every  vacancy.  The  prince  elected  must  be
either  a  Foreigner  or  a  Native  :  The  former  will  be  ignorant
of  the  people  whom  he  is  to  govern ;  suspicious  of  his  new
subjects,  and  suspected  by  them ;  giving  his  confidence  en
tirely  to  strangers,  who  will  have  no  other  care  but  of  enrich
ing  themselves  in  the  quickest  manner,  while  their  master's
favour  and  authority  are  able  to  support  them.  A  native
will  carry  into  the  throne  all  his  private  animosities  and
friendships,  and  will  never  be  viewed  in  his  elevation,  with
out  exciting  the  sentiment  of  envy  in  those,  who  formerly
considered  him  as  their  equal.  Not  to  mention  that  a  crown
is  too  high  a  reward  ever  to  be  given  to  merit  alone,  and
will  always  induce  the  candidates  to  employ  force,  or  money,
or  intrigue,  to  procure  the  votes  of  the  electors :  So  that
such  an  election  will  give  no  better  chance  for  superior  merit
in  the  prince,  than  if  the  state  had  trusted  to  birth  alone  for
determining  their  sovereign.

It  may  therefore  be  pronounced  as  an  universal  axiom  in
politics,  That  an  hereditary  prince,  a  nobility  without  vassals,
and  a  people  voting  by  their  representatives,  form  the  best
MONARCHY,  ARISTOCRACY,  and  DEMOCRACY.  But  in  order  to
prove  more  fully,  that  politics  admit  of  general  truths,  which
are  invariable  by  the  humour  or  education  either  of  subject
or  sovereign,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  observe  some  other  prin
ciples  of  this  science,  which  may  seem  to  deserve  that
character.

It  may  easily  be  observed,  that,  though  free  governments
have  been  commonly  the  most  happy  for  those  who  partake
of  their  freedom;  yet  are  they  the  most  ruinous  and  op
pressive  to  their  provinces :  And  this  observation  may,  I
believe,  be  fixed  as  a  maxim  of  the  kind  we  are  here  speaking
of.  When  a  monarch  extends  his  dominions  by  conquest,  he
soon  learns  to  consider  his  old  and  his  new  subjects  as  on
the  same  footing ;  because,  in  reality,  all  his  subjects  are  to


102  ESSAY  TIL

him  the  same,  except  the  few  friends  and  favourites,  with
whom  he  is  personally  acquainted.  He  does  not,  therefore,
make  any  distinction  between  them  in  his  general  laws ;  and,
at  the  same  time,  is  careful  to  prevent  all  particular  acts  of
oppression  on  the  one  as  well  as  on  the  other.  But  a  free
state  necessarily  makes  a  great  distinction,  and  must  always
do  so,  till  men  learn  to  love  their  neighbours  as  well  as
themselves.  The  conquerors,  in  such  a  government,  are  all
legislators,  and  will  be  sure  to  contrive  matters,  by  restric
tions  on  trade,  and  by  taxes,  so  as  to  draw  some  private,  as
well  as  public,  advantage  from  their  conquests.  Provincial
governors  have  also  a  better  chance,  in  a  republic,  to  escape
with  their  plunder,  by  means  of  bribery  or  intrigue ;  and
their  fellow-citizens,  who  find  their  own  state  to  be  enriched
by  the  spoils  of  the  subject  provinces,  will  be  more  inclined
to  tolerate  such  abuses.  Not  to  mention,  that  it  is  a  necessary
precaution  in  a  free  state  to  change  the  governors  frequently  ;
which  obliges  these  temporary  tyrants  to  be  more  expedi
tious  and  rapacious,  that  they  may  accumulate  sufficient
wealth  before  they  give  place  to  their  successors.  What
cruel  tyrants  were  the  ROMANS  over  the  world  during  the
time  of  their  commonwealth  !  It  is  true,  they  had  laws  to
prevent  oppression  in  their  provincial  magistrates ;  but
CICERO  informs  us,  that  the  ROMANS  could  not  better  consult
the  interests  of  the  provinces  than  by  repealing  these  very
laws.  For,  in  that  case,  says  he,  our  magistrates,  having
entire  impunity,  would  plunder  no  more  than  would  satisfy
their  own  rapaciousnesg ;  whereas,  at  present,  they  must
also  satisfy  that  of  their  judges,  and  of  all  the  great  men  in
ROME,  of  whose  protection  they  stand  in  need.  Who  can
read  of  the  cruelties  and  oppressions  of  VERRES  without
horror  and  astonishment  ?  And  who  is  not  touched  with  in
dignation  to  hear,  that,  after  CICERO  had  exhausted  on  that
abandoned  criminal  all  the  thunders  of  his  eloquence,  and
had  prevailed  so  far  as  to  get  him  condemned  to  the  utmost
extent  of  the  laws ;  yet  that  cruel  tyrant  lived  peaceably  to
old  age,  in  opulence  and  ease,  and,  thirty  years  afterwards,
was  put  into  the  proscription  by  MARK  ANTHONY,  on  account
of  his  exorbitant  wealth,  where  he  fell  with  CICERO  himself,
and  all  the  most  virtuous  men  of  ROME  ?  After  the  dissolu
tion  of  the  commonwealth,  the  ROMAN  yoke  became  easier


POLITICS  A  SCIENCE.  103

upon  the  provinces,  as  TACITUS  informs  us  l ;  and  it  may  be
observed,  that  many  of  the  worst  emperors,  DoMiTiAN,2  for
instance,  were  careful  to  prevent  all  oppression  on  the  pro
vinces.  In  3  TIIJERIUS'S  time,  GAUL  was  esteemed  richer  than
ITALY  itself :  Nor,  do  I  find,  during  the  whole  time  of  the
KOMAN  monarchy,  that  the  empire  became  less  rich  or  popu
lous  in  any  of  its  provinces;  though  indeed  its  valour  and
military  discipline  were  always  upon  the  decline.  4  The  op
pression  and  tyranny  of  the  CARTHAGINIANS  over  their  sub
ject  states  in  AFEICA  went  so  far,  as  we  learn  from  POLYBIUS,S
that,  not  content  with  exacting  the  half  of  all  the  produce  of
the  land,  which  of  itself  was  a  very  high  rent,  they  also
loaded  them  with  many  other  taxes.  If  we  pass  fron  ancient
to  modern  times,  we  shall  still  find  the  observation  to  hold.
The  provinces  of  absolute  monarchies  are  always  better  treated
than  those  of  free  states.  Compare  the  Pais  conquis  of
FRANCE  with  IRELAND,  and  you  will  be  convinced  of  this
truth ;  though  this  latter  kingdom,  being,  in  a  good  measure,
peopled  from  ENGLAND,  possesses  so  many  rights  and  privi
leges  as  should  naturally  make  it  challenge  better  treatment
than  that  of  a  conquered  province.  CORSICA  is  also  an
obvious  instance  to  the  same  purpose.

There  is  an  observation  in  MACHIAVEL,  with  regard  to  the
conquests  of  ALEXANDER  the  Great,  which  1  think,  may  be
regarded  as  one  of  those  eternal  political  truths,  which  no
time  nor  accidents  can  vary.  It  may  seem  strange,  says  that
politician,  that  such  sudden  conquests,  as  those  of  ALEX
ANDER,  should  be  possessed  so  peaceably  by  his  successors,
and  that  the  PERSIANS,  during  all  the  confusions  and  civil
wars  among  the  GREEKS,  never  made  the  smallest  effort
towards  the  recovery  of  their  former  independent  govern
ment.  To  satisfy  us  concerning  the  cause  of  this  remarkable
event,  we  may  consider,  that  a  monarch  may  govern  his
subjects  in  two  different  ways.  He  may  either  follow  the
maxims  of  the  eastern  princes,  and  stretch  his  authority  so
far  as  to  leave  no  distinction  of  rank  among  his  subjects,  but

1  Ann.  lib.  1.  cap.  2.  cogitarent. TACIT.  Ann.  lib.  3.  40. [Ed.

2  STJET.  in  vita  DOMIT.  c.  8.  A  reads Vespasian's,  and  gives  no  ro-

3  Egregium  resumenda  lihertati  tern- feronce.]

pus,  si  ipsi  florentes,  quam  inops  ITALIA,  4  [This  sentence  and  the  notes  1  and  2

quam  imbcllis  urbana  plebs,  nihil  vali- were  added  in  Edition  K.]
dum  in  exercitibus,  nisi  quod  cxtcrnum *  Lib.  1.  cap.  72.


104


ESSAY III.


what  proceeds  immediately  from  himself:  no  advantages  of
birth ;  no  hereditary  honours  and  possessions ;  and,  in  a
word,  no  credit  among  the  people,  except  from  his  commis
sion  alone.  Or  a  monarch  may  exert  his  power  after  a  milder
manner,  like  other  EUROPEAN  princes ;  and  leave  other
sources  of  honour,  beside  his  smile  and  favour :  Birth,  titles,
possessions,  valour,  integrity,  knowledge,  or  great  and  fortu
nate  achievements.  In  the  former  species  of  government,
after  a  conquest,  it  is  impossible  ever  to  shake  off  the  yoke  ;
since  no  one  possesses,  among  the  people,  so  much  personal
credit  and  authority  as  to  begin  such  an  enterprize :
Whereas,  in  the  latter,  the  least  misfortune,  or  discord
among  the  victors,  will  encourage  the  vanquished  to  take
arms,  who  have  leaders  ready  to  prompt  and  conduct  them
in  every  undertaking.1


1  I  have  taken  it  for  granted,  accord
ing  to  the  supposition  of  MACHIAVEL,
that  the  ancient  PERSIANS  had  no  no
bility  ;  though  there  is  reason  to  suspect,
that  the  FLORENTINE  secretary,  who
seems  to  have  been  better  acquainted
with  the  ROMAN  than  the  GREEK
authors,  was  mistaken  in  this  parti
cular.  The  more  ancient  PERSIANS,
whose  manners  are  described  by  XENO-
PHON,  were  a  free  people,  and  had  nobi
lity.  Their  d^rt/^oi  were  preserved
even  after  the  extending  of  their  con
quests  and  the  consequent  change  of
their  government.  ARRIAN  mentions
them  in  DARIUS'S  time,  DC  cxpcd.  ALEX,
lib.  ii.  11.  Historians  also  speak  often  of
the  persons  in  command  as  men  of
family.  TYGRANES,  who  was  general  of
the  MKDBS  imder  XERXES,  was  of  the
race  of  ACHMJENES,  HEROD,  lib.  vii.  cap.
K'2.  ARTACH^EAS,  who  directed  the
cutting  of  the  canal  about  mount  ATHOS,
was  of  the  same  family.  Id.  cap.  117.
JVlEGABYXTis  was  one  of  the  seven  emi
nent  PERSIANS  who  conspired  against
the  MAGI.  His  son,  ZOPYRTJS,  was  in
the  highest  command  under  DARIUS,
and  delivered  BABYLON  to  him.  His
grandson,  MEGABYZTJS,  commanded  the
army,  defeated  at  MARATHON.  His
great-grandson,  ZOPYRTTS,  was  also  emi
nent,  and  was  banished  PERSIA.  HEROD.
lib.  iii.  160.  THTJC.  lib.  i.  109.  ROSACES,
who  commanded  an  army  i  n  EGYPT  und  er
ARTAXERXES,  was  also  descended  from
one  of  the  seven  conspirators,  DIOD.  Sic.
lib.  xvi.  47.  AGESILATS,  in  XENOPHON,


Hist.  GR;EC.  lib.  iv.  1.  being  desirous  of
making  a  marriage  betwixt  king  COTYS
his  ally,  and  the  daughter  of  SPITHRI-
DATES,  a  PERSIAN  of  rank,  who  had
deserted  to  him,  first  asks  COTYS  what
family  SPITHRIDATES  is  of.  One  of  the
most  considerable  in  PERSIA,  says  COTYS.
ARITEUS,  when  offered  the  sovereignty
by  CLEARCHUS  and  tho  ten  thousand
GREEKS,  refused  it  as  of  too  low  a  rank,
and  said,  that  BO  many  eminent  PER
SIANS  would  never  endure  his  rule.  Id.
de  exped.  lib.  ii.  Some  of  the  families
descended  from  the  seven  PERSIANS
abovementioned  remained  during  all
ALEXANDER'S  successors ;  and  MITHRI-
DATES,  in  ANTIOCHUS'S  time,  is  said  by
POLYBIUS  to  be  descended  from  one  of
them,  lib.  v.^cap.  43.  ARTABAZUS  was
esteemed,  as  ARRIAN  says,  (vrols  irpiaru^s
Ufpffccv.  lib.  iii.  23.  And  when  ALEX
ANDER  married  in  one  day  80  of  his
captains  to  PERSIAN  women,  his  inten
tion  plainly  was  to  ally  the  MACEDO
NIANS  with  the  most  eminent  PERSIAN
families.  Id.  lib.  vii.  4.  DIODORUS  SICTJ-
LUS  says  they  were  of  the  most  noblo
birth  in  PERSIA,  lib.  xvii.  107.  The  go
vernment  of  PERSIA  was  despotic,  and
conducted  in  many  respects,  after  the
eastern  manner,  but  was  not  carried  so
far  as  to  extirpate  all  nobility,  and  con
found  all  ranks  and  orders.  It  left  men
who  were  still  great,  by  themselves  and
their  family,  independent  of  their  office
and  commission.  And  the  reason  why
the  MACEDONIANS  kept  so  easily  domi
nion  over  them  was  owing  to  other


POLITICS A SCIENCE.  105

Such  is  the  reasoning  of  MACHIAVEL,  which  seems  solid  and
conclusive ;  though  I  wish  he  had  not  mixed  falsehood  with
truth,  in  asserting,  that  monarchies,  governed  according  to
eastern  policy,  though  more  easily  kept  when  once  subdued,
yet  are  the  most  difficult  to  subdue ;  since  they  cannot  con
tain  any  powerful  subject,  whose  discontent  and  faction  may
facilitate  the  enterprizes  of  an  army.  For  besides,  that  such
a  tyrannical  government  enervates  the  courage  of  men,  and
renders  them  indifferent  towards  the  fortunes  of  their  sove
reign  ;  besides  this,  I  say,  we  find  by  experience,  that  even
the  temporary  and  delegated  authority  of  the  generals  and
magistrates ;  being  always,  in  such  governments,  as  absolute
within  its  sphere,  as  that  of  the  prince  himself;  is  able,  with
barbarians,  accustomed  to  a  blind  submission,  to  produce  the
most  dangerous  and  fatal  revolutions.  So  that,  in  every  re
spect,  a  gentle  government  is  preferable,  and  gives  the
greatest  security  to  the  sovereign  as  well  as  to  the  subject.

Legislators,  therefore,  ought  not  to  trust  the  future  govern
ment  of  a  state  entirely  to  chance,  but  ought  to  provide  a
system  of  laws  to  regulate  the  administration  of  public  affairs
to  the  latest  posterity.  Effects  will  always  correspond  to
causes ;  and  wise  regulations  in  any  commonwealth  are  the
most  valuable  legacy  that  can  be  left  to  future  ages.  In  the
smallest  court  or  office,  the  stated  forms  and  methods,  by
which  business  must  be  conducted,  are  found  to  be  a  con
siderable  check  on  the  natural  depravity  of  mankind.  Why
should  not  the  case  be  the  same  in  public  affairs  ?  Can  we
ascribe  the  stability  and  wisdom  of  the  VENETIAN  govern
ment,  through  so  mfiny  ages,  to  any  thing  but  the  form  of
government  ?  And  is  it  not  easy  to  point  out  those  defects
in  the  original  constitution,  which  produced  the  tumultuous
governments  of  ATHENS  and  EOME,  and  ended  at  last  in  the
ruin  of  these  two  famous  republics  ?  And  so  little  dependance
has  this  affair  on  the  humours  and  education  of  particular
men,  that  one  part  of  the  same  republic  may  be  wiselv  con
ducted,  and  another  weakly,  by  the  very  same  men,  merely
on  account  of  the  difference  of  the  forms  and  institutions,  by
which  these  parts  are  regulated.  Historians  inform  us  that
this  was  actually  the  case  with  GENOA.  For  while  the  state

causes  easy  to  be  found  in  the  histo-  however  doubtful  its  application  to  the
rians;  though  it  must  be  owned  that  present  case.  [This  note  was  added  in
MACHIAYKL'S  reasoning  is,  in  itself,  just.  Edition  K.I


106  ESSAY  III.

was  always  full  of  sedition,  and  tumult,  and  disorder,  the
bank  of  St.  GEORGE,  which  had  become  a  considerable  part
of  the  people,  was  conducted,  for  several  ages,  with  the
utmost  integrity  and  wisdom. l

2  The  ages  of  greatest  public  spirit  are  not  always  most
eminent  for  private  virtue.  Good  laws  may  beget  order  and
moderation  in  the  government,  where  the  manners  and  cus
toms  have  instilled  little  humanity  or  justice  into  the  tempers
of  men.  The  most  illustrious  period  of  the  KOMAN  history,
considered  in  a  political  view,  is  that  between  the  beginning
of  the  first  and  end  of  the  last  PUNIC  war ;  the  due  balance
between  the  nobility  and  people  being  then  fixed  by  the
contests  of  the  tribunes,  and  not  being  yet  lost  by  the  extent
of  conquests.  Yet  at  this  very  time,  the  horrid  practice  of
poisoning  was  so  common,  that,  during  part  of  a  season,  a
Praetor  punished  capitally  for  this  crime  above  three  thousand3
persons  in  a  part  of  ITALY  ;  and  found  informations  of  this
nature  still  multiplying  upon  him.  There  is  a  similar,  or
rather  a  worse  instance,4  in  the  more  early  times  of  the
commonwealth.  So  depraved  in  private  life  were  that  people,
whom  in  their  histories  we  so  much  admire.  I  doubt  not
but  they  were  really  more  virtuous  during  the  time  of  the
Triumvirates ;  when  they  were  tearing  their  common  country
to  pieces,  and  spreading  slaughter  and  desolation  orer  the
face  of  the  earth,  merely  for  the  choice  of  tyrants. 6

Here,  then,  is  a  sufficient  inducement  to  maintain,  with
the  utmost  ZEAL,  in  every  free  state,  those  forms  and  institu
tions,  by  which  liberty  is  secured,  the  public  good  consulted,
and  the  avarice  or  ambition  of  particular  men  restrained  and
punished.  Nothing  does  more  honour  to  human  nature,  than
to  see  it  susceptible  of  so  noble  a  passion  ;  as  nothing  can
be  a  greater  indication  of  meanness  of  heart  in  any  man,
than  to  see  him  destitute  of  it.  A  man  who  loves  only  him-

1  Essempio veramente raro, $~ da  daUa VENETIANA memorabilc. Delia

Filosqft  intante  loro  imaginate  $  vedute  Hist.  Florentine,  lib.  8.

EepiMiche  mai  non  trovato,  vcdere  dentro  2  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Edi-

ad  un medctimo  cerchio,  fra  medcsimi  tion  D.]

ciitadini,  la  liberta  $  la  tirannide,  la  3  T.  Livn,  lib.  40.  cap.  43.

vita  civile  $  la  coroita,  la  giustitia  $  la  *  Id.  lib.  8.  cap.  18.

liccnza  ;  pcrche  qucllo  ordine  solo  man-  5  L'Aigle contre L'Aigle, ROMAINS

tierc  quella  citta  piena  di  costumi  an-  contre  ROMAINS,

tii'hi  Q  venerabili. E  s'egli  avvenisse  Combatans  sculcment  pour  Ic  choix

(chc  col  tempo  in  ogni  modo  auvcrra)  quo  dc  tyrans.

SAN  GIORGIO  tutta  qucl  la  citta  occu-  COUNEILLE.
passe,  sambbc  quella  una  Rcpublica  piu


POLITICS  A  SCIENCE.  107

self,  without  regard  to  friendship  and  desert,  merits  the
severest  blame ;  and  a  man,  who  is  only  susceptible  of  friend
ship,  without  public  spirit,  or  a  regard  to  the  community,  is
deficient  in  the  most  material  part  of  virtue.

But  this  is  a  subject  which  needs  not  be  longer  insisted  on
at  present.  There  are  enow  of  zealots  on  both  sides  who
kindle  up  the  passions  of  their  partizans,  and  under  pretence
of  public  good,  pursue  the  interests  and  ends  of  their  par
ticular  faction.  For  my  part,  I  shall  always  be  more  fond  of
promoting  moderation  than  zeal ;  though  perhaps  the  surest
way  of  producing  moderation  in  every  party  is  to  increase
our  zeal  for  the  public.  Let  us  therefore  try,  if  it  be  possible,
from  the  foregoing  doctrine,  to  draw  a  lesson  of  moderation
with  regard  to  the  parties,  into  which  our  country  is  at  pre
sent  l  divided ;  at  the  same  time,  that  we  allow  not  this
moderation  to  abaie  the  industry  and  passion,  with  which
every  individual  is  bound  to  pursue  the  good  of  his  country.

Those  who  either  attack  or  defend  a  minister  in  such  a
government  as  ours,  where  the  utmost  liberty  is  allowed,
always  carry  matters  to  an  extreme,  and  exaggerate  his  merit
or  demerit  with  regard  to  the  public.  His  enemies  are  sure
to  charge  him  with  the  greatest  enormities,  both  in  domestic
and  foreign  management ;  and  there  is  no  meanness  or  crime,
of  which,  in  their  account,  he  is  not  capable.  Unnecessary
wars,  scandalous  treaties,  profusion  of  public  treasure,  op
pressive  taxes,  every  kind  of  mal-administration  is  ascribed
to  him.  To  aggravate  the  charge,  his  pernicious  conduct,  it
is  said,  will  extend  its  baleful  influence  even  to  posterity,  by
undermining  the  best  constitution  in  the  world,  and  dis
ordering  that  wise  system  of  laws,  institutions,  and  customs,
by  which  our  ancestors,  during  so  many  centuries,  have  been
so  happily  governed.  He  is  not  only  a  wicked  minister  in
himself,  but  has  removed  every  security  provided  against
wicked  ministers  for  the  future.

On  the  other  hand,  the  partizans  of  the  minister  make  his
panegyric  run  as  high  as  the  accusation  against  him,  and
celebrate  his  wise,  steady,  and  moderate  conduct  in  every
part  of  his  administration.  The  honour  and  interest  of  the
nation  supported  abroad,  public  credit  maintained  at  home,
persecution  restrained,  faction  subdued ;  the  merit  of  all
these  blessings  is  ascribed  solely  to  the  minister.  At  the

1  [Editions  D  to  N  give  the  date  1742.]


108  ESSAY  HI.

same  time,  lie  crowns  all  Iris  other  merits  by  a  religious  care
of  the  best  constitution  in  the  world,  which  he  has  preserved
in  all  its  parts,  and  has  transmitted  entire,  to  be  the  happiness
and  security  of  the  latest  posterity.

When  this  accusation  and  panegyric  are  received  by  the
partizans  of  each  party,  no  wonder  they  beget  an  extraor
dinary  ferment  011  both  sides,  and  fill  the  nation  with  violent
animosities.  But  I  would  fain  persuade  these  part)r- zealots,
that  there  is  a  flat  contradiction  both  in  the  accusation  and
panegyric,  and  that  it  were  impossible  for  either  of  them  to
run  so  high,  were  it  not  for  this  contradiction.  If  our  con
stitution  be  really  that  noble  fabric,  the  pride  of  BRITAIN,  the
envy  of  our  neighbours,  raised  by  the  labour  of  so  many  centu
ries,  repaired  at  the  expence  of  so  many  millions,  and  cemented
by  such  a  profusion  of  blood ! ;  I  say,  if  our  constitution  does
in  any  degree  deserve  these  2eulogies,  it  would  never  have
suffered  a  wicked  and  weak  minister  to  govern  triumphantly
for  a  course  of  twenty  years,  when  opposed  by  the  greatest
geniuses  in  the  nation,  who  exercised  the  utmost  liberty  of
tongue  and  pen,  in  parliament,  and  in  their  frequent  appeals
to  the  people.  But,  if  the  minister  be  wicked  and  weak,  to
the  degree  so  strenuously  insisted  on,  the  constitution  must  be
faulty  in  its  original  principles,  and  he  cannot  consistently  be
charged  with  undermining  the  best  form  of  government  in
the  world.  A  constitution  is  only  so  far  good,  as  it  provides
a  remedy  against  mal-administration  ;  and  if  the  BRITISH,
when  in  its  greatest  vigour,  and  repaired  by  two  such  re
markable  events,  as  the  Revolution  and  Accession,  by  which
our  ancient  royal  family  was  sacrificed  to  it ;  if  our  constitu
tion,  I  say,  with  so  great  advantages,  does  not,  in  fact,
provide  any  such  remedy,  we  are  rather  beholden  to  any
minister  who  undermines  it,  and  affords  us  an  opportunity
of  erecting  a  better  in  its  place.

I  would  employ  the  same  topics  to  moderate  the  zeal  of
those  who  defend  the  minister.  Is  our  constitution  so  excel
lent  ?  Then  a  change  of  ministry  can  be  110  such  dreadful
event ;  since  it  is  essential  to  such  a  constitution,  in  every
ministry,  both  to  preserve  itself  from  violation,  and  to
prevent  all  enormities  in  the  administration.  Is  our  consti
tution  very  bad  ?  Then  so  extraordinary  a  jealousy  and  ap-

1  Dissertation  on  parties,  Letter  10. word  is  frequently so written in  the
*  [Elogiums :  Editions  A  to  D. The Treatise.]


POLITICS A SCIENCE.  109

prehension,  on  account  of  changes,  is  ill  placed  ;  and  a  man
should  no  more  be  anxious  in  this  case,  than  a  husband,  who
had  married  a  woman  from  the  stews,  should  be  watchful  to
prevent  her  infidelity.  Public  affairs,  in  such  a  government,
must  necessarily  go  to  confusion,  by  whatever  hands  they  are
conducted ;  and  the  zeal  of  patriots  is  in  that  case  much  less
requisite  than  the  patience  and  submission  of  philosophers.
The  virtue  and  good  intentions  of  CATO  and  BRUTUS  are
highly  laudable ;  but,  to  what  purpose  did  their  zeal  serve  ?
Only  to  hasten  the  fatal  period  of  the  ROMAN  government,
and  render  its  convulsions  and  dying  agonies  more  violent
and  painful.

I  would  not  be  understood  to  mean,  that  public  affairs
deserve  no  care  and  attention  at  all.  Would  men  be  mode
rate  and  consistent,  their  claims  might  be  admitted ;  at
least  might  be  examined.  The  country-party  might  still
assert,  that  our  constitution,  though  excellent,  will  admit  of
mal-administration  to  a  certain  degree  :  and  therefore,  if
the  minister  be  bad,  it  is  proper  to  oppose  him  with  a
suitable  degree  of  zeal.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  court-party
may  be  allowed,  upon  the  supposition  that  the  minister  were
good,  to  defend,  and  with  some  zeal  too,  his  administration.
I  would  only  persuade  men  not  to  contend,  as  if  they  were
fighting  pro  aris  &focis,  and  change  a  good  constitution  into
a  bad  one,  by  the  violence  of  their  factions.1

1  have  not  here  considered  any  thing  that  is  personal  in
the  present  controversy.  In  the  best  civil  constitution,
where  every  man  is  constrained  by  the  most  rigid  laws,  it  is
easy  to  discover  either  the  good  or  bad  intentions  of  a
minister,  and  to  judge,  whether  his  personal  character
deserve  love  or  hatred.  But  such  questions  are  of  little  im
portance  to  the  public,  and  lay  those,  who  employ  their  pens
upon  them,  under  a  just  suspicion  either  of  malevolence  or
of  flattery.

ESSAY  IV. — Of  the  First  Principles  of  Government.

NOTHING  appears  more  surprizing  to  those,  who  consider
human  affairs  with  a  philosophical  eye,  than  the  easiness
with  which  the  many  are  governed  by  the  few;  and  the

1  [Editions  D  to  P  give  in  a  note  the Walpole. It  will  be  found  in  the  con-
well-known Character  of Sir Kobert eluding  section  of  Vol.  IV.— ED.]


110  ESSAY  IV.

implicit  submission,  with  which  men  resign  their  own  senti
ments  and  passions  to  those  of  their  rulers.  When  we
enquire  by  what  means  this  wonder  is  effected,  we  shall  find,
that,  as  FOECE  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  governed,  the
governors  have  nothing  to  support  them  but  opinion.  It
is  therefore,  on  opinion  only  that  government  is  founded ;
and  this  maxim  extends  to  the  most  despotic  and  most
military  governments,  as  well  as  to  the  most  free  and  most
popular.  The  soldan  of  EGYPT,  or  the  emperor  of  EOME,
might  drive  his  harmless  subjects,  like  brute  beasts,  against
their  sentiments  and  inclination  :  But  he  must,  at  least,  have
led  his  mamalukes,  or  praetorian  bands.,  like  men,  by  their
opinion.

Opinion  is  of  two  kinds,  to  wit,  opinion  of  INTEREST,  and
opinion  of  RIGHT.  By  opinion  of  interest,  I  chiefly  under
stand  the  sense  of  the  general  advantage  which  is  reaped
from  government ;  together  with  the  persuasion,  that  the
particular  government,  which  is  established,  is  equally  ad
vantageous  with  any  other  that  could  easily  be  settled.
When  this  opinion  prevails  among  the  generality  of  a  state,
or  among  those  who  have  the  force  in  their  hands,  it  gives
great  security  to  any  government.

Right  is  of  two  kinds,  right  to  POWER  and  right  to  PRO
PERTY.  What  prevalence  opinion  of  the  first  kind  has  over
mankind,  may  easily  be  understood,  by  observing  the  attach
ment  which  all  nations  have  to  their  ancient  government,
and  even  to  those  names,  which  have  had  the  sanction  of
antiquity.  Antiquity  always  begets  the  opinion  of  right ;
and  whatever  disadvantageous  sentiments  we  may  entertain
of  mankind,  they  are  always  found  to  be  prodigal  both  of
blood  and  treasure  in  the  maintenance  of  public  justice.1
There  is,  indeed,  no  particular,  in  which,  at  first  sight,  there
may  appear  a  greater  contradiction  in  the  frame  of  the
human  mind  than  the  present.  When  men  act  in  a  faction,
they  are  apt,  without  shame  or  remorse,  to  neglect  all  the
ties  of  honour  and  morality,  in  order  to  serve  their  party ;
and  yet,  when  a  faction  is  formed  upon  a  point  of  right  or
principle,  there  is  no  occasion,  where  men  discover  a  greater

1  [Editions  A  to  P  insert  as  follows  : —  human  affairs,  would  prove  himself  but

This  passion  we  may  denominate en-  of  a  very  limited  understanding,
thusiasm,  or  we  may  give  it  what  ap-  Editions  A  and  B  omit  the  remainder

pollation  we  please ; but  a  politician,  of  the  paragraph.]
who  should  overlook  its  influence  on


PRINCIPLES  OF  GOVERNMENT.  Ill

obstinacy,  and  a  more  determined  sense  of  justice  and
equity.  The  same  social  disposition  of  mankind  is  the  cause
of  these  contradictory  appearances.

It  is  sufficiently  understood,  that  the  opinion  of  right  to
property  is  of  moment  in  all  matters  of  government.  A
noted  author1  has  made  property  the  foundation  of  all
government ;  and  most  of  our  political  writers  seem  inclined
to  follow  him  in  that  particular.  This  is  carrying  the
matter  too  far ;  but  still  it  must  be  owned,  that  the  opinion
of  right  to  property  has  a  great  influence  in  this  subject.

Upon  these  three  opinions,  therefore,  of  public  interest,
of  right  to  power,  and  of  right  to  property,  are  all  govern
ments  founded,  and  all  authority  of  the  few  over  the  many.
There  are  indeed  other  principles,  which  add  force  to  these,
and  determine,  limit,  or  alter  their  operation ;  such  as  self-
interest,  fear,  and  affection :  But  still  we  may  assert,  that
these  other  principles  can  have  no  influence  alone,  but  sup
pose  the  antecedent  influence  of  those  opinions  above-
mentioned.  They  are,  therefore,  to  be  esteemed  the  se
condary,  not  the  original  principles  of  government.

For,  first,  as  to  self-interest,  by  which  I  mean  the  expecta
tion  of  particular  rewards,  distinct  from  the  general  protec
tion  which  we  receive  from  government,  it  is  evident  that
the  magistrate's  authority  must  be  antecedently  established,
at  least  be  hoped  for,  in  order  to  produce  this  expectation.
The  prospect  of  reward  may  augment  his  authority  with
regard  to  some  particular  persons  ;  but  can  never  give  birth
to  it,  with  regard  to  the  public.  Men  naturally  look  for  the
greatest  favours  from  their  friends  and  acquaintance ;  and
therefore,  the  hopes  of  any  considerable  number  of  the  state
would  never  center  in  any  particular  set  of  men,  if  these
men  had  no  other  title  to  magistracy,  and  had  no  separate
influence  over  the  opinions  of  mankind.  The  same  obser
vation  may  be  extended  to  the  other  two  principles  of  fear
and  affection.  No  man  would  have  any  reason  to  fear  the
fury  of  a  tyrant,  if  he  had  no  authority  over  any  but  from
fear ;  since,  as  a  single  man,  his  bodily  force  can  reach  but
a  small  way,  and  all  the  farther  power  he  possesses  must  be
founded  either  on  our  own  opinion,  or  on  the  presumed
opinion  of  others.  And  though  affection  to  wisdom  and
virtue  in  a  sovereign  extends  very  far,  and  has  great  in-

1  [Harrington:  see  p.  122. — ED.]


112  ESSAY IV.

fluence ;  yet  lie  must  antecedently  be  supposed  invested  with
a  public  character,  otherwise  the  public  esteem  will  serve
him  in  110  stead,  nor  will  his  virtue  have  any  influence
beyond  a  narrow  sphere.

A  government  may  endure  for  several  ages,  though  the
oalance  of  power,  and  the  balance  of  property  do  not  coincide.
This  chiefly  happens,  where  any  rank  or  order  of  the  state
has  acquired  a  large  share  in  the  property ;  but  from  the
original  constitution  of  the  government,  has  no  share  in  the
power.  Under  what  pretence  would  any  individual  of  that
order  assume  authority  in  public  affairs  ?  As  men  are  com
monly  much  attached  to  their  ancient  government,  it  is  not
to  be  expected,  that  the  public  would  ever  favour  such
usurpations.  But  where  the  original  constitution  allows
any  share  of  power,  though  small,  to  an  order  of  men,
who  possess  a  large  share  of  the  property,  it  is  easy  for
them  gradually  to  stretch  their  authority,  and  bring  the
balance  of  power  to  coincide  with  that  of  property.  This
has  been  the  case  with  the  house  of  commons  in  ENGLAND.

Most  writers,  that  have  treated  of  the  BRITISH  govern
ment,  have  supposed,  that,  as  the  lower  house  represents  all
the  commons  of  GREAT  BRITAIN,  its  weight  in  the  scale
is  proportioned  to  the  property  and  power  of  all  whom  it
represents.  But  this  principle  must  not  be  received  as
absolutely  true.  For  though  the  people  are  apt  to  attach
themselves  more  to  the  house  of  commons,  than  to  any
other  member  of  the  constitution  ;  that  house  being  chosen
by  them  as  their  representatives,  and  as  the  public  guar
dians  of  their  liberty ;  yet  are  there  instances  where  the
house,  even  when  in  opposition  to  the  crown,  has  not  been
followed  by  the  people ;  as  we  may  particularly  observe  of
the  tory  house  of  commons  in  the  reign  of  king  WILLIAM.
Were  the  members  obliged  to  receive  instructions  from
their  constituents,  like  the  DUTCH  deputies,  this  would
entirely  alter  the  case ;  and  if  such  immense  power  and
riches,  as  those  of  all  the  commons  of  GREAT  BRITAIN,  were
brought  into  the  scale,  it  is  not  easy  to  conceive,  that  the
crown  could  either  influence  that  multitude  of  people,  or
withstand  that  overbalance  of  property.  It  is  true,  the
crown  has  great  influence  over  the  collective  body  in  the
elections  of  members ;  but  were  this  influence,  which  at
present  is  only  exerted  once  in  seven  years,  to  be  employed
in  bringing  over  the  people  to  every  vote,  it  would  soon  be


PRINCIPLES OF  GOVERNMENT.  113

wasted;  and  no  skill,  popularity,  or  revenue,  could support
it. I  must,  therefore,  be  of  opinion,  that  an  alteration  in
this particular would introduce  a  total alteration  in  our
government,  and  would  soon  reduce  it  to  a  pure  republic;
and,  perhaps,  to  a  republic  of  no  inconvenient  form. For
though  the  people,  collected  in  a  body  like  the  ROMAN  tribes,
be  quite  unfit  for  government, yet  when  dispersed  in  small
bodies,  they  are  more  susceptible  both  of  reason  arid  order ;
the  force  of  popular  currents  and  tides  is,  in  a  great  measure,
broken ;  and  the  public  interest  may  be  pursued  with  some
method  and  constancy. But  it  is  needless  to  reason  any
farther  concerning  a  form  of  government,  which  is  never
likely  to  have  place  in  GREAT  BRITAIN, and which seems
not  to  be  the  aim  of  any  party  amongst  us. Let  us  cherish
and  improve  our  ancient  government  as  much  as  possible,
without  encouraging  a  passion  for  such  dangerous  novelties.1  ~

ESSAY  V.2 — Of  the  Origin  of  Government.
MAN,  born  in  a  family,  is  compelled  to  maintain  society,
from  necessity,  from  natural  inclination,  and  from  habit.
The  same  creature,  in  his  farther  progress,  is  engaged  to
establish  political  society,  in  order  to  administer  justice;
without  which  there  can  be  no  peace  among  them,  nor  safety,
nor  mutual  intercourse.  We  are,  therefore,  to  look  upon  all
the  vast  apparatus  of  our  government,  as  having  ultimately

1  [Editions  A  to  N  add  the  following  which  ought  to  be  plac'd  on  instruc-
paragraph  :-  [  shall  conclude  this  tions.  But  such  is  the  nature  of  Ian-
subject  with  observing,  that  the  present  guage,  that  it  is  impossible  for  it  to
political  controversy,  with  regard  to  in-  express  distinctly  these  different  de
structions,  is  a  very  frivolous  one.  and  grees  ;  and  if  men  will  carry  on  a  con-
can  never  be  brought  to  any  decision,  troversy  on  this  head,  it  may  well
as  it  is  managed  by  both  parties.  The  happen,  that  they  differ  in  their  lan-
country-party  pretend  not,  that  a  mem-  guage,  and  yet  agree  in  their  sentiments  •
her  is  absolutely  bound  to  follow  in-  or  differ  in  their  sentiments,  and  yet
structoons,  as  an  ambassador  or  general  agree  in  their  language.  Besides,  how
is  confined  by  his  orders,  and  that  his  is  it  possible  to  find  these  degrees,  con-
vote  is  not  to  be  received  in  the  house,  sidering  the  variety  of  affairs  which
but  so  tar  as  it  is  conformable  to  them.  come  before  the  house,  and  the  variety
Ine  court-party  again,  pretend  not,  that  of  places  which  members  represent?
the  sentiments  ot  the  people  ought  to  Ought  the  instructions  of  TOTNESS  to
have  no  weight  with  every  member;  have  the  same  weight  as  those  of
much  less  that  he  ought  to  despise  the  LONDON?  or  instructions,  with  regard
sentiments  of  those  he  represents,  and  to  the  Convention,  which  respected
with  whom  he  is  more  particularly  con-  foreign  politics,  to  have  the  same  weight
nected.  And  if  their  sentiments  be  of  as  those  with  regard  to  theareiw,  which
weight,  why  ought  they  not  to  express  respected  only  our  domestic  affairs  ?  ]
these  sentiments?  The  question,  then,  «  [This  Essay  was  added  in  the  last
is  only  concerning  the  degrees  of  weight,  Edition.]
VOL.  III.


114  ESSAY V.

no  other  object  or  purpose  but  the  distribution  of  justice,
or,  in  other  words,  the  support  of  the  twelve  judges.  Kings
and  parliaments,  fleets  and  armies,  officers  of  the  court  and
revenue,  ambassadors,  ministers,  and  privy-counsellors,  are
all  subordinate  in  their  end  to  this  part  of  administration.
Even  the  clergy,  as  their  duty  leads  them  to  inculcate
morality,  may  justly  be  thought,  so  far  as  regards  this  world,
to  have  no  other  useful  object  of  their  institution.

All  men  are  sensible  of  the  necessity  of  justice  to  main
tain  peace  and  order;  and  all  men  are  sensible  of  the
necessity  of  peace  and  order  for  the  maintenance  of  society.
Yet,  notwithstanding  this  strong  and  obvious  necessity,  such
is  the  frailty  or  perverseness  of  our  nature  !  it  is  impossible
to  keep  men,  faithfully  and  unerringly,  in  the  paths  of
justice.  Some  extraordinary  circumstances  may  happen,  in
which  a  man  finds  his  interests  to  be  more  promoted  by
fraud  or  rapine,  than  hurt  by  the  breach  which  his  injustice
makes  in  the  social  union.  But  much  more  frequently,  he
is  seduced  from  his  great  and  important,  but  distant  in
terests,  by  the  allurement  of  present,  though  often  very  frivo
lous  temptations.  This  great  weakness  is  incurable  in
human  nature.

Men  must,  therefore,  endeavour  to  palliate  what  they
cannot  cure.  They  must  institute  some  persons,  under  the
appellation  of  magistrates,  whose  peculiar  office  it  is,  to
point  out  the  decrees  of  equity,  to  punish  transgressors,  to
correct  fraud  and  violence,  and  to  oblige  m3n,  however  re
luctant,  to  consult  their  own  real  and  permanent  interests.
In  a  word,  OBEDIENCE  is  a  new  duty  which  must  be  in
vented  to  support  that  of  JUSTICE  ;  and  the  tyes  of  equity
must  be  corroborated  by  those  of  allegiance.

But  still,  viewing  matters  in  an  abstract  light,  it  may  be
thought,  that  nothing  is  gained  by  this  alliance,  and  that
the  factitious  duty  of  obedience,  from  its  very  nature,  lays
as  feeble  a  hold  of  the  1mm  an  mind,  as  the  primitive  and
natural  duty  of  justice.  Peculiar  interests  and  present
temptations  may  overcome  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.
They  are  equally  exposed  to  the  same  inconvenience.  And
the  man,  who  is  inclined  to  be  a  bad  neighbour,  must  be  led  by
the  same  motives,  well  or  ill  understood,  to  be  a  bad  citizen
and  subject.  Not  to  mention,  that  the  magistrate  himself  may
often  be  negligent,  or  partial,  or  unjust  in  his  administration.

Experience,  however,  proves,  that  there  is a  great  dif-


OKIGIX OF GOVERNMENT.  115

ference  between  the  cases.  Order  in  society,  we  find,  is  much
better  maintained  by  means  of  government;  and  our  duty  to
the  magistrate  is  more  strictly  guarded  by  the  principles  of
human  nature,  than  our  duty  to  our  fellow-citizens.  The  love
of  dominion  is  so  strong  in  the  breast  of  man,  that  many,
not  only  submit  to,  but  court  all  the  dangers,  and  fatigues,  and
cares  of  government;  and  men,  once  raised  to  that  station,
though  often  led  astray  by  private  passions,  find,  in  ordinary
cases,  a  visible  interest  in  the  impartial  administration  of
justice.  The  persons,  who  first  attain  this  distinction  by
the  consent,  tacit  or  express,  of  the  people,  must  be  endowed
with  superior  personal  qualities  of  valour,  force,  integrity,
or  prudence,  which  command  respect  and  confidence  :  and
after  government  is  established,  a  regard  to  birth,  rank,  and
station  has  a  mighty  influence  over  men,  and  enforces  the
decrees  of  the  magistrate.  The  prince  or  leader  exclaims
against  every  disorder,  which  disturbs  his  society.  He
summons  all  his  partizans  and  all  men  of  probity  to  aid
him  in  correcting  and  redressing  it :  and  he  is  readily  fol
lowed  by  all  indifferent  persons  in  the  execution  of  his  office.
He  soon  acquires  the  power  of  rewarding  these  services  ;  and
in  the  progress  of  society,  he  establishes  subordinate  minis
ters  and  often  a  military  force,  who  find  an  immediate  and  a
visible  interest,  in  supporting  his  authority.  Habit  soon
consolidates  what  other  principles  of  human  nature  had  im
perfectly  founded ;  and  men,  once  accustomed  to  obedience,
never  think  of  departing  from  that  path,  in  which  they  and
their  ancestors  have  constantly  trod,  and  to  which  they  are
confined  by  so  many  urgent  and  visible  motives.

But  though  this  progress  of  human  aS'airs  may  appear
certain  and  inevitable,  and  though  the  support  which  alle
giance  brings  to  justice,  be  founded  on  obvious  principles  of
human  nature,  it  cannot  be  expected  that  men  should  before
hand  be  able  to  discover  them,  or  foresee  their  operation.
Government  commences  more  casually  and  more  imperfectly.
It  is  pi'obable,  that  the  first  ascendant  of  one  man  over
multitudes  begun  during  a  state  of  war ;  where  the  superiority
of  courage  and  of  genius  discovers  itself  most  visibly,  where
unanimity  and  concert  are  most  requisite,  and  where  the
pernicious  effects  of  disorder  are  most  sensibly  felfc.  The
long  continuance  of  that  state,  an  incident  common  among
savage  tribes,  enured  the  people  to  submission  ;  and  if  the

1  2


116  ESSAY  V.

chieftain  possessed  as  much  equity  as  prudence  and  valour,
he  became,  even  during  peace,  the  arbiter  of  all  differences,
and  could  gradually,  by  a  mixture  of  force  and  consent,
establish  his  authority.  The  benefit  sensibly  felt  from  his
influence,  made  it  be  cherished  by  the  people,  at  least  by  the
peaceable  and  well  disposed  among  them  -\  and  if  his  son  en
joyed  the  same  good  qualities,  government  advanced  the
sooner  to  maturity  and  perfection  ;  but  was  still  in  a  feeble
state,  till  the  farther  progress  of  improvement  procured  the
magistrate  a  revenue,  and  enabled  him  to  bestow  rewards  on
the  several  instruments  of  his  administration,  and  to  inflict
punishments  on  the  refractory  and  disobedient.  Before  that
period,  each  exertion  of  his  influence  must  have  been  par
ticular,  and  founded  on  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the
case.  After  it,  submission  was  no  longer  a  matter  of  choice
in  the  bulk  of  the  community,  but  was  rigorously  exacted
by  the  authority  of  the  supreme  magistrate.

In  all  governments,  there  is  a  perpetual  intestine  struggle,
open  or  secret,  between  AUTHORITY  and  LIBERTY  ;  and
neither  of  them  can  ever  absolutely  prevail  in  the  contest.
A  great  sacrifice  of  liberty  must  necessarily  be  made  in  every
government ;  yet  even  the  authority,  which  confines  liberty,
can  never,  and  perhaps  ought  never,  in  any  constitution,  to
become  quite  entire  and  uncontroulable.  The  sultan  is
master  of  the  life  and  fortune  of  any  individual ;  but  will
not  be  permitted  to  impose  new  taxes  on  his  subjects  :  a
French  monarch  can  impose  taxes  at  pleasure ;  but  would
find  it  dangerous  to  attempt  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  in
dividuals.  Religion  also,  in  most  countries,  is  commonly
found  to  be  a  very  intractable  principle  ;  and  other  principles
or  prejudices  frequently  resist  all  the  authority  of  the  civil
magistrate;  whose  power,  being  founded  on  opinion,  can
never  subvert  other  opinions,  equally  rooted  with  that  of  his
title  to  dominion.  The  government,  which,  in  common  ap
pellation,  receives  the  appellation  of  free,  is  that  which  admits
of  a  partition  of  power  among  several  members,  whose
united  authority  is  no  less,  or  is  commonly  greater  than  that
of  any  monarch  ;  but  who,  in  the  usual  course  of  administra
tion,  must  act  by  general  and  equal  laws,  that  are  previously
known  to  all  the  members  and  to  all  their  subjects.  In  this  t
sense,  it  must  be  owned,  that  liberty  is  the  perfection  of
civil  society ;  but  still  authority  must  be  acknowledged  |


ORIGIN  OF  GOVERNMENT.


117


essential  to  its  very  existence  :  and  in  those  contests,  which
so  often  take  place  between  the  one  and  the  other,  the  latter
may,  on  that  account,  challenge  the  preference.  Unless
perhaps  one  may  say  (and  it  may  be  said  with  some  reason)
that  a  circumstance,  which  is  essential  to  the  existence  of
civil  society,  must  always  support  itself,  and  needs  be  guarded
with  less  jealousy,  than  one  that  contributes  only  to  its  per
fection,  which  the  indolence  of  men  is  so  apt  to  neglect,  or
their  ignorance  to  overlook.


ESSAY  VI. — On  the  Independency  of  Parliament.1

POLITICAL  writers  have  established  it  as  a  maxim,  that,  in
contriving  any  system  of  government,  and  fixing  the  several
checks  and  controuls  of  the  constitution,  every  man  ought  to


1  [In  Editions  A  to  N  this  Essay  is
introduced  by  the  following  examina
tion  of  the  spirit  of  parties.

I  have  frequently  observed,  in  com
paring  the  conduct  of  the  court  and
country  parties,  that  the  former  are
commonly  less  assuming  and  dogmati
cal  in  conversation,  more  apt  to  make
concessions ;  and  tho'  not,  perhaps,
more  susceptible  of  conviction,  yet  more
able  to  bear  contradiction  than  the
latter  ;  who  are  apt  to  fly  out  upon  any
opposition,  and  to  regard  one  as  a
mercenary  designing  fellow,  if  he
argues  with  any  coolness  and  impar
tiality,  or  makes  any  concessions  to
their  adversaries.  This  is  a  fact,  which,
I  believe,  every  one  may  have  observed,
who  has  been  much  in  companies  where
political  questions  have  been  discussed  ;
tho',  were  one  to  ask  the  reason  of  this
difference,  every  party  would  be  apt  to
assign  a  different  reason.  Gentlemen
in  the  Opposition  will  ascribe  it  to  the
very  nature  of  their  party,  which,
being  founded  on  public  spirit,  and  a
zeal  for  the  constitution,  cannot  easily
endure  such  doctrines,  as  are  of  perni
cious  consequence  to  liberty.  The  cour
tiers,  on  the  other  hand,  will  be  apt  to
put  us  in  mind  of  the  clown  mentioned
by  lord  SHAFTSBURY.  "  A  clown,"  says
that  excellent  author,1  "once  took  a
fa  ncy  to  hear  the  Latin  disputes  of  doctors
at  an  university.  He  was  asked  what
pleasure  he  could  take  in  viewing  such
combatants,  when  he  could  never  know


so  much,  as  which  of  the  parties  had
the  better.  For  that  matter,  replied
the  clown,  /  a! n't  such  a  fool  neither,
but  I  can  see  who's  the  first  that  puts
t'other  into  a  passion.  Nature  herself
dictated  this  lesson  to  the  clown,  that
he  who  had  the  better  of  the  argument
would  be  easy  and  well-humoured :
But  he  who  was  unable  to  support  his
cause  by  reason  would  naturally  lose
his  temper  and  grow  violent."

To  which  of  these  reasons  shall  we
adhere  ?  To  neither  of  them,  in  my
opinion  ;  unless  we  have  a  mind  to
enlist  ourselves  and  become  zealots  in
either  party.  I  believe  I  can  assign
the  reason  of  this  different  conduct  of
the  two  parties,  without  offending
either.  The  country  party  are  plainly
most  popular  at  present,  and  perhaps
have  been  so  in  most  administrations  :
So  that,  being  accustomed  to  prevail  in
company,  they  cannot  endure  to  hear
their  opinions  controverted,  but  are  as
confident  on  the  public  favour,  as  if
they  were  supported  in  all  their  sen
timents  by  the  most  infallible  demon
stration.  The  courtiers,  on  the  other
hand,  are  commonly  so  run  down  by
popular  talkers,  that  if  you  sp.eak  to
them  with  any  moderation,  or  make
them  the  smallest  concessions,  they
think  themselves  extremely  beholden
to  you,  and  are  apt  to  return  the  favour
by  a  like  moderation  and  facility  on
their  part.  To  be  furious  and  passion
ate,  they  know,  would  only  gain  them


Miscellaneous  Reflections,  107.


118


ESSAY  VI.


be  supposed  a  Jcnave,  and  to  have  no  other  end,  in  all  his
actions,  than  private  interest.  By  this  interest  we  must
govern  him,  and,  by  means  of  it,  make  him,  notwithstanding
his  insatiable  avarice  and  ambition,  co-operate  to  public
good.  Without  this,  say  they,  we  shall  in  vain  boast  of  the
advantages  of  any  constitution,  and  shall  find,  in  the  end,
that  we  have  no  security  for  our  liberties  or  possessions,  ex
cept  the  good-will  of  our  rulers ;  that  is,  we  shall  have  no
security  at  all.

It  is,  therefore,  a  just  political  maxim,  that  every  man  must
be  supposed  a  knave :  Though  at  the  same  time,  it  appears
somewhat  strange,  that  a  maxim  should  be  true  in  politics,


the  character  of  shameless  mercenaries ;
not  that  of  zealous  patriots,  which  is
the  character  that  such  a  warm  beha
viour  is  apt  to  acquire  to  the  other
party.

In  all  controversies,  we  find,  without
rea^Hing  the  truth  or  falshood  on
either1  side,  that  those  who  defend  the
established  and  popular  opinions,  are
always  the  most  dogmatical  and  im
perious  in  their  stile:  while  their  ad
versaries  affect  almost  extraordinary
gentleness  and  moderation,  in  order  to
soften,  as  much  as  possible,  any  preju
dices  that  may  lye  against  them.  Con
sider  the  behaviour  of  our  free-thinkers
of  all  denominations,  whether  they  be
such  as  decry  all  revelation,  or  only
oppose  the  exorbitant  power  of  the
clergy  ;  Collins,  Tindal,  Foster,  Hoadley.
Compare  their  moderation  and  good
manners  with  the  furious  zeal  and
scurrility  of  their  adversaries,  and  you
will  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of
my  observation.  A  like  difference  may
be  observed  in  the  conduct  of  those
French  writers,  who  maintained  the
controversy  with  regard  to  ancient  and
modern  learning.  Boileau,  Monsieur
and  Madame  Dacier,  1'Abbe  de  Bos,
who  defended  the  party  of  the  ancients,
mixed  their  reasonings  with  satire  and
invective ;  while  Fontenelle,  la  Motte,
Charpentier,  and  even  Perrault,  never
transgressed  the  bounds  of  moderation
and  good  breeding ;  though  provoked
by  the  most  injurious  treatment  of
their  adversaries.

[I  must,  however,  observe,  that  this
Remark  with  regard  to  the  seeming


Moderation  of  the  Court  Party,  is  en
tirely  confin'd  to  Conversation,  and
to  Gentlemen,  who  have  been  engag'd
by  Interest  or  Inclination  in  that
Party.  For  as  to  the  Court-Writers,
being  commonly  hir'd  Rcriblers,  they
are  altogether  as  scurrilous  as  the
Mercenaries  of  the  other  Party;  nor
has  the  Gazetrer  any  Advantage,  in
this  Respect,  above  Common  Sense.  A
man  of  Education  will,  in  any  Party,
discover  himself  to  be  such,  by  his
Good-breeding  and  Decency ;  as  a
Scoundrel  will  always  betray  the
opposite  Qualities.  The  false  Accusers
accus'd,  &c.  is  very  scurrillous,  tho'
that  Side  of  the  Question,  being  least
popular,  shou'd  be  defended  with  most
Moderation.  When  L  —  d  B  —  e,
L  _  d  M  —  t,  Mr.  L  —  n  take  the
Pen  in  Hand,  tho'  they  write  with
Warmth,  they  presume  rot  upon  their
Popularity  so  far  as  to  transgress  the
Bounds  of  Decency.1])

I  am  led  into  this  train  of  reflection,
by  considering  some  papers  wrote  upon
that  grand  topic  of  court  influence  and
parliamentary  dependence,  where,  in  my
humble  opinion,  the  country  party,
besides  vehemence  and  satyre,  shew  too
rigid  an  inflexibility,  and  too  great  a
jealousy  of  making  concessions  to  their
adversaries.  Their  reasonings  lose
their  force  by  being  carried  too  far ;  and
the  popularity  of  their  opinions  has
seduced  them  to  neglect  in  some  measure
their  justness  and  solidity.  The  follow
ing  reason  will,  I  hope,  serve  to  justify
me  in  this  opinion.]


[This  paragraph  is  only  found  in  Editions  A  and  B.]


INDEPENDENCY OF PARLIAMENT.  119

which  is  false  in  fact.  But  to  satisfy  us  on  this  head,  we
may  consider,  that  men  are  generally  more  honest  in  their
private  than  in  their  public  capacity,  and  will  go  greater
lengths  to  serve  a  party,  than  when  their  own  private  interest
is  alone  concerned.  Honour  is  a  great  check  upon  mankind  :
But  where  a  considerable  body  of  men  act  together,  this
check  is,  in  a  great  measure,  removed  ;  since  a  man  is  sure
to  be  approved  of  by  his  own  party,  for  what  promotes  the
common  interest ;  and  he  soon  learns  to  despise  the  clamours
of  adversaries.  To  which  we  may  add,  that  every  court  or
senate  is  determined  by  the  greater  number  of  voices;  so
that,  if  self-interest  influences  only  the  majority,  (as  it  will
always  do1)  the  whole  senate  follows  the  allurements  of  this
separate  interest,  and  acts  as  if  it  contained  not  one  member,
who  had  any  regard  to  public  interest  and  liberty.

When  there  offers,  therefore,  to  our  censure  and  examina
tion,  any  plan  of  government,  real  or  imaginary,  where  the
power  is  distributed  among  several  courts,  and  several  orders
of  men,  we  should  always  consider  the  separate  interest  of
each  court,  and  each  order;  and,  if  we  find  that,  by  the
skilful  division  of  power,  this  interest  must  necessarily,  in  its
operation,  concur  with  public,  we  may  pronounce  that  gov
ernment  to  be  wise  and  happy.  If,  on  the  contrary,  separate
interest  be  not  checked,  and  be  not  directed  to  the  public,
we  ought  to  look  for  nothing  but  faction,  disorder,  and
tyranny  from  such  a  government.  In  this  opinion  I  am
justified  by  experience,  as  well  as  by  the  authority  of  all
philosophers  and  politicians,  both  antient  and  modern.

How  much,  therefore,  would  it  have  surprised  such  a
genius  as  CICERO,  or  TACITUS,  to  have  been  told,  that,  in  a
future  age,  there  should  arise  a  very  regular  system  of  mixed
government,  where  the  authority  was  so  distributed,  that  one
rank,  whenever  it  pleased,  might  swallow  up  all  the  rest,  and
engross  the  whole  power  of  the  constitution.  Such  a  govern
ment,  they  would  say,  will  not  be  a  mixed  government.  For
so  great  is  the  natural  ambition  of  men,  that  they  are  never
satisfied  with  power ;  and  if  one  order  of  men,  by  pursuing
its  own  interest,  can  usurp  upon  every  other  order,  it  will
certainly  do  so,  and  render  itself,  as  far  as  possible,  absolute
and  uncontroulable.

But,  in  this  opinion,  experience  shews they  would  have

1  [In  the  present  depraved  state  of  mankind. Editions  A  to  D.]


120  ESSAY  VI.

been  mistaken.  For  this  is  actually  the  case  with  the  BRITISH
constitution.  The  share  of  power,  allotted  by  our  constitu
tion  to  the  house  of  commons,  is  so  great,  that  it  absolutely
commands  all  the  other  parts  of  the  government.  The  king's
legislative  power  is  plainly  no  proper  check  to  it.  For  though
the  king  has  a  negative  in  framing  laws ;  yet  this,  in  fact,  is
esteemed  of  so  little  moment,  that  whatever  is  voted  by  the
two  houses,  is  always  sure  to  pass  into  a  law,  and  the  royal
assent  is  little  better  than  a  form.  The  principal  weight  of
the  crown  lies  in  the  executive  power.  But  besides  that  the
executive  power  in  every  government  is  altogether  subordinate
to  the  legislative ;  besides  this,  I  say,  the  exercise  of  this
power  requires  an  immense  expence ;  and  the  commons  have
assumed  to  themselves  the  sole  right  of  granting  money.
How  easy,  therefore,  would  it  be  for  that  house  to  wrest  from
the  crown  all  these  powers,  one  after  another ;  by  making
every  grant  conditional,  and  choosing  their  time  so  well,  that
their  refusal  of  supply  should  only  distress  the  government,
without  giving  foreign  powers  any  advantage  over  us  ?  Did
the  house  of  commons  depend  in  the  same  manner  on  the
king,  and  had  none  of  the  members  any  property  but  from
his  gift,  would  not  he  command  all  their  resolutions,  and  be
from  that  moment  absolute  ?  As  to  the  house  of  lord* ,  they
are  a  very  powerful  support  to  the  Crown,  so  long  as  they
are,  in  their  turn,  supported  by  it ;  but  both  experience  and
reason  shew,  that  they  have  no  force  or  authority  sufficient
to  maintain  themselves  alone,  without  such  support.

How,  therefore,  shall  we  solve  this  paradox  ?  And  by  what
means  is  this  member  of  our  constitution  confined  within  the
proper  limits ;  since,  from  our  very  constitution,  it  must
necessarily  have  as  much  power  as  it  demands,  and  can  only
be  confined  by  itself?  How  is  this  consistent  with  our  ex
perience  of  human  nature  ?  I  answer,  that  the  interest  of
the  body  is  here  restrained  by  that  of  the  individuals,  and
that  the  house  of  commons  stretches  not  its  power,  because
such  an  usurpation  would  be  contrary  to  the  interest  of  the
majority  of  its  members.  The  crown  has  so  many  offices  at
its  disposal,  that,  when  assisted  by  the  honest  and  disinter
ested  part  of  the  house,  it  will  always  command  the  resolu
tions  of  the  whole  so  far,  at  least,  as  to  preserve  the  antient
constitution  from  danger.  We  may,  therefore,  give  to  this
influence  what  name  we  please;  we  may  call  it  by  the


INDEPENDENCY OF PARLIAMENT.  121

invidious  appellations  of  corruption  and  dependence  ;  but  some
degree  and  some  kind  of  it  are  inseparable  from  the  very
nature  of  the  constitution,  and  necessary  to  the  preservation
of  our  mixed  government.

Instead  then  of  asserting1  absolutely,  that  the  dependence
of  parliament,  in  every  degree,  is  an  infringement  of  BRITISH
liberty,  the  country-party  should  have  made  some  concessions
to  their  adversaries,  and  have  only  examined  what  was  the
proper  degree  of  this  dependence,  beyond  which  it  became
dangerous  to  liberty.  But  such  a  moderation  is  not  to  be
expected  in  party-men  of  any  kind.  After  a  concession  of
this  nature,  all  declamation  must  be  abandoned  ;  and  a  calm
enquiry  into  the  proper  degree  of  court-influence  and  par
liamentary  dependence  would  have  been  expected  by  the
readers.  And  though  the  advantage,  in  such  a  controversy,
might  possibly  remain  to  the  country-party ;  yet  the  victory
would  not  be  so  compleat  as  they  wish  for,  nor  would  a  true
patriot  have  given  an  entire  loose  to  his  zeal,  for  fear  of
running  matters  into  a  contrary  extreme,  by  diminishing  too2
far  the  influence  of  the  crown.  It  was,  therefore,  thought
best  to  deny,  that  this  extreme  could  ever  be  dangerous  to
the  constitution,  or  that  the  crown  could  ever  have  too  little
influence  over  members  of  parliament.

All  questions  concerning  the  proper  medium  between
extremes  are  difficult  to  be  decided ;  both  because  it  is  not
easy  to  find  words  proper  to  fix  this  medium,  and  because  the
good  and  ill,  in  such  cases,  run  so  gradually  into  each  other,
as  even  to  render  our  sentiments  doubtful  and  uncertain.  But
there  is  a  peculiar  difficulty  in  the  present  case,  which  would
embarrass  the  most  knowing  and  most  impartial  examiner.
The  power  of  the  crown  is  always  lodged  in  a  single  person,
either  king  or  minister ;  and  as  this  person  may  have  either
a  greater  or  less  degree  of  ambition,  capacity,  courage,  popu
larity,  or  fortune,  the  power,  which  is  too  great  in  one  hand,

1  See  Dissertation  on  Parties,  through-  spy,  or  to  be  corrupted,  is  always  infa-
out.  mous  under  all  ministers,  and  is  to  be

2  By that  influence  of the  crown,  regarded  as  a  shameless  prostitution,
•which  I  would  justify, I mean  only,  POLYBITJS  justly  esteems  the  pecuniary
that  arising  from  the  offices  and  honours  influence  of  the  senate  and  censors  to
•which  are  at  the  disposal  of  the  crown.  be  one  of  the  regular  and  constitutional
As  to  private  bribery,  it  may  be  con-  weights,  which  preserved  the  balance  of
sidered  in  the  same  light  as  the  practice  the  ROWAN  government, Lib. 6,  cap.
of employing spies, which is scarce  15. [The reference to Polybius was
justifiable  in  a  good  minister,  and  is  added  in  Edition  K.]

infamous  in  a  bad  one : But  to  be  a


122  ESSAY VII.

may  become  too  little  in  another.  In  pure  republics,  where
the  authority  is  distributed  among  several  assemblies  or
senates,  the  checks  and  controuls  are  more  regular  in  their
operation  ;  because  the  members  of  such  numerous  assemblies
may  be  presumed  to  be  always  nearly  equal  in  capacity  and
virtue ;  and  it  is  only  their  number,  riches,  or  authorit}',
which  enter  into  consideration.  But  a  limited  monarchy
admits  not  of  any  such  stability  ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  assign
to  the  crown  such  a  determinate  degree  of  power,  as  will,  in
every  hand,  form  a  proper  counterbalance  to  the  other  parts
of  the  constitution.  This  is  an  unavoidable  disadvantage,
among  the  many  advantages,  attending  that  species  of
crovernment.


ESSAY  VII. — Whether  the  British  Government  inclines  more
to  Absolute  Monarchy,  or  to  a  Republic.

IT  affords  a  violent  prejudice  against  almost  every  science,
that  no  prudent  man,  however  sure  of  his  principles,  dares
prophesy  concerning  any  event,  or  foretel  the  remote  con
sequences  of  things.  A  physician  will  not  venture  to  pro
nounce  concerning  the  condition  of  his  patient  a  fortnight
or  month  after  :  And  still  less  dares  a  politician  foretel  the
situation  of  public  affairs  a  few  years  hence.  HARRINGTON
thought  himself  so  sure  of  his  general  principle,  that  the
balance  of  power  depends  on  that  of  property,  that  he  ventured
to  pronounce  it  impossible  ever  to  re-establish  monarchy  in
ENGLAND  :  But  his  book  was  scarcely  published  when  the
king  was  restored  ;  and  we  see,  that  monarchy  has  ever  since
subsisted  upon  the  same  footing  as  before.  Notwithstanding
this  unlucky  example,  I  will  venture  to  examine  an  impor
tant  question,  to  wit,  Whether  the  BRITISH  government  inclines
more  to  absolute  'monarchy,  or  to  a  republic  ;  and  in  which  of
these  two  species  of  government  it  ivill  most  probably  terminate  ?
As  there  seems  not  to  be  any  great  danger  of  a  sudden  revo
lution  either  way,  I  shall  at  least  escape  the  shame  attending
my  temerity,  if  I  should  be  found  to  have  been  mistaken.

Those  who  assert,  that  the  balance  of  our  government  in
clines  towards  absolute  monarchy,  may  support  their  opinion
by  the  following  reasons.  That  property  has  a  great  influ
ence  on  power  cannot  possibly  be  denied  ;  but  yet  the  general
maxim,  that  the  balance  of  one  depends  on  the  balance  of  the


THE BKITISH GOVERNMENT.  123

other,  must  be  received  with  several  limitations.  It  is  evi
dent,  that  much  less  property  in  a  single  hand  will  be  able
to  counterbalance  a  greater  property  in  several ;  not  only
because  it  is  difficult  to  ma,ke  many  persons  combine  in  the
same  views  and  measures ;  but  because  property,  when
united,  causes  much  greater  dependence,  than  the  same  pro
perty,  when  dispersed.  A  hundred  persons,  of  1000?.  a  year
a-piece,  can  consume  all  their  income,  and  no  bod}7  shall
ever  be  the  better  for  them,  except  their  servants  and  trades
men,  who  justly  regard  their  profits  as  the  product  of  their
own  labour.  But  a  man  possessed  of  100,OOOL  a  year,  if  he
has  either  any  generosity  or  any  cunning,  may  create  a  great
dependence  by  obligations,  and  still  a  greater  by  expecta
tions.  Hence  we  may  observe,  that,  in  all  free  governments,
any  subject  exorbitantly  rich  has  always  created  jealousy,
even  though  his  riches  bore  no  proportion  to  those  of  the
state.  CRASSUS'S  fortune,  if  I  remember  well,  amounted '
only  to2  about  two  millions  and  a  half  of  our  money ;  yet  we
find,  that,  though  his  genius  was  nothing  extraordinar}',  he
was  able,  by  means  of  his  riches  alone,  to  counterbalance,
during  his  lifetime,  the  power  of  POMPEY  as  well  as  that  of
CAESAR,  who  afterwards  became  master  of  the  world.  The
wealth  of  the  MEDICI  made  them  masters  of  FLORENCE  ;
though,  it  is  probable,  it  was  not  considerable,  compared  to
the  united  property  of  that  opulent  republic.

These  considerations  are  apt  to  make  one  entertain  a  mag
nificent  idea  of  the  BRITISH  spirit  and  love  of  liberty ;  since
we  could  maintain  our  free  government,  during  so  many  cen
turies,  against  our  sovereigns,  who,  besides  the  power  and
dignity  and  majesty  of  the  crown,  have  always  been  possessed
of  much  more  property  than  any  subject  has  ever  enjoyed  in
any  commonwealth.  But  it  may  be  said,  that  this  spirit,
however  great,  will  never  be  able  to  support  itself  against
that  immense  property,  which  is  now  lodged  in  the  king,  and
which  is  still  encreasing.  Upon  a  moderate  computation,
there  are  near  three  millions  a  year  at  the  disposal  of  the
crown.  The  civil  list  amounts  to  near  a  million ;  the  col
lection  of  all  taxes  to  another ;  and  the  employments  in  the

1  [Editions  A  and  B :  to  Three  Thou-  in  our  money.]

Band  Talents a  Year,  about  400,0001.  -  [Editions  D  to  Q  add:  As  interest

Sterling. — Editions D to  Q : only  to  in  Rome  was  higher  than  with  us,  this

about  sixteen  hundred  thousand  pounds-  might  yield  above  100,000i?.  a  year.]


124  ESSAY  VII.

army  and  navy,  tog-ether  with  ecclesiastical  preferments,  to
above  a  third  million :  An  enormous  sum,  and  what  may
fairly  be  computed  to  be  more  than  a  thirtieth  part  of  the
whole  income  and  labour  of  the  kingdom.  When  we  add  to
this  great  property,  the  encreasing  luxury  of  the  nation,  our
proneness  to  corruption,  together  with  the  great  power  and
prerogatives  of  the  crown,  and  the  command  of  military  force,
there  is  no  one  but  must  despair  of  being  able,  without  ex
traordinary  efforts,  to  support  our  free  government  much
longer  under  these  disadvantages.

On  the  other  hand,  those  who  maintain,  that  the  byass  of
the  BRITISH  government  leans  towards  a  republic,  may  sup
port  their  opinion  by  specious  arguments.  It  may  be  said,
that,  though  this  immense  property  in  the  crown,  be  joined
to  the  dignity  of  first  magistrate,  and  to  many  other  legal
powers  and  prerogatives,  which  should  naturally  give  it
greater  influence ;  yet  it  really  becomes  less  dangerous  to
liberty  upon  tha,t  very  account.  Were  ENGLAND  a  republic,
and  were  any  private  man  possessed  of  a  revenue,  a  third,  or
even  a  tenth  part  as  large  as  that  of  the  crown,  he  would
very  justly  excite  jealousy  ;  because  he  would  infallibly  have
great  authority,  in  the  government :  And  such  an  irregular
authority,  not  avowed  by  the  laws,  is  always  more  dangerous
than  a  much  greater  authority,  derived  from  them.  A  man,
possessed  of  usurped  power,  can  set  no  bounds  to  his  preten
sions  :'  His  partizans  have  liberty  to  hope  for  every  thing  in
his  favour  :  His  enemies  provoke  his  ambition,  with  his  fears,
by  the  violence  of  their  opposition :  And  the  government
being  thrown  into  a  ferment,  every  corrupted  humour  in  the
state  naturally  gathers  to  him.  On  the  contrary,  a  legal
authority,  though  great,  has  always  some  bounds,  which  ter
minate  both  the  hopes  and  pretensions  of  the  person  possessed
of  it :  The  laws  must  have  provided  a  remedy  against  its
excesses  :  Such  an  eminent  magistrate  has  much  to  fear,
and  little  to  hope  from  his  usurpations  :  And  as  his  legal
authority  is  quietly  submitted  to,  he  has  small  temptation
and  small  opportunity  of  extending  it  farther.  Besides,  it
happens,  with  regard  to  ambitious  aims  and  projects,  what
may  be  observed  with  regard  to  sects  of  philosophy  and  reli-

1  [Editions  A  to  N  have  the  note: to the President de Bellievre. —  De
On  ne  monte  jamais  si  haut  quequand Retz's  Memoirs.]
on  lie  scait  pas  ou  on  va,  said  Cromwell


THE  BRITISH  GOVERNMENT.  125

gion.  A  new  sect  excites  such  a  ferment,  and  is  both  op
posed  and  defended  with  such  vehemence,  that  it  always
spreads  faster,  and  multiplies  its  partizans  with  greater
rapidity,  than  any  old  established  opinion,  recommended  by
the  sanction  of  the  laws  and  of  antiquity.  Such  is  the  nature
of  novelty,  that,  where  any  thing  pleases,  it  becomes  doubly
agreeable,  if  new;  but  if  it  displeases,  it  is  doubly  displeasing,
upon  that  very  account.  And,  in  most  cases,  the  violence  of
enemies  is  favourable  to  ambitious  projects,  as  well  as  the
zeal  of  partizans.

It  may  farther  be  said,  that,  though  men  be  much  governed
by  interest ;  yet  even  interest  itself,  and  all  human  affairs,
are  entirely  governed  by  opinion.  Now,  there  has  been  a-
sudden  and  sensible  change  in  the  opinions  of  men  within
these  last  fifty  years,  by  the  progress  of  learning  and  of
liberty.  Most  people,  in  this  island,  have  divested  them
selves  of  all  superstitious  reverence  to  names  and  authority :
The  clergy  have l  much  lost  their  credit :  Their  pretensions

OJ

and  doctrines  have  been  ridiculed  ;  and  even  religion  can
scarcely  support  itself  in  the  world.  The  mere  name  of  king
commands  little  respect ;  and  to  talk  of  a  king  as  GOD'S
viceregent  on  earth,  or  to  give  him  any  of  those  magnificent
titles,  which  formerly  dazzled  mankind,  would  but  excite
laughter  in  every  one.  Though  the  crown,  by  means  of  its
large  revenue,  may  maintain  its  authority  in  times  of  tran
quillity,  upon  private  interest  and  influence  ;  yet,  as  the  least
shock  or  convulsion  must  break  all  these  interests  to  pieces,
the  royal  power,  being  no  longer  supported  by  the  settled
principles  and  opinions  of  men,  will  immediately  dissolve.
Had  men  been  in  the  same  disposition  at  the  revolution,  as
they  are  at  present,  monarchy  would  have  run  a  great  risque
of  being  entirely  lost  in  this  island.

Durst  I  venture  to  deliver  my  own  sentiments  amidst  these
opposite  arguments,  I  would  assert,  that,  unless  there  happen
some  extraordinary  convulsion,  the  power  of  the  crown,  by
means  of  its  large  revenue,  is  rather  upon  the  encrease ;
though,  at  the  same  time  I  own,  that  its  progress  seems
very  slow,  and  almost  insensible.  The  tide  has  run  long,
and  with  some  rapidity,  to  the  side  of  popular  government,
and  is  just  beginning  to  turn  towards  monarchy.

It  is  well  known,  that  every  government  must  come  to  a

1  [Editions  A  to  D  read:  have  entirely  lost.]


126  ESSAY VII.

period,  and  that  death  is  unavoidable  to  the  political  as  well
as  to  the  animal  body.  But,  as  one  kind  of  death  may  be
preferable  to  another,  it  may  be  enquired,  whether  it  be
more  desirable  for  the  BRITISH  constitution  to  terminate  in
a  popular  government,  or  in  absolute  monarchy  ?  Here  I
would  frankly  declare,  that,  though  liberty  be  preferable  to
slavery,  in  almost  every  case ;  yet  I  should  rather  wish  to
see  an  absolute  monarch  than  a  republic  in  this  island.  For,
let  us  consider,  what  kind  of  republic  we  have  reason  to  ex
pect.  The  question  is  not  concerning  any  fine  imaginary
republic,  of  which  a  man  may  form  a  plan  in  his  closet.
There  is  no  doubt,  but  a  popular  government  may  be  ima
gined  more  perfect  than  absolute  monarchy,  or  even  than
our  present  constitution.  But  what  reason  have  we  to  ex
pect  that  any  such  government  will  ever  be  established  in
GREAT  BRITAIN,  upon  the  dissolution  of  our  monarchy  ?  Tf
any  single  person  acquire  power  enough  to  take  our  consti
tution  to  pieces,  and  put  it  up  a-new,  he  is  really  an  abso
lute  monarch  ;  and  we  have  already  had  an  instance  of  this
kind,  sufficient  to  convince  us,  that  such  a  person  will  never
resign  his  power,  or  establish  any  free  government.  Matters,
therefore,  must  be  trusted  to  their  natural  progress  and
operation  ;  and  the  house  of  commons,  according  to  its  pre
sent  constitution,  must  be  the  only  legislature  in  such  a
popular  government.  The  inconveniencies  attending  such  a
situation  of  affairs,  present  themselves  by  thousands.  If  the
house  of  commons,  in  such  a  case,  ever  dissolve  itself,  which
is  not  to  be  expected,  we  may  look  for  a  civil  war  every
election.  If  it  continue  itself,  we  shall  suffer  all  the  tyranny
of  a  faction,  subdivided  into  new  factions.  And  as  such  a
violent  government  cannot  long  subsist,  we  shall,  at  last,
after  many  convulsions,  and  civil  wars,  find  repose  in  abso
lute  monarchy,  which  it  would  have  been  happier  for  us  to
have  established  peaceably  from  the  beginning.  Absolute
monarchy,  therefore,  is  the  easiest  death,  the  true  Euthanasia
of  the  BRITISH  constitution.

Thus,  if  we  have  reason  to  be  more  jealous  of  monarchy,
because  the  danger  is  more  imminent  from  that  quarter ;  we
have  also  reason  to  be  more  jealous  of  popular  government,
because  that  danger  is  more  terrible.  This  may  teach  us  a
lesson  of  moderation  in  all  our  political  controversies.


OF  PARTIES  IN  GENERAL.  127

ESSAY  VIII. — Of  Parties  in  General.

OF  all  men,  that  distinguish,  themselves  by  memorable
atchievements,  the  first  place  of  honour  seems  due  to  LEGIS
LATORS  and  founders  of  states,  who  transmit  a  system  of  laws
and  institutions  to  secure  the  peace,  happiness,  and  liberty
of  future  generations.  The  influence  of  useful  inventions  in
the  arts  and  sciences  may,  perhaps,  extend  farther  than  that
of  wise  laws,  whose  effects  are  limited  both  in  time  and
place  ;  but  the  benefit  arising  from  the  former,  is  not  so  sen
sible  as  that  which  results  from  the  latter.  Speculative
sciences  do,  indeed,  improve  the  mind ;  but  this  advantage
reaches  only  to  a  few  persons,  who  have  leisure  to  apply
themselves  to  them.  And  as  to  practical  arts,  which  en-
crease  the  commodities  and  enjoyments  of  life,  it  is  well
known,  that  men's  happiness  consists  not  so  much  in  an
abundance  of  these,  as  in  the  peace  and  security  with  which
they  possess  them ;  and  those  blessings  can  only  be  derived
from  good  government.  Not  to  mention,  that  general  virtue
and  good  morals  in  a  state,  which  are  so  requisite  to  happi
ness,  can  never  arise  from  the  most  refined  precepts  of  philo
sophy,  or  even  the  severest  injunctions  of  religion  ;  but  must
proceed  entirety  from  the  virtuous  education  of  youth,  the
effect  of  wise  laws  and  institutions.  I  must,  therefore,  pre
sume  to  differ  from  Lord  BACON  in  this  particular,  and  must
regard  antiquity  as  somewhat  unjust  in  its  distribution  of
honours,  when  it  made  gods  of  all  the  inventors  of  useful
arts,  such  as  CERES,  BACCHUS,  AESCULAPIUS  ;  and  dignify
legislators,  such  as  EOMULUS  and  THESEUS,  only  with  the
appellation  of  demigods  and  heroes.

As  much  as  legislators  and  founders  of  states  ought  to  be
honoured  and  respected  among  men,  as  much  ought  the
founders  of  sects  and  factions  to  be  detested  and  hated ;
because  the  influence  of  faction  is  directly  contrary  to  that
of  laws.  Factions  subvert  government,  render  laws  impo
tent,  and  beget  the  fiercest  animosities  among  men  of  the
same  nation,  who  ought  to  give  mutual  assistance  and  pro
tection  to  each  other.  And  what  should  render  the  founders
of  parties  more  odious  is,  the  difficulty  of  extirpating  these
weeds,  when  once  they  have  taken  root  in  any  state.  They
naturally  propagate  themselves  for  many  centuries,  and
seldom  end  but  by  the  total  dissolution  of  that  government,


128  ESSAY  VHI.

in  which  they  are  sown.  They  are,  besides,  plants  which
grow  most  plentifully  in  the  richest  soil ;  and  though  abso
lute  governments  be  not  wholly  free  from  them,  it  nrust  be
confessed,  that  they  rise  more  easily,  and  propagate  them
selves  faster  in  free  governments,  where  they  always  infect
the  legislature  itself,  which  alone  could  be  able,  by  the  steady
application  of  rewards  and  punishments,  to  eradicate  them.

Factions  may  be  divided  into  PERSONAL  and  EEAL  ;  that
is,  into  factions,  founded  on  personal  friendship  or  animosity
among  such  as  compose  the  contending  parties,  and  into
those  founded  on  some  real  difference  of  sentiment  or  in
terest.  The  reason  of  this  distinction  is  obvious  ;  though  I
must  acknowledge,  that  parties  are  seldom  found  pure  and
unmixed,  either  of  the  one  kind  or  the  other.  It  is  not  often
seen,  that  a  government  divides  into  factions,  where  there  is
no  difference  in  the  views  of  the  constituent  members,  either
real  or  apparent,  trivial  or  material :  And  in  those  factions,
which  are  founded  on  the  most  real  and  most  material  differ
ence,  there  is  always  observed  a  great  deal  of  personal  ani
mosity  or  affection.  But  notwithstanding  this  mixture,  a
party  may  be  denominated  either  personal  or  real,  according
to  that  principle  which  is  predominant,  and  is  found  to  have
the  greatest  influence.

Personal  factions  arise  most  easily  in  small  republics.
Every  domestic  quarrel,  there,  becomes  an  affair  of  state.
Love,  vanity,  emulation,  any  passion,  as  well  as  ambition
and  resentment,  begets  public  division.  The  NERI  and
BIANCHI  of  FLORENCE,  the  FREGOSI  and  ADORNI  of  GENOA,
the  COLONESI  and  ORSINI  of  modern  ROME,  were  parties  of
this  kind.

Men  have  such  a  propensity  to  divide  into  personal  fac
tions,  that  the  smallest  appearance  of  real  difference  will
produce  them.  What  can  be  imagined  more  trivial  than
the  difference  between  one  colour  of  livery  and  another  in
horse  races  ?  Yet  this  difference  begat  two  most  inveterate
factions  in  the  GREEK  empire,  the  PRASINI  and  VENETI,  who
never  suspended  their  animosities,  till  they  ruined  that  un
happy  government.

1  We  find  in  the  ROMAN  history  a  remarkable  dissension
between  two  tribes,  the  POLLIA  and  PAPIRIA,  which  continued
for  the  space  of  near  three  hundred  years,  and  discovered

1  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Edition  B.]


OF PARTIES IX  GEXEHAL.  129

itself  in  their  suffrages  at  every  election  of  magistrates.1
This  faction  was  the  more  remarkable,  as  it  could  continue
for  so  long  a  tract  of  time ;  even  though  it  did  not  spread
itself,  nor  draw  any  of  the  other  tribes  into  a  share  of  the
quarrel.  If  mankind  had  not  a  strong  propensity  to  such
divisions,  the  indifference  of  the  rest  of  the  community
must  have  suppressed  this  foolish  animosity,  that  had  not
any  aliment  of  new  benefits  and  injuries,  of  general  sym
pathy  and  antipathy,  which  never  fail  to  take  place,  when
the  whole  state  is  rent  into  two  equal  factions.

Nothing  is  more  usual  than  to  see  parties,  which  have
begun  upon  a  real  difference,  continue  even  after  that  dif
ference  is  lost.  When  men  are  once  inlisted  on  opposite
sides,  they  contract  an  affection  to  the  persons  with  whom
they  are  united,  and  an  animosity  against  their  antagonists  :
And  these  passions  they  often  transmit  to  their  posterity.
The  real  difference  between  GUELP  and  GHIBBELLINE  was
long  lost  in  Italy,  before  these  factions  were  extinguished.
The  GUELFS  adhered  to  the  pope,  the  GHIBBELLINES  to  the
emperor ;  yet  the  family  of  SFORZA,  who  were  in  alliance
with  the  emperor,  though  they  were  GUELFS,  being  expelled
MILAN  by  the  king2  of  FRANCE,  assisted  by  JACOMO  TEIVULZIO
and  the  GHIBBELLINES,  the  pope  concurred  with  the  latter,
and  they  formed  leagues  with  the  pope  against  the  emperor.
The  civil  wars  which  arose  some  few  years  ago  in  MO
ROCCO,  between  the  Hacks  and  whites,  merely  on  account  of
their  complexion,  are  founded  on  a  pleasant  difference.
We  laugh  at  them ;  but  I  believe,  were  things  rightly  ex
amined,  we  afford  much  more  occasion  of  ridicule  to  the
MOORS.  For,  what  are  all  the  wars  of  religion,  which  have
prevailed  in  this  polite  and  knowing  part  of  the  world?
They  are  certainly  more  absurd  than  the  MOORISH  civil  wars.

As this fact has  not  been  much  corona  Icge  belli  venire:  Memoriamque

>bserved  by  antiquaries  or  politicians,  ejus ire TUSCULANIS in pan® tarn

1 shall  deliver  it  in  the  words  of  the  atrocis auctores mansisse ad patris

JfoMAx  historian. Populus  TUSCTJLANUS  <etatcm  constat;  ncc  qucmquam  fere  ex

cum  conjugibus  ac  hberis  EOMAM  venit :  Powitrifacand.idatumP*piiajMferrg

La  multitude, veste  mutata, et  specie  solitam,  T.  Livn,  lib.  8.  37. The  CASTE-

r,  arum  tribus  circuit,  genibusse  omnium  LAXI  and  NICOLLOTI  are  two  mobbish

cdvolvens. Plus  itaque  misericordia  ad  factions  in  VENICE,  who  frequently  box

pcma  oeniam  unpetrandam,  quam  causa  together, and then lay aside their

ad  cnmen  purgandum  valuit. Tribu*  quarrels  presently. [The  last  sentence

omnes prater POLLIAM, antiquarunt  was  added  in  Edition  D.l

Icgem. POLLI.E  sententia  fuit,  puberes  2  LEWIS  XII.
vcrbcratos  nrcnri,  hbtros  conjuqesque  sub

.VOL.  III.  K


l.°,0  ESSAY VTIT.

The  difference  of  complexion  is  a  sensible  and  a  real  dif
ference  :  But  the  controversy  about  an  article  of  faith,  which
is  utterly  absurd  and  unintelligible,  is  not  a  difference  in
sentiment,  but  in  a  few  phrases  and  expressions,  which  one
party  accepts  of,  without  understanding  them ;  and  the
other  refuses  in  the  same  manner.1

Real  factions  may  be  divided  into  those  from  interest,  frorr
principle,  and  from  affection.  Of  all  factions,  the  first  are
the  most  reasonable,  and  the  most  excusable.  When  two
orders  of  men,  such  as  the  nobles  and  people,  have  a  distinct
authority  in  a  government,  not  very  accurately  balanced  and
modelled,  they  naturally  follow  a  distinct  interest ;  nor  can
we  reasonably  expect  a  different  conduct,  considering  that
degree  of  selfishness  implanted  in  human  nature.  It  requires
great  skill  in  a  legislator  to  prevent  such  parties ;  and  many
philosophers  are  of  opinion,  that  this  secret,  like  the  grand
elixir,  or  perpetual  motion,  may  amuse  men  in  theory,  but
can  never  possibly  be  reduced  to  practice.  In  despotic
governments,  indeed,  factions  often  do  not  appear  ;  but  they
are  not  the  less  real ;  or  rather,  they  are  more  real  and
more  pernicious,  upon  that  very  account.  The  distinct
orders  of  men,  nobles  and  people,  soldiers  and  merchants,
have  all  a  distinct  interest ;  but  the  more  powerful  oppresses
the  weaker  with  impunity,  and  without  resistance ;  which
begets  a  seeming  tranquillity  in  such  governments.2

There  has  been  an  attempt  in  ENGLAND  to  divide  the
landed  and  trading  part  of  the  nation ;  but  without  success.
The  interests  of  these  two  bodies  are  not  really  distinct,
and  never  will  be  so,  till  our  public  debts  encrease  to  such  a
degree,  as  to  become  altogether  oppressive  and  intolerable.

Parties  from  principle,  especially  abstract  speculative
principle,  are  known  only  to  modern  times,  and  are,  perhaps,
the  most  extraordinary  and  unaccountable  phenomenon,  that
has  yet  appeared  in  human  affairs.  Where  different  prin
ciples  beget  a  contrariety  of  conduct,  which  is  the  case  with
all  different  political  principles,  the  matter  may  be  more

1  [Editions  A  to  P  add  the  following :  form  a  real  opinion,  more  at  his  disposal

Besides,  I  do  not  find  that  the  whites  than  his  complexion  ? And  can  one  be

in  MOBOCCO  ever  imposed  on  the  blacks  induced  by  force  or  fear  to  do  more

any  necessity of  altering  their com-  than  paint  and  disguise  in  the  one  case

plexion,  or  threatened  them  with  inqui-  as  well  as  in  the  other  ?]
sitions  and  penal  laws  in  case  of  obsti-  2  [See  Considerations  sur  le  Grandeur

nacy :  nor  have  the  blacks  been  more  et  sur  la  Decadence  de  Remains. Edi-

unreasonable  in  this particular. But  tion  K'.]
is  a  man's  opinion,  where  he  is  able  to


OF PARTIES IX GENERAL.  131

easily  explained.  A  man,  who  esteems  the  true  right  of
government  to  lie  in  one  man,  or  one  family,  cannot  easily
agree  with  his  fellow-citizen,  who  thinks  that  another  man
or  family  is  possessed  of  this  right.  Each  naturally  wishes
that  right  may  take  place,  according  to  his  own  notions  of
it.  But  where  the  difference  of  principle  is  attended  with
no  contrariety  of  action,  but  every  one  may  follow  his  own
way,  without  interfering  with  his  neighbour,  as  happens  in
all  religious  controversies :  what  madness,  what  fury  can
beget  such  unhappy  and  such  fatal  divisions?

Two  men  travelling  on  the  highway,  the  one  east,  the
other  west,  can  easily  pass  each  other,  if  the  way  be  broad
enough :  But  two  men,  reasoning  upon  opposite  principles
of  religion,  cannot  so  easily  pass,  without  shocking  ;  though
one  should  think,  that  the  way  were  also,  in  that  case,  suffi
ciently  broad,  and  that  each  might  proceed,  without  inter
ruption,  in  his  own  course.  But  such  is  the  nature  of  the
human  mind,  that  it  always  lays  hold  on  every  mind  that
approaches  it;  and  as  it  is  wonderfully  fortified  by  an
unanimity  of  sentiments,  so  is  it  shocked  and  disturbed  by
any  contrariety.  Hence  the  eagerness,  which  most  people
discover  in  a  dispute ;  and  hence  their  impatience  of  opposi
tion,  even  in  the  most  speculative  and  indifferent  opinions.

This  principle,  however  frivolous  it  may  appear,  seems
to  have  been  the  origin  of  all  religious  wars  and  divisions.
But  as  this  principle  is  universal  in  human  nature,  its  effects
would  not  have  been  confined  to  one  age,  and  to  one  sect
of  religion,  did  it  not  there  concur  with  other  more  acci
dental  causes,  which  raise  it  to  such  a  height,  as  to  produce
the  greatest  misery  and  devastation.  Most  religions  of  the
ancient  world  arose  in  the  unknown  ages  of  government,
when  men  were  as  yet  barbarous  and  uninstructed,  and  the
prince,  as  well  as  the  peasant,  was  disposed  to  receive,  with
implicit  faith,  every  pious  tale  of  fiction,  which  was  offered
him.  The  magistrate  embraced  the  religion  of  the  people,
and  entering  cordially  into  the  care  of  sacred  matters,
naturally  acquired  an  authority  in  them,  and  united  the
ecclesiastical  with  the  civil  power.  But  the  Christian
religion  arising,  while  principles  directly  opposite  to  K
were  firmly  established  in  the  polite  part  of  the  world  who
despised  the  nation  that  first  broached  this  novelty  ;
no  wonder,  that,  in  such  circumstances,  it  was  but  little

* 2


132  ESSAY VIII.

countenanced  by  the  civil  magistrate,  and  that  the  priest
hood  was  allowed  to  engross  all  the  authority  in  the  new
sect.  So  bad  a  use  did  they  make  of  this  power,  even  in
those  early  times,  that  the  primitive  persecutions  may,
perhaps,  in  part,1  be  ascribed  to  the  violence  instilled  by

.them  into  their  followers.  And  the  same  principles  of
priestly  government  continuing,  after  Christianity  became
the  established  religion,  they  have  engendered  a  spirit  of
persecution,  which  has  ever  since  been  the  poison  of  human
society,  and  the  source  of  the  most  inveterate  factions  in
every  government.  Such  divisions,  therefore,  on  the  part  of
the  people,  may  justly  be  esteemed  factions  of  principle;  but,
on  the  part  of  the  priests,  who  are  the  prime  movers,  they

„  are  really  factions  of  interest.

There  is  another  cause  (beside  the  authority  of  the  priests,
and  the  separation  of  the  ecclesiastical  and  civil  powers)
which  has  contributed  to  render  CHRISTENDOM  the  scene  of
z-eligious  wars  and  divisions.  Religions,  that  arise  in  ages
totally  ignorant  and  barbarous,  consist  mostly  of  traditional
tales  and  fictions,  which  may  be  different  in  every  sect,  with
out  being  contrary  to  each  other ;  and  even  when  they  are
contrary,  every  one  adheres  to  the  tradition  of  his  own  sect,
without  much  reasoning  or  disputation.  But  as  philosophy
was  widely  spread  over  the  world,  at  the  time  when  Chris
tianity  arose,  the  teachers  of  the  new  sect  were  obliged  to
form  a  system  of  speculative  opinions  ;  to  divide,  with  some
accuracy,  their  articles  of  faith ;  and  to  explain,  comment,

1  I  say,  in  part  ;  For  it  is  a  vulgar  the  G-ATTLS  from  their  ancient  prejudices,

error  to  imagine,  that  the  ancients  were  SUETONIUS in vita CLATJDII. [PLINY

as great friends  to  toleration as the  ascribes  the  abolition  of  the  Druidical

ENGLISH  or  DUTCH  are  at  present. The  superstitions to TIBERIUS, probably

laws against external superstition,  because  that  emperor  had  taken some

amongst the ROMANS, were as an-  steps towards restraining them (lib.

cient [as the time of the twelve  xxx.  cap.  i.)] This  is  an  instance  of  the

tables] ;  and  the  JEWS  as  well  as  CHRIS-  x  usual caution  and moderation of  the

TIANS were sometimes punished by  KOMANS in such cases ; and very

them ; though,  in  general,  these  laws  different  from  their violent and san-

vere  not  rigorously  executed. Imme-  guinary  method  of  treating  the  Chris-

diately  after  the  conquest  of  GAUL,  they  tians. Hence  we  may  entertain  a  sus-

forbad  all  but  the  natives  to  be  initia-  picion,  that  those furious  persecutions

ted  into the  religion  of  the DRUIDS  ;  of  Christianity  were  in  some  measure

and  this  was  a  kind  of  persecution. In  owing  to  the  imprudent  zeal  and  bigotry

about  a  century  after  this  conquest,  [the  of  the  first  propagators  of  that  sect ;  and

emperor, CLAUDIUS,] quite abolished  Ecclesiastical  history  affords  us  many

that  superstition  by  penal  laws  ;  which  reasons  to  confirm  this  suspicion. [This

would  have  been  a  very  grievous  per-  note  is  not  in  A. B  and  D  read :  '  were

secution,  if  the  imitation  of  the  KOMAN  --  very  ancient,'  '  they  quite,'  and  omit  the

manners  had  not,  before-hand,  weaned  reference  to  PLINY.]


OF PARTIES IN GENERAL.  133

confute,  and  defend  with  all  the  subtilty  of  argument  am\
science.  Hence  naturally  arose  keenness  in  dispute,  when
the  Christian  religion  came  to  be  split  into  new  divisions  and
heresies  :  And  this  keenness  assisted  the  priests  in  their
policy,  of  begetting  a  mutual  hatred  and  antipathy  among
their  deluded  followers.  Sects  of  philosophy,  in  the  ancient
world,  were  more  zealous  than  parties  of  religion ;  but  in
modern  times,  parties  of  religion  are  more  furious  and
enraged  than  the  most  cruel  factions  that  ever  arose  from
interest  and  ambition.

I  have  mentioned  parties  from  affection  as  a  kind  of  real
parties,  beside  those  from  interest  and  principle.  By  parties
from  affection,  I  understand  those  which  are  founded  on  the
different  attachments  of  men  towards  particular  families  and
persons,  whom  they  desire  to  rule  over  them.  These  factions
are  often  very  violent ;  though,  I  must  own,  it  may  seem
unaccountable,  that  men  should  attach  themselves  so  strongly
to  persons,  with  whom  they  are  no  wise  acquainted,  whom
perhaps  they  never  saw,  and  from  whom  they  never  received,
nor  can  ever  hope  for  any  favour.  Yet  this  we  often  find  to
be  the  case,  and  even  with  men,  who,  on  other  occasions,
discover  no  great  generosity  of  spirit,  nor  are  found  to  be
easily  transported  by  friendship  beyond  their  own  interest.
We  are  apt  to  think  the  relation  between  us  and  our  sove
reign  very  close  and  intimate.  The  splendour  of  majesty  and
power  bestows  an  importance  on  the  fortunes  even  of  a
single  person.  And  when  a  man's  good-nature  does  not
give  him  this  imaginary  interest,  his  ill-nature  will,  from
spite  and  opposition  to  persons  whose  sentiments  are  differ
ent  from  his  own.

ESSAY  IX.— Of  the  Parties  of  Great  Britain.

WERE  the  British  Government  proposed  as  a  subject  of
speculation,  one  would  immediately  perceive  in  it  a  source
of  division  and  party,  which  it  would  be  almost  impossible
for  it,  under  any  administration,  to  avoid.  The  just  balance
between  the  republican  and  monarchical  part  of  our  con
stitution  is  really,  in  itself,  so  extremely  delicate  and  uncer
tain,  that,  when  joined  to  men's  passions  and  prejudices,  it  is
impossible  but  different  opinions  must  arise  concerning  it,
even  among  persons  of  the  best  understanding.  Those  of


134  ESSAY IX.

mild  tempers,  who  love  peace  and  order,  and  detest  sedition
and  civil  wars,  will  always  entertain  more  favourable  senti
ments  of  monarchy,  than  men  of  bold  and  generous  spirits,
who  are  passionate  lovers  of  liberty,  and  think  no  evil  com
parable  to  subjection  and  slavery.  And  though  all  reasonable
men  agree  in  general  to  preserve  our  mixed  government ;
yet,  when  they  come  to  particulars,  some  will  incline  to  trust
greater  powers  to  the  crown,  to  bestow  on  it  more  influence,
and  to  guard  against  its  encroachments  with  less  caution,
than  others  who  are  terrified  at  the  most  distant  approaches
of  tyranny  and  despotic  power.  Thus  are  there  parties  of
PRINCIPLE  involved  in  the  very  nature  of  our  constitution,
which  may  properly  enough  be  denominated  those  of  COURT
and  COUNTRY.1  The  strength  and  violence  of  each  of  these
parties  will  much  depend  upon  the  particular  administration.
An  administration  may  be  so  bad,  as  to  throw  a  great
majority  into  the  opposition  ;  as  a  good  administration  will
reconcile  to  the  court  many  of  the  most  passionate  lovers  of
liberty.  But  however  the  nation  may  fluctuate  between
them,  the  parties  themselves  will  always  subsist,  so  long  as
we  are  governed  by  a  limited  monarchy.

But,  besides  this  difference  of  Principle,  those  parties  are
very  much  fomented  by  a  difference  of  INTEREST,  without
which  they  could  scarcely  ever  be  dangerous  or  violent.  The
crown  will  naturally  bestow  all  trust  and  power  upon  those,
whose  principles,  real  or  pretended,  are  most  favourable  to
monarchical  government ;  and  this  temptation  will  naturally
engage  them  to  go  greater  lengths  than  their  principles
would  otherwise  carry  them.  Their  antagonists,  who  were
disappointed  in  their  ambitious  aims,  throw  themselves  into
the  party  whose  sentiments  incline  them  to  be  most  jealous
of  royal  power,  and  naturally  carry  those  sentiments  to  a
gr*  ater  height  than  sound  politics  will  justify.  Thus  Court
and  Country,  which  are  the  genuine  offspring  of  the  BRITISH

1  [Editions  A  to  P  add  the  following  Populares ; and CICERO,  like a true

note  :  These  words  have  become  of  gene-  party  man,  defines  the  Optimates  to  be

ral use,  and  therefore  I  shall  employ  such  as,  in  all  public  conduct,  regulated

them,  without  intending  to  express  by  themselves by the sentiments  of  the

them an  universal  blame of  the  one  best  and  worthiest  of  the  ROMANS  :  Pro

party,  or  approbation  of  the  other. The  Scxtio,  cap.  45. The  term  of  Country-

court-party may, no doubt,  on some  party  may  afford  a  favourable  definition

occasions consult best  the  interest of  or  etymology  of  the  same  kind  :  But  it

the country, and the country-party  would be  folly  to  draw  any  argument

oppose  it. In  like  manner,  the  ROMAN  from  that  head,  and  I  have  regard  to  it

parties  were  denomiuated  Optimates  and  in  employing  these  terms.]


THE PARTIES OF GREAT BRITAIN.  135

government,  are  a  kind  of  mixed  parties,  and  are  influenced
both  by  principle  and  by  interest.  The  heads  of  the  factions
are  commonly  most  governed  by  the  latter  motive ;  the
inferior  members  of  them  by  the  former.1

As  to  ecclesiastical  parties  j  we  may  observe,  that,  in  all
ages  of  the  world,  priests  have  been  enemies  to  liberty  ;2
and  it  is  certain,  that  this  steady  conduct  of  theirs  must
have  been  founded  on  fixed  reasons  of  interest  and  ambition.
Liberty  of  thinking,  and  of  expressing  our  thoughts,  is
always  fatal  to  priestly  power,  and  to  those  pious  frauds,  on
which  it  is  commonly  founded ;  and,  by  an  infallible  con
nexion,  which  prevails  among  all  kinds  of  liberty,  this  privi
lege  can  never  be  enjoyed,  at  least  has  never  yet  been
enjoyed,  but  in  a  free  government.  Hence  it  must  happen,
in  such  a  constitution  as  that  of  GREAT  BRITAIN,  that  the
established  clergy,  while  things  are  in  their  natural  situation,
will  always  be  of  the  CWrc-party  ;  as,  on  the  contrary,
dissenters  of  all  kinds  will  be  of  the  Country  -party ;  since
they  can  never  hope  for  that  toleration,  which  they  stand  in
need  of,  but  by  means  of  our  free  government.  All  princes,
that  have  aimed  at  despotic  power,  have  known  of  what  im
portance  it  was  to  gain  the  established  clergy :  As  the
clergy,  on  their  part,  have  shewn  a  great  facility  on  entering
into  the  views  of  such  princes.3  GUSTAVUS  VAZA  was,
perhaps,  the  only  ambitious  monarch,  that  ever  depressed
the  church,  at  the  same  time  that  he  discouraged  liberty.
But  the  exorbitant  power  of  the  bishops  in  SWEDEN,  who,  at
that  time,  overtopped  the  crown  itself,  together  with  their
attachment  to  a  foreign  family,  was  the  reason  of  his  embrac
ing  such  an  unusual  system  of  politics.

1  [Editions  A  to  P  add  the  following :  great  and principal opposers of the
I  must  be understood  to  mean  this  of  crown  :  But,  at  that  time,  their  posses-
persons  who  have  motives  for  taking  sions  were  so  immensely  great,  that  they
party on  any  side. For,  to tell the  composed a considerable  part of  the
truth,  the  greatest  part  are  commonly  proprieiors  of  ENGLAND,  and  in  many
men who  associate themselves they  contests were direct rivals of the
know not  why  ; from example, from  crown.]

passion,  from  idleness. But  still  it  is  3  Judai sibi ipsi  reges imposuere  ;

requisite,  that  there  be  some  source  of  qui  mobilitate  vulgi expulsi,  resumpta

division,  either  in  principle  or  interest;  per  arma  dominatione; fugas  civium,

otherwise  such  persons  would  not  find  urbium  eversiones,  fratrum,  conjugum,

p  irties,  to  which  they  could  associate  parentum  neces,  aliaque  solita  regibus

themselves.]  ausi, superstitionem fovebant ; quia

2  [Editions  B  to P add the note:  honor  sacerdotii  firmamentum  potentiae
This  proposition  is  true,  notwithstand-  assumebatur. TACIT, hist. lib. v. 8.
ing,  that  in  the  early  times  of  the  Exu-  [This  note  was  added  in  Edition  K.]
I.ISH  government,  the  clergv  were  the


136  ESSAY  IX.

This  observation,  concerning  the  propensity  of  priests  to
the  government  of  a  single  person,  is  not  true  with  regard
to  one  sect  only.  The  Presbyterian  and  Calvinistic  clergy  in
HOLLAND  were  professed  friends  to  the  family  of  ORANGE  ;
as  the  Arminians,  who  were  esteemed  heretics,  were  of  the
LOUVESTEIN  faction,  and  zealous  for  liberty.  But  if  a  prince
have  the  choice  of  both,  it  is  easy  to  see,  that  he  will  prefer
the  episcopal  to  the  presbyterian  form  of  government,  both
because  of  the  greater  affinity  between  monarchy  and  epis
copacy,  and  because  of  the  facility,  which  he  will  find,  in
such  a  government,  of  ruling  the  clergy,  by  means  of  their
ecclesiastical  superiors.1

If  we  consider  the  first  rise  of  parties  in  ENGLAND,  during
the  great  rebellion,  we  shall  observe,  that  it  was  conformable
to  this  general  theory,  and  that  the  species  of  government
gave  birth  to  them,  by  a  regular  and  infallible  operation.
"*  The  ENGLISH  constitution,  before  that  period,  had  lain  in  a
kind  of  confusion ;  yet  so,  as  that  the  subjects  possessed
many  noble  privileges,  which,  though  not  exactly  bounded
and  secured  by  law,  were  universally  deemed,  from  long  pos
session,  to  belong  to  them  as  their  birth-right.  An  ambitious,
or  rather  a  misguided,  prince  arose,  who  deemed  all  these
privileges  to  be  concessions  of  his  predecessors,  revokeable
at  pleasure  ;  and,  in  prosecution  of  this  principle,  he  openly
acted  in  violation  of  liberty,  during  the  course  of  several
years.  Necessity,  at  last,  constrained  him  to  call  a  parlia
ment:  The  spirit  of  liberty  arose  and  spread  itself:  The
prince,  being  without  any  support,  was  obliged  to  grant  every
thing  required  of  him  :  And  his  enemies,  jealous  and  impla
cable,  set  no  bounds  to  their  pretensions.  Here  then  began
those  contests,  in  which  it  was  no  wonder,  that  men  of  that
age  were  divided  into  different  parties ;  since,  even  at  this
day,  the  impartial  are  at  a  loss  to  decide  concerning  the
justice  of  the  quarrel.  The  pretensions  of  the  parliament,
if  yielded  to,  broke  the  balance  of  the  constitution,  by  ren
dering  the  government  almost  entirely  republican.  If  not
yielded  to,  the  nation  was,  perhaps,  still  in  danger  of  absolute
power,  from  the  settled  principles  and  inveterate  habits  of
the  king,  which  had  plainly  appeared  in  every  concession
that  he  had  been  constrained  to  make  to  his  people.  In  this

1  Populi  imperium  juxta  libertatem :  proprior  est.  TACIT.  Ann.  lib.  vi.  41.
pnueorum  dominatio  regise  libidini  [This  note  was  added  in  Edition  K.]


THE PARTIES OF GREAT BRITAIN.  1.^7

question,  so  delicate  and  uncertain,  men  naturally  fell  to  the
side  which  was  most  conformable  to  their  usual  principles ;
and  the  more  passionate  favourers  of  monarchy  declared  for
the  king,  as  the  zealous  friends  of  liberty  sided  with  the  par
liament.  The  hopes  of  success  being  nearly  equal  on  both
sides,  interest  had  no  general  influence  in  this  contest :  So
that  ROUND-HEAD  and  CAVALIER  were  merely  parties  of  prin
ciples  ;  neither  of  which  disowned  either  monarchy  or  liberty;
but  the  former  party  inclined  most  to  the  republican  part  of
our  government,  the  latter  to  the  monarchical.  In  this
respect,  they  may  be  considered  as  court  and  country-party,
enflamed  into  a  civil  war,  by  an  unhappy  concurrence  of
circumstances,  and  by  the  turbulent  spirit  of  the  age.  The
commonwealth's  men,  and  the  partizans  of  absolute  power,  lay
concealed  in  both  parties,  and  formed  but  an  inconsiderable
part  of  them.

The  clergy  had  concurred  with  the  king's  arbitrary  designs;
and,  in  return,  were  allowed  to  persecute  their  adversaries,
whom  they  called  heretics  and  schismatics.  The  established
clergy  were  episcopal ;  the  non-conformists  presbyteriau  :  So
that  all  things  concurred  to  throw  the  former,  without  re
serve,  into  the  king's  party ;  and  the  latter  into  that  of  the
parliament.1

Every  one  knows  the  event  of  this  quarrel ;  fatal  to  the
king  first,  to  the  parliament  afterwards.  After  many  confu
sions  and  revolutions,  the  royal  family  was  at  last  restored,
and  the  ancient  government  re-established.  CHARLES  II.  was
not  made  wiser  by  the  example  of  his  father ;  but  prosecuted
the  same  measures,  though  at  first,  with  more  secrecy  and
caution.  New  parties  arose,  under  the  appellation  of  Whig
and  Tory,  which  have  continued  ever  since  to  confound  and
distract  our  government.  To  determine  the  nature  of  these

1 [For this paragraph Editions  and  the  latter  into  that  of  the  parlin-

A to P substitute the following:  ment. The  Cavaliers  being  the  court-

Ihe _  clergy had concurred  2 with  party,  and  the  Eound-head*  the  country-

the  kings  arbitrary  designs,  according  party,  the  union  was  infallible  between

to  their  usual  maxims  in  such  cases  :  the  former  and  the  established  prelacy

And,  in  return,  were  allowed  to  perse-  and  between  the  latter  and  presbyteriari

cute  their  adversaries,  whom  they  called  non-conformists. This union is so

heretics  and  schismatics. The estab-  natural,  according  to  the  general  prin-

hshed  clergy  were  episcopal ;  the  non-  ciples  of  politics,  that  it  requires  some

conformists  presbytenan : So  that  all  very  extraordinary  situation  of  affairs

things  concurred  to  throw  the  former,  to  break  it.]
without  reserve,  into  the  king's  party  ;

2  [In  a  shameless  manner  :  A  to  K.]


138  ESSAY IX.

parties  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems,  that
can  be  met  with,  and  is  a  proof  that  history  may  contain
questions,  as  uncertain  as  any  to  be  found  in  the  most  ab
stract  sciences.  We  have  seen  the  conduct  of  the  two  parties,
during  the  course  of  seventy  years,  in  a  vast  variety  of  cir
cumstances,  possessed  of  power,  and  deprived  of  it,  during
peace,  and  during  war :  Persons,  who  profess  themselves  of
one  side  or  other,  we  meet  with  every  hour,  in  company,  in  our
pleasures,  in  our  serious  occupations  :  We  ourselves  are  con
strained,  in  a  manner,  to  take  party;  and  living  in  a  country
of  the  highest  liberty,  every  one  may  openly  declare  all  his
sentiments  and  opinions;  Yet  are  we  at  a  loss  to  tell  the
nature,  pretensions,  and  principles  of  the  different  factions.1

When  we  compare  the  parties  of  WHIG  and  TORY  with
those  of  ROUND-HEAD  and  CAVALIER,  the  most  obvious  dif
ference,  that  appears  between  them,  consists  in  the  principles
of  passive  obedience,  and  indefeasible  right,  which  were  but
little  heard  of  among  the  CAVALIERS,  but  became  the  univer
sal  doctrine,  and  were  esteemed  the  true  characteristic  of  a
TORY.  Were  these  principles  pushed  into  their  most  obvious
consequences,  they  imply  a  formal  renunciation  of  all  our
liberties,  and  an  avowal  of  absolute  monarchy;  since  nothing
can  be  a  greater  absurdity  than  a  limited  power,  which  must
not  be  resisted,  even  when  it  exceeds  its  limitations.  But  as
the  most  rational  principles  are  often  but  a  weak  counterpoise
to  passion ;  it  is  no  wonder  that  these  absurd  principles 2
were  found  too  weak  for  that  eifect.  The  TORIES,  as  men,
were  enemies  to  oppression  ;  and  also  as  ENGLISHMEN,
they  were  enemies  to  arbitrary  power.  Their  zeal  for  liberty,
was,  perhaps,  less  fervent  than  that  of  their  antagonists ;
but  was  sufficient  to  make  them  forget  all  their  general
principles,  when  they  saw  themselves  openly  threatened  with
a  subversion  of  the  ancient  government.  From  these  senti
ments  arose  the  revolution ;  an  event  of  mighty  consequence,
and  the  firmest  foundation  of  BRITISH  liberty.  The  conduct
of  the  TORIES,  during  that  event,  and  after  it,  will  afford  us  a
true  insight  into  the  nature  of  that  party.

In  the  first  place,  they  appear  to  have  had  the  genuine
sentiments  of  BRITONS  in  their  affection  for  liberty,  and  in

1  [Editions  A  to  P  add :  The  question  according  to  a  celebrated  author,  (Dis-

is,  perhaps,  in  itself,  somewhat  diffi-  serta tion  on  Parties,  Letter  2d.)  to  shock

cult ;  but  has  been  rendered  more  so,  the  common  sense  of  a  HOTTENTOT  or

by  the  prejudice  and  violence  of  party.]  SAJIUIEDK.]

*  [Editions  A to  P  add : sufficient.


THE PARTIES OF GREAT BRITAIN.  1.39

their  determined  resolution  not  to  sacrifice  it  to  any  abstract
principle  whatsoever,  or  to  any  imaginary  rights  of  princes.
This  part  of  their  character  might  justly  have  been  doubted
of  before  the  revolution,  from  the  obvious  tendency  of  their
avowed  principles,  and  from  their1  compliances  with  a  court,
which  seemed  to  make  little  secret  of  its  arbitrary  designs.
The  revolution  shewed  them  to  have  been,  in  this  respect,
nothing,  but  a  genuine  court-party,  such  as  might  be  expected
in  a  BRITISH  government  :  That  is,  Lovers  of  liberty,  but
greater  lovers  of  monarchy.  It  must,  however,  be  confessed,
that  they  carried  their  monarchical  principles  farther,  even
in  practice,  but  more  so  in  theory,  than  was,  in  any  degree,
consistent  with  a  limited  government.

Secondly,  Neither  their  principles  nor  affections  concurred,
entirely  or  heartily,  with  the  settlement  made  at  the  revolu
tion,  or  with  that  which  has  since  taken  place.  This  part  of
their  character  may  seem  opposite  to  the  former ;  since  any
other  settlement,  in  those  circumstances  of  the  nation,  must
probably  have  been  dangerous,  if  not  fatal  to  liberty.  But
the  heart  of  man  is  made  to  reconcile  contradictions :  and
this  contradiction  is  not  greater  than  that  between  passive
obedience,  and  the  resistance  employed  at  the  revolution.  A
TORY,  therefore,  since  the  revolution,  may  be  defined  in  a
few  words,  to  be  a  lover  of  monarchy,  though  without  abandon
ing  liberty  ;  and  a  partizan  of  the  family  of  STUART.  As  a
WHIG  may  be  defined  to  be  a  lover  of  liberty  though  without
renouncing  monarchy  ;  and  a  friend  to  the  settlement  in  the
PROTESTANT  line.*

These  different  views,  with  regard  to  the  settlement  of  the
crown,  were  accidental,  but  natural  additions  to  the  principles

1  [Editions  A  to  Kread  :  almost  un-  Man  must  hare  a  great  Opinion  of  his

bounded  compliances. M  to  Q :  great  own  Eloquence  to  attempt  the  proving

compliances.]  of  it.— A  and  B.]

-  [Editions  A  to  P  add  the  following  I  shall  first  mention,  as  a  proof  of  a

note : The author1 above cited has  real  distinction  between  these  parties,

asserted,  that  the  REAL  distinction  be-  what  every  one may have  observed

twixt  WHIG  and  TORY  was  lost  at  the  or  heard  concerning the  conduct  and

revolution,  and  that  ever  since  they  have  conversation  of  all  his  friends  and  ac-

continued  to  be  mere  personal  parties,  quaintence on  both sides. Have not

like  the  GUELFS  and  GIBBELINES,  after  the TORIES always  borne  an avowed

the  emperors  had  lost  all  authority  in  affection  to  the  family  of  STUART,  and

ITALY. Such an  opinion,  were  it  re-  have  not  their  adversaries  always  op-

ceived,  would  turn  our  whole  history  posed with vigour  the succession of

into  an  aenigma ;  [and  is,  indeed,  so  con-  that  family  ?

trary  to  the  strongest  Evidence,  that  a  The  TORY  principles  are  confessedly


1  [Celebrated  writer  :  A.  B,  and  D.]


140  ESSAY  IX.

of  the  court  and  country  parties,  which  are  the  genuine
divisions  in  the  BRITISH  government.  A  passionate  lover  of
monarchy  is  apt  to  be  displeased  at  any  change  of  the  succes
sion;  as  savouring  too  much  of  a  commonwealth:  A  passionate
lover  of  liberty  is  apt  to  think  that  every  part  of  the  govern-
ment  ought  to  be  subordinate  to  the  interests  of  liberty.

Some,  who  will  not  venture  to  assert,  that  the  real  dif
ference  between  WHIG  and  TORY  was  lost  at  the  revolution,
seem  inclined  to  think,  that  the  difference  is  now  abolished,
and  that  affairs  are  so  far  returned  to  their  natural  state,  that
there  are  at  present  no  other  parties  among  us  but  court  and
country ;  that  is,  men,  who,  by  interest  or  principle,  are
attached  either  to  monarchy  or  liberty.  The  TORIES  have
been  so  long  obliged  to  talk  in  the  republican  stile,  that  they
seem  to  have  made  converts  of  themselves  by  their  hypocrisy,
and  to  have  embraced  the  sentiments,  as  well  as  language  of
their  adversaries.  There  are,  however,  very  considerable
remains  of  that  party  in  ENGLAND,  with  all  their  old  pre
judices  ;  and  a  proof  that  court  and  country  are  not  our  only
parties,  is,  that  almost  all  the  dissenters  side  with  the  court,
and  the  lower  clergy,  at  least,  of  the  church  of  ENGLAND,
with  the  opposition.  This  may  convince  us,  that  some  biass
still  hangs  upon  our  constitution,  some  extrinsic  weight,

the  most  favourable  to  monarchy. Yet  from openly  appearing,  if  it  did not

the  Tories  have  almost  always  opposed  openly appear, but  prudence,  and a

the  court  those  fifty  years; nor  were  sense  of  decency?

they  cordial  friends  to  King  WILLIAM,  'Tis  monstrous  to  see  an  established
oven  when  employed  by  him.  Their  episcopal  clergy  in  declared  opposition
quarrel,  therefore,  cannot  be  supposed  to  the  court,  and  a  non-conformist  pres
to  have  lain  with  the  throne,  but  with  byterian  clergy  in  conjunction  with  it.
the  person  who  sat  on  it.  What  could  have  produced  such  an  un-

They concurred heartily with the  natural conduct in both? Nothing,

c»urt during the  four last years of  but  that  the  former  espoused  monarch! -

Queen  ANNE. But  is  any  one  at  a  loss  cal  principles  too  high  for  the  present

to  find  the  reason  ?  settlement,  which  is  founded  on  princi-

1  The succession  of  the  crown  in  the  pies  of  liberty:  And  the  latter,  being

BRITISH  government  is  a  point  of  too  afraid  of  the  prevalence  of  those  high

pi-eat  consequence  to  be  absolutely  in-  principles,  adhered  to  that  party  from

different  to  persons  who  concern them-  whom  they  had  reason  to  expect  liberty

selves,  in  any  degree,  about  the  fortune  and  toleration.

of  the  public; much  less can it  be  The different  conduct of  the two

supposed that the TOBY  party, who  parties,  with  regard  to  foreign  politics,

never  valued  themselves  upon  modera-  is  also  a  proof  to  the  same purpose,

tion,  could  maintain  a  stoical  indiffe-  HOLLAND has always been most fa-

rence  in  a  point  of  such  importance.  voured  by  one,  and  FRANCE  by  the
Were  they,  therefore,  zealous  for  the  •  other.  In  short,  the  proofs  of  this

house of  HANOVKE? Or was there  kind  seem  so  palpable  and  evident,  that

any  thing  that  kept  an  opposite  zeal  'tis  almost  needless  to  collect  them,]


[This  paragraph  is  not  in  A  and  B.]


THE PARTIES OF GREAT BRITAIN.  141

\vhich  turns  it  from  its  natural  course,  and  causes  a  confu
sion  in  our  parties.1

[So  the  Essay  concludes  in  Editions  Q  and  R. In  place  of
the  last  paragraph,  the  preceding  Editions  read  as  follows  :]

'Tis  however  remarkable,  that  tho'  the  principles  of  WHIG
and  TORY  were  both  of  them  of  a  compound  nature;  yet  the
ingredients,  which  predominated  in  both,  were  not  corre
spondent  to  each  other.  A  TORY  loved  monarchy,  and  bore
an  affection  to  the  family  of  STUART  ;  but  the  latter  affection
was  the  predominant  inclination  of  the  party.  A  WHIG
loved  liberty,  and  was  a  friend  to  the  settlement  in  the  PRO
TESTANT  line  ;  but  the  love  of  liberty  was  professedly  his
predominant  inclination.  The  TORIES  have  frequently  apted
as  republicans,  where  either  policy  or  revenge  has  engaged
them  to  that  conduct ;  and  there  was  no  one  of  that  party,
who,  upon  the  supposition,  that  he  was  to  be  disappointed  in
his  views  with  regard  to  the  succession,  would  not  have
desired  to  impose  the  strictest  limitations  on  the  crown,  and
to  bring  our  form  of  government  as  near  republican  as  pos
sible,  in  order  to  depress  the  family,  which,  according  to  his
apprehension,  succeeded  without  any  just  title.  The  WHIGS,
'tis  true,  have  also  taken  steps  dangerous  to  liberty,  under
colour  of  securing  the  succession  and  settlement  of  the  crown,
according  to  their  views  :  But  as  the  body  of  the  party  had
no  passion  for  that  succession,  otherwise  than  as  the  means
of  securing  liberty,  they  have  been  betrayed  into  these  steps
by  ignorance,  or  frailty,  or  the  interests  of  their  leaders.
The  succession  of  the  crown  was,  therefore,  the  chief  point
with  the  TORIES  ;  the  security  of  our  liberties  with  the
WmGS.2  Nor  is  this  seeming  irregularity  at  all  difficult  to
be  accounted  for,  by  our  present  theory.  Court  and  country
parties  are  the  true  parents  of  TORY  and  WHIG.  But  'tis
almost  impossible,  that  the  attachment  of  the  court  party  to
monarchy  should  not  degenerate  into  an  attachment  to  the
monarch  ;  there  being  so  close  a  connexion  between  them,
and  the  latter  being  so  much  the  more  natural  object.  How
easily  does  the  worship  of  the  divinity  degenerate  into  a

1  Some  of  the  opinions  delivered  in  ment  by  his  own  preconceived opinions
these  Essays,  with  regard  to  the  piiblic  and  principles ;  nor  is  he  ashamed  to
transactions  in the last  century, the  acknowledge  his  mistakes. These  mis-
Author,  on  more  accurate examination,  takes  were  indeed,  at  that  time,  almost
found  reason  to  retract  in  his  History  of  universal  in  this  kingdom.
GKEAT  BRITAIN. And  as  he  would  not  2  [The  remainder  of  this  paragraph  is
enslave  himself  to  the  systems  of  either  not  in  A  and  B.J
party,  neither  would  he  fetter  his  judg-


142  ESSAY K.

worship  of  the  idol  ?  The  connexion  is  not  so  great  between
liberty,  the  divinity  of  the  old  country  party  or  WHIGS,  and
any  monarch  or  royal  family ;  nor  is  it  so  reasonable  to  sup
pose,  that  in  that  party,  the  worship  can  be  so  easily  trans
ferred  from  the  one  to  the  other.  Tho'  even  that  would  be
no  great  miracle.

'Tis  difficult  to  penetrate  into  the  thoughts  and  sentiments
of  any  particular  man  ;  but  'tis  almost  impossible  to  dis
tinguish  those  of  a  whole  party,  where  it  often  happens,  that
no  two  persons  agree  precisely  in  the  same  maxims  of  conduct.
Yet  I  will  venture  to  affirm,  that  it  was  not  so  much  PRIN
CIPLE,  or  an  opinion  of  indefeasible  right,  which  attached
the  TORIES  to  the  ancient  royal  family,  as  AFFECTION,  or  a
certain  love  and  esteem  for  their  persons.  The  same  cause
divided  ENGLAND  formerly  between  the  houses  of  YORK  and
LANCASTER,  and  SCOTLAND  between  the  families  of  BRUCE
and  BALIOL  ;  in  an  age,  when  political  disputes  were  but
little  in  fashion,  and  when  political  principles  must  of  course
have  had  but  little  influence  on  mankind.  The  doctrine  of
passive  obedience  is  so  absurd  in  itself,  and  so  opposite  to
our  liberties,  that  it  seems  to  have  been  chiefly  left  to  pulpit-
declaimers,  and  to  their  deluded  followers  among  the  vulgar.
Men  of  better  sense  were  guided  by  affection  ;  and  as  to  the
leaders  of  this  party,  'tis  probable,  that  interest  was  their
chief  motive,  and  that  they  acted  more  contrary  to  their
private  sentiments,  than  the  leaders  of  the  opposite  party.
1  Tho'  'tis  almost  impossible  to  maintain  with  zeal  the  right
of  any  person  or  fanrity,  without  acquiring  a  good-will  to
them,  and  changing  the  principle  into  affection ;  yet  this  is
less  natural  to  people  of  an  elevated  station  and  liberal  edu
cation,  who  have  had  full  opportunity  of  observing  the
weakness,  folly,  and  arrogance  of  monarchs,  and  have  found
them  to  be  nothing  superior,  if  not  rather  inferior  to  the  rest
of  mankind.  The  interest,  therefore,  of  being  heads  of  a  party
does  often,  with  such  people,  supply  the  place  both  of  prin
ciple  and  affection.

Some,  who  will  not  venture  to  assert,  that  the  real  differ
ence  between  WHIG  and  TORT  was  lost  at  the  revolution,
seem  inclined  to  think,  that  the  difference  is  now  abolished,
and  that  affairs  are  so  far  returned  to  their  natural  state,
that  there  are  at  present  no  other  parties  amongst  us  but

1  [The  remainder  of  this  paragraph  is  not  in  A  and  B.]


THE PARTIES OF  GREAT BRITAIN.  14-$

court  and  country  ;  that  is,  men,  who  by  interest  or  principle,
are  attached  either  to  monarchy  or  to  liberty.  It  must
indeed,  be  confest,  that  the  TORY  party  seem,  of  late,  to  have
decayed  much  in  their  numbers ;  still  more  in  their  zeal ;
and  I  may  venture  to  say,  still  more  in  their  credit  and
authority.  There  are  few  men  of  knowledge  or  learning-,
at  least,  few  philosophers,  since- Mr.  LOCKE  has  wrote,  who
would  not  be  ashamed  to  be  thought  of  that  party  ;  and  in
almost  all  companies  the  name  of  OLD  WHIG  is  mentioned
as  an  uncon testable  appellation  of  honour  and  dignity.
Accordingly,  the  enemies  of  the  ministry,  as  a  reproach,
call  the  courtiers  the  true  TORIES  ;  and  as  an  honour,  de
nominate  the  gentlemen  in  the  opposition  the  true  WHIGS. l
The  TORIES  have  been  so  long  obliged  to  talk  in  the  repub
lican  stile,  that  they  seem  to  have  made  converts  of  them
selves  by  their  hypocrisy,  and  to  have  embraced  the
sentiments,  as  well  as  language  of  their  adversaries.  Thero
are,  however,  very  considerable  remains  of  that  party  in
ENGLAND,  with  all  their  old  prejudices;  and  a  proof  that
court  and  country  are  not  our  only  parties,  is,  that  almost  all
the  dissenters  side  with  the  court,  and  the  lower  clergy,  at
least,  of  the  church  of  ENGLAND,  with  the  opposition.  This
may  convince  us,  that  some  biass  still  hangs  upon  our  consti
tution,  some  intrinsic  weight,  which  turns  it  from  its  natural
course,  and  causes  a  confusion  in  our  parties.2

I  shall  conclude  this  subject  with  observing  that  we  never
had  any  TORIES  in  SCOTLAND,  according  to  the  proper  signi
fication  of  the  word,  and  that  the  division  of  parties  in  this
country  was  really  into  WHIGS  and  JACOBITES.  A  JACOBITE
seems  to  be  a  TORT,  who  has  no  regard  to  the  constitution,
but  is  either  a  zealous  partizan  of  absolute  monarchy,  or  at
least  willing  to  sacrifice  our  liberties  to  the  obtaining  the
succession  in  that  family  to  which  he  is  attached.  The  reason
of  the  difference  between  ENGLAND  and  SCOTLAND,  I  take  to
be  this  :  Political  and  religious  divisions  in  the  latter  country,
have  been,  since  the  revolution,  regularly  correspondent  to
each  other.  The  PRESBYTERIANS  were  all  WHIGS  without
exception :  Those  who  favoured  episcopacy,  of  the  opposite
party.  And  as  the  clergy  of  the  latter  sect  were  turned  out
of  the  churches  at  the  revolution,  they  had  no  motive  for

'  [The last two sentences were omitting  '  at  least  —  wrote.']
onittedin  P. A  and  B  read  no  mm,  *  [This  sentence  does  not  occur  in  A.]


144  ESSAY X.

making  any  compliances  with  the  government  in  their  oaths,
or  their  forms  of  prayers,  but  openly  avowed  the  highest
principles  of  their  party ;  which  is  the  cause  why  their  fol
lowers  have  been  more  violent  than  their  brethren  of  the
TORY  party  in  ENGLAND.1


ESSAY  X. — Of  Superstition  and  Enthusiasm.

THAT  the  corruption  of  the  beat  things  produces  the  wor?t.  is
grown  into  a  maxim,  and  is  commonly  proved,  among  other
instances,  by  the  pernicious  effects  of  superstition  and  enthu
siasm,  the  corruptions  of  true  religion.

These  two  species  of  false  religion,  though  both  pernicious,
are  yet  of  a  very  different,  and  even  of  a  contrary  nature.
The  mind  of  man  is  subject  to  certain  unaccountable  terrors
and  apprehensions,  proceeding  either  from  the  unhappy
situation  of  private  or  public  affairs,  from  ill  health,  from
a  gloomy  and  melancholy  disposition,  or  from  the  con
currence  of  all  these  circumstances.  In  such  a  state  of
mind,  infinite  unknown  evils  are  dreaded  from  unknown
agents  ;  and  where  real  objects  of  terror  are  wanting,  the
soul,  active  to  its  own  prejudice,  and  fostering  its  predomi
nant  inclination,  finds  imaginary  ones,  to  whose  power  and
malevolence  it  sets  no  limits.  As  these  enemies  are  entirely

1  Some  of  the  opinions,  delivered  in  not  enslave  himself  to  the  systems of

these  Essays,  with  regard  to  the  public  either  party, neither  would  he fetter

transactions in  the last century, the  his  judgment  by  his  own  preconceived

Author,  on  more  accurate  examination,  opinions and principles; nor is ho

found  reason  to  retract  in  his  History  ashamed  to  acknowledge  his  mistakes.1
of  GREAT  BRITAIN.  And  as  he  would


1  [This  note  does  not  occur  in  any  have  some  Fortune  and  Education,  and
edition  prior  to  M.  A  and  JB  add  the  the  meanest  slaving  Poor ;  without  any
following  paragraph  to  the  text  : — As  considerable  Number  of  that  middling
violent  Things  have  not  commonly  so  Rank  of  Men,  which  abounds  more  in
long  a  Duration  as  moderate,  we  ENGLAND,  both  in  Cities  and  in  the
actually  find,  that  the  Jacobite  Party  is  Country,  than  in  any  other  Part  of  the
almost  entirely  vanish'd  from  among  World.  The  slaving  Poor  are  incapa-
us,  and  that  the  Distinction  of  Court  ble  of  any  Principles :  Gentlemen  may
and  Country,  which  is  but  creeping  in  be  converted  to  true  Principles,  by
at  LONDON,  is  the  only  one  that  is  ever  Time  and  Experience.  The  middling
mention'd  in  this  kingdom.  Beside  the  Rank  of  Men  have  Curiosity  and  Know-
Violence  and  Openness  of  the  JACOBITE  ledge  enough  to  form  Principles,  but
party,  another  Reason  has,  perhaps,  not  enough  to  form  true  ones,  or  correct
contributed  to  produce  so  sudden  and  any  Prejudices  that  they  may  have
so  visible  an  Alteration  in  this  part  of  imbib'd  :  And  'tis  among  the  middling
BRITAIN.  There  are  only  two  Ranks  Rank,  that  TORY  Principles  do  at  pro
of  Men  among  us  ;  Gentlemen,  who  sent  prevail  most  in  ENGLAND.]


OF SUPERSTITION  AND ENTHUSIASM.  145

invisible  and  unknown,  the  methods  taken  to  appease  them
are  equally  unaccountable,  and  consist  in  ceremonies,  obser
vances,  mortifications,  sacrifices,  presents,  or  in  any  practice,
however  absurd  or  frivolous,  which  either  folly  or  knavery
recommends  to  a  blind  and  terrified  credulity.  Weakness,
fear,  melancholy,  together  with  ignorance,  are,  therefore,  the
true  sources  of  SUPERSTITION.

But  the  mind  of  man  is  also  subject  to  an  unaccountable
elevation  and  presumption,  arising  from  prosperous  success,
from  luxuriant  health,  from  strong  spirits,  or  from  a  bold
and  confident  disposition.  In  such  a  state  of  mind,  the
imagination  swells  with  great,  but  confused  conceptions,  to
which  no  sublunary  beauties  or  enjoyments  can  correspond.
Every  thing  mortal  and  perishable  vanishes  as  unworthy  of
attention.  And  a  full  range  i^  given  to  the  fancy  in  the  in
visible  regions  or  world  of  spirits,  where  the  soul  is  at  liberty
to  indulge  itself  in  every  imagination,  which  may  best  suit
its  present  taste  arid  disposition.  Hence  arise  raptures,
transports,  and  surprising  flights  of  fancy;  and  confidence
and  presumption  still  encreasing,  these  raptures,  being  alto
gether  unaccountable,  and  seeming  quite  beyond  the  reach
of  our  ordinary  faculties,  are  attributed  to  the  immediate
inspiration  of  that  Divine  Being,  who  is  the  object  of  devo
tion.  In  a  little  time,  the  inspired  person  comes  to  regard
himself  as  a  distinguished  favourite  of  the  Divinity;  and
when  this  frenzy  once  takes  place,  which  is  the  summit  of
enthusiasm,  every  whimsy  is  consecrated :  Human  reason,
and  even  morality  are  rejected  as  fallacious  guides:  And
the  fanatic  madman  delivers  himself  over,  blindly,  and  with
out  reserve,  to  the  supposed  illapses  of  the  spirit,  and  to  in
spiration  from  above.  Hope,  pride,  presumption,  a  warm
imagination,  together  with  ignorance,  are,  therefore,  the  true,
sources  of  ENTHUSIASM.

These  two  species  of  false  religion  might  afford  occasion  to
many  speculations ;  but  I  shall  confine  myself,  at  present,,
to  a  few  reflections  concerning  their  different  influence  on
government  and  society.

1  My  first  reflection  is,  That  superstition  is  favourable  to

1  [In  Editions  A  and  B,  this  and  the  and  violent  than  those  which  partake  of

three  next  paragraphs  were  written  as  Superstition ;  but  in  a  little  Time  be-

follows:  My  first  Reflection  is,  that  Ke-  come  much  more  gentle  and  moderate

ligions,  which  partake  of  Enthusiasm  are,  The  Violence  of  this  Speciesof  Religion'

on  their  first  Rise,  much  more  furious  when  excited  by  Novelty,  and  animated

VOL.  III.  T.


146


ESSAY  X.


priestly  power,  and  enthusiasm  not  less  or  ratlier  more  contrary
to  it,  than  sound  reason  and  philosophy.  As  superstition  is
founded  on  fear,  sorrow,  and  a  depression  of  spirits,  it  re
presents  the  man  to  himself  in  such  despicable  colours,  that


by  Opposition,  appears  from  numberless
Instances ;  of  the  Anabaptists  in  Ger
many,  the  Camisars  in  France,  the  Le
vellers  and  other  Fanaticks  in  England,
and  the  Covenanters  in  Scotland.  As
Enthusiasm  is  founded  on  strong  Spirits
and  a  presumptuous  Boldness  of  Cha
racter,  it  naturally  begets  the  most  ex
treme  Resolutions  ;  especially  after  it
rises  to  that  Height  as  to  inspire  the
deluded  Fanaticks  with  the  Opinion  of
Divine  Illuminations,  and  with  a  Con
tempt  of  the  common  Kules  of  Keason,
Morality  and  Prudence.

'Tis  thus  Enthusiasm  prodtrces  the
most  cruel  Desolation  in  human  Society  :
But  its  Fury  is  like  that  of  Thunder
and  Tempest,  which  exhaust  themselves
in  a  little  Time,  and  leave  the  Air  more
calm  and  serene  than  before.  The  Rea
son  of  this  will  appear  evidently,  by
comparing  Enthusiasm  to  Superstition,
the  other  Species  of  false  Religion;  and
tracing  the  natural  Consequences  of
each.  As  Superstition  is  founded  on
Fear,  Sorrow,  and  a  Depression  of
Spirits,  it  represents  the  Person  to  him
self  in  such  despicable  Colours,  that  he
appears  unworthy,  in  his  own  Eyes,  of
approaching  the  Divine  Presence,  and
naturally  has  Recourse  to  any  other
Person,  whose  Sanctity  of  Life,  or,  per
haps,  Impudence  and  Cunning,  have
made  him  be  supposed  to  be  more
favoured  by  the  Divinity.  To  him  they
entrust  their  Devotions :  To  his  Care
they  recommend  their  Prayers,  Petitions,
and  Sacrifices :  And,  by  his  Means,  hope
to  render  their  Addresses  acceptable  to
their  incensed  Deity.  Hence  the  Origin
of  PmESTS,1  who  may  justly  be  regarded
as  one  of  the  grossest  Inventions  of  a
timorous  and  abject  Superstition,  which,
ever  diffident  of  itself,  dares  not  offer
up  its  own  Devotions,  but  ignorantly
thinks  to  recommend  itself  to  the  Di
vinity,  by  the  Mediation  of 'his  supposed


Friends  and  Servants.  As  Superstition
is  a  considerable  Ingredient  of  almost
all  Religions,  even  the  most  fanatical ;
there  being  nothing  but  Philosophy  able
to  conquer  entirely  these  unaccountable
Terrors ;  hence  it  proceeds,  that  in  al
most  every  Sect  of  Religion  there  are
Priests  to  be  found :  But  the  stronger
'  Mixture  there  is  of  Superstition,  the
higher  is  the  Authority  of  the  Priesthood.
Modern  Judaism  and  Popery,  especially
the  latter,  being  the  most  barbarous  and
absurd  Superstitions  that  have  yet  been
known  in  the  World,  are  the  most  en-
sla^d  by  their  Priests.  As  the  Church
of  ENGLAND  may  justly  be  said  to  retain
a  strong  Mixture  of  Popish  Superstition,
it  partakes  also,  in  its  original  Consti
tution,  of  a  Propensity  to  Priestly  Power
and  Dominion  ;  particularly  in  the  Re
spect  it  exacts  to  the  Priest.  And
though,  according  to  the  Sentiments  of
that  Church,  the  Prayers  of  the  Priest
must  be  accompanied  with  those  of  the
Laity ;  yet  is  he  the  mouth  of  the  Con
gregation,  his  Person  is  sacred,  and
without  his  Presence  few  would  think
their  public  Devotions,  or  the  Sacra
ments,  and  other  Rites,  acceptable  to
the  Divinity.

On  the  other  Hand,  it  may  be  ob
served,  That  all  Enthusiasts  have  been
free  from  the  Yoke  of  Ecclesiastics,  and
have  exprest  a  great  Independence  in
their  Devotion ;  with  a  contempt  of
Forms,  Tradition  and  Authorities.  The
Quakers  are  the  most  egregious,  tho',  at
the  same  Time,  the  most  innocent,  En
thusiasts  that  have  been  yet  known ;
and  are,  perhaps,  the  only  Sect,  that
have  never  admitted  Priests  among
them.  The  Independents,  of  all  the
ENGLISH  Sectaries,  approach  nearest
to  the  QUAKERS  in  Fanaticism,  and  in
their  Freedom  from  Priestly  Bondage.
The  Presbyterians  follow  after,  at  an
equal  Distance  in  both  these  Particulars.


1  [By  Priests  I  understand  only  the
Pretenders  to  Power  and  Dominion,
and  to  a  superior  Sanctity  of  Character,
distinct  from  Virtue  and  good  Morals.
These  are  very  different  from  Clergymen,


who  are  set  apart  (2  by  the  Laws)  to  the
care  of  sacred  Matters,  and  the  conduct
ing  our  public  Devotions  with  greater
Decency  and  Order.  There  is  no  Rank  of
Men  more  to  l-;e  respected  than  thelatter.]


2  [Added  in  Edition  B.]


OF  SUPERSTITION  AND  ENTHUSIASM.


he  appears  unworthy,  in  his  own  eyes,  of  approaching  the
divine  presence, and  naturally  has  recourse  to  any  other
person,  whose  sanctity  of  life,  or,  perhaps,  impudence  and
cunning-,  have  made  him  be  supposed  more  favoured  by  the
Divinity. To  him  the  superstitious  entrust  their  devotions  :
To  his  care  they  recommend  their  prayers,  petitions, and
sacrifices: And  by  his  means, they  hope  to  render their
addresses  acceptable  to  their  incensed  Deity. Hence  the
origin  of  PRIESTS/  who  may  justly  be  regarded 2  as  an  in
vention  of  a  timorous  and  abject  superstition,  which ever
diffident  of  itself,  darea  not  offer  up  its  own  devotions,  but
ignorantly  thinks  to  recommend  itself  to  the  Divinity,  by
the mediation of  his  supposed  friends  and  servants. As
superstition  is  a  considerable  ingredient  in  almost  all  reli
gions,  even  the  most  fanatical; there being  nothing  but
philosophy able entirely to conquer  these unaccountable
terrors ;  hence  it  proceeds,  that  in  almost  every sect of
religion  there  are  priests  to  be  found :  But  the  stronger  mix-
Superstition,  on  the  contrary,  steals  in
gradually  and  insensibly;  renders  Men
tame  and  submissive  ;  is  acoeptable  to
the  Magistrate,  and  seems  inoffensive  to
the  People: Till at  last  the  Priest,
having  firmly  establish'd  his  Authority,
becomes  the  Tyrant  and  Disturber  of  hu
man  Society,  by  his  endless  Contentions,
Persecutions,  and  religious  Wars.  How
smoothly  did  the  Romish  Church  ad
vance  in  their  Acquisition  of  Power  ?
But  into  what  dismal  Convulsions  did
they  throw  all  ETTKOPE,  in  order  to  main
tain  it  ? On  the  other  Hand,  our  Sec
taries,  who  were  formerly  such  danger
ous  Bigots,  are  now  become  our  greatest
Free-thinkers; and the Quakers  are,
perhaps,  the  only  regular  Body  of  Deists
in  the  Universe,  except  the  Literati  or
Disciples  of  Confucius  in  China.]

1  [The  following  note  is  appended  in
Editions  D  to  N  :  By  Priests,  I  here
mean  only  the  pretenders  to  power  and
dominion,  and  to  a  superior  sanctity  of
character,  distinct  from  virtue  and
good  morals.  These  are  very  different
from  clergymen,  who  are  set  apart  by
the  laws,  to  the  care  of  sacred  matters,
and  to  the  conducting  our  public  devo
tions  with  greater  decency  and  order.
There  is  no  rank  of  men  more  to  be
respected  than  the  latter.]

3  [As  one  of  the  grossest  inventions.
D  to  N.]


In  short,  this  Observation  is  founded  on
the  most  certain  Experience  ;  and  will
also  appear  to  be  founded  on  Reason,  if
we  consider,  that  as  Enthusiasm  arises
from  a  presumptuous  Pride  and  Confi
dence,  it  thinks  itself  sufficiently
qualified  to  approach  the  Divinity  with
out  any  human  Mediator.  Its  rapturous
Devotions  are  so  fervent,  that  it  even
imagines  itself  actually  to  approach  him
by  the  Way  of  Contemplation  and  in
ward  Converse ;  which  makes  it  neglect
all  those  outward  Ceremonies  and  Ob
servances,  to  which  the  Assistance  of
the  Priests  appears  so  requisite  in  the
Eyes  of  their  superstitious  Votaries.
The  Fanatick  consecrates  himself,  and
bestows  on  his  own  Person  a  sacred
Character,  much  superior  to  what  Forms
and  ceremonious  Institutions  can  confer
on  any  other.

^  'Tis  therefore  an  infallible  Rule,  That
Superstition  is  favourable  to  Priestly
Power,  and  Enthusiasm  as  much,  or
rather  more,  contrary  to  it  than  sound
Reason  and  Philosophy.  The  Conse
quences  are  evident.  When  the  first
Fire  of  Enthusiasm  is  spent,  Men  natu
rally,  in  such  fanatical  Sects,  sink  into
the  greatest  Remissness  and  Coolness  in
Sacred  Matters  ;  there  being  no  Body  of
Men  amongst  them,  endow'd  with  suffi
cient  Authority,  whose  Interest  is  con
cerned,  to  support  the  religious  Spirit.


148  ESSAY X.

tare  there  is  of  superstition,  the  higher  is  the  authority  of
the  priesthood.1

On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  observed,  that  all  enthusiasts
have  been  free  from  the  yoke  of  ecclesiastics,  and  have  ex
pressed  great  independence  in  their  devotion ;  with  a  contempt
of  forms, ceremonies,  and  traditions. The  quakers  are  the
most  egregious,  though,  at  the  same  time,  the  most  innocent
enthusiasts  that  have  yet  been  known ;  and  are,  perhaps,  the
only  sect,  that  have  never  admitted  priests  amongst  them.
The  independents, of  all  the  ENGLISH sectaries,  approach
nearest  to  the  quakers  in  fanaticism,  and  in  their  freedom
from  priestly  bondage. The  presbyterians  follow  after,  at  an
equal  distance  in  both  particulars. In  short  this  observation
is  founded  in  experience ;  and  will  also  appear  to  be  founded
in  reason,  if  we  consider,  that,  as  enthusiasm  arises  from  a
presumptuous  pride  and  confidence,  it  thinks  itself  sufficiently
qualified  to  approach  the  Divinity,  without  any  human  medi
ator. Its  rapturous  devotions  are  so  fervent,  that  it  even
imagines  itself  actually  to  approach  him  by  the  way  of  con
templation  and  inward  converse  ;  which  makes  it  neglect  all
those  outward  ceremonies and  observances,  to  which  the
assistance  of  the  priests  appears  so  requisite  in  the  eyes  of
their  superstitious  votaries. The  fanatic  consecrates  himself,
and  bestows  on  his  own  person  a  sacred  character,  much
superior  to  what  forms  and  ceremonious  institutions can
confer  on  any  other.

My  second  reflection  with  regard  to  these  species  of  false
religion  is,  that  religions,  which  partake  of  enthusiasm  are,  on
their  first  rise,  more  furious  and  violent  than  those  which  par
take  of  superstition  ;  lut  in  a  little  time  become  more  gentle  and
moderate.  The  violence  of  this  species  of  religion,  when  ex
cited  by  novelty,  and  animated  by  opposition,  appears  from
numberless  instances;  of  the  anabaptists  in  GERMANY,  the
camisars  in  FRANCE,  the  levellers  and  other  fanatics  in  ENG-

1 [Here D to P add : Modern  cularly  in  the  respect  it  exacts  to  tho

Judaism and popery, (especially tho  sacerdotal character. And though

latter)  being  the  most  unphilosophical  according to the sentiments of  that

and  absurd superstitions which have  Church,  the  prayers  of  the  priest  must

yet  been  known  in  the  world,  are  the  beaccompamed  with  those  of  the  laity  ;

most  enslaved  by  their  priests. As  the  yet  is he  the  mouth  of  the  congrega-

church  of  ENGLAND  may  justly  be  said  tion,  his  person  is  sacred,  and  without

to retain some mixture of Popish  his presence few would think their

superstition, it partakes also, in its  public devotions, or the sacraments,

original  constitution, of  a  propensity  and  other rites,  acceptable  to  the  d

to  priestly  power  and  dominion  ;  parti-  vinity.]


OF SUPERSTITION  AND ENTHUSIASM.  149

LAND,  and  the  covenanters  in  SCOTLAND.  Enthusiasm  being
founded  on  strong  spirits,  and  a  presumptuous  boldness  of
character,  it  naturally  begets  the  most  extreme  resolutions  j
especially  after  it  rises  to  that  height  as  to  inspire  the
deluded  fanatic  with  the  opinion  of  divine  illuminations,  and
with  a  contempt  for  the  common  rules  of  reason,  morality,
and  prudence.

It  is  thus  enthusiasm  produces  the  most  cruel  disorders
in  human  society ;  but  its  fury  is  like  that  of  thunder  and
tempest,  which  exhaust  themselves  in  a  little  time,  and  leave
the  air  more  calm  and  pure  than  before.  When  the  first  fire
of  enthusiasm  is  spent,  men  naturally,  in  all  fanatical  sects,
sink  into  the  greatest  remissness  and  coolness  in  sacred
matters  ;  there  being  no  body  of  men  among  them,  endowed
with  sufficient  authority,  whose  interest  is  concerned  to
support  the  religious  spirit :  No  rites,  no  ceremonies,  no
holy  observances,  which  may  enter  into  the  common  train  of
life,  and  preserve  the  sacred  principles  from  oblivion.  Super
stition,  on  the  contrary,  steals  in  gradually  and  insensibly ;
renders  men  tame  and  submissive  ;  is  acceptable  to  the  magis
trate,  and  seems  inoffensive  to  the  people  :  Till  at  last  the
priest,  having  firmly  established  his  authority,  becomes  the
tyrant  and  disturber  of  human  society,  by  his  endless  con
tentions,  persecutions,  and  religious  wars.  How  smoothly
did  the  ROMISH  church  advance  in  her  acquisition  of  power  ?
But  into  what  dismal  convulsions  did  she  throw  all  EUROPE,
in  order  to  maintain  it  ?  On  the  other  hand,  our  sectaries,
who  were  formerly  such  dangerous  bigots,  are  now  become
very  free  reasoners  ;  and  the  qiiakc/rs  seem  to  approach  nearly
the  only  regular  body  of  deists  in  the  universe,  the  literati,  or
the  disciples  of  CONFUCIUS  in  CHINA.'

My  third  observation  on  this  head  is,  that  superstition  is  an
enemy  to  civil  liberty,  and  enthusiasm  a  friend  to  it.  As
superstition  groans  under  the  dominion  of  priests,  and  en
thusiasm  is  destructive  of  all  ecclesiastical  power,  this
sufficiently  accounts  for  the  present  observation.  Not  to
mention,  that  enthusiasm,  being  the  infirmity  of  bold  and
ambitious  tempers,  is  naturally  accompanied  with  a  spirit  of
liberty ;  as  superstition,  on  the  contrary,  renders  men  tame

1  The CHINESE Literati have no  to approach nearly  the  only  regular

priests  or  ecclesiastical  establishment.  body  of  deists  in  the  universe,  the  literati,

This  note  is  not  in  D  and  K,  which  or  the  disciples  of  Confucius  in  ChinaJ
read  in  the  text :  and  the  quakers  seem


150  ESSAY  X.

and  abject,  and  fits  them  for  slavery.  We  learn  from  ENG
LISH  history,  that,  during  the  civil  wars,  the  independents  and
deists,  though  the  most  opposite  in  their  religious  principles ;
yet  were  united  in  their  political  ones,  and  were  alike
passionate  for  a  commonwealth.  And  since  the  origin  of
whig  and  tory,  the  leaders  of  the  whigs  have  either  been
deists  or  profest  latitudinarians  in  their  principles ;  that  is,
friends  to  toleration,  and  indifferent  to  any  particular  sev.fc  of
Christians :  While  the  sectaries,  who  have  all  a  strong
tincture  of  enthusiasm,  have  always,  without  exception,
concurred  with  that  party,  in  defence  of  civil  liberty.  The
resemblance  in  their  superstitions  long  united  the  high-
church  tories,  and  the  Roman  catholics,  in  support  of  preroga
tive  and  kingly  power;  though  experience  of  the  tolerating
spirit  of  the  whigs  seems  of  late  to  have  reconciled  the
catholics  to  that  party.

The  molinists  and  jansenists  in  FRANCE  have  a  thousand
unintelligible  disputes,  which  are  not  worthy  the  reflection
of  a  man  of  sense  :  But  what  principally  distinguishes  these
two  sects,  and  alone  merits  attention,  is  the  different  spirit
of  their  religion.  The  molinists  conducted  by  the  Jesuits,  are
great  friends  to  superstition,  rigid  observers  of  external
forms  and  ceremonies,  and  devoted  to  the  authority  of  the
priests,  and  to  tradition.  The  jansenists  are  enthusiasts,  and
zealous  promoters  of  the  passionate  devotion,  and  of  the
inward  life ;  little  influenced  by  authority ;  and,  in  a  word,
but  half  catholics.  The  consequences  are  exactly  conform
able  to  the  foregoing  reasoning.  The  Jesuits  are  the  tyrants
of  the  people,  and  the  slaves  of  the  court :  And  the  jansenists
preserve  alive  the  small  sparks  of  the  love  of  liberty,  which
are  to  be  found  in  the  FRENCH  nation.


ESSAY  XI. — Of  the  Dignity  or  Meanness  of  Human  Nature.1

THERE  are  certain  sects,  which  secretly  form  themselves  in
the  learned  world,  as  well  as  factions  in  the  political ;  and
though  sometimes  they  come  not  to  an  open  rupture,  they
give  a  different  turn  to  the  ways  of  thinking  of  those  who
have  taken  part  on  either  side.  The  most  remarkable  of  this
kind  are  the  sects,  founded  on  the  different  sentiments  with

1  [All  the  Editions  from  A  to  P  are  headed :  Of  the  Dignity  of  Humc-m  Nature.]


DIGNITY OR  MEANNESS  OF HUMAN NATURE. 161

regard  to  the  dignity  of  human  nature ;  which  is  a  point  that
seems  to  have  divided  philosophers  and  poets,  as  well  as
divines,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this  day.  Some
exalt  our  species  to  the  skies,  and  represent  man  as  a  kind  of
human  demigod,  who  derives  his  origin  from  heaven,  and  re
tains  evident  marks  of  his  lineage  and  descent.  Others  insist
upon  the  blind  sides  of  human  nature,  and  can  discover
nothing,  except  vanity,  in  which  man  surpasses  the  othei
animals,  whom  he  affects  so  much  to  despise.  If  an  author
possess  the  talent  of  rhetoric  and  declamation,  he  commonly
takes  part  with  the  former :  If  his  turn  lie  towards  irony
and  ridicule,  he  naturally  throws  himself  into  the  other
extreme.

I  am  far  from  thinking,  that  all  those,  who  have  depreciated
our  species,  have  been  enemies  to  virtue,  and  have  exposed
the  frailties  of  their  fellow  creatures  with  any  bad  intention.
On  the  contrary,  I  am  sensible  that  a  delicate  sense  of  morals,
especially  when  attended  with  a  splenetic  temper,1  is  apt  to
give  a  man  a  disgust  of  the  world,  and  to  make  him  consider
the  common  course  of  human  affairs  with  too  much  indigna
tion.  I  must,  however,  be  of  opinion,  that  the  sentiments  of
those,  who  are  inclined  to  think  favourably  of  mankind,  are
more  advantageous  to  virtue,  than  the  contrary  principles,
which  give  us  a  mean  opinion  of  our  nature.  When  a  man  is
prepossessed  with  a  high  notion  of  his  rank  and  character  in
the  creation,  he  will  naturally  endeavour  to  act  up  to  it,  and
will  scorn  to  do  a  base  or  vicious  action,  which  might  sink
him  below  that  figure  which  he  makes  in  his  own  imagina
tion.  Accordingly  we  find,  that  all  our  polite  and  fashionable
moralists  insist  upon  this  topic,  and  endeavour  to  represent
vice  as  unworthy  of  man,  as  well  as  odious  in  itself.2

We  find  few  disputes,  that  are  not  founded  on  some  am
biguity  in  the  expression;  and  I  am  persuaded,  that  the  present
dispute,  concerning  the  dignity  or  meanness  of  human  nature,
is  not  more  exempt  from  it  than  any  other.  It  may,  therefore,
be  worth  while  to  consider,  what  is  real,  and  what  is  only
verbal,  in  this  controversy.

1  [Editions  A  to  P  read :  especially  which  may  proceed  from  this  reason,
when  attended  with  somewhat  of  the  among  others,  that  their  chief  point  of
Misanthrope.]  honour  is considered  as much more

2  [Editions  A  to  P  add  the  following:  difficult  than  ours,  and  requires  to  be
Women are generally much more  supported by all that decent pride,
flattered in their  youth than men;  which  can  be  instilled  into  them.]


Ifcj  ESSAY  XI.

That  there  is  a  natural  difference  between  merit  and
demerit,  virtue  and  vice,  wisdom  and  folly,  no  reasonable
man  will  deny :  Yet  is  it  evident,  that  in  affixing  the  term,
which  denotes  either  our  approbation  or  blame,  we  are  com
monly  more  influenced  by  comparison  than  by  any  fixed
unalterable  standard  in  the  nature  of  things.  In  like  manner,
quantity,  and  extension,  and  bulk,  are  by  every  one  acknow
ledged  to  be  real  things  :  But  when  we  call  any  animal  great
or  little,  we  always  form  a  secret  comparison  between  that
animal  and  others  of  the  same  species  ;  and  it  is  that  compa
rison  which  regulates  our  judgment  concerning  its  greatness.
A  dog  and  a  horse  may  be  of  the  very  same  size,  while  the
one  is  admired  for  the  greatness  of  its  bulk,  and  the  other
for  the  smallness.  When  I  am  present,  therefore,  at  any
dispute,  I  always  consider  with  myself,  whether  it  be  a  ques
tion  of  comparison  or  not  that  is  the  subject  of  the  contro
versy ;  and  if  it  be,  whether  the  disputants  compare  the
same  objects  together,  or  talk  of  things  that  are  widely
different.1

In  forming  our  notions  of  human  nature,  we  are  apt  to
make  a  comparison  between  men  and  animals,  the  only
creatures  endowed  with  thought  that  fall  under  our  senses.
Certainly  this  comparison  is  favourable  to  mankind.  On  the
one  hand,  we  see  a  creature,  whose  thoughts  are  not  limited
by  any  narrow  bounds,  either  of  place  or  time  ;  who  carries
his  researches  into  the  most  distant  regions  of  this  globe,  and
beyond  this  globe,  to  the  planets  and  heavenly  bodies ;  looks
backward  to  consider  the  first  origin,  at  least,  the  history  of
human  race ;  casts  his  eye  forward  to  see  the  influence  of  his
actions  upon  posterity,  and  the  judgments  which  will  be
formed  of  his  character  a  thousand  years  hence ;  a  creature,
who  traces  causes  and  effects  to  a  great  length  and  intricacy;
extracts  general  principles  from  particular  appearances ;  im
proves  upon  his  discoveries ;  corrects  his  mistakes ;  and
makes  his  very  errors  profitable.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are
presented  with  a  creature  the  very  reverse  of  this  ;  limited  in
its  observations  and  reasonings  to  a  few  sensible  objects
which  surround  it;  without  curiosity,  without  foresight;
blindly  conducted  by  instinct,  and  attaining,  in  a  short  time,

1  [Editions  A  to  P  add:  As  the  manifest  abuses  of  leisure,  the  most
latter  is  commonly  the  case,  I  have  long  valuable  present  that  could  be  made  to
since  learnt  to  neglect  such  disputes  as  mortals.]


DIGNITY  OR  MEANNESS  OF  HUMAN NATURE. 153

its  utmost  perfection,  beyond  which  it  is  never  able  to  advance
a  single  step.  What  a  wide  difference  is  there  between
these  creatures  !  And  how  exalted  a  notion  must  we  enter
tain  of  the  former,  in  comparison  of  the  latter  !

There  are  two  means  commonly  employed  to  destroy  this
conclusion  :  .First,  By  making  an  unfair  representation  of
the  case,  and  insisting  only  upon  the  weaknesses  of  human
nature.  And  secondly,  By  forming  a  new  and  secret  com
parison  between  man  and  beings  of  the  most  perfect  wisdom.
Among  the  other  excellencies  of  man,  this  is  one,  that  he  can
form  an  idea  of  perfections  much  beyond  what  he  ha,s  expe
rience  of  in  himself;  and  is  not  limited  in  his  conception  of
wisdom  and  virtue.  He  can  easily  exalt  his  notions  and
conceive  a  degree  of  knowledge,  which,  when  compared  to
his  own,  will  make  the  latter  appear  very  contemptible,  and
will  cause  the  difference  between  that  and  the  sagacity  of
animals,  in  a  manner,  to  disappear  and  vanish.  Now  this
being  a  point,  in  which  all  the  world  is  agreed,  that  human
understanding  falls  infinitely  short  of  perfect  wisdom ;  it  is
proper  we  should  know  when  this  comparison  takes  place,
that  we  may  not  dispute  where  there  is  no  real  difference  in
our  sentiments.  Man  falls  much  more  short  of  perfect  wis
dom,  and  even  of  his  own  ideas  of  perfect  wisdom,  than
animals  do  of  man;  yet  the  latter  difference  is  so  considerable,
that  nothing  but  a  comparison  with  the  former  can  make  it
appear  of  little  moment.

It  is  also  usual  to  compare  one  man  with  another ;  and
rinding  very  few  whom  we  can  call  wise  or  virtuous,  we  are
apt  to  entertain  a  contemptible  notion  of  our  species  in
general.  That  we  may  be  sensible  of  the  fallacy  of  this  way
of  reasoning,  we  may  observe,  that  the  honourable  appella
tions  of  wise  and  virtuous,  are  not  annexed  to  any  particular
degree  of  those  qualities  of  wisdom  and  virtue',  but  arise
altogether  from  the  comparison  we  make  between  one  man
and  another.  When  we  find  a  man,  who  arrives  at  such  a
pitch  of  wisdom  as  is  very  uncommon,  we  pronounce  him
a  wise  man  :  So  that  to  say,  there  are  few  wise  men  in  the
world,  is  really  to  say  nothing ;  since  it  is  only  by  their
scarcity,  that  they  merit  that  appellation.  Were  the  lowest
of  our  species  as  wise  as  TULLT,  or  lord  BACON,  we  should
still  have  reason  to  say,  that  there  are  few  wise  men.  For  in
that  case  we  should  exalt  our  notions  of  wisdom,  and  should


154  ESSAY  XL

not  pay  a  singular  honour  to  any  one,  who  was  not  singularly
distinguished  by  his  talents.  In  like  manner,  I  have  heard
it  observed  by  thoughtless  people,  that  there  are  few  women
possessed  of  beauty,  in  comparison  of  those  who  want  it ;  not
considering,  that  we  bestow  the  epithet  of  beautiful  only  on
such  as  possess  a  degree  of  beauty,  that  is  common  to  them
with  a  few.  The  same  degree  of  beauty  in  a  woman  is
sailed  deformity,  which  is  treated  as  real  beauty  in  one  of
our  sex.

As  it  is  usual,  in  forming  a  notion  of  our  species,  to  com
pare  it  with  the  other  species  above  or  below  it,  or  to  compare
the  individuals  of  the  species  among  themselves ;  so  we  often
compare  together  the  different  motives  or  actuating  principles
of  human  nature,  in  order  to  regulate  our  judgment  concern
ing  it.  And,  indeed,  this  is  the  only  kind  of  comparison,
which  is  worth  our  attention,  or  decides  any  thing  in  the
present  question.  Were  our  selfish  and  vicious  principles  so
much  predominant  above  our  social  and  virtuous,  as  is  asserted
by  some  philosophers,  we  ought  undoubtedly  to  entertain  a
contemptible  notion  of  human  nature.

1  There  is  much  of  a  dispute  of  words  in  all  this  controversy.
When  a  man  denies  the  sincerity  of  all  public  spirit  or  affec
tion  to  a  country  and  community,  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  think
of  him.  Perhaps  he  never  felt  this  in  so  clear  and  distinct  a
manner  as  to  remove  all  his  doubts  concerning  its  force  and
reality.  But  when  he  proceeds  afterwards  to  reject  all  private
friendship,  if  no  interest  or  self-love  intermix  itself;  I  am
then  confident  that  he  abuses  terms,  and  confounds  the  ideas
of  things;  since  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  be  so  selfish,
or  rather  so  stupid,  as  to  make  no  difference  between  one
man  and  another,  and  give  no  preference  to  qualities,  which
engage  his  approbation  and  esteem.  Is  he  also,  say  I,  as
insensible  to  anger  as  he  pretends  to  be  to  friendship  ?  And
does  injury  and  wrong  no  more  affect  him  than  kindness  or
benefits  ?  Impossible  :  He  does  not  know  himself :  He  has
forgotten  the  movements  of  his  heart ;  or  rather  he  makes

1  [This  paragraph  does  not  occur  in  the  most  powerful  of  any,  and  that  even
Editions  A  to  1),  which  read  instead  of  all  the  other  Passions  receive  from  them
it :  I  may,  perhaps,  treat  more  fully  of  their  chief  Force  and  Influence.  Who-
this  Subject  in  some  future  Essay.  In  ever  desires  to  see  this  Question  treated
the  mean  Time,  I  shall  observe,  what  at  large,  with  the  greatest  Force  of
has  been  prov'd  beyond  Question  by  Argument  and  Eloquence,  may  consult
several  great  Moralists  of  the  present  my  Lord  SHAFTSKUKY'S  Enquiry  con-
Age,  that  the  social  Passions  are  by  far  cerning  Virtue.]


DIGNITY  OR  MEANNESS  OF  HUMAN  NATURE. 156

use  of  a  different  language  from  the  rest  of  his  countrymen,
and  calls  not  things  by  their  proper  names.  What  say  you
of  natural  affection  ?  (I  subjoin)  Is  that  also  a  species  of
self-love  ?  Yes  :  All  is  self-love.  Your  children  are  loved
only  because  they  are  yours  :  Your  friend  for  a  like  reason :
And  your  country  engages  you  only  so  far  as  it  has  a  con
nexion  with  yourself:  Were  the  idea  of  self  removed,  nothing
would  affect  you :  You  would  be  altogether  unactive  and
insensible :  Or,  if  you  ever  gave  yourself  any  movement,  it
would  only  be  from  vanity,  and  a  desire  of  fame  and  reputa
tion  to  this  same  self.  I  am  willing,  reply  I,  to  receive  your
interpretation  of  human  actions,  provided  you  admit  the
facts.  That  species  of  self-love,  which  displays  itself  in
kindness  to  others,  you  must  allow  to  have  great  influence
over  human  actions,  and  even  greater,  on  many  occasions,
than  that  which  remains  in  its  original  shape  and  form.  For
how  few  are  there,  who,  having  a  family,  children,  and  rela
tions,  do  not  spend  more  on  the  maintenance  and  education
of  these  than  on  their  own  pleasures  ?  This,  indeed,  you  justly
observe,  may  proceed  from  their  self-love,  since  the  prosperity
of  their  family  and  friends  is  one,  or  the  chief  of  their
pleasures,  as  well  as  their  chief  honour.  Be  you  also  one  of
these  men,  and  you  are  sure  of  every  one's  good  opinion  and
good  will ;  or  not  to  shock  your  ears  with  these  expressions,
the  self-love  of  every  one,  and  mine  among  the  rest,  will  then
incline  us  to  serve  you,  and  speak  well  of  you.

In  my  opinion,  there  are  two  things  which  have  led  astray
those  philosophers,  that  have  insisted  so  much  on  the  selfish
ness  of  man.  In  the  first  place,  they  found,  that  every  act
of  virtue  or  friendship  was  attended  with  a  secret  pleasure ;
whence  they  concluded,  that  friendship  and  virtue  could  not
be  disinterested.  But  the  fallacy  of  this  is  obvious.  The
virtuous  sentiment  or  passion  produces  the  pleasure,  and
does  not  arise  from  it.  I  feel  a  pleasure  in  doing  good  to
my  friend,  because  I  love  him  ;  but  do  not  love  him  for  the
sake  of  that  pleasure.

In  the  second  place,  it  has  always  been  found,  that  the
virtuous  are  far  from  being  indifferent  to  praise ;  and  there
fore  they  have  been  represented  as  a  set  of  vain-glorious  men,
who  had  nothing  in  view  but  the  applauses  of  others.  But
this  also  is  a  fallacy.  It  is  very  unjust  in  the  world,  when
they  find  any  tincture  of  vanity  in  a  laudable  action,  to  de-


156  ESSAY  XH.

preciate  it  upon  that  account,  or  ascribe  it  entirely  to  that
motive.  The  case  is  not  the  same  with  vanity,  as  with  other
passions.  Where  avarice  or  revenge  enters  into  any  seem
ingly  virtuous  action,  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  determine  how
far  it  enters,  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  it  the  sole  actuating
principle.  But  vanity  is  so  closely  allied  to  virtue,  and  to
love  the  fame  of  laudable  actions  approaches  so  near  the  love
of  laudable  actions  for  their  own  sake,  that  these  passions
are  more  capable  of  mixture,  than  any  other  kinds  of  affec
tion  ;  and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  have  the  latter  without
some  degree  of  the  former.  Accordingly,  we  find,  that  this
passion  for  glory  is  always  warped  and  varied  according  to
the  particular  taste  or  disposition  of  the  mind  on  which  it
falls.  NERO  had  the  same  vanity  in  driving  a  chariot,  that
TRAJAN  had  in  governing  the  empire  with  justice  and  ability.
To  love  the  glory  of  virtuous  deeds  is  a  sure  proof  of  the  love
of  virtue.

ESSAY  XIL— Of  Civil  Liberty.1

THOSE  who  employ  their  pens  on  political  subjects,  free
from  party-rage,  and  party-prejudices,  cultivate  a  science,
which,  of  all  others,  contributes  most  to  public  utility,  and
even  to  the  private  satisfaction  of  those  who  addict  them
selves  to  the  study  of  it.  I  am  apt,  however,  to  entertain  a
suspicion,  that  the  world  is  still  too  young  to  fix  many
general  truths  in  politics,  which  will  remain  true  to  the
latest  posterity.  We  have  not  as  yet  had  experience  of  three
thousand  years  ;  so  that  not  only  the  art  of  reasoning  is  still
imperfect  in  this  science,  as  in  all  others,  but  we  even  want
sufficient  materials  upon  which  we  can  reason.  It  is  not
fully  known,  what  degree  of  refinement,  either  in  virtue  or
vice,  human  nature  is  susceptible  of;  nor  what  may  be  ex
pected  of  mankind  from  any  great  revolution  in  their  educa
tion,  customs,  or  principles.  MACHIAVEL  was  certainly  a
great  genius ;  but  having  confined  his  study  to  the  furious
and  tyrannical  governments  of  ancient  times,  or  to  the  little
disorderly  principalities  of  ITALY,  his  reasonings  especially
upon  monarchical  government,  have  been  found  extremely
defective ;  and  there  scarcely  is  any  maxim  in  his  prince,
which  subsequent  experience  has  not  entirely  refuted.  A
weak  prince,  says  he,  is  incapable  of  receiving  good  counsel;

1  [Editions  A  to  K  have  the  title  :  Of  Liberty  and  Despotism.]


OF CIVIL LIBERTY.  157

for  if  he  consult  with  several,  he  will  not  be  able  to  choose  among
their  different  counsels.  If  he  abandon  himself  to  one,  that
minister  may,  perhaps,  have  capacity  ;  but  he  will  not  long  be
a  minister  :  He  will  be  sure  to  dispossess  his  master,  and  place
himself  and  his  family  upon  the  throne.  I  mention  this,  among
many  instances  of  the  errors  of  that  politician,  proceeding-,
in  a  great  measure,  from  his  having  lived  in  too  early  an  age
of  the  world,  to  be  a  good  judge  of  political  truth.  Almost
all  the  princes  of  EUROPE  are  at  present  governed  by  their
ministers ;  and  have  been  so  for  near  two  centuries ;  and  yet
no  such  event  has  ever  happened,  or  can  possibly  happen.
SEJANUS  might  project  dethroning  the  OESARS  ;  but  FLEURT,
though  ever  so  vicious,  could  not,  while  in  his  senses,  enter
tain  the  least  hopes  of  dispossessing  the  BOURBONS.

Trade  was  never  esteemed  an  affair  of  state  till  the  last
century  ;  and  there  scarcely  is  any  ancient  writer  011  politics,
who  has  made  mention  of  it.1  Even  the  ITALIANS  have  kept
a  profound  silence  with  regard  to  it,  though  it  has  now  en
gaged  the  chief  attention,  as  well  of  ministers  of  state,  as  of
speculative  reasoners.  The  great  opulence,  grandeur,  and
military  atchievements  of  the  two  maritime  powers  seem  first
to  have  instructed  mankind  in  the  importance  of  an  extensive
commerce.

Having,  therefore,  intended  in  this  essay  to  make  a  full
comparison  of  civil  liberty  and  absolute  government,  and  to
show2  the  great  advantages  of  the  former  above  the  latter;
I  began  to  entertain  a  suspicion,  that  no  man  in  this  age
was  sufficiently  qualified  for  such  an  undertaking ;  and  that
whatever  any  one  should  advance  on  that  head  would,  in  all
probability,  be  refuted  by  further  experience,  and  be  rejected
by  poster%.  Such  mighty  revolutions  have  happened  in
human  affairs,  and  so  many  events  have  arisen  contrary  to
the  expectation  of  the  ancients,  that  they  are  sufficient  to
beget  the  suspicion  of  still  further  changes.

It  has  been  observed  by  the  ancients,  that  all  the  arts  and
sciences  arose  among  free  nations ;  and,  that  the  PERSIANS
and  EGYPTIANS,  notwithstanding  their  ease,  opulence,  and
luxury,  made  but  faint  efforts  towards  a  relish  in  those  finer

1  XENOPHON  mentions  it ;  but  with  a  republic  De  legibus,  lib.  iv. [This  note

doubt  if  itj.^ of any advantage to  was  added  in  Ed.  K]
a  state. E« 5e  Kal  ipiropia. &$€\ti  rt  2  [Editions  A  to  D  read :  the  Advan-

*6\n>,  &c.  XKN.  HIERO. 9.  9.  PLATO  tages  and  Disadvantages  of  each.]
totally  excludes  it  from  his  imaginary


158  ESSAY  XH.

pleasures,  which,  were  carried  to  such  perfection  by  the
GREEKS,  amidst  continual  wars,  attended  with  poverty,  and
the  greatest  simplicity  of  life  and  manners.  It  had  also  been
observed,  that,  when  the  GREEKS  lost  their  liberty,  though
they  increased  mightily  in  riches,  by  means  of  the  conquests
of  ALEXANDER;  yet  the  arts,  from  that  moment,  declined
among  them,  and  have  never  since  been  able  to  raise  their
head  in  that  climate.  Learning  was  transplanted  to  ROME,
the  only  free  nation  at  that  time  in  the  universe ;  and  having
met  with  so  favourable  a  soil,  it  made  prodigious  shoots  for
above  a  century ;  till  the  decay  of  liberty  produced  also  the
decay  of  letters,  and  spread  a  total  barbarism  over  the  world.
From  these  two  experiments,  of  which  each  was  double  in  its
kind,  and  shewed  the  fall  of  learning  in  absolute  govern
ments,  as  well  as  its  rise  in  popular  ones,  LONGINUS  thought
himself  sufficiently  justified,  in  asserting,  that  the  arts  and
sciences  could  never  flourish,  but  in  a  free  government :  And
in  this  opinion,  he  has  been  followed  by  several  eminent
writers  l  in  our  own  country,  who  either  confined  their  view
merely  to  ancient  facts,  or  entertained  too  great  a  par
tiality  in  favour  of  that  form  of  government,  established
amongst  us.

But  what  would  these  writers  have  said,  to  the  instances
of  modern  SOME  and  of  FLORENCE?  Of  which  the  former
carried  to  perfection  all  the  finer  arts  of  sculpture,  painting,
and  music,  as  well  as  poetry,  though  it  groaned  under
tyranny,  and  under  the  tyranny  of  priests  :  While  the  latter
made  its  chief  progress  in  the  arts  and  sciences,  after  it
began  to  lose  its  liberty  by  the  usurpation  of  the  family  of
MEDICI.  ARIOSTO,  TASSO,  GALILEO,  more  than  RAPHAEL,
and  MICHAEL  ANGELO,  were  not  born  in  republics.  And
though  the  LOMBARD  school  was  famous  as  well  as  the
ROMAN,  yet  the  VENETIANS  have  had  the  smallest  share  in
its  honours,  and  seem  rather  inferior  to  the  other  ITALIANS,
in  their  genius  for  the  arts  and  sciences.  RUBENS  esta
blished  his  school  at  ANTWERP,  not  at  AMSTERDAM  :  DRES
DEN,  not  HAMBURGH,  is  the  centre  of  politeness  in  GERMANY.

But  the  most  eminent  instance  of  the  nourishing  of  learn
ing  in  absolute  governments,  is  that  of  FRANCE,  which
scarcely  ever  enjoyed  any  established  liberty,  and  yet  has

1  Mr.  ADDISON  and  LOED  SHAFTESBTTRT.


OF  CIVIL  LIBERTY.  159

carried  the  arts  and  sciences  as  near  perfection  as  any  other
nation.  The  ENGLISH  are,  perhaps,  greater  philosophers ;  »
the  ITALIANS  better  painters  and  musicians;  the  BOMANS
were  greater  orators :  But  the  FRENCH  are  the  only  people,
except  the  GREEKS,  who  have  been  at  once  philosophers,
poets,  orators,  historians,  painters,  architects,  sculptors,  and
musicians.  With  regard  to  the  stage,  they  have  excelled
even  the  GREEKS,2  who  far  excelled  the  ENGLISH.  And,  in
common  life,  they  have,  in  a  great  measure,  perfected  that
art,  the  most  useful  and  agreeable  of  any,  I' Art  de  Vime,  the
art  of  society  and  conversation.

If  we  consider  the  state  of  the  sciences  and  polite  arts  in
our  own  country,  HORACE'S  observation,  with  regard  to  the
EOMANS,  may,  in  a  great  measure,  be  applied  to  the  BRITISH.

Sedin  Ion  gum  tamen  eevum

Manserunt,  hodieque  manent  vestigia  runs.

The  elegance  and  propriety  of  style  have  been  very  much
neglected  among  us.  We  have  no  dictionary  of  our  language,
and  scarcely  a  tolerable  grammar.  The  first  polite  prose  we
have,  was  writ  by  a  man  who  is  still  alive.3  As  to  SPRAT,
LOCKE,  and  even  TEMPLE,  they  knew  too  little  of  the  rules
of  art  to  be  esteemed  elegant  writers.  The  prose  of  BACON,
HARRINGTON,  and  MILTON,  is  altogether  stiff  and  pedantic ;
though  their  sense  be  excellent.  Men,  in  this  country,  have
been  so  much  occupied  in  the  great  disputes  of  Religion,
Politics,  and  Philosophy,  that  they  had  no  relish  for  the
seemingly  minute  observations  of  grammar  and  criticism.
And  though  this  turn  of  thinking  must  have  considerably
improved  our  sense  and  our  talent  of  reasoning ;  it  must  be
confessed,  that,  even  in  those  sciences  above-mentioned,  we
have  not  any  standard  book  which  we  can  transmit  to  pos
terity  :  And  the  utmost  we  have  to  boast  of,  are  a  few  essays
towards  a  more  just  philosophy;  which,  indeed,  promise
well,  but  have  not,  as  yet,  reached  any  degree  of  per-

/» i«  *^  XT

fection.

It  has  become  an  established  opinion,  that  commerce  can
never  flourish  but  in  a  free  government ;  and  this  opinion
seems  to  be  founded  on  a  longer  and  larger  experience  than
the  foregoing,  with  regard  to  the  arts  and  sciences.  If  we

u  ',£?•?•  This  was  Publi8hod  in  1742. 2  [Who— English;  added  in  Edition  K  1
bo  Edition  P.]  3  DP  SWIFT.


160  ESSAY XII.

trace  commerce  in  its  progress  through  TYRE,  ATHENS,
SYRACUSE,  CARTHAGE,  VENICE,  FLORENCE,  GENOA,  ANTWERP,
HOLLAND,  ENGLAND,  &c.  we  shall  always  find  it  to  have
fixed  its  seat  in  free  governments.  The  three  greatest
towns  in  Europe,  are  LONDON,  AMSTERDAM,  and  HAMBURGH  ;
all  free  cities,  and  protestant  cities ;  that  is,  enjoying  «*
double  liberty.  It  must,  however,  be  observed,  that  the
great  jealousy  entertained  of  late,  with  regard  to  the  com
merce  of  FRANCE,  seems  to  prove,  that  this  maxim  is  no
more  certain  and  infallible  than  the  foregoing,  and  that  the
subjects  of  an  absolute  prince  may  become  our  rivals  in
commerce,  as  well  as  in  learning.

Durst  I  deliver  my  opinion  in  an  affair  of  so  much  un
certainty,  I  would  assert,  that,  notwithstanding  the  efforts
of  the  FRENCH,  there  is  something  hurtful  to  commerce
inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  absolute  government,  and  in
separable  from  it :  Though  the  reason  I  should  assign  for
this  opinion,  is  somewhat  different  from  that  which  is  com
monly  insisted  on.  Private  property  seems  to  me  almost  as
secure  in  a  civilized  EUROPEAN  monarchy,  as  in  a  republic ;
nor  is  danger  much  apprehended  in  such  a  government,
from  the  violence  of  the  sovereign  ;  more  than  we  commonly
dread  harm  from  thunder,  or  earthquakes,  or  any  accident
the  most  unusual  and  extraordinary.  Avarice,  the  spur  of
industry,  is  so  obstinate  a  passion,  and  works  its  way  through
so  many  real  dangers  and  difficulties,  that  it  is  not  likely  to
be  scared  by  an  imaginary  danger,  which  is  so  small,  that  it
scarcely  admits  of  calculation.  Commerce,  therefore,  in  my
opinion,  is  apt  to  decay  in  absolute  governments,  not  because
it  is  there  less  secure,  but  because  it  is  less  honourable.  A
subordination  of  ranks  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  support
of  monarchy.  Birth,  titles,  and  place,  must  be  honoured
above  industry  and  riches.  And  while  these  notions  prevail,
all  the  considerable  traders  will  be  tempted  to  throw  up
their  commerce,  in  order  to  purchase  some  of  those  employ
ments,  to  which  privileges  and  honours  are  annexed.

Since  I  am  upon  this  head,  of  the  alterations  which  time
has  produced,  or  may  produce  in  politics,  I  must  observe,
that  all  kinds  of  government,  free  and  absolute,  seem  to
have  undergone,  in  modern  times,  a  great  change  for  the
better,  with  regard  both  to  foreign  and  domestic  manage
ment.  The  balance  of  power  is  a  secret  in  politics,  fully


OF  CIVIL  LIBERT  Y.  16]

known  only  to  the  present  age ;  and  I  must  add,  that  the
internal  POLICE  of  states  has  also  received  great  improve
ments  within  the  last  century.  We  are  informed  by  SAL-
LUST,  that  CATILINE'S  army  was  much  augmented  by  the
accession  of  the  highwaymen  about  ROME  ;  though  I  believe,
that  all  of  that  profession,  who  are  at  present  dispersed  over
EUEOPE,  would  not  amount  to  a  regiment.  In  CICEKO'S
pleadings  for  MILO,  I  find  this  argument,  among  others,
made  use  of  to  prove,  that  his  client  had  not  assassinated
CLODIUS.  Had  MILO,  said  he,  intended  to  have  killed
CLODIUS,  he  had  not  attacked  him  in  the  day-time,  and  at
such  a  distance  from  the  city :  He  had  way-laid  him  at  night,
near  the  suburbs,  where  it  might  have  been  pretended,  that
lie  was  killed  by  robbers ;  and  the  frequency  of  the  acci
dent  would  have  favoured  the  deceit.  This  is  a  surprizing
proof  of  the  loose  police  of  ROME,  and  of  the  number  and
force  of  these  robbers ;  since  CLODIUS  l  was  at  that  time
attended  by  thirty  slaves,  who  were  completely  armed,  and
sufficiently  accustomed  to  blood  and  danger  in  the  frequent


2


tumults  excited  by  that  seditious  tribune.1

But  though  all  kinds  of  government  be  improved  in  modern
times,  yet  monarchical  government  seems  to  have  made  the
greatest  advances  towards  perfection.  It  may  now  be
affirmed  of  civilized  monarchies,  what  was  formerly  said  in
praise  of  republics  alone,  that  they  are  a  government  of  Laws,
not  of  Men.  They  are  found  susceptible  of  order,  method,
and  constancy,  to  a  surprizing  degree.  Property  is  there
secure;  industry  encouraged;  the  arts  nourish;  and  the
prince  lives  secure  among  his  subjects,  like  a  father  among
his  children.  3  There  are  perhaps,  and  have  been  for  two
centuries,  nearly  two  hundred  absolute  princes,  great  and
small,  in  EUEOPE  ;  and  allowing  twenty  years  to  each  reign,
we  may  suppose,  that  there  have  been  in  the  whole  two
thousand  monarchs  or  tyrants,  as  the  GEEEKS  would  have
called  them  :  Yet  of  these  there  has  not  been  one,  not  even
PHILIP  II.  of  SPAIN,  so  bad  as  TIBEEIUS,  CALIGULA,  NEEO,
or  DOMITIAN,  who  were  four  in  twelve  amongst  the  ROMAN
emperors.  It  must,  however,  be  confessed,  that,  though
monarchical  governments  have  approached  nearer  to  popular

1  Vide  Asc.  Fed.  in  Orat.pro  Milone. own  Lives,  for  the  Life  of  their  Master.]

2  [Edition A  added : and, by the  s  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edi-
Roman  Laws,  answerable,  upon their tion  K.]

VOL. III.  M


162  ESSAY  XII.

ones,  in  gentleness  and  stability ;  they  are  still  inferior.  Our
modern  education  and  customs  instil  more  humanity  and
moderation  than  the  ancient ;  but  have  riot  as  yet  been
able  to  overcome  entirely  the  disadvantages  of  that  form  of
government.

But  here  I  must  beg  leave  to  advance  a  conjecture,  which
seems  probable,  but  which  posterity  alone  can  fully  judge
of.  I  am  apt  to  think,  that,  in  monarchical  governments
there  is  a  source  of  improvement,  and  in  popular  govern
ments  a  source  of  degeneracy,  which  in  time  will  bring  these
species  of  civil  polity  still  nearer  an  equality.  The  greatest
abuses,  which  arise  in  FRANCE,  the  most  perfect  model  of
pure  monarchy,  proceed  not  from  the  number  or  weight  of
the  taxes,  beyond  what  are  to  be  met  with  in  free  countries  ;
but  from  the  expensive,  unequal,  arbitrary,  arid  intricate
method  of  levying  them,  by  which  the  industry  of  the  poor,
especially  of  the  peasants  and  farmers,  is,  in  a  great  measure,
discouraged,  and  agriculture  rendered  a  beggarly  and  slavish
employment.  But  to  whose  advantage  do  these  abuses  tend?
If  to  that  of  the  nobility,  they  might  be  esteemed  inherent
in  that  form  of  government ;  since  the  nobility  are  the  true
supports  of  monarchy ;  and  it  is  natural  their  interest
should  be  more  consulted,  in  such  a  constitution,  than  that
of  the  people.  But  the  nobility  are,  in  reality,  the  chief
losers  by  this  oppression ;  since  it  ruins  their  estates,  and
beggars  their  tenants.  The  only  gainers  by  it  are  the
Financiers*  a  race  of  men  rather  odious  to  the  nobility  and  •
the  whole  kingdom.  If  a  prince  or  minister,  therefore,
should  arise,  endowed  with  sufficient  discernment  to  know
his  own  and  the  public  interest,  and  with  sufficient  force  of
mind  to  break  through  the  ancient  customs,  we  might  ex
pect  to  see  these  abuses  remedied ;  in  which  case,  the  dif
ference  between  that  absolute  government  and  our  free  one,
would  not  appear  so  considerable  as  at  present.

The  source  of  degeneracy,  which  may  be  remarked  in  free
governments,  consists  in  the  practice  of  contracting  debt,
and  mortgaging  the  public  revenues,  by  which  taxes  may,
in  time,  become  altogether  intolerable,  and  all  the  property
of  the  state  be  brought  into  the  hands  of  the  public.  This

1  [The  cedilla  is  not  found  in  B,  or  in  some  Editions  of  the  Political  Discourses,
where  the  word  occurs.]


OF CIVIL LIBEETY.  1G3

practice  is  of  modern  date.  The  ATHENIANS,1  though
governed  by  a  republic,  paid  near  two  hundred  per  Cent,  for
those  sums  of  money,  which  any  emergence  made  it  neces
sary  for  them  to  borrow;  as  we  learn  from  XENOPHON.*
Among  the  moderns,  the  DUTCH  first  introduced  the  practice
of  borrowing  great  sums  at  low  interest,  and  have  well  nigh
ruined  themselves  by  it.  Absolute  princes  have  also  con
tracted  debt ;  but  as  an  absolute  prince  may  make  a  bank
ruptcy  when  he  pleases,  his  people  can  never  be  oppressed  by
his  debts.  In  popular  governments,  the  people,  and  chiefly
those  who  have  the  highest  offices,  being  commonly  the
public  creditors,  it  is  difficult  for  the  state  to  make  use  of
this  remedy,  which,  however  it  may  sometimes  be  necessary,
is  always  cruel  and  barbarous.  This,  therefore,  seems  to  be
an  inconvenience,  which  nearly  threatens  all  free  govern
ments  ;  especially  our  own,  at  the  present  juncture  of
affairs.  And  what  a  strong  motive  is  this,  to  encrease  our
frugality  of  public  money ;  lest  for  want  of  it,  we  be  re
duced,  by  the  multiplicity  of  taxes,  or  what  is  worse,  by  our
public  impotence  and  inability  for  defence,  to  curse  our  very
liberty,  and  wish  ourselves  in  the  same  state  of  servitude
with  all  the  nations  that  surround  us  ?


ESSAY  XIII. — Of  Eloquence.

THOSE,  who  consider  the  periods  and  revolutions  of  human
kind,  as  represented  in  history,  are  entertained  with  a  spec
tacle  full  of  pleasure  and  variety,  and  see,  with  surprize,  the
manners,  customs,  and  opinions  of  the  same  species  suscep
tible  of  such  prodigious  changes  in  different  periods  of  time.
It  may,  however,  be  observed,  that,  in  civil  history,  there  is
found  a  much  greater  uniformity  than  in  the  history  of  learn-

1  [The  Athenians,  though  a  Republic,  any  emergent  occasion  made  it  necessary

paid  Twenty  per  Cent,  for  Money,  as  we  for  them  to  borrow;  as  we  learn  from

learn  from  Xenophon. — Edition  A : , and  Xenophon. — EditionsD  toQ, :  and  note.]

no  note.  * Krriffiv  8e  air5  ovSevbs  &i>  OVTG>  Ka\^v

The  Athenians,  though  govern'd  by  a  /CT^<rau/To,  &a"irfp  atp'  ov  &v  irporf\fff<affiv

Republic,  paid Twenty  per Cent, for  fis TTJV a.(pop^v — ol Se ye  Tr\eiffToi

those  sums  of  Money,  which  any  emer-  ' f^-qvaiiav  Tr\fiova  \^ovrai  tear'  eviavr6i>

gent  Occasion  made it necessary for  f) offa &j/ tlfftviyKuffiv ol yap  fjivav

them  to  borrow  ;  as  we  learn  fron  Xen-  vport\fffa.vrfs,  eyyvsSvo'ti'/j.i'divn-pd  >o5ov

ophon. — Edition  B:  and  no  note.  e£ovvi — &  fioKf:7T£>vav§pwn-iv<ava.a'<$n\(.ff-

The  Athenians,  though  governed  by  ra.-r6v -re Kal ir6\vxpovLfararof elvai.

R  republic,  paid  near  two  hundred  per  HKN. IIOPOI.  III.  9.  10.
Cent,  for  those  sums  of  money,  which

M  2


1G4  ESSAY  XIII.

ing  and  science,  and  that  the  wars,  negociations,  and  politics
of  one  age  resemble  more  those  of  another,  than  the  taste,
wit,  and  speculative  principles.  Interest  and  ambition,
honour  and  shame,  friendship  and  enmity,  gratitude  and
revenge,  are  the  prime  movers  in  all  public  transactions ;
and  these  passions  are  of  a  very  stubborn  and  intractable
nature,  in  comparison  of  the  sentiments  and  understanding,
which  are  easily  varied  by  education  and  example.  The
GOTHS  were  much  more  inferior  to  the  ROMANS,  in  taste  and
science,  than  in  courage  and  virtue.

But  not  to  compare  together  nations  so  widely  different ; '
it  may  be  observed,  that  even  this  later  period  of  human
learning  is,  in  many  respects,  of  an  opposite  character  to  the
ancient ;  and  that,  if  we  be  superior  in  philosophy,  we  are
still,  notwithstanding  all  our  refinements,  much  inferior  in
eloquence.

In  ancient  times,  no  work  of  genius  was  thought  to  re
quire  so  great  parts  and  capacity,  as  the  speaking  in  public ;
and  some  eminent  writers  have  pronounced  the  talents,  even
of  a  great  poet  or  philosopher,  to  be  of  an  inferior  nature  to
those  which  are  requisite  for  such  an  undertaking.  GREECE
and  ROME  produced,  each  of  them,  but  one  accomplished
orator;  and  whatever  praises  the  other  celebrated  speakers
might  merit,  they  were  still  esteemed  much  inferior  to  these
great  models  of  eloquence.  It  is  observable,  that  the  ancient
critics  could  scarcely  find  two  orators  in  any  age,  who  de
served  to  be  placed  precisely  in  the  same  rank,  and  possessed
the  same  degree  of  merit.  CALVUS,  CLELius,  CURIO,  HOR-
TENSIUS,  CAESAR  rose  one  above  another :  But  the  greatest
of  that  age  was  inferior  to  CICERO,  the  most  eloquent  speaker,
that  had  ever  appeared  in  ROME.  Those  of  fine  taste,  how
ever,  pronounce  this  judgment  of  the  ROMAN  orator,  as  well
as  of  the  GRECIAN,  that  both  of  them  surpassed  in  eloquence
all  that  had  ever  appeared,  but  that  they  were  far  from
reaching  the  perfection  of  their  art,  which  was  infinite,  and
not  only  exceeded  human  force  to  attain,  but  human  imagi
nation  to  conceive.  CICERO  declares  himself  dissatisfied  with
his  own  performances ;  nay,  even  with  those  of  DEMO-


1  [Editions  C  to  Padd  : that  they may  almost be  esteemed of  a  different
epeeieg.]


OF  ELOQUENCE.  1G5

STHENES. Ita  suni  avidce  &  capaces  mecu  aures,  says  he,  &
semper  aliquid  immensum,  infinitumque  desiderant.1

Of  all  the  polite  and  learned  nations,  ENGLAND  alone  pos
sesses  a  popular  government,  or  admits  into  the  legislature
such  numerous  assemblies  as  can  be  supposed  to  lie  under
the  dominion  of  eloquence.  But  what  has  ENGLAND  to  boast
of  in  this  particular  ?  In  enumerating  the  great  men,  who
have  done  honour  to  our  country,  we  exult  in  our  poets  and
philosophers  ;  but  what  orators  are  ever  mentioned  ?  Or
where  are  the  monuments  of  their  genius  to  be  met  with  ?
There  are  found,  indeed,  in  our  histories,  the  names  of  several,
who  directed  the  resolutions  of  our  parliament :  But  neither
themselves  nor  others  have  taken  the  pains  to  preserve  their
speeches ;  and  the  authority,  which  they  possessed,  seems  to
have  been  owing  to  their  experience,  wisdom,  or  power,  more
than  to  their  talents  for  oratory.  At  present,  there  are  above
half  a  dozen  speakers  in  the  two  houses,  who,  in  the  judg
ment  of  the  public,  have  reached  very  near  the  same  pitch
of  eloquence  ;  and  no  man  pretends  to  give  any  one  the  pre
ference  above  the  rest.  This  seems  to  me  a  certain  proof,
that  none  of  them  have  attained  much  beyond  a  mediocrity
in  their  art,  and  that  the  species  of  eloquence,  which  they
aspire  to,  gives  no  exercise  to  the  sublimer  faculties  of  the
mind,  but  may  be  reached  by  ordinary  talents  and  a  slight
application.  A  hundred  cabinet-makers  in  LONDON  can  work
a  table  or  a  chair  equally  well ;  but  no  one  poet  can  write
verses  with  such  spirit  and  elegance  as  Mr.  POPE.

We  are  told,  that,  when  DEMOSTHENES  was  to  plead,  all
ingenious  men  nocked  to  ATHENS  from  the  most  remote
parts  of  GREECE,  as  to  the  most  celebrated  spectacle  of  the
world.2  At  LONDON  you  may  see  men  sauntering  in  the
court  of  requests,  while  the  most  important  debate  is  carry
ing  on  in  the  two  houses  ;  and  many  do  not  think  themselves
sufficiently  compensated,  for  the  losing  of  their  dinners,  by
all  the  eloquence  of  our  most  celebrated  speakers.  When  old

1  [Editions  C  to  P  add :  This  single  ita  necesse  fuisse, cum DEWOSTHEXES
circumstance  is  sufficient  to  make us  dicturus  esset,  ut  concursus,  audiendi
apprehend  the  wide  difference  between  causa,  ex  tota  GBECIA  fiereut. At  cum
ancient  and  modern  eloquence,  and  to  isti  ATTICI  dicunt,  non  niodo  a  corona
let  us  see  how  much the  latter  is  in-  (quod  est  ipsum  miserabile)  sed  etiam
ferior  to  the  former.]  ab  advocatis  relinquuntur.

2  Ne illud  quidem  intelligunt,  non  CICEEO  de  Claris  Oratoribus,  c.  84.
modo  ita  memoriae  proditum  osse,  sed


166  ESSAY  XIII.

GIBBER  is  to  act,  the  curiosity  of  several  is  more  excited,  than
when  our  prime  minister  is  to  defend  himself  from  a  motion
for  his  removal  or  impeachment.

Even  a  person,  unacquainted  with  the  noble  remains  of
ancient  orators,  may  judge,  from  a  few  strokes,  that  the  stile
or  species  of  their  eloquence  was  infinitely  more  sublime  than
that  which  modern  orators  aspire  to.  How  absurd  would  it
appear,  in  our  temperate  and  calm  speakers,  to  make  use  of
an  Apostrophe,  like  that  noble  one  of  DEMOSTHENES,  so  much
celebrated  by  QUINTILIAN  and  LONGINUS,  when  justifying
the  unsuccessful  battle  of  CH^ERONEA,  he  breaks  out,  No,  my
Fellow-Citizens,  No :  You  have  not  erred.  I  swear  by  the
manes  of  those  heroes,  who  fought  for  the  same  cause  in  the
plains  of  MARATHON  and  PLAT^EA.  Who  could  now  endure
such  a  bold  and  poetical  figure,  as  that  which  CICERO  em
ploys,  after  describing  in  the  most  tragical  terms  the  cruci
fixion  of  a  ROMAN  citizen.  Should  I  paint  the  horrors  of  this
scene,  not  to  ROMAN  citizens,  not  to  the  allies  of  our  slate,  not
to  those  who  have  ever  heard  of  the  ROMAN  Name,  not  even  to
men,  but  to  brute-creatures;  or,  to  go  farther,  should  I  lift  up
my  voice  in  the  most  desolate  solitude,  to  the  rocks  and  moun~
tains,  yet  should  I  surely  see  those  rude  and  inanimate  parts  of
nature  moved  with  horror  and  indignation  at  the  recital  of  so
enormous  an  action.1  With  what  a  blaze  of  eloquence  must
such  a  sentence  be  surrounded  to  give  it  grace,  or  cause  it
to  make  any  impression  on  the  hearers  ?  And  what  noble
art  and  sublime  talents  are  requisite  to  arrive,  by  just  de
grees,  at  a  sentiment  so  bold  and  excessive  :  To  inflame  the
audience,  so  as  to  make  them  accompany  the  speaker  in  such
violent  passions,  and  such  elevated  conceptions  :  And  to  con
ceal,  under  a  torrent  of  eloquence,  the  artifice,  by  which  all
this  is  effectuated  !  2  Should  this  sentiment  even  appear  to
us  excessive,  as  perhaps  it  justly  may,  it  will  at  least  serve
to  give  an  idea  of  the  stile  of  ancient  eloquence,  where  such
swelling  expressions  were  not  rejected  as  wholly  monstrous
and  gigantic.

Suitable  to  this  vehemence  of  thought and  expression,

1  The  original  is ;  Quod  si  hsec  non  tudine, ad  saxa & ad  scopulos  haec

ad  cives  Romanes,  non  ad  aliquos  ami-  conqueri & deplorare vellem, tamen

cos  nostrse civitatis, non ad eos qni  omnia muta atque inanima,  tanta  &

populi  Romani  nomen  audissent;  deni-  turn  indigna  rerum  atrocitate  commove-

que, si non ad homines, verum ad  rentur Cic.  in  Ver.  Act  ii.  Lib.  v.  c.  67.
hestias ; aut etiam, ut longius  pro-  2  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edi-

grediar,  si  in  aliqua  desertissima  soli-  tion  P.]


OF  ELOQUENCE.  167

was  the  vehemence  of  action,  observed  in  the  ancient  orators.
The  supplosio  pedis,  or  stamping  with  the  foot,  was  one  ol
the  most  usual  and  moderate  gestures  which  they  made  use
of;1  though  that  is  now  esteemed  too  violent,  either  for  the
senate,  bar,  or  pulpit,  and  is  only  admitted  into  the  theatre,
to  accompany  the  most  violent  passions,  which  are  there
represented.

One  is  somewhat  at  a  loss  to  what  cause  we  may  ascribe
so  sensible  a  decline  of  eloquence  in  later  ages.  The  genius
of  mankind,  at  all  times,  is,  perhaps,  equal :  The  moderns
have  applied  themselves,  with  great  industry  and  success,  to
all  the  other  arts  and  sciences  :  And  a  learned  nation  pos
sesses  a  popular  government ;  a  circumstance  which  seems
requisite  for  the  full  display  of  these  noble  talents  :  But  not
withstanding  all  these  advantages,  our  progress  in  eloquence
is  very  inconsiderable,  in  comparison  of  the  advances,  which
we  have  made  in  all  other  parts  of  learning.

Shall  we  assert,  that  the  strains  of  ancient  eloquence  are
unsuitable  to  our  age,  and  ought  not  to  be  imitated  by  modern
orators  ?  Whatever  reasons  may  be  made  use  of  to  prove  this,
I  am  persuaded  that  they  will  be  found,  upon  examination
to  be  unsound  and  unsatisfactory.

First,  It  may  be  said,  that,  in  ancient  times,  during  the
flourishing  period  of  GREEK  and  BOM  AN  learning,  the  muni
cipal  laws,  in  every  state,  were  but  few  and  simple,  and  the
decision  of  causes,  was,  in  a  great  measure,  left  to  the  equity
and  common  sense  of  the  judges.  The  study  of  the  laws  was
not  then  a  laborious  occupation,  requiring  the  drudgery  of  a
whole  life  to  finish  it,  and  incompatible  with  every  other
study  or  profession.  The  great  statesmen  and  generals
among  the  ROMANS  were  all  lawyers ;  and  CICERO,  to  shew
the  facility  of  acquiring  this  science,  declares,  that,  in  the
midst  of  all  his  occupations,  he  would  undertake,  in  a  few
days,  to  make  himself  a  compleat  civilian.  Now,  where  a
pleader  addresses  himself  to  the  equity  of  his  judges,  he  has
much  more  room  to  display  his  eloquence,  than  where  he
must  draw  his  arguments  from  strict  laws,  statutes,  and  pre
cedents.  In  the  former  case,  many  circumstances  must  bo

1  Ubi  dolor? Ubi  ardor  animi,  qui  mum esf) nulla -supplosio.  Itaque tanturu

etiam ex infantium ingeniis elicere  abfuit  ut  inflammares  nostros  animos ;

voces  &  querelas  solet  ? nulla  pertur-  somnum isto loco  vix tenebamus. —

batio  animi,  nulla  corporis :  frons  non  CICEKO  de  Claris  Oratoribus,  c.  80.
nercussa,  non  femur ;  pedis  (quod  mini-


168  ESSAY

taken  in ;  many  personal  considerations  regarded ;  and  even
favour  and  inclination,  which  it  belongs  to  the  orator,  by  his
art  and  eloquence,  to  conciliate,  may  be  disguised  under  the
appearance  of  equity.  But  how  shall  a  modern  lawyer  have
leisure  to  quit  his  toilsome  occupations,  in  order  to  gather
the  flowers  of  PARNASSUS  ?  Or  what  opportunity  shall  he
have  of  displaying  them,  amidst  the  rigid  and  subtile  argu
ments,  objections,  and  replies,  which  he  is  obliged  to  make
use  of?  The  greatest  genius,  the  greatest  orator,  who
should  pretend  to  plead  before  the  Chancellor,  after  a  month's
study  of  the  laws,  would  only  labour  to  make  himself  ridi
culous.

I  am  ready  to  own,  that  this  circumstance,  of  the  multi
plicity  and  intricacy  of  laws,  is  a  discouragement  to  elo
quence  in  modern  times :  But  I  assert,  that  it  will  not
entirely  account  for  the  decline  of  that  noble  art.  It  may
banish  oratory  from  WESTMINSTER-HALL,  but  not  from  either
house  of  parliament.  Among  the  ATHENIANS,  the  AEEO-
PAGITES  expressly  forbad  all  allurements  of  eloquence ;
and  some  have  pretended  that  in  the  GREEK  orations,  written
in  the  judiciary  form,  there  is  not  so  bold  and  rhetorical  a
stile,  as  appears  in  the  ROMAN.  But  to  what  a  pitch  did  the
ATHENIANS  carry  their  eloquence  in  the  deliberative  kind,
when  affairs  of  state  were  canvassed,  and  the  liberty,  hap
piness,  and  honour  of  the  republic  were  the  subject  of
debate  ?  Disputes  of  this  nature  elevate  the  genius  above
all  others,  and  give  the  fullest  scope  to  eloquence ;  and  such
disputes  are  very  frequent  in  this  nation.

Secondly,  It  may  be  pretended  that  the  decline  of  elo
quence  is  owing  to  the  superior  good  sense  of  the  moderns,
who  reject  with  disdain  all  those  rhetorical  tricks,  employed
to  seduce  the  judges,  and  will  admit  of  nothing  but  solid
argument  in  any  debate  of  deliberation.  If  a  man  be  ac
cused  of  murder,  the  fact  must  be  proved  by  witnesses  and
evidence ;  and  the  laws  will  afterwards  determine  the  pun
ishment  of  the  criminal.  It  would  be  ridiculous  to  describe,
in  strong  colours,  the  horror  and  cruelty  of  the  action :  To
introduce  the  relations  of  the  dead ;  and,  at  a  signal,  make
them  throw  themselves  at  the  feet  of  the  judges,  imploring
justice  with  tears  and  lamentations  :  And  still  more  ridi
culous  would  it  be,  to  employ  a  picture  representing  the
bloody  deed,  in  order  to  move  the  judges  by  the  display  of


OF  ELOQUENCE.  1G9

so  tragical  a  spectacle  :  Though  we  know,  that  this  artifice
was  sometimes  practised  by  the  pleaders  of  old.1  Now,  banish
the  pathetic  from  public  discourses,  and  you  reduce  the
speakers  merely  to  modern  eloquence;  that  is,  to  good  sense,
delivered  in  proper  expression.

Perhaps  it  may  be  acknowledged,  that  our  modern  customs,
or  our  superior  good  sense,  if  you  will,  should  make  our
orators  more  cautious  and  reserved  than  the  ancient,  in
attempting  to  inflame  the  passions,  or  elevate  the  imagina
tion  of  their  audience :  But,  I  see  no  reason,  why  it  should
make  them  despair  absolutely  of  succeeding  in  that  attempt.
It  should  make  them  redouble  their  art,  not  abandon
it  entirely.  The  ancient  orators  seem  also  to  have  been  on
their  guard  against  this  jealousy  of  their  audience ;  but
they  took  a  different  way  of  eluding  it.2  They  hurried
away  with  such  a  torrent  of  sublime  and  pathetic,  that  they
left  their  hearers  no  leisure  to  perceive  the  artifice,  by
which  they  were  deceived.  Nay,  to  consider  the  matter
aright,  they  were  not  deceived  by  any  artifice.  The  orator,
by  force  of  his  own  genius  and  eloquence,  first  inflamed
himself  with  anger,  indignation,  pity,  sorrow;  and  then
communicated  those  impetuous  movements  to  his  audience.

Does  any  man  pretend  to  have  more  good  sense  than
JULIUS  (LESAR  ?  yet  that  haughty  conqueror,  we  know,  was
so  subdued  by  the  charms  of  CICERO'S  eloquence,  that  he
was,  in  a  mariner,  constrained  to  change  his  settled  purpose
and  resolution,  and  to  absolve  a  criminal,  whom,  before  that
orator  pleaded,  he  was  determined  to  condemn.

3  Some  objections,  I  own,  notwithstanding  his  vast  success,
may  lie  against  some  passages  of  the  ROMAN  orator.  He  is
too  florid  and  rhetorical :  His  figures  are  too  striking  and
palpable :  The  divisions  of  his  discourse  are  drawn  chiefly
from  the  rules  of  the  schools  :  And  his  wit  disdains  not
the  artifice  even  of  a  pun,  rhyme,  or  jingle  of  words.  The
GRECIAN  addressed  himself  to  an  audience  much  less  refined
than  the  ROMAN  senate  or  judges.  The  lowest  vulgar  of
ATHENS  were  his  sovereigns,  and  the  arbiters  of  his  elo
quence.4  Yet  is  his  manner  more  chaste  and  austere  than

1  QTJINTIL.  lib.  vi.  cap.  1.  ATHENIAN  people,  not  the  people  of  the

2  LONGINUS,  cap.  15.  orators. GOKGIAS  LEONTINTJS  was  very

3  [The  paragraph  was  added  in  Edi-  taking  with  them,  till  they  became  ac
tion  K.]  quainted  with  a  better  manner. His

4  The  orators  formed  the  taste  of  the  figures  of  speech,  says  DIODOEI'S  Sico-


!70  ESSAY  XIII.

that  of  the  other.  Could  it  be  copied,  its  success  would  be
•'nfallible  over  a  modern  assembly.  It  is  rapid  harmony,
exactly  adjusted  to  the  sense:  It  is  vehement  reasoning,
without  any  appearance  of  art :  It  is  disdain,  anger,  boldness,
freedom,  involved  in  a  continued  stream  of  argument :  And  of
all  human  productions,  the  orations  of  DEMOSTHENES  present
to  us  the  models,  which  approach  the  nearest  to  perfection.

Thirdly,  It  may  be  pretended,  that  the  disorders  of  the
ancient  governments,  and  the  enormous  crimes,  of  which  the
citizens  were  often  guilty,  afforded  much  ampler  matter  for
eloquence  than  can  be  met  with  among  the  moderns.  Were
there  no  VEEEES  or  CATILINE,  there  would  be  no  CICEEO.  But
that  this  reason  can  have  no  great  influence,  is  evident.  It
would  be  easy  to  find  a  PHILIP  in  modern  times;  but
where  shall  we  find  a  DEMOSTHENES  ?

What  remains,  then,  but  that  we  lay  the  blame  on  the
want  of  genius,  or  of  judgment  in  our  speakers,  who  either
found  themselves  incapable  of  reaching  the  heights  of
ancient  eloquence,  or  rejected  all  such  endeavours,  as  un
suitable  to  the  spirit  of  modem  assemblies?  A  few  suc
cessful  attempts  of  this  nature  might  rouse  the  genius  of  the
nation,  excite  the  emulation  of  the  youth,  and  accustom  our
ears  to  a  more  sublime  and  more  pathetic  elocution,  than
what  we  have  been  hitherto  entertained  with.  There  is
certainly  something  accidental  in  the  first  rise  and  the
progress  of  the  arts  in  any  nation.  I  doubt  whether  a  very
satisfactory  reason  can  be  given,  why  ancient  SOME,  though
it  received  all  its  refinements  from  GEEECE,  could  attain
only  to  a  relish  for  statuary,  painting  and  architecture,  with
out  reaching  the  practice  of  these  arts  :  While  modern  EOME
has  been  excited,  by  a  few  remains  found  among  the  ruins
of  antiquity,  arid  has  produced  artists  of  the  greatest  eminence
and  distinction.  Had  such  a  cultivated  genius  for  oratory,
as  WALLEE'S  l  for  poetry,  arisen,  during  the  civil  wars,  when
liberty  began  to  be  fully  established,  and  popular  assemblies
to  enter  into  all  the  most  material  points  of  government ;  I

rus,  his antithesis, his  ifftnuXov,  his  performances. It  would  be  strange  pre-

opoioTetevTov,  which  are  now  despised,  judice  in  favour  of  antiquity, not  to

h=id  a  great  effect  upon  the  audience.  allow  a  BRITISH  parliament  to  be  na-

Lib.  xn.  page  106. ex  editions  EHOD.  turally  superior  in  judgment  and  deli-

It is in vain therefore  for  modern  cacy  to  an  ATHENIAN  mob.

orators to plead the taste of  their  '  [As  my  Lord  Bolingbrol:e.— C.  ar-^

hearers  as  an  apology  for  their  lame  D.]


OF  ELOQUENCE.


17]


am  persuaded  so  illustrious  an  example  would  have  given
a  quite  different  turn  to  BRITISH  eloquence,  aiid  made  us
reach  the  perfection  of  the  ancient  model.  Our  orators
would  then  have  done  honour  to  their  country,  as  well  as
our  poets,  geometers,  and  philosophers,  and  BRITISH
CICEEOS  have  appeared,  as  well  as  BEITISH  l  ARCHIMEDESES
and  ViRGiLS.2


1  [Platos and  Virgils.— C.  D. Plu-
tarchs  and  Virgils. — K.  to  P.]

2  [C  to  P  proceed  : I  have  confest
that there  is  something  accidental  in
the  origin  and  progress  of  the  arts  in
any  nation ;  and  yet  I  cannot  forbear
thinking,  that  if  the  other  learned  and
polite  nations  of  EUROPE had  possest
the  same  advantages  of  a  popular  go
vernment, they  would probably  have
carried  eloquence  to a  greater  height
than it  has  yet reached in BRITAIN.
The  FRENCH  sermons,  especially  those
of  FLECHIER  and  BUSSUET, are much
superior  to  the  ENGLISH  in  this  parti
cular  ;  and  '  in  both  these  authors  are
found  many  strokes  of  the  most  sublime
poetry. None  but private causes, in
that  country,  are  ever  debated  before
their  parliaments  or  courts  of  judica
ture  ; but  notwithstanding  this  disad
vantage,  there  appears  a  spirit  of  elo
quence  in  many  of  their  lawyers,  which,
v/ith  proper  cultivation  and  encourage
ment,  might  rise  to  the  greatest  height.
The  pleadings  of  PATRTJ  are  very  ele
gant,  and  give  us  room  to  imagine  what
so  fine  a  genius  could  have  performed
in  questions  concerning  public  liberty
or  slavery,  peace  or  war,  who exerts
himself  with  such  success in  debates
concerning  the  price  of  an  old  horse,  or
a  gossiping  story  of  a  quarrel  between
an  abbess  and  her  nuns. For  'tis  re
markable,  that  this  polite  writer,  tho'
esteemed  by  all  the  men  of  wit  in  his
time,  was  never  employed  in  the  most
considerable  causes  of  their  courts  of
judicature,  but  lived  and  died  in  poverty :
From  an  ancient  prejudice  industriously
propagated  by  the  dunces  in  all  coun
tries,  That  a  man  of  genius  is  unfit  for
business. The  disorders produced by
the  factions  against  cardinal  MAZARINE,
made  the  parliament  of  PARIS  enter  into


the  discussion  of  public  affairs,  and
during  that  short  interval,  there  ap
peared  many  symptoms  of  the  revival  of
ancient  eloquence.  The  avocat  general
TALON,  in  an  oration,  invoked  on  his
knees,  the  spirit  of  St.  Louis  to  look
down  with  compassion  on  his  divided
and  unhappy  people,  and  to  inspire
them,  from  above,  with  the  love  of  con
cord  and  unanimity.2  The  members  of
the  FRENCH  academy  have  attempted
to  give  us  models  of  eloquence  in  their
harangues  at  their  admittance :  But,
having  no  subject  to  discourse  upon,
they  have  run  altogether  into  a  fulsome
strain  of  panegyric  and  flattery,  the
most  barren  of  all  subjects.  Their
stile,  however,  is  commonly,  on  these
occasions,  very  elevated  and  sublime,
and  might  reach  the  greatest  heights,
were  it  employed  on  a  subject  more
favourable  and  engaging.

There  are  some  circumstances,  I  con
fess,  in  the  ENGLISH  temper  and  genius,
which  are  disadvantageous  to  the  pro
gress  of  eloquence,  and  render  all
attempts  of  that  kind  more  dangerous
and  difficult  among  them  than  among
any  other  nation.  The  ENGLISH  are
conspicuous  for  good-sense,  which  makes
them  very  jealous  of  any  attempts  to
deceive  them  by  the  flowers  of  rhetoric
and  elocution.  They  are  also  peculiarly
modest;  which  makes  them  consider  it
as  a  piece  of  arrogance  to  offer  any
thing  but  reason  to  public  assemblies,
or  attempt  to  guide  them  by  passion  or
fancy.  I  may,  perhaps,  be  allowed  to
add,  that  the  people  in  general  are  not
remarkable  for  delicacy  of  taste,  or  for
sensibility  to  the  charms  of  the  muses.
Their  musical  parts,  to  use  the  expres
sion  of  a  noble  author,  are  but  in
different.  Hence  their  comic  poets,  to
move  them,  must  have  recourse  to  ob-


1  [C  and  D :  and  in  Flechier  there  are
found  many  strokes  of  the  most  sublime
poetry.  His  funeral  sermon  on  the


Marechal de Turenne is  a
stance.]

2  [De  KETZ'S  Memoirs.]


172  ESSAY  XIII.

It  is  seldom  or  never  found,  when  a  false  taste  in  poetry
or  eloquence  prevails  among  any  people,  that  it  has  been
preferred  to  a  true,  upon  comparison  and  reflection.  It
commonly  prevails  merely  from  ignorance  of  the  true,  and
from  the  want  of  perfect  models,  to  lead  men  into  a  juster
apprehension,  and  more  refined  relish  of  those  production  f.
of  genius.  When  these  appear,  they  soon  unite  all  suffrages
in  their  favour,  and,  by  their  natural  and  powerful  charms,
gain  over,  even  the  most  prejudiced,  to  the  love  and  admira
tion  of  them.  The  principles  of  every  passion,  and  of  every
sentiment,  is  in  every  man ;  and  when  touched  properly,
they  rise  to  life,  and  warm  the  heart,  and  convey  that  satis
faction,  by  which  a  work  of  genius  is  distinguished  from  the
adulterate  beauties  of  a  capricious  wit  and  fancy.  And  if
this  observation  be  true,  with  regard  to  all  the  liberal  arts,
it  must  be  peculiarly  so,  with  regard  to  eloquence  ;  which,
being  merely  calculated  for  the  public,  and  for  men  of  the
world,  cannot,  with  any  pretence  of  reason,  appeal  from  the
people  to  more  refined  judges;  but  must  submit  to  the
public  verdict,  without  reserve  or  limitation.  Whoever,
upon  comparison,  is  deemed  by  a  common  audience  the
greatest  orator,  ought  most  certainly  to  be  pronounced  such,
by  men  of  science  and  erudition.  And  though  an  indifferent
speaker  may  triumph  for  a  long  time,  and  be  esteemed  al
together  perfect  by  the  vulgar,  who  are  satisfied  with  his
accomplishments,  and  know  not  in  what  he  is  defective  :  Yet,
whenever  the  true  genius  arises,  he  draws  to  him  the  atten
tion  of  every  one,  and  immediately  appears  superior  to  his
rival.

Now  to  judge  by  this  rule,  ancient  eloquence,  that  is,  the
sublime  and  passionate,  is  of  a  much  juster  taste  than  the
modern,  or  the  argumentative  and  rational ;  and,  if  pro-

scenity ;  their  tragic  poets  to  blood  and  nonnce,  that  this  is  a  field,  in  which

slaughter: And hence their orators,  the  most  flourishing  laurels  may  yet  be

being deprived  of  any  such  resource,  gathered,  if  any  youth  of  accomplished

have abandoned  altogether  the  hopes  genius,  thoroughly  acquainted  •with  all

of  moving them, and have confined  the polite arts, and  not ignorant of

themselves  to  plain  argument  and  rea-  public  business,  should  appear  in  par-

soning.  liament,  and  accustom  our  ears  to  an

These  circumstances,  joined  to  parti-  eloquence  more commanding  and  pa-

cular  accidents,  may,  perhaps,  have  re-  thetic. And to confirm me  in this

tarded  the  growth  of  eloquence  in  this  opinion,  there  occur  two  considerations,

kingdom  ;  but  will  not  be  able  to  pre-  the  one  derived  from  ancient,  the  other

vent its success, if ever it appear  from  modern  times.]
amongst  us :  And  one  may  safely  pro-


OF  ELOQUENCE.  173

perly  executed,  will  always  have  more  command  and  au
thority  over  mankind.  We  are  satisfied  with  our  mediocrity,
because  we  have  had  no  experience  of  anything  better :  But
the  ancients  had  experience  of  both,  and,  upon  comparison,
gave  the  preference  to  that  kind,  of  which  they  have  left  ua
such  applauded  models.  For,  if  I  mistake  not,  our  modern
eloquence  is  of  the  same  stile  or  species  with  that  which
ancient  critics  denominated  ATTIC  eloquence,  that  is,  calm,
elegant,  and  subtile,  which  instructed  the  reason  more  than
affected  the  passions,  and  never  raised  its  tone  above  argu
ment  or  common  discourse.  Such  was  the  eloquence  of
LTSIAS  among  the  ATHENIANS,  and  of  CALVUS  among  the
HOMANS.  These  were  esteemed  in  their  time ;  but  when
compared  with  DEMOSTHENES  and  CICEBO,  were  eclipsed  like
a  taper  when  set  in  the  rays  of  a  meridian  sun.  Those
latter  orators  possessed  the  same  elegance,  and  subtilty,  and
force  of  argument,  with  the  former ;  but  what  rendered  them
chiefly  admirable,  was  that  pathetic  and  sublime,  which,  on
proper  occasions,  they  threw  into  their  discourse,  and  by
which  they  commanded  the  resolution  of  their  audience.

Of  this  species  of  eloquence  we  have  scarcely  any  instance
in  ENGLAND,  at  least  in  our  public  speakers.  In  our  writers,
we  have  had  some  instances,  which  have  met  with  great  ap
plause,  and  might  assure  our  ambitious  youth  of  equal  or
superior  glory  in  attempts  for  the  revival  of  ancient  elo
quence.  Lord  BOLINGBROKE'S  productions,  'with  all  their
defects  in  argument,  method  and  precision,  contain  a  force
and  energy  which  our  orators  scarcely  ever  aim  at ;  though
it  is  evident,  that  such  an  elevated  stile  has  much  better
grace  in  a  speaker  than  in  a  writer,  and  is  assured  of  more
prompt  and  more  astonishing  success.  It  is  there  seconded
by  the  graces  of  voice  and  action:  The  movements  are  mutually
communicated  between  the  orator  and  the  audience :  And
the  very  aspect  of  a  large  assembly,  attentive  to  the  dis
course  of  one  man,  must  inspire  him  with  a  peculiar  eleva
tion,  sufficient  to  give  a  propriety  to  the  strongest  figures
and  expressions.  It  is  true,  there  is  a  great  prejudice
against  set  speeches  ;  and  a  man  cannot  escape  ridicule,  who
repeats  a  discourse  as  a  school-boy  does  his  lesson,  and
takes  no  notice  of  any  thing  that  has  been  advanced  in  the
course  of  the  debate.  But  where  is  the  necessity  of  falling

1  ['  with — precision ' ; — this  clause  was  added  in  Edition  K.]


174  ESSAY  XIV.

into  this  absurdity  ?  A  public  speaker  must  know  before
hand  the  question  under  debate.  He  may  compose  all  the
arguments,  objections,  and  answers,  such  as  he  thinks  will
be  most  proper  for  his  discourse.1  If  any  thing  new  occur,
he  may  supply  it  from  his  invention ;  nor  will  the  difference
be  very  apparent  between  his  elaborate  and  his  extemporary
compositions.  The  mind  naturally  continues  with  the  same
impetus  or  force,  which  it  has  acquired  by  its  motion  ;  as  a
vessel,  once  impelled  by  the  oars,  carries  on  its  course  for
some  time,  when  the  original  impulse  is  suspended.

I  shall  conclude  this  subject  with  observing,  that,  even
though  our  modern  orators  should  not  elevate  their  stile  or

O

aspire  to  a  rivalship  with  the  ancient ;  yet  is  there,  in  most
of  their  speeches,  a  material  defect,  which  they  might  cor
rect,  without  departing  from  that  composed  air  of  argument
and  reasoning,  to  which  they  limit  their  ambition.  Their
great  affectation  of  extemporary  discourses  has  made  them
reject  all  order  and  method,  which  seems  so  requisite  to
argument,  and  without  which  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  pro
duce  an  entire  conviction  on  the  mind.  It  is  not,  that  one
would  recommend  many  divisions  in  a  public  discourse,
unless  the  subject  very  evidently  offer  them  :  But  it  is  easy,
without  this  formality,  to  observe  a  method,  and  make  that
method  conspicuous  to  the  hearers,  who  will  be  infinitely
pleased  to  see  the  arguments  rise  naturally  from  one  an
other,  and  will  retain  a  more  thorough  persuasion,  than  can
arise  from  the  strongest  reasons,  which  are  thrown  together
in  confusion.

ESSAY  XIV. — Of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  Arts  and

Sciences.

NOTHING  requires  greater  nicety,  in  our  enquiries  concern
ing  human  affairs,  than  to  distinguish  exactly  what  is  owing
to  chance,  and  what  proceeds  from  causes ;  nor  is  there  any
subject,  in  which  an  author  is  more  liable  to  deceive  himself
by  false  subtilties  and  refinements.  To  say,  that  any  event
is  derived  from  chance,  cuts  short  all  farther  enquiry  con
cerning  it,  and  leaves  the  writer  in  the  same  state  of  ignorance

1  The  first  of  the  ATHKNIANS,  who  ypairrbv  \6yov ev  SiKaffr-npicf  flirt,  rSiv

composed  and  wrote  his  speeches,  was  irpb airrov ffxeSiatfvTcav. — Suidas in

PERICLES,  &  man  of  business  and  a  man  TlfptK\T)s.
of  sense,  if  ever  there  was  one,  Upta-ros


THE RISE OF  ARTS AND SCIENCES.  175

with  the  rest  of  mankind.  But  when  the  event  is  supposed
to  proceed  from  certain  and  stable  causes,  he  may  then  dis
play  his  ingenuity,  in  assigning  these  causes ;  and  as  a  mail
of  any  subtilty  can  never  be  at  a  loss  in  this  particular,  he
has  thereby  an  opportunity  of  swelling  his  volumes,  and  dis
covering  his  profound  knowledge,  in  observing  what  escapes
the  vulgar  and  ignorant.

The  distinguishing  between  chance  and  causes  must  depend
upon  every  particular  man's  sagacity,  in  considering  every
particular  incident.  But,  if  I  were  to  assign  any  general
rule  to  help  us  in  applying  this  distinction,  it  would  be  the
following,  What  depends  upon  a  few  persons  is,  in  a  great
measure,  to  be  ascribed  to  chance,  or  secret  and  unknown  causes :
What  arises  from  a  great  number,  may  often  be  accounted  for
by  determinate  and  known  causes.

Two  natural  reasons  may  be  assigned  for  this  rule.  First,
If  you  suppose  a  dye  to  have  any  biass,  however  small,  to  a
particular  side,  this  biass,  though,  perhaps,  it  may  not  ap
pear  in  a  few  throws,  will '  certainly  prevail  in  a  great  num
ber,  and  will  cast  the  balance  entirely  to  that  side.  In  like
manner,  when  any  causes  beget  a  particular  inclination  or
passion,  at  a  certain  time,  and  among  a  certain  people ;
though  many  individuals  may  escape  the  contagion,  and  be
ruled  by  passions  peculiar  to  themselves  ;  yet  the  multitude
will  certainly  be  seized  by  the  common  affection,  and  be
governed  by  it  in  all  their  actions.

Secondly,  Those  principles  of  causes,  which  are  fitted  to
operate  on  a  multitude,  are  always  of  a  grosser  and  more
stubborn  nature,  less  subject  to  accidents,  and  less  influenced
by  whim  and  private  fancy,  than  those  which  operate  on  a
few  only.  The  latter  are  commonly  so  delicate  and  refined,
that  the  smallest  incident  in  the  health,  education,  or  fortune
of  a  particular  person,  is  sufficient  to  divert  their  course,  and
retard  their  operation  ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  reduce  them  to
any  general  maxims  or  observations.  Their  influence  at  one
time  will  never  assure  us  concerning  their  influence  at  an
other  ;  even  though  all  the  general  circumstances  should  be
the  same  in  both  cases.

To  judge  by  this  rule,  the  domestic  and  the  gradual  revo
lutions  of  a  state  must  be  a  more  proper  subject  of  reasoning
and  observation,  than  the  foreign  and  the  violent,  which  are
commonly  produced  by  single  persons,  and  are  more  influ-


176  ESSAY  XIV.

enced  by  whim,  folly,  or  caprice,  than  by  general  passions
and  interests.  The  depression  of  the  lords,  and  rise  of  the
commons  in  ENGLAND,  after  the  statutes  of  alienation  and
the  encrease  of  trade  and  industry,  are  more  easily  accounted
for  by  general  principles,  than  the  depression  of  the  SPANISH,
and  rise  of  the  FRENCH  monarchy,  after  the  death  of  CHARLES
QUINT.  Had  HARRY  IV.  Cardinal  RICHLIEU,  and  Louis  XIV.
been  SPANIARDS  ;  and  PHILIP  II.  III.  and  IV.  and  CHARLES
II.  been  FRENCHMEN,  the  history  of  these  two  nations  had
been  entirely  reversed.

For  the  same  reason,  it  is  more  easy  to  account  for  the
rise  and  progress  of  commerce  in  any  kingdom,  than  for  that
of  learning ;  and  a  state,  which  should  apply  itself  to  the
encouragement  of  the  one,  would  be  more  assured  of  success,
than  one  which  should  cultivate  the  other.  Avarice,  or  the
desire  of  gain,  is  an  universal  passion,  which  operates  at  all
times,  in  all  places,  and  upon  all  persons :  But  curiosity,  or
the  love  of  knowledge,  has  a  very  limited  influence,  and  re
quires  youth,  leisure,  education,  genius,  and  example,  to
make  it  govern  any  person.  You  will  never  want  booksellers,
while  there  are  buyers  of  books  :  But  there  may  frequently
be  readers  where  there  are  no  authors.  Multitudes  of  people,
necessity  and  liberty,  have  begotten  commerce  in  HOLLAND  :
But  study  and  application  have  scarcely  produced  any  eminent
writers.

We  may,  therefore,  conclude,  that  there  is  no  subject,  in
which  we  must  proceed  with  more  caution,  than  in  tracing
the  history  of  the  arts  and  sciences ;  lest  we  assign  causes
which  never  existed,  and  reduce  what  is  merely  contingent
to  stable  and  universal  principles.  Those  who  cultivate  the
sciences  in  any  state,  are  always  few  in  number  :  The  passion,
which  governs  them,  limited:  Their  taste  and  judgment
delicate  and  easily  perverted  :  And  their  application  dis
turbed  with  the  smallest  accident.  Chance,  therefore,  or
secret  and  unknown  causes,  must  have  a  great  influence  on
the  rise  and  progress  of  all  the  refined  arts.

But  there  is  a  reason,  which  induces  me  not  to  ascribe  the
matter  altogether  to  chance.  Though  the  persons,  who  cul
tivate  the  sciences  with  such  astonishing  success,  as  to  at
tract  the  admiration  of  posterity,  be  always  few,  in  all  nations
and  all  ages ;  it  is  impossible  but  a  share  of  the  same  spirit
and  genius  must  be  antecedently  diffused  throughout  the


THE RISE OF  ARTS  AND  SCIENCES.  177

people  among  whom  they  arise,  in  order  to  produce,  form,
and  cultivate,  from  their  earliest  infancy,  the  taste  and  judg
ment  of  those  eminent  writers.  The  mass  cannot  be  alto-l
gether  insipid,  from  which  such  refined  spirits  are  extracted./
There  is  a  God  within  us,  says  OVID,  who  breathes  that  divine
fire,  by  which  we  are  animated.1  Poets,  in  all  ages,  have
advanced  this  claim  to  inspiration.  There  is  not,  however,
any  thing  supernatural  in  the  case.  Their  fire  is  not  kindled
from  heaven.  It  only  runs  along  the  earth  ;  is  caught  from
one  breast  to  another ;  and  burns  brightest,  where  the  ma
terials  are  best  prepared,  and  most  happily  disposed.  The
question,  therefore,  concerning  the  rise  and  progress  of  the
arts  and  sciences,  is  not  altogether  a  question  concerning
the  taste,  genius,  and  spirit  of  a  few,  but  concerning  those
of  a  whole  people ;  and  may,  therefore,  be  accounted  for,  in
some  measure,  by  general  causes  and  principles.  I  grant,
that  a  man,  who  should  enquire,  why  such  a  particular  poet,
as  HOMEK,  for  instance,  existed,  at  such  a  place,  in  such  a
time,  would  throw  himself  headlong  into  chimsera,  and  could
never  treat  of  such  a  subject,  without  a  multitude  of  false
subtilties  and  refinements.  He  might  as  well  pretend  to  give
a  reason,  why  such  particular  generals,  as  FABIUS  and  SCIPIO,
lived  in  ROME  at  such  a  time,  and  why  FABIUS  came  into  the
world  before  SCIPIO.  For  such  incidents  as  these,  no  other
reason  can  be  given  than  that  of  HORACE  :

Scit  genius,  natale  comes,  gui  tcmperat  astrum,

Natures  Deus  human®,  mart  alls  in  unum

Quodque  caput,  vultu  mutabilis,  albus  $  ater.

But  I  am  persuaded,  that  in  many  cases  good  reasons
might  be  given,  why  such  a  nation  is  more  polite  and  learned,
at  a  particular  time,  than  any  of  its  neighbours.  At  least,
this  is  so  curious  a  subject,  that  it  were  a  pity  to  abandon  it
entirely,  before  we  have  found  whether  it  be  susceptible  of
reasoning,  and  can  be  reduced  to  any  general  principles.8

My  first  observation  on  this  head  is,  That  it  is  impossible
for  the  arts  and  sciences  to  arise,  at  first,  among  any  people
unless  that  people  enjoy  the  blessing  of  a  free  government.

1  Est  Deus  in  nobis ;  agitante  calescimus  2  [Editions  C  to  P  add :  I  shall  there-

illo :  fore  proceed  to  deliver  a  few  observa-

Impetus hie, sacrse semina  mentis  tions  on  this  subject,  which  I  submit  to

habet.  the censure and examination of  the

OVID,  Fast.  lib.  vi.  5.  learned.]

VOL. III.  N


178  ESSAY XIV.

In  the  first  ages  of  the  world,  when  men  are  as  yet  bar
barous  and  ignorant,  they  seek  no  farther  security  against
mutual  violence  and  injustice,  than  the  choice  of  some  rulers,
few  or  many,  in  whom  they  place  an  implicit  confidence,
without  providing  any  security,  by  laws  or  political  institu
tions,  against  the  violence  and  injustice  of  these  rulers.  If
the  authority  be  centered  in  a  single  person,  and  if  the  people,
either  by  conquest,  or  by  the  ordinary  course  of  propagation,
encrease  to  a  great  multitude,  the  monarch,  finding  it  im
possible,  in  his  own  person,  to  execute  every  office  of  sove
reignty,  in  every  place,  must  delegate  his  authority  to  inferior
magistrates,  who  preserve  peace  and  order  in  their  respective
districts.  As  experience  and  education  have  not  yet  refined
the  judgments  of  men  to  any  considerable  degree,  the  prince,
who  is  himself  unrestrained,  never  dreams  of  restraining  his
ministers,  but  delegates  his  full  authority  to  every  one,  whom
he  sets  over  any  portion  of  the  people.  All  general  laws  are
attended  with  inconveniencies,  when  applied  to  particular
cases ;  and  it  requires  great  penetration  and  experience,
both  to  perceive  that  these  inconveniencies  are  fewer  than
what  result  from  full  discretionary  powers  in  every  magis
trate  ;  and  also  to  discern  what  general  laws  are,  upon  the
whole,  attended  with  fewest  inconveniencies.  This  is  a  matter
of  so  great  difficulty,  that  men  may  have  made  some  ad
vances,  even  in  the  sublime  arts  of  poetry  and  eloquence,
where  a  rapidity  of  genius  and  imagination  assist  their  pro
gress,  before  they  have  arrived  at  any  great  refinement  in
their  municipal  laws,  where  frequent  trials  and  diligent
observation  can  alone  direct  their  improvements.  It  is  not,
therefore,  to  be  supposed,  that  a  barbarous  monarch,  unre
strained  and  uninstructed,  will  ever  become  a  legislator,  or
think  of  restraining  his  Bashaws,  in  every  province,  or  even
his  Cadis  in  every  village.  We  are  told,  that  the  late  Czar,
though  actuated  with  a  noble  genius,  and  smit  with  the  love
and  admiration  of  EUROPEAN  arts  ;  yet  professed  an  esteem  for
the  TURKISH  policy  in  this  particular,  and  approved  of  such
summary  decisions  of  causes,  as  are  practised  in  that  bar
barous  monarchy,  where  the  judges  are  not  restrained  by
any  methods,  forms,  or  laws.  He  did  not  perceive,  how
contrary  such  a  practice  would  have  been  to  all  his  other
endeavours  for  refining  his  people.  Arbitrary  power,  in  all
cases,  is  somewhat  oppressive  and  debasing ;  but  it  is  alto-


THE  RISE OF  ARTS  AND  SCIENCES.  179

gether  ruinous  and  intolerable,  when  contracted  into  a  small
compass;  and  becomes  still  worse,  when  the  person,  who
possesses  it,  knows  that  the  time  of  his  authority  is  limited
and  uncertain.  Habet  subjectos  tanquam  suos;  vilvs,  ut  alienos.1
He  governs  the  subjects  with  full  authority,  as  if  they  were
his  own ;  and  with  negligence  or  tyranny,  as  belonging  to
{mother.  A  people,  governed  after  such  a  manner,  are  slaves
in  the  full  and  proper  sense  of  the  word ;  and  it  is  impos
sible  they  can  ever  aspire  to  any  refinements  or  taste  or
reason.  They  dare  not  so  much  as  pretend  to  enjoy  the
necessaries  of  life  in  plenty  or  security.

To  expect,  therefore,  that  the  arts  and  sciences  should
take  their  first  rise  in  a  monarchy,  is  to  expect  a  contra
diction.  Before  these  refinements  have  taken  place,  the
monarch  is  ignorant  and  uninstructed ;  and  not  having
knowledge  sufficient  to  make  him  sensible  of  the  necessity  of
balancing  his  government  upon  general  laws,  he  delegates
his  full  power  to  all  inferior  magistrates.  This  barbarous
policy  debases  the  people,  and  for  ever  prevents  all  improve
ments.  Were  it  possible,  that,  before  science  were  known
in  the  world,  a  monarch  could  possess  so  much  wisdom  as  to
become  a  legislator,  and  govern  his  people  by  law,  not  by
the  arbitrary  will  of  their  fellow-subjects,  it  might  be  possible
for  that  species  of  government  to  be  the  first  nursery  of
arts  and  sciences.  But  that  supposition  seems  scarcely  to
be  consistent  or  rational.

It  may  happen,  that  a  republic,  in  its  infant  state,  may
be  supported  by  as  few  laws  as  a  barbarous  monarchy,  and
may  entrust  as  unlimited  an  authority  to  its  magistrates  or
judges.  But,  besides  that  the  frequent  elections  by  the
people,  are  a  considerable  check  upon  authority ;  it  is  im
possible,  but,  in  time,  the  necessity  of  restraining  the  magis
trates,  in  order  to  preserve  liberty,  must  at  last  appear,  and
give  rise  to  general  laws  and  statutes.  The  ROMAN  Consuls,
for  some  time,  decided  all  causes,  without  being  confined
by  any  positive  statutes,  till  the  people,  bearing  this  yoke
with  impatience,  created  the  decemvirs,  who  promulgated
the  twelve  tables  ;  a  body  of  laws,  which,  though,  perhaps,
they  were  not  equal  in  bulk  to  one  ENGLISH  act  of  par
liament,  were  almost  the  only  written  rules,  which  regulated

1  TACIT,  hist.  lib.  i.  37.
N  2


180  ESSAY  XIV.

property  and  punishment,  for  some  ages,  in  that  famous
republic.  They  were,  however,  sufficient,  together  with  the
forms  of  a  free  government,  to  secure  the  lives  and  pro
perties  of  the  citizens,  to  exempt  one  man  from  the  dominion
of  another  ;  and  to  protect  every  one  against  the  violence  or
tyranny  of  his  fellow-citizens.  In  such  a  situation  the
sciences  may  raise  their  heads  and  flourish :  But  never  can
have  being  amidst  such  a  scene  of  oppression  and  slavery,
as  always  results  from  barbarous  monarchies,  where  the
people  alone  are  restrained  by  the  authority  of  the  magis
trates,  and  the  magistrates  are  not  restrained  by  any  law
or  statute.  An  unlimited  despotism  of  this  nature,  while  it
exists,  effectually  puts  a  stop  to  all  improvements,  and  keeps
men  from  attaining  that  knowledge,  which  is  requisite  to
instruct  them  in  the  advantages,  arising  from  a  better  police,
and  more  moderate  authority.

Here  then  are  the  advantages  of  free  states.  Though  a
republic  should  be  barbarous,  it  necessarily,  by  an  infallible
operation,  gives  rise  to  LAW,  even  before  mankind  have  made
any  considerable  advances  in  the  other  sciences.  From  law
arises  security  :  From  security  curiosity  :  And  from  curiosity
knowledge.  The  latter  steps  of  this  progress  may  be  more
accidental ;  but  the  former  are  altogether  necessary.  A  re
public  without  laws  can  never  have  any  duration.  On  the
contrary,  in  a  monarchical  government,  law  arises  not  neces
sarily  from  the  forms  of  government.  Monarchy,  when
absolute,  contains  even  something  repugnant  to  law.  Great
wisdom  and  reflection  can  alone  reconcile  them.  But  such
a  degree  of  wisdom  can  never  be  expected,  before  the  greater
refinements  and  improvements  of  human  reason.  These  re
finements  require  curiosity,  security,  and  law.  The  first
growth,  therefore,  of  the  arts  and  sciences  can  never  be  ex
pected  in  despotic  governments.1

There  are  other  causes,  which  discourage  the  rise  of  the
refined  arts  in  despotic  governments;  though  I  take  the
want  of  laws,  and  the  delegation  of  full  powers  to  every
petty  magistrate,  to  be  the  principal.  Eloquence  certainly

1  [Editions  C  to  P  add :  According  to  cannot  precede science. An  absolute

the  necessary  progress  of  things,  law  prince,  who  is  barbarous,  renders all

must  precede  science. In  republics  law  his  ministers  and  magistrates  as  abso-

may precede science, and may  arise  lute  as  himself: And  there  needs  no

from  the  very  nature  of  the govern-  more  to  prevent,  for  ever,  all  industry,

merit. In  monarchies  it  arises  not  from  curiosity,  and  science.]
the nature of the government, aud


THE RISE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES.  181

springs  up  more  naturally  in  popular  governments :  Emula
tion  too  in  every  accomplishment  must  there  be  more  ani
mated  and  enlivened :  And  genius  and  capacity  have  a  fuller
scope  and  career.  All  these  causes  render  free  governments
the  only  proper  nursery  for  the  arts  and  sciences.

The  next  observation,  which  I  shall  make  on  this  head,  is,
That  nothing  is  more  favourable  to  the  rise  of  politeness  and
learning,  than  a  number  of  neighbouring  and  independent  statesf
connected  together  by  commerce  and  policy.  The  emulation,
which  naturally  arises  among  those  neighbouring  states,  is
an  obvious  source  of  improvement :  But  what  I  would  chiefly
insist  on  is  the  stop,  which  such  limited  territories  give  both
to  power  and  to  authority.

Extended  governments,  where  a  single  person  has  great
influence,  soon  become  absolute ;  but  small  ones  change
naturally  into  commonwealths.  A  large  government  is  ac
customed  by  degrees  to  tyranny ;  because  each  act  of  vio
lence  is  at  first  performed  upon  a  part,  which,  being  distant
from  the  majority,  is  not  taken  notice  of,  nor  excites  any
violent  ferment.  Besides,  a  large  government,  though  the
whole  be  discontented,  may,  by  a  little  art,  be  kept  in  obe
dience  ;  while  each  part,  ignorant  of  the  resolutions  of  the
rest,  is  afraid  to  begin  any  commotion  or  insurrection.  Not
to  mention,  that  there  is  a  superstitious  reverence  for  princes,
which  mankind  naturally  contract  when  they  do  not  often
see  the  sovereign,  and  when  many  of  them  become  not  ac
quainted  with  him  so  as  to  perceive  his  weaknesses.  And
as  large  states  can  afford  a  great  expence,  in  order  to  sup
port  the  pomp  of  majesty ;  this  is  a  kind  of  fascination  on
men,  and  naturally  contributes  to  the  enslaving  of  them.

In  a  small  government,  any  act  of  oppression  is  imme
diately  known  throughout  the  whole  :  The  murmurs  and
discontents,  proceeding  from  it,  are  easily  communicated  :
And  the  indignation  arises  the  higher,  because  the  subjects
are  not  apt  to  apprehend  in  such  states,  that  the  distance  is
very  wide  between  themselves  and  their  sovereign.  *  No  man,'
said  the  prince  of  CONDE,  'is  a  hero  to  his  Valet  de  Chambre.'
It  is  certain  that  admiration  and  acquaintance  are  altogether
incompatible  towards  any  mortal  creature.1  Sleepand  love  con-

1  [Editions  C  to  K  add  the  following :  the  universe, Upon  that  head,  says  he,

Antigonus,  being  complimented  by  his  you  may  consult  the  person  that  empties

llatterers,  as  a  deity,  and  as  the  son  of  my  close  stool.\
that  glorious  planet,  which  illuminates


182  ESSAY  XIV.

vinced  even  ALEXANDER  himself  that  he  was  not  a  God :  But  I
suppose  that  such  as  daily  attended  him  could  easily,  from  the
numberless  weaknesses  to  which  he  was  subject,  have  given
him  many  still  more  convincing  proofs  of  his  humanity.

But  the  divisions  into  small  states  are  favourable  to  learn
ing,  by  stopping  the  progress  of  authority  as  well  as  that  of
power.  Reputation  is  often  as  great  a  fascination  upon  men
as  sovereignty,  and  is  equally  destructive  to  the  freedom  of
thought  and  examination.  But  where  a  number  of  neigh
bouring  states  have  a  great  intercourse  of  arts  and  com
merce,  their  mutual  jealousy  keeps  them  from  receiving  too
lightly  the  law  from  each  other,  in  matters  of  taste  and  of
reasoning,  and  makes  them  examine  every  work  of  art  with  the
greatest  care  and  accuracy.  The  contagion  of  popular  opinion
spreads  not  so  easily  from  one  place  to  another.  It  readily
receives  a  check  in  some  state  or  other,  where  it  concurs  not
with  the  prevailing  prejudices.  And  nothing  but  nature
and  reason,1  or,  at  least,  what  bears  them  a  strong  resem
blance,  can  force  its  way  through  all  obstacles,  and  unite  the
most  rival  nations  into  an  esteem  and  admiration  of  it.

GREECE  was  a  cluster  of  little  principalities,  which  soon
became  republics ;  and  being  united  both  by  their  near
neighbourhood,  and  by  the  ties  of  the  same  language  and
interest,  they  entered  into  the  closest  intercourse  of  commerce
and  learning.  There  concurred  a  happy  climate,  a  soil  not
unfertile,  and  a  most  harmonious  and  comprehensive  lan
guage  ;  so  that  every  circumstance  among  that  people
seemed  to  favour  the  rise  of  the  arts  and  sciences.  Each  city
produced  its  several  artists  and  philosophers,  who  refused  to
yield  the  preference  to  those  of  the  neighbouring  republics  :
Their  contention  and  debates  sharpened  the  wits  of  men :
A  variety  of  objects  was  presented  to  the  judgment,  while
each  challenged  the  preference  to  the  rest :  and  the  sciences,
not  being  dwarfed  by  the  restraint  of  authority,  were  enabled
to  make  such  considerable  shoots,  as  are,  even  at  this  time,
the  objects  of  our  admiration.  After  the  ROMAN  Christian,
or  catholic  church  had  spread  itself  over  the  civilized  world,
and  had  engrossed  all  the  learning  of  the  times ;  being  really
one  large  state  within  itself,  and  united  under  one  head ;
this  variety  of  sects  immediately  disappeared,  and  the
PERIPATETIC  philosophy  was  alone  admitted  into  all  the

1  [Or  —  resemblance  :  omitted  in  C  and  D.]


THE  RISE OF  ARTS AND SCIENCES.  183

schools,  to  the  utter  depravation  of  every  kind  of  learning
But  mankind,  having  at  length  thrown  off  this  yoke,  affairs
are  now  returned  nearly  to  the  same  situation  as  before,  and
EUROPE  is  at  present  a  copy  at  large,  of  what  GREECE  was
formerly  a  pattern  in  miniature.  We  have  seen  the  ad
vantage  of  this  situation  in  several  instances.  What  checked
the  progress  of  the  CARTESIAN  philosophy,  to  which  the
FRENCH  nation  shewed  such  a  strong  propensity  towards  the
end  of  the  last  century,  but  the  opposition  made  to  it  by
the  other  nations  of  EUROPE,  who  soon  discovered  the  weak
sides  of  that  philosophy  ?  The  severest  scrutiny,  which
NEWTON'S  theory  has  undergone,  proceeded  not  from  his  own
countrymen,  but  from  foreigners  ;  and  if  it  can  overcome
the  obstacles,  which  it  meets  with  at  present  in  all  parts  of
EUROPE,  it  will  probably  go  down  triumphant  to  the  latest
posterity.  The  ENGLISH  are  become  sensible  of  the  scan
dalous  licentiousness  of  their  stage,  from  the  example  of  the
FRENCH  decency  and  morals.  The  FRENCH  are  convinced,
that  their  theatre  has  become  somewhat  effeminate,  by  too
much  love  and  gallantry  ;  and  begin  to  approve  of  the  more
masculine  taste  of  some  neighbouring  nations.

In  CHINA,  there  seems  to  be  a  pretty  considerable  stock  of
politeness  and  science,  which,  in  the  course  of  so  many
centuries,  might  naturally  be  expected  to  ripen  into  some
thing  more  perfect  and  finished,  than  what  has  yet  arisen
from  them.  But  CHINA  is  one  vast  empire,  speaking  one
language,  governed  by  one  law,  and  sympathizing  in  the
same  manners.  The  authority  of  any  teacher,  such  as  CON
FUCIUS,  was  propagated  easily  from  one  corner  of  the  empire
to  the  other.  None  had  courage  to  resist  the  torrent  of  popu
lar  opinion.  And  posterity  was  not  bold  enough  to  dispute
what  had  been  universally  received  by  their  ancestors.  This
seems  to  be  one  natural  reason,  why  the  sciences  have  made
so  slow  a  progress  in  that  mighty  empire.1

1  If  it  be  asked  how  we  can  reconcile  They  have  no  neighbours,  except  the

to  the  foregoing  principles  the  happi-  TARTARS,  from  whom  they  were,  in  some

ness, riches,  and good police of  the  measure  secured,  at  least  seemed  to  be

CHINESK, who have always been go-  secured,  by  their  famous  wall,  and  by

verned by a sole monarch, and  can  the  great  superiority  of  their  numbers,

(scarce  form  an idea  of  a  free  govern-  By  this  means,  military  discipline  has

ment ;  I  would  answer,  that  tho' the  always  been  much neglected  amongst

CHINUSE government  be  a  pure  mon-  them ; and  their standing forces  are

archy, it is not, properly speaking,  mere  militia,  of  the  worst  kind ; and

absolute. This  proceeds  from  a  pecu-  unfit  to  suppress  any  general  insurrec-

liarity  of  the  situation  of  that  country  :  tiou  in  countries  so  extremely  populous.


184  ESSAY  XIV.

If  we  consider  the  face  of  the  globe,  EUROPE,  of  all  the
four  parts  of  the  world,  is  the  most  broken  by  seas,  rivers,
and  mountains ;  and  GREECE  of  all  countries  of  EUROPE.
Hence  these  regions  were  naturally  divided  into  several
distinct  governments.  And  hence  the  sciences  arose  in
GREECE  ;  and  EUROPE  has  been  hitherto  the  most  constant
habitation  of  them.

I  have  sometimes  been  inclined  to  think,  that  interrup
tions  in  the  periods  of  learning,  were  they  not  attended
with  such  a  destruction  of  ancient  books,  and  'the  records  of
history,  would  be  rather  favourable  to  the  arts  and  sciences,
by  breaking  the  progress  of  authority,  and  dethroning  the
tyrannical  usurpers  over  human  reason.  In  this  particular,
they  have  the  same  influence,  as  interruptions  in  political
governments  and  societies.  Consider  the  blind  submission
of  the  ancient  philosophers  to  the  several  masters  in  each
school,  and  you  will  be  convinced,  that  little  good  could  be
expected  from  a  hundred  centuries  of  such  a  servile  philo
sophy.  Even  the  ECLECTICS,  who  arose  about  the  age  of
AUGUSTUS,  notwithstanding  their  professing  to  chuse  freely
what  pleased  them  from  every  different  sect,  were  yet,  in  the
main,  as  slavish  and  dependent  as  any  of  their  brethren
since  they  sought  for  truth  not  in  nature,  but  in  the  several
schools  ;  where  they  supposed  she  must  necessarily  be  found,
though  not  united  in  a  body,  yet  dispersed  in  parts.  Upon
the  revival  of  learning,  those  sects  of  STOICS  and  EPI
CUREANS,  PLATONISTS  and  PYTHAGORICIANS,  could  never  re
gain  any  credit  or  authority  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  by  the
example  of  then*  fall,  kept  men  from  submitting,  with  such
blind  deference,  to  those  new  sects,  which  have  attempted
to  gain  an  ascendant  over  them.

The  third  observation,  which  I  shall  form  on  this  head,  of
the  rise  and  progress  of  the  arts  and  sciences,  is,  That  though
the  only  proper  Nursery  of  these  noble  plants  be  a  free  state  ;
yet  may  they  be  transplanted  into  any  government ;  and  that  a

The  sword,  therefore,  may  properly  be  have  been  so  frequent  and  dangerous

said  to  be  always  in the  hands  of  the  in  that  government. Perhaps,  a  pure

people,  -which  is  a sufficient  restraint  monarchy  of  this  kind,  were  it  fitted

upon  the  monarch,  and  obliges  him  to  for  a  defence  against  foreign  enemies,

lay  his  mandarins  or  governors  of  pro-  would  be  the  best  of  all  governments,

vinces under  the  restraint  of  general  as  having  both  the  tranquillity  attending

laws,  in  order  to  prevent  those  rebel-  kingly  power,  and  the  moderation  and

lions,  which  we  learn  from  history  to  liberty  of  popular  assemblies.


THE  RISE  OF  ARTS  AND  SCIENCES.  185

republic  is  most  favourable  to  the  growth  of  the  sciences,  a
civilized  monarchy  to  that  of  the  polite  arts.

To  balance  a  large  state  or  society,  whether  monarchical
or  republican,  on  general  laws,  is  a  work  of  so  great  difficulty,
that  no  human  genius,  however  comprehensive,  is  able,  by
the  mere  dint  of  reason  and  reflection,  to  effect  it.  The
judgments  of  many  must  unite  in  this  work:  Experience
must  guide  their  labour :  Time  must  bring  it  to  perfection :
And  the  feeling  of  inconveniencies  must  correct  the  mistakes,
which  they  inevitably  fall  into,  in  their  first  trials  and  ex
periments.  Hence  appears  the  impossibility,  that  this  un
dertaking  should  be  begun  and  carried  on  in  any  monarchy ;
since  such  a  form  of  government,  ere  civilized,  knows  no
other  secret  or  policy,  than  that  of  entrusting  unlimited
powers  to  every  governor  or  magistrate,  and  subdividing
the  people  into  so  many  classes  and  orders  of  slavery.  From
such  a  situation,  no  improvement  can  ever  be  expected  in
the  sciences,  in  the  liberal  arts,  in  laws,  and  scarcely  in  the
manual  arts  and  manufactures.  The  same  barbarism  and
ignorance,  with  which  the  government  commences,  is  propa
gated  to  all  posterity,  and  can  never  come  to  a  period  by  the
efforts  or  ingenuity  of  such  unhappy  slaves.

But  though  law,  the  source  of  all  security  and  happiness,
arises  late  in  any  government,  and  is  the  slow  product  of
order  and  of  liberty,  it  is  not  preserved  with  the  same
difficulty,  with  which  it  is  produced ;  but  when  it  has  once
taken  root,  is  a  hardy  plant,  which  will  scarcely  ever  perish
through  the  ill  culture  of  men,  or  the  rigour  of  the  seasons.
The  arts  of  luxury,  and  much  more  the  liberal  arts,  which
depend  on  a  refined  taste  or  sentiment,  are  easily  lost ;  be
cause  they  are  always  relished  by  a  few  only,  whose  leisure,
fortune,  and  genius  fit  them  for  such  amusements.  But
what  is  profitable  to  every  mortal,  and  in  common  life,  when
once  discovered,  can  scarcely  fall  into  oblivion,  but  by  the
total  subversion  of  society,  and  by  such  furious  inundations
of  barbarous  invaders,  as  obliterate  all  memory  of  former
arts  and  civility.  Imitation  also  is  apt  to  transport  these
coarser  and  more  useful  arts  from  one  climate  to  another,
and  make  them  precede  the  refined  arts  in  their  progress  ;
though  perhaps  they  sprang  after  them  in  their  first  rise  and
propagation.  From  these  causes  proceed  civilized  mo-


180  ESSAY  XIV.

narchics ;  where  the  arts  of  government,  first  invented  in
free  states,  are  preserved  to  the  mutual  advantage  and  se
curity  of  sovereign  and  subject.

However  perfect,  therefore,  the  monarchical  form  may
appear  to  some  politicians,  it  owes  all  its  perfection  to  the
republican ;  nor  is  it  possible,  that  a  pure  despotism,  estab
lished  among  a  barbarous  people,  can  ever,  by  its  native
force  and  energy,  refine  and  polish  itself.  It  must  borrow
its  laws,  and  methods,  and  institutions,  and  consequently  its
stability  and  order,  from  free  governments.  These  advan
tages  are  the  sole  growth  of  republics.  The  extensive  des
potism  of  a  barbarous  monarchy,  by  entering  into  the  detail
of  the  government,  as  well  as  into  the  principal  points  of
administration,  for  ever  prevents  all  such  improvement.

In  a  civilized  monarchy,  the  prince  alone  is  unrestrained
in  the  exercise  of  his  authority,  and  possesses  alone  a  power,
which  is  not  bounded  by  any  thing  but  custom,  example,  and
the  sense  of  his  own  interest.  Every  minister  or  magistrate,
however  eminent,  must  submit  to  the  general  laws,  which
govern  the  whole  society,  and  must  exert  the  authority  dele
gated  to  him  after  the  manner,  which  is  prescribed.  The
people  depend  on  none  but  their  sovereign,  for  the  security
of  their  property.  He  is  so  far  removed  from  them,  and  is
so  much  exempt  from  private  jealousies  or  interests,  that
this  dependence  is  scarcely  felt.  And  thus  a  species  of
government  arises,  to  which,  in  a  high  political  rant,  we  may
give  the  name  of  Tyranny,  but  which,  by  a  just  and  prudent
administration,  may  afford  tolerable  security  to  the  people,
and  may  answer  most  of  the  ends  of  political  society.

But  though  in  a  civilized  monarchy,  as  well  as  in  a  repub
lic,  the  people  have  security  for  the  enjoyment  of  their  pro
perty  ;  yet  in  both  these  forms  of  government,  those  who
possess  the  supreme  authority  have  the  disposal  of  many
honours  and  advantages,  which  excite  the  ambition  and
avarice  of  mankind.  The  only  difference  is,  that,  in  a  re
public,  the  candidates  for  office  must  look  downwards,  to  gain
the  suffrages  of  the  people  ;  in  a  monarchy,  they  must  turn
their  attention  upwards,  to  court  the  good  graces  and  favour
of  the  great.  To  be  successful  in  the  former  way,  it  is
necessary  for  a  man  to  make  himself  useful,  by  his  industry,
capacity,  or  knowledge :  To  be  prosperous  in  the  latter  way,
it  is  requisite  for  him  to  render  himself  agrecalle,  by  his  wit,


THE  HISE  OF  ARTS  AND SCIENCES.  187

complaisance,  or  civility.  A  strong  genius  succeeds  best  in
republics  :  A  refined  taste  in  monarchies.  And  consequently
the  sciences  are  the  more  natural  growth  of  the  one,  and  the
polite  arts  of  the  other.

Not  to  mention,  that  monarchies,  receiving  their  chief
stability  from  a  superstitious  reverence  to  priests  and  princes,
have  commonly  abridged  the  liberty  of  reasoning,  with  re
gard  to  religion,  and  politics,  and  consequently  metaphysics
and  morals.  All  these  form  the  most  considerable  branches
of  science.  Mathematics  and  natural  philosophy,  which  only
remain,  are  not  half  so  valuable.1

Among  the  arts  of  conversation,  no  one  pleases  more  than
mutual  deference  or  civility,  which  leads  us  to  resign  our
own  inclinations  to  those  of  our  companion,  and  to  curb  and
conceal  that  presumption  and  arrogance,  so  natural  to  the
human  mind.  A  good-natured  man,  who  is  well  educated,
practises  this  civility  to  every  mortal,  without  premeditation
or  interest.  But  in  order  to  render  that  valuable  quality
general  among  any  people,  it  seems  necessary  to  assist  the
natural  disposition  by  some  general  motive.  Where  power
rises  upwards  from  the  people  to  the  great,  as  in  all  republics,
such  refinements  of  civility  are  apt  to  be  little  practised  ;
since  the  whole  state  is,  by  that  means,  brought  near  to  a
level,  and  every  member  of  it  is  rendered,  in  a  great  measure,
independent  of  another.  The  people  have  the  advantage,  by
the  authority  of  their  suffrages  :  The  great,  by  the  supe
riority  of  their  station.  But  in  a  civilized  monarchy,  there
is  a  long  train  of  dependence  from  the  prince  to  the  peasant,
which  is  not  great  enough  to  render  property  precarious,  or
depress  the  minds  of  the  people ;  but  is  sufficient  to  beget
in  every  one  an  inclination  to  please  his  superiors,  and  to
form  himself  upon  those  models,  which  are  most  acceptable
to  people  of  condition  and  education.  Politeness  of  manners,
therefore,  arises  most  naturally  in  monarchies  and  courts ;
and  where  that  flourishes,  none  of  the  liberal  arts  will  be
altogether  neglected  or  despised.

The  republics  in  EUROPE  are  at  present  noted  for  want  of
politeness.  The  good-manners  of  a  Swiss  civilized  in  HOLLAND2,

1  [Editions  C  to  P :  There  is  a  very  allow  the  others  to  remain  altogether

great  connection among all the arts,  rude  and  barbarous.]
which  contribute  to  pleasure ;  and  the  2  C'est  la  politosse  d'un  Suissc

ivime  delicacy  of  taste,  which  enables  us  En  HOLLAND*;  civilise,

to  make  improvements  in  one,  will  not  ROUSSEAU.


188  ESSAY  XIV.

is  an  expression  for  rusticity  among  the  FRENCH.  The  ENG
LISH,  in  some  degree,  fall  under  the  same  censure,  notwith
standing  their  learning  and  genius.  And  if  the  VENETIANS
be  an  exception  to  the  rule,  they  owe  it,  perhaps,  to  their
communication  with  the  other  ITALIANS,  most  of  whose
governments  beget  a  dependence  more  than  sufficient  for
civilizing  their  manners.

It  is  difficult  to  pronounce  any  judgment  concerning  the
refinements  of  the  ancient  republics  in  this  particular :  But
I  am  apt  to  suspect,  that  the  arts  of  conversation  were  not
brought  so  near  to  perfection  among  them  as  the  arts  of
writing  and  composition.  The  scurrility  of  the  ancient  ora
tors,  in  many  instances,  is  quite  shocking,  and  exceeds  all
belief.  Vanity  too  is  often  not  a  little  offensive  in  authors  of
those  ages  !  ;  as  well  as  the  common  licentiousness  and  im
modesty  of  their  stile,  Quicunque  impudicus,  adulter,  ganeo,
manu,  venire,  pene,  bona  patria  laceraverat,  says  SALLUST  in
one  of  the  gravest  and  most  moral  passages  of  his  history.
Nam  fuit  ante  Helenam  Cunnus  teterrima  belli  Causa,  is  an
expression  of  HORACE,  in  tracing  the  origin  of  moral  good
and  evil.  OVID  and  LUCRETIUS  2  are  almost  as  licentious  in
their  stile  as  Lord  ROCHESTER  ;  though  the  former  were  fine
gentlemen  and  delicate  writers,  and  the  latter3,  from  the
corruptions  of  that  court,  in  which  he  lived,  seems  to  have
thrown  off  all  regard  to  shame  and  decency.  JUVENAL  in
culcates  modesty  with  great  zeal ;  but  sets  a  very  bad
example  of  it,  if  we  consider  the  impudence  of  his  expres
sions.

I  shall  also  be  bold  to  affirm,  that  among  the  ancients,
there  was  not  much  delicacy  of  breeding,  or  that  polite  defe
rence  and  respect,  which  civility  obliges  us  either  to  express
or  counterfeit  towards  the  persons  with  whom  we  converse.
CICERO  was  certainly  one  of  the  finest  gentlemen  of  his  age  ;

1  It  is needless to  cite CICEEO  or  commends  a,  very  extraordinary  cure  for
PLTNY on this head  : They  are too  love,  and  what  one  expects  not  to  meet
much  noted  :  But  one  is  a  little  sur-  with  in  so  elegant  and  philosophical  a
prised  to  find  AREIAN, a very  grave,  poem. It  seems  to  have  been  the  ori-
jinlicious  writer,  interrupt the  thread  ginal  of  some  of  Dr.  SWIFT'S'  images,
of  his  narration  all  of  a  sudden,  to  tell  The  elegnnt  CATUJXUS and  PII.EDKTJS
his  readers  that  he  himself  is  as  emi-  fall  under  the  same  censure.

nent  among  the  GREEKS  for  eloquence  3  [Editions  C  and  D  read :  was  an

as  ALEXANDER  was  for  arms.  Lib.  i.  12. abandou'd  and  shameless  Profligate.]

2  This  poet  (See  lib.  iv. 1175.)  re-


1  [C  to  P  insert :  beautiful  and  cleanly.]


THE  RISE  OF  ARTS  AND SCIENCES.  189

yet  I  must  confess  I  have  frequently  been  shocked  with  the
poor  figure  under  which  he  represents  his  friend  ATTICUS,  in
those  dialogues,  where  he  himself  is  introduced  as  a  speaker.
That  learned  and  virtuous  ROMAN,  whose  dignity,  though  he
was  only  a  private  gentleman,  was  inferior  to  that  of  no  one
in  ROME,  is  there  shewn  in  rather  a  more  pitiful  light  than
PHILALETHES'S  friend  in  our  modern  dialogues.  He  is  a
humble  admirer  of  the  orator,  pays  him  frequent  compli
ments,  and  receives  his  instructions,  with  all  the  deference
which  a  scholar  owes  to  his  master '.  Even  CATO  is  treated
in  somewhat  of  a  cavalier  manner  in  the  dialogues  de
finibus.2

3  One  of  the  most  particular  details  of  a  real  dialogue,
which  we  meet  with  in  antiquity,  is  related  by  POLYBIUS  4  ;
when  PHILIP,  king  of  MACEDON,  a  prince  of  wit  and  parts,
met  with  TITUS  FLAMININUS,  one  of  the  politest  of  the
ROMANS,  as  we  learn  from  PLUTARCH  5,  accompanied  with
ambassadors  from  almost  all  the  GREEK  cities.  The  ^ETOLIAN
ambassador  very  abruptly  tells  the  king,  that  he  tallied  like
a  fool  or  a  madman  (Xrjpsiv).  That's  evident,  says  his  majesty,
even  to  a  blind  man ;  which  was  a  raillery  on  the  blindness  of
his  excellency.  Yet  all  this  did  not  pass  the  usual  bounds  :
For  the  conference  was  not  disturbed  ;  and  FLAMININUS  was
very  well  diverted  with  these  strokes  of  humour.  At  the
end,  when  PHILIP  craved  a  little  time  to  consult  with  his
friends,  of  whom  he  had  none  present,  the  ROMAN  general,
being  desirous  also  to  shew  his  wit,  as  the  historian  says,
tells  him,  that  perhaps  the  reason,  why  he  had  none  of  his
friends  with  him,  was  because  he  had  murdered  them  all ;
which  was  actually  the  case.  This  unprovoked  piece  of
rusticity  is  not  condemned  by  the  historian;  caused  110

1  ATT. Non mihi  videtur  ad  beate  great  a  genius  as  himself,  had  he  spoke,
vivendum  satis  esse virtutem. MAB.  not  to  have  said  something  decisive  on
At  hercule  BRTJTO  meo  videtur ;  cujus  the  subject,  and  have  carried  every  thing
ego  judicium,  pace  tua  dixerim,  longe  before  him,  as  he  always  does  on  other
antepono  tuo, Tusc.  Qusest.  lib.  v.  5. ' occasions. There  is  also  a  spirit  of  dia-

2  [Editions  C  to  P  add  the  following :  logue  observed  in  the  eloquent  books  de
And 'tis remarkable, that CJCEEO,  Oratore,  and  a  tolerable  equality  main-
being a great sceptic in matters of  tained  among  the  speakers  : But  then
religion, and unwilling to  determine  these  speakers  are  the  great  men  of  the
any thing on that head among the  age  preceding  the  author,  and  he  recounts
different  sects  of  philosophy,  introduces  the  conference  as  only  from  hearsay.]
his friends disputing concerning the  3  [This  paragraph  is  not found in
being  and  nature  of  the  gods,  while  he  Editions  C  and  D.]

is  only  a  hearer;  because,  forsooth,  it  4  Lib.  xvii.  4.

would  have  been  an  impropriety  for  so  s  In  viUiIrLAMiN.,c.  2.


190


ESSAY XIV.


farther  resentment  in  PHILIP,  than  to  excite  a  SARDONIAN
smile,  or  what  we  call  a  grin ;  and  hindered  him  not  from
renewing  the  conference  next  day.  PLUTARCH  l  too  mentions
this  raillery  amongst  the  witty  and  agreeable  sayings  of

FLAMININUS.2


1  PLUT.  in  vita  FLAMIN. c.  17.

2  [Editions  C  to  P  insert : 'Tis  but
an indifferent compliment, which
HORACE  pays  to  his  friend  GROSPHUS,
in  the  ode  addressed  to  him. No  one,
says  he,  is  happy  in  every  respect. And
I  may  perhaps  enjoy  some  ad.vantagis,
which  you  are  deprived  of. You  possess
great riches : Your bellowing herds
cover  the  SICILIAN  plains : Your  chariot
is  drawn  by  the  finest  horses  :  And  you
fire  arrayed  in  the  richest  purple. But
the  indulgent  fates,  with  a  small  inheri
tance,  have  given  MB  a  fine  genius,  and
have  endowed  me  with  a  contempt  for
ihe,  malignant  judgments  of  the  vulgar, .'
PHJEDRUS  says  to  his  patron,  EUTYCHUS,
If  you  intend  to  read  my  works,  I  shall
Itepleasid:  If  not,  1  shall,  at  least,  have
the  advantage  of  pleasing  posterity.'2 I
am apt  to  think  that  a  modern  poet


would  not  have  been  guilty  of  such  an
impropriety  as  that  which  may  be  ob
served  in  VIRGIL'S  address  to  AUGUSTUS,
when,  after  a  great  deal  of  extravagant
flattery,  and  after  having  deified  the
emperor,  according  to  the  custom  of
those  times,  he,  at  last,  places  this  god
on  the  same  level  with  himself.  By
your  gracious  nod,  says  he,  render  my
undertaking  prosperous;  and  taking
pity,  together  with  me,  of  the  Swains
ignorant  of  husbandry,  bestow  your
favourable  influence  on  this  work.3  Had
men,  in  that  age.  been  accustomed  to
observe  such  niceties,  a  writer  so  delicate
as  VIRGIL  would  certainly  have  given
a  different  turn  to  this  sentence.  The
court  of  AUGUSTUS,  however  polite,  had
not  yet,  it  seems,  worn  off  the  manners
of  the  republic.


Nihil  est  ab  omni


Parte  beatum.

Abstulit  clarum  cita  mors  ACHILLKM,
Longa  TITHONUM  minuit  senectus,
Kt  milii  forsan,  tibi  quod  negarit,

Porriget  hora.

Te  greges  centum.  Siculaeque  circum
Mugiunt  vaccae :  tibi  tollit.  hinni-
Tum  apta  quadrigis  equa:  te  bis  Afro

Murice  tinctae

Vestiunt  lanae :  mihi  parva  rura,  &
Spiritum  Graise  tenucm  Camcenae
Parca  non  mendax  dedit  &  malignum

Spernere  vulgus.

Lib.  2.  Ode  16.

2  Quern  si  leges,  laetabor ;  sin  autem

minus,

Ilabebunt  certe  quo  se  oblectent  posteri.
Lib.  3.  Prol.  31.

3  Ignarosque vise mecum miseratus

agrestes

Jngredere,  &  votis  jam  mine  assuesce
vocari.

Georg.  Lib.  1.41.

One  would  not  say  to  a  prince  or
great  man,  '  When  you  and  I  were  in
fiich  a  place,  we  saw  such  a  thing
happen.'  But,  '  When  you  were  in  such
a  place,  I  attended  you :  And  such  a
thing  happened.'

Here  I  cannot  forbear  mentioning  a


piece  of  delicacy  observed  in  FRANCE,
which  seems  to  me  excessive  and  ridi
culous.  You  must  not  say,  '  That  is  a
very  fine  dog,  Madam.'  But,  '  Madam,
that  is  a  very  fine  dog.'  They  think  it
indecent  that  those  words,  dog  and
madam,  should  be  coupled  together  in
the  sentence  ;  though  they  have  no  re
ference  to  each  other  in  the  sense.

After  all,  I  acknowledge,  that  this
reasoning  from  single  passages  of  an
cient  authors  may  seem  fallacious  ;  and
that  the  foregoing  arguments  cannot
have  great  force,  but  with  those  who
are  well  acquainted  with  these  writers,
and  know  the  truth  of  the  general
position.  For  instance,  what  absurdity
would  it  be  to  assert,  that  VIRGIL
understood  not  the  force  of  the  terms
he  employs,  and  could  not  chuse  his
epithets  with  propriety  ?  Because  in
the  following  lines,  addressed  also  to
AUGUSTUS,  he  has  failed  in  that  par
ticular,  and  has  ascribed  to  the
INDIANS  a  quality,  which  seems,  in  a
manner,  to  turn  his  hero  into  ridicule.

-  Et  te,  maxime  CJKSAR,
Qui  nuuc  extremis  ASIJE  jam  victor  in

or  is

Imbdlcm  avertis  HOMANIS  arcibus  Indum.
Georg.  Lib.  2.  171.]


THE RISE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES.  101

Cardinal  WOLSEY  apologized  for  his  famous  piece  of  inso
lence,  in  saying,  EGO  ET  REX  MEUS,  I  and  my  king,  by  ob
serving,  that  this  expression  was  conformable  to  the  Latin
idiom,  and  that  a  ROMAN  always  named  himself  before  the
person  to  whom,  or  of  whom  he  spake.  Yet  this  seems  to
have  been  an  instance  of  want  of  civility  among  that  people.
The  ancients  made  it  a  rule,  that  the  person  of  the  greatest
dignity  should  be  mentioned  first  in  the  discourse ;  inso
much,  that  we  find  the  spring  of  a  quarrel  and  jealousy
between  the  ROMANS  and  ^ETOLIANS,  to  have  been  a  poet's
naming  the  ^ETOLIANS  before  the  ROMANS,  in  celebrating  a
victory  gained  by  their  united  arms  over  the  MACEDONIANS.1
2  Thus  LIVIA  disgusted  TIBERIUS  by  placing  her  own  name
before  his  in  an  inscription.3

No  advantages  in  this  world  are  pure  and  unmixed.  In
like  manner,  as  modern  politeness,  which  is  naturally  so
ornamental,  runs  often  into  affectation  and  foppery,  disguise
and  insincerity  ;  so  the  ancient  simplicity,  which  is  naturally
so  amiable  and  affecting,  often  degenerates  into  rusticity  and
abuse,  scurrility  and  obscenity.

If  the  superiority  in  politeness  should  be  allowed  to  modern
times,  the  modern  notions  of  gallantry,  the  natural  produce
of  courts  and  monarchies,  will  probably  be  assigned  as  the
causes  of  this  refinement.  No  one  denies  this  invention  to
be  modern4 :  But  some  of  the  more  zealous  partizans  of  the
ancients,  have  asserted  it  to  be  foppish  and  ridiculous,  and  a
reproach,  rather  than  a  credit,  to  the  present  age.5  It  may
here  be  proper  to  examine  this  question.

Nature  has  implanted  in  all  living  creatures  an  affection
between  the  sexes,  which,  even  in  the  fiercest  and  most  rapa
cious  animals,  is  not  merely  confined  to  the  satisfaction  of
the  bodily  appetite,  but  begets  a  friendship  and  mutual  sym
pathy,  which  runs  through  the  whole  tenor  of  their  lives.
Nay,  even  in  those  species,  where  nature  limits  the  indulgence
of  this  appetite  to  one  season  and  to  one  object,  and  forms  a
kind  of  marriage  or  association  between  a  single  male  and
female,  there  is  yet  a  visible  complacency  and  benevolence,

1  PLTJT.  in  vita,  FLAMIN. c.  9.  CLINIAS,  whenever  he  comes  to  town,

2  [This  sentence  and  the  paragraph instead  of  waiting  on  his  mistress,  sends
next following were added in Edi- for  her  to  come  to  him.

tion  K.]  5  Lord  SHAFTESBUEY,  see  his  Moral-

3  TACIT,  Ann.  lib.  iii.  cap.  64.  ists.

4  In  the  Sdf -Tor mentor  of  TEUENCE,


192  ESSAY  XIV.

which  extends  farther,  and  mutually  softens  the  affections  of
the  sexes  towards  each  other.1  How  much  more  must  this
have  place  in  man,  where  the  confinement  of  the  appetite  is
not  natural ;  bat  either  is  derived  accidentally  from  some
strong  charm  of  love,  or  arises  from  reflections  on  duty
and  convenience  ?  Nothing,  therefore,  can  proceed  less  from
affectation  than  the  passion  of  gallantry.  It  is  natural  in
the  highest  degree.  Art  and  education,  in  the  most  elegant
courts,  make  no  more  alteration  on  it,  than  on  all  the  other
laudable  passions.  They  only  turn  the  mind  more  towards
it ;  they  refine  it ;  they  polish  it ;  and  give  it  a  proper  grace
and  expression.

But  gallantry  is  as  generous  as  it  is  natural.  To  correct
such  gross  vices,  as  lead  us  to  commit  real  injury  on  others,
is  the  part  of  morals,  and  the  object  of  the  most  ordinary
education.  Where  that  is  not  attended  to,  in  some  degree,
no  human  society  can  subsist.  But  in  order  to  render  con
versation,  and  the  intercourse  of  minds  more  easy  and  agree
able,  good-manners  have  been  invented,  and  have  canned  the
matter  somewhat  farther.  Wherever  nature  has  given  the
mind  a  propensity  to  any  vice,  or  to  any  passion  disagreeable
to  others,  refined  breeding  has  taught  men  to  throw  the  biass
on  the  opposite  side,  and  to  preserve,  in  all  their  behaviour,
the  appearance  of  sentiments  different  from  those  to  which
they  naturally  incline.  Thus,  as  we  are  commonly  proud  and
selfish,  and  apt  to  assume  the  preference  above  others,  a  polite
man  learns  to  behave  with  deference  towards  his  companions,
and  to  yield  the  superiority  to  them  in  all  the  common  in
cidents  of  society.  In  like  manner,  wherever  a  person's
situation  may  naturally  beget  any  disagreeable  suspicion  in
him,  it  is  the  part  of  good-manners  to  prevent  it,  by  a  studied
display  of  sentiments,  directly  contrary  to  those  of  which  he
is  apt  to  be  jealous.  Thus,  old  men  know  their  infirmities,
and  naturally  dread  contempt  from  the  youth :  Hence,  well-
educated  youth  redouble  the  instances  of  respect  and  defer
ence  to  their  elders.  Strangers  and  foreigners  are  without
protection  :  Hence,  in  all  polite  countries,  they  receive  the

1  [Editions  C  to  P  add  the  following  L'orsa  con  1'orso  al  bosco  sicura  erra,

quotation.  La  Leonessa  appresso  il  Leon  giace,

Tutti  gli  altri  animai  che  sono  in  terra,  Con  Lupo  vive  il  Lupa  sicura,

0  che  vivon  quieti  &  stanno  in  pace ;  Ne  la  Ciuvenca  ha  del  Torel  paura.

O  se  vengon  a  rissa,  &  si  fan  guerra,  . ARIOSTO,  Canto  5.

A  la  femiua  il  maschio  non  la  face.


THE RISE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES.  11):!

highest  civilities,  and  are  entitled  to  the  first  place  in  every
company.  A  man  is  lord  in  his  own  family,  and  his  guests
are,  in  a  manner,  subject  to  his  authority :  Hence,  he  is  always
the  lowest  person  in  the  company ; .  attentive  to  the  wants  of
every  one ;  and  giving  himself  all  the  trouble,  in  order  to
please,  which  may  not  betray  too  visible  an  affectation,  or
impose  too  much  constraint  on  his  guests.1  Gallantry  ia
nothing  but  an  instance  of  the  same  generous  attention.  As
nature  has  given  man  the  superiority  above  woman,  by  en
dowing  him  with  greater  strength  both  of  mind  and  body ;
it  is  his  part  to  alleviate  that  superiority,  as  much  as  possible,
by  the  generosity  of  his  behaviour,  and  by  a  studied  deference
and  complaisance  for  all  her  inclinations  and  opinions.  Bar
barous  nations  display  this  superiority,  by  reducing  their
females  to  the  most  abject  slavery ;  by  confining  them,  by
beating  them,  by  selling  them,  by  killing  them.  But  the
male  sex,  among  a  polite  people,  discover  their  authority  in  a
more  generous,  though  riot  a  less  evident  manner ;  by  civility,
by  respect,  by  complaisance,  and,  in  a  word,  by  gallantry.
In  good  company,  you  need  not  ask,  Who  is  the  master  of  the
feast  ?  The  man,  who  sits  in  the  lowest  place,  and  who  is
always  industrious  in  helping  every  one,  is  certainly  the
person.  We  must  either  condemn  all  such  instances  of  gene
rosity,  as  foppish  and  affected,  or  admit  of  gallantry  among
the  rest.  The  ancient  MUSCOVITES  wedded  their  wives  with
a  whip,  instead  of  a  ring.  The  same  people,  in  their  own
houses,  took  always  the  precedency  above  foreigners,  even2
foreign  ambassadors.  These  two  instances  of  their  generosity
and  politeness  are  much  of  a  piece.

Gallantry  is  not  less  compatible  with  wisdom  and  prudence,
than  with  nature  and  generosity  ;  and  when  under  proper
regulations,  contributes  more  than  any  other  invention,  to  the
entertainment  and  improvement  of  the  youth  of  both  sexes.3
Among  every  species  of  animals,  nature  has  founded  on  the

1  The frequent mention in ancient  at  present  so  uncivilized  as  to  admit  of

authors  of  that  ill-bred  custom  of  the  such  a  custom.

master of  the family's eating better  -  See  Relation  of  three  Embassies,  by

bread  or  drinking  better  wine  at  table,  the  Earl  of  CARLISLE.
than  he  afforded  his  guests,  is  but  an  3  [Editions  C  to  P  read :  In  all  vege-

indifferent  mark  of  the  civility  of  those  tallies,  'tis  observable, that  the  flower

ages. See  JUVEXAL,  sat.  5.  PLINII  lib.  and the seed are always connected

xiv.  cap.  13. Also  PLINII  Epist.  Lucian  together;  and  in  like  manner,  among

de  -iiiercede  conductis, Saturnalia, cfc.  every  species,  &c.]
There  is  scarcely  any  part  of  EBKOPE

VOL. III.  0


194  ESSAY XIV.

love  between  the  sexes  their  sweetest  and  best  enjoyment.
But  the  satisfaction  of  the  bodily  appetite  is  not  alone  suffi
cient  to  gratify  the  mind  ;  and  even  among  brute-creatures,
we  find,  that  their  play  and  dalliance,  and  other  expressions  of
fondness,  form  the  greatest  part  of  the  entertainment.  In
rational  beings,  we  must  certainly  admit  the  mind  for  a  con
siderable  share.  Were  we  to  rob  the  feast  of  all  its  garniture
v>f  reason,  discourse,  sympathy,  friendship,  and  gaiety,  what
remains  would  scarcely  be  worth  acceptance,  in  the  judgment
of  the  truly  elegant  and  luxurious.

What  better  school  for  manners,  than  the  company  of
virtuous  women  ;  where  the  mutual  endeavour  to  please  must
insensibly  polish  the  mind,  where  the  example  of  the  female
softness  and  modesty  must  communicate  itself  to  their
admirers,  and  where  the  delicacy  of  that  sex  puts  every  one
on  his  guard,  lest  he  give  offence  by  any  breach  of  decency1.

Amono-  the  ancients,  the  character  of  the  fair-sex  was  con-

O

sidered  as  altogether  domestic ;  nor  were  they  regarded  as
part  of  the  polite  world  or  of  good  company.  This,  perhaps,
is  the  true  reason  why  the  ancients  have  not  left  us  one  piece
of  pleasantry  that  is  excellent,  (unless  one  may  except  the
Banquet  of  XENOPHON,  and  the  Dialogues  of  LUCIAN)  though
many  of  their  serious  compositions  are  altogether  inimitable.
HORACE  condemns  the  coarse  railleries  and  cold  jests  of
PLAUTUS  :  But,  though  the  most  easy,  agreeable,  and
judicious  writer  in  the  world,  is  his  own  talent  for  ridicule
very  striking  or  refined  ?  This,  therefore,  is  one  considerable
improvement,  which  the  polite  arts  have  received  from  gal
lantry,  and  from  courts,  where  it  first  arose.2

1  [C  to  O  add :  I  must  confess,  That  ing  :  The  point  of  honour,  or  duelling,
my  own  particular  choice  rather  leads  is a modern invention, as well as
me to  prefer  the  company of  a few  gallantry ; and by some esteemed
select companions,  with  whom  I  can,  equally useful for the refining of
calmly  and  peaceably,  enjoy  the  feast  manners :  But  how  it  has  contributed
of  reason,  mnd  try  the  justness  of  every  to that effect,  I  am  at  a  loss  to de-
reflection,  whether  gay  or  serious,  that  termine. Conversation, among the
may  occur  to  me. But  as  such  a  de-  greatest  rustics,  is not  commonly  in-
lightful  society  is  not  every  day  to  be  vested  with  such  rudeness  as  can  give
met  with,  I  must  think,  that  mixt  com-  occasion  to  duels,  even  according  to  the
panics, without  the fair-sex, are the  most refined laws of this fantastic
most insipid entertainment in the  honour ;  and  as  to  the  other  small  in-
world, and destitute of gaiety and  decencies,  which  are  the  most  offensive,
politeness,  as much as of  sense and  because  the most frequent, they can
reason. Nothing  can  keep  them  from  never  be  cured  by  the  practice  of  duel-
excessive  dulness  but  hard  drinking ;  a  ling. But  these  notions  are not  only
remedy  worse  than  the  dise<ise.]  useless :  They  are  also  pernicious. By

2  [Editions  C  to  P  insert  the  follow-  separating  the  man  of  honour  from  the


THE RISE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES.  195

But,  to  return  from  this  digression,  I  shall  advance  it  as  a
fourth  observation  on  this  subject,  of  the  rise  and  progress  of
the  arts  and  sciences,  That  when  the  arts  and  sciences  come  to
perfection  in  any  state,  from  that  moment  they  naturally,  or
rather  necessarily  decline,  and  seldom  or  never  revive  in  that
nation,  where  they  formerly  flourished.

It  must  be  confessed,  that  this  maxim,  though  conform
able  to  experience,  may,  at  first  sight,  be  esteemed  contrary
to  reason.  If  the  natural  genius  of  mankind  be  the  same  in
all  ages,  and  in  almost  all  countries,  (as  seems  to  be  the  truth)
it  must  very  much  forward  and  cultivate  this  genius,  to  be
possessed  of  patterns  in  every  art,  which  may  regulate  the
taste,  and  fix  the  objects  of  imitation.  The  models  left  us
by  the  ancients  gave  birth  to  all  the  arts  about  200  years  ago,
find  have  mightily  advanced  their  progress  in  every  country
of  EUROPE  :  Why  had  they  not  a  like  eifect  during  the  reign
of  TRAJAN  and  his  successors ;  when  they  were  much  more
entire,  and  were  still  admired  and  studied  by  the  whole  world  ?
So  late  as  the  emperor  JUSTINIAN,  the  POET,  by  way  of  dis
tinction,  was  understood,  among  the  GREEKS,  to  be  HOMER;
among  the  ROMANS,  VIRGIL.  Such  admiration  still  remained
for  these  divine  geniuses  ;  though  no  poet  had  appeared  for
many  centuries,  who  could  justly  pretend  to  have  imitated
them.

A  man's  genius  is  always,  in  the  beginning  of  life,  as  much
unknown  to  himself  as  to  others  ;  and  it  is  only  after  frequent
trials,  attended  with  success,  that  he  dares  think  himself
equal  to  those  undertakings,  in  which  those,  who  have  suc
ceeded,  have  fixed  the  admiration  of  mankind.  If  his  own
nation  be  already  possessed  of  many  models  of  eloquence,  he

man  of  virtue,  the  greatest  profligates  Honour's  a  sacred  tye,  the  law  nf  kings,

have  got  something  to  value  themselves  The  noble  mind's  distinguishing  perfee-

upon,  and  have  been  able  to  keep  them-  (inn,

selves  in  countenance,  tho'  guilty  of  the  That  aids  and  strengthens  virtue  when

most  shameful  and  most  dangerous  vices.  it  meets  her,

They  are  debauchees,  spendthrifts,  and  And  imitates her  actions  where  she  is

never  pay  a farthing  they  owe : But  not :

they  are  men  of  honour  ;  and  therefore  It  ought  not  to  be  sported  with.
are  to  be  received  as  gentlemen  in  all

companies.  These  lines  are  very  beautiful  :  But  I
There  are  some  of  the  parts  of  am  afraid,  that  Mr.  ADDISON  has  here
modern  honour,  which  are  the  most  been  guilty  of  that  impropriety  of  sen-
essential  parts  of  morality  ;  such  as  timent,  with  which,  on  other  occasions,
fidelity,  the  observing  promises,  and  he  has  so  justly  reproached  our  poets,
telling  truth.  These  points  of  honour  The  ancients  certainly  never  had  any
Mr.  ADDISON  had  in  his  eye  when  he  notion  of  honour  as  distinct  from  virtue.]
made  JTBA  say,

O  2


196  ESSAY  XIV.

naturally  compares  his  own  juvenile  exercises  with  these;
and  being  sensible  of  the  great  disproportion,  is  discouraged
from  any  farther  attempts,  and  never  aims  at  a  rivalship  with
those  authors,  whom  he  so  much  admires.  A  noble  emulation
is  the  source  of  every  excellence.  Admiration  and  modesty
naturally  extinguish  this  emulation.  And  no  one  is  so  liable
to  an  excess  of  admiration  and  modesty,  as  a  truly  great

genius.

Next  to  emulation,  the  greatest  encourager  of  the  noble
arts  is  praise  and  glory.  A  writer  is  animated  with  new
force,  when  he  hears  the  applauses  of  the  world  for  his  former
productions ;  and,  being  roused  by  such  a  motive,  he  often
reaches  a  pitch  of  perfection,  which  is  equally  surprizing  to
himself  and  to  his  readers.  But  when  the  posts  of  honour
a,re  all  occupied,  his  first  attempts  are  but  coldly  received  by
the  public  ;  being  compared  to  productions,  which  are  both  in
themselves  more  excellent,  and  have  already  the  advantage
of  an  established  reputation.  Were  MOLIEEE  and  CORNEILLE
to  bring  upon  the  stage  at  present  their  early  productions,
which  were  formerly  so  well  received,  it  would  discourage  the
young  poets,  to  see  the  indifference  and  disdain  of  the  public.
The  ignorance  of  the  age  alone  could  have  given  admission
to  the  Prince  of  TYRE  ;  but  it  is  to  that  we  owe  the  Moor  :
Had  Every  man  in  his  humour  been  rejected,  we  had  never
seen  VOLPONE.

Perhaps,  it  may  not  be  for  the  advantage  of  any  nation  to
have  the  arts  imported  from  their  neighbours  in  too  great
perfection.  This  extinguishes  emulation,  and  sinks  the
ardour  of  the  generous  youth.  So  many  models  of  ITALIAN
painting  brought  into  ENGLAND,  instead  of  exciting  our
artists,  is  the  cause  of  their  small  progress  in  that  noble  art.
The  same,  perhaps,  was  the  case  of  SOME,  when  it  received
the  arts  from  GREECE.  That  multitude  of  polite  productions
in  the  FRENCH  language,  dispersed  all  over  GERMANY  and
the  NORTH,  hinder  these  nations  from  cultivating  their  own
language,  and  keep  them  still  dependent  on  their  neighbours
for  those  elegant  entertainments.

It  is  true,  the  ancients  had  left  us  models  in  every  kind  of
writing,  which  are  highly  worthy  of  admiration.  But  besides
that  they  were  written  in  languages,  known  only  to  the
learned  ;  besides  this,  I  say,  the  comparison  is  not  so  perfect
or  entire  between  modern  wits,  and  those  who  lived  in  so


THE RISE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES.  197

remote  an  age.  Had  WALLER  been  born  in  BOME,  during
the  reign  of  TIBERIUS,  his  first  productions  had  been  despised,
when  compared  to  the  finished  odes  of  HORACE.  But  in  this
island  the  superiority  of  the  BOM  AN  poet  diminished  nothing
from  the  fame  of  the  ENOLISH.  We  esteemed  ourselves
sufficiently  happy,  that  our  climate  and  language  could  pro
duce  but  a  faint  copy  of  so  excellent  an  original.

In  short,  the  arts  and  sciences,  like  some  plants,  require  a
fresh  soil ;  and  however  rich  the  land  may  be,  and  however
you  may  recruit  it  by  art  or  care,  it  will  never,  when  once
exhausted,  produce  any  thing  that  is  perfect  or  finished  in
the  kind.

ESSAY  XV. — The  Epicurean.1

IT  is  a  great  mortification  to  the  vanity  of  man,  that  his
utmost  art  and  industry  can  never  equal  the  meanest  of
nature's  productions,  either  for  beauty  or  value.  Art  is  only
the  under- workman,  and  is  employed  to  give  a  few  strokes  of
embellishment  to  those  pieces,  which  come  from  the  hand  of
the  master.  Some  of  the  drapery  may  be  of  his  drawing ;
but  he  is  not  allowed  to  touch  the  principal  figure.  Art  may
make  a  suit  of  clothes  :  But  nature  must  produce  a  man.

Even  in  those  productions,  commonly  denominated  works
of  art,  we  find  that  the  noblest  of  the  kind  are  beholden  for
their  chief  beauty  to  the  force  and  happy  influence  of  nature.
To  the2  native  enthusiasm  of  the  poets,  we  owe  whatever  is
admirable  in  their  productions.  The  greatest  genius,  where
nature  at  any  time  fails  him,  (for  she  is  not  equal)  throws
aside  the  lyre,  and  hopes  not,  from  the  rules  of  art,  to  reach
that  divine  harmony,  which  must  proceed  from  her  inspi
ration  alone.  How  poor  are  those  songs,  where  a  happy
flow  of  fancy  has  not  furnished  materials  for  art  to  embelish
and  refine !

But  of  all  the  fruitless  attempts  of  art,  no  one  is  so  ridicu
lous,  as  that  which  the  severe  philosophers  have  undertaken,

1  OR,  The  man  of  dcgance  and  plea-  life  and  of  happiness.  I  have  given  each

sure.  The  intention  of  this  and  the  three  of  them  the  name  of  the  philosophical

following  essays  is  not  so  much  to  ex-  sect,  to  which  it  bears  the  greatest  affi-

plain  accurately  the  sentiments  of  the  nity.

ancient  sects  of  philosophy,  as  to  de-  2  [Editions  C  to  D :  To  the  Oestrum

liver  the  sentiments  of  sects,  that  na-  or  Verve. K  to  P :  To  the  Oestrum  or

turally  form  themselves  in  the  world,  native  enthusiasm,]
and  entertain  different  ideas  of  human


108  ESSAY  XV.

the  producing  of  an  artificial  happiness,  and  making  us  be
pleased  by  rules  of  reason,  and  by  reflection.  Why  did  none
of  them  claim  the  reward,  which  XERXES  promised  to  him,
who  should  invent  a  new  pleasure  ?  Unless,  perhaps,  they
invented  so  many  pleasures  for  their  own  use,  that  they  de
spised  riches,  and  stood  in  no  need  of  any  enjoyments,  which
the  rewards  of  that  monarch  could  procure  them.  I  am  apt,
indeed,  to  think,  that  they  were  not  willing  to  furnish  the
PERSIAN  court  with  a  new  pleasure,  by  presenting  it  with  so
new  and  unusual  an  object  of  ridicule.  Their  speculations,
when  confined  to  theory,  and  gravely  delivered  in  the  schools
of  GREECE,  might  excite  admiration  in  their  ignorant  pupils :
But  the  attempting  to  reduce  such  principles  to  practice
would  soon  have  betrayed  their  absurdity.

You  pretend  to  make  me  happy  by  reason,  and  by  rules  of
art.  You  must,  then,  Create  me  anew  by  rules  of  art.  For
ou  my  original  frame  and  structure  does  my  happiness
depend.  But  you  want  power  to  eflect  this ;  and  skill  too,
I  am  afraid :  Nor  can  I  entertain  a  less  opinion  of  nature's
wisdom  than  of  yours.  And  let  her  conduct  the  machine,
which  she  has  so  wisely  framed.  I  find,  that  I  should  only
spoil  it  by  my  tampering.

To  what  purpose  should  I  pretend  to  regulate,  refine,  or
invigorate  any  of  those  springs  or  principles,  which  nature
has  implanted  in  me  ?  Is  this  the  road  by  which  I  must
reach  happiness  ?  But  happiness  implies  ease,  contentment,
repose,  and  pleasure ;  not  watchfulness,  care,  and  fatigue.
The  health  of  my  body  consists  in  the  facility,  with  which
all  its  operations  are  performed.  The  stomach  digests  the
aliments :  The  heart  circulates  the  blood  :  The  brain  sepa
rates  and  refines  the  spirits  :  And  all  this  without  my  con
cerning  myself  in  the  matter.  When  by  my  will  alone  I  can
stop  the  blood,  as  it  runs  with  impetuosity  along  its  canals,
then  may  I  hope  to  change  the  course  of  my  sentiments  and
passions.  In  vain  should  I  strain  my  faculties,  and  endea
vour  to  receive  pleasure  from  an  object,  which  is  not  fitted
by  nature  to  affect  my  organs  with  delight.  I  may  give  my
self  pain  by  my  fruitless  endeavours  ;  but  shall  never  reach
any  pleasure.

Away  then  with  all  those  vain  pretences  of  making  our
selves  happy  within  ourselves,  of  feasting  on  our  own
thoughts,  of  being  satisfied  with  the  consciousness  of  well-


THE EPICUREAN.  ]99

doing,  and  of  despising  all  assistance  and  all  supplies  from
external  objects.  This  is  the  voice  of  PRIDE,  not  of  NATURE.
And  it  were  well,  if  even  this  pride  could  support  itself,  and
communicate  a  real  inward  pleasure,  however  melancholy
or  severe.  But  this  impotent  pride  can  do  no  more  than
regulate  the  outside ;  and  with  infinite  pains  and  attention
compose  the  language  and  countenance  to  a  philosophical
dignityj  in  order  to  deceive  the  ignorant  vulgar.  The  heart,
mean  while,  is  empty  of  all  enjoyment :  And  the  mind,  un
supported  by  its  proper  objects,  sinks  into  the  deepest  sorrow
and  dejection.  Miserable,  but  vain  mortal !  Thy  mind  be
happy  within  itself !  With  what  resources  is  it  endowed  to
fill  so  immense  a  void,  and  supply  the  place  of  all  thy  bodily
senses  and  faculties  ?  Can  thy  head  subsist  without  thy
other  members  ?  In  such  a  situation,

What  foolish  figure  must  it  make?
Do  nothing  else  but  sleep  and  ake.

Into  such  a  lethargy,  or  such  a  melancholy,  must  thy  mind
be  plunged,  when  deprived  of  foreign  occupations  and  enjoy
ments.

Keep  me,  therefore,  no  longer  in  this  violent  constraint.
Confine  me  not  within  myself ;  but  point  out  to  me  those
objects  and  pleasures,  which  afford  the  chief  enjoyment.  But
why  do  I  apply  to  you,  proud  and  ignorant  sages,  to  shew
me  the  road  to  happiness  ?  Let  me  consult  my  own  passions
and  inclinations.  In  them  must  I  read  the  dictates  of
nature ;  not  in  your  frivolous  discourses.

But  see,  propitious  to  my  wishes,  the  divine,  the  amiable
PLEASUEE,1  the  supreme  love  of  GODS  and  men,  advances
towards  me.  At  her  approach,  my  heart  beats  with  genial
heat,  and  every  sense  and  every  faculty  is  dissolved  in  joy ;
while  she  pours  around  me  all  the  embellishments  of  the
spring,  and  all  the  treasures  of  the  autumn.  The  melody  of
her  voice  charms  my  ears  with  the  softest  music,  as  she
invites  me  to  partake  of  those  delicious  fruits,  which,  with  a
Bmile  that  diffuses  a  glory  on  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  she
presents  to  me.  The  sportive  CUPIDS,  who  attend  her,  or
fan  me  with  their  odoriferous  wings,  or  pour  on  my  head  the
most  fragrant  oils,  or  offer  me  their  sparkling  nectar  in

1  Dia  Voluptas. LUCBET,


200  ESSAY XV.

golden  goblets.  0  !  for  ever  let  me  spread  my  limbs  on  this
bed  of  roses,  and  thus,  thus  feel  the  delicious  moments  with
soft  and  downy  steps,  glide  along.  But  cruel  chance  !
Whither  do  you  fly  so  fast  ?  Why  do  my  ardent  wishes,  and
that  load  of  pleasures,  under  which  you  labour,  rather  hasten
than  retard  your  unrelenting  pace  ?  Suffer  me  to  enjoy
this  soft  repose,  after  all  my  fatigues  in  search  of  happi
ness.  Suffer  me  to  satiate  myself  with  these  delicacies,  after
the  pains  of  so  long  and  so  foolish  an  abstinence.

But  it  will  not  do.  The  roses  have  lost  their  hue :  The
fruit  its  flavour :  And  that  delicious  wine,  whose  fumes,  so
late,  intoxicated  all  my  senses  with  such  delight,  now  soli
cits  in  vain  the  sated  palate.  Pleasure  smiles  at  my  lan
guor.  She  beckons  her  sister,  Virtue,  to  come  to  her
assistance.  The  gay,  the  frolic  Virtue  observes  the  call,  and
brings  along  the  whole  troop  of  my  jovial  friends.  Welcome,
thrice  welcome,  my  ever  dear  companions,  to  these  shady
bowers,  and  to  this  luxurious  repast.  Your  presence  has
restored  to  the  rose  its  hue,  and  to  the  fruit  its  flavour.
The  vapours  of  this  sprightly  nectar  now  again  play  around
my  heart ;  while  you  partake  of  my  delights,  and  discover
in  your  cheerful  looks,  the  pleasure  which  you  receive  from
my  happiness  and  satisfaction.  The  like  do  I  receive  from
yours  ;  and  encouraged  by  your  joyous  presence,  shall  again
renew  the  feast,  with  which,  from  too  much  enjoyment,  my
senses  were  well  nigh  sated ;  while  the  mind  kept  not  pace
with  the  body,  nor  afforded  relief  to  her  o'er-burthened
partner.

In  our  cheerful  discourses,  better  than  in  the  formal  rea
sonings  of  the  schools,  is  true  wisdom  to  be  found.  In  our
friendly  endearments,  better  than  in  the  hollow  debates  of
statesmen  and  pretended  patriots,  does  true  virtue  display
itself.  Forgetful  of  the  past,  secure  of  the  future,  let  us
here  enjoy  the  present ;  and  while  we  yet  possess  a  being,
let  us  fix  some  good,  beyond  the  power  of  fate  or  fortune.
To-morrow  will  bring  its  own  pleasures  along  with  it:  Or
should  it  disappoint  our  fond  wishes,  we  shall  at  least  enjoy
the  pleasure  of  reflecting  on  the  pleasures  of  to-day.

Fear  not,  my  friends,  that  the  barbarous  dissonance  of
BACCHUS,  and  of  his  revellers,  should  break  in  upon  this
entertainment,  and  confound  us  with  their  turbulent  and
clamorous  pleasures.  The  sprightly  muses  wait  around ;


THE EPICUREAN.  201

and  with  their  charming  symphony,  sufficient  to  soften  the
wolves  and  tygers  of  the  savage  desert,  inspire  a  soft  joy  into
every  bosom.  Peace,  harmony  and  concord  reign  in  this
retreat ;  nor  is  the  silence  ever  broken  but  by  the  music  of
our  songs,  or  the  cheerful  accents  of  our  friendly  voices.

But  hark  !  the  favourite  of  the  muses,  the  gentle  DAMON,
strikes  the  lyre ;  and  while  he  accompanies  its  harmonious
notes  with  his  more  harmonious  song,  he  inspires  us  with
the  same  happy  debauch  of  fancy,  by  which  he  is  himself
transported.  '  Ye  happy  youth,'  he  sings,  '  Ye  favoured
of  heaven,1  while  the  wanton  spring  pours  upon  you  all  her
blooming  honours,  let  not  glory  seduce  you,  with  her  delusive
blaze,  to  pass  in  perils  and  dangers  this  delicious  season,
this  prime  of  life.  Wisdom  points  out  to  you  the  road  to
pleasure  :  Nature  too  beckons  you  to  follow  her  in  that
smooth  and  flowery  path.  Will  you  shut  your  ears  to  their
commanding  voice  ?  Will  you  harden  your  heart  to  their
soft  allurements  ?  Oh,  deluded  mortals,  thus  to  lose  your
youth,  thus  to  throw  away  so  invaluable  a  present,  to  trifle
with  so  perishing  a  blessing.  Contemplate  well  your  recom-
pence.  Consider  that  glory,  which  so  allures  your  proud
hearts,  and  seduces  you  with  your  own  praises.  It  is  an
echo,  a  dream,  nay  the  shadow  of  a  dream,  dissipated  by
every  wind,  and  lost  by  every  contrary  breath  of  the  ignorant
and  ill-judging  multitude.  You  fear  not  that  even  dec.th
itself  shall  ravish  it  from  you.  But  behold  !  while  you  are
yet  alive,  calumny  bereaves  you  of  it;  ignorance  neglects
it ;  nature  enjoys  it  not ;  fancy  alone,  renouncing  every
pleasure,  receives  this  airy  recompence,  empty  and  unstable
as  herself.'

Thus  the  hours  passed  unperceived  along,  and  lead  in  their
wanton  train  all  the  pleasures  of  sense,  and  all  the  joys  of
harmony  and  friendship.  Smiling  innocence  closes  the  pro
cession  ;  and  while  she  presents  herself  to  our  ravished  eyes,
she  embellishes  the  whole  scene,  and  renders  the  view  of
these  pleasures  as  transporting,  after  they  have  past  us,  as
when,  with  laughing  countenances,  they  were  yet  advancing
toward  us.

1  An  imitation  of  the  STEEN'S  song  in  V ammantan di fiorite & verde

TASSO.  spoglie.'  &c.

'0 Giovinetti, mentre APBILE &  Giuresaleimne  liberata,  Canto  14.
MAGGIO


202  ESSAY  XV.

But  the  sun  has  sunk  below  the  horizon ;  and  darkness,
stealing  silently  upon  us,  has  now  buried  all  nature  in  an
universal  shade.  '  Rejoice,  my  friends,  continue  your  repast,
or  change  it  for  soft  repose.  Though  absent,  your  joy  or  your
tranquillity  shall  still  be  mine.'  But  whither  do  you  go  ?  Or
ivhat  new  pleasures  call  you  from  our  society  ?  Is  there  augl<  t
agreeable  without  your  friends  ?  And  can  aught  please,  in
which  we  partake  not  ?  '  Yes,  my  friends  ;  the  joy  which  I
now  seek,  admits  not  of  your  participation.  Here  alone  I
wish  your  absence  :  And  here  alone  can  I  find  a  sufficient
compensation  for  the  loss  of  your  society.'

But  I  have  not  advanced  far  through  the  shades  of  the
thick  wood,  which  spreads  a  double  night  around  me,  ere,
methinks,!  perceive  through  the  gloom,  the  charming  C^ELIA,
the  mistress  of  my  wishes,  who  wanders  impatient  through
the  grove,  and  preventing  the  appointed  hour,  silently  chides
my  tardy  steps.  But  the  joy,  which  she  receives  from  my
presence,  best  pleads  my  excuse ;  and  dissipating  every
anxious  and  every  angry  thought,  leaves  room  for  nought
but  mutual  joy  and  rapture.  With  what  words,  my  fair  one,
shall  I  express  my  tenderness  or  describe  the  emotions  which
now  warm  my  transported  bosom !  Words  are  too  faint  to
describe  my  love  ;  and  if,  alas  !  you  feel  not  the  same  flame
within  you,  in  vain  shall  I  endeavour  to  convey  to  you  a  just
conception  of  it.  But  your  every  word  and  every  motion  suf
fice  to  remove  this  doubt ;  and  while  they  express  your  pas
sion,  serve  also  to  enflame  mine.  How  amiable  this  solitude,
this  silence,  this  darkness  !  No  objects  now  importune  the
ravished  soul.  The  thought,  the  sense,  all  full  of  nothing
but  our  mutual  happiness,  wholly  possess  the  mind,  and  con
vey  a  pleasure,  which  deluded  mortals  vainly  seek  for  in  every
other  enjoyment

But  why1  does  your  bosom  heave  with  these  sighs,  while
tears  ba.the  your  glowing  cheeks  ?  Why  distract  your  heart
with  such  vain  anxieties  ?  Why  so  often  ask  me,  How  long
my  love  shall  yet  endure  ?  Alas,  my  C^ELIA  !  can  I  resolve
this  question  P  Do  I  know  how  long  my  life  shall  yet  endure  ?
But  does  this  also  disturb  your  tender  breast  ?  And  is  the
image  of  our  frail  mortality  for  ever  present  with  you,  to
throw  a  damp  on  your  gayest  hours,  and  poison  even  those
joys  which  love  inspires !  Consider  rather,  that  if  life  be

1  [Edition  C  :  after  our  tumultuous- joys.]


THE  EPICUREAN.  20:5

frail,  if  youth  be  transitory,  we  should  well  employ  the  pre
sent  moment,  and  lose  no  part  of  so  perishable  an  existence.
Yet  a  little  moment  and  these  shall  be  no  more.  We  shall  be,
as  if  we  had  never  been.  Not  a  memory  of  us  be  left  upon
earth  ;  and  even  the  fabulous  shades  below  will  not  afford  us
a  habitation.  Our  fruitless  anxieties,  our  vain  projects,  our
uncertain  speculations  shall  all  be  swallowed  up  and  lost.  Our
present  doubts,  concerning  the  original  cause  of  all  things,
must  never,  alas !  be  resolved.  This  alone  we  may  be  cer
tain  of,  that,  if  a»y  governing  mind  preside,  he  must  be
pleased  to  see  us  fulfil  the  ends  of  our  being,  and  enjoy
that  pleasure,  for  which  alone  we  were  created.  Let  this
reflection  give  ease  to  your  anxious  thoughts ;  but  render
not  your  joys  too  serious,  by  dwelling  for  ever  upon  it.  It
is  sufficient,  once,  to  be  acquainted  with  this  philosophy,  in
order  to  give  an  unbounded  loose  to  love  and  jollity,  and  re
move  all  the  scruples  of  a  vain  superstition  :  But  while  youth
and  passion,  my  fair  one,  prompt  our  eager  desires,  we  must
find  gayer  subjects  of  discourse,  to  intermix  with  these
amorous  caresses.


ESSAY  XVI.— The  Stoic.1

THERE  is  this  obvious  and  material  difference  in  the  con
duct  of  nature,  with  regard  to  man  and  other  animals,  that,
having  endowed  the  former  with  a  sublime  celestial  spirit,
and  having  given  him  an  affinity  with  superior  beings,  she
allows  not  such  noble  faculties  to  lie  lethargic  or  idle ;  but
urges  him,  by  necessity,  to  employ,  on  every  emergence,  his
utmost  art  and  industry.  Brute-creatures  have  many  of
their  necessities  supplied  by  nature,  being  cloathed  and  armed
by  this  beneficent  parent  of  all  things  :  And  where  their  own
industry  is  requisite  on  any  occasion,  nature,  by  implanting
instincts,  still  supplies  them  with  the  art,  and  guides  them  to
their  good  by  her  unerring  precepts.  But  man,  exposed
naked  and  indigent  to  the  rude  elements,  rises  slowly  from
that  helpless  state,  by  the  care  and  vigilance  of  his  parents  ;
and  having  attained  his  utmost  growth  and  perfection,
reaches  only  a  capacity  of  subsisting,  by  his  own  care  and
vigilance.  Every  thing  is  sold  to  skill  and  labour ;  and  where

1  Or  the  man  of  action  and  virtue.


204  ESSAY  XVI.

nature  furnishes  the  materials,  they  are  still  rude  and  un
finished,  till  industry,  ever  active  and  intelligent,  refines  them
from  their  brute  state,  and  fits  them  for  human  use  and  con
venience.

Acknowledge,  therefore,  0  man,  the  beneficence  of  nature  ;
for  she  has  given  thee  that  intelligence  which  supplies  all  thy
necessities.  But  let  not  indolence,  under  the  false  appearance
of  gratitude,  persuade  thee  to  rest  contented  with  her  pre
sents.  Wouldest  thou  return  to  the  raw  herbage  for  thy
food,  to  the  open  sky  for  thy  covering,  and  to  stones  and  clubs
for  thy  defence  against  the  ravenous  animals  of  the  desert?
Then  return  also  to  thy  savage  manners,  to  thy  timorous
superstition,  to  thy  brutal  ignorance  ;  and  sink  thyself  be
low  those  animals,  whose  condition  thou  admirest,  and
wouldest  so  fondly  imitate.

Thy  kind  parent,  nature,  having  given  thee  art  and  intel
ligence,  has  filled  the  whole  globe  with  materials  to  employ
these  talents  :  Hearken  to  her  voice,  which  so  plainly  tells
thee,  that  thou,  thyself  shouldest  also  be  the  object  of  thy
industry,  arid  that  by  art  and  attention  alone  thou  canst
acquire  that  ability,  which  will  raise  thee  to  thy  proper  sta
tion  in  the  universe.  Behold  this  artizan,  who  converts  a
rude  and  shapeless  stone  into  a  noble  metal;  and  moulding
that  metal  by  his  cunning  hands,  creates,  as  it  were  by
magic,  every  weapon  for  his  defence,  and  every  utensil  for
his  convenience.  He  has  not  this  skill  from  nature  :  Use
and  practice  have  taught  it  him :  And  if  thou  wouldest
emulate  his  success,  thou  must  follow  his  laborious  foot
steps.

But  while  thou  ambitiously  aspirest  to  perfecting  thy
bodily  powers  and  faculties,  wouldest  thou  meanly  neglect  thy
mind,  and  from  a  preposterous  sloth,  leave  it  still  rude  and
uncultivated,  as  it  came  from  the  hands  of  nature  ?  Far  be
such  folly  and  negligence  from  every  rational  being.  If
nature  has  been  frugal  in  her  gifts  and  endowments,  there  ia
the  more  need  of  art  to  supply  her  defects.  If  she  has  been
generous  and  liberal,  know  that  she  still  expects  industry  and
application  on  our  part,  and  revenges  herself  in  proportion  to
our  negligent  ingratitude.  The  richest  genius,  like  the  most
fertile  soil,  when  uncultivated,  shoots  up  into  the  rankest
weeds ;  and  instead  of  vines  and  olives  for  the  pleasure  and


THE STOIC.  -05

use  of  mail,  produces,  to  its  slothful  owner,  the  most  abun
dant  crop  of  poisons.

The  great  end  of  all  human  industry,  is  the  attainment  o
happiness.  For  this  were  arts  invented,  sciences  cultivated,
laws  ordained,  and  societies  modelled,  by  the  most  profound
wisdom  of  patriots  and  legislators.  Even  the  lonely  savage,
who  lies  exposed  to  the  inclemency  of  the  elements,  and  the
fury  of  wild  beasts,  forgets  not,  for  a  moment,  this  grand
object  of  his  being.  Ignorant  as  he  is  of  every  art  of  life,  he
still  keeps  in  view  the  end  of  all  those  arts,  and  eagerly  seeks
for  felicity  amidst  that  darkness  with  which  he  is  environed.
But  as  much  as  the  wildest  savage  is  inferior  to  the  polished
citizen,  who,  under  the  protection  of  laws,  enjoys  every  con
venience  which  industry  has  invented  ;  so  much  is  this  citi
zen  himself  inferior  to  the  man  of  virtue,  and  the  true  phi
losopher,  who  governs  his  appetites,  subdues  his  passions,  and
has  learned,  from  reason,  to  set  a  just  value  on  every  pursuit
and  enjoyment.  For  is  there  an  art  and  an  apprenticeship
necessary  for  every  other  attainment  ?  And  is  there  no  art
of  life,  no  rule,  no  precepts  to  direct  us  in  this  principal  con
cern  ?'  Can  no  particular  pleasure  be  attained  without  skill ;
and  can  the  whole  be  regulated  without  reflection  or  intelli
gence,  by  the  blind  guidance  of  appetite  and  instinct?
Surely  then  no  mistakes  are  ever  committed  in  this  affair  ;  but
every  man,  however  dissolute  and  negligent,  proceeds  in  the
pursuit  of  happiness,  with  as  unerring  a  motion,  as  that  which
the  celestial  bodies  observe,  when,  conducted  by  the  hand  of
the  Almighty,  they  roll  along  the  ethereal  plains.  But  if
mistakes  be  often,  be  inevitably  committed,  let  us  register
these  mistakes ;  let  us  consider  their  causes  ;  let  us  weigh
their  importance  ;  let  us  enquire  for  their  remedies.  When
from  this  we  have  fixed  all  their  rules  of  conduct,  we  are
philosophers :  When  we  have  reduced  these  rules  to  practice,
we  are  sages.

Like  many  subordinate  artists,  employed  to  form  the
several  wheels  and  springs  of  a  machine :  Such  are  those
who  excel  in  all  the  particular  arts  of  life.  He  is  the  master
workman  who  puts  those  several  parts  together  ;  moves  them
according  to  just  harmony  and  proportion:  and  produces
true  felicity  as  the  result  of  their  conspiring  order.

While  thou  hast  such  an  alluring  object  in  view,  shall  that


20G  ESSAY  XVI.

labour  and  attention,  requisite  to  the  attainment  of  thy  end,
ever  seem  burdensome  and  intolerable  ?  Know,  that  this
labour  itself  is  the  chief  ingredient  of  the  felicity  to  which
thou  aspirest,  and  that  every  enjoyment  soon  becomes  insipid
and  distasteful,  when  not  acquired  by  fatigue  and  industry.
See  the  hardy  hunters  rise  from  their  downy  couches,  shake
off  the  slumbers  which  still  weigh  down  their  heavy  eye-lids,
and,  ere  Aurora  has  yet  covered  the  heavens  with  her  flaming
mantle,  hasten  to  the  forest.  They  leave  behind,  in  their
own  houses,  and  in  the  neighbouring  plains,  animals  of  every
kind,  whose  flesh  furnishes  the  most  delicious  fare,  and  which
offer  themselves  to  the  fatal  stroke.  Laborious  man  disdains
so  easy  a  purchase.  He  seeks  for  a  prey,  which  hides  itself
from  his  search,  or  flies  from  his  pursuit,  or  defends  itself
from  his  violence.  Having  exerted  in  the  chace  every  pas
sion  of  the  mind,  and  every  member  of  the  body,  he  then  finds
the  charms  of  repose,  and  with  joy  compares  its  pleasures  to
those  of  his  engaging  labours.

And  can  vigorous  industry  give  pleasure  to  the  pursuit
even  of  the  most  worthless  prey,  which  frequently  escapes
our  toils  ?  And  cannot  the  same  industry  render  the  culti
vating  of  our  mind,  the  moderating  of  our  passions,  the
enlightening  of  our  reason,  an  agreeable  occupation ;  while
we  are  every  day  sensible  of  our  progress,  and  behold  our
inward  features  and  countenance  brightening  incessantly
with  new  charms  ?  Begin  by  curing  yourself  of  this  lethargic
indolence  ;  the  task  is  not  difficult :  You  need  but  taste  the
sweets  of  honest  labour.  Proceed  to  learn  the  just  value  of
every  pursuit ;  long  study  is  not  requisite  :  Compare,  though
but  for  once,  the  mind  to  the  body,  virtue  to  fortune,  and
glory  to  pleasure.  You  will  then  perceive  the  advantages  of
industry :  You  will  then  be  sensible  what  are  the  proper
objects  of  your  industry.

In  vain  do  you  seek  repose  from  beds  of  roses :  In  vain  do
you  hope  for  enjoyment  from  the  most  delicious  wines  and
fruits.  Your  indolence  itself  becomes  a  fatigue  :  Your  plea
sure  itself  creates  disgust.  The  mind,  unexercised,  finds
every  delight  insipid  and  loathsome  ;  and  ere  yet  the  body,
full  of  noxious  humours,  feels  the  torment  of  its  multiplied
diseases,  your  nobler  part  is  sensible  of  the  invading  poison,
and  seeks  in  vain  to  relieve  its  anxiety  by  new  pleasures,
which  still  augment  the  fatal  malady.


THE  STOIC.  207

I  need  not  tell  you,  that,  by  this  eager  pursuit  of  pleasure,
you  more  and  more  expose  yourself  to  fortune  and  accidents,
and  rivet  your  affections  on  external  objects,  which  chance
may,  in  a  moment,  ravish  from  you.  I  shall  suppose,  that
your  indulgent  stars  favour  you  still  with  the  enjoyment  of
your  riches  and  possessions.  I  prove  to  you,  that  even  in
the  midst  of  your  luxurious  pleasures,  you  are  unhappy  ;  and
that  by  too  much  indulgence,  you  are  incapable  of  enjoying
what  prosperous  fortune  still  allows  you  to  possess.

But  surely  the  instability  of  fortune  is  a  consideration  not
to  be  overlooked  or  neglected.  Happiness  cannot  possibly
exist,  where  there  is  no  security ;  and  security  can  have  no
place,  where  fortune  has  any  dominion.  Though  that  un
stable  deity  should  not  exert  her  rage  against  you,  the  dread
of  it  would  still  torment  you  ;  would  disturb  your  slumbers,
haunt  your  dreams,  and  throw  a  damp  on  the  jollity  of  your
most  delicious  banquets.

The  temple  of  wisdom  is  seated  on  a  rock,  above  the  rage
of  the  fighting  elements,  and  inaccessible  to  all  the  malice
of  man.  The  rolling  thunder  breaks  below  ;  and  those  more
terrible  instruments  of  human  fury  reach  not  to  so  sublime
a  height.  The  sage,  while  he  breathes  that  serene  air,  looks
down  with  pleasure,  mixed  with  compassion,  on  the  errors  of
mistaken  mortals,  who  blindly  seek  for  the  true  path  of  life,
and  pursue  riches,  nobility,  honour,  or  power,  for  genuine
felicity.  The  greater  part  he  beholds  disappointed  of  their
fond  wishes  :  Some  lament,  that  having  once  possessed  the
object  of  their  desires,  it  is  ravished  from  them  by  envious
fortune  :  And  all  complain,  that  even  their  own  vows,  thoiigh
granted,  cannot  give  them  happiness,  or  relieve  the  anxiety
of  their  distracted  minds.

But  does  the  sage  always  preserve  himself  in  this  philoso
phical  indifference,  and  rest  contented  with  lamenting  the
miseries  of  mankind,  without  ever  employing  himself  for
their  relief?  Does  he  constantly  indulge  this  severe  wisdom,
which,  by  pretending  to  elevate  him  above  human  accidents,
does  in  reality  harden  his  heart,  and  render  him  careless  of
the  interests  of  mankind,  a,nd  of  society  ?  No ;  he  knows
that  in  this  sullen  Apathy,  neither  true  wisdom  nor  true  hap
piness  can  be  found.  He  feels  too  strongly  the  charm  of  the
social  affections  ever  to  counteract  so  sweet,  so  natural,  so
virtuous  a  propensity.  Even  when,  bathed  in  tears,  he


208  ESSAY XVI.

laments  the  miseries  of  human  race,  of  his  country,  of  his
friends,  and  unable  to  give  succour,  can  only  relieve  them  by
compassion ;  he  yet  rejoices  in  the  generous  disposition,  and
feels  a  satisfaction  superior  to  that  of  the  most  indulged
sense.  So  engaging  are  the  sentiments  of  humanity,  that
they  brighten  up  the  very  face  of  sorrow,  and  operate  like
the  sun,  which,  shining  on  a  dusky  cloud  or  falling  rain,
paints  on  them  the  most  glorious  colours  which  are  to  be
found  in  the  whole  circle  of  nature.

But  it  is  not  here  alone,  that  the  social  virtues  display
their  energy.  With  whatever  ingredient  you  mix  them,  they
are  still  predominant.  As  sorrow  cannot  overcome  them,  so
neither  can  sensual  pleasure  obscure  them.  The  joys  of
love,  however  tumultuous,  banish  not  the  tender  sentiments
of  sympathy  and  affection.  They  even  derive  their  chief  in
fluence  from  that  generous  passion ;  and  when  presented
alone,  afford  nothing  to  the  unhappy  mind  but  lassitude  and
disgust.  Behold  this  sprightly  debauchee,  who  professes  a
contempt  of  all  other  pleasures  but  those  of  wine  and  jollity:
Separate  him  from  his  companions,  like  a  spark  from  a  fire,
where  before  it  contributed  to  the  general  blaze  :  His  alacrity
suddenly  extinguishes ;  and  though  surrounded  with  every
other  means  of  delight,  he  lothes  the  sumptuous  banquet,
and  prefers  even  the  most  abstracted  study  and  speculation,
as  more  agreeable  and  entertaining.

<_>  O

But  the  social  passions  never  afford  such  transporting
pleasures,  or  make  so  glorious  an  appearance  in  the  eyes
both  of  GOD  and  man,  as  when,  shaking  off  every  earthly
mixture,  they  associate  themselves  with  the  sentiments  of
virtue,  and  prompt  us  to  laudable  and  worthy  actions.  As
harmonious  colours  mutually  give  and  receive  a  lustre  by
their  friendly  union  ;  so  do  these  ennobling  sentiments  of
the  human  mind.  See  the  triumph  of  nature  in  parental
affection  !  What  selfish  passion ;  what  sensual  delight  is  a
match  for  it !  Whether  a  man  exults  in  the  prosperity  and
virtue  of  his  offspring,  or  flies  to  their  succour,  through  the
most  threatening  and  tremendous  dangers  ?

Proceed  still  in  purifying  the  generous  passion,  you  will
still  the  more  admire  its  shining  glories.  What  charms  are
there  in  the  harmony  of  minds,  and  in  a  friendship  founded
on  mutual  esteem  and  gratitude  !  What  satisfaction  in  re
lieving  the  distressed,  in  comforting  the  afflicted,  in  raising


THE STOIC.  209

the  fallen,  and  in  stopping  the  career  of  cruel  fortune,  or  of
more  cruel  man,  in  their  insults  over  the  good  and  virtuous  I
But  what  supreme  joy  in  the  victories  over  vice  as  well  as
misery,  when,  by  virtuous  example  or  wise  exhortation,  our
fellow-creatures  are  taught  to  govern  their  passions,  reform
their  vices,  and  subdue  their  worst  enemies,  which  inhabit
within  their  own  bosoms?

But  these  objects  are  still  too  limited  for  the  human  mind,
which,  being  of  celestial  origin,  swells  with  the  divinest  and
most  enlarged  affections,  and  carrying  its  attention  beyond
kindred  and  acquaintance,  extends  its  benevolent  wishes  to
the  most  distant  posterity.  It  views  liberty  and  laws  as  the
source  of  human  happiness,  and  devotes  itself,  with  the  ut
most  alacrity,  to  their  guardianship  and  protection.  Toils,
dangers,  death  itself  carry  their  charms,  when  we  brave
them  for  the  public  good,  and  ennoble  that  being,  which  we
generously  sacrifice  for  the  interests  of  our  country.  Happv
the  man,  whom  indulgent  fortune  allows  to  pay  to  virtue
what  he  owes  to  nature,  and  to  make  a  generous  gift  of  what
must  otherwise  be  ravished  from  him  by  cruel  necessity  !

In  the  true  sage  and  patriot  are  united  whatever  can  dis
tinguish  human  nature,  or  elevate  mortal  man  to  a  resem
blance  with  the  divinity.  The  softest  benevolence,  the  most
undaunted  resolution,  the  tenderest  sentiments,  the  most
sublime  love  of  virtue,  all  these  animate  successively  his
transported  bosom.  What  satisfaction,  when  he  looks  within,
to  find  the  most  turbulent  passions  turned  to  just  harmony
and  concord,  and  every  jarring  sound  banished  from  this
enchanting  music  !  If  the  contemplation,  even  of  inanimate
beauty,  is  so  delightful ;  if  it  ravishes  the  senses,  even  when
the  fair  form  is  foreign  to  us  :  What  must  be  the  effects  of
moral  beauty  ?  And  what  influence  must  it  have,  when  it
embellishes  our  own  mind,  and  is  the  result  of  our  own  re
flection  and  industry  ?

But  where  is  the  reward  of  virtue  ?  And  what  recompence
has  nature  provided  for  such  important  sacrifices,  as  those  of
life  and  fortune,  which  we  must  often  make  to  it  ?  Oh,  sons  of
earth  !  Are  ye  ignorant  of  the  value  of  this  celestial  mis
tress  ?  And  do  ye  meanly  enquire  for  her  portion,  when  ye
observe  her  genuine  charms  ?  But  know,  that  nature  has
been  indulgent  to  human  weakness,  and  has  not  left  this
favourite  child,  naked  and  unendowed.  She  has  provided

VOL. III.  P


210  ESSAY  XVI.

virtue  with  the  richest  dowry ;  but  being  careful,  lest  the
•allurements  of  interest  should  engage  such  suitors,  as  were
insensible  of  the  native  worth  of  so  divine  a  beauty,  she  has
wisely  provided,  that  this  dowry  can  have  no  charms  but  in
the  eyes  of  those  who  are  alread}'  transported  with  the  love
of  virtue.  GLORY  is  the  portion  of  virtue,  the  sweet  reward
of  honourable  toils,  the  triumphant  crown,  which  covers  the
thoughtful  head  of  the  disinterested  patriot,  or  the  dusty
brow  of  the  victorious  warrior.  Elevated  by  so  sublime  a
prize,  the  man  of  virtue  looks  down  with  contempt  on  all
the  allurements  of  pleasure,  and  all  the  menaces  of  danger.
Death  itself  loses  its  terrors,  when  he  considers,  that  its
dominion  extends  only  over  a  part  of  him,  and  that,  in  spite
of  death  and  time,  the  rage  of  the  elements,  and  the  endless
vicissitudes  of  human  affairs,  he  is  assured  of  an  immortal
fame  among  all  the  sons  of  men.

There  surely  is  a  being  who  presides  over  the  universe ;
and  who,  with  infinite  wisdom  and  power,  has  reduced  the
jarring  elements  into  just  order  and  proportion.  Let  specu
lative  reasoners  dispute,  how  far  this  beneficent  being  ex
tends  his  care,  and  whether  he  prolongs  our  existence  beyond
the  grave,  in  order  to  bestow  on  virtue  its  just  reward,  and
render  it  fully  triumphant.  The  man  of  morals,  without
deciding  any  thing  on  so  dubious  a  subject,  is  satisfied  with
the  portion,  marked  out  to  him  by  the  supreme  disposer  of
all  things.  Gratefully  he  accepts  of  that  farther  reward
prepared  for  him  ;  but  if  disappointed,  he  thinks  not  virtue
an  empty  name  ;  but  justly  esteeming  it  its  own  reward,  he
gratefully  acknowledges  the  bounty  of  his  creator,  who,  by
calling  him  into  existence,  has  thereby  afforded  him  an  oppor
tunity  of  once  acquiring  so  invaluable  a  possession.


ESSAY  XVII.— The  Platonist.1

To  some  philosophers  it  appears  matter  of  surprize,  that  all
mankind,  possessing  the  same  nature,  and  being  endowed
with  the  same  faculties,  should  yet  differ  so  widely  in  their
pursuits  and  inclinations,  and  that  one  should  utterly  con
demn  what  is  fondly  sought  after  by  another.  To  some  it
appears  matter  of  still  more  surprize,  that  a  man  should

1  Or,  the  man  of  contemplation,  and  philosophical  devotion.


THE PLATOXIST.  L'll

differ  so  widely  from  himself  at  different  times ;  and,  after
possession,  reject  with  disdain  what,  before,  was  the  object
of  all  his  vows  and  wishes.  To  me  this  feverish  uncertainty
and  irresolution,  in  human  conduct,  seems  altogether  un
avoidable  ;  nor  can  a  rational  soul,  made  for  the  contempla
tion  of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  of  his  works,  ever  enjoy
tranquillity  or  satisfaction,  while  detained  in  the  ignoble
pursuits  of  sensual  pleasure  or  popular  applause.  The  divinity
is  a  boundless  ocean  of  bliss  and  glory  :  Human  minds  are
smaller  streams,  which,  arising  at  first  from  this  ocean,  seek
still,  amid  all  their  wanderings,  to  return  to  it,  and  to  lose
themselves  in  that  immensity  of  perfection.  When  checked
in  this  natural  course,  by  vice  or  folly,  they  become  furious
and  enraged;  and,  swelling  to  a  torrent,  do  then  spread
horror  and  devastation  on  the  neighbouring  plains.

In  vain,  by  pompous  phrase  and  passionate  expression,  each
recommends  his  own  pursuit,  and  invites  the  credulous  hearers
to  an  imitation  of  his  life  and  manners.  The  heart  belies
the  countenance,  and  sensibly  feels,  even  amid  the  highest
success,  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  all  those  pleasures,
which  detain  it  from  its  true  object.  I  examine  the  volup
tuous  man  before  enjoyment ;  I  measure  the  vehemence  of
his  desire,  and  the  importance  of  his  object ;  1  find  that  all
his  happiness  proceeds  only  from  that  hurry  of  thought,
which  takes  him  from  himself,  and  turns  his  view  from  his
guilt  and  misery.  I  consider  him  a  moment  after ;  he  has
now  enjoyed  the  pleasure,  which  he  fondly  sought  after.
The  sense  of  his  guilt  and  misery  returns  upon  him  with
double  anguish  :  His  mind  tormented  with  fear  and  remorse ;
his  body  depressed  with  disgust  and  satiety.

But  a  more  august,  at  least  a  more  haughty  personage,
presents  himself  boldly  to  our  censure  ;  and  assuming  the
title  of  a  philosopher  and  a  man  of  morals,  offers  to  submit
to  the  most  rigid  examination.  He  challenges,  with  a
visible,  though  concealed  impatience,  our  approbation  and
applause ;  and  seems  offended,  that  we  should  hesitate  a
moment  before  we  break  out  into  admiration  of  his  virtue.
Seeing  this  impatience,  I  hesitate  still  more  :  I  begin  to  ex
amine  the  motives  of  his  seeming  virtue  :  But  behold  !  ere  I
can  enter  upon  this  enquiry,  he  flings  himself  from  me ;  and
addressing  his  discourse  to  that  crowd  of  heedless  auditors,
fondly  abuses  them  by  his  magnificent  pretensions.

f  2


212  ESSAY XYIL

O  philosopher !  thy  wisdom  is  vain,  and  thy  virtue  un
profitable.  Thou  seekest  the  ignorant  applauses  of  men,  not
the  solid  reflections  of  thy  own  conscience,  or  the  more  solid
approbation  of  that  being,  who,  with  one  regard  of  his  all-
seeing  eye,  penetrates  the  universe.  Thou  surely  art  con
scious  of  the  hollowness  of  thy  pretended  probity,  whilst
calling  thyself  a  citizen,  a  son,  a  friend,  thou  forgettest  thy
higher  sovereign,  thy  true  father,  thy  greatest  benefactor.
Where  is  the  adoration  due  to  infinite  perfection,  whence
every  thing  good  and  valuable  is  derived  ?  Where  is  the
gratitude,  owing  to  thy  creator,  who  called  thee  forth  from
nothing,  who  placed  thee  in  all  these  relations  to  thy  fellow-
creatures,  and  requiring  thee  to  fulfil  the  duty  of  each  rela
tion,  forbids  thee  to  neglect  what  thou  owest  to  himself,  the
most  perfect  being,  to  whom  thou  art  connected  by  the
closest  tye  ?

But  thou  art  thyself  thy  own  idol :  Thou  worshippest  thy
imaginary  perfections  :  Or  rather,  sensible  of  thy  real  imper
fections,  thou  seekest  only  to  deceive  the  world,  and  to  please
thy  fancy,  by  multiplying  thy  ignorant  admirers.  Thus,  not
content  with  neglecting  what  is  most  excellent  in  the  uni
verse,  thou  desirest  to  substitute  in  his  place  what  is  most
vile  and  contemptible.

Consider  all  the  works  of  men's  hands  ;  all  the  inventions
of  human  wit,  in  which  thou  affectest  so  nice  a  discernment :
Thou  wilt  find,  that  the  most  perfect  production  still  pro
ceeds  from  the  most  perfect  thought,  and  that  it  is  MIND
alone,  which  we  admire,  while  we  bestow  our  applause  on
the  graces  of  a  well-proportioned  statue,  or  the  symmetry  of
a  noble  pile. The  statuary,  the  architect  conies  still  in  view,
and  makes  us  reflect  on  the  beauty  of  his  art  and  contriv
ance,  which,  from  a  heap  of  unformed  matter,  could  extra.ct
such  expressions  and  proportions. This  superior  beauty  of
thought  and  intelligence  thou  thyself  acknowledgest,  while
thou  irivitest  us  to  contemplate,  in  thy  conduct,  the  harmony
of  affections,  the  dignity  of  sentiments,  and  all  those  graces
of  a  mind,  which  chiefly  merit our attention. But why
stoppest  thou  short? Seest  thou  nothing  farther  that  is
valuable? Amid  thy  rapturous applauses of  beauty and
order,  art  thou  still  ignorant  where  is  to  be  found  the  most
consummate  beauty? the  most perfect order? Compare
the works  of  art  with  those  of  nature. The  one  are  but


THE PLATONIST.  213

imitations  of  the  other.  The  nearer  art  approaches  to  na
ture,  the  more  perfect  is  it  esteemed.  But  still,  how  wide
are  its  nearest  approaches,  and  what  an  immense  interval
may  be  observed  between  them  ?  Art  copies  only  the  out
side  of  nature,  leaving  the  inward  and  more  admirable  springs
and  principles ;  as  exceeding  her  imitation ;  as  beyond  her
comprehension.  Art  copies  only  the  minute  productions  of
nature,  despairing  to  reach  that  grandeur  and  magnificence,
which  are  so  astonishing  in  the  masterly  works  of  her  origi
nal.  Can  we  then  be  so  blind  as  not  to  discover  an  intelli
gence  and  a  design  in  the  exquisite  and  most  stupendous
contrivance  of  the  universe?  Can  we  be  so  stupid  as  not  to
feel  the  warmest  raptures  of  worship  and  adoration,  upon
the  contemplation  of  that  intelligent  being,  so  infinitely  good
and  wise  ?

The  most  perfect  happiness,  surely,  must  arise  from  the
contemplation  of  the  most  perfect  object.  But  what  more
perfect  than  beauty  and  virtue  ?  And  where  is  beauty  to  be
found  equal  to  that  of  the  universe  ?  Or  virtue,  which  can
be  compared  to  the  benevolence  and  justice  of  the  Deity  ?
If  aught  can  diminish  the  pleasure  of  this  contemplation,
it  must  be  either  the  narrowness  of  our  faculties,  wrhich  con
ceals  from  us  the  greatest  part  of  these  beauties  and  perfec
tions  ;  or  the  shortness  of  our  lives,  which  allows  not  time
sufficient  to  instruct  us  in  them.  But  it  is  our  comfort,
that,  if  we  employ  worthily  the  faculties  here  assigned  us,
they  will  be  enlarged  in  another  state  of  existence,  so  as  to
render  us  more  suitable  worshippers  of  our  maker  :  And  that
the  task,  which  can  never  be  finished  in  time,  will  be  the
business  of  an  eternity.

ESSAY  XVIIL—  The  Sceptic.

^~.

I  HAVE  long  entertained  a  suspicion,  with  regard  to  the  de
cisions  of  philosophers  upon  all  subjects,  and  found  in  myself
a  greater  inclination  to  dispute,  than  assent  to  their  conclu
sions.  There  is  one  mistake,  to  which  they  seem  liable,
almost  without  exception ;  they  confine  too  much  their
principles,  and  make  no  account  of  that  vast  variety,  which
nature  has  so  much  affected  in  all  her  operations.  "When  a,
philosopher  has  once  laid  hold  of  a  favourite  principle,  which
perhaps  accounts  for  many  natural  effects,  he  extends  the


214  ESSAY XVIII.

same  principle  over  the  whole  creation,  and  reduces  to  it
every  phenomenon,  though  by  the  most  violent  and  absurd
reasoning.  Our  own  mind  being  narrow  and  contracted,  we
cannot  extend  our  conception  to  the  variety  and  extent  of
nature ;  but  imagine,  that  she  is  as  much  bounded  in  her
operations,  as  we  are  in  our  speculation.

But  if  ever  this  infirmity  of  philosophers  is  to  be  suspected
on  any  occasion,  it  is  in  their  reasonings  concerning  human
life,  and  the  methods  of  attaining  happiness.  In  that  case,
they  are  led  astray,  not  only  by  the  narrowness  of  their
understandings,  but  by  that  also  of  their  passions.  Almost
every  one  has  a  predominant  inclination,  to  which  his  other
desires  and  affections  submit,  and  which  governs  him,  though,
perhaps,  with  some  intervals,  through  the  whole  course  of
his  life.  It  is  difficult  for  him  to  apprehend,  that  any  thing,
which  appears  totally  indifferent  to  him,  can  ever  give  en
joyment  to  any  person,  or  can  possess  charms,  which  alto
gether  escape  his  observation.  His  own  pursuits  are  always,
in  his  account,  the  most  engaging  :  The  objects  of  his  passion,
the  most  valuable  :  And  the  road,  which  he  pursues,  the  only
one  that  leads  to  happiness.

But  would  these  prejudiced  reasoners  reflect  a  moment,
there  are  many  obvious  instances  and  arguments,  sufficient  to
undeceive  them,  and  make  them  enlarge  their  maxims  and
principles.  Do  they  not  see  the  vast  variety  of  inclinations
and  pursuits  among  our  species  ;  where  each  man  seems  fully
satisfied  with  his  own  course  of  life,  and  would  esteem  it  the
greatest  unhappiness  to  be  confined  to  that  of  his  neighbour  ?
Do  they  not  feel  in  themselves,  that  what  pleases  at  one
time,  displeases  at  another,  by  the  change  of  inclination;
and  that  it  is  not  in  their  power,  by  their  utmost  efforts,  to
recall  that  taste  or  appetite,  which  formerly  bestowed  charms
on  what  now  appears  indifferent  or  disagreeable  ?  What  is
the  meaning  therefore  of  those  general  preferences  of  the
town  or  country  life,  of  a  life  of  action  or  one  of  pleasure,  of
retirement  or  society  ;  when  besides  the  different  inclinations
of  different  men,  every  one's  experience  may  convince  him,
that  each  of  these  kinds  of  life  is  agreeable  in  its  turn,  and
that  their  variety  or  their  judicious  mixture  chiefly  con
tributes  to  the  rendering  all  of  them  agreeable.

But  shall  this  business  be  allowed  to  go  altogether  at
adventures  ?  And  must  a  man  consult  only  his  humour  and


THE  SCEPTIC.  215

inclination,  in  order  to  determine  his  course  of  life,  without
employing  his  reason  to  inform  him  what  road  is  preferable,
and  leads  most  surely  to  happiness  !  Is  there  no  difference
then  between  one  man's  conduct  and  another  ?

I  answer,  there  is  a  great  difference.  One  man,  following
his  inclination,  in  chusing  his  course  of  life,  may  employ
much  surer  means  for  succeeding  than  another,  who  is  led
by  his  inclination  into  the  same  course  of  life,  and  pursues
the  same  object.  Are  riches  the  chief  object  of  your  desires  ?
Acquire  skill  in  your  profession ;  be  diligent  in  the  exercise
of  it ;  enlarge  the  circle  of  your  friends  and  acquaintance ;
avoid  pleasure  and  expense ;  and  never  be  generous,  but
with  a  view  of  gaining  more  than  you  could  save  by  frugality.
Would  you  acquire  the  public  esteem  ?  Guard  equally  against
the  extremes  of  arrogance  and  fawning.  Let  it  appear  that
you  set  a  value  upon  yourself,  but  without  despising  others.
If  you  fall  into  either  of  the  extremes,  you  either  provoke
men's  pride  by  your  insolence,  or  teach  them  to  despise  you
by  your  timorous  submission,  and  by  the  mean  opinion  which
you  seem  to  entertain  of  yourself.

These,  you  say,  are  the  maxims  of  common  prudence,  and
discretion;  what  every  parent  inculcates  on  his  child,  and
what  every  man  of  sense  pursues  in  the  course  of  life,  which
he  has  chosen. — What  is  it  then  you  desire  more  ?  Do  you
come  to  a  philosopher  as  to  a  cunning  man,  to  learn  some
thing  by  magic  or  witchcraft,  beyond  what  can  be  known  by

common  prudence  and  discretion  ? Yes ;  we  come  to  a

philosopher  to  be  instructed,  how  we  shall  chuse  our  ends,
more  than  the  means  for  attaining  these  ends  :  We  want
to  know  what  desire  we  shall  gratify,  what  passion  we  shall
comply  with,  what  appetite  we  shall  indulge.  As  to  the  rest,
we  trust  to  common  sense,  and  the  general  maxims  of  the
world  for  our  instruction.

I  am  sorry  then,  I  have  pretended  to  be  a  philosopher :
For  I  find  your  questions  very  perplexing ;  and  am  in  dan
ger,  if  my  answer  be  too  rigid  and  severe,  of  passing  for  a
pedant  and  scholastic :  if  it  be  too  easy  and  free,  of  being
taken  for  a  preacher  of  vice  and  immorality.  However,  to
satisfy  you,  I  shall  deliver  my  opinion  upon  the  matter,  and
^hall  only  desire  you  to  esteem  it  of  as  little  consequence  as

do  myself.  By  that  means  you  will  neither  think  it
worthy  of  your  ridicule  nor  your  anger.

VOL.  in.  *  p  4


216  ESSAY

If  we  can  depend  upon  any  principle,  which  we  learn  from
philosophy,  this,  I  think,  may  be  considered  as  certain  and
undoubted,  that  there  is  nothing,  in  itself,  valuable  or  de
spicable,  desirable  or  hateful,  beautiful  or  deformed;  but
that  these  attributes  arise  from  the  particular  constitution
^and  fabric  of  human  sentiment  and  affection.  What  seems
the  most  delicious  food  to  one  animal,  appears  loathsome  to
another  :  What  affects  the  feeling  of  one  with  delight,  pro
duces  uneasiness  in  another.  This  is  confessedly  the  case
with  regard  to  all  the  bodily  senses  :  But  if  we  examine  the
matter  more  accurately,  we  shall  find,  that  the  same  obser
vation  holds  even  where  the  mind  concurs  with  the  body,
and  mingles  its  sentiment  with  the  exterior  appetite.

Desire  this  passionate  lover  to  give  you  a  character  of  his
mistress  :  He  will  tell  you,  that  he  is  at  a  loss  for  words  to
describe  her  charms,  and  will  ask  you  very  seriously  if  ever
you  were  acquainted  with  a  goddess  or  an  angel  ?  If  you
answer  that  you  never  were  :  He  will  then  say,  that  it  is  im
possible  for  you  to  form  a  conception  of  such  divine  beauties
as  those  which  his  charmer  possesses ;  so  complete  a  shape  ;
such  well-proportioned  features  ;  so  engaging  an  air ;  such
sweetness  of  disposition ;  such  gaiety  of  humour.  You  can
infer  nothing,  however,  from  all  this  discourse,  but  that  the
poor  man  is  in  love  ;  and  that  the  general  appetite  between
the  sexes,  which  nature  has  infused  into  all  animals,  is  in
him  determined  to  a  particular  object  by  some  qualities,
which  give  him  pleasure.  The  same  divine  creature,  not  only
to  a  different  animal,  but  also  to  a  different  man,  appears  a
mere  mortal  being,  and  is  beheld  with  the  utmost  indifference.

Nature  has  given  all  animals  a  like  prejudice  in  favour  of
their  offspring.  As  soon  as  the  helpless  infant  sees  the  light,
though  in  every  other  eye  it  appears  a  despicable  and  a
miserable  creature,  it  is  regarded  by  its  fond  parent  with  the
utmost  affection,  and  is  preferred  to  every  other  object,  how
ever  perfect  and  accomplished.  The  passion  alone,  arising
from  the  original  structure  and  formation  of  human  nature,
bestows  a  value  on  the  most  insignificant  object.

We  may  push  the  same  observation  further,  and  may  con
clude,  that,  even  when  the  mind  operates  alone,  and  feeling
the  sentiment  of  blame  or  approbation,  pronounces  one  object
deformed  and  odious,  another  beautiful  and  amiable  ;  I  say,
that,  even  in  this  case,  those  qualities  are  not  really  in  the


THE SCEPTIC.  217

objects,  but  belong  entirely  to  the  sentiment  of  that  mind
which  blames  or  praises.  I  grant,  that  it  will  be  more  diffi
cult  to  make  this  proposition  evident,  and  as  it  were,  palpable,
to  negligent  thinkers ;  because  nature  is  more  uniform  in  the
sentiments  of  the  mind  than  in  most  feelings  of  the  body,
a,nd  produces  a  nearer  resemblance  in  the  inward  than  in  the
outward  part  of  human  kind.  There  is  something  approach
ing  to  principles  in  mental  tastes  ;  and  critics  can  reason  and
dispute  more  plausibly  than  cooks  or  perfumers.  We  may
observe,  however,  that  this  uniformity  among  human  kind,
hinders  not,  but  that  there  is  a  considerable  diversity  in  the
sentiments  of  beauty  and  worth,  and  that  education,  custom,
prejudice,  caprice,  and  humour,  frequently  vary  our  taste  of
this  kind.  You  will  never  convince  a  man,  who  is  not  accus
tomed  to  ITALIAN  music,  and  has  not  an  ear  to  follow  its
intricacies,  that  a  SCOTCH  tune  is  not  preferable.  You  have
not  even  any  single  argument,  beyond  your  own  taste,  which
you  can  employ  in  your  behalf:  And  to  your  antagonist,  his
particular  taste  will  always  appear  a  more  convincing  argu
ment  to  the  contrary.  If  you  be  wise,  each  of  you  will  allow,
that  the  other  may  be  in  the  right ;  and  having  many  other
instances  of  this  diversity  of  taste,  you  will  both  confess,  that
beauty  and  worth  are  merely  of  a  relative  nature,  and  consist
in  an  agreeable  sentiment,  produced  by  an  object  in  a  par
ticular  mind,  according  to  the  peculiar  structure  and  consti
tution  of  that  mind.

By  this  diversity  of  sentiment,  observable  in  human  kind,
nature  has,  perhaps,  intended  to  make  us  sensible  of  her
authority,  and  let  us  see  what  surprizing  changes  she  could
produce  on  the  passions  and  desires  of  mankind,  merely  by
the  change  of  their  inward  fabric,  without  any  alteration  on
the  objects.  The  vulgar  may  even  be  convinced  by  this
argument :  But  men,  accustomed  to  thinking,  may  draw
a  more  convincing,  at  least  a  more  general  argument,  from
the  very  nature  of  the  subject.

In  the  operation  of  reasoning,  the  mind  does  nothing  but
run  over  its  objects,  as  they  are  supposed  to  stand  in  reality,
without  adding  any  thing  to  them,  or  diminishing  any  thing
from  them.  If  I  examine  the  PTOLOMAIC  and  COPEENICAN
systems,  I  endeavour  only,  by  my  enquiries,  to  know  the  real
situation  of  the  planets ;  that  is,  in  other  words,  I  endeavour
to  give  them,  in  my  conception,  the  same  relations,  that  they


218  ESSAY  XVIII.

bear  towards  each  other  in  the  heavens.  To  this  operation
f  of  the  mind,  therefore,  there  seems  to  be  always  a  real,
though  often  an  unknown  standard,  in  the  nature  of  things  ;
nor  is  truth  or  falsehood  variable  by  the  various  appreheu-
Bions  of  mankind.  Though  all  human  race  should  for  ever
conclude,  that  the  sun  moves,  and  the  earth  remains  at  rest,
the  sun  stirs  not  an  inch  from  his  place  for  all  these  reason
ings  ;  and  such  conclusions  are  eternally  false  and  erroneous.
r  But  the  case  is  not  the  same  with  the  qualities  of  beautiful
and  deformed,  desirable  and  odious,  as  with  truth  and  falsehood.
In  the  former  case,  the  mind  is  not  content  with  merely  sur
veying  its  objects,  as  they  stand  in  themselves :  It  also  feels
a  sentiment  of  delight  or  uneasiness,  approbation  or  blame,
consequent  to  that  survey ;  and  this  sentiment  determines  it
jto  affix  the  epithet  beautiful  or  deformed,  desirable  or  odious.
Now,  it  is  evident,  that  this  sentiment  must  depend  upon  the
particular  fabric  or  structure  of  the  mind,  which  enables
such  particular  forms  to  operate  in  such  a  particular  manner,
and  produces  a  sympathy  or  conformity  between  the  mind
and  its  objects.  Vary  the  structure  of  the  mind  or  inward
organs,  the  sentiment  no  longer  follows,  though  the  form
remains  the  same.  The  sentiment  being  different  from  the
object,  and  arising  from  its  operations  upon  the  organs  of  the
mind,  an  alteration  upon  the  latter  must  vary  the  effect,  nor
can  the  same  object,  presented  to  a  mind  totally  different,
produce  the  same  sentiment.

This  conclusion  every  one  is  apt  to  draw  of  himself,  with
out  much  philosophy,  where  the  sentiment  is  evidently  dis
tinguishable  from  the  object.  Who  is  not  sensible,  that
power,  and  glory,  and  vengeance,  are  not  desirable  of  them
selves,  but  derive  all  their  value  from  the  structure  of  human
passions,  which  begets  a  desire  towards  such  particular  pur
suits  ?  But  with  regard  to  beauty,  either  natural  or  moral,
the  case  is  commonly  supposed  to  be  different.  The  agree
able  quality  is  thought  to  lie  in  the  object,  not  in  the  senti
ment;  and  that  merely  because  the  sentiment  is  not  so
turbulent  and  violent  as  to  distinguish  itself,  in  an  evident
manner,  from  the  perception  of  the  object.

But  a  little  reflection  suffices  to  distinguish  them.  A  man
may  know  exactly  all  the  circles  and  ellipses  of  the  COPER-
NICAN  system,  and  all  the  irregu-lar  spirals  of  the  PTOLOMAIC,
without  perceiving  that  the  former  is  more  beautiful  than


THE SCEPTIC.  1>19

the  latter.  EUCLID  has  fully  explained  every  quality  of  the
circle,  but  has  not,  in  any  proposition,  said  a  word  of  its
beauty.  The  reason  is  evident.  Beauty  is  not  a  quality  of
the  circle.  It  lies  not  in  any  part  of  the  line  whose  parts  are
all  equally  distant  from  a  common  center.  It  is  only  the
effect,  which  that  figure  produces  upon  a  mind,  whose  par
ticular  fabric  or  structure  renders  it  susceptible  of  such
sentiments.  In  vain  would  you  look  for  it  in  the  circle,  or
seek  it,  either  by  your  senses,  or  by  mathematical  reasonings,
in  all  the  properties  of  that  figure.

The  mathematician,  who  took  no  other  pleasure  in  reading
VIRGIL,  but  that  of  examining  ENEAS'S  voyage  by  the  map,
might  perfectly  understand  the  meaning  of  every  Latin
word,  employed  by  that  divine  author;  and  consequently,
might  have  a  distinct  idea  of  the  whole  narration.  He  would
even  have  a  more  distinct  idea  of  it,  than  they  could  attain
who  had  not  studied  so  exactly  the  geography  of  the  poem.
He  knew,  therefore,  every  thing  in  the  poem  :  But  he  was
ignorant  of  its  beauty  ;  because  the  beauty,  properly  speaking,
lies  not  in  the  poem,  but  in  the  sentiment  or  taste  of  the
reader.  And  where  a  man  has  no  such  delicacy  of  temper,
as  to  make  him  feel  this  sentiment,  he  must  be  ignorant  of
the  beauty,  though  possessed  of  the  science  and  under
standing  of  an  angel.1

The  inference  upon  the  whole  is,  that  it  is  not  from  the
value  or  worth  of  the  object,  which  any  person  pursues,  that
we  can  determine  his  enjoyment,  but  merely  from  the  passion
with  which  he  pursues  it,  and  the  success  which  he  meets
with  in  his  pursuit. Objects have  absolutely  no worth  or~]
value  in  themselves. They  derive  their  worth  merely  from  <
the  passion. If  that  be  strong,  and  steady,  and  successful,
the  person  is  happy. It  cannot  reasonably  be  doubted,  but

1  Were  I  not  afraid  of  appearing  Tho'  colours  were  allowed  to  lie  only  in
too  philosophical,  1  should  remind  my  the  eye,  would  dyers  or  painters  ever  be
reader  of  that  famous  doctrine,  supposed  less  regarded  or  esteemed  ?  There  is  a
to  be  fully  proved  in  modern  times,  sufficient  uniformity  in  the  senses  and
•  That  tastes  and  colours,  and  all  other  feelings  of  mankind,  to  make  all  these
sensible  qualities,  lie  not  in  the  bodies,  qualities  the  objects  of  art  and  reason-
but  merely  in  the  senses.'  The  case  is  ing,  and  to  have  the  greatest  influence
the  s:ime  with  beauty  and  deformity,  on  life  and  manners.  And  as  'tis  cer-
virtue  and  vice.  This  doctrine,  how-  tain,  that  the  discovery  above-mentioned
ever,  takes  off  no  more  from  the  reality  in  natural  philosophy,  makes  no  altera-
of  the  latter  qualities,  than  from  that  tion  on  action  and  conduct;  why  should
of  the  former;  nor  need  it  give  any  a  like  discovery  in  moral  philosophy
umbrage  either  to  critics  or  moralists.  make  any  alteration  ?


220  ESSAY XVIII.

a  little  miss,  dressed  in  a,  new  gown  for  a  dancing-school
ball,  receives  as  compleat  enjoyment  as  the  greatest  orator,
who  triumphs  in  the  splendour  of  his  eloquence,  while  he
governs  the  passions  and  resolutions  of  a  numerous  assembly.

All  the  difference,  therefore,  between  one  man  and  another,
with  regard  to  life,  consists  either  in  the  passion,  or  in  the
enjoyment :  And  these  differences  are  sufficient  to  produce
the  wide  extremes  of  happiness  and  misery.

To  be  happy,  the  passion  must  neither  be  too  violent  noi
too  remiss.  In  the  first  case,  the  mind  is  in  a  perpetual  hurry
and  tumult ;  in  the  second,  it  sinks  into  a  disagreeable  indo
lence  and  lethargy.

To  be  happy,  the  passion  must  be  benign  and  social ;  not
rough  or  fierce.  The  affections  of  the  latter  kind  are  not
near  so  agreeable  to  the  feeling,  as  those  of  the  former.
Who  will  compare  rancour  and  animosity,  envy  and  revenge,
to  friendship,  benignity,  clemency,  and  gratitude  ?

To  be  happy,  the  passion  must  be  chearful  and  gay,  not
gloomy  and  melancholy.  A  propensity  to  hope  and  joy  is
real  riches :  One  to  fear  and  sorrow,  real  poverty.

Some  passions  or  inclinations,  in  the  enjoyment  of  their
object,  are  not  so  steady  or  constant  as  others,  nor  convey
such  durable  pleasure  and  satisfaction.  Philosophical  devotion,
for  instance,  like  the  enthusiasm  of  a  poet,  is  the  transitoiy
effect  of  high  spirits,  great  leisure,  a  fine  genius,  and  a  habit
of  study  and  contemplation  :  But  notwithstanding  all  these
circumstances,  an  abstract,  invisible  object,  like  that  which
natural  religion  alone  presents  to  us,  cannot  long  actuate  the
mind,  or  be  of  any  moment  in  life.  To  render  the  passion
of  continuance,  we  must  find  some  method  of  affecting  the
senses  and  imagination,  and  must  embrace  some  historical,  as
well  as  philosophical  account  of  the  divinity.  Popular  super
stitious  and  observances  are  even  found  to  be  of  use  in  this
particular.

Though  the  tempers  of  men  be  very  different,  yet  we  may
safely  pronounce  in  general,  that  a  life  of  pleasure  cannot
support  itself  so  long  as  one  of  business,  but  is  much  more
subject  to  satiety  and  disgust.  The  amusements,  which  are
the  most  durable,  have  all  a  mixture  of  application  and
attention  in  them  ;  such  as  gaming  and  hunting.  And  in
general,  business  and  action  fill  up  all  the  great  vacancies
in  human  life.


THE SCEPTIC.  221

Bat  where  the  temper  is  the  best  disposed  for  any  enjoy
ment,  the  object  is  often  wanting :  And  in  this  respect,  the
passions,  which  pursue  external  objects,  contribute  not  so
much  to  happiness,  as  those  which  rest  in  ourselves  ;  since  we
are  neither  so  certain  of  attaining  such  objects,  nor  so  secure
in  possessing  them.  A  passion  for  learning  is  preferable,
with  regard  to  happiness,  to  one  for  riches.

Some  men  are  possessed  of  great  strength  of  mind;  and  even
when  they  pursue  external  objects,  are  not  much  affected  by
a  disappointment,  but  renew  their  application  and  industry
with  the  greatest  chearfulness.  Nothing  contributes  more
to  happiness  than  such  a  turn  of  mind.

According  to  this  short  and  imperfect  sketch  of  human
life,  the  happiest  disposition  of  mind  is  the  virtuous ;  or,  in
other  words,  that  which  leads  to  action  and  employment,
renders  us  sensible  to  the  social  passions,  steels  the  heart
against  the  assaults  of  fortune,  reduces  the  affections  to  a
just  moderation,  makes  our  own  thoughts  an  entertainment
to  us,  and  inclines  us  rather  to  the  pleasures  of  society  and
conversation,  than  to  those  of  the  senses.  This,  in  the  mean
time,  must  be  obvious  to  the  most  careless  reasoner,  that  all
dispositions  of  mind  are  not  alike  favourable  to  happiness,
and  that  one  passion  or  humour  may  be  extremely  desirable,
while  another  is  equally  disagreeable.  And  indeed,  all  the
difference  between  the  conditions  of  life  depends  upon  the
mind ;  nor  is  there  any  one  situation  of  affairs,  in  itself,  pre
ferable  to  another.  Good  and  ill,  both  natural  and  moral,  \
are  entirely  relative  to  human  sentiment  and  affection.  No-
man  would  ever  be  unhappy,  could  he  alter  his  feelings.
PEOTEUS-like,  he  would  elude  all  attacks,  by  the  continual
alterations  of  his  shape  and  form.

But  of  this  resource  nature  has,  in  a  great  measure,  deprived
us.  The  fabric  and  constitution  of  our  mind  no  more  depends
OP  our  choice,  than  that  of  our  body.  The  generality  of  men
have  not  even  the  smallest  notion,  that  any  alteration  in  this
respect  can  ever  be  desirable.  As  a  stream  necessarily
follows  the  several  inclinations  of  the  ground,  on  which  it
runs ;  so  are  the  ignorant  and  thoughtless  part  of  mankind
actuated  by  their  natural  propensities.  Such  are  effectually
excluded  from  all  pretensions  to  philosophy,  and  the  medicine
of  the  mind,  so  much  boasted.  But  even  upon  the  wise  and
thoughtful,  nature  has  a  prodigious  influence ;  nor  is  it  always


2L>2  ESSAY XVIH.

in  a  man's  power,  by  the  utmost  art  and  industry,  to  correct
his  temper,  and  attain  that  virtuous  character,  to  which  he
aspires.  The  empire  of  philosophy  extends  over  a  few ;  and
with  regard  to  these  too,  her  authority  is  very  weak  and
limited.  Men  may  well  be  sensible  of  the  value  of  virtue,
and  may  desire  to  attain  it ;  but  it  is  not  always  certain,  that
they  will  be  successful  in  their  wishes.

Whoever  considers,  without  prejudice,  the  course  of  hu
man  actions,  will  find,  that  mankind  are  almost  entirely
guided  by  constitution  and  temper,  and  that  general  maxims
have  little  influence,  so  far  as  they  affect  our  taste  or  senti
ment.  If  a  man  have  a  lively  sense  of  honour  and  virtue,
with  moderate  passions,  his  conduct  will  always  be  conform
able  to  the  rules  of  morality ;  or  if  he  depart  from  them,  his
return  will  be  easy  and  expeditious.  On  the  other  hand,
where  one  is  born  of  so  perverse  a  frame  of  mind,  of  so  cal
lous  and  insensible  a  disposition,  as  to  have  no  relish  for
virtue  and  humanity,  no  sympathy  with  his  fellow-creatures,
no  desire  of  esteem  and  applause  ;  such  a  one  must  be  al
lowed  entirely  incurable,  nor  is  there  any  remedy  in  philo
sophy.  He  reaps  no  satisfaction  but  from  low  and  sensual
objects,  or  from  the  indulgence  of  malignant  passions:  Be
feels  no  remorse  to  controul  his  vicious  inclinations  :  He  has
not  even  thai  sense  or  taste,  which  is  requisite  to  make  him
desire  a  better  character :  For  my  part,  I  know  not  how  I
should  address  myself  to  such  a  one,  or  by  what  arguments  I
should  endeavour  to  reform  him.  Should  I  tell  him  of  the
inward  satisfaction  which  results  from  laudable  and  humane
actions,  the  delicate  pleasure  of  disinterested  love  and  friend
ship,  the  lasting  enjoyments  of  a  good  name  and  an  estab
lished  character,  he  might  still  reply,  that  these  were,  per
haps,  pleasures  to  such  as  were  susceptible  of  them ;  but
that,  for  his  part,  he  finds  himself  of  a  quite  different  turn
and  disposition.  I  must  repeat  it ;  my  philosophy  affords  no
remedy  in  such  a  case,  nor  could  I  do  anything  but  lament
this  person's  unhappy  condition.  But  then  I  ask,  If  any
other  philosophy  can  afford  a  remedy ;  or  if  it  be  possible,  by
any  system,  to  render  all  mankind  virtuous,  however  per
verse  may  be  their  natural  frame  of  mind  ?  Experience  will
soon  convince  us  of  the  contrary ;  and  I  will  venture  to
affirm,  that,  perhaps,  the  chief  benefit,  which  results  from


THE SCEPTIC.  223

philosophy,  arises  in  an  indirect  manner,1  and  proceeds  more
from  its  secret,  insensible  influence,  than  from  its  immediate
application.

It  is  certain,  that  a  serious  attention  to  the  sciences  and
liberal  arts  softens  and  humanizes  the  temper,  and  cherishes
those  fine  emotions,  in  which  true  virtue  and  honour  consists.
It  rarely,  very  rarely  happens,  that  a  man  of  taste  and  learn
ing  is  not,  at  least,  an  honest  man,  whatever  frailties  ma,y
attend  him.  The  bent  of  his  mind  to  speculative  studies
must  mortify  in  him  the  passions  of  interest  and  ambition,
and  must,  at  the  same  time,  give  him  a  greater  sensibility
of  all  the  decencies  and  duties  of  life.  He  feels  more  fully
a  moral  distinction  in  characters  and  manners ;  nor  is  his
sense  of  this  kind  diminished,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is
much  encreased,  by  speculation.

Besides  such  insensible  changes  upon  the  temper  and  dis
position,  it  is  highly  probable,  that  others  may  be  produced
by  study  and  application.  The  prodigious  effects  of  educa
tion  may  convince  us,  that  the  mind  is  not  altogether  stub
born  and  inflexible,  but  will  admit  of  many  alterations  from
its  original  make  and  structure.  Let  a  man  propose  to  him
self  the  model  of  a  character,  which  he  approves  :  Let  him
be  well  acquainted  with  those  particulars,  in  which  his  own
character  deviates  from  this  model :  Let  him  keep  a  constant
watch  over  himself,  and  bend  his  mind,  by  a  continual  effort,
from  the  vices,  towards  the  virtues ;  and  I  doubt  not  but,  in
time,  he  will  find,  in  his  temper,  an  alteration  for  the  better.

Habit  is  another  powerful  means  of  reforming  the  mind,
and  implanting  in  it  good  dispositions  and  inclinations.  A
man,  who  continues  in  a  course  of  sobriety  and  temperance,
will  hate  riot  and  disorder :  If  he  engage  in  business  or
study,  indolence  will  seem  a  punishment  to  him  :  If  he  con
strain  himself  to  practise  beneficence  and  affability,  he  will
soon  abhor  all  instances  of  pride  and  violence.  Where  one
is  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  virtuous  course  of  life  is
preferable  ;  if  he  have  but  resolution  enough,  for  some  time,
to  impose  a  violence  on  himself ;  his  reformation  needs  not
be  despaired  of.  The  misfortune  is,  that  this  conviction  and
this  resolution  never  can  have  place,  unless  a  man  be,  before
hand,  tolerably  virtuous.

1  [The  remainder  of  this  sentence  does  not  occur  in  Editions  C  and  D.]


224  ESSAY XVIH.

Here  then  is  the  chief  triumph  of  art  and  philosophy :  It
insensibly  refines  the  temper,  and  it  points  out  to  us  those
dispositions  which  we  should  endeavour  to  attain,  by  a
constant  bent  of  mind,  and  by  repeated  habit.  Beyond  this
I  cannot  acknowledge  it  to  have  great  influence  ;  and  I  must
entertain  doubts  concerning  all  those  exhortations  and
consolations,  which  are  in  such  vogue  among  speculative
reasoners.

We  have  already  observed,  that  no  objects  are,  in  them
selves,  desirable  or  odious,  valuable  or  despicable ;  but  that
objects  acquire  these  qualities  from  the  particular  character
and  constitution  of  the  mind,  which  surveys  them.  To  di
minish  therefore,  or  augment  any  person's  value  for  an  object,
to  excite  or  moderate  his  passions,  there  are  no  direct  argu
ments  or  reasons,  which  can  be  employed  with  any  force  or
Influence.  The  catching  of  flies,  like  DOMITIAN,  if  it  give
more  pleasure,  is  preferable  to  the  hunting  of  wild  beasts,
like  WILLIAM  RUFUS,  or  conquering  of  kingdoms,  like
ALEXANDER.

But  though  the  value  of  every  object  can  be  determined
only  by  the  sentiment  or  passion  of  every  individual,  we  may
observe,  that  the  passion,  in  pronouncing  its  verdict,  con
siders  not  the  object  simply,  as  it  is  in  itself,  but  surveys  it
with  all  the  circumstances,  which  attend  it.  A  man  trans
ported  with  joy,  on  account  of  his  possessing  a  diamond,
confines  not  his  view  to  the  glistering  stone  before  him  :  He
also  considers  its  rarity,  and  thence  chiefly  arises  his  pleasure
and  exultation.  Here  therefore  a  philosopher  may  step  in,
and  suggest  particular  views,  and  considerations,  and  cir
cumstances,  which  otherwise  would  have  escaped  us  ;  and,
by  that  means,  he  may  either  moderate  or  excite  any
particular  passion.

It  may  seem  unreasonable  absolutely  to  deny  the  authority
of  philosophy  in  this  respect :  But  it  must  be  confessed,  that
there  lies  this  strong  presumption  against  it,  that,  if  these
views  be  natural  and  obvious,  they  would  have  occurred  of
themselves,  without  the  assistance  of  philosophy;  if  they
be  not  natural,  they  never  can  have  any  influence  on  the
affections.  These  are  of  a  very  delicate  nature,  and  can
not  be  forced  or  constrained  by  the  utmost  art  or  industry.
A  consideration,  which  we  seek  for  on  purpose,  which  we
enter  into  with  difficulty,  which  we  cannot  retain  without


THE  SCEPTIC.  225

care  and  attention,  will  never  produce  those  genuine  and
durable  movements  of  passion,  which  are  the  result  of  nature,
and  the  constitution  of  the  mind.  A  man  may  as  well
pretend  to  cure  himself  of  love,  by  viewing  his  mistress
through  the  artificial  medium  of  a  microscope  or  prospect,
and  beholding  there  the  coarseness  of  her  skin,  and  monstrous
disproportion  of  her  features,  as  hope  to  excite  or  moderate
any  passion  by  the  artificial  arguments  of  a  SENECA  or  an
EPICTETUS.  The  remembrance  of  the  natural  aspect  and
situation  of  the  object,  will,  in  both  cases,  still  recur  upon
him.  The  reflections  of  philosophy  are  too  subtile  and
distant  to  take  place  in  common  life,  or  eradicate  any  affec
tion.  The  air  is  too  fine  to  breathe  in,  where  it  is  above  the
winds  and  clouds  of  the  atmosphere.

Another  defect  of  those  refined  reflections,  which  philo
sophy  suggests  to  us,  is,  that  commonly  they  cannot  diminish
or  extinguish  our  vicious  passions,  without  diminishing  or
extinguishing  such  as  are  virtuous,  and  rendering  the  mind
totally  indifferent  and  unactive.  They  are,  for  the  most  part,
general,  and  are  applicable  to  all  our  affections.  In  vain  do
we  hope  to  direct  their  influence  only  to  one  side.  If  by  in
cessant  study  and  meditation  we  have  rendered  them  inti
mate  and  present  to  us,  they  will  operate  throughout,  and
spread  an  universal  insensibility  over  the  mind.  When  we
destroy  the  nerves,  we  extinguish  the  sense  of  pleasure,
together  with  that  of  pain,  in  the  human  body.

It  will  be  easy,  by  one  glance  of  the  eye  to  find  one  or
other  of  these  defects  in  most  of  those  philosophical  reflec
tions,  so  much  celebrated  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times.
Let  not  the  injuries  or  violence  of  men,  say  the  philosophers,1
ever  discompose  you  by  anger  or  hatred.  Wcndd  you  be  angry  at
the  ape  for  its  malice,  or  the  tyger  for  its  ferocity  ?  This  re
flection  leads  us  into  a  bad  opinion  of  human  nature,  and
must  extinguish  the  social  affections.  It  tends  also  to  pre
vent  all  remorse  for  a  man's  own  crimes ;  when  he  considers,
that  vice  is  as  natural  to  mankind,  as  the  particular  instincts
to  brute-creatures.

All  ills  arise  from  the  order  of  the  universe,  which  is  abso
lutely  perfect.  Would  you  wish  to  disturb  so  divine  an  order
for  the  sake  of  your  own  particular  interest  ?  What  if  the  ills
I  suffer  arise  from  malice  or  oppression  ?  But  the  vices  and

1  PLOT,  de  ira  cohibenda.
VOL.  III.  Q


226  ESSAY XVHI.

imperfections  of  men  are  also  comprehended  in  the  order  of  the

universe :

If  plagues  and  earthquakes  break  not  heav'n's  design,
Why  then  a  BORGIA  or  a  CATILINE  ?

Let  this  be  allowed ;  and  my  own  vices  will  also  be  a  part  oT
the  same  order.

'To  one  who  said,  that  none  were  happy,  who  were  not
above  opinion,  a  SPARTAN  replied,  then  none  are  happy  but
knaves  and  robbers.2

Man  is  born  to  be  miserable  ;  and  is  he  surprized  at  any  par
ticular  misfortune?  And  can  he  give  way  to  sorrow  and
lamentation  upon  account  of  any  disaster  ?  Yes :  He  very
reasonably  laments,  that  he  should  be  born  to  be  miserable.
Your  consolation  presents  a  hundred  ills  for  one,  of  which
you  pretend  to  ease  him.

You  should  always  have  before  your  eyes  death,  disease,
poverty,  blindness,  exile,  calumny,  and  infamy,  as  ills  which
are  incident  to  human  nature.  If  any  one  of  these  ills  fall  to
your  lot,  you  will  bear  it  the  better,  when  you  have  reckoned
upon  it.  I  answer,  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  a  general  and
distant  reflection  on  the  ills  of  human  life,  that  can  have  no
effect  to  prepare  us  for  them.  If  by  close  and  intense  medi
tation  we  render  them  present  and  intimate  to  us,  that  is  the
true  secret  for  poisoning  all  our  pleasures,  and  rendering  us
perpetually  miserable.

Your  sorrow  is  fruitless,  and  will  not  change  the  course  of
destiny.  Very  true  :  And  for  that  very  reason  I  am  sorry.

Cicero's  consolation  for  deafness  is  somewhat  curious,
How  many  languages  are  there,  says  he,  which  you  do  not
understand?  The  PUNIC,  SPANISH,  GALLIC,  EGYPTIAN,  &c.
With  regard  to  all  these,  you  are  as  if  you  were  deaf,  yet  you
are  indifferent  about  the  matter.  Is  it  then  so  great  a  misfor
tune  to  be  deaf  to  one  language  more?3

I  like  better  the  repartee  of  ANTIPATER  the  CTRENIAC,
when  some  women  were  condoling  with  him  for  his  blind
ness  :  Wliat !  says  he,  Do  you  think  there  are  no  pleasures  in
the  dark  ?

Nothing  can  be  more  destructive,  says  FONTENELLE,  to  am
bition,  and  the  passion  for  conquest,  than  the  true  system  of

1  [This  paragraph  does  not  occur  in  2  PLUT.  Lacon,  Apophtheg.

Editions  C  and  D.]  3  Tusc.  Quest,  lib.  v.  40.


THE SCEPTIC.  227

astronomy.  What  a  poor  thing  is  even  the  whole  globe  in  com
parison  of  the  infinite  extent  of  nature  ?  This  consideration  is
evidently  too  distant  ever  to  have  any  effect.  Or,  if  it  had
any,  would  it  not  destroy  patriotism  as  well  as  ambition  ?
The  same  gallant  author  adds  with  some  reason,  that  the
bright  eyes  of  the  ladies  are  the  only  objects,  which  lose
nothing  of  their  lustre  or  value  from  the  most  extensive  views
of  astronomy,  but  stand  proof  against  every  system.  Would
philosophers  advise  us  to  limit  our  affection  to  them?

1  Exile,  says  PLUTARCH  to  a  friend  in  banishment,  is  no
evil :  Mathematicians  tell  us,  that  the  whole  earth  is  but  a
point.,  compared  to  the  heavens.  To  change  one's  country  then
is  little  more  than  to  remove  from  one  street  to  another.  Man
is  not  a  plant,  rooted  to  a  certain  spot  of  earth :  All  soils  and
all  climates  are  alike  suited  to  him  2.  These  topics  are  admi
rable,  could  they  fall  only  into  the  hands  of  banished  persons.
But  what  if  they  come  also  to  the  knowledge  of  those  who
are  employed  in  public  affairs,  and  destroy  all  their  attach
ment  to  their  native  country?  Or  will  they  operate  like  the
quack's  medicine,  which  is  equally  good  for  a  diabetes  and  a
dropsy  ?

It  is  certain,  were  a  superior  being  thrust  into  a  human
body,  that  the  whole  of  life  would  to  him  appear  so  mean,
contemptible,  and  puerile,  that  he  never  could  be  induced  to
take  part  in  any  thing,  and  would  scarcely  give  attention  to
what  passes  around  him.  To  engage  him  to  such  a  con
descension  as  to  play  even  the  part  of  a  PHILIP  with  zeal
and  alacrity,  would  be  much  more  difficult,  than  to  constrain
the  same  PHILIP,  after  having  been  a  king  and  a  conqueror
during  fifty  years,  to  mend  old  shoes  with  proper  care  and
attention  ;  the  occupation  which  LUCIAN  assigns  him  in  the
infernal  regions.  Now  all  the  same  topics  of  disdain  towards
human  affairs,  which  could  operate  on  this  supposed  being,
occur  also  to  a  philosopher ;  but  being,  in  some  measure,  dis-
proportioned  to  human  capacity,  and  not  being  fortified  by
the  experience  of  any  thing  better,  they  make  not  a  full
impression  on  him.  He  sees,  but  he  feels  not  sufficiently
their  truth  ;  and  is  always  a  sublime  philosopher,  when  he
needs  not ;  that  is,  as  long  as  nothing  disturbs  him,  or  rouzes
his  affections.  While  others  play,  he  wonders  at  their  keen-

1  [The  two  following  paragraphs  do  not  occur  in  Editions  C  and  D.]
"  De  rxilio.


228  ESSAY  XVHL

ness  and  ardour ;  but  he  no  sooner  puts  in  his  own  stake,
than  he  is  commonly  transported  with  the  same  passions,
that  he  had  so  much  condemned,  while  he  remained  a  simple
spectator.

There  are  two  considerations  chiefly,  to  be  met  with  in
books  of  philosophy,  from  which  any  important  effect  is  to
be  expected,  and  that  because  these  considerations  are  drawn
from  common  life,  and  occur  upon  the  most  superficial  view
of  human  affairs.  When  we  reflect  on  the  shortness  and
uncertainty  of  life,  how  despicable  seem  all  our  pursuits  of
Happiness  ?  And  even,  if  we  would  extend  our  concern
beyond  our  own  life,  how  frivolous  appear  our  most  enlarged
and  most  generous  projects ;  when  we  consider  the  incessant
changes  and  revolutions  of  human  affairs,  by  which  laws  and
learning,  books  and  governments  are  hurried  away  by  time,
as  by  a  rapid  stream,  and  are  lost  in  the  immense  ocean  of
matter  ?  Such  a  reflection  certainly  tends  to  mortify  all  our
passions  :  But  does  it  not  thereby  counterwork  the  artifice  of
nature,  who  has  happily  deceived  us  into  an  opinion,  that
human  life  is  of  some  importance  ?  And  may  not  such  a
reflection  be  employed  with  success  by  voluptuous  reasoners,
in  order  to  lead  us,  from  the  paths  of  action  and  virtue,  into
the  flowery  fields  of  indolence  and  pleasure  ?

We  are  informed  by  THTJCYDIDES,  that,  during  the  famous
plague  of  ATHENS,  when  death  seemed  present  to  every  one,
a  dissolute  mirth  and  gaiety  prevailed  among  the  people,
who  exhorted  one  another  to  make  the  most  of  life  as  long
as  it  endured.  l  The  same  observation  is  made  by  BOOCACE
with  regard  to  the  plague  of  FLORENCE.  A  like  principle
makes  soldiers,  during  war,  be  more  addicted  to  riot  and  ex-
pence,  than  any  other  race  of  men.  *  Present  pleasure  is
always  of  importance ;  and  whatever  diminishes  the  impor
tance  of  all  other  objects  must  bestow  on  it  an  additional
influence  and  value.

The  second  philosophical  consideration,  which  may  often
have  an  influence  on  the  affections,  is  derived  from  a  com
parison  of  our  own  condition  with  the  condition  of  others.
This  comparison  we  are  continually  making,  even  in  common

1  [This  sentence does  not  occur in  Peace,  by  producing  Security,  has  much
Editioais  Cand  D.]  alter'd  them  in  this  Particular,  and  has

2  [In  place  of  this  sentence  Editions  quite  remoVd our Officers from the
0  and  D  read  as  follows  : And 'tis  ob-  generous Character of their Profes-
aei-vable.  in  this  Kingdom,  that  long  siou.]


THE SCEPTIC.


220


life  :  but  th.o  misfortune  is,  that  we  are  rather  apt  to  com
pare  our  situation  with  that  of  our  superiors,  than  with  that
of  our  inferiors.  A  philosopher  corrects  this  natural  in
firmity,  by  turning  his  view  to  the  other  side,  in  order  to
render  himself  easy  in  the  situation,  to  which  fortune  has
confined  him.  There  are  few  people,  who  are  not  susceptible
of  some  consolation  from  this  reflection,  though,  to  a  very
good-natured  man,  the  view  of  human  miseries  should  rather
produce  sorrow  than  comfort,  and  add,  to  his  lamentations
for  his  own  misfortunes,  a  deep  compassion  for  those  of
others.  Such  is  the  imperfection,  even  of  the  best  of  these
philosophical  topics  of  consolation.1

I  shall  conclude  this  subject  with  observing,  that,  though
virtue  be  undoubtedly  the  best  choice,  when  it  is  attainable  ;
yet  such  is  the  disorder  and  confusion  of  human  affairs,  that


1  The  Sceptic,  perhaps,  carries  the
matter  too  far,  when  he  limits  all  philo
sophical  topics  and  reflections  to  these
two.  There  seem  to  be  others,  whose
truth  is  undeniable,  and  whose  natural
tendency  is  to  tranquillize  and  soften
all  the  passions.  Philosophy  greedily
sseizes  these,  studies  them,  weighs  them,
commits  them  to  the  memory,  and
familiarizes  them  to  the  mind:  And
their  influence  on  tempers,  which  are
thoughtful,  gentle,  and  moderate,  may
be  considerable.  But  what  is  their  in
fluence,  you  will  say,  if  the  temper  be
antecedently  disposed  after  the  same
manner  as  that  to  which  they  pretend
to  form  it  ?  They  may,  at  least,  fortify
that  temper,  and  furnish  it  with  views,
by  which  it  may  entertain  and  nourish
itself.  Here  are  a  few  examples  of  such
philosophical  reflections.

1.  Is  it  not  certain,  that  every  con
dition  has  concealed  ills? Then  why
envy  any  body  ?

2.  Every  one  has  known  ills ; and
there is a compensation throughout.
Why not  be  contented  with  the pre
sent?

3.  Custom  deadens  the  sense  both  of
the  good  and  the  ill,  and  levels  every
thing.

4.  Health  and  humour  all. The  rest
of  little  consequence, except  these  be
affected.

5.  How  many  other  good  things  have
I  ? Then  why  be  vexed  for  one  ill  ?

6.  How  many  are  happy  in  the  con
dition of which I complain? How
mauv  envv  me  ?


7.  Every  good must  be  paid for :
Fortune  by  labour,  favour  by  flattery.
Would  I  keep  the  price,  yet  have  the
commodity  ?

8.  Expect  not  too  great  happiness  in
life. Human  nature  admits  it  not.

9.  Propose  not  a  happiness  too  com
plicated.  But  does  that  depend  on  me  ?
Yes  :  The  first  choice  does.  Life  is  like
a  game : One  may  choose  the  game :
And  passion,  by  degrees,  seizes  the  pro
per  object.

10.  Anticipate by your hopes and
fancy  future  consolation,  which  time  in
fallibly  brings  to  every  affliction.

11.  I  desire  to  be  rich. Why?  That
I  may  possess  many  fine  objects  ;  houses,
gardens,  equipage,  &c. How  many  fine
objects  does  nature  offer  to  every  one
without  expence  ?  If  enjoyed,  sufficient.
If  not :  See  the  effect  of  custom  or  of
temper,  which  would  soon  take  off  the
relish  of  the  riches.

12.  I  desire  fame. Let  this  occur:
If  I  act  well,  I  shall  have  the  esteem
of  all  my  acquaintance. And  what  is
all  the  rest  to  me  ?

These  reflections  are  so  obvious,  that
it  is  a  wonder  they  occur  not  to  every
man  :  So  convincing,  that  it  is  a  wonder
they  persuade  not  every  man.  But
perhaps  they  do  occur  to  and  persuade
most  men  ;  when  they  consider  human
life,  by  a  general  and  calm  survey :
But  where  any  real,  affecting  incident
happens ;  when  passion  is  awakened,
fancy  agitated,  example  draws,  and
counsel  urges ;  the  philosopher  is  lost
in  the  man,  and  he  seeks  in  vain  for


230  ESSAY  XVIH.

no  perfect  or  regular  distribution  of  happiness  and  misery  is
ever,  in  this  life,  to  be  expected.  Not  only  the  goods  of
fortune,  and  the  endowments  of  the  body  (both  of  which  are
important),  not  only  these  advantages,  I  say,  are  unequally
divided  between  the  virtuous  and  vicious,  but  even  the  mind
itself  partakes,  in  some  degree,  of  this  disorder,  and  the
most  worthy  character,  by  the  very  constitution  of  the  pas
sions,  enjoys  not  always  the  highest  felicity.

It  is  observable,  that,  though  every  bodily  pain  proceeds
from  some  disorder  in  the  part  or  organ,  yet  the  pain  is  not
always  proportioned  to  the  disorder ;  but  is  greater  or  less,
according  to  the  greater  or  less  sensibility  of  the  part,  upon
which  the  noxious  humours  exert  their  influence.  A  tooth-aclt
produces  more  violent  convulsions  of  pain  than  a  phthisis  or
a  dropsy.  In  like  manner,  with  regard  to  the  ceconomy  of
the  mind,  we  may  observe,  that  all  vice  is  indeed  pernicious;
yet  the  disturbance  or  pain  is  not  measured  out  by  nature
with  exact  proportion  to  the  degree  of  vice,  nor  is  the  man
of  highest  virtue,  even  abstracting  from  external  accidents,
always  the  most  happy.  A  gloomy  and  melancholy  disposi
tion  is  certainly,  to  our  sentiments,  a  vice  or  imperfection  ;
but  as  it  may  be  accompanied  with  great  sense  of  honour
and  great  integrity,  it  may  be  found  in  very  worthy  charac
ters  ;  though  it  is  sufficient  alone  to  imbitter  life,  and  render
the  person  affected  with  it  completely  miserable.  On  the
other  hand,  a  selfish  villain  may  possess  a  spring  and  alacrity
of  temper,  a  certain  ]  gaiety  of  heart,  which  is  indeed  a  good
quality,  but  which  is  rewarded  much  beyond  its  merit,  and
when  attended  with  good  fortune,  will  compensate  for  the
uneasiness  and  remorse  arising  from  all  the  other  vices.

I  shall  add,  as  an  observation  to  the  same  purpose,  that,  if
a  man  be  liable  to  a  vice  or  imperfection,  it  may  often  hap
pen,  that  a  good  quality,  which  he  possesses  along  with  it,

that  persuasion  which  before  seemed  so  external  aid  : By  habit  and  study  ac-

firm  and  unshaken. What  remedy  for  quire  that  philosophical  temper  which

this  inconvenience  ? Assist  yourself  by  both  gives  force  to  reflection,  and  by

a  frequent  perusal  of  the  entertaining  rendering  a  great  part  of  your  happi-

moralists  :  Have  recourse  to  the  learn-  ness independent,  takes off  the  edge

ing  of  PLTTTARCH,  the  imagination  of  from  all  disorderly  passions,  and  traii-

LUCIAN,  the  eloquence  of  CICERO, the  quillizes  the  mind. Despise  not  these

wit  of  SENECA,  the  gaiety  of  MONTAIGNE,  helps; but  confide not  too much in

the  sublimity  of  SHAFTKSBURY. Moral  them  neither ;  unlea.  nature  has  been

precepts,  so  couched,  strike  deep,  and  favourable  in  the  temper,  with which

fortify  the  mind  against  the  illusions  of  she  has  endowed  you.
passion. But trust  not  altogether  to  '  [Gaieti  de  Ceyur  :  Edition  C.]


THE  SCEPTIC.  231

will  render  him  more  miserable,  than  if  he  were  completely
vicious.  A  person  of  such  imbecility  of  temper  as  to  be
easily  broken  by  affliction,  is  more  unhappy  for  being  endowed
with  a  generous  and  friendly  disposition,  which  gives  him  a
lively  concern  for  others,  and  exposes  him  the  more  to  for
tune  and  accidents.  A  sense  of  shame,  in  an  imperfect
character,  is  certainly  a  virtue ;  but  produces  great  uneasi
ness  and  remorse,  from  which  the  abandoned  villain  is  en
tirely  free.  A  very  amorous  complexion,  with  a  heart  in
capable  of  friendship,  is  happier  than  the  same  excess  in
love,  with  a  generosity  of  temper,  which  transports  a  man
beyond  himself,  and  renders  him  a  total  slave  to  the  object  of
his  passion.

In  a  word,  human  life  is  more  governed  by  fortune  than  byf
reason ;  is  to  be  regarded  more  as  a  dull  pastime  than  as  a
serious  occupation ; and  is  more influenced by  particular  |
humour,  than  by  general  principles. Shall  we  engage  our
selves  in  it  with  passion  and  anxiety  ? It  is  not  worthy  of
so  much  concern. Shall  we  be  indifferent  about  what  hap
pens  ? We  lose  all  the  pleasure  of  the  game  by  our  phlegm
and  carelessness. While  we  are  reasoning  concerning  life,  1
life  is  gone  ;  and  death,  though  perhaps  they  receive  him  j
differently,  yet  treats  alike  the  fool  and  the  philosopher. Ta
reduce  life  to  exact  rule  and  method,  is  commonly  a  painful,
oft  a  fruitless  occupation : And  is  it  not  also  a  proof,  that
we  overvalue  the  prize  for  which  we  contend?  Even  to  reason
so  carefully  concerning  it,  and  to  fix  with  accuracy  its  just
idea,  would  be  overvaluing  it,  were  it  not  that,  to  some
tempers,  this  occupation  is  one  of  the  most amusing, in
which  life  could  possibly  be  employed.

ESSAY  XIX. — Of  Polygamy  and  Divorces.

As  marriage  is  an  engagement  entered  into  by  mutual  con
sent,  and  has  for  its  end  the  propagation  of  the  species,  it
is  evident,  that  it  must  be  susceptible  of  all  the  variety  of
conditions,  which  consent  establishes,  provided  they  be  not
contrary  to  this  end.

A  man,  in  conjoining  himself  to  a  woman,  is  bound  to  her
according  to  the  terms  of  his  engagement:  In  begetting
children,  he  is  bound,  by  all  the  ties  of  nature  and  humanity,
to  provide  for  their  subsistence  and  education.  When  he  has


232  ESSAY  XIX.

performed  these  two  parts  of  duty,  no  one  can  reproach  him
with  injustice  or  injury.  And  as  the  terms  of  his  engagement,
as  well  as  the  methods  of  subsisting  his  offspring,  may  be
various,  it  is  mere  superstition  to  imagine,  that  marriage  can
be  entirely  uniform,  and  will  admit  only  of  one  mode  or  form.
Did  not  human  laws  restrain  the  natural  liberty  of  men,  every
particular  marriage  would  be  as  different  as  contracts  or
bargains  of  any  other  kind  or  species.

As  circumstances  vary,  and  the  laws  propose  different
advantages,  we  find,  that,  in  different  times  and  places,  they
impose  different  conditions  on  this  important  contract.  In
TONQUIN,  it  is  usual  for  the  sailors,  when  the  ships  come  into
harbour,  to  marry  for  the  season ;  and  notwithstanding  this
precarious  engagement,  they  are  assured,  it  is  said,  of  the
strictest  fidelity  to  their  bed,  as  well  as  in  the  whole  manage
ment  of  their  affairs,  from  those  temporary  spouses.

I  cannot,  at  present,  recollect  my  authorities  ;  but  I  have
somewhere  read,  that  the  republic  of  ATHENS,  having  lost
many  of  its  citizens  by  war  and  pestilence,  allowed  every  man
to  marry  two  wives,  in  order  the  sooner  to  repair  the  waste
which  had  been  made  by  these  calamities.  The  poet  EURIPIDES
happened  to  be  coupled  to  two  noisy  Vixens  who  so  plagued
him  with  their  jealousies  and  quarrels,  that  he  became  ever
after  a  professed  woman-hater:,  and  is  the  only  theatrical
writer,  perhaps  the  only  poet,  that  ever  entertained  an  aver
sion  to  the  sex.

In  that  agreeable  romance,  called  the  History  of  the
SEVARAMBIANS,  where  a  great  many  men  and  a  few  women
are  supposed  to  be  shipwrecked  on  a  desert  coast ;  the  captain
of  the  troop,  in  order  to  obviate  those  endless  quarrels  which
arose,  regulates  their  marriages  after  the  following  manner  :
He  takes  a  handsome  female  to  himself  alone ;  assigns  one  to
every  couple  of  inferior  officers  ;  and  to  five  of  the  lowest  rank
he  gives  one  wife  in  common.1

The  ancient  BRITONS  had  a  singular  kind  of  marriage,  to
be  met  with  among  no  other  people.  Any  number  of  them,
as  ten  or  a  dozen,  joined  in  a  society  together,  which  was
perhaps  requisite  for  mutual  defence  in  those  barbarous  times.
In  order  to  link  this  society  the  closer,  they  took  an  equal
number  of  wives  in  common ;  and  whatever  children  were

1  [ Editions C  to P add  the  following:  circumstances,  have  contrived  matters
Could  the  greatest  legislator,  in  such  with  greater  wisdom  ?]


OF  POLYGAMY  AND  DIVORCES.  233

born,  were  reputed  to  belong  to  all  of  them,  and  were  accord
ingly  provided  for  by  the  whole  community.

Among  the  inferior  creatures,  nature  herself,  being  the
supreme  legislator,  prescribes  all  the  laws  Avhich  regulate
their  marriages,  and  varies  those  laws  according  to  the  differ
ent  circumstances  of  the  creature.  Where  she  furnishes,
with  ease,  food  and  defence  to  the  newborn  animal,  the
present  embrace  terminates  the  marriage;  and  the  care  of
the  offspring  is  committed  entirely  to  the  female.  Where
the  food  is  of  more  difficult  purchase,  the  marriage  continues
for  one  season,  till  the  common  progeny  can  provide  for
itself;  and  the  union  immediately  dissolves,  and  leaves  each
of  the  parties  free  to  enter  into  a  new  engagement  at  the
ensuing  season.  But  nature,  having  endowed  man  with  reason,
has  not  so  exactly  regulated  every  article  of  his  marriage
contract,-  but  has  left  him  to  adjust  them,  by  his  own  prud
ence,  according  to  his  particular  circumstances  and  situation.
Municipal  laws  are  a  supply  to  the  wisdom  of  each  individual ;
and,  at  the  same  time,  by  restraining  the  natural  liberty  of
men,  make  private  interest  submit  to  the  interest  of  the
public.  All  regulations,  therefore,  on  this  head  are  equally
lawful,  and  equally  conformable  to  the  principles  of  nature ;
though  they  are  not  all  equally  convenient,  or  equally  useful
to  society.  The  laws  may  allow  of  polygamy,  as  among  the
Eastern  nations ;  or  of  voluntary  divorces,  as  among  the
GREEKS  and  ROMANS  ;  or  they  may  confine  one  man  to  one
woman,  during  the  whole  course  of  their  lives,  as  among  the
modem  EUROPEANS.  It  may  not  be  disagreeable  to  consider
the  advantages  and  disadvantages,  which  result  from  each  of
these  institutions.

The  advocates  for  polygamy  may  recommend  it  as  the
only  effectual  remedy  for  the  disorders  of  love,  and  the  only
expedient  for  freeing  men  from  that  slavery  to  the  females,
which  the  natural  violence  of  our  passions  has  imposed
upon  us.  By  this  means  alone  can  we  regain  our  right
of  sovereignty ;  and,  sating  our  appetite,  re-establish  the
authority  of  reason  in  our  minds,  and,  of  consequence,  our
own  authority  in  our  families.  Man,  like  a  weak  sovereign,
being  unable  to  support  himself  against  the  wiles  and  intrigues
of  his  subjects,  must  play  one  faction  against  another,  and
become  absolute  by  the  mutual  jealousy  of  the  females.  To
divide  and  toyovern  is  an  universal  maxim;  and  by  neglecting


234  ESSAY  XIX.

it,  the  EUKOPEANS  undergo  a  more  grievous  and  a  more
ignominious  slavery  than  the  TURKS  or  PERSIANS,  who  are
subjected  indeed  to  a  sovereign,  that  lies  at  a  distance  from
them,  but  in  their  domestic  affairs  rule  with  an  uncontroul-
able  sway.1

On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  urged  with  better  reason,
that  this  sovereignty  of  the  male  is  a  real  usurpation,  and
destroys  that  nearness  of  rank,  not  to  say  equality,  which
nature  has  established  between  the  sexes.  We  are,  by  nature,
their  lovers,  their  friends,  their  patrons  :  Would  we  willingly
exchange  such  endearing  appellations,  for  the  barbarous  title
of  master  and  tyrant  ?

In  what  capacity  shall  we  gain  by  this  inhuman  proceed
ing  ?  As  lovers,  or  as  husbands  ?  The  lover,  is  totally
annihilated ;  and  courtship,  the  most  agreeable  scene  in  life,
can  no  longer  have  place,  where  women  have  not  the  free
disposal  of  themselves,  but  are  bought  and  sold,  like  the
meanest  animal.  The  husband  is  as  little  a  gainer,  having
found  the  admirable  secret  of  extinguishing  every  part  of
love,  except  its  jealousy.  No  rose  without  its  thorn ;  but  he
must  be  a  foolish  wretch  indeed,  that  throws  away  the  rose
and  preserves  only  the  thorn. s

But  the  ASIATIC  manners  are  as  destructive  to  friendship
as  to  love.  Jealousy  excludes  men  from  all  intimacies  and
familiarities  with  each  other.  No  one  dares  bring  his  friend
to  his  house  or  table,  lest  he  bring  a  lover  to  his  numerous
wives.  Hence  all  over  the  east,  each  family  is  as  much
separate  from  another,  as  if  they  were  so  many  distinct
kingdoms.  No  wonder  then,  that  SOLOMON,  living  like  an
eastern  prince,  with  his  seven  hundred  wives,  and  three
hundred  concubines,  without  one  friend,  could  write  so

1  [Editions  C  to  P  add  the  following  :  ambassador in FRANCE. We TURKS,
An  honest  TURK,  who  should  come  from  says  he,  are  great  simpletons  in  com-
his  seraglio,  where  every  one trembles  parison  of  the Christians. We  are  at
before  him, would  be  surprized  to  see  the expense  and  trouble  of  keeping a
SYLVIA  in  her  drawing-room,  adored  by  seraglio,  each  in  his  own house : But
all  the  beaus  and  pretty  fellows  about  you  (asc  yourselves  of  this  burden,  and
town,  and  he  would  certainly  take  her  have your straylio  in your friends'
for some  mighty  and  despotic  queen,  houses. The known virtue of our
surrounded  by  her  guard  of  obsequious  BRITISH  ladies  frees  them sufficiently
slaves  and  eunuchs.]  from  this imputation  :  And  the  TURK

2  [C  to  N  add the following  para-  himself,  had he travelled among iis,
graph : I  would not willingly insist  must have  owned,  that  our  free  com-
upon  it  as  an  advantage  in  our  EURO-  merce  with  the  fair  sex,  more  than  any
PEAN  customs,  what  was  observed  by  other  invention, embellishes,  enlivens,
MKHEJIKT  EFFKNDI the last TURKISH  aud  polishes  society.]


OF POLYGAMY AND DIVORCES.  235

pathetically  concerning  the  vanity  of  the  world.  Had  he
tried  the  secret  of  one  wife  or  mistress,  a  few  friends,  and  a
great  many  companions,  he  might  have  found  life  somewhat
more  agreeable.  Destroy  love  and  friendship  ;  what  remains
in  the  world  worth  accepting?

1  The  bad  education  of  children,  especially  children  of
condition,  is  another  unavoidable  consequence  of  these  eastern
institutions.  Those  who  pass  the  early  part  of  life  among
slaves,  are  only  qualified  to  be,  themselves,  slaves  and
tyrants ;  and  in  every  future  intercourse,  either  with  their
inferiors  or  superiors,  are  apt  to  forget  the  natural  equality
of  mankind.  What  attention,  too,  can  it  be  supposed  a
parent,  whose  seraglio  affords  him  fifty  sons,  will  give  to
instilling  principles  of  morality  or  science  into  a  progeny,
with  whom  he  himself  is  scarcely  acquainted,  and  whom  he
loves  with  so  divided  an  affection?  Barbarism,  therefore,
appears,  from  reason  as  well  as  experience,  to  be  the  insepar
able  attendant  of  polygamy.

To  render  polygamy  more  odious,  I  need  not  recount  the
frightful  effects  of  jealousy,  and  the  constraint  in  which  it
holds  the  fair-sex  all  over  the  east.  In  those  countries  men
are  not  allowed  to  have  any  commerce  with  the  females,  not
even  physicians,  when  sickness  may  be  supposed  to  have
extinguished  all  wanton  passions  in  the  bosoms  of  the  fair,
and,  at  the  same  time,  has  rendered  them  unfit  objects  of
desire.  TOURNEFORT  tells  us,  that,  when  he  was  brought  into
the  grand  signor's  seraglio  as  a  physician,  he  was  not  a  little
surprized,  in  looking  along  a  gallery,  to  see  a  great  number
of  naked  arms,  standing  out  from  the  sides  of  the  room.  He
could  not  imagine  what  this  could  mean ;  till  he  was  told,
that  those  arms  belonged  to  bodies,  which  he  must  cure,
without  knowing  any  more  about  them,  than  what  he  could
learn  from  the  arms.  He  was  not  allowed  to  ask  a  question
of  the  patient,  or  even  of  her  attendants,  lest  he  might  find
it  necessary  to  enquire  concerning  circumstances,  which  the
delicacy  of  the  seraglio  allows  not  to  be  revealed.  Hence
physicians  in  the  east  pretend  to  know  all  diseases  from  the
pulse ;  as  our  quacks  in  EUROPE  undertake  to  cure  a  person
merely  from  seeing  his  water.  I  suppose,  had  Monsieur
TOURNEFORT  been  of  this  latter  kind,  he  would  not,  in
CONSTANTINOPLE,  have  been  allowed  by  the  jealous  TURKS

1  [This  paragraph  does  not  occur  in  Editions  C  to  K.]


236  ESSAY  XIX.

to  be  furnished  with  materials  requisite  for  exercising  his
art.

In  another  country,  where  polygamy  is  also  allowed,  they
render  their  wives  cripples,  and  make  their  feet  of  no  use  to
them,  in  order  to  confine  them  to  their  own  houses.  But  it
will,  perhaps,  appear  strange,  that,  in  a  EUROPEAN  country,
jealousy  can  yet  be  carried  to  such  a  height,  that  it  is  inde
cent  so  much  as  to  suppose  that  a  woman  of  rank  can  have
feet  or  legs.1  Witness  the  following  story,  which  we  have
from  very  good  authority.2  When  the  mother  of  the  late
king  of  SPAIN  was  on  her  road  towards  MADRID,  she  passed
through  a  little  town  in  SPAIN,  famous  for  its  manufactory  of
gloves  and  stockings.  The  magistrates  of  the  place  thought
they  could  not  better  express  their  joy  for  the  reception  of
their  new  queen,  than  by  presenting  her  with  a  sample  of
those  commodities,  for  which  alone  their  town  was  remark
able.  The  major  domo,  who  conducted  the  princess,  received
the  gloves  very  graciously  :  But  when  the  stockings  were
presented,  he  flung  them  away  with  great  indignation,  and
severely  reprimanded  the  magistrates  for  this  egregious  piece
of  indecency.  Know,  says  he,  that  a  queen  of  SPAIN  has  no
legs.  The  young  queen,  who,  at  that  time,  understood  the
language  but  imperfectly,  and  had  often  been  frightened  with
stories  of  SPANISH  jealousy,  imagined  that  they  were  to  cut
oft'  her  legs.  Upon  which  she  fell  a  crying,  and  begged  them
to  conduct  her  back  to  GERMANY  ;  for  that  she  never  could
endure  the  operation :  And  it  was  with  some  difficulty  they
could  appease  her.  PHILIP  I V.  is  said  never  in  his  life  to
have  laughed  heartily,  but  at  the  recital  of  this  story.3

Having  rejected  polygamy,  and  matched  one  man  with
one  woman,  let  us  now  consider  what  duration  we  shall  assign
to  their  union,  and  whether  we  shall  admit  of  those  voluntary

1  [Editions  C  to  P  add  the  following:  TURKISH  lady?  She  must  not  be  sup-
A  SPANIARD  is  jealous  of  the  very  posed  to  have  a  being  at  all.  Accord-
thoughts  of  those  who  approach  his  ingly,  'tis  esteemed  a  piece  of  rudeness
wife ;  and,  if  possible,  will  prevent  his  and  indecency  at  CONSTANTINOPLE,  ever
being  dishonoured,  even  by  the  wanton-  to  make  mention  of  a  man's  wives  be-
ness  of  imagination.]  fore  him.1  In  EUROPE,  'tis  true,  line

•  Memoirs  de  la  cour  oTEspAGNE  par  bred  people  make  it  also  a  rule  never

Madame  d" AUXOY.  to  talk  of  their  wives.  But  the  reason

3  [Editions  C  to  P  add  as  follows :  If  is  not  founded  on  our  jealousy.  I  sup-

a  SPANISH  lady  must  not  be  supposed  to  pose  it  is  because  we  should  be  apt.,

have  legs,  what  must  be  supposed  of  a  were  it  not  for  this  rule,  lo  become


1  [Memoircs  de  Marquis  d'Aryens.~\


OF  POLYGAMY  AND DIVORCES.  237

divorces,  which  were  customary  among  the  GREEKS  and
ROMANS.  Those  who  would  defend  this  practice  may  employ
the  following  reasons.

How  often  does  disgust  and  aversion  arise  after  marriage,
from  the  most  trivial  accidents,  or  from  an  incompatibility  of
humour ;  where  time,  instead  of  curing  the  wounds,  proceed
ing  from  mutual  injuries,  festers  them  every  day  the  more,  by
new  quarrels  and  reproaches  ?  Let  us  separate  hearts,  which
were  not  made  to  associate  together.  Each  of  them  may,
perhaps,  find  another  for  which  it  is  better  fitted.  At  least,
nothing  can  be  more  cruel  than  to  preserve,  by  violence,  an
union,  which,  at  first,  was  made  by  mutual  love,  and  is  now,
in  effect,  dissolved  by  mutual  hatred.

But  the  liberty  of  divorces  is  not  only  a  cure  to  hatred  and
domestic  quarrels  :  It  is  also  an  admirable  preservative  against
them,  and  the  only  secret  for  keeping  alive  that  love,  which
first  united  the  married  couple.  The  heart  of  man  delights  in
liberty  :  The  very  image  of  constraint  is  grievous  to  it :  When
you  would  confine  it  by  violence,  to  what  would  otherwise
have  been  its  choice,  the  inclination  immediately  changes,
and  desire  is  turned  into  aversion.  If  the  public  interest  will
not  allow  us  to  enjoy  in  polygamy  that  variety,  which  is  so
agreeable  in  love :  at  least,  deprive  us  not  of  that  liberty,
which  is  so  essentially  requisite.  In  vain  you  tell  me,  that
I  had  my  choice  of  the  person,  with  whom  I  would  conjoin
myself.  I  had  my  choice,  it  is  true,  of  my  prison ;  but  this
is  but  a  small  comfort,  since  it  must  still  be  a  prison.

Such  are  the  arguments  which  may  be  urged  in  favour  of
divorces :  But  there  seem  to  be  these  three  unanswerable
objections  against  them.  First,  What  must  become  of  the
children,  upon  the  separation  of  the  parents  ?  Must  they  be
committed  to  the  care  of  a  step-mother ;  and  instead  of  the
fond  attention  and  concern  of  a  parent,  feel  all  the  indiffer
ence  or  hatred  of  a  stranger  or  an  enemy  ?  These  incon
veniences  are  sufficiently  felt,  where  nature  has  made  the
divorce  by  the  doom  inevitable  to  all  mortals :  And  shall  we
seek  to  multiply  those  inconveniences,  by  multiplying  divorces,


troublesome  to  company,  by  talking  too  to  mention  their  wives  in  company,  lest

much  of  them.  they  should  talk  of  them  before  people,

•  The  author  of  the  PEBSIAN letters  who  are  better  acquainted  with  them  than

has given  a  different reason  for  this  themselves .]
polite  maxim.  Men,  Bays  he,  never  care


238  ESSAY  XIX.

and  putting  it  in  the  power  of  parents,  upon  every  caprice,  to
render  their  posterity  miserable?

Secondly,  If  it  be  true,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  heart  of  man
naturally  delights  in  liberty,  and  hates  every  thing  to  which
it  is  confined ;  it  is  also  true,  on  the  other,  that  the  heart  of
man  naturally  submits  to  necessity,  and  soon  loses  an  in
clination,  when  there  appears  an  absolute  impossibility  of
gratifying  it.  These  principles  of  human  nature,  you'll  say,
are  contradictory :  But  what  is  man  but  a  heap  of  contradic
tions  !  Though  it  is  remarkable,  that,  where  principles  are,
after  this  manner,  contrary  in  their  operation,  they  do  not
always  destroy  each  other ;  but  the  one  or  the  other  may
predominate  on  any  particular  occasion,  according  as  circum
stances  are  more  or  less  favourable  to  it.  For  instance,  love
is  a  restless  and  impatient  passion,  full  of  caprices  and
variations  :  arising  in  a  moment  from  a  feature,  from  an  air,
from  nothing,  and  suddenly  extinguishing  after  the  same
manner.  Such  a  passion  requires  liberty  above  all  things  ;
and  therefore  ELOISA  had  reason,  when,  in  order  to  preserve
this  passion,  she  refused  to  marry  her  beloved  ABELAKD.

How  oft,  when  prest  to  marriage,  have  I  said,
Curse  on  all  laws  but  those  which  love  has  made ;
Love,  free  as  air,  at  sight  of  human  ties,
Spreads  his  light  wings,  and  in  a  moment  flies.

But  friendship  is  a  calm  and  sedate  affection,  conducted  by
reason  and  cemented  by  habit ;  springing  from  long  acquaint
ance  and  mutual  obligations ;  without  jealousies  or  fears,  and
without  those  feverish  fits  of  heat  and  cold,  which  cause  such
An  agreeable  torment  in  the  amorous  passion.  So  sober  an
affection,  therefore,  as  friendship,  rather  thrives  under  con
straint,  and  never  rises  to  such  a  height,  as  when  any  strong
interest  or  necessity  binds  two  persons  together,  and  gives
them  some  common  object  of  pursuit.1  We  need  not,  there
fore,  be  afraid  of  drawing  the  marriage-knot,  which  chiefly
subsists  by  friendship,  the  closest  possible.  The  amity

1  [Editions  C  to  P  add  as  follows :  of  raptures  and  extasies  beyond  the
Let  us  consider  then,  whether  love  or  honey-month,  is  a  fool.  Even  romances
friendship  should  most  predominate  in  themselves,  with  all  their  liberty  of
marriage  ;  and  we  shall  soon  deter-  fiction,  are  obliged  to  drop  their  lovers
mine  whether  liberty  or  constraint  be  the  very  day  of  their  marriage,  and  find
most  favourable  to  it.  The  happiest  it  easier  to  support  the  passion  for  a
marriages,  to  be  sure,  are  found  where  dozen  years  under  coldness,  disdain  and
love,  by  long  acquaintance,  is  consoli-  difficulties,  than  a  week  under  posses-
dated  into  friendship.  Whoever  dreams  sion  and  security.]


OF  POLYGAMY  AND DIVORCES.  2:^,9

between  the  persons,  where  it  is  solid  and  sincere,  will  rather
gain  by  it :  And  where  it  is  wavering  and  uncertain,  this  is
the  best  expedient  for  fixing  it.  How  many  frivolous  quarrels
and  disgusts  are  there,  which  people  of  common  prudence
endeavour  to  forget,  when  they  lie  under  a  necessity  of  passing
their  lives  together;  but  which  would  soon  be  inflamed  into
the  most  deadly  hatred,  were  they  pursued  to  the  utmost,
under  the  prospect  of  an  easy  separation  ?

In  the  third  place,  we  must  consider,  that  nothing  is  more
dangerous  than  to  unite  two  persons  so  closely  in  all  their
interests  and  concerns,  as  man  and  wife,  without  rendering-
the  union  entire  and  total.  The  least  possibility  of  a  separate
interest  must  be  the  source  of  endless  quarrels  and  sus
picions.  '  The  wife,  not  secure  of  her  establishment,  will  still
be  driving  some  separate  end  or  project ;  and  the  husband's
selfishness,  being  accompanied  with  more  power,  may  be  stf1
more  dangerous.

Should  these  reasons  against  voluntary  divorces  be  deemed
insufficient,  I  hope  no  body  will  pretend  to  refuse  the  testi
mony  of  experience.  At  the  time  when  divorces  were  most
frequent  among  the  ROMANS,  marriages  were  most  rare  ;  and
AUGUSTUS  was  obliged,  by  penal  laws,  to  force  men  of  fashion
into  the  married  state :  A  circumstance  which  is  scarcely  to
be  found  in  any  other  age  or  nation.2  The  more  ancient  laws
of  ROME,  which  prohibited  divorces,  are  extremely  praised  by
DIONYSIUS  HALYCARNASS^Eirs.3  Wonderful  was  the  harmony,
says  the  historian,  which  this  inseparable  union  of  interests
produced  between  married  persons  ;  while  each  of  them  con
sidered  the  inevitable  necessity  by  which  they  were  linked
together,  and  abandoned  all  prospect  of  any  other  choice  or
establishment.

The  exclusion  of  polygamy  and  divorces  sufficiently  re
commends  our  present  EUROPEAN  practice  with  regard  to
marriage.

1  [In  place  of  '  The  wife,  not  secure  wife,  will  be  doubly  ruinous.']
of  her  establishment,  will  still  be  driv-  2  [Editions  C and  D omit the re-
ing  some  separate  end  or  project.' Edi-  mainder  of  the  paragraph.]
tions  P  to  C  read  : 'What  Dr.  PARNEL  s  Lib.ii.  25.
calls,  The  little  pilf  ring  temper of  a


240  ESSAY  XX.


ESSAY  XX. — Of  Simplicity  and  Refinement  in  Writing.

FINE  writing-,  according  to  Mr.  ADDISON,  consists  of  senti
ments,  which  are  natural,  without  being  obvious.  There
cannot  be  a  juster,  and  more  concise  definition  of  fine  writing

Sentiments,  which  are  merely  natural,  affect  not  the  mind
with  any  pleasure,  and  seem  not  worthy  of  our  attention.
The  pleasantries  of  a  waterman,  the  observations  of  a  peasant,
the  ribaldry  of  a  porter  or  hackney  coachman,  all  of  these
are  natural,  and  disagreeable.  What  an  insipid  comedy
should  we  make  of  the  chit-chat  of  the  tea.-table,  copied
faithfully  and  at  full  length?  Nothing  can  please  persons  of
taste,  but  nature  drawn  with  all  her  graces  and  ornaments,
la  belle  nature ;  or  if  we  copy  low  life,  the  strokes  must  be
strong  and  remarkable,  and  must  convey  a  lively  image  to
the  mind.  The  absurd  naivety1  of  8ancho  Pancho  is  represented
in  such  inimitable  colours  by  CERVANTES,  that  it  entertains  as
much  as  the  picture  of  the  most  magnanimous  hero  or  softest
lover.

The  case  is  the  same  with  orators,  philosophers,  critics,  or
any  author  who  speaks  in  his  own  person,  without  introducing
other  speakers  or  actors.  If  his  language  be  not  elegant,  his
observations  uncommon,  his  sense  strong  and  masculine,  he
will  in  vain  boast  his  nature  and  simplicity.  He  may  be
correct ;  but  he  never  will  be  agreeable.  It  is  the  unhappiness
of  such  authors,  that  they  are  never  blamed  or  censured.
The  good  fortune  of  a  book,  and  that  of  a  man,  are  not  the
same.  The  secret  deceiving  path  of  life,  which  HOKACE
talks  of,  fallentis  semita  vitce,  may  be  the  happiest  lot  of  the
one ;  but  is  the  greatest  misfortune,  which  the  other  can
possibly  fall  into.

On  the  other  hand,  productions,  which  are  merely  sur
prising,  without  being  natural,  can  never  give  any  lasting
entertainment  to  the  mind.  To  draw  chimeras  is  not,  pro
perly  speaking,  to  copy  or  imitate.  The  justness  of  the
representation  is  lost,  and  the  mind  is  displeased  to  find  a
picture,  which  bears  no  resemblance  to  any  original.  Nor
are  such  excessive  refinements  more  agreeable  in  the  epistolary
or  philosophic  style,  than  in  the  epic  or  tragic.  Too  much

1  [Editions  C  to  K :  Naivety,  a  word  which  I  have  borrow'd  from  the  French,
and  which  is  wanted  in  our  language.]


OF SIMPLICITY AND REFINEMENT.  241

ornament  is  a  fault  in  every  kind  of  production.  Uncommon
expressions,  strong  flashes  of  wit,  pointed  similes,  and
epigrammatic  turns,  especially  when  they  recur  too  frequently,
are  a  disfigurement,  rather  than  any  embellishment  of  dis
course.  As  the  eye,  in  surveying  a  GOTHIC  building,  is  dis
tracted  by  the  multiplicity  of  ornaments,  and  loses  tiie  whole
by  its  minute  attention  to  the  parts  ;  so  the  mind,  in  perusing
a  work  overstocked  with  wit,  is  fatigued  and  disgusted  with
the  constant  endeavour  to  shine  and  surprize.  This  is  the
case  where  a  writer  overabounds  in  wit,  evf>n  though  that
wit,  in  itself,  should  be  just  and  agreeable.  But  it  commonly
happens  to  such  writers,  that  they  seek  for  their  favourite
ornaments,  even  where  the  subject  does  not  afford  them  ;  and
by  that  means,  have  twenty  insipid  conceits  for  one  thought
which  is  really  beautiful.

There  is  no  subject  in  critical  learning  more  copious,  than
this  of  the  just  mixture  of  simplicity  and  refinement  in
writing  ;  and  therefore,  not  to  wander  in  too  large  a  field,  I
shall  confine  myself  to  a  few  general  observations  on  that
head.

First,  I  observe,  That  though  excesses  of  loth  kinds  are  to  be
avoided,  and  though  a  proper  medium  ought  to  be  studied  in  all
productions  ;  yet  this  medium  lies  not  in  a  point,  but  admits  of
a  considerable  latitude.  Consider  the  wide  distance,  in  this
respect,  between  Mr.  POPE  and  LUCRETIUS.  These  seem  to
lie  in  the  two  greatest  extremes  of  refinement  and  simplicity,
in  which  a  poet  can  indulge  himself,  without  being  guilty  of
any  blameable  excess.  All  this  interval  may  be  filled  with
poets,  who  may  differ  from  each  other,  but  may  be  equally
admirable,  each  in  his  peculiar  stile  and  manner.  CORNEILLE
and  CONGREVE,  who  carry  their  wit  and  refinement  some
what  farther  than  Mr.  POPE  (if  poets  of  so  different  a  kind
can  be  compared  together),  and  SOPHOCLES  and  TERENCE,
who  are  more  simple  than  LUCRETIUS,  seem  to  have  gone  out
of  that  medium,  in  which  the  most  perfect  productions  are
found,  and  to  be  guilty  of  some  excess  in  these  opposite  cha
racters.  Of  all  the  great  poets,  VIRGIL  and  RACINE,  in  my
opinion,  lie  nearest  the  center,  and  are  the  farthest  removed
from  both  the  extremities.

M.y  second  observation  on  this  head  is,  That  it  is  very  diffi
cult,  if  not  impossible, to explain by  words, where the  just
medium  lies  between  the  excesses  of  simplicity  and  refinement,  or
VOL.  in.  *


ojo  ESSAY XX.

to  give  any  rule  by  wliicli  we  can  know  precisely  the  bounds
between  the  fault  and  the  beauty.  A  critic  may  not  only  dis
course  very  judiciously  on  this  head,  without  instructing  his
readers,  but  even  without  understanding  the  matter  perfectly
himself.  There  is  not  a  finer  piece  of  criticism  than  the  dis
sertation  on  pastorals  by  FONTENELLE  ;  in  which,  by  a  number
of  reflections  and  philosophical  reasonings,  he  endeavours  to
fix  the  just  medium,  which  is  suitable  to  that  species  of
writing.  But  let  any  one  read  the  pastorals  of  that  author,
and  he  will  be  convinced,  that  this  judicious  critic,  notwith
standing  his  fine  reasonings,  had  a  false  taste,  and  fixed  the
point  of  perfection  much  nearer  the  extreme  of  refinement
than  pastoral  poetry  will  admit  of.  The  sentiments  of  his
shepherds  are  better  suited  to  the  toilettes  of  PARIS,  than  to
the  forests  of  ARCADIA.  But  this  it  is  impossible  to  discover
from  his  critical  reasonings.  He  blames  all  excessive  painting
and  ornament  as  much  as  VIRGIL  could  have  done,  had  that
great  poet  writ  a  dissertation  on  this  species  of  poetry.
However  different  the  tastes  of  men,  their  general  discourse
on  these  subjects  is  commonly  the  same.  No  criticism  can
be  instructive,  which  descends  not  to  particulars,  and  is  not
full  of  examples  and  illustrations.  It  is  allowed  on  all  hands,
that  beauty,  as  well  as  virtue,  always  lies  in  a  medium ;  but
where  this  medium  is  placed,  is  the  great  question,  and  can
never  be  sufficiently  explained  by  general  reasonings.

I  shall  deliver  it  as  a  third  observation  on  this  subject,
That  we  ought  to  be  more  on  our  guard  against  the  excess  of
refinement  than  that  of  simplicity  ;  and  that  because  the  former
excess  is  both  less  beautiful,  and  more  dangerous  than  the  latter.
It  is  a  certain  rule,  that  wit  and  passion  are  entirely  in
compatible.  When  the  affections  are  moved,  there  is  no  place
for  the  imagination.  The  mind  of  man  being  naturally
limited,  it  is  impossible  that  all  its  faculties  can  operate  at
once :  And  the  more  any  one  predominates,  the  less  room  is
there  for  the  others  to  exert  their  vigour.  For  this  reason,
a  greater  degree  of  simplicity  is  required  in  all  compositions,
where  men,  and  actions,  and  passions  are  painted,  than  in
such  as  consist  of  reflections  and  observations.  And  as  the
former  species  of  writing  is  the  more  engaging  and  beautiful,
one  may  safely,  upon  this  account,  give  the  preference  to  the
extreme  of  simplicity  above  that  of  refinement.

We  may  also  observe,  that  those  compositions,  which  we


OF SIMPLICITY AND REFINEMENT.  24*

read  the  oftenest,  and  which  every  man  of  taste  has  got  by
heart,  have  the  recommendation  of  simplicity,  and  have
nothing  surprising  in  the  thought,  when  divested  of  that
elegance  of  expression,  and  harmony  of  numbers,  with  which
it  is  cloathed.  If  the  merit  of  the  composition  li»3  in  a  point
of  wit ;  it  may  strike  at  first ;  but  the  mind  anticipates  the
thought  in  the  second  perusal,  and  is  not  longer  affected  by
it.  When  I  read  an  epigram  of  MARTIAL,  the  first  line  re
calls  the  whole ;  and  I  have  no  pleasure  in  repeating  to
myself  what  I  know  already.  But  each  line,  each  word  in
CATULLUS,  has  its  merit ;  and  I  am  never  tired  with  the
perusal  of  him.  It  is  sufficient  to  run  over  COWLET  once  :
But  PARNEL,  after  the  fiftieth  reading,  is  as  fresh  as  at  the
first.  Besides,  it  is  with  books  as  with  women,  where  a
certain  plainness  of  manner  and  of  dress  is  more  engaging
than  that  glare  of  paint  and  airs  and  apparel,  which  may
dazzle  the  eye,  but  reaches  not  the  affections.  TERENCE  is  a
modest  and  bashful  beauty,  to  whom  we  grant  everything,
because  he  assumes  nothing,  and  whose  purity  and  nature
make  a  durable,  though  not  a  violent  impression  on  us.

But  refinement,  as  it  is  the  less  beautiful,  so  is  it  the  more
dangerous  extreme,  and  what  we  are  the  aptest  to  fall  into.
Simplicity  passes  for  dulness,  when  it  is  not  accompanied
with  great  elegance  and  propriety.  On  the  contrary,  there
is  something  surprizing  in  a  blaze  of  wit  and  conceit.  Or
dinary  readers  are  mightily  struck  with  it,  and  falsely  ima
gine  it  to  be  the  most  difficult,  as  well  as  most  excellent  way
of  writing.  SENECA  abounds  with  agreeable  faults,  says
QUINTILIAN,  abundat  dulcibus  vitiis ;  and  for  that  reason  is
the  more  dangerous,  and  the  more  apt  to  pervert  the  taste
of  the  young  and  inconsiderate.

I  shall  add,  that  the  excess  of  refinement  is  now  more  to
be  guarded  against  than  ever ;  because  it  is  the  extreme,
which  men  are  the  most  apt  to  fall  into,  after  learning  has
made  some  progress,  and  after  eminent  writers  have  ap
peared  in  every  species  of  composition.  The  endeavour  to
please. by  novelty  leads  men  wide  of  simplicity  and  nature,
and  fills  their  writings  with  affectation  and  conceit.  'It
was  thus  the  ASIATIC  eloquence  degenerated  so  much  from
the  ATTIC  :  It  was  thus  the  age  of  CLAUDIUS  and  NERO
became  so  much  inferior  to  that  of  AUGUSTUS  in  taste  and

1 [The  first  clause  of  this  sentence  was  added  in  Edition  K.]


244  ESSAY XXT.

genius :  And  perhaps  there  are,  at  present,  some  symptoms
of  a  like  degeneracy  of  taste,  in  FRANCE  as  well  as  in  ENG
LAND.

1  ESSAY  XXI. — Of  National  Characters.

THE  vulgar  are  apt  to  carry  all  national  characters  to  ex
tremes  ;  and  having  once  established  it  as  a  principle,  thab
any  people  are  knavish,  or  cowardly,  or  ignorant,  they  will
admit  of  no  exception,  but  comprehend  every  individual
under  the  same  censure.  Men  of  sense  condemn  these  un-
distinguishing  judgments :  Though  at  the  same  time,  they
allow,  that  each  nation  has  a  peculiar  set  of  manners,  and
that  some  particular  qualities  are  more  frequently  to  be  met
with  among  one  people  than  among  their  neighbours.  The
common  people  in  SWITZERLAND  have  probably  more
honesty  than  those  of  the  same  rank  in  IRELAND  ;  and  every
prudent  man  will,  from  that  circumstance  alone,  make  a
difference  in  the  trust  which  he  reposes  in  each.  We  have
reason  to  expect  greater  wit  and  gaiety  in  a  FRENCHMAN
than  in  a  SPANIARD  ;  though  CERVANTES  was  born  in  SPAIN.
An  ENGLISHMAN  will  naturally  be  supposed  to  have  more
knowledge  than  a  DANE  ;  though  TYCHO  BRAHE  was  a  native
of  DENMARK.

Different  reasons  are  assigned  for  these  national  characters  ;
while  some  account  for  them  frommoraZ,  others  from  physical
causes.  By  moral  causes,  I  mean  all  circumstances,  which
are  fitted  to  work  on  the  mind  as  motives  or  reasons,  and
which  render  a  peculiar  set  of  manners  habitual  to  us.  Of
this  kind  are,  the  nature  of  the  government,  the  revolutions
of  public  affairs,  the  plenty  or  penury  in  which  the  people
live,  the  situation  of  the  nation  with  regard  to  its  neighbours,
and  such  like  circumstances.  By  physical  causes  I  mean
those  qualities  of  the  air  and  climate,  which  are  supposed
to  work  insensibly  on  the  temper,  by  altering  the  tone  and
habit  of  the  body,  and  giving  a  particular  complexion,  which,
though  reflection  and  reason  may  sometimes  overcome  it,
will  yet  prevail  among  the  generality  of  mankind,  and  have
an  influence  on  their  manners.

That  the  character  of  a  nation  will  much  depend  on  moral
causes,  must  be  evident  to  the  most  superficial  observer ;
since  a  nation  is  nothing  but  a  collection  of  individuals,  and
1  [This  Essay  was  first  published  iu  Edition  D.]


OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS.  245

the  manners  of  individuals  are  frequently  determined  by
these  causes.  As  poverty  and  hard  labour  debase  the  minds
of  the  common  people,  and  render  them  unfit  for  any  science
and  ingenious  profession  ;  so  where  any  government  becomes
very  oppressive  to  all  its  subjects,  it  must  have  a  proportional
effect  on  their  temper  and  genius,  and  must  banish  all  the
liberal  arts  from  among  them.1

The  same  principle  of  moral  causes  fixes  the  character  of
different  professions,  and  alters  even  that  disposition,  which
the  particular  members  receive  from  the  hand  of  nature.  A
soldier  and  a  priest  are  different  characters,  in  all  nations,
and  all  ages ;  and  this  difference  is  founded  on  circumstances,
•whose  operation  is  eternal  and  unalterable.

The  uncertainty  of  their  life  makes  soldiers  lavish  and
generous,  as  well  as  brave  :  Their  idleness,  together  with
the  large  societies,  which  they  form  in  camps  or  garrisons,
inclines  them  to  pleasure  and  gallantry :  By  their  frequent
change  of  company,  they  acquire  good  breeding  and  an  open
ness  of  behaviour  :  Being  employed  only  against  a  public
and  an  open  enemy,  they  become  candid,  honest,  and  unde-
signing :  And  as  they  use  more  the  labour  of  the  body  than
that  of  the  rnind,  they  are  commonly  thoughtless  and  ig
norant.11

It  is  a  trite,  but  not  altogether  a  false  maxim,  that  priests
of  all  religions  are  the  same ;  and  though  the  character  of
the  profession  will  not,  in  every  instance,  prevail  over  the
personal  character,  yet  it  is  sure  always  to  predominate  with
the  greater  number.  For  as  chymists  observe,  that  spirits,
when  raised  to  a  certain  height,  are  all  the  same,  from  what
ever  material  they  be  extracted  ;  so  these  men,  being  elevated
above  humanity,  acquire  a  uniform  character,  which  is  en
tirely  their  own,  and  which,  in  my  opinion,  is,  generally
speaking,  not  the  most  amiable  that  is  to  be  met  with  in
human  society.  It  is,  in  most  points,  opposite  to  that  of  a
soldier ;  as  is  the  way  of  life,  from  which  it  is  derived.3

1  [Editions  D  to  P  add  :  Instances  of  This  seems  to  me  a  presumption,  that
this  nature  are very  frequent  in the  the  ancients  owed  all  their  refinement
world.]  and  civility  to  books  and  study ; for

2  It is a saying of MENANDER,  which,  indeed,  a  soldier's  life  is  not  KO
Kojui|/J)s  ffpaTKaTijs,  0118'  kv  el  ir\drrfi  6fbs  well calculated. Company and the
QvBfls  yivoit'  &v.  MEN.  apud  STOB^UM.  world  is  their  sphere. And  if  there  V>e
It  is  not  in  the  power  even  of  God  to  any  politeness  to  be  learned  from  com-
make  a  polite  sofdier. The  contrary  ob-  pany,  they  will  certainly  have  a,  con
servation  with  regard  to  the  manners  siderable  share  of  it.

of  soldiers takes place in our  days.  3  Though  all  mankind  hare  a  strong


240


ESSAY  XXL


As  to  physical  causes,  I  am  inclined  to  doubt  altogether  ol
their  operation  in  this  particular;  nor  do  I  think,  that  men
owe  any  thing  of  their  temper  or  genius  to  the  air,  food,  or
climate.  I  confess,  that  the  contrary  opinion  may  justly,  at


propensity  to  religion  at  certain  times
and  in  certain  dispositions ;  yet  are
there  few  or  none,  who  have  it  to  that
degree,  and  with  that  constancy,  which
is  requisite  to  support  the  character  of
this  profession.  It  must,  therefore,  hap
pen,  that  clergymen,  being  drawn  from
the  common  mass  of  mankind,  as  people
are  to  other  employments,  by  the  views
of  profit,  the  greater  part,  though  no
atheists  or  free-thinkers,  will  find  it
necessary,  on  particular  occasions,  to
feign  more  devotion  than  they  are,  at
that  time,  possessed  of,  and  to  maintain
the  appearance  of  fervor  and  serious
ness,  even  when  jaded  with  the  exer
cises  of  their  religion,  or  when  they
have  their  minds  engaged  in  the  com
mon  occupations  of  life.  They  must
not,  like  the  rest  of  the  world,  give
scope  to  their  natural  movements  and
sentiments:  They  must  set  a  guard
over  their  looks  and  words  and  actions  :
And  in  order  to  support  the  veneration
paid  them  by  the  multitude,  they  must
not  only  keep  a  remarkable  reserve,  but
must  promote  the  spirit  of  superstition,
by  a  continued  grimace  and  hypocrisy.
This  dissimulation  often  destroys  the
candor  smd  ingenuity  of  their  temper,
and  makes  an  irreparable  breach  in
their  character.

If  by  chance  any  of  them  be  pos
sessed  of  a  temper  more  susceptible  of
devotion  than  usual,  so  that  he  has  but
little  occasion  for  hypocrisy  to  support
the  character  of  his  profession  ;  it  is  so
natural  for  him  to  over-rate  this  ad
vantage,  and  to  think  that  it  atones  for
every  violation  of  morality,  that  fre
quently  he  is  not  more  virtuous  than
the  hypocrite.  And  though  few  dare
openly  avow  those  exploded  opinions,
that  every  thing  is  lawful  to  the  saints,
and  that  they  alone  have  property  in
their  goods ;  yet  may  we  observe,  that
these  principles  lurk  in  every  bosom,
and  represent  a  zeal  for  religious  obser
vances  as  so  groat  a  merit,  that  it  may
compensate  for  many  vices  and  enormi
ties.  This  observation  is  so  common,
that  all  prudent  men  are  on  their  guard,
when  they  meet  with  any  extraordinary
appearance  of  religion  ;  though  at  the
eame  time,  thev  confess,  that  there  are


many  exceptions  to  this  general  rule,  and
that  probity  and  superstition,  or  even
probity  and  fanaticism,  are  not  altogether
and  in  every  instance  incompatible.

Most  men  are  ambitious ;  but  the
ambition  of  other  men  may  commonly
be  satisfied,  by  excelling  in  their  par
ticular  profession,  and  thereby  promo
ting  the  interests  of  society.  The
ambition  of  the  clergy  can  often  be
satisfied  only  by  promoting  ignorance
and  superstition  and  implicit  faith  and
pious  frauds.  And  having  got  what
ARCHIMEDES  only  wanted,  (namely,
another  world,  on  which  he  could  fix
his  engines)  no  wonder  they  move  this
•world  at  their  pleasure.

Most  men  have  an  overweening  con
ceit  of  themselves  ;  but  these  have  a
peculiar  temptation  to  that  vice,  who
are  regarded  with  such  veneration,  and
are  even  deemed  sacred,  by  the  ignorant
multitude.

Most  men  are  apt  to  bear  a  particular
regard  for  members  of  their  own  pro
fession  ;  but  as  a  lawyer,  or  physician,
or  merchant,  does,  each  of  them,  follow
out  his  business  apart,  the  interests  of
men  of  these  professions  are  not  so
closely  united  as  the  interests  of  clergy
men  of  the  same  religion ;  where  the
whole  body  gains  by  the  veneration,
paid  to  their  common  tenets,  and  by  the
suppression  of  antagonists.

Few  men  can  bear  contradiction  with
patience  ;  but  the  clergy  too  often  pro
ceed  even  to  a  degree  of  fury  on  this
head  :  Because  all  their  credit  and  live
lihood  depend  upon  the  belief,  which
their  opinions  meet  with ;  and  they
alone  pretend  to  a  divine  and  super
natural  authority,  or  have  any  colour
for  representing  their  antagonists  as
impious  and  prophane.  The  Odium
Theologicum,  or  Theological  Hatred,  is
noted  even  to  a  proverb,  and  means
that  degree  of  rancour,  which  is  the
most  furious  and  implacable.

Revenge  is  a  natural  passion  to  man
kind  ;  but  seems  to  reign  with  the
greatest  force  in  priests  and  women  :
Because,  being  deprived  of  the  imme
diate  exertion  of  anger,  in  violence  and
combat,  they  are  apt  to  fancy  them
selves  despised  on  that  account ;  and


OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS.


247


first  sight,  seem  probable  ;  since  we  find,  that  these  circum
stances  have  an  influence  over  every  other  animal,  and  that
even  those  creatures,  which  are  fitted  to  live  in  all  climates,
such  as  dogs,  horses,  &c.  do  not  attain  the  same  perfection
in  all.  The  courage  of  bull-dogs  and  gamecocks  seems  pecu
liar  to  ENGLAND.  FLANDERS  is  remarkable  for  large  and
heavy  horses  :  Spain  for  horses  light,  and  of  good  mettle.
And  any  breed  of  these  creatures,  transplanted  from  one
country  to  another,  will  soon  lose  the  qualities,  which  they
derived  from  their  native  climate.  It  may  be  asked,  why
not  the  same  with  men  ?  J

There  are  few  questions  more  curious  than  this,  or  which
will oftener occur in our enquiries concerning human


their  pride  supports  their  vindictive
disposition.  [This  paragraph  was  added
in  Edition  K.]

Thus  many  of  the  vices  of  human
nature  are,  by  fixed  moral  causes,  in
flamed  in  that  possession  ;  and  though
several  individuals  escape  the  conta
gion,  yet  all  wise  governments  will  be
on  their  guard  against  the  attempts  of
n,  society,  who  will  for  ever  combine
into  one  faction,  and  while  it  acts  as  a
society,  will  for  ever  be  actuated  by  am
bition,  pride,  revenge,  and  a  persecuting
spirit.

The  temper  of  religion  is  grave  and
serious  ;  and  this  is  the  character  re
quired  of  priests,  which  confines  them
to  strict  rules  of  decency,  and  commonly
prevents  irregularity  and  intemperance
amongst  them.  The  gaiety,  much  less
the  excesses  of  pleasure,  is  not  per
mitted  in  that  body  ;  and  this  virtue  is,
perhaps,  the  only  one  which  they  owe
to  their  profession.  In  religions,  in
deed,  founded  on  speculative  principles,
and  where  public  discourses  make  a
part  of  religious  service,  it  may  also  be
supposed  that  the  clergy  will  have  a
considerable  share  in  the  learning  of
the  times ;  though  it  is  certain  that
their  taste  in  eloquence  will  always  be
greater  than  their  proficiency  in  rea
soning  and  philosophy.  But  whoever
possesses  the  other  noble  virtues  of
humanity,  meekness,  and  moderation,
as  very  many  of  them,  no  doubt,  do,  is
beholden  for  them  to  nature  or  reflec
tion,  not  to  the  genius  of  his  calling.


It  was  no  bad  expedient  in  the  old
ROMANS,  for  preventing  the  strong  effect
of  the  priestly  character,  to  make  it  ;t
law  that  no  one  should  be  received  into
the  sacerdotal  office,  till  he  was  past
fifty  years  of  age,  DION.  Hal.  lib.  ii.  21.
The  living  a  layman  till  that  age,  it  is
presumed,  would  be  able  to  fix  the  cha
racter.  [This  paragraph  was  added  in
Edition  K.]

1  CJESAR  (de  Bell.  GAXLICO,  lib.  4.  2.)
says  that  the  GALLIC  horses  were  very
good  ;  the  GERMAN  very  bad.  We  find
in  lib.  7-  65.  that  he  was  obliged  to  re
mount  some  GERMAN  cavalry  with
GALLIC  horses.  At  present,  no  part  of
EUROPE  has  so  bad  horses  of  all  kinds
as  FRANCE  :  But  GERMANY  abounds
with  excellent  war  horses.  This  may
beget  a  little  suspicion,  that  even  ani
mals  depend  not  on  the  climate  ;  but  ou
the  different  breeds,  and  on  the  skill
and  care  in  rearing  them.  The  north
of  ENGLAND  abounds  in  the  best  horses
of  all  kinds  which  are  in  the  world.  In
the  neighbouring  counties,  north  side
the  TWEED,  no  good  horses  of  any  kind
are  to  be  met  with.  STRABO,  lib.  2. 103.
rejects,  in  a  great  measure,  the  influence
of  climate  upon  men.  All  is  custom
and  education,  says  he.  It  is  not  from
nature,  that  the  ATHENIANS  are  learned,
the  LACEDEMONIANS  ignorant,  and  the
THEBANS  too,  who  are  still  nearer
neighbours  to  the  former.  Even  the
difference  of  animals,  he  adds,  depends
not  on  climate.  [This  note  is  not  in
Edition  D.]


[This  paragraph  ie  not  in  Edition  D.]


248  ESSAY XXI.

affairs ;  and  therefore  it  may  be  proper  to  give  it  a  full  ex
amination.

The  human  mind  is  of  a  very  imitative  nature ;  nor  is  it
possible  for  any  set  of  men  to  converse  often  together,  with
out  acquiring  a  similitude  of  manners,  and  communicating
to  each  other  their  vices  as  well  as  virtues.  The  propensity
to  company  and  society  is  strong  in  all  rational  creatures ;
and  the  same  disposition,  which  gives  us  this  propensity,
makes  us  enter  deeply  into  each  other's  sentiments,  and
causes  like  passions  and  inclinations  to  run,  as  it  were,  by
contagion,  through  the  whole  club  or  knot  of  companions.
"Where  a  number  of  men  are  united  into  one  political  body,
the  occasions  of  their  intercourse  must  be  so  frequent,  for
defence,  commerce,  and  government,  that,  together  with  the
same  speech  or  language,  they  must  acquire  a  resemblance  in
their  manners,  and  have  a  common  or  national  character,  as
well  as  a  personal  one,  peculiar  to  each  individual.  Now
though  nature  produces  all  kinds  of  temper  and  under
standing  in  great  abundance,  it  does  not  follow,  that  she
always  produces  them  in  like  proportions,  and  that  in  every
society  the  ingredients  of  industry  and  indolence,  valour  and
cowardice,  humanity  and  brutality,  wisdom  and  folly,  will
be  mixed  after  the  same  manner.  In  the  infancy  of  society,
if  any  of  these  dispositions  be  found  in  greater  abundance
than  the  rest,  it  will  naturally  prevail  in  the  composition,
and  give  a  tincture  to  the  national  character.  Or  should  it
be  asserted,  that  no  species  of  temper  can  reasonably  be  pre
sumed  to  predominate,  even  in  those  contracted  societies,
and  that  the  same  proportions  will  always  be  preserved  in
the  mixture ;  yet  surely  the  persons  in  credit  and  authority,
being  still  a  more  contracted  body,  cannot  always  be  pre
sumed  to  be  of  the  same  character ;  and  their  influence  on
the  manners  of  the  people,  must,  at  all  times,  be  very  con
siderable.  If  on  the  first  establishment  of  a  republic,  a
BRUTUS  should  be  placed  in  authority,  and  be  transported
with  such  an  enthusiasm  for  liberty  and  public  good,  as  to
overlook  all  the  ties  of  nature,  as  well  as  private  interest,
such  an  illustrious  example  will  naturally  have  an  effect  on
the  whole  society,  and  kindle  the  same  passion  in  every
bosom.  Whatever  it  be  that  forms  the  manners  of  one
generation,  the  next  must  imbibe  a  deeper  tincture  of  the
same  dye ;  men  being  more  susceptible  of  all  impressions


OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS.  240

during  infancy,  and  retaining  these  impressions  as  long  as
they  remain  in  the  world.  I  assert,  then,  that  all  national
characters,  where  they  depend  not  on  fixed  moral  causes,
proceed  from  such  accidents  as  these,  and  that  physical
causes  have  no  discernible  operation  on  the  human  mind,
1  It  is  a  maxim  in  all  philosophy,  that  causes  which  do  not
appear,  are  to  be  considered  as  not  existing.

If  we  run  over  the  globe,  or  revolve  the  annals  of  history,
we  shall  discover  every  where  signs  of  a  sympathy  or  con
tagion  of  manners,  none  of  the  influence  of  air  or  climate.

First.  We  may  observe,  that,  where  a  very  extensive
government  has  been  established  for  many  centuries,  it
spreads  a  national  character  over  the  whole  empire,  and
communicates  to  every  part  a  similarity  of  manners.  Thus
the  CHINESE  have  the  greatest  uniformity  of  character
imaginable :  though  the  air  and  climate  in  different  parts
of  those  vast  dominions,  admit  of  very  considerable  varia
tions.

Secondly.  In  small  governments,  which  are  contiguous,  the
people  have  notwithstanding  a  different  character,  and  are
often  as  distinguishable  in  their  manners  as  the  most  distant
nations.  ATHENS  and  THEBES  were  but  a  short  day's  jour
ney  from  each  other ;  though  the  ATHENIANS  were  as  remark
able  for  ingenuity,  politeness,  and  gaiety,  as  the  THEBANS
for  dulness,  rusticity,  and  a  phlegmatic  temper.  PLUTARCH,
discoursing  of  the  effects  of  air  on  the  minds  of  men,  observes,
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  PIILEUM  possessed  very  different
tempers  from  those  of  the  higher  town  in  ATHENS,  which  was
distant  about  four  miles  from  the  former  :  But  I  believe  no
one  attributes  the  difference  of  manners  in  WAPPING  and  St.
JAMES'S,  to  a  difference  of  air  or  climate.

Thirdly.  The  same  national  character  commonly  follows
the  authority  of  government  to  a  precise  boundary ;  and
upon  crossing  a  river  or  passing  a  mountain,  one  finds  a  new
set  of  majmers,  with  a  new  government.  The  LANGUEDO-
CIANS  and  GASCONS  are  the  gayest  people  in  FRANCE  ;  but
whenever  you  pass  the  PYRENEES,  you  are  among  SPANIARDS.
Is  it  conceivable,  that  the  qualities  of  the  air  should  change
exactly  with  the  limits  of  an  empire,  which  depend  so
much  on  the  accidents  of  battles,  negociations,  and  mar
riages  ?

1  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edition  Q.]


250  ESSAY  XXL

Fourthly.  Where  any  set  of  men,  scattered  over  distant
nations,  maintain  a  close  society  or  communication  together,
they  acquire  a  similitude  of  manners,  and  have  but  little  in
common  with  the  nations  amongst  whom  they  live.  Thus  tho
JEWS  in  EUROPE,  and  the  ARMENIANS  in  the  east,  have  a
peculiar  character ;  and  the  former  are  as  much  noted  for
fraud,  as  the  latter  for  probity.1  The  Jesuits,  in  all  Roman-
catholic  countries,  are  also  observed  to  have  a  character  pe
culiar  to  themselves.

Fifthly.  Where  any  accident,  as  a  difference  in  language
or  religion,  keeps  two  nations  inhabiting  the  same  country,
from  mixing  with  each  other,  they  will  preserve,  during
several  centuries,  a  distinct  and  even  opposite  set  of  manners.
The  integrity,  gravity,  and  bravery  of  the  TURKS,  form  an
exact  contrast  to  the  deceit,  levity,  and  cowardice  of  the
modern  GREEKS.

Sixthly.  The  same  set  of  manners  will  follow  a  nation,
and  adhere  to  them  over  the  whole  globe,  as  well  as  the
same  laws  and  language.  The  SPANISH,  ENGLISH,  FRENCH
and  DUTCH  colonies  are  all  distinguishable  even  between  the
tropics.

Seventhly.  The  manners  of  a  people  change  very  con
siderably  from  one  age  to  another,  either  by  great  alterations
in  their  government,  by  the  mixtures  of  new  people,  or  by
that  inconstancy,  to  which  all  human  affairs  are  subject.  The
ingenuity,  industry,  and  activity  of  the  ancient  GREEKS  have
nothing  in  common  with  the  stupidity  and  indolence  of  the
present  inhabitants  of  those  regions.  Candour,  bravery,  and
love  of  liberty  formed  the  character  of  the  ancient  ROMANS  ;
as  subtilty,  cowardice,  and  a  slavish  disposition  do  that  of
the  modern.  The  old  SPANIARDS  were  restless,  turbulent,
and  so  addicted  to  war,  that  many  of  them  killed  themselves,
when  deprived  of  their  arms  by  the  ROMANS. 2  One  would
find  an  equal  difficulty  at  present,  (at  least  one  would  have
found  it  fifty  years  ago)  to  rouze  up  the  modern  SPANIARDS
to  arms.  The  BATAVIANS  were  all  soldiers  of  fortune,  and

1  A  small  sect  or  society  amidst  a  infamy  on  the smaller society, inde-

greater  are  commonly  most  regular  in  pendent  of  their  morals. For  in  that

their  morals ; because  they  are  more  case,  having  no  character  either  to  save

remarked,  and  the  faults  of  individuals  or  gain,  they  become  careless  of  their

draw  dishonour  on  the  whole.  The  only  behaviour, except among themselves,

exception  to  this  rule  is,  when  the  super-  [This  note  was  added  in  Edition  K.]

gtition and prejudices of the large  2  TIT.  Livu,  lib.  xxxiv.  cap.  17.
Society are so  strong  as  to  throw  an


OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS.  251

hired  themselves  into  the  ROMAN  armies.  Their  posterity
make  use  of  foreigners  for  the  same  purpose  that  the  ROMANS
did  their  ancestors.  Though  some  few  strokes  of  the  FRENCH
character  be  the  same  with  that  which  CAESAR  has  ascribed
to  the  Gauls :  yet  what  comparison  between  the  civility,
humanity,  and  knowledge  of  the  modern  inhabitants  of  that
country,  and  the  ignorance,  barbarity,  and  grossness  of  the
ancient  ?  l  Not  to  insist  upon  the  great  difference  between
the  present  possessors  of  BRITAIN,  and  those  before  the
Roman  conquest ;  we  may  observe  that  our  ancestors,  a  few
centuries  ago,  were  sunk  into  the  most  abject  superstition,
last  century  they  were  inflamed  with  the  most  furious  en
thusiasm,  and  are  now  settled  into  the  most  cool  indifference
with  regard  to  religious  matters,  that  is  to  be  found  in  any
nation  of  the  world.

Eighthly.  Where  several  neighbouring  nations  have  a  very
close  communication  together,  either  by  policy,  commerce,  or
travelling,  they  acquire  a  similitude  of  manners,  proportioned
to  the  communication.  Thus  all  the  Franks  appear  to  have
a  uniform  character  to  the  eastern  nations.  The  differences
among  them  are  like  the  peculiar  accents  of  different  pro
vinces,  which  are  not  distinguishable,  except  by  an  ear  ac
customed  to  them,  and  which  commonly  escape  a  foreigner.

Ninthly.  We  may  often  remark  a  wonderful  mixture  of
manners  and  characters  in  the  same  nation,  speaking  the
same  language,  and  subject  to  the  same  government :  And
in  this  particular  the  ENGLISH  are  the  most  remarkable  of
any  people,  that  perhaps  ever  were  in  the  world.  Nor  is  this
to  be  ascribed  to  the  mutability  and  uncertainty  of  their  cli
mate,  or  to  any  other  physical  causes ;  since  all  these  causes
take  place  in  the  neighbouring  country  of  SCOTLAND,  without
having  the  same  effect.  Where  the  government  of  a  nation
is  altogether  republican,  it  is  apt  to  beget  a  peculiar  set
of  manners.  Where  it  is  altogether  monarchical,  it  is  more
apt  to  have  the  same  effect ;  the  imitation  of  superiors  spread
ing  the  national  manners  faster  among  the  people.  If  the
governing  part  of  a  state  consist  altogether  of  merchants,  as
in  HOLLAND,  their  uniform  way  of  life  will  fix  their  character.
If  it  consists  chiefly  of  nobles  and  landed  gentry,  like  GER
MANY,  FRANCE,  and  SPAIN,  the  same  effect  follows.  The
genius  of  a  particular  sect  or  religion  is  also  apt  to  mould

1  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edition  K.]


252  ESSAY XXI.

the  manners  of  a  people.  But  the  ENGLISH  government  is  a
mixture  of  monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  democracy.  The
people  in  authority  are  composed  of  gentry  and  merchants.
All  sects  of  religion  are  to  be  ibund  among  them.  And  the
great  liberty  and  independency,  which  every  man  enjoys,  al
lows  him  to  display  the  manners  peculiar  to  him.  Hence  the
ENGLISH,  of  any  people  in  the  universe,  have  the  least  of  a
national  character ;  unless  this  very  singularity  may  pass  for
such.

If  the  characters  of  men  depend  on  the  air  and  climate,
the  degrees  of  heat  and  cold  should  naturally  be  expected  to
have  a  mighty  influence  ;  since  nothing  has  a  greater  effect
on  all  plants  and  irrational  animals.  And  indeed  there  is
aome  reason  to  think,  that  all  the  nations,  which  live  beyond
the  polar  circles  or  between  the  tropics,  are  inferior  to  the
rest  of  the  species,  and  are  incapable  of  all  the  higher  attain
ments  of  the  human  mind.  The  poverty  and  misery  of  the
northern  inhabitants  of  the  globe,  and  the  indolence  of  the
southern,  from  their  few  necessities,  may,  perhaps,  account
for  this  remarkable  difference,  without  our  having  recourse
to  physical  causes.  This  however  is  certain,  that  the  charac
ters  of  nations  are  very  promiscuous  in  the  temperate  cli
mates,  and  that  almost  all  the  general  observations,  which
have  been  formed  of  the  more  southern  or  more  northern
people  in  these  climates,  are  found  to  be  uncertain  and  fal
lacious.1

Shall  we  say,  that  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun  inflames
the  imagination  of  men,  and  gives  it  a  peculiar  spirit  and
vivacity.  The  FRENCH,  GREEKS,  EGYPTIANS,  and  PERSIANS
are  remarkable  for  gaiety.  The  SPANIARDS,  TURKS,  and

1  I  am  apt  to  suspect  the  negroes,  so  many  countries  and  ages,  if  nature

and  in  general  all  the  other  species  of  had  not  made an original distinction

men  (for  there  are  four  or  five  different  betwixt  these  breeds  of  men. Not  to

kinds)  to  be  naturally  inferior  to  the  mention  our  colonies,  there  are  NEGROE

whites. There never  was  a  civilized  slaves dispersed  all  over EUROPE,  of

nation  of  any  other  complexion than  which  none  ever  discovered  any  symp-

white,  nor  even  any  individual  eminent  toms of  ingenuity ; tho' low people,

either in action or speculation. No  without  education,  will  start  up  amongst

ingenious  manufactures  amongst  them,  us,  and  distinguish  themselves  in  every

no arts, no sciences. On the other  profession. In JAMAICA indeed they

hand,  the  most  rude  and  barbarous  of  talk  of  one  negroe  as  a  man  of  parts

the  whites,  such  as  the  ancient  GER-  and  learning ;  but  'tis  likely  he  is  ad-

MANS,  the  present  TARTARS,  have  still  mired  for  very  slender  accomplishments,

something  eminent  about  them,  in  their  like  a  parrot,  who  speaks  a  few  words

valour,  form  of  government,  or  some  plainly. [This  note  was  added  in  Edi-

other  particular. Such  a,  uniform  and  tion  K.]
constant  difference  could  not  happen,  in


OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS.  253

CHINESE  are  noted  for  gravity  and  a  serious  deportment,
without  any  such  difference  of  climate  as  to  produce  this  dif
ference  of  temper.

The  GREEKS  and  ROMANS,  who  called  all  other  nations
barbarians,  confined  genius  and  a  fine  understanding  to
the  more  southern  climates,  and  pronounced  the  northern
nations  incapable  of  all  knowledge  and  civility.  But  our
island  has  produced  as  great  men,  either  for  action  or  learn
ing,  as  GREECE  or  ITALY  has  to  boast  of.

It  is  pretended,  that  the  sentiments  of  men  become  more
delicate  as  the  country  approaches  nearer  to  the  sun ;  and
that  the  taste  of  beauty  and  elegance  receives  proportional
improvements  in  every  latitude ;  as  we  may  particularly  ob
serve  of  the  languages,  of  which  the  more  southern  are
smooth  and  melodious,  the  northern  harsh  and  untuneable.
But  this  observation  holds  not  universally.  The  ARABIC  is
uncouth  and  disagreeable:  The  MUSCOVITE  soft  and  musical.
Energy,  strength,  and  harshness  form  the  character  of  the
LATIN  tongue  :  The  ITALIAN  is  the  most  liquid,  smooth,  and
effeminate  language  that  can  possibly  be  imagined.  Every
language  will  depend  somewhat  on  the  manners  of  the
people  ;  but  much  more  on  that  original  stock  of  words  and
sounds,  which  they  received  from  their  ancestors,  and  which
remain  unchangeable,  even  while  their  manners  admit  of  the
greatest  alterations.  Who  can  doubt,  but  the  English  are  at
present  a  more  polite  and  knowing  people  than  the  GREEKS
were  for  several  ages  after  the  siege  of  Troy  ?  Yet  is  there
no  comparison  between  the  language  of  MILTON  and  that  of
HOMER.  Nay,  the  greater  are  the  alterations  and  improve
ments,  which  happen  in  the  manners  of  a  people,  the  less  can
be  expected  in  their  language.  A  few  eminent  and  refined
geniuses  will  communicate  their  taste  and  knowledge  to  a
whole  people,  and  produce  the  greatest  improvements  ;  but
they  fix  the  tongue  by  their  writings,  and  prevent,  in  some
degree,  its  farther  changes.

Lord  BACON  has  observed,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  south
are,  in  general,  more  ingenious  than  those  of  the  north ;  but
that,  where  the  native  of  a  cold  climate  has  genius,  he  rises
to  a  higher  pitch  than  can  be  reached  by  the  southern  wits.
This  observation  a  late  '  writer  confirms,  by  comparing  the
southern  wits  to  cucumbers,  which  are  commonly  all  good  iu
1  Dr.  Berkeley  :  Minute  Philosopher.


2K4  ESSAY XXI.

their  kind  ;  but  at  best  are  an  insipid  fruit :  While  the  nor
thern  geniuses  are  like  melons,  of  which  not  one  in  fifty  is
good  ;  but  when  it  is  so,  it  has  an  exquisite  relish.  I  believe
this  remark  may  be  allowed  just,  when  confined  to  the
EUROPEAN  nations,  and  to  the  present  age,  or  rather  to  the
preceding  one :  But  I  think  it  may  be  accounted  for  from
moral  causes.  All  the  sciences  and  liberal  arts  have  been
imported  to  us  from  the  south  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  imagine,
that,  in  the  first  order  of  application,  when  excited  by  emu
lation  and  by  glory,  the  few,  who  were  addicted  to  them,
would  carry  them  to  the  greatest  height,  and  stretch  every
nerve,  arid  every  faculty,  to  reach  the  pinnacle  of  perfection.
Such  illustrious  examples  spread  knowledge  everywhere,  and
begot  an  universal  esteem  for  the  sciences  :  After  which  it
is  no  wonder,  that  industry  relaxes  ;  while  men  meet  not  with
suitable  encouragement,  nor  arrive  at  such  distinction  by
their  attainments.  The  universal  diffusion  of  learning
timoiig  a  people,  and  the  entire  banishment  of  gross  igno
rance  and  rusticity,  is,  therefore,  seldom  attended  with  any
remarkable  perfection  in  particular  persons.  '  It  seems  to  be
taken  for  granted  in  the  dialogue  de  Oratoribus,  that  know
ledge  was  much  more  common  in  VESPASIAN'S  age  than  in
that  of  CICERO  and  AUGUSTUS.  QUINTILIAN  also  complains
of  the  profanation  of  learning,  by  its  becoming  too  common.
4  Formerly,'  says  JUVENAL,  '  science  was  confined  to
GREECE  and  ITALY.  Now  the  whole  world  emulates  ATHENS
and  ROME.  Eloquent  GAUL  has  taught  BRITAIN,  knowing  in
the  laws.  Even  THULE  entertains  thoughts  of  hiring  rheto
ricians  for  its  instruction.' 2  This  state  of  learning  is  re
markable  ;  because  JUVENAL  is  himself  the  last  of  the  EOMAN
writers,  that  possessed  any  degree  of  genius.  Those,  who
succeeded,  are  valued  for  nothing  but  the  matters  of  fact,  of
which  they  give  us  information.  I  hope  the  late  conversion
of  MUSCOVY  to  the  study  of  the  sciences  will  not  prove  a  like
prognostic  to  the  present  period  of  learning.

Cardinal  BENTIVOGLIO  gives  the  preference  to  the  northern
nations  above  the  southern  with  regard  to  candour  and  sin-

1  [This  sentence  and  the  next were Nunc  totus  GKAIAS,  nostrnpque  hab^t
added  in  Edition  K.]  orl>is  ATHENAS.

GAIXIA  causidicos ' docuit  facunda  Rni-
2  "  Sed  Cantabor  unde  TANNOS:

Stoieus  ?  antiqui  pr?esertim  setnte  Me- De oondncondo loquitur jn.m rfietore

THVI.E."  Sat.  In.  108.


OF  NATIONAL  CHARACTERS.  A255

cerity ;  and  mentions,  on  the  one  hand,  the  SPANIARDS  an</
ITALIANS,  and  on  the  other,  the  FLEMINGS  and  GERMANS
But  I  am  apt  to  think,  that  this  has  happened  by  accident.
The  ancient  ROMANS  seem  to  have  been  a  candid  sincere
people,  as  are  the  modern  TURKS.  But  if  we  must  needs
suppose,  that  this  event  has  arisen  from  fixed  causes,  we  may
only  conclude  from  it,  that  all  extremes  are  apt  to  concur,
and  are  commonly  attended  with  the  same  consequences.
Treachery  is  the  usual  concomitant  of  ignorance  and  bar
barism  ;  and  if  civilised  nations  ever  embrace  subtle  and
crooked  politics,  it  is  from  an  excess  of  refinement,  which
makes  them  disdain  the  plain  direct  path  to  power  and  glory.

Most  conquests  have  gone  from  north  to  south ;  and  it  has
hence  been  inferred,  that  the  northern  nations  possess  a
superior  degree  of  courage  and  ferocity.  But  it  would  have
been  juster  to  have  said,  that  most  conquests  are  made  by
poverty  and  want  upon  plenty  and  riches.  The  SARACENS,
leaving  the  deserts  of  ARABIA,  carried  their  conquests  north
wards  upon  all  the  fertile  provinces  of  the  ROMAN  empire  ;
and  met  the  TURKS  half  way,  who  were  coming  southwards
from  the  deserts  of  TARTART.

An  eminent  writer  l  has  remarked,  that  all  courageous  ani
mals  are  also  carnivorous,  and  that  greater  courage  is  to  be  ex
pected  in  a  people,  such  as  the  ENGLISH,  whose  food  is  strong
and  hearty,  than  in  the  half-starved  commonalty  of  other
countries.  But  the  SWEDES,  notwithstanding  their  disadvan
tages  in  this  particular,  are  not  inferior,  in  martial  courage,
to  any  nation  that  ever  was  in  the  world.

In  general,  we  may  observe,  that  courage,  of  all  national
qualities,  is  the  most  precarious  ;  because  it  is  exerted  only
at  intervals,  and  by  a  few  in  every  nation ;  whereas  industry,
knowledge,  civility,  may  be  of  constant  and  universal  use,
and  for  several  ages,  may  become  habitual  to  the  whole
people.  If  courage  be  preserved,  it  must  be  by  discipline,
example,  and  opinion.  The  tenth  legion  of  C^SAR,  and  the
regiment  of  PICARDY  in  FRANCE  were  formed  promiscuously
from  among  the  citizens ;  but  having  once  entertained  a
notion,  that  they  were  the  best  troops  in  the  service,  this  very
opinion  really  made  them  such.

As  a  proof  how  much  courage  depends  on  opinion,  we  may
observe,  that,  of  the  two  chief  tribes  of  the  GREEKS,  the

1  Sir  WILLIAM  TEMPLE'S  account  of  the  Netherlands.


25P,  ESSAY XXI.

DORIANS,  and  IONIANS,  the  former  were  always  esteemed,
and  always  appeared  more  brave  and  manly  than  the  latter  ;
though  the  colonies  of  both  the  tribes  were  interspersed  and
intermingled  throughout  all  the  extent  of  GREECE,  the  Lesser
ASIA,  SICILY,  ITALY,  and  the  islands  of  the  J^GEAN  sea.  The
ATHENIANS  were  the  only  IONIANS  that  ever  had  any  reputa
tion  for  valour  or  military  achievements  ;  though  even  these
were  deemed  inferior  to  the  LACEDEMONIANS,  the  bravest  of
the  DORIANS.

The  only  observation,  with  regard  to  the  difference  of  men
in  different  climates,  on  which  we  can  rest  any  weight,  is
the  vulgar  one,  that  people  in  the  northern  regions  have  a
greater  inclination  to  strong  liquors,  and  those  in  the  south
ern  to  love  and  women.  One  can  assign  a  very  probable
physical  cause  for  this  difference.  Wine  and  distilled  waters
warm  the  frozen  blood  in  the  colder  climates,  and  fortify
men  against  the  injuries  of  the  weather  :  As  the  genial  heat
of  the  sun,  in  the  countries  exposed  to  his  beams,  inflames
the  blood,  and  exalts  the  passion  between  the  sexes.

Perhaps  too,  the  matter  may  be  accounted  for  by  moral
causes.  All  strong  liquors  are  rarer  in  the  north,  and  con
sequently  are  more  coveted.  DIODORUS  SICULUS  '  tells  us,
that  the  GAULS  in  his  time  were  great  drunkards,  and  much
addicted  to  wine ;  chiefly,  I  suppose,  from  its  rarity  and
novelty.  On  the  other  hand,  the  heat  in  the  southern
climates,  obliging  men  and  women  to  go  half  naked,
thereby  renders  their  frequent  commerce  more  dangerous,
and  inflames  their  mutual  passion.  This  makes  parents  and
husbands  more  jealous  and  reserved ;  which  still  further
inflames  the  passion.  Not  to  mention,  that,  as  women  ripen
sooner  in  the  southern  regions,  it  is  necessary  to  observe
greater  jealousy  and  care  in  their  education ;  it  being  evi
dent,  that  a  girl  of  twelve  cannot  possess  equal  discretion  to
govern  this  passion,  with  one  who  feels  not  its  violence  till
she  be  seventeen  or  eighteen.  2  Nothing  so  much  encourages

1  Lib.  v.  26.  The  same  author  ascribes  says, that the GAULS are the only

taciturnity  to  that  people ;  a  new  proof  warlike  nation,  who  are  negligent  of

that  national  characters  may  alter  very  women.

much. '  Taciturnity,  as  a  national  cha-  2  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edi-

racter, implies unsociableness. ARIS-  tion  R.]
TOTLE  in  hie  Politics,  book  ii.  cap.  9.


1  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edition  K;  and  the  next  in  Edition  M.J


OF  NATIONAL CHARACTERS.  257

the  passion  of  love  as  ease  and  leisure,  or  is  more  destructive
to  it  than  industry  and  hard  labour ;  and  as  the  necessities
of  men  are  evidently  fewer  in  the  warm  climates  than  in  the
cold  ones,  this  circumstance  alone  may  make  a  considerable
difference  between  them.

But  perhaps  the  fact  is  doubtful,  that  nature  has,  either
from  .moral  or  physical  causes,  distributed  these  respective
inclinations  to  the  different  climates.  The  ancient  GEEEKS,
though  born  in  a  warm  climate,  seem  to  have  been  much
addicted  to  the  bottle ;  nor  were  their  parties  of  pleasure
anything  but  matches  of  drinking  among  men,  who  passed
their  time  altogether  apart  from  the  fair.  Yet  when  ALEX
ANDER  led  the  GREEKS  into  PERSIA,  a  still  more  southern
climate,  they  multiplied  their  debauches  of  this  kind,  in
imitation  of  the  PERSIAN  manners.1  So  honourable  was  the
character  of  a  drunkard  among  the  PERSIANS,  that  CYRUS
the  younger,  soliciting  the  sober  LACEDEMONIANS  for  succour
against  his  brother  ARTAXERXES,  claims  it  chiefly  on  ac
count  of  his  superior  endowments,  as  more  valorous,  more
bountiful,  and  a  better  drinker.2  DARIUS  HTSTASPES  made
it  be  inscribed  on  his  tombstone,  among  his  other  virtues  and
princely  qualities,  that  no  one  could  bear  a  greater  quantity
of  liquor.  You  may  obtain  any  thing  of  the  NEGROES  by
offering  them  strong  drink;  and  may  easily  prevail  with
them  to  sell,  not  only  their  children,  but  their  wives  and
mistresses,  for  a  cask  of  brandy.  In  FRANCE  and  ITALY  few
drink  pure  wine,  except  in  the  greatest  heats  of  summer ;  and
indeed,  it  is  then  almost  as  necessary,  in  order  to  recruit  the
spirits,  evaporated  by  heat,  as  it  is  in  SWEDEN,  during  the
winter,  in  order  to  warm  the  bodies  congealed  by  the  rigour
of  the  season.

If  jealousy  be  regarded  as  a  proof  of  an  amorous  disposi
tion,  no  people  were  more  jealous  than  the  MUSCOVITES,
before  their  communication  with"  EUROPE  had  somewhat
altered  their  manners  in  this  particular.

But  supposing  the  fact  true,  that  nature,  by  physical  prin
ciples,  has  regularly  distributed  these  two  passions,  the  one
to  the  northern,  the  other  to  the  southern  regions ;  we  can
only  infer,  that  the  climate  may  affect  the  grosser  and  more
bodily  organs  of  our  frame  ;  not  that  it  can  work  upon  those

1  BABYLONII  maxime  in  vinum,  fy  qua CUR  lib.  v.  cap.  i.
ebrietatem  sequuntur.  effusi  aunt.  QUINT.  2  PLUT.  SYMP.  lib.  i.  qusest.  4.

VOL.  III.  8


•258  ESSAY  XXII.

finer  organs,  on  which  the  operations  of  the  mind  and  un
derstanding  depend.  And  this  is  agreeable  to  the  analogy
of  nature.  The  races  of  animals  never  degenerate  when
carefully  tended ;  and  horses,  in  particular,  always  show
their  blood  in  their  shape,  spirit,  and  swiftness  :  But  a  cox
comb  may  beget  a  philosopher;  as  a  man  of  virtue  may
leave  a  worthless  progeny.

I  shall  conclude  this  subject  with  observing,  that  though
the  passion  for  liquor  be  more  brutal  and  debasing  than
love,  which,  when  properly  managed,  is  the  source  of  all
politeness  and  refinement ;  yet  this  gives  not  so  great  an
advantage  to  the  southern  climates,  as  we  may  be  apt,  at
first  sight,  to  imagine.  When  love  goes  beyond  a  certain
pitch,  it  renders  men  jealous,  and  cuts  off  the  free  inter
course  between  the  sexes,  on  which  the  politeness  of  a  nation
will  commonly  much  depend.  And  if  we  would  subtilize
and  refine  upon  this  point,  we  might  observe,  that  the  people,
in  very  temperate  climates,  are  the  most  likely  to  attain  all
sorts  of  improvement ;  their  blood  not  being  so  inflamed  as
to  render  them  jealous,  and  yet  being  warm  enough  to  make
them  set  a  due  value  on  the  charms  and  endowments  of  the
fair  sex.

1  ESSAY  XXII.— Of  Tragedy.

IT  seems  an  unaccountable  pleasure,  which  the  spectators  of
a  well- written  tragedy  receive  from  sorrow,  terror,  anxiety,
and  other  passions,  that  are  in  themselves  disagreeable  and
uneasy.  The  more  they  are  touched  and  affected,  the  more
are  they  delighted  with  the  spectacle ;  and  as  soon  as  the
uneasy  passions  cease  to  operate,  the  piece  is  at  an  end.
One  scene  of  full  joy  and  contentment  and  security  is  the
utmost,  that  any  composition  of  this  kind  can  bear ;  and  it
is  sure  always  to  be  the  concluding  one.  If,  in  the  texture
of  the  piece,  there  be  interwoven  any  scenes  of  satisfaction,
they  afford  only  faint  gleams  of  pleasure,  which  are  thrown
in  by  way  of  variety,  and  in  order  to  plunge  the  actors  into
deeper  distress,  by  means  of  that  contrast  and  disappoint
ment.  The  whole  heart  of  the  poet  is  employed,  in  rouzing
and  supporting  the  compassion  and  indignation,  the  anxiety
and  resentment  of  his  audience.  They  are  pleased  in  pro
portion  as  they  are  afflicted,  and  never  are  so  happy  as  when
they  employ  tears,  sobs,  and  cries  to  give  vent  to  their  sor-

1  [This  Essay  was  first  published  in  Edition  L.]


OF  TRAGEDY.  259

row,  and  relieve  their  heart,  swoln  with  the  tenderest  sym
pathy  and  compassion.

The  few  critics  who  have  had  some  tincture  of  philosophy,
have  remarked  this  singular  phenomenon,  and  have  en
deavoured  to  account  for  it.

L'Abbe  DUBOS,  in  his  reflections  on  poetry  and  painting,
asserts,  that  nothing  is  in  general  so  disagreeable  to  the
mind  as  the  languid,  listless  state  of  indolence,  into  which
it  falls  upon  the  removal  of  all  passion  and  occupation.  To
get  rid  of  this  painful  situation,  it  seeks  every  amusement
and  pursuit ;  business,  gaming,  shews,  executions ;  what
ever  will  rouze  the  passions,  and  take  its  attention  from  it
self.  No  matter  what  the  passion  is  :  Let  it  be  disagreeable,
afflicting,  melancholy,  disordered ;  it  is  still  better  than  that
insipid  languor,  which  arises  from  perfect  tranquillity  and
repose.

It  is  impossible  not  to  admit  this  account,  as  being,  at
least  in  part,  satisfactory.  You  may  observe,  when  there
are  several  tables  of  gaming,  that  all  the  company  run  to
those,  where  the  deepest  play  is,  even  though  they  find  not
there  the  best  players.  The  view,  or,  at  least,  imagination
of  high  passions,  arising  from  great  loss  or  gain,  affects
the  spectator  by  sympathy,  gives  him  some  touches  of  the
same  passions,  and  serves  him  for  a  momentary  entertain
ment.  It  makes  the  time  pass  the  easier  with  him,  and  is
some  relief  to  that  oppression,  under  which  men  commonly
labour,  when  left  entirely  to  their  own  thoughts  and  medi
tations.

We  find  that  common  liars  always  magnify,  in  their  nar
rations,  all  kinds  of  danger,  pain,  distress,  sickness,  deaths,
murders,  and  cruelties ;  as  well  as  joy,  beauty,  mirth,  and
magnificence.  It  is  an  absurd  secret,  which  they  have  for
pleasing  their  company,  fixing  their  attention,  and  attaching
them  to  such  marvellous  relations,  by  the  passions  and
emotions,  which  they  excite.

There  is,  however,  a  difficulty  in  applying  to  the  present
subject,  in  its  full  extent,  this  solution,  however  ingenious
and  satisfactory  it  may  appear.  It  is  certain,  that  the  same
object  of  distress,  which  pleases  in  a  tragedy,  were  it  really
set  before  us,  would  give  the  most  unfeigned  uneasiness ;
though  it  be  then  the  most  effectual  cure  to  languor  and
indolence.  Monsieur  FONTENELLE  seems  to  have  been  sen-

s  2

\


200  ESSAY  XXII.

sible  of  this  difficulty;  and  accordingly  attempts  another
solution  of  the  phenomenon ;  at  least  makes  some  addition
to  the  theory  above  mentioned.1

'  Pleasure  and  pain,'  says  he,  (  which  are  two  sentiments
so  different  in  themselves,  differ  not  so  much  in  their  cause.
From  the  instance  of  tickling,  it  appears,  that  the  move
ment  of  pleasure,  pushed  a  little  too  far,  becomes  pain ;  and
that  the  movement  of  pain,  a  little  moderated,  becomes  plea
sure.  Hence  it  proceeds,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a
sorrow,  soft  and  agreeable :  It  is  a,  pain  weakened  and
diminished.  The  heart  likes  naturally  to  be  moved  and
affected.  Melancholy  objects  suit  it,  and  even  disastrous
and  sorrowful,  provided  they  are  softened  by  some  circum
stance.  It  is  certain,  that,  on  the  theatre,  the  representation
has  almost  the  effect  of  reality ;  yet  it  has  not  altogether  that
effect.  However  we  may  be  hurried  away  by  the  spectacle  ;
whatever  dominion  the  senses  and  imagination  may  usurp
over  the  reason,  there  still  lurks  at  the  bottom  a  certain  idea
of  falsehood  in  the  whole  of  what  we  see.  This  idea,  though
weak  and  disguised,  suffices  to  diminish  the  pain  which  we
suffer  from  the  misfortunes  of  those  whom  we  love,  and  to
reduce  that  affliction  to  such  a  pitch  as  converts  it  into  a
pleasure.  We  weep  for  the  misfortune  of  a  hero,  to  whom
we  are  attached.  In  the  same  instant  we  comfort  ourselves,
by  reflecting,  that  it  is  nothing  but  a  fiction :  And  it  is  pre
cisely  that  mixture  of  sentiments,  which  composes  an  agree
able  sorrow,  and  tears  that  delight  us.  But  as  that  affliction,
which  is  caused  by  exterior  and  sensible  objects,  is  stronger
than  the  consolation  which  arises  from  an  internal  reflection,
they  are  the  effects  and  symptoms  of  sorrow,  that  ought  to
predominate  in  the  composition.'

This  solution  seems  just  and  convincing ;  but  perhaps  it
wants  still  some  new  addition,  in  order  to  make  it  answer
fully  the  phenomenon,  which  we  here  examine.  All  the
passions,  excited  by  eloquence,  are  agreeable  in  the  highest
degree,  as  well  as  those  which  are  moved  by  painting  and
the  theatre.  The  epilogues  of  CICEEO  are,  on  this  account
chiefly,  the  delight  of  every  reader  of  taste ;  and  it  is  difficult
to  read  some  of  them  without  the  deepest  sympathy  and
sorrow.  His  merit  as  an  orator,  no  doubt,  depends  much  on
his  success  in  this  particular.  When  he  had  raised  tears  in

1  Eeflexions  sur  la  poetique,  §  36.


OF TRAGEDY.  261

his  judges  and  all  his  audience,  they  were  then  the  most
highly  delighted,  and  expressed  the  greatest  satisfaction  with
the  pleader.  The  pathetic  description  of  the  butchery,  mado
by  VERRES  of  the  SICILIAN  captains,  is  a  masterpiece  of  this
kind :  But  I  believe  none  will  affirm,  that  the  being  present
at  a. melancholy  scene  of  that  nature  would  afford  any  enter
tainment.  Neither  is  the  sorrow  here  softened  by  fiction  :
For  the  audience  were  convinced  of  the  reality  of  every  cir
cumstance.  What  is  it  then,  which  in  this  case  raises  a
pleasure  from  the  bosom  of  uneasiness,  so  to  speak;  and  a
pleasure,  which  still  retains  all  the  features  and  outward
symptoms  of  distress  and  sorrow  ?

I  answer :  This  extraordinary  effect  proceeds  from  that
very  eloquence,  with  which  the  melancholy  scene  is  repre
sented.  The  genius  required  to  paint  objects  in  a  lively
manner,  the  art  employed  in  collecting  all  the  pathetic  cir
cumstances,  the  judgment  displayed  in  disposing  them  :  the
exercise,  I  say,  of  these  noble  talents,  together  with  the
force  of  expression,  and  beauty  of  oratorial  numbers,  diffuse
the  highest  satisfaction  on  the  audience,  and  excite  the  most
delightful  movements.  By  this  means,  the  uneasiness  of
the  melancholy  passions  is  not  only  overpowered  and  effaced
by  something  stronger  of  an  opposite  kind ;  but  the  whole
impulse  of  those  passions  is  converted  into  pleasure,  and
swells  the  delight  which  the  eloquence  raises  in  us.  The
same  force  of  oratory,  employed  on  an  uninteresting  subject,
would  not  please  half  so  much,  or  rather  would  appear  alto
gether  ridiculous  ;  and  the  mind,  being  left  in  absolute  calm
ness  and  indifference,  would  relish  none  of  those  beauties  of
imagination  or  expression,  which,  if  joined  to  passion,  give
it  such  exquisite  entertainment.  The  impulse  or  vehemence,
arising  from  sorrow,  compassion,  indignation,  receives  a  new
direction  from  the  sentiments  of  beauty.  The  latter,,  being
the  predominant  emotion,  seize  the  whole  mind,  and  convert
the  former  into  themselves,  at  least  tincture  them  so  strongly
as  totally  to  alter  their  nature.  And  the  soul,  being,  at  the
same  time,  rouzed  by  passion,  and  charmed  by  eloquence,
feels  on  the  whole  a  strong  movement,  which  is  altogether
delightful.

The  same  principle  takes  place  in  tragedy  ;  with  this  addi
tion,  that  tragedy  is  an  imitation;  and  imitation  is  always
of  itself  agreeable.  This  circumstance  serves  still  farther


2G2  ESSAY  XXII.

to  smooth  the  motions  of  passion,  and  convert  the  whole
feeling  into  one  uniform  and  strong  enjoyment.  Objects  of
the  greatest  terror  and  distress  please  in  painting,  and  please
more  than  the  most  beautiful  objects,  that  appear  cairn  and
indifferent.1  The  affection,  rouzing  the  mind,  excites  a
large  stock  of  spirit  and  vehemence ;  which  is  all  trans
formed  into  pleasure  by  the  force  of  the  prevailing  move
ment.  It  is  thus  the  fiction  of  tragedy  softens  the  passion,
by  an  infusion  of  a  new  feeling,  not  merely  by  weakening  or
diminishing  the  sorrow.  You  may  by  degrees  weaken  a  real
sorrow,  till  it  totally  disappears ;  yet  in  none  of  its  gradua
tions  will  it  ever  give  pleasure  ;  except,  perhaps,  by  accident,
to  a  man  sunk  under  lethargic  indolence,  whom  it  rouzes
from  that  languid  state.

To  confirm  this  theory,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  produce
other  instances,  where  the  subordinate  movement  is  converted
into  the  predominant,  and  gives  force  to  it,  though  of  a  dif
ferent,  and  even  sometimes  though  of  a  contrary  nature.

Novelty  naturally  rouzes  the  mind,  and  attracts  our  atten
tion  ;  and  the  movements,  which  it  causes,  are  always  con
verted  into  any  passion,  belonging  to  the  object,  and  join
their  force  to  it.  Whether  an  event  excite  joy  or  sorrow,
pride  or  shame,  anger  or  good-will,  it  is  sure  to  produce  a
stronger  affection,  when  new  or  unusual.  And  though
novelty  of  itself  be  agreeable,  it  fortifies  the  painful,  as  well
as  agreeable  passions.

Had  you  any  intention  to  move  a  person  extremely  by  the
narration  of  any  event,  the  best  method  of  en  creasing  its
effect  would  be  artfully  to  delay  informing  him  of  it,  and
first  to  excite  his  CTiriosity  and  impatience  before  you  let  him
into  the  secret.  This  is  the  artifice  practised  by  IAGO  in  the
famous  scene  of  SHAKESPEARE  ;  and  every  spectator  is  sensi
ble,  that  OTHELLO'S  jealousy  acquires  additional  force  from
his  preceding  impatience,  and  that  the  subordinate  passion
is  here  readily  transformed  into  the  predominant  one.

Difficulties  encreaee  passions  of  every  kind  ;  and  by  rouz-

1  Painters  make  no  scruple  of  repre-  one  instant ; and  if  that  be  passionate

anting  distress  and  sorrow  as  well  as  enough,  it  is  sure  to  affect  and  delight

any  other  passion  :  But  they  seem  not  the  spectator  :  But  nothing  can  furnish

to  dwell  so  much  on  these  melancholy  to  the  poet  a  variety  of  scenes  and  inci-

affections  as the  poets,  who,  tho'  they  dents  and  sentiments,  except  distress,

copy  every  emotion  of  the  human  la-east,  terror,  or  anxiety. Compleat  joy  and

yet  pass  very  quickly  over  the  agreeable  satisfaction  is  attended  with  security,

sentiments. A  painter  represents  only  and  leaves  no  farther  room  for  action.


OF  TRAGEDY  263

ing  our  attention,  and  exciting  our  active  powers,  they  pro
duce  an  emotion,  which  nourishes  the  prevailing  affection.

Parents  commonly  love  that  child  most,  whose  sickly  in
firm  frame  of  body  has  occasioned  them  the  greatest  pains,
trouble,  and  anxiety  in  rearing  him.  The  agreeable  senti
ment  of  affection  here  acquires  force  from  sentiments  of  un
easiness.

Nothing  endears  so  much  a  friend  as  sorrow  for  hi*
death.  The  pleasure  of  his  company  has  not  so  powerful  an
influence.

Jealousy  is  a  painful  passion ;  yet  without  some  share  of
it,  the  agreeable  affection  of  love  has  difficulty  to  subsist  in
its  full  force  and  violence.  Absence  is  also  a  great  source  of
complaint  among  lovers,  and  gives  them  the  greatest  uneasi
ness  :  Yet  nothing  is  more  favourable  to  their  mutual  pas
sion  than  short  intervals  of  that  kind.  And  if  long  intervals
often  prove  fatal,  it  is  only  because,  through  time,  men  are
accustomed  to  them,  and  they  cease  to  give  uneasiness.
Jealousy  and  absence  in  love  compose  the  dolce peccante  of  the
ITALIANS,  which  they  suppose  so  essential  to  all  pleasure.

There  is  a  fine  observation  of  the  elder  PLINY,  which  illus
trates  the  principle  here  insisted  on.  It  is  very  remarkable,
says  he,  that  the  last  works  of  celebrated  artists,  which  they  left
imperfect,  are  always  the  most  prized,  such  as  the  IRIS  of
AKISTIDES,  the  TYNDARIDES  of  NICOMACHUS,  the  MEDEA  of
TIMOMACHUS,  and  the  VENUS  of  APELLES.  These  are  valued
even  above  their  finished  productions :  The  broken  lineaments
of  the  piece,  and  the  half-formed  idea  of  the  painter  are  care
fully  studied  ;  and  our  very  grief  for  that  curious  hand,  which,
had  been  stopped  by  death,  is  an  additional  encrease  to  our
pleasure.1

These  instances  (and  many  more  might  be  collected)  are
sufficient  to  afford  us  some  insight  into  the  analogy  of  nature,
and  to  show  us,  that  the  pleasure,  which  poets,  orators,  and
musicians  give  us,  by  exciting  grief,  sorrow,  indignation,
compassion,  is  not  so  extraordinary  or  paradoxical,  as  it  may
at  first  sight  appear.  The  force  of  imagination,  the  energy

1  Illud  vero  perquam  rarum  ac  memo-  tione  esse  quam  perfecta. Quippe  in

ria  dignum,  etiam  suprema  opera  arti-  iis  lineamcnta  reliqua,  ipsseque  cogita-

ficum, imperfectasque tabulas, sicut,  tiones artificum spectantur, atque ia

IRINARISTIDIS,  TYNDARiDAsNiccwACHi,  lenocinio commendationis dolor est

MEDEAM  TIMOMACHI,  &  quam  diximus  manus,  cum  id  ageret,  extinctse. Lib,

VENEKKM  APELLIS,  in  majori  admira-  xxxv.  cap.  11.


-'04  ESSAY XXII.

of  expression,  the  power  of  numbers,  the  charms  of  imita
tion  ;  all  these  are  naturally,  of  themselves,  delightful  to
the  mind  :  And  when  the  object  presented  lays  also  hold  of
gorne  affection,  the  pleasure  still  rises  upon  us,  by  the  con
version  of  this  subordinate  movement  into  that  which  is
predominant.  The  passion,  though,  perhaps,  naturally,  and
when  excited  by  the  simple  appearance  of  a  real  object,  it
may  be  painful ;  yet  is  so  smoothed,  and  softened,  and
mollified,  when  raised  by  the  finer  arts,  that  it  affords  the
highest  entertainment.

To  confirm  this  reasoning,  we  may  observe,  that  if  the
movements  of  the  imagination  be  not  predominant  above
those  of  the  passion,  a  contrary  effect  follows ;  and  tin-
former,  being  now  subordinate,  is  converted  into  the  latter,
and  still  farther  encreases  the  pain  and  affliction  of  tho
sufferer.

Who  could  ever  think  of  it  as  a  good  expedient  for  com
forting  an  afflicted  parent,  to  exaggerate,  with  all  the  force
of  elocution,  the  irreparable  loss,  which  he  has  met  with  by
the  death  of  a  favourite  child  ?  The  more  power  of  imagina
tion  and  expression  you  here  employ,  the  more  you  encrease
his  despair  and  affliction.

The  shame,  confusion,  and  terror  of  VEEEES,  no  doubt,
rose  in  proportion  to  the  noble  eloquence  and  vehemence  of
CICEEO  :  So  also  did  his  pain  and  uneasiness.  These  forme]"
passions  were  too  strong  for  the  pleasure  arising  from  the
beauties  of  elocution  ;  and  operated,  though  from  the  same
principle,  yet  in  a  contrary  manner,  to  the  sympathy,  com
passion,  and  indignation  of  the  audience.

Lord  CLAEENDON,  when  he  approaches  towards  the  catas
trophe  of  the  royal  party,  supposes,  that  his  narration  must
then  become  infinitely  disagreeable ;  and  he  hurries  over  the
king's  death,  without  giving  us  one  circumstance  of  it.  He
considers  it  as  too  horrid  a  scene  to  be  contemplated  with
any  satisfaction,  or  even  without  the  utmost  pain  and  aver
sion.  He  himself,  as  well  as  the  readers  of  that  age,  were
too  deeply  concerned  in  the  events,  and  felt  a  pain  from  sub
jects,  which  an  historian  and  a  reader  of  another  age  would
regard  as  the  most  pathetic  and  most  interesting,  and,  by
•consequence,  the  most  agreeable.

An  action,  represented  in  tragedy,  may  be  too  bloody  and
iitrocious.  It  may  excite  such  movements  of  horror  a?  will


OF  TRAGEDY.  266

not  soften  into  pleasure ;  and  the  greatest  energy  of  expres
sion,  bestowed  on  descriptions  of  that  nature,  serves  only  to
Augment  our  uneasiness.  Such  is  that  action  represented  in
the  Ambitious  Stepmother,  where  a  venerable  old  man,  raised
to  the  height  of  fury  and  despair,  rushes  against  a  pillar,
and  striking  his  head  upon  it,  besmears  it  all  over  with
mingled  brains  and  gore.  The  ENGLISH  theatre  abounds  too
much  with  such  shocking  images.

Even  the  common  sentiments  of  compassion  require  to  be
softened  by  some  agreeable  affection,  in  order  to  give  a
thorough  satisfaction  to  the  audience.  The  mere  suffering
of  plaintive  virtue,  under  the  triumphant  tyranny  and  oppres
sion  of  vice,  forms  a  disagreeable  spectacle,  and  is  carefully
avoided  by  all  masters  of  the  drama.  In  order  to  dismiss
the  audience  with  entire  satisfaction  and  contentment,  the
virtue  must  either  convert  itself  into  a  noble  courageous
despair,  or  the  vice  receive  its  proper  punishment.

Most  painters  appear  in  this  light  to  have  been  very  un
happy  in  their  subjects.  As  they  wrought  much  for  churches
and  convents,  they  have  chiefly  represented  such  horrible
subjects  as  crucifixions  and  martyrdoms,  where  nothing  ap
pears  but  tortures,  wounds,  executions,  and  passive  suffering,
without  any  action  or  affection.  When  they  turned  their
pencil  from  this  ghastly  mythology,  they  had  commonly  re
course  to  OVID,  whose  fictions,  though  passionate  and  agree
able,  are  scarcely  natural  or  probable  enough  for  painting.

The  same  inversion  of  that  principle,  which  is  here  insisted
on,  displays  itself  in  common  life,  as  in  the  effects  of  oratory
and  poetry.  Raise  so  the  subordinate  passion  that  it  becomes
the  predominant,  it  swallows  up  that  affection  which  it  before
nourished  and  encreased.  Too  much  jealousy  extinguishes
love :  Too  much  difficulty  renders  us  indifferent :  Too  much
sickness  and  infirmity  disgusts  a  selfish  and  unkind  parent.

What  so  disagreeable  as  the  dismal,  gloomy,  disastrous
stories,  with  which  melancholy  people  entertain  their  com
panions  ?  The  uneasy  passion  being  there  raised  alone,  un
accompanied  with  any  spirit,  genius,  or  eloquence,  conveys  a
pure  uneasiness,  and  is  attended  with  nothing  that  can  soften
it  into  pleasure  or  satisfaction.


266  ESSAY  XX1H.

1  ESSAY  XXIII.— Of  the  Standard  of  Taste.

THE  great  variety  of  Taste,  as  well  as  of  opinion,  which  pre
vails  in  the  world,  is  too  obvious  not  to  have  fallen  under
every  one's  observation.  Men  of  the  most  confined  knowledge
are  able  to  remark  a  difference  of  taste  in  the  narrow  circle
of  their  acquaintance,  even  where  the  persons  have  been
educated  under  the  same  government,  and  have  early  imbibed
the  same  prejudices.  But  those,  who  can  enlarge  their  view
to  contemplate  distant  nations  and  remote  ages,  are  still
more  surprized  at  the  great  inconsistence  and  contrariety.
We  are  apt  to  call  barbarous  whatever  departs  widely  from
our  own  taste  and  apprehension :  But  soon  find  the  epithet
of  reproach  retorted  on  us.  And  the  highest  arrogance  and
self-conceit  is  at  last  startled,  on  observing  an  equal  assurance
on  all  sides,  and  scruples,  amidst  such  a  contest  of  sentiment,
to  pronounce  positively  in  its  own  favour.

As  this  variety  of  taste  is  obvious  to  the  most  careless
enquirer ;  so  will  it  be  found,  on  examination,  to  be  still
greater  in  reality  than  in  appearance.  The  sentiments  of
men  often  differ  with  regard  to  beauty  and  deformity  of  all
kinds,  even  while  their  general  discourse  is  the  same.  There
are  certain  terms  in  every  language,  which  import  blame,  and
others  praise ;  and  all  men,  who  use  the  same  tongue,  must
agree  in  their  application  of  them.  Every  voice  is  united  in
applauding  elegance,  propriety,  simplicity,  spirit  in  writing  ;
and  in  blaming  fustian,  affectation,  coldness,  and  a  false
brilliancy  :  But  when  critics  come  to  particulars,  this  seeming
unanimity  vanishes ;  and  it  is  found,  that  they  had  affixed
a  very  different  meaning  to  their  expressions.  In  all  matters
of  opinion  and  science,  the  case  is  opposite  :  The  difference
among  men  is  there  oftener  found  to  lie  in  generals  than  in
particulars ;  and  to  be  less  in  reality  than  in  appearance.
An  explanation  of  the  terms  commonly  ends  the  controversy  ;
and  the  disputants  are  surprized  to  find,  that  they  had  been
quarrelling,  while  at  bottom  they  agreed  in  their  judgment.

Those  who  found  morality  on  sentiment,  more  than  011
reason,  are  inclined  to  comprehend  ethics  under  the  former
observation,  and  to  maintain,  that,  in  all  questions,  which
regard  conduct  and  manners,  the  difference  among  men  is
really  greater  than  at  first  sight  it  appears.  It  is  indeed

1  [This  Essay  w;is  first  published  in  Edition  L.]


OF  THE STANDARD OF TASTE.  267

obvious,  that  writers  of  all  nations  and  all  ages  concur  in
applauding  justice,  humanity,  magnanimity,  prudence,  vera
city  ;  and  in  blaming  the  opposite  qualities.  Even  poets  and
other  authors,  whose  compositions  are  chiefly  calculated  to
please  the  imagination,  are  yet  found,  from  HOMER  down  to
FENELON,  to  inculcate  the  same  moral  precepts,  and  to  bestow
their  applause  and  blame  on  the  same  virtues  and  vices.
This  great  unanimity  is  usually  ascribed  to  the  influence  of
plain  reason ;  which,  in  all  these  cases,  maintains  similar
sentiments  in  all  men,  and  prevents  those  controversies,  to
which  the  abstract  sciences  are  so  much  exposed.  So  far  as
the  unanimity  is  real,  this  account  may  be  admitted  as  satis
factory  :  But  we  must  also  allow  that  some  part  of  the  seem
ing  harmony  in  morals  may  be  accounted  for  from  the  very
nature  of  language.  The  word  virtue,  with  its  equivalent  in
every  tongue,  implies  praise ;  as  that  of  vice  does  blame  :
And  no  one,  without  the  most  obvious  and  grossest  impro
priety,  could  afiix  reproach  to  a  term,  which  in  general
acceptation  is  understood  in  a  good  sense ;  or  bestow  applause,
where  the  idiom  requires  disapprobation.  HOMER'S  general
precepts,  where  he  delivers  any  such,  will  never  be  contro
verted;  but  it  is  obvious,  that,  when  he  draws  particular
pictures  of  manners,  and  represents  heroism  in  ACHILLES  and
prudence  in  ULYSSES,  he  intermixes  a  much  greater  degree
of  ferocity  in  the  former,  and  of  cunning  and  fraud  in  the
latter,  than  FENELON  would  admit  of.  The  sage  ULYSSES  in
the  GREEK  poet  seems  to  delight  in  lies  and  fictions,  and
often  employs  them  without  any  necessity  or  even  advantage  :
But  his  more  scrupulous  son,  in  the  FRENCH  epic  writer,  ex
poses  himself  to  the  most  imminent  perils,  rather  than  depart
from  the  most  exact  line  of  truth  and  veracity.

The  admirers  and  followers  of  the  ALCORAN  insist  on  the
excellent  moral  precepts  interspersed  throughout  that  wild
and  absurd  performance.  But  it  is  to  be  supposed,  that  the
ARABIC  words,  which  correspond  to  the  ENGLISH,  equity,
justice,  temperance,  meekness,  charity,  were  such  as,  from
the  constant  use  of  that  tongue,  must  always  be  taken  in  a
good  sense ;  and  it  would  have  argued  the  greatest  ignorance,
not  of  morals,  but  of  language,  to  have  mentioned  them  with
any  epithets,  besides  those  of  applause  and  approbation.  But
would  we  know,  whether  the  pretended  prophet  had  really
attained  a  just  sentiment  of  morals  ?  Let  us  attend  to  his


ESSAY  xxm.

narration ;  and  we  shall  soon  find,  that  he  bestows  praise  on
such  instances  of  treachery,  inhumanity,  cruelty,  revenge,
bigotry,  as  are  utterly  incompatible  with  civilized  society.
No  steady  rule  of  right  seems  there  to  be  attended  to ;  and
every  action  is  blamed  or  praised,  so  far  only  as  it  is  bene
ficial  or  hurtful  to  the  true  believers.

The  merit  of  delivering  true  general  precepts  in  ethics  is
indeed  very  small.  Whoever  recommends  any  moral  virtues,
really  does  no  more  than  is  implied  in  the  terms  themselves.
That  people,  who  invented  the  word  charity,  and  used  it  in  a
good  sense,  inculcated  more  clearly  and  much  more  effica
ciously,  the  precept,  be  charitable,  than  any  pretended  legis
lator  or  prophet,  who  should  insert  such  a  maxim  in  his
writings.  Of  all  expressions,  those,  which,  together  with
their  other  meaning,  imply  a  degree  either  of  blame  or  appro
bation,  are  the  least  liable  to  be  perverted  or  mistaken.

It  is  natural  for  us  to  seek  a  Standard  of  Taste  ;  a  rule,  by
which  the  various  sentiments  of  men  may  be  reconciled  ;  at
least,  a  decision,  afforded,  confirming  one  sentiment,  and
condemning  another.

There  is  a  species  of  philosophy,  which  cuts  off  all  hopes
of  success  in  such  an  attempt,  and  represents  the  impossibility
of  ever  attaining  any  standard  of  taste.  The  difference,  it  is
said,  is  very  wide  between  judgment  and  sentiment.  All
sentiment  is  right ;  because  sentiment  has  a  reference  to
nothing  beyond  itself,  and  is  always  real,  wherever  a  man  is
conscious  of  it.  But  all  determinations  of  the  understanding
are  not  right ;  because  they  have  a  reference  to  something  be
yond  themselves,  to  wit,  real  matter  of  fact;  and  are  not
always  conformable  to  that  standard.  Among  a  thousand
different  opinions  which  different  men  may  entertain  of  the
same  subject,  there  is  one,  and  but  one,  that  is  just  and  true;
and  the  only  difficulty  is  to  fix  and  ascertain  it.  On  the
contrary,  a  thousand  different  sentiments,  excited  by  the  same
object,  are  all  right :  Because  no  sentiment  represents  what
is  really  in  the  object.  It  only  marks  a  certain  conformity
or  relation  between  the  object  and  the  organs  or  faculties  of
the  mind ;  and  if  that  conformity  did  not  really  exist,  the
sentiment  could  never  possibly  have  being.  Beauty  is  no
quality  in  things  themselves :  It  exists  merely  in  the
mind  which  contemplates  them  ;  and  each  mind  perceives
a  different  beauty.  One  person  may  even  perceive  deformity,


OF  THE STANDARD OF  TASTE.  209

where  another  is  sensible  of  beauty  ;  and  every  individual
ought  to  acquiesce  in  his  own  sentiment,  without  pretending  to
regulate  those  of  others.  To  seek  the  real  beauty,  or  real  de
formity,  is  as  fruitless  an  enquiry,  as  to  pretend  to  ascertain
the  real  sweet  or  real  bitter.  According  to  the  disposition  of
^the  organs,  the  same  object  may  be  both  sweet  and  bitter ;
and  the  proverb  has  justly  determined  it  to  be  fruitless  to
dispute  concerning  tastes.  It  is  very  natural,  and  even  quite
necessary,  to  extend  this  axiom  to  mental,  as  well  as  bodily
taste ;  and  thus  common  sense,  which  is  so  often  at  variance
with  philosophy,  especially  with  the  sceptical  kind,  is  found,
in  one  instance  at  least,  to  agree  in  pronouncing  the  same
decision.

But  though  this  axiom,  by  passing  into  a  proverb,  seems  to
have  attained  the  sanction  of  common  sense ;  there  is  certainly
a  species  of  common  sense  which  opposes  it,  at  least  serves
to  modify  and  restrain  it.  Whoever  would  assert  an  equality
of  genius  and  elegance  between  OGILBY  and  MILTON,  or
BUNYAN  and  ADDISON,  would  be  thought  to  defend  no  less
an  extravagance,  than  if  he  had  maintained  a  mole-hill
to  be  as  high  as  TENERIFFE,  or  a  pond  as  extensive  as  the
ocean.  Though  there  may  be  found  persons,  who  give  the
preference  to,  .the  former  authors  ;  no  one  pays  attention  to
such  a  taste  ;  and  we  pronounce  without  scruple  the  senti
ment  of  these  pretended  critics  to  be  absurd  and  ridiculous.
The  principle  of  the  natural  equality  of  tastes  is  then  totally
forgot,  and  while  we  admit  it  on  some  occasions,  where  the
objects  seem  near  an  equality,  it  appears  an  extravagant
paradox,  or  rather  a  palpable  absurdity,  where  objects  so  dis-
proportioned  are  compared  together.

It  is  evident  that  none  of  the  rules  of  composition  are
fixed  by  reasonings  a  priori,  or  can  be  esteemed  abstract  con
clusions  of  the  understanding,  from  comparing  those  habitudes
and  relations  of  ideas,  which  are  eternal  and  immutable.
/Their  foundation  is  the  same  with  that  of  all  the  practical
sciences,  experience  ;  nor  are  they  any  thing  but  general
observations,  concerning  what  has  been  universally  found  to
please  in  all  countries  and  in  all  ages.  Many  of  the  beauties
of  poetry  and  even  of  eloquence  are  founded  on  falsehood
and  fiction,  on  hyperboles,  metaphors,  and  an  abuse  or  per
version  of  terms  from  their  natural  meaning.  To  check  the
sallies  of  the  imagination,  and  to  reduce  every  expression  to


270  ESSAY XXIII.

geometrical  truth  and  exactness,  would  be  the  most  contrary
to  the  laws  of  criticism ;  because  it  would  produce  a  work,
which,  by  universal  experience,  has  been  found  the  most
insipid  and  disagreeable.  But  though  poetry  can  never  sub-
/mit  to  exact  truth,  it  must  be  confined  by  rules  of  art,  dis
covered  to  the  author  either  by  genius  or  observation.  If
some  negligent  or  irregular  writers  have  pleased,  they  have
not  pleased  by  their  transgressions  of  rule  or  order,  but  in
spite  of  these  transgressions  :  They  have  possessed  other
beauties,  which  were  conformable  to  just  criticism  ;  and  the
force  of  these  beauties  has  been  able  to  overpower  censure,
and  give  the  mind  a  satisfaction  superior  to  the  disgust
arising  from  the  blemishes.  ARIOSTO  pleases  ;  but  not  by
his  monstrous  and  improbable  fictions,  by  his  bizarre  mixture
of  the  serious  and  comic  styles,  by  the  want  of  coherence  in
his  stories,  or  by  the  continual  interruptions  of  his  narration.
He  charms  by  the  force  and  clearness  of  his  expression,  by
the  readiness  and  variety  of  his  inventions,  and  by  his  natural
pictures  of  the  passions,  especially  those  of  the  gay  and
amorous  kind :  And  however  his  faults  may  diminish  our
satisfaction,  they  are  not  able  entirely  to  destroy  it.  Did
our  pleasure  really  arise  from  those  parts  of  his  poem,  which
we  denominate  faults,  this  would  be  no  objection  to  criticism
in  general :  It  would  only  be  an  objection  to  those  particular
rules  of  criticism,  which  would  establish  such  circumstances
to  be  faults,  and  would  represent  them  as  universally  blame-
able.  If  they  are  found  to  please,  they  cannot  be  faults  ;  let
the  pleasure,  which  they  produce,  be  ever  so  unexpected  and
unaccountable.

But  though  all  the  general  rules  of  art  are  founded  only  on
experience  and  on  the  observation  of  the  common  sentiments
of  human  nature,  we  must  not  imagine,  that,  on  every  occa
sion,  the  feelings  of  men  will  be  conformable  to  these  rules.
Those  finer  emotions  of  the  mind  are  of  a  very  tender  and
delicate  nature,  and  require  the  concurrence  of  many  favour
able  circumstances  to  make  them  play  with  facility  and
exactness,  according  to  their  general  and  established  princi
ples.  The  least  exterior  hindrance  to  such  small  springs,  or
the  least  internal  disorder,  disturbs  their  motion,  and  con
founds  the  operation  of  the  whole  machine.  When  we  would
make  an  experiment  of  this  nature,  and  would  try  the  force
of  any  beauty  or  deformity,  we  must  choose  with  care  a


OF  TIIE  STANDARD  OF  TASTE.  271

proper  time  and  place,  and  bring  the  fancy  to  a  suitable
situation  and  disposition.  A  perfect  serenity  of  mind,  a  re
collection  of  thought,  a  due  attention  to  the  object ;  if  any
of  these  circumstances  be  wanting,  our  experiment  will  be
fallacious,  and  we  shall  be  unable  to  judge  of  the  catholic
and  universal  beauty.  The  relation,  which  nature  has  placed
(s  between  the  form  and  the  sentiment,  will  at  least  be  more
obscure ;  and  it  will  require  greater  accuracy  to  trace  and
discern  it.  We  shall  be  able  to  ascertain  its  influence  not  so
much  from  the  operation  of  each  particular  beauty,  as  from  the
durable  admiration,  which  attends  those  works,  that  have
survived  all  the  caprices  of  mode  and  fashion,  all  the  mis
takes  of  ignorance  and  envy.

The  same  HOMER,  who  pleased  at  ATHENS  and  SOME  two
thousand  years  ago,  is  still  admired  at  PARIS  and  at  LONDON.
All  the  changes  of  climate,  government,  religion,  and  lan
guage,  have  not  been  able  to  obscure  his  glory.  Authority
or  prejudice  may  give  a  temporary  vogue  to  a  bad  poet  or
orator ;  but  his  reputation  will  never  be  durable  or  general.
When  his  compositions  are  examined  by  posterity  or  by
foreigners,  the  enchantment  is  dissipated,  and  his  faults
appear  in  their  true  colours.  On  the  contrary,  a  real  genius,
the  longer  his  works  endure,  and  the  more  wide  they  are
spread,  the  more  sincere  is  the  admiration  which  he  meets
with.  Envy  and  jealousy  have  too  much  place  in  a  narrow
circle ;  and  even  familiar  acquaintance  with  his  person  may
diminish  the  applause  due  to  his  performances  :  But  when
these  obstructions  are  removed,  the  beauties,  which  are  natu
rally  fitted  to  excite  agreeable  sentiments,  immediately  dis
play  their  energy ;  and  while  the  world  endures,  they  maintain
their  authority  over  the  minds  of  men.

It  appears  then,  that,  amidst  all  the  variety  and  caprice  of
taste,  there  are  certain  general  principles  of  approbation  or
blame,  whose  influence  a  careful  eye  may  trace  in  all  opera
tions  of  the  mind.  Some  particular  forms  or  qualities,  from
the  original  structure  of  the  internal  fabric,  are  calculated  to
V  please,  and  others  to  displease  ;  and  if  they  fail  of  their
effect  in  any  particular  instance,  it  is  from  some  apparent
defect  or  imperfection  in  the  organ.  A  man  in  a  fever  would
not  insist  on  his  palate  as  able  to  decide  concerning  flavours ;
nor  would  one,  affected  with  the  jaundice,  pretend  to  give  a
verdict  with  regard  to  colours.  In  each  creature,  there  is  a


272  ESSAY  XXIII.

sound  and  a  defective  state;  and  the  former  alone  can  be
supposed  to  afford  us  a  true  standard  of  taste  and  sentiment.
If,  in  the  sound  state  of  the  organ,  there  be  an  entire  or  a
considerable  uniformity  of  sentiment  among  men,  we  may
thence  derive  an  idea  of  the  perfect  beauty ;  in  like  manner
as  the  appearance  of  objects  in  day-light,  to  the  eye  of  a  man
in  health,  is  denominated  their  true  and  real  colour,  even
while  colour  is  allowed  to  be  merely  a  phantasm  of  the  senses.

Many  and  frequent  are  the  defects  in  the  internal  organs,
which  prevent  or  weaken  the  influence  of  those  general  prin
ciples,  on  which  depends  our  sentiment  of  beauty  or  deformity.
Though  some  objects,  by  the  structure  of  the  mind,  be  natu
rally  calculated  to  give  pleasure,  it  is  not  to  be  expected,  that
in  every  individual  the  pleasure  will  be  equally  felt.  Parti
cular  incidents  and  situations  occur,  which  either  throw  a
false  light  on  the  objects,  or  hinder  the  true  from  conveying
to  the  imagination  the  proper  sentiment  and  perception.

One  obvious  cause,  why  many  feel  not  the  proper  sentiment
of  beauty,  is  the  want  of  that  delicacy  of  imagination,  which
is  requisite  to  convey  a  sensibility  of  those  finer  emotions.
This  delicacy  every  one  pretends  to  :  Every  one  talks  of  it ;
and  would  reduce  every  kind  of  taste  or  sentiment  to  its
standard.  But  as  our  intention  in  this  essay  is  to  mingle
some  light  of  the  understanding  with  the  feelings  of  senti
ment,  it  will  be  proper  to  give  a  more  accurate  definition
of  delicacy,  than  has  hitherto  been  attempted.  And  not  to
draw  our  philosophy  from  too  profound  a  source,  we  shall
have  recourse  to  a  noted  story  in  DON  QUIXOTE.

It  is  with  good  reason,  says  SANCHO  to  the  squire  with  the
great  nose,  that  I  pretend  to  have  a  judgment  in  wine  :  This
is  a  quality  hereditary  in  our  family.  Two  of  my  kinsmen
were  once  called  to  give  their  opinion  of  a  hogshead,  which
was  supposed  to  be  excellent,  being  old  and  of  a  good  vintage.
One  of  them  tastes  it ;  considers  it ;  and  after  mature  reflec
tion  pronounces  the  wine  to  be  good,  were  it  not  for  a  small
taste  of  leather,  which  he  perceived  in  it.  The  other,  after
using  the  same  precautions,  gives  also  his  verdict  in  favour  of
the  wine ;  but  with  the  reserve  of  a  taste  of  iron,  which  he
could  easily  distinguish.  You  cannot  imagine  how  much
they  were  both  ridiculed  for  their  judgment.  But  who
laughed  in  the  end  ?  On  emptying  the  hogshead,  there  was
found  at  the  bottom,  an  old  key  with  a  leathern  thong  tied  to  it.


OF  THE  STANDARD  OF TASTE.  273

The  great  resemblance  between  mental  and  bodily  taste
will  easily  teach  us  to  apply  this  story.  Though  it  be  certain,
that  beauty  and  deformity,  more  than  sweet  and  bitter,  are
not  qualities  in  objects,  but  belong  entirely  to  the  sentiment,
internal  or  external ;  it  must  be  allowed,  that  there  are  cer
tain  qualities  in  objects,  which  are  fitted  by  nature  to  produce
those  particular  feelings.  Now  as  these  qualities  may  be  found
in  a  small  degree,  or  may  be  mixed  and  confounded  with  each
other,  it  often  happens,  that  the  taste  is  not  affected  with
such  minute  qualities,  or  is  not  able  to  distinguish  all  the
particular  flavours,  amidst  the  disorder,  in  which  they  are
presented.  Where  the  organs  are  so  fine,  as  to  allow  nothing
to  escape  them ;  and  at  the  same  time  so  exact  as  to  perceive
every  ingredient  in  the  composition  :  This  we  call  delicacy  of
taste,  whether  we  employ  these  terms  in  the  literal  or  meta
phorical  sense.  Here  then  the  general  rules  of  beauty  are  of
use ;  being  drawn  from  established  models,  and  from  the
observation  of  what  pleases  or  displeases,  when  presented
singly  and  in  a  high  degree  :  And  if  the  same  qualities,  in  a
continued  composition  and  in  a  smaller  degree,  affect  not  the
organs  with  a  sensible  delight  or  uneasiness,  we  exclude  the
person  from  all  pretensions  to  this  delicacy.  To  produce
these  general  rules  or  avowed  patterns  of  composition  is  like
finding  the  key  with  the  leathern  thong ;  which  justified  the
verdict  of  SANCHO'S  kinsmen,  and  confounded  those  pretended
judges  who  had  condemned  them.  Though  the  hogshead  had
never  been  emptied,  the  taste  of  the  one  was  still  equally
delicate,  and  that  of  the  other  equally  dull  and  languid :  But
it  would  have  been  more  difficult  to  have  proved  the  supe
riority  of  the  former,  to  the  conviction  of  every  by-stander.
In  like  manner,  though  the  beauties  of  writing  had  never
been  methodized,  or  reduced  to  general  principles  ;  though
no  excellent  models  had  ever  been  acknowledged ;  the  dif
ferent  degrees  of  taste  would  still  have  subsisted,  and  the
judgment  of  one  man  been  preferable  to  that  of  another;
but  it  would  not  have  been  so  easy  to  silence  the  bad  critic,
who  might  always  insist  upon  his  particular  sentiment,  and
refuse  to  submit  to  his  antagonist.  But  when  we  show  him
an  avowed  principle  of  art ;  when  we  illustrate  this  principle
by  examples,  whose  operation,  from  his  own  particular  taste,
he  acknowledges  to  be  conformable  to  the  principle ;  when
we  prove,  that  the  same  principle  may  be  applied  to  the  pre-

VOL.  III.  T


274  ESSAY XXIII.

sent  case,  where  he  did  not  perceive  or  feel  its  influence  :  He
must  conclude,  upon  the  whole,  that  the  fault  lies  in  himself,
and  that  he  wants  the  delicacy,  which  is  requisite  to  make
him  sensible  of  every  beauty  and  every  blemish,  in  any  com
position  or  discourse.

It  is  acknowledged  to  be  the  perfection  of  every  sense  or
faculty,  to  perceive  with  exactness  its  most  minute  objects,
and  allow  nothing  to  escape  its  notice  and  observation.  The
smaller  the  objects  are,  which  become  sensible  to  the  eye,
the  finer  is  that  organ,  and  the  more  elaborate  its  make  and
composition.  A  good  palate  is  not  tried  by  strong  flavours  ;
but  by  a  mixture  of  small  ingredients,  where  we  are  still
sensible  of  each  part,  notwithstanding  its  minuteness  and  its
confusion  with  the  rest.  In  like  manner,  a  quick  and  acute
V  perception  of  beauty  and  deformity  must  be  the  perfection  of
our  mental  taste ;  nor  can  a  man  be  satisfied  with  himself
while  he  suspects,  that  any  excellence  or  blemish  in  a  dis
course  has  passed  him  unobserved.  In  this  case,  the  perfec
tion  of  the  man,  and  the  perfection  of  the  sense  or  feeling,
are  found  to  be  united.  A  very  delicate  palate,  on  many  oc
casions,  may  be  a  great  inconvenience  both  to  a  man  himself
and  to  his  friends :  But  a  delicate  taste  of  wit  or  beauty
must  always  be  a  desirable  quality ;  because  it  is  the  source
of  all  the  finest  and  most  innocent  enjoyments,  of  which
human  nature  is  susceptible.  In  this  decision  the  sentiments
of  all  mankind  are  agreed.  Wherever  you  can  ascertain  a
delicacy  of  taste,  it  is  sure  to  meet  with  approbation ;  and
the  best  way  of  ascertaining  it  is  to  appeal  to  those  models
and  principles,  which  have  been  established  by  the  uniform
consent  and  experience  of  nations  and  ages.

But  though  there  be  naturally  a  wide  difference  in  point
of  delicacy  between  one  person  and  another,  nothing  tends
further  to  encrease  and  improve  this  talent,  than  practice  in
a  particular  art,  and  the  frequent  survey  or  contemplation  of
a  particular  species  of  beauty.  When  objects  of  any  kind
are  first  presented  to  the  eye  or  imagination,  the  sentiment,
which  attends  them,  is  obscure  and  confused ;  and  the  mind
is,  in  a  great  measure,  incapable  of  pronouncing  concerning
their  merits  or  defects.  The  taste  cannot  perceive  the
several  excellences  of  the  performance;  much  less  distin
guish  the  particular  character  of  each  excellency,  and  ascer
tain  its  quality  and  degree.  If  it  pronounce  the  whole  in


OF  THE  STANDARD  OF  TASTE.  275

general  to  be  beautiful  or  deformed,  it  is  the  utmost  that  can
be  expected ;  and  even  this  judgment,  a  person,  so  unprac
tised,  will  be  apt  to  deliver  with  great  hesitation  and  reserve
But  allow  him  to  acquire  experience  in  those  objects,  his
feeling  becomes  more  exact  and  nice :  He  not  only  perceives
the  beauties  and  defects  of  each  part,  but  marks  the  dis
tinguishing  species  of  each  quality,  and  assigns  it  suitable
praise  or  blame.  A.  clear  and  distinct  sentiment  attends  him
through  the  whole  survey  of  the  objects ;  and  he  discerns
that  very  degree  and  kind  of  approbation  or  displeasure,
which  each  part  is  naturally  fitted  to  produce.  The  mist
dissipates,  which  seemed  formerly  to  hang  over  the  object :
The  organ  acquires  greater  perfection  in  its  operations  ;  and
can  pronounce,  without  danger  of  mistake,  concerning  the
merits  of  every  performance.  In  a  word,  the  same  address
and  dexterity,  which  practice  gives  to  the  execution  of  any
work,  is  also  acquired  by  the  same  means,  in  the  judging
of  it.

So  advantageous  is  practice  to  the  discernment  of  beauty,
that,  before  we  can  give  judgment  on  any  work  of  impor
tance,  it  will  even  be  requisite,  that  that  very  individual
performance  be  more  than  once  perused  by  us,  and  be  sur
veyed  in  different  lights  with  attention  and  deliberation.
There  is  a  flutter  or  hurry  of  thought  which  attends  the  first
perusal  of  any  piece,  and  which  confounds  the  genuine  senti
ment  of  beauty.  The  relation  of  the  parts  is  not  discerned :
The  true  characters  of  style  are  little  distinguished :  The
several  perfections  and  defects  seem  wrapped  up  in  a  species
of  confusion,  and  present  themselves  indistinctly  to  the  im
agination.  Not  tc  mention,  that  there  is  a  species  of  beauty,
which,  as  it  is  florid  and  superficial,  pleases  at  first ;  but
being  found  incompatible  with  a  just  expression  either  of
reason  or  passion,  soon  palls  upon  the  taste,  and  is  then
rejected  with  disdain,  at  least  rated  at  a  much  lower  value.

It  is  impossible  to  continue  in  the  practice  of  contemplat
ing  any  order  of  beauty,  without  being  frequently  obliged  to
form  comparisons  between  the  several  species  and  degrees  of
excellence,  and  estimating  their  proportion  to  each  other.  A
man,  who  has  had  no  opportunity  of  comparing  the  different
kinds  of  beauty,  is  indeed  totally  unqualified  to  pronounce  an
opinion  with  regard  to  any  object  presented  to  him.  By
^/comparison  alone  we  fix  the  epithets  of  praise  or  blame,  and

T 2


27G  ESSAY  XXIII.

learn  how  to  assign  the  due  degree  of  .each.  The  coarsest
daubing  contains  a  certain  lustre  of  colours  and  exactness  of
imitation,  which  are  so  far  beauties,  and  would  affect  the
mind  of  a  peasant  or  Indian  with  the  highest  admiration.
The  most  vulgar  ballads  are  not  entirely  destitute  of  har
mony  or  nature;  and  none  but  a  person,  familiarized  to
superior  beauties,  would  pronounce  their  numbers  harsh,  or
narration  uninteresting.  A  great  inferiority  of  beauty  gives
pain  to  a  person  conversant  in  the  highest  excellence  of  the
kind,  and  is  for  that  reason  pronounced  a  deformity :  As  the
most  finished  object,  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  is  na
turally  supposed  to  have  reached  the  pinnacle  of  perfection,
and  to  be  entitled  to  the  highest  applause.  One  accustomed
to  see,  and  examine,  and  weigh  the  several  performances,
admired  in  different  ages  and  nations,  can  only  rate  the
merits  of  a  work  exhibited  to  his  view,  and  assign  its  proper
rank  among  the  productions  of  genius.

But  to  enable  a  critic  the  more  fully  to  execute  this  under
taking,  he  must  preserve  his  mind  free  from  all  prejudice,  and
allow  nothing  to  enter  into  his  consideration,  but  the  very
object  which  is  submitted  to  his  examination.  We  may
observe,  that  every  work  of  art,  in  order  to  produce  its  due
effect  on  the  mind,  must  be  surveyed  in  a  certain  point  of
view,  and  cannot  be  fully  relished  by  persons,  whose  situation,
real  or  imaginary,  is  not  conformable  to  that  which  is  re
quired  by  the  performance.  An  orator  addresses  himself  to
a  particular  audience,  and  must  have  a  regard  to  their  par
ticular  genius,  interests,  opinions,  passions,  and  prejudices  ;
otherwise  he  hopes  in  vain  to  govern  their  resolutions,  and
inflame  their  affections.  Should  they  even  have  entertained
some  prepossessions  against  him,  however  unreasonable,  he
must  not  overlook  this  disadvantage ;  but,  before  he  enters
upon  the  subject,  must  endeavour  to  conciliate  their  affec
tion,  and  acquire  their  good  graces.  A  critic  of  a  different
age  or  nation,  who  should  peruse  this  discourse,  must  have
all  these  circumstances  in  his  eye,  and  must  place  himself  in
the  same  situation  as  the  audience,  in  order  to  form  a  true
judgment  of  the  oration.  In  like  manner,  when  any  work  is
addressed  to  the  public,  though  I  should  have  a  friendship
or  enmity  with  the  author,  I  must  depart  from  this  situa
tion  ;  and  considering  myself  as  a  man  in  general,  forget,  if
possible,  my  individual  being  and  my  peculiar  circumstances.


OF  THE  STANDARD  OF  TASTE.  277

A  person  influenced  by  prejudice,  complies  not  with  this
condition;  but  obstinately  maintains  his  natural  position,
without  placing  himself  in  that  point  of  view,  which  the
performance  supposes.  If  the  work  be  addressed  to  persons
of  a  different  age  or  nation,  he  makes  no  allowance  for  their
peculiar  views  and  prejudices ;  but,  full  of  the  manners  of  his
own  age  and  country,  rashly  condemns  what  seemed  admira
ble  in  the  eyes  of  those  for  whom  alone  the  discourse  was
calculated.  If  the  work  be  executed  for  the  public,  he  never
sufficiently  enlarges  his  comprehension,  or  forgets  his  interest
as  a  friend  or  enemy,  as  a  rival  or  commentator.  By  this
means,  his  sentiments  are  perverted ;  nor  have  the  same
beauties  and  blemishes  the  same  influence  upon  him,  as  if
he  had  imposed  a  proper  violence  on  his  imagination,  and
had  forgotten  himself  for  a  moment.  So  far  his  taste  evi
dently  departs  from  the  true  standard ;  and  of  consequence
loses  all  credit  and  authority.

It  is  well  known,  that  in  all  questions,  submitted  to  the
-  understanding,  prejudice  is  destructive  of  sound  judgment,
and  perverts  all  operations  of  the  intellectual  faculties :  It  is
no  less  contrary  to  good  taste ;  nor  has  it  less  influence  to
corrupt  our  sentiment  of  beauty.  It  belongs  to  good  sense
to  check  its  influence  in  both  cases ;  and  in  this  respect,  as
well  as  in  many  others,  reason,  if  not  an  essential  part  of
taste,  is  at  least  requisite  to  the  operations  of  this  latter
faculty.  In  all  the  nobler  productions  of  genius,  there  is  a
mutual  relation  and  correspondence  of  parts ;  nor  can  either
the  beauties  or  blemishes  be  perceived  by  him,  whose
thought  is  not  capacious  enough  to  comprehend  all  those
parts,  and  compare  them  with  each  other,  in  order  to  per
ceive  the  consistence  and  uniformity  of  the  whole.  Every
work  of  art  has  also  a  certain  end  or  purpose,  for  which  it  is
calculated ;  and  is  to  be  deemed  more  or  less  perfect,  as  it  is
more  or  less  fitted  to  attain  this  end.  The  object  of  eloquence
is  to  persuade,  of  history  to  instruct,  of  poetry  to  please  by
means  of  the  passions  and  the  imagination.  These  ends  we
must  carry  constantly  in  our  view,  when  we  peruse  any  per
formance  ;  and  we  must  be  able  to  judge  how  far  the  means
employed  are  adapted  to  their  respective  purposes.  Besides,
every  idnd  of  composition,  even  the  most  poetical,  is  nothing
but  a  chain  of  propositions  and  reasonings ;  not  always,  indeed,
the  justest  and  most  exact,  but  still  plausible  and  specious,


278  ESSAY  XXIII.

however  disguised  by  the  colouring  of  the  imagination.
The  persons  introduced  in  tragedy  and  epic  poetry,  must  be
represented  as  reasoning,  and  thinking,  and  concluding,  and
acting,  suitably  to  their  character  and  circumstances ;  and
without  judgment,  as  well  as  taste  and  invention,  a  poet  can
never  hope  to  succeed  in  so  delicate  an  undertaking.  Not  to
mention,  that  the  same  excellence  of  faculties  which  con
tributes  to  the  improvement  of  reason,  the  same  clearness  of
conception,  the  same  exactness  of  distinction,  the  same
vivacity  of  apprehension,  are  essential  to  the  operations  of
true  taste,  and  are  its  infallible  concomitants.  It  seldom,  or
never  happens,  that  a  man  of  sense,  who  has  experience  in
any  art,  cannot  judge  of  its  beauty;  and  it  is  110  less  rare  to
meet  with  a  man  who  has  a  just  taste  without  a  sound  under
standing.

Thus,  though  the  principles  of  taste  be  universal,  and,
nearly,  if  not  entirely  the  same  in  all  men;  yet  few  are
qualified  to  give  judgment  on  any  work  of  art,  or  establish
their  own  sentiment  as  the  standard  of  beauty.  The  organs
of  internal  sensation  are  seldom  so  perfect  as  to  allow  the
general  principles  their  full  play,  and  produce  a  feeling  cor
respondent  to  those  principles.  They  either  labour  under
some  defect,  or  are  vitiated  by  some  disorder ;  and  by  that
means,  excite  a  sentiment,  which  may  be  pronounced  er
roneous.  When  the  critic  has  no  delicacy,  he  judges  with
out  any  distinction,  and  is  only  affected  by  the  grosser  and
more  palpable  qualities  of  the  object :  The  finer  touches
pass  unnoticed  and  disregarded.  Where  he  is  not  aided  by
practice,  his  verdict  is  attended  with  confusion  and  hesita
tion.  Where  no  comparison  has  been  employed,  the  most
frivolous  beauties,  such  as  rather  merit  the  name  of  defects,
are  the  object  of  his  admiration.  Where  he  lies  under  the
influence  of  prejudice,  all  his  natural  sentiments  are  per
verted.  Where  good  sense  is  wanting,  he  is  not  qualified  to
discern  the  beauties  of  design  and  reasoning,  which  are
the  highest  and  most  excellent.  Under  some  or  other  of
these  imperfections,  the  generality  of  men  labour;  and
hence  a  true  judge  in  the  finer  arts  is  observed,  even  during
the  most  polished  ages,  to  be  so  rare  a  character :  Strong
sense,  united  to  delicate  sentiment,  improved-  by  practice,
perfected  by  comparison,  and  cleared  of  all  _prejudice,  can
alone  entitle  critics  to  this  valuable  character.;  and  the  joint


OF THE STANDARD OF TASTE.  279

verdict  of  such,  wherever  they  are  to  be  found,  is  the  true
standard  of  taste  and  beauty.

But  where  are  such  critics  to  be  found?  By  what  marks
are  they  to  be  known?  How  distinguish  them  from  pre
tenders  ?  These  questions  are  embarrassing ;  and  seem  to
throw  us  back  into  the  same  uncertainty,  from  which,  during
the  course  of  this  essay,  we  have  endeavoured  to  extricate
ourselves.

But  if  we  consider  the  matter  aright,  these  are  questions  of
fact,  not  of  sentiment.  Whether  any  particular  person  be
endowed  with  good  sense  and  a  delicate  imagination,  free
from  prejudice,  may  often  be  the  subject  of  dispute,  and  be
liable  to  great  discussion  and  enquiry  :  But  that  such  a
character  is  valuable  and  estimable  will  be  agreed  in  by  all
mankind.  Where  these  doubts  occur,  men  can  do  no  more
than  in  other  disputable  questions,  which  are  submitted  to
the  understanding  :  They  must  produce  the  best  arguments,
that  their  invention  suggests  to  them ;  they  must  acknow
ledge  a  true  and  decisive  standard  to  exist  somewhere,  to
wit,  real  existence  and  matter  of  fact ;  and  they  must  have
indulgence  to  such  as  differ  from  them  in  their  appeals  to
this  standard.  It  is  sufficient  for  our  present  purpose,  if
\/  we  have  proved,  that  the  taste  of  all  individuals  is  not  upon
an  equal  footing,  and  that  some  men  in  general,  however
difficult  to  be  particularly  pitched  upon,  will  be  acknow
ledged  by  universal  sentiment  to  have  a  preference  above
others.

But  in  reality  the  difficulty  of  finding,  even  in  particulars,
the  standard  of  taste,  is  not  so  great  as  it  is  represented.
Though  in  speculation,  we  may  readily  avow  a  certain
criterion  in  science  and  deny  it  in  sentiment,  the  matter  is
found  in  practice  to  be  much  more  hard  to  ascertain  in  the
former  case  than  in  the  latter.  Theories  of  abstract  philo
sophy,  systems  of  profound  theology,  have  prevailed  during
one  age  :  In  a  successive  period,  these  have  been  universally
exploded  :  Their  absurdity  has  been  detected :  Other  theories
and  systems  have  supplied  their  place,  which  again  gave
place  to  their  successors :  And  nothing  has  been  experienced
more  liable  to  the  revolutions  of  chance  and  fashion  than  these
pretended  decisions  of  science.  The  case  is  not  the  same
with  the  beauties  of  eloquence  and  poetry.  Just  expressions
of  passion  and  nature  are  sure,  after  a  little  time,  to  gain


280  ESSAY  XXHI.

public  applause,  which  they  maintain  for  ever.  ARISTOTLE,
and  PLATO,  and  EPICURUS,  and  DESCARTES,  may  successively
yield  to  each  other :  But  TERENCE  and  VIRGIL  maintain
an  universal,  undisputed  empire  over  the  minds  of  men.
The  abstract  philosophy  of  CICERO  has  lost  its  credit :  The
vehemence  of  his  oratory  is  still  the  object  of  our  admira
tion.

Though  men  of  delicate  taste  be  rare,  they  are  easily  to
be  distinguished  in  society,  by  the  soundness  of  their  under
standing  and  the  superiority  of  their  faculties  above  the  rest
of  mankind.  The  ascendant,  which  they  acquire,  gives  a
prevalence  to  that  lively  approbation,  with  which  they  re
ceive  any  productions  of  genius,  and  renders  it  generally
predominant.  Many  men,  when  left  to  themselves,  have  but
a  faint  and  dubious  perception  of  beauty,  who  yet  are
capable  of  relishing  any  fine  stroke,  which  is  pointed  out  to
them.  Every  convert  to  the  admiration  of  the  real  poet  or
orator  is  the  cause  of  some  new  conversion.  And  though
prejudices  may  prevail  for  a  time,  they  never  unite  in  cele
brating  any  rival  to  the  true  genius,  but  yield  at  last  to  the
force  of  nature  and  just  sentiment.  Thus,  though  a  civilized
nation  may  easily  be  mistaken  in  the  choice  of  their  admired
philosopher,  they  never  have  been  found  long  to  err,  in  their
affection  for  a  favorite  epic  or  tragic  author.

But  notwithstanding  all  our  endeavours  to  fix  a  standard
of  taste,  and  reconcile  the  discordant  apprehensions  of  men,
there  still  remain  two  sources  of  variation,  which  are  not
sufficient  indeed  to  confound  all  the  boundaries  of  beauty
and  deformity,  but  will  often  serve  to  produce  a  difference
in  the  degrees  of  our  approbation  or  blame.  The  one  is  the
different  humours  of  particular  men;  the  other,  the  par
ticular  manners  and  opinions  of  our  age  and  country.  The
general  principles  of  taste  are  uniform  in  human  nature :
Where  men  vary  in  their  judgments,  some  defect  or  per
version  in  the  faculties  may  commonly  be  remarked ;  pro
ceeding  either  from  prejudice,  from  want  of  practice,  or  want
of  delicacy ;  and  there  is  just  reason  for  approving  one  taste,
and  condemning  another.  But  where  there  is  such  a  diver
sity  in  the  internal  frame  or  external  situation  as  is  entirely
blameless  on  both  sides,  and  leaves  no  room  to  give  one  the
preference  above  the  other ;  in  that  case  a  certain  degree  of
diversity  in  judgment  is  unavoidable,  and  we  seek  in  vain


OF  THE  STANDARD  OF  TASTE.  281

for  a  standard,  by  which  we  can  reconcile  the  contrary  sen
timents.

A  young  man,  whose  passions  are  warm,  will  be  more
sensibly  touched  with  amorous  and  tender  images,  than  a
aian  more  advanced  in  years,  who  takes  pleasure  in  wise,
philosophical  reflections  concerning  the  conduct  of  life  and
moderation  of  the  passions.  At  twenty,  OVID  may  be  the
favourite  author ;  HORACE  at  forty ;  and  perhaps  TACITUS
at  fifty.  Vainly  would  we,  in  such  cases,  endeavour  to  enter
into  the  sentiments  of  others,  and  divest  ourselves  of  those
propensities,  which  are  natural  to  us.  We  choose  our
favourite  author  as  we  do  our  friend,  from  a  conformity  of
humour  and  disposition.  Mirth  or  passion,  sentiment  or  reflec
tion  ;  whichever  of  these  most  predominates  in  our  temper,  it
gives  us  a  peculiar  sympathy  with  the  writer  who  resembles  us.

One  person  is  more  pleased  with  the  sublime;  another
with  the  tender ;  a  third  with  raillery.  One  has  a  strong
sensibility  to  blemishes,  and  is  extremely  studious  of  cor
rectness  :  Another  has  a  more  lively  feeling  of  beauties,  arid
pardons  twenty  absurdities  and  defects  for  one  elevated  or
pathetic  stroke.  The  ear  of  this  man  is  entirely  turned
towards  conciseness  and  energy  ;  that  man  is  delighted  with
a  copious,  rich,  and  harmonious  expression.  Simplicity  is
affected  by  one ;  ornament  by  another.  Comedy,  tragedy,
satire,  odes,  have  each  its  partizans,  who  prefer  that  par
ticular  species  of  writing  to  all  others.  It  is  plainly  an
error  in  a  critic,  to  confine  his  approbation  to  one  species  or
"•  style  of  writing,  and  condemn  all  the  rest.  But  it  is  almost
impossible  not  to  feel  a  predilection  for  that  which  suits  our
particular  turn  and  disposition.  Such  preferences  are  in
nocent  and  unavoidable,  and  can  never  reasonably  be  the
object  of  dispute,  because  there  is  no  standard,  by  which
they  can  be  decided.

For  a  like  reason,  we  are  more  pleased,  in  the  course  of
our  reading,  with  pictures  and  characters,  that  resemble
objects  which  are  found  in  our  own  age  or  country,  than
with  those  which  describe  a  different  set  of  customs.  It  is
not  without  some  effort,  that  we  reconcile  ourselves  to  the
simplicity  of  ancient  manners,  and  behold  princesses  carry
ing  water  from  the  spring,  and  kings  and  heroes  dressing
their  own  victuals.  We  may  allow  in  general,  that  the  re
presentation  of  such  manners  is  no  fault  in  the  author,  nor


28i>  ESSAY  XXIII.

deformity  in  the  piece ;  but  we  are  not  so  sensibly  touched
with  them.  For  this  reason,  comedy  is  not  easily  trans
ferred  from  one  age  or  nation  to  another.  A  FKENCHMAN  or
ENGLISHMAN  is  not  pleased  with  the  ANDRIA  of  TERENCE,
or  CLITIA  of  MACHIAVEL  ;  where  the  fine  lady,  upon  whom
all  the  play  turns,  never  once  appears  to  the  spectators,  but
is  always  kept  behind  the  scenes,  suitably  to  the  reserved
humour  of  the  ancient  GREEKS  and  modern  ITALIANS.  A
man  of  learning  and  reflection  can  make  allowance  for  these
peculiarities  of  manners  ;  but  a  common  audience  can  never
divest  themselves  so  far  of  their  usual  ideas  and  sentiments,
as  to  relish  pictures  which  in  no  wise  resemble  them.

But  here  there  occurs  a  reflection,  which  may,  perhaps,
be  useful  in  examining  the  celebrated  controversy  con
cerning  ancient  and  modern  learning ;  where  we  often  find
the  one  side  excusing  any  seeming  absurdity  in  the  ancients
from  the  manners  of  the  age,  and  the  other  refusing  to
admit  this  excuse,  or  at  least,  admitting  it  only  as  an  apology
for  the  author,  not  for  the  performance.  In  my  opinion,
the  proper  boundaries  in  this  subject  have  seldom  been
fixed  between  the  contending  parties.  Where  any  inno
cent  peculiarities  of  manners  are  represented,  such  as  those
above  mentioned,  they  ought  certainly  to  be  admitted  ;  and
a  man,  who  is  shocked  with  them,  gives  an  evident  proof  of
false  delicacy  and  refinement.  The  poet's  monument  more
durable  than  trass,  must  fall  to  the  ground  like  common  brick
or  clay,  were  men  to  make  no  allowance  for  the  continual
revolutions  of  manners  and  customs,  and  would  admit  of
nothing  but  what  was  suitable  to  the  prevailing  fashion.
Must  we  throw  aside  the  pictures  of  our  ancestors,  because  of
their  ruffs  and  fardingales  ?  But  where  the  ideas  of  morality
and  decency  alter  from  one  age  to  another,  and  where  vicious
manners  are  described,  without  being  marked  with  the  proper
characters  of  blame  and  disapprobation ;  this  must  be  al
lowed  to  disfigure  the  poem,  and  to  be  a  real  deformity.  I
cannot,  nor  is  it  proper  I  should,  enter  into  such  sentiments  ;
and  however  I  may  excuse  the  poet,  on  account  of  the  man
ners  of  his  age,  I  never  can  relish  the  composition.  The
\vant  of  humanity  and  of  decency,  so  conspicuous  in  the
characters  drawn  by  several  of  the  ancient  poets,  even  some
times  by  HOMER  and  the  GREEK  tragedians,  diminishes  con
siderably  the  merit  of  their  noble  performances,  and  gives


OF  THE  STANDARD  OF  TASTE.  283

modern  authors  an  advantage  over  them.  We  are  not  in
terested  in  the  fortunes  and  sentiments  of  such  rough  heroes  :
We  are  displeased  to  find  the  limits  of  vice  and  virtue  so
much  confounded  :  And  whatever  indulgence  we  may  give  to
the  writer  on  account  of  his  prej  udices,  we  cannot  prevail  011
ourselves  to  enter  into  his  sentiments,  or  bear  an  affection  to
characters,  which  we  plainly  discover  to  be  blameable.

The  case  is  not  the  same  with  moral  principles,  as  with  \
speculative  opinions  of  any  kind.  These  are  in  continual  !
flux  and  revolution.  The  son  embraces  a  different  system
from  the  father.  Nay,  there  scarcely  is  any  man,  who  can
boast  of  great  constancy  and  uniformity  in  this  particular.
Whatever  speculative  errors  may  be  found  in  the  polite
writings  of  any  age  or  country,  they  detract  but  little  from
the  value  of  those  compositions.  There  needs  but  a  certain
turn  of  thought  or  imagination  to  make  us  enter  into  all  the
opinions,  which  then  prevailed,  and  relish  the  sentiments  or
conclusions  derived  from  them.  But  a  very  violent  effort  is
requisite  to  change  our  judgment  of  manners,  and  excite  sen
timents  of  approbation  or  blame,  love  or  hatred,  different  from
those  to  which  the  mind  from  long  custom  has  been  familiar
ized.  And  where  a  man  is  confident  of  the  rectitude  of  that
moral  standard,  by  which  he  judges,  he  is  justly  jealous  of  it,
and  will  not  pervert  the  sentiments  of  his  heart  for  a  moment,
in  complaisance  to  any  writer  whatsoever.

Of  all  speculative  errors,  those,  which  regard  religion,  are
the  most  excusable  in  compositions  of  genius ;  nor  is  it  ever
permitted  to  judge  of  the  civility  or  wisdom  of  any  people,  or
even  of  single  persons,  by  the  grossness  or  refinement  of  their
theological  principles.  The  same  good  sense,  that  directs
men  in  the  ordinary  occurrences  of  life,  is  not  hearkened  to
in  religious  matters,  which  are  supposed  to  be  placed  alto
gether  above  the  cognizance  of  human  reason.  On  this  ac
count,  all  the  absurdities  of  the  pagan  system  of  theology
must  be  overlooked  by  every  critic,  who  would  pretend  to
form  a  just  notion  of  ancient  poetry ;  and  our  posterity,  in
their  turn,  must  have  the  same  indulgence  to  their  fore
fathers.  No  religious  principles  can  ever  be  imputed  as  a
fault  to  any  poet,  while  they  remain  merely  principles,  and
take  not  such  strong  possession  of  his  heart,  as  to  lay  him
under  the  imputation  of  bigotry  or  superstition.  Where  that
happens,  they  confound  the  sentiments  of  morality,  and  alter


284  ESSAY  XXIII.

the  natural  boundaries  of  vice  and  virtue.  They  are  there
fore  eternal  blemishes,  according  to  the  principle  above  men
tioned;  nor  are  the  prejudices  and  false  opinions  of  the  age
sufficient  to  justify  them.

It  is  essential  to  the  ROMAN  catholic  religion  to  inspire  a
violent  hatred  of  every  other  worship,  and  to  represent  all
pagans,  niahometans,  and  heretics  as  the  objects  of  divine
wrath  and  vengeance.  Such  sentiments,  though  they  are  in
reality  very  blameable,  are  considered  as  virtues  by  the  zea
lots  of  that  communion,  and  are  represented  in  their  trage
dies  and  epic  poems  as  a  kind  of  divine  heroism.  This  bigotry
has  disfigured  two  very  fine  tragedies  of  the  FRENCH  theatre.
POLIEUCTE  and  ATHALIA  ;  where  an  intemperate  zeal  for  par
ticular  modes  of  worship  is  set  off  with  all  the  pomp  imagi
nable,  and  forms  the  predominant  character  of  the  heroes.
'  What  is  this,'  says  the  sublime  JOAD  to  JOSABET,  finding  her
in  discourse  with  MATHAN,  the  priest  of  BAAL,  '  Does  the
daughter  of  DAVID  speak  to  this  traitor  ?  Are  you  not  afraid,
lest  the  earth  should  open  and  pour  forth  flames  to  devour
you  both  ?  Or  lest  these  holy  walls  should  fall  and  crush
you  together?  What  is  his  purpose?  Why  comes  that
enemy  of  God  hither  to  poison  the  air,  which  we  breathe,
with  his  horrid  presence  ? '  Such  sentiments  are  received
with  great  applause  on  the  theatre  of  PAKIS  ;  but  at  LONDON
the  spectators  would  be  full  as  much  pleased  to  hear
ACHILLES  tell  AGAMEMNON,  that  he  was  a  dog  in  his  forehead,
and  a  deer  in  his  heart,  or  JUPITER  threaten  JUNO  with  a
sound  drubbing,  if  she  will  not  be  quiet.

RELIGIOUS  principles  are  also  a  blemish  in  any  polite  com
position,  when  they  rise  up  to  superstition,  and  intrude
themselves  into  every  sentiment,  however  remote  from  any
connection  with  religion.  It  is  no  excuse  for  the  poet,  that
the  customs  of  his  country  had  burthened  life  with  so  many
religious  ceremonies  and  observances,  that  no  part  of  it  was
exempt  from  that  yoke.  It  must  for  ever  be  ridiculous  in
PETRARCH  to  compare  his  mistress  LAURA,  to  JESUS  CHRIST.
Nor  is  it  less  ridiculous  in  that  agreeable  libertine,  BOCCACE,
very  seriously  to  give  thanks  to  GOD  ALMIGHTY  and  the
ladies,  for  their  assistance  in  defending  him  against  his
enemies.


ESSAYS,


AND


LITERARY.


PART IV


•  PUBLISHED  in  1752. [This  Note  was  first  given  in  Edition  M.]


ESSAYS.
PAKT  II.

ESSAY  I. — Of  Commerce.

THE  greater  part  of  mankind  may  be  divided  into  two
classes ;  that  of  shallow  thinkers,  who  fall  short  of  the  tnith,
and  that  of  abstruse  thinkers,  who  go  beyond  it.  The  latter
class  are  by  far  the  most  rare ;  arid  I  may  add,  by  far  the
msot  useful  and  valuable.  They  suggest  hints,  at  least,  and
start  difficulties,  which  they  want,  perhaps,  skill  to  pursue  ;
but  which  may  produce  fine  discoveries,  when  handled  by
men  who  have  a  more  just  way  of  thinking.  At  worst,  what
they  say  is  uncommon ;  and  if  it  should  cost  some  pains  to
comprehend  it,  one  has,  however,  the  pleasure  of  hearing
something  that  is  new.  An  author  is  little  to  be  valued,
who  tells  us  nothing  but  what  we  can  learn  from  every  coffee
house  conversation.

All  people  of  shallow  thought  are  apt  to  decry  even  those
of  solid  understanding,  as  abstruse  thinkers,  and  metaphy
sicians,  and  refiners ;  and  never  will  allow  any  thing  to  be
just  which  is  beyond  their  own  weak  conceptions.  There
are  some  cases,  I  own,  where  an  extraordinary  refinement
affords  a  strong  presumption  of  falsehood,  and  where  no
reasoning  is  to  be  trusted  but  what  is  natural  and  easy.
When  a  man  deliberates  concerning  his  conduct  in  any  par
ticular  affair,  and  forms  schemes  in  politics,  trade,  ceconomy,
or  any  business  in  life,  he  never  ought  to  draw  his  argu
ments  too  fine,  or  connect  too  long  a  chain  of  consequences
together.  Something  is  svire  to  happen,  that  will  disconcert
his  reasoning,  and  produce  an  event  different  from  what  he


288  ESSAY  I.

expected.  But  when  we  reason  upon  general  subjects,  one
may  justly  affirm,  that  our  speculations  can  scarcely  ever  be
too  fine,  provided  they  be  just ;  and  that  the  difference  be
tween  a  common  man  and  a  man  of  genius  is  chiefly  seen  in
the  shallowness  or  depth  of  the  principles  upon  which  they
proceed.  General  reasonings  seem  intricate,  merely  because
they  are  general ;  nor  is  it  easy  for  the  bulk  of  mankind  to
distinguish,  in  a  great  number  of  particulars,  that  common
circumstance  in  which  they  all  agree,  or  to  extract  it,  pure
and  unmixed,  from  the  other  superfluous  circumstances.
Every  judgment  or  conclusion,  with  them,  is  particular.
They  cannot  enlarge  their  view  to  those  universal  propo
sitions,  which  comprehend  under  them  an  infinite  number
of  individuals,  and  include  a  whole  science  in  a  single
theorem.  Their  eye  is  confounded  with  such  an  extensive
prospect ;  and  the  conclusions,  derived  from  it,  even  though
clearly  expressed,  seem  intricate  and  obscure.  But  however
intricate  they  may  seem,  it  is  certain,  that  general  principles,
if  just  and  sound,  must  always  prevail  in  the  general  course
of  things,  though  they  may  fail  in  particular  cases  ;  and  it  is
the  chief  business  of  philosophers  to  regard  the  general
course  of  things.  I  may  add,  that  it  is  also  the  chief  busi
ness  of  politicians  ;  especially  in.  the  domestic  government
of  the  state,  where  the  public  good,  which  is,  or  ought  to  be
their  object,  depends  on  the  concurrence  of  a  multitude  of
causes  ;  not,  as  in  foreign  politics,  on  accidents  and  chances,
and  the  caprices  of  a  few  persons.  This  therefore  makes  the
difference  between  particular  deliberations  and  general  reason-
in  gs,  and  renders  subtility  and  refinement  much  more  suit
able  to  the  latter  than  to  the  former.

I  thought  this  introduction  necessary  before  the  following
discourses  '  on  commerce,  money,  interest,  balance  of  trade,  &c.
where,  perhaps,  there  will  occur  some  principles  which  are
uncommon,  and  which  may  seem  too  refined  and  subtile  for
such  vulgar  subjects.  If  false,  let  them  be  rejected:  But
no  one  ought  to  entertain  a  prejudice  against  them,  merely
because  they  are  out  of  the  common  road.

The  greatness  of  a  state,  and  the  happiness  of  its  subjects,
how  independent  soever  they  maybe  supposed  in  some  respects,
are  commonly  allowed  to  be  inseparable  with  regard  to  com
merce  ;  and  as  private  men  receive  greater  security,  in  the

1  [On  commerce,  luxury,  money,  interest,  &c.  Editions  H  to  M.]


OF COMMERCE.  289

possession  of  tlieir  trade  and  riches,  from  tlie  power  of  the
public,  so  the  public  becomes  powerful  in  proportion  to  the
opulence  and  extensive  commerce-  of  private  men.  This
maxim  is  true  in  general ;  though  I  cannot  forbear  thinking,
that  it  may  possibly  admit  of  exceptions,  and  that  we  often
establish  it  with  too  little  reserve  and  limitation.  There  may
be  some  circumstances,  where  the  commerce  and  riches  and
luxury  of  individuals,  instead  of  adding  strength  to  the
public,  will  serve  only  to  thin  its  armies,  and  diminish  its
authority  among  the  neighbouring  nations.  Man  is  a  very
variable  being,  and  susceptible  of  many  different  opinions,
principles,  and  rules  of  conduct.  What  may  be  true,  while
he  adheres  to  one  way  of  thinking,  will  be  found  false,  when
he  has  embraced  an  opposite  set  of  manners  and  opinions.

The  bulk  of  every  state  may  be  divided  into  husbandmen
and  manufacturers.  The  former  are  employed  in  the  culture
of  the  land ;  the  latter  work  up  the  materials  furnished  by
the  former,  into  all  the  commodities  which  are  necessary  or
ornamental  to  human  life.  As  soon  as  men  quit  their  savage
state,  where  they  live  chiefly  by  hunting  and  fishing,  they
must  fall  into  these  two  classes ;  though  the  arts  of  agricul
ture  employ  at  first  the  most  numerous  part  of  the  society.1
Time  and  experience  improve  so  much  these  arts,  that  the
land  may  easily  maintain  a  much  greater  number  of  men,
than  those  who  are  immediately  employed  in  its  culture,  or
who  furnish  the  more  necessary  manufactures  to  such  as  are
so  employed.

If  these  superfluous  hands  apply  themselves  to  the  finer
arts,  which  are  commonly  denominated  the  arts  of  luxury,
they  add  to  the  happiness  of  the  state  ;  since  they  afford  to
many  the  opportunity  of  receiving  enjoyments,  with  which
they  would  otherwise  have  been  unacquainted.  But  may  not
another  scheme  be  proposed  for  the  employment  of  these
superfluous  hands  ?  May  not  the  sovereign  lay  claim  to  them,
and  employ  them  in  fleets  and  armies,  to  encrease  the  domin
ions  of  the  state  abroad,  and  spread  its  fame  over  distant
nations  ?  It  is  certain  that  the  fewer  desires  and  wants  are

1  Mons.  MELON,  in  his  political  essay  calculation  is  certainly  very  erroneous,

on  commerce,  asserts,  that  even  at  pre-  In  FRANCE,  ENGLAND,  and  indeed  most

sent,  if  you  divide  FRANCE  into  20  parts,  parts  of  EUROPE,  half  of  the  inhabitants

16  are  labourers  or  peasants  ;  two  only  live  in  cities  ;  and  even  of  those  who

artizans  ; one belonging to the law,  live  in  the  country,  a  great  number  are

church,  and military  ; and one mer-  artizans,  perhaps  above  a  third,
chants,  financiers,  and  bourgeois. This

VOL. III.  U


290  ESSAY I.

found  in  the  proprietors  and  labourers  of  land,  the  fewer
hands  do  they  employ ;  and  consequently  the  superfluities  of
the  land,  instead  of  maintaining  tradesmen  and  manufac
turers,  may  support  fleets  and  armies  to  a  much  greater
extent,  than  where  a  great  many  arts  are  required  to  minister
to  the  luxury  of  particular  persons.  Here  therefore  seems  to  be
a  kind  of  opposition  between  the  greatness  of  the  state  and
the  happiness  of  the  subject.  A  state  is  never  greater  than
when  all  its  superfluous  hands  are  employed  in  the  service  of
the  public.  The  ease  and  convenience  of  private  persons
require,  that  these  hands  should  be  employed  in  their  service.
The  one  can  never  be  satisfied,  but  at  the  expence  of  the
other.  As  the  ambition  of  the  sovereign  must  entrench  on
the  luxury  of  individuals ;  so  the  luxury  of  individuals  must
diminish  the  force,  and  check  the  ambition  of  the  sovereign.
Nor  is  this  reasoning  merely  chimerical ;  but  is  founded  on
history  and  experience.  The  republic  of  SPAKTA  was  cer
tainly  more  powerful  than  any  state  now  in  the  world,  con
sisting  of  an  equal  number  of  people ;  and  this  was  owing
entirely  to  the  want  of  commerce  and  luxury.  The  HELOTES
were  the  labourers :  The  SPARTANS  were  the  soldiers  or  gen
tlemen.  It  is  evident,  that  the  labour  of  the  HELOTES  could
not  have  maintained  so  great  a  number  of  SPARTANS,  had
these  latter  lived  in  ease  and  delicacy,  and  given  employment
to  a  great  variety  of  trades  and  manufactures.  The  like
policy  may  be  remarked  in  ROME.  And  indeed,  throughout
all  ancient  history,  it  is  observable,  that  the  smallest  repub
lics  raised  and  maintained  greater  armies,  than  states  con
sisting  of  triple  the  number  of  inhabitants,  are  able  to  support
at  present.  It  is  computed,  that,  in  all  EUROPEAN  nations,
the  proportion  between  soldiers  and  people  does  not  exceed
one  to  a  hundred.  But  we  read,  that  the  city  of  ROME  alone,
with  its  small  territory,  raised  and  maintained,  in  early  times,
ten  legions  against  the  LATINS.  ATHENS,  the  whole  of  whose
dominions  was  not  larger  than  YORKSHIRE,  sent  to  the  expe
dition  against  SICILY  near  forty  thousand  men.1  DIONYSIUS
the  elder,  it  is  said,  maintained  a  standing  army  of  a  hundred
thousand  foot  and  ten  thousand  horse,  besides  a  large  fleet
of  four  hundred  sail;2  though  his  territories  extended  no

1  THUCYDIDES,  lib.  vii.  75.  say  worse ;  chiefly  because this  army

2  DIOD.  Sic.  Jib.  ii.  5. This  account, was  not  composed  of  citizens, but  of
I  own,  is  somewhat  suspicious,  not  to mercenary  forces.


OF COMMERCE.  291

farther  than  the  city  of  SYEACUSE,  about  a  third  of  the
island  of  SICILY,  and  some  sea-port  towns  and  garrisons  on
the  coast  of  ITALY  and  ILLYRICUM.  It  is  true,  the  ancient
armies,  in  time  of  war,  subsisted  much  upon  plunder :  But
did  not  the  enemy  plunder  in  their  turn  ?  which  was  a  more
ruinous  way  of  levying  a  tax,  than  any  other  that  could  be
devised.  In  short,  no  probable  reason  can  be  assigned  for
the  great  power  of  the  more  ancient  states  above  -the  modern,
but  their  want  of  commerce  and  luxury.  Few  artizaris  were
maintained  by  the  labour  of  the  farmers,  and  therefore  more
soldiers  might  live  upon  it.  LIVY  says,  that  EOME,  in  his
time,  would  find  it  difficult  to  raise  as  large  an  army  as  that
which,  in  her  early  days,  she  sent  out  against  the  GAULS  and^
LATINS.1  Instead  of  those  soldiers  who  fought  for  liberty
and  empire  in  CAMILLUS'S  time,  there  were,  in  AUGUSTUS'S
days,  musicians,  painters,  cooks,  players,  and  tailors ;  and  if
the  land  was  equally  cultivated  at  both  periods,  it  could  cer
tainly  maintain  equal  numbers  in  the  one  profession  as  in  the
other.  They  added  nothing  to  the  mere  necessaries  of  life,
in  the  latter  period  more  than  in  the  former.

It  is  natural  on  this  occasion  to  ask,  whether  sovereigns
may  not  return  to  the  maxims  of  ancient  policy,  and  consult
their  own  interest  in  this  respect,  more  than  the  happiness  of
their  subjects  ?  I  answer,  that  it  appears  to  me,  almost  im
possible  ;  and  that  because  ancient  policy  was  violent,  and
contrary  to  the  more  natural  and  usual  course  of  things.  It
is  well  known  with  what  peculiar  laws  SPARTA  was  governed,
and  what  a  prodigy  that  republic  is  justly  esteemed  by  every
one,  who  has  considered  human  nature  as  it  has  displayed
itself  in  other  nations,  and  other  ages.  Were  the  testimony
of  history  less  positive  and  circumstantial,  such  a  government
would  appear  a  mere  philosophical  whim  or  fiction,  and  im
possible  ever  to  be  reduced  to  practice.  And  though  the
ROMAN  and  other  ancient  republics  were  supported  on  prin
ciples  somewhat  more  natural,  yet  was  there  an  extraordinary
concurrence  of  circumstances  to  make  them  submit  to  such
grievous  burthens.  They  were  free  states  ;  they  were  small
ones ;  arid  the  age  being  martial,  all  their  neighbours  were
continually  in  arms.  Freedom  naturally  begets  public  spirit,
especially  in  small  states ;  and  this  public  spirit,  this  amor

1  TITI  LIVII,  lib.  rii.  cap.  25.  '  Adeo  in  quse  laboramus,'  says  he, '  sola  crevimus,
divitias  luxuriemque.'

u  2


patrice,  must  encrease,  when  the  public  is  almost  in  continual
alarm,  and  men  are  obliged,  every  moment,  to  expose  them
selves  to  the  greatest  dangers  for  its  defence.  A  continual
succession  of  wars  makes  every  citizen  a  soldier :  He  takes
the  field  in  his  turn :  And  during  his  service  he  is  chiefly
maintained  by  himself.  This  service  is  indeed  equivalent  to
a  heavy  tax  ;  yet  is  it  less  felt  by  a  people  addicted  to  arms*,
who  fight  for  honour  and  revenge  more  than  pay,  and  are  un
acquainted  with  gain  and  industry  as  well  as  pleasure.1  Not
to  mention  the  great  equality  of  fortunes  among  the  inhabit
ants  of  the  ancient  republics,  where  every  field,  belonging  to
a  different  proprietor,  was  able  to  maintain  a  family,  and  ren
dered  the  numbers  of  citizens  very  considerable,  even  without
trade  and  manufactures.

But  though  the  want  of  trade  and  manufactures,  amon<;
a  free  and  very  martial  people,  may  sometimes  have  no  other
effect  than  to  render  the  public  more  powerful,  it  is  certain,
that,  in  the  common  course  of  human  affairs,  it  will  have  a
quite  contrary  tendency.  Sovereigns  must  take  mankind  as
they  find  them,  and  cannot  pretend  to  introduce  any  violent
change  in  their  principles  and  ways  of  thinking.  A  long
course  of  time,  with  a  variety  of  accidents  and  circumstances,
are  requisite  to  produce  those  great  revolutions,  which  so
much  diversify  the  face  of  human  affairs.  And  the  less
natural  any  set  of  principles  are,  which  support  a  particular
society,  the  more  difficulty  will  a  legislator  meet  with  in
raising  and  cultivating  them.  It  is  his  best  policy  to  com
ply  with  the  common  bent  of  mankind,  and  give  it  all  the
improvements  of  which  it  is  susceptible.  Now,  according  to
the  most  natural  course  of  things,  industry  and  arts  and

1  The  more  antient  ROMANS  lived  in  consistent with the most common

perpetual war with all their neigh-  maxims of  policy  or of  nature, that

Lours  : and  in old LATIN,  the  term,  any  state  should  regard  its  public  ene-

hostis,  expressed  both  a  stranger  and  an  mies  with  a friendly  eye,  or  preserve

enemy. This  is  remarked  by  CICERO  ;  any  such  sentiments for  them  as  the

but  by  him  is  ascribed  to  the  humanity  ROMAN  orator  would  ascribe  to  his  an-

of  his  ancestors,  who  softened,  as  much  cestors. Not  to  mention,  that  the  early

as possible, the denomination of  an  ROMANS  really  exercised  piracy,  as  we

enemy, by  calling him by the same  learn  from  their  first  treaties  with  CAK-

appellation  which  signified  a  stranger.  THAGK,  preserved  by  POLYBIUS,  lib. 3,

De  Off.  lib.  i. 12. 'Tis however  much  and  consequently  like  the  SAI.LEE  and

more  probable,  from  the  manners  of  the  AI.OERINE  rovers,  were  actually  at  war

times,  that  the  ferocity  of  those  people  with  most  nations,  and  a  stranger  and

was  so  great  as  to  make  them  regard  an enemy were with them almost

all  strangers  as  enemies,  and  call  them  synonymous,
by  the  same  name. It  is  not,  besides,


OF  COMMERCE.  293

trade  encrease  the  power  of  the  sovereign  as  well  as  the
happiness  of  the  subjects ;  and  that  policy  is  violent,  which
aggrandises  the  public  by  the  poverty  of  individuals.  This
will  easily  appear  from  a  few  considerations,  which  will  pre
sent  to  us  the  consequences  of  sloth  and  barbarity.

Where  manufactures  and  mechanic  arts  are  not  cultivated,
the  bulk  of  the  people  must  apply  themselves  to  agriculture ;
and  if  their  skill  and  industry  encrease,  there  must  arise  a
great  superfluity  from  their  labour  beyond  what  suffices  to-
maintain  them.  They  have  no  temptation,  therefore,  to  en-
crease  their  skill  and  industry ;  since  they  cannot  exchange
that  superfluity  for  any  commodities,  which  may  serve  either
to  their  pleasure  or  vanity.  A  habit  of  indolence  naturally
prevails.  The  greater  part  of  the  land  lies  uncultivated.
What  is  cultivated,  yields  not  its  utmost  for  want  of  skill  and
assiduity  in  the  farmers.  If  at  any  time  the  public  exigencies
require,  that  great  numbers  should  be  employed  in  the  public
service,  the  labour  of  the  people  furnishes  now  no  superfluities,
by  which  these  numbers  can  be  maintained.  The  labourers
cannot  encrease  their  skill  and  industry  on  a  sudden.  Lands
uncultivated  cannot  be  brought  into  tillage  for  some  years.
The  armies,  mean  while,  must  either  make  sudden  and
violent  conquests,  or  disband  for  want  of  subsistence.  A
regular  attack  or  defence,  therefore,  is  not  to  be  expected
from  such  a  people,  and  their  soldiers  must  be  as  ignorant  and
unskilful  as  their  farmers  and  manufacturers.

Every  thing  in  the  world  is  purchased  by  labour ;  and  our
passions  are  the  only  causes  of  labour.  When  a  nation
abounds  in  manufactures  and  mechanic  arts,  the  proprietors
of  land,  as  well  as  the  farmers,  study  agriculture  as  a  science,
and  redouble  their  industry  and  attention.  The  superfluity,
which  arises  from  their  labour,  is  not  lost ;  but  is  exchanged
with  manufactures  for  those  commodities,  which  men's  luxury
now  makes  them  covet.  By  this  means,  land  furnishes  a
great  deal  more  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  than  what  suffices
for  those  who  cultivate  it.  In  times  of  peace  and  traii-
quility,  this  superfluity  goes  to  the  maintenance  of  manu
facturers,  and  the  improvers  of  liberal  arts.  But  it  is  easy
for  the  public  to  convert  many  of  these  manufacturers  into
soldiers,  and  maintain  them  by  that  superfluity,  which  arises
from  the  labour  of  the  farmers.  Accordingly  we  find,-  that
this  is  the  case  in  all  civilized  governments.  When  the


294  ESSAY I.

sovereign  raises  an  army,  what  is  the  consequence  ?  He  im
poses  a  tax.  This  tax  obliges  all  the  people  to  retrench  what
is  least  necessary  to  their  subsistence.  Those,  who  labour  in
such  commodities,  must  either  enlist  in  the  troops,  or  turn
themselves  to  agriculture,  and  thereby  oblige  some  labourers
to  enlist  for  want  of  business.  And  to  consider  the  matter
abstractedly,  manufacturers  encrease  the  power  of  the  state
only  as  they  store  up  so  much  labour,  and  that  of  a  kind  to
which  the  public  may  lay  claim,  without  depriving  any  one
of  the  necessaries  of  life.  The  more  labour,  therefore,  is
employed  beyond  mere  necessaries,  the  more  powerful  is  any
state  ;  since  the  persons  engaged  in  that  labour  may  easily
be  converted  to  the  public  service.  In  a  state  without  manu
facturers,  there  may  be  the  same  number  of  hands ;  but  there
is  not  the  same  quantity  of  labour,  nor  of  the  same  kind.  All
the  labour  is  there  bestowed  upon  necessaries,  which  can
admit  of  little  or  no  abatement.

Thus  the  greatness  of  the  sovereign  and  the  happiness  of
the  state  are,  in  a  great  measure,  united  with  regard  to  trade
and  manufactures.  It  is  a  violent  method,  and  in  most  cases
impracticable,  to  oblige  the  labourer  to  toil,  in  order  to  raise
from  the  land  more  than  what  subsists  himself  and  family.
Furnish  him  with  manufactures  and  commodities,  and  he  will
do  it  of  himself.  Afterwards  you  will  find  it  easy  to  seize
some  part  of  his  superfluous  labour,  and  employ  it  in  the
public  service,  without  giving  him  his  wonted  return.  Being
accustomed  to  industry,  he  will  think  this  less  grievous,  than
if,  at  once,  you  obliged  him  to  an  augmentation  of  labour
without  any  reward.  The  case  is  the  same  with  regard  to
the  other  members  of  the  state.  The  greater  is  the  stock  of
labour  of  all  kinds,  the  greater  quantity  may  be  taken  from
the  heap,  without  making  any  sensible  alteration  in  it.

A  public  granary  of  corn,  a  storehouse  of  cloth,  a  maga
zine  of  arms ;  all  these  must  be  allowed  real  riches  and
strength  in  any  state.  Trade  and  industry  are  really  nothing
but  a  stock  of  labour,  which,  in  times  of  peace  and  tran
quillity,  is  employed  for  the  ease  and  satisfaction  of  indi
viduals  ;  but  in  the  exigencies  of  state,  may,  in  part,  be
turned  to  public  advantage.  Could  we  convert  a  city  into  a
kind  of  fortified  camp,  and  infuse  into  each  breast  so  martial
a  genius,  and  such  a  passion  for  public  good,  as  to  make
every  one  willing  to  undergo  the  greatest  hardships  for  the


OF  COMMERCE.  295

sake  of  the  public ;  these  affections  might  now,  as  in  ancient
times,  prove  alone  a  sufficient  spur  to  industry,  and  support
the  community.  It  would  then  -be  advantageous,  as  in
camps,  to  banish  all  arts  and  luxury ;  and,  by  restrictions
on  equipage  and  tables,  make  the  provisions  and  forage  last
longer  than  if  the  army  were  loaded  with  a  number  of  super
fluous  retainers.  But  as  these  principles  are  too  disinterested
and  too  difficult  to  support,  it  is  requisite  to  govern  men  by
other  passions,  and  animate  them  with  a  spirit  of  avarice  and
industry,  art  and  luxury.  The  camp  is,  in  this  case,  loaded
with  a  superfluous  retinue ;  but  the  provisions  flow  in  pro-
portionably  larger.  The  harmony  of  the  whole  is  still  sup
ported  ;  and  the  natural  bent  of  the  mind  being  more  com
plied  with,  individuals,  as  well  as  the  public,  find  their
account  in  the  observance  of  those  maxims.

The  same  method  of  reasoning  will  let  us  see  the  advan
tage  of  foreign  commerce,  in  augmenting  the  power  of  the
state,  as  well  as  the  riches  and  happiness  of  the  subject.  It
encreases  the  stock  of  labour  in  the  nation  ;  and  the  sovereign
may  convert  what  share  of  it  he  finds  necessary  to  the  ser
vice  of  the  public.  Foreign  trade,  by  its  imports,  furnishes
materials  for  new  manufactures ;  and  by  its  exports,  it  pro
duces  labour  in  particular  commodities,  which  could  not  be
consumed  at  home.  In  short,  a  kingdom,  that  has  a  large
import  and  export,  must  abound  more  with  industry,  and
that  employed  upon  delicacies  and  luxuries,  than  a  kingdom
which  rests  contented  with  its  native  commodities.  It  is,
therefore,  more  powerful,  as  well  as  richer  and  happier.  The
individuals  reap  the  benefit  of  these  commodities,  so  far  as
they  gratify  the  senses  and  appetites.  And  the  public  is
also  a  gainer,  while  a  greater  stock  of  labour  is,  by  this
means,  stored  up  against  any  public  exigency;  that  is,  a
greater  number  of  laborious  men  are  maintained,  who  may
be  diverted  to  the  public  service,  without  robbing  any  one  of
the  necessaries,  or  even  the  chief  conveniencies  of  life.

If  we  consult  history,  we  shall  find,  that,  in  most  nations,
foreign  trade  has  preceded  any  refinement  in  home  manufac
tures,  and  given  birth  to  domestic  luxury.  The  temptation  is
stronger  to  make  use  of  foreign  commodities,  which  are
ready  for  use,  and  which  are  entirely  new  to  us,  than  to
make  improvements  on  any  domestic  commodity,  which
always  advance  by  slow  degrees,  and  never  affect  us  by  their


203  ESSAY  I.

novelty.  The  profit  is  also  very  great,  in  exporting  what  is
superfluous  at  home,  and  what  bears  no  price,  to  foreign
nations,  whose  soil  or  climate  is  not  favourable  to  that  com
modity.  Thus  men  become  acquainted  with  the  pleasures  of
luxury  and  the  profits  of  commerce ;  and  their  delicacy  and
industry,  being  once  awakened,  carry  them  on  to  farther  im
provements,  in  every  branch  of  domestic  as  well  as  foreign
trade.  And  this  perhaps  is  the  chief  advantage  which  arises
from  a  commerce  with  strangers.  It  rouses  men  from  their
indolence  ;  and  presenting  the  gayer  and  more  opulent  part
of  the  nation  with  objects  of  luxury,  which  they  never  before
dreamed  of,  raises  in  them  a  desire  of  a  more  splendid  way  of
life  than  what  their  ancestors  enjoyed.  And  at  the  same
time,  the  few  merchants,  who  possess  the  secret  of  this  im
portation  and  exportation,  make  great  profits  ;  and  becoming
rivals  in  wealth  to  the  ancient  nobility,  tempt  other  adven
turers  to  become  their  rivals  in  commerce.  Imitation  soon
diffuses  all  those  arts  ;  while  domestic  manufactures  emulate
the  foreign  in  their  improvements,  and  work  up  every  home
commodity  to  the  utmost  perfection  of  which  it  is  suscepti
ble.  Their  own  steel  and  iron,  in  such  laborious  hands,  be
come  equal  to  the  gold  and  rubies  of  the  INDIES.

When  the  affairs  of  the  society  are  once  brought  to  this
situation,  a  nation  may  lose  most  of  its  foreign  trade,  and
yet  continue  a  great  and  powerful  people.  If  strangers  will
not  take  any  particular  commodity  of  ours,  we  must  cease  to
labour  in  it.  The  same  hands  will  turn  themselves  towards
some  refinement  in  other  commodities,  which  maybe  wanted
at  home.  And  there  must  always  be  materials  for  them  to
work  upon ;  till  every  person  in  the  state,  who  possesses
riches,  enjoys  as  great  plenty  of  home  commodities,  and
those  in  as  great  perfection,  as  he  desires ;  which  can  never
possibly  happen.  CHINA  is  represented  as  one  of  the  most
flourishing  empires  in  the  world ;  though  it  has  very  little
commerce  beyond  its  own  territories.

It  will  not,  I  hope,  be  considered  as  a  superfluous  digres
sion,  if  I  here  observe,  that,  as  the  multitude  of  mechanical
arts  is  advantageous,  so  is  the  great  number  of  persons  to
whose  share  the  productions  of  these  arts  fall.  A  too  great
disproportion  among  the  citizens  weakens  any  state.  Every
person,  if  possible,  ought  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  labour,  in
a  full  possession  of  all  the  necessaries,  and  many  of  the  con-


OF COMMERCE.  207

veniencies  of  life.  No  one  can  doubt,  but  such  an  equality
is  most  suitable  to  human  nature,  and  diminishes  much  less
from  the  happiness  of  the  rich  thail  it  acids  to  that  of  the
poor.  It  also  augments  the  power,  of  the  state,  and  makes
any  extraordinary  taxes  or  impositions  be  paid  with  more
chearfulness.  Where  the  riches  are  engrossed  by  a  few,
these  must  contribute  very  largely  to  the  supplying  of  the
public  necessities.  But  when  the  riches  are  dispersed  among
multitudes,  the  burthen  feels  light  on  every  shoulder,  and
the  taxes  make  not  a  very  sensible  difference  on  any  one's
way  of  living.

Add  to  this,  that,  where  the  riches  are  in  few  hands,  these
must  enjoy  all  the  power,  and  will  readily  conspire  to  lay  the
whole  burthen  on  the  poor,  and  oppress  them  still  farther,  to
the  discouragement  of  all  industry.

In  this  circumstance  consists  the  great  advantage  of  ENG
LAND  above  any  nation  at  present  in  the  world,  or  that
appears  in  the  records  of  any  story.  It  is  true,  the  ENGLISH
feel  some  disadvantages  in  foreign  trade  by  the  high  price  of
labour,  which  is  in  part  the  effect  of  the  riches  of  their  arti
sans,  as  well  as  of  the  plenty  of  money :  But  as  foreign
trade  is  not  the  most  material  circumstance,  it  is  not  to  be
put  in  competition  with  the  happiness  of  so  many  millions.
And  if  there  were  no  more  to  endear  to  them  that  free
government  under  which  they  live,  this  alone  were  sufficient.
The  poverty  of  the  common  people  is  a  natural,  if  not  an
infallible  effect  of  absolute  monarchy ;  though  I  doubt,
whether  it  be  always  true,  on  the  other  hand,  that  their
riches  are  an  infallible  result  of  liberty.  Liberty  must  be
attended  with  particular  accidents,  and  a  certain  turn  of
thinking,  in  order  to  produce  that  effect.  Lord  BACON,  ac
counting  for  the  great  advantages  obtained  by  the  ENGLISH
in  their  wars  with  FKANCE,  ascribes  them  chiefly  to  the
superior  ease  and  plenty  of  the  common  people  amongst  the
former ;  yet  the  government  of  the  two  kingdoms  was,  at
that  time,  pretty  much  alike.  Where  the  labourers  and
artisans  are  accustomed  to  work  for  low  wages,  and  to  retain
but  a  small  part  of  the  fruits  of  their  labour,  it  is  difficult
for  them,  even  in  a  free  government,  to  better  their  con
dition,  or  conspire  among  themselves  to  heighten  their
wages.  But  even  where  they  are  accustomed  to  a  more
plentiful  way  of  life,  it  is  easy  for  the  rich,  in  an  arbitrary


298  ESSAY  I.

government,  to  conspire  against  them,  and  throw  the  whole
burthen  of  the  taxes  on  their  shoulders.

It  may  seem  an  odd  position,  that  the  poverty  of  the
common  people  in  FKANCE,  ITALY,  and  SPAIN,  is,  in  some
measure,  owing  to  the  superior  riches  of  the  soil  and  happi-
xiess  of  the  climate ;  yet  there  want  not  reasons  to  justify
this  pa,radox.  In  such  a  fine  mould  or  soil  as  that  of  those
more  southern  regions,  agriculture  is  an  easy  art ;  and  one
man,  with  a  couple  of  sorry  horses,  will  be  able,  in  a  season,
to  cultivate  as  much  land  as  will  pay  a  pretty  considerable
rent  to  the  proprietor.  All  the  art,  which  the  farmer  knows,
is  to  leave  his  ground  fallow  for  a  year,  as  soon  as  it  is  ex
hausted  ;  and  the  warmth  of  the  sun  alone  and  temperature
of  the  climate  enrich  it,  and  restore  its  fertility.  Such  poor
peasants,  therefore,  require  only  a  simple  maintenance  for
their  labour.  They  have  no  stock  or  riches,  which  claim
more ;  and  at  the  same  time  they  are  for  ever  dependent  on
their  landlord,  who  gives  no  leases,  nor  fears  that  his  land
Avill  be  spoiled  by  the  ill  methods  of  cultivation.  In  ENG
LAND,  the  land  is  rich,  but  coarse  ;  must  be  cultivated  at  a
great  expense  ;  and  produces  slender  crops,  when  not  care
fully  managed,  and  by  a  method  which  gives  not  the  full
profit  but  in  a  course  of  several  years.  A  farmer,  therefore,
in  ENGLAND  must  have  a  considerable  stock,  and  a  long  lease  ;
which  beget  proportional  profits.  The  fine  vineyards  of
CHAMPAGNE  and  BURGUNDY,  that  often  yield  to  the  landlord
about  five  pounds  per  acre,  are  cultivated  by  peasants  who
have  scarcely  bread  :  The  reason  is,  that  such  peasants  need
no  stock  but  their  own  limbs,  with  instruments  of  husbandry,
which  they  can  buy  for  twenty  shillings.  The  farmers  are
commonly  in  some  better  circumstances  in  those  countries.
But  the  grasiers  are  most  at  their  ease  of  all  those  who  culti
vate  the  land.  The  reason  is  still  the  same.  Men  must  have
profits  proportionable  to  their  expense  and  hazard.  Where
so  considerable  a  number  of  the  labouring  poor  as  the
peasants  and  farmers  are  in  very  low  circumstances,  all  the
rest  must  partake  of  their  poverty,  whether  the  government
of  that  nation  be  monarchical  or  republican.

We  may  form  a  similar  remark  with  regard  to  the  general
history  of  mankind.  What  is  the  reason,  why  no  people,  living
between  the  tropics,  could  ever  yet  attain  to  any  art  or  civility,
or  reach  even  any  police  in  their  government,  and  any  uiili-


OF  COMMERCE.  209

tary  discipline ;  while  few  nations  in  the  temperate  climates
have  been  altogether  deprived  of  these  advantages  ?  It  is
probable  that  one  cause  of  this  phenomenon  is  the  warmth
and  equality  of  weather  in  the  torrid  zone,  which  render
clothes  and  houses  less  requisite  for  the  inhabitants,  and
thereby  remove,  in  part,  that  necessity,  which  is  the  great
spur  to  industry  and  invention.  Curis  acuens  mortalia  corda.
Not  to  mention,  that  the  fewer  goods  or  possessions  of  this
kind  any  people  enjoy,  the  fewer  quarrels  are  likely  to  arise
amongst  them,  and  the  less  necessity  will  there  be  for  a  set
tled  police  or  regular  authority  to  protect  and  defend  them,
from  foreign  enemies,  or  from  each  other.


ESSAY  II. — Of  Refinement  in  the  Arts.1

LUXURY  is  a  word  of  uncertain  signification,  and  may  be
taken  in  a  good  as  well  as  in  a  bad  sense.  In  general,  it
means  great  refinement  in  the  gratification  of  the  senses;
and  any  degree  of  it  may  be  innocent  or  blameable,  accord
ing  to  the  age,  or  country,  or  condition  of  the  person.  The
bounds  between  the  virtue  and  the  vice  cannot  here  be  ex
actly  fixed,  more  than  in  other  moral  subjects.  To  imagine,
that  the  gratifying  of  any  sense,  or  the  indulging  of  any
delicacy  in  meat,  drink,  or  apparel,  is  of  itself  a  vice,  can
never  enter  into  a  head,  that  is  not  disordered  by  the  fren
zies  of  enthusiasm.  I  have,  indeed,  heard  of  a  monk  abroad,
who,  because  the  windows  of  his  cell  opened  upon  a  noble
prospect,  made  a  covenant  with  his  eyes  never  to  turn  that
way,  or  receive  so  sensual  a  gratification.  And  such  is  the
crime  of  drinking  CHAMPAGNE  or  BURGUNDY,  preferably  to
small  beer  or  porter.  These  indulgences  are  only  vices,
when  they  are  pursued  at  the  expense  of  some  virtue,  as
liberality  or  charity  ;  in  like  manner  as  they  are  follies,  when
for  them  a  man  ruins  his  fortune,  and  reduces  himself  to
want  and  beggary.  Where  they  entrench  upon  no  virtue,
but  leave  ample  subject  whence  to  provide  for  friends,  family,
and  every  proper  object  of  generosity  or  compassion,  they
are  entirely  innocent,  and  have  in  every  age  been  acknow
ledged  such  by  almost  all  moralists.  To  be  entirely  occu
pied  with  the  luxury  of  the  table,  for  instance,  without  any

1  [In  Editions  H  to  M  this  Essay  is  healed  :  Of  Luxury.]


300  ESSAY II.

relish  for  the  pleasures  of  ambition,  study,  or  conversation,
is  a  mark  of  stupidity,  and  is  incompatible  with  any  vigour
of  temper  or  genius.  To  confine  one's  expense  entirely  to
such  a  gratification,  without  regard  to  friends  or  family,  is  an
indication  of  a  heart  destitute  of  humanity  or  benevolence.
But  if  a  man  reserve  time  sufficient  for  all  laudable  pursuits,
and  money  sufficient  for  all  generous  purposes,  he  is  free
from  every  shadow  of  blame  or  reproach.

Since  luxury  may  be  considered  either  as  innocent  or
blameable,  one  may  be  surprized  at  those  preposterous
opinions,  which  have  been  entertained  concerning  it ;  while
men  of  libertine  principles  bestow  praises  even  on  vicious
luxury,  and  represent  it  as  highly  advantageous  to  society ;  and
on  the  other  hand,  men  of  severe  morals  blame  even  the  most
innocent  luxury,  and  represent  it  as  the  source  of  all  the  corrup
tions,  disorders,  and  factions, incident  to  civil  government.  We
shall  here  endeavour  to  correct  both  these  extremes,  by  prov-
ing,  first,  that  the  ages  of  refinement  are  both  the  happiest
and  most  virtuous  :  secondly,  that  wherever  luxury  ceases  to
be  innocent,  it  also  ceases  to  be  beneficial ;  and  when  carried
a  degree  too  far,  is  a  quality  pernicious,  though  perhaps  not
the  most  pernicious,  to  political  society.

To  prove  the  first  point,  we  need  but  consider  the  effects
of  refinement  both  on  private  and  on  public  life.  Human
happiness,  according  to  the  most  received  notions,  seems  to
consist  in  three  ingredients  ;  action,  pleasure,  and  indolence  :
And  though  these  ingredients  ought  to  be  mixed  in  different
proportions,  according  to  the  particular  disposition  of  the
person ;  yet  no  one  ingredient  can  be  entirely  wanting,
without  destroying,  in  some  measure,  the  relish  of  the  whole
composition.  Indolence  or  repose,  indeed,  seems  not  of  it
self  to  contribute  much  to  our  enjoyment;  but,  like  sleep,  is
requisite  as  an  indulgence  to  the  weakness  of  human  nature,
which  cannot  support  an  uninterrupted  course  of  business  or
pleasure.  That  quick  march  of  the  spirits,  which  takes  a
man  from  himself,  and  chiefly  gives  satisfaction,  does  in  the
end  exhaust  the  mind,  and  requires  some  intervals  of  repose,
which,  though  agreeable  for  a  moment,  yet,  if  prolonged,
beget  a  languor  and  lethargy  that  destroys  all  enjoyment.
Education,  custom,  and  example,  have  a  mighty  influence
in  turning  the  mind  to  any  of  these  pursuits  ;  and  it  must  be
owned,  that,  where'  they  promote  a  relish  for  action  and


OF  REFINEMENT IN  THE AIITS.  801

pleasure,  they  are  so  far  favourable  to  human  happiness.  In
times  when  industry  and  the  arts  nourish,  men  are  kept  in
perpetual  occupation,  and  enjoy  ,x  as  their  reward,  the  occu
pation  itself,  as  well  as  those  pleasures  which  are  the  fruit  of
their  labour.  The  mind  acquires  new  vigour ;  enlarges  its
powers  and  faculties ;  and  by  an  assiduity  in  honest  industry,
both  satisfies  its  natural  appetites,  and  prevents  the  growth
of  unnatural  ones,  which  commonly  spring  up,  when
nourished  by  ease  and  idleness.  Banish  those  arts  from
society,  you  deprive  men  both  of  action  and  of  pleasure ;  and
leaving  nothing  but  indolence  in  their  place,  you  even  destroy
the  relish  of  indolence,  which  never  is  agreeable,  but  when
it  succeeds  to  labour,  and  recruits  the  spirits,  exhausted  by
too  much  application  and  fatigue.

Another  advantage  of  industry  and  of  refinements  in  the
mechanical  arts,  is,  that  they  commonly  produce  some  refine
ments  in  the  liberal ;  nor  can  one  be  carried  to  perfection,
without  being  accompanied,  in  some  degree,  with  the  other.
The  same  age,  which  produces  great  philosophers  and  poli
ticians,  renowned  generals  and  poets,  usually  abounds  with
skilful  weavers,  and  ship-carpenters.  We  cannot  reasonably
expect,  that  a  piece  of  woollen  cloth  will  be  brought  to  perfec
tion  in  a  nation,  which  is  ignorant  of  astronomy,  or  where
ethics  are  neglected.  The  spirit  of  the  age  affects  all  the
arts ;  and  the  minds  of  men,  being  once  roused  from  their
lethargy,  and  put  into  a  fermentation,  turn  themselves  on  all
sides,  and  carry  improvements  into  every  art  and  science.
Profound  ignorance  is  totally  banished,  and  men  enjoy  the
privilege  of  rational  creatures,  to  think  as  well  as  to  act,  to
cultivate  the  pleasures  of  the  mind  as  well  as  those  of  the
body.

The  more  these  refined  arts  advance,  the  more  sociable
men  become :  nor  is  it  possible,  that,  when  enriched  with
science,  and  possessed  of  a  fund  of  conversation,  they  should
be  contented  to  remain  in  solitude,  or  live  with  theirfellow-citi-
/ens  in  that  distant  manner,  which  is  peculiar  to  ignorant
and  barbarous  nations.  They  flock  into  cities  ;  love  to  re
ceive  and  communicate  knowledge ;  to  show  their  wit  or
their  breeding ;  their  taste  in  conversation  or  living,  in
clothes  or  furniture.  Curiosity  allures  the  wise;  vanity  the
foolish ;  and  pleasure  both.  Particular  clubs  and  societies
are  everywhere  formed  :  Both  sexes  meet  in  an  easy  and


302  ESSAY  H.

sociable  manner :  and  the  tempers  of  men,  as  well  as  their
behaviour,  refine  apace.  So  that,  beside  the  improvements
which  they  receive  from  knowledge  and  the  liberal  arts,  it  is
impossible  but  they  must  feel  an  encrease  of  humanity,  from
the  very  habit  of  conversing  together,  and  contribute  to  each
s  other's  pleasure  and  entertainment.  Thus  industry,  know
ledge,  and  humanity,  are  linked  together  by  an  indissoluble
chain,  and  are  found,  from  experience  as  well  as  reason,  to
be  peculiar  to  the  more  polished,  and,  what  are  commonly
denominated,  the  more  luxurious  ages.

Nor  are  these  advantages  attended  with  disadvantages,  that
bear  any  proportion  to  them.  The  more  men  refine  upon
pleasure,  the  less  they  indulge  in  excess  of  any  kind ;  be
cause  nothing  is  more  destructive  to  true  pleasure  than  such
excesses.  One  may  safely  affirm,  that  the  TARTARS  are
oftener  guilty  of  beastly  gluttony,  when  they  feast  on  their
dead  horses,  than  EUROPEAN  courtiers  with  all  their  refine
ments  of  cooker}\  And  if  libertine  love,  or  even  infidelity
to  the  marriage-bed,  be  more  frequent  in  polite  ages,  when  it
is  often  regarded  only  as  a  piece  of  gallantry ;  drunkenness,
on  the  other  hand,  is  much  less  common  :  A  vice  more  odious,
and  more  pernicious  both  to  mind  and  body.  And  in  this
matter  I  would  appeal,  not  only  to  an  OVID  or  a  PETRONIUS,
but  to  a  SENECA  or  a  CATO.  We  know,  that  C^SAR,  during
CATILINE'S  conspiracy,  being  necessitated  to  put  into  CATO'S
hands  a  billet-doux,  which  discovered  an  intrigue  with  SER-
VILIA,  CATO'S  own  sister,  that  stern  philosopher  threw  it
back  to  him  with  indignation ;  and  in  the  bitterness  of  his
wrath,  gave  him  the  appellation  of  drunkard,  as  a  term  more
opprobrious  than  that  with  which  he  could  more  justly  have
reproached  him.

But  industry,  knowledge,  and  humanity,  are  not  advan
tageous  in  private  life  alone :  They  diffuse  their  beneficial
influence  on  the  public,  and  render  the  government  as  great
and  flourishing  as  they  make  individuals  happy  and  pros
perous.  The  encrease  and  consumption  of  all  the  com
modities,  which  serve  to  the  ornament  and  pleasure  of  life,
are  advantageous  to  society ;  because,  at  the  same  time  that
they  multiply  those  innocent  gratifications  to  individuals,
they  are  a  kind  of  storehouse  of  labour,  which,  in  the  exigen
cies  of  state,  may  be  turned  to  public  service.  In  a  nation,
where  there  is  no  demand  for  such  superfluities,  men  sink


OF REFINEMENT IX THE ARTS.  303

into  indolence,  lose  all  enjoyment  of'  life,  and  are  useless
to  the  public,  which  cannot  maintain  or  support  its  fleets
and  armies,  from  the  industry  of  such  slothful  members.

The  bounds  of  all  the  EUROPEAN  kingdoms  are,  at  present,
nearly  the  same  they  were  two  hundred  years  ago :  But
what  a  difference  is  there  in  the  power  and  grandeur  of  those
kingdoms?  Which  can  be  ascribed  to  nothing  but  the  encrease
of  art  and  industry.  When  CHARLES  VIII.  of  FRANCE  in
vaded  ITALY,  he  carried  with  him  about  20,000  men  :  Yet
this  armament  so  exhausted  the  nation,  as  we  learn  from
GUICCIARDIN,  that  for  some  years  it  was  not  able  to  make  so
great  an  effort.  The  late  king  of  FRANCE,  in  time  of  war,
kept  in  pay  above  400,000  men ;  '  though  from  MAZARINE'S
death  to  his  own,  he  was  engaged  in  a  course  of  wars  that
lasted  near  thirty  years.

This  industry  is  much  promoted  by  the  knowledge  in
separable  from  ages  of  art  and  refinement ;  as,  on  the  other
hand,  this  knowledge  enables  the  public  to  make  the  best
advantage  of  the  industry  of  its  subjects.  Laws,  order,
police,  discipline  ;  these  can  never  be  carried  to  any  degree
of  perfection,  before  human  reason  has  refined  itself  by
exercise,  and  by  an  application  to  the  more  vulgar  arts,  at
least,  of  commerce  and  manufacture.  Can  we  expect,  that
a  government  will  be  well  modelled  by  a  people,  who  know
not  how  to  make  a  spinning-wheel,  or  to  employ  a  loom  to  ad
vantage  ?  Not  to  mention,  that  all  ignorant  ages  are  infested
with  superstition,  which  throws  the  government  off  its
bias,  and  disturbs  men  in  the  pursuit  of  their  interest  and
happiness.

Knowledge  in  the  arts  of  government  naturally  begets
mildness  and  moderation,  by  instructing  men  in  the  ad
vantages  of  humane  maxims  above  rigour  and  severity,
which  drive  subjects  into  rebellion,  and  make  the  return  to
submission  impracticable,  by  cutting  oft'  all  hopes  of  pardon.
When  the  tempers  of  men  are  softened  as  well  as  their
knowledge  improved,  this  humanity  appears  still  more  con
spicuous,  and  is  the  chief  characteristic  which  distinguishes
a  civilized  age  from  times  of  barbarity  and  ignorance.  Fac
tions  are  then  less  inveterate,  revolutions  less  tragical,  au
thority  less  severe,  and  seditions  less  frequent.  Even  foreign
wars  abate  of  their  cruelty ;  and  after  the  field  of  battle,

1  The  inscription  on  the  PLACE-DE-VENDOME  says  440,000.


804  ESSAY EL

where  honour  and  interest  steel  men  against  compassion  as
-well  as  fear,  the  combatants  divest  themselves  of  the  brute,
and  resume  the  man.

Nor  need  we  fear,  that  men,  by  losing  their  ferocity,  will
lose  their  martial  spirit,  or  become  less  undaunted  and
vigorous  in  defence  of  their  country  or  their  liberty.  The
arts  have  no  such  effect  in  enervating  either  the  mind  or
body.  On  the  contrary,  industry,  their  inseparable  at
tendant,  adds  new  force  to  both.  And  if  anger,  which  is
said  to  be  the  whetstone  of  courage,  loses  somewhat  of  its
asperity,  by  politeness  and  refinement ;  a  sense  of  honour,
which  is  a  stronger,  more  constant,  and  more  governable
principle,  acquires  fresli  vigour  by  that  elevation  of  genius
which  arises  from  knowledge  and  a  good  education.  Add  to
this,  that  courage  can  neither  have  any  duration,  nor  be  of
any  use,  when  not  accompanied  with  discipline  and  martial
skill,  which  are  seldom  found  among  a  barbarous  people.
The  ancients  remarked,  that  DATAMES  was  the  only  barbarian
that  ever  knew  the  art  of  war.  And  PYRRHUS,  seeing  the
ROMANS  marshal  their  army  with  some  art  and  skill,  said
with  surprize,  These  barbarians  have  nothing  barbarous  in  their
discipline !  It  is  observable,  that,  as  the  old  ROMANS,  by
applying  themselves  solely  to  war,  were  almost  the  only  un
civilized  people  that  ever  possessed  military  discipline;  so
the  modern  ITALIANS  are  the  only  civilized  people,  among
EUROPEANS,  that  ever  wanted  courage  and  a  martial  spirit.
Those  who  would  ascribe  this  effeminacy  of  the  ITALIANS  to
their  luxury,  or  politeness,  or  application  to  the  arts,  need
but  consider  the  FRENCH  and  ENGLISH,  whose  bravery  is  as
uncontestable,  as  their  love  for  the  arts,  and  their  assiduity
in  commerce.  The  ITALIAN  historians  give  us  a  more  satis
factory  reason  for  this  degeneracy  of  their  countrymen.
They  shew  us  how  the  sword  was  dropped  at  once  by  all  the
ITALIAN  sovereigns ;  while  the  VENETIAN  aristocracy  was
jealous  of  its  subjects,  the  FLORENTINE  democracy  applied
itself  entirely  to  commerce  ;  ROME  was  governed  by  priests,
und  NAPLES  by  women.  War  then  became  the  business  of
soldiers  of  fortune,  who  spared  one  another,  and  to  the
astonishment  of  the  world,  could  engage  a  whole  day  in
what  they  called  a  baitle,  and  return  at  night  to  their  camp,
without  the  least  bloodshed.

What has chiefly  induced severe moralists to  declaim


OF  REFINEMENT IN THE ARTS.  305

against  refinement  in  the  arts,  is  the  example  of  ancient
ROME,  which,  joining,  to  its  poverty  and  rusticity,  virtue
and  public  spirit,  rose  to  such  a  surprising  height  of  grandeur
and  liberty ;  but  having  learned  from  its  conquered  provinces
'the  ASIATIC  luxury,  fell  into  every  kind  of  corruption  ;
whence  arose  sedition  and  civil  wars,  attended  at  last  with
the  total  loss  of  liberty.  All  the  LATIN  classics,  whom  we
peruse  in  our  infancy,  are  full  of  these  sentiments,  and  uni
versally  ascribe  the  ruin  of  their  state  to  the  arts  and  riches
imported  from  the  East :  Insomuch  that  SALLUST  represents
a  taste  for  painting  as  a  vice,  no  less  than  lewdness  and
drinking.  And  so  popular  were  these  sentiments,  during
the  later  ages  of  the  republic,  that  this  author  abounds  in
praises  of  the  old  rigid  ROMAN  virtue,  though  himself  the
most  egregious  instance  of  modern  luxury  and  corruption  ;
speaks  contemptuously  of  the  GRECIAN  eloquence,  though  the
most  elegant  writer  in  the  world  ;  nay,  employs  prepos
terous  digressions  and  declamations  to  this  purpose,  though
a  model  of  taste  and  correctness.

But  it  would  be  easy  to  prove,  that  these  writers  mistook
the  cause  of  the  disorders  in  the  ROMAN  state,  and  ascribed
to  luxury  and  the  arts,  what  really  proceeded  from  an  ill
modelled  government,  and  the  unlimited  extent  of  con
quests.  2  Refinement  on  the  pleasures  and  conveniences  of
life  has  no  natural  tendency  to  beget  venality  and  corruption.
The  value,  which  all  men  put  upon  any  particular  pleasure,
depends  on  comparison  and  experience ;  nor  is  a  porter  less
greedy  of  money,  which  he  spends  on  bacon  and  brandy,
than  a  courtier,  who  purchases  champagne  and  ortolans.
Riches  are  valuable  at  all  times,  and  to  all  men ;  because  they
always  purchase  pleasures,  such  as  men  are  accustomed  to,
and  desire  :  Nor  can  anything  restrain  or  regulate  the  love
of  money,  but  a  sense  of  honour  and  virtue ;  which,  if  it  be
not  nearly  equal  at  all  times,  will  naturally  abound  most  in
ages  of  knowledge  and  refinement.

Of  all  EUROPEAN  kingdoms,  POLAND  seems  the  most  de
fective  in  the  arts  of  war  as  well  as  peace,  mechanical  as  well
as  liberal ;  yet  it  is  there  that  venality  and  corruption  do
most  prevail.  The  nobles  seem  to  have  preserved  their
crown  elective  for  no  other  purpose,  than  regularly  to  sell

1  [The  Grecian  and  Asiatic  luxury  :  -  [Luxury  or  refinement  on  pleasure

Editions  H  to  K.]  h;is,  &c. :  Editions  H  to  M.]

VOL. III.  I


306  ESSAY  n.

it  to  the  highest  bidder. This  is  almost  the  only  species  of
commerce,  with  which  that  people  are  acquainted.

The  liberties  of  ENGLAND,  so  far  from  decaying  since  the
improvements  in  the  arts,  have  never  flourished  so  much  as
during  that  period.  And  though  corruption  may  seem  to
encrease  of  late  years ;  this  is  chiefly  to  be  ascribed  to  our
established  liberty,  when  our  princes  have  found  the  im
possibility  of  governing  without  parliaments,  or  of  terrifying
parliaments  by  the  phantom  of  prerogative.  Not  to  mention,
that  this  corruption  or  venality  prevails  much  more  among
the  electors  than  the  elected;  and  therefore  cannot  justly
be  ascribed  to  any  refinements  in  luxury.

If  we  consider  the  matter  in  a  proper  light,  we  shall  find,
that  a  progress  in  the  arts  is  rather  favourable  to  liberty,
and  has  a  natural  tendency  to  preserve,  if  not  produce  a  free
government.  In  rude  unpolished  nations,  where  the  arts
are  neglected,  all  labour  is  bestowed  on  the  cultivation  of
the  ground ;  and  the  whole  society  is  divided  into  two  classes,
proprietors  of  land,  and  tlieir  vassals  or  tenants.  The  latter
are  necessarily  dependent,  and  fitted  for  slavery  and  subjec
tion  ;  especially  where  they  possess  no  riches,  and  are  not
valued  for  their  knowledge  in  agriculture ;  as  must  always
be  the  case  where  the  arts  are  neglected.  The  former
naturally  erect  themselves  into  petty  tyrants;  and  must
either  submit  to  an  absolute  master,  for  the  sake  of  peace
and  order ;  or  if  they  will  preserve  their  independency,  like
the  *  ancient  barons,  they  must  fall  into  feuds  and  contests
among  themselves,  and  throw  the  whole  society  into  such  con
fusion,  as  is  perhaps  worse  than  the  most  despotic  government.
But  where  luxury  nourishes  commerce  and  industry,  the
peasants,  by  a  proper  cultivation  of  the  land,  become  rich
and  independent ;  while  the  tradesmen  and  merchants  acquire
a  share  of  the  property,  and  draw  authority  and  considera
tion  to  that  middling  rank  of  men,  who  are  the  best  and
firmest  basis  of  public  liberty.  These  submit  not  to  slavery,
like  the  peasants,  from  poverty  and  meanness  of  spirit ;  and
having  no  hopes  of  tyrannizing  over  others,  like  the  barons,
they  are  not  tempted,  for  the  sake  of  that  gratification,  to
submit  to  the  tyranny  of  their  sovereign.  They  covet  equal
laws,  which  may  secure  their  property,  and  preserve  them
from  monarchical,  as  well  as  aristocratical  tyranny.
1  [The  Gothic  barons  :  Editions  H  to  N.]


OF  REFINEMENT  IN  THE  ARTS.  307

The  lower  house  is  the  support  of  our  popular  government ;
and  all  the  world  acknowledges,  that  it  owed  its  chief  influ
ence  and  consideration  to  the  encrease  of  commerce,  which
threw  such  a  balance  of  property  into  the  hands  of  the
commons.  How  inconsistent  then  is  it  to  blame  so  violently
a  refinement  in  the  arts,  and  to  represent  it  as  the  bane  of
liberty  and  public  spirit !

To  declaim  against  present  times,  and  magnify  the  virtue
of  remote  ancestors,  is  a  propensity  almost  inherent  in  human
nature :  And  as  the  sentiments  and  opinions  of  civilized  ages
alone  are  transmitted  to  posterity,  hence  it  is  that  we  meet
with  so  many  severe  judgments  pronounced  against  luxury,
and  even  science ;  and  hence  it  is  that  at  present  we  give  so
ready  an  assent  to  them.  But  the  fallacy  is  easily  perceived,
by  comparing  different  nations  that  are  contemporaries ;
where  we  both  judge  more  impartially,  and  can  better  set  in
opposition  those  manners,  with  which  we  are  sufficiently
acquainted.  Treachery  and  cruelty,  the  most  pernicious  and
most  odious  of  all  vices,  seem  peculiar  to  uncivilised  ages ;
and  by  the  refined  GREEKS  and  ROMANS  were  ascribed  to  all
the  barbarous  nations,  which  surrounded  them.  They  might
justly,  therefore,  have  presumed,  that  their  own  ancestors,  so
highly  celebrated,  possessed  no  greater  virtue,  and  were  as
much  inferior  to  their  posterity  in  honour  and  humanity,  as
in  taste  and  science.  An  ancient  FRANK  or  SAXON  may  be
highly  extolled :  But  I  believe  every  man  would  think  his
life  or  fortune  much  less  secure  in  the  hands  of  a  MOOR  or
TARTAR,  than  in  those  of  a  FRENCH  or  ENGLISH  gentleman,
the  rank  of  men  the  most  civilized  in  the  most  civilized
nations.

We  come  now  to  the  second  position  which  we  propose  to
illustrate,  to  wit,  that,  as  innocent  luxury,  or  a  refinement  in
the  arts  and  conveniences  of  life,  is  advantageous  to  the
public  ;  so  wherever  luxury  ceases  to  be  innocent,  it  also  ceases
to  be  beneficial ;  and  when  carried  a  degree  farther,  begins
to  be  a  quality  pernicious,  though,  perhaps,  not  the  most
pernicious,  to  political  society.

Let  us  consider  what  we  call  vicious  luxury.  No  gratifica
tion,  however  sensual,  can  of  itself  be  esteemed  vicious.  A
gratification  is  only  vicious,  when  it  engrosses  all  a  man's
experice,  and  leaves  no  ability  for  such  acts  of  duty  a,nd
generosity  as  are  required  by  his  situation  and  fortune,

x  2


308  ESSAY  II.

Suppose,  that  he  corcect  the  vice,  and  employ  part  of  his
expence  in  the  education  of  his  children,  in  the  support  of
his  friends,  and  in  relieving  the  poor :  would  any  prejudice
result  to  society  ?  On  the  contrary,  the  same  consumption
would  arise  ;  and  that  labour,  which,  at  present,  is  employed
only  iu  producing  a  slender  gratification  to  one  man,  would
relieve  the  necessitous,  and  bestow  satisfaction  on  hundreds.
The  same  care  and  toil  that  raise  a  dish  of  peas  at  CHRIST-
MAS,  would  give  bread  to  a  whole  family  during  six  months.
To  say,  that,  without  a  vicious  luxury,  the  labour  would  not
have  been  employed  at  all,  is  only  to  say.  that  there  is  some
other  defect  in  human  nature,  such  as  indolence,  selfishness,
inattention  to  others,  for  which  luxury,  in  some  measure,
provides  a  remedy ;  as  one  poison  may  be  an  antidote  to
another.  But  virtue,  like  wholesome  food,  is  better  than
poisons,  however  corrected.

Suppose  the  same  number  of  men,  that  are  present  in
GREAT  BRITAIN,  with  the  same  soil  and  climate ;  I  ask,  is  it
not  possible  for  them  to  be  happier,  by  the  most  perfect  way
of  life  that  can  be  imagined,  and  by  the  greatest  reformation
that  Omnipotence  itself  could  work  in  their  temper  and  dis
position  ?  To  assert,  that  they  cannot,  appears  evidently
ridiculous.  As  the  land  is  able  to  maintain  more  than  all  its
present  inhabitants,  they  could  never,  in  such  a  UTOPIAN
state,  feel  any  other  ills  than  those  which  arise  from  bodily
sickness  ;  and  these  are  not  the  half  of  human  miseries.  All
other  ills  spring  from  some  vice,  either  in  ourselves  or  others  ;
and  even  many  of  our  diseases  proceed  from  the  same  origin.
Eemove  the  vices,  and  the  ills  follow.  You  must  only  take
care  to  remove  all  the  vices.  If  you  remove  part,  you  may
render  the  matter  worse.  By  banishing  vicious  luxury,  with
out  curing  sloth  and  an  indifference  to  others,  you  only
diminish  industry  in  the  state,  and  add  nothing  to  men's
charity  or  their  generosity.  Let  us,  therefore,  rest  contented
with  asserting,  that  two  opposite  vices  in  a  state  may  be
more  advantageous  than  either  of  them  alone;  but  let  us
never  pronounce  vice  in  itself  advantageous.  Is  it  not  very
inconsistent  for  an  Author  to  assert  in  one  page,  that  moral
distinctions  are  inventions  of  politicians  for  public  interest ;
and  in  the  next  page  maintain,  that  vice  is  advantageous  to
the  public  ? '  And  indeed  it  seems  upon  any  system  of

1  Fable  of  the  Bees.


OF REFINEMENT IN THE ARTS.  309

morality,  little  less  than  a  contradiction  in  terms,  to  talk  of
a  vice,  which  is  in  general  beneficial  to  society.1

1  thought  this  reasoning  necessary,  in  order  to  give  some
light  to  a  philosophical  question,  which  has  been  much  dis
puted  in  ENGLAND.  I  call  it  a  philosophical  question,  not  a
political  one.  For  whatever  may  be  the  consequence  of  such
a  miraculous  transformation  of  mankind,  as  would  endow
them  with  every  species  of  virtue,  and  free  them  from  every
species  of  vice ;  this  concerns  not  the  magistrate,  who  aims
only  at  possibilities.  He  cannot  cure  every  vice  by  substitu
ting  a  virtue  hi  its  place.  Very  often  he  can  only  cure  one
vice  by  another  ;  and  in  that  case,  he  ought  to  prefer  what
is  least  pernicious  to  society.  Luxury,  when  excessive,  is  the
source  of  many  ills ;  but  is  in  general  preferable  to  sloth  and
idleness,  which  would  commonly  succeed  in  its  place,  and  are
more  hurtful  both  to  private  persons  and  to  the  public.
When  sloth  reigns,  a  mean  uncultivated  way  of  life  prevails
amongst  individuals,  without  society,  without  enjoyment.
And  if  the  sovereign,  in  such  a  situation,  demands  the  ser
vice  of  his  subjects,  the  labour  of  the  state  suffices  only  to
furnish  the  necessaries  of  Hfe  to  the  labourers,  and  can  afford
nothing  to  those  who  are  employed  in  the  public  service.


ESSAY  III. — Of  Money.

MONET  is  not,  properly  speaking,  one  of  the  subjects  of
commerce  ;  but  only  the  instrument  which  men  have  agreed
upon  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  one  commodity  for  another.
It  is  none  of  the  wheels  of  trade  :  It  is  the  oil  which  renders
the  motion  of  the  wheels  more  smooth  and  easy.  If  we  con
sider  any  one  kingdom  by  itself,  it  is  evident,  that  the  greater
or  less  plenty  of  money  is  of  no  consequence;  since  the
prices  of  commodities  are  always  proportioned  to  the  plenty
of  money,  and  a  crown  in  HAERT  Vll.'s  time  served  the  same

1  [Prodigality  is  not  to  be  confounded  But  idleness  is  the  great  source  of  pro-

with  a  refinement  in  the  arts. It  even  digality at all  times ;  and there are

appears, that that  vice  is much less  pleasures and vanities in every  age,

frequent  in the  cultivated ages. In-  which  allure  men  equally  when  they  are

dustry  and  gain beget  this  frugality,  unacquainted  with better enjoyments,

among  the  lower  and  middle  ranks  of  Not  to  mention,  that  the  high  interest,

men  ;  and  in  all  the  busy  professions.  payed  in  rude  times,  quickly  consumes

Men of  high  rank,  indeed,  it  may  be  the  fortunes  if  the  landed  gentry,  and

pretended, are more allured by the  multiplies  th?ir  necessities. — Edition  f

pleasures,  which  become  more  frequent.  in  the  text.]


310  ESSAY  in.

purpose  as  a  pound  does  at  present.  It  is  only  the  publw
wiuch  draws  any  advantage  from  the  greater  plenty  of
money  ;  and  that  only  in  its  wars  and  negociations  with
foreign  states.  And  this  is  the  reason,  why  all  rich  and
trading  countries  from  CARTHAGE  to  GEE  AT  BRITAIN  and
HOLLAND,  have  employed  mercenary  troops,  which  they  hired
from  their  poorer  neighbours.  Were  they  to  make  use  of
their  native  subjects,  they  would  find  less  advantage  from
their  superior  riches,  and  from  their  great  plenty  of  gold  and
silver ;  since  the  pay  of  all  their  servants  must  rise  in  pro
portion  to  the  public  opulence.  Our  small  army  of  20,000
men  is  maintained  at  as  great  expence,  as  a  FRENCH  army
1  twice  as  numerous.  The  ENGLISH  fleet,  during  the  late  war,
required  as  much  money  to  support  it  as  all  the  ROMAN
legions,  which  kept  the  whole  world  in  subjection,  during  the
time  of  the  emperors.2

The  greater  number  of  people  and  their  greater  industry
are  serviceable  in  all  cases ;  at  home  and  abroad,  in  private
and  in  public.  But  the  greater  plenty  of  money,  is  very
limited  in  its  use,  and  may  even  sometimes  be  a  loss  to  a
nation  in  its  commerce  with  foreigners.

There  seems  to  be  a  happy  concurrence  of  causes  in  human
affairs,  which  checks  the  growth  of  trade  and  riches,  and
hinders  them  from  being  confined  entirely  to  one  people  ;  as
might  naturally  at  first  be  dreaded  from  the  advantages  of
an  established  commerce.  Where  one  nation  has  gotten  the
start  of  another  in  trade,  it  is  very  difficult  for  the  latter  to
regain  the  ground  it  has  lost ;  because  of  the  superior  in-

'  [Thrice :  Editions  H  to  P.]  armies,  in  comparison  of  what  are  em-
2  A  private  soldier  in  the  ROMAN  ployed  in  all  our  modern  troops,  except
infantry  had  a  denarius  a  day,  some-  some  Swiss  corps.  And  these  officers
what  less  than  eightpence.  The  ROMAN  had  very  small  pay  :  A  centurion,  for
emperors  had  commonly  25  legions  in  instance,  only  double  a  common  soldier,
pay,  which  allowing  5000  men  to  a  And  as  the  soldiers  from  their  pay
legion,  makes  125,000.  TACIT.  Ann.  (TACIT.  Ann.  lib.  i.  17)  bought  their  own
lib.  iv.  5.  It  is  true,  there  were  also  aux-  cloaths,  arms,  tents,  and  baggage  ;  this
iliaries  to  the  legions ;  but  their  num-  must  also  diminish  considerably  the
bers  are  uncertain,  as  well  as  their  other  charges  of  the  army.  So  little
pay.  To  consider  only  the  legionaries,  expensive  was  that  mighty  government,
the  pay  of  the  private  men  could  not  and  so  easy  was  its  yoke  over  the
exceed  1,600,000  pounds.  Now,  the  world.  And,  indeed,  this  is  the  more
parliament  in  the  last  war  commonly  natural  conclusion  from  the  foregoing
allowed  for  the  fleet  2,500,000.  We  calculations.  For  money,  after  the  con-
have  therefore  900,000  over  for  the  quest  of  ./EGYPT,  seems  to  have  been
officers  and  other  expences  of  the  nearly  in  as  great  plenty  at  ROME,  as  it
ROMAN  legions.  There  seem  to  have  is  at  present  in  the  richest  of  the  Euao-
been  but  few  officers  in  the  ROMAN  MSAN  kingdoms.


OF  MONEY.  311

dustry  and  skill  of  the  former,  and  the  greater  stocks,  of  which
its  merchants  are  possessed,  and  which  enable  them  to  trade
on  so  much  smaller  profits.  But  these  advantages  are  com
pensated,  in  some  measure,  by  the  low  price  of  labour  in
every  nation  which  has  not  an  extensive  commerce,  and  does
not  much  abound  in  gold  and  silver.  Manufactures,  there
fore  gradually  shift  their  places,  leaving  those  countries  and
provinces  which  they  have  already  enriched,  and  flying  to
others,  whither  they  are  allured  by  the  cheapness  of  pro
visions  and  labour;  till  they  have  enriched  these  also,  and
are  again  banished  by  the  same  causes.  And,  in  general,  we
may  observe,  that  the  dearness  of  every  thing,  from  plenty  of
money,  is  a  disadvantage,  which  attends  an  established  com
merce,  and  sets  bounds  to  it  in  every  country,  by  enabling
the  poorer  states  to  undersel  the  richer  in  all  foreign  mar
kets.

This  has  made  me  entertain  a  doubt  concerning  the  benefit
of  banks  and  paper-credit,  which  are  so  generally  esteemed
advantageous  to  every  nation.  That  provisions  and  labour
should  become  dear  by  the  encrease  of  trade  and  money,  is
in  many  respects,  an  inconvenience ;  but  an  inconvenience
that  is  unavoidable,  and  the  effect  of  that  public  wealth  and
prosperity  which  are  the  end  of  all  our  wishes.  It  is  com
pensated  by  the  advantages,  which  we  reap  from  the  posses
sion  of  these  precious  metals,  and  the  weight,  which  they
give  the  nation  in  all  foreign  wars  and  negociations.  But
there  appears  no  reason  for  encreasing  that  inconvenience  by
a  counterfeit  money,  which  foreigners  will  not  accept  of  in  any
payment,  and  which  any  great  disorder  in  the  state  will  reduce
to  nothing.  There  are,  it  is  true,  many  people  in  every  rich
state,  who  having  large  sums  of  money,  would  prefer  paper
with  good  security ;  as  being  of  more  easy  transport  and
more  safe  custody.  If  the  public  provide  not  a  bank,  private
bankers  will  take  advantage  of  this  circumstance ;  as  the
goldsmiths  formerly  did  in  LONDON,  or  as  the  bankers  do  at
present  in  DUBLIN  :  And  therefore  it  is  better,  it  may  be
thought,  that  a  public  company  should  enjoy  the  benefit  of  that
paper-credit,  which  always  will  have  place  in  every  opulent
kingdom.  But  to  endeavour  artificially  to  encrease  such  a
credit,  can  never  be  the  interest  of  any  trading  nation  ;  but
must  lay  them  under  disadvantages,  by  encreasing  money
beyond  its  natural  proportion  to  labour  and  commodities,  and.


812  ESSAY  HI.

thereby  heightening  their  price  to  the  merchant  and  manu
facturer.  And  in  this  view,  it  must  be  allowed,  that  no  bank
could  be  more  advantageous,  than  such  a  one  as  locked  up
all  the  money  it  received,1  and  never  augmented  the  circulating
coin,  as  is  usual,  by  returning  part  of  its  treasure  into  com
merce.  A  public  bank,  by  this  expedient,  might  cut  off
much  of  the  dealings  of  private  bankers  and  money-jobbers  ;
and  though  the  state  bore  the  charge  of  salaries  to  the
directors  and  tellers  of  this  bank  (for,  according  to  the  pre
ceding  supposition,  it  would  have  no  profit  from  its  dealings) ,
the  national  advantage,  resulting  from  the  low  price  of  labour
and  the  destruction  of  paper-credit,  would  be  a  sufficient
compensation.  Not  to  mention,  that  so  large  a  sum,  lying
ready  at  command,  would  be  a  convenience  in  times  of  great
public  danger  and  distress  ;  and  what  part  of  it  was  used
might  be  replaced  at  leisure,  when  peace  arid  tranquility  was
restored  to  the  nation.

But  of  this  subject  of  paper-credit  we  shall  treat  more
largely  hereafter.  And  I  shall  finish  this  essay  on  money,
by  proposing  and  explaining  two  observations,  which  may,
perhaps,  serve  to  employ  the  thoughts  of  our  speculative
politicians.8

It  was  a  shrewd  observation  of  ANACHARSis3  the  SCYTHIAN,
who  had  never  seen  money  in  his  own  country,  that  gold  and
silver  seemed  to  him  of  no  use  to  the  GREEKS,  but  to  assist
them  in  numeration  and  arithmetic.  It  is  indeed  evident,
that  money  is  nothing  but  the  representation  of  labour  and
commodities,  and  serves  only  as  a  method  of  rating  or  esti
mating  them.  Where  coin  is  in  greater  plenty  ;  as  a  greater
quantity  of  it  is  required  to  represent  the  same  quantity  of
goods ;  it  can  have  no  effect,  either  good  or  bad,  taking  a
nation  within  itself;  any  more  than  it  would  make  an  altera
tion  on  a  merchant's  books,  if,  instead  of  the  ARABIAN  method
of  notation,  which  requires  few  characters,  he  should  make
use  of  the  KOMAN,  which  requires  a  great  many.  Nay,  the
greater  quantity  of  money,  like  the  ROMAN  characters,  is
rather  inconvenient,  and  requires  greater  trouble  both  to  keep

1  This  is  the  case  with  the  bank  of  sometimes,  in  this  age,  attached  to  the
AMSTERDAM. [This  note  was  added  in  character  of  a  philosopher,  without  add-
Ed.  K.]  ing  to  it  that  which  belongs  to  a  pro-

2  [Editions  H  to  P  add :  For  to  these  jector.]

only  I  all  along  address  myself. 'Tis  3  PLTJT. Quomodo  quis  suosprofcvtiw

enough  that  I  submit  to the  ridicule in  virtufe  sentire  possit.


OF MONEY.  313

and  transport  it.  But  notwithstanding  this  conclusion,  which
must  be  allowed  just,  it  is  certain,  that,  since  the  discovery
of  the  mines  in  AMEEICA,  industry  has  encreased  in  all  the
nations  of  EUROPE,  except  in  the  possessors  of  those  mines ;
and  this  may  justly  be  ascribed,  amongst  other  reasons,  to
the  encrease  of  gold  and  silver.  Accordingly  we  find,  that,
in  every  kingdom,  into  which  money  begins  to  flow  in  greater
abundance  than  formerly,  every  thing  takes  a  new  face  :
labour  and  industry  gain  life  ;  the  merchant  becomes  more
enterprising,  the  manufacturer  more  diligent  and  skilful,  and
even  the  farmer  follows  his  plough  with  greater  alacrity  and
attention.  This  is  not  easily  to  be  accounted  for,  if  we  con
sider  only  the  influence  which  a  greater  abundance  of  coin
has  in  the  kingdom  itself,  by  heightening  the  price  of  com
modities,  and  obliging  every  one  to  pay  a  greater  number  of
these  little  yellow  or  white  pieces  for  every  thing  he  purchases.
And  as  to  foreign  trade,  it  appears,  that  great  plenty  of
money  is  rather  disadvantageous,  by  raising  the  price  of  every
kind  of  labour.

To  account,  then,  for  this  phenomenon,  we  must  consider,
that  though  the  high  price  of  commodities  be  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  encrease  of  gold  and  silver,  yet  it  follows
not  immediately  upon  that  encrease  ;  but  some  time  is  re
quired  before  the  money  circulates  through  the  whole  state,
and  makes  its  effect  be  felt  on  all  ranks  of  people.  At  first,
no  alteration  is  perceived ;  by  degrees  the  price  rises,  first  of
one  commodity,  then  of  another  ;  till  the  whole  at  last  reaches
a  just  proportion  with  the  new  quantity  of  specie  which  is  in
the  kingdom.  In  my  opinion,  it  is  only  in  this  interval  or
intermediate  situation,  between  the  acquisition  of  money  and
rise  of  prices,  that  the  encreasing  quantity  of  gold  and  silver
is  favourable  to  industry.  When  any  quantity  of  money  is
imported  into  a  nation,  it  is  not  at  first  dispersed  into  many
hands ;  but  is  confined  to  the  coffers  of  a  few  persons,  who
immediately  seek  to  employ  it  to  advantage.  Here  are  a  set
of  manufacturers  or  merchants,  we  shall  suppose,  who  have
received  returns  of  gold  and  silver  for  goods  which  they  sent
to  CADIZ.  They  are  thereby  enabled  to  employ  more  work
men  than  formerly,  who  never  dream  of  demanding  higher
wages,  but  are  glad  of  employment  from  such  good  pay
masters.  If  workmen  become  scarce,  the  manufacturer  gives
higher  wages,  but  at  first  requires  an  encrease  of  labour;


314  ESSAY  III.

and  this  is  willingly  submitted  to  by  the  artisan,  who  can
now  eat  and  drink  better,  to  compensate  his  additional  toil
and  fatigue.  He  carries  his  money  to  market,  where  he  finds
every  thing  at  the  same  price  as  formerly,  but  returns  with
greater  quantity  and  of  better  kinds,  for  the  use  of  his  family.
The  farmer  and  gardener,  finding,  that  all  their  commodities
are  taken  off,  apply  themselves  with  alacrity  to  the  raising
more ;  and  at  the  same  time  can  afford  to  take  better  arid
more  cloths  from  their  tradesmen,  whose  price  is  the  same
as  formerly,  and  their  industry  only  whetted  by  so  much  new
gain.  It  is  easy  to  trace  the  money  in  its  progress  through
the  whole  commonwealth  ;  where  we  shall  find,  that  it  must
first  quicken  the  diligence  of  every  individual,  before  it  en-
crease  the  price  of  labour.

And  that  the  specie  may  encrease  to  a  considerable  pitch,
before  it  have  this  latter  effect,  appears,  amongst  other  in
stances,  from  the  frequent  operations  of  the  FRENCH  king  on
the  money  ;  where  it  was  always  found,  that  the  augmenting
of  the  numerary  value  did  not  produce  a  proportional  rise  of
the  prices,  at  least  for  some  time.  In  the  last  year  of  Louis
XIV.  money  was  raised  three-sevenths,  but  prices  augmented
only  one.  Corn  in  FRANCE  is  now  sold  at  the  same  price,  or
for  the  same  number  of  livres,  it  was  in  1683  ;  though  silver
was  then  at  30  livres  the  mark,  and  is  now  at  50.1  Not  to
mention  the  great  addition  of  gold  and  silver,  which  may
have  come  into  that  kingdom  since  the  former  period.

1  These  facts  I  giv<?  upon  the  autho-  probably purchase every thing that

rity  of  Mons.  du  TOT  in  his  Reflections  could  have  been  bought by  the old ;

politiques, an author of reputation.  the  prices  of  every  thing  would  thereby

Though  I  must  confess,  that  the  facts  be  insensibly  diminished ;  foreign  trada

which  he  advances  on  other  occasions,  enlivened ; and  domestic  industry,  by

are  often  so  suspicious,  as  to  make  his  the  circulation of  a  great  number  of

authority  less in this  matter. How-  pounds and shillings, would receive

ever,  the  general  observation,  that  the  some  encrease  and  encouragement. In

augmenting  of  the  money  in  FRANCE  executing  such  a  project,  it  would  be

does not  at  first proportionably  aug-  better  to  make  the  new  shilling  pass

ment  the  prices,  is  certainly  just.  for  '24  halfpence,  in  order  to  preserve

By  the  by,  this  seems  to  be  one  of  the  illusion,  and  make  it  be  taken  for

the  best  reasons  which  can  be  given,  the  same. And  as  a  recoinage  of  our

for  a  gradual  and  universal  encrease  of  silver begins to be requisite,  by  the

the  denomination  of  money,  though  it  continual  wearing  of  our  shillings?  and

has been entirely  overlooked in all  sixpences,  it  may  be  doubtful,  whether

those  volumes  which  have  been  written  we ought  to imitate the example  in

on  that  question  by  MKLON,  Du  TOT,  KING  WILLIAM'S  reign,  when  the  dipt

and  PARIS  de  VERNEY. Were  all  our  money  was  raised  to  the  old  standard,

money,  for  instance, recoined,  and a  [This  last  sentence  is  entered,  to  be

penny's worth of silver taken from  added,  in  the  list  of  errata  in  II : it

every  shilling,  the  new  shilling  would  was  incorporated  in  the  text  of  I.]


OF  MONEY.  315

v.
From  the  whole  of  this  reasoning  we  may  conclude,  that

it  is  of  no  manner  of  consequence,  with  regard  to  the  domestic
happiness  of  a  state,  whether  money  be  in  a  greater  or  less
quantity.  The  good  policy  of  the  magistrate  consists  only
in  keeping  it,  if  possible,  still  encreasing ;  because,  by  that
means,  he  keeps  alive  a  spirit  of  industry  in  the  nation,  and
encreases  the  stock  of  labour,  in  which  consists  all  real  power
and  riches.  A  nation,  whose  money  decreases,  is  actually,
at  that  time,  weaker  and  more  miserable  than  another  nation,
which  possesses  no  more  money,  but  is  on  the  encreasing  hand.
This  will  be  easily  accounted  for,  if  we  consider,  that  the
alterations  in  the  quantity  of  money,  either  on  one  side  or
the  other,  are  not  immediately  attended  with  proportionable
alterations  in  the  price  of  commodities.  There  is  always  an
interval  before  matters  be  adjusted  to  their  new  situation ;
and  this  interval  is  as  pernicious  to  industry,  when  gold  and
silver  are  diminishing,  as  it  is  advantageous  when  these
metals  are  encreasing.  The  workman  has  not  the  same
employment  from  the  manufacturer  and  merchant ;  though
he  pays  the  same  price  for  everything  in  the  market.  The
farmer  cannot  dispose  of  his  corn  and  cattle;  though  he
must  pay  the  same  rent  to  his  landlord.  The  poverty,  and
beggary,  and  sloth,  which  must  ensue,  are  easily  foreseen.

II.  The  second  observation  which  I  proposed  to  make
with  regard  to  money,  may  be  explained  after  the  following
manner.  There  are  some  kingdoms,  and  many  provinces  in
EUROPE,  (and  all  of  them  were  once  in  the  same  condition)
where  money  is  so  scarce,  that  the  landlord  can  get  none  at
all  from  his  tenants  ;  but  is  obliged  to  take  his  rent  in  kind,
and  either  to  consume  it  himself,  or  transport  it  to  places
where  he  may  find  a  market.  In  those  countries,  the  prince
can  levy  few  or  no  taxes,  but  in  the  same  manner :  And  as  %
he  will  receive  small  benefit  from  impositions  so  paid,  it  is
evident  that  such  a  kingdom  has  little  force  even  at  home  ;
and  cannot  maintain  fleets  and  armies  to  the  same  extent,  as
if  every  part  of  it  abounded  in  gold  and  silver.  There  is
surely  a  greater  disproportion  between  the  force  of  GERMANY,
at  present,  and  what  it  was  three  centuries  ago,1  than  there
is  in  its  industry,  people,  and  manufactures.  The  AUSTRIAN

1  The  ITALIANS  gave  to  the  Emperor that  prince  ever  succeeded,  for  want  of
MAXIMILIAN,  the nickname  of  Pocci- money.
DANARI. None  of the enterprises  of


316  ESSAY in.

dominions  in  the  empire  are  in  general  well  peopled  and  well
cultivated,  and  are  of  great  extent ;  but  have  not  a  propor
tionable  weight  in  the  balance  of  EUEOPE  ;  proceeding,  as  is
commonly  supposed,  from  the  scarcity  of  money.  How  do
all  these  facts  agree  with  that  principle  of  reason,  that  the
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  is  in  itself  altogether  indifferent  ?
According  to  that  principle  wherever  a  sovereign  has  numbers
of  subjects,  and  these  have  plenty  of  commodities,  he  should
of  course  be  great  and  powerful,  and  they  rich  and  happy,
independent  of  the  greater  or  lesser  abundance  of  the  precious
metals.  These  admit  of  divisions  and  subdivisions  to  a  great
extent ;  and  where  the  pieces  might  become  so  small  as  to  be
in  danger  of  being  lost,  it  is  easy  to  mix  the  gold  or  silver
with  a  baser  metal,  as  is  practised  in  some  countries  of
EUROPE  ;  and  by  that  means  raise  the  pieces  to  a  bulk  more
sensible  and  convenient.  They  still  serve  the  same  pur
poses  of  exchange,  whatever  their  number  may  be,  or  what
ever  colour  they  may  be  supposed  to  have.

To  these  difficulties  I  answer,  that  the  effect,  here  sup
posed  to  flow  from  scarcity  of  money,  really  arises  from  the
manners  and  customs  of  the  people ;  and  that  we  mistake,
as  is  too  usual,  a  collateral  effect  for  a  cause.  The  contra
diction  is  only  apparent ;  but  it  requires  some  thought  and
reflection  to  discover  the  principles,  by  which  we  can  recon
cile  reason  to  experience.

It  seems  a  maxim  almost  self-evident,  that  the  prices  of
every  thing  depend  on  the  proportion  between  commodities
and  money,  and  that  any  considerable  alteration  on  either
has  the  same  effect,  either  of  heightening  or  lowering  the
price.  Encrease  the  commodities,  they  become  cheaper ;
en  crease  the  money,  they  rise  in  their  value.  As,  on  the  other
hand,  a  diminution  of  the  former,  and  that  of  the  latter,
have  contrary  tendencies.

It  is  also  evident,  that  the  prices  do  not  so  much  depend
on  the  absolute  quantity  of  commodities  and  that  of  money,
which  are  in  a  nation,  as  on  that  of  the  commodities,  which
come  or  may  come  to  market,  and  of  the  money  which  cir
culates.  If  the  coin  be  locked  up  in  chests,  it  is  the  same
thing  with  regard  to  prices,  as  if  it  were  annihilated ;  if  the
commodities  be  hoarded  in  1  magazines  and  granaries,  a  like
effect  follows.  As  the  money  and  commodities,  in  these
1  [Magazines  and  :  first  added  in  Edition  Q.]


OF  MONEY.  317

cases,  never  meet,  they  cannot  affect  each  other.  Were  we,
at  any  time,  to  form  conjectures  concerning  the  price  of  pro
visions,  the  corn,  which  the  farmer  must  reserve  'for  seed  and
for  the  maintenance  of  himself  and  family,  ought  never  to
enter  into  the  estimation.  It  is  only  the  overplus,  compared
to  the  demand,  that  determines  the  value.

To  apply  these  principles,  we  must  consider,  that,  in  the
first  and  more  uncultivated  ages  of  any  state,  ere  fancy  has
confounded  her  wants  with  those  of  nature,  men,  content
with  the  produce  of  their  own  fields,  or  with  those  rude  im
provements  which  they  themselves  can  work  upon  them,
have  little  occasion  for  exchange,  at  least  for  money,  which,
by  agreement,  is  the  common  measure  of  exchange.  The
wool  of  the  farmer's  own  flock,  spun  in  his  own  family,  and
wrought  by  a  neighbouring  weaver,  who  receives  his  payment
in  corn  or  wool,  suffices  for  furniture  and  cloathing.  The
carpenter,  the  smith,  the  mason,  the  tailor,  are  retained  by
wages  of  a  like  nature  ;  and  the  landlord  himself,  dwelling
in  the  neighbourhood,  is  content  to  receive  his  rent  in  the
commodities  raised  by  the  farmer.  The  greater  part  of
these  he  consumes  at  home,  in  rustic  hospitality  :  The  rest,
perhaps,  he  disposes  of  for  money  to  the  neighbouring  town,
whence  he  draws  the  few  materials  of  his  expense  and
luxury.

But  after  men  begin  to  refine  on  all  these  enjoyments,  and
live  not  always  at  home,  nor  are  content  with  what  can  be
raised  in  their  neighbourhood,  there  is  more  exchange  and
commerce  of  all  kinds,  and  more  money  enters  into  that
exchange.  The  tradesmen  will  not  be  paid  in  corn  ;  because
they  want  something  more  than  barely  to  eat.  The  farmer
goes  beyond  his  own  parish  for  the  commodities  he  purchases,
and  cannot  always  carry  his  commodities  to  the  merchant
who  supplies  him.  The  landlord  lives  in  the  capital,  or  in
a  foreign  country ;  and  demands  his  rent  in  gold  and  silver,
which  can  easily  be  transported  to  him.  Great  undertakers,
and  manufacturers,  and  merchants,  arise  in  every  com
modity  ;  and  these  can  conveniently  deal  in  nothing  but
in  specie.  And  consequently,  in  this  situation  of  society,
the  coin  enters  into  many  more  contracts,  and  by  that  means
is  much  more  employed  than  in  the  former.

The  necessary  effect  is,  that,  provided  the  money  encrease

1  [For  sewi  and  :  first  added  in  Edition  R.J


318  ESSAY III.

not  in  the  nation,  every  thing  must  become  much  cheaper  in
times  of  industry  and  refinement,  than  in  rude,  uncultivated
ages.  It  is  the  proportion  between  the  circulating  money,
and  the  commodities  in  the  market,  which  determines  the
prices.  Goods,  that  are  consumed  at  home,  or  exchanged
with  other  goods  in  the  neighbourhood,  never  come  to  mar
ket  ;  they  affect  not  in  the  least  the  current  specie ;  with
regard  to  it  they  are  as  if  totally  annihilated ;  and  conse
quently  this  method  of  using  them  sinks  the  proportion  on  the
side  of  the  commodities,  and  encreases  the  prices.  But  after
money  enters  into  all  contracts  and  sales,  and  is  every  where
the  measure  of  exchange,  the  same  national  cash  has  a  much
greater  task  to  perform ;  all  commodities  are  then  in  the
market;  the  sphere  of  circulation  is  enlarged  ;  it  is  the  same
case  as  if  that  individual  sum  were  to  serve  a  larger  kingdom  ;
and  therefore,  the  proportion  being  here  lessened  on  the  side
of  the  money,  every  thing  must  become  cheaper,  and  the
prices  gradually  fall.

,  By  the  most  exact  computations,  that  have  been  formed
all  over  EUROPE,  after  making  allowance  for  the  alteration
in  the  numerary  value  or  the  denomination,  it  is  found,  that
the  prices  of  all  things  have  only  risen  three,  or  at  most,  four
times,  since  the  discovery  of  the  WEST  INDIES.  But  will  any
one  assert,  that  there  is  not  much  more  than  four  times  the
coin  in  EUROPE,  that  was  in  the  fifteenth  century,  and
the  centuries  preceding  it?  The  SPANIARDS  and  PORTU-
G¥ESE  from  their  mines,  the  ENGLISH,  FRENCH,  and  DUTCH,
by  their  AFRICAN  trade,  and  by  their  interlopers  in  the  WEST
INDIES,  bring  home  about  'six  millions  a  year,  of  which  not
above  a  third  goes  to  the  EAST  INDIES.  This  sum  alone,  in
ten  years,  would  probably  double  the  ancient  stock  of  money
in  EUROPE.  And  no  other  satisfactory  reason  can  be  given,
why  all  prices  have  not  risen  to  a  much  more  exorbitant
height,  except  that  which  is  derived  from  a  change  of  cus
toms  and  manners.  Besides  that  more  commodities  are
produced  by  additional  industry,  the  same  commodities  come
more  to  market,  after  men  depart  from  their  ancient  airn-
plicity  of  manners.  And  though  this  encrease  has  not  been
equal  to  that  of  money,  it  has,  however,  been  considerable,
and  has  preserved  the  proportion  between  coin  and  commo
dities  nearer  the  ancient  standard.

1  [Editions  H  and  I  read  :  Seven  millions ... a  tenth  part.]


OF MONEY.  319

Were  the  question  proposed,  Which  of  these  methods  of
living  in  the  people,  the  simple  or  refined,  is  the  most  ad
vantageous  to  the  state  or  public  ?  I  should,  without  much
scruple,  prefer  the  latter,  in  a  view  to  politics  at  least ;  and
should  produce  this  as  an  additional  reason  for  the  encou
ragement  of  trade  and  manufactures.

While  men  live  in  the  ancient  simple  manner,  and  supply
all  their  necessaries  from  domestic  industry  or  from  the
neighbourhood,  the  sovereign  can  levy  no  taxes  in  money
from  a  considerable  part  of  his  subjects  ;  and  if  he  will  impose
on  them  any  burthens,  he  must  take  payment  in  commo
dities,  with  which  alone  they  abound ;  a  method  attended
with  such  great  and  obvious  inconveniencies,  that  they  need
need  not  here  be  insisted  on.  All  the  money  he  can  pretend
to  raise,  must  be  from  his  principal  cities,  where  alone  it
circulates ;  and  these,  it  is  evident,  cannot  afford  him  so
much  as  the  whole  state  could,  did  gold  and  silver  circulate
throughout  the  whole.  But  besides  this  obvious  diminution
of  the  revenue,  there  is  another  cause  of  the  poverty  of  the
public  in  such  a  situation.  Not  only  the  sovereign  receives
less  money,  but  the  same  money  goes  not  so  far  as  in  times
of  industry  and  general  commerce.  Ever}1-  thing  is  dearer,
where  the  gold  and  silver  are  supposed  equal ;  and  that  be
cause  fewer  commodities  come  to  market,  and  the  whole
coin  bears  a  higher  proportion  to  what  is  to  be  purchased  by
it ;  whence  alone  the  prices  of  every  thing  are  fixed  and  de
termined.

Here  then  we  may  learn  the  fallacy  of  the  remark,  often
to  be  met  with  in  historians,  and  even  in  common  conversation,
that  any  particular  state  is  weak,  though  fertile,  populous,
and  well  cultivated,  merely  because  it  wants  money.  It  ap
pears,  that  the  want  of  money  can  never  injure  any  state
within  itself:  For  men  and  commodities  are  the  real  strength
of  any  community.  It  is  the  simple  manner  of  living  which
here  hurts  the  public,  by  confining  the  gold  and  silver  to  few
hands,  and  preventing  its  universal  diffusion  and  circulation.
On  the  contrary,  industry  and  refinements  of  all  kinds  incor
porate  it  with  the  whole  state,  however  small  its  quantity  may
be :  They  digest  it  into  every  vein,  so  to  speak  ;  and  make  it
enter  into  every  transaction  and  contract.  No  hand  is  entirely
empty  of  it.  And  as  the  prices  of  every  thing  fall  by  that
means,  the  sovereign  has  a  double  advantage  :  He  may  draw


320  ESSAY  nr.

money  by  his  taxes  from  every  part  of  the  state  ;  and  what
he  receives,  goes  farther  in  every  purchase  and  payment.

We  may  infer,  from  a  comparison  of  prices,  that  money  is
not  more  plentiful  in  CHINA,  than  it  was  in  EUROPE  three  cen
turies  ago  :  But  what  immense  power  is  that  empire  possessed
of,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  civil  and  military  establishment
maintained  by  it  ?  Polybius  1  tells  us,  that  provisions  were  so
cheap  in  ITALY  during  his  time,  that  in  some  places  the2  stated
price  for  a  meal  at  the  inns  was  a  semis  a  head,  little  more
than  a  farthing  !  Yet  the  ROMAN  power  had  even  then  sub
dued  the  whole  known  world.  About  a  century  before  that
period,  the  CARTHAGINIAN  ambassador  said,  by  way  of  raillery,
*hat  no  people  lived  more  sociably  amongst  themselves  than
the  ROMANS  ;  for  that,  in  every  entertainment,  which,  as
foreign  ministers,  they  received,  they  still  observed  the  same
plate  at  every  table.3  The  absolute  quantity  of  the  precious
metals  is  a  matter  of  great  indifference.  There  are  only  two
circumstances  of  any  importance,  namely,  their  gradual  en-
crease,  and  their  thorough  concoction  and  circulation  through
the  state  ;  and  the  influence  of  both  these  circumstances  has
here  been  explained.

In  the  following  Essay  we  shall  see  an  instance  of  a  like
fallacy  as  that  above  mentioned;  where  a  collateral  effect  is
taken  for  a  cause,  and  where  a  consequence  is  ascribed  to  the
plenty  of  money ;  though  it  be  really  owing  to  a  change  in
the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people.


ESSAY  TV. —Of  Interest.

NOTHING  is  esteemed  a  more  certain  sign  of  the  nourishing
condition  of  any  nation  than  the  lowness  of  interest :  And
with  reason ;  though  I  believe  the  cause  is  somewhat  different
from  what  is  commonly  apprehended.  Lowness  of  interest  is
generally  ascribed  to  plenty  of  money.  But  money,  however
plentiful,  has  no  other  effect,  if  fixed,  than  to  raise  the  price
of  labour.  Silver  is  more  common  than  gold ;  and  therefore
you  receive  a  greater  quantity  of  it  for  the  same  commodities.
But  do  you  pay  less  interest  for  it  ?  Interest  in  BATAVIA  and
JAMAICA  is  at  10  per  cent,  in  PORTUGAL  at  G ;  though  these

1  Lib.  ii.  cap.  15.  club  at  the  inns.]

2  [Editions  H  to  P  read  :  The  stated  3  PI.IN.  lib.  xxxiii.  cap.  11.


OF  INTEREST,  321

places,  as  we  may  learn  from  the  prices  of  every  thing,
abound  more  in  gold  and  silver  than  either  LONDON  or
AMSTERDAM.

Were  all  the  gold  in  ENGLAND  annihilated  at  once,  and
one  and  twenty  shillings  substituted  in  the  place  of  every
guinea,  would  money  be  more  plentiful  or  interest  lower?
No  surely :  We  should  only  use  silver  instead  of  gold.  Were
gold  rendered  as  common  as  silver,  and  silver  as  common  as
copper ;  would  money  be  more  plentiful  or  interest  lower  ?
We  may  assuredly  give  the  same  answer.  Our  shillings
would  then  be  yellow,  and  our  halfpence  white  ;  and  we
should  have  no  guineas.  No  other  difference  would  ever
be  observed  ;  no  alteration  on  commerce,  manufactures,
navigation,  or  interest ;  unless  we  imagine,  that  the  colour  of
the  metal  is  of  any  consequence.

Now,  what  is  so  visible  in  these  greater  variations  of
scarcity  or  abundance  in  the  precious  metals,  must  hold  in
all  inferior  changes.  If  the  multiplying  of  gold  and  silver
fifteen  times  makes  no  difference,  much  less  can  the  doubling
or  tripling  them.  All  augmentation  has  no  other  effect
than  to  heighten  the  price  of  labour  and  commodities ;  and
even  this  variation  is  little  more  than  that  of  a  name.  In  the
progress  towards  these  changes,  the  augmentation  may  have
some  influence,  by  exciting  industry ;  but  after  the  prices  are
settled,  suitably  to  the  new  abundance  of  gold  and  silver,  it
has  no  manner  of  influence.

An  effect  always  holds  proportion  with  its  cause.  Prices
have  risen  near  four  times  since  the  discovery  of  the  INDIES  ;
and  it  is  probable  gold  and  silver  have  multiplied  much
more :  But  interest  has  not  fallen  much  above  half.  The
rate  of  interest,  therefore,  is  not  derived  from  the  quantity  of
the  precious  metals.

Money  having  chiefly  a  fictitious  value,1  the  greater  or  less
plenty  of  it  is  of  no  consequence,  if  we  consider  a  nation
within  itself;  and  the  quantity  of  specie,  when  once  fixed,
though  ever  so  large,  has  no  other  effect,  than  to  oblige  every
one  to  tell  out  a  greater  number  of  those  shining  bits  of  metal,
for  clothes,  furniture  or  equipage,  without  encreasing  any  one
convenience  of  life.  If  a  man  borrow  money  to  build  a  house,
he  then  carries  home  a  greater  load ;  because  the  stone,  tim
ber,  lead,  glass,  &c.  with  the  labour  of  the  masons  and

1  [Value,  arising  from  the  agreement  and  convention  of  men  :  Editions  H  to  P.]
VOL.  III.  Y


322  ESSAY  IV.

^\

carpenters,  are  represented  by  a  greater  quantity  of  gold
and  silver.  But  as  these  metals  are  considered  chiefly  as
representations,  there  can  no  alteration  arise,  from  their  bulk
or  quantity,  their  weight  or  colour,  either  upon  their  real
value  or  their  interest.  The  same  interest,  in  all  cases,
bears  the  same  proportion  to  the  sum.  And  if  you  lent  me
so  much  labour  and  so  many  commodities ;  by  receiving  five
per  cent,  you  always  receive  proportional  labour  and  commo
dities,  however  represented,  whether  by  yellow  or  white  coin,
whether  by  a  pound  or  an  ounce.  It  is  in  vain,  therefore,  to
look  for  the  cause  of  the  fall  or  rise  of  interest  in  the  greater
or  less  quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  which  is  fixed  in  any  nation.
High  interest  arises  from  three  circumstances :  A  great
demand  for  borrowing  ;  little  riches  to  supply  that  demand ;
and  great  profits  arising  from  commerce  :  And  these  circum
stances  are  a  clear  proof  of  the  small  advance  of  commerce
and  industry,  not  of  the  scarcity  of  gold  and  silver.  Low
interest,  on  the  other  hand,  proceeds  from  the  three  opposite
circumstances  :  A  small  demand  for  borrowing ;  great  riches
to  supply  that  demand ;  and  small  profits  arising  from  com
merce  :  And  these  circumstances  are  all  connected  together,
and  proceed  from  the  encrease  of  industry  and  commerce,  not
of  gold  and  silver.  We  shall  endeavour  to  prove  these  points ;
and  shall  begin  with  the  causes  and  the  effects  of  a  great  or
email  demand  for  borrowing.

When  a  people  have  emerged  ever  so  little  from  a  savage
state,  and  their  numbers  have  encreased  beyond  the  original
multitude,  there  must  immediately  arise  an  inequality  of
property ;  and  while  some  possess  large  tracts  of  land,  others
are  confined  within  narrow  limits,  and  some  are  entirely
without  any  landed  property.  Those  who  possess  more  land
than  they  can  labour,  employ  those  who  possess  none,  and
agree  to  receive  a  determinate  part  of  the  product.  Thus
the  landed  interest  is  immediately  established  ;  nor  is  there
any  settled  government,  however  rude,  in  which  affairs  are
not  on  this  footing.  Of  these  proprietors  of  land,  some
.  must  presently  discover  themselves  to  be  of  different  tempers
from  others  ;  and  while  one  would  willingly  store  up  the
produce  of  his  land  for  futurity,  another  desires  to  consume
at  present  what  should  suffice  for  many  years.  But  as  the
spending  of  a  settled  revenue  is  a  way  of  life  entirely  without
occupation ;  men  have  so  much  need  of  somewhat  to  fix  and


OF  INTEREST.  323

engage  them,  that  pleasures,  such  as  they  are,  will  be  the
pursuit  of  the  greater  part  of  the  landholders,  and  the  pro
digals  among  them  will  always  be  more  numerous  than  the
misers.  In  a  state,  therefore,  where  there  is  nothing  but  a
landed  interest,  as  there  is  little  frugality,  the  borrowers
must  be  very  numerous,  and  the  rate  of  interest  must  hold
proportion  to  it.  The  difference  depends  not  on  the  quantity
of  money,  but  on  the  habits  and  manners  which  prevail.
By  this  alone  the  demand  for  borrowing  is  encreased  or
diminished.  Were  money  so  plentiful  as  to  make  an  egg
be  sold  for  sixpence ;  so  long  as  there  are  only  landed  gentry
and  peasants  in  the  state,  the  borrowers  must  be  numerous,
and  interest  high.  The  rent  for  the  same  farm  would  be
heavier  and  more  bulky :  But  the  same  idleness  of  the  land
lord,  with  the  higher  price  of  commodities,  would  dissipate  it
in  the  same  time,  and  produce  the  same  necessity  and  demand
for  borrowing.1

Nor  is  the  case  different  with  regard  to  the  second  circum
stance  which  we  proposed  to  consider,  namely,  the  great  or
little  riches  to  supply  the  demand.  This  effect  also  depends
on  the  habits  and  way  of  living  of  the  people,  not  on  the
quantity  of  gold  and  silver.  In  order  to  have,  in  any  state,
a  great  number  of  lenders,  it  is  not  sufficient  nor  requisite,
that  there  be  great  abundance  of  the  precious  metals.  It  is
only  requisite,  that  the  property  or  command  of  that  quan
tity,  which  is  in  the  state,  whether  great  or  small,  should  be
collected  in  particular  hands,  so  as  to  form  considerable  sums,
or  compose  a  great  monied  interest.  This  begets  a  number  of
lenders,  and  sinks  the  rate  of  usury ;  and  this  I  shall  venture
to  affirm,  depends  not  on  the  quantity  of  specie,  but  on  par
ticular  manners  and  customs,  which  make  the  specie  gather
into  separate  sums  or  masses  of  considerable  value.

For  suppose,  that,  by  miracle,  every  man  in  GEEAT  BRITAIN
should  have  five  pounds  slipt  into  his  pocket  in  one  night ;

1  [Editions  H  to  N  add  :  I  have  been  going reasoning. Men, in that age,

informed by  a  very eminent lawyer,  lived  so  much  at  home,  and  in  so  very

and  a  man  of  great  knowledge  and  ob-  simple  and  frugal  a  manner,  that  they

servation,  that  it  appears  from  antient  had  no  occasion  for  money  ;  and  though

papers and records,  that,  about four  the lenders were then few,  the bor-

centuries  ago,  money  in  SCOTLAND,  and  rowers  were  still  fewer. The  high  rate

probably  in  other  parts  of  ETJKOPE,  was  of  interest  among  the  early  ROMANS  is

only  at  five  per  cent,  and  afterwards  accounted  for  by  historians from  the

rose  to  ten  before  the  discovery  of  the  frequent losses sustained by the in-

WEST-INIHKS. The  fact  is  curious ;  but  roads  of  the  enemy.]
might  easily  be  reconciled  to  the  fore-

Y  2


324  ESSAY  IV.

this  would  much  more  than  double  the  whole  money  that  is
at  present  in  the  kingdom  ;  yet  there  would  not  next  day,  nor
for  some  time,  be  any  more  lenders,  nor  any  variation  in  the
interest.  And  were  there  nothing  but  landlords  and  peasants
in  the  state,  this  money,  however  abundant,  could  never
gather  into  sums  ;  and  would  only  serve  to  en  crease  the  prices
of  every  thing,  without  any  farther  consequence.  The  pro
digal  landlord  dissipates  it,  as  fast  as  he  receives  it ;  and  the
beggarly  peasant  has  no  means,  nor  view,  nor  ambition  of
obtaining  above  a  bare  livelihood.  The  overplus  of  borrowers
above  that  of  lenders  continuing  still  the  same,  there  will
follow  no  reduction  of  interest.  That  depends  upon  another
principle ;  and  must  proceed  from  an  encrease  of  industry  and
frugality,  of  arts  and  commerce.

Every  thing  useful  to  the  life  of  man  arises  from  the
ground ;  but  few  things  arise  in  that  condition  which  is  re
quisite  to  render  them  useful.  There  must,  therefore,  beside
the  peasant  and  the  proprietors  of  land,  be  another  rank  of
men,  who  receiving  from  the  former  the  rude  materials,  work
them  into  their  proper  form,  and  retain  part  for  their  own
use  and  subsistence.  In.  the  infancy  of  society,  these  con
tracts  between  the  artisans  and  the  peasants,  and  between
one  species  of  artisans  and  another  are  commonly  entered  into
immediately  by  the  persons  themselves,  who,  being  neigh
bours,  are  easily  acquainted  with  each  other's  necessities,  and
can  lend  their  mutual  assistance  to  supply  them.  But  when
men's  industr}r  encreases,  and  their  views  enlarge,  it  is  found,
that  the  most  remote  parts  of  the  state  can  assist  each  other
as  well  as  the  more  contiguous,  and  that  this  intercourse  of
good  offices  may  be  carried  on  to  the  greatest  extent  and
intricacy.  Hence  the  origin  of  'merchants,  one  of  the  most
useful  races  of  men,  who  serve  as  agents  between  those  parts
of  the  state,  that  are  wholly  unacquainted,  and  are  ignorant
of  each  other's  necessities.  Here  are  in  a  city  fifty  workmen
in  silk  and  linen,  and  a  thousand  customers ;  and  these  two
ranks  of  men,  so  necessary  to  each  other,  can  never  rightly
meet,  till  one  man  erects  a  shop,  to  which  all  the  workmen
and  all  the  customers  repair.  Tii  this  province,  grass  rises
in  abundance  :  The  inhabitants  abound  in  cheese,  and  butter,
and  cattle  ;  but  want  bread  and  corn,  which,  in  a  neighbouring
province,  are  in  too  great  abundance  for  the  use  of  the  in
habitants.  One  man  discovers  this.  He  brings  corn  from


OF  INTEREST.  325

the  one  province  and  returns  with  cattle ;  and  supplying  the
wants  of  both,  he  is,  so  far,  a  common  benefactor.  As  the
people  encrease  in  numbers  and  industry,  the  difficulty  of
their  intercourse  encreases :  The  business  of  the  agency  07
merchandize  becomes  more  intricate ;  and  divides,  subdivides,
compounds,  and  mixes  to  a  greater  variety.  In  all  these  trans
actions,  it  is  necessary,  and  reasonable,  that  a  considerable
part  of  the  commodities  and  labour  should  belong  to  the
merchant,  to  whom,  in  a  great  measure,  they  are  owing.
And  these  commodities  he  will  sometimes  preserve  in  kind,
or  more  commonly  convert  into  money,  which  is  their  com
mon  representation.  If  gold  and  silver  have  encreased  in  the
state  together  with  the  industry,  it  will  require  a  great  quan
tity  of  these  metals  to  represent  a  great  quantity  of  commo
dities  and  labour.  If  industry  alone  has  encreased,  the  prices
of  every  thing  must  sink,  and  a  small  quantity  of  specie  will
serve  as  a  representation.

There  is  no  craving  or  demand  of  the  human  mind  more  con
stant  and  insatiable  than  that  for  exercise  and  employment ;
and  this  desire  seems  the  foundation  of  most  of  our  passions
and  pursuits.  Deprive  a  man  of  all  business  and  serious  occupa
tion,  he  runs  restless  from  one  amusement  to  another ;  and
the  weight  and  oppression,  which  he  feels  from  idleness,  is  so
great,  that  he  forgets  the  ruin  which  must  follow  him  from
his  immoderate  expeiices.  Give  him  a  more  harmless  way  of
employing  his  mind  or  body,  he  is  satisfied,  and  feels  no  longer
that  insatiable  thirst  after  pleasure.  But  if  the  employment
you  give  him  be  lucrative,  especially  if  the  profit  be  attached
to  every  particular  exertion  of  industry,  he  has  gain  so  often
in  his  eye,  that  he  acquires,  by  degrees,  a  passion  for  it,  and
knows  no  such  pleasure  as  that  of  seeing  the  daily  encrease
of  his  fortune.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  trade  encreases
frugality,  and  why,  among  merchants,  there  is  the  same
overplus  of  misers  above  prodigals,  as,  among  the  possessors
of  land,  there  is  the  contrary.

Commerce  encreases  industry,  by  conveying  it  readily  from
one  member  of  the  state  to  another,  and  allowing  none  of  it
to  perish  or  become  useless.  It  encreases  frugality,  by  giving
occupation  to  men,  and  employing  them  in  the  arts  of  gain,
which  soon  engage  their  affection,  and  remove  all  relish  for
pleasure  and  expense.  It  is  an  infallible  consequence  of  all
industrious  professions,  to  beget  frugality,  and  make  the  love


326  ESSAY  IV.

of  gain  prevail  over  the  love  of  pleasure.  Among  lawyers  and
physicians  who  have  any  practice,  there  are  many  more  who
live  within  their  income,  than  who  exceed  it,  or  even  live  up
to  it.  But  lawyers  and  ph}rsicians  beget  no  industry ;  and  it
is  even  at  the  expence  of  others  they  acquire  their  riches ;  so
that  they  are  sure  to  diminish  the  possessions  of  some  of  their
fellow-citizens,  as  fast  as  they  encrease  their  own.  Merchants,
on  the  contrary,  heget  industry,  by  serving  as  canals  to  con
vey  it  through  every  corner  of  the  state :  And  at  the  same
time,  by  their  frugality,  they  acquire  great  power  over  that
industry,  and  collect  a  large  property  in  the  labour  and  com
modities,  which  they  are  the  chief  instruments  in  producing.
There  is  no  other  profession,  therefore,  except  merchandize,
which  can  make  the  monied  interest  considerable,  or,  in  other
words,  can  encrease  industry,  and,  by  also  encreasing  fru
gality,  give  a  great  command  of  that  industry  to  particular
members  of  the  society.  Without  commerce,  the  state  must
consist  chiefly  of  landed  gentry,  whose  prodigality  and  ex-
pence  make  a  continual  demand  for  borrowing  ;  and  of  pea
sants,  who  have  no  sums  to  supply  that  demand.  The  money
never  gathers  into  large  stocks  or  sums,  which  can  be  lent  at
interest.  It  is  dispersed  into  numberless  hands,  who  either
squander  it  in  idle  show  and  magnificence,  or  employ  it  in
the  purchase  of  the  common  necessaries  of  life.  Commerce
alone  assembles  it  into  considerable  sums  ;  and  this  effect  it
has  merely  from  the  industry  which  it  begets,  and  the  fru
gality  which  it  inspires,  independent  of  that  particular  quan
tity  of  precious  metal  which  may  circulate  in  the  state.

Thus  an  encrease  of  commerce,  by  a  necessary  conse
quence,  raises  a  great  number  of  lenders,  and  by  that  means
produces  lowness  of  interest.  We  must  now  consider  how
far  this  encrease  of  commerce  diminishes  the  profits  arising
from  that  profession,  and  gives  rise  to  the  third  circumstance
requisite  to  produce  lowness  of  interest.

It  may  be  proper  to  observe  on  this  head,  that  low  interest
and  low  profits  of  merchandize  are  two  events,  that  mutually
forward  each  other,  and  are  both  originally  derived  from  that
extensive  commerce,  which  produces  opulent  merchants,  and
renders  the  monied  interest  considerable.  Where  merchants
possess  great  stocks,  whether  represented  by  few  or  many
pieces  of  metal,  it  must  frequently  happen,  that,  when  they
either  become  tired  of  business,  or  leave  heirs  unwilling  or


OF  INTEREST.  327

unfit  to  engage  in  commerce,  a  great  proportion,  of  these
riches  naturally  seeks  an  annual  and  secure  revenue.  The
plenty  diminishes  the  price,  and  makes  the  lenders  accept  of
a  low  interest.  This  consideration  obliges  many  to  keep
their  stock  employed  in  trade,  and  rather  be  content  with
low  profits  than  dispose  of  their  money  at  an  under-value.
On  the  other  hand,  when  commerce  has  become  extensive,
and  employs  large  stocks,  there  must  arise  rivalships  among
the  merchants,  which  diminish  the  profits  of  trade,  at  the
same  time  that  they  encrease  the  trade  itself.  The  low  pro
fits  of  merchandize  induce  the  merchants  to  accept  more
willingly  of  a  low  interest,  when  they  leave  off  business,  and
begin  to  indulge  themselves  in  ease  and  indolence.  It  is
needless,  therefore,  to  enquire  which  of  these  circumstances,
to  wit,  low  interest  or  low  profits,  is  the  cause,  and  which  the
effect  ?  They  both  arise  from  an  extensive  commerce,  and
mutually  forward  each  other.  No  man  will  accept  of  low
profits,  where  he  can  have  high  interest ;  and  no  man  will
accept  of  low  interest,  where  he  can  have  high  profits.  An
extensive  commerce,  by  producing  large  stocks,  diminishes
both  interest  and  profits ;  and  is  always  assisted,  in  it»
diminution  of  the  one,  by  the  proportional  sinking  of  the
other.  I  may  add,  that,  as  low  profits  arise  from  the  encrease
of  commerce  and  industry,  they  serve  in  their  turn  to  its
farther  encrease,  by  rendering  the  commodities  cheaper,  en
couraging  the  consumption,  and  heightening  the  industry.
And  thus,  if  we  consider  the  whole  connexion  of  causes  and
effects,  interest  is  the  barometer  of  the  state,  and  its  low-
ness  is  a  sign  almost  infallible  of  the  flourishing  condition  of
a  people.  It  proves  the  encrease  of  industry,  and  its  prompt
circulation  through  the  whole  state,  little  inferior  to  a
demonstration.  And  though,  perhaps,  it  may  not  be  im
possible  but  a  sudden  and  a  great  check  to  commerce  may
have  a  momentary  effect  of  the  same  kind,  by  throwing  so
many  stocks  out  of  trade ;  it  must  be  attended  with  such
misery  and  want  of  employment  in  the  poor,  that,  besides  its
short  duration,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  mistake  the  one  case
for  the  other.

Those  who  have  asserted,  that  the  plenty  of  money  was
the  cause  of  low  interest,  seem  to  have  taken  a  collateral
effect  for  a  cause  ;  since  the  same  industry,  which  sinks  the
interest,  commonly  acquires  great  abundance  of  the  precious


328  ESSAY  IV.

metals.  A  variety  of  fine  manufactures,  with  vigilant  enter
prising  merchants,  will  soon  draw  money  to  a  state,  if  it  be
any  where  to  be  found  in  the  world.  The  same  cause,  by
multiplying  the  conveniencies  of  life,  and  encreasing  industry,
collects  great  riches  into  the  hands  of  persons,  who  are  not
proprietors  of  land,  and  produces,  by  that  means,  a  lowness
of  interest.  But  though  both  these  effects,  plenty  of  money
and  low  interest,  naturally  arise  from  commerce  and  in
dustry,  they  are  altogether  independent  of  each  other.  For
suppose  a  nation  removed  into  the  Pacific  ocean,  without  any
foreign  commerce,  or  any  knowledge  of  navigation :  Sup
pose,  that  this  nation  possesses  always  the  same  stock  of
coin,  but  is  continually  encreasing  in  its  numbers  and  in
dustry  :  It  is  evident,  that  the  price  of  every  commodity
must  gradually  diminish  in  that  kingdom  ;  since  it  is  th^
proportion  between  money  and  any  species  of  goods,  which
fixes  their  mutual  value  ;  and,  upon  the  present  supposition,
the  conveniencies  of  life  become  every  day  more  abundant,
without  any  alteration  in  the  current  specie.  A  less  quantity
of  money,  therefore,  among  this  people,  will  make  a  rich
man,  during  the  times  of  industry,  than  would  suffice  to  that
purpose,  in  ignorant  and  slothful  ages.  Less  money  will
build  a  house,  portion  a  daughter,  buy  an  estate,  support  a
manufactory,  or  maintain  a  family  and  equipage.  These  are
the  uses  for  which  men  borrow  money ;  and  therefore,  the
greater  or  less  quantity  of  it  in  a  state  has  no  influence  on
the  interest.  But  it  is  evident,  that  the  greater  or  less
stock  of  labour  and  commodities  must  have  a  great  influence;
since  we  really  and  in  effect  borrow  these,  when  we  take
money  upon  interest.  It  is  true,  when  commerce  is  extended
all  over  the  globe,  the  most  industrious  nations  always
abound  most  with  the  precious  metals :  So  that  low  interest
and  plenty  of  money  are  in  fact  ahnost  inseparable.  But
still  it  is  of  consequence  to  know  the  principle  whence  any
phenomenon  arises,  and  to  distinguish  between  a  cause  and
a  concomitant  effect.  Besides  that  the  speculation  is  curious,
it  may  frequently  be  of  use  in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs.
At  least,  it  must  be  owned,  that  nothing  can  be  of  more  use
than  to  improve,  by  practice,  the  method  of  reasoning  on
these  subjects,  which  of  all  others  are  the  most  important;
though  they  are  commonly  treated  in  the  loosest  and  most
careless  manner.


OF  INTEREST.  329

Another  reason  of  this  popular  mistake  with  regard  to  the
cause  of  low  interest,  seems  to  be  the  instance  of  some  na
tions  ;  where,  after  a  sudden  acquisition  of  money  or  of  the
precious  metals,  by  means  of  foreign  conquest,  the  interest
has  fallen,  not  only  among  them,  but  in  all  the  neighbouring
states,  as  soon  as  that  money  was  dispersed,  and  had  in
sinuated  itself  into  every  corner.  Thus,  interest  in  SPAIN
fell  near  a  half  immediately  after  the  discovery  of  the  WEST
INDIES,  as  we  are  informed  by  GAECILASSO  DE  LA  VEGA  :
And  it  has  been  ever  since  gradually  sinking  in  every  king
dom  of  EUROPE.  Interest  in  ROME,  after  the  conquest  of
EGYPT,  fell  from  6  to  4  per  cent,  as  we  learn  from  DiON.1

The  causes  of  the  sinking  of  interest,  upon  such  an  event,
seem  different  in  the  conquering  country  and  in  the  neigh
bouring  states  ;  but  in  neither  of  them  can  we  justly  ascribe
that  effect  merely  to  the  encrease  of  gold  and  silver.

In  the  conquering  country,  it  is  natural  to  imagine,  that
this  new  acquisition  of  money  will  fall  into  a  few  hands,  and
be  gathered  into  large  sums,  which  seek  a  secure  revenue,
either  by  the  purcha.se  of  land  or  by  interest ;  and  con
sequently  the  same  effect  follows,  for  a  little  time,  as  if  there
had  been  a  great  accession  of  industry  and  commerce.  The
encrease  of  lenders  above  the  borrowers  sinks  the  interest;
and  so  much  the  faster,  if  those,  who  have  acquired  those
large  sums,  find  no  industry  or  commerce  in  the  state,  and
no  method  of  employing  their  money  but  by  lending  it  at
interest.  But  after  this  new  mass  of  gold  and  silver  has
been  digested,  and  has  circulated  through  the  whole  state,
pffairs  will  soon  return  to  their  former  situation;  while  the
landlords  and  new  money-holders,  living  idly,  squander
above  their  income ;  and  the  former  daily  contract  debt,  and
the  latter  encroach  on  their  stock  till  its  final  extinction.
The  whole  money  may  sti]l  be  in  the  state,  and  make  itself
felt  by  the  encrease  of  prices  :  But  not  being  now  collected
into  any  large  masses  or  stocks,  the  disproportion  between
the  borrowers  and  lenders  is  the  same  as  formerly,  and  con
sequently  the  high  interest  returns.

Accordingly  we  find,  in  EOME,  that,  so  early  as  TIBERIUS'S

time,  interest  had  again  mounted  to  6  per  cent.*  though  no

accident  had  happened  to  drain  the  empire  of  money. In

TRAJAN'S  time, money  lent  on  mortgages  in  ITALY,  bore

1  Lib.  51,  21.  2  COLUMELLA,  lib.  iii.  cap.  3.


330  ESSAY  V.

6  per  cent.1 ;  on  common  securities  in  BITHYNIA,  12s.  And
if  interest  in  SPAIN  has  not  risen  to  its  old  pitch ;  this  can
be  ascribed  to  nothing  but  the  continuance  of  the  same  cause
that  sunk  it,  to  wit,  the  large  fortunes  continually  made  in
the  INDIES,  which  come  over  to  SPAIN  from  time  to  time,  and
supply  the  demand  of  the  borrowers.  By  this  accidental
and  extraneous  cause,  more  money  is  to  be  lent  in  SPAIN,
that  is,  more  money  is  collected  into  large  sums  than  would
otherwise  be  found  in  a  state,  where  there  are  so  little  com
merce  and  industry.

As  to  the  reduction  of  interest,  which  has  followed  in
ENGLAND,  FRANCE,  and  other  kingdoms  of  EUROPE,  that
have  no  mines,  it  has  been  gradual ;  and  has  not  proceeded
from  the  encrease  of  money,  considered  merely  in  itself;  but
from  that  of  industry,  which  is  the  natural  effect  of  the
former  encrease,  in  that  interval,  before  it  raises  the  price  of
labour  and  provisions.  For  to  return  to  the  foregoing  sup
position;  if  the  industry  of  ENGLAND  had  risen  as  much
from  other  causes,  (and  that  rise  might  easily  have  happened,
though  the  stock  of  money  had  remained  the  same)  must  not
all  the  same  consequences  have  followed,  which  we  observe
at  present?  The  same  people  would,  in  that  case,  be  found
in  the  kingdom,  the  same  commodities,  the  same  industry,
manufactures,  and  commerce ;  and  consequently  the  same
merchants,  with  the  same  stocks,  that  is,  with  the  same
command  over  labour  and  commodities,  only  represented  by
a  smaller  number  of  white  or  yellow  pieces ;  which  being  a
circumstance  of  no  moment,  would  only  affect  the  wa.ggoner,
porter,  and  trunk-maker.  Luxury,  therefore,  manufactures,
arts,  industry,  frugality,  nourishing  equally  as  at  present,  it
is  evident,  that  interest  must  also  have  been  as  low ;  since
that  is  the  necessary  result  of  all  these  circumstances  ;  so  far
as  they  determine  the  profits  of  commerce,  and  the  propor
tion  between  the  borrowers  and  lenders  in  any  state.


ESSAY  V. — Of  the  Balance  of  Trade.

IT  is  very  usual,  in  nations  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  com
merce,  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of  commodities,  and  to
preserve  among  themselves  whatever  they  think  valuable  and

1  PLINII  epist.  lib.  vii.  ep.  18.  2  Id.  lib.  x.  ep.  62.


OF  THE  BALANCE OF  TRADE.  331

useful.  They  do  not  consider,  that,  in  this  prohibition,  they
•..ct  directly  contrary  to  their  intention ;  and  that  the  more  is
exported  of  any  commodity,  the  more  will  be  raised  at  home,
v  Y  which  they  themselves  will  always  have  the  first  offer.

It  is  well  known  to  the  learned,  that  the  ancient  laws  of
ATHENS  rendered  the  exportation  of  figs  criminal ;  that  being
supposed  a  species  of  fruit  so  excellent  in  ATTICA,  that  the
ATHENIANS  deemed  it  too  delicious  for  the  palate  of  any
foreigner.  And  in  this  ridiculous  prohibition  they  were  so
much  in  earnest,  that  informers  were  thence  called  sycophants
among  them,  from  two  GKEEK  words,  which  signify  figs  and
discoverer.1  '2  There  are  proofs  in  many  old  acts  of  parliament
of  the  same  ignorance  in  the  nature  of  commerce,  particularly
in  the  reign  of  EDWAED  III.  And  to  this  day,  in  FRANCE,
the  exportation  of  corn  is  almost  always  prohibited ;  in  order,
as  they  say,  to  prevent  famines ;  though  it  is  evident,  that
nothing  contributes  more  to  the  frequent  famines,  which  so
much  distress  that  fertile  country.

The  same  jealous  fear,  with  regard  to  money,  has  also
prevailed  among  several  nations  ;  and  it  required  both  reason
and  experience  to  convince  any  people,  that  these  prohibitions
serve  to  no  other  purpose  than  to  raise  the  exchange  against
them,  and  produce  a  still  greater  exportation.

These  errors,  one  may  say,  are  gross  and  palpable :  But
there  still  prevails,  even  in  nations  well  acquainted  with
commerce,  a  strong  jealousy  with  regard  to  the  balance  of
trade,  and  a  fear,  that  all  their  gold  and  silver  may  be  leaving
them.  This  seems  to  me,  almost  in  every  case,  a  groundless
apprehension ;  and  I  should  as  soon  dread,  that  all  our  springs
and  rivers  should  be  exhausted,  as  that  money  should  abandon
a  kingdom  where  there  are  people  and  industry.  Let  us
carefully  preserve  these  latter  advantages ;  and  we  need  never
be  apprehensive  of  losing  the  former.

It  is  easy  to  observe,  that  all  calculations  concerning  the
balance  of  trade  are  founded  on  very  uncertain  facts  and
«- appositions.  The  custom-house  books  are  allowed  to  be  an
insufficient  ground  of  reasoning ;  nor  is  the  rate  of  exchange

1  PLTJT.  De  Curiositate.  dom,  &c.

2  [For  this  sentence  Editions  H  to  M  Edition  N  reads:  There  are  proofs
read  :  I  have  been  told,  that  many  old  in  many  old  acts  of  the  SCOTCH  parlia-
acts  of  parliament  show  the  same  ignor-  ment of  the same ignorance in the
ance  in  the  nature  of  Commerce. And  nature  of  commerce. And  to  this  day,
to  this  day,  in a  neighbouring  king-  in  France,  &c.]


332  ESSAY V.

much  better ;  unless  we  consider  it  with  all  nations,  and  know
also  the  proportions  of  the  several  sums  remitted ;  which  one
may  safely  pronounce  impossible.  Every  man,  who  has  ever
reasoned  on  this  subject,  has  always  proved  his  theory,  what
ever  it  was,  by  facts  and  calculations,  and  by  an  enumeration
of  all  the  commodities  sent  to  all  foreign  kingdoms.

The  writings  of  Mr.  Gee  struck  the  nation  with  an  uni
versal  panic,  when  they  saw  it  plainly  demonstrated,  by  a
detail  of  particulars,  that  the  balance  was  against  them  for
so  considerable  a  sum  as  must  leave  them  without  a  single
shilling  in  five  or  six  years.  But  luckily,  twenty  years  have
since  elapsed,  with  an  expensive  foreign  war ;  yet  is  it  com
monly  supposed,  that  money  is  still  more  plentiful  among  us
than  in  any  former  period.

Nothing  can  be  more  entertaining  on  this  head  than  Dr.
SWIFT  ;  an  author1  so  quick  in  discerning  the  mistakes  and
absurdities  of  others.  He  says,  in  his  short  view  of  the  state
of  IRELAND,  that  the  whole  cash  of  that  kingdom  formerly
amounted  but  to  500,OOOL  ;  that  out  of  this  the  IRISH  remitted
every  year  a  neat  million  to  ENGLAND,  and  had  scarcely  any
other  source  from  which  they  could  compensate  themselves,
and  little  other  foreign  trade  than  the  importation  of  FRENCH
wines,  for  which  they  paid  ready  money.  The  consequence
of  this  situation,  which  must  be  owned  to  be  disadvantageous,
was,  that,  in  a  course  of  three  years,  the  current  money  of
IRELAND,  from  500,OOOZ.  was  reduced  to  less  than  two.  And
at  present,  I  suppose,  in  a  course  of  30  years  it  is  absolutely
nothing.  Yet  I  know  not  how,  that  opinion  of  the  advance
of  riches  in  IRELAND,  which  gave  the  Doctor  so  much  indig
nation,  seems  still  to  continue,  and  gain  ground  with  every
body.

In  short,  this  apprehension  of  the  wrong  balance  of  trade,
appears  of  such  a  nature,  that  it  discovers  itself,  wherever
one  is  out  of  humour  with  the  ministry,  or  is  in  low  spirits  ;
and  as  it  can  never  be  refuted  by  a  particular  detail  of  all  the
exports,  which  counterbalance  the  imports,  it  may  here  be
proper  to  form  a  general  argument,  that  they  may  prove  the
impossibility  of  this  event,  as  long  as  we  preserve  our  people
and  our  industry.

1 [Editions  H  and  I  read  :  An  author, spleen,  prejudice,  and  passion  than  any
who  has  more  humour  than  knowledge, of  these  qualities.]
more  taste  than  judgment,  and  more


OF  THE  BALANCE  OF  TRADE. 333

Suppose  four-fifths  of  all  the  money  in  GEE  AT  BRITAIN
to  be  annihilated  in  one  night,  and  the  nation  reduced  to  the
same  condition,  with  regard  to  specie,  as  in  the  reigns  of  the
HARRYS  and  EDWARDS,  what  would  be  the  consequence  ?
Must  not  the  price  of  all  labour  and  commodities  sink  in
proportion,  and  everything  be  sold  as  cheap  as  they  were  in
those  ages  ?  What  nation  could  then  dispute  with  us  in  any
foreign  market,  or  pretend  to  navigate  or  to  sell  manufactures
at  the  same  price,  which  to  us  would  afford  sufficient  profit  ?
In  how  little  time,  therefore,  must  this  bring  back  the  money
which  we  had  lost,  and  raise  us  to  the  level  of  all  the  neigh
bouring  nations  ?  Where,  after  we  have  arrived,  we  immedi
ately  lose  the  advantage  of  the  cheapness  of  labour  and
commodities;  and  the  farther  flowing  in  of  money  is  stopped
by  our  fulness  and  repletion.

Again,  suppose,  that  all  the  money  of  GREAT  BRITAIN
were  multiplied  fivefold  in  a  night,  must  not  the  contrary
effect  follow  ?  Must  not  all  labour  and  commodities  rise  to
such  an  exorbitant  height,  that  no  neighbouring  nations  could
afford  to  buy  from  us ;  while  their  commodities,  on  the  other
hand,  became  comparatively  so  cheap,  that,  in  spite  of  all  the
laws  which  could  be  formed,  they  would  be  run  in  upon  us,
and  our  money  flow  out ;  till  we  fall  to  a  level  with  foreigners,
and  lose  that  great  superiority  of  riches,  which  had  laid  us
under  such  disadvantages  ?

Now,  it  is  evident,  that  the  same  causes,  which  would
correct  these  exorbitant  inequalities,  were  they  to  happen
miraculously,  must  prevent  their  happening  in  the  common
course  of  nature,  and  must  for  ever,  in  all  neighbouring
nations,  preserve  money  nearly  proportionable  to  the  art  and
industry  of  each  nation.  All  water,  wherever  it  communicates,
remains  always  at  a  level.  Ask  naturalists  the  reason ;  they
tell  you,  that,  were  it  to  be  raised  in  any  one  place,  the  superior
gravity  of  that  part  not  being  balanced,  must  depress  it,  till
it  meet  a  counterpoise ;  and  that  the  same  cause,  which
redresses  the  inequality  when  it  happens,  must  for  ever  pre
vent  it,  without  some  violent  external  operation.1

1  There is another cause, though  turns  against  us,  and  this  becomes  a

more  limited in  its operation,  which  new  encouragement  to  export  ;  as  much

checks  the  wrong  balance  of  trade,  to  as  the  charge  of  carriage  and  insurance

every  particular nation  to  which the  of  the  money  which  becomes  due  would

kingdom  trades.  When  we  import  more  amount  to.  For  the  exchange  can  never

goods than we export,  the  exchange  rise  but  a  little  higher  than  that  sum.


334  ESSAY  V.

Can  one  imagine,  that  it  had  ever  been  possible,  by  any  laws,
or  even  by  any  art  or  industry,  to  have  kept  all  the  money
rn  SPAIN,  which  the  galleons  have  brought  from  the  INDIES  ?
Or  that  all  commodities  could  be  sold  in  FRANCE  for  a  tenth
of  the  price  which  they  would  yield  on  the  other  side  of  the
PYRENEES,  without  finding  their  way  thither,  and  draining
from  that  immense  treasure  ?  What  other  reason,  indeed,
is  there,  why  all  nations,  at  present,  gain  in  their  trade
with  SPAIN  and  PORTUGAL;  but  because  it  is  impossible  to
heap  up  money,  more  than  any  fluid,  beyond  its  proper  level  ?
The  sovereigns  of  these  countries  have  shown,  that  they
wanted  not  inclination  to  keep  their  gold  and  silver  to  them
selves,  had  it  been  in  any  degree  practicable.

But  as  any  body  of  water  may  be  raised  above  the  level
of  the  surrounding  element,  if  the  former  has  no  communica
tion  with  the  latter ;  so  in  money,  if  the  communication  be
cut  off,  by  any  material  or  physical  impediment,  (for  all  laws
alone  are  ineffectual)  there  may,  in  such  a  case,  be  a  very
great  inequality  of  money.  Thus  the  immense  distance  of
CHINA,  together  with  the  monopolies  of  our  INDIA  companies,
obstructing  the  communication,  preserve  in  EUROPE  the  gold
and  silver,  especially  the  latter,  in  much  greater  plenty  than
they  are  found  in  that  kingdom.  But,  notwithstanding  this
great  obstruction,  the  force  of  the  causes  abovementioned  is
still  evident.  The  skill  and  ingenuity  of  EUROPE  in  general
surpasses  perhaps  that  of  CHINA,  with  regard  to  manual  arts
and  manufactures ;  yet  are  we  never  able  to  trade  thither
without  great  disadvantage.  And  were  it  not  for  the  con
tinual  recruits,  which  we  receive  from  AMERICA,  money  would
soon  sink  in  EUROPE,  and  rise  in  CHINA,  till  it  came  nearly  to
a  level  in  both  places.  Nor  can  any  reasonable  man  doubt,
but  that  industrious  nation,  were  they  as  near  us  as  POLAND
or  BARB  ART,  would  drain  us  of  the  overplus  of  our  specie,
and  draw  to  themselves  a  larger  share  of  the  WEST  INDIAN
treasures.  We  need  not  have  recourse  to  a  physical  attraction,
in  order  to  explain  the  necessity  of  this  operation.  There  is
a  moral  attraction,  arising  from  the  interests  and  passions  of
men,  which  is  full  as  potent  and  infallible.

How  is  the  balance  kept  in  the  provinces  of  every  kingdom
among  themselves,  but  by  the  force  of  this  principle,  which
makes  it  impossible  for  money  to  lose  its  level,  and  either  to
rise  or  sink  beyond  the  proportion  of  the  labour  and  com-


OF  THE  BALANCE  OF  TRADE.  335

niodities  which  are  in  each  province?  Did  not  long  experi
ence  make  people  easy  on  this  head,  what  a  fund  of  gloomy
reflections  might  calculations  afford  to  a  melancholy  YORK-
BHIREMAN,  while  he  computed  and  magnified  the  sums  drawn
co  LONDON  by  taxes,  absentees,  commodities,  and  found  on
comparison  the  opposite  articles  so  much  inferior  ?  And  no
doubt,  had  the  Heptarchy  subsisted  in  ENGLAND,  the  legisla
ture  of  each  state  had  been  continually  alarmed  by  the  fear
of  a  wrong  balance ;  and  as  it  is  probable  that  the  mutual
ha,tred  of  these  states  would  have  been  extremely  violent  on
account  of  their  dose  neighbourhood,  they  would  have  loaded
and  oppressed  all  commerce,  by  a  jealous  and  superfluous
caution.  Since  the  union  has  removed  the  barriers  between
SCOTLAND  and  ENGLAND,  which  of  these  nations  gains  from
the  other  by  this  free  commerce  ?  Or  if  the  former  kingdom
has  received  any  encrease  of  riches,  can  it  reasonably  be
accounted  for  by  any  thing  but  the  encrease  of  its  art  and
industry  ?  It  was  a  common  apprehension  in  ENGLAND,
before  the  union,  as  we  learn  from  L'ABBE  DTJ  Bos,1  that
SCOTLAND  would  soon  drain  them  of  their  treasure,  were  an
open  trade  allowed ;  and  on  the  other  side  the  TWEED  a  con
trary  apprehension  prevailed  :  With  what  justice  in  both,
time  has  shown.

What  happens  in  small  portions  of  mankind,  must  take
place  in  greater.  The  provinces  of  the  ROMAN  empire,  no
doubt,  kept  their  balance  with  each  other,  and  with  ITALY,
independent  of  the  legislature ;  as  much  as  the  several
counties  of  GREAT  BRITAIN,  or  the  several  parishes  of  each
county.  And  any  man  who  travels  over  EUROPE  at  this  day,
may  see,  by  the  prices  of  commodities,  that  money,  in  spite
of  the  absurd  jealousy  of  princes  and  states,  has  brought
itself  nearly  to  a  level ;  and  that  the  difference  between  one
kingdom  and  another  is  not  greater  in  this  respect,  than  it
is  often  between  different  provinces  of  the  same  kingdom.
Men  naturally  flock  to  capital  cities,  sea-ports,  and  navigable
rivers.  There  we  find  more  men,  more  industry,  more  com
modities,  and  consequently  more  money ;  but  still  the  latter
difference  holds  proportion  with  the  former,  and  the  level  is
preserved 2.

1  Les  interets  tf ANGLETEERE mal-  speak  of  the  level  of  money,  I  mean
entendus.  always  its  proportional  level  to  the  com-

2  It  must  carefully  be  remarked,  that  modities,  labour, industry, and skill,
throughout  this  discourse,  wherever  I  which  is  in  the  several  states. And  I


336  ESSAY  V.

Our  jealousy  and  our  hatred  of  FRANCE  are  without
bounds;  and  the  former  sentiment,  at  least,  must  be  ac
knowledged  reasonable  and  well-grounded.  These  passions
have  occasioned  innumerable  barriers  and  obstructions  upon
commerce,  where  we  are  accused  of  being  commonly  the
aggressors.  But  what  have  we  gained  by  the  bargain  ?  We
lost  the  FRENCH  market  for  our  woollen  manufactures,  and
transferred  the  commerce  of  wine  to  SPAIN  and  PORTUGAL,
where  we  buy  worse  liquor  at  a  higher  price.  There  are  few
ENGLISHMEN  who  would  not  think  their  country  absolutely
ruined,  were  FRENCH  wines  sold  in  ENGLAND  so  cheap  and
in  such  abundance  as  to  supplant,  in  some  measure,  all  ale,
and  home-brewed  liquors  :  But  would  we  lay  aside  preju
dice,  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  prove,  that  nothing  could  be
more  innocent,  perhaps  advantageous.  Each  new  acre  of
vineyard  planted  in  FRANCE,  in  order  to  supply  ENGLAND
with  wine,  would  make  it  requisite  for  the  FRENCH  to  take
the  produce  of  an  ENGLISH  acre,  sown  in  wheat  or  barley,  in
order  to  subsist  themselves  ;  and  it  is  evident,  that  we  should
thereby  get  command  of  the  better  commodity.

There  are  many  edicts  of  the  FRENCH  king,  prohibiting
the  planting  of  new  vineyards,  and  ordering  all  those  which
are  lately  planted  to  be  grubbed  up :  So  sensible  are  they,  in
that  country,  of  the  superior  value  of  corn,  above  every  other
product.

Mareschal  YAUBAN  complains  often,  and  with  reason,  of
the  absurd  duties  which  load  the  entry  of  those  wines  of
LANGUEDOC,  GUIENNE,  and  other  southern  provinces,  that
are  imported  into  BRITANNY  and  NORMANDY.  He  enter
tained  no  doubt  but  these  latter  provinces  could  preserve
their  balance,  notwithstanding  the  open  commerce  which  he
recommends.  And  it  is  evident,  that  a  few  leagues  more
navigation  to  ENGLAND  would  make  no  difference ;  or  if  it
did,  that  it  must  operate  alike  on  the  commodities  of  both
kingdoms.

assert,  that  where  these  advantages  are  cattle, cheese,  butter,  of  DERBYSHIRE,

double,  triple,  quadruple,  to  what  they  cannot  draw  the  money  of  LONDON,  so

are in the neighbouring  states, the  much  as  the  manufactures  of  LONDON

money  infallibly  will  also be  double,  draw  the  money  of  DERBYSHIRE. But

triple, quadruple. The only circum-  this  objection  is  only  a  seeming  one :

stance  that  can  obstruct  the  exactness  For  so  far  as  the  transport  of  commodi-

of  these  proportions,  is  the  expense  of  ties  is  expensive,  so  far  is  thecommuni-

transporting  the  commodities  from  one  cation  between  the places obstructed

place  to  another ;  and  this  expense  is  and  imperfect,
sometimes unequal. Thus the corn,


OF  THE  BALANCE  OF  TRADE. 837

There  is  indeed  one  expedient  by  which  it  is  possible  to
sink,  and  another  by  which  we  may  raise  money  beyond  its
natural  level  in  any  kingdom;  but  these  cases,  when  ex
amined,  will  be  found  to  resolve  into  our  general  theory,  and
to  bring  additional  authority  to  it.

I  scarcely  know  any  method  of  sinking  money  below  its
level,  but  those  institutions  of  banks,  funds,  and  paper-
credit,  l  which  are  so  much  practised  in  this  kingdom.  These
render  paper  equivalent  to  money,  circulate  it  throughout
the  whole  state,  make  it  supply  the  place  of  gold  and  silver,
raise  proportion  ably  the  price  of  labour  and  commodities,
and  by  that  means  either  banish  a  great  part  of  those  pre
cious  metals,  or  prevent  their  farther  encrease.  What  can
be  more  short-sighted  than  our  reasonings  on  this  head?
We  fancy,  because  an  individual  would  be  much  richer,  were
his  stock  of  money  doubled,  that  the  same  good  effect  would
follow  were  the  money  of  every  one  encreased;  not  con
sidering,  that  this  would  raise  as  much  the  price  of  every
commodity,  and  reduce  every  man,  in  time,  to  the  same  con
dition  as  before.  It  is  only  in  our  public  negociations  and
transactions  with  foreigners,  that  a  greater  stock  of  money
is  advantageous ;  and  as  our  paper  is  there  absolutely  in
significant,  we  feel,  by  its  means,  all  the  ill  effects  arising
from  a  great  abundance  of  money,  without  reaping  any  of
the  advantages a.

Suppose  that  there  are  12  millions  of  paper,  which  circu
late  in  the  kingdom  as  money,  (for  we  are  not  to  imagine,
that  all  our  enormous  funds  are  employed  in  that  shape)  and
suppose  the  real  cash  of  the  kingdom  to  be  18  millions  :
Here  is  a  state  which  is  found  by  experience  to  be  able  to
hold  a  stock  of  30  millions.  I  say,  if  it  be  able  to  hold  it,
it  must  of  necessity  have  acquired  it  in  gold  and  silver,  had
we  not  obstructed  the  entrance  of  these  metals  by  this  new
invention  of  paper.  Whence  would  it  have  acquired  that  sum  ?
From  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world.  But  why  ?  Because,  if
you  remove  these  12  millions,  money  in  this  state  is  below
its  level,  compared  with  our  neighbours ;  and  we  must  im-

1  [Editions H to N read  : With  rise  of  the  prices. A  good  effect  of  this
which  we  are  in  this  kingdom  so  much  nature may follow  too from paper-
infatuated.]  credit;  but  it  is  dangerous  to  precipi-

2  We  observed  in Essay III. that  tate  matters,  at  the  risk  of  losing  all
money,  when  encreasing,  gives  encou-  by  the  failing  of  that  credit,  us  niu^t
ragemeut  to  industry,  during  the  inter-  happen  upon  any  violent  shock  in  pub-
val  between  the  encrease  of  money  and  lie  affairs.

VOL.  III.  2


338  ESSAY V.

mediately  draw  from  all  of  them,  till  we  be  full  and  saturate,
so  to  speak,  and  can  hold  no  more.  By  our  present  politics,
we  are  as  careful  to  stuff  the  nation  with  this  fine  commodity
of  bank-bills  and  chequer-notes,  as  if  we  were  afraid  of
being  overburthened  with  the  precious  metals.

It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  the  great  plenty  of  bullion  in
FRANCE  is,  in  a  great  measure,  owing  to  the  want  of  paper-
credit.  The  FRENCH  have  no  banks :  Merchants  bills  do  not
there  circulate  as  with  us  :  Usury  or  lending  on  interest  is
not  directly  permitted ;  so  that  many  have  large  sums  in
their  coffers  :  Great  quantities  of  plate  are  used  in  private
houses  ;  and  all  the  churches  are  full  of  it.  By  this  means,
provisions  and  labour  still  remain  cheaper  among  them,  than
in  nations  that  are  not  half  so  rich  in  gold  and  silver.  The
advantages  of  this  situation,  in  point  of  trade  as  well  as  in
great  public  emergencies,  are  too  evident  to  be  disputed.

The  same  fashion  a  few  years  ago  prevailed  in  GENOA,
which  still  has  place  in  ENGLAND  and  HOLLAND,  of  using
services  of  CmNA-ware  instead  of  plate;  but  the  senate,
foreseeing  the  consequence,  prohibited  the  use  of  that  brittle
commodity  beyond  a  certain  extent ;  while  the  use  of  silver-
plate  was  left  unlimited.  And  I  suppose,  in  their  late  dis
tresses,  they  felt  the  good  effect  of  this  ordinance.  Our  tax
on  plate  is,  perhaps,  in  this  view,  somewhat  impolitic.

Before  the  introduction  of  paper-money  into  our  colonies,
they  had  gold  and  silver  sufficient  for  their  circulation.
Since  the  introduction  of  that  commodity,  the  least  incon-
veniency  that  has  followed  is  the  total  banishment  of  the
precious  metals.  And  after  the  abolition  of  paper,  can  it  be
doubted  but  money  will  return,  while  these  colonies  possess
manufactures  and  commodities,  the  only  thing  valuable  in
commerce,  and  for  whose  sake  alone  all  men  desire  money.

What  pity  LYCURGUS  did  not  think  of  paper-credit,  when
he  wanted  to  banish  gold  and  silver  from  SPARTA  !  It  would
have  served  his  purpose  better  than  the  lumps  of  iron  he
made  use  of  as  money ;  and  would  also  have  prevented  more
effectually  all  commerce  with  strangers,  as  being  of  so  much
less  real  and  intrinsic  value.

1  It  must,  however,  be  confessed,  that,  as  all  these  questions
of  trade  and  money  are  extremely  complicated,  there  are
certain  lights,  in  which  this  subject  may  be  placed,  so  as  to

1  [This  paragraph  does  not  occur  in  Editions  H  to  N.]


OF THE BALANCE OF TRADE.  339

represent  the  advantages  of  paper-credit  and  banks  to  be
superior  to  their  disadvantages.  That  they  banish  specie
and  bullion  from  a  state  is  undoubtedly  true ;  and  whoever
looks  no  farther  than  this  circumstance  does  well  to  condemn
them ;  but  specie  and  bullion  are  not  of  so  great  con
sequence  as  not  to  admit  of  a  compensation,  and  even  an
overbalance  from  the  encrease  of  industry  and  of  credit,
which  may  be  promoted  by  the  right  use  of  paper-money.
It  is  well  known  of  what  advantage  it  is  to  a  merchant  to
be  able  to  discount  his  bills  upon  occasion ;  and  every  thing
that  facilitates  this  species  of  traffic  is  favourable  to  the
general  commerce  of  a  state.  But  private  bankers  are
enabled  to  give  such  credit  by  the  credit  they  receive  from
the  depositing  of  money  in  their  shops  ;  and  the  bank  of
ENGLAND  in  the  same  manner,  from  the  liberty  it  has  to
issue  its  notes  in  all  payments.  There  was  an  invention
of  this  kind,  which  was  fallen  upon  some  years  ago  by  the
banks  of  EDINBURGH  ;  and  which,  as  it  is  one  of  the  most
ingenious  ideas  that  has  been  executed  in  commerce,  has
also  been  thought  advantageous  to  SCOTLAND.  It  is  there
called  a  BANK-CREDIT  ;  and  is  of  this  nature.  A  man  goes
to  the  bank  and  finds  surety  to  the  amount,  we  shall  sup
pose,  of  a  thousand  pounds.  This  money,  or  any  part  ot
it,  he  has  the  liberty  of  drawing  out  whenever  he  pleases,
and  he  pays  only  the  ordinary  interest  for  it,  while  it  is  in
his  hands.  He  may,  when  he  pleases,  repay  any  sum  so
small  as  twenty  pounds,  and  the  interest  is  discounted  from
the  very  day  of  the  repayment.  The  advantages,  resulting
from  this  contrivance,  are  manifold.  As  a  man  may  find
surety  nearly  to  the  amount  of  his  substance,  and  his  bank-
credit  is  equivalent  to  ready  money,  a  merchant  does  hereby
in  a  manner  coin  his  houses,  his  household  furniture,  the
goods  in  his  warehouse,  the  foreign  debts  due  to  him,  his
ships  at  sea;  and  can,  upon  occasion,  employ  them  in  all
payments,  as  if  they  were  the  current  money  of  the  country.
If  a  man  borrow  a  thousand  pounds  from  a  private  hand,
besides  that  it  is  not  always  to  be  found  when  required,  he  pays
interest  for  it,  whether  he  be  using  it  or  not :  His  bank-credit
costs  him  nothing  except  during  the  very  moment  in  which  it
is  of  service  to  him :  And  this  circumstance  is  of  equal  ad
vantage  as  if  he  had  borrowed  money  at  much  lower  interest.
Merchants,  likewise  from,  this  invention,  acquire  a  great

z '2


340  ESSAY V.

facility  in  supporting  each  other's  credit,  which  is  a  con
siderable  security  against  bankruptcies.  A  man,  when  his
own  bank-credit  is  exhausted,  goes  to  any  of  his  neighbours
who  is  not  in  the  same  condition  ;  and  he  gets  the  money,
which  he  replaces  at  his  convenience.

1  After  this  practice  had  taken  place  during  some  years  at
EDINBURGH,  several  companies  of  merchants at GLASGOW
carried  the  matter  farther. They  associated  themselves  into
different  banks,  and  issued  notes  so  low  as  ten  shillings,
which  they  used  in  all  payments  for  goods,  manufactures,
tradesmen's  labour  of  all  kinds ;  and  these  notes,  from  the
established  credit  of  the  companies,  passed  as  money  in  all
payments  throughout  the  country. By  this  means,  a  stock
of  five  thousand  pounds  was  able  to  perform  the  same  opera
tions  as  if  it  were  six  or  seven ;  and  merchants  were  thereby
enabled  to  trade  to  a  greater extent,  and  to  require  less
profit  in  all  their  transactions. But  whatever  other  advan
tages  result  from  these  inventions,  it  must  still  be  allowed
that,  besides  giving  too  great  facility  to  credit,  which  is  dan
gerous,  they  banish  the  precious  metals  :  and  nothing  can  be
a  more  evident  proof  of  it,  than  a  comparison  of  the  past  and
present  condition  of  SCOTLAND  in  that  particular. It  was
found,  upon  the  recoinage  made  after  the  union,  that  there
was  near  a  million  of  specie  in  that  country :  But  notwith
standing  the  great  encrease  of  riches,  commerce  and  manu
factures  of  all  kinds,  it  is  thought,  that,  even  where  there
is  no  extraordinary  drain  made  by  ENGLAND,  the  current
specie  will  not  now  amount  to  a  third  of  that  sum.

2  But  as  our  projects  of  paper-credit  are  almost  the  only
expedient,  by  which  we  can  sink money below its level ;
so,  in my  opinion,  the only  expedient,  by  which  we  can
raise  money  above  it,  is a  practice  which we should all
exclaim against  as  destructive, namely, the  gathering  of
large  sums  into  a  public  treasure,  locking  them  up,  and
absolutely preventing their circulation. The fluid, not
communicating  with the neighbouring element,  may,  by
such  an  artifice,  be  raised  to  what  height  we  please. To
prove  this,  we  need  only  return  to  our  first  supposition,  of
annihilating  the  half  or  any  part  of  our  cash ;  where  we

1  [This  paragraph  does  not  occur  in our darling  projects  of paper-credit
Editions  H  to  N.]  are  pernicious,  being  almost,  &c.]

*  [Editions  H  to  N  resume  : But  as


OF  THE  BALANCE  OF  TRADE. 341

found,  that  the  immediate  consequence  of  such  an  event
would  be  the  attraction  of  an  equal  sum  from  all  the  neigh
bouring  kingdoms.  Nor  does  there  seem  to  be  any  neces
sary  bounds  set,  by  the  nature  of  things,  to  this  practice  of
hoarding.  A  small  city,  like  GENEVA,  continuing  this
policy  for  ages,  might  engross  nine  tenths  of  the  money  of
EUEOPE.  There  seems,  indeed,  in  the  nature  of  man,  an
invincible  obstacle  to  that  immense  growth  of  riches.  A
weak  state,  with  an  enormous  treasure,  will  soon  become  a
prey  to  some  of  its  poorer,  but  more  powerful  neighbours.  A
great  state  would  dissipate  its  wealth  in  dangerous  and  ill-
concerted  projects ;  and  probably  destroy,  with  it,  what  is
much  more  valuable,  the  industry,  morals*  and  numbers  of
its  people.  The  fluid,  in  this  case,  raised  to  too  great  a
height,  bursts  and  destroys  the  vessel  that  contains  it ;  and
mixing  itself  with  the  surrounding  element,  soon  falls  to  its
proper  level.

So  little  are  we  commonly  acquainted  with  this  principle,
that,  though  all  historians  agree  in  relating  uniformly  so
recent  an  event,  as  the  immense  treasure  amassed  by  HARRY
VII.  (which  they  make  amount  to  l  2,700,000  pounds,)  we
rather  reject  their  concurring  testimony,  than  admit  of  a
fact,  which  agrees  so  ill  with  our  inveterate  prejudices.  It
is  indeed  probable,  that  this  sum  might  be  three-fourths  of
all  the  money  in  ENGLAND.  But  where  is  the  difficulty  in
conceiving,  that  such  a  sum  might  be  amassed  in  twenty
years,  by  a  cunning,  rapacious,  frugal,  and  almost  absolute
monarch  ?  Nor  is  it  probable,  that  the  diminution  of  circu
lating  money  was  ever  sensibly  felt  by  the  people,  or  ever  did
them  any  prejudice.  The  sinking  of  the  prices  of  all  com
modities  would  immediately  replace  it,  by  giving  ENGLAND
the  advantage  in  its  commerce  with  the  neighbouring  king
doms.

Have  we  not  an  instance  in  the  small  republic  of  ATHENS
with  its  allies,  who,  in  about  fifty  years,  between  the  MEDIAN
and  PELOPONNESIAN  wars,  amassed  2a  sum  not  much  inferior
to  that  of  HARRY  VII.  ?  For  all  the  GREEK  historians3  and
orators4  agree,  that  the  ATHENIANS  collected  in  the  citadel

1  [Editions  H to Pread:  1,700,000.]  3  THTJCYDIDES,  lib.  ii.  13  and  DIOD.

2  [Editions  H  to P  read :  A sum Sic.  lib.  xii.  40.

greater  than  that  of  Harry  VII.  (There  4 Vid. JEscmms  (p.  688)  cz1  DEMOS-

were  about  eight  ounces  of  silver  in  a THESIS  Epist.
pound  sterling  in  Harry  VII.'s  time.]


34:1  ESSAY  V.

more  than  10,000  talents,  which  they  afterwards  dissipated
in  their  own  ruin,  in  rash  and  imprudent  enterprises.  But
when  this  money  was  set  a  running,  and  began  to  communi
cate  with  the  surrounding  fluid  ;  what  was  the  consequence  ?
Did  it  remain  in  the  state  ?  No.  For  we  find,  by  the  memo
rable  census  mentioned  by  DEMOSTHENES'  and  PoLYBius2,
that,  in  about  fifty  years  afterwards,  the  whole  value  of  the
republic,  comprehending  lands,  houses,  commodities,  slaves,
and  money,  was  less  than  6,000  talents.

What  an  ambitious  high-spirited  people  was  this,  to  collect
and  keep  in  their  treasury,  with  a  view  to  conquests,  a  sum,
which  it  was  every  day  in  the  power  of  the  citizens,  by  a
single  vote,  to  disti  ibute  among  themselves,  and  which  would
have  gone  near  to  triple  the  riches  of  every  individual !  For
we  must  observe,  that  the  numbers  and  private  riches  of
the  ATHENIANS  are  said,  by  ancient  writerc,  to  have  been
no  greater  at  the  beginning  of  the  PELOPONNESIAN  war,  than
at  the  beginning  of  the  MACEDONIAN.

Money  was  little  more  plentiful  in  GREECE  during  the  age
of  PHILIP  and  PERSEUS,  than  in  ENGLAND  during  that  of
HARRY  VII.  :  Yet  these  two  monarchs  in  thirty  years  3  col
lected  from  the  small  kingdom  of  MACEDON,  a  larger  treasure
than  that  of  the  ENGLISH  monarch.  PAULUS  J?EMILIUS
brought  to  SOME  about  1,700,000  pounds  Sterling*  PLINY
says,  2,400,000.5  And  that  was  but  a  part  of  the  MACEDONIAN
treasure.  The  rest  was  dissipated  by  the  resistance  and  flight

of  PERSEUS.6

We  may  learn  from  STANIAN,  that  the  canton  of  BERNE
had  300,000  pounds  lent  at  interest,  and  had  above  six  times
as  much  in  their  treasury.  Here  then  is  a  sum  hoarded  of
1,800,000  pounds  Sterling,  which  is  at  least  quadruple  what
should  naturally  circulate  in  such  a  petty  state ;  and  yet  110
one,  who  travels  in  the  PAIS  DE  VAUX,  or  any  part  of  that
canton,  observes  any  want  of  money  more  than  could  be
supposed  in  a  country  of  that  extent,  soil,  and  situation.  On
the  contrary,  there  are  scarce  any  inland  provinces  in  the
continent  of  FRANCE  or  GERMANY,  where  the  inhabitants
are  at  this  time  so  opulent,  though  that  canton  has  vastly

1  riepl  ~2ufj./j.opla.s,  183.  4  VEX.  PATERC.  lib.  i.  cap.  9.

*  Lib.  ii.  cap.  62.  *  LIB.  xxxiii.  cap.  3.

'  TITI  LIVII,  lib.  xlv.  cap.  40.  6  Trn  LIVII,  ibid.


OF  THE  BALANCE  OF  TRADE. 343

encreased  its  treasure  since  1714,  the  time  when  STANIAN
wrote  his  judicious  account  of  SWITZERLAND.1

The  account  given  by  APPIAN  2  of  the  treasure  of  the
PTOLEMIES,  is  so  prodigious,  that  one  cannot  admit  of  it ;
and  so  much  the  less,  because  the  historian  says,  that  the
other  successors  of  ALEXANDER  were  also  frugal,  and  had
many  of  them  treasures  not  much  inferior.  For  this  saving
humour  of  the  neighbouring  princes  must  necessarily  have
checked  the  frugality  of  the  EGYPTIAN  monarchs,  according
to  the  foregoing  theory.  The  sum  he  mentions  is  740,000
talents,  or  191,166,666  pounds  13  shillings  and  4  pence,
according  to  Dr.  AEBUTHNOT'S  computation.  And  yet  APPIAN
says,  that  he  extracted  his  account  from  the  public  records  ;
and  he  was  himself  a  native  of  ALEXANDRIA.

From  these  principles  we  may  learn  what  judgment  we
ought  to  form  of  those  numberless  bars,  obstructions,  and
imposts,  which  all  nations  of  Europe,  and  none  more  than
ENGLAND,  have  put  upon  trade ;  from  an  exorbitant  desire
of  amassing  money,  which  never  will  heap  up  beyond  its
level,  while  it  circulates ;  or  from  an  ill-grounded  apprehen
sion  of  losing  their  specie,  which  never  will  sink  below  it.
Could  any  thing  scatter  our  riches,  it  would  be  such  impolitic
contrivances.  But  this  general  ill  effect,  however,  results
from  them,  that  they  deprive  neighbouring  nations  of  that
free  communication  and  exchange  which  the  Author  of  the
world  has  intended,  by  giving  them  soils,  climates,  and
geniuses,  so  different  from  each  other.

Our  modern  politics  embrace  the  only  method  of  banishing
money,  the  using  of  paper-credit ;  they  reject  the  only  method
of  amassing  it,  the  practice  of  hoarding ;  and  they  adopt  a
hundred  contrivances,  which  serve  to  no  purpose  but  to
check  industry,  and  rob  ourselves  and  our  neighbours  of  the
common  benefits  of  art  and  nature.

All  taxes,  however,  upon  foreign  commodities,  are  not  to
be  regarded  as  prejudicial  or  useless,  but  those  only  which
are  founded  on  the  jealousy  above-mentioned.  A  tax  on
German  linen  encourages  home  manufactures,  and  thereby

1  The  poverty  which  STA.NFAN  speaks  the  people  are  not  poorer  than  in  the

of  is  only  to  be  seen  in  the  most  moun-  diocese  of  SA.LTSBTJRGH  r^  the  one  haiul,

tainous  cantons,  where  there  is  no  com-  or  SAVOY  on  the  other,

modity  to  liring  money.  And  even  there  *  Proem.  10.


344  ESSAY  V.

multiplies  our  people  and  industry.  A  tax  on  brandy  en-
creases  the  sale  of  rum,  and  supports  our  southern  colonies.
And  as  it  is  necessary,  that  imposts  should  be  levied,  for  the
support  of  government,  it  may  be  thought  more  convenient
to  lay  them  on  foreign  commodities,  which  can  easily  be
intercepted  at  the  port,  and  subjected  to  the  impost.  We
ought,  however,  always  to  remember  the  maxim  of  Dr.  SWIFT,
That,  in  the  arithmetic  of  the  customs,  two  and  two  make
not  four,  but  often  make  only  one.  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted,
but  if  the  duties  on  wine  were  lowered  to  a  third,  they  would
yield  much  more  to  the  government  than  at  present :  Our
people  might  thereby  afford  to  drink  commonly  a  better  and
more  wholesome  liquor  ;  and  no  prejudice  would  ensue  to  the
balance  of  trade,  of  which  we  are  so  jealous.  The  manufac
ture  of  ale  beyond  the  agriculture  is  but  inconsiderable,  and
gives  employment  to  few  hands.  The  transport  of  wine
and  corn  would  not  be  much  inferior.

But  are  there  not  frequent  instances,  you  will  say,  of  states
and  kingdoms,  which  were  formerly  rich  and  opulent,  and
are  now  poor  and  beggarly  ?  Has  not  the  money  left  them,
with  which  they  formerly  abounded  ?  I  answer,  If  they  lose
their  trade,  industry,  and  people,  they  cannot  expect  to
keep  their  gold  and  silver :  For  these  precious  metals  will
hold  proportion  to  the  former  advantages.  When  LISBON
and  AMSTERDAM  got  the  EAST-INDIA  trade  from  VENICE  and
GENOA,  they  also  got  the  profits  and  money  which  arose  from
it.  Where  the  seat  of  government  is  transferred,  where
expensive  armies  are  maintained  at  a  distance,  where  great
funds  are  possessed  by  foreigners;  there  naturally  follows
from  these  causes  a  diminution  of  the  specie.  But  these,  we
may  observe,  are  violent  and  forcible  methods  of  carrying
away  money,  and  are  in  time  commonly  attended  with  the
transport  of  people  and  industry.  But  where  these  remain,
and  the  drain  is  not  continued,  the  money  always  finds  its
way  back  again,  by  a  hundred  canals,  of  which  we  have  no
notion  or  suspicion.  What  immense  treasures  have  been
spent,  by  so  many  nations,  in  FLANDERS,  since  the  revolution,
in  the  course  of  three  long  wars  !  More  money  perhaps
than  the  half  of  what  is  at  present  in  EUROPE.  But  what
has  now  become  of  it?  Is  it  in  the  narrow  compass  of  the
AUSTRIAN  provinces  ?  No,  surely  :  It  has  most  of  it  returned
to  the  several  countries  whence  it  came,  and  has  followed


OF THE BALANCE OF TRADE.  3-15

that  art  and  industry,  by  which  at  first  it  was  acquired.
1  For  above  a  thousand  years,  the  money  of  EUROPE  has  been
flowing  to  ROME,  by  an  open  and  sensible  current ;  but  it  has
been  emptied  by  many  secret  and  insensible  canals  :  And  the
want  of  industry  and  commerce  renders  at  present  the  papal
dominions  the  poorest  territory  in  all  ITALY.

In  short,  a  government  has  great  reason  to  preserve  with
care  its  people  and  its  manufactures.  Its  money,  it  may
safely  trust  to  the  course  of  human  affairs,  without  fear  or
jealousy.  Or  if  it  ever  give  attention  to  this  latter  circum
stance,  it  ought  only  to  be  so  far  as  it  affects  the  former.


8  ESSAY  VI. — Of'  the  Jealousy  of  Trade.

Having  endeavoured  to  remove  one  species  of  ill-founded
jealousy,  which  is  so  prevalent  among  commercial  nations,  it
may  not  be  amiss  to  mention  another,  which  seems  equally
groundless.  Nothing  is  more  usual,  among  states  which
have  made  some  advances  in  commerce,  than  to  look  on  the
progress  of  their  neighbours  with  a  suspicious  eye,  to  consider
all  trading  states  as  their  rivals,  and  to  suppose  that  it  is
impossible  for  any  of  them  to  flourish,  but  at  their  expence.
In  opposition  to  this  narrow  and  malignant  opinion,  I  will
venture  to  assert,  that  the  encrease  of  riches  and  commerce
in  any  one  nation,  instead  of  hurting,  commonly  promotes
the  riches  and  commerce  of  all  its  neighbours ;  and  that  a
state  can  scarcely  carry  its  trade  and  industry  very  far,  where
all  the  surrounding  states  are  buried  in  ignorance,  sloth,  and
barbarism.

It  is  obvious,  that  the  domestic  industry  of  a  people  can
not  be  hurt  by  the  greatest  prosperity  of  their  neighbours ;
and  as  this  branch  of  commerce  is  undoubtedly  the  most  im
portant  in  any  extensive  kingdom,  we  are  so  far  removed
from  all  reason  of  jealousy.  But  I  go  farther,  and  observe,
that  where  an  open  communication  is  preserved  among
nations,  it  is  impossible  but  the  domestic  industry  of  every
one  must  receive  an  encrease  from  the  improvements  of  the
others.  Compare  the  situation  of  GREAT  BRITAIN  at  present,
with  what  it  was  two  centuries  ago.  All  the  arts  both  of
agriculture  and  manufactures  were  then  extremely  rude  and

1  [This  sentence  is  not  in  Editions  H  2  [This  Essay  first  appeared  in  Edi-

and  I.]  tion  M. See  p.  72.]


34(3  ESSAY  VI.

imperfect.  Every  improvement,  which  we  have  since  made,
has  arisen  from  our  imitation  of  foreigners  ;  and  we  ought
so  far  to  esteem  it  happy,  that  they  had  previously  made
advances  in  arts  and  ingenuity.  But  this  intercourse  is  still
upheld  to  our  great  advantage  :  Notwithstanding  the  ad
vanced  state  of  our  manufactures,  we  daily  adopt,  in  every
art,  the  inventions  and  improvements  of  our  neighbours.  The
commodity  is  first  imported  from  abroad,  to  our  great  dis
content,  while  we  imagine  that  it  drains  us  of  our  money :
Afterwards,  the  art  itself  is  gradually  imported,  to  our  visible
advantage :  Yet  we  continue  still  to  repine,  that  our  neigh
bours  should  possess  any  art,  industry,  and  invention ;
forgetting  that,  had  they  not  first  instructed  us,  we  should
have  been  at  present  barbarians ;  and  did  they  not  still  con
tinue  their  instructions,  the  arts  must  fall  into  a  state  of
languor,  and  lose  that  emulation  and  novelty,  which  con
tribute  so  much  to  their  advancement.

The  encrease  of  domestic  industry  lays  the  foundation  of
foreign  commerce.  Where  a  great  number  of  commodities
are  raised  and  perfected  for  the  home-market,  there  will
always  be  found  some  which  can  be  exported  with  advantage.
But  if  our  neighbours  have  no  art  or  cultivation,  they  cannot
take  them ;  because  they  will  have  nothing  to  give  in  ex
change.  In  this  respect,  states  are  in  the  same  condition  as
individuals.  A  single  man  can  scarcely  be  industrious,  where
all  his  fellow-citizens  are  idle.  The  riches  of  the  several
members  of  a  community  contribute  to  encrease  my  riches,
whatever  profession  I  may  follow.  They  consume  the  pro
duce  of  my  industry,  and  afford  me  the  produce  of  theirs  in
return.

Nor  needs  any  state  entertain  apprehensions,  that  their
neighbours  will  improve  to  such  a  degree  in  every  art  and
manufacture,  as  to  have  no  demand  from  them.  Nature,  by
giving  a  diversity  of  geniuses,  climates,  and  soils,  to  different
nations,  has  secured  their  mutual  intercourse  and  commerce,
as  long  as  they  all  remain  industrious  and  civilized.  Nay,
the  more  the  arts  encrease  in  any  state,  the  more  will  be  its
demands  from  its  industrious  neighbours.  The  inhabitants,
having  become  opulent  and  skilful,  desire  to  have  every  com
modity  in  the  utmost  perfection  ;  and  as  they  have  plenty  of
commodities  to  give  in  exchange,  they  make  large  importa
tions  from  every  foreign  country.  The  industry  of  the  nations,


OF  THE  JEALOUSY  OF  TRADE.  .",47

from  whom  they  import,  receives  encouragement :  Their  own
is  also  encreased,  by  the  sale  of  the  commodities  which  they
give  in  exchange.

But  what  if  a  nation  has  any  staple  commodity,  such  as
the  woollen  manufacture  is  in  ENGLAND  ?  Must  not  the  in
terfering  of  our  neighbours  in  that  manufacture  be  a  loss  to
us  ?  I  answer,  that,  when  any  commodity  is  denominated  the
staple  of  a  kingdom,  it  is  supposed  that  this  kingdom  has
some  peculiar  and  natural  advantages  for  raising  the  com
modity  ;  and  if,  notwithstanding  these  advantages,  they  lose
such  a  manufacture*  they  ought  to  blame  their  own  idleness,
or  bad  government,  not  the  industry  of  their  neighbours.
It  ought  also  to  be  considered,  that,  by  the  encrease  of  in
dustry  among  the  neighbouring  nations,  the  consumption  of
every  particular  species  of  commodity  is  also  encreased  ;  and
though  foreign  manufactures  interfere  with  them  in  the
market,  the  demand  for  their  product  may  still  continue,  or
even  encrease.  And  should  it  diminish,  ought  the  con
sequence  to  be  esteemed  so  fatal  ?  If  the  spirit  of  industry
be  preserved,  it  may  easily  be  diverted  from  one  branch  to
another ;  and  the  manufacturers  of  wool,  for  instance,  be
employed  in  linen,  silk,  iron,  or  any  other  commodities,  for
which  there  appears  to  be  a  demand.  We  need  not  appre
hend,  that  all  the  objects  of  industry  will  be  exhausted,  or
that  our  manufacturers,  while  they  remain  on  an  equal
footing  with  those  of  our  neighbours,  will  be  in  danger  of
wanting  employment.  The  emulation  among  rival  nations
serves  rather  to  keep  industry  alive  in  all  of  them  :  And  any
people  is  happier  who  possess  a  variety  of  manufactures,  than
if  they  enjoyed  one  single  great  manufacture,  in  which  they
are  all  employed.  Their  situation  is  less  precarious;  and
they  will  feel  less  sensibly  those  revolutions  and  uncertainties,
to  which  every  particular  branch  of  commerce  will  always  be
exposed.

The  only  commercial  state,  that  ought  to  dread  the  im
provements  and  industry  of  their  neighbours,  is  such  a  one  as
the  DUTCH,  who  enjoying  no  extent  of  land,  nor  possessing  any
number  of  native  commodities,  flourish  only  by  their  being
the  brokers,  and  factors,  and  carriers  of  others.  Such  a
people  may  naturally  apprehend,  that,  as  soon  as  the  neigh
bouring  states  come  to  know  and  pursue  their  interest,  they
will  take  into  their  own  hands  the  management  of  their


348  ESSAY  VII.

affairs,  and  deprive  their  brokers  of  that  profit,  which  they
formerly  reaped  from  it.  But  though  this  consequence  may
naturally  be  dreaded,  it  is  very  long  before  it  takes  place  ;  and
by  art  and  industry  it  may  be  warded  off  for  many  genera
tions,  if  not  wholly  eluded.  The  advantage  of  superior
stocks  and  correspondence  is  so  great,  that  it  is  not  easily
overcome ;  and  as  all  the  transactions  encrease  by  the  en-
crease  of  industry  in  the  neighbouring  states,  even  a  people
whose  commerce  stands  on  this  precarious  basis,  may  at  first
reap  a  considerable  profit  from  the  flourishing  condition  of
their  neighbours.  The  DUTCH,  having  mortgaged  all  their
revenues,  make  not  such  a  figure  in  political  transactions  as
formerly ;  but  their  commerce  is  surely  equal  to  what  it  was
in  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  when  they  were  reckoned
among  the  great  powers  of  EUROPE.

Were  our  narrow  and  malignant  politics  to  meet  with  suc
cess,  we  should  reduce  all  our  neighbouring  nations  to  the
same  state  of  sloth  and  ignorance  that  prevails  in  MOROCCO
and  the  coast  of  BARBARY.  But  what  would  be  the  con
sequence  ?  They  could  send  us  no  commodities  :  They  could
take  none  from  us:  Our  domestic  commerce  itself  would  lan
guish  for  want  of  emulation,  example  and  instruction  :  And  we
ourselves  should  soon  fall  into  the  same  abject  condition,  to
which  we  had  reduced  them.  I  shall  therefore  venture  to
"acknowledge,  that,  not  only  as  a  man,  but  as  a  BRITISH  subject,
I  pray  for  the  flourishing  commerce  of  GERMANY,  SPAIN,  ITALY,
and  even  FRANCE  itself.  I  am  at  least  certain,  that  GEEAT
BRITAIN,  and  all  those  nations,  would  flourish  more,  did
their  sovereigns  and  ministers  adopt  such  enlarged  and
benevolent  sentiments  towards  each  other.


ESSAY  VII.  —Of  the  Balance  of  Power.

IT  is  a  question  whether  the  idea  of  the  balance  of  power
be  owing  entirely  to  modern  policy,  or  whether  the  phrase
only  has  been  invented  in  these  later  ages  ?  It  is  certain,
that  XENOPHON,  *  in  his  Institution  of  CYRUS,  represents  the
combination  of  the  ASIATIC  powers  to  have  arisen  from  a
jealousy  of  the  encreasing  force  of  the  MEDES  and  PERSIANS  ;
and  though  that  elegant  composition  should  be  supposed

1  Lib.  i.  5,  3.


OF  THE BALANCE OF  POWER.  349

altogether  a  romance,  this  sentiment,  ascribed  by  the  author
to  the  eastern  princes,  is  at  least  a  proof  of  the  prevailing
notion  of  ancient  times.

In  all  the  politics  of  GREECE,  the  anxiety,  with  regard  to
the  balance  of  power,  is  apparent,  and  is  expressly  pointed
out  to  us,  even  by  the  ancient  historians.  THUCYDIDES  l
represents  the  league,  which  was  formed  against  ATHENS,
and  which  produced  the  PELOPONNESIAN  war,  as  entirely
owing  to  this  principle.  And  after  the  decline  of  ATHENS,
when  the  THEBANS  and  LACEDEMONIANS  disputed  for  sove
reignty,  we  find,  that  the  ATHENIANS  (as  well  as  many  other
republics)  always  threw  themselves  into  the  lighter  scale,
and  endeavoured  to  preserve  the  balance.  They  supported
THEBES  against  SPARTA,  till  the  great  victory  gained  by
EPAMINONDAS  at  LEUCTRA;  after  which  they  immediately
went  over  to  the  conquered,  from  generosity,  as  they  pre
tended,  but  in  reality  from  their  jealousy  of  the  conquerors.2

Whoever  will  read  DEMOSTHENES'S  oration  for  the  MEG-
ALOPOLITANS,  may  see  the  utmost  refinements  on  this  princi
ple,  that  ever  entered  into  the  head  of  a  VENETIAN  or  ENG
LISH  speculatist.  And  upon  the  first  rise  of  the  MACE
DONIAN  power,  this  orator  immediately  discovered  the  danger,
sounded  the  alarm  throughout  all  GREECE,  and  at  last  as
sembled  that  confederacy  under  the  banners  of  ATHENS,
which  fought  the  great  and  decisive  battle  of  CHAERONEA.

It  is  true,  the  GRECIAN  wars  are  regarded  by  historians  as
wars  of  emulation  rather  than  of  politics ;  and  each  state
seems  to  have  had  more  in  view  the  honour  of  leading  the  rest,
than  any  well-grounded  hopes  of  authority  and  dominion.
If  we  consider,  indeed,  the  small  number  of  inhabitants
in  any  one  republic,  compared  to  the  whole,  the  great  diffi
culty  of  forming  sieges  in  those  times,  and  the  extraordinary
bravery  and  discipline  of  every  freeman  among  that  noble
people  ;  we  shall  conclude,  that  the  balance  of  power  was,
of  itself,  sufficiently  secured  in  GREECE,  arid  needed  not  to
have  been  guarded  with  that  caution  which  may  be  requisite
in  other  ages.  But  whether  we  ascribe  the  shifting  of  sides
in  all  the  GRECIAN  republics  to  jealous  emulation  or  cautious
politics,  the  effects  were  alike,  and  every  prevailing  power
was  sure  to  meet  with  a  confederacy  against  it,  and  that
often  composed  of  its  former  friends  and  allies.

1  Lib.  i.  23.  *  XKXOFH.  Hist.  GKAKC.  lib.  vi.  and  vii.


350  ESSAY VH.

The  same  principle,  call  it  envy  or  prudence,  which  pro
duced  the  Ostracism  of  ATHENS,  and  Petalism  of  SYRACUSE,
and  expelled  every  citizen  whose  fame  or  power  overtopped
the  rest;  the  same  principle,  I  say,  naturally  discovered
itself  in  foreign  politics,  and  soon  raised  enemies  to  the
leading  state,  however  moderate  in  the  exercise  of  its  at-
thority.

The  PERSIAN  monarch  was  really,  in  his  force,  a  petty
prince,  compared  to  the  GRECIAN  republics ;  and  therefore
it  behoved  him,  from  views  of  safety  more  than  from  emu
lation,  to  interest  himself  in  their  quarrels,  and  to  support
the  weaker  side  in  every  contest.  This  was  the  advice
given  by  ALCIBIADES  to  TISSAPHERNES,*  and  it  prolonged
near  a  century  the  date  of  the  PERSIAN  empire ;  till  the
neglect  of  it  for  a  moment,  after  the  first  appearance  of  the
aspiring  genius  of  PHILIP,  brought  that  lofty  and  frail
edifice  to  the  ground,  with  a  rapidity  of  which  there  are  few
instances  in  the  history  of  mankind.

The  successors  of  ALEXANDER  showed  great  jealousy  of
the  balance  of  power ;  a  jealousy  founded  on  true  politics
and  prudence,  and  which  preserved  distinct  for  several  ages
the  partition  made  after  the  death  of  that  famous  conqueror.
The  fortune  and  ambition  of  ANTIGONUS  2  threatened  them
anew  with  a  universal  monarchy  ;  but  their  combination  and
their  victory  at  IPSUS  saved  them.  And  in  subsequent  times,
we  find,  that,  as  the  Eastern  princes  considered  the  GREEKS
and  MACEDONIANS  as  the  only  real  military  force,  with  whom
they  had  any  intercourse,  they  kept  always  a  watchful  eye
over  that  part  of  the  world.  The  PTOLEMIES,  in  particular,
supported  first  ARATUS  and  the  ACHAEANS,  and  then  CLEO-
MENES  king  of  SPARTA,  from  no  other  view  than  as  a  counter
balance  to  the  MACEDONIAN  monarchs.  For  this  is  the  ac
count  which  POLYEIUS  gives  of  the  EGYPTIAN  politics.3

The  reason,  why  it  is  supposed,  that  the  ancients  were
entirely  ignorant  of  the  balance  of  power,  seems  to  be
drawn  from  the  ROMAN  history  more  than  the  GRECIAN;
and  as  the  transactions  of  the  former  are  generally  more
familiar  to  us,  we  have  thence  formed  all  our  conclusions.
It  must  be  owned,  that  the  ROMANS  never  met  with  any  such
general  combination  or  confederacy  against  them,  as  might
naturally  have  been  expected  from  the  rapid  conquests  and

1  Tiiccvi).  lib.  viii.16.  -  Dion.  ?ic.  lib.  xx.  10G.  *  Lib.  ii.  cap.  51.


OF THE BALANCE OF POWER.  351

declared  ambition ;  but  were  allowed  peaceably  to  subdue  their
neighbours,  one  after  another,  till  they  extended  their  dominion
over  the  whole  known  world.  Not  to  mention  the  fabulous
history  of  their l  ITALIC  wars ;  there  was,  upon  HANNIBAL'S
invasion  of  the  ROMAN  state,  a  remarkable  crisis,  which
ought  to  have  called  up  the  attention  of  all  civilized  nations.
It  appeared  afterwards  (nor  was  it  difficult  to  be  observed
at  the  time)  2  that  this  was  a  contest  for  universal  empire ;
yet  no  prince  or  state  seems  to  have  been  the  least  alarmed
about  the  event  or  issue  of  the  quarrel.  PHILIP  of
MACEDON  remained  neuter,  till  he  saw  the  victories  of  HAN
NIBAL  ;  and  then  most  imprudently  formed  an  alliance  with
the  conqueror,  upon  terms  still  more  imprudent.  He  stipu
lated,  that  he  was  to  assist  the  CARTHAGINIAN  state  in  their
conquest  of  ITALY  ;  after  which  they  engaged  to  send  over
forces  into  GREECE,  to  assist  him  in  subduing  the  GRECIAN
commonwealths.3

The  EHODIAN  and  ACHAEAN  republics  are  much  celebrated
by  ancient  historians  for  their  wisdom  and  sound  policy  ;
yet  both  of  them  assisted  the  ROMANS  in  their  wars  against
PHILIP  and  ANTIOCHUS.  And  what  may  be  esteemed  still  a

1  [Editions  H  and  L  add  as  a  note  :  sented  as  fabulous.  I  wou'd  willingly,
There  have  strong  suspicions,  of  late,  therefore,  in  my  private  sentiments,
arisen  among  critics,  and,  in  my  opinion,  divide  the  matter  with  these  critics;
not  without  reason,  concerning  the  first  and  allow,  that  the  battles  and  victories
ages  of  the  ROMAN  history;  as  if  they  and  triumphs  of  those  ages  had  been
were  almost  entirely  fabulous,  'till  after  extremely  falsify'd  by  family  memoirs,
the  sacking  of  the  city  by  the  GATJLS  ;  as  CICERO  says  they  were  :  But  as  in
and  were  even  doubtful  for  some  time  the  accounts  of  domestic  factions,  there
afterwards,  'till  the  GREEKS  began  to  were  two  opposite  relations  transmitted
give  attention  to  ROMAN  affairs,  and  to  posterity,  this  both  serv'd  as  a  check
commit  them  to  writing.  This  scepti-  upon  fiction,  and  enabled  latter  histo-
cism,  however,  seems  to  me,  scarcely  rians  to  gather  some  truth  from  corn-
defensible  in  its  full  extent,  with  regard  parison  and  reasoning.  Half  of  the
to  the  domestic  history  of  ROME,  which  slaughter  which  LIVY  commits  on  the
has  some  air  of  truth  and  probability,  .ZEQti  and  the  Voxsci,  would  depopu-
and  cou'd  scarce  be  the  invention  of  an  late  FRANCE  and  GERMANY;  and  that
historian,  who  had  so  little  morals  or  historian,  tho'  perhaps  he  may  be  justly
judgment  as  to  indulge  himself  in  fiction  charged  as  superficial,  is  at  last  shock' 0
and  romance.  The  revolutions  seem  so  himself  with  the  incredibility  of  his
well  proportion'd  to  their  causes  :  The  narration.  The  same  love  of  exaggera-
progress  of  the  factions  is  so  conform-  tion  seems  to  have  magnify'd  the  num-
able  to  political  experience  :  The  man-  bers  of  the  ROMANS  in  their  armies,
ners  and  maxims  of  the  age  are  so  and  census.]

uniform  and  natural,  that  scarce  any  '*  It  was  observed  by  some,  as  appears

real  history  affords  more  just  reflection  by  the  speech  of  AGKLATJS  of  NAUPAC-

and  improvement. Is  not  MACHIAVEL'S  TUM,  in  the  general  congress  of  GKEECJ-;.

comment on LIVY  (a work surely  of  See  POLYH.  lib.  v.  cap.  104.
great judgment and genius) founded  *  TITI  LIVII.  lib.  xxiii.  cap.  33.

entiraly  oo  this  period,  which  is  rcpre-


352  ESSA.Y  m

stronger  proof,  that  this  maxim  was  not  generally  known  in
those  ages ;  no  ancient  author  has  remarked  the  imprudence
of  these  measures,  nor  has  even  blamed  that  absurd  treaty
above-mentioned,  made  by  PHILIP  with  the  CARTHAGINIANS.
Princes  and  statesmen,  in  all  ages,  may,  before-hand,  be
blinded  in  their  reasonings  with  regard  to  events  :  But  it  is
somewhat  extraordinary,  that  historians,  afterwards,  should
not  form  a  sounder  judgment  of  them.

MASSINISSA,  ATTALUS,  PRUSIAS,  in  gratifying  their  private
passions,  were,  all  of  them,  the  instruments  of  the  ROMAN
greatness;  and  never  seem  to  have  suspected,  that  they
were  forging  their  own  chains,  while  they  advanced  the  con
quests  of  their  ally.  A  simple  treaty  and  agreement  between
MASSINISSA  and  the  CARTHAGINIANS,  so  much  required  by
mutual  interest,  barred  the  ROMANS  from  all  entrance  into
AFRICA,  and  preserved  liberty  to  mankind.

The  only  prince  we  meet  with  in  the  ROMAN  history,  who
seems  to  have  understood  the  balance  of  power,  is  HIEKO
king  of  SYRACUSE.  Though  the  ally  of  ROME,  he  sent  as
sistance  to  the  CARTHAGINIANS,  during  the  war  of  the
auxiliaries  :  '  Esteeming  it  requisite,'  says  PoLYBius,1  '  both
in  order  to  retain  his  dominions  in  SICILY,  and  to  preserve
the  ROMAN  friendship,  that  CARTHAGE  should  be  safe ;  lest
by  its  fall  the  remaining  power  should  be  able,  without  con
trast  or  opposition,  to  execute  every  purpose  and  undertaking.
And  here  he  acted  with  great  wisdom  and  prudence.  For
that  is  never,  on  any  account,  to  be  overlooked ;  nor  ought
such  a  force  ever  to  be  thrown  into  one  hand,  as  to  incapa
citate  the  neighbouring  states  from  defending  their  rights
against  it.'  Here  is  the  aim  of  modern  politics  pointed  out
in  express  terms.

In  short,  the  maxim  of  preserving  the  balance  of  power  is
founded  so  much  on  common  sense  and  obvious  reasoning,
that  it  is  impossible  it  could  altogether  have  escaped  anti
quity,  where  we  find,  in  other  particulars,  so  many  marks  of
deep  penetration  and  discernment.  If  it  was  not  so  generally
known  and  acknowledged  as  at  present,  it  had,  at  least,  an
influence  on  all  the  wiser  and  more  experienced  princes  and
politicians.  And  indeed,  even  at  present,  however  generally
known  and  acknowledged  among  speculative  reasoners,  it  has

1  Lib.  i.  cap.  83.


OF  THE BALANCE  OF  POWER.  353

not,  in  practice,  an  authority  much  more  extensive  among
those  who  govern  the  world.

After  the  fall  of  the  ROMAN  empire,  the  form  of  govern
ment,  established  by  the  northern  conquerors,  incapacitated
them,  in  a  great  measure,  for  farther  conquests,  and  long
maintained  each  state  in  its  proper  boundaries.  But  when
vassalage  and  the  feudal  militia  were  abolished,  mankind
were  anew  alarmed  by  the  danger  of  universal  monarchy,
from  the  union  of  so  many  kingdoms  and  principalities  in
the  person  of  the  emperor  CHARLES.  But  the  power  of  the
house  of  AUSTRIA,  founded  on  extensive  but  divided  domin
ions,  and  their  riches,  derived  chiefly  from  mines  of  gold
and  silver,  were  more  likely  to  decay,  of  themselves,  from
internal  defects,  than  to  overthrow  all  the  bulwarks  raised
against  them.  In  less  than  a  century,  the  force  of  that
violent  and  haughty  race  was  shattered,  their  opulence  dis
sipated,  their  splendor  eclipsed.  A  new  power  succeeded,
more  formidable  to  the  liberties  of  EUROPE,  possessing  ail
the  advantages  of  the  former,  and  labouring  under  none  of
its  defects  ;  except  a  share  of  that  spirit  of  bigotry  and  perse
cution,  with  which  the  house  of  AUSTRIA  was  so  long,  and
still  is  so  much  infatuated.

1  In  the  general  wars,  maintained  against  this  ambitious
power,  GREAT  BRITAIN  has  stood  foremost;  and  she  still
maintains  her  station.  Beside  her  advantages  of  riches  and
situation,  her  people  are  animated  with  such  a  national
spirit,  and  are  so  fully  sensible  of  the  blessings  of  their  gov
ernment,  that  we  may  hope  their  vigour  never  will  languish
in  so  necessary  and  so  just  a  cause.  On  the  contrary,  if  we

1  [Editions  H  to  P  proceed  as  fol-  There  remains rather  room  to hope,

lows : Europe has  now, for  above  a  that,  by  maintaining  the  resistance  for

century, remained on the defensive  some time,  the  natural  revolutions  of

against  the greatest force that ever,  human  affairs,  together  with  unforeseen

perhaps,  was  formed  by  the  civil or  events and accidents, may  guard us

political  combination  of  mankind. And  against  universal  monarchy,  and  pre-

such  is  the  influence  of  the  maxim  here  serve  the  world  from  so  great  an  evil,
treated of, that tho' that ambitious  In the three last  of  these general

nation,  in  the  five  last  general  wars,  wars,  BRITAIN  has  stood  foremost  in

have  been  victorious  in  four,1  and  un-  the glorious struggle ; and she still

successful  only  in  one,2  they  have  not  maintains  her  station,  as  guardiau  of

much  enlarged their dominions,  nor  the  general liberties of  EUROPE,  and

acquired  a  total  ascendant  over  EUROPE.  patron  of  mankind.]


1  Those  concluded  by  the  peace  of 2  That concluded by the peace of
the  PYRKNKF.S,  NIMEGUEN.RYSWICK,  and UTRECHT.
AIX-LA.-CHAPELLE.

VOL. III.  A  A


354  ESSAY  VII.

may  judge  by  the  past,  their  passionate  ardour  seems  rather
to  require  some  moderation ;  and  they  have  offcener  erred
from  a  laudable  excess  than  from  a  blameable  deficiency.

In  the  first  place,  we  seem  to  have  been  more  possessed
with  the  ancient  GREEK  spirit  of  jealous  emulation,  than
actuated  by  the  prudent  views  of  modern  politics.  Our  wars
with  FRANCE  have  been  begun  with  justice,  and  even,  per
haps,  from  necessity ;  but  have  always  been  too  far  pushed
from  obstinacy  and  passion.  The  same  peace,  which  was
afterwards  made  at  RYSWICK  in  1697,  was  offered  so  early
as  the  year  ninety-two;  that  concluded  at  UTRECHT  in  1712
might  have  been  finished  on  as  good  conditions  at  GERTRUY-
TENBERG  in  the  year  eight;  and  we  might  have  given  at
FRANKFORT,  in  1743,  the  same  terms,  which  we  were  glad  to
accept  of  at  AIX-LA-CHAPELLE  in  the  year  forty-eight.  Here
then  we  see,  that  above  half  of  our  wars  with  FRANCE,  and
all  our  public  debts,  are  owing  more  to  our  own  imprudent
vehemence,  than  to  the  ambition  of  our  neighbours.

In  the  second  place,  we  are  so  declared  in  our  opposition  to
FRENCH  power,  and  so  alert  in  defence  of  our  allies,  that
they  always  reckon  upon  our  force  as  upon  their  own ;  and
expecting  to  carry  on  war  at  our  expence,  refuse  all  reason
able  terms  of  accommodation.  Habent  subjectos,  tanquam
suos :  viles,  ut,  alienos.  All  the  world  knows,  that  the  factious
vote  of  the  House  of  Commons,  in  the  beginning  of  the  last
parliament,1  with  the  professed  humour  of  the  nation,  made
the  queen  of  HUNGARY  inflexible  in  her  terms,  and  prevented
that  agreement  with  PRUSSIA,  which  would  immediately  have
restored  the  general  tranquillity  of  EUROPE.

In  the  third  place,  we  are  such  true  combatants,  that,  when
once  engaged,  we  lose  all  concern  for  ourselves  and  our  pos
terity,  and  consider  only  how  we  may  best  annoy  the  enemy.
To  mortgage  our  revenues  at  so  deep  a  rate,  in  wars,  where
we  were  only  accessories,  was  surely  the  most  fatal  delusion,
that  a  nation,  which  had  any  pretension  to  politics  and  pru
dence,  has  ever  yet  been  guilty  of.  That  remedy  of  funding,
if  it  be  a  remedy,  and  not  rather  a  poison,  ought,  in  all  rea
son,  to  be  reserved  to  the  last  extremity ;  and  no  evil,  but  the
greatest  and  most  urgent,  should  ever  induce  us  to  embrace
so  dangerous  an  expedient.

These  excesses,  to  which  we  have  been  carried,  are  preju-

1  [At  the  close  of  the  parliament  of  1734  -41. Ed.]


OF THE BALANCE OF POWER.  355

dicial ;  and  may,  perhaps,  in  time,  become  still  more  preju
dicial  another  way,  by  begetting,  as  is  usual,  the  opposite
extreme,  and  rendering  us  totally  careless  and  supine  with
regard  to  the  fate  of  EUROPE.  The  ATHENIANS,  from  the
most  bustling,  intriguing,  warlike  people  of  GREECE,  finding
their  error  in  thrusting  themselves  into  every  quarrel,  aban
doned  all  attention  to  foreign  affairs  ;  and  in  no  contest  ever
took  part  on  either  side,  except  by  their  flatteries  and  com
plaisance  to  the  victor.

Enormous  monarchies1  are,  probably,  destructive  to  human
nature ;  in  their  progress,  in  their  continuance,2  and  even  in
their  downfall,  which  never  can  be  very  distant  from  their
establishment.  The  military  genius,  which  aggrandized  the
monarchy,  soon  leaves  the  court,  the  capital,  and  the  center
of  such  a  government ;  while  the  wars  are  carried  on  at  a
great  distance,  and  interest  so  small  a  part  of  the  state.  The
ancient  nobility,  Avhose  affections  attach  them  to  their  sover
eign,  live  all  at  court ;  and  never  will  accept  of  military  em
ployments,  which  would  carry  them  to  remote  and  barbarous
frontier?,  where  they  are  distant  both  from  their  pleasures
and  their  fortune.  The  arms  of  the  state,  must,  therefore,
be  entrusted  to  mercenary  strangers,  without  zeal,  without
attachment,  without  honour  ;  ready  on  every  occasion  to  turn
them  against  the  prince,  and  join  each  desperate  malcontent,
who  offers  pay  and  plunder.  This  is  the  necessary  progress
of  human  affairs :  Thus  human  nature  checks  itself  in  its
airy  elevation  :  Thus  ambition  blindly  labours  for  the  destruc
tion  of  the  conqueror,  of  his  family,  and  of  every  thing  near
and  dear  to  him.  The  BOURBONS,  trusting  to  the  support  of
their  brave,  faithful,  and  affectionate  nobility,  would  push
their  advantage,  without  reserve  or  limitation.  These,  while
fired  with  glory  and  emulation,  can  bear  the  fatigues  and
dangers  of  war  ;  but  never  would  submit  to  languish  in  the
garrisons  of  HUNGARY  or  LITHUANIA,  forgot  at  court,  and
sacrificed  to  the  intrigues  of  every  minion  or  mistress,  who
approaches  the  prince.  The  troops  are  filled  with  CRAVATES
and  TARTARS,  HUSSARS  and  COSSACS  ;  intermingled,  perhaps,
with  a  few  soldiers  of  fortune  from  the  better  provinces :

1  [Editions  H  to  0  :  Such  as  EUROPE  this,  that  mankind  were  generally  in  a

is  at  present  threatened  with.]  very  disorderly,  uncivilized  coaditiion,

1  If  the  ROMAN  empire  was  of  ad-  before  its  establishment,
vantage, it  could only proceed from

A 42


366  ESSAY  VIII.

And  the  melancholy  fate  of  the  ROMAN  emperors,  from  the
same  cause,  is  renewed  over  and  over  again,  till  the  final  dis
solution  of  the  monarchy.

ESSAY  VIII.— Of  Taxes.

THERE  is  a  prevailing  maxim,1  among  some  reasoners,  that
every  new  tax  creates  a  new  ability  in  the  subject  to  bear  it,  and
that  each  encrease  of  public  burdens  encreases  proportionably
Uie  industry  of  the  people.  This  maxim  is  of  such  a  nature
as  is  most  likely  to  be  abused ;  and  is  so  much  the  more  dan
gerous,  as  its  truth  cannot  he  altogether  denied  :  but  it  must
be  owned,  when  kept  within  certain  bounds,  to  have  some
foundation  in  reason  and  experience.

When  a  tax  is  laid  upon  commodities,  which  are  consumed
by  the  common  people,  the  necessary  consequence  may  seem
to  be,  either  that  the  poor  must  retrench  something  from
their  way  of  living,  or  raise  their  wages,  so  as  to  make  the
burden  of  the  tax  fall  entirely  upon  the  rich.  But  there  is  a
.third  consequence,  which  often  follows  upon  taxes,  namely,
that  the  poor  encrease  their  industry,  perform  more  work,
and  live  as  well  as  before,  without  demanding  more  for  their
labour.  Where  taxes  are  moderate,  are  laid  on  gradually,  and
affect  not  the  necessaries  of  life,  this  consequence  naturally
follows  ;  and  it  is  certain,  that  such  difficulties  often  serve  to
excite  the  industry  of  a  people,  and  render  them  more  opulent
and  laborious,  than  others,  who  enjoy  the  greatest  advan
tages.  For  we  may  observe,  as  a  parallel  instance,  that  the
most  commercial  nations  have  not  always  possessed  the
greatest  extent  of  fertile  land ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  that
the}r  have  laboured  under  many  natural  disadvantages.  TYRE,
ATHENS,  CARTHAGE,  RHODES,  GENOA,  VENICE,  HOLLAND,  are
strong  examples  to  this  purpose.  And  in  all  history,  we  find
only  three  instances  of  large  and  fertile  countries,  which
have  possessed  much  trade ;  the  NETHERLANDS,  ENGLAND,
and  FRANCE.  The  two  former  seem  to  have  been  allured  by
the  advantages  of  their  maritime  situation,  and  the  necessity
they  lay  under  of  frequenting  foreign  ports,  in  order  to  pro
cure  what  their  own  climate  refused  them.  And  as  to
FRANCE,  trade  has  come  late  into  that  kingdom,  and  seems

1  [Editions H to  P  read : Among nominated  Financiers  and Maltotieri
those whom in this  country wo call in  FHANCK.]
ways  and  means  men,  and  who  are  de-


OF  TAXES.  867

to  have  been  the  effect  of  reflection  and  observation  in  an
ingenious  and  enterprizing  people,  who  remarked  the  riches
acquired  by  such  of  the  neighbouring  nations  as  cultivated
navigation  and  commerce.

The  places  mentioned  by  CiCEROj1  as  possessed  of  the
greatest  commerce  in  his.  time,  are  ALEXANDRIA,  COLCHUS,
TYRE,  SIDON,  ANDROS,  CYPRUS,  PAM.PHYLIA,  LYCIA,  RHODES,
CHIOS,  BYZANTIUM,  LESBOS,  SMYRNA,  MILETUM,  Coos.  All
these,  except  ALEXANDRIA,  were  either  small  islands,  or  narrow
territories.  And  that  city  owed  its  trade  entirely  to  the  hap
piness  of  its  situation.

Since  therefore  some  natural  necessities  or  disadvantages
may  be  thought  favourable  to  industry,  why  may  not  artificial
burdens  have  the  same  effect  ?  Sir  WILLIAM  TEMPLE,1  we
may  observe,  ascribes  the  industry  of  the  DUTCH  entirely  to
necessity,  proceeding  from  their  natural  disadvantages  ;  and
illustrates  his  doctrine  by  a  striking  comparison  with  IRELAND;
*  where,'  says  he,  *  by  the  largeness  and  plenty  of  the-  soil,
and  scarcity  of  people,  all  things  necessary  to  life  are  so
cheap,  that  an  industrious  man,  by  two  days'  labour,  may
gain  enough  to  feed  him  the  rest  of  the  week.  Which  I
take  to  be  a  very  plain  ground  of  the  laziness  attributed  to
the  people.  For  men  naturally  prefer  ease  before  labour,
and  will  not  take  pains  if  they  can  live  idle ;  though  when,
by  necessity,  they  have  been  inured  to  it,  they  cannot  leave
it,  being  grown  a  custom  necessary  to  their  health,  and  to
their  very  entertainment.  Nor  perhaps  is  the  change  harder,
from  constant  ease  to  labour,  than  from  constant  labour  to
ease.'  After  which  the  author  proceeds  to  confirm  his  doc
trine,  by  enumerating,  as  above,  the  places  where  trade  has
most  flourished,  in  ancient  and  modern  times ;  and  which
are  commonly  observed  to  be  such  narrow  confined  territories,
as  beget  a  necessity  for  industry.3

1  Epist.  ad  ATT.  lib.  ix.  ep.  n.  riot. I  have-  been  told,  by  a  consider-

2  Account of the NETHKIUANDS, able manufacturer, that  in the  year
chiip.  6.  J74-0,  when  bread  and  provisions  of  all

3  [Editions  H  to  P  insest  as  follows :  kinds  were  very  dear,  his  workmen  not
'Tis always observed, in years of  only  made a shift to live,  but  paid
scarcity,  if  it  be  not  extreme,  that  the  debts, which they had contracted  in
poor  labour  more,  and  really  live  better,  former  years,  that  were  much  more  fa-
than in years of  great  plenty,  when  vourable  and  abundant.1

they  indulge  themselves- in  idleness  and  This  doctrine,  therefore,  with  regard


1  To  this  purpose  sen  also  Essay  i.  at  the  end.


858  ESSAY VIII.

The  best  taxes  are  such  as  are  levied  upon  consumptions,
especially  those  of  luxury ;  because  such  taxes  are  least  felt
by  the  people.  They  seem,  in  some  measure,  voluntary ;  since
a  man  may  chuse  how  far  he  will  use  the  commodity  which  is
taxed :  They  are  paid  gradually,  and  insensibly : l  They  natu
rally  produce  sobriety  and  frugality,  if  judiciously  imposed  :
And  being  confounded  with  the  natural  price  of  the  commodity,
they  are  scarcely  perceived  by  the  consumers.  Their  only  dis
advantage  is,  that  they  are  expensive  in  the  levying.

Taxes  upon  possessions  are  levied  without  expence ;  but
have  every  other  disadvantage.  Most  states,  however,  are
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  them,  in  order  to  supply  the  defi
ciencies  of  the  other.

But  the  most  pernicious  of  all  taxes  are  the  arbitrary.  They
are  commonly  converted,  by  their  management,  into  punish
ments  on  industry ;  and  also,  by  their  unavoidable  inequality,
are  more  grievous,  than  by  the  real  burden  which  they  im
pose.  It  is  surprising,  therefore,  to  see  them  have  place
among  any  civilized  people.

In  general,  all  poll-taxes,  even  when  not  arbitrary,  which
they  commonly  are,  may  be  esteemed  dangerous :  Because  it
is  so  easy  for  the  sovereign  to  add  a  little  more,  and  a  little
more,  to  the  sum  demanded,  that  these  taxes  are  apt  to
become  altogether  oppressive  and  intolerable.  On  the  other
hand,  a  duty  upon  commodities  checks  itself;  and  a  prince
will  soon  find,  that  an  encrease  of  the  impost  is  no  encrease
of  his  revenue.  It  is  not  easy,  therefore,  for  a  people  to  be
altogether  ruined  by  such  taxes.

Historians  inform  us,  that  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the
destruction  of  the  ROMAN  state,  was  the  alteration,  which
CONSTANTINE  introduced  into  the  finances,  by  substituting
an  universal  poll-tax,  in  lieu  of  almost  all  the  tithes,  customs,
and  excises,  which  formerly  composed  the  revenue  of  the
empire.  The  people,  in  all  the  provinces,  were  so  grinded

to  taxes,  may  be  admitted  in  some  de-  as  the  contrary  character  is  much  more,

gree:  But  beware  of  the  abuse. Exor-  common,  'tis  to  be  feared  that  taxes,  all

bitant taxes, like extreme necessity,  over  EUROPE,  are  multiplying  to  such

destroy industry, by producing de-  a  degree,  as  will  intirely  crush  all  art

spair  ;  and  even  before  they  reach  this  and  industry  ;  tho',  perhaps,  their  first

pitch,  they  raise the  wages  of  the la-  increase,  together with other  circum-

bourer  and  manufacturer,  and  heighten  stances,  might  have  contributed  to  the

the  price  of  all commodities. An at-  growth  of  these,  advantages.]
tentive  disinterested  legislature,  will  ob-  ' [This clause was first idded in

serve  the point  when  the emolument  Edition  Q.]
Ceases,  and the  prejudice  begins :  But


OF  TAXES.  359

and  oppressed  by  the  publicans,  that  they  were  glad  to  take
refuge  under  the  conquering  arms  of  the  barbarians  ;  whose
dominion,  as  they  had  fewer  necessities  and  less  art,  was
found  preferable  to  the  refined  tyranny  of  the  EOMANS.

1  It  is  an  opinion,  zealously  promoted  by  some  political
writers,  that,  since  all  taxes,  as  they  pretend,  fall  ultimately
upon  land,  it  were  better  to  lay  them  originally  there,  and
abolish  every  duty  upon  consumptions.  But  it  is  denied,
that  all  taxes  fall  ultimately  upon  land.  If  a  duty  be  laid
upon  any  commodity,  consumed  by  an  artisan,  he  has  two
obvious  expedients  for  paying  it ;  he  may  retrench  somewhat
of  his  expence,  or  he  may  encrease  his  labour.  Both  these
resources  are  more  easy  and  natural,  than  that  of  heightening
his  wages.  We  see,  that,  in  years  of  scarcity,  the  weaver
either  consumes  less  or  labours  more,  or  employs  both  these
expedients  of  frugality  and  industry,  by  which  he  is  enabled
to  reach  the  end  of  the  year.  It  is  but  just,  that  he  should
subject  himself  to  the  same  hardships,  if  they  deserve  the
name,  for  the  sake  of  the  publick,  which  gives  him  protection.
By  what  contrivance  can  he  raise  the  price  of  his  labour  ?
The  manufacturer  who  employs  him,  will  not  give  him  more  :
Neither  can  he,  because  the  merchant,  who  exports  the
cloth,  cannot  raise  its  price,  being  limited  by  the  price  which
it  yields  in  foreign  markets.  Every  man,  to  be  sure,  is
desirous  of  pushing  off  from  himself  the  burden  of  any  tax,
which  is  imposed,  and  of  laying  it  upon  others  :  But  as  every
man  has  the  same  inclination,  and  is  upon  the  defensive ;  no,
set  of  men  can  be  supposed  to  prevail  altogether  in  this
contest.  And  why  the  landed  gentleman  should  be  the  victim
of  the  whole,  and  should  not  be  able  to  defend  himself,  as
well  as  others  are,  I  cannot  readily  imagine.  All  tradesmen,
indeed,  would  willingly  prey  jipon  him,  and  divide  him  among
them,  if  they  could :  But  this  inclination  they  always  have,
though  no  taxes  were  levied ;  and  the  same  methods,  by
which  he  guards  against  the  imposition  of  tradesmen  before
taxes,  will  serve  him  afterwards,  and  make  them  share  the

1  [Editions  H  to  P  omit  the  open-  ture  is  chiefly  lodged,  and  making  them

ing  sentences  as  far  as  '  foreign  mar-  preserve  great  regard  for  trade  and  in-

kets,'  and  read  instead  of  them :  There  dustrv. But  I  must  confess,  that  this

is  a  prevailing  opinion,  that  all  taxes,  principle,  tho'  first  advanced  by  a  cele-

however  levied,  fall  upon  the  land  at  brated  writer,  lias  so  little  appearance

last. Such  an  opinion  may  be  useful  of  reason,  that,  were  it  not  for  his  au-

in BHITAIN, by checking the landed  thority,  it  had  never  been  received  by

gentlemen,  in  whose  hands  our  legisla-  any  body.]


SCO  ESSAY  IX.

burden  with  him.  '  They  must  be  very  heavy  taxes,  indeed,
and  very  injudiciously  levied,  which  the  artizan  will  not,  of
himself,  be  enabled  to  pay,  by  superior  industry  and  frugality,
without  raising  the  price  of  his  labour.

I  shall  conclude  this  subject  with  observing,  that  we  have,
with  regard  to  taxes,  an  instance  of  what  frequently  happens
in  political  institutions,  that  the  consequences  of  things  are
diametrically  opposite  to  what  we  should  expect  on  the  first
appearance.  It  is  regarded  as  a  fundamental  maxim  of  the
TURKISH  government,  that  the  Grand  Signior,  though  absolute
master  of  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  each  individual,  has  no
authority  to  impose  a  new  tax ;  and  every  OTTOMAN  prince,  who
has  made  such  an  attempt,  either  has  been  obliged  to  retract,
or  has  found  the  fatal  effects  of  his  perseverance.  One  would
imagine,  that  this  prejudice  or  established  opinion  were  the
firmest  barrier  in  the  world  against  oppression;  yet  it  is
certain,  that  its  effect  is  quite  contrary.  The  emperor,  having
no  regular  method  of  encreasing  his  revenue,  must  allow  all
the  bashaws  and  governors  to  oppress  and  abuse  the  subjects :
And  these  he  squeezes  after  their  return  from  their  govern
ment.  Whereas,  if  he  could  impose  a  new  tax,  like  our
EUROPEAN  princes,  his  interest  would  so  far  be  united  with
that  of  his  people,  that  he  would  immediately  feel  the  bad
effects  of  these  disorderly  levies  of  money,  and  would  find,
that  a  pound,  raised  by  a  general  imposition,  would  have
less  pernicious  effects,  than  a  shilling  taken  in  so  unequal
and  arbitrary  a  manner.


ESSAY  IX.—  Of  Public  Credit.

IT  appears  to  have  been  the  common  practice  of  antiquity,
to  make  provision,  during  peace,  for  the  necessities  of
war,  and  to  hoard  up  treasures  before-hand,  as  the  in
struments  either  of  conquest  or  defence;  without  trusting
to  extraordinary  impositions,  much  less  to  borrowing,  in
times  of  disorder  and  confusion.  Besides  the  immense  sums

1  [The  concluding  sentence  is  not  in  price  of  most  species  of  labour  nearly

Editions  H  to  0.— Ed.  P.  reads  in  its  the  same  after  the  imposition  of  taxes,

place  :  No  labour  in  any  commodities,  I  may  add,  that  it  has  this  effect  upon

that are exported,  can be  very  con-  the  whole  :  For  were  any  kind  of  la-

siclerably  raised  in  the  price,  without  bour paid beyond its proportion,  all

losing  the  foreign  market 4  and  as  some  hands  would  flock  to  it,  and  would  soon

part  of  almost every manufactory  is  sink  it  to  a  level  with  the  rest.]
exported, this  circumstance  keeps  the


OF PUBLIC CREDIT.  361

above  mentioned,1  which  were  amassed  by  ATHENS,  and  bv
the  PTOLEMIES,  and  other  successors  of  ALEXANDER  ;  we
learn  from  PLATO,2  that  the  frugal  LACEDEMONIANS  had  also
collected  a  great  treasure ;  and  ARRIAN  3  and  PLUTARCH  4
take  notice  of  the  riches  which  ALEXANDER  got  possession  of
on  the  conquest  of  SUSA  and  ECBATANA,  and  which  were
reserved,  some  of  them,  from  the  time  of  CYRUS.  If  I
remember  right,  the  scripture  also  mentions  the  treasure  of
HEZEKIAH  and  the  JEWISH  princes ;  as  profane  history  does
that  of  PHILIP  and  PERSEUS,  kings  of  MACEDON.  The
ancient  republics  of  GAUL  had  commonly  large  sums  in
reserve.5  Every  one  knows  the  treasure  seized  in  ROME  by
JULIUS  CAESAR,  during  the  civil  wars :  and  we  find  after
wards,  that  the  wiser  emperors,  AUGUSTUS,  TIBERIUS,  VES
PASIAN,  SEVERUS,  &c.  always  discovered  the  prudent  fore
sight,  of  saving  great  sums  against  any  public  exigency.

On  the  contrary,  our  modern  expedient,  which  has  become
very  general,  is  to  mortgage  the  public  revenues,  and  to
trust  that  posterity  will  pay  off  the  incumbrances  contracted
by  their  ancestors :  And  they,  having  before  their  eyes,  so
good  an  example  of  their  wise  fathers,  have  the  same  pru
dent  reliance  on  their  posterity  ;  who,  at  last,  from  necessity
more  than  choice,  are  obliged  to  place  the  same  confidence
iii  a  new  posterity.  But  not  to  waste  time  in  declaiming
against  a  practice  which  appears  ruinous,  6  beyond  all  con
troversy  ;  it  seems  pretty  apparent,  that  the  ancient  maxims
a.re,  in  this  respect,  more  prudent  than  the  modern;  even
though  the  latter  had  been  confined  within  some  reasonable
bounds,  and  had  ever,  in  any  instance,  been  attended  with
such  frugality,  in  time  of  peace,  as  to  discharge  the  debts
incurred  by  an  expensive  war.  For  why  should  the  case  be
so  different  between  the  public  and  an  individual,  as  to  make
us  establish  different  maxims  of  conduct  for  each  ?  If  the
funds  of  the  former  be  greater,  its  necessary  expences  are
proportionably  larger ;  if  its  resources  be  more  numerous,
they  are  not  infinite ;  and  as  its  frame  should  be  calculated
for  a  much  longer  duration  than  the  date  of  a  single  life,  or

1  Essay  V.  ALEXANDER  found  in  SUSA  above  50,000

2  ALCIB.  i.  p.  123.  talents.

3  Lib.  iii.  16  and  19.  s  STRABO,  lib.  iv.  p.  188.

4  PI.VT in vita  ALEX.  36, 37. He  6  [Editions H  to  P  add: Beyond
makes  those  treasures  amount  to  80,000  the  evidence  of  a  hundred  demonstra-
talents,or  about  15  millions  sterl.  QUIN-  tioiis.]

TUS  CtntTiu*  (lib.  v.  cap.  2  )  says,  that


302  ESSAY IX.

even  of  a  family,  it  should  embrace  maxims,  large,  durable,
and  generous,  agreeably  to  the  supposed  extent  of  its  exist
ence.  To  trust  to  chances  and  temporary  expedients,  is,
indeed,  what  the  necessity  of  human  affairs  frequently  renders
unavoidable :  but  whoever  voluntarily  depend  on  such  re
sources,  have  not  necessity,  but  their  own  folly,  to  accuse  for
their  misfortunes,  when  any  such  befal  them.

If  the  abuses  of  treasures  be  dangerous,  either  by  en
gaging  the  state  in  rash  enterprizes,  or  making  it  neglect
military  discipline,  in  confidence  of  its  riches ;  the  abuses  of
mortgaging  are  more  certain  and  inevitable  ;  poverty,  impo
tence,  and  subjection  to  foreign  powers.

According  to  modern  policy  war  is  attended  with  every
destructive  circumstance;  loss  of  men,  ericrease  of  taxes,
decay  of  commerce,  dissipation  of  money,  devastation  by  sea
and  land.  According  to  ancient  maxims,  the  opening  of  the
public  treasure,  as  it  produced  an  uncommon  affluence  of
gold  and  silver,  served  as  a  temporary  encouragement  to  in
dustry,  and  atoned,  in  some  degree,  for  the  inevitable  calami
ties  of  war.

1  It  is  very  tempting  to  a  minister  to  employ  such  an
expedient,  as  enables  him  to  make  a  great  figure  during
his  administration,  without  overburthening  the  people  with
taxes,  or  exciting  any  immediate  clamours  against  himself.
The  practice,  therefore,  of  contracting  debt  will  almost  in
fallibly  be  abused,  in  every  government.  It  would  scarcely
be  more  imprudent  to  give  a  prodigal  son  a  credit  in  every
banker's  shop  in  London,  than  to  impower  a  statesman  to
draw  bills,  in  this  manner,  upon  posterity.

What  then  shall  we  say  to  the  new  paradox,  that  public
incumbrances  are,  of  themselves,  advantageous,  independent
of  the  necessity  of  contracting  them ;  and  that  any  state,
even  though  it  were  not  pressed  by  a  foreign  enemy,  could
not  possibly  have  embraced  a  wiser  expedient  for  promoting
commerce  and  riches,  than  to  create  funds,  and  debts,  and
taxes,  without  limitation  ?  Reasonings,  such  as  these,  might
naturally  have  passed  for  trials  of  wit  among  rhetoricians,
like  the  panegyrics  on  folly  and  a  fever,  on  BUSIRIS  and
NERO,  had  we  not  seen  such  absurd  maxims  patronized  by
great  ministers,  and  by  a  whole  party  among  us.2

1  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Ed.  2  [Editions  H  to  P  add:  And  these

Q.]  puzzling  arguments,  (for  they  deserve


•  OF PUBLIC CREDIT.  3(53

Let  us  examine  the  consequences  of  public  debts,  both  in
our  domestic  management,  by  their  influence  on  commerce
and  industry ;  and  in  our  foreign  transactions,  by  their  efieet
on  wars  and  negociations.1

Public  securities  are  with  us  become  a  kind  of  money,  and
pass  as  readily  at  the  current  price  as  gold  or  silver.  Wher
ever  any  profitable  undertaking  offers  itself,  how  expensive
soever,  there  are  never  wanting  hands  enow  to  embrace  it ;
nor  need  a  trader,  who  has  sums  in  the  public  stocks,  fear  to
launch  out  into  the  most  extensive  trade ;  since  he  is  pos
sessed  of  funds,  which  will  answer  the  most  sudden  demand
that  can  be  made  upon  him.  No  merchant  thinks  it  neces
sary  to  keep  by  him  any  considerable  cash.  Bank-stock,  or
India-bonds,  especially  the  latter,  serve  all  the  same  pur
poses  ;  because  he  can  dispose  of  them,  or  pledge  them  to  a
banker,  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  and  at  the  same  time  they
are  not  idle,  even  when  in  his  scritoire,  but  bring  him  in
a  constant  revenue.  In  short,  our  national  debts  furnish
merchants  with  a  species  of  money,  that  is  continually  mul
tiplying  in  their  hands,  and  produces  sure  gain,  besides  the

not  the  name  of  specious)  though  they  gives  new  encouragement  to  the first

could  not  be  the  foundation  of  LORD  dealer  or  the  manufacturer  and  all  his

ORFOED'S conduct, for he  had  more  tradesmen, and makes them produce

sense ;  served  at  least  to  keep  his  par-  more  and  better  commodities  of the

tizans  in  countenance,  and  perplex  the  same species. A  stagnation is here

understanding  of  the  nation.]  pernicious,  wherever  it happens  ; be-

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add :  There  is  a  cause  it  operates  backwards,  and  stops

word,  which  is  here  in  the  mouth  of  or  benumbs  the  industrious  hand  in  its

every  body,  and  which,  I  find,  has  also  production  of  what  is  useful  to  human

got  abroad,  and  is  much  employed  by  life. But  what  production  we  owe  to

foreign writers,1 in imitation of  the  CHANGE-ALI.MT,  or  even  what  consump-

ENGLISH  ; and this is, CIRCULATION,  tion,  except  that  of  coffee,  and  pen,  ink,

This word serves as  an account  cf  and  paper,  I  have  not  yet  learned ;  nor

every  thing ;  and  though  I  confess,  that  can  one  forsee  the  loss  or  decay  of  any

I  have  sought  for  its  meaning  in  the  one  beneficial  commerce  or  commodity,

present subject, ever since I was a  though  that  place  and  all  its  inhabitants

school-boy,  I  have  never  yet  been  able  were  for  ever  buried  in  the  ocean,

to  discover  it. What  possible  advan-  But  though  this  term  has  never  been

tage  is  there  which  the  nation  can  reap  explained  by  those  who  insist  so  much

by  the  easy  transference  of  stock  from  on the  advantages that  result  from  a

hand  to  hand  ?  Or  is  there  any  parallel  circulation,  there  seems,  however,  to  be

to  be drawn from the  circulation of  some  benefit  of  a  simila.r  kind,  arising

other  commodities,  to  that  of  chequer-  from  our incumbrances : As indeed,

notes  and  INDIA  bonds?  Whereamanu-  what  human  evil  is  there,  which  is  not

facturer  has  a  quick  sale  of  his  goods  attended  with  some  advantage? This

to  the  merchant,  the  merchant  to  the  we  shall  endeavour  to  explain,  that  w«

shopkeeper,  the  shopkeeper  to  his  cus-  may estimate the weight which we

tomers  ; this enlivens industry, and  ought  to  allow  it.]


1  MELON,  Dr  TOT,  LAW,  in  the  pamphlets  published  in  FRANCE.


304  ESSAY  IX.

profits  of  their  commerce.  This  must  enable  them  to  trade
upon  less  profit.  The  small  profit  of  the  merchant  renders
the  commodity  cheaper,  causes  a  greater  consumption,
quickens  the  labour  of  the  common  people,  and  helps  to
spread  arts  and  industry  throughout  the  whole  society.

There  are  also,  we  may  observe,  in  ENGLAND  and  in  all
states,  which  have  both  commerce  and  public  debts,  a  set  of
men,  who  are  half  merchants,  half  stock-holders,  and  may
be  supposed  willing  to  trade  for  small  profits ;  because  com
merce  is  not  their  principal  or  sole  support,  and  their
revenues  in  the  funds  are  a  sure  resource  for  themselves  and
their  families.  Were  there  no  funds,  great  merchants  would
have  no  expedient  for  realizing  or  securing  any  part  of  their
profit,  but  by  making  purchases  of  lands;  and  land  has
many  disadvantages  in  comparison  of  funds.  Eequiring
more  care  and  inspection,  it  divides  the  time  and  attention
of  the  merchant ;  upon  any  tempting  offer  or  extraordinary
accident  in  trade,  it  is  not  so  easily  converted  into  money ;
and  as  it  attracts  too  much,  both  by  the  many  natural  plea
sures  it  affords,  and  the  authority  it  gives,  it  soon  converts
the  citizen  into  the  country  gentleman.  More  men,  there
fore,  with  large  stocks  and  incomes,  may  naturally  be  sup
posed  to  continue  in  trade,  where  there  are  public  debts ;  and
this,  it  must  be  owned,  is  of  some  advantage  to  commerce,
by  diminishing  its  profits,  promoting  circulation,  and  en
couraging  industry.1

But,  in  opposition  to  these  two  favourable  circumstances,
perhaps  of  no  very  great  importance,  weigh  the  many  dis
advantages  which  attend  our  public  debts,  in  the  whole
interior  ceconomy  of  the  state :  You  will  find  no  comparison
between  the  ill  and  the  good  which  result  from  them.

First,  It  is  certain,  that  national  debts  cause  a  mighty  con
fluence  of  people  and  riches  to  the  capital,  by  the  great  sums,
levied  in  the  provinces  to  pay  the  interest ;  and  perhaps,  too,
by  the  advantages  in  trade  above  mentioned,  which  the}r  give
the  merchants  in  the  capital  above  the  rest  of  the  kingdom.
The  question  is,  whether,  in  our  case,  it  be  for  the  public

1  [Editions  H  to  0  add  as  a  note:  the  cheaper  may  they  expect  to  borrow ;
On  this  head,  I  shall  observe,  without  contrary  to  first  appearance,  and  con-
interrupting  the  thread  of  the  argument,  trary  to  common  opinion.  The  profits
that  the  multiplicity  of  our  public  debts  of  trade  have  an  influence  on  interest,
serves  rather  to  sink  the  interest,  and  See  Essay  IV.]
that  the  more  the  government  borrows,


OF PUBLIC CREDIT.  3(35

interest,  that  so  many  privileges  should  be  conferred  on
LONDON,  which  has  already  arrived  at  such  an  enormous  size,
and  seems  still  encreasingp  Some  men  are  apprehensive  of
the  consequences.  For  my  own  part,  I  cannot  forbear
thinking,  that,  though  the  head  is  undoubtedly  too  large  for
the  body,  yet  that  great  city  is  so  happily  situated,  that  its
excessive  bulk  causes  less  inconvenience  than  even  a  smaller
capital  to  a  greater  kingdom.  There  is  more  difference
between  the  prices  of  all  provisions  in  PARIS  and  LANGTJEDOC,
than  between  those  in  LONDON  and  YORKSHIRE.  l  The  im
mense  greatness,  indeed,  of  LONDON,  under  a  government
which  admits  not  of  discretionary  power,  renders  the  people
factious,  mutinous,  seditious,  and  even  perhaps  rebellious.
But  to  this  evil  the  national  debts  themselves  tend  to  provide
a  remedy.  The  first  visible  eruption,  or  even  immediate
danger,  of  public  disorders  must  alarm  all  the  stockholders,
whose  property  is  the  most  precarious  of  any  ;  and  will  make
them  fly  to  the  support  of  government,  whether  menaced  by
Jacobitish  violence  or  democratical  frenzy.

Secondly,  Public  stocks,  being  a  kind  of  paper-credit,  have
all  the  disadvantages  attending  that  species  of  money.  They
banish  gold  and  silver  from  the  most  considerable  commerce
of  the  state,  reduce  them  to  common  circulation,  and  by  that
means  render  all  provisions  and  labour  dearer  than  otherwise
they  would  be.2

Thirdly,  The  taxes,  which  are  levied  to  pay  the  interests  of
these  debts,3  are  apt  either  to  heighten  the  price  of  labour,  or
be  an  oppression  on  the  poorer  sort.

Fourthly,  As  foreigners  possess  a  great  share  of  our
national  funds,  they  render  the  public,  in  a  manner,  tributary
to  them,  and  may  in  time  occasion  the  transport  of  our
people  and  our  industry.

Fifthly,  The  greater  part  of  the  public  stock  being  always
in  the  hands  of  idle  people,  who  live  on  their  revenue,  our

1  [The  remainder  of  this  paragraph  dies  itself  in  a  little  time  :  The  money
was  added  in  Ed.  Q.]  soon  flows  out  into  all  the  neighbouring

2  [Edition  P  adds  : We may  also  nations :  The  prices  fall  to  a  level :  And
remark,  that  this  increase  of  prices,  do-  industry  may  be  continued  as  before ;  a
rived from paper-credit, has a more  relief,  which  cannot  be  expected,  where
durable  and  a  IP  ore  dangerous  influence  the  circulating  specie  consists  chiefly  of
than  when  it  arises  from  a  great  increase  paper,  and  has  no  intrinsic  value.]

of  gold  and  silver :  "Where  an  accidental  3  [Editions H to N read: Are a

overflow  of  money  raises  the  price  of  check  upon  industry,  heighten  the  price
labor  and  commodities,  the  evil  reme-  of  labour,  and  are  an  oppr.  &c.]


300  ESSAY IX.

funds,  in  that  view,  give  great  encouragement  to  an  useless
and  unactive  life.

But  though  the  injury,  that  arises  to  commerce  and  in
dustry  from  our  public  funds,  will  appear,  upon  balancing  the
whole,  not  inconsiderable,  it  is  trivial,  in  comparison  of  the
prejudice  that  results  to  the  state  considered  as  a  body  politic,
which  must  support  itself  in  the  society  of  nations,  and  have
various  transactions  with  other  states  in  wars  and  negocia-
tions.  The  ill,  there,  is  pure  and  unmixed,  without  any
favourable  circumstance  to  atone  for  it ;  and  it  is  an  ill  too  of
a  nature  the  highest  and  most  important.

We  have,  indeed,  been  told,  that  the  public  is  no  weaker
upon  account  of  its  debts  ;  since  they  are  mostly  due  among
ourselves,  and  bring  as  much  property  to  one  as  they  ta,ke
from  another.  It  is  like  transferring  money  from  the  right
hand  to  the  left ;  which  leaves  the  person  neither  richer  nor
poorer  than  before.  Such  loose  reasonings  and  specious
comparisons  will  always  pass,  where  we  judge  not  upon  prin
ciples.  I  ask,  Is  it  possible,  in  the  nature  of  things,  to  over-
burthen  a  nation  with  taxes,  even  where  the  sovereign  resides
among  them  ?  The  very  doubt  seems  extravagant ;  since  it
is  requisite,  in  every  community,  that  there  be  a  certain  pro
portion  observed  between  the  laborious  and  the  idle  part  of
it.  But  if  all  our  present  taxes  be  mortgaged,  must  we  not
invent  new  ones  ?  And  may  not  this  matter  be  carried  to  a
length  that  is  ruinous  and  destructive  ?

In  every  nation,  there  are  always  some  methods  of  levying
money  more  easy  than  others,  agreeably  to  the  way  of  living
of  the  people,  and  the  commodities  they  make  use  of.  In
GREAT  BRITAIN,  the  excises  upon  malt  and  beer  afford  a  large
revenue  ;  because  the  operations  of  malting  and  brewing  are
tedious,  and  are  impossible  to  be  concealed ;  and  at  the  same
time,  these  commodities  are  not  so  absolutely  necessary  to
life,  as  that  the  raising  of  their  price  would  very  much  affect
the  poorer  sort.  These  taxes  being  all  mortgaged,  what
difficulty  to  find  new  ones !  what  vexation  and  ruin  of  the
poor  !

Duties  upon  consumption  are  more  equal  and  easy  than
those  upon  possessions.  What  a  loss  to  the  public,  that  the
former  are  all  exhausted,  and  that  we  must  have  recourse  to
the  more  grievous  method  of  levying  taxes  !

Were  all  the  proprietors  of  land  only  stewards  to  the  public,


OF PUBLIC CREDIT.  307

must  not  necessity  force  them  to  practise  all  the  arts  of  oppres
sion  used  by  stewards  ;  where  the  absence  or  negligence  of
the  proprietor  render  them  secure  against  enquiry  ?

It  will  scarcely  be  asserted,  that  no  bounds  ought  ever  to
be  set  to  national  debts ;  and  that  the  public  would  be  no
weaker,  were  twelve  or  fifteen  shillings  in  the  pound,  land-tax,
mortgaged,  with  all  the  present  customs  and  excises.  There
is  something,  therefore,  in  the  case,  beside  the  mere  trans
ferring  of  property  from  the  one  hand  to  another.  In  500
years,  the  posterity  of  those  now  in  the  coaches,  and  of  those
upon  the  boxes,  will  probably  have  changed  places,  without
affecting  the  public  by  these  revolutions.

1  Suppose  the  public  once  fairly  brought  to  that  condition,
to  which  it  is  hastening  with  such  amazing  rapidity  ;  suppose
the  land  to  be  taxed  eighteen  or  nineteen  shillings  in  the
pound ;  for  it  can  never  bear  the  whole  twenty ;  suppose  all
the  excises  and  customs  to  be  screwed  up  to  the  utmost  which
the  nation  can  bear,  without  entirely  losing  its  commerce  and
industry ;  and  suppose  that  all  those  funds  are  mortgaged  to
perpetuity,  and  that  the  invention  and  wit  of  all  our  pro
jectors  can  find  no  new  imposition,  which  may  serve  as  the
foundation  of  a  new  loan  ;  and  let  us  consider  the  necessary
consequences  of  this  situation.  Though  the  .imperfect  state
of  our  political  knowledge,  and  the  narrow  capacities  of  men,
make  it  difficult  to  fortel  the  effects  which  will  result  from
any  untried  measure,  the  seeds  of  ruin  are  here  scattered  with
such  profusion  as  not  to  escape  the  eye  of  the  most  careless
observer.

In  this  unnatural  state  of  society,  the  only  persons,  who
possess  any  revenue  beyond  the  immediate  effects  of  their
industry,  are  the  stock-holders,  who  draw  almost  all  the  rent
of  the  land  and  houses,  besides  the  produce  of  all  the  customs
and  excises.  These  are  men,  who  have  no  connexions  with
the  state,  who  can  enjoy  their  revenue  in  any  part  of  the
globe  in  which  they  chuse  to  reside,  who  will  naturally  bury
themselves  in  the  capital  or  in  great  cities,  and  who  will  sink
into  the  lethargy  of  a  stupid  and  pampered  luxury,  without
spirit,  ambition,  or  enjoyment.  Adieu  to  all  ideas  of  nobility,
gentry,  and  family.  The  stocks  can  be  transferred  in  an  in
stant,  and  being  in  such  a  fluctuating  state,  will  seldom  be
transmitted  during  three  generations  from  father  to  son.  Or

1  [The  six  following  paragraphs  were  added  in  Ed.  0.]


308

were  they  to  remain  ever  so  long  in  one  family,  they  convey
no  hereditary  authority  or  credit  to  the  possessor ;  and  by
this  means,  the  several  ranks  of  men,  which  form  a  kind  of
'Independent  magistracy  in  a  state,  instituted  by  the  hand  of
nature,  are  entirely  lost ;  and  every  man  in  authority  derives
his  influence  from  the  commission  alone  of  the  sovereign.
No  expedient  remains  for  preventing  or  suppressing  insur
rections,  but  mercenary  armies :  No  expedient  at  all  remains
for  resisting  tyranny :  Elections  are  swayed  by  bribery  and
corruption  alone  :  And  the  middle  power  between  king  and
people  being  totally  removed,  a  grievous  despotism  must  in
fallibly  prevail.  The  landholders,  despised  for  their  poverty,
and  hated  for  their  oppressions,  will  be  utterly  unable  to  make
any  opposition  to  it.

Though  a  resolution  should  be  formed  by  the  legislature
never  to  impose  any  tax  which  hurts  commerce  and  dis
courages  industry,  it  will  be  impossible  for  men,  in  subjects
of  such  extreme  delicacy,  to  reason  so  justly  as  never  to  be
mistaken,  or  amidst  difficulties  so  urgent,  never  to  be  seduced
from  their  resolution.  The  continual  fluctuations  in  com
merce  require  continual  alterations  in  the  nature  of  the  taxes ;
which  exposes  the  legislature  every  moment  to  the  danger
both  of  wilful  and  involuntary  error.  And  any  great  blow
given  to  trade,  whether  by  injudicious  taxes  or  by  other
accidents,  throws  the  whole  system  of  government  into  con
fusion.

But  what  expedient  can  the  public  now  employ,  even  sup
posing  trade  to  continue  in  the  most  flourishing  condition,  in
order  to  support  its  foreign  wars  and  enterprizes,  and  to
defend  its  own  honour  and  interests,  or  those  of  its  allies  ?
I  do  not  ask  how  the  public  is  to  exert  such  a  prodigious
power  as  it  has  maintained  during  our  late  wars  ;  where  we
have  so  much  exceeded,  not  only  our  own  natural  strength,
but  even  that  of  the  greatest  empires.  This  extravagance  is
the  abuse  complained  of,  as  the  source  of  all  the  dangers,  to
which  we  are  at  present  exposed.  But  since  we  must  still
suppose  great  commerce  and  opulence  to  remain,  even  after
every  fund  is  mortgaged ;  these  riches  must  be  defen^-ed  by
proportional  power ;  and  whence  is  the  public  to  derive  the
revenue  which  supports  it?  It  must  plainly  be  from  a  con
tinual  taxation  of  their  annuitants,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,
from  mortgaging  anew,  on  every  exigency,  a  certain  part  of


OF  PUBLIC CREDIT.  3G9

their  annuities ;  and  thus  making  them  contribute  to  their
own  defence,  and  to  that  of  the  nation.  But  the  difficulties,
attending  this  system  of  policy,  will  easily  appear,  whether
we  suppose  the  king  to  have  become  absolute  master,  or  to
be  still  controuled  by  national  councils,  in  which  the  annui
tants  themselves  must  necessarily  bear  the  principal  sway.

If  the  prince  has  become  absolute,  as  may  naturally  be
expected  from  this  situation  of  afi'airs,  it  is  so  easy  for  him
to  encrease  his  exactions  upon  the  annuitants,  which  amount
only  to  the  retaining  money  in  his  own  hands,  that  this
species  of  property  would  soon  lose  all  its  credit,  and  the
whole  income  of  every  individual  in  the  state  must  lie  en
tirely  at  the  mercy  of  the  sovereign :  A  degree  of  despotism,
which  no  oriental  monarchy  has  ever  yet  attained.  If,  on
the  contrary,  the  consent  of  the  annuitants  be  requisite  for
every  taxation,  they  will  never  be  persuaded  to  contribute
sufficiently  even  to  the  support  of  government ;  as  the  dimi
nution  of  their  revenue  must  in  that  case  be  very  sensible,
would  not  be  disguised  under  the  appearance  of  a  branch  of
excise  or  customs,  and  would  not  be  shared  by  any  other
order  of  the  state,  who  are  already  supposed  to  be  taxed  to
the  utmost.  There  are  instances,  in  some  republics,  of  a
hundredth  penny,  and  sometimes  of  the  fiftieth,  being  given
to  the  support  of  the  state ;  but  this  is  always  an  extraordi
nary  exertion  of  power,  and  can  never  become  the  foundation
of  a  constant  national  defence.  We  have  always  found,
where  a  government  has  mortgaged  all  its  revenues,  that
it  necessarily  sinks  into  a  state  of  languor,  inactivity,  and
impotence.

Such  are  the  inconveniencies,  which  may  reasonably  be
foreseen,  of  this  situation,  to  which  GREAT  BRITAIN  is  visibly
tending.  Not  to  mention,  the  numberless  inconveniencies,
which  cannot  be  foreseen,  and  which  must  result  from  so
monstrous  a  situation  as  that  of  making  the  pubac  the  chief
or  sole  proprietor  of  land,  besides  investing  it  with  every
branch  of  customs  and  excise,  which  the  fertile  imagination
of  ministers  and  projectors  have  been  able  to  invent.

I  must  confess,  that  there  is  a  strange  supineness,  from
long  custom,  creeped  into  all  ranks  of  men,  with  regard  to
public  debts,  not  unlike  what  divines  so  vehemently  complain
of  with  regard  to  their  religious  doctrines.  We  all  own,
that  the  most  sanguine  imagination  cannot  hope,  either  that

VOL.  III.  B  B


370  ESSAY  IX.

this  or  any  future  ministry  will  be  possessed  of  such  rigid
and  steady  frugality,  as  to  make  a  considerable  progress  in
the  payment  of  our  debts  ;  or  that  the  situation  of  foreign
affairs  will,  for  any  long  time,  allow  them  leisure  and  tran
quillity  for  such  an  undertaking.1  What  then  is  to  become  of
us  ?  Were  we  ever  so  good  Christians,  and  ever  so  resigned
to  Providence  ;  this,  methinks,  were  a  curious  question,  even
considered  as  a  speculative  one,  and  what  it  might  not  be
altogether  impossible  to  form  some  conjectural  solution  of.
The  events  here  will  depend  little  upon  the  contingencies  of
battles,  negociations,  intrigues,  and  factions.  There  seems
to  be  a  natural  progress  of  things,  which  may  guide  our
reasoning.  As  it  would  have  required  but  a  moderate  share
of  prudence,  when  we  first  began  this  practice  of  mortgaging,
to  have  foretold,  from  the  nature  of  men  and  of  ministers,
that  things  would  necessarily  be  carried  to  the  length  we
see ;  so  now,  that  they  have  at  last  happily  reached  it,  it  may
not  be  difficult  to  guess  at  the  consequences.  It  must,  indeed,
be  one  of  these  two  events  ;  either  the  nation  must  destroy
public  credit,  or  public  credit  will  destroy  the  nation.  It  is
impossible  that  they  can  both  subsist,  after  the  manner  they
have  been  hitherto  managed,  in  this,  as  well  as  in  some
other  countries.

There  was,  indeed,  a  scheme  for  the  payment  of  our  debts,
which  was  proposed  by  an  excellent  citizen,  Mr.  HUTCHINSON,
above  thirty  years  ago,  and  which  was  much  approved  of  by
some  men  of  sense,  but  never  was  likely  to  take  effect.  He
asserted,  that  there  was  a  fallacy  in  imagining  that  the
public  owed  this  debt ;  for  that  really  every  individual  owed
a  proportional  share  of  it,  and  paid,  in  his  taxes,  a  propor
tional  share  of  the  interest,  beside  the  expence  of  levying
these  taxes.  Had  we  not  better,  then,  says  he,  make  a  dis
tribution  of  the  debt  among  ourselves,  and  each  of  us  con
tribute  a  sum  suitable  to  his  property,  and  by  that  means

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add  the  note  :  In  For  the  sake,  I  suppose,  of  a  posterity,
times  of  peace  and  security,  when  alone  which  he  will  never  see,  or  of  a  few-
it  is  possible  to  pay  debt,  the  monied  reasonable  reflecting  people,  whose  uni-
interest  are  averse  to  receive  partial  ted  interest,  perhaps,  will  not  be  able
payments,  which  they  know  not  how  to  to  secure  him  the  smallest  burrough  in
dispose  of  to  advantage ;  and  the  landed  ENGLAND.  'Tis  not  likely  we  shall  ever
interest  are  averse  to  continue  the  taxes  find  any  minister  so  bad  a  politician,
requisite  for  that  purpose.  Why  there-  With  regard  to  these  narrow  destructive
fore  should  a  minister  persevere  in  a  maxims  of  politics,  all  ministers  are  ex-
measure  so  disagreeable  to  all  parties  ?  pert  enough.]


OF PUBLIC CREDIT.  371

discharge  at  once  all  our  funds  and  public  mortgages  ?  He
seems  not  to  have  considered,  that  the  laborious  poor  pay  a
considerable  part  of  the  taxes  by  their  annual  consumptions,
though  they  could  not  advance,  at  once,  a  proportional  part
of  the  sum  required.  Not  to  mention,  that  property  in
money  and  stock  in  trade  might  easily  be  concealed  or  dis
guised  ;  and  that  visible  property  in  lands  and  houses  would
really  at  last  answer  for  the  whole :  An  inequality  and
oppression,  which  never  would  be  submitted  to.  But  though
this  project  is  not  likely  to  take  place ;  it  is  not  altogether
improbable,  that,  when  the  nation  becomes  heartily  sick  of
their  debts,  and  is  cruelly  oppressed  by  them,  some  daring
projector  may  arise  with  visionary  schemes  for  their  discharge.
And  as  public  credit  will  begin,  by  that  time,  to  be  a  little
frail,  the  least  touch  will  destroy  it,  as  happened  in  FEANCE
during  the  regency ;  and  in  this  manner  it  will  die  of  the
doctor.1

But  it  is  more  probable,  that  the  breach  of  national  faith
will  be  the  necessary  effect  of  wars,  defeats,  misfortunes,  and
public  calamities,  or  even  perhaps  of  victories  and  conquests.
I  must  confess,  when  I  see  princes  and  states  fighting  and
quarrelling,  amidst  their  debts,  funds,  and  public  mortgages,
it  always  brings  to  my  mind  a  match  of  cudgel-playing  fought
in  a  China  shop.  How  can  it  be  expected,  that  sovereigns
will  spare  a  species  of  property,  which  is  pernicious  to  them
selves  and  to  the  public,  when  they  have  so  little  compassion
on  lives  and  properties,  that  are  useful  to  both  ?  Let  the
time  come  (and  surely  it  will  come)  when  the  new  funds,
created  for  the  exigencies  of  the  year,  are  not  subscribed  to,
and  raise  not  the  money  projected.  Suppose,  either  that  the
cash  of  the  nation  is  exhausted ;  or  that  our  faith,  which  has
hitherto  been  so  ample,  begins  to  fail  us.  Suppose,  that,  in

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add  :  Some  neigh-  trnrily  tax  the  funds,  as  well  as  other
bouring  states  practise  an  easy  expe-  property.  Could  we  practise  either  of
client,  by  which  they  lighten  their  these  methods,  we  need  never  be  op-
public  debts.  The  French  have  a  pressed  by  the  national  debt ;  and  it  is
custom  (as  the  Romans  formerly  had)  not  impossible  but  one  of  these,  or  some
of  augmenting  their  money ;  and  this  other  method,  may,  at  all  adventures,
the  nation  has  been  so  much  fami-  be  tried,  on  the  augmentation  of  our
liarised  to,  that  it  hurts  not  public  incumbrances  and  difficulties.  But  people
credit,  though  it  be  really  cutting  off  in  this  country  are  so  good  reasoners
at  once,  by  an  edict,  so  much  of  their  upon  whatever  regards  their  interests,
debts.  The  Dutch  diminish  the  interest  that  such  a  practice  will  deceive  no-
without  the  consent  of  their  creditors,  body;  and  public  credit  will  probably
v  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  they  arbi-  tumble  at  once,  by  so  dangerous  a  trial.]

B  n  2


372  ESSAY  IX.

this  distress,  the  nation  is  threatened  with  an  invasion  ;  a
rebellion  is  suspected  or  broken  out  at  home ;  a  squadron
cannot  be  equipped  for  want  of  pay,  victuals,  or  repairs  ;  or
even  a  foreign  subsidy  cannot  be  advanced.  What  must  a
prince  or  minister  do  in  such  an  emergence  ?  The  right  of
self-preservation  is  unalienable  in  every  individual,  much
more  in  every  community.  And  the  folly  of  our  statesmen
must  then  be  greater  than  the  folly  of  those  who  first  con
tracted  debt,  or,  what  is  more,  than  that  of  those  who  trusted
or  continue  to  trust  this  security,  if  these  statesmen  have  the
means  of  safety  in  their  hands,  and  do  not  employ  them.
The  funds,  created  and  mortgaged,  will,  by  that  time,  bring
in  a  large  yearly  revenue,  sufficient  for  the  defence  and  secu
rity  of  the  nation  :  Money  is  perhaps  lying  in  the  exchequer,
ready  for  the  discharge  of  the  quarterly  interest :  Necessity
calls,  fear  urges,  reason  exhorts,  compassion  alone  exclaims  :
The  money  will  immediately  be  seized  for  the  current  service,
under  the  most  solemn  protestations,  perhaps,  of  being  im
mediately  replaced.  But  no  more  is  requisite.  The  whole
fabric,  already  tottering,  falls  to  the  ground,  and  buries
thousands  in  its  ruins.  And  this,  I  think,  may  be  called  the
natural  death  of  public  credit  *  For  to  this  period  it  tends  as
naturally  as  an  animal  body  to  its  dissolution  and  destruc
tion.

lSo  great  dupes  are  the  generality  of  mankind,  that,  not
withstanding  such  a  violent  shock  to  public  credit,  as  a
voluntary  bankruptcy  in  ENGLAND  would  occasion,  it  would
not  probably  be  long  ere  credit  would  again  revive  in  as
flourishing  a  condition  as  before.  The  present  king  of
FEANCE,  during  the  late  war,  borrowed  money  at  lower  in
terest  than  ever  his  grandfather  did;  and  as  low  as  the
BRITISH  parliament,  comparing  the  natural  rate  of  interest
in  both  kingdoms.  And  though  men  are  commonly  more
governed  by  what  they  have  seen,  than  by  what  they  foresee,
with  whatever  certainty;  yet  promises,  protestations,  fair
appearances,  with  the  allurements  of  present  interest,  have
such  powerful  influence  as  few  are  able  to  resist.  Mankind
are,  in  all  ages,  caught  by  the  same  baits  :  The  same  tricks,
played  over  and  over  again,  still  trepan  them.  The  heights
of  popularity  and  patriotism  are  still  the  beaten  road  to
power  and  tyranny ;  flattery  to  treachery ;  standing  armies
1  [This  paragraph  appears  in  Editions  H  to  P  as  a  footnote.  ]


OF PUBLIC CREDIT.  373

to  arbitrary  government ;  and  the  glory  of  God  to  the  tem
poral  interest  of  the  clergy.  The  fear  of  an  everlasting  de
struction  of  credit,  allowing  it  to  be  an  evil,  is  a  needless
bugbear.  A  prudent  man,  in  reality,  would  rather  lend  to
the  public  immediately  after  we  had  taken  a  spunge  to  our
debts,  than  at  present ;  as  much  as  an  opulent  knave,  even
though  one  could  not  force  him  to  pay,  is  a  preferable  debtor
to  an  honest  bankrupt :  For  the  former,  in  order  to  carry  on
business,  may  find  it  his  interest  to  discharge  his  debts
where  they  are  not  exorbitant :  The  latter  has  it  not  in  his
power.  The  reasoning  of  TACITUS/  as  it  is  eternally  true,  is
very  applicable  to  our  present  case.  Sed  vulgus  ad  magnitu-
dinem  beneficiorum  aderat :  Stultissimus  quisque  pecuniis  merca-
batur :  Apud  sapientes  cassa  habebatitur,  quce  neque  dari  neque
accipi,  salva  republica,  poterant.  The  public  is  a  debtor,  whom
no  man  can  oblige  to  pay.  The  only  check  which  the
creditors  have  upon  her,  is  the  interest  of  preserving  credit ;
an  interest,  which  may  easily  be  overbalanced  by  a  great
debt,  and  by  a  difficult  and  extraordinary  emergence,  even
supposing  that  credit  irrecoverable.  Not  to  mention,  that  a
present  necessity  often  forces  states  into  measures,  which  are,
strictly  speaking,  against  their  interest.

These  two  events,  supposed  above,  are  calamitous,  but  not
the  most  calamitous.  Thousands  are  thereby  sacrificed  to
the  safety  of  millions.  But  we  are  not  without  danger,  that
the  contrary  event  may  take  place,  and  that  millions  may  be
sacrificed  for  ever  to  the  temporary  safety  of  thousands.2
Our  popular  government,  perhaps,  will  render  it  difficult  or
dangerous  for  a  minister  to  venture  on  so  desperate  an  ex
pedient,  as  that  of  a  voluntary  bankruptcy.  And  though  the
house  of  Lords  be  altogether  composed  of  proprietors  of  land,
and  the  house  of  Commons  chiefly ;  and  consequently  neither

1  Hist.  lib.  iii.  55.  event  a  very  near  period,  such  as  half  a
z  I  have  heard  it  has  been  computed,  century,  had  not  our  fathers'  prophecies
that  all  the  creditors  of  the  public,  na-  of  this  kind  been  already  found  falla-
tives  and  foreigners,  amount  only  to  cious,  by  the  duration  of  our  public
17,000.  These  make  a  figure  at  pro-  credit,  so  much  beyond  all  reasonable
sent  on  their  income  ;  but,  in  case  of  a  expectation.  When  the  astrologers  in
public  bankruptcy,  would,  in  an  instant,  FRANCE  were  every  year  foretelling  the
become  the  lowest,  as  well  as  the  most  death  of  HENKY  IV.  These  fellows,  says
wretched  of  the  people.  The  dignity  he,  must  be  right  at  last.  We  shall,
and  authority  of  the  landed  gentry  and  therefore,  be  more  cautious  than  to
nobility  is  much  better  rooted ;  and  assign  any  precise  date ;  and  shall  con-
would  render  the  contention  very  un-  tent  ourselves  with  pointing  out  the
equal,  if  ever  we  come  to  that  extremity.  event  in  general.
One  would  incline  to  assign  to  this


374  ESSAY  X.

of  them  can  be  supposed  to  have  great  property  in  the  funds ;
yet  the  connections  of  the  members  may  be  so  great  with
the  proprietors,  as  to  render  them  more  tenacious  of  public
faith,  than  prudence,  policy,  or  even  justice,  strictly  speaking,
requires.  And  perhaps  too,  our  foreign  enemies  l  may  be  so
politic  as  to  discover,  that  our  safety  lies  in  despair,  and  may
not,  therefore,  show  the  danger,  open  and  barefaced,  till  it  be
inevitable.  The  balance  of  power  in  EUROPE,  our  grand
fathers,  our  fathers,  and  we,  have  all  deemed  too  unequal  to
be  preserved  without  our  attention  and  assistance.  But  our
children,  weary  of  the  struggle,  and  fettered  with  incurn-
bvances,  may  sit  down  secure,  and  see  their  neighbours
oppressed  and  conquered ;  till,  at  last,  they  themselves  and
their  creditors  lie  both  at  the  mercy  of  the  conqueror.  And
this  may  properly  enough  be  denominated  the  violent  death
of  our  public  credit.

These  seem  to  be  the  events,  which  are  not  very  remote,
and  which  reason  foresees  as  clearly  almost  as  she  can  do
any  thing  that  lies  in  the  womb  of  time.  And  though  the
ancients  maintained,  that  in  order  to  reach  the  gift  of  pro
phecy,  a  certain  divine  fury  or  madness  was  requisite,  one
may  safely  affirm,  that,  in  order  to  deliver  such  prophecies  as
these,  no  more  is  necessary,  than  merely  to  be  in  one's  senses,
free  from  the  influence  of  popular  madness  and  delusion.


ESSAY  X. — Of  some  Remarkable  Customs.

I  SHALL  observe  three  remarkable  customs  in  three  celebrated
governments ;  and  shall  conclude  from  the  whole,  that  all
general  maxims  in  politics  ought  to  be  established  with  great
caution ;  and  that  irregular  and  extraordinary  appearances
are  frequently  discovered  in  the  moral,  as  well  as  in  the
physical  world.  The  former,  perhaps,  we  can  better  account
for,  after  they  happen,  from  springs  and  principles,  of  which
every  one  has,  within  himself,  or  from  observation,  the
strongest  assurance  and  conviction  :  But  it  is  often  fully  as
impossible  for  human  prudence,  before-hand,  to  foresee  and
foretel  them.

I.  One  would  think  it  essential  to  every  supreme  council
or  assembly,  which debates,  that  entire  liberty  of  speech

1  [Editions  H  to  T  : or  rather  enemy  (for  we  have  but  one  to  dread.)]


OF SOME REMARKABLE CUSTOMS.  375

should  be  granted  to  every  member,  and  that  all  motions  or
reasonings  should  be  received,  which  can  any  wise  tend  to
illustrate  the  point  under  deliberation.  One  would  conclude,
with  still  greater  assurance,  that,  after  a  motion  was  made,
which  was  voted  and  approved  by  that  assembly  in  which  the
legislative  power  is  lodged,  the  member  who  made  the  motion
must  for  ever  be  exempted  from  future  trial  or  enquiry.  But
no  political  maxim  can,  at  first  sight,  appear  more  undis-
putable,  than  that  he  must,  at  least,  be  secured  from  all
inferior  jurisdiction  ;  and  that  nothing  less  than  the  same
supreme  legislative  assembly,  in  their  subsequent  meetings,
could  make  him  accountable  for  those  motions  and  harangues,
to  which  they  had  before  given  their  approbation.  But  these
axioms,  however  irrefragable  they  may  appear,  have  all  failed
in  the  ATHENIAN  government,  from  causes  and  principles  too,
which  appear  almost  inevitable.

By  the  ypa(f>rj  irapavo^wv,  or  indictment  of  illegality,  (though
it  has  not  been  remarked  by  antiquaries  or  commentators)
any  man  was  tried  and  punished  in  a  common  court  of  judica
ture,  for  any  law  which  had  passed  upon  his  motion,  in  the
assembly  of  the  people,  if  that  law  appeared  to  the  court
unjust,  or  prejudicial  to  the  public.  Thus  DEMOSTHENES,
finding  that  ship-money  was  levied  irregularly,  and  that  the
poor  bore  the  same  burden  as  the  rich  in  equipping  the
gallies,  corrected  this  inequality  by  a  very  useful  law,  which
proportioned  the  expence  to  the  revenue  and  income  of  each
individual.  He  moved  for  this  law  in  the  assembly:  he
proved  its  advantages  ! ;  he  convinced  the  people,  the  only
legislature  in  ATHENS  ;  the  law  passed,  and  was  carried  into
execution :  Yet  was  he  tried  in  a  criminal  court  for  that  law,
upon  the  complaint  of  the  rich,  who  resented  the  alteration
that  he  had  introduced  into  the  finances.2  He  was  indeed
acquitted,  upon  proving  anew  the  usefulness  of  his  law.

OTESIPHON  moved  in  the  assembly  of  the  people,  that
particular  honours  should  be  conferred  on  DEMOSTHENES,  as
on  a  citizen  affectionate  and  useful  to  the  commonwealth  :
The  people,  convinced  of  this  truth,  voted  those  honours :  Yet
was  CTESIPHON  tried  by  the  7pa</>»)  Trapavo^wv.  It  was  asserted,
among  other  topics,  that  DEMOSTHENES  was  not  a  good
citizen,  nor  affectionate  to  the  commonwealth :  And  the
orator  was  called  upon  to  defend  his  friend,  and  consequently

1  His  harangue  for  it  is  still  extant ;  irepl  ^u^ooias. 2  Pro  CxEsiriioxTK.


37fi  ESSAY  X.

himself;  which  he  executed  by  that  sublime  piece  of  elo
quence,  that  has  ever  since  been  the  admiration  of  mankind.

After  the  battle  of  CHJBRONEA,  a  law  was  passed  upon  the
motion  of  HYPERIDES,  giving  liberty  to  slaves,  and  inrolling
them  in  the  troops.1  On  account  of  this  law,  the  orator  was
afterwards  tried  by  the  indictment  above-mentioned,  and
defended  himself,  among  other  topics,  by  that  stroke  cele
brated  by  PLUTARCH  and  LONGINUS.  It  was  not  I,  said  he,
that  moved  for  this  law  :  It  was  the  necessities  of  war  ;  it  was
the  battle  of  CH^ERONEA.  The  orations  of  DEMOSTHENES
abound  with  many  instances  of  trials  of  this  nature,  and  prove
clearly,  that  nothing  was  more  commonly  practised.

The  ATHENIAN  Democracy  was  such  a  tumultuous  govern
ment  as  we  can  scarcely  form  a  notion  of  in  the  present  age
of  the  world.  The  whole  collective  body  of  the  people  voted
in  every  law,  without  any  limitation  of  property,  without
any  distinction  of  rank,  without  controul  from  any  magistracy
or  senate 2 ;  and  consequently  without  regard  to  order,  jus
tice,  or  prudence.  The  ATHENIANS  soon  became  sensible  of
the  mischiefs  attending  this  constitution  :  But  being  averse
to  checking  themselves  by  any  rule  or  restriction,  they  re
solved,  at  least,  to  check  their  demagogues  or  counsellors,  by
the  fear  of  future  punishment  and  enquiry.  They  accordingly
instituted  this  remarkable  law ;  a  law  esteemed  so  essential
to  their  form  of  government,  that  JEscniNES  insists  on  it  as  a
known  truth,  that,  were  it  abolished  or  neglected,  it  were
impossible  for  the  Democracy  to  subsist.3

The  people  feared  not  any  ill  consequence  to  liberty  from  the
authority  of  the  criminal  courts ;  because  these  were  nothing
but  very  numerous  juries,  chosen  by  lot  from  among  the
people.  And  they  justly  considered  themselves  as  in  a  state
of  perpetual  pupillage ;  where  they  had  an  authority,  after
they  came  to  the  use  of  reason,  not  only  to  retract  and  con-

1  PLUTABCHUS  in  vita  decem  oratorum.  was  not  great.

DEMOSTHEKES  gives  a  different  account  3  In  CTESIPHONTEM. It  is  remarkable,

of  this  law. Contra  AHISTOGITON. orat.  that  the  first  step  after  the  dissolution

II.  803-4.  He  says,  that  its  purport  was,  of  the  Democracy  by  CKITUS  and  the

to  render  the  aripoi  EITITIJUOI,  or  to  restore  Thirty,  was  toannulthe7pa(/>7)wapaj'(fyiaH',

tlip  privilege  of  bearing  offices  to  those  as  we learn  from DEMOSTHENES  Kara

who  had  been  declared  incapable. Per-  TI/UOK. The  orator  in  this  oration  gives

haps  these  were  both  clauses  of  the  same  us  the  words  of  the  law,  establishing

law.  the  ypatyri  tra.pnv6ii.uv,  pag.  297.  ex  edit.

*  The  senate  of  the  Bean  was  only  a  ALDI. And  he  accounts  for  it,  from  the

less  numerous  mob,  chosen  by  lot  from  same  principles  we  here  reason  upon,
among  the  people ;  and  their  authority


OF  SOME  REMARKABLE CUSTOMS.  377

troul  whatever  had  been  determined,  but  to  punish  any
guardian  for  measures  which  they  had  embraced  by  his
persuasion.  The  same  law  had  place  in  THEBES  ; '  and  for
the  same  reason.

It  appears  to  have  been  a  usual  practice  in  ATHENS,  on  the
establishment  of  any  law  esteemed  very  useful  or  popular,  to
prohibit  for  ever  its  abrogation  and  repeal.  Thus  the  dema
gogue,  who  diverted  all  the  public  revenues  to  the  support  of
shows  and  spectacles,  made  it  criminal  so  much  as  to  move
for  a  repeal  of  this  law.2  Thus  LEPTINES  moved  for  a  law,
not  only  to  recal  all  the  immunities  formerly  granted,  but  to
deprive  the  people  for  the  future  of  the  power  of  granting
any  more.3  Thus  all  bills  of  attainder 4  were  forbid,  or  laws
that  affected  one  ATHENIAN,  without  extending  to  the  whole
commonwealth.  These  absurd  clauses,  by  which  the  legisla
ture  vainly  attempted  to  bind  itself  for  ever,  proceeded  from
an  universal  sense  in  the  people  of  their  own  levity  and  in
constancy.

II.  A  wheel  within  a  wheel,  such  as  we  observe  in  the
GERMAN  empire,  is  considered  by  Lord  SnAFTESBURY,5  as  an
absurdity  in  politics  :  But  what  must  we  say  to  two  equal
wheels,  which  govern  the  same  political  machine,  without
any  mutual  check,  controul,  or  subordination ;  and  yet  pre
serve  the  greatest  harmony  and  concord  ?  To  establish  two
distinct  legislatures,  each  of  which  possesses  full  and  absolute
authority  within  itself,  and  stands  in  no  need  of  the  other's
assistance,  in  order  to  give  validity  to  its  acts ;  this  may
appear,  before-hand,  altogether  impracticable,  as  long  as
men  are  actuated  by  the  passions  of  ambition,  emulation,
and  avarice,  which  have  hitherto  been  their  chief  governing
principles.  And  should  I  assert,  that  the  state  I  have  in  my
eye  was  divided  into  two  distinct  factions,  each  of  which
predominated  in  a  distinct  legislature,  and  yet  produced  no
clashing  in  these  independent  powers ;  the  supposition  may
appear  incredible.  And  if,  to  augment  the  paradox,  I  should
affirm,  that  this  disjointed,  irregular  government,  was  the
most  active,  triumphant,  and  illustrious  commonwealth,  that
ever  yet  appeared ;  I  should  certainly  be  told,  that  such  a
political  chimera  was  as  absurd  as  any  vision  of  priests  or

1  PLTJT.  in  vita  PELOP.  c.  25.  4  DEMOST.  contra  ARISTOCRATEM,  649.

2  DEMOST.  Olynth.  1.2.  *  Essay  on  the  freedom  of  wit  aud
*  DEMOST.  contra  LEFT.  457. humour,  part  3.  §  2.


378  ESSAY X.

poets.  But  there  is  no  need  for  searching  long,  in  order  to
prove  the  reality  of  the  foregoing  suppositions  :  For  this  was
actually  the  case  with  the  ROMAN  republic.

The  legislative  power  was  there  lodged  in  the  comitia  cen-
turiata  and  comitia  tributa.  In  the  former,  it  is  well  known,
the  people  voted  according  to  their  census ;  so  that  when  the
first  class  was  unanimous,  though  it  contained  not,  perhaps,
the  hundredth  part  of  the  commonwealth,  it  determined  the
whole  ;  and,  with  the  authority  of  the  senate,  established  a
law.  In  the  latter,  every  vote  was  equal ;  and  as  the  authority
of  the  senate  was  not  there  requisite,  the  lower  people  entirely
prevailed,  and  gave  law  to  the  whole  state.  In  all  party-
divisions,  at  first  between  the  PATRICIANS  and  PLEBEIANS,
afterwards  between  the  nobles  and  the  people,  the  interest  of
the  Aristocracy  was  predominant  in  the  first  legislature;  that
of  the  Democracy  in  the  second :  The  one  could  always
destroy  what  the  other  had  established  :  Nay,  the  one,  by
a  sudden  and  unforeseen  motion,  might  take  the  start  of  the
other,  and  totally  annihilate  its  rival,  by  a  vote,  which,  from
the  nature  of  the  constitution,  had  the  full  authority  of  a  law.
But  no  such  contest  is  observed  in  the  history  of  ROME  :  No
instance  of  a  quarrel  between  these  two  legislatures  ;  though
many  between  the  parties  that  governed  in  each.  Whence
arose  this  concord,  which  may  seem  so  extraordinary  ?

The  legislature  established  in  ROME,  by  the  authority  of
SERVIUS  TULLIUS,  was  the  comitia  centuriata,  which,  after
the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  rendered  the  government,  for
some  time,  very  aristocratical.  But  the  people,  having  num
bers  and  force  on  their  side,  and  being  elated  Avith  frequent
conquests  and  victories  in  their  foreign  wars,  always  prevailed
when  pushed  to  extremity,  and  first  extorted  from  the  senate
the  magistracy  of  the  tribunes,  and  next  the  legislative
power  of  the  comitia  tributa.  It  then  behoved  the  nobles  to
be  more  careful  than  ever  not  to  provoke  the  people.  For
beside  the  force  which  the  latter  were  always  possessed  of,
they  had  now  got  possession  of  legal  authority,  and  could
instantly  break  in  pieces  any  order  or  institution  which
directly  opposed  them.  By  intrigue,  by  influence,  by  money,
by  combination,  and  by  the  respect  paid  to  their  character,
the  nobles  might  often  prevail,  and  direct  the  whole  machine
of  government :  But  had  they  openly  .set  their  comitia  cen-
turiata  in  opposition  to  the  tributa,  they  had  soon  lost  the


OF  SOME  REMARKABLE CUSTOMS.  379

advantage  of  that  institution,  together  with  their  consuls,
prsetors,  ediles,  and  all  the  magistrates  elected  by  it.  But
the  comitia  tributa,  riot  having  the  same  reason  for  respecting
the  centuriata,  frequently  repealed  laws  favourable  to  the
Aristocracy  :  They  limited  the  authority  of  the  nobles,  pro
tected  the  people  from  oppression,  and  controuledthe  actions  of
the  senate  and  magistracy.  The  centuriata  found  it  convenient
always  to  submit ;  and  though  equal  in  authority,  yet  being
inferior  in  power,  durst  never  directly  give  any  shock  to  the
other  legislature,  either  by  repealing  its  laws,  or  establishing
laws,  which,  it  foresaw,  would  soon  be  repealed  by  it.

No  instance  is  found  of  any  opposition  or  struggle  be
tween  these  comitia;  except  one  slight  attempt  of  this
kind,  mentioned  by  APPIAN  in  the  third  book  of  his  civil
wars.  MARK  ANTHONY,  resolving  to  deprive  DECIMUS
BEUTUS  of  the  government  of  CISALPINE  GAUL,  railed  in
the  Forum,  and  called  one  of  the  comitia,  in  order  to  pre
vent  the  meeting  of  the  other,  which  had  been  ordered  by
the  senate.  But  affairs  were  then  fallen  into  such  con
fusion,  and  the  Roman  constitution  was  so  near  its  final
dissolution,  that  no  inference  can  be  drawn  from  such  an
expedient.  This  contest,  besides,  was  founded  more  on
form  than  party.  It  was  the  senate  who  ordered  the  comi
tia  tributa,  that  they  might  obstruct  the  meeting  of  the
centuriata,  which,  by  the  constitution,  or  at  least  forms  of
the  government,  could  alone  dispose  of  provinces.

CICERO  was  recalled  by  the  comitia  centuriata,  though
banished  by  the  tributa,  that  is,  by  a  plebiscitum.  But  his
banishment,  we  may  observe,  never  was  considered  as  a
legal  deed,  arising  from  the  free  choice  and  inclination  of
the  people.  It  was  always  ascribed  to  the  violence  alone
of  CLODIUS,  and  to  the  disorders  introduced  by  him  into  the
government.

III.  The  third  custom,  which  we  purpose  to  remark,
regards  ENGLAND;  and  though  it  be  not  so  important  as
those  which  we  have  pointed  out  in  ATHENS  and  EOME,  is
no  less  singular  and  unexpected.  It  is  a  maxim  in  politics,
which  we  readily  admit  as  undisputed  and  universal,  that  a
power,  however  great,  when  granted  by  law  to  an  eminent
magistrate,  is  not  so  dangerous  to  liberty,  as  an  authority,
however  inconsiderable,  which  he  acquires  from  violence
and  usurpation.  For,  besides  that  the  law  always  limits


880  ESSAY  X.

every  power  which  it  bestows,  the  very  receiving  it  as  a  con
cession  establishes  the  authority  whence  it  is  derived,  and
preserves  the  harmony  of  the  constitution.  By  the  same
right  that  one  prerogative  is  assumed  without  law,  another
may  also  be  claimed,  and  another,  with  still  greater  facilitj  ,
while  the  first  usurpations  both  serve  as  precedents  to  the
following,  and  give  force  to  maintain  them.  Hence  the
heroism  of  HAMPDEN'S  conduct,  who  sustained  the  whole
violence  of  royal  prosecution,  rather  than  pay  a  tax  of  twenty
shillings,  not  imposed  by  parliament ;  hence  the  care  of  all
ENGLISH  patriots  to  guard  against  the  first  encroachments
of  the  crown  ;  and  hence  alone  the  existence,  at  this  day,  of
ENGLISH  liberty.

There  is,  however,  one  occasion,  where  the  parliament
has  departed  from  this  maxim ;  and  that  is,  in  the  pressing
of  seamen.  The  exercise  of  an  irregular  power  is  here  tacitly
permitted  in  the  crown  ;  and  though  it  has  frequently  been
under  deliberation,  how  that  power  might  be  rendered  legal,
and  granted,  under  proper  restrictions,  to  the  sovereign,  no
safe  expedient  could  ever  be  proposed  for  that  purpose ;
and  the  danger  to  liberty  always  appeared  greater  from  law
than  from  usurpation.  While  this  power  is  exercised  to  no
other  end  than  to  man  the  navy,  men  willingly  submit  to
it,  from  a  sense  of  its  use  and  necessity ;  and  the  sailors,
who  are  alone  affected  by  it,  find  no  body  to  support  them,
in  claiming  the  rights  and  privileges,  which  the  law  grants,
without  distinction,  to  all  ENGLISH  subjects.  But  were  this
power,  on  any  occasion,  made  an  instrument  of  faction  or
ministerial  tyranny,  the  opposite  faction,  and  indeed  all
lovers  of  their  country,  would  immediately  take  the  alarm, .
and  support  the  injured  party ;  the  liberty  of  ENGLISHMEN
would  be  asserted;  juries  would  be  implacable;  and  the
tools  of  tyranny,  acting  both  against  law  and  equity,  would
meet  with  the  severest  vengeance.  On  the  other  hand,
were  the  parliament  to  grant  such  an  authority,  they  would
probably  fall  into  one  of  these  two  inconveniencies :  They
would  either  bestow  it  under  so  many  restrictions  as  would
make  it  lose  its  effect,  by  cramping  the  authority  of  the
crown ;  or  they  would  render  it  so  large  and  comprehensive,
as  might  give  occasion  to  great  abuses,  for  which  we  could,
in  that  case,  have  no  remedy.  The  very  irregularity  of  the


OF SOME REMARKABLE CUSTOMS.  381

practice,  at  present,  prevents  its  abuses,  by  affording1  so  easy
a  remedy  against  them.

I  pretend  not,  by  this  reasoning,  to  exclude  all  possi
bility  of  contriving  a  register  for  seamen,  which  might  man
the  navy,  without  being  dangerous  to  liberty.  I  only  ob
serve,  that  no  satisfactory  scheme  of  that  nature  has  yet
been  proposed.  Eather  than  adopt  any  project  hitherto
invented,  we  continue  a  practice  seemingly  the  most  absurd
and  unaccountable.  Authority,  in  times  of  full  internal
peace  and  concord,  is  armed  against  law.  A  continued  vio
lence  is  permitted  in  the  crown,  amidst  the  greatest  jealousy
and  watchfulness  in  the  people  ;  nay  proceeding  from  those
very  principles  :  Liberty,  in  a  country  of  the  highest  liberty,
is  left  entirely  to  its  own  defence,  without  any  countenance
or  protection :  The  wild  state  of  nature  is  renewed,  in  one
of  the  most  civilised  societies  of  mankind :  And  great  vio
lence  and  disorder1  are  committed  with  impunity;  while
the  one  party  pleads  obedience  to  the  supreme  magistrate,
the  other  the  sanction  of  fundamental  laws.


ESSAY  XI. — Of  the  Populousness  of  Ancient  Nations.*

THERE  is  very  little  ground,  either  from  reason  or  observation,
to  conclude  the  world  eternal  or  incorruptible.  The  continual
and  rapid  motion  of  matter,  the  violent  revolutions  with
which  every  part  is  agitated,  the  changes  remarked  in  the
heavens,  the  plain  traces  as  well  as  tradition  of  an  universal
deluge,  or  general  convulsion  of  the  elements ;  all  these  prove
strongly  the  mortality  of  this  fabric  of  the  world,  and  its
passage,  by  corruption  or  dissolution,  from  one  state  or  order
to  another.  It  must  therefore,  as  well  as  each  individual
form  which  it  contains,  have  its  infancy,  youth,  manhood,
and  old  age;  and  it  is  probable,  that,  in  all  these  variations,
man,  equally  with  every  animal  and  vegetable,  will  partake.
In  the  flourishing  age  of  the  world,  it  may  be  expected,  that
the  human  species  should  possess  greater  vigour  both  of
mind  and  body,  more  prosperous  health,  higher  spirits,  longer

1  [Editions H to P  : Among  the  2  [For  the  history  of  this  Essay  see

poople,  the  most  humane  and  the  best p.  56.]
uafured.]


382  ESSAY  XI.

life,  and  a  stronger  inclination  and  power  of  generation.
But  if  the  general  system  of  things,  and  human  society  of
course,  have  any  such  gradual  revolutions,  they  are  too  slow  to
be  discernible  in  that  short  period  which  is  comprehended  by
history  and  tradition.  Stature  and  force  of  body,  length  of
life,  even  courage  and  extent  of  genius,  seem  hitherto  to  have
been  naturally,  in  all  ages,  pretty  much  the  same.  The  arts
and  sciences,  indeed,  have  flourished  in  one  period,  and  have
decayed  in  another :  But  we  may  observe,  that,  at  the  tima
when  they  rose  to  greatest  perfection  among  one  people,  they
were  perhaps  totally  unknown  to  all  the  neighbouring
nations ;  and  though  they  universally  decayed  in  one  age,
yet  in  a  succeeding  generation  they  a,gain  revived,  and
diffused  themselves  over  the  world.  As  far,  therefore,  as
observation  reaches,  there  is  no  universal  difference  discern
ible  in  the  human  species  ;  and  though  it  were  allowed,  that
the  universe,  like  an  animal  body,  had  a  natural  progress
from  infancy  to  old  age ;  yet  as  it  must  still  be  uncertain,
whether,  at  present,  it  be  advancing  to  its  point  of  perfection,
or  declining  from  it,  we  cannot  thence  presuppose  any  decay
in  human  nature.1  To  prove,  therefore,  or  account  for  that
superior  populousness  of  antiquity,  which  is  commonly
supposed,  by  the  imaginary  youth  or  vigour  of  the  world,
will  scarcely  be  admitted  by  any  just  reasoner.  These
general  physical  causes  ought  entirely  to  be  excluded  from
this  question.

There  are  indeed  some  more  particular  physical  causes  of
importance.  Diseases  are  mentioned  in  antiquity,  which  are
almost  unknown  to  modern  medicine  ;  and  new  diseases  have
arisen  and  propagated  themselves,  of  which  there  are  no
traces  in  ancient  history.  In  this  particular  we  may  observe,
upon  comparison,  that  the  disadvantage  is  much  on  the  side
of  the  moderns.  Not  to  mention  some  others  of  less  moment ;
the  small-pox  commits  such  ravages,  as  would  almost  alone
account  for  the  great  superiority  ascribed  to  ancient  times.
The  tenth  or  the  twelfth  part  of  mankind,  destroyed  every

1  Columella  says,  lib.  iii.  cap.  8.,  that  contrary,  we are apt to  suppose the

in Egypt  and Africa  the  bearing  of  northern  nations  more  prolific. As  those

twins  was  frequent,  and  even  customary;  two countries  were provinces of  the

geminipartusfamiliares,ac  pcenesolennes  Koman  empire,  it is difficult,  though

aunt. If  this  was  true,  there  is  a  physi-  net  altogether  absurd,  to  suppose  that

cal  difference  both  in  countries  and  ages.  such  a  man  as  Columella  might  be  mis-

For  travellers  make  no  such  remarks  on  taken  with  regard  to  them,
these countries at  presf-nt. On the


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  383

generation,  should  make  a  vast  difference,  it  may  be  thought,
in  the  numbers  of  the  people ;  and  when  joined  to  venereal
distempers,  a  new  plague  diffused  every  where,  this  disease  it,
perhaps  equivalent,  by  its  constant  operation,  to  the  three
great  scourges  of  mankind,  war,  pestilence,  and  famine.
Were  it  certain,  therefore,  that  ancient  times  were  more
populous  than  the  present,  and  could  no  moral  causes  be
assigned  for  so  great  a  change ;  these  physical  causes  alone,
in  the  opinion  of  many,  would  be  sufficient  to  give  us  satis
faction  on  that  head.

But  is  it  certain,  that  antiquity  was  so  much  more  popu
lous,  as  is  pretended  ?  The  extravagancies  of  Vossius,  with
regard  to  this  subject,  are  well  known.  But  an  author  of
much  greater  genius  and  discernment  has  ventured  to  affirm,
that,  according  to  the  best  computations  which  these  subjects
will  admit  of,  there  are  not  now,  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  the
fiftieth  part  of  mankind,  which  existed  in  the  time  of  JULIUS
CAESAR.1  It  may  easily  be  observed,  that  the  comparison,  in
this  case,  must  be  imperfect,  even  though  we  confine  ourselves
to  the  scene  of  ancient  history;  EUROPE,  and  the  nations
round  the  MEDITERRANEAN.  We  know  not  exactly  the
numbers  of  any  EUROPEAN  kingdom,  or  even  city,  at  present :
How  can  we  pretend  to  calculate  those  of  ancient  cities  and
states,  where  historians  have  left  us  such  imperfect  traces  ?
For  my  part,  the  matter  appears  to  me  so  uncertain,  that,  as
I  intend  to  throw  together  some  reflections  on  that  head,  I
shall  intermingle  the  enquiry  concerning  causes  with  that
concerning  facts  ;  which  ought  never  to  be  admitted,  where
the  facts  can  be  ascertained  with  any  tolerable  assurance.
We  shall,  first,  consider  whether  it  be  probable,  from  what
we  know  of  the  situation  of  society  in  both  periods,  that
antiquity  must  have  been  more  populous ;  secondly,  whether
in  reality  it  was  so.  If  I  can  make  it  appear,  that  the  con
clusion  is  not  so  certain  as  is  pretended,  in  favour  of  antiquity,
it  is  all  I  aspire  to.

In  general,  we  may  observe,  that  the  question,  with  regard
to  the  comparative  populousness  of  ages  or  kingdoms,  implies
important  consequences,  and  commonly  determines  concern
ing  the  preference  of  their  whole  police,  their  manners,  and
the  constitution  of  their  government.  For  as  there  is  in  all
men,  both  male  and  female,  a  desire  and  power  of  generation,

Lettres  PERSANKS. See  also  L' Esprit  de  Loix,  liv.  xxiii.  cap.  17,  IS,  19.


384  ESSAY XT.

more  active  than  is  ever  universally  exerted,  the  restraints,
which  they  lie  tinder,  must  proceed  from  some  difficulties  in
their  situation,  which  it  belongs  to  a  wise  legislature  carefully
to  observe  and  remove.  Almost  every  man  who  thinks  lie
can  maintain  a  family  will  have  one ;  and  the  human  species,
at  this  rate  of  propagation,  would  more  than  double  every
generation.1  How  fast  do  mankind  multiply  in  every  colony
or  new  settlement ;  where  it  is  an  easy  matter  to  provide  for
a  family ;  and  where  men  are  nowise  straitened  or  confined,
as  in  long  established  governments  ?  History  tells  us  fre
quently  of  plagues,  which  have  swept  away  the  third  or
fourth  part  of  a  people :  Yet  in  a  generation  or  two,  the
destruction  was  not  perceived;  and  the  society  had  again
acquired  their  former  number.  The  lands  which  were  culti
vated,  the  houses  built,  the  commodities  raised,  the  riches
acquired,  enabled  the  people,  who  escaped,  immediately  to
marry,  and  to  rear  families,  which  supplied  the  place  of  those
who  had  perished.2  And  for  a  like  reason,  every  wise,  just,
and  mild  government,  by  rendering  the  condition  of  its  sub
jects  easy  and  secure,  will  always  abound  most  in  people,  as
well  as  in  commodities  and  riches.3  A  country,  indeed,
whose  climate  and  soil  are  fitted  for  vines,  will  naturally  be
more  populous  than  one  which  produces  corn  only,  and  that
more  populous  than  one  which  is  only  fitted  for  pasturage.
In  general,  warm  climates,  as  the  necessities  of  the  in
habitants  are  there  fewer,  and  vegetation  more  powerful,
are  likely  to  be  most  populous :  But  if  everything  else  be
equal,  it  seems  natural  to  expect,  that,  wherever  there  are
most  happiness  and  virtue,  and  the  wisest  institutions,  there
will  also  be  most  people.

The  question,  therefore,  concerning  the  populousness  of
ancient  and  modern  times,  being  allowed  of  great  import
ance,  it  will  be  requisite,  if  we  would  bring  it  to  some
determination,  to  compare  both  the  domestic  and  political
situation  of  these  two  periods,  in  order  to  judge  of  the  facts

1  [Editions  H  to  W  add :  Were  every  bills.  It  is  remarked  by  DON  GKRONIMO

one  coupled  as  soon  as  he  comes  to  the  DE  USTAEIZ,  that  the  provinces  of  SPAIN,

age  of  puberty.]  which  send  most  people  to  the  INDIES,

-  This  too  is  a  good  reason  why  the  are most  populous  ; which proceeds

small-pox  does  not  depopulate  countries  from  their  superior  riches,
so  much  as  may  at  first  sight  be  im-  3  [A  country  ...  to  ...  pasturage,

ngined. Where  there  is  room  for  more  was  added  in  Edition  H,  and  In  general

people,  they will always arise,  even  .  .  .  to  .  .  .  populous,  in  Edition  Q.]
without  the  assistance  of  naturalization


POPULOTJSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  886

by  their  moral  causes ;  which  is  the  first  view  in  which  we
proposed  to  consider  them.

The  chief  difference  between  the  domestic  ceconomy  of  the
ancients  and  that  of  the  moderns  consists  in  the  practice  of
slavery,  which  prevailed  among  the  former,  and  which  has
been  abolished  for  some  centuries  throughout  the  greater
part  of  EUROPE.  Some  passionate  admirers  of  the  ancients,
and  zealous  partizans  of  civil  liberty,  (for  these  sentiments,
as  they  are,  both  of  them,  in  the  main,  extremely  just,  are
found  to  be  almost  inseparable)  cannot  forbear  regretting
the  loss  of  this  institution  ;  and  whilst  they  brand  all  sub
mission  to  the  government  of  a  single  person  with  the
harsh  denomination  of  slavery,  they  would  gladly  reduce
the  greater  part  of  mankind  to  real  slavery  and  subjection.
But  to  one  who  considers  coolly  on  the  subject  it  will  appear,
that  human  nature,  in  general,  really  enjoys  more  liberty  at
present,  in  the  most  arbitrary  government  of  EUKOPE,  than
it  ever  did  during  the  most  flourishing  period  of  ancient
times.  As  much  as  submission  to  a  petty  prince,  whose
dominions  extend  not  beyond  a  single  city,  is  more  grievous
than  obedience  to  a  great  monarch ;  so  much  is  domestic
slavery  more  cruel  and  oppressive  than  any  civil  subjection
whatsoever.  The  more  the  master  is  removed  from  us  in
place  and  rank,  the  greater  liberty  we  enjoy ;  the  less  are
our  actions  inspected  and  controled ;  and  the  fainter  that
cruel  comparison  becomes  between  our  own  subjection,  and
the  freedom,  and  even  dominion  of  another.  The  remains
which  are  found  of  domestic  slavery,  in  the  AMERICAN  colo
nies,  and  among  some  EUROPEAN  nations,  would  never  surely
create  a  desire  of  rendering  it  more  universal.  The  little
humanity,  commonly  observed  in  persons,  accustomed,  from,
their  infancy,  to  exercise  so  great  authority  over  their  fellow-
creatui'es,  and  to  trample  upon  human  nature,  were  sufficient
alone  to  disgust  us  with  that  unbounded  dominion.  Nor
can  a  more  probable  reason  be  assigned  for  the  severe,  I
might  say,  barbarous  manners  of  ancient  times,  than  the
practice  of  domestic  slavery ;  by  which  every  man  of  rank
was  rendered  a  petty  tyrant,  and  educated  amidst  the  flat
tery,  submission,  and  low  debasement  of  his  slaves.

According  to  ancient  practice,  all  checks  were  on  the
inferior,  to  restrain  him  to  the  duty  of  submission  ;  none  on
the  superior,  to  engage  him  to  the  reciprocal  duties  of  gentle-

VOL.  III.  C  C


386  ESSAY  XI.

ness  and  humanity.  In  modern  times,  a  bad  servant  finda
not  easily  a  good  master,  nor  a  bad  master  a  good  servant ;
and  the  checks  are  mutual,  suitably  to  the  inviolable  and
eternal  laws  of  reason  and  equity.

The  custom  of  exposing  old,  useless,  or  sick  slaves  in  an
island  of  the  TYBER,  there  to  starve,  seems  to  have  been
pretty  common  in  ROME  ;  and  whoever  recovered,  after
having  been  so  exposed,  had  his  liberty  given  him,  \)y  an
edict  of  the  emperor  CLAUDIUS  ;  in  which  it  was  likewise
forbidden  to  kill  any  slave  merely  for  old  age  or  sickness.1
But  supposing  that  this  edict  was  strictly  obeyed,  would  it
better  the  domestic  treatment  of  slaves,  or  render  their
lives  much  more  comfortable  ?  We  may  imagine  what  others
would  practise,  when  it  was  the  professed  maxim  of  the
elder  CATO,  to  sell  his  superannuated  slaves  for  any  price,
rather  than-  maintain  what  he  esteemed  a  useless  burden.2

The  ergastula,  or  dungeons,  where  slaves  in  chains  were
forced  to  work,  were  very  common  all  over  ITALY.  COLU-
MELLA3  advises,  that  they  be  always  built  under  ground ;
and  recommends4  it  as  the  duty  of  a  careful  overseer,  to  call
over  every  day  the  names  of  these  slaves,  like  the  mustering
of  a  regiment  or  ship's  company,  in  order  to  know  presently
when  any  of  them  had  deserted.  A  proof  of  the  frequency
of  these  ergastula,  and  of  the  great  number  of  slaves  usually
confined  in  them.5

A  chained  slave  for  a  porter,  was  usual  in  ROME,  as  appears
from  OviD,6  and  other  authors.7  Had  not  these  people  shaken
off  all  sense  of  compassion  towards  that  unhappy  part  of
their  species,  would  they  have  presented  their  friends,  at
the  first  entrance,  with  such  an  image  of  the  severity  of  the
master,  and  misery  of  the  slave  ?

Nothing  so  common  in  all  trials,  even  of  civil  causes,  as  to
.call  for  the  evidence  of  slaves  ;  which  was  always  extorted
by  the  most  exquisite  torments.  DEMOSTHENES  says,8  that,
where  it  was  possible  to  produce,  for  the  same  fact,  either
freemen  or  slaves,  as  witnesses,  the  judges  always  preferred
the  torturing  of  slaves,  as  a  more  certain  evidence.9

1  SUETONIUS  in  vita  CLAUDII,  25.  '  Amor.  lib.  i.  eleg.  6.

2  PLUT.  in  vita  CATONIS,  4.  *  SUETON,  de  claris  rhetor,  3.  So  also

3  Lib.  i.  cap.  6.  the  ancient  poet,  Janitoris  tintinnire  im-

4  Id.  lib.  xi.  cap.  1.  pedimenta  audio. [Nigid.  ap  Non.  Ed.J
*  [Editions  H  and  I  added  the  mis-  8  In  Onetor.  orat.  1.  874.

quotation  : Partem  Italise ergastula a  9  The  same  practice  was  very  common

solitudine  vindicant.]  in  HOME;  but  CICEKO  seems  not  to  think


POPULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  .387

SENECA  draws  a  picture  of  that  disorderly  luxury,  which
changes  day  into  night,  and  night  into  day,  and  inverts
every  stated  hour  of  every  office  in  life.  Among  other
circumstances,  such  as  displacing  the  meals  and  times  of
bathing,  he  mentions,  that,  regularly  about  the  third  hour
of  the  night,  the  neighbours  of  one,  who  indulges  this  false
refinement,  hear  the  noise  of  whips  and  lashes ;  and,  upon
enquiry,  find  that  he  is  then  taking  an  account  of  the  con
duct  of  his  servants,  and  giving  them  due  correction  and
discipline.  This  is  not  remarked  as  an  instance  of  cruelty,
but  only  of  disorder,  which  even  in  actions  the  most  usual
and  methodical,  changes  the  fixed  hours  that  an  established
custom  had  assigned  for  them.1

But  our  present  business  is  only  to  consider  the  influence
of  slavery  on  the  populousness  of  a  state.  It  is  pretended,
that,  in  this  particular,  the  ancient  practice  had  infinitely
the  advantage,  and  was  the  chief  cause  of  that  extreme  popu
lousness,  which  is  supposed  in  those  times.  At  present,  all
masters  discourage  the  marrying  of  their  male  servants,  and
admit  not  by  any  means  the  marriage  of  the  female,  who
are  then  supposed  altogether  incapacitated  for  their  service.
But  where  the  property  of  the  servants  is  lodged  in  the
master,  their  marriage  forms  his  riches,  and  brings  him  a
succession  of  slaves  that  supply  the  place  of  those  whom  age
and  infirmity  have  disabled.  He  encourages,  therefore,  their
propagation  as  much  as  that  of  his  cattle;  rears  the  young
with  the  same  care;  and  educates  them  to  some  art  or
calling,  which  may  render  them  more  useful  or  valuable  to
him.  The  opulent  are,  by  this  policy,  interested  in  the  being
at  least,  though  not  in  the  well-being  of  the  poor;  and
enrich  themselves,  by  encreasing  the  number  and  industry

this  evidence  so  certain  as  the  testimony  that  the  people  had  but  one  neck.  A.
of  free-citizens.  Pro  Ccelio,  28.  man  could  almost  be  pleased,  by  a  single
1  Epist.  122.  The  inhuman  sports  blow,  to  put  an  end  to  such  a  race  of
exhibited  at  ROME,  may  justly  be  con-  monsters.  You  may  thank  GOD,  says
sidered  too  as  an  effect  of  the  people's  the  author  above  cited,  (epist.  7)  ad-
contempt  for  slaves,  and  was  also  a  great  dressing  himself  to  the  ROMAN  people,
cause  of  the  general  inhumanity  of  their  that  you  have  a  master,  (viz.  the  mild
princes  and  rulers.  Who  can  read  the  and  merciful  NKKO)  who  is  incapable  of
accounts  of  the  amphitheatrical  enter-  learning  cruelty  from  your  example,
tainments  without  horror?  Or  who  is  This  was  spoke  in  the  beginning  of  his
surprized,  that  the  emperors  should  reign :  But  he  fitted  them  very  well
treat  that  people  in  the  same  way  the  afterwards  ;  and  no  doubt  was  consider-
people  treated  their  inferiors  ?  One's  ably  improved  by  the  sight  of  the  bar-
humanity,  on  that  occasion,  is  apt  to  barous  objects,  to  which  he  had,  fronj
renew  the  barbarous  wish  of  CALIHVLA,  his  infancy,  been  accustomed.

c  c  2


388  ESSAY XL

of  those  who  are  subjected  to  them.  Each  man,  being  a
sovereign  in  his  own  family,  has  the  same  interest  with  regard
to  it,  as  the  prince  with  regard  to  the  state ;  and  has  not,
like  the  prince,  any  opposite  motives  of  ambition  or  vain
glory,  which  may  lead  him  to  depopulate  his  little  sovereignty.
All  of  it  is,  at  all  times,  under  his  eye ;  and  he  has  leisure
to  inspect  the  most  minute  detail  of  the  marriage  and  edu
cation  of  his  subjects.1

Such  are  the  consequences  of  domestic  slavery,  according
to  the  first  aspect  and  appearance  of  things  :  But  if  we  enter
more  deeply  into  the  subject,  we  shall  perhaps  find  reason  to
retract  our  hasty  determinations.  The  comparison  is  shock
ing  between  the  management  of  human  creatures  and  that
of  cattle;  but  being  extremely  just,  when  applied  to  the
present  subject,  it  may  be  proper  to  trace  the  consequences
of  it.  At  the  capital,  near  all  great  cities,  in  all  populous,
rich,  industrious  provinces,  few  cattle  are  bred.  Provisions,
lodging,  attendance,  labour  are  there  dear ;  and  men  find
their  account  better  in  buying  the  cattle,  after  they  come
to  a  certain  age,  from  the  remoter  and  cheaper  countries.
These  are  consequently  the  only  breeding  countries  for
cattle ;  and  by  a  parity  of  reason,  for  men  too,  when  the
latter  are  put  on  the  same  footing  with  the  former.  To
rear  a  child  in  LONDON,  till  he  could  be  serviceable,  would
cost  much  dearer,  than  to  buy  one  of  the  same  age  from
SCOTLAND  or  IRELAND  ;  where  he  had  been  bred  in  a  cottage,
covered  with  rags,  and  fed  on  oatmeal  or  potatoes.  Those
who  had  slaves,  therefore,  in  all  the  richer  and  more  popu
lous  countries,  would  discourage  the  pregnancy  of  the
females,  and  either  prevent  or  destroy  the  birth.  The  human
species  would  perish  in  those  places  where  it  ought  to
encrease  the  fastest ;  and  a  perpetual  recruit  be  wanted
from  the  poorer  and  more  desert  provinces.  Such  a  con
tinued  drain  would  tend  mightily  to  depopulate  the  state,
and  render  great  cities  ten  times  more  destructive  than  witli
us ;  where  every  man  is  master  of  himself,  and  provides  for
his  children  from  the  powerful  instinct  of  nature,  not  the

1  We  may  here  observe,  that  if  do-  humour  or  interest,  may  make  his  slaves

mestic  slavery  really  encreased popu-  very  unhappy,  yet  be  careful,  from  in-

lousneps,  it  would  be an  exception  to  terest,  to  increase  their  number. Their

the  general  rule,  that  the  happiness  of  marriage  is  not  .1  matter  of  choice  -with

any society  and its  populousness are  them,  more  than any  other action  of

necessary  attendants. A  master,  from  their  life.


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  SRO

calculations  of  sordid  interest.  If  LONDON,  at  present,  with
out  much  encreasing,  needs  a  yearly  recruit  from  tne  country,
of  5000  people,  as  is  usually  computed,  what  must  it  require,
if  the  greater  part  of  the  tradesmen  and  common  people
were  slaves,  and  were  hindered  from  breeding  by  their
avaricious  masters?

All  ancient  authors  tell  us,  that  there  was  a  perpetual  flux
of  slaves  to  ITALY  from  the  remoter  provinces,  particularly
SYEIA,  CiLiciA,1  CAPPADOCIA,  and  the  Lesser  ASIA,  THRACE,
and  ^EGYPT  :  Yet  the  number  of  people  did  not  encrease  in
ITALY;  and  writers  complain  of  the  continual  decay  of
industry  and  agriculture.9  Where  then  is  that  extreme
fertility  of  the  EOMAN  slaves,  which  is  commonly  supposed  ?
So  far  from  multiplying,  they  could  not,  it  seems,  so  much
as  keep  up  the  stock,  without  immense  recruits.  And  though
great  numbers  were  continually  manumitted  and  converted
into  EOMAN  citizens,  the  numbers  even  of  these  did  not
encrease,3  till  the  freedom  of  the  city  was  communicated  to
foreign  provinces.

The  term  for  a  slave,  born  and  bred  in  the  family,  was
verna4 ;  and  these  slaves  seem  to  have  been  entitled  by  custom

1  Ten  thousand  slaves  in  a  day  have  penter,  smith,  tailor,  &c.  have  no  corre-
often  been  sold  for  the  use  of  the  ROMANS,  spondent terms,  which express those
at  DELUS  in  CILICIA. STEABO,  lib.  xiv.,  who  are  no  seamen,  or  carpenters,  $c.
668.  Languages  differ  very  much  with  regard

2  COLTTMELZA,  lib.  \.  proeem.  et  cap.  2,  to  the  particular  words  where  this  dis-
et.  7. VAEBO,  lib.  iii.  cap.  1. HOBAT,  tinction  obtains;  and  may  thence  afford
lib.  ii.  od. 15. TACIT, annal.  lib.  iii.  very  strong  inferences,  concerning  the
cap.  54.  SUETON.  in  vita  AUG.  cap.  xlii.  manners  and  customs  of  different  na-
PLIN.  lib.  xviii,  cap.  13.  tions. The  military  government  of  the

3  Minore  indies  plebe  ingenua,  says  RoMANemperorshadexaltedthe  soldiery
TACITUS,  ann.  lib.  iv.  cap.  27.  so  high,  that  they  balanced  all  the  other

4  As  servus  was  the  name  of  the  genus,  orders  of  the  state : Hence  miles  and
and  verna  of  the  species,  without  any  paganus  became  relative  terms ;  a .thing,
correlative, this forms a strong  pre-  till  then,  unknown  to  ancient,  and  still
Mimption,  that  the  latter  were  by  far  so  to  modern  languages.  Modern  super-
the  least  numerous. It  is  an  universal  stition  exalted  the  clergy  so  high,  that
observation  which  we  may  form  upon  they overbalanced the whole state :
language,  that  where  two  related  parts  Hence  clergy  and  laity  are  terms  opposed
of  a  whole  bear  any  proportion  to  each  in  all  modern  languages  ;  and  in  these
other,  in  numbers,  rank  or  consideration,  alone. And  from  the  same  principles
there  are  always  correlative  terms  in-  I  infer,  that  if  the  number of  slaves
vented,  which  answer  to  both  the  parts,  bought  by  the ROMANS from foreign
and  express  their  mutual  relation. If  countries,  had  not  extremely  exceeded
they  bear  no  proportion  to  each  other,  those  which  were  bred  at  home,  verna
the  term  is  only  invented  for  the  less,  would  have had  a  correlative, which
and  marks  its  distinction  from  the  whole.  would  have  expressed  the  former  species
Thus  man  and  woman,  master  and  ser-  of  slaves. But  these, it  would seem,
vant,  father  and  son,  prince  and  subject,  composed  the  main  body  of  the  ancient
stranger and citi~en, are correlative  slaves,  and  the  latter  were  but  a  few
terms. But  the words, seaman, car-  exceptions.


300  ESSAY XL

to  privileges  and  indulgences  beyond  others ;  a  sufficient
reason  why  the  masters  would  not  be  fond  of  rearing  many
of  that  kind.1  Whoever  is  acquainted  with  the  maxims  of
our  planters,  will  acknowledge  the  justness  of  this  observa
tion.2

ATTICUS  is  much  praised  by  his  historian  for  the  care,
which  he  took  in  recruiting  his  family  from  the  slaves  born
in  it3 :  May  we  not  thence  infer,  that  this  practice  was  not
then  very  common  ?

The  names  of  slaves  in  the  GREEK  comedies,  SYEUS,
MTSUS,  GETA,  THEAX,  DAVUS,  LTDUS,  PHETX,  &c.  afford  a
presumption,  that,  at  ATHENS  at  least,  most  of  the  slaves
were  imported  from  foreign  countries.  The  ATHENIANS,  says
STEABO,4  gave  to  their  slaves,  either  the  names  of  the  nations
whence  they  were  bought,  as  LYDUS,  SYEUS  ;  or  the  names
that  were  most  common  among  those  nations,  as  MANES  or
MIDAS  to  a  PHEYGIAN,  TIBIAS  to  a  PAPHLAGONIAN.

DEMOSTHENES,  having  mentioned  a  law  which  forbad  any
man  to  strike  the  slave  of  another,  praises  the  humanity  of
this  law ;  and  adds,  that,  if  the  barbarians  from  whom  the
slaves  were  bought,  had  information,  that  their  countrymen
met  with  such  gentle  treatment,  they  would  entertain  a  great
esteem  for  the  ATHENIANS."  IsocEATES6  too  insinuates,  that
the  slaves  of  the  GEEEKS  were  generally  or  very  commonly
barbarians.7  AEISTOTLE  in  his  Politics8  plainly  supposes,  that  a

1  Verna  is  used  by  ROMAN  writers  as  be  procured.  A  man  is  obliged  tocloath
a  word  equivalent  to  scurra,  on  account  and  feed  his  slave ;  and  be  does  no  more
of  the  petulance  and  impudence  of  those  for  his  servant :  The  price  of  the  first
slaves. MART,  lib.  i.  ep.  42. HORACE  purchase  is,  therefore,  so  much  loss  to
also  mentions  the  venue  procaces ;  and  him :  not  to  mention,  that  the  fear  of
PETRONIUS,  cap.  24. vernula  urbanitas.  punishment  will  never  draw  so  much
SENECA,  de  provid.  cap.  1.  vernularum  labour  from  a  slave,  as  the  dread of
licentia.  being  turned  off  and  not  getting  another

2  It  is  computed  in  the  WEST  INDIES,  service,  will  from  a  freeman.

that  a  stock  of  slaves  grow  worse  five  3  CORN.  NEPOS  in  vita  ATTICI. We

per  cent,  every  year,  unless  new  slaves  may  remark,  that  ATTICUS'S  estate  lay

be  bought  to  recruit  them. They  are  chiefly  in  EPIR.US,  which,  being  a  remote,

not  able  to  keep  up  their  number,  even  desolate  place,  would  render  it  profitable

in  those  warm  countries,  where  cloaths  for  him  to  rear  slaves  there.

and  provisions  are  so  easily  got. How  4  Lib.  vii.,  304.

much  more  must  this  happen  in  EURO-  *  In  MIDIAM,  p.  221,  ex  edit.  ALDI.

PEAN  countries,  and  in  or  near  great  *  Panegyr. [See  p.  59.]

cities?1 I  shall  add,  that,  from  the  *  [The  remainder  of  this  paragraph

experience  of  our  planters,  slavery  is  as  was  added  in  Edition  M.]

little  advantageous  to  the  master  as  to  8  Lib.  vii.  cap.  10,  sub  fin.

the  slave,  wherever  hired  servants  can


[The  remainder  of  this  note  wa&  added  in  Ed.  R.]


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT NATIONS.  3M

slave  is  always  a  foreigner.  The  ancient  comic  writers  repre
sented  the  slaves  as  speaking  a  barbarous  language.1  This
was  an  imitation  of  nature.

It  is  well  known  that  DEMOSTHENES,  in  his  nonage,  had
been  defrauded  of  a  large  fortune  by  his  tutors,,  and  that
afterwards  he  recovered,  by  a  prosecution  at  law,  the  value
of  his  patrimony.  His  orations,  on  that  occasion,  still  remain,
and  contain  an  exact  detail  of  the  whole  substance  left  by  his
father,2  in  money,  merchandise,  houses,  and  slaves,  together
with  the  value  of  each  particular.  Among  the  rest  were  52
slaves,  handicraftsmen,  namely,  32  sword-cutlers,  and  20
cabinet-makers3 ;  all  males ;  not  a  word  of  any  wives,  children
or  family,  which  they  certainly  would  have  had,  had  it  been
a  common  practice  at  ATHENS  to  breed  from  the  slaves :
And  the  value  of  the  whole  must  have  much  depended  on
that  circumstance.  No  female  slaves  are  even  so  much  aa
mentioned,  except  some  house-maids,  who  belonged  to  his
mother.  This  argument  has  great  force,  if  it  be  not  altogether
conclusive.

Consider  this  passage  of  PLUTARCH,*  speaking  of  the  Elder
CATO.  *  He  had  a  great  number  of  slaves,  whom  he  took

*  care  to  buy  at  the  sales  of  prisoners  of  war ;  and  he  chose

*  them  young,  that  they  might  easily  be  accustomed  to  any

*  diet  or  manner  of  life,  and  be  instructed  in  any  business  or

'  labour,  as  men  teach  any  thing  to  young  dogs  or  horses.

'  And  esteeming  love  the  chief  source  of  all  disorders,  he

*  allowed  the  male  slaves  to  have  a  commerce  with  the  female
'  in  his  family,  upon  paying  a  certain  sum  for  this  privilege :
'  But  he  strictly  prohibited  all  intrigues  out  of  his  family.'
Are  there  any  symptoms  in  this  narration  of  that  care  which
is  supposed  in  the  ancients,  of  the  marriage  and  propagation
of  their  slaves  ? If  that  was  a  common  practice,  founded  on
general  interest,  it  would  surely  have  been  embraced  by  Cato,
who  was  a  great  oaconomist,  and  lived  in  times  when  the
ancient frugality  and simplicity  of  manners  were  still  in
credit  and  reputation.

It  is  expressly  remarked  by  the  writers  of  the  EOMAN  law,
that  scarcely  any  ever  purchase  slaves  with  a  view  of  breeding
from  them.8

1  ARISTOPH. Equites. 1. 17. The  3 tcXivmoiol, makers  of  those beds
aneient  scholiast  remarks  on  this  pas-  which  the  ancients  lay  upon  at  meals,
sage  &a.pl3a.pi£ei  is  ScwAoy.  4  In  vita  CATONIS,  21.

2  In  Aphobum  orat.  1.  816.  s  '  Non  temere  aneillae  ejus  rei  causa


31)2  ESSAY  XL

Our  lackeys  and  house-maids,  Town,  do  not  serve  much  to
multiply  their  species :  But  the  ancients,  besides  those  who
attended  on  their  person,  had  almost  all  their  labour  per
formed,  '  and  even  manufactures  executed,  by  slaves,  who
lived,  many  of  them,  in  their  family ;  and  some  great  men
possessed  to  the  number  of  10,000.  If  there  be  any  suspicion,
therefore,  that  this  institution  was  unfavourable  to  propaga
tion,  (and  the  same  reason,  at  least  in  part,  holds  with  regard
to  ancient  slaves  as  modern  servants)  how  destructive  must
slavery  have  proved  ?

History  mentions  a  EOMAN  nobleman,  who  had  400  slaves
under  the  same  roof  with  him  :  And  having  been  assassinated
at  home  by  the  furious  revenge  of  one  of  them,  the  law  was
executed  with  rigour,  and  all  without  exception  were  put  to
death.2  Many  other  ROMAN  noblemen  had  families  equally,
or  more  numerous  ;  and  I  believe  every  one  will  allow,  that
this  would  scarcely  be  practicable,  were  we  to  suppose  all  the
slaves  married,  and  the  females  to  be  breeders.3

So  early  as  the  poet  HESIOD,4  married  slaves,  whether
male  or  female,  were  esteemed  inconvenient.  How  much
more,  where  families  had  encreased  to  such  an  enormous  size
as  in  ROME,  and  where  the  ancient  simplicity  of  manners
was  banished  from  all  ranks  of  people  ?

XENOPHON  in  his  Oeconomics,  where  he  gives  directions

comparantur  ut  pariant.'  Digest,  lib.  5.  part  or  office  of  women  to  bear  chil-
tit.  3.  de  h&red.  petit,  lex  27.  The  follow-  dren.  '  Si  mulier  prsegnans  venerit,
ing  texts  are  to  the  same  purpose.  '  Spa-  inter  omnes  convenit  sanam  earn  esse.
donem  morbosum  non  esse,  neque  vitio-  Maximum  enim  ac  prEecipuum  munus
sum,  verius  mihi  videtur  ;  sed  sanum  fceminarum  accipere  ac  tueri  conceptum.
esse,  sicuti  ilium  qui  unum  testiculum  Puerperam  quoque  sanam  esse ;  si  modo
habet,  qui  etiam  generare  potest.'  Di-  nihil  extrinsecus  accedit,  quod  corpus
gest.  lib.  2.  tit.  1.  de  csdilitio  edicto,  lex,  ejus  in  aliquam  valetudinem  immitteret.
6.  §  2.  '  Sin  autem  quis  ita  spado  sit,  De  sterili  Ccelius  distinguere  Trebatium
ut  tarn  necessaria  pars  corporis  penitus  dicit,  ut  si  natura  sterilis  sit,  sana  sit ;
absit,  morbosus  est.'  Id.  lex  1.  His  si  vitio  corporis,  contra.'  Id.
impotence,  it  seems,  was  only  regarded  '  [And  even  manufactures  executed ;
so  far  as  his  health  or  life  might  be  added  in  Edition  Q.]
affected  by  it.  In  other  respects,  he  2  TACIT,  ann.  lib.  xiv.  cap.  43.
was  full  as  valuable.  The  same  3  The  slaves  in  the  great  houses  had
reasoning  is  employed  with  regard  to  little  rooms  assigned  to  them,  called
female  slaves.  '  Quseritur  de  ea  muliere  cellte.  Whence  the  name  of  cell  was
quae  semper  mortuos  parit,  an  morbosa  transferred  to  the  monk's  room  in  a  con-
sit?  et  ait  Sabinus,  si  vulvae  vitio  hoc  vent.  See  farther  on  this  head,  JUST.
oontingit,  morbosam  esse.'  Id  lex  14.  LIPSIUS,  Saturn,  i.  cap.  14.  These  form
It  has  even  been  doubted,  whether  a  strong  presumptions  against  the  mar-
woman  pregnant  was  morbid  or  vitiated;  riage  and  propagation  of  the  family
and  it  is  determined,  that  she  is  sound,  slaves.

not  on  account  of  the  value  of  her  off-  4  Opera  et  Dies,  405,  also  602.

spring,  but  because  it  is  the  natural


POPULOUSN.ESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  393

for  the  management  of  a  farm,  recommends  a  strict  care  and
attention  of  laying  the  male  and  the  female  slaves  at  a  dis
tance  from  each  other.  He  seems  not  to  suppose  that  they
are  ever  married.  The  only  slaves  among  the  GEEEKS  that
appear  to  have  continued  their  own  race,  were  the  HELOTES,
who  had  houses  apart,  and  were  more  the  slaves  of  the
public  than  of  individuals.1

2  The  same  author3  tells  us  that  NICIAS'S  overseer,  by
agreement  with  his  master,  was  obliged  to  pay  him  an
obolus  a  da,y  for  each  slave  ;  besides  maintaining  them,  and
keeping  up  the  number.  Had  the  ancient  slaves  been  all
breeders,  this  last  circumstance  of  the  contract  had  been
superfluous.

The  ancients  talk  so  frequently  of  a  fixed,  stated  portion
of  provisions  assigned  to  each  slave,4  that  we  are  naturally
led  to  conclude,  that  slaves  lived  almost  all  single,  and
received  that  portion  as  a  kind  of  board-wages.

The  practice,  indeed,  of  marrying  slaves  seems  not  to  have
been  very  common,  even  among  the  country-labourers,  where
it  is  more  naturally  to  be  expected.  CATO,S  enumerating  the
slaves  requisite  to  labour  a  vineyard  of  a  hundred  acres,
makes  them  amount  to  15  ;  the  overseer  and  his  vfife,villicus
and  villica,  and  13  male  slaves ;  for  an  olive  plantation  of
240  acres,  the  overseer  and  his  wife,  and  11  male  slaves ;  and
so  in  proportion  to  a  greater  or  less  plantation  or  vineyard.

VAEEO,'  quoting  this  passage  of  CATO,  allows  his  compu
tation  to  be  just  in  every  respect,  except  the  last.  For  as  it  is
requisite,  says  he,  to  have  an  overseer  and  his  wife,  whether
the  vineyard  or  plantation  be  great  or  small,  this  must  alter
the  exactness  of  the  proportion.  Had  CATO'S  computation
been  erroneous  in  any  other  respect,  it  had  certainly  been
corrected  by  VAEEO,  who  seems  fond  of  discovering  so  trivial
an  error.

The  same  author,7  as  well  as  COLUMELLA,S  recommends
it  as  requisite  to  give  a  wife  to  the  overseer,  in  order  to
attach  him  the  more  strongly  to  his  master's  service.  This


1  STRABO,  lib.  viii.  365.  epist.  80.

2  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Edi-  4  De  re  rust.  cap.  10,  11.
tion  K.]  6  Lib.  i.  cap.  18.

3  Derations  redituum,  4,14.  *  Lib.  i.  cap.  17.

4  See  CATO  de  re  rustica,  cap.  56.  8  Lib.  i.  cap  18.
Donatus  in  Phormion,  1.  1,  9. SENKCAE


394  ESSAY XI.

•was  therefore  a  peculiar  indulgence  granted  to  a  slave,  in
whom  so  great  confidence  was  reposed.

In  the  same  place,  VARKO  mentions  it  as  an  useful  pre
caution,  not  to  buy  too  many  slaves  from  the  same  nation,
lest  they  beget  factions  and  seditions  in  the  family :  A  pre
sumption,  that  in  ITALY,  the  greater  part,  even  of  the  country
labouring  slaves,  (for  he  speaks  of  no  other)  were  bought
from  the  remoter  provinces.  All  the  world  knows,  that  the
family  slaves  in  ROME,  who  were  instruments  of  show  and
luxury,  were  commonly  imported  from  the  east.  Hoc  profe-
cere,  says  PLINY,  speaking  of  the  jealous  care  of  masters,
mancipiorum  legiones,  et  in  domo  turba  externa,  ac  servorum
quoque  causa  nomenclator  adhibendus.*

It  is  indeed  recommended  by  VARRO,S  to  propagate  young
shepherds  in  the  family  from  the  old  ones.  For  as  grasing
farms  were  commonly  in  remote  and  cheap  places,  and  each
shepherd  lived  in  a  cottage  apart,  his  marriage  and  encrease
were  not  liable  to  the  same  inconveniencies  as  in  dearer
places,  and  where  many  servants  lived  in  the  family  ;  which
was  universally  the  case  in  such  of  the  ROMAN  farms  as
produced  wine  or  corn.  If  we  consider  this  exception  with
regard  to  shepherds,  and  weigh  the  reasons  of  it,  it  will
serve  for  a  strong  confirmation  of  all  our  foregoing  suspicions.3

CoLUMELLA,4  I  own,  advises  the  master  to  give  a  reward,
and  even  liberty  to  a  female  slave,  that  had  reared  him
above  three  children  :  A  proof  that  sometimes  the  ancients
propagated  from  their  slaves ;  which,  indeed,  cannot  be
denied.  Were  it  otherwise,  the  practice  of  slavery,  being
so  common  in  antiquity,  must  have  been  destructive  to  a
degree  which  no  expedient  could  repair.  All  I  pretend  to
infer  from  these  reasonings  is,  that  slavery  is  in  general
disadvantageous  both  to  the  happiness  and  populousness  of
mankind,  and  that  its  place  is  much  better  supplied  by  the
practice  of  hired  servants.

The  laws,  or,  as  some  writers  call  them,  the  seditions  of
the  GRACCHI,  were  occasioned  by  their  observing  the  encrease
of  slaves  all  over  ITALY,  and  the  diminution  of  free  citizens.
AppiAN5  ascribes  this  encrease  to  the  propagation  of  the

1  Lib. xxxiii. cap. 1. So  likewise  3  Pastoris duri est hie  ftlius,  ille
TACITUS,  annal.  lib.  xiv.  cap.  44. [This bubulci. JUVEN,  sat.  11,  151.
reference  to  TACITUS  was  added  in  Edi-  4  Lib.  i.  cap.  8.

tion  K.]  *  De  bel.  civ.  lib.  i.  7.

2  Lib.  ii.  cap.  10.


POrULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  305

slaves :  PLUTARCH'  to  the  purchasing  of  barbarians,  who
were  chained  and  imprisoned,  fiapflapifca  SeoyitoT^pui.2  It  is
to  be  presumed  that  both  causes  concurred.

SICILY,  says  FLORUS,3  was  full  of  ergastula,  and  was  cul
tivated  by  labourers  in  chains.  EUNUS  and  ATHENIO
excited  the  servile  war,  by  breaking  up  these  monstrous
prisons,  and  giving  liberty  to  60,000  slaves.  The  younger
POMPET  augmented  his  army  in  SPAIN  by  the  same  expe
dient.4  If  the  country  labourers,  throughout  the  ROMAN
empire,  were  so  generally  in  this  situation,  and  if  it  was
difficult  or  impossible  to  find  separate  lodgings  for  the
families  of  the  city  servants,  how  unfavourable  to  propa
gation,  as  well  as  to  humanity,  must  the  institution  of
domestic  slavery  be  esteemed  ?

CONSTANTINOPLE,  at  present,  requires  the  same  recruits
of  slaves  from  all  the  provinces,  that  EOME  did  of  old ;  and
these  provinces  are  of  consequence  far  from  being  populous.

EGYPT,  according  to  Mons.  MAILLET,  sends  continual  colo
nies  of  black  slaves  to  the  other  parts  of  the  TURKISH  empire  ;
and  receives  annually  an  equal  return  of  white  :  The  one
brought  from  the  inland  parts  of  AFRICA  ;  the  other  from
MINGRELIA,  CIRCASSIA,  and  TARTARY.

Our  modern  convents  are,  no  doubt,  bad  institutions :  But
there  is  reason  to  suspect,  that  anciently  every  great  family
in  Italy,  and  probably  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  was  a
species  of  convent.  And  though  we  have  reason  to  condemn
all  those  popish  institutions,  as  nurseries5  of  superstition,
burthensome  to  the  public,  and  oppressive  to  the  poor  pri
soners,  male  as  well  as  female ;  yet  may  it  be  questioned
whether  they  be  so  destructive  to  the  populousness  of  a  state,
as  is  commonly  imagined.  Were  the  land,  which  belongs
to  a  convent,  bestowed  on  a  nobleman,  he  would  spend  its

1  In  vita  TIB.  &  C.  GRACCHI.  Agrorum,  et  quondam  duro  sulcata

2  To  the  same  purpose  is  that  passage  Camilli

of  the  elder  SENECA,  ex  controversia  5,  Vomere,  et  antiquas  Curiorum  passa

lib.  v. '  Arata  quondam  populis  rura,  ligones

singulorum  ergastulorum  sunt ; latins-  Longa  sub ignotis extendere rura

que  nunc  villici,  quam  olim  reges,  im-  colonis.' Lbi.  i.  167.

perant. At  nunc  eadem,'  says PLINY,

'  vincti  pedes,  damnatae  manus,  inscripti  'Vincto  f>ssore  coluntur

vultus  exercent.' Lib.  xviii.  cap.  3. So  Hesperiae  segetes. '  Lib.  vii.  402.

also  MARTIAL.

'Et  sonet  innumera  eompede  Thuscus  3  Lib.  iii.  cap.  19.

ager.' Lib.  ix.  ep.  23.  4  Id.  lib.  iv.  cap.  8.

And LUCAN. '  Turn longos jungere  5  [Of  the  most  abject  superstition :

lines  Editions  H  1o  P.]


30G  ESSAY XI.

revenue  on  dogs,  horses,  grooms,  footmen,  cooks,  and  house
maids  ;  and  his  family  would  not  furnish  many  more  citizens
than  the  convent.

The  common  reason,  why  any  parent  thrusts  his  daughters
into  nunneries,  is,  that  he  may  not  be  overburthened  with
too  numerous  a  family ;  but  the  ancients  had  a  method
almost  as  innocent,  and  more  effectual  to  that  purpose,  to
wit,  exposing  their  children  in  early  infancy.  This  practice
was  very  common ;  and  is  not  spoken  of  by  any  author  of
those  times  with  the  horror  it  deserves,  or  scarcely1  even
with  disapprobation.  PLUTAECH,  the  humane,  good-natured
PLUTARCH,2  mentions  it  as  a  merit  in  ATTALUS,  king  of
PEEGAMUS,  that  he  murdered,  or,  if  you  will,  exposed  all
his  own  children,  in  order  to  leave  his  crown  to  the  son  of
his  brother,  EUMENES  ;  signalizing  in  this  manner  his  grati
tude  and  affection  to  EUMENES,  who  had  left  him  his  heir
preferably  to  that  son.  It  was  SOLON,  the  most  celebrated
of  the  sages  of  GEEECE,  that  gave  parents  permission  by
law  to  kill  their  children.8

Shall  we  then  allow  these  two  circumstances  to  compen
sate  each  other,  to  wit,  monastic  vows,  and  the  exposing  of
children,  and  to  be  unfavourable,  in  equal  degrees,  to  the
propagation  of  mankind  ?  I  doubt  the  advantage  is  here  on
the  side  of  antiquity.  Perhaps,  by  an  odd  connexion  of
causes,  the  barbarous  practice  of  the  ancients  might  rather
render  those  times  more  populous.  By  removing  the  terrors
of  too  numerous  a  family  it  would  engage  many  people  in
marriage ;  and  such  is  the  force  of  natural  affection,  that
very  few,  in  comparison,  would  have  resolution  enough,
when  it  came  to  the  push,  to  carry  into  execution  their
former  intentions.

CHINA,  the  only  country  where  this  practice  of  exposing
children  prevails  at  present,  is  the  most  populous  country
\ve  know  off;  and  every  man  is  married  before  he  is  twenty.
Such  early  marriages  could  scarcely  be  general,  had  not
men  the  prospect  of  so  easy  a  method  of  getting  rid  of  their
children.  I  own  that  4  PLTJTAECH  speaks  of  it  as  a  very
general  maxim  of  the  poor  to  expose  their  children ;  and

1  TACITUS  blames it. De morib.  firm  children. De  ira,  lib.  i.  cap.  15.
Germ.  ]  9.  3  SKXT.  EMP.  lib.  iii.  cap.  24.

-  De  fraterno  amore. SENECA  also  *  De  amore  prolis.

approves  of  the exposing  of  sickly  in-


POPULOUSNESS  OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  307

as  the  rich  were  then  averse  to  marriage,  on  account  of  the
courtship  they  met  with  from  those  who  expected  legacies
from  them,  the  public  must  have  been  in  a  bad  situation
between  them.1

Of  all  sciences  there  is  none,  where  first  appearances  are
more  deceitful  than  in  politics.  Hospitals  for  foundlings
seem  favourable  to  the  encrease  of  numbers ;  and  perhaps,
may  be  so,  when  kept  under  proper  restrictions.  But  when
they  open  the  door  to  every  one,  without  distinction,  they
have  probably  a  contrary  effect,  and  are  pernicious  to  the
state.  It  is  computed,  that  every  ninth  child  born  at  PARIS,
is  sent  to  the  hospital ;  though  it  seems  certain,  according
to  the  common  course  of  human  affairs,  that  it  is  not  a
hundredth  child  whose  parents  are  altogether  incapacitated
to  rear  and  educate  him.  The  2  great  difference,  for  health,
industry,  and  morals,  between  an  education  in  an  hospital
and  that  in  a  private  family,  should  induce  us  not  to  make
the  entrance  into  the  former  too  easy  and  engaging.  To
kill  one's  own  child  is  shocking  to  nature,  and  must  there
fore  be  somewhat  unusual ;  but  to  turn  over  the  care  of  him
upon  others,  is  very  tempting  to  the  natural  indolence  of
mankind.

Having  considered  the  domestic  life  and  manners  of  the
ancients,  compared  to  those  of  the  moderns ;  where,  in  the
main,  we  seem  rather  superior,  so  far  as  the  present  ques
tion  is  concerned ;  we  shall  now  examine  the  political  cus
toms  and  institutions  of  both  ages,  and  weigh  their  influence
in  retarding  or  forwarding  the  propagation  of  mankind.

Before  the  encrease  of  the  ROMAN  power,  or  rather  till  its
full  establishment,  almost  all  the  nations,  which  are  the
scene  of  ancient  history,  were  divided  into  small  territories
or  petty  commonwealths,  where  of  course  a  great  equality  of


1  The  practice  of  leaving  great  sums  discouragement  to  marriage. Such a

of  money  to  friends,  tho'  one  had near  practice prevents not quarrels from

relations,  was  common  in  GREECE as  well  humour,  but  rather  increases  them  ;  and

as EOME; as we may gather from  occasions  also  those  from  interest,  which

IVUCIAN. This  practice  prevails  much  are  much  more  dangerous  and destruc-

less  in  modern  times ;  and  BEX.  JOHN-  tive. See  farther  on  this  head,  Essays

SON'S  VOLPONE  is  therefore  almost  en-  moral, political, and  literary,  Part  I.

tirely  extracted  from  antient  authors,  essay  XIX. Perhaps  too  the  unnatural

and  suits  better  the  manners  of  those  lusts  of  the  antients  ought  to  be  taken

times.  into  consideration,  as  of  some  moment.

It  may  justly  be  thought,  that  the  2  [Infinite:  Editions  H  to  P.]
liberty  of  divorces  in  Rome  was  another


398  ESSAY XI.

fortune  prevailed,  and  the center  of  the  government  was
always  very  near  its  frontiers.

This  was  the  situation  of  affairs  not  only  in  GEEEOE  and
ITALY,  but  also  in  SPAIN,  GAUL,  GERMANY,  AFRIC,  and  a
great  part  of  jhe  Lesser  ASIA  :  And  it  must  be  owned,  that
no  institution  could  be  more  favourable  to  the  propagation
of  mankind.  For,  though  a  man  of  an  overgrown  fortune,
not  being  able  to  consume  more  than  another,  must  share
it  with  those  who  serve  and  attend  him ;  yet  their  posses
sion  being  precarious,  they  have  not  the  same  encouragement
to  marry,  as  if  each  had  a  small  fortune,  secure  and  indepen
dent.  Enormous  cities  are,  besides,  destructive  to  society,
beget  vice  and  disorder  of  all  kinds,  starve  the  remoter
provinces,  and  even  starve  themselves,  by  the  prices  to  which
they  raise  all  provisions.  Where  each  man  had  his  little
house  and  field  to  himself,  and  each  county  had  its  capital,
free  and  independent ;  what  a  happy  situation  of  mankind !
How  favourable  to  industry  and  agriculture ;  to  marriage
and  propagation !  The  prolific  virtue  of  men,  were  it  to  act
in  its  full  extent,  without  that  restraint  which  poverty  and
necessity  imposes  on  it,  would  double  the  number  every
generation :  And  nothing  surely  can  give  it  more  liberty,
than  such  small  commonwealths,  and  such  an  equality  of
fortune  among  the  citizens.  All  small  states  naturally  pro
duce  equality  of  fortune,  because  they  afford  no  opportunities
of  great  encrease ;  but  small  commonwealths  much  more,  by
that  division  of  power  and  authority  which  is  essential  to  them.

When  XENOPHON'  returned  after  the  famous  expedition
with  CYRUS,  he  hired  himself  and  6000  of  the  GREEKS  into
the  service  of  SEUTHES,  a  prince  of  THRACE  ;  and  the  articles
of  his  agreement  were,  that  each  soldier  should  receive  a
daric  a  month,  each  captain  two  darics,  and  he  himself,  as
general,  four  :  A  regulation  of  pay  which  would  not  a  little
surprise  our  modern  officers.

DEMOSTHENES  and  J^SCHINES,  with  eight  more,  were  sent
ambassadors  to  PHILIP  of  MACEDON,  and  their  appointments
for  above  four  months  were  a  thousand  drachmas,  which  is
less  than  a  drachma  a  day  for  each  ambassador.2  But  a
drachma  a  day,  nay  sometimes  two,3  was  the  pay  of  a  common
foot-soldier.

1  De  exp.  CYK.  lib.  vii.  6.  calls  it  a  considerable  sum.

3  DEMOST. de  falsa  leg. 390. He  3  THUCYD.  lib.  iii.  17.


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  399

A  centurion  among  the  ROMANS  had  only  double  pay  to  a
private  man,  in  POLTBIUS'S  time,1  and  we  accordingly  find
the  gratuities  after  a  triumph  regulated  by  that  proportion.2
But  MARK  ANTHONY  and  the  triumvirate  gave  the  centu
rions  five  times  the  reward  of  the  other.3  So  much  had  the
encrease  of  the  commonwealth  encreased  the  inequality
among  the  citizens.4

It  must  be  owned,  that  the  situation  of  affairs  in  modern
times,  with  regard  to  civil  liberty,  as  well  as  equality  of
fortune,  is  not  near  so  favourable,  either  to  the  propagation
or  happiness  of  mankind.  EUROPE  is  shared  out  mostly
into  great  monarchies ;  and  such  parts  of  it  as  are  divided
into  small  territories,  are  commonly  governed  by  absolute
princes,  who  ruin  their  people  by  a  mimicry  of  the  greater
monarchs,  in  the  splendor  of  their  court  and  number  of  their
forces.  SWISSERLAND  alone  and  HOLLAND  resemble  the
ancient  republics ;  and  though  the  former  is  far  from  pos
sessing  any  advantage  either  of  soil,  climate,  or  commerce,
yet  the  numbers  of  people,  with  which  it  abounds,  notwith
standing  their  enlisting  themselves  into  every  service  in
Europe,  prove  sufficiently  the  advantages  of  their  political
institutions.

The  ancient  republics  derived  their  chief  or  only  security
from  the  numbers  of  their  citizens.  The  TRACHINIANS  having
lost  great  numbers  of  their  people,  the  remainder,  instead  of
enriching  themselves  by  the  inheritance  of  their  fellow-
citizens,  applied  to  SPARTA,  their  metropolis,  for  a  new  stock
of  inhabitants.  The  SPARTANS  immediately  collected  ten
thousand  men ;  among  whom  the  old  citizens  divided  the
lands  of  which  the  former  proprietors  had  perished.5

After  TIMOLEON  had  banished  DIONYSIUS  from  SYRA
CUSE,  and  had  settled  the  affairs  of  SICILY,  finding
the  cities  of  SYRACUSE  and  SELLINUNTIUM  extremely
depopulated  by  tyranny,  war,  and  faction,  he  invited  over
from  GREECE  some  new  inhabitants  to  repeople  them.6
Immediately  forty  thousand  men  (PLUTAECHT  says  sixty
thousand)  offered  themselves ;  and  he  distributed  so  many

1  Lib.  vi.  cap.  37.  cartel,  mentioned  afterwards,  no  distinc-

2  TIT.  Liv.  lib.  xli.  cap.  7,  13  $•  alibi  tiou  in  the  ransom  was  made  on  account
passim.  of  ranks  in  the  army.

3  APPIAN.  De  bell.  civ.  lib.  iv.,  20.  s  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xii.  59. THTJCYD.  lib,

4  CAESAR  gave  the  centurions  ten  times  iii.  92.

the  gratuity  of  the  common  soldiers,  De  8  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xvi.  82.

Itllo  Gallico,  lib.  viii.  4.  In  the  RHODIAN  '  In  vita  TIMOL,  23.


400  ESSAY XL

lots  of  land  among  them,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the
ancient  inhabitants :  A  proof  at  once  of  the  maxims  of
ancient  policy,  which  affected  populousness  more  than
riches ;  and  of  the  good  effects  of  these  maxims,  in  the
extreme  populousness  of  that  small  country,  GREECE,  which
could  at  once  supply  so  great  a  colony.  The  case  was  not
much  different  with  the  EOMANS  in  early  times.  He  is  a
pernicious  citizen,  said  M.  CUEIUS,  who  cannot  be  content
with  seven  acres.1  Such  ideas  of  equality  could  not  fail  of
producing  great  numbers  of  people.

We  must  now  consider  what  disadvantages  the  ancients
lay  under  with  regard  to  populousness,  and  what  checks
they  received  from  their  political  maxims  and  institutions.
There  are  commonly  compensations  in  every  human  condi
tion  :  and  though  these  compensations  be  not  always
perfectly  equal,  yet  they  serve,  at  least,  to  restrain  the
prevailing  principle.  To  compare  them  and  estimate  their
influence,  is  indeed  difficult,  even  where  they  take  place  in
the  same  age,  and  in  neighbouring  countries  :  But  where
several  ages  have  intervened,  and  only  scattered  lights  are
afforded  us  by  ancient  authors ;  what  can  we  do  but  amuse
ourselves  by  talking  pro  and  con,  on  an  interesting  subject,
and  thereby  correcting  all  hasty  and  violent  determinations  ?

First,  We  may  observe,  that  the  ancient  republics  were
almost  in  perpetual  war,  a  natural  effect  of  their  martial
spirit,  their  love  of  liberty,  their  mutual  emulation,  and  that
hatred  which  generally  prevails  among  nations  that  live  in
close  neighbourhood.  Now,  war  in  a  small  state  is  much
more  destructive  than  in  a  great  one ;  both  because  all  the
inhabitants,  in  the  former  case,  must  serve  in  the  armies ;
and  because  the  whole  state  is  frontier,  and  is  all  exposed
to  the  inroads  of  the  enemy.

The  maxims  of  ancient  war  were  much  more  destructive
than  those  of  modern ;  chiefly  by  that  distribution  of
plunder,  in  which  the  soldiers  were  indulged.  The
private  men  in  our  armies  are  such  a  low  set  of  people,

1  PUN.  lib. 18. cap. 3. The  same  so  destructive  to  the  public  as  we  may

author,  in  cap.  6,  says,  Verumque  faten-  imagine. These  never  ceased  till  they

tibus latifundia perdidere ITALIAM  ;  had extinguished all the illustrious

jam  vero  et  provincias. Sex  domi  semis-  families,  which  had  enjoyed  the  plunder

sem  AFRICA  possidebant,  cum  interfecit  of  the  world,  during  the  latter  ages  of

eos NERO  princeps. In  this  view,  the  the  republic. The  new  nobles  who  rose

barbarous  butchery  committed by the  in  their  place,  were  less  splendid,  as  we

first  ROMAN  emperors,  was  not,  perhaps.  learn  from  TACIT,  ann.  lib.  3.  cap.  5.0.


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  401

that  we  find  any  abundance,  beyond  their  simple  pay,  breeds
confusion  and  disorder  among  them,  and  a  total  dissolution
of  discipline.  The  very  wretchedness  and  meanness  of  those,
who  fill  the  modern  armies,  render  them  less  destructive
to  the  countries  which  they  invade :  One  instance,  among
many,  of  the  deceitfulness  of  first  appearances  in  all  political
reasonings.1

Ancient  battles  were  much  more  bloody,  by  the  very  nature
of  the  weapons  employed  in  them.  The  ancients  drew  up
their  men  16  or  20,  sometimes  50  men  deep,  which  made  a
narrow  front ;  and  it  was  not  difficult  to  find  a  field,  in  which
both  armies  might  be  marshalled,  and  might  engage  with
each  other.  Even  where  any  body  of  the  troops  was  kept
off  by  hedges,  hillocks,  woods,  or  hollow  ways,  the  battle
was  not  so  soon  decided  between  the  contending  parties,  but
that  the  others  had  time  to  overcome  the  difficulties  which
opposed  them,  and  take  part  in  the  engagement.  And  as
the  whole  army  was  thus  engaged,  and  each  man  closely
buckled  to  his  antagonist,  the  battles  were  commonly  very
bloody,  and  great  slaughter  was  made  on  both  sides,  espe
cially  on  the  vanquished.  The  long  thin  lines,  required
by  fire-arms,  and  the  quick  decision  of  the  fray,  render  our
modern  engagements  but  partial  rencounters,  and  enable  the
general,  who  is  foiled  in  the  beginning  of  the  day,  to  draw
off  the  greater  part  of  his  army,  sound  and  entire.2

The  battles  of  antiquity,  both  by  their  duration,  and  their
resemblance  to  single  combats,  were  wrought  up  to  a  degree
of  fury  quite  unknown  to  later  ages.  Nothing  could  then
engage  the  combatants  to  give  quarter,  but  the  hopes  of
profit,  by  making  slaves  of  their  prisoners.  In  civil  wars,
as  we  learn  from  TAcrrus,3  the  battles  were  the  most  bloody,
because  the  prisoners  were  not  slaves.

1  The ancient soldiers, being free  favour  of  the  ancients,
citizens,  above  the  lowest  rank,  were  all  2  [Editions H to P add: Could

married.  Our  modern  soldiers  are  either  FOLARD'S  project  of  the column take

forced  to  live  unmarried,  or  their  mar-  place  (which  seems  impracticable  ')  it

riages  turn  to  small  account  towards  the  would  render  modern  battles  as  destruc-

encrease  of  mankind. A  circumstance  tive  as  the  antient.]
which  ought,  perhaps,  to  be  taken  into  3  Hist.  lib.  ii.  cap.  44.

consideration,  as  of  some  consequence  in

1  What  is  the  advantage  of  the  column  them,  does  it  not  present  a  flank  to  the

after it has  broke  the  enemy's  line  ?  enemy,  and  that  exposed to  their  mus-

only,  that  it  then  takes  them  in  flank,  quetry,  and,  what  is  much  worse,  to  their

and  dissipates  whatever  stands  near  itby  cannon  ?
afire  from  all  sides.  But  till  it  has  broke

VOL.  III.  D  D


402  ESSAY XI.

What  a  stout  resistance  must  be  made,  where  the  van
quished  expected  so  hard  a  fate  !  How  inveterate  the  rage,
where  the  maxims  of  war  were,  in  every  respect,  so  bloody
and  severe  !

Instances  are  frequent,  in  ancient  history,  of  cities  be
sieged,  whose  inhabitants,  rather  than  open  their  gates,
murdered  their  wives  and  children,  and  rushed  themselves
on  a  voluntary  death,  sweetened  perhaps  by  a  little  prospect
of  revenge  upon  the  enemy.  GREEKS,'  as  well  as  BARBA
RIANS,  have  often  been  wrought  up  to  this  degree  of  fury.
And  the  same  determined  spirit  and  cruelty  must,  in  other
instances  less  remarkable,  have  been  destructive  to  human
society,  in  those  petty  commonwealths,  which  lived  in  close
neighbourhood,  and  were  engaged  in  perpetual  wars  and
contentions.

Sometimes  the  wars  in  GREECE,  says  PLUTARCH,2  were
carried  on  entirely  by  inroads,  and  robberies,  and  piracies.
Such  a  method  of  war  must  be  more  destructive  in  small
states,  than  the  bloodiest  battles  and  sieges.

By  the  laws  of  the  twelve  tables,  possession  during  two
years  formed  a  prescription  for  land  ;  one  year  for  moveables  3 :
An  indication,  that  there  was  not  in  ITALY,  at  that  time,
much  more  order,  tranquillity,  and  settled  police,  than  there
is  at  present  among  the  TARTARS.

The  only  cartel  I  remember  in  ancient  history,  is  that  be
tween  DEMETRIUS  POLIORCETES  and  the  EHODIANS  ;  when  it
was  agreed,  that  a  free  citizen  should  be  restored  for  1000
drachmas,  a  slave  bearing  arms  for  500.4

But,  secondly,  it  appears  that  ancient  manners  were  more
unfavourable  than  the  modern,  not  only  in  times  of  war,  but
also  in  those  of  peace ;  and  that  too  in  every  respect,  except
the  love  of  civil  liberty  and  of  equality,  which  is,  I  own,  of
considerable  importance.  To  exclude  faction  from  a  free
government,  is  very  difficult,  if  not  altogether  impracticable  ;
but  such  inveterate  rage  between  the  factions,  and  such  bloody
maxims,  are  found,  in  modern  times  amongst  religious

1  As  ABYDTJS,  mentioned  by  LIVY,  lib. 2  In  vita  AKATI,  6.
xxxi.  cap.  17,  18,  and  POLYB.  lib.  xvi. 3  INST.  lib.  ii.  cap.  6.1
34. As  also  the  XANTHIANS,  APPIAN.  de 4  DIOD.  SICCL.  lib.  xx.  84.
bell,  civil,  lib.  iv.  80.

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add  :  Tis  true  the troduced  by  barbarism  are  not  always
same  law  seems  to  have  continued  till corrected  by  civility.]
the  time  of  JUSTINIAN. But  abuses  in-


POrULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  403

parties  alone.1  In  ancient  history,  we  may  always  observe,
where  one  party  prevailed,  whether  the  nobles  or  people  (for
I  can  observe  no  difference  in  this  respect2)  that  they  imme
diately  butchered  all  of  the  opposite  party  who  fell  into  their
hands,  and  banished  such  as  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to
escape  their  fury.  No  form  of  process,  no  law,  no  trial,  no
pardon.  A  fourth,  a  third,  perhaps  near  half  of  the  city  was
slaughtered,  or  expelled,  every  revolution;  and  the  exiles
always  joined  foreign  enemies,  and  did  all  the  mischief
possible  to  their  fellow-citizens ;  till  fortune  put  it  in  their
power  to  take  full  revenge  by  a  new  revolution.  And  as
these  were  frequent  in  such  violent  governments,  the  disorder,
diffidence,  jealousy,  enmity,  which  must  prevail,  are  not  easy
for  us  to  imagine  in  this  age  of  the  world.

There  are  only  two  revolutions  I  can  recollect  in  ancient
history,  which  passed  without  great  severity,  and  great  effu
sion  of  blood  in  massacres  and  assassinations,  namely,  the
restoration  of  the  ATHENIAN  Democracy  by  THEASYBULUS,
and  the  subduing  of  the  ROMAN  republic  by  CAESAR.  We
learn  from  ancient  history,  that  THEASYBULUS  passed  a
general  amnesty  for  all  past  offences ;  and  first  introduced
that  word,  as  well  as  practice,  into  GEEECE.3  It  appears,
however,  from  many  orations  of  LYSiAS,4  that  the  chief,
and  even  some  of  the  subaltern  offenders,  in  the  preceding
tyranny,  were  tried  and  capitally  punished.5  And  as  to
(LESAR'S  clemency,  though  much  celebrated,  it  would  not  gain
great  applause  in  the  present  age.  He  butchered,  for  instance,
all  CATO'S  senate,  when  he  became  master  of  UTICA°  ;  and
these,  we  may  readily  believe,  were  not  the  most  worthless  of
the  party.  All  those  who  had  borne  arms  against  that  usurper,
were  attainted ;  and,  by  HIETIUS'S  law,  declared  incapable  of
all  public  offices.

These  people  were  extremely  fond  of  liberty ;  but  seem  not
to  have  understood  it  very  well.  When  the  thirty  tyrants
first  established  their  dominion  at  ATHENS,  they  began  with

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add:  Where  bi-  3  CICERO,  PHILIP.  1,  1.

gotted  priests  are  the  accusers,  judges,  4  As  orat.  12.  contra  ERATOST.  oral.

and  executioners.]  13.  contra.  AGOEAT.  orat.  16,  pro  MAN-

2  LYSIAS,  who  was himself  of  the TITH.

popular  faction,  and  very  narrowly  es-  5  [Editions  H  to  Q,  add  :  This  is  a

caped from the  thirty  tyrants,  says,  difficulty  not cleared  up,  and  even  net

that  the  Democracy  was  as  violent a  observedbyantiquariansandhistorians.]

government  as  the  Oligarchy. Orat.  '25,  6  APPIAN,  dc  bell.  civ.  lib.  ii.  100.
tie  stqtu  popid.

D D 2


404  ESSAY  XI.

seizing  all  the  sycophants  and  informers,  who  had  been  so
troublesome  during  the  Democracy,  and  putting  them  to
death  by  an  arbitrary  sentence  and  execution.  Every  man,
says  SALLUST  l  and  LTSIAS,2  was  rejoiced  at  these  punishments;
not  considering,  that  liberty  was  from  that  moment  annihi
lated.

The  utmost  energy  of  the  nervous  style  of  THUCYDIDES,  and
the  copiousness  and  expression  of  the  GREEK  language,  seem
to  sink  under  that  historian,  when  he  attempts  to  describe
the  disorders,  which  arose  from  faction  throughout  all  the
GRECIAN  commonwealths.  You  would  imagine,  that  he  still
labours  with  a  thought  greater  than  he  can  find  words  to  com
municate.  And  he  concludes  his  pathetic  description  with
an  observation,  which  is  at  once  refined  and  solid.  '  In  these
contests,'  says  he,  '  those  who  were  the  dullest,  and  most
stupid,  and  had  the  least  foresight,  commonly  prevailed.
For  being  conscious  of  this  weakness,  and  dreading  to  be
over-reached  by  those  of  greater  penetration,  they  went  to
work  hastily,  without  premeditation,  by  the  sword  and
poinard,  and  thereby  got  the  start  of  their  antagonists,  who
were  forming  fine  schemes  and  projects  for  their  destruc
tion.'3

Not  to  mention  DiONYSius4  the  elder,  who  is  computed  to
have  butchered  in  cool  blood  above  10,000  of  his  fellow-
citizens  ;  or  AGATHOCLES,*  NABIS,S  and  others,  still  more
bloody  than  he ;  the  transactions,  even  in  free  governments,
were  extremely  violent  and  destructive.  At  ATHENS,  the
thirty  tyrants  and  the  nobles,  in  a  twelvemonth,  murdered,
without  trial,  about  1200  of  the  people,  and  banished  above
the  half  of  the  citizens  that  remained.7  In  ARGOS,  near  the

1  See  CAESAR'S  speech  de  bdl.  CatiL  c.  and  depopulation  of  that  country. The
51.  GREEK  factions  I  imagine  to  have  been

2  Orat.  25,  173.  And  in  orat.  30,  184,  inflamed  still  to  a  higher  degree  of  rage;
hementionsthefactiousspiritofthepopn-  the  revolutions  being  commonly  more
lar  assemblies  as  the  only  cause  why  these  frequent,  and  the  maxims  of  assassina-
illegal  punishments  should  displease.  tion  much  more  avowed  and  acknow-

3  Lib.  iii. [The  country  in  EVROPE  ledged. Editions  H  to  P.]

in  which  I  have  observed  the  factions  4  PLUT.  dcvirt.  $  fort.  ALEX.

to  be  most  violent,  and  early-hatred  the  5  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xviii.  xix.

strongest,  is  IRELAND. This  goes  so  far  s  TIT.  Liv.  xxsi.  xxxiii.  xxxiv.

as  to  cut  off  even  the  mo«t  common  in-  7  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xiv.  5. ISGCRATES

tercourse  of  civilities  between  the  Pro-  says  there  were  only  5000  banished.  He

testants  and  Catholics. Their  cruel  in-  makes  the  number  of  those  killed  amount

surrections  and  the  severe  revenges  which  to  1500.  AREOP.  153.  ^SCHINES  contra.

they  have  taken  of  each  other,  are  the  CTKSIPH.  455  assigns  precisely  the  same

causes  of  this  mutual  ill  will,  which  is  number. SENECA  (dc  tranq.  anim.  cap.

the  chief  source  of  the  disorder,  poverty,  5.)  says  1300.


POPULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT NATIONS.


405


same  time,  the  people  killed  1200  of  the  nobles ;  and  after
wards  their  own  demagogues,  because  they  had  refused  to
carry  their  prosecutions  farther.1  The  people  also  in  CORCYRA
killed  1500  of  the  nobles,  and  banished  a  thousand.2  These
numbers  will  appear  the  more  surprising,  if  we  consider  the
extreme  smallness  of  these  states.  But  all  ancient  history  is
full  of  such  instances.3

When  ALEXANDER  ordered  all  the  exiles  to  be  restored
throughout  all  the  cities;  it  was  found,  that  the  whole
amounted  to  20,000  men4 ;  the  remains  probably  of  still
greater  slaughters  and  massacres.  What  an  astonishing
multitude  in  so  narrow  a  country  as  ancient  GREECE  !  And
what  domestic  confusion,  jealousy,  partiality,  revenge,  heart
burnings,  must  tear  those  cities,  where  factions  were  wrought
up  to  such  a  degree  of  fury  and  despair.

It  would  be  easier,  says  ISOCRATES  to  PHILIP,  to  raise  an
army  in  GREECE  at  present  from  the  vagabonds  than  from
the  cities.


1  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xv.  c.  58.

2  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xiii.  c.  48.

3  We  shall  mention  from  DIODORTIS
SICTJXUS  alone  a  few  massacres,  which
passed  in  the  course  of  sixty  years,  dur
ing  the  most  shining  age  of  GBEECE.
There  were  banished  from  SYBABIS  500
of  the  nobles  and  their  partizans ;  lib.
xii.  p.  77,  ex  edit.  RHODOMANNI. Of
CHIANS,  600  citizens  banished  ;  lib.  xiii.
p.  189. AtEpHESUS,  340  killed,  1000
banished; lib. xiii. p.  223. Of  CY-
HENIANS,  500  nobles  killed,  all  the  rest
banished  ;  lib.  xiv.  p.  263. The  CORIN
THIANS  killed 120,  banished  500  ;  lib.
xiv.  p.  304. PH.EBIDAS the SPARTAN
banished  300  BJEOTIANS  ;  lib.  xv.  p.  342.
Upon  the  fall  of  the  LACEDJEMONIANS,
Democracies  were restored in many
cities,  and severe  vengeance taken  of
the  nobles,  after  the  G-REEK  manner.
But  matters  did  not  end  there. For  the
banished nobles, returning in many
places,  butchered their  adversaries  at
PHIALJE,  in CORINTH,  in MEGARA,  in
PHLIASIA. In  this  last  place  they  killed
300  of  the  people ;  but  these  again  re
volting,  killed  above  600  of  the  nobles,
and  banished  the  rest  ;  lib.  xv.  p.  357.
In ARCADIA 1400 banished, besides


many  killed.  The  banished  retired  to
SPARTA  and  to  PAILANTIUM  :  The  latter
were  delivered  up  to  their  countrymen,
and  all  killed ;  lib.  xv.  p.  373.  Of  the
banished  from  ARGOS  and  THKBKS,  there
were  509  in  the  SPARTAN  army ;  id.  p.
374.  Here  is  a  detail  of  the  most  re
markable  of  AGATHOCLES'S  cruelties  from
the  same  author.  The  people  beforo
his  usurpation  had  banished  600  nobles ;
lib.  xix.  p.  655.  Afterwards  that  tyrant,
in  concurrence  with  the  people,  killed
4000  nobles,  and  banished  6000;  id.
p.  647.  He  killed  4000  people  at  GELA  ;
id.  p.  741.  BY  AGATHOCLES'S  brother
8000  banished  from  SYRACUSE;  lib. xx.
p.  757.  The  inhabitants  of  -ZEoESTA,  to
the  number  of  40,000,  were  killed, man,
woman,  and  child ;  and  with  tortures,
for  the  sake  of  their  money ;  id.  p.  802.
All  the  relations,  to  wit,  father,  brother,
children,  grandfather,  of  his  LIBYAN
army,  killed;  id.  p.  803.  He  killed
7000  exiles  after  capitulation ;  id.  p.
816.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  AGATHO-
CLES  was  a  man  of  great  sense  and
courage,1  and  is  not  to  be  suspected  of
wanton  cruelty,  contrary  to  the  maxims
of  his  age.

*  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xviii.  c.  8.


1  [Theremainder  is  not  in  Editions  H
to  O. P  has  instead  of  it :  His  violent


tyranny,  therefore,  is  a  stronger  proof
of  the  measures  of  the  age.]


406  ESSAY  XI.

Even  when  affairs  came  not  to  such  extremities  (which
they  failed  not  to  do  almost  in  every  city  twice  or  thrice
every  century)  property  was  rendered  very  precarious  by  the
maxims  of  ancient  government.  XENOPHON,  in  the  Banquet
of  SOCEATES,  gives  us  a  natural  unaffected  description  of  the
tyranny  of  the  ATHENIAN  people.  'In  my  poverty/  says
CHARMIDES,  '  I  am  much  more  happy  than  I  ever  was  while
possessed  of  riches :  as  much  as  it  is  happier  to  be  in  security
than  in  terrors,  free  than  a  slave,  to  receive  than  to  pay  court,
to  be  trusted  than  suspected.  Formerly  I  was  obliged  to
caress  every  informer ;  some  imposition  was  continually  laid
upon  me ;  and  it  was  never  allowed  me  to  travel,  or  be  absent
from  the  city.  At  present,  when  I  am  poor  I  look  big,  and
threaten  others.  The  rich  are  afraid  of  me,  and  show  me
every  kind  of  civility  and  respect ;  and  I  am  become  a  kind
of  tyrant  in  the  city.' l

In  one  of  the  pleadings  of  LYSIAS,*  the  orator  very  coolly
speaks  of  it,  by  the  by,  as  a  maxim  of  the  ATHENIAN  people,
that,  whenever  they  wanted  money,  they  put  to  death  some
of  the  rich  citizens  as  well  as  strangers,  for  the  sake  of  the
forfeiture.  In  mentioning  this,  he  seems  not  to  have  any
intention  of  blaming  them ;  still  less  of  provoking  them,  who
were  his  audience  and  judges.

Whether  a  man  was  a  citizen  or  a  stranger  among  that
people,  it  seems  indeed  requisite,  either  that  he  should  im
poverish  himself,  or  that  the  people  would  impoverish  him,
and  perhaps  kill  him  into  the  bargain.  The  orator  last
mentioned  gives  a  pleasant  account  of  an  estate  laid  out  in
the  public  service5;  that  is,  above  the  third  of  it  in  raree-
shows  and  figured  dances.

1  Pag.  885.  ex  edit.  LKUNCIAV.  NIAN  fortune,  and  what  alone  would  be

2  Orat.  29.  in  NICOM.  185.  esteemed greatriches,  Orat.  21, 161.  Tis

3  In  order  to  recommend  his  client  to  true,  he  says,  the  law  did  not  oblige  him
*he  favour  of  the  people,  he  enumerates  absolutely  to  be  at  so  much  expence,  not
all  the  suras  he  had  expended. When  above  a  fourth. But  without  the  favour
X°/"77^s,  SOminas:  Upon  a  chorus  of  men  of  the  people,  no  body  was  so  much  as
20 minas  ; ds  irupptxtfras,  8 minas  ;  safe;  and  this  was  the  only  way  to  gain
ia>Spdffi.  xopirY&v,  50 minas ; KvK\nc<f  it. See  farther,  orat.  25.  de  pop.  statu.
xopy,  3  minas; Seven  times  trierarch,  In  another  place,  he  introduces  a  speaker,
where  he  spent  6  talents  :  Taxes,  once  who  says  that  he  had  spent  his  whole
30  minas,  another  time  40;  yv^vaa-tapx^f,  fortune, and  an  immense one,  eighty
12 minas; xwy^s TraiSiKijj x°PV>  15  talents,  for  the  people.  Orat. 26  deprob.
minas; Kufi-cpSois xwiyv*',  18 minas;  EVANDRI. The  pfroiKoi,  or  strangers,
iruppLXHTrais  ayfvfiois,  7  minas ;  rotripti  find,  says  he,  if  they  do  not  contribute
a^uAA.aytej>oy,  15  minas;  apxtOfwpos,  30  largely  enough to  the  people's  fancy,
minas : In the whole ten talents  38  that  they  have  reason  to  repent. Orat.
minas. An  immense  sum  for  an  ATHK-  31  contra  PHIL. You  may  see  with  what


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  407

I  need  not  insist  on  the  GREEK  tyrannies,  which  were  alto
gether  horrible.  Even  the  mixed  monarchies,  by  which  most
of  the  ancient  states  of  GREECE  were  governed,  before  the
introduction  of  republics,  were  very  unsettled.  Scarcely  any
city,  but  ATHENS,  says  ISOCRATES,  could  show  a  succession  of
kings  for  four  or  five  generations.1

Besides  many  other  obvious  reasons  for  the  instability  of
ancient  monarchies,  the  equal  division  of  property  among  the
brothers  in  private  families,  must,  by  a  necessary  consequence,
contribute  to  unsettle  and  disturb  the  state.  The  universal
preference  given  to  the  elder  by  modern  laws,  though  it  en-
creases  the  inequality  of  fortunes,  has,  however,  this  good
effect,  that  it  accustoms  men  to  the  same  idea  in  public  suc
cession,  and  cuts  off  all  claim  and  pretension  of  the  younger.

The  new  settled  colony  of  HERACLEA,  falling  immediately
into  faction,  applied  to  SPARTA,  who  sent  HERIPIDAS  with  full
authority  to  quiet  their  dissentions.  This  man,  not  provoked
by  any  opposition,  not  inflamed  by  party  rage,  knew  no  better
expedient  than  immediately  putting  to  death  about  500  of
the  citizens.2  A  strong  proof  how  deeply  rooted  these  violent
maxims  of  government  were  throughout  all  GREECE.

If  such  was  the  disposition  of  men's  minds  among  that
refined  people,  what  may  be  expected  in  the  commonwealths
of  ITALY,  AFRIC,  SPAIN,  and  GAUL,  which  were  denominated
barbarous  ?  Why  otherwise  did  the  GREEKS  so  much  value
themselves  on  their  humanity,  gentleness,  and  moderation,
above  all  other  nations  ?  This  reasoning  seems  very  natural.
But  unluckily  the  history  of  the  ROMAN  commonwealth,  in
its  earlier  times,  if  we  give  credit  to  the  received  accounts,
presents  an  opposite  conclusion.  No  blood  was  ever  shed
in  any  sedition  at  ROME,  till  the  murder  of  the  GRACCHI.
DIONYSIUS  HALiCARNASS^EUS,3  observing  the  singular  hu
manity  of  the  ROMAN  people  in  this  particular,  makes  use  of
it  as  an  argument  that  they  were  orginally  of  GRECIAN
extraction :  Whence  we  may  conclude,  that  the  factions  and
revolutions  in  the  barbarous  republics  were  usually  more
violent  than  even  those  of  GREECE  above-mentioned.

care  DEMOSTHENES  displays  his  expences  valued  themselves  on  having  the  most

of  this  nature,  when  he  pleads  for  him-  legal  and  regular  administration  of  any

self  de  corona ;  and  how  he  exaggerates  people  in  GREECE.

MIDIAS'S  stinginess  in  this  particular,  in  '  Panath.  258.

his  accusation  of  that  criminal.  All  this,  2  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xiv.  38.

by  the  by,  is  a  mark  of  a  very  iniquitous  3  Lib.  i.  89.

judicature : And  yet the ATHENIANS


rf08  ESSAY  XL

If  the  EOMANS  were  so  late  in  coming  to  blows,  they
made  ample  compensation,  after  they  had  once  entered  upon
the  bloody  scene  ;  and  APPIAN'S  history  of  their  civil  wars
contains  the  most  frightful  picture  of  massacres,  proscrip
tions,  and  forfeitures,  that  ever  was  presented  to  the
world.  What  pleases  most,  in  that  historian,  is  that  he
seems  to  feel  a  proper  resentment  of  these  barbarous  pro
ceedings  ;  and  talks  not  with  that  provoking  coolness  and
indifference,  which  custom  had  produced  in  many  of  the
GKEEX  historians.1

The  maxims  of  ancient  politics  contain,  in  general,  so
little  humanity  and  moderation,  that  it  seems  superfluous  to
give  any  particular  reason  for  the  acts  of  violence  committed
at  any  particular  period.  Yet  I  cannot  forbear  observing,
that  the  laws,  in  the  later  period  of  the  KOMAN  common
wealth,  were  so  absurdly  contrived,  that  they  obliged  the
heads  of  parties  to  have  recourse  to  these  extremities.  All
Capital  punishments  were  abolished :  However  criminal,  or,
what  is  more,  however  dangerous  any  citizen  might  be,  he
could  not  regularly  be  punished  otherwise  than  by  banish
ment  :  And  it  became  necessary,  in  the  revolutions  of  party,
to  draw  the  sword  of  private  vengeance ;  nor  was  it  easy,
when  laws  were  once  violated,  to  set  bounds  to  these  sangui
nary  proceedings.  Had  BRUTUS  himself  prevailed  over  the
triumvirate,  could  he,  in  common  prudence  have  allowed
OCTAVIUS  and  ANTHONY,  to  live,  and  have  contented  himself
with  banishing  them  to  .RHODES  or  MARSEILLES,  where
they  might  still  have  plotted  new  commotions  and  rebel
lions  ?  His  executing  C.  ANTONIUS,  brother  to  the  triumvir.,
shows  evidently  his  sense  of  the  matter.  Did  not  CICERO,

1  The  authorities  cited  above,  are  all  and  their  deputies. The  plots  in  that

historians, orators, and philosophers,  kingdom  are  usually  the  workmanship

whose  testimony  is  unquestioned. 'Tis  of  those  persons, '$C.GVU,I\ER'S  travels.

dangerous  to  rely  upon  writers  who  deal  Such  a  representation  might  suit  the

in  ridicule  and  satyr. What  will  pos-  government  of  ATHENS;  but  not  that  of

terity,  for  instance,  infer  from  this  pas-  ENGLAND,  which  is  a  prodigy  even  in

sage  of  Dr.  SWIFT  ? 'I  told  him,  that  modern  times,  for  humanity,  justice,  and

in  the  kingdom  of  TEIBNIA  (BRITAIN)  liberty. Yet  the  Doctor's  satyr, tho'

by  the  natives  called  LANGDON  (LONDON)  carried  to  extremes,  as  is  usual  with

where  I  had  sojourned  some  time  in  my  him,  even  bey  on  d  other  satyrical  writers,

travels,  the  bulk  of  the  people  consist,  did  not  altogether  want  an  object The

in a manner, wholly of  discoverers,  Bishop of  ROCHESTER, who  was his

witnesses,  informers,  accusers,  prosecu-  friend,  and  of  the  same  party,  had  been

tors,  evidences,  swearers,  together  with  banished  a  little  before  by  a  bill  of  at-

their  several  subservient  and  subaltern  tainder,  with  great  justice,  but  without

instruments,  all  under  the  colours,  the  such  a  proof  as  was  legal,  or  according

conduct,  and  pay  of  ministers  of  state  to  the  strict,  forms  of  common  law.


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  400

with  the  approbation  of  all  the  wise  and  virtuous  of  EOME,
arbitrarily  put  to  death  CATILINE'S  accomplices,  contrary  to
law,  and  without  any  trial  or  form  of  process  ?  And  if  he
moderated  his  executions,  did  it  not  proceed,  either  from  the
clemency  of  his  temper,  or  the  conjunctures  of  the  times  ?  A
wretched  security  in  a  government  which  pretends  to  laws
and  liberty !

Thus,  one  extreme  produces  another.  In  the  same  manner
as  excessive  severity  in  the  laws  is  apt  to  beget  great  relaxa
tion  in  their  execution ;  so  their  excessive  lenity  naturally
produces  cruelty  and  barbarity.  It  is  dangerous  to  force  us,
in  any  case,  to  pass  their  sacred  boundaries.

One  general  cause  of  the  disorders,  so  frequent  in  all
ancient  governments,  seems  to  have  consisted  in  the  great
difficulty  of  establishing  any  Aristocracy  in  those  ages,  and  the
perpetual  discontents  and  seditions  of  the  people,  whenever
even  the  meanest  and  most  beggarly  were  excluded  from  the
legislature  and  from  public  offices.  The  very  quality  of
freemen  gave  such  a  rank,  being  opposed  to  that  of  slave,
that  it  seemed  to  entitle  the  possessor  to  every  power  and
privilege  of  the  commonwealth.  SOLON'S  1  laws  excluded
no  freeman  from  votes  or  elections,  but  confined  some  magis
tracies  to  a  particular  censvis;  yet  were  the  people  never
satisfied  till  those  laws  were  repealed.  By  the  treaty  with
ANTiPATEE,2  no  ATHENIAN  was  allowed  a  vote  whose  census
was  less  than  2000  drachmas  (about  601.  Sterling).  And
though  such  a  government  would  to  us  appear  sufficiently
democratical,  it  was  so  disagreeable  to  that  people,  that
above  two-thirds  of  them  immediately  left  their  country.3
CASSANDEE  reduced  that  census  to  the  half;4  yet  still  the
government  was  considered  as  an  oligarchical  tyranny,  and
the  effect  of  foreign  violence.

SERVIUS  TULLIUS'S  6  laws  seem  equal  and  reasonable,  by
fixing  the  power  in  proportion  to  the  property  :  Yet  the
EOMAN  people  could  never  be  brought  quietly  to  submit  to
them.

In  those  days  there  was  no  medium  between  a  severe,
jealous  Aristocracy,  ruling  over  discontented  subjects ;  and  a
turbulent,  factious,  tyrannical  Democracy.6  At  present,

1  PLUTARCHTJS  in  vita  SOLON,  18.  5  TIT.  Liv.  lib.  i.  cap.  43.

2  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xviii.  18.  6  [The  remainder  of  this  paragraph
*  Id.  ibid. was  added  in  Edition  E.]

4  Id.  ibid.  7-1.


410  ESSAY  XI.

there  is  not  one  republic  in  EUROPE,  from  one  extremity  of
it  to  the  other,  that  is  not  remarkable  for  justice,  lenity,  and
stability,  equal  to,  or  even  beyond  MARSEILLES,  EHODES,  or
the  most  celebrated  in  antiquity.  Almost  all  of  them  are
well- tempered  Aristocracies.

But  thirdly,  there  are  many  other  circumstances,  in  which
ancient  nations  seem  inferior  to  the  modern,  both  for  the
happiness  and  encrease  of  mankind.  Trade,  manufactures,
industry,  were  no  where,  in  former  ages,  so  flourishing  as
they  are  at  present  in  EUROPE.  The  only  garb  of  the  an
cients,  both  for  males  and  females,  seems  to  have  been  a
kind  of  flannel,  which  they  wore  commonly  white  or  grey,
and  which  they  scoured  as  often  as  it  became  dirty.  TYRE,
which  carried  on,  after  CARTHAGE,  the  greatest  commerce  of
any  city  in  the  MEDITERRANEAN,  before  it  was  destroyed  by
ALEXANDER,  was  no  mighty  city,  if  we  credit  ARRIAN'S  ac
count  of  its  inhabitants.1  ATHENS  is  commonly  supposed  to
have  been  a  trading  city :  But  it  was  as  populous  before  the
MEDIAN  war  as  at  any  time  after  it,  according  to  HERODOTUS  ;2
yet  its  commerce,  at  that  time,  was  so  inconsiderable,  that,
as  the  same  historian  observes,3  even  the  neighbouring  coasts
of  ASIA  were  as  little  frequented  by  the  GREEK  as  the
pillars  of  HERCULES  :  For  beyond  these  he  conceived  nothing.

Great  interest  of  money,  and  great  profits  of  trade,  are
an  infallible  indication,  that  industry  and  commerce  are  but
in  their  infancy.  We  read  in  LYSIAS4  of  WO  per  cent,  profit
made  on  a  cargo  of  two  talents,  sent  to  110  greater  distance
than  from  ATHENS  to  the  ADRIATIC  :  Nor  is  this  mentioned
as  an  instance  of  extraordinary  profit.  ANTIDORUS,  says
DEMOSTHENES,*  paid  three  talents  and  a  half  for  a  house
which  he  let  at  a  talent  a  year :  And  the  orator  blames  his
own  tutors  for  not  employing  his  money  to  like  advantage.
My  fortune,  says  he,  in  eleven  years  minority,  ought  to  have
been  tripled.  The  value  of  20  of  the  slaves  left  by  his  father,
he  computes  at  40  minas,  and  the  yearly  profit  of  their  labour
at  12.6  The  most  moderate  interest  at  ATHENS,  (for  there

'Lib.ii.  24.  There  were  8,000killed  du-  THAGE.

ringthesiege;  and  thecaptives amounted  2  Lib.  v.  97,  he  makes  the  number  of

to  30.000. DIODORTJS  SICTJLUS,  lib.  xvii.  the  citizens  amount  to  30,000.

46,  says  only  13, 000:  But  he  accounts  for  3  Ib.  viii.  132.

this  small  number,  by  saying  that  the  *  Orat.  32,  908  advers.  DIOGIT.

TYBIANS  had  sent  away  before-hand  part  5  Contra  APHOB.  p.  25.  ex  edit.  ALDI.

of  their  wives and children  to  CAR-  6  Id.  p.  19.


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  411

was  higher1  often  paid)  was  12  per  cent.,*  and  that  paid
monthly.  Not  to  insist  upon  the  high  interest,  to  which  the
vast  sums  distributed  in  elections  had  raised  money 3  at
ROME,  we  find,  that  VERRES,  before  that  factious  period,
stated  24  per  cent,  for  money  which  he  left  in  the  hands
of  the  publicans  :  And  though  CICERO  exclaims  against  this
article,  it  is  not  on  account  of  the  extravagant  usury ;  but
because  it  had  never  been  customary  to  state  any  interest  on
such  occasions.4  Interest,  indeed,  sunk  at  Rome,  after  the
settlement  of  the  empire :  But  it  never  remained  any  con
siderable  time  so  low,  as  in  the  commercial  states  of  modern
times.5

Among  the  other  inconveniencies,  which  the  ATHENIANS
felt  from  the  fortifying  of  DECELIA  by  the  LACEDEMONIANS,
it  is  represented  by  TnucYDiDES,6  as  one  of  the  most  con
siderable,  that  they  could  not  bring  over  their  corn  from
EUBEA  by  land,  passing  by  OROPUS  ;  but  were  obliged  to
embark  it,  and  to  sail  round  the  promontory  of  SUNIUM.  A
surprising  instance  of  the  imperfection  of  ancient  naviga
tion  !  For  the  water-carriage  is  not  here  above  double  the
land.

I  do  not  remember  a  passage  in  any  ancient  author,  where
the  growth  of  a  city  is  ascribed  to  the  establishment  of  a
manufacture.  The  commerce,  which  is  said  to  nourish,  is
chiefly  the  exchange  of  those  commodities,  for  which  dif
ferent  soils  and  climates  were  suited.  The  sale  of  wine  and
oil  into  AFRICA,  acccording  to  DIODORUS  SICULUS/  was  the
foundation  of  the  riches  of  AGRIGENTUM.  The  situation  of
the  city  of  SYBARIS,  according  to  the  same  author,8  was  the
cause  of  its  immense  populousness ;  being  built  near  the  two
rivers  CRATHYS  and  SYBARIS.  But  these  two  rivers,  we  may
observe,  are  not  navigable ;  and  could  only  produce  some
fertile  vallies,  for  agriculture  and  tillage ;  an  advantage  so
inconsiderable,  that  a  modern  writer  would  scarcely  have
taken  notice  of  it.

The  barbarity  of  the  ancient  tyrants,  together  with  the
extreme  love  of  liberty,  which  animated  those  ages,  must
have  banished  every  merchant  and  manufacturer,  and  have

1  Id.  ibid.  s  See  Essay  IV.

2  Id. ibid, and ^ESCHINES contra  *  Lib.  vii.  28.
CTKSIPH.  104.  '  Lib.  xiii.  81.

3  Ejrist.  ad  ATTIC,  lib.  iv.  ppiat.  15.  8  Lib.  xii.  9.
*  Contra  VERB.  orat.  3,  71.


412  ESSAY  XL

quite  depopulated  the  state,  had  it  subsisted  upon  industry
and  commerce.  While  the  cruel  and  suspicious  DIONYSIUS
was  carrying  on  his  butcheries,  who,  that  was  not  detained
by  his  landed  property,  and  could  have  carried  with  him  any
art  or  skill  to  procure  a  subsistence  in  other  countries,  would
have  remained  exposed  to  such  implacable  barbarity  ?  The
persecutions  of  PHILIP  II.  and  LEWIS  XIV.  filled  all  EUROPE
with  the  manufacturers  of  FLANDERS  and  of  FRRACE.

I  grant,  that  agriculture  is  the  species  of  industry  chiefly
requisite  to  the  subsistence  of  multitudes ;  and  it  is  possible,
that  this  industry  may  flourish,  even  where  manufactures
and  other  arts  are  unknown  and  neglected.  SWISSERLAND
is  at  present  a  remarkable  instance  where,  we  find,  at  once,
the  most  skilful  husbandmen,  and  the  most  bungling  trades
men,  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  EUROPE.  That  agriculture
flourished  in  GREECE  and  ITALY,  at  least  in  some  parts  of  them,
and  at  some  periods,  we  have  reason  to  presume ;  And
whether  the  mechanical  arts  had  reached  the  same  degree
of  perfection,  may  not  be  esteemed  so  material ;  especially,
if  we  consider  the  great  equality  of  riches  in  the  ancient
republics,  where  each  family  was  obliged  to  cultivate,  with
the  greatest  care  and  industry,  its  own  little  field,  in  order
to  its  subsistence.

But  is  it  just  reasoning,  because  agriculture  may,  in
some  instances,  flourish  without  trade  or  manufactures,  to
conclude,  that,  in  any  great  extent  of  country,  and  for  any
great  tract  of  time,  it  would  subsist  alone  ?  The  most  natural
way,  surely,  of  encouraging  husbandry,  is,  first,  to  excite
other  kinds  of  industry,  and  thereby  afford  the  labourer  a
ready  market  for  his  commodities,  and  a  return  of  such
goods  as  may  contribute  to  his  pleasure  and  enjoyment.
This  method  is  infallible  and  universal ;  and,  as  it  prevails
more  in  modern  government  than  in  the  ancient,  it  affords  a
presumption  of  the  superior  populousness  of  the  former.

Every  man,  says  XENOPHON,  '  may  be  a  farmer  :  No  art  or
skill  is  requisite  :  All  consists  in  industry,  and  in  attention
to  the  execution.  A  strong  proof,  as  COLUMELLA  hints,
that  agriculture  was  but  little  known  in  the  age  of
XENOPHON.

All  our  later  improvements  and  refinements,  have  they
done  nothing  towards  the  easy  subsistence  of  men,  and

1  Oecon.15,  10.


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  413

consequently  towards  their  propagation  and  encrease  ?  Our
superior  skill  in  mechanics ;  the  discovery  of  new  worlds,  by
which  commerce  has  been  so  much  enlarged  ;  the  establish
ment  of  posts  ;  and  the  use  of  bills  of  exchange  :  These  seem
all  extremely  useful  to  the  encouragement  of  art,  industry,
and  populousness.  Were  we  to  strike  off  these,  what  a  check
should  we  give  to  every  kind  of  business  and  labour,  and
what  multitudes  of  families  would  immediately  perish  from
want  and  hunger?  And  it  seems  not  probable,  that  we
could  supply  the  place  of  these  new  inventions  by  any  other
regulation  or  institution.

Have  we  reason  to  think,  that  the  police  of  ancient  states
was  any  wise  comparable  to  that  of  modern,  or  that  men  had
then  equal  security,  either  at  home,  or  in  their  journies  by
land  or  water  ?  I  question  not,  but  every  impartial  exami
ner  would  give  us  the  preference  in  this  particular.1

Thus,  upon  comparing  the  whole,  it  seems  impossible  to
assign  any  just  reason,  why  the  world  should  have  been
more  populous  in  ancient  than  in  modern  times.  The  equality
of  property  among  the  ancients,  liberty,  and  the  small
divisions  of  their  states,  were  indeed  circumstances  favour
able  to  the  propagation  of  mankind  :  But  their  wars  were
more  bloody  and  destructive,  their  governments  more  factions
and  unsettled,  commerce  and  manufactures  more  feeble  and
languishing,  and  the  general  police  more  loose  and  irregular.
These  latter  disadvantages  seem  to  form  a  sufficient  counter
balance  to  the  former  advantages;  and  rather  favour  the
opposite  opinion  to  that  which  commonly  prevails  with
regard  to  this  subject.

But  there  is  no  reasoning,  it  may  be  said,  against  matter  of
fact.  If  it  appear  that  the  world  was  then  more  populous  than
at  present,  we  may  be  assured  that  our  conjectures  are  false,
and  that  we  have  overlooked  some  material  circumstance  in
the  comparison.  This  I  readily  own  :  All  our  preceding
reasonings,  I  acknowledge  to  be  mere  trifling,  or,  at  least,
small  skirmishes  and  frivolous  rencounters,  which  decide
nothing.  But  unluckily  the  main  combat,  where  we  com
pare  facts,  cannot  be  rendered  much  more  decisive.  The
facts,  delivered  by  ancient  authors,  are  either  so  uncertain  or
so  imperfect  as  to  afford  us  nothing  positive  in  this  matter.
How  indeed  could  it  be  otherwise  P  The  very  facts,  which

1  Sec  Part  I.  Essay  XI.


414  ESSAY XL

we  must  oppose  to  them,  in  computing  the  populousness  of
modern  states,  are  far  from  being  either  certain  or  complete.
Many  grounds  of  calculation  proceeded  on  by  celebrated
writers,  are  little  better  than  those  of  the  Emperor  HELIO-
GABALUS,  who  formed  an  estimate  of  the  immense  greatness
of  ROME,  from  ten  thousand  pound  weight  of  cobwebs  which
had  been  found  in  that  city.1

It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  all  kinds  of  numbers  are  uncer
tain  in  ancient  manuscripts,  and  have  been  subject  to  much
greater  corruptions  than  any  other  part  of  the  text;  and
that  for  an  obvious  reason.  Any  alteration,  in  other  places,
commonly  affects  the  sense  or  grammar,  and  is  more  readily
perceived  by  the  reader  and  transcriber.

Few  enumerations  of  inhabitants  have  been  made  of  any
tract  of  country  by  any  ancient  author  of  good  authority,  so
as  to  afford  us  a  large  enough  view  for  comparison.

It  is  probable,  that  there  was  formerly  a  good  foundation
for  the  number  of  citizens  assigned  to  any  free  city ;  because
they  entered  for  a  share  in  the  government,  and  there  were
exact  registers  kept  of  them.  But  as  the  number  of  slaves
is  seldom  mentioned,  this  leaves  us  in  as  great  uncertainty
as  ever,  with  regard  to  the  populousness  even  of  single  cities.

The  first  page  of  THUCYDIDES  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  com
mencement  of  real  history.  All  preceding  narrations  are  so
intermixed  with  fable,  that  philosophers  ought  to  abandon
them,  in  a  great  measure,  to  the  embellishment  of  poets  and
orators.1

With  regard  to  remote  times,  the  numbers  of  people
assigned  are  often  ridiculous,  and  lose  all  credit  and  autho
rity.  The  free  citizens  of  SYBAKIS,  able  to  bear  arms,  and
actually  drawn  out  in  battle,  were  300,000.  They  encoun
tered  at  SIAGRA  with  100,000  citizens  of  CEOTONA,  another
GREEK  city  contiguous  to  them ;  and  were  defeated.  This


1  JEui  LAMPEID.  in  vita  HELIOGAB.  printing,  has  obliged  modern  historians

cap.  26.  to  be  more  careful  in  avoiding  contra-

"  In  general,  there  is  more  candour  and  dictions  and  incongruities.  DIODORUS

sincerity  in  ancient  historians,  but  less  Sicurus  is  a  good  writer,  but  it  is  with

exactness  and  care,  than  in  the  moderns.  pain  I  see  his  narration  contradict,  in  so

Our  speculative  factions,  especially  those  many  particulars,  the  two  most  authentic

of  religion,  throw  such  an  illusion  over  pieces  of  all  GREEK  history,  to  wit,  XENO-

our  minds,  that  men  seem  to  regard  im-  FHOX'S  expedition,  and  DEMOSTHENES' s

partiality  to  their  adversaries  and  to  orations.  PLUTARCH  and  APPIAN  seem

heretics,  as  a  vice  or  weakness :  But  the  scarce  ever  to  have  read  CICERO'S

commonness  of  books,  by  means  of  epistles.


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  415

is  DIODORUS  SICULUS'S  '  account;  and  is  very  seriously
insisted  on  by  that  historian.2  STRABO  also  mentions  the
same  number  of  SYBARITES.

DIODORUS  SicuLUS,3  enumerating  the  inhabitants  of  AGRI-
GENTUM,  when  it  was  destroyed  by  the  CARTHAGINIANS,  says,
that  they  amounted  to  20,000  citizens,  '200,000  strangers,
besides  slaves,  who,  in  so  opulent  a  city  as  he  represents  it,
would  probably  be,  at  least,  as  numerous.  We  must  remark,
that  the  women  and  the  children  are  not  included;  and  that,
therefore,  upon  the  whole,  this  city  must  have  contained
near  two  millions  of  inhabitants.4  And  what  was  the  reason
of  so  immense  an  encrease  !  They  were  industrious  in  culti
vating  the  neighbouring  fields,  not  exceeding  a  small
ENGLISH  county ;  and  they  traded  with  their  wine  and  oil
to  AFRICA,  which,  at  that  time,  produced  none  of  these
commodities.

PTOLEMY,  says  THEOCRITUS,*  commands  33,339  cities.  I
suppose  the  singularity  of  the  number  was  the  reason  of
assigning  it.  DIODORUS  SICULUS  6  assigns  three  millions  of
inhabitants  to  ^EGYPT,  a  small  number  :  But  then  he  makes
the  number  of  cities  amount  to  18,000  :  An  evident  contra
diction.

He  says,7  the  people  were  formerly  seven  millions.  Thus
remote  times  are  always  most  envied  and  admired.

That  XERXES'S  army  was  extremely  numerous,  I  can
readily  believe ;  both  from  the  great  extent  of  his  empire,
and  from  the  practice  among  the  eastern  nations,  of  encum
bering  their  camp  with  a  superfluous  multitude  :  But  will
any  rational  man  cite  HERODOTUS'S  wonderful  narrations  as
an  authority  ?  There  is  something  very  rational,  I  own,  in
LYSIAS'S  8  argument  upon  this  subject.  Had  not  XERXES'S
army  been  incredibly  numerous,  says  he,  he  had  never  made
a  bridge  over  the  HELLESPONT  :  It  had  been  much  easier  to
have  transported  his  men  over  so  short  a  passage,  with  the
numerous  shipping  of  which  he  was  master.

POLYBIUS  9  says,  that  the  EOMANS,  between  the  first  and
second  PUNIC  wars,  being  threatened  with  an  invasion  from

1  Lib.xii.  9.  5  Idyll.  17.

2  Lib.  vi.  26.  6  Lib.  i.  18.

3  Lib.  xiii.  90.  '  Id.  ibid.

4  DIOGENES  LAERTIUS  (in  vita  EMPK-  8  Orat.  funfbris,  193.
noci.is)  says,  that  AGRIGF.NTUM  contained  "  Lib.  ii.  24.

only  800,000  inhabitants.


41G  ESSAY XL

the  GAULS,  mustered  all  their  own  forces,  and  those  of  their
allies,  and  found  them  amount  to  seven  hundred  thousand
men  able  to  bear  arms  :  A  great  number  surely,  and  which,
when  joined  to  the  slaves,  is  probably  l  not  less,  if  not  rather
more,  than  that  extent  of  country  affords  at  present.2  The
enumeration  too  seems  to  have  been  made  with  some  exact
ness  ;  and  POLYBIUS  gives  us  the  detail  of  the  particulars.
But  might  not  the  number  be  magnified,  in  order  to  encou
rage  the  people  ?

DIODOEUS  SICULUS  3  makes  the  same  enumeration  amount
to  near  a  million.  These  variations  are  suspicious.  He
plainly  too  supposes,  that  ITALY  in  his  time  was  not  so
populous  :  Another  suspicious  circumstance.  For  who  can
believe,  that  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  diminished  from
the  time  of  the  first  PUNIC  war  to  that  of  the  triumvirates  ?

JULIUS  (LESAR,  according  to  APPIAN,*  encountered  four
millions  of  GAULS,  killed  one  million,  and  made  another
million  prisoners.5  Supposing  the  number  of  the  enemy's
army  and  that  of  the  slain  could  be  exactly  assigned,  which
never  is  possible ;  how  could  it  be  known  how  often  the  same
man  returned  into  the  armies,  or  how  distinguish  the  new
from  the  old  levied  soldiers  ?  No  attention  ought  ever  to  be
given  to  such  loose,  exaggerated  calculations ;  especially
where  the  author  does  not  tell  us  the  mediums,  upon  which
the  calculations  were  founded.

PATEKCULUS  6  makes  the  number  of  GAULS  killed  by  CAESAR
amount  only  to  400,000  :  A  more  probable  account,  and
more  easily  reconciled  to  the  history  of  these  wars  given  by
that  conqueror  himself  in  his  Commentaries.7  8The  most
bloody  of  his  battles  were  fought  against  the  HELVETII  and
the  GERMANS.

1  [Not  less,  if  not rather — added  6  Lib.  ii.  cap.  47.

in  Edition  M.]  '  PLINY,  lib.  vii.  cap.  25,  says,  that

2  The country that supplied this  CAESAR  used  to  boast,  that  there  had
number,  was  not  above  a  third  of  ITALY,  fallen  in  battle  against  him  one  million
viz.  the  Pope's  dominions,  TUSCANY,  and  one  hundred  and  ninety-two  thousand
a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  NAPLES  :  But  men,  besides  those  who  perished  in  the
perhaps  in  those  early  times  there  were  civil  wars.  It  is  not  probable,  that  that
very  few  slaves,  except  in  ROME,  or  the  conqueror  could  ever  pretend  to  be  so
great  cities. [The  last  clause  was  added  exact  in  his  computation.  But  allowing
in  Edition  K.]  the  fact,  it  is  likely,  that  the  HELVETII,

3  Lib.  ii.  5.  GERMANS,  andBmTONS,  whom  he  slaugh-

4  CKLTICA,  c.  2.  tered,  would  amount  to  near  a  half  of

5  PLUTARCH  (in  vita  CJES.  15)  makes  the  number. [This  note  was  added  in
the number  that CJBSAR  fought  with  Edition  R.]

amount  to  three  millions  ;  JULIAN  (in  *  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edi-

to  two.  tion  R.]


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  417

One  would  imagine,  that  every  circumstance  of  the  life
and  actions  of  DIONYSIUS  the  elder  might  be  regarded  as
authentic, and  free  from all fabulous  exaggeration  ; both
because  he  lived  at  a  time  when  letters  flourished  most  in
GREECE,  and  because  his  chief  historian  was  PHILISTUS,  a
man  allowed  to  be  of  great  genius,  and  who  was  a  courtier
and minister  of  that  prince. But  can  we  admit,  that  he
had  a  standing  army  of  100,000 foot,  10,000  horse,  and  a
fleet  of  400  gallies?1 These,  we  may  observe,  were  mer
cenary  forces,  and subsisted  upon  pay,  like  our  armies  in
EUROPE. For  the  citizens were all disarmed;  and when
DION  afterwards  invaded SICILY,  and  called  on  his  country
men  to  vindicate  their  liberty,  he  was  obliged  to  brino-  arms
along  with  him,  which he distributed among those  who
joined  him.2 In  a  state  where  agriculture  alone  flourishes,
there  may  be  many  inhabitants ;  and  if  these  be  all  armed
and  disciplined,  a  great  force  may  be  called  out  upon  occa
sion  : But  great  bodies  of  mercenary  troops  can  never  be
maintained,  without  either  great  trade  and  numerous  manu
factures,  or  extensive dominions. The United Provinces
never  were  masters  of  such  a  force  by  sea  and  land,  as  that
which  is  said  to  belong  to  DIONYSIUS  ;  yet  they  possess  as
large  a  territory,  perfectly  well  cultivated,  and  have  much
more  resources  from  their  commerce  and  industry. DIODORUS
SICULUS  allows,  that,  even  in  his  time,  the  army  of  DIONY
SIUS appeared incredible; that is,  as I  interpret  it,  was
entirely  a  fiction,  and  the  opinion  arose  from  the  exaggerated
flattery  of  the  courtiers,  and  perhaps  from  the  vanity  and
policy  of  the  tyrant  himself.3

DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  ii.  5.  perience.  I  shall  give  an  instance  with
I  LCTAECH  in  vita  DIONYS,  25.  regard  to  modern  history.  Sir  William
3  [Editions  H  to  M  proceed  as  fol-  Temple  tells  us,  in  his  memoirs,  that
lows  :  The  critical  art  may  very  justly  having  a  free  conversation  with  Charles
be  suspected  of  temerity,  when  it  pre-  the  II.,  he  took  the  opportunity  of  re-
tends  to  correct  or  dispute  the  plain  presenting  to  that  monarch  the  impossi-
testimony  of  ancient  historians  by  any  bility  of  introducing  into  this  island
probable  or  analogical  reasonings  :  Yet  the  religion  and  government  of  France,
the  licence  of  authors  upon  all  subjects,  chiefly  on  account  of  the  great  force
particularly  with  regard  to  numbers,  is  requisite  to  subdue  the  spirit  and  liberty
so  great,  that  we  ought  still  to  retain  a  of  so  brave  a  people.  '  The  Komans,'
kind  of  doubt  or  reserve,  whenever  the  says  he,  '  were  forced  to  keep  up  twelve
facts  advanced  depart  in  the  least  from  legions  for  that  purpose  '  (a  great  ab-
the  common  bounds  of  nature  and  ex-  surdity),  '  '  and  Cromwell  left" an  army

1  Strabo,  lib.  iv.  200,  says,  that  one  up  somewhat  a  greater  force  ^n  this
legion  would  be  sufficient,  with  a  few  island,  which  they  never  took  the  pains
cavalry  ;  but  the  Komans  commonly  kept  entirely  to  subdue.

VOL. III.  E  E


418  ESSAX  XL

It  is  a  usual  fallacy,  to  consider  all  the  ages  of  antiquity
as  one  period,  and  to  compute  the  numbers  contained  in  the
great  cities  mentioned  by  ancient  authors,  as  if  these  cities
had  been  all  cotemporary.  The  GREEK  colonies  nourished
extremely  in  SICILY  during  the  age  of  ALEXANDER  :  But  in
AUGUSTUS'S  time  they  were  so  decayed,  that  almost  all  the
produce  of  that  fertile  island  was  consumed  in  ITALY.1

Let  us  now  examine  the  numbers  of  inhabitants  assigned
to  particular  cities  in  antiquity ;  and  omitting  the  numbers
of  NINEVEH,  BABYLON,  and  the  EGYPTIAN  THEBES,  let  us
confine  ourselves  to  the  sphere  of  real  history,  to  the
GRECIAN  and  ROMAN  states.  I  must  own,  the  more  I  con
sider  this  subject,  the  more  am  I  inclined  to  scepticism,  with
regard  to  the  great  populousness  ascribed  to  ancient  times.

ATHENS  is  said  by  PLATO2  to  be  a  very  great  city ;  and
it  was  surely  the  greatest  of  all  the  GREEK3  cities,  except
SYRACUSE,  which  was  nearly  about  the  same  size  in  THUCY-
DiDEs's4  time,  and  afterwards  encreased  beyond  it.  For
CiCERO5  mentions  it  as  the  greatest  of  all  the  GREEK  cities
in  his  time ;  not  comprehending,  I  suppose,  either  ANTIOCH
or  ALEXANDRIA  under  that  denomination.  ATHEN^EUS6  says,

of near eighty  thousand  men.' Must  2  Apolog.  SOCR.  29  D.

not  this  last  be  regarded  as  unquestioned  3  AUGOS  seems  also  to  have  heen  a

l>y  future  critics,  when  they  find  it  as-  great  city  ;  for  LYCIAS  contents  himself

sorted  by  a  wise  and  learned  minister  with saying that it did not exceed

of  state  cotemporary  to  the  fact,  and  ATHKNS.  Orat.  34,  922.

who  addressed  his  discourse,  upon  an  4  Lib. vi. See also PLUTARCH in

ungrateful  subject,  to  a  great  monarch  vita  NICI.B,  1 7-

who  was  also cotemporary, and who  5 Orat.  contra  VERREM,  lib.  iv.  cap.  52.

himself  broke  those  very  forces  about  STRABO,  lib.  vi.  270,  says,  it  was  t  wenty-

fourteen years before? Yet, by the  two  miles  in  compass. But  then  we  are

most  undoubted  authority,  we  may  in-  to  consider,  that  it  contained  two  har-

sist,  that Cromwell's army,  when he  bours  within  it;  one of  which  was  a

died,  did  not  amount  to  half  the  num-  very  large  one,  and  might  be  regarded

ber  here  mentioned.1]  as  a  kind  of  bay.

1  STRABO,  lib.  vi.  273.  "  Lib.  vi.  cap.  20.


1  It  appears  that  Cromwell's  parlia-  foot  and  10,000  horse  are  fixed  by
ment,  in  1656,  settled  but  1,300.000  Cromwell  himself,  and  afterwards  con-
pounds  a  year  on  him  for  the  constant  firmed  by  the  parliament,  as  the  regular
charges  of  government  in  all  the  three  standing  army  of  the  commonwealth,
kingdoms.  See  Scobel,  chap.  31.  This  That  number,  indeed,  seems  not  to  have
was  to  supply  the  fleet,  army,  and  civil  been  much  exceeded  during  the  whole
list.  It  appears  from  Whitelocke,  that  time  of  the  protectorship.  See  farther
in  the  year  1649,  the  sum  of  80,000  Thurlo,  Vol.  II.  pp.  413,  499,  568.  We
pounds  a  month  was  the  estimate  for  may  there  see,  that  though  the  Protector
40.000  men.  We  must  conclude,  there-  had  more  considerable  armies  in  Ireland
fore,  that  Cromwell  had  much  less  than  and  Scotland,  he  had  not  sometimes
that  number  upon  pay  in  1656.  In  the  more  than  4,000  or  5,000  men  in  Eng-
very  instrument  of  government,  20,000  land.


POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS.  419

that,  by  the  enumeration  of  DEMETRIUS  PHALEREUS,  there
were  in  ATHENS  21,000  citizens,  10,000  strangers,  and
400,000  slaves.  This  number  is  much  insisted  on  by  those
whose  opinion  I  call  in  question,  and  is  esteemed  a  funda
mental  fact  to  their  purpose  :  But,  in  my  opinion,  there  is
no  point  of  criticism  more  certain,  than  that  ATHEN^EUS  and
CTESICLES,  whom  he  quotes,  are  here  mistaken,  and  that
the  number  of  slaves  is,  at  least,  augmented  by  a  whole
cypher,  and  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  more  than  40,000.

First,  When  the  number  of  citizens  is  said  to  be  21,000
by  ATHEisLEUS,1  men  of  full  age  are  only  understood.  For,
(1.)  HERODOTUS  says,2  that  ARISTAGORAS,  ambassador  from
the  IONIANS,  found  it  harder  to  deceive  one  SPARTAN  than
30,000  ATHENIANS  ;  meaning,  in  a  loose  way,  the  whole
state,  supposed  to  be  met  in  one  popular  assembly,  excluding
the  women  and  children.  (2.)  TnucYDiDES3  says,  that,
making  allowance  for  all  the  absentees  in  the  fleet,  army,
garrisons,  and  for  people  employed  in  their  private  affairs,
the  ATHENIAN  assembly  never  rose  to  five  thousand.  (3.)
The  forces,  enumerated  by  the  same  historian,4  being  all
citizens,  and  amounting  to  13,000  heavy-armed  infantry,
prove  the  same  method  of  calculation  ;  as  also  the  whole
tenor  of  the  GREEK  historians,  who  always  understand  men
of  full  age  when  they  assign  the  number  of  citizens  in  any
republic.  Now,  these  being  but  the  fourth  of  the  inhabitants,
the  free  ATHENIANS  were  by  this  account  84,000 ;  the
strangers  40,000 ;  and  the  slaves,  calculating  by  the  smaller
number,  and  allowing  that  they  married  and  propagated  at
the  same  rate  with  freemen,  were  160,000  ;  and  the  whole
of  the  inhabitants  284,000  :  A  number  surely  large  enough.
The  other  number,  1,720,000,  makes  ATHENS  larger  than
LONDON  and  PARIS  united.

Secondly,  There  were  but  10,000  houses  in  ATHENS.*
Thirdly,  Though  the  extent  of  the  walls,  as  given  us  by
TnucTDiDES,6  be  great,  (to  wit,  eighteen  miles,  beside  the
sea-coast) :  Yet  XENOPHON7  says,  there  was  much  waste
ground  within  the  walls.  They  seem  indeed  to  have  joined
four  distinct  and  separate  cities.8

1  DEMOSTHENES  assigns  20,000  ;  con- count  perfectly  agrees,  lib.  xii.  40.
tra  ARISTOG,  785. ,  5  XENOPHON.  Mem.  lib.  iii.  6,  14.

-  Lib.  v.  99.  6  Lib.  ii.  13.

*  Lib.  viii.72.  7  De  ratione  red.  2,  6.

4  Lib.  ii.  13. DIODORUS  SICVLUS'S  ac-  s  We are to observe, that when

E K 2


420  ESSAY  XI.

Fourthly,  No  insurrection  of  the  slaves,  or  suspicion  of
insurrection,  is  ever  mentioned  by  historians ;  except  one
3ommotion  of  the  miners.1

Fifthly,  The  treatment  of  slaves  by  the  ATHENIANS  is  said
by  XENOPHON,*  and  DEMOSTHENES,S  and  PLAUTUS,*  to  have
been  extremely  gentle  and  indulgent :  Which  could  never
have  been  the  case,  had  the  disproportion  been  twenty  to
one.  The  disproportion  is  not  so  great  in  any  of  our  colo
nies  ;  yet  are  we  obliged  to  exercise  a  rigorous  military
government  over  the  negroes.

Sixthly,  No  man  is  ever  esteemed  rich  for  possessing  what
may  be  reckoned  an  equal  distribution  of  property  in  any
country,  or  even  triple  or  quadruple  that  wealth.  Thus
every  person  in  England  is  computed  by  some  to  spend  six
pence  a  day :  Yet  is  he  esteemed  but  poor  who  has  five
times  that  sum.  Now  TIMARCHUS  is  said  by  .ZEscmNES5  to
have  been  left  in  easy  circumstances ;  but  he  was  master
only  of  ten  slaves  employed  in  manufactures.  LYSIAS  arid  his
brother,  two  strangers,  were  proscribed  by  the  thirty  for
their  great  riches;  though  they  had  but  sixty  a-piece/'
DEMOSTHENES  was  left  very  rich  by  his  father ;  yet  he  had
no  more  than  fifty-two  slaves.7  His  work-house,  of  twenty
cabinet-makers,  is  said  to  be  a  very  considerable  manu
factory.8

Seventhly,  During  the  DECELIAN  war,  as  the  GREEK  his
torians  call  it,  20,000  slaves  deserted,  and  brought  the
ATHENIANS  to  great  distress,  as  we  learn  from  THUCYDiDES.9
This  could  not  have  happened,  had  they  been  only  the
twentieth  part.  The  best  slaves  would  not  desert.

Eighthly,  XENOPHONI()  proposes  a  scheme  for  maintaining
by  the  public  10,000  slaves  :  And  that  so  great  a  number
may  possibly  be  supported,  any  one  will  be  convinced,  says

DIONYSIUS  HALYCARNASS.EUS  says,  that  This  observation  destroys  all  Vossros's

if  we  regard  the  ancient  walls  of  ROME,  reasonings,andintroducescommon  sense

the  extent  of  that  city  will  not  appear  into  these  calculations.

greater  than  that  of  ATHENS;  he  must  '  ATHKN.  lib.  vi.  104.

mean the ACROPOLIS and high town  2  DC  rep. ATHEN,  1.

only. No  ancient  author  ever  speaks  *  PHILIP.  3.  31.

of  the  PYR.EUM,  PHALEKUS,  and  MUNY-  4  STICHO.  3.  1,  39.

CHIA,  as  the  same  with  ATHKNS. Much  5  Contra  TIMARCH.  42.

less  can  it  be  supposed,  that  DIONYSTOS  6 Orat.  xii.

would  consider  the  matter  in  that  light,  7 Contra  APHOB.  816.

after  the  walls  of  CIMON  and  PERICLES  '  Ibid.

were destroyed,  and  ATHENS was en-  9  Lib.  vii.  27.

tirely  separated  from  these  other  towns. !u  De  rat.  red.  4,  25.


POPULOTJSNESS OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  421

he,  who  considers  the  numbers  we  possessed  before  the
DECELIAN  war.  A  way  of  speaking  altogether  incompatible
with  the  larger  number  of  ATHEN^EUS.

Ninthly,  The  whole  census  of  the  state  of  ATHENS  was
less  than  6000  talents.  And  though  numbers  in  ancient
manuscripts  be  often  suspected  by  critics,  yet  this  is  unex
ceptionable  ;  both  because  DEMOSTHENES,1  who  gives  it,
gives  also  the  detail,  which  checks  him ;  and  because  POLY-
Bius2  assigns  the  same  number,  and  reasons  upon  it.  Now,
the  most  vulgar  slave  could  yield  by  his  labour  an  obolus
a  day,  over  and  above  his  maintenance,  as  we  learn  from
XENOPHON,3  who  says,  that  NICIAS'S  overseer  paid  his  master
so  much  for  slaves,  whom  he  employed  in4  mines.  If  you  will
take  the  pains  to  estimate  an  obolus  a  day,  and  the  slaves  at
400,000,  computing  only  at  four  years  purchase,  you  will
find  the  sum  above  12,000  talents;  even  though  allowance
be  made  for  the  great  number  of  holidays  in  ATHENS.
Besides,  many  of  the  slaves  would  have  a  much  greater
value  from  their  art.  The  lowest  that  DEMOSTHENES  esti
mates  any  of  his5  father's  slaves  is  two  minas  a  head.  And
upon  this  supposition,  it  is  a  little  difficult,  I  confess,  to
reconcile  even  the  number  of  40,000  slaves  with  the  census  of
6000  talents.

Tenthly,  CHIOS  is  said  by  THUCTDIDES,G  to  contain  more
slaves  than  any  GREEK  city,  except  SPARTA.  SPARTA  then
had  more  than  ATHENS,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of
citizens.  The  SPARTANS  were  9000  in  the  town,  30,000  in
the  country.7  The  male  slaves,  therefore,  of  full  age,  must
have  been  more  than  780,000  ;  the  whole  more  than
3,120,000.  A  number  impossible  to  be  maintained  in  a
narrow  barren  country,  such  as  LACONIA,  which  has  no  trade.
Had  the  HELOTES  been  so  very  numerous,  the  murder  of
2000  mentioned  by  THUCYDIDES,S  would  have  irritated  them,
without  weakening  them.

O

Besides,  we  are  to  consider,  that  the  number  assigned  by
ATHEN^EUS,9  whatever  it  is,  comprehends  all  the  inhabitants

1  DC  classibus,  183.  r  PLTJTARCH,  in  vita  LYCUHG,  8.

2  Lib.  ii.  cap.  62.  8  Lib.  iv.  80.

3  DC  rat.  red.  4,  14.  9  The same author affirms, that

4  [In  digging  of  mines,  and  also  kept CORINTH  had  once  460, 000  slaves,  J^GINA
up  the  number  of  slaves:  Editions  H 470,000. But  the  foregoing  arguments
I.  In  digging  of  mines  :  K  to  Q.]  hold  stronger  against  those  facts,  which

5  Contra  APHOBDM,  816.  are  indeed  entirely  absurd  and  impos-

6  Lib.  viii.  40.  sible. It  is  however  remarkable,  that


422  .ESSAY XI.

of  ATTICA,  as  well  as  those  of  ATHENS.  The  ATHENIANS
affected  much  a  country  life,  as  we  learn  from  THUCYDIDES  ;'
and  when  they  were  all  chased  into  town,  by  the  invasion
of  their  territory  during  the  PELOPONNESIAN  war,  the  city
was  not  able  to  contain  them ;  and  they  were  obliged  to
lie  in  the  porticoes,  temples,  and  even  streets,  for  want  of
lodging.2

The  same  remark  is  to  be  extended  to  all  the  other  GREEK
cities;  and  when  the  number  of  citizens  is  assigned,  we  must
always  understand  it  to  comprehend  the  inhabitants  of  the
neighbouring  country,  as  well  as  of  the  city.  Yet,  even  with
this  allowance,  it  must  be  confessed,  that  GREECE  was  a
populous  country,  and  exceeded  what  we  could  imagine
concerning  so  narrow  a  territory,  naturally  not  very  fertile,
and  which  drew  no  supplies  of  corn  from  other  places.  For,
excepting  ATHENS,  which  traded  to  PONTUS  for  that  commo
dity,  the  other  cities  seem  to  have  subsisted  chiefly  from
their  neighbouring  territory.*

RHODES  is  well  known  to  have  been  a  city  of  extensive
commerce,  and  of  great  fame  and  splendor ;  yet  it  contained
only  6,000  citizens  able  to  bear  arms,  when  it  was  besieged
by  DEMETRIUS/

THEBES  was  always  one  of  the  capital  cities  of  GREECE  : 5
But  the  number  of  its  citizens  exceeded  not  those  of  RHODES. fi

ATHKJMSTJS  cites  so  great  an  authority,  seems  to  have  been  about  the  size  of

as  ARISTOTLE  for  this  last  fact : And  our  third  rates,  carried  as  much  corn  us

the  scholiast  on PINDAR  mentions  the  would maintain Attica for a  twelvo-

same  number  of  slaves  in  .ZEoiNA.  month. But  perhaps  Athens  was  de-

1  Liu.  il.  14.  cayed  at  that  time;  and,  besides,  it  is

2  JD.  lib.  ii.  17.  not  safe  to  trust  to  such  loose  rhetorical

3  Dnjii  ST.  C'  ntra  LEFT. 466. The  calculations.
Athenians  brought  yearly  from  Pontus  4  Dion.  Sic.  lib.  xx.  84.
400.000  medimni  or  bushels  of  corn,  as  5  ISOCR.  paneg.

appeared  from  the  custom-house  books.  6  DIOD.  Sic.  lib.  xvii.14.2  When  Alex-

And  this  was  the  greater  part  of  their  ander  attacked  Thebes,  we  may  safely

importation  of  corn. This,  by  the  by,  conclude  that  almost  all  the  inhabitants

is  a  strong proof that there  is  some  were  present. Whoever  is  acquainted

great  mistake  in  the  foregoing  passage  with  the  spirit  of  the  Greeks,  especially

of  Athenseus. For  Attica  itself  was  so  of  the  Thebans,  will  never  suspect  that

barren  of  corn,  that  it produced not  any  of  them  would  desert  their  country

enough  even  to  maintain  the  peasants.  when  it  was  reduced to  such  extreme

T>r,  Liv.  lib.  xliii.  cap.  6.  'And  400,000  peril  and  distress. As  Alexander  took

medimni would  scarcely feed 100,000  the  town  by  storm,  all  those  who  bore

rajn  during  A  twelvemonth. Lucian,  in  arms  were put  to  the  sword without

his navigium  sive rota, says, that  a  mercy,  and  they  amounted  only  to  6,000

sliip,  which,  by  the  dimensions  he  gives,  men.  Among  these  were  some  strangers


1  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edi-  2  [DioD.  Sic.  lib.  15  and  17:  Editions

tion  Q.]  H  and  I,  and  omit  the  rest  of  thi°  note.]


POrULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  423

PHLIASIA  is  said  to  be  a  small  city  by  XENOPHON,'  yet  we
find  that  it  contained  6,000  citizens.2  I  pretend  not  to
reconcile  these  two  facts.3  Perhaps,  XENOPHON  calls
PHLIASIA  a  small  town,  because  it  made  but  a  small  figur0
in  GEEECE,  and  maintained  only  a  subordinate  alliance  with
SPAETA  ;  or  perhaps  the  country,  belonging  to  it,  was
extensive,  and  most  of  the  citizens  were  employed  in  the
cultivation  of  it,  and  dwelt  in  the  neighbouring  villages.

MANTINEA  was  equal  to  any  city  in  AECADIA  : 4  Conse
quently  it  was  equal  to  MEGALOPOLIS,  which  was  fifty  stadia,
or  six  miles  and  a  quarter  in  circumference.5  But  MANTISEA
had  only  3,000  citizens.6  The  GEEEK  cities,  therefore,  con
tained  often  fields  and  gardens,  together  with  the  houses ;
and  we  cannot  judge  of  them  by  the  extent  of  their  walls.
ATHENS  contained  no  more  than  10,000  houses ;  yet  its  walls,
with  the  sea-coast,  were  above  twenty  miles  in  extent,
SYEACUSE  was  twenty-two  miles  in  circumference ;  yet  was
scarcely  ever  spoken  of  by  the  ancients  as  more  populous
than  ATHENS.  BABYLON  was  a  square  of  fifteen  miles,  or
sixty  miles  in  circuit;  but  it  contained  large  cultivated  fields
and  inclosures,  as  we  learn  from  PLINY.  Though  AUEE-
LIAN'S  wall  was  fifty  miles  in  circumference  ; 7  the  circuit  of
all  the  thirteen  divisions  of  ROME,  taken  apart,  according  to
PUBLIUS  VICTOE,  was  only  about  forty-three  miles.  When
an  enemy  invaded  the  country,  all  the  inhabitants  retired
within  the  walls  of  the  ancient  cities,  with  their  cattle  and
furniture,  and  instruments  of  husbandry  :  and  the  great
height,  to  which  the  walls  were  raised,  enabled  a  small
number  to  defend  them  with  facility.

SPAETA,  says  XENOPHON,®  is  one  of  the  cities  of  GEEECE

and  manumitted  slaves, The  captives,  A  very  moderate  number,  it  must  be
consisting  of  old  men,  women,  children,  confessed  ;  and  this  computation,  being
and  slaves,  were  sold,  and  thej  amoun-  founded  on  facts  which  appear unlis
ted  to  30,000. We  may  therefore  con-  putable,  must  have  great  weight  in  the
elude,  that  the  free  citizens  in  Thebes,  present  controversy. The  above-men-
of  both  sexes  and  all  ages,  were  near  tioned  number  of  Rhodians,  too,  were
24,000,  the  strangers  and  slaves  about  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  who
12,000. These  last,  we  may  observe,  were  free,  and  able  to  bear  arms,
were somewhat fewer in proportion  '  Hist.  GRJKC.  lib.  vii.  2,  1.
than at Athens, as is reasonable to  2  Id.  lib.  vii.

im;igine  from this circumstance,  that  3  [The remainder  of  the  paragraph

Athens  was  a  town  of  more  trade  to  was  added  in  Edition  K.]

support  slaves,  and  of  more  entertain-  4  POLYB.  lib.  ii.  56.

ment  to  allure  strangers. It  is  also  to  5  POLYC.  lib.  ix.  cap.  20.

be  remarked,  that  36,000  was  the  whole  6  LYSIAS,  orat.  34,  92..

number  of  people,  loth  in the  city  of  '  VOPISCUS  in  vita  AURKI,,  222  B.

Thi'bes  and  the  neighbouring  territory.  8  J)e  rep.  LACKD.  1,1. This  passage  is


424  ESSAY XI.

that  has  the  fewest  inhabitants.  Yet  POLYBIUS  !  says  that
it  was  forty-eight  stadia  in  circumference,  and  was  round.

All  the  ^ETOLIANS  able  to  bear  arms  in  ANTIPATER'S  time,
2deducting  some  few  garrisons,  were  but  ten  thousand  men.3

POLYBIUS  4  tells  us,  that  the  ACHAEAN  league  might,  with
out  any  inconvenience,  march  30  or  40,000  men  :  And  this
account  seems  probable  :  For  that  league  comprehended  the
greater  part  of  PELOPONNESUS.  Yet  PAUSANiAS,5  speaking
of  the  same  period,  says,  that  all  the  ACB^EANS  able  to  bear
arms,  even  when  several  manumitted  slaves  were  joined  to
them,  did  not  amount  to  fifteen  thousand.

The  THESSALIANS,  till  their  final  conquest  by  the  EOMANS,
were,  in  all  ages,  turbulent,  factious,  seditious,  disorderly.6  It
is  not  therefore  natural  to  suppose,  that  this  part  of  GREECE
abounded  much  in  people.

7  We  are  told  by  THUCYDIDES,®  that  the  part  of  PELOPON
NESUS,  adjoining  to  PYLOS,  was  desart  and  uncultivated.
HERODOTUS  says,9  that  MACEDONIA  was  full  of  lions  and  wild
bulls;  animals  which  can  only  inhabit  vast  unpeopled  forests.
These  were  the  two  extremities  of  GREECE.

All  the  inhabitants  of  EPIRUS,  of  all  ages,  sexes,  and  con
ditions,  who  were  sold  by  PAULUS  vEMiLius,  amounted  only
to  1-50,000.10  Yet  EPIRUS  might  be  double  the  extent  Jf

YORKSHIRE.11

not  easily  reconciled  with  that  of  PLTT-  ber comprehends, I suppose, all the

TARCH above,  who  says, that  SPARTA  free  citizens,  throughout  all  the  cities ;

had  9000  citizens.  but  the  authority,  on  which  that  com-

1  POLYB.  lib.  ix.  cap.  20.  pilation  is  founded,  has,  I  own,  escap'd

2  [Deducting some few  garrisons:  either  my  memory  or  reading ;  and  that
not  in  F  G.]  writer,  tho'  otherwise  very  ingenious,

;<  Dion.  Sic.  lib.  xviii.  24.  has  given  into  a  bad  practice,  of  dc-

4  LEGAT.  livering  a  great  deal  of  erudition,  with-

5  In  ACHAICIS,  7.  If),  7.  out  one  citation. But  supposing,  that

6  TIT.  Liv  lib.  xxxiv.  cap.  51.  PLATO  that  enumeration  cou'd  be  justify'd  by
in  CBITONB,  53  D.  good  authority  from  antiquity,  we  may

7  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Edi-  establish the following computation,
tion  K.]  The  free  Greeks  of  all  ages  and  sexes

*  Lib.  iv.  3.  were  920,000. The  slaves,  computing

9  Lib.  vii.  126.  them by the number of Athenian

0  TIT.  Liv.  lib.  xlv.  cap.  34.  slaves  as  above,  who  seldom  marry 'd

"  [Editions  Hand  I  add  the  following  or  had  families,  were  double  the  male

note, in  place  of  the following  para-  citizens  of  full  age,  viz.  400,000. And

graph  :  A late French,  writer, in his  the  whole  inhabitants  of  antient  Greece

observations on the Gneks, has re-  about  one  million,  three  hundred  and

mark'd,  that  Philip  of  Maccdon,  being  eighty  thousand.  No  mighty  number  nor

deelar'd  captain-general  of  the  GKKKKS.  much exceeding  what  may be found

vou'cl  have  been  back'd  by  the  force  of  at present in Scotland,  a  country  of

2:50,000  of that  nation  in  his  intended  nearly  the  same  extent,  and  which  is

expedition  against  Persia. This num-  very  indifferently  peopl'd.]


POPULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT NATIONS.  425

1  JUSTIN  2  tells  us,  that,  when  PHILIP  of  MACEDON  was  de
clared  head  of  the  GREEK  confederacy,  he  called  a  congress
of  all  the  states,  except  the  LACEDEMONIANS,  who  refused  to
concur ;  and  he  found  the  force  of  the  whole,  upon  computa
tion,  to  amount  to  200,000  infantry,  and  15,000  cavalry.
This  must  be  understood  to  be  all  the  citizens  capable  of
bearing  arms.  For  as  the  GREEK  republics  maintained  no
mercenary  forces,  and  had  no  militia  distinct  from  the  whole
body  of  the  citizens,  it  is  not  conceivable  what  other  medium
there  could  be  of  computation.  That  such  an  army  could
ever,  by  GREECE,  be  brought  into  the  field,  and  be  main
tained  there,  is  contrary  to  all  history.  Upon  this  supposi
tion,  therefore,  we  may  thus  reason.  The  free  GREEKS  of  all
ages  and  sexes  were  860,000.  The  slaves,  estimating  them
by  the  number  of  ATHENIAN  slaves  as  above,  who  seldom
married  or  had  families,  were  double  the  male  citizens  of  full
age,  to  wit,  430,000.  And  all  the  inhabitants  of  ancient
GREECE,  excepting  LACONIA,  were  about  one  million  two
hundred  and  ninety  thousand  :  No  mighty  number,  nor  ex
ceeding  what  may  be  found  at  present  in  SCOTLAND,  a  country
of  not  much  greater  extent,  and  very  indifferently  peopled.

We  may  now  consider  the  numbers  of  people  in  ROME  and
ITALY,  and  collect  all  the  lights  afforded  us  by  scattered
passages  in  ancient  authors.  We  shall  find,  upon  the
whole,  a  great  difficulty  in  fixing  any  opinion  on  that  head ;
and  no  reason  to  support  those  exaggerated  calculations,  so
much  insisted  on  by  modern  writers.

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASS^EUS  3  says,  that  the  ancient  walls
of  ROME  were  nearly  of  the  same  compass  with  those  of
ATHENS,  but  that  the  suburbs  ran  out  to  a  great  extent;
and  it  was  difficult  to  tell,  where  the  town  ended  or  the
country  began.  In  some  places  of  ROME,  it  appears,  from
the  same  author,4  from  JUVENAL,S  and  from  other  ancient
writers,6  that  the  houses  were  high,  and  families  lived  in

1  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Edi-  high. See also to the same  purpose

tion  K.]  VITKUVIUS,  lib.  ii.  cap.  8. ARISTIUES

-  Lib.  ix.  cap.  5.  the  sophist, in  his oration  tls  Poi/i)j/>,

3  Lib.  iv.  13.  says,  that  ROME  consisted  of  cities  on

4  Lib.  x.  32.  the  top  of  cities  ;  and  that  if  one  wore

5  Satyr,  iii.  1.  269.  270.  to  spread  it  out,  and  unfold  it,  it  would

6  STEABO,  liv.  v.  says,  that  the  em-  cover  the  whole  surface  of  ITALY.  Where
peror  AUGUSTUS  prohibited  the  raising  an  author  indulges  himself  in  such  ox-
houses higher  than seventy  feet. In  travagant declamations,  and gives  so
another  passage,  lib.  xvi.  he  speaks  of  much  into  the  hyperbolical  style,  one
the houses of KOME as remarkablv  knows  not  how  far  he  must  be  reduced.


4JI5


ESSAY XI.


separate  storeys,  one  above  another  :  But  it  is  probable,  that
these  were  only  the  poorer  citizens,  and  only  in.  some  few
streets.  If  we  may  judge  from  the  younger  PLINY'S  l
account  of  his  own  house,  and  from  BARTOH'S  plans  of
ancient  buildings,  the  men  of  quality  had  very  spacious
palaces ;  and  their  buildings  were  like  the  CHINESE  houses  at
this  day,  where  each  apartment  is  separated  from  the  rest,
and  rises  no  higher  than  a  single  storey.2  To  which  if  we
add,  that  the  ROMAN  nobility  much  affected  extensive  por
ticoes,  and  even  woods3  in  town;  we  may  perhaps  allow
Vossius  (though  there  is  no  manner  of  reason  for  it)  to  read
the  famous  passage  of  the  elder  PLINY  4  his  own  way,  with-


Thit  this  reasoning  seems  natural:  If
HOME  was  built  in  so  scattered  a  manner
ns  DiONYSitrs  says,  and  ran  so  much
into  the  country,  there  must  have  been
very  few  streets  where  the  houses  were
raised  so  high.  It  is  only  for  want  of
room,  that  any  body  builds  in  that  in
convenient  manner.

1  LIB.  ii.  epist.  16.  lib.  v.  epist.  6.  It
is  true,  PLINY  there  describes  a  country-
house  : But since that  was  the idea
which  the  ancients  formed  of  a  magni
ficent  and  convenient  building,  the  great
men would certainly build the  same
way in town. '  In laxitatem ruris
excurrunt,' says SENECA of the rich
and  voluptuous,  epist. 114. VALERIUS
MAXIMTTS,  lib.  iv.  cap.  4.  speaking  of
CINCINNATI'S  field  of  four  acres,  says,
'  Angnste  se  habitare  nunc  putat,  cujus
domus  tantum  patet  quantum  CINCIN
NATI  rura  patuerant.' To  the  same  pur
pose  see  lib.  xxxvi.  cap. 15.  also  lib.
xviii.  cap.  2.

2  [For  the history  of  this  sentence
see  p.  57-]

3  VITKTJV. lib. v. cap. 11. TACIT.
annal.  lib.  xi.  cap.  3. STJETON.  in  vita
OCTAV.  cap.  72,  &c.

4  '  MOKNIA ejus (ROM;E) collegere
ambitu imperatoribus, eensoribusque
VKSPASIANIS,  A.  U. C. 828.  pass.  xiii.
MCC. complexa montes septem, ipsa
dividitur in regiones quatuordecim,
compita earum 265. Ejusdem spatii
mensura,  currente  a  milliario in capite
ROM. Fori  statute,  ad  singulas  portas,
quae sunt hodie numero 37, ita ut
duodecim  porise  semel  numerentur.  prre-
tereanturque  ex  veteribus  septem,  quae
esse  desierunt,  efficit  passuum per  di-
rectum  30,775. Ad  extroma  vcro  tec-
torum  cum  castris  praetoriis  ab  eodem


Milliario,  per  vicos  omnium  viarum,
mensura  collegit  paulo  amplius  septua-
ginta  millia  passuum.  Quo  si  quis
altitudinem  tectorum  addat,  dignam
profecto,  aestimationem  coneipiat,  fatea-
turque  nullius  urbis  magnitudinem  in
toto  orbe  potuisse  ei  comparari.'  PLIN.
lib.  iii.  cap.  5.

All  the  best  manuscripts  of  PLINY
read  the  passage  as  here  cited,  and  fix
the  compass  of  the  walls  of  ROME  to  be
thirteen  miles.  The  question  is,  What
PLINY  means  by  30,775  paces,  and  how
that  number  was  formed?  The  manner
in  which  I  conceive  it,  is  this.  ROMK
was  a  semicircular  area  of  thirteen
miles  circumference.  The  Forum,  and
consequently  the  Milliarmm,  we  know,
was  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  TYBEK,
and  near  the  center  of  the  circle,  or
upon  fhe  diameter  of  the  semicircular
area.  Though  there  were  thirty- seven
gates  to  ROME,  yet  only  twelve  of  them
had  straight  streets,  leading  from  them
to  the  JVIilliarium.  PLINY,  therefore,
having  assigned  the  circumference  of
ROMK,  and  knowing  that  that  alone  was
not  sufficient  to  give  us  a  just  notion  of
its  surface,  uses  this  farther  method.
He  supposes  all  the  streets,  leading
from  the  Milliarium  to  the  twelve  gates,
to  be  laid  together  into  one  straight
line,  and  supposes  we  run  along  that
line,  so  as  to  count  each  gate  once :  In
which  case,  he  says,  that  the  wbole  line
is  30,775  paces  :  Or,  in  other  words,
that  each  street  or  radius  of  the  semi
circular  area  is  upon  an  average  two
miles  and  a  half;  and  the  whole  length
of  ROME  is  five  miles,  and  its  breadth
about  half  as  much,  besides  the  scattered
suburbs.

PERE HARUOUIN understands this


POPULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT NATIONS.


42;


out  admitting  the  extravagant  consequences  which  he  draws
from  it.

The  number  of  citizens  who  received  corn  by  the  public
distribution  in  the  time  of  AUGUSTUS,  were  two  hundred
thousand.1  This  one  would  esteem  a  pretty  certain  ground
of  calculation  :  Yet  is  it  attended  with  such  circumstances
as  throw  us  back  into  doubt  and  uncertainty.


passage  in  the  same  manner ;  with  re
gard  to  the  laying  together  the  several
streets  of  ROMK  into  one  line,  in  order
to  compose  30,775  paces  :  But  then  he
supposes,  that  streets  led  from  the
Milliarium  to  every  gate,  and  that  no
street  exceeded  800  paces  in  length.
But  (1.)  a  semicircular  area,  whose
radius  was  only  800  paces,  could  never
hare  a  circumference  near  thirteen
miles,  the  compass  of  ROME  as  assigned
by  PLINY.  A  radius  of  two  miles  and
a  half  forms  very  nearly  that  circum
ference.  (2.)  There  is  an  absurdity  in
supposing  a  city  so  built  as  to  have
streets  running  to  its  center  from  every
gate  in  its  circumference.  These  streets
must  interfere  as  they  approach.  (3.)
This  diminishes  too  much  from  the
greatness  of  ancient  ROME,  and  reduces
that  city  below  even  BRISTOL  or  ROTTER
DAM.

The  sense  which  Vossius  in  his  Ob-
servationes  varite  puts  on  this  passage
of  PLINY,  errs  widely  in  the  other  ex
treme.  One  manuscript  of  no  authority,
instead  of  thirteen  miles,  has  assigned
thirty  miles  for  the  compass  of  the
walls  of  ROMK.  And  Vossius  under
stands  this  only  of  the  curvilinear  part
of  the  circumference;  supposing,  that
as  the  TYBER  formed  the  diameter,
there  were  no  walls  built  on  that  side.
But(l.)  this  reading  is  allowed  to  be
contrary  to  almost  all  the  manuscripts.
(2.)  Why  should  PLINY,  a  concise
writer,  repeat  the  compass  of  the  walls
of  ROME  in  two  successive  sentences?
(3.)  Why  repeat  it  with  so  sensible  a
variation?  (4.)  What  is  the  meaning
of  PLINY'S  mentioning  twice  the  MIL-
LIAKITTM,  if  a  line  was  measured  that
had  no  dependence  on  the  MILLIARIUM?
(5.)  AURELIAN'S  wall  is  said  by  VOPIS-
cus  to  have  been  drawn  laxiore  amhitu,
and  to  have  comprehended  all  the  build
ings  and  suburbs  on  the  north  side  of
the  TYBER  ;  yet  its  compass  was  only
fifty  miles  ;  and  even  here  critics  sus
pect  some  mistake  or  corruption  in  thr


text ;  since  the  walls,  which  remain,
and  which  are  supposed  to  lie  the
same  with  Aurolian's,  exceed  not  twelve
miles.  It  is  not  probable,  that  ROMH
would  diminish  from  AUGUSTUS  to
AURELIAN.  It  remained  still  the  capital
of  the  same  empire ;  and  none  of  the
civil  wars  in  that  long  period,  except
the  tumults  on  the  death  of  MAXIMTJS
and  BALBINUS,  ever  affected  the  city.
CARACALLA  is  said  by  AURELIUS  VICTOR
to  have  encreased  ROME.  (6.)  There
are  no  remains  of  ancient  buildings,
which  mark  any  such  greatness  of
ROME.  Vossius's  reply  to  this  objec
tion  seems  absurd.  That  the  rubbish
would  sink  sixty  or  seventy  feet  under
ground.  It  appears  from  SPARTIAN  (in
vita  Sevcri)  that  the  five-mile  stone  in
via  Lavicana  was  out  of  the  city.  (7.)
OLYMPIOHORUS  and  PUBLIUS  VICTOR  fix
the  number  of  houses  in  ROME  to  be
betwixt  forty  and  fifty  thousand.  (8.)
The  very  extravagance  of  the  conse
quences  drawn  by  this  critic,  as  well  as
LIPSIUS,  if  they  be  necessary,  destroys
the  foundation  on  which  they  are
grounded  :  That  ROME  contained  four
teen  millions  of  inhabitants  ;  while  the
whole  kingdom  of  FRANCE  contains
only  five,  according  to  his  computa
tion,  &c.

The  only  objection  to  the  sense  which
we  have  affixed  above  to  the  pass;igo  of
PLINY,  seems  to  lie  in  this,  That  PLINY,
after  mentioning  the  thirty-seven  gates
of  ROME,  assigns  only  a  reason  for
suppressing  the  seven  old  ones,  and
says  nothing  of  the  eighteen  gates,  the
streets  leading  from  which  terminated,
according  to  my  opinion,  before  they
reached  the  Forum.  But  as  PLINY  was
writing  to  the  ROMANS,  who  perfectly
knew  the  disposition  of  the  streets,  it  is
not  strange  he  should  ttike  a  circum
stance  for  granted,  which  was  so  fa
miliar  to  every  body.  Perhaps  too,
many  of  these  gates  led  to  wharf's  upon
the  river.

1  Ex  monument.  Ancyr.


428  ESSAY  XI.

Did  tlie  poorer  citizens  only  receive  the  distribution  ?  It
was  calculated,  to  be  sure,  chiefly  for  their  benefit.  But  it
appears  from  a  passage  in  CICEEO  l  that  the  rich  might  also
take  their  portion,  and  that  it  was  esteemed  no  reproach  in
them  to  apply  for  it.

To  whom  was  the  corn  given ;  whether  only  to  heads  of
families,  or  to  every  man,  woman,  and  child?  The  portion
every  month  was  five  modii  to  each2  (about £  of  a  bushel).
This  was  too  little  for  a  family,  and  too  much  for  an  indivi
dual.  A  very  accurate  antiquary,3  therefore,  infers,  that  it
was  given  to  every  man  of  full  age  :  But  he  allows  the
matter  to  be  uncertain.

Was  it  strictly  enquired,  whether  the  claimant  lived  within
the  precincts  of  Rome ;  or  was  it  sufficient,  that  he  presented
himself  at  the  monthly  distribution  ?  This  last  seems  more
probable.4

Were  there  no  false  claimants?  We  are  told,5  that
CL-ESAR  struck  off  at  once  170,000,  who  had  creeped  in
without  a  just  title ;  and  it  is  very  little  probable,  that  he
remedied  all  abuses.

But,  lastly,  what  proportion  of  slaves  must  we  assign  to
these  citizens  ?  This  is  the  most  material  question  ;  and  the
most  uncertain.  It  is  very  doubtful,  whether  ATHENS  can
be  established  as  a  rule  for  ROME.  Perhaps  the  ATHENIANS
had  more  slaves,  because  they  employed  them  in  manufac
tures,  for  which  a  capital  city,  like  ROME,  seems  not  so
proper.  Perhaps,  on  the  other  hand,  the  ROMANS  had  more
slaves,  on  account  of  their  superior  luxury  and  riches.

There  were  exact  bills  of  mortality  kept  at  ROME  ;  but  no
ancient  author  has  given  us  the  number  of  burials,  except
SuETONius,6  who  tells  us,  that  in  one  season,  there  were
80,000  names  carried  to  the  temple  of  LIBITINA  :  But  this
was  during  a  plague ;  which  can  afford  no  certain  founda
tion  for  any  inference.

The  public  corn,  though  distributed  only  to  20,000  citizens,

1  Tusc.  Quasi,  lib.  iii.  cap.  48.  convenient,  (as  preserving.  I  suppose,

2  Licinius apud Sallust. hist.  frag.  a  more  regular  oeconomy  in  their  family)
lib.  iii.  desired  to  have  them  restored,  SUETON.

3  Nicolaus  Hortensius  de  re  f rumen-  AUGUST, cap. 40. Had not some  of
taria  Roman.  the people come from some  distance

4  Not to take  the  people  too  much  for  their corn,  AUGUSTUS'S  precaution
from  their  business,  AUGUSTUS  ordained  seems  superfluous.

the distribution  of  corn to  be made  a  Sueton.  in  Jul.  cap.  41.

only thrice a-year : But the people  6  In  vita  Ncronis.  39.

finding  the  monthly  distributions  more


POPULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT NATIONS.


429


affected  very  considerably  the  whole  agriculture  of  ITALY  :'
a  fact  no  wise  reconcileable  to  some  modern  exaggerations
with  regard  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  country.

The  best  ground  of  conjecture  I  can  find  concerning  the
greatness  of  ancient  Home  is  this  :  We  are  told  by  HERODIAN,2
that  ANTIOCH  and  ALEXANDRIA  were  very  little  inferior  to
ROME.  It  appears  from  DIODORUS  SicuLUS,3  that  one  straight
street  of  ALEXANDRIA  reaching  from  gate  to  gate,  was  five  miles
long  ;  and  as  ALEXANDRIA  was  much  more  extended  in  length
than  breadth,  it  seems  to  have  been  a  city  nearly  of  the  bulk
of  PARIS  ;4  and  ROME  might  be  about  the  size  of  LONDON.

There  lived  in  ALEXANDRIA,  in  DIODORUS  SICULUS'S  time,5
800,000  free  people,  comprehending,  I  suppose,  women  and
children.6  But  what  number  of  slaves?  Had  we  any  just
ground  to  fix  these  at  an  equal  number  with  the  free  inhabi
tants,  it  would  favour  the  foregoing  computation.

There  is  a  passage  in  HERODIAN,  which  is  a  little  surprising.
He  says  positively,  that  the  palace  of  the  Emperor  was  as
large  as  all  the  rest  of  the  city.7  This  was  NERO'S  golden
house,  which  is  indeed  represented  by  SUETONIUS  8  and  PLINY


1  Sueton.  Aug.  cap.  42.

2  Lib.  iv.  cap.  5,

3  Lib.  xvii.  62.

4  Quintus  Curtius  says,  its  walls  were
ten  miles  in  circumference,  when  foun
ded by Alexander, lib. iv. cap. 8.
Strabo,  who  had  travelled  to  Alexan
dria  as  well  as  Diodorus  Siculus,  says
it  was scarce  four  miles  long,  and  in
most  places about  a  mile  broad,  lib.
xvii. Pliny  says  it  resembled  a  Mace
donian  cassock,  stretching  out  in the
corners,  lib.  v.  cap.  10. JSiotwithstand-
iiig this bulk ot Alexandria, which
seems  but  moderate,  Diodorus  Siculus,
speaking of its circuit as  drawn by
Alexander  (which  it  never  exceeded,  as
we  learn  from  Ammianus  Marcelliuus,
lib.  xxii.  cap.  16,)  says  it  was  peyeOei
Siatfifpovra,  extremely  yreat,  ibid. Tiie
reason  which  he assigns  for  its sur
passing  all  cities  in  the  world  (for  he
excepts  not  Rome)  is,  that  it  contained
300,000  free  inhabitants. He  also  men
tions  thfe  revenues  of  the  kings,  to  wit,
0,000  talents,  as  another  circumstance
to  the  same  purpose ;  no  such  mighty
sum  in  our  eyes,  evert  though  we  make
allowance for  the different  value  of
money.  What  Strabo  says  of  the  neigh
bouring  country,  means  only  that  it  was


peopled,  oiKovfjifva.  xa\cas.  Might  not
one  affirm,  without  any  great  hyperbole,
that  the  whole  banks  of  the  river,  from
Gravesend  to  Windsor,  are  one  city  ?
This  is  even  more  than  Strabo  says  of
the  banks  of  the  lake  Mareotis,  and  of
the  canal  to  Canopus.  It  is  a  vulgar
saying  in  Italy,  that  the  king  of  Sar
dinia  has  but  one  town  in  Piedmont,
for  it  is  all  a  town.  Agrippa,  in
Joscphus  de  hello  Judaic,  lib.  ii.  cap.
16,  to  make  his  audience  comprehend
the  excessive  greatness  of  Alexandria,
which  he  endeavours  to  magnify,  de
scribes  only  the  compass  of  the  city  as
drawn  by  Alexander ;  a  clear  proof
that  the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  were
lodged  there,  and  that  the  neighbouring
country  was  no  more  than  what  might
be  expected  about  all  great  towns,  very
well  cultivated,  and  well  peopled.

5  Lib.  xvii.  52.

6  He says t'Aeuflepoi, not TroAn-ai,
which  last  expression  must  have  been
understood  of  citizens  alone,  and  grown
men.

7  Lib.  iv.  cap.  1.  iracnjs  irdAeeos.  POLI-
TIA.N interprets it  •  sedibus majoribus
etiam  reliqua  urbe.'

8  He  says  (in  NKEONE  cap.  30.)  that
a portico or piazza of it was 3000


430  ESSAY  XL

as  of  an  enormous  extent ; l  but  no  power  of  imagination
can  make  us  conceive  it  to  bear  any  proportion  to  such  a  city
as  LONDON.

We  may  observe,  had  the  historian  been  relating  NERO'S
extravagance,  and  had  he  made  use  of  such  an  expression,  it
would  have  had  much  less  weight ;  these  rhetorical  exagge
rations  being  so  apt  to  creep  into  an  author's  style,  even
when  the  most  chaste  and  correct.  But  it  is  mentioned  by
HERODIAN  only  by  the  by,  in  relating  the  quarrels  between
GETA  and  CARACALLA.

It  appears  from  the  same  historian,2  that  there  was  then
much  land  uncultivated,  and  put  to  no  manner  of  use ;  and
he  ascribes  it  as  a  great  praise  to  PERTINAX,  that  he  allowed
every  one  to  take  such  land  either  in  ITALY  or  elsewhere,
and  cultivate  it  as  he  pleased,  without  paying  any  taxes.
Lands  uncultivated,  and  put  to  no  manner  of  use !  This  is  not
heard  of  in  any  part  of  CHRISTENDOM  ;  except  in  some  remote
parts  of  HUNGARY  ;  as  I  have  been  informed.  And  it  surely
corresponds  very  ill  with  that  idea  of  the  extreme  populous-
ness  of  antiquity,  so  much  insisted  on.

We  learn  from  Vopiscus,3  that  there  was  even  in  ETRURIA
much  fertile  land  uncultivated,  which  the  Emperor  AURELIAN
intended  to  convert  into  vineyards,  in  order  to  furnish  the
EOMAN  people  with  a  gratuitous  distribution  of  wine ;  a  very
proper  expedient  for  depopulating  still  farther  that  capital
and  all  the  neighbouring  territories.

It  may  not  be  amiss  to  take  notice  of  the  account  which
PoLYBius4  gives  of  the  great  herds  of  swine  to  be  met  with
in  TUSCANY  and  LOMBARDY,  as  well  as  in  GREECE,  and  of
the  method  of  feeding  them  which  was  then  practised.
'  There  are  great  herds  of  swine,'  says  he,  '  throughout  all
'  ITALY,  particularly  in  former  times,  through  ETRURIA  and
'  CISALPINE  GAUL.  And  a  herd  frequently  consists  of


a


feet  long ; '  tanta laxitas  ut portions  Portions  excipiebat  Arcton.' Lib.

triplices  milliarias  baberet.' He  can-  2.  ode  15.

not  mean  three  miles. For  the  whole  So  also  in  lib.  1.  satyr.  8.

extent  of  the  house  from  the  PALATINE  '  Mille  pedes in fronte,  trecentos

to  the  ESQUILINE  was  not  near  so  great.  cippus  in  agrum

So  when VOPISC.  in ATJRELIANO  men-  Hie  dabat.'

tions  a  portico  in  SAKLUST'S  gardens,  '  PLINIUS,  lib.  xxxvi.  cap.  15. 'Bis

which  he  calls  -portions  milliarcnsis,  it  vidimus urbem totam cingi domibus

must  be  understood  of  a  thousand  feet.  principum,  CAII  ac  NEUONIS.'

fc>o  also  HORACE;  2  LJ^  ^ cap 15

'  Nulla  decempedis  3  In  AURELIAN.  cap.  48.

Metata  privatis  opacam  4  Lib.  xii.  cap.  2.


POPULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT NATIONS.  431

*  thousand  or  more  swine. When  one  of  these  herds  in

*  feeding  meets  with  another,  they  mix  together ;  and  the
'  swine-herds  have  no  other  expedient  for  separating  them
''  than  to  go  to  different  quarters,  where  they  sound  their  horn  ;
'  and  these  animals,  being  accustomed  to  that  signal,  run
'  immediately  each  to  the  horn  of  his  own  keeper. Whereas
'  in  GEEECB,  if  the  herds  of  swine  happen  to  mix  in  the
'  forests,  he  who  has  the  greater  flock,  takes  cunningly  the
'  opportunity  of  driving  all  away. And  thieves  are  very  apt

*  to  purloin  the  straggling  hogs,  which  have  wandered  to  a
'  great  distance  from  their  keeper  in  search  of  food.'

May  we  not  infer  from  this  account,  that  the  north  of
ITALY,  as  well  as  GREECE,  was  then  much  less  peopled,  and
worse  cultivated,  than  at  present9  How  could  these  vast
herds  be  fed  in  a  country  so  full  of  inclosures,  so  improved
by  agriculture,  so  divided  by  farms,  so  planted  with  vines  and
corn  intermingled  together  ?  I  must  confess,  that  POLYBIUS'S
relation  has  more  the  air  of  that  oeconomy  which  is  to  be  met
with  in  our  AMERICAN  colonies,  than  the  management  of  a
EUROPEAN  country.

We  meet  with  a  reflection  in  ARISTOTLE'S  l  Ethics,  which
seems  unaccountable  on  any  supposition,  and  by  proving  too
much  in  favour  of  our  present  reasoning,  may  be  thought
really  to  prove  nothing.  That  philosopher,  treating  of  friend
ship,  and  observing,  that  this  relation  ought  neither  to  be
contracted  to  a  very  few,  nor  extended  over  a  great  multitude,
illustrates  his  opinion  by  the  following  argument.  '  In  like
'  manner,'  says  he,  '  as  a  city  cannot  subsist,  if  it  either  have
'  so  few  inhabitants  as  ten,  or  so  many  as  a  hundred  thousand  ;
'  so  is  there  a  mediocrity  required  in  the  number  of  friends  ;
'  and  you  destroy  the  essence  of  friendship  by  running  into
'  either  extreme.'  What !  impossible  that  a  city  can  contain
a  hundred  thousand  inhabitants  !  Had  ARISTOTLE  never  seen
nor  heard  of  a  city  so  populous  ?  This,  I  must  own,  passes
my  comprehension.

PLiNY2  tells  us  that  SELEUCIA,  the  seat  of  the  GREEK
empire  in  the  East,  was  reported  to  contain  600,000  people.
CARTHAGE  is  said  by  STRABO3  to  have  contained  700,000.
The  inhabitants  of  PEKIN  are  not  much  more  numerous.

1  Lib.  ix.  cap.  10. His  expression  is  2  Lib.  vi.  cap.  28.

avBpuTTos,  not iroArrTjy  ;  inhabitant,  not  3  Lib.  xvii.  833.

citizen.


432  ESSAY XT.

LONDON,  PARIS,  and  CONSTANTINOPLE,  may  admit  of  nearly
the  same  computation ;  at  least,  the  two  latter  cities  do  not
exceed  it.  KOME,  ALEXANDRIA,  ANTIOCH,  we  have  already
spoken  of.  From  the  experience  of  past  and  present  ages,
one  might  conjecture  that  there  is  a  kind  of  impossibility,
that  any  city  could  ever  rise  much  beyond  this  proportion.
Whether  the  grandeur  of  a  city  be  founded  on  commerce  01
on  empire,  there  seem  to  be  invincible  obstacles,  which  pre
vent  its  farther  progress.  The  seats  of  vast  monarchies,  by
introducing  extravagant  luxury,  irregular  expence,  idleness,
dependence,  and  false  ideas  of  rank  and  superiority,  are  im
proper  for  commerce.  Extensive  commerce  checks  itself,  by
raising  the  price  of  all  labour  and  commodities.  When  a
great  court  engages  the  attendance  of  a  numerous  nobility,
possessed  of  overgrown  fortunes,  the  middling  gentry  remain
in  their  provincial  towns,  where  they  can  make  a  figure  on  a
moderate  income.  And  if  the  dominions  of  a  state  arrive
at  an  enormous  size,  there  necessarily  arise  many  capitals,  in
the  remoter  provinces,  whither  all  the  inhabitants,  except  a
few  courtiers,  repair  for  education,  fortune,  and  amusement.1
LONDON,  by  uniting  extensive  commerce  and  middling  empire,
has,  perhaps,  arrived  at  a  greatness,  which  no  city  will  ever
be  able  to  exceed.

Chuse  DOVER  or  CALAIS  for  a  center  :  Draw  a  circle  of
two  hundred  miles  radius :  You  comprehend  LONDON,  PARIS,
the  NETHERLANDS,  the  UNITED  PROVINCES,  and  some  of  the
best  cultivated  parts  of  FRANCE  and  ENGLAND.  It  may
safely,  I  think,  be  affirmed,  that  no  spot  of  ground  can  be
found,  in  antiquity,  of  equal  extent,  which  contained  near  so
many  great  and  populous  cities,  and  was  so  stocked  with
riches  and  inhabitants.  To  balance,  in  both  periods,  the
states,  which  possessed  most  art,  knowledge,  civility,  and  the
best  police,  seems  the  truest  method  of  comparison.

It  is  an  observation  of  L'ABBE  DU  Bos,2  that  ITALY  is
warmer  at  present  than  it  was  in  ancient  times,  '  The  annals

*  of  ROME  tell  us,'  says  he,  '  that  in  the  year  483  ab  U.C.  the

*  winter was so severe that  it  destroyed the  trees. The
'  TYBER  froze  in  ROME,  and  the ground  was  covered  with

1  Such  were  ALEXANDRIA,  ANTIOCH,  ROUEN,  Aix,  &c.  in  FRANCE  ;  DUBLIN,

CAKTIIAGB,  EPHKSUS,  LYONS,  &c.  in  the  EDINBURGH,  YORK,  in  the  BRITISH  do-

ROMAN  empire. Such  are  even  BOUR-  minions.

UEAUX, THOLOUSE, DIJON, RENNES,  "  Vol.  2.  Sect.  1C.


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  433

'  snow  for  forty  days.  When  JUVENAL  '  describes  a  super-
'  stitious  woman,  he  represents  her  as  breaking  the  ice  of  the
4  TYBER,  that  she  might  perform  her  ablutions  :

'  Hybernum  fr act  a  glacis  descendet  in  amnem,
'  Ter  matutino  Tyberi  mvrgetur.

f  He  speaks  of  that  river's  freezing  as  a  common  event.
'  Many  passages  of  HORACE  suppose  the  streets  of  BOMB  full
'of  snow  and  ice.  We  should  have  more  certainty  with
'  regard  to  this  point,  had  the  ancients  known  the  use  of

*  thermometers  :  But  their  writers,  without  intending  it,  give
'  us  information,  sufficient  to  convince  us,  that  the winters
'  are  now  much  more  temperate  at  ROME  than  formerly. At

*  present  the TYBER no more freezes  at  ROME  than  the

*  NILE at CAIRO. The  ROMANS  esteem  the  winters  very

*  rigorous,  if  the  snow  lie  two  days,  and  if  one  see  for  eight
'  and  forty  hours  a  few  icicles  hang  from  a  fountain  that  has

*  a  north  exposure.'

The  observation  of  this  ingenious  critic  may  be  extended
to  other  EUROPEAN  climates.  Who  could  discover  the  mild
climate  of  FRANCE  in  DIODORUS  SICULUS'S*  description  of
that  of  GAUL  ?  '  As  it  is  a  northern  climate,'  says  he,  *  it  is

*  infested  with  cold  to  an  extreme  degree. In  cloudy  weather,

*  instead  of-  rain  there  fall  great  snows  ;  and  in  clear  weather
'  it  there  freezes  so  excessive  hard,  that  the  rivers  acquire
'bridges of their own  substance, over which,  not only

*  single  travellers  may  pass,  but  large  armies,  accompanied
'with  all  their  baggage  and  loaded  waggons. And  there
'  being  many  rivers  in  GAUL,  the  RHONE,  the  RHINE,  &c.,
'  almost  all  of  them  are  frozen  over ;  and  it  is  usual,  in  order
'  to  prevent  falling,  to  cover  the  ice  with  chaff  and  straw  at
'the  places  where  the  road  passes.' 3 Colder  than  a  GALLIC
Winter,  is  used by  PETRONIUS  as  a  proverbial  expression.
ARISTOTLE  says,  that  GAUL  is  so  cold  a  climate  that  an  ass
could  not  live  in  it.4

North  of  the  CEVENNES,  says  STRABO,5  GAUL  produces  not
figs  and  olives  :  And  the  vines,  which  have  been  planted,
bear  not  grapes,  that  will  ripen.

OVID  positively  maintains,  with  all  the  serious  affirmation

1  Sat.  6.  522.  added  in  Edition  R]

2  Lib.  iv.  25.  4  De  generat.  anim.  lib.  ii.  8,  14*

3  [The  next  two  sentences  are  not  in  s  Lib.  iv.  178.
Editions  H  to  K :  and the  latter  was

VOL. III.  F  F


434  ESSAY  XL

of  prose,  that  the  EUXINE  sea  was  frozen  over  every  winter
in  his  time ;  and  he  appeals  to  ROMAN  governours,  whom  he
names,  for  the  truth  of  his  assertion.1  This  seldom  or  never
happens  at  present  in  the  latitude  of  TOMI,  whither  OVID
was  banished.  All  the  complaints  of  the  same  poet  seem  to
mark  a  rigour  of  the  seasons,  which  is  scarcely  experienced
at  present  in  PETERSBURGH  or  STOCKHOLM.

TOURNEFORT,  a  Provencal,  who  had  travelled  into  the  same
country,  observes  that  there  is  not  a  finer  climate  in  the
world  :  And  he  asserts  that  nothing  but  OVID'S  melancholy
could  have  given  him  such  dismal  ideas  of  it.  But  the  facts,
mentioned  by  that  poet,  are  too  circumstantial  to  bear  any
such  interpretation.

POLTBIUS  2  says  that  the  climate  in  ARCADIA  was  very
cold,  and  the  air  moist.

'  ITALY,'  says  VARRO,S  '  is  the  most  temperate  climate  in
EUROPE.  The  inland  parts '  (GAUL,  GERMANY,  and  PAN-
NONIA,  no  doubt)  '  have  almost  perpetual  winter.'

The  northern  parts  of  SPAIN,  according  to  STRABO,4  are
but  ill  inhabited,  because  of  the  great  cold.

Allowing,  therefore,  this  remark  to  be  just,  that  EUROPE
is  become  warmer  than  formerly ;  how  can  we  account  for  it  ?
Plainly,  by  no  other  method,  than  by  supposing  that  the
land  is  at  present  much  better  cultivated,  and  that  the
woods  are  cleared,  which  formerly  threw  a  shade  upon  the
earth,  and  kept  the  rays  of  the  sun  from  penetrating  to  it.
Our  northern  colonies  in  AMERICA  become  more  temperate,
in  proportion  as  the  woods  are  felled ; s  but  in  general,  every
one  may  remark  that  cold  is  still  much  more  severely  felt,
both  in  North  and  South  AMERICA,  than  in  places  under  the
same  latitude  in  EUROPE.

SASERNA,  quoted  by  COLUMELLA,S  affirmed  that  the  dispo
sition  of  the  heavens  was  altered  before  his  time,  and  that
the  air  had  become  much  milder  and  warmer ;  as  appears
hence,  says  he,  that  many  places  now  abound  with  vineyards
and  olive  plantations,  which  formerly,  by  reason  of  the  rigour

1  Trist.  lib.  iii.  eleg.  10. De  Ponto, of  the  first  discovery  and  conquest  of
lib.  iv.  eleg.  7.  9,  10.  these  countries, they  appear  to  have

2  Lib.  iv.  cap.  21.  been  very  healthful; being  then  well
8  Lib.  i.  cap.  2.  peopled  and  cultivated. No  account  of

4  Lib.  iii.  137-  the sickness  or  decay  of  COETES'S  or

5  The  warm  southern  colonies also  PIZARRO'S  small  armies,
become  more  healthful :  And  it  is  re-  6  Lib.  i.  cap.  1.
markable,  that  in  the  SVANISH  histories


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  435

of  the  climate,  could  raise  none  of  these  productions.  Such
a  change,  if  real,  will  be  allowed  an  evident  sign  of  the  better
cultivation  and  peopling  of  countries  before  the  age  of
SASERNA  ;  '  and  if  it  be  continued  to  the  present  times,  is  a
proof,  that  these  advantages  have  been  continually  encreasing
throughout  this  part  of  the  world.

Let  us  now  cast  our  eye  over  all  the  countries  which  are
the  scene  of  ancient  and  modern  history,  and  compare  their
past  and  present  situation  :  We  shall  not,  perhaps,  find  such
foundation  for  the  complaint  of  the  present  emptiness  and
desolation  of  the  world.  U?EGYPT  is  represented  by  MAILLET,
to  whom  we  owe  the  best  account  of  it,  as  extremely  popu
lous  ;  though  he  esteems  the  number  of  its  inhabitants  to  be
diminished.  SYRIA,  and  the  Lesser  ASIA,  as  well  as  the
coast  of  BARBARY,  I  can  readily  own,  to  be  desart  in  compa
rison  of  their  ancient  condition.  The  depopulation  of
GREECE  is  also  obvious.  But  whether  the  country  now
called  TURKEY  in  EUROPE  may  not,  in  general,  contain  more
inhabitants  than  during  the  flourishing  period  of  GREECE,
may  be  a  little  doubtful.  The  THRACIANS  seem  then  to
have  lived  like  the  TARTARS  at  present,  by  pasturage  and
plunder :  2  The  GETES  were  still  more  uncivilized  : 3  And  the
ILLYRIANS  were  no  better.4  These  occupy  nine-tenths  ot
that  country  :  And  though  the  government  of  the  TURKS  be
not  very  favourable  to  industry  and  propagation  ;  yet  it  pre
serves  at  least  peace  and  order  among  the  inhabitants  ;  and
is  preferable  to  that  barbarous,  unsettled  condition,  in  which
they  anciently  lived.

POLAND  and  MUSCOVY  in  EUROPE  are  not  populous ;  but
are  certainly  much  more  so  than  the  ancient  SARMATIA  and
SCYTHIA  ;  where  no  husbandry  or  tillage  was  ever  heard  of,
and  pasturage  was  the  sole  art  by  which  the  people  were
maintained.  The  like  observation  may  be  extended  to
DENMARK  and  SWEDEN.  No  one  ought  to  esteem  the  im
mense  swarms  of  people,  which  formerly  came  from  the
North,  and  over-ran  all  EUROPE,  to  be  any  objection  to  this
opinion.  Where  a  whole  nation,  or  even  half  of  it  remove
their  seat,  it  is  easy  to  imagine,  what  a  prodigious  multitude
they  must  form;  with  what  desperate  valour  they  must

1  He  seems  to  hare  lived  about  the iv.  cap.  45.

time  of  the  younger  AFKICANTJS  ;  lib.  i.  8  Ovid,  passim,  $c. Strabo,  lib.  vii.

cap.  1.  4  Polyb.  lib.  ii.  cap.  12.

2  Xcnoph.  Kxp.  lib.  vii. Polyb.  lib.

F  F  2


430  ESSAY  XI.

make  their  attacks ;  and  how  the  terror  they  strike  into  the
invaded  nations  will  make  these  magnify,  in  their  imagina
tion,  both  the  courage  and  multitude  of  the  invaders.  SCOT
LAND  is  neither  extensive  nor  populous ;  but  were  the  half
of  its  inhabitants  to  seek  new  seats,  they  would  form  a
colony  as  numerous  as  the  TEUTONS  and  CIMBEI  ;  and  would
shake  all  EUEOPE,  supposing  it  in  no  better  condition  for
defence  than  formerly.

GERMANY  has  surely  at  present  twenty  times  more  inha
bitants  than  in  ancient  times,  when  they  cultivated  no
ground,  and  each  tribe  valued  itself  on  the  extensive  desola
tion  which  it  spread  around;  as  we  learn  from  G/ESAR,'  and
TACITUS,2  and  STRABO.S  A  proof,  that  the  division  into
small  republics  will  not  alone  render  a  nation  populous,
unless  attended  with  the  spirit  of  peace,  order,  and  industry.

The  barbarous  condition  of  BRITAIN  in  former  times  is
well  known,  and  the  thinness  of  its  inhabitants  may  easily  be
conjectured,  both  from  their  barbarity,  and  from  a  circum
stance  mentioned  by  HERODiAN,4  that  all  BRITAIN  was
marshy,  even  in  SEVERUS'S  time,  after  the  ROMANS  had  been
fully  settled  in  it  above  a  century.

It  is  not  easily  imagined,  that  the  GAULS  were  anciently
much  more  advanced  in  the  arts  of  life  than  their  northern
neighbours  ;  since  they  travelled  to  this  island  for  their
ediication  in  the  mysteries  of  the  religion  and  philosophy  of
the  DRUIDS.*  I  cannot,  therefore,  think,  that  GAUL  was
then  near  so  populous  as  FRANCE  is  at  present.

Were  we  to  believe,  indeed,  and  join  together  the  testi
mony  of  APPIAN,  and  that  of  DIODORUS  SICULUS,  we  must
admit  of  an  incredible  populousness  in  GAUL.  The  former
historian  6  says,  that  there  were  400  nations  in  that  country ;
the  latter  7  affirms,  that  the  largest  of  the  GALLIC  nations
consisted  of  200,000  men,  besides  women  and  children,  and
the  least  of  50,000.  Calculating,  therefore,  at  a  medium,
we  must  admit  of  near  200  millions  of  people,  in  a  country,
which  we  esteem  populous  at  present,  though  supposed  to
contain  little  more  than  twenty.8  Such  calculations,  there-

1  De  Bella  Gal/ico,  lib.  vi.  23.  were  not  much  more  improved  than  the

2  De  Moribus  Germ.  GERMANS.

3  Lib.  vii.  6  Celt,  pars  1.  lib.  iv.  2.

4  Lib.  iii.  cap.  47.  '  Lib.  v.  25.

5  CJESAH  de  Bella  Galileo,  lib.  vi.  13.  8  Ancient  GAUL  was  more  extensive
STRABO,  lib.  vii.  290  says,  the  GAULS  than  modern  FRANCE.


POPULOUSNESS OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  437

fore,  by  their  extravagance,  lose  all  manner  of  authority.
We  may  observe,  that  the  equality  of  property,  to  which  the
populousness  of  antiquity  may  be  ascribed,  had  no  place
among  the  GAULS.!  Their  intestine  wars  also,  before
CAESAR'S  time,  were  almost  perpetual.2  And  STRABO  3
observes,  that,  though  all  GAUL  was  cultivated,  yet  was  it
not  cultivated  with  any  skill  or  care;  the  genius  of  the
inhabitants  leading  them  less  to  arts  than  arms,  till  their
slavery  under  SOME  produced  peace  among  themselves.

CAESAR*  enumerates  very  particularly  the  great  forces
which  were  levied  in  BELGIUM  to  oppose  his  conquest,  and
makes  them  amount  to  208,000.  These  were  not  the  whole
people  able  to  bear  arms  :  For  the  same  historian  tells  us,
that  the  BELLOVACI  could  have  brought  a  hundred  thousand
men  into  the  field,  though  they  engaged  only  for  sixty.
Taking  the  whole,  therefore,  in  this  proportion  of  ten  to  six,
6  the  sum  of  fighting  men  in  all  the  states  of  BELGIUM  was
about  350,000;  all  the  inhabitants  a  million  and  a  half.  And
BELGIUM  being  about  a  fourth  of  GAUL,  that  country  might
contain  six  millions,  which  is  not 6  near  the  third  of  its
present  inhabitants.7  8  We  are  informed  by  CAESAR,  that  the
GAULS  had  no  fixed  property  in  land ;  but  that  the  chief
tains,  when  any  death  happened  in  a  family,  made  a  new
division  of  all  the  lands  among  the  several  members  of  the
family.  This  is  the  custom  of  Tanistry,  which  so  long
prevailed  in  IRELAND,  and  which  retained  that  country  in
a  state  of  misery,  barbarism  and  desolation.

1  C^ESAK  de  Bella  Gallico,  lib.  vi.  1 3.  day :  And a nobleman  of  GAUL had

2  Id.  ibid.  15.  sometimes  ten  thousand  dependants  of

3  Lib.  iv.  178.  this  kind. Nor  can  we  doubt,  that  the

4  De  Bdlo  Gallico,  lib.  ii.  4.  armies  were  composed  of  the  people  as

5  [Editions  H  and  I  read  as  follows :  well  as  of  the  nobility: An  army  of
The  sum of fighting  men  in  all the  100,000 noblemen  from  a  very  small
States  of  BELGIUM  was  above  half  a  state  is  incredible. The  fighting  men
million ; the whole inhabitants two  amongst  the  HELVETII  were  the  fourth
millions. And  BELGIUM being about  part  of  the  whole  inhabitants  ;  a  ele;ir
the  fourth  of  G-AUL,  that  country  might  proof  that  all  the  males  of  military  ngo
contain  eight  millions,  which  is  scarce  bore  arms. See CJESAB  de  bello  Gall.
above  the  third  of  its  present  inhabi-  lib.  1.

tants.]  We  may  remark,  that  the  numbers

6  ['Near'  wns  added  in  Edition  R.]  in  CAESAR'S  commentaries  can  be  more

7  It  appears  from CJESAR'S  account,  depended  on than  those  of  any  other
that  the  GAULS  had  no  domestic  slaves,1  antient  author, because  of  the  GKEEK
(who  formed  a  different  order  from  the  translation, which still remains, and
Plebes.)  The  whole  common  people  were  which  checks  the  LATIX  original.
indeed  a  kind  of  slaves  to  the  nobility,  8  [The  remainder  of  the  paragraph
as  the  people  of  POLAXD  are  at this  was  added  in  Edition  N  )

1 ['  who — Plebes'  not  in  Editions  H  and  I.]


488  ESSAY  XI.

The  ancient  HELVETIA  was  250  miles  in  length,  and  180
in  breadth,  according  to  the  same  author  ;  *  yet  contained
only  360,000  inhabitants.  The  canton  of  BERNE  alone  has,
at  present,  as  many  people.

After  this  computation  of  APPIAN  and  DIODORUS  SICULU&,
1  know  not,  whether  I  dare  affirm,  that  the  modern  DUTCE
are  more  numerous  than  the  ancient  BATAVI.

SPAIN  is,  perhaps,  decayed  from  what  it  was  three  cen
turies  ago;  but  if  we  step  backward  two  thousand  years,
and  consider  the  restless,  turbulent,  unsettled  condition  of
its  inhabitants,  we  may  probably  be  inclined  to  think  that  it
is  now  much  more  populous.  Many  SPANIARDS  killed  them
selves,  when  deprived  of  their  arms  by  the  EoMANS.2  It
appears  from  PLUTARCH  3,  that  robbery  and  plunder  were
esteemed  honourable  among  the  SPANIARDS.  HIRTIUS  4
represents  in  the  same  light  the  situation  of  that  country  in
CAESAR'S  time  ;  and  he  says,  that  every  man  was  obliged  to
live  in  castles  and  walled  towns  for  his  security.  It  was  not
till  its  final  conquest  under  AUGUSTUS,  that  these  disorders
were  repressed.5  The  account  which  STRABO  6  and  JUSTIN  r
give  of  SPAIN,  corresponds  exactly  with  those  above  men
tioned.  How  much,  therefore,  must  it  diminish  from  our
idea  of  the  populousness  of  antiquity,  when  we  find  that
TULLY,  comparing  ITALY,  AFRIC,  GAUL,  GREECE,  and  SPAIN,
mentions  the  great  number  of  inhabitants,  as  the  peculiar
circumstance,  which  rendered  this  latter  country  formidable  ?  8

ITALY,  however,  it  is  probable,  has  decayed  :  But  how
many  great  cities  does  it  still  contain  ?  VENICE,  GENOA,
PA  VIA,  TURIN,  MILAN,  NAPLES,  FLORENCE,  LEGHORN,  which
either  subsisted  not  in  ancient  times,  or  were  then  very
inconsiderable  ?  If  we  reflect  on  this,  we  shall  not  be  apt
to  carry  matters  to  so  great  an  extreme  as  is  usual,  with
regard  to  this  subject.

When  the  EOMAN  authors  complain,  that  ITALY,  which


.  lib.  i.  2.  gentis, ac  terrse domestico natiroque

Titi  Livii,  lib.  xxxiv.  cap.  17.  sensu,  Italos  ipsos  ac  Latinos—  super-

In  vita  Marti.  6.  avimus.' De  harusp.  resp.  cap.  9. The

*  De  Hello  Hisp.8.  disorders  of  SPAIN  seem  to  have  been

Veil.  Paterc.  lib.  ii.  §  90.  almost  proverbial: 'Nee impacatos  a

Lib.  hi.  tergo horrebis Iberos.' Virg. Gcorg.

s  Lib.  xliv.  lib.  iii.  408. The  IBERI  are  here  plainly

'  Nee  numero  Hispanos,  nee  robore  taken,  by  a  poetical  figure,  for  robbers

Gallos,  nee  calliditate  Pocnos,  nee  arti-  in  general.
bus  Grsecos,  nee  denique  hoc  ipso  hujus


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  439

formerly  exported  corn,  became  dependent  on  all  the  pro
vinces  for  its  daily  bread,  they  never  ascribe  this  alteration
to  the  encrease  of  its  inhabitants,  but  to  the  neglect  of  tillage
and  agriculture.1  A  natural  effect  of  that  pernicious  practice
of  importing  corn,  in  order  to  distribute  it  gratis  among  the
BOMAN  citizens,  and  a  very  bad  means  of  multiplying  the
inhabitants  of  any  country.2  The  sportula,  so  much  talked
of  by  MARTIAL  and  JUVENAL,  being  presents  regularly  made
by  the  great  lords  to  their  smaller  clients,  must  have  had  a
like  tendency  to  produce  idleness,  debauchery,  and  a  conti
nual  decay  among  the  people.  The  parish-rates  have  at
present  the  same  bad  consequences  in  ENGLAND.

Were  I  to  assign  a  period,  when  I  imagine  this  part  of  the
world  might  possibly  contain  more  inhabitants  than  at  pre
sent,  I  should  pitch  upon  the  age  of  TRAJAN  and  the  ANTO-
NINES  ;  the  great  extent  of  the  BOM  AN  empire  being  then
civilized  and  cultivated,  settled  almost  in  a  profound  peace
both  foreign  and  domestic,  and  living  under  the  same  regular
police  and  government.3  But  we  are  told  that  all  extensive
governments,  especially  absolute  monarchies,  are  pernicious
to  population,  and  contain  a  secret  vice  and  poison,  which

1  VARRO  de  re  rustica,  lib.  ii.  prasf.  deum  electa  (speaking  of  ITALY)  quae

COLTJMELLA  prsef.  SHEWN.  AUGUST.  ccelum  ipsum  clarius  faceret,  sparsa

cap.  42.  congregaret  imperia,  ritusque  molliret,

*  Though  the  observations  of  L'Abbe  &  tot  populorum  discordes,  ferasque

du  Bos  should  be  admitted,  that  ITALY  linguas  sermonis  commercio  contrahe-

is  now  warmer  than  in  former  times,  ret  ad  colloquia,  &  humanitatem  homini

the  consequence  may  not  be  necessary,  daret ;  breviterque,  una  cunctarum  gen-

that  it  is  more  populous  or  better  cul-  tium  in  toto  orbe  patria  fieret ; '  lib.  ii.

tivated.  If  the  other  countries  of  cap.  5.  Nothing  can  be  stronger  to  this

EUROPE  were  more  savage  and  woody,  purpose  than  the  following  passage

the  cold  winds  that  blew  from  them,  from  TERTOLLIAN,  who  lived  about  the

might  affect  the  climate  of  Italy.  age  of  SEVERUS.  'Certe  quidem  ipse

3  The  inhabitants  of  MARSEILLES  orbis  in  promptu  est,  cultior  de  die  &
lost  not  their  superiority  over  the  instructior  pristine.  Omnia  jam  pervia,
GAULS  in  commerce  and  the  mechanic  omnia  nota,  omnia  negotiosa.  Solitu-
arts,  till  the  ROMAN  dominion  turned  dines  famosas  retro  fundi  amcenissimi
the  latter  from  arms  to  agriculture  and  obliteraverunt,  silvas  arva  domuerunt,
civil  life.  See  STRABO,  lib.  iv.  180-1.  feras  pecora  fugaverunt;  arense  serun-
That  author,  in  several  places,  repeats  tur,  saxa  panguntur,  paludes  eliquantur,
the  observation  concerning  the  improve-  tantse  urbes,  quantse  non  casse  quondam,
rnent  arising  from  the  ROMAN  arts  and  Jam  nee  insulse  horrent,  nee  scopuli
civility :  And  he  lived  at  the  time  when  terrent ;  ubique  domus,  ubique  populus,
the  change  was  new,  and  would  be  ubique  respublica,  ubique  vita.  Sum-
more  sensible.  So  also  PLINY:  'Quis  mum  testimonium  frequentise  humanse,
enim  non,  communicate  orbe  terrarum,  onerosi  sumus  mundo,  vix  nobis  ele-
majestate  ROMANI  imperii,  profecisse  menta  sufficiunt ;  &  necessitates  arc-
vitam  putet,  commercio  rerum  ac  socie-  tiores,  et  querelae  apud  omnes,  dum  jam
tate  festse  pacis,  omniaque  etiam,  quse  nos  natura  non  sustinet.'  De  aiiima,
occulta  antea  fuerant,  in  promiscuo  cap.  30.  The  air  of  rhetoric  and  de-
usufacta.  Lib.  xiv.  prooem.  Numine  clamation  which  appears  in  this  pussage,


440


ESSAY  XI.


destroy  the  effect  of  all  these  promising  appearances.1  To
confirm  this,  there  is  a  passage  cited  from  PLUTARCH,"  which
being  somewhat  singular,  we  shall  here  examine  it.

That  author,  endeavouring  to  account  for  the  silence  of
many  of  the  oracles,  says,  that  it  may  be  ascribed  to  the
present  desolation  of  the  world,  proceeding  from  former  wars
and  factions ;  which  common  calamity,  he  adds,  has  fallen
heavier  upon  GREECE  than  on  any  other  country  ;  insomuch,
that  the  whole  could  scarcely  at  present  furnish  three  thou
sand  warriors ;  a  number  which,  in  the  time  of  the  MEDIAN
war,  were  supplied  by  the  single  city  of  MEGARA.  The  gods,
therefore,  who  affect  works  of  dignity  and  importance,  have
suppressed  many  of  their  oracles,  and  deign  not  to  use  so
many  interpreters  of  their  will  to  so  diminutive  a  people.

I  must  confess,  that  this  passage  contains  so  many  difficul
ties,  that  I  know  not  what  to  make  of  it.  You  may  observe,


diminishes  somewhat  from  its  authority,
but  does  not  entirely  destroy  it.1  The
eame  remark  may  be  extended  to  the
following  passage  of  ARISTIDES  the
sophist,  who  lived  in  the  age  of  ADRIAN.
'  The  whole  world,'  says  he,  addressing
himself  to  the  ROMANS,  '  seems  to  keep
one  holiday;  and  mankind,  laying  aside
the  sword  which  they  formerly  wore,
now  betake  themselves  to  feasting  and
to  joy-  The  cities,  forgetting  their
ancient  animosities,  preserve  only  one
emulation,  which  shall  embellish  itself
most  by  every  art  and  ornament ;
Theatres  every  where  arise,  amphithea
tres,  porticoes,  aqueducts,  temples,
schools,  academies  ;  and  one  may  safely
pronounce,  that  the  sinking  world  has
been  again  raised  by  your  auspicious
empire.  Nor  have  cities  alone  received
an  encrease  of  ornament  and  beauty ;
but  the  whole  earth,  like  a  garden  or
paradise,  is  cultivated  and  adorned :
Insomuch,  that  such  of  mankind  as  are
placed  out  of  the  limits  of  your  empire
(who  are  but  few)  seem  to  merit  our
sympathy  and  compassion.'

it  is  remarkable,  that  though  Dio-
DORUS  SICULUS  makes  the  inhabitants
of  ^EGYPT,  when  conquered  by  the
EOMANS,  amount  only  to  three  millions ;
yet  JOSEPH,  da  bcllo  Jud.  lib.  ii.  cap.  16.


says,  that  its  inhabitants,  excluding
those  of  ALEXANDRIA,  were  seven  mil
lions  and  a  half,  in  the  reign  of  NERO  :
And  he  expressly  says,  that  he  drew  this
account  from  the  books  of  the  ROMAN
publicans,  who  levied  the  poll-tax,
STRABO,  lib.  xvii.  797,  praises  the  su
perior  police  of  the  EOMANS  with  regard
to  the  finances  of  J^GYPT,  above  that  of
its  former  monarchs  :  And  no  part  of
administration  is  more  essential  to  the
happiness  of  a  people.  Yet  we  read
in  ATHEN^EUS,  (lib.  i.  cap.  25.)  who
flourished  during  the  reign  of  the
ANTONINES,  that  the  town  MAREIA,  near
ALEXANDRIA,  which  was  formerly  a  large
city,  had  dwindled  into  a  village.  This
is  not,  properly  speaking,  a  contradic
tion.  SUIDAS  (AUGUST.)  says,  that  the
Emperor  AUGUSTUS,  having  numbered
the  whole  ROMAN  empire,  found  it
contained  only  4,101,017  men  (&vSpes).
There  is  here  surely  some  great  mis
take,  either  in  the  author  or  tran
scriber.  But  this  authority,  feeble  as
it  is,  may  be  sufficient  to  coimterbalance
the  exaggerated  accounts  of  HERODOTUS
and  DIODORUS  SICULUS  with  regard  to
more  early  times.

1  L' Esprit  de  Loix,  liv.  xxiii.  chap.
19.

2  De  Orac.  Defectu.


1  [Editions  H  and  I  add  :  A  man  of
violent  imagination,  such  asTERTUixiAN,
augments  everything  equally,  and  for


that  reason  his  comparative  judgments
are  the  most  to  be  depended  on.]


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  441

that  PLUTARCH  assigns,  for  a  cause  of  the  decay  of  mankind,
not  the  extensive  dominion  of  the  EOHANS,  but  the  former
wars  and  factions  of  the  several  states ;  all  which  were
quieted  by  the  EOMAN  arms.  PLUTARCH'S  reasoning,  there
fore,  is  directly  contrary  to  the  inference,  which  is  drawn  from
the  fact  he  advances.

POLTBIUS  supposes,  that  GREECE  had  become  more  pros
perous  and  flourishing  after  the  establishment  of  the  EOMAN
yoke1;  and  though  that  historian  wrote  before  these  con
querors  had  degenerated,  from  being  the  patrons,  to  be  the
plunderers  of  mankind ;  yet,  as  we  find  from  TACITUS,2  that
the  severity  of  the  emperors  afterwards  corrected  the  licence
of  the  governors,  we  have  no  reason  to  think  that  extensive
monarchy  so  destructive  as  it  is  often  represented.

We  learn  from  STRABO,3  that  the  EOMANS,  from  their
regard  to  the  GREEKS,  maintained,  to  his  time,  most  of  the
privileges  and  liberties  of  that  celebrated  nation  ;  and  NERO
afterwards  rather  encreased  them.4  How  therefore  can  we
imagine,  that  the  EOMAN  yoke  was  so  burdensome  over  that
part  of  the  world  ?  The  oppression  of  the  proconsuls  was
checked ;  and  the  magistracies  in  GREECE  being  all  bestowed,
in  the  several  cities,  by  the  free  votes  of  the  people,  there  was
no  necessity  for  the  competitors  to  attend  the  emperor's  court.
If  great  numbers  went  to  seek  their  fortunes  in  EOME,  and
advance  themselves  by  learning  or  eloquence,  the  commodities
of  their  native  country,  many  of  them  would  return  with  the
fortunes  which  they  had  acquired,  and  thereby  enrich  the
GRECIAN  commonwealths.

But  PLUTARCH  says,  that  the  general  depopulation  had
been  more  sensibly  felt  in  GREECE  than  in  any  other  country.
How  is  this  reconcileable  to  its  superior  privileges  and  advan
tages  ?

Besides,  this  passage,  by  proving  too  much,  really  proves
nothing.  Only  three  thousand  men  able  to  bear  arms  in  all
GREECE  !  Who  can  admit  so  strange  a  proposition,  espe-

1  LIB.  ii. cap.  62. It  may  perhaps  if  there  be  any  suspicion  of  an  author's

be  imagined,  that  POLYBITTS,  being  de-  insincerity,  that  these  oblique  proposi-

pendeut  on  ROME,  would  naturally  extol  tions  discover  his  real  opinion  better

the  ROMAX  dominion. But,  in  the  first  than  his  more  formal  and  direct  aeser-

place,  PoLYBius,  though  one  sees  some-  tions.

times  instances  of  his  caution,  discovers  2  Annal.  lib.  i.  cap.  2.

no  symptoms  of  flattery.  Secondly,  This  8  Lib.  yiii.  and  ix.

opinion  is only  delivered  in  a  single  4  PLUTARCH.  De  his  qid  scro  a  Numine

Btroke,  by  the  by,  while  he  is  intent  puniuntur.
upon  another  subject;  and  it  is  allowed,


442  ESSAY  XL

cially  if  we  consider  the  great  number  of  GREEK  cities,  whose
names  still  remain  in  history,  and  which  are  mentioned  by
writers  long  after  the  age  of  PLUTARCH?  There  are  there
surely  ten  times  more  people  at  present,  when  there  scarcely
remains  a  city  in  all  the  bounds  of  ancient  GREECE.  That
country  is  still  tolerably  cultivated,  and  furnishes  a  sure
supply  of  corn,  in  case  of  any  scarcity  in  SPAIN,  ITALY,  or
the  south  of  FRANCE.

We  may  observe,  that  the  ancient  frugality  of  the  GREEKS,
and  their  equality  of  property,  still  subsisted  during  the  age
of  PLUTARCH  ;  as  appears  from  LuciAN.1  Nor  is  there  any
ground  to  imagine,  that  that  country  was  possessed  by  a  few
masters,  and  a  great  number  of  slaves.

It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  military  discipline,  being  en
tirely  useless,  was  extremely  neglected  in  GREECE  after  the
establishment  of  the  ROMAN  empire ;  and  if  these  common
wealths,  formerly  so  warlike  and  ambitious,  maintained  each
of  them  a  small  city-guard,  to  prevent  mobbish  disorders,  it
is  all  they  had  occasion  for :  And  these,  perhaps,  did  not
amount  to  3,000  men,  throughout  all  GREECE.  I  own,  that,
if  PLUTARCH  had  this  fact  in  his  eye,  he  is  here  guilty  of  a
gross  paralogism,  and  assigns  causes  no  wise  proportioned  to
the  effects.  But  is  it  so  great  a  prodigy,  that  an  author
should  fall  into  a  mistake  of  this  nature  ?2

1  De  merccde  conductis.  been  found  in  most  of  his  other  com-

2  I  must  confess  that  that  disomrse positions.

of  PLUTARCH,  concerning  the  silence  of  There  is  only  one  other  discourse  of
the  oracles,  is  in  general  of  so  odd  a  PLUTARCH  liable  to  like  objections,  viz.
texture,  and  so  unlike  his  other  produc-  that  concerning  those  whose  punishment
tions,  that  one  is  at  a  loss  what  judg-  is  delayed  by  the  Deity.  It  is  also
ment  to  form  of  it.  'Tis  wrote  in  wrote  in  dialogue,  contains  like  super-
dialogue,  which  is  a  method  of  composi-  stitious,  wild  visions,  and  seems  to  have
tion  that  PLUTARCH  commonly  little  been  chiefly  composed  in  rivalship  to
affects.  The  personages  he  introduces  PLATO,  particularly  his  last  book  de
advance  very  wild,  absurd,  and  contra-  rcpublica.

dictory  opinions,  more  like  the  visionary  And  here  I  cannot  but  observe,  that

systems  or  ravings  of  PLATO  than  the  Mons. FONTENELLE,  a  writer  eminent

solid  sense  of  PLUTARCH. There  runs  for  candor,  seems  to  have  departed  a

also  thro'  the  whole  an  air  of  supersti-  little  from  his  usual  character,  when  he

tion and credulity, which resembles  endeavours to  throw  a  ridicule  upon

very  little the spirit  that  appears  in  PLUTARCH  on  account  of  passages  to  be

other  philosophical  compositions  of  that  met  with  in  this dialogue concerning

author. For  'tis  remarkable,  that  tho'  oracles. The  absurdities  here  put  into

PLUTARCH  be  an  historian  as  supersti-  the  mouths  of  the  several  personages

tious  as  HERODOTUS  or  LIVY,  yet  there  are  not  to  be  ascribed to  PLUTARCH.

is scarcely, in all  antiquity,  a  philo-  He  makes  them  refute  each  other ;  and,

sopher less superstitious, excepting  in general, he seems to intend the

CICERO  and  LUCIAX. I  must  therefore  ridiculing  of  those  very  opinions,  which

confess, that  a  passage  of  PLUTARCH,  FONTENKLLE  would ridicule him for

cited from this discourse, has much  maintaining. See  Histoirc  dcs  oracles.
less  authority  with  me,  than if  it  had


POPULOUSNESS  OF  ANCIENT  NATIONS.  443

But  whatever  force  may  remain  in  this  passage  of  PLU
TARCH,  we  shall  endeavour  to  counterbalance  it  by  as  remark
able  a  passage  in  DIODORUS  SICULUS,  where  the  historian,
after  mentioning  NINUS'S  army  of  1,700,000  foot  and  200,000
horse,  endeavours  to  support  the  credibility  of  this  account
by  some  posterior  facts  ;  and  adds,  that  we  must  not  form  a
notion  of  the  ancient  populousness  of  mankind  from  the
present  emptiness  and  depopulation  which  is  spread  over
the  world.1  Thus  an  author,  who  lived  at  that  very  period  of
antiquity  which  is  represented  as  most  populous,2  complains
of  the  desolation  which  then  prevailed,  gives  the  preference
to  former  times,  and  has  recourse  to  ancient  fables  as  a  foun
dation  for  his  opinion.  The  humour  of  blaming  the  present,
and  admiring  the  past,  is  strongly  rooted  in  human  nature,
and  has  an  influence  even  on  persons  endued  with  the  pro-
foundest  judgment  and  most  extensive  learning.3

ESSAY  XII. — Of  the  Original  Contract.

As  no  party,  in  the  present  age,  can  well  support  itself,
without  a  philosophical  or  speculative  system  of  principles,
annexed  to  its  political  or  practical  one ;  we  accordingly  find,
that  each  of  the  factions,  into  which  this  nation  is  divided,
has  reared  up  a  fabric  of  the  former  kind,  in  order  to  pro
tect  and  cover  that  scheme  of  actions,  which  it  pursues.  The
people  being  commonly  very  rude  builders,  especially  in  this
speculative  way,  and  more  especially  still,  when  actuated  by
party-zeal ;  it  is  natural  to  imagine,  that  their  workmanship
must  be  a  little  unshapely,  and  discover  evident  marks  of
that  violence  and  hurry,  in  which  it  was  raised.  The  one
party,  by  tracing  up  Government  to  the  DEITY,  endeavour
to  render  it  so  sacred  and  inviolate,  that  it  must  be  little
less  than  sacrilege,  however  tyrannical  it  may  become,  to
touch  or  invade  it,  in  the  smallest  article.  The  other  party,
by  founding  government  altogether  on  the  consent  of  the
PEOPLE,  suppose  that  there  is  a  kind  of  original  contract,  by
which  the  subjects  have  tacitly  reserved  the  power  of  resist
ing  their  sovereign,  whenever  they  find  themselves  aggrieved
by  that  authority,  with  which  they  have,  for  certain  purposes,
voluntarily  entrusted  him.  These  are  the  speculative  prin-

1  Lib.  ii.  5.  these  two  volumes  have  been  verified  ;

2  He  was*  cotemporary  with  C-SJSAB  and  in  very  many  cases  the  page,  chap-
and  AUGUSTUS.  ter,  or  line  has  been  added. — ED.]

3  [Most  of  the  references  throughout


444  ESSAY  XII.

ciples  of  the  two  parties ;  and  these  too  are  the  practical
consequences  deduced  from  them.

I  shall  venture  to  affirm,  That  both  these  systems  of  specula
tive  principles  are  just ;  though  not  in  the  sense,  intended  by  the
parties :  And,  That  both  the  schemes  of  practical  consequences
are  prudent ;  though  not  in  the  extremes,  to  which  each  party,
in  opposition  to  the  other,  has  commonly  endeavoured  to  carry
them.

That  the  DEITY  is  the  ultimate  author  of  all  government,
will  never  be  denied  by  any,  who  admit  a  general  providence,
and  allow,  that  all  events  in  the  universe  are  conducted  by  an
uniform  plan,  and  directed  to  wise  purposes.  As  it  is  im
possible  for  the  human  race  to  subsist,  at  least  in  any  com
fortable  or  secure  state,  without  the  protection  of  government;
this  institution  must  certainly  have  been  intended  by  that
beneficent  Being,  who  means  the  good  of  all  his  creatures :
And  as  it  has  universally,  in  fact,  taken  place,  in  all  countries,
and  all  ages ;  we  may  conclude,  with  still  greater  certainty,
that  it  was  intended  by  that  omniscient  Being,  who  can
never  be  deceived  by  any  event  or  operation.  But  since  he
gave  rise  to  it,  not  by  any  particular  or  miraculous  interposi
tion,  but  by  his  concealed  and  universal  efficacy  ;  a  sovereign
cannot,  properly  speaking,  be  called  his  vice-gerent,  in  any
other  sense  than  every  power  or  force,  being  derived  from
him,  may  be  said  to  act  by  his  commission.  Whatever
actually  happens  is  comprehended  in  the  general  plan  or  in
tention  of  providence ;  nor  has  the  greatest  and  most  lawful
prince  any  more  reason,  upon  that  account,  to  plead  a  pecu
liar  sacredness  or  inviolable  authority,  than  an  inferior
magistrate,  or  even  an  usurper,  or  even  a  robber  and  a  pyrate.
The  same  divine  superintendant,  who,  for  wise  purposes,  in
vested  *a  TITUS  or  a  TRAJAN  with  authority,  did  also,  for
purposes,  no  doubt,  equally  wise,  though  unknown,  bestow
power  on  a  BORGIA  or  an  ANGRIA.  The  same  causes,  which
gave  rise  to  the  sovereign  power  in  every  state,  established
likewise  every  petty  jurisdiction  in  it,  and  every  limited
authority.  A  constable,  therefore,  no  less  than  a  king,  acts
by  a  divine  commission,  and  possesses  an  indefeasible  right.

When  we  consider  how  nearly  equal  all  men  are  in  their
bodily  force,  and  even  in  their  mental  powers  and  faculties,
till  cultivated  by  education  ;  we  must  necessarily  allow,  that
1  [An  Elizabeth  or  a  Henry  the  4th  of  France  :  Editions  D  to  P.]


OF  THE  ORIGINAL  CONTRACT.  445

nothing  but  their  own  consent  could,  at  first,  associate  them
together,  and  subject  them  to  any  authority.  The  people,  if
we  trace  government  to  its  first  origin  in  the  woods  and
desarts,  are  the  source  of  all  power  and  jurisdiction,  and
voluntarily,  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  order,  abandoned  their
native  liberty,  and  received  laws  from  their  equal  and  com
panion.  The  conditions,  upon  which  they  were  willing  to
submit,  were  either  expressed,  or  were  so  clear  and  obvious,
that  it  might  well  be  esteemed  superfluous  to  express  them.
If  this,  then,  be  meant  by  the  original  contract,  it  cannot  be
denied,  that  all  government  is,  at  first,  founded  on  a  contract,
and  that  the  most  ancient  rude  combinations  of  mankind
were  formed  chiefly  by  that  principle.  In  vain,  are  we  asked
in  what  records  this  charter  of  our  liberties  is  registered.  It
was  not  written  on  parchment,  nor  yet  on  leaves  or  barks  of
trees.  It  preceded  the  use  of  writing  and  all  the  other
civilized  arts  of  life.  But  we  trace  it  plainly  in  the  nature
of  man,  and  in  the  equality,  !  or  something  approaching
-equality,  which  we  find  in  all  the  individuals  of  that  species.
The  force,  which  now  prevails,  and  which  is  founded  on
fleets  and  armies,  is  plainly  political,  and  derived  from  autho
rity,  the  effect  of  established  government.  A  man's  natural
force  consists  only  in  the  vigour  of  his  limbs,  and  the  firm
ness  of  his  courage;  which  could  never  subject  multitudes
to  the  command  of  one.  Nothing  but  their  own  consent,
and  their  sense  of  the  advantages  resulting  from  peace  and
order,  could  have  had  that  influence.

2  Yet  even  this  consent  was  long  very  imperfect,  and  could
not  be  the  basis  of  a  regular  administration.  The  chieftain,
who  had  probably  acquired  his  influence  during  the  con
tinuance  of  war,  ruled  more  by  persuasion  than  command  ;
and  till  he  could  employ  force  to  reduce  the  refractory  and
disobedient,  the  society  could  scarcely  be  said  to  have  attained
a  state  of  civil  government.  No  compact  or  agreement,  it  is
evident,  was  expressly  formed  for  general  submission ;  an
idea  far  beyond  the  comprehension  of  savages :  Each  exer
tion  of  authority  in  the  chieftain  must  have  been  particular,
and  called  forth  by  the  present  exigencies  of  the  case:  The
sensible  utility,  resulting  from  his  interposition,  made  these
exertions  become  daily  more  frequent ;  and  their  frequency

1  [Or— equality  : added  in  Editions  2  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Ed-

Q-]  tion  K.]


44G  ESSAY  XII.

gradually  produced  an  habitual,  and,  if  you  please  to  call  it
so,  a  voluntary,  and  therefore  precarious,  acquiescence  in  the
people.

But  philosophers,  who  have  embraced  a  party  (if  that  be
not  a  contradiction  in  terms)  are  not  contented  with  these
concessions.  They  assert,  not  only  that  government  in  its
earliest  infancy  arose  from  consent  or  rather  the  voluntary
acquiescence  of  the  people ;  but  also,  that,  even  at  present,
when  it  has  attained  its  full  maturity,  it  rests  on  no  other
foundation.  They  affirm,  that  all  men  are  still  born  equal,
and  owe  allegiance  to  no  prince  or  government,  unless  bound
by  the  obligation  and  sanction  of  a  promise.  And  as  no  man,
without  some  equivalent,  would  forego  the  advantages  of  his
native  liberty,  and  subject  himself  to  the  will  of  another ;
this  promise  is  always  understood  to  be  conditional,  and  im
poses  on  him  no  obligation,  unless  he  meet  with  justice  and
protection  from  his  sovereign.  These  advantages  the  sovereign
promises  him  in  return  ;  and  if  he  fail  in  the  execution,  he
has  broken,  on  his  part,  the  articles  of  engagement,  and  has
thereby  freed  his  subject  from  all  obligations  to  allegiance.
Such,  according  to  these  philosophers,  is  the  foundation  of
authority  in  every  government ;  and  such  the  right  of  resist
ance,  possessed  by  every  subject.

But  would  these  reasoners  look  abroad  into  the  world,  they
would  meet  with  nothing  that,  in  the  least,  corresponds  to
their  ideas,  or  can  warrant  so  refined  and  philosophical  a
system.  On  the  contrary,  we  find,  every  where,  princes,  who
claim  their  subjects  as  their  property,  and  assert  their  inde
pendent  right  of  sovereignty,  from  conquest  or  succession.
We  find  also,  every  where,  subjects,  who  acknowledge  this
right  in  their  prince,  and  suppose  themselves  born  under
obligations  of  obedience  to  a  certain  sovereign,  as  much  as
under  the  ties  of  reverence  arid  duty  to  certain  parents.
These  connexions  are  always  conceived  to  be  equally  inde
pendent  of  our  consent,  in  PEESIA  and  CHINA  ;  in  FRANCE
and  SPAIN  ;  and  even  in  HOLLAND  and  ENGLAND,  wherever
the  doctrines  above-mentioned  have  not  been  carefully  incul-yi
cated.  Obedience  or  subjection  becomes  so  familiar,  thaT
most  men  never  make  any  enquiry  about  its  origin  or  cause,
more  than  about  the  principle  of  gravity,  resistance,  or  the  \
most  universal  laws  of  nature.  Or  if  curiosity  ever  move
them  ;  as  soon  as  they  learn,  that  they  themselves  and  their


OF  THE  ORIGINAL  CONTRACT.  447

ancestors  have,  for  several  ages,  or  from  time  immemorial,
been  subject  to  such  a  form  of  government  or  such  a  family ;
they  immediately  acquiesce,  and  acknowledge  their  obliga
tion  to  allegiance.  Were  you  to  preach,  in  most  parts  of  the
world,  that  political  connexions  are  founded  altogether  011
voluntary  consent  or  a  mutual  promise,  the  magistrate  would
soon  imprison  you,  as  seditious,  for  loosening  the  ties  of  obe
dience  ;  if  your  friends  did  not  before  shut  you  up  as  delirious,
for  advancing  such  absurdities.  It  is  strange,  that  an  act  of
the  mind,  which  every  individual  is  supposed  to  have  formed,
and  after  he  came  to  the  use  of  reason  too,  otherwise  it  could
have  no  authority ;  that  this  act,  I  say,  should  be  so  much
unknown  to  all  of  them,  that,  over  the  face  of  the  whole
earth,  there  scarcely  remain  any  traces  or  memory  of  it.

But  the  contract,  on  which  government  is  founded,  is  said
to  be  the  original  contract ;  and  consequently  may  be  supposed
too  old  to  fall  under  the  knowledge  of  the  present  generation.  '
If  the  agreement,  by  which  sava.ge  men  first  associated  and
conjoined  their  force,  be  here  meant,  this  is  acknowledged  to
be  real ;  but  being  so  ancient,  and  being  obliterated  by  a
thousand  changes  of  government  and  princes,  it  cannot  now
be  supposed  to  retain  any  authority.  If  we  would  say  any
thing  to  the  purpose,  we  must  assert,  that  every  particular
government,  which  is  lawful,  and  which  imposes  any  duty  of
allegiance  on  the  subject,  was,  at  first,  founded  on  consent
and  a  voluntary  compact.  But  besides  that  this  supposes  the
consent  of  the  fathers  to  bind  the  children,  even  to  the  most
remote  generations,  (which  republican  writers  will  never
allow)  besides  this,  I  say,  it  is  not  justified  by  history  or
experience,  in  any  age  or  country  of  the  world.

Almost  all  the  governments,  which  exist  at  present,  or  of
which  there  remains  any  record  in  story,  have  been  founded  x
originally,  either  on  usurpation  or  conquest,  or  both,  with
out  any  pretence  of  a  fair  consent,  or  voluntary  subjection
of  the  people.  When  an  artful  and  bold  man  is  placed  at
the  head  of  an  army  or  faction,  it  is  often  easy  for  him,  by
employing,  sometimes  violence,  sometimes  false  pretences,
to  establish  his  dominion  over  a  people  a  hundred  times
more  numerous  than  his  partizans.  He  allows  no  such  open
communication,  that  his  enemies  can  know,  with  certainty,
their  number  or  force.  He  gives  them  no  leisure  to  assemble
together  in  a  body  to  oppose  him.  Even  all  those,  who  are


448  ESSAY  XII.

the  instruments  of  his  usurpation,  may  wish  his  fall ;  but
their  ignorance  of  each  other's  intention  keeps  them  in  awe,
and  is  the  sole  cause  of  his  security.  By  such  arts  as  these,
many  governments  have  been  established ;  and  this  is  all  the
original  contract,  which  they  have  to  boast  of.

The  face  of  the  earth  is  continually  changing,  by  the  en-
crease  of  small  kingdoms  into  great  empires,  by  the  dissolution
of  great  empires  into  smaller  kingdoms,  by  the  planting  of
colonies,  by  the  migration  of  tribes.  Is  there  any  thing
discoverable  in  all  these  events,  but  force  and  violence?
Where  is  the  mutual  agreement  or  voluntary  association  so
much  talked  of?

Even  the  smoothest  way,  by  which  a  nation  may  receive
a  foreign  master,  by  marriage  or  a  will,  is  not  extremely
honourable  for  the  people ;  but  supposes  them  to  be  disposed
of,  like  a  dowry  or  a  legacy,  according  to  the  pleasure  or
interest  of  their  rulers.

But  where  no  force  interposes,  and  election  takes  place ;
what  is  this  election  so  highly  vaunted?  It  is  either  the
combination  of  a  few  great  men,  who  decide  for  the  whole,
and  will  allow  of  no  opposition  :  Or  it  is  the  fury  of  a  multi
tude,  that  follow  a  seditious  ringleader,  who  is  not  known,
perhaps,  to  a  dozen  among  them,  and  who  owes  his  advance
ment  merely  to  his  own  impudence,  or  to  the  momentary
caprice  of  his  fellows.

Are  these  disorderly  elections,  which  are  rare  too,  of  such
mighty  authority,  as  to  be  the  only  lawful  foundation  of  all
government  and  allegiance?

In  reality,  there  is  not  a  more  terrible  event,  than  a  total
dissolution  of  government,  which  gives  liberty  to  the  mul
titude,  and  makes  the  determination  or  choice  of  a  new
establishment  depend  upon  a  number,  v/hich  nearly  approaches
to  that  of  the  body  of  the  people  :  Tor  it  never  comes  entirely
to  the  whole  body  of  them.  Every  wise  man,  then,  wishes  to
see,  at  the  head  of  a  powerful  and  obedient  army,  a  general,
who  may  speedily  seize  the  prize,  and  give  to  the  people  a
master,  which  they  are  so  unfit  to  chuse  for  themselves.  So
little  correspondent  is  fact  and  reality  to  those  philosophical
notions.

Let  not  the  establishment  at  the  Revolution  deceive  us,
or  make  us  so  much  in  love  with  a  philosophical  origin  to
government,  as  to  imagine  all  others  monstrous  and  irre-


OF THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT.  44$

gular.  Even  that  event  was  far  from  corresponding  to  these  '<
refined  ideas.  It  was  only  the  succession,  and  that  only  in
the  regal  part  of  the  government,  which  was  then  changed  :
And  it  was  only  the  majority  of  seven  hundred,  who  deter
mined  that  change  for  near  ten  millions.  I  doubt  riot,
indeed,  but  the  bulk  of  those  ten  millions  acquiesced
willingly  in  the  determination  :  But  was  the  matter  left,  in
the  least,  to  their  choice  ?  Was  it  not  justly  supposed  to  be,
from  that  moment,  decided,  and  every  man  punished,  who
refused  to  submit  to  the  new  sovereign?  How  otherwise
could  the  matter  have  ever  been  brought  to  any  issue  or
conclusion  ?

The  republic  of  ATHENS  was,  I  believe,  the  most  extensive
democracy,  that  we  read  of  in  history :  Yet  if  we  make  the
requisite  allowances  for  the  women,  the  slaves,  and  the
strangers,  we  shall  find,  that  that  establishment  was  not,  at
first,  made,  nor  any  law  ever  voted,  by  a  tenth  part  of  those
who  were  bound  to  pay  obedience  to  it :  Not  to  mention  the
islands  and  foreign  dominions,  which  the  ATHENIANS  claimed
as  theirs  by  right  of  conquest.  And  as  it  is  well  known,  that
popular  assemblies  in  that  city  were  always  full  of  licence
and  disorder,  notwithstanding  the  institutions  and  laws  by
which  they  were  checked  :  How  much  more  disorderly  must
they  prove,  where  they  form  not  the  established  constitution,
but  meet  tumultuously  on  the  dissolution  of  the  ancient
government,  in  order  to  give  rise  to  a  new  one?  How
chimerical  must  it  be  to  talk  of  a  choice  in  such  cir
cumstances  ?

1  The  ACHJSANS  enjoyed  the  freest  and  most  perfect  demo
cracy  of  all  antiquity;  yet  they  employed  force  to  oblige
some  cities  to  enter  into  their  league,  as  we  learn  from

POLYBIUS.2

HAERY  the  IVth  and  HARRY  the  Vllth  of  ENGLAND,  had
really  no  title  to  the  throne  but  a  parliamentary  election ;
yet  they  never  would  acknowledge  it,  lest  they  should  thereby
weaken  their  authority.  Strange,  if  the  only  real  foundation
of  all  authority  be  consent  and  promise  !

It  is  in  vain  to  say,  that  all  governments  are  or  should  be,
at  first,  founded  on  popular  consent,  as  much  as  the  neces
sity  of  human  affairs  will  admit.  This  favours  entirely  mj

1  [The  two  following  paragraph?  wore  2  Lib  ii.  cap  38

added  in  Edition  K.]

VOL. III.  G  G


150  ESSAY  Xir.

pretension.  I  maintain,  that  human  affairs  will  never  admit
of  this  consent  $  seldom  of  the  appearance  of  it.  But  that
conquest  or  usurpation,  that  is,  in  plain  terms,  force,  by
dissolving  the  ancient  governments,  is  the  origin  of  almost
all  the  new  ones,  which  were  ever  established  in  the  world.
And  that  in  the  few  cases,  where  consent  may  seem  to  have
taken  place,  it  was  commonly  so  irregular,  so  confined,  or  so
much  intermixed  either  with  fraud  or  violence,  that  it  cannot
have  any  great  authority.

1  My  intention  here  is  not  to  exclude  the  consent  of  the  people
from  being  one  just  foundation  of  government  where  it  has
place.  It  is  surely  the  best  and  most  sacred  of  any.  I
only  pretend,  that  it  has  very  seldom  had  place  in  any  degree,
and  never  almost  in  its  full  extent.  And  that  therefore
some  other  foundation  of  government  must  also  be  admitted.

Were  all  men  possessed  of  so  inflexible  a  regard  to  justice,
that,  of  themselves,  they  would  totally  abstain  from  the
properties  of  others ;  they  had  for  ever  remained  in  a  state  of
absolute  liberty,  without  subjection  to  any  magistrate  or
political  society  :  But  this  is  a  state  of  perfection,  of  which
human  nature  is  justly  deemed  incapable.  Again  ;  were  all
men  possessed  of  so  perfect  an  understanding,  as  always  to
know  their  own  interests,  no  form  of  government  had  ever
been  submitted  to,  but  what  was  established  on  consent,  and
was  fully  canvassed  by  every  member  of  the  society  :  Bui
this  state  of  perfection  is  likewise  much  superior  to  human
nature.  Reason,  history,  and  experience  shew  us,  that  all
political  societies  have  had  an  origin  much  lest  accurate
and  regular;  and  were  one  to  choose  a  period  of  time,
when  the  people's  consent  was  the  least  regarded  in  public
transactions,  it  would  be  precisely  on  the  establishment  of  a
new  government.  In  a  settled  constitution,  their  inclina
tions  are  often  consulted ;  but  during  the  fury  of  revolutions,
conquests,  and  public  convulsions,  military  force  or  political
craft  usually  decides  the  controversy.

When  a  new  government  is  established,  by  whatever
means,  the  people  are  commonly  dissatisfied  with  it,  and  pay
obedience  more  from  fear  and  necessity,  than  from  any  idea
of  allegiance  or  of  moral  obligation.  The  prince  is  watchful
and  jealous,  and  must  carefully  guard  against  every  begin
ning  or  appearance  of  insurrection.  Time,  by  degrees,

1  [This  paragraph  and  the  next  were  added  in  Edition  K.]


OF  THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT.  451

removes  all  these  difficulties,  and  accustoms  the  nation  to
regard,  as  their  lawful  or  native  princes,  that  family,  which,
at  first,  they  considered  as  usurpers  or  foreign  conquerors.
In  order  to  found  this  opinion,  they  have  no  recourse  to  any
notion  of  voluntary  consent  or  promise,  which,  they  know,
never  was,  in  this  case,  either  expected  or  demanded.  The
original  establishment  was  formed  by  violence,  and  submitted
to  from  necessity.  The  subsequent  administration  is  also
supported  by  power,  and  acquiesced  in  by  the  people,  not  as
a  matter  of  choice,  but  of  obligation.  They  imagine  not  that
their  consent  gives  their  prince  a  title :  But  they  willino-ly
consent,  because  they  think,  that,  from  long  possession,  he  has
acquired  a  title,  independent  of  their  choice  or  inclination.

Should  it  be  said,  that,  by  living  under  the  dominion  of  a
prince,  which  one  might  leave,  every  individual  has  given  a
tacit  consent  to  his  authority,  and  promised  him  obedience ;
it  may  be  answered,  that  such  an  implied  consent  can  only-
have  place,  where  a  man  imagines,  that  the  matter  depends
on  his  choice.  But  where  he  thinks  (as  all  mankind  do  who
are  born  under  established  governments)  that  by  his  birth  ho
owes  allegiance  to  a  certain  prince  or  certain  form  of  govern
ment;  it  would  be  absurd  to  infer  a  consent  or  choice,  which
he  expressly,  in  this  case,  renounces  and  disclaims.

Can  we  seriously  say,  that  a  poor  peasant  or  artizan  has  a
free  choice  to  leave  his  country,  when  he  knows  no  foreign
language  or  manners,  and  lives  from  day  to  day,  by  the
small  wages  which  he  acquires  ?  We  may  as  well  assert,  that
a  man,  by  remaining  in  a  vessel,  freely  consents  to  the
dominion  of  the  master ;  though  he  was  carried  on  board
while  asleep,  and  must  leap  into  the  ocean,  and  perish,  the
moment  he  leaves  her.

What  if  the  prince  forbid  his  subjects  to  quit  his  domi
nions  ;  as  in  TIBERIUS'S  time,  it  was  regarded  as  a  crime  in  a
KOMAN  knight  that  he  had  attempted  to  fly  to  the  PARTHIAKA
in  order  to  escape  the  tyranny  of  that  emperor?  l  Or  as  the
ancient  MUSCOVITES  prohibited  all  travelling  under  pain  of
death?  And  did  a  prince  observe,  that  many  of  his  subjects
were  seized  with  the  frenzy  of  migrating  to  foreign  countries,
he  would  doubtless,  with  great  reason  and  justice,  restrain
them,  in  order  to  prevent  the  depopulation  of  his  own  king
dom.  Would  he  forfeit  the  allegiance  of  all  his  subjects,  by

1  TACIT.  Ann.  vi.  cup.  14.
a  u  2


452  ESSAY XII.

so  wise  and  reasonable  a  law? Yet  the  freedom  of  their
choice  is  surely,  in  that  case,  ravished  from  them.

A  company  of  men,  who  should  leave  their  native  country,
in  order  to  people  some  uninhabited  region,  might  dream  of
recovering  their  native  freedom  ;  but  they  would  soon  find,
that  their  prince  still  laid  claim  to  them,  and  called  them
his  subjects,  even  in  their  new  settlement.  And  in  this  he
would  but  act  conformably  to  the  common  ideas  of  mankind.

The  truest  tacit  consent  of  this  kind,  that  is  ever  observed,
is  when  a  foreigner  settles  in  any  country,  and  is  beforehand
acquainted  with  the  prince,  and  government,  and  laws,  to
which  he  must  submit  :  Yet  is  his  allegiance,  though  more
voluntary,  much  less  expected  or  depended  on,  than  that  of
a  natural  born  subject.  On  the  contrary,  his  native  prince
still  asserts  a  claim  to  him.  And  if  he  punish  not  the  rene
gade,  when  he  seizes  him  in  war  with  his  new  prince's
commission  ;  this  clemency  is  not  founded  on  the  municipal
law,  which  in  all  countries  condemns  the  prisoner ;  but  on  the
consent  of  princes,  who  have  agreed  to  this  indulgence,  in
order  to  prevent  reprisals.

1  Did  one  generation  of  men  go  off  the  stage  at  once,  and
another  succeed,  as  is  the  case  with  silk-worms  and  butter
flies,  the  new  race,  if  they  had  sense  enough  to  choose  their
government,  which  surely  is  never  the  case  with  men,  might
voluntarily,  and  by  general  consent,  establish  their  own  form
of  civil  polity,  without  any  regard  to  the  laws  or  precedents,
which  prevailed  among  their  ancestors.  But  as  human  society^
is  in  perpetual  flux,  one  man  every  hour  going  out  of  the
world,  another  coming  into  it,  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  pre
serve  stability  in  government,  that  the  new  brood  should  con
form  themselves  to  the  established  constitution,  and  nearly
follow  the  path  which  their  fathers,  treading  in  the  footsteps
of  theirs,  had  marked  out  to  them.  Some  innovations  must
necessarily  have  place  in  every  human  institution,  and  it  is
happy  where  the  enlightened  genius  of  the  age  gives  these  a
direction  to  the  side  of  reason,  liberty,  and  justice  :  but
violent  innovations  no  individual  is  entitled  to  make  :  they
are  even  dangerous  to  be  attempted  by  the  legislature  :  more
ill  than  good  is  ever  to  be  expected  from  them :  and  if  history  <|
affords  examples  to  the  contrary,  they  are  not  to  be  drawn  into
precedent,  and  are  only  to  be  regarded  as  proofs,  that  the
science  of  politics  affords  few  rules,  which  will  not  admit  of

1  [This  paragraph  was  added  in  Edition  R.]


OF  THE  ORIGINAL  CONTRACT.  453

some  exception,  and  which  may  not  sometimes  be  eontrouled
by  fortune  and  accident.  The  violent  innovations  in  the
reign  of  HENRY  VIII.  proceeded  from  an  imperious  monarch,
seconded  by  the  appearance  of  legislative  authority  :  Those
in  the  reign  of  CHARLES  I.  were  derived  from  faction  and
fanaticism,  and  both  of  them  have  proved  happy  in  the  issue  :
But  even  the  former  were  long  the  source  of  many  disorders,
and  still  more  dangers ;  and  if  the  measures  of  allegiance
were  to  be  taken  from  the  latter,  a  total  anarchy  must  have
place  in  human  society,  and  a  final  period  at  once  be  put  to-
every  government.

Suppose,  that  an  usurper,  after  having  banished  his  lawful
prince  and  royal  family,  should  establish  his  dominion  for
ten  or  a  dozen  years  in  any  country,  and  should  preserve  so*
exact  a  discipline  in  his  troops,  and  so  regular  a  disposition
in  his  garrisons,  that  no  insurrection  had  ever  been  raised,
or  even  murmur  heard,  against  his  administration :  Can  it  be
asserted,  that  the  people,  who  in  their  hearts  abhor  his
treason,  have  tacitly  consented  to  his  authority,  and  pro
mised  him  allegiance,  merely  because,  from  necessity,  they
live  under  his  dominion  ?  Suppose  again  their  native  prince
restored,  by  means  of  an  army,  which  he  levies  in  foreign
countries  :  They  receive  him  with  joy  and  exultation,  and
shew  plainly  with  what  reluctance  they  had  submitted  to  any
other  yoke.  I  may  now  ask,  upon  what  foundation  the
prince's  title  stands  ?  Not  on  popular  consent  surely  :  For
though  the  people  willingly  acquiesce  in  his  authority,  they
never  imagine,  that  their  consent  made  him  sovereign.  They
consent ;  because  they  apprehend  him  to  be  already,  by  birth,
their  lawful  sovereign.  And  as  to  that  tacit  consent,  which
may  now  be  inferred  from  their  living  under  his  dominion,
this  is  no  more  than  what  they  formerly  gave  to  the  tyrant
and  usurper.

When  we  assert,  that  all  lawful  government  arises  from  the
consent  of  the  people,  we  certainly  do  them  a  great  deal
more  honour  than  they  deserve,  or  even  expect  and  desire
from  us.  After  the  ROMAN  dominions  became  too  unwieldly  for
the  republic  to  govern  them,  the  people,  over  the  whole  known
world,  were  extremely  grateful  to  AUGUSTUS  for  that  authority,
which,  by  violence,  he  had  established  over  them ;  and  they
showed  an  equal  disposition  to  submit  to  the  successor,  whom
he  left  them,  by  his  last  will  and  testament.  It  was  after-


4.ri4  ESSAY XII.

wards  their  misfortune,  that  there  never  was,  in  one  family,
any  long  regular  succession ;  but  that  their  line  of  princes
was  continually  broken,  either  by  private  assassinations  or
public  rebellions.  The  prcetorian  bands,  on  the  failure  of
every  family,  set  up  one  emperor ;  the  legions  in  the  East  a
second  ;  those  in  GERMANY,  perhaps,  a  third  :  And  the  sword
alone  could  decide  the  controversy.  The  condition  of  the
people,  in  that  mighty  monarchy,  was  to  be  lamented,  not
because  the  choice  of  the  emperor  was  never  left  to  them  ;
for  that  was  impracticable  :  But  because  they  never  fell  under
any  succession  of  masters,  who  might  regularly  follow  each
other.  As  to  the  violence  and  wars  and  bloodshed,  occasioned
by  every  new  settlement ;  these  were  not  blameable,  because
they  were  inevitable.

The  house  of  LANCASTER  ruled  in  this  island  about  sixty
years ; l  yet  the  partizans  of  the  white  rose  seemed  daily  to
multiply  in  ENGLAND.  The  present  establishment  has  taken
place  during  a  still  longer  period.  Have  all  views  of  right  in
another  family  been  utterly  extinguished ;  even  though  scarce
any  man  now  alive  had  arrived  at  years  of  discretion,  when
it  was  expelled,  or  could  have  consented  to  its  dominion,  or
have  promised  it  allegiance  ?  A  sufficient  indication  surely
of  the  general  sentiment  of  mankind  on  this  head.  For  we
blame  not  the  partizans  of  the  abdicated  family,  merely  on
account  of  the  long  time,  during  which  they  have  preserved
their  imaginary  loyalty.  We  blame  them  for  adhering  to  a
family,  which,  we  affirm,  has  been  justly  expelled,  and  which,
from  the  moment  the  new  settlement  took  place,  had  for
feited  all  title  to  authority.

But  would  we  have  a  more  regular,  at  least  a  more  philo
sophical,  refutation  of  this  principle  of  an  original  contract
or  popular  consent ;  perhaps,  the  following  observations  may
suffice.

All  moral  duties  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds.  The  first
are  those,  to  which  men  are  impelled  by  a  natural  instinct  or
immediate  propensity,  which  operates  on  them,  independent
of  all  ideas  of  obligation,  and  of  all  views,  either  to  public  or
private  utility.  Of  this  nature  are,  love  of  children,  gratitude
to  benefactors,  pity  to  the  unfortunate.  When  we  reflect  on
the  advantage,  which  results  to  society  from  such  humane
instincts,  we  pay  them  the  just  tribute  of  moral  approba-

1  [The  latter  half  of  this  sentence  was  added  in  Edition  K.j


OF  THE  ORIGINAL CONTRACT.  4oo

tion  and  esteem :  But  the  person,  actuated  by  them,  feels
their  power  and  influence,  antecedent  to  any  such  reflection.

The  second  kind  of  moral  duties  are  such  as  are  not  sup
ported  by  any  original  instinct  of  nature,  but  are  performed
entirely  from  a  sense  of  obligation,  when  we  consider  the
necessities  of  human  society-,  and  the  impossibility  of  sup
porting  it,  if  these  duties  were  neglected.  It  is  thus  justice
or  a  regard  to  the  property  of  others,  fidelity  or  the  obser
vance  of  promises,  become  obligatory,  and  acquire  an  autho
rity  over  mankind.  For  as  it  is  evident,  that  every  man  loves
himself  better  than  any  other  person,  he  is  naturally  impelled
to  extend  his  acquisitions  as  much  as  possible;  and  nothing
can  restrain  him  in  this  propensity,  but  reflection  and  experi
ence,  by  which  he  learns  the  pernicious  effects  of  that  licence,
and  the  total  dissolution  of  society  which  must  ensue  from  it.
His  original  inclination,  therefore,  or  instinct,  is  here  checked
and  restrained  by  a  subsequent  judgment  or  observation.

The  case  is  precisely  the  same  with  the  political  or  civil
duty  of  allegiance,  as  with  the  natural  duties  of  justice  and
fidelity.  Our  primary  instincts  lead  us,  either  to  indulge
ourselves  in  unlimited  freedom,  or  to  seek  dominion  over
others :  And  it  is  reflection  only,  which  engages  us  to  sacrifice
such  strong  passions  to  the  interests  of  peace  and  public
order.  A  small  degree  of  experience  and  observation  suffices
to  teach  us,  that  society  cannot  possibly  be  maintained  with
out  the  authority  of  magistrates,  and  that  this  authority
must  soon  fall  into  contempt,  where  exact  obedience  is  not
paid  to  it.  The  observation  of  these  general  and  obvious
interests  is  the  source  of  all  allegiance,  and  of  that  moral
obligation,  which  we  attribute  to  it.

What  necessity,  therefore,  is  there  to  found  the  duty  of
allegiance  or  obedience  to  magistrates  on  that  of  fidelity  or  a
regard  to  promises,  and  to  suppose,  that  it  is  the  consent  of
each  individual,  which  subjects  him  to  government ;  when
it  appears,  that  both  allegiance  and  fidelity  stand  precisely
on  the  same  foundation,  and  are  both  submitted  to  by  man
kind,  on  account  of  the  apparent  interests  and  necessities  of
human  society  ?  We  are  bound  to  obey  our  sovereign,  it  is
said  ;  because  we  have  given  a  tacit  promise  to  that  purpose.
But  why  are  we  bound  to  observe  our  promise  ?  It  must
here  be  asserted,  that  the  commerce  and  intercourse  of
mankind,  which  are  of  such  mighty  advantage,  can  have  no


456  ESSAY XIL

security  where  men  pay  no  regard  to  their  engagements.  Tn
like  manner,  may  it  be  said,  that  men  could  not  live  at  all
in  society,  at  least  in  a  civilized  society,  without  laws  and
magistrates  and  judges,  to  prevent  the  encroachments  of  the
strong  upon  the  weak,  of  the  violent  upon  the  just  and
equitable.  The  obligation  to  allegiance  being  of  like  force
and  authority  with  the  obligation  to  fidelity,  we  gain  nothing
by  resolving  the  one  into  the  other.  The  general  interests
or  necessities  of  society  are  sufficient  to  establish  both.

If  the  reason  be  asked  of  that  obedience,  which  we  are
bound  to  pay  to  government,  I  readily  answer,  because  society
could  not  otherwise  subsist :  And  this  answer  is  clear  and  in
telligible  to  all  mankind.  Your  answer  is,  because  we  should
keep  our  word.  But  besides,  that  no  body,  till  trained  in  a
philosophical  system,  can  either  comprehend  or  relish  this
answer :  Besides  this,  I  say,  you  find  yourself  embarrassed,
when  it  is  asked,  why  we  are  bound  to  keep  our  word  ?  Nor
can  you  give  any  answer,  but  what  would,  immediately,
without  any  circuit,  have  accounted  for  our  obligation  to
allegiance.

But  to  whom  is  allegiance  due  ?  And  who  is  our  lawful
sovereign  ?  This  question  is  often  the  most  difficult  of  any,
and  liable  to  infinite  discussions.  When  people  are  so  happy,
that  they  can  answer,  Our  present  sovereign,  who  inherits,  in  a
direct  line,  from  ancestors,  that  have  governed  us  for  many  ages  ;
this  answer  admits  of  no  reply  ;  even  though  historians,  in
tracing  up  to  the  remotest  antiquity,  the  origin  of  that  royal
family,  may  find,  as  commonly  happens,  that  its  first  autho
rity  was  derived  from  usurpation  and  violence.  It  is  con
fessed,  that  private  justice,  or  the  abstinence  from  the
properties  of  others,  is  a  most  cardinal  virtue  :  Yet  reason
tells  us,  that  there  is  no  property  in  durable  objects,  such  as
lands  or  houses,  when  carefully  examined  in  passing  from
hand  to  hand,  but  must,  in  some  period,  have  been  founded
on  fraud  and  injustice.  The  necessities  of  human  society,
neither  in  private  nor  public  life,  will  allow  of  such  an  accu
rate  enquiry  :  And  there  is  no  virtue  or  moral  duty,  but  what
may,  with  facility,  be  refined  away,  if  we  indulge  a  false
philosophy,  in  sifting  and  scrutinizing  it,  by  every  captious
rule  of  logic,  in  every  light  or  position,  in  which  it  may  be
placed.

The  questions  with  regard  to  private  property  have  filled


OF  THE  ORIGINAL CONTRACT.  457

infinite  volumes  of  law  and  philosophy,  if  in  both  we  add
the  commentators  to  the  original  text ;  and  in  the  end,  we
may  safely  pronounce,  that  many  of  the  rules,  there  estab
lished,  are  uncertain,  ambiguous,  and  arbitrary.  The  like
opinion  may  be  formed  with  regard  to  the  succession  and
rights  of  princes  and  forms  of  government.1  Several  cases,
no  doubt,  occur,  especially  in  the  infancy  of  any  constitution,
which  admit  of  no  determination  from  the  laws  of  justice
and  equity :  And  our  historian  EAPIN  2pretends,  that  the
controversy  between  EDWARD  the  THIRD  and  PHILIP  DF,
VALOIS  was  of  this  nature,  and  could  be  decided  only  by  an
appeal  to  heaven,  that  is,  by  war  and  violence.

Who  shall  tell  me,  whether  GERMANICUS  or  DRUSUS  ought
to  have  succeeded  to  TIBERIUS,  had  he  died,  while  they  were
both  alive,  without  naming  any  of  them  for  his  successor  P
Ought  the  right  of  adoption  to  be  received  as  equivalent  to
that  of  blood,  in  a  nation,  where  it  had  the  same  effect  in
private  families,  and  had  already,  in  two  instances,  taken
place  in  the  public  ?  Ought  GERMANICUS  to  be  esteemed  the
elder  son  because  he  was  born  before  DRUSUS;  or  the  younger,
because  he  was  adopted  after  the  birth  of  his  brother?
Ought  the  right  of  the  elder  to  be  regarded  in  a  nation,
where  he  had  no  advantage  in  the  succession  of  private
families  ?  Ought  the  EOMAN  empire  at  that  time  to  be
deemed  hereditary,  because  of  two  examples ;  or  ought  it,
even  so  early,  to  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  stronger  or
to  the  present  possessor,  as  being  founded  on  so  recent  an
usurpation  ?

COMMODUS  mounted  the  throne  after  a  pretty  long  suc
cession  of  excellent  emperors,  who  had  acquired  their  title,
not  by  birth,  or  public  election,  but  by  the  fictitious  rite  of
adoption.  That  bloody  debauchee  being  murdered  by  a  con
spiracy  suddenly  formed  between  his  wench  and  her  gallant,
who  happened  at  that  time  to  be  Prcetorian  Prcefect ;  these
immediately  deliberated  about  choosing  a  master  to  human
kind,  to  speak  in  the  style  of  those  ages  ;  and  they  cast  their

1  [Edition  D  omits  from  this  sentence  which  is  due  to  the  established  Govern-
down  to  '  monarchies '  on  page  459  :  and  ment,  in  every  Kingdom  and  Commou-
•substitutes  as  follows — The  Discussion  wealth.  When  there  is  no  legal  Prince,
of  these  Matters  would  lead  us  entirely  who  has  a  Title  to  a  Throne,  I  believe
beyond  the  Compass  of  these  Essays.  it  may  safely  be  determined  to  belong  to
'Tis  sufficient  for  our  present  Purpose,  if  the  first  Occupier.  This  was  frequently
\ve  have  been  able  to  determine,  in  gene-  the  Case  with  the  ROMAN  Empire.]
ral,  the  Foundation  of  that  Allegiance,  Allows :  Editions  K  to  P.]


458  ESSAY  XII.

eyes  on  PERTINAX.  Before  the  tyrant's  death  was  known,
the  Prcefect  went  secretly  to  that  senator,  who,  on  the  ap
pearance  of  the  soldiers,  imagined  that  his  execution  had
been  ordered  by  COMMODUS.  He  was  immediately  saluted
emperor  by  the  officer  and  his  attendants ;  chearfully  pro
claimed  by  the  populace ;  unwillingly  submitted  to  by  the
guards ;  formally  recognized  by  the  senate ;  and  passively
received  by  the  provinces  and  armies  of  the  empire.

The  discontent  of  the  Praetorian  bands  broke  out  in  a  sud
den  sedition,  which  occasioned  the  murder  of  that  excellent
prince :  And  the  world  being  now  without  a  master  and
without  government,  the  guards  thought  proper  to  set  the
empire  formally  to  sale.  JULIAN,  the  purchaser,  was  pro
claimed  by  the  soldiers,  recognized  by  the  senate,  and  sub
mitted  to  by  the  people ;  and  must  also  have  been  submitted
to  by  the  provinces,  had  not  the  envy  of  the  legions  begotten
opposition  and  resistance.  PESCENNIUS  NIGER  in  SYRIA
elected  himself  emperor,  gained  the  tumultuary  consent  of
his  army,  and  was  attended  with  the  secret  good-will  of
the  senate  and  people  of  EOME.  ALBINUS  in  BRITAIN
found  an  equal  right  to  set  up  his  claim ;  but  SEVERUS,  who
governed  PANNONIA,  prevailed  in  the  end  above  both  of  them.
That  able  politician  and  warrior,  finding  his  own  birth  and
dignity  too  much  inferior  to  the  imperial  crown,  professed,  at
first,  an  intention  only  of  revenging  the  death  of  PERTINAX.
He  marched  as  general  into  IT  ALT  ;  defeated  JULIAN  ;  and
without  our  being  able  to  fix  any  precise  commencement
even  of  the  soldiers'  consent,  he  was  from  necessity  acknow
ledged  emperor  by  the  senate  and  people ;  and  fully  established
in  his  violent  authority  by  subduing  NIGER  and  ALBINUS. 1

Inter  hcec  Gordianus  (IftSAR  (says  CAPITOLINUS,  speaking  of
another  period)  sublatus  a  militibus,  Irnperator  est  appellatus,
quia  nan  erat  alius  in  prcesenti,  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that
GORDIAN  was  a  boy  of  fourteen  years  of  age.

Frequent  instances  of  a  like  nature  occur  in  the  history  of
the  emperors ;  in  that  of  ALEXANDER'S  successors ;  and  of
many  other  countries  :  Nor  can  anything  be  more  unhappy
than  a  despotic  government  of  this  kind  ;  where  the  succes
sion  is  disjoined  and  irregular,  and  must  be  determined,  on
every  vacancy,  by  force  or  election.  In  a  free  government,
the  matter  is  often  unavoidable,  and  is  also  much  less  dari-

1  HEKODJAN,  lib.  ii.


OF  THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT.  459

gerous.  The  interests  of  liberty  may  there  frequently  lead
the  people,  in  their  own  defence,  to  alter  the  succession  of
the  crown.  And  the  constitution,  being  compounded  of
parts,  may  still  maintain  a  sufficient  stability,  by  resting  on
the  aristocratical  or  democratical  members,  though  the
monarchical  be  altered,  from  time  to  time,  in  order  to
accommodate  it  to  the  former.

In  an  absolute  government,  when  there  is  no  legal  prince,
who  lias  a  title  to  the  throne,  it  may  safely  be  determined  to
belong  to  the  first  occupant.  Instances  of  this  kind  are  but
too  frequent,  especially  in  the  eastern  monarchies.  l  "When
any  race  of  princes  expires,  the  will  or  destination  of  the  last
sovereign  will  be  regarded  as  a  title.  Thus  the  edict  of
LEWIS  the  XlVth,  who  called  the  bastard  princes  to  the
succession  in  case  of  the  failure  of  all  the  legitimate  princes,
would,  in  such  an  event,  have  some  authority.2  3  Thus  the
will  of  CHARLES  the  Second  disposed  of  the  whole  SPANISH
monarchy.  The  cession  of  the  ancient  proprietor,  especially
when  joined  to  conquest,  is  likewise  deemed  a  good  title.
The  general  obligation,  which  binds  us  to  government,  is  the
interest  and  necessities  of  society ;  and  this  obligation  is
very  strong.  The  determination  of  it  to  this  or  that  parti
cular  prince  or  form  of  government  is  frequently  more
uncertain  and  dubious.  Present  possession  has  considerable
authority  in  these  cases,  and  greater  than  in  private  pro
perty  ;  because  of  the  disorders  which  attend  all  revolutions
and  changes  of  government.4

1  [In  Edition  D  the  remainder  of  this  the  same arts,  which  have  ever  been
paragraph  is  given  in  continuation  of  the  employed  by  all  conquerors  and  usurpers,
following  note.]  He  got  his  title,  indeed,  recognized  by

2  It  is  remarkable,  that,  in the  re-  the  states  after  he  had put  himself  in
monstrance  of  the  duke  of  BOURBON  and  possession:  But  is  this  a  choice  or  a,
the  legitimate  princes,  against  this  des-  contract? The Comte de BOULAIN-
tination of  Louis the  XlVth,  the  doc-  VIIXIERS,  we  may  observe,  was  a  noted
trine  of  the  original  contract  is  insisted  republican  ;  but  being  a  man  of  learn-
on,  even  in that  absolute  government.  ing,  and  very  conversant  in  history,  ho
The  FRENCH  nation,  say  they,  chusing  knew  th;it  the  people  were  never  almost
HUGH  CAPET  and  his  posterity  to  rule  consulted  in  these  revolutions  and  new
over  them  and  their  posterity, where  establishments,  and  that  time  alone  be-
thoformer  line  fails,  there  is  a  tacit  right  stowed  right  and  authority  on  what  was
reserved  to  choose  a  new  royal  family  ;  commonly  at  first  founded  on force  and
and  this  right  is  invaded  by  calling  the  violence. See  Etat  de  la  France,  Vol.
bastard  princes  to  the  throne,  without  III.

the  consent of  the nation. But  the  3  [This  sentence  was  added  in  Edi-

Oomte  de  BOULAJNVILLIERS,  who  wrote  tion  M.]

in  defence  of  the  bastard  princes,  ridi-  4  [Here  Editions  K  to P  subjoin  in

mips  this  notion  of  an  original  contract,  a  note  what  is  now  the  concluding  para-

es-pecially  when  applied  to  HUGH  CAPET  ;  graph  of  the  Essay.]

who  mounted  the  throne,  says  he,  by


4(50  ESSAY XIII.

We  shall  only  observe,  before  we  conclude,  that,  though
an  appeal  to  general  opinion  may  justly,  in  the  speculative
sciences  of  metaphysics,  natural  philosophy,  or  astronomy,  be
deemed  unfair  and  inconclusive,  yet  in  all  questions  with
regard  to  morals,  as  well  as  criticism,  there  is  really  no  other
standard,  by  which  any  controversy  can  ever  be  decided.
And  nothing  is  a  clearer  proof,  that  a  theory  of  this  kind  is
erroneous,  than  to  find,  that  it  leads  to  paradoxes,  repugnant
to  the  common  sentiments  of  mankind,  and  to  the  practice
and  opinion  of  all  nations  and  all  ages.  The  doctrine,  which
founds  all  lawful  government  on  an  original  contract,  or
consent  of  the  people,  is  plainly  of  this  kind ;  nor  has  the
most  noted  of  its  parti zans,  in  prosecution  of  it,  scrupled  to
affirm,  that  absolute  monarchy  is  inconsistent  with  civil  society,
and  so  can  be  no  form  of  civil  government  at  all ;  *  and  that  the
supreme  power  in  a  state  cannot  take  from  any  man,  by  taxes  and
impositions,  any  part  of  his  property,  without  his  own  consent
or  that  of  his  representatives.*  What  authority  any  moral
reasoning  can  have,  which  leads  into  opinions  so  wide  of  the
general  practice  of  mankind,  in  every  place  but  this  single
kingdom,  it  is  easy  to  determine.3

The  only  passage  I  meet  with  in  antiquity,  where  the
obligation  of  obedience  to  government  is  ascribed  to  a  pro
mise,  is  in  PLATO'S  Crito  :  where  SOCRATES  refuses  to  escape
from  prison,  because  he  had  tacitly  promised  to  obey  the
laws.  Thus  he  builds  a  tory  consequence  of  passive  obedience,
on  a  whig  foundation  of  the  original  contract.

New  discoveries  are  not  to  be  expected  in  these  matters.
If  scarce  any  man,  till  very  lately,  ever  imagined  that
government  was  founded  on  compact,  it  is  certain  that  it
cannot,  in  general,  have  any  such  foundation.

The  crime  of  rebellion  among  the  ancients  was  commonly
expressed  by  the  terms  vewrsp'^siv,  novas  res  moliri.


ESSAY  XIII. — Of  Passive  Obedience.

IN  the  former  essay,  we  endeavoured  to refute  the  specu
lative  systems  of  politics  advanced  in  this  nation  ;  as  well  the

1  See  LOCKE  on  Government,  chap.  vii. stop. Editions  K  to  P give  the  two
§  90.  next  paragraphs  as  a  note ;  they  have

2  Id.  chap.  xi.  §  138,  139,  140.  already  given  the  concluding  one  as  a
8  [At this point  editions D to P note  on  page  492.]


OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE.  461

religious  system  of  the  one  pai'ty,  as  the  philosophical  of  the
other.  We  come  now  to  examine  the  practical  consequences,
deduced  by  each  party,  with  regard  to  the  measures  of
submission  due  to  sovereigns.

As  the  obligation  to  justice  is  founded  entirely  on  the
interests  of  society,  which  require  mutual  abstinence  from
property,  in  order  to  preserve  peace  among  mankind ;  it  is
evident,  that,  when  the  execution  of  justice  would  be  attended
with  very  pernicious  consequences,  that  virtue  must  be
suspended,  and  give  place  to  public  utility,  in  such  extraor
dinary  and  such  pressing  emergencies.  The  maxim,  fiat
Justitia  et  mat  Coelum,  let  justice  be  performed,  though  the
universe  be  destroyed,  is  apparently  false,  and  by  sacrificing
the  end  to  the  means,  shews  a  preposterous  idea  of  the
subordination  of  duties.  What  governor  of  a  town  makes
any  scruple  of  burning  the  suburbs,  when  they  facilitate  the
approaches  of  the  enemy  ?  Or  what  general  abstains  from
plundering  a  neutral  country,  when  the  necessities  of  war
require  it,  and  he  cannot  otherwise  subsist  his  army  ?  The
case  is  the  same  with  the  duty  of  allegiance  ;  and  common
sense  teaches  us,  that,  as  government  binds  us  to  obedience
only  on  account  of  its  tendency  to  public  utility,  that  duty
must  always,  in  extraordinary  cases,  when  public  ruin
would  evidently  attend  obedience,  yield  to  the  primary  and
original  obligation.  Solus  populi  suprema  Lex,  the  safety  of
the  people  is  the  supreme  law.  This  maxim  is  agreeable  to
the  sentiments  of  mankind  in  all  ages  :  Nor  is  any  one,  when
he  reads  of  the  insurrections  against  NERO  l  or  PHILIP  the
Second,  so  infatuated  with  party-systems,  as  not  to  wish
success  to  the  enterprize,  and  praise  the  undertakers.  Even
our  high  monarchical  party,  in  spite  of  their  sublime  theory,
are  forced,  in  such  cases,  to  judge,  and  feel,  and  approve,  in
conformity  to  the  rest  of  mankind.

Resistance,  therefore,  being  admitted  in  extraordinary
emergencies,  the  question  can  only  be  among  good  reasoners,
with  regard  to  the  degree  of  necessity,  which  can  justify
resistance,  and  render  it  lawful  or  commendable.  And  here
I  must  confess,  that  I  shall  always  incline  to  their  side,  who
draw  the  bond  of  allegiance  very  close,  and  consider  an
infringement  of  it,  as  the  last  refuge  in  desperate  cases,
when  the  public  is  in  the  highest  danger,  from  violence  and

1  [Or  a  Caracalla:  Edition  D; or  a  Philip: Editions  K to  P.]


402  ESSAY XIII.

tyranny.  For  besides  the  mischiefs  of  a  civil  war,  which
commonly  attends  insurrection,  it  is  certain,  that,  where  a
disposition  to  rebellion  appears  among  any  people,  it  is  one
chief  cause  of  tyranny  in  the  rulers,  and  forces  them  into
many  violent  measures  which  they  never  would  have  em
braced,  had  every  one  been  inclined  to  submission  and
obedience.  Thus  the  tyrannicide  or  assassination,  approved
of  by  ancient  maxims,  instead  of  keeping  tyrants  and
usurpers  in  awe,  made  them  ten  times  more  fierce  and
unrelenting ;  and  is  now  justly,  upon  that  account,  abolished
by  the  laws  of  nations,  and  universally  condemned  as  a  base
and  treacherous  method  of  bringing  to  justice  these  disturbers
of  society.

Besides  we  must  consider,  that,  as  obedience  is  our  duty  in
the  common  course  of  things,  it  ought  chiefly  to  be  incul
cated;  nor  can  any  thing  be  more  preposterous  than  an
anxious  care  and  solicitude  in  stating  all  the  cases,  in  which
resistance  may  be  allowed.  In  like  manner,  though  a
philosopher  reasonably  acknowledges,  in  the  course  of  an
argument,  that  the  rules  of  justice  may  be  dispensed  with  in
cases  of  urgent  necessity ;  what  should  we  think  of  a  preacher
or  casuist  who  should  make  it  his  chief  study  to  find  out
such  cases,  and  enforce  them  with  all  the  vehemence  of
argument  and  eloquence  ?  Would  he  not  be  better  employed
in  inculcating  the  general  doctrine,  than  in  displaying  the
particular  exceptions,  which  we  are,  perhaps,  but  too  much
inclined,  of  ourselves,  to  embrace  and  to  extend  ?

There  are,  however,  two  reasons,  which  may  be  pleaded  in
defence  of  that  party  among  us,  who  have,  with  so  much
industry,  propagated  the  maxims  of  resistance;  maxims,
which,  it  must  be  confessed,  are,  in  general,  so  pernicious,  and
so  destructive  of  civil  society.  The  first  is,  that  their  anta
gonists  carrying  the  doctrine  of  obedience  to  such  an  extra
vagant  height,  as  not  only  never  to  mention  the  exceptions
in  extraordinary  cases  (which  might,  perhaps,  be  excusable),
but  even  positively  to  exclude  them  ;  it  became  necessary  to
insist  on  these  exceptions,  and  defend  the  rights  of  injured
truth  and  liberty.  The  second,  and,  perhaps,  better  reason,  is
founded  on  the  nature  of  the  BRITISH  constitution  and  form
of  government.

It  is  almost  peculiar  to  our  constitution  to  establish  a  first
magistrate  with  such  high  pre-eminence  and  dignity,  that,


OF  PASSIVE OBEDIENCE.  403

though  limited  by  the  laws,  he  is,  in  a  manner,  so  far  as
regards  his  own  person,  above  the  laws,  and  can  neither  be
questioned  nor  punished  for  any  injury  or  wrong,  which  may
be  committed  by  him. His  ministers  alone,  or  those  who
act  by  his  commission,  are  obnoxious  to  justice  ; and  while
the  prince  is  thus  allured,  by  the  prospect  of  personal  safety,
to  give  the  laws  their  free  course,  an  equal  security  is,  in
effect,  obtained  by  the  punishment  of  lesser  offenders,  and
at  the  same  time  a  civil  war  is  avoided,  which  would  be  the
infallible  consequence,  were  an  attack,  at  every  turn,  made
directly  upon  the  sovereign. But  though  the  constitution
pays  this  salutary  compliment  to  the  prince,  it  can  never
reasonably  be  understood,  by  that  maxim,  to  have  determined
its  own  destruction,  or  to  have  established  a  tame  submis
sion,  where  he  protects  his  ministers,  perseveres  in  injustice,
and  usurps  the  whole  power  of  the  commonwealth. This
case,  indeed,  is  never  expressly  put  by  the  laws ;  because  it
is  impossible  for  them,  in  their  ordinary  course,  to  provide  a
remedy  for  it,  or  establish any magistrate,  with superior
authority,  to  chastise  the  exorbitancies  of  the  prince. But
as  a  right  without  a  remedy  would  be  an  absurdity;  the
remedy,  in  this  case,  is  the  extraordinary  one  of  resistance,
when  affairs  come  to  that  extremity,  that  the  constitution
can  be  defended  by  it  alone. Resistance  therefore  must,  of
course,  become  more  frequent  in  the  BRITISH  government,
than  in  others,  which  are  simpler,  and  consist  of  fewer  parts
and  movements. Where  the  king  is  an  absolute  sovereign,
he  has  little  temptation  to  commit  such  enormous  tyranny
as  may  justly  provoke  rebellion  :  But  where  he  is  limited,
his imprudent ambition,  without  any  great  vices,  may  run
him  into  that  perilous  situation. This  is  frequently  supposed
to  have  been  the  case  with  CHARLES  the  First ;  and  if  we
may  now  speak  truth,  after  animosities  are  ceased,  this  was
also  the  case  with  JAMES  the  Second. These  were  harmless,
if  not,  in  their  private  character,  good  men  ;  but  mistaking
the  nature  of  our  constitution,  and  engrossing  the whole
legislative  power,  it  became  necessary  to  oppose  them  with
some  vehemence  ;  and  even  to  deprive  the  latter  formally  of
that  authority,  which  he  had  used  with  such  imprudence  and
indiscretion.


404  ESSAY XIV.


ESSAY  XIV. — Of  the  Coalition  of  Parties.*

To  abolish,  all  distinctions  of  party  may  not  be  practicable,
perhaps  not  desirable,  in  a  free  government.  The  only  dan
gerous  parties  are  such  as  entertain  opposite  views  with
regard  to  the  essentials  of  government,  the  succession  of
the  crown,  or  the  more  considerable  privileges  belonging
to  the  several  members  of  the  constitution ;  where  there  is
no  room  for  any  compromise  or  accommodation,  and  where
the  controversy  may  appear  so  momentous  as  to  justify  even
an  opposition  by  arms  to  the  pretensions  of  antagonists.  Of
this  nature  was  the  animosity,  continued  for  above  a  century
past,  between  the  parties  in  ENGLAND  ;  an  animosity  which
broke  out  sometimes  into  civil  war,  which  occasioned  violent
revolutions,  and  which  continually  endangered  the  peace  and
tranquillity  of  the  nation.  But  as  there  have  appeared  of
late  the  strongest  symptoms  of  an  universal  desire  to  abolish
these  party  distinctions ;  this  tendency  to  a  coalition  affords
the  most  agreeable  prospect  of  future  happiness,  and  ought
to  be  carefully  cherished  and  promoted  by  every  lover  of  his
country.

There  is  not  a  more  effectual  method  of  promoting  so  good
an  end,  than  to  prevent  all  unreasonable  insult  and  triumph
of  the  one  party  over  the  other,  to  encourage  moderate
opinions,  to  find  the  proper  medium  in  all  disputes,  to  per
suade  each  that  its  antagonist  may  possibly  be  sometimes  in
the  right,  and  to  keep  a  balance  in  the  praise  and  blame,
which  we  bestow  on  either  side.  The  two  former  Essays,
concerning  the  original  contract  and  passive  obedience,  are  cal
culated  for  this  purpose  with  regard  to  the  philosophical2  and
practical  controversies  between  the  parties,  and  tend  to  show
that  neither  side  are  in  these  respects  so  fully  supported  by
reason  as  they  endeavour  to  flatter  themselves.  We  shall
proceed  to  exercise  the  same  moderation  with  regard  to  the
historical  disputes  between  the  parties,  by  proving  that  each
of  them  was  justified  by  plausible  topics  ;  that  there  were
on  both  sides  wise  men,  who  meant  well  to  their  country  ;
and  that  the  past  animosity  between  the  factions  had  no

1  [This  Essay  first  appeared  in  Edl-  2  [And  practical :  added  in  Edition
tion  M.]  R.]


OF  THE  COALITION  OF  PARTIES.  465

better  foundation  than  narrow  prejudice  or  interested  pas
sion.

The  popular  party,  who  afterwards  acquired  the  name
of  whigs,  might  justify,  by  very  specious  arguments,  that
opposition  to  the  crown,  from  which  our  present  free  con
stitution  is  derived.  Though  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that
precedents  in  favour  of  prerogative  had  uniformly  taken  place
during  many  reigns  before  CHAKLES  the  First,  they  thought,
that  there  was  no  reason  for  submitting  any  longer  to  so
dangerous  an  authority.  Such  might  have  been  their  rea
soning  :  As  the  rights  of  mankind  are  for  ever  to  be  deemed
sacred,  no  prescription  of  tyranny  or  arbitrary  power  can
have  authority  sufficient  to  abolish  them.  Liberty  is  a  bless
ing  so  inestimable,  that,  wherever  there  appears  any  pro
bability  of  recovering  it,  a  nation  may  willingly  run  many
hazards,  and  ought  not  even  to  repine  at  the  greatest  effu
sion  of  blood  or  dissipation  of  treasure.  All  human  institu
tions,  and  none  more  than  government,  are  in  continual  fluc
tuation.  Kings  are  sure  to  embrace  every  opportunity  of
extending  their  prerogatives  :  And  if  favourable  incidents  be
not  also  laid  hold  of  for  extending  and  securing  the  privi
leges  of  the  people,  an  universal  despotism  must  for  ever
prevail  amongst  mankind.  The  example  of  all  the  neigh
bouring  nations  proves,  that  it  is  no  longer  safe  to  entrust
with  the  crown  the  same  high  prerogatives,  which  had  for
merly  been  exercised  during  the  rude  and  simple  ages.  And
though  the  example  of  many  late  reigns  may  be  pleaded  in
favour  of  a  power  in  the  prince  somewhat  arbitrary,  more
remote  reigns  afford  instances  of  stricter  limitations  imposed
on  the  crown ;  and  those  pretensions  of  the  parliament,  now
branded  with  the  title  of  innovations,  are  only  a  recovery  of
the  just  rights  of  the  people.

These  views,  far  from  being  odious,  are  surely  large,  and
generous,  and  noble  :  To  their  prevalence  and  success  the
kingdom  owes  its  liberty ;  perhaps  its  learning,  its  industry,
commerce,  and  naval  power :  By  them  chiefly  the  ENGLISH
name  is  distinguished  among  the  society  of  nations,  and
aspires  to  a  rivalship  with  that  of  the  freest  and  most  illus
trious  commonwealths  of  antiquity.  But  as  all  these  mighty
consequences  could  not  reasonably  be  foreseen  at  the  time
when  the  contest  began,  the  royalists  of  that  age  wanted  not
specious  arguments  on  their  side,  by  which  they  could  justify

VOL.  III.  H  E


466  ESSAY XIV.

their  defence  of  the  then  established  prerogatives  of  the
prince.  We  shall  state  the  question,  as  it  might  have  ap
peared  to  them  at  the  assembling  of  that  parliament,  which,
by  its  violent  encroachments  on  the  crown,  began  the  civil

wars.

The  only  rule  of  government,  they  might  have  said,  known
and  acknowledged  among  men,  is  use  and  practice  :  Reason
is  so  uncertain  a  guide  that  it  will  always  be  exposed  to  doubt
and  controversy  :  Could  it  ever  render  itself  prevalent  over
the  people,  men  had  always  retained  it  as  their  sole  rule  of
conduct :  They  had  still  continued  in  the  primitive,  uncon
nected,  state  of  nature,  without  submitting  to  political
government,  whose  sole  basis  is,  not  pure  reason,  but  au
thority  and  precedent.  Dissolve  these  ties,  you  break  all  the
bonds  of  civil  society,  and  leave  every  man  at  liberty  to  con
sult  his  private  interest,  by  those  expedients,  which  his
appetite,  disguised  under  the  appearance  of  reason,  shall
dictate  to  him.  The  spirit  of  innovation  is  in  itself  per
nicious,  however  favourable  its  particular  object  may  some
times  appear :  A  truth  so  obvious,  that  the  popular  party
themselves  are  sensible  of  it;  and  therefore  cover  their  en
croachments  011  the  crown  by  the  plausible  pretence  of  their
recovering  the  ancient  liberties  of  the  people.

But  the  present  prerogatives  of  the  crown,  allowing  all  the
suppositions  of  that  party,  have  been  incontestably  estab
lished  ever  since  the  accession  of  the  House  of  TUDOR  ;  a
period,  which,  as  it  now  comprehends  a  hundred  and  sixty
years,  may  be  allowed  sufficient  to  give  stability  to  any  con
stitution.  Would  it  not  have  appeared  ridiculous,  in  the
reign  of  the  Emperor  ADRIAN,  to  have  talked  of  the  re
publican  constitution  as  the  rule  of  government ;  or  to  have
supposed,  that  the  former  rights  of  the  seriate,  and  consuls,
and  tribunes  were  still  subsisting?

But  the  present  claims  of  the  ENGLISH  monarchs  are  much
more  favourable  than  those  of  the  ROMAN  emperors  during
that  age.  The  authority  of  AUGUSTUS  was  a  plain  usurpa
tion,  grounded  only  on  military  violence,  and  forms  such  an
epoch"  in  the  ROMAN  history,  as  is  obvious  to  every  reader.
But  if  HENRY  VII.  really,  as  some  pretend,  enlarged  the
power  of  the  crown,  it  was  only  by  insensible  acquisitions,
which  escaped  the  apprehension  of  the  people,  and  have
scarcely  been  remarked  even  by  historians  and  politicians.


OF THE COALITION OF PARTIES.  467,

The  new  government,  if  it  deserve  the  epithet,  is  an  imper
ceptible  transition  from  the  former  ;  is  entirely  engrafted  on
it ;  derives  its  title  fully  from  that  root ;  and  is  to  be  con
sidered  only  as  one  of  those  gradual  revolutions,  to  which
human  affairs,  in  every  nation,  will  be  for  ever  subject.

The  House  of  TUDOR,  and  after  them  that  of  STUART,
exercised  no  prerogatives,  but  what  had  been  claimed  and
exercised  by  the  PLANTAGENETS.  Not  a  single  branch  of
their  authority  can  be  said  to  be  an  innovation.  The  only
difference  is,  that,  perhaps,  former  kings  exerted  these  powers
only  by  intervals,  and  were  not  able,  by  reason  of  the  op
position  of  their  barons,  to  render  them  so  steady  a  rule  of
administration.1  But  the  sole  inference  from  this  fact  is,
that  those  ancient  times  were  more  turbulent  and  seditious ;
and  that  royal  authority,  the  constitution,  and  the  laws  have
happily  of  late  gained  the  ascendant.

Under  what  pretence  can  the  popular  party  now  speak  of
recovering  the  ancient  constitution  ?  The  former  controul
over  the  kings  was  not  placed  in  the  commons,  but  in  the
barons  :  The  people  had  no  authority,  and  even  little  or  no
liberty  ;  till  the  crown,  by  suppressing  these  factious  tyrants,
enforced  the  execution  of  the  laws,  and  obliged  all  the  sub
jects  equally  to  respect  each  others  rights,  privileges,  and
properties.  If  we  must  return  to  the  ancient  barbarous  and
2  feudal  constitution ;  let  those  gentlemen,  who  now  behave
themselves  with  so  much  insolence  to  their  sovereign,  set
the  first  example.  Let  them  make  court  to  be  admitted  as
retainers  to  a  neighbouring  baron ;  and  by  submitting  to
slavery  under  him,  acquire  some  protection  to  themselves :
together  with  the  power  of  exercising  rapine  and  oppression
over  their  inferior  slaves  and  villains.  This  was  the  con
dition  of  the  commons  among  their  remote  ancestors.

But  how  far  back  must  we  go,  in  having  recourse  to  ancient
constitutions  and  governments  ?  There  was  a  constitution
still  more  ancient  than  that  to  which  these  innovators  affect
so  much  to  appeal.  During  that  period  there  was  no  mayna,

1  [Editions  M  to  Q,  append  the  note :  are  strong  symptoms  of  arbitrary  power
The  author  believes  that  he  was  the  first  in  some  former  reigns,  even  after  sign-
writer  who  advanced  that  the  family  ing  of  the  charters. The  power  of  the
of  TUDOR possessed in general  more  crown  in  that  age  depended  less  on  the
authority  than  their  immediate  prede-  constitution  than on  the  capacity  and
cessors  :  An  opinion,  which,  he  hopes,  vigour  of  the  prince  who  wore  it.  "
will  be  supported  by  history,  but  which  -'  [GOTHIC:  Editions  M  to  Q.]
he  proposes  with  some  diffidence. There


H  H ?,


468  ESSAY  XIV.

zharta  :  The  barons  themselves  possessed  few  regular,  stated
privileges  :  And  the  house  of  commons  probably  had  not  an
existence.

It  is  ridiculous  to  hear  the  commons,  while  they  are  as
suming,  by  usurpation,  the  whole  power  of  government,  talk
of  reviving  ancient  institutions.  Is  it  not  known,  that,
though  representatives  received  wages  from  their  con
stituents  ;  to  be  a  member  of  the  lower  house  was  always
considered  as  a  burden,  and  an  exemption  from  it  as  a  pri
vilege  ?  Will  they  persuade  us,  that  power,  which,  of  all
human  acquisitions,  is  the  most  coveted,  and  in  comparison
of  which  even  reputation  and  pleasure  and  riches  are  slighted,
could  ever  be  regarded  as  a  burden  by  any  man  ?

The  property,  acquired  of  late  by  the  commons,  it  is  said,
entitles  them  to  more  power  than  their  ancestors  enjoyed.
But  to  what  is  this  encrease  of  their  property  owing,  but  to  an
encrease  of  their  liberty  and  their  security  ?  Let  them  there
fore  acknowledge,  that  their  ancestors,  while  the  crown  was
restrained  by  the  seditious  barons,  really  enjoyed  less  liberty
than  they  themselves  have  attained,  after  the  sovereign  ac
quired  the  ascendant :  And  let  them  enjoy  that  liberty  with
moderation  ;  and  not  forfeit  it  by  new  exorbitant  claims,
and  by  rendering  it  a  pretence  for  endless  innovations.

The  true  rule  of  government  is  the  present  established
practice  of  the  age.  That  has  most  authority,  because  it  is
recent :  It  is  also  best  known,  for  the  same  reason.  Who
has  assured  those  tribunes,  that  the  PLANTAGENETS  did  not
exercise  as  high  acts  of  authority  as  the  TUDOES  ?  Historians,
they  say,  do  not  mention  them.  But  historians  are  also  silent
with  regard  to  the  chief  exertions  of  prerogative  by  the
TUDORS.  Where  any  power  or  prerogative  is  fully  and  un
doubtedly  established,  the  exercise  of  it  passes  for  a  thing  of
course,  and  readily  escapes  the  notice  of  history  and  annals.
Had  we  no  other  monuments  of  ELIZABETH'S  reign,  than
what  are  preserved  even  by  CAMDEN,  the  most  copious,
judicious,  and  exact  of  our  historians,  we  should  be  entirely
ignorant  of  the  most  important  maxims  of  her  government.

Was  not  the  present  monarchical  government,  in  its  full
extent,  authorized  by  lawyers,  recommended  by  divines,
acknowledged  by  politicians,  acquiesced  in,  nay  passionately
cherished,  by  the  people  in  general ;  and  all  this  during  a
period  of  at  least  a  hundred  and  sixty  years,  and  till  of  late,


OF THE COALITION OF PARTIES.  469

without  the  smallest  murmur  or  controversy  ?  This  general
consent  surely,  during  so  long  a  time,  must  be  sufficient  to
render  a  constitution  legal  and  valid.  If  the  origin  of  all
power  be  derived,  as  is  pretended,  from  the  people ;  here  is
their  consent  in  the  fullest  and  most  ample  terms  that  can
be  desired  or  imagin'd.

But  the  people  must  not  pretend,  because  they  can,  by
their  consent,  lay  the  foundations  of  government,  that  there
fore  they  are  to  be  permitted,  at  their  pleasure,  to  overthrow
and  subvert  them.  There  is  no  end  of  these  seditious  and
arrogant  claims.  The  power  of  the  crown  is  now  openly
struck  at :  The  nobility  are  also  in  visible  peril :  The  gentry
will  soon  follow :  The  popular  leaders,  who  will  then  assume
the  name  of  gentry,  will  next  be  exposed  to  danger :  And  the
people  themselves,  having  become  incapable  of  civil  govern
ment,  and  lying  under  the  restraint  of  no  authority,  must,
for  the  sake  of  peace,  admit,  instead  of  their  legal  and  mild
monarchs,  a  succession  of  military  and  despotic  tyrants.

These  consequences  are  the  more  to  be  dreaded,  as  the  pre
sent  fury  of  the  people,  though  glossed  over  by  pretensions  to
civil  liberty,  is  in  reality  incited  by  the  fanaticism  of  religion  ;
a  principle  the  most  blind,  headstrong,  and  ungovernable,  by
which  human  nature  can  possibly  be  actuated.  Popular  rage
is  dreadful,  from  whatever  motive  derived :  But  must  be  at
tended  with  the  most  pernicious  consequences,  when  it  arises
from  a  principle,  which  disclaims  all  controul  by  human  law,
reason,  or  authority.

These  are  the  arguments,  which  each  party  may  make  use
of  to  justify  the  conduct  of  their  predecessors,  during  that
great  crisis.  The  event,  if  that  can  be  admitted  as  a  reason,
has  shown,  that  the  arguments  of  the  popular  party  were
better  founded ;  but  perhaps,  according  to  the  established
maxims  of  lawyers  and  politicians,  the  views  of  the  royalists
ought,  before-hand,  to  have  appeared  more  solid,  more  safe,
and  more  legal.  But  this  is  certain,  that  the  greater  mode
ration  we  now  employ  in  representing  past  events ;  the
nearer  shall  we  be  to  produce  a  full  coalition  of  the  parties,
and  an  entire  acquiescence  in  our  present  establishment.
Moderation  is  of  advantage  to  every  establishment :  Nothing
but  zeal  can  overturn  a  settled  power :  And  an  over-active
zeal  in  friends  is  apt  to  beget  a  like  spirit  in  antagonists.
The  transition  from  a  moderate  opposition  against  an  es


470  ESSAY  XV.

tablishment,  to  an  entire  acquiescence  in  it,  is  easy  and
insensible.

There  are  many  invincible  arguments,  which  should  induce
fche  malcontent  party  to  acquiesce  entirely  in  the  present
settlement  of  the  constitution.  They  now  find,  that  the
spirit  of  civil  liberty,  though  at  first  connected  with  religious
fanaticism,  could  purge  itself  from  that  pollution,  and  appear
under  a  more  genuine  and  engaging  aspect ;  a  friend  to  tole
ration,  and  an  encourager  of  all  the  enlarged  and  generous
sentiments  that  do  honour  to  human  nature.  They  may
observe,  that  the  popular  claims  could  stop  at  a  proper
period ;  and  after  retrenching  the  high  claims  of  prerogative,
could  still  maintain  a  due  respect  to  monarchy,  to  nobility,
and  to  all  ancient  institutions.  Above  all,  they  must  be
sensible,  that  the  very  principle,  which  made  the  strength
of  their  party,  and  from  which  it  derived  its  chief  authority,
has  now  deserted  them,  and  gone  over  to  their  antagonists.
The  plan  of  liberty  is  settled  ;  its  happy  effects  are  proved  by
experience;  a  long  tract  of  time  has  given  it  stability;  and
whoever  would  attempt  to  overturn  it,  and  to  recall  the  past
government  or  abdicated  family,  would,  besides  other  more
criminal  imputations,  be  exposed,  in  their  turn,  to  the  re
proach  of  faction  and  innovation.  While  they  peruse  the
history  of  past  events,  they  ought  to  reflect,  both  that  those
rights  of  the  crown  are  long  since  annihilated,  and  that  the
tyranny,  and  violence,  and  oppression,  to  which  they  often
gave  rise,  are  ills,  from  which  the  established  liberty  of  the
constitution  has  now  at  last  happily  protected  the  people.
These  reflections  will  prove  a  better  security  to  our  freedom
and  privileges,  than  to  deny,  contrary  to  the  clearest  evidence
of  facts,  that  such  regal  powers  ever  had  an  existence.  There
is  not  a  more  effectual  method  of  betraying  a  cause,  than  to
lay  the  stress  of  the  argument  on  a  wrong  place,  and  by
disputing  an  untenable  post,  enure  the  adversaries  to  success
and  victory.

1  ESSAY  XV. — Of  the  Protestant  Succession.

I  SUPPOSE,  that  a  member  of  parliament,  in  the  reign  of  King
WILLIAM  or  Queen  ANNE,  while  the  establishment  of  the
Protestant  Succession  was  yet  uncertain,  were  deliberating

1  [For  the  history  of  the  publication  of  this  Essay,  see  p.  48.]


OF THE PROTESTANT SUCCESSION.  471

concerning  the  party  he  would  chuse  in  that  important
question,  and  weighing,  with  impartiality,  the  advantages
and  disadvantages  on  each  side.  I  believe  the  following
particulars  would  have  entered  into  his  consideration.

He  would  easily  perceive  the  great  advantage  resulting
from  the  restoration  of  the  STUART  family  ;  by  which  we
should  preserve  the  succession  clear  and  undisputed,  free
from  a  pretender,  with  such  a  specious  title  as  that  of  blood,
which,  with  the  multitude,  is  always  the  claim,  the  strongest
and  most  easily  comprehended.  It  is  in  vain  to  say,  as  many
have  done,  that  the  question  with  regard  to  gov&t'nors,  inde
pendent  of  government,  is  frivolous,  and  little  worth  disputing,
much  less  fighting  about.  The  generality  of  mankind  never
will  enter  into  these  sentiments ;  and  it  is  much  happier,  I
believe,  for  society,  that  they  do  not,  but  rather  continue  in
their  natural  prepossessions.  How  could  stability  be  preserved
in  any  monarchical  government,  (which,  thoiigh,  perhaps,
not  the  best,  is,  and  always  has  been,  the  most  common  of
any)  unless  men  had  so  passionate  a  regard  for  the  true  heir
of  their  royal  family;  and  even  though  he  be  weak  in  under
standing,  or  infirm  in  years,  gave  him  so  sensible  a  preference
above  persons  the  most  accomplished  in  shining  talents,  or
celebrated  for  great  atchievements  ?  Would  not  every  popular
leader  put  in  his  claim  at  every  vacancy,  or  even  without  any
vacancy;  and  the  kingdom  become  the  theatre  of  perpetual
wars  and  convulsions  ?  The  condition  of  the  ROMAN  empire,
surely,  was  not,  in  this  respect,  much  to  be  envied ;  nor  is
that  of  the  Eastern  nations,  who  pay  little  regard  to  the  titles
of  their  sovereign,  but  sacrifice  them,  every  day,  to  the  caprice
or  momentary  humour  of  the  populace  or  soldiery.  It  is  but  a
foolish  wisdom,  which  is  so  carefully  displayed,  in  undervaluing
princes,  and  placing  them  on  a  level  with  the  meanest  of
mankind.  To  be  sure,  an  anatomist  finds  no  more  in  the
greatest  monarch  than  in  the  lowest  peasant  or  day-labourer ;
and  a  moralist  ma,y,  perhaps,  frequently  find  less.  But  what
do  all  these  reflections  tend  to  ?  We,  all  of  us,  still  retain
these  prejudices  in  favour  of  birth  and  family  ;  and  neither
in  our  serious  occupations,  nor  most  careless  amusements,
can  we  ever  get  entirely  rid  of  them.  A  tragedy,  that  should
represent  the  adventures  of  sailors,  or  porters,  or  even  of
private  gentlemen,  would  presently  disgust  us ;.  but  one  that
introduces  kings  and  princes,  acquires  in  our  eyes  an  air  of


472  ESSAY XV.

importance  and  dignity.  Or  should  a  man  be  able,  by  hia
superior  wisdom,  to  get  entirely  above  such  prepossessions,
he  would  soon,  by  means  of  the  same  wisdom,  again  bring
himself  down  to  them,  for  the  sake  of  society,  whose  welfare
he  would  perceive  to  be  intimately  connected  with  them.  Far
from  endeavouring  to  undeceive  the  people  in  this  particular,
he  would  cherish  such  sentiments  of  reverence  to  their
princes ;  as  requisite  to  preserve  a  due  subordination  in
society.  And  though  the  lives  of  twenty  thousand  men  be
often  sacrificed  to  maintain  a  king  in  possession  of  his  throne,
or  preserve  the  right  of  succession  undisturbed,  he  entertains
no  indignation  at  the  loss,  on  pretence  that  every  individual
of  these  was,  perhaps,  in  himself,  as  valuable  as  the  prince
lie  served.  He  considers  the  consequences  of  violating  the
hereditary  right  of  kings  :  Consequences,  which  may  be  felt
for  many  centuries ;  while  the  loss  of  several  thousand  men
brings  so  little  prejudice  to  a  large  kingdom,  that  it  may  not
be  perceived  a  few  years  after.

The  advantages  of  the  HANOVER  succession  are  of  an  oppo
site  nature,  and  arise  from  this  very  circumstance,  that  it
violates  hereditary  right ;  and  places  on  the  throne  a  prince,
to  whom  birth  gave  no  title  to  that  dignity.  It  is  evident,
from  the  history  of  this  island,  that  the  privileges  of  the
people  have,  during  near  two  centuries,  been  continually
upon  the  encrease,  by  the  division  of  the  church-lands,  by
the  alienations  of  the  barons'  estates,  by  the  progress  of
trade,  and  above  all,  by  the  happiness  of  our  situation,  which,
for  a  long  time,  gave  us  sufficient  security,  without  any  stand
ing  army  or  military  establishment.  On  the  contrary,  public
liberty  has,  almost  in  every  other  nation  of  EUROPE,  been,
during  the  same  period,  extremely  upon  the  decline  ;  while
the  people  were  disgusted  at  the  hardships  of  the  old  J  feudal
militia,  and  rather  chose  to  entrust  their  prince  with  mer
cenary  armies,  which  he  easily  turned  against  themselves.
It  was  nothing  extraordinary,  therefore,  that  some  of  our
BRITISH  sovereigns  mistook  the  nature  of  the  constitution,  at
least,  the  genius  of  the  people  ;  and  as  they  embraced  all  the
favourable  precedents  left  them  by  their  ancestors,  they  over
looked  all  those  which  were  contrary,  and  which  supposed  a
limitation  in  our  government.  They  were  encouraged  in
this  mistake,  by  the  example  of  all  the  neighbouring  princes,
1  [GOTHIC:  Editions  H  to  N.j


OF  THE  PROTESTANT  SUCCESSION.


473


who  bearing  tlie  same  title  or  appellation,  and  being  adorned
with  the  same  ensigns  of  authority,  naturally  led  them  to
claim  the  same  powers  and  prerogatives.  "It  appears  from
the  speeches,  and  proclamations  of  JAMES  I.  and  the  whole
train  of  that  prince's  actions,  as  well  as  his  son's,  that  he  re
garded  the  ENGLISH  government  as  a  simple  monarchy,  and
never  imagined  that  any  considerable  part  of  his  subjects  en
tertained  a  contrary  idea.  This  opinion  made  those  monarchs
discover  their  pretensions,  without  preparing  any  force  to
support  them ;  and  even  without  reserve  or  disguise,  which
are  always  employed  by  those,  who  enter  upon  any  new  pro
ject,  or  endeavour  to  innovate  in  any  government.  The  flat
tery  of  courtiers  farther  2  confirmed  their  prejudices ;  and
above  all,  that  of  the  clergy,  who  from  several  passages  of


1  [For  this  sentence  and  the  next,  Edi
tions  H  to  P  read  as  follows  ;  K  to  P,  in
a  note :  It  appears  from  the  speeches,  and
proclamations,  and  whole  train  of  King
JAMES  I.'s  actions,  as  well  as  his  son's,
that  they  considered  the  ENGLISH  govern
ment  as  a  simple  monarchy,  and  never
imagined  that  any  considerable  part  of
their  subjects  entertained  a  contrary
idea.  This  made  them  discover  their
pretensions,  without  preparing  any  force
to  support  them  ;  and  even  without  re
serve  or  disguise,  which  are  always  em
ployed  by  those,  who  enter  upon  any
new  project,  or  endeavour  to  innovate
in  any  government.  King  JAMES  told
his  parliament  plainly,  when  they  med
dled  in  state  affairs,  Ne  sutor  ultra  cre-
pidam.  He  used  also,  at  his  table,  in
promiscuous  companies,  to  advance  his
notions,  in  a  manner  still  more  undis
guised  :  As  we  may  learn  from  a  story
told  in  the  life  of  Mr.  WALLER,  and
which  that  poet  used  frequently  to  re
peat.  When  Mr.  WALLER  was  young,
he  had  the  curiosity  to  go  to  court ;  and
he  stood  in  the  circle,  and  saw  King
JAMES  dine,  where,  amongst  other  com
pany,  there  sat  at  table  two  bishops.
The  King,  openly  and  aloud,  proposed
this  question,  Whether  he  might  not
take  his  subjects  money,  when  he  had
occasion  for  it,  without  all  this  formality
of  parliament !  The  one  bishop  readily
replied,  God  forbid  you  should  not :  For
you  are  the  breath  of  our  nostrils.  The
other  bishop  declined  answering,  and


said  he  was  not  skilled  in  parliamentary
cases :  But  upon  the  King's  urging
him,  and  saying  he  would  admit  of  no
evasion,  his  lordship  replied  very  plea
santly,  Why,  then,  I  think  your  majesty
may  lawfully  take  my  brother's  money :
For  he  offers  it.  In  Sir  WALTER
RALEIGH'S  preface  to  the  History  of  the
World,  there  is  this  remarkable  passage.
PHILIP  II.  by  strong  hand  and  main
force,  attempted  to  make  himself  not
only  an  absolute  monarch  over  the
Netherlands,  like  unto  the  kings  and
sovereigns  of  England  and  France  ;  but
Turk-like,  to  tread  under  his  feet  all  thtir
natural  and  fundamental  laws,  privileges,
and  antient  rights.  SPENSER,  speaking
of  some  grants  of  the  ENGLISH  kings  to
the  IRISH  corporations,  says,  '  All  which,
tho',  at  the  time  of  their  first  grant,
they  were  tolerable,  and  perhaps  reason
able,  yet  now  are  most  unreasonable
and  inconvenient.  But  all  these  will
easily  be  cut  off  with  the  superior  power
of  her  majesty's  prerogative,  against
which  her  own  grants  are  not  to  be
pleaded  orinforced.'  State  of  IRELAND,
p.  1537.  Edit.  1706.

As  these  were  very  common,  if  not,
perhaps,  the  universal  notions  of  the
times,  the  two  first  princes  of  the  house
of  STUART  were  the  more  excusable  for
their  mistake.  And  KAPIN,  '  suitable  to
his  usual  malignity  and  partiality,
seems  to  treat  them  with  too  much  se
verity,  upon  account  of  it.

2  [Blinded  them  :  Editions  H  to  N.]


[Editions  H  and  I  read  :  The  most  judicious  of  historians.]


474  ESSAY XV.

scripture.,  and  these  wrested  too,  had  erected  a  regular  and
avowed  system  of  arbitrary  power.  The  only  method  of  de
stroying,  at  once,  all  these  high  claims  and  pretensions,  was
to  depart  from  the  true  hereditary  line,  and  choose  a  prince,
who,  being  plainly  a  creature  of  the  public,  and  receiving  the
crown  on  conditions,  expressed  and  avowed,  found  his  au
thority  established  on  the  same  bottom  with  the  privileges,
of  the  people.  By  electing  him  in  the  royal  line,  we  cut  off
all  hopes  of  ambitious  subjects,  who  might,  in  future  emer
gencies,  disturb  the  government  by  their  cabals  and  preten
sions  :  By  rendering  the  crown  hereditary  in  his  family,  we
avoided  all  the  inconveniencies  of  elective  monarchy  :  And  by
excluding  the  lineal  heir,  we  secured  all  our  constitutional
limitations,  and  rendered  our  government  uniform  and  of  a
piece.  The  people  cherish  monarchy,  because  protected  by
it :  The  monarch  favours  liberty,  because  created  by  it.  And
thus  every  advantage  is  obtained  by  the  new  establishment,
as  far  as  human  skill  and  wisdom  can  extend  itself.

These  are  the  separate  advantages  of  fixing  the  succession,
either  in  the  house  of  STUART,  or  in  that  of  HANOVER.  There
are  also  disadvantages  in  each  establishment,  which  an  im
partial  patriot  would  ponder  and  examine,  in  order  to  form,
a  just  judgment  upon  the  whole.

The  disadvantages  of  the  protestant  succession  consist  in
the  foreign  dominions,  which  are  possessed  by  the  princes  oi
the  HANOVER  line,  and  which,  it  might  be  supposed,  would
engage  us  in  the  intrigues  and  wars  of  the  continent,  and
lose  us,  in  some  measure,  the  inestimable  advantage  we
possess,  of  being  surrounded  and  guarded  by  the  sea,  which
we  command.  The  disadvantages  of  recalling  the  abdicated
family  consist  chiefly  in  their  religion,  which  is  more  preju
dicial  to  society  than  that  established  amongst  us,  is  contrary
to  it,  and  affords  no  toleration,  or  peace,  or  security  to  any
other  communion.

It  appears  to  me,  that  these  advantages  and  disadvantages
are  allowed  on  both  sides  ;  at  least,  by  every  one  who  is  at  all
susceptible  of  argument  or  reasoning.  No  subject,  however
loyal,  pretends  to  deny,  that  the  disputed  title  and  foreign
dominions  of  the  present  royal  family  are  a  loss.  Nor  is
there  any  partizan  of  the  STUARTS,  but  will  confess,  that
the  claim  of  hereditary,  indefeasible  right,  and  the  Eoman
Catholic  religion,  arc  also  disadvantages  in  that  family.  It


OF THE PROTESTANT SUCCESSION.  475

belongs,  therefore,  to  a  philosopher  alone,  who  is  of  neither
party,  to  put  all  the  circumstances  in  the  scale,  and  assign
jo  each  of  them  its  proper  poise  and  influence.  Such  a  one
will  readily,  at  first,  acknowledge  that  all  political  questions
are  infinitely  complicated,  and  that  there  scarcely  ever
occurs,  in  any  deliberation,  a  choice,  which  is  either  purely
good,  or  purely  ill.  Consequences,  mixed  and  varied,  may  be
foreseen  to  flow  from  every  measure  :  And  many  conse
quences,  unforseen,  do  always,  in  fact,  result  from  every  one.
Hesitation,  and  reserve,  and  suspense,  are,  therefore,  the  only
sentiments  he  brings  to  this  essay  or  trial.  Or  if  he  indulges
any  passion,  it  is  that  of  derision  against  the  ignorant  multi
tude,  who  are  always  clamorous  and  dogmatical,  even  in  the
nicest  questions,  of  which,  from  want  of  temper,  perhaps  still
more  than  of  understanding,  they  are  altogether  unfit  judges.

But  to  say  something  more  determinate  on  this  head,  the
following  reflections  will,  I  hope,  show  the  temper,  if  not  the
understanding  of  a  philosopher.

Were  we  to  judge  merely  by  first  appearances,  and  by  past
experience,  we  must  allow  that  the  advantages  of  a  parliamfen-
tary  title  in  the  house  of  HANOVER  are  greater  than  those  of
an  undisputed  hereditary  title  in  the  house  of  STUART  ;  and
that  our  fathers  acted  wisely  in  preferring  the  former  to  the
latter.  So  long  as  the  house  of  STUART  ruled  in  GREAT
BRITAIN,  which,  with  some  interruption,  was  above  eighty
years,  the  government  was  kept  in  a  continual  fever,  by  the
contention  between  the  privileges  of  the  people  and  the  pre
rogatives  of  the  crown.  If  arms  were  dropped,  the  noise  of
disputes  continued  :  Or  if  these  were  silenced,  jealousy  still
corroded  the  heart,  and  threw  the  nation  into  an  unnatural
ferment  and  disorder.  And  while  we  were  thus  occupied  in
domestic  disputes,  a  foreign  power,  dangerous  to  public
liberty,  erected  itself  in  Europe,  without  any  opposition  from
us,  and  even  sometimes  with  our  assistance.

But  during  these  last  sixty  years,  when  a  parliamentary
establishment  has  taken  place  ;  whatever  factions  may  have
prevailed  either  among  the  people  or  in  public  assemblies,
the  whole  force  of  our  constitution  has  always  fallen  to  one
side,  and  an  uninterrupted  harmony  has  been  preserved
between  our  princes  and  our  parliaments.  Public  liberty,
with  internal  peace  and  order,  has  flourished  almost  without
interruption :  Trade  and  manufactures,  and  agriculture,  have


47G  ESSAY XV.

eiicr eased  :  The  arts,  and  sciences,  and  philosophy,  have  been
cultivated.  Even  religious  parties  have  been  necessitated  to
lay  aside  their  mutual  rancour :  And  the  glory  of  the  nation
has  spread  itself  all  over  EITKOPE  ; l  derived  equally  from  our
progress  in  the  arts  of  peace,  and  from  valour  and  success  in
war.  So  long  and  so  glorious  a  period  no  nation  almost  can
boast  of :  Nor  is  there  another  instance  in  the  whole  history
of  mankind,  that  so  many  millions  of  people  have,  during
such  a  space  of  time,  been  held  together,  in  a  manner  so
free,  so  rational,  and  so  suitable  to  the  dignity  of  human
nature.

But  though  this  recent  experience  seems  clearly  to  decidu
in  favour  of  the  present  establishment,  there  are  some  cir
cumstances  to  be  thrown  into  the  other  scale ;  and  it  is
dangerous  to  regulate  our  judgment  by  one  event  or  example.

We  have  had  two  rebellions  during  the  flourishing  period
above  mentioned,  besides  plots  and  conspiracies  without
number.  And  if  none  of  these  have  produced  any  very
fatal  event,  we  may  ascribe  our  escape  chiefly  to  the  narrow
genius  of  those  princes  who  disputed  our  establishment ;  and
we  may  esteem  ourselves  so  far  fortunate.  But  the  claims  of
the  banished  family,  I  fear,  are  not  yet  antiquated  ;  and  who
can  foretel,  that  their  future  attempts  will  produce  no  greater
disorder  ?

The  disputes  between  privilege  and  prerogative  may  easily
be  composed  by  laws,  and  votes,  and  conferences,  and  con
cessions  ;  where  there  is  tolerable  temper  or  prudence  on
both  sides,  or  011  either  side.  Among  contending  titles,  the
question  can  only  be  determined  by  the  sword,  and  by  devas
tation,  and  by  civil  war.

A  prince,  who  fills  the  throne  with  a  disputed  title,  dares
not  arm  his  subjects  ;  the  only  method  of  securing  a  people
fully,  both  against  domestic  oppression  and  foreign  conquest.

Notwithstanding  our  riches  and  renown,  what  a  critical
escape  did  we  make,  by  the  late  peace,  from  dangers,  which
were  owing  not  so  much  to  bad  conduct  and  ill  success  in
war,  as  to  the  pernicious  practice  of  mortgaging  our  finances,
and  the  still  more  pernicious  maxim  of  never  paying  off  our
incumbrances  ?  Such  fatal  measures  would  not  probably

1  [For  the  remainder  of  this  sentence,  and  the  great  antagonist  of  that  power
Editions  H  to  P  substitute  :  While  we  which  threatens  every  people  with  con-
stand  the  bulwark  against  oppression,  quest  and  subjection.]


OF  THE PROTESTANT SUCCESSION.  477

have  been  embraced,  had  it  not  been  to  secure  a  precarious
establishment.1

But  to  convince  us,  that  an  hereditary  title  is  to  be  em
braced  rather  than  a  parliamentary  one,  which  is  not  sup
ported  by  any  other  views  or  motives  ;  a  man  needs  only
transport  himself  back  to  the  sera  of  the  restoration,  and
suppose,  that  he  had  had  a  seat  in  that  parliament  which
recalled  the  royal  family,  and  put  a  period  to  the  greatest
disorders  that  ever  arose  from  the  opposite  pretensions  of
prince  and  people.  What  would  have  been  thought  of  one,
that  had  proposed,  at  that  time,  to  set  aside  CHARLES  II.
and  settle  the  crown  on  the  Duke  of  YORK  or  GLOUCESTER,
merely  in  order  to  exclude  all  high  claims,  like  those  of  their
father  and  grandfather  ?  Would  not  such  a  one  have  been
regarded  as  an  extravagant  projector,  who  loved  dangerous
remedies,  and  could  tamper  and  play  with  a  government  and
national  constitution,  like  a  quack  with  a  sickly  patient  ?  2

In  reality,  the  reason  assigned  by  the  nation  for  excluding
the  race  of  STUART,  and  so  many  other  branches  of  the  royal
family,  is  not  on  account  of  their  hereditary  title  (a  reason,
which  would,  to  vulgar  apprehensions,  have  appeared  alto
gether  absurd),  but  on  account  of  their  religion.  Which
leads  us  to  compare  the  disadvantages  above  mentioned  in
each  established.

I  confess,  that,  considering  the  matter  in  general,  it  were
much  to  be  wished,  that  our  prince  had  no  foreign  dominions,
and  could  confine  all  his  attention  to  the  government  of  this
island.  For  not  to  mention  some  real  inconveniencies  that
may  result  from  territories  on  the  continent,  they  afford  such
a  handle  for  calumny  and  defamation,  as  is  greedily  seized
by  the  people,  always  disposed  to  think  ill  of  their  superiors.
It  must,  however,  be  acknowledged,  that  HANOVER,  is,  per-

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add the note:  be  sufficient  for  committing  what  would

Those  who  consider  how  universal  this  be  regarded  as  an  injustice  to  the  prince,

pernicious  practice  of  lending  has  be-  They  must  be  supported  by  some  gross,

come  all  over  EUROPE,  may  perhaps  dis-  popular,  and  familiar  topics  ;  and  wise

pute this last opinion. But we lay  men,  thoiigh  convinced  of  their  force,

under  less  necessity  than  other  states.]  would  reject  them,  in  compliance  with

-  [Editions  H  to  P  add  the  following  the  weakness  and  prejudices  of  the  peo-

paragraph  :  The advantages  which  re-  pie. An  incroaching  tyrant  or  deluded

suit  from  a  parliamentary  title,  prefer-  bigot  alone,  by  his  misconduct,  is  able

ably  to  an  hereditary  one,  tho'  they  are  to  enrage  the  nation,  and  render  prac-

great,  are  too  refined  ever  to  enter  into  ti  cable  what  was  always  perhaps  desir-

the  conception  of  the  vulgar. The  bulk  able.]
of  mankind  would  never  allow  them  to


478  ESSAY  XV.

haps,  the  spot  of  ground  in  EUROPE  the  least  inconvenient
for  a  King  of  ENGLAND.  It  lies  in  the  heart  of  GERMANY,
at  a  distance  from  the  great  powers,  which  are  our  natural
rivals :  It  is  protected  by  the  laws  of  the  empire,  as  well  as
by  the  arms  of  its  own  sovereign  :  And  it  serves  only  to  con
nect  us  more  closely  with  the  house  of  AUSTRIA,  our  natural
ally.1

The  religious  persuasion  of  the  house  of  STUART  is  an  in
convenience  of  a  much  deeper  dye,  and  would  threaten  us
with  much  more  dismal  consequences.  The  Roman  Catholic
religion,  with  its  train  of  priests  and  friers,  is  more  expensive
than  ours :  Even  though  unaccompanied  with  its  natural
attendants  of  inquisitors,  and  stakes,  and  gibbets,  it  is  less
tolerating  :  And  not  content  with  dividing  the  sacerdotal
from  the  regal  office  (which  must  be  prejudicial  to  any  state),
it  bestows  the  former  on  a  foreigner,  who  has  always  a  sepa
rate  interest  from  that  of  the  public,  and  may  often  have  an
opposite  one.

But  were  this  religion  ever  so  advantageous  to  society,  it  is
contrary  to  that  which  is  established  among  us,  and  which
is  likely  to  keep  possession,  for  a  long  time,  of  the  minds  of
the  people.  And  though  it  is  much  to  be  hoped,  that  the
progress  of  reason  will,  by  degrees,  abate  the  2  acrimony  of
opposite  religions  all  over  EUROPE  ;  yet  the  spirit  of  modera
tion  has,  as  yet,  made  too  slow  advances  to  be  entirely
trusted.3

Thus,  upon  the  whole,  the  advantages  of  the  settlement  in

1  [Editions  H  to  P  insert  the  follow-  from  those  of  other  princes:  made  a  per-

ing  paragraph  :  In  the  last  war,  it  has  sonal  quarrel  of  every  public  injury.]  '
been  of  service  to  us,  by  furnishing  us  2  [The  virulent  acrimony :  Editions

with  a  considerable  body  of  auxiliary  H  to  N.]

troops,  the  bravest  and  most  faithful  in  3  [Editions  H  to  P  add  :  The  conduct

the  world. The  Elector  of  HANOVER  is  of  the  SAXON  family,  where  the  same

the  only  considerable  prince  in  the  em-  person  cnn  be  a  Catholic  King  and  Pro-

pire,  who  has  pursued  no  separate  end,  testant  Elector,  is, perhaps, the first

and  has  raised  up  no  stale  pretensions,  instance,  in  modern  times,  of  so  reason-

during  the  late  commotions  of  EUROPE  ;  able  and  prudent  a  behaviour. And  the

but  has  acted,  all  along,  with  the  dignity  gradual  progress  of  the  Catholic  super-

of  a  King  of  BRITAIN. And  ever  since  stition  does,  even  there,  prognosticate  a

the accession of  that  family,  it  would  speedy alteration  : After which, 'tis

be  difficult  to  show  any  harm  we  have  justly  to  be  apprehended,  that  persecu-

ever received  from the electoral do-  tions  will  put  a  speedy  period  to  the

minions, except that short  disgust  in  Protestant  religion in the  place  of  its

1718,  with  CHARGES  XII.,  who,  regula-  nativity.]
ting  himself  by  maxims  very  different


1 [Editions  0  and  P  append  the  note  :  This  was  published  in  1752.]


OF  THE PROTESTANT SUCCESSION.  479

the  family  of  STUART,  which  frees  us  from  a  disputed  title,
seem  to  bear  some  proportion  with  those  of  the  settlement
in  the  family  of  HANOVER,  which  frees  us  from  the  claims  of
prerogative  :  But  at  the  same  time,  its  disadvantages,  by
placing  on  the  throne  a  Koman  Catholic,  are  greater  than
those  of  the  other  establishment,  in  settling  the  crown  on  a
foreign  prince.  What  party  an  impartial  patriot,  in  the
reign  of  K.  WILLIAM  or  Q.  ANNE,  would  have  chosen  amidst
these  opposite  views,  may,  perhaps,  to  some  appear  hard  to
determine.1

But  the  settlement  in  the  House  of  HANOVER  has  actually
taken  place.  The  princes  of  that  family,  without  intrigue,
without  cabal,  without  solicitation  on  their  part,  have  been
called  to  mount  our  throne,  by  the  united  voice  of  the  whole
legislative  body.  They  have,  since  their  accession,  displayed,
in  all  their  actions,  the  utmost  mildness,  equity,  and  regard
to  the  laws  and  constitutions.  Our  own  ministers,  our  own
parliaments,  ourselves  have  governed  us  ;  and  if  aught  ill  has
befallen  us,  we  can  only  blame  fortune  or  ourselves.  What
a  reproach  must  we  become  among  nations,  if,  disgusted  with
a  settlement  so  deliberately  made,  and  whose  conditions  have
been  so  religiously  observed,  we  should  throw  every  thing
again  into  confusion  ;  and  by  our  levity  and  rebellious  dis
position,  prove  ourselves  totally  unfit  for  any  state  but  that
of  absolute  slavery  and  subjection  ?

The  greatest  inconvenience,  attending  a  disputed  title,  is,
that  it  brings  us  in  danger  of  civil  wars  and  rebellions.  What
wise  man,  to  avoid  this  inconvenience,  would  run  directly
into  a  civil  war  and  rebellion  ?  Not  to  mention,  that  so  long
possession,  secured  by  so  many  laws,  must,  ere  this  time,  in
che  apprehension  of  a  great  part  of  the  nation,  have  begotten
a  title  in  the  house  of  HANOVER,  independent  of  their  pre
sent  possession  :  So  that  now  we  should  not,  even  by  a  revo
lution,  obtain  the  end  of  avoiding  a  disputed  title.

No  revolution  made  by  national  forces,  will  ever  be  able,
without  some  other  great  necessity,  to  abolish  our  debts  and
incuHibrances,  in  which  the  interest  of  so  many  persons  is
concerned.  And  a  revolution  made  by  foreign  forces,  is  a
conquest :  A  calamity,  with  which  the  precarious  balance  of

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add  :  For  my  part,  progress  and  security,  can  scarce  be  too
I  esteem  liberty  so  invaluable  a  blessing  fondly  cherished  by  every  one  who  is  a
in  society,  that  whatever  favours  its  lover  of  human  kind.]


480  ESSAY  XVI.

power  threatens  us,  and  which  our  civil  dissentions  aie  likely,
above  all  other  circumstances,  to  bring  upon  us.


ESSAY  XVI. — Idea  of  a  perfect  Commonwealth.

1  IT  is  not  with  forms  of  government,  as  with  other  artificial
contrivances;  where  an  old  engine  maybe  rejected,  if  we  can
discover  another  more  accurate  and  commodious,  or  where
trials  may  safely  be  made,  even  though  the  success  be  doubtful.
An  established  government  has  an  infinite  advantage,  by  that
very  circumstance  of  its  being  established  ;  the  bulk  of  man
kind  being  governed  by  authority,  not  reason,  and  never
attributing  authority  to  any  thing  that  has  not  the  recom
mendation  of  antiquity.  To  tarn  per,  therefore,  in  this  affair,
or  try  experiments  merely  upon  the  credit  of  supposed  argu
ment  and  philosophy,  can  never  be  the  part  of  a  wise  magis
trate,  who  will  bear  a  reverence  to  what  carries  the  marks  of
age  ;  and  though  he  may  attempt  some  improvements  for  the
public  good,  yet  will  he  adjust  his  innovations,  as  much  as
possible,  to  the  ancient  fabric,  and  preserve  entire  the  chief
pillars  and  supports  of  the  constitution.

The  mathematicians  in  EUROPE  have  been  much  divided
concerning  that  figure  of  a  ship,  which  is  the  most  commo
dious  for  sailing ;  and  HUYGENS,  who  at  last  determined  the
controversy,  is  justly  thought  to  have  obliged  the  learned,  as
well  as  commercial  world;  though  COLUMBUS  had  sailed  to
AMERICA,  and  Sir  FRANCIS  DRAKE  made  the  tour  of  the
world,  without  any  such  discovery.  As  one  form  of  govern
ment  must  be  allowed  more  perfect  than  another,  indepen
dent  of  the  manners  and  humours  of  particular  men ;  why
may  we  not  enquire  what  is  the  most  perfect  of  all,  though
the  common  botched  and  inaccurate  governments  seem  to
serve  the  purposes  of  society,  and  though  it  be  not  so  easy  to
establish  a  new  system  of  government,  as  to  build  a  vessel
upon  a  new  construction  ?  The  subject  is  surely  the  most
worthy  curiosity  of  any  the  wit  of  man  can  possibly  devise.
And  who  knows,  if  this  controversy  were  fixed  by  the

1  [Editions  H  to  P  begin  as  follows :  politician  is  the  most  beneficial  cha-

Of  all  mankind  there  are  none  so  per-  racter  in  nature,  if  accompanied  with

nicious  as  political  projectors,  if  they  authority ;  and  the  most  innocent,  and

have  power  ;  nor  so  ridiculous,  if  they  not  altogether  useless,  even  if  deprived

want  it :  As  on  the  other  hand,  a  wise  of  it.]


IDEA  OF  A  PERFECT  COMMONWEALTH.  481

universal  consent  of  the  wise  and  learned,  but,  in  some  future
age,  an  opportunity  might  be  afforded  of  reducing  the  theory
to  practice,  either  by  a  dissolution  of  some  old  government,
or  by  the  combination  of  men  to  form  a  new  one,  in  some
distant  part  of  the  world  ?  In  all  cases,  it  must  be  advan
tageous  to  know  what  is  most  perfect  in  the  kind,  that  we
may  be  able  to  bring  any  real  constitution  or  form  of  govern
ment  as  near  it  as  possible,  by  such  gentle  alterations  and
innovations  as  may  not  give  too  great  disturbance  to  society.

All  I  pretend  to  in  the  present  essay  is  to  revive  this  sub
ject  of  speculation ;  and  therefore  I  shall  deliver  my  sentiments
in  as  few  words  as  possible.  A  long  dissertation  on  that
head  would  not,  I  apprehend,  be  very  acceptable  to  the
public,  who  will  be  apt  to  regard  such  disquisitions  both  as
useless  and  chimerical.

All  plans  of  government,  which  suppose  great  reformation
in  the  manners  of  mankind,  are  plainly  imaginary.  Of  this
nature,  are  the  Republic  of  PLATO,  and  the  Utopia  of  Sir
THOMAS  MOEE.  The  OCEANA  is  the  only  valuable  model  of
a  commonwealth,  that  has  yet  been  offered  to  the  public.

The  chief  defects  of  the  OCEANA  seem  to  be  these.  First,
Its  rotation  is  inconvenient,  by  throwing  men,  of  whatever
abilities,  by  intervals,  out  of  public  employments.  Secondly,
Its  Agrarian  is  impracticable.  Men  will  soon  learn  the  art,
which  was  practised  in  ancient  ROME,  of  concealing  their
possessions  under  other  people's  name  ;  till  at  last,  the  abuse
will  become  so  common,  that  they  will  throw  off  even  the
appearance  of  restraint.  Thirdly,  The  OCEANA  provides  not
a  sufficient  security  for  liberty,  or  the  redress  of  grievances.
The  senate  must  propose,  and  the  people  consent ;  by  which
means,  the  senate  have  not  only  a  negative  upon  the  people,
but,  what  is  of  much  greater  consequence,  their  negative
goes  before  the  votes  of  the  people.  Were  the  King's  nega
tive  of  the  same  nature  in  the  ENGLISH  constitution,  and
could  he  prevent  any  bill  from  coming  into  parliament;,  he
would  be  an  absolute  monarch.  As  his  negative  follows  the
votes  of  the  houses,  it  is  of  little  consequence  :  Such  a  dif
ference  is  there  in  the  manner  of  placing  the  same  thing.
When  a  popular  bill  has  been  debated  in  parliament,  is
brought  to  maturity,  all  its  conveniences  and  inconveniences,
weighed  and  balanced ;  if  afterwards  it  be  presented  for  the
royal  assent,  few  princes  will  venture  to  reject  the  unanimous

VOL.  III.  I  i


482  ESSAY XVI.

desire  of  the  people.  But  could  the  King  crush  a  dis
agreeable  bill  in  embryo  (as  was  the  case,  for  some  time,  in
the  SCOTTISH  parliament,  by  means  of  the  lords  of  the
articles),  the  BRITISH  government  would  have  no  balance,
nor  would  grievances  ever  be  redressed  :  And  it  is  certain,
that  exorbitant  power  proceeds  not,  in  any  government,
from  new  laws,  so  much  as  from  neglecting  to  remedy  the
abuses,  which  frequently  rise  from  the  old  ones.  A  govern
ment,  says  MACHIAVEL,  must  often  be  brought  back  to  its
original  principles.  It  appears  then,  that,  in  the  OCEANA,
the  whole  legislature  may  be  said  to  rest  in  the  senate ;
which  HARRINGTON  would  own  to  be  an  inconvenient  form
of  government,  especially  after  the  Agrarian  is  abolished.

Here  is  a  form  of  government,  to  which  I  cannot,  in  theory,
discover  any  considerable  objection.

Let  GREAT  BRITAIN  and  IRELAND,  or  any  territory  of
equal  extent,  be  divided  into  100  counties,  and  each  county
into  100  parishes,  making  in  all  10,000.  If  the  country,
proposed  to  be  erected  into  a  commonwealth,  be  of  more
narrow  extent,  we  may  diminish  the  number  of  counties ;
but  never  bring  them  below  thirty.  If  it  be  of  greater
extent,  it  were  better  to  enlarge  the  parishes,  or  throw  more
parishes  into  a  county,  than  encrease  the  number  of  counties.

1  Let  all  the  freeholders  of  twenty  pounds  a-year  in  the
county,  and  all  the  householders  worth  500  pounds  in  the
town  parishes,  meet  annually  in  the  parish  church,  and  chuse,
by  ballot,  some  freeholder  of  the  county  for  their  member,
whom  we  shall  call  the  county  representative.

Let  the  100  county  representatives,  two  days  after  their
election,  meet  in  the  county  town,  and  chuse  by  ballot,  from
their  own  body,  ten  county  magistrates,  and  one  senator.
There  are,  therefore,  in  the  whole  commonwealth,  100
senators,  1100  county  magistrates,  and  10,000  county  re
presentatives.  For  we  shall  bestow  on  all  senators  the
authority  of  county  magistrates,  and  on  all  county  magis
trates  the  authority  of  county  representatives.

Let  the  senators  meet  in  the  capital,  and  be  endowed  with
the  whole  executive  power  of  the  commonwealth ;  the  power

1  [Editions  H  and  I  read :  Let  all  Let  all  the  freeholders  of  ten  pounds  a

the  freeholders  in  the  country  parishes,  year  in  the  country,  and  all  the  house-

and those who pay scot  and  lot in  holders  worth  200  pounds  in  the  town-

the  town  parishes,  &c. K  to  P,  read  :  parishes,  &c.]


IDEA OF  A  PERFECT  COMMONWEALTH.  483

of  peace  and  war,  of  giving  orders  to  generals,  admirals,  and
ambassadors,  and,  in  short,  all  the  prerogatives  of  a  BRITISH
King,  except  his  negative.

Let  the  county  representatives  meet  in  their  particular
counties,  and  possess  the  whole  legislative  power  of  the  com
monwealth  ;  the  greater  number  of  counties  deciding  the
question ;  and  where  these  are  equal,  let  the  senate  have  the
casting  vote.

Every  new  law  must  first  be  debated  in  the  senate ;  and
though  rejected  by  it,  if  ten  senators  insist  and  protest,  it
must  be  sent  down  to  the  counties.  The  senate,  if  they
please,  may  join  to  the  copy  of  the  law  their  reasons  for
receiving  or  rejecting  it.

Because  it  would  be  troublesome  to  assemble  all  the  county
representatives  for  every  trivial  law,  that  may  be  requisite,
the  senate  have  their  choice  of  sending  down  the  law  either
to  the  county  magistrates  or  county  representatives.

The  magistrates,  though  the  law  be  referred  to  them,  may,
if  they  please,  call  the  representatives,  and  submit  the  affair
to  their  determination.

Whether  the  law  be  referred  by  the  senate  to  the  county
magistrates  or  representatives,  a  copy  of  it,  and  of  the
senate's  reasons,  must  be  sent  to  every  representative  eight
days  before  the  day  appointed  for  the  assembling,  in  order  to
deliberate  concerning  it.  And  though  the  determination  be,
by  the  senate,  referred  to  the  magistrates,  if  five  representa
tives  of  the  county  order  the  magistrates  to  assemble  the
whole  court  of  representatives,  and  submit  the  affair  to  their
determination,  they  must  obey.

Either  the  county  magistrates  or  representatives  may  give,
to  the  senator  of  the  count}'-,  the  copy  of  a  law  to  be  pro
posed  to  the  senate ;  and  if  five  counties  concur  in  the
same  order,  the  law,  though  refused  by  the  senate,  must
come  either  to  the  county  magistrates  or  representatives,  as
is  contained  in  the  order  of  the  five  counties.

Any  twenty  counties,  by  a  vote  either  of  their  magistrates
or  representatives,  may  throw  any  man  out  of  all  public
offices  for  a  year.  Thirty  counties  for  three  years.

The  senate  has  a  power  of  throwing  out  any  member  or
number  of  members  of  its  own  body,  not  to  be  re-elected  for
that  year.  The  senate  cannot  throw  out  twice  in  a.  year  the
senator  of  the  same  county.

i  i  2


464  ESSAY XVI.

The  power  of  the  old  senate  continues  for  three  weeks
after  the  annual  election  of  the  county  representatives.
Then  all  the  new  senators  are  shut  up  in  a  conclave,  like  the
cardinals  ;  and  by  an  intricate  ballot,  such  as  that  of  VENICE
or  MALTA,  they  chuse  the  following  magistrates ;  a  protector,
who  represents  the  dignity  of  the  commonwealth,  and  pre
sides  in  the  senate ;  two  secretaries  of  state ;  these  six
councils,  a  council  of  state,  a  council  of  religion  and  learning,
a  council  of  trade,  a  council  of  laws,  a  council  of  war,  a
council  of  the  admiralty,  each  council  consisting  of  five
persons ;  together  with  six  commissioners  of  the  treasury
and  a  first  commissioner.  All  these  must  be  senators.  The
senate  also  names  all  the  ambassadors  to  foreign  courts,
who  may  either  be  senators  or  not.

The  senate  may  continue  any  or  all  of  these,  but  must
re-elect  them  every  year.

The  protector  and  two  secretaries  have  session  and  suffrage
in  the  council  of  state.  The  business  of  that  council  is  all
foreign  politics.  The  council  of  state  has  session  and  suffrage
in  all  the  other  councils.

The  council  of  religion  and  learning  inspects  the  univer
sities  and  clergy.  That  of  trade  inspects  every  thing  that
may  affect  commerce.  That  of  laws  inspects  all  the  abuses  of
law  by  the  inferior  magistrates,  and  examines  what  improve
ments  may  be  made  of  the  municipal  law.  That  of  war
inspects  the  militia  and  its  discipline,  magazines,  stores,  &c.,
and  when  the  republic  is  in  war,  examines  into  the  proper
orders  for  generals.  The  council  of  admiralty  has  the  same
power  with  regard  to  the  navy,  together  with  the  nomina
tion  of  the  captains  and  all  inferior  officers.

None  of  these  councils  can  give  orders  themselves,  except
where  they  receive  such  powers  from  the  senate.  In  other
cases,  they  must  communicate  every  thing  to  the  senate.

When  the  senate  is  under  adjournment,  any  of  the
councils  may  assemble  it  before  the  day  appointed  for  its
meeting.

Besides  these  councils  or  courts,  there  is  another  called
the  court  of  competitors  ;  which  is  thus  constituted.  If  any
candidates  for  the  office  of  senator  have  more  votes  than  a
third  of  the  representatives,  that  candidate,  who  has  most
votes,  next  to  the  senator  elected,  becomes  incapable  for  one
year  of  all  public  offices,  even  of  being  a  magistrate  or


IDEA OF A PERFECT COMMONWEALTH.  485

representative :  But  he  takes  his  seat  iu  the  court  of  compe
titors.  Here  then  is  a  court  which  may  sometimes  consist
of  a  hundred  members,  sometimes  have  no  members  at  all ;
and  by  that  means,  be  for  a  year  abolished.

The  court  of  competitors  has  no  power  in  the  common
wealth.  It  has  only  the  inspection  of  public  accounts,  and
the  accusing  of  any  man  before  the  senate.  If  the  senate
acquit  him,  the  court  of  competitors  may,  if  they  please,
appeal  to  the  people,  either  magistrates  or  representatives.
Upon  that  appeal,  the  magistrates  or  representatives  meet  on
the  day  appointed  by  the  court  of  competitors,  and  chuse  in
each  county  three  persons,  from  which  number  every  senator
is  excluded.  These,  to  the  number  of  300,  meet  in  the
capital,  and  bring  the  person  accused  to  a  new  trial.

The  court  of  competitors  may  propose  any  law  to  the
senate ;  and  if  refused,  may  appeal  to  the  people,  that  is,  to
the  magistrates  or  representatives,  who  examine  it  in  their
counties.  Every  senator,  who  is  thrown  out  of  the  senate
by  a  vote  of  the  court,  takes  his  seat  in  the  court  of
competitors.

The  senate  possesses  all  the  judicative  authority  of  the
house  of  Lords,  that  is,  all  the  appeals  from  the  inferior
courts.  It  likewise  appoints  the  Lord  Chancellor,  and  all
the  officers  of  the  law.

Every  county  is  a  kind  of  republic  within  itself,  and  the
representatives  may  make  bye-laws,  which  have  no  authority
'till  three  months  after  they  are  voted.  A  copy  of  the  law  is
sent  to  the  senate,  and  to  every  other  county.  The  senate,
or  any  single  county,  may,  at  any  time,  annul  any  bye-law  of
another  county.

The  representatives  have  all  the  authority  of  the  BRITISH
justices  of  peace  in  trials,  commitments,  &c.

The  magistrates  have  the  appointment  of  all  the  officers  of
the  revenue  in  each  county.  All  causes  with  regard  to  the
revenue  are  carried  ultimately  by  appeal  before  the  magis
trates.  They  pass  the  accompts  of  all  the  officers ;  but  must
have  their  own  accompts  examined  and  passed  at  the  end  of
the  year  by  the  representatives.

The  magistrates  name  rectors  or  ministers  to  all  the
parishes.

The  Presbyterian  government  is  established ;  and  the
highest  ecclesiastical  court  is  an  assembly  or  synod  of  all  the


486  ESSAY  XVI.

presbyters  of  the  county.  The  magistrates  may  take  any
cause  from  this  court,  and  determine  it  themselves.

The  magistrates  may  try,  and  depose  or  suspend  any
presbyter.

The  militia  is  established  in  imitation  of  that  of  SWISSEE-
LAND,  which  being  well  known,  we  shall  not  insist  upon  it.
It  will  only  be  proper  to  make  this  addition,  that  an  army  of
20,000  men  be  annually  drawn  out  by  rotation,  paid  and
encamped  during  six  weeks  in  summer;  that  the  duty  of  a
camp  may  not  be  altogether  unknown.

The  magistrates  appoint  all  the  colonels  and  downwards.
The  senate  all  upwards.  During  war,  the  general  appoints
the  colonel  and  downwards,  and  his  commission  is  good  for
a  twelvemonth.  But  after  that,  it  must  be  confirmed  by  tha
magistrates  of  the  county,  to  which  the  regiment  belongs.
The  magistrates  may  break  any  officer  in  the  county  regi
ment.  And  the  senate  may  do  the  same  to  any  officer  in  the
service.  If  the  magistrates  do  not  think  proper  to  confirm
the  general's  choice,  they  may  appoint  another  officer  in  the
place  of  him  they  reject.

All  crimes  are  tried  within  the  county  by  the  magistrates
and  a  jury.  But  the  senate  can  stop  any  trial,  and  bring  it
before  themselves.

Any  county  may  indict  any  man  before  the  senate  for  any
crime.

The  protector,  the  two  secretaries,  the  council  of  state,  with
any  five  or  more  that  the  senate  appoints,  are  possessed,  on
extraordinary  emergencies,  of  dictatorial  power  for  six  months.

The  protector  may  pardon  any  person  condemned  by  the
inferior  courts.

In  time  of  war,  no  officer  of  the  army  that  is  in  the  field
can  have  any  civil  office  in  the  commonwealth.

The  capital,  which  we  shall  call  LONDON,  may  be  allowed
four  members  in  the  senate.  It  may  therefore  be  divided
into  four  counties.  The  representatives  of  each  of  these
chuse  one  senator,  and  ten  magistrates.  There  are  therefore
in  the  city  foui\  senators,  forty-four  magistrates,  and  four
hundred  representatives.  The  magistrates  have  the  same
authority  as  in  the  counties.  The  representatives  also  have
the  same  authority;  but  they  never  meet  in  one  general
court  :  They  give  their  votes  in  their  particular  county,  or
division  of  hundreds.


IDEA OF A PERFECT COMMONWEALTH.  487

When  they  enact  any  bye-law,  the  greater  number  of
counties  or  divisions  determines  the  matter.  And  where
these  are  equal,  the  magistrates  have  the  casting  vote.

The  magistrates  chuse  the  mayor,  sheriff,  recorder,  and
other  officers  of  the  city.

In  the  commonwealth,  no  representative,  magistrate,  or
senator,  as  such,  has  any  salary.  The  protector,  secretaries,
councils,  and  ambassadors,  have  salaries.

The  first  year  in  every  century  is  set  apart  for  correcting
all  inequalities,  which  time  may  have  produced  in  the  repre
sentative.  This  must  be  done  by  the  legislature.

The  following  political  aphorisms  may  explain  the  reason
of  these  orders.

The  lower  sort  of  people  and  small  proprietors  are  good
judges  enough  of  one  not  very  distant  from  them  in  rank  or
habitation  ;  and  therefore,  in  their  parochial  meetings,  will
probably  chuse  the  best,  or  nearly  the  best  representative  :
But  they  are  wholly  unfit  for  county-meetings,  and  for  electing
into  the  higher  offices  of  the  republic.  Their  ignorance
gives  the  grandees  an  opportunity  of  deceiving  them.

Ten  thousand,  even  though  they  were  not  annually  elected,
are  a  basis  large  enough  for  any  free  government.  It  is  true,
the  nobles  in  POLAND  are  more  than  10,000,  and  yet  these
oppress  the  people.  But  as  power  always  continues  there  in
the  same  persons  and  families,  this  makes  them,  in  a  manner,
a  different  nation  from  the  people.  Besides  the  nobles  are
there  united  under  a  few  heads  of  families.

All  free  governments  must  consist  of  two  councils,  a  lesser
and  greater;  or,  in  other  words,  of  a  senate  and  people.  The
people,  as  HARRINGTON  observes,  would  want  wisdom,  without
the  senate  :  The  senate,  without  the  people,  would  want
honesty.

A  large  assembly  of  1,000,  for  instance,  to  represent  the
people,  if  allowed  to  debate,  would  fall  into  disorder.  If
not  allowed  to  debate,  the  senate  has  a  negative  upon  them,
and  the  worst  kind  of  negative,  that  before  resolution.

Here  therefore  is  an  inconvenience,  which  no  government
has  yet  fully  remedied,  but  which  is  the  easiest  to  be  remedied
in  the  world.  If  the  people  debate,  all  is  confusion  :  If  they
do  not  debate,  they  can  only  resolve ;  and  then  the  senate
carves  for  them.  Divide  the  people  into  many  separate


488  ESSAY  XVI.

bodies ;  and  then  they  may  debate  with  safety,  and  every  in
convenience  seems  to  be  prevented.

Cardinal  de  EETZ  says,  that  all  numerous  assemblies,
however  composed,  are  mere  mob,  and  swayed  in  their
debates  by  the  least  motive  This  we  find  confirmed  by
daily  experience.  When  an  absurdity  strikes  a  member,  he
conveys  it  to  his  neighbour,  and  so  on,  till  the  whole  be
infected.  Separate  this  great  body ;  and  though  every  membei
be  only  of  middling  sense,  it  is  not  probable,  that  any  thing
but  reason  can  prevail  over  the  whole.  Influence  and
example  being  removed,  good  sense  will  always  get  the
better  of  bad  among  a  number  of  people.1

There  are  two  things  to  be  guarded  against  in  every
senate  :  Its  combination,  and  its  division.  Its  combination
is  most  dangerous.  And  against  this  inconvenience  we  have
provided  the  following  remedies.  1.  The  great  dependence
of  the  senators  on  the  people  by  annual  elections  ;  and  that
not  by  an  undistinguishing  rabble,  like  the  ENGLISH  electors,
but  by  men  of  fortune  and  education.  2.  The  small  power
they  are  allowed.  They  have  few  offices  to  dispose  of.
Almost  all  are  given  by  the  magistrates  in  the  counties.
3.  The  court  of  competitors,  which  being  composed  of  men
that  are  their  rivals,  next  to  them  in  interest,  and  uneasy  in
their  present  situation,  will  be  sure  to  take  all  advantages
against  them.

The  division  of  the  senate  is  prevented,  1.  By  the  small-
ness  of  their  number.  2.  As  faction  supposes  a  combination
in  a  separate  interest,  it  is  prevented  by  their  dependence  on
the  people.  3.  They  have  a  power  of  expelling  any  factious
member.  It  is  true,  when  another  member  of  the  same
spirit  comes  from  the  county,  they  have  no  power  of
expelling  him  :  Nor  is  it  fit  they  should ;  for  that  shows
the  humour  to  be  in  the  people,  and  may  possible  arise  from
some  ill  conduct  in  public  affairs.  4.  Almost  any  man,  in  a
senate  so  regularly  chosen  by  the  people,  may  be  supposed
fit  for  any  civil  office.  It  would  be  proper,  therefore,  for  the
senate  to  form  some  general  resolutions  with  regard  to  the
disposing  of  offices  among  the  members :  Which  resolutions
would  not  confine  them  in  critical  times,  when  extraordinary

1  [Editions  H  to  P  add :  Good  sense  only  way  of  making  a  people  wise,  is  to
is  one  thing:  Butfollies  are  numberless  ;  keep  them  from  uniting  into  large  HS-
and  every  man  has  a  different  one.  The  semblies.]


IDEA  OF  A  PERFECT  COMMONWEALTH.  489

parts  on  the  one  hand,  or  extraordinary  stupidity  on  the
other,  appears  in  any  senator ;  but  th^y  would  be  sufficient
to  prevent1  intrigue  and  faction,  by  making  the  disposal  of
the  offices  a  thing  of  course.  For  instance,  let  it  be  a  reso
lution,  that  no  man  shall  enjoy  any  office,  till  he  has  sat
four  years  in  the  senate  :  That,  except  ambassadors,  no  man
shall  be  in  office  two  years  following :  That  no  ma,n  shall
attain  the  higher  offices  but  through  the  lower :  Tha.t  no
man  shall  be  protector  twice,  &c.  The  senate  of  VENICE
govern  themselves  by  such  resolutions.

In  foreign  politics  the  interest  of  the  senate  can  scarcely
ever  be  divided  from  that  of  the  people ;  and  therefore  it  is
fit  to  make  the  senate  absolute  with  regard  to  them ;  other
wise  there  could  be  no  secrecy  or  refined  policy.  Besides,
without  money  no  alliance  can  be  executed ;  and  the  senate
is  still  sufficiently  dependant.  Not  to  mention  that  the
legislative  power  being  always  superior  to  the  executive,  the
magistrates  or  representatives  may  interpose  whenever  they
think  proper.

The  chief  support  of  the  BKITISH  government  is  the  oppo
sition  of  interests  ;  but  that,  though  in  the  main  serviceable,
breeds  endless  factions.  In  the  foregoing  plan,  it  does  all
the  good  without  any  of  the  harm.  The  competitors  have
no  power  of  controlling  the  senate  :  they  have  only  the  power
of  accusing,  and  appealing  to  the  people.

It  is  necessary,  likewise,  to  prevent  both  combination  and
division  in  the  thousand  magistrates.  This  is  done  suffi
ciently  by  the  separation  of  places  and  interest.

But  lest  that  should  not  be  sufficient,  their  dependence  on
the  10,000  for  their  elections,  serves  to  the  same  purpose.

Nor  is  that  all  :  For  the  10,000  may  resume  the  power
whenever  they  please ;  and  not  only  when  they  all  please,  but
when  any  five  of  a  hundred  please,  which  will  happen  upon
the  very  first  suspicion  of  a  separate  interest.

The  10,000  are  too  large  a  body  either  to  unite  or  divide,
except  when  they  meet  in  one  place,  and  fall  under  the
guidance  of  ambitious  leaders.  Not  to  mention  their  annual
election,2  by  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  that  are  of  any
consideration.

A  small  commonwealth  is  the  happiest  government  in  the

1  [Brigue :  Editions  H  to  P.]  people : so  editions  IT  to  M  end  the

2  [By  almost  the  whole  body  of  the paragraph.]


490  ESSAY  XVI.

world  within  itself,  because  every  thing  lies  under  the  eye  of
the  rulers :  But  it  may  be  subdued  by  great  force  from
without.  This  scheme  seems  to  have  all  the  advantages  both
of  a  great  and  a  little  commonwealth.

Every  county-law  may  be  annulled  either  by  the  senate  01:
another  county ;  because  that  shows  an  opposition  of  interest :
In  which  case  no  part  ought  to  decide  for  itself.  The  matter
must  be  referred  to  the  whole,  which  will  best  determine
what  agrees  with  general  interest.

As  to  the  clergy  and  militia,  the  reasons  of  these  orders
are  obvious.  Without  the  dependence  of  the  clergy  on  the
civil  magistrates,  and  without  a  militia,  it  is  in  vain  to  think
tha.t  any  free  government  will  ever  have  security  or  stability.

In  many  governments,  the  inferior  magistrates  have  no
rewards  but  what  arise  from  their  ambition,  vanity,  or  public
spirit.  The  salaries  of  the  FRENCH  judges  amount  not  to  the
interest  of  the  sums  they  pay  for  their  offices.  The  DUTCH
burgo-masters  have  little  more  immediate  profit  than  the
ENGLISH  justices  of  peace,  or  the  members  of  the  house  of
commons  formerly.  But  lest  any  should  suspect,  that  this
would  beget  negligence  in  the  administration  (which  is  little
to  be  feared,  considering  the  natural  ambition  of  mankind),  let
the  magistrates  have  competent  salaries.  The  senators  have
access  to  so  many  honourable  and  lucrative  offices,  that  their
attendance  needs  not  be  bought.  There  is  little  attendance
required  of  the  representatives.

That  the  foregoing  plan  of  government  is  practicable,  no
one  can  doubt,  who  considers  the  resemblance  that  it  bears
to  the  commonwealth  of  the  United  Provinces,1  a  wise  and
renowned  government.  The  alterations  in  the  present  scheme
seem  all  evidently  for  the  better.  1.  The  representation  is
more  equal.  2.  The  unlimited  power  of  the  burgo-masters
in  the  towns,  which  forms  a  perfect  aristocracy  in  the  DUTCH
commonwealth,  is  corrected  by  a  well-tempered  democracy,
in  giving  to  the  people  the  annual  election  of  the  county
representatives.  3.  The  negative,  which  every  province  and
town  has  upon  the  whole  body  of  the  DUTCH  republic,  with
regard  to  alliances,  peace  and  war,  and  the  imposition  of
taxes,  is  here  removed.  4.  The  counties,  in  the  present
plan,  are  not  so  independent  of  each  other,  nor  do  they  form

1  [Formerly  one  of  the  wisest  and  most  renowned  governments  in  the  world :
Editions  H  to  P.


IDEA OF  A PERFECT  COMMONWEALTH.  491

separate  bodies  so  much  as  the  seven  provinces;  where  the
jealousy  and  envy  of  the  smaller  provinces  and  towns  against
the  greater,  particularly  HOLLAND  and  AMSTERDAM,  have
frequently  disturbed  the  government.  5.  Larger  powers,
though  of  the  safest  kind,  are  intrusted  to  the  senate  than  the
States-General  possess ;  by  which  means,  the  former  may
become  more  expeditious,  and  secret  in  their  resolutions,
than  it  is  possible  for  the  latter.

The  chief  alterations  that  could  be  made  on  the  BRITISH
government,  in  order  to  bring  it  to  the  most  perfect  model  of
limited  monarchy,  seem  to  be  the  following.  First,  The
plan  of  l  CROMWELL'S  parliament  ought  to  be  restored,  by
making  the  representation  equal,  and  by  allowing  none  to
vote  in  the  county  elections  who  possess  not2  a  property  of
200  pounds  value.  Secondly,  As  such  a  house  of  Commons
would  be  too  weighty  for  a  frail  house  of  Lords,  like  the
present,  the  Bishops  and  SCOTCH  Peers  ought  to  be  re
moved  : 3  The  number  of  the  upper  house  ought  to  be  raised
to  three  or  four  hundred :  Their  seats  not  hereditary,  but
during  life  :  They  ought  to  have  the  election  of  their  own
members ;  and  no  commoner  should  be  allowed  to  refuse  a
seat  that  was  offered  him.  By  this  means  the  house  of  Lords
would  consist  entirely  of  the  men  of  chief  credit,  abilities,
and  interest  in  the  nation ;  and  every  turbulent  leader  in  the
house  of  Commons  might  be  taken  off,  and  connected  by
interest  with  the  house  of  Peers.  Such  an  aristocracy  would
be  an  excellent  barrier  both  to  the  monarchy  and  against  it.
At  present,  the  balance  of  our  government  depends  in  some
measure  on  the  abilities  and  behaviour  of  the  sovereign;
which  are  variable  and  uncertain  circumstances.

This  plan  of  limited  monarchy,  however  corrected,  seems
still  liable  to  three  great  inconveniences.  First,  It  removes
not  entirely,  though  it  may  soften,  the  parties  of  court  and
country.  Secondly,  The  king's  personal  character  must  still
have  great  influence  on  the  government.  Thirdly,  The  sword
is  in  the  hands  of  a  single  person,  who  will  always  neglect  to
discipline  the  militia,  in  order  to  have  a  pretence  for  keeping
up  a  standing  army.4

1  [Of  therepublicauparliament:  Edi-  liaments, destroyed entirely the  au-
tions  H  to  P.]  thority  of  that  house :  Editions  H  to  P.  ]

2  [A hundred a year :  Editions  H  4  [Editions  H  to  P  add :  It  is  evi-
and  I.]  dent,  that  this  is  a  mortal  distemper  in

*  [Whose  behaviour,  in  former  par- the  BRITISH government,  of  which  it


492  ESSAY  XVI.

We  shall  conclude  this  subject,  with  observing  the  false
hood  of  the  common  opinion,  that  no  large  state,,  such  as
FRANCE  or  GREAT  BRITAIN,  could  ever  be  modelled  into  a
commonwealth,  but  that  such  a  form  of  government  can  only
take  place  in  a  city  or  small  territory.  The  contrary  seem?
probable.  Though  it  is  more  difficult  to  form  a  republican
government  in  an  extensive  country  than  in  a  city  ;  there  is
more  facility,  when  once  it  is  formed,  of  preserving  it  steady
and  uniform,  without  tumult  and  faction.  It  is  not  easy,  for
the  distant  parts  of  a  large  state  to  combine  in  any  plan  of
free  government ;  but  they  easily  conspire  in  the  esteem  and
reverence  for  a  single  person,  who,  by  means  of  this  popular
favour,  may  seize  the  power,  and  forcing  the  more  obstinate
to  submit,  may  establish  a  monarchical  government.  On  the
other  hand,  a  city  readily  concurs  in  the  same  notions  of
government,  the  natural  equality  of  property  favours  liberty,
and  the  nearness  of  habitation  enables  the  citizens  mutually
to  assist  each  other.  Even  under  absolute  princes,  the
subordinate  government  of  cities  is  commonly  republican ;
while  that  of  counties  and  provinces  is  monarchical.  But
these  same  circumstances,  which  facilitate  the  erection  of
commonwealths  in  cities,  render  their  constitution  more  frail
and  uncertain.  Democracies  are  turbulent.  For  however
the  people  may  be  separated  or  divided  into  small  parties,
either  in  their  votes  or  elections ;  their  near  habitation  in  a
city  will  always  make  the  force  of  popular  tides  and  currents
very  sensible.  Aristocracies  are  better  adapted  for  peace  and
order,  and  accordingly  were  most  admired  by  ancient  writers ;
but  they  are  jealous  and  oppressive.  In  a  large  government,
which  is  modelled  with  masterly  skill,  there  is  compass  and
room  enough  to  refine  the  democracy,  from  the  lower  people,
who  may  be  admitted  into  the  first  elections  or  first  concoc
tion  of  the  commonwealth,  to  the  higher  magistrates,  who
direct  all  the  movements.  At  the  same  time,  the  parts  are
so  distant  and  remote,  that  it  is  very  difficult,  either  by  in
trigue,  prejudice,  or  passion,  to  hurry  them  into  any  measures
against  the  public  interest.

It  is  needless  to  enquire,  whether  such  a  government  would
be  immortal.  I  allow  the  justness  of  the  poet's  exclamation

must  at  last  inevitably  perish. I  must,  with  its  limited  monarchy,  as  well  as  a

however,  confess,  that  SWEDEN  seems,  standing  army,  which  is  less  dangerous

in  some  measure,  to  have  remedied  this  than  the  BRITISH.]
inconvenience,  and  to  have  a militia,


IDEA OF A PERFECT COMMONWEALTH.  493

on  the  endless  projects  of  human  race,  Man  and  for  ever !
The  world  itself  probably  is  not  immortal.  Such  con
suming  plagues  may  arise  as  would  leave  even  a  perfect
government  a  weak  prey  to  its  neighbours.  We  know  not  to
what  length  enthusiasm,  or  other  extraordinary  movements
of  the  human  mind,  may  transport  men,  to  the  neglect  of  all
Drder  and  public  good.  Where  difference  of  interest  is  re
moved,  whimsical  and  unaccountable  factions  often  arise,
from  personal  favour  or  enmity.  Perhaps,  rust  may  grow  to
the  springs  of  the  most  accurate  political  machine,  and  dis
order  its  motions.  Lastly,  extensive  conquests,  when  pursued,
must  be  the  ruin  of  every  free  government ;  and  of  the  more
perfect  governments  sooner  than  of  the  imperfect ;  because
of  the  very  advantages  which  the  former  possess  above  the
latter.  And  though  such  a  stat£  ought  to  establish  a  funda
mental  law  against  conquests  ;  'yet  republics  have  ambition
as  well  as  individuals,  and  present  interest  makes  men  forget
ful  of  their  posterity.  It  is  a  sufficient  incitement  to  human
endeavours,  that  such  a  government  would  nourish  for  many
ages ;  without  pretending  to  bestow,  on  any  work  of  man,
that  immortality,  which  the  Almighty  seems  to  have  refused
to  his  own  productions.


IND  EX


THE THIED VOLUME.


f.  means  '  and  folio-wing  pages.'


ADD

Addison,  195

JEglna,  slaves  in,  421

Machines,  376,  398,  404,  411

Agathocles,  cruelties  of,  405

Agriculture,  in  Greece  and  Italy,  412

Alexander  VI.,  character  of,  by  Guic-
ciardin,  29

Alexander  the  Great,  103 ;  his  suc
cessors  jealous  of  balance  of  power,
350 ;  treasures  amassed  by  his  suc
cessors,  361

Alexandria,  ancient,  greatness  of,  429

America,  discovery  of  mines  a  stimulant
to  industry,  313

Ammianus  Marcellinus,  429

Anacharsis  the  Scythian,  remark  of,  312

Ancients,  instance  of  their  outspoken
ness,  189;  war  caused  by  their  want
of  politeness,  191  ;  rude  custom,  of,
193;  slavery  among,  387,  f;  pay  of
their  public  servants,  388  ;  supposed
to  be  ignorant  of  balance  of  power,
350 ;  infanticide  among,  396  ;  their
soldiers  all  married,  401  ;  their  battles
more  destructive  than  modern  battles,
401  ;  cold-blooded  butcheries  of,  404,
405 ;  insecurity  of  property  among,
406  ;  cause  of  their  political  disorders,
409  ;  inferior  to  the  moderns,  410  ;
their  populousness,  414,  f. —  See
Greece,  Rome

Annandale,  Hume  tutor  to  Marquis  of,
47

Antigonus,  anecdote  of,  181

Antipater,  repartee  of,  226

Appian,  his  account  of  the  treasures  of
the  Ptolemies,  343  ;  quoted,  394,  399,
402,  416,  436,  438


ATH

Ariosto,  192  ;  as  a  poet,  270

Aristides  the  Sophist,  440

Aristocracy,  power  of  in  a  state,  100 ;
Venetian  and  Polish,  ib. ;  best  form
of,  101

Aristophanes,  391

Aristotle,  431,  433

Armies,  ancient,  290,  f. ;  employment  of
mercenaries,  310  ;  cost  of  Roman,  ib.;
cost,  &c.  of  Cromwell's  army,  418  ;
Philip  of  Macedon's,  424,  425;  a
model  army,  486

Arrian,  his  vanity,  188;  cited,  104,
361,  410

Arts  and  Sciences :  cultivation  of  the
liberal  arts,  93  ;  the  product  of  free
nations,  157 ;  decline  of  in  Greece,
1 58  ;  progress  of  in  Eome  and  Flor
ence,  ib.;  in  France,  159  ;  in  England,
ib.;  rise  and  advancement  of,  174,  f. :
causes,  ib.;  caution  needed  in  tracing
history  of,  176;  impossible,  except
under  free  government,  177,  179;
discouraging  causes,  180;  conditions
favourable  to,  181 ;  influence  of
monarchy  and  republic  on,  185  ;  de
pend  on  refined  taste,  ib.;  commence
ment  of  their  decline,  195  ;  emulation
in,  196;  French  literature  a  hin
drance  to  German,  ib. ;  influence  on
temper,  223  ;  refinements  in,  299,  f.,
305  ;  increase  power  of  nations,  303  ;
flourishing  state  of  in  England,  306  ;
favourable  to  liberty,  ib. ;  innocent
luxury  beneficial,  307

Astronomy,  discouraging  to  ambition,
227

Athenceus,  418,  419,  421,  422,  440


496


INDEX TO


ATH

Athenians,  pay  enormous  interest  on
loans,  163;  their  taste  formed  by
orators,  169  ;  tyranny  of,  406

Athens,  plague  of,  228  ;  prohibition  to
export  figs,  331 ;  money  amassed  by,
341,  361 ;  singular  customs,  375,  f. ;
slavery  at,  390  ;  the  Thirty  Tyrants,
404;  greatness  of,  418;  population
and  extent,  419  ;  census  of,  421

Attains  of  Pergamus,  praised  for  infan
ticide,  396

Atticus,  makes  a  poor  figure  in  Cicero,
189

Austria,  empire  of,  353

Authors,  ancient,  their  licentiousness,
188

Autobiography,  Hume's,  Adam  Smith's
share  in  it,  80 ;  hostile  criticism,
81


Bacon,  Lord,  253,  297

Balance  of  Power,  348,  f.;  anxiety  as  to
in  Greece,  349  ;  founded  on  common
sense,  352

Banks,  doubt  as  to  benefit  of,  311  ;
effect  of,  339;  in  Scotland,  340

Batavians,  the  ancient,  250

Belgium,  ancient,  population  of,  437

Bentivoglio,  Cardinal,  255

Berkeley,  Dr.,  35,  253

Berne,  money  lent  by,  342

Boccaccio,  228

Bolingbroke,  Lord,  Hume's  opinion  of,
74  ;  his  eloquence,  173

Boswell,  passages  cited  from,  83

Britain,  ancient,  marriage  in,  232  ;  bar
barous  condition  of,  436

British  Constitution. — See  Constitu
tion

Burgoyne,  Geometric  du  Due  de,  40

Burton,  Mr.,  mistake  in  his  Life  of
Hume,  38  ;  cited,  47  ;  his  account  of
Hume's  Dialogues  on  Natural  Eeli-
gion,  77

Butler,  Dr.,  24


CcEsar, Julius, his good sense, 1 69 ;

cited,  247,  399,  404,  436;  hands  Cato

a  billet-doux, 302 ; his  subjugation

of  the  Republic,  403
Capitolinus,  458

Carthaginians,  oppression  of,  103
Cato,  189;  his  indignation  with  Csesar,

302 ;  his  slaves,  391,  393
Catullus,  243

Cirvantes,  his  Sancho  Panza,  240
Character. — See  National
Charles  IL,  137


CRO

Charles  VIII.  of  France  his  invasion  ol
Italy,  303

China,  progress  of  Confucianism  in,
183;  commerce  of,  296;  infanticide
in,  396

Chios,  number  of  slaves  in,  421

Christian  Religion,  131,  f. ;  a  system  of
speculative  opinions,  132;  priesthood
promotes  hatred  and  discord,  132,
133

Christians,  Early,  charged  viith  bigotry
and  imprudence,  132

Cicero,  29,  161,  254,  357,  386,  411,  418,
428 ;  proscribed  by  Mark  Antony,
102;  a  party  man,  134;  dissatisfied
with  his  own  eloquence,  164;  with
that  of  Demosthenes,  1 65  ;  a  rhetori
cal  flight,  166;  the  finest  gentleman
of  his  age,  188;  his  scepticism  and
vanity,  189;  De  Oratore,  ib.;  his
solace  for  deafness,  226 ;  his  epilogues,
260;  as  an  orator,  261

Civil  Liberty,  156  ;  England  an  example
of,  97  ;  involved  in  liberty  of  press,  98

Clanndon,  Lord,  264

Clephane,  Dr.,  Hume's  letter  to.  56

Clergy. — See  Priest,  Priesthood,  Chris
tian  Religion

Climate,  alterations  in,  433,  f.

Columella,  382,  389,  393,  394,  412.  434

Commerce,  287. — See  Trade  and  Manu
factures

Commodus,  Emperor,  457

Commonwealth,  idea  of  a  perfect,  480,
482,  f. ;  false  opinion  as  to,  492 ;
probable  duration  of  it,  493

Conde,  Prince  of,  181

Congreve,  241

Confucius,  resemblance  of  the  Quakers
to  his  followers,  149;  progress  of  his
doctrines,  183

Constitution,  British,  120,  f.;  power  of
King, Lords,  and  Commons,  ib.;  influ
ence  of  the  Crown,  121 ;  Hume's  re
marks  on,  126

Contract,  Original,  443  ;  meaning  of,
445  ;  debated  in  France,  459

Convents,  nurseries  of  superstition,  395  ;
reason  why  women  become  nuns,  396

Conway,  General,  6

Corinth,  great  number  of  slaves  in,  421

Corneille,  106,  241

Crassus,  wealth  of,  123

Credit,  public,  360,  f.

Cromwell,  number  and  cost  of  his  army,
418  ;  plan  of  his  parliament,  491

Crown,  British,  revenues  of,  1 23  ;  power
of  on  the  increase,  125  ;  prerogative
of,  465,  f.;  of  Tudors  and  Stuarts
467  ;  privileges  usurped  by  Commons
468


THE THIRD VOLUME.


497


cus


FRA


Customs,  some  remarkable,  374,  f.;  at
Athens,  375,  f.;  ancient  and  modern,
385,  f.;  destructive  of  population,  402

Cyrus,  the  Younger,  a  toper,  257

Datames,  remark  of  the  ancients  con
cerning,  304

I? Aunty,  Madame,  236

Decclean  war,  desertion  of  slaves  during,
420

Delicacy  of  passion,  hurtful,  91 ;  cure
for,  92

of  taste,  desirable.  92 ;  favour
able  to  love  and  friendship,  93  ;  ex-
clusiveness  of,  94

—  French,  190

Deinocracy,  effects  of,  1 00  ;  best  form  of,
101;  the  Athenian,  376;  restoration
of,  403

Demosthenes  pleading.  165;  his  daring
apostrophe,  166;  his  slaves.  391;
quoted,  342,  349,  375,  376,  377,  386,
390,  391,  398,  407,410,  419,  420,  422

DeBetz,  Cardinal,  124,  171,  488

Dialogues  concerning  Natural  Religion,
account  of,  77;  letters  to  Adam  Smith,
78  ;  A.  Smith's  objections  to  publish
ing,  79 ;  Hume's  dispositions  re
garding,  ib.;  published  by  his  nephew,
80

Diodorus  Siculus,  104,  169,  256,  290,
399,  404,405,  409,  411,  415,  416,  417,
422,  424,  429,  433,  436,  438,  440,
443

Diogenes  Laertius,  415

Dionysius  Halicarnassus,  239,  425

—  the  Elder, 290,  417;  butcheries
of,  404

Dissenters,  the  country  party,  135

Dissertations,  Hume's  four,  60,  67 ;
mutilation  of,  68,  f.;  Dr.  Home's  re
marks,  ib.

Divorce,  voluntary,  233,  237;  reasons
against,  238,  239  ;  ancient  laws  of
Rome,  ib.

Douglas,  Home's,  64  ;  Hume's  remarks
on,  64,  66

Du  Bos,  1'Abbe,  259,  335, 432,  439

Duelling,  character  of  men  of  honour,
194

Dutch,  the,  first  introduced  the  practice
of  borrowing,  163  ;  commerce  of,  348  ;
cause  of  their  industry,  357

Du  Tot,  314


Eclectics,  the  Roman,  184
Editions  of  Hiime's  Works,  list  of,  85
Egypt,  population when  conquered  by
Romans,  440

VOL.  in.


Elliot,  Gilbert,  Hume's  letter  to,  52 ;
Elliot's  reply,  ib

Elotsa  and  Abelard,  239

Eloquence,  ancient,  164;  English,  165,
166  decline  of,  167;  difference  of
ancient  and  modern,  ib. ;  discourage
ments  of  modern,  168;  Roman  and
Greek,  ib. ;  causes  of  its  decline,  ib.  ;
conditions  favouring  it  in  ancient
times,  170;  want  of  genius  in  modern,
ib.  ;  of  French  sermons,  superior  to
English,  171  ;  French  lawyers,  ib.;
English  temper  disadvantageous  to,
ib.  ;  false  taste  in,  172;  common
opinion  of,  ib.  ;  Attic.  173;  Lysias
and  Calvus  compared  with  Demo
sthenes  and  Cicero,  ib.;  Lord  Boling-
broke,  ib.

England,  government  of,  a  compromise,
96;  liberty  in,  ib.;  parties  in,  107,  f.,
117,  133,  136,  139;  increase  of  vena
lity,  306  ;  cost  of  her  army  and  fleet,
310  ;  guardian  of  liberties  of  Europe,
353;  wars  with  France,  354;  her  re
venues,  366 ;  her  creditors.  373  ;
singular  custom,  379  ;  innovations  of
Henry  VIII.  and  Charles  I.,  453

Enthusiasm,  true  sources  of,  145  ;  its
consequences  to  society,  146;  opposed
to  priestly  power,  ib;  religions  arising
from,  148  ;  its  fury  soon  spent,  ib.

Epicurean,  the,  197,  f.

Epirus,  inhabitants  sold  by  P.  ,33milius,
424

Erskine,  Sir  H.,  3

Essays,  Moral  and  Political,  Hume's,
40  ;  their  success,  41 ;  preface  to,  ib. ;
list  of,  42  ;  classification  of,  43,  f.

Ethics, — See  Morals.

Euxine,  climate  described  by  Ovid,  434  ;
by  Tournefort,  ib.

Euripides,  the  two  wives  of,  232


Factions,  political  and  religious,  129,  f. ;
in  ancient  Greece,  404  ;  in  Ireland,  ib.

Fanaticism,  148

Flamininus,  Titus,  his  conference  with
Philip  of  Macedon,  189

Flechier,  his  funeral  sermon  on  Marshal
Turenne,  171

Florus,  395

Fontenelle,  94,  227,  242,  260,  442

Fowler,  Professor,  on  quoting  Hume's
Treatise,  39

France,  form  of  government,  95 ;  under
Henri  III.  and  IV.,  98  ;  disputes  of
Molinists  and  Jansenists  in,  150;
progress  of  the  arts  and  sciences  in,
159  ;  of  drama,  ib.;  of  trade,  160,
336;  abuses  in  government  of,  162;
K


498


INDEX TO


GAL


poverty of  peasantry, 298 ; abun
dance  of  bullion  in,  338


Gallantry,  the  passion  of,  192,  f.

Gaul,  character  and  condition  of  people,
256,  437;  climate  of,  433;  popula
tion  of,  436

Gee,  Mr.,  his  writings  on  Trade,
322

Genoa,  anarchy  in,  105 ;  bank  of  St.
George,  106

Gentleman's  Magazine,  notices  of
Hume's  Dissertations  in,  68,  f.

Germany,  scarcity  of  money  in,  316;
inhabitants,  436

Gorgias  Leontinus,  169

Government,  absolute,  inconveniences
of,  99 ;  free  and  republican,  depend
ing  upon  checks,  ib. ;  anarchy  in
Roman,  100;  Venetian  and  Polish,
ib.;  Eastern  mode  of,  105;  stability
of  the  Venetian,  ib. ;  first  principles
of,  109;  founded  on  opinion,  110;
origin  and  object  of,  113  ;  consolida
tion  of,  115;  origin  of  kingly,  ib.;
struggle  between  authority  and
liberty,  116;  system  of  mixed,  119;
modern  monarchical,  great  improve
ments  in,  161;  abuses  in  the  French,
162;  sources  of  abuse  in  free  go
vernments,  ib. ,  the  Chinese,  183;
monarchical,  owes  its  perfection  to
the  republican,  186;  difference  be
tween  monarchies  and  republics,  187;
ill  manners  of  European  republics,
188:  knowledge  in  the  arts  of,  303;
different  theories  of  in  England,  443 ;
Deity,  ultimate  author  of,  444;  the
people  the  pretended  source  of  power,
445  ;  original  foundation  of,  446  ;  re
volution,  448  ;  Athenian  democracy,
449  ;  force  the  origin  of  most  govern
ments,  450  ;  allegiance  to,  455  ;  suc
cession  of  Eoman  Emperors,  458 ;
title,  459  ;  passive  obedience  to,  460  ;
when  resistance  to,  lawful,  461  ;  true
rule  of,  468  ;  English,  as  regarded  by
James  I.,  473 ;  under  the  Stuarts,
474 ;  plan  of,  482  ;  chief  support  of
British,  489

Gracchi,  sedition  of,  394

Grant,  General,  3

Greece,  ancient,  decline  of  arts  in,  158  ;
small  states  favourable  to  the  arts.
182 ;  anxiety  as  to  the  balance  of
power,  349;  cold-blooded  butcheries
in,  404,  f.;  unsettled  state,  407  ;  size
and  population  of  cities,  418,  f.,
422;  neglect  of  military  discipline,
442


HUM

Greeks,  ancient,  fond  of  the  bottle,  257  ;

their  privileges  observed  by  Romans,

441

Guelfs  and  Ghibellines,  factions  of,  129
Guicciardin,  29,  303
Gustavus  Vasa,  135

Hannibal,  his  victories  in  Italy,  351

Happiness,  attainment  of,  205,  220 ;
Spartan  idea,  226 ;  no  perfect  distribu
tion  of,  230

Hardouin,  Pere,  426

Harrington,  J.,  his  '  Oceana  '  the  only
valuable  model  of  a  commonwealth,
481 ;  prediction  of,  122

Helvetia,  inhabitants,  438

Henriadc,  96

Henri.  IV.,  remark  of,  about  astrologers,
373

Henry  VII.,  treasure  amassed  by,  341

Herodian,  429,  436

Herodotus,  104,  410.  419,  424

Hertford,  Earl  of,  6

Hiero  of  Syracuse,  understood  the  balance
of  power,  352

Hirtius,  438

History  of  House  of  Tudor,  Hume's,  6

Holland,  form  of  government  of,  95 ;
Presbyterian  and  Arminian  factions
in,  136

Home,  J.,  author  of  Douglas,  9,  64,  65

Ho  mer,  moral  characters  of  hi  s  h  eroes,  267

Horace,  159,  177,  190,  194,  390

Home,  Dr.,  remarks  on  Hume's  Disser
tations,  68  ;  attacks  Hume  and  Adam
Smith,  80,  f.

Hortcnsius.  Kicolaus,  428

House  of  Commons,  British,  112;  sup
port  of  popular  government,  307

Human  Life,  more  governed  by  fortune
than  reason,  231

Human  Nature,  dignity  and  meanness
of,  150,  f. ;  estimate  of,  152  ;  com
parison  of  men  and  animals,  ib. ;  its
passions,  154,  f.;  ills  of,  226,  f.

Human  Understanding,  Hume's  Enquiry
concerning.  3

Hume,  his  birth  and  family,  1  ;  residence
in  France.  2,  3  ;  rising  reputation,  4 ;
plan  of  history,  ib. ;  success  of  his
works,  6 ;  attached  to  embassy  to
Paris,  ib.;  illness,  7  ;  his  character
drawn  by  himself,  ib.;  his  death,  13  ;
his  passion  for  literature,  15;  letter
to  M.  Ramsay,  ib.;  his  mode  of  life,
18.  f.;  letters  to  Prof.  Hutcheson,  27,
f.,  33  ;  his  Collection  of  Scotticisms,
35 ;  dissatisfied  with  his  own  style,
•36  ;  desire  of  applause,  ib.;  criticism
of  his  own  works,  36,  f . ;  Johnson's
observations,  40,  83 ;  his  Sceptic,  46 ;


THE THIRD  VOLUME.


499


HUM

Stoic,  ib.;  tendency  to  materialism,  ib.;
residence  in  Edinburgh,  47 ;  ap
pointed  Judge-Advocate  of  expedi
tion  against  Port  1' Orient,  ib. ;  Philo
sophical  Essays  concerning  the
Human  Understanding,  49 ;  sale  of
his  works,  50 ;  Warburton's  attack,
ib.;  his  Essay  on  Miracles,  50 ;  Con
versation  with  a  Jesuit,  51 ;  his  En
quiry  concerning  the  Principles  of
Morals,  52 ;  his  letters  to  Gilbert
Elliot,  51,  54,  t.;  his  Dialogues  con
cerning  Natural  Eeligion,  54,  77;
literary  activity,  55  ;  political  dis
courses,  56 ;  becomes  known  abroad,
ib. ;  letter  to  Dr.  Clephane,  ib. ;  ap
pointed  keeper  of  Advocates'  library,
59;  his  History  of  Great  Britain,  ib.;
letters  to  Adam  Smith,  59,  78  ;  trans
lates  Plutarch's  Lives,  ib. ;  declines
editing  a  newspaper,  60;  his  Pour
Dissertations,  60,  67 ;  his  remarks  on
Dr.  Warburton,  64 ;  dedication  of
his  Dissertations,  65 ;  letters  to
Andrew  Millar,  60,  65 ;  Essays  on
Suicide  and  Immortality  of  the  Soul,
69,  f., — surreptitiously  published,  ib.;
his  care  in  preparing  his  works  for
the  press,  73 ;  his  changes  of  opinion,
73,  74  ;  remarks  on  Bolingbroke  and
Swift,  ib.;  neglects  philosophy,  75,  f.;
appoints  W.  Slrahan  his  literary  ex
ecutor,  79  ;  publication  of  his  Auto
biography,  80;  hostile  criticism,  81 ;
Wesley's  sermon  on,  82  ;  his  deathbed,
83  ;  supplement  to  the  Life  of,  84;
watching  his  grave,  ib.;  list  of  edi
tions  of  his  works,  85;  his  remarks
on  English  parties,  107,  f.,  117,  f . ;
on  the  British  constitution,  126 ;
charges  early  Christians  with  '  im
prudence  and  bigotry,'  132  ;  his  defi
nition  of  '  Priests,'  147;  on  Judaism
and  Popery,  148  ;  on  Church  of  Eng
land,  ib. ;  on  English  sects,  ib. ;  his
objection  to  mixed  companies,  194;
his  ideas  of  happiness,  198,  220  ;  on
the  value  of  money,  314  ;  his  plan  of
a  commonwealth,  482,  f.

Hunt,  Mr.,  on  Hume's  Treatise  of  Hu
man  Nature,  39 ;  on  Hume's  scepti
cism,  75

Hurd,  Dr.,  his  pamphlet  against  Hume,
5 ;  a  pious  fraud,  62

Hutcheson,  Professor,  27,  f.

Hutchinson,  Mr.,  his  scheme  for  pay
ment  of  National  Debt,  370


Independents,  character  of,  148 ;  political
union  with  Deists,  150


MAN

Interest,  low,  a  sign  of  prosperity,
320. — See  Money

Ireland,  Swift  on  financial  condition  of,
332  ;  factions  in,  404

Isocrates,  404,  405

Italy,  factions,  129 ;  poverty  of  pea
santry,  298  ;  want  of  martial  spirit  in
modern  Italians,  304 ;  cheap  prices
in  ancient,  320 ;  population,  425,  f. ;
uncultivated  laud,  430 ;  herds  of
swine,  ib.


Jacobites,  the,  144
James  I.,  anecdote  by  Waller,  473
Jansenists,  enthusiasm  of,  150
Jealousy,  in  Asia,  235;  m  Spain,  236
Jesuits,  tyrants  of  the  people,  1 50
Johnson,  remark  on  Hume's  Collection

of  Scotticisms,  35 ;  his  strictures  on

Hume,  40,  83

Johnson,  Ben,  Volpone  of,  397
Josephus,  429,  440
Justin,  438
Juvenal,  188,  193,  254,  433


Kames,  Lord,  Hume's  letters  to,  23,  48
Koran,  moral  precepts  of,  267


La  Fleche,  Hume's  residence  at,  22,  23,

40  ;  conversation  with  a  Jesuit  at,  51
Language,  dependent  on  manners,  253
Le Blanc, 1'Abbe, translates Hume's

Political  Discourses,  56
Liberty. — See  Civil  Liberty
Literature, simplicity and refinement

in  writing,  240,  243  ;  sensational,  ib.;

style,  241  ;  great  authors  compared,

ib.;  taste  in,  266,  f.
lAvy,  106,  129,  291,  342,  399,  404,409,

424,  438
Locke,  35,  460
Longinus,  159
Longman, T., publishes 3rd vol. of

Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  30,  32
Lucan,  395
Lucian,  442

Lucretius,  188,  199,  241
Luxury,  indulgences  in,  299 ;  different

estimates  of,  300  ;  refined  arts,  301,

f. ;  vicious,  307,  f.
Lysias,  406,  410,  423


Machiavel, 103  ; his  defective  reason
ings,  156;  his  character  of  a  weak
prince,  157;  cited,  351
Mallet,  his  account  of  Egypt,  435
Manufactures,  absence  of  supplied  by


K K 2


500


INDEX TO


MAR

agriculture,  293 ;  contribute  to  the
power  of  a  state,  294

Marriage,  contract  of,  231;  an  extra
•wife  allowed  by  Athenians,  232 ;
among  the  ancient  Britons,  ib. ;  poly
gamy,  233  ;  duration  of,  237  f.

Martial.  390,  395

Mauvillon,  Eleazar  publishes  transla
tion  of  Hume's  Political  Discourses
in  France,  56

Medici,  their  wealth  makes  them  mas
ters  of  Florence,  123

Mehemct  Effendi,  saying  of,  234

Melon,  M.,  289

Mcnander,  245

Miller,  A.,  Hume's  letters  to,  60,  65 ;
letter  to  Hume,  68

Miracles,  Hume's  Essay  on,  50  ;  its
style,  51

Molinists,  friends  to  superstition,  150

Monarchy,  absolute,  points  of  resem
blance  to  a  republic,  95 ;  incon
venience  of  an  elective,  1 01 ;  the
best  form  of,  ib. ;  improved  character
of  modern  monarchs,  161  ;  absolute,
repugnant  to  law,  180 ;  the  Chinese,
183  ;  enormous  monarchies  destruc-
•  ve  to  human  nature,  355  ;  plan  of
limited,  482  f.

Money,  not  one  of  the  subjects  of  com
merce,  309  ;  representative  of  labour,
312;  causes  high  prices,  313;  value
of  in  France,  314 ;  its  quantity
of  little  consequence  to  a  State,
315  f . ;  scarcity  in  some  parts  of
Europe,  ib. ;  rise  of  prices  after  dis
covery  of  West  Indies,  318  ;  in  China,
320 ;  has  a  fictitious  value.  321  ;
causes  of  high  interest,  322  ;  rise  of
interest  in  Scotland,  323 ;  causes  of
low  interest,  326  ;  interest  the
barometer  of  the  State,  327  ;  propor
tion  between,  and  goods,  328  ;  in
terest  in  Eoman  Spain,  329 ;  reduc
tion  of  interest  in  England  and
France,  330  ;  methods  of  sinking  and
raising  its  A'alue,  337 ;  treasures
amassed  by  Henry  VII.,  341  ;  by
Philip  of  Macedon  and  Perseus,  342

Montesquieu,  440

Morals.  Hume's  Inquiry  concerning  the
Principles  of,  52 ;  a  delicate  sense
of,  151 ;  harmony  of  authors  as  to,
267

More,  Sir  T.,  Utopia  of,  481

Morocco,  wars  of  colour  in,  129,  130

Muscovites,  ancient,  193


National  Character. Hume's Essay  on,
49 ; influence of physical causes,


PHI

244,  246  f. ;  of  example,  248;
of  government,  249 ;  similarity
of  Jews  and  Armenians,  250  ;
ancient  Greek  and  Eoman,  ib. ;
French  and  British,  251  ;  negroes
inferior  to  -whites,  252 ;  pretended
influence  of  climate,  253 ;  language
dependent  on,  ib. ;  of  Northern  and
Southern  countries,  253  f.  256 ;
Turks  and  ancient  Eomans,  255 ;
moral  causes  of,  256;  addiction  to
strong  drinks,  257 ;  amorousness,
258

National  Debt,  a  modern  expedient,
361  f . ;  consequences  of,  363,  368  f. ;
scheme  for  payment  of,  370

Nepos,  Cornelius,  Life  of  Atticus,  390

Newton,  183

Nicole,  his  Perpetuite  de  la  Foi,  54

Ninm,  immense  army  of,  443

Noone,  John,  25


Obedience,  a  duty  in  a  State,  114

Oceana,  Harrington's,  its  defects,  481.
See  Harrington

Opinion,  of  two  kinds,  110;  its  de
fenders  and  assailants,  118;  changes
in,  125;  influence  in  formation  oi
character,  255  f.

Optimates  and  Populares,  Eoman  parties,
134

Orators,  ancient  and  modern,  164  f. ;
Eoman  and  Greek,  1 69  ;  scurrility  of
ancient,  188.  See  Eloquence

Ovid,  177,  386,  433,  435


Parties,  in  general,  127,  131,  133;  in
Greek  empire,  128;  in  Eome,  129,
134;  in  Italy,  ib. ;  in  Morocco,  ib. ;
in  England,  133,  134;  ecclesiastical,
court,  and  country,  135;  origin —
Whig  and  Tory,  136f. ;  coalition  of,
464  f.

Passive  obedience,  460

Paten,  pleadings  of,  171

Paterculus,  416

Persecution,  religious,  among  the  an
cients,  132

Persian  empire,  cause  of  its  overthrow,
350

Persian  Letters,  237

Persians,  ancient,  Machiavel  on  their
subjugation  by  the  Greeks,  103  f . ;
drunkenness  in  repute  among,  257

Persona/  Identity,  33

Petromus,  390

Pfyedms,  190

Philip  of  Macedon,  his  rejoinder  to  a
candid  Eoman,  189  ;  treasure  amassed


THE THIRD VOLUME.


501


PHI

by,  .142  ;  his  army  as  Captain-Gene
ral  of  Greece,  424  f.

Philosophy,  attention  paid  to  in  Eng
land,  33  ;  in  the  early  Christian
period,  132  ;  excellence  of  the  Eng
lish  in,  159;  Peripatetic  introduced
in  the  schools,  182  ;  Cartesian,
183;  the  Eclectics,  184;  the  Epi
curean,  197  f. ;  Stoic,  203  f . ;
Platonist,  210  f . ;  Sceptic,  213  f . ;
devotion  to,  220  ;  considerations  on,
224  f.

Plato,  361,  418,  420,  424,  481

Platonist,  the,  210

Plautus,  420

Pleasure,  Hume  on,  198  f.

Pliny,  193,  263,  342,  389,  394,  400,
416,  426,  429,  439

Plutarch,  190,  191,  226,  227,  249,  257,
361,  331,  376,  386,  391,  395,  396,
404,  409,  416,  438,  440,  441,  442

Poetry,  pretended  inspiration,  177;
taste  and  genius  in,  270  f.

Poisoning,  among  the  Romans,  pre
valence  of,  106

Poland,  deficient  in  the  arts,  305

Politeness,  ancient,  188  f . ;  modern,
190  f.

Pclitian,  429

Politics,  science  of,  98 ;  '  every  man  a
knave,'  118

Polybius,  103,  104,  121,  189,  292,  320,
342.  399,  402,  415,  416,  423,  424,
434,  435,  436,  441

Polygamy,  reasons  for  and  against,  233,
234,  235

Pope,  226

Population,  of  ancient  nations,  381,
383 ;  effect  of  slavery  on,  387  ;  of
monasticism  and  infanticide,  396 ;
disadvantages  of  the  ancients  as  re
gards,  400 ;  ancient  and  modern
compared,  413,  432,  435;  of  Greek
and  Roman  cities,  418  f. ;  of  Roman
Empire  under  Augustus  and  Trajan,
439, 440

Presbyterians,  character  of,  148

Press,  liberty  of,  94  ;  peculiar  to  Great
Britain,  95  ;  accounted  for  in  Eng
land,  96  ;  advantages  of,  97

Priests,  enemies  of  liberty,  135;  defini
tion  of,  147  ;  a  superstitious  inven
tion,  ib. ;  of  all  religions  the  same,
245  ;  their  hypocrisy,  246 ;  their
self-deception,  ambition  and  fury,
ib. ;  among  the  Romans,  247

Protestant  Succession,  Hume's  Essay
on,  48 ;  its  advantages  and  disad
vantages  considered,  471  f.,  475 ;
reasons  for  excluding  the  Stuarts,
477  f.


SKN


Ptolemies,  their  treasjrc'S,  343
Pyrrhus,  on  Roman  discipline,  304


Quakers,  resemble  Confucians,  148f.
Quintilian,  254
Quintus  Curtius,  257,  429
Quixote,  Don,  272


Raleigh,  473

Ramsay,  M.,  Hume's  letters  to,  15,  26

Eapin,  74,  457

Religion,  truth  in,  54;  ancient,  131;
Christian,  ib. ;  above  human  cog
nizance,  283

Republics,  oppressions  of,  101 ;  great
armies  of  ancient,  290.  See  Govern
ment

Rheims,  Hume's  residence  at,  2,  23

Rhodes,  422

Right,  origin  of,  110

Rochester,  Lord,  licentiousness  of,
188

Rome,  buildings  of  ancient,  56,  57 ;
government  under  Emperors,  96 ;
Roman  tyranny,  102 ;  most  illus
trious  period  of  its  history,  106 ;
parties  in,  129,  134;  progress  of
arts  in,  158  ;  arbitrary  decisions  of
consuls,  179 ;  Roman  rudeness,
191  ;  Romans  a  candid  race,  255 ;
always  at  war,  292;  corrupted  by
luxury,  305;  armies  of,  310;  doubts
as  to  Roman  history,  351 ;  cause  of
the  destruction  of  the  empire,  358 ;
public  spectacles,  387  ;  influx  of
slaves,  389,  391  ;  Civil  Law,  391  ;
pay  of  troops,  399 ;  Roman  hu
manity.  407  ;  massacres  during  civil
wars,  408  ;  extent  of,  423,  426,  427  ;
how  built,  425 ;  population  of,  425,
427  ;  bills  of  mortality,  428 ;  streets
full  of  snow  and  ice,  433 ;  largest
population  of  empire,  450  ;  how  the
emperors  succeeded  each  other,  458

Romish  Church,  acquisition  of  power
by,  149  ;  a  hindrance  to  learning,
183;  inspires  hatred  of  other  reli
gions,  284

Rousseau,  187


Sallust,  161,  188,  305,  428

Sascrna,  434,  435

Saxony,  Catholic  King  and  Protestant

Elector  of,  478
Sceptic,  the,  213
Sciences. See  Arts
Senate,  an  ideal,  488
Seneca,  387,  390,  393,  395,  396,  404


502


INDEX TO


SEV


Sevcrambians,  history  of  the,  232

Shaftesbury,  Lord,  117,  154,  191,  377

Shakespeare,  262

Slavery,  Koman,  385  f. ;  influence  oil
population,  387  f.  ;  privileges  of,
390 ;  at  Athens,  390,  420 ;  in  West
Indies,  390;  at  Eome,  391  f . ;  in
Sicily,  395;  in  Turkey  and  Egypt,
395  ;  in  Sparta,  421 ;  in  Corinth  and
^Egina,  ib.

Smith,  Adam,  letter  to  W.  Strahan,
Esq.,  9  ;  correspondence  with  Hume,
77  f. ;  assailed  for  his  share  in
Hume's  Autobiography,  80  f.

Sofomon,  his  polygamy,  234

Solon,  legalizes  infanticide,  396

Sophocles,  211

Spain,  poverty  of  peasantry,  298 ;  con
dition  of  ancient,  438

Sparta,  absence  of  commerce,  290

Spenser,  473

Spinoza,  40

St.  Glair,  General,  3 ;  Hume  appointed
secretary  to,  47

Stage,  English,  licentiousness  of,  183;
tJie  French,  284

Stanian,  342,  343

Stale,  chief  magistrate  in  a,  100;  in
convenience  of  an  elective  monarchy,
101;  necessity  for  wise  laws,  105;
ascendancy  of  one  man,  115;  autho
rity  and  liberty  in,  116;  possessors
of  wealth  in,  123  ;  trade  not  regarded
as  an  affair  of,  157 ;  internal  police,
161  ;  small  states  favourable  to  the
arts,  182 ;  divisions  of  the,  289 ;
agricultural,  293  ;  causes  of  its  great
ness,  294  f.  ;  quantity  of  money  of
little  consequence  to,  315;  refined
life  beneficial  to,  319

Stoic,  the,  203  f.

Strabo,  247,  389,  393,  417,  425,  433,
436,  438,  440,  441

Strahan,  letter  to,  from  Adam  Smith,
9 ;  appointed  Hume's  literary  exe
cutor,  79  ;  declines,  80

Suetonius,  103,  386,  389,  426,  428

Suicide  and the Immortality of the
Soul,  Hume's  Essays  on,  69  f. ;  note
by  Allan  Eamsay  (?)  71
Sui'das,  440

Supcrstitian, 144; true sources of,
145;  favourable to priestly  power,
146; its insidiousness, 149; an
enemy  to  civil  liberty,  ib.
Swtdtn,  military  force  of,  492
Swift,  Dr.,  74,  332,  408
Sybaris, cause of its populousness,

411
Syracuse,  greatness  of,  418


VAR


Tacitus, 96, 103, 135,  310, 373,  389,

392,  394,  396,  401,  426,  436,  441
Talon,  171
Tasso,  201

Taste,  standard  of,  266,  279  ;  varieties,
269,  f.;  want  of  imaginative  delicacy,
272 ;  right  criticism,  275,  278  ;  its
principles,  276;  influenced  by  man
ners,  280 ;  by  rt-ligious  principle?
283
Taxes,  dangerous  maxim  as  to,  3o6  ;

best  kind  of,  358  ;  on  land,  359
Timple,  Sir  W.,  357
Terence,  241
Tertullian,  439,  440
Thebes,  conquest  by  Alexander,  422
Theocritus,  415

Thought,  liberty  of  in  ancient  times,  66
Thucydides, 104, 228, 290, 399, 404,

411,  414,  419,  421,422,  424
Tiber,  frozen,  432
Timoleon,  399
Toleration,  religious,  97
Tories,  character  and  conduct  of,  1 39,  f. ;
none  in  Scotland,  143;  union  of  High
Church  with  Koman  Catholics,  150
Tonrnefort, his visit to the Grand

Txirk's  seraglio,  235 ;  cited,  434
Trachinians,  their  application  to  Sparta,

399

Trade,  not  regarded  as  an  affair  of  state,
157;  needs  a  free  government,  159  ;
ancient  marts,  160,  357;  progress  in
France,  160;  decay  under  absolute
government,  ib.;  contributes  to  great
ness  of  state,  289,  294 ;  banks  and
paper  currency,  311,  365;  increases
industry,  325  ;  ignorance,  330,  f. ;  re
strictions  in  France,  336  ;  obstructions
to,  343 ;  taxes  on  foreign  commodi
ties,  ib.;  domestic  industry  basis  of
foreign  commerce,  346,  f. ;  nations
pre-eminent  in,  356

Tragedy,  power  of, 258, f. ;  cause of

pleasure  produced  by,  261,  f.;  tragic

scenes  in  painting  and  poetry,  262  ;

action  of,  265

Treatise  on  Human  Nature,  Hume's,  2,

25,  32,  33,  36,  37,  40,  49
Turkey,  taxes  in,  360;  slave  trade  in,

395
Tyre,  destruction  of,  410


United  provinces,  government  of,  490
Upper  House,  plan  for  an,  491
Ustariz,  Geronimo  di,  384


Valerius  Maximus,  426
Varro,  389,  393,  394,  434


THE THIRD VOLUME.


503


VAU


Vauban,  Marshal,  336
Velleius  Paterculus,  342,  438
Venetian  Government,  stability  of,  105
Venice,  factions  in,  129;  not  eminent  in

the  arts,  158

Verres,  cruelties  of,  102;  proscribed,  ib.
Virgil,  190
Vitruvius,  426
Voltaire,  96
Vopiscus,  423,  430


Wallace,  Dr.,  his  Dissertation  on  Popu-
lousness  of  Ancient  and  Modern
Times,  58

Waller,  170,  197

Walpole,  Sir  K.,  his  character  by  Hume,
45


ZEA


Warburton,  attacks  Hume,  50,  61,  62

Wars,  religious,  129,  132

Wesley,  J.,  sermon  on  Hume,  82

West  Indies,  slavery  in,  390

Whigs,  character  and  conduct  of,  139,f.;

definition of, 139; their leaders

Deists,  150.— See  Tories
Wilkes,  J.,  61
Wolsey,  Card.  191
Works  of  the  Learned,  review  in,  33


Xenophon,  104,  163,  348,  393,  398,  406,

412,  419,  420,  421,  423,  435
Xerxes,  in  want  of  a  new  pleasure,  198


Zeal,  public  106;  needs  moderating,  108


SPOTTISWOODE AND CO.. \LW-STREET SQUARE
LONDON


THE


PHILOSOPHICAL WOEKS

OF

DAVID HUME


VOL.  I1L


THE


PHILOSOPHICAL  WORKS


DAVID HUME


EDITED BY


T.  H.  GREEN  A*,»  T.  H.  GROSE

LATE FEI.I.OW  AND  TUTOR  OF  BALUOL  FKLLOW  AND  TUTOR  OP  QUE

COLLKGK,  OXFOKD  COLLEGE,  OXFOItD


IN FOUR VOLUMES
VOL.  III.

NEW IMPRESSION


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON

NEW  YORK AND BOMBAY

1898


H  Classfffeb Catalogue

OF  WORKS  IN

GENERAL LITERATURE

PUBLISHED BY

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.G.

91  AND  93  FIFTH  AVENUE,  NEW  YORK,  AND  32  HORNBY  ROAD,  BOMBAY


CONTENTS.

BADMINTON  LIBRARY  {THE)  - -  ^12

MENTAL,  MORAL,  AND  POLITICAL

PAGE

BIOGRAPHY, PERSONAL ME

PHILOSOPHY

17

MOIRS, &c.

CHILDREN'S  BOOKS - - - 32

MISCELLANEOUS  AND  CRITICAL
WORKS

18

CLASSICAL  LITERATURE,  TRANS

o"

LATIONS,  ETC  22

POETRY  AND  THE  DRAMA -

23

COOKERY, DOMESTIC MANAGE

POLITICAL ECONOMY AND  ECO

MENT,  &c. ... ,5

NOMICS

20

EVOLUTION, ANTHROPOLOGY
&c. - - - 1 21

POPULAR  SCIENCE  -

30

FICTION,  HUMOUR,  &c. - - . 2g

RELIGION,  THE  SCIENCE  OF

21

FUR,  FEATHER  AND  FIN  SERIES 15

SILVER  LIBRARY  (THE)

33

FINE  ARTS  (THE)  AND  MUSIC • 36 SPORT  AND  PASTIME

12

HISTORY, POLITICS POLITY
POLITICAL  MEMOIRS,  &c - - 3 STONYHURST PHILOSOPHICAL

LANGUAGE, HISTORY AND

J9

SCIENCE  OF - - - 20 TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE,  THE

LOGIC,  RHETORIC,  PSYCHOLOGY, COLONIES,  &c.

u

17 WORKS  OF  REFERENCE  -

3i

INDEX OF AUTHORS AND EDITORS

Page Page
Abbott  (Evelyn) - 3,  22  i  Baring-Gould  (Rev.
<J.  H.  M.) - 3 S.)- - - -2138

Page
Butler  (E.  A.)  - - 3o Dale  (L.)  -

Page-

4

(T.  K.) -  r7,  18 Barnett  (S.  A.  and  H.) '  2O
<E'  A-) - 17 Baynes  (T.  S.)  - - 38
Acland  (A.  H.  D.) - 3 Beaconsfield  (Earl  of) 25
Acton  (Eliza) - - 39 Beaufort  (Duke  of)  -  13,  14
Adelborg  (O.) - - 32 Becker  (W.  A.) - 22
^schylus - - 22  :  Beesly  (A.  H.)  - - 9
Ainger  (A.  C.)  - - i^. Bell  (Mrs  Huuh) 23

Cameron  of  Lochiel 15
Campbell(Rev.Lewis)  21  ,22
Chasseloup  -  Laubat
(Marquis  de)- - 13
Chesney  (Sir  G.) - 3
Childe-Pemberton(W.S.)  9
Chisholm  (G.  C  ) - 31

—  (  1  .  F.J - - J4.
Dallinger  (F.  W.) - r
Dauglish  (M.  G.) - 9
Davenport  (A.) - 2j
Davidson  (A.  M.  C.) 22
—  —  (W.  L.) - I7  20  2I
Davies  (J.  F.) - . 22

Albemarle  (Earl  of)  - I3 Bent  (J.  Theodore)  - 11
Alcock  (C.  W.) - 15 Besant  (Sir  Walter)- a
A  e°  (Gl£nt) ' ' 3° Bickerdyke  (J.) -  14,  15
Allgood  (G.) - 3 Bird  (G.)  - - - »
Alverstone  (Lord) - 15 Blackburne  (J.  H.) - i\
Angwin(M.  C.) - 36 Bland  (Mrs.  Hubert) 24
Anstey  (F.) - - 35 Blount  (Sir  E.) - q
Aristophanes - - 22 Boase  (Rev.  C.  W  )  - 6
Aristotle - - - 17 Boedder  (Rev.  B.) - iq
Armstrong  (W.) - 13 Bonnell  (H.  H.) - ,8
Arnold  (Sir  Edwin)-  11,23 Booth  (A.  J.) - - 38
—  -  (Dr-  T-)T - - 3 Bottome  (P.) - - 25
Asnbourne  (Lord) - 3 Bowen  (W.  E.) - 9

Cholmondeley-Pennell
(H.) - 13
Christie  (R.  C.) - 38
Churchill(  W.  Spencer)  4,  25
Cicero - - - 22
Clarke  (Rev.  R.  F.)  - 19
Climenson  (E.  J.) - 10
Clodd  (Edward) -21,30
Clutterbuck  (W.  J.)- 12
Colenso  (R.  J.) - 36
Conington  (John) - 23
Conway  (Sir  W.  M  ) 14
Conybeare  (Rev.  W.  J.)

Dent  (C.  T.) - . u
De  Salis  (Mrs.) . 3g
De  Tocqueville  (A.)  - 4
Devas  (C.  S.) - -  IQ)  2O"
Dickinson  (G.  L.) -
-  (W.  H.) - - 38
Dougall(L.) - . L
Dowden  (E.) - - ,Q
Doyle  (Sir  A.Conan) 25
Du  Bois  (W.  E.  B.)- 5
Dufferin  (Marquis  of) 14
Dunbar  (Mary  F.) - 2l
Dyson  (E.) - . 2|

A  Suiby  %'r T - 36 Brassey  (Lady) - n
Ashley  (W  J.)- - 3,  2o (Lord) - - M
Avebury(Lord) - 21 Bright  (Rev.  J.  F  )- a
Ayre  (Rev.  J.)  - - 31 Broadfoot  (Major  W.) if
Brooks  (H.  J.)  - - j*
Bacon - - - 9,  17 Brown  (A.  F.)  - - 32
Bagehot  (  W.)  - 9,  20,  38 (J.  Moray) - 14
Bagwell  (R.) - - 3 Bruce  (R.  I.) - - 3
Bailey  (H.  C.)  - - 2c Brvce  (].)- - it
Baillie  (A.  F.)  - - 3 Buck  (H.  A  ) -

&  Howson  (Dean) 33
Coolidge  (W.  A.  B.) 11
Corbett  (Julian  S.)  - 4
Coutts  (W.) - - 22
Coventry  (A.)  - - 14
Cox  (Harding) - 13
Crake  (Rev.  A.  D.) - 32
Craven  (W.  G.) - 14
Crawford  (J.  H.) - 25
(R.) ii

Ebrington  (Viscount) is
Ellis  (J.  H.) . . ,!
—  (R.L.) - - j
Erasmus  - Q
Evans  (Sir  John) - 38
Falkiner  (C.  L.) - 4
Farrar(Dean) - -20,26
Fitzmaurice  (Lord  E.) 4
Folkard  (H.  C.) - 15

Bam  (Alexander) - 17 Buckland  (Jas.) - £
Baker  (J.  H.) - 38 Buckle  (H.  T.)  - -
—  (SirS.W.) . „ Bull(T.) - '. . J
Bafour(A.J.) -13,21 Burke  (U.  R.) - - ,
Ball  (John) - - „ Burne-Jones  (Sir  E.) 36
Banks  (M.  M.)  - - 24 Burns  (C.  L.) - - 36
Burrows  (Montagu) 6

Creed  (S.) - - 25
3reiehton  (Bishop)  -4,  6,  9
Cross  (A.  L.) - - 5
Crozier  (J.  B.)  - - 9,  17
distance  (Col.  H.)  - 15
Cults  (Rev.  E.  L.) - 6

Dabney  (J.  P.)  - - 23

Ford  (H.)  -
Fountain  (P
Fowler  (Edith  H.) -
Francis  (Francis) -
Francis  (M.  E.)
Freeman  (Edward  A.)
Fremantle  (T.  F.) .
Fresnfield  (D.  W.) -

16
ii
26
16
26
6
16
14

INDEX OF AUTHORS AND EDITORS— continued.


Page . Page

Page Page

Frost  (G.)- - - 38 Keary  (C.  F.) - - 23

Ogilvie  (R.) - - 22

Southey  (R.)  -  -  40

Froude  (James  A.)  4,9,11,26  !  Kelly  (E.)- - - 18

Oldfield  (Hon.  Mrs.) 9

Spedding  (J.)  -  -  9,  17

Fuller  (F.  W.)  - 5  |  Kent  (C.  B.  R.) - 6

Onslow  (Earl  of) - 14

Spender  (A.  E.)  -  12

Furneaux  (W.) - 30 Kerr  (Rev.  J.) - - 14

Osbourne  (L.)  - - 28

Stanley  (Bishop)  -  31

_ ,. ,c ,  „  . . Kielmansegge  (F.) - 9
Gardiner  (Sam*  R.) 5 Killick  (Rev.  A.  H.)  - 18
Gathorne-Hardy(Hon. Kitchin  (Dr.  G.  W.) 6

Packard  (A.  S.) - 21
Paget  (Sir  J.) - - 10

Stebbing  (W.)  -  -  28
Steel  (A.  G.)  -  -  13
Stephen  (Leslie)  -  12

r  -i  -  '  ,» n~ •  "  I5' Knight  (E.  F.)  - -11,14

Park(W.) - - 16

Stephens  (H.  Morse)  S

Geikie  (Rev.  Cunning- Kostlin  (I.) - - l°

Parker  (B.) - - 40

Sternberg  (Count

ham) - - - 38 i/risteiier  (p  )  - - vj
Gibbons  (J.  S.) - 15

Payne-Gallwey (Sir
R.) - - -  14,  16

Adalbert)  -  -  8
Stevens  (R.  W.)  -  40

Gibson  (C.  H.)- - 17 Ladd  (G.  T.) - - 18
Gleig  (Rev.  G.  R.) - 10 Lang  (Andrew)  6,  14,  16,  21,

Pearse  (H.  H.  S.) - 6
Pearson  (C.  H.) - 10

Stevenson  (R.  L.)  25,28,33
Storr  (F.)  -  -  -  17

Gore-Booth  (Sir  H.  W.)  14 22,  23,  27,  32,  39
Graham  (A.) - - 5  .  Lapsley  (G.  T.) - 5
—  (P.  A.) - -  15,  16  '  Lascelles  (Hon.  G.) 13,  15

Peek  (Hedley)  - - 14
Pemberton (W. S.
Childe-) 9

Stuart-  Wortley  (A.  J.) 15
Stubbs  (J.  W.)  - - 8
—  (W.)- - - 8

(G.  F.) - - 20 Laurie  (S.  S.) - - 6
Granby  (Marquess  of) 15 Lawley  (Hon.  F.) - 14

Pembroke  (Earl  of)  - 14
Pennant  (C.  D.) - 15

Suffolk  &  Berkshire
(Earl  of) - - 14

Grant  (Sir  A.)  - - 17 Lawrence  (F.  W.) - 20
Graves  (R.  P.)  - - 9 Lear  (H.  L.  Sidney)- 36
Green  (T.  Hill) -  17,  18 Lecky  (W.  E.  H.) 6,  18,  23

Penrose  (H.  H.) - 33
Phillipps-Wolley  (C.)  12,  28
Pierce  (A.  H.)  - - 19

Sullivan  (Sir  E.)  -  14
Sully  (James)  -  -  19
Sutherland  (A.  and  G.)  8

Greene  (E.  B.)- - 5 Lees  (J.  A.) - - 12

Pitman  (C.  M.) - 14 (Alex.) - -  iq,  40

Greville  (C.  C.  F.) - 5 Leighton  (J.  A.) - 21
Grose  (T.  H.) - - 18 Leslie  (T.  E.  Cliffe)  - 20
Gross  (C.) - - 5 Lieven  (Princess) - 10

Pleydell-Bouverie(E.O.)i4
Pole  (W.)  - - - 17
Pollock  (W.  H.)  - 13,  40

(G.)  -  -  -  40
Suttner  (B.  von)  -  29
Swan  (M.)  -  -  29

Grove  (F.  C.) - - 13 Lillie  (A.)- - - 16

Poole(W.  H.  and  Mrs.) 36

Swinburne  (A.  J.)  -  19

(Lady) - - n Lindley(J.) - - 31
(Mrs.  Lilly) - 13 Locock  (C.  D.) - 16
Guiney  (L.  I.) - 9 Lodge  (H.  C.)  -
Gurdon  (Ladv  Camilla) 26 Loftie  (Rev.  W.  J.)  - 6
Gurnhill  (J.)  '  - - 18 Longman  (C.  J.) -12,16
Gwilt(J.)- - - 31 (F.  W.) - - 16
,  ir, H  \ . .  T>  TC

Poore  (G.  V.) - - 40
Pope  (W.  H.) - - 15
Powell  (E.) - - 7
Powys  (Mrs.  P.  L.)  - 10
Praeger  (S.  Rosamond) 33
Prevost  (C.) - - 13

Symes  (J.  E.)  -  -  20

Tait(J.)  7
Tallentyre  (S.  G.)  -  10
Tappan  (E.  M.)  -  33
Tavlor  (Col.  Meadows)  8
Te'bbutt  (C.  G.)  -  14

Haggard  (H.  Rider)
n,  26,  27,  38

(Mrs.  C.  J.) - 37
Lowell  (A.  L.)  - - 6

Pritchett  (R.  T.) - 14
Proctor  (R.  A.) -  17,  30

Terry  (C.  S.)  -  -  10
Thomas  (J.  W.)  -  19

Hake  (O.)  - - - 14

Raine  (Rev.  James)  - 6

Thomson  (H.  C.)  -

Halliwell-PhillippsQ.) 10
Hamilton  (Col.  H.  B.) 5
Hamlin  (A.  D.  F.) - 36

Lutoslawski  (W.) - 18
Lyall  (Edna) - -  27,  32
Lynch  (G.) - - 6

Ramal  (W.) - - 24
Randolph  (C.  F.) - 7
Rankin  (R.) - - 8,  25

ThornhilKW.  J.)  -  23
Thornton  (T.  H.)  -  10
Thuillier  (H.  F.)  -  4°

Harding  (S.  B.) - 5
Harmsworth  (A.  C.) 13,  14
Harte  (Bret) - - 27
Harting(J.E-)- - 15

(H.  F.  B.)- - 12
Lyttelton  (Hon.  R.  H.) 13
(Hon.  A.)  - - 14
Lytton  (Earl  of) - 24

Ransome  (Cyril) - 3,  8
Reid  (S.  J.) 9
Rhoades(J.) - - 23
Rice  (S.  P.) - - 12

Todd  (A.)  -
Tout  (T.  F.) - 7
Toynbee  (A.) - - 20
Trevelyan  (Sir  G.  O.)

Hartwig  (G.) - - 30

Rich  (A.)  - - - 23

6,  7,  8,  9,  10

Hassall(A.) - - 8

Macaulay  (Lord)  6,  7,  10,  24

Richardson  (C.) -  13,15

(G.  M.)  -  -  7.  8

Haweis  (H.  R.) - 9,  36
Head  (Mrs.) - - 37
Heath  (D.  D.)  - - 17
Heathcote  (J.  M.) - 14
(C.  G.) - - 14
(N.) - - n
Helmholtz  (Hermann
von) - - - 30
Henderson (Lieut-
Col.  G.  F.  R.)  - 9
Henry  (W.) - - 14

Macdonald  (Dr.  G.)  - 24
Macfarren(Sir  G.  A.) 37
Mackail  (J.  W.) - 10
Mackenzie  (C.  G.) - 16
Mackinnon  (J.) - 7
Macleod  (H.  D.) - 20
Macpherson  (Rev.H.A.)  15
Madden  (D.  H.) - 16
Magniisson  (E.) - 28
Maher  (Rev.  M.) - 19
Mallet  (B.)

Richmond  (Ennis) - 19
Rickaby  (Rev.  John) 19
(Rev.  Joseph) - 19
Ridley  (Lady  Alice)  - 28
Riley  (J.  W.) - - 24
Roberts  (E.  P.) - 33
Robertson  (W.  G.)  - 37
Roget  (Peter  M.) -  20,  31
Rolls  (Hon.  C.  S.) - 13
Romanes  (G.  J.)  10,19,21,24
(Mrs.  G.  J.) - 10

Trollope  (Anthony)-  29
Turner  (ri.  G.)  -  4°
Tyndall  (J.)  -  -  9,  12
Tyrrell  (R.  Y.)  -  -22,23

Unwin  (R.)  -  -  4°
Upton(F.K.and  Bertha)  33
Van  Dyke  (J.  C.)  -  37
Vanderpoel  (E.  N.)  -  37
'  Veritas  '  -  5
Virgil  -  -  -  23

Henty  (G.  A.)  - - 32
Herbert  (Col.  Kenney) 15

Malleson  (Col.  G.B.) 6
Marchment  (A.  W.) 27

Ronalds  (A.) - - 17
Roosevelt  (T.)  - - 6

Wagner  (R.)  25
Wakeman  (H.  O.)  -  8

Higgins  (Mrs.  N.) - 9

Marshman  (J.  C.) - 9

Ross  (Martin)  - - 28

Walford  (L.  B.)  -  29

Hill  (Mabel) - - 5
Hillier  (G.  Lacy) - 13

Maryon  (M.) - - 39
Mason  (A.  E.  W.) - 27

Rossetti  (Maria  Fran-

Wallas  (Graham) - is
—  (Mrs.  Graham)- 32

Hime  (H.  W.  L.) - 22

Maskelyne  (J.  N.) - 16

Rotheram  (M.  A.) - 36

Walpole  (Sir  Spencer)  8,  10

Hodgson  (Shadworth) 18
Hoenig(F.) - - 38
Hogan  (J.  F.) - - 9

Matthews  (B.) - 39
Maunder  (S.) - - 31
Max  Miiller  (F.)

Rowe  (R.  P.  P.) - 14

Russell  (Lady)- - 10

(Horace) - - 10
Walrond  (Col.  H.) - 12
Walsingham  (Lord)  - 14

Holmes  (R.  R.) - 10

10,  l8,  20,  21,  22,  27,  39

Saintsbury  (G.) - 15

Ward  (Mrs.  W.) - 29

Homer - - - 22

May  (Sir  T.  Erskine) 7

Salomons  (Sir  D.) - 13

Warwick  (Countess  of) 40

Hope  (Anthony) - 27
Horace - - - 22

McFerran  (J.) - - 14
Meade  (L.  T.)  - - 32

Sandars  (T.  C.) - 18
Sanders  (E.  K.) 9

Watson  (A.  E.  T.) - 14
(G.L.) - - 14

Houston  (D.  F.) - 5
Howard  (Lady  Mabel) 27
Howitt(W.) - - ii

Mecredy  (R.  J.) - 13
Melville  (G.J.Whyte) 27
Merivale  (Dean) - 7

Savage-Armstrong(G.F.)25
Scott  (F.  J.) - - 37
Scott-Montagu

Weathers  (J.) - - 40
Webb  (Mr.  and  Mrs.
Sidney) - - 20

Hudson  (W.  H.) - 30  '  Merriman  (H.  S.) - 27

(Hon.  J.) - - 13

—  (Judge  T.) - 4°

Huish  (M B.)  - - 37 Mill  (John  Stuart) -  18,  20 Seebohm  (F.) - - H,  10

(T.  E.) - - 19

Hullah(J.) - - 37 Millias  (J.  G.)  - -  16,  30 Selqus  (_F_._C.) - -12,17 Weber  (A.) - - 19

Hume  (David)  - - 18
(M.  A.  S.) - 3

Milner  (G.) - - 40 Senior  (W.) - -14,15 Weir  (Capt.  R.) - 14
Mitchell  (E.  B.) 13 Seth-Smith  (C.  E.)  - 14  •  Wellington  (Duchess  of)  37

Hunt  (Rev.  W.) - 6
Hunter  (Sir  W.) - 6

Monck  (W.  H.  S.) - 19
Montague  (F.  C.) - 7

beton-Karr
Sewell  (Elizabeth  M.) 28

i  Wemyss  (M.  C.  E.)- 33
Weyman  (Stanley) - 25

Hutchinson  (Horace  G.)

Moore  (T.) - - 31 Shadwell  (A.) - - 40

Whately(Archbishop)  17,19

13,  16,  27,  38 (Rev.  Edward)  - 17

Shakespeare - - 25

Whitelaw  (R.)  - - 25

Ingelow  (Jean) - 23
Ingram  (T.  D.) - 6

Morgan  (C.  Lloyd)  - 21
Morris  (Mowbray) - 13

Shand  (A I.) - - 15
Shaw  (W.  A.)  - - 8

WhittalKSirJ.  W.  )- 4°
Wilkins  (G.) - - 23

(W.) - - 22,  23,  24,

Shearman  (M.) -  12,  13

—  (W.  H.) - - 3

lames  (W.) -  18,  21

27,  28,  37,  40

Sheehan  (P.  A.) - 28  |  willard  (A.  R.) - 12

Jajneson  (Mrs.  Anna) 37
fefferies  (Richard) - 38
Jekyll  (Gertrude) - 38
Jerome  (Jerome  K.)- 27
Tohnson  (J.  &  J.  H.) 39

Mulhall  (M.  G.) - 20
Murray  (Hilda) - 33

Nansen  (F.) - - 12
Nash  (V.)  - - - 7

Sheppard  (E.)  - - 8 willich  (C.  M.) - 31
Sinclair  (A.) - - 14 witham  (T.  M.) - 14
Skrine  (F.  H.)  - 9 Wood  (Rev.  J.  G.) - 31
Smith  (C.  Fell) - 10 Wood-Martin  (W.  G.) 22
(R.  Bosworth)  - 8  ,  Wyatt  (A.  J.) - - 24

Tones  (H.  Bence) - 31
Joyce  (P.  W.) - 6,27,3?
Justinian  - - - if

Nesbit  (E.) - - 24
Nettleship  (R.  L.) - 17
Newman  (Cardinal)  - 28

(T.  C.) - - 3 Wylie  (J.  H.) - 8
Smith  (W.  P.  HaskeUI 12 Yeatg  (g Levett) - 29

Kant  (I  ) - - - *8

Nichols  (F.  M.) - 9

Sophocles - - 23 Yoxa11  (J'  H'>  ' ' 29
