A Treatise on the Blood, Inflammation, and Gun-shot Wounds
John Hunter (1794)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Hunter's posthumous masterpiece (1794): the physiology of blood and inflammation applied to surgery — the foundation of scientific surgery. First edition; bookseller's catalogue matter removed. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

A

TREATISE


on


THE  BLOOD,

INFLAMMATION,


AND


GUN-SHOT  WOUNDS,


BY  THE  LATE


JOHN  HUNTER.


to  whi^i^sVretixed,

A  SHORT  ACCOUNTtf$JiK£  AUTHOR'S  LIFE,

HOS^


BY  HIS  BROTHER-IN-LAW,

EVERARD  HOME.


LONDON:

Printed  by  John  Richardsonj

FOR  GEORGE  NICOL,  BOOKSELLER  TO  HIS  MAJESTY,  PALL-MALL,

I794"-


[Hi]


TO  THE  KING.

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  MAJESTY,

In  the  year  1761,  I  had  the  honour  of  being
appointed  by  your  Majesty  a  surgeon  on  the
staff  in  the  expedition  against  Bellisle.

In  the  year  1 790,  your  Majesty  honoured  mc
with  one  of  the  most  important  appointments  in
the  medical  department  of  the  army,  in  fulfilling
the  duties  of  which  every  exertion  shall  be  called
forth  to  render  me  deserving  of  the  trust  reposed
in  me,  and  not  unworthy  of  your  Majesty's  pa-
tronage. ^

The  first  of  these  appointments  gave  me  ex-
tensive opportunities  of  attending  to  gun-shot
wounds,  of  seeing  the  errors  and  defects  in  that
branch  of  military  surgery,  and  of  studying  to  re-


[iv]

move  them.  It  drew  my  attention  to  inflamma-
tion in  general,  and  enabled  me  to  make  obser-
vations which  have  formed  the  basis  of  the  prefent
Treatise.  That  office  which  I  now  hold  has  af-
forded me  the  means  of  extending  my  pursuits,
and  of  laying  this  work  before  the  public.

As  the  object  of  this  book  is  the  improvement  of
furgery  in  general,  and  particularly  of  that  branch
of  it  which  is  peculiarly  directed  to  the  service  of
the  army,  I  am  led  by  my  situation,  my  duty,
and  my  feelings,  to  address  it,  with  all  humility,
to  your  Majesty.

That  your  Majesty  may  long  live  to  enjoy  the
love  and  esteem  of  a  happy  people,  is  the  fervent
wish  of

YOUR  MAJESTY'S

MOST  FAITHFUL  SUBJECT,

AND  MOST  DUTIFUL  SERVANT,


Leicester  Square,  JOHN  HUNTER.

May  20, 1793.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR,  page  xiii

INTRODUCTION,  i

Sect.  I.  Of  diseased  actions,  as  being  incompatible  with  each
other,  3

II.  Of  parts  susceptible  of  particular  diseases,  5

III.  Of  sympathy,  6

IV.  Of  mortification,  8

PART  I.

Chap.  I.  General  principles  of  the  blood,  11

Sect.  I.  Of  the  mass  of  blood,as  composed  of  different  parts,  15

II.  Of  coagulation,  and  its  effects,  17

III.  Of  the  serum,  29

IV.  Of  the  red  globules,  40

V.  Of  the  quantity  of  blood,  and  course  of  its  circu-

lation, 69

VI.  Of  the  living  principle  of  the  blood,  76

VII.  Some unconnected experiments respecting the
blood,  94

Chap.  II.  Of  the  vascular  system,  101

Sect.  I.  General  observations  on  muscular  contraction  and

elasticity,  101

II.  General  observations on  the  elongation  of  relaxed

muscles,  106

III.  Of  the  structure  of  arteries,  113

I V .  Of  the  vasa  arteriarum,  131

V.  Of  the  heart,  133


vi  Table  of  contents.

Sect.  VI.  General  observations  on  blood-vessels, page  152

VII.  Valves  of  arteries,  1  en

VIII.  Of  the  division  or  branching  of  arteries,  163

IX.  Of  the  action  of  the  arteries,  and  the  velocity  of
the  blood's  motion,  17  r

X.  Of  veins,  180

PART  II.

Chap.  I.  Union  by  the  first  intention,  189

Sect.  I.  Of  injuries  in  which  there  is  no  external  commu-
nication, m2

II.  Of  injuries  where  the  wound  communicates  exter-

nally, 202

III.  Practical  observations  respecting  union  by  the  first
intention,  209

IV.  Of  scabbing,  214

V.  Accidents attended  with death  in a superficial

part,  219

Chap.  II.  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation,  221

Sect.  I.  Of  the  different  causes  which  increase  and  diminish

the  susceptibility  for  inflammation,  either  in  the

whole  body  or  in  parts,  226

II.  Effects  of  strength,  or  weakness  of  constitution,  and

of  parts,  while  under  inflammation,  230

III.  Of  parts  of  the  body  most  susceptible  of  the  three
different  inflammations  to  be  treated  of,  234

IV.  Of  the  two  parts  that  have  the  orders  of  inflamma-
tion respecting  priority  inverted,  240

V.  The  natural  cause  of  the adhesive inflammation

being  limited,  243

VI.  Of  inflammation — its  stages,  248

VII.  Of  the  different  degrees,  and  different  kinds  of  in-
mation,  255


\


Table  of  contents.  vii

Chap.  III.  The  adhesive  inflammation,  page  277

Sect.  I.  Action  of  the  vessels  in  inflammation,  278

II.  Of  thecolour,  swelling,  and  pain  of  inflamed  parts, 283

III.  The  heat  of  parts  in  inflammation,  290

IV.  Of  the  production  of  cold  in  inflammation, 300

V.  Of  the  time  the  adhesive  inflammation  commences

after  its  cause,  and  in  what  cases  and  parts  it  is
imperfect  in  its  consequences,  303

VI.  Of  the  uniting  medium  in  inflammation,  307

VII.  The  state  of  the  blood  and  of  the  pulse  in  inflam-
mation, 313

VIII.  The  effects  of  inflammation  on  the  constitution
according  to  the  structure  of  the  parts,  situation
of  similar  structures,  and  whether  vital  or  not
vital,  322

IX.  General  reflections  on  the  resolution  of  inflamma-
tion, 326

X.  Of  the methods of  resolution by  constitutional

means*  334

XI.  The  use  of  medicines  internally,  and  of  local  ap-
plications in  inflammation,  346

XII.  General  observations  on  repulsion,  sympathy,  de-
rivation, revulsion,  and  translation,  352

XIII.  Of  the  different  forms  in  which  medicines  are  ap-
plied, and  the  subsiding  of  inflammation,  361

XIV.  Of  the  use  of  the  adhesive  inflammation,  364
Chap.  IV.  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,  371

Sect.  I.  The  symptoms  of  the  suppurative  inflammation,  377

II.  Of  the  treatment  necessary  in  inflammation  when

suppuration  must  take  place,  380

III.  The  treatment  of  the  inflammation  when  suppu-
ration has  taken  place,  387

IV.  Collections  of  matter  without  inflammation, 390


viii  Table  of  contents.

Sect.  V.  Of  the  effects  such  formations  of  matter  have  on  the

constitution,  393

VI.  The  effects  of  the  suppurative  inflammation  on  the

constitution,  396

Chap.  V.  Of  pus,  415

Sect.  L  Of  the  general  opinion  of  the  formation  of  pus,  417

II.  Of  the  properties  of  pus,  428

III.  Of  the  use  of  pus,  436
Chap.  VI.  The  ulcerative  inflammation,  439

Sect.  I.  Of  the  remote  cause  of  the  absorption  of  the  animal
itself,  445

II.  Of  the  disposition  of  living  parts  to  absorb  and  to  be

absorbed,  446

III.  Of  interstitial  absorption,  45 1

IV.  Of  the  progressive  absorption,  45  3

V.  Of  absorption  attended  with  suppuration,  which  I

have  called  ulceration,  456

VI.  Of  the  relaxing  process,  460

VII.  Of  the  intention  of  absorption  of  the  body  in  dis-
ease, 464

VIII.  The  modes  of  promoting  absorption,  465

IX.  Illustrations  of  ulceration,  466
Chap.  VII.  Granulations, 473

Sect.  I.  Of  Granulations  independent  of  suppuration, 475

II.  The  nature  and  properties  of  granulations,  477

III.  Longevity  of  granulations,  481

IV.  Of  the  contraction  of  granulations,  483
Chap.  VIII.  Of  skinning,  487

Sect.  I.  The  nature  of  the  new  cutis,  490

II.  Of  the  new  cuticle,  492

III.  Of  the  rete  mucosum,  493
Chap.  IX.  Effects  of  inflammation,  and  its  consequences  on  the  con-
constitution, 495


x


Table  of  contents.

ix

Sect.  I.  Of  the  hectic,

II.  Treatment  of  the  hectic,

III.  Of  dissolution,

page  496

5°3
504

PART  III.

Chap.  I.  The  treatment  of  abscesses,  509

Sect.  I.  The  progress  of  abscesses  to  the  skin,  51 1

II.  Of  tha  time  when  abscesses  should  be  opened, 515

III.  Of  the  methods  of  opening  abscesses,  and  treating
them  afterwards,  519

PART  IV.

Chap.  I.  Of  gun-shot  wounds,  521

Sect.  I.  The  difference  between  gun-shot  wounds  and  com-
mon wounds,  52  a

II.  Of  the  different  effects  arising  from  the  difference  in

the  velocity  of  the  ball,  525

III.  Of  the  different  kinds  of  gun-shot  wounds, 528
Chap.  II.  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  529

Sect.  I.  Of  the  propriety  of  dilating  gun-shot  wounds, 532

II.  Of  the  strange  course  of  some  balls,  539

III.  Penetrating  wounds  of  the  abdomen,  542

IV.  Of  penetrating  wounds  in  the  chest,  551

V.  Of  concussions  and  fractures  of  the  scull,  557

VI.  Of  wounds  compounded  with  fractured  bones,  or
containing  extraneous  bodies,  557

VII.  Of  the  time  proper  for  removing  incurable  parts, 559

VIII.  Of  the  treatment  of  the  constitution,  563
Explanation  of  the  plates, 567


\


[xi]


ADVERTISEMENT.


As  a  considerable  part  of  the  present  work  was  printed
during  Mr.  Hunter's  life,  and  the  whole  of  the  manu-
script and  dedication  were  then  also  prepared  for  the
press,  the  work  may  be  said  to  be  laid  before  the  public
very  nearly  in  the  state  intended  by  the  author.

The  only  addition  the  executors  have  ventured  to
make,  is  an  account  of  Mr.  Hunter's  life  and  writings,
with  an  engraving  of  his  head,  which  is  prefixed  to  it.
They  were  induced  to  do  this  from  a  desire  to  gratify  the
wishes  of  the  public  and  preclude  more  imperfect  at-
tempts. Mr.  Home,  the  brother-in-law  of  Mr.  Hunter,
who  lived  with  him  many  years,  and  was  his  assistant  in
all  his  pursuits,  was  considered  as  the  most  proper  per-
son to  be  the  biographer  of  his  deceased  friend.


[  xiii  1


SHORT  ACCOUNT


OF  THE


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.


John  Hunter  was  the  son  of  John  and  Agnes  Hunter  of  Kilbride,
in  the  county  of  Lanerk  ;  he  was  the  youngeft:  of  ten  children,  and
was  born  on  the  fourteenth  of  July,  1728,  at  Long  Calderwood,  a
small  estate  belonging  to  the  family.  His  father  was  descended  from
Hunter  of  Hunterston,  an  old  family  in  Ayrshire,  and  his  mother
was  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Paul,  a  very  respectable- man,  and  treasurer
of  the  city  of  Glasgow.

He  had  four  brothers,  John,  Andrew,  James,  and  William  •  and
five  sisters,  Elizabeth,  Janet,  Agnes,  Dorothea,  and  Isabella  ;  of  these,
John,  Andrew,  Elizabeth,  Agnes,  and  Isabella  died,  while  children.
James  was  born  in  1715;  was  brought  up  to  the  law,  as  a  writer  to  the
signet  in  Edinburgh,  but  in  the  year  1742  went  to  London  on  a  visit
to  his  brother  William,  who  was  at  that  time  a  teacher  of  anatomy,
and  so  much  was  he  captivated  by  the  pursuits  in  which  he  found  his
brother  engaged,  that  he  purposed  to  follow  them  himself,  and  become
a  practitioner  in  physic.  His  health  however  was  so  much  impaired
by  his  application  to  anatomy,  that  he  was  obliged  to  return  to  Long


xiv  Life  of  the  author,

Calderwood,  where  he  died  of  a  spitting  of  blood,  in  the  twenty-eighth
year  of  his  age*.

Willia  n  was  born  on  the  twenty-third  of  May,  1718,  who  became
unrivalled  as  a  teacher  of  anatomy,  and  it  was  under  his  fostering  care
that  his  younger  brother  John  was  initiated  in  these  pursuits,  in  which
he  afterwards  became  so  distinguished.  His  history  is  already  in  the
hands  of  the  public  f.

Janet  married  Mr.  Buchanan  of  Glasgow,  and  died  in  1749.  Do-
rothea, who  is  still  alive,  married  the  Rev.  Doctor  James  Bail  lie,  pro-
fessor of  divinity  in  the  university  of  Glasgow,  by  whom  she  has  one
son,  Matthew,  doctor  of  physic,  successor  to  Dr.  Hunter,  as  a  teacher
of  anatomy  and  one  of  the  physicians  to  St.  George's  Hospital,  and
two  daughters,  Agnes  and  Joanna.

John  Hunter  was  about  ten  years  old  at  his  father's  death,  and  was
left  under  the  direction  of  his  mother,  who  was  particularly  indulgent
to  this  her  youngest  son.

He  was  sent  to  the  grammar-school,  but  not  having  a  turn  for
languages,  nor  being  sufficiently  under  controul,  he  neglected  his
studies,  and  spent  the  greatest  part  of  his  time  in  country  amusements.
About  this  time  Mr.  Buchanan,  who  had  lately  come  from  London  to
settle  at  Glasgow  as  a  cabinet-maker,  paid  his  addresses  to  Mr.  Hun-
ter's sister  Janet,  and  having  many  agreeable  qualities,  she  was  in-
duced to  marry  him,  although  contrary  to  the  advice  of  her  relations.
This  marriage  gave  the  family  great  concern  ;  for  the  qualities  which

*  Mr.  James  Hunter  was  a  young  man  of  an  uncommonly  pleasing  address,  and  of  very
quick  parts.  The  late  Dr.  Hunter  has  been  heard  to  remark,  that  if  he  had  lived  to  practice
physic  in  London,  nothing  could  have  prevented  him  from  rising  to  the  top  of  his  profession.
It  would  have  been  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  three  brothers  should  have  acquired  the
first  reputation  in  three  different  branches  of  the  same  profession.

*  Written  by  Dr.  S,  Foart.  Simmons,  and  published  in  1783.


Life  of  the  author.  xv

had  rendered  Mr.  Buchanan  agreeable,  led  him  into  dissipation,  and
made  him  neglect  his  business.  Mr.  John  Hunter,  who  was  now
seventeen,  went  to  Glasgow  upon  a  visit  to  his  sister,  for  whom  he  had
the  greatest  affection,  to  comfort  her  in  her  distress,  and  endeavour
to  assist  her  husband  in  extricating  himself  from  his  difficulties;  but
finding,  after  some  time,  all  his  efforts  ineffectual,  he  returned  to  Long
Calderwood.

Tired  of  living  idle  in  the  country  he  began  to  turn  his  mind  to  some
more  active  employment;  and  hearing  much  of  the  reputation  which
his  brother  William  had  acquired  as  a  teacher  of  anatomy,  he  wrote
to  request  that  he  would  allow  him  to  come  to  London  upon  a  visit,
making  at  the  same  time  an  offer  to  be  his  assistant  in  his  anatomical
researches  ;  or,  if  that  proposal  should  not  be  accepted,  expressing  a
wish  to  go  into  the  army.  In  answer  to  this  letter,  he  received  a
very  kind  invitation  from  his  brother,  and  immediately  set  off  for
London,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  a  friend  of  the  family  who
was  going  upon  business;  they  rode  up  together  on  horseback.

Mr.  Hunter  arrived  in  London  in  September,  1748,  about  a  fort-
night before  his  brother  began  his  course  of  lectures;  and  Dr. Hunter,
who  was  very  anxious  to  form  some  opinion  of  his  talents  for  ana-
tomy, gave  him  an  arm  to  dissect  for  the  muscles,  with  the  necessary
directions  how  it  was  to  be  done;  and  he  found  the  performance  such
as  greatly  exceeded  his  expectation.

His  first  essay  in  anatomy  having  thus  gained  him  some  credit,
Mr.  Hunter  was  now  employed  in  a  dissection  of  a  more  difficult
nature  ;  this  was  an  arm  in  which  all  the  arteries  were  injected,  and
these,  as  well  as  the  muscles  were  to  be  exposed  and  preserved ;  the
manner  in  which  this  was  performed,  gave  Dr.  Hunter  so  much  sa-
tisfaction, that  he  did  not  scruple  to  say,  that  his  brother  would  be-
come a  good  anatomist,  and  that  he  should  not  want  for  employment.


xvi  Life  of  the  author »

From  this  period  we  may  consider  Mr.  Hunter  as  having  seriously
encaged  in  anatomy  and  under  the  instructions  of  Dr.  Hunter  and
his  assistant  Mr.  Symonds,  he  had  every  opportunity  of  improvement,
as  all  the  dissections  at  this  time  carried  on  in  London  were  confined
to  that  school.

In  the  su  mmer  1749,  Mr.  Cheselden,  at  the  request  of  Dr.  Hunter,
permitted  him  to  attend  at  Chelsea  Hospital,  and  he  there  learnt  the
first  rudiments  of  surgery.

The  following  winter  he  was  so  far  advanced  in  the  knowledge  of
human  anatomy,  as  to  instruct  the  pupils  in  dissection,  to  whom  Dr.
Hunter  had  very  little  time  to  pay  attention.  This  office,  therefore,
fell  almost  entirely  upon  him,  and  was  his  constant  employment  du-
ring the  winter  season.

In  the  summer  months  of  1750,  Mr.  Hunter  attended  the  hospital
at  Chelsea  ;  in  1751,  he  became  a  pupil  at  St.  Bartholomew's,  and  in
the  winter  was  present  at  operations  occasionally,  whenever  any  thing
extraordinary  occurred.  The  following  summer  he  went  to  Scotland,
and  brought  up  his  sister  Dorothea,  and  in  1753  entered  as  a  gentle-
man commoner  at  St.  Mary  Hall,  Oxford.  In  1754,  he  became  a
surgeon's  pupil,  at  St.  George's  Hospital,  where  he  continued  during
the  summer  months,  and  in  1756,  was  appointed  house-surgeon.

In  the  winter,  1755,  Dr.  Hunter  admitted  him  to  a  partnership  in
his  lectures,  .and  a  certain  portion  of  the  course  was. allotted  to  him,
besides  which,  he  gave  lectures  when  the  doctor  was  called  away  to
attend  his  patients.

Making  anatomical  preparations  was  at  this  time  a  new  art,  and
very  little  known  ;  every  preparation,  therefore,  that  was  skilfully
made,  became  an  object  of  admiration ;  many  were  wanting  for  the
use  of  the  lectures,  and  the  doctor  having  himself  an  enthusiasm  for  the
♦irt,  left  no  means  untried  to  infuse  into  his  brother  a  love  for  his  fa-


Life  of  the  author.  xvii

vourite  pursuits.  How  well  he  succeeded,  the  collection  afterwards
made  by  Mr.  Hunter  will  sufficiently  evince.

Anatomy  seems  to  have  been  a  pursuit  for  which  Mr.  Hunter's  mind
was  peculiarly  fitted,  and  he  applied  to  it  with  an  ardor  and  per-
severance of  which  there  is  hardly  any  example.  His  labours  were  so
useful  to  his  brother's  collection,  and  so  gratifying  to  his  disposition,
that  although  in  many  other  respects  they  did  not  agree,  this  simple
tie  kept  them  together  for  many  years.

Mr.  Hunter  worked  for  ten  years  on  human  anatomy,  during  which
period  he  made  himself  master  of  what  was  already  known,  as  well
as  made  some  addition  to  that  knowledge*.  He  traced  the  rami-
fications of  the  olfactory  nerves  upon  the  membranes  of  the  nose,  and
discovered  the  course  of  some  of  the  branches  of  the  fifth  pair  of
nerves.  In  the  gravid  uterus,  he  traced  the  arteries  of  the  uterus  to
their  termination  in  the  placenta.  He  was  also  the  first  who  dis-
covered the  existence  of  the  lymphatic  vessels  in  birds.

Many  parts  of  the  human  body  being  so  complex,  that  their  struc-
ture could  not  be  understood,  nor  their  uses  ascertained,  Mr.  Hunter
was  led  to  examine  similar  parts  in  other  animals,  in  which  the  struc-
ture was  more  simple,  and  more  within  the  reach  of  investigation  ;
this  carried  him  into  a  wide  field,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  his  collec-
tion in  comparative  anatomy.

In  this  new  line  of  pursuit  this  active  inquirer  began  with  the  more
common  animals,  and  preserved  such  parts  as  appeared  by  their  ana-
logy, or  in  some  other  way,  to  elucidate  the  human  oeconomy.  It
was  not  his  intention  to  make  dissections  of  particular  animals,  but

*  An  account  of  his  injecting  the  testis,  his  description  of  the  descent  of  that  body,  with
observation  on  the  hernia  congenita,  and  his  experiments  in  proof  of  the  veins  not  being  ab-
sorbents, are  published  in  Dr.  Hunter's  Medical  Commentaries.

C


xviii  Life  of  the  author.

to  institute  an  inquiry  into  the  various  organizations  by  which  the
functions  of  life  are  performed,  that  he  might  thereby  acquire  some
knowledge  of  general  principles.  This,  I  believe,  had  never  been
before  attempted,  or  certainly  had  never  been  carried  far  into  ex-
ecution.

So  eagerly  did  Mr.  Hunter  attach  himself  to  comparative  anatomy,
that  he  sought  by  every  means  in  his  power  the  opportunities  of  pro-
secuting it  with  advantage.  He  applied  to  the  keeper  of  wild  beasts
in  the  Tower  for  the  bodies  of  those  which  died  there,  and  he  made
similar  applications  to  the  men  who  showed  wild  beasts.  He  pur-
chased all  rare  animals  which  came  in  his  way  ;  and  these,  with  such
others  as  were  presented  to  him  by  his  friends,  he  entrusted  to  the
showmen  to  keep  till  they  died,  the  better  to  encourage  them  to  assist
him  in  his  labours.

His  health  was  so  much  impaired  by  excessive  attention  to  his  pur-
suits, that  in  the  year  1760  he  was  advised  to  go  abroad,  having  com-
plaints in  his  breast,  which  threatened  to  be  consumptive.  In  October
of  that  year,  Mr.  Adair,  inspector-general  of  hospitals,  appointed  him
a  surgeon  on  the  staff;  and  in  the  following  spring  he  went  with  the
army  to  Bellisle,  leaving  Mr.  Hewson  to  assist  his  brother  during  his
absence.

Mr.  Hunter  served,  while  the  war  continued,  as  senior  surgeon  on
the  staff,  both  in  Bellisle  and  Portugal,  till  the  year  1763 ;  and  in  that
period  acquired  his  knowledge  of  gun-shot  wounds;  a  subject  which
makes  no  inconsiderable  part  of  the  present  work.

On  his  return  to  England  he  settled  in  London  ;  where  not  finding
the  emoluments  from  his  half-pay  and  private  practice  sufficient  to
support  him,  he  taught  practical  anatomy  and  operative  surgery  for
several  winters. He  returned  also  with  unabated  ardour  to  compa-


~_.


Life  of  the  author.  xix

rative  anatomy,  and  as  his  experiments  could  not  be  carried  on  in  a
large  town,  he  purchased,  for  that  purpose,  about  two  miles  from
London,  a  piece  of  ground  near  Brompton,  at  a  place  called  Earl's
Court,  on  which  he  built  a  house.

In  the  course  of  his  inquiries  this  excellent  anatomist  ascertained
the  changes  which  animal  and  vegetable  substances  undergo  in  the
stomach  when  acted  on  by  the  gastric  juice;  he  discovered,  by  means
of  feeding  young  animals  with  madder,  (which  tinges  growing  bones
red)  the  mode  in  which  a  bone  retains  its  shape  during  its  growth ;
and  explained  the  process  of  exfoliation  by  which  a  dead  piece  of
bone  is  separated  from  the  living.

His  fondness  for  animals  made  him  keep  several  of  different  kinds
in  his  house  which  by  attention  he  rendered  familiar  with  him,  and
amused  himself  by  observing  their  peculiar  habits,  and  instincts  ;  but
this  familiarity  was  attended  with  considerable  risk,  and  sometimes
led  him  into  situations  of  danger,  of  which  the  following  is  a  re-
markable instance.

Two  leopards,  which  were  kept  chained  in  an  out-house,  had  broken
from  their  confinement,  and  got  into  the  yard  among  some  dogs,"
which  they  immediately  attacked  ;  the  howling  this  produced,  alarmed
the  whole  neighbourhood  ;  Mr.  Hunter  ran  into  the  yard  to  see  what
was  the  matter,  and  found  one  of  them  getting  up  the  wall  to  make
his  escape,  the  other  surrounded  by  the  dogs ;  he  immediately  laid
hold  of  them  both,  and  carried  them  back  to  their  den  ;  but  as  soon
as  they  were  fecured,  and  he  had  time  to  reflect  upon  the  risk  of  his
own  situation,  he  was  so  much  agitated  that  he  was  in  danger  of
fainting.

On  the  fifth  of  February,  1767,  he  was  chosen  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal
Society. His  desire  for  improvement  in  thofe  branches  of  knowledge


xx  Life  of  the  author.

which  might  assist  in  his  researches  led  him  at  this  time  to  propofe  to
Dr.  George  Fordyce  and  Mr.  dimming  an  eminent  mechanic,  that
they  should  adjourn  from  the  meetings  of  the  Royal  Society,  to  some
coffee  -houfe,  and  discuss  such  subjects  as  were  connected  with  sci-
ence. This  plan  was  no  sooner  established,  than  they  found  their
numbers  increased  ;  they  were  joined  by  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  Dr.  So-
lander,  Dr.  Maskelyne,  Sir  George  Shuckburgh,  Sir  Harry  Engle-
field,  Sir  Charles  Blagden,  Dr.  Noothe,  Mr.  Ramsden,  Mr.  Watt  of
Birmingham,  and  many  others.  At  these  meetings  discoveries  and
improvements  in  different  branches  of  philofophy  were  the  objects
of  their  consideration  ;  and  the  works  of  the  members  were  read
over  and  criticised,  before  they  were  given  to  the  public.

It  was  in  this  year  that  by  an  exertion  in  dancing,  after  the  mus-
cles of  the  leg  were  fatigued,  he  broke  his  tendo  achillis.  This  acci-
dent, and  the  confinement  in  consequence  of  it,  led  him  to  pay  at-
tention to  the  subject  of  broken  tendons,  and  to  make  a  series  of
experiments  to  ascertain  the  mode  of  their  union.  He  did  not,  ac-
cording to  the  common  practice,  confine  himself  to  his  bed,  but  by
compressing  the  muscles,  and  raising  the  heel,  he  was  enabled,  with  the
knee  being  kept  straight,  to  walk  about  the  third  day  after  receiving
the  accident.  He  divided  the  tendo  achillis  of  several  dogs,  by  intro-
ducing a  couching  needle  through  the  skin  at  some  distance  from  it,
and  with  the  edge  cut  through  the  tendon  ;  in  this  way  the  orifice  in
the  skin  healed  up,  and  made  it  similar  to  a  broken  tendon.  The  dogs
were  killed  at  different  periods  to  show  the  progress  of  union,  which,
was  exactly  similar  to  that  of  a  fractured  bone  when  there  is  no
wound  in  the  skin.

In  the  year  1768,  Dr.  Hunter  having  completed  the  house  in  Wind-
mill-street, in  which  his  collection  is  at  present  deposited,  and  where"


Life  of  the  author.  xxi

he  afterwards  carried  on  his  anatomical  lectures,  he  gave  up  to  Mr.
Hunter  the  lease  of  his  house  in  Jermyn-street,  which  was  commodi-
ous and  well  situated  for  private  practice.  In  this  house  Mr.  Hunter
lived  ten  years  ;  the  same  year  too  he  became  a  member  of  the  corpo-
ration of  surgeons;  and  in  the  year  following,  through  his  brother's
interest,  he  was  elected  one  of  the  surgeons  of  St.  George's  Hospital.

As  he  was  always  engaged  in  the  improvement  of  his  profession,
young  gentlemen  who  came  to  London  to  finish  their  education  were
very  desirous  of  living  in  his  house,  and  several  gentlemen,  very  emi-
nent in  practice  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  received  part  of  their
education  as  his  house-pupils.  Dr.  Edward  Jenner  of  Berkley,  Mr.
William  Guy  of  Chichester,  and  Mr.  John  Kingston,  boarded  in  his
house  in  1770  and  1771,  and  lived  in  habits  of  intimacy  with  him  till
his  death.

In  May  1771,  his  Treatise  on  the  natural  History  of  the  Teeth  was
published ;  and  in  July  of  the  same  year  he  was  married  to  Miss  Home,
the  eldest  daughter  of  Mr.  Home,  surgeon  to  Burgoyne's  regiment  of
light  horse.  The  expence  of  his  pursuits  had  been  so  great,  that  it
was  not  till  several  years  after  his  first  engagement  with  this  lady,
that  his  affairs  could  be  sufficiently  arranged  to  admit  of  his  marrying.

In  June  1772,  his  son  John  was  born,  who  is  now  an  officer  in  the
army  *.  In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  I  came  to  him  as  an  ap-
prentice.

While  he  was  paying  his  addresses  to  my  sister  Mifs  Home,  I  was  a
boy  at  Westminster-school. During  the  holidays  I  came  home,  and  Mr.

*  He  had  another  son  who  died  an  infant,  and  two  daughters,  of  which  Mary  Anne
died  while  very  young ;  and  Agnes,  who  is  still  alive,  is  married  to  Capt.  James  Camp-
bell, eldest  son  of  Sir  James,  brother  of  the  late  Sir  Archibald  Campbell.


xxii  Life  of  the  author.

Hunter  who  was  frequently  there,  always  shewed  me  particular  kind-
ness ;  he  made  my  father  an  offer  to  bring  me  up  to  his  profession ;
a  proposal  which  I  readily  accepted.  I  was  struck  with  the  novelty,
and  extent  of  his  researches,  had  the  highest  respect  and  admiration
for  his  talents,  and  was  ambitious  to  tread  the  paths  of  science  under
so  able  a  master.  It  is  a  tribute  which  I  owe  to  his  memory  to  de-
clare, that  an  intimate  knowledge  of  him  for  one-and-twenty  years
has  increased  my  admiration  of  his  uncommon  exertions,  and  mv
respect  for  his  abilities.

After  finishing  my  education  at  Westminster-school  as  a  king's  scho-
lar, and  being  elected  off  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  I  found  that  no
advantages  which  could  have  been  derived  from  a  scholarship  in  the
University  would  compensate  for  the  time  I  must  have  given  up  in
keeping  my  terms,  to  the  disadvantage  of  my  chirurgical  education ;
I  therefore  thought  it  prudent  to  forego  my  claims  upon  the  Univer-
sity as  a  king's  scholar,  and  instead  of  going  down  to  Cambridge,
though  elected,  went  immediately  to  Mr.  Hunter.

At  this  time  his  private  practice  and  his  professional  character  were
advancing  very  fast,  and  his  family  had  begun  to  increase,  but  still  no
small  part  of  his  time  was  devoted  to  his  collection,  which,  as  it
daily  became  larger,  was  also  attended  with  greater  expence.  The
whole  suite  of  the  best  rooms  in  his  house  were  occupied  by  his  pre-
parations ;  and  he  dedicated  his  mornings,  from  sun-rise  to  eight
o'clock,  (the  hour  for  breakfast)  entirely  to  his  pursuits.  To  these
he  added  such  parts  of  the  day  as  were  not  engaged  in  attending  his
patients.

The  knowledge  he  derived  from  his  favourite  studies  he  constantly
applied  to  the  improvement  of  the  art  of  surgery,  and  omitted  no  op-


Lift  of  the  author.  xxiii

portunity  of  examining  morbid  bodies,  from  which  he  made  a  collec-
tion of  facts  which  are  invaluable,  as  they  tend  to  explain  the  real
causes  of  symptoms,  which,  during  life  could  not  be  exactly  ascertained,
the  judgment  of  the  practitioner  being  too  frequently  misled  by  the-
oretical opinions,  and  delusive  sensations  of  the  patients.

In  the  practice  of  surgery,  where  cases  occurred  in  which  the  opera-
tions proved  inadequate  to  their  intention,  he  always  investigated  with
uncommon  attention  the  causes  of  that  want  of  success,  and  in  this
way  detected  many  fallacies,  as  well  as  made  some  important  discove-
ries in  the  healing  art.

He  detected  the  cause  of  failure,  common  to  all  the  operations  in
use  for  the  radical  cure  of  the  hydrocele,  and  was  enabled  to  propose
a  mode  of  operating,  in  which  that  event  can  with  certainty  be  avoided.
He  ascertained,  by  experiments  and  observations,  that  exposure  to  at-
mospherical air  simply,  can  neither  produce  nor  increase  inflamma-
tion. He  discovered  in  the  blood  so  many  phenomena  connected
with  life,  and  not  to  be  referred  to  any  other  cause,  that  he  considered
it  as  alive  in  its  fluid  state.  This  opinion  seems  to  be  advanced  in
the  Old  Testament*,  and,  what  is  very  extraordinary,  in  the  Alcorant

*  "  Ye  shall  eat  the  blood  of  no  manner  of  flesh,  for  the  life  of  all  flesh  is  the  blood
*'  thereof."  Leviticus,  chap.  xvii.  verse  14.

t  Alcoran,  chap,  xxiii.  intitled,  "  The  true  Believer's  revealed  at  Mecca."

"  We  formerly  created  man  of  a  finer  sort  of  clay ;  afterwards  we  placed  him  in  the
"  form  of  seed  in  a  fure  resceptacle  :  afterwards  we  made  the  seed  coagulated  blood;
*'  and  we  formed  the  coagulated  blood  into  a  piece  of  flesh  ;  then  we  formed  the  piece
"  of  flesh  into  bones, -and  we  cloathed  those  bones  with  flesh;  then  we  produced  the
"  same  by  another  creation,  wherefore,  blessed  be  God,  the  most  excellent  Creator."

Chap.  xcvi.  intitled  "  Conjealed  Blood  revealed  at  Mecca."
"  Read  in  the  name  of  thy  Lord,  who  hath  created  all  things,  who  hath  created  man
"  of  congealed  blood."


xxiv  Life  of  the  author,

of  Mohammed,  it  also  appears  to  have  been  entertained  by  the  ce-
lebrated Harvey*;  but  the  mode  in  which  this  subject  is  considered
in  the  following  work  will  sufficiently  shew  that  in  Mr.  Hunter's
mind  this  was  not  an  opinion  adopted,  but  one  which  arose  from  his
own  investigation  of  the  properties  of  the  blood.

He  improved  the  operation  for  the  fistula  lacrymalis,  by  removing  a
circular  portion  of  the  os  unguis  instead  of  breaking  it  down  with  the
point  of  a  trochar.  He  also  discovered  that  the  gastric  juice  had  a
power  when  the  stomach  was  dead  of  dissolving  it,  and  gave  to  the
Royal  Society  a  paper  on  this  subject,  which  is  published  in  the  Phi-
losophical Transactions +.

In  the  winter  1773,  he  formed  a  plan  of  giving  a  course  of  lectures
on  the  theory  and  principles  of  surgery,  with  a  view  of  laying  before
the  public  his  own  opinions  upon  that  subject.  For  two  winters  he
read  his  lectures  gratis  to  the  pupils  of  St.  George's  Hospital,  and  in
1775,  gave  a  course  for  money  upon  the  same  terms  as  the  other
teachers  in  the  different  branches  of  medicine  and  surgery.

Giving  lectures  was  always  particularly  unpleasant  to  him ;  so  that
the  desire  of  submitting  his  opinions  to  the  world,  and  learning  their
general  estimation,  were  scarcely  sufficient  to  overcome  his  natural
dislike  to  speaking  in  public.  He  never  gave  the  first  lecture  of  his
course  without  taking  thirty  drops  of  laudanum  to  take  off  the
effects  of  his  uneasiness. He  was  so diffident  of  himself  that  he

*  Quinimo  ex  vario  ipsius  motu,  in  celeritate  aut  tarditate  vehementia  aut  debilitate
et  caetera,  eumet  irritantis  injuriam  et  foventis  commodum  persentiscere  manifestum  est.
Ideoque  concludimus  sanguinem  per  se  vivere  et  nutriri ;

GUELIELMI  HARVEII,

Operum,  torn.  ii.  Exercitatio  52.

t  There  are  several  preparations  both  in  Dr.  Hunter's  and  Mr.  Hunter's  collection
illustrating  this  fact.


Life  of  the  author*  xxv

trusted  nothing  to  memory,  and  made  me  draw  up  a  short  abstract  of
each  lecture,  which  he  read  on  the  following  evening  as  a  recapitu-
lation, to  connect  the  subject  in  the  minds  of  the  students.

It  is  curious  that  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  these  lectures,  which
constitute  the  principal  part  of  the  present  work,  should  be  the  last
of  his  publications;  and  that  his  anxiety  to  render  them  complete,
should  make  him  patiently  revise  and  correct  them  for  twenty  years
before  he  gave  them  to  the  press.  We  learn  from  these  circum-
stances both  his  diffidence  respecting  himself,  and  the  value  which  he
placed  upon  his  future  reputation.

Comparative  anatomy  may  be  considered  as  the  pursuit  in  which
Mr.  Hunter  was  constantly  employed.  No  opportunity  escaped  him.
In  the  year  1773,  at  tne  request  of  his  friend  Mr.  Walsh,  he  dissected
the  torpedo,  and  laid  before  the  Royal  Society  an  account  of  it's
electrical  organs.

A  young  elephant  which  had  been  presented  to  the  Queen  by  Sir
Robert  Barker  died,  and  the  body  was  given  to  Dr.  Hunter,  which
afforded  Mr.  Hunter  an  opportunity  of  examining  the  structure  of
that  animal  by  assisting  his  brother  in  the  dissection  ;  since  that  time
two  other  elephants  died  in  the  Queen's  menagerie,  both  of  which  came
under  Mr.  Hunter's  examination.

In  1774,  he  published  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  an  Ac-
count of  certain  Receptacles  of  Air  in  Birds,  which  communicate  with
the  Lungs,  and  are  lodged  both  among  the  fleshy  Parts  and  hollow
Bones  of  these  Animals ;  and  a  paper  on  the  Gillaroo-trout,  com-
monly called  in  Ireland,  the  Gizzard-trout.

In  1775,  several  animals  of  that  species,  called  the  gymnotus  electri-
cus  of  Surinam  was  brought  alive  to  this  country,  and  by  their  elec-
trical properties  excited  very  much  the  public  attention. Mr.  Walsh,

d


xxvi  Life  of  the  author*

desirous  of  pursuing  his  investigation  of  animal  electricity,  made  a
number  of  experiments  on  the  living  animals  ;  and,  to  give  his  friend
Mr.  Hunter  an  opportunity  of  examining  them,  purchased  those  that
died.  An  anatomical  account  of  their  electrical  organs  was  drawn
up  by  Mr.  Hunter,  and  published  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions.
In  the  same  volume  there  is  a  paper  of  his  containing,  Experiments  on
Animals  and  Vegetables  respecting  their  Power  of  producing  Heat.

In  the  course  of  his  pursuits,  Mr.  Hunter  met  wilh  many  parts  of  ani-
mals where  natural  appearances  could  not  be  preserved,  and  others,  in
which  the  minuter  vessels  could  not  be  diftinctly  seen  when  kept  in
spirits;  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  have  them  drawn,  either  at  the  mo-
ment, or  before  they  were  put  into  bottles.  The  expence  of  employing
professed  draftsmen,  the  difficulty  of  procuring  them,  and  the  disad-
vantage which  they  laboured  under  in  being  ignorant  of  the  subject
they  were  to  represent,  made  him  desirous  of  having  an  able  person
in  his  house  entirely  for  that  purpose.

With  this  view  he  engaged  an  ingenious  young  artist  to  live  with
him  for  ten  years  ;  his  time  to  be  wholly  employed  as  a  draftsman,  and
in  making  anatomical  preparations.  This  gentleman,  whofe  name  was
Bell,  foon  became  a  very  good  practical  anatomist,  and  from  that
knowledge  was  enabled  to  give  a  spirited  and  accurate  resemblance
of  the  subjects  he  drew;  such  as  is  rarely  to  be  met  with  in  represen-
tations of  anatomical  subjects.  By  his  labours  Mr.  Hunter's  collec-
tion is  enriched  with  a  considerable  number  of  very  valuable  draw-
ings, and  a  great  variety  of  curious  and  delicate  anatomical  prepa-
rations*.

*  The  engravings  inserted  in  Mr.  Hunter's  Treatise  on  the  Venereal  Disease,  in  his
book  upon  the  Animal  CEconomy,  and  most  of  these  contained  in  the  present  work,  are
taken  from  Mr.  Bell's  drawings,  and  will  remain  as  proofs  of  his  abilities  in  that  par-
ticular line  of  drawing.


Life  of  the  author*  xxvii

In  January  1776,  Mr.  Hunter  was  appointed  surgeon-extraordinary
to  his  Majesty,  and  in  the  spring  he  gave  to  the  Royal  Society  a
paper  on  the  best  Mode  of  recovering  drowned  Persons.

In  the  autumn  he  was  taken  extremely  ill,  and  the  nature  of  his
complaints  made  his  friends,  as  well  as  himself,  consider  his  life  to  be
in  danger.  When  he  reflected  upon  his  own  situation,  that  all  his
fortune  had  been  expended  in  his  pursuits,  and  that  his  family  had  no
provision  but  what  should  arise  from  the  sale  of  his  collection,  he  be-
came very  solicitous  to  give  it  its  full  value,  by  leaving  it  in  a  state
of  arrangement.

As  soon  as  he  was  able  to  leave  his  room,  his  firft  object  was  to
make  a  catalogue  of  his  collection  ;  but  his  health  requiring  him  to
go  to  Bath,  I  was  employed,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Bell,  during
his  absence,  in  making  descriptions  of  the  preparations,  leaving  blanks
for  such  as  I  was  not  acquainted  with.  His  complaints  were  a  good
deal  relieved,  but  his  impatience  to  return  to  town,  made  him  come
back  before  he  was  well ;  he  continued,  however,  to  amend,  and  very
soon  recovered.

In  1778,  he  published  the  second  part  of  his  Treatise  on  the  Teeth,
in  which  their  diseases,  and  the  mode  of  treatment  are  considered.
This  rendered  his  work  upon  that  subject  complete.  He  published
also  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  a  paper  on  the  Heat  of  Animals
Vegetables.

I  had  now  lived  six  years  with  Mr.  Hunter,  and  had  completed  my
education  ;  his  expences  had  always  exceeded  his  income,  I  had  there-
fore no  emolument  to  expect  from  remaining  in  his  house,  which,
made  it  necessary  for  me  to  take  up  some  line  for  my  own  support,
and  Admiral  Keppel's  action  with  the  French  flee,t  was  the  means  of
procuring  me  a  very  eligible  situation.


xxviii  Life  of  the  author.

The  newly  finished  naval  hospital  at  Plymouth  received  the  whole
of  the  wounded  men  from  Admiral  Keppel's  fleet,  and  Dr.  Farquarson,
the  first  commissioner  of  sick  and  hurt,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Adair,  the
present  surgeon-general  to  the  garrison  of  Gibraltar,  gave  me  the  ap-
pointment of  assistant-surgeon,  with  apartments  to  reside  at  the  hos-
pital. From  the  circumstance  of  my  being  the  only  surgeon  on  that
establishment,  who  was  a  member  of  the  corporation,  I  was  authorized
by  the  sick  and  hurt  board  to  perform  operations,  and  assist  the  sur-
geon in  the  more  important  parts  of  his  duty.

In  this  situation  many  opportunities  occurred  to  me  of  adding  to
Mr.  Hunter's  collection;  the  sea  furnishing  curious  fish  and  other  ma-
rine productions,  and  the  hospital  practice  preparations  of  morbid
parts.

Mr.  Hunter  was  now  wholly  assisted  by  Mr.  Bell.  In  1779,  ^e
published  his  Account  of  the  Free  Martin  in  the  Philosophical  Trans-
actions.

In  1780,  he  laid  before  the  Royal  Society  an  Account  of  a  Woman
who  had  the  Small-pox  during  Pregnancy,  where  the  disease  seemed
have  been  communicated  to  the  fcetus.

In  1781,  he  was  elected  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Sciences
and  Belles  Lettres,  at  Gottenburg.

In  1782,  he  gave  the  Royal  Society  a  paper  on  the  Organ  of  Hearing
in  Fish.  Besides  the  papers  which  he  presented  to  that  learned  body,
he  read  six  Croonion  lectures  upon  the  subject  of  Muscular  Action,  for
the  years  1776,  1778,  1779,  1780,  1781,  and  1782.  In  these  lectures
he  collected  all  his  observations  upon  muscles,  respecting  their  powers
and  effects,  and  the  stimuli  by  which  they  are  affected;  and  to  these
he  added  Comparative  Observations  upon  the  moving  Powers  of
Plants.


■  - .-^


Life  of  the  author.  xxix

These  lectures  were  not  published  in  the  Philosophical  Trans-
actions, for  they  were  withdrawn  as  soon  as  read,  not  being  con-
sidered by  the  author  as  complete  dissertations,  but  rather  as  mate-
rials for  some  future  publication.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  Mr.  Hunter  was  so  tardy  in  giving
his  observations  to  the  public;  but  such  was  his  turn  for  investiga-
tion, and  so  extensive  the  scale  upon  which  he  instituted  his  inquiries,
that  he  always  found  something  more  to  be  accomplished,  and  was
unwilling  to  publish  any  thing  which  appeared  to  himself  unfinished.
His  observations  on  the  Muscular  Action  of  the  Blood-vessels  were
laid  before  the  Royal  Society  in  1780,  and  yet  he  delayed  publishing
them  till  his  Observations  on  the  Blood  and  Inflammation  were  ar-
ranged, and  they  will  be  found  to  make  a  part  of  the  present  work.

In  1783,  he  was  chosen  into  the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine,  and
Royal  Academy  of  Surgery  in  Paris.

In  this  year  the  lease  of  his  house  in  Jermyn-ftreet  having  expired,
and  his  collection  being  now  too  large  to  be  contained  in  his  dwelling-
house,  he  purchased  the  lease  of  a  large  house  on  the  east  side  of
Leicester-square,  and  the  whole  lot  of  ground  extending  to  Castle-
street,  on  which  there  was  another  house.  In  the  middle  space  be-
tween the  two  houses  he  erected  a  building  for  his  collection.

Upon  this  building  he  expended  above  three  thousand  pounds,  and
unfortunately  for  his  family,  the  lease  did  not  extend  beyond  twenty-
four  years.

In  excuse  for  so  inconsiderate  a  transaction,  it  can  only  be  said,  that
the  difficulties  he  had  met  with  in  finding  ground  in  an  eligible  situ-
ation, had  harrassed  his  mind,  already  too  much  occupied,  to  such  a
degree,  that  he  was  glad  to  be  relieved  from  that  embarrassment,  and


xxx  Life  of  the  author.

made  the  interest  of  his  family  give  way  to  his  present  accommo-
dation.

In  the  building  formed  for  the  collection  there  was  a  room  fifty-
two  feet  long,  by  twenty-eight  feet  wide,  lighted  from  the  top,  and
having  a  gallery  all  round,  for  containing  his  preparations.  Under
this  were  two  apartments ;  one  for  his  lectures,  and  the  other,  with
no  particular  destination  at  first,  but  afterwards  made  use  of  for
weekly  meetings  of  medical  friends  during  the  winter.  To  this  build-
ing the  house  in  Castle-street  was  entirely  subservient ;  and  the  rooms
in  it  were  used  for  the  different  branches  of  human  and  comparative
anatomy.

During  the  execution  of  this  extensive  plan  I  returned  to  England
from  Jamaica,  where  at  the  close  of  the  war  I  had  been  appointed
staff  surgeon.  Sir  Archibald  Campbell,  the  governor,  coming  home,
gave  me  leave  of  abfence  on  account  of  my  health,  and  allowed  me
to  attend  him.  We  arrived  in  August  1784,  and  I  was  permitted  to
exchange  upon  half  pay.

I  found  Mr.  Hunter  now  advanced  to  a  very  considerable  share
of  private  practice,  and  a  still  greater  share  of  the  public  confidence.
His  collection  had  increased  with  his  income.  In  this  he  was  ma-
terially assisted  by  the  friendship  of  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  who  not  only
allowed  him  to  take  any  of  his  own  specimens,  but  procured  him
every  curious  animal  production  in  his  power,  and  afterwards  di-
vided between  him  and  the  British  Museum  all  the  specimens  of  ani-
mals he  had  collected  in  his  voyage  round  the  world.  To  his  friends
the  honourable  Mr.  Charles  Greyille  and  Mr.  Walsh>  he  was  also  under
particular  obligations.

Drawing  materials  from  such  ample  sources,  standing  alone  in  this


Life  of  the  author.  xxxi

branch  of  science,  and  high  in  the  public  estimation,  he  had  so  much
attention  paid  to  him,  xhat  no  new  animal  was  brought  to  this  country
which  was  not  shewn  to  him  ;  many  were  given  to  him  ;  and  of  those
that  were  for  sale  he  commonly  had  the  refusal :  under  these  circum-
stances, his  collection  made  a  progress,  which  would  otherwise  have
been  impossible.

In  April  1785,  the  new  room  was  completed,  and  I  devoted  the
whole  of  the  summer  to  the  object  of  assisting  him  in  moving  his
preparations,  and  arranging  them  in  their  proper  order.  Mr.  Bell  and
Mr.  Andre,  a  gentleman  who  had  been  the  greater  part  of  his  life
engaged  in  anatomical  pursuits,  were  constantly  employed  in  this  bu-
siness.

At  this  period  Mr.  Hunter  may  be  considered  as  at  the  height  of  his
chirurgical  career;  his  mind  and  body  were  both  in  their  full  vigor.
His  hands  were  capable  of  performing  whatever  was  suggested  by
his  mind  ;  and  his  judgment  was  matured  by  former  experience.
Some  instances  of  his  extraordinary  skill  may  very  properly  be  men-
tioned.

He  removed  a  tumor  from  the  side  of  the  head  and  neck  of  a  pa-
tient at  St.  George's  Hospital,  as  large  as  the  head  to  which  it  was
attached  ;  and  by  bringing  the  cut  edges  of  the  skin  together,  the
whole  was  nearly  healed  by  the  first  intention.

He  dissected  out  a  tumor  on  the  neck,  which  one  of  the  best  ope-
rating surgeons  in  this  country  had  declared,  rather  too  ftrongly,  that
no  one  but  a  fool  or  a  madman  would  attempt ;  and  the  patient  got
perfectly  well.

He  discovered  a  new  mode  of  performing  the  operation  for  the  pop-
liteal aneurism,  by  taking  up  the  femoral  artery  on  the  anterior  part


xxxii  Life  of  the  author..

of  the  thigh,  without  doing  any  thing  to  the  tumor  in  the  ham.  The
safety  and  efficacy  of  this  mode  have  been  confirmed  by  many  sub-
sequent trials ;  and  it  must  be  allowed  to  stand  very  high  among  the
modern  improvements  in  surgery  *.

I  believe  Mr.  Hunter  was  one  of  the  first  who  taught,  that  cutting
out  the  part  was  the  only  mode  of  preventing  the  hydrophobia  ;  and  he
extended  the  time  in  which  that  might  be  done  with  every  probability
of  success,  beyond  the  period  generally  believed.  This  doctrine,  in
favour  of  cutting  out  the  part,  met  with  the  strongest  confirmation
by  two  melancholy  cases,  in  which,  from  the  nature  of  the  parts,  and
numberless  scratches  on  the  skin,  it  was  impossible  to  remove  them.
Though  caustic  was  applied  to  every  part  that  had  a  visible  mark,
and  every  other  precaution  that  could  be  thought  of  was  used,  the
wounds  in  both  instances  proved  fatal.

If  we  consider  Mr.  Hunter  at  this  period  of  his  life,  it  will  afford
us  a  strong  picture  of  the  turn  of  his  mind,  of  his  desire  to  acquire
knowledge,  and  his  unremitting  assiduity  inprosecuting  whatever  was
the  object  of  his  attention.

He  was  engaged  in  a  very  extensive  private  practice  ;  he  was  sur-
geon to  St.  George's  Hospital  •  he  was  giving  a  very  long  course  of
lectures  in  the  winter ;  he  was  carrying  on  his  inquiries  in  compa-
rative anatomy;  had  a  school  of  practical  human  anatomy  in.  his
house;  and  was  always  employed  in  some  experiments  respecting  the
animal  ceconomy.

He  was  always  solicitous  for  some  improvement  in  medical  educa-
tion ;  and,  with  the  assistance  of  Dr.  Fordyce,  instituted  a  medical

*  An  account  of  this  operation  is  published  in  the  Transactions  of  a  Society  for  im-
proving Medical  and  Chirurgical  Knowledge.


Life  of  the  author.  xxxiii

society,  which  he  allowed  to  meet  in  his  lecture-rooms,  and  of  which  he
was  chosen  one  of  the  patrons.  This  society,  called  the  Lyceum  Me-
dicum  Londinense,  under  his  auspices  and  those  of  Dr.  Fordyce,  has
acquired  considerable  reputation,  both  from  the  numbers  and  merits
of  its  members.

In  the  year  1786,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Middleton,
Mr.  Hunter  was  appointed  deputy  surgeon-general  to  the  army.  He
now  published  his  work  upon  the  Venereal  Disease,  which  had  been
long  expected  by  the  public  ;  and,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  rapid  sale
of  the  first  edition,  these  expectations  have  not  been  disappointed.  He
alfo  published  a  work  entitled,  Observations  on  certain  Parts  of  the
Animal  (Economy.  In  this  work  he  has  collected  several  of  his  papers
inserted  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  which  related  to  that  sub-
ject, having  permission  from  the  president  and  council  of  the  Royal
Society  to  reprint  them  ;  there  are  also  Observations  upon  some  other
Parts  of  the  Animal  GEconomy,  which  had  not  before  been  published.
This  work  met  with  a  very  ready  sale.  It  is  to  be  considered  among
the  peculiarities  of  his  character,  that  he  chose  to  have  his  works  printed
and  published  in  his  own  house,  where  they  were  also  sold  ;  but  find-
ing this  measure  to  bear  hard  upon  the  booksellers,  in  a  way  which
had  not  been  explained,  and  which  was  not  intended,  the  second  edi-
tions were  sold  by  Mr.  Johnson  in  St.  Paul's  Church -yard,  and  Mr.
Nicol  in  Pall-mall.

In  the  spring  of  this  year  he  had  a  very  severe  illness,  which  con-
fined him  to  his  bed,  and  rendered  him  incapable  of  attending  to  any
kind  of  business.  In  this  state  I  was  obliged  to  take  upon  myself  the
charge  of  his  patients,  as  well  as  of  his  other  affairs,  and  these  were  so
extensive  that  my  residence  in  his  house  became  absolutely  necessary.


xxxiv  Life  of  the  Author,

His  recovery  was  very  slow;  and  his  health  received  sp  severe  a  shock
that  he  was  never  afterwards  entirely  free  from  complaint,  or  capable
of  his  usual  bodily  exertions.

After  his  recovery  from  this  illness,  he  was  subject  to  affections  of
his  heart,  upon  every  occasion  which  agitated  his  mind,  or  required
any  sudden  exertion  of  the  body.  In  this  infirm  state  he  was  un-
able to  attend  his  patients  upon  sudden  calls  in  the  night,  or  to  pen-
form  operations  without  assistance;  and  for  these  reasons  I  continued
to  live  with  him  till  within  a  year  of  his  death,  and  then  took  a  house
within  a  few  doors,  which  in  no  respect  detached  me  from  his  pur-
suits, or  prevented  me  taking  a  part  in  his  private  practice.

In  the  year  1787,  he  gave  a  paper  to  the  Royal  Society,  containing
an  Experiment  to  determine  the  Effect  of  extirpating  one  Ovarium  on
the  Number  of  Young ;  a  paper  in  which  the  Wolfe,  Jackall,  and
Dog,  are  proved  to  be  of  the  same  Species;  and  a  third  upon  the  Ana-
tomy of  the  Whale  Tribe.  These  papers  procured  him  the  honour  of
receiving  Sir  John  Copley's  annual  gold  medal,  given  as  a  mark  of
distinguished  abilities.

These  labors  shew  that  the  decline  of  his  health,  although  it  di-
minished his  exertions,  by  no  means  abated  his  ardour  for  the  in-
quiries in  which  he  was  always  engaged.

In  July,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  American  Philosophical
Society.  He  now  applied  to  the  governors  of  St.  George's  Hospital,
to  be  allowed,  on  account  of  his  healthy  an  assistant-surgeon,  which
they  very  readily  granted,  and  I  was  appointed  to  that  office.

His  collection,  which  had  been  the  great  object  of  his  life,  both  as  a
pursuit  and  an  amusement,  was  now  brought  into  a  state  of  arrange-
ment; and  gave  him  at  length  the  satisfaction  of  shewing  to  the  public


Life  of  the  author.  xxxv

a  series  of  anatomical  facts  formed  into  a  system,  by  which  the  oeco-
homy  of  animal  life  was  illustrated.  He  shewed  it  to  his  friends  and
acquaintances  twice  a  year,  in  October  to  medical  gentlemen,  and  in
May  to  noblemen  and  gentlemen,  who  were  only  in  town  during  the
spring. This  custom  he  continued  to  his  death.

Several  of  his  friends  had  long  been  desirous  of  having  an  engrav-
ing of  him,  and  requested  him  to  sit  for  a  picture  to  some  painter  of
eminence  whom  they  would  employ.  This  he  always  declined,  not
choosing  that  it  should  be  done  at  the  expence  of  others ;  and  thinking
the  price  too  high  for  himself  to  pay.  His  scruples  were,  however,
at  length  surmounted,  by  a  desire  to  oblige  Mr.  Sharp,  the  engraver,
of  whose  works  he  was  an  admirer.  This  artist  made  a  request  that
he  would  sit  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  who  had  promised  to  take  un-
usual pains  with  the  picture  ;  as  the  engraving  was  proposed  more  as
a  test  of  the  artist's  abilities  upon  which  he  might  establish  a  character,
than  as  a  print  for  sale.

This  picture,  which  is  one  of  the  very  last  works  of  that  eminent
painter,  and  one  of  his  best,  remains  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Hunter's
son  ;  and  the  print  which  Mr.  Sharp  engraved  from  it,  is  considered  as
one  of  the  most  spirited  heads,  and  finest  engravings,  which  have  been
produced  in  this  country.

In  the  year  1789,  Mr.  Bell,  who  was  become  a  very  skilful  anatomist,
and  good  practical  surgeon,  received  an  appointment  as  assistant-sur-
geon to  the  Island  of  Sumatra,  in  the  service  of  the  Honourable  East
India  Company.  This  appointment,  procured  by  the  friendship  of  Sir
Joseph  Banks,  he  accepted  with  a  double  view,  the  one  to  improve  his
fortune,  the  other  to  collect  specimens  in  natural  history.  In  both  of
these  pursuits  he  was  successful  beyond  his  most  sanguine  expecta-


xxxvi  Life  of  the  author*

tions  ;  he  sent  home  some  very  rare  specimens  of  animals  and  corals,
and  two  papers,  since  printed  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  one
on  the  Double  horned  Rhinoceros,  the  other  giving  a  Description  of
an  uncommonly  formed  Fish  ;  but,  unfortunately  for  science,  he  died
Of  a  fever,  very  much  regretted  by  his  friends,  in  the  year  1792.

In  the  year  1792,  Mr.  Hunter  found  that  his  course  of  lectures  took
up  so  much  of  his  time,  that  he  was  unable  to  correct  his  other  papers.
He  therefore  gave  it  up  to  me.  As  a  previous  step  to  this  arrange-
ment I  had  given  it  for  the  two  preceding  summers.  Mr.  Hunter  now
began  to  prepare  the  present  work  for  the  press,  and  intended  as  soon
as  it  was  in  the  hands  of  the  public,  to  give  a  course  of  practical  lectures
in  surgery,  for  which  he  had  many  years  been  collecting  materials  ;
these  were  so  far  advanced,  that  another  winter,  had  he  lived,  would
have  finished  them.  The  materials  of  these  lectures  having  come  into
my  hands;  that  they  may  not  be  entirely  lost  to  the  public,  I  mean  to
avail  myself  of  them,  and  am  preparing  my  arrangements  for  that
purpose.

Upon  the  death  of  Mr.  Adair,  which  happened  in  this  year,  Mr.
Hunter  was  appointed  inspector-general  of  hospitals,  and  surgeon-
general  of  the  army.  He  was  also  elected  a  member  of  the  Royal
College  of  Surgeons  in  Ireland.

In  the  year  1791,  he  was  so  much  engaged  in  the  duties  of  his
ofiice,  as  surgeon-general  to  the  army,  and  his  private  practice,  that
he  had  little  time  to  bestow  upon  his  scientifical  objects ;  but  his  lei-
sure time,  small  as  it  was,  he  wholly  devoted  to  them.

In  1792,  he  was  elected  an  honorary  member  of  the  Chirurgo  Physi-
cal Society  of  Edinburgh,  and  was  chosen  one  of  the  vice-presidents  of
the  Veterinary  College,  then  first  established  in London. He  pub-


mm


Life  of  the  author.  xxxvii

lished  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  for  the  Improvement  of  medi-
cal and  chirurgical  Knowledge,  of  which  society  he  was  one  of  the  ori-
ginal members  and  a  zealous  promoter,  three  papers,  on  the  following
subjects:  Upon  the  Treatment  of  inflamed  Veins,  on  Introsusception,
and  on  a  Mode  of  conveying  Food  into  the  Stomach,  in  Cases  of  Pa-
ralysis of  the  CEsophagus.

He  finished  his  Observations  on  the  CEconomy  of  Bees,  and  pre-
sented them  to  the  Royal  Society.  These  observations  were  made  at
Earl's  Court,  and  had  engaged  his  attention  for  many  years;  every
inquiry  into  the  ceconomy  of  these  insects  had  been  attended  by
almost  unsurmountable  difficulties  ;  but  these  proved  to  him  only  an
incitement,  and  the  contrivances  he  made  use  of  to  bring  the  different
operations  of  these  indefatigable  animals  to  view  were  almost  without
end.

Earl's  Court  to  Mr.  Hunter  was  a  retirement  from  the  fatigues  of  his
profession  ;  but  in  no  respect  a  retreat  from  his  labours;  there, on  the
contrary,  they  were  carried  on  with  less  interruption,  and  with  an  un-
wearied perseverance.  From  the  year  1772  till  his  death,  he  made  it  his
custom  to  sleep  there  during  the  autumn  months,  coming  to  town  only
during  the  hours  of  business  in  the  forenoon,  and  returning  to  dinner.

It  was  there  he  carried  on  his  expei  lments  on  digestion,  on  exfoliation,
on  the  transplanting  of  teeth  into  the  combs  of  cocks,  and  all  his  other
investigations  on  the  animal  oeconomy,  as  well  in  health  as  in  disease.
The  common  bee  was  not  alone  the  subject  of  his  observation,  but  the
wasp,  hornet,  and  the  less  known  kinds  of  bees  were  also  objects  of  his
attention.  It  was  there  he  made  the  series  of  preparations  of  the  exter.
nal  and  internal  changes  of  the  silk-worm;  also  a  series  of  the  incubation
of  the  egg,  with  a  very  valuable  set  of  drawings  of  the  Whole  series.


xxxviii  Life  of  the  author.

The  growth  of  vegetables  was  also  a  favorite  subject  of"  inquiry,  and
one  on  which  he  was  always  engaged  in  making  experiments.

In  this  retreat  he  had  collected  many  kmds  of  animals  and  birds,
and  it  was  to  him  a  favorite  amusement  in  his  walks  to  attend  to  their
actions  and  their  habits,  and  to  make  them  familiar  with  him.  The
fiercer  animals  were  those  to  which  he  was  most  partial,  and  he  had
several  of  the  bul1  kind  from  different  parts  of  the  world.  Among
these  was  a  beautiful  small  bull  he  had  received  from  the  Oueen,
with  which  he  used  to  wrestle  in  play,  and  entertain  himself  with  its
exertions  in  its  own  defence.  In  one  of  these  contests  the  bull  over-
powered him,  and  got  him  down,  and  had  not  one  of  the  servants  ac-
cidentally come  by  and  frightened  the  animal  away,  this  frolic  would
probably  have  cost  him.  his  life.

The  collection  of  comparative  anatomy  which  Mr.  Hunter  has  left,
and  which  may  be  considered  as  the  great  object  of  his  life,  must  be
allowed  to  be  a  proof  of  talents,  assiduity,  and  labour,  which  cannot
be  contemplated  without  surprise  and  admiration.

It  remains  an  unequivocal  test  of  his  perseverance  and  abilities,  and
an  honor  to  the  country  in  whose  schools  he  was  educated,  and  by  the
patronage  of  which  he  was  enabled  on  so  extensive  a  scale  to  carry  on
his  pursuits.

In  this  collection  we  find  an  attempt  to  expose  to  view  the  grada-
tions of  nature,  from  the  most  simple  state  in  which  life  is  found  to
exist,  up  to  the  most  perfect  and  most  complex  of  the  animal  creation
—man  himself.

By  the  powers  of  his  art,  this  collector  has  been  enabled  so  to
expose,  and  preserve  in  spirits  or  in  a  dried  state,  the  different  parts  of


/


Life  of  the  author,  xxxix

animal  bodies  intended  for  similar  uses,  that  the  various  links  of  the
chain  of  perfection  are  readily  followed  and  may  be  clearly  under-
stood.

This  collection  of  anatomical  facts  is  arranged  according  to  the  sub-
jects they  are  intended  to  illustrate,  which  are  placed  in  the  following
order:  First,  parts  constructed  for  motion.  Secondly,  parts  essential.
to  animals  respecting  their  own  internal  ceconomy.  Thirdly,  parts
superadded  for  purposes  connected  with  external  objects.  Fourthly,
parts  for  the  propagation  of  the  species  and  maintenance  or  support  of
the  young.

The  first  class  exhibits  the  sap  of  vegetables  and  blood  of  animals,
from  which  fluids  all  the  different  parts  of  the  vegetable  and  animal
creation  are  formed,  supported,  and  increased.

These  fluids  being  more  and  more  compounded,  as  the  vegetables
and  animals  become  more  perfect,  are  coagulated  and  form  a  regular
series.  The  sap  of  many  plants  does  not  coagulate  spontaneously,  but
is  made  to  undergo  this  change  by  adding  the  extract  of  Gowlard,  in
this  respect  differing  from  water:  the  sap  of  such  plants  is  consider-
ed as  the  most  simple :  in  the  onion  there  is  a  spontaneous  coagu-
lation :  in  insects  the  blood  coagulates,  but  is  without  colour :  in  the
amphibia,  colour  is  superadded.  The  moving  powers  of  animals  from
the  simple  straight  muscle,  to  the  most  complicated  structure  of  that
organ,  with  the  different  applications  of  elastic  ligaments,  form  a  se*
cond  series.  The  growth  of  bone,  horn,  and  shell,  come  next  in  or-
der ;  and  the  joints  which  admit  of  their  moving  readily  on  one  ano-
ther, finish  this  subject.

The  second  class  begins  with  those  animals  of  the  hydatid  kind,
which  receive  nourishment,  like  vegetables,  from  their  external  surface,


xl  Life  of  the  author.

having  no  mouth.  Then  follow  those  which  are  simply  a  bag  or
stomach,  with  one  opening,  as  the  polypus,  having  no  organs  of
generation,  as  every  part  of  the  bag  is  endowed  with  that  power  ;
but  in  the  leech  the  structure  becomes  more  complex,  for  although
the  animal  is  composed  of  a  bag  with  only  one  opening,  the  organs
of  generation,  brain,  and  nerves,  are  superadded,  and  thence  a  gra-
dual series  is  continued  to  those  animals  in  which  the  stomach  forms
only  a  distinct  part  of  the  animal,  for  the  purpose  of  digestion.  The
stomachs  themselves  are  also  arranged  in  the  order  of  their  simpli-
city. First,  the  true  membranous  digesting  stomach,  then  those  with
the  addition  of  crops,  and  other  bags,  to  prepare  the  food  for  digestion,
as  in  the  ruminating  tribe,  and,  lastly,  those  with  gizzards.  Annexed
to  the  stomachs,  is  a  very  complete  and  extensive  series  of  teeth,  which
are  varied  according  to  the  kind  of  food  and  stomach.

After  the  stomachs,  are  the  different  appearances  of  the  intestinal
canal,  which  exhibit  almost  an  infinite  variety  in  the  structure  of
their  internal  surface  from  which  the  aliment  is  absorbed.  The
quantity  of  surface  is  increased  in  some  by  transverse  folds,  in  some
by  spiral  or  longitudinal  ones,  and  in  others  puts  on  a  loculated
appearance,  as  in  the  whale.

To  these  are  added  the  glands,  connected  with  the  intestines,  as  the
liver,  pancreas,  and  spleen,  which  may  properly  be  considered  as  ap-
'pendages.

After  digestion,  follows  the  system  of  absorbing  vessels,  the  sim-
plest being  the  roots  of  plants,  after  which  are  the  lymphatic  and
lacteal  vessels  of  different  animals.  These  in  the  human  subject  and
the  elephant  are  small,  and  in  the  turtle  large  and  more  numerous;
but  in  the  spermaceti  whale,  where  they  are  employed  for  conveying


Life  of  the  author.  xli

the  spermaceti,  of  a  size  infinitely  beyond  what  is  met  with  in  any
other  animal.  To  these  are  annexed  the  thoracic  ducts  in  different
animals.

The  natural  order,  in  following'  the  course  of  the  aliment  from  the  sto-
mach as  a  guide,  leads  from  the  absorbents  to  the  heart,  which  in  the
catarpillar  is  a  simple  canal  or  artery  running  along  the  middle  of  the
back  of  the  animal,  admitting  of  undulation  of  the  blood;  from  this
simple  structure  it  becomes,  in  different  animals,  by  fmall  additions,
more  and  more  complex,  till  it  arrives  at  the  degree  of  perfection  which
is  displayed  in  the  organization  of  the  human  heart.  These  are  fol-
lowed by  the  different  structures  of  valves  in  the  arteries  and  veins,  and
the  coats  of  these  vessels.  Then  the  lungs  are  mown  in  all  their  grada-
tions from  the  simple  vascular  lining  of  the  eggshell,  which  serves  as
rungs  for  the  chicken,  to  those  of  the  more  perfect  animals.  In  one  in-
stance, viz.  that  of  the  syren,  both  gills  and  lungs  are  seen  in  the  same
animal.  The  windpipe  and  larynx  are  then  shown,  under  all  their
different  forms.  The  kidnies,  which  separate  the  superfluous  fluids
from  the  circulation,  make  the  last  part  of  this  subject.

The  third  class  takes  up  the  most  simple  state  of  the  brain,  which
is  in  the  leech  a  single  nerve  with  ramifications.  In  the  snail,  the
brain  forms  a  circular  nerve,  through  the  middle  of  which  passes
the  cesophagus,  from  which  circle  there  are  branches  going  to  every
part  of  the  skin  of  the  animal.  In  the  insect,  the  brain  has  a  more
compact  form,  is  larger  in  fish,  but  still  more  so  in  birds,  gradually
increasing  in  size  as  the  animal  is  endowed  with  a  greater  degree
of  sagacity,  till  at  last  it  becomes  the  large  complex  organ  found
in  the  elephant  and  in  the  human  subject.  The  coverings  of  the
brain,  and  the  ganglions  and  peculiarities  of  the  nerves  are  annexed.

f


xlii  Life  of  the  author.

The  organs  of  sense  are  arranged  in  the  order  of  their  simplicity,
beginning  with  that  of  touch,  which  is  only  a  villous  vascular  sur-
face, the  villi  very  short  where  the  impression  is  to  be  made  through
a  thin  cuticle,  as  in  the  human  finger ;  very  long  where  the  covering
is  thick,  as  the  hoof  of  the  horse.  The  organ  of  taste  is  only  a  mo-
dification of  touch,  and  therefore  nothing  in  the  organization  is  dif-
ferent, but  the  varieties  in  structure  adapting  the  tongue  for  different
purposes  are  numerous;  in  many  animals  it  answers  the  purpose
of  a  hand,  to  bring  the  food  to  the  mouth,  as  in  many  shell- fish,  the
ant-bear,  woodpecker,  and  camelion.  Connected  with  the  tongue
are  the  fauces,  which  in  many  animals  have  peculiarities ;  in  the  elec-
tric eel,  they  have  a  very  curious  carrunculated  irregular  appearance;
but  they  are  yet  more  extraordinary  in  the  camel,  which  has  an  ap-
paratus to  moisten  the  parts,  so  as  to  prevent  the  painful  sensation  of
thirst,  thus  adapting  the  animal  to  the  sandy  desarts  which  it  is  de-
stined to  inhabit;  this  apparatus  consists  of  a  large  bag  hanging
down  several  inches  in  the  fauces,  and  attached  to  the  palate,  which
the  animals  can  at  pleasure  move  up  and  down,  and  lubricate  the
fauces.  The  organ  of  smell  is  variously  constructed,  and  is  more
complicated  in  many  animals  than  in  man,  as  in  the  lion,  and  sea-cow.
The  organ  of  hearing  in  fish  consists  of  three  semicircular  canals ;  but
is  much  more  complex  in  land  animals.  The  organ  of  seeing  is  dif-
ferent in  those  animals  which  are  formed  to  see  in  water,  and  in  those
which  see  in  air;  it  differs  again  in  those  which  are  to  see  with  little  or
with  much  light ;  all  those  peculiarities  are  illustrated  by  preparati-
ons. The  pigmentum  of  the  eye  in  some  fish  resembles  polished  silver ;
in  ruminating  animals  ai  the  bottom  of  the  eye  it  has  a  greenish  hue,
in  the  lion  and  cat  kind,  a  portion  of  the  bottom  is  white ;  but,  as  a


Life  of  the  author.  xliii

general  principle,  the  colour  of  the  pigmentum  is  the  same  as  the  rete
mucosum  of  the  skin  of  the  animal,  being  white  in  white  animals  and
black  in  very  dark  ones.

After  the  brain  and  senses  are  arranged  the  cellular  membrane  and
enimal  oils,  which  are  followed  by  the  external  coverings.  These  are
divided  into  the  different  kinds,  as  hair,  feathers,  scales,  etc.  with  the
rete  mucosum,  or  that  membrane  which  is  interposed  between  the  true
skin  and  the  scarf-skin,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  the  peculiar  colour.
Added  to  these  are  the  parts  peculiar  to  different  animals,  for  offence
and  defence,  as  spurs,  hoofs,  horns,  stings,  and  also  electric  organs.
There  follow  next  such  peculiar  structures  as  occur  in  certain  tribes  of
animals,  as  the  air-bladders  in  fish,  etc.

The  fourth  class  begins  with  those  animals  which  have  no  distinct
parts  allotted  for  generation,  that  power  being  diffused  over  the  whole
animal.  In  these  the  young  grow  out  of  the  old,  as  in  the  coral  and
polypi ;  and  next  in  order  come  the  hermaphrodite  organs  both  of
plants,  and  of  animals.  The  male  organs  are  then  taken  up  as  a
distinct  subject,  first  in  plants  and  then  in  animals,  both  at  the  times
in  which  they  do  not  breed,  and  in  the  breeding  season,  to  show  their
different  states ;  to  these  are  added  a  number  of  parts  which  answer
secondary  purposes  in  generation,  and  may  be  considered  as  appen-
dages.

The  female  organs  are  first  exhibited  in  the  maiden  state,  in  every
class  of  animals,  demonstrating  the  shape  and  length  of  the  oviducts,
the  form  of  the  uterus,  the  length  of  its  horns,  with  the  varieties  in  their
structure,  and  the  instances  in  which  these  horns  are  entirely  wanting,
as  in  some  monkeys;  to  which  are  added,  the  peculiarities  respecting
the  hymen. They  are  then  exemplified  in  the  impregnated  state,  be-


xliv  Life  of  the  author.

ginning  with  the  seeds  of  vegetables  and  those  which  have  both  seeds
and  young  shoots,  as  the  onion.  The  eggs  of  insects  follow  next,  with
their  changes,  particularly  of  the  silkworm.  The  fpawn  of  fish,  are
next  shown,  first  in  those  which  have  eggs,  and  then  in  those  which
have  their  eggs  hatched  in  the  oviducts,  as  the  dog-fish.

The  arrangement  then  proceeds  to  the  formation  and  incubation  of
the  egg  in  the  fowl,  and  the  process  of  fcetation  in  the  quadruped,
with  their  peculiarities  and  the  different  structures  and  appearances
of  the  afterbirth.  Added  to  these  are  the  peculiarities  of  the  fcetus,
and  the  different  modes  by  which  the  mother  gives  nourishment  to
her  young.

In  this  collection,  besides  the  preparations  of  the  parts  themselves  in
spirits,  in  a  dried  state  or  corroded,  so  as  to  give  the  most  accurate
ideas  of  their  structure,  there  is  a  considerable  number  of  very  valua-
ble drawings  to  show  the  progress  of  different  processes  in  the  animal
ceconomy,  together  with  such  appearances  as  were  not  capable  of  Jaeing
preserved.

This  sketch  will  give  an  idea,  but  a  very  inadequate  one,  of  the
system  which  is  comprehended  in  Mr.  Hunter's  collection.  It  also
includes  a  very  large  series  of  whole  animals  in  spirits,  arranged  ac-
cording to  their  internal  structure,  and  many  of  the  most  rare  speci-
mens of  preserved  animals  in  this  country,  as  the  camelopardos,  gua-
nica,  hippopotamus,  tapir,  argus-pheasant,  etc.

There  is  also  a  series  of  sculls  of  different  animals,  to  show  their
peculiarities,  and  skeletons  of  almost  every  known  genus  of  animals.
There  is  a  large  collection  of  shells  and  insects;  a  prodigious  number
of  calculi  of  different  sorts  from  the  urinary  and  gall-bladders,  the
stomach,  and  intestinal  canal ;  there  are  likewise  the  most  uncommon


Life  of  the  autlw  r.  x  1  v

deviations  from  the  natural  structure,  both  in  man  and  in  other  ani-
mals, preserved  in  spirits  or  in  a  dried  state ;  the  most  extraordinary
specimens  of  this  kind  are  a  double  human  uterus,  one  of  the  parts
pregnant,  and  a  double  human  scull  perfectly  formed,  the  one  upon
the  top  of  the  other.  To  make  this  collection  more  complete  in
every  subject  connected  with  comparative  anatomy,  is  added  one  of
the  largest  and  mod  select  collections  of  extraneous  fossils  that  can  be
seen  in  this  country.

The  symptoms  of  Mr.  Hunter's  complaint,  for  the  last  twenty  years
of  his  life,  may  be  considered  as  those  of  the  angina  pectoris  ;  and  form
one  of  the  most  -complete  histories  of  that  disease  upon  record.  I  have
chosen  to  give  this  account  a  place  by  itself  flistinet  from  the  general
history  of  his  life,  of  which  it  forms  an  important  part,  more  especi-
ally when  prefixed  to  a  medical  work.

Each  symptom  was  described  at  the  lime  it  occurred,  and  either
notea  by  himself,  or  dictated  to  me,  when  Mr.  Hunter  was  too  ill  to
write  ;  they  will  therefore  be  found  more  accurately  detailed  than  in
ordinary  cases  *.

Mr.  Hunter  was  a  very  healthy  man  for  the  first  forty  years  of  his
life;  and,  if  we  except  an  inflammation  of  his  lungs  in  the  y.ear  1759,
occasioned  most  probably  by  his  attention  to  anatomical  pursuits,  he
had  no  complaint  of  any  consequence  during  that  period. In  the

*  As  the  statement  ef  the  following  case  is  made  up  from  detached  notes  which  were
not  written  with  a  view  to  publication,  it  will  appear  in  point  of  language  extremely  de-
ficient-, it  was,  fiowever,  thought  better  to  leave  it  in  its  present  form,  lest,  by  altering
the  language,  the  effect  of  some  of  the  expressions  might  he  diminished.,  or  misunder-
stood ;  it  was  also  believed,  that  an  account,  however  crude,  coming  directly  from  the
author,  would  be  more  acceptable  to  the  public,  than  one  a  little  more  finished  from  any
other  hand.


xlvi  Life  of  the  author,

tyring  of  1769,  in  his  forty-first  year,  he  had  a  regular  fit  of  the  gout,
Wliich  returned  the  three  following  springs,  but  not  the  fourth;  and  in
the  spring  of  1773,  having  met  with  something  which  very  forcibly
affected  his  mind,  he  was  attacked  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  with
a  pain  in  the  stomach,  about  the  pylorus;  it  was  the  sensation  peculiar
to  those  parts,  and  became  so  violent  that  he  tried  change  of  position
to  procure  ease,  he  sat  down,  then  walked,  laid  himself  down  on  the
carpet,  then  upon  chairs,  but  could  find  no  relief;  he  took  a  spoonful
of  tincture  of  rhubarb,  with  thirty  drops  of  laudanum,  without  the
smallest  benefit. While  he  was  walking  about  the  room  he  cast  his
eyes  on  the  looking-glass,  and  observed  his  countenance  to  be  pale,
his  lips  white,  giving  the  appearance  of  a  dead  man;  this  alarmed
him,  and  led  him  to  feel  for  his  pulse,  but  he  found  none  in  either  arm ;
he  now  thought  his  complaint  serious  ;  several  physicians  of  his  ac-
quaintance were  then  sent  for,  Dr.  William  Hunter,  Sir  George  Baker,
Dr.  Huck  Saunders,  and  Sir  William  Fordyce,  all  came,  but  could
find  no  pulse  ;  the  pain  still  continued,  and  he  found  himself  at  times
not  breathing. Being  afraid  of  death  soon  taking  place  if  he  did  not
breathe,  he  produced  the  voluntary  act  of  breathing,  by  working  his
lungs  by  the  power  of  the  will;  the  sensitive  principle,  with  all  its
effects  on  the  machine  not  being  in  the  least  affected  by  the  complaint.
In  this  state  he  continued  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  in  which  time
frequent  attempts  were  made  to  feel  the  pulse,  but  in  vain ;  however,
at  last,  the  pain  lessened,  and  the  pulse  returned,  although  at  first  but
faintly,  and  the  involuntary  breathing  began  to  take  place;  while  in
this  state,  he  took  Madeira,  brandy,  ginger,  etc.  but  did  not  believe
them  of  any  service,  as  the  return  of  health  was  very  gradual ;  in  two
hours  he  was  perfectly  recovered.

In  this  attack  there  was  a  suspension  of  the  most  material  involuiv-


Life  of  the  author,  xlvii

tary  actions,  even  involuntary  breathing  was  stopped,  while  sensation
with  its  consequences,  as  thinking  and  acting  with  the  will,  weie  per-
fect, and  all  the  voluntary  actions  were  as  strong  as  before.

Quere.  What  would  have  been  the  consequence  of  his  not  having
breathed  by  means  of  the  voluntary  muscles?  It  struck  him  at  the
time  that  he  would  have  died ;  but  we  cannot  suppose  that  would
have  been  the  consequence,  as  breathing  most  probably  is  only
necessary  for  the  blood  while  circulating,  and  as  the  circulation  was
stopped,  no  good  could  have  arisen  from  breathing.

From  this  case  it  appears  that,  the  involuntary  actions  of  the  body
are  not  a  regular  series  of  actions  depending  absolutely  on  one  ano-
ther, but  each  part  can  and  often  does  act  independently,  or  leaves  off
acting  while  other  actions  are  going  on;  but  although  there  is  not  an
absolute  dependance,  there  is  a  necessary  connexion  among  them,
without  which  their  actions  cannot  long  continue.  The  stomach  was
probably  the  seat,  or  origin  of  this  cessation  of  action  ;  as  we  know
that  affections  of  the  stomach  have  the  greatest  influence  on  every
part  of  the  body,  and  that  affections  of  every  part,  have  the  power
of  influencing  the  stomach.

Mr.  Hunter  never  had  any  return  of  these  affections  of  the  stomach,
though  frequently  troubled  with  slight  complaints  both  in  the  sto-
mach and  bowels,  which  were  readily  removed  by  small  doses  of
rhubarb.  In  other  respects  he  enjoyed  his  health  till  the  year  1776.
Towards  the  end  of  the  spring  he  was  seized  with  a  very  severe  and
dangerous  illness,  in  consequence  of  anxiety  of  mind  from  being
obliged  to  pay  a  large  sum  of  money  for  a  friend,  for  whom  he  had
been  security,  and  which  his  circumstances  made  extremely  incon*
venient.

At  two  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  he  eat  some  cold  chicken  and  ham.


xlviii  Life  of  the  author,  •

and  drank  a  little  weak  punch  ;  immediately  after. tliis  he  went  eight
miles  in  a  post-chaise.  While  he  was  on  the  journey  he  had  thie  fcel
of  having  drank  too  much,  but  passed  the  remainder  of  the  day
toh  cably  well ;  at  twelve  o'clock  at  night  his  stomach  -was  a  little
disordered,  for  which  he  took  some  caraways,  and  went  to  bed;  he
had  no  sooner  lain  down  than  he  felt  as  if  suspended  in  the  air,  and
soon  after  the  room  appeared  to  go  round  ;  the  quickness  of  this
motion  seemed  to  increase,  and  at  last  was  very  rapid ;  it  continued
for  some  time,  then  became  slowrer  and  slower  till  the  whole  wTas  at
rest;  this  was  succeeded  by  vomiting,  which  was  encouraged,  and
gave  him  a  good  night's  rest ;  next  day  he  was  tolerably  well,  but
fatigued  ;  the  morning  after,  thinking  himself  quite  recovered,  he
went  out  before  breakfast,  drank  some  tea  and  eat  some  bread  and-
butter,  which  he  was  not  accustomed  to  do.  At  eleven  o'clock,  he
felt  his  stomach  much  in  the  same  state  as  before ;  in  about  half  an
hour,  the  sensation  of  the  room  appearing  to  turn,  recommenced,  and
continued  for  some  time,  but  not  with  such  violence  as  in  the  lasfe
attack;  he  became  sick  and, vomited;  the  sensation  of  himself  and
every  thing  else  going  round,  wTent  off,  but  that  of  being  suspended-
in  the  air  continued,  with  a  giddiness;  he  now  could  hardly  move  his
head  from  an  horizontal  position,  and  about  two  o'clock  was  brought
home  in  his  carriage,  the  motion  of  which  was  very  disagreeable,
giving  the  sensation  of  going  down,  or  sinking*.

After  he  went  to  bed,  the  giddiness  and  the  idea  of  being  suspended


*  It  is  very  curious  that,  the  sensation  of  sinking  is  very  uneasy,  to  most  animals.
When  a  person  is  tossed  in  a  blanket,  the  uncomfortable  part  is  falling  down  ;  take  any
animal  in  the  hand  and  raise  it  up,  it  is  very  quiet,  but  bring  it  down,  and  it  will  exert
all  its  powers  of  resistance,  evefy  muscle  in  the  body  is  in  action  ;  this  is  the  ease  evea
with  a  child  as  early  as  its  birth.


::


Life  of  the  author,  xlix

in  the  air  increased,  and  the  least  motion  of  the  head  upon  the  pil-
low appeared  to  be  so  great  that  he  hardly  durst  attempt  it;  if  he  but
moved  his  head  half  round,  it  appeared  to  be  moving  to  some  dis-
tance with  great  velocity  ;  the  idea  he  had  of  his  own  size  was  that  of
being  only  two  feet  long,  and  when  he  drew  up  his  foot,  or  pushed  it
down,  it  appeared  to  him  to  be  moving  a  vast  way.  His  sensations  be-
came extremely  acute  or  heightened;  he  could  not  bear  the  least  light,
so  that  although  the  window-blinds  were  shut,  a  curtain  and  blanket
were  obliged  to  be  hung  up  against  it,  the  fire  to  have  a  skreen  before
it,  and  the  bed-curtains  to  be  drawn ;  he  kept  his  eyelids  closed,  yet
if  a  lighted  candle  came  across  the  room,  he  could  not  bear  it ;  his
hearing  was  also  painfully  acute,  but  not  so  much  increased  as  his
sight ;  the  smell  and  taste  were  also  acute,  every  thing  he  put  into  his
mouth  being  much  higher  flavoured  than  common,  by  which  means  he
relished  what  he  eat;  his  appetite  at  first  was  very  indifferent,  but  soon
became  good  ;  his  pulse  was  generally  about  sixty,  and  weak,  and  a
small  degree  of  heat  on  the  skin,  especially  on  the  hands  and  feet ;  he
remained  in  this  state  for  about  ten  days,  and  was  obliged  to  be  fed
as  he  lay;  by  this  time  he  was  rather  better ;  that  is,  he  could  move
his  head  more  freely.

When  he  was  first  attacked,  the  pulse  was  full,  and  eight  ounces  of
blood  were  taken  away,  but  this  did  not  appear  to  be  of  service  ;  the
day  following  he  was  cupped  between  the  shoulders,  and  had  a  large
blister  applied  upon  the  part;  he  took  an  emetic,  and  several  times
purging  medicines,  and  bathed  his  feet  in  warm  water,  but  nothing  ap-
peared to  be  of  the  least  use.  The  purging  and  vomiting  distressed
him  greatly,  for  both  the  stomach  and  intestines  were  so  irritable,  that
less  than  half  the  usual  quantity  had  the  desired  effect. He  took  some

g


1  Life  of  the  author,.

James's  powder,  and  drank  some  white  wine  whey  on  account  of  the
heat  in  the  skin,  especially  in  the  feet  and  hands,  which  took  it  off,  and
gave  him  for  the  first  time  a  comfortable  feel.  At  the  end  of  ten  days  all
his  ideas  of  his  present  state  became  more  natural,  the  strange  decepti-
on concerning  his  own  size  was  in  part  corrected,  and  the  idea  of  sus-
pension in  the  air  became  less ;  but  for  some  time  after,  the  fire  appeared
of  a  deep  purple  red.  When  he  got  so  well  as  to  be  able  to  stand  with-
out being  giddy,  he  was  unable  to  walk  without  support,  for  his  own
feelings  did  not  give  him  information  respecting  his  centre  of  gravity,
so  that  he  was  unable  to  balance  his  body,  and  prevent  himself  from
falling.

He  gradually  recovered  from  this  state,  and  as  soon  as  he  was  able
went  to  Bath,  where  he  staid  some  time  and  drank  the  waters,  which
were  thought  to  be  of  service  to  him  ;  but  did  not  stay  long  enough
to  give  them  a  fair  trial ;  he  returned  to  town  much  better,  and  in  a
few  weeks  got  quite  well.  From  this  period  to  1785,  he  had  no  par-
ticular indisposition,  but  certainly  did  not  enjoy  perfect  health,  for  in
1785,  he  appeared  much  altered  in  his  looks,  and  gave  the  idea  of  hav-
ing grown  much  older  than  could  be  accounted  for  from  the  number
of  years  which  had  elapsed.

About  the  beginning  of  April  1785,  he  was  attacked  with  a  spas-
modic complaint,  which  at  first  was  slight,  but  became  afterwards  very
violent,  and  terminated  in  a  fit  of  the  gout  in  the  ball  of  the  great  toe;
this,  like  his  other  attacks,  was  brought  on  by  anxiety  of  mind ;  the
first  symptom  was  a  sensation  of  the  muscles  of  the  nose  being  in
action,  but  whether  they  really  were,  or  not,  he  was  never  able  to  de-
termine ;  this  sensation  returned  at  intervals  for  about  a  fortnight,
-attended  with  an  unpleasant  sensation  in  the  left  side  of  the  face.  lower


Life  of  the  author.  ii

jaw,  and  throat,  which  seemed  to  extend  into  the  head  on  that  side,
and  down  the  left  arm,  as  low  as  the  ball  of  the  thumb,  where  it  ter-
minated all  at  once;  these  sensations  were  not  constant,  but  returned  at
irregular  times ;  they  became  soon  more  violent,  attacking  the  head,
face,  and  both  sides  of  the  lower  jaw,  giving  the  idea  that  the  face
was  swelled,  particularly  the  cheeks,  and  sometimes  slightly  affected
the  right  arm. After  they  had  continued  for  a  fortnight  they  ex-
tended to  the  sternum,  producing  the  same  disagreeable  sensations
there,  and  giving  the  feel  of  the  sternum  being  drawn  backwards  to-
ward the  spine,  as  well  as  that  of  oppression  in  breathing,  although
the  action  of  breathing  was  attended  with  no  real  difficulty  ;  at  these
times  the  heart  seemed  to  miss  a  stroke,  and  upon  feeling  the  pulse,
the  artery  was  very  much contracted,  often  hardly  to  be  felt,  and
every  now  and  then  the pulse  was  entirely  stopt; he  was  after-
wards attacked  with  a  pain  in  the  back,  about  that  part  where  the
oesophagus  passes  through  the  diaphragm,  the  sensation  being  that  of
something  scalding  hot  passing  down  the  oesophagus ; he  was  next
seized  with  a  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart  itself,  and  last  of  all  with
a  sensation  in  the  left  side,  nearly  in  the  seat  of  the  great  end  of  the
stomach,  attended  with  considerable  eructations  of  wind  from  that
viscus ; these  seemed  to  be  rather  spasmodic  than  a  simple  discharge
of  wind,  a  kind  of  mixture  of  hiccough  and  eructation,  which  last
symptoms  did  not  accompany  the  former,  but  came  on  by  themselves.
In  every  attack  there  was  a  raw  sore  feel,  as  if  the  fauces  were  exco-
riated. All  these  succeeding  symptoms  (those  in  the  stomach  and
nose  only  excepted)  were,  in  addition  to  the  first,  for  every  attack
began  with  the  first  symptoms. The  complaint  appeared  to  be  in
the  vascular  system,  for  the  larger  arteries  were  sensibly  contracted^


Hi  Life  of  the  author.

and  sore  to  the  touch,  as  far  as  they  could  be  touched,  principally  in
the  left  arm ;  the  urine  at  those  times  was  in  general  very  pale.

These  symptoms  increased  in  violence  at  every  return,  and  the  at-
tack which  was  the  most  violent,  came  on  one  morning  about  the  end
of  April,  and  lasted  above  two  hours;  it  began  as  the  others  had  done,
but  having  continued  about  an  hour,  the  pain  became  excruciating  at
the  apex  of  the  heart ;  the  throat  was  so  sore  as  not  to  allow  of  an
attempt  to  swallow  any  thing,  and  the  left  arm  could  not  bear  to  be
touched,  the  least  pressure  upon  it  giving  pain,  the  sensation  at  the
apex  of  the  heart  was  that  of  burning  or  scorching,  which,  by  its  vi-
olence, quite  exhausted  him,  and  he  sunk  into  a  swoon  or  doze,  which
lasted  about  ten  minutes,  after  which  he  started  up,  without  the
least  recollection  of  what  had  passed,  or  of  his  preceding  illness.  I  was
with  him  during  the  whole  of  this  attack,  and  never  saw  any  thing
equal  to  the  agonies  he  suffered;  and  when  he  fainted  away,  I
thought  him  dead,  as  the  pain  did  not  seem  to  abate,  but  to  carry
him  off,  having  first  completely  exhausted  him.

He  then  fell  asleep  for  half  an  hour,  and  awoke  with  a  confusion
in  his  head,  and  a  faint  recollection  of  something  like  a  delirium ;  this
went  off  in  a  few  days.

The  affections  above-described  were,  in  the  beginning,  readily
brought  on  by  exercise,  and  he  even  conceived  that  if  he  had  continued
at  rest,  they  would  not  have  come  on  ;  tut  they  at  last  seized  him
when  lying  in  bed,  and  in  his  sleep,  so  as  to  awaken  him ;  affections
of  the  mind  also  brought  them  on ;  but  coolly  thinking  or  reason-
ing did  not  appear  to  have  that  effect.  While  these  complaints  were
upon  him,  his  face  was  pale,  and  had  a  contracted  appearance,  mak-
ing him  look  thinner  than  ordinary,  and  after  they  went  off  his  colour
returned,  and  his  face  recovered  its  natural  appearance. On  the


Life  of  the  author,  liii

commencement  of  the  complaint,  he  suspected  it  to  be  rheumatism,
and  applied  electricity  to  his  arm,  which  took  it  off  for  the  time  only;
he  then,  for  two  or  three  nights  successively,  took  three  grains  of
James's  powder,  without  any  abatement  of  the  symptoms ;  he  next
had  recourse  to  the  camphorated  julep,  both  at  the  commencement  of
the  spasm,  and  while  it  was  upon  him,  but  obtained  no  relief;  he
tried  Hoffman's  anodyne  liquor,  in  the  dose  of  a  tea-spoonful,  and
not  finding  it  to  answer  alone,  joined  to  it  the  camphorated  julep,  but
the  spasms  seemed  to  be  more  violent;  one  night  he  took  twenty  drops
of  thebaic  tincture,  which  made  his  head  confused  all  the  following
day,  but  did  not  at  all  abate  the  spasms;  the  following  day  he  took  two
tea-spoonfuls  of  the  bark,  which  heated  him,  and  gave  him  a  head-
ach,  thirst,  and  dryness  of  his  mouth,  which  prevented  his  continuing
it.  At  the  desire  of  Dr.  David  Pitcairn,  he  took  the  powder  of  vale-
rian, an  ounce  a  day,  which  seemed  for  the  first  two  days  to  remove  his
spasms,  but  they  returned  on  the  third  with  more  violence  than  usual,
especially  one  evening  at  the  Royal  Society,  which  induced  him  to
leave  off  the  valerian,  and  he  bathed  his  feet  on  going  to  bed  in  warm
water,  mixed  with  half  a  pound  of  flour  of  mustard,  and  took  a  tea-
spoonful  of  tincture  of  rhubarb  in  ginger-tea;  also  wore  worsted
stockings  all  night.

On  Friday  morning,  the  twentieth  of  May,  between  six  and  seven
o'clock,  he  had  a  violent  spasm,  attended  with  most  violent  eructa-
tions of  wind  from  the  stomach  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Dr.
Pitcairn,  who  was  sent  for  upon  this  occasion,  asked  him,  if  there
was  any  distress  upon  his  mind  that  had  brought  on  this  attack;  and  he
confessed  his  mind  to  have  been  much  harrassed,  in  consequence  of
having  opened  the  body  of  a  person  who  died  from  the  bite  of  a  mad


liv  Life  of  the  author,

dog,  about  six  weeks  before,  in  doing  which  he  had  wounded  his  hand ';
and  for  the  last  fortnight  his  mind  had  been  in  continual  suspense,  con-
ceiving it  possible  that  he  might  be  seized  with  symptoms  of  hydro-
phobia. This  anxiety  preying  upon  his  mind  for  so  long  a  time,  there
is  every  reason  to  believe  was  the  cause  of  the  present  attack,  and
probably  had  also  brought  on  the  former  ones,  which  were  all  after  the
accident  which  had  impressed  his  mind  with  this  horrible  idea.

At  the  desire  of  Dr.  Pitcairn,  he  took  at  two  doses  in  the  forenoon,
ten  grains  of  asafcetida,and  three  grains  of  opium,  and  in  the  afternoon
fifteen  of  asafcetida,  and  one  of  opium;  in  the  evening  he  had  a  head-
ach,  which  was  supposed  to  be  brought  on  by  the  opium,  his  bowels
were  loaded  and  oppressed  with  wind,  and  he  endeavoured  in  vain  to
procure  a  motion  by  laxative  clysters,  although  repeated,  and  ten
grains  of  jalap  were  taken  by  the  mouth;  he  passed  a  very  restless  night.
On  Saturday  morning  he  was  visited  by  Sir  George  Baker,  Dr.  Warren,
and  the  late  Dr.  Pitcairn  ;  he  repeated  the  asafcetida  twice  in  the
course  of  the  day,  and  two  spoonfuls  of  the  following  mixture  were
taken  every  hour,  without  producing  a  motion  till  about  half  an  hour
after  the  whole  was  used.

Infusion  of  senna,  six  ounces ;

Tincture  of  senna,  one  drachm  and  a  half;

Soluble  tartar,  three  drachms.

M.
In  the  afternoon  he  had  another  evacuation,  soon  after  which,  the-
most  violent  attack  of  spasm  which  he  experienced,  came  on ;  no-
thing was  attempted  internally  during  the  attack,  which  lasted  two
hours  ;  a  bladder  of  hot  water  was  applied  to  the  heart,  and  afterwards.
to  the  feet,  without  any  effect.


Life  of  the  author.  Iv

The  asafcetida  was  now  left  off,  and  this  evening  he  began  the  oleum
succini  in  saline  draughts  fifteen  drops  every  six  hours.  On  Sunday
morning  he  continued  the  oleum  succini,  but  the  saline  draught  was
changed  to  cinnamon-water,  and  a  large  blister  was  put  upon  the  back
close  to  the  neck ;  he  continued  pretty  free  from  spasm.  On  Monday  the
blister  was  taken  off,  and  the  oleum  succini  continued  ;  but  about  nine
o'clock  at  night  he  had  threatenings  of  spasm,  with  head-ach,  and  the
feel  of  a  load  in  his  bowels ;  he  had  a  pain  in  the  left  fide  and  region  of
the  stomach,  with  violent  eructations  of  wind  from  the  stomach,  which
lasted  about  two  hours ;  he  took  thebaic  tincture,  twenty-five  dropSj
in  the  warm  tincture  of  rhubarb,  and  afterwards  some  baume  de  vie±
but  the  eructations  continuing,  sinapisms  were  applied  to  the  feet,  after
which  they  ceased,  and  the  sinapisms  were  so  troublesome  that  he  had
them  taken  off  five  hours  after  they  were  applied.  On  Tuesday  morn-
ing he  felt  himself  easier,  the  oleum  succini  was  continued,  five  drops
of  laudanum  being  added  to  each  dose ;  in  the  evening  he  bathed
his  feet  in  warm  water,  to  clean  them  from  the  sinapisms,  and  both
the  great  toes  appeared  a  little  inflamed,  and  very  tender;  they  were
more  painful  after  being  bathed,  and  were  very  troublesome  all  night.
On  Wednesday  morning  the  inflammation  and  swelling  in  the  great
toes  appeared  evidently  to  be  the  gout,  and  the  pain  continued  very
acute  till  Thursday,  when  it  began  to  abate  ;  and  on  Friday  was  very
much  diminished :.  he  continued  the  oleum  succini  on  Wednesday,
and  took  a  bolus  of  aromatic  species  before  each  dose;  but  on  Friday
the  oleum  succini  made  him  sick,  and  was  left  off.  On  Saturday  he
began  the  bark  in  tincture  and  decoction  with  the  species  aromaticae;
Sunday  continued  the  bark,  and  having  eructations  and  flatulencies
after  his  meals,  he  was  ordered  every  day  before  dinner,  rhubarb  fifteen


lvi  Life  of  the  author.

grains,  ginger  ten  grains,  in  a  bolus.  He  had  no  spasm  after  Mon-
day the  thirtieth  of  May ;  he  however  had  threatenings,  or  slight  sen-
sations, similar  to  those  which  preceded  the  spasms,  and  occasional
eructations.  Although  evidently  relieved  from  the  violent  attacks  of
spasm  by  the  gout  in  his  feet,  yet  he  was  far  from  being  free  from  the
disease,  for  he  was  still  subject  to  the  spasms,  upon  exercise  or  agi-
tation of  mind;  the  exercise  that  generally  brought  it  on,  was  walk-
ing, especially  on  an  ascent,  either  of  stairs  or  rising  ground,  but  never
on  going  down  either  the  one  or  the  other;  the  affections  of  the  mind
that  brought  it  on  were  principally  anxiety  or  anger :  it  was  not  the
cause  of  the  anxiety,  but  the  quantity  that  most  affected  him  ;  the
anxiety  about  the  hiving  of  a  swarm  of  bees  brought  it  on;  the  anxiety
lest  an  animal  should  make  its  escape  before  he  could  get  a  gun  to
shoot  it, brought  it  on;  even  the  hearing  of  a  story,  in  which  the  mind
became  so  much  engaged  as  to  be  interested  in  the  event,  although  the
particulars  were  of  no  consequence  to  him,  would  bring  it  on  ;  anger
brought  on  the  same  complaint  and  he  could  conceive  it  possible
for  that  passion  to  be  carried  so  far  as  totally  to  deprive  him  of  life  ;
but  what  was  very  extraordinary,  the  more  tender  passions  of  the  mind
did  not  produce  it ;  he  could  relate  a  story  which  called  up  the  finer
feelings,  as  compassion,  admiration  for  the  actions  of  gratitude  in
others,  so  as  to  make  him  shed  tears,  yet  the  spasm  was  not  excited  :
it  is  extraordinary  that  he  eat  and  slept  as  well  as  ever,  and  his  mind
was  in  no  degree  depressed;  the  want  of  exercise  made  him  grow  un-
usually fat.

As  he  had  not  drank  wine  for  four  or  five  years  he  was  advised  to  try
it,  which  he  complied  with,  but  found  the  spasms  more  easily  brought
on  after  using  it,  than  on  those  days  on  which  he  drank  none ;  and


Life  of  the  author.  lvii

and  they  were  always  more  readily  produced  after  eating  a  hearty  meal.
He  continued  very  much  in  the  same  way  till  August,  when  he  went
to  Tunbridge  and  drank  the  waters  for  about  a  fortnight,  without  the
the  least  benefit,  but  rather  conceived  he  was  worse. From  thence  he
hurried  to  Bath,  the  first  week  in  September,  and  drank  the  waters  for
four  weeks,  twice  before  breakfast,  and  once  at  noon  ;  having  drank
them  for  about  a  fortnight,  he  began  to  bathe  every  other  night  in  the
hot-bath,  and  on  the  intermediate  nights  put  his  feet  into  the  hot-bath
waters,  and  sometimes  rode  on  horseback. After  being  there  three
weeks  he  did  not  find  the  least  benefit,  but  On  Monday,  the  begin-
ning of  the  fourth  week,  he  found  that  his  walking  to  the  pump-room
in  a  morning  did  not  bring  on  the  spasm  as  usual,  and  found  also
that  he  could  extend  his  walk  very considerably  on  that  day ;  on
Tuesday,  he  was  not  quite  so  well,  although  when  he  compared  that
day  with  the  preceding  days,  or  rather  months,  he  could  say  that  he
was  better;  this  seemed  to  be  a  step  gained;  in  this  state  he  left  Bath,
and  continued  the  same  through  the  whole  winter. About  the  begin-
ning of  May  1786,  he  began  to  believe  that  the  exercise  he  was  able  to
make  use  of  affected  him  less  ; he  found  that  in  the  months  of  June,
July,  August,  and  September,  he  was  able  to  take  a  long  walk  slowly;
he  could,  however,  at  any  time,  bring  on  the  complaint,  for  upon  using
the  least  exercise  he  felt  as  if  it  was  coming  on ; and  often,  by  forget-
ting himself,  he  brought  it  on  slightly,  which  made  him  slacken  his
pace. In  the  month  of  October,  when  the  weather  became  cold,  he
was  obliged  constantly  to  use  his  carriage,  because  he  could  not  walk
sufficiently  fast  to  keep  himself  warm,  although  in  other  respects  he
was  not  affected  by  it. What  appeared  very  extraordinary  was,  that
the  spasm  did  not  come  on  equally  upon  all  kinds  of  exercise ;  he
often  performed  an  operation,  as  cutting  for  the  stone,  or  extirpation

h


lviii  Life  of  the  author.

of  a  breast,  which,  from  peculiar  circumstances,  required  a  consi-
derable deal  of  fatigue,  and  lasted  near  an  hour  each  time,  yet  the
spasm  did  not  come  on.  He  was  employed  in  embalming  the  Princess
Amelia  for  three  hours,  in  which  time  he  was  really  fatigued,  but  had
no  spasm  the  whole  time ;  yet,  by  going  the  length  of  Cavendish-
square,  and  on  towards  Oxford-road,  he  was  seized  with  a  consider-
able spasm ;  but  the  fatigue  he  had  undergone  acted,  probably,  as  a
predisposing  cause.

Thefe  spasms,  although  they  did  not  increase  in  violence,  were
uniformly  more  frequent,  and  came  on  upon  a  greater  variety  of  oc-
casions ;  but  as  he  became  accustomed  to  their  effects,  less  attention
was  paid  to  them.  Nothing  particular  occurred  from  this  period  till
about  the  beginning  of  December  1789,  in  the  evening,  when  at  the
house  of  a  friend  on  a  visit,  he  was  attacked  with  a  total  loss  of  me-
mory ;  he  did  not  know  in  what  part  of  the  town  he  was,  not  even
the  name  of  the  street  when  told  it,  nor  where  his  own  house  was;  he
had  not  a  conception  of  any  place  existing  beyond  the  room  he  was
in,  and  yet  was  perfectly  conscious  of  the  loss  of  memory.  He  was
sensible  of  impressions  of  all  kinds  from  the  senses,  and  therefore
looked  out  of  the  window,  although  rather  dark,  to  see  if  he  could
be  made  sensible  of  the  situation  of  the  house ;  this  loss  of  me-
mory gradually  went  off,  and  in  less  than  half  an  hour  his  memory
was  perfectly  recovered.  About  a  fortnight  after,  as  he  was  visiting
his  patient  one  forenoon,  he  observed  occasionally  a  little  giddiness  in
his  head,  and  by  three  o'clock  it  was  attended  with  an  inclination  to
vomit.  He  came  home  and  drank  some  warm  water,  which  made  him
vomit  severely,  but  nothing  came  off  his  stomach  except  the  water.
The  giddiness  became  severe,  but  went  off  again  about  seven  or  eight
o'clock;  about  nine  or  ten  it  returned  with  more  severity,  and  when


Life  of  the  author,  lix

going  to  bed,  about  eleven  o'clock,  he  had  entirely  lost  the  centre  of
gravity,  although  he  could  move  his  limbs  as  the  will  directed  ;  light
became  offensive,  and  every  thing  had  a  kind  of  yellow  cast ;  sounds
were  more  acute  than  natural,  objects  had  lost  their  true  direction :
a  perpendicular,  for  instance,  seemed  to  lean  to  the  left,  making,  as
nearly  as  he  could  conjecture,  an  angle  with  the  horizon  of  fifty  or
sixty  degrees  ;  objects  were  also  smaller  than  the  natural  recollection
of  them ;  his  idea  of  his  own  size  was  that  of  only  being  four feet
high ;  also  objects  appeared  to  be  at  an  unusual  distance,  as  if  seen
through  a  concave  glass ;  he  had  a  slight  sound  in  the  right  ear,
at  every  stroke  of  the  pulse ;  motion  in  his  head  was  extremely  dis-
agreeable, he  therefore  moved  with  great  caution;  although  cough-
ing and  sneezing  did  not  affect  it:  during  this  illness  Dr.  Pitcairn  and
Dr.  Baillie  attended  him. It  is  difficult  to  describe  sensations,  espe-
cially when  they  are  not  common  ;  the  sensation  which  he  had  in  his
head  was  not  pain,  but  rather  so  unnatural  as  to  give  him  the  idea  of
having  no  head ;  with  all  this,  neither  the  mind  nor  the  reasoning  fa-
culty were  affected,  which  is  not  the  case  when  such  effects  are  pro-
duced from  liquor. Objects  in  the  mind  were  very  lively,  and  often
disagreeably  so;  dreams  had  the  strength  of  reality,  so  much  so,  as  to
awaken  him  ;  the  remembrance  of  them  was  very  perfect. The  dis-
position to  sleep  was  a  good  deal  gone,  an  hour  or  two  in  the  twenty-
four  being  as  much  as  could  be  obtained  ;  these  symptoms  were  much
the  same  for  about  a  week,  and  began  gradually  to  diminish,  so  that
in  a  fortnight  he  was  able  to  sit  up,  and  in  three  weeks  went  an  airing
in  the  carriage;  cordial  medicines  were  given,  and  the  body  kept  open;
he  felt  a  pain  in  the  joint  of  the  great  toe,  which  inflamed  gently,  but
soon  left  it ;  his  pulse  was  rather  increased  in  frequency,  the  urine  at


Ix  Life  of  the  author.

first  was  high  coloured,  deposited  a  sediment,  and  was  rather  dimi-
nished in  quantity  ;  but  the  retention  in  the  bladder  was  very  great,
as  he  was  not  able  to  make  water  from  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening  till
the  same  time  the  next  evening,  the  quantity  being  very  considerable,
although  not  so  much  as  would  have  been  made  in  the  same  time  had
he  been  in  health.  The  urine  became  of  a  yellow  colour,  and  after-
wards pale;  the  stools  were  solid;  the  taste  of  victuals  was  not  im-
paired, except  tea,  for  which  he  had  no  relish.  Although  he  had  no
particular  inclination  to  eat,  yet  his  appetite  was  not  much  dimi-
nished. To  excite  the  action  of  the  gout,  sinapisms  were  applied  to
the  feet,  but  had  not  the  desired  effect;  in  the  fourth  week  the  head  not
recovering  so  fast  as  was  expected,  a  blister  was  applied  between  the
shoulders,  but  had  no  immediate  effect,  probably  did  harm,  by  pro-
ducing irritation  and  want  of  sleep  ;  one  night,  not  having  above  an
hour's  sleep,  he  drank  a  tumbler  full  of  hot  water,  which  set  him  im-
mediately to  sleep,  in  which  state  he  continued  near  four  hours ;  he
took  a  hint  from  this  and  drank  a  tumbler  full  of  hot  water  every  night,
just  before  he  went  to  bed,  which  did  not  fail  of  putting  him  soon  to
sleep,  and  giving  him  a  good  night's  rest*.

The  apparent  obliquity  of  objects  he  accounted  for  by  supposing
that  the  two  corresponding  oblique  muscles  had  an  unnatural  con-
traction which  moved  the  two  eyes  round  near  thirty  or  forty  degrees;
we  shall  suppose  that  the  obliquus  fuperior  of  the  left  eye  brought
the  eye-ball  forwards  towards  the  nose,  while  the  obliquus  inferior  of

*  He  took  advantage  of  this  circumstance,  and  in  all  cases  of  irritable  stomachs,  from
whatever  cause,  prescribed  warm  water,  which  in  general  gave  relief;  one  remarkable
ease  of  bleeding  from  the  stomach,  in  consequence  of  irritation,  was  entirely  cured  by
the  internal  use  of  warm  water.


Life  of  the  author.  Ixi

the  right  eye  contracted  equal  to  the  superior  of  the  left  ;  this  turned
the  under  part  of  the  right  eye  inwards  towards  the  nose,  and  the  up-
per part  outwards,  which  moved  a  lateral  part  of  the  eye  upon  the
object,  and  gave  it  that  obliquity.

His  recovery  from  this  indisposition  was  less  perfect  than  from  any
of  the  others;  he  never  lost  entirely  the  oblique  vision;  his  memory
was  in  some  respects  evidently  impaired,  and  the  spasms  became  more
constant ;  he  never  went  to  bed  without  their  being  brought  on  by  the
act  of  undressing  himself;  they  came  on  in  the  middle  of  the  night;
the  least  exertion  in  conversation  after  dinner  was  attended  by  them;
he  felt  therefore  obliged  to  confine  himself  within  a  certain  sphere  of
action,  and  to  avoid  dining  in  large  companies.  Even  operations  in
surgery,  if  attended  with  any  nicety,  now  produced  the  same  effects.

In  the  autumn  1790,  and  in  the  spring  and  autumn  1791,  he  had
more  severe  attacks  than  during  the  other  periods  of  the  year,  but  of
not  more  than  a  few  hours  duration:  in  the  beginning  of  October  1792,
one,  at  which  I  was  present,  was  so  violent  that  I  thought  he  would  have
died.  On  October  the  16th,  1793,  when  in  his  usual  state  of  health,
he  went  to  St.  George's  Hospital,  and  meeting  with  some  things  which
irritated  his  mind,  and  not  being  perfectly  master  of  the  circumstances,
he  withheld  his  sentiments,  in  which  state  of  restraint  he  went  into  the
next  room,  and  turning  round  to  Dr.  Robertson,  one  of  the  physi-
cians of  the  hospital,  he  gave  a  deep  groan,  and  dropt  down  dead.

It  is  a  curious  circumstance  that,  the  first  attack  of  these  complaints
was  produced  by  an  affection  of  the  mind,  and  every  future  return  of
any  consequence  arose  from  the  same  cause  ;  and  although  bodily  ex-
ercise, or  distention  of  the  stomach,  brought  on  slighter  affections,  it
still  required  the  mind  to  be  affected  to  render  them  severe ;  and  as


Ixii  Li/c  of  the  author,

his  mind  was  irritated  by  trifles,  these  produced  the  most  violent  ef-
fects on  the  disease.  His  coachman  being  beyond  his  time,  or  a  ser-
vant not  attending  to  his  directions,  brought  on  the  spasms,  while  a
real  misfortune  produced  no  effect.

At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  in  the  65th  year  of  his  age,  the  same
age  at  which  his  brother,  the  late  Dr.  Hunter,  died.

Upon  inspecting  the  body  after  death,  the  following  were  the  ap-
pearances :  the  skin  in  several  places  was  mottled,  particularly  on
the  sides  and  neck,  which  arose  from  the  blood  not  having  been  com-
pletely coagulated,  but  remaining  nearly  fluid.

The  contents  of  the  abdomen  were  in  a  natural  state,  but  the  coats
of  the  stomach  and  intestines  were  unusually  loaded  with  blood,  giving
them  a  fleshy  appearance,  and  a  dark  reddish  colour ;  those  parts,
which  had  a  depending  situation,  as  in  the  bottom  of  the  pelvis,  and
upon  the  loins,  had  this  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  others  ;  this  evi-
dently arose  from  the  fluid  state  of  the  blood.  The  stomach  was
rather  relaxed,  but  the  internal  surface  was  entirely  free  from  any  ap-
pearance of  disease  ;  the  orifice  at  the  pylorus  was  uncommonly  open.
The  gall-bladder  contained  five  or  six  small  stones  of  a  light  yellow
colour.  The  liver  and  the  other  viscera  exhibited  nothing  unusual  in
their  appearance.

The  cartilages  of  the  ribs  hadin  many  places  become  bone,  requi-
ring a  saw  to  divide  them.  There  was  no  water  in  the  cavity  of  the
chest,  and  the  lungs  of  the  right  side  were  uncommonly  healthy  ;  but
those  of  the  left  had  very  strong  adhesions  to  the  pleura,  extending
over  a  considerable  surface,  more  especially  towards  the  sternum.

The  pericardium  was  very  unusually  thickened,  which  did  not  allow
it  to  collapse  upon  being  opened  ;  the  quantity  of  water  contained  in


Life  of  the  author,  lxiii

it  was  scarcely  more  than  is  frequently  met  with,  although  it  might
probably  exceed  that  which  occurs  in  the  most  healthy  state  of  these

parts.

The  heart  itself  was  very  small,  appearing  too  little  for  the  cavity
in  which  it  lay,  and  did  not  give  the  idea  of  its  being  the  effect  of  an
unusual  degree  of  contraction,  but  more  of  its  having  shrunk  in  its
size. Upon  the  under  surface  of  the  left  auricle  and  ventricle,  there
were  two  spaces  nearly  an  inch  and  half  square,  which  were  of  a  white
colour,  with  an  opaque  appearance,  and  entirely  distinct  from  the  ge-
neral surface  of  the  heart :  these  two  spaces  were  covered  by  an  ex-
udation of  coagulating  lymph,  which  at  some  former  period  had  been
the  result  of  inflammation  there. The  muscular  structure  of  the
heart  was  paler  and  looser  in  its  texture  than  the  other  muscles  in  the
body. There  were  no  coagula  in  any  of  its  cavities. The  coronary
arteries  had  their  branches  which  ramify  through  the  substance  of  the
heart  in  the  state  of  bony  tubes,  which  were  with  difficulty  divided  by
the  knife,  and  their  transverse  sections  did  not  collapse,  but  remained
open. The  valvulae  mitrales,  where  they  come  off  from  the  lower  edge
of  the  auricle,  were  in  many  places  ossified,  forming  an  imperfectly
bony  margin  of  different  thicknesses,  and  in  one  spot  so  thick  as  to
form  a  knob  ;  but  these  ossifications  were  not  continued  down  upon
the  valve  towards  the  chordae  tendineae.

The  semilunar  valves  of  the  aorta  had  lost  their  natural  pliancy,
the  previous  stage  to  becoming  bone,  and  in  several  spots  there  were
evident  ossifications.

The  aorta  immediately  beyond  the  semilunar  valves  had  its  cavity
larger  than  usual,  putting  on  the  appearance  of  an  incipient  aneurism ;
this  unusual  dilatation  extended  for  some  way  along  the  ascending


Jxiv  Life  of  the  author*

aorta,  but  did  not  reach  so  far  as  the  common  trunk  of  the  axillary
and  carotid  artery.  The  increase  of  capacity  of  the  artery  might
be  about  one-third  of  its  natural  area ;  and  the  internal  membrane  of
this  part  had  lost  entirely  the  natural  polish,  and  was  studded  over
with  opaque  white  spots,  raised  higher  than  the  general  surface.

On  inspecting  the  head,  the  cranium  and  dura  mater  were  found  in
a  natural  state.  The  pia  mater  had  the  vessels  upon  the  surface  of  the
two  hemispheres  of  the  brain  turgid  with  blood,  which  is  commonly
found  to  be  the  case  after  sudden  death.

The  internal  structure  of  the  brain  was  very  carefully  examined,
and  the  different  parts  both  of  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  were
found  in  the  most  natural  and  healthy  state  ;  but  the  internal  carotid
arteries  as  they  pass  by  the  sides  of  the  cella  tursica  were  ossified,  and
several  of  the  ramifications  which  go  off  from  them  had  become
opaque  and  unhealthy  in  their  appearance.  The  vertebral  arteries
lying  upon  the  medulla  oblongata  had  also  become  bony,  and  the  ba-
sillary  artery,  which  is  formed  by  them,  had  opaque  white  spots  very
generally  along  its  coats.

From  this  account  of  the  appearances  observed  after  death,  it  is
reasonable  to  attribute  the  principal  symptoms  of  the  disease  to  an  or-
ganic affection  of  the  heart.  That  organ  was  rendered  unable  to  carry
on  its  functions,  whenever  the  actions  were  disturbed,  either  in  con-
sequence of  bodily  exertion,  or  affections  of  the  mind.

The  stoppage  of  the  pulse  arose  from  a  spasm  upon  the  heart,  and
in  this  state  the  nerves  were  probably  pressed  against  the  ossified
arteries,  which  may  account  for  the  excruciating  pain  he  felt  at  those
times.


Life  of  the  author,  lxv

The  other  symptoms  may  be  explained  from  the  defect  in  the  valves
and  the  dilatation  of  the  aorta,  which  had  lost  its  elasticity.

In  the  last  attack  the  spasm  upon  the  heart  was  either  too  violent
in  the  degree  of  contraction,  or  too  long  continued  to  admit  of  re-
laxation, so  that  death  immediately  ensued.

His  remains  were  interred  in  a  vault  under  the  parish  church  of  St.
Martin  in  the  Fields,  attended  by  a  few  of  his  oldest  medical  friends.

Mr.  Hunter  was  of  a  short  stature,  uncommonly  strong  and  active,
very  compactly  made,  and  capable  of  great  bodily  exertion.  His
countenance  was  animated,  open,  and  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life
deeply  impressed  with  thoughtfulness.  When  his  print  was  shewn  to
Lavator,  he  said,  "  That  man  thinks  for  himself."  In  his  youth  he
was  cheerful  in  his  disposition,  and  entered  into  youthful  follies  like
others  of  the  same  age  ;  but  wine  never  agreed  with  his  stomach,  so
that  after  some  time  he  left  it  off  altogether,  and  for  the  last  twenty
years  drank  nothing  but  water.

His  temper  was  very  warm  and  impatient,  readily  provoked,  and
when  irritated,  not  easily  soothed.  His  disposition  was  candid,  and
free  from  reserve,  even  to  a  fault.  He  hated  deceit,  and  as  he  was  above
every  kind  of  artifice,  he  detested  it  in  others,  and  too  openly  avowed
his  sentiments.  His  mind  was  uncommonly  active  ;  it  was  naturally
formed  for  investigation,  and  that  turn  displayed  itself  on  the  most
trivial  occasions,  and  always  with  mathematical  exactness.  What  is
curious,  it  fatigued  him  to  be  long  in  a  mixed  company  which  did  not
admit  of  connected  conversation;  more  particularly  during  the  last
ten  years  of  his  life.

He  required  less  relaxation  than  most  other  men ;  seldom  sleeping
more  than  four  hours  in  the  night,  but  almost  always  nearly  an  hour


Ixvi  Life  of  the  author.

after  dinner;  this,  probably,  arose  from  the  natural  turn  of  his  mind
being  so  much  adapted  to  his  own  occupations,  that  they  were  in
reality  his  amusement,  and  therefore  did  not  fatigue.

To  his  own  abilities  alone  was  he  indebted  for  the  eminence  which
he  acquired  in  his  profession;  for  although  his  medical  education,  his
situation  as  surgeon  to  St.  George's  Hospital,  and  above  all,  his  bro-
ther's recommendation  entitled  him  to  notice,  yet  the  increase  of  his
private  practice  was  at  first  but  slow.  The  natural  independence  of
his  mind,  led  him  rather  to  indulge  in  his  own  pursuits,  than  to  cul-
tivate the  means  of  enlarging  the  sphere  of  his  business ;  but  the
proofs  which  he  afterwards  gave  of  his  talents  commanded  the  attention
of  the  public  and  procured  him  a  very  liberal  income.

In  the  first  eleven  years  of  his  practice,  from  1763  to  1774,  his  in-
come never  amounted  to  a  thousand  pounds  a  year ;  in  the  year  1778
it  exceeded  that  sum;  for  several  years  before  his  death  it  had  increas-
ed to  five,  and  at  that  period  was  above  six  thousand  pounds.

In  private  practice  he  was  liberal,  scrupulously  honest  in  saying
what  was  really  his  opinion  of  the  case,  and  ready  upon  all  occasions
to  acknowledge  his  ignorance  whenever  there  was  any  thing  which
he  did  not  understand.

In  conversation  he  spoke  too  freely,  and  sometimes  harshly  of  his
cotemporaries  ;  but  if  he  did  not  do  justice  to  their  undoubted  merits,
it  arofe  not  from  envy,  but  from  his  thorough  conviction  that  surgery
was  as  yet  in  its  infancy,  and  he  himfelf  a  novice  in  his  own  art ;  and
his  anxiety  to  have  it  carried  to  perfection,  made  him  think  meanly
and  ill  of  every  one  whose  exertions  in  that  respect  did  not  equal  his
own.


Life  of  the  author.  lxvii

Public -spirited  to  an  extreme^  he  valued  money  no  farther  than  as
it  enabled  him  to  prosecute  and  extend  his  various,  and  nearly  uni-
versal researches  ;  and  hurried  on  by  the  ambition  of  benefiting  man-
kind at  large,  he  paid  too  little  attention  to  his  own  and  his  family's
interests.  But  imprudence  almost  always  goes  hand  in  hand  with
genius  ;  if  it  deserves  a  harsher  name,  let  it  be  remembered,  that  his
immediate  relatives  alone,  and  not  the  public,  have  a  right  to  com-
plain; for  viewed  in  a  professional  light,  and  as  a  man  of  science,  his
zeal  for  the  improvement  of  surgery  in  particular,  and  for  the  ad-
vancement of  knowledge  in  general,  to  both  of  which  he  himself
materially  contributed,  entitles  him  at  least  to  the  gratitude,  if  not  to
the  veneration  of  posterity.


[  I  ]


INTRODUCTION,


X  he  following  pages,  treating  of  inflammation,  were  firft  arranged  in
the  year  1762,  at  Bellisle,  after  the  complete  reduction  of  that  place.
They  were  compiled  from  notes,  and  memorandums  of  observations,  made
in  the  course  of  twelve  years  residence  in  London.  During  this  space,  my
time  was  occupied  partly  in  my  education  under  the  late  Dr.  Hunter,  and
partly  in  assisting  him.  In  the  winter  season  I  was  principally  employed
in  the  dissecting-room,  where  I  taught  the  practical  part  of  anatomy  ^  in
the  summer  I  attended  the  hospitals.  The  truth  of  these  observations
was,  during  the  siege  of  Bellisle,  in  some  degree  put  to  the  test,  by  corn-
pairing  them  with  many  cases  of  wounds,  which  were  attended  with  in-
flammation. From  the  frequency  of  gun-mot  wounds  at  that  place,  I
was  naturally  led  to  arrange  my  thoughts  upon  the  subject,,  and  was  in-
duced to  select  them  more  particularly,  for  the  illustration  of  my  opinions
on  inflammation.  About  the  year  1770,  when  I  began  my  lectures  on
the  principles  of  disease,  inflammation  was  the  subject  of  a  considerable
part  of  them;  and,  from  that  time  till  this,  though  I  have  been  extending
and  correcting  the  materials,  my  principles  remain  the  same.  To  distin-
guish the  different  species  of  inflammation*,  and  to  express  my  own  ideas
the  better,  I  was  naturally  led  to  substitute  such  terms  as  appeared  to  me
more  expressive  of  what  was  meant,  than  those  usually  employed. The

*  In  the  course  of  this  work  I  very  often  make  use  of  the  word  species  or  specific,  by
which  I  only  mean  peculiarities  or  distinctions ;  and  probably  the  term  is  much  too  loose
in  its  application ;  for  as  we  are  not  entirely  acquainted  with  the  specific  differences  in  disease,
we  may  call  that  a  species  which  more  properly  ranks  as  a  genus,  clafs,  &c.  Of  morbid
poisons  we  can  make  a  correct  arrangement;  but,  with  regard  to  disease  arifing  from  peculi-.
arities  in  the  constitution,  we  have  no  such  absolute  guides.

B


2  Introduction.

best  test  of  the  propriety  of  these  terms  is,  that  they  have  been  adopted  by
many  medical  writers  since  that  period  ;  and  indeed  my  principles  have  un-
dergone the  same  kind  of  test.  In  this  some  medical  writers  have  been
very  liberal,  for,  not  contented  with  taking  hints,  they  have  even  laid  hold
of  large  portions  of  my  lectures,  screening  themselves  under  the  very  ho-
nourable protection  of  their  not  being  in  print ;  and,  at  the  same  time,
quoting  authors  to  show  their  reading  and  their  candour.  It  would  appear
that  they  consider  the  discoveries  and  opinions  of  a  lecturer,  found  proba-
bly in  a  manuscript,  as  fair  game;  though  their  delicate  attention  to  the
rights  of  another  would,  no  doubt,  have  prevented  them  from  adopting
the  same  doctrines,  had  they  been  actually  in  print.  Such  freedoms  have
made  me  anxious  to  publish,  not  only  because  the  public  interests  itself
in  the  origin  of  every  discovery  or  opinion,  but  because  I  wish  to  preserve
my  right,  and  also  to  give  in  a  more  perfect  form,  what  was  thought  wor-
thy of  the  public,  even  in  a  mutilated  state.  My  respect  for  that  public,
however,  has  withheld  me  hitherto  from  publishing,  that  I  might  first  be
able  to  complete  my  subject,  as  far  as  time  and  other  circumstances  would
allow  me.  I  hope  this  publication  will,  at  least,  have  equal  good  effects
with  those  I  have  before  produced,  not  only  enabling  persons  to  write  on
the  same  subject,  who  could  not  otherwise  have  done  it,  but  even  to  be-
come critics  in  matters  of  which,  till  then,  they  were  entirely  ignorant.

I  have  endeavoured,  as  far  as  my  other  pursuits  would  permit,  to  form
this  work  into  a  regular  system,  one  part  exactly  depending  on  another;
how  far  I  have  succeeded  the  world  must  judge;  but  at  the  same  time  it
ought  to  be  considered  as  a  new  figure  composed  from  rough  materials,
in  which  process  little  or  no  assistance  could  be  had  from  any  quarter,
wherein  the  author  is  conscious  of  many  imperfections,  more  of  which  he
is  persuaded  he  shall  himself  observe  at  every  successive  review.

There  are  many  opinions  respecting  the  animal  ceconomy  peculiar  to
myself,  which  are  introduced,  or  frequently  referred  to,  in  the  course  of
this  work.  It  is  therefore  neceffary  to  premise  a  short  explanation  of  some
of  them,  that  the  ideas  and  terms  which  are  employed  may  be  better  un-
derstood. To  others  of  them,  however,  this  method  cannot  be  applied,
as  they  belong  essentially  to  the  body  of  the  work,  or  are  so  immediately


Introduction.  3

connected  with  it,  as  to  be  best  understood  when  treated  in  connection
with  that  part.

I  shall  carry  my  ideas  of  life  further  than  has  commonly  been  done :
life  I  believe  to  exist  in  every  part  of  an  animal  body,  and  to  render  it  sus-
ceptible of  impressions  which  excite  action  ;  there  is  no  part  which  has
not  more  or  less  of  this  principle,  and  consequently  no  part  which  does  not
act  according  to  the  nature  of  the  principle  itself,  and  the  impressions
thence  arising,  producing  thereby  infinite  variety,  both  in  all  natural  and
diseased  acts.  How  far  every  part  has  an  equal  quantity  of  life,  or  of  the
powers  of  life,  is  not  easily  ascertained  ;  but  if  we  were  to  estimate  them
by  the  powers  of  action,  we  should  judge  tolerably  well.  Disease  would
seem  to  give  some  intelligence  with  regard  to  this  matter;  but  how  far  re-
sistance to  disease,  and  powers  of  restoration,  depend  on  the  powers  of
life,  or  simply  on  the  powers  of  action,  I  cannot  say;  but  I  believe  it
may  be  set  down  as  a  rule,  that  those  parts  that  are  endowed  with  most
action  resist  disease  most  strongly,  and  in  disease  restore  themselves  more
readily  to  a  healthy  state.


I.  OF  DISEASED  ACTIONS,  AS  BEING  INCOMPATIBLE  WITH  EACH

OTHER.

As  I  reckon  every  operation  in  the  body  an  action,  whether  universal
or  partial,  it  appears  to  me,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  no  two  actions  can  take
place  in  the  same  constitution,  nor  in  the  same  part  at  one  and  the  same
time ;  the  operations  of  the  body  are  similar  in  this  respect  to  actions  or
motions  in  common  matter.  It  naturally  results  from  this  principle,
that  no  two  different  fevers  can  exist  in  the  same  constitution,  nor  two
local  diseases  in  the  same  part  at  the  same  time.  There  are  many  local
diseases  which  have  dispositions  totally  different,  but  having  very  similar
appearances,  have  been  supposed  by  some  to  be  one  sort  of  disease,  by
others  to  be  a  different  kind,  and  by  others  again  a  compound  of  two  dis-
eases. Thus  the  venereal  disease,  when  it  attacks  the  skin,  is  very  similar


4  Introduction.

to  those  diseases  which  are  vulgarly  called  scorbutic,  and  vice  versa.  These,
therefore,  are  often  supposed  to  be  mixed,  and  to  exist  in  the  same  part.
Thus  we  hear  of  a  pocky-scurvy,  a  pocky-itch,  rheumatic-gout,  etc.  etc.
which  names,  according  to  my  principle,  imply  a  union  that  cannot  pos-
sibly exist.

It  has  been  considered  as  contradictory  to  this  opinion,  that  a  patient
might  have  the  scrofula,  scurvy,  venereal  disease,  small -pox,  etc.  at  the
same  time;  all  of  this  is  indeed  possible;  but  then  no  two  of  them  can
exist  in  the  same  part  of  the  body  at  the  same  time  ;  but  before  one  of
them  can  occupy  the  place  of  another,  that  other  must  be  first  destroyed,
or  it  may  be  superseded  for  a  time,  and  may  afterwards  return.

When  a  constitution  is  susceptible  of  any  one  disease,  this  does  not
hinder  it  from  being  also  susceptible  of  others.  I  can  conceive  it  possible
that  a  man  may  be  very  susceptible  of  every  disease  incident  to  the  hu-
man body,  although  it  is  not  probable ;  for  I  should  believe  that  one
susceptibility  is  in  some  degree  incompatible  with  another,  in  a  manner
similar  to  the  incompatibility  between  different  actions,  though  not  of  so
strict  a  kind.

A  man  may  have  the  lues  and  the  small-pox  at  the  same  time;  that  is,
parts  of  his  body  may  be  contaminated  by  the  venereal  poison  ;  the  small-
pox may  at  the  same  time  take  place,  and  both  diseases  may  appear  to-
gether, but  still  not  in  the  same  part.

In  two  eruptive  diseases,  where  both  are  necessarily  the  consequence  of
fever,  and  where  both  naturally  appear  after  the  fever  nearly  at  the  same
distance  of  time,  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  two  to  have  their  respec-
tive eruptions,  even  in  different  parts,  because  it  is  impossible  that  the
two  preceding  fevers  should  be  co-existent.

From  this  principle  I  think  I  may  fairly  put  the  following  queries  :—
Does  not  the  failure  of  inoculation,  and  the  power  of  resisting  many  in-
fections, arise  from  the  existence  of  some  other  disease  at  that  time  in  the
body,  which  is  therefore  incapable  of  another  action  ?

Does  not  the  great  difference  in  the  time,  from  the  application  of  the
cause  to  the  appearance  of  the  disease,  in  many  cases,  depend  upon  the
same  principle  ?  For  instance,  a  person  is  inoculated,  and  the  puncture


Introduction.  5

does  not  inflame  for  fourteen  days,  cases  of  which  I  have  seen,  is  not
this  deviation  from  the  natural  progress  of  the  disease  to  be  attributed  to
another  disease  in  the  constitution  at  the  time  of  inoculation  ?

Does  not  the  cure  of  some  diseases  depend  upon  the  same  principle  as
the  suspension  or  cure  of  a  gonorrhoea  by  a  fever  ?

Let  me  illustrate  this  principle  still  further,  by  one  of  many  cases
which  have  come  under  my  own  observation.  On  Thursday,  the  six-
teenth of  May,  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  seventy-five,  I  moculaced
a  gentleman's  child,  and  it  was  observed  that  I  made  pretty  large  punc-
tures. On  the  Sunday  following,  viz.  the  nineteenth,  he  appeared  to  have
received  the  infection,  a  small  inflammation  or  redness  appearing  round
each  puncture,  and  a  small  tumor.  On  the  twentieth  and  the  twenty-
first  the  child  was  feverish;  but  I  declared  that  it  was  not  the  variolous
fever,  as  the  inflammation  had  not  at  all  advanced  since  the  nineteenth.
On  the  twenty-second  a  considerable  eruption  appeared,  which  was  evi-
dently the  measles,  and  the  sores  on  the  arms  appeared  to  go  back,  be-
coming less  inflamed.

On  the  twenty-third  he  was  very  full  of  the  measles;  but  the  punctures
on  the  arms  were  in  the  same  state  as  on  the  preceding  day.

'On  the  twenty- fifth  the  measles  began  to  disappear.  On  the  twenty-
sixth  and  twenty-seventh  the  punctures  began  again  to  look  a  little  red.
On  the  twenty-ninth  the  inflammation  increased,  and  there  was  a  little
matter  formed.  On  the  thirtieth  he  was  seized  with  fever.  The  small-
pox appeared  at  the  regular  time,  went  through  its  usual  course,  and  ter-
minated favourably.


II.  OF  PARTS  SUSCEPTIBLE  OF  PARTICULAR  DISEASES.

There  are  some  parts  much  more  susceptible  of  specific  diseases  than
others.  Poisons  take  their  different  seats  in  the  body  as  if  they  were  al-
lotted to  them.  Thus  the  skin  is  attacked  by  what  are  vulgarly  called
scorbutic-eruptions,  as  well  as  many  other  diseases  5.  it  is  also  the  seat  of


6  Introduction.

the  small-pox  and  the  measles  ;  the  throat  is  the  seat  of  action  in  the  hy-
drophobia and  the  hooping-cough.  The  absorbent  system,  especially  the
glands,  are  more  susceptible  of  scrofula  than  most  other  parts  of  the  body.
The  breasts,  testicles,  and  the  conglomerate  glands,  are  most  commonly
the  seat  of  cancer.  The  skin,  throat,  and  nose,  are  more  readily  affected
by  the  lues  venerea,  than  the  bones  and  periosteum,  which  however  suffer
sooner  than  many  other  parts,  particularly  the  vital  parts,  which  perhaps
are  not  at  all  susceptible,  of  this  disease.  These  differences  may  arise  from
the  nature  of  the  parts  themselves,  or  from  some  regular  circumstances,
which  must  act  as  an  existing  cause.


III.  OF  SYMPATHY.


It  is  unnecessary  to  give  a  definition  of  sympathy,  for  it  is  generally
very  well  understood  when  applied  to  the  mind,  and  also  by  medical  men
when  applied  to  the  body.  In  the  mind  its  reference  is  external,  it  de-
pends upon  the  state  of  others,  and  one  of  its  chief  uses  is  to  excite  an  ac-
tive interest  in  favour  of  the  distressed,  the  mind  of  the  spectators  taking
on  nearly  the  same  action  with  that  of  the  sufferers,  and  disposing  them
to  give  relief  or  consolation;  it  is,  therefore,  one  of  the  firft  of  the  social
feelings,  and  by  many  useful  operations,  incline  mankind  to  union.  In
the  body,  fympathy  has  only  a  reference  internally  to  the  body  itfelf,  and
is  not  fo  evident  as  the  fympathy  of  the  mind;  although  in  fome  cafes  we
fee  its  effects.  It  is  either  natural  or  diseased;  but  it  is  the  diseased  only
that  I  propose  at  present  to  consider.  I  shall  divide  the  sympathy  of  the
body  into  two  kinds,  universal  and  partial.

By  the  universal  sympathy  is  meant,  where  the  whole  constitution  sym-
pathizes with  some  sensation  or  action  of  a  part.  By  partial  sympathy
is  meant,  when  one  or  more  distinct  parts  sympathize  with  some  local
sensation  or  action.  The  universal  sympathies  are  various  in  different
diseases ;  but  those  which  arise  in  consequence  of  local  violence,  are  prin-


Introduction,  7

cipally  three,  viz.  the  symptomatic,  the  nervous,  and  the  hectic  fever.  The
symptomatic  fever  is  an  immediate  effect  of  some  local  injury,  and  there-
fore is  an  universal  sympathy  arising  from  a  local  cause ;  the  nervous
has  no  determined  form  nor  stages  of  the  disease  from  the  firft  cause,  as
delirium,  spasm,  almoft  of  all  kinds  and  in  all  parts,  locked-jaw,  etc.
The  hectic  fever  is  also  an  universal  sympathy,  attended  with  a  local  dis-
ease, which  the  constitution  is  not  able  to  overcome.  Most  of  these  will
be  more  fully  treated  when  I  have  occafion  to  describe  their  causes.

I  divide  partial  sympathy  into  three  kinds  -y  the  remote,  the  contiguous,
and  the  continuous.

The  remote  sympathy  is  where  there  appears  no  visible  connection  of
parts  that  can  account  for  such  effects.  In  these  cases  there  is  commonly
a  sensation  in  the  sympathizer  which  appear  to  be  delusive,  and  produces
a  wrong  reference  of  the  mind  to  the  seat  of  the  disease,  such  as  the  pain
of  the  shoulder  in  an  inflammation  of  the  liver.

The  contiguous  sympathy  is  that  which  appears  to  have  no  other  con-
nection than  arises  from  the  contact  of  separate  parts.  An  instance  of
which  we  have  in  contained  parts  sympathizing  with  the  containing ;
such  as  the  stomach  and  intestines  sympathizing  with  the  integuments  of
the  abdomen,  the  lungs  with  the  chest,  the  brain  with  the  scalp,  and  the
testicles  with  the  scrotum.

The  continuous  sympathy  is  where  there  is  no  interruption  of  parts,  and
the  sympathy  runs,  or  is  continued  along  from  the  irritating  point  as  from
a  centre,  so  as  to  be  gradually  lost  in  the  surrounding  parts,  in  proportion
to  the  distance;  and  this  is  the  most  common  of  all  the  sympathies  ;  an
example  of  it  we  have  in  the  spreading  of  inflammation,  which  will  be
often  mentioned  in  this  treatise.


8  Introduction.


IV. OF  MORTIFICATION.


Mortification  is  of  two  kinds,  the  one  without  inflammation,  and
the  other  preceded  by  it ;  but  as  the  cases  of  mortification,  which  will
be  mentioned  in  this  work,  are  all  of  the  second  kind,  I  shall  confine
my  observations  to  that  species.

I  consider  inflammation  as  an  increased  action  of  that  power  which  a
part  naturally  possesses  ;  and,  in  healthy  inflammations  at  least,  it  is  pro-
bably attended  with  an  increase  of  power;  but  in  inflammations  which
terminate  in  mortification,  there  is  no  increase  of  power ;  but,  on  the  con-
trary, a  diminution  of  it.  This,  when  joined  to  an  increased  action,  be-
comes a  cause  of  mortification,  by  destroying  the  balance  which  ought
to  subsist  between  the  power  and  action  of  every  part.  There  are  besides,
cases  of  mortification  preceded  by  inflammation,  which  do  not  arise  wholly
from  that,  as  a  cause,  but  rather  seem  to  have  something  in  their  nature;
of  this  kind  is  the  carbuncle,  and  the  slough  formed  in  the  small-pox
pustule.

If  this  account  of  mortifications,  ariiing  from  no  specific  nature,  be
just  we  shall  find  it  no  difficult  matter  to  establish  a  rational  mode  of
cure ;  but,  before  we  attempt  this,  let  us  take  a  view  of  the  treatment
which  has  been  hitherto  recommened,  and  see  how  far  it  agrees  with  our
theory.  It  is  plain,  from  the  common  practice,  that  the  weakness  has
been  attended  to ;  but  it  is  plain  that  the  increased  action  has  been  over-
looked ;  and,  therefore,  the  whole  aim  has  been  to  increase  the  action
in  order  to  remove  the  weakness.  The  Peruvian  bark,  confectio  cardiaca,
serpentaria,  etc.  have  been  given  in  large  quantities,  as  the  case  appeared
to  require,  or  the  constitution  could  bear;  by  which  means  an  artificial  or
temporary  appearance  of  strength  has  been  produced,  while  it  was  only  an
increased  action.  Cordials  and  wine,  upon  the  principle  on  which  they
have  been  given,  are  rationally  administered ;  but  there  are  strong  reasons
for  not  recommending  them,  arising  from  the  general  effect  which  they
possess,  of  increasing  the  action  without  giving  real  strength.  The
powers  of  the  body  are,  by  this  treatment,  sunk  afterwards  in  the  same


Introduction,  9

proportion  as  they  had  been  raised,  by  which  nothing  can  be  gained,  but
a  great  deal  may  be  lost  j  for,  in  all  cases,  if  the  powers  are  allowed  to
sink  below  a  certain  point,  they  are  irrecoverable.

The  local  treatment  has  been  as  absurd  as  the  constitutional ;  scarifi-
cations have  been  made  down  to  the  living  parts,  that  stimulating  and  an-
tiseptic medicines  might  be  applied  to  them,  as  turpentines,  the  warmer
balsams,  and  sometimes  the  essential  oils  ;  warm  fomentations  have  been
also  applied,  as  being  congenial  to  life;  but  warmth  always  increases  ac-
tion, and,  therefore,  should  be  well  adjusted  to  the  case;  for,  on  the  other
hand,  cold  debilitates,  or  lessens  powers  when  carried  too  far,  but  at  first
lessens  action.  Stimulants  likewise  are  improper  where  the  actions  are  al-
ready too  violent.

Upon  the  principles  here  laid  down,  the  bark  is  the  principal  medicine,
as  yet  known,  that  we  depend  upon,  as  it  increases  the  powers  and  lessens
the  degree  of  action.  Upon  many  occasions  opium  will  be  of  singular  ser-
vice, by  lessening  the  action;  although  it  does  not  give  real  strength.  I
have  seen  good  effects  from  it,  both  when  given  internally  in  large  doses,
and  when  applied  to  the  part.  It  is  proper  also  to  keep  the  parts  cool,  and
all  the  applications  should  be  cold.


—  .-r  -,


[  II  ]

PART  I.

J

CHAPTER  h
GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  BLOOD,


i\s  the  blood  is  allowed  by  all  to  have  a  considerable  share  in  inflamma-
tion, or  at  least  to  be  particularly  affected  by  it,  becoming,  by  its  appear-
ances, one  of  the  signs  or  symptoms  of  its  existence ;  and,  as  the  blood  is
a  material  object  with  me  in  the  theory  of  inflammation,  I  shall  begin
my  treatise  with  its  natural  history,  a  previous  knowledge  of  which  is  the
more  requisite,  because  the  accounts  of  this  fluid,  hitherto  given,  will
hardly  explain  any  of  its  uses  in  the  machine  in  health,  or  of  its  changes
in,  disease.

The  heart  and  vessels  are  very  active  in  inflammations ;  and  as  their
structures  and  actions  have  not  hitherto  been  understood,  I  have  subjoined
to  the  natural  history  of  the  blood  an  account  of  the  structure  of  the  heart
and  vessels,  together  with  their  actions  in  the  machine ;  to  which  I  have
added  one  use  of  the  absorbents  not  hitherto  known.

As  every  natural  action  of  the  body  depends,  for  its  perfection,  on  a  num-
ber of  circumstances,  we  are  led  to  conclude,  that  all  the  various  combi-
ning actions  are  established  while  the  body  is  in  health,  and  well-disposed;
but  this  does  not  take  place  in  diseased  actions,  for  disease,  on  the  con-
trary, consists  in  the  want  of  this  very  combination;  and  diseased  actions,
therefore,  vary  according  to  many  natural  circumstances,  of  which  I  pro-
pose to  point  out  a  few  of  the  most  striking  instances.

Inflammation  must  have  some  exciting  cause,  and  the  same  cause  will
produce  an  effect  under  one  circumstance,  which  it  will  not  under  another.
I  have,  therefore,  begun  with  trie  supposition  of  an  injury,  attended  with
such  circumstances  as  do  not  excite  inflammation,  which  will  form  a


12  General  principles  of  the  blood.

strong  contrast  to  those  which  do,  the  opposite  effects  mutually  illustra-
ting each  other;  but  as  inflammation  is  a  very  general  action  of  the  vessels
in  disease,  and  is  of  various  kinds,  I  have  previously  given  a  short  account
of  several  of  the  most  common  sorts  of  inflammation,  which  will  explain
the  rest.

The  whole  material  world  has  been  very  properly  divided  into  solids  and
fluids ;  these  being  the  only  essentially  different  states  of  matter  we  are
able  to  observe.  From  one  of  these  states,  to  the  other,  matter  appears  to
be  continually  passing,  but  with  these  restrictions,  that  no  species  of  mat-
ter can  assume  a  solid  form,  without  having  first  been  in  a  fluid  state ;
nor  can  any  change  take  place  in  a  solid  till  it  be  first  formed  into,  or  sus-
pended in  a  fluid.  The  living  animal  body  is  obedient  to  these  general
laws,  for  all  solid  and  animal  matter  has  first  been  fluid,  and  having  passed
into  this  solid  form,  becomes  a  recipient  for  other  fluids,  out  of  which  the
solids  may  themselves  be  renovated  and  increased.

The  solids  of  an  animal,  although  composed  of  one  species  of  matter,
yet  admit  of  great  variety  in  their  appearance,  and  this  variety  takes  place
in  some  animals  more  than  in  others.  But  the  fluid  part  of  an  animal  body,
in  its  natural  state,  has  but  one  appearance,  which  is  that  of  blood.  There
are  certain  parts  of  animals  which,  though  hardly  solid  in  their  own  na-
ture, are  yet  to  be  considered  as  solids,  from  their  being  fixed  in  their  si-
tution,  and  appropriated  to  local  actions ;  some  of  them  acting  on  the
fluids  (which  are,  to  a  certain  degree,  passive  in  all  animals)  and  disposing
of  them  for  particular  purposes  in  the  animal  ceconomy,  in  the  same  man-
ner as  is  done  by  those  which  are  usually  called  the  solids  in  animals  -y  of
this  sort  are  the  gelatinous  parts  in  many  of  the  inferior  orders  of  sea  ani-
mals, as  the  medusa,  the  vitrious  humour  of  the  eye,  etc.  There  appears  to
be  a  sympathetic  intercourse  between  the  solid  and  the  fluid  parts  of  an
animal,  designed  by  nature  for  their  mutual  support.  In  disease,  when  the
machine  cannot  be  furnished  in  the  common  way,  the  solids  of  the  body
supply  the  defects,  and  the  person  becomes  lean ;  and  the  fluids  would  ap-
pear from  this,  to  be  more  an  object  of  attention  in  the  machine  than
even  the  solids.  fk

This  fluid  part  of  an  animal  is  called  the  blood,  and  in  the  animals  with


General  principles  cf  the  blood.  1 3

which  we  are  most  acquainted,  it  is  of  a  red  colour.  The  nature  and  ap-
pearances of  the  blood  have  been  more  attended  to  in  diseases,  especially  of
the  inflammatory  kind,  than  in  full  health,  as  it  is  more  expressive  of  dis-
ease, when  removed  from  the  body,  than  any  of  the  solids,  and  undergoes
changes  which  the  solids  do  not.  Some  of  these  changes  are  produced  by
the  separation  of  parts  from  one  another ;  but  as  the  body  is  seldom  in
perfect  health,  we  can  hardly  procure  the  blood  in  the  same  state  twice
from  one  person,  although  it  may  not  be  sensibly  diseased.  In  a  history
of  the  blood  these  varieties  must  be  mentioned,  although  they  are  often
slighter  appearances  of  what  we  find  in  disease  ;  for  disease  certainly
throws  great  light  on  the  natural  history  of  the  blood,  and  the  apparent
changes  which  it  undergoes  must  have  unavoidably  called  medical  men  to
consider  it  with  attention.

The  only  knowledge,  however,  we  have  of  any  difference  in  the  blood,
arises  from  these  varieties  in  its  spontaneous  changes  when  extravasated ;
nor  do  these  differences  appear  always  to  affect  the  real  nature  of  the  blood,
as  the  animals  often  continue  in  health  while  they  are  going  on.

Blood  is  most  probably  as  much  alike  in  all  animals,  as  the  muscle  of
one  animal  is  like  that  of  another ;  only  with  this  difference,  that  some
animals  have  not  that  part  which  gives  it  the  red  colour  •  but  the  other
parts,  as  the  lymph  and  serum,  are,  as  far  as  I  yet  know,  the  same  in  all.

Transfusion  of  the  blood  of  one  animal  into  the  vessels  of  another,
proves,  to  a  certain  degree,  the  uniform  nature  of  the  blood ;  for,  as  far  as
these  experiments  have  been  urged,  no  alteration  has  been  observed.

Concerning  natural  objects,  we  usually  acquire  a  gross  knowledge,  from
the  frequency  with  which  they  are  observed,  and  it  often  requires  little
more  than  common  attention  to  have  a  tolerable  conception  of  their  gene-
ral principles. This  is  the  case  with  the  blood.

Blood  is  known  to  be  of  a  red  colour  in  a  great  number  of  animals,
and  to  be  altogether  a  fluid  while  circulating  in  the  living  body.  It  is
known  to  separate  into  parts  when  out  of  the  body,  and  a  portion  of  it  to
become  solid  -,  it  is  likewise  known,  that,  when  deprived  of  a  certain  pro-
portion of  it,  an  animal  dies ;  it  has,  therefore,  been  held  in  particular  ve^»


1 4  General  principles  of  the  blood,

neration,  as  constituting  the  life  of  the  animal.  Like  other  things  which
are  discovered  to  be  of  great  use,  the  blood  has  frequently  attracted  the  at-
tention of  mankind,  as  an  object  of  curiosity  only,  from  which  some  have
proceeded  to  a  more  critical  enquiry  into  its  nature  and  properties,  and  to
more  extensive  elucidation  of  the  subject  at  large.  To  this,  practitioners
in  physic  have  a  great  deal  contributed,  from  a  conviction,  that  this  know-
ledge would  be  of  much  use  to  them  in  their  profession ;  and  the  teachers
of  the  art  have  been  still  more  industrious  in  their  investigations ;  but  the
frequent  recourse  which  is  had  to  the  lancet  in  diseases,  has  afforded  the
most  ample  opportunities  of  observation,  almost  sufficient  to  explain  every
principle  in  the  blood,  without  the  aid  of  further  experiment.

In  animals  possessed  of  red  blood,  two  modes  of  investigation  may  be
adopted.  One  of  these  respects  the  blood  while  it  is  circulating,  when  the
colour  makes  its  motion  visible,  and  gives  an  idea  of  the  circulation  in  the
smaller  vessels.  Accidents,  operations,  and  anatomical  knowledge  of  the
vessels  in  which  the  blood  is  contained,  have  at  the  same  time  assisted  us
to  form  more  perfect  ideas  of  its  motion  in  the  larger  vessels.  The  other
mode,  which  is  that  of  examining  the  blood  when  out  of  the  body,  ena-
bles us  to  observe  whatever  relates  to  its  spontaneous  changes  and  separa-
tion, together  with  the  apparent  properties  of  each  component  part.  Its
chemical  properties  become  known  likewise  by  this  second  mode,  though
without  throwing  much  light  on  the  nature  of  the  fluid  itself.

The  blood  is  called  a  fluid  because  it  is  always  found  in  a  fluid  state  in
the  vessels  of  a  living  animal,  while  under  the  influence  of  the  circulation  :
yet  it  is  not,  under  all  circumstances,  naturally  so;  for  of  one  part  of  it,
when  not  circulating,  solidity  is  a  necessary  and  essential  property;  flui-
dity being  only  necessary  at  the  time  of  circulation  for  its  motion,  distri-
bution, and  the  easy  separation  of  its  parts.

Without  being  fluid,  it  could  not  be  propelled  through  flexible  tubes,
and  distributed  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  It  could  not  be  divided  into  por-
tions, as  the  vessels  branch  off;  it  could  not  pass  through  the  smaller  ves-
sels, nor  admit  of  the  various  separations  of  its  parts,  which  are  to  pro-
duce the  increase  and  repairs  of  the  whole  body ; neither  could  it  be


*!\


General  principles  of  the  blood.  1 5

adapted  for  furnishing  the  various  secretions  ->  nor  could  it  be  brought
back  to  the  heart*.

The  red  colour  of  the  blood  is  produced  merely  by  some  red  matter  dif-
fused through  it,  but  not  common  to  all  animals.  The  blood  exhibits  a
greater  variety  of  changes,  and  admits  of  more  experiments  to  determine
its  nature  and  properties  than  the  solids.  This,  in  some  degree,  arises  from
its  fluidity,  in  which  form  it  has  not  yet  attained  its  ultimate  state,  and  is
only  the  substance  that  furnishes  materials,  out  of  which  the  solids  are
produced  or  augmented.

The  heat  in  the  animal  body,  principally  in  those  which  are  called  warm
animals,  has  been  commonly  considered  as  depending  principally  on  the
blood,  or  at  least  as  being  connected  with  it,  as  much  as  with  any  other
portion  of  the  body  +  :  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  take  notice  of  the
increased  heat  of  inflamed  parts,  it  might  be  expected,  that  I  mould  en-
deavour to  explain  this  principle  in  the  history  of  the  blood.  I  profess,
however,  not  thoroughly  to  understand  it,  and  the  theories  hitherto
brought  forward,  do  not  in  the  least  satisfy  me;  as  I  think  that  none  of
them  accord  perfectly  with  every  circumstance  observable  in  these  cases.


I.  OF  THE  MASS  OF  BLOOD,  AS  COMPOSED  OF  DIFFERENT  PARTS.

The  blood,  while  circulating  in  the  vessels,  appears  to  the  eye  to  be  a
homogeneous  mass;  but  when  it  is  passing  in  vessels  so  small  as  almost
to  separate  its  visible  parts,  and  is  viewed  in  a  microscope,  there  is  no
appearance  but  that  of  globules  moving  in  the  vessels.

*  The  distribution  of  water  from  the  sea,  is  similar  to  the  arterial  system ;  and  the  rivers
returning  to  it  have  an  analogy  to  the  veins ;  but  their  effects  are  different,  because  the  globe
works  entirely  upon  its  own  materials.  The  waters  are  continually  carrying  away  the  land
from  one  situation,  and  depositing  it  in  another;  taking  down  continents,  and  leaving  the
ocean  in  their  place;  while  at  the  same  time  they  are  raising  continents  out  of  the  sea.  But
animals  work  upon  foreign  matter,  introduced  from  time  to  time  into  the  system.

-f-  From  whence  the  expression,  warm  blooded,  or  cold  blooded  animals  ;  but  the  expression
should  rather  be,  the  animals  of  a  permanent  heat  ill  all  atmospheres,  and  animals  of  a  hea;
variable  with  every  atmosphere.


16  General  principles  of  the  blood.

In  such  a  situation  the  other  parts  called  the  coagulable  lymph,  and
the  serum,  are  not  distinguishable,  on  account  of  their  being  transparent,
and  the  globules  do  not,  strictly  speaking,  constitute  a  part  of  the  fluid,
but  are  only  diffused  through  it.  These  globules  being  red,  give  this
collar  to  the  blood,  and  are  called  the  red  part,  but  are  not  always  of  the
same  redness  when  collected  in  a  mass;  this  is  probably  owing  to  each
globule  being  changed  in  its  tint  of  colouring.  The  blood  of  some  ani-
mals has  no  such  globules,  but  is  perfectly  transparent,  indeed  more  so
than  the  most  transparent  parts  of  the  red  blood,  to  which  it  is  analo-
geous.  A  red  colour  is  therefore  not  essential  to  constitute  true  blood;
and  I  believe  the  slight  tinge  of  colour  there  is  in  the  blood,  independent
of  the  globules,  arises  from  the  solution  of  various  substances  in  the  serum.
The  blood  has  a  peculiar  taste,  being  faltish,  but  of  a  peculiar  flavor:
we  can  always  distinguish  by  the  taste  when  there  is  blood  in  the  mouth.

These  are  the  principal  observations  we  can  make  on  the  blood  when
circulating,  or  in  its  fluid  state;  but  as  one  part  of  it  under  certain  cir-
cumstances changes  into  a  solid,  or  as  it  is  commonly  termed,  coagulates,
more  of  its  parts  are  thus  exposed;  in  this  process  the  blood  separates
into  two  distinct  substances,  a  coagulating  part,  and  another  which  se-
parates from  it  and  remains  fluid;  but  the  coagulum  entangles  the  red
part,  and  this  alone  shews  the  blood  to  be  formed  of  these  component
parts.  The  parts  of  the  blood  so  separated,  have  been  named  according
to  their  apparent  properties ;  the  one,  the  coagulable  lymph ;  the  other,
the  serum;  and  the  red  part  has  been  called,  the  red  globules;  but  upon
a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  different  parts  of  this  fluid,  we  shall
And  that  those  terms  are  not  expressive  of  all  their  properties.

The  term  coagulable  lymph,  is.  not  expressive  of  this  property,  as  one
which  is  inherent  in  the  lymph  itself;  for  many  substances  are  capable
of  being  coagulated,  though  not  spontaneously,  yet  by  chemical  means.
For  instance;  heat  coagulates  the  farinaceous  part  of  vegetables,  and  thus
forms  paste;  and  also  mucus.  Spirits  of  wine  coagulates  many  animal
substances ;  acid  coagulates  milk,  etc.  the  term,  therefore,  to  be  used  re-
specting this  property  of  the  blood,  should  be  such  as  expresses  its  inhe-
rent power  of  self-coagulation :  perhaps  coagulating  might  be  better  ap-


General  principles  of  the  blood.  17

plied  to  what  is  called  coagulable  lymph ;  and  the  epithet  coagulahle  might
be  reserved  for  those  fluids  which  require  a  chemical  process  to  produce
that  effect.  Of  this  kind  is  the  serum,  for  I  have  discovered  this  fluid  to
be  composed  of  two  parts,  which  is  ascertained  by  means  of  the  different
causes  of  coagulation.  To  discover  all  the  various  properties  and  uses  of
the  component  parts  of  the  blood  in  the  machine,  may  be  impossible  ;  and
to  determine  whether  they  will  act,  or  are  employed  conjunctively  to  pro-
duce the  effect,  is  not  easy:  but  there  are  some  properties  discoverable
which  would  incline  us  to  believe,  that  particular  parts  of  the  blood  are
employed  to  compose  particular  solid  parts,  which  are  found  to  possess
properties  similar  to  different  parts  of  the  blood.


II.  OF  COAGULATION,  AND  ITS  EFFECTS.

As  coagulation  is  the  first  change  which  the  blood  undergoes,  when  out
of  the  vessels,  and  as  it  even  coagulates  while  in  them,  under  certain  cir-
cumstances, we  shall  consider  this  process  first.  Though  fluidity  is  ne-
cessary to  enable  the  blood  to  circulate,  yet  coagulation  is  no  less  neces-
sary, when  it  is  to  be  disposed  of  out  of  the  circulation,  even  within  the
body,  and  therefore  deserves  to  be  considered  with  no  less  attention.  There
is,  I  think,  more  to  be  learned  of  the  use  of  blood  in  the  animal  oeconomyj
from  its  coagulation,  than  from  its  fluidity.  The  coagulation  of  the  blood,
when  out  of  the  circulation,  would  seem  to  be  unconnected  with  life,  vet
life  could  not  go  on  without  it ;  for  as  all  the  solid  parts  of  the  body  are
formed  from  the  blood,  this  could  not  take  place,  if  there  did  not  exist  in
it  the  power  of  coagulating.  Many  diseases  exhibit  the  blood  coagulated
in  the  living  body,  even  in  the  vessels  themselves,  but  more  frequently
when  extravasated.  Coagulation  does  not  belong  to  the  whole  mafs  of
circulating  blood  j  but  only  to  the  part  I  have  called  coagulating  lymph,
which  during  this  action  commonly  detaches  itself  from  the  other  part,
called  the  serum.

D


j  g  General  principles  of  the  blood.

Whether  the  whole  mass  of  the  serum  be  a  distinct  part  of  the  blood
when  circulating,  is  not  easily  determined,  as  we  have  no  mode  of  sepa-
rating it  from  the  coagulating  lymph,  while  both  are  fluid.  The  serum
making  a  part  of  the  whole  mass  in  the  fluid  state,  the  first  stage  in  the
coagulation  is  a  species  of  decomposition,  forming  a  separation  of  the
serum.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  reasons  for  considering  the
coagulating  lymph  as  distinct  from  the  serum,  even  when  both  are  fluid  ;
since  the  serum  can  be  separated  from  the  lymph,  without  coagulating,  by
many  actions  of  the  vessels,  both  natural,  preternatural,  or  diseased.  Thus
the  liquor  of  the  amnios,  and  that  of  dropsies,  are  formed  ;  and  therefore
we  may  conclude,  that  the  separation  of  the  serum,  when  the  lymph  is
coagulated,  is  not  an  act  necessary  to  the  coagulation,  but  an  effect  of  it.

The  circumstances  attending  the  coagulation  of  the  lymph  are  subject
to  great  varieties.  These  depend  upon  or  correspond  with  the  state  of  the
body  at  the  time,  of  which  we  can  best  judge  by  the  readiness  or  diffi-
culty with  which  the  blood  coagulates,  and  by  the  firmness  or  loosness  of
the  coagulum.  The  whole  mass  of  the  blood  being  a  compound,  of
which  the  parts  are  in  some  degree  separated  :  the  appearances  upon  coa-
gulation are  attended  with  still  more  variety  than  the  lymph  alone  could
exhibit,  or  than  could  occur  in  those  animals  which  are  not  possessed  of
red  blood,  as  the  red  part  brings  to  view  many  of  the  changes  in  the
lymph,  by  the  difference  of  its  colour,  as  well  as  of  its  specific  gravity.

The  three  substances  which  become  visibly  distinct  when  the  lymph
coagulates,  diifer  as  to  gravity ;  the  serum  is  the  lightest,  and  remaining
fluid  swims  upon  the  top  j  the  red  globules  which  undergo  no  change,
are  the  heaviest,  and  sink  more  or  less  in  the  lymph  ;  but  being  entan-
gled in  it,  add  to  its  weight  so  as  to  make  it  sink  deeper  in  the  serum.

Blood  when  extravasated  coagulates  sooner  or  later,  according  to  the
quickness  or  slowness  of  its  extravasation,  and  the  quantity  extravasated  :
it  coagulates  late  when  drawn  into  a  bason  rapidly,  and  in  considerable
quantity  -,  soon,  when  allowed  to  flow  slowly,  and  in  small  quantities.
This  will  be  better  understood  when  I  treat  of  the  principles  of  coagula-
tion.

When  blood  is  received  into  a  cup,  and  is  thereby  exposed,  it  certainly


■


General  principles  of  the  blood.  19

coagulates  more  readily  than  when  extravasated  in  the  cellular  membrane,
or  in  the  vessels;  and  on  the  exposed  surface  it  coagulates  more  readily
than  any  where  else,  except  round  the  edges  of  the  dish  in  which  it  is  con-
tained. It  has  been  observed,  that  the  upper  surface  of  the  blood  coagu-
lates first,  forming  a  thin  pellicle,  as  milk  does,  when  near  boiling;  while
underneath  it  still  remains  fluid;  but  the  whole  gradually  becoming
thicker,  and  losing  its  transparency,  coagulates  in  about  fifteen  or  twenty
minutes  into  a  substance  of  pretty  thick  consistence.  The  time  required
will  vary  according  to  the  quantity  of  blood  in  one  mass,  and  the  dispo-
sition of  the  blood  at  the  time.

"We  may  observe  the  following  appearances  when  the  blood  is  coagu-
lated. The  coagulum  is  generally,  but  not  always,  swimming  in  a  fluid;
for  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  lymph  does  not  squeeze  out  the  serum
in  the  act  of  coagulation,  in  which  there  is  an  act  of  contraction.  The
top  of  the  coagulum  is  toughest,  or  firmest;  and  it  becomes  less  and  less
so  towards  the  bottom,  because  there  is  less  of  the  coagulating  lymph  at
the  bottom,  in  proportion  as  the  red  globules  subside  in  the  lymph  before
it  coagulates.  The  coagulating  lymph  has  a  degree  of  toughness  in  pro-
portion as  it  is  free  from  serum ;  for  while  the  serum  is  mixed  within
it,  though  there  may  be  red  globules,  it  is  not  very  tough;  but  when
pressed  between  the  finger  and  thumb,  so  as  to  squeeze  out  the  serum,  it
becomes  nearly  as  tough,  and  elastic,  as  the  coats  of  an  artery,  to  appear-
ance, becoming  fibrous  and  even,  forming  lamina;  and  indeed  appears  to
be  very  much  the  same  kind  of  substance  with  an  artery,  which  gives  us
a  clear  idea  how  a  membrane  may  be  formed,  and  probably  can  be  varied
according  to  the  impression  made  on  it  by  the  surrounding  parts.  This  is
one  reason  why  the  lymph,  which  has  the  strongest  disposition  for  coagu-
lation, is  the  toughest,  as  it  parts  with  more  of  its  serum.  The  lymph  is
transparent,  but  whether  tinged  as  the  serum  is  found  to  be,  we  can  hardly
say,  as  it  is  seldom  possible  to  catch  it  in  a  fluid  state  free  from  red  glo-
bules, and  never  from  serum,  which  has  itself  a  tinge.  When  out  of  the
body  in  a  dish,  where  it  is  long  in  coagulating,  and  the  red  globules  sink
fast,  we  find  it  transparent;  but,  during  coagulation,  it  becomes  more
muddy,  till  at  last  it  is  opaque,  but  with  a  tinge  of  colour. On  being


20  General  principles  of  the  blood.

steeped  in  water  it  is  often  rendered  very  white,  which  would  not  probably
be  the  case  if  it  had  a  tinge  of  its  own,  independent  of  the  serum.

Blood  usually  requires  a  considerable  time  for  its  complete  coagulation,
or  rather  contraction ;  for,  if  allowed  to  stand  some  days,  the  coagulated
part  becomes  less  and  less,  as  more  and  more  of  the  serum  is  squeezed  out,
which  cannot  arise  from  the  serum  being  lighter,  and  issuing  out  sponta-
neously; for  without  some  expelling  force  it  would  be  retained  mechani-
cally by  the  capillary  attraction,  as  in  a  sponge.  The  blood  which  is
longest  in  coagulating,  coagulates  most  strongly,  and  produces  the  most
complete  separation  of  its  parts.  In  such  instances  as  the  coagulating
lymph  continues  longer  fluid,  it  allows  the  red  globules  more  time  to  sub-
side, and  the  serum  to  be  more  squeezed  out  from  the  crassimentum,
When  the  coagulation  is  slow,  and  of  that  kind  which  will  be  firm  when
completed,  we  may  skim  off  the  fluid  coagulating  lymph,  free  from  the
red  globules;  and  the  part  so  taken  will  coagulate  immediately  ,\vhile
that  in  the  cup  remains  fluid  some  time  longer.

Many  causes  have  been  assigned  for  the  coagulation  of  the  lymph,
which  appear  to  me  to  be  ill-founded.  It  frequently  happens  that  when
changes  take  place  in  matter  of  which  the  immediate  causes  are  unknown,
the  mind  refers  them  to  some  circumstances  which  accompany  these
changes;  although,  perhaps,  they  may  have  had  no  concern  whatever
in  producing  them,  and  may  be  only  attendants.  This  will  always
be  the  case  where  those  changes  arise  out  of  the  nature  of  the  part  itself.
A  seed  put  into  moist  ground  grows;  but  the  moist  ground  is  only  a  ne-
cefiary  attendant,  and  not  the  immediate  cause.  The  life  of  the  seed,
stimulated  to  action  by  the  moisture,  is  the  immediate  cause  of  its  growth,
and  it  continues  to  grow  because  its  action  is  always,  excited.  All  the
water  in  the  world  would  not  make  a  dead  seed  grow.  The  same  mode
of  distinction  is  applicable  to  the  coagulation  of  the  lymph.

The  first  observations  on  the  blood  were  most  probably  made  on  that
of  the  more  perfect  animals,  whose  heat  is  commonly  greater  than  the
heat  of  the  atmosphere.  Such  blood  when  extravasated,  was  found  to
coagulate  on  cooling;  it  was  therefore  natural  to  suppose  that  the  coagu-


General  principles  of  the  blood,  21

ktion  of  the  lymph  arose  from  its  becoming  colder,  as  happens  in  jelly*;
but  cold,  simply,  has  certainly  no  effect  upon  the  coagulating  lymph.

If  we  take  a  fish  out  of  the  sea,  the  heat  of  its  body,  perhaps  about  6o°,
and  bring  it  into  an  atmosphere  of  700,  the  blood,  on  being  let  out  of  the
vessels,  will  immediately  coagulate.  This  was  ascertained  on  board  of  a
ship  lying  off  Bellisle,  in  the  summer  1761 ;  for  immediately  upon  a  fish
being  caught,  I  ascertained  its  heat,  and  letting  out  part  of  its  blood,  it
immediately  coagulated,  although  the  blood  discharged  was  become  warmer
than  that  remaining  in  the  vessels  of  the  fish ;  which,  however,  still  con-
tinued fluid.

Indeed  common  experience  and  observation  shews  us,  that  cold  alone
has  no  power  to  coagulate  the  blood.  It  often  happens  that  particular
parts  of  an  animal,  such  as  the  fingers,  face,  nose,  ears,  6tc.  are  cooled
nearly  to  the  freezing  point,  and  frequently  are  in  that  state  for  a  confi-
derable  time;  yet  the  blood  retains  its  fluidity  in  those  parts,  as  I  have  ex-
perienced in  my  own  fingers ;  and  indeed  in  those  parts  of  an  animal  where
the  blood  has  been  frozen,  and  again  thawed,  the  blood  appears  as  fluid  as
before,  and  circulates  as  usual.  Heat  has  the  power  of  exciting  action  in
an  animal;  and  we  find  that  heat  even  increases  the  action  of  coagulation;
for,  if  blood  be  heated  to  about  1 200,  it  will  coagulate  five  minutes  sooner
than  when  kept  at  its  natural  heat,  and  even  sooner  than  the  blood  of  the
same  animal,  taken  at  the  same  time  and  cooled  to  50°+  Mr.  Hewson
has  laboured  this  point,  endeavouring  to  shew  it  is  not  cold  that  makes
the  blood  coagulate;  and  he  has  laboured  no  less  to  shew  the  real  cause
of  such  a  change.

He  took  fresh  blood  and  froze  it  quickly;  on  being  thawed,  it  was

*  This  term  has  been  applied  to  the  coagulation  of  the  blood,  but  I  think  improperly;  for
I  should  only  call  that  jelly,  which  became  solid  by  cold,  and  fluid  again  by  heat;  coagulation
is  totally  different,  for  it  is  a  new  species  of  combination.  The  freezing  of  blood  may  be
called,  congelation.

f  These  experiments  were  made  on  the  jugular  veins  of  dogs,  by  taking  a  section  of  the
veins  on  each  side  filled  with  blood,  and  immersing  them  in  water,  either  warmer or.  colder
or  of  the  natural  heat,  and  observing  the  comparative  difference.


22  General  principles  of  the  blood.

again  fluid,  but  soon  afterwards  coagulated;  this  he  conceived  to  be  a
sufficient  proof,  that  it  was  not  cold  which  made  the  blood  coagulate*.

From  the  above  observations,  and  experiments,  it  must  appear  that
cold,  simply,  has  no  influence  whatever  upon  the  coagulation  of  the
blood.

And  in  most  of  the  cases  in  which  the  blood  is  observed  to  coagulate,
the  air  is  commonly  in  contact  with  it;  this  was  next  presumed  to  be  the
cause  of  its  coagulation  t;  but  the  air  has  really  no  more  effect  than  any
other  extraneous  body,  in  contact  with  the  blood,  that  is  capable  of  making
an  impression  upon  it;  for  the  blood  coagulates  more  readily  in  a  vacuum
than  in  the  open  air;  nor  will  either  of  these  supposed  causes  assist  in  ex-
plaining why  it  is  not  found  coagulated  after  many  kinds  of  death,  nor  in
the  menstrual  discharge.  Neither  will  they  account  for  the  very  speedy
coagulation  of  the  blood  which  usually  takes  place  in  all  the  vessels  after
death,  or  when  it  has  been  extravasated  into  cavities,  or  cellular  mem-
branes, where  no  air  has  ever  been  admitted.

Rest  is  another  cause  upon  which  the  coagulation  of  the  blood  has  been
said  to  depend :  and  although  this  opinion  be  not  true  in  the  full  extent
in  which  it  has  been  taken,  I  think  that  rest  has  greater  influence  in  the
change  than  any  other  circumstance  whatever.  But  though  rest  seems
greatly  to  dispose  the  blood  to  coagulation,  it  is  the  operation  of  rest  alone,
without  exposure,  which  we  are  to  confider;  as  otherwise  we  shall  be  apt
to  confound  it  with  the  two  foregoing  causes,  viz.  cold,  and  the  contact
of  air.

Since  therefore  the  blood  may  coagulate  in  the  veffels,  either  of  a  living,
or  a  dead  body,  and  fince  it  coagulates  when  extravasated  into  different
parts  of  a  living  body,  rest,  like  cold,  or  air,  might  be  supposed  to  be  the
sole  cause  of  the  coagulation  of  the  blood :  yet  it  is  not  rest,  considered
simply,  but  rest,  under  certain  circumstances,  which  appears  to  possess
such  a  power ;  for  motion  given  to  the  blood,  out  01  the  vessels,  will  not  of
itself  prevent  its  coagulation ;  nor  will  it  even  in  the  vessels  themselves,  if
all  the  purposes  of  motion  are  not  answered  by  it. Motion  seems  to  re-

*  Hewson  on  the  Blood,  page  21. f  Ibid,  page  23.


x  I

General  principles  of  the  blood.  23

tard  coagulation* ;  yet  we  know  for  certain  that  blood  will  in  time  coa-
gulate, even  in  the  vessels  themselves,  and  under  certain  circumstances
sooner,  perhaps,  than  any  where  else ;  as  for  instance,  when  there  is  a  dis-
position to  mortification.  In  this  case  we  find  the  blood  coagulated  even
in  the  larger  vessels.

I  have  seen  a  mortification  come  on  the  foot,  and  leg,  and  when  it
had  advanced  only  to  a  certain  degree,  the  person  died.  On  examining
the  parts  above  the  mortified  part,  I  found  the  crural,  and  iliac  arteries,
filled  completely  with  strong  coagulated  blood;  we  may  thence  infer,
that  the  tendency  to  mortification  in  the  vessels  produced  this  disposition
in  the  blood.  If  the  coagulation  mould  be  supposed  to  have  arisen  from
the  blood  being  stopped  in  the  large  vessels,  at  the  mortified  part,  let  us
reflect,  that  this  cannot  account  for  it;  the  same  thing  ought  then  to
happen  in  an  amputation,  or  in  any  case  where  the  larger  vessels  are
tied  up.

' In  a  priapism  the  blood  does  not  coagulate,  except  it  threatens  mor-
tification.

The  separation  of  the  blood,  either  from  itself,  that  is,  when  divided
into  small  portions,  or  separated  from  the  living  body,  becomes  one  of
the  immediate  causes  of  the  coagulation  of  the  lymph;  therefore,  the
contact  of  blood  with  blood,  or  with  living  vessels,  in  some  degree  re-
tards coagulation:  this  is  the  reason  why  blood  which  comes  from  the
vessels  slowly,  or  falls  from  some  height,  or  runs  someway  on  the  surface
of  a  dish,  coagulates  sooner  than  when  the  contrary  circumstances  hap-
pen; and  upon  this  principle  it  is,  that  blood,  when  shaken  in  a  phial,
will  coagulate  the  sooner,  even  if  shaken  in  a  vacuum.  A  deep  mass  of
blood  is  also  from  the  same  cause,  longer  in  coagulating  than  a  shallow
one.

From  the  above  observations  it  must  appear  evident,  that  neither  cold,
nor  air,  nor  rest  alone,  have  any  influence  on  the  coagulating  power  of  the
blood;  there  must,  therefore,  be  some  other  principle  on  which  this  pro-

*  This  is  motion  given  to  it  in  a  vessel,  without  any  empty  space,  and  having  beads  put
into  it,  which  are  shaken.


2A.  General  principles  of  the  blood.

•cess  depends  j  and,  as  it  retains  its  fluid  state  while  circulating,  and  even
for  a  long  time  when  at  rest  in  the  living  vessels,  and  coagulates  when
the  vessels  or  the  body  dies,  it  might  naturally  be  supposed  that  it  was
the  life  of  the  body  or  vessels  which  kept  it  fluid;  we  know,  however,
that  life  in  the  body  or  vessels  does  not  hinder  the  blood  from  coagulating
under  certain  circumstances,  but  often  rather  excites  coagulation;  nor
does  death,  in  the  body  or  vessels,  in  all  cases  become  a  cause  of  coagu-
lation ;  for  we  find  that  in  many  who  die  suddenly,  from  a  strong  im-
pression of  the  mind,  the  blood  does  not  coagulate ;  there  is,  therefore,
something  more  than  the  mere  situation  of  the  blood,  surrounded  with
dead  parts,  that  allows  of  coagulation;  and  that  must  be  a  something  in
the  blood  itself.

From  these  observations  it  must  be  evident,  that  the  fluid  state  of  the
blood  is  connected  with  the  living  vessels,  which  is  its  natural  iituation,
and  with  motion;  and  that  where  there  is  a  full  power  of  life,  the  vessels
are  capable  of  keeping  the  blood  in  a  fluid  state:  I  believe,  however,
very  little  motion  is  required  to  keep  up  this  fluidity  when  the  other  is
present.  A  total  stagnation  of  the  blood,  while  the  body  is  alive,  as  in  a
trance,  or  where  the  circulation  has  been  stopt  for  several  hours,  as  in  the
case  of  persons  apparently  drowned,  does  not  make  it  coagulate;  yet  where
there  are  no  actions  going  on,  in  a  part,  if  the  blood  stagnates  for  a  much
shorter  time  than  in  a  trance,  it  will  be  found  coagulated,  as  in  mortifi-
cations; but  then  this  coagulation  is  to  answer  a  good  purpose,  and  arises
from  necessity*,  which  appears  to  act  as  a  stimulus  in  disposing  the  blood
to  coagulate.

As  a  proof  that  blood  will  not  coagulate  in  living  vessels,  in  a  perfect
and  natural  state,  and  ready  to  act  when  powers  were  restored  to  it,  I
found  that  the  blood  of  a  fish,  which  had  the  actions  of  life  stopped  for
three  days,  and  was  supposed  to  be  dead,  did  not  coagulate  in  the  vessels;
but,  upon  being  exposed,  or  extravasated,  soon  coagulated.

*  By  action  taking  place  from  necessity,  effects  are  meant  which  arise  in  consequence  of
some  unusual,  or  unnatural  change,  going  on  in  the  parts,  and  become  a  stimulus  to  action.
The  stimuli  from  this  cause,  may  vary  exceedingly  among  themselves;  but  as  we  are  unable
to  investigate  them,  I  have  included  them  under  this  general  term,  stimulus  of  necessity.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  2$

The  blood  of  a  lamprey-ecl,  which  had  been  dead  to  appearance  some
days,  was  found  fluid  in  the  vessels,  because  the  animal  was  not  really
dead;  there  had,  however,  been  no  motion  in  the  blood,  as  the  heart  had
ceased  acting;  but  upon  its  being  exposed,  and  extravasated  into  water,
it  soon  coagulated* :  yet  under  certain  circumstances  in  life,  it  had
been  observed,  that  the  blood  will  in  a  small  degree  coagulate:  this  is  in
the  state  of  torpor.  It  is  asserted  by  some  author,  whom  I  now  do  not
recollect,  that  the  blood  of  a  batt  coagulates  when  in  that  state;  and  Mr.
Cornish,  surgeon,  at  Totness,  Denvonshire,  to  whom  I  applied  for  some
batts  in  the  torpid  state,  sent  me  them,  but  in  the  carriage  they  always
died;  however,  he  took  opportunities  of  examining  them,  and  he  found
jhat  the  blood  was  in  a  certain  degree  coagulated;  but  it  soon  reco-
vered its  fluidity  on  motion  and  heat.

From  these  remarks  I  should  conclude,  that  rest  does  not  of  itself  in  the
least  assist  the  coagulation  of  the  blood ;  but  that  this  effect  arises  from  the
blood  being  separated  from  the  living  vessels,  and  being  deprived  of  mo-
tion; and  that  it  happens  sooner,  or  later,  according  to  other  circum-
stances. It  might  be  supposed  that  these  are  rather  negative  causes  of
coagulation,  than  positive  ones;  but  it  is  to  be  considered,  that  in  a  living
body,  the  cessation  of  a  natural  action,  the  absence  of  an  usual  impression
becomes  a  cause  of  action,  of  which  innumerable  instances  may  be  given.

I  have  now  considered  the  circumstances  under  which  the  blood  coa-
gulates, and  shewn  that  none  of  them  alone,  nor  all  them  combined,  in-
duce the  blood  to  coagulate.  My  opinion  is,  that  it  coagulates  from  an
impression  :  that  is,  its  fluidity  under  such  circumstances,  being  improper,
or  no  longer  necessary,  it  coagulates  to  answer  now  the  necessary  purpose
of  solidity. This  power  seems  to  be  influenced  in  a  way,  in  some  degree

*  There  are  some  circumstances  which  hinder  the  coagulation  of  blood  in  living  bodies  al-
though extravasated.  Two  leeches  had  been  applied,  and  had  sucked  till  full.  Thefe  were
preserved  for  ten  weeks,  and  then  had  contained  considerable  quantity  of  blood,  which  ap-
peared like  that  recently  drawn  from  a  vein,  and  coagulated  when  exposed.  I  have  known,
in  tapping  a  hydrocele,  that  a  small  vessel  has  been  wounded,  and  the  blood,  as  it  extra-
vasated, got  into  the  sack,  and  when  tapped  sixty-five  days  after,  the  blood  has  come  out
thickishj  but  when  extracted  it  coagulated,  and  separated  into  different  parts.

E


26  General  principles  of  the  blood,

similar  to  muscular  action,  though  probably  not  entirely  of  that  kind;  for
I  have  reason  to  believe,  that  blood  has  the  power  of  action  within  itself,
according  to  the  stimulus  of  necessity;  which  necessity  arises  out  of  its
situation.

I  shall  now  consider  the  simple  act  of  coagulation,  abstracted  from
causes.

Coagulation  I  conceive  to  be  an  operation  of  life;  and  I  imagine  it  to
proceed  exactly  upon  the  same  principle  as  the  union  by  the  first  intention;
it  is  particle  uniting  with  particle,  by  the  attraction  of  cohesion,  which,  in
the  blood,  forms  a  solid;  and  it  is  this  coagulum,  uniting  with  the  sur-
rounding parts,  which  forms  the  union  by  the  first  intention :  for  union
by  the  first  intention,  is  no  more  than  the  living  parts  when  separated,
whether  naturally,  or  by  art,  forming  a  reciprocal  attraction  of  cohesion
with  the  intermediate  coagulum,  which  immediately  admits  of  mutual
intercourse,  and  as  it  were,  one  interest.

To  produce  coagulation  of  the  blood,  however,  something  more  is  re-
quired than  merely  the  reverse  of  the  causes  abovementioned,  as  having
the  power  to  keep  it  fluid;  for  the  blood  becomes  in  many  cases  instanta-
neously incapable  of  coagulation,  either  in  or  out  of  the  vessels,  even  when
nothing  has  been  added,  or  taken  away,  and  must  be  therefore  under  the
influence  of  some  other  cause.  This,  I  believe,  must  be  sought  in  some
property  inherent  in  the  blood  itself:  besides,  some  natural  operations  de-
stroy this  principle  in  the  blood,  when  extravasated.

In  many  modes  of  destroying  life  the  blood  is  deprived  of  its  power  of
coagulation,  as  happens  in  sudden  death  produced  by  many  kinds  of  fits;
by  anger,  electricity,  or  lightning;  or  by  a  blow  on  the  stomach,  etc.
In  these  cases  we  find  the  blood,  after  death,  not  only  in  as  fluid  a  state
as  in  the  living  vessels,  but  it  does  not  even  coagulate  when  taken  out  of
them.  As  in  the  bodies  of  such  persons  no  action  of  life  takes  place,  the
muscles  do  not  contract.  There  are  partial  influences,  likewise,  which
destroy  the  power  of  coagulation,  as  a  blow  on  a  part  producing  a  consi-
derable extravasation.  This  forms  an  ecchymosis,  in  which  we  shall
often  find  the  blood  not  in  the  least  coagulated.  In  healthy  menstruation,
the  blood  which  is  discharged  does  not  coagulate;  in  the  irregular  or  un-


General  principles  of  the  blood.  27

healthy  it  does.  The  healthy  menses,  therefore,  fliew  a  peculiar  action  of
the  constitution  ;  and  it  is  most  probably  in  this  action  that  its  salubrious
purposes  consist;  for  if  twice  the  usual  quantity  is  evacuated  with  the
power  of  coagulation,  even  from  the  same  vessels,  the  same  benefit  is  not
produced;  much  less  when  taken  from  another  part  by  art.

Many  substances,  when  mixed  with  the  blood,  prevent  coagulation  ;
bile  has  this  effect  out  of  the  body;  but  we  cannot  suppose  that  in  a  living
body  it  can  be  taken  into  the  blood  in  such  quantity  as  to  produce  this
effect ;  for  we  find  in  a  very  severe  jaundice,  that  the  blood  is  still  capable
of  coagulating  strongly.

That  probably  every  inanimate  fluid  in  nature,  which  is  capable  of
being  rendered  solid,  produces  heat,  during  that  change ;  and  in  the
contrary  change  cold  is  commonly  known ;  it  is  on  that  principle  Dr.
Black  has  established  his  very  ingenious  theory  of  latent  heat.  Thus  in
the  freezing  of  water,  heat  is  produced.

To  see  how  far  the  coagulation  of  the  blood  was  fimilar  in  this  respecfc
to  the  same  change  in  other  substances,  I  first  coagulated  the  white  of  an
egg,  by  applying  to  it  rectified  spirits  of  wine :  the  heat  of  both  was
the  same  before  their  union  ;  but  I  found  upon  uniting  them,  that  the
white  of  the  egg  was  immediately  coagulated,  and  that  the  heat  of  the
mixture  was  increased  four,  sometimes  five  degrees,  according  as  it  coa-
gulated, slowly,  or  quickly.

As  the  blood  in  the  animals  upon  which  we  most  commonly  make  our
experiments  is  warm,  it  becomes  a  difficult  matter  to  ascertain  whether  it
produces  heat  upon  coagulation.  In  holding  the  ball  of  the  thermometer
in  the  stream  of  blood  coming  from  the  arm,  I  found  the  heat  raised  to
ninety-two  degrees  :  I  then  took  a  cup  of  human  blood,  allowed  it  to
coagulate,  and  put  it  up  to  the  brim  in  water  warmed  to  ninety-two  de-
grees, till  the  whole  mass  was  heated  to  this  point.  I  bled  afterwards
another  person  to  the  same  quantity,  in  a  similar  cup,  which  was  put
into  the  same  water.  Having  two  well  regulated  thermometers,  one  in
each  cup  of  blood,  I  observed  which  cooled  first,  for  I  did  not  expect  so
much  heat  to  be  produced  as  to  make  it  warmer ;  but  conceived,  if  any
heat  was  formed,  it  would  retard  the  cooling  of  the  frefh  blood  ;  but  it


28  General  principles  of  the  blood.

rather  cooled  faster,  which  I  imputed  to  the  coagulated  blood  parting  with
its  heat  slower  than  the  fluid  blood.  These  experiments  I  have  repeated
several  times,  with  nearly  the  same  effect.  I  then  conceived  the  experi-
ment would  be  more  conclusive  if  I  could  get  blood  in  a  fluid  state,  which
was  naturally  of  the  heat  of  the  atmosphere,  for  which  purpose  I  took
the  blood  of  turtles.

A  healthy  turtle  was  kept  in  a  room  all  night,  the  floor  of  which  was
about  640,  and  the  atmosphere  65°.  In  the  morning  the  heat  was  nearly
the  same.  The  thermometer  was  introduced  into  the  anus,  and  the  heat
of  that  part  was  64°.  The  animal  being  suspended  by  the  hind  legs,
the  head  was  cut  off"  at  once,  and  the  blood  caught  in  a  bason  j  the  blood
while  flowing,  was  650  and  when  collected,  was  66°,  but  fell  to  65^
while  coagulating,  which  it  did  very  slowly  :  it  remained  at  65°,  and  when
coagulated,  was  still  650.  These  experiments  had  been  made  several  times,
but  not  with  that  nice  accuracy  which  was  obtained  by  causing  all  the
heats  to  correspond  exactly  ;  yet  as  they  were  all  known,  and  marked
down,  if  any  heat  had  been  produced  upon  coagulation,  its  exact  quantity
would  have  been  ascertained  in  each  ;  and,  indeed,  in  some,  it  seemed  to
cool,  but  in  none  it  became  warmer.  From  these  experiments  I  fhould
say,  that  in  the  coagulation  of  the  blood,  no  heat  is  formed.

Coagulated  blood,  is  an  inorganized  animal  substance.  When  the
blood  is  thinly  spread  before  coagulation,  or  oozes  out  on  surfaces,  in
which  act  it  immediately  coagulates,  and  coagulates  in  that  form,  it  may
then  be  said  to  form  an  inorganized  membrane,  of  which  there  are
many  ;  and  organization  is  seemingly  so  simple  in  many  (which  we  know
to  be  constituent  parts  of  the  body)  that  these  coagula,  more  especially
the  thin  ones,  cannot  easily  by  their  appearances  be  distinguished  from  them.

The  coagulating  lymph  of  the  blood  being  common,  probably  to  all  ani-
mals, while  tlie  red  particles  are  not,  we  must  suppose  it  from  this  alone,
to  be  the  most  cflential  part ;  and  as  we  find  it  capable  of  undergoing,  in
certain  circumstances,  spontaneous  changes,  which  are  necessary  to  the
growth,  continuance,  and  preservation  of  the  animal ;  while  to  the  other
parts  we  cannot  assign  any  such  uses,  we  have  still  more  reason  to  suppose
it  the  most  essential  part  of  the  blood  in  every  animal*


General  principles  of  the  blood.  29

Besides  a  disposition  for  coagulation  under  certain  circumstances,  as
before  described,  the  blood  has  also  a  disposition  for  the  separation  of  the
red  globules,  and  probably  of  all  its  parts;  for  I  think  I  have  reason  to
believe  that  a  disposition  for  coagulation,  and  a  disposition  for  a  separa-
tion of  the  red  part,  are  not  the  same  thing,  but  arise  from  two  different
principles.  Indeed,  a  disposition  to  coagulation  would  counteract  the  ef-
fect, and  hinder  the  separation  of  the  red  particles  from  taking  place.
Thus  we  see  that  rest,  or  slow  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  vessels,  gives  a
disposition  towards  the  separation  of  the  red  part,  as  well  as  when  it  is
extravasated ;  since  the  blood  in  the  veins  of  an  animal  acquires  a  dispo-
sition to  separate  its  red  parts,  more  than  in  the  arteries,  especially  if  it  be
retarded  in  the  veins;  the  nearer,  therefore,  to  the  heart  ii>  the  veins  the
greater  will  the  disposition  for  separation  be ;  though  it  does  not  seem  to
retard  coagulation.  This  is  always  observable  in  bleeding;  for  if  we  tie
up  an  arm,  and  do  not  bleed  immediately,  the  first  blood  that  flows  from
the  orifice,  or  that  which  has  stagnated  for  some  time  in  the  veins,  will
soonest  separate  into  its  three  constituent  parts:  this  circumstance  exposes
more  of  the  coagulating  lymph,  at  the  top,  which  is  supposed  by  the  igno-
rant to  indicate  more  inflammation,  while  the  next  quantity  taken  sus-
pends its  red  parts  in  the  lymph,  and  gives  the  idea  that  the  first  small
quantity  had  been  of  such  service  at  the  time  of  its  flowing,  as  to  have
altered  for  the  better  the  whole  mass  of  blood.  Rest,  therefore,  may  be
regarded  as  one  of  the  immediate  causes  of  the  separation.


III.  OF  THE  SERUM.


The  serum  is  the  second  part  of  which  the  whole  mass  of  blood  ap-
pears to  be  composed;  or  is  one  of  those  substances  into  which  the  blood
spontaneously  separates  itself.  So  far  it  appears  as  a  simple  fluid,  in  which
light  I  shall  first  consider  it;  though  we  shall  find  hereafter  that  it  is
composed  of  two  substances,  which,  in  many  of  our  experiments,  separate,


^o  General  principles  of  the  blood.

Serum,  I  believe,  is  common  to  the  blood  of  all  animals;  but  there  is  more
of  it,  I  think,  in  those  animals  which  have  red  blood :  perhaps  it  may  bear
some  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  red  particles  in  the  blood,  and  may  be
of  use  to  dilute  it.

The  serum  is  lighter  than  the  other  parts  of  the  blood,  and  therefore
swims  above  them  when  separated.  It  is  commonly  separated  from  the
coagulating  lymph  when  that  fluid  coagulates;  and  is,  therefore,  almost
always  found  when  the  blood  is  taken  out  of  the  blood  vessels,  and  kept
together  in  a  considerable  mass.  When  the  lymph  coagulates  strongly,  we
commonly  find  more  serum,  because  it  is  then  squeezed  out  more  forcibly
than  when  the  coagulation  is  formed  loosely;  it  is  not,  however,  necessary
for  the  lymph  to  coagulate,  in  order  to  separate  the  serum,  for  we  find
that  it  separates  in  disease,  as  in  the  dropsy.  It  is  separated  also  from  the
mass  of  blood  in  uterine-gestation,  being  the  fluid  in  which  the  foetus  is
immersed  or  swims.

I  have  seen  it  separate  from  the  remaining  mass  before  the  coagulation
of  the  lymph.  I  observed  once  in  the  blood  of  a  lady,  that  a  separation
between  the  two  fluids  almost  immediately  took  place,  the  serous  part
swimming  on  the  top,  while  the  lymph  remained  still  fluid.  From  this
appearance  I  had  pronounced  that  there  would  be  a  great  deal  of  buff,
supposing  that  the  transparent  fluid  at  the  top  was  coagulating  lymph ;  but
I  was  mistaken,  for  when  the  lymph  was  coagulated,  there  was  no  buff,
and  the  transparent  fluid  remaining  at  top,  proved  to  be  the  serum.

In  this  there  could  be  no  deception,  as  there  was  no  buff,  or  size;  for  if
there  had  been  size  at  the  top  of  the  coagulum,  it  might  have  been  supposed
that  this  fluid,  which  appeared  so  soon  after  bleeding,  had  been  the  coa-
gulating lymph,  and  that  the  serum  had  been  separated  in  the  act  of  coa-
gulation as  usual.  The  serum  is  commonly  of  a  yellowish  colour,  some-
times more  so  than  at  others ;  and  this  I  should  conceive  arises  from  the
substances  dissolved  in  it*,  by  means  of  the  water  it  contains;  for  it  pro-
bably suspends  every  salt  soluble  in  water,  many  of  which  are  dissolved  in

*  The  red  globules  are  suspended  without  being  dissolved  in  the  serum,  in. which  they
are  commonly  examined.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  3 1

it.  If  serum  be  not  coagulable  in  itself,  though  it  contains  a  large  quantity
of  coap-ulable  matter,  yet  I  conceive  it  to  be  in  a  more  fluid  state  when
circulating.  As  it  is  separated  from  a  compound  mass,  it  appears  in  this
respect  to  be  somewhat  similar  to  the  whey  of  milk,  though  not  exactly.
This  fluid  undergoes  no  spontaneous  changes  but  what  may  arise  from  its
separation,  from  the  coagulating  lymph,  except  putrifa&ion.  Though
not  coagulable  in  itself,  yet  one  of  its  properties  out  of  the  body,  is  to
coagulate  upon  the  application  of  certain  substances.  This  is  the  prin-
cipal change  it  undergoes,  and  during  the  process,  it  more  or  less  separates
into  two  parts ;  one  of  which  is  not  coagulable  by  such  means.

The  coagulable  part,  which  I  now  mean  to  describe,  seems  to  be  in  some
degree  the  same  with  that  in  the  white  of  an  egg,  synovia,  etc.  and
many  other  secretions,  but  not  exactly ;  for  those  secretions  contain,  as  I
conceive,  a  quantity  of  the  coagulating  lymph  united  to  them,  which
makes  them  in  part,  coagulate  after  secretion  -y  and  the  further  coa-
gulation of  those  secretions  afterwards,  by  mixture  with  other  sub-
stances, is  owing  to  this  part  of  the  serum.  Though  the  serum  is
coagulable  under  certain  circumstances,  and  with  certain  mixtures,  yet
this  power,  or  effect,  may  be  prevented  by  other  mixtures.  Heat,  to  a
certain  degree,  coagulates  this  part;  and  probably  this  is  the  only  test
necessary  to  know  whether  a  fluid  found  any  where  in  the  body,  not
coagulable  in  itself,  is  this  part  of  the  serum ;  but  as  many  substances  do
also  coagulate  it,  I  fhall  mention  a  few  of  them,  although  to  me  their  effects
do  not  seem  to  throw  any  light  on  the  subject.  Heat  coagulates  the  serum
at  1600,  or  1650;  it  stood  at  150°,  for  some  time  perfectly  fluid.  There
is  a  great  deal  of  air  contained  in  the  serum,  which  is  let  loose  by  heat ;
but  not  from  its  coagulation,  for  when  it  is  coagulated  by  other  means,  no
air  is  separated.  The  serum,  which  was  a  little  whitish,  coagulated  in  that
degree  of  heat  necessary  for  separating  its  air,  which  was  extricated  in  very
large  quantities.  This  coagulum  becomes  first  like  the  synovia,  and  then
thicker.  Many  substances  which  do  not  coagulate  this  part  of  the  serum,
do  not,  however,  hinder  its  coagulation  by  heat  -y  such  as  vinegar,  acid  of
lemon,  salt  of  wormwood,  nitre,  sea-salt.

Serum  coagulates  with  spirits  of  wine,  in  about  equal  quantities,  into


3  2  General  principles  of  the  blood.

a  sort  of  curd  and  whey;  which,  upon  heating,  becomes  something  like  a
jelly,  but  the  spirit  seems  to  evaporate.

It  coagulates  with  volatile  spirits,  into  a  milky  fluid,  which  becomes
like  a  jelly  upon  heating;  it  requires  a  greater  proportion  of  the  spirit
than  the  serum ;  and  the  spirit  seems  chiefly  to  evaporate.

When  mixed  with  salt  of  hartshorn,  it  does  not  coagulate  with  heat,
but  makes  a  large  effervescence,  till  the  whole  is  formed  into  froth.  This
again  becomes  a  fluid,  by  the  froth  subsiding,  but  at  last  it  forms  a  sort
©f  coagulum,  which  is  not  tough.  Being  mixed  with  water,  and  let  to
•stand  for  twelve  hours,  it  coagulates  like  pure  serum  upon  heating.  If
this  be  mixed  with  sal.  cernu  cervi,  as  above,  it  rather  becomes  more
fluid,  and  continues  so  for  a  long  time,  with  a  strong  effervescence;  but
it  forms  at  length  into  a  jelly,  or  paste,  although  not  a  solid  one.

Here  I  suspect  that  the  salt  is  evaporated,  and  likewise  thq  water  in
the  paste,  so  that  it  is  not  a  true  coagulation.

When  mixed  with  common  water,  it  is  coagulated  by  heat;  but  the
water  separates  with  the  other  substance,  and  does  not  unite  with  the
coagulum.

Upon  the  coagulation  of  the  serum,  by  heat,  I  have  observed  that  it
separates  a  fluid,  which  is  not  coagulable  by  heat ;  and,  I  have  reason  to
believe,  by  none  of  the  other  means,  viz.  spirits  of  wine,  etc.  though  this
is  not  so  easily  ascertained;  for  the  other  coagulating  substances,  as  spirits
of  wine,  etc.  are  applied  in  a  fluid  form,  and  therefore,  a  fluid  may  remain
after  the  coagulation  of  the  serum,  which  might  be  supposed  to  be  the
iluid  separated ;  but  from  other  experiments,  it  is  proved  that  those  sub-
stances coagulate  the  coagulating  part,  and  unite  with  the  other.  It  is  also
observable  in  meat,  either  roasted,  or  boiled,  that  when  cut,  there  flows
from  it  a  fluid,  more  or  less  tinged  with  the  red  part,  commonly  called
gravy.  I  conceived  that  this  must  be  different  from  the  coagulating  part  of
the  serum,  believing  that  the  heat  had  been  sufficient  to  coagulate  it;  but
I  chose  to  try  it  further,  and  therefore  gave  it  such  heat,  as  would  have
produced  the  effect  if  it  had  been  coagulable  by  heat ;  but  I  found  it  did
not  coagulate. The  fluid  separated  from  the  coagulable  part  of  the  serum,


Ge?ieral  principles  of  the  blood,  33

I  conceived  to  be  the  same  with  this.  Thus  then  I  saw  there  was  in  the
serum  a  matter  coagulable  by  heat ;  and  a  fluid  which  was  not  so.

Pursuing  the  above  observations  on  drefled  meat,  I  observed  that  the
older  the  animal  had  been,  the  more  of  this  fluid  was  contained  in  the  meat.
In  lamb  we  have  hardly  any  of  it :  in  young  mutton  of  a  year  old,  but
little;  but  in  mutton  of  three,  four,  five,  or  six  years  old,  it  is  in  large
quantity  :  in  veal  also  we  have  but  little ;  while  we  have  it  in  great
quantity  in  beef;  but  perhaps  we  know  less  in  general  of  the  age  of  our
beef,  than  of  our  mutton*.

Poultry  is  commonly  killed  young  in  this  country,  therefore  we  have
not  the  comparative  trials ;  but  'in  wild  fowl,  and  what  is  commonly  called
game,  we  find  the  above  observations  hold  good.  I  likewise  observe  that
animals  who  have  not  had  exercise,  such  as  house-lamb,  veal,  etc.  have
less  of  this  fluid,  than  those  of  the  same  class  which  have  been  al-
lowed to  go  at  large :  nothing  can  be  drier  than  the  English  veal,  though
kept  to  a  greater  age  than  any  where  else;  while  it  is  juicy  in  every  other
country,  though  killed  much  younger.

In  many  of  the  trials  respecting  the  coagulation  of  the  serum,  I  ob-
served, that  it  had  in  some  cases  much  more  coagulum  than  in  others ;  and
of  course  a  less  proportion  of  the  fluid  part  that  separated,  and  vice  versa:
from  the  above  observations  too,  I  conceived  that  a  deficiency  of  this  fluid-
part  bespoke  a  greater  quantity  of  coagulating  matter  in  the  serum;  and  to
ascertain  this,  I  took  the  serum  of  persons  of  different  ages.  This  fluid,
like  the  serum  itself  when  united  with  the  coagulating  lymph,  appears
only  to  be  mixed  with  the  serum  ;  for  it  is  separated  in  the  living  body  for
many  purposes  of  the  ceconomy ;  it  is  not  therefore  serum  in  another
form;  but  a  distinct  fluid,  which,  before  the  coagulation,  is  mingled  with
the  serum,  and  seems  to  make  a  part  of  it.

The  following  experiments  are,  perhaps,  not  perfectly  conclusive;  for

*  It  may  be  observed  here,  that  this  is  very  different  from  the  jelly  formed  in  boiling,  or
roasting  meat;  that  which  forms  the  jelly,  is  part  of  the  meat  itself,  dissolved  down  in  this,
very  fluid,  and  the  water  in  which  it  is  boiled ;  and  we  find  that  this  effect  is  just  the  reverse
of  the  above,  for  in  young  meat  there  is  the  most  of  this  jelly.

F


2  a.  General  principles  of  the  blood.

many  were  obliged  to  be  made  on  blood  taken  from  those  who  were  not
perfectly  in  health :  peculiar  dispositions  in  the  body  may  make  a  material
difference  in  the  serum.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  disease  may  not  have
any  great  effect  upon  the  serum ;  for  I  found,  from  experiment,  that  the
serum  of  blood  taken  from  a  person  labouring  under  an  inflammatory  com-
plaint, and  the  serum  of  blood  in  a  case  not  at  all  inflammatory,  were
nearly  the  same  respecting  coagulation,  and  the  quantity  of  matter  not
coagulable  by  heat.

The  serum  of  a  man  fifty-six  years  of  age,  who  had  met  with  a  slight
accident,  and  was  of  a  healthy  constitution,  coagulated  by  heat,  almost
wholly  into  a  pretty  firm  coagulum,  separating  only  a  small  portion  of  that
fluid  which  is  not  coagulable  by  such  means.

The  serum  of  the  blood  of  a  man  seventy-two  years  of  age,  of  a  healthy
constitution,  hardly  coagulated  by  heat,  became  only  a  little  thicker,  and
formed  a  small  coagulum,  adhering  to  the  bottom  of  the  veflel.  With
spirits,  it  formed  but  a  very  small  quantity  of  coagulable  matter.

On  putting  about  three-fourths  of  water  to  the  blood  of  the  person
aged  fifty-six,  and  heating  it  as  above,  it  coagulated  much  in  the  same
way  with  the  serum  of  seventy-two.

The  serum  of  a  boy  fifteen  years  of  age,  coagulated  wholly;  there  was
hardly  any  of  the  fluid  part  that  could  be  squeezed  out;  at  the  same  time
I  coagulated  the  serum  of  a  man  sixty-three  years  of  age,  in  which  there
was  but  a  small  quantity  of  the  fluid  part.

Conceiving  that  the  whey  of  milk,  made  with  runnet,  was  the  serum
of  the  blood,  I  made  experiments  on  it,  analogous  to  the  above.  I  heated
some  of  the  whey,  and  found  it  formed  a  coagulable  matter,  which
floated  in  flakes  in  a  fluid,  which  did  not  coagulate  by  this  means.

As  this  less  coagulable  fluid  is  a  substance  hitherto  not  taken  notice  of,
and  makes  perhaps  as  interesting  a  part  as  any  of  the  whole  mass  of  blood,
it  will  be  necessary  to  be  more  descriptive  in  giving  an  account  of  it  than
of  the  other  parts.  As  urine  does  not  coagulate  by  heat;  but  I  had  found
that  it  coagulated  with  the  extract  of  Goulard* ;  and  as  I  also  knew  that

*  What  led  me  to  the  above  knowledge,  was,  mixing  this  extract  of  Goulard  with  folu-
tions  of  gum  arabic  in  water,  for  injections;  when  I  found  that  the  whole  always  became  a


General  principles  of  the  blood.  35

this  extract  coagulated  the  whole  mass  of  the  serum,  I  conceived  that  the
fluid  in  question  might  be  similar  to  urine,  and  that  the  coagulation  of  the
serum  might  be  owing  to  the  coagulation  of  this  part ;  I  therefore  put  the
fluid  to  this  test,  and  found  that  it  was  coagulated  by  the  extract,  which
led  to  a  series  of  experiments.

As  several  fluids,  apparently  different  from  each  other,  appear  to  be  thrown
out  from  the  blood  on  many  occasions,  I  wifhed  to  see  how  far  they  con-
sisted of  the  common  serum,  viz.  of  a  pretty  equal  quantity  of  matter
coagulable  by  heat,  or  principally  of  that  coagulable  by  Goulards  extract ;
I  therefore  collected  the  several  kinds,  not  only  those  which  may  be  called
natural,  but  also  those  proceeding  from  disease,  which  appear  more  like
serum  than  the  others.  Of  the  natural,  I  took  the  aqueous  humor  of  the
eye,  and  first  heated  it  in  a  spoon,  to  see  what  quantity  of  coagulable
matter  by  heat  was  in  it,  and  I  found  it  became  gently  wheyish  ;  therefore
it  had  a  small  portion  of  matter  coagulable  by  heat;  but,  upon  adding  the
extract  to  it,  it  coagulated  immediately.  The  same  exactly  happened  with
the  water  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain;  and  also  with  the  tears.

Water  was  tajcen  from  the  leg  of  a  dropsical  boy,  who  was  extremely
reduced  by  a  compound  fracture  of  the  opposite  thigh-bone;  which  water
was  much  clearer  than  any  serum.  Upon  heating  it  in  a  spoon  over  a
candle,  it  became  a  little  wheyish,  and  had  a  few  flakes  of  coagulum
floating  in  it.

The  water  from  the  abdomen  of  a  lady,  which  was  a  little  wheyish,
coagulated  before  it  gave  out  its  air ;  but  the  coagulum  was  not  one  half
of  its'  quantity.

In  another  case  of  ascites,  the  water  coagulated  wholly,  although  not  to
a  firm  coagulum.

Water  drawn  from  the  abdomen  of  a  gentleman,  which  was  pretty
clear,  when  held  over  a  lamp  to  coagulate,  became  at  first  wheyish.

folic!  mass;  while  injections  with  sachrum  saturni,  had  not  that  effect.  I  then  tried  it  upon
many  other  vegetable  juices,  and  found  it  coagulated  every  one  of  them.  In  some  of  these
experiments,  I  put  fome  of  the  compounds  into  a  vessel  where  there  was  some  urine,  and  I
found  that  when  the  extract  had  been  in  too  large  a  quantity,  that  the  urine  was  also  coa-
gulated.


36  General  principles  of  the  blood.

The  liquor  amnii  has  but  very  little  coagulable  matter  in  it.

In  coagulating  all  the  above  kinds  of  serum  by  heat,  and  taking  the
incoagulable  parts,  and  putting  extract  of  Goulard  to  them,  they  coagu-
lated immediately.

Whether  this  fluid  is  of  the  same  specific  gravity  with  the  other,  I  do
not  know;  for  though  when  part  of  it  is  coagulated  by  the  extract  of  lead
it  is  the  heaviest ;  yet  as  it  is  united  with  the  lead,  it  may  acquire  its  ad-
ditional weight  from  this  union.

The  use  of  the  serum  is  probably  to  keep  suspended,  and  undissolved,
the  red  globules ;  for  we  find  it  in  largest  quantity  when  these  globules  are
most  abundant.  It  is  also  intended  to  suspend,  and  dissolve  any  foreign
substances  in  the  blood,  whether  they  are  of  use  to  the  body,  or  other-
wise, acting  upon  them  as  a  common  solvent.

Thus  we  see  in  a  jaundiced  person,  the  serum  is  yellower  than  common.
When  a  person  has  taken  rheubarb,  the  same  thing  happens.  It  is  probably
the  solvent  of  all  our  secretions.

I  conceive  it  to  be  unnecessary  to  say  how  much  water  enters  into  the
composition  of  the  blood.  In  order  to  constitute  a  perfect  body  or  com-
pound, it  is  necessary  that  all  its  parts  should  be  in  due  proportion ;  but
as  the  blood  in  many  animals  is  made  up  of  four  distinct  parts,  viz.  the
coagulating  lymph;  serum,  which  we  find  is  composed  of  two  parts ;  and
the  red  globules,  each  must  have  its  due  quantity  of  water  when  in  a  per-
fect state;  and  I  think  it  is  probable  that  the  lymph,  and  red  part,  cannot
have  more  water  than  a  certain  quantity,  but  that  the  serum  may  be  diluted
with  any  proportion  of  it ;  yet  as  serum,  it  can  have  a  certain  proportion
only ;  and  indeed  this  was  in  some  degree  proved  by  the  experiment  of
mixing  some  water  with  serum,  and  then  coagulating  the  whole  with  heat :
the  water  separated  and  did  not  make  part  of  the  coagulum.

Some  of  the  juices  of  a  living  animal,  whether  circulating,  or  out  of
circulation,  as  those  which  lubricate  surfaces,  are  in  a  volatile  state  while
the  animal  is  alive ;  for  when  the  scarfskin  is  taken  off,  the  part  soon  dries ;
and  if  the  skin  is  removed  from  a  new  killed  animal,  it  immediately  dries ;
or  if  a  cavity  is  opened,  the  surface  of  the  cavity  dries  quickly ;  this  shews
that  some  part  of  the  juices  must  have  evaporated  from  the  surface :  but


General  principles  of  the  blood.  37

let  the  animal  cool,  before  it  is  skined,  or  the  cavity  is  opened,  and  then
give  it  the  same  degree  of  heat  that  it  had  when  alive,  you  will  find,  on
taking  off  the  skin,  no  immediate  sensible  evaporation  ;  but  the  parts  so
exposed  will  remain  moist.  This  volatility  I  conceive  therefore  to  be  con-
nected with  life,  and  not  with  the  circulation ;  for  that  is  stopped  in  both
cases  before  the  experiment.  Whether  it  is  this  volatile  part  that  gives  the
smell  that  most  recent  killed  animals  have  upon  being  skined,  or  opened,
I  do  not  know ;  but  it  may  be  observed  that  it  follows  the  same  rules ;  for
if  the  animal  is  allowed  to  cool,  it  looses  this  smell,  although  warmed  to
the  same  degree  of  heat  as  when  alive.

The  serum  of  the  blood  is  sometimes  wheyish,  and  then  upon  settling,  it
often  throws  up  a  white  scum  like  cream  :  this  was  most  probably  first
observed  in  the  human  blood;  but  is  not  peculiar  to  it;  although  these
appearances  pretty  often  happen,  yet  few  instances  fall  under  the  observation
of  one  man  in  the  common  course  of  bleeding.  When  they  have  occurred
to  myself,  I  have  made  inquiry  after  the  state  of  health  of  the  patient,  as
well  as  examined  the  nature  of  this  change ;  and  whether  there  was  any
variety  in  it.  So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  observe,  it  can  hardly  be  said
to  have  any  leading  cause ;  having  found  it,  however,  more  frequently  in
the  blood  of  breeding  women,  I  conceived  it  might  have  some  connection
with  that  state ;  but  I  have  seen  it  in  others,  and  sometimes  in  men  :  yet
it  is  possible  that  the  state  of  pregnancy  may  adapt  the  constitution  for
forming  such  appearances,  as  well  as  for  producing  other  symptoms  in  the
blood  like  those  of  inflammation  ;  for  we  often  find  the  same  effect,  or
disease,  arising  from  various  causes,  which  have  no  immediate  connection
with  each  other.  There  have  been  many  opinions  formed  about  the  na-
ture and  cause  of  this  appearance  of  the  serum.

It  has  been  supposed  to  be  occasioned  by  chyle  not  yet  assimilated  *
but  it  does  not  occur  frequently  enough  to  be  attributed  to  this  fluid.
Mr.  Hewson  supposed  it  to  be  absorbed  fat,  or  oil ;  which  certainly  is  not
the  case;  for  it  is  not  the  same  in  all  cases.

The  globules  forming  this  wheyifli  appearance  are  not  of  the  same
specific  gravity  in  every  case;  for  though  they  always,  I  believe,  swim  on
the  serum,  and  often  on  water,  yet  they  sometimes  sink  in  water.  The  white


38  General  principles  of  the  blood.

cream  that  swims  on  the  top  of  the  serum,  I  believe  to  be  formed  after  the
serum  is  separated  from  the  mass;  for,  if  it  existed  as  such,  prior  to  this,  it
would  be  retained  in  the  coagulum,  as  the  red  globules  are,  which  is  not
the  fact ;  and  therefore  it  does  not  exist  in  the  blood  while  circulating.

I  bled  a  little  woman  who  seemed  half  an  idiot,  and  was  big  with  child  :
this  happened  in  the  afternoon,  about  three  or  four  hours  after  her  having
eat  some  veal-cutlets  :  the  day  following  I  went  to  see  the  blood,  and  found
the  serum  of  a  milky  white,  with  a  white  pellicle  swimming  at  the  top  like
cream.

I  bled  a  lady  in  the  arm,  who  was  six  months,  gone  with  child.  It  was
about  two  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  :  she  had  only  eaten  a  dry  toast,  and
drank  a  cup  of  chocolate  for  breakfast,  about  ten  o'clock,  which  was
four  hours  before  she  was  bled.  On  seeing  the  blood  the  next  day,  I  found
it  inflamed  rather  more  than  is  common  in  women  who  are  pregnant;  and
I  also  found  a  thin  white  scum  on  the  the  top  of  the  serum ;  this  scum  I
examined  in  the  microscope,  and  found  it  to  be  globular:  I  diluted  it  with
water,  and  found  the  globules  did  not  dissolve,  as  the  red  globules  do.  I
put  some  of  them  in  water,  and  found  that  they  rose  to  the  top,  but  not  so-
fast  as  in  the  serum.

About  six  days  after,  I  bled  the  same  lady  again,  after  she  had  eaten  the
same  kind  of  breakfast,  and  about  the  same  interval  of  time  from  it.  The
blood  was  still  sizy,  but  the  serum  had  no  white  appearance  at  the  top.

I  examined  the  wheyish  serum  taken  from  the  blood  of  a  man  at  St^
George's  Hospital,  who  had  received  a  severe  blow  on  the  head,  which
had  stunned  him,  but  had  produced  no  bad  symptoms.  In  this  serum,  when
viewed  in  the  microscope,  I  could  not  observe  any  thing  like  globules,  or
Hakes,  although  the  magnifier  was  a  deep  one.  The  red  globules  when
mixed  with  it  were  the  same  as  in  common  serum.  It  dried  uniformly
like  size.

Blood  was  taken  away  from  the  arm,  being  of  no  particular  quality,
except  in  having  a  wheyidi  serum,  and  was  allowed  to  stand  quiet  in  order
to  see  the  spontaneous  changes  of  this  serum.  The  white  part  came  to  the
top  like  cream,  being  therefore  lighter  than  the  serum,  and  was  very  white
when  collected. When  viewed  in  a  microscope,  it  was  plainly  globular,


—


General  principles  of  the  blood.  39

but  the  globules  were  smaller  than  those  of  red  blood. They  did  not  seenj
to  be  dissolved,  when  mixed  with  water,  as  red  globules  are.

Thomas  Skelton,  a  publican,  forty-seven  years  of  age,  being  rather
lusty,  subject  to  frequent  colds,  attended  with  coughs,  hoarsness,  and  a
discharge  of  matter  from  the  lungs  or  throat,  but  otherwise  enjoying  a
good  state  of  health,  was  attacked  with  a  violent  cold,  together  with  a
difficulty  of  breathing,  and  applied  to  Mr.  Wilson,  apothecary,  who  took
twelve  ounces  of  blood  from  his  arm,  which  relieved  him  greatly.  He
had  taken  some  bread  and  butter,  with  some  tea,  without  milk,  about
four  hours  before  he  was  bled.  The  blood  coagulated  firmly,  and  the
serum  which  separated,  was  of  a  white  colour,  with  a  yellowish  tinge,
appearing  like  the  colour  of  cream ;  upon  the  top  of  this  floated  a  whiter
scum,  like  another  cream.

On  viewing  this  cream  in  a  microscope,  it  had  a  flakey  appearance.
It  did  not  coagulate  sooner  than  common  serum.

In  spirits  of  wine,  a  white  mixture  was  produced,  which,  on  standing,
fell  to  the  bottom  of  the  glass ;  this  most  probably  arose  from  the  serum,
with  which  it  was  mixed,  coagulating.

The  globules  of  the  white  serum,  differ  from  the  red  globules  in  colour;
specific  gravity,  size,  and  in  not  dissolving  in  water.

To  see  how  far  this  is  chyle,  it  would  be  proper  to  try  the  chyle  in  the
same  way  in  serum,  etc.

After  dipping  a  bit  of  blotting  paper  into  the  cream,  and  absorbing  all
of  it,  and  also  dipping  a  piece  of  the  same  paper  into  the  serum,  and  drying
them,  I  burnt  them  both,  to  see  if  one  burnt  more  briskly  than  the  other;
but  there  appeared  to  be  no  difference.

The  white  part  of  the  white  serum  sunk  in  water.


40  General  principles  of  the  blood.

IV.  OF  THE  RED  GLOBULES.

The  red  part  of  the  blood  I  choose  to  consider  last,  although  it  has
been  more  the  object  of  attention  than  the  other  two,  because  I  believe  it
to  be  the  least  important;  for  it  is  not  an  universal  ingredient  in  the
blood  of  animals,  like  the  coagulating  lymph,  and  the  serum;  neither  is
it  to  be  found  in  every  part  of  those  animals  who  have  it*  in  the  general
mass  of  their  blood.

The  blood,  as  I  have  already  observed,  in  those  animals  we  are  most
acquainted  with,  appears  to  the  naked  eye  to  be  a  red  mass  of  fluid,  having
a  part  which  coagulates  upon  being  extravasated.  The  red  part,  however,
may  be  washed  out  of  this  coagulum,  so  as  to  leave  it  white;  and  this
shews  that  the  blood  is  not  wholly  red,  but  only  has  a  red  matter  diffused
through  its  other  component  parts.

Any  further  information  we  receive  concerning  the  red  part  of  the
blood,  is  by  means  of  magnifying  glasses,  which  appear  to  give  a  good
deal  of  information.

They  mew  us,  that  the  red  part  is  composed  of  bodies  of  a  globular
form,  swimming  in  the  lymph,  and  serum  of  the  blood:  this  circum-
stance, of  the  red  part  having  form,  probably  led  anatomists  to  pay  more
attention  to  it  than  it  deserves ;  as  if  they  could  thence  explain  any  essen-
tial principle  in  the  blood,  or  animal  ceconomy.

This  knowledge  is  of  late  date;  for  such  examinations  of  minute
bodies  could  only  have  taken  place  since  the  invention  and  application  of
magnifying  glasses.

Malpighi  was  probably  the  first  who  employed  the  microscope  for  this
purpose,  and  he,  in  1668,  wrote  a  description  of  the  appearance  of  the
globules  in  the  blood-vessels  of  the  omentum,  which  he  mistook,  how-
ever, for  globules  of  fat. Microscopical  observations  were  pursued  with

*  The  blood  of  the  insect-tribe  of  every  kind  is  free  from  any  red  parts,  as  is  probably  that
of  most  animals  below  them;  yet  it  has  been  asserted,  and  supposed,  that  their  blood  contains
globules,  although  not  red.  I  have  examined  the  blood  of  the  silk-worm,  lobster,  etc.  and
with  considerable  magnifying  powers;  but  never  could  discover  any  thing,  but  an  uniform
transparent  mass.


General  principles  of  the  bhoa*.  41

great  ardour  by  Antonius  Van  Leeuwenhoeck,  who  saw  the  red  globules,
August  the  15th,  1673*.  These  early  observers  probably  imagined  more
than  they  saw.

When  an  old  opinion  is  partly  exploded,  and  a  new  one  brought  for-
ward, it  becomes  only  necessary  to  see  how  far  the  new  one  is  just;  be-
cause, if  it  be  not  proved,  we  must  revert  to  the  old  opinion  again  or  to

some  other.

Mr.  Hewson  has  been  at  great  pains  to  examine  the  blood  in  the  mi-
croscope, and  has  given  us  figures  of  the  different  shapes  of  those  glo-
bules; but  there  is  reason  to  think  he  may  have  been  deceived  in  the
manner  I  have  just  mentioned.

The  red  globules  are  always  nearly  of  the  same  size  in  the  same  ani-
mal, and  when  in  the  serum  do  not  run  into  one  another  as  oil  does
when  divided  into  small  globules  in  water.  This  form,  therefore,  does
not  arise  simply  from  their  not  uniting  with  the  serum,  but  they  have
really  a  determined  mape  and  size.  This  is  similar  to  what  is  observed
of  the  globules  in  milk;  for  milk  being  oily,  its  globules  are  not  soluble  in
water;  neither  do  they  consist  of  such  pure  oil  as  to  run  into  each
other;  nor  will  they  dissolve  in  oil.  I  suspect,  therefore,  that  they  are
regular  bodies,  so  that  two  of  them  could  not  unite  and  form  one-f*.

What  this  property  in  the  red  part  is,  I  do  not  know,  for  it  has  some-
thing like  the  nature  of  a  solid  body,  yet  the  particles  seem  not  to  have
the  properties  of  a  solid;  for  to  the  touch  they  yield  no  feeling  of  solidity;
when  circulating  in  the  vessels  they  may  be  seen  to  assume  eliptical
forms,  adapting  themselves  to  the  size  of  the  vessels;  they  must,  there-
fore, be  a  fluid,  with  an  attraction  to  themselves  while  in  the  serum,
which  forms  them  into  round  globules,  yet  without  the  power  of  uniting
with  one  another,  which  may  arise  from  their  central  attraction  extend-
ing no  farther  than  their  own  circumference  :  if  they  are  found,  how-
ever, of  an  oval  figure  in  some  animals,  as  authors  have  described,  that
circumstance  would  rather  oppose  the  idea  of  their  being  a  fluid,  having

*  Halter's  Physiology,  vol.  ii.  lib.  v. Sangui.  feet  xi.  page  51.
\  Milk  appears  to  be  oil  united  with  a  proportion  of  mucus..

G


42  General  principles  of  the  blood.

a  central  attraction;  but  this  is  probably  an  optical  deception.  What-
ever their  shape  is,  I  fhould  suppose  it  to  be  always  the  same,  in  the  same
animals,  and  indeed  in  all  animals,  as  it  must  depend  upon  a  fixed
principle  in  the  globule  itself.

Hence,  the  less  credit  is  to  be  given  to  those  who  have  described  the
globules  as  being  of  an  oval  figure  in  some  animals;  for  they  have  also
described  them  as  being  of  different  and  strange  shapes,  even  in  the  same
animal*.

•  I  am  led  to  believe  that  wa  may  be  deceived  by  the  appearances  viewed  through  a  mag-
nifying glass ;  for  although  objects,  large  enough  to  be  seen  by  the  naked  eye,  are  the  same
when  viewed  through  a  magnifying  glass  which  can  only  magnify  in  a  small  degree,  yet  as
the  naked  eye,  when  viewing  an  object  rather  too  small  for  it,  is  not  to  be  trusted,  it  is
much  less  to  be  depended  upon,  when  viewing  an  object  infinitely  smaller,  brought  to  the
same  magnitude  by  a  glass.  In  such  a  situation,  respecting  our  eye,  all  the  relative  objects,
by  which  the  eye,  from  habit,  judges  with  more  nicety  of  the  object  itself,  are  cut  ofF;  the
eye  has  likewise  a  power  of  varying  its  forms,  adapting  it  to  the  different  distances  of  the
parts  of  an  object  within  its  compass,  making  the  object  always  a  whole ;  but  a  magnifying
glass  has  no  such  power  :  for  instance,  in  viewing  a  spherical  body,  a  magnifying  glass
must  be  made  to  vary  its  position,  and  bring  in  succession  the  different  parts  of  the  hemisphere
into  so  many  focal  points  ;  every  part  separate,  not  having  the  same  relative  effect  on  our
organ  of  vision  as  when  they  are  all  seen  at  the  same  time;  and  the  eye,  under  such  circum-
stances, being  unable  to  vary  itself  sufficiently  to  alter  the  focal  distance  of  the  glass,  is  the
reason  why  rounded  bodies  appear  of  different  shapes,  giving  the  shape  only  of  the  part  that
is  within  the  focus  of  the  glass,  placed  upon  an  undefined  plane  ;  and  if  it  should  have  more
focal  points  than  one,  then  there  is  an  increase  of  parts;  and  this  will  vary  according  to  the
opacity  or  transparency  of  the  body.  It  may  also  be  remarked,  that,  from  habit  our  minds  are
informed  by  the  necessary  actions  of  our  body  ;  therefore  the  eye  taking  on  the  necessary  actions
(as  it  were  instinctively)  adapting  itself  at  once  to  the  circumstances  of  the  object,  gives  an
intelligence  to  the  mind,  independent  of  the  real  impression  of  the  object,  fo  that  both  the
impression  and  the  consequent  action  give  information;  but  this  cannot  be  effected  by  glasses,
for  the  different  focal  distances  of  the  hemisphere  do  not  accord  with  those  to  which  we  vary
our  eyes  in  adapting  them  to  the  distances  of  the  different  parts  of  a  rounded  body;  we  are,
therefore,  left  to  the  impression  alone,  which  is  new,  and  consequently  imperfect,  the  centre  being
too  near  for  the  circumference  to  be  seen  at  one  distance,  and  the  circumference,  when  seen,
bringing  the  centre  within  the  focus,  so  as  to  obscure  it :  for  an  eye  with  a  given  focus  which
can  vary  it  in  a  certain  degree  when  viewing  objects  alone,  yet  when  looking  through  a  magni-
fying glass  of  any  power,  must  now  vary  the  distance  of  the  object,  according  to  the  magnifying
power  in  the  glass,  the  eye  not  being  able  to  vary  the  focal  distance  of  both ;  and  this,  probably,
in  an  inverse  degree,  to  the  magnifying  power  of  the  glass. This  may  be  observed  to  take  place


SB MHflHM


General  principles  of  the  blood,  43

The  globules  of  the  blood  are  endowed  with  a  number  of  properties.
They  are  the  only  part  of  the  blood  which  has  form  or  colour;  two  pro-
perties which  are  ready  to  catch  the  eye,  and  render  the  mass  more  vi-
sible. In  the  living  body,  by  making  it  an  object  of  sight,  they  give
some  idea  of  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  smaller  vessels  where  it  is
much  divided ;  being  there  viewed  with  microscopes,  the  red  globules  are
seen  moving  with  different  velocities  in  different  parts,  and  taking  retro-
grade, or  lateral  motions,  according  as  mechanical  obstructions,  or  those
arising  from  contractions  in  the  vessels,  may  happen  to  retard  or  change
their  motion.

They  are  heavier  than  the  coagulating  lymph,  and  of  course  heavier
than  the  serum,  which  is  known  by  their  falling  to  the  bottom  of  the  cup
when  blood  is  taken  out  of  a  blood-vessel.  This  allows  the  coagulating
lymph  to  be  seen  more  or  less  at  the  top,  and  produces  on  the  surface  va-
rious hues,  according  as  the  red  globules  subside:  when  they  subside  much,
the  buffis  then  of  a  yellowiih  colour  j  when  the  buff  is  thin  at  the  top,  then
we  have  the  red  globules  shining  through  it,  of  various  colours,  such  as

in  very  short-sighted  people,  for  in  them  the  eye  has  the  least  variation  respecting  distance.  A
rounded  body  may  be  just  of  such  a  size  as  fhall  have  either  of  its  parts  out  of  the  focal  dis-
tance of  the  eye,  and  must  be  moved  to  and  fro,  alternately,  before  the  centre  and  circum-
ference can  be  seen ;  and  indeed,  it  is  only  having  a  spherical  body,  of  a  size  proportional  to
the  length  of  focus,  to  produce  the  same  effect  in  every  eye.

The  appearance  in  a  transparent  body,  when  viewed  through  a  magnifying  glass,  are  still
more  falacious  than  of  an  opaque  one;  for  an  opaque  body  gives  only  the  reflected  light,
which,  however,  will  vary  according  as  the  rays  come  on  the  object.  The  moon,  an  opaque
body,  gives  us  various  shapes,  and  therefore  (hews  only  the  light  and  shade  arising  from  the
irregularity  of  the  surface;  but  a  semi-transparent  body,  like  a  red  globule,  gives  both  the
reflection  of  the  light  from  the  surface  and  also  the  refraction  of  other  rays  of  lights,  which
vary  according  to  the  direction  of  the  light  thrown  upon  the  object  respecting  our  eye.

In  some  transparent  bodies  we  have  still  a  greater  variety,  for  we  have  both  the  reflex  and
refracted  light,  and  these  varying  according  to  the  distance  of  the  object  from  the  eye,  or  the
distance  of  the  light.

If  the  transparent  body  is  not  perfectly  round,  or  is  by  any  circumstance  broken  in  the
uniformity  of  structure  on  which  transparency  depends,  which,  I  conceive  happens  to  the
red  globules  when  diluted  in  the  serum,  then  the  different  reflections  and  refractions  will  give
to  the  eye  the  impression  of  so  many  shapes,


44.  General  principles  of  the  blood,

blue,  purple*,  etc.  according  to  the  reflection  or  refraction,  which  is  ac-
cording to  the  depths.

In  healthy  blood,  however,  the  coagulum  is  commonly  formed  before
the  red  part  has  time  to  subside ;  but  we  may  always  observe,  that  the
lower  part  of  the  mass  contains  more  red  globules  than  the  top,  and  will
sink  more  quickly  in.  water.  The  red  globules  do  not  retain  their  globular
form  in  every  fluid,  but  are  dissolved  and  diffused  through  the  whole,  and
this  probably  happens  sooner  in  water  than  in  any  other  fluid,  though  the
red  globules  are  not  soluble  in  the  serum  of  the  blood,  yet  it  is  not  the  only
fluid  in  which  they  are  insoluble  ;  the  urine  does  not  dissolve  them ;  but
urine  might  be  supposed  to  be  principally  serum.  Water  itself,  however,
ceases  to  dissolve  them  when  saturated  with  many  of  the  neutral  salts,
or  with  some  of  the  acids.  The  red  globules  are  not  soluble  in  water  mixed
with  common  sea-salt,  sal.  armoniac,  Epsom-salt,  nitre,  Glauber-salt,
soluble  tartar,  Lymington -tartar;  nor  in  the  fixed  vegetable  alkalies,  when
saturated  with  fixed  air.  As  they  do  not  dissolve  in  the  serum  or  urine,  it
might  be  imagined  to  arise  from  the  neutral  salts  which  they  contain;
but  I  should  believe  that  neither  of  these  fluids  have  a  quantity  sufficient
for  that  purpose.

The  vitriolic  acid  does  not  dissolve  the  red  globules  when  diluted  so
low  as  to  have  less  pungency  of  taste  than  common  vinegar.

The  red  globules  are  soluble  in  common  vinegar,  but  take  a  longer
time  to  dissolve  than  in  water;  and  they  also  dissolve  much  sooner  when
the  vinegar  is  diluted  with  water.

In  muriatic  acid,  diluted  so  as  to  be  more  pungent  to  the  tongue,  and
three  times  stronger  than  the  vinegar,  the  red  globules  are  not  dissolved,
but  lose  their  red  colour  :  by  adding  more  water  to  the  red  globules  they
dissolve  ;  lemon  juice  dissolves  the  red  globules  :  all  this,  however,  throws
but  little  light  on  this  part  of  the  blood.

When  the  globules  are  put  into  water  they  dissolve,  which  destroys
their  globular  form  :  it  is  therefore  the  serum,  and  probably  the  coagu-
lating lymph  also,  when  circulating,  which  confines  them  to  this  form  ;

*  The  blood  in  the  veins,  when  near  the  skin,  gives  the  same  hues.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  45

but  when  the  serum  is  diluted  with  water,  they  dissolve  in  it;  and  this
appears  to  take  place  at  once;  as  quick  as  water  unites  with  water.  I
could  not  observe  that  it  was  like  the  solution  of  a  solid  body,  as  a  salt
for  instance  :  a  drop  of  blood  requires  about  two  drops  of  water  added  to
it  to  dissolve  its  globules :  if  urine  also  be  diluted  with  water,  the  glo-
bules dissolve  in  it.  However,  after  standing  some  days,  the  globules
dissolve  both  in  serum  and  urine ;  but  I  think  later  in  the  last.  When
the  globules  are  not  dissolved  in  any  fluid,  the  whole  looks  muddy,  not
transparent ;  but  when  dissolved  in  water  the  whole  is  a  fine  clear  red.
What  are  the  properties  of  the  serum,  and  those  other  substances  that
preserve  the  red  part  of  the  blood  in  a  regular  form,  I  do  not  know.

The  red  globules,  when  dried  in  the  serum,  and  moistened  in  the
same,  do  not  again  resume  their  regular  form;  nor  do  they  dissolve  in
it,  as  they  do  in  water,  but  form  rather  a  sort  of  flakes.  As  the  serum
and  solutions  of  many  kind  of  salts  do  not  dissolve  the  red  globules,  I
conceived  that  it  might  be  possible  for  them  to  resume  their  globular
figure  (after  having  been  dissolved  in  water)  by  adding  such  a  quantity  of
serum  as  to  make  the  proportion  of  water  very  little;  but  I  could  not  pro-
duce this  effect,  although  the  menstruum  was  such  as  not  to  dissolve  fresh
globules.

The  red  globules  not  dissolving  in  the  serum,  nor  in  the  coagu-
lating lymph,  become  separable  from  those  parts,  when  circulating,  and
therefore  may  be  prevented  from  going  where  the  coagulating  lymph  passes
in  a  natural  state;  which  they  certainly  do  not*;  and  which  also  is  the
reason  why  they  are  so  perfectly  retained  in  the  coagulum  when  extra  -
vasated.  The  globules,  besides  being  heavier  than  the  serum,  or  the
coagulating  lymph,  appear  to  have  more  substance,  for  they  do  not  lose
so  much  upon  drying,  and  when  dried  with  serum,  they  give  a  kind  of
roughness  to  the  surface,  which  serum  has  not  by  itself.  They  appear
not  to  be  a  natural  part  of  the  blood  ;  but  as  it  were,  composed  out  of  it,
or  composed  in  it,  and  not  with  it;  for  they  seem  to  be  formed  later  in

*  This  will  be  more  fully  explained,  when  on  the  colour  of  parts  from  the  blood.


46  General  principles  of  the  blood.

life  than  either  of  the  other  two  ;  thus  we  see,  while  the  chick  is  in  the
egg,  the  heart  beating,  and  it  then  contains  a  transparent  fluid  before
any  red  globules  are  formed,  which  we  may  suppose  to  be  the  serum,
and  the  lymph.  The  globules  do  not  appear  to  be  formed  in  those  parts
of  the  blood  already  produced,  but  rather  to  rise  up  in  the  surrounding
parts*.  It  would  also  seem  to  be  formed  with  more  difficulty,  than
either  of  the  other  two  parts.  When  an  animal  has  lost  a  considerable
quantity  of  its  blood,  the  other  parts  seem  to  be  sooner  made  up  than
the  red  globules;  the  animal  looks  long  pale;  but  this  is  only  con-
jecture, for  we  have  no  method  of  knowing  the  quantity  of  the  other
parts.

From  the  above  account  it  appears,  that  whatever  may  be  their  utility
in  the  machine,  the  red  globules  certainly  are  not  of  such  universal  use
as  the  coagulating  lymph,  since  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  all  animals,
nor  so  early  in  those  that  have  them,  nor  are  they  pushed  into  the  extreme
arteries,  where  we  must  suppose  the  coagulating  lymph  reaches ;  neither
do  they  appear  to  be  so  readily  formed. This  being  the  case,  we  must
conclude  them  not  to  be  the  important  part  of  the  blood,  in  contribut-
ing to  growth,  repair,  etc. Their  use  would  seem  to  be  connected  with
strength  • for  the  ftronger  the  animal  the  more  it  has  of  the  red  globules ;
and  the  strength  acquired  by  exercise  increases  their  proportion ;  not  only
in  the  whole  body,  but,  as  we  shall  find,  occasions  them  to  be  carried
into  parts  where  in  either  a  quiet  or  debelitated  state  of  the  animal  they
were  not  allowed  to  go,*  the  use,  therefore,  of  a  part,  and  the  quantity  of
red  globules  passing  through it,  are  probably  pretty  well proportioned
to  each  other. This  effect  is  so  well  known  to  feeders  of  young  animals,
for  the  table  of  the  epicure,  that  bleeding,  to  lessen  the  quantity,  is  im-
mediately practised-  as  also  debarring  the  creature  from  exercise,  in  order
to  prevent  their  increasing,  and  being  carried  so  far  from  the  heart,  as
they  otherwise  would  be.

*  Thus,  on  some  of  the  first  appearances  of  the  chick  we  find  a  zone  surrounding  it,,
composed  of  dots,  which  contain  red  globules,  but  not  in  vefl*els,and  which  zone  becomes  vas-
cular afterwards. Vide  plate  i.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  47

These  three  substances  are  of  different  specific  gravities :  the  serum  or
fluid  part  is  the  lightest  ;  the  solid  part  or  lymph  is  the  next  in  order ;  and
the  red  globules  are  the  heavieft.  This  is  seen  in  such  blood  as  separates
readily  into  its  constituent  parts.  The  serum  swims  upon  the  top,  and  the
red  globules  fall  to  the  bottom,  while  the  lymph  would  be  suspended
between  the  two,  if  the  red  part  were  not  retained  in  the  lymph,  from
its  coagulation  ;  but  this  constant  effect  is  no  absolute  proof  of  the  dif-
ference in  the  specific  gravities  of  the  serum,  and  coagulating  lymph  ;  for
we  still  do  not  know  but  that  the  red  globules,  which  are  evidently  the
heavieft,  make  the  coagulating  lymph  to  link  in  the  serum.  To  ascer-
tain this  circumstance,  I  made  the  following  experiment  :  I  took  some
blood,  which  separated  easily  into  its  constituent  parts;  I  then  suspended
in  a  portion  of  serum  apiece  of  coagulating  lymph,  which  was  free  from
red  globules,  and  it  sunk  to  the  bottom,  but  not  very  quickly ;  this
proves  that  the  lymph,  when  coagulated,  is  somewhat  heavier  than  the
serum.

I  then  took  as  much  of  the  bottom  of  the  coagulum,  containing  the  red
globules,  and  put  it  into  the  serum  along  with  the  lymph,  to  see  which  of
them  sunk  the  fastest,  and  found  that  the  piece  with  the  red  globules  sunk
much  more  quickly  than  the  other;  I  should  think  three  times  as  faft.
The  serum  itself  is  much  heavier  than  common  water,  for  when  the
parts  beforementioned  were*put  into  common  water,  in  the  same  man-
ner as  into  the  serum,  they  both  sunk  much  faster,  and  there  was  not
that  disproportion  between  the  times  of  their  falling,  as  in  the  serum.
But  if  the  blood  has  a  strong  disposition  to  coagulate,  and  is  not  in  large
quantity,  it  will  coagulate  soon,  and  involve  the  red  globules;  yet  there
will  then  be  fewest  at  top,  and  they  will  be  more  and  more  crowded
towards  the  bottom ;  though  there  would  appear  in  such  blood  to  be
no  coagulating  lymph  at  top  free  from  the  red  globules,  yet  in  most  of  it
a  thin  pellicle  may  be  found,  which  can  be  pulled  off.

I  have  already  observed  that  the  whole  mass  of  blood,  taken  together
in  a  great  variety  of  classes  of  animals,  appears  of  a  red  colour;  and  I
mall  now  further  remark,  that  it  is  of  a  much  deeper  colour  in  some
classes  of  animals  than  in  others,  which  I  believe  arises  from  a  greater


48  General  principles  of  the  blood.

number  of  red  globules  being  contained  in  a  given  quantity  of  lymph
and  serum.  This,  I  think,  evidently  appears  to  be  the  case  when  we  ex-
amine a  portion  of  the  blood  itself,  belonging  to  different  classes  of  ani-
mals. In  the  class  called  quadruped,  I  believe  it  has  the  deepest  body  of
colour ;  I  am  not,  however,  certain  that  it  is  not  nearly  as  deep  in  some
birds  ;  and  even  in  the  same  class  of  animals  it  appears  to  have  a  much
greater  body  of  colour  in  some  species  than  in  others.  Thus  it  appears
to  be  deeper  in  the  hare  than  the  rabbit.

It  is  the  red  part  itself  which  makes  the  difference  in  depth  of  colour
in  different  parts  of  the  same  animal;  and  the  common  mode  of  judging
is  by  the  colour  of  the  parts  in  different  classes  of  animals  that  have  red
blood ;  on  these  we  generally  form  our  opinion,  for  though  in  some
animals,  which  have  white  muscles,  the  liver,  kidney,  and  heart,  may  be
nearly  as  red  as  in  others  whose  muscles  are  universally  as  red;  yet,  as
the  muscles  are  white,there  must  be  a  deficiency  in  the  red  globules  on  the
whole;  for  if  ther^  parts  which  are  red  in  animals,  having  white  muscles,
as  the  heart,  liver,  etc.  have  no  more  than  their  due  proportion  with  other
animals  that  are  universally  red,  there  must  be  in  such  animals  a  defi-
ciency of  red  globules  on  the  whole.  This  idea  may  be  gradually  carried
on,  from  the  animal  which  has  fewest  red  muscles,  to  those  whose
muscles  are  universally  red,  and  of  a  high  colour;  even  in  the  same  species
the  colour  of  all  the  muscles  is  not  equally  high.  What  are  called  dif-
ferent temperaments  have  their  muscles  redder,  or  paler;  the  darker  the
colour  of  the  skin,  hair,  etc.  of  any  one  species,  I  believe  the  blood  is  in
proportion  redder.  When  a  part,  of  whatever  kind,  is  red,  it  takes  place  in
consequence  of  its  vessels  being  large  enough  to  carry  red  blood  ;  and
therefore,  when  we  find  a  muscle  red,  we  know  it  arises  from  the  same
cause.  When  a  part,  on  the  contrary,  is  white,  as  a  tendon,  it  is  because
its  vessels  are  small,  and  have  little  or  none  of  the  red  blood  passing  along
them;  although  it  may  probably  be  as  vascular  as  the  muscle  to  which
it  belongs*;  and  those  animals  that  have  no  red  blood,  have  white  flesh

*  Conceiving  that  the  amnion  of  a  calf  might  have  but  few  vessels,  I  injected  a  piece  of
it  with  quick-silver,  first  drying  its  edges  all  round,  on  the  edge  of  a  dish>  while  the  middle


General  principles  of  the  blood.  49

universally*,  and  this,  probably,  no  less  vascular  than  the  flesh  which  re-
ceives red  blood.

The  blood  in  the  same  animals  is  not  equally  deep  coloured  in  every
part;  that  is,  every  part  of  the  body  has  not  its  blood  equally  loaded  with
red  globules,  or,  at  least,  it  is  not  equally  red,  even  in  parts  of  the  same
construction  and  use,  such  as  muscles ;  this  arises  from  the  red  globules
not  being  carried  into  those  parts  in  equal  proportion;  these  are  the  white
parts  of  animals;  such  muscles,  in  animals  used  for  food,  are  called  white
meat.  In  animals,  which  have  these  muscles,  there  is  commonly  not  so
much  red  blood,  as  in  others  where  thefe  parts  are  more  universally  red;
and  perhaps  the  red  part  of  the  blood  is  not  pushed  so  far  in  them  as
kl  those  which  have  it  in  a  larger  proportion :  there  are  some  animals,
however,  which  have  a  larger  quantity  of  red  globules  in  the  blood,  yet
have  some  of  their  muscles  of  a  lighter  colour  than  others :  even  in  the
human  subject,  all  the  muscles  are  not  equally  red;  the  muscular  part
of  the  intestines,  for  instance,  is  not  equal  in  redness  to  the  heart,  and
many  other  muscles.  To  what  is  this  owing?  Does  it  arise  from  me-
chanical causes  ?  Do  the  vessels  become  suddenly  so  small  beyond  a  cer-
tain limit  as  not  to  allow  the  red  blood  to  pass  ?  or  are  the  other  parts  of
the  blood  less  tenacious?  Is  the  red  part  in  such  not  allowed  to  go  so  far?
or  is  it  a  separating  principle  in  the  vessels  themselves  ?  Many  circum-
stances in  life  either  increase  the  quantity  of  the  red  globules,  or  make
them  more  universal  in  the  muscles  of  the  same  animal :  thus  exercise
increases  the  quantity  of  the  red  globules,  and  the  red  colour  of  muscles,
while  there  is  the  same  quantity  on  the  whole,  or  perhaps  we  should
rather  say, that  indolence  decreases  the quantity; this is particularly

of  it  lay  in  the  dish  in  water;  but  the  whole  became  one  mass  of  vessels.  The  intention  of
this  experiment  was  to  see,  if  possible,  the  communication  between  the  arteries  and  the;
veins ;  but  the  mass  of  vessels  prevented  every  view  of  this  kind.

*  The  redness  of  the  blood  is  of  great  use  towards  the  knowledge  of  diseases;  many  in-
flammations are  known  by  it,  when  on  the  skin,  and  even  the  kind  of  inflammation  is  di-
stinguished by  the  kind  of  redness:  also  putrid  diseases  are  distinguished  when  the  blood  is
cxtravasated. The  quantity  in  the  face  is  a  sign  of  health  or  disease.

H


ro  General  principles  of  the  blood*

remarkable  in  woman  ;  and  probably  the  whiteness  of  the  muscles  of
young  animals  may  arise  from  the  same  cause ;  I.  suspect,  however^
something  more ;  I  .conceive  it  arises  from  the  principle  of  life,  in-
fluenced by  accidental  or  mechanical  causes;  for  the  muscles  of  young
animals  are  increasing  in  colour  till  they  arrive  at  the  age  of  maturity,
and  not  afterwards,  although  they  continue  to  use  exercise.  Diseases
lessen  the  quantity  of  the  red  globules,  and  often  render  their  distribu-
tion unequal.

From  the  above  account  we  may  reason  upon  the  whole,  that  the
animals  which  are  reddest,  or  have  the  greatest  number  of  red  parts,  have
their  blood  furnished  with  the  greatest  proportion  of  red  globules.

One  would  naturally  suppose  that  the  red  globules  were  of  the  same  co-
lour every  where  in  the  same  animal;  this  last  is  perhaps  the  case,  but  now
we  find  that  these  globules  are  of  different  hues  in  the  different  systems
of  vessels  in  the  same  animal.  In  the  more  perfect  animals,  where  there
are  two  systems  of  vessels,  carrying  the  blood,  viz.  arteries  and  veins,  the
blood  is  not  of  the  same  species  of  red  in  both  of  them  in  the  same  ani-
mal ;  one  red  is  the  scarlet,  which  takes  place  in  the  arteries  of  the  body,
the  other  is  the  modena  which  takes  place  in  the  veins;  and  as  every  part
of  the  body  possesses  such  systems  of  vessels,  the  parts  which  are  visited
by  red  blood  must  have  a  mixture  of  both.  As  there  are  two  circulations
in  every  animal  above  the  insect,  one  in  the  lungs  in  those  that  breathe
air,  or  in  the  gills  in  fish  who  breathe  water,  and  the  other  the  general
circulation  to  the  body  in  both,  we  find  the  two  colours  of  the  globules
not  corresponding  to  the  same  system  of  vessels  in  each.  The  scarlet  is
the  venal  blood  in  the  lungs,  and  afterwards  becomes  the  arterial  in  the
body,  where  it  is  commonly  seen ;  and  hence  it  is  called  the  arterial  blood ;
the  modena  is  the  venal  blood  of  the  body,  and  is  the  blood  also  of  the
pulmonary  artery;  but,  as  it  is  commonly  seen  in  the  veins  only  of  the
body,  it  is  called  the  venal  blood;  the  scarlet  colour,  therefore,  is  ac-
quired in  the  lungs,  and  the  modena  in  the  body.  There  are  so  many
proofs  of  this,  that  it  hardly  requires  any  illustration ;  yet,  many  circum-
stances and  experiments  may  be  brought  in  direct  proof  of  it. I  bled  a


General  prmciples  of  the  blood.  51

man  in  the  temporal  artery,  and  in  the  vein  of  the  arm  at  the  same  time,
each  into  a  phial.  The  blood  of  the  artery  was  of  a  florid  red,  and  the
venal  was  dark.  The  arterial  kept  its  colour,  and  did  not  separate  its
serum;  but  this  was  singular,  for  in  others  it  does  separate  its  serum  and
coagulum;  the  venal  separated  into  its  constituent  parts  as  usual.

Although  this,  however,  is  a  general  rule,  yet  there  are  many  ex-
ceptions ;  for  we  find  in  many  cases  the  scarlet  colour  of  the  blood
in  the  arteries  not  changed  in  the  veins,  and  under  some  circumstances
the  modena  taking  place  in  the  arteries,  as  well  as  where  blood  is  extra-
vasated  in  the  body.

It  becomes  a  question,  how  the  change  is  produced  in  each  ?

More  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  mode  in  which  it  gets  the  scarlet
colour,  than  the  modena,  (though  both  probably  are  of  equal  importance)
because  it  was  believed  that  life,  in  some  degree,  depended  on  this  colour.
Many  substances  change  the  colour  of  the  blood  from  the  modena  to  the
scarlet:  respirable  air  has  this  effect,  and  many  of  the  neutral  salts,  more
especially  nitre,  which  occasions  the  florid  colour  in  meat  that  has  been
salted,  also  with  sea-salt.  But,  as  the  air  produces  this  effect  in  the  living
body,  and  as  we  find  that  without  air  the  animal  dies,  great  stress  has
been  laid  on  this  change  of  colour,  whereas,  it  should  only  be  considered
as  a  sign  that  the  blood  has  been  in  contact  with  the  air,  but  not  that  it
must  be  fit  for  the  purpose  of  circulation.  This  effect  takes  place  readily
under  many  circumstances;  it  takes  place  out  of  the  circulation  as  readily
as  when  in  it;  as  readily  when  blood  is  coagulated  as  before:  it  takes
place  in  blood  whose  coagulating  principle  has  been  destroyed,  as  by
lightning,  sudden  death,  etc.  it  does  not,  therefore,  depend  upon  life.  It
is  the  cause  only  of  this  change  in  the  colour  by  respirable  air,  which  be-
comes an  object  of  consideration;  for  if  we  suppose  the  change  of  colour
in  the  red  globules  to  be  all  that  respiration  is  to  perform,  we  shall  make
the  red  globules  the  most  essential  part  of  the  blood,  whereas  they  are
the  least  so.  Most  prcbably,  the  effect  of  air  upon  the  blood  is  greatest
on  the  coagulating  lymph;  and  this  conjecture  is  rendered  more  likely,
when  we  consider,  that  in  animals  which  have  no  red  globules  of  any  kind,
respiration  is  as  essential  to  their  existence  as  in  any  other;  and  we  find,


5  2  General  principles  of  the  blood.

that  the  blood  may  lose  this  effect,  and  yet  retain  its  salutary  effects  in  the
constitution. Thus  in  the  tying  up  a  large  artery,  when  the  parts  be-
yond must  be  supplied  with  blood  that  shall  have  lost  its  florid  colour;
and  in  the  chick  in  the  egg,  the  blood  in  the  arterial  system is  dark,
while  in  the  veins  of  the  temporary  lungs  it  is  florid. We  are  led,  by
daily  experience,  to  observe,  that  the  dark  blood  taken  from  a  vein  becomes
red  on  that  surface  which is  exposed  to  the  common  atmosphere; and>
that  if  it  be  shaken  in  a  phial  with  air,  the  whole  becomes  red*. If  blood
also  be  allowed  to  stand  exposed  to  the  air,  and  coagulate,  its  upper  sur-
face will  become  of  the  scarlet  red,  while  the  bottom  remains  dark,  or
even  of  a  darker  colour  than  common  venal  blood,  because  it  contains  a
greater  quantity  of  red  globules. If  the  coagulated  blood  be  inverted,
and  the  bottom  exposed  to  the  air,  this  part  will  also  assume  the  scar-
let red,  and  become  even  redder  than  that  exposed  before, because  it
contains  a  greater  number  of  red  globules,  which  undergo  this  change.
The  red  colour  will  even  penetrate  to  some  depth,  which  fhews  that  the
effect  can  be  produced  through  a  thick  substance.  We  often  find  the  ves-
sels of  the  lungs  full  of  blood,  and  the  whole  substance  of  the  lungs  of  a
dark colour;  but,  if  we  inflate  the  lungs,  the  cells  will become  of  a
florid  red,  the  small  vessels  on  those  cells,  both  arteries  and  veins,  having
the  colour  of  their  blood  changed  by  the  air  in  the  cells  affecting  it
through  their  coats:  we  find  the  same  thing  on  the  surface  of  flesh,  or
.muscles,  liver,  etc. We  may  observe  in  the  gills  of  fish,  that  they  retain
their  florid  colour  as  long  as  the  fish  is  fresh,  from  being  exposed  to  the
air,  for  they  naturally  have  the  air  applied  externally  in  the  act  of  breathing.
It  is  from  these  facts  we  reason,  respecting  the  scarlet  colour  which  the
blood  acquires  in  the  lungs,  but  loses  in  the  body,  and  therefore  is  found
of  the  modena  colour  in  the  veins,  and  of  course  in  the  right  side  of  the
heart,  and  larger  trunks  of  the  pulmonary  artery. As  the  blood  is  florid
in  the  pulmonary  veins,  as  far  as  we  can  trace  them,  we  reasonably  sup-
pose that  it  acquires  this  appearance  in  the  small  vessels  of  the  lungs,  and  as

*  This  docs  not  arise  from  motion,  for  fill  the  phial  with  blood  without  air,  and  put  into
it  glass-beads,  and  shake  them,  so  as  to  give  it  motion,  the  colour  will  not  be  altered.


Geiieral  principles  of  the  blood.  S3

the  lungs  constantly  take  in  frefh  air,  we  conceive  that  by  exposure  to  the
air  (perhaps  both  in  arteries  and  veins)  it  acquired  the  scarlet  colour ;  for
we  fhall  see  that  the  air,  or  the  influence  of  the  air,  is  capable  of  passing
through  animal  substance.

In  the  living  body  when  the  breathing  is  imperfect,  we  can  plainly  see
the  change  taking  place  in  the  colour  of  the  blood,  in  proportion  as
the  breathing  becomes  more  perfect,  of  which  the  following  experiments
are  proofs  :

They  were  made  with  a  view  to  observe  the  motion  of  the  heart,  by
producing  an  artificial  breathing,  and  exhibited  a  vast  variety  of  satisfac-
tory phenomena,  of  which  the  change  in  the  colour  of  the  blood  in  the
lungs  was  one.

I  invented  a  pair  of  double  bellows,  each  of  which  had  two  openings,
but  their  actions  were  reversed ;  two  of  the  openings  were  inclosed  in  one
pipe  or  nozzle,  and  the  other  two  were  on  the  sides. The  lower  cham-
ber had  its  valve  placed  exactly  similar  to  that  of  the  common  bellows;
but  it  had  also  a  valve  at  the  nozzle,  which  did  not  allow  any  air  to  enter
there. The  upper  half  had  a  valve  placed  at  the  nozzle,  which  allowed
the  air  to  enter,  but  not  to  escape,  and  the  opening  on  the  upper  side,  allow-
ed the  air  to  escape,  but  not  to  enter ; so  that  on  dilating  the  bellows,  the
upper  side,  or  chamber,  drew  in  the  air,  by  the  nozzle  only,  and  at  the
same  time,  the  under  chamber  drew  in  its  air  by  the  side  only:  on  clos-
ing the  bellows,  or  expelling  this  air,  the  air  drawn  in  by  the  nozzle  passed
out  at  the  opening  on  the  upper  side,  and  the  air  that  was  drawn  in  by
the  under  side,  passed  out  by  the  nozzle. By  this  means  I could,  by
fixing  the  nozzle  into  the  trachea,  draw  the  air  out  of  the  lungs  into  the
upper  chamber  of  the  bellows,  and  at  the  same  time  draw  fresh  air  into
the  lower  chamber;  on  emptying  these  cavities  of  their  air,  the  pure  air
in  the  lower  chamber  passed  into  the  lungs,  and  that  which  had  been  just
taken  from  the  lungs  into  the  upper  chamber  passed  into  the  open  air  al-
ternately. The  action  of  these bellows, though  double,  is  exactly  as
simple  as  breathing  itself;  and  they  appear  to  me  to  be  superior  to  any
invention  made  since  for  the  same  purpofe. I  fixed  the  nozzle  of  these
bellows  into  the  trachea  of  a  dog,  and  immediately  began  the  artificial
breathing; I  then  removed  the  sternum  and  cartilages,  and  opened  the


V


54  General  principles  of  the  blood.

pericardium.  While  I  continued  the  artificial  breathing,  I  observed  that
the  blood  in  the  pulmonary  veins,  coming  from  the  lungs,  the  left  auricle,
the  aorta,  etc.  was  florid  or  dark,  just  as  I  threw  in  air  or  not,  into  the
lungs.

I  cut  off  a  piece  of  the  lungs,  and  found  that  the  colour  of  the  blood
which  came  from  the  wound  corresponded  with  the  above  effects :  when
I  threw  air  into  the  lungs,  so  as  to  render  the  blood  florid  in  the  pul-
monary veins,  two  kinds  of  blood  issued  from  the  wound ;  and  when  I
left  off  blowing,  the  whole  blood  which  passed  out  by  the  wound  was  of
the  dark  colour.  If  the  air  is  confined  in  the  lungs  of  a  quadruped,  it
soon  loses  its  power  over  the  blood,  which  remains  dark,  or  has  the  ap-
pearance of  becoming  dark,  because  dark  coloured  blood  is  thrown  in,
and  it  undergoes  no  change ;  but  if  the  same  experiment  is  made  on  an  am-
phibious animal,  it  is  a  considerable  time  before  the  whole  blood  becomes
dark,  because  in  such  animals,  the  lungs  are  a  reservoir  of  air,  which
of  course  continues  its  influence  over  the  blood  the  longer.

This  experiment  I  have  repeated  upon  several  animals,  and  commonly
for  half  an  hour  at  a  time,  which  was  sufficient  to  allow  me  to  make  my
observations  with  coolness  and  accuracy  :  in  this  part  of  the  experi-
ment it  was  curious  to  see  the  coronary  arteries  turn  darker  and  darker,
becoming  like  the  veins  which  run  on  each  side  of  them ;  and  on  blow-
ing again,  resume  gradually  a  brighter  colour,  till  they  become  of  a  florid
red.  As  respiration  was  generally  prevented  in  the  first  part  of  the  expe-
riment, the  blood  was  found  at  firft  wholly  of  a  dark  colour,  and  the
heart  large,  and  hardly  acting ;  but  on  throwing  into  the  lungs  fresh
air,  the  heart  began  to  act,  upon  which  both  auricles  and  ventricles  be-
came gradually  smaller;  then  by  stopping  the  respiration,  they  again  be-
came larger  and  larger.

The  diminution  of  the  heart's  motion  upon  stopping  respiration,  does  not
depend  upon  the  immediate  impression  of  improper  blood  on  the  left  auri-
cle and  ventricle,  as  a  sedative,  but  upon  the  sympathetic  connection  be-
tween the  heart  and  lungs ;  one  action  ceasing,  the  other  also  ceases ;
which  sympathy  is  established,  because,  if  the  heart  were  to  continue
acting,  it  would  send  improper  blood  into  the  body,  by  which  it  can  be
supported  only  a  little  while. The  right  auricle  and  ventricle  also  cease


General  principles  of  the  blood.  55

a&ing,  although  not  so  early,  and  for  the  same  reason ;  because,  on  the
cessation  in  the  lungs  the  blood  cannot  receive  any  benefit  in  passing
through  them.

These  actions  and  cessations  of  actions  are  all  dependant  on  life,  and
the  connection  of  one  action  with  another.  It  is  upon  the  same  prin-
ciple that  the  first  effect  of  recovery  is  the  act  of  breathing.

The  following  cases  illustrate  this  flill  further  :

I  bled  a  gentleman  in  the  temporal  artery,  while  in  a  fit  of  apoplexy ;
he  breathed  seemingly  with  great  difficulty ;  the  blood  flowed  very  freely,
and  he  continued  to  bleed  longer  than  we  commonly  find,  from  the  same
wound,  which  made  me  suspect  that  the  artery  had  lost  some  of  its  con-
tracting power.  The  blood  was  as  dark  as  venal  blood ;  he  became  some-
what relieved,  and  his  breathing  more  free;  about  two  hours  afterwards
we  opened  the  same  orifice,  which  still  bled  freely,  but  now  the  blood
was  become  florid  as  usual.

Mrs. ,  in  Norris-street,  Haymarket,  fell  into  an  apoplectic  fit,

in  which  she  was  insensible,  respecting  ideas :  her  breathing  was  very
imperfect,  attended  with  a  rattling  in  her  throat,  and  a  snort ;  the  pulse
was  very  steady,  but  rather  slow.  I  opened  the  temporal  artery,  which
bled  very  freely ;  but  I  observed  that  when  she  breathed  freely,  the  blood
from  the  artery  became  red  ;  and  when  her  breathing  was  difficult,  or
when  she  hardly  breathed  at  all,  the  blood  became  dark,  and  this  alter-
nately several  times  in  the  course  of  bleeding ;  yet  all  this  made  but  little
alteration  in  the  pulse.

1

In  many  disseases  of  the  heart,  as  well  as  of  the  lungs,  we  may  often
observe  the  same  appearance.  In  many  diseases  of  the  heart,  producing
what  is  called  angina  pectoris,  (the  symptoms  of  which  arise  from  a  vast
variety  of  causes,  palpitations  being  commonly  one)  we  mail  see  that
upon  any  exertion,  the  heart  acts  with  great  violence,  and  the  breathing
is  very  laborious,  or  rather  imperfect,  not  corresponding  with  the  violence
of  the  motion  of  the  blood;  the  face  will  become  of  a  dark  purple  colour,
the  patients  will  be  nearly  expiring,  and  nothing  but  rest  relieves  them;
of  this  the  following  case  is  a  strong  inftance.


5  6  General  principles  of  the  blood.

A.  B.  when  a  boy,  could  never  use  the  same  exercise  that  other  boys
did;  he  could  not  run  up  flairs,  nor  ascend  a  hill  without  being  out  of
breath,  and  had  almost  through  his  whole  life,  an  irregular  pulse;  more
especially  when  he  used  more  exercise  than  he  could  well  bear.  Upon  the
least  increase  of  motion,  he  had  a  palpitation  at  the  heart,  which  was
often  so  strong,  as  to  be  heard  by  those  that  were  near  to  him  ;  and  his
becoming  soon  fatigued,  was  by  his  acquaintance  supposed  to  be  owing  to
a  want  of  spirit  or  courage.

With  all  this  he  grew  to  be  a  well  formed  and  common  sized  man,  but
fall  he  retained  those  defects,  which,  indeed,  rather  increased  as  he  ex-
tended his  views,  and  with  them  extended  his  actions.  About  the  age  of
thirty,  he  took  to  violent  exercise,  such  as  hunting,  and  often  in  the  chase
would  be  seized  so  ill  with  palpitations,  and  almofl  a  total  suffocation,
that  he  was  obliged  to  flop  his  horse,  and  be  held  upon  the  saddle.  At
such  times  he  became  black  in  the  face,  and  continued  so  as  long  as  the
fit  lasted.  It  was  often  several  days  before  he  perfectly  recovered  his
usual  health ;  and  frequently  he  could  not  lie  down  in  his  bed,  but  was
obliged  to  sit  up  for  ,hreath  :  all  these  symptoms  gradually  increased
upon  him,  and  at  times,  without  any  violence  of  exercise  or  action,  he
would  feel  as  if  dying,  and  used  so  to  express  himself:  but  as  the  cause
of  these  feelings  did  not  appear  to  his  friends,  they  rather  treated  them
slightly.

At  last  mere  anxiety  of  mind  would  bring  on  these  feelings,  palpita-
tions, and  suffocations  in  some  degree.

In  the  winter  1780,  and  17S1,  he  hunted  very  violently  and  also  caught
cold,  which  together  brought  on  the  abovementioned  complaints  with
greater  violence  than  ever.

He  consulted  two  gentlemen  of  the  profession  :  the  palpitation,  the
difficulty  of  breathing,  the  great  oppression,  with  the  blackness  in  the  face
(I  suppose)  they  thought  either  arose  from  spasms,  or  was  nervous,  for
they  ordered  cordials,  such  as  spirit  of  lavender,  wine,  etc.

I  was  sent  for,  to  give  a  name  to  the  disease.  Upon  enquiring  into  all
the  symptoms,  my  opinion  was,  that  there  was  something  very  wrong
about  the  construction  of  the  heart,  viz.  about  the  source  of  the  circu-


General  principles  of  the  blood.  '  $j

lation  ;  that  the  blood  did  not  flow  at  any  time  freely  through  the  lungs,
so  as  to  have  the  proper  influence  of  the  air,  but  much  less  so  when  he
was  hurried ;  that  a  stagnation  of  the  blood  in  any  one  part  about  the
heart  would  produce  in  some  degree  suffocation;  and  want  of  due  influ-
ence of  the  air  upon  the  blood,  being  the  same  thing,  which  was  the
cause  of  the  darkness  of  the  face  at  those  times  :  that  the  means  to  be
practised  were  in  some  degree  contrary  to  what  had  been  advised,  namely,
reft,  gentle  bleeding,  care  to  eat  moderately,  keep  the  body  open,  and  the
mind  easy  ;  and  as  he  had  got  the  better  of  former  attacks,  (although
those  were  not  so  violent)  I  saw  no  absolute  reason  why  he  should  not
get  the  better  of  the  present.  Eight  ounces  of  blood  were  taken  from
him  that  day,  which  relieved  him.  The  fymptoms  still  continuing,
though  not  so  violently,  I  saw  him  once  more;  he  lost  about  four  or  five
ounces  more  blood,  which  also  relieved  him,  but  still  he  did  not  get  ma-
terially better:  at  last,  as  an  addition  to  the  above  symptoms,  he  became
yellow,  his  legs  began  to  swell  with  water,  and  all  his  other  complaints
gradually  increased,  which  made  me  suspect  that  a  deposit  of  water
was  begun  in  the  chest.  He  was  now  attended  by  a  physician;  was
blistered  on  his  legs,  which  threatened  a  mortification,  and  a  caustic  was
applied  to  the  pit  of  his  stomach,  (I  suppose  for  a  pain  there):  nature
was  at  last  worn  out,  and  he  died.  I  solicited  to  open  him,  and  was  al-
lowed.

On  opening  the  belly  there  was  found  in  the  abdomen  a  very  small
quantity  of  bloody  yellowish  serum.  Every  viscus  appeared  to  be  sound  ;
the  gall-bladder  was  pretty  full  of  bile,  which  was  thick,  but  not  ropy,  as
if  the  thinner  parts  had  been  strained  off;  the  ducts  were  clear  both  to
and  from  the  gall-bladder.

Upon  opening  the  chest  the  lungs  did  not  collapse,  being  a  good  deal
oedematous,  but  otherwise  appearing  sound.

There  was  also  a  little  bloody  serum  in  both  sides  of  the  chest.  These
I  conceive  were  the  consequences  of  the  last  attack.

The  heart  was  very  large,  and  very  full  of  blood.

I


58  General  principles  of  the  blood.

Upon  opening  the  right  side  of  the  heart,  I  found  nothing  uncommon,
either  in  the  heart  or  the  pulmonary  artery.

Upon  opening  the  left  side,  I  found  the  valves  of  the  aorta  thicker,  and
harder  than  usual,  having  at  the  same  time  the  appearance  of  being  very
much  shrivelled.  This  diseased  structure  of  the  valves  accounts  for
every  one  of  what  may  be  called  his  original  symptoms,  and  was  such  as
to  render  them  of  very  little  use;  the  blood,  therefore,  must  have  fallen
back  into  the  cavity  of  the  ventricle  again  at  every  systole  of  the
artery.

Whether  this  shrivelled  state  of  the  valves  of  the  aorta  was  a  natural
formation,  or  a  disease,,  is  not  easily  ascertained ;  but  if  it  was  a  disease,
it  muff,  have  begun  much  earlier  in  life  than  such  diseases  commonly  do,
as  the  symptoms  appeared  when  he  was  young*.  From  this  conftruc-
tion  of  valve,  we  must  see  that  it  required  the  greateft  quiet  to  allow  the
motions  of  the  blood  from  the  left  side  of  the  heart  to  go  on  sufficiently,
and  that  whatever  interrupted  this,  produced  a  stagnation,  or  an  accumu-
lation of  the  blood  almost  in  every  part  of  the  body  ;  first  in  the  left  ven-
tricle, then  the  left  auricle;  pulmonary  veins,  pulmonary  arteries;  right
ventricle,  right  auricle,  and  all  the  veins  in  the  body  ;  however  a  smaller
quantity  than  usual  could  get  to  the  veins  of  the  body  through  the  arteries,
so  that  a  kind  of  circulation  went  on.

If  we  consider  the  effect  arising  from  this  construction  of  valves,  simply

on  mechanical  principles,  we  cannot  account  for  the  darkness  of  the  ar-
terial blood,  which  must  have  passed  through  the  lungs,  when  there  was
no  mechanical  obstruction  to  respiration  ;  but  since  it  happens  that  when
the  heart  either  ceases  to  act,  or  cannot  get  rid  of  its  blood,  (which  must
have  been  the  case  in  the  present  instance)  respiration  ceases,  or  is  per-
formed so  imperfectly  as  to  have  nearly  the  same  effect-f-;  the  person  is  in
reality  in  a  state  of  suffocation.  Suffocation  is  no  more  than  imperfect
respiration,  which  is  the  cause  of  imperfect  blood  passing  to  and  from  the

*  I  have  seen  it  at  a  very  early  period.

t  In  such  inspirations  I  conceive  that  so  little  air  is  taken  in  as  hardly  to  reach  the  cells  o£
the  lungs,  so  as  to  be  able  to  influence  the  blood  circulating  on  those  cells.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  59

left  side  of  the  heart ;  and  it  is  therefore  immaterial,  as  to  consequences,
whether  a  stoppage  to  respiration  is  the  first  cause,  or  is  an  effect,  for  in
either  way  it  is  the  cause  of  imperfect  blood  being  introduced  into  the  ar-
terial system.

It  may  be  difficult  to  account  for  the  increased  size  of  the  heart,  whe-
ther it  was  a  mechanical  effect,  as  the  blood  would  be  thrown  back  into
it  at  every  systole  of  the  aorta  and  diastole  of  the  heart,  or  whether  it
arose  from  a  particular  affection  of  that  viscus.  The  first  idea  is  the  more
natural;  but  it  is  not  neceflary  that  the  cause  should  be  of  this  kind;  for
we  see  every  day  enlarged  hearts,  where  the  symptoms  have  been  some-
what similar,  and  yet  no  vifible  mechanical  cause  existed  ;  and  indeed  it
is  a  common  effect  where  there  is  an  impeded  circulation.

It  is  easy  to  be  conceived,  first,  that  the  circulation  could  not,  in  the
case  of  this  patient,  be  carried  on  regularly  and  perfectly:  secondly,  that
a  stoppage  to  the  blood's  motion  in  either  arteries  or  veins,  but  much  more
a  retrograde  motion  in  the  blood  in  any  part  must  produce  a  stagnation,
which  will  be  more  or  less  extensive,  according  to  the  quantity  of  blood
passing  that  way :  thirdly,  that  if  it  was  only  in  a  branch  of  an  artery,  or
vein,  the  stagnation  would  probably  be  only  partial;  but  when  in  an  artery,
or  the  veins  of  the  whole  body,  as  the  aorta,  or  vena  cava,  it  must  then  be
pretty  universal ;  and  as  the  retrogade  motion  in  the  blood  began  in  the
aorta,  we  can  easily  trace  its  effects.  We  also  find  in  imperfect  construc-
tions of  the  heart,  etc.  where  there  is  a  communication  between  the  right
and  left  side,  kept  up  after  birth,  that  the  same  circumstances  and  ap-
pearances take  place  ;  cases  of  this  kind  frequently  occur,  of  which  the
following  is  a  strong  inftance:

I  was  several  times  consulted  about  the  state  of  a  young  gentleman's
health,  and  though  it  could  not  be  said  anatomically,  with  precision,
what  the  real  confirmation  of  the  heart  was,  yet  it  was  imagined  that
the  symptoms  arose  from  some  imperfection  in  that  organ.  From  his
infancy,  every  considerable  exertion  produced  a  seeming  tendency  to  suf-
focation ;  and  as  suffocation  always  arises  from  a  want  of  the  due  effect
of  air  on  the  blood,  while  the  circulation  is  going  on,  the  whole  body
must  change  from  the  scarlet  tinge  to  the  modena  or  purple ; and  in


60  General  principles  of  the  blood.

those  parts  where  the  blood  gives  its  colour  most,  there  will  this  effect
be  greatest,  which  is  commonly  in  the  face,  and  particular  parts  of  the
face,  at  the  finger-ends,  etc.  While  very  young,  nothing  but  crying
brought  on  those  fits,  but  when  he  was  grown  so  as  to  take  bodily  exer-
cise, as  running,  etc.  then  they  became  more  frequent  and  more  violent ;
and  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  older  he  grew,  the  worse  he  was  likely  to
be;  for  with  years  approaching  to  maturity,  his  actions  were  likely  to  in-
crease :  great  care,  however,  was  taken  to  suppress  such  actions  as  were
found,  from  experience,  to  bring  on  the  fits.  No  medical  advice  could  be
of  the  least  service,  further  than  to  inform  him  what  experience  had  al-
ready taught,  unless  to  recommend  occasionally,  when  his  friends  found
that  the  fits  of  suffocation  were  more  easily  excited  than  usual,  that  he
should  lose  a  little  blood,  so  as  to  lessen  the  necessary  action  of  breathing;
putting,  in  this  way,  the  quantity  and  motion  of  the  blood  more  upon  a
par,  and  at  the  same  time,  not  to  indulge  too  much  his  appetite  ;  but  all
these  precautions  hardly  kept  him  tolerably  well.  The  heart,  in  propor-
tion to  the  difficulty,  acted  with  more  violence,  and  one  could  rather  have
wished  the  contrary  to  have  taken  place.  As  he  could  hardly  use  any
exercise  of  his  own,  motion  was  given  him,  such  as  riding  slowly  on
horseback,  in  carriages,  etc.  He  lived  to  the  age  of  between  thirteen  and
fourteen;  and  though  the  disorder  did  not  destroy  him,  yet  it  is  most  pro-
bable that  he  could  not  have  lived  long,  as  he  was  every  day  arriving
more  and  more  at  an  age  of  action,  but  not  in  the  same  proportion  ac-
quiring prudence.  When  he  died  he  was  opened  by  Dr.  Poultney,  who
transmitted  an  account  of  the  appearance  of  the  parts  to  the  College  of
Physicians  of  London,  which  is  published  in  the  third  volume  of  their
Medical  Transactions :  such  parts  as  are  immediately  connected  with  my
subject,  I  shall  transcribe.

"  Both  lobes  of  the  lungs  were  remarkably  small,  and  some  parts  of
them  flacid  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  suggest  an  idea  of  their  having  been
incapable  of  performing  their  functions  *.  The  liquor  pericardii  was
in  due  quantity,  and  the  heart  was  firm  in  texture,  and  of  the  natural

*  Although  I  have  transcribed  this,  yet  I  do  not  lay  much  stress  upon  it.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  6 1

size  *.  On  examining  the  ventricles,  and  the  beginning  of  the  aorta,  a
canal,  or  passage,  was  found  communicating  with  both  ventricles,  situ-
ated in  an  oblique  direction  near  the  basis  of  the  heart,  so  large  as  to  ad-
mit the  end  of  the  finger  from  the  aorta,  with  equal  facility  into  either
ventricle  ;  the  septum  of  the  ventricle  appearing  to  terminate  with  this
canal.  On  examining  the  entrance  of  the  pulmonary  artery  within  the
ventricle,  it  was  judged  that  this  entrance  was  much  smaller,  and  more
firm  than  common."  It  is  difficult  here  to  say  what  would  be  the  exact
effect  of  this  communication  on  the  motion  of  the  two  bloods;  that  is,
whether  the  blood  of  the  right  side  was  received  into  the  left,  or  vice  versa ;
if  the  oblique  direction  of  this  passage  had  been  further  described,  it
might  have  explained  this  doubt ;  for  if  the  passage  was  direct,  the  blood
would  most  probably  pass  from  the  left  to  the  right,  as  the  left  ventricle
acquires  the  greatest  strength;  the  word  oblique,  however,  and  the  ex-
pression, that  the  finger,  from  the  aorta,  passed  with  equal  facility  into
either  ventricle,  would  make  us  suppose  that  the  obliquity  led  out  of  the
right  ventricle  into  the  aorta;  but  even  with  this  obliquity,  I  should  not
think  it  probable  that  the  blood  would  pass  from  the  right  to  the  left,  be-
cause the  left  acts  with  so  much  more  force:  the  description  leaves  us  to
account  for  the  defect  in  respiration  another  way.  If  the  blood  passed
from  the  right  to  the  left,  then  it  would  have  had  the  same  effect  as  the
canalis  arteriosus,  and  probably  was  the  only  one  in  the  foetus.  In  this
case  too  little  blood  would  pass  through  the  lungs;  but  I  do  not  conceive
that  this  circumstance  would  affect  respiration,  because  no  stagnation
would  take  place  in  the  lungs  ;  but  if  the  blood  got  from  the  left  to  the
right,  then  too  much  blood  would  be  sent  to  the  lungs,  as  it  would  be
found  to  take  its  course  twice.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  lungs  be  not
capable  of  allowing  a  full  distention  equal  to  the  actions  of  the  heart,
though  naturally  framed,  the  same  thing  takes  place.  In  natural  deaths,
the  pulsation  of  the  heart  commonly  stops  before  breathing  ceases ;  but  in
deaths  arising  from  a  stoppage  of  breath,  such  as  hanging  or  drowning,
the  reverse  must  take  place;  and  in  such  we  shall  always  find  dark  blood

*  This  shews  there  was  no  disease.


62  General  principles  of  the  blood.

in  the  left  side,  which  plainly  took  place  in  the  experiment  abovemen-
tioned.

It  may  be  supposed  that  in  the  lungs  the  blood  cannot  come  in  con-
tact with  the  air,  but  the  circumstances  above  related,  that  the  florid
colour  will  extend  some  depths  into  the  blood,  shews  that  the  effect  of
air  can,  and  does  pervade  animal-matter.  Not  attending  to  this  fact  at
firft,  I  covered  the  mouths  of  vessels  filled  with  venal  blood  with  gold-
beaters' (kin,  touching  the  surface  of  the  blood,  and  the  blood  conftantly
became  of  a  florid  red  on  the  surface,  and  even  for  some  depth.

I  put  some  dark  venal  blood  into  a  phial,  till  it  was  about  half  full,
and  shook  the  blood  which  mixed  with  the  air  in  this  motion,  and  it  be-
came immediately  of  a  florid  red*.

As  the  globules  are  the  coarsest  part  of  the  blood,  and  they  appear  to
be  fully  affected  by  the  air  in  the  lungs,  we  may  suppose  that  the  vessels
of  that  viscus  do  not  run  into  extreme  minuteness,  by  which,  apparently,
no  other  purpose  would  be  answered.

The  blood  of  the  menses,  when  it  comes  down  to  the  mouth  of  the
vagina,  is  as  dark  as  venal  blood;  and  as  it  does  not  coagulate,  it  has  ex-
actly the  appearance  of  the  blood  in  those  where  the  blood  continues  fluid.
Whether  this  arises  from  its  being  venal  blood,  or  from  its  acquiring  that
colour  after  extravasation,  by  its  slow  motion,  it  is  not  easily  determined ;
but  upon  being  exposed  it  becomes  florid:  it  is  naturally  of  a  dark  colour,
but  rather  muddy,  not  having  that  transparency  which  pure  blood  has.
Whether  this  arises  from  its  mixing  with  the  mucus  of  the  vagina,  or
from  the  cessation  of  life  in  it,  I  will  not  pretend  to  say.  The  red  glo-
bules, however,  are  not  dissolved,  they  retain  their  figure.

Does  air  in  the  cellular  membrane  of  an  emphysematous  person  pro-
duce, or  continue  the  floridness  of  the  blood  or  not-f-?

The  surface  of  the  blood  becoming  of  a  scarlet  red,  whether  exposed
immediately  to  the  air,  or  when  only  covered  by  membranes, through

*  These  experiments  I  made  in  the  summer  1755,  when  I  was  house-surgeon  at  St.
George's  Hospital,  and  Dr.  Hunter  taught  them  ever  after  at  his  lectures.

•f-  Vide  Chester  on  Cases.  Case  first,  the  venal  florid.  St,  George's,  a  man  emphyse-
matous i  blood  very  dark.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  63

which  we  may  suppose  its  influence  to  pass,  is  a  circumstance  which
leads  us  to  suppose,  that  it  is  the  pure  air  which  has  this  effect,  and  not
simply  an  exposed  surface*.  To  ascertain  this,  I  made  the  following
experiment:

I  took  a  phial,  and  fixed  a  stop  cock  to  its  mouth,  and  then  applying
an  air-pump  to  the  cock,  exhausted  the  whole  air :  in  this  state  keeping
it  stopped,  I  immersed  its  mouth  in  fresh  blood  flowing  from  a  vein,  and
then  turning  the  cock,  allowed  the  blood  to  be  pressed  up  into  the  phial.
When  it  was  about  half  full,  I  turned  the  cock  back,  and  now  shook  the
phial  with  the  blood,  but  its  colour  did  not  alter,  as  in  the  former  experi-
ments; and  when  I  allowed  the  blood  to  stand  in  this  vacuum,  its  ex-
posed surface  was  not  in  the  least  changed.

The  vast  number  of  cells  into  which  the  lungs  are  divided,  the  whole
arterial  and  venal  system  ramifying  on  the  surface  of  those  cells  and  of
course  the  whole  of  the  blood  passing  through  them  in  every  circulation,
together  with  the  loss  of  life  upon  the  missing  three  or  four  breathings  in
the  most  perfect  animals,  shew  the  great  nicety  that  is  required  in  preserv-
ing the  due  properties  of  the  blood  for  the  purposes  of  animal  life :  the  time
that  we  can  live  without  air,  or  breathing,  is  shorter  than  that  in  which  we
die  from  a  defect  in  any  other  natural  operation;  breathing,  therefore,
seems  to  render  life  to  the  blood,  and  the  blood  continues  it  in  every  part
of  the  body.  This  nicety  is  not  nearly  so  great  in  many  of  the  more  im-
perfect animals.

The  amphibia  have  not  this  division  of  lungs,  nor  does  the  whole  of
the  blood  pass  through  the  lungs  in  them,  and  they  can  live  a  considerable
time  without  breathing.  This,  at  present  I  only  mention  as  a  fact,  not
meaning  to  give  my  opinion  of  the  mode  of  preserving  life,  either  in  the
blood,  or  body,  by  the  application  of  air  to  it;  though,  I  will  say,  that
mere  life  in  both  is  supported  by  the  air,  and  probably  few  of  the  other
properties  connected  with  the  blood  depend  so  much  upon  air,  as  its  life.
But  we  may  observe,  that  it  was  not  necessary  for  the  blood  to  undergo
this  change,  to  render  it  fit  for  every  purpose  in  the  animal  ceconomy ;

*  I  may  here  observe,  that  fixed  air,  as  also  inflammable  airs,  have  contrary  effects,


64  General  principles  of  the  blood,

for  we  find  that  venal  blood  answers  some  purposes :  thus  the  blood  from
the  intestines,  spleen,  etc.  going  to  the  liver,  as  we  suppose,  for  the  secre-
tion of  the  bile,  fliews  that  venal  blood  will  do  for  some  secretions,  though
propably  not  absolutely  necessary.  This  application  of  venal  blood,  is  a
saving  of  blood ;  and  it  is  not  necessary  for  the  formation  of  bile,  that  the
venous  blood  should  proceed  from  the  parts  abovementioned;  for  in  birds,
amphibia,  etc.  other  veins,  besides  those,  enter  the  liver.

I  have  shewn  that  several  substances  mixed  with  dark  coloured  blood,
have  the  property  of  rendering  it  of  a  florid  red;  and  it  must  have  ap-
peared, that  by  circulating  through  the  body,  its  dark  colour  is  restored.
As  it  is  capable  of  being  rendered  florid,  by  several  substances,  so  it  may
be  rendered  dark  by  several  when  florid:  vital  air  has  the  power  of  ren-
dering it  florid;  but  the  other  vapours,  or  gasses,  which  have  the  name  of
airs,  such  as  fixed  air,  inflammable  air,  etc.  render  it  dark.  This  change
is  peculiar  to  the  living  body ;  for  if  arterial  blood  is  taken  away,  it  retains
its  florid  colour,  although  not  in  the  least  exposed  to  the  air.  As  it  is
found  dark  in  the  veins,  and  as  it  performs  some  offices  in  the  course  of
the  circulation,  which  perhaps  render  it  unfit  for  the  purposes  of  life,  we
may  conceive,  that  the  loss  of  colour,  and  this  unfitness,  are  effects  of  the
same  cause :  but,  upon  further  observations  on  this  fluid,  it  will  be
found,  that  it  may  be  rendered  unfit  for  the  purposes  of  life,  without
losing  its  colour,  and  may  lose  its  colour  without  being  rendered
unfit  for  life:  slowness  of  motion  in  the  blood  of  the  veins,  is  one  cir-
cumstance that  causes  die  alteration ;  but  this  alone  will  not  produce  the
effect;  for  I  have  observed  above,  that  arterial  blood  put  into  a  phial,  and
allowed  to  stand  quiet,  does  not  become  dark  ;  but  rest,  or  slowness  of
motion  in  living  parts,  would  appear,  from  many  observations,  to  be  a
cause  of  this  change  in  its  colour :  we  know  that  the  blood  begins  to
move  more  and  more  slowly  in  the  arteries:  we  know  its  motion  in  the
veins  is  slow,  in  comparison  to  what  it  is  in  the  arteries;  we  should,
therefore,  naturally  suppose,  (considering  this  alone)  that  it  was  the  slow-
ness of  the  motion  that  was  the  immediate  cause.  Rest,  or  slowness  of
motion,  in  living,  and  probably  healthy  parts,  certainly  allows  the  blood
to  change  its  colour :  thus  we  never  see  extravasations  of  blood,  but  it  is


General  principles  of  the  blood,  65

continually  dark.  I  never  saw  a  person  die  of  an  apoplexy,  from  ex-
travasation in  the  brain,  but  the  extravasated  blood  was  dark;  even  in
aneurism  it  becomes  dark  in  the  aneurismal  sac,  also  when  the  blood  es-
capes out  of  the  artery  and  coagulates  in  the  cellular  membrane,  we  find
the  same  appearance.

These  observations  respecting  apoplexy,  struck  me  much.  I  conceived
at  first,  that  the  extravasations  there  must  consist  of  venal  blood;  but,
from  reasoning,  I  could  hardly  allow  myself  to  think  so ;  for  whatever
mi^ht  be  the  beginning  of  the  disease,  it  was  impossible  it  could  continue
afterwards  wholly  venal;  especially  when  the  blood  was  found  in  a
considerable  quantity  ;  because,  in  many  cases,  great  mischief  was  done  to
both  systems  of  vessels,  and  the  arteries  once  ruptured  would  give  the
greatest  quantity  of  blood ;  but  to  afcertain  this  with  more  certainty,  I
made  the  following  experiment :

I  wounded  the  femoral  artery  of  a  puppy  obliquely ;  the  opening  in  the
skin  was  made  at  some  distance  from  the  artery,  by  a  couching  needle;
the  blood  that  came  from  the  small  orifice  in  the  skin  was  florid.  The
cellular  membrane  swelled  up  very  much;  about  five  minutes  afterwards,  I
punctured  the  tumour,  and  the  blood  was  fluid.  In  ten  minutes  I  punc-
tured it  again ;  the  blood  was  thinner,  and  more  serous,  but  still  florid.
In  fifteen  minutes  I  punctured  it  again  :  at  firft  only  serum  issued;  upon
squeezing,  a  little  blood  came,  but  still  florid  :  the  mass  now  seemed  to  be
principally  coagulated,  which  prevented  further  trials.  Some  days  after,
when  I  cut  into  the  swelled  part,  1  found  the  blood  as  dark  as  common
venal  blood  ;  so  that  here  the  change  had  taken  place  after  coagulation.

When  I  had  plaster  of  Paris  applied  to  my  face  to  make  a  mould,  in
the  taking  it  off,  it  produced  a  kind  of  suction  on  the  fore  part  of  the
nose,  which  I  felt ;  and  when  the  plaster  was  removed,  on  observing  the
part,  it  was  red,  as  if  the  cells  of  the  skin  were  loaded  with  extravasated
blood  ;  this  was  then  of  a  florid  red,  but  it  soon  became  of  a  dark  purple,
which  shewed  that  it  was  arterial  blood,  and  that  by  stagnating  in  the
cells  of  the  body  it  became  of  the  colour  of  venal  blood.

Blood  may  even  be  rendered  dark  in  the  larger  arteries,  by  a  shore
stagnation.  I  laid  bare  the  caroted  artery  of  a  dog,  for  about  two  inches  in
length  ;  I  then  tied  a  thread  round  it  at  each  end,  leaving  a  space  of  two

K


66  General  principles  of  the  blood.

inches  in  length  between  each  ligature,  filled  with  blood;  the  external
wound  was  stitched  loosly  up:  several  hours  after,  I  opened  the  stitches,
and  observed  in  this  vessel  that  the  blood  was  coagulated,  and  of  a  dark
colour,  the  same  as  in  the  vein.  Thus  I  have  also  seen  when  a  tourni-
quet has  been  applied  round  the  thigh,  and  the  artery  divided,  that  when
it  was  slackened  the  first  blood  came  out  of  a  dark  colour,  but  what  fol-
lowed was  florid.

This  I  have  seen  in  amputations,  when  a  tourniquet  had  been  applied
for  a  considerable  time ;  and,  it  is  commonly  observed  in  performing  the
operation  for  the  anuerism.

July,  1779,  Mr.  Bromfield  had  a  patient  in  St.  George's  Hospital,  with
an  anuerism  in  the  crural  artery,  about  the  middle  of  the  thigh :  the  arterv
had  been  dilated  about  three  inches  in  length.  The  operation  was  per-
formed, in  which  the  artery  was  tied  up  above  the  dilatation,  three  or  more
inches,  for  security.  When  this  was  done,  the  tourniquet  was  slackened*
and  a  pretty  considerable  bleeding  was  observed,  seemingly  at  the  lower
orifice,  leading  from  the  dilated  part,  which,  at  first,  was  supposed,  from
its  colour,  to  be  the  venous  blood  that  had  stagnated  in  the  veins,  by  means
of  the  tourniquet;  but  this  it  could  not  be;  and  it  was  found  to  flow  from
the  lower  orifice  of  the  artery,  which  was  immediately  tied :  we  must  sup-
pose, that  the  motion  of  the  blood,  in  making  this  retrograde  course,  was
very  slow,  for  it  had  first  to  pass  off  into  small  collateral  branches,  above
where  it  was  tied,  then  to  anastomose  with  similar  small  ones,  from
the  trunk  below,  and  then  to  enter  that  trunk;  all  of  which  must  very
much  retard  its  motion ;  and  indeed,  the  manner  of  its  oozing  out  of  the
vessels  shewed  such  a  retardation.  This  motion  of  the  blood,  though  in
the  arterial  system,  was  in  some  respects  similar  to  the  motion  of  the
blood  in  both  systems  of  vessels.

This  last  circumstance  plainly  indicates  a  communication  of  the  arteries
above  the  anuerism  with  those  below,  by  means  of  the  anastomozing
branches.

The  blood  from  the  lower  orifice  flowed  without  any  pulsation  ;  which
must  have  been  owing  to  its  coming  into  the  large  artery  below  by  a  vast
number  of  smaller  ones  at  different  distances,  and  of  course,  at  different


Genera!  principles  of  the  blood,  67

times  -,  but  probably,  the  chief  cause  of  this  want  of  pulsation  in  the  great
artery  was,  that  the  power  of  the  heart  was  lost  in  the  two  systems  of
smaller  arteries  above,  and  below ;  for  the  second  system,  or  those  from
below,  became  in  a  considerable  degree  similar  to  veins ;  and  the  great
artery  in  the  leg  below  the  anuerism  was  like  a  considerable  vein.

A  young  man,  servant  to  Henry  Drummond,  Esq.  having  had  a  knife
run  into  his  thigh,  which  wounded  the  crural  artery,  a  considerable  tumour
came  on  the  part,  consisting  chiefly  of  blood  extravasated,  and  lodged  in
the  cellular  membrane.  This  in  some  degree  stopped  the  flowing  of  the
blood  from  the  cut  artery,  and  on  dilating  the  wound  so  as  to  get  to  the
artery,  I  observed  that  the  extravasated  blood  in  the  cellular  membrane
was  of  the  venal  colour.  On  exposing  the  artery,  which  was  first  secured
from  bleeding  by  a  tourniquet  above,  and  then  slightly  slackening  that
instrument,  the  first  blood  which  flowed  from  above,  was  dark  -y  and  even
was  taken  for  venous  blood  by  the  operator ;  but  he  was  soon  convinced
that  it  was  arterial,  by  the  florid  colour  of  that  which  almost  immedi-
ately ensued.  I  observed  that  the  colour  of  the  blood  was  as  dark  as
that  of  any  venous  blood  I  ever  saw.

From  these  experiments,  and  observation,  we  must  conclude  that  the
colour  of  the  blood  is  altered,  either  by  rest,  or  slow  motion,  in  living
parts,  and  even  in  the  arteries  j  this  circumstance  takes  place  in  the  ves-
sels as  the  motion  of  the  blood  decreases.

Another  observation  occurs,  viz.  that  the  whole  of  the  limbs  below  the
ligature,  where  the  crural  artery  has  been  taken  up,  must  be  entirely
supplied  with  such  altered  blood ;  and  as  this  leg  kept  its  life,  its  warmth,
and  the  action  of  the  muscles,  it  is  evident  that  the  colour  of  the  blood  is
of  little  service  to  any  of  those  properties.  It  is  probably  from  this  cause,
that  granulations  on  the  lower  part  of  the  lower  extremity  look  dark
when  the  person  stands  erect ;  as  well  as  in  very  indolent  sores,  however
situated.

Another  observation  strongly  in  favor  of  the  supposition,  that  rest  is  a
cause  of  the  change  of  blood  from  the  scarlet  colour  to  the  dark,  or  mo-
dena,  is  taken  from  the  common  operation  of  bleeding ;  for  we  generally
find  the  blood  of  a  dark  colour  at  its  first  coming  out,  but  it  becomes


68  ( , ,  nei  al  principles  of  the  blood.

lighter  and  lighter  towards  the  last.  Some  reasons  may  be  given  for  this:
fust,  it  has  stagnated  in  the  veins,  while  the  vein  was  filling,  and  the  ori-
fice  making,  which  occupies  sonic  time,  and  may  render  it  darker  than  it
otherwise  might  have  been  in  the  same  vein  :  secondly,  when  there  is  a
free  orifice,  the  blood  may  pass  more  readily  into  the  veins  from  the  arte-
ries, and  therefore  may  he  somewhat  in  the  state  of  arterial  blood,  which
may  occasion  the  last  blood  to  be  rather  lighter.  What  amounts  almost
to  a  proof  of  this,  is,  that  although  a  ligature  is  tied  so  as  to  stop  the  pas-
sage of  the  blood  to  the  heart,  and  therefore  it  might  be  supposed  not  to
.have  so  free  a  passage  from  the  arteries  as  in  common,  yet  from  the  fol-
lowing observations,  it  appears  that  it  certainly  has  a  much  freer;  for  if
the  orifice  be  large  in  a  full  sized  vein,  the  arm  beyond  the  orifice  will  be
much  paler  than  the  natural  colour,  and  the  blood  will  become  more  flo-
rid ;  but  if  on  the  contrary  the  vein  be  small  and  little  blood  passes,  it
will  retain  its  dark  colour;  this,  however,  would  appear  not  always  to  be
the  case.

I  bled  a  lady  whose  blood,  at  first  was  of  a  dark  colour;  but  she
fainted,  and  while  she  continued  in  the  lit,  the  colour  of  the  blood  that
came  from  the  vein,  was  a  fine  scarlet.

The  circulation  was  then  very  languid.

We  may  observe  that  venal  blood  in  the  most  healthy,  is  commonly,  if
not  always,  the  darkest;  and  when  the  body  is  the  least  out  of  order,  it  is
then  not  so  much  changed  from  the  florid  to  the  very  dark  purple.  This
I  have  often  observed,  and  particularly  recollect  a  stricking  instance  of  it
in  a  gentleman  who  hail  a  slight  fever;  his  venal  blood  was  quite  florid,
like  arterial  blood.  This  could  not  arise  from  the  increase  of  the  blood's
motion,  or  from  being  kept  up  in  the  veins  by  the  fever,  for  it  was  slight*.

The  blood  will  change  its  colour  from  the  scarlet  to  the  modena  in
rent  situations,  according  to  the  mode  of  circulation. In  animals  who

I  believe  the  blood  does  not  become  dark,  by  standing  in  an  inflamed  parti I  have  seen

of  a  .  wiurv  the  person  died  some  days  after  the  attack. I have  found  the  pia-

matei ml!  in,  .1 m  several places, even  to  the  length of  inflammatory  transfusion; forming

•  >ts,  all  of  which  were  of  a  florid  red  colour,  while  the  Other  parts  of  the  same  membrane,

blood  in  the  larger  vessels,  and  also  the  extravasated  blood,  were  of  the  usual  dark  colour.


General  principles  of  the  blood,  69

have  lungs,  and  a  complete  double  circulation,  the  darkest  blood  will  be
where  it  comes  (if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression)  to  get  anew  its  bright
colour;  for  instance,  in  the  arteries  of  the  lungs,  and  of  course  the  brighteft
in  the  veins  of  the  same  part,  which  will  be  continued  more  or  less  into
the  arteries  of  the  other  circulation,  where  again  it  will  begin  to  change,
except  in  one  stage  of  life  of  some  animals  who  do  not  use  their  lungs,  such
as  foetuses ;  but  in  such  foetuses  as  convert  animal-matter  into  nourishment,
therefore,  most  probably,  must  have  it  influenced  by  the  air,  such  as  the
chick  in  the  egg,  although  not  by  means  of  the  lungs  of  the  chick,  we  find
the  blood  in  the  veins  of  their  temporary  lungs  of  a  florid  colour  while  it  is
dark  in  the  arteries;  therefore  has  become  of  a  dark  colour,  in  its  passage  to
and  from  the  heart;  but  in  the  more  perfect  animals  the  blood,  I  believe,
becomes  darker  and  darker,  as  it  proceeds  from  the  heart,  till  it  returns
to  the  heart  again;  but  this  change  is  very  little  in  the  arterial  system,
more  especially  in  vessels  near  the  heart,  as  the  coronary  arteries.  The
change  of  colour  is  more  rapid  in  the  veins,  but  it  is  not  equally  made
through  the  whole  venous  system;  for  it  will  be  produced  more  quickly
in  the  lower  parts  of  the  lower  extremities,  than  in  the  veins  near  the
heart:  it  begins,  most  probably,  where  the  motion  first  has  a  tendency
to  become  languid;  and  this  usually  takes  place  in  the  very  small  arte*
ries ;  for  in  bleeding  in  the  foot,  or  on  the  back  of  the  hand,  I  have
observed,  in  general,  that  the  blood  is  of  aiWiore  florid  red  than  in  the
bend  of  the  arm.


V.  OF  THE  QUANTITY  OF  BLOOD,  AND  COURSE  OF  ITS  CIRCU-
LATION.

It  appears  to  me  impossible  to  acsertain  the  quantity  of  blood  in  the
body  ;  and  the  knowledge  of  it  would  probably  give  very  little  assistance
towards  better  understanding  the  ccconomy  of  the  animal.  The  quantity
of  blood  is  probably  as  permanent  a  circumstance  as  any,  and  not  de-
pending on  immediate  action: we  have  not  one  hour  less  and  another


jo  General  principles  of  the  blood,

hour  more;  nothing  but  accident  or  disease  can  lessen  the  quantity;  the
first,  probably,  immediately,  the  other  slowly;  but  even  then,  although
under  par,  it  is  so  slowly  made  up  as  not  to  constitute  sudden  variations;  yet
when  we  come  to  consider  the  varieties  in  the  pulse,  we  should  imagine
there  would  be  great  varieties  in  the  quantity  of  blood.  The  quantity
I  think  must  be  considerable,  when  we  reflect  on  the  use  of  this  fluid ;
the  quantity  of  supply,  or  food,  necessary  to  keep  it  up  ;  that  it  sup-
ports the  body  and  life,  every  where;  and,  that  it  forms  the  pabulum
of  many  secretions.  All  these  cannot  depend  on  a  very  small  quantity  of
this  fluid,  without  conceiving  at  the  same  time  an  extremely  quick  change.
There  seems  to  be  two  modes  of  judging,  both  of  which  are  evidently
liable  to  objections  in  point  of  accuracy,  and  they  differ  so  much,  as  to
shew  that  neither  can  be  right.  One  is  to  calculate  how  much  may  be  in
an  animal  from  the  quantity  it  will  lofe  in  a  short  time.  I  have  seen  se-
veral quarts  thrown  up  from  the  stomach  in  a  few  hours,  even  by  a  very
thin,  puny  person:  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  had  not  this  proof,  we
should  suppose  there  could  be  but  very  little,  when  a  few  ounces  will
make  a  person  faint:  I  have  an  idea,  however,  that  people  can  bear  to  lose
more  by  the  stomach,  than  in  any  other  way.  Besides,  it  becomes  a  mat-
ter almost  of  surprise,  how  little  is  commonly  found  in  the  dead  body:
but  I  believe  in  disease  it  in  some  degree  diminishes  with  the  body;  for
more  is  to  be  found  in  those  who  die  suddenly,  or  of  acute  diseases;  and
even  in  some  who  die  of  lingering  diseases,  as  a  dropsy,  we  have  a  consi-
derable quantity  of  blood.  The  only  way  of  accounting  for  this  is,  that
in  a  common  lingering  illness  there  is  less  blood;  and  in  a  dropsy,  it
coagulates  less;  for  the  strong  coagulation  squeezes  out  the  serum,  which,
I  imagine,  transudes  after  death,  and  is  not  observable.

It  would  appear  upon  the  whole,  that  the  quantity  of  blood  in  an
animal  is  proportioned  to  the  uses  of  that  blood  in  the  machine,  which,
probably,  may  be  reckoned  three  in  number :  the  first  is  simply  the  sup-
port of  the  whole,  which  includes  the  growth,  or  increase  of  parts,  the
keeping  the  parts  already  formed  to  their  necessary  standard,  and  also  the
supply  of  waste  in  the  parts.  The  second  is  the  support  of  action,  such
as  the  action  of  the  brain,  and  muscles,  in  which  is  produced  uncommon


General  principles  of  the  blood,  yi

waste;  and  thirdly,  secretion ;  all  of  which  will  fluctuate  except  the  simple
support;  but  more  particularly  the  support  of  action.  I  have  alrea4y
observed  that  the  anastomosing  of  vessels  gives  greater  space  for  blood.
Probably,  a  paralytic  limb  would  give  the  necessary  quantity  for  simple
support.

There  is  nothing  in  the  veins  particular,  so  as  to  give  an  idea  that  they
were  intended  to  increase  the  quantity  of  blood;  they  hold,  however,  more
than  the  arteries,  which  certainly  adds  to  the  quantity :  but  the  increase
of  size  lessens  the  velosity.  They  form  plexuses,  and  what  are  called  cer-
tain bodies,  as  the  plexus  retiformis  in  the  female;  the  corpora  caver-
nosa, and  spongiosa  in  the  male.  We  see  how  little  blood  supports  a  part
in  an  aneurism ;  and,  probably,  slowness  of  motion  is  suitable  to  little
blood.

It  must  have  appeared  in  the  account  of  the  different  colours,  of  the
different  parts  of  the  body,  arising  from  the  proportion  of  red  blood,  that
some  parts  must  have  much  more  blood  than  others,  and  we  have  now  to
mention,  that  some  parts  have  much  larger  vessels  going  to  them,
than  others.  This  idea  is  confirmed,  by  the  blood  being  the  moving  ma-
terial of  life,  and  taking  a  part  in  every  action  of  it:  its  quantity  is  to  be
found  in  proportion  to  those  actions ;  and  since  the  body  is  a  compound
of  parts,  or  rather  of  actions,  whose  uses  are  known  to  vary  considerably,
we  find  blood  directed  to  those  parts  in  proportion  to  their  actions;  and
this  we  judge  of  by  the  size  of  the  vessels,  and  redness  of  the  part,  in
those  animals  which  have  red  blood,  and  we  may  suppose  the  same  in
those  which  have  not  this  part  of  the  blood.  The  brain  has  considerable
vessels,  etc.  going  to  it,  yet  its  substance  is  white,  which  is  in  some  de-
gree owing  to  its  opacity.  The  tongue  is  vascular.  The  thyroid  gland
is  vascular.  The  lungs  allow  of  the  passage  of  the  whole  blood  in  most
animals,  and  therefore  have  always  a  current  of  blood  through  them  equal
to  the  whole.

The  liver  is  extremely  vascular,  which  is  known  from  its  proportion  of
vessels,  as  well  as  its  colour;  and  as  there  is  in  this  viscus  a  peculiar  cir-
culation, the  very  great  quantity  of  blood  passing  through  it,  adds  to  the
quantity  in  the  whole  body.


J2  General  principles  of  the  blood.

The  spleen  is  extremely  vascular,  as  are  likewise  the  kidnies.  The  sto-
mach, and  intestines,  have  considerable  vessels  going  to  them,  and  the
muscles  in  general,  more  especially  those  of  labouring  people;  for  labour
increases  the  quantity  of  blood  in  the  whole,  beyond  simple  nourishment
in  the  full  grown,  or  beyond  the  mere  growth  in  the  young.

In  tracing  the  course  of  this  nourishment  in  animals,  which  consists
ultimately  in  the  blood;  from  the  most  simple  to  the  most  complicated,
there  is  a  pretty  regular  series ;  but  this  regularity  is  interrupted  when-
ever there  is  a  variety  in  the  circumstances  which  are  to  be  taken  into  the
account ;  but  the  whole  of  this  forms  too  extensive  a  subject  for  our  pre-
sent consideration.

If  I  were  to  begin  at  the  formation  of  the  blood,  I  should  first  treat  of
digestion  in  those  animals  which  have  stomachs;  but  this  is  a  distinct  sub-
ject: we  may,  however,  begin  with  its  immediate  consequences,  as  it
produces  the  first,  and  most  essential  change,  viz.  the  conversion  of  the
blood  into  a  fluid  called  chyle.  The  chyle  is  the  immediate  effect,  or  pro-
duct of  digestion,  and  is  the  seed,  which,  as  it  were,  grows  into  blood,  or
may  be  said  to  be  the  blood,  not  yet  made  perfect.  The  chyle,  to  ap-
pearance, varies  in  different  animals.  In  the  quadruped,  and  in  the  cro-
codile, it  is  white ;  but  in  moft  other  animals  it  is  transparent :  where  it
is  white  its  parts  are  more  conspicuous  than  where  it  is  transparent.  In
this  respect  it  is  similar  to  the  red  blood,  and  is  found  to  consist  of  a  coa-
gulating matter,  a  serum,  and  white  globules,  which  render  it  of  a  white
colour,  and  in  some  degree  resembles  milk.  These  globules  are  smaller
than  the  red  globules  of  the  blood,  and  about  the  size  of  those  in  the
pancreatic  juice;  they  retain  their  figure  in  water,  and  therefore  are  not
similar  to  the  red  globules :  they  retain,  also,  their  round  form  in  the
serum.

They  are  specifically  heavier  than  their  own  lymph,  and  serum.

One  would  naturally  suppose  from  observing  the  chyle  to  have  glo-
bular particles,  in  certain  animals,  that  they  formed  the  red  globules  in
the  blood;  but  when  we  consider  that  the  chyle  in  fowls,  has  no  glo-
bules, and  yet  that  they  have  red  blood,  we  must  conclude  that  they  do>
not  answer  this  purpose.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  j$

The  first  motion  of  the  nourishment  in  most  animals  is  by  the  ab-
sorption of  this  fluid  from  the  appendages  of  the  stomach;  and  in  many,
this  alone  appears  to  be  the  whole,  as  they  have  no  such  organ,  or  viscus,
as  a  heart,  to  which  it  may  be  carried;  and  in  such,  it  may  be  supposed
to  be  in  its  mode  of  distinction  somewhat  similar  to  the  mesenteric  veins
and  vena-portarum:  the  parts,  therefore,  assimilate,  and  dispose  of  it
themselves;  but  this  structure  belongs  only  to  the  most  simple,  or  the
first  class  of  animals.  In  those  which  are  more  perfect,  where  parts  are
formed  for  each  particular  purpose,  the  chyle  is  brought  to  one  organ,
called  the  heart,  having  first  joined  the  venous  blood,  which  now  requires
a  similar  process,  and  both  are  sent  to  the  lungs,  where,  most  probably,
the  chyle  receives  its  finishing  process,  and  from  thence  it  comes  back  to
the  heart  again,  to  be  sent  to  every  part  of  the  body*.

In  those  animals  that  have  hearts,  we  are  to  take  into  the  account  a
number  of  particulars :  first,  the  blood's  motion  in  consequence  of  that
organ:  secondly,  the  first  intention  of  that  motion,  viz.  to  be  prepared  in
the  lungs,  which  introduces  breathing :  thirdly,  the  variety  in  the  kinds
of  lungs:  fourthly,  the  different  kinds  of  substance  animals  are  obliged  to
breathe  for  the  purpose  of  matter,  employed  in  the  preparation  of  this
fluid.

In  this  investigation  we  shall  find  there  is  not  an  exact,  or  regular  cor-
respondence in  all  the  parts  so  employed.

This  irregularity  arises  from  animals  breathing  different  substances;
such  as  some  breathing  the  common  atmosphere,  in  which  is  included  the
respirable  air ;  others  water,  in  which  air  is  included,-  as  fish.

Some  breathe  both  air  and  water;  while  there  are  others  which  breathe
air  in  their  perfect  state,  but  water  in  their  first  periods,  or  imperfect  state
oflife+.

If  we  were  to  take  a  view  of  all  these  systems,  each  should  be  consi-
dered apart,  with  all  its  peculiarities  or  connections  ;  together  with  the

•

.  *  The  circulation  in  fish  is  an  exception  to  this.

A  Li  this  account  I  do  not  include  animals  in  embryo,  and  some  others,  which  do  not
breathe  at  all.

L


74  General  principles  of  the  blood.

different  systems,  as  they  gradually  creep  into  one  another,  some  being
perfectly  distinct,  while  others  partake  more  or  less  of  both.

The  complete  system  is  always  to  be  considered  as  the  most  perfect,
although  it  may  belong,  in  other  respects,  to  a  more  imperfect  order  of
animals.

It  has  been  supposed  by  physiologists,  that  as  the  blood  is  found  to
consist  of  different  parts,  or  rather  properties,  that  certain  parts,  or  pro-
perties, were  determined  to  certain  parts  of  the  body,  for  particular  pur-
poses ;  but  from  the  frequent  anastomosis  of  arteries,  the  great  variety  in
their  number,  origin,  and  the  different  courses  which  they  take  in  different
bodies,  it  is  very  evident,  that  there  can  be  no  particular  blood  sent  to  any
part  of  the  body,  vvhere  the  whole  blood  can  circulate.  Many  unnatural
situations  of  parts  shew  this.  For  instance,  the  kidneys  sometimes  have
one  artery  only  on  one  side,  and  two,  three,  or  four  on  the  other.  On
one  side  they  arise  from  the  aorta  as  high  as  near  the  superior  mesenteric,
on  the  other  as  low  almost  as  the  division  into  the  two  iliacs  :  and  in
some  cases  a  kidney  has  been  formed  in  the  pelvis,  and  the  artery  has
arisen  from  the  iliac;  the  spermatic  arteries  too,  sometimes,  arise  on  one
side  from  the  aorta,  and  on  the  other  from  the  emulgents  or  the  arteria  cap-
sular renalis.  If  there  was  a  particular  blood  sent  to  every  gland,  we  should
expect  to  find  urine  secreted  in  the  testicle,  when  its  artery  arose  from
the  emulgent :  but  as  the  blood  visibly  consists  of  different  parts  in  those
animals  we  are  most  acquainted  with,  and  whose  physiology  is  probably
best  known  to  us,  and  as  one  part  of  the  blood  can  be  traced  in  the  vessels,
we  can  determine  with  sufficient  accuracy  the  proportions  of  blood  sent,
as  well  as  the  different  kinds.  Thus,  the  red  part  of  the  blood  informs  us,
how  far  it  is  carried;  and  we  find  that  our  coloured  injections  nearly  cor-
respond with  this  information.  I  may  here  first  remind  the  reader,  that
the  red  globules  are  the  grosser  part  of  the  blood,  and  therefore,  whenever
they  are  most  in  quantity,  we  have  the  blood  with  all  its  parts  in  due
proportion  and  unseparated;  but  the  construction  in  many  parts  of  an
animal  is  such,  that  the  red  blood  is  excluded,  and  this  also  excludes  every
coloured  powder  we  can  inject;  the  vascularity,  therefore,  of  such  parts
is  not  known,  as  has  been  mentioned.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  J$

Through  them  the  coagulating  lymph  only  can  pass,  and  probably  the
serum,  for  the  simple  nourishment  of  the  parts.  Of  this  nature  are  tendons,
or  tendinous  parts,  ligaments,  elastic  ligaments,  cartilages,  especially  those
of  joints,  the  cornia,  etc.  Even  the  brain,  and  nerves,  have  not  the  red
blood  pushed  so  far  into  their  substance  as  many  other  parts  have;  we
see,  therefore,  that  the  whole  blood  is  not  conveyed  to  all  parts  alike,  and
this  we  must  suppose  to  answer  some  good  purpose;  yet,  upon  a  more
particular  view  of  this  subject,  we  may  find  it  difficult  to  assign  causes
for  this  selection  of  the  blood;  for  in  many  animals  we  find  parts  similar
in  construction  and  use,  such  as  muscles,  which  are  furnished,  some  with
the  whole  blood,  others  with  the  coagulating  lymph  only,  with  all  the
gradations;  some  animals  having  both  red,  and  white  muscles;  others
having  them  wholly  red,  and  others  wholly  white,  as  will  be  more  fully
explained.  Even  venous  blood  can  be  rendered  useful,  when  it  is  not  to
answer  the  purpose  of  nourishment;  for  we  find  the  blood  of  the  intestine,
and  spleen,  going  to  the  liver,  we  may  presume,  for  the  secretion  of  the
bile,  as  has  been  already  observed.

The  idea  of  particular  kinds  of  blood  being  sent  to  parts  having  parti-
cular uses,  more  especially  where  the  part  is  employed  solely  in  disposing
of  this  fluid,  such  as  glands,  is  now,  I  believe,  pretty  well  exploded;  and,
it  is  supposed,  therefore,  that  the  whole  mass  of  blood  is  such  as  to  be
fitted  for  all  the  purposes  of  the  machine.  This  idea  gives  to  the  parts
themselves,  full  power  over  the  blood  so  composed,  and  makes  us  con-
sider the  circulation,  or  motion  of  the  blood  simply.

As  the  blood  is  composed  of  different  parts,  it  might  be  supposed,  that
if  any  particular  part  had  been  expended  in  any  process,  the  remainder,  as
returned  by  the  veins,  would  shew  this,  by  its  different  appearance  or
qualities.  The  only  visible  difference  that  I  could  conceive  to  take  place,
was  in  the  appearance,  or  the  quantity  of  coagulating  lymph.  To  ascertain
this,  however,  I  made  the  following  experiments  :

I  opened  the  right  side  of  the  thorax  in  a  living  dog,  and  tied  a  ligature
round  the  vena-cava  inferior,  above  the  diaphragm.  I  then  applied  my  hand
upon  the  opening,  which  allowed  him  to  breathe,  that  the  circulation
might  go  on  and  fill  the  larger  veins. When  the  inferior  vena-cava  be-


7  6  General  principles  of  the  blood.

came  turgid,  I  killed  him.  On  the  day  following  I  examined  the  blood
in  the  different  veins,  and  found  a  coagulum  in  the  emulgent,  mesenteric,
vena-cava  inferior,  splenic,  and  in  the  venae-cavas  hepaticae,  of  sizes  pro-
portional to  the  sizes  of  the  vessels  ;  nor  was  there  any  difference  in  any
other  way.

Experiment  the  second.  Some  blood  was  taken  from  the  mesenteric
vein  of  a  living  dog,  and  similar  quantities  from  the  splenic  vein,  the
emulgent  vein,  and  the  vena-cava  inferior,  below  the  openings  of  the
emulgents.

These  four  quantities  were  taken  in  four  separate  cups.

They  all  soon  coagulated:  if  there  was  any  one  later  of  coagulating-
than  another,  it  was  that  from  the  mesenteric  veins.  On  standing  twenty-
four  hours  the  coagula  were  all  of  the  same  firmness.


VI.  OF  THE  LIVING  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  BLOOD.

So  far  I  have  considered  the  blood,  and  in  the  common  way;  but  all
this  will  explain  nothing  in  the  animal  ceconomyr  unless  we  can  refer  it
to  some  principle  which  may  shew  the  nature  of  its  connection  with  the
living  solids  in  which  it  moves,  and  which  it  both  forms  and  supports.
If  we  should  find  this  principle  to  be  similar  to  life  in  the  solids,  then  we
shall  see  the  harmony  that  is  supported  between  the  two,  and  we  shall
call  it,  the  living  principle  of  the  blood.  Without  some  such  principle,
all  we  have  been  examining  is  like  dissecting  a  dead  body  without  having
any  reference  to  the  living,  or  even  knowing  it  ever  had  been  alive.  But,
from  the  account  I  have  given  of  the  blood,  it  must  have  appeared,  that
I  have  still  in  reserve  a  property  not  hitherto  explained;  for  in  treating  of
the  coagulation  of  the  coagulating  lymph,  I  have  not  been  so  full  in  my
account  as  I  might  have  been.  As  many  phoenomena,  respecting  the  coa-
gulating or  not  coaguluting  of  the  blood,  develope  this  principle,  I  have
chosen  in  part  to  reserve  it  for  this  place;  nor  shall  I  be  so  full  upon  the


General  principles  of  the  blood,  Jj

present  occasion,  as  I  should  otherwise  be,  were  I  writing  on  this  subject
expressly.  My  intention  being  rather  to  explain  many  appearances  in  the
animal  oeconomy,  and  particularly  the  diseases  I  am  to  treat  of,  than  to
discuss  this  single  principle.  I  reserve  the  illustration  of  my  doctrine  for
such  parts  of  the  treatise  as  shall  be  employed  on  these  subjects;  the  ex-
planations, and  illustrations,  therefore,  will  be  interspersed  through  the
work,  by  which  means  they  will  come  more  forcibly  on  the  mind :  from
many  circumstances  attending  this  fluid,  it  would  seem  to  be  the  most
simple  body  we  know  of,  endowed  with  the  principle  of  life.  That  the
blood  has  life,  is  an  opinion  I  have  started  for  above  thirty  years,  and
have  taught  it,  for  near  twenty  of  that  time,  in  my  lectures;  it  does  not,
therefore,  come  out  at  present  as  a  new  doctrine;  but  has  had  time  to
meet  with  considerable  opposition,  and  also  acquire  its  advocates.  To
conceive  that  blood  is  endowed  with  life,  while  circulating,  is  perhaps
carrying  the  imagination  as  far  as  it  well  can  go  ;  but  the  difficulty  arises
merely  from  its  being  fluid,  the  mind  not  being  accustomed  to  the  idea  of
a  living  fluid*.  It  may  therefore  be  obscure  at  first,  and  it  will  be  the  more
necessary  that  I  should  be  pretty  full  in  my  account  of  it;  yet  the  illus-
tration of  it  in  my  account  of  inflammation,  will,  perhaps,  do  more  to  pro-
duce conviction,  than  any  other  attempt,  although  strongly  supported  by
facts.  It  is  tome  somewhat  astonifhing,  that  this  idea  did  not  early  strike
the  medical  enquirers,  considering  the  stress  which  they  have  laid  on  the
appearances  of  this  fluid  in  diseases;  since  it  is  probably  more  expressive  of
disease  than  any  other  part  of  the  animal  ceconomy:  and  yet  all  this,  ac-
cording to  them,  must  have  arisen  from,  what  shall  I  call  it  ?  a  dead  ani-

*  It  is  just  as  difficult  for  a  man  born  in  the  West-Indies,  to  conceive  water  becoming  a
solid.  I  recollect  a  gentleman  from  Barbadoes,  walking  out  with  me,  one  frosty  morning,
when  there  was  ice  on  the  gutters,  and  I,  without  having  any  thing  else  in  my  mind  than  just
common  observation,  said,  "  it  has  been  a  frost  in  the  night."  He  immediately  caught  at  the
word  frost,  and  asked  me,  "  How  I  knew  that?"  Without  thinking  particularly  of  the  cause
of  his  question,  I  said,  "because  I  see  the  ice  on  the  gutters."  He  immediately  said,
"where?"  and  I  answered,  ft  there."  Having  been  told  that  ice  was  a  solid,  he  put  his
fingers  down  upon  it,  but  with  such  caution  as  bespoke  a  mind  that  did  not  know  what  it  was
to  meet;  and  upon  feeling  the  resistance  it  gave,  he  gently  pulled  his  hand  back,  and  looked  at
the  ice,  and  then  became  more  bold;  broke  it,  and  examined  it,


n%  General  principles  of  the  blood.

mal  fluid,  on  which  a  disease  in  the  solids  must  have  had  such  an  effect.
This,  I  think,  is  giving  too  much  to  the  solids,  and  too  little  to  the  fluids.
When  all  the  circumstances  attending  this  fluid  are  fully  considered,  the
idea,  that  it  has  life  within  itself,  may  not  appear  so  difficult  to  compre-
hend; and  indeed,  when  once  conceived,  I  do  not  see  how  it  is  possible  we
should  think  it  to  be  otherwise;  when  we  consider,  that  every  part  is
formed  from  the  blood,  that  we  grow  out  of  it,  and  if  it  has  not  life  pre-
vious to  this  operation,  it  must  then  acquire  it  in  the  act  of  forming ;  for
we  all  give  our  assent  to  the  existence  of  life  in  the  parts,  when  once
formed.  Our  ideas  of  life  have  been  so  much  connected  with  organic
bodies,  and  principally  those  endowed  with  visible  action,  that  it  requires
a  new  bend  to  the  mind,  to  make  it  conceive  that  these  circumstances  are
not  inseparable.  It  is  within  these  fifty  years  only,  that  the  callus  of
bones  has  been  allowed  to  be  alive*;  but,  I  shall  endeavour  to  show,  that
organization,  and  life,  do  not  depend  in  the  least  on  each  other;  that  or-
ganization may  arise  out  of  living  parts,  and  produce  action,  but  that  life
can  never  rise  out  of,  or  depend  on  organization.  An  organ  is  a  peculiar
conformation  of  matter,  (let  that  matter  be  what  it  may)  to  answer  some
purpose,  the  operation  of  which  is  mechanical;  but,  mere  organization
can  do  nothing,  even  in  mechanics,  it  must  still  have  something  corres-
ponding to  a  living  principle;  namely,  some  power.  I  had  long  suspected
that  the  principle  of  life  was  not  wholly  confined  to  animals,  or  animal
substances  endowed  with  visible  organization  and  spontaneous  motion:
I  conceived  that  the  same  principle  existed  in  animal  substances  devoid  of
apparent  organization  and  motion,  where  there  existed  simply  the  power
of  preservation.

I  was  led  to  this  notion  about  the  years  $$,  or  56,  when  I  was  making
drawings  of  the  growth  of  the  chick,  in  the  process  of  incubation.  I  then
observed,  that  whenever  an  egg  was  hatched,  the  yolk,  (which  is  not  di-
minished in  the  time  of  incubation)  was  always  perfectly  sweet  to  the  very
last;  and  that  part  of  the  albumen,  which  is  not  expended  on  the  growth

*  Dr.  Hunter  was  the  first  who  showed  callus  to  be  endowed  with  the  principle  of  life,
as  much  as  bone.


General  principles  of  the  blood,  79

of  the  animal,  some  days  before  hatching,  was  also  sweet,  although  both
were  kept  in  a  heat  of  1030  in  the  hen's  egg  for  three  weeks,  and  in  the
ducks  for  four.  I  observed,  however,  that  if  an  egg  did  not  hatch,  it  be-
came putrid  in  nearly  the  same  time  with  any  other  dead  animal  matter;
an  egg,  therefore,  must  have  the  power  of  self-preservation,  or  in  other
words,  the  simple  principle  of  life.  To  determine  how  far  eggs  would
stand  other  tests,  to  prove  a  living  principle,  I  made  the  following  ex-
periments* :

Having  put  a  new  laid  egg  into  a  cold  about  o,  which  froze  it,  I  then
allowed  it  to  thaw ;  from  this  process  I  imagined  that  the  preserving
powers  of  the  egg  might  be  destroyed.!

I  next  put  this  egg  into  the  cold  mixture,  and  with  it  one  newly  laid ;
the  difference  in  freezing  was  seven  minutes  and  a  half;  the  fresh  egg
taking  so  much  longer  time  in  freezing.

A  new  laid  egg  was  put  into  a  cold  atmosphere,  fluctuating  between
170  and  1 50  ;  it  took  above  half  an  hour  to  freeze  ;  but  when  thawed,
and  put  into  an  atmosphere  at  250,  viz.  nine  degrees  warmer,  it  froze  in
half  the  time  :  this  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  with  nearly  the
same  result.

To  determine  the  comparative  heat  between  a  living  and  a  dead  eggt
and  also  to  determine  whether  a  living  egg  be  subject  to  the  same  laws
with  the  more  imperfect  animals,  I  made  the  following  experiments  :  A
fresh  egg,  and  one  which  had  been  frozen,  and  thawed,  were  put  into  the
cold  mixture  at  150 ;  the  thawed  one  soon  came  down  to  320  and  began
to  swell  and  congeal ;  the  fresh  one  sunk  first  to  29  °  and  a  half,  and  in
twenty-five  minutes  after  the  dead  one,  it  rose  to  320,  and  began  to  swell,
and  freeze.  The  result  of  this  experiment  upon  the  fresh  egg  was  similar
to  what  was  observed  in  the  like  experiments  upon  frogs,  eels,  snails,  &c.
where  life  allowed  the  heat  to  be  diminished  two  or  three  degrees  below

*  Philos.  Transact,  vol.  48,  part  i,  page  28,  9;  as  also  Observations  on  certain  Parts  of  the
Animal  CEconomy,  page  106,  first  edition.

f  However,  this  was  at  first  not  so  certain;  but  the  result  of  the  experiment  proved  it  was
so.  To  be  more  certain  of  killing  a  part  by  freezing  it,  I  believe  it  should  be  froze  very
slowly,  for  simple  freezing  does  not  kill.


8o  General  principles  of  the  blood,'

the  freezing  point,  and  then  resisted  all  further  decrease ;  but  in  both,
the  powers  of  life  were  expended  by  this  exertion,  and  then  the  parts  froze
like  any  other  dead  animal  matter.

This  is  not  a  principle  peculiar  to  life,  but  is  common  in  many  other
cases :  it  has  been  observed  that  water  could  be  so  circumstanced  as  to
be  brought  below  the  freezing  point,  without  freezing  ;  but  just  as  it
began  to  freeze,  it  rose  to  320.  In  my  experiments  on  the  heat  of  vege-
tables, I  observed  that  the  sap  of  a  tree  would  freeze  at  320,  when  taken
out  of  the  vessels  of  the  tree;  but  I  found  the  trees  often  so  low  as  150,
and  the  sap  not  frozen.

From  these  experiments,  it  appears  that  a  fresh  egg  has  the  power  of
resisting  heat,  cold,  and  putrefaction,  in  a  degree  equal  to  many  of  the
more  imperfect  animals,  which  exhibit  exactly  the  same  phenomena  under
the  same  experiments ;  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  this  power  arises
from  the  same  principle  in  both.  Similar  experiments  have  been  made  on
the  blood :  after  a  portion  of  blood  had  been  frozen,  and  then  thawed,  it
has  again  been  frozen  with  a  similar  quantity  of  fresh  blood,  drawnf  rom
the  same  person,  and  that  which  had  undergone  this  process  froze  again
much  faster  than  the  fresh  blood*.

As  all  the  experiments  I  had  made  upon  the  freezing  of  animals,  with
a  view  to  see  whether  it  was  possible  to  restore  the  actions  of  life,  when
they  were  again  thawed,  were  made  upon  whole  animals ;  and  as  I  never
saw  life  return  by  thawing,  I  wished  to  ascertain  how  far  parts  were,  in
this  respect,  similar  to  the  whole;  especially  fince  it  was  asserted,  and  with
some  authority,  that  parts  of  a  man  may  be  frozen,  and  may  afterwards  re-
cover; for  this  purpose  I  made  the  following  experiments  upon  an  animal
of  the  same  order  with  ourselves.

In  January  1777,  I  mixed  salt  and  ice,  till  the  cold  was  about  o  ;  and
on  the  side  of  the  vessel  containing  them  was  a  hole,  through  which  I
introduced  the  ear  of  a  rabbit.  To  carry  off  the  heat  as  fast  as  possible,
the  ear  was  held  between  two  flat  pieces  of  iron,  that  sunk  further  into
the  mixture  than  the  ear;  the  ear  remained  in  the  mixture  nearly  an  hour,

*  Vide  Corrie  on  the  Vitality  of  the  Blood,  page  45.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  8 1

in  which  time  the  part  projecting  into  the  vessel  became  stiff;  when
taken  out,  and  cut  into,  did  not  bleed ;  and  a  part  being  cut  off  by  a
pair  of  scissars,  flew  from  between  the  blades  like  a  hard  chip.  It  soon
after  thawed,  and  began  to  bleed,  and  became  very  flaccid,  so  as  to  dou-
ble upon  itself,  having  lost  its  natural  elasticity.  When  it  had  been
out  of  the  mixture  nearly  an  hour,  it  became  warm,  and  this  warmth
increased  to  a  considerable  degree;  it  also  began  to  thicken,  in  con-
sequence of  inflammation ;  while  the  other  ear  continued  of  its  usual  tem-
perature. On  the  day  following,  the  frozen  ear  was  still  warm,  and  it
retained  its  heat,  and  thickness,  for  many  days  after.  About  a  week  after
this,  the  mixture  in  the  vessel,  being  the  same  as  in  the  former  experi-
ment, I  introduced  both  ears  of  the  same  rabbit  through  the  hole,  and
froze  them  both;  the  sound  one  however  froze  first,  probably  from  its
being  considerably  colder  at  the  beginning,  and  probably  too,  from  its
powers  not  being  so  easily  excited  as  those  of  the  other:  when  withdrawn,
they  both  soon  thawed,  and  became  warm;  and  the  fresh  ear  thickened
as  the  other  had  done  before.  These  changes  in  the  parts,  do  not  always
so  quickly  take  place;  for  on  repeating  these  experiments  on  the  ear  of
another  rabbit,  till  it  became  as  hard  as  a  board,  it  was  longer  in  thawing,
than  in  the  former  experiment;  and  much  longer  before  it  became  warm;
in  about  two  hours,  however,  it  became  a  little  warm,  and  the  following
day  it  was  very  warm,  and  thickened.  In  the  spring,  1776,  I  observed,
that  the  cocks  I  had  in  the  country  had  their  combs  smooth  with  an
even  edge,  and  not  so  broad  as  formerly,  appearing  as  if  nearly  one  half
of  them  had  been  cut  off.  Having  inquired  into  the  cause  of  this,  my
servant  told  me,  that  it  had  been  common  in  that  winter,  during  the  hard
frost.  He  observed,  that  the  combs  had  become  in  part  dead,  and,  at  last,
had  dropt  off;  and,  that  the  comb  of  one  cock,  had  dropped  off  entirely;
this  I  did  not  see,  as  the  cock  by  accident  had  burnt  himself  to  death.
I  naturally  imputed  this  effect  to  the  combs  having  been  frozen  in  the
time  of  the  severe  frost,  and  having,  consequently,  lost  their  life  by  this
operation.  I  endeavoured  to  try  the  solidity  of  this  reasoning  by  experi-
ment. I  attempted  to  freeze  the  comb  of  a  very  large  young  cock,  (being
of  a  considerable  breadth)  but  could  only  freeze  the  serrated  edges,  (which

M


#2  General  principles  of  the  blood,

processes  were  fully  half  an  inch  long) ;  for  the  comb  itself  being  very
thick  and  warm,  resisted  the  cold.  The  frozen  parts  became  white  and
hard;  and  when  I  cut  off  a  little  bit,  it  did  not  bleed,  neither  did  the
animal  show  any  signs  of  pain.  I  next  introduced  into  the  cold  mixture,
one  of  the  cock's  wattles,  which  was  very  broad  and  thin;  it  froze  very
readily  ;  and,  upon  thawing  both  the  frozen  parts  of  the  comb  and  wattle,
they  became  warm,  but  were  of  a  purple  colour,  having  lost  the  trans-
parency which  remained  in  the  other  parts  of  the  comb,  and  in  the  other
wattle:  the  wound  in  the  comb  now  bled  freely:  both  comb  and  wattle,
recovered  perfectly  in  about  a  month :  the  natural  colour  returned  first,
next  to  the  sound  parts,  and  increased  gradually  till  the  whole  had  ac-
quired a  healthy  appearance.  Finding  that  freezing  both  the  solids,  and  the
blood,  did  not  destroy  the  life  in  either;  nor  the  future  actions  depending
on  organization;  and,  that  it  also  did  not  prevent  the  blood  from  re-
covering its  fluidity,  I  conceived  the  life  of  every  part  of  the  body  to  be  si-
milar :  what  will  affect,  therefore,  the  life  of  any  one  part,  will  affect,
also,  that  of  another,  though  probably  not  in  an  equal  degree;  for  in  these
experiments,  the  blood  was  under  the  same  circumstances  with  the  solids,
and  it  retained  its  life ;  that  is  to  say,  when  the  solids  and  blood  were
frozen,  and  afterwards  thawed,  they  were  both  capable  of  carrying  on
their  functions.

The  following  experiments  were  made  in  the  same  manner,  on  living
muscles,  to  see  how  far  the  contractions  of  living  muscles,  after  having
been  frozen,  correspond  with  the  coagulation  of  the  blood.

A  muscle  was  removed  from  a  frog's  leg,  with  a  portion  of  its  tendon,
was  immediately  placed  between  two  pieces  of  lead,  and  exposed  to  a  cold
about  ten  degrees  below  o.  In  five  minutes  it  was  taken  out,  when  it  was
quite  hard  and  white  ;  on  being  gradually  thawed,  it  became  shorter,  and
thicker,  than  wdiile  frozen;  but  on  being  irritated,  did  not  contract;  yet
if  at  all  elongated  by  force,  it  contracted  again,  and  the  tendinous  expansion
covering  the  muscle  was  thrown  into  wrinkles :  when  the  stimulus  of
death  took  place,  it  became  still  shorter.

From  a  straight  muscle  in  a  bullock's  neck,  a  portion,  three  inches  in
length,  was  taken  out  immediately  after  the  animal  had  been  knocked*


General  principles  of  the  blood*  83

down,  and  was  exposed  between  two  pieces  of  lead,  to  a  cold  below  o,  for
fourteen  minutes  ;  at  the  end  of  this  time  it  was  found  to  be  frozen  ex-
ceedingly hard,  was  become  white,  and  was  now  only  two  inches  long  :
it  was  thawed  gradually,  and  in  about  fix  hours  after  thawing,  it  contracted
so  as  only  to  measure  one  inch  in  length ;  but  irritation  did  not  produce  any
sensible  motion  in  the  fibres.  Here  then  were  the  juices  of  muscles
frozen,  so  as  to  prevent  all  power  of  contraction  in  their  fibres,  without
destroying  their  life;  for  when  thawed,  they  showed  the  same  life  which
they  had  before:  this  is  exactly  similar  to  the  freezing  of  blood  too  fast
for  its  coagulation;  which,  when  thawed,  does  afterwards  coagulate,  as  it
depends  in  each  on  the  life  of  the  part  not  being  destroyed.  I  took  no-
tice in  the  history  of  the  coagulation  of  the  lymph,  that  heat  of  1 200
excited  this  action  in  that  fluid:  to  see  how  far  muscular  contraction  was
similar  in  this  respect,  I  made  the  following  experiment*.

As  soon  as  the  skin  could  be  removed  from  a  sheep  that  was  newly  killed,
a  square  piece  of  muscle  was  cut  off,  which  was  afterwards  divided  into
three  pieces,  in  the  direction  of  the  fibres :  each  piece  was  put  into  a  bason
of  water ;  the  water  in  each  bason  being  of  different  temperatures,  viz.  one
1 2 50,  about  27  degrees  warmer  than  the  animal;  another  980,  the  heat
of  the  animal;  and  the  third  550 ,  about  43  degrees  colder  than  the  animal.
The  muscle  in  the  water  heated  to  1250,  contracted  directly,  so  as  to  be
half  an  inch  shorter  than  the  other  two,  and  was  hard  and  stiff.  The  mus-
cle in  the  water  heated  to  98  °;  after  six  minutes,  began  to  contract  and
grow  stiff:  at  the  end  of  20  minutes  it  was  nearly,  though  not  quite,  as
short  and  hard  as  the  above.  The  muscle  in  the  water  heated  to  550  ;
after  15  minutes,  began  to  shorten,  and  grow  hard:  after  20  minutes,  it
was  nearly  as  short,  and  as  hard,  as  that  in  the  water  heated  to  980.  At
the  end  of  24  hours,  they  were  all  found  to  be  of  the  same  length  and
stiffness.

Here  is  also  a  similarity  in  the  excitements  of  coagulation  in  the  blood,

and  of  contraction  in  muscles,  both  apparently  depending  on  the  same

principle,  namely,  lifet.

*  Vide  Philos.  Trans,  vol.  66,  page  412.  Paper  on  Drowning;  alfo.  Observations  on
certain  Parts  of  the  Animal  (Economy.

•j-  The  application  of  this  principle  in  disease,  I  shall  not  at  present  take  notice  of.


gq.  General  principles  of  the  Blood.

If  it  should  still  be  difficult  to  conceive  how  a  body  in  a  fluid  state,
whose  parts  are  in  constant  motion  upon  one  another,  always  shifting
their  situation  with  respect  to  themselves  and  the  body  ;  and  which  may
lose  a  portion  without  affecting  itself  or  the  body,  can  possibly  be  alive,
let  us  see  if  it  is  also  difficult  to  conceive  that  a  body  may  be  so  com-
pounded, as  to  make  a  perfect  whole  of  itself,  having  no  parts  dissimilar,
and  having  the  same  properties  in  a  small  quantity,  as  in  a  great.  Under
those  circumstances,  the  removing  a  portion  is  not  taking  away  a  consti-
tuent part,  upon  which  the  whole  depends,  or  by  which  it  is  made  a
whole,  but  is  only  taking  away  a  portion  of  the  whole;  the  remaining
portion  being  equal  in  quality  to  the  whole,  and  in  this  respect  is  similar
to  the  reducing  a  whole  of  any  thing.  This  might  be  perfectly  illustrated
without  straining  the  imagination,  by  considering  the  operation  of  union
by  the  first  intention.  Union,  by  the  first  intention,  is  an  immediate
sympathetic  harmony  between  divided  parts,  when  brought  simply  into
contact,  which  I  call,  contiguous  sympathy.  In  this  case,  it  is  not  ne-
cessary that  the  very  same  parts  should  oppose  each  other,  else  harmony,
and  consequently  union,  could  never  take  place;  it  is  simply  necessary
that  the  two  parts  be  alive,  and  they  might  be  shifted  from  one  sort  of  a
living  creature  to  another  for  ever,  without  any  injury  to  either,  or  with-
out exciting  irritation;  and  the  whole  would  still  be  as  perfect  as  ever.
Neither  can  the  motion  of  one  living  part  upon  another,  affect  the  body,
because  all  its  parts  are  similar,  and  in  harmony  with  each  other.  It  is
exactly  the  same  with  the  blood,  for  neither  its  motion  on  itself,  nor  its
motion  on  the  body,  can  either  affect  it,  or  the  body,  since  all  the  parts
are  similar  among  themselves.  This  is  the  case  with  all  matter,  where
the  property  does  not  depend  upon  structure,  or  configuration,  but  upon
the  compound;  for  water,  is  still  water,  whether  its  parts  are  moving  on
each  other,  or  at  rest :  and  a  small  portion  has  the  same  property  with
the  whole,  and  is  in  fact,  a  smaller  whole.  One  of  the  great  proofs  that
the  blood  possesses  life,  depends  on  the  circumstances  affecting  its  coagu-
lation ;  and,  at  present,  we  are  only  to  explain  the  principles  upon  which
these  are  founded,  which  it  will  be  in  some  degree  necessary  to  recapi-
tulate ;  but,  perhaps,  the  strongest  conviction  on  the  mind  will  arise  from


General  principles  of  the  blood \  $$

the  application  of  this  principle  to  diseases,  especially  inflammation.
While  the  blood  is  circulating,  it  is  subject  to  certain  laws  to  which  it  is
not  subject  when  not  circulating.  It  has  the  power  of  preserving  its  fluidity,
which  was  taken  notice  of  when  treating  of  its  coagulation  ;  or,  in  other
words,  the  living  principle  in  the  body  has  the  power  of  preserving  it  in
this  state.  This  is  not  produced  by  motion  alone,  for  in  the  colder  ani-
mals, when  almost  in  a  state  of  death  during  the  winter,  when  their  blood
is  moving  with  extreme  slowness,  and  would  appear  to  preserve  simply
animal  life  through  the  whole  body,  and  keep  up  that  dependence  which
exists  between  the  blood,  and  the  body  already  formed,  the  blood  does  not
coagulate  to  accomplish  these  purposes.  If  the  blood  had  not  the  living
principle,  it  would  be,  in  respect  of  the  body,  as  an  extraneous  substance.
Blood  is  not  only  alive  itself,  but  is  the  support  of  life  in  every  part  of  the
body;  for  mortification  immediately  follows,  when  the  circulation  is  cut
off  from  any  part,  which  is  no  more  than  death  taking  place  in  the  part,
from  the  want  of  the  successive  changes  of  fresh  blood.  This  shows,  that
no  part  of  the  body  is  to  be  considered  as  a  complete  living  substance,
producing  and  continuing  mere  life,  without  the  blood:  so  that  blood
makes  one  part  of  the  compound;  without  which  life  would  neither  begin
nor  be  continued.  This  circumstance,  on  its  first  appearance,  would
seem  a  little  extraordinary,  when  we  consider  that  a  part,  or  the  whole,
are  completely  formed  in  themselves,  and  have  their  nerves  going  to  them,
which  are  supposed  to  give  animal  life;  yet  that  perfect  living  part,  or
whole,  shall  die  in  a  little  time,  by  simply  preventing  the  blood  from
moving  through  the  vessels :  under  this  idea,  it  is  not  clear  to  me,  whe-
ther the  blood  dies  sooner  without  the  body,  or  the  body  without  the
blood.  Life,  then  is  preserved  by  the  compound  of  the  two,  and  an
animal  is  not  perfect  without  the  blood:  but  this  alone  is  not  sufficient,  for
the  blood  itself  must  be  kept  alive ;  because,  while  it  is  supporting  life
in  the  solids,  it  is  either  losing  its  own,  or  is  rendered  incapable  of  sup-
porting that  of  the  body.  To  accomplish  all  this  it  must  have  motion,
and' that  in  a  circle,  as  it  i&  a  continuance  of  the  same  blood  which  cir-
culates, in  which  circle  it  is  in  one  vieu  supersaturated,  as  it  were,  with
living  powers,  and  in  another  is  deficient,  having  parted  with  them  while


86  General  principles  of  the  blood.

it  visited  the  different  parts  of  the  body.  Life  is  in  some  degree,  in  pro-
portion to  this  motion,  either  stronger,  or  weaker;  so  that  the  motion  of
the  blood  may  be  reckoned,  in  some  degree,  a  first  moving  power ;  and
not  only  is  the  blood  alive  in  itself,  but  seems  to  carry  life  every  where;
however,  it  is  not  simply  the  motion,  but  it  is  that  which  arises  out  of,  or
in  consequence  of  the  motion.  Here  then  would  appear  to  be  three  parts,
viz.  body,  blood,  and  motion;  which  latter  preserves  the  living  union  be-
tween the  other  two,  or  the  life  in  both.  These  three  make  up  a  complete
body,  out  of  which  arises  a  principle  of  self-motion ;  a  motion  totally
spent  upon  the  machine,  or  which  may  be  said  to  move  in  a  circle,  for
the  support  of  the  whole:  for  the  body  dies  without  the  motion  of  the
blood  upon  it;  and  the  blood  dies  without  the  motion  of  the  body  upon
it;  perhaps,  pretty  nearly  in  equal  times.

~So  far,  I  have  considered  the  blood  when  compounded  with  the  body
and  motion,  in  which  we  find  it  preserves  its  fluidity,  and  continues  life
in  the  body ;  but  fluidity  is  only  necessary  for  its  motion  to  convey  life,
and  the  continuance  of  life  is,  probably,  owing  to  its  being  coagulated,
and  becoming  a  solid;  or  at  least,  the  support  of  the  body  is  owing  to  this
cause.  For  this,  however,  it  requires  rest,  either  by  extravasation,  or  by
being  retained  in  the  vessels  till  the  utility  of  circulating  is  lost;  or  till
it  can  answer  some  good  purpose  by  its  coagulation,  as  in  mortification.
Under  any  of  these  circumstances  it  becomes  a  solid  body;  for  the  moment
it  is  at  rest,  it  begins  to  form  itself  into  a  solid,  and  changes  into  this  or  that
particular  kind  of  substance,  according  to  the  stimulus  of  the  surrounding
parts  which  excites  this  coagulum  into  action,  and  makes  it  form  within
itself,  blood,  vessels,  nerves,  etc.

The  coagulation  is  the  first  step  towards  its  utility  in  the  constitution,
and  this  arises  from  its  living  principle;  for  if  that  principle  be  destroyed
it  does  not  coagulate  at  all,  that  is  naturally;  for  I  do  not  here  speak  of
any  chemical  coagulation.

I  shall  now  endeavour  to  prove  that  the  coagulation  of  the  coagulating
lymph  bears  some  analogy  to  the  actions  of  muscles,  which  we  know  to
depend  upon  life;  and  which  affords  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  of  the  ex-
istence of  this  principle:  and  though  the  action  of  coagulation  itself  be


General  principles  of  the  blood,  87

not  similar  to  the  actions  of  muscles;  yet,  if  we  can  show  that  they
are  governed  by  the  same  laws,  we  may  reasonably  conclude,  that  the  first
principle  is  the  same  in  both.  When  I  was  treating  of  the  coagulation
of  the  lymph,  I  took  notice  that  cold  did  not  cause  it,  and  supported  the
opinion  by  several  experiments;  at  the  same  time  I  mentioned  an  expe-
riment of  Mr.  Hewson,  to  prove  the  same  thing,  and  which  he  conceived
to  be  conclusive,  but  which  does  not  appear  to  me  in  any  way  to  affect
his  hypothesis.  This  experiment  I  had  often  made,  but  with  another
view,  viz.  to  illustrate  the  living  principle  of  the  blood,  which  to  me,  it
in  some  measure  does,  more  especially  when  compared  with  similar  expe-
riments on  living  muscles.

As  the  coagulation  of  the  blood  is  a  natural  process,  and  as  all  natural
processes  have  their  time  of  action,  unless  influenced  by  some  exciting
causes,  and  since  cold  is  not  a  cause  of  the  blood's  coagulation,  even  when
removed  out  of  the  circulation,  the  blood  may  be  frozen  much  more
quickly  than  it  can  coagulate,  by  which  change  its  coagulating  power  is
suspended.  To  prove  this  by  experiment,  I  took  a  thin  leaden  vessel,  with
a  flat  bottom,  of  some  width,  and  put  it  into  a  cold  mixture  below  o,
and  allowed  as  much  blood  to  run  from  a  vein  into  it,  as  covered  its
bottom.  The  blood  froze  immediately,  and  when  thawed,  became  fluid,
and  coagulated,  I  believe,  as  soon  as  it  would  have  done  had  it  been
frozen .

As  the  coagulation  of  the  blood  appears  to  be  that  process  which  may
be  compared  with  the  action  of  life  in  the  solids,  we  shall  examine  this
property  a  little  further,  and  see  if  this  power  of  coagulation  can  be  de-
stroyed; if  it  can,  we  shall  next  inquire,  if  by  the  same  means  life  is
destroyed  in  the  solids ;  and  if  the  phenomena  are  nearly  the  same  in  both.
The  prevention  of  coagulation  may  be  effected  by  electricity,  and  often  is
by  lightning  :  it  takes  place  in  some  deaths,  and  is  produced  in  some  of  the
natural  operations  of  the  body;,  all  of  which  1  shall  now  consider.

Animals  killed  by  lightning,  and  also  by  electricity,  have  not  their
muscles  contracted  :  this  arises  from  death  being  instantaneously  produced
in  the  muscles,  which  therefore  cannot  be  affected  by  any  stimulus,  nor
consequently  by  the  stimulus  of  death. In  such  cases  the  blood  does  not


88  General  principles  of  the  blood.

coagulate.  Animals  who  are  run  very  hard,  and  killed  in  such  a  state,  or
what  produces  still  a  greater  effect,  are  run  to  death,  have  neither  their
muscles  contracted,  nor  their  blood  coagulated;  and  in  both  respects
the  effect  is  in  proportion  to  the  cause*.

I  had  two  deer  run,  till  they  dropped  down  and  died  ;  in  neither  did  I
find  the  muscles  contracted,  nor  the  blood  coagulated.

In  many  kinds  of  death,  we  find  that  the  muscles  neither  contract,  nor
the  blood  coagulate.  In  some  cases  the  muscles  will  contract  while  the
blood  continues  fluid,  in  some  the  contrary  happens ;  and  in  others  the
blood  will  only  coagulate  to  the  consistence  of  cream.

Blows  on  the  stomach  kill  immediately,  and  the  muscles  do  not  contract,
nor  do^s  the  blood  coagulate.  Such  deaths  as  prevent  the  contraction  of
the  muscles,  or  the  coagulation  of  the  blood,  are,  I  believe,  always  sudden.
Death  from  sudden  gusts  of  passion,  is  of  this  kind  j  and  in  all  these  cases
the  body  soon  putnfies  after  death.  In  many  diseases,  if  accurately  at-
tended to,  we  find  this  correspondence  between  muscles  and  blood ;  for
where  there  is  strong  action  going  on,  the  muscles  contract  strongly  after
death,  and  the  blood  coagulates  strongly.

It  is  unnecessary,  I  imagine,  to  relate  particular  instances  of  the  effects
of  each  of  those  causes  :  I  need  only  mention  that  I  have  seen  them  all.
In  a  natural  evacuation  of  blood,  viz.  menstruation,  it  is  neither  similar
to  blood  taken  from  a  vein  of  the  same  person,  nor  to  that  which  is  ex-
travasated  by  an  accident  in  any  other  part  of  the  body;  but  is  a  species
of  blood,  changed,  separated,  or  thrown  off  from  the  common  mass,  by  an
action  of  the  vessels  of  the  uterus,  similar  to  that  of  secretion  ;  by  which
action  the  blood  loses  the  principle  of  coagulation,  and  I  suppose  life.

The  natural  deduction  from  all  these  facts,  and  observations,  I  think  is
perfectly  easy;  it  is  impossible  to  miss  it.

This  living  principle  in  the  blood,  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  to
be  similar  in  its  effects  to  the  living  principle  in  the  solids,  owes  its  ex-
istence to  the  same  matter  which  belongs  to  the  other,  and  is  the  materia

*  This  is  the  reason  why  hunted  animals  are  commonly  more  tender  than  those  that

are  shot.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  B<)

vitas  diffusa,  of  which  every  part  of  an  animal  has  its  portion* :  it  is,  as  it
were,  diffused  through  the  whole  solids  and  fluids,  making  a  necessary
constituent  part  of  them,  and  forming  with  them  a  perfect  whole  ;  giving
to  both  the  power  of  preservation,  the  susceptibility  of  impression;  and,
from  their  construction,  giving  them  consequent  reciprocal  action.  This
is  the  matter  which  principally  composes  the  brain ;  and  where  there  is-  a
brain,  their  must  necessarily  be  parts  to  connect  it  with  the  rest  of  the
body,  which  are  the  nerves;  and  as  the  use  of  the  nerves  is  to  continue,
and  therefore  convey  the  impression  or  action  of  the  one  to  the  other,  these
parts  of  communication  must  necessarily  be  of  the  same  matter;  for  any
other  matter  could  not  continue  the  same  action.

From  this  it  may  be  underftood,  that  nothing  material  is  conveyed  from
the  brain,  by  the  nerves ;  nor  vice  versa,  from  the  body  to  the  brain :  for
if  that  was  exactly  the  case,  it  would  not  be  necessary  for  the  nerves  to  be
of  the  same  materials  with  the  brain ;  but  as  we  find  the  nerves  of  the  same
materials,  it  is  a  presumptive  proof,  that  they  only  continue  the  same
action  which  they  receive  at  either  end.

The  blood  has  as  much  the  materia  vitae  as  the  solids,  which  keeps  up
that  harmony  between  them;  and  as  every  part  endued  with  this  principle
has  a  sympathetic  affection  upon  simple  contact,  so  as  to  affect  each  other,
(which  I  have  called  contiguous  sympathy)  so  the  blood,  and  the  body,
are  capable  of  affecting,  and  being  affected,  by  each  other;  which  accounts
for  that  reciprocal  influence  which  each  has  on  the  other.  The  blood  be-
ing evidently  composed  of  the  same  materials  with  the  body,  being  endued
with  the  same  living  powers,  but  from  its  unsettled  state,  having  no  com-
munication with  the  brain,  is  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  of  the  materia
vitae  making  part  of  the  composition  of  the  body,  independent  of  the
nerves ;  and  is  similar,  in  this  respect,  to  those  inferior  order  of  animals
that  have  no  nerves,  where  every  other  principle  of  the  animal  is  diffused
through  the  whole. This  opinion  cannot  be  proved  by  experiment;  but  I

*  I  consider  that  something  similar  to  the  materials  of  the  brain  is  diffused  through  the  body,
and  even  contained  in  the  blood  ;  between  this  and  the  brain  a  communication  is  kept  up  by
the  nerves  ;  I  have,  therefore,  adopted  terms  explanatory  of  this  theory  ;  calling  the  brain,  the
materia  vitae  coascervata  ;  the  nerves,  the  chordae  internunciae  ;  and  that  diffused  through  the
body,  the  materia  visa;  diffusa.

N


(jo  General  principles  of  the  blood.

think  daily  experience  shows  us,  that  the  living  principle  in  the  body  acts
exactly  upon  the  same  principle  with  the  brain.  Every  part  of  the  body
is  susceptible  of  impression  j  and  the  materia  vita*,  of  every  part,  is  thrown
ijlto  action  ;  which,  il  continued  to  the  brain,  produces  sensation  ;  but  it
may  only  be  sucb  as  to  throw  the  part  of  impression  into  such  actions  as
il  IB  Capable  of,  according  to  the  kind  of  impression  j  BO  does  the  brain  or
mind.  The  body  loses  impression  by  habit;  so  does  the  brain  j  it  continues
action  from  habit;  so  does  the  brain.  The  body,  or  parts  of  the  body,
have  a  recollection  of  former  impressions,  when  impressed  anew;  so  has
the  brain;  but  they  have  not  spontaneous  memory  as  the  brain  has,  because
the  brain  is  a  complete  whole  of  itself,  and  therefore  its  actions  arc  com-
plete in  themselves.  The  materia  vita*  of  the  body  being  diffused,  makes
part  of  the  body  in  which  it  exists  and  acts  lor  this  part,  probably  for  this
part  alone.  The  whole,  taken  together,  hardly  makes  a  whole,  so  as  to
constitute  what  might  be  called  an  organ  ;  the  action  of  which  is  always
for  some  other  purpose  than  itscll  :  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  the  brain.
The  brain  is  a  mass  ol  this  matter,  not  diffused  through  any  thing,  for
the  purpose  of  that  thing,  but  constituting  an  organ  in  itself,  the  actions
ol  which  are  for  other  purposes,  viz.  receiving,  by  means  of  the  nerves,
the  vast  variety  of  actions  in  the  diffused  materia  vita:,  which  arise  from
Impression,  and  habit,  combining  these  and  distinguishing  from  what  part
they  come.  The  whole  ol  these  actions  lorm  the  mind;  and,  according
to  the  result,  impress  more  or  less  of  the  materia  vita:  of  the  body  in  re-
turn, producing  in  such  parts  consequent  actions.  The  brain  then  depends
upon  the  body  for  its  impression,  which  is  sensation;  and  the  consequent
action  is  that  of  the  mind:  and  the  body  depends  upon  the  consequence  of
this  intelligence,  or  effect  of  this  mind,  called  the  will,  to  impress  it  to
action  ;  but  such  are  not  spent  upon  itself,  but  are  for  other  purposes,  and
are  Called  voluntary.

But  mere  composition  of  matter  does  not  give  life;  for  the  dead  body
has  all  the  composition  it  ever  had:  life  is  a  property  we  do  not  under-
stand : we  can  only  see  the  necessary  leading  steps  towards  it.

If  nerves,  either  of  themselves,  or  from  their  connection  with  the  brain,
gave  vitality  to  our  solids,  how  should  a  solid  continue  life,  after  a  nerve


General  principles  of  the  blood.  9 1

is  destroyed  ?  or  still  more,  when  paralytic  ?  for  the  part  continues  to  be
nourished,  although  not  to  the  full  health  of  voluntary  action;  and  this
nourishment  is  the  blood  ;  for  deprive  it  of  the  blood,  and  it  mortifies.

The  uterus,  in  the  time  of  pregnancy,  increases  in  substance  and  size,
probably  fifty  times  beyond  what  it  naturally  is,  and  this  increase  is  made
up  of  living  animal  matter,  which  is  capable  of  action  within  itself.  I
think  we  may  suppose  its  action  more  than  double;  for  the  action  of  every
individual  part  of  this  viscus,  at  this  period,  is  much  increased,  even  beyond
its  increase  of  size;  and  yet  we  find  that  the  nerves  of  this  part,  are  not
in  the  smallest  degree  increased.  This  shews  that  the  nerves,  and  brain,
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  actions  of  a  part  :  while  the  vessels,  whose
uses  are  evident,  increase  in  proportion  to  the  increased  size :  if  the  same
had  taken  place  with  the  nerves,  we  should  have  reasoned  from  analogy.
It  is  probably  impossible  to  say  where  the  living  principle  first  begins  in
the  blood  :  whether  in  the  chyle  itself,  or  not  till  that  fluid  mixes  with  the
other  blood,  and  receives  its  influence  from  the  lungs.  I  am,  however,
rather  inclined  to  think,  that  the  chyle  is  itself  alive;  for  we  find  it  coagu-
lates when  extravasatcd;  it  has  the  same  powers  of  separation  with  the
blood;  and  it  acquires  its  power  of  action  in  the  lungs  as  the  venal  blood
does.  I  conceive  this  to  be  similar  to  the  influence  of  the  male  and  female
on  an  egg,  which  requires  air,  and  a  due  warmth,  to  produce  the  principle
of  action  in  it;  and  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  venal  blood  coming  to  the
lungs  to  receive  new  powers,  which  it  communicates  to  the  body.  To
endeavour  to  prove  whether  the  chyle  had  the  power  of  action  in  it,  similar
to  the  blood,  I  made  the  following  experiment:

I  opened  the  abdomen  of  a  dog,  and  punctured  one  of  the  largest  lactcals
at  the  root  of  the  mesentery,  out  of  which  flowed  a  good  deal  of  chyle  :  1
then  allowed  this  part  to  come  in  contact  with  another  part  of  the  mesen-
tery, to  see  if  they  would  unite,  as  extravasatcd  blood  does;  but  they  did
not;  however,  this  experiment,  though  performed  twice,  is  not  conclusive;
for  similar  experiments  with  blood  might  not  have  succeeded.

From  what  has  been  said  with  regard  to  the  blood,  that  it  becomes  a
solid,  when  extravasatcd  in  the  body,  we  must  suppose  that  some  material-
purpose  is  answered  by  it;  for  if  the  blood  could  only  have  been  of  use  in  a


92  General  principles  of  the  blood.

fluid  state,  its  solidity  would  not  have  been  so  much  an  object  with  nature.
It  appears  to  me  to  be  evident  that  its  fluidity  is  only  intended  for  its  motion ;
and  its  motion  is  only  to  convey  life,  and  living  materials,  to  every  part  of
the  body.  These  materials  when  carried,  become  solid;  so  that  solidity
is  the  ultimate  end  of  the  blood,  as  blood.

The  blood  when  it  naturally  increases  the  body,  or  repairs  a  part,  may
be  said  to  be  extravasated,  although  not  commonly  so  considered  ;  what  is
usually  understood  to  be  extravasation,  is  when  it  arises  from  accident  of
some  kind,  or  disease  in  the  vessel,  and  of  course  is  obvious  to  the  sight ;
but  even  this  extravasation  is  of  use  by  the  blood  coagulating,  although  too
often  it  is  in  too  large  a  quantity.  Accident  does  not  calculate  the  size  of
the  vessel  ruptured,  to  be  just  equal  to  the  effect  wanted  by  the  rupture  :
but  nature  has  made  a  wise  provision  for  this  overplus.

As  extravasation  arises  from  a  rupture  of  a  vessel,  it  is  of  service  in  the
reunion  of  that  vessel :  if  there  are  more  solids  ruptured  than  a  vessel,  as  in
a  fracture  of  a  bone,  it  becomes  a  bond  of  union  to  those  parts ;  and  this
may  be  called,  union  by  the  first  intention  :  but  the  union  is  not  that  of
the  two  parts  to  each  other,  but  the  union  of  the  broken  parts  to  the  in-
termediate extravasated  blood  ;  so  that  it  is  the  blood  and  parts  uniting,
which  constitutes  the  union  by  the  first  intention.

This  blood,  so  extravasated,  forms  either  vessels  in  itself,  or  vessels  shoot
out  from  the  original  surface  of  contact  into  it,  forming  an  elongation  of
themselves,  as  we  have  reason  to  suppose  they  do  in  granulations.  I  have  rea-
son, however,  to  believe  that  the  coagulum  has  the  power,  under  necessary
circumstances,  to  form  vessels  in,  and  of  itself;  for  I  have  already  observed,
that  coagulation,  although  not  organic,  is  still  of  a  peculiar  form,  structure,
or  arrangement,  so  as  to  take  on  necessary  action,  which  I  should  suppose
is  somewhat  similar  to  muscular  action.  I  think  I  have  been  able  to  inject
what  I  suspected  to  be  the  beginning  of  a  vascular  formation  in  a  coagulum,
when  it  could  not  derive  any  vessels  from  the  surrounding  parts.  By
injecting  the  crural  artery  of  a  stump,  above  the  knee,  where  there  was  a
small  piramidal  coagulum,  I  have  filled  this  coagulum  with  my  injection,
as  if  it  had  been  cellular;  but  there  was  no  regular  structure  of  vessels..
When  I  compare  this  appearance,  with  that  of  many  violent  inflammations


General  principles  of  the  blood*  93

on  surfaces  where  the  red  blood  is  extravasated,  forming  as  it  were  specks
of  extravasation  like  stars ;  and  which,  when  injected,  produce  the  same
appearance  with  what  I  have  described  in  the  injection  of  the  coagulum:
when  I  compare  these  again  with  the  progress  of  vascularity  in  the  mem-
branes of  the  chick,  one  can  perceive  where  a  zone  of  specks  beyond  the
surface  of  regular  vessels  close  to  the  chick,  similar  to  the  above  extravasa-
tion, and  which  in  a  few  hours  become  vascular,  I  conceive  that  these
parts  have  a  power  of  forming  vessels  within  themselves,  all  of  them  acting
upon  the  same  principle.  But  where  this  coagulum  can  form  an  immediate
union  with  the  surrounding  parts,  it  either  receives  vessels  at  this  surface,
or  forms  vessels  first  at  this  union,  which  communicate  with  those'  of  the
surrounding  surface ;  and  they  either  shoot  deeper,  and  deeper,  or  form
vessels  deeper,  and  deeper,  in  the  coagulum,  till  the  whole  meets  in  its
centre :  if  it  is  by  the  first  mode,  viz.  the  shooting  of  vessels  from  the
surrounding  surfaces  into  the  coagulum,  then  it  maybe  the  ruptured  vessels
in  cases  of  accident,  which  shoot  into  the  coagulum,  and  where  a  coagu-
lum, or  extravasation  of  coagulable  lymph  is  thrown  in  between  two  sur-
faces only  contiguous,  there  it  may  be  the  exhaling  vessels  of  those  surfaces
which  now  become  the  vessels  of  the  part.  In  whatever  way  they  meet  in
the  centre,  they  instantly  embrace,  unite,  or  inosculate :  now  this  is  all
perfectly,  and  easily  conceived,  among  living  parts,  but  not  otherwise.

As  the  coagulum,  whether  wholly  blood,  or  coagulating  lymph  alone,
has  the  materia  vitae  in  its  composition,  which  is  the  cause  of  all  the  above
actions,  it  soon  opens  a  communication  with  the  mind,  forming  within
itself,  nerves.  Nerves  have  not  the  power  of  forming  themselves  into
longer  chords,  as  we  conceive  vessels  to  have;  for  we  know,  that  in  the
union  of  a  cut  nerve,  where  a  piece  has  been  taken  out,  it  is  by  means  of
the  blood  forming  a  union  of  coagulum;  and,  that  the  coagulum  gra-
dually becomes  more  and  more  of  the  texture,  and  has,  of  course,  more
and  more  the  use  of  a  nerve,  somewhat  similar  to  the  gfadual  change  of
blood  into  a  bone,  in  fractures.

It  would  appear  then,  that  the  blood  is  subservient  to  two  purposes  in
an  animal :  the  one  is  the  support  of  the  matter  of  the  body  when  formed;,
the  other  is  the  support  of  the  different  actions  of  the  body.


94  Genera!  principles  of  the  blood.


VII.  SOME  UNCONNECTED  EXPERIMENTS  RESPECTING  THE  BLOOD.

The  following  experiments  have  rather  been  imagined  than  fully  ex-
ecuted, and  the  subject  is  rather  broached  and  touched  upon  than  pro-
secuted ;  but  as  I  have  not  time,  at  present,  to  go  through  with  the
experiments,  so  as  to  arrive  at  some  general  result,  I  thought  it  better  to
bring  forward,  what,  in  my  opinion,  should  be  done,  than  to  omit  the
subject  altogether*.

I  wished  to  see  if  blood  that  coagulated  with  an  inflammatory  crust
putrified  later  than  that  which  coagulated  without  it ;  for  I  conceived
that  the  strength  of  "coagulation  was  something  similar  to  the  strength  of
contraction  in  a  muscle,  resisting  putrifaction.  For  this  purpose  I  ordered
the  following  experiments  to  be  made :

Experiment  I.  Four  ounces  of  blood  were  taken  from  the  arm,  which,
after  coagulation,  had  the  inflammatory  crust  upon  its  surface,  and  was
also  cupped.

Experiment  II.  On  the  same  day,  four  ounces  of  blood  were  taken
from  another  person's  arm,  which,  on  coagulating,  shewed  no  inflam-
matory crust  on  its  surface.  Both  these  quantities  of  blood  were  kept,
in  order  to  see  which  would  resist  putrifa&ion  longeil.

By  the  fourth  day,  that  without  buff  was  putrified  ;  but  the  blood  with
the  inflammatory  crust  did  not  putrify  till  the  seventh  day.

In  these  two  experiments  it  would  appear  that  the  inflammatory  blood
preserved  its  sweetness  longest ;  but,  from  a  repetition  of  these  experi-
ments, it  did  not  appear  upon  the  whole  that  there  was  much  difference.

To  see  whether  the  blood  in  a  young  person  or  an  old  one  become
soonest  putrid,  I  desired  that  the  following  trials  should  be  made:

June  24th. Some  blood  was taken  from  a  woman  twenty  years  of

*  Many  of  these  experiments  were  repeated,  by  my  desire,  by  Dr.  Physic,  now  of  Phila-
delphia, when  he  acted  as  bouse-surgeon  at  St.  George's  Hospital,  whose  accuracy  I  could
depend  upon.


General  principles  of  the  blood \  95

age,  and  its  surface,  after  coagulation,  was  covered  with  an  inflammatory
cruft.

On  the  same  day,  some  blood  was  taken  from  a  woman,  aged  sixty,
when  the  crassamentum  was  also  covered  with  an  inflammatory  crust.

These  quantities  of  blood  were  set  by.

The  blood  from  the  old  woman  putrified  in  two  days.  That  from  the
young  woman  kept  quite  sweet  till  the  fifth  day,  when  it  began  to  smell
disagreeably ;  in  this  state  it  continued  two  days  more,  and  then  emitted
the  common  odour  of  putrid  blood.

Several  experiments  were  made  in  the  course  of  the  summer,  of  a  simi-
lar nature  with  the  last,  in  all  which  it  appeared  that  the  blood  from
young  people,  kept  longer  sweet  than  that  which  was  taken  from  the  old.

Experiment  III.  In  October,  1790,  when  the  weather  was  cold,  some
blood  was  taken  from  two  men,  one  of  whom  was  seventy-five  years  of
age,  and  the  other  eighty-three,  about  six  ounces  from  each.  The  blood
in  each  kept  sweet  till  the  fifth  day  j  but,  on  the  sixth,  both  quantities
smelt  equally  putrid,  which  uniformity  accords  with  the  above  experi-
ment.

To  see  if  recent  blood  or  coagulated  tylood  loft  their  heat  soonest.

Experiment  IV.  Four  ounces  of  blood,  after  coagulation,  was  heated  till
it  raised  the  mercury  of  a  thermometer,  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  coa-
gulum  to  the  98th  degree.  The  thermometer  was  put  into  a  similar
quantity  of  blood,  immediately  after  it  was  taken  from  the  vein,  and  the
mercury  flood  at  900.  These  were  placed hy  each  other,  and  the  ther-
mometer put  alternately  into  each,  to  observe  how  they  parted  with  their
heat.

Coagulated  blood 98°  Recent  blood , 90°

Ditto,  after  two  minutes 97°  Ditto,  after  two  minutes 89°

Ditto,  after  four  minutes  more  93°  Ditto,  after  four  minutes  more 88*

Ditto,  after  two  ditto  more....  92°  Ditto,  after  two  ditto  more  coagulated  87°

Ditto,  after  two  ditto  more. ...91°  Ditto,  after  two  ditto  more 86*

This  experiment  was  not  accurately  made,  for  the  two  bloods  should
have  been  of  the  same  temperature,  because  the  warmer  any  body  is,  the


96  Genera!  principles  of  the  blood.

fafler  it  will  lose  its  heat  to  any  neighbouring  colder  body  ;  yet  I  believe
that  the  coagulated  blood  loft  its  heat  fafter  than  the  fluid  blood.

To  see  whether  a  stimulus  can  be  applied  to  the  blood,  so  as  to  make
it  coagulate  faster  than  it  does  naturally,  I  defired  the  following  experi-
ment to  be  made  :

Three  ounces  of  blood  were  taken  from  a  boy  about  ten  years  of  age,
and  immediately  after,  the  cup  was  put  into  water  heated  to  1500.  A
similar  quantity  was  taken  in  another  cup  from  the  same  boy,  at  the
same  time,  which  was  put  into  water  heated  only  to  48  °.  The  first  co-
agulated completely  in  five  minutes,  but  the  latter  remained  quite  fluid
for  twenty  minutes,  and  then  began  to  coagulate,  but  was  not  com-
pletely coagulated  for  five  minutes  more.  When  looking  at  each  portion
of  blood  an  hour  afterwards,  it  appeared  that  the  blood  which  coagulated
in  the  warmest  water,  had  the  greatest  proportion  of  serum,  and  the  leaft
of  crassamentum ;  but  by  next  morning,  the  serum  in  each  was  equal  in
quantity,  and  the  crassamentum  of  equal  size.

This  experiment  shews  that  heat  above  the  natural  standard,  acts  as  a
stimulus  upon  the  blood,  and  makes  it  coagulate  considerably  sooner  than
cold  does,  though  not  more  firmly.  This  heat  did  not  act  as  heat  upon
the  blood,  but  only  as  the  stimulus ;  for  heat  acting  as  heat  would  also
have  coagulated  the  serum,  which  was  not  the  case.

This  experiment,  or  a  similar  one,  is  brought  forwards  as  one  of  the
proofs  of  the  living  principles  of  the  blood,  where  it  is  contrasted  with
a  similar  experiment  on  living  mufcles.

To  see  whether  blood,  when  mixed  with  different  substances  in  strong
solution,  and  which  appeared  to  prevent  coagulation,  would,  when  di-
luted with  water,  admit  of  coagulation.

In  December,  half  an  ounce  of  blood,  immediately  after  it  was  taken
from  the  arm,  was  mixed  with  one  pound  of  water.  This  was  intended
as  a  standard  to  judge  of  the  others.

More  blood  was  taken  from  the  same  person  at  the  same  time,  to
which  a  strong  solution  of  Glauber's  salts  was  added;  this  altered  its


General  principles  of  the  hlood,  97

colour  to  a  florid  red,  and  was  found  to  prevent  it  from  coagulating.  A
strong  solution  of  Glauber's  salts,  therefore,  has  the  power  of  preventing
the  coagulation  of  the  blood.  Ten  minutes  after  this  mixture,  half  an
ounce  of  it  was  mixed  with  one  pound  of  water  ;  half  an  hour  after,
another  half  ounce  was  mixed  with  one  pound  of  water;  at  the  end  of  an
hour,  the  same  was  done,  and  also  after  two  hoars;  all  these  were  allowed
to  stand  twenty-four  hours,  when  the  pure  blood  and  water  had  deposited
a  considerable  dark  coloured  sediment,  and  a  light  coloured  blood  was
suspended,  which  had  begun  to  subside,  leaving  the  fluid  above  perfectly
transparent,  and  of  a  beautiful  red  colour.  The  different  portions  of
blood  which  had  been  firft  mixed  with  the  salt,  and  afterwards  with
water,  had  the  cloud  exactly  like  that  of  the  pure  blood,  but  there  was  no
sediment  whatever  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel :  this  cloud  gradually  sub-
sided, and  left  the  fluid  above  of  a  beautiful  red  colour,  and  also  quite
transparent.  At  this  time,  (viz.  twenty- four  hours  after  the  mixture  of
the  salt  with  the  blood)  another  half  ounce  was  mixed  with  one  pound  of
water,  and  next  day  the  appearances  were  exactly  similar  to  what  have
been  already  described.

The  sediment  in  the  pure  blood  was  moft  probably  the  coagulating
lymph;  and  as  there  was  none  in  the  others,  it  is  moft  likely. that  the
lymph  in  them  did  not  now  coagulate.

As  medicines,  when  taken  into  the  circulation,  whether  by  the  stomach
or  by  the  skin,  produce  considerable  effects  on  the  constitution,  I  wished
to  know  what  effect  such  substances  would  have  upon  the  blood,  with
regard  to  the  act  and  power  of  its  coagulation.

Two  ounces  of  blood  were  received  from  the  arm  into  a  vessel,  as  a
standard  of  natural  coagulation.

Two  ounces  more  were  taken  in  another  vessel,  to  which  one  ounce  of
water  was  added.  The  intention  of  this  addition  was  to  put  this  blood  in
the  same  circumstances  with  blood  in  other  comparative  trials,  respecting
water,  so  that  the  difference,  if  there  was  any,  must  belong  to  the  sub-
stance mixed  with  the  blood,  independent  of  the  water.

O


o8  Getter al  principles  of  the  blood.

Two  ounces  more  blood  were  received  in  another  vessel,  to  which  was
added  one  ounce  of  the  decoction  of  bark.

These  different  quantities  were  taken  from  one  person,  one  after  the
other  in  the  same  order  in  which  they  are  here  set  down.  After  six  mi-
nutes, the  blood  mixed  with  water  was  quite  coagulated:  after  nine
minutes,  that  mixed  with  the  decoction  of  Peruvian-bark  formed  a  loose
coagulum  :  after  twelve  minutes,  the  blood  firft  drawn  coagulated :  the
coagula  of  the  firft  and  second  drawn  blood  were  equally  firm ;  the  water
in  the  second  having  been  squeesed  out  along  with  the  serum ;  but  that
mixed  with  the  decoction  of  bark  was  much  less  so.  It  appears  from
these  experiments,  that  water  rather  hastened  coagulation,  but  made  it
neither  firmer  nor  looser  in  the  texture.

In  the  following  experiments,  the  blood  was  firft  all  received  into  one
vessel,  and  stirred  before  it  was  mixed  with  the  different  substances.

The  intention  of  this  was,  that  the  three  portions  of  blood  might  all
be  exactly  under  the  same  circumstances.

Two  ounce  were  poured  into  a  vessel  as  a  standard  of  natural  coagu-
lation.

Two  ounces  more  of  blood  were  poured  into  another  vessel,  to  which
was  added  two  ounces  of  water,  as  in  the  former  experiment.  Two
ounces  more  were  mixed  with  two  ounces  of  the  decoction  of  bark:
after  twelve  minutes  the  two  first  were  coagulated,  and  the  coagula  were
equally  firm  :  after  fourteen  minutes,  that  with  the  decoction  of  bark
coagulated,  but  the  coagulum  was  very  loose.  Upon  comparing  the
three  coagula  next  day,  that  which  had  the  decoction  of  bark  mixed  with
it,  was  by  much  the  least  firm.

This  experiment  was  repeated,  and  the  result  was  nearly  the  same ;  and
it  shews,  that  even  putting  equal  parts  of  water  and  blood  together,  did
not  alter  the  time,  or  the  firmness  of  coagulation  ;  but  that  the  decoction
of  bark  evidently  did.

Some  blood  was  taken  from  the  arm  into  a  bason,  stirred,  and  then
mixed  with  different  infusions,  as  follows  :

Two  ounces  were  mixed  with  the  same  quantity  of  the  infusion  of
columba-root.


General  principles  of  the  blood.  99

Two  ounces,  with  the  same  quantity  of  the  infusion  of  gentian;  two
more,  with  two  ounces  of  the  watery  solution  of  opium ;  and  two  ounces
were  kept  in  a  vessel  by  themselves.

The  blood  which  had  been  mixed  with  the  bitter  infusions,  and  the
simple  blood,  all  coagulated  at  the  same  time,  viz.  in  six  minutes ;  but
that  which  had  been  mixed  with  the  infusion  of  gentian  was  firmer  than
with  the  infusion  of  columba-root,  but  was  not  more  firm  than  the  coa-
gulum  of  the  simple  blood.  The  blood  which  had  been  mixed  with  the
solution  of  opium  did  not  coagulate  for  twelve  minutes,  and  then  the  co-
agulum  was  very  loose.

This  experiment,  with  the  opium,  was  repeated,  and  the  result  was
exactly  the  same.

Of  extraneous  matter  in  the  blood.

Whatever  is  dissolved  in  the  blood  must  be  only  diffused  through  it,
not  chemically  combined  with  it,  otherwise  the  nature  of  the  blood  itself
would  be  altered,  and  the  effect  of  medicine  destroyed.  The  blood  can
receive  and  retain  extraneous  matter,  capable  of  destroying  the  solids,  by
stimulating  to  action  so  as  to  destroy  them.

Extraneous  matter  in  the  blood  is  capable  of  altering  the  chemical  pro-
perties of  the  solids  in  those  who  work  in  lead,  as  is  evident  in  the  follow-
ing case :

Morgan,  a  house-painter,  who  had  been  paralytic  in  his  hands  and  legs
for  a  considerable  time,  was  thrown  down,  and  had  his  thigh-bone  broken
just  below  the  little  trochanter.  The  upper  end  of  the  inferior  portion
had  passed  over  the  outside  of  the  other,  and  moved  with  the  knee,  so
that  the  end  of  the  lower  bone  was  taken  for  the  great  trochanter ;  but  I
discovered  the  fracture,  by  extending  the  leg,  and  got  the  portions  of
bone  in  their  places,  and  bound  up  the  limb  with  a  wroller.  It  went  on
well  for  near  a  fortnight,  only  his  hands  swelling  at  times,  which  gave
way  to  fomentations ;  in  the  third  week  he  grew  very  ill,  became  low,
had  a  kind  of  lethargy,  a  great  deal  of  blood  came  out  of  his  mouth,  he
sunk  still  lower,  and  died  about  three  weeks  after  the  accident.

On  examining  the  body  after  death,  the  muscles,  particularly  those  of


loo  General  principles  of  the  blood,

the  arms,  had  lost  their  natural  colour  •,  but  instead  of  being  ligamentous
and  semitransparent,  as  happens  in  common  paralysis,  they  were  opaque,
resembling  exactly,  in  appearance,  parts  steeped  in  a  solution  of  Goulard's
extract.  From  this  case  it  appears  the  lead  had  been  evidently  carried
along  with  the  blood,  even  into  the  muscles  themselves.


[ioi  ]


*


CHAPTER  II.
OF  THE  VASCULAR  STSTEM.


I.  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MUSCULAR  CONTRACTION  AND

ELASTICITY.

It  is  not  my  present  intention  to  explain  all  the  circumstances  connected
with  muscular  contraction  and  relaxation,  nor  that  other  power  of  action
introduced  into  an  animal  body,  called  elasticity.  I  propose  only  to  state  a
few  of  the  facts  which  throw  some  light  upon  the  vascular  system,  by
shewing  that  there  is  in  vessels  a  power  of  muscular  action ;  and  that  the
co-operation  of  elasticity  is  also  necessary  to  their  function ;  these  may
likewise  assist  in  explaining  the  manner  in  which  the  two  powers  are  com-
bined; I  may,  however,  occasionally  be  led  to  mention  causes  and  effects,
which  cannot  be  immediately  considered  as  applicable  to  the  vessels  them-
selves, though  they  will  render  many  of  the  phenomena  in  the  vascular
systemmore  easy  to  be  understood.

The  common  action  of  a  muscle,  from  which  its  immediate  use  is  de-
rived, is  its  contraction;  and  the  effect  produced  by  it,  is  that  of  bringing
the  origin  and  insertion,  or  the  parts  which  it  is  fitted,  to  move  nearer  each
other*;  which  is  universally  the  case  whether  the  muscle  is  straight,  hollow,
or  circular.  It  is  likewise  necessary  that  a  muscle  should  relax,  or  be
capable  of  relaxation ;  a  condition  which  allows  it  to  be  stretched,  by  per-
mitting the  parts  acted  upon  to  recede  from  each  other.  Muscles,  in  com-
mon, probably,  with  every  other  part  of  the  body,  have  a  power  of  adapting
themselves  to  the  necessary  distance  between  origin  and  insertion,  in  case
an  alteration  has  taken  place  in  the  natural  distance;  and  I  have  reason  to

*  I  do  not  here  consider  the  circumflex  tendons ;  for,  by  the  origin  and  insection,  I  mean
the  muscular  ends  of  the  fibres.


102  Of  the  vascular  system,

believe,  that  under  certain  circumstances,  they  have  a  power  of  becoming
longer,  almost  immediately,  than  they  are  in  the  natural  relaxed,  or  even
the  natural  elongated  state  of  their  fibres.  This  opinion  will  be  best
illuftrated  in  inflammation.

Muscular  contraction  has  been  generally  supposed  to  arise  from  some
impression,  which  is  commonly  called,  a  stimulus ;  I  doubt,  however,  of
an  impression  being  always  necessary  ;  and  I  believe  that  in  many  cases
the  cessation  of  an  accustomed  impulse  may  become  the  cause  of  contrac-
tion in  a  muscle.  The  sphincter  iridis  of  the  eye  contracts  when  there  is
too  much  light;  but  the  radii  contract  when  there  is  little  or  no  light.  I
can  even  conceive  that  a  cessation  of  action  requires  its  stimulus  to  produce
it,  which  may  be  called,  the  stimulus  of  cessation;  for  relaxation  is  not
the  state  into  which  a  muscle  will  naturally  fall  upon  the  removal  of  a
continued  stimulus ;  a  muscle  remaining  contracted  after  absolute  death,
when  the  stimulus  of  relaxation  cannot  be  applied;  so  that  a  muscle  can
as  little  relax  after  death,  as  it  can  contract.  If  a  stone  is  raised,  and  the
raising  power  removed,  it  falls  ;  but  it  would  not  fall  if  not  acted  upon.
When  it  has  fallen  it  lies  at  rest,  but  so  it  would  have  done,  when  raised,  if
gravitation  would  have  allowed  it.  The  stone  is  passive  and  must  be  acted
upon.  Whatever  becomes  a  stimulus  to  one  set  of  muscles,  becomes  a
cause  of  relaxation  to  those  which  act  in  a  contrary  direction*;  and  what-
ever becomes  a  stimulus  to  one  part  of  a  muscular  canal,  where  a  succession
of  actions  is  to  take  place,  becomes  also  a  cause  of  relaxation  in  the  part
beyond  it,  as  in  an  intestine.

Muscular  contraction,  in  some  of  the  involuntary  muscles,  does  not  con-
stantly arise  from  immediate  stimuli,  as  in  the  sphincters;  for  the  sphincter
ani  contracts  whenever  the  stimulus  of  relaxation  is  removed,  which  may
be  said  to  produce  the  stimulus  for  contraction.

Muscular  actions  have  been  divided  into  the  voluntary,  involuntary,  and
mixed,  which  is  only  dividing  them  according  to  the  different  natural
modes  of  stimuli,  or  causes  of  their  action :  to  these  a  fourth  might  be

*  This  might  be  called  a  sympathetic  stimulus,  and  is  that  which  regulates  the  actions  of
the  whole  machine  ;  and  which  I  have  called,  in  another  place,  the  stimulus  of  necessity.


Of  the  vascular  system.  103

added,  where  the  actions  are  in  consequence  of  accidental  stimuli  or  im-
pressions, to  which  both  the  voluntary  and  involuntary  muscles  are  subject,
viz.  such  as  arise  from  affections  of  the  mind*,  or  are  the  immediate  effects
of  violence.

The  involuntary  contraction  should  be  first  considered,  as  the  more
necessary  operations  of  the  machine  are  carried  on  by  it ;  for  the  machine
could  even  exist  independent  of  any  voluntary  contraction ;  but  it  could  not
go  on  if  left  wholly  to  the  voluntary  contraction  of  the  muscles,  unless  we
were  endued  with  innate  ideas  capable  of  producing  a  will.  This  involuntary
contraction  is  very  extensive  in  the  system,  and  is  employed  in  carrying  on
a  number  of  operations,  of  which  the  circulation  is  one;  and  which  may  be
said  to  be,  in  a  great  measure,  the  ceconomy  of  the  animal  within  itself.

The  mixed  kind  of  contraction  is  most  to  our  present  purpose,  and  is
of  two  kinds,  though  it  has  been  in  general  supposed  to  be  of  one  kind
only,  and  that  belonging  solely  to  the  muscles  of  respiration,  as  being  in
them  the  most  conspicuous.  But  in  fact,  we  find  another  mode  of  involun-
tary actions  in  other  muscles  of  the  body  where  it  answers  very  useful  pur-
poses. In  these  the  involuntary  contraction  may  be  reckoned  the  natural
state  j  and  it  is  a  kind  of  permanent  contraction,  these  muscles  only  relaxing
occasionally;  by  which  means  parts  are  sustained  or  supported  ;  the  volun-
tary contraction  of  such  muscles  is  also  only  occasional.  All  sphincter
muscles  in  some  degree  partake  of  this  power,  and  therefore  should  be  called,
muscles  with  power  of  occasional  relaxation.  For  although  many  circular
muscles  may  not  have  these  mixed  contractions,  as  the  orbicularis  palpe-
brarum; yet  that  muscle  has  a  disposition  to  contract  peculiar  to  itself.  Its
relaxation  is  to  be  reckoned  of  the  active  kind,  which  may  be  called,  the
relaxation  of  watchfulness,  and  it  is  when  tired  of  this  species  of  action
that  it  contracts ;  which,  on  the  contrary,  may  be  called,  the  contraction  of
fleep:  or  it  may  be  considered  as  an  elongator  muscle  to  the  levator  palpe-
bras,  with  a  disposition  to  remain  relaxed  while  that  muscle  is  contracted;
but  contracting  when  the  elevator  is  tired.  The  natural  contraction  of  the
orbicularis  muscle  is  involuntary;  the  relaxation,  both  natural  and  occasi-

*  Mind  and  will  arc  often  blended  together,  but  will  has  nothing  to  do  here.


104  Of  the  vascular  system.

onal  is  involuntary;  but  it  has  likewise  a  voluntary  contraction  and  relaxa-
tion, which  can  be  made  to  exceed  the  involuntary,  resembling  what  is  in-
herent in  all  the  sphincters.

Sphincter  muscles,  as  those  of  the  anus  and  urethra,  and  probably  the
expulsatores,  seminis,  and  crura  of  the  diaphragm,  have  both  a  voluntary
and  involuntary  contraction.  In  the  two  sphincters  of  the  anus  and  urethra
this  is  evident;  and  the  involuntary  contraction  in  these  muscles  I  have
called,  sphintoric.  The  sphincter  ani  possesses  it  to  a  degree  just  sufficient  to
resist  the  pressure  of  the  air  and  faeces,  while  the  parts  above  are  inactive,
preventing  the  escape  of  these,  till  they  give  the  stimulus  for  expulsion,
and  then  an  involuntary  relaxation  naturally  takes  place,  similar  to  what
happens  in  muscular  canals.

The  sphinctoric  contraction  resembles,  in  its  effects,  that  produced  by
elastic  ligaments  in  other  parts  of  the  body,  which  action  may  be  called,
contractile  elasticity,  as  bringing  back  the  parts  to  a  certain  necessary
state,  and  retaining  them  there.  But  elasticity  would  not  here  have  an-
swered all  the  purposes,  since,  as  it  has  no  relaxing  power,  more  force  would
have  been  required  to  overcome  its  resistance  in  the  expulsion  of  the  faeces
than  the  gut  above  could  have  been  able  to  exert.  But  the  sustaining
power  being  muscular  contraction,  a  relaxation  or  cessation  of  that  con-
traction during  the  time  of  expulsion,  leaves  nothing  for  the  faeces  to  do;
but,  by  means  of  the  action  above,  simply  to  dilate  the  relaxed  parts.
There  is,  likewise,  in  these  muscles,  a  still  further  power  of  contraction,
which  is  produced  by  the  will,  and  for  the  purpose  of  giving  on  particular
occasions  greater  force  than  what  is  commonly  necessary.  The  voluntary
action  of  these  muscles  is,  therefore,  we  find  more  powerful  than  the  invo-
luntary; but  upon  the  whole  I  think  we  have  reason  to  suppose,  that  the
involuntary  muscles  are  much  stronger  than  the  voluntary.  Can  we  be-
lieve that  so  thin  a  muscle  as  the  colon  of  a  horse  could  squeeze  out  its
contents,  consisting  of  a  column  of  dung  about  eight  inches  diameter,  if
those  involuntary  muscles  had  no  more  strength  than  the  muscles  of  an
extremity  ?  When  we  see  the  bladder  of  urine  throwing  out  its  contents
through  a  large  tube,  to  a  distance  perhaps  two  yards  beyond  its  extreme
end,  we  must  suppose  a  much  greater  force  exerted  than  could  belong  to


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 05

any  such  quantity  of  voluntary  muscle.  For  I  believe  that  by  grasping  the
bladder  with  both  hands  we  could  not  make  the  water  flow  out  to  an  equal
distance.  It  may  be  here  observed,  that  the  power  of  involuntary  contrac-
tion commonly  remains  longer  than  that  of  the  voluntary,  though  I  be-
lieve not  in  all  instances ;  which  difference  produces  a  greater  variety  in
the  former,  than  in  the  latter.  Thus  the  muscular  action  of  the  arteries
is  longer  retained  than  that  of  the  heart.

Elasticity  is  a  property  of  matter  (whether  animal  or  not)  which  renders
it  capable  of  restoring  itself  to  its  natural  position,  after  having  been  acted
upon  by  some  mechanical  power,  but  having  no  power  of  action  arising
out  of  itself;  this  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  muscular  contraction.  Muscles,
as  has  been  already  observed,  have  the  power  of  contraction  and  of  cessa-
tion, which  last  is  called,  relaxation ;  but  not  the  power  of  elongation,  which
would  be  an  act  of  restoration,  such  as  exists  in  elasticity.  A  muscle,
therefore,  has  the  power  of  action  within  itself,  by  which  it  produces  its
effects,  but  is  obliged  to  other  powers  for  its  restoration,  so  as  to  be  able  to
act  again;  whereas  elasticity  is  obliged  to  other  powers  to  alter  the  position
of  the  parts,  so  as  to  require  recovery  or  restoration ;  but  this  it  is  capable
of  doing  itself,  and  by  this  power  it  produces  its  effects,  becoming  a  cause
of  motion  in  other  bodies.  A  body  possessed  of  this  property,  when  brought
from  the  state  of  rest,  is  always  endeavouring  to  arrive  at  this  state,  which
it  also  endeavours  to  preserve;  and  it  is  capable  of  supporting  itself  in  this
state  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  elasticity  which  may  belong  to  it.

The  action  of  elasticity  is  continual,  and  its  immediate  effects  are  pro-
duced whenever  the  resistance  is  removed;  by  which  it  may  be  distinguished
from  other  powers.  Elastic  matter  can  either  be  expended  beyond  its
state  of  rest,  or  brought  within  it.  Thus  a  spring  being  bent,  its  cancave
side  is  brought  within  this  state,  and  the  convex  side  is  carried  beyond  it:
when  under  these  circumstances  it  is  left  to  itself,  both  sides  endeavour  to
restore  themselves.  The  power  of  an  elastic  body  is  permanent,  always
acting  with  a  force  proportioned  to  the  power  applied,  and  therefore  reacts
as  the  body  is  elongated,  bent,  or  compressed ;  but  this  is  very  different
from  the  action  of  a  muscle,  as  this  last  may  act  with  its  full  force,  or  only

P


io6  Of  the  xdscular  system.

part,  or  not  at  nil,  according  to  circumstances.  Elasticity*,  which  his  the
power  of  resisting  the  action  of  other  parts,  as  well  as  of  reftoring  the  sub-
stance endowed  with  it,  when  forcibly  removed  from  a  state  of  rest,  is
introduced  into  an  animal  body,  in  order  to  co-operate  in  many  respects
with  the  muscles,  and  so  to  act  as  to  restore  or  fit  them  for  a  new  action,
becoming  in  many  cases  antagonists  to  the  muscles,  which  will  be  described
when  we  speak  of  the  combination  of  the  two.


II.  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ELONGATION  OF  RELAXED

MUSCLES.

Every  thing  in  nature  that  has  the  power  of  action  has  two  kinds  of
motion  exerted  alternately,  and  a  state  of  rest.  Of  the  former  the  one
may  be  called,  the  active  ;  the  other,  the  state  of  recovery.  In  a  muscle
the  active  is  the  state  of  contraction  ;  the  other,  the  state  of  relaxation  :
the  state  of  rest  is  merely  the  state  of  inaction.  The  contractile  state  of
a  muscle,  as  well  as  the  relaxed,  arises  from  a  power  inherent  in  itself;
but  the  recovery,  or  elongation,  must  depend  on  some  other  power.

Simple  relaxation  of  a  contracted  muscle  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  it
to  produce  another  requisite  effect ;  it  is,  therefore,  necessary  that  there
should  be  an  elongatcr  equal  to  the  quantity  of  contraction  intended  to  be
produced  :  and  as  no  muscle  has  the  power  of  extending  itself  into  what
I  shall  call,  the  state  of  recovery,  an  elongater  of  some  kind  or  other  is
required,  to  enable  every  muscle  to  produce  its  effect,  by  a  renewal  of
contraction.  This,  although  in  some  respects  similar  to  the  winding  up
of  a  clock,  in  others  differs  materially  from  it. For  the  muscle  being

*  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  elasticity  in  animals  docs  not,  like  muscular  contraction,  de-
pend on  life;  an  clastic  body  possessing  that  quality  as  perfectly  after  death  as  before.  Elas-
ticity admits  of  two  actions,  a  contraction,  when  the  substance  is  extended  beyond  the  natural
state,  and  an  extension,  when  it  is  compressed  within  it;  both  these  is  possessed  by  the  elastic
parts  which  compose  the  vascular  system  ;  whereas,  muscles  have  but  one  action,  or  at  least,
but  ©nc  which  can  produce  an  immediate  effect,  and  that  is  contraction.


Of  the  vascular  system.  107

capable  of  relaxing  itself,  there  is  no  resistance  to  overcome,  except  the
vis  inertiae  and  friction  of  the  matter  to  be  removed:  whereas  in  the  clock,
the  power  that  winds  it  up  must  be  greater  than  the  spring  or  weight,  to
be  capable  of  overcoming  the  gravity  of  the  weight,  or  the  elasticity  of
the  spring,  together  with  the  vis  inertiae.

The  elongation  of  muscles  is  not  the  immediate  cause  of  their  relaxation,
but  the  effect  of  a  contrary  and  necessary  motion  of  the  elongaters,  by
which  they  are  recovered  so  as  to  be  enabled  to  renew  their  action  with
effect .

The  elongaters,  or  powers  which  enable  muscles  to  recover  themselves,
are  not  always  muscular ;  for  when  simple  elongation  is  required,  it  is
effected  by  other  means,  as  elasticity,  which  is  the  case,  in  part,  in  the
blood-vessels ;  and  sometimes  by  motion  in  matter  foreign  to  the  body,
yet  propelled  either  by  muscles  or  elasticity,  as  is  also  the  case  in  blood-
vessels. The  elongaters  may  be  divided  into  three  kinds,  with  their
compounds.

The  first  kind  is  muscular,  and  these  may  either  act  immediately,  or
they  may  act  on  some  other  substance,  by  which  action  that  substance
becomes  the  immediate  cause  of  the  elongation.  Those  which  act  imme-
diately, and  become  elongators  to  other  muscles  by  their  contraction  are
in  turn  elongated  by  the  contraction  of  these  very  muscles,  to  which  they
served  as  elongaters ;  the  two  sets  thus  becoming  reciprocally  elongaters  to
each  other.  This  is  the  case  with  the  greater  part  of  the  muscles  in  the
body,  and  in  some  muscles,  as  the  occipito,  frontalis,  two  different  portions
are  reciprocally  elongators  ;  yet  these  may  strictly  be  considered  as  two
muscles;  for  although  there  is  no  interruption,  in  the  tendon  they  move
the  same  part  in  two  opposite  directions,  like  distinct  antagonist  muscles-..

These  reciprocal  elongaters,  by  their  mutual  action  on  each  other,  bring-
out  a  middle  state  between  the  extremes  of  contraction  and  elongaUi;ia>
which  is  the  state  of  ease,  or  tone,  in  both.  This  appears  not  to  be  se»
much  required  for  the  ease  of  the  relaxed,  muscle,  as  for  that  of  the  part
moved ;  either  extreme  of  motion  leaving  the  muscle  in  an  uneasy  state.
We  find,  therefore,  that  as  soon  as  any  set  of  muscles  cease  to  act,  tVcc
elongaters  which  were  stretched  during  their  action,  are  stimulated  tishcr


io8  Of  the  vascular  system,

by  this  cessation,  or  by  the  uneasy  state  into  which  the  parts  moved  have
been  put,  they  act  to  bring  these  parts  into  a  state  the  furthest  removed
from  the  extremes  which  were  uneasy,  and  by  which  the  stimulus  arising
from  both  is  equally  balanced.

This,  however,  can  only  happen  in  such  parts  of  the  body  as  are  fur-
nished with  muscular  elongaters ;  where  these  are  wanting,  the  muscles
of  the  part  having  but  one  office,  their  state  of  ease  is  that  of  simple
relaxation,  as  they  can  have  no  middle  state  from  the  action  of  antago-
nists, but  such  are  commonly  muscular  parts,  or  so  constructed  as  not
to  be  thrown  into  an  uneasy  position  by  the  action  of  their  muscles.  I
suppose,  however,  that  an  elongated  state  in  a  muscle  is  an  uneasy  state;
a  muscle,  therefore,  that  is  stretched,  although  in  a  relaxed  state,  is  uneasy
and  will  contract  a  certain  length,  to  what  is  probably  the  middle  state.

It  is  still  necessary  that  such  parts  as  are  simply  muscular,  and  having
no  antagonist  muscles  appropriated  immediately  for  such  purposes  should
have  their  muscles  elongated ;  this  is  still  performed  by  muscles,  but  in
a  secondary  way ;  for  instance,  by  a  succession  of  actions  in  different
parts,  each  performing  the  same  effect,  the  last  action  becoming  an
antagonist  to  the  succeeding.

This  second  mode  of  elongation  takes  place  in  all  the  muscles  which
assist  in  forming  canals.  In  them  the  muscles,  if  once  contracted,  can-
not be  elongated,  or  the  part  dilated  again  ;  but  by  the  contraction  of
some  other  part  of  the  canal,  propelling  its  contents  into  the  relaxed  part,
and  by  that  means  serving  as  an  elongater.  This,  in  some  instances,  goes
on  in  regular  succession,  as  we  know  the  dilatation  of  the  fauces  to  be
occasioned  by  the  action  of  the  mouth  and  tongue;  that  of  the  oesopha-
gus, by  the  contraction  of  the  fauces  ;  of  the  stomach,  by  that  of  the
oesophagus ;  the  upper  part  of  the  intestines  by  the  stomach,  and  so  on  ;
the  successive  contractions  of  the  last  dilated  parts  pushing  on  the  con-
tents, and  in  that  manner  becoming  elongaters  of  the  muscles  next  in
succession  of  action.  A  first  propelling  power,  such  as  a  heart,  could  in
these  instances  have  had  but  little  effect,  and  would  even  have  been  un-
necessary ;  for  as  there  must  be  a  succession  of  contractions  and  dilatati-
ons, its  power  would  soon  have  been  lost. This  mode  of  propelling


Of  the  vascular  system,  109

substances  through  canals,  as  stated  above,  would  probably  have  been
too  slow  for  the  circulation  in  many  animals ;  but  I  believe  is  very  much
the  case  in  others.

The  elongation  of  the  muscles  of  the  bladder,  from  the  distention  of
urine,  becomes  the  means  by  which  they  are  excited  to  recover  themselves
so  as  to  renew  their  action,  and  may  be  referred  to  the  same  general  head.

The  third  kind  is  by  means  of  elastic  substances,  which  render  the
combined  actions  produced  by  muscular  contraction  and  elasticity  more
complicated. Elasticity  we  find  to  be  introduced  both  as  an  assistant  to
the  contraction  of  the  mussels,  and  as  an  antagonist  or  elongater  ;  the
natural  position  being  that  which  is  produced  by  the  elasticity. Thus
we  see  elasticity  combined  with  muscular  action  assisting  in  the  contrac-
tion of  muscles  on  one  side,  and  likewise  performing  the  office  of  elon-
gaters  or  antagonists  on  the  opposite,  by  bringing  parts,  which  have  been
moved  by  muscles,  back  into  their  natural  position. Such  parts  too  as
have  yielded  to  the  action  of  some  other  power,  as  gravitation,  are  brought
back  into  what  may  be  called,  a  natural  6tate,  and  are  retained  there  by
elasticity,  till  that  power  is  again  overcome  by  another,  as  in  the  necks
of  some  animals. We  may  hence  see  that  the  application  of  those  powers
is  twofold ;  one,'  where  the  muscles  and  elastic  substances  assist  each
other ;  the  second,  where  they  are  antagonists,  the  elastic  being  neither
assisted  by  the  muscular  parts,  nor  the  muscular  by  the  elastic  :  for  many
parts  of  the  body  are  so  constructed,  as  to  admit  of  but  one  kind  of
muscular  action,  the  other  action  arising  from  elasticity  alone  ;  it  being
necessary  that  such^arts  should  have  a  determined  or  middle  state,  though
not  intended  as  a  state  of  ease.

Of  this  kind  are  the  blood-vessels,  trachea,  bronchia,  the  ears  of  ani-
mals, etc.  in  which  therefore  elasticity  is  introduced  to  procure  that  deter-
mined state,  and  is  chiefly  employed  where  the  middle  state  is  much
limited.  For  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  middle  state,  when  produced
by  muscular  action,  has  not  commonly  a  determined  point  of  rest,  but
admits  of  considerable  latitude  between  the  two  extremes  ;  except  in  the
sphincters.  Where  it  is  produced  by  elasticity,  it  is  always  more  deter-
mined, provided the elasticity  has  sufficient  power to  overcome  the


I  id  Of  I  be  vascular  system.

natural  or  .icciiirni.il  resistance^  anp1  where  that  is  the  case,  wc  must

SUDpOSC thai a State in some  degree  determined  was  necessary  to  such

parts.  But  where  the  elastic  power  is  not  sufficient  to  overcome  the
naturali  or  accidental  resistancci  then  it  is  assisted  by  the  muscular,
which  forms  one  of  the  compounds  of  the  three  modes  of  elongation  j

instances  of  which  we  have  in  many  joints.

The  relaxed  state  of  a  muscle  would  appear  in  general  to  he  the  most
natural;  hut  to  this  there  aie  exceptions;  a  decree  of  contraction  ap-
pearing natural  to  sonic  muscles.

The  face,  lor  instance,  is  a  part  where  the  action  of  the  muscles  on

one  side influences  the  position  ol the  pails  on  (lie  other  side; a  circum-

stance,  perjiaps,,  peculiar  to  the  face  j  lure,  therefore,  the  muscles  bring

and  keep  the  skin  in  pop  position,  till  altered  by  an  increased  action  in
some  other  muscle;  and  when  this  increased  action  ceases,  the  constant
and  natural  contraction  of  the  whole  (similar  to  tliat  of  the  sphincter)

immediately  take.,  place > .

Sphincter muscles are the most remarkable instances of  this, being

always  above  three  parts  con,tractcdt.

The  constant  and  regular  degree  ol  contraction  in  those  sphincter  mus-
i  les,  serves  the  purposes  ol  elasticity,  and  may  have  superior  advantages  j
as  we  know  thai  they  have  a  power  of  relaxing  when  their  elongaters  act,
whi<  h  no  elastic  substance  can  have.  I  Knee,  we  see,  that  where  a  con-
tinued action  only  is  wauled,  there  is  elasticity:  where  an  alternate  action
and  relaxation,  there  is  the  .u  lion  of  muscles;  where  only  an  occasional  re-
laxing power  is  required,  then-  are  muscles  under  certain  restrictions;  and

when  .:  constant  power  of  contraction  is  necessary,  but  which  is  occasi-
on illy  to  hi  overcome  by  muse  les,  there  are  introduced  both  elasticity  and
mUSCUlai powers  CO-operating  with  each  other  in  their  actions.

Where  constat  action  is  not  necessary,  muscles  alone  are  employed,  as

* /v.  ,i  proof  'l1-1'  ,niS  I'  WMISCulil  I  "ii(i. i<  lion,  and  not  il.istii  itv,  v\r  fuul  that  the  face  in  a

dead  l"»iy  docs  not  keep  its  natural  form,  noi  resume  it  when  lost.

I  ')  He  parts  suppled  with  sphincters,  do  not  contract  after  being  dilated  in  the  dead  body,
wbiih  they  certainly  would  do  i'  the couWuCtt'on  in  tin-  living  body  had  arisen  frorh  elasticity.


Of  the  vascular  tyshm*  1 1  r

in  the  greater  number  of  moving  parts  irt  most  animals]  and  vvlicrc  any
position  is  required  to  he  constant,  and  the  motion  only  occasional,  from
being  seldom  wanted,  there  elasticity  alone  is  employed  for  the  purpose  of
constant  position,  and  muscles  for  the  occasional  action*.

When  a  position  is  to  he  pretty  constant,  yet  elastic  substances  arc  not
employed,  we  have  muscles  endowed  with  the  power  of  constant  con-
traction to  a  certain  degree,  but  capable  of  either  relaxation,  or  greater
contraction,  as  in  the  sphincters.

We  find,  therefore,  that  in  many  parts  of  an  animal  body  fitted  for  mo-
tion, a  tolerably  constant  position  is  necessary,  at  the  same  time  that  an
occasional  self-moving  power  is  also  wanted,  to  serve  as  a  sort  of  auxiliary
to  the  performance  of  the  necessary  action.  For  such  occasional  actions,
muscles,  assisted  by  elastic  substances,  arc  employed;  the  elastic  power
easing  the  muscles  in  the  fixed  position,  and  the  muscular  giving  the  in-
creased occasional  action;  and  in  other  parts  of  the  body,  where  a  more
constant  action  was  wanted,  find  could  not  be  completely  obtained  by
elasticity,  there  are  to  be  found  muscles  endowed  with  the  property  of  both
permanent  and  occasional  contraction.

The  elastic  power  is  very  remarkable  in  such  parts  of  an  animal  body
as  require  a  constant  effort  to  support  them;  elasticity  being  introduced  to
act  against  the  power  of  gravitation,  as  in  the  necks  of  animals  whose  heads
are  held  horizontally,  or  beyond  the  centre  of  gravity.  This  is  effected  by
an  elastic  ligament,  and  is  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  camel,  whose  neck
is  long.  Between  the  vertebra?  of  the  neck  and  backs  of  fowls,  are  placed
elastic  ligaments  for  the  same  purpose ;  the  wings  of  birds  and  bats  arc  also
furnished  with  them,  by  which  means  they  are  retained  close  to  the  body
when  not  used  in  flying.  On  the  abdomen  of  most  quadrupeds  are  like-
wise to  be  found  elastic  ligaments,  especially  on  that  of  the  elephant,  which
is  a  constant  support  to  the  parts  in  their  horizontal  position,  and  even  the

*  Some  bivalves  (as  the  oyster)  have  a  strong  muscle  passing  between  thr  shells  for  closing
them  occasionally;  but  for  opening  them  no  muscles  arc  made  use  of,  as  this  is  performed  by
an  clastic  ligament  in  the  joint  of  the  two  shells,  which  is  squeezed,  when  shut,  by  the  contrac-
tion of  the  muscle;  and  when  the  muscle  ceases  to  contract,  the  elasticity  of  the  ligament
expands  it,  so  that  the  shell  is  opened.


1 1 2  Of  the  vascular  system.

cellular  membrane  of  the  elephant  has  a  degree  of  elasticity  much  above
what  is  generally  met  with  in  cellular  membranes.  Hence  there  is  less
expence  of  muscular  contraction  in  such  parts.  The  trachea  and  its
branches  are  instances  of  these  two  powers;  being  composed  of  cartilages,
muscles,  and  membranes,  the  proportion  of  muscular  substance,  how-
ever, is  small,  the  muscles  which  act  principally  upon  this  part  being
those  of  respiration  ;  but  the  tendency  of  the  action  of  the  proper  muscles
of  the  trachea  is  to  compress  and  alter  the  size  of  the  trachea;  this  is
counteracted  by  the  elasticity  of  the  cartilages,  and  membranes,  exerting
a  constant  and  regular  endeavour  to  keep  it  of  one  certain  size.

The  external  ears  of  many  animals  furnish  us  with  another  instance  of
the  joint  application  of  these  two  powers;  for  being  chiefly  composed  of
elastic  cartilage,  they  retain  a  general  uniformity  of  shape,  although  that
is  capable  of  being  altered  occasionally  by  the  action  of  muscles.

It  is  however  to  be  observed,  that  in  all  cases  where  these  two  powers
are  joined,  the  muscular,  as  it  can  always  act  in  opposition  to  the  elastic,
must  be  the  strongest  and  capable  of  being  carried  further  than  the  other;
it  therefore  must  always  be  proportionably  stronger  than  it  otherwise  need
to  have  been.

Parts  in  which  these  two  powers  are  employed,  are  capable  of  being  in
either  of  three  states,  the  natural,  the  stretched,  and  the  contracted;  but
in  some  parts  the  natural  state  may  coincide  cither  with  the  stretched,
or  contracted,  and  consequently  such  parts  are  only  capable  of  being  in
two  states.  The  natural  state  is  produced  by  the  elastic  power  simply,
the  contracted  is  the  effect  of  the  muscular  power  alone,  and  the
stretched  is  produced  either  by  some  foreign  force  or  body  protruded,
which  may  be  effected  by  a  muscular  power.


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 1 3


III OF  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  ARTERIES.

The  arteries  in  an  animal,  as  far  as  we  can  examine  them,  are  endowed,
with  the  property  of  elasticity,  the  use  of  which  we  perceive  in  the
action  of  those  parts  ;  and  this  power  is  at  all  times  demonstrable,  while
the  muscular  has  been  by  some  overlooked,  by  others  denied,  and  has
only  been  asserted  by  others  as  appearing  necessary  by  reasoning  from
analogy.

The  quantity  of  elafticity  in  any  artery,  on  which  an  experiment
can  be  made,  is  easily  ascertained,  as  it  only  requires  the  application  of
an  opposing  force,  to  prove  both  its  power  and  extent.  But  it  will  ap-
pear from  experiment,  that  the  power  varies  according  to  the  diftance
from  the  heart,  being  greateft  at  the  heart;  while  probably  the  extent  may
be  the  same  in  every  artery.

To  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  elasticity  of  arteries,  I  made  comparative
experiments  on  the  aorta  and  pulmonary  artery.  Having  cut  off  a  por-
tion of  about  an  inch  in  length  from  the  ascending  aorta,  at  half  an
inch  above  the  valves,  and  having  slit  it  up,  it  measured,  transversly,
two  inches  and  three  quarters,  but  when  stretched  to  its  full  length,
three  inches  and  three  quarters,  having  gained  rather  more  than  one
third,  and  having  required  a  force  equal  to  the  weight  of  one  pound  ten
ounces  to  produce  this  effect.  A  similar  section  was  made  of  the  pul-
monary artery  in  the  same  subject,,  which  measured  two  inches  one  half,
transversly;  and  when  subjected  to  trial  in  the  same  manner,  was  stretched
to  three  inches  and  a  half,  being  rather  more  in  proportion  than  the  aorta;
so  that  the  pulmonary  artery  appears  to  have  rather  more  elasticity  than  the
aorta.  It  is  not  impossible  that  this  difference  might  arise  from  the  aorta
having  lost  some  of  its  elasticity  by  use;  for  although  I  chose  for  my  ex-
periment the  arteries  of  a  young  man,  where  I  conceived  them  to  be  per-
fectly sound,  yet  if  there  could  have  been  any  diminution  of  the  elasticity,
from  use,  it  would  be  most  considerable  in  the  aorta.


1 14  Of  the  vascular  system.

These  experiments  were  made  on  different  arteries  with  nearly  the  same
result,  and  seemed  to  prove  that  there  was  almost  the  same  extent  of  elas-
ticity, though  not  the  same  powers.

An  artery  being  composed  of  an  elastic  and  inelastic  substance,  its
elasticity  is  not  altogether  similar  to  that  of  a  body  which  is  wholly  elastic.
There  is  an  effect  produced  from  stretching  it  that  is  expressive  of  the
nature  of  both  these  substances,  till  it  gives  way  or  breaks ;  for  an  artery
has  a  check  to  its  yielding  to  so  great  a  degree,  and  is  ftopt  at  once,  when
stretched  to  a  certain  point*,  which  check  is  occasioned  propably  by  the
muscular,  together  with  the  internal  inelastic  coat.

To  prove  the  muscularity  of  an  artery,  it  is  only  necessary  to  compare
its  action  with  that  of  elastic  substances.

Action  in  an  elastic  body  can  only  be  produced  by  a  mechanical
power;  but  muscles  acting  upon  another  principle,  can  act  quickly  or
slowly,  much  or  little,  according  to  the  stimulus  applied;  though  all  mus-
cles do  not  act  alike  in  this  respect.

If  an  artery  is  cut  through  or  laid  bare,  it  will  be  found  that  it  con-
tracts by  degrees  till  the  whole  cavity  is  closed;  but  if  it  be  allowed  to
remain  in  this  contracted  state  till  after  the  death  of  the  animal,  and  be
then  dilated  beyond  the  state  of  rest  of  elastic  substances,  it  will  only  con-
tract to  the  degree  of  that  state;  this  it  will  do  immediately,  but  the  con-
traction will  not  be  equal  to  that  of  which  it  was  capable  while  alive.

The  posterior  tibial  artery  of  a  dog  being  laid  bare,  and  its  size  attended
to,  it  was  observed  to  be  so  much  contracted  in  a  short  time  as  almofr.  to
prevent  the  blood  from  passing  through  it,  and  when  divided,  the  blood
only  oozed  out  from  the  orifice.

On  laying  bare  the  carotid  and  crural  arteries,  and  observing  what  took
place  in  them  while  the  animal  was  allowed  to  bleed  to  death,  these  ar-
teries very  evidently  became  smaller  and  smaller.

When  the  various  uses  of  arteries  is  considered,  fuch  as  their  forming
different  parts  of  the  body  out  of  the  blood,  their  performing  the  different
secretions,  their  allowing  at  one  time  the  blood  to  pass  readily  into  the

*  This  gives  a  determined  size  to  an  artery.


Of  the  vascular  system.  115

smaller  branches,  as  in  blushing,  and  at  another  preventing  it  altogether,
as  in  paleness  from  fear  ;  and  if  to  these  we  add  the  power  of  producing  a
diseased  increase  of  any  or  every  part  of  the  body,  we  cannot  but  con-
clude that  they  are  possessed  of  muscular  powers.

The  influence  of  the  heart  in  the  body,  like  that  of  the  sun  in  the  pla-
netary system,  we  know  extends  to  every  part ;  all  the  parts  of  the
vascular  system  being  supplied  according  to  the  necessity  it  has,  though
every  part  is  not  equally  endowed  with  power,  or  disposition  to  make  use
of  that  power.

The  arteries,  upon  the  whole,  may  be  said  to  possess  considerable
living  powers,  and  to  retain  them  for  a  long  time.  This  is  evident
when  we  observe  what  must  happen  in  transplanting  a  living  part  of  one
body  with  an  intention  that  it  should  unite  with  another  body  and  become
a  part  of  it :  the  part  transplanted  must  retain  life  till  it  can  unite  so  as
to  receive  its  nourishment  from  that  into  which  it  has  been  inserted.  It
is  however  to  be  supposed,  that  in  such  situations,  life  can  be  retained
longer  than  in  others,  although  it  is  well  known  that  it  is  preserved  in
the  vascular  system,  even  when  there  is  no  colateral  assistance.  I  found
in.  the  uterus  of  a  cow,  which  had  been  separated  from  the  animal  above
twenty-four  hours,  that  after  its  having  been  injected  and  allowed  to  stand
another  day,  the  larger  vessels  were  become  much  more  turgid  than  when
I  first  injected  them,  and  that  the  smaller  arteries  had  contracted  so  as
to  force  the  injection  back  into  the  larger.  This  contraction  was  so
obvious  that  it  could  not  but  be  observed  at  the  time,  which  was  forty-
eight  hours  after  the  separation  from  the  body  of  the  animal.

This  shews  too  the  muscular  power  of  the  smaller  arteries  to  be  supe-
rior to  that  of  the  larger,  and  that  it  is  probably  continued  longer  after
the  separation  from  the  body  j  a  property  which  the  involuntary  muscles
possess  to  a  degree  greater  than  the  voluntary,  in  the  former  of  which
classes  the  muscular  structure  of  the  arteries  is  to  be  considered.

To  ascertain  how  long  the  living  power  existed  in  an  artery  after  sepa-
ration from  the  body,  or  perhaps,  to  speak  more  properly,  after  that  com-
munication with  the  body  was  cut  off,  by  which  we  have  reason  to  sup-


1 1 6  Of  the  vascular  system.

pose  life  to  be  continued  in  a  part,  I  made  the  following  experiments,  for
which  I  chose  the  umbilical  arteries,  because  I  could  confine  the  blood
in  them,  and  keep  them  distended  for  any  length  of  time.  In  a  woman
delivered  on  the  Thursday  afternoon,  the  naval  string  was  separated  from
the  foetus;  it  was  first  tied  in  two  places  and  cut  between,  so  that  the
blood  contained  in  the  chord  and  placenta  was  confined  in  them.

The  placenta  came  away  full  of  blood;  and  on  Friday  morning,  the  day
after,  I  tied  a  string  round  the  chord  about  an  inch  below  the  other  lig-
ature, that  the  blood  might  still  be  confined  in  the  placenta  and  remain-
ing chord.  Having  cut  off  this  piece,  the  blood  immediately  gushed
out,  and  by  examining  the  cut  ends  of  the  chord,  I  attentively  observed
to  what  degree  the  ends  of  the  arteries  were  open;  and  the  blood  having
now  all  escaped  from  this  portion,  the  vessels  were  left  to  contract  with
the  whole  of  their  elastic  power,  the  effect  of  which  is  immediate.

Saturday  morning,  the  day  after  this  last  part  of  the  experiment,  having
examined  the  mouths  of  the  arteries,  I  found  them  closed  up,  so  that  the
muscular  coat  had  contracted  in  the  twenty-four  hours  to  such  a  degree
as  to  close  entirely  the  area  of  the  artery.  That  same  morning  I  repeated
the  experiment  of  Friday,  and  on  Sunday  morning  observed  the  result  of
this  second  experiment  to  be  similar  to  that  of  the  former.

On  this  morning,  Sunday,  I  repeated  this  experiment  the  third  time,  and
on  Monday  observed  that  the  result  had  not  been  the  same  as  before,  the
mouths  of  the  arteries  remaining  open;  which  shewed  that  the  artery  was
become  dead.

There  was  but  little  alteration  perceived  in  the  orifices  of  the  veins  in
all  the  experiments.  .

These  experiments  shew  that  the  vessels  of  the  chord  have  the  powerof
contraction  above  two  days  after  separation  from  the  body.

Having  given  a  general  idea  of  muscular  action,  including  muscular
relaxation,  together  with  the  union  of  the  muscular  and  elastic  power  in
an  animal,  I  shall  now  apply  them  to  the  arteries.

There  are  three  states  in  which  an  artery  is  found,  viz.  the  natural
pervious  state,  the  stretched,  and  the  contracted  state  which  may  or  may
not  be  pervious.


Of  the  vascular  system.  117

The  natural  pervious  state  is  that  to  which  the  elastic  power  naturally
brings  a  vessel  which  has  been  stretched  beyond  or  contracted  within
the  extent  which  it  held  in  a  state  of  rest.

The  stretched  is  that  state  produced  by  the  impulse  of  the  blood  in
consequence  of  the  contraction  of  the  heart;  from  which  it  is  again
brought  back  to  the  natural  state  by  the  elastic  power,  perhaps  assisted  by
the  muscular.

The  contracted  state  of  an  artery  arises  from  the  action  of  the  muscular
power,  and  is  again  restored  to  the  natural  state  by  the  elastic.  It  has
been  shewn  that  certain  muscles  have  both  a  voluntary  and  involuntary
contraction,  and  that  in  some  of  these  the  involuntary  action  having
brought  the  part  to  a  necessary  position,  supports  it  in  that  state  till  it  be
either  necessary  for  the  muscle  to  relax,  or  for  the  voluntary  action  to
take  place  ;  instances  of  which  I  have  given  in  the  sphincter  muscles.

I  shall  now  endeavour  to  shew  that  the  arteries  have  a  middle  state ;
but  that  in  them  the  power  of  bringing  the  coats  into  a  certain  position
and  sustaining  them  in  it,  is  not  the  effect  of  a  muscular  but  of  an  elastic
power;  and  that  the  muscular  action,  both  in  contraction  and  relaxation,
is  involuntary.

In  parts  endowed  with  considerable  elastic  powers,  although  not  appa-
rently muscular,  as  many  arteries,  but  which  we  yet  know  from  other  modes
of  information  to  be  possessed  of  muscular  power,  elasticity  is  so  com-
bined as  to  produce  a  middle  or  natural  state,  by  acting  to  a  certain  degree
only  as  an  elongator  of  the  muscular  part  in  some  of  its  actions*.

These  two  powers,  muscular  and  elastic,  are  probably  introduced  into
the  vascular  system  of  all  animals,  the  parts  themselves  being  composed
of  substances  of  this  description,  together  with  a  fine  inner  membrane,
which  I  believe  to  be  but  little  elastic,  and  this  membrane  is  more  appa-
rent in  the  larger  than  in  the  smaller  ramifications;  although  when  we
consider  the  construction  and  use  of  the  arteries,  we  must  at  once  see  the
necessity  of  their  having  these  two  powers;  yet  in  the  greatest  number  it

*  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  muscular  coat  of  the  artery  assists  the  elastic  in  bring-
ing it  to  the  middle  state  when  already  contracted  within  it.


1 1 8  Of  the  vascular  system

is  impossible  to  give  clear  ocular  demonstration  of  the  existence  of
distinct  muscular  fibres.  But  still,  as  arteries  are  evidently  composed  of
two  distinst  substances,  one  of  which  is  demonstrably  elastic,  and  we
know  them  likewise  to  be  certainly  endowed  with  the  power  of  contraction
peculiar  to  a  muscle,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  the  other  substance  to  be
muscular;  I  shall  endeavour  also  to  prove  its  existence  in  such  vessels
from  their  having  a  power  of  contraction  in  the  action  of  death.

As  the  human  body  is  always  alluded  to  in  this  account,  I  shall  found
my  experiments  and  observations  on  such  animals  only  as  have  a  similar
structure,  as  in  other  animals,  as  the  turtle,  alligator,  &c.  we  can  plainly
discern  muscular  fibres,  the  insides  of  the  arteries  and  veins  being  evi-
dently fasciculated  with  them.

Every  part  of  the  vascular  system  is  not  equally  furnished  with  mus-
cular fibres ;  some  parts  being  almoft  wholly  composed  of  the  elastic  sub-
stance, such  as  the  larger  vessels,  especially  the  arteries,  in  which,  were
they  equally  muscular  with  the  smaller  vessels,  the  existence  of  muscular
fibres  might  be  more  easily  proved.  Neither  does  the  elastic  substance
equally  prevail  in  every  part,  for  many,  especially  the  smaller  arteries,  or
what  have  been  called,  the  capillary  vessels,  appear  to  be  almost  entirely
muscular ;  at  least  I  am  led  to  think  so  by  my  observations  and  experi-
ments on  that  subject.  From  these  I  have  discovered  that  the  larger
arteries  possess  little  muscular  powers,  but  that  as  they  recede  from  the
heart  towards  the  extremities,  the  muscular  power  is  gradually  increased,
and  the  elastic  diminished.  Hence  I  imagine  there  may  exist  a  size  of
vessels  totally  void  of  elasticity  ;  but  this  I  should  conceive  to  be  in  the
very  extremities  only.  For  it  is  to  be  observed  that  every  portion  of  an
artery,  of  a  considerable  length,  is  capable  of  assuming  the  middle  state,
which  state  must  be  referred  to  the  elastic  power.

The  greatest  part  of  the  arterial  system  evidently  appears  to  be  com-
posed of  two  substances,  which  structure  is  most  remarkable  in  the  mid-
dle sized  arteries,  where  the  two  subftances  are  more  equally  divided,
and  where  the  size  admits  of  a  visible  distinction  of  parts.  The  best
method  to  see  this  is  to  cut  the  vessels  either  across  or  longitudinally,  and
to  look  upon  the  edges  that  have  been  cut.


Of  the  vascular  system,  1 1 9

If  the  aorta  be  treated  In  this  way,  we  shall  find  that  though  it  appears
to  be  composed  of  one  substance,  yet  towards  the  inner  surface  it  is
darker  in  colour,  and  of  a  structure  which  differs,  although  but  in  a
small  degree,  from  that  of  the  outer  surface.

If  we  proceed  by  this  mode  of  investigation,  following  the  course  of
the  circulation,  we  shall  find  that  the  internal  and  external  parts  become
evidently  more  distinguishable  from  each  other :  the  internal  part  which
is  darker,  but  with  a  degree  of  transparency,  begins  almost  insensibly  in
the  larger  vessels,  and  increases  proportionably  in  thickness,  as  the  arte-
ries divide,  and  of  course  become  smaller,  while  the  external,  being  of  a
white  colour,  is  gradually  diminishing,  but  in  a  greater  degree,  according
to  the  diminution  of  size  in  the  artery,  and  of  the  increased  thickness  of
the  other  coat,  so  that  the  two  do  not  bear  the  same  proportion  to  each
other  in  the  small  arteries,  as  in  the  larger.

The  disproportion,  however,  between  them  appears  greater  than  it  really
is,  some  deception  arising  from  the  greater  muscular  power,  possessed  by
the  smaller  arteries,  in  consequence  of  which  the  inner  coat  will  be  more
contracted,  and  therefore  seem  thicker.  This  circumstance  alone  makes
the  difference  of  thickness  between  the  whole  coats  of  a  large  artery,  and
those  of  a  small  one,  appear  less  than  it  really  is;  accordingly  we  find  the
coats  of  the  humeral  artery  in  the  horse  apparently  thicker  than  the  coats
of  the  axillary,  the  coats  of  the  radial  as  thick  as  those  of  the  humeral,  and
the  artery  near  the  hoof  as  thick  in  its  coats  as  any  of  the  others.  There
is  yet  another  circumstance  which  also  deserves  attention  in  comparing  the
two  coats,  namely,  that  in  many  places,  but  especially  at  the  surfaces  of
contact  in  the  elastic  and  muscular  substances  of  the  middle  sized
arteries,  the  fibres  of  the  muscular  and  elastic  are  very  much  blended  or
intermixed.  I  mention  this,  because  otherwise  we  might  be  led  to  draw
false  conclusions,  with  regard  to  the  comparative  quantity  of  each  sub-
stance ;  and,  because  it  explains  by  what  means  both  these  coats  are
made  elastic.

The  external  coat,  however,  is  more  so  than  the  internal,  being  com-
posed almost  entirely  of  elastic  substance,  while  the  internal  has  a  mix-
ture of  muscular  with  its  elastic  fribres. As  there  is,  therefore,  a  dif-


120  Of  the  vascular  system*

ference  in  the  elastic  power  of  the  two  coats,  there  must  be  a  difference
in  their  powers  of  contraction  after  death  ;  for  instance,  the  external  coat
contracting  more  than  the  internal,  and  also,  as  there  is  a  difference  be-
tween the  muscular  and  elastic  powers  of  contraction,  the  muscular  hav-
ing the  greatest,  there  must  have  been  a  difference  between  the  contracting
powers  of  these  two  coats  during  life,  but  contrary  to  that  which  takes
place  after  death.

In  those  arteries,  which  are  evidently  composed  of  two  distinct  sub-
stances, especially  in  the  smaller,  we  may  observe  two  very  opposite
appearances,  according  as  the  elastic  or  muscular  coats  have  contracted
most.  In  the  one,  when  we  make  a  transverse  section,  and  look  upon
the  cut  end,  we  may  observe  that  the  inner  surface  has  been  thrown  into
ruga?,  so  as  to  fill  up  the  whole  cavity;  and  if  such  an  artery  be  slit  up
longitudinally,  so  as  to  expose  its  inner  surface,  we  shall  find  that  inner
surface  forming  wrinkles,  which  are  principally  longitudinal.  If  the
finger  is  passed  over  that  surface,  it  feels  hard,  while  the  external  is  soft;
but  if  the  artery  be  stretched,  and  allowed  to  recover  itself  by  its  elasticity,
which  is  the  only  power  it  now  has,  it  will  be  felt  equally  soft  on  both
surfaces,  and  its  coats  will  be  found  to  have  become  thinner  than  before.
On  the  contrary,  I  have,  observed  in  many  of  the  smaller  arteries,  when
the  muscular  contraction  has  been  considerable,  the  external  or  elastic
coat  to  be  thrown  into  longitudinal  inequalities,  from  not  having  an  equal
power  of  contraction  with  the  muscular,  an  artery  under  such  circum-
stances being  to  the  touch,  as  hard  as  a  cord.  But  if  the  muscular  con-
traction be  destroyed  by  stretching,  or  passing  something  through  the
artery,  then  it  becomes  very  soft  and  pliant,  and  the  muscular  coat  hav-
ing once  been  stretched,  without  having  the  power  of  contracting  again,
is  thrown  into  irregularities  by  the  action  of  the  elastic.

The  elastic  coat  of  an  artery  is  fibrous,  and  the  direction  of  its  fibres  is
principally  transverse  or  circular ;  but  where  a  branch  is  going  off",  or  at
the  division  of  an  artery  into  two,  the  direction  of  the  fibres  is  very  irre-
gular. I  cannot  say  that  I  have  found  any  fibres  which  are  to  a  great
degree  oblique  or  longitudinal,  a  circumstance  that  shews  their  simple
elasticity  to  be  equal  to  the  intention  or  use,  a  transverse  or  circular  di,-


Of  the  "vascular  system.  Ill

rection  of  fibres  not  being  the  most  advantageous  for  producing  the
greatest  effect*.  They  are  also  elastic  laterally,  from  the  direction  of  their
fibres,  which  property  shortens  the  artery  when  elongated  by  the  blood  ;
and  I  believe  the  muscles  have  little  share  in  this  action  ;  the  whole  of
which  tends  to  shew  that  the  elastic  power  is  equal  to  the  task  of  pro-
ducing, and  really  does  produce  the  natural  state  of  the  artery.  What
the  direction  of  the  muscular  fibres  may  be,  I  never  could  discover,  but
should  suppose  them  oblique,  because  the  degree  of  contraction  appears
greater  than  a  straight  muscle  could  produce,  in  which  light  a  circular
muscle  is  to  be  considered,  as  its  effects  are  in  the  direction  of  its  fibres  •,  for
either  the  diameter  or  the  circumference  of  the  artery  will  decrease  in  the
same  proportion,  but  not  the  area,  which  will  decrease  in  proportion  to
the  square  of  the  diameter.

We  should  naturally  suppose  that  where  the  action  of  the  heart  is
strong,  elasticity  is  the  best  property  to  sustain  its  force ;  and  that  where
the  force  and  elasticity  are  well  proportioned,  no  mischief  can  ensue.
Where  the  force,  therefore,  of  the  heart  is  greatest  there  is  a  degree  of
elasticity,  which  yields  with  reluctance,  and  constantly  endeavours  to
oppose  and  counteract  that  force.

From  these  active  powers  of  an  artery,  together  with  a  foreign  power,
viz.  the  blood  acting  upon  them  in  a  manner  somewhat  similar  to  the
common  action  of  fluids  in  canals,  protruding  their  contents,  we  may
perceive  that  there  are  three  actions  which  take  place,  all  of  them,
operating  in  concert  with  each  other,  and  producing  one  ultimate  effect.

As  the  filling  of  the  cavity  of  an  artery  produces  an  extension  of  its
coats  in  every  direction,  the  arteries  are  endowed  with  the  elastic  power,
which,  by  contracting  in  all  directions,  may  bring  the  vessels  back  again
to  their  natural  state.

The  action  of  the  muscular  power  being  principally  in  a  transverse  di-
rection, tends,  when  the  artery  is  extended,  to  lessen  its  diameter,  and

*  This  is  a  principle  in  mechanics  so  well  known,  that  it  need  not  here  be  explained;  we
find  it  happily  introduced  in  the  disposition  of  muscles  in  various  parts  of  the  body.

R


122  Of  the  vascular  system.

assist  the  elastic  power;  but  as  its  quantity  of  contraction  is  superior  to
that  of  the  elastic  power,  it  does  or  may  contract  the  artery  within  what
the  latter  could  effect.  When  the  muscular  action  ceases,  elasticity  will
be  exerted  to  dilate  the  vessel  and  restore  it  to  a  middle  state  again,  be-
coming the  elongater  or  antagonist  of  the  muscular  coat,  and  by  that
means  fitting  it  for  a  new  action  as  described  in  other  parts  of  the  body.
This  will  be  most  evident  in  the  middle  sized  vessels ;  for  in  the  smaller,
the  proportion  of  elastic  substance  is  not  so  considerable,  and  therefore
it  will  contribute  less  to  the  dilatation  of  the  vessel,  when  the  muscular
coat  relaxes.  Yet  we  must  suppose  that  no  vessel,  even  to  its  very  extremity,
is  ever  entirely  collapsed ;  but  that  it  possesses  an  elastic  power  sufficient
to  give  it  a  middle  state.  Although  these  differences  do  not  in  all  cases  bear
the  same  proportion  to  the  size  of  artery,  yet  we  must  conclude  there  is  in
the  arteries  themselves  a  certain  regular  proportion  preserved  ;  and  I  am
inclined  to  believe,  that  this  is  in  some  degree  in  an  inverse  proportion  to
the  decrease  of  size,  presuming  at  the  same  time  that  the  muscular  power
increases  in  the  same  proportion.  A  vessel  is  stretched  beyond  its  natural
state,  first  by  the  force  of  the  heart,  and  in  succession  by  the  first  order
of  vessels;  then  it  is  that  the  elastic  power  is  exerted  to  contract  the
vessel,  and  restore  it  to  the  natural  size;  and  in  the  performance  of  this
it  will  be  more  or  less  assisted  by  the  muscular  power,  according  to  the
size  of  the  vessels ;  least  in  the  larger,  and  most  in  the  smaller  vessels,  as
was  observed  above.

There  appears  to  be  no  muscular  power  capable  of  contracting  an
artery  in  its  length,  the  whole  of  that  contraction  being  produced  by  the
elasticity.  For  in  a  transverse  section  of  an  artery,  made  when  the
muscles  of  the  vessel  are  in  a  contracted  state,  it  may  always  be  observed,
that  the  external  or  elastic  coat,  immediately  contracts  longitudinally,
and  leaves  the  internal  or  muscular  projecting ;  which  would  not  be  the
case  if  there  was  a  longitudinal  muscular  contraction,  equal  to  the
elastic;  and  were  not  the  quantity  of  muscular  contraction  greater  than
the  elastic  there  would  be  no  occasion  for  muscles.

Another  proof  of  this  is,  that  if  a  piece  of  contracted  artery  be
stretched  transversly,  or  have  its  area  increased  and  be  allowed  to  recover


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 2  3

itself,  it  loses  a  part  of  its  length.  To  understand  this  it  will  be  neces-
sary to  know  that  muscular  fibres,  by  contraction,  become  thicker,  and  in
proportion  corresponding  with  the  degree  of  contraction  in  the  muscle.

The  thickening  in  the  muscle  of  a  horse  was  found  to  be  an  increase
of  one  fourth  part  of  thickness  to  one  third  of  a  contraction*;  from  which
it  follows,  that  the  more  the  muscular  fibres  of  any  vessel  contract,  the
more  the  vessel  is  lengthened ;  but  destroy  the  muscular  contraction  by
dilating  the  artery,  and  the  elastic  power,  which  acts  in  all  directions,
will  immediately  take  place  and  restore  the  vessel  to  its  proper  size;
which  is  a  proof  that  the  effect  of  the  lateral  swell,  produced  by  the
muscular  contraction,  is  greater  than  that  of  the  longitudinal  elasticity  of
ths  artery.

If  we  examine  how  much  the  vessel  has  lost  of  its  length  in  this  trial,
we  shall  find  it  will  amount  to  about  one  twelfth  of  the  whole ;  a  proof
that  the  internal  coat  does  not  contract  so  much  longitudinally  by  its
muscular  power,  as  the  external  does  by  its  elasticity.  By  multiplying
such  experiments  we  have  further  proofs  that  the  power  of  muscular
contraction  acts  chiefly  in  a  circular  direction;  for  in  a  longitudinal
section  of  an  artery  in  its  contracted  state,  the  internal  coat  does  not  pro-
ject as  in  a  transverse  section,  both  coats  remaining  equal,  or  rather
indeed  the  elastic  coat  projects  beyond  the  other,  from  the  intermal
muscular  coat  having  contracted  most.  But  if  this  section  be  stretched
transversly,  the  external  coat  then  contracts  and  leaves  the  internal  most
projecting;  because  the  internal  or  muscular  has  now  no  power  of  con-
traction. If  the  transverse  extension  be  repeated,  and  to  a  greater  degree,
the  artery,  when  allowed  to  recover  itself,  will  have  its  inside  turned  out-
wards, as  well  as  bent  longitudinally,  having  the  inside  of  the  artery  on
the  outside  of  the  curve,  and  often  bringing  the  two  ends  together;  but
this  is  easily  accounted  for,  as  by  the  transverse  extension  of  the  artery  its
muscular  contraction  is  destroyed,  it  becomes  pliant,  and  the  only  resis-

*  This  calculation  is  not  accurate  ;  for  in  the  experiments  made  to  discover  if  the  muscle
lost  of  its  size  in  the  whole  when  contracted,  I  found  it  hardly  did  ;  therefore  what  it  lost  in
length,  it  must  have  acquired  in  thickness.


124  Of  the  vascular  system.

tance  to  the  elastic  power  on  this  side  being  removed,  it  is  allowed  to
exert  itself  to  its  utmost  extent.  In  doing  this  it  bends  the  section  in  a
longitudinal  direction,  which  also  inclines  us  to  believe,  that  the  external
part  of  the  elastic  coat,  is  the  most  elastic.

These  experiments  not  only  prove  that  the  muscular  power  of  an
artery,  acts  chiefly  in  a  transverse  direction;  but  also,  that  the  elastic
power'  exists  almost  entirely  in  the  external  coat,  and  therefore  that  the
internal  coat  must  be  the  seat  of  the  muscular  power.

Experiments  on  the  arteries  of  a  horse  bled  to  death.

To  ascertain  the  muscular  power  of  contraction  in  the  arteries,  and
determine  the  proportions  which  it  bears  to  their  elasticity,  I  made  the
following  experiments  upon  the  aorta,  iliac,  axillary,  carotid,  crural,
humeral,  and  radial  arteries  of  a  horse.

In  this  animal  the  muscles  were  all  allowed  equally  to  contract,  and
therefore  we  might  reasonably  presume  that  the  vessels  (at  least  such  of
them  as  were  furnished  with  muscles)  would  also  be  contracted,  the
stimulus  of  death  acting  equally  upon  muscles  in  every  form,  and  every
situation.  The  animal  had  also  been  bled  to  death,  so  that  the  vessels
had  an  additional  stimulus  to  produce  contraction  in  them;  as  we  know
that  all  vessels  in  animals  endeavour  as  much  as  possible  to  adapt  them-
selves to  the  quantity  of  fluid  circulating  through  them.

As  I  supposed  the  larger  arteries  had  less  of  this  power  than  the
smaller,  and  that  perhaps  in  an  inverse  proportion  to  their  size,  in  order
to  ascertain  that  fact,  and  also  to  contrast  the  two  powers,  I  made  my
first  experiments  upon  the  aorta  and  its  nearest  branches  ;  continuing
them  on  the  other  branches  as  these  became  smaller  and  smaller.

The  arteries  were  taken  out  of  the  body  with  great  care,  so  as  not  in
the  least  to  alter  their  texture,  or  state  of  contraction.

The  experiments  were  made  in  the  following  manner :  I  took  short
sections  of  the  different  arteries,  slit  them  up  in  a  longitudinal  direction,
and  in  that  state  measured  the  breadth  of  each,  by  which  means  as  I
conceived,  I  could  ascertain  their  muscular  contraction  ;  then  taking  the


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 2  5

same  sections  and  stretching  them  transversly,  I  measured  them  in  that
state,  which  gave  me  the  greatest  elongation  their  muscular,  and  elastic
powers  were  capable  of.  As  by  this  extension  I  had  entirely  destroyed
their  muscular  contraction  ;  whatever  degree  of  contraction  they  exerted
afterwards  must,  I  believe,  have  been  owing  to  elasticity.  Having  allowed
them  to  contract,  I  again  measured  them  a  third  time  in  that  state,  and  thus
ascertained  three  different  states  of  vessels,  between  which  I  could  compare
the  difference  either  in  the  same  or  different  sections,  so  as  from  the  result  to
deduce  with  some  degree  of  certainty  the  extent  of  these  powers  in  every  size
of  vessel.  I  say  only  with  some  degree  of  certainty;  for  I  do  not  pretend
to  affirm  that  these  experiments  will  always  be  exact;  circumstances  often
happening  in  the  body  which  prevent  the  stimulus  of  death  from  taking
place  with  equal  effect  in  every  part.  I  have  accordingly  seen  in  the
same  artery  some  parts  wider  than  others,  even  when  the  more  contracted
parts  were  nearest  the  heart,  and  this  merely  from  a  difference  of  action
in  the  muscular  power  ;  for  when  that  was  destroyed  by  stretching,  the
parts  contracted  equally  in  both.

Experiment  I.  A  circular  section  of  the  aorta  ascendens  when  slit  up
and  opened  into  a  plane,  measured  five  inches  and  a  half;  on  being
stretched,  it  lengthened  to  ten  inches  and  a  half;  the  stretching  power  be-
ing removed,  it  contracted  again  to  six  inches,  which  we  must  suppose  to
be  the  middle  state  of  the  vessel.  Hence  the  vessel  appeared  to  have
gained  by  stretching  half  an  inch  in  width  or  rather  circumference,  which
may  be  attributed  to  the  relaxation  of  its  muscular  fibres,  whose  contrac-
tion must  have  been  equal  to  one-eleventh  part ;  six  inches  being  the
natural  size,  or  most  contracted  state  of  the  elastic  power.

Experiment  II.  A  circular  section  of  the  aorta  at  the  origin  cf  the  first
intercostal  artery,  measuring  four  inches  one-fourth,  extended  by  stretch-
ing to  seven  inches  and  one-half;  it  contracted  again  to  four  inches  and
one  half,  and  therefore  gained  one-seventeenth  part.

Experiment  III.  A  circular  section  of  the  aorta  at  the  lower  part  of  the
thorax,  on  being  stretched,  and  being  allowed  to  contract  again,  gained
one- tenth  part.


j  26  Of  the  vascular  system.

Experiment  IV.  A  circular  section  of  the  iliac  artery,  measuring  two
inches,  when  stretched  and  allowed  to  contract  again,  measured  two
inches  and  four-twelfths,  and  therefore  gained  one-sixth.

Experiment  V.  A  circular  section  of  the  axillary  artery,  measuring  one
inch,  when  stretched  and  contracted  again,  measured  an  inch  and  one-
eighth,  therefore  gained  one-eighth.

Experiment  VI.  A  circular  section  of  the  carotid  artery,  measuring
six-twelfths  of  an  inch,  when  stretched,  measured  sixteen-twelfths  and
one-half;  and  when  contracted  again,  ten-twelfths ;  therefore  had  gained
two -thirds.

Experiment  VII.  A  circular  section  of  the  crural  artery,  measuring  ten-
twelfths,  when  contracted  after  being  stretched,  measured  one  inch  and
two-twelfths,  therefore  gained  one-third.

Experiment  VIII.  The  humeral  artery,  near  the  joint  of  the  elbow,  in  a
contracted  state,  was  thicker  in  its  coats  than  the  axillary;  the  circumfe-
rence of  the  artery  in  that  state  being  seven-twelfths  and  one-half;  after
being  stretched  and  contracted  again,  it  measured  nine-twelfths,  therefore
gained  one-seventh  and  one-half.

Experiment  IX.  A  circular  section  of  the  radial  artery  being  taken,
was  found  so  contracted  as  hardly  to  be  at  all  pervious;  and  the
coats,  especially  the  inner,  much  thicker  than  even  the  humeral  :
when  slit  up  it  scarcely  measured  three-twelfths  of  an  inch;  when
stretched,  and  allowed  to  contract  again,  six-twelfths ;  therefore  gained
three-twelfths  of  an  inch,  which  was  about  the  whole  contraction  of  the

artery.

To  see  how  far  this  power  of  recovery  in  the  same  artery  took  place  at
different  distances  from  the  source  of  the  circulation,  I  made  the  follow-
ing experiments  on  the  spermatic  artery  of  a  bull;  and  likewise  en  the
artery  of  the  fore-leg  and  penis.  The  spermatic  artery,  near  the  aorta,
when  stretched  longitudinally,  recovered  perfectly  the  former  length  ;
when  stretched  transversly,  it  likewise  recovered  perfectly.  About  the
middle,  when  stretched  transversly,  it  gained  one-twelfth.  Upon  the
testicle  a  portion  separated ;  when  stretched  transversly  gained  one-fourth.,
which  was  its  muscular  power.


SL


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 27

The  humeral  portion  of  the  artery  of  the  fore-leg,  when  stretched
transversly,  and  also  longitudinally,  recovered  entirely.

The  artery  of  one  hoof,  or  rather  finger,  when  stretched  transversly,
gained  one-twentieth,  when  stretched  longitudinally  it  recovered  perfectly;
which  one-twentieth  was  the  muscular  power.

The  artery  of  the  penis,  when  stretched  longitudinally,  or  transversly,
recovered  itself  perfectly.  This  artery  is  considerably  more  elastic  longi-
tudinally than  the  others,  but  not  more  transversly.  This  increased  elas-
ticity in  the  longitudinal  direction  may  be  intended  to  allow  of  the  differ-
ence in  the  length  of  the  penis  at  different  times.

From  these  experiments  we  see  that  the  power  of  recovery  in  a  vessel  is
greater  in  proportion  as  it  is  nearer  to  the  heart;  but  as  it  becomes  more
distant  it  lessens;  which  shews  the  decrease  of  the  elastic,  and  the  increase
of  the  muscular  power.

Inches.  Inches.  Inches.

Aorta  ascendens 5^  stretched  to 10— Recovered  to 6 Had  contracted  by  death  -Jj-  part.
Aorta  descendens  1 ,  6_  6^  %

at  first  intercostal  J 4  + 7l2 4l2 *T

Aorta  descendens  "1

at  the  lowest  part  J *^

Iliac  artery 2

Axillary ji... 1

Carotid T<L  iT\  \

Crural f|

Humeral -^\

Radial -^V • T* equal  to  the  whole.


*»:


-1  2

i4-


1 2


Experiments  on  the  power  of  arteries  to  contract  longitudinally.

To  prove  that  arteries  do  not  produce  the  same  power  of  muscular
contraction  in  a  longitudinal,  which  they  do  in  a  transverse  direction,  the
following  experiments  were  made  :

Experiment  I.  A  longitudinal  section  of  the  aorta  ascendens,  measuring
two  inches,  when  stretched  and  allowed  again  to  contract,  measured  the
same  length.


j  2  8  Of  the  vascular  system.

Experiment  II.  A  longitudinal  section  of  the  aorta  descendens  at  the
lower  part  of  the  thorax,  of  a  given  length,  after  having  been  stretched,
contracted  exactly  the  same  length.

Experiment  III.  Two  inches  of  the  same  carotid  artery  used  in  the
sixth  experiment,  when  stretched  longitudinally,  recovered  itself,  so  as
not  to  be  longer  than  before  the  experiment.

Experiment  IV.  A  portion  of  that  humeral  artery  used  in  the  eighth
of  the  former  experiments  was  not  altered  in  its  original  length,  when
it  recovered  itself  after  being  stretched.

These  experiments  appear  to  be  decisive,  and  prove  that  the  muscular
power  acts  chiefly  in  a  transverse  direction;  yet  it  is  to  be  observed  that
the  elastic  power  of  arteries  is  greater  in  a  longitudinal  than  in  a  trans-
verse direction.  This  appears  to  be  intended  to  counteract  the  lengthen-
ing effect  of  the  heart,  as  well  as  that  arising  from  the  action  of  the  mus
cula'f  coat  {  for  the  transverse  contraction  of  that  coat  lengthens  the
artery,  therefore  stretches  the  clastic,  which  again  contracts  upon  the
diastole  of  the  artery.

From  the  account  we  have  given  of  those  substances  which  compose
an  artery,  we  may  perceive  it  has  two  powers,  the  one  elastic  and  the
other  muscular.  We  see  also  that  the  larger  arteries  are  principally  en-
dowed with  the  elastic  power,  and  the  smaller  with  the  muscular,  that
the  elastic  is  always  gradually  diminishing  in  the  smaller,  and  the  mus-
cular increasing,  till,  at  last,  probably,  the  action  of  an  artery  is  almost
wholly  muscular  ;  yet  I  think  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  but  that  some
degree  of  elasticity  is  continued  to  the  extremity  of  an  artery  j  for  the
middle  state  cannot  be  procured  without  it ;  and  I  conceive  the  middle
state  to  be  essential  to  every  part  of  an  artery.  Let  us  now  apply  those
two  powers  of  action  ;  or,  to  speak  more  properly,  of  re-action,  with
their  different  proportions  in  the  different  parts  of  the  arterial  system.
From  these  we  must  suppose  the  elastic  to  be  best  fitted  for  sustaining  a
force  applied  to  it,  such  as  the  motion  of  the  blood  given  by  the  heart,
and  propelling  it  along  the  vessel ;  the  muscular  power,  most  probably,
is  required  to  assist  in  continuing  that  motion,  the  force  of  the  heart  be-


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 29

rng  partly  spent;  but  certainly  was  intended  to  dispose  of  the  blood  when
arrived  at  its  place  of  destination  ;  for  elasticity  can  neither  assist  in  the
one  nor  the  other ;  it  is  still,  however,  of  use  through  the  whole  to  pre-
serve the  middle  state. Elasticity  is  better  adapted  to  sustain  a  force
than  muscular  power;  for  an  elastic  body  recovers  itself  again,  whenever
the  stretching  cause  suspends  its  action  j  while  muscles  endeavour  to
adapt  themselves to  circumstances  as  they  arise. This  is  verified  by
different  sorts  of  engines  whose  pipes  are  made  of  differerit  metals. A
pipe  made  of  lead  will,  for  instance,  in  time  dilate  and  become  useless*;
whereas  a  pipe  of  iron  will  re-act  on  the  fluid,  if  the  force  of  the  fluid  be
in  proportion  to  the  elastic  power  of  the  iron  ;  but  the  lead  having  little
or  no  elasticity  whenever  it  is  stretched,  it  will  remain  so,  and  every  new
force  will  stretch  it  more  and  more. We  are  therefore  to  suppose  that
the  force  of  the  heart  is  not  capable  of  stretching  the  artery  so  much  as
to  destroy  its  elasticity  ;  or  in  other  words,  the  force  of  the  heart  is  not
able  to  dilate  the  artery  beyond  the  contracting  power. As  the  motion
of  the  blood  is  mechanical,  elasticity  is  best  adapted  to  take  off  the  im-
mediate force  of  the  heart ;  and,  as  we  go  from  the  heart,  this  property
becomes  less  necessary ;  because  in  this  course,  the  influence  of  the  heart  is
gradually  lessened,  by  which  means  a  more  equal  motion  of  the  blood  is
immediately  produced,  and  even  in  the  first  artery  a  continued  stream  is  at
all  times  obtained;  although  it  is  considerably  increased  by  each  contrac-
tion of  the  heart. Without  this  power  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the
aorta  would  have  been  similar  to  what  it  is  in  its  passage  out  of  the  heart,
and  would  have  been  nearly  the  same  in  every  part  of  the  arterial  system.
For  though  the  motion  of  the  blood  out  of  the  heart  be  by  interrupted
jerks,  yet  the  whole  arterial  tube  being  more  or  less  elastic,  the  motion  of
the  blood  becomes  gradually  more  uniform  from  this  cause. Elasticity  in
arteries  acts  like  a pair  of  double  bellows  j  although  their  motion  be
alternate,  the  stream  of  air  is  continued ;  and  if  it  were  to  pass  through
a  long  elastic  pipe,  resembling  an  artery,  the  current  of  air  would  be  still

*  This  accounts  for  the  size  of  aneurisms  in  arteries  whose  coats  must  have  lost  their
elasticity  before  they  could  be  dilated.

s


1 30  Of  the  vascular  system.

more  uniform.  The  advantage  arising  from  elasticity  in  the  arterial
system,  will  be  more  complete  in  the  young  subject  than  in  the  old ;  for
in  the  latter,  the  elasticity  of  the  arteries  being  very  considerably  diminished,
more  especially  in  the  larger  trunks,  where  the  force  of  the  heart  ought
to  be  broken,  the  blood  will  be  thrown  into  the  second  and  third  order  of
vessels  with  increased  velocity.  In  the  young,  the  current  is  slower,  from
the  re-action  of  the  elastic  power  during  the  relaxed  state  of  the  heart  -,
whereas  at  the  heart,  the  motion  is  equal  to  the  contraction  of  the
heart ;  and  as  the  heart  is  probably  twice  the  time  in  relaxing  that  it  is
in  contracting,  from  this  cause  alone  we  may  suppose  the  whole  is  two-
thirds  less  in  the  smaller  vessels.  As  elastic  bodies,  I  have  already  ob-
served, have  a  middle  state,  or  state  of  rest,  to  which  they  return  after
having  been  dilated  or  contracted  by  any  other  power,  and  as  they  must
always  be  acted  upon  before  they  can  re-act,  the  use  of  elasticity  in  the
arterial  system  will  be  very  evident.  It  is  by  this  means  that  the  vessels
are  adapted  to  the  different  motions  of  the  body,  flexion  and  extension ;  so
that  one  side  of  an  artery  contracts  while  the  other  is  elongated  ;  and  the
canal  is  always  open  for  the  reception  of  blood  in  the  curved,  stretched,
or  relaxed  state.

The  muscular  power  of  an  artery  renders  a  smaller  force  of  the
heart  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  circulation  ;  for  the  heart  need  only
act  with  such  force  as  to  carry  the  blood  through  the  larger  arteries,  and
then  the  muscular  power  of  the  arteries  takes  it  up,  and,  as  it  were,  re-
moves the  load  of  blood  while  the  heart  is  dilating.  In  confirmation  of
this  remark,  it  is  observable  in  animals  whose  arteries  are  very  muscular,
that  the  heart  is  proportionably  weaker,  so  that  the  muscular  portion  of  the
vessels  becomes  a  second  part  to  the  heart,  acting  where  the  power  of  the
heart  begins  to  fail,  and  increasing  in  strength  as  that  decreases  in  power
Besides  this,  it  disposes  of  such  part  of  the  blood  as  is  necessary  for
the  animal  oeconomy,  principally  in  growth,  repair,  and  secretions.  At
the  extreme  ends  of  the  arteries,  therefore,  we  must  suppose  that  their
actions  are  varied  from  that  of  simply  conveying  blood,  except  those
arteries  which  are  continued  into  veins.


I


Of  the  vascular  system,  J  3*


IV.  OF  THE  VASA  ARTERIARUM.


The  arteries  are  furnished  with  both  arteries  and  veins,  although  it
cannot  be  said  that  they  are  to  appearance  very  vascular.  Their  arteries
come  from  neighbouring  vessels,  and  not  from  the  artery  itself  which
they  supply.

This  we  see  in  dissection ;  and  I  found  by  filling  an  artery,  such  as  the
carotid,  with  fine  injection,  that  still  the  arteries  of  the  artery  were  not
injected.  On  laying  the  coats  of  arteries  bare  in  the  living  body  we  can
discern  their  vessels  more  evidently  some  little  time  after  the  exposure,  for
then  they  become  vessels  conveying  red  blood,  as  in  a  beginning  inflam-
mation, growing  turgid,  when  the  arteries  may  be  easily  discerned  from
the  veins  by  the  difference  of  colour  of  the  blood  in  each  :  these  obser-
vations will  also  generally  apply  to  the  corresponding  veins.

Perhaps  arteries  afford  the  most  striking  instance  of  animal  substance
furnished  with  two  powers  existing  in  the  same  part,  one  to  resist  mech-
anical impulse,  the  other  to  produce  action.  The  first  of  these  powers
is  greatest  where  there  is  the  most  impulse  to  resist ;  therefore  we  find  it
particulary  in  the  arteries  nearest  to  the  heart,  the  better  to  support  the
force  of  that  organ  ;  but  in  those  parts  where  gravitation  is  gradually  in-
creasing, the  diminution  of  power  in  the  artery  is  not  in  proportion  to
the  diminution  of  the  force  of  the  heart.

In  the  veins,  the  allotment  of  strength  is  commonly  the  reverse ;  for  as
they  have  nothing  mechanical  to  resist,  but  the  effect  of  gravitation,
their  principal  strength  is  at  the  extremities.

We  are  to  suppose  that  the  power  of  the  heart,  and  the  mechanical
strength  of  the  arteries,  bear  a  just  proportion  to  each  other;  and  there-
fore by  ascertaining  the  last  we  may  give  a  tolerable  good  guess  with  re-
spect to  the  other.

In  this  view,  to  determine  the  strength  of  the  ventricles,  so  far  as  I  was
able,  I  made  comparative  trials  of  the  strength  of  the  aorta  and  pulmonary
arteries  in  a  healthy  young  man. I  separated  a  circular  section  of  each,


132  Of  the  vascular  system,

and  on being  slit, they measured  three  inches and three-eights,  their
breadths  being  also  equal. On  trial  I  found  the  aorta,  being  stretched  to ""■
near  five  inches,  broke  with  a  weight  of  eight  pounds. The  pulmonary
artery  stretched  to  near  five  inches  and  a  half,  and  then  broke  with  four
pounds,  twelve  ounces.

This  experiment  I  have  repeated,  but  with  very  different  results;  for  in
one  experiment,  although  the  aorta  took  one  pound  ten  ounces  to  stretch
it,  while  the  pulmonary  artery  took  only  six  ounces ;  yet  to  break  this
pulmonary  artery  required  eleven  pounds,  three  ounces,  while  the  aorta
broke  with  ten  pounds,  four  ounces  ;  but  this  difference  I  impute  to  the
aorta  having  lost  its  elasticity,  which  is  very  apt  to  happen  in  that
vessel.

There  is  nearly  the  same  proportion  of  elasticity  in  both  arteries ;  but  the
strength  of  the  aorta  in  the  first  experiment  appeared  to  be  nearly  double
that  of  the  pulmonary  artery;  while  in  the  second  it  was  less  :  yet  we  must
suppose  the  result  of  the  first  experiment  nearer  the  truth  ;  for  we  seldom
find  the  pulmonary  artery  diseased,  while  the  aorta  is  seldom  otherwise.

The  mechanical  strength  of  arteries  is  much  greater  in  the  trunk  than
in  the  branches;  which  is  evident  from  accidents  and  from  injections  in
dead  bodies.  For  when  we  inject  arteries  with  too  much  force,  the  first
extravasation  takes  place  in  the  smaller  vessels.  This  can  only  be  proved
by  subtile  injections,  which  do  not  become  solid  by  cold ;  such  injections
keeping  up  an  equal  pressure  throughout  the  arterial  system ;  and  the  smaller
arteries  being  found  to  give  way  first,  viz.  those  of  the  muscles,  pia-mater,
and  the  cellular  membrane;  which  contradicts  Haller's  theory  of  the  re-
lative strength  of  the  coats  of  the  vessels.

I  am  however  inclined  to  suppose  that  they  are  even  weaker  in  propor-
tion to  their  size,  viz.  in  proportion  to  the  diminished  force  of  the  heart,
or  motion  of  the  blood ;  but  how  far  this  is  the  case  I  will  not  venture  to
determine,  as  mechanical  strength  is  not  so  much  wanted  in  the  smaller
arteries,  as  muscular;  for  the  mechanical  strength  of  muscles  appear  to  be
less  than  the  power  of  their  own  contraction ;  experiments,  therefore,  made
in  the  dead  body  upon  parts  whose  uses  arise  from  an  action  within
themselves  when  active  are  not  conclusive. The  flexor  policis  longus,  be-


If  the


Of  the  vascular  system.  J  3  3

ing  one  of  the  most  detached  muscles  in  the  body  respecting  structure  and
use,  has  been  selected  for  experiments  on  this  subject,  and  is  found  to
raise  by  its  action  a  greater  weight  than  it  can  sustain  after  death.  This
however  is  liable  to  fallacy,  as  the  two  experiments  are  made  on  different
muscles,  one  certainly  healthy,  the  other  most  probably  weakened  by  the
disease  preceding  death.

The  coats  of  arteries  are  not  equally  strong  on  all  sides  of  the  same
artery  ;  at  the  bending  of  a  joint  they  are  strongest  on  the  convex  side
through  the  whole  length  of  the  curve ;  this  is  most  evident  in  the  per-
manent curves,  such  as  in  the  great  curvature  of  the  aorta.  Arteries
are  likewise  strongest  at  the  sharp  angles  made  by  a  trunk  and  its  branch,
and  at  an  angle  formed  by  a  trunk  divided  into  two.

These  parts  have  the  blood  as  it  were  dashing  against  them.  Those
likewise  are  the  parts  which  first  lose  their  elasticity  and  soonest  ossify,
being  generally  more  stretched  than  the  other  parts  of  an  artery,  and
making  a  kind  of  bag.  These  circumstances  are  chiefly  observable  in  the
curvature  of  the  aorta,  that  of  the  internal  carotids,  and  the  division  of
the  aorta  into  the  two  iliacs.


V.  OF  THE  HEART.


The  heart  is  an  organ  which  is  the  great  agent  in  the  motion  of  the
blood,  but  it  is  not  essential  to  animals  of  every  class,  nor  for  the  motion
of  the  blood  in  every  part  where  it  is  perfect;  it  is  less  so  than  the  nerves,
and  many  even  possess  the  organs  of  generation,  that  have  no  heart.
Its  actions  in  health  are  regular  and  characteristic  of  that  state;  and  in
disease  its  actions  are  in  some  degree  characteristic  of  the  disease ;  but
although  there  is  that  connection  between  the  body  and  the  heart,  yet
there  seems  not  to  be  such  a  connection  between  the  heart  and  the  body ;
for  the  heart  may  be  in  some  degree  disordered  in  its  action,  yet  the  body
but  little  affected ;  it  is  therefore  only  to  be  considered  as  a  local  agent


134-  Qf  the  vascular  system

very  little  affecting  the  constitution  sympathetically,  except  by  means  of
the  failure  in  its  duty.  The  heart  in  the  more  perfect  animals  is
double,  answerable  to  the  two  circulations,  the  one  through  the  lungs,  the
other  over  the  body;  but  many  that  have  only  single  hearts  have  what
is  analagous  to  a  double  circulation  ;  and  this  is  performed  in  very  dif-
ferent ways  in  different  animals,  so  that  one  of  the  circulations  in  these  is
performed  without  a  heart.

A  large  class  of  animals,  well  known  and  pretty  perfect  in  their  con-
struction, namely,  all  the  class  of  fish,  have  no  heart  for  the  motion  of
the  blood  in  the  great  circulation,  or  that  over  the  whole  body,  having
only  a  heart  for  the  lungs  or  branchea,  while  the  snail  has  only  a  heart
for  the  great  circulation,  and  none  for  the  lungs;  as  also  in  the  liver  of  the
most  perfect  animals,  the  motion  of  the  blood,  in  the  vana  portarum,  and
vena  cava  hypatica,  is  carried  on  without  a  heart.  The  absorbing  system
in  every  animal  has  no  immediate  propelling  power;  therefore  this  pro-
pelling power  is  not  universally  necessary.  The  heart  varies  in  its  struc-
ture in  different  orders  of  animals,  principally  with,  respect  to  the  number
of  cavities  and  their  communications  with  each  other,  yet  in  all  nearly
the  same  purpose  is  answered.  I  shall  here  observe,  that  in  the  bird  and
quadruped  there  is  a  double  circulation,  which  requires  a  double  heart,
namely,  a  heart  for  each  circulation,  each  heart  consisting  of  an  auricle
and  ventricle,  called  the  right  and  the  left ;  and  from  their  forming  but
one  body  among  them,  they  are  all  included  in  one  heart;  the  right  side,
or  heart,  may  be  called  the  pulmonary,  and  the  left  may  be  called  the  cor-
poreal. In  many  classes  of  animals  there  is  to  be  found  only  one  of  those
hearts  ;  and  according  to  the  class,  it  is  either  the  pulmonary  or  corporeal.
In  the  fish,  as  was  observed,  the  heart  is  the  pulmonary;  and  in  the  snail,
the  heart  is  the  corporeal ;  so  that  the  corporeal  motion  of  the  blood  in  the
fish  is  carried  on  without  a  heart ;  and  in  the  snail  the  pulmonary  motion
is  carried  on  without  a  heart ;  and  in  the  winged  insects  which  have  but
one  heart,  as  also  but  one  circulation,  there  is  this  heart,  answering  both,
purposes ;  and  in  all  these  varieties,  breathing  is  the  principal  object.

The  heart  in  most  animals  is  composed  principally  of  a  strong  muscle
thrown  into  the  form  of  a  cavity  or  cavities;  but  it  is  not  wholly  muscular,


Of  the  vascular  system.  135

being  in  part  tendinous  or  ligamentous,  which  last  parts  have  neither
action  nor  re-action  within  themselves,  but  are  only  acted  upon ;  they  are
therefore  made  inelastic  and  rigid  to  support  the  force  of  the  acting  parts
in  this  action,  without  varying  in  themselves.

The  heart  is  in  all  animals  which  have  red  blood,  the  reddest  muscle
in  the  body.  Thus  in  the  bird  whose  muscles  are  mostly  white,  the  heart
is  red;  we  find  it  the  same  in  the  white  fish.

As  it  differs  in  the  different  orders  of  animals  respecting  the  number  of
cavities,  it  may  admit  of  dispute  what  are  to  be  reckoned  truly  hearts,
and  what  only  appendages ;  for  some  of  its  cavities  may  only  be  con-
sidered as  reservoirs  peculiar  to  some  hearts.

The  most  simple  form  of  heart  is  composed  of  one  cavity  only,  and
the  most  complicated  has  no  more  than  two  ;  it  would  seem  indeed  to
increase  progressively  in  the  number  of  cavities  from  one  to  four,  which
includes  the  mixed;  yet  two  of  these  belonging  to  the  heart  with  four
cavities,  ought  not  to  be  called  parts  of  the  heart  although  they  belong  to
it.  The  single  cavity  of  the  heart  in  the  most  simple  class,  or  the  two  in
the  most  complicated,  are  called  ventricles.  The  other  cavities  belong-
ing to  it  are  called  auricles,  many  of  those  which  have  one  ventricle  only
have  no  auricle,  such  as  insects;  but  there  are  others  which  have  both  a
ventricle  and  auricle,  such  as  fish,  the  snail,  many  shell  fish  ;  some  of
the  last  class  have  indeed  two  auricles  with  only  one  ventricle ;  which
shows  that  the  number  of  auricles  is  not  fixed  under  the  same  mode  of
circulation;  those  animals  which  have  two  distinct  ventricles,  constituting
four  cavities,  are  what  are  called  quadrupedes,  or  mammalia,  and  birds.
If  the  auricles  are  considered  as  parts  of  the  heart,  we  might  class
animals  which  have  hearts  according  to  the  number  of  their  cavities,  viz.
monocoilia,  dicoilia,  tricoilia,  tetracoilia  ;  the  tricoilia  is  a  mixture  of
the  dicoilia  and  tetracoilia.  This  is  the  case  in  distinct  classes  of  ani-
mals ;  but  it  takes  place  in  other  classes  at  different  stages  of  life  ;  for  the
foetus  of  the  class  possessing  four  cavities  may  be  classed  with  the  mixed,
having  but  one  auricle,  by  the  communication  between  the  two  and  also  one
ventricle,  by  means  of  the  union  between  the  two  arteries  which  produces
an  union  of  blood  although  not  in  the  same  way. Those  passages  how-


1 36  Of  the  vascular  system,

ever  are  shut  up  almost  immediately  after  birth,  or  at  least  the  canalis  ar-
teriosus*, which  immediately  prevents  the  foramen  ovale  from  producing
its  former  effects ;  therefore  it  is  not  so  necessary  it  should  be  shut  up  in
the  adult.  I  have  seen  it,  to  common  appearance,  as  much  open  as  in  a
foetus.

The  heart  may  be  considered  as  a  truly  mechanical  engine;  for  al-
though muscles  are  the  powers  in  an  animal,  yet  these  powers  are  them-
selves often  converted  into  a  machine,  of  which the  heart  is  a  strong

o

instance;  for  from  the  disposition  of  its  muscular  fibres,  tendons,  liga-
ments, and  valves,  it  is  adapted  to  mechanical  purposes ;  which  make  it
a  complete  organ  or  machine  in  itself.  It  is  most  probable  that  by  means
of  this  viscus  a  quicker  supply  of  blood  is  furnished  than  otherwise  could
be  effected.

In  birds  and  quadrupedes  the  heart  by  its  action  first  throws  out  the
blood,  both  that  which  is  fit  for  the  purposes  of  life,  and  that  which
requires  to  be  prepaired;  the  last  having  lost  those  salutary  powers  in  the
growth,  repairs,  secretion,  etc.  in  the  machine.

It  may  be  said  to  give  the  first  impulse  to  the  blood,  producing  a
greater  velocity  where  the  blood  is  simply  conveyed  to  the  parts  for
whose  use  it  is  destined.  This  velocity  is  alternately  greater  and  less,
and  from  the  construction  of  the  arteries  alone  is  gradually  diminished,
becoming  more  uniform  where  slowness  and  eveness  in  motion  is  neces-
sary. This  velocity  of  the  blood  in  those  parts  where  it  is  to  be  consi-
dered as  passing  only,  allows  a  much  larger  quantity  to  flow  through  the
part  to  which  it  is  destined  than  otherwise  could  be  transmitted

The  heart  is  placed  in  the  vascular  system,  to  be  ready  to  receive  the
blood  from  the  body,  and  to  propel  it  back  on  the  body  again,  although
not  in  the  centre  of  the  whole ;  but  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  its
situation  is  such  as  to  be  best  suited  to  the  various  parts  of  the  body;
some  parts  requiring  a  brisk,  others  a  more  languid  circulation.  Some
also  require  a  greater  supply  of  blood  than  others.

*  There  have  been  instances  of  the  canalis  arteriosus  being  open  in  the  adult.


Of  the  vascular  system,  J  37

We  may  suppose  that  the  parts  near  the  heart  will  receive  more  blood
than  those  at  a  greater  distance,  because  the  resistance  will  be  less  if  the
vessels  are  of  equal  size  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  part.  The
situation  of  the  heart  in  the  body  varies  in  different  animals.  One  would
imagine  when  the  animal  was  divided  into  its  several  portions  appropria-
ted for  the  different  purposes,  that  the  situation  of  the  heart  would  be
nearly  the  same  in  all;  but  we  find  this  not  to  be  the  case;  its  situation
depends  upon  the  organs  of  respiration,  more  than  any  other  part.  It
is  placed  in  what  is  called  the  chest  in  the  quadruped,  bird,  amphibia,
in  fish,  and  in  the  aquatic  and  terrestial  insect ;  but  not  in  what  may  be
called  the  chest  in  the  flying  insect.  The  chest  in  the  above  named  ani-
mals seems  best  suited  to  contain  the  lungs  and  branchia,  and  therefore
the  heart  is  placed  there  ;  but  as  the  lungs  of  the  flying  insect  are  placed
through  the  whole  body,  the  heart  is  more  diffused,  extending  through
the  whole  length  of  the  animal.  The  situation,  therefore,  of  the  heart  is
chiefly  connected  with  that  of  the  lungs ;  and  when  it  is  united  with  the
body  at  large,  it  is  because  the  lungs  are  also  so  disposed.  We  must
suppose  that  these  two  have  a  relation  to  each  other.

A  heart  is  composed  of  an  auricle  and  ventricle ;  and  it  is  the  ven-
tricle which  sends  the  blood  through  its  course  in  the  circulation  ;  and
from  what  has  been  said,  it  must  appear  that  the  ventricle  is  the  true  heart,
the  other  parts  having  only  secondary  uses ;  and  as  the  ventricle  is  the
part  which  propels  the  blood  to  the  different  parts  of  the  body,  its  mus-
cular power  must  be  adequate  to  that  purpose,  and  therefore  it  has  a  very
strong  muscular  coat.  Much  more  pains  than  were  necessary  have  been
taken  to  dissect  and  describe  the  course  and  arrangement  of  the  muscular
fibres  of  the  heart,  as  if  the  knowledge  of  the  course  of  its  fibres  could  in
the  least  account  for  its  action.  But  as  the  heart  can,  in  its  contracted
state,  almost  throw  out  its  whole  contents,  to  produce  this  effect,  its
fibres  must  pass  obliquely.

Its  red  colour  arises  probably  from  its  being  at  the  fountain  head  of  the
circulation  :  for  those  animals  that  have  but  little  red  blood  have  it  only  in
those  parts  near  the  heart;  and  the  heart  being  nearest  to  its  own  powers,

T


1 38  Of  the  vascular  system.

receives  the  blood  before  the  vessels  can  so  act  as  to  dispose  of  the  red
blood,  or  allow  of  a  kind  of  separation  by  distance;  its  constant  action
too  renders  it  more  red,  as  happens  in  other  muscles.

The  ventricles  in  the  quadruped,  bird,  and  amphibia,  are  called  right
and  left,  and  this  accords  very  well  with  the  situation  in  such  animals  ;
but  where  there  is  only  one  ventricle,  and  that  in  some  acting  the  part
of  right,  as  in  fish,  and  in  others  acting  the  part  of  the  left,  as  in  the
snail,  we  ought  to  have  some  term  expressive  of  their  immediate  use,  and
such  as  would  apply  to  all  animals  that  have  such  a  viscus.

The  auricles  of  the  heart  are  to  be  considered  only  as  reservoirs  for  the
blood  to  be  ready  to  supply  the  ventricles;  for  an  auricle  is  not  to  be
found  in  all  the  animals  which  have  a  ventricle;  nor  does  the  number  of
auricles  always  correspond  to  that  of  the  ventricles.  Where  the  veins  entering
into  the  heart  are  small,  in  comparison  to  the  quantity  of  blood  which  is
wanted  in  the  ventricles,  there  we  have  an  auricle ;  but  where  the  veins
near  to  the  heart  are  large,  there  is  no  auricle;  as  in  the  lobster,  and  ge-
nerally in  insects.  In  the  snail,  where  the  veins  in  common  are  large,  yet
as  they  are  small  where  they  enter  the  heart,  there  is  an  auricle;  and  as
its  office  is  somewhat  similar  to  a  large  vein,  it  has  some  of  its  properties,
viz.  being  in  some  degree  both  elastic  and  muscular.

The  name  sinus  venosus  is  a  very  proper  one;  and  as  a  proof  that  it  is
only  such  in  the  circulation,  there  are  no  valves  placed  between  it  and
the  veins.

As  the  heart  is  an  engine  formed  to  keep  up  the  motion  of  the  blood,
and  as  it  is  necessary  that  this  motion  should  be  determined  in  a  particu-
lar direction,  it  is  adapted,  as  are  also  the  other  parts  of  the  vascular
system,  to  this  purpose.

The  heart  is  formed  into  a  cavity  through  which  the  blood  must  pass,
receiving  at  once  a  considerable  quantity  of  this  fluid,  upon  which  it
immediately  acts  with  equal  force,  although  not  progressively,  as  an  in-
testine ;  and  that  this  motion  of  the  blood  may  be  regulated,  and  a  re-
trograde motion  prevented,  we  find  the  valves  constructed.


Of  the  vascular  system.  139

A  valve,  I  believe,  is  in  general  understood  to  be  a  part  in  every  machine,
calculated  to  allow  whatever  is  to  pass  to  move  in  one  direction  only  ;
and  the  valves  in  the  vascular  system  are  intended  for  this  purpose.
They  are  of  two  kinds,  having  two  modes  of  attachment,  which  is  suited
to  the  action  of  the  part  to  which  they  are  attached,  and  making  a  very
essential  difference  in  their  formation.

Thev  are  thin  inelastic  membranes,  having  no  action  within  them-
selves, with  one  edge  fixed,  the  other  loose  in  some,  but  not  entirely  so
in  others ;  they  are  either  attached  in  a  circular  form,  or  in  an  oblique
one.  The  circular  attachment  belongs  to  those  of  the  ventricles,  and
the  oblique  to  those  of  the  arteries  and  veins.  The  circular  are  the
most  complex,  requiring  an  additional  apparatus  to  make  them  answer
the  intended  purpose;  it  is  necessary  that  their  loose  floating  edges
should  be  restrained  from  inverting  themselves  into  the  auricle  upon  the
contraction  of  the  ventricles  :  this  is  done  by  tendons,  which  are  fixed  at
one  extremity  along  the  edge  of  the  valves,  and  at  the  other  to  some
part  upon  the  inside  of  the  ventricle.

The  tendons  which  are  longest  are  inserted  into  columns  of  muscle,
the  intention  of  which  is  very  evident;  for  if  they  had  gone  the  whole
length  in  form  of  a  tendon,  they  would  have  been  too  long  when  the
heart  contracted,  and  the  valves  in  such  a  case  would  have  allowed  of
being  pushed  into  the  auricles,  so  far  as  to  admit  of  the  blood  escaping
back  again  into  the  cavity;  but  the  carnias  columnar  keep  the  valves
within  the  ventricle,  in  the  contracted  state  of  the  ventricles ;  and  the
dilatation  of  the  ventricles  counteracts  them  and  places  the  valves  in  their
proper  situation  in  that  state.

If  the  valves  in  this  cavity  had  been  placed  obliquely  along  the  inner
sides  of  the  ventricle,  as  in  the  beginning  of  the  arteries,  and  in  the  veins,
the  attachment  then  would  not  have  been  permanent;  for  it  would  have
varied  according  to  the  relaxed  or  contracted  state  of  the  heart ;  it  would
have  been  short  in  the  contracted  state,  and  longer  in  the  relaxed  ;  there-
fore to  have  a  fixed  base,  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  be  attached  all
round  the  mouth  of  the  ventricles.

I  have  reason  to  believe,  that  the  valves  in  the  right  side  of  the  heart


1 40  Of  the  vascular  system.

do  not  so  perfectly  do  their  duty  as  those  of  the  left,  therefore  we  may
suppose  it  was  not  so  necessary.

The  vessels  of  the  heart  are  called  coronary  arteries  and  veins.  In
quadrupeds  and  birds,  there  are  two  coronary  arteries,  which  arise  from
the  aorta  just  at  its  beginning,  behind  two  of  the  valves  of  the  artery ;
from  this  circumstance  a  theory  respecting  the  action  of  the  heart  was
raised  ;  but  in  the  amphibia  they  arise  at  some  distance,  and  not  always
from  the  same  artery  in  the  same  species,  often  from  the  subclavian,  and
often  from  the  anterior  surface  of  the  ascending  aorta,  which  is  reflected
back.  In  the  fish  they  arise  from  the  artery  as  they  are  coming  from
the  gills.

The  veins  pass  into  the  right  auricle.

In  all  animals,  which  have  an  auricle  and  ventricle,  so  far  as  I  know,
there  is  a  bag  (unattached)  in  which  they  are  placed,  called  a  pericar-
dium,* but  the  insect  tribe,  whether  aerial,  aquatic,  or  terrestial  have
none,  their  heart  being  attached  to  the  surrounding  parts  by  the  cellular
membrane,  or  some  other  mode  of  attachment.  In  those  animals  which
have  this  bag,  it  is  not  a  smooth  termination  of  the  cellular  membrane,
as  the  peritonaeum  may  be  supposed  to  be;  but  a  distinct  bag,  as  in  man,
and  in  all  quadrupeds.

The  use  of  this  bag  is  probably  that  the  heart  may  move  with  more
ease  and  facility ;  the  two  parts,  to  wit,  the  contained  and  containing,
acting  as  a  kind  of  joint  with  a  capsular  ligament,  and  like  such  joints  it
contains  a  fluid,  but  not  a  synovia,  as  the  two  surfaces  are  not  hard  like
cartilage  ;  besides,  the  heart  is  kept  very  much  in  its  place,  which  we
must  suppose  is  of  use.  I  have  conceived  it  also  to  be  possible,  as  it  is  a
pretty  strong  membrane,  that  it  might  in  some  degree  preserve  the  heart
from  too  great  distention;  for  I  have  observed  by  injections,  that  a  little
force  will  distend  it  beyond  its  natural  size,  if  a  part  of  the  pericardium

*  There  have  been  instances  where  the  pericardium  has  been  wanting  in  the  human  sub-
ject: a  case  of  this  kind  is  published  by  Dr.  Baillie,  in  a  periodical  work,  entitled  "  Trans-
w  actions  of  a  Society  instituted  for  promoting  medical  and  chirurgical  Knowledge.''


Of  the  vascular  system,  14.1

he  taken  off;  but  in  the  heart  mentioned  by  Dr.  Baillie  there  was  no
particular  increase  of  bulk.

This  bag  has,  like  most  others,  a  fluid  which  moistens  the  two  surfaces.
In  every  other  cavity  of  the  body  the  fluid  is  no  more  in  quantity  than
what  is  simply  sufficient  to  moisten  the  parts.  In  this  bag,  however,  it
is  more,  from  whence  it  has  acquired  the  name  of  liquor  pericardii.
There  may  be  about  a  tea  spoon-full  in  the  whole.  This  fluid  appears
to  be  serum,  and  is  commonly  a  little  tinged  with  blood,  which  arises
from  the  transudation  of  the  red  blood  after  death.

That  this  cavity  has  more  water  in  it  than  most  other  cavities  of  the
body,  may  arise  from  there  being  a  greater  action  of  those  parts  on  one
another  than  takes  place  in  others;  it  may  also  fill  up  the  interstices
formed  between  two  round  bodies,  so  that  when  the  pulmonary  artery
and  aorta  are  filled,  they  may  more  easily  assume  a  round  figure.

The  size  of  a  heart  we  should  naturally  suppose  is  proportioned  to  the
size  of  the  animal,  and  the  natural  quantity  of  blood;  which  last  is,  we
might  conceive,  ever  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  animal ;  but  I  believe
these  modes  of  calculation  will  not  be  found  to  be  just ;  for  certainly
some  animals  have  much  more  blood  in  proportion  to  their  size  than
others;  and  I  believe  the  heart  is  not  in  size  proportioned  to  the  size  of  the
animal,  but  bears  a  compound  proportion  or  ratio  to  the  quantity  of
blood  to  be  moved,  and  the  frequency  of  the  stroke  it  has  to  make ;  for
when  it  is  decreased  in  the  one  respect  it  must  be  increased  in  the  other;
and  as  a  proof  of  this  we  find  when  an  animal  loses  a  considerable
quantity  of  blood,  the  heart  increases  in  its  frequency  of  strokes,  as  also  in
its  violence.  That  it  principally  bears  proportion  to  the  quantity  of
blood  is  evident;  for  the  right  ventricle  is  equal  in  size  to  the  left,  if  not
larger,  which  sends  its  blood  to  the  lungs  only,  which  are  infinitely
small  when  compared  to  the  body;  and  the  hearts  of  those  animals
which  have  but  one  ventricle,  as  fish  for  instance,  which  is  similar  in
use  to  our  right,  are  perhaps  made  as  large  in  proportion  to  the  size  of
the  body  as  both  ventricles  in  the  quadruped.


r


H2  Of  the  vascular  system.

The  strength  of  a  heart  is  commonly,  if  not  always,  in  proportion  to  the
size  of  the  parts  to  which  the  blood  is  carried  with  the  velocity  with
which  the  blood  is  propelled,  which  becomes  a  collateral  proof  that  it  is
an  universal  agent  in  the  circulation.  In  the  complete  heart  this  is  not
equal  in  every  part  of  the  same  heart ;  the  right  ventricle  being  much
weaker  than  the  left,  but  still  in  the  above  proportions.  The  proportion
between  the  two  will  be  best  known  by  ascertaining  the  difference  in  the
strength  of  the  two  arteries,  and  this  again  will  differ  according  to  the
whole  parts  the  blood  is  sent  to  by  the  heart.  In  the  fish,  for  instance,
it  is  only  necessary  it  should  bear  the  proportion  in  strength  to  the
whole  fish,  that  our  right  ventricle  bears  to  our  lungs,  which  is  not
in  the  least  equal  to  that  of  the  left  ventricle  ;  or  in  other  words,
its  strength  should  commensurate  with  the  size  of  the  lungs ;  how-
ever, it  is  most  probable  that  the  right  ventricle  in  the  quadruped  is
stronger  than  in  this  proportion,  because  it  is  obliged  to  move  a  larger
quantity  of  blood  than  is  contained  in  any  other  part  of  the  body  of  the
same  size,  and  with  greater  velocity ;  in  the  double  heart,  therefore,  such
as  the  human,  the  two  cavities  are  not  of  equal  strength,  each  being  nearly
in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  parts,  or  rather  to  the  distance  the
blood  is  to  go ;  the  right  ventricle  only  throwing  it  into  the  lungs,  the
left  into  the  body.  As  a  proof  of  this  doctrine,  we  find  that  in  the  fcetal
state  of  this  class  of  animals,  the  two  ventricles  and  the  two  large  ar-
teries, are  equal  in  strength.  Indeed,  from  reasoning,  we  should  expect
this,  and  even  that  the  right  ventricle  should  rather  be  the  strongest;
for  at  this  period  it  sends  the  blood  to  the  lower  extremities;  but  since
both  the  arteries  unite  into  one  canal  we  must  suppose  it  to  be  necessary
that  the  velocities  of  the  blood  in  both  should  be  equal;  upon  examina-
tion we  find  the  two  ventricles  to  be  nearly  equal  in  thickness  in  this
young  state  of  the  animal.

The  mixt  kind  of  heart,  as  that  of  the  turtle,  etc.  is  under  the  same
predicament.  The  two  ventricles  are  to  be  considered  as  joint  agents  in
the  circulation ;  and  as  the  pulmonary  artery  and  aorta  are  equally  strong,
it  becomes  a  proof  that  the  strength  of  the  heart  must  be  equal  every
where.


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 43

If  we  were  to  estimate  the  strength  of  the  ventricles  in  those  possessed
of  four  cavities,  by  the  strength  of  the  aorta  and  pulmonary  arteries,  either
by  their  absolute  strength  or  elasticity,  we  might  come  pretty  near  the
truth.

Dr.  Hales  made  an  experiment  on  a  horse,  to  ascertain  the  strength  of
the  arteries,  which  gives  us  the  power  of  the  left  ventricle;  but  all  this
explains  nothing,  for  its  power  is  equal  to  the  use  wanted.

The  power  of  contraction  of  the  ventricle  must  be  within  the
strength  of  the  artery;  but  it  is  hardly  possible  to  ascertain  what  is  the
strength  of  an  artery,  nor,  if  we  could,  would  it  ascertain  the  strength  of
the  ventricle,  for  the  force  of  the  heart  is  in  part  immediately  lost  by  the
blood  being  allowed  to  pass  on,  although  not  so  freely  as  if  the  artery
was  open  at  the  other  end ;  in  proportion,  therefore,  to  the  retardment,  the
artery  is  affected.  We  can  ascertain  the  elastic  power  of  a  given  section
of  an  artery,  and  also  its  absolute  strength,  but  we  are  not  acquainted
with  the  size  of  a  section  that  will  give  the  strength  of  the  artery  to
which  it  belonged  when  the  whole  was  in  a  perfect  state  or  form.

Experiment  I.  A  section  of  a  sound  aorta,  close  to  the  valves,  three
quarters  of  an  inch  long,  was  stretched  transversly  to  its  greatest  extent,
which  state  was  ascertained  by  measuring  it  with  a  pair  of  compasses,
and  the  artery  was  allowed  to  contract.  The  weight  required  to  stretch
it  again  to  the  same  degree  was  one  pound  ten  ounces.  To  break  the  ar-
tery required  ten  pounds  and  a  quarter.

Experiment  II.  A  section  of  the  pulmonary  artery,  similar  to  the
former  in  length  and  situation,  required  six  ounces  two  drachms  to
stretch  it  to  its  full  extent.  To  break  it  required  eleven  pounds  three
quarters.

The  use  of  this  viscus  is  in  general  very  well  known;  however,  its  use
has  been  frequently  supposed  to  be  more  universal  than  it  really  is.  It
gives  to  the  blood  its  motion  in  most  animals,  and  in  all  it  sends  the
blood  to  the  organs  of  respiration  :  in  the  flying  insect  it  sends  the  blood
both  to  those  organs  and  to  the  body  at  large ;  but  in  fish  to  those  organs
only,  the  body  at  large  in  them  having  no  heart. In  the  amphibia  there


1 44  Cf  the  vascular  system*

is  an  attempt  towards  a  heart  both  for  the  lungs  and  body,  but  not  two
distinct  hearts.  In  the  bird  and  quadruped  there  is  a  distinct  heart  for
each.  We  may  say,  therefore,  that  there  is  one  heart  for  respiration,  and
another  for  the  life,  nourishment,,  etc.  of  the  animal ;  these  constitute
the  two  ventricles.

As  the  extent  of  these  two  circulations  is  different,  the  two  hearts,  or
in  other  words,  the  two  ventricles,  are  suited  in  their  strength  to  the  dif-
ferent extents  of  each  circulation,  as  was  observed  above  in  treating  of
the  strength  of  the  heart.

How  far  the  heart  is  alone  capable  of  carrying  on  the  circulation  is  not  to
be  ascertained;  for  although  the  circulation  is  carried  on  in  paralytic  cases,
yet  this  does  not  exclude  the  involuntary  nervous  influence  of  the  part ;
this,  however,  varies  very  much  in  different  classes  of  animals;  for  I  have
already  observed  concerning  the  structure  of  the  arteries,  that  their  mus-
cularity assisted  in  the  circulation,  and  that  in  proportion  as  the  vessels
in  general  were  endowed  with  this  power  the  heart  was  weaker.  I  be-
lieve that  the  quadruped  has  the  strongest  heart  of  any  class  of  animals  -,
and  I  believe  that  their  vessels  have  the  least  muscular  power,  more
especially  near  the  heart.

The  immediate  use  of  the  heart  in  an  animal,  would  seem  to  be  ge-
nerally  subject  to  as  little  variety  as  that  of  any  other  viscus;  but  perhaps
the  heart  is  subject  to  more  variety  than  any  other  part  in  its  construction.
I  have  observed  that  it  is  either  single,  double,  or  mixed,  that  it  is
single  without  an  auricle,  single  with  one  auricle,  single  with  two  auri-
cles, double  with  a  union  of  the  two,  making  the  mixed,  and  double  with
two  auricles.  With  respect  to  its  use,  it  is,  in  the  most  simple  kind  of
single  heart,  to  propel  the  blood  through  the  body,  immediately  from  the
veins,  which  blood  is  to  receive  its  purification  in  this  passage,  when  the
lungs  are  disposed  throughout  the  body,  as  in  the  flying  insect.  In  ano-
ther single  heart  it  is  intended  to  mix  both  the  purified  and  the  adulte-
rated blood,  and  of  course  to  throw  it  out  to  the  body  and  lungs  equally  in
this  mixed  state,  as  in  the  lobster.  In  the  single  heart,  with  an  auricle,  its
use  is,  in  one  class,  to  throw  the  blood  throughout  the  body,  after  being
purified,  as  in  the  snail;  and  in  another  single  kind,  with  an  auricle,  it  is


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 45

to  receive  the  blood  from  the  body,  and  send  it  to  the  lungs  only,  as  in
all  fish.  In  the  single  heart  with  two  auricles,  it  is  formed  to  receive
the  blood  both  purified  and  unpurified,  and  dispose  of  it  to  both  body  and
lungs  in  that  state,  as  was  observed  in  the  lobster:  the  same  thing  happens,
in  some  degree,  in  the  turtle,  snake,  foetus,  etc.  In  the  double  heart  with
two  auricles,  it  acts  like  an  union  of  the  heart  of  the  snail  with  that  of  the
fish,  one  heart  receiving  the  blood  purified  from  the  lungs,  and  sending  it
over  the  body,  as  in  the  snail;  and  the  other  receiving  the  blood  from  the
body,  and  sending  it  into  the  lungs  to  be  purified,  as  in  the  fish.  From
the  above  account  we  must  see  that  the  immediate  use  arising  from  the
heart  in  one  class  of  animals  will  not  agree  with  its  immediate  use  in
another ;  but  still  in  all,  it  is  the  engine  employed  to  throw  the  blood  to
those  parts  into  which  the  arteries  conduct  it.

It  is  impossible  to  say  what  the  quantity  of  blood  is  that  is  thrown  out
of  the  heart  at  each  contraction.  The  size  of  a  relaxed  heart,  in  the  dead
body  of  any  animal,  gives  us  the  size  of  the  cavity,  or  what  it  is  capable
of  holding;  but  muscles  seldom  or  ever  are  obliged  to  relax  themselves
to  their  full  extent  in  common  actions,  although  they  often  are  when
extensive  effects  are  to  be  produced.  The  heart,  like  every  part  constructed
for  action,  has  its  times  of  action  beyond,  and  also  within  its  natural
limit  of  action  ;  but  it  is  its  natural  action  which  should  be  ascertained.

If  we  compare  the  actions  of  the  heart  with  those  of  the  body,  we
may  suppose  that  the  common  quantity  of  motion  in  the  heart  is  about
half  what  it  can  perform,  that  is,  it  relaxes  three-fourths  and  contracts
one-half;  therefore  a  ventricle  which  contains  four  ounces,  will,  in
common,  only  dilate  so  as  to  contain  three,  and  will  only  contract  so  as
to  throw  out  two.

The  question  is,  when  the  heart  acts  with  more  frequency,  as  from
exercise,  Does  it,  or  does  it  not  also  dilate  and  contract  more  fully,
and  also  act  with  greater  velocity  in  its  contraction  ?  I  believe  that
all  these  circumstances  take  place;  for  in  exercise,  the  pulse  not  only
becomes  more  frequent,  but  fuller,  as  if  more  was  thrown  out  of  the
heart ;  and  the  heart  is  found  to  make  a  greater  emotion  in  the  chest,

U


146  Of  the  vascular  system.

striking  with  its  apex  against  the  inside  of  the  chest  with  greater  force*,
which  can  only  arise  from  a  greater  quantity  being  thrown  out,  and  with
greater  velocity.  The  breathing  corresponds  with  the  quantity  of  blood
and  the  velocity  ;  for  if  a  larger  quantity  passes  through  the  lungs  in  a
given  time,  the  breathing  must  be  in  the  same  proportion  increased ;  if
with  a  greater  velocity,  the  same  thing  must  necessarily  take  place ;  and
if  a  greater  quantity  is  thrown  out,  and  with  a  greater  velocity,  then  the
arteries  must  relax  in  proportion,  since  the  different  parts  must  correspond
with  each  other ;  we  must  suppose,  therefore,  that  in  health,  whenever
there  is  any  exertion  greater  than  common,  (which  always  increases  the
pulse)  the  heart  dilates  more,  contracts  more,  and  does  both  with  greater
velocity  ;  this  I  conceive  arises  from  a  necessity,  which  begins  first  in
the  veins;  for  when  the  body  is  in  action,  the  blood  in  the  veins  is  obliged
to  move  with  greater  velocity  than  when  at  rest:  how  far  there  may  be
other  reasons  for  this,  I  will  not  pretend  to  determine.

Another  question  naturally  arises  ;  as  we  find  that  the  times  of  repeti-
tion of  the  pulse  or  the  actions  of  the  heart  increase  in  many  diseases,
Does  the  same  thing  happen,  that  is  above  supposed  to  arise,  from  exercise
in  health  ?  viz.  Does  the  heart  dilate  more,  contract  more,  and  also  con-
tract with  more  velocity  ?  I  believe  this  case  does  not  in  the  least  corre-
spond with  our  former  position.  The  pulse  in  such  circumstances,
altho*  frequent,  is  small  and  hard,  showing  the  arteries  to  be  too  much  con-
tracted by  their  muscular  power,  and  therefore  unfit  to  receive  a  large
quantity  of  blood  from  the  heart  in  any  given  time.  The  breathing  does
not  correspond  with  the  frequency  of  the  pulsations,  as  in  the  former  in-
stance; yet  it  is possible  that  nearly  the  same  quantity  of  blood  may

*  The  reason  why  the  apex  of  the  heart  strikes  against  the  chest  in  its  actions,  was,  I  be-
lieve, first  accounted  for  by  the  late  Dr.  William  Hunter,  in  his  lectures,  as  far  back  as  the
year  1746.  The  systole  and  diastole  of  the  heart,  simply,  could  not  produce  such  an  effect ;
nor  could  it  have  been  produced,  if  it  had  thrown  the  blood  into  a  straight  tube,  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  axis  in  the  left  ventricle,  as  is  the  case  with  the  ventricles  of  fish,  and  some  other
classes  of  animals;  but  by  its  throwing  the  blood  into  a  curved  tube,  viz.  the  aorta,  that  ar-
tery at  its  curve  endeavours  to  throw  itself  into  a  straight  line  to  increase  its  capacity ;  but
the  aorta  being  the  fixed  point  against  the  back,  and  the  heart  in  some  degree  loose  or  pen-
delous,  the  influence  of  its  own  action  is  thrown  upon  itself,  and  it  is  tilted  forwards  against
the  inside  of  the  chest.


Of  the  vascular  system,  1 47

pass  as  when  in  health,  the  velocity  in  the  contracted  state  of  heart  and
vessels  making  up  for  the  quantity  in  the  enlarged.  That  it  moves  faster
in  such  state  of  vessels,  is,  I  think  probable;  for  in  bleeding,  the  blood  in
the  veins  during  such  a  state  of  vessels,  is  commonly  more  florid.

Observations  upon  the  heart's  motion,  while  under  the  influence

of  artificial  breathing.

I.  I  observed  that  the  auricles  contracted  but  very  little,  so  that  they
did  not  nearly  empty  themselves.

II.  That  the  ventricles  were  not  turgid  at  the  time  of  their  diastole;
for  I  could  feel  them  soft,  and  could  easily  compress  them.

III.  That  the  ventricles  became  hard  at  the  time  of  their  systole.

IV.  That  the  heart,  when  it  ceased  to  act,  became  nearly  twice  as
large  as  when  acting,  and  that  it  recovered  its  small  size  again  whenever
it  began  to  act.

Observations  on  the  above  appearances.

From  the  first  observation  it  would  appear,  that  the  auricles  are  only  re-
servoirs, capable  of  holding  a  much  larger  quantity  than  is  necessary  for
filling  the  ventricles  at  any  one  time,  in  order  that  the  ventricles  may  al-
ways have  blood  ready  to  fill  them.

From  observation  the  fourth,  it  would  appear,  that  any  idea  we  form  of
the  size  of  a  heart  from  those  in  dead  bodies,  must  be  far  from  the  truth;
for  the  blood  coming  from  every  part  of  the  body  to  the  heart,  in  some
measure  distends  it  while  it  is  in  a  relaxed  state,  so  that  when  the  heart
begins  to  contract  (as  muscles  do  some  time  after  death)  it  is  kept  dilated
by  the  contained  blood.  However,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  increased
size  of  the  heart  would  be  less  in  the  present  case,  than  natural;  for
the  very  quick  motion  of  this  viscus,  under  this  irritation,  hindered  a  full
diastole ;  but  when  I  left  off  blowing,  and  the  heart  ceased  acting,  it  be-
came large;  and  on  resuming  my  artificial  breathing,  it  again  became
small ;  which  I  did  three  times  in  the  course  of  this  experiment.  But  I
think  I  have  observed  in  general  that  the  heart  is  not  so  much  affected  by
the  stimulus  of  death  as  the  other  muscles  of  the  body. We  seldom  see


1 4.S  Of  the  vascular  system,

a  dead  body  that  is  not  stiff  j  but  we  very  often  find  the  heart  large  and
flabby,  not  in  the  least  contracted  :  and  I  am  not  certain  but  this  may  be
the  case  also  with  some  of  the  other  vital  parts,  as  the  stomach  and  in-
testines.

It  is  to  be  set  down  as  a  principle,  that  the  action  of  every  muscle  is
alternate  contraction  and  relaxation  ;  and  it  cannot  be  otherwise  ;  but
as  there  is  a  necessity  for  a  more  constant  and  regular  motion  in  the
heart,  than  probably  in  any  of  the  other  muscles,  more  disputes  have
arisen  about  the  cause  of  its  regular  alternate  motion.  Some  have  ac-
counted for  it  from  the  position  of  the  mouths  of  the  coronary  arteries
respecting  the  valves  of  the  aorta,  supposing,  erroneously,  that  the  heart
has  its  blood  in  the  time  of  its  relaxation*  ;  but  the  circulation,  whether
existing  or  not,  has  not  such  immediate  effect  upon  a  muscle  ;  nor  would  it
account  for  the  action  of  the  auricle  in  the  same  animal,  nor  would  it
account  for  the  action  of  the  heart  in  a  fish  ;  but  from  what  we  shall
observe  on  the  valves  of  the  aorta,  we  shall  find  that  this  opinion  imme-
diately falls  to  the  ground.  An  easy  experiment  may  put  this  beyond  a
doubt ;  for,  if  the  heart  of  a  dog  be  laid  open  and  the  coronary  artery
wounded,  it  will  be  found  to  jet  out  its  blood  as  the  aorta  distends.
Others  have  accounted  for  the  alternate  motion  of  the  heart,  from  the
course  of  its  nerves  passing  between  the  two  great  arteries,  so  as  to  be
compressed  when  the  arteries  are  dilated  ;  but  this  could  only  produce
relaxation.  We  know  too  that  such  immediate  compression  on  a  nerve
has  no  such  immediate  effect  upon  a  muscle  ;  and  it  would  most  probably
make  it  contract;  for  when  the  nerves  of  the  heart  are  cut,  it  does  not  stop
its  motion,  but  rather  makes  it  contract  for  the  instant.  The  heart's  mo-
tion does  not  arise  from  an  immediate  impulse  from  the  brain,  as  it  does
in  the  voluntary  muscles,  and  as  it  is  only  in  the  quadruped  and  bird
that  the  nerves  can  be  influenced  in  their  passage  to  it;  it  does  not  ac-
count for  this  alternate  motion  in  other  classes  of  animals. The  flowing

*  This  will  be  readily  understood  when  I  come  to  explain  the  mode  of  action  in  the  valves

of  the  arteries.


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 49

of  the  blood  into  the  heart  has  been  assigned  as  a  cause  of  its  contraction  ;
but  even  that  will  not  account  for  it ;  although  it  will  for  many  of  its
phenomena,  yet  not  for  all;  for  a  local  stimulus  merely  is  too  mechani-
cal to  produce  all  the  variety  attending  the  action  of  this  viscus ;  it'
would  not  be  attended  with  that  regularity  which  it  has  in  health,  nor
that  irregularity  which  we  find  in  disease;  neither  could  it  ever  stop,  un-
less when  absolute  death  took  place;  nor  resume  its  action  if  it  ever  did  stop.
We  find  that  those  parts  which  have  occasion  for  the  immediate  stimulus
to  produce  action,  have  that  action  very  irregular;  as  for  instance,  the  blad-
der of  urine  and  intestines.  The  bladder  is  taking  up  its  action  as  simply
for  itself,  and  not  secondarily,  however  beneficial  that  might  be  for  the  whole
in  a  secondary  degree;  but  the  heart's  actions  arise  from  its  being  so  much
part  of  the  whole,  as  the  whole  immediately  to  depend  upon  it ;  there-
fore we  must  look  out  for  another  cause  of  this  regular  alternate  ac-
tion of  the  heart,  than  that  arising  from  mechanism  or  mechanical  im-
pression ;  something  more  immediately  connected  with  the  general  laws  of
the  animal  ceconomy.

The  alternate  contraction  and  relaxation  of  the  heart  constitutes  a
part  of  the  circulation;  and  the  whole  takes  place  in  consequence  of  a
necessity,  the  constitution  demanding  it,  and  becoming  the  stimulus,  it
is  rather  therefore  the  want  of  repletion  which  makes  a  negative  impres-
sion on  the  constitution,  which  becomes  the  stimulus,  than  the  imme-
diate impression  of  something  applied  to  the  heart.

This  we  see  to  be  the  case,  wherever  a  constant  supply,  or  some  kind
of  aid,  is  wanted  in  consequence  of  some  action  ;  we  have  as  regularly  the
stimulus  for  respiration,  the  moment  one  is  finished  an  immediate  demand
taking  place;  and  if  prevented,  as  this  action  is  under  the  influence  of  the
will,  the  stimulus  of  want  is  increased.  We  have  the  stimulus  of  want  of
food,  which  takes  place  regularly  in  health,  and  so  it  is  with  the  circula-
tion. The  heart,  we  find,  cannot  rest  one  stroke,  but  the  constitution
feels  it;  even  the  mind  and  the  heart  is  thereby  stimulated  to  action.  The
constant  want  in  the  constitution  of  this  action  in  the  heart,  is  as  much  as
the  constant  action  of  the  spring  of  a  clock  is  to  its  pendulum,  all  hang-
ing or  depending  on  each  other.


j  eo  Of  the  vascular  system.

The  nearest  dependence  of  the  heart  is  upon  the  lungs,  and  probably
they  have  the  same  upon  the  heart  ;  the  two  together  become  in  their
immediate  use  interwoven  with  the  whole ;  for  a  stoppage  of  respiration
produces  a  stoppage  of  circulation,  and  a  restoration  of  respiration  pro-
duces a  restoration  of  the  circulation  or  heart's  motion.  Thus,  in  my  ex-
periments on  artificial  breathing,  the  heart  soon  ceased  acting  whenever  I
left  off  acting  with  my  bellows;  and  upon  renewing  my  artificial  breath-
ing, it,  in  a  very  short  time,  renewed  its  action,  first  by  slow  degrees;  but
became  quicker  and  quicker  till  it  came  to  its  full  action.

I  believe  this  experiment  cannot  be  reversed;  we  cannot  make  an  arti-
ficial circulation,  so  as  to  know,  that  if  we  stopped  the  heart's  motion,
we  should  so  readily  stop  respiration  ;  and  on  producing  the  heart's  moti-
on, respiration  would  again  take  place  ;  but  if  we  could  do  this,  I  doubt
very  much  its  being  attended  with  equal  success,  because  I  believe  that  in
all  deaths,  respiration  stops  first ;  however  it  must  be  supposed,  that  if
the  heart  stopped  for  any  length  of  time,  respiration  would  also  stop ;
and  if  I  were  to  take  the  following  case  as  proof,  it  would  appear  that  re-
spiration would  not  go  on  without  the  heart's  motion.

A  gentleman  was  attacked  with  a  pain  in  the  situation  of  the  pylorus.
The  pains  were  such  as  indicated  its  seat  to  be  in  the  nerves  of  the  stomach
and  its  connections.  It  was  such  as  he  could  hardly  bear.  The  other
attending  symptom  was  a  total  stoppage  in  the  actions  of  the  heart;  and  of
course  the  face  was  pale  and  ghastly.  Not  the  least  signs  of  motion  in  the
heart  could  be  felt.  In  this  state  he  was  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour.
He  was  attended  by  Drs.  Hunter,  Sir  George  Baker,  Sir  William  Fordyce
and  Dr.  Huck  Saunders.  As  he  was  perfectly  sensible  at  the  time,  and  could
perform  every  voluntary  action,  he  observed,  that  he  was  not  breathing,
which  astonished  him ;  and  at  first  conceiving  he  must  die  if  he  did  not
breathe,  he  performed  the  act  of  breathing  voluntarily.  This  shews  that
breathing  depends  on  the  actions  of  the  heart;  and  it  also  shews,  that
under  certain  circumstances  the  actions  of  both  may  be  suspended,  and
yet  death  not  be  the  consequence.  As  he  spoke  while  in  this  fit,  with-
out attending  to  his  breathing,  it  shews  that  the  breathing  which
produces  sound,  is  voluntary;  and  if  we  had  only  the  power  of  involun-


Of  the  vascular  system.  151

tary  breathing,  then  probably  we  could  not  speak ;  for  it  is  probable  we
could  not  regulate  the  action  of  the  glottis  and  tongue,  which  are  volun-
tary, to  so  regular  an  action  of  the  lungs ;  for  in  speaking,  it  is  the  one
acting  so  as  to  correspond  with  the  other,  both  becoming  voluntary.  A
gentleman  who  had  a  singular  asthmatic  affection,  his  breathing  gradu-
ally stopt,  and  again  gradually  recovered,  but  became  violent,  and  this
constantly  and  alternately  held  two  or  three  minutes;  and  when  the
breathing  ceased  yet  he  spoke,  although  but  faintly.

In  those  animals  which  have  two  ventricles,  it  has  been  asserted  by
some,  that  their  actions  are  alternate ;  but  observation  and  experiment
shews  us,  that  the  two  auricles  contract  together,  and  that  the  two  ven-
tricles also  contract  together.  This  can  be  observed  simply  by  looking
on  the  heart  in  its  actions;  and  if  we  in  that  state  make  a  puncture  into
the  pulmonary  artery  and  the  aorta,  we  shall  find  the  jet  in  both  at  the
same  instant,  corresponding  with  the  contractions  of  the  ventricles.  Indeed
the  circulation  in  the  foetus  is  a  proof  of  it;  for  in  the  child  there  would
otherwise  be  two  pulsations  instead  of  one.

This  alternate  motion  of  the  heart  is  quicker  in  some  classes  of  animals
than  others ;  in  some  being  extremely  quick,  in  others  very  slow.  In  all
the  more  inferior  orders  of  animals,  I  believe  it  is  the  slowest;  and  this
may  probably  be  in  some  degree  in  proportion  to  their  imperfection.  It  is
also  slower,  probably,  in  each  class  in  proportion  to  the  size;  and  we
know  it  is  slower  in  each  species,  in  some  degree  in  proportion  to  the  size,
although  not  nearly  exactly  so.  The  pulse  is  also  found  to  be  quicker
in  the  young  than  in  the  old  of  each  species,  in  greater  proportion  than
what  we  find  arising  from  size  only.  Thus  the  motion  of  the  heart  of
a  caterpillar  is  extremely  slow,  and  also  of  a  snail.  The  motion  of  the
heart  in  fish  is  not  frequent;  and  we  know  it  is  extremely  slow  in  the
amphibia.  But  in  those  possessed  of  two  ventricles,  as  in  birds  and
quadrupeds,  the  motion  of  this  viscus  is  much  quicker.  In  them  too  it
differs  very  much  in  proportion  to  their  size,  although  not  nearly  in  the
same  proportion.  Thus,  a  horse's  pulse  is  about  thirty-six  in  a  minute ;
while  a  man's  is  about  seventy. In  the  same  species  it  is  nearly  of  equal


152  Of  the  vascular  system.

quickness;  for  in  a  man  three  feet  high,  the  pulse  was  eighty,  while  a  man
above  eight  feet  high,  had  a  pulse  about  seventy.


VI.  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  BLOOD-VESSELS.

By  the  vessels  in  an  animal,  are  commonly  understood  those  canals
which  carry  the  juices  of  the  body,  called  the  blood  of  the  animal,  to
and  from  the  heart,  for  the  immediate  purposes  of  the  animal  ceco-
nomy ;  and  in  those  animals  where  no  heart  is  to  be  found,  yet  vessels
are  found,  though  their  uses  are  not  so  demonstrable ;  and  in  some  of
a  still  more  inferior  order,  where  no  vessels  can  be  demonstrated,  yet,
from  analogy,  canals  may  be  supposed  to  exist;  and  those  should  still  be
called  vessels*.

The  vascular  system  in  an  animal,  is,  in  some  degree,  to  be  considered
as  the  efficient  part  of  the  whole  animal  respecting  itself;  every  other
part  of  the  body  being  more  or  less  subservient  to  it,  and  depending  upon
it,  for  existence  and  support ;  and  therefore  the  greatest  attention  should
■fce  paid  to  every  circumstance  that  can  possibly  explain  the  various  uses
of  the  vessels;  for  there  is  no  operation  respecting  the  internal  ceconomy
of  the  animal,  but  is  performed  by  them  ;  insomuch,  that  for  the  con-
venience of  the  vessels  in  performing  those  peculiar  actions,  they  seem  to
constitute  various  combinations, which  are  called organst. And al-

*  Of  this,  I  am  not  certain.  I  have  an  idea,  that  some  animals  absorb  their  nourish-
ment, even  without  action,  somewhat  similar  to  a  sponge;  but  dispose  of  it  immediately  by
converting  it  into  its  own  increase.

+  Perhaps  it  may  be  difficult  to  give  a  difinition  of  an  organ  that  will  meet  every  one's
ideas;  or  will  distinguish  those  bodies,  accurately,  from  what  may  be  said,  not  to  be  an  or-
gan. A  muscle  may  be  called  an  organ  ;  but  I  would  only  consider  it  among  the  materials
of  which  an  organ  is  composed.  I  have  the  same  idea  of  elastic  substances,  cellular  mem-
i>rarie,  bone,  cartilage,  etc.

I  would,  at  present,  define  an  organ  to  be  a  part  of  a  particular  construction,  composed  of
p.  variety  of  substances,  which  are  combined  together  to  answer  some  particular  purpose,
jA'hich  is  the  resuk  pi"  the  actions  of  the  whole.  .


Of  the  vascular  system.  153

though  many  parts  have  actions,  independent  of  the  vessels,  yet  these  are
not  for  the  purposes  of  growth,  support,  etc.  So  that  the  vessels  are  con-
structed for  the  immediate  use  of  the  machine,  and  may  be  called  labour-
ers in  the  machine.  This  naturally  implies  something  that  is  not
vessel,  or  vessels  ;  a  something  that  constitutes  the  different  parts  of  the
bociy,  and  is  only  more  or  less  vascular.  They  are  probably  the  very  first
active  parts  in  the  system.;  for  we  find  them  in  action  before  they  have
formed  themseLves  into  a  heart;  and  in  such  a  state  of  parts  we  find  them
the  only  part  that  has  any  strength  ;  the  other  parts  only  preparing  for
action  :  this  is  so  remarkable  that  we  can  dissect  the  vessels  of  a  chicken
in  the  egg  without  injection,  the  other  parts  easily  giving  way.  These
parts  are  formed  of  living  animal  matter,  so  composed  as  to  constitute
the  different  structures  fitted  for  their  different  uses  in  the  machine;  yet
some  parts  are  so  vascular  as.  to  appear  almost  to  consist  wholly  of  ves-
sels ;  as- if  vessels  were  formed  into  such  structures;  but  this,  we  cannot
conceive,  for  then  they  must  lose  the  action  of  vessels.

In  those  animals  where  the  vascular  system  is  connected  with  a  heart,
which  may  be  called  the  termination,  as  well  as  origin  of  the  vessels,  we
find  that  viscus  to  make  so  material  a  part  of  this  system,  as  to  require
particular  attention.

In  many  of  these  animals,  we  find  two  systems  of  vessels,  the  arteries,
and  veins  ;  and  most  probably  they  exist  in  all  of  them :  there  is  also  a
third,  which  consists  of  the  absorbents.  The  heart  is  the  source  of  the
arteries,  and  the  termination  of  the  veins  and  absorbents.  The  two  first
depending  on  each  other,  form  the  circulation ;  and  the  third,  is  essential
to  both,  bringing  the  materials  which  are  to  circulate*.

The  arteries  are  to  be  considered  as  the  acting  part  of  the  vascular  sys-
tem, since  they  perform  a  variety  of  actions,  the  uses  of  which  are  very
important  in  the  animal  ceconomy..  They  may  be  called  universal,  or
constitutional,  for  their  actions  are  immediately  productive  of  health,
or  disease,,  in  the  constitution ;  and  if  they  could  be  diseased  as  a  system,

*  This  system  is  too  extensive  to  be  described,  in  the  present  work,  although  it  will  be  neces-
sary to  describe  one  use  not  hitherto  attributed  to  it,  as  it  explains  one  part  of  my  system  of
disease.-

X


1^4  Of  the  vascular  system,

that  disease  would,  of  course,  be  universal  ;  as  their  actions  are  expressive
of  health,  or  disease,  they  become  also  one  means  of  discovering  either.

There  is  no  internal  operation  in  the  machine  respecting  growth,  natu-
ral repair,  and  secretion,  that  is  not  performed  by  them  :  no  new  part  is
formed,  nor  additional  alteration  made  in  the  structure  of  natural  parts,
nor  repair  for  the  loss  of  natural  substances,  either  by  disease  or  accident,
but  is  made  by  the  arteries,  although  of  all  operations  we  know  nothing,
but  from  the  effect  produced.  These  operations  are  performed  by  the
termination  of  the  arteries,  which  may  be  supposed  to  be  of  three  kinds  :
one  may  be  called  arterial,  conveying  debelitated  blood  into  the  veins,
and  through  their  whole  length,  may  be  called  arteries  :  another  kind
consists  of  the  separaters  from  the  blood,  performing  the  different  secre-
tions :  and  the  third  contains  the  formers  and  supporters  of  the  body :
the  two  latter  kinds  I  should  not  call  arteries,  they  are  the  workers,
or  labourers.

The  absorbing  system  also  takes  a  very  active  part  in  the  animal  ceco-
nomy,  whether  natural  or  diseased,  and  seems  in  many  actions  to  be  the
antagonist  of  the  arteries ;  while  the  veins  are  much  more  passive,  being
principally  employed  in  returning  the  blood  to  the  heart.

It  is  probable,  that  every  part  of  the  body  is  equally  vascular,  although
they  may  not  all  have  equal  quantities  of  blood  passing  through  them,
which  must  arise  from  the  smallness  of  the  vessels,  and  not  from  their
being  fewer  in  number.  When  we  say  that  a  part  is  very  vascular,  we
can  only  mean  that  it  is  visibly  so,  by  having  a  large  vessel,  or  vessels,
going  to  it,  and  ramifying  in  it ;  from  which  circumstance  it  contains  a
certain  proportion  of  red  blood,  rendering  the  vessels  visible  ;  which  may
also  easily  be  made  conspicuous  by  injections.  Where  the  vessels  are
smaller  this  is  not  the  case.  When  we  say,  therefore,  that  a  part
is  not  vascular,  we  mean  it  is  not  visibly  so ;  but  still  we  must  suppose
such  parts  to  be  equally  vascular,  so  far  as  respects  their  ceconomy  within
themselves ;  but  in  such  parts  I  conceive  the  blood  to  be  more  languid
in  its  motion.  Many  parts  appear  to  be  much  more  vascular  than  they  really
are,  from  their  vessels  dividing,  and  anastomising,  and  taking  a  winding


Of  the  vascular  system,  155

course  before  they  terminate* ;  for  it  is  by  the  number  of  terminations
of  an  artery  in  a  given  space,  that  a  part  is  made  vascular,  or  not
vascular :  muscles  appear  to  be  more  vascular  than  they  really  are.
When  parts  have  another  use,  in  which  blood  furnishes  the  materials  to
be  disposed  of,  as  in  secretion,  and  respiration,  where  vessels  fitted  for
such  purposes  are  superadded,  then  parts  become  proportionably  more
vascular.  When  blood  does  not  seem  to  be  the  matter  to  be  disposed  of,
yet  if  there  are  other  operations  continually  carried  on  in  a  part,  besides
its  simple  support,  as  in  a  muscle,  which  has  both  the  power  of  con-
traction, and  considerable  sensation,  etc.  then  the  vessels  are  larger,  and
of  course  appear  in  great  numbers  :  this  is  evident  in  the  living  body,  for
if  a  muscle  is  hardly  allowed  to  act,  its  vessels  become  small,  and  it  be-
comes pale  ;  but  if  thrown  into  more  violent  action,  for  a  continuance
it  becomes  red  :  we  cannot  here  suppose  an  increase  of  vessels,  but  only
an  increase  of  size.  Thus  we  have  parts  vascular  in  proportion  to  the
quantity  of  action  they  are  capable  of,  or  under  the  necessity  of  perform-
ing :  and  this  particularly  in  parts  whose  uses  may  be  called  double,  as
the  organs  of  secretion  in  general,  brain,  and  muscles;  even  in  inflamma-
tion, and  in  proportion  as  these  parts  are  employed  in  their  peculiar  ac-
tions, they  become  to  appearance  more  vascular.  Some  animals  have
naturally  red  muscles,  without  its  being  the  effect  of  considerable  action  :
this  is  very  remarkable  in  the  hare  ;  but  the  redness  in  the  muscles  of
this  animal  may  be  intended  to  adapt  its  muscles  naturally  for  violent
exertions  at  all  times.  Muscles  are  of  different  colours,  respecting  red
and  white,  in  the  same  animal;  but  that  I  believe  is  also  in  proportion  to
the  quantity  of  action  the  parts  are  put  to.

This  effect  the  epicure  is  well  acquainted  with  ;  he  knows  that  the
wing  of  a  p»rfcridge  is  whiter  than' the  leg:  and  that  the  leg  of  a  wood-
cock is  whiter* than  the  wing.  The  veal  of  this  country  is  a  remarkable
instance  of  this ;  for  the  calf  is  hardly  allowed  to  stir,  and  the  muscles
are  white  ;  but  when  the  calf  is  allowed  to  follow  its  mother,  the  mus-
cles are  of  a  reddish  colour  :  it  may  be,  however,  remarked,  that  white

*  By  simply  cutting  into  the  spermatic  artery  of  a  bull  it  appears  to  be  extremely  vascu-
lar, though,  according  to  our  idea  of  vascularity,  it  is  as  little  so  as  any  part.


I  r6  Of  the  vascular  system.

meat  is  commonly  the  least  juicy  ;  and  we  find  it  remarkably  so  in  those
animals  which  are  fed  for  this  purpose,  because,  they  require  nothing  but
their  simple  support,  and  having  little  or  no  action  within  themselves,
they  have  but  little  waste.  Such  change  of  appearance  we  find  carried
to  a  considerable  extent  in  the  uterus,  at  the  time  of  the  menses  ;  but
much  more  particularly  at  the  time  of  uterine-gestation,  where  the  ves-
sels increase  both  in  size  and  length,  in  proportion  to  the  actions  required.
But  parts  whose  use  in  the  machine  may  be  said  to  be  passive,  as  tendon,
cellular  membrane,  ligaments,  investing  membrane,  bone,  and  cartilage,
which  last  is  probably  the  most  passive,  have  all  small  vessels,  and  of
course  but  few  that  are  visible.  As  bone,  however,  is  composed  of  two
parts,  viz.  animal  substance,  and  earth,  it  is  probable  there  may  be  more
action  required  to  form  the  latter  than  either  tendon  or  cartilage,  and
therefore  there  will  be  more  vessels.

As  a  further  proof  that  this  is  a  general  principle,  we  find  that  all
growing  parts  are  much  more  vascular  than  those  that  are  come  to  their
full  growth;  because  growth  is  an  operation  beyond  the  simple  support
of  the  part:  this  is  the  reason  why  young  animals  are  more  vascular,
than  those  that  are  full  grown.  This  is  not  peculiar  to  the  natural  ope-
ration of  growth,  but  applies  also  to  disease,  and  restoration.  Parts
become  vascular  in  inflammation  j  the  callus,  granulations,  and  new
formed  -cutis,-  are  much  more  vascular  in  the  growing  state,  or  when
Just  formed,  than  afterwards  -,  for  we  see  them  crowded  with  blood-ves-
sels when  growing,  but  when  full  grown,  they  begin  to  lose  their  visible
vessels,  and  become  not  even  so  vascular  as  in  the  other  neighbouring
original  parts,  only  retaining  a  sufficient  number  of  vessels  to  carry  on
the  simple  oeconomy  of  the  part ;  which  would  now  seem  to  be  less  than
in  an  original  part.  This  is  known  :by  injections,  when  parts  are  -in  the
growing  state,  or  are  just  grown,  and  for  some  time  after.  We  may
observe,  when  the  small -pox  is  cured,  that  the  remains  of  the  pustules
are  red,  and  continue  so  for  some  time  -t  which  is  owing  to  those  parts
being  visibly  more  vascular  than  common  :  and  those  who  have  had  the
small-pox  severely,  are,  in  general,  afterwards  more  pale  than  others,
when  those  parts  have  arrived  at  their  permanent  state. If  we  cut  into


Of  the  vascular  system .  157

a  part  that  has  had  a  wound,  or  sore,  upon  it,  which  has  been  healed
for  a  considerable  time,  we  shall  find  that  the  cicatrix,  and  the  new
formed  parts,  are  not  nearly  so  vascular  as  the  original,  which  corre-
sponds with  what  has  been  advanced ;  for  we  know  that  those  parts  are
not  equal  in  power  to  original  parts.  In  short,  whenever  nature  has
considerable  operations  going  on,  and  those  are  rapid,  then  we  find  the
vascular  system  in  a  proportionable  degree  enlarged.

The  number  of  vessels  in  a  part,  and  also  the  circulation  of  the  blood
through  them,  appears  to  keep  pace  with  its  sensibility  ;  for  first  we  find
that  most  probably  all  parts  endowed  with  vessels  are  sensible  -t  and  all
sensible  parts  are,  to  appearance,  very  vascular.  Where  any  increased
action  is  going  on,  requiring  increased  sensibility,  there  is  also  an  in-
creased circulation  through  those  vessels,  as  in  the  parts  of  generation,
during  the  time  of  coition,  more  especially  in  the  female ;  and  this  in-
crease of  vessels,  circulation,  and  sensibility  in  a  part,  takes  place  in  dis-
ease, as  is  well  illustrated  in  inflammation,  where  the  whole  seems  to  be
increased  in  the  same  proportion,  especially  the  two  last,  viz.  circulation,
and  sensibility.

These  observations  can  only  be  made  in  animals  which  have  red  blood  ;
and  best  in  those  which  have  the  most  red  blood  ;  but  it  is  not  possible  to
ascertain,  with  accuracy,  the  proportion  that  one  blood-vessel  bears  to
another,  so  as  to  know  the  exact  quantity  of  blood  each  part  may  pos-
sess ;  which  would  better  ascertain  the  action  of  the  part ;  for  they  may
be  said  not  to  be  measurable  with  any  degree  of  accuracy ;  and  therefore
such  investigation  must  be  taken  in  the  gross.

Vessels  have  a  power  of  increase  within  themselves,  both  in  diameter
and  in  length  ;  which  is  according  to  the  necessity,  whether  natural,  or
diseased.  The  necessity  appears  to  arise  from  an  increase  of  the  part  to
which  the  artery  is  going,  the  formation  of  a  new  part,  or  an  irritation.
The  first  may  be  reckoned  the  natural  increase  of  the  body  :  the  second,
the  occasional  increase  of  parts,  as  of  the  uterus,  in  uterine-gestation,
where  the  vessels  are  increased  in  width,  in  proportion  to  the  whole  solid
contents,  including  the  young  :  besides  this,  they  are  considerably  in-
creased in  length  before  they  reach  the  uterus,  which  obliges  the  sper-


i  $8  Of  the  vascular  system.

matic  artery,  in  particular,  to  be  thrown  into  a  serpentine  form  :  this  is
more  remarkable  in  some  animals  than  in  the  human  species.

Instances  of  new-formed  parts,  where  the  vessels  are  increased,  are  to>
be  found  in  the  stag,  or  all  those  of  the  deer  kind  which  cast  their  horns  ;
such  animals  having  the  arteries  considerably  increased  at  the  time  the
young  horn  is  growing,  so  that  the  carotid  arteries,  which  before  had
only  to  supply  the  head,  and  the  external  carotid,  which  before  had  only
to  supply  the  sides  of  the  head,,  now  become  larger,  and  are  continued
into  the  horn,  which  is  extremely  vascular.

After  the  separation  of  the  foetus,  or  the  full  growth  of  the  horn,  the
vessels  naturally  lesson,  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  diminished  size  of  the
parts.

It  is  curious  to  observe  how  vessels  become  enlarged  upon  any  irrita-
tion ;  not  only  the  arteries,  but  the  veins ;  and  not  only  the  smaller
branches,  but  the  larger  trunks.  This  was  evident  in  the  following
case :  I  applied  a  caustic  to  the  ball  of  the  great  toe  of  a  patient  every
other  day,  for  more  than  a  month,  and  after  each  application  the  sur-
rounding parts  put  on  a  blush ;  and  all  the  veins  on  the  top  of  the  foot,  as
well  as  up  the  leg,  immediately  began  to  swell,  and  became  large  and
full.  This  was  so  remarkable,  that  the  patient  watched  for  this  effect,,
on  the  days  on  which  the  caustic  was  applied,  from  its  happening  only
on  those  days.

In  diseases  where  there  is  an  increased  size  of  the  part,  as  in  tumors*
etc.  the  increase  of  vessels  is  no  less  conspicuous ;  and  they  have  the
power  of  dilatation,  and  increase  of  strength,  in  proportion  to  the  size  of
the  vessels ;  which  are  now  endowed  with  new  dispositions,  and  actions,
different  from  those  they  had  before.

The  arteries  often  perform  diseased  operations  in  the  body,  which  be-
come symptoms  both  of  local  and  constitutional  actions,  as  in  inflamma-
tion, fever,  etc.  for  they  are  not  only  active  in  local  disease,  but  their
action  often  becomes  a  symptom  of  a  constitutional  disease,  whether  ori-
ginal, or  arising  from  a  local  cause  ;  but  these  symptoms  become  mostly
sensible  to  us  in  those  arteries  whose  actions  we  can  feel ;  because  they
have  a  peculiar  action  in  their  diastole,  as  well  as  in  their  systole,  which


Of  the  vascular  system.  159

is  sensible  to  the  touch ;  from  which  sensation,  we,  in  many  cases,
judge  of  the  state  of  the  body  at  the  time  ;  as  also  the  state  of  the  cause,
when  it  is  local,  and  out  of  sight.  The  heart,  the  source  of  the  circu-
lation, is  also  affected  from  the  same  cause ;  so  that  its  motion,  and  the
motions  of  the  arteries,  commonly,  if  not  always,  correspond.


VII.  VALVES  OF  ARTERIES.


The arteries  arising  from  the  heart,  I  believe  in  all  animals,  have
valves,  which  are  so  many  flood-gates,  to  hinder  a  return  of  the  blood
into  the  cavities  : and  as  there  are  two  main  arteries  in  the  human  body,
so  there  are  two  sets  of  valves,  viz.  one  belonging  to  each  artery. These
are  situated  at  the  beginning  of  the  artery,  and  from  their  shape,  are
called  semilunar. Veins  have  similar  valves,  almost  through  their  whole
course. The  valves  are  inelastic,  being  similar  to  the  inner  coat  of  an
artery ;  but  the  difference  in  the  properties  of  the  valves,  and  the  arteries
themselves,  which  are  elastic,  will  be  further  considered  in  treating  of
the  use,  and  mode  of  action  of  the  valves. Each  of  these  sets  is  made  up
of  three  valves*  ;  but  in  veins,  there  are  commonly  only  two. This  dif-
ference in  the  valves  of  the  arteries,  and  veins,  is  perhaps  to  bring  the
artery  into  a  more  rounded  figure,  than  could  have  taken  place  by  two
valves only  :  each  of  these  valves  is  of  a  semilunar  form,  having  one
convex  edge,  and  the  other  nearly  straight. These  valves  are  attached  to
the insides  of  the  artery,  at  its  very  beginning,  by  their  semicircular
edge,  which  is  oblique  ;  the  points, as  it  were,  running  a  little way
into  the  artery. These  terminations  in  each  valve  come  close  to  one
another ;  but  the  loose  edges,  which  constitute  the  diameter,  are  not  cut
straight  off,  but  rounded. There  is,  besides,  a  small  body  on  each,  at-
tached to,  or  near,  the  edge,  between  the  two  points,  called  corpora-

*  I  have  found  in  the  human  subject,  only  two  valves  to  the  aorta  j  but  this  is  very  rare.


160  Of  the  vascular  system.

sesamoidea.  These  bodies  are  not  placed  exactly  on  the  edge,  but  rather
on  that  side  next  to  the  artery,  leaving  the  edge  of  the  valve  loose  :  this
situation  is  best  adapted  to  their  intended  use;  the  reason  of  the  loose
edge  being  a  little  rounded,  and  of  the  bodies  called  corpora-scsamoidea
being  placed  there,  arises  from  there  being  three  valves  to  each  artery.
Each  of  these  valves,  with  its  artery,  forms  a  pouch,  whose  mouth,  or
cavity,  opens  towards  the  artery;  and  the  convexity  of  each  of  the  valves,,
when  the  artery  is  dilated,  makes  nearly  the  third  of  a  circle,  which  is
turned  inwards,  towards  the  centre  of  the  artery,  as  well  as  towards  the
heart.  It  is  from  this  oblique  direction  in  the  attachment  that  the  valves
perform  their  office,  simply  from  the  action  of  the  heart  upon  the  blood  ;
and  the  blood  upon  the  artery.  This  is  entirely  mechanical ;  depending
on  mechanical  principles  alone,  as  much  as  the  action  of  a  joint.

I  have  above  observed,  that  the  area  described  by  the  valves-  is  the
same  with  the  artery,  when  that  vessel  is  in  its  systole,  their  outer
surface  lining  the  inner  surface  of  the  artery ;  but  the  artery  being  elastic,
its  diameter  becomes  larger  when  the  blood  flows  into  it ;  and  the  valves
being  inelastic,  their  loose  margins,  or  edges,  are  brought  more  into,
straight  lines  across  the  area  of  the  mouth  of  the  artery,  and  nearer  to
each  other,  so  as  to  make  an  equilateral  triangle.  Thus  they  are  fitted
to  catch  the  returning  blood ;  and  the  artery  re-acting  with  considerable
force  on  the  blood,  presses  on  the  valves,  so  as  to  push  them  inwards  :.
these  having  no  pressure  on  the  side  next  the  heart  become  convex  on
this  side,,  shutting  up  entirely  the  mouth  of  the  artery.  Here  then  is  an
effect  arising  naturally  out  of  a  variety  of  causes,  viz.  the  oblique  direc-
tion of  the  valves  ;  their  want  of  elasticity ;  the  elasticity  of  the  artery  ;
and  the  dilatation  of  the  artery ;  so  that  the  return  of  the  blood  does  not
open  the  mouths  of  the  valves,  and  in  that  way,  shut  up  the  mouths  of
the  artery.  To  demonstrate  this,  let  us  suppose  the  extreme  length  of
each  of  these  valves  to  be  an  inch  ;  then  the  circumference  of  the  artery,
when  in  its  systole,  will  be  three  inches  :  in  that  case  the  valves  lie  close
to  the  sides  of  the  artery,,  and  describe  a  circle  of  three  inches  circumfe-
rence, (as  in  figure  I.) ;  but  if  you  dilate  this  artery,  as  far  as  the  valves
will  allow,  which  will  be  rather  more  than  one  fifth,  the  valves  will


/'■"'


/  ffl.


-


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 6 1

run  nearly  into  straight  lines,  and  make  an  equilateral  triangle,  (as  in
figure  II.)  whose  sides  are  a  little  curved  inwards.  As  the  artery  is  filled
from  the  contraction  of  the  heart,  it  is  distended  :  and  as  it  is  distended,
the  valves  do  more  and  more  their  duty,  till  at  length,  by  the  full  dis-
tension of  the  artery,  they  are  made  to  bulge  inwards,  and  the  loose  edges,
with  the  corpora-sesamoidea,  are  pushed  further  towards  one  another ;
by  all  of  which  positions  the  area  of  the  artery  is  entirely  shut  up.

Figure  I.  shews  the  artery  in  its  systole,  with  the  three  valves,  nearly
close  to  its  sides.  The  two  black  dots  are  designed  to  represent  the
mouths  of  the  coronary  arteries,  now  covered  by  the  valves.

aaa The  circular  section  of  the  aorta.

b  b The  mouths  of  the  coronary  arteries  almost  covered  by  the  valves,

ccc The  hollow  pouch  of  the  valves.

d The  area  within  the  valves.

Figure  II.  shews  the  artery  in  its  diastole,  where  the  three  valves  run
nearly  into  straight  lines,  making  an  equilateral  triangle  of  the  area  of
the  aorta,  d  d  d.  But  as  their  edges  are  rounded,  and  the  bodies  of  the
valves  make  a  curve  inwards,  they  by  these  means  fill  up  in  part  this
triangular  space,  as  is  seen  at  f ;  and  the  corpora-sesamoidea,  fill  up  the
other  part  at  e.  In  this  way  the  whole  of  the  area  of  the  artery  is  filled
up.

aaa The  circular  section  of  the  aorta,  in  its  state  of  diastole;  being

now  larger  about  one-fifth.

bb The  mouths  of  the  coronary,  now  quite  exposed.

cccccc.  The  hollow  pouch  of  the  valves,  now  enlarged.

ddd The  circular  edges  which  fill  up  more  of  the  area  of  the  artery

than  if  they  were  straight,
c  e  e The  corpora-sesamoidea,

Y


1 62  Of  lie  vascular  system.

The  foregoing  account  is  proved  by  injections  against  the  valves ;  but  it
is  still  more  clearly  proved  that  the  diastole  of  the  arteries  makes  the
v. lives  do  their  duty,  when  it  is  injected  with  the  current  of  blood  :  for  in
proportion  as  the  artery  IS  distended,  the  valves  recede  from  the  sides  of  the
artery  :  and  il  the  artery  is  fully  distended,  the  communication  is  entirely
Cut  oil' between  the  two  pieces  of  injection,  viz.  that  which  is  within  the
heart,  and  that  which  is  within  the  artery.  It  may  be  objected  here,  that  it
will  require  a  certain  quantity  of  blood  to  make  these  valves  do  their  of-
fice: and  when  there  is  not  that  quantity,  it  must  be  done  by  regurgitation.
To  this  it  may  be  answered,  that  nature  always  keeps  a  due  proportion  ;
and  all  the  parts  depend  on  one  another:  so  that  the  quantity  of  blood,
that  is  just  sufficient  to  keep  the  animal  alive,  is  sufficient  to  distend  the
artery  so  as  to  shut  the  valves*.  The  valves  of  the  pulmonary  artery  do  not
do  their  duty  SO  completely  as  those  of  the  aorta  ;  for  in  them  we  do  not
find  the  corpora- sesamoidea  j  ami  if  we  inject  a  pulmonary  artery,  towards
the  right  ventricle,  it  does  not  so  completely  hinder  the  injection  passing
into  that  cavity:  nor  arc  the  two  portions  of  injection  completely  separated
when  the  artery  is  injected  from  the  ventricle,  as  in  the  left  side.  So
far  as  respects  injections,  the  same  observations  are  applicable  to  the
valvule  tricuspides  ;  therefore  I  believe  the  valves  of  the  right  side  of
the  heart,  are  not  so  perfect  as  those  of  the  left :  from  hence  we  may
suppose  that  the  universal  circulation  requires  to  be  more  perfect  than
that  through  the  lungs.  We  must  see  from  this  account  of  the  action  of
the  valves,  that  the  mouths  of  the  coronary  arteries  are  opened  by  the
action  of  the  heart ;  for  as  the  arteries  dilate,  they  become  more  and
more  exposed.

*  As  people  advance  in  life,  especially  men,  wc  find  the  aorta  losing  its  elasticity  :  and
as  it  is  acted  upon  with  great  force  by  the  impetus  of  the  blood,  it  loses  that  elasticity  in  the
st. i(e  i>f  its  diastole;  which  throws  the  valves  continually  across  the  area  of  the  vessels;  and
as  the  valves  in  those  cases  commonly  become  thicker,  are  often  very  irregular,  and  bony,
we  find  that  they  neither  recede  from  the  sides  of  the  aorta,  during  the  contraction  of  the*
heart,  nor  towards  it  during  the  systole  of  the  artery:  so  that  more  blood  is  allowed  to  rc-»
gurgitatc  into  the  ventricle,  than  in  a  regular  circulation.


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 6  5


VIII.  OF  THE  DIVISION,  OR  BRANCHING,  OF  ARTERIES.

As  all  the  arteries  in  animals  possessed  of  a  heart  arise  from,  or  begin
at  that  heart,  by  one,  or  two  trunks  only,  they  are  obliged  to  divide  into,
or  send  off  branches,  or  smaller  trunks,  which  again  divide  into  still
smaller,  till  at  last  the  whole  body  is  supplied  by  the  ultimate  divisions.
This  is  called  the  branching,  or  ramification  of  arteries  -,  and  is  some-
what similar  to  the  branching  of  a  tree.

This  branching  of  an  artery  does  not  depend  on  the  artery  itself,  or  on
the  powers  propelling  the  blood,  as  in  a  tree,  but  is  governed  by  the  for-
mation of  the  body  ;  that  is,  according  as  a  greater,  or  less  quantity  of
blood,  or  a  greater,  or  less  velocity  is  necessary  to  different  parts.

Various  modes  of  branching  are  made  use  of  to  answer  the  above  pur-
poses.

In  general  the  most  favourable  mode  for  the  free  passage  of  the  blood
is  adopted,  viz.  branching  with  acute  angles ;  more  especially  those
which  are  to  carry  the  blood  some  considerable  way  ;  and  still  more  so  in
those  which  are  at  a  great  distance  from  the  propelling  impulse  of  the
heart;  which  I  shall  now  more  particularly  consider.

As  the  force  of  the  blood  in  the  artery  is  stronger,  the  nearer  it  is  to
the  heart,  the  difference  in  the  velocity  of  the  blood,  near,  and  at  a  dis-
tance from  the  heart,  if  there  was  nothing  to  retard  it,  would  be  too
great  for  the  difference  in  parts;  the  near  and  the  distant  parts  being  in
many  instances  of  the  same  kind.  To  keep  up  a  velocity  sufficient  for
the  parts,  and  no  more,  nature  has  varied  the  angle  of  the  origin  of
arteries,  at  different  distances,  from  the  source  of  the  circulation.  Thus
we  find  that  near  the  heart  the  arteries  arise  by  obtuse  angles  ;  some  of
them  being  reflected,  and  the  angles  become  less  and  less,  till  at  length
they  are  very  sharp.  The  most  remarkable  instance  of  this  is  in  the
intercostal  and  lumbar  arteries  ;  because  since  they  arc  a  set  of  branches
in  the  body,  whose  length  and  uses  are  so  much  the  same,  if  there  be


164  Of  the  vascular  system.

any  difference  in  the  angles,  at  the  origin  of  the  arteries,  at  equal  dis-
tances from  the  heart,  it  must  be  made  with  regard  to  their  length,  from
the  origin  to  the  part  supplied.  We  find  a  difference  even  in  the  arteries
which  arise  from,  the  intercostals ;  for  they  are  much  more  obtuse  at  the
beginning  of  the  intercostals,  than  at  their  termination.  The  reason
why  this  is  not  so  evident,  in  all  the  arteries  of  the  body,  is,  that  there
are  so  few  arteries  on  the  same  side  of  the  body,  which  take  the  same
course,  go  to  the  same  distance,  and  have  the  same  office  :  for  some
parts  require  a  greater  velocity  than  others,  which  will  make  a  difference
in  the  origin  of  the  two  arteries,  supposing  they  should  go  the  same
length,  and  take  the  same  course.  We  see  the  same  thing  in  the  se-
condary arteries,  such  as  the  subclavian;  for  it  sends  off  its  branches  near
its  origin,  at  much  more  obtuse  angles  than  it  does  further  on.  Haller,
in  his  Physiology,  says,  That  the  arteries  arise  at  an  angle  of  forty-five
degrees  ;  which  is  the  greatest  angle  in  projection  :  but  he  did  not  consi-
der, that  in  projection  there  are  two  powers,  viz.  gravitation,  and  the
force  applied  ;  while  the  blood  in  the  arteries  has  only  one.  It  may  be
asked,  Whether  the  blood  in  an  artery  of  a  given  size,  arising  from  a
large  one,  is  sent  in  with  the  same  force  as  if  the  artery  had  arisen  from  a
much  smaller  trunk  ;  or  from  an  artery  of  the  same  size  with  itself,
whose  blood  passed  with  the  same  velocity  as  in  the  large  one  ?  We  find
small  arteries  coming  off  at  once  from  large  ones,  instead  of  being  a
third,  fourth,  or  fifth,  from  the  large  one.  Arteries  send  off  their
branches  at  a  longer,  or  shorter  distance,  according  to  circumstances ;  or,
in  other  words,  they  divide,  and  subdivide,  more  quickly  in  some  places
than  in  others.  I  believe  this  quick  division  is  more  peculiar  to  glands,
than  most  other  parts,  though  it  does  not  take  place  in  all,  as  in  the
testicle.  They  divide  also  quickly  in  the  substance  of  the  brain.  In  the
kidney,  this  is  also  remarkable  ;  they  would  seem  in  that  gland  to  be
hurrying  to  their  termination.  The  same  happens  as  soon  as  the  arteries
enter  the  substance  of  the  brain.  Other  parts  appear  to  have  the  arteries
elongated  before  they  enter  the  part,  as  the  spermatic  artery  ;  more  espe-
cially in  some  animals,  as  the  bull,  boar,  etc.  and  in  the  female,  in  the
time  of  uterine-gestation,  where  we  should  expect  the  quickest  circula-


Of  the  vascular  system*  .  16$

tion,  we  find  the  arteries  elongated  very  considerably,  which  throws
them  into  a  serpentine  course;  all  of  which  must  retard  the  blood's
motion  in  the  part.  We  also  find  arteries  playing  in  the  parts,  ramify-
ing and  anastomosing,  which  diminishes  the  velocity  of  the  blood  ;
such  as  those  of  muscles,  membranes,  etc.  We  may  suppose  from  the
foregoing  instances,  that  in  some,  a  quick  supply  of  blood  was  neces-
sary in  such  parts  :  in  the  one  for  the  drain ;  in  an  other,  for  the  sup-
port of  the  living  powers  :  while  in  others,  a  more  regular,  slow,  and
even  motion,  answered  the  purpose  better.

Arteries,  in  common,  pass  in  as  direct  lines  from  their  origin  to  their
destination,  as  possible ;  but  this  is  not  universally  the  case,  for  in  many
parts  they  run  in  a  serpentine  manner ;  so  much  so  in  some  as  to  form  a
body  of  themselves.  Thus  the  spermatic  artery  in  the  male  of  many
animals,  more  especially  the  bull,  is  so  convoluted,  as  to  form  a  body.
In  the  female  also,  the^spermatic  artery  increases  its  serpentine  course  in
the  state  of  uterine-gestation.  The  internal  carotid  artery  in  man,  and
many  other  animals,  as  the  horse,  where  it  passes  through  the  skull,  runs
in  a  serpentine  direction  ;  and  in  the  lion,  bull,  etc.  it  forms  a  plexus.
This  would  appear  to  answer  two  purposes ;  one  to  lessen  the  impulse  of
the  blood,  as  in  the  vertebral,  and  internal  carotid,  the  spermatic  artery,
etc.  the  other  to  allow  of  the  stretching  of  the  parts,  upon  which  the
artery  passes,  as  the  mouth,  or  lips,  the  uterus,  and  other  parts  of  the
body,  which  admit  of  being  stretched,  or  relaxed,  as  the  bladder,  sto-
mach, intestines,  etc.  independent  of  their  elasticity.

We  find  not  only  the  different  systems  of  vessels  communicating  with
each  other,  as  the  arteries  with  the  veins,  the  veins  with  the  heart,  to
be  continued  into  the  artery  again,  and  the  absorbents  with  the  veins,  to
communicate,  in  the  end,  with  the  whole,  but  also  the  branches  of
each  system  communicating  with  one  another,  which  is  called  anasto-
mosis.

Anastomosing  of  vessels,  is  the  opening  of  one  vessel  into  another  ;  so
that  if  one  of  them  be  prevented  from  carrying  its  contents,  the  office  can


1 66  Of  the  vascular  system.

be  performed  by  die  other.  The  most  common  mode  of  anastomosing  is,
when  two  vessels  run  into  one,  or  are  continued  into  each  other ;  or  one
vessel  opens  into  another,  from  which  others  arise  ;  but  there  is  a  pecu-
liar communication  between  the  two  carotids,  as  well  as  between  them
and  the  vertebral,  where  a  canal  of  communication  passes  directly  be-
tween them  j  and  this  mode  of  communication  takes  place  between  the
two  descending  aortas  of  some  of  the  amphibia.

This  anastomosing  is  much  more  frequent  in  the  smaller  than  the  larger
arteries. We  seldom  find  trunks anastomose  with  one  another. One
reason  for  this  is, the  great  disproportion  in  number  between  the  larger
and  smaller  arteries  ; but  the  anastomosis  is  much  more  frequent  in  the
smaller,  in  proportion  to  their  number. The  use  of  this  is  to  give  free-
dom to  the  circulation,  as  the  chance  of  a  stop  being  put  to  it  is  greatest
in  the  smaller  arteries  ; the  circulation  in  them  not  being  so  strong  ;  and
passing  through  parts  liable  to  be  pressed  upon  : this  is  readily  seen  in
the  transparent  parts  of  the  living  bodv, when  viewed  through  a  micro-
scope. In  some  parts  of  the  body  we  find  anastomosis  in  pretty  large
trunks  ; but  these  are  in  parts  essential  to  life, very  liable  to  be corn-
ed ;  or  both.
The  mesenteric  artery  anastomoses  by  large  trunks  ;  the  mysentcry  bc-
i  part  essential  to  life,  and  very  liable  to  compression,  from  indurated
compn  ssing  the  artery. In  this  case,  if  they  only  anastomosed  by
tlie  small  branches, on  the  intestines, the  circulation  might  not  be  kept
up sufficiently  to  preserve  the  gut. We  observe  the  same  thing in  the
brain  ; for  there  the  arteries  anastomose  by  large  trunks, before  thev  are
ributed  to  the  brain. The  USC  of  this  is, that all  parts  of  the  brain
'it  have  an  equal  quantity  of  blood  at  all  times,  even  where  accident
had  put  a  stop  to  the  circulation  in  any  one  vessel  ; for  the  small  anasto-
mosis  on  the  pia-mater,  would  not  be  sufficient  to  keep  up  a  due  circu-
lati  >n  ;  every  where  in  the  brain  as  I  believe  the  arteries  do  not  anasto-
in  th< ubstance  oi  the  brain  itselt. There  are  large  anastomose-  in
i hand, and foot, for  the same reason, as  in the  intestines. All the
u  ( ari  i from the anastomosing  of  the vessels  are, perhaps, not  yet
:!-. understood: general reasons  can, 1 think, be assigned for


Of  the  vascular  system.  i6y

them ;  but  these  will  not  apply  to  all  cases ;  there  is  something,  there-
fore, more  than  we  are  yet  acquainted  with.  The  absorbents,  and  the
veins,  upon  the  whole,  anastomose  more  frequently  than  the  arteries ;  yet
that  circumstance  is  reversed  respecting  the  veins  in  some  places ;  and  in
the  instances  the  uses  of  these  systems  of  vessels  are  also  in  some  mea-
sure reversed.  Where  all  the  three  systems  of  vessels  have  nearly  the
same  mode  of  action,  we  find  that  their  manner  of  anastomosing  is  some-
what similar  ;  and  probably  the  differences  might  be  easily  accounted
for.

Wherever  they  appear  to  be  simply  carriers,  then  their  mode  of  anas-
tomosing is  somewhat  similar  :  however,  the  absorbents  anastomose  more
frequently  than  the  veins  ;  and  the  veins  more  than  the  arteries ;  and,
probably,  the  absorbents  anastomose  every  where.  This  is  not  so  much
the  case  with  the  veins ;  and  not  in  the  least  so  in  some  parts  with  the
arteries.  Let  us  see  if  we  can  assign  reasons  for  all  this  variety  in  the
different  systems  of  vessels.  The  absorbents,  from  the  office  of  absorbing,
are  to  be  considered  only  as  carriers  ;  and  as  they  have  no  propelling
force  applied  to  their  contents,  and  their  coats  are  not  strong,  it  is  very
probable,  that  a  free  communication  between  vessel,  and  vessel,  should
take  place ;  upon  the  same  general  principle,  the  veins  also  anastomose;
although  perhaps  not  so  frequently  ;  and  this  difference  may  be,  because
they  have,  in. some  degree,  a  propelling  power  applied  to  their  contents;
namely,  the  action  of  the  heart.  The  arteries  having  a  very  strong  pro-
pelling power  applied  to  their  contents,  it  was  in  them  not  necessary  as
a  general  principle;  but  where  they  are  placed  in  similar  circumstances,
we  rind  them  similar  in  this  respect.

xMthough  the  anastomosing  of  vessels  is  upon  a  general  principle  very
proper,  yet  in  many  cases  it  would  appear  in  the  following  parts  to  be
very  improper.  The  arteries  do  not  anastomose  in  the  kidnies.  This
cannot  arise  simply  from  there  being  no  occasion  for  it,  on  account  of
there  being  no  lateral,  mechanical  obstruction  ;  since  from  the  same
mode  of  reasoning,  the  veins  should  not  anastomose  •  which  they  do,
very  freely  :  this  want  of  anastomosis  in  the  arteries,  therefore,  answers
some  purpose  in  the  ceconomy  of  the  part. In  the  liver,  the  branches  of


1 68  Of  the  vascular  system.

the  vena-porta  do  not  anastomose  although  the  arteries  do  in  their  smaller
branches  ;  we  may,  therefore,  suppose  some  particular  purpose  answered,
besides  free  communication  ;  and  I  believe  the  arteries  do  not  anastomose
in  the  substance  of  the  brain  j  which  makes  the  brain  appear  less  vascu-
lar than  it  really  is.  We  may  observe,  perhaps,  as  a  general  principle,  that
arteries  near  to  their  destination,  where  they  are  to  perform  their  particular
functions,  do  not  anastomose.  Thus  the  artery  of  the  kidnies,  the  vena-
porta*  ;  the  arteries  in  the  substance  of  the  brain,  do  not  anastomose ;
nor  do  the  arteries  on  the  villous  coat  of  the  intestines.

If  it  be  questioned,  whether  anastomoses  are  a  means  of  retarding,  or
accelerating  the  circulation,  I  should  answer,  that  they  appear  to  me,
to  retard  the  blood's  motion  ;  although  we  find  vessels  anastomosing  as
freely  with  one  another,  at  the  greatest  distance  from  the  heart,  as  near  to
it  ■  but  at  the  same  time  we  may  observe,  that  where  we  should  suppose  it
was  necessary  for  the  circulation  to  be  brisk,  we  find  no  anastomoses  in
the  arteries,  as  in  the  lungs,  the  kidnies  ;  and  I  believe  hardly  in  the  liver,
except  on  the  peritoneal  coat,  whose  arteries  are  continuations  of  the
hypatic  artery.

I  believe  that  the  anastomosing  of  vessels  increases  their  volume  on
the  whole,  and  therefore  allows  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  to  be  in  them,
than  if  they  did  not :  that  kind  of  net  work  too,  which  they  make,  in-
creases the  magnitude  of  the  vascular  system;  for  to  answer  this  purpose,
they  take  lateral  and  circular  courses ;  which  give  them  greater  length,
than  if  they  had  simply  passed  between  origin,  and  destination,  in  straight
lines.

The  better  to  ascertain  the  velocity  of  the  blood  in  the  arteries,  at  the
different  distances  from  the  heart,  it  will  be  necessary  to  know,  whether
an  artery  be  a  cylinder,  or  a  cone  ;  and  when  it  divides  into  any  number
of  branches,  whether  the  whole  of  these,  taken  together,  be  less,  equal,
or  greater,  than  the  vessel,  or  vessels,  from  which  they  arose ;  and,  there-
fore, whether they  hold  less,  the  same, or  more  blood. It  may  be

*  This  vessel  should  be  considered  as  an  artery,


Of  the  vascular  system.  169

observed,  that  arteries  keep  a  pretty  exact  proportion  with  each  other  j
the  branches,  with  the  trunk,  etc.  through  the  whole  system;  and  there-
fore, whatever  may  be  their  shape,  they  preserve  it  pretty  regular,  viz.  if
they  are  cylindrical,  they  are  so  regularly ;  if  conical,  the  same.  I
should  suspect,  however,  that  the  anastomosing  of  the  arteries,  in  some
degree,  interferes  with  this  regularity ;  but  it  is  probable  that  the  ultimate
branches  may  come  back  again,  and  correspond  with  the  original  trunk.
To  ascertain  this,  it  is  necessary  to  make  choice  of  arteries,  which  for
some  length  either  send  off  no  branches,  or  at  least  such  as  are  very  small,
when  compared  with  the  trunk  :  for  it  is  impossible  to  measure  with  any
degree  of  accuracy  the  size  of  branches,  and  then  calculate  their  different
capacity,  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  trunk,  from  whence  they  are  de-
rived :  and  I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  whether  an  artery
divides  or  not,  the  size  must  be  the  same  in  both  ;  for  it  is  necessary  that
the  ultimate  effect  should  be  the  same.

The  arteries  which  are  best  adapted  for  this  experiment,  are  those  of
the  placenta,  and  of  the  testicles  ;  particularly  in  the  bull.  The  carotid
arteries  in  some  animals  are  tolerably  well  formed  for  experiments  of  this
kind  j  for  though  these  do  not  give  us  the  exact  proportions  which  the
one  end  bears  to  another,  yet  they  plainly  demonstrate  which  end  is  the
largest.

The  arteries  of  the  placenta  evidently  increase  in  size,  the  nearer  they
approach  to  the  placenta ;  and  this  so  very  considerably  as  to  require  no
experiment,  unless  it  be  intended  to  ascertain  the  difference  correctly.  In
the  spermatic  artery  of  the  bull,  it  is  equally  evident;  but  as  these  ar-
teries are  much  longer  than  the  distance  between  their  origin,  and  the
parts  which  they  are  to  supply,  it  may  be  supposed  that  this  increase  is
peculiar  to  them,  in  order  to  answer  some  particular  purpose :  but  the
carotid  arteries  in  some  animals  afford  sufficient  proof  that  the  arteries  in
common  become  larger  as  they  pass  on  and  ramify  ;  for  the  carotids  may
be  reckoned  ramifying  arteries,  as  they  send  off  branches.

The  carotid  artery  of  the  camel,  among  quadrupeds,  and  of  the  swan,
among  birds,  are  very  proper  arteries  for  such  experiments.

To  be  as  accurate  as  possible,  I  injected  the  arteries  of  two  camels,  and

Z '


ijq  Of  the  vascular  system.

the  arteries  of  a  swan  ;  and  that  one  end  might  not  be  more  distended
than  the  other,  the  artery  was  well  warmed,  and  placed  in  a  perfectly
horizontal  position  :  the  pipe  was  fixed  into  the  lower  end*,  and  the  in-
jection made  so  warm,  as  to  keep  fluid  some  time  after  having  been  in-
jected :  in  this  position  it  was  allowed  to  cool.  I  made  sections  from
each  end ;  and,  that  they  might  be  perfectly  equal,  I  took  a  hard  piece
of  wood,  an  inch  thich,  and  bored  a  hole  through  it  of  the  size  of  the
artery,  so  as  to  contain  a  section  exactly  of  that  length,  having  a  moveable
button  fixed  at  one  end,  which  could  be  turned  upon  the  hole,  or  off,  at
discretion.  The  artery  being  introduced  through  the  hole,  a  projecting
part  was  cut  through,  by  a  thin  knife,  in  order  that  thi  artery  might  be
divided  at  right  angels  to  itself.  After  doing  this,  the  artery  was  with-
drawn, and  the  button  was  then  turned  upon  the  hole,  so  as  to  stop  that
end;  and  the  cut  end  of  the  artery  introduced  to  the  bottom,,  or  button:
this  piece,  so  enclosed,  was  separated  in  the  same  manner.

Having  taken  a  piece  of  the  carotid  artery  from  each  end,  which  were
of  course  exactly  of  equal  lengths,  I  weighed  them,  and  found  that  the
section  of  the  upper  end  was  one  grain  and  a  half  heavier  than  that  of  the
lower.

The  carotid  artery  of  another  camel,  measuring  three  feet  and  a  half
in  length,  was  found  to  send  off  forty-four  small  branches,  about  the
size  of  the  human  intercostal  arteries ;  with  one  as  large  as  the  ulnar.
Of  this  artery,  a  transverse  section,  of  one  inch  in  length,  being  taken
from  each  end,  and  weighed ;  that  from  the  lower  end  was  found  to
weigh  two  scruples,  sixteen  grains  and  a  half:  while  that  from  the  upper
end,  weighed  only  two  scruples,  fourteen  grains  and  a  half.

In  similar  sections  of  the  opposite  carotid,  which  sent  off  forty-seven
branches,  the  difference  in  weight,  between  the  upper  and  lower  section,
was  five  grains.

Similar  sections  from  carotid  arteries  of  a  swan  being  weighed,  the
lower  sections  were  found  to  be  three  grains  and  a  half  heavier  than  the
upper  ;  the  lower  section  weighing  thirteen  grains  and  a  half.

*  The  fixing  the  pipe  into  the  lower  end  was  rather  in  favour  of  increasing  the  size  of
this  end.


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 7 1

Had  the  lateral  branches  been  preserved  an  inch  long,  being  the
length  of  the  sections  of  the  trunk,  I  believe  each  might  have  weighed
above  a  grain  ;  and  in  that  case,  the  forty-four  would  have  been  nearly
equal  in  weight  to  the  trunk  :  should  this  be  true,  the  arteries  increase
very  considerably,  not  only  in  their  ramifications,  but  in  their  trunks.  I
imagine  if  the  carotid  artery,  in  the  camel,  did  not  send  off  any  branch
in  it's  course,  it  would  increase  in  size,  nearly  in  the  same  proportion  with
the  umbilical  artery,  or  the  spermatic,  in  the  bull.

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  as  arteries  divide  they  increase  in  size,  much
faster  than  if  they  did  not :  for  instance,  if  a  section  of  an  artery,  two
inches  long,  is  equally  divided  into  two,  the  section  that  is  the  further
from  the  heart  shall  be  heavier  than  the  other,  perhaps,  by  one  grain  ;
but  if  the  most  distant  section  had  divided  into  two  branches,  the  two,
taken  together,  would  have  been  a  grain  and  a  half  heavier ;  if  three
branches,  two  grains  heavier,  etc.

The  increase  of  size  in  the  arteries  as  they  ramify,  is  an  effect  of  the
numerous  ramifications*

From  what  has  been  already  said,  it  must  appear  that  arteries  form  a
cone,  whose  apex  is  at  the  heart :  and  if  this  be  the  case,  in  the  adult,
we  shall  find  that  it  must  be  more  so  in  the  young  subject;  and  will
every  day  become  less,  as  the  child  increases  in  growth.

The  capillary  arteries  in  the  foetus  are  probably  as  numerous  as  in  an
adult,  perhaps  more  so ;  for  we  know  that  there  is  the  same  number  of
principal  .arteries  in  each.  As  far  as  we  can  trace  them,  they  seem  to
send  off  the  same  number  of  smaller  branches  ;  and  in  many  parts  we
find  a  great  many  more  small  vessels  in  the  foetus  than  in  the  adult.

In  the  eye,  the  membrane  of  the  ear,  etc.  in  all  growing  parts,  such  as
callus,  granulations,  etc.  we  find  a  great  many  more  vessels,  than  in  simi-
lar grown  parts ;  or  in  the  same  parts,  when  completely  formed ;  not  in
proportion  to  the  size  of  the  part,  but  more  in  number.

These  are  strong  proofs  that  many  arteries  are  obliterated  in  the  adult.
How  much  more  vascular,  therefore,  must  a  child  be,  than  an  adult,  in


2  7  2  Of  the  vascular  system,

proportion  to  its  size,  when  in  a  much  smaller  compass  a  greater  number
of  arteries  are  accumulated  !

From  this  it  would  appear,  that  the  only  great  change  in  the  vascular
system,  is  elongation  of  the  vessels.  As  we  find  very  little  difference  be-
tween the  blood  of  a  fcetus,  and  of  an  adult,  it  is  natural  to  infer,  that  the
smallest  vessels  are  nearly  of  the  same  size  in  both  ;  for  the  termination
of  the  arteries,  or  what  may  be  called  the  operative  part  of  the  arterial
system,  being  intended  to  perform  the  same  functions  in  the  foetus,  as  in
the  adult,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  the  increase  is  in  the  length  of
the  whole  vascular  system ;  and  that  the  increase  in  the  size  of  the  trunks
is  in  an  uniform  gradation,  from  the  capillaries,,  towards  the  heart ;  but
never  becoming  equal  to  the  capillaries.

If  the  preceding  account  be  true,  or  nearly  so,  we  see  that  there  must
be  a  great  proportional  difference  between  the  size  of  the  two  extremes  of
the  arteries,  in  the  young  subject,  and  the  adult.  We  may  venture  to
say,  that  the  aorta  in  the  child  is  not  one-fourth  of  the  size  of  that  vessel
in  the  adult ;  and  that  the  capillaries  are  rather  larger  than  those  in  the
adult,  which  would  of  itself  make  the  whole  capillaries  in  the  foetus
more  than  four  times  the  size  of  the  aorta  in  the  same ;  and  as  these  ar-
teries are  very  short,  the  cone,  of  course,  increases  very  fast.

In  the  foetus  in  utero,  we  are  to  consider  that  the  aorta,  at  the  begin-
ning from  the  ventricle,  is  larger  than  in  the  adult,  in  proportion  to  the
quantity  of  blood  that  passes  through  the  foramen  ovale  :  and  beyond  the
entrance  of  the  canalis  arteriosus  the  aorta  is  increased  in  proportion  to
the  size  of  the  canalis  arteriosus  j  and  it  is  at  this  part  its  size  is  to  be
estimated  :  this  probably  makes  the  aorta,  beyond  the  entrance  of  the  ca-
nalis anteriosus,  twice  as  large  as  in  the  adult,  in  proportion  to  their  size;
but  the  drawback  upon  this,  from  the  body,  is  the  placenta;  for  the
placenta  is  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the  body,  disposing  of  the  blood
that  afterwards  circulates  through  the  lungs  :  however,  when  it  is  sepa-
rated, it  may  take  away  with  it  nearly  its  own  proportion  of  blood ;  al-
though I  rather  suspect  it  does  not.  But  I  do  not  suppose  it  is  equal  to
the  quantity  passing  through  the  foramen  ovale,  and  canalis  arteriosus ;
and  if  so,  then  the  body  has  the  overplus.


Of  the  vascular  system.  173

The  aorta  of  a  foetus  is,  therefore,  not  only  larger  than  that  of  an  adult,
but  larger  than  in  that  proportion  which  the  size  of  the  foetus  bears  to
the  size  of  the  placenta  :  or  it  may  be  put  in  this  view,  that  besides  the
difference  in  the  size  of  the  aorta,  in  a  young  subject,  (as  before  observed)
and  in  an  adult,  the  size  of  the  aorta,  in  the  foetus,  is  still  larger,  viz.
more  than  in  that  proportion  which  the  circulation  in  the  lungs  of  the
adult,  bears  to  the  circulation  in  the  lungs  of  the  foetus  j  which  is  proba-
bly much  more  than  that  of  the  placenta.

Experiment  on  the  arteries  of  a  child.

I  injected  the  descending  aorta  of  a  foetus,  just  above  the  diaphragm,
in  the  same  manner  as  I  did  the  carotids  in  the  camel,  and  swan,  by
which  means  I  injected  the  mysenteric  artery,  the  subject  of  experiment.

This  artery  has  a  trunk,  which  at  first  does  not  put  off  branches,  and
then  sends  off  several  •>  which  may  be  all  called,  so  many  trunks.  These
again  do  not  immediately  give  off  branches,  and  are  therefore  measur-
able with  the  trunk,  from  which  they  arise.

I  first  made  a  section  of  the  trunk  of  the  mesenteric  artery,  near  its
root,  before  it  sends  off  any  considerable  branches,  one- third  of  an  inch
in  length  ;  and  then  another  section  of  the  same  artery,  having  the  same
length,  close  to  the  origin  of  the  first  branch  :  all  the  branches  arising
from  it  being  preserved  of  the  same  length  with  the  trunk  itself.  When
they  were  weighed  in  opposition  to  each  other,  the  trunk  without  the
branches  was  found  to  weigh  thirteen  grains  and  a  half;  while  that
with  the  branches  weighed  eighteen  grains  ;  four  grains  more  than  the
trunk.  A  section  of  the  aorta,  near  half  an  inch  long,  being  made  just
above  the  origin  of  the  inferior  mesenteric  artery,  was  weighed  against  a
section  of  the  same  length,  including  the  inferior  mesenteric,  likewise  of
the  same  length ;  the  last  section  weighing  one  grain  more  than  the
other.  The  highest  amounting  to  six  grains,  the  lowest  to  seven.  A
section  of  the  lower  end  of  the  aorta,  including  a  portion  of  the  two
iliacs,  was  weighed  against  a  section  of  the  two  iliacs,  which  was  equal
in  length,  and  these  were  found  to  weigh  rather  heavier.

By  the  above  is  confirmed  what  I  formerly  asserted ;  that  an  artery,


1 74  Of  the  'vascular  system.

not  giving  off  branches,  does  not  increase  so  fast  as  another  which  does,
if  we  include  all  the  branches.

From  all  that  has  been  said,  it  appears  that  there  must  be  a  much
greater  quantity  of  blood  in  a  fcetus,  than  an  adult,  in  proportion  to  their
difference  of  size ;  and  that  the  heart  must  be  larger  and  stronger,  in  pro-
portion, to  move  this  blood  -,  which  will  probably  still  circulate  in  the
smaller  vessels  with  less  velocity.

The  whole  of  these  differences,  between  the  fcetus  and  the  adult,  must
be  intended  for  the  purposes  of  growth  ;  and  indeed  we  may  discern  the
necessity  of  it :  for  if  a  child  was  not  more  vascular  in  proportion  to  its
size,  than  the  adult,  its  growth,  we  might  conceive,  would  only  be  in  pro-
portion to  the  number  of  its  vessels ;  which  would  be  twelve  times  less
than  they  are  •  for  a  new  born  child  is  only  one-twelfth  in  size  to  that  of
an  adult.  A  child  would,  therefore,  grow  faster  and  faster  every  year ;
for  instance,  in  proportion  to  its  size,  as  the  vessels  would  become  nu »
merous  in  that  proportion.

But  this  is  not  really  the  case,  for  children  grow  less  and  less,  every
year,  in  proportion  to  the  size  ;  only  adding  its  first  year's  growth  to  it-
self every  succeeding  year ;  though,  perhaps,  not  quite  so  much,  as  the
vessels  rather  decrease  in  number.

That  this  is  the  case  may  be  proved  by  taking  the  eye  for  an  example,
which  grows  more  the  first  year  after  conception,  than  it  does  any  year
after ;  so  that  the  disproportion  between  the  vessels  of  this  part,  in  those
two  states,  is  particularly  great.

Thegrowth  of  an  animal  is,  therefore,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of
its  capillary  vessels  :  as  the  body  grows,  the  vessels  elongate  to  keep  pace
with  that  growth :  the  capillary  vessels  at  last  come  to  a  stand  ;  and  the
arterial  system  is  daily  losing  ground.

The  heart  grows  in  proportion  to  the  increased  length  of  arteries,  that
it  may  be  able  to  throw  the  blood  through  the  whole,  but  not  in  propor-
tion to  the  size  of  the  whole  body;  because  the  vessels  do  not  increase  in
number,  or  size,  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  body.  But  as  the  heart
increases  only  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  whole  vascular  system ;
while  the  body  increases  faster,  and  more,  the  heart  cannot  be  in  pro-


Of  the  vascular  system,  ij$

portion  to  the  size  of  the  whole  body  ;  hence  its  action  must  in  time  lose
the  power  of  elongating  the  body,  and  become  merely  sufficient  to  nourish
what  is  already  formed.  Perhaps  it  does  not  even  continue  to  do  so
much  j  for  it  is  not  impossible,  that  the  body  may  begin  to  decline  from
the  moment  it  ceases  to  grow  -,  the  heart  having  pushed  the  growth  of
the  body,  even  beyond  its  own  powers,  to  preserve  it  in  that  state.


IX.  OF  THE  ACTION  OF  THE  ARTERIES,  AND  THE  VELOCITY  OF  THE

BLOOD'S  MOTION.

Arteries  during  their  diastole,  which  arises  from  an  increased  quan-
tity of  blood  being  thrown  into  them,  increase  much  more  in  length
than  width,  being  thrown  into  a  serpentine  course;  therefore,  instead  of
the  term  diastole,  it  should  rather  be  called,  the  elongated  state.  It  is,
however,  the  increased  diameter  that  becomes  sensible  to  the  touch.  This,
probably,  arises  from  the  muscular  coat  opposing  the  dilatation  of  the
arteries,  while  it  cannot  the  lengthening.  The  dilatation  of  the  artery  pro-
ducing the  stroke,  is  either  felt  by  the  finger,  or  may  be  seen  when  su-
perficial ;  but  were  we  to  judge  of  the  real  increase  of  the  artery  by  this,
we  should  deceive  ourselves  ;  for  when  covered  by  the  integuments,  the
apparent  effect  is  much  greater  than  it  really  is  in  the  artery  itself ;  for
in  laying  such  an  artery  bare,  the  nearer  we  come  to  it,  the  less  visible  is
its  pulsation ;  and  when  laid  bare,  its  motion  is  hardly  to  be  either  felt,
or  seen.

The  more  an  artery  is  covered,  especially  with  solid  bodies,  the  more  is
the  pulsation  to  be  felt,  or  seen  :  thus  tumors  over  large  arteries  have  a
considerable  motion  given  to  them ;  and  have  often  been  supposed  to  be
aneurisms.

The  knowledge  of  this  fact  arising  more  from  experiment  than  com-
mon observation  in  the  living  body,  may  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  keeping
to  the  old  expression,  dilatation.


176  Of  the  vascular  system.

This  circumstance,  which  has  been  but  little  taken  notice  of,  produces
an  effect,  which  has  also  been  unobserved.  If  the  arteries  had  been  di-
lated by  the  force  of  the  blood's  motion,  as  has  been  supposed,  its  motion
should  be  much  less  retarded  than  it  is  ;  for  even  supposing  that  the  in-
creased area  of  the  artery  is  the  same  when  elongated,  as  if  dilated,  and
therefore  holds  an  equal  quantity  to  a  dilated  one,  it  must  appear  evident,
that  the  blood  will  not  arrive  so  quickly  at  the  opposite  end.

The  continual  repetition  of  the  cause  of  this  serpentine  course  obliges
the  arteries  in  many  places  to  retain  this  state,  especially  in  parts  that  do
not  yield  readily,  as  the  scull,  upon  which  the  temporal  artery  is  placed ;
and  this  retention  of  the  serpentine  course,  is  still  more  obvious  in  those
•arteries  which  have  lost  a  good  deal  of  their  elasticity.  However,  this
increase  of  the  artery  is  so  manifest,  as  to  be  felt,  or  seen  ;  and  produces
what  is  called  the  pulse;  which  must  gradually  diminish  in  proportion  as
the  arteries  divide  into  smaller  branches  j  a  small  artery  having  a  propor-
tional pulse,  and  the  arterial  system  increasing  as  it  goes  along  5  both  of
which  causes  diminish  the  velocity  of  the  blood,  render  the  diastole  less,
and  its  motions  more  uniform.

From  the  description  I  have  given  of  the  heart,  with  its  action,  and  the
parts  of  which  an  artery  is  composed,  it  must  appear  that  an  artery  is  at
all  times  full  of  blood,  which  is  moving  on  with  more  or  less  velocity;  be-
cause it  receives  it  from  the  heart,  at  interrupted  periods  ;  and  when  a
given  quantity  is  thrown  in  at  one  end,  this  will  make  a  considerable  dif-
ference between  this  part  and  the  other;  which  part  will  of  course  be
more  upon  the  stretch ;  for  although  the  artery  dilates,  yet  as  it  is  from
the  impulse  of  the  blood,  the  blood  must  move  much  faster  on  in  the
diastole  of  the  artery,  than  its  systole.  This  part  of  the  artery  will  con-
tract, and  throw  the  blood  into  the  remaining  part;  but  no't  with  the
same  force  it  was  received ;  but  still  the  artery  beyond  will  receive  it
faster,  than  it  will  give  it.  By  these  means,  all  the  parts  of  the  artery  are
brought  to  a  more  equal  state ;  for  this  additional  quantity  of  blood,  that
was  at  first  in  one  part  only,  is  in  some  degree  equally  diffused  through
the  whole  arterial  system ;  by  which  means  too,  it  is  becoming  propor-


Of  the  vascular  system.  177

tionably  slower  in  its  motion  :  but  all  these  circumstances  will  vary  ac-
cording as  the  arterial  system  consists  of  cylinders,  or  cones  ;  and  if  of
cones,  then  according  to  the  extremity,  which  is  the  base  ;  all  of  which
may  be  conjectured,  but  cannot  be  exactly  estimated.  Yet  that  the  force
of  the  heart  might  not  be  lost,  the  elasticity  of  the  great  artery,  over  the
smaller,  is  happily  applied  ;  because  it  propels  the  blood  more  forcibly
on,  between  the  strokes' of  the  heart :  for  although  we  are  to  suppose  that
the  heart,  which  was  capable  of  distending  a  part,  so  as  to  make  it  react,
and  send  the  blood  through  any  given  length,  was  also  capable  of  sending
it  through  that  length  at  once ;  yet  we  must  see,  that  by  an  elastic  power
being  applied  at  one  end,  while  this  is  gradually  lost  towards  the  other,
the  elastic  part  acts  with  a  superior  force  over  the  other,  in  the  propor-
tion as  the  other  has  less  elasticity.  This  other  being  also  less  upon  the
stretch,  is  overcome  by  that  which  is  more  so ;  which  is  always  the  end
next  to  the  heart :  for  the  muscular  part  relaxes,  requiring  hardly  any
force  to  distend  it ;  and  indeed,  as  the  muscular  power  has  contracted  the
artery,  within  its  middle,  or  stationary  state ;  and  this  more  and  more,  as
we  get  into  smaller  vessels,  the  muscular  coat  is  at  first  stretched  by  the
recovery  of  the  elastic  power  •  so  that  the  blood  passes  into  the  smaller
branches  with  much  less  resistance  than  it  would  have  done  if  the  ves-
sels had  been  elastic  in  proportion  to  their  size.  These  proportions,
however,  in  the  blood's  motion,  arising  from  the  elastic  power  of  the  ar-
teries, will  not  be  the  same  in  the  fcetus,  and  adult ;  and  will  be  still
more  different  in  the  aged  subject ;  for  in  this  last  the  elastic  power  of
the  artery  is  diminishing,  as  well  as  the  muscular,  the  coats  becoming  more
rigid :  besides  which,  the  vessels  vary  from  a  conical  shape,  (whose  apex
is  at  the  heart,  and  basis  at  their  extremities)  towards  a  cylinder ;  and
this  change  is  also  increased  by  the  loss  of  many  of  the  smaller  vessels ;
so  that  as  we  grow  up,  the  base  of  the  cone  is  gradually  diminished  from
two  causes.

The  elastic  power  will  allow  of  a  quantity  of  blood  in  the  animal,
beyond  the  natural  state  of  the  artery  ;  and  the  muscular  power  will
allow  of  a  smaller,  without  the  animal  being  affected,  although  the  mus-
cular alone  would  have  answered  both  these  purposes. Arteries  then  are

A  a


r


?


iy%  Of  the  vascular  system,

the  conducters,  and  disposers  of  the  blood :  as  conducters,  they  are  in
every  animal  above  fish,  both  passive,  and  active  ;  passive,  in  admitting
of  the  propelling  power  of  the  heart;  and  active,  in  continuing  that  power
to  the  extreme  part.

Besides  these  reasons  for  a  difference  in  the  velocities  of  the  blood,  at
different  distances  from  the  heart,  I  conceive  there  is  a  material  difference
between  the  velocities  of  the  blood,  in  those  vessels  which  carry  red  blood,
and  those  which  carry  only  the  coagulable  lymph,  and  the  serum  ;  for
where  the  red  blood  goes,  there  is  a  quicker  return,  than  where  there  is
only  the  coagulable  lymph,  and  scrum.  For  this,  there  are  two  reasons,
viz.  that  where  the  red  biood  passes,  it  is  commonly  nearer  to  the  hearty
v/hile  the  other  parts  go  to  a  greater  distance  :  but,  besides  this,  the  ves-
sels which  carry  the  red  blood,  are  larger,  and  I  believe  ramify  more
quickly  ;  the  velocity  therefore  of  the  blood,  is  greater  in  them.  Where
the  lymph  and  serum  pass  only,  the  velocity  of  the  blood  is  languid,
and  it  appears  merely  to  carry  nourishment,  such  as  in  tendons,  liga-
ments, etc.

So  far  we  are  to  consider  the  above  as  a  general  principle  arising  out  of
the  construction  of  a  blood-vessel ;  but  there  are  secondary,  or  collateral
circumstances,  acting  so  as  to  accelerate,  or  retard,  the  blood's  motion.

Since  the  solids  and  fluids  have  a  mutual  dependence  on  each  other,
and  since  the  solids  answer  various  purposes,  for  which,  quantity,  velo-
city, etc.  are  peculiarly  necessary,  we  find  that  this  intercourse  between
the  two  is  with  great  exactness  kept  up.  I  have  already  observed  that
the  angles,  by  which  branches  of  an  artery  arise,  either  retard  or  allow  of
a  freer  motion  in  the  blood ;  but  Nature  appears  to  have  taken  still  more
care  in  retarding  the  blood's  motion,  where  velocity  might  do  mischief.
She  seems  also  to  have  taken  more  care  about  the  blood's  motion  in  some
parts  than  in  others  :  as  for  example,  in  the  brain ;  a  part  which  proba-
bly cannot  bear  the  same  irregularity  in  quantity,  or  velocity,  of  the
blood,  as  many  other  parts  of  the  body.  I  should  suppose,  that  by  send-
ing four  arteries  to  the  brain,  instead  of  one,  or  which  would  have  been
more  regular,  two,  the  force  of  the  motion  of  the  blood  is  broken,  as  well
as  by  the  winding  course  of  the  internal  carotid  arteries. The  verter-


Of  the  vascular  system.  179

bra,  likewise,  are  intended,  we  may  suppose,  to  prevent  a  too  great  velocity
of  the  blood ;  both  because  the  artery  is  longer  than  it  need  be,  and  the
blood  is  hindered  from  moving  in  a  straight  line :  but  besides  the  serpen-
tine course  of  the  arteries  of  the  head,  they  pass  through  a  bone  -,  but
principally  the  carotids,  where  the  bony  canal  is  closely  applied  to  the
coats  of  the  artery  ;  so  that  there  can  be  no  pulsation  here,  but  a  greater
velocity  of  the  blood  in  those  parts,  and  probably  less  in  the  brain.
This  I  should  suppose  retards  also  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  brain  ;
because  the  blood  passing  through  a  smaller  place  than  common,  must
meet  with  a  greater  resistance,  and  therefore  a  small  quantity  must  pass
through  this  part  in  a  given  time,  so  that  the  pulsation  of  the  arteries  in
the  brain  should  be  less  than  any  where  else  :  for  we  may  suppose,  that
the  motion  is  considerably  lost  by  the  blood  coming  into  an  elastic  canal
of  the  same  diameter,  with  that  through  which  it  passed,  before  it  came
into  the  bony  canal.  If  then  this  motion  is  lost,  and  the  quantity  of
blood  is  really  lessened  in  a  given  time,  its  motion  must  be  more  regular,
and  the  pulsation  less.

In  some  animals,  the  carotid  artery  is  found  to  divide  and  subdivide,
forming  a  plexus,  and  the  branches  unite  again  before  it  goes  to  the  brain.
This  is  called,  rete  mirabile  5  and  in  animals,  which  have  it,  will  cer-
tainly break  the  force  of  the  blood's  motion  :  but  since  it  is  not  universal,
some  peculiar  purpose  must  be  answered  by  it.  It  is  not  in  the  horse,
and  ass,  for  instance;  but  it  is  in  the  lion.  Where  the  vessels  anasto-
mose, there  is  also  a  considerable  retardation  to  the  blood's  motion;  and
they  are  found  to  anastomose  a  good  deal  on  the  pia-mater,  before  they
enter  the  brain  j  but  I  believe  not  "within  its  substance.


1 80  Of  the  vascular  system.


X.  OF  VEINS.

The  vessels*  carrying  the  blood  from  any  part  of  the  body  towards
the  heart,  are  called  the  veins :  they  are  more  passive  than  the  arteries  ;
and  seem  to  be"  from  their  beginning,  to  their  termination  in  the  heart,
little  more  than  conducters  of  the  blood  to  the  heart,  that  it  may  receive
its  salutary  influence  from  the  lungs.  However,  this  is  not  universally
the  case,  for  the  vena  portarum  would  seem  to  assume  the  office  of  an
artery  in  the  liver,  and  therefore  becomes  an  active  part;  and  we  have
many  veins  formed  into  plexuses,  so  as  to  answer  some  purpose,  not  at  all
subservient  to  the  circulation  ;  but  still  in  this  respect,  they  are  not  to  be
reckoned  active.  They  differ  from  the  arteries  in  many  of  their  proper-
ties, although  in  some  they  are  very  similar.

They  do  not  compose  so  uniform,  or  regular  a  system  of  vessels,  as  the
arteries,  either  in  their  form,  or  use,  being  subject  to  considerable  variety
in  their  uses,  which  are,  however,  passive,  not  active ;  and  often  answer-
ing, from  their  construction,  collateral  purposes.

The  coats  of  the  veins,  upon  the  whole,  are  not  so  thick  as  those  of
the  arteries ;  but  differ  materially  in  different  situations  of  the  body.
Thus  they  become  thinner,  and  thinner,  in  proportion  to  their  size,  the
nearer  to  the  heart :  however,  this  is  not  equally  so  through  the  whole
venal  system,  but  principally  in  the  depending  veins,  as  those  of  the  ex-
tremities, more  especially  the  lower  in  the  human,  and  still  more  so,  the
nearer  to  the  extreme  parts.  In  such  parts  it  is  often  difficult  to  dis-
tinguish the  vein  from  the  artery :  yet  this  is  not  to  be  remarked  in  the
veins  of  ascending  parts,  or  those  coming  from  the  head,  or  such  as  are
horizontal,  especially  in  the  human  subject ;  and  in  animals  who  have  a
large  portion  of  their  body  horizontal,  there  is  little  difference  in  the
coats  of  such  veins  at  different  distances  from  the  heart.  I  suspect  the
muscular  powers  are  much  greater  in  what  may  be  called  ascending  veins,
than  either  descending,  or  horizontal :  and  I  believe,  in  general,  it  is  very

*  A  vein  is  commonly  a  canal,  especially  that  which  carries  red  blood  ;  but  in  many  ani-
mals it  is  entirely  cellular ;  yet  I  use  the  word  as  a  general  term,  when  applied  to  the  blood.


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 8 1

considerable;  for  if  we  look  at  the  back  of  our  hand,  and  compare  their
size  in  a  warm  day,  or  before  a  fire;  and  in  a  cold  day,  they  hardly  appear
to  be  the  same  veins.  They  are  not  so  strong  in  their  coats  as  the  arteries,
and  their  strength  is  in  an  inverse  proportion  to  their  size  in  the  extremi-
ties; and  the  reason  is  very  obvious.  They  are  more  dense  in  their  coats
than  the  arteries,  yet  in  the  dead  body  they  seem  to  admit  the  transu-
dation of  the  blood;  for  when  there  is  the  least  degree  of  putrefaction,  we
can  trace  the  veins  with  the  eye,  on  the  skin,  as  if  very  large,  the  cellular
membrane  and  the  skin  being  tinged  for  some  way  on  each  side  of  the
vein.  In  the  liver,  we  find  injections  escaping  the  vena  cava  hepatica,
and  getting  into  its  substance  in  a  peculiar  manner.  They  have  nearly
the  same  elasticity  with  the  arteries.

They  are  similar  to  the  arteries  in  their  structure,  being  composed  of  an
elastic,  and  muscular  substance;  the  elastic  in  some  degree  preserving  a
middle  state,  although  not  so  perfectly  as  in  the  arteries.  The  muscular
power  adapts  the  veins  to  the  various  circumstances  which  require  the
area  to  be  within  the  middle  state,  and  assists  the  blood  in  its  motion
towards  the  heart.

The  coats  of  the  veins  themselves  are  vascular ;  although  not  very
much  so.  The  arteries  arise  from  the  nearest  small  ramifying  arteries;
and  the  corresponding  veins  do  not  terminate  in  the  cavity  of  the  vein  to
which  they  belong,  but  pass  off  from  the  body  of  the  vein,  and  join  some
others  from  different  parts;  and  at  last  terminate  in  the  common  trunk,
some  way  higher.

On  laying  open  the  jugular  vein  of  a  dog,  and  closing  up  the  wound
for  some  hours,  and  then  opening  it,  I  observed  the  vessels  of  this  part
very  distinctly.  They  were  becoming  inflamed,  therefore  turgid ;  and  I
could  easily  distinguish  between  the  arteries  and  veins,  by  the  colour  of  the
blood  in  them.

Veins  have  interruptions  in  their  cavities,  called  valves.  They  are  thin
inelastic  membranes,  of  an  exact  semilunar  form;  their  unattached  edge
being  cut  off  straight,  not  curved,  as  in  those  of  the  arteries;  and  this  is,


1 8  2  Of  the  vascular  system.

because  there  are  only  two  of  them,  whose  semiclrcu inference  adheres  to
the  sides  of  the  vein.  They  are  not  placed  in  a  transverse  direction,  so
as  to  cut  the  axis  of  the  vein  perpendicularly;  but  obliquely,  as  the  valves
at  the  beginning  of  the  arteries,  making  a  pouch,  whose  mouth  is  turned
towards  the  heart.  They  are  attached  in  pairs,  the  two  making  two
pouches,  whose  edges  come  in  contact.  In  the  larger  veins  of  many
animals,  as  the  jugular  veins  of  a  horse,  etc.  there  are  often  three  valves,  as
at  the  beginning  of  the  aorta,  but  not  so  completely  formed:  these  valves
as  it  were,  cut  the  veins  into  two  at  this  part.  These  two  valves  are  not
always  of  equal  lize.  At  this  part  there  are  always  two  swellings  in  this
form;  but  I  believe  more  in  the  adult,  than  in  the  young  subject.  They
are  not  formed  from  a  doubling  of  the  internal  coat,  as  has  been  imagined ;
for  the  internal  coat  is  elastic;  but  the  valves  are  rather  of  a  tendinous
nature;  from  this  circumftance,  together  with  their  fhape,  and  their
mode  of  attachment  to  the  sides  of  the  vein,  they  always  do  their  office
whenever  the  vein  is  full,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  valves  of  the  arteries.
The  valves  of  the  veins  are  chiefly  in  the  extremities,  jugular  veins,  and
the  veins  on  the  exterior  parts  of  the  head ;  but  never  in  the  veins  of  the
brain,  heart,  lungs,  intestines,  liver,  spleen,  nor  kidnies.

Where  a  smaller  vein  opens  into  a  larger,  there  is  often  a  valvular
structure  at  the  acute  angles;  but  this  is  not  constant.

The  veins,  taken  altogether,  are  much  larger  than  the  arteries ;  but  in
the  extremities,  the  veins  that  attend  an  artery,  are  sometimes  less.  Never-
theless, there  are  commonly  two  of  them;  but  besides  these,  there  are  su-
perficial ones,  which  are  much  larger  than  those  deeply  seated.  The  best
way,  however,  of  judging,  is  by  comparing  them  with  the  corresponding
arteries,  where  there  are  no  supernumerary  veins,  as  in  the  intestines,
kidnies,  lungs,  brain,  etc.  we  find  that  they  are  larger  than  the  .arteries;
and  this  too,  where  a  con fider able  waste  has  taken  place  of  the  arterial
blood  in  the  different  secretions.

From  this  circumstance  the  blood's  motion  in  them  is  slower;  and  they
allow  a  greater  quantity  to  be  in  the  body  at  all  times.


Of  the  vascular  system*  1 8  3

There  is  a  greater  number  of  trunks  of  veins  in  the  body,  than  of  arteries,
at  least  visible  veins  ;  for  wherever  there  is  an  artery,  is  common  there
is  a  vein  ;  and  in  many  places  two,  one  on  each  side,  which  some-
times make  a  kind  of  plexus  round  it ;  besides,  there  are  many  veins
where  there  are  no  corresponding  arteries,  as  on  the  surface  of  the  body;
for  in  the  extremities  many  of  the  larger  veins  pass  superficially  ;  but  those
become  fewer  and  fewer  towards  the  trunk  of  the  body.  They  are  numer-
ous also  in  the  neck  of  the  human  subject;  but  in  some  of  the  viscera,
as  the  intestines,  the  veins  and  arteries  correspond  in  number  very  exactly.
Dr.  Hales,  however,  in  his  Staticks  says,  that  he  has  seen  a  number  of
arteries  throw  their  blood  into  one  vein,  which,  if  true,  shews  that  thers
are  more  small  arteries  than  veins.

Although  veins  generally  attend  the  arteries,  there  are  some  exceptions,
even  in  corresponding  veins,  as  in  the  piamater;  but  they  cannot  all
attend  the  arteries,  there  being  more  superficial  veins  on  the  extremities,
and  neck;  but  the  large  trunks  do.  The  supernumerary  veins  are  not  so
regular  as  those  that  attend  the  arteries,  being  hardly  alike  in  two  people

The  veins  may  be  said,  upon  the  whole,  to  accompany  the  arteries;  and
it  is  most  reasonable  that  this  should  be  the  case,  since  both  perform  the
same  office  of  conducting  the  blood,  the  same  course  muft  answer  equally
in  both  :  this,  however,  is  not  universally  the  case,  some  veins  being-  in-
tended for  particular  purposes,  as  the  vena  portarum;  some  forming
bodies,  as  the  penis,  plexus  reteformis,  and  others  varying  their  course
for  convenience,  as  in  the  brain ;  the  veins  of  this  viscus  taking  in  general
a  very  different  course  from  the  arteries,  but  this  is  principally  in  the
larger  veins  of  the  brain ;  for  the  smaller,  which  are  in  the  substance,
accompany  the  arteries.  The  intention  of  this  seems  to  be,  that  the
largest  veins,  called  the  sinuses,  should  be  so  formed  as  not  to  be  com-
pressible ;  probably  that  there  should  be  as  little  chance  as  possible  of  any
stoppage  to  the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  this  part.  But  in  some  parts
of  animals  they  vary  their  course  from  the  arteries,  where  we  do  not  so
well  see  the  intention,  because  it  is  not  the  case  in  others. Thus  the


1 84  Of  tfje  vascular  system.

veins  in  the  kidnies  of  the  cat  kind  and  hyaena  have  the  veins,  in  part,
passing  along  the  surface  in  the  external  membrane,  like  the  sinuses  in
the  brain.  Veins  seldom  or  ever  take  a  serpentine  course,  because  a  retard-
ment in  the  blood's  motion  in  them  answers  no  particular  purpose  in  the
ceconomy  of  the  parts ;  and  the  more  readily  the  blood  gets  to  the  heart
the  better.  However,  the  plexuses,  although  not  intended  to  retard  the
motion  of  the  blood,  answer  other  purposes  not  immediately  connected
with  the  circulation.

Veins,  upon  the  whole,  anastomose  more  frequently  than  the  arteries,
especially  by  their  larger  trunks,  and  more  particularly  in  the  extremities ;
for  we  often  see  a  canal  of  communication  going  between  two  trunks,
and  one  trunk  shall  divide  into  two,  and  then  unite  again.  Where  the
veins  and  the  arteries  correspond,  their  anastomoses  are  nearly  the  same.
I  believe  they  do  not  anastomose  in  the  lungs  or  liver ;  however,  the  veins
corresponding  to  the  arteries,  do  not  always  follow  this  rule;  for  the  veins
in  the  spleen  and  kidnies  anastomose  in  very  large  trunks,  while  the
arteries  do  not  at  all.  This  of  the  larger  veins  anastomosing  more  fre-
quently, is  because  a  vein  is  easily  compressed,  and  the  blood  has  a  ready
passage  into  another  ;  besides,  the  valves  render  it  more  necessary,  for
when  the  blood  has  got  past  a  valve,  it  cannot  take  a  retrograde  course,
but  may  take  a  lateral :  and  indeed  it  is  principally  in  those  veins  which
have  valves  that  we  find  those  large  anastomosing  branches ;  by  this
means  the  blood  gets  freely  to  the  heart.

As  the  area  of  all  the  veins  is  larger  than  that  of  the  arteries,  the
blood  will  move  more  slowly  through  them;  and  this  is  evident  from
every  observation  that  can  be  made.  It  may  be  observed  in  the  large
superficial  veins  in  the  extremities  of  the  living  body,  and  the  difference  of
velocity  in  the  blood  flowing  from  a  vein  and  artery  in  an  operation  is
very  great.  The  blood,  however,  moves  with  a  good  deal  of  velocity  in  a
vein  :  for  if  we  stop  the  circulation  in  the  beginning  of  any  of  the  super-
ficial veins  of  an  extremity,  and  empty  the  vein  above,  immediately  upon
.removing  the  finger  the  blood  will  move  along  the  vein  faster  than  the


Of  the  vascular  system.  1 85'

eye  can  follow*  it ;  yet  its  motion  is  so  slow  as  to  allow  the  blood  to
lose  its  scarlet  colour,  and  acquire  the  modena  red ;  and  this  more  so  as
it  passes  on  to  the  heart.

The  blood  moves  more  slowly  in  the  veins  than  in  the  arteries,  that  it
may  come  into  the  right  auricle  more  slowly  -,  for  if  the  two  venae  cava;
were  of  the  same  size  with  the  aorta,  the  blood  would  have  the  same
velocity  in  them  which  the  auricle,  as  it  is  now  constructed,  could  not
have  borne  :  but  it  may  be  probable,  that  the  blood  is  assisted  in  its  pas-
sage into  the  auricle  by  a  kind  of  vacuum  being  produced  by  the  decrease
of  the  size  of  the  ventricles  in  their  contraction.

From  the  number  of  anastomosing  branches,  especially  by  larger  trunks,
from  the  blood  being  liable  to  temporary  obstructions  in  many  places,  and
and  also  moving  with  little  force,  its  course  becomes  often  very  irregular,
and  undetermined •,  much  more  so  than  in  the  arteries.

The  first  cause  of  the  blood's  motion  in  a  vein  of  a  quadruped,  is  the
force  of  the  heart ;  for  I  think  we  must  suppose  that  the  heart  can,  and
does  carry  on  simple  circulation  ;  because  in  paralytic  limbs,  where  volun-
tary muscular  action  is  totally  lost,  and  where,  I  conceive,  the  involuntary
is  very  weak,  the  circulation  is  continued,  although,  I  believe,  with  much
less  velocity  than  in  perfect  and  sound  parts  :  besides,  we  have  observed,
that  the  arteries  continue  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  them  where  the  heart
either  fails  to  do  it,  or  where  an  increased  motion  may  be  wanted.  The
arteries,  therefore,  will  assist  the  heart  in  propelling  the  blood  through  the
veins  ;  however,  it  is  assisted  by  collateral  causes.  The  second  cause,  is
their  muscular  contraction  ;  which  most  probably  is  in  the  direction  of  the
blood's  motion,  assisted  by  lateral  pressure  of  all  kinds ;  because  the
valves  will  favour  this  course  wherever  they  are.  However,  as  the  valves
are  not  universal,  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  some  veins  must  be  carried
on  without  them,  and  therefore  they  are  not  absolutely  necessary.

Since  we  see  the  veins  afluming  the  office  of  arteries  in  the  liver  of  qua-
drupeds, birds,  amphibia,  and  fish,  and  much  more  so  in  many  of  the  infe-
rior orders  of  animals,  the  motion  of  whose  blood  is  first  derived  from  the
heart,  we  must  suppose  that  veins  have  considerable  power  in  carrying  on

Bb


1 86  Of  the  vascular  system.

the  circulation  ;  but  the  resistance  being  continually  removed  at  their  ter-
mination into  the  heart,  will  direct  and  assist  the  blood's  motion  in  that
direction,  more  especially  when  influenced  by  the  action  of  the  vessels
themselves,  or  any  lateral  pressure.  In  those  veins  which  are  accompanied
by  the  arteries,  the  pulsation  of  the  artery  assists  in  propelling  the  blood
towards  the  heart ;  more  especially  where  there  are  two  or  more  attending
an  artery.

When  treating  of  the  motion  of  the  blood,  in  the  arteries,  I  observed
that  its  motion  was  not  in  an  uniform  stream,  but  interrupted,  which
arose  from  the  heart's  action ;  but  as  it  receded  from  that  viscus,  that  its
motion  gradually  became  more  uniform,  till  at  last  it  was  nearly  a  continued
stream.  However,  it  is  not  certain,  but  an  alternate  accelerated  motion
is  continued  into  the  veins,  immediately  from  the  heart,  although  it  may
not  be  an  easy  undertaking  to  ascertain  this :  for  {imply  observing  an  ac-
celerated motion  in  the  blood  of  the  veins,  more  especially  the  small  ones,
does  not  prove  that  this  was  an  alternate  increase  immediately  from  the
arteries.

Every  artery  has  a  pulsation  in  itself,  immediately  from  the  heart ;  but
a  secondary  vein,  or  one  that  is  a  third  or  fourth  in  order  of  size  cannot,
because  it  has  more  than  one  cause  acting  upon  it :  for  such  vein  is  receiv-
ing the  impulse  of  the  heart  at  very  different  times,  owing  to  the  larger
trunk  receiving  blood  by  a  number  of  smaller  veins  that  come  from  a  va-
riety of  parts  :  so  that  if  the  trunk  was  to  receive  it  by  starts  from  the
smaller  veins,  it  would  only  be  a  tremor,  or  confused  motion.  This  is  a
reason  why  this  cause  could  produce  none  in  the  secondary  veins.  The
fact  is,  however,  that  there  is  a  pulsation  in  the  veins  ;  for  when  we  bleed
a  patient  in  the  hand,  or  foot,  we  evidently  see  a  strong  jet,  much  more
in  some  than  in  others  ;  and  much  more  here  than  in  the  bend  of  the  arm.
The  query  is,  Does  this  arise  from  the  immediate  stroke  of  the  heart ;  or
is  it  by  the  lateral  prefTure,  occasoned  by  the  swell  of  the  arteries  ?  To
ascertain  this  the  better,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  several  things :  we  may
remark  that  the  pulsation  in  the  veins  is  more  in  some  parts  than  in  others :
thus  I  should  suppose  it  was  more  in  the  veins  of  the  kidney,  spleen,  lungs
and  brain,  especially  the  last,  than  in  many  other  parts :  but  this  from  the


Of  the  vascular  system.  187

lateral  swell  of  the  arteries  cannot,  from  the  above  observations,  affect  all
parts  alike ;  for  the  veins  on  the  back  of  the  hand  being  superficial,  and
not  surrounded  with  vascular  parts,  could  not  be  affected  by  arteries :  but
still  it  may  arise  from  the  lateral  swell  of  the  smaller  arteries ;  and  this
acceleration,  given  to  the  blood's  motion  in  the  smaller  veins,  is  carried
to  those  on  the  back  of  the  hand.  But  I  think  I  have  seen  the  difference
in  the  projection  so  great,  that  it  hardly  could  arise  from  that  cause
alone  :  and,  indeed,  if  this  was  the  only  cause,  we  should  have  it  in  some
degree  in  every  vein  ;  for  every  vein  is  so  far  surrounded  as  to  be  in
some  measure  affected  from  the  swell  of  the  arteries  of  the  part :  but  we
certainly  do  not  perceive  it  in  so  great  a  degree  in  the  bend  of  the  arm.
The  larger  veins,  near  to  the  heart,  have  a  pulsation  which  arises  from
the  contraction  of  the  heart  preventing  the  entrance  of  the  blood  at  that
time,  and  producing  a  stagnation.  This  I  saw  very  evidently  in  a  dog
whose  chest  I  opened,  and  produced  artificial  breathing :  but  I  could  not
say  whether  this  arose  from  the  contraction  of  the  auricles,  ventricles,  or
both  :  but  the  vena  cava  superior  has  a  contraction  in  itself,  in  both  dog
and  cat,  and,  probably,  in  the  human  subject.  Even  breathing  produ-
ces a  stagnation  near  the  thorax  -y  for  during  inspiration  the  veins  readily
empty  themselves ;  but  in  expiration  there  is  a  degree  of  stagnation.
Coughing,  sneezing,  or  straining,  in  any  way  where  the  thoracic  and  ab-
dominal muscles  are  concerned,  produces  this  effect.

I  think  it  is  probable,  that  where  there  is  an  universal  action  of  the
vascular  system,  the  action  of  the  arteries  and  veins  is  alternate.  That
when  the  arteries  contract,  as  in'  many  fevers,  the  veins  rather  dilate,
more  especially  the  larger.


C  189  J
PART  II.

CHAPTER  I.
UNION  BT  THE  FIRST  INTENTION


1  MAY  observe,  that  all  alterations  in  the  natural  dispositions  of  a  body
are  the  result  either  of  injury  or  disease;  and,  that  all  deviations  from  its
natural  actions  arise  from  a  new  disposition  being  formed.

Injury  is  commonly  simple;  disease  more  complicated.

The  dispositions  arising  from  these  are  of  three  kinds ;  the  firft,  is  the
disposition  of  restoration  in  consequence  of  some  immediate  mischief,  and
is  the  most  simple.

The  second  is  the  disposition  arising  from  necessity;  as  for  instance,
that  vvhich  produces  the  action  of  thickning  parts,  of  ulceration,  etc.

This  is  a  little  more  complicated  than  the  former,  as  it  may  arise  both
from  accident  and  disease,  and  therefore  becomes  a  compound  of  the  two.

The  third  is  the  disposition  in  consequence  of  disease;  which  is  more
complicated  than  either,  as  diseases  are  infinite.  Yet  many  local  diseases  al-
though complex  in  their  natures,  are  so  simple  in  their  extent,  as  to  allow
the  removal  of  the  diseased  part,  becoming  when  that  is  done,  similar  to
many  accidents.

As  disease  is  a  wrong  action  of  the  living  parts,  the  restoration  to  health
muft  first  consist  in  stopping  the  diseased  dispostions  and  actions,  and
then  in  a  retrograde  motion  towards  health.

In  treating  systematically  of  such  complaints  as  are  the  object  of  sur-
gery, we  should  always  begin  with  the  most  simple,  and  advance  gradually


190  Union  by  the  firjl  intention.

to  the  more  complicated,  by  which  means  we  shall  be  more  clearly
understood.

There  are  many  complaints  requiring  the  attention  of  the  surgeon,
which  cannot  be  called  disease,  because  having  been  produced  by  some-
thing foreign  to  the  body,  as  in  accidents,  they  are  to  be  considered  as  a
violence  committed  upon  it,  altering  in  some  degree  the  structure  of  parts,
and  consequently  interrupting  the  natural  operations  already  described.

The  parts  so  hurt  not  being  able  to  pursue  their  original  or  natural
mode  of  action,  are  obliged  to  deviate  from  it;  and  this  deviation  will  vary
according  to  the  nature  of  the  violence,  the  nature  of  the  part,  and  the
state  of  the  constitution  at  the  time.

An  alteration  in  structure  requires  a  new  mode  of  action  for  its  resto-
ration ;  as  the  act  of  restoration  cannot  be  the  same  with  what  was  na-
tural to  the  parts  before  any  alteration  had  taken  place.

The  alteration  of  structure  by  violence,  requires  only  the  most  simple
change  in  the  natural  action  of  the  part  to  restore  it ;  and  of  course  the
most  simple  method  of  treatment  by  art,  if  it  be  such  as  to  require  any
assistance  at  all ;  for  there  are  many  accidents  where  none  is  necessary.

It  will  be  proper  to  observe  here,  that  there  is  a  circumstance  attending
accidental  injury  which  does  not  belong  to  disease,  viz.  that  the  injury
done,  has  in  all  cases  a  tendency  to  produce  both  the  disposition  and  the
means  of  cure.

The  operations  of  restoration  arise  naturally  out  of  the  accident  itself  j
for  when  there  is  only  a  mechanical  alteration  in  the  structure,  the  sti-
mulus of  imperfection  taking  place,  immediately  calls  forth  the  action  of
restoration;  but  this  is  contrary  to  what  happens  in  disease;  for  disease  is
a  disposition  producing  a  wrong  action,  and  it  must  continue  this  wrong
action  till  the  disposition  is  stopped,  or  wears  itself  out;  when  this  salu-
tary effect,  however,  has  once  taken  place,  the  state  of  the  body  becomes
similar  to  that  in  a  simple  accident,  viz.  a  consciousness  of  imperfection
is  excited,  which  produces  the  action  of  restoration.

In  injuries  arising  from  accident,  we  have  hitherto  supposed  that
the  parts  have  no  tendency  to  any  diseased  action,  independent  of  the
accident  -t  for  if  they  have,  it  is  probable  that  such  a  tendency  may  be


Union  by  the  firjl  intention,  191

stronger  than  the  disposition  for  restoration,  and  in  that  case  they  will
fall  into  the  peculiar  diseased  action,  as  was  explained  when  treating  of
susceptibility.  Let  us  take  the  scrophula  and  the  cancer  as  examples,
and  we  shall  find,  that  if  a  part  be  hurt,  which  has  a  strong  tendency  to
scrophula,  it  will,  most  probably  run  into  the  scrophulous  mode  of  action,
in  preference  to  that  of  restoration;  and  therefore,  we  have  many  joints,
when  injured,  assuming  the  scrophulous  action,  called  white  swelling;  or
if  a  woman,  beyond  thirty  years  of  age,  receives  a  blow  on  the  breast,  it  is
more  likely  to  acquire  the  cancerous  mode  of  action,  than  that  of  restora-
tion ;  which  should  be  well  distinguished  from  what  is  immediately  conse-
quent, viz.  the  inflammation;  for  on  this  depends  a  knowledge  of  diseases.

Although  accident  may  be  said  to  produce  an  effect  on  a  part  (what-
ever that  effect  may  be)  which  has  a  tendency  to  its  own  cure,  yet  there
are  often  not  only  immediate  consequences  arising  from  that  effect,  as  in-
flammation; and  again,  the  consequences  of  this  inflammation,  as  suppu-
ration; but  the  basis  of  diseases  are  also  frequently  laid  by  it,  not  by  pro-
ducing them  immediately  or  naturally,  but  by  exciting  some  susceptibi-
lity of  the  constitution,  or  of  a  part,  into  a  disposition  for  a  disease,  which
may  be  latent  for  a  considerable  time,  and  then  come  into  action.

Thus  scrophula,  cancer,  etc.  often  arise  from  accident,  even  where  the
parts  in  consequence  of  the  injury  have  gone  through  the  immediate  and
the  secondary  stages  of  a  cure.

Those  effects  of  accident  which  arise  from  the  nature  of  the  parts  hurt,
may  be  divided  into  such  as  take  place  in  sound  parts,  and  such  as  affect
parts  already  diseased.  The  first  is  what  I  shall  at  present  treat  of,  the
second,  being  connected  with  disease,  is  not  to  our  present  purpose.

The  injuries  done  to  sound  parts,  I  shall  divide  into  two  sorts,  ac-
cording to  the  effects  of  the  accident.

The  first  kind  consists  of  those  in  which  the  injured  parts  do  not  com-
municate externally,  as  concussions  of  the  whole  body,  or  of  particular
parts,  strains,  bruises,  and  simple  fractures,  either  of  bone  or  of  tendon,
which  form  a  large  division.  The  second  consists  of  those  which  have
an  external  communication,  comprehending  wounds  of  all  kinds,  and
compound  fractures.


1 92  Union  by  the  Jirjl  intention.

Bruises  which  have  destroyed  the  life  of  the  part,  may  be  considered  as
a  third  division,  partaking,  at  the  beginning,  of  the  nature  of  the  first,  but
finally  terminating  like  the  second.


I.  OF  INJURIES,  IN  WHICH  THERE  IS  NO  EXTERNAL  COMMUNI-
CATION.

The  injuries  of  the  first  division  in  which  the  parts  do  not  communicate
externally,  seldom  inflame  ;  while  those  of  the  second  commonly  both
inflame  and  suppurate.  The  same  operations,  however,  very  often  take
place  in  both,  though  the  order  in  which  they  happen  is  reversed ;  the
first  becoming  like  the  second,  by  inflaming  and  suppurating;  and  the
second  being  in  many  cases,  when  properly  treated,  brought  back  to  a
resemblance  of  the  first,  and  united  by  the  first  intention ;  by  which  in-
flammation and  suppuration  are  prevented.  But  when  the  life  of  a  part
has  been  destroyed  by  the  accident,  it  must  necessarily  suppurate;  and
therefore  these  injuries  will  be  rendered  similar,  in  this  respect,  to  those
of  parts  which  communicate  immediately,  and  have  not  been  united  by
the  first  intention.

That  injury  which  in  its  nature  is  the  most  simple,  and  yet  calls  forth
the  actions  of  the  part  to  recover  from  it,  is  a  degree  of  concussion*,  where
the  only  effect  produced  is  a  debility  of  the  actions  or  functions  of  the  whole
or  part,  similar  to  that  occasioned  by  a  bruise,  in  which  the  continuity
of  the  substance  is  not  interrupted;  in  such  a  state  the  parts  have  little  to
do,  but  to  expand,  and  reinstate  themselves  in  their  natural  position,  ac-
tions, and  feelings;  and  this  is  what  happens  in  concussion  of  the  brain.

The  rupture  of  a  small  blood-vessel  is,  perhaps,  the  next  in  order  of  v
simplicity; where the  continuity  of  the  part  is broken,  extravasation
takes  place,  and  the  blood  is  diffused  into  the  common  cellular  mem-
brane, into  the  interstices  of  some  part,  or  into  a  circumscribed  cavity.
But  should  the  vessel  be  either  very  large,  or  essential  to  life,  such  as  are

*  Here  I  mean  concussion  as  a  general  term,  not  confining  it  to  the  brain.


Union  by  the  jirfl  intention.  193

femoral,  bracheal,  or  coronary  arteries;  or  should  the  rupture  take  place
in  a  vital  part,  as  the  brain,  or  in  interstices  or  cavities  belonging  to  a
vital  part,  as  in  the  cavities  of  the  brain,  or  pericardium,  in  all  such  cases
the  injury  may  kill  from  the  extravasation  alone,  however  inconsiderable
may  be  the  original  mischief.

The  operation  of  restoration  in  this  case,  when  the  vital  parts  are  not
concerned  or  disturbed,  consists  first  in  the  coagulation  of  the  extravasated
blood  between  the  ruptured  parts,  laying,  as  it  were,  the  foundation
of  union,  next  in  closing  the  ruptured  vessel,  or  in  promoting  its  inoscu-
lation, and  sometime  after  in  bringing  about  an  absorption  of  the  super-
fluous extravasated  blood.  If  the  vessel  close,  that  effect  is  produced  by
the  muscular  contraction  of  its  coats;  but  in  what  way  it  inosculates,
whether  by  the  two  orifices  when  opposed  having  a  mutual  attraction,
and  instead  of  contracting  the  two  portions  of  the  ruptured  vessel  elon-
gating, so  as  to  approach  each  other  reciprocally  and  unite*  ;  or  whether
a  new  piece  of  vessel  is  formed  in  the  intermediate  coagulable  lymph,  is
not  easily  determined.

Inosculation,  however,  can  only  take  place  where  the  extent  of  the
parts  divided  is  not  great,  and  the  opposite  surfaces  remain  near  each
other;  but  even  then  it  is  most  probable  that  we  must  in  part  ascribe
to  another  mode  of  union  the  communication  of  vessels  which  takes  place
between  the  two  divided  surfaces;  for  where  inosculation  does  not,  or  can-
not take  place,  the  union  of  the  ruptured  vessels  is  produced  by  the  coa-
gulation of  the  extravasated  blood  of  this  part,  which  becomes  vascular.

*  Inosculation  is  a  term  commonly  used  by  writers,  but  whether  it  was  derived  from
theory  or  observation  is  not  material.  The  very  few  instances  where  it  can  be  obferved,  to-
gether with  the  want  of  accuracy  in  thofe  who  first  introduced  the  term,  would  incline  me  to
think  that  it  arofc  from  theory,  or  opinion  only.  I  never  could  get  an  opportunity  of  ob-
serving it  in  all  my  experiments,  and  observations  on  inflammation,  except  in  the  coats  of  the
eye.  In  many  inflammations  of  that  organ,  we  find  an  artery  or  arteries  passing  from  the
tunica  conjunctiva  to  the  cornea,  and  ramifying  on  that  part.  These  have  been  often  cut
across  to  prevent  the  influx  of  blood ;  the  two  ends  are  seen  to  shrink,  but  in  a  little  time  they
are  again  perceived  to  unite,  and  the  circulation  to  be  carried  on  as  before.  In  this  there
can  be  no  deception ;  and  to  perform,  therefore,  such  an  operation  effectually,  a  part  of  the
vessel  should  be  removed.

Cc


J  94  Union  by  the  first  intention.

That  the  blood  becomes  vascular,  is  clearly  shewn  in  the  case  of  the
blood  extra vasa ted  on  the  testicle.

The  superfluous  extra vasated  blood  is  taken  up  by  the  absorbents,  by
which  means  the  whole  is  reinstated  as  much  as  it  is  in  the  power  of  the
parts  to  do  it.  I  may  observe  here,  that  the  power  of  recovery  in  the
arteries  is  greater  nearly  in  proportion  to  the  smallness  of  their  size,  which
is  combined  with  several  causes,  viz.  their  distance  from  the  heart,  their
elasticity,  their  division  into  smaller  branches,  and  their  accumulated  dia-
meters becoming  larger,  which  allows  them  to  recover.  Secondly,  there  is
an  increased  power  within  the  smaller  artery  itself  abstracted  from  the
above  circumstances.

This  includes  a  great  variety  of  cases,  and  the  most  simple  difference
which  can  happen  between  them  will  be  owing  to  the  magnitude  of  the
ruptured  parts,  or  to  a  difference  in  the  parts  themselves ;  or  to  the  mag-
nitude of  the  injury ;  or  to  a  difference  in  the  effects.  It  will  comprehend
simple  fractures  of  all  kinds,  broken  tendons,  as  is  often  the  case  with  the
tendo-achilles -,  even  many  injuries  of  the  brain  producing  extravasated
blood,  which  is  probably  the  only  way  in  which  the  brain  can  be  torn
when  there  is  no  fracture.

Some  of  these  will  often  require  art  to  reinstate  them  in  the  natural
position,  out  of  which  they  may  have  been  put  by  the  accident,  or  by  some
peculiar  circumstance  attending  the  nature  of  the  part,  as  we  see  in  a  frac-
ture of  the  patella,  or  broken  tendon,  where  the  upper  part  being  too  far
pulled  up  by  the  muscles,  it  must  be  reinstated  by  thehand  of  the  surgeon,
to  bring  the  parts  into  a  situation  more  favorable  to  their  recovery.

But  extravasations,  even  from  the  most  simple  accidents,  are  often  so
situated  as  to  obstruct  the  actions  of  life;  as  for  instance,  in  that  affection
of  the  brain,  which  is  called  apoplexy.  The  same  thing  happens  in  ex-
travasations into  the  pericardium,  or  into  any  of  the  other  vital  parts,
where  little  can  be  done,  although  much  is  wanted.  In  many  other
parts,  where  the  actions  of  life  cannot  be  affected,  yet  the  extravasations
are  often  too  considerable  to  allow  the  parts  to  go  through  their  proper
modes  of  restoration. The  quantity  of  exravasated  blood  being  often  so


Union  by  the  Jirst  intention.  195

large  as  to  distend  the  parts,  and  form  a  kind  of  tumor,  called  ecchymosis,
of  which  I  shall  now  treat.

The  extravasated  blood  in  such  cases  being  the  only  visible  complaint,
to  remove  it  is  the  cure,  which  may  be  effected  by  absorption ;  or,  if  ne-
cessary, by  an  operation.

An  ecchymosis  we  may  consider  as  of  two  kinds,  one  in  which  the
blood  coagulates  when  extravasated,  the  other  where  it  remains  fluid ;  but
this  distinction  makes  little  difference  in  the  disease  itself,  and  of  course
little  in  the  mode  of  treatment;  it  should  be  observed,  however,  that  the
first  kind,  for  the  most  part,  terminates  well ;  while  the  second  sometimes
inflames  and  suppurates.

When  these  injuries  get  well  by  the  absorption  of  the  blood,  the  cure
is  gradual,  and  often  takes  a  considerable  time ;  but  if  the  tumors  become
less  and  do  not  inflame,  they  should  be  allowed  to  go  on  to  perform  their
own  cure;  and  even  where  inflammation  takes  place,  that  should  be  per-
mitted to  advance  to  suppuration,  and  the  tumors  to  threaten  bursting
before  they  are  opened  by  art,  or  what  I  believe  would  be  still  better  prac-
tice, they  should  be  left  to  open  of  themselves.

In  some  instances,  a  blow  the  cause  of  the  ecchymosis,  may  have  in-
jured the  superficial  parts  or  skin  so  much  as  to  produce  inflammation ;
and  under  such  circumstances  I  should  recommend  the  case  to  be  treated
as  an  inflammation  arising  from  any  other  cause,  without  paying  attention
to  the  blood  underneath.  It  often  happens  that  the  blow  has  deadened
the  skin  over  this  blood,  which  deadened  part,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,
must,  in  a  certain  time,  afterwards  separate  from  the  living*

Where  this  has  taken  place,  and  the  extravasated  blood  haa  coagulated,
it  has  often  been  found  to  remain  in  the  cavity,  as  a  mere  extraneous  body,
without  acting,  and  without  even  allowing  the  stimulus  of  an  exposed
surface,  or  of  an  imperfect  cavity  to  take  place.  The  edges  of  the  skin
all  round  shewing  the  disposition  to  contract  over  this  blood,  as  if  it  was
a  living  part  to  be  preserved,  nothing  has  seemed  to  be  wanting  to  finish
the  cure  but  the  blood  being  alive  with  due  powers  of  action.

In  these  cases  the  common  practice  has  been  to  scoop  out  the  blcod


196  Union  by  the  first  intention.

and  distend  the  internal  surface  with  warm  dressings  to  stimulate  it  to  in-
flammation, etc.  and  a  sore  being  the  consequence  of  this  method  it  goes
on  as  sores  commonly  do.  But  in  other  cases  where  the  opening  leading
to  the  coagulated  blood  has  been  very  small,  I  have  seen  that  without  any
other  means  being  used  the  blood  has  been  gradually  squeezed  out  of  the
orifice  by  the  contraction  of  the  surrounding  parts,  till  the  whole  cavity
became  so  much  contracted  as  to  contain  no  more  than  what  seemed
to  serve  as  a  bond  of  union  to  the  parts  ;  and  thus  the  cure  has  been
completed  without  further  trouble.  The  following  case  was  treated  in
this  way.

CASE.

Mrs.  B — t  fell  backwards  and  pitched  upon  a  pail  which  was  behind
her,  and  the  left  labium  pudendi  struck  against  its  handle  with  the  whole
weight  of  her  body.

Within  five  minutes  after  the  accident,  the  bruised  part  swelled  to  as
great  degree  as  the  skin  would  allow;  from  which  sudden  appearance  of
the  swelling,  and  the  feeling  of  fluctuation,  I  concluded  that  blood  had
been  extravasated  by  the  rupture  of  some  small  artery.  I  bled  her,
and  desired  a  poultice  to  be  applied  to  the  part,  in  order  to  keep  the  skin
as  easy  as  possible  under  such  distention.

Believing  the  tumor  to  arise  from  extravasated  blood,  I  did  not  chuse  to
open  it,  that  the  bleeding  might  be  sooner  stopped  by  the  prefTure  of  the
extravasated  blood  against  the  sides  of  the  cavity.  Some  hours  after  the
accident  the  skin  burst,  and  a  good  deal  of  blood  came  away.  On  ex-
amining the  wound  I  found  the  opening  of  considerable  size,  leading  into
a  cavity  as  large  as  the  egg  of  a  goose,  and  filled  with  coagulated  blood,
which  I  did  not  remove  for  the  reason  given  above,  that  it  might  assist  in
stopping  the  vessels  which  were  still  bleeding.  The  poultice  was  conti-
nued, the  bleeding  gradually  became  less;  and  every  time  I  examined  the
part,  1  found  the  cavity  diminished,  but  still  filled  with  coagulated  blood,
which  continued  to  be  pushed  out  of  the  wound,  and  after  some  time
a  slough  came  ofF  from  the  bruised  skin,  which  enlarged  the  size  of
the  wound.  About  a  fortnight  after  the  accident  the  parts  were  all  so
much collapsed,  as  to  have  forced  out  the  blood  entirely,  and  there


Union  by  the  first  intention.  197

seemed  only  a  superficial  sore,  not  above  an  inch  long  and  half  an
inch  wide.  What  may  it  be  supposed  would  have  been  the  consequence,
if  I  had  enlarged  the  opening,  scooped  out  the  blood  and  dressed  the  part
with  lint,  or  any  other  application  I  might  think  proper?

The  effect  of  such  treatment  would  certainly  have  been  a  large  sore,
nearly  of  the  same  size  with  the  cavity;  and  the  sides  of  the  cavity  would
have  inflamed  and  suppurated.  '  Is  there  not  reason  to  believe  that  the
coagulated  blood,  by  remaining  in  the  wound,  prevented  inflammation
over  the  whole  surface,  and  allowed  the  parts  to  contract  to  their  natural
position,  so  as  to  leave  no  other  sore  than  that  where  the  skin  had  burst
and  sloughed  ?

This  practice  should  be  generally  followed  in  such  cases  of  ecchymosis.

The  second  species  of  ecchymosis  is  that  in  which  the  blood  has  not
coagulated  but  remains  fluid.  This  case,  although  it  also  frequently  oc-
curs, does  not  always  terminate  so  well  as  the  former,  nor  allow  of  such
a  salutary  termination,  where  an  opening  has  been  made,  either  by  the  ac-
cident, or  by  art;  for  then  suppuration  will  be  produced  all  over  the
cavity;  more  caution  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  prevent  an  opening.  It  has
often  the  appearance  of  an  incysted  tumor;  but  being  an  immediate  con-
sequence of  some  accident  upon  the  part,  its  nature  becomes  readily
understood,  though  sometimes  from  its  situation  it  has  the  symptoms  of
an  aneurism  attending  it;  neither  does  the  cause  of  it  contradict  this  idea.

If  formed  over  a  large  artery  the  tumor  will  be  attended  with  a  pulsa-
tion ;  but  when  from  this  cause  it  cannot  be  made  to  subside  by  pressure,
yet  it  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  supposed  harmless,  as  in  fact  it  requires  to  be
treated  with  great  caution.

If  the  pulsation  should  arise  from  the  real  influx  of  blood,  this  will
soon  be  shewn  by  the  increase  of  the  tumor,  and  will  lead  to  the  proper
treatment,  viz.  opening  it  and  stopping  the  bleeding  vessel.  This  seldom
happens  from  contusion,  the  kind  of  accident  destroying  in  some  degree
the  free  exit  of  the  blood  out  of  the  artery;  and  if  the  tumor  should  not
increase  after  a  certain  period,  even  if  there  be  a  pretty  evident  pulsation,
we  may  then  be  certain  that  it  assumes  this  symptom  from  some  neigh-
bouring artery  or  arteries.  The  ecchymosis  which  is  produced  on  the
head  of  a  child  during  birth,  has  sometimes  a  pulsation,  arising  from  that


198  Union  by  the  first  intention,

of  the  brain,  as  the  sutures  are  still  open  ;  and  every  tumor  of  the  scalp,
whether  from  a  blow  or  any  other  cause,  may  be  mistaken  for  aneurism,
if  it  appears  before  the  fontinelle  be  closed,  and  mould  it  be  opened  with-
out proper  examination,  may  disconcert  the  ignorant  surgeon.

That  the  blood  does  not  coagulate  in  this  species  of  ecchymosis,  mufl
arise  from  some  peculiar  mode  of  action  in  the  vessels,  occasioned  by  the
effects  of  the  injury  ;  for  I  apprehend  that  in  such  cases,  the  blood  dies  in
the  act  of  extravasation,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  blood  of  the  menstrual
discharge  whenever  it  is  effused.

The  ecchymosis  which  we  have  mentioned,  as  happening  very  com-
monly to  children  in  the  birth,  particularly  under  the  scalp,  requires
nothing  to  be  done  -,  as  by  waiting  with  patience,  the  whole  will  in  gene-
ral be  absorbed.

Although  this  is  commonly  the  event  In  new  born  infants,  yet  ecchy-
mosis does  not  terminate  alike  favourably  in  other  cases,  the  tumor  often
remaining  for  a  confiderable  time  without  undergoing  any  change,  and
after  months,  sometimes  disappearing,  but  at  other  times  inflaming  and
suppurating.

When  an  extravasation  of  blood  takes  place  between  the  scalp  and
head,  in  consequence  of  a  blow,  which  is  very  common,  and  continues
fluid,  we  find  a  kind  of  ridge  all  round  the  bag,  and  by  pressing  all  round
the  edge  of  the  bag,  the  finger  sinks,  so  as  to  give  distinctly,  (we  con-
ceive) the  feel  of  a  depressed  bone ;  but  this  feeling  of  a  depression  follow-
ing the  edge  of  the  ecchymosis  all  round,  is  a  proof  that  it  cannot  be
depression  of  the  bone  -}  because  no  depression  could  be  so  regular,  nor
would  any  depression  be  of  the  same  extent  with  the  ecchymosis.  The
edge  of  the  scalp  surrounding  the  ecchymosis  seems  to  be  raised,  and  I
believe  it  is  ;  if  so,  then  something  similar  to  the  adhesive  inflammation
must  have  taken  place  to  set  bounds  to  the  extent  of  the  bag,  and  to
hinder  the  blood  from  getting  into  the  cellular  membrane.

It  might  perhaps  be  the  best  practice  to  make  a  small  opening  into  such
tumors  with  a  lancet,  and  by  letting  out  the  blood  get  the  sides  of  the
cavity  to  heal  by  the  first  intention.  When  the  parts  inflame  and  suppu-
rate, the  case  is  to  be  treated  as  an  abscess.


Union  by  the  jir st  intention.  199

This  sometimes  disappears  by  resolution  :  but  this  being  seldom  per-
mitted, the  ecchymosis  is  reduced  either  to  the  state  of  a  fresh  wound,
which  is  allowed  to  suppurate,  or  an  abscess  ;  for  surgeons  are  induced  to
open  early,  by  seeing  an  inflammation,  and  feeling  a  fluctuation,  two
strong  motives  when  every  circumstance  is  not  well  attended  to  ;  but  in
such  cases  I  should  wait  till  I  observed  evident  signs  of  suppuration,  viz.
the  thinning  of  the  skin  over  the  matter,  and  pointing  of  the  contents,
which  are  the  only  true  marks  of  the  formation  of  the  matter,  as  well  as
of  its  coming  near  the  skin.

If  the  blow  should  have  deadened  a  part  of  the  skin,  then  a  separation
of  the  slough  will  take  place,  and  expose  this  cavity  so  as  to  produce  sup-
puration. And  this  is  to  be  considered  as  a  step  still  farther  removed  from
the  most  simple  species  of  injury,  than  where  the  blood  coagulates.

I  am  not  able,  under  such  circumstances,  decidedly  to  say  which  is  the
best  practice,  whether  to  leave  the  slough  to  separate,  or  to  make  a  small
opening  and  allow  the  blood  to  escape  slowly  from  the  cavity.

In  both  kinds  of  ecchymosis,  when  inflammation  has  taken  place  in
the  skin  from  the  violence,  if  it  has  not  advanced  to  suppuration,  the
object  of  the  surgeon  should  be  to  bring  about  the  resolution  of  the
tumor  ;  when  he  finds  there  is  no  further  increase  of  the  tumor,  he  may
conclude  that  resolution  is  beginning  to  take  place ;  which  being  clearly
ascertained,  he  is  then  to  assit  in  exciting  the  absorbents  to  do  their  duty,
in  order  to  take  up  the  extravasated  blood.  I  believe  the  best  exciting
power  is  pressure,  which  if  urged  beyond  the  point  of  ease,  sets  the  obsor-
bents  of  the  part  to  work,  for  the  purpose  of  removing  the  substance
which  presses,  or  the  part  that  is  pressed :  but  most  commonly  the  body
pressing,  if  it  be  subject  to  the  laws  (or  powers)  of  absorption ;  and  in
this  case  the  extraneous  substance  pressing  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  ca-
vity, is  the  extavasated  blood  which  we  wish  to  have  removed.

The  following  cases  explain  this.

A  lady  fell  and  struck  her  shin  against  a  stone,  a  considerable  ecchy-
mosis came  on  almost  immediately,  and  the  skin  over  it  inflamed  to  a
considerable  degree.  The  blood  had  not  coagulated,  there  was  therefore
a  perceptible  fluctuation  underneath,  and  her  physician  recommended  an


200  Union  by  the  first  intention.

opening  to  be  made.  I  was  sent  for,  and  on  examining  the  part,  was
rather  of  opinion,  from  the  surface  being  a  regular  curve,  and  no  part
pointing,  that  matter  had  no  tformed  ;  I  therefore  recommended  patience ;
the  subsiding  of  the  inflammation,  and  the  application  of  such  pressure  as
she  could  bear  without  uneasiness,  caused  the  whole  tumor  to  be  absorbed.

A  man  was  brought  into  St.  George's  Hospital  whose  thigh  had  been
run  over  by  the  wheel  of  a  cart ;  a  very  large  enchymosis  was  formed  on  its
inside,  and  a  considerable  inflammation  of  the  skin  had  taken  place.  The
blood  had  not  coagulated,  therefore  a  fluctuation  could  easily  be  felt ;  but
as  there  was  no  appearance  of  pointing,  similar  to  that  of  matter  coming
to  the  skin,  I  was  in  hopes  that  suppuration  was  not  coming  on  ;  and  al-
though the  inflammation  was  considerable,  I  supposed  that  it  might  arise
rather  from  the  violence  of  the  accident  than  from  the  extravasation  :  I
waited  therefore  the  event ;  saw  the  inflammation  gradually  go  off,  and  as
that  subsided  I  observed  the  tumor  decay,  although  it  was  very  slow  in  its
decrease  :  I  then  directed  a  slight  compress  to  be  applied,  after  which  the
tumor  evidently  diminised  much  faster  than  before,  till  the  whole  was
absorbed.

The  union  by  the  first  intention  usually  takes  place  so  soon  after  the
injury,  that  it  may  be  said  to  be  almost  immediate;  for  when  the  blood
has  coagulated  in  such  a  situation  as  to  adhere  to  both  surfaces,  and  so  as
to  keep  them  together,  it  may  be  said  that  the  union  is  begun.  It  is  not,
however,  immediately  secure  from  mechanical  violence,  and  the  blood  it-
self by  losing  its  power  of  retaining  life,  may  likewise  be  rendered  unfit  to
preserve  the  communication  with  the  adhesing  surface,  (by  which  it  is
connected  with  the  body  at  large)  and  thus  the  union  be  of  course  pre-
vented. If  there  be  no  such  impediment,  then  the  union  of  the  parts
may  be  very  quick ;  but  it  will  be  in  some  degree  according  to  the  quan-
tity of  extravasated  blood  interposed ;  for  if  that  be  large,  the  whole
blood  will  not  become  vascular,  but  the  surface  only  which  is  in  contact,
with  surrounding  parts,  and  the  rest  will  be  absorbed  as  in  the  enchymosis.
Where  the  quantity  is  small,  as  in  a  slight  wound  without  laceration,  and
where  all  the  divided  surfaces  can  be  brought  into  almost  absolute  contact,
their  union  will  be  firm  in  twenty-four  hours,  as  happens  in  a  hair-lip,
or  wounds  of  the  scalp.


Union  by  the  first  intention.  201

Although  under  such  circumstances  the  blood  seems  to  change  into  a
solid  form  very  quickly,  yet  when  the  situation  of  the  wound  particular-
ly subjects  the  parts  to  mechanical  violence,  we  should  not  trust  to  this
union  being  completed  in  so  short  a  time.

In  the  hair-lip,  for  instance,  perhaps  forty-eight  hours  may  be  required
to  make  it  perfectly  secure,  and  except  when  the  stitches  by  producing  ul-
ceration might  make  scars,  there  can  be  no  harm  in  allowing  such  parts
even  a  longer  time  for  their  union.  But  in  wounds  of  the  scalp,  this  cau-
tion is  not  necessary ;  and  indeed  in  such  cases  it  is  scarcely  required  to
make  stitches  at  all.

In  cases  of  accidental  injury,  whether  they  be  in  themselves  slight  or
considerable,  in  whatever  situation  or  part  they  may  have  happened,  if
the  salutary  processes,  above  described,  go  on  readily,  no  other  effect  of  in-
jury, or  irritation,  or  pain,  in  consequence  of  nature's  operations  is  felt.
No  universal  sympathy  or  fever  takes  place,  except  what  arises  from  the
mere  injury  done,  but  all  is  quiet  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  This  is
sometimes  the  case  even  in  a  simple  fracture  of  the  bones  of  the  leg,  in
fissures  of  the  scull,  etc.  However,  the  magnitude  of  the  accident  often
produces  effects  which  are  alarming,  and  more  particularly  when  they  hap-
pen to  parts  essential  to  life.  These  effects  are  often  the  cause  of  much
danger,  the  constitution  becoming  affected  according  to  the  nature  and
importance  of  the  parts  injured.  Thus  concussion  and  extravasation
affecting  the  brain,  must  likewise  affect  the  constitution,  from  its  natural
action  and  influence  on  the  body  being  diminished,  increased,  or  otherwise-
disturbed.  The  same  thing  happens  from  an  injury  done  to  any  other
vital  part  of  the  body,  and  the  effects  will  be  according  to  the  use  of  such
parts,  or  the  influence  which  they  have  on  the  system.

However,  these  immediate  and  salutary  operations  do  not  always  take
place  simply,  for  they  are  often  altered  by  other  circumstances ;  as  the
accident  sometimes  becomes  the  cause  of  irritation,  and  produces  another
operation  of  the  parts,  called  inflammation,  which  is  often  of  singular  ser-
vice,  by  increasing  the  power  of  union  in  the  broken  parts.

This  inflammation  will  generally  be  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  in-
jury done,  the  nature  of  the  parts  injured,  and  the  state  of  the  consti-

Dd


202  Union  by  the  first  intention,

tutton  at  the  time,  which  in  other  words,  is  in  proportion  to  what  is
requisite  for  the  first  powers  of  union.  But  it  sometimes  happens,  that
inflammation  goes  further  than  is  required,  and  produces  a  variety  of
actions  succeeding  each  other  in  regular  progression.  This  may  occa-
sionally he  observed  in  certain  simple  fractures,  in  which  the  extravasated
blood  acting  as  an  extraneous  body,  becomes  the  cause  of  the  suppura-
tive inflammation  ;  and  the  simple  is  in  this  way  brought  to  a  state
resembling  the  compound  fracture.  The  inflammation,  however,  does
not  extend  over  all  the  lacerated  parts,  as  when  they  are  exposed  at  the
time  of  the  injury,  many  of  these  having  united  by  the  first  intention.

We  may  here  observe,  that  accidents  of  the  most  simple  kind  may
produce  effects  which  do  not  allow  the  common  operations  of  nature  to
take  place,  as  when  a  large  blood-vessel  is  broken,  or  when  a  fractured
rib  penetrates  into  the  lungs,  or  a  compression  of  the  brain  arises  from  a
fracture  of  the  scull.  But  none  of  these  accidents  admit  of  the  modes
of  cure  abovementioned,  as  they  each  require  particular  treatment,  and
therefore  are  not  to  our  present  purpose.


II.  OF  INJURIES  WHERE  THE  WOUND  COMMUNICATES  EXTERNALLY.

The  second  division  of  injury  arising  from  accident,  is  where  the  rup-
tured parts  communicate  externally,  producing  effects  different  from  the
former.  These  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds,  viz.  wounds  made  by  a
sharp  cutting  instrument,  and  contusions  producing  death  in  the  parts
injured. Wounds -are  subject  to  as  great  a  variety  as  any  thing  in  surgery.

A  wound  is  a  breach  made  in  the  continuity  of  the  solids  of  a  part,  be-
ginning most  commonly  on  the  external  surface,  and  proceeding  inwards ;
although  sometimes  its  direction  is  from  the  inside  outwards,  as  in  com-
pound fractures.  A  gun-shot  wound  may  be  said  to  partake  of  both  cir-
cumstances, as  it  passes  through  a  part ; wounds  often  admit  of  the  same


Union  by  the  first  intention.  203

mode  of  cure  with  accidents  which  do  not  communicate  externally,  but
then  it  requires  the  art  of  the  surgeon  to  place  them  in  the  same  situation,
or  under  the  same  circumstances.

A  wound  is  either  simple  or  compound ;  the  simple  is  what  I  have
now  to  explain,  and  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  admit  of  union  by  the  first
intention.  Of  this  description  we  may  likewise  consider  wounds  which
are  the  consequence  of  certain  surgical  operations.

The  form  of  the  instrument  by  which  wounds  have  been  inflicted  will
also  make  a  difference  in  their  nature ;  for  if  it  be  sharp  it  will  make  a
clean  cut  wound ;  if  obtuse  in  its  shape,  a  bruised  one.  and  may  also
deaden  a  part,  and  the  parts  may  likewise  be  torn  after  having  been  cut  j
all  of  which  varieties  will  render  a  different  treatment  necessary  towards-
effecting  a  cure.

In  the  most  simple  cases  of  wounds,  a  number  of  blood-vessels  being
divided,  there  is  an  effusion  of  blood,  which  escaping  by  the  wound,  the
internal  parts  are  left  exposed,  especially  the  cellular  membrane ;  and
these  if  not  brought  into  contact  with  corresponding  living  parts  imme-
diately, or  by  means  of  the  coagulated  blood,  will  inflame  and  suppurate.
Accidents  of  this  kind  differ  frora  those  of  the  first  division  by  commu-
nicating externally,  a  circumftance  which  makes  them  often  require  very
different  modes  of  treatment.  In  cases  where  parts  have  been  forced  out
of  their  natural  situation,  they  should  be  reduced,  that  when  cured  they
may  answer  their  natural  purposes,  as  in  fracture,  dislocation,  &c.

Wounds  admit  of  three  modes  of  treatment,  arising  from  their  size,
situation,  and  the  nature  of  the  parts  wounded.  One  mode  is  artificial,
two  are  natural,  in  which  last  the  constitution  is  allowed  to  perform
the  cure  in  its  own  way,  which  will  be  explained  when  we  speak  of
scabbing.

These  being  different  from  the  former,  and  from  each  other,  it  might
be  thought  that  I  should  have  considered  them  first  as  being  natural
processes  ;  but  the  first  can  be  put  into  the  same  state  with  the  two
others,  and  therefore  ought  to  precede  them.  For  this  purpose  art  must
be  employed  by  the  surgeon  to  bring  the  separated  surfaces  in  contact-.


£04  Union  by  the  first  intention.

that  by  retaining  them  there  till  union  shall  have  taken  place,  the  injury
inay  be  removed  from  the  state  of  an  exposed  wound.

This  treatment  of  fresh  wounds  with  a  view  to  cure  them  by  the  first
intention,  is  equally  proper  after  many  operations,  as  in  accidental  in-
juries. Instances  of  this  often  occur  after  dissecting  out  tumors,  scalping
'when  no  fracture  is  found,  and  when  trepanning  has  not  been  performed ;
and  it  has  been  put  in  practice  even  where  the  trepan  has  been  applied.
It  has  been  employed  also  after  amputations ;  in  short,  wherever  a  clean
cut  wound  is  made  in  sound  parts,  and  when  the  surfaces  can  be  brought
into  contact,  or  where  there  is  sufficient  skin  to  cover  the  part,  this  prac-
tice may,  and  should  be  followed.

In  no  case,  however,  of  a  breach  of  continuity,  can  we  entirely  prevent
the  parts  from  retaining  the  appearance  of  a  wound,  for  the  breach  in  the
skin  will  more  or  less  remain,  and  the  blood  will  coagulate,  become  dry,
and  form  a  scab.  But  this  operation  of  nature  reduces  the  injury  to  the
state  of  a  mere  superficial  wound,  and  the  blood  which  is  continued  from
the  scab  to  the  more  deeply  seated  parts,  retaining  its  living  principle,  just
as  the  natural  parts  do  at  the  bottom  of  a  superficial  wound,  the  skin  is
formed  under  this  scab  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other;  yet  if  the  scab
should  either  irritate,  or  a  part  underneath  lose  its  uniting  powers,  then
inflammation,  and  even  sometimes  suppuration,  may  be  produced.  It  is
often,  however,  only  inflammation  that  is  produced;  the  scab  here  pre-
venting the  further  progress  of  mischief  in  the  same  manner  as  the  scab-
bing of  the  pus  on  a  sore  prevents  the  process  of  suppuration,  which  be-
comes one  of  the  uses  of  pus.

In  many  of  the  cases  in  which  we  mean  to  produce  union  by  the  first
intention,  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  very  nice  in  spunging  out  the  blood,
with  a  view  to  make  the  two  surfaces  of  the  flesh  come  entirely  into  con-
tact, the  blood  itself  answering  a  similar  purpose.  In  several  cases,
having  brought  the  two  portions  of  loose  skin  together,  I  have  seen  the
two  cut  edges  unite  almost  immediately,  and  though  the  cavity  underneath
-was  distended  with  blood  yet  it  did  well,  the  tumor  gradually  decreasing
as  the  blood  was  absorbed;  this  is  to  be  considered  in  the  same  light  as  an
€Cchymosis.


Union  by  thejirst  intention.  205

When  the  portion  of  skin  is  not  sufficient  to  cover  the  whole  wound,
and  the  cut  edges  cannot  be  brought  together,  still  the  skin  should  be
made  to  cover  as  much  as  it  can,  in  order  to  diminish  the  size  of  the  parts
that  must  otherwise  suppurate  and  form  a  sore;  as  in  consequence  of  this
mode  of  treatment,  the  living  extravasated  blood  is  confined  in  the  wound,
and  coagulating  there,  unites  the  two  surfaces  together.

The  mouths  of  the  vessels  are  soon  shut,  either  by  inosculation,  or  their
own  power  of  contraction,  and  by  the  blood  becoming  vascular,  as  in  the
former  stated  case  of  union  by  the  first  intention;  and  if  there  should  be
any  superfluous  extravasated  blood,  we  know  that  it  will  be  afterwards
absorbed.

The  blood  being  alive,  this  uniting  medium  becomes  immediately  a
part  of  ourselves,  and  the  parts  not  being  offended  by  it,  no  irritation  is
produced.  The  red  particles  are  absorbed,  and  nothing  but  the  coagu-
lating lymph  is  retained,  which  being  the  true  living  bond  of  union,  after-
wards becomes  vascular,  nervous,  etc.

This  mode  of  treatment  by  art,  though  an  imitation  of  the  former,
can  seldom  be  supposed  equally  complete;  perhaps  we  ought  not  to  ex-
pect it  to  be  so  in  any  case,  as  there  are  circumstances  often  attending  the
artificial  mode  of  treating  wounds,  which  do  not  occur  in  the  natural.
The  ligature  used  for  tying  a  blood-vessel  leaves  an  extraneous  body  in  the
wound* ;  a  part  deprived  of  life  by  the  instrument,  etc.  will  become  an
extraneous  substance,  and  the  surfaces  cannot  always  be  brought  into
contact,  so  as  to  allow  a  perfect  union  to  take  place.  In  such  cases,
union  is  prevented  by  the  blood  losing  in  part  its  living  principle,  espe-
cially in  those  parts  next  to  the  external  surface;  and  perhaps  the  art  em-
ployed by  the  surgeon  himself  may  assist  in  changing  the  original  state
of  the  wound,  as  the  passing  of  needles  and  ligatures  must  always  pro-
duce suppuration  through  the  whole  passage.

These  substances  so  circumstanced,  most  probably  become  the  cause  of
irritation,  and  consequently  of  inflammation. But  if  the  position  of  the

*  If  such  a  wound  has  a  depending  angle,  and  the  vessels  should  even  be  tied  nearer  the
upper  angle  than  the  lower,  yet  I  would  advise  to  bring  the  loose  end  of  the  thread  out  of  the
ivound  at  the  lower,  for  by  that  means  the  matter  will  flow  much  more  easily.


2o6  Union  by  the  first  intention.

parts  be  such  as  in  any  sort  to  allow  of  union,  although  not  readily,  the
inflammation  will  go  no  further  than  the  first  stage,  and  will  even  give
assistance  to  the  first  mode  of  union.

The  possibility  of  effecting  a  cure  by  this  method  is  probably  limited
to  some  certain  distance  of  time  after  the  wound  has  been  received,  though
that  space  may  admit  of  some  latitude ,-  perhaps  the  sooner  it  is  done  the
better ;  but  while  the  blood  continues  to  be  extravasated  it  certainly  may
be  attempted  upon  our  first  principles  of  union.

Where  the  former  bond  of  union  is  lost  in  a  part,  to  produce  a  new
one  a  secondary  operation  takes  place,  namely,  inflammation  ;  and  if  this-
is  likewise  lost,  then  a  third  mode  of  union  will  arise,  which  is  by  means
of  granulation.

If  the  divided  parts  are  allowed  to  remain  till  the  mouths  of  the
divided  vessels  be  entirely  shut,  inflammation  will  inevitably  follow,  and
will  furnish  the  same  materials  for  union  which  are  contained  in  extrava-
sated blood,  by  throwing  out  the  coagulated  lymph  ;  so  that  union  may
still  take  place,  though  some  time  later  after  the  division  of  the  parts.
This  inflammation  I  have  called  the  adhesive ;  and  the  inflammation  that
precedes  suppuration,,  I  have  called  the  suppurative  inflammation.  If  the
parts,  however,  continue  too  long  asunder,  suppuration  must  follow,  and
pus  is  unfriendly  to  union.  We  may  here  observe,  that  suppuration  takes
place  on  exposed  surfaces,  with  a  much  less  degree  of  inflammation  and
in  much  less  time  than  on  those  which  are  not  exposed,  and  from  their
not  being  opposed  by  living  surfaces,  which  tend  to  bring  on  the  adhesive
state,  they  continue  it  much  longer.

Whether  this  coagulating  lymph  issues  from  the  half  closed  mouths  of
the  vessels  which  were  cut,  or  from  the  surface  of  the  opened  cells,  is
not  easily  determined ;  but  most  probably  it  is  from  the  latter,  as  it
comes  on  about  the  time  that  the  swelling  of  the  surrounding  parts
begins  to  appear.  There  is  reason  to  suppose  it  to  be  the  same  kind  of
discharge  with  that  which  causes  the  swelling,  and  which  is  continued
through  the  whole  course  of  this  stage  of  inflammation ;  for  on  examining
the  dressings  of  such  wounds  as  are  allowed  to  suppurate,  several  days


Union  by  the  first  intention.  207

after  the  wounds  have  been  made,  the  lint  is  generally  adhering  to  the
surface  by  means  of  the  coagulating  lymph  ;  the  suppuration  not  having
yet  sufficiently  taken  place  to  loosen  it.

When  these  operations  are  completed  in  due  order,  the  simple  opera-
tions of  the  animal  are  entirely  confined  to  the  part,  neither  the  mind  nor
the  constitution  seeming  in  such  cases  to  be  at  all  affected,  except  that
there  is  a  feeling  of  tenderness  in  the  part.  But  whatever  these  sensations
maybe,  they  arise  entirely  from  the  injury  done,  and  not  from  the  opera-
tion of  union,  unless  when  the  suppurative  inflammation  comes  on.

The  inflammation  often  runs  so  high,  even  where  the  parts  have  been
brought  into  contact,  as  to  destroy,  by  its  violence,  that  union  which  the
extravasated  juices  were  intended  to  produce,  the  consequence  of  which
is  suppuration  at  last.

Is  it  by  this  excess  of  inflammation  that  the  extravasated  juices  lose
their  living  principle,  and  become  as  it  were  extraneous  bodies  ?  or  is  it
not  possible,  that  in  these  cases  the  inflammation  may  be  the  effect  rather
than  the  cause  of  the  loss  of  the  living  principle,  by  the  blood  first  losing
its  living  principle,  and  inflammation  arising  from  it  as  a  consequence  ?

The  time  requisite  to  complete  this  union  will  be  nearly  the  same  as
that  of  the  first  intention  ;  and  probably  sooner  if  there  be  no  particular
tendency  to  suppuration  ;  but  if  there  be,  union  may  be  suspended  some
time  longer,  for  here  the  uniting  medium  will  be  thrown  out  in  larger
quantity,  and  where  the  union  is  most  easily  effected,  there  is  less  of  this
medium  ;  when  two  surfaces  unite  by  inflammation,  they  are  commonly
in  contact,  or  else  most  probably  union  from  this  cause  would  not  so
readily  take  place.  We  shall  find  in  the  description  of  the  adhesive
inflammation,  that  the  union  of  two  sides  of  a  circumscribed  cavity  is
very  soon  effected,  and  soon  becomes  strong-
There  is  another  mode  of  union,  which,  although  upon  the  same
principle,  yet  differs  with  regard  to  the  parts  which  are  to  be  united.

I  have  hitherto  explained  union  as  taking  place  only  in  the  division  of
-corresponding  parts  of  the  same  living  body,  but  it  is  equally  possible  to
unite  different  parts  of  the  same,  or  of  different  bodies,  by  bringing  them
into  contact  under  certain  circumstances. There  is  seldom  occasion  fo;


2o8  Union  by  the  first  intention,

such  practice ;  but  accident,  or  rather  want  of  attention,  has  in  some
cases  been  the  cause  of  union  taking  place  between  different  parts  of  the
body.  The  chin  has  been  united  to  the  breast,  the  tongue  to  the  lips  or
cheek,  etc.  and  when  this  happens  it  has  commonly  been  through  the
medium  of  granulations.  The  attempt  to  unite  parts  of  two  different
bodies,  has  only  been  recommended  by  Taliacotius,  The  most  extra-
ordinary of  all  the  circumstances  respecting  union,  is  by  removing  a  part
of  one  body  and  afterwards  uniting  it  to  some  part  of  another,  where
on  one  side  there  can  be  no  assistance  given  to  the  union,  as  the  divided
or  separated  part  is  hardly  able  to  do  more  than  preserve  its  own  living
principle,  and  accept  of  the  union.

The  possibility  of  this  species  of  union  shews  how  strong  the  uniting
power  must  be  ;  by  it  the  spurs  of  the  young  cock  can  be  made  to  grow
on  his  comb,  or  on  that  of  another  cock ;  and  its  testicles,  after  having
been  removed,  may  be  made  to  unite  to  the  inside  of  any  cavity  of  an
animal.

Teeth,  after  having  been  drawn  and  inserted  into  the  sockets  of  another
person,  unite  to  the  new  socket,  which  is  called  transplanting.  Ingraft-
ing and  the  inoculating  of  trees  succeed  upon  the  same  principle*.

*  That  the  living  principles  in  two  bodies  which  have  a  perfect  affinity  to  one  another,
should  not  only  be  a  preservative,  but  a  cause  of  union  is  evident ;  but  even  in  bodies  which
appear  foreign  to  one  another,  the  stimulus  of  an  extraneous  body  is  not  produced  where
union  is  not  intended,  and  cannot  take  place,  although  we  should  at  first  suppose  that  the
extraneous  stimulus  would  be  given,  and  suppuration  succeed.

This  is  verified  by  the  eggs  of  many  insects,  which  are  laid  under  the  skin  of  different
animals,  producing  only  the  adhesive  inflammation  in  the  surrounding  parts ;  by  which  the
skin  is  thickened  and  a  nidus  is  formed  for  the  eggs.

The  Guinea  worm,  called  vena  medenensis,  is  also  a  striking  inftance  of  this  ;  for  while
the  animal  is  endowed  with  the  living  principle,  it  gives  but  little  trouble,  yet  if  killed,
gives  the  stimulus  of  an  extraneous  body,  which  produces  suppuration  through  its  whole
length.

Other  instances  of  the  same  sort  are  :

The  aestrum  bovis,  which  lays  its  eggs  in  the  backs  of  cattle.

The  aestrum  tarendi,  which  lays  its  eggs  in  the  back  of  the  rein  deer.

The  aestrum  nasale,  which  lays  its  eggs  in  the  noses  of  rein  deer.

The  aestrum  hjemorrhoidale,  which  lays  its  eggs  in  the  rectum  of  horses.


Union  by  the  first  intention.  209


III.  PRACTICAL  OBSERVATIONS  RESPECTING  UNION  BY  THE  FIRST

INTENTION.

It  is  with  a  view  to  this  principle  of  union,  that  it  has  been  recom-
mended to  bring  the  sides  (or  lips)  of  wounds  together;  but  as  the  natu-
ral elasticity  of  the  parts  makes  them  recede,  it  has  been  found  necessary
to  employ  art  for  that  purpose.  This  necessity  first  suggested  the  practice
of  sewing  wounds,  and  afterwards  gave  rise  to  various  inventions  in  order
to  answer  this  end,  such  as  bandages,  sticking-plasters,  and  ligatures.
Among  these,  the  bandage  commonly  called  the  uniting  bandage,  is
preferable  to  all  the  rest,  where  it  can  be  employed ;  but  its  application
is  very  confined,  from  being  only  adapted  to  parts  where  a  roller  can  be
used.  A  piece  of  sticking-plaster,  which  has  been  called  the  dry  suture,
is  more  general  in  its  application  than  the  uniting  bandage,  and  is  there-
fore preferable  to  it  on  many  occasions.

I  can  hardly  suppose  a  wound,  in  any  situation,  where  it  may  not  be
applied,  excepting  penetrating  wounds,  where  we  wish  the  inner  portion
of  the  wound  to  be  closed  equally  with  the  outer,  as  in  the  case  of  hair-
lip.  But  even  in  such  wounds,  if  the  parts  are  thick,  and  the  wound
not  large,  the  sides  will  seldom  recede  so  far  as  to  make  any  other  means
necessary.  The  dry  suture  has  an  advantage  over  stitches,  by  bringing  a
larger  surface  of  the  wound  together,  by  not  inflaming  the  parts  to  which
it  is  applied,  and  by  neither  producing  in  them  suppuration  or  ulceration,
which  stitches  always  do.  When  parts,  therefore,  can  be  brought  to-
gether, and  especially  where  some  force  is  required  for  that  purpose,  from
the  skin  not  being  in  large  quantity,  the  sticking-plaster  is  certainly  the
best  application.  This  happens  frequently  to  be  the  case  after  removal
of  tumors,  in  amputation,  or  where  the  sides  of  the  wound  are  only  to  be
brought  together  at  one  end,  as  in  the  hair-lip ;  and  I  think  the  difference

The  aestrum  ovis,  which  lays  its  eggs  in  the  nose  and  frontal  sinuses  of  ruminating  animals,
particularly  sheep.

The  little  insect  in  Mexico,  called  migna>  which  lays  its  eggs  under  the  skin  j  and  lastly,
the  cheggarSj  which  get  in  the  feet  of  animals.

E  e


2 1  o  Union  by  the  first  intention*

between  Mr.  Sharp's  cross  stitch,  after  amputation,  as  recommended  in
his  Critical  Enquiries,  and  Mr.  Alison's  practice,  shews  strongly  the
superiority  of  the  sticking-plaster  (or  dry  suture).  In  those  parts  of  the
body  where  the  skin  recedes  more  than  in  others,  this  treatment  becomes
most  necessary  ;  and  as  the  scalp  probably  recedes  as  little  as  any,  it  is
therefore  seldom  necessary  to  apply  any  thing  in  wounds  of  that  part ;  the
practice  will  certainly  answer  best  in  superficial  wounds,  because  the
bottom  is  in  these  more  within  its  influence.

The  sticking-plasters  should  be  laid  on  in  stripes,  and  these  should  be
at  small  distances  from  each  other,  viz.  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  at
most,  if  the  part  requires  close  confinement ;  but  when  it  does  not,  they
may  be  at  greater  distances.  This  precaution  becomes  more  necessary  if
the  bleeding  is  not  quite  stopped,  there  should  be  passages  left  for  the  exit
of  blood,  as  its  accumulation  might  prevent  the  union,  although  this
does  not  always  happen.  If  any  extraneous  body,  such  as  a  ligature,
should  have  been  left  in  the  wound,  suppuration  will  take  place,  and  the
matter  should  be  allowed  to  vent  at  some  of  those  openings,  or  spaces,
between  the  slips  of  plaster.  I  have  known  a  very  considerable  abscess
formed  in  consequence  of  this  precaution  being  neglected,  by  which  the
whole  of  the  recently  united  parts  has  been  separated.

The  interrupted  suture,  which  has  generally  been  recommended  in
large  wounds,  is  still  in  use,  but  seldom  proves  equal  to  the  intention.
This  we  may  reckon  to  be  the  only  one  that  deserves  the  name  of  suture  -,
it  was  formerly  used,  but  is  now  in  a  great  measure  laid  aside  in  practice,
not  from  the  impropriety  of  uniting  parts  by  this  process,  but  from  the
ineffectual  mode  of  attempting  it.  In  what  manner  better  methods  could
be  contrived,  I  have  not  been  able  to  suggest.  It  is  to  be  understood
that  the  above  methods  of  bringing  wounded  parts  together,  in  order  to
unite,  are  only  to  be  put  in  practice  in  such  cases  as  will  admit  of  it ;
for  if  there  was  a  method  known,  which  in  all  cases  would  bring  the
wounded  surfaces  into  contact,  it  would  in  many  instances  be  improper,
as  some  wounds  are  attended  with  contusion,  by  which  the  parts  have
been  more  or  less  deadened  •  in  such  cases,  as  was  formerly  observed,


Union  by  the  first  intention,  21 1

union  cannot  take  place  according  to  our  first  principle,  and  therefore  it
is  improper  to  attempt  it.

In  many  wounds  which  are  not  attended  with  contusion,  when  we
either  know,  or  suspect,  that  extraneous  bodies  have  been  introduced  into
the  wound,  union  by  the  first  intention  should  not  be  attempted,  but  they
should  be  allowed  to  suppurate,  in  order  that  the  extraneous  matter  may
be  expelled.  Wounds  which  are  attended  with  laceration,  although  free
from  contusion,  cannot  always  be  united  by  the  first  intention,  because
it  must  frequently  be  impossible  to  bring  the  external  parts,  or  skin,  so
much  in  contact,  as  to  prevent  that  inflammation  which  is  naturally  pro-
duced by  exposure.  But  even  in  cases  of  simple  laceration,  where  the
external  influence  is  but  slight,  or  can  be  prevented,  (as  we  observed  in
treating  of  the  compound  simple  fracture)  we  find  that  union  by  the  first
intention  often  takes  place  ;  the  blood  which  fills  up  the  interstices  of
the  lacerated  parts  having  prevented  the  stimulus  of  imperfection  in
them,  and  preventing  suppuration,  may  afterwards  be  absorbed.

Many  operations  may  be  so  performed  as  to  admit  of  parts  uniting  by
the  first  intention ;  but  the  practice  should  be  adopted  with  great  circum-
spection; the  mode  of  operating  with  that  view,  should,  in  all  cases,  be
a  secondary,  and  not  a  first,  consideration,  which  it  has  unluckily  been
too  often  among  surgeons.  In  cases  of  cancer,  it  is  a  most  dangerous
attempt  at  refinement  in  surgery.

In  the  union  of  wounded  parts  by  the  first  intention,  it  is  hardly  or  never
possible  to  bring  them  so  close  together  at  the  exposed  edges,  as  to  unite
them  perfectly  by  these  means  ;  such  edges  are  therefore  obliged  to  take
another  method  of  healing.  If  kept  moist,  they  will  inflame  as  deep
between  the  cut  surfaces  as  the  blood  fails  in  the  union,  and  there  sup-
purate and  granulate;  but  if  the  blood  is  allowed  to  dry  and  form  a  scab
between,  and  along  the  cut  edges,  then  inflammation  and  suppuration  of
those  edges  will  be  prevented,  and  this  will  complete  the  union,  as  will
be  described  by  and  by.

As  those  effects  of  accidental  injury,  which  can  be  cured  by  the  first
intention,  call  up  none  of  the  powers  of  the  constitution  to  assist  in  the
reparation,  it  is  not  the  least  affected  or  disturbed  by  them ;  the  parts  are


2 1 2  Union  by  the  first  intention \

united  by  the  extravasated  blood  alone,  which  was  thrown  out  by  the
injury,  either  from  the  divided  vessels,  or  in  consequence  of  inflam-
mation, without  a  single  action  taking  place,  even  in  the  part  itself,
except  the  closing,  or  inosculation  of  the  vessels,  for  the  flowing  of  the
blood  is  to  be  considered  as  entirely  mechanical.  Even  in  cases  where  a
small  degree  of  inflammation  comes  on,  it  is  merely  a  local  action,  and
so  inconsiderable,  that  the  constitution  is  not  affected  by  it  ;  because  it
is  an  operation  to  which  the  powers  belonging  to  the  parts  themselves  are
fully  equal.  The  inflammation  may  produce  a  small  degree  of  pain,  but
the  operation  of  union  gives  no  sensation  of  any  kind  whatever.

The  first  and  great  requisite  for  the  restoration  of  injured  parts,  is  rest,
as  it  allows  that  action,  which  is  necessary  for  repairing  injured  parts,
to  go  on  without  interruption,  and  as  injuries  often  excite  more  action
than  is  required,  rest  becomes  still  more  necessary.  But  rest  may  be
thought  to  consist  merely  in  abstaining  from  bodily  exercise ;  this  will
in  general  be  proper,  as  most  parts  of  the  body  will  be  affected  either
immediately,  as  being  engaged  in  the  action  itself,  or  intermediately  by
some  connection  with  the  injured  parts.  Thus,  if  the  injury  be  in  the
limbs,  and  not  such  as  to  prevent  walking  altogether,  still  persons  should
not  be  allowed  to  walk;  and  we  find  from  the  want  of  this  caution,  com-
plaints in  those  parts  are  commonly  longer  in  recovering  than  in  others ;
for  by  keeping  the  limbs  at  rest,  the  whole  progressive  motion  is  stopped,
a  thing  more  disagreeable  to  the  mind  than  any  prevention  of  motion  in
the  body.  If  an  arm  be  injured,  it  is  not  so,  the  want  of  its  use  is  not  so
distressing  to  the  patient,  because  he  can  enjoy  locomotion,  and  may
have  no  objection  to  keeping  his  hands  quiet.  Rest  is  often  admitted
from  necessity,  as  in  the  fracture  of  a  leg,  but  seldom  where  motion  is
onlv  an  inconvenience.  But  it  must  appear,  that  the  rupture  of  a  vessel
requires  union  as  well  as  the  fracture  of  a  bone,  although  the  vessel  hav-
ing more  powers  of  restoration  within  itself  than  the  bone,  and  having
less  occasional  disturbance  from  other  powers,  especially  of  fractures  of
the  lower  extremities,  yet  the  rest  should  be  proportioned  to  the  mischief
which  would  follow  from  the  want  of  it ;  and  this  will  vary  according  to


Union  by  the  Jfrjt  intention*  2 1 3

the  situation  of  parts.  The  same  principle  of  rest  should  apply  to  every  in-
jury, although  this  is  not  often  allowed  to  be  the  case.  Thus  where  an  in-
jury produces  inability  to  move  a  part,  especially  if  in  a  joint,  it  is  from  fear
of  the  loss  of  motion,  not  only  allowed  to  be  moved  by  its  own  muscles,
which  would  be  the  most  proper  mode,  if  motion  at  all  was  necessary,
but  is  moved  by  the  surgeon,  or  by  his  direction,  who,  not  satisfied  with
mechanical  violence,  has  recourse  to  stimulants,  as  warm  applications,
in  order  to  rouse  up  the  internal  action  of  the  parts,  and  at  the  very  time
when  every  thing  should  be  kept  quiet  till  restoration  of  the  injury  has
taken  place.  In  many  parts  of  the  body  this  practice  is  not  so  injurious
as  in  others,  in  which  it  may  be  attended  with  very  serious  consequences.
Thus  when  a  man  has  suffered  a  concussion  of  the  brain,  and  perhaps  a
blood-vessel  has  given  way,  the  mind  is  deranged,  becoming  either  de-
fective or  too  acute,  and  if  these  symptoms  should  continue  but  a  little
while,  the  medical  assistant  applies  blisters  to  remove  the  effect,  either
forgetting,  or  not  rightly  judging  the  cause.  This  is  even  carried  further,
we  hardly  see  a  man  taken  with  all  the  signs  of  an  apoplexy,  where  a
paralysis  in  some  part  takes  place,  or  hemiplegia*,  but  that  he  is  im-
mediately attacked  with  cordials,  stimulants,  electricity,  etc.  Upon  a
supposition  that  it  is  nervous,  debility,  etc.  the  poor  body  is  also  tor-
tured, because  it  cannot  act,  the  brain  not  being  in  a  condition  to  influ-
ence the  voluntary  muscles  ;  we  might  with  exactly  the  same  propriety
stimulate  the  fingers  when  their  muscles  were  torn  to  pieces.  I  must
own  I  never  saw  one  of  them  which  had  not  an  extravasation  of  blood
in  the  brain  when  opened,  excepting  one,  who  died  of  a  gouty  affection
in  the  brain,  with  symptoms  similar  to  apoplexy^.  Such  a  case,  most
probably,  would require  a  very  different  mode  of  treatment,  therefore

*  It  may  be  observed  here,  that  the  only  difference  between  an  apoplexy  and  hemiplegia,  is
in  degree,  for  they  both  arise  from  extravasations  of  blood.

t  For  many  years  I  have  been  particularly  attentive  to  those  who  have  been  attacked  with
a  paralitic  stroke,  forming  a  hemiplegia.  I  have  watched  them  while  alive,  that  I  might
have  an  opportunity  to  open  them  when  dead ;  and  in  all  I  found  an  injury  done  to  the  brain,
in  consequence  of  the  extravasation  of  blood.  I  have  examined  them  at  all  stageSj  when  it
was  recent,  some  of  weeks  standing,  others  of  months,  and  a  faw  years,  in  which  I  saw  the
progress  of  reparation.


214  Union  by  the  first  intention.

when  it  happens  to  a  gouty  man,  blisters  to  the  head,  feet,  etc.  would
probably  be  the  best  practice;  but  surely  this  would  not  be  the  proper
practice  in  a  rupture  of  a  vessel ;  we  ought  to  bleed  at  once  very  largely,
especially  from  the  temporal  artery,  till  the  patient  begin  to  shew  signs  of
recovery,  and  to  continue  it  till  he  might  begin  to  become  faintish.  We
should  give  saline  purges  freely,  to  diminish  impetus  and  promote  absorp-
tion ;  then  great  quietness  should  be  enjoined,  and  as  little  exercise  of
body  as  possible,  and  especially  to  avoid  coughing  and  sneezing.  Plain
food  should  be  directed,  and  but  little  of  it ;  nor  will  such  cases  ever
allow  of  being  roused  to  action,  when  as  much  recovered  in  their  texture
as  nature  can  accomplish,  to  the  same  degree  that  other  parts  will  admit
of  or  even  require.

These  observations  lead  us  to  consider  the  means  of  relief,  for,  besides
rest,  it  often  happens  that  the  parts  can  be  relieved  from  the  secondary
consequences  of  the  injury,  such  as  inflammations,  etc.  But  this  leads  to
constitutional  and  local  treatment,  and  will  be  included  in  the  history  of
inflammation.

I  have  already  mentioned  that  when  the  salutary  effects  above  described
take  place,  the  constitution  is  not  in  the  least  effected,  yet  it  is  proper  in
all  cases  where  much  mischief  might  arise  from  a  failure,  to  pay  a  little
attention  to  the  constitution.  The  patient  should  eat  plain  food,  drink
weak  liquors,  and  have  the  body  kept  open  j  this  treatment  with  rest
suitable  to  the  case,  will  in  many  instances  prevent  evils  that  might
otherwise  occur  and  prove  troublesome.


IV.  OF  SCABBING.


The  operations  which  I  have  described  prevent  inflammation,  espe-
cially that  sort  of  it  which  produces  suppuration ;  but  even  where  the
parts  are  not  brought  together,  so  as  to  admit  of  union  by  the  first  inten.


Union  by  the  first  intention.  215

tion,  nature  is  always  endeavouring  to  produce  the  same  effect.  The
blood  which  is  thrown  out  in  consequence  of  the  accident,  and  which
would  have  united  surfaces  brought  into  contact,  is  in  part  allowed  to
escape,  but  by  its  coagulation  on  the  surface  a  portion  is  there  retained,
which  drying  and  forming  a  scab*,  becomes  an  obstacle  to  suppuration.
The  inflammation  in  this  case  may  be  greater  than  where  union  can  be
effected,  but  not  nearly  so  great  as  when  suppuration  takes  place.

The  blood  lying  on  the  fresh  surface,  although  not  now  alive,  and
therefore  not  fitted  for  union  with  the  living  parts  underneath,  yet  pre-
cludes the  necessity  of  any  further  discharge  as  a  covering  to  the  exposed
surface,  which  is  one  of  the  uses  of  pus.

This  might  be  considered  as  the  first  mode  of  healing  a  wound  or  sore,
for  it  appears  to  be  the  natural  one,  requiring  no  art ;  and  in  the  state
of  parts  beforementioned,  the  complete  union  is  in  some  degree  indebted  to
this  mode  of  healing,  by  uniting  the  edges  that  were  not  or  could  not  be
brought  into  close  contact,  by  means  of  a  scab ;  proper  attention  to  this
has,  I  believe,  been  too  much  neglected.

Many  wounds  ought  to  be  allowed  to  scab,  in  which  this  process  is  now
prevented j  and  this  arises,  I  believe,  from  the  conceit  of  surgeons,  who
think  themselves  possessed  of  powers  superior  to  nature,  and  therefore  have
introduced  the  practice  of  making  sores  of  all  wounds :  as  a  scab  how-
ever must  always  be  on  a  surface,  it  is  only  on  superficial  wounds,  or  on
superficial  parts  of  deeper  wounds,  that  scabs  can  form.

How  far  this  practice  may  be  extended,  I  do  not  know,  but  there  are
cases  in  which  it  should  be  discouraged,  as  where  deep  seated  extraneous
bodies  have  been  introduced,  as  in  gun-shot  wounds,  or  where  deeper
seated  parts  have  been  filled  -,  but  if  will  answer  extremely  well,  where
the  superficies  only  is  deprived  of  life.

Superficial  hurts  are  very  common,  on  parts  opposite  and  near  to  some
bone,  as  on  the  head,  shin-bone,  fingers,  etc.  but  more  especially  on
the  shin. In  all  such  cases  it  is  better  to  let  them  scab,  if  they  seem

*  A  scab  may  be  defined  first,  dried  blood  on  a  wound,  dried  pus  on  a  sore,  a  slough
from  whatever  cause  allowed  to  dry,  mucus  from  an  inflamed  surface,  as  in  the  nose.


2i  6  Union  by  the  first  intention,

inclined,  or  will  admit  of  it;  and  if  that  should  not  succeed,  they  can  but
suppurate  at  laft,  and  no  harm  is  done.

In  many  deep  seated  wounds,  where  all  the  parts  have  remained  in
contact,  those  underneath  will  unite  much  better  if  the  surface  be  allowed
to  scab.  Some  compound  fractures  (more  especially  where  the  external
wound  is  very  small)  should  be  allowed  to  heal  in  the  same  way  ;  for  by
permitting  the  blood  to  scab  upon  the  wound,  either  by  itself,  or  when
soaked  into  lint,  the  parts  underneath  will  unite,  the  blood  under  the  scab
will  become  vascular,  and  the  union  will  be  complete,  even  where  the
parts  are  not  in  contact.

How  far  this  practice  may  be  extended  is  not  yet  ascertained.  A  small
wound  doing  well  under  this  treatment  is  a  common  case,  and  some  exam-
ples of  large  wounds  are  mentioned,  though  these  do  not  so  generally  succeed;
but  I  do  not  know  that  there  is  any  danger  in  the  attempt.  In  many  cases,
therefore,  which  seem  doubtful,  where  the  external  contusion  is  not  very
great,  or  not  continued  of  the  same  size  as  in  the  deeper  seated  parts,  it
may  be  tried.

In  some  of  those  cases  which  have  been  allowed  to  scab,  the  parts  in-
jured have  appeared  ready  to  go  into  inflammation  •>  a  red  circle  has
been  seen  all  round,  produced  by  the  irritation  of  the  scab.  Suppuration
takes  place  underneath  the  scab,  and  the  pus  makes  its  escape  from  under
its  edges  :  but  even  in  such  cases,  I  should  be  cautious  of  treating  it  as  a
suppurating  sore  :  I  should  allow  it  to  go  on,  and  occasionally  press  the
scab  in  order  to  squeeze  out  the  pus ;  for  it  very  often  happens  that  the
red  circle  surrounding  the  scab  becomes  of  a  dusky  brown,  which  is  the
best  sign  of  resolution,  the  suppuration  diminishes,  and  the  whole  does
well.  But  if  inflammation  should  proceed  farther  and  seem  to  be  in-
creased by  the  mode  of  treatment,  it  must  not  be  urged  further;  the  scab
should  be  poulticed  in  order  to  soften  it,  that  it  may  come  off  easily,  and
it  should  afterwards  be  treated  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sore.

This  practice  succeeds  wonderfully  well  in  cases  where  we  find  appli-
cations of  all  kinds  disagree  with  the  skin.  A  person  shall  get  a  blow  on
the  shin,  which  shall  probably  deaden  a  part,  a  poultice  is  then  often
applied,  that  poultice  brings  out  pimples  on  the  surrounding  skin, these


Union  by  the  Jirst  intention.  217

pimples  increase  and  become  sores  of  some  breadth,  the  poultice  is  in-
creased in  breadth  to  cover  them,  new  pimples  arise,  and  so  on,  that  I
have  seen  a  whole  leg  full  of  those  sores.

In  such,  I  always  allow  the  wound  to  scab,  and  to  accomplish  this,
the  best  way  is  to  take  off  the  dressings  in  the  morning,  and  put  on
trowsers,  without  stockings,  and  by  the  evening  the  parts  are  scabbed  ;
or  we  may  powder  them  with  lapis  calam  :  or  chalk  finely  powdered,  and
desire  the  patient  to  go  to  bed,  for  the  first  night,  with  the  trowsers  on  ;
where  the  sore  has  been  only  one,  I  have  made  a  circular  pad,  and  bound
that  on  till  the  scab  was  formed.

The  mode  of  assisting  the  cure  of  wounds  by  permitting  a  scab  to  form
is  likewise  applicable,  in  some  cases,  to  that  species  of  accident  where
the  parts  have  not  only  been  lacerated,  but  deprived  of  life.  If  the
deadened  surface  is  not  allowed  to  dry  or  scab,  it  must  separate  from  the
living  parts,  by  which  means  these  will  be  exposed,  and  suppuration
brought  on ;  but  if  the  whole  can  be  made  to  dry,  the  parts  underneath
the  slough  will  cicatrize,  and  the  dried  slough  will  at  last  drop  off.  I  have
seen  this  take  place  after  the  application  of  a  caustic,  and  many  other
sloughs.  Where  this  can  be  effected,  it  is  the  best  practice,  as  it  will
preclude  inflammation  and  suppuration,  which,  in  most  cases  should  be
avoided  if  possible.

I  have  treated  many  cases  in  this  way,  and  the  living  parts  underneath
have  formed  a  skin  as  the  slough  separated.  This  will  more  readily  take
place  where  the  cutis  is  not  deprived  of  life  through  its  whole  substance;
for  it  has  a  much  stronger  disposition  and  powers  to  restore  itself  than  the
cellular  membrane  has  to  form  a  new  cutis ;  indeed  the  skin  formed  upon
entire  new  flesh  is  very  different  from  the  original  cutis  ;  therefore  as  the
skin  is  the  part  most  liable  to  these  accidents,  we  have  the  best  chance  of
succeeding  in  this  way  when  the  cutis  alone  is  injured.

This  practice  is  the  very  best  for  burns  or  scalds,  after  the  inflamma-
tion has  either  been  considerably  prevented,  or  subdued,  by  proper  appli-
cations or  by  time,  for  which  there  probably  are  more  remedies  than
for  an  inflammation  arising  from  any  other  cause,  as  if  there  was  some-
thing specific in  such  causes. Whatever  will  abate  an  inflammation

Ff


2 1 8  Union  by  the  first  intention.

arising  from  accident,  will  have  the  same  effect  upon  a  scald  or  a  burn  •
and  from  the  diversities  of  applications,  we  have  opportunities  of  know-
ing the  best.  Oil  was  long  an  application,  but  which  has  no  virtue ;
spirits  has  also  been  long  applied,  and  with  very  good  effect.  The  com-
mon application,  which  is  a  soap  made  with  lime  water  and  oil,  seemed
to  answer  better  ;  and  now  vinegar  is  strongly  recommended,  and  I  think
with  justice,  as  far  as  I  have  seen.

Cold  lessens  all  inflammations,  and  is  a  very  good  application  where  it
can  be  applied,  but  it  cannot  be  applied  so  universally  as  many  others :
however,  cold  has  this  disadvantage,  that  the  pain,  although  removed
while  under  the  application,  occurs  with  double  force  when  it  is  removed,
much  more  than  from  any  of  the  applications,  and  the  reason  is  evident,
for  as  the  warmth  returns,  the  pain  is  increased  by  the  warmth,  even  in
sound  parts ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  recommended,  that  when  a  part  is
burnt  to  hold  it  to  the  fire  as  hot  and  as  long  as  it  can  be  held,  which
undoubtedly*  lessens  the  succeeding  inflammation,  and  soon  gives  ease.
This  I  have  often  seen,  and  probably  it  can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the
principle  of  producing  the  act  of  contraction  in  the  vessels.

I  have  taken  a  bucket  of  cold  spring  water  with  me,  when  I  have
made  an  attempt  on  a  wasp's  nest,  and  put  my  hand  into  it  after  having
been  stung,  and  while  my  hand  was  in  the  water  I  felt  no  pain,  but  when
I  took  it  out,  the  pain  was  greater  than  when  I  put  it  in.  This  is  not
the  case  with  other  applications,  for  their  specific  virtues  are  not  counter-
acted by  any  natural  circumstance  attending  the  body,  and  then  they  can
be  applied  with  a  continuance  to  any  part  where  the  skin  is  thin.  The
blisters  commonly  break,  and  so  much  the  better,  as  the  application  can
come  in  contact  with  the  inflamed  surface,  but  on  the  hand,  foot,  fingers,
and  toes,  especially  in  working  people,  and  those  who  walk  much,  the
blisters  seldom  break  of  themselves ;  they  should  be  pricked  with  a
needle  to  take  off  the  tension.

When  the  inflammation  has  gone  through  its  stages,  then  the  parts
should  be  allowed  to  dry.  This  in  many  parts  is  very  awkward,  as  when
a  large  surface  of  the  body  is  scalded,  for  exposure  is  necessary,  and  in
some  parts  it  is  almost  impossible,  as  behind  the  ears,  armpits,  etc. To


Union  by  the  first  intention.  2 1 9

keep  the  cloths  from  sticking  to  the  parts,  it  is  necessary  to  powder  it
with  some  inoffensive  powder,  such  as  lapis  calaminaris,  very  fine  powder-
ed chalk ;  this  does  not  hinder  evaporation,  the  principle  of  scabbing ;
and  if  the  discharge  should  be  so  much  at  first  as  to  moisten  the  first
powdering,  then  strew  more  over  the  whole,  till  it  forms  a  hard  crust.

This  is  hardly  necessary  on  the  face,  but  it  will  rather  dry  sooner  by
being  at  first  powdered.  In  such  cases  nature  will  go  on  infinitely  far-
ther than  if  the  parts  had  been  disturbed  by  our  applications.


V.  ACCIDENTS  ATTENDED  WITH  DEATH  IN  A  SUPERFICIAL  PART

In  the  foregoing  account  of  injuries  done  to  the  body,  and  of  the  modes
of  restoration,  we  have  been  so  far  from  considering  inflammation  as  one
of  them,  that  hitherto  it  has  been  inculcated  to  guard  against  it  with  the
utmost  care.

It  sometimes,  however,  takes  place,  and  is  one  of  the  modes  of  restora-
tion when  the  methods  abovementioned  fail,  as  well  as  a  mode  of  restor-
ing parts  under  disease,  we  shall  therefore  proceed  to  explain  its  principle;
but  as  there  are  accidents  already  mentioned,  which  often  advance  to  sup-
puration, I  shall  now  treat  of  them.

Among  the  divisions  of  accidents,  one  is  where  death  is  produced  in
the  injured  parts,  and  where  inflammation  and  suppuration  must  take
place,  in  consequence  of  the  dead  parts  which  separate  not  being  within
the  power  of  the  former  treatment  to  produce  a  cure;  but  it  should  be
remembered,  that  the  inflammation,  which  is  the  forerunner  of  suppura-
tion in  such  cases,  is  not  nearly  so  great  as  even  the  inflammation  arising
from  a  wound  that  suppurates.  In  many  accidents,  such  as  bruises,
the  skin  preserves  its  living  powers,  while  the  cellular  membrane  under-
neath has  become  dead  ;  this  will  afterwards  produce  an  abscess,  and  must
be  treated  as  abscesses  commonly  are,  remembering  that,  in  the  present
case,  the  abscess,  after  being  opened,  will  be  later  in  acquiring  the  heal-


.220  Union  by  the  first  intention,

ing  disposition  than  abscesses  are  commonly ;  the  dead  cellular  membrane
must  separate,  which  will  come  away  like  wet  dirty  lint.

It  sometimes  happens,  that  in  one  part,  the  skin ;  in  another,  the
cellular  membrane  only  shall  become  dead  j  and  in  such  cases,  I  have
often  observed  that  the  bruised  skin  sloughs  much  sooner  than  the  cellular
membrane  ;  an  abscess,  therefore,  is  frequently  forming  under  the  sound
skin  while  the  other  parts  are  healing,  a  circumstance  which  often  disap-
points both  the  patient  and  surgeon.

When  the  wound,  or  the  dead  part,  is  considerable,  it  is  probable  the
treatment  will,  in  general,  be  very  proper,  because  the  degree  of  mischief
calling  up  the  attention  of  the  surgeon,  and  producing  acquiesence  in
the  patient,  he  will  be  induced  to  submit  to  whatever  may  be  thought
necessary.  The  best  application,  at  first,  will  probably  be  a  poultice,
which  should  be  either  simple  or  medicated,  according  to  the  nature  of
the  succeeding  inflammation,  and  continued  either  till  the  inflammation
has  subsided,  and  suppuration  come  on  sufficient  to  keep  the  parts
moist,  or  till  the  slough  has  entirely  separated,  when  the  sore  may  be
dressed  according  to  its  particular  disposition.  But  such  accidents  as  have
a  superficial  part  killed,  when  the  slough  would  readily  separate,  and  the
part  suppurate  kindly,  are  often  treated  improperly  at  first,  by  the  patients
themselves  applying  Friar's  balsam,  or  some  such  medicines ;  but  these
not  being  within  the  power  of  scabbing,  inflammation  comes  on  and
alarms  the  patient,  a  poultice  is  then  commonly  applied,  which  removes
the  first  dressing,  and  the  slough  appears,  which  gives  a  disagreeable  ap-
pearance to  the  wound,  and  it  is  supposed  to  be  a  foul  sore.  From  such
an  idea  various  methods  are  employed,  and  the  application  of  red  precipi-
tate, etc.  but  with  no  good  effect ;  and  the  patient  becomes  fretted  from
a  sore,  apparently  so  trifling,  being  so  difficult  to  heal ;  but  it  is  impossible
that  such  a  sore  can  heal,  while  there  is  a  slough  to  separate.  It  is,
therefore,  the  surgeon's  business  to  inform  himself  of  the  nature  of  the
complaint,  to  explain  it  to  his  patient,  who  will  then  become  better  satis-
fied, and  less  uneasy  about  his  own  situation.  When  this  piece  of  slough
comes  away,  the  sore  will  put  on  an  appearance  according  to  the  nature
of  the  constitution,  or  of  the  part,  and  is  to  be  treated  accordingly.


[ 221 ]

CHAPTER  II.
FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  INFLAMMATION.


An  animal  in  perfect  health  is  to  be  considered  as  a  perfect  machine,
no  part  of  it  appearing  naturally  weaker  than  another,  yet  this  is  not
strictly  true ;  but  still  if  no  relative  action,  with  regard  to  external  mat-
ter, was  to  take  place,  the  machine  would,  in  itself,  be  tolerably  perfect
for  its  own  actions.  As  the  animal,  however,  is  employed  upon  com-
mon matter,  and  therefore  liable  to  accidents,  which  interrupt  the  natu-
ral operations,  it  becomes  absolutely  necessary  for  its  continuance,  that
it  should  possess,  within  itself,  the  power  of  repair  ;  we  find  it  accord-
ingly endowed  with  powers  of  repair  upon  many  such  occasions ;  but
where  parts  give  way  from  their  own  natural  actions,  this  mischief  can-
not be  repaired ;  because,  if  they  are  not  able  to  sustain  their  own  actions,
they  cannot  recover  when  diseased  or  injured.  It  is  found  that  some
structures  of  parts  more  readily  give  way  than  others,  and  conse-
quently are  much  longer  in  repair,  either  when  diseased  or  injured  by
accident.  We  also  find  that  different  situations,  of  similar  parts,  give
them  advantages  or  disadvantages,  with  regard  to  their  powers  of  restora-
tion. This  is  principally  known  from  injuries  being  done  to  them,  or  in
consequence  of  those  injuries  from  the  attack  of  a  disease.

It  is  also  shewn  in  the  common  actions  of  the  body,  or  parts,  of  which,
in  health,  we  have  comparative  trials.  We  never  can  know  what  a  thing
is  incapable  of  doing  till  it  gives  way,  which  giving  way  is  either  a
disease,  or  productive  of  it :  nor  can  we  know  the  powers  of  restoration  in
the  part  till  tried.

As  a  proof  that  parts  cannot  always  be  proportioned  to  the  action  or
powers  applied,  which  have  no  action  within  themselves,  but  are  only
acted  upon  by  external  force,  we  adduce  the  instances  of  a  broken  patella,


222  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

or  broken  tendo  achillis,  or  a  thickening  of  the  valves  of  the  heart.  In  the
first,  however,  there  is  commonly  another  power  superadded  besides  simply
the  actions  of  the  parts,  viz.  the  body  falling  and  being  stopped  at  once.
In  the  valves  of  the  aorta,  however,  and  the  valvula  mitralis,  we  have
the  best  examples,  for  they  become  thickened  from  the  actions  of  the
parts  themselves ;  while  no  such  effect  takes  place  in  the  valves  of  the
pulmonary  artery,  even  an  anuerism  proves  the  same.

Where  there  is  a  difference  in  structure,  there  are  comparative  powers
to  resist  the  consequences  of  actions,  attended  with  injury,  such  as  their
admitting  more  or  less  readily  of  thickening,  ulceration,  or  mortification,
and  their  comparative  powers  of  restoration.  When  we  compare  the
powers  of  restoration  in  muscle,  nerve,  cellular  membrane,  ligament,
tendon,  bone,  etc.  with  each  other,  they  are  found  to  be  very  different.
Muscles,  skin,  and  probably  nerves,  possess  the  greatest  powers  of  that
kind  j  and  the  cellular  membrane,  ligament,  tendon,  bone,  etc.  the  least,
and  are,  in  this  respect,  pretty  equal  among  themselves.  How  far  elastic
ligaments  have  powers  of  resistance  and  repair,  I  do  not  know,  but  I
should  suppose  they  had  them  in  a  very  considerable  degree,  from  the
vessels  not  giving  way  so  readily  as  in  many  of  the  others.

Their  comparative  powers  become  pretty  evident  in  most  of  their  dis-
eases, but  chiefly,  I  think,  in  mortification.  As  mortification  is  the  most
simple  effect  of  debility,  it  gives  the  comparative  powers  of  parts  in  the
most  simple  manner.  We  find  that  muscles,  skin,  and  often  blood-
vessels, stand  their  ground,  while  they  are  deprived  of  their  connecting
membrane,  which  has  either  sloughed  off,  or  ulcerated  j  tendons  likewise
slough  off  as  far  as  these  muscles,  and  stop  there.

I  have  also  observed,  that  difference  in  the  situation  of  similar  struc-
tures in  the  body  makes  a  material  difference  both  in  the  powers  of  re-
sistance to  injuries,  and  of  reparation  when  injuries  have  taken  place.
This  difference  seems  to  arise  in  proportion  to  the  distance  of  the  parts
from  the  heart,  or  source  of  the  circulation.  Thus  we  see  muscles,  skin,
etc.  becoming  more  readily  diseased  in  the  legs  than  any  where  else,
and  more  slow  in  their  progress  towards  a  cure  ;  but  this  is  not  wholly  to
be  laid  to  the  charge  of  situation  or  distance  from  the  source  of  the  circu-


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  223

lation,  some  portion  of  it  is  to  be  attributed  to  position,  the  legs  being  de-
pending parts,  and  those  parts  which  are  most  distinct  happen  also  to  be
the  most  dependent*.  We  find  an  horizontal  position  assist  in  the  repair
of  such  parts,  but  even  then  they  are  not  equal  in  their  powers  to  parts
situated  about  the  chest;  the  difference  therefore  is  principally  to  be  attri-
buted to  situation,  or  distance  from  the  heart.  The  same  disease  that
shewed  the  comparative  powers  between  the  muscle  and  tendon,  shews
also  that  they  are  equally  affected  by  position  ;  thus  we  see  ulceration
and  mortification  taking  place  in  the  lower  extremity,  as  such,  more
readily  and  with  less  powers  of  repair,  than  happens  in  parts  near  the
chest.

This  is  still  more  the  case  if  the  person  be  tall.  This  is  seen  by  chang-
ing a  limb  from  a  horizontal  position,  in  which  it  was  easy,  to  a  depen-
dent one,  wherein  it  feels  pain ;  because  the  new  position  increases  the
length  of  the  column  of  blood  in  the  veins.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that
the  retardation  of  the  cure  is  more  owing  to  a  stagnation  of  the  blood  in
the  veins,  from  the  length  of  the  column,  than  from  a  deficiency  in  the
motion  of  the  blood  in  the  arteries.  As  the  readiness  of  a  part  to  fall  into
disease,  and  its  backwardness  to  admit  of  cure,  arises  from  position,  it  is
in  some  degree  compensated  by  rest  and  a  change  of  the  position.

These  differences  in  the  structure,  situation,  and  position  of  parts  in
the  body,  make,  I  believe,  but  little  difference  in  the  progress  of  specific
diseases :  the  venereal  disease,  however,  certainly  does  not  make  such
progress  in  bone,  tendon,  etc.  as  in  the  skin,  nor  does  the  cure  advance  so
rapidly  in  those  parts ;  but  both  these  effects  may  be  attributed  to  another
cause,  which  is,  that  bones  and  tendons  are  more  deeply  seated.  I  believe,
however,  that  position  makes  no  difference  in  the  disease  itself,  although
it  may  have  some  influence  upon  the  power  of  cure,  and  perhaps  in  all
specific  diseases,  in  the  progress  towards  a  cure  ;  for  a  venereal  sore  is
always  approaching  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  nature  of  a  common  sore,
and  therefore  is  more  and  more  readily  influenced  by  what  influences  a
common  sore.

*  We  find  in  most  authors  the  whole  laid  to  this,  which  I  shall  more  fully  discuss  in  the
history  of  opinions.


224  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

But  in  diseases,  for  which  there  is  at  present  no  cure,  as  the  cancer,  I
believe  it  makes  no  difference  where  it  is  situated,  or  in  what  it  is  placed,
except  in  the  case  of  such  parts  as  have  a  tendency  to  such  diseases,  which
no  one  of  the  parts  abovementioned  has  more  than  another.

I  have  so  far  considered,  in  the  general  way,  the  comparative  powers
of  different  structures,  of  different  situations,  and  of  different  positions  in
some  parts  of  the  body  when  affected  by  disease.  Disease  is  the  only  cir-
cumstance which  exposes  these  principles  to  our  view,  but  to  see  how  far
the  same  principle  was  carried  in  natural  operations,  of  which  the  most
remarkable  is  the  growth  of  parts,  I  made  several  experiments  on  fowls.
The  first  was  the  common  experiment  of  transplanting  the  spur  of  a
young  chicken  from  its  leg  to  its  comb,  in  which  experiment  I  always
found  that  the  spur  on  the  comb,  whea  it  took  root,  grew  much  faster
and  became  much  larger  than  that  left  on  the  leg.  This  I  attributed  to
the  greater  power  of  action  in  the  comb  than  in  the  leg,  although  they
are  pretty  nearly  at  equal  distances  from  the  source  of  the  circulation  ;  but
probably  position  also  favoured  it,  as  there  was  no  stagnation  in  the  veins
of  the  head.  In  the  power  of  producing  such  effects  in  disease,  as  well  as
in  the  growth  of  parts,  I  was  then  desirous  to  know  the  comparative  de-
grees between  the  male  and  the  female.  I  wished  also  to  ascertain  if  the
parts  peculiar  to  the  male  could  grow  on  the  female,  and  if  the  parts  of  a
female,  on  the  contrary,  would  grow  on  a  male.

Although  I  had  formerly  transplanted  the  testicles  of  a  cock  into  the
abdomen  of  a  hen,  and  they  had  sometimes  taken  root  there,  but  not
frequently,  and  then  had  never  come  to  perfection,  yet  the  experiment
could  not,  from  this  cause,  answer  fully  the  intended  purpose  ;  there  is,
I  believe,  a  natural  reason  to  believe  it  could  not,  and  the  experiment  was
therefore  disregarded*.  I  took  the  spur  from  the  leg  of  a  young  cock,
and  placed  it  in  the  situation  of  the  spur  in  the  leg  of  a  hen  chicken,  it
took  root,  the  chicken  grew  to  a  hen,  but  at  first  no  spur  grew,  while
the  spur  that  was  left  on  the  other  leg  of  the  cock,  grew  as  usual.

This  experiment  I  have  repeated  several  times,  in  the  same  summer,

*  Vide  book  on  Teeth.


Fundamental  pri?iciples  of  inflammation.. .  225

with  the  same  effects,  which  led  me  to  conceive  that  .the  spur  of  a  cock
would  not  grow  upon  a  hen,  and  that  they  were,  therefore,  to  be  considered
as  distinct  animals,  having  very  distinct  powers.  In  order  to  ascertain  this,
I  took  the  spurs  of  hen  chickens  and  placed  them  on  the  legs  of  young
1  cocks.  I  found  that  those  which  took  root,  grew  nearly  as  fast,  and  to
as  large  a  size  as  the  natural  spur  on  the  other  leg,  which  appeared  to  be
a  contradiction  to  my  other  experiments.  Upon  another  examination  of
my  hens,  however,  I  found  that  the  spurs  had  grown  considerably,  although
they  had  taken  several  years  to  do  it ;  for  I  found  that  the  same  quantity
of  growth  in  the  spur  of  the  cock,  while  on  the  cock  during  one  year,
was  as  much  as  that  of  the  cock's  spur  on  the  hen  in  the  course  of  three
or  four  years,  or  as  three  or  four  to  one ;  whereas  the  growth  of  the  hen's
spur  on  the  cock  was  to  that  of  the  proper  spur  of  the  cock  as  two  to
one.  These  experiments  shew  that  there  is  an  inequality  of  powers  in
different  parts  of  the  same  animal,  and  that  the  legs  have  much  less  than
the  comb  ;  they  also  shew  that  there  is  a  material  difference  in  the  powers
of  the  male  and  the  female.  The  spurs  of  a  cock  were  found  to  possess
powers  beyond  those  of  a  hen,  while  at  the  same  time,  the  one  animal  as
a  whole,  has  more  powers  than  the  other ;  yet  when  I  apply  these  prin-
ciples to  the  powers  of  cure  in  local  diseases  of  the  two  sexes  in  the  hu-
man race,  I  can  hardly  say  that  I  have  observed  any  difference.  It  is  to
be  observed,  however,  that  women  commonly  live  a  much  more  temperate
life  than  men,  which  certainly  must  have  considerable  influence  both  with
regard  to  resisting  and  curing  diseases.

In  all  complicated  animals,  among  which  man  is  the  most  complex,
the  parts  are  composed  of  different  structures,  and  we  find  that  in  such
animals  the  powers  of  action  of  those  different  structures  within  themselves
are  very  different ;  when  they  are  therefore  excited  to  any  common  action,
the  varieties  produced  should  be  well  known  and  particularly  attended
to.  Besides,  every  similar  structure  in  different  animals  does  not  always
act  in  the  same  manner.  Thus  we  cannot  make  a  horse  vomit ;  nor
can  we  give  many  specific  diseases,  which  attack  the  human  subject,  to
any  other  animal,  more  particularly  the  morbid  poisons.  The  mode,
therefore,  of  action  in  one  animal  does  not  implicetly  direct  to  the  mode


226  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

of  action  in  another ;  nor  does  the  same  structure  in  the  same  animal
always  act  in  the  same  way  at  all  times  :  it  acts  at  various  times  in  a
way  similar  to  the  same  structure  in  various  animals  ;  and  besides,  the
same  structure  varies  its  action  in  different  situations  in  the  same  animal.
Besides,  the  exterior  actions  of  life  make  a  very  material  difference  in  the
internal  actions  of  animals,  or  in  the  excitement  of  disease,  either  univer-
sally or  locally  -}  for  there  are  parts  which  cannot  bear  one  mode  of  life,
while  there  are  other  parts  which  cannot  bear  another.  Parts  and  mode
of  life  being  in  opposition  with  each  other,  A  great  many  of  these  varieties
depends  upon  the  difference  in  the  natural  strength  and  weakness  of  the
parts;  but  as  those  vary  very  considerably  in  different  habits,  so  the  va-
rieties are  increased «  and  likewise,  as  many  occurrences  in  life  produce
the  principle  of  strength  or  weakness,  we  have  those  varieties  still  more
increased,  as  well  as  disease.

These  observations,  as  heads,  I  shall  treat  more  fully,  but  not  as  my
principle  subject,  attending  to  them  only  so  far  as  they  are  connected
with  inflammation,  and  may  illustrate  the  varieties  in  that  action.


I.  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  CAUSES  WHICH  INCREASE  AND  DIMINISH  THE
SUSCEPTIBILITY  FOR  INFLAMMATION  EITHER  IN  THE  WHOLE

BODY  OR  IN  PARTS.

Susceptibility  for  inflammation  may  be  said  to  have  two  causes,  the
one  original,  the  other  acquired.  The  original  constitutes  a  part  of  the
animal  ceconomy,  and  is  probably  inexplicable.

Of  the  acquired  it  is  probable  that  climate,  and  modes  of  life,  may
tend  considerably  either  to  diminish  or  increase  the  susceptibility  for  in-
flammation.

The  influence,  however,  of  climate  may  not  be  so  great  as  it  commonly
appears  to  be,  for  it  is  generally  accompanied  by  modes  of  life  that  are
not  suited  to  others  -,  and  if  we  consider  how  much  less  pernicious  many


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  227

climates  are  now  than  they  were  formerly,  arising  from  the  mode  of
living  being  different,  we  may  be  led  to  allow  less  influence  to  climate ;
and  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  consider  how  diseases  become  multiplied
and  varied  in  the  same  climate,  we  shall  see  that  climate  alone  is  not  at-
tended with  so  much  variety  as  may  have  been  supposed.

It  is  observed  by  some  of  the  ablest  physicians  of  this  day,  that  the  fever
called  inflammatory,  is  now  not  so  common  in  this  country  as  it  was  for-
merly represented  to  have  been ;  that  it  is  now  seldom  that  in  fevers  they
are  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  lancet,  at  least  to  that  excess  which  is
described  by  authors  in  former  times.  They  are  now  more  obliged  to
have  recourse  to  cordials  than  evacuations,  and  indeed  the  disease  called
the  putrid  fever,  and  putrid  sore  throat,  are  but  of  late  date.  I  remember
when  the  last  was  called,  Fothergill's  sore  throat,  because  he  first  pub-
lished upon  it,  and  altered  the  mode  of  practice.  I  remember  when
practitioners  uniformly  bled  in  putrid  fevers  ;  but  signs  of  debility  and
want  of  success  made  them  alter  their  practice.

Whether  the  same  difference  takes  place  in  inflammation  I  do  not
know,  but  I  suspect  that  it  does  in  some  degree,  for  I  am  inclined  to  be-
lieve that  fever  and  inflammation  are  very  nearly  allied,  that  is,  that  either
will  be  according  to  the  constitution,  which  is  not  the  case  with  specific
diseases,  excepting  in  their  common  modes  of  action,  which  consist  either
in  fever  or  inflammation  -3  but  I  believe  we  have  much  less  occasion  for  eva-
cuations in  inflammation  than  there  were  formerly,  the  lancet,  therefore,
in  inflammation,  and  also  purgatives,  are  much  more  laid  aside.  How
far  climate  varies  the  constitution  so  as  to  alter  the  nature  of  diseases,  I
•do  not  at  present  know  -y  but  it  would  appear  from  Dr.  Blane's  account,
that  inflammation  is  hardly  a  disease  in  the  West  Indies.

.  How  far  an  alteration  in  the  mode  of  life  is  the  cause  of  this  difference,
I  will  not  pretend  to  say,  but  certainly  the  way  of  life  is  very  much  al-
tered. We  certainly  live  now  more  fully  than  what  they  did  formerly.
We  may  be  said  to  live  above  par.  At  the  full  stretch  of  living,
therefore,  when  disease  attacks  us,  our  powers  cannot  be  excited  further,
and  we  sink,  so  as  to  require  being  supported  and  kept  up  to  that  mode
of  life  to  which  we  have  been  accustomed.


228  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

A  kind  of  constant  state  and  variety  of  mind  may  often  alter  constitu-
tions so  much  as  to  alter  the  mode  of  diseased  action,  which  is  much
more  common  in  some  countries  than  others.  We  may  be  pretty  certain
that  this  state  of  mind  often  produces  the  inflammation  of  the  gout.

Probably  there  is  but  little  power  in  art  to  correct  the  susceptibility  of
inflammation  ;  however,  if  the  susceptibility  of  the  body  be  similar  to  that
of  the  mind  it  ought  to  be  in  some  degree  corrected  by  art.  The  mind  is
corrected  by  reason,  together  with  habit,  but  the  body  can  only  have  the
last  employed  upon  it  ;  it  might  be  made  less  susceptible  by  the  imme-
diate causes  coming  slowly  upon  it,  or  by  avoiding  those  causes  and  even
acting  in  diametrical  opposition  to  them  ;  this  will  at  least  answer  in  the
acquired  susceptibilities.  The  acquired  susceptibility  for  inflammation,
or  indeed  for  any  other  disease  as  it  is  acquired  by  art  or  habit,  may  be  les-
sened simply  by  a  cessation  of  those  habits  ;  and  if  the  habit  is  of  any
particular  kind,  which  is  always  ascertainable,  then  the  habit  of  the  con-
trary is  to  be  used,  which  must  also  be  ascertainable.

Strength  and  weakness  are  the  opposites  of  each  other,  and  therefore
must  have  very  different  effects  in  disease.  They  have  very  different
powers  in  resisting  disease  in  their  mode  of  action,  and  also  their  readiness
to  terminate  that  action.

Strength,  probably,  under  every  circumstance,  produces  good  effects,  or
at  least  it  is  always  more  in  the  power  of  management,  by  art,  than  weak-
ness ;  I  can  conceive,  however,  that  too  much  strength  might  act  with  too
much  power,  becoming  unmanageable  under  disease  that  excites  action.

In  inflammation,  when  the  constitution  is  strong,  then  it  will  be  com-
monly the  most  manageable,  for  strength  lessens  irritability  :  but  in  every
kind  of  constitution,  inflammation  will  be  the  most  manageable  where  the
power  and  the  action  are  pretty  well  proportioned ;  but  as  every  part  of
the  body  has  not  equal  strength,  these  proportions  cannot  be  the  same  in
every  part  of  the  same  constitution.  According  to  this  idea  of  strength,
the  following  parts,  viz.  muscles,  cellular  membrane,  and  skin,  and  more
so  in  proportion  as  they  are  nearer  to  the  source  of  the  circulation,  will  be


Fundamental  principle's  of  inflammation,  229

most  manageable  in  inflammation  and  its  consequences,  because  they  are
stronger  in  their  powers  of  action  than  the  other  parts  of  the  body.

The  other  parts,  as  bone,  tendon,  ligament,  etc.  fall  into  an  inflamma-
tion which  is  less  in  the  power  of  art  to  manage,  because,  though  the
constitution  is  good,  yet  they  have  less  powers  within  themselves,  and
therefore  are  attended  with  the  feeling  of  their  own  weakness ;  and  I  be-
lieve they  affect  the  constitution  more  readily  than  the  former,  because
the  constitution  is  more  affected  by  local  disease,  when  the  parts  have  less
power  within  themselves  of  doing  well ;  and  the  effects,  if  bad  on  the
constitution,  reflect  a  backwardness  on  the  little  powers  they  have.
Strength  and  weakness  of  the  constitution,  or  of  parts,  are  synonymous
terms  with  a  greater  or  less  quantity  of  animal  life,  or  living  principle
joined  with  powers  of  action.

The  inflammation,  if  in  vital  parts,  will  be  still  less  manageable,  for
although  the  parts  themselves  may  have  pretty  strong  powers,  yet  the
constitution,  and  the  natural  operations  of  universal  health,  become  so
much  affected,  that  no  salutary  effect  can  so  readily  take  place,  and  there-
fore the  disease  becomes  less  manageable.

If  the  vital  part  is  the  stomach,  or  such  as  the  stomach  readily  sympa-
thises with,  inflammation,  in  such  parts,  will  be  still  less  manageable,  for
no  operation  can  go  on  well,  either  in  the  stomach  or  in  other  parts,
where  this  viscus  is  affected,  as  the  powers  of  restoration  become  weaker
than  ever.

In  weak  constitutions,  although  the  inflammation  be  in  parts  which  ad-
mit of  the  most  salutary  operations,  in  the  time  of  the  disease,  and  in  situa-
tions the  most  favourable  to  restoration  after  disease,  yet  the  operations  of
inflammation  are  proportionably  more  backward,  as  to  their  salutary
effects,  in  such  constitutions,  and  more  or  less  according  to  the  nature  of
the  parts  affected,  which  I  shall  now  consider  more  fully.


23°  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation,

II.  EFFECTS  OF  STRENGTH  OR  WEAKNESS  OF  CONSTITUTION,  AND
OF  PARTS,  WHILE  UNDER  INFLAMMATION.

Whatever  is  to  be  the  consequence  of  injuries,  especially  inflamma-
tion, is  produced  much  more  readily  in  a  strong  constitution  than  in  a  weak
one.  A  wound,  for  instance,  made  upon  a  person  of  an  healthy  constitu-
tion, and  sound  parts,  will  unite  almost  at  once ;  it  admits  readily  of  an
union  by  the  first  intention.  A  greater  strength  of  constitution  and  of  parts,
admits  of  resolution,  while  in  the  adhesive  state  of  inflammation,  very
readily,  and  therefore  tends  much  to  prevent  the  suppurative  inflammation
from  taking  place,  for  it  gives  a  better  disposition  to  heal  by  the  adhesive  •
so  that  the  union  of  parts  by  the  first  intention,  the  inflammation  and  re-
solution, as  well  as  the  readiness  to  change  from  the  one  to  the  other,
according  as  the  preceding,  is  prevented,  depends  equally  upon  the  strength
and  health  of  constitution  and  parts  inflamed.  We  may  also  observe,
that  a  greater  strength  and  soundness  of  the  constitution,  or  parts  inflam-
ed, when  the  inflammation  has  got  beyond  the  stage  of  resolution,  and  has
assumed  the  disposition  for  suppuration,  hastens  on  inflammation  and  sup-
puration, and  also  brings  it  soon  to  a  termination,  while,  at  the  same  time,
the  matter  is  brought  more  quickly  to  the  skin  by  ulceration.

Whatever,  therefore,  is  the  step  which  nature  is  to  take,  whenever  an
injury  is  done,  or  a  necessity  for  inflammation  has  taken  place,  it  is  per-
formed with  readiness  and  facility  in  strong  constitutions  and  parts.

Weakness  of  constitution  and  weakness  of  parts,  are  supposed  to  be  the
immediate  cause  of  most  tedious  or  chronic  diseases.  It  appears  to  be
often  used  as  a  general  term,  as  have  also  nervous,  bilious,  to  denote  any
thing  for  which  we  cannot  well  account,  and  to  which,  I  am  certain,
there  has  been  affixed  no  precise  meaning.  Every  action  that  is  not  acute,
especially  a  mild  continuation  of  some  of  the  symptons  of  a  former  violent
disease,  is  called  weakness.  Thus  a  gleet  is  called  a  weakness,  fluor  albus
is  called  a  weakness,  diarrhoea  is  called  a  weakness ;  none  of  which  I  con-
ceive simply  to  arise  from  weakness;  for  I  believe  that  weakness  seldom  or
«ver  becomes  an  immediate  cause  of  disease,  or  action  of  any  kind ;  but


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  231

it  often  becomes  the  predisposing  cause  of  disease,  many  diseases  not  taking
place,  except  where  weakness  is  an  attendant,  as  agues,  scrophula,  ner-
vous, etc.  none  of  which  are  simple  weakness  ;  and  it  may  continue  many
diseases  when  they  have  already  taken  place.  This  is,  I  think,  very  evident
in  many  diseases  which  would  terminate  well  if  there  was  strength  in  the
constitution  to  perform  the  right  actions.  However,  where  there  is  a
strong  susceptibility  for  any  one  disease,  in  which  weakness  might  also
become  a  predisposing  cause,  I  can  believe  that,  in  such  cases,  weakness,
especially  if  suddenly  brought  on,  may  become  an  immediate  cause  of  that
disease  j  as,  for  instance,  a  man  may,  from  a  wound,  or  any  other  cause,
have  a  strong  tendency  to  a  locked  jawj  if  you  bleed  that  man  freely,  it  is
a  thousand  to  one  but  that  a  locked  jaw  comes  on  :  weakness  produces  a
consciousness  of  its  own  want  of  powers,  or  incapacity,  which  produces  in-
creased action,  that  even  proceeds  the  length  of  unnatural  actions,  called
nervous.  These  effects,  are  no  less  visible  in  acute  diseases  in  such  constitu-
tions, which  include  accidents,  or  violence,  of  all  kinds ;  for  they  run  into
too  violent  action,  which  is  not  of  a  salutary  kind,  and  therefore  may  be
called  unnatural  diseased  action.

When  a  wound  is  made  in  a  person  of  a  weak  habit,  there  is  a  great
backwardness  in  the  two  cut  surfaces  to  unite  by  the  first  intention,  therefore
inflammation  takes  place  if  there  be  strength  of  constitution  to  produce  it,
which  is  not  always  the  case;  so  that  in  such  habits  inflammation  is  more
likely  to  be  a  consequence  ;  but  this  does  not  arise  from  a  greater  readi-
ness to  inflammation  in  the  habit,  but  from  a  want  of  power  and  dispo-
sition to  heal,  which  renders  inflammation  necessary ;  however,  in  this
case  the  want  of  powers  or  disposition  to  unite  may  partly  depend  upon  a
different  principle  from  that  of  weak  parts  or  solids ;  it  is  probable  that
the  blood  of  people  of  weak  habits  is  weak  in  its  living  principle,  which
it  therefore  very  soon  loses  upon  extravasation,  so  as  to  become  unfit  for
a  bond  of  union,  by  which  it  degenerates  into  an  extraneous  body,  and
therefore  the  suppurative  inflammation  must  take  place  if  there  be  strength
to  produce  it.

In  weak  habits  and  diseased  parts,  inflammation  is  slow  in  any  of  its
salutary  effects,  and  is  hardly  capable  of  either  producing  the  adhesive  or


232  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation*

suppurative  inflammation;  if  they  should  take  place,  it  is  but  imperfectly,
artd  the  surrounding  inflamed  parts  of  the  suppurating  surfaces  are  hardly
capable  of  resolution,  but  continue  inflamed  ;  we  even  find  in  many  con-
stitutions, where  the  animal  powers  are  very  much  weakened,  that  instead
of  their  readily  running  into  inflammation,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  promote
it,  even  from  a  breach  of  continuity  in  the  solids,  which,  in  most  other
cases,  is  surest  of  being  followed  by  inflammation  :  such  constitutions
are  in  general  those  which  are  dropsical  :  I  have  seen  several  cases,
where  the  power  has  been  so  weak,  that  the  wound,  after  tapping,
has  not  united  by  the  first  intention,  nor  has  even  acquired  the  adhesive
state  of  inflammation,  and  has  admitted  water  to  pass  through  it  from  the
abdomen  for  several  weeks  without  the  peritoneal  inflammation  being
excited.  In  the  same  dropsical  habits,  I  have  seen  scarifications  in  the
legs  or  feet  not  inflame,  so  that  the  cells  were  not  united,  but  continue
io  discharge  the  water  for  many  weeks.  In  such  cases  of  extreme  weak-
ness, this  total  want  of  inflammation  would  appear  to  be  a  salutary
effect;  for  in  many  dropsical  cases,  where  the  parts  have  powers  to  inflame,
but  not  sufficient  to  go  through  the  different  stages  of  the  inflammation,
and  at  last  resolve,  as  in  healthy  constitutions,  the  inflammation  generally
produces  a  total  loss. of  animal  powers,  and  the  part  mortifies,  which
often  produces  death  in  the  whole,  so  that  in  such  cases  the  parts  only
act  to  destroy  themselves*.  As  a  further  proof  that  debility  is  often  the
cause  of  increased  inflammation,  in  consequence  of  any  violence,  and  often
the  cause  of  mortification,  is  plainly  shewn  in  Mr.  Dick's  account  of
dropsies  among  the  troops  in  the  East  Indies,  Edin.  Med.  Com.  In
the  first  year  of  the  attack  in  any  man,  he  durst  not  venture  to  scarify  the
legs,  but  when  they  were  attacked  with  the  same  disease  the  year  fol-
lowing, which  was  often  the  case,  whenever  he  attempted  to  scarify  the
legs,  a  violent  inflammation  and  mortification  were  the  consequence.  He
was  in  this  second  attack  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  strengtheners ;  and
we  may  observe  that,  in  the  case  of  tapping,  if  the  constitution  is  irritable,
the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  commonly  feels  the  effect,  and  inflammation
of  the  peritoneum,  and  death  is  the  consequence.

*  Vide  paper  on  the  Recovery  of  drowned  Peoplet


"Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  233

As  the  effect  which  this  inflammation  has  upon  the  constitution  is  by
sympathy,  it  must  be  in  proportion  to  the  readiness  with  which  the  con-
stitution assumes  that  action.  This  susceptibility  is  stronger  in  some
constitutions  than  in  others ;  and  every  constitution  is  more  susceptible  of
sympathy  with  some  parts  of  the  body  than  with  others.

The  kind  of  constitution  which  is  least  affected  by  this  inflammation,
is  that  which  is  in  general  most  healthy,  where  sympathy  hardly  takes
place  ;  this  happens  to  be  the  case  with  such  constitutions  as  can  most
readily  perform  all  the  different  operations  with  ease  ;  and  when  the  parts
inflamed  are  able  to  manage  their  own  business,  they  thereby  affect  the
constitution  less  ;  for  we  fhall  find,  that  a  constitution  may  be  affected  by
a  local  disease,  merely  because  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  the  part  to  cure
itself.

But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  constitutions  in  full  vigor,  or  which  have
not  been  in  the  smallest  degree  accustomed  to  local  disease,  take  the  alarm
much  more  readily  than  those  which  are  not  in  such  full  health,  or  which
have  been  accustomed  with  local  disease.  Thus,  if  a  man  in  perfect  health
gets  a  very  bad  compound  fracture  in  the  leg,  or  has  his  leg  taken  off,
either  for  this  fracture  or  in  consequence  of  any  other  accident,  he  stands
a  much  worse  chance  of  recovery  than  one  who  has  been  accustomed  to
a  local  disease  j  even  the  man  with  the  compound  fracture  will  do  much
better,  if  his  leg  is  not  taken  off,  till  the  first  symptoms  are  over;  or  at
least  we  may  be  certain  that  the  symptoms  arifing  from  the  amputation
will  not  be  nearly  so  great  as  those  that  arise  at  first  from  the  fracture,  or
would  have  arisen  from  the  immediate  amputation.  This  would  appear  to
be  a  contradiction  to  the  above  position ;  but  upon  an  accurate  investigation
I  think  it  may  be  accounted  for ;  for  first,  I  do  not  look  upon  full  health,
as  the  best  condition  to  resist  disease;  disease  is  a  state  of  body  which  re-
quires a  medium;  health  brooks  disease  ill,  and  full  health  is  often  above
par;  persons  in  full  health  are  too  often  at  the  full  stretch  of  action,  and
cannot  bear  an  increase,  especially  when  diseased;  and  as  I  before  observed,
it  is  a  new  impression  on  the  constitution,  and  till  it  be  in  some  degree
accustomed  to  local  disease,  it  is  less  able  to  bear  such  as  .is  violent;  be-
sides, the  removal of  a  diseased  part  which  the  constitution  has  been

Hh


2  34.  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation*

accustomed  to,  and  which  is  rather  fretting  the  constitution,  is  adding  less
violence  than  the  removal  of  a  sound  part  in  perfect  harmony  with  the
constitution  -,  the  difference,  however,  is  not  wholly  owing  to  that  cause,
for  the  circumftance  of  a  constitution  being  accustomed  to  a  mode  of
life,  etc.  which  it  is  to  continue,  makes  a  considerable  difference.


III.  OF  PARTS  OF  THE  BODY  MOST  SUSCEPTIBLE  OF  THE  THREE
DIFFERENT  INFLAMMATIONS  TO  BE  TREATED  OF.

All  parts  of  the  body  are  susceptible  of  inflammation,  although  not  all
equally  so;  nor  will  all  parts  of  the  body  admit  readily  of  the  three  different
kinds  of  inflammation  I  mean  to  treat  of;  some  parts  admitting  readily
of  one  only,  others  of  two,  and  others  of  all  the  three  ;  which  difference
appears  to  be  according  to  the  situation  of  the  inflamed  parts  in  the  body,
and  also  the  nature  of  the  parts  inflamed.  The  cellular  membrane  the  first.
The  cellular  membrane  free  from  the  adipose,  appears  to  be  more  sus-
ceptible of  the  adhesive  inflammation,  than  the  adipose  membrane,  and
much  more  readily  passes  into  the  suppurative.  Whether  this  arises  from
surfaces  inflaming  more  readily  than  other  parts,  I  will  not  pretend  to  say.
Thus  we  see  that  the  cellular  membrane  connecting  parts  together  as
muscles,  and  the  cellular  membrane  connecting  the  adipose  to  muscles,
easily  inflames  and  runs  readily  into  suppuration,  and,  as  it  were,  separates
the  muscles  from  their  lateral  connexion,  and  even  separates  the  adipose
from  the  muscles,  while  the  skin  and  adipose  membrane  shall  only  be  highly
inflamed,  and  the  matter  so  formed  must  produce  ulceration  through  all  this
adipose  membrane,  to  get  to  the  skin,  and  then  through  the  skin,  in  which
last  mentioned  parts  it  is  much  more  tedious ;  ulceration,  therefore,  does
not  so  readily  take  place  in  those  parts  as  it  does  in  the  common  connecting
membrane.  Muscles,  nerves,  and  blood-vessels,  are  parts  which  nature
wishes  to  retain,  and  the  adipose  membrane  contains  a  substance  which  is
properly  no  part  of  the  animal,  viz.  oil;  it  may  therefore  be  more  difficult


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation .  235

for  this  part  to  be  absorbed  than  what  are  properly  the  parts  of  the  animal
itself.

As  a  deficiency  in  the  power  to  heal  becomes  a  stimulus,  or  an  incite-
ment to  inflammation,  we  find  that  similar  parts,  in  proportion  as  they  are
removed  from  the  source  of  the  circulation,  such  as  the  lower  extremities,
are  more  ready  to  inflame  than  others  not  so  circumstanced  -,  and  what  adds
to  this  backwardness  is  their  being  depending  parts,  which  adds  to  the
incitement.

The  deeper  seated  parts  of  the  body,  and  more  especially  the  vital,  very
readily  admit  of  the  adhesive  inflammation,  which  is  proved  by  dissections  ;
for  we  hardly  ever  open  a  human  subject  where  there  are  not  in  the  cir-
cumscribed cavities  considerable  adhesions  ;  and  most  probably  many  in
the  common  cellular  membrane,  if  they  were  equally  visible.

The  deeper  seated  parts,  however,  do  not  in  common  so  readily  pass  into
the  suppurative  inflammation  j  and  this  readiness  to  accept  of  the  adhesive,
most  probably  becomes  a  cause  why  the  suppurative  inflammation  does
not  so  readily  take  place.

But  if  the  inflammation  comes  on  at  once,  with  great  violence,  it  would
appear  to  pass  almost  at  once  over  the  adhesive,  immediately  to  the  sup-
purative action  ;  or  perhaps  where  it  may  appear  to  have  done  this,  there
may  be  an  erysepelatous  disposition;  for  although  it  is  not  the  disposition
of  the  erysepelatous  inflammation  to  suppurate,  yet  it  has  a  greater  back-
wardness to  produce  adhesions.  This  effect  we  often  find  take  place  in  the
abdomem,  in  the  thorax,  etc.  and  I  have  already  mentioned  that  I  sus-
pect the  erysepelatous  inflammation  does,  in  some  degree,  reverse  the  com-
mon rules  of  the  common  inflammation,  by  being  more  ready  to  suppurate
in  deep  seated  parts  than  in  the  superficial,  and  extend  much  farther  to-
wards the  centre  of  the  body.

I  suspect  too,  that  the  coverings  of  the  brain,  viz.  pia  and  dura-mater,
have  something  of  this  disposition.  They  appear  to  suppurate  very  readily,
or  with  very  little  inflammation  -,  for  from  a  slight  blow  on  the  head,  we
find  these  membranes  much  oftener  suppurate  than  we  should  from  a  similar
blow  on  the  shin-bone ;  for  instance,  a  blow  on  this  bone  will  only  pro-


236  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

duce  suppuration  on  the  external  surface,  very  seldom  in  its  internal  cavity  j
but  a  blow  on  the  head  that  mail  not  even  produce  the  adhesive  inflam-
mation in  the  scalp,  shall  make  those  membranes  suppurate.

Inflammation,  wherever  situated,  is  always  more  violent  on  that  side  of
the  point  of  inflammation  next  to  the  external  surface.

This  effect  we  often  find  take  place  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  thorax,  etc.
and  I  have  already  mentioned  that  I  suspect  inflammation,  wherever  situated,
if  there  be  a  continuity  of  parts  between  it  and  the  external  surface,  will  be
greater  on  that  side  next  to  the  external  surface  of  the  part,  than  towards
the  centre  of  the  part.

This  also  equally  takes  place  in  inflammations,  although  close  to  the  dif-
ferent outlets  of  the  body,  and  is  probably  most  easily  demonstrated  in  them.
Thus,  for  instance,  if  an  inflammation  comes  on  in  the  socket  of  a  tooth
at  its  root,  inflammation  will  not  take  place  on  the  inside  of  the  jaw,  but
towards  the  outside;  and  if  it  is  beyond  the  union  of  the  lips  with  the  gum,
it  will  attack  the  skin  over  the  inflamed  part,  while  all  the  internal  parts,
•such  as  the  gums  on  both  sides,  but  principally  on  the  inside.  The  tongue
if  in  the  lower  jaw,  shall  be  perfectly  sound.

If  an  inflammation  attacks  the  cellular  membrane  on  the  outside  of  the
gut  near  the  anus,  although  the  gut  is  in  contact  with  the  inflamed  part,
yet  the  inflammation  extends  to  the  skin  of  the  buttock,  while  the  gut  re-
mains pretty  free  from  inflammation.

If  an  inflammation  attacks  the  peritonaeum  covering  an  intestine,  and  if
adhesions  between  it  and  the  peritonaeum  lining  the  abdomen  are  a  con-
sequence, the  inflammation  immediately  passes  through  the  abdominal
muscles  towards  the  skin,  while  the  proper  coats  of  the  intestines  shall  in
most  cases  remain  sound;  however,  this  is  not  always  the  case,  although
much  more  commonly  so  than  the  reverse:  we  see  the  same  thing  in  the
obstruction  of  the  natural  passage  of  the  tears  called  fistula  lacrymalis,
for  there  the  sack  and  skin  ulcerate  on  the  inner  angle  of  the  eye,  while
the  inside  of  the  nose  defends  itself  by  becoming  thicker;  so  much  so  in
many  cases  as  to  stop  the  cavity  of  the  nose,  and  unite  with  the  septum,
which  has  been  the  cause  of  the  failure  of  the  operation  for  the  fistula
lacrymalis. We  even  find,  that  if  an  abscess  forms  in  a  frontal  sinus  from


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  lyj

an  obstruction  in  its  duct,  that  the  matter  makes  its  way  through  the
frontal  bone  externally,  instead  of  getting  into  the  nose.

The  same  observations  are  applicable  to  abscesses  in  the  antrum,  which
are  common  cases;  and  indeed,  if  we  observe  accurately,  we  shall  find
that  nature  rather  defends  such  parts  as  are  either  deeper  seated,  or  on  the
inside  of  outlets,  as  will  be  explained  hereafter.

The  specific  qualities  in  diseases  also  tend  more  rapidly  to  the  skin  than
to  the  deeper  seated  parts,  except  the  cancer ;  although  even  in  this  dis-
■  ease  the  progress  towards  the  superficies  is  more  quick  than  its  progress  to-
wards the  centre. The  venereal  has  something  of  the  same  disposition
with  the  cancer,  although  not  so  much. In  short,  this  is  a  law  in  nature,
and  it  probably  is  upon  the  same  principle  by  which  vegetables  always
approach  the  surface  of  the  earth. That  this  is  a  general  principle  in  ve-
getation requires  no  illustration,  but  what  is  the  immediate  cause  is  not
so  easily  determined. I  conceived  it  might  be  the  light,  not  warmth,  for
the  ground  is  often  warmer  than  the  air,  or  surface,  into  which  vegeta-
bles are  often  growing. To  ascertain  this,  as  far  as  I  could,  by  experi-
ment, I  took  a  tub,  about  eighteen  inches  deep,  and  about  two  wide,  and
filled  it  with  fine  mould,  in  which  I  planted  some  beans  and  peas ;  their
eyes  were  placed  in  various  directions,  and  over  the  surface  was  spread  a
close  mashed  net. The  mouth  of  this  tub  was  turned  down,  was  raised
about  three  feet  from  the  ground,  and  was  suspended  between  two  posts.
Round  the  tub,  and  over  its  bottom,  which  was  uppermost,  were  placed
wet  straw,  mats,  etc.  to  take  off  any  influence  the  sun  or  air  might  have
upon  its  contents,  and  a  small  hole  was  bored  in  its  bottom,  to  which  was
fixed  a  small  long  tube  that  came  through  the  straw.  This  was  intended
for  pouring  some  water,  if  I  found  the  earth  get  dry,  into  the  tub. Under
the  mouth  of  the  tub  I  placed  looking  glasses,  in such  a  way that  the
light  was  thrown  upon  the  mouth  of  the  tub,  or  surface  of  the  earth.
The  weather  was  fine,  so  that  through  the  whole  day  there  was  the  reflec-
tion of  the  light  from  the  looking  glasses  upon  the  surface  of  the  mould,
which  was  much  more  powerful  than  day-light  without  the  direct  rays  of
the  sun. This  I  continued  till  I  conceived  that  the  beans  and  peas  had
grown  some  length,  but  not  finding  their  tops  coming  down  through  the


238  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

surface  of  the  mould,  I  examined  the  contents  of  the  tub,  and  found  that
they  had  all  grown  upwards  towards  the  bottom  of  the  tub,  and  that  in
those  whose  eyes  had  been  placed  downwards  the  young  shoot  had  turned
round  so  as  to  arise  up.  As  one  experiment  leads  to  another,  I  wished  to
see  how  a  bean  would  grow  if  kept  in  a  constant  rotatory  motion.  For
this  purpose  I  put  some  earth  in  a  basket,  having  the  shape  of  a  cylinder,
and  about  a  foot  diameter,  with  the  two  ends  of  wood  for  greater  strength,
through  the  centre  of  which  I  fixed  an  axis  or  spindle ;  in  this  earth  I
planted  a  bean,  about  halfway  between  the  surface  and  axis,  with  its  eye
to  the  surface.  The  basket  was  laid  across  the  mouth  of  a  large  tub,
with  the  ends  of  the  spindle  resting  on  the  edges  of  the  tub,  which  were
fitted  to  one  another  so  as  to  allow  of  easy  motion.  Round  the  basket
was  rolled  some  small  cord,  to  the  end  of  which  was  suspended  a  box,
water  tight ;  into  this  was  put  lead,  so  as  almost  to  make  it  sink  in  water,
and  which  was  sufficient  to  turn  the  basket  round  in  the  open  air.  This
large  tub  was  filled  with  water,  and  the  box  placed  upon  it,  and  the  spin-
dle with  the  basket  placed  across  the  mouth  of  the  tub  ;  a  very  small  hole
was  bored  at  the  lower  end  of  the  tub,  which  allowed  the  water  to  escape,
but  very  slowly  ;  as  the  water  sunk  in  the  tub  the  box  descended,  and  as
the  box  descended  the  basket  was  turned  round.  This  tub  took  about
twelve  hours  in  emptying,  and  during  that  time  the  spindle  with  the  bas-
ket only  turned  about  one  and  a  half.  The  tub  was  repeatedly  rilled,  and
when  I  conceived  the  bean  might  have  grown  some  inches,  if  it  had  grown
at  all,  I  examined  it,  and  found  it  had  grown  as  much  as  if  it  had  been
planted  in  the  common  ground,  but  it  had  no  particular  direction  but  that
of  passing  in  a  straight  line  from  the  bean,  which  was  at  first  towards  the
circumference,  the  direction  in  which  it  was  planted;  but  in  its  course  it
had  met  with  a  small  stone,  which  had  turned  it  into  the  direction  of  the
axis,  and  it  had  gone  on  in  a  straight  line  in  that  direction.  Here,  as  there
was  no  fixed  inducement  to  grow  in  any  one  direction,  the  bean  grew  in  a
straight  line,  in  that  direction  given  it  by  chance.

This  circumstance  of  the  deeper  seated  parts  not  so  readily  taking  on  the
suppurative  inflammation  as  those  which  are  superficial,  is  shewn  in  cases
where  extraneous  bodies  irritate  any  parts ;  for  we  find  that  extraneous  bo-


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  239

dies  are  in  general  capable  of  producing  inflammation,  but  if  these  extra-
neous bodies  are  deeply  seated,  they  may  remain  for  years  without  doing
more  than  producing  the  adhesive  inflammation,  by  which  means  they  are
inclosed  in  a  cyst,  and  only  give  some  uneasiness ;  or  if  they  are  such  as
can  be  made  to  change  their  situation  by  the  actions  of  the  body  upon
them,  as  pins  and  needles,  or  from  gravity,  as  is  the  case  sometimes  with
bullets,  then  the  parts  through  which  they  pass  seem  not  to  be  much  al-
tered or  disturbed*  ;  but  if  the  same  body  was  nearer  to  the  skin  it  would
produce  suppuration.  This  is  proved  by  the  cases  that  have  occurred  of
people  swallowing  pins,  needles,  etc.  they  have  been  found  to  travel  al-
most over  the  whole  body,  without  producing  any  effect,  except  in  some
situations  exciting  some  sensation ;  but  when  they  have  come  near  to  the
skin,  the  very  same  substance  has  generally  produced  suppuration.  This
principle  shews  itself  very  remarkably  in  the  cattle  which  feed  in  bleach
fields  -,  there  is  not  one  of  these  killed  without  having  their  stomachs,  etc.
stuck  full  of  pins,  and  no  seeming  inconvenience  takes  place,  for  they  ap-
pear to  be  healthy,  and  fatten  as  readily  as  other  cattle.  However,  it  is
to  be  remarked  that  these  pins  are  not  found  in  the  fourth  or  digesting  sto-
mach, therefore  do  not  give  that  disturbance  to  the  constitution  that
might  be  expected.  It  is  probable  that  these  cases  of  pins,  etc.  owe  their
want  of  power  in  producing  suppuration,  not  entirely  to  situation,  but  in
some  degree  to  the  nature  of  the  substance,  metals  perhaps  not  having
the  power  of  irritation  beyond  the  adhesive,  for  when  the  adhesive  has
taken  place,  the  part  appears  to  be  satisfied.

This  appears  also  to  be  the  case  with  the  introduction  of  glass,  even  in
superficial  parts;  a  piece  of  glass  shall  enter  the  skin  just  deep  enough  to
bury  itself,  inflammation  shall  come  on,  the  wound  in  the  skin,  if  brought
together,  shall  heal  by  the  first  intention,  and  the  inflammation  shall  not
exceed  the  adhesive,  but  rather  degenerate  into  the  disposition  for  forming

*  This  circumstance  of  such  bodies  moving  in  various  directions,  and  not  towards  the
surface,  is  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  my  principle,  for  their  motion  arises  from  a  mechanical
cause,  and  is  ruled  by  it ;  which  ever  way  it  is  directed  they  must  move,  whether  by  gravi-
tation, as  is  the  case  with  bullets,  or  by  the  mechanical  pressure  of  the  part  upon  the  two
ends  of  the  pin,  which  will  determine  the  motion  towards  the  point.


240  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

a  sack,  by  which  means  a  sack  is  formed  round  the  glass,  and  no  distur-
bance is  given  to  the  irritability  of  the  parts.  This  was  the  case  with  Mr.
Knight,  apothecary,  who  had  a  piece  of  glass  three-fourths  of  an  inch
long  run  into  the  palm  of  his  hand,  and  remained  there  for  ten  weeks,
without  any  further  inconvenience  then  retarding  the  motion  of  the  hand,
and  sometimes  giving  a  pricking  pain,  when  the  sack  was  made  to  press
upon  the  points  of  the  glass  ;  this  insensibility,  however,  arises  from  a
sack  being  formed  with  such  properties,  but  it  cannot  be  assigned  as  a
cause  in  the  case  of  bodies  moving  as  pins.  Whether  this  fact,  of  exter-
nal parts  assuming  the  suppurative  inflammation  more  readily  than  the  in-
ternal, arises  from  unknown  properties  in  the  parts  themselves,  or  from
circumstances  which  attend  situation,  such  as  heat,  cold,  etc.  is  not  easily
determined;  but  whatever  be  the  cause,  the  effects  are  good,  as  many  si-
tuations of  inflammation,  viz.  the  internal,  would  prove  dangerous,  if  the
parts  were  always,  or  often  to  suppurate ;  of  two  evils,  nature  chooses
the  least;  while  on  the  other  hand,  when  near  the  external  surface,  it  be-
comes the  least  evil  to  produce  suppuration,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  ex-
traneous matter.  Accidents  may  be  assigned  as  one  cause  of  this  frequency
upon  the  external  surfaces,  but  the  cases  of  pins  abovementioned,  (which
is  accident)  show,  that  even  when  it  arises  from  accident,  the  parts
near  the  external  surface  much  more  readily  suppurate;  and  in  all  cases
arising  from  the  constitution,  or  spontaneous,  the  external  inflammations
exceed  the  internal,  in  number,  violence,  and  extent.


IV.  OF  THE  TWO  PARTS  THAT  HAVE  THE  ORDERS  OF  INFLAMMA-
TION RESPECTING  PRIORITY  INVERTED.

I  formerly  divided  the  surfaces  capable  of  taking  on  inflammation
into  two ;  the  first  of  these  was  the  cellular  membrane  in  general,  together
with  the  whole  circumscribed  cavities :  the  second  was  all  the  outlets  in


Tundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  24  I

the  body,  commonly  called  mucous  membranes  \  for  instance,  all  the
ducts  of  glands,  and  the  alimentary  canal.

The  first  order  of  parts,  I  have  already  observed,  generally  (if  not  al-
ways) takes  the  adhesive  first  in  the  true  inflammation,  and  then  all  the
three  inflammations  in  succession  ;  for  the  adhesive  is  immediately  admit-
ed  in  the  cellular  membrane  and  circumscribed  cavities,  to  exclude,  if
possible,  suppuration,  where  suppuration,  and  of  course  ulceration,  would
prove  hurtful.

In  the  following  parts  the  order  of  inflammation,  with  regard  to  its
being  adhefive  or  suppurative,  appears  to  be  inverted  ;  as  the  ulcerative  is
a  consequence  either  of  the  adhesive  or  of  the  suppurative  inflammation,
it  is  ruled  equally  by  both.  In  internal  canals*,  where  adhesions  in  most
cases  would  prove  hurtful,  the  parts  run  immediately  into  the  suppurative
inflammation,  the  adhesive  inflammation  in  common  being  excluded  ;
such  parts  are  the  internal  surfaces  of  the  eyelids,  nose,  mouth,  trachea,  air-
cells  of  the  lungs,  oesophagus,  stomach,  intestines,  pelvis  of  the  kidneys,
ureters,  bladder,  urethra,  uterus,  vagina,  and  indeed  all  the  ducts  and
outlets  of  the  organs  of  secretion,  which  all  these  parts  mentioned  may
be  in  some  degree  reckoned,  and  which  are  commonly  called  mucous
membranes.  In  such  parts,  if  the  inflammation  is  but  slight,  the  sup-
purative in  common  takes  place,  which  is  almost  immediate,  as  it  is  not
retarded  by  the  adhesive  stage,  which  accounts  for  the  quickness  of  sup-
puration of  these  parts  in  many  cases.  I  have  known  a  violent  discharge
of  pus  come  on  the  surface  of  the  urethra  only  a  few  hours  after  contami-
nation. These  facts  are  shewn  us  every  day  in  various  inflammations
of  those  parts,  and  particularly  in  the  gonorrhoea,  cold  in  the  nose,  lungs,
intestines,  etc.  The  matter  from  such  is  generally  not  called  true  matter,
or  purulent,  but  is  often  so,  if  not  always,  having  all  the  characters  of
pus  ;  however  this  will  be  according  to  circumstances. Since  those  sur-

*  I  make  a  distinction  between  an  internal  cavity  and  a  canal ;  they  are  very  different  in
their  construction,  their  uses,  and  also  their  mode  of  action  in  disease  are  very  different.

Ii


242  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

faces  are,  in  general,  secreting  surfaces,  suppuration  would  appear  to  be
only  a  change  in  the  secretion ;  and  I  think  I  have  visibly  seen,  or  could
visibly  trace,  the  one  change  gradually  leading  into  the  other  :  the  differ-
ent parts,  therefore,  of  which  the  pus  is  composed,  will  not  always  be  in
the  same  proportion,  so  that  the  matter  will  seem  to  vary  from  true  mat-
ter, towards  that  of  the  common  secretion  of  the  part,  and  vice  versa.  But
this  does  not  alter  the  position,  for  it  is  common  to  matter  from  a  sore ;
and  even  common  to  our  ordinary  secretions.  If  this  inflammation,
which  produced  suppuration  on  those  surfaces,  becomes  more  violent,  or
has  something  of  the  erysepelatous  disposition,  we  find  that  it  moves  from
the  suppurative  to  the  adhesive,  and  throws  out  the  coagulating  lymph.
I  have  seen  this  in  the  intestines,  often  on  the  inside  of  intestines  that  had
been  strangulated  in  a  hernia.  I  have  been  able,  also,  to  produce  it  on  the
inside  of  the  vagina  of  an  ass,  by  injecting  a  strong  solution  of  corrosive
sublimate.  But  if  of  the  erysepelous  kind,  these  surfaces  will  take  on  the
adhesive  action  immediately  or  at  first.  This  is  evidently  the  case  in
what  is  called  the  ulcerous  sore  throat  -y  I  have  seen  it  in  the  trachea,  I
have  seen  it  thrown  up  from  the  the  lungs  in  branches,  I  have  seen  it  in
the  pelves  of  the  kidneys,  ureters,  bladder  and  urethra.

This  is  contrary  to  the  mode  of  action  of  the  erysepelatous  inflammation
in  the  cellular  membrane  and  circumscribed  cavities,  for  there  it  hardly
produces  adhesions,  and  when  it  suppurates  the  suppuration  takes  place
first.  The  common  inflammation  and  the  erysepelatous  would  seem  to
change  actions  similar  to  the  adhesive  and  the  suppurative,  according  as
they  are  changed  to  places  of  different  dispositions,  never  acting  in  the
same  way  under  the  same  apparent  circumstances,  and,  therefore,  some-
thing specifically  different.  As  the  adhesive  inflammation  is  commonly  ex-
cluded from  such  surfaces  in  the  true  inflammation,  so  of  course  is  the
ulcerative  in  such  cases  ;  for  it  is  in  general  only  as  a  consequence  of
the  adhesive  and  suppurative  having  previously  taken  place,  with  the  con-
finement of  pus,  that  ulceration  becomes  necessary ;  for  the  ulcerative  in
such  cases  is  a  consequence  of  *a  stimulus  arising  from  pressure  from
within.


"Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  243

In  inflammation  we  seldom  pay  attention  to  more  than  the  continued
and  the  universal  sympathy;  how  far  the  contiguous  takes  place  without
adhesions,  further  than  sensation,  I  am  not  certain.  I  believe  it  never  pro-
duces inflammation  without  them  ;  for  we  may  observe,  that  a  testicle
shall  be  considerably  inflamed,  and  the  scrotum  not  in  the  least  affected.
The  scrotum  shall  even  inflame  and  slough  off,  without  the  testicle  be-
ing affected  till  death  or  exposure  takes  place  in  the  tunica  vaginalis  ;  then
it  becomes  an  exposed  or  imperfect  surface,  similar  to  the  opening,  or  ap-
plication of  a  caustic  in  the  hydrocele;  but  I  know  that  contiguous  sym-
pathy produces  a  nervous  tenderness  or  sensibility,  expressed  by  the  word
sore.

Thus  I  have  seen  complaints  in  the  viscera  of  the  abdomen  produce  a
vaft  tenderness  in  the  skin  of  the  abdomen;  and  also  complaints  of  the
lungs,  produce  a  tenderness  in  the  skin  of  the  chest  opposite  to  the  com-
plaint. The  remote  sympathy  sometimes  takes  place  when  particular  parts
are  inflamed.

The  continued  is  that  sympathy  which  increases  the  inflammatory  space,
by  which  means  the  inflammation  spreads  beyond  the  irritating  point.
This  becomes  more  a  subject  of  surgery  than  any  of  the  sympathies,  be-
cause it  increases  the  local  complaint,  and  it  takes  its  peculiarities  from
the  constitution  at  large,  as  well  as  from  the  nature  of  the  parts  inflamed  ;
as  much  can  be  learned  from  it  in  an  inflammation  as  from  any  other
symptom.

The  universal  sympathy,  or  constitutional,  is  where  the  whole  constitu-
tion feels  the  local  diseased  action.


V.  THE  NATURAL  CAUSE  OF  THE  ADHESIVE  INFLAMMATION  BEING

LIMITED.

i

As  the  body  is  made up  of  dissimilar  parts,  whose  construction  and
functions  are  peculiar  to  themselves,  yet  all  tending  to  the  benefit  of  the


244  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

whole,  we  find  them  also  keeping  themselves  distinct  in  many  of  their  dis-
eases as  long  as  they  can ;  and  if  it  is  a  disease  somewhat  peculiar  to  the  part
it  will  be  kept  in  proportion  longer  confined.  Thus  a  cancer  in  the  breast
will  spread  faster  in  the  glandular  part  of  the  breast  than  in  the  surrounding
parts  which  may  even  be  in  contact  with  it.  A  disease  taking  place  in  any
part  of  a  lymphatic  gland,  will  communicate  its  disease  to  the  whole  of
that  gland  much  sooner  than  to  the  surrounding  cellular  membrane.  Even
a  disease  common  to  all  parts  alike,  if  it  takes  place  in  any  dissimilar  part
will  keep  distinct  at  first.

Thus  an  inflammation  in  a  lymphatic  gland  is  not  taken  up  by  the  sur-
rounding cellular  membrane,  till  the  inflammation  has  made  some  con-
siderable advancement,  and  then  it  begins  to  inflame.  Thus  a  lymphatic
gland  shall  inflame  and  the  surrounding  parts  mall  not,  till  other  processes
besides  inflammation  are  going  on,  viz.  suppuration;  this,  however,  will  be
more  or  less,  according  to  the  constitution,  for  if  it  has  a  strong  suscepti-
bility for  the  erysepelatous,  the  dissimilar  parts  will  more  readily  sympa-
thize with  the  seat  of  the  disease.

Thus  the  investing  membranes  have  not  this  sympathetic  connexion
with  the  parts  which  they  either  cover  or  line,  nor  have  the  parts  either
covering  the  envesting  membrane,  or  lined  by  it,  any  sympathizing  affection
with  it  in  the  adhesive  stages  of  inflammation.  Thus  the  peritoneum  is
both  a  lining  and  a  covering,  and  so  is  the  pleura.  If  the  peritoneum  which
lines  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  inflames,  its  inflammation  does  not  affect
the  parietes  of  the  abdomen ;  or  if  the  peritoneum  covering  any  of  the
viscera  is  inflamed,  it  does  not  affect  the  viscera.  Thus  the  peritoneum
shall  be  universally  inflamed,  as  in  the  puerporal  fever,  yet  the  parietes  of
the  abdomen  and  the  proper  coats  of  the  intestines  shall  not  be  affected ;
on  the  other  hand,  if  the  parietes  of  the  abdomen,  or  the  proper  coats  of
the  intestines  are  inflamed,  the  peritoneum  shall  not  be  affected.

The  same  principle  will  lead  to  distinctions  between  an  inflammation
of  the  lungs  and  that  of  the  pleura ;  but  I  suspect  that  the  reticular  or
connecting  substance,  which  joins  the  air-cells  of  the  lungs,  has  a  greater
sympathetic  affection  with  the  air-cells,  or  reciprocally  with  each  other,
than  the  beforementioned  parts;  and  this  may  arise  from  the  thinness  of


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  245

the  air-cells.  And  it  is  also  upon  the  same  principle  that  inflammation  of
the  pia-mater  is  seldom  continued  into  the  substance  of  the  brain,  although
the  pia-mater  may  be  in  some  degree  considered  as  a  continuation  of  the
same  vessels.

Contiguity  of  parts  does  not  communicate  inflammation.  Thus  when
an  intestine  is  inflamed  the  inflammation  is  not  communicated  to  the  perito-
neum, lining  the  abdomen,  although  in  contact;  but  I  have  already  ob-
served it  produces  somewhat  of  a  soreness,  even  to  the  external  touch  ;
but  if  continuity  by  adhesions  takes  place,  then  inflammation  will  be  con-
tinued from  the  one  into  the  other.

The  second  cause  of  the  limitation  of  inflammation  is  simple  contact.
I  have  already  observed,  that  exposure  of  internal  surfaces  becomes  an  im*
mediate  cause  of  inflammation  ;  and  when  it  extends  further  than  the  sur-
face of  exposure,  it  is  then  by  continued  sympathy  only,  and  that  a  whole
cavity,  if  wholly  exposed,  will  wholly  acquire  the  inflammation  ;  but  we
may  now  observe,  that  although  a  cavity  is  opened  and  so  far  rendered  im-
perfect, yet  simple  contact,  of  its  sides  renders  it  perfect  again,  and  sets
bounds  to  the  immediate  cause.

To  explain  this  further,  we  may  observe  that  there  is  no  such  thing  in
an  animal  as  empty  space,  exclusive  of  outlets  or  reservoirs,  which  can-
not be  reckoned  internal  or  circumscribed  cavities,  for  they  are  perfect  by
not  being  such.  Every  part  of  the  body  is  either  connected  by  a  continu-
ation of  one  part  into  that  of  another,  or  by  simple  contact.

This  takes  place  equally,  either  in  the  common  cellular  membrane,
or  in  the  circumscribed  cavities  j  for,  if  a  wound  is  made  either  into
the  cellular  membrane,  or  into  a  circumscribed  cavity,  we  find  that  the
surfaces  of  both,  beyond  the  cut  edges,  are  naturally  and  generally
in  contact  with  one  another,  for  without  this,  union  by  the  first
intention  would  not  take  place,  either  in  circumscribed  cavities,  or
in  the  common  cellular  membrane.  To  explain  this  position,  let  me
suppose  a  case.

If  we  make  a  wound  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  and  in  a  sound
state  of  those  parts,  we  shall  find  that  every  viscus  is  in  contact  with
some  other  viscus,  and  that  the  whole  inside  of  the  peritoneum  is  in


246  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

contact  with  the  viscera  in  general ;  so  that  no  space is  unfilled  while
this  contact  of  parts  remains. If  this  wound  is not  allowed  to  heal
by the  first  intention, still we  shall find  that no inflammation will
take  place, or  extend  further than the  attachment  of  those parts to
the  cut  edges;  except  what  is owing  to  continued  sympathy. If  this
was  not  the  case,  every  part  of  the  same  cavity  must  inflame, because
every  part  would  be  equally  imperfect  j  for  if  this  contact  was  removed,
upon  the  receiving  of  the  wound,  or  at  any  time  afterwards,  the  whole
cavity  must  inflame,  because  every  part  is  equally  under  the  same  pre-
dicament with  regard  to  exposure. The  same  thing  would  take  place  in
the  common  cellular  membrane,  if  those  cells  were not (in a  natural
state) in  contact. Inflammation,  in  case  of  wounds,  would  as  readily
extend  over  the  surface  of  each  cell,  as  air  does  through  the  cavity of
each  cell  when  blown  into. Now  this  simple  and  natural  contact  of
natural  parts,  keeps  off  the  inflammation  beyond  the  cut  edges  of  ex-
posure ; and inflammation only takes  place  at  this  part, to  preserve
this  contact,  as  also  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  future  operations. This,
I  apprehend,  is  upon  the  principle  of  contiguous  sympathy,  two  surfaces
being  simply  in  contact,  mutually  agreeing  not  to  inflame;  or  perhaps,
more  properly  expressed,  by  being  in  contact  there  is  a  mutual  harmony
which  prevents  their  being  excited  to  inflammation. This  circumstance
is  a  reason  why  we  should  not  attempt  to  bring  circumscribed  cavities
to  universal  suppuration,  by  simply  opening  them,  and  allowing  them  to
collapse;  for  we  may  be  pretty  certain,  that  union  only  will  take  place
at  the  exposed  edges  of  contact,  which  excludes  the  general  cavity,  and
which is the  reason  why  the  operation for the  radical  cure  in the
hydrocele  often  fails. lft  on  the  other  hand,  this  natural  contact  of
parts  did  not  preserve  the  whole  beyond  the  cut  edges,  then  we  must
allow,  that  the  cavity  is  under  the  same  predicament  with  the  cut  edges;
and  if  the  cut  edges  inflame,  so  must  the  whole.

In  cases  of  spontaneous  inflammations  of  circumscribed  cavities,  we
find  where  this  contact  is  completest,  that  the  inflammation  and  its
consequences  are  the  least;  for  instance,  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  cases
of  the  peritoneal  inflammations,  the  inflammation  is  the  greatest  where


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation,  247

the  surfaces  are  not  so  well  opposed  to  one  another,  viz.  in  the  angle
between  any  of  the  two  viscera.

This  fact  of  simple  contact  being  sufficient  to  exclude  the  irritation
for  inflammation,  was  well  illustrated  in  a  woman  who  had  the
Cesarian  operation  performed  upon  her,  where  a  wound  of  eight  inches
long  was  made  into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  to  extract  the  child.
After  the  child  was  extracted,  the  wound  could  not  be  brought  exactly
together  5  therefore,  so  far  gave  rise  to  a  peritoneal  inflammation ;  but
the  belly  collapsing,  and  falling  on  its  contents,  they  all  came  in  contact
as  before,  and  the  woman  living  twenty-six  hours,  gave  time  for  the
inflammatory  irritatation  to  take  place.  After  death  it  was  found,
that  the  intestines  were  united  to  the  peritoneum,  all  round  the  wound
for  about  half  an  inch  in  breadth,  and  the  surface  of  the  intestii.es  which
lay  unattached  and  exposed  at  the  bottom  of  the  wound  were  inflamed,
while  every  other  viscus,  as  well  as  the  peritoneum,  beyond  the  adhesions,
were  free  from  inflammation.

Ulceration  does  not  seem  to  obey  this  law  so  much,  and  the  reason  is,
that  ulceration  is  a  second  operation,  and  is  preceded  by  inflammation,  so
that  pus  is  brought  equally  through  every  part,  if  equally  susceptible  of
ulceration,  which  all  parts  are  not,  although  not  depending  upon  their
being  similar  or  dissimilar.  Thus  a  muscle  or  artery  will  not  ulcerate
so  readily  as  cellular  membrane ;  but  if  pus  was  formed  on  the  inside  of
an  artery,  or  in  the  centre  of  a  muscle,  they  would  ulcerate  very  readily,  and
the  ulceration  would  not  stop,  or  remain  stationary,  when  it  came  to  the
cellular  membrane,  but  would  go  on ;  if  pus  too  be  formed  in  a  lymphatic
gland,  ulceration  would  go  on  in  the  parts  between  it  and  the  external
surface,  as  fast  as  it  did  in  the  gland,  if  not  faster,  because,  inflammation
would  have  gone  before,  and  as  it  were  assimilated  the  parts,  and  all  from
this  cause,  viz.  being  equally  disposed  to  ulcerate.  The  cause  of  the
spreading  of  inflammation  is  sympathetic ;  but,  the  cause  of  ulceration
is  immediate.


248  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.


VI.  OF  INFLAMMATION— ITS  STAGES.

I  have  given  the  mod  simple  idea  I  can  form  of  an  injury  done  to  a
part,  with  the  natural,  immediate,  and  consequent  means  of  restoration,
I  have  also  treated  of  cases  where  they  become  a  little  more  complicated,
requiring  the  aid  of  art  as  a  substitute  for  the  simpliciry  of  the  first.
The  action  of  the  parts  is  not  necessary  in  either  of  these,  except  that  of
the  blood  forming  its  vessels  and  other  solid  parts,  and  becoming  of  the
nature  of  the  parts  in  which  it  is  extravasated.  But  I  took  notice  that
the  violence  done  was  often  so  great,  or  that  restoration  did  not  take  place
so  readily,  as  in  all  cases  to  exclude  irritation ;  we  had,  therefore,  an  ac-
tion in  such  cases  taking  place  in  the  parts  called  inflammation.  That
this  action  assisted  in  the  restoration  by  producing  an  extravasation  of
the  coagulating  lymph,  which  became  the  second  bond  of  union.  I  have
also  stated  what  may  be  called  the  natural  tendency  to  inflammation,  to
serve  as  a  kind  of  leading  principle.  We  shall  find  that  inflammation
may  arise  from  very  different  causes,  and  often  without  any  apparent
cause,  and  that  its  operations  are  far  more  extensive  than  simply  the  act
of  producing  union  in  parts  divided  by  violence  ;  for  it  more  commonly
produces  union  in  whole  parts  or  in  natural  separations,  such  as  the  com-
mon cellular  membrane,  large  circumscribed  cavities,  joints,  etc.  because
such  surfaces  are  not  naturally  disposed  to  unite,  but  only  in  consequence
of  some  uncommon  action  being  produced ;  and  although  these  adhesions
are  unnatural,  yet  that  tendency  of  the  parts  to  admit  of  this  union  be-
comes a  species  of  cure.  It  is  in  consequence  of  the  parts  taking  on,  in
some  degree,  the  same  mode  of  action  which  divided  parts  do  when
brought  irj  contact,  that  in  such  cases  suppuration  is  precluded.  As  in-
flammation often  arises  from  disease,  its  salutary  purposes  are  in  many
instances  not  so  evident,  although  they  may  finally  take  effect ;  as  it
likewise  takes  place  in  disease,  or  becomes  the  ultimate  in  disease  where
it  did  not  begin  in  it,  as  in  the  scrofula,  cancer,  etc.  and  some  indolent
tumors ;  on  these  accounts  too  its  salutary  purposes  are  sometimes  not
obvious. However,  upon  the  whole,  as  inflammation  is  an  action  pro-


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  249

duced  for  the  restoration  of  the  most  simple  injury  in  sound  parts,  which
goes  beyond  the  power  of  union  by  the  first  intention,  we  must  look  upon
it  in  such  instances,  as  one  of  the  most  simple  operations  in  nature,  what-
ever it  may  be  when  arising  from  disease,  or  in  diseased  parts.  Inflammation
is  to  -be  considered  only  as  a  disturbed  state  of  parts,  which  requires  a  new
but  salutary  mode  of  action  to  restore  them  to  that  state  wherein  a  natural
mode  of  action  alone  is  necessary:  from  such  a  view  of  the  subject,  there-
fore, inflammation  in  itself  is  not  to  be  considered  as  a  disease,  but  as  a
salutary  operation,  consequent  either  to  some  violence  or  some  disease.
But  this  same  operation  can  and  does  vary;  it  is  often  carried  much  further
even  in  sound  parts,  than  to  accomplish  union,  producing  a  very  different
eifect,  and  forming  a  very  different  species  of  discharge  from  the  former  $
instead  of  uniting  and  confining  the  parts,  rather  separating  and  exposing
them,  which  process  is  called  suppuration,  and  varies  with  circumstances.
However,  even  this  in  sound  parts  leads  to  a  cure,  although  in  another  or
secondary  way;  and  in  disease,  where  it  can  alter  the  diseased  mode  of
action,  it  likewise  leads  to  a  cure;  but  where  it  cannot  accomplish  that
salutary  purpose,  as  in  the  cancer,  scrofula,  venereal  disease,  etc.  it  does-
mischief.

This  operation  of  the  body,  termed  inflammation,  requires  our  greatest
attention,  for  it  is  one  of  the  most  common  and  most  extensive  in  its
effects  of  any  in  the  animal  body;  it  is  both  very  extensive  in  its  causes,
and  it  becomes  itself  the  cause  of  many  local  effects,  both  salutary  and
diseased.

It  has  its  different  stages  in  which  it  produces  more  immediately  its
different  effects,  which  are  local;  such  as  adhesions,  suppuration,  and
ulceration,  and  often  death  in  the  part  inflamed,  together  with  secondary
complaints  which  are  universal,  as  fever,  nervous  affections;  and  when
in  parts  that  cannot  heal,  or  in  constitutions  which  are  too  weak,  the
hectic  fever,  next  dissolution,  or  universal  death.  However,  by  its  forming
those  adhesions,  it  often  precludes  the  necessity  of  suppuration ;  and  also
entirely  prevents  many  local  diseases  where  probably  suppuration  would
be  the  consequence,  if  such  adhesions  had  not  taken  place,  with  all  the.
train  of  consequences  of  suppuration,  such  as  abscesses,  fistula?,  diseased

Kk


250  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

bones,  etc.  which  are  prevented  by  it.  It  is  also  one  of  the  modes  of  action
in  many  specific  diseases,  and  in  morbid  affections  proceeding  from
poisons.

Inflammation  is  not  only  occasionally  the  cause  of  diseases,  but  it  is
often  a  mode  of  cure,  since  it  frequently  produces  a  resolution  of  indu-
rated parts,  by  changing  the  diseased  action  into  a  salutary  one,  if  capable
of  resolution.

By  these  extensive  powers  inflammation  becomes  the  first  principle  in
surgery.  In  one  point  of  view  it  may  be  considered  as  a  disease  in  itself
where  it  takes  place  without  any  visible  cause;  and  it  may  be  looked  upon
as  an  increase  of  the  mischief,  when  it  is  a  consequence  of  some  injury;
but  in  either  case  it  is  a  sign  of  powers,  and  of  necessary  powers ;  for  if  a
part  under  the  influence  of  such  irritation  as  should  naturally  excite
inflammation,  had  either  no  powers  or  disposition  to  exert  them,  the  conse-
quences would  be  much  worse,  for  mortification  would  probably  take
place.  I  intend  at  present  to  consider  the  most  common  causes  and  effects
of  inflammation,  together  with  the  end  proposed  by  nature  in  producing
it,  and  the  use  to  which  it  can  be  applied  in  surgery.

It  becomes  therefore  necessary,  first  to  begin  with  describing  its  most
simple  forms,  together  with  its  general  effects,  and  then  to  particularize
as  I  proceed.

Inflammation  has  several  well  marked  local  peculiarities  by  which  it  is
distinguished.

I  shall  call  by  the  name  of  inflammation  whatever  produces  the  fol-
lowing local  effects,  viz.  pain,  swelling,  and  redness,  in  a  given  time,  and
these  dependent  on  or  the  effects  of  one  immediate  cause.

Inflammation  appears  capable  of  arising  from  three  causes,  which  may
be  called  remote.

First,  from  some  accidental  force  applied  to  a  part,  making  a  wound  or
bruise  which  cannot  recover  itself,  unless  by  inflammation.  Such  violence
at  least  is  naturally  capable  of  exciting  it.

Secondly,  from  some  irritation  which  does  not  destroy  the  texture  of
parts,  but  simply  the  natural  actions,  as  many  irritations,  such  as  pressure,


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  2  5 1

friction,  heat,  cold,  blisters,  pungent  applications,  and  often  fevers  of
every  kind.

Thirdly,  from  a  particular  disposition  in  parts  themselves,  as  boils
arising  spontaneously  without  the  constitution  having  been  preconcerned,
so  little  so,  as  to  have  given  the  idea  that  such  inflammations  were  healthy.
Each  of  these  will  be  of  a  kind  peculiar  to  the  constitution ;  but  from
whatever  cause  inflammation  arises,  it  appears  to  be  nearly  the  same  in  all,
for  in  all  it  is  an  effect  intended  to  bring  about  a  reinstatement  of  the  parts
nearly  to  their  natural  functions.

Inflammation  may  first  be  divided  into  two  kinds  as  first  principles,  viz.
the  healthy  and  the  unhealthy.

The  healthy  probably  consists  only  of  one  kind,  not  being  divisible  but
into  its  different  stages,  and  is  that  which  will  always  attend  an  healthy
constitution  or  part,  is  rather  to  be  considered  as  a  restorative  action  than
a  diseased  one,  and  would  rather  appear  to  be  an  effect  of  a  stimulus  than
an  irritation.  The  unhealthy  admits  of  vast  variety,  (diseases  being  almost
numberless)  and  is  that  which  always  attends  an  unhealthy  constitution
or  part,  and  will  be  according  to  the  kind  of  health  in  that  constitution  or
part,  but  principally  according  to  the  constitution;  however,  many  parts
naturally  have  a  tendency  to  run  into  inflammations  of  particular  kinds.
Most  of  these  arising  from  the  nature  of  the  constitution,  are,  I  conceive,
in  most  cases,  if  not  in  all,  called,  although  erroneouily,  the  erysepelatus
inflammation ;  which  will  be  further  taken  notice  of.

The  simple  act  of  inflammation  cannot  be  called  specific,  for  it  is  an
uniform  or  simple  action  in  itself;  but  it  may  have  peculiarities  or  specific
actions  superadded.

Inflammation  is  either  single  or  compound;  it  may  be  called  single  when
it  has  only  one  mode  of  action  in  the  part  inflamed,  as  in  its  first  stages ;
compound,  when  attended  with  another  mode  of  action,  or  when  it  pro-
duces other  effects.

Inflammation  is  capable  of  producing  three  different  effects,  viz.  adhe-
sions of  the  parts  inflamed,  suppuration  in  the  parts,  and  ulceration  of  those
parts;  which  I  have  called  the  adhesive,  the  suppurative,  and  the  ulcerative
inflammation  ;  the  last  or  ulcerative,  is,  properly  speaking,  only  a  second-


252  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation,

zvy  effect  of  inflammation,  not  being  performed  by  the  same  vessels  ;  how-
ever it  is  possible  it  may  keep  up  inflammation,  as  it  always  keeps  up  a
species  of  violence,  viz.  a  destruction  of  the  parts.

The  two  first  do  not  take  place  in  the  same  vessels,  at  the  same  time,
but  succeed  one  another,  although  all  the  three  effects  may  exist  at  the
same  time  in  the  different  parts  of  the  same  inflammation.

I  have  placed  the  adhesive  first  in  order,  although  it  is  not  always  so,
for  with  respect  to  the  priority  of  those  three  actions  of  inflammation,  it
depends  principally  upon  the  nature  of  the  parts,  together  with  the  degrees
of  violence  of  the  inflammation.

To  explain  this  more  fully,  we  shall  first  divide  the  body,  respecting
inflammation,  into  two  parts,  viz.  the  cellular  membrane,  or  the  body  in
general,  together  with  the  circumscribed  cavities  as  belonging  to  the  first  ;
and  then  all  the  outlets  of  the  body,  as  the  second.  We  shall  treat  of
each  according  to  the  nature  of  the  parts,  and  of  the  inflammation  joined,
and  observe  their  effects,  which  will  show  that  the  common  effects  of  one,
as  to  priority,  may  be  changed  into  those  of  the  others  and  become  second
or  third,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  parts,  the  inflammation,  and  its
degree  of  violence.

We  may  observe  that  inflammation,  but  more  especially  the  suppurative,
in  the  first  order  of  parts,  more  readily  takes  place  nearer  to  the  surface  of
the  body  than  in  parts  more  deeply  seated,  and  as  a  proof  of  this  observa-
tion, it  has  been  formerly  observed  that  tumors,  and  even  extraneous  bodies,
will  make  their  way  from  some  deeper-seated  part  to  the  skin,  but  no  in-
flammation shall  take  place  till  they  arrive  near  the  skin  •  but  this  cir-
cumstance will  be  more  fully  described  when  I  treat  on  suppuration.

It  does  not  seem  necessary  that  both  surfaces  which  are  to  be  united
should  be  in  a  state  of  inflammation  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  an  union;
it  appears  only  necessary  that  one  should  be  in  such  a  state,  which  is  to
furnish  the  materials,  viz.  to  throw  out  the  coagulating  lymph,  and  the
opposite  uninflamed  surface  accepts  simply  of  the  union  ;  nor  is  it  even
necessary  that  either  surface  should  be  in  a  state  of  inflammation,  to  ad-
mit of  union ;  for  I  just  observed,  that  extravasated  blood  produces  an


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  253

union  without  inflammation ;  and  we  often  find  adhesions  of  parts  which
can  hardly  be  called  inflamed.

Thus  a  truss  applied  to  a  rupture  will  produce  adhesions,  as  has  been
observed,  although  it  may  sit  very  easily.

In  describing  inflammation  it  will  be  found  that  the  principal  theory  of
inflammation  will  be  introduced  in  the  adhesive  stages ;  for  in  the  first
stated  parts  it  appears  only  preparatory  to  the  suppurative  either  in  pre-
venting or  promoting  it.

When  inflammation  takes  place  in  the  first  order  of  parts,  it  is  com-
monly the  adhesive,  but  it  will  be  according  to  circumstances  whether  the
suppurative  or  the  ulcerative  follows  first.  That  either  the  one  or  the  other
should  follow,  seems  to  arise  in  many  cases  from  an  increase  of  the  in-
flammation ;  but  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  suppurative  takes  place
almost  immediately,  and  probably  from  two  causes  -3  the  first  is,  the  inten-
sity of  the  inflammation,  its  exceeding  the  adhesive  almost  immediately;
the  second,  an  inflammation  of  a  different  kind,  where  the  adhesive  makes
110  part  of  the  inflammation,  and  suppuration  takes  place  in  the  first
instance.  I  suspect  that  the  erysepelatous  inflammation  has  very  little  of
the  adhesive  in  its  nature,  and  therefore  probably  these  inflammations  are
in  some  degree  of  this  nature,  and  go  into  suppuration  without  adhesions.
In  some  cases  ulcerations  must  take  place  prior  to  suppuration,  as  when  an
inflammation  happens  on  a  surface,  viz.  the  skin,  as  for  instance,  in  a
chancre,  and  with  such  violence  as  is  necessary  for  suppuration  to  take
place,  then  ulceration  must  begin  first,  so  as  to  expose  internal  surfaces
for  suppuration  ;  but  in  the  parts  of  the  second  order,  viz.  internal  canals
or  ducts,  it  is  the  suppurative  inflammation  which  mest  readily  takes  place
first ;  but  if  carried  further  the  adhesive  follows,  as  will  be  more  fully  ex-
plained hereafter.  When  it  is  an  inflammation  of  the  first  order  of  parts,
the  suppurative  succeeds  the  adhesive,  and  the  ulcerative  may  be  said  to  be
an  action  superadded  to  the  suppurative,  arising  out  of  effects  produced  by
the  first,  now  becoming  new  causes,  the  suppurative  naturally  taking
place  in  the  time  of  the  first,  and  the  ulcerative  in  consequence  of  the  sup-
purative, which  has  called  forth  the  action  of  another  system  of  vessels,


254  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

the  absorbents ;  all  of  which  may  be  reckoned  as  three  different  modes  of
action  arising  from  the  first  irritation  or  cause.

The  adhesive,  as  also  the  suppurative  inflammation,  either  in  the  first  or
second  orders  of  parts,  with  their  varieties,  may  have  a  principle  superadded,
which  does  not  in  the  least  alter  their  inflammatory  mode  of  action,  which
still  continues  to  go  on.  This  principle  is  some  specific  disposition,  from
scrophula,  or  poisons,  as  the  venereal,  small-pox,  etc.

These  three  different  modes  of  action,  viz.  the  adhesive,  the  suppurative,
and  the  ulcerative,  when  carried  on  perfectly,  are  generally  the  effects  of  a
good  constitution,  seldom  attending  the  unhealthy ;  they  are  what  I  would
call  common  inflammation.

I  have  already  observed  that  common  inflammation  either  takes  place
in  parts  that  constitute  the  largest  part  of  an  animal,  which  are  all  the
circumscribed  cavities,  all  the  cellular  membrane,  and  the  substance  of
every  part,  the  two  last  of  which  are  the  most  universal ;  or  upon  internal
canals  or  outlets,  which  are,  in  common,  only  excretory  ducts.

That  whatever  has  a  tendency  to  discharge  any  extraneous  matter,
whether  already  existing,  as  matter  already  formed,  or  a  ball  lodged,  etc.
or  only  preparatory  to  its  formation,  such  as  inflammation  that  has  a  dis-
position to  suppurate,  the  inflammation  is  always  greatest  and  extends
farthest  on  that  side  next  to  the  skin  ;  for  instance,  suppose  a  man  mot  into
the  thigh,  the  ball  passes  through  to  within  an  inch  or  two  of  the  opposite
side;  the  ball  has  not  deadened  any  part  for  an  inch  or  two  of  the  last
part  of  its  passage  so  as  to  allow  this  part  to  unite,  we  shall  find  if  that
ball  excites  inflammation,  it  will  not  be  along  its  passage  where  we  should
(without  knowing  the  principle)  have  mostly  expected  it,  but  the  inflam-
mation will  commence  on  that  side  next  to  the  opposite  skin  that  has  not
in  the  least  been  hurt.  If  a  ball  passes  quite  through,  a  piece  of  cloth  is
carried  in,  and  lies  in  the  middle  between  the  two  orifices ;  if  the  passage  is
pretty  superficial,  say  only  an  inch  distant  from  the  skin  where  the  cloth
lies,  but  which  is  two  or  three  inches  from  either  orifice,  we  shall  find
that  the  inflammation,  for  its  exit  will  not  lead  to  either  orifice,  but  di-
rectly across  to  the  skin.

As  the  adhesive  inflammation  precedes  the  suppurative  in  every  part  of


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation .  255

the  body,  except  the  outlets,  as  was  observed,  and  the  suppurative  commonly
precedes  the  ulcerative,  excepting  on  an  external  surface,  the  propriety  of
following,  likewise,  this  order  of  nature  in  treating  of  them  will  appear
evident,  especially  as  each  succeeding  inflammation  is  in  some  measure
illustrated  by  that  which  has  gone  before.


VII.  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  DEGREES,  AND  DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF

INFLAMMATION.

Inflammation  will  in  general  be  in  proportion  to  the  exciting  cause,
(in  which  may  be  included  the  mischief  done),  the  constitution  and  the
nature  of  the  part;  in  all  which,  as  there  is  great  variety,  so  must  there
be  in  the  inflammations.  The  degrees  of  inflammation  will  be  more  in
the  adhesive  than  in  the  suppurative,  for  the  adhesive  may  have  all  the  de-
grees of  violence  between  the  most  slight  inflammation  and  suppurations;
but  the  suppurative  is  a  more  fixed  or  determined  quantity,  for  when  got
to  a  certain  point,  it  takes  a  new  action,  and  inflammation  ceases;  how-
ever, we  have  not  always  inflammation  producing  suppuration  when  it  has
arrived  to  a  certain  degree  of  violence,  for  in  some  it  often  goes  beyond
that  point  which  would  produce  it  in  others,  and  in  such  cases  there  is  no
disposition  for  suppuration,  and  it  seems  to  become  stationary,  for  neither
has  it  any  disposition  for  resolution.

Spontaneous  inflammations  which  are  to  suppurate,  are  more  violent
than  those  inflammations  arising  in  consequence  of  an  operation  or  accident,
which  also  must  produce  suppuration ;  and  those  inflammations  from  either
operations  or  accidents,  if  they  have  not  produced  death  in  the  part
operated  upon,  are  more  violent,  and  of  greater  extent  than  those  where
death  in  the  part  has  been  produced.

The  inflammation  of  a  boil  or  abscess  is  more  violent,  and  commonly
more  extensive  than  that  in  consequence  of  a  cut,  or  even  an  amputation
of  a  leg. The  inflammation  in  consequence  of  a  cut  or  amputation  of  a


2j6  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

leg,  will  be  more  violent  than  that  from  a  gun-shot  wound,  or  from  the
application  of  a  caustic,  which  produces  death  in  the  part,  and  even
although  more  parts  have  been  destroyed  by  these  means;  neither  do  specific
diseases,  except  the  gout,  produce  so  violent  inflammation,  nor  are  they
commonly  so  painful  as  what  I  have  called  the  common  inflammation.

It  may  appear  not  to  be  an  easy  matter  to  account  for  all  those  differ-
ences ;  however  it  is  possible  that  in  the  spontaneous  inflammation  there
is  more  occasion  for  inflammation  than  suppuration  ;  the  inflammation
being  the  only  action  which  is  necessary  to  produce  the  ultimate  effect,  as
for  instance,  in  the  gout ;  in  this  disease  the  inflammation  is  the  only  thing
necessary  for  its  action,  and  the  inflammation  runs  much  higher  than
many  others  do  which  produce  suppuration*.

The  spontaneous  inflammation  arises  often  from  disease,  which  probably
makes  the  parts  more  susceptable  of  inflammation.

When  inflammation  arises  from  the  irritation  of  death  in  a  part,  let  the
cause  of  that  effect  be  what  it  will,  whether  mechanical,  as  in  bruises,
gun-shot  wounds,  etc.  or  by  chemical  means,  as  caustic,  etc.  the  inflam-
mation is  late  in  coming  on,  and  in  comparison  with  the  others  gentle
when  come  on.

However,  in  many  bruises,  even  where  the  death  of  parts  has  taken
place,  we  have  inflammation  quick  and  violent,  but  then  the  living  parts
have  also  suffered,  and  have  suffered  much  more  than  if  simply  wounded.

In  many  bruises  we  also  have  inflammations  quick  and  violent,  even
where  death  has  been  produced  in  a  part;  but  then  death  does  not  take
place  in  all  the  hurt  parts',  as  in  many  gun-shot  wounds,  such  as  those
attended  with  fractured  bones,  in  which  the  surrounding  parts  were  only
hurt  so  far  as  to  bring  on  irritation  and  not  death.

If  caustics  do  not  act  with  vigour,  they  will  irritate  so  as  to  bring  on  the
inflammation  sooner  than  if  they  had  killed  the  part  quickly.

*  It  is  a  curious  circumstance  in  the  gout,  that  although  it  is  attended  with  all  the  com-
mon effects  of  the  adhesive  inflammation,  as  considerable  swelling,  etc.  which  swelling  must
arise  from  extravasation  of  the  coagulating  lymph ;  yet,  adhesions  do  not  seem  to  be  the  in-
tention, for  none  are  produced;  the  lymph  is  in  general  taken  up,  and  chalk-stone  or
tophaceous  matter  put  in  its  place.


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  257

Irritating  substances,  when  of  no  specific  kind,  produce  inflammation
sooner  than  other  visible  causes  of  inflammation.  If  of  a  specific  kind*
then  the  time,  sort,  and  violence,  will  be  according  to  that  kind.

But  irritating  applications  must  be  continued  for  some  time  to  produce
violent  inflammation.

These  differences  are  easily  accounted  for;  quick  death  does  not  irri-
tate the  part  killed,  and  the  contiguous  living  part,  not  being  itself  hurt,
is  only  irritated  to  get  rid  of  the  dead  part.

A  wound  is  a  quick  irritation  of  a  living  part,  so  that  it  inflames  more
readily,  and  more  violently,  according  to  the  quantity  of  irritation ;  but
that  cannot  be  of  long  standing,  as  nature  sets  about  procuring  relief.
But  when  irritating  substances  are  applied,  the  part  inflames  quickly,  ac-
cording to  their  power  of  irritation;  and  if  they  are  continued,  nature  is
not  allowed  to  relieve  herself,  but  is  constantly  teazed,  by  which  means
the  inflammation  becomes  also  violent.

I  need  hardly  mention,  that  fever  is  often  the  cause  of  local  inflam-
mation. We  see  this  happen  every  day.

These  causes,  and  of  course  the  inflammation,  are  of  two  kinds,  one
which  may  be  called  accidental,  as  inflammation  arising  in  consequence
of  common  fever;  the  others  are  more  determined,  depending  upon  the
species  of  a  fever,  which  may  be  called  specific,  as  the  small- pox,
chicken-pox,  etc.  These  inflammations  in  consequence  of  fever,  are
commonly  supposed  to  be  critical;  but  I  very  much  doubt  the  truth  of
this  opinion.  The  small-pox  and  chicken-pox  are,  perhaps,  the  strongest
instances  of  an  appearance  in  proof  of  this  opinion ;  and,  perhaps,  the  mea-
sles, as  a  critical  inflammation,  might  be  produced  as  another;  but,  I
believe,  that  it  is  peculiar  to  these  diseases  to  form  inflammation  and
sores.  We  must  allow,  however,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary,  even  in
them,  that  abscesses  should  be  formed,  viz.  the  pock  to  lessen  or  carry  off
the  fever.  For  the  specific  fever  in  them  cannot  exist  beyond  a  certain
time,  even  although  no  eruption  appears.

But  I  think  that  in  the  cases  of  the  small-pox,  chicken-pox,  and  the
measles,  those  diseases  often  prove  the  contrary  to  that  which  is  supposed

LI


•258  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation,

•to  be  the  case;  for  we  have  large  abscesses  as  often  formed  after  those  dis-
eases as  after  any  other,  which  are  commonly  supposed  to  be  the  settling  of
the  fever  in  this  part,  but  which  are  equally  accidental  with  those  from  com-
mon fever,  and  therefore  we  cannot  suppose  that  those  abscesses  are  critical
in  such  diseases,  because  they  are  either  common  abscesses,  or  scrophulous ;
for  no  one  disease  can  have  two  distinct  and  different  critical  inflammations.
In  further  confirmation  of  my  opinion,  those  inflammations  are  found  to
be  not  in  the  least  of  the  nature  of  the  disease  which  produces  them,  so
little  so  in  most  cases,  as  to  be  truly  specific  of  another  kind,  viz.  the
scrophulous.  Now  we  certainly  find  it  difficult  to  conceive  one  universal
specific  disease,  as  the  small-pox,  etc.  producing  a  local  one  of  another
specific  disposition  to  cure  the  first,  or  terminating  in  another  disease,
whose  mode  of  action  is  totally  different;  and  the  more  so  when  we  see
that  the  same  local  diseases  can  and  do  arise  from  every  kind  of  fever.
To  ascertain  this  fact,  therefore,  we  are  to  look  out  for  that  disposition,  or
that  mode  of  action  common  to  all  fevers  which  are  capable  of  producing
this  effect,  with  the  disposition  of  the  constitution,  or  of  the  part  at  the
rime,  and  we  shall  find  that  this  kind  of  inflammation  depends  upon  the
constitution  and  part  at  the  time,  and  not  upon  any  peculiarity  in  the
fever,  as  is  also  the  case  with  the  small-pox  eruptions,  viz.  they  partake
of  the  constitution.

This  common  principle  in  fever,  of  producing  local  inflammation,  is
the  simple  fever  itself,  abstracted  from  every  peculiarity.  A  fever  in  all
cases  or  of  all  kinds,  is  a  disturbed  action,  like  inflammation  itself,  which
may  be  ioined  with  any  specific  mode  of  action,  and  this  disturbed  action
will  always  be  according  to  the  constitution,  even  when  joined  with  any
specific  quality.  The  inflammatory  fever  is,  perhaps,  the  most  simple,
because  it  is  a  simple  fever  on  a  constitution  having  no  peculiarity  of  dis-
position. The  putrid  fever  (as  it  is  called)  is  perhaps  no  more  than  the
same  fever  upon  a  constitution  that  has  a  peculiarity  of  action  under  that
disturbance,  and  therefore  it  proceeds  according  to  that  peculiarity.

This  is  well  illusf*ated  in  specific  diseases;  for  instance,  in  the  small-pox.
The  small-pox  produces  a  fever,  viz.  a  disturbed  action,  joined  with  the
specific,  and  although  this  action  is  produced  by  the  same  poison  in  two


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation ,  259

different  persons,  yet  the  one  shall  be  the  true  inflammatory,  and  the
other  the  putrid,  the  erysepelatous,  etc.  Now  the  same  poison  can  have
but  one  mode  of  irritating,  abstracted  from  its  poisonous  quality,  and  this
one  mode  produces  fever;  and  it  also  can  have  but  one  mode  of  irritating
in  respect  of  its  poisonous  quality,  but  that  fever  abstracted  from  its  poi-
sonous quality  will  be  according  to  the  nature  of  the  constitution  at  the
time,  the  poison  being  capable  of  producing  nothing  but  a  fever  joined
with  its  specific  poison,  and  that  specific  quality  takes  place  equally  on
every  kind  of  constitution,  the  poison  itself  having  no  power  of  affecting
the  constitution  "in  one  person  differently  from  that  of  another,  it  can  only
act  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  according  to  the  susceptibility  of  the  person
for  such  irritation.

Now  since  every  fever,  whether  common  of  specific,  is  equally  capable
of  producing  local  inflammation,  which  may  be  carried  the  length  of  sup-
puration ;  and  as  it  cannot  with  any  degree  of  reason  be  called  critical  in
specific  fevers,  we  have  no  reason  for  supposing  that  those  suppurations
are  critical  in  the  common  fever,  or  in  those  fevers  which  are  of  no  spe~
cific  kind.

It  was  a  leading  doctrine  of  Boerhaave>  that  inflammation  consisted  in
an  obstruction  of  the  minute  vessels,  in  consequence  of  too  great  a  spissi-
tude  of  the  fluids,  and  his  practice  consisted  in  seeking  for  attenuants ;  but
this  theory  seems  to  be  almost  entirely  exploded.

This  was  certainly  too  confined  an  idea  of  all  the  causes  of  inflammation!
and  reduced  all  inflammations  to  one  species.  The  only  distinction
between  inflammations  must  have  arisen  from  the  nature  of  the  ob-
struction, if  there  could  be  any;  but  this  could  never  account  for  the
action  of  many  specific  diseases  and  poisons.

It  was  also  too  mechanical.  If  they  had  said  that  any  obstruction  to  the
natural  actions  of  a  part  which  could  stop  the  blood's  motion  in  it,  be-
came a  cause  of  inflammation,  they  would  not  have  been  so  materially
wrong  as  to  a  possible  cause  of  inflammation.

It  has  been  as  much  laboured  on  the  other  hand,  to  shew  that  the
cause  cannot  on  any  occasion  be  obstruction  in  the  blood's  motion  through


260  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

the  small  vessels ;  but  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  any  cause  which  can  ob-
struct the  motion  of  the  blood,  for  a  given  time,  will  become  the  cause  of
inflammation,  for  either  the  cause  of  the  obstruction  itself,  or  the  blood
being  retained  in  the  smaller  vessels  for  a  certain  time,  will  either  irritate
or  unite  the  parts,  or  where  it  irritates  will  throw  the  vessels  into
such  actions  as  naturally  arise  out  of  an  extraneous  irritating  cause,  but
not  an  increased  motion  of  the  blood  behind,  to  drive  on  the  bbstucted
blood  through  these  vessels,  as  has  been  supposed.  It  will  excite  that
action  which  in  the  end  produces  suppuration,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the
extraneous  matter,  which  was  the  cause  of  the  obstruction ;  such  as  pres-
sure on  external  parts,  or  the  obstructing  matter  itself,  which  is  to  be
reckoned  extraneous.  But  though  pure  inflammation  is  rather  an  effort
of  nature  than  a  disease,  yet  it  always  implies  disease  or  disturbance,  in  as
much  as  there  must  be  a  previous  morbid  or  disturbed  state  to  make  such
effort  necessary.

All  inflammations  attended  with  disease  have  some  specific  quality,
which  simple  inflammation  has  not;  and  in  such  cases  it  is  the  specific
quality  which  is  the  disease,  and  not  the  inflammation ;  for  such  con-
stitutions or  parts  as  are  capable  of  falling  into  the  true  adhesive  and
juppurative  inflammation,  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  most  healthy,
and  the  freest  from  diseases  of  all  kinds.  Indeed,  even  where  there  is  a
specific  quality,  it  often  can  hardly  be  called  disease;  for  in  the  small-pox,
where  the  disorder  goes  through  its  different  operations  well,  it  is  exactly
similar  to  common  healthy  inflammation;  for  if  such  an  irritation  as  above
described  were  to  attack  a  constitution  or  parts,  in  another  state  than  that
of  health,  we  should  then  not  have  either  the  adhesive,  or  suppurative  in-
flammation taking  place,  but  most  probably  some  other,  such  as  the  eryse-
pelatous  or  scrophulous,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  constitution  or
parts  at  the  time.

This  state  of  health  in  a  constitution  is  so  remarkable,  that  we  see  in
the  time  of  the  symptomatic  fever,  when  nature  would  seem  to  be  uni-
versally disturbed,  a  kindly  or  benign  inflammation  going  on,  and  kindly
suppuration  ;  which  shews  that  this  fever  has  no  specific  tendency  to  wrong
action,  the  constitution  being  only  disturbed  by  sympathizing  with  a  local


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation*  2  6 1

injury,  but  not  capable  of  giving  or  reflecting  back  upon  the  part  in-
flamed, a  diseased  disposition  or  action.

And  this  is  so  remarkable,  that  such  inflammations  as  seem  to  affect  the
constitution  by  sympathy  only,  which  is  commonly  either  from  extent,
quantity,  or  the  seat  of  it  being  a  part  essential  to  or  connected  with  parte
belonging  to  life,  go  on  as  kindly  as  they  do  in  a  small  inflammation,  as  a
boil,  which  does  not  affect  the  constitution  in  the  least.  Indeed  fever  is  a
good  symptom  when  equal  to  the  injury,  and  of  the  same  kind  with  the
local  affection,  when  that  kind  is  good.

Let  us  take  an  amputation  of  a  leg  as  an  example,  which  produces  some-
thing more  than  a  disturbed  constitution,  for  there  is  a  great  loss  of  a  sub-
stance to  that  constitution,  which,  abstracted  from  the  violence,  would
probably  produce  considerable  effects  till  the  constitution  became  ac-
customed to  the  loss ;  but  even  with  all  this  loss  we  often  find  that  a  healthy
inflammation  shall  come  upon  the  stump,  and  a  kindly  suppuration  take
place  while  the  symptomatic  fever  lasts;  in  many  cases  also  it  still  keeps  its
ground  even  when  affected  by  many  specific  irritations  which  are  foreign
to  it ;  and  nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  when  affected  by  a  common  ir-
ritation, which  will  only. rouse  that  constitution  into  action,  but  not  alter
it,  having  only  the  specific  difference  added,  so  that  the  parts  will  go
readily  through  the  adhesive  or  suppurative  inflammation ;  the  specific
being  only  an  attendant  on  this  healthy  action ;  this  we  see  plainly  to  be
the  case  in  the  healthy  small-pox,  and  the  lues  venerea  in  its  first  stages.
But  on  the  contrary,  if  the  constitution  is  such  at  the  time  as  would  readily
fall  into  an  unhealthy  inflammation,  from  common  irritation  or  accidental
violence,  then  it  will  also  fall  into  that  state,  when  irritated  by  a  specific
irritation  foreign  to  the  constitution,  such  as  the  small-pox,  which  in  this
case  will  run  into  the  confluent  kind.

There  are  many  constitutions  which  have  a  tendency  to  specific  diseases,
that  when  injured  by  fever,  or  any  constitutional  complaint,  readily  pro-
duce the  specific  inflammation  in  such  parts  of  the  body  as  have  the  greatest
susceptibility  for  any  specific  action ;  or  if  such  parts  are  affected  by  any
local  violence,  the  parts  affected  will  not  go  through  the  healthy  adhesive
inflammation,  nor  will  they  enter  into  the  healthy  suppurative  in  flam-


262  Fundamental  principles  of  Inflammation .

ma'tion,  but  will  fall  into  the  specific  inflammation  peculiar  to  the  habit;
such  is  the  case  with  an  erysepelatous  habit.  Or  if  a  specific  inflamma-
tion has  already  taken  place,  any  violence  clone  to  it,  when  already  begun,
will  increase  that  disposition,  and  action,  which  we  plainly  see  to  be  the
case  with  the  scrophula;  because  this  disease  can  and  often  does  arise  from
such  a  cause  alone.  Besides  the  constitution  producing  such  effects,  there
are  many  parts  of  the  body  which  have  a  greater  tendency  to  some  specific
disease  than  the  constitution  in  general ;  which  particular  parts  will  fall
into  these  specific  inflammations  more  readily  than  others,  either  upon  the
constitution  being  affected,  or  a  violence  committed  upon  themselves ;  for
instance,  many  parts  of  the  body  have  a  greater  tendency  to  fall  into  the
scrophula  than  others,  and  these  will  fall  into  that  mode  of  action  when
injured,  either  by  means  of  the  constitution,  or  from  accident;  except  the
constitutional  complaint  is  such  as  to  be  a  specific  for  the  scrofula,  which
I  can  easily  conceive  it  may ;  in  the  cancer  also,  if  the  disease  has  pre-
viously taken  place,  then  the  tendency  of  an  injury  is  to  exasperate  and
increase  it.

But  there  are  specific  irritations  which  do  not  affect  either  the  part  or
the  constitution,  as  a  common  irritation,  but  affect  them  in  a  way  peculiar
to  the  irritation,  altering  at  the  same  time  both  the  parts  affected  and  the
constitution,  from  an  healthy  state  to  an  unhealthy  one  of  its  own  kind.

This  seems  to  be  the  case  with  the  plague,  perhaps  with  the  putrid
and  jail-distempers  in  a  less  degree;  for  whatever  be  the  kind  of  con-
stitution which  they  attack,  they  always  reduce  that  constitution  to  their
own  kind;  it  is  not  a  healthy  operation  going  on,  and  the  specific  super-
added, as  in  the  healthy  small-pox,  etc.  However,  even  the  plague  has
its  degrees  of  power  over  a  constitution,  some  being  much  more  easily,
and  of  course  more  violently,  affected  than  others.

This  change  in  these  cases,  especially  in  the  first,  is  often  so  great,  that
the  constitution  hardly  ever  recovers  it,  so  that  the  patient  dies  ;  which  we
have  observed  above,  is  not  the  case  with  many  other,  specific  diseases
or  poisons,  as  the  small-pox,  etc.  for  this  disease  makes  no  change  in  the
constitution  peculiar  to  itself.

From  what  has  been  said,  it  must  appear,  that  the  irritations  which


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation*  263

are  capable  of  producing  those  inflammations  may  be  either  simple,  as  the
adhesive,  or  producing  with  it  other  modes  of  action,  as  either  suppuration
or  ulceration ;  and  also  either  of  the  above  modes  of  action  may  be  joined
with  some  of  the  specific  actions.

Hence  we  may  conclude,  that  irritations  of  whatever  kind,  either  pro-
duce an  inflammation  peculiar  to  the  constitution,  or  the  nature  of  the
parts  ;  or,  according  to  the  irritating  cause,  as  in  the  plague;  and  where  it
is  according  to  the  constitution,  that  many  specific  irritations  may  be  ad-
ded, without  altering  the  nature  of  the  inflammation  itself,  and  that  they
only  determine  its  situation,  extent,  duration,  etc.  according  to  the  specific
disposition  added,  provided  the  constitution  be  healthy  j  but  if  the  con-
stitution be  unhealthy,  whether  affected  with  erysepelas,  putrid  fever,  or
plague,  and  the  specific  disease  is  superadded,  it  will  be  a  mixture  of  both,
that  is,  it  will  be  a  specific  inflammation,  set  down  upon  a  constitution
of  a  peculiar  kind,  which  partakes  of  both,  and  those  specific  properties
will  not  be  so  distinct,  or  so  well  formed,  as  when  they  appear  in  a  sound
constitution.

If  the  constitution  has  a  susceptibility  to  be  putrid,  and  the  small-pox
attacks  it,  the  inflammation  will  be  the  small-pox  joined  with  the  putrid
mode  of  action  of  the  constitution,  which  will  affect  the  mode  of  action
peculiar  to  the  small-pox,  and  destroy  the  specific  difference  of  the  in-
flammation belonging  to  the  small-pox,  the  pustules  will  spread,  not  sup-
purate, and  look  livid,  according  to  the  putrid  disposition.

These  constant  effects,  peculiar  to  the  constitution,  may  be  changed
from  the  one  to  the  other,  just  as  the  constitution  changes,  for  the  small-
pox may  begin  upon  a  healthy  constitution,  in  which  they  will  be  distinct
or  circumscribed;  but  if  the  constitution  becomes  diseased,  they  will  spread;
and  if  the  constitution  takes  a  healthy  turn  again,  they  vail  begin  to  con-
tract to  their  specific  distance  again*.

*  The  knowledge  of  these  facts,  is  of  great  service  in  the  cure  of  many  specific  diseases  ;
for  whatever  the  specific  disease  may  be,  we  are  always  to  treat  the  patient  in  one  respect  ac-
cording to  the  general  nature  of  the  inflammation  ;  and  if  we  have  a  specific  remedy,  we  are
also  to  join  that  with  the  other  ;  but  if  we  have  not  a  specific  remedy,  we  are  then  only  to  take
up  the  disease  according  to  the  constitution.

Let  us  illustrate  the  foregoing  propositions  by  example. The  first  case  is  explained  by  the


264  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

Many  people  are  much  more  susceptible  of  inflammation  than  others,
even  of  the  common  kind,  and  those  probably  may  be  reckoned  simply
irritable.  In  such  it  is  more  violent,  and  in  such  it  is  more  apt  to  spread,
the  surrounding  parts  being  ready  to  act  or  sympathize  with  an  action  to
what  they  are  prone;  continued  sympathy  more  readily  takes  place  in
such  cases*;  but  this  is  not  universal,  for  we  find  many  very  considerable
inflammations  confined  to  the  part  irritated,  and  in  such  instances  con-
tinued sympathy  is  not  great,  only  the  part  irritated  takes  up  the  action
violently.

The  term  or  idea  of  inflammation  may  be  too  general,  yet  it  is  pro-
venereal  disease  in  the  form  of  a  chancre ;  the  venereal  matter  produces  an  inflammation  and
ulceration  according  to  the  nature  of  the  specific  disease,  and  the  constitution  ;  if  the  con-
stitution is  perfectly  healthy,  then  the  effects  are  the  suppurative  and  specific  disease  joined  ;
the  limits  of  both  are  confined  according  to  the  constitution  and  the  nature  of  the  specific
disease.  For  the  inflammation  and  ulceration  never  extend  beyond  the  specific  affection;
but  if  the  constitution  is  sucli  as  readily  to  fall  into  the  eryscpelatous,  then  it  becomes  the
erysepelatous  and  specific  joined  ;  and  although  the  extent  of  the  specific  affection  is  limited,
that  of  the  erysepelatous  is  not ;  the  consequence  of  which  is,  that  it  spreads  over  the  whole
prepuce,  and  often  the  whole  skin  of  the  penis.

In  this  disease,  under  such  circumstances,  we  are  led  to  the  method  of  cure;  for  although
we  have  a  medicine  for  the  venereal  inflammation,  yet  bark  is  to  be  given  for  the  erysepelatous,
the  quantity  to  be  given  is  according  to  the  predominancy  of  the  one  or  the  other.  The
effects  of  this  practice  are  very  striking;  for  as  the  erysepilatous  inflammation  lessens  it  be-
comes more  confined  in  its  limits,  and,  as  it  were,  drawn  into  the  original  point;  and  when
it  becomes  truly  suppurative,  and  venereal,  its  limits  then  are  brought  within  the  specific
distance.

The  second  case  is  explained  by  the  small-pox.  The  variolous  matter  in  healthy  con-
stitutions produces  the  suppurative  and  specific  inflammations,  the  specific  is  limited,  and
directs  the  suppurative ;  but  if  the  erysepelatous  comes  on,  the  suppurative  ceases,  it  then  spreads
along  the  surface,  uniting  inflammation  with  inflammation,  and  producing  the  confluent
small-pox.

We  have  no  specific  remedy  for  the  small-pox,  nor  can  we  readily  have  any  for  a  disease
which  cures  itself;  our  business  then  is  to  cure  the  erysepelatous,  if  possible,  and  leave  the
constitution  to  cure  the  specific.

*  This  one  might  illustrate  by  a  piece  of  paper  being  either  dry  or  damp ;  if  dry,  then  ink
will  not  spread,  it  will  be  confined  to  its  point,  but  if  damp,  it  will  spread,  being  attracted  by
the  surrounding  damp  to  which  it  has  an  affinity.


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  26$

bable  that  it  may  form  a  genus,  in  which  there  is  a  number  of  species,  or
it  may  be  more  confined  in  its  classification,  and  be  reckoned  a  species
containing  several  varieties.  These  are,  however,  so  connected  among  them-
selves, that  we  cannot  justly  understand  anyone  of  the  species  or  varieties
without  forming  some  idea  of  the  whole,  by  which  means,  when  treating
of  any  one,  we  can  better  contrast  it  with  the  others,  which  gives  us  a
dearer  idea  both  of  the  one  we  are  treating  of,  and  of  the  whole.  So  far
as  it  appears  to  be  necessary  to  take  notice  of  the  different  inflammations,
as  illustrative,  they  may  be  comprehended  in  five  divisions:  although,  I
must  own  that  if  we  take  in  all  the  specific  diseases  which  produce  in-
flammation, such  as  the  venereal  disease  in  its  different  forms,  the  gout,
etc.  they  may  be  without  number ;  however,  many  of  them  produce  very
much  the  same  appearance  and  effects  with  those  which  are  of  no  specific
kind.  The  specific  is  of  no  particular  kind,  but  only  the  cause,  and  the
specific  effect  is  a  something  superadded.  The  present,  viz.  the  adhesive,
with  its  different  effects,  as  suppuration,  I  shall  consider  as  one.  The
cedematous,  which  comes  nearest  to  the  adhesive,  forms  a  second  division.
The  erysepelatous,  the  carbuncle,  and  that  which  leads  immediately  to
mortification,  form  a  third.  There  is  another  inflammation  very  like
chilblains,  which  is  not  very  lively  and  is  often  in  blotches,  some  the
breadth  of  a  shilling,  others  of  the  breadth  of  half  a  crown,  and  even
broader,  etc.  This  inflammation  certainly  arises  from  irritable  debility ;
the  blotches  look  more  of  a  copper-colour,  and  the  skin  over  them  is  often
diseased.  All,  except  the  first,  have  a  kind  of  affinity  to  each  other;
although  I  think  the  cedematous  has  the  least  affinity  to  the  three  last,
and  many  vary  so  as  to  make  it  difficult  to  say  to  which  species  the
varieties  belong.  There  are  a  great  many  other  inflammations,  but  which
arise  from  some  specific  cause,  as  the  gout,  scrophula,  etc.  or  poisons;  but
as  these  do  not  explain,  or  illustrate  by  contrast,  the  adhesive  or  suppu-
rative inflammation,  I  shall  not  give  the  outlines  of  them  here,  except  just
to  mention  the  particulars  of  the  gout,  as  an  inflammation.

The  action  of  the  complete  gout,  has  all  the  characters  (while  it  lasts)
of  the  true  inflammation,  and  which  may  be  called  the  inflammatory
action  of  the  gout;  but  it  has  many  singularities  attending  it,  which  attend

Mm


•266  Fundamental  principles  of  injfanvnathff,

no  other  inflammation,  and  which  of  course  become  some  of  its  specific
characters.

The  inflammation  of  the  gout  is  very  different  from  the  adhesives  and
suppurative  in  its  sensation.  It  seldom  throbs-,  it  is  a  pricking,  cutting,
and  darting  pain;  befides  which,  there  is  a -pain  which  feels  as  if  the
inflamed  parts  were  all  moving,  and  in  that  motion  there  was  pain  ;
therefore  the  action,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  pain,  must  be  very  different,
and  is  most  probably  from  the  action  of  the  vessels,  not  from  their
distention,  as  in  the  suppurative  inflammation.

It  probably  comes  on  more  quickly  than  any  other.  Its  violence  is  pro-
bably greater.  In  duration  it  is  probably  the  most  uncertain  ;  and  its  going
off  is  quicker  than  of  any  other  inflammation.  Its  shifting  from  one  part
of  the  body  to  another,  is  probably  in  some  degree  peculiar  to  itself ;  and  it
leaves  parts  in  a  state  which  no  other  inflammation  does.  Without  enter-
ing further  into  the  nature  of  this  disease  than  saying  it  is  an  act  of  the
constitution,  I  shall  describe  some  of  its  visible  effects,  which  of  course
can  only  be  observed  when  it  falls  on  an  external  part,  and  when  it  does,
it  is  most  commonly  on  an  extremity,  more  especially  on  the  lower,  but
sometimes  on  the  upper,  and  still  more  commonly  the  extreme  parts  of  the
extremity  in  either  the  upper  or  the  lower ;  and  its  principal  seat  in  the
extremity  is  a  joint.  When  it  falls  on  internal  parts,  it  is  most  commonly
the  stomach,  which  is  only  supposed  by  its  effects  or  symptoms  ;  from  its
being  transferred,  and  from  the  mode  of  relief.  It  attacks  also  the  brain,
producing  delirium,  giddiness,  the  loss  of  the  natural  and  accustomed  feel
of  the  body,  incessant  sleepiness,  etc.  which  is  also  known  by  the  above
circumstances.  When  it  falls  on  other  parts,  either  externally  or  inter-
nally, it  is  not  so  much  determined  on  what  part  it  is  most  apt  to  fall.
It  sometimes  falls  either  on  the  lungs  or  muscles  of  respiration,  the  throat,
testicles,  urethra,  producing  a  discharge,  etc.  on  the  anus,  forming  piles ;
which  can  only  be  known  to  be  gout  by  collateral  circumstances.

Why  the  extremities,  the  stomach,  and  brain,  should  be  similar  in  sus-
ceptibility to  take  the  gouty  action  from  the  constitution,  is  not  easily  ac-
counted for.  I  should  be  inclined  to  suppose  that  its  effects  on  the  stomach
•or  brain  are  not  similar  to  those  on  the  extremity,  or  probably  it  does  not


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  267

advance  so  far  in  its  effects  there,  because  in  that  case  it  would  certainly
kill.  Its  effects  on  the  extremities  are,  I  believe,  always  more  or  less  an
inflammation,  or  at  least  it  has  the  common  visible  or  sensible  effects  of
inflammation.  It  is  most  probably  what  may  be  called  a  true  specific  in-
flammation, for  it  produces  the  same  immediate  effects  in  every  constitu-
tion, therefore  does  not  produce  an  inflammation  according  to  the  con-
stitution, having  the  specific  action  added,  similar  to  poisons,  but  from  its
nature  it  produces  nearly  the  same  effects  in  every  constitution.  I  have
seen  constitutions  whose  extremities  were  attacked  with  the  cedematous
inflammation,  attended  with  a  purplish  appearance  •>  violent  pain  in  such
cases  comes  on,  which  creates  some  apprehensions  of  a  tendency  to  morti-
fication ;  upon  looking  at  the  part,  we  may  suspect  suppuration,  the  in-
flammation to  appearance  being  of  that  kind;  but  may  think  it  odd  that
such  healthy  inflammation  and  suppuration  should  take  place  in  themidsC
of  inflammation  of  so  contrary  a  kind,  but  shall  find  no  suppuration ;  the
inflammation  shall  continue  its  period  and  then  leave  the  extremities  in  a
much  better  state  than  it  found  them.  Although  the  inflammatory  action
of  the  gout  is  attended  with  great  pain,  yet  I  think  it  is  not  so  tender  as
the  true  inflammation  is  ;  a  part  may  be  violently  inflamed,  and  yet  it  may
be  handled  or  squeezed,  the  nerves  are  not  in  such  a  state  of  irritation,  its
consequeht  effects  are  very  different  from  that  of  the  true  inflammation,  for
instead  of  entire  resolution,  it  gives  the  dispofition  to  the  inflamed  parts  to
fill  the  joint,  or  whatever  parts  have  been  affected,  as  for  instance,  the
cellular  membrane  with  chalk.

However,  chalk  is  not  neceflarily  an  effect  of  the  gouty  inflammation  >
for  in  a  gouty  habit  we  have  chalk  formed  where  there  never  had  been  any
gouty  inflammation,  yet  it  is  singular  it  should  attack  such  dissimilar
parts  as  the  skin,  ligaments,  etc.  It  has  not  only  no  tendency  to  sup-
puration, as  an  immediate  effect  of  inflammation,  but  it  leaves  the  parts  in
a  state  not  easily  excited  to  inflammation;  the  chalk  shall  remain  for  years
without  producing  inflammation,  and  seldom  produces  it  at  all,  but  from
quantity ;  and  when  the  interior  surfaces  are  exposed,  they  hardly  take  on
common  inflammation  and  suppuration,  healing  more  readily  than  a  sore
of  the  same  magnitude  from  any  other  cause;  even  a  joint  shall  be  ex-.


2  6  8  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation .

posed,  yet  common  inflammation  shall  not  come  on,  nor  shall  it  sup-
purate, only  a  watery  fluid  shall  come  out,  bringing  with  it  the  chalk
occasonally,  and  it  shall  heal  up  kindly.  It  is  probable  that  the  gout  is
not  always  an  act  of  the  constitution,  but  that  parts  may  be  so  susceptible,
or  rather  disposed  for  this  action,  that  they  may  immediately  run  into  it
when  deranged  :  if  this  notion  be  well  founded,  then  it  may  be  a  question,
whether  this  local  affection  relieves  the  constitution  for  the  time  from  any
susceptibility  for  such  an  action  ?

It  may  be  disputed,  whether  trie  following  are  all  inflammations  or  not.
They  often  arise  from  the  same  causes  $  accident,  for  instance,  produces  all
of  them.  They  have  certainly  many  characters  in  common,  although  not
always  the  same  result.  The  vessels  becoming  inlarged,  there  is  an  ex-
travasation, pain,  and  a  separation  of  the  cuticle,  but  seldom  a  formation
of  matter,  although  there  sometimes  is,  which  happens  when  they  have
at  first  more  of  the  adhesive  state ;  and  there  is  a  circumstance  which
I  think  is  common  to  them,  namely,  a  red  streak  passing  from  the  inflamed
part,  generally  towards  the  trunk,  although  not  always  in  this  direction.
In  common  language  they  are  called  erysepelatous,  although  very  different;
the  erysepelatous  being  one  of  the  best  marked  inflammations  of  any.  I
do  not  mean  to  treat  of  these  but  in  a  general  way,  not  even  when  con-
sidering the  method  of  cure.  It  is  probable  there  is  no  specific  distinction
between  any  of  these  inflammations  but  what  arises  from  the  constitution
or  the  parts,  for  we  find  them  all  proceeding  from  what  may  be  called  the
same  accidental  cause,  which  therefore  cannot  produce  any  thing  specific ;
the  distinctions  in  the  mode  of  action  of  the  inflamed  parts  being  occa-
sioned by  a  peculiarity  in  the  constitution,  or  the  nature  of  the  part  itself,
but  probably  in  the  constitution.  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  different
species  or  varieties  of  inflammation  arise  from  the  difference  in  the  nature
of  the  part  inflamed ;  but  this  is  certainly  not  the  case;  for  if  it  was,  we
should  soon  be  made  acquainted  with  all  the  different  inflammations  in
the  same  person,  at  the  same  time,  and  even  in  the  same  wound ;  for  in-
stance, in  an  amputation  of  a  leg,  where  we  cut  through  skin,  cellular
membrane,  muscle,  tendon,  periosteum,  bone,  and  marrow,  the  skin  should
give  us  the  inflammation  of  its  kind,  the  cellular  membrane  of  its  kind,


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.  269

the  muscles  of  theirs,  the  tendons  of  theirs,  the  periosteum,  bone,  marrow,
etc.  of  theirs ;  but  we  find  it  is  the  same  inflammation  in  them  all  ;  it  is
the  adhesive  in  them  all  if  the  parts  are  brought  together  ;  it  is  the  sup-
purative if  parts  are  exposed.  I  shall  at  present  only  take  notice  of  the
four  last,  as  I  mean  to  treat  more  fully  of  the  first,  which  cannot  be  so
completely  understood  without  seeing  the  distinctions.

What  I  would  call  the  oedematous  inflammation,  is  when  the  ex-
travasated  fluid  is  water ;  it  has  very  much  the  appearance  of  the  adhesive,
and  probably  comes  the  nearest  to  it  of  any,  being  of  a  scarlet  colour  ;  but
much  more  diffused.  The  fluid  extravasated,  being  principally  the  serum,
renders  the  swelling  more  diffused  than  even  the  inflammation  itself;  it  is
very  painful,  or  rather  sore,  but  there  is  not  so  much  of  the  throbbing
sensation  as  in  the  adhesive  inflammation;  it  appears  to  be  only  on  the
surface,  but  most  probably  goes  much  deeper;  for  in  such  -cases  the  ex-
travasated fluid  is  in  too  large  quantity  to  be  furnifhed  by  the  cells  of  the
cutis  alone ;  but  in  this  we  have  not  the  same  guide,  as  in  the  adhesive,
viz.  the  swelling  and  inflammation  corresponding  with  each  other.  The
difference  between  this  inflammation  and  the  adhesive,  arises,  I  conceive,
from  the  principle  of  inflammation  acting  upon  a  dropsical  disposition,
which  is  always  attended  with  weakness;  whereas  a  greater  degree  -of
strength  would  have  produced  the  adhesive  inflammation  under  the  same
cause,  or  irritation ;  and  what  makes  me  conceive  this,  is,  that  in  many
cases  of  anasarcous  legs  we  have  exactly  this  inflammation  come  on  from
distention,  which  adds  to  the  extravasation  of  the  serum,  as  well  as  in  most
cases  of  scarifications  of  oedematous  parts  to  evacuate  the  water.  When
inflammation  takes  place  it  is  much  more  lasting  than  the  adhesive  ;
and,  I  believe,  seldom,  or  ever  produces  suppuration ;  but  if  it  should  run
into  this  stage,  it  is  more  general,  and  the  whole  cellular  membrane  in  the
interstices  of  parts  is  apt  to  mortify  and  slough,  producing  very  extensive
abscesses.,  which  are  not  circumscribed..

The erysepelatous  inflammation  is  very  peculiar;  and  most  inflammati-
ons that  are  not  of  the  true  adhesive  and  suppurative  kinds,  are  called  so,
although  probably  they  do  not  in  the  least  belong  to  it;  and  this  may


2jo  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation,

arise  more  from  the  want  of  terms,  than  the  want  of  discrimination.  This
inflammation  often  arises  spontaneously,  or  in  consequence  of  a  low  or  de-
bilitating fever.  It  often  arises  from  accident,  but  then  it  is  commonly  a
secondary  inflammation,  although  not  always ;  for  the  first  shall  have  gone
off,  and  when  suppuration  was  to  take  place,  it  shall  have  come  kindly
on,  but  afterwards  the  erysepelatous  shall  take  place.

This  may  be  called  a  remote  inflammation,  and  is,  in  this  respect,  some-
what similar  to  the  locked  jaw.

It  is  more  commonly  a  cutaneous  inflammation  than  situated  in  the
deeper  seated  parts;  although  in  some  constitutions  every  inflammation,
wherever  it  exists,  will  most  probably  be  of  this  kind  ;  however,  the  skirt
appears  to  be  most  susceptible  of  it,  because  it  will  spread  over  a  prodigious
surface  of  skin,  while  it  does  not  affect  even  the  cellular  membrane
Underneath;  at  least  not  commonly* There  is  an  inflammation  which
attacks  internal  canals,  which  is  classed  with  the  erysepelatous,  but  how
far  it  is  the  same  I  do  not  know;  it  is  certainly  not  the  suppurative;  and
as  almost  every  other  inflammation  was  formerly  called  erysepelatous ;  this
has  been  supposed  to  belong  to  this  kind  of  inflammation. The  inflam-
mation I  am  speaking  of  is  more  common  to  the  throat  than  any  other
part,  often  going  down  the  trachea :  whatever  it  is,  it  may  be  considered  in
some  of  its  effects  to  be  in  direct  opposition  to  the  adhesive  and  the  suppu-
rative inflammations;  for  where  the  adhesive  most  readily  produces  adhe-
sions, there  the  erysepelatous  does  not,  as  in  the  common  cellular  mem-
brane; and  where  the  adhesive  seldom  takes  place,  excepting  from  extreme
violence,  there  this  inflammation  (if  erysepelatous)  has  a  tendency  to  pro-
duce adhesions,  as  in  canals  or  outlets ;  it  also  opposes,  in  some  degree,
the  suppurative,  in  being  backward  in  producing  suppuration  even  in  those
places  where  suppuration  most  readily  takes  place,  such  as  canals  and
outlets ;  for  there,  as  above  observed,  it  more  readily  throws  out  the  coa-
gulating lymph. Whatever  the  inflammation  may  be,  it  is  certainly  at-
tended with  nearly  the  same  kind  of  constitutional  affection.  The  fever  in
both  appears  to  be  the  same,  viz.  accompanied  with  debility,  languor,  etc.
The  extravasation  in  consequence  of  the  erysepelatous  inflammation  is  not
so  great  as  in  either  the  adhesive,  or  the  cedematous ;  nor  is  it  of  that  kind


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation*  271

which  produces  adhesions  between  the  parts  inflamed,  which  in  this
inflammation  would  commonly  be  unnecessary,  as  it  seldom  produces  sup-
puration, but  is  attended  with  very  bad  consequences  when  it  does.  It
appears  to  support  itself  by  continued  sympathy,  for  it  commonly  begins
at  a  point  and  spreads,  while  it  shall  be  getting  well,  where  it  first  began.

This  cannot  be  merely  constitutional,  for  if  it  was,  the  parts  already  in-
flamed could  not  recover,  if  its  increase  in  new  parts  arose  from  the  con-
stitution ;  but  it  gives  the  idea  that  when  the  parts  have  once  gone  through
this  action  that  they  lose  the  disposition  and  become  healthy.  This  pro-
perty is  not  peculiar  to  this  inflammation,  the  ring-worm  has  this  pecu-
liarity, as  also  many  cutaneous  ulcers*.

This  inflammation  is  more  common  in  the  summer  than  in  the  winter,
more  especially  in  hospitals ;  and  I  think  takes  place  oftener  after  wounds
on  the  head  than  any  other.  I  have  often  seen  it  begin  round  a  wound,
on  the  scalp,  extending  itself  over  the  whole  head  and  face ;  the  eye-lids
being  very  much  swelled,  the  ears  thickened,  and  k  has  advanced  to  the
neck,  shoulders,  and  body,  creeping  along  both  arms,  and  terminating  at
the  fingers  ends;  that  which  attacks  the  body  often  goes  along  the  body  to
both  thighs,  down  the  legs,  and  terminates  at  the  ends  of  the  toes  j  and
while  this  is  going  on,  it  is  as  expeditiously  cured  behind,  and  the  skin
peels  off  the  cured  parts ;  however,  this  is  not  always  the  case,  it  often
stops,  and  where  it  proceeds  so  far,  it  is  commonly  becoming  milder.
This  inflammation,  when  it  runs  along  the  skin,  has  a  determined  edge,
not  losing  itself  gradually  and  insensibly  in  the  skin  beyond,  as  in  the  true
adhesive,  and  indeed  most  of  the  inflammations;  the  skin  feels  as  if  only  a
little  thickened,  and  not  so  pliable ;  for  by  passing  the  finger  along  the
sound  skin  to  the  inflamed,  we  feel  an  evident  difference.  The  colour  of
the  skin  is  of  a  darkish  red. When  it  goes  deeper  than  the  skin  into  the

*  There  appear  to  me  two  ways  of  accounting  for  this;  one  is,  that  the  whole  skin  is  very
susceptible  of  such  action,  and  readily  goes  on  with  it  by  continued  sympathy,  and  the  part
having  gone  through  the  action,  like  the  small-pox,  etc.  loses  the  disposition,  and  the  action
ceases.

The  other  is,  that  the  inflammation  is  such  as  to  contaminate  while  it  spreads,  but  when  it
:has  once  acted  it  is  cured  as  above  observed.  If  this  last  be  a  true  solution,  then  the  right
practice  would  be  to  stop  its  progress  by  destroying  the  parts  beyond  it.


•zrjz  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

cellular  membrane,  it  often  suppurates ;  but  then  I  suspect  it  is  not  the  true
erysepelatous ;  for  in  such  cases  it  commonly  produces  mortification  in  the
cells,  by  which  air  is  let  loose  -,  this  gives  a  strange  feel,  neither  of  fluctu-
ation nor  crepitation,  and  as  there  are  no  adhesions  the  matter  finds  an  easy
passage  into  the  common  cellular  membrane,  increasing  the  same  kind  of
suppuration  wherever  it  comes  j  and  as  mortification  is  a  consequence  of
these  inflammations,  putrifaction  ensues,  and  the  discharge  becomes  very
offensive.  Whether  this  difference  in  the  effect  of  the  inflammation  arises
from  the  nature  of  the  parts,  I  will  not  pretend  to  say.  This  effect  takes
place  about  the  buttocks  and  side  of  the  anus  oftener  than  any  where  else;
as  indeed  does  common  inflammation  and  suppuration.

This  inflammation  commonly  begins  with  fever,  lowness  of  spirits,  and
prostration  of  strength,  loss  of  appetite,  etc.  but  it  commonly  does  not  last
long,  and  the  inflammation  shall  spread  even  when  the  fever  is  gone  off",
but  then  it  is  not  so  violent:  when  it  produces  suppuration  in  the  cellular
membrane  it  is  often  dangerous,  both  from  the  disease  itself,  and  the  con-
sequences of  the  matter  diffusing  itself  much  farther.  This  effect  frequently
takes  place  when  this  inflammation  attacks  the  buttocks  or  parts  near  the
anus,  and  often  proves  fatal.  In  such  cases,  as  the  sores  seldom  ulcerate,
they  should  be  opened  early,  for  the  matter  either  gets  into  the  cellular
membrane  from  the  want  of  adhesions,  or  it  separates  parts  that  are  only
attached,  as  the  periosteum  from  the  bone,  muscles  from  muscles,  etc.
whereas  the  true  suppurative  ulcerates  briskly,  which,  therefore,  should  not
be  opened  early,  but  allowed  to  burst.

Many  inflammations  on  the  skin  which  come  to  suppuration,  have
something  of  the  erysepelatou  s  disposition,  for  we  see  them  increasing  the
circle  of  inflammation,  the  cuticle  separating,  matter  formed  underneath
from  the  cutis ,  and  the  sore  healing  in  the  centre ;  they  perhaps  begin  like
a  pimple,  but  spread  in  that  way  to  the  breadth  of  a  sixpence,  shilling,  or
crown -piece  j  such  often  take  place  on  the  fingers.

The  inflammation  that  produces  the  carbuncle  is  of  a  different  nature
from  any  of  the  former  $  it  is  stationary  with  respect  to  place,  and  is  pretty


fundamental  principles  of  inflammation,  273

much  circumscribed,  even  forming  a  broad,  flat,  firm  tumour;  it  begins  in
the  skin  almost  like  a  pimple,  and  goes  deeper  and  deeper,  spreading  with
a  broad  base  under  the  skin  in  the  cellular  membrane ;  and  although  con-
siderably minified,  yet  this  does  not  arise  from  the  extravasation  of  coagu-
lating lymph  producing  adhesions  which  are  to  retain  life,  for  the  very  cells
into  which  it  is  extravasated  become  dead.  It  produces  a  suppuration,
but  not  an  abscess,  somewhat  similar  to  the  erysepelatous  when  the  in-
flammation passes  into  the  cellular  membrane,  for  as  there  are  no  adhe-
sions, the  matter  lies  in  the  cells  where  it  was  formed,  almost  like  water
in  an  anasarca ;  but  still  it  is  not  diffused  through  the  uninflamed  cellular
membrane,  as  in  the  erysepelatous,  for  it  appears  to  extend  no  further  than
the  inflammation  ;  one  would  almost  imagine  that  there  was  a  limitation
to  the  extent,  beyond  which,  this  species  of  inflammation  could  not  go,
and  at  these  limits  the  adhesive  inflammation  took  place  to  confine  the
matter  within  the  bounds  of  the  carbuncle.  A  diffused  ulceration  on  the
inside  for  the  exit  of  the  matter  takes  place,  making  a  number  of  openings
in  the  skin ;  there  are  generally  more  carbuncles  than  one  at  the  same  time*
a  great  number  succeeding  each  other,  which  would  almost  seem  to  pro-
duce each  other  in  this  succession;  they  are  commonly  more  on  the  trunk
of  the  body  than  any  where  else;  however,  I  have  seen  them  on  the
head,  and  sometimes  on  the  extremities,  although  but  seldom.

They  are  more  commonly  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  body  than  the
anterior.

This  inflammation  attacks  more  beyond  the  middle  age  than  at  it,  and
very  few  under  it.

It  is  most  common  in  those  that  have  lived  well.  I  never  saw  but  one
patient  of  this  kind  in  an  hospital.  It  appears  to  have  some  affinity  to  the
boil ;  but  the  boil  differs  in  this  respect,  that  it  has  more  of  the  true  in-
flammation, therefore  spreads  less,  and  is  more  peculiar  to  the  young  than
the  old,  which  may  be  the  reason  why  it  partakes  more  of  the  true  inflam-
mation.

As  death  is  produced  in  a  great  deal  of  the  cellular  membrane,  and
J  believe,  in  it  only,  except  the  skin  giving  way,  which  I  believe  is  by
ulceration  principally,  it  becomes  a  question,  whether  this  mortification

Nn


274  Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation.

arises  "from  the  nature  of  the  inflammation,  or  rather  from  the  matter  being
confined  in  the  cells  of  the  cellular  membrane?  I  rather  suspect  the  latter;
for  I  find  that  if  this  matter  escapes  from  these  cells  and  comes  into  unin-
■ 'flamed  cells,  it  produces  mortification  there,  This  is  like  the  urine,  for
whenever  the  urine  escapes  into  the  cellular  membrane  it  there  produces
mortification  ;  the  colour  of  the  skin  is  at  first  more  vivid  than  afterwards,
for  it  becomes  of  a  purple  colour.

Inflammation  often  produces  mortification  or  death  in  the  part  inflamed.
This  commonly  takes  place  in  old  people  that  are  become  very  much
debilitated,  and  chiefly  in  the  lower  extremities.  I  suspect  it  to  be  some-
what similar  to  the  carbuncle,  viz.  principally  in  those  who  have  lived
well,  although  not  so  much  confined  to  them  as  the  carbuncle;  however,
it  takes  place  in  the  young,  where  great  debility  has  been  produced  from
disease,  especially  those  diseases  that  have  debility  as  a  principle,  such
as  what  are  commonly  called  putrid  fevers;  but  the  situation  of  these  is  not
"so  determined,  and  in  such,  inflammation  hardly  takes  place  without  an
immediate  exciting  cause,  as  the  application  of  blifters,  etc.  Death  in  a
part  sometimes  takes  place,  almost  immediately  without  inflammation;
but  this  is  not  to  the  present  purpose.  Where  mortification  succeeds  in-
Sammation  in  the  extremities,  especially  in  elderly  persons,  there  is  often
an  early  separation  of  the  cuticle  which  forms  a  blister,  filled  with  a  bloody
serum ;  and  we  shall  observe  dark  brownish  spots,  which  consist  of  ex-
travasated  blood  in  the  true  cutis,  and  which  shall  at  last  blister,  and  then
the  cutis  forms  a  slough.

Such  inflammations  have  little  of  the  adhesive  tumefaction  in  them,
but  more  of  the  oedematous;  are  not  clear  or  transparent,  but  rather  of  a
dusky  red;  as  the  colour  of  the  inflamed  parts  show  something  of  its
nature,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  it  is  different  in  all  these  inflammations
from  that  of  the  true  adhesive,  and  as  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  the
circulation  is  quicker  in  the  adhesive  inflammation  than  is  natural,  and
that  the  colour  arises  from  this  cause,  we  may  suppose  that  the  motion  of
the  blood  in  these  is  languid,  and  that  it  assumes  the  venal  appearance,
-even  in  the  arteries.

In  most  of  these  four  inflammations  there  is  an  appearance  that  often


Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation  +.  275

arises,  which  is  a  reddish  streak  commonly  passing  from  the  inflamed  parts
towards  the  source  of  the  circulation,  but  not  always  in  this  direction ;
sometimes  juft  the  contrary,  and  this  is  more  certain  when  it  happens  to
take  place  in  an  extremity,  because  there  we  know  the  course  of  all  the  ves-
sels better;  but  it  does  not  always  arise  from  the  part  inflamed.  I  have  seen
this  last  species  of  inflammation  attack  the  toes,  and  red  streaks  run  up
the  foot,  terminating  about  the  ankle,  while  there  were  several  arising
on  the  fore  part  of  the  leg,  just  below  the  knee.  They  often  make  a  net-
work on  the  leg,  and  are  frequently  a  forerunner,  and  an  attendant  on
mortification.  They  seldom  go  farther  than  a  blush  in  the  skin,  seldom
thicken,  but  are  more  of  the  cedematous  kind;  however,  we  sometimes
find  hard  cords  running  from  sores  and  inflammations,  but  these  are
commonly  deeper  seated,  and  I  have  suspected  them  to  be  veins;  as  a  proof
of  this,  I  have  seen  the  superficial  veins  of  the  leg  have  the  skin  red  over
them,  similar  to  those  above  described,  and  the  veins  have  felt  hard  under
the  finger.  These  reddish  streaks  are  supposed  to  be  absorbents,  becoming
inflamed  by  their  carrying  a  stimulating  fluid.  I  am  apt  to  suppose  them
to  be  absorbents,  but  I  do  not  conceive  that  this  effect  arises  from  ab-
sorption. If  it  arose  from  such  a  cause,  it  should  be  uniform,  the  cause
should  always  exist  when  the  effect  takes  place.  It  is  first  to  be  observed,
that  it  only  takes  place  in  certain  constitutions,  in  which  absorption,  one
way  or  other,  explains  nothing;  and  I  find,  upon  observation,  that  this
effect  shall  be  coeval  with  the  inflammation  where  no  suppuration  has
taken  place;  I  have  even  seen  it  arise  from  accident,  prior  to  the  possibility
of  inflammation  taking  place,  viz.  in  the  time  of  the  pain  arising  from  the
immediate  effects  of  the  accident;  this  was  in  the  finger,  from  the  prick
of  a  clean  needle,  which  had  been  for  some  time  piercing  new  buck-skin
leather;  the  glands  in  the  armpit  were  sore,  sickness,  attended  with  its
usual  symptoms,  such  as  oppreflion,  was  nearly  as  immediate.  Its  direction
from  the  source  of  the  circulation  is  another  strong  proof  of  its  not  arising
from  absorption,  and  its  taking  place  at  some  distance  is  also  a  cor-
roboration of  the  same  opinion.  Another  strong  circumstance  in  favour
of  this  opinion  is,  that  the  morbid  poisons  do  not  produce  this  effect,  where
we  know  absorption  has.  taken  place. Thus  the  venereal  seldom  or  ever


*2j6  'Fundamental  principles  of  inflammation*

•produces  it.  The  hard  cord  passing  from  the  prepuce  along  the  upper
part  of  the  penis,  I  do  not  conceive  to  be  of  this  kind.  In  the  small-pox,
after  inoculation,  it  has  been  observed,  but  I  imagine  it  was  only  in  the
•abovementioned  constitutions.  I  could  conceive  it  to  arise  in  the  plague,
.if  there  was  any  local  disease.  I  am,  therefore,  rather  apt  to  attribute
this  appearance  to  the  irritation  running  along  the  lymphatics,  more
.especially  in  such  constitutions  j  and  as  we  do  not  allow  the  veins  to  be
absorbents,  their  being  affected  must  be  supposed  to  arise  from  the  same
.cause.  Whenever  we  see  this  effect,  we  may,  in  some  degree,  form  an
opinion  of  the  kind  of  inflammation,  and  that  it  is  not  the  most  favorable.


£  *77  ]


CHAPTER  III.
?HE  ADBESIFE  INFLAMMATION


I  shall  begin  by  treating  of  the  nature  and  effects  of  what  I  have  called
the  adhesive  inflammation,  as  well  as  giving  a  proper  idea  of  it.  I  shall
also  open  the  way  to  a  clear  understanding  of  the  many  phenomena
which  attend  the  suppurative  inflammation;  but  as  inflammation  does  nofc
produce  one  effect  only,  but  several,  and  as  most  of  them  take  place  about
the  same  time,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  in  the  rnind,  which  to  describe
first.

Inflammation  in  most  cases  appears  to  begin  at  a  point;  for  at  the  very
first  commencement,  all  the  local  symptoms  are  within  a  very  small
compass,  and  they  afterwards  spread  according  to  the  violence  of  the
cause ;  the  disposition  in  the  parts  for  inflammation,  and  the  nature  of  the
surrounding  parts  themselves,  which  susceptibility  in  the  surrounding  parts
may  be  either  constitutional  or  local.

This  is  so  much  the  case,  that  inflammation  shall  come  on  at  once  in
a  fixed  point,  giving  great  pain,  and  which  shall  be  soon  followed'  by
tumefaction.

This  is  also  the  case  with  those  inflammations  which  arise  from  acci»
dent,  for  all  accidents  are  confined  to  fixed  and  determined  limits,  but  the
inflammation  which  follows  is  not;  it  spreads  over  a  large  extent,  yet
the  inflammation  is  always  the  greater,  the  nearer  it  is  to  the  first  fixed
point j  and  gradually  becomes  less  and  less  in  the  surrounding  parts,  till
at  last  it  is  insensibly  lost  in  them.

This  spreading  of  the  inflammation  is  owing  to  continued  sympathy,
the  surrounding  parts  sympathising  with  the  point  of  irritation,;  and  in


278  The  adhesive  inflammation.

proportion  to  the  health  of  the  surrounding  parts  and  constitution,  this
sympathy  is  less;  for  we  find  in  many  states  of  parts,  and  many  consti-
tutions, that  there  is  a  disposition  to  this  sympathy,  and  in  such,  the  in-
flammation spreads  in  proportion.


I.  ACTION  OF  THE  VESSELS  IN  INFLAMMATION.

The  act  of  inflammation  would  appear  to  be  an  increased  action  of  the
vessels*,  but  whatever  action  it  is,  it  takes  place,  most  probably  in  the
smaller  vessels,  for  it  may  be  confined  almost  to  a  point  where  nothing
but  the  smallest  vessels  exist.  The  larger  vessels  may  be  considered  as
only  the  conveyers  of  the  materials,  for  the  smaller  to  act  upon  and  dispose
of  according  to  the  different  intentions ;  however,  inflammation  in  a  part,
is  not  only  an  action  of  the  smaller  vessels  in  the  part  itself,  but  in  the
larger  vessels  leading  to  it.  This  is  proved  by  a  whitlow  taking  place  on
the  end  of  a  finger;  for  although  the  inflammation  itself  shall  be  confined
to  the  end  of  a  finger,  and  the  inflammatory  sensation  or  throbbing  be
situated  in  this  part,  yet  we  can  feel  by  our  hands,  when  we  grasp  the
finger,  a  strong  pulsation  in  the  two  arteries  leading  to  the  inflamed  part,
while  no  such  pulsation  can  be  felt  in  the  other  fingers;  and  if  the  in-
flammation is  very  considerable,  the  artery,  as  high  as  the  wrist,  will  be
sensibly  affected,  which  proves  that  the  arterial  system  is  at  that  time
dilating  itself,  and  allowing  a  much  larger  quantity  of  blood  to  pass  than
is  usual. This  is  probably  by  continued  sympathy.

Where  the  inflammation  affects  the  constitution,  the  vessels  of  the
system  rather  contract,  and  keep  as  it  were  stationary,  which  stationary
contraction  is  more  or  less  according  to  the  state  of  the  constitution ;  in
strong  healthy  constitutions  whose  powers  are  equal  to  the  necessary  actions,

*  It  may  be  here  remarked,  that  the  action  of  vessels  is  commonly  supposed  to  be  con?-
traction,  either  by  their  elastic  or  muscular  coats  j  but  I  have  shewn  that  their  elastic  powe.c
also  dilated  them ;  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  their  muscular  power  has  a  similar  effect.


T/je  adhesive  i?ijlammation%  279

or  in  parts  that  affect  the  constitution  less,  this  contraction  is  less  and  less
stationary.

The  very  first  act  of  the  vessels  when  the  stimulus  which  excites  in-
flammation is  applied,  is,  I  believe,  exactly  similar  to  a  blush. It  is,  I
believe,  simply  an  increase  or  distension  beyond  their  natural  size. This
effect  we  see  takes  place  upon  many  occasions,  gentle  friction  on  the  skin
produces  it;  gently  stimulating  medicines  have  the  same  effect,  a  warm
glow  is  the  consequence,  similar  to  that  of  the  cheek  in  a  blush ;  and  if
either  of  these  be  increased  or  continued,  real  inflammation  will  be  the  con-
sequence, as  well  as  excoriation,  suppuration,  and  ulceration.  This  effect  we
often  see,  even  where  considerable  mischief  has  been  done  ;  and  I  believe
it  is  what  always  terminates  the  boundaries  of  the  true  inflammation. A
musket-ball  shall  pass  a  considerable  way  under  the  skin,  perhaps  half
way  round  the  body,  which  shall  be  discovered  and  traced  by  a  red  band
in  the  skin,  not  in  the  least  hard,  only  a  little  tender  to  the  touch;  and  it
shall  subside  without  extending  farther. This  appearance  I  shall  term  a
blush;  for  although  this  may  be  reckoned  the  first  act  of  inflammation,
yet  I  would  not  call  it  inflammation,  having  produced  a  lafting  effect;  I
should  rather  say,  that  inflammation  sets  out  from  this  point,  and  that
afterwards  a  new  action  begins,  which  is  probably  first  a  separation  of  the
coagulating  lymph,  and  the  throwing  it  out  of  the  vessels.

The  parts  inflamed  appear  to  become  more  vascular;  but  how  far  they
are  really  so,  I  am  not  certain,  for  this  appearance  does  (at  least  in  part)
arise  from  the  dilatation  of  the  vessels,  which  allows  the  red  part  of  the
blood  to  go  into  vessels  where  only  serum  and  coagulating  lymph  could
pass  when  they  were  in  a  natural  state,  and  till  the  newly  extravasated
substances  become  vascular;  the  effect  is  most  probably  owing  wholly  to
the  above  cause.

This  incipient  enlargement  of  the  vessels  upon  the  first  excitement  of
inflammation  is  satisfactorily  seen  in  the  following  manner.  Make  an  in-
cision through  the  skin  on  the  inside  of  the  upper  part  of  a  dog's  thigh,
three  inches  long;  by  pulling  the  cut  edges  asunder,  and  observing  the  ex-
posed surface,  we  shall  see  the  blush  or  ash-coloured  cellular  membrane
covering  the  different  parts  underneath,  with  a  few  arteries  passing  through


28o  ¥  be  adhesive  inflammation.

it  to  the  neighbouring  parts;  but  in  a  little  time  we  shall  see  these  vessels
increasing  in  size,  and  also  smaller  vessels  going  off  from  them  that  were
not  before  observable,  as  if  newly  formed  or  forming;  the  number  and
size  shall  increase  till  the  whole  surface  shall  become  extremely  vascular,
and  at  last  the  red  blood  shall  be  thrown  out  in  small  dots  on  the  ex-
posed surface,  probably,  through  the  cut  ends  of  the  arteries  that  only
carried  the  lymph  before.  This  surface  will  become  in  time  more  opaque,
and  less  ductile.  Parts  inflamed,  when  compared  with  similar  parts  not
inflamed,  shew  a  considerable  difference  in  the  size  of  the  vessels,  and  pro-
bably from  this  cause  bring  an  increased  number  to  view.  I  froze  the
ear  of  a  rabbit  and  thawed  it  again;  this  excited  a  considerable  inflam-
mation, an  increased  heat,  and  a  considerable  thickening  of  the  part.  This
rabbit  was  killed  when  the  ear  was  in  the  height  of  inflammation,  and  the
head  being  injected,  the  two  ears  were  removed  and  dried.  The  uninflamed
ear  dried  clear  and  transparent,  the  vessels  were  distinctly  seen  ramifying
through  the  substance;  but  the  inflamed  ear  dried  thicker  and  more
opaque,  and  its  arteries  were  considerably  larger.

In  inflammation  of  the  eye,  which  is  commonly  of  the  tunica  conjunc-
tiva, the  progress  of  inflammation  may,  in  part,  be  accurately  observed,
although  not  so  progressively  as  in  a  wound.  The  contrast  between  the
red  vessel  and  the  white  of  the  eye,  under  this  coat  is  very  conspicuous,
and  although  we  do  not  see  the  vessels  enlarging  in  this  coat,  yet  we  see
the  progress  they  have  made,  the  white  appears  as  if  it  was  becoming
more  vascular,  and  these  vessels  larger,  till  at  last  the  whole  tunica  con-
junctiva shall  appear  as  one  mass  of  blood,  looking  more  like  extravasated
blood  then  a  congeries  of  vessels,  although  I  believe  it  is  commonly  the
last.

From  these  circumstances  it  must  appear,  that  a  much  larger  quan-
tity of  blood  passes  through  parts  when  inflamed  than  when  in  a  natural
state,  which  is  according  to  the  common  rules  of  the  animal  ceconomy;
for,  whenever  a  part  has  more  to  do  than  simply  to  support  itself,  the
blood  is  there  collected  in  larger  quantity;  this  we  find  to  take  place  uni-
versally in  those  parts  whose  powers  are  called  up  to  action  by  some
necessary  operation  to  be  performed,  whether  natural  or  diseased.


The  adhesive  inflammation.  281

As  the  vessels  become  larger,  and  the  part  becomes  more  of  the  colour
of  the  blood,  it  is  to  be  supposed  there  is  more  blood  in  the  part ;  and  as
the  true  inflammatory  colour  is  scarlet,  or  that  colour  which  the  blood
has  when  in  the  arteries,  one  would  from  hence  conclude,  either  that  the
arteries  were  principally  dilated,  or  at  least,  if  the  veins  are  equally  dis-
tended, that  the  blood  undergoes  no  change  in  such  inflammation  in  its
passage  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  which  I  think,  is  most  probably
the  case;  and  this  may  arise  from  the  quickness  of  its  passage  through
those  vessels.

When  inflammation  takes  place  in  parts  that  have  a  degree  of  trans-
parency, that  transparency  is  lessened.  This  is,  probably,  best  seen  in
membranes,  such  as  those  membranes  which  line  cavities,  or  cover  bodies
in  those  cavities,  such  as  the  pia-mater,  where,  in  a  natural  state,  we  may
observe  the  blood-vessels  to  be  very  distinct.  But  when  we  see  the  blood-
vessels fuller  than  common,  yet  distinct  in  such  membranes,  we  are  not
to  call  that  inflammation,  although  it  may  be  the  first  step,  as  we  find  to
be  the  case  in  the  first  action  of  the  vessels  in  consequence  of  such  irri-
tation as  will  end  in  inflammation.  As  it  may  not,  however,  be  the  first
step,  there  must  be  other  attending  circumstances  to  determine  it  to  be  the
very  first  action  of  the  vessels  in  inflammation,  for  as  that  appearance
may  either  belong  to  a  briskness  in  the  circulation  in  the  part  at  the  time,
or  the  very  first  step  in  inflammation,  their  causes  are  to  be  discriminated
by  some  other  symptom ;  they  are  both  a  kind  of  blush,  or  an  exertion  of
the  action  of  the  vessels;  but  when  it  is  an  effect  of  an  inflammatory  cause,
it  is  then  only  that  the  inflammation  has  not  yet  produced  any  change  in
the  natural  structure  of  the  parts,  but  which  it  will  soon  do*.  What  the
action  is,  or  in  what  it  differs  from  the  common  action  of  the  vessels,  is
not  easily  ascertained,  since  we  are  more  able  to  judge  of  the  effects
than  the  immediate  cause. However,  it  is  probably  an  action  of  the

*  When  this  appearance  is  seen  any  where  after  death,  it  should  not"  be  called  inflam-
mation, even  although  we  knew  it  was  the  first  action  of  inflammation;  for  as  we  are  then
only  looking  out  for  the  causes  of  death,  or  the  symptoms  prior  to  death,  we  are  only  to  look
out  for  such  as  can  be  a  cause,  and  not  lay  hold  of  those  that  cannot  possibly  be  a  cause
which  those  first  actions  eannot  be.

O  0


282  The  adhesive  inflammation.

vessels,  which  we  can  better  observe  than  any  diseased  action  in  the  body,
for  we  can  observe  the  state  in  which  the  arteries  are,  with  their  general
effects;  we  feel,  also,  a  different  temperature  respecting  heat,  yet  the  im-
mediate cause  may  not  be  ascertainable.

The  vessels,  both  arteries  and  veins,  in  the  inflamed  part  are  enlarged,
and  the  part  becomes  visibly  more  vascular,  from  which  we  should  sus-
pect, that  instead  of  an  increased  contraction,  there  was  rather  what  would
appear  an  increased  relaxation  of  their  muscular  powers,  being,  as  we  might
suppose,  left  to  the  elasticity  entirely. This  would  be  reducing  them  to  a
state  of  paralysis  simply  ;  but  the  power  of  muscular  contraction  would
seem  to  give  way  in  inflammation,  for  they  certainly  dilate  more  in  in-
flammation than  the  extent  of  the  elastic  power  would  allow;  and  it  must
also  be  supposed,  that  the  elastic  power  of  the  artery  must  be  dilated
in the same proportion. The contents of the circulation being
thrown  out  upon  such  occasions,  would,  from  considering  it  in  those
lights,  rather  confirm  us  in  that  opinion ;  and  when  we  consider  the  whole
of  this  as  a  necessary  operation  of  nature,  we  must  suppose  it  something
more  than  simply  a  common  relaxation;  we  must  suppose  it  an  action  in
the  parts  to  produce  an  increase  of  size  to  answer  particular  purposes;  and
this  I  should  call  the  action  of  dilatation,  as  we  see  the  uterus  increase
in  size  in  the  time  of  uterine-gestation,  as  well  as  the  os  tineas  in  the  time
of  labour,  the  consequence  of  the  preceding  actions,  and  necessary  for
the  completion  of  those  which  are  to  follow.

The  force  of  the  circulation  would  seem  to  have  some  share  in  this
effect,  but  only  as  a  secondary  cause;  for  I  could  conceive  a  part  to
inflame,  or  be  in  a  .ctate  of  inflammation,  although  no  blood  were  to  pass.
As  a  proof  of  this,  we  may  observe,  that  by  lessening  either  the  action
of  the  heart,  or  the  column  of  blood,  inflammation  is  lessened;  and  I  may
also  observe,  that  we  have  an  increased  pain  in  the  inflamed  part  in  the
diastole  of  the  artery,  and  a  part  inflamed  by  being  gently  pressed  is  made
easier.  Thus,  a  person  with  an  inflammation  in  the  fingers  will  find  relief
by  gently  pressing  it  in  the  other  hand.  These  are  strong  proofs  that  it
is  not  a  contractile  action  of  the  vascular  coat  of  the  vessel ;  for  in  such  a
sensible  state  of  vessels  if  they  contracted  by  their  muscular  power,  the


The  adhesive  inflammation,  283

pain  would  be  in  their  systole;  for  we  find  in  all  muscles  which  are  in  a
state  of  great  sensibility,  from  whatever  cause,  that  they  cannot  act
without  giving  great  pain.  Thus  an  inflamed  bladder  becomes  extremely
painful  when  expelling  its  contents,  an  inflamed  intestine  in  the  same
manner;  I  should  say,  therefore,  that  in  inflammations  the  muscular  coats
of  the  arteries  do  not  contract.

Whatever  purpose  this  increase  of  the  size  of  the  vessels  may  answer,
we  must  suppose  it  allows  a  greater  quantity  of  blood  to  pass  through  the
inflamed  part  than  in  the  natural  state,  which  supposition  is  supported  by
many  other  observations.

The  part  inflamed,  I  have  already  observed,  becomes  to  appearance
more  vascular  than  when  in  the  natural  state,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  is
really  so,  both  from  new  vessels  being  set  up  in  the  inflamed  part,  as  well
as  the  new  and  adventitious  uniting  substance  becoming  vascular.  Besides,
the  vessels  of  the  parts  are  enlarged,  so  that  the  red  blood  passes  further
than  common,  which  increases  those  appearances.  But  the  brain  appears
to  be  an  exception  to  these  general  rules ;  for  in  all  diseases  of  the  brain,
where  the  effects  were  such  as  are  commonly  the  consequence  of  inflam-
mation, such  as  suppuration  from  accidents,  I  never  could  find  the  above
appearances;  the  brain  may,  perhaps,  go  directly  into  suppuration,  as
sometimes  the  peritoneum  does ;  but  its  slowness  of  going  into  suppuration
after  the  accident,  would  make  us  suppose,  apriori,  that  there  was  suf-
ficient time  for  adhesions  to  form.


II.  OF  THE  COLOUR,  SWELLING,  AND  PAIN  OF  INFLAMED  PARTS.

The  colour  of  an  inflamed  part  is  visibly  changed  from  the  natural,
whatever  it  was,  to  a  red.  This  red  is  of  various  hues,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  inflammation;  if  healthy,  it  is  a  pale  red  ;  if  less  healthy,
the  colour  will  be  darker,  more  of  a  purple,  and  so  on  till  it  shall  be  a
blueish  purple,  which  I  took  notice  of  in  the  short  sketch  of  the  peculiar


2S4  cF7je  adhesive  inflammation*

inflammations  j  but  the  parts  inflamed  will  in  every  constitution  be  more
of  the  healthy  red  when  the  parts  inflamed  are  near  to  the  source  of  the
circulation,  than  when  far  from  it.  This  increase  of  red  appears  to  arise
from  two  causes ;  the  first  is  a  dilatation  of  the  vessels,  whereby  a  greater
quantity  of  blood  is  allowed  to  pass  into  those  vessels  which  only  admitted
serum  or  lymph  before*.

The  second  is  owing  probably  to  new  veflels  being  set  up  in  the  ex-
travasated  uniting  coagulating  lymph.

This  colour  is  gradually  lost  in  the  surrounding  part  if  the  inflammation
is  of  the  healthy  kind,  but  in  many  others  it  has  a  determined  edge,  as  in
the  true  erysepelatous,  and  in  some  specific  diseases,  as  in  the  small-pox,
where  its  quick  termination  is  a  sign  of  health.

From  the  account  I  have  given  of  the  immediate  effects  of  inflammation
of  the  cellular  membrane,  in  which  I  include  the  larger  cavities,  the
volume  of  the  part  inflamed  must  be  increased.  This,  when  a  common
consequence  of  inflammation,  is  not  circumscribed,  but  rather  diffused,  as
the  inflammation,  however,  begins  in  a  circumscribed  part,  which  is  at
least  the  case  with  that  arising  from  violence ;  the  inflammation  I  just  now
observed  is  always  the  greatest  nearest  to  that  point,  and  is  gradually  lost
in  the  surrounding  parts,  the  swelling  of  course  is  the  greatest  at,  or  nearest
to  this  point,  and  it  is  also  lost  in  the  surrounding  sound  parts.  This
takes  place,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  constitution,  or  the  situation  of
the  inflammation;  for  if  the  constitution  be  strong  and  healthy,  the  sur-
rounding parts  will  sympathize  less  with  the  point  of  irritation,  so  that
inflammation  and  its  consequences,  viz.  extravasation  will  be  less  diffused.

There  will  be  less  of  the  serum,  and  of  course  a  purer  coagulating  lymph,
so  that  the  swelled  parts  will  be  firmer  -,  but  in  some  specific  disease  or
dissimilar  part,  as  a  gland,  it  has  a  more  determined  edge,  the  surrounding
parts  not  so  readily  taking  on  specific  diseased  action  as  in  other  cases.  In
this  both  the  colour  and  swelling  correspond  very  much,  since  they  both
depend  on  the  same  principle.

*  The  tunica  conjunctiva  of  the  eye  when  inflammed,  is  a  striking  instance  of  this;  but  the
viiible  progress  of  inflammation  I  have  already  described  in  the  experiment  on  the  dog.


The  adhesive  inflammation.  2%$

This  increase  of  volume  is  owing  to  the  extravasation  of  the  coagulating
lymph,  and  some  serum;  in  proportion  to  the  inflammation,  the  degree  of
which  depends  on  the  causes  abovementioned,  this  effect  is  more  or  Ies?,
and  therefore  is  greatest  at  the  point  of  inflammation,  becoming  less  and
less  as  it  extends  into  the  surrounding  parts,  till  it  is  insensibly  lost  in
them.

The  extravasation  of  the  serum  along  with  the  coagulating  lymph  is,
probably,  not  a  separation  of  itself,  as  in  a  dropsy,  but  a  part  of  it  being
separated  from  the  lymph  in  the  coagulation  of  that  fluid,  is  squeezed  into
the  surrounding  cellular  membrane,  where  there  is  but  little  extravasation,
and  where  the  cells  are  not  united  by  it.  Thus  the  circumference  of  such
swellings  is  a  little  cedamatous ;  but  the  whole  of  the  serum,  if  there  be  a
depending  part,  will  move  thither,  and  distend  it  considerably,  as  in  the
foot  in  consequence  of  an  inflammation  in  the  leg.  But  in  most  cases
there  is  a  continued  extravasation  of  serum,  long  after  the  extravasation  ot'
the  coagulating  lymph  is  at  an  end;  so  that  depending  parts  will  continue
oedematous,  while  the  inflammation  is  resolving,  or  while  suppuration,  or
even  healing  is  going  on.

The  whole  swelling  looks  like  a  part  of  the  body  only  a  little  changed,
without  any  appearance  of  containing  extraneous  matter ;  and  indeed  it  is
simply  formed  by  an  extravasation  of  fluids  without  their  having  under-
gone any  visible  or  material  change,  except  coagulation.

As  few  uncommon  operations  can  go  on  in  an  animal  body  without
affecting  the  sensations,  and  as  the  first  principle  of  sensation  arises  from
some  uncommon  action,  or  alteration  being  made  in  the  natural  position
or  arrangement  of  the  parts,  we  should  naturally  suppose  that  the  sensation
would  be  in  some  degree  according  to  those  effects,  and  the  sensibility  of
the  parts.  One  can  easily  form  an  idea  of  an  alteration  in  the  structure
of  parts  giving  sensation  which  may  even  be  carried  to  pain,  but  that  the
simple  action  of  parts  should  produce  sensations  and  even  violent  pain  is
but  little  known,  or  at  least  has  been,  I  believe,  but  little  attended  to;  aU


2. 86  The  adhesive  inflammation,

these  effects,  I  think,  may  justly  be  included  under  the  term  spasm* ; at
least  we  are  led  by  analogy  to  suppose  that  they  belong  to  that  class.

By  spasm  I  should  understand  a  contraction  of  a  muscle,  without  the
leading  and  natural  causes.

Thus  the  contraction  of  a  muscle  of  the  leg,  called  the  cramp,  gives
considerable  pain,  often  violent,  as  also  the  tetanus,  and  when  in  a  less
degree,  as  in  the  twinkling  of  the  eye-lid,  it  gives  only  sensation,  whereas
if  the  muscles  were  to  act  by  the  will,  no  sensation  would  be  produced.

We  find  that  those  sensations  are  more  or  less  acute,  according  to  the
quickness  or  slowness  of  the  progress  of  these  causes,  from  whence  we  are
naturally  led  to  assign  two  causes  which  must  always  attend  one  another;
for  when  both  do  not  take  place  at  the  same  time,  the  mind  then  remains
insensible  to  the  alteration.  This  is  its  being  produced  in  a  given  time,
for  the  alteration  in  the  position  of  the  parts  may  be  produced  so  slowly,
as  not  to  keep  pace  with  sensation,  which  is  the  case  with  many  indolent
tumors,  ascites,  etc.  on  the  other  hand  this  alteration  in  the  natural  posi-
tion of  parts  may  be  so  quick  as  to  exceed  sensation,  and  therefore  there  is
a  certain  medium,  which  produces  the  greatest  pain.

The  actions  I  have  been  describing  being  pretty  quick  in  their  effects,
we  cannot  fail  to  see  why  the  pain  from  the  inflammation  must  be  consi-
derable; however,  the  pain  is  not  the  same  in  all  the  different  stages.  In  the
adhesive  state  of  the  inflammation  it  is  generally  but  very  inconsiderable,
especially  if  it  is  to  go  no  further,  and  is  perhaps  more  of  a  heavy  than  an
acute  pain ;  when  it  happens  on  the  skin  it  often  begins  with  an  itching;
but  as  the  inflammation  is  passing  from  the  adhesive  to  the  suppurative,
the  parts  then  undergo  a  greater  change  than  before,  and  the  pain  grows
more  and  more  acute,  till  it  becomes  very  considerable.  The  nerves  also
acquire  at  that  time  a  degree  of  sensibility,  which  renders  them  much  more
susceptible  of  impression  than  when  they  are  in  their  natural  state;  thus
an  inflamed  part  is  not  only  painful  in  itself,  but  it  communicates  im-

t  How  far  a  nerve  from  a  part,  or  how  far  the  materia  vitae  of  a  part,  can  act  so  as  to  con-
vey sensation  I  do  not  know ;  but  we  all  know  that  an  involuntary  action  of  a  voluntary
muscle,  or  the  spontaneous  action  of  an  involontary  muscle  will  produce  it.


The  adhesive  inflammation*.  287

presslons  to  the  mind  independent  of  pain,  which  do  not  arise  from  a  na-
tural sound  part.  This  pain  increases  every  time  the  arteries  are  dilated,
whence  it  would  appear  that  the  arteries  do  not  contract  by  their  muscular
power,  in  their  systole,  for  if  they  did,  we  might  expect  a  considerable  pain
in  that  action  which  would  be  at  the  full  of  the  pulse.  Whether  this
pain  arises  from  the  distention  of  the  artery  by  the  force  of  the  heart,  or
whether  it  arises  from  the  action  of  distention  from  the  force  of  the  artery
itself,  is  not  easily  determined.  We  know  that  diseased  muscles  give  much
pain  in  their  contraction,  perhaps  more  than  they  do  when  stretched*.

That  the  degree  of  inflammation  which  becomes  the  cause  of  adhesions
gives  but  little  pain,  is  proved  from  the  dissections  of  dead  bodies ;  for  we
seldom  or  never  find  a  body  in  dissection  which  has  not  adhesions  in  some
of  the  larger  cavities;  and  yet  it  may  reasonably  be  supposed,  that  many
of  these  persons  never  had  any  acute  symptoms,  or  violent  pain  in  those
parts ;  indeed,  we  find  many  strong  adhesions  upon  the  opening  of  dead
bodies,  in  parts  which  the  friends  of  these  persons  never  heard  mentioned,
during  life,  as  the  subject  of  a  single  complaint.

That  adhesions  can  be  produced  from  very  slight  inflammation,  is
proved  in  ruptures  in  consequence  of  wearing  a  truss;  for  we  find  the
slight  pressure  of  a  truss  exciting  such  action  as  to  thicken  parts,  by
which  means  the  two  sides  of  the  sack  are  united,  though  there  be  hardly
any  sensation  in  the  part;  we  also  see,  in  cases  where  this  inflammation
arises  from  violence,  that  it  gives  little  or  no  pain.  A  man  shall  be  shot
through  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  and  if  none  of  the  contained  parts  are
materially  hurt,  the  adhesive  inflammation  shall  take  place  in  all  the  in-
ternal parts  contiguous  to  the  wound  made  by  the  ball,  and  yet  no  great
degree  of  pain  shall  be  felt.  This  assertion  is  still  proved  by  the  little  pain
suffered  after  many  bruises,  where  there  is  evident  inflammation;  and  in
simple  fractures,  the  pain  from  the  the  inflammation  is  very  trifling,  what-
ever it  may  be  from  the  laceration  of  the  parts. But  this  will  be  ac-

*  This  is  very  evident  in  the  bladder  of  urine  when  inflamed,  for  in  the  contraction  of  that
viscus  to  expel  the  urine,  there  is  more  pain  than  in  the  dilatation ;  indeed,  the  distention
is  gradual,  and  when  the  urine  is  wholly  evacuated,  the  irritation  produced  bv  the  contraction
still  continues,  which  produces  a  continuance  of  the  straining.


288  The  adhesive  inflammation.

cording  to  the  degree  of  inflammation,  what  stage  it  is  in,  and  what  parts
are  inflamed,  as  will  be  fully  explained  hereafter.

We  find  it  a  common  principle  in  the  animal  machine,  that  every  part
increases  in  some  degree  according  to  the  action  required.  Thus  we  find
muscles  increase  in  size  when  much  exercised;  vessels  become  larger  in
proportion  to  the  necessity  of  supply,  as  for  instance,  in  the  gravid  uterus;
the  external  carotids  in  the  stag,  also,  when  his  horns  are  growing,  are
much  larger  than  at  any  other  time;  and  I  have  observed,  that  in  inflam-
mation, the  vessels  become  larger,  more  blood  passes,  and  there  appear  to
be  more  actions  taking  place;  but  the  nerves  do  not  seem  to  undergo  any
change.  The  nerves  of  the  gravid  uterus  are  the  same  as  when  it  is  in
the  natural  state;  neither  do  the  branches  of  the  fifth  and  seventh  pair  of
nerves  in  the  stag  become  larger;  and  in  inflammation  of  the  nerves,  their
blood-vessels  are  enlarged,  and  have  coagulating  lymph  thrown  into  their
intestines,  but  the  nerve  itself  is  not  increased  so  as  to  bring  the  part  to
the  state  of  a  natural  part,  fitted  for  acute  sensation,  which  shews  that  the
motions  of  the  nerves  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  ceconomy  of  the  part,
they  are  only  the  messengers  of  intelligence  and  orders.  It  appears  that
only  the  actions  of  the  materia  vita?  in  the  inflamed  parts  is  increased,  and
this  increase  of  action  in  the  inflamed  part  is  continued  along  the  nerve
which  is  not  inflamed,  to  the  mind,  so  that  the  impression  on  the  senso-
rum  is,  probably,  equal  to  the  action  of  the  inflamed  materia  vita?.

The  quantity  of  natural  sensibility  is,  I  believe,  proportioned  to  the
quantity  of  nerves,  under  any  given  circumstance;  but  I  apprehend,  the
diseased  sensibility  does  not  take  place  at  all  in  this  proportion,  but
in  proportion  to  the  diseased  action  of  the  materia  vita?.  Thus  a  tendon
has  very  little  sensation  when  injured  in  a  natural  state;  but  let  that  ten-
don become  inflamed,  or  otherwise  diseased,  and  the  sensation  shall  be
very  acute.

It  may  not  be  improper  to  observe,  that  many  parts  of  the  body  in
a  natural  state,  give  peculiar  sensations  when  impressed;  and  when  those
parts  are  injured,  they  give,  likewise,  pain  peculiar  to  themselves;  it
is  this  latter  effect,  which  I  am  to  consider. I  may  also  observe,  that  the


The  adhesive  inflammation,  289

same  mode  of  impression  shall  give  a  peculiar  sensation  to  one  part,  while
it  shall  give  pain  to  another.  Thus,  what  will  produce  sickness  in  the
stomach,  will  produce  pain  in  the  colon.  When  the  sensation  of  pain  is
in  a  vital  part,  it  is  somewhat  different  from  most  of  those  pains  that  are
common.  Thus,  when  the  pain  arises  from  an  injury  done  to  the  head,
the  sensation  is  a  heavy  stupifying  pain,  rendering  the  person  affected
unfit  to  pay  attention  to  other  sensations,  and  is  often  attended  with  sick-
ness, from  the  stomach  sympathizing  with  it.

When  the  pain  is  in  the  heart  or  lungs,  it  is  more  acute,  and  is  very
much  confined  to  the  part  diseased.

When  in  the  stomach  and  intestines,  especially  the  upper  part  of  them,
it  is  a  heavy  oppressive  sickly  pain,  but  more  or  less,  attended  with  sick-
ness, according  to  its  pressure  or  proximity  to  the  stomach  ;  for  when
situated  in  the  colon,  it  is  more  acute,  and  less  attended  with  sickness.

We  cannot  give  a  better  illustration  of  this,  than  by  taking  notice  of
the  effects  of  a  purge.  If  we  take  such  a  purge  as  will  produce  both  sick-
ness and  griping,  we  can  easily  trace  the  progress  of  the  medicine  in  the
.canal ;  when  in  the  stomach  it  makes  us  sick„  but  we  soon  find  the  sick-
ness becoming  more  faint,  by  which  we  can  judge  that  it  has  proceeded
to  the  duodenum,  and  then  a  kind  of  uneasiness,  approaching  to  pain,  suc-
ceeds; when  this  is  the  case,  we  may  be  certain  that  the  medicine  is  passing
along  the  jejunum;  it  then  begins  to  give  a  sickish  griping  pain,  which  I
conceive  belongs  to  the  ilium  ;  and  when  in  the  colon  it  is  a  sharp  pain,
soon  after  which  a  motion  takes  place.

The  liver,  testicles,  and  uterus,  are  subject  nearly  to  the  same  kind  of
pain  as  the  stomach.

A  tendon,  ligament,  and  bone,  give  something  of  the  same  kind  of  pain,
though  not  so  oppressive;  namely,  a  dull  and  heavy  pain,  often  attended
with  some  little  sickness,  the  stomach  generally  sympathizing  in  such
cases.

But  the  skin,  muscles,  and  the  cellular  membrane,  in  common,  give  an
acute  pain,  which  rather  rouses  than  oppresses,  if  not  too  great.  All  of
this  will  be  further  mentioned  when  we  treat  of  each  part.


290  The  adhesive  inflammation.

One  cause  of  this  variety  of  sensations,  according  as  the  parts  inflamed,
are  vital  or  not  vital,  seems  to  consist  in  the  different  systems  of  materia  vitae
with  which  those  parts  are  supplied,  having,  probably,  nerves  peculiarly
constructed  for  this  purpose;  for  all  the  parts  which  are  supplied  with
branches  from  the  par  vagum  and  intercostals,  affect  the  patient  with  low-
ness  of  spirits  from  the  very  first  attack  of  the  inflammation:  the  actions
of  those  parts  are  involuntary,  and  therefore  are  more  immediately  con-
nected with  the  living  principle,  and  consequently  that  principle  is  affected
whenever  any  thing  affects  these  nerves.

The  other  system  of  the  materia  vitae,  when  affected  by  this  inflamma-
tion, rather  rouses  at  first  the  constitution,  which  shows  signs  of  strength,
unless  the  parts  have  rather  weak  powers  of  recovery,  such  as  tendon,
bone,  etc.  or  are  far  from  the  heart,  in  which  cases  the  signs  of  weakness,
sooner  or  later,  appear :  hence  it  would  see/n  that  this  difference  in  the  con-
stitution, arising  from  the  difference  in  parts  and  their  situation,  arises  from
the  constitution  having  a  disease  which  it  cannot  so  easily  manage,  as  it
can  in  those  parts  which  are  not  vital,  and  in  parts  that  are  near  to  the
heart,  which  circumstances  alone  become  a  cause  of  irritation  in  the  con-
stitution.


III.  THE  HEAT  OF  PARTS  IN  INFLAMMATION.

When  I  was  treating  of  the  blood,  I  observed  that  the  heat  of  the  animal
was  commonly  considered  as  connected  with  that  fluid ;  but  as  I  had  not
made  up  my  mind  about  the  cause  of  the  heat  of  animals,  not  being  satisfied
with  the  opinions  hitherto  given,  I  did  not  endeavour  to  offer  any  account
of  that  property ;  but  I  shall  now  consider  this  power  when  the  animal
is  under  disease,  where  it  would  appear  often  to  be  diminished,  and  often
increased,  and  of  course  the  animal  often  becomes  colder  and  hotter  than
its  natural  temperature.

There  is  an  endeavour  to  bring  the  heat  of  a  living  body  to  the  tern-


The  adhesive  inflammation.  29  r

perature  of  the  surrounding  medium,  but  in  the  more  perfect  animals  this
is  prevented  by  the  powers  in  the  animal  to  support  its  owrr  tempe-
rature, more  especially  in  and  near  the  vital  parts,;  therefore,  in  making
experiments,  to  ascertain  any  variation,  it  is  not  necessary  to  ascertain  at
the  same  time  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere.

Heat,  I  imagine,  is  a  sign  of  strength  and  power  of  constitution,  although
it  may  often  arise  from  an  increased  action  either  of  weak  constitutions  or
of  weakened  parts.

Heat  is  a  positive  action,  while  cold  is  the  reverse,  therefore  producing
weakness,  and  often  arising  from  a  diminished  action  of  strong  parts.

It  has  not  yet  been  considered  whether  an  animal  has  the  power  of  pro-
ducing heat  equally  in  every  part  of  the  body ;  although  from  what  is
generally  advanced  on  this  subject,  we  are  led  to  suppose  that  every  part
has  this  power ;  or  whether  it  is  carried  from  some  one  source  of  heat  by
the  blood  to  every  part ;  this  may  probably  not  be  easily  determined;  but
I  am  apt  to  suspect  there  is  a  principal  source  of  heat,  although  it  may  not
be  in  the  blood  itself,  the  blood  being  only  affected  by  having  its  source
near  the  source  of  heat.

That  this  principle  resides  in  the  stomach  is  probable,  or  at  least  I  am
certain  that  affections  of  the  stomach  will  produce  either  heat  or  cold.

There  are  affections  of  the  stomach  which  produce  the  sensation  of
heat  in  it,  and  the  air  that  arises  in  eructations,  feels  hot  to  the  mouth  of
the  person ;  but  whether  these  sensations  arise  from  actual  heat,  or  from
sensation  only,  I  have  not  been  able  to  determine.

Stimulating  substances  applied  to  the  stomach  will  produce  a  glow.
Affections  of  the  mind  produce  the  same  effect,  which  last  circumstance
might  seem  to  contradict  the  idea  of  its  arising  from  the  stomach  ;  but  I
suspect  that  the  stomach  sympathizes  with  those  actions  of  the  brairt
which  form  the  mind,  and  then  produces  heat,  which  will  be  better
illustrated  in  treating  of  cold.  I  suspect  that  the  cold  bath  produces  heat
in  the  same  way,  from  the  sympathizing  intercourse  between  the  skin  and
the  stomach.

That  diseases  augment  or  lessen  this  power  in  the  animal  is  evident;  for
in  many  diseases  the  animal  becomes  much  hotter,  and  in  many  others


agi  The  adhesive  inflammation.

much  colder  than  is  usual  to  it.  This  fact  was  first  discovered  by  simple
•sensation  alone,  both  to  the  patients  themselves,  and  the  practitioner,  before
the  absolute  measurement  of  the  degrees  of  heat  by  instruments  was  known;
but  it  was  impossible  that  such  knowledge  of  it  could  be  accurate,  for  we
find  by  experiment,  that  the  measurement  of  degrees  of  heat  by  sensation
is  very  vague.  This  happens  because  the  variations  in  the  degrees  of  heat
in  ourselves  (which,  in  such  experiments  is  the  instrument)  is  not  of  one
standard,  but  must  vary  pretty  much  before  we  are  made  sensible  of  the
difference,  and  therefore  there  can  be  only  a  relative  knowledge  respecting
our  own  heat  at  the  time.  But  now  our  measurement  is  more  determined,
and  can  be  brought  even  nearer  to  the  truth  than  is  absolutely  necessary  to
be  known  in  disease.

The  increase  and  decrease  of  the  heat  of  an  animal  body  may  be  divided
into  constitutional  and  local.  The  constitutional  arises  from  a  constitu-
tional affection,  and  may  arise  primarily  in  the  constitution  itself;  or  it
probably  may  arise  secondarily,  as  from  a  local  disease  with  which  the
constitution  sympathizes ;  but  of  this  I  am  not  yet  certain,  for  from  several
experiments  made  to  ascertain  this  point,  it  seemed  to  appear  that  local  in-
flammation had  little  power  of  increasing  the  heat  of  the  body  beyond  the
natural  standard,  although  the  body  was  under  the  influence  of  the  inflam-
mation by  sympathy,  called  the  symptomatic  fever;  but  if  the  heat  of  the
body  is  below  the  natural  heat,  or  that  heat  where  actions,  whether  natural
or  diseased,  are  called  forth,  then  the  heat  of  the  body  is  roused  to  its
natural  standard*.

As  it  is  the  principle  of  increase  of  local  heat  in  inflammation  I  am
now  to  consider,  it  should  be  first  ascertained  how  far  such  a  principle
exists  in  a  part,  and  what  that  principle  may  be;  the  constitutional  prin-
ciple being  in  some  measure  not  to  the  present  purpose,  although  it  may
throw  some  light  on  the  difference  between  the  powers  of  the  constituti-
onal, and  those  of  the  local  principle.  It  is  said,  that  disease,  as  fever,  has
been  known  to  raise  the  heat  of  the  body  to  twelve  degrees  above  the

*  Vide  Animal  (Economy,  page  99.


The  adhesive  inflammation*  293

natural  heat  >,  and  if  so,  then  there  is  In  such  cases  either  an  increased
power  or  an  increased  exertion  of  that  power ;  and  to  know  whether  this
arises  only  from  a  constitutional  affection  at  large,  or  whether  it  can  take
place  in  parts  when  the  constitution  is  affected  by  those  parts,  is  worthy  of
inquiry.

The  principal  instance  of  supposed  increased  local  heat  is  in  inflam-
mation; and  we  find  that  external  parts  inflamed  do  actually  become  hotter;
but  let  us  see  how  far  the  increase  goes.  From  all  the  observations  and
experiments  I  have  made,  I  do  not  find  that  a  local  inflammation  can  in-
crease the  local  heat  above  the  natural  heat  of  the  animal ;  and  when  in
parts  whose  natural  heat  is  inferior  to  that  which  is  at  the  source  of  the
circulation,  it  does  not  rise  so  high:  those  animals  too,  which  appear  to
have  no  power  either  of  increase  or  decrease  in  health,  naturally  appear  to
be  equally  deficient  in  disease  ;  as  will  be  seen  in  the  experiments.

I  suspect  that  the  blood  has  an  ultimate  standard  heat  in  itself,  when
in  health,  and  that  nothing  can  increase  that  heat  but  some  universal  or
constitutional  affection;  and  probably  the  sympathetic  fever  is  such  as
has  no  power  in  this  way,  and  that  the  whole  power  of  local  inflammation
is  only  to  increase  it  a  little  in  the  part,  but  that  it  cannot  bring  it  above
the  standard  heat  at  the  source,  nor  even  up  to  it  in  parts  that  naturally
or  commonly  do  not  come  up  to  it,  as  just  abovementioned.

As  inflammation  is  the  principal  instance  capable  of  producing  local
increased  heat,  I  have  taken  the  opportunity  of  examining  inflammations,
both  when  spontaneous  and  in  consequence  of  operations.  I  have  also
made  several  experiments  for  that  purpose,  which  are  similar  to  operations,
and  cannot  say  that  I  ever  saw,  from  all  these  experiments  and  observa-
tions, a  case  where  the  heat  was  really  so  much  increased,  as  it  appeared
to  be  to  the  sensations.

EXPERIMENTS  ON  INTERNAL  SURFACES.
EXPERIMENT  I.

A  man  had  the  operation  for  the  radical  cure  of  the  hydrocle,  performed
at  St.  George's  Hospital.  When  I  opened  the  tunica  vaginalis,  I  im-
mediately introduced  the  ball  of  the  thermometer  into  it,  and  close  by  the


294  The  adhesive  inflammation.

side-  of  the  testicle.  The  mercury  rose  exactly  to  ninety-two  degrees.
The  cavity  was  filled  with  lint,  dipped  in  salve,  that  it  might  be  taken  out
at  will;  the  next  day,  when  inflammation  was  come  on,  the  dressings  were
taken  out  and  the  ball  of  the  thermometer  introduced  as  before,  when  it
arose  to  ninety-eight  degrees  and  three-fourths  exactly.

Here  was  an  increase  of  heat  of  six  degrees  and  three-fourths;  but  even
this  was  not  equal  to  that  of  the  blood,  probably,  at  the  source  of  the
circulation  in  the  same  man.  This  experiment  I  have  repeated  more  than
once,  and  with  nearly  the  same  event.

As  the  human  subject  cannot  always  furnish  us  with  opportunities  of
ascertaining  the  fact,  and  it  is  often  impossible  to  make  experiments  when
proper  cases  occur,  I  was  led  to  make  such  experiments  on  animals,  as
appeared  to  me  proper  for  determining  the  fact  ->  but  in  none  of  them  could
I  ever  increase  the  inflammatory  heat  so  as  to  make  it  equal  to  the  natural
heat  of  the  blood  at  its  source.

EXPERIMENT II.

I  made  an  incision  into  the  thorax  of  a  dog,  the  wound  was  made  about
the  centre  of  the  right  side,  and  the  thermometer  pushed  down,  so  as  to
come  in  contact,  or  nearly  so,  with  the  diaphragm.  The  degree  of  heat
was  one  hundred  and  one ;  a  large  dossil  of  lint  was  put  into  the  wound
to  prevent  its  healing  by  the  first  intention,  and  covered  over  by  a  sticking-
plaster.  The  dog  was  affected  with  a  shivering.  The  day  following  the
lint  was  extracted  and  the  thermc  meter  again  introduced,  the  degree  of
heat  appeared  exactly  the  same,  viz.  one  hundred  and  one.  This  dog
recovered.

EXPERIMENT  III.

An  oblique  inciiion  was  made  about  two  inches  deep  into  the  gluteal
muscles  of  an  ass,  and  into  this  wound  was  introduced  a  tin  canula  about
an  inch  and  half  long,  so  that  half  an  inch  of  the  bottom  of  the  wound
projected  beyond  the  canula ;  into  this  canula  was  introduced  a  wooden
plug,  which  projected  half  an  inch  beyond  the  canula,  so  as  to  fill  up  the
bottom  of  the  wound,  and  which  kept  that  part  of  the  wound  from


The  adhesive  inflammation.  295

uniting.  The  whole  was  fastened  into  the  wound  by  threads  attached  to
the  skin.

Immediately  upon  making  the  wound  the  ball  of  the  thermometer  was
introduced  into  it  to  the  bottom,  and  the  mercury  rose  to  one  hundred
degrees  exactly,  as  it  did  also  at  the  same  time  in  the  vagina.

On  the  next  morning  the  wooden  plug  was  taken  out,  and  the  ball  of
the  thermometer  (being  previously  warmed  to  ninety-nine  degrees)  was
introduced  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  wound,  which  projected  beyond  the
canula,  and  the  mercury  rose  to  one  hundred  degrees.  The  wooden  plug
was  returned  and  secured  as  before.  In  the  evening  the  same  experiment
was  repeated,  and  the  mercury  rose  to  one  hundred  degrees.  Friday
morning  it  rose  only  to  ninety-nine  degrees.  Friday  evening  it  rose  to
near  one  hundred  and  one  degrees  and  a  half.  Saturday  morning,  ninety-
nine  degrees,  and  in  the  evening  one  hundred  degrees.

A  similar  experiment  to  this  was  made  on  a  dog,  and  the  heat  was  one
hundred  and  one  degrees.  The  day  following  the  heat  was  the  same,
as  also  on  the  third  day,  when  suppuration  was  taking  place.

EXPERIMENT IV.

Although  in  the  experiment  upon  the  dog,  by  making  an  opening  into
the  thorax  so  as  to  excite  an  inflammation  there,  and  to  affect  his  consti-
tution, the  heat  of  the  part  was  not  increased;  yet  in  order  to  be  more  clear
with  regard  to  the  result  of  such  an  experiment,  a  wound  was  made  into
the  abdomen  of  an  ass,  and  a  solution  of  common  salt  and  water  thrown
in  (about  a  handful  to  a  pint  of  water),  to  excite  an  universal  inflam-
mation in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen.  This  produced  great  pain  and
uneasiness,  so  as  to  make  the  animal  lie  down  and  roll,  becoming  as
restless  as  horses  when  griped.

The  next  morning,  Friday,  the  thermometer  was  introduced  into  the
vagina,  and  the  mercury  stood  at  ninety-nine  degrees  and  a  half,  nearly  the
same  heat  as  before  the  experiment ;  in  the  evening  one  hundred  and  one
degrees  and  a  half.  Saturday  morning,  one  hundred  degrees  and  a  half;
evening,  a  hundred  degrees  and  a  half. The  vagina,  therefore,  was  not


296  The  adhesive  inflammation.

rendered  hotter  by  an  inflammation  which  produced  what  we  may  call  the
sympathetic  fever.

The  animal  was  now  killed,  and  on  examining  the  abdomen,  the  side
where  the  wound  was  made  appeared  much  inflamed,  as  well  as  the
intestine  opposite  to  this  part.  All  of  them  adhered  together,  and  the
intestines  surrounding  this  part  of  the  adhesions  had  their  peritoneal  coat
become  extremely  vascular,  and  matter  was  formed  in  the  abdomen.

But  that  the  heat  of  a  part  can  be  increased  above  the  common  standard
of  a  healthy  person  is  certain,  when  it  is  such  a  part  as  is  naturally  of  the
standard  heat ;  as  for  instance,  the  abdomen.  For  in  lord  Hertford's  ser-
vant, who  was  tapped  eight  times,  and  seven  of  them  in  thirteen  weeks,  the
severlth  time  I  held  the  ball  of  a  thermometer  in  the  stream,  as  it  flowed
from  the  canula  of  the  trochar,  and  it  raised  the  mercury  to  one  hundred  and
one  degrees,  exactly,  through  the  whole  time.  Twelve  days  after  I  tapped
him  the  eighth  time,  the  water  was  pretty  clear ;  when  I  held  the  ther-
mometer in  the  stream,  it  rose  to  one  hundred  and  four  degrees.  Now  as
the  heat  of  the  abdomen  was  one  hundred  and  four,  we  must,  I  think,
suppose  that  the  general  heat  of  the  man  would  also  be  one  hundred
and  four  degrees.

EXPERIMENTS  ON  SECRETING  SURFACES.
EXPERIMENT  I.

I  took  the  degree  of  heat  of  a  dog's  rectum,  by  introducing  the  ther-
mometer about  three  inches  ;  and  when  it  was  ascertained,  four  grains  of
corrosive  sublimate  were  dissolved  in  two  ounces  of  water,  and  the  solution
thrown  up  the  rectum.  The  day  following  the  thermometer  was  again
introduced,  and  then  I  found  the  heat  somewhat  increased,  but  not  quite
a  degree.  As  far  as  one  might  judge  from  external  appearances,  the  rec-
tum was  very  much  inflamed,  as  there  was  a  considerable  external  swel-
ling, forming  a  thick  elevated  ring  round  the  anus.

EXPERIMENT II.

I  introduced  into  the  rectum  of  an  ass,  the  thermometer,  and  the  mercury
rose  to  ninety-eight  degrees  and  a  half  exactly :  this  was  repeated  several


The  adhesive  inflammation*  297

times  with  the  same  result. I  then  threw  up  the  rectum  an  injection  of
flour  of  mustard  and  ginger,  mixed  in  about  a  pint  of  water. About
twelve  hours  after,  I  introduced  the  thermometer,  and  it  rose  to  ninety-
nine  degrees  and  a  half.

The  injection  was  repeated  several  times,  but  the  heat  did  not  increase.

EXPERIMENT III.

To  irritate  the  rectum  still  more,  I  threw  up  a  solution  of  corrosive
sublimate  j  and  about  twelve  hours  after,  I  introduced  the  thermometer,
and  found  no  increase  of  heat.  Twenty  hours  after,  I  introduced  the
thermometer ;  but  the  heat  was  the  same.  Sixty  hours  after  the  injection,
the  thermometer  being  introduced,  the  mercury  rose  to  one  hundred  degrees,
exactly.  This  injection  had  irritated  so  much,  as  to  give  a  very  severe
tenesmus;  and  even  blood  passed.

EXPERIMENT IV.

The  natural  heat  of  the  vagina  of  a  young  ass  was  one  hundred  degrees4
A  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate,  as  much  as  would  dissolve  in  a  tea-cup
full  of  water,  viz.  about  ten  grains,  was  injected  into  the  vagina.  In
about  two  hours  after,  the  mercury  fell  to  ninety-nine  degrees.  Thursday
morning  ninety- nine  degrees,  evening  one  hundred.  Friday  morning
ninety-nine,  evening  near  to  one  hundred  and  one.  Saturday  morning
ninety-nine,  evening  one  hundred  degrees.

This  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  upon  the  same  ass,  with  the
same  result.

In  these  experiments  it  can  hardly  be  said,  that  the  heat  was  increased.
That  the  inflammation  had  been  raised  to  a  very  considerable  degree  was
plain,  for  it  produced  a  discharge  of  matter  which  was  often  bloody,  and
upon  killing  the  ass  for  another  experiment,  the  following  appearances
were  found  in  the  uterus.

The  horns  of  the  uterus  were  filled  with  serum,  and  the  inflammation
had  run  so  high  by  the  stimulating  injections  which  were  used  for  the
experiments  on  the  vagina,  that  the  coagulating  lymph  had  been  thrown
out  so  as  almost  to  obliterate  the  v.igina,  uterus,  etc.  by  thos?  adhesions


298  The  adhesive  inflammation*

which  are  the  ultimate  effects  of  inflammation  on  secreting  canals,  while
suppuration  is  the  ultimate  effect  of  inflammation  on  internal  surfaces  :
there  were  no  signs  of  inflammation  on  the  external  surface  of  the  uterus,
which  is  covered  by  the  peritoneum.

It  may  just  be  remarked,  that  in  most  of  those  experiments  the  heat  in
the  morning  was  a  degree  less  than  in  the  evening;  and  I  may  also  re-
mark,  that  this  is  commonly  the  case  in  the  natural  heat  of  the  animal.

I  wished  to  know  whether  such  animals  as  have  little  or  no  power  of
varying  their  natural  heat,  had  a  power  of  increasing  their  heat  in  con-
sequence of  injuries,  for  which  purpose  I  opened  into  circumscribed  cavi-
ties in  frogs,  toads,  and  snails,  and  at  different  periods,  after  the  opening
was  made,  the  thermometer  was  introduced.  As  the  heat  of  those  ani-
mals is  principally  from  the  atmosphere,  the  external  heat  is  to  be  con-
nected with  the  experiments.

NOVEMBER  27,  I788.

A  healthy  toad  and  frog,  after  having  the  heat  in  the  stomach  ascer-
tained, had  openings  made  through  the  skin  of  the  belly,  large  enough  to
admit  a  thermometer,  and  the  orifice  was  kept  open  by  a  piece  of  sponge.

Atmosphere 360

Stomach  of  both 400

Under  skin  of  the  belly 400

Atm. Frog. Toad. Stom,
Under  the  skin.

Half  an  hour  after  the  opening 35°....40°....4o0 40*

Hour  and  a  half. 35°«— 39°«— 39°

Two  hours  and  a  half. 39°""39°

The  abdomen  was  now  opened,  and  a  piece  of  sponge  kept  in  the
orifice.

Atm. Frog. Toad. Stom.
Abdomen.

The  heat ... 36°....4o°....4o° 400

Hour  and  a  half  after  opening.. 36°....39°... .39° 390

Four  hours  and  a  half„ 380'»-39°—-39°


The  adhesive  inflammation.  299

Part  of  the  left  oviduct  protruded  of  the  natural  colour  and  appear-
ance.

Atm. Frog. Toad. Stom.

Nine  hours  after 38°....380....38°....38o

Twenty-one  hours  and  a  half...35°....35° 35°.*«*35°

The  protruded  oviduct  was  more  vascular  and  of  a  uniformly  red  ap-
pearance; it  was  returned  into  the  belly  and  retained  there.

Atm. Frog. Toad. Stom.

Twenty-four  hours 32°....320....320....32°

Forty-six  hours 34°....34°....34°....34<'

The  toad  died,  and  the  frog  was  become  very  weak  and  languid :  part  of
the  oviduct  protruded  and  had  the  small  vessels  loaded  with  blood.

It  lived  one  hundred  and  eighteen  hours,  that  is,  seventy-two  longer
than  the  toad,  during  which  period  its  heat  corresponded  with  the  at-
mosphere.

Upon  examining  the  abdomen  after  death,  there  were  no  adhesions
nor  any  appearances  from  inflammation,  except  on  the  protruded  oviduct.

Some  healthy  shell-snails  had  openings  made  into  the  lungs,  and  their
heat  ascertained  at  the  following  times.

Atm. Snail.

The  heat  at  the  time 34°....38°

One  hour  and  a  half.....32°....32°
Six  hours  and  a  half.....32°....35°

Ten  hours 3i°....36*

Twenty-four  hours 30°....30°

To  ascertain  the  standard  heat  of  a  snail.

Atm. Snail,

A  fresh  lively  snail  had  its  heat  in  the  lungs 30°....36°

Another 280....35*

Another Z°° ~-lT

Experiments  to  ascertain  the  heat  of  worms,  leeches  and  snails,  when


300  The  adhesive  inflammation,

compared  with  the  atmosphere,  and  the  changes  produced  in  their  heat
by  inflammation.

EXPERIMENT I.

Heat  of  the  air  in  the  room 5.6°

water  in  the  room $j°

some  earth-worms 58°  ±

EXPERIMENT II.

Water  as  a  standard 560  £

Leeches  in  the  same  quantity... 570

EXPERIMENT III.

Water  as  a  standard ; 560

Fresh  egg 5  c0

Leeches  alone 6o°

Worms  alone 570

Air 54°

Worms  ■) 580

Leeches  >two  hours  after  being  wounded 570

Slugs J 580

Air  5s0

Worms  -j 550

Leeches  >twenty-four  hours  after  being  wounded 550

Slugs J $5°

They  were  all  very  weak  and  dying.


IV.  OF  THE  PRODUCTION  OF  COLD  IN  INFLAMMATION.

The  production  of  cold  is  certainly  an  operation  which  the  more
perfect  animals  are  endowed  with;  and  this  power  would  appear  to  be  both


The  adhesive  inflammation,  301

constitutional  and  local,  similar  to  the  power  of  producing  heat.  As  the
word  inflammation  implies  heat,  and  has  been  used  to  express  that  action
of  the  vessels  where  heat  is  commonly  an  effect,  it  may  seem  strange
that  we  should  treat  of  cold  in  the  action  of  inflammation  ;  but  probably
we  have  no  action  in  the  body  that  is  not  attended  with  an  occasional
production  of  cold;  how  far  this  takes  place  in  parts  I  do  not  know;
but  that  it  takes  place  constitutionally,  from  almost  every  affection,  is
evident,  whether  it  be  inflammatory  fever,  or  local  inflammation.  As  an
animal  has  no  standard  of  cold,  but  at  the  source,  which  is  also  the
standard  of  heat,  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  ascertain  with  certainty  the
degree  of  cold  produced  either  by  disease,  or  from  the  surrounding  cold;  but
perhaps  by  comparing  the  part  suspected  of  being  colder  than  is  natural
from  disease,  with  a  similar  part  under  the  same  external  influence  of  heat
and  cold,  as  for  instance,  one  limb  with  the  other,  or  one  hand  with  the
other,  a  pretty  fair  inference  may  be  made  ;  and  we  often  find  that  diseased
parts  shall  become  extremely  cold,  while  from  other  circumstances  than
disease  they  should  not  be  so.

I  suspect  that  coldness  in  disease  arises  either  from  weakness,  or  a  feel
or  consciousness  of  weakness  in  the  whole  constitution  or  a  part,  joined
with  a  peculiar  mode  of  action  at  the  time.

Thus  we  have  many  constitutional  diseases  beginning  with  absolute
coldness,  which  seems  afterwards  to  terminate  in  a  sensitive  coldness
only,  as  the  cold  fit  of  an  ague ;  for  I  apprehend  that  the  sickness  which
generally  preceeds  such  complaints,  produces  universal  cold,  and  once
having  produced  the  action  of  the  body  arising  from  absolute  cold,  the  ac-
tion goes  on  for  some  time,  although  the  cause  no  longer  exists,  which
continues  the  sensation  ;  and  although  the  absolute  coldness  is  gone,  yet
the  action  of  the  parts,  which  is  a  continuation  of,  and  therefore  similar
to  the  action  of  the  absolute  cold,  is  capable  of  destroying  itself  by  pro-
ducing the  hot  fit,  if  there  be  power  or  disposition.

That  weakness,  or  a  feel  of  weakness,  produces  cold  is  evident;  and  that
universal  or  constitutional  cold  arises  from  the  stomach  is  also  evident ;  for
whenever  we  are  made  sick  an  universal  coldness  takes  place ;  and  this  is
best  proved  by  producing  sickness  on  animals  that  we  can  kill,  or  that  die


J02  The  adhesive  inflammation.

while  they  are  under  these  affections  of  the  stomach.  The  experi-
ments I  made  to  ascertain  this  were  not  conducted  with  great  accuracy,  as
I  trusted  in  them  entirely  to  my  own  sensations  or  feelings.

Experiment.  I  threw  three  grains  of  tartar  emetic  into  the  veins  of
a  healthy  bitch,  the  quantity  of  water  near  an  ounce.  In  about  twenty
minutes  she  had  a  stool  and  voided  some  single  tape-worms.  Some  of
the  stools  were  extremely  thin,  and  made  up  principally  of  bile.  Some  time
after  she  had  two  more  stools,  which  were  thin  and  bilious.  She  con-
tinued pretty  easy  for  about  three  hours,  but  became  a  little  convulsed,
which  increased,  and  at  last  she  became  senseless,  with  little  twitchings  -t
hardly  breathing,  except  with  the  diaphragm,  and  having  a  low,  slow
pulse  She  was  very  cold  to  our  feel,  when  applying  our  hand  on  the  skirt
of  the  body. In  about  ten  or  twelve  hours  after  the  injection,  she  died.

Experiment.  I  repeated  the  above  experiment  on  another  bitch,
adding  a  full  grain  more  to  the  medicine.  She  vomited  in  less  than  a
minute  after  it  was  thrown  in,  and  strained  excessively  hard,  throwing  up
a  great  deal  of  froth,  which  was  only  the  mucus  of  the  stomach  mixed  up
with  the  air  in  the  act  of  reaching.  In  less  than  three  minutes  she
had  a  stool,  which  was  pretty  loose  and  partly  of  the  natural  appear-
ance. She  continued  reaching  and  purging  for  above  an  hour,  and
was  extremely  uneasy,  at  last  she  got  into  a  dark  corner  and  lay  there,
frothing  at  the  mouth,  was  taken  with  convulsive  twitchings  like  the
former,  and  died  in  about  five  hours  after  the  injection.  I  opened  her  body
immediately  after  death,  and  found  the  intestines,  liver,  and  heart,  not
so  warm  as  we  usually  find  them.

I  have  known  people  who  had  affections  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,
say,  that  they  had  plainly  the  feeling  of  cold  in  their  bellies.  I  knew  a
gentleman  who  told  me,  that  often  when  he  threw  the  wind  off  his
stomach,  it  felt  cold  to  his  mouth  and  even  to  his  hands,  which  was
by  much  the  best  guide  respecting  sensation.

A  lady  near  seventy  years  of  age,  has  a  violent  cough,  which  often
makes  her  puke,  and  what  comes  off  her  stomach  feels  like  ice  to  the
mouth.

Affections  of  the  mind  also  produce  constitutional  coldness,  but  they


The  adhesive  inflammation.  303

are  such  affections  as  the  stomach  sympathizes  with,  producing  sickness,
shuddering,  etc.

A  disagreeable  idea  or  sight  will  sometimes  give  a  quick,  sensation
of  sickness,  and  the  skin  shall  sympathize  with  the  stomach,  it  shall  ap-
pear to  begin,  as  it  were,  in  the  mouth  or  throat,  as  if  something  there
had  a  tendency  to  come  up  ;  the  muscles  of  the  neck  shall  become  con-
vulsed, and  the  head  shall  be  violently  shaken ;  from  thence  a  disagree-
able feeling  shall  spread  over  the  whole  body,  passing  directly  down  the
back  to  the  feet ;  commonly  expressed  by  saying  "ones  flesh  creeps";  and
hence  the  words,  shudder  and  horror,  express  mental  as  well  as  bodily  af-
fections. Another  action  shall  be  joined  with  the  cold,  viz.  the  action  of
sweating,  so  that  a  cold  sweat  shall  take  place  over  the  whole  body.  This
cold  shall  be  partial,  for  under  many  diseases  a  partial  cold  sweat  will
sometimes  come  on,  while  other  parts  remain  tolerably  temperate.


V.  OF  THE  TIME  THE  ADHESIVE  INFLAMMATION  COMMENCES  AF-
TER ITS  CAUSE;  AND  IN  WHAT  CASES  AND  PARTS  IT  IS  IMPER-
FECT IN  ITS  CONSEQUENCES.

It  will  be  often  impossible  to  determine  the  distance  of  time  between
the  impression  which  becomes  the  cause  of  inflammation,  and  the  action
itself,  which  will  depend  upon  two  circumstances,  viz.  the  nature  of  the
exciting  cause,  and  the  susceptibility  for  such  action  in  the  parts.

In  the  exposure  of  internal  surfaces,  inflammation  is  perhaps  sooner
brought  on  than  in  most  others  ;  for  the  incitement  is  immediate,  and
there  is  no  remission  in  the  cause  itself.

In  specific  diseases  its  time  is  perhaps  more  regular,  each  having  a  de-
termined interval  between  the  application  of  the  exciting  cause  and  the
appearance  of  the  disease,  although  even  in  some  of  these  there  is  a  vast
difference  in  the  time  after  contamination,  but  in  those  arising  spontaneously
it  must  be  uncertain ;  yet  in  some  cases  it  can  be  pretty  well  ascertained,  sup-


304  ^je  adhesive  inflammation.

posing  sensation  the  first  effect  of  the  inflammatory  impression;  and  in  such
instance  we  often  find  it  very  rapid.  They  shall  be  attacked  with  a
violent  pain  in  the  part,  so  much  so  as  hardly  to  be  able  to  bear  it,  which
shall  be  immediately  succeeded  with  a  violent. inflammation.

A  lady  was  walking  in  her  garden,  and  at  once  was  attacked  with
a  violent  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  fore  part  of  the  thigh,  which  made  her
immediately  lame ;  soon  after,  the  skin  appeared  discoloured,  which
spread  nearly  over  one-half  of  the  thigh  ;  this  part  became  thick  and
swelled,  which  appeared  to  go  as  deep  as  the  bone  ;  it  afterwards  suppu-
rated, all  in  a  few  days ;  this  appeared  to  be  a  well-marked  case.

The  commencement  of  inflammation  after  accidents  is  more  easily  as-
certained, for  we  must  date  it  from  the  accident,  and  we  find  it  is  not  im-
mediate; for  after  a  wound  has  been  received,  inflammation  does  not  begin
for  twelve,  eighteen,  or  twenty-four  hours.

It  sometimes  happens,  however,  that  the  adhesive  state  cannot  set
bounds  to  itself,  and  therefore  cannot  set  bounds  to  the  suppurative.  This
may  be  owing  to  two  causes-,  the  one  is,  the  violence  of  the  inflammation,
and  quickness  of  the  attack  of  the  suppurative  spreading  before  parts  have
had  a  sufficient  union,  and  even  perhaps  joined  with  a  species  of  suppu-
ration from  the  veryfirft,  so  that  union  is  prevented.  Secondly,  the  inflam-
mation may,  I  suspect,  be  of  the  erysepelatious  kind,  especially  when
there  is  a  tendency,  from  the  beginning,  to  mortification.

This  mixing  of  the  suppurative  with  the  adhesive,  or  the  hurrying  on  of
the  suppurative,  or  this  mixture  of  the  erysepelatous  with  the  others,  I  have
frequently  seen  in  the  abdomen  of  women  who  have  been  attacked  with
the  peritoneal  inflammation  after  child-birth,  and  which  from  these  cir-
cumstances became  the  cause  of  their  death.

In  such  cases  we  find  matter  mixed  with  coagulating  lymph,  as  if  formed
with  it ;  for  without  having  been  formed  with  it,  it  could  not  have  mixed
with  it  after  coagulation ;  we  find  also  coagulating  lymph  mixed  with  the
matter,  as  it  were,  separated  from  the  inflamed  surface  by  the  formation
of  the  matter;  and  in  those  cases  where  there  is  a  tendency  to  mortification
from  the  beginning,  as  in  strangulated  ruptures,  we  often  find  the  adhesive


The  adhesive  inflammation.  305

and  suppurative  inflammation  going  hand  in  hand.  All  of  these  causes
and  effects  account  for  the  violence  of  the  symptoms,  the  quickness  of  the
progress  of  the  disease,  and  its  fatal  consequences  beyond  such  inflam-
mations as  have  only  the  true  adhesive  progress,  or  where  it  takes  place
perfectly  prior  to  suppuration.

It  seems  to  appear  from  observation,  that  some  surfaces  of  the  body  do
not  so  readily  unite  by  the  coagulating  lymph  as  others,  and  therefore,  on
such  surfaces  there  is  commonly  a  much  larger  quantity  of  this  matter
thrown  out  than  probably  would  have  been  if  union  had  readily  taken
place ;  for  we  may  suppose,  that  where  once  union  has  taken  place,
extravasation  is  at  an  end.  Thus,  we  see  in  (what  we  may  suppose)
inflammation  of  the  heart,  that  the  coagulating  lymph  is  thrown  out  on
the  exterior  surface  in  vast  quantities,  while  at  the  same  time  the  heart
shall  not  adhere  to  the  pericardium.  This  is  not  only  seen  in  the  human,
but  in  other  animals.  In  an  ox,  the  heart  was  furred  all  over,  and
in  some  places,  the  coagulating  lymph  was  near  an  inch  in  thickness.
The  external  surface  of  such  hearts  have  an  uncommon  appearance  -,  the
outer  surface  of  the  coagulating  lymph  is  extremely  irregular,  appearing
very  much  like  the  external  surface  of  a  sponge,  while  the  base,  or  attach-
ment to  the  heart  is  very  solid  and  firm.  However,  in  many  instances  we
find  the  pericardium  adhering  to  the  heart,  and  generally  in  pretty  close  con-
tact, which  would  make  us  suppose  that  the  extent  of  motion  of  those  two
parts  on  one  another  is  not  great.  These  adhesions  affect  the  pulse  much,
which  is  a  good  reason  why  nature  avoids  them  as  much  as  possible.  On
the  other  hand,  it  seems  deducible  from  observation,  that  neither  the  pia
nor  dura-mater  are  apt  to  throw  out  much  coagulating  lymph,  for  here  it
would  produce  compression ;  and,  therefore,  we  seldom  find  adhesions
between  them  -}  in  consequence  of  such  accidents  as  produce  suppuration
between  these  two  membranes,  we  seldom  or  ever  find  the  surrounding
parts  adhering  so  as  to  confine  the  matter  to  the  suppurating  surface.

Inflammation  of  the  skin,  or  such  as  approaches  to  the  skin,  produces  in
general  a  separation  of  the  cuticle,  often  of  the  hair,  or  the  nails.  These
effects  arise  sooner  or  later,  according  to  the  nature  and  degree  of  the  in-
flammation,  but  more  particularly  according  to  its  nature; they  take

R  r


306  T6e  adhesive  inflammation,

place  the  least  and  latest  in  the  true  adhesive  inflammation,  which  is  always
attended  with  the  greatest  strength.  In  such  cases,  the  separation  does
not  happen  till  the  inflammation  has  subsided ;  and  as  a  proof  of  this,  in
the  gout,  it  is  least  and  latest  of  all ;  for  this  is  always  a  healthy  inflam-
mation, otherwise  it  would  not  take  place;  but  in  weak  habits,  at
the  early  part  of  the  disease,  there  are  often  vesications,  which  are  filled
with  serum,  sometimes  with  coagulating  lymph,  etc.  both  of  these  are
sometimes  tinged  with  red  blood ;  when  the  inflammation  is  of  a  weak
kind,  tending  to  mortification,  the  cuticle  commonly  separates  early  du-
ring the  time  of  inflammation,  almost  beginning  with  it,  and  of  course  the
vesications  will  be  filled  with  serum,  and  often  with  the  red  globules  ;
we  may  observe  in  wounds  of  the  skin  which  are  not  allowed  to  heal  by
the  first  intention,  that  a  separation  of  the  cuticle  will  take  place  at  the
edges  of  the  wound,  and  this  will  extend  according  to  the  nature  of  the
inflammation,  which  is  according  to  the  nature  of  the  constitution  ;  this
will  be  attended  with  other  concomitant  appearances,  such  as  flabby  edges
and  thin  matter  :  I  conceive,  in  the  weak  habit  it  depends  on  an  action
of  the  inflammation  itself;  but  in  the  strong,  it  depends  on  a  state  in
which  the  parts  are  left  to  separate  the  cuticle.

This  separation  arises,  I  apprehend,  from  a  degree  of  weakness  ap-
proaching to  a  kind  of  death  in  the  connection  between  the  cuticle  and
cutis,  from  life  being  in  this  part  naturally  very  weak.  In  the  beginning  of
mortification  it  is  produced;  in  the  cedematous  and  erysepelatous  inflam-
mations it  is  greatest,  and  in  putrefaction  of  dead  bodies  it  is  the  first
operation.  I  suspect  too,  that  a  blistering  plaster,  hot  water,  etc.  only  kills
the  uniting  parts,  by  which  means  an  irritation  is  produced  in  the  cutis,
and  the  extravasation  is  according  to  that  irritation.

The  connection  of  the  cuticle  is  more  or  less  destroyed  in  every  inflam-
mation of  the  skin  ;  for  we  seldom  see  an  inflammation  attack  the  skin
but  the  cuticle  comes  off  sooner  or  later;  we  generally  observe  it  peeling
off  in  fleakes,  after  inflammation  has  subsided,  and  it  begins  nearest  the
point  of  inflammation*.

*  It  may  be  observed,  that  when  an  inflammation  attacks  the  finger  ends,  or  toes,  so  as  to
produce  suppuration  either  in  the  substance  of  these  parts,  although  not  larger  than  a  pimple,


The  adhesive  inflammation.  307


VI.  OF  THE  UNITING  MEDIUM  IN  INFLAMMATIONS.

1

Every  new  substance  that  is  formed  is  either  for  a  salutary  purpose,
or  it  is  diseased.  The  first  consists  either  of  granulations,  or  of  adhesions,
whether  with  the  first,  or  second  intention ;  and  all  these  may  be  considered
as  a  revival  of  the  rational  principles  and  powers  of  growth,  whereas
diseased  substances  are,  as  it  were,  monsters.

In  the  adhesive  inflammation,  the  vessels  being  enlarged,  as  above  de-
scribed, similar  to  what  they  are  in  the  young  subject,  begin  to  separate
from  the  mass  some  portion  of  the  coagulating  lymph,  with  some  serum,
and  also  red  globules,  and  throw  it  out  on  the  internal  surface;  probably
through  the  exhaling  vessels,  or  perhaps,  open  new  ones,  and  cover  the
sides  of  those  cells,  which  easily  unite  with  the  opposite,  with  which
they  are  in  contact,  forming  the  first  progress  of  adhesions.

That  this  is  really  the  case,  and  that  this  effect  has  taken  place  in  con-
sequence of  inflammation,  is  evident  from  the  following  observations.
In  all  large  cavities,  where  we  can  make  our  observations  with  certainty,
when  in  the  state  of  inflammation,  we  find  diffused  over  the  sides,  or
through  the  cavity,  a  substance  exactly  similar  to  the  coagulating  lymph
when  separated  from  the  serum,  and  red  blood,  after  common  bleeding.
That  the  blood,  when  thrown  out  of  the  circulation  from  an  inflammatory
state  of  the  vessels,  as  well  as  the  blood  itself,  unites  parts  together,  is
probably  best  seen  in  the  inflammation  of  the  larger  cavities  abovemen-
tioned.  The  following  I  shall  gave  as  an  example,  which  I  have  often
observed  on  the  peritoneum  of  those  who  have  died  in  consequence  of
inflammation  of  this  membrane.  The  intestines  are  more  or  less  united
to  one  another,  and,  according  to  the  stage  of  the  inflammation,  this  union
is  stronger  or  weaker;  in  some  it  is  so  strong  as  to  admit  of  some  force

or  only  on  the  surface  of  the  cutis,  an  extensive  separation  of  the  cuticle  takes  place,  not
entirely  from  the  inflammation,  but  assisted  by  it :  this  is  owing,  principally,  to  the  cuticle  in
such  places  not  giving  way,  being  there  strong,  so  that  a  seeming  abscess  almost  occupies  the
whole  finger,  etc.  this  should  be  opened  early  to  prevent  this  separatioa  as  much  as  possible,
or  to  prevent  the  separation,  from,  extending  too  far.


308  The  adhesive  inflammation.

to  pull  them  asunder* ;  the  smooth  peritoneal  coat  is,  as  it  were,  lost,
having  become  cellular,  like  cellular  membrane.  When  the  vessels  of
this  part  are  injected  we  shall  find,  that  in  those  parts  where  a  separation
has  been  made  by  laceration,  previous  to  the  injecting,  the  injection  will
appear  on  that  surface  like  small  spots  or  drops,  which  shews  that  the
vessels  had  at  least  passed  to  the  very  surface  of  the  intestines.

In  parts  where  the  union  was  preserved,  I  have  observed  the  three  fol-
lowing facts.  On  separating  the  united  parts,  I  have  observed,  in  some
places,  the  vessels  come  to  the  surface  of  the  intestines,  and  then  terminate
all  at  once.  In  other  places,  I  could  observe  the  vessels  passing  from  the
intestine  into  the  extravasated  substance,  and  there  ramifying,  so  that  the
vessel  was  plainly  continued  from  the  old  into  the  new.

In  a  vast  number  of  instances,  I  have  observed,  that  in  the  substance
of  the  extravasation,  there  were  a  great  number  of  spots  of  red  blood
in  it,  so  that  it  looked  mottled.  The  same  appearance  was  very  observable
on  the  surface  of  separation,  between  the  old  substance  and  the  new,  a
good  deal  like  petechial  spots.  How  this  red  blood  got  here  is  the  thing
to  be  considered,  especially  as  a  good  deal  was  within  the  substance  of  the
coagulum.  Was  it  extravasated  along  with  the  coagulating  lymph  ?  In
this  case,  I  should  have  rather  supposed  it  would  have  been  more  diffused,
and  if  not  diffused,  more  attached  to  the  intestine,  and  not  in  the  centre  of
the  coagulum ;  if  it  had  been  extravasation,  one  would  have  expected
extravasation  of  injection,  but  we  had  none  in  any  of  these  places;  I  have
therefore  suspected,  that  parts  have  the  power  of  making  vessels  and  red
blood  independent  of  circulation.  This  appears  to  be  evidently  the  case
with  the  chick  in  the  egg.

I  have  observed,  when  I  was  treating  of  the  blood,  that  it  was  capable
of  becoming  vascular,  when  deposited  either  by  accident,  or  for  particular
purposes ;  and  I  had  reason  to  believe,  that  a  coagulum,  or  coagulating
lymph  had  a  power  of  becoming  vascular  in  itself,  when  it  could  be  sup-

*  Adhesions  in  consequence  of  inflammations  become  very  soon  strong,  and  are  very  soon
elongated;  probably  as  soon  as  they  become  organized  they  adapt  themselves  to  their  fkuation
or  the  necessity.  Thus  the  dog  who  had  his  belly  opened  to  wound  some  lacteals,  when  killed
on  the  ninth  day,  had  his  intestines  connected  by  adhesion  in  several  places,  and  those  very
firm  and  long.


The  adhesive  inflammation*  309

plied  with  blood,  and  mentioned  the  coagulum  in  a  large  artery  as  an
instance.  Likewise,  when  I  was  treating  of  union  by  the  first  intention,  I
explained  the  intercourse  established  by  the  uniting  medium  becoming
vascular,  and  those  vessels  uniting  across  by  a  process,  called  inosculation.
The  same  reasoning  is  applicable  to  the  union  by  means  of  the  adhesive
inflammation ;  for  it  is  the  blood  in  all  cases  that  is  to  become  vascular ;
but  this  takes  place  sooner  or  later,  according  to  the  apparent  necessity.
In  some  it  becomes  vascular,  immediately;  in  others  very  late;  and  indeed,
in  some  hardly  ever,  according  to  the  degree  of  utility  to  arise  from  that
change.  Where  it  becomes  vascular  soonest,  there  the  vessels  arc  found
also  in  greatest  numbers,  the  two  effects  depending  on  the  same  principle.

Extravasation,  whether  of  blood,  or  only  of  lymph,  becomes  vascular,
almost  immediately,  when  thrown  out  into  the  cavity  of  the  human  uterus
in  the  state  of  pregnancy.  Here  is  an  operation  necessary  to  go  on,  which
is  more  than  the  simple  support  of  the  extravasation  itself;  but  when  the
extravasation  is  thrown  out  by  accident,  or  for  the  purpose  of  producing
adhesions,  the  immediate  intent  is  answered  without  the  vessels,  and  vas-
cularity only  becomes  necessary  afterwards;  therefore  vascularity  in  such
cases  is  the  second  consideration,  not  an  immediate  one.  But  in  the  case
of  impregnation  it  must  be  immediate,  for  the  simple  extravasation  would
not  answer  the  intention.  This  shews  that  this  extravasation  is  very  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  menses.

The  new  vessels  which  are  formed  in  the  newly  extravasating  and
uniting  substance,  become  of  use  both  during  the  state  of  adhesion  and
suppuration.

In  the  first,  they  serve  to  give  powers  of  action  to  this  new  substance,
which  assists  in  preventing  suppuration.  In  the  second,  where  this  can-
not be  done,  they  assist  in  forming  a  vascular  basis  for  the  granulations.

When  we  cut  into  inflamed  parts  after  death,  we  find  them  firm  and
solid,  resembling  the  section  of  a  lemon,  or  some  cedematous  tumor,
where  we  know  extravasation  has  taken  place.

This  appearance  arises  from  the  cells  in  the  cellular  membrane,  and
other  interstices  of  parts,  being  loaded  with  extravasated  coagulating
lymph;  from  this  circumstance  they  are  cemented  together  and  become
empervious  to  air,  not  similar  in  these  respects  to  common  cellular  mem-


2 1  o  The  adhesive  inflammation*

brane,  or  natural  parts.  In  many  places  where  this  extravasation  has
been  in  considerable  quantities,  it  is  formed  in  time  into  cellular  mem-
brane.

I  have  observed,  that  this  mode  of  the  separation  of  coagulating  lymph
is  not  peculiar  to  inflammation  ;  it  is  separated  in  many  diseases.

It  is  thrown  out  to  form  tumors,  etc.  where  inflammation  does  not
seem  to  be  a  leading  cause;  and  we  often  find  the  adhesive  stages,  as  it  were,
degenerate  into,  or  terminate  in  the  formation  of  a  cyst,  to  contain  the
body  that  was  the  cause  of  the  inflammation.  Thus,  a  sack  is  formed  for
bullets,  pieces  of  glass,  etc.

It  is  unnecessary  to  instance  every  possible  situation  where  adhesions
could  be  produced  ;  they  can  take  place  wherever  there  are  two  internal
surfaces  in  contact,  or  that  can  be  brought  into  contact.  I  cannot  give  a
better  instance  of  its  utility  in  the  animal  ccconomy  than  in  the  following
experiment :  I  wished  to  know  in  wounds  which  penetrated  into  the  chest,
(many  of  which  I  have  sqqu  in  the  army)  where  suppuration  had  come  on
the  whole  cavity  of  the  chest,  as  well  as  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  and
where  the  lungs  collapsed,  how  parts  were  reinstated,  or  in  what  form
they  healed;  whether  the  lungs,  etc.  lost  their  suppurating  disposition,
and  dilated,  so  as  to  fill  the  chest  again.  To  ascertain  this  as  far  as  one
well  could,  I  made  the  following  experiment  on  a  dog.

October  1779,  I  made  an  opening  between  the  ribs  into  the  chest  of  a
dog,  and  touched  the  edges  of  the  wound  all  round  with  caustic  to  prevent
it  from  healing  by  the  first  intention,  and  then  allowed  the  dog  to  do  as
he  pleased.  The  air  at  first  passed  in  and  out  of  his  chest  by  the  wound.
He  eat,  etc.  for  some  days,  but  his  appetite  gradually  began  to  fall  off.
He  breathed  with  difficulty,  which  increased  ;  he  lay  principally  on  that
side,  which  we  find  people  do  who  have  the  lungs  diseased  in  one  side  only
or  principally  ;  and  he  died  the  eleventh  day  after  the  opening.  On  open-
ing the  body,  I  found  the  collapsed  lungs  passing  directly  across  the
chest  and  attached  to  the  inside  of  the  wound  all  round  so  that  they  ex-
cluded the  cavity  of  the  chest  from  all  external  communication.  This  cir-
cumstance of  the  lungs  falling  across  the  chest  was  owing  to  his  having  lain
principally  on  that  side,  which  I  conceived  to  have  been  only  accidental.

The  cavity  of  the  chest  all  round  was  filled  with  air. That  part  of  thq


The  adhesive  inflammation,  3 1 1

external  surface  of  the  lungs  which  did  not  adhere,  that  is  to  say,  the  up-
per surface  of  the  diaphragm,  and  that  part  of  the  pleura  which  covered
the  ribs  were  entirely  free  from  inflammation,  or  suppuration  ;  this  cavity,
from  these  adhesions,  being  rendered  a  perfect  cavity,  shews  that  air,
simply,  has  no  power  to  excite  inflammation  when  the  cavity  is  otherwise
perfect,  which  the  adhesions  had  effected  ;  this  shews  also  that  adhesions  of
two  surfaces  round  the  exposed  part,  exclude  every  part  from  the  necessity
of  inflammation,  as  was  explained  when  treating  of  inflammation.

From  the  connection  between  the  living  powers  of  the  solids  and  the
flu-'ds,  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  such  an  uncommon  action  could  take
place  in  the  vascular  system,  without  producing  its  effects  upon  the  fluids;
and,  therefore,  from  reasoning  we  might  suppose,  that  the  coagulating
lymph  undergoes  some  changes  in  its  passage  through  the  inflamed
vessels,  which  obliges  it  to  coagulate  more  immediately,  or  much  sooner
than  it  otherwise  would*.

For  in  those  cases  of  inflamed  arms,  after  bleeding,  and  in  inflammations
in  consequence  of  other  causes,  we  find  that  the  cavities  of  the  veins  are  in
many  places  furred  over,  and  in  others  united  by  means  of  the  coagulating
lymph.  Now  if  this  coagulating  lymph  is  similar  in  its  productions  to  that
which  we  have  been  describing,  it  must  have  been  thrown  out  from  the  vasa
vasorum,  these  vessels  having  separated  it  and  poured  it  into  the  cavity
of  the  veins,  and  it  must  there  have  coagulated  immediately;  in  this  sepa-
ration, therefore,  from  the  blood,  it  must  have  undergone  some  change,
arising  from  the  actions  of  the  vessels;  for  if  this  lymph  was  no  more  than
the  coagulating  lymph  with  its  common  properties,  or  the  properties  com-
mon to  that  which  is  circulating  in  the  same  vein  which  receives  it,  it
would  in  such  cases  only  continue  to  throw  in  more  coagulating  lymph,
in  addition  to  what  was  circulating,  and  therefore,  probably,  it  would  be
carried  along  with  the  blood  to  the  heart,  as  a  part  of  the  common  mass.
From  this  we  should  infer  that  this  coagulating  matter  is  not  simply  the

*  This  is  contrary  to  the  disposition  of  inflammatory  blood  when  taken  out  of  the  vessels
and  allowed  to  go  through  its  spontaneous  changes ;  from  which  it  would  appear  that  the
general  affection  of  the  blood  (which  I  would  call  sympathy  of  the  coagulating  lymph  with
the  universal  irritation)  is  different  from  its  affection  or  disposition  when  employed  for  the
purposes  of  union.


3 1 2  The  adhesive  inflammation.

coagulating  lymph,  such  as  it  is  when  circulating,  but  somewhat  different,
from  having  undergone  a  change  in  its  paflage  through  the  inflamed
vessels,  partaking  of  the  disposition  of  those  solids  which  are  inflamed,
through  which  it  passed.  This  process  cannot,  therefore,  be  supposed  to
be  merely  extravasation ;  for  I  conceive  that  an  cedema  would  be  a  conse-
quence of  simple  extravasation.  But  this  may  be  taken  up  in  another  point
of  view,  and  upon  the  same  principle.  The  inflamed  vessels  may  give  a
disposition  to  the  blood,  as  it  is  moving  slowly  along,  to  coagulate  on  its
surface  ;  and  this  is  probably  the  more  just  idea  of  the  two;  as  we  find  that
the  vessels,  both  veins  and  arteries,  can  give  this  disposition,  and  to  a  very
great  extent:  we  find  in  the  beginning  of  mortification,  the  blood  coagu-
lating in  the  vessels,  so  as  to  fill  them  up  entirely,  and  this  preceding  the
mortification,  seems  to  be  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  vessel  before  it  is
to  give  way;  we,  therefore,  cannot  doubt  of  a  coagulating  principle  being
given  to  the  blood  from  the  vessels;  and  as  a  further  proof  of  this,  we  may
observe  that  the  extravasated  coagulating  lymph,  which  produces  either  ad-
hesions or  forms  tumors,  (which  is  often  the  case)  is  always  of  the  nature
of  the  diseased  solids  that  produced  it.  If  the  case  is  venereal,  the  new
substance  is  of  the  same  nature ;  if  cancerous,  it  is  cancerous-,  for  I  find  that
it  has,  when  absorbed,  the  power  of  contaminating,  similar  to  matter  or
pus  produced  by  the  sores  or  ulcers  of  such  diseases  j  the  absorbent  glands
being  often  affected  by  the  absorption  of  the  coagulating  matter  of  a  schir-
rous  breast.

Whatever  change  the  coagulating  lymph  has  undergone  in  this  operation
of  inflammation,  it  seems  so  far  the  same,  as  to  retain  still  the  nature  of
the  coagulating  lymph,  and  to  possess  the  living  principle;  this  is  most
probably  in  a  greater  degree,  and  therefore,  the  coagulating  lymph  is  still
better  fitted  to  be  formed  into  a  part  of  the  solids  of  the  body,  as  will  be
taken  notice  of  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  state  of  the  blood  in
inflammation.

But  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary  that  the  coagulating  lymph  should  first
undergo  a  change  in  the  extravasated  vessels,  before  it  can  become  a  living
solid,  or  unite  living  solids ;  for  we  find  that  common  blood  extravasated
from  a  ruptured  vessel  is,  perhaps,  equally  efficacious  in  this  respect;
therefore  the  red  globules  do  not  retard  union,  but  they  may  promote  it.


The  adhesive  inflammation.  3 1 3


VII. THE  STATE  OF  THE  BLOOD,  AND  OF  THE PULSE, IN IN-
FLAMMATION.

From  what  has  been  said  of  the  living  power  of  the  blood,  I  think
we  must  allow  that  it  will  be  commonly  affected  much  in  the  same
manner  with  the  constitution,  and  that  disease  will  have  nearly  the  same
effect  upon  it,  as  it  has  on  the  body;  because,  the  same  living  principle
runs  through  the  whole.  We  find  this  to  be  nearly  the  case;  for  till  a
disease  has  affected  the  constitution,  the  blood  continues  the  same  as  be-
fore ;  but  as  the  constitution  becomes  affected,  the  blood  also  becomes
affected,  and  undergoes  the  same  changes,  which,  probably,  may  be  as-
cribed to  contiguous  sympathy  between  the  vessels  and  the  blood;  and  we
shall  find  that  the  changes  in  the  blood  is  often  as  much  expressive  of  dis*.
ease  a«s  any  other  part  of  the  body.  It  is  expressive  of  strong  action,
as  well  as  of  weak,  action;  but  as  it  does  not  give  sensation,  it  cannot
convey  to  the  mind  all  the  varieties  of  disease  that  may  take  place  in  it  j
yet  I  could  conceive,  if  the  blood  was  to  be  primarily  affected,  that  an  im-
pression would  be  made  upon  the  mind,  from  its  affecting  the  vessels  in
which  it  moved.  However,  it  is  not  always  the  case  that  the  state  of  the
blood  and  the  other  symptoms  are  expressive  exactly  of  the  same  thing ;
the  blood  often  expressing  less,  and  often  more  >  when  the  action  of  the
solids  is  of  the  inflammatory  kind,  or  which,  perhaps,  is  the  same  thing*
when  there  is  too  great  an  action  of  the  solids,  the  blood  more  readily
admits  of  a  separation  of  its  visible  parts,  and  the  coagulating  lymph  co-
agulates more  flowly,  but  becomes  firmer  when  coagulated;  this  last  cir-
cumstance, however,  might  be  supposed  not  to  be  so  clear,  for  its  firmness
may  be  owing  to  its  want  of  the  red  particles,  which  certainly  give  the
blood  a  brittlenefs  in  proportion  to  their  quantity,  but  although  this  may
may  have  some  effect,  yet  it  is  very  little ;  for  we  find  blood  of  loose
texture  in  some  inflammations,  when  deprived  of  its  red  part;  when  blood
has  this  disposition  it  is  called  sizy  blood.  These  changes  in  the  nature
of  the  blood  depend  so  much  upon  the  abovementioned  causes  of  inflam-
mation, that  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  they  do  not  constitute  the
first  universal  effect  produced  from  the  local  inflammation,  and  whether

S  s


3 1 4  The  adhesive  inflammation.

the  constitutional  is  an  effect  of  this  change  in  the  blood.  I  knew  a  man
who  was  stabbed  in  the  loins,  and,  according  to  the  consequent  symptoms,
was  most  probably  wounded  or  hurt  in  some  viscus  within  the  adomen.
At  first  he  had  no  symptoms,  but  simple  pain  in  the  part,  I  there-
fore only  bled  him,  by  way  of  precaution,  and  the  blood  was  perfectly  na-
tural ;  in  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after,  constitutional  symptoms
came  on,  such  as  rigor,  sickness,  etc.  and  on  opening  the  same  orifice,
and  taking  away  more  blood,  this  second  quantity  had  a  very  thick  and
strong  buff  upon  it,  having  all  the  appearance  of  inflammatory  blood ;
while  this  constitutional  disposition  lasted,  which  was  some  time,  his
blood  continued  the  same,  which  was  proved  by  the  subsequent  bleed-
ings. The  subsiding,  however,  of  the  red  globules  in  the  blood  when  in
an  inflamed  state,  although  pretty  frequent,  is  not  always  an  attendant,
or  in  other  words  (and  perhaps  upon  some  other  principle)  the  blood  is
not  always  attended  with  this  appearance,  when  the  visible  symptoms  are
the  same.  A  young  woman  was  attacked  with  a  violent  cough,  oppres-
sion in  breathing,  quick,  full,  and  hard  pulse.  She  was  bled,  which  gave
her  ease;  the  blood  was  sizy;  the  symptoms  again  returned,  and  she
was  bled  a  second  time ;  which  also  relieved  her,  and  the  blood  was  more
sizy  than  before,  so  far  all  the  symptoms  agreed ;  the  symptoms  again
recurred  and  were  more  violent  than  before;  she  was  bled  a  third  time,
and  a  third  time  relieved ;  but  this  blood  was  not  in  the  least  sizy,  although
it  came  from  the  vein  very  freely.  Here  then,  the  blood,  under  the  same
disease,  lost  this  disposition,  although  the  symptoms  remained  the  same.
As  inflamed  blood  leaves  a  portion  of  the  coagulating  lympth  free  from
the  red  globules  at  the  top,  and  as  that  can  be  accounted  for  upon  the
principle  of  the  coagulating  limph,  in  such  cases  not  coagulating  so
fast  as  when  the  blood  has  not  this  appearance,  and  as  the  coagulation
hinders  any  comparative  experiment  respecting  the  weight  of  the  red  glo-
bules of  each,  I  tried  to  see  if  they  sunk  in  serum  faster  in  the  one  kind
of  blood  than  in  the  other;  I  took  the  serum  of  inflammatory  blood,  with
some  of  the  red  part,  and  also  some  serum  of  blood  free  from  inflam-
mation, with  nearly  the  same  quantity  of  the  red  part ;  they  were  put
into  phials  of  the  same  size ;  I  shook  them  at  the  same  time,  then  al-


The  adhesive  inflammation,  315

lowed  them  to  stand  quiet,  and  observed  that  the  red  globules  subsided
much  faster  in  the  inflammatory  blood  than  in  the  other.  To  ascertain
whether  this  arose  from  the  red  globules  being  heavier,  or  the  serum  lighter,
I  poured  off  the  serum  from  each,  as  free  from  red  blood  as  possible,  then
put  the  red  part  of  the  one  into  the  serum  of  the  other,  and  shook  them  to
mix  them  well;  and,  upon  letting  them  stand  quiet,  the  red  globules  ap-
peared to  fall  equally  fast.  From  these  experiments  it  appears,  that  the
red  part  of  inflammatory  blood  was  heavier  than  that  which  is  not  so,  and
the  serum  was  lighter,  and  the  difference  pretty  nearly  equal  j  for  if  we
could  suppose  that  the  red  globules  were  one-tenth  heavier,  and  the  serum
one-tenth  lighter,  then  the  difference  in  the  subsiding  of  the  red  globules
of  inflammatory  blood  in  its  own  serum,  to  that  which  is  not  inflammatory,
would  be  as  one  to  five ;  and,  if  they  were  to  be  changed,  then  they  would
be  equal.  To  see  whether  the  blood  from  an  inflamed  part  was  different
from  that  drawn  from  a  part  not  inflamed,  the  following  experiments  were
made :

A  large  leech  was  applied  to  an  inflamed  surface,  and  when  it  had  sucked
itself  full,  another  leech  was  suffered  to  fill  itself  from  the  breast  where
no  inflammation  existed ;  they  were  both  cut  in  two,  and  the  blood  re-
ceived in  two  tea-cups,  kept  moderately  warm  in  a  dish  of  warm  water ;
both  of  them  coagulated  without  the  serum  separating;  but  the  in-
flamed blood  was  evidently  of  a  lighter  colour  than  the  blood  from  the
uninflamed  part ;  but  neither  had  the  appearance  of  a  buffy  coat.

Whether  the  disposition  for  inflammation,  and  the  change  produced  in
the  blood,  arise  from  a  real  increase  of  animal  life,  or  whether  it  is  only
an  increase  of  a  disposition  to  act  with  the  full  powers  which  the  machine
is  already  in  possession  of,  is  not  easily  determined;  but  it  appears  to  be
certain,  that  it  is  either  the  one  or  the  other :  there  are  some  circumstances,
however,  that  would  incline  us  to  suspect  it  to  be  the  latter,  because  there
is  often  inflammation  when  the  powers  of  the  machine  are  but  weak,
where  it  appears  to  be  only  an  exertion  of  very  weak  powers,  arising  from
some  irritation  produced ;  in  such  cases  the  blood  will  shew  signs  of
weakness  although  sizy.


gi6  The  adhesive  inflammation.

This  appears  to  be  equally  the  case  in  local  inflammation,  and  inflam-
matory fevers,  or  in  the  symptomatic  fever*.  That  it  is  an  increase  of  the
one  or  the  other,  and  that  the  sensible  effect  produced  arises  from  the  action
taking  place,  both  in  the  solids  and  fluids,  is  proved  by  the  method  of  treat-
ment, which  will  be  further  illustrated  in  speaking  of  the  mode  of  cure:  on
the  other  hand,  where  there  is  great  debility  in  the  solids,  where  the  powers
of  preservation  (the  first  animal  powers)  are  weak,  therefore  the  action
weak,  and  where  of  course  the  body  must  have  a  tendency  to  dissolution,
there  we  find  the  very  reverse  of  the  former  appearance  in  the  blood.  Instead
of  separating  distinctly,  and  coagulating  firmly,  we  have  the  whole  mass  of
blood  keeping  mixed,  and  hardly  any  coagulation,  only  becoming  of  a
thicker  consistence.

This  effect,  or  appearance,  often  takes  place  in  thofe  who  die  instan-
taneously, I  suspect  that  in  such  cases  the  blood  dies  first,  and  also  in-
stantaneously.

In  the  commencement  of  most  diseases,  and  even  through  the  whole
course  of  many,  the  situation  of  the  blood  appears  to  be  an  object  with
nature.  In  some  the  blood  forsakes  the  skin  and  extremities,  and  we  may
suppose  the  smaller  vessels  in  general;  for  when  we  can  observe  internal
parts,  so  we  find  it,  such  as  the  mouth  in  general,  eyes,  etc.  a  general  pale-
ness takes  place,  which  is  best  seen  in  the  lips,  and  even  a  shrinking  of  the
external  visible  parts  takes  place,  especially  the  eyes,  so  that  the  person
looks  ill,  and  often  looks  as  if  dying.  The  pulse  is  at  this  time  small,
which  shows  that  the  whole  arterial  system  is  in  action.

*  On  the  other  hand  it  would  appear  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  there  was  really  an  in-
crease of  animal  life,  for  women  who  are  breeding,  and  are  in  perfect  health,  always  have  sizy
blood;  and  this  is  most  remarkably  the  case  with  all  animals  in  similar  situations;  now  it
would  appear  necessary  for  an  animal,  whenever  put  into  a  situation  where  greater  powers  are
wanted,  to  have  these  powers  increased.  In  a  breeding  woman  there  is  a  process  going  on,
though  natural  yet  uncommon,  and  which  requires  a  greater  exertion,  or  a  greater  quantity  of
powers  than  usual,  and  therefore  we  have  them  produced.  This  process  of  breeding,  although
Tn  many  of  its  symptoms  it  is  similar  to  fever,  is  yet  very  different;  for  actual  fever  kept  up
for  nine  months  would  destroy  the  person,  while  on  the  other  hand,  many  are  relieved  by
such  a  process.

If  these  observations  arejust,  this  biood  should  not  be  called  inflammatory  blood,  but  blood
whose  powers  of  life  are  increased.


*The  adhesive  inflammation.  317

.  This  appears  to  arise  from  debility,  or  the  want  of  powers  in  the  constitu-
tion to  be  acted  on  by  such  a  disposition  at  the  time,  so  that  the  whole  powers
or  materials  of  life  are  called  into  the  vital  parts  or  citadel,  and  the  out-
works are  left  to  themselves.  Such  is  the  case  with  fainting;  the  cold  fit
of  an  ague;  the  cold  fit  or  beginning  of  a  fever;  rigors  or  beginnings  of
exacerbations;  it  is  also  the  case  with  the  hectic.

In  the  commencement  of  diseases  it  does  not  appear  to  arise  from
real  debility  of  constitution,  but  the  novelty  of  the  action,  and  of  course
a  debility  in  that  action,  and  in  that  only;  but  in  the  hectic,  where  a  real
debility  has  taken  place,  those  appearances  are  owing  to  that  cause;
however,  even  in  the  hectic,  this  debility  is  assisted  by  the  unnaturalness
of  the  action.

In  the  first,  where  there  are  real  powers,  it  would  appear  as  if  nature
was  struggling  with  the  new  disposition,  and  it  either  becomes  destroyed
entirely  or  in  part,  and  the  blood  is  then  determined  to  the  skin ;  and  we
may  suppose  into  the  smaller  vessels  in  general;  then  the  pulse  becomes
full;  the  whole  action  now  appears  to  be  there,  and  it  becomes  hot;
when  that  action  in  the  skin  ceases,  a  perspiration  takes  place,  and  nature
seems  in  many  cases  to  be  at  rest;  in  some  disorders  this  cessation  is
perfect  for  a  time,  as  in  agues;  sometimes  wholly,  as  in  slight  colds;  but
often  imperfectly,  as  in  continued  fevers,  where  the  cessation  appears  only
to  arise  from  weariness,  which  prevents  the  continuance  of  the  action,
not  from  an  alteration  of  the  disposition.

In  other  diseases  the  blood  is  thrown  very  early  upon  the  exterior
parts.  The  face  shall  look  bloated,  the  eyes  full,  the  skin  red,  dry  and
hard  to  the  touch.

These  symptoms,  I  suspect,  belong  more  to  fevers  of  the  putrid
kind,  and  have  less  connexion  with  surgery  -than  the  former.

The  pulse  is  often  as  strong  a  sign  of  the  state  of  the  constitution  as
any  other  action  that  takes  place  in  it,  though  it  is  not  so  always  ;  but  as
the  pulse  has  but  one  circumstance  attending  it,  that  we  can  really  mea-
sure, all  the  others  being  referable  to  the  sensation  or  feeling  of  the  person
who  is  to  judge  of  it,  the  true  state  of  the  pulse  is  not  eafily  ascertained.


3 1 8  T'he  adhesive  inflammation.

The  knowledge  of  the  soft,  the  hard,  and  the  thrill,  are  such  as  can  only
be  acquired  with  accuracy  by  the  habit  of  feeling  pulses  in  these  different
states,  and  by  many  is  not  to  be  attained;  for  simple  sensation  in  the  minds
of  any  two  men  are  seldom  alike.  Thus,  we  find,  it  happens  with  respect  to
music ;  for  what  would  be  disagreeable  and  not  in  harmony  to  one  ear,
which  is  nice  and  accustomed  to  the  harmany  of  sounds,  will  not  be  so  to
another.

The  late  Dr.  Hunter  was  a  ftriking  inftance  of  this ;  for  though  he  was
extremely  accurate  in  most  things,  he  could  never  feel  that  nice  distinction
in  the  pulse  that  many  others  did,  and  was  ready  to  suspect  more  nicety  of
discrimination  than  can  really  be  found..  Frequency  of  pulsation  in  a
given  time  is  measurable  by  instruments;  smartness  or  quickness  in  the
stroke,  with  a  pause,  is  measureable  by  the  touch ;  but  the  nicer  peculi-
arities in  the  pulse  are  only  sensations  in  the  mind.  I  think  I  have  been
certain  of  the  pulse  having  a  disagreeable  jar  in  it  when  others  did  not  per-
ceive it,  when  they  were  only  sensible  of  its  frequency  and  strength ;  and  it
is  perhaps  this  jar  that  is  the  specific  diftinction  between  constitutional
disease  or  irritation  and  health;  frequency  of  pulsation  may  often  arise  from
stimulus,  but  the  stroke  will  then  be  soft ;  yet  softness  is  not  to  be  depended
on  as  a  mark  of  health,  it  is  often  a  sign  of  dissolution;  but  then  there  must
be  other  attending  symptoms.

In  the  consideration  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  pulse,  it  is  always  necessary
to  observe,  that  there  are  two  powers  acting  to  produce  them,  the  heart  and
the  arteries ;  that  one  part  of  the  pulse  belongs  to  the  heart  alone,  another
to  the  arteries  alone,  and  the  third  is  a  compound  of  both;  but  the  actions
of  the  heart  and  arteries  do  not  always  correspond ;  the  heart  may  be  in  a
flate  of  irritation,  and  act  quickly  in  its  systole,  while  the  arteries  may  be
acting  slowly;  for  the  heart  is  to  be  considered  as  a  local  part,  while  the
vessels  must  be  considered  as  universal,  or  even  constitutional.  The  stroke,
(which  is  the  pulse)  with  the  number  of  them  that  are  made  in  a  given
time,  whence  the  pulse  is  commonly  called  quick  or  slow,  their  regularity
and  irregularity  as  to  time,  and  the  quicknesss  of  the  stroke  itself,  belongs
to  the  heart.  The  quicknes  of  the  heart's  action  often  takes  place,  although
the  pulsations  are  not  frequent,  which  gives  a  kind  of  rest  or  halt  to  the


T'he  adhesive  inflammation.  3 1 9

artery  or  pulse,  especially  if  the  pulse  be  not  frequent.  The  hardness,  the
vibratory  thrill,  the  slowness  of  the  systole,  with  the  fulness  and  smalness
of  the  pulse  belong  to  the  arteries.  As  the  pulse  arises  from  the  actions  of
the  solids  or  machine,  its  state  will  be  of  course  according  to  the  nature  of
the  machine  at  the  time,  and  therefore  is  capable  of  being  in  one  of  these
states,  natural  and  diseased.

In  most  diseases  of  the  constitution,  whether  originating  from  it,  or  ari-
sing in  consequence  of  diseases  of  parts,  where  the  constitution  becomes
affected  by  sympathy,  the  pulse  is  altered  from  a  natural  to  a  diseased  state,
the  degree  of  which  will  be  regulated  by  those  affections.  This  alteration
is  commonly  so  constant,  and  so  regularly  of  the  nature  of  the  disease,  that
it  is  one  of  the  first  modes  of  intelligence  we  have  recourse  to,  in  our  in-
quiries into  its  nature;  but  alone  it  is  not  always  a  certain  guide  ;  for  where
there  are  peculiarities  of  constitution,  we  find  the  pulse  corresponding  to
those  peculiarities,  and,  perhaps,  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  accustomed
state  of  the  local  affection.  The  same  parts  too,  under  disease,  give  very
irregular,  or  uncertain  signs  in  the  actions  of  the  heart  and  vessels,  such
as  diseases,  or  injuries  done  to  the  brain.

The  varieties  which  the  pulse  admits  of  are  several.  It  is  increased
in  its  number  of  strokes,  or  it  is  diminished.  It  is  regular  or  irregular,
as  to  time,  in  its  strokes  ;  it  is  quick  in  its  stroke,  or  diastole,  and
slow  in  its  systole. It  is  hard  in  its  diastole,  and  it  vibrates  in  its  diastole.

In  most  cases,  probably  where  the  constitution  is  in  a  state  of  irritation,
the  pulse  will  be  quick  and  frequent  in  its  number  of  strokes  in  a  given
time,  and  the  artery  will  become  hard  from  a  constant,  or  spasmodic
contraction  of  its  muscular  coats,  so  as  to  give  the  feel  of  hardness  to  the
touch  ;  besides  which,  the  diastole  of  the  artery  is  not  regularly  uniform
and  smooth,  but  proceeds  by  a  vast  number  of  stops,  or  interruptions,
which  are  so  quick  as  to  give  the  feel  of  a  vibration,  or  what  we  would
express,  by  a  thrill.

The  pulse  under  such  a  disposition,  or  mode  of  action,  may  be  either
full,  or  small.

These  two  very  opposite  effects  do  not  seem  to  arise  from  a  difference  in
the  quantity  of  blood,  which  might  at  first  be  supposed  j  I  should  rather


3  2o  The  adhesive  inflammation.

suspect  that  they  arise  from  a  difference  in  the  degrees  of  strength,  which
will  be  more  or  less,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  parts  inflamed,  and  the
degree  of  irritability  of  the  patient  at  the  time.  These  give,  more  or  less,
an  anti-diastolic  disposition  to  the  arteries ;  and  while  the  arteries  have  the
power  of  contraction,  and  are  in  a  state  of  irritation,  this  effect  will  al-
ways take  place.

It  is  certain  at  least,  that  the  arteries  do  not  commonly,  in  such  a  state  of
constitution,  dilate  so  freely  and  so  fully  as  at  other  times,  and  as  this  will
vary  very  quickly,  (if  the  constitutional  irritation  varies  quickly)  it  is  more
reasonable  to  suppose,  that  it  is  an  immediate  effect  of  the  arteries,  than  an
increase,  and  decrease  of  the  quantity  of  blood.

If  this  be  really  the  case,  then  we  should  naturally  suppose  that  the
motion  of  the  blood  in  the  arteries  would  be  increased  in  proportion  to
their  diminished  size>  except  we  should  also  suppose,  that  the  diastole,  or
the  systole,  or  contraction  of  the  heart,  is  also  diminished  in  the  same  pro-
portion. The  first  of  these,  I  think,  may  probably  be  the  case,  as  we
find  that  the  blood  forsakes  the  surface  of  the  body  in  such  a  state  of  the
constitution,  as  will  hereafter  be  observed,  therefore  must  be  collected  in
the  larger  veins  about  the  heart.

If  the  heart  was  to  dilate  and  throw  out  its  whole  contents  at  each  sys-
tole, then  the  velocity  of  the  blood,  in  the  arteries,  under  such  a  state
of  contraction  of  arteries  would  be  immense,  and  it  might  then  be  pushed
into  the  smaller  vessels  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  which  it  certainly
is  not.

The  quick,  hard,  and  vibratory  pulse  is  generally  an  attendant  upon
inflammations  ;  and  whether  it  be  attended  with  fulness,  or  the  contrary,
depends  a  good  deal  upon  the  part  that  is  inflamed,  which  either  increases,
or  decreases  the  irritability,  which  will  be  described  in  treating  of  the  dif-
ferent parts  inflamed.

In  such  a  state  of  the  constitution,  as  produces  such  a  pulse,  the  blood,
which  appears  to  be  only  a  passive  body,  acted  upon  by  the  heart,  so  as  to
produce  the  diastole  of  the  artery,  and  reacted  on  by  the  vessels,  making  the
complete  pulse,  this  blood,  I  say,  is  generally  found  in  a  different  state
from  that  where  there  are  not  these  symptoms  in  the  pulse ;  they,  as  it


The  adhesive  inflammation.  321

were,  constantly  attend  each  other,  or  are  the  reciprocal  cause  and  effects  of
one  another,  as  was  taken  notice  of  when  I  was  speaking  of  the  state  of
the  blood  in  inflammation.

From  the  account  I  then  gave  of  the  state  of  the  blood  in  inflammation,
and  have  now  given  of  the  pulse,  under  the  same  action,  it  mould  naturally
be  expected,  that  they  mould  explain  each  other ;  which,  for  the  first
part  they  certainly  do  j  yet,  these  appearances  of  the  blood,  and  the  kind
of  pulse,  are  every  now  and  then  appearing  to  be  in  opposition  to  each
Other,  in  their  common  attending  circumstances ;  but  this  cannot  be-
known  till  the  person  is  bled  -,  when  the  pulse  is  quick  and  hard,  with  a
kind  of  vibration  in  the  action,  we  generally  have  sizy  blood.  This  may
arise  from  fever,  or  such  inflammation,  etc.  as  affects  the  constitution,  or
vital  parts,  these  being  so  diseased  as  to  keep  up  a  constitutional  irritation,
which  will  always  be  an  attending  symptom  ;  but,  when  we  have  neither
a  quick,  nor  hard  pulse,  both,  perhaps  below  par,  and  rather  small,  no
visible  fever,  nor  inflammation,  but,  probably,  some  strong,  undetermined
symptoms,  such  as  pain,  which  is  moveable,  being  sometimes  in  one
place,  sometimes  in  another,  but  at  the  same  time  seeming  to  impede  no
natural  function,  yet  upon  bleeding,  the  blood  shall  be  sizy,  and  the  size
shall  have  strong  powers  of  contraction,  so  as  to  cup.

A  gentleman  was  ill  with  a  pain,  chiefly  in  his  right  side ;  but  upon
the  part  being  rubbed,  or  application  being  made  to  it,  the  pain  seemed
to  move  to  some  other  part ;  from  which  circumstance  it  was  supposed  to
have  connexion  with  the  bowels;  at  other  times  he  was  tolerably  well.
His  pulse  was  slow,  small,  and  soft,  and  not  at  all,  to  the  feel,  like  a  pulse!
which  required  bleeding.  He  desired  to  be  bled,  and  when  bled,  the
blood  was  extremely  sizy ;  the  size  being  strong,  and  contracting  so  much
as  to  draw  in  the  edges,  forming  the  upper  surface  into  a  hollow,  or  cup.
His  pulse  became  fuller,  quicker,  and  harder  ;  he  was  bled  a  second  time ;
the  blood  was  the  same,  and  the  above  symptoms  increased  so  much,  that
I  observed,  immediately  after  the  second  bleeding,  his  pulse  was  quicker,
harder,  and  fuller,  than  it  was  just  before  the  bleeding.  That  it  might
be  quicker  and  fuller,  I  could  conceive,  because  I  have  often  seen  such
effect  from  bleeding,  where  there  had  been  an  oppressed  and  languid  pulse ;

T  t


322  The  adhesive  inflammation.

but  I  cannot  say  that  I  ever  saw  a  case  where  the  pulse  became  harder,
and  acquired  the  vibration,  except  when  debility,  or  languor  was  pro-
duced, and  where  the  blood  was  weak  in  its  powers  of  coagulation,  be-
ing flat  on  the  coagulated  surface.  Another  want  of  correspondence,  or
.  irregularity,  takes  place  when  a  constitution  sympathizes  with  a  local  in-
flammation. There  are  cases  where  the  pulse  becomes  slow,  and  often
irregular;  such  are  mostly  to  be  found  in  all  people,  when  the  constitu-
tion is  affected  either  originally  or  sympathetically,  and  in  such,  I  suspect
that  a  disposition  for  dissolution,  and  perhaps  mortification,  is  much  to  be
feared.

A  man,  aged  sixty-eight  years,  had  an  occasional  inflammation  in  one
of  his  legs,  which  often  ulcerated,  and  which  seemed  to  arise  more  from
a  defect  in  the  constitution  than  to  be  simply  local.  In  those  indisposi-
tions, his  pulse  seldom  exceeded  forty  in  the  minute,  and  as  he  began  to
get  better,  his  pulse  became  more  and  more  frequent.

The  varieties  of  the  pulse  arising  from  the  seat  of  the  inflammation,  and
the  nature  of  the  part  inflamed,  will  be  expressed  when  I  treat  on  inflam-
mations in  different  situations  and  parts.


VIII.  THE  EFFECTS  OF  INFLAMMATION  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION,
ACCORDING  TO  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  PARTS,  SITUATION  OF  SI-
MILAR STRUCTURES,  AND  WHETHER  VITAL  OR  NOT  VITAL.

These  circumstances  make  a  very  material  difference  in  the  effects  on
the  constitution,  arising  from  local  inflammation  ;  for  we  shall  find  that
the  effects  on  the  constitution  are  not  simply  as  the  quantity  of  inflam-
mation, but  according  to  the  quantity  and  parts  combined,  (supposing
constitutions  to  be  equal)  which  I  shall  now  consider  separately.

In  common  parts,  as  muscle,  cellular  membrane,  skin,  etc.  the  symp-
toms will  be  acute  -,  the  pulse  strong  and  full,  and  the  more  so,  if  it  be
felt  near  to  the  heart;  but  perhaps  not  so  quick  as  when  the  part  is  far


Tfo  adhesive  inflammation.  323

from  it;  fince  there  will  be  less  irritability. The  stomach  will  simpa-
thize  less,  and  the  blood  will  be  pushed  further  into  the  smaller  vessels.

If  the  inflammation  is  in  tendinous,  ligamentous,  or  bony  parts,  the
symptoms  will  be  less  acute,  the  stomach  will  sympathize  more,  the
pulse  will  not  be  so  full,  but  perhaps  quicker,  because  there  will  be  more
irritability,  and  the  blood  will  not  be  60  much  pushed  into  the  smaller
vessels,  and  therefore  forsake  the  skin  more.

It  seems  to  be  a  material  circumstance,  whether  the  inflammation  is  in
the  lower  or  upper  extremity;  that  is,  far  from,  or  near  to  the  heart ;  for
the  symptoms  are  the  more  violent,  the  constitution  is  more  affected,  and
the  power  of  resolution  seems  to  be  less,  when  the  part  inflamed  is  far
from  the  source  of  the  circulation,  than  when  near  it,  even  when  parts
are  similar,  both  in  texture  and  use.

Whatever  course  the  inflammation  is  to  run,  or  in  whatever  way  it  is
to  terminate,  it  is  done  with  more  ease  when  near  to  the  heart  than  when
far  off.

All  the  parts  that  may  in  one  sense  be  called  vital,  do  not  produce  the
same  effects  upon  the  constitution  j  and  the  difference  seems  to  arise  from
the  difference  in  their  connexions  with  the  stomach.  It  is  to  be  observed,
that  vital  parts  may  be  divided  into  two,  one  which  is  in  itself  immedi-
ately connected  with  life,  as  the  stomach  ;  the  other,  where  life  only  de-
pends upon  it  in  its  action  or  use;  the  heart,  lungs,  and  brain  are  only
to  be  considered  in  this  last  light;  therefore,  they  have  a  considerable
sympathizing  affection  with  the  stomach ;  the  symptoms  are  rather  de-
pressing ;  the  pulse  is  quick,  small,  and  the  blood  is  not  pushed  into  the
smaller  vessels.

If  the  heart  or  lungs  are  inflamed,  either  immediately,  or  affected  se-
condarily, as  by  sympathy,  the  disease  has  Ihore  violent  effects  upon  the
constitution  than  the  same  quantity  of  inflammation  would  have,  if  it
was  not  in  a  vital  part,  or  was  in  one  with  which  the  vital  parts  did
not  sympathize;  for  if  it  is  such  as  the  vital  parts  sympathize  with  rea-


324  Tfo  adhesive  inflammation,

dily,  then  the  sympathetic  action  of  the  vital  parts  will  affect  the  consti-
tution, as  in  an  inflammation  of  the  testicle.

The  pulse,  in  such  cases,  is  much  quicker  and  smaller  than  when  in  a
common  part, as  a  muscle,  cellular  membrane,  or  skin;  but  not  so  much  so
as  in  the  stomach,  and  the  blood  is  more  sizy.  When  the  inflammation  is
in  the  heart  only,  its  actions  are  extremely  agitated  and  irregular.  If  in  the
lungs,  singly,  the  heart  in  such  cases  would  appear  to  sympathize,  and  not
allow  of  a  full  or  free  diastole.

The  stomach  does  not  in  common  sympathize  in  such  cases,  which  is
the  reason,  perhaps,  of  the  inflammation  not  depressing;  but  it  is  to  be  ob-
served, that  I  make  a  material  difference  between  the  inflammation  of  the
lungs,  commonly  called  a  pleurisy,  and  those  diseases  that  begin  slowly,
and  spin  out  to  great  lengths,  and  which  are  truly  scrophulous,  producing
the  hectic  ;  for  in  them  we  have  the  hectic  pulse,  and  not  the  inflammatory.

If  the  stomach  is  inflamed,  the  patient  feels  an  oppression  and  dejection
through  all  the  stages  of  the  inflammation  ;  simple  animal  life  seems  to
be  hurt  and  lessened,  just  as  sensation  is  lessened  when  the  brain  is  in-
jured ;  the  pulse  is  generally  low  and  quick,  the  pain  is  obtuse,  strong,
and  oppressing,  such  as  a  patient  can  hardly  bear.

If  the  intestines  are  much  affected,  the  same  symptoms  take  place,
especially  if  the  inflammation  be  in  the  upper  part  of  the  canal ;  but  if  it
is  the  colon  only  which  is  affected,  the  patient  is  more  roused;  and  the
pulse  is  fuller  than  when  the  stomach  only  is  inflamed.

If  it  be  the  uterus,  the  pulse  is  extremely  quick  and  low.  If  it  be  a
testicle  that  is  inflamed,  the  pain  is  depressing,  the  pulse  is  quick,  but  not
strong.

When  the  inflammation  is  either  in  the  intestines,  testicle,  or  uterus,
the  stomach  generally  sympathizes  with  them,  which  will  produce,  or  in-
crease the  symptoms  peculiar  to  the  stomach.  In  inflammation  of  the
brain,  1  believe  the  pulse  varies  more  than  in  inflammations  of  any  other
part;  and,  perhaps,  we  are  led  to  judge  of  inflammation  there,  more  from
other  symptoms  than  the  pulse.  I  believe  the  pulse  is  sometimes  quick,
slow,  depressed,  full,  etc.  and  which  may  accord  with  the  other  symp-
toms, such  as  delirium,  stupor,  etc.


The  adhesive  inflammation.  325

It  is  to  be  observed,  when  the  attack  upon  these  organs,  which  are
principally  connected  with  life,  proves  fatal,  that  the  effects  of  the  in-
flammation upon  the  constitution  run  through  all  the  stages  with  more
rapidity  than  when  it  happens  in  other  parts  ;  so  that  at  its  very  begin-
ning, it  has  the  same  effect  upon  the  constitution,  which  is  only  produced
by  the  second  stage  of  fatal  inflammation  in  other  parts.  Debility  begins
very  early,  because  the  inflammation  itself  is  interfering  immediately  with
the  actions  of  life ;  and  also  in  such  parts  universal  sympathy  takes  place
more  readily,  because  the  connexion  of  these  parts  by  sympathy  is  more
immediate;  and  if  the  sympathy  is  similar  to  the  action,  then  the  whole
is,  in  some  degree,  in  the  same  action.

If  the  inflammation  comes  on  in  a  part  not  very  essential  to  life,
and  with  such  violence  as  to  affect  the  actions  of  life,  or  to  produce  uni-
versal sympathy,  the  pulse  is  fuller  and  stronger  than  common  ;  the
blood  is  pushed  further  into  the  extreme  arteries  than  when  the  inflam-
mation is  in  a  vital  part ;  the  patient,  after  many  occasional  rigors,  is  at
first  rather  roused,  because  the  actions  of  the  part  are  roused;  and  the
effects  in  the  constitution  are  such  as  do  not  impede  any  of  the  operations
of  the  vital  parts.  It  is  allowed  to  proceed  to  greater  lengths,  or  greater
violence  in  itself,  before  the  constitution  becomes  equally  hurt  by  it;  and
the  constitutional  symptoms  produced  at  last,  may  be  said  to  arise  simply
from  the  violence  of  the  inflammation  ;  but  this  will  take  place,  more  or
less,  according  to  circumstances  ;  it  will  be  according  to  the  nature  of  the
parts,  whether  active  as  muscles,  or  inactive  as  tendons  ;  also  according  to
the  situation  of  the  same  kind  of  parts,  as  well  as  according  to  the  nature
of  the  constitution.  If  the  constitution  is  strong,  and  not  irritable,  the
pulse  will  be  as  above ;  but  if  the  constitution  is  extremely  irritable  and
weak,  as  in  many  women  who  live  sedentary  lives,  the  pulse  may  be  quick,
hard,  and  small,  at  the  commencement  of  the  inflammation,  similar  to
the  inflammation  of  vital  parts.  The  blood  may  be  sizy,  but  will  be  loose
and  flat  on  the  surface.


326  The  adhesive  inflammation.

IX.  GENERAL  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  RESOLUTION  OF  INFLAMMA-
TION.

I  now  come  to  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  subject,  for  it  is  much
more  easy  to  describe  actions,  than  to  assign  motives  ;  and  without  being
able  to  assign  motives,  it  is  impossible  to  know  when  or  how  we  may  or
should  check,  actions,  or  remove  them.  I  have  endeavoured  to  shew,  that
an  animal  body  is  susceptible  of  impression,  producing  action  :  that  the
action,  in  quantity,  is  in  the  compound  ratio  of  the  impression,  the  suscep-
tibility of  the  part,  and  the  powers  of  action  of  the  part  or  whole ;  and  in
quality,  that  it  is  according  to  the  nature  of  the  impressing  power  and  the
parts  affected.  I  have  also  endeavoured  to  shew  that  impressions  are  capable
of  producing,  or  increasing  natural  actions,  and  are  then  called  stimuli :  but
that  they  are  likewise  capable  of  producing  too  much  action,  as  well  as
depraved,  unnatural,  or  what  are  commonly  called  diseased  actions.  The
first  of  these  I  have  mentioned  by  the  general  term,  irritations :  the  depraved,
etc.  come  in  more  properly  in  treating  of  peculiar,  or  specific  actions.

Since  then  an  animal  body  can  be  made  to  increase  its  natural  action,
or  to  act  improperly  by  impression,  so  we  can  see  no  reason,  when  it  is
acting  too  violently,  why  it  should  not  be  restrained  by  impression;  or
when  acting  improperly,  in  consequence  of  these  impressions,  why  it
should  not  be  made  to  act  properly  again  by  the  same  mode,  namely,  by
impressions.

These  modes  of  action  we  are  first  to  understand,  and  then  the  power
of  correcting,  or  counteracting  those  impressions,  in  order  to  diminish,  or
prevent  the  action,  so  as  to  produce  one  that  is  healthy  or  natural ;  be-
sides, an  injury  which  produces  a  new  mode  of  action,  and  a  disease,
which  is  a  new  mode  of  action,  often  happen  when  the  machine  is  in
perfect  health,  and  in  such  a  state  as  is  perfectly  in  harmony  with  that
health ;  but  which  state  is  not  suitable  to  disease ;  therefore,  it  is  to  be
presumed,  the  more  perfect  health  the  body  enjoys,  the  less  it  bears  a
change  in  its  actions.  Thus  we  know,  that  strong  health  does  not
bear  considerable  injuries,  such  as  accidents,  operations,  etc.  A  man  in
strong  health,  for  instance,  will  not  bear  a  compound  fracture  in  the  leg,


The  adhesive  inflammation.  ,  327

or  an  amputation  of  the  same,  so  well  as  a  man  accustomed  to  such  dis-
eases, and  reduced  by  them.  We  find,  commonly,  that  our  artificial  mode
of  reduction,  is  by  far  too  quick,  and  is  almost  as  much  a  violence  on  the
constitution  as  the  injury;  when,  therefore,  considerable  injuries  or  diseases
commence,  the  constitution  is  to  be  brought  to  that  state  which  accords
best  with  that  accident,  or  disease.  The  knowledge  of  that  state  of  the
body,  at  that  time,  as  well  as  the  operations  of  the  whole  animal,  or  of
its  parts,  when  arising  from  a  disturbed  or  deranged  state,  or  a  diseased
disposition,  are  to  be  considered  as  the  first  steps  towards  a  rational  cure  :
but  this  alone  is  insufficient ;  the  means  of  bringing  the  body  to  that  state
are  also  necessary,  which  will  include  the  knowledge  of  certain  causes  and
effects,  acquired  by  experience,  including  the  application  of  many  sub-
stances, called  medicines,  which  have  the  power  of  counteracting  the
action  of  disease  :  or  of  substances  perfectly  inefficient  in  themselves,  but
capable,  under  certain  circumstances,  of  producing  considerable  effects,
such  as  water,  when  hot  and  cold;  or  a  substance  when  it  varies  its  form^
as  from  fluidity  to  vapour.  Of  these  virtues  we  know  nothing  definitely ;
all  we  know  is,  that  some  are  capable  of  altering  the  mode  of  action,  others
stimulating,  many  counter-stimulating  :  some  even  irritating,  and  others
quieting,  so  as  to  produce  either  a  healthy  disposition,  and  action  in  a
diseased  part,  or  to  change  the  disease  to  that  action  which  accords  with
the  medicine,  or  to  quiet  where  there  is  too  much  action ;  and  our  reasoning
goes  no  further  than  to  make  a  proper  application  of  those  substances,
with  these  virtues.  The  difficulty  is  to  ascertain  the  connexion  of  substance
and  virtue,  and  to  apply  this  in  restraining  or  altering  any  diseased  action;
and  as  that  cannot  be  demonstrated  a  priori,  it  reduces  the  practice  of  me-
dicine to  experiment ;  and  this  not  built  upon  well  determined  data,  but
upon  experience,  resulting  from  probable  data.  This  is  not  equally  the
case  through  the  whole  practice  of  medicine,  for  in  many  diseases  we  are
much  more  certain  of  a  cure  than  in  others  ;  but  still,  even  in  them,  the
certainty  does  not  arise  from  reasoning  upon  any  more  fixed  data,  than  in
others,  where  the  certainty  of  a  cure  is  less;  but  it  arises  from  a  greater
experience  alone;  it  is  still  no  more  than  inferring  that  in  what  is  now  to
be  tried,  there  is  a  probable  effect  or  good  to  arise  in  the  experiment,  from


328  The  adhesive  inflammation,

what  has  been  found  serviceable  in  similar  cases :  diseases,  however,  of  the
same  specific  nature,  not  only  vary  in  their  visible  symptoms  or  actions,
but  in  many  of  those  that  are  invisible,  arising  probably  from  peculiari-
ties of  constitution,  and  causes,  which  will  make  the  effects  of  applica-
tions vary,  probably,  almost  in  the  same  proportion;  and  as  those  varieties
may  not  be  known,  so  as  either  to  adapt  the  specific  medicine  to  them,  or
to  suit  the  disease  to  the  medicine,  it  will  then  be  only  given  upon  a  gene-
ral principle,  which  of  course  may  not  correspond  to  the  peculiarities.
Even  in  well-marked  specific  diseases,  where  there  is  a  specific  remedy,  we
find  that  there  are  often  peculiarities,  which  counteract  the  simple  specific
medicine.  This  we  even  see  in  poisons,  the  most  simple  specific  of  all,
because  its  effect  arises  in  all  cases  from  one  cause ;  the  peculiarities,  there-
fore, in  the  disease  must  arise  from  a  peculiarity  in  the  constitution,  and
not  from  the  cause  of  the  disease.

The  inflammation  I  have  been  treating  of,  is  the  most  simple  of  any,
because  it  is  the  simple  action  of  the  parts  unmixed  with  any  specific  qua-
lity, arising  from  causes  of  no  specific  kind,  and  attacking  constitutions,
and  parts,  not  necessarily  having  any  specific  tendency ;  the  cure,  therefore,
or  method  of  terminating  the  inflammation,  which  is  called  resolution,
(in  cases  that  will  admit  of  it)  must  also  be  very  simple,  if  we  knew  it;
and  accordingly,  when  the  cure  of  such  is  known,  it  lays  the  foundation
of  the  general  plan  for  the  treatment  of  all  inflammations  of  the  same
kind  :  but  it  very  rarely  happens  that  a  constitution  is  perfectly  free  from
a  tendency  to  some  disease*;  we  seldom,  therefore,  see  simple  salutary
actions  of  parts  tending  to  relieve  themselves  from  a  violence  committed  :
some  constitutions  being  so  irritable,  that  the  inflammation  has  no  dispo-
sition to  terminate,  and  others  so  indolent  that  the  inflammation  passes
into  another  species,  as  into  scrophula ;  all  of  which  will  require  very
different  treatment.

The  same  varieties  take  place  in  specific  inflammations;  as  also  in  in-
flammations arising  from  poisons  ;  for  many  will  have  the  true  inflamma-
tory disposition  joined  with  the  specific;  in  such,  therefore,  the  same  plan

*  Vide  the  varieties  of  the  inflammation,  in  the  introduction.


The  adhesive  inflammation.  329

is  to  be  pursued  with  the  addition  only  of  the  specific  treatment ;  but  this
must  not  be  omitted,  as  the  inflammation  depends  upon  the  specific  dis-
ease. It  is  this  critical  knowledge,  which  becomes  the  basis  of  practice  ;
and  it  is  this  which  requires  the  greatest  sagacity;  and  I  must  own,  it  re-
quires more  knowledge  than  comes  to  the  share  of  most  practitioners.
As  every  inflammation  has  a  cause,  that  cause  should  be  removed  before
resolution  can  take  place ;  for  the  animal  ceconomy  having  a  disposition
within  itself  to  discontinue  diseased  action,  that  of  course  subsides  upon
the  removal  of  the  cause;  and  this  disposition  is  so  strong  in  some,  as
to  appear  to  act  alone.  That  removing  the  cause  is  a  mode  of  resolu-
tion, is  proved  in  the  venereal  bubo  ;  for  by  taking  off  the  venereal  action
with  mercury,  the  inflammation  subsides,  if  another  mode  of  action  does
not  arise*.  Inflammation,  where  it  must  suppurate,  is  most  probably  a
restorative  act,  and  cannot  be  resolved  in  those  cases  where  restoration
becomes  necessary;  as  for  instance,  in  a  wound  that  is  kept  exposed,  the  in-
flammatory act  of  restoration  becomes,  or  is  rendered,  necessary,  and  it
takes  place;  but  bring  those  parts  together,  or  let  the  blood  coagulate
and  dry  upon  it,  and  it  becomes  unnecessary.  I  have  already  observed,
when  treating  of  the  causes  of  inflammation,  which  might  be  called  the
spontaneous,  that  they  probably  arose  from  a  state  of  parts,  in  which  they
could  not  exist,  similar  to  exposed  surfaces,  and  therefore  this  act  of  re-
storation became  necessary  :  if  this  be  true,  then  probably  by  altering
that  state  of  parts,  as  we  can  by  bringing  the  divided  parts  together,  the
inflammation  would  either  not  rise,  or  immediately  cease ;  but  as  we  arc
not  in  all  cases  acquainted  with  the  mode  of  restoring  those  natural  actions,
we  are  obliged  to  be  restricted  to  those  methods  that  render  them  easier
under  this  state,  and  which  are  often  capable  of  turning  the  balance  in
favor  of  resolution.

As  inflamed  parts  are  not  always  visible,  it  becomes  necessary  that  we
should  have  some  rule  to  inform  us,  whether  the  part  is  inflamed  or  not;
to  ascertain  which,  we  must  have  recourse  to  all  the  symptoms  formerly
mentioned,  except  the  visible  ones. We  ought  also  to  have  a  guide  re-

*  Vide  Treatise  on  Venerea  Disease.

U  u


3  30  *?&*  adhesive  inflammation.

jpecting  the  kind  of  inflammation,  more  especially  as  it  is  not  sufficient,
in  many  cases,  to  be  guided  entirely  by  the  appearances,  even  where  it  is
in  sight;  it  is  often,  therefore,  very  necessary  to  inquire  into  the  cause
of  the  inflammation,  the  nature  of  the  constitution,  the  effects  that  for-
mer inflammation  has  produced,  and  even  into  the  temper  and  mind  of
the  patient.

The  cure  of  inflammation  is  resolution  ;  and  the  attempt  towards  it  is
principally  to  be  made  when  the  inflammation  is  in  the  adhesive  state;
for  we  find  that  often  it  goes  no  further,  but  subsides,  and  this  is  resolution  ;
probably  the  sooner  after  its  commencement  it  is  the  better.  The  ob-
ject of  the  attempt  is  to  prevent  supparation  taking  place,  although  sup-
puration may  be  considered  as  a  resolution,  but  it  is  the  mode  of  resolu-
tion we  commonly  wish  to  avoid.  Resolution  is  in  general  only  to  be
attempted,  with  anv  probability  of  success,  under  the  following  circum-
stances :  when  the  inflammation  is  in  consequence  of  the  constitution,
or  a  disease  of  the  part  :  secondly,  in  cases  of  accident,  where  there  is  either
no  exposure,  or  where  it  has  been  removed  in  time :  as,  for  example!,  by
bringing  the  parts  in  contact  :  thirdly,  where  the  life  of  the  part  has  not
been  destroyed.  In  all  such  cases  we  find  that  resolution  can  take  place  ;
but  in  those  cases  arising  from  accident,  and  a  continuance  of  exposure
joined,  or  where  death  of  the  parts  is  produced  by  the 'accident,  it  becomes
impossible  to  hinder  the  suppuration  from  taking  place.

I  have  already  observed,  that  in  many  bruises,  as  well  as  simple  frac-
tures, where  the  cavities  are  not  exposed,  and  where  they  are  to  heal  by
•the  first  and  second  intention,  the  inflammation,  in  most  of  these  cases,  is
capable  of  being  resolved;  although,  in  some  such  cases,  the  inflamma-
tion runs  so  high  as  to  threaten  suppuration.  I  have  also  already  shewn,
that  in  parts  which  have  been  divided  and  exposed,  the  inflammation  is,
by  bringing  them  together,  in  a  great  measure  prevented ;  or  if  it  has
taken  place  previous  to  the  union,  that  the  same  operation  of  union  \%
sufficient  to  produce  resolution ;  and  I  have  likewise  shewn  that  where
parts  were  not  brought  together,  nature  attempted  to  prevent  inflamma-
tion, by  covering  the  wound  with  blood,  and  forming  an  eschar,  which,
in  many  cases,  will  either  prevent,  or  remove  inflammation  ; all  of  which


T/5e  adhesive  injla  mmatlon .  331

shews  a  power  of  resolution,  even  in  the  cases  where  the  parts  have  been
exposed.

As  it  is  commonly  supposed  that  there  are  a  great  many  local  diseases
that  should  not  be  resolved,  the  first  thing  necessary  to  be  considered,  is,
when  the  resolution  should  or  should  not  be  attempted.  On  the  con-
trary, there  are  cases  where  inflammation  is  to  be  excited,  but  these  arise
commonly  from  disease,  which  is  not  to  our  present  purpose  ;  yet  it  some-
times happens  in  accidents,  where  inflammation  is  necessary,  that  it  is-
not  sufficient  for  the  reinstatement  of  the  injured  parts,  as  in  some  simple
fractures,  where  the  first  bond  of  union,  the  extravasated  blood,  had  not
fulfilled  its  purpose,  and  had  been  absorbed,  and  where  the  inflammation
was  too  slight  to  supply  its  place ;  so  that  union  of  parts  was  prevented*
and  another  mode  became  necessary,  not  at  all  a  consequence  of  inflamma-
tion, viz.  granulations  without  suppuration  ;  all  of  which  retards  still
more  the  restoration  of  the  parts.  As  this  defect  can  only  be  known  in
bone,  and  in  the  soft  union  of  the  bone,  which  is  similar  to  the  union
in  the  soft  parts,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  it  may  also  take  place  in  the
soft  parts;  more  especially  those  which  are  tendinous,  or  ligamentous,
where  we  find  recovery  very  slow,  for  the  soft  union  in  bones  differs  in
nothing  from  that  of  the  soft  parts ;  it  may,  therefore,  be  a  much  more
common  defect  than  is  generally  imagined.  In  such  cases,  if  it  could  be
known,  it  would  be  proper  to  encourage,  or  even  excite  inflammation.  If
we  cannot,  probably,  in  any  case  determine  where  it  should  be  excited,
nor  even  where  it  should  be  checked,  yet  we  can  say,  in  many  cases,
where  it  is  unnecessary  to  check  it.  Before  we  attempt  to  check  inflam-
mation, we  should  have  reason  to  suppose  it  is  going  further  than  is  ne-
cessary for  the  natural  cure  ;  and  therefore  it  is  laying  the  foundation  of
work  for  the  surgeon.  It  may  be  very  difficult  to  say,  in  many  cases,
when  it  should  be  checked.  The  most  simple  reason  will  be  to  lessen
pain,  arising  in  a  part  not  merely  when  moved  or  touched,  but  in  the  act  of
inflammation.  Secondly,  where  it  may  be  uniting  parts,  the  union  of  which
we  wish  to  avoid  j  but  this  is  an  uncertain  guide,  even  if  we  knew  adhe-
sions were  taking  place,  for  adhesions  often  prevent  suppuration.  Thirdly,
to  prevent  the  inflammation  from  suppurating  •  and  in  this  last,  although


332  The  adhesive  inflammation.

the  most  obvious,  yet  there  is  less  certainty  how  far  we  may  advise  the
attempt.  It  is  also  the  most  difficult  to  effect;  for  in  many  cases  of  spon-
taneous inflammation,  if  it  arises  from  a.  state  under  which  the  parts  can-
not exist,  nor  their  functions  go  on,  similar  to  an  exposed  breach  in  the
solids,  then  resolution  should  not  be  attempted:  it  may  be  palliated  when
going  beyond  what  is  necessary  for  suppuration:  but  when  this  practice
is  carried  farther,  it  rather  retards  that  salutary  process.  From  the  fore-
going statement  of  particulars,  it  must  appear,  that  in  many  cases  it  is  un-
necessary to  check  inflammation  ;  in  others  it  would  be  wrong,  and  in
many  very  necessary;  and  probably  the  best  guide  is  its  going  further  than
appears  from  the  cause  to  be  salutary;  yet  in  practice  we  find  applications,
and  other  modes  of  resolution,  immediately  had  recourse  to,  which  must  be
considered  as  opprobrious  to  surgery.

Inflammations,  in  consequence  of  accidents,  ought  in  general  to  be  re-
solved, if  possible.  It  is  perhaps  impossible  to  produce  a  single  instance
where  a  contrary  practice  would  be  preferable,  except  as  above  related,
where  its  consequence  would  be  to  answer  some  great  purpose ;  and  it  is
also  conceivable,  that  this  local  disease,  produced  by  accident,  might  re-
lieve the  constitution  from  some  prior  disorders,  similar  to  what  is  under-
stood to  be  the  effects  of  an  issue.  Mr.  Foote  was  relieved  of  head-achs,
of  long  standing,  by  the  loss  of  a  leg,  which  may  be  considered  as  a  proof
of  this ;  but  he  afterwards  died  of  a  complaint  in  his  head,  very  similar  to
an  apoplexy.  It  might  be  supposed,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  tempo-
rary cure  was  the  cause  of  the  apoplexy.

Inflammation,  in  consequence  only  of  a  disease  in  a  part,  appears  to  be
under  the  same  circumstances,  with  respect  to  resolution  ;  but  an  inflam-
mation arising  from  a  preceding  indisposition  in  the  constitution  (com-
monly called  critical)  has  always  been  classed  among  those  which  should
not  be  cured  locally,  and  this  has  got  the  term  of  repulsion  :  it  has  been
insisted  on,  that  the  inflammation  should  rather  be  encouraged,  and  sup-
puration produced,  if  possible.  If  the  inflammation  is  really  a  concentra-
tion of  the  constitutional  complaint,  and  that  by  not  allowing  it  to
rest  here,  the  same  disposition  is  really  diffused  over  the  whole  animal


The  adhesive  inflammation.  333

again,  and  at  liberty  to  fix  on  some  other  part,  it  certainly  would
be  better  to  encourage  its  stay  ;  but,  in  such  cases  it  is  always  understood
that  the  inflammation  is  in  such  parts  as  will  readily  admit  of  a  cure  when
suppuration  takes  place  $  for  if  the  disease  be  otherwise  situated,  then  the
cure  of  the  constitution  by  suppuration  will  be  a  mode  of  cure  which  will
reflect  back  another  disease  upon  it,  under  which  it  will  sink  :  resolution
of  inflammation,  therefore,  in  the  first  of  these  situations  should,  if  pos-
sible, be  brought  about.  For  instance,  many  deep-seated  inflammations,
if  allowed  to  suppurate,  would  of  themselves  most  certainly  kill.  This
might,  be  illustrated  by  the  gout,  when  either  in  the  head  or  stomach,  for
when  in  such  parts  it  had  better  be  repelled,  and  left  to  find  another
part  less  connected  with  life  5  which,  if  in  the  feet,  would  be  called  re-
pelling of  it  ;  but  still  it  does  not  appear  to  me  necessary  that  it  should
suppurate,  for  suppuration  is  only  a  consequence  of  the  inflammation,  and
not  an  immediate  consequence  of  the  original  or  constitutional  disease,  but
a  secondary  one*:  as  suppuration,  therefore,  is  only  a  thing  superadded,  and
as  we  shall  find  that  inflammation  generally  subsides  when  suppuration
comes  on,  I  see  no  reason  why  inflammation,  in  the  present  case,  should  not
as  well  subside  by  resolution  as  by  suppuration  :  however,  it  may  be  sup-
posed, that  although  suppuration  is  not  the  natural,  or  immediate  effect  of
the  disease,  yet  as  it  is  a  continued  local  action,  and  the  thing  sought  for
by  the  constitution,  and  as  inflammation  must  precede  it,  the  parts  must
submit  to  those  regular  processes  ;  for  it  must  be  supposed  to  be  capable  of
diverting  the  disease  to  this  part.

*  This  is  contrary  to  the  common  received  opinion,  but  it  is  according  to  my  idea  of  sup-
puration, for  I  have  all  along  considered  inflammation  as  the  disease,  and  suppuration  oidv  as
a  consequence  of  that  disease ;  and  have  supposed  the  disease  to  be  gone  when  suppuration
has  taken  place  :  but,  according  to  the  common  opinion,  suppuration  was  the  thing  to  be
wished  for ;  because  all  diseases  arose  from  humors  ;  but  as  we  have  not  once  mentioned  hu~
mors,  and  therefore  made  it  no  part  of  our  system,  we  must  also  drop  it -at  present.


334  •  The  adhesive  inflammation.

X. OF  THE  METHODS  OF RESOLUTION  BY  CONSTITUTIONAL

MEANS.

The  first  thing  to  be  considered  is  the  kind  of  inflammation;  when  vi-
sible, which  will  in  some  degree  shew  the  kind  of  constitution  ;  the  next
is  the  nature  of  the  part  inflamed,  and  the  stage  of  inflammation  ;  for  upon
these  depend  in  some  measure  the  method  of  relief.  In  cases  of  exposed
internal  surfaces,  the  inflammation  cannot  be  resolved,  because  the  cause;
still  exists  till  inflammation  has  resolved  itself;  but  it  may  be  lessened,
and  this  probably  takes  place  by  lessening  every  thing  which  has  a  ten-
dency to  keep  it  up ;  and  in  all  likelihood,  little  more  can  be  done  in
spontaneous  inflammations ;  for  as  yet  we  know  of  no  method  which  will
entirely  quiet  or  remove  the  inflammatory  disposition  or  mode  of  action,
as  there  is  no  inflammatory  specific  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  When
I  described  inflammation,  I  observed  there  was  either  an  increase  of  life,
or  an  increased  disposition  to  use  with  more  violence  the  life  which  the
machine,  or  the  part  was  in  possession  of;  and  also  there  was  an  increased
size  of  vessels,  and  of  course  an  increased  circulation  in  the  part  inflamed,
and  in  the  constitution  in  general.  If  this  theory  of  the  mode  of  action
of  the  vessels  in  inflammation  is  just,  then  our  practice  is  reducible  to
two  principles;  one  consisting  in  removing  the  cause  of  that  action  ;  the
other  in  counteracting  the  effect.  In  the  first,  as  we  seldom  know  the
cause,  but  only  see  the  effect,  except  in  some  specific  diseases,  for  which
we  have  a  specific  remedy,  we  do  not  know  with  any  degree  of  certainty
how  to  act;  but  as  the  second,  that  is,  the  effect,  is  more  an  object  of  our
senses,  we  can  apply  with  more  certainty  our  reasoning  upon  it ;  for  rea-
soning from  analogy  will  assist  us  in  our  attempts.  We  find,  from  com-
mon observation,  that  many  circumstances  in  life,  as  also  many  applica-
tions to  parts,  will  call  forth  the  contraction  of  the  vessels  :  we  are,
from  the  above  theory,  to  apply  such  means  ;  and  whatever  will  do  this,
without  irritation,  will  so  far  counteract  the  effect*. I  have  already  ob-

*  As  this  is  a  new  theory  of  the  action  of  the  vessels  in  inflammation,  and  the  only  one
that  can  possibly  direct  to  a  method  of  cure,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  attention  will  be  paid  to  it  j
and,  if  just,  that  more  certain  methods  of  resolution  will  be  discovered.


The  adhesive  inflammation.  335

served,  that  wherever  there  has  been  a  violence  committed,  or  some  vi-
olent action  is  going  on,  there  is  a  greater  influx  of  blood  to  that  part.
Lessening,  therefore,  that  influx  becomes  one  mode  of  relief ;  for  as  the
vessels  dilate,  they  should  not  be  encouraged  in  that  action.  Although
the  increased  influx  is  to  be  considered  chiefly  as  an  effect,  yet  it  is  to  be
considered  as  a  secondary  cause ;  and  from  our  ignorance  of  the  immedi-
ate cause,  it  is  probably  only  through  such  secondary  causes  that  we  can
produce  any  effect ;  and  upon  these  principles,  most  likely  rests,  in  some
measure,  the  method  of  resolution  j  for  whatever  will  lessen  the  power
and  disposition,  will  also  lessen  the  effect ;  and  possibly  these  will  likewise
lessen  the  force  of  the  circulation.

If  the  inflammation  is  attended  with  considerable  action  and  power,  as
it  were,  increasing  itself,  then  the  modes  of  resolution  are  to  be  put
in  practice  ;  the  oiig  by  producing  a  contraction  of  the  vessels,  the  other
by  soothing  or  lessening  irritability,  or  the  action  of  dilatation.

The  first,  or  contraction  of  the  vessels,  is  produced  in  two  ways  ;  one
by  producing  weakness  ;  for  weakness  excites  the  action  of  contraction
of  the  vessels  ;  the  other,  by  such  applications  as  induce  the  vessels  to
contract.

The  means  of  producing  absolute  weakness  are  bleeding  and  purging*
but  the  bleeding  also  produces  irritability  for  a  time,  and  is  often  attended
by  a  temporary  weakness  of  another  kind,  viz.  sickness.

The  inconvenience,  however,  arising  from  this  practice  is,  that  the
sound  parts  must  nearly,  in  the  same  proportion,  suffer  with  the.  infla-
med; for,  by  bringing  the  inflamed  part  upon  a  par  with  health,  the
sound  parts  must  be  brought  much  lower,  so  as  to  be  too  low.  The
soothing  may  be  produced  by  sedatives,  relaxants,  antistimulents,  etc.
such  as  many  sudorifics,  anodines,  etc.

The  first  method  will  have  the  greatest,  the  most  permanent,  and  the
most  lasting  effect ;  because,  if  it  has  any  effect  at  all,  the  diseased  action
cannot  be  soon  renewed.  The  second  will  act  as  an  auxilary  ;  for  so  far
as  irritation  is  a  cause,  this  will  also  lessen  it ;  and  the  two  should  go
hand  in  hand  ;  for  wherever  we  lessen  power,  we  should,  at  the  same
time,  lessen  the  disposition  for  action,  or  else  we  may  increase  the  dispo-


<■>  2  6  The  adhesive  inflammation.

tjj  j

sition  ;  but  neither  bleeding,  purging,  nor  sickness,  can  possibly  lessen
the  original  inflammatory  disposition ;  for  none  of  them  will  resolve  a
venereal  inflammation,  when  mercury  will  :  nor  will  they  resolve  the  ery-
sepelatous  inflammation,  although  that  inflammation  has  the  very  action
for  which  we  should  bleed  in  the  common  inflammation,  viz.  dilatation
of  vessels.  However,  these  means  may,  in  some  sense,  be  reckoned  direct ;
for  whatever  will  produce  the  action  of  contraction  in  the  vessels  is
counteracting  the  action  of  dilatation.  Lessening  the  power  of  action
belonging  to  any  disposition,  can  only  lessen  or  protract  the  effects,
which,  however,  will  be  of  singular  service,  as  less  mischief  will  be  done,
and  it  will  often  give  the  disposition  time  to  wear  itself  out.  Means  em-
ployed, on  this  principle,  should  be  such  as  give  the  feel  of  weakness  to
the  constitution  j  which  will  effect  the  part,  and  will  make  the  vessels
contract;  but  this  practice  should  not  be  carried  so  far  as  to  produce  the
sense  of  too  much  weakness,  for  then  the  heart  acts  with  great  force,
and  the  arteries  dilate.

Bleeding  then,  as  a  general  principle,  is  to  be  put  in  practice ;  but  this
must  be  done  with  judgment ;  for  I  conceive  the  effects  of  bleeding  to
be  very  extensive.  Besides  the  loss  of  any  quantity  of  blood  being  uni-
versally felt,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  lost,  an  universal  alarm  is
excited,  and  a  greater  contraction  of  the  vessels  ensues,  than  simply  in
proportion  to  this  quantity,  in  consequence  as  it  would  appear,  of  a  sym-
pathetic affection  with  the  part  bleeding.

Too  much  blood,  in  an  inflammation,  is  a  load  upon  the  actions  of
the  circulation.  Too  little,  produces  debility  and  irritability;  because,
there  is  a  loss  of  powers,  with  an  increased  action  to  keep  up,  which  is-
now  not  supported.  It  would  ecem  that  violent  actions  of  a  strong  arte-
rial system,  required  less  blood  than  even  the  natural  actions  -y  and  even
less  still  than  a  weak  or  irritable  system  :  from  whence  we  must  see,  that
bleeding  can  either  relieve  inflammatory  action,  or  increase  it,  and  there-
fore not  to  be  used  at  random.

As  many  patients  that  seem  to  require  bleeding  have  been  already  bled,
it  may  not  be  improper  to  inquire  how  they  bear,  or  are  effected  by  bleed-
ing -,  for,  certainly,  all  constitutions  (independent  of  every  other  circum-


The  adhesive  inflammation,  337

stance)  do  not  bear  this  evacuation  equally,  and  it  is  probable,  that  its
effects  on  inflammation  may  be  nearly  in  the  same  proportion;  if  so,  it
becomes  a  very  useful  caution ;  for  although  the  loss  of  blood  may,  as  a
general  principle,  be  set  down  as  a  weakener,  and  probably  the  greatest,
as  we  can  kill  by  such  means,  yet  the  loss  of  certain  quantities  in  many
constitutions  is  necessary  for  health  :  this  is  either  when  there  is  a  dispo-
sition to  make  too  much  blood,  or  a  constitution  that  cannot  bear  the
usual  quantity;  in  such,  when  known,  bleeding  with  freedom  is  certainly
necessary.  If  the  inflammation  is  known  to  be  attended  with  real  powers,
bleeding  is  absolutely  necessary,  in  such  quantity  as  to  take  off  from  the
force  of  the  circulation,  which  arises  from  too  much  blood  ;  or  if  that  is
not  sufficient,  then  as  much  as  will  cause  a  contraction  of  the  vessels ;
but  in  cases  of  too  great  an  action  of  weak  parts,  then  the  proper  quan-
tity to  be  taken,  is  no  more  than  may  assist  the  dilatation  of  the  ves-
sels, which  will  lessen  the  violence  of  motion  in  the  blood,  or  remove  the
sensation  in  the  part  inflamed,  of  having  too  much  to  do;  the  quantity,
therefore,  must  be  regulated  according  to  the  symptoms,  and  other  cir-
cumstances; for  instance,  according  to  the  visible  indications.

We  are  to  remark  here,  that  every  part  of  the  body,  under  inflamma-
tion, will  not  bear  bleeding  alike.  I  believe  that  the  constitution  bears
bleeding  best,  when  the  inflammation  is  in  parts  not  vital,  and  those
near  the  source  of  the  circulation:  whatever  disturbs  some  of  the  vital
parts,  depresses,  but  not  equally  in  all ;  and  in  them  it  becomes  more  ne-
cessary to  be  particular,  for  in  accidents  of  the  brain,  bleeding  freely,  even
so  as  to  produce  sickness  and  fainting,  is  necessary.  It  is  probable,  that
the  sickness  attending  such  accidents,  is  designed  to  lessen  the  influx  to  the
head,  and  occasion  the  vessels  of  the  brain  to  contract.

The  indications  for  bleeding  are  first,  according  to  the  violence  of  the
inflammation,  joined  with  the  strength  of  the  constitution,  which  will  in
general  point  out  the  kind  of  inflammation.  Secondly,  according  to  the
disposition  to  form  much  blood  :  thirdly,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
part,  whether  vital  or  not  :  fourthly,,  according  to  its  situation,  in  point
of  distance  from  the  heart :  fifthly,  according  to  the  effect  of  the  inflam-
mation on  the  constitution.

X  x


22$  'The  adhesive  inflammation.

With  regard  to  this  evacuation,  it  is  worthy  of  particular  consideration,
whether  or  not  in  all  cases,  where  it  can  be  put  in  practice,  bleeding  in
or  near  the  part  will  answer  better  than  taking  the  blood  from  the  gene-
ral habit ;  for  certainly  less  may  be  removed  in  this  way,  so  as  to  have
equal  effect  upon  the  part  inflamed,  (and  probably  upon  every  other  dis-
ease that  is  relieved  by  bleeding)  and  yet  affect  the  constitution  less ;  for
although,  in  many  cases,  the  general  habit  may  be  relieved  by  bleeding,
yet  the  part  affected,  where  it  can  act,  will  in  all  cases  require  this  evacu-
ation most,  and  local  bleeding  will  keep  nearer  these  proportions,  whereas
taking  blood  from  the  general  system  is  just  the  reverse.  That  local
bleeding  has  very  considerable  effects  on  the  inflamed  part,  is  proved  by
the  gout ;  for  applying  leeches  to  the  part  inflamed,  commonly  relieves
that  part,  and  often  almost  immediately*.  We  find  that  bleeding  by
leeches  alone  will  remove  a  tumor  in  the  breast,  having  all  the  appearances
of  a  schirrus,  which  cannot  be  considered  as  inflammatory  ;  its  powers,
therefore,  extend  beyond  inflammation.  We  find  relief  by  bleeding  in  the
temporal  artery,  or  jugular  vein,  for  complaints  in  the  brain  ;  or  cupping
and  bleeding  with  leeches,  on  or  near  the  part ;  as  applying  leeches  to  the
temples  in  inflammations  of  the  eye.

I  have  observed  that  there  is  something  similar  to  sympathetic  affection
in  bleeding.  I  conceive  that  all  the  sympathetic  powers,  the  universal,
continued,  and  contiguous,  may  be  brought  into  action  from  the  local  in-
fluence of  bleeding.  Thus,  bleeding  in  the  part  inflamed,  I  can  conceive,  doe8
more  than  simply  emptying  the  vessels  mechanically,  for  that  would  be  soon
restored  from  the  general  circulation  ;  but  it  acts  by  continued  sympathy,
viz.  the  vessels  of  the  part  being  opened,  they  contract  for  their  own  de-
fence, and  this  is  carried  further  among  the  vessels  of  the  part ;  so  that
bleeding  from  the  part  acts  in  two  ways,  viz.  mechanically,  by  relieving
the  vessels  of  some  blood,  so  as  allow  them  to  contract  in  proportion  as
the  load  is  taken  off  -y  and  also  to  excite  them  to  contraction,  in  order  to
prevent  the  effusion  of  blood.  I  suppose,  likewise,  that  contiguous  sym-
pathy comes  into  action ;  for  this  would  appear  from  practice  and  obser-

*  It  is  not  meant  here  to  recommend  bleeding  in  this  disease.


The  adhesive  inflammation,  339

vation  to  be  a  principle  in  bleeding ;  therefore,  in  inflammation  of  con-
tiguous parts,  it  is  proper  to  bleed  from  the  skin  opposite  to  them,  as
from  the  skin  of  the  abdomen,  in  complaints  of  the  liver,  stomach,  and
bowels;  and  likewise  from  the  loins  in  inflammatory  affections  of  the
kidneys.  In  affections  of  the  lungs,  bleeding  opposite  to  them  is  of  ser-
vice; but  in  such  cases,  it  is  not  clear  where  the  inflammation  is;  for
if  in  the  pleura,  then  it  does  not  act  upon  this  principle,  but  by  continued
sympathy:  bleeding  on  the  scalp  relieves  head-achs  ;  and  the  relief  given
to  the  testicle  by  bleeding  from  the  scrotum,  in  inflammation  of  that  body,
proves  the  principle.

Where  the  first  indication  for  bleeding  takes  place,  viz.  where  there  is
violent  inflammation,  with  strength  of  constitution,  bleeding  freely,  will
be  of  singular  service.  The  same  mode  of  practice  is  also  to  be  followed
under  the  circumstance  of  strength,  with  respect  to  the  second,  third,
fourth,  and  fifth;  but  each  will  not  require  the  same  quantity  to  be  taken
under  equal  strength  of  constitution,  as  will  be  taken  notice  of  when
treating  of  them  separately.  As  it  seldom  happens  that  bleeding  once
will  be  sufficient'  in  a  considerable  inflammation,  the  first,  or  preceding
blood  taken,  becomes  a  symptom  of  the  disease.  If  the  coagulating
lymph  is  long  in  coagulating,  so  that  the  globules  have  time  to  subside,
there  will  be  what  is  called  a  thick  buff;  and  if  its  surface  is  considerably
cupped,  then  future  bleedings  may  be  used  with  less  caution ;  because  such
appearance  indicates  strong  powers  of  coagulation,  which  always  shews
strength  in  the  solids  ;  but  if  the  blood  is  weak  in  its  powers  of  coagula-
tion, lies  flat  in  the  dish,  then  we  must  be  cautious  in  our  future  bleed-
ings; or  if  it  was  strong  at  first  in  its  powers  of  coagulation,  and  after
repeated  bleedings  becomes  weak,  then  we  must  not  pursue  this  further ;
but  in  some  cases  it  is  proper  to  pursue  it  to  this  point,  for  we  shall  some-
times find  that  the  inflammatory  symptoms  shall  not  cease  after  repeated
bleedings,  if  the  strength  continues ;  but  the  moment  a  degree  of  loos-
ness  is  produced  in  the  blood,  that  moment  will  the  inflammatory  action
cease.  The  following  case  is  a  strong  instance  of  this.  A  lady  had  a  vio-
lent cough,  tightness  in  respiration,  loss  of  appetite,  strong  sizy  blood,
and  the  symptoms  continued  to  the  sixth  bleeding,  when  the  blood  was


34©  The  adhesive  inflammation,

not  quite  so  slzy;  but  the  most  remarkable  change  was,  its  remaining  flat
on  the  surface.  Upon  this  bleeding,  all  the  symptoms  disappeared;  and
here,  although  the  blood  became  weak  in  its  power  of  coagulation,  yet  it
did  not  produce  irritability  in  the  constitution,  the  vessels  of  the  inflamed
parts  having  still  had  power  to  contract.  On  the  other  hand,  there  may
be  indications  for  bleeding  sparingly  :  first,  when  there  is  too  much  action,
with  weakened  powers  :  secondly,  when  there  is  a  disposition  to  form  but
little  blood :  thirdly,  when  the  part  affected  is  far  from  the  source  of  the
circulation.

From  the  above  three  dispositions  that  require  bleeding  sparingly,  or
with  caution,  I  may  observe,  that  it  will  most  probably  be  proper  in  all
such  cases  to  bleed  from,  or  as  near  the  part  affected  as  possible,  in  order
to  have  the  greatest  effect,  with  the  loss  of  the  least  quantity  of  blood ;
more  so  than  when  the  constitution  is  strong ;  because  the  constitution  in
such  cases  should  feel  the  loss  of  blood  as  little  as  possible ;  if  from  the
part,  leeches  will  answer  best,  because  commonly  little  irritation  follows
the  wound  of  a  leech*:  however,  this  can  only  be  put  in  practice  in  in-
flammations not  very  remote  from  the  surface.  But  in  many  cases  the
blood  cannot  be  taken  away  from  the  part  itself,  but  only  from  some
neighbouring  part,  so  as  to  affect  the  part  inflamed  :  thus,  we  bleed  in  the
temporal  artery  for  inflammation  of  the  eyes  ;  we  bleed  in  the  jugular
veins  for  inflammation  of  the  brain ;  and  also  in  the  temporal  artery,  to
lessen  the  column  of  blood  going  to  the  brain,  by  the  internal  carotids.
But  in  many  situations  it  will,  probably,  be  impossible  to  do  this,  with
any  hopes  of  success,  and  therefore  we  may  have  recourse  to  the  sympa-
thetic affections  before  described.

*  However,  this  is  not  always  the  case;  for  it  sometimes  happens  that  an  unkindly  inflam-
mation attends  the  wound,  though  not  extensive.  It  sometimes,  also,  happens  that  the  lym-
phatic glands  swell  in  consequence  of  their  bite;  but  these  so  rarely  occur,  and  are  of  such
little  consequence  when  they  do,  that  they  are  not  to  be  regarded.  From  thence  it  has  been
conceived,  that  there  was  something  poisonous  in  the  bite  of  a  leech ;  but  I  think  there  are
no  proofs  of  it :  however,  from  another  effect,  I  conceive  there  is  a  power  or  property  ap-
plied to  the  wound,  which  hinders  the  irritation  of  contraction  that  naturally  takes  place  in  a
wounded  vessel,  producing,  probably,  a  paralysis  for  a  time.


The  adhesive  Inflammation,  341

Too  much  action,  with  small  powers  may  often,  if  not  always,  be  classed
with  the  irritable  constitution,  and  bleeding  should  then  be  performed
with  very  great  caution :  one  case  out  of  many  I  shall  relate  as  an  instance
of  great  action  with  debility.  A  gentleman  had  one  of  the  most  violent
inflammations  I  ever  saw,  in  one  of  his  eyes,  attended  with  violent  pain  in
his  head,  the  blood  extremely  sizy,  all  of  which  denotes  great  action  of
parts  ;  yet  the  buff  of  the  blood  was  so  loose  when  coagulated,  that  it  could
hardly  bear  its  own  weight,  or  make  any  resistance  to  the  finger  when
pressed ;  and  although  he  was  bled  pretty  freely,  yet  he  never  found  any
relief  from  it.  This  blood  becoming  a  symptom,  both  of  the  constitution
and  disease,  manifestly  showed  weak  powers  from  its  looseness,  and  too
great  action  from  its  slowness  of  coagulation,  which  was  the  cause  of  the
buff.  '

The  following  case  is  another  strong  instance  of  great  action  in  a  weak,
irritable  habit.  A  lady  had  a  violent  inflammation  at  the  root  of  the
tongue,  so  as  to  form  a  considerable  suppuration  -}  with  a  pulse  of  one
hundred  and  twenty,  one  hundred  and  twenty-five,  and  often  one  hun-
dred and  thirty,  in  a  minute :  her  blood  was  extremely  sizy,  yet  she
received  but  little  benefit  from  the  first  bleeding,  although  the  blood
coagulated  pretty  firmly,  which  indicated  strength.  She  was  of  an  irrita-
ble constitution,  so  as  to  receive  less  benefit  from  bleeding  than  another  ;
and  when  bled  three  times,  the  blood  became  extremely  loose  in  its  tex-
ture, which  bark  removed,  as  well  as  the  other  symptoms.  Upon  leaving
off  the  bark,  the  symptoms  all  recurred,  and  when  she  was  bled  again
for  the  second  attack,  which  was  the  fourth  time  the  blood,  although  in-
flammatory, had  recovered  a  good  deal  of  its  proper  firmness  ;  but  in  the
second  bleeding,  for  this  second  attack,  it  was  less  so  ;  and  in  the  third  it
was  still  less.  Suspecting  that  bleeding  in  the  present  case  would  not
produce  resolution,  I  paid  particular  attention  to  the  pulse  at  the  time  of
bleeding,  and  found  that  in  this  last  bleeding  the  pulse  increased  in  its
frequency  even  in  the  time  of  bleeding  ;  and  within  a  few  minutes  after
the  bleeding  was  over,  it  had  increased  ten  strokes  in  the  minute*. These

*  This,  of  the  pulse  increafing  upon  bleeding,  is  not  always  to  be  set  down  as  a  sure  sign  of
irritation  being  an  effect  j  for  in  a  sluggish  pulse,  arising  from  too  much  blood,  the  increase


342  The  adhesive  inflammation,

bleedings  retarded  suppuration,  but  by  producing  irritability  they  could
not  effect  resolution.

Where  there  is  a  disposition  to  form  but  little  blood,  when  known,
bleeding  should  be  performed  with  great  caution.

When  the  inflammation  is  far  from  the  source  of  the  circulation,  the
same  precautions  are  necessary.  In  general  it  can  be  taken  away  from
the  part  in  such  cases.  But  these  are  only  so  many  facts,  that  require
peculiar  symptoms  to  ascertain  them.

The  common  indications  of  bleeding,  besides  inflammation,  are  too
often  very  little  to  be  relied  upon  ;  and  I  shall  consider  them  no  further
than  as  it  concerns  inflammation  ;  which  will  indeed  throw  light  on  other
cases.  The  pulse  is  the  great  indication  in  inflammation  ;  but  not  always
to  be  depended  upon.

In  inflammations  that  are  visible,  a  knowledge  of  the  kind  of  inflam-
mation is  in  some  degree  ascertained,  as  has  been  observed,  we  therefore
go  upon  surer  ground  in  our  indications  for  bleeding :  but  all  inflamma-
tions are  not  visible ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  have  some  other
criterion  :  however,  if  we  could  ascertain  the  pulse,  peculiar  to  such  and
such  appearances,  in  visible  inflammation,  and  that  was  universally  the
same  in  all  such  appearances,  we  might  then  suppose  that  we  had  got  a
true  indicative  criterion  for  our  guide,  and  therefore  apply  it  to  invisible
inflammation,  so  as  to  judge  of  the  inflammation  by  the  state  of  the
pulse ;  but  when  we  consider,  that  the  same  kind  of  inflammation  in
every  part  of  the  body  will  not  produce  the  same  kind  of  pulse,  but  very
different  kinds,  not  according  to  the  inflammation,  but  according  to  the
nature  of  the  parts  inflamed,  and  those  other  parts  also  not  visible,  we
lose  at  once  the  criterion  of  pulse  as  a  guide.  When  we  consider,  also,
that  there  shall  be  every  other  sign,  or  symptom  of  inflammation  in  some
viscus,  and  from  the  symptoms  the  viscus  shall  be  well  ascertained,  yet
the  pulse  shall  be  soft,  and  of  the  common  frequency  ;  and  upon  bleed-
ing, in  consequence  of  these  inflammatory  symptoms,  the  blood  shall  cor-
respond exactly  with  all  of  them,  except  the  pulse,  it  shall  be  sizy,  firm,

of  stroke,  and  freedom  given  to  the  circulation  is  salutary;  but  when  a  pulse  is  already  quick,
an  increase  must  arise  from  irritation.


The  adhesive  inflammation*  34 j

and  cup,  as  was  the  case  in  a  lady,  which  has  been  before  described,  we
shall  be  still  farther  convinced  that  the  pulse  is  a  very  inadequate  criterion.
If  a  pulse  be  hard,  pretty  full,  and  quick,  bleeding  appears  to  be  the  im-
mediate remedy,  for  hardness  rather  shews  strong  contractile  action  of  the
vessels  not  in  a  state  of  inflammation,  which  also  implies  strong  action  of
the  blood;  and  from  such  a  pulse,  a  sizy  blood  will  generally  be  found;
but  even  a  quick,  hard  pulse,  and  sizy  blood,  are  not  always  to  be  depend-
ed upon  as  sure  indications  of  bleeding  being  the  proper  method  of  the  re-
solution of  inflammations  ;  more  must  be  taken  into  the  account.

The  kind  of  blood  is  of  great  Consequence  to  be  known  ;  for  although  it
should  prove  sizy,  yet  if  it  lies  squat  in  the  bason,  and  is  not  firm  in  tex-
ture, and  if  the  symptoms,  at  the  same  time,  are  very  violent,  bleeding
must  be  performed  very  sparingly,  if  at  all ;  for  I  suspect  that  under  such  a
state  of  blood,  if  the  symptoms  continue,  bleeding  is  not  the  proper  mode
of  treatment.  The  cases  of  this  kind,  which  have  been  related,  are
strong  proofs  of  this.

As  the  pulse,  abstracted  from  all  other  considerations,  is  not  an  absolute
criterion  to  go  by,  and  as  sizy  blood,  and  a  strong  coagulum  are  after
proofs,  let  us  see  if  there  are  any  collateral  circumftances  that  can  throw '
some  light  on  this  subject,  so  as  to  allow  us  to  judge,  a  priori,  whether  it
be  right  to  bleed  or  not,  where  the  pulse  does  not  of  itself  indicate  it.
Let  us  remember,  that  in  treating  of  inflammation  of  different  parts,  I
took  notice  of  the  pulse  peculiar  to  each  part,  which  I  may  now  be
allowed  to  repeat.  First,  I  observed  that  an  inflammation  in  parts  not
vital,  or  such  as  the  stomach  did  not  sympathize  with,  if  there  were  great
powers,  and  the  constitution  not  very  irritable,  the  pulse  was  full,  frequent,
and  hard.  Secondly,  that  on  the  contrary,  in  inflammations  of  the  same
parts,  if  the  constitution  was  weak,  irritable,  etc.  that  then  the  pulse  was
small,  frequent,  and  hard,  although  perhaps  not  so  much  so  as  when  in
vital  parts.  Thirdly,  that  when  the  inflammation  is  in  a  vital  part,  such
as  the  stomach,  intestines,  or  such  as  the  stomach  readily  sympathizes  with,
then  the  pulse  is  quick,  small,  and  hard,  similar  to  the  above.  Now,  in
the  first  stated  positions  we  have  some  guide,  for  in  the  first  of  these,  viz.
where  the  pulse  is  strong,  etc.  there  bleeding  is  most  probably  absolutely


3^4  ^t'  adhesive  inflammation.

necessary,  and  the  symptoms,  with  the  state  of  blood  joined,  will  determine
better  the  future  conduct ;  but  in  the  second,  where  the  pulse  is  small,
very  frequent,  and  hard,  bleeding  should  be  performed  with  great  caution  ;
yet  in  inflammations  of  the  second  stated  parts,  the  constitution  seems  to
be  more  irritable,  giving  more  the  signs  of  weakness,  as  if  less  in  the
power  of  the  constitution  to  manage.

Bleeding,  restricted  to  two  or  three  ounces,  can  do  no  harm,  by  way  of
trial ;  and,  as  in  the  first  case,  the  symptoms  and  blood  are  to  determine  the
future  repetition  ;  but  in  the  third,  or  vital  parts,  viz.  either  the  stomach,
or  such  as  the  stomach  sympathizes  with,  we  are  yet,  I  am  afraid,  left  in
the  dark  respecting  the  pulse.  Perhaps,  bleeding  at  first  with  caution,
and  judging  from  the  blood  and  its  effects  upon  the  other  symptoms  is
the  only  criterion  we  can  go  by.

The  kind  of  constitution  will  make  a  material  difference,  whether
robust,  or  delicate.

The  mode  of  life  will  also  make  a  material  difference,  whether  accus-
tomed to  considerable  exercise,  and  can  bear  it  with  ease :  constitutions
so  habituated  will  bear  bleeding  freely,  but  those  with  contrary  habits  will
not.  The  sex  will  likewise  make  a  difference,  although  the  mode  of  life
will  increase  that  difference ;  therefore  men  will  bear  bleeding  better  than
women :  even  age  makes  a  material  difference,  the  young  being  able  to  lose
more  blood  than  the  old;  for  the  vessels  of  the  old  are  not  able  to  adapt
themselves  so  readily  to  the  decreased  quantity;  it  even  should  not  be  taken
away  so  quickly;  and  probably  the  constitution  may,  in  some  degree,  have
lost  the  habit  of  making  blood,  since  it  has  lost  the  necessity.

The  urine  will  throw  some  light  on  the  disease;  if  high  coloured,  and
not  much  in  quantity,  it  may  be  presumed,  with  the  other  symptoms,  that
bleeding  will  be  of  singular  service;  but  if  pale,  and  a  good  deal  of  it,  al-
though the  other  indications  are  in  favor  of  bleeding,  yet  it  may  be  neces-
sary to  do  it  with  caution.

However,  bleeding  should  in  all  cases  be  performed  with  great  caution,
more  particularly  at  first;  and  no  more  taken  then  appears  to  be  really
necessary;  it  should  only  be  done  to  ease  the  constitution,  or  the  part,  and
rather  lower  it  where  the  constitution  can  bear  it ;  but  if  the  constitution


The  adhesive  inflammation.  345

is  already  below  or  brought  below  a  certain  point,  or  gives  the  signs  of  it
from  the  situation  of  the  disease,  then  an  irritable  habit  takes  place,  which
is  an  increased  disposition  to  act  without  the  power  to  act  with.  This,
of  itself,  becomes  a  cause  of  the  continuance  of  the  original  disposition,
and  therefore  will  admit  neither  of  resolution,  nor  suppuration,  but  continue
in  a  state  of  inflammation;  which  is  a  much  worse  disease,  than  the
former.

Upon  any  other  principle  than  those  abovementioned,  I  cannot  see-
why  bleeding  should  have  such  effects  in  inflammation  as  it  sometimes
has.  If  considered  in  a  mechanical  light,  as  simply  lessening  the  quan-
tity of  blood,  it  cannot  account  for  it ;  because  the  removal  of  any  na-
tural mechanical  power,  can  never  remove  a  cause  which  neither  took
its  rise  from,  nor  is  supported  by  it :  however,  in  this  light  it  may  be  of
some  service ;  because,  all  the  actions  relative  to  the  blood's  motion  will
be  performed  with  more  ease  to  the  solids,  when  the  quantity  is  well  pro-
portioned.

It  is  probably  from  that  connexion  between  the  solids  and  fluids,  that
the  constitution,  or  a  part,  is  in  a  state  of  perfect  quietude,  or  health,  in
which  we  find  that  the  fluids  are,  and  ought  to  be,  in  a  large  quantity;
but  in  a  state  of  inflammation,  or  increased  powers  and  actions,  those
proportions  do  not  correspond,  at  least  in  the  parts  inflamed ;  and  by
producing  the  equilibrium  between  the  two,  suitable  to  such  a  state,  the
body  becomes  so  far  as  this  one  circumstance  can  affect  it,  in  a  state  of
health ;  and  this  in  many  cases  will  cast  the  balance  in  favour  of  health :
it  is  not,  however,  sufficient  to  produce  this  effect  in  all  inflamma-
tions.

How  far  taking  the  blood  from  parts  peculiarly  situated  with  respect  to
the  parts  inflamed,  is  more  efficacious,  I  believe  is  not  yet  determined  ;  as
bleeding  in  the  left  side  for  an  inflammation  in  the  right,  upon  the  sup-
posed principle  of  derivation,  which  might  be  classed  with  remote  sym-
pathy ;  but  so  far  as  the  loss  of  the  blood  acts  mechanically,  viz.  so  far
as  it  simply  empties  the  vessels,  it  certainly  can  have  no  more  effect  than
jf  taken  in  any  other  way  ; nor  can  it  affect  the  living  principle,  either

Yy


346  The  adhesive  inflammation.

universally,  or  locally,  more  in  this  mode  than  in  any  other ;  but  how  far
it  can  affect  the  sympathizing  principle,  I  do  not  know.

Bleeding  is  often  performed  from  no  constitutional  indication,  but  only
as  a  preventive,  arising  from  experience;  such  as  in  consequence  of  con-
siderable accidents,  as  blows  on  the  head,  fractured  bones,  etc.  but  this
is  not  to  the  present  purpose.


XI. THE  USE  OF  MEDICINES  INTERNALLY,  AND  OF LOCAL APPLI-
CATIONS IN  INFLAMMATION.

Every  thing  given  to  the  body,  or  applied  to  the  part  inflamed,  that
can  abate  inflammation,  or  its  effects  in  the  constitution,  may  be  called
medicine ;  such,  therefore,  divide  themselves  into  constitutional,  and
local :  the  first  will  be  internal,  the  second  external ;  but  whichsoever
way  they  are  applied,  they  that  tend  to  lessen  inflammation,  have  their
effects  local ;  for  mercury,  although  given  internally,  for  a  venereal  ulcer
in  the  throat,  yet  acts  locally  on  the  disease  ;  but  those  that  tend  to  re-
move constitutional  affections,  have  their  effects  constitutional.

The  internal  medicines  generally  ordered  for  the  resolution  of  inflam-
mation, are  such  as  tend  to  have  similar  effects  to  that  which  is  produced
by  bleeding ;  namely,  lowering  the  constitution,  or  the  action  of  the
parts;  and  this  has  usually  been  performed  principally  by  purges ;  and  the
medicines  that  were  given  to  remove,  or  lessen  the  effects  of  inflamma-
tion on  the  constitution,  have  been  such  as  generally  tend  to  lessen  fever,
or  the  effects  that  the  inflammation  has  upon  the  constitution.

Purges  were  generally  given  in  cases  of  inflammation,  (probably  at  first
from  the  idea  of  humors  to  be  discharged)  and  such  practice  will  answer
best  where  bleeding  succeeds  ;  because  it  will  lower  the  body  to  a  more
natural  standard,  and  of  course  the  inflamed  part,  as  a  part  of  that  con-
stitution j  but  here  the  same  cautions  are  necessary  that  were  given  upon
bleeding,  because  nothing  debilitates  so  much  as  purging,  when  carried
beyond  a  certain  point.  One  purging  stool  shall  even  kill,  where  the
constitution  is  very  much  reduced,  as  in  many  dropsies : therefore,  keep-


The  adhesive  inflammation.  347;

ing  the  body  simply  open,  is  all  that  should  be  done.  However,  al-
though purging  lowers  considerably,  yet  its  effect  is  not  so  permanent  as
that  of  bleeding  :  it  rather  lowers  action,  without  diminishing  strength  ;
for  if  a  person  was  to  feel  the  loss  of  blood  equal  to  a  purge,  that  sen-
sation would  be  more  lasting.

Many  constitutions  rather  acquire  strength  upon  being  gently  purged  ;
particularly  such  as  have  been  living  above  par ;  but  such  strength  as  is
acquired  by  putting  the  body  in  good  order,  I  should  suppose  is  not  ini-
mical to  inflammation.

In  irritable  habits,  where  the  inflammation  becomes  more  diffused,
greater  caution  is  necessary,  with  regard  to  purging,  as  well  as  bleeding;  for
1  observed  on  the  subject  of  bleeding,  that  in  such  constitutions,  no  more
blood  should  be  taken  than  would  relieve  the  constitution,  as  it  were  me-
chanically, but  not  such  a  quantity  as  to  have  a  tendency  towards  lower-
ing or  weakening  that  constitution;  for  in  such  cases  the  action  is  greater
than  the  strength;  and  whenever  the  disposition  between  these  two  is  of
this  kind,  we  cannot  expect  any  thing  salutary  from  this  mode  of  treat-
ment, and  therefore  should  not  increase  it.  In  such  cases,  the  very  reverse
of  the  former  method  should  often  be  practised;  whatever  has  a  tendency
to  raise  the  constitution  above  irritability,  should  be  given  ;  such  as  bark,
etc.  The  object  of  this  last  practice  consists  in  bringing  the  strength  of
the  constitution,  and  part,  as  near  upon  a  par  with  the  action  as  possible,
by  which  means  a  kindly  resolution,  or  suppuration,  may  take  place,  ac-
cording as  the  parts  inflamed  are  capable  of  acting.

Medicines,  which  have  the  power  of  producing  sickness,  lessen  the  ac-
tion, and  even  the  general  powers  of  life,  for  a  time,  in  consequence  of
every  part  of  the  body  sympathizing  with  the  stomach,  and  their  effects
are  pretty  quick.

Sickness  lowers  the  pulse ;  makes  the  smaller  vessels  contract,  and
rather  disposes  the  skin  for  perspiration,  but  not  of  the  active  or  warm
kind;  but  I  believe  it  should  proceed  no  farther  than  sickness;  for  the
act  of  vomiting  is  rather  a  counteraction  to  that  effect,  and  produces  its
effects  from  another  cause,  and  of  course  of  another  kind,  which  I  be-
lieve rather  rouse:  it  is  probably  an  action  arising  from  the  feel  of  weak-


34S  The  adhesive  inflammation*

ness,  and  intended  to  relieve  the  person  from  that  weakness.  It  is  similar
to  the  hot  fit  of  an  ague  ;  a  counteraction  to  the  cold  one.  There  are
few  so  weak,  but  they  will  bear  vomiting,  but  cannot  bear  sickness  long.

If  we  had  medicines,  which,  when  given  internally,  could  be  taken  in-
to the  constitution,  and  were  endowed  with  a  power  of  making  the  vessels
contract,  such,  I  apprehend,  would  be  proper  medicines.  Bark  has  cer-
tainly this  property,  and  is  of  singular  service,  I  believe,  in  every  inflam-
mation attended  with  weakness,  and  therefore,  I  conceive,  should  be  oftener
given  than  is  commonly  done;  but  it  is  supposed  to  give  strength  which
would  not  accord  with  inflammations  attended  with  too  much  strength
and  considerable  irritation.

Preparations  of  lead,  given  in  very  small  doses,  might  be  given  with
success,  in  cases  attended  with  great  strength.

Applications  to  the  body  to  cure  or  resolve  inflammations  are,  with  re-
gard to  their  mode  of  application,  of  two  kinds ;  one  is  applied  to  the
part  inflamed,  the  other  to  some  distant  part :  the  first  may  be  called  local
or  absolute,  respecting  the  part  itself;  the  second,  relative;  but  even  the
first  may  be  considered  as  having  a  relative  effect  in  one  of  its  modes  of
action,  viz.  that  called  repulsion,  from  which  local  applications  have  by
some  been  objected  to,  and  it  is  principally  local  applications  that  can  re-
pel, although  not  literally.

The  first,  or  absolute  effects  of  medicine,  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds,
viz.  one,  the  simple  cure  of  the  part;  the  second,  producing  an  irritation
of  another  kind  in  the  part;  both,  however,  act  locally,  and  their  ulti-
mate effect  is  local.  Local  applications  to  a  part,  where  that  application
possesses  really  the  powers  of  resolution,  must  be  much  more  efficacious
than  any  of  the  other  modes  of  resolution ;  for  instance,  mercury  has  much
greater  powers  when  applied  immediately  to  the  veneral  complaint,  than
when  applied  to  the  nearest  surface;  where,  however,  we  have  not  medi-
cines that  can  resolve  inflammation  by  application,  then  of  course  the
other  method  is  the  most  efficacious,  but  whether  we  have  external  or  lo-
cal applications  which  have  really  a  tendency  to  lessen  the  inflammatory
disposition,  is  not  well  ascertained. I  doubt  our  being  in  possession  of


The  adhesive  inflammation*  '349

many  that  can  remove  the  immediate  cause.  Such  would  of  course  re-
move the  action,  or  if  not  wholly,  would  at  least  lessen  it,  and  allow  the
inflammation  to  go  off.

But  most  of  our  powers  in  this  way  appear  to  be  of  the  soothing  kind,
which,  therefore,  lessen  the  action,  although  the  cause  may  still  exist,  and
hence  the  effects  are  also  lessened.  This  either  produces  a  termination  of
the  inflammation,  or  it  is  protracted,  the  cause  lessens,  and  the  inflamma-
tion wears  itself  out.

As  inflammation  has  too  much  action,  which  action  gives  the  idea  of
strength,  such  applications  as  weaken  have  been  recommended,  and  cold
is  one  of  them.  Cold,  according  to  its  degrees,  produces  two  very  different
effects,  one  is  the  exciting  of  action  without  lessening  the  powers,  the  other
is  absolutely  debilitating,  while  at  the  same  time  it  excites  action,  if  carried
too  far ;  in  the  first,  it  becomes  like  suitable  exercise  to  the  vascular  sys-»
tern,  as  bodily  exercise  is  to  the  muscles,  increasing  strength ;  but  when
carried  or  continued  beyond  this  point,  it  lessens  the  powers,  and  becomes  a
weakener,  calling  up  the  action  of  resistance  after  the  powers  are  lessened;
therefore  cold  should  not  be  indiscriminately  used,  and  should  be  well  pro-
portioned to  the  powers.

Cold  produces  the  action  of  contraction  in  the  vessels,  which  is  an  action
of  weakness.  A  degree  of  cold  suddenly  applied,  which  hardly  produces
more  than  the  sense  of  cold,  excites  action  after  the  immediate  effect  is
over,  which  is  the  action  of  dilatation,  and  which  is  the  effect  of  the
cold-bath  when  it  agrees;  and  as  cold  produces  weakness  in  proportion  to
its  degree,  its  application  should  not  be  carried  too  far,  for  then  it  produces
a  much  worse  disease,  irratability ;  or  over  action  to  the  strength  of  the
parts,  and  then  indolence  too  often  commences.  Cold  might  be  supposed
to  act  on  an  inflamed  part,  similar  to  its  action  on  a  frozen  part,  restrain-
ing action,  keeping  it  within  the  strength  of  the  part  in  the  one  case,  so  as
not  to  allow  death  to  take  place  from  over  action ;  and  in  the  other,  to
keep  it  within  bounds*.

*  As  cold  can  be  applied  upon  two  very  different  principles,  it  is  necessary  to  mention  which
is  here  meant.  When  cold  is  applied  either  within  the  powers  of  resistance  of  the  part,  to
excite  heat,  or  only  for  so  short  a  time  as  to  give  the  stimulus  of  cold,  then  a  re-action


•?  co  tfhe  adhesive  inflammation.

Lead  is  also  supposed  to  have  considerable  effects  in  this  way ;  but  I
believe  much  more  is  ascribed  to  it  than  it  deserves.

The  property  of  lead  appears  to  be  that  oflessening  the  powers  and  not
the  action,  therefore  should  never  be  used  but  when  the  powers  are  too
strong,  and  acting  with  too  much  violence :  however,  lead  certainly  has
the  power  of  producing  the  contraction  of  the  vessels,  and  therefore  where
there  is  great  strength,  lead  is  certainly  a  powerful  application.

Applications  which  can  weaken  should  never  be  applied  to  an  irritable
inflammation,  especially  if  the  irritability  arises  from  weakness ;  I  am
certain  I  have  seen  lead  increase  such  inflammations,  particularly  in  many
inflammations  of  the  eyes  and  eyelids;  and  I  believe  it  is  a  bad  application
in  all  scrofulous  cases ;  in  such  cases  the  parts  should  be  ftrengthened
without  producing  action.

Warmth,  more  especially  when  joined  with  moiflure,  called  fomenta-
tion, is  commonly  had  recourse  to ;  but  I  am  certain  that  warmth  when
as  much  as  the  sensative  principle'can  bear,  excites  action;  but  whether  it
is  the  action  of  inflammation,  or  the  action  of  the  contraction  of  the  ves-
sels, I  cannot  determine  ;  we  see  that  in  many  cases  they  cannot  bear  it,
and  therefore  might  be  supposed  to  increase  the  action  of  dilatation,  and
do  hurt ;  but  if  that  pain  arises  from  the  contraction  of  the  inflamed  ves-
sels, then  it  is  doing  good,  but  this  I  doubt,  because  I  rather  conceive
the  action  of  contraction  would  give  ease.

Acids  have  certainly  a  sedative  power,  as  also  alcohel,  and  I  believe
many  of  the  neutral  salts.

I  believe  it  is  not  known  that  we  have  the  power  of  adding  strength  to
a  part  by  local  application ;  that,  in  general,  I  believe  must  arise  from  the
constitution  ;  for  although  we  have  the  power  of  giving  action,  yet  this
does  not  imply  strength.

takes  place,  and  warmth  is  the  consequence;  but  if  cold  is  applied  beyond  the  powers  of  re-
siftance,  then  a  contraction  of  the  vessels  takes  place,  and  that  contraction  is  in  some  degree
permanent ;  but  this  must  be  done  with  caution,  for  if  continued  too  long,  it  will  produce
debility,  and  action  will  be  excited  which  will  be  irritable.  In  the  present,  the  application  of
cold  should  only  be  sufficient  to  excite  the  contraction  of  the  vessels,  and  that  not  contained
too  long,  for  reasons  above  assigned.


T/je  adhesive  inflammation.  351

Many  local  applications  are  recommended  to  us,  respecting  many  of
which  I  have  my  doubts.

The  mods  of  cure  by  an  irritation  different  from  the  disease,  appears  to
increase  the  disease,  but  by  destroying  the  firir,  mode  of  action  it  produces
another  disease,  viz.  one  according  to  the  mode  of  irritation  of  the  ap-
plication, and  which  more  eafily  admits  of  a  cure  than  the  first.  I  be-
lieve, however,  that  this  takes  place  principally  in  specific  diseases,  and
not  so  readily  in  common  inflammation ;  for  a  common  inflammation  most
probably  would  be  increased  by  it.  I  have  known  specific  inflammations
much  more  easily  cured  by  their  specific  medicine,  than  the  common
inflammation  of  the  same  constitution,  viz.  I  have  seen  a  gonorrhoea  and
a  chancre  cured  much  more  easily  in  some  constitutions,  than  an  in-
flammation from  an  accident,  and  oftener  than  once  or  twice  in  the  same
person.  However,  this  mode  will  not  do  in  all  specific  diseases,  for  the
scorfula  will  not  change  its  nature  by  it,  nor  will  the  irritable,  although
specific.  The  venereal  gonorrhoea  (if  parts  are  very  irritable)  is  an  in-
stance of  this,  for  irritating  injections  increase  it;  still  we  have  many  cu-
taneous inflammations  cured  in  this  way;  for  a  pretty  strong  solution  of  cor-
rosive sublimate  will  remove  an  inflammation  of  the  skin.  The  unguen-
tum  citrinum  mixed  with  any  common  ointment,  cures  many  inflamma-
tions of  the  eyelids  ;  yet  I  believe  that  artificial  irritations  are  similar  to
one  another ;  and  I  do  not  know  if  there  be  any  difference  between  them,
although  I  can  conceive  one  may  agree  better  with  some  constitutions
than  others.  However,  these  local  or  immediate  applications  can  only  be
such  as  come  in  contact  with  the  disease,  which  always  must  be  some  ex-
posed surface,  as  when  the  skin  of  the  eyelids,  tonsils,  etc.  are  inflamed  ;
but  even  there,  some  part  must  be  affected  by  continued  sympathy,  if  they
produce  a  cure,  as  the  inflammation  generally  goes  beyond  the  surface  of
immediate  contact.

That  inflammation  which  admits  of  repulsion,  although  by  local  means,
might  be  considered  here  but  from  its  effects  and  connexion  with  the
constitution,  it  comes  in  more  properly  with  the  several  relations,  under
which  I  shall  consider  it.


3^2  The  adhesive  inflammation.

XII.  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  REPULSION,  SYMPATHY,  DERIVA-
TION, REVULSION,  AND  TRANSLATION.

These  terms  are  meant  to  be  expressive  of  a  change  in  the  situation  of
diseased  actions  in  the  body,  and  they  are  so  named  according  to  the  im-
mediate cause;  for  any  one  disease  may  admit  of  any  of  these  modes  equal-
ly j  that  is,  a  disease  which  admits  of  being  repelled,  may  admit  of  being
cured  by  sympathy,  which  probably includes  derivation,  repulsion,  and
translation. That  such  a  principle  or  principles  exist,  is,  I  think,  evident ;
but  the  precise  mode  of  action  is,  I  believe,  not  known  ;  that  is,  it  is  not
known  what  part  of  the  body  more  readily  accepts  of  the  action  of  another  j
if  there  are  such  parts,  they  might  be  called  correspondent  parts,  whether
the  action  changes  its  place  from  repulsion,  sympathy,  derivation,  or  trans-
lation. In  derivation  and  repulsion,  whether  one  mode  of  irritation  is  better
than  another,  to  invite  or  divert  the  action,  and  whether  parts  of  a  pecu-
liar action  do  not  require  a  peculiar  irritation  to  divert  them ; to  all
this  we  are  likewise  totally  strangers.

It  is  not  to  my  present  purpose  to  go  into  the  different  effects  of  this
principle  ;  although  I  must  own  it  might  be  as  useful  a  part  of  the  heal-
ing art  as  any  ;  and  even  more,  for  it  is  probably  the  least  known,  as  being
the  least  intelligible,  and  therefore  the  more  use  may  be  derived  from  its
investigation.

The  operations  denominated  by  these  terms,  so  far  as  they  exist,  appear
all  to  belong  to  the  same  principle  in  the  animal  ceconomy,  for  they  all
consist  either  in  a  change  of  the  situation  of  a  disease  or  its  action  j  a
change  of  the  situation,  as  in  the  gout,  a  change  of  the  action,  as  a  swel-
ling of  the  testicles  in  the  stopping  of  a  gonorrhoea. This  last  is  not  pro-
perly a  change  of  the  situation  of  the  disease,  but  only  of  the  general  in-
flammatory action  without  the  specific  action  j  these  principles  can  only
produce  a  change  in  the  seat  of  action,  not  in  any  of  the  consequences  of
disease  j  they  have  in  some  instances  a  connexion  with  the  natural  ope-
rations of  the  body,  as  it  were,  interfering  with  them  ;  and  when  that  is
the  case,  they  in  general  must  produce  disease  of  some  kind. Thus,  the
stopping  of  the  menses,  a  local  natural  action,  arising  from  the  constitu-


The  adhesive  inflammation.  353

tion,  which  may  be  effected  by  local  applications,  called  repelling,  by  a
derangement  of  the  constitution,  and  by  many  consequences  which  depend
on  a  deranged  constitution  simply,  or  it  may  be  drawn  off  by  a  derange-
ment of  the  constitution,  which  is  a  kind  of  derivation  or  revultion.  We
find  that  local  applications  derange  also  other  parts,  which  have  no  visi-
ble effect  upon  the  part  of  application  as  the  above,  nor  any  visible  con-
nexion with  the  parts  which  assume  the  action.  Thus  cold,  especially
if  wet  be  applied  to  the  feet,  will  bring  on  complaints  in  the  stomach
and  bowels,  by  sympathy ;  and  the  same  mode  of  application  of  cold,  if
local,  will  produce  a  local  complaint  ,•  as  cold  air  blowing  on  a  part
will  bring  on  rheumatism.

These  changes  were  all  supposed  formerly  to  be  of  more  consequence
than  I  apprehend  they  really  are ;  for  they  are  only  the  change  of  situation
of  disease.  They  were  introduced  into  the  ceconomy  of  disease  from  the
idea  of  humors.  Repellents  were  such  applications  as  drove  the  hu-
mors out  of  a  part,  which  would  fall  on  some  other  ;  sympathy  con-
sisted in  another  part  taking  them  up  5  derivation  was  a  drawing  off,  or
inviting  the  humors  ;  revulsion  was  the  same,  and  translation  was  the
moving  of  humors  from  one  part  to  another.  Thus  we  have  those  dif-
ferent terms  applied  to  that  connexion  of  parts,  by  which  one  part  being
affected,  some  other  is  affected  or  relieved ;  or,  as  in  translation,  some
other  part  takes  up  the  disease  as  it  were  voluntarily,  as  is  often  the  case
in  the  gout.  All  of  these  produce  one  of  the  symptoms  of  a  disease,
viz.  sensation  and  inflammation;  but  I  believe  seldom  or  ever  real  diseased
structures.  This'  agrees  with  what  was  formerly  observed,  that  local  in-
flammations, depending  on  the  constitution,  seldom  or  ever  suppurate.

I  believe  that  these  powers  have  greater  effects  in  diseases,  depending  on,
or  producing  action  and  sensation,  which  are  called  nervous,  than  on  those
producing  an  alteration  in  the  structure  of  parts.

Thus,  we  have  the  cramp  in  the  leg  cured  by  a  gentle  irritation  round
the  lower  part  of  the  thigh,  such  as  a  garter,  which  may  be  said  to  ariss
from  derivation,  or  sympathy.

I  have  known  in  a  nervous  girl,  a  pain  in  one  arm  cured  by  rubbing
the  other,

Z  z


354  T^be  adhesive  inflammation.

These  cures  by  derivation,  repulsion,  translation,  etc.  do  not  deserve  that
name,  although  the  patients  are  cured  of  the  original  disease,  as  in  many
cases  there  is  as  large  a  quantity  somewhere  else  in  the  body  uncured ;
for  example,  in  those  cases  where  the  cure  is  from  some  local  inflamma-
tion being  produced,  and  perhaps  more  violent  than  the  first  j  but  in
other  cases  where  the  cure  arises  only  from  an  action  in  a  part  without  a
diseased  alteration  of  structure,  then  the  cure,  in  such  cases,  is  performed
without  any  other  disease  having  been  produced;  such  as  sickness  or  vo-
miting, curing  a  disease  of  the  testicles.

I  have  already  observed  that  local  applications  were  principally  supposed
to  repel,  by  the  first  or  second  mode  of  action ;  yet  internal  medicines  hav-
ing a  specific,  or  what  might  be  called  a  local  action,  although  given  inter-
nally, may  repel  by  stopping  the  diseased  action  in  the  part  which  it
chiefly  affects,  such  as  mercury  falling  on  the  mouth,  might  repel  a  dis-
ease from  the  mouth.  Hemlock  might  do  the  same,  with  regard  to  the
head;  or  turpentine  with  regard  to  the  urethra.  In  the  last,  we  often  find  by
taking  balsams,  that  by  stopping  the  discharge,  a  swelling  of  the  testicles
comes  on,  or  an  irritable  bladder.  As  repulsion  in  this  way  is  not  so  evi-
dent, it  is  less  noticed.  The  uncertainty  in  the  power  of  medicines,  respect-
ing repulsion,  has  led  surgeons  into  more  errors  than  any  other  principle  in
the  animal  ceconomy,  with  regard  to  diseases.  It  has  prevented  their  act-
ing in  many  cases,  where  they  might  have  done  it  with  safety  and  effect.
A  stronger  instance  cannot  be  given  than  in  that  species  of  the  venereal  dis-
ease, called  a  gonorrhoea,  which  they  did  not  venture  to  cure  by  local  ap-
plications, for  fear  of  driving  it  into  the  constitution,  and  producing  a
pox;  but  they  did  not  consider  that  a  gonorrhoea  did  not  arise  from  the
constitution,  but  may  be  said  to  arise  from  accident,  or  at  least  is  entirely
local,  and  therefore  no  repulsion  could  take  place.  The  idea  of  repelling
was  first  introduced  when  local  diseases  were  supposed  to  arise  from  a  de-
posit or  derivation  of  humors  to  a  part,  and  is  still  retained  by  those  wIiq
cannot  or  will  not  allow  themselves  to  think  better;  yet  still  the  term
might  be  applied  to  diseased  action,  for  the  removal  of  many  diseased


The  adhesive  inflammation*  355

actions  from  a  part  which  fall  on  some  other  part,  is  certainly  the  repelling
of  that  diseased  action  ;  but  since  it  is  not  subdued,  but  only  driven
from  the  part,  as  is  often  the  case  with  the  gout,  no  cure  is  performed  by
this  means.

Both  or  either  of  the  two  local  methods  of  removing  disease,  just  now
mentioned,  viz.  whether  by  simply  curing  the  disease,  or  by  destroying  the
diseased  action,  in  consequence  of  exciting  an  action  of  another  kind,  may
produce  the  effect  called  repulsion  ;  but  the  former,  I  believe,  can  only
take  place  in  inflammations  arising  from  the  constitution,  and  which  being
prevented  from  settling  in  this  part,  return  upon  the  constitution  again,
and  often  fall  upon  some  other  part,  viz.  one  next  in  order  of  susceptibility
for  such  inflammation,  as  is  often  the  case  in  the  gout,  and  in  many  other
diseases  beside  inflammation,  as  in  many  nervous  complaints.  St.  Vitus"
dance  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  it;  but  in  this  case  it  is  not  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  cure  of  the  disease,  but  only  as  a  suspension  of  its  action  in
this  part.

I  could  conceive  it  possible  that  the  second  mode  of  local  cure,  which
is  by  producing  an  irritation  of  another  kind,  might  not  repel ;  although
it  cured  the  first  or  local  complaint,  because  there  is  in  such  modes  of  cure
still  a  larger  quantity  of  inflammation  in  the  part  than  was  produced  by
the  disease  (although  of  another  kind);  but  as  the  idea  of  repelling  is  to  have
a  disease  somewhere,  although  not  in  the  same  place,  keeping  it  in  the
present  situation  may  be  as  proper,  if  not  more  so,  than  in  any  other  it
might  go  to.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  constitution  requires  to  have
a  local  complaint  arising  from  itself,  which,  as  it  were,  is  drawing  off,
or  relieving  this  constitutional,  disposition,  then  curing  the  one  already
formed,  by  producing  another  in  the  same  part,  can  be  of  no  service;  for
if  the  artificial  disease  is  not  of  the  same  nature  with  the  constitutional  one,
(which  it  cannot  be)  if  it  destroys  the  other,  then  it  cannot  act  as  a  substitute
for  the  other.  We  may  observe  that  by  producing  an  irritation  of  another
kind  in  the  gout,  we  may  destroy  the  gouty  inflammation  in  the  part,  but
cannot  always  clear  the  constitution  of  it;  there  is,  therefore,  no  benefit
arising  from  such  practice  in  these  cases.

The  repelling  powers  which  act  from  applications  being  made  to  the


356  The  adhesive  inflammation*

parts  immediately  affected,  or  by  the  change  of  one  disease  into  another,
become  the  most  difficult  of  any  to  be  ascertained  -,  because  it  must  be
very  difficult  to  say,  what  will  merely  repel  and  what  will  completely
cure,  or  perfectly  change  the  disease.  Repulsion  is  certainly  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  cure  of  the  part,  whatever  may  be  the  consequence;  and  a
change  in  the  disease  is  certainly  a  cure  of  the  first,  although  a  disease
may  still  exist  in  the  part.

That  an  artificial  irritation  made  on  one  part  does  not  (always  at  least)
cure  or  remove  a  diseased  irritation  of  a  specific  nature  in  another  part,  is,
I  think,  evident  in  many  cases,  even  although  that  specific  should  be  an
affection  of  the  constitution.  This,  at  least,  was  evident  in  a  case  of  the
gout,  for  when  the  gout  was  in  some  of  the  vital  parts,  and  sinapisms  were
applied  to  the  feet,  they  did  not  relieve  those  vital  parts  i  although  the  in-
flammation in  consequence  of  the  sinapisms  was  considerable;  but  this
inflammation  brought  on  the  gout  on  the  feet  >  and  as  soon  as  this  hap-
pened, the  vital  parts  were  relieved ;  from  which  it  would  appear,  that  a
specific  irritation  required  a  specific  derivator.  It  may  be  supposed  that
the  inflammation,  in  consequence  of  the  sinapisms,  brought  on,  or  pro-
duced, such  a  derangement  in  the  feet  as  made  them  more  susceptible  of
the  gout ;  or  the  inflammation  became  an  immediate  cause  of  the  action
of  gout  taking  place  there.

It  is  plain  too,  that  where  there  is  a  gouty  disposition,  or  a  gouty  action,
in  the  constitution,  a  derangement  in  a  part  may  bring  it  on  ;  for  in  the
above  person,  who  had  still  those  internal  spasms  recurring  upon  the  least
exercise  or  anxiety  of  mind,  but  was  in  all  other  respects,  and  at  all  other
times  well,  by  applying  sinapisms  a  second  time  to  his  feet,  till  a  consider-
able cutaneous  inflammation  came  on,  the  gout  attacked  the  ball  of  the
great  toe  of  the  right  foot,  and  the  last  joint  of  the  great  toe  of  the  left,
which  lasted  about  two  days.  This  attack  of  gout,  however,  did  not  re-
lieve him  of  the  remaining  spasms,  as  the  first  did;  and  therefore  was  to
be  considered  an  additional  gouty  action.  This  could  certainly  not  have
taken  place  if  the  constitution  had  not  been  gouty.

In  diseases  where  we  have  no  specific  application  capable  of  acting  im-


The  adhesive  inflammation,  357

mediately,  the  advantages  gained  by  derivation,  revulsion,  or  sympathy,
are  much  greater  in  many  cases  than  by  the  effects  of  any  local  application
at  present  known ;  and  the  medicines  which  are  capable  of  producing
this  effect  are  often  such  as  would  either  have  an  effect  if  applied  to  the
diseased  part,  or  would  increase  it.  This  arises  from  the  dissimilar  ac-
tions of  the  two  parts;  that  is,  the  diseased  actions  of  the  one  being  simi-
lar to,  or  producing  the  actions  of  recovery  in  the  other;  nor  is  it  difficult
to  conceive  why  it  should  be  so  ;  for  since  the  medicines  are  not  specifics,
but  only  invite  or  remove  the  disease  by  that  connexion  which  the  living
powers  of  the  one  part  have  with  those  of  another,  it  is  reasonable  to  sup-
pose that  this  principle  of  action  between  the  parts  must  be  much  stronger
than  the  effects  of  many  medicines  which  have  only  a  tendency  to  cure  -,
or  perhaps  no  tendency  that  way  at  all.  Thus  we  find,  that  vomits  will
often  cure  inflammations  of  the  testicles,  when  all  soothing  applications
prove  ineffectual,  and  when  the  same  emetic  could  not  have  the  least  effect
on  the  part  itself,  were  it  applied  to  it.

Thus,  we  also  find  that  a  caustic  behind  the  ear  will  relieve  inflamma-
tions of  the  eyes  or  eyelids,  when  every  application  to  the  parts  affected
has  proved  ineffectual,  and  when  this  caustic,  if  applied  to  the  parts  them-
selves only  as  a  stimulent,  would  increase  the  disease.

Sympathy,  perhaps,  (except  the  continued)  includes  the  mode  of  action
in  all  of  those  which  1  have  called  relatives,  viz.  repulsion,  derivation,  re-
vulsion, and  translation ;  at  least  it  is  probably  the  same  principle  in
the  whole.  What  I  would  call  a  cure  by  sympathy,  is  producing  a  cu-
rative action  in  a  sound  part,  that  the  diseased  may  take  on  the  same  mode
of  action  from  sympathy,  that  it  would  take  on,  if  the  curative  was  ap-
plied to  it ;  so  that  sympathy  might  even  be  supposed  to  repel  in  cases
which  would  admit  of  repelling,  and  fall  on  some  other  part,  although  not
the  part  necessarily  where  the  application  was  made.  The  difference  be-
tween derivation,  or  repulsion,  and  sympathy,  consists  in  derivation  pro-
ducing a  disease  in  a  sound  part  to  cure  a  disease  in  another  part,  as  was
observed;  while  sympathy  is  applying  the  cure  to  a  sor.ndpartto  cure  the


358  The  adhesive  inflammation.

diseased; but  in  many  cases  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  distinguish  the  one
from  the  other.

Sympathy  is  very  universal,  or  more  general  than  any  others;  for  there
are  few  local  diseases  that  do  not  extend  beyond  the  surfice  of  contact,
which  produces  continued  sympathy ;  and  also,  there  are  few  parts  that
have  not  some  connexion  with  some  other  part,  which  gives  us  remote
sympathy.

It  may  be  recollected,  that  when  sympathy  was  treated  of,  it  was
divided  into  continued,  contiguous,  remote,  similar,  and  dissimilar.

The  cure  by  continued  sympathy  is  that  application  which  we  have
reason  to  suppose  would  cure  if  applied  to  the  part  itself;  such  as  apply-
ing mercury  to  the  skin  over  a  venereal  node. The  node  is  cured  by  its
sympathizing  with  the  mercurial  irritation  of  the  skin  ;  and  the  action  of
the  sympathizer  here  is similar  to  the  action  of  the  part  of  application.
Remote  sympathy  is  seldom  or  ever  produced  by  a  similarity  of  action  in
similar  parts;  but  most  probably  cures  by  dissimilar  modes  of  action  in
the  two  parts,  and  therefore  might  be  called  dissimilar  sympathy,  viz.  by
stimulating  the  part  of  application  in  such  a  way  that  the  sympathizer  shall
act  in  the  same  way  as  if  the  real  application  of  cure  was  made  to  it,  and
yet  the  mode  of  action  of  the  part  of  application  shall  not  be  at  all  si-
milar to  the  sympathizer. I  can  even  suppose  a  local  disease  cured  by
sympathy  and  by  that  medicine  which  would  increase  it,  if  applied  imme-
diately to  it. Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  any  diseased  mode  of  action,
and  that  this  mode  could  be  increased  by  some  irritating  medicine,  if  ap-
plied to  it ;  but  apply  this  irritator  to  some  other  part  which  this  diseased
part  simpathizes  with,  and  that  the  sympathetic  act  in  the  diseased  part
shall  be  the  same  as  if  its  curative  medicine  was  applied  to  it,  similar  to
what  would  have  taken  place,  if  its  specific  irritator  was  applied  ;  then,
in  such  a  case  the  medicine  would  cure  by  sympathy,  although  it  would
increase  the  disease  if  applied  locally,  or  have  no  effect  at  all.

The  contiguous  sympathy  is  where  it  would  appear  to  act  from  the
approximation  of  dissimilar  parts,  and  therefore  is  not  continued  sympa-
thy ;  neither  can  it  be  called  remote  sympathy,  as  there  appears  to  be  no


T/jc  adhesive  inflammation.  359

Specific  connexion,  but  to  arise  entirely  from  contiguity  or  approximation
of  parts.  Of  this  kind  are  blisters  on  the  head,  curing  head-ach;  on  the
chest,  curing  pains  in  the  chest;  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  to  cure  irrita-
tions there  ;  to  the  belly,  to  cure  complaints  of  the  bowels.

The  applications  which  act  by  contiguous  sympathy  are  only  those
which  can  be  applied  to  the  nearest  surface  to  that  which  is  inflamed,  and
the  inflamed  part  beyond  this  surface  becomes  affected  in  some  degree,
similar  to  the  part  of  application,  such  as  the  applications  to  the  eyelids,
when  it  is  in  the  eye  ;  to  the  scrotum,  when  in  the  testicle;  to  the  ab-
domen, when  some  of  the  bowels  are  inflamed ;  to  the  thorax,  in  inflam-
mations of  the  lungs,  etc.

These  may  be  either  of  the  specific,  stimulating,  or  soothing  kinds,
something  which  affects  the  parts  in  such  a  manner  as  that  a  remote  dis-
eased action  ceases.  It  may  be  specific,  as  opium  applied  to  the  pit  of
the  stomach  curing  an  irritation  of  that  viscus ;  stimulating,  as  blisters
to  cure  inflammation  in  the  subjacent  viscera,  as  has  been  mentioned;
soothing,  as  fomentations  to  the  abdomen  to  relieve  complaints  in  the
bowels.

Derivation  means  a  cessation  of  action  in  one  part,  in  consequence  of
an  action  having  taken  place  in  another;  and  when  this  is  a  cessation  of  a
diseased  action,  then  a  cure  of  that  action  in  the  original  part  may  be
said  to  be  performed  ;  this  cure  was  brought  into  use  from  the  idea  of  hu-
mors ;  that  is,  the  drawing  off  of  the  humors  from  the  seat  where
they  had  taken  possession  ;  but  I  believe  much  more  has  been  ascribed  to
it  than  it  deserves.

How  far  it  really  takes  place,  I  have  not  been  able  fully  to  ascertain
in  all  its  parts  ;  that  is,  how  far  the  real  disease  is  invited,  and  accepts
of  the  invitation ;  but  I  have  already  observed,  that  there  is  such  a  prin-
ciple of  disease  in  the  animal  ceconomy,  although  we  must  see  from  de-r
rivation,  that  the  same  quantity,  or  perhaps  more  irritation  is  retained  in
the  constitution;  yet  the  artificial  irritation  produced  being  either  such  as
more  readily  admits  of  a  cure  than  the  diseased  part,  or  being  in  parts
which  are  not  so  essential  to  life,  an  advantage  by  this  means  is  gained  -9


360  The  adhesive  inflammation,

thus,  burning  the  ear  is  practised  as  a  cure  for  the  tooth-ach,  and  the  part
which  is  burnt  more  readily  admits  of  a  cure,  than  the  tooth.  We  also
find  that  blisters  often  cure  or  remove  deep  seated  pains,  such  as  head-
ach,  and  relieve  the  bladder  when  applied  to  the  perineum.  Blisters  and
caustics  behind  the  ear,  cure  also  inflammations  of  the  eye.

Less  may  be  said  on  revulsion,  since  we  have  explained  derivation.

To  draw  off  a  disease  always  implies  safe  ground,  and  can  be  applied
with  safety  in  any  disease  ;  revulsion  can  best  be  applied,  when  the  disease
attacks  essential  parts  where  the  application  cannot  be  so  near  as  to  im-
ply derivation.

Thus  we  find  that  vomits  will  cure  an  inflammation  of  the  testicles,  white
swellings,  and  even  venereal  bubos ;  and  sinapisms  applied  to  the  feet  re-
lieve the  head.

Translation  differs  from  derivation,  revulsion,  and  repulsion,  only  as  it
proceeds  from  a  natural  or  spontaneous  cause,  whereas  these  proceed  from
an  artificial,  accidental,  or  external  cause,  and  the  common  principle  of
them  all  seems  to  be  sympathy  ;  for  if  not  an  act  of  its  own,  then  it
must  be  either  repelled,  derived,  or  from  sympathy.

Very  strange  instances  of  translation  are  given  us;  it  has  been  supposed,
that  pus  already  formed  has  been  translated  to  another  part  of  the  body
deposited  there  in  form  of  an  abscess,  and  then  discharged  -,  this  is  an  ope-
ration absolutely  impossible  ;  matter  absorbed  may  be  carried  off  by  some
of  the  secretions,  such  as  by  the  kidnies,  which  have  a  power  of  removing
more  than  they  secrete  ;  but  the  deposition  of  pus  is  the  same  with  its  for-
mation.

Both  revulsion  and  repulsion  may  be  reckoned  a  species  of  translation.

The  gout  moving  of  its  own  accord  from  the  stomach  to  the  foot,  or
from  one  foot  to  the  other,  may  be  reckoned  a  translation  of  the  gout.


The  adhesive  inflammation*  361

XIII.  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  FORMS  IN  WHICH  MEDICINES  ARE  APPLIED,
AND  THE  SUBSIDING  OF  INFLAMMATION.

Fomentations,  or  steams,  washes,  and  poultices,  are  the  common
applications  to  a  part  in  the  state  of  inflammation.  The  first,  and  last,
are  commonly  applied  to  inflammation  arising  from  external  violence,
and  proceeding  to  suppuration ;  the  second,  commonly  to  internal  sur-
faces, as  the  mouth,  nose,  urethra,  vagina,,  rectum,  etc.  The  action  of
the  two  first  is  but  of  very  short  duration.

Fomentations  and  steams,  are  fluid  bodies  raised  into  vapor  :  they  may
be  either  simple,  or  compound  j  simple,  as  steam,  or  vapor  of  water  ;
compound,  as  steam  of  water  impregnated  with  medicines.

This  mode  of  applying  heat,  and  moisture,  appears  from  experience  to
be  more  efficacious  than  when  these  are  applied  in  the  form  of  a  fluid  -,
it  often  gives  ease  at  the  time  of  the  application,  while  at  other  times  it
gives  great  pain  ;  but  if  it  does  give  ease,  the  symptoms  generally  return
between  the  times  of  applying  it,  and  with  nearly  the  same  violence.  How
far  the  application  of  a  medicine  for  fifteen  minutes  out  of  twenty-four
hours  can  do  good,  I  am  not  certain  :  we  find,  however,  that  the  appli-
cation of  a  vapor  of  a  specific  medicine,  though  but  for  a  few  minutes  in
the  day,  will  have  very  considerable  effects :  fumigations  with  cinnaber,
may  serve  as  an  instance.  The  fomentations  are  commonly  composed  of
the  decoction  of  herbs ;  sometimes  the  marsh-mallows,  etc.  but  oftener  of
the  decoction  of  herbs  possessing  essential  oil,  which  I  believe  are  the  best,
because  I  suppose  that  whatever  will  excite  contraction  of  the  vessels,  will
in  some  degree  counteract  the  dilating  principle  :  vinegar,  as  well  as  spi-
rits, are  put  into  it ;  how  far  they  stimulate  to  contraction,  I  do  not
know,  but  rather  believe  they  remove  irritation,  which  must  lessen  the
inflammatory  action.

Washes  are  in  general  fluid  applications,  and  are  more  commonly  ap-
plied to  inflammations  of  internal  surfaces,  than  of  the  common  integu-
ments :  there  are  washes  to  the  eye,  called  collyria ;  washes  to  the  mouth
and  throat,  called  gargles ;  washes  to  the  urethra,  called  injections ;  and

3  A


362  The  adhesive  inflammation.

to  the  rectum,  called  clysters ;  but  I  am  fearful  that  we  are  not  yet  ac-
quainted with  the  true  specific  virtues  of  these  washes,  at  least  there  is
something  very  vague  in  their  application.  There  are,  for  instance,
astringent  washes  for  the  inflammation  of  the  eye,  such  as  white  and  blue
vitriol,  alum,  etc.  stimulating  warm  gargles  for  inflammations  of  the
throat,  such  as  mustard,  red  port,  claret  with  vinegar  and  honey ;  but  to
moderate  or  resolve  external  inflammations,  they  do  not  apply  substances
with  any  such  properties.  How  absurd  would  it  appear  to  surgeons  in
genera],  if  any  one  made  use  of  the  same  application  to  an  inflammation
in  any  other  part ;  yet  I  do  not  know  if  there  is  any  difference  between  an
inflammation  of  the  eye  or  throat,  and  one  in  any  other  part,  if  the  inflam-
mations are  of  the  same  kind  :  mercury  cures  a  venereal  inflammation,  ei-
ther of  the  eye  or  throat,  as  easily  as  a  venereal  inflammation  any  where
else,  because  it  is  an  inflammation  of  the  same  kind.

These  applications,  like  fomentations,  are  of  short  duration,  for  there
is  no  possibility  of  applying  these  powers  constantly,  except  in  the  form
of  a  poultice,  whose  operation  is  somewhat  similar;  and,  indeed,  they
are  only  substitutes  for  a  poultice,  where  that  mode  of  application  cannot
be  made  use  of,  as  I  observed  with  respect  to  internal  surfaces.

Poultices  are  constant  applications,  and  like  fomentations  may  be  of
two  kinds,  either  simply  warm  and  wet,  or  medicated.  The  greatest  ef-
fect that  a  poultice  can  produce  must  be  immediate,  but  its  power  will
extend  beyond  the  surface  of  contact,  although  only  in  a  secondary
degreee.

To  the  common  inflammation,  the  simplest  poultice  is  supposed  to  be
the  best,  and  that  effect  I  believe  is  only  by  keeping  the  parts  easier  under
the  complaint;  but  I  am  of  opinion,  that  such  do  not  affect  the  inflam-
mation any  other  way.  A  common  poultice  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the
best  applications  when  we  mean  to  do  nothing  but  to  allow  nature  to
perform  the  cure  with  as  much  ease  to  herself  as  possible.

Poultices  may  be  medicated,  so  as  to  be  adapted  to  the  kind  of  inflam-
mation ;  such  as  the  solution  of  lead,  opium,  mercury,  etc.  in  short,  they
may  be  compounded  with  any  kind  of  medicine.


The  adhesive  inflammation.  363

Whatever  the  disposition  is,  which  produces  Inflammation,  and  what-
ever the  actions  are  which  produce  the  effects,  that  disposition  under
certain  circumstances,  viz.  when  it  arises  either  from  the  constitution  or
the  parts,  can  be  removed,  and  of  course  the  actions  excited  by  it.  The
disposition  for  inflammation  shall  have  taken  place,  and  the  vessels  which
are  the  active  parts,  shall  have  dilated,  and  allowed  more  blood  to  enter
them,  so  that  the  part  shall  look  red,  but  no  hardness  or  fullness  shall  be
observed,  and  the  whole  shall  subside  before  adhesions  have  been  formed;
or  if  inflammation  has  gone  so  far  as  to  produce  swelling,  which  is  the  ad-
hesive stage  of  the  disease,  it  by  certain,methods  can  be  frequently  so  as-
suaged as  to  prevent  suppuration  taking  place,  and  then  the  parts  will  fall
back  into  their  natural  state,  which  is  called  resolution ;  some  adhesions
being  perhaps  the  only  remaining  consequences  of  the  inflammation.

The  same  methods  are  likewise  often  used  with  considerable  success  in
lessening  inflammation  arising  from  violence,  so  as  to  prevent  suppuration
entirely;  but  in  many  of  these  cases  they  are  not  sufficient,  and  in  those
where  it  cannot  be  prevented,  yet  it  may  be  lessened  by  the  same  means.

As  the  first  symptom  of  inflammation  is  commonly  pain,  so  is  the  first
symptom  of  resolution  a  cessation  of  that  pain,  as  well  as  one  of  the  symp-
toms of  suppuration,  which  is  a  species  of  resolution.  I  have  known  the
cessation  of  pain  so  quick,  as  to  appear  like  a  charm,  although  no  other
visible  alteration  had  taken  place,  the  swelling  and  colour  being  the
same.

Why  inflammation  of  any  kind  should  cease  after  it  has  once  begun,  is
verydifficult  to  explain,  or  even  to  form  an  idea  of,  since  yet  we  have  no
mode  of  counteracting  the  first  cause  or  irritation  ;  it  may  be  supposed  to
arise  from  the  principle  of  parts  adapting  themselves  in  time  to  their  pre-
sent situation,  which  I  call  custom,  and  that  therefore  in  order  to  keep  up
the  inflammation,  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  cause  to  increase,  in  pro-
portion as  the  parts  get  reconciled  to  their  present  circumstances;  but  al-
lowing this  to  be  the  cause,  it  will  not  account  for  their  returning  back  to
their  natural  or  original  state,  when  this  increase  of  irritation  ceases,  and
only  the  last  or  original  irritation  remains ;  for  upon  this  principle,  they
only  grow  more  easy  under  their  present  state;  or  perhaps,  which  is  worse,


364  The  44kfttwt  inflammation*

acquire  a  habit  of  it,  which  may  be  the  cause  of  many  indolent  specific
diseases.

If  we  suppose  the  removal  of  the  original  cause  to  bs  sufficient  to  stop
the  progress  of  inflammation,  and  when  this  is  stopped,  that  the  parts
cannot  easily  remain  in  the  same  inflamed  state,  but  by  their  own  efforts
begin  to  restore  themselves  to  health  ;  which  we  can  easily  conceive  to
be  the  case  in  specific  diseases,  especially  those  arising  from  poisons  of
such  kinds  as  to  be  capable  of  a  termination,  as  the  small  pox ;  or  where
a  cure  can  be  administred  for  the  effects  of  the  poison,  as  in  the  lues  ve-
nera ;  then  we  must  conclude  that  the  inflamed  state  is  an  uneasy  state,
a  force  upon  the  organs  which  suffer  it;  like  the  bending  of  a  spring,
which  is  always  endeavouring  to  restore  itself,  and  the  moment  that  the
power  is  removed,  returns  back  to  its  natural  state  again;  or  it  may  be
like  the  mind,  forgetful  of  injuries.


XIV.  OF  THE  USE  OF  THE  ADHESIVE  INFLAMMATION.

This  inflammation  may  be  said  in  all  cases  to  arise  from  a  state  of
parts  in  which  they  cannot  remain,  and  therefore  an  irritation  of  imper-
fection takes  place.  It  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  effect  of  wise  counsels,
the  constitution  being  so  formed  as  to  take  spontaneously  all  the  precau-
tions necessary  for  its  defence;  for  in  most  cases  we  shall  evidently  see  that
it  answers  wise  purposes.

Its  utility  may  be  said  to  be  both  local  and  constitutional,  but  certainly
most  so  with  regard  to  the  first.  Its  utility  is  most  evident  when  it  arises
from  a  disease  in  a  part,  whether  this  proceeds  from  the  constitution  or
otherwise,  and  when  it  does,  it  must  be  considered  as  arising  from  a  state
in  which  that  part  cannot  exist,  as  in  exposure,  and  therefore  is  the  first
step  towards  a  cure.  It  is  often  of  service  in  those  cases  which  arise
from  violence,  although  not  so  necessarily  so,  the  injured  parts  not  being
always  under  the  necessity  of  having  recourse  to  it,  as  was  shewn  in  treat-
ing of  union  by  the  first  intention.


The  adhesive  inflammation,  365

WHen  the  adhesive  inflammation  arises  from  the  constitution,  it  may
depend  on  some  disease  of  that  constitution ;  and  if  so,  it  may  be  con-
ceived to  be  of  use  to  it,  especially  if  it  should  be  supposed  to  be  the  ter-
mination of  an  universal  irritation  in  a  local  one,  by  that  means  relieving
the  constitution  of  the  former,  as  in  the  gout;  but  when  it  is  only
the  simple  adhesive  inflammation  that  takes  place,  I  am  rather  apt  to
think  that  it  is  more  a  part  of  the  disease,  than  a  termination  of  it,  or  an
act  of  the  constitution.

The  adhesive  inflammation  serves  as  a  check  to  the  suppurative,  by
making  parts,  which  otherwise  must  infallibly  fall  into  that  state,  pre-
viously unite,  in  order  to  prevent  its  access,  as  was  described  in  the  ad-
hesive inflammation  being  limited;  and  where  it  cannot  produce  this  effect,
so  as  altogether  to  hinder  the  suppurative  inflammation  itself  from  tak-
ing place,  it  becomes  in  most  cases  a  check  upon  the  extent  of  it.  This
we  see  evidently  to  be  the  case  in  large  cavities,  as  in  the  tunica  vaginalis
after  the  operation  of  the  hydrocele  j  for  after  the  water  has  made  its  escape,
parts  of  the  collapsed  sack  frequently  unite  to  other  parts  of  the  same
sack  by  this  inflammation,  and  thereby  preclude  the  suppurative  from  ex-
tending beyond  these  adhesions,  which  so  far  prevents  the  intention  of
the  surgeon  from  having  its  full  effect;  and  often  on  the  other  hand,  the
adhesive  state  of  the  inflammation  takes  place  universally  in  this  bag,
in  consequence  of  the  palliative  cure,  which  produces  the  radical,  and
thereby  prevents  a  relapse.  In  the  hernea  it  performs  a  cure  by  uniting
the  two  sides  of  the  sack  together,  by  means  of  slight  pressure,  so  that  we
should  understand  perfectly  its  mode  of  action,  where  it  can  prevent  a  cure,
aud  where  it  can  perform  one.  In  still  larger  cavities,  such  as  the  abdomen,
where  often  only  a  partial  inflammation  takes  place,  as  is  frequently  the  case
after  child-bearing,  and  in  wounds  of  this  cavity,  we  find  this  inflammation
produced,  which  either  prevents  the  suppurative  altogether,  or  if  it  does  not,
it  unites  the  parts  surrounding  the  suppurative  centre,  and  confines  the  sup-
puration to  that  point;  and  as  the  abscess  increases  in  size,  the  adhesive  in--
flammation  spreads,  uniting  the  parts  as  it  spreads,  so  that  the  general  ca-i
vity  is  excluded. Thus  the  suppuration  is  confined  to  the  Erft  point,  and


«66  *The  adhesive  inflammation.

forms  there  a  kind  of  circumscribed  abscess,  as  will  be  more  fully  explained
hereafter.

In  inflammations  of  the  pleura  or  surface  of  the  lungs,  the  same  thirrd
happens,  for*  the  adhesive  inflammation  takes  place,  and  the  surfaces  are
united,  which  union  going  before  the  suppurative  confines  it  to  certain  li-
mits, so  that  distinct  abscesses  are  formed  in  this  union  of  the  parts;  and  the
whole  cavity  of  the  thorax  is  not  involved  in  a  general  suppuration ;  such
cases  are  called  the  spurious  empyema.

The  cellular  membrane,  every  where  in  the  body,  is  united  exactly  in
the  same  manner,  the  sides  of  the  cells  throw  out,  or  as  it  were,  sweat
out  the  uniting  matter,  which  fills  the  cavities  and  unites  the  whole  into
one  mass.

The  adhesive  inflammation  often  disposes  the  parts  to  form  a  cyst,  of
bag ;  this  is  generally  to  cover  some  extraneous  body  that  does  not  irritate
so  much  as  to  produce  suppuration;  such  as  a  sack  formed  to  inclose  a
bullet,  pieces  of  glass,  etc.

With  the  same  wise  views  it  unites  the  parts  or  cellular  membrane
which  lies  between  an  abscess,  and  the  spot  where  that  abscess  has  a  ten-
dency to  open,  as  will  be  more  fully  explained  hereafter,  when  I  come  to
treat  of  ulceration.

The  lungs  are  so  circumstanced  as  to  partake  of  the  effects  of  two  princi-
ples, the  one  as  an  internal  uniting  surface,  the  other  as  a  secreting  surface;
the  last  of  which  constitutes  the  peculiar  structure  and  use  of  this  viscus ;
and  the  first  is  no  more  than  the  reticular  or  uniting  substance  of  those
cells.  The  internal  or  the  uniting  membrane  of  the  lungs  unites  readily
by  the  adhesive  inflammation,  as  in  cellular  membrane  through  the  body
generally;  but  the  air-cells,  like  the  inner  surface  of  the  urethra,  nose,  in-
testines, etc.  pass  directly  into  the  suppurative  inflammation,  and  therefore
do  not  admit  of  the  adhesive,  by  which  means  the  matter  formed  is  obli-
ged to  be  coughed  up,  which  produces  symptoms  peculiar  to  the  parts  af-
fected ;  and  it  is  perhaps  almost  impossible  to  produce  an  inflammation
on  either  of  those  two  surfaces  without  affecting  the  other;  which,  proba-


The  adhesive  inflammation.  367

bly  is  one  reason  why  the  treatment  of  inflammation  in  those  parts  is  at-
tended with  such  bad  success.

We  cannot  give  a  better  illustration  of  the  use  of  the  adhesions  pro-
duced in  consequence  of  this  inflammation,  than  to  contrast  it  with  the
erysipelatous,  of  which  I  have  already  given  an  account.

When  the  erysipelatous  inflammation  takes  place,  the  matter  gets  very
freely  into  the  surrounding  and  sound  cellular  membrane,  and  then  dif-
fuses itself  almost  over  the  whole  body ;  while,  in  another  kind  of  con-
stitution, the  adhesive  inflammation  would  have  been  produced,  to  have
prevented  its  progress.

A  man  was  attacked  with  a  violent  inflammation  on  each  side  of  the
anus,  which  I  did  not  see  till  some  days  after  it  began.  It  had  the  ap-
pearance of  the  suppurative  inflammation  joined  with  the  erysipelatous ;
for  it  was  not  so  circumscribed  as  the  suppurative,  nor  did  it  spread  upon
the  skin  like  the  true  erysipelatous,  and  the  skin  had  a  shining  cedematous
appearance.  The  inflammation  went  deeper  into  the  cellular  membrane
than  the  true  erysipelatous.

He  was  bled.  The  blood  was  extremely  sizy.  He  took  a  purge,  and
was  fomented.  He  had  a  difficulty  in  making  water,  most  probably
from  the  pressure  of  the  swelling  upon  the  urethra.  The  day  following
I  observed  that  the  scrotum  of  that  side  was  very  much  swelled,  which
had  extended  up  the  right  spermatick  chord ;  on  examining  this  swel-
ling, I  plainly  felt  a  fluid  in  it,  with  air,  which  sounded  on  being  shaken.
The  case  now  plainly  discovered  itself.  I  immediately  opened  the  sup-
puration on  each- side  of  the  anus,  which  discharged  a  dusky  coloured
pus,  very  foetid,  with  a  good  deal  of  air.  Upon  squeezing  the  swelling
in  the  scrotum,  etc.  I  could  easily  discharge  the  matter  and  air  by  these
openings,  therefore  made  him  lie  principally  upon  his  back,  and  squeeze
these  swellings  often,  with  a  view  to  discharge  this  matter  by  the  openings;
the  matter  at  the  part  where  it  was  formed,  was  not  contained  in  a
bag  or  abscess,  but  formed  in  the  cellular  membrane,  without  previous
adhesion.

The  scrotum  now  inflamed,  and  seemed  to  have  a  tendency  to  openj
at  least  it  looked  livid  and  spotted. I  opened  it  at  this  part,  and  it  dis-


36S  -The  adhesive  inflammation.

charged  a  good  deal  of  matter  and  air.  A  general  suppuration  came  upon
the  whole  cellular  membrane  of  those  parts,  and  the  matter  passed  up
through  the  cellular  membrane  of  the  belly  ;  and  the  cellular  membrane
of  the  loins  was  loaded  with  matter,  from  its  sinking  down  from  the  cells
of  the  abdomen.  I  made  openings  there,  and  could  squeeze  out  a  great
deal  of  matter  and  air.  A  mortification  came  on  just  above  the  right
groin,  and  when  I  removed  the  slough,  matter  was  discharged.  I  also
made  openings  on  the  loins,  on  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  etc.  lie  lived
but  a  few  days  in  this  way,  in  which  time  the  cellular  membrane  was.
hanging  out  of  the  wounds  like  wet  dirty  tow.

The  adhesive  inflammation  takes  place  in  consequence  of  accidents,,
when  it  is  impossible  it  should  ever  produce  the  same  good  effects,  such  as
in  wounds  which  are  not  allowed  or  cannot  heal  by  the  first  intention  ;
for  instance,  a  stump  after  amputation,  and  many  other  wounds  ;  but  it
is  one  of  those  fixed,  and  invariable  principles  of  the  animal  machine,
which  upon  all  such  irritations,  uniformly  produces  the  uniting  process,
though  like  many  other  principles  in  the  same  machine,  these  effects  are
perhaps  not  so  much  required,  so  that  although  a  wound  is  not  allowed
to  heal,  or  cannot  heal  by  means  of  the  adhesive  inflammation,  yet  the
surrounding  parts  go  through  the  common  consequences  of  being  wound-
ed, and  the  surrounding  cells  are  united,  as  was  described  when  I  treated
of  union  by  the  first  intention.  It  first  throws  out  the  blood,  as  if  the  in-
tention was  to  unite  the  parts  again  ;  the  newly  cut  or  torn  ends  of  the
vessels,  however,  soon  contract  and  close  up,  and  then  the  discharge  is  not
blood,  but  a  serum  with  the  coagulating  part  of  the  blood,  similar  to  that
which  is  produced  by  the  adhesive  state  of  inflammation,  so  that  they  go
through  the  two  first  processes  of  union  ;  therefore  the  use  of  the  adhesive
inflammation  does  not  appear  so  evidently  in  these  cases,  as  in  spontane-
ous inflammation  ;  however,  in  case  of  wounds,  which  are  allowed  to  sup-
purate, it  answers  the  great  purpose  of  uniting  the  cells  at  the  cut  surface
from  their  being  simply  in  contact  with  each  other,  as  has  been  described,,
which  confines  the  inflammation  to  that  part,  without  which  the  irri-
tation arising  from  this  state  of  imperfection  might  have  been  communi-


The  adhesive  inflammation*  369

communicated  from  cell  to  cell,  and  proceed  farther  than  it  commonly
does.  The  cut  vessels,  by  this  means,  are  also  united,  which  hinders  the
progress  of  inflammation  from  running  along  their  cavities,  as  we  find
sometimes  to  be  the  case  in  the  veins  of  a  wounded  surface,  where  this
inflammation  has  not  taken  place.  From  every  thing  which  has  beert
said,  it  must  appear,  that  all  surfaces  which  are  suppurating  in  conse-
quence of  this  inflammation,  have  their  basis  in  that  state  of  the  adhesive
inflammation,  which  very  nearly  approaches  to.  suppuration  j  and  this
inflammation  is  less  and  less,  as  it  recedes  further  from  the  suppurating
centre.


3  B


[  37*  1

CHAPTER  IV.
OF  THE  SUPPURATIVE  INFLAMMATION.


When  the  adhesive  inflammation  is  not  capable  of  resolution,  and  has
gone  as  far  as  possible  to  prevent  the  necessity  of  suppuration,  especially
in  those  cases  that  might  have  admitted  of  a  resolution,  as  in  spontane*
ous  *  inflammations  in  general,  where  there  has  neither  been  an  exposed
laceration  of  the  solids,  nor,  as  beforementioned,  loss  of  substance,  but
where  the  natural  functions  of  the  part  have  only  been  so  deranged  that
it  was  unable  to  fall  back  into  a  natural  and  sound  state  again ;  or  second*
ly,  v/here  it  was  a  consequence  of  such  accidents,  as  the  effects  of  the  ad-
hesive could  not  in  the  least  prevent,  (as  in  wounds  that  were  prevented
from  healing  by  the  first  or  second  intention)  then  under  either  of  these
two  circumstances  suppuration  takes  place.

The  immediate  effect  of  suppuration,  is  the  produce  of  the  pus,  from
the  inflamed  surface,  which  appears  in  such  cases  or  under  such  circum-
stances to  be  a  leading  step  to  the  formation  of  a  new  substance,  called
granulations,  which  granulations  are  the  third  method  in  the  first  order
of  parts,  of  restoring  those  parts  to  health;  but  upon  all  internal  canals,
suppuration  is  certainly  not  a  leading  step  to  granulations,  which  will  be
explained  hereafter.

The  same  theory  of  the  adhesive  inflammation  respecting  the  vessels  is,  I
believe,  applicable  to  the  suppurative;  for  when  suppuration  is  the  first,
we  have  the  vessels  in  the  same  state  as  in  the  adhesive  when  it  happens,
but  their  dispositions  and  actions  must  have  altered,  there  being  a  great  dif-
ference in  their  effects.

*  I  have  ufed  this  word  to  denote  a  cafe  where  no  visible  caufe  of  inflammation  existed;  for
strictly  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  in  nature  as  fpontaneous.


373  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation*

This  is  so  much  the  case,  that  the  true  inflammatory  disposition  and
.action  almost  immediately  ceases  upon  the  commencement  of  suppuration;
and  although  the  vessels  may  be  nearly  in  the  same  state,  yet  they  are  in  a
much  more  quiescent  state  than  before,  and  have  acquired  a  new  mode  of
action.

I  shall  enc.eavour  to  establish,  as  an  invariable  fact,  that  no  suppurati-
on takes  place  which  is  not  preceded  by  inflammation  ;  that  is,  no  pus
is  formed  but  in  consequence  of  it ;  that  it  is  an  effect  of  inflammation
only,  is  proved  in  abscesses,  from  a  breach  in  the  solids  attended  with  ex-
posure, and  from  extraneous  matter  of  all  kinds,  whether  introduced  or
formed  there.  In  abscess,  suppuration  is  an  immediate  consequence  of
inflammation;  from  the  exposure  of  internal  cavities  no  suppuration  comes
on  till  inflammation  has  formed  the  disposition  and  action;  and  although
we  find  collections  of  extraneous  matter,  something  like  pus,  in  different
parts  of  the  body,  yet  such  extraneous  matter  is  not  pus  :  however,  to-
wards the  last,  in  such  collections,  pus  is  often  formed,  but  then  this  is  in
consequence  of  inflammation  having  taken  place  towards  the  surface,  and
when  such  collections  are  opened  they  immediately  inflame,  universally
similar  to  every  branch  of  the  solids,  and  then  the  future  discharge  is  pus,
all  of  which  I  shall  now  treat.

The  irritation,  which  is  immediately  the  cause  of  suppuration,  is  the
.same,  from  whatever  cause  it  may  proceed,  similar  to  that  which  pro-
duces the  adhesive  stage ;  it  is  a  similar  process  going  through  the  same
stages,  and  is  attended  with  nearly  the  srme  circumstances,  whether  it
takes  its  rise  from  external  violence,  the  constitution,  or  a  disposition  in  the
part  if  all  other  circumstances  are  equal ;  however,  it  is  not  so  general  in
its  causes  as  the  adhesive,  for  the  thickening  process  will  take  place  in
many  diseases,  where  true  suppuration  is  not  admitted ;  as  in  some  scro-
fulous cases,  some  venereal,  and  also  cancers ;  suppuration,  therefore,  de-
pends more  on  the  soundness  of  parts  than  the  adhesive,  and  this  is  so
much  the  case,  that  we  can,  in  some  degree,  judge  of  a  sore  simply  by  its
discharge.

It  appears  very  difficult  to  give  a  true  and  clear  idea  of  the  whole  chain
of  causes  leading  to  suppuration, The  immediate  state  of  parts,  which


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation*  373

may  be  called  the  immediate  cause,  I  conceive  to  be  such  as  cannot  carry
on  its  usual  functions  of  life,  and  which  state  of  parts  I  have  called  the
state  of  imperfection,  let  the  cause  of  that  state  be  what  it  will ;  we  have
shown  that  irritation  simply  is  not  always  sufficient,  it  often  only  brings
on  the  adhesive  stage,  which  is  in  most  cases  intended  to  prevent  the  sup-
purative, as  has  been  observed.

It  is  a  curious  fact,  to  see  the  same  mode  of  action  producing  two  such
contrary  effects,  and  each  tending  to  a  cure ;  the  first  producing  from  ne-
cessity the  second,  and  being  also  subservient  to  it.  Violence  done  to  parts
is  one  of  the  great  causes  of  suppuration ;  but  we  have  already  remarked
that  violence  simply  does  not  always  produce  this  inflammation  :  that  it
must  be  a  violence  followed  by  a  prevention  of  the  parts  performing  their
cure  in  a  more  simple  way,  viz.  a  restoration  of  the  structure,  so  as  to
carry  on  the  animal  functions  of  the  part,  or  in  other  words,  a  prevention
of  union  by  the  first  or  second  intention,  or  attended  with  this  circum-
stance of  the  parts  being  kept  a  sufficient  time  in  that  state  into  which
they  were  put  by  the  violence ;  or  what  is  something  similar  to  this,  vio-
lence attended  with  death  in  a  part,  such  as  in  many  bruises,  mortificati-
ons, sloughs  in  consequence  of  caustics,  etc.  which,  when  separated,
have  exposed  internal  surfaces*.

Various  have  been  the  opinions  on  this  subject;  and  as  every  violence
committed  from  without,  under  the  circumstances  beforementioned,  is
exposed  more  or  less  to  the  surrounding  air,  the  applications  of  this
matter  to  internal  surfaces  has  generally  been  assigned  as  a  cause  of  this
inflammation;  but  air  certainly  has  not  the  least  effect  upon  those  parts;
for  a  stimulus  would  arise  from  a  wound  were  it  even  contained  in  a  va-


*  But  here  we  may  just  remark,  that  the  first  processes  towards  suppuration  in  cases  of
mortification,  where  a  separation  must  take  place  prior  to  fuppuration,  are  different  from  the
foregoing ;  because,  the  living  surface  is  to  feparate  from  it  the  dead  parts,  and  therefore  ano-
ther action  of  the  living  powers  is  required,  which  is  what  I  call  ulceration ;  and  by  the  pheno-
mena on  this  occasion,  it  would  appear  that  nature  can  carry  on  two  processes  at  one  and  th«
same  time ;  for  while  the  separation  is  carried  on  by  the  absorbents,  the  arteries  are  forming
themselves  for  suppuration ;  so  that  at  the  same  time  the  part  is  going  through  these  two
very  different  species  of  inffa,m.mation.


374  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

cuum.  Nor  does  the  air  get  to  the  parts  that  form  circumscribed  ab-
scesses so  as  to  be  a  cause  of  their  formation,  and  yet  they  as  readily  sup-
purate in  consequence  of  inflammation  as  exposed  surfaces.

Further,  in  many  cases  of  the  emphysema,  where  the  air  is  diffused  over
the  whole  body,  we  have  no  such  effect,  and  this  air  not  the  purest,  ex-
cepting there  is  produced  an  exposure  or  imperfection  of  some  internal  sur-
face for  this  air  to  make  its  escape  by,  and  then  this  part  inflames.  Nay,
as  a  stronger  proof,  and  of  the  same  kind  with  the  former,  that  it  is  not
the  admission  of  air  which  makes  parts  fall  into  inflammation,  we  find
that  the  cells  in  the  soft  parts  of  birds,  and  many  of  the  cells  and  ca-
nals of  the  bones  of  the  same  tribe  of  animals,  which  communicate  with
the  lungs*,  and  at  all  times  have  more  or  less  air  in  them,  never  inflame;
but  if  these  cells  are  exposed  in  an  unnatural  way,  by  being  wounded,  etc.
then  the  stimulus  of  imperfection  is  given,  and  the  cells  inflame,  and  unite
if  allowed;  but  if  prevented,  they  then  suppurate,  granulate,  etc.

The  same  observation  is  applicable  to  a  wound  made  into  the  cavity  of
the  abdomen  of  a  fowl ;  for  there  the  wound  inflames  and  unites  to  the
intestines  to  make  it  a  perfect  cavity  again;  but  if  this  union  is  not  al-
lowed to  take  place,  then  more  or  less  of  the  abdomen  will  inflame  and
suppurate,

U  it  was  necessary  that  air  should  be  admitted  in  order  for  suppuration
to  take  place,  we  should  not  very  readily  account  for  suppuration  taking
place  in  the  nose  from  a  cold,  as  this  part  is  not  more  under  the  influence
of  air  at  one  time  than  at  another;  nor  is  the  urethra  in  a  gonorrhoea  af-
fected by  the  air  more  at  that  time  than  at  any  other;  these  parts  being  at
all  times  under  the  same  circumstances  with  respect  to  air,  therefore  there
must  be  another  cause.

The  sympathetic  fever  has  been  supposed  a  cause,  which  will  be  con-
sidered when  I  treat  of  the  formation  of  pus.

In  cases  of  violence  I  have  endeaveavoured  to  give  a  tolerably  distinct
idea  of  the  steps  leading  to  suppuration;  but  we  are  still  at  a  loss  with  re-
spect to  the  immediate  cause  of  those  suppurations  which  appear  to  arise

*  Vide  Observations  on  certain  Parts  of  the  Animal  CEconomy,  page  89.


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  375

Spontaneously  ;  for  in  these  it  is  almost  impossible  to  determine  whether
the  inflammation  itself  be  a  real  disease,  viz,  an  original  morbid  affection,
or  whether  it  may  not  be  (as  is  evidently  the  case  from  external  violence)  a
salutary  process  of  nature  to  restore  parts  whose  functions,  and  perhaps
texture,  has  been  destroyed  by  some  previous,  and  almost  imperceptible
disease  or  cause.  Suppuration  being,  in  cases  of  violence,  a  means  of  re-
storation, affords  a  presumption  that  it  is  a  like  instrument  of  nature  in
spontaneous  cases.  If  it  is  the  first,  viz.  a  real  disease,  then  two  causes
that  are  different  in  themselves  can  produce  one  effect,  or  one  mode  of
action,  for  the  result  of  both  is  the  same ;  but  if  it  is  the  last,  then
suppuration  must  be  considered  as  depending  on  exactly  the  same  stimu-
lus being  given,  as  in  the  abovementioned  instance  of  violence.

Suppuration  does  not  arise  from  the  violence  of  the  action  of  the  parts
inflamed,  for  that  circumstance  simply  rather  tends  to  produce  mortifica-
tion; and  we  see  that  in  the  gout  which  does  not  suppurate,  there  is  often
more  violent  inflammation  than  in  many  others  that  do ;  all  internal  ca-
nals likewise  suppurate  with  very  slight  inflammation,  when  not  in  an
irritable  habit ;  but  if  of  a  very  irritable  disposition,  the  action  will  almost
exceed  suppuration>  and  by  its  becoming  milder,  suppuration  will  come
on.

But  if  we  suppose  the  cause  of  inflammation  to  be  a  disposition  in  the
parts  for  such  actions,  without  the  parts  themselves  being  either  diseased,
or  in  such  state  to  be  similar  to  the  destruction  or  alteration  of  their  tex-
ture, this  inflammation  then  may  arise  from  a  vast  variety  of  causes,  with
which  we  are  at  present  totally  unacquainted;  nay,  which  we  do  not  per-
haps even  suspect ;  and  this  last  opinion,  upon  a  slight  view,  would  seem
to  be  the  most  probable,  because  we  can  frequently  put  back  these  spon-
taneous inflammations,  which  would  not  be  the  case  if  they  came  on  from
the  destruction  of  a  part,  or  any  thing  else,  whose  stimulus  was  simular  to
it ;  for  no  such  thing  can  be  done  with  wounds,  if  they  are  not  soon
united  by  the  first  intention,  they  must  suppurate;  however,  this  argu-
ment is  not  conclusive,  for  we  can  prevent  suppuration  in  those  arjsing
from  accident,  by  uniting  them  by  the  second  intentionj  jvlxifih  is;-pre*yent?»
ing  suppuration,  by  acting  as  a  kind  of  resolution.


$j6  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

Although  suppuration  is  often  produced  without  much  visible  violence
of  action  m  the  part,  yet  when  it  is  a  consequence  of  a  healthy  inflam-
mation, we  find  in  general  that  the  inflammation  has  been  violent.

It  is  always  more  violent  than  in  its  preceding  inflammation  ;  and  in
such  cases  it  would  appear  to  be  little  more  than  an  increased  action,  out
of  which  is  produced  an  entire  new  mode  of  action,  and  which  of  course
destroys  the  first.

It  is  from  this  violence  that  it  produces  its  effects  so  quickly;  for  the
inflammation  which  is  capable  of  producing  quickly  so  great  a  change  in
the  operations  of  the  parts,  as  suppuration,  must  be  violent;  because  it  is  $
violence  committed  upon  the  natural  actions  and  structure  of  the  parts.

This  inflammation  will  also  be  more  or  less,  according  to  the  violence  of
.the  cause  producing  it,  compared  with  the  state  of  the  constitution  and
parts  affected.

The  inflammation  which  precedes  suppuration  is  much  more  violent  ia
those  cases  where  it  appears  to  arise  spontaneously,  than  when  it  arise*
from  any  injury  done  by  violence.  A  suppuration  equal  in  quantity  to
that  from  an  amputation  of  the  thigh,  shall  have  been  preceded  by  a
much  greater  inflammation  than  that  which  is  a  consequence  of  the  am*
,putation.

This  inflammation  would  seem  to  vary  somewhat  in  its  effects  accord-
ing to  the  exertion  of  that  power  during  its  progress ;  for  in  proportion
to  its  rapidity  the  cause  is  certainly  more  simple,  and  its  termination  and
effects  more  speedy  and  salutary ;  and  this  idea  agrees  perfectly  with  in-
inflammation  in  consequence  of  accidents,  for  there  it  runs  through  its
stages  more  rapidly,  and  with  less  inflammation;  necessity  appears  to  be
the  leading:  cause  here.

This  seems  to  be  the  case  even  in  those  parts  which  have  a  tendency  to
slow  and  specific  diseases ;  as  for  example,  in  the  breasts  of  women,  or  the
testicles  in  men.  For  if  these  parts  inflame  quickly,  the  effects  will  be
more  salutary  than  if  they  inflamed  slowly.  In  other  words,  those  parts
are  capable  of  being  affected  by  the  common  suppurative  inflammation,
which  in  most  cases  germinates  well  j  perhaps,  the  specific  inflammation


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  377

is  slow  in  its  progress  and  operation,  and  such  slowness  marks  it  to  be  art
inflammation  of  some  specific  kind.

In  whatever  light  we  view  this  fact,  it  at  least  leads  us  with  more  cer-
tainty to  what  the  effects  of  an  inflammation  will  be,  and  thus  often  to
form  a  just  prognostic.

Suppuration  takes  place  much  more  readily  in  internal  canals,  than  in-
ternal cavities.

Suppuration  takes  place  more  readily  upon  the  surface  of  canals  than  in
either  the  cellular  or  investing  membrane.  The  same  cause  which  would
produce  a  suppuration  in  the  first  parts,  would  only  produce  the  adhesive
in  the  other;  for  instance,  if  a  bougie  is  introduced  into  the  urethra  for  a
few  hours,  it  will  produce  suppuration;  while,  if  a  bougie  was  intro-
duced into  either  the  tunica  vaginalis  testis,  or  the  abdomen,  but  for  a  few,
hours,  it  would  only  give  the  disposition  for  adhesions,  and  even  might  not
go  the  length  of  this  stage  of  inflammation  in  so  short  a  time  ;  but  such
surfaces  often  produce  a  greater  variety  of  matter  than  a  sore,  it  is  not  al-
ways pus  ;  and  this,  probably,  arises  from  the  cause  not  being  so  easily
got  rid  of.  An  irritation  in  the  bladder  from  stone,  stricture  in  the  ure-
thra, or  disease  of  the  bladder  itself,  gives  us  a  great  variety  of  matter;
pus,  mucus,  slime,  are  often  all  found;  sometimes  only  one  or  two  of  them.
I  have  some  idea  that  the  mucus  is  easiest  of  production  ;  but  lam  certain,
that  for  the  formation  of  slime,  the  greatest  irritation  is  required.


I.  THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  THE  SUPPURATIVE  INFLAMMATION.

This  inflammation  has  symptoms  common  to  inflammation  in  gene-
ral ;  but  it  has  these  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  inflammation  leading  to
it,  and  has  also  some  symptoms  peculiar  to  itself;  it  therefore  becomes
necessary  to  be  particular  in  our  description  of  these  peculiarities.

The  sensations  arising  from  a  disease  generally  convey  some  idea'  of
its  nature;  the  suppurative  inflammation  gives  us  as  much  as  possible  the

3  c


378  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

idea  of  simple  pain,  without  having  a  relation  to  any  other  mode  of  sen-
sation :  we  cannot  annex  an  epithet  to  it,  but  it  will  vary  in  some  decree,
according  to  the  nature  of  the  parts  going  into  suppuration,  and  what
was  remarked,  when  treating  of  the  adhesive  state,  is  in  some  degree  ap-
plicable here.

This  pain  is  increased  at  the  time  of  the  dilating  of  the  arteries,  which
gives  the  sensation  called  throbbing,  in  which  every  one  can  count  his  own
pulse  from  paying  attention  merely  to  the  inflamed  part ;  and  perhaps  this
last  symptom  is  one  of  the  best  characteristics  of  this  species  of  inflamma-
tion. When  the  inflammation  is  moving  from  the  adhesive  state  to  the
suppurative,  the  pain  is  considerably  increased,  (and  which  would  seem
to  be  the  extent  of  this  operation  in  the  part);  but  when  suppuration
has  taken  place,  the  pain  in  some  degree  subsides;  however,  as  ulceration
begins,  it  in  some  degree  keeps  up  the  pain,  and  this  is  more  or  less,  ac-
cording to  the  quickness  of  ulceration,  but  the  sensation  attending  ulcera-
tion gives  more  the  idea  of  soreness.

The  redness  that  took  place  in  the  adhesive  stage  is  now  increased,  and
is  of  a  pale  scarlet.  This  is  the  true  arterial  colour,  and  is  to  be  accounted
a  constant  symptom,  as  we  find  it  in  all  internal  inflammations,  when  at
any  time  exposed,  as  well  as  in  those  that  are  external.

Besides,  I  observed  in  the  introduction  to  inflammation,  and  when  treat-
ing of  the  adhesive  state,  that  the  old  vessels  were  dilated,  and  new  ones
were  formed  ;  these  effects,  therefore,  are  here  carried  still  further  in  the
surrounding  parts,  which  do  not  suppurate,  and  constitute  two  other  causes
of  this  redness  being  increased,  by  the  vessels  becoming  still  more  nume-
rous, and  the  red  part  of  the  blood  being  pushed  more  forward  into  many
vessels,  where  only  the  serum  and  coagulating  lymph  went  before.

The  part  which  was  firm,  hard,  and  swelled,  while  in  the  first  stages,  or
the  adhesive  state,  now  becomes  still  more  swelled  by  the  greater  dilatation
of  the  vessels,  and  greater  quantity  of  extravasated  coagulating  lymph
thrown  out,  in  order  to  secure  the  adhesions.

The  cedematous  swelling  surrounding  the  adhesive  gradually  spreads
into  the  neighbouring  parts.

In  spontaneous  suppurations,  one,  two,  three,  or  more  parts  of  the  in-


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  379

flammation  lose  the  power  of  resolution,  and  assume  exactly  the  same  dis-
position with  those  of  an  exposed  surface,  or  a  surface  in  contact  with  an
extraneous  body.  If  it  is  in  the  cellular  membrane  that  this  disposition
takes  place,  or  in  the  investing  membranes  of  circumscribed  cavities,  their
vessels  now  begin  to  alter  their  disposition  and  mode  of  action,  and  con-
tinue changing  till  they  gradually  form  themselves  to  that  state  which  fits
them  to  form  pus  j  so  that  the  effect  or  discharge  is  gradually  changing
from  coagulating  lymph  to  pus  ;  hence  we  commonly  find  in  abscesses,  both
coagulating  lymph  and  pus,  and  the  earlier  they  are  opened  the  greater  is
the  proportion  of  the  former.  This  gave  rise  to  the  common  idea  and
expression,  "  That  the  matter  is  not  concocted;"  or,  "  The  abscess  is  not
yet  ripe."  The  real  meaning  of  which  is,  the  abscess  is  not  yet  arrived
at  the  true  suppurative  state.

From  hence  it  must  appear  that  suppuration  takes  place  upon  those  sur-
faces without  a  breach  of  solids  or  dissolution  of  parts,  a  circumstance
not  commonly  allowed  *j  and  when  got  beyond  the  adhesive  state  they
become  similar  in  their  suppuration  to  the  inner  surfaces  of  internal  canals.
There  is  a  certain  period  in  the  inflammation,  when  the  suppurative
disposition  takes  place,  which  is  discovered  by  new  symptoms  taking  place
in  the  constitution,  viz.  the  shivering.

Although  the  sudden  effects  produced  in  the  constitution  would  shew
that  this  change  of  disposition  is  pretty  quick,  yet  its  effects  in  the  parts
muft  be  far  from  immediate,  for  some  time  is  required  for  the  vessels  to  be
formed  by  it,  so  as  to  produce  all  the  consequences  intended  by  nature  ;
and,  indeed,  we  find  it  is  some  time  before  suppuration  completely  takes
place;  and  that  it  is  sooner  or  later  according  as  the  inflamed  state  is  back-

*  The  knowledge  of  this  fact  in  some  of  the  Targer  cavities  is  not  quite  new;  for  I  remem*
ber,  about  the  year  1749  or  1750,  that  a  young  subject  came  under  our  inspection,  and
on  opening  the  thorax  it  was  found  on  the  left  side  to  contain  a  considerable  quantity  of  pus*
Upon  examining  the  pleura  and  surface  of  the  lungs,  they  were  found  to  be  perfectly  entire.
This  was  taken  notice  of  by  Dr.  Hunter  as  a  new  fact,  that  suppuration  could  take  place
without  a  breach  of  surface  ;  and  he  sent  to  Mr.  Samuel  Sharp  to  see  it.  It  was  also  new  to
him,  and  he  published  it  in  his  Critical  Inquiry.  Since  that  period  it  has  been  often  observed
in  the  peritoneal  inflammation.


380  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

ward  in  going  oft";  for  while  the  inflammation  lasts,  the  part,  as  it  were,
hangs  between  inflammation  and  suppuration.

The  effect  of  inflammation  appears  to  be  the  producing  of  the  suppu-
rative disposition,  or  that  state  of  a  part  which  disposes  it  to  form  pus ;
in  doing  this  the  inflammation  seems  first  to  be  carried  Lo  such  a  height
as  to  destroy  that  state  of  the  parts  on  which  itself  depends,  the  conse-
quence of  which  is,  that  they  lose  the  inflammatory  disposition,  and  come
into  that  which  fits  them  for  forming  pus.

It  seems  to  be  a  fixed  and  most  useful  law  in  the  animal  ceconomy,
that  in  spontaneous  inflammation,  when  it  has  either  destroyed  the
natural  functions  of  parts,  so  much  as  to  prevent  their  returning  by  a  re-
trograde motion,  as  it  were,  to  the  state  from  whence  they  set  out,  or
where  the  first  cause  was  a  destruction  of  the  natural  functions,  as  an  ex-
posure of  internal  surfaces,  that  they  form  a  disposition  to  the  second
method  of  cure.  That  the  disposition  for  suppuration  is  very  diffe-
rent from  the  actual  state  of  inflammation,  though  produced  by  it,  is
proved  by  a  variety  of  observations  ->  for  no  perfect  suppuration  takes
place  till  the  inflammation  is  gone  off;  and  as  the  inflammation  ceases,  the
disposition  to  suppuration  gradually  comes  on.  If  too  by  any  peculiarity
in  the  constitution  or  inflammation  by  which  it  is  continued,  or  if  by  any
accident  an  inflammation  is  brought  on  a  healthy  sore,  the  discharge  and
other  appearances  become  the  same  as  they  were  when  the  part  from
whence  they  arose  was  first  in  an  inflamed  state,  very  different  from  those
observed  when  it  was  arrived  at  the  state  of  a  kind  of  suppuration.


IL  OF  THE  TREATMENT  NECESSARY  IN  INFLAMMATION,  WHEN
SUPPURATION  MUST  TAKE  PLACE.

In  cases  of  inflammation  arising  from  accident,  but  so  circumstanced,
that  we  know  suppuration  cannot  be  prevented,  the  practice  will  be  to
moderate  the  inflammation,  if  necessary,  but  not  with  a  view  to  prevent


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,  381

suppuration  \  for  if  the  powers  are  very  great,  and  the  violence  committed
very  considerable,  the  inflammation  will  probably  be  very  violent;  and
if  it  should  have  equal  effects  on  the  constitution,  which  will  be  in
proportion  to  the  quantity  of  surface  inftamed,  then  certain  constitutio-
nal means  of  relief  will  be  necessary,  such  as  bleeding,  purging,  regi-
men, and  perhaps  producing  sickness;  because,  while  that  inflammation
continues  to  have  effects  upon  the  constitution,  the  suppuration  which
takes  place  will  not  be  so  kindly,  as  it  would  otherwise  be ;  but  if  the
constitution  is  of  the  irritable  kind,  which  will  be  generally  known  by
the  inflammation,  the  same  practice  as  mentioned  above  is  necessary  ;  in
short,  whatever  is  to  be  the  consequence,  whether  resolution  or  suppu-
ration, the  irritability  and  the  too  great  action  of  the  vessels,  whether
arising  from  too  great  powers,  or  too  great  action  with  small  powers,  are
to  be  corrected  or  removed,  as  they  in  all  cases  counteract  salutary  opera-
tions.

In  cases  where  the  constitution  has  sympathized  much  with  the  in-
flamed part,  such  medicines  as  produce  a  slight  perspiration  much  relieve
the  patient;  such  as  antimonials,  Dover's  powders,  saline  draughts,  spirits
of  mendereries,  etc.  because  they  endeavour  to  keep  up  an  universal  harmo-
ny, by  putting  the  skin  in  good  humour,  which  quiets  every  sympathiz-
ing part,  and  by  counteracting  the  effects  of  the  irritability.  Opium  often
lessens  actions,  although  it  seldom  alters  them,  when  only  given  as  an
opiate,  and  may  be  of  a  temporary  service  :  however,  this  is  not  always  a
consequence  of  opium,  as  there  are  constitutions  where  it  increases  irrita-
tion, and  of  course  diseased  action.

Fresh  wounds,  considered  simply  as  wounds,  are  all  of  the  same  nature,
and  require  one  uniform  treatment;  the  intention  being  to  put  them  into
that  situation  in  which  they  can  suppurate  with  most  ease  to  themselves;
and  the  first  dressings  commonly  remain  till  suppuration  comes  on,  unless
some  peculiarity  from  the  situation  of  parts,  or  other  collateral  circum-
stances, should  make  it  necessary  to  remove  the  dressings  or  vary  the
treatment.

The  difference  between  one  wound  and  another,  with  respect  to  the


382  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

nature  of  the  part  wounded,  will  vary  very  much ;  some  will  have  small
vessels  wounded  that  cannot  be  conveniently  got  at  in  order  to  tie  them
up,  yet  should  be  stopt  from  bleeding,  which  can  be  done  by  the  mode
of  dressing,  and  therefore  require  dressing  suitable  to  this  circumstance
alone.

Wounds  opening  into  cavities  where  peculiarities  of  the  contained
parts  are  joined  with  the  injury  done  to  them  by  the  accident  will  require
a  suitable  mode  of  dressing  ;  the  influence  too  that  a  simple  wound  in  the
containing  parts  may  have  upon  those  in  the  cavity,  as  a  wound  into  the
belly,  thorax,  joints,  skull,  etc.  will  oblige  the  surgeon  to  vary  the  mode  of
dressing  from  that  of  a  simple  wound.  While  many  wounds  will  require
being  kept  open  for  fear  of  uniting  again,  in  order  to  answer  some  future
purpose,  as  the  wound  made  into  the  tunica  vaginalis  testis,  for  the  radical
cure  of  the  hydrocele ;  others  may  require  attention  being  paid  to  them
before  suppuration  comes  on,  and  therefore  should  be  so  dressed  as  to  ad-
mit of  being  soon  and  easily  removed,  to  examine  the  parts  occasionally
as  the  symptoms  arise.  This  ought  to  be  the  case  in  wounds  of  the  head,
attended  or  not  attended  with  fracture  of  the  skull.  But  whatever  mode
of  application  may  be  thought  necessary  to  answer  the  various  attending
circumstances,  yet  as  they  are  all  wounds  which  are  to  come  to  suppura-
tion, one  general  method  is  to  be  followed  respecting  them  all,  as  far  as
those  peculiarities  will  allow.

The  application  which  has  been  made  to  wounds  for  some  years  past
in  this  country,  has  been  in  general  dry  lint ;  what  brought  this  applica-
tion into  common  practice,  most  probably  was,  its  assisting  in  stopping  the
hemorrhage;  and  as  most  wounds  are  attended  with  bleeding,  it  became
universal;  but  as  it  became  universal,  it  lost  the  first  intention,  and  be-
came simply  a  first  dressing.

I  need  hardly  remark  here,  that  all  wounds  that  are  to  suppurate  are  first
attended  with  inflammation,  and  therefore  are  so  far  similar  to  sponta-
neous inflammations  which  are  to  suppurate.  If  this  observation  is  just,
how  contradictory  must  this  mode  of  treatment  be  to  common  practice,
when  spontaneous  inflammation  has  already  taken  place;  for  let  me  ask,
where  is  the  difference  between  an  inflammation  with  a  wound,  and  one


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,  383

without  ?  And  also,  what  should  be  the  difference  in  the  application  to  a
part  that  is  to  inflame,  (while  that  application  is  made  to  the  part)  and  one
applied  to  an  inflammation  which  has  already  taken  place  ?  The  answer
I  should  make  to  such  a  question  is ; there  is  no  difference.

Wounds  that  are  to  suppurate,  I  have  already  observed,  are  first  to  go
through  the  adhesive  and  suppurative  inflammation.  These  inflamma-
tions in  a  wound,  are  exactly  similar  to  those  spontaneous  inflammations
which  suppurate  and  form  an  abscess,  or  those  inflammations  which  ul-
cerate on  the  surface,  and  form  a  sore.

The  applications  to  these  which  are  now  in  practice,  I  have  formerly
observed,  are  poultices  and  fomentations  ;  these,  however,  appear  to  be  ap-
plied without  much  critical  exactness  or  discrimination,  for  they  are  ap-
plied before  suppuration  has  taken  place,  and  where  it  is  not  intended  it
should  take  place ;  they  are  applied  to  inflammations  where  it  is  wished
they  should  suppurate;  and  applied  after  suppuration  has  taken  place.
Now,  with  respect  to  suppuration  itself,  abstracted  from  all  other  con-
siderations, the  indication  cannot  be  the  same  in  all  of  those  states  ;  but  if
poultices  and  fomentations  are  found  to  be  of  real  service  in  those  two
stages  of  the  disease,  then  there  must  be  something  common  to  both,  for
which  they  are  of  service,  abstracted  from  simple  suppuration.  I  also
formerly  observed,  that  poultices  were  of  service  when  the  inflammation
had  attacked  the  skin,  either  of  itself,  or  when  an  abscess  had  approached
so  near  that  the  skin  had  become  inflamed,  and  that  this  service  consisted
in  keeping  the  skin  soft  and  moist.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  the  use  of
a  poultice  in  an  inflammation,  either  before  suppuration  or  after,  as  in-
flammation still  exists,  till  it  is  opened;  for  inflammation  is  necessary  in  an
abscess,  while  it  is  making  its  approaches  to  the  skin,  which  I  have  called
the  ulcerative,  and  then,  and  only  then,  it  begins  to  subside;  it  is  therefore
still  proper,  in  as  much  as  it  is  of  service  to  inflammation  ;  so  far,  there-
fore, their  practice  is  right  and  consistent,  as  the  first  reason  exists  through
the  whole ;  but  when  applied  to  inflamed  parts,  which  are  meant  not  to
suppurate,  their  reasoning  or  principles  upon  which  they  applied  it  must
fail  them,  although  the  application  is  still  very  proper.

If  my  first  proposition  is  just,  viz.  that  wounds  which  are  allowed  to


384  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

suppurate,  are  similar  to  inflammations  that  are  also  to  suppurate;  then
let  us  see  how  far  the  two  practices  agree  with  this  proposition.  Lint,  I
have  observed,  is  applied  to  a  fresh  wound,  which  is  to  inflame;  and  the
same  lint  is  continued  through  the  whole  of  the  inflammation  till  suppu-
ration comes  on,  because  it  cannot  be  removed.  Lint,  considered  simply
as  an  application  to  fresh  wounds  which  are  to  inflame,  is  a  very  bad
one,  for  it  more  or  less  adheres  to  the  furface  of  the  wound,  by  means
of  the  extravasated  blood;  hence  it  becomes  difficult  of  removal,  and  often
shall  remain  in  sores  for  months,  being  interwoven  with  the  granulations,
especially  when  applied  to  the  surface  of  circumscribed  cavities,  such  as
the  tunica  vaginalis  testis,  after  the  operation  for  the  hydrocele;  however,
this  is  not  always  the  greatest  inconvenience,  the  circumstance  of  its  be-
ing loaded  or  soaked  with  blood,  subjects  it  to  become  extremely  hard
when  it  dries,  which  it  always  does  before  the  separation  takes  place,
which  separation  is  only  effected  by  the  suppuration.  In  this  way  it  be-
comes the  worst  dressing  possible  for  wounds.

As  poultices  are  allowed  by  most  to  be  the  best  application  to  an  in-
flamed part,  not  attended  by,  or  a  consequence  of  a  wound,  but  consider-
ing it  simply  as  an  inflammation,  I  do  conceive  that  the  same  application
is  the  best  for  every  inflammation,  let  it  be  from  whatever  cause  ;  for  the
idea  I  have  of  the  best  dressing  to  a  wound,  simply  as  a  wound  which  is  to
inflame,  is  something  that  keeps  soft  and  moist,  and  has  no  continuity  of
parts,  so  that  it  is  easily  separated.  The  only  application  of  this  kind  is  a
poultice,  which,  from  these  qualities,  is  the  very  best  application  to  a
fresh  wound.  It  keeps  it  soft  and  moist,  and  is  at  all  times  easily  re-
moved, either  in  part  or  the  whole.

The  same  medical  advantage  is  gained  here,  as  when  it  is  applied  to  an
inflamed  part ;  but  although  it  had  not  these  advantages,  yet  the  circum-
stance of  being  easily  removed  is  much  in  its  favour,  especially  when  com-
pared to  dry  lint.

But  a  poultice,  from  other  circumstances,  cannot  at  all  times  and  in
all  places  be  conveniently  applied.

To  preserve  the  above  properties,  it  is  necessary  there  should  be  a  mass,


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  385

much  too  large  for  many  purposes  ;  but  when  they  can  be  used  with  to-
lerable convenience,  they  are  the  best  applications.  When  they  cannot
be  applied  with  ease,  I  should  still  object  to  dry  lint,  and  would  therefore
recommend  the  lint  to  be  covered  with  some  oily  substance,  so  that  the
blood  shall  not  entangle  itself  with  the  lint,  but  may  lie  soft,  and  come
easily  off.

This  mode  of  dressing  should  be  continued  for  several  days,  or  at  least
till  fair  suppuration  comes  on,  and  when  that  has  taken  place,  then  dry
lint  may  be  with  great  propriety  used,  except  the  sore  is  of  some  specific
kind,  which  is  seldom  the  case  in  fresh  wounds;  for  accidental  wounds
seldom  happen  to  specific  diseases;  and  a  wound  in  consequence  of  an
operation  should  not  be  specific,  because  the  specific  affection  (if  there  is
any)  should  have  been  removed  by  the  operation  ;  and  should  therefore  be
a  wound  in  the  sound  part ;  as  after  an  amputation  of  a  scrofulous  joint,
or  the  extirpation  of  a  cancerous  breast.  Or  if  they  take  on  some  specific
disposition  afterwards,  then  they  must  be  dressed  accordingly,  as  will  be
explained  hereafter.

Poultices  are  commonly  made  too  thin,  by  which  means  the  least  pres-
sure, or  their  own  gravity,  removes  them  from  the  wound ;  they  should  be
thick  enough  to  support  a  certain  form  when  applied.

They  are  generally  made  of  stale  bread  and  milk  -,  this  composition,  in
general,  makes  a  too  brittle  application,  it  breaks  easily  into  different  por-
tions, from  the  least  motion,  and  often  leaves  some  part  of  the  wound  un-
covered, which  is  frustrating  the  first  intention.

The  poultice  which  makes  the  best  application,  and  continues  most
nearly  the  same  between  each  dressing,  is  that  formed  of  the  meal  of  lin-
seed ;  it  is  made  at  once*  and  when  applied  it  keeps  always  in  one  mass.

Fomentations  are  generally  applied  at  this  stage  of  the  wound,  and  they
generally  give  ease  at  the  time  of  application,  which  has  (joined  with  cus-
tom) been  always  a  sufficient  inducement  to  continue  them. As  soon  as

*  Take  boiling  water,  q.  s.  and  stir  in  the  linseed  till  it  becomes  of  a  sufficient  thickness,
and  then  add  a  small  quantity  of  some  sweet  oil.

3  d


3  86  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation*

suppuration  is  well  established,  the  part  may  then  be  dressed  according  to
the  appearances  of  the  sore  itself.

The  kind  of  wound  to  which  the  above  application  is  best  adapted,  is  a
wound  made  in  a  sound  part,  which  we  intend  shall  heal  by  granulation.
The  same  application  is  equally  proper,  where  parts  are  deprived  of  life>
and  consequently  will  slough.  It  is  therefore  the  very  best  dressing  for  a
gun-shot  wound,  and  probably  for  most  lacerated  wounds.  For  lint  ap-
plied to  a  part  that  is  to  throw  off  a  slough,  will  often  be  retained  till
that  slough  is  separated,  which  will  be  for  eight,  ten,  or  more  days.

In the  treatment  of  wounds  that  are  to  suppurate,  it  is  in  one  view
of  the  subject  right  to  allow  the  parts  to  take  their  natural  and  spontaneous
bent. From  the  natural  elasticity  of  the  skin,  and  the  contraction  of
muscles,  the  parts  wounded  are  generally  exposed,  and  from  the  conse-
quent inflammation,  they  generally  become  more  so. This  is  commonly
more  the  case  in  wounds  produced  by  accident  j  for  as  a  small  wound
and  much  old  skin  are  always  desirable,  surgeons  very  wisely  are  anxious
to  wish  for  both. In  many  operations,  they  are  desirous  of  preserving  the
skin,  viz.  where  they  are  removing  parts,  as  a  limb;  dissecting  out  tu-
mors, or  opening  an  abscess  ; all  of  which  is  extremely  proper,  and they
continue  to  practice  upon  this  principle  immediately  upon  the  receiving
the  wound,  and  in  performing  any  of  the  abovementioned  operations  ;  for
the  skin,  after  amputation,  is  drawn  down,  and  bound  down,  and  the
wounds  are  pressed  together  by  bandages. In  one  point  of  view,  this  is
beginning  too  early  ; it  is beginning  it  when nature  has  the very  op-
posite principle  in  view. Inflammation,  the  parts  must  submit  to;  and  as
inflammation  by  its  effects  will  generally  have  a  tendency  to  make  them
recede  more,  in  this  light  it  is  proper  not  to  check the effects  of  in-
flammation, therefore  let them  take their  own  way  till inflammation
subsides,  and  granulations  are  formed,  which  granulations,  I  have  already
observed,  by  their  power  of  contraction,  will  do  what  we  wanted  to  have
done ;  and  if,  from  some  of  the  first  circumstances  not  being  properly  at-
tended to,  the  contraction  of  the  granulations  is  not  sufficient,  then  is  the
time  to  assist,  and  not  before. However,  if  we  take  up  this  in  another


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,  387

point  of  view,  we  shall  see  a  considerable  utility  arising  from  bringing  the
skin  as  much  as  possible  over  the  wound,  and  keeping  it  there ;  for  in  the
time  of  inflammation  the  parts  will  adhere  or  unite  in  this  situation,  by
which  means  the  sore  will  be  less  than  it  otherwise  would  ;  and  I  conceive
that  this  practice,  when  begun,  should  be  for  some  time  continued,  for
fear  the  adhesions  may  not  be  sufficient  to  stand  their  ground  till  the  gra-
nulations can  assist.

It  often  happens  in  many  wounds,  both  from  accident  and  operations,
that  part  of  the  wound  may  with  great  propriety  be  healed  by  the  first  in-
tention ;  such  as  in  many  accidents  on  the  head,  when  a  part  of  the  scalp
has  been  torn  off,  on  the  face,  etc.  as  also  after  many  operations,  especially
where  the  skin  is  loose,  as  in  the  scrotum ;  or  where  the  skin  has  been
attended  to  in  the  time  of  the  operation,  as  in  some  methods  of  amputa-
tion, extirpation  of  breasts,  etc.  a  part  of  the  saved  skin,  etc.  may  be
made  to  unite  to  the  parts  underneath  by  the  first  intention,  and  therefore
only  part  of  the  wound  allowed  to  suppurate ;  in  all  such  cases,  a  proper
contracting  or  sustaining  bandage  may  be  applied  with  great  advantage ;
even  stitches  may  be  used  with  great  propriety,  as  was  recommended  in
the  healing  of  wounds  by  the  first  intention.


III.  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  INFLAMMATION  WHEN  SUPPURATION

HAS  TAKEN  PLACE.

In  spontaneous  inflammations,  whether  from  a  constitutional  or  local
affection,  when  suppuration  has  taken  place,  it  is  most  probable  that  ano-
ther mode  of  practice  must  be  followed  than  that  which  was  pursued  to
prevent  it ;  but  even  now,  if  a  stop  could  be  put  to  the  further  formation
of  matter,  after  it  has  begun,  it  would  in  many  cases  be  very  proper,  and
still  prevent  a  great  deal  of  mischief.  Suppuration  does  certainly  some-
times stop,  after  having  begun,  which  shows  that  there  is  a  principle  in


3  8  8  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation*

the  animal  oeconomy  of  diseases  from  which  the  machine  is  capable  of
producing  this  effect*.

I  have  seen  buboes  cured  by  vomits,  after  suppuration  had  been  con-
siderably advanced  ;  and  it  is  a  very  common  termination  of  scrofulous
abscesses  ;  but  in  scrofulous  abscesses  we  very  seldom  find  inflammation ;
this  process  appears  to  be  a  leading  circumstance  in  ulceration,  which
is  the  very  reverse  of  union  ;  even  in  superficial  sores,  which  are  the  most
likely  to  continue  suppuration,  if  excited,  we  find  by  allowing  them  to  scab,
when  they  will  admit  of  it,  that  the  act  which  admits  of  scabbing  is  the
reverse  of  suppuration,  and  it  ceases ;  however,  it  is  a  process  which  the
animal  ceconomy  does  not  readily  accept  of,  and  our  powers  in  producing
this  effect  are  but  very  small  :  if  these  powers  could  be  increased  by  any

*  I  have  formerly  observed,  that  the  inflammation  goes  off"  often  without  producing  suppu-
ration; and  I  have  also  mentioned  instances  of  suppuration  going  off"  without  the  parts  having
produced  granulations,  and  then  the  parts  fall  back,  into  the  adhesive  state,  and  the  matter  being
absorbed,  they  are  left  in  nearly  the  same  state  as  before  the  inflammation  came  on;  as  a
presumptive  proof  of  this,  in  many  of  the  large  cavities,  which  have  been  allowed  to  inflame
and  suppurate,  (by  having  been  opened)  we  find  them  often  doing  well,  without  ever  forming
granulations  ;  and  that  suppuration  generally  goes  oft";  and  I  do  not  believe  ever  fall  back
into  the  adhesive  state,  so  as  to  unite  the  parts,  but  the  parts  resume  their  original  and  natural
state  or  disposition,  and  no  adhesions  are  formed ;  this  appears  sometimes  to  happen  in  cases
of  the  empyema  after  the  operation  has  been  performed  ;  I  have  seen  cases  where  wounds  had
been  made  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  where  there  was  every  reason  to  suppose  the  whole
cavity  was  in  a  state  of  suppuration,  and  yet  those  patients  got  well ;  I  can  hardly  suppose
that  in  these  cases  the  parts  had  granulated  and  united  in  the  cure,  as  the  cellular  membrane
does  ;  because  I  have  seen  many  similar  cases,  where  the  patients  have  died,  and  no  granula-
tions have  been  found  ;  and  I  have  seen  cases  of  the  hydrocele  attempted  to  be  cured  radi-
cally by  the  caustic ;  when  the  slough  came  out,  suppuration  came  on  ;  but  the  orifice  healing
too  soon,  suppuration  has  ceased,  and  the  cure  was  thought  to  be  completed  ;  but  a  return
of  the  disease  has  led  to  another  attempt,  and  by  laying  open  the  whole  sack,  it  has  been
found  that  the  tunica  vaginalis  was  perfectly  entire.  In  such  the  fluids  were  a  mothery  se«
rum.  I  have  seen  abscesses  go  back  in  the  same  manner  :  but  I  believe  that  this  process  is
more  common  to  scrofulous  suppurations  than  any  other  ;  and  I  believe  to  the  erysipela-
tous. I  have  seen  joints  heal  after  having  suppurated  and  been  opened,  without  having  pro-
duced granulations,  leaving  a  kind  of  joint,  even  when  the  cartilages  have  exfoliated  from  the
ends  of  the  bones,  which  was  known  by  the  grating  of  the  two  ends  of  the  bones  on  one
another.


Of  the  suppurative  i?iflammation,  389

means,  it  would  be  a  salutary  discovery;  because  suppuration  itself,  in
many  cases,  proves  fatal  ;  for  instance,  suppuration  of  the  brain  and  its
membranes  ;  of  the  thorax  and  its  contents  ;  as  well  as  of  the  abdomen
and  its  contents ;  in  short,  suppuration  of  any  of  the  vital  parts  often
kills  of  itself,  simply  from  the  matter  being  produced;  but  this  practice
will  by  most  be  forbid  in  many  cases  of  suppuration  ;  for  it  is  supposed
this  very  suppuration  is  a  deposit  of  matter  or  humors  already  formed  in
the  constitution ;  but  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  time  and  experience  will  get
rid  of  such  prejudices.

When  suppuration  cannot  be  stopped  or  resolved,  then  in  most  cases  it
is  to  be  hurried  on,  which  generally  is  the  first  step  taken  by  surgeons.

How  far  suppuration  can  be  increased  by  medicine  or  application  I  do
not  know;  but  attempts  are  generally  made  ;  and  thence  we  have  sup-
purating cataplasms,  plasters,  etc.  recommended  to  us,  which  are  com-
posed of  the  warmer  gums,  seeds,  etc.  but  I  doubt  very  much  if  they  have
considerable  effect  in  this  way;  for  if  the  same  applications  were  made  to
a  sore,  they  would  hardly  increase  the  discharge  of  that  sore,  probably  ra-
ther decrease  it;  however,  in  many  cases,  where  thfi  parts  are  indolent,
and  hardly  admit  of  true  inflammation,  in  consequence  of  which  a  perfect
suppuration  cannot  takef  place;  by  stimulating  the  skin,  a  more  salutary  in-
flammation may  be  produced,  and  of  course  a  quicker  suppuration :  but  in
the  true  suppuration,  where  inflammation  preceded  it,  I  believe  it  is  hardly
necessary  to  do  any  thing  with  respect  to  suppuration  itself;  however,
from  experience,  I  believe  these  applications  have  been  found  to  bring  the
matter  faster  to  the  skin,  even  in  the  most  rapid  suppurations,  which  was
supposed  to  be  an  increased  formation  of  matter ;  but  it  can  only  be  in
those  cases  where  the  inner  surface  of  the  abscess  is  within  the  influence
of  the  skin.  This  effect  arises  from  another  cause  or  mode  of  action  be-
ing produced,  than  that  of  quickening  suppuration,  which  is  the  hasten-
ing on  of  ulceration.  I  have  mentioned  that  ulceration  was  an  effect  of,
or  at  least  attended  by  inflammation ;  and,  therefore,  whatever  in-
creases that  inflammation,  will  also  increase  the  ulceration,  which  will
bring  the  matter  sooner  to  the  skin,  without  an  increased  formation  of
matter.


390  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

Poultices  of  bread  and  milk  are  commonly  used  to  inflamed  parts  when
suppuration  is  known  to  have  taken  place ;  this  application  can  have  no
effect  upon  suppuration,  excepting  by  lessening  inflammation,  or  rather
making  the  skin  easy  under  it;  for  we  observed,  that  true  suppuration  did
not  begin  till  inflammation  was  abated  ;  but  the  inflammation  must  have
reached  the  skin  before  poultices  can  have  much  effect,  for  it  can  only  af-
fect that  part.

It  may  be  thought  necessary  that  the  ease  of  the  patient  should  be  con-
sidered, and  we  find  that  fomentations  and  poultices  often  produce  that  ef-
fect ;  we  find  too,  that  by  keeping  the  cuticle  moifl  and  warm,  the  sensi-
tive operations  of  the  nerves  of  the  parts  are  soothed,  or  lulled  to  rest;
while,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  inflamed  skin  is  allowed  to  dry,  the  inflam-
mation is  increased,  and  as  probably  suppuration  is  not  checked  by  such
treatment,  it  ought  to  be  put  into  practice;  as  warmth  excites  action,  it  is
probable,  the  warmer  the  fomentation,  so  much  the  better  ;  and  in  many-
cases  the  action  is  increased  so  that  they  can  hardly  bear  it.


IV.  COLLECTIONS  OF  MATTER  WITHOUT  INFLAMMATION.

I  have  hitherto  been  describing  true  suppuration,  which  I  have  said,
**  I  believe  is  a  consequence  only  of  inflammation,"  a  process  generally  al-
lowed. Also  in  treating  on  the  cause  of  suppuration,  viz.  inflammation,  I
hinted,  that  there  were  often  swellings,  or  thickening  of  parts  without  the
visible  or  common  symptoms  of  inflammation,  viz.  without  pain,  change
of  colour,  etc.  and  I  also  hinted,  in  treating  of  suppuration,  that  there
were  collections  of  matter  somewhat  similar  to  suppuration,  which  did
not  arise  in  consequence  of  the  common  inflammation  ;  these  I  shall  now
consider:  I  conceive  all  such  collections  of  matter  to  be  of  a  scrofulous
nature;  they  are  most  common  in  the  young  subject,  and  seldom  found  in
the  full-grown  or  old.  It  is  commonly  called  matter,  or  pus,  and  therefore
I  choose  to  contrast  true  suppuration  with  it. Although  I  have  termed  this


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation .  39 1

suppuration,  yet  it  has  none  of  its  true  characters,  any  more  than  the  swel-
lings, which  are  the  forerunners  of  it,  have  the  true  characters  of  inflam-
mation; and  as  I  did  not  call  them  inflammatory,  strictly  speaking,  I
should  not  call  this  suppuration ;  but  I  have  no  other  term  expressive  of  it.

Many  indolent  tumors,  slow  swellings  in  joints,  swellings  of  the  lym-
phatic glands,  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  and  swellings  in  many  parts  of  the
body,  are  diseased  thickenings,  without  visible  inflammation;  and  the
contents  of  some  kinds  of  incysted  tumor;  the  matter  of  many  scrofu-
lous suppurations,  as  in  the  lymphatic  glands ;  the  suppuration  of  many
joints,  viz.  those  scrofulous  suppurations  in  the  joints  of  the  foot  and
hand ;  in  the  knee,  called  white  swellings  ;  the  joint  of  the  thigh,  commonly
called  hip-cases  j  the  loins,  called  lumber  abscesses  ;  the  discharge  of  the
abovementioned  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  as  well  as  in  many  other  parts  of  the
body,  are  all  matter  formed  without  any  previous  visible  inflammation*
and  are  therefore,  in  this  one  respect,  all  very  similar  to  one  another.
They  come  on  insensibly;  the  first  symptom  being  commonly  the  swel-
lings, in  consequence  of  the  thickening,  which  is  not  the  case  with  in-
flammation, for  there  the  sensation  is  the  first  symptom.

These  formations  of  matter,  although  they  do  approach  the  skin,  yet
do  not  do  it  in  the  same  manner  as  collections  of  pus.  They  do  not
produce  readily  either  the  elongating  or  the  ulcerative  process,  and  as  the
matter  was  not  preceded  by  the  adhesive  inflammation,  these  collections
are  more  easily  moved  from  their  original  seat  into  some  other  part,  by
any  slight  pressure,  such  as  the  weight  of  their  own  matter,  which  I  have
called  abscesses  in  a  part,  in  opposition  to  abscesses  of  a  part :  when  the
matter  does  approach  the  skin,  it  is  commonly  by  merely  a  distention  of
the  part,  coming  by  a  broad  surface,  not  attended  with  any  marks  of
pointing.

Their  surrounding  parts  or  bounderies  are  soft,  not  being  attended  with
thickening; more  especially  those  in  a  part.

Such  collections  of  matter  are  always  larger  than  they  would  have  been,
if  they  had  been  either  a  consequence  of  inflammation,  or  attended  by  it;
this  is  owing  to  their  indolence,  allowing  of  great  distention  beyond  the
extent  of  the  first  disease,  even  moving  into  other  parts ;  whereas,  an  ab-


1Q2  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,

scess,  in  consequence  of  inflammation,  is  confined  to  the  extent  of  inflam-
tion  that  takes  on  suppuration,  and  its  rapid  progress  towards  the  skin
prevents  distention,  and  of  course  extention  of  the  disease

All  those  formations  of  matter,  not  preceded  by  inflammation,  nor  a
consequence  of  it,  are,  I  believe,  similar  to  each  other,  having  in  this  re-
spect one  common  principle,  very  different  from  inflammation.  The
cancer,  although  it  produces  a  secretion,  yet  does  not  produce  pus  till  ex-
posed ;  it  is,  therefore,  one  of  those  diseases,  like  the  scrofula,  which
does  not  suppurate  till  inflammation  comes  on,  and  even  seldom  then;  for
true  suppuration  arises  from  inflammation,  terminating  in  a  disposition  to
heal,  which  is  not  the  case  with  cancer.  In  the  scrofulous  suppuration
there  is  often  a  like  reluctance  to  heal.

The  kind  of  matter  is  another  distinguishing  mark,  between  that  pro-
duced in  consequence  of  inflammation,  and  what  is  formed  without  it;
the  last  being  generally  composed  of  a  curdly  substance,  mixed  with  a
flaky  matter,  the  curdly  substance  is,  we  may  suppose,  the  coagulating
lymph  deprived  of  its  serum*,  and  the  other,  or  flaky,  is  probably  the
same,  only  in  smaller  parts ;  it  looks  like  the  precipitate  of  animal  matter,
from  an  acid  or  alkali.

So  far  these  productions  of  matter  in  their  remote  and  immediate  cause,
are  not  in  the  least  similar  to  that  arising  from  common  inflammation,
nor  is  the  effect,  viz.  the  matter  similar;  and  to  show  still  further,  that
suppuration  is  always  preceded  by  inflammation,  the  very  surfaces  which
formed  the  above  matter,  immediately  produced  true  matter,  when  the  in-
flammation comes  on,  which  it  always  does  whenever  opened;  which  I
shall  now  consider.

Since  they  are  not  similar  in  their  causes  or  modes  of  production,  let  us
next  examine  how  far  they  are  similar  in  their  first  steps  towards  a  cure.

All  parts  which  form  matter  of  any  kind,  viz.  whether  in  consequence
of  inflammation  or  otherwise,  must  go  through  similar  processes  to  pro-
duce the  ultimate  effect  or  cure  :  the  first  step  in  either,  is  the  evacuation

*  I  may  observe  here,  that  the  coagulating  lymph  of  long  standing,  is  not  similar  to  the  re-
Cent.  This  is  similar  to  blood  in  general,  for  we  find  that  the  Mood  in  anuerisms,  which
Was  first  coagulated,  is  very  different  from  that  which  has  only  coagulated  lately.


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  393

of  this  matter,  for  till  this  is  effected,  nature  cannot  pursue  the  proper
means  towards  a  cure;  and  if  opened,  the  second  step  is  granulation,  and
the  third  cicatrization.  To  accomplish  the  evacuation  of  the  matter,  there
are  two  modes,  one  is  the  absorption  of  the  matter,  which  is  very  com-
mon in  the  scrofula,  or  those  productions  of  matter,  not  preceded  by  in-
flammation. This  produces  no  alteration  in  the  part,  except  that  it  gra-
dually creeps  into  a  sound  state,  the  parts  uniting  again  that  had  been  se-
parated by  the  accumulation  of  the  matter;  it  produces,  also,  no  altera--
tion  in  the  constitution.  Absorption,  however,  seldom  takes  place  in  sup-
puration, which  is  the  consequence  of  inflammation  The  other  mode  of
discharging  this  matter  is  either  by  opening  the  abscess,  in  order  to  allow
it  to  pass  out,  or  by  allowing  ulceration  to  take  place  from  the  inside  tcr
produce  its  escape ;  and  this  process,  in  the  present  case,  having  peculiari-
ties different  from  those  arising  from  inflammation,  it  is  necessary  they
should  be  understood.  Ulceration,  in  consequence  of  suppuration  ari-<
sing  from  inflammation,  is  very  rapid,  especially  if  the  suppuration  is  so'
likewise ;  but  ulceration,  in  consequence  of  matter  being  formed,  which
i$  not  the  effect  of  inflammation,  is  extremely  slow ;  it  will  remain
months,  even  years,  before  the  parts  have  completely  given  way ;  they
commonly  come  to  the  skin  by  a  broad  surface,  and  not  pointing  like  a
circumscribed  abscess  in  consequence  of  inflammation  -t  so  far  are  these
two  different.


V. OF  THE  EFFECTS  SUCH  FORMATIONS  OF  MATTER  HAVE  ON'

THE  CONSTITUTION.

Whatever  may  be  the  extent  of  such  collections  of  matter,  they
seldom  or  ever  affect  the  constitution,  unless  they  are  seated  in  a  vital  part,
or  so  connected  with  it  as  to  disturb  its  functions.

This  is  an  effect  of  indolence  in  any  disease.  A  young  person  shall  have
z.  lumbar  abscess,  for  instance,  for  years,  without  a  single  constituti-
on^] symptom, It  shall  appear  to  be  making  its  wav  through  a  num~

3  &


^94  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

ber  of  parts,  such  as  the  loins  behind,  the  buttocks,  the  lower  part  of  the
abdomen  before,  and  through  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh ;  and  in  each
part  shall  shew  large  collections  of  matter.  All  these  shall  even  attend  the
same  person,  yet  not  any  bad  symptoms,  no  shiverings  shall  accompany
this  suppuration*.  In  some  there  is  not  even  the  least  degree  of  lameness,
but  this  is  often  the  first  stage  of  the  disease  in  the  lumbar  abscess.

Let  us  next  consider  and  compare  the  consequences  attending  these  two
collections  of  matter  when  opened.  When  an  abscess,  in  consequence  of
inflammation  is  opened,  it  immediately  proceeds  towards  a  cure,  and  per-
haps it  may  have  gone  some  steps  towards  a  cure  before  opening,  the  in-
flammation still  lessens,  the*9uppuration  becomes  more  perfect,  granu-
lations begin  to  form,  and  all  of  these  steps  naturally  take  place,  because
inflammation  had  been  the  cause  >  but  when  a  collection  of  matter,  not
preceded  by  inflammation,  is  opened,  a  very  different  process  is  first  to
take  place,  viz.  inflammation  is  now  excited  over  the  whole  cavity  of  the
abscess,  which  afterwards  produces  a  perfect  matter,  similar  to  that  pro-
duced in  consequence  of  inflammation,  when  it  is  the  original  disease ;  and
which  now  produces  its  constitutional  affection,  if  it  is  such  as  to  have
connexion  with  the  constitution  j  but  this  will  depend  on  the  size  of  the
scess,  the  situation,  and  the  nature  of  the  parts,  etc.  however,  it  some-
times happens  that  they  inflame  before  they  are  opened ;  but  this  is  in
consequence  of  the  matter  distending  the  cavity,  and  thereby  acting  as  an
extraneous  body.  I  have  seen  white  swellings  in  the  knee  inflame  before
they  were  opened,  then  ulceration  take  place,  and  the  pus  brought  soon
to  the  skin,  even  after  it  had  been  confined  for  months,  without  producing
the  least  tendency  to  ulceration,  because  there  had  been  none  to  inflam-
mation ;  but  the  confinement  of  the  matter  becomes  a  cause  of  the  inflam-
mation, and  then  ulceration  takes  place.

The  inflammation  and  new  suppuration  taking  place  in  consequence  of
opening  into  these  abscesses  is  exactly  similar  to  those  arising  in  conse-
quence of  wounds  or  openings  made  into  natural  cavities  ;  it  was  still,

*  I  have  heard  surgeons  ask  such  patients,  if  they  had  rigors,  even  alluding  to  the  time  of
•increase;  this  was  applying  the  idea  of  the  symptom  of  one  disease  to  another,  and  also  the
first  stage  of  a  disease  to  the  .second.


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  295

therefore,  necessary,  that  they  should  go  through  all  the  common  steps  to-
wards restoration  -,  but,  unfortunately,  such  inflammations  have  begun  afi
the  wrong  end  j  they  have  also  set  down  upon  a  specific  disease,  which
they  can  seldom  alter  to  their  own  nature.  The  inflammation  is  in  such
cases  extended  over  a  much  larger  surface  than  the  original ;  which  is
not  the  case  in  abscess,  in  consequence  of  inflammation,  for  there  the  in-
flammation was  the  cause  and  confined  to  the  point.

In  some  cases,  as  in  lumbar  abscess,  the  extent  of  surface  to  inflamo
is  immense,  in  comparison  to  the  extent  of  the  original  disease,  and  of
course,  when  such  abscesses  inflame,,  the  symptoms  in  the  constitution  are
in  the  same  proportion.

How  different  is  this  from  the  opening  of  the  abscess  in  consequence  of
inflammation !  There  we  have  no  inflammation  following,  except  what
arises  in  consequence  of  the  wound  made  in  the  solids  in  the  operation  of
opening  ;  but  when  it  is  allowed  to  open  of  itself,  there  is  no  consequent
inflammation,  but  suppuration  goes  on. But  it  would  appear  that  when
those  collections  of  matter  are  allowed  to  open  of  themselves,  that  the  suc-
ceeding inflammation  does  not  so  readily  take  place,  as  when  opened  by
art. I  have  seen  large  lumbar  abscesses  open  of  themselves  on  the  lower
part  of  the  loins,  which  have  discharged  a  large  quantity  of  matter  ;  then
closed  up,  then  broke  out  anew,  and  so  on  for  months,  without  giving  any
other  disturbance  -,  but  when  opened,  so  as  to  give  a  free  discharge  to  the
matter,  inflammation  has  immediately  succeeded,  fever  has  come  on,  and
from  the  situation  of  the  parts  inflamed,  as  well  as  their  extent,  death  in  a
very  few  days  after  has  been  the  consequence  j  it,  therefore,  often  becomes
a  queftion  whether  we  should  inlarge  the  first  opening  or  not. We  may
observe  in  general,  that  in  cases  of  this  kind,  where  they  are  to  terminate
ill,  that  is,  where  they  cannot  be  cured,  and  are  such  as  to  affect  the  con-
stitution, the  consequent  inflammation  upon  opening  them,  which  pro-
duces the  sympathetic  fever,  has  that  fever  commonly  terminating  in  tha
hectic,  or  continued  into  the  hectic  before  any  recess  takes  place,  so  that  the
one  is  continued  into  the  other,  without  any  intermission  ;  however,  this
is  not  always  the  case,  and  those  variations  will  depend  on  the  state  of
the  sore,  the  state  of  the  constitution,  etc.


2g6  ■  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,

VI.  THE  EFFECTS  OF  THE  SUPPURATIVE  INFLAMMATION  ON  THE'

CONSTITUTION.

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  every  local  complaint  of  any  consequence,  or
-which  has  considerable  and  quick  action  within  itself,  although  not  of
considerable  magnitude,  affects  more  or  less  the  constitution,  and  gives  rise
to  what  has  been  commonly  called  the  symptomatic  fever. These  symp-
toms are  the  sympathies  of  the  constitution  with  a  local  disease  or  injury,
and  will  vary  according  to  a  vast  variety  of  circumstances. They  will  vary
according  to  the  nature  of  the  constitution,  which  admits  of  great  differ-
ences, and  which  will  include  different  ages  ;  they  will  vary  according  to
the  nature  of  the  part  in  a  state  of  disease,  which  also  admits  of  great  dif-
ferences ;  they  will  vary  according  to  the  quantity  of  mischief  done,  as
well  as  the  manner  of  its  being  done  j  that  is,  whether  so  as  to  call  forth
immediate  inflammation  as  a  wound;  or,  not  so  immediate,  as  from  having
only  killed  a  part;  they  will  vary  according  to  the  situation  of  similar  parts
in  the  body  ;  and  they  will  vary  according  to  the  stage  of  the  disease. This
last  variation  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds,  the  one  which  begins  slowly
and  increases  progressively,  as  in  the  veneral  disease,  and  the  sympathetic
affections  of  course  come  on  gradually; the  other,  where  it  begins  at  once
with  violence  and  diminishes. The  first  of  this  last  division  we  have  no-
thing to  do  with  at  present ;  it  is,  therefore,  the  kind  of  constitution,  the
kind  of  parts,  the  diseases  which  commence  with  so  much  violence  as  to
affect  the  constitution  at  once  with  the  constitutional  effects  arising  from
^the  local  disease  being  incurable,  that  form  our  present  subject. I  shall
observe  here,  that  every  disease,  whether  local  or  constitutional,  that  has  the
power  of  termination  in  itself,  commonly  has  its regular  progress  and
stated times  of  action  ; in  some,  however,  there  are  no  changes  in  the
modes  of  action,  the  disease  coming  on  and  dying  away;  but  in others
there  are ;  and  in  those  where  changes  take  place,  there  are  stated  periods
for  those  changes,  so  as  to  render  them  regular. As  regularity  in  the
modes  of  action  in  disease  is  conducive  to  the  termination  of  that  disease,
it  is  a  thing  very  much  desired;  for  these  changes  are  a  cessation  of  the
action,  either  temporary  or  perminent. As  the  constitution sympathies


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation*  $gj

"with  a  local  irritation,  and  as  that  sympathy  is  according  to  the  constitu-
tion, to  the  violence  of  the  irritation,  and  to  the  nature  of  the  parts  irri-
tated ;  and  the  symptoms  of  that  sympathy  must  be  similar  to  constitu-
tional complaints  that  are  commonly  taking  place ;  and  if  the  local  coitl-
plaint  should  not  be  known,  then  they  will  be  taken  for  constitutional
complaints  wholly,  and  treated  as  such;  but  often  from  their  continuance,
some  local  affection  is  suspected ;  local  complaints,  however,  are  com>-
monly  preceded  or  attended  with  some  local  symptom  either  directly  or
indirectly,  or  with  some  collateral  symptom  or  symptoms,  so  as  to  direct
us  to  the  cause.  Local  complaints  attended  with  inflammations,  the  ob-
jects of  surgery,  are  often  attended  with,  or  rather  consequent  upon  vio-
lence of  some  kind ;  such  as  the  loss  of  a  part,  either  fluid  or  solid,
which  the  constitution  feels,  and  which  loss,  or  violence,  adds  to  the  con-
stitutional affection.  This  will  be  according  to  the  quantity  of  injury  of
loss  of  living  matter,  whether  blood,  or  some  solid,  the  time  in  the  opera-
tion, the  state  of  the  parts  operated  upon,  and  the  nature  of  the  part  re-
moved. I  have  seen  a  man  die  almost  immediately  upon  the  loss  of  a  tes-
ticle. I  have  seen  convulsions  immediately  attend  the  operation  for  the
hydrocele,  so  that  I  have  almost  despaired  of  recovery.  I  have  seen,  a
most  violent  sympathetic  fever,  delirium,  and  death,  follow,  in  consequence
of  dividing  parts  in  the  leg,  and  searching  after  a  bleeding  artery.  The
loss  of  a  limb  above  the  knee,  is  more  than  many  can  bear ;  the  cutting  for
the  stone,  where  it  breaks,  and  may  be  an  hour  in  extracting,  is  also  more
than  many  can  bear;  the  parts  being  in  such  diseased  state,  as  not  to  be
relieved,  have  continued  the  symptoms  of  the  disease;  and  the  loss  of  a  tes-
ticle, although  of  so  small  a  size,  when  compared  with  many  other  parts
which  we  can  lose  with  impunity,  yet  from  its  vital  connexion  is  more  se-
rious. We  cannot  bear  to  lose  much  brain.

The  loss  of  too  much  blood  is  often  an  attendant  on,  or  a  consequence
of  operations ;  but  sometimes  takes  place  without  much  violence.  This
produces  very  considerable  constitutional  effects;  bringing  on  weakness,
and  many  complaints,  depending,  as  it  were,  upon  debility,  which  are  what
are  commonly  called  nervous. I  have  seen  a  lucked  jaw  come  on  in  cense-


39S  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

quence  of  the  loss  of  a  considerable  quantity  of  blood,  the  cause  of  the  loss
being  but  trifling,  and  giving  no  symptoms  whatever.

The  nature  of  the  cause  of  inflammation,  produces,  I  believe,  but  little-
variation  in  the  constitution  ;  for  of  whatever  kind  it  is,  the  symptoms  in
the  constitution  will  be  in  all  cases  nearly  the  same,  proportioned  only  to
the  violence  and  rapidity  of  its  progress ;  and  as  this  inflammation  is  pretty
violent,  more  especially  if  it  produces  healthy  suppuration,  it  generally
produces  more  violent  effects  upon  the  constitution  than  any  other  3
this,  however,  will  be  in  some  degree  according  to  the  susceptibility  of  the
constitution  for  inflammation ;  and  if  any  difference  takes  place  in  the  in-
flammation in  one  constitution  from  that  of  another,  it  will  arise  from  the
nature  of  the  constitution,  the  nature  of  parts,  and  their  situation,  and  not
from  the  nature  of  the  cause.

The  sympathy  of  the  constitution  with  a  local  disease,  is  what  I  have
called  universal  sympathy,  and  is,  perhaps,  the  most  simple  act  of  a  con-
stitution ;  it  is  the  sympathy,  with  a  simple  violence,  as  a  cold,  etc.  but
still  it  will  vary  in  different  constitutions,  because  all  constitutions  will  not
act  alike  under  the  influence  of  a  local  disease,  although  it  will  vary  accord-
ing to  the  stages  of  inflammation,  according  to  the  natural  disposition  of
the  parts  inflamed,  and  the  situation  of  those  parts  in  the  body  ;  yet  it  may
be  the  most  simple  act  of  that  constitution  at  the  time;  for  although  it
would  appear  at  the  time  to  be  an  increase  of  the  disease  by  its  becoming
universal,  yet  as  it  is  a  natural  consequence,  it  is  a  much  better  sign  of
health,  than  if  no  fever  had  occurred  in  consequence  of  considerable  inju-
ries i  for  if  there  was  no  inflammation,  there  would  probably  be  little  or  no
fever.  Nature  requires  to  feel  the  injury,  for  where,  after  a  considerable
operation,  there  is  rather  a  weak  quiet  pulse,  often  with  a  nervous  op-
pression, with  a  seeming  difficulty  of  breathing  and  a  loathing  of  food,
the  patient  is  in  a  dangerous  way.  Fever  shews  powers  of  resistance,  the
other  symptoms  shew  weakness  sinking  under  the  injury.  This  is  like
the  effects  of  the  cold-bath ;  yet  we  see  it  calling  forth,  or  rousing  up  to
action,  some  peculiarity  in  the  constitution,  or  a  part,  which  may  be  con-
tinued after  the  sympathetic  action  is  lost,  and  which  may  again  reflect


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  399

back  upon  the  part  its  reluctance  to  heal. This  may  be  examplined  by
affection  or  injury,  scrofula,  even  cancer,  etc*.

Rigors  are  commonly  the  first  symptom  of  a  constitutional  affection ;
but  a  rigor  is  productive  of  other  effects,  or  symptoms,  as  it  were  natu-
rally rising  out  of  the  rigor;  and  these  are  according  to  the  nature  of  the
constitution;  in  a  strong  constitution,  a  hot  period  succeeds,  as  if  the  con-
stitution was  roused  to  action  to  resist  debility,  which  terminates  the  rigor;
and  this  hot  fit  terminates  in  perspiration,  which  is  the  complete  action  of
the  disease,  restoring  tranquility,  which  is  the  cure,  and  is  the  best  termina-
tion that  can  happen  where  a  rigor  takes  place;  for  it  shews  that  the  con-
stitution has  the  power  of  terminating  the  effects  of  the  cause.  I  believe,
however,  that  in  most  cases  it  shews  a  degree  of  weakness,  especially  if  easily
excited,  or  a  peculiarity  of  constitution.  But  as  the  cause  is  still  continu-
ing in  cases  of  rigor  arising  from  local  irritation,  these  rigors  may  recur ;  and
if  they  recur,  it  shews  a  constitution  ready  to  be  affected  -r  however,  if  they
do  recur  at  stated  periods,  it  still  shews  the  constitution  to  be  able  to  re-
sist the  effects  of  the  disease.  Further,  if  the  constitution  is  weak,  a  rigor
comes  on,  and  no  hot  fit  succeeds,  but  it  runs  directly  into  the  sweat ;  it
will  probably  be  cold  and  clammy.  If  it  is  a  constitution  of  another  kind,
the  hot  fit  will  continue,  having  only  a  kind  of  abatement,  but  no  sweat  or
perfect  intermission  will  take  place,  and  therefore  the  whole  action  has  not
taken  place.

Rigors  from  local  irritation,  attended  with  the  full  action,  and  at  re-

*  I  believe  that  local  specific  irritations  do  not  produce  much  variety  in  the  constitution;
for  I  am  persuaded  that  specific  local  irritations  are  not  capable  of  altering  that  constitution,
similar  to  the  plague  and  other  contageous  diseases.  I  believe  that  morbid  poisons  do  rtot
act  by  any  peculiar  mode  of  action  in  the  part,  so  as  to  affect  the  constitution  in  any  peculiar
way,  but  such  as  are  capable  of  continuing  so  long  as  to  weaken  that  constitution,  as  for  in-
stance, the  lues,  when  of  long  standing ;  but  this  will  be  similar  to  every  other  lasting  disease;
for  at  first  it  certainly  does  not  affect  the  constitution  so  as  to  alter  the  disposition  of  a  wound
made  upon  any  part.  I  am  not  so  certain  respecting  natural  poisons.  The  tecuna,  poison-
ed arrow,  etc.  would  seem  to  produce  a  peculiar  constitutional  affection,  from  a  local  cause  j
for  we  can  hardly  fuppose  absorption  to  have  taken  place  in  so  short  a  time.


4qo.  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

galar  stated  times,  have  all  the  characters  of  an  intermittent  fever  ;  but  it
may  be  observed  that,  in  common,  rigors  preceding  suppuration  are  not
followed  by  fo  much  heat  and  sweating,  as  an  intermittent  is.

In  spontaneous  inflammations,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  ascertain,  whether  the
constitution  or  the  part  is  first  affected,  and  if  it  always  could,  it  would  be
the  best  guide  to  know  whether  the  inflammation  was  local  entirely,  or  an
effect  of  a  constitutional  affection ;  nothing  but  the  priority  of  the  symptoms,
can  in  some  degree  fix  this  ;  but  the  constitutional  symptoms  are  often  so.
slight,  at  least  at  first,  as  not  to  be  taken  notice  of.  However,  we  know
that  indispositions  of  the  constitution  are  productive  of  local  complaints*
which  are  often  attended  with  inflammation,  but  which  is  often  accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  the  parts*,  the  constitution  being  first  diseased ;  and
we  know  that  in  many  fevers  there  is  suppuration  in  some  part  of  the
txxly,  and  often  in  particular  parts,  such  as  the  parotid  glands,  probably
according  to  the  nature  of  the  fever ;  such  inflammations  will,  according
to  their  violence,  add  to  the  constitutional  affection.  Constitutional  af*
fection  arising  from  inflammations  will  be  almost  coeval  with  the  inflam-*
mations,  or  at  least  will  very  soon  follow ;  however,  that  will  be  accord*
ing  to  the  circumstance  before  related  -t  for  inflammation  is  an  act  of  the
part,  attended  with  a  degree  of  violence,  and  the  constitution  will  feel  it
sooner  or  later,  according  to  circumstances :  we  see  in  cases  of  inflamma-
tion of  the  testicles  from  a  gonorrhoea,  (which  must  be  considered  as  en-
tirely local)  that  the  constitution  is  soon  affected  by  it.  But  constituti-
onal symptoms  arise  from  external  violence  alone,  and  more  especially
when  attended  with  loss  of  substance  j  and  they  will  be  sooner  or  later,  ac-*
cording  to  the  degree  of  the  violence,  and  the  importance  of  the  parts  lost,
agreeably  to  what  has  been  said  j  but  simple  violence,  even  with  the  loss
of  a  part,  I  have  already  observed,  is.  not  of  such  consequence  as  we  should
at  first  imagine ;  for  in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  a  limb,  if  the  parts  ars
allowed  to  heal  by  the  first  intention,  the  constitution  is  but  little  effected  j

*  Local  inflammations  arising  from  derangement  of  the  constitution,  I  think  are  most
Commonly  of  the  scrofulous  kind,  more  especially  when  in  parts  of  a  particular  nature,  such
as  lymphatic  glands,  ligamentous  or  tendinous  parts,  which,  when  in  particular  situations,  ar»
often  supposed  to,  be  venereal. Vide.  Treatise  on  Venereal  Difease.


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  401

it  is,  therefore,  violence  with  loss  of  substance,  and  which  is  to  produce  in-
flammation and  suppuration,  that  gives  rise  to  the  constitutional  symptoms ;
and  when  these  commence,  or,  more  probably,  when  the  part  sets  about
these  operations,  the  constitution  becomes  affected.  It  is  more  the  new  dis-
position in  the  parts,  than  the  quantity  of  inflammatory  action  in  them,
by  which  the  constitution  is  affected;  for  we  shall  see,  that  upon  the  simple,
commencement  of  the  suppurative  disposition,  before  it  has  taken  place,
rigors,  etc.  come  on.

The  constitutional  effects  arising  upon  the  commencement  of  inflam-
mation independent  of  situation,  of  vital  parts,  nerves,  etc.  are  greater  or
less  according  to  the  nature  of  the  disease.  When  the  adhesive  stage  com-
mences, it  has  but  very  little  effect  upon  the  whole  system ;  there  is  some-
times, however,  a  rigor,  although  not  always ;  this  is  more  in  common
spontaneous  inflammations  than  in  those  arising  from  an  injury  done  to  a
part,  but  such  are  seldom  or  ever  alarming.  When  the  suppurative  dispo-
sition takes  place,  new  effects  upon  the  constitution  arise,  which  are  very
considerable  and  varying  in  themselves.  The  cold  fits,  or  rigors,  are  more
frequently  felt  at  the  commencement  of  the  suppurative  than  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  adhesive  inflammation,  more  especially  too  if  it  is  what  we
commonly  call  spontaneous  inflammations,  which  advance  to  suppu-
ration ;  for  in  those  inflammations  occasioned  by  an  accident,  or  an
operation,  which  must  suppurate,  they  appear  to  set  out  at  the  very  first
with  a  kind  of  suppurative  disposition.  Those  arising  in  consequence  of
spontaneous  inflammation,  or  from  an  injury,  are  not  lasting,  are  often
succeeded  by  hot  fits,  and  if  they  terminate  in  perspiration  then  the  patient
is  relieved;  and  are  more  or  less  so  according  to  the  greatness  of  the
present  inflammation  and  the  suppuration  that  is  likely  to  follow,  joined
to  the  nature  of  the  parts  and  their  situation  :  if  in  vital  parts  they  will
be  most  violent,  and  next  to  these,  in  parts  far  from  the  heait.  This
cold  fit  is,  indeed,  a  constant  symptom  in  most  local  diseases,  which
affect  the  constitution  ;  and  in  this  case,  plainly  shews  that  the  con-
stitution is  so  affected,  or  sympathizes  with  the  part.  It  is  thus  also,  that
fevers  usually  commence;  and  upon  the  absorption  of  any  poisonous
matter  the  same  symptoms  appear. I  have  seen  them  arise  from  a  simple

3  F


4-02  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

prick  in  the  end  of  a  ringer,  made  with  a  clean  sewing  needle*,  exactly
similar  to  those  arising  from  the  absorption  of  poison.  Disagreeable
applications  to  the  stomach  produce  them,  and  also  disagreeable  affec-
tions of  the  mind :  but  rigors  are  not  confined  to  the  commencement  of
•disease,  for  they  occur  in  its  progress,  and  sometimes  at  its  termination,  as
will  be  mentioned.

It  is  probable  that  the  stomach  is  the  cause  of  those  rigors,  by  its
taking  part  in  the  diseased  action  of  the  constitution ;  for  as  the  stomach
is  the  seat  of  simple  animal  life,  and  thereby  the  organ  of  universal  sym-
pathy of  the  materia  vita?,  or  the  living  principle,  it  is  of  course  more  or
less  affected  upon  all  these  occasions  •  so  that  an  affection  of  any  part  of
the  body  and  of  the  mind,  can  produce  very  nearly  the  same  effect,  as
that  which  arises  from  disagreeable  applications  to  the  stomach  itself;
which  accounts  for  that  viscus  taking  part  in  all  constitutional  affections.
I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  sympathy  of  the  stomach  which  occafions
sickness,  arises  from  causes  producing  weakness  or  debility.  It  takes  place
from  injuries  or  disorders  of  the  brain,  which  occasion  universal  debility;
it  arises  from  loss  of  blood,  and  also  from  epileptic  fits.  How  far  the
sickness  is  to  be  considered  as  an  effect  which  is  to  produce  action,  viz.
vomiting,  and  which  action  is  to  reflect  strength  back  upon  the  consti-
tution, I  do  not  know ;  but  it  is  certain,  that  people  who  are  fick,  and
going  to  faint,  are  prevented  by  the  action  of  vomiting;  the  act  of
vomiting,  therefore,  appears  often  to  be  a  cause  of  the  prevention  of  the
fits  coming  on,  by  rousing  up  the  actions  of  life.  The  rigors  I  should  be
apt  to  suspect  arise  from  weakness  at  the  time.  A  sudden  alteration,  a
sudden  call,  or  a  sudden  and  universal  irritation  upon  the  constitution,
will,  I  imagine,  produce  immediate  weakness;  for  every  new  action  in  a
constitution,  must  produce,  or  tend  to  produce  a  weakness  in  that  func-
tion ;  the  effects  of  which  will  vary  according  to  the  necessity,  and  state
of  the  constitution. In  some  cases  where  the  constitution  is  strong,  and

*  Hence  it  would  seem  as  if  simple  irritation  in  a  part,  was  capable  of  affecting  the  whole
nervous  system.


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation  %  403

as  it  were  equal  of  itself  to  the  task,  it  will  call  up  the  animal  powers  to
action,  and  produce  the  hot  fit  of  a  fever;  but  in  weak  constitutions,  or  in
such  as  threaten  dissolution,  as  in  many  diseases,  especially  towards  the
close,  it  loses  by  every  rigor,  and  is  seldom  capable  of  producing  a  hot
fit,  but  only  occasions  a  cold  clammy  sweat;  hence,  cold  sweats,  when  a
person  is  in  extremities,  is  a  common  symptom.  That  rigors  are  an  effect
of  every  sudden  change  in  the  constitution,  and  are  not  peculiar  to  the
commencement  of  disease,  is  evident  from  the  following  cases  ;  which  also
prove,  that  even  the  change  to  health  shall  produce  the  same  effect,  so
that  not  only  in  its  commencement,  and  in  its  different  stages,  a  disease
shall  produce  rigors,  but  in  its  termination  or  crisis.

A  boy  about  eleven  months  old  was  taken  ill  with  a  complaint,  which
could  not  be  well  understood  from  the  symptoms,  and  which  came  on  in-
sensibly. His  pulse  was  quick  and  full,  for  which  he  was  bled  three  times,
and  the  blood  was  rather  sizy;  the  tongue  was  white;  he  was  not  very  hot,
but  uneasy  and  restless,  with  loss  of  appetite.  His  stools  were  upon  the
whole  pretty  natural ;  he  was  observed  to  be  every  other  day  rather  worse,
although  there  never  was  a  perfect  intermission,  but  only  a  kind  of  remis-
sion. After  having  been  ill  for  about  a  fortnight  in  this  way,  he  was  taken
with  a  cold  shivering  fit,  succeeded  by  a  hot  fit,  and  then  a  sweat.  My
opinion  was,  that  the  disease  was  now  formed,  and  that  he  would  have
more  at  the  intermitting  times ;  but  he  had  no  more  after.  In  short,  the
disease  formed  itself  into  that  which  has  but  one  fit,  and  in  this  formation
he  had  those  symptoms.  I  have  seen  the  same  symptoms  in  many  dis-
eases, especially  those  occasioned  by  an  operation,  which  in  general  alarm,
but  which  should  not  if  they  go  through  their  stages.  A  patient  of  mine
at  St.  George's  Hospital  was  cut  for  the  stone ;  he  had  no  uncommon
symptoms  for  several  weeks,  when  he  was  taken  with  a  cold  fit,  which
was  succeeded  by  a  hot  one,  and  then  by  a  profuse  sweat.  The  young
gentlemen  of  the  hospital  were  rather  alarmed,  conceiving  them  to  be  the
signs  of  dissolution  ;  but  I  told  them,  that  this  was  of  no  consequence,  as
the  disease  had  completed  its  full  action.  That  it  was  either  a  regular
ague,  or  arose  from  the  irritation  of  the  wound}  and  if  the  first,  he  would


404  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,

liave  more  of  them  at  stated  periods,  which  the  bark  would  probably  cure;
but  if  the  second,  it  might  not  return;  for,  since  the  constitution  was  in
possession  of  the  complete  action,  that  when  the  parts  got  better  he  would
be  well.  He  had  no  more;  and  went  on  doing  as  well  as  if  no  such  fit
had  ever  taken  place. This  is  not  the  only  instance  of  this  nature.

Here  it  is  to  be  considered,  that  those  affections  of  the  constitution,  are
effects  of  the  local  action  of  the  solids,  either  when  produced  by  sponta-
neous causes,  or  by  accident;  but  there  are  sometimes  constitutional  symp-
toms, or  universal  sympathies,  which  arise  immediately  out  of  the  act  of
the  violence  itself,  and  which  are  often  dangerous.  Loss  of  blood  may
be  reckoned  one  cause,  which  will  bring  on  all  kinds  of  constitutional
complaints,  in  consequence  of  weakness  being  produced,  either  immediate,
as  fainting,  or  secondary,  as  in  dropsies,  as  well  as  nervous  affections;
the  locked  jaw,  for  instance;  or  violence  alone  without  the  loss  of  blood,
may  often  produce  immediate  fatal  effects.

I  have  seen  a  man  thrown  into  such  convulsions  from  the  operation  of
the  hydrocele  being  performed  upon  him,  that  I  began  to  despair  of  his
recovery.  I  have  known  a  man  die  immediately  of  castration.  These
symptoms  are  somewhat  similar  to  the  second,  or  nervous,  but  are  still
very  different;  for  in  the  present,  the  persons  are  as  it  were  lost  to  them-
selves, being  rendered  senseless,  therefore,  it  is  probably  more  an  affection
of  the  brain  than  the  nerves.

Another  symptom  attending  inflammation  when  it  has  affected  the  con-
stitution, is  frequent  exacerbations,  or  periods  in  which  the  inflammation
appears  to  be  increased.  They  have  great  affinity  to  the  rigors  we  have
been  mentioning.

Exacerbations  are  common  to  all  constitutional  diseases,  and  would
often  appear  to  belong  to  many  local  complaints.  They  are  commonly
regular  if  the  constitution  is  strong,  having  their  stated  times,  and  in  pro-
portion as  they  are  so  the  disease  is  less  dangerous.  They  are  a  repetition
of  the  first  attack,  but  seldom  so  strong,  except  where  there  is  a  perfect
cessation  in  the  disease  between  the  fits. This  is  an  attribute  belonging


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,  405

to  life,  and  shews  that  life  cannot  go  on  the  same  continually  in  any  state,
but  must  have  its  hours  of  rest,  and  hours  of  action.

In  this,  as  in  almost  every  other  symptom  of  disease,  the  effect  has
been  considered  as  a  cause;  for  exacerbations  have  always  been  considered
as  owing  to  the  disease  having  its  time  of  subsiding,  or  lessening,  and  its
time  of  increase.  This  idea  might  pass  as  just  in  fevers  where  causes
are  not  known;  but  where  the  causes  continue  the  same,  as  in  local  dis-
eases, we,  a.  priori,  should  not  expect  it;  yet  we  find  in  such  cases,
periods  of  increase,  and  decrease  of  the  symptoms,  in  the  constitution,
and  therefore  we  must  search  pfter  some  principle  belonging  to  animal
life,  as  a  cause  of  this.

We  shall  find  that  an  animal  is  so  constituted  as  to  be  incapable  of  ex-
isting for  any  continuance  of  time  in  any  one  state  whatever;  the  actions
of  the  sensitive  principle,  when  in  perfect  hearth,  Have  their  regular  ex-
acerbations, viz.  watching,  and  sleep;  it  is  disease  that  interrupts  this
regularity  of  the  actions  of  health;  therefore  we  find  that  the  actions  of
disease  cannot  always  go  on  in  the  same  way;  nature  rests  insensible  of
the  disease,  while  the  disease  exists  at  all  times  alike:  since  this  is  the
case,  where  we  see  evidently  a  continuance  of  the  remote  cause,  and  that
the  constitution  is  only  capable  of  being  affected  by  this  cause  at  stated
times ;  according  to  the  species  of  irritation  given,  and  the  constitution  at
the  time ;  may  we  not  reasonably  suppose  this  to  be  the  case,  where  the
cause  is  invisible,  as  in  fevers.

Whether  these  exacerbations  are  an  effect  of  an  occasional  increase  of  the
inflammation,  or  whether  the  inflammation  is  increased  by  the  paroxysm
of  the  fever,  is  not  easy  to  determine;  but  they  attend  each  other.

An  ague  is  a  disease  which  exists  in  the  constitution,  between  the  fits,
as  much  as  at  the  time  of  the  fit;  but  the  constitution  becomes  insensible
of  it,  and  the  action  can  only  last  a  stated  time.

The  process  of  ulceration  seldom  appears  to  affect  the  whole  system;  it
is  hardly  known  to  exist,  but  in  the  appearance  of  the  parts,  viz.  when  the
part  which  contains  the  matter  gets  softer  to  the  touch,  or  when  an  ulcer


jq6'  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

becomes  larger. But  that  rigors  take  place  upon  the  commencement  of
ulceration,  I  think  is  evident;  although  it  cannot  well  be  known  in  all
cases ;  for  ulceration  will  be  so  close  upon  suppuration  in  most  cases,  that
it  will  be  difficult  to  distinguish  which  was  the  cause  of  the  rigor;  but
where  suppuration  has  taken  place,  and  the  abscess  is  opened,  so  that  the
first  act  of  suppuration  is  finished,  yet  if  it  is  not  opened  so  as  to  allow  of
a  ready  outlet  to  the  matter;  for  instance,  if  not  opened  at  a  depending
part,  the  pressure  of  the  matter  against  the  most  depending  part  of  the
abscess  will  produce  ulceration  there,  and  rigors  will  take  place. Those
rigors,  however,  will  not  commence  for  some  time  after  the  first  opening  >
because  the  first  opening  will  for  some  time  remove  the  disposition  for
ulceration  all  over  the  surface  of  the  abscess;  but  when  it  finds  that  this
opening  is  not  sufficient  to  take  off  the  pressure,  then  it  sets  about  forming
another  opening,  and  when  it  does  so,  the  rigors  will  recur,  and  with  as
much  severity  as  before. This  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  new  matter
forming  from  fresh  inflammation,  and  by  others  to  be  the  absorption  of
matter  already  formed. Although  ulceration  does  not  affect  the  constitu-
tion equal  to  the  mischief  it  is  doing,  yet  its  operations  are  often  much
affected  by  indispositions  of  the  constitution ;  in  some  indispositions  its  pro-
gress is  increased,  in  jothers  it  is  even  brought  on,  as  in  many  old  sores,
especially  of  the  lower  extremities  j  and  in  some  indispositions  its  progress
is  lessened  or  stopped.

The  constitutional  sypmtoms  arising  from  a  local  complaint  may  be
divided  into  three  as  to  time,  the  immediate,  indefinite,  and  remote.  Of
the  first,  or  immediate,  there  appears  to  be  but  one ;  of  the  second,  there
is  probably  a  great  variety,  at  least,  appearing  in  very  different  forms
and  at  very  different  periods,  in  respect  of  the  original  cause.  Of  the  re-
mote there  is  probably  only  one.  The  immediate  I  shall  reckon  that
which  is  called,  the  symptomatic  fever;  and  what  I  shall  reckon  the  second
are,  nervous  affections,  as  spasms,  both  temporary  and  permanent,  and  de-
lirium. Whether  the  symptomatic  fever,  the  spasms,  or  the  delirium,
come  first,  is  not  certain,  for  often  all  concur  or  occur  at  the  same  time;
but  as  the  sympathetic  fever  is  most  constant,  and  is  more  an  universal
principle,  it  is  to  be  reckoned  the  first. And  the  third,  which  I  have


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,  407

called,  remote,  is  what  is  understood  by  the  hectic;  to  which  may  be
added  the  symptoms  of  dissolution,  which  is  the  last  stage  of  all,  and  may
be  a  consequence  of  either  the  above,  or  any  other  disease.

The  first  of  the  constitutional  affections  is  commonly  called,  the  symp-
tomatic fever;  but  which  I  choose  to  call  the  sympathetic  inflammatory
fever.  This  is  immediate,  or  nearly  so,  and  is  the  sympathy  of  the
constitution,  with  the  first  stages  of  a  local  disease,  which  excites  an
alarm  in  the  constitution,  thereby  rousing  up  its  powers  to  produce  suc-
ceeding actions.  This  would  appear  to  show  very  much  the  nature  of
the  constitution  at  the  time;  for  not  being  of  any  specific  nature,  both
inflammation  and  fever  are  led  of  course  into  the  nature  of  the  constitution
by  the  natural  tendency  of  the  constitution  itself,  and  therefore  partake
of  it,  and  only  become  more  or  less  of  a  specific,  in  proportion  as  the  con-
stitution has  more  or  less  of  a  specific  susceptibility  or  disposition.

I  have  already  observed,  that  affections  of  the  constitution  often  com-
mence with  rigor.  However,  the  commencement  of  the  sympathetic  fever
is  not  always  attended  with  that  effect;  and  I  believe  it  is  the  best  consti-
tution where  it  is  not;  and  in  that  case,  it  changes  into  a  regular  fever  of
the  inflammatory  kind.  If  the  constitution  has  powers,  heat  comes  on,  at-
tended with  dry  skin,  frequent  and  commonly  a  full  pulse,  having  at  the
same  time  a  degree  of  hardness  in  the  stroke ;  watchfulness,  high  co-
loured urine,  loss  of  appetite  for  solids,  and  thirst;  all  these  will  vary  ac-
cording to  various  visible  circumstances,  as  well  as  according  to  many  in-
visible ones,  some  one  symptom  being  more  in  one  constitution,  and  less
in  another.

It  is  in  many  instances  difficult  to  determine  what  is  cause,  and
what  is  effect.  It  has  been  commonly  supposed  that  this  fever  was
necessary  for  the  operation  of  suppuration,  and  therefore  the  fever  did
not  arise  from  the  sympathy  of  the  constitution  with  a  local  injury,
but  as  a  necessary  effect  to  become  a  cause  of  suppuration.  If  this  was
the  case,  we  could  have  no  suppuration  which  had  not  been  preceded
by  fever ;  and  the  fever  must  have  been  equal  in  all  cases  in  the  same


40  3  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.

constitution,  let  the  quantity  of  injury  be  what  it  will.  For  if  a  pimple,
or  the  suppuration  of  a  scratch  depended  upon  fever,  they  would  re-
quire as  much  fever  for  their  production  of  inflammation  and  sup-
puration as  the  largest  abscess,  or  largest  wound ;  for  a  point  that
inflames  and  suppurates  is  under  the  same  predicament  with  respect  to
the  whole  that  a  thousand  are;  and  a  large  abscess  is  to  be  considered  as
only  made  up  of  a  thousand  points.  One  venereal  sore  requires  as  much
mercury  to  cure  it  as  a  thousand.  One  plant  requires  as  much  wet  weather
and  sunshine  as  a  million.  A  principle  that  affects  universally  can  only
affect  a  part  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  the  universal  affection  there
is  in  the  part,  each  part  has  just  its  portion  of  general  influence.

Now,  according  to  this  proposition,  which  is  undeniable,  a  scratch  re-
qiures  the  same  quantity  of  fever  that  an  amputation  of  the  thigh  does.  Let
us  see  how  this  accords  with  common  experience ;  we  find  that  inflam-
mations and  suppurations  of  sores  shall  take  place  without  any  fever;  that
the  fever,  in  consequence  of  an  injury,  is  not  in  all  cases  in  the  least  pro-
portioned to  the  quantity  of  injury,  inflammation,  and  suppuration,  which
it  always  should,  if  the  last  was  an  effect  of  it;  and  we  know  if  an  increase
of  fever  comes  on,  superadded  to  the  sympathetic,  that  suppuration  is  re-
tarded or  stopped  altogether,  instead  of  being  quickened.

From  the  same  mode  of  reasoning  it  should  be  exactly  the  same  whe-
ther the  fever  produce  suppuration  in  a  vital  part  or  not  a  vital  part.
It  is  much  more  easy  to  conceive  that  an  injury  done  to  a  vital  part
shall  be  the  cause  of  universal  sympathy,  than  that  a  vital  part  should
require  more  fever  to  make  it  inflame  and  suppurate  than  a  part  does
which  is  not  vital.  This  theory  would  at  once  overset  our  observation
that  the  constitution  is  affected  or  sympathizes  more  readily  with  some
parts  than  with  others.  In  many  cases  of  spontaneous  inflammations  and
suppurations  it  was  natural  to  suppose  that  the  fever  was  the  cause  of  the
suppuration  ;  but  if  persons  who  thought  so  had  observed  accurately,  they
would  have  divided  spontaneous  suppurations  into  two  kinds;  one,  whose
remote  and  immediate  cause  was  local,  and  therefore  in  such  the  fever
followed  the  local  action,  as  in  injuries;  the  other,  where  the  remote  cause
was  fever,  which  produced  the  injury;  and  the  injury,  whatever  it  was,


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  409

produced  the  inflammation  and  suppuration ;  so  that  here  fever  preceded,
and  was  necessary  for  the  remote  cause,  but  not  as  the  immediate ;  and
indeed,  as  a  proof  of  this,  suppuration  hardly  takes  place  till  the  fever  is
gone.  The  small-pox  is  of  this  last  kind;  as  probably  many  other  con-
tagious diseases.  ;*/

Those  symptoms  continue  more  or  less,  according  to  the  degree  of  in-,
jury,  the  nature  and  situation  of  parts,  and  the  constitution  ;  but  as  they
arise  from  a  local  cause,  which  subsides,  they  of  course  subside  also  ;
however,  as  the  constitution  has  often  an  inflammatory  tendency,  or  a  ten-
dency to  some  other  disease,  besides  the  action  arising  from  the  violence
singly,  the  parts  often  run  into  it,  and  this  is  reflected  upon  the  consti-
tution, which  passes  into  that  action  to  which  it  has  a  tendency,  by  which
fever  is  kept  up,  and  thereby  inflammation.

The  subsiding  of  these  symptoms  is  the  cure ;  and  where  they  are  sim-
ply the  effects  of  the  violence,  the  fever  cures  itself;  therefore,  the  only
thing  necessary  is  to  lessen  its  violence;  but  if  the  injury  is  of  any  specific
kind,  that  specific  quality  must  be  corrected,  if  possible,  and  then  the  cure
will  take  place.

As  the  motion  of  the  blood  in  the  whole  system  is  increased,  and  as
we  have  reason  to  suppose  it  is  locally  increased,  then  what  will  diminish
the  motion  of  the  blood,  will  relieve  in  this  respect;  there  are  two  me-
thods of  doing  this;  the  first,  by  taking  off  its  force;  and  this  will  be  ef-
fected by  bleeding.

This,  if  it  does  not  lessen  its  motion,  or  take  off  from  the  sympathy  of
the  constitution,  with  the  local  disease,  yet  it  lessens  the  momentum  in  the
whole  and  in  the  part,  which  is  taking  off  the  effect  of  the  excess  of  mo-
tion in  the  blood.

The  other  is  diminishing  the  action  of  the  parts  by  affecting  the  con-
stitution, which  may  be  done  by  1  urging;  in  this  light,  bleeding  may
also  be  in  some  degree  considered.  It  becomes  in  such  cases  very  necessary
to  relieve  the  constitution  by  lessening  the  action  of  that  constitution;  for
although  what  has  been  advised,  was  to  lessen  the  inflammation  itself,
and  thereby  lessen  its  effects  on  the  constitution,  yet  as  that  seldom  is
done  sufficiently  to  remove  any  affection  of  the  constitution,  we  must

3  G


4 1  o  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation .

therefore  pay  attention  to  that  constitution;  the  two  remedies  will  in  some
degree  go  hand  in  hand,  one  assisting  the  other;  for  instance,  in  a  strong
healthy  constitution  where  the  symptomatic  fever  runs  high,  bleeding
and  purging  will  have  their  double  effects;  but  still  the  constitution  may
require  its  peculiar  medicines,  which  will  in  a  secondary  way  relieve  the
inflammation.

The  secondary  constitutional  symptoms  are  not  so  determined  as  to
time;  I  have  called  them  nervous,  although  not  strictly  so  in  every  case,
because  more  variety  of  affections  are  produced  than  from  any  cause  I  know;
yet  these  affections  seem  all  to  have  more  connexion  with  the  nervous  than
the  vascular  system,  and  are  severally  excited  by  the  particular  tendency
or  susceptibility  of  different  constitutions.  Many  of  them,  I  believe,  are
more  common  to  the  young  than  the  old,  which  come  under  the  doc-
trine of  universal  nervous  sympathy,  with  a  local  complaint ;  of  this  kind
are  universal  convulsions  from  teething  or  worms;  local  convulsions,  as
St.  Vitus's  dance,  and  probably  many  others  not  so  well  marked,  as  those
which  worms  and  teething  often  produce.  I  have  seen  hickup  come  on
early  in  consequence  of  an  operation;  but  in  this  stage  of  the  nervous  af-
fection, little  was  to  be  apprehended,  although  it  certainly  shewed  a  pecu-
liarity of  constitution,  and  such  as  should  be  attended  to;  but  when  hick-
up occurs  towards  the  last  stages,  it  shews  strong  signs  of  dissolution.

Many  full-grown  persons  are  also  subject  to  very  severe  affections  of
the  nervous  kind,  especially  those  people  who  are  called  nervous;  and  more
particularly  still  those  who  have  bad  affections,  in  consequence  of  com-
plaints of  the  stomach.  In  such  constitutions  there  is  observed  great  de-
jection, sinking,  cold  sweats,  hardly  any  pulse,  loss  of  appetite,  no  sleep,
etc.  seeming  to  threaten  dissolution  ;  those  symptoms  are  worse  by  fits.
Delirium  appears  to  arise  from  nervous  affection  of  the  brain,  or  sensori-
um,  producing  a  sympathy  of  the  action  of  the  brain,  with  the  materia
vitae  of  the  parts ;  not  sensation  as  a  head-ach,  but  action,  producing  ideas
without  the  exciting  impression,  and  therefore  delusive.  This  symptom
is  common  to  them  all ;  it  is  frequently  a  consequence  of  their  being  vi-
olent, or  carried  to  considerable  length  in  their  several  kinds:  often  ari-
sing in  consequence  of  compound  fractures,  amputation  of  the  lower  ex-


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation.  41 *

tremities,  injuries  done  to  joints,  brain,  etc.  but  not  so  often  attending  the
hectic,  although  it  is  often  a  symptom  of  dissolution.  We  have  agues
also  from  many  diseases  of  parts,  more  especially  of  the  liver,  as  also  ot  the
spleen,  and  from  induration  of  the  misenteric  glands.

The  following  cases  are  remarkarble  instances  of  well  marked  consti-
tutional diseases  from  local  irritation,  where  the  constitution  took  on  a
particular  action,  to  which  it  had  a  strong  tendency.  A  gentleman  had  a
very  bad  fistula  in  perinaeo  from  a  stricture,  and  when  the  water  did  not
come  freely,  an  inflammation  in  the  part  and  scrotum  was  produced,  and
then  he  had  an  ague,  which  was  relieved  for  a  time  by  the  bark.  Two
children  had  an  ague  from  worms,  which  was  not  in  the  least  relieved  by
the  bark,  but  by  destroying  the  worms  they  were  cured.

As  these  diseases  which  I  have  brought  into  this  class  are  of  such  va-
rious kinds,  each  must  be  taken  up  apart,  and  treated  accordingly  ;  but
they  are  such  as  yield  very  little  to  medicine,  for  in  some  the  constituti-
onal disease  is  formed,  and  does  not  require  the  presence  of  the  local  disease
to  keep  it  up,  as  in  the  tetanus  ;  and  in  others,  the  local  disease  being  still
in  force,  it  is  nojt  to  be  expected  that  the  constitutional  affection  is  to  be
entirely  relieved,  although  in  some  degree  it  may.  In  those  which  form  a
regular  constitutional  disease,  such  as  an  ague,  although  the  local  diseases
may  still  exist  in  full  force,  yet  some  relief  may  be  expected ;  the  bark  is
to  be  administred,  although  not  with  a  view  to  cure,  as  the  immediate
cause  still  exists;  but  bark  will  in  some  lessen  that  susceptibility  in  the
constitution,  and  may  cure  at  least  for  a  time,  as  I  have  seen  in  agues
arising  from  the  fistula  in  perinso.  But  the  susceptibility  in  the  two  chil-
dren, cited  above,  was  so  strong  for  such  a  disease,  that  the  bark  was  not
sufficient  -,  and  therefore,  when  the  local  cause  is  not  known,  and  when
the  common  remedies  for  such  effects  do  not  cure  them,  some  local  dis-
ease should  be  suspected.  We  see  often  such  symptoms  arising  from  dis-
eases of  the  liver,  and  the  bark  curing  this  symptom,  yet  the  liver  shall
go  on  with  its  disease,  and  probably  faster,  as  I  believe  bark  is  not  a  pro-
per medicine  for  diseases  of  this  viscus  5  such  complaints  of  the  liver  have
been  too  often  attributed  to  the  curing  of  the  ague  improperly  by  bark.
St.  Vitus's  dance,  and  many  other  involuntary  actions,  have  arisen  from


412  Of  the  suppurative  inflammation,

the  same  cause ;  such  constitutions  required  only  an  immediate  cause  to
produce  the  effects.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  no  other  mode  of  local
irritation  would  have  produced  the  same  effect,  every  constitution  having
a  part  that  is  capable  of  affecting  it  most.  We  find  also  local  effects  in
consequence  of  local  injuries,  as  the  locked  jaw,  etc.  which  are  remote
sympathies  with  the  part  affected,  which  may  become  pretty  universal,
and  which  cannot  be  called  immediate  effects  as  to  time,  as  they  are  often
forming  after  the  sympathetic  fever  has  taken  place,  especially  the  locked
jaw,  which  appears  in  many  cases  to  be  formed  in  the  time  of  the  prece-
ding disease,  and  not  appearing  till  it  has  subsided.  There  are  certain  in-
termediate steps  between  the  inflammatory  and  the  hectic  state  ;  but  nei-
ther cure  nor  dissolution  take  place  in  this  period.

The  following  case  illustrates  the  effects  of  inflammation  on  the  con-
stitution.

A  lady,  of  what  is  called  a  nervous  constitution,  arising  in  some  degree
from  an  irritable  stomach,  often  troubled  with  flatulencies,  and  what  are
called  nervous  head-achs,  with  pale  urine  at  those  times,  uncomfortable
feelings  and  often  sinkings,  had  a  tumor  removed  from  the  breast,  and
likewise  from  near  the  arm-pit  ;  nothing  appeared  uncommon  for  a  few
days,  when  very  considerable  disorders  came  on.  She  was  attacked  with  a
shivering  or  cold  fit,  attended  with  the  feel  of  dying,  and  followed  with
cold  sweat.-  It  being  supposed  that  she  was  dying,  brandy  was  thrown  in,
•which  soon  brought  on  a  warmth,  and  she  was  relieved;  the  fits  came  on
frequently  for  several  days,  which  were  always  relieved  by  brandy;  and
she  took  in  one  of  the  most  violent  of  them  about  half  a  pint  of  brandy.

While  under  these  affections  she  took  the  bark  as  a  strengthener;  the
musk,  occasionally,  as  a  sedative  in  pretty  large  quantities  •  camphorated
julap  frequently,  as  an  antispasmodic  ;  and  towards  the  last  she  took  the
valerian  in  large  quantities :  but  whatever  effect  these  might  have  in  lessen-
ing the  disease  on  the  whole,  they  were  certainly  not  equal  to  it  without
the  brandy.  Brandy  removed  those  dying  fits,  and  I  thought  they  became
less  violent  after  taking  the  valerian.

A  question  naturally  occurs;  would  the  brandy  alone,  if  it  had  b<xn.


Of  the  suppurative  inflammation*  413

continued  as  a  medicine,  have  cured  her,  without  the  aid  of  the  other  me-
dicines ?  The  other  medicines,  I  think,  certainly  could  not  have  done  it;
nor  do  I  believe  that  the  brandy  could  have  been  continued  in  such  quan-
tity as  to  have  prevented  their  returns,  if  so,  then  the  two  modes  were
happily  united,  the  one  gradually  to  prevent,  the  other  to  remove  imme-
diately the  fits  when  they  came  on.  This  case  from  the  general  tenor  of
the  constitution,  was  running  with  great  facility  into  the  hectic.


[4i5l

CHAPTER  V.

OF  PUS.


JriiTFiERTo  I  have  been  treating  of  the  operations  of  parts,  preparatory
to  the  formation  of  pus  j  I  am  now  come  to  the  formation  of  that  fluid,
its  nature  and  supposed  uses.

The  immediate  effect  of  the  mode  of  action  above  described,  is  the  for-
mation of  a  fluid,  commonly  termed  pus ;  this  is  very  different  from  what
was  discharged  in  the  time  of  the  adhesive  stage  of  the  inflammation,  when
either  formed  in  the  cellular  membrane  or  circumscribed  cavities;  it  is  also
very  different  from  the  natural  secretion  of  internal  canals,  though  it  is
probably  formed  in  both  by  the  same  vessels,  but  under  very  different
modes  of  action.

The  cellular  membrane,  or  circumscribed  cavities,  have  their  vessels  but
little  changed  from  the  adhesive  state  at  the  commencement  of  the  sup-
purative disposition ;  so  that  they  still  retain  much  of  the  form  they  had
acquired  by  the  first  state,  the  discharge  being  at  the  beginning  little  more
than  coagulating  lymph  mixed  with  some  serum.  This  is  scarcely  different
from  the  adhesive  stage  of  the  inflammation  ;  but  as  the  inflammatory  dis-
position subsides,  the  new  disposition  is  every  instant  of  time  altering  those
vessels  to  their  suppurative  state?  the  discharge  is  also  varying  and  chang-
ing from  a  species  of  extravasation  to  a  new  formed  matter  peculiar  to  sup-
puration ;  this  matter  is  a  remove  further  from  the  nature  of  the  blood,
and  becomes  more  and  more  of  the  nature  of  the  pus  ;  it  becomes  whiter
and  whiter,  losing  more  and  more  of  the  yellow  and  green,  which  it
is  apt  to  give  the  linen  that  is  stained  with  it  in  its  first  stages,  and  in  con-
sistence more  and  more  viscid,  or  creamy.

By  the  formation  of  this  new  substance,  the  coagulating  lymph,  which
was  extravasated  in  the  adhesive  state  of  the  inflammation,  and  adhered  to


41 6  Of  pus.

the  sides  of  the  cells,  either  in  cut  surfaces  as  in  wounds,  in  abscesses,  or
circumscribed  cavities,  is  pushed  off  from  these  surfaces,  and  if  it  is  the
inner  surface  of  a  cavity,  it  is  pushed  into  it,  so  that  the  cavity  contains
both  coagulating  lymph  and  pus;  or  if  it  is  a  cut  surface,  the  coagulating
lymph  is  separated  from  it  by  the  suppuration  taking  place,  and  is  thrown
off;  but  as  such  surfaces  are  generally  dressed  immediately  after  the  ope-
ration, while  the  wound  is  bleeding,  this  blood  unites  the  dressings  to  the
sore,  which  is  assisted  afterwards  by  the  coagulating  lymph  thrown  out  in
the  adhesive  stage,  the  whole,  viz.  dressings,  blood,  and  coagulating  lymph
are  generally  thrown  off  together,  when  suppuration  commences  on  these
surfaces. This  is  the  process  which  takes  place  in  the  first  formation  of
an  abscess,  and  the  first  process  towards  suppuration  in  a  fresh  wound.

Upon  the  internal  surfaces  of  the  canals,  the  parts  do  not  go  through
all  those  steps;  they  would  appear  to  run  into  suppuration  almost  in-
stantaneously; however,  inflammations  even  here  is  a  kind  of  forerun-
ner of  suppuration.  This  discharge,  from  internal  canals,  has  never  been
reckoned  true  matter,  it  has  been  called  mucus,  etc.  but  it  has  all  the  cha-
racters of  true  pus,  which  I  am  yet  acquainted  with.

Pus  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  blood,  similar  to  that  which  was  produced
in  the  first  stage ;  but  is  formed  from  some  change,  decomposition,  or  se-
paration of  the  blood,  which  it  undergoes  in  its  passage  out  of  the  vessels,
and  for  effecting  which,  the  vessels  of  the  parts  have  been  formed,  which
produces  a  subsiding  of  the  inflammation  from  which  it  took  its  dispo-
sition ; hence  it  must  appear,  that the  formation  of  pus  consists of
something  more  than  a  straining  of  juices  from  the  blood. Many  sub-
stances indeed  which  are  to  be  considered  as  extraneous  bodies  in  the  blood,
being  only  mixed  with,  and  not  making  an  essential  part  of  that  fluid,
and  perhaps  even  necessary  to  it,  may  pass  off  with  the  pus,  as  with  every
other  secretion,  yet  the  pus  is  not  to  be  considered  on  that  account  as  sim-
ply parts  of  the  blood  unchanged ;  but  we  must  look  upon  it  as  a  new
combination  of  the  blood  itself,  and  must  be  convinced  that  in  order  to
carry  on  the  decompositions  and  combinations  necessary  for  producing
this  effect,  either  a  new  or  peculiar  structure  of  vessels  must  be  formed,
or  a  new  disposition,  and  of  course  a  new  mode  of  action  of  the  old  must


Of  pus,  417

take  place. This  new  structure,  or  disposition  of  vessels,  I  shall  call
glandular,  and  the  effect  or  pus,  a  secretion.


I.  OF  THE  GENERAL  OPINION  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  PUS.

The  dissolution  of  the  living  solids  of  an  animal  body  into  pus,  and
that  the  pus  already  formed  has  the  power  of  continuing  the  dissolution,
is  an  old  opinion,  and  is  still  the  opinion  of  many ;  for  their  language  is,
f  Pus  corrodes,  it  is  acrid,  etc."  If  this  idea  of  theirs  was  just,  no  sore
which  discharges  matter  could  be  exempted  from  a  continual  dissolu-
tion ;  and  I  think  it  must  appear  inconsistent,  that  the  matter  which  was
probably  intended  for  salutary  purposes,  should  be  a  means  of  destroying
the  very  parts  which  produced  it,  and  which  it  is  meant  to  heal.  Probably
they  took  their  idea  from  rinding,  that  an  abscess  was  a  hollow  cavity  in
the  solids,  and  supposing  the  whole  of  the  original  substance  of  this  cavity
was  now  the  matter  which  was  found  in  it.  This  was  a  very  natural  way
of  accounting  for  the  formation  of  pus,  by  one  entirely  ignorant  of  the
moving  juices,  the  powers  of  the  arteries,  and  the  operation  of  an  abscess
after  it  was  opened ;  for  the  knowledge  of  these  three,  abstracted  from
the  knowledge  of  the  abscess  before  opening,  should  have  naturally  led
them  to  account  for  the  formation  of  pus  from  the  blood  by  the  powers  of
the  arteries  alone;  for  upon  their  principle  these  abscesses  should  continue
to  increase  after  opening,  as  fast  as  before.  Upon  this  principle  being
established  in  their  minds,  viz.  that  solids  were  dissolved  down  into  pus,
they  built  a  practice  which  was  to  bring  all  indurated  parts  to  suppura-
tion if  possible,  and  not  to  open  the  suppuration  in  such  parts  early  ;  this
was  done  with  a  view  to  give  such  solids  time  to  melt  down  into  pus,  which
was  the  expression ;  but  according  to  their  own  theory,  they  seemed  to
forget  that  abscesses  formed  matter  after  opening,  and  therefore  the  parts
stood  the  same  chance  of  dissolution  into  pus  as  before.  Also,  from  be-
ing possessed  of  this  idea,  that  solids  went  into  the  composition  of  pus,  they
never  saw  pus  flowing  from  any  internal  canal,  as  in  a  gonorrhoea,  etc.

3  H


418  Of 'pus \

but  they  concluded  that  there  was  an  ulcer  ;  we  would  forgive  such  ov>U
nions,  before  the  knowledge  that  such  surfaces  could  and  generally  did
form  pus  without  a  breach  of  the  solids ;  but  that  such  an  opinion  should
exist  afterwards,  is  not  mere  ignorance,  but  stupidity ;  and  the  very  circum-
stance of  internal  circumscribed  cavities,  as  the  abdomen,  thorax,  etc.
forming  pus,  where  they  might  often  have  seen  pints  of  matter,  and  yet  no
breach  in  the  solids  to  have  produced  it,  which  is  a  proof  beyond  contro-
versy, should  have  taught  them  better;  such  ideas  discover  defect  of  know-
ledge and  incapacity  for  observation.

The  moderns  have  been  still  more  ridiculous,  for  knowing  that  it  was
denied,  that  solids  were  ever  dissolved  into  pus,  and  also  knowing  that
there  was  not  a  single  proof  of  it,  they  have  been  busy  in  producing  what
to  them  seemed  proof.  They  have  been  putting  dead  animal  matter  into
abscesses,  and  rinding  that  it  was  either  wholly  or  in  part  dissolved,  they
therefore  attributed  the  loss  to  its  being  formed  into  pus;  but  this  was  put-
ting living  and  dead  animal  matter  upon  the  same  footing,  which  is  a  con-
tradiction in  itself;  for  if  the  result  of  this  experiment  was  really  according
to  their  idea  of  it,  the  idea  of  living  parts  being  dissolved  into  pus  must  fall
to  the  ground,  because  living  animal  matter  and  dead  animal  matter  can
never  stand  upon  the  same  ground.

Common  observation  in  their  profession  should  have  taught  them,  that
even  extraneous  animal  matter  would  lie  in  abscesses  for  a  considerable  time
before  it  was  even  dissolved.  They  might  have  observed  in  abscesses  ari-
sing either  from  violence,  or  from  a  species  of  erysipelatous  inflammation,
that  there  were  often  sloughs  of  the  cellular  membrane,  and  that  those
sloughs  would  come  away  like  wet  tow,  and  therefore  were  not  dissolved
into  pus.

They  might  also  have  observed  in  abscesses  on  tendinous  parts,  as  about
the  ancle,  etc.  that  often  a  tendon  became  dead  and  sloughed  away,  and
that  these  sores  do  not  heal  till  such  parts  have  sloughed,  and  this  is  often
not  accomplished  for  months,  and  yet  all  this  time  those  sloughs  are  not
formed  into  pus.  They  might  have  also  known,  or  observed,  that  pieces  of
dead  bone  shall  lie  soaking  in  matter  for  many  months,  and  yet  not  dissolve
into  pus ;  and  although  bones  in  such  situations  shall  lose  considerably  of
their  substance  (which  might  by  the  ignorant  be  supposed  to  have  been


Of  pus,  419

dissolved  into  pus)  yet  that  waste  can  be  accounted  for  and  proved  on  the
principle  of  absorption ;  for  they  always  lose  on  that  surface  where  the
continuity  is  broke  off,  and  which  is  only  a  continuation  of  the  separating
process*.  To  see  how  far  the  idea  was  just,  that  dead  animal  matter  was
dissolved  by  pus,  I  put  it  to  the  trial  of  experiment,  because  I  could  put  a
piece  of  dead  animal  matter  of  a  given  weight  into  an  abscess,  and  which
could  at  stated  times  be  weighed;  to  make  it  still  more  satisfactory,  a
similar  piece  was  put  into  water,  kept  to  nearly  the  same  heat :  they  both
lost  in  weight,  but  that  in  the  abscess  most,  and  there  was  also  a  difference
in  the  manner,  for  that  in  the  water  became  soonest  putrid;  but  these  ex-
periments having  been  made  as  far  back  as  the  year  1757,  I  shall  not  rely
on  their  accuracy,  but  state  them  as  made  by  my  brother-in-law,  Mr.
Home,  and,  as  given  in  his  Dissertation  on  the  Properties  of  Pus,  page  32,
under  the  idea  that  pus  had  a  corroding  quality.

"  As  pus  has  been  supposed  to  have  a  corroding  quality,"  I  may  add
even  upon  the  living  solids,  "  I  made  the  following  experiments  to  as-
certain the  truth,  or  fallacy  of  such  an  assertion,  and  found  it  to  be
void  of  foundation,  and  to  have  arisen  from  the  inaccuracy  of  observers
having  prevented  them  from  seeing  the  distinctions  between  pus  in  a  pure
state,  and  when  mixed  with  other  substances.


f\  I  made  a  comparitive  trial  upon  matter  contained  in  an  abscess,  and
on  pus  and  animal  jelly  out  of  the  body.  The  matter  and  jelly  were  in
equal  quantities  and  contained  in  glass-vessels,  kept  nearly  in  the  tem-
perature of  the  human  body.  To  make  the  comparative  trials  as  fair  as
possible,  a  portion  of  muscle,  weighing  exactly  one  drachm,  was  im-
mersed in  the  matter  of  a  compound  fracture  in  the  arm  of  a  living  man,
and  a  similar  portion  into  some  of  the  same  matter  out  of  the  body ;
also  a  third  portion  into  fluid  calf's  foot  jelly,  in  which  the  animal  sub-
stance was  pure,  having  neither  wine  nor  vegetables  mixed  with  it. These

*  It  maybe  supposed  that  bones  are  not  capable  of  being  dissolved  into  pus;  but  we  knew
that  bone  has  animal  substance  in  it,  and  we  also  know  that  this  animal  substance  is  capa-
ble of  being  dissolved  into  chyle.


420  Of  put,

three  portions  of  muscle  were  taken  out  once  every  twenty-four  hour?,

washed  in  water,  weighed  and  returned  again. The  results  were  as  fol-
lows :

"  In  twenty-four  hours. — The  portion  of  muscle  in  the  abscess  weighed
sixty  grains,  was  pulpy  and  soft,  but  quite  free  from  puterfaction :  that
portion  immersed  in  the  pus,  weighed  forty-six  grains,  was  pulpy,  soft,
and  had  a  slightly  putrid  smell :  the  portion  in  the  jelly  weighed  thirty-
eight  grains,  was  smaller  and  firmer  in  its  texture.

"  Forty-eight  hours. — The  portion  of  muscle  in  the  abscess  weighed
thirty-eight  grains,  and  had  undergone  no  change:  that  in  the  matter
weighed  thirty-six  grains,  was  softer  and  more  putrid:  that  in  the  jelly
thirty-six  grains  and  smaller.

"  Seventy-two  hours. — The  portion  of  muscle  in  the  abscess  weighed
twenty-seven  grains,  was  drier  and  firmer  :  that  in  the  matter  eighteen
grains,  and  was  rendered  fibrous  and  thready :  that  in  the  jelly  un-
altered.

"  Ninety-six  hours. — The  portion  of  muscle  in  the  abscess  weighed
twenty-five  grains :  that  in  the  matter  was  dissolved  :  that  in  the  jelly
weighed  thirty-six  grains*.

'*  One  hundred  and  twenty  hours. — The  portion  of  muscle  in  the  abscess
weighed  twenty-two  grains,  not  at  all  putrid:  that  in  the  jelly  thirty-
four  grains,  not  at  all  putrid.

"  One  hundred  and  forty-four  hours. — The  portion  of  muscle  in  the  ab-
scess weighed  twenty-two  grains,  and  was  free  from  putrefaction  :  that
in  the  jelly  thirty-four  grains."
The  supposed  facts  of  the  solids  dissolving  being  established  in  the  mind

as  so  many  data  to  reason  from,  they  had  now  no  difficulty  to  account  for

*  One  reason,  probably,  for  the  piece  of  meat  so  soon  becoming  putrid  and  dissolving  in  the
pus,  was  its  being  kept  in  the  same  pus  the  whole  time ;  therefore  its  dissolution  was  owing
more  to  putrefaction  than  a  dissolving  quality  in  the  pus ;  whereas  the  piece  in  the  abscess  had
its  matter  continually  changing,  which  is  the  common  result  in  a  sore,  and  if  it  had  a  corroding
quality  independant  of  the  putrefaction,  it  ought  to  have  been  dissolved  first ;  but  we  may
observe  that,  the  piece  of  muscle  in  the  abscess,  and  the  piece  in  the  jelly  were  nearly  upon  a
par.


Of  pus.  42 1

the  formation  of  pus  from  both  the  solids  and  the  fluids ;  fermentation  start-
ed up  in  the  mind  immediately  as  a  cause;  but  there  must  be  a  cause  for
fermentation;  and  according  to  this  idea,  there  are  facts  which  go  against  it :
first,  let  us  consider  internal  canals,  where  only  mucus  is  naturally  form-
ed, taking  on  the  formation  of  pus  without  the  loss  of  substance,  or  any
previous  ferment,  and  leaving  it  off.

Now  if  a  fermentation  of  the  solids  and  fluids  was  the  immediate  cause,
I  should  beg  leave  to  ask  what  solids  were  destroyed  in  order  to  enter  into
the  composition  of  the  pus  discharged;  for  the  whole  penis  could  not  af-
ford matter  enough  to  form  the  pus,  which  is  discharged  in  a  common
gonorrhoea ;  I  should  also  beg  leave  to  be  informed  how  that  fermentation
of  the  fluids  ever  ceased,  for  there  is  the  same  surface,  secreting  its  mucus,
whenever  the  formation  of  pus  ceases.

Besides,  if  dissolved  solids  enter  necessarily  into  the  composition  of  pus,
by  the  power  of  some  ferment,  it  may  be  asked  by  what  power  the  first
particle  of  this  fluid  in  an  abscess  or  sore  is  formed,  before  there  is  any
particle  existing  which  is  capable  of  dissolving  the  solids  ?

An  abscess  shall  form,  and  suppuration  ceasing,  it  shall  become  sta-
tionary, perhaps  for  months,  and  at  last  be  absorbed,  and  the  whole  shall
heal ;  what  becomes  of  the  ferment  the  whole  time  it  is  stationary  ?

It  has  been  supposed  that  blood  when  extravasated  becomes  of  itself
pus-,  but  we  find  blood,  when  extravasated,  either  from  violence  or  a  rup-
ture of  a  vessel,  as  in  an  aneurism,  never  of  itself  becomes  pus ;  nor  was  pus
ever  formed  in  such  cavities  till  inflammation  had  taken  place  in  them,  and
that  in  such  cavities  there  was  to  be  found  both  the  blood  and  the  matter ;
if  the  blood  had  coagulated  (as  it  seldom  does  in  those  cases  of  violence)  it
would  be  found  still  coagulated,  and  if  it  had  not  coagulated  the  pus  would
be  bloody.

True  pus  has  certain  properties,  which  when  taken  singly  may  belong
to  other  secretions,  but  when  all  joined,  form  the  peculiar  character  of  pus,
viz.  globules  swimming  in  a  fluid,  which  is  coagulable  by  a  solution  of
sal  ammoniac,  which  no  other  animal  secretion  that  I  know  is ;  and  at  the
same  time  a  consequence  of  inflammation;  these  circumstances  taken  to*
gether  may  be  said  to  constitute  pus.


422  Of  pus.

As  inflammation  does  not  produce  at  first  true  pus,  I  made  the  following
experiments  to  ascertain  its  progress  or  formation.  To  do  this  it  was  only
necessary  to  keep  up  an  irritation  on  some  living  part  a  sufficient  time  to
oblige  it  to  set  about  the  natural  consequent  actions,  and  the  smooth  coat
of  an  internal  cavity  appeared  to  me  to  be  well  calculated  for  such  an  ex-
periment, where  nothing  could  interfere  with  the  actions  of  the  parts,  or
their  result,  and  it  would  also  show  its  progress  on  internal  surfaces,
which  sho»vs  its  progress  in  wounds  and  abscesses.


II.  EXPERIMENTS  TO  ASCERTAIN  THE  PROGRESS  OF  SUPPURATION.

EXPERIMENT I.

The  tunica  vaginalis  of  a  young  ram  was  opened  and  the  testicle  expo-
sed. The  surface  of  the  testicle  was  wiped  clean,  and  a  piece  of  talc  was
laid  upon  it.  The  surface  almost  immediatly  became  more  vascular ;
five  minutes  after,  the  talc  was  removed  and  examined  in  a  microscope,  but
no  globules  could  be  observed,  only  a  moisture  which  appeared  to  be  se-
rum. Ten  minutes  after,  there  were  irregular  masses  formed  on  the  talc,
some  transparent,  with  determined  edges,  but  no  globules:  fifteen  minutes
after,  nearly  the  same.

At  twenty  minutes,  there  was  an  appearance  of  globules.

At  twenty-five  minutes,  there  were  globules  in  clusters ;  but  I  could  not
say  exactly  what  those  globules  were.

At  thirty-five  minutes,  the  globules  more  distinct,  more  diffused,  and
numerous.

At  fifty-five  minutes,  the  globules  still  more  perfect  and  distinct.

At  seventy,  the  globules  more  irregular,  and  of  course  less  distinct.

At  eighty-five,  the  globules  more  distinct  and  numerous.

At  one  hundred,  more  irregular  and  less  distinct,  forming  little  masses.

At  two  hours,  the  masses  more  transparent,  and  the  globules  fewer.

At  two  hours  and  half,  the  masses  transparent,  and  no  distinct  globules.

At  four  hours,  some  transparent  masses  appearing  to  contain  globules.


Of  pus.  .423

At  seven  hours,  distinct  globules  and  numerous.

At  eight  hours,  the  globules  more  distinct  and  somewhat  larger.

At  nine  hours,  less  appearance  of  globules.

At  twenty -one  hours,  the  testicle  was  covered  with  lint,  and  the  skin
brought  over  and  kept  together  with  a  ligature,  and  allowed  to  remain  for
twelve  hours,  which,  from  the  first,  was  thirty-three  hours ;  when  it  was
opened,  it  was  wiped  dry,  and  a  piece  of  talc  applied  for  five  minutes ;
the  quantity  of  fluid  very  small,  but  containing  globules  small  and  nu-
merous.

N.B.  In  this  time  when  the  testicle  was  covered,  there  were  strong  adhe-
sions took  place  between  the  testicles  and  tunica  vaginalis,  which  shows
that  probably  the  inflammation  moved  back  to  the  adhesive  stage  when-
ever two  similar  surfaces  were  opposed.

Forty  hours,  the  above  repeated  and  the  globules  a  little  more  distinct.

Forty-four  hours,  the  appearance  of  globules  very  distinct,  and  it  looked
like  common  matter  diluted.

EXPERIMENT II.

An  opening  was  made  through  the  linea  alba  below  the  navel,  several
inches  long,  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  of  a  dog,  care  being  taken  that  no
blood  should  pass  into  that  cavity  ;  a  piece  of  talc  was  applied  to  the  pe-
ritoneum so  as  to  be  covered  with  the  fluid  which  lubricates  that  surface;
to  do  which,  it  was  found  necessary  to  draw  it  over  some  considerable
surface :  this  fluid  was  examined  in  the  field  of  the  microscope,  and  ap-
peared to  contain  small  semitransparent  globules,  few  in  number,  swim"-*
ing  in  a  fluid.

The  lubricating  fluid  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  appears  from  re-
peated experiments  on  healthy  dogs,  to  be  so  small  in  quantity  as  only  to
give  a  polish  to  the  different  surfaces,  but  not  sufficient  to  have  a  drop
collected.

After  five  minutes,  the  surfaces  had  more  moisture  upon  them,  which
being  examined  as  before,  the  globular  appearance  was  more  distinct.

In  fifteen  minutes,  the  surfaces  were  more  vascular ;  a  portion  of  in-
testine was  wipeoVdry,  and  a  piece  of  talc  applied  to  it;  the  fluid  collected


424  Of  pus.

on  it  had  a  great  number  of  globules,  which  were  smaller  than  those  at
first  observed.

In  an  hour,  this  portion  of  intestine  had  its  blood-vessels  considerably
increased  in  number;  the  whole  surface  appearing  of  an  uniformly  red
colour:  this  was  wiped  dry  and  a  piece  of  talc  laid  upon  it;  the  fluid  col-
lected did  not  appear  to  be  made  up  of  globules,  but  of  very  small  parts
which  had  some  transparency,  but  not  exactly  regular  in  their  figure,
which  became  still  more  evident  on  drying,  when  they  lost  the  transpa-
rency altogether ;  these  were  most  probably  coagulating  lymph.

This  was  repeated  upon  the  surface  of  the  spleen,  which  had  its  sur-
face excessively  red,  from  the  increased  number  of  small  vessels  carrying
red  blood,  and  the  result  was  exactly  similar.

From  these  experiments,  the  fluid  which  lubricates  the  peritoneum
seems  to  undergo  changes,  in  consequence  of  exposure,  and  at  last,  when
inflammation  takes  place,  to  have  coagulating  lymph  substituted  for  it.

Although  the  lubricating  fluid  of  the  peritoneum  is  so  small  in  quan-
tity in  a  natural  state,  yet  before  that  cavity  has  been  exposed  for  half  an
hour,  the  quantity  is  much  increased,  and  has  a  motled  appearance  of  oil
and  water  ;  but  from  the  appearance  in  the  microscope,  it  is  only  an  in-
crease of  the  original  fluid  with  some  coagulating  lymph,  although  mis-
taken by  some  anatomists  for  an  oily  lubricating  liquor.

EXPERIMENT IIT.

At  half  past  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  an  incision  was  made  with  a
lancet  into  the  upper  fleshy  part  of  a  young  ram's  thigh,  into  which  was  in-
troduced a  silver  canula,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  three
quarters  long,  with  a  great  number  of  small  holes  in  the  sides,  and  open
at  the  bottom;  it  was  fastened  by  means  of  ligatures  to  the  skin,  and  a
small  cork  adapted  to  it.

The  blood  was  sponged  out  several  times,  and  the  cork  kept  in  during
the  intervals.  At  half  past  nine  the  cork  was  withdrawn,  and  the  canula  was
found  to  contain  a  fluid  j  a  piece  of  talc  was  dipped  in  it,  and  the  appearance
was  evidently  globular,  exactly  like  the  red  globules  without  the  colour.


Of  pus.  425

At  eleven,  the  quantity  of  fluid  much  increased,  and  the  same  appearance.

Atone,  the  quantity  half  filling  the  pipe,  of  a  redish  brown  colour;
the  globules  more  numerous,  without  colour  when  diluted  with  water.

At  three,  the  quantity  considerable,  the  globules  smaller,  freer  from
colour.

At  half  past  five,  the  same.

EXPERIMENT  IV.

In  the  same  manner  the  canula  was\introduced  into  the  fleshy  part  of
an  ass's  thigh,  at  nine  in  the  morning;  and  at  one  o'clock,  as  also  at  two,
there  was  a  fluid  tinged  with  red  globules.

At  four,  there  were  no  diffused  globules,  but  there  appeared  to  be  small
flakes  in  a  transparent  fluid;  however  they  proved  to  be  clusters  of  globules.

At  seven,  next  morning,  which  was  twenty-two  hours,  there  was  found
in  the  canula,  common  pus.

From  the  experiments  on  internal  surfaces,  it  would  appear  that  pus  was
formed  coeval  with  its  secretion;  but  from  Mr.  Home's  experiments,  page
51,  it  would  rather  appear  that  the  globules  were  not  formed  till  some  time
after  secretion,  and  this  sooner  or  later,  according  to  circumstances,  which
we  probably  do  not  know.

So  far  these  experiments  explain  the  progress  of  suppuration  on  inter-
nal surfaces,  and  I  shall  now  give  its  progress  on  the  cutis,  when  deprived
of  its  cuticle,  from  Mr.  Home's  Dissertation  on  that  subject  beforemen-
tioned.

"  I  applied  a  blistering  plaster  of  the  size  of  a  half-crown  piece  to  the
pit  of  the  stomach  of  a  healthy  young  man.  In  eight  hours  a  blister
arose,  which  was  opened,  and  the  contents  removed;  they  were  fluid,
transparent,  and  coagulated  by  heat;  had  no  appearance  of  globules,  when
examined  by  the  microscope;  and  in  every  respect  resembled  the  serum  of
blood.  The  cuticle  was  not  removed,  but  allowed  to  collapse,  and  the
fluid,  which  was  formed  upon  the  surface  of  the  cutis,  was  examined  from
time  to  time  by  a  microscope,  to  determine  as  accurately  as  possible  the
changes  which  took  place.

"  The  better  to  do  this,  as  the  quantity  in  the  intervals  stated  below
must  be  exceedingly  small,  a  piece  of  talc,  very  thin  and  transparent,  was

3 1


426  Of  pus.

applied  to  the  whole  surface,  and  covered  with  an  adhesive  plaster ;  and
the  surface  of  the  talc  applied  to  the  skin  was  removed  and  examined  by
the  microscope,  applying  a  fresh  piece  of  talc  after  every  examination,  to
prevent  any  mistake  which  might  have  arisen  from  the  surface  not  being
quite  clean.

"  The  fluid  was  examined  by  the  microscope,  to  ascertain  its  appearance;
but  as  the  aqueous  part  in  which  the  globules  of  pus  swim,  is  found  by
experiment  to  coagulate,  by  adding  to  it  a  saturated  solution  of  sal  am-
moniac, which  is  not  the  case  with  the  serum  of  the  blood  nor  the  trans-
parent part  of  the  milk,  I  considered  this  as  a  property  peculiar  to  pus  ;
and  consequently  that  it  would  be  a  very  good  test  by  which  to  ascertain
the  presence  of  true  pus.

"  In  eight  hours. — From  the  time  the  blister  was  applied,  the  fluid  dis-
charged was  perfectly  transparent,  and  did  not  coagulate  with  the  solu-
tion of  sal  ammoniac.
"  Nine  hours. — The  discharge  was  less  transparent;  but  free  from  the

appearance  of  globules.
"  Ten  hours. — The  discharge  contained  globules  which  were  very  small,

and  few  in  number.
«'  Eleven  hours. — The  globules  were  numerous,  but  still  the  fluid  did  not

coagulate  with  the  solution  of  sal  ammoniac.
"  Twelve  hours. — The  appearance  much  the  same  as  before.
"  Fourteen  hours. — The  globules  a  little  larger,  and  the  fluid  appeared  to

be  thickened  by  a  solution  of  sal  ammoniac.
•*  Sixteen  hours. — The  globules  seemed  to  form  themselves  into  masses;

but  were  transparent.
"  Twenty  hours. — The  globules  were  double  the  size  of  those  first  observ-
ed at  ten  hours,  and  gave  the  appearance  of  true  pus,  in  a  diluted  state  :
the  fluid  was  coagulated  by  a  solution  of  sal  ammoniac ;  the  globules-
at  the  same  time  remaining  perfectly  distinct,  so  that  I  should  con-
sider this  as  true  pus.
"  Twenty-two  hours. — No  change  appeared  to  have  taken  place.
"  Thirty-two  hours. — The  fluid  was  considerably  thicker  in  consistence,
the  number  of  globules  being  very  much  increased  :  but  in  no  other  re-


Of  pus.  427

spect  that  I  could  observe,  did  it  differ  from  that  formed  twenty  hours

after  the  application  of  the  blister."

To  ascertain  the  progress  of  suppuration  on  canals,  or  secreting  surfaces,
I  have  often  examined  the  matter  on  a  bougie,  that  had  been  introduced
into  the  urethra,  and  found  it  to  be  formed  earlier  than  either  of  the  times
bsforementioned;  Mr.  Home's  experiment  makes  it  five  hours;  but  we  often
iind  a  gonorrhoea  coming  on  at  once,  not  having  in  the  least  been  prece-
ded by  a  leading  discharge.

Since  that  period  experiments  have  been  made  on  pus,  from  different
kinds  of  sores,  with  an  intention  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  sore  by  the
result  of  such  analasis.  That  sores  give  very  different  kinds  of  pus  is
evident  to  the  naked  eye,  and  that  the  different  parts  of  which  the  blood  is
composed  will  come  away  in  different  proportions,  we  can  make  no  doubt;
and  we  find  that  whatever  is  in  solution  in  the  blood,  comes  away  more
in  one  kind  of  pus  than  another,  which  are  all  so  many  deviations  from  true
pus;  we  may  also  observe,  that  such  kinds  of  pus  change,  after  being  se-
creted, much  sooner  than  true  pus,  which  will  be  observed  by  and  by.
From  all  this  I  should  be  apt  to  conceive,  that  such  experiments  will
throw  little  light  on  the  specific  nature  of  the  disease,  which  is  the  thing
wanted.  From  such  experiments  we  may  find  out  that  pus,  from  a  ve-
nereal bubo  in  its  height  of  malady,  or  that  from  a  cancer,  is  bad  matter,
fout  cannot  ascertain  the  difference  between  those  two  matters  and  all
others,  nor  the  specific  difference  between  the  two.  The  small-pox,  al-
though as  malignant  a  disease  as  any,  and  one  which  produces  a  pus  as
replete  with  poisonous  particles  as  any,  yet  gives  a  true  pus,  when  not  of
the  confluent  kind,  which  disposition  is  not  small-pox.  The  reason  whv
it  is  good  pus,  is,  because  its  inflammation  is  of  the  true  suppurative  kind;
and  the  reason  why  it  is  of  the  true  suppurative  kind,  is,  because  the  parts
have  the  power  of  curing  themselves,  just  as  much  as  in  any  accident
which  happens  to  such  a  constitution  ;  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  either
the  venereal  disease  or  the  cancer;  from  the  moment  these  set  out,  their
dispositions  tend  to  become  worse  and  worse;  but  the  venereal  bubo,  if  mer-
cury is  given  so  as  to  affect  it,  soon  gives  us  another  kind  of  pus,  although
this  has  the  poison  equally  in  it ; therefore  it  is  not  the  circumstance  of


423  Of  pus.

containing  a  poison  which  makes  it  what  is  called  a  bad  pus,  but  its  be-
ing formed  from  a  sore  that  has  no  disposition  to  heal :  as  we  cannot  give
healing  action  to  a  cancer,  so  we  never  can  have  a  good  pus.  The  ob-
servation respecting  the  small-pox  is  applicable  to  the  venereal  gonorrhoea;,
for  this  complaint"  having  the  power  of  curing  itself,  its  pus  is  good  in
proportion  to  that  power;  but  as  the  periods  of  cure  are  not  so  determined
as  in  the  small-pox,  neither  is  its  time  in  producing  good  pus  so  deter-
mined ;  but  like  the  small-pox,  as  well  as  the  venereal  disease  when  it  is
healing,  we  have  good  pus,  although  it  contains  the  poison.

From  the  above  experiments  it  must  appear  unnecessary  to  give  the  che-
mical analyses  of  what  is  commonly  called  pus,  for  whatever  comes  from
a  sore  has  that  name,  although  very  different  in  many  cases  from  what  I
should  call  true  pus  ;  and  we  shall  find  in  those  sores  that  have  some  spe-
cific quality  which  hinders  them  from  healing,  that  the  discharge  is  not
pus.  Probably  the  chemical  properties  may  be  nearly  the  same  in  them
all.


II.  OF  THE  PROPERTIES  OF  PUS.


Pus,  in  the  most  perfect  state,  has  at  the  first  view  certain  peculiar  qua-
lities. These  are  principally  colour  and  consistence;  but  it  appears  that
the  colour  takes  its  rise  from  the  largest  portion  of  the  whole  mass  being
composed  of  very  small  round  bodies,  very  much  like  those  small  round
globules  which  swimming  in  a  fluid  make  cream  :  I  should  suppose  those
round  globules  to  be  white  in  themselves,  as  cream  would  appear  to  be ;
although  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  substance  of  matter  which  reflects  a
white,  should  be  itself  white ;  for  a  vast  number  of  transparent  bodies  be-
ing brought  together  will  produce  a  white,  such  as  broken  glass,  broken
ice,  water  covering  globules  of  air,  making  froth,  etc.

These  globules  swim  in  a  fluid,  which  we  should  at  first  suppose  to  be
the  serum  of  the  blood,  for  it  coagulates  with  heat  like  serum,  and  most
probably  is  mixed  with  a  small  quantity  of  coagulating  lymph  ;  for  pus  in


Of  pus'.  429

part  coagulates,  after  having  been  discharged  from  the  secreting  vessels,  as
mucus  is  observed  to  do.  But  although  it  is  thus  far  similar  to  serum,  yet
it  has  properties  that  serum  has  not.  Observing  there  was  a  similarity  be-
tween pus  and  milk,  I  tried  if  the  fluid  part  of  pus  could  be  coagulated
with  the  juice  of  the  stomach  of  other  animals,  but  found  it  could  not.  I
then  tried  it  with  several  mixtures,  principally  with  the  neutral  salts,  and
found  that  a  solution  of  sal  ammoniac  coagulated  this  fluid ;  not  rinding
that  a  solution  of  this  salt  coagulated  any  other  of  our  natural  juices,  I
concluded  that  globules  swimming  in  a  fluid  that  was  coagulable  by  this
salt  was  to  be  considered  as  pus,  and  would  be  always  formed  in  sores
that  had  no  peculiar  backwardness  to  heal.

The  proportion  that  these  white  globules  in  the  pus  bear  to  the  other
parts  depends  on  the  health  of  the  parts  which  formed  it;  for  when  they  are
in  a  large  proportion,  the  matter  is  thicker  and  whiter,  and  is  called  good
matter  ;  the  meaning  of  which  is,  that  the  solids  which  produced  it  are  in
good  health;  for  these  appearances  in  the  matter  are  no  more  than  the
result  of  certain  salutary  processes  going  on  in  the  solids,  the  effect  of
which  processes  is,  to  produce  the  disposition  on  which  both  suppuration
and  granulation  depend  ;  all  this  is  a  good  deal  similar  to  the  formation
of  milk;  for  in  the  commencement  of  the  secretion  of  this  fluid,  it  is  at
first  principally  serum,  and  as  the  animal  advances  towards  delivery,
the  globules  are  forming  and  become  more  in  quantity,  and  the  animal
that  has  them  in  largest  quantity  has  the  richest  milk;  likewise  when  they
are  naturally  leaving  off  secreting  milk,  it  again  takes  an  exact  retrograde
motion ;  and  we  may  also  observe,  that  if  any  local  affection  attacks  this
gland,  such  as  inflammation,  the  milk  is  falling  back  to  the  state  I  have
been  now  describing;  or  if  any  constitutional  affection  takes  place,  such  as
fever,  etc.  then  this  gland  suffers  in  the  same  manner.

Pus  is  specifically  heavier  than  water;  it  is  probably  nearly  of  the  same
weight  with  blood  or  any  other  animal  substance  rendered  fluid.

Pus,  besides  the  abovementioned  properties,  has  a  sweetish  and  maukish
taste,  probably  from  having  sugar  in  it,  which  is  very  different  from  most
other  secretions,  and  the  same  taste  takes  place,  whether  it  is  pus  from  a


4  jo  Of  pus.

sore,  viz.  an  ulcer,  or  an  irritated  inflamed  surface.  Thus,  if  any  have  an.
ulcer  in  their  nose,  mouth,  throat,  lungs,  or  parts  adjacent,  so  that  the
matter  shall  come  into  the  mouth  unaltered  by  putrefaction,  they  will  be
able  to  taste  it  from  its  having  this  property;  whereas  the  mucus  and
saliva  of  those  parts  is  tasteless.  The  same  thing  happens  when  an  irri-
tation to  inflammation  takes  place  on  the  surface  of  those  parts  with-
out ulceration.

If  the  internal  surface  of  the  nose  is  inflamed,  so  that  when  we  blow  it
on  a  white  handkerchief,  we  see  the  substance  discharged  of  a  yellow  co-
lour; we  also  find  that  when  we  draw  up  the  same  substance  into  the
mouth,  that  it  has  a  sweetish  mawkish  taste.  If  it  is  the  surface  of  the
mouth  or  throat  that  discharge  this  matter,  the  same  taste  is  observable;
and  if  it  is  brought  up  from  the  trachea  and  lungs,  in  consequence  of  the
common  effects  of  a  cold  on  those  parts,  the  same  taste  is  also  to  be  ob-
served; so  that  pus,  from  whatever  surface,  whether  an  irritated  natural
surface,  or  the  surface  of  a  common  sore,  has  this  property.

Pus  has  a  smell  in  some  degree  peculiar  to  itself;  but  this  differs;  some
diseases,  such  for  instance,  as  the  venereal  gonorrhoea,  it  is  pretended  may
be  known  by  the  smell.

To  ascertain  the  properties  of  pus,  or  to  distinguish  it  from  mucus,  it
has,  with  mucus,  been  put  to  the  test  of  chemistry.  Solution  in  menstrua,
and  precipitation  were  thought  to  be  a  test  of  their  distinction.

This  principle  in  its  very  first  appearance  is  unphilosophical,  and  was
at  the  very  first  treated  by  me  as  absurd.  I  conceived  that  all  animal  sub-
stance whatever,  when  in  solution,  either  in  acids  or  alkalies,  would  then
be  in  the  same  state,  and  therefore  that  the  precipitation  would  be  the  same
in  all.  Calcarious  earth,  when  dissolved  in  an  acid,  (for  instance,  the
muriatic)  is  in  that  acid  in  the  same  state,  whether  it  has  been  dissolved
from  chalk,  lime-stone,  marble,  or  calcarious  spar;  and  the  precipitations
from  all  are  the  same.

However,  whatever  my  opinion  might  be,  yet  bold  assertions,  the  result
of  described  experiments,  made  me  avoid  falling  into  the  same  error,  of
.describing  what  I  never  had  seen;  I  made,  therefore,  some  experiments  on.


Of  pus,  431

this  subject ;  and  In  consequence  of  having  previously  formed  the  above-
mentioned  opinion,  I  was  more  general  in  my  experiments.  I  made  them
on  organic  animal  matter,  as  well  as  on  inorganic,  and  the  result  was  the
same  in  all.

As  organic  animal  matter,  I  took  muscle,  tendon,  cartilage,  gland,  viz.
liver  and  brain.

As  inorganic  animal  matter,  I  took  pus,  and  the  white  of  an  egg,  and
dissolved  each  in  the  vitriolic  acid,  and  then  precipitated  the  solution  with
vegetable  alkali.

Each  precipitation  I  examined  with  such  magnifiers  as  plainly  shewed
the  forms  of  the  precipitate  j  all  of  which  appeared  to  be  fleaky  sub-
stances.

The  precipitate  by  the  volatile  alkali,  appeared  exactly  the  same.

To  carry  those  experiments  a  little  further,  I  dissolved  the  same  sub-
stance in  the  vegetable  caustic  alkali,  and  precipitated  the  solution  with
the  muriatic  acid,  and  examined  each  precipitate  with  the  microscope,  and
the  appearance  was  the  same,  viz.  a  fleaky  substance,  without  any  regu-
lar form.

To  see  how  far  the  nature  of  sores  might  be  ascertained  from  the  nature
of  their  discharge,  matter  from  a  cancerous  sore  has  been  analized,  and
the  result  has  been,  that  such  matter  differs  from  true  pus  ;  but  this  ex-
plains nothing  more  than  what  the  naked  eye  can  perceive,  that  it  is  not
pus  j  but  it  will  not  shew  the  specific  difference  between  the  matter  from  a
cancer  and  matter  from  a  venereal  bubo,  where  mercury  has  not  been  given,
nor  will  it  tell  that  one  is  cancer  and  the  other  is  venereal.  We  might  as
well  analize  the  urine  at  different  times,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  nature  of
kidnies  at  those  times.

The  quality  of  pus  is  always  according  to  the  nature  of  the  parts  which
produce  it ;  and  whatever  specific  qualities  the  parts  may  have  besides,  the
pus  has  also  this  specific  quality;  hence  we  have  venereal  matter  from  ve-
nereal sores,  small-pox  matter  from  small-pox  sores,  cancerous  matter
from  cancerous  sores,  etc.  It  is  not  in  the  least  affected  by  the  con-
stitution, except  the  parts  which  produce  it  are  also  affected  by  the  con-
stitution.


432  Of  put.

Pus  is  so  far  of  the  same  specific  nature  with  the  part  which  produces
it,  that  it  does  not  become  an  irritator  to  that  part ;  it  is  perfectly  in  har-
mony with  it,  the  part  is  not  in  the  least  sensible  of  it  j  therefore  the  pus
of  a  suppurating  surface  is  not  an  irritator  to  the  same  surface,  but  may
be  an  irritator  to  any  other  not  of  the  same  kind  ;  hence,  no  suppurating
surface  of  any  specific  kind  can  be  kept  up  by  its  own  matter,  for  if  this
had  not  been  the  case,  no  sore  of  any  specific  quality,  or  producing  matter
of  an  irritating  quality,  could  ever  have  been  healed.  This  is  similar  to  every
other  secretion  of  stimulating  fluids,  as  the  bile,  tears,  etc.  for  those  do  not
stimulate  their  own  glands  or  ducts,  but  are  capable  of  stimulating  any
other  part  of  the  body.  The  venereal  gonorrhoea,  small-pox,  etc.  healing
Or  recovering  of  themselves,  are  striking  instances  of  this  •>  however,  we  find
matter  under  certain  circumstances  stimulating  its  own  sore,  and  also  se-
cretions stimulating  their  own  canals,  as  the  secretions  of  the  intestines  sti-
mulating themselves ;  but  how  far  this  may  not  arise  from  one  part  of  the
intestines  being  so  diseased,  as  to  secrete  a  stimulating  fluid,  and  coming  to
a  sound  part,  stimulates  that  only,  I  will  not  determine.  This  I  am  certain
happens  to  the  rectum  and  anus;  for  it  very  often  happens  in  purging,  that
the  watery  stools  shall  irritate  those  parts  so  much  as  to  make  them  feel  as
if  they  were  scalded.  This  idea  seems  reasonable  on  another  principle;  for
when  we  consider  matter  in  the  gross,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  often  mixed
with  extraneous  substances  which  make  no  part  of  it,  being  probably
strained  from  the  blood  ;  and  also,  probably,  undergoing  a  change  after-
wards from  its  not  being  pure  pus;  nor  do  these  always  arise  entirely  from
the  nature  of  the  sore,  for  they  are  produced  by  sores  of  very  different  spe-
cific qualities,  it  being  the  species  of  matter  itself  which  arises  from  the
nature  of  the  sore  ;  however,  the  kind  of  sore  will  often  produce  more  or
less  of  this  extraneous  matter,  and  this  additional  substance  may  act  as  a
stimulus  on  every  kind  of  sore.

What  I  have  considered  thus  far,  is  the  natural  process  of  a  sound  con-
stitution and  sound  parts  -,  since  a  sore  that  is  going  through  all  the  na-
tural stages  to  a  cure,  is  not  to  be  called  a  disease.

A  proof  of  this  is,  that  whenever  a  real  disease  attacks  either  the  sup-
purating surface,  or  the  constitution,  these  processes  of  nature  are  destroyed,


Ofpus.  433

and  the  very  reverse  takes  place;  the  production  of  true  pus  ceases,  and
the  fluid  becomes  changed  in  some  measure  in  proportion  to  these  mor-
bid alterations  ;  in  general  it  becomes  thinner  and  more  transparent,  as
if  the  part  was  returning  back  to  the  adhesive  state,  it  partakes  more  of
the  nature  of  the  blood,  as  is  the  case  in  most  other  secretions  under
similar  circumstances.  This,  in  common  language,  is  not  called  pus,  but
sanies.

Pus,  arising  from  such  state  of  sores,  has  more  of  the  serum,  and  fre-
quently of  the  coagulating  lymph  in  it,  and  less  of  the  combination  that
renders  it  coagulable  with  a  solution  of  sal  ammoniac.  It  has  a  greater
proportion  also  of  the  extraneous  parts  of  the  blood  that  are  soluble  ia
water,  such  as  salts;  and  becomes  sooner  putrid.  The  two  last  species
of  matter  not  being  of  the  same  specific  nature  with  the  sore,  they  have
the  power  of  stimulating  even  their  own  sore.

On  this  last  account  too,  pus  becomes  more  irritating  to  the  adjoining
parts,  with  which  it  comes  in  contact,  producing  excoriation  of  the  skin,  and
the  ulcerative  inflammation;  as  the  tears,  when  they  run  out, excoriate  the
skin  of  the  cheek  from  the  quantity  of  salts  which  they  contain.  From
this  effect  the  matter  has  been  called  corrosive,  a  quality  which  it  has  not;
the  only  quality  which  it  possesses  being  that  of  irritating  the  parts  with
which  it  comes  in  contact,  in  such  a  manner  that  they  are  removed  out  of
the  way  by  the  absorbents,  as  will  be  described  when  treating  on  ulcera-
tion .

In  these  instances  of  the  change  in  the  pus,  we  may  say  that  the  change
is  effected  by  the  decomposition  and  new  combination  not  being  carried
on  so  perfectly;  this  may  probably  depend  on  the  secreting  vessels  having
lost  their  due  structure  and  action,  and  this  appears  to  be  so  much  the
case,  that  they  not  only  fail  in  this  operation,  but  the  other  offices  of  those
vessels,  viz.  the  production  of  granulations  is  also  checked;  for  the  vessels
forming  themselves  into  a  certain  structure  which  fits  them  for  secreting
pus,  it  is  so  ordered,  that  the  same  structure  also  fits  them  for  producing
granulations,  and  thus  those  two  processes  are  concomitant  effects  of  the
same  cause,  which  cause  is  a  peculiar  organization  superadded  to  the  vessels
pf  the  part.

2  K


434  Of  pus.

What  organization  this  may  be  is  not  in  the  least  known,  nor  must  we
wonder  at  this,  for  it  is  exactly  the  same  with  every  other  organ  of  secre-
tion, about  all  which  we  are  equally  ignorant;  indeed,  some  of  the  dif-
ferences between  one  gland  and  another  are  made  out,  and  also  something
of  their  general  structure;  but  not  in  such  a  way  as  can  lead  us  to  the
actions  and  operations  of  the  several  parts  upon  which  the  nature  of  the
different  secretions  depend,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  conclude  a  priori,  that
this  or  that  gland  must  secrete  this  or  that  peculiar  juice.

Pus,  from  several  circumstances  often  attending  it,  would  appear  in  ge-
neral to  have  a  greater  tendency  to  putrefaction  than  the  natural  juices
have ;  but  I  very  much  suspect  that  this  is  not  really  the  case  with  pure
pus;  for  when  it  is  first  discharged  from  an  abscess,  it  is  in  general  per-
fectly sweet.  There  are,  however,  some  exceptions  to  this,  but  these  de-
pend on  circumstances  entirely  foreign  to  the  nature  of  pus  itself.  Thus,
if  the  abscess  had  any  communication  with  the  air  while  the  matter  was
■confined  in  it,  (as  is  frequently  the  case  with  those  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  lungs)  or  if  it  has  been  so  near  the  colon  or  rectum,  as  to  have
been  infected  by  the  fceces,  under  such  circumstances  we  cannot  wonder
that  it  becomes  putrid  :  matter  formed  early  in  the  state  of  suppuration,
either  in  abscesses,  or  more  especially  in  consequence  of  any  external  vi-
olence committed  on  the  solids,  has  always  in  it  a  portion  of  blood  ;  or  if
some  parts  of  the  solids  mortify  and  slough,  these  will  mix  with  the  mat-
ter ;  the  same  thing  happens  when  the  inflammation  has  something  of
the  erysipelatous  disposition,  so  as  to  have  produced  a  mortification  in  the
seat  of  the  abscess ;  in  all  such  circumstances  we  find  the  pus  has  a
greater  tendency  to  putrify  than  the  pure  or  true  pus,  which  comes  to  be
discharged  afterwards  in  sound  abscesses  or  healing  sores;  and  accordingly
the  matter  from  recent  sores  becomes  very  putrid  between  every  dressing;
whereas,  when  the  same  sores  are  further  advanced,  it  is  perfectly  sweet
at  the  same  periods ;  but  although  the  imperfect  or  heterogeneous  matter
that  is  formed  at  first  is  liable  to  putrify  when  exposed,  yet  if  it  is  perfectly
confined  in  an  abscess,  it  will  remain  a  considerable  time  without  putre-
faction ;  the  suppuration,  however,  in  consequence  of  the  erysipelatous  in-
flammation, which  is  often  attended  with  suppuration  produced  by  inter-


Of  pus.  435

rial  mortification,  is,  as  we  have  observed,  an  exception  to  this  rule ;  for
although  confined  from  external  air,  yet  the  matter  becomes  soon  putrid,
and  this  most  probably  arises  from  the  solids  themselves  first  becoming
putrid.

A  similar  observation  may  be  made  with  respect  to  sores  which  have
been  in  the  habit  of  discharging  good  pus ;  for  if  by  any  accident  an  ex-
travasation of  blood  is  produced  in  these  parts,  or  a  disposition  is  brought
on  to  throw  out  blood,  which  mixes  with  the  pus,  the  discharge  changes
from  its  former  sweetness,  and  becomes  much  more  putrid  and  offensive.
It  appears  that  pure  matter,  although  easily  rendered  susceptible  of  change
by  extraneous  additions,  is  in  its  own  nature  pretty  uniform  and  immuta-
ble. It  appears  so  unchangeable,  that  we  find  it  retained  in  an  abscess
for  weeks,  without  having  undergone  any  change ;  but  these  qualities
belong  only  to  perfect  pus  j  for  if  a  sore  from  a  sound  state  changes  its
disposition  and  becomes  inflamed,  the  matter  now  produced  from  it,
though  there  be  no  extravasated  blood  or  dead  solids,  becomes  much
sooner  putrid  than  that  which  was  discharged  before  this  alteration  of
disposition,  and  shall  become  much  more  irritating,  as  has  already  been
observed.

From  the  abovementioned  considerations,  we  can  explain  why  the  dis-
charge in  many  specific  diseases,  although  not  in  all,  is  so  much  more  of-
fensive than  in  common  sores  ;  for  in  these  cases  it  is  commonly  not  true
pus,  and  is  generally  mixed  with  blood.

In  the  same  manner,  likewise,  where  there  are  diseased  bones,  or  other
extraneous  bodies  which  excite  irritation,  sometimes  even  to  so  great  a
degree  as  to  cause  the  vessels  to  bleed,  and  often  wounding  the  vessels  of
the  part,  the  matter  is  always  found  to  be  very  offensive,  one  mark  (al-
though not  commonly  accounted  for)  of  a  diseased  bone.

Our  silver  probes  are  rendered  almost  black,  when  introduced  into  the
discharge  of  an  unhealthy  sore ;  preparation  of  lead  are  the  same,  when
applied  to  such  matter.  It  even  dissolves  animal  substance ;  if,  for  in-
stance, a  fresh  wound  has  its  lips  brought  together  and  held  there  with
•ticking  plaster  spread  upon  leather,  we  shall  find  if  the  wound  suppu-
rates, that  the  parts  of  the  straps  of  leather  going  over  the  wound  will  be


436  Of  pus.

between  the  first  and  second  dressing  quite  dissolved,  dividing  the  straps
into  their  two  ends ;  and  the  plaster,  which  commonly  has  lead  in  it,  shall
become  black,  where  it  has  come  in  contact  with  this  matter.  This
change  in  the  colour  of  metals  is  also  produced  by  eggs,  when  not  per-
fectly fresh,  although  not  become  putrid ;  and  probably  this  property  is
assisted  by  the  boiling  or  roasting.  Dr.  Crawford,  in  his  experiments  on
the  m  atter  of  cancers  and  animal  hepatic  air,  attributes  the  dissolution  of
the  metals  to  that  air  *.


III.  OF  THE  USE  OF  PUS.


The  final  intention  of  this  secretion  of  matter  is,  I  believe,  not  yet  un-
derstood, although  almost  everyone  thinks  himself  able  to  assign  one;  and
various  are  the  uses  attributed  to  it.  It  is  by  some  supposed  to  carry  off
humors  from  the  constitution.  It  is  sometimes  supposed  a  constitutional
disease  changed  into  a  local  one,  and  so  discharged  or  thrown  out  of  the  body,
either  in  form  of,  or  with  the  pus,  as  in  those  cases  to  be  called  critical  ab-
scesses; but  even  those  who  see  this  final  intention  are  very  ready  to  overturn
it,  by  supposing  that  this  matter  is  capable  of  being  taken  back  again  into
the  constitution  by  absorption,  and  producing  much  worse  evils  than  those
it  was  meant  to  relieve.  I  believe  that  the  supposed  cases  of  absorption
are  more  numerous  than  those  where  it  is  supposed  to  relieve;  if  so,  then
by  their  own  account  nothing  is  gained.  Or  it  is  presumed  to  carry  off
local  complaints  from  other  parts  of  the  body  by  way  of  derivation,  or  re-
vulsion ;  for  this  reason  sores,  as  issues,  are  made  in  sound  parts,  to  allow
other  sores  to  be  dried  up ;  or  even  with  a  view  to  oblige  parts  to  dissolve
themselves  into  pus,  as  indurated  swellings ;  but  we  have  endeavoured  to
show  that  the  solids  make  no  part  of  pus.

A  secretion  of  pus  is  also  looked  upon  as  a  general  prevention  of  many,
or  of  all  the  causes  of  disease ;  issues,  therefore,  are  made  to  keep  off  both

*  Philos.  Transact,  vol.  8oth,  year  1790,  part  2nd.  page  385.


Of  pus.  437

universal  disease  as  well  as  local.  But  I  am  apt  to  believe  that  we  are  not
yet  well,  or  perhaps  at  all  acquainted  with  its  use,  for  it  is  common  to  all
sores  ;  takes  place  in  the  most  perfect  degree  in  those  sores  which  may  be
said  to  be  the  most  healthy,  and  especially  in  those  where  the  constitution
is  most  healthy.

We  find  also  that  very  large  discharges,  when  proceeding  from  a  part
which  is  not  essential  to  life,  produces  very  little  change  in  the  constitu-
tion, and  as  little  upon  being  healed  up,  whatever  some  people  may  sup-
pose to  the  contrary.

One  might  naturally  imagine,  that  it  was  of  service  to  the  sore  which
formed  it,  to  keep  it  moist,  etc.  for  all  internal  surfaces  have  their  peculiar
moisture ;  but  as  a  sore  is  to  heal,  and  if  allowed  to  dry,  so  as  to  form  a
scab,  then  a  sore  is  disposed  to  form  no  more  pus,  and  heal  faster;  it  is  the
mode  of  dressing  external  sores  that  keeps  up  this  secretion,  which  in  this
respect  maintains  the  sore  in  the  state  of  an  internal  one ;  but  this  will
not  account  for  the  formation  of  an  abscess,  which  is  the  formation  of  pus
we  can  best  account  for,  since  it  produces  the  exposure  of  internal  sur-
faces ;  in  many  cases  it  is  of  singular  service,  to  procure  the  second  mode
of  cure,  and  open  a  communication  between  the  disease  and  the  external
surface  of  the  body.

It  also  forms  a  passage  for  the  exit  of  extraneous  bodies ;  but  all  these
are  only  secondary  uses.


[  439  ]

CHAPTER  VL
THE  VLCERATIVE  INFLAMMATION.


In  considering  the  origin  and  course  of  the  blood,  it  would  have  been  most
natural  to  have  considered  absorption,  or  the  absorbing  vessels ;  for  in  one
point  of  view,  they  may  be  considered  as  the  animal  consisting  of  so  many
mouths,  every  thing  else  depending  upon  them,  or  belonging  to  them ;  for  in
tracing  these  dependences  we  find  that  there  exists  ultimately  little  else  but
absorbents.  The  stomach  and  the  organs  connected  with  it  in  such  ani-
mals as  have  a  stomach,  are  to  be  considered  as  subservient  to  this  system;
and  many  an  animal  is  to  be  considered  as  consisting  of  a  number  of  sto-
machs; a  piece  of  coral,  for  instance,  appears  to  be  no  more  than  a  thou-
sand stomachs,  all  taking  in  food  for  digestion,  and  absorption  for  increase,
and  support  of  the  whole;  for  each  stomach  does  not  increase,  as  the  piece
of  coral  increases,  but  they  multiply  in  number,  and  of  course  the  whole
piece  of  coral  increases ;  for  although  each  appears  to  be  a  distinct  animal,
yet  it  is  not  so  ;  but  as  this  is  too  general  a  view  of  this  system  for  our  pre-
sent purpose,  I  shall  leave  it,  and  confine  myself  principally  to  the  uses  of
the  absorbents  in  the  diseases  of  which  I  am  going  to  treat ;  and  as  one  of
their  uses  in  diseases,  and  indeed  the  principal  one,  has  not  been  described,
nor  indeed  in  the  least  conjectured,  that  it  may  be  clearly  understood  or
distinguished  from  the  other  known  uses,  I  shall  relate  first  the  more  com-
mon uses  which  have  been  formerly  assigned  to  this  system.

First,  the  absorbents  take  up  extraneous  matter,  in  which  is  included
nourishment.

Secondly,  superfluous  and  extravasated  matter,  whether  natural  or  dis-
eased.

Thirdly,  the  fat.

Fourthly,  they  produce  a  waste  of  parts,  in  consequence  of  which


4^0  *Fhe  ulcerative  inflammation,

muscles  become  smaller,  bones  become  lighter,  etc.  Although  these  two
last  effects  were  perhaps  not  expressly  said  to  be  carried  on  by  absorption,
either  by  veins,  or  any  other  system  of  vessels,  yet  we  must  suppose  they  were
understood  :  so  far  the  absorbents  have  in  general  been  considered  as  active
parts  in  the  animal  ceconomy ;  but  from  a  further  knowledge  of  these  ves-
sels, we  shall  find  that  they  are  of  much  more  consequence  in  the  body
than  has  been  imagined,  and  that  they  are  often  taking  down  what  the  ar-
teries had  formerly  built  up;  removing  whole  organs,  becoming  model-
lers of  the  form  of  the  body  while  growing ;  also  removing  many  diseased
and  dead  parts,  which  were  beyond  the  power  of  cure ;  of  all  which  I  shall
now  take  particular  notice.

As  these  vessels  are  productive  of  a  vast  variety  of  effects  in  the  animal
ceconomy,  which  are  very  dissimilar  in  the  intention  and  effect,  they  may
be  reviewed  in  a  variety  of  lights,  and  admit  of  a  variety  of  divisions.  I
shall  consider  them  in  two  views  :  first,  as  they  absorb  matter,  which  is
not  any  part  of  the  machine  ;  secondly,  as  they  absorb  the  machine  it-
self.

The  first  of  these  is  the  well-known  use,  the  absorption  of  matter,
which  is  no  part  of  the  machine.  This  is  of  two  kinds,  one  exterior
matter,  in  which  may  be  ranked  every  thing  applied  to  the  skin,  as  also
the  chyle;  and  the  other  interior,  such  as  many  of  the  secreted  juices,
the  fat,  and  the  earth  of  bones,  etc*.  These  are  principally  with  a  view
to  its  nourishment,  and  also  answer  many  other  purposes;  so  that  the  ac-
tion of  absorbing  foreign  rhatter  is  extremely  extensive ;  for  besides  its  sa-
lutary effects,  it  is  often  the  cause  of  a  thousand  diseases,  especially  from
poisons,  none  of  which  are  to  my  present  purpose.

In  the  second  of  these  views,  we  are  to  consider  them  as  removing  parts
of  the  body  itself,  in  which  they  may  be  viewed  in  two  lights.  The  first
is,  where  only  a  wasting  is  produced  in  the  whole  machine,  or  part,  such
as  in  the  wasting  of  the  whole  body,  from  an  atrophy  ;  or  in  a  part,  as
in  the  wasting  of  the  muscles  of  the  leg,  etc.  from  some  injury  done  to

*  It  may  be  necessary  to  remark  here,  that  I  do  not  consider  either  the  fat,  or  the  earth
of  bones,  as  a  part  of  the  animal;  they  are  not  animal  matter;  they  have  no  action  within
themselves. They  have  not  the  principle  of  life.


I


The  ulcerative  Inflammation.  441

some  nerve,  tendinous  part,  or  joint ;  all  of  which  I  call  interstitial  ab-
sorption, because  it  is  removing  parts  of  the  body  out  of  the  interstices  of
that  part  which  remains,  leaving  the  part  still  as  a  perfect  whole*.  But
this  mode  is  often  carried  further  than  simply  wasting  of  die  part ;  it  is
often  continued  till  not  a  vestage  is  left,  such  as  the  total  decay  of  a  testicle,
so  that  the  interstitial  absorption  might  be  understood  in  two  senses.

The  second  is,  where  they  are  removing  whole  parts  of  the  body.  This
may  be  divided  into  the  natural,  and  the  diseased-f-.

In  the  natural  they  are  to  be  considered  a,s  the  modellers  of  the  original
construction  of  the  body  ;  and  if  we  were  .to  consider  them  fully  in  this
view,  we  should  find  that  no  alteration  can  take  place  in  the  original  for-
mation of  many  of  the  parts,  either  in  the  natural  growth,  or  that  forma-
tion arising  from  disease,  in  which  the  absorbents  are  not  in  action,  and
take  not  a  considerable  part :  this  absorption  I  shall  call  modelling  ab-
sorption. If  I  were  to  consider  their  powers  in  (this  light,  it  would  lead
me  into  a  vast  variety  of  effects,  as  extensive  as  any  principle  in  the  ani-
mal ceconomy,  for  a  bone  cannot  be  formed  without  il^  nor  probably  many
other  parts.  A  part  which  was  of  use  in  one  stage  of  life,  but  which  be-
comes entirely  useless  in  another,  is  thus  removed.  This  is  evident  in  many
animals ;  the  thymus  gland  is  removed ;  the  ductus  arteriosus,  and  the
membrana  pupilaris  is  removed.  This  process  is,  perhaps-,, fnore  remark-
able in  the  changes  of  the  insect,  than  in  any  other  known  animal.  Ab-
sorption in  consequence  of  disease,  is  the  power  of  removing  complete  parts
of  the  body,  and  is  in  its  operation  somewhat  similar  to  the  first  of  this  di-
vision, or  modelling  process,  but  very  different  in  the  intention,  and  there-
fore in  its  ultimate  effects.

This' process  of  removing  whole  parts  in  consequence  of  disease,  in
some  cases  produces  effects  which  are  not  similar  to  one  another  ;  one
of  these  is  a  sore  or  ulcer,  and  I  therefore  call  it  ulcerative.  In  other
cases  no  ulcer  is  produced,  although  whole  parts  are  removed,  and  for  this

*  This  mode  of  absorption  has  always  been  allowed,  or  supposed,  whether  performed  by
the  lymphatic  veins,  or  lymphatics.

f  These  uses  I  claim  as  my  own  discovery.  I  have  taught  them  publicly  ever  since  the
vear  1772.

3  l


442  ¥be  ulcerative  inflammation*

I  have  not  been  able  to  find  a  term ;  but  both  may  be  denominated  pro-
gressive absorption.

This  process  of  the  removal  of  a  whole  solid  part  of  the  body,  or  that
power  which  the  animal  ceconomy  has  of  taking  part  of  itself  into  the
circulation  by  means  of  the  absorbing  vessels,  whenever  it  is  necessary,  is  a
fact  that  has  not  in  the  least  been  attended  to,  nor  was  it  even  supposed,  and
having  now  been  noticed,  I  mean  to  give  a  general  idea  of  it.  I  may  just
be  allowed  once  more  to  observe,  that  the  oil,  or  fat,  of  animals,  and  the
earth  of  bones,  have  always  been  considered  as  subject  to  absorption;  and
some  other  parts  of  the  body  being  liable  to  wasting,  have  been  supposed  to
surfer  this  by  absorption;  but  that  any  solid  part  should  totally  be  ab-
sorbed, is  a  new  doctrine, t

This  use  of  the  absorbents  I  have  long  been  able  to  demonstrate;  and  the
first  hints  I  received  of  it,  were  in  the  waste  of  the  sockets  of  the  teeth,  as
also  in  the  fangs  of  the  shedding  teeth.

It  may  be  difficult  at  first  to  conceive  how  a  part  of  the  body  can  be
removed  by  itself;  but  it  is  just  as  difficult  to  conceive  how  a  body  can  form
itself,  which  we  see  daily  taking  place  ;  they  are  both  equally  facts,  and
the  knowledge  of  their  mode  of  action,  would  answer  perhaps  very  little
purpose  ;  but  this  I  may  assert,  that  whenever  any  solid  part  of  our  bodies
undergoes  a  diminution,  or  is  broken  in  upon,  in  consequence  of  any  dis-
ease, it  is  the  absorbing  system  which  does  it.

When  it  becomes  necessary  that  some  whole  living  part  should  be
removed/  it  is  evident  that  nature,  in  order  to  effect  this,  must  not  only
confer  a  new  activity  on  the  absorbents,  but  must  throw  the  part  to  be  ab-
sorbed into  such  a  state  as  to  yield  to  this  operation.

This  is  the  only  animal  power  capable  of  producing  such  effects,  and
like  all  other  operations  of  the  machine  arises  from  a  stimulus,  or  an
irritation;  all  other  methods  of  destruction  being  either  mechanical  or
chemical.  The  first  by  cutting  instruments,  as  knives,  saws,  etc.  the  se-
cond by  caustics,  metalic  salts,  etc.

The  process  of  ulceration  is  of  the  same  general  nature  in  all  cases;  but
some  of  the  causes  and  effects  are  very  different  from  one  another.


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  443

The  knowledge  of  the  use  of  this  system  is  but  of  late  date;  and  the
knowledge  of  its  different  modes  of  action  is  still  later.  Physiologists
have  laboured  to  account  for  its  modes  of  action ;  and  the  principle  of
capillary  tubes  was  at  first  the  most  general  idea,  because  it  was  a  familiar
one.  But  this  is  too  confined  a  principle  of  an  animal  machine,  nor  will
it  account  for  every  kind  of  absorption.  Capillary  tubes  can  only  attract
fluids;  but  as  these  inquirers  found  that  solids  were  often  absorbed,  such  as*
schirrous  tumors,  coagulated  blood,  the  earth  of  bones,  etc.  they  were
driven  to  the  necessity  of  supposing  a  solvent;  this  may  or  may  not  be
true;  it  is  one  of  those  hypotheses  that  can  never  be  proved  or  disproved,
and  may  for  ever  rest  upon  opinion.  But  my  conception  of  this  matter  is,
that  nature  leaves  as  little  as  possible  to  chance,  and  that  the  whole  ope-
ration of  absorption  is  performed  by  an  action  in  the  mouths  of  the  ab-
sorbents:  but  even  under  the  idea  of  capillary  tubes,  physiologists  were
still  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  action  of  those  vessels  to  carry  it  along
after  it  was  absorbed ;  and  might  therefore  as  well  have  carried  this  action
to  the  mouths  of  these  vessels.

As  we  know  nothing  of  the  mode  of  action  of  the  mouths  of  these  ves-
sels, it  is  impossible  we  can  form  any  opinion  that  can  be  relied  upon ;  but
as  they  are  capable  of  absorbing  substances  in  two  different  states,  that  of
solidity  and  fluidity,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  have  different
modes  of  action ;  for  although  any  construction  of  parts  that  is  capable
of  absorbing  a  solid,  may  also  be  such  as  is  capable  of  absorbing  a  fluid  ;
yet  I  can  suppose  a  construction  only  capable  of  absorbing  a  fluid,  and
not  at  all  fitted  for  absorbing  a  solid,  though  this  is  not  likely ;  and  to  see
the  propriety  of  this  remark  more  forcibly,  let  us  only  consider  the  mouths
of  different  animals,  and  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  the  mouths  of  all  the
different  animals  have  not  a  greater  variety  of  substances  to  work  upon,
than  the  absorbents  have,  and  we  may  observe  that  with  all  the  variety  of
mouths  in  different  animals,  this  variety  is  only  for  the  purpose  of  adapting
them  to  absorb  solids,  which  admit  of  great  variety  in  form,  texture,  etc.
every  one  being  capable  of  absorbing  fluid  matter,  which  admits  of  no
variety.


444  $*&*  ulcerative  inflammation.

This  process  of  the  removal  of  parts  of  the  body,  either  by  interstitial
or  progressive  absorption,  answers  very  arterial  purposes  in  the  machine,
without  which  many  local  diseases  could  not  be  removed,  and  which,  if
allowed  to  remain,  would  destroy  the  person.  It  may  be  called  in  such-
cases,  the  natural  surgeon.

It  is  by  the  progressive  absorption,  that  matter  or  pus,  and  extraneous
bodies  of  all  kinds,  whether  in  consequence  of  or  producing  inflammation
and  suppuration  are  brought  to  the  external  surface ;  it  is  by  means  of
this  that  bones  exfoliate;  it  is  this  operation  which  separates  sloughs;  it
is  the  absorbents  which  are  removing  whole  bones,  while  the  arteries  are
supplying  new  ones ;  and  although  in  these  last  cases  of  bones  it  arises
from  disease,  yet  it  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  modelling  process  of  this
system  in  the  natural  formation  of  bone  ;  it  is  this  operation  that  removes
useless  parts,  as  the  alveolar  processes,  when  the  teeth  drop  out,  or  when
they  are  removed  by  art ;  as  also  the  fangs  of  the  shedding  teeth,  which
allows  them  to  drop  off;  and  it  is  by  these  means  ulcers  are  formed.

It  becomes  a  substitute  in  many  cases  for  mortification,  which  is  ano-
ther mode  of  the  loss  of  substance;  and  in  such  cases  it  seems  to  owe  its
taking  place  of  mortification  to  a  degree  of  strength  or  vigor,  superior  to
that  where  mortification  takes  place ;  for  although  it  arises  often  from
weakness,  yet  it  is  an  action,  while  mortification  is  the  loss  of  all  action.
In  many  cases  it  finishes  what  mortification  had  begun,  by  separating  the
mortified  part.

These  two  modes  of  absorption,  the  interstitial  and  the  progressive,  are
often  wisely  united,  or  perform  their  purposes  often  in  the  same  part  which
is  to  be  removed;  and  this  may  be  called  the  mixed,  which  I  believe  takes
place  in  most  cases,  as  in  that  of  extraneous  bodies  of  all  kinds  coming  to
the  skin  ;  also  in  abscesses,  when  in  soft  parts.  It  is  the  second  kind  of
interstitial  absorption,  the  progressive  and  the  mixed,  that  become  mostly
the  object  of  surgery,  although  the  first  of  the  interstitial  sometimes  takes
place,  so  as  to  be  worthy  of  attention.

This  operation  of  the  absorption  of  whole  parts,  like  many  other  processes
in  the  animal  ceconomy,  arising  from  disease,  would  often  appear  to  be
doing  mischief,  by  destroying  parts  which  are  of  service,  and  where  no


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  445

visible  good  appears  to  arise  from  it ;  for  it  is  this  process  which  forms  a
sore  called  an  ulcer;  such  as  in  those  cases  where  the  solids  are  destroyed
upon  the  external  surface,  as  in  old  sores  in  the  leg,  breaking  out  anew,
or  increasing ;  but  in  all  cases  it  must  still  be  referred  to  some  necessary
purpose ;  for  we  may  depend  upon  it,  that  those  parts  have  not  the  power
of  maintaining  their  ground,  and  it  becomes  a  substitute  for  mortifica-
tion; and  indeed  in  many  ulcers,  we  shall  see  both  ulceration  and  mor-
tification going  on,  ulceration  removing  those  parts  that  have  power  to  re-
sist death.


I.  OF  THE  REMOTE  CAUSE  OF  THE  ABSORPTION  OF  THE  ANIMAL

ITSELF.

The  remote  cause  of  the  removal  of  parts  of  the  animal  appears  to  be
of  various  kinds,  and  whatever  will  produce  the  following  effects,  will  be
a  cause.

The  most  simple  intention,  or  object  of  nature,  seems  to  be  the  removal
of  a  useless  part,  as  the  thymus  gland,  membrana  pupilaris,  ductus  arte-
riosus, the  alveoli  when  the  teeth  drop,  or  the  crystaline  humor  after  couch-
ing, and  probably  the  wasting  of  the  body  from  fever,  either  accute  or
hectic.  These  parts  are  removed  by  the  absorbents,  either  as  useless  parts,
or  in  consequence  of  strength  being  unnecessary  while  under  disease,  or
such  as  not  to  accord  with  disease  *,

Another  cause  is  a  weakness,  or  the  want  of  power  in  the  part  to  support
itself  under  certain  irritations,  which  may  be  considered  as  the  basis  of
every  cause  of  removal  of  whole  parts ;  as  the  absorption  of  calluses,  cica-
trices, the  gums  in  salivation;  also  that  arising  from  pressure,  or  irritating
applications,  under  which  may  be  included  the  attachment  of  dead  parts  to

*  It  might  be  asked  as  a  question,  whether  the  waste  of  the  constitution  in  disease  arises
from  the  body  becoming  ufeless  when  under  such  diseases,  as  may  be  observed  of  muscles
when  their  joint,  tendon,  etc.  is  diseased ;  or  whether  it  accords  better  with  the  diseased
state,  and  may  even  tend  to  a  natural  cure  ?


446  The  ulcerative  inflammation.

a  living  one;  all  of  which  may  be  accounted  for  upon  the  same  principle
of  parts  or  organs  not  being  able  to  support  themselves  under  the  present
evil.

From  the  above  account  of  the  final  cause  of  the  absorption  of  whole
parts  from  disease,  it  would  appear  that  they  are  capable  of  being  absorbed
from  five  causes.  First,  from  parts  being  pressed  ;  secondly,  from  parts
being  considerably  irritated  by  irritating  substances ;  thirdly,  from  parts
being  weakened  ;  fourthly,  from  parts  being  rendered  useless ;  fifthly,  from
parts  becoming  dead.  The  two  first,  for  instance,  parts  being  pressed,
and  parts  being  irritated,  appear  to  me  to  produce  the  same  irritation  ;
the  third,  or  weakness,  an  irritation  of  its  own  kind  ;  and  the  fourth,  or
parts  being  rendered  useless,  and  the  fifth,  or  parts  becoming  dead,  may
be  somewhat  similar.

It  is  probable  that  every  cause  above  enumerated  is  capable  of  ..producing
every  mode  ;  or  rather  effect  of  absorption,  whether  interstitial  or  pro-
gressive ;  but  pressure  attended  with  suppuration  always  produces  the  pro-
gressive, whether  applied  externally  or  internally,  as  in  the  case  of  abscesses.


II.  OF  THE  DISPOSITION  OF  LIVING  PARTS  TO  ABSORB  AND  TO  BE

ABSORBED.

The  dispositions  of  the  two  parts  of  the  living  body,  which  absorb  and
are  absorbed,  must  be  of  two  kinds  respecting  the  parts  ;  one  passive  and
the  other  active.  The  first  of  these  is  an  irritated  state  of  the  part  to
be  absorbed,  which  renders  it  unfit  to  remain  under  such  circumstances j
the  action  excited  by  this  irritation  being  incompatible  with  the  natural
actions  and  the  existence  of  the  parts  whatever  these  are,  therefore  become
ready  for  removal,  or  yield  to  it  with  ease.  The  second  is  the  absorbents
being  stimulated  to  action  by  such  a  state  of  parts,  so  that  both  conspire
to  the  same  end.

When  the  part  to  be  absorbed  is  a  dead  part,  as  nourishment  or  extra-
neous matter  of  all  kinds,  then  the  whole  disposition  is  in  the  absorbents.


The  ulcerative  inflammation*  447

When  those  immediate  causes  arise  in  consequence  of  pressure,  it  would
appear  that  absorption  takes  place  more  readily  under  certain  circum-
stances than  others,  although  the  remote  causes  of  them  appear  to  be
the  same,  therefore  something  more  than  simple  pressure  ;  for  we  find
that  pressure  from  within  produces  ulceration  or  absorption  much  more  rea-
dily than  from  without;  for  if  it  was  pressure  only,  absorption  then  would
be  according  to  the  quantity  of  pressure ;  but  we  find  very  different  effects
from  the  same  quantity  of  pressure  under  the  abovementioned  circum-
stances ;  for  when  from  without,  pressure  rather  stimulates  than  irritates
it  shall  give  signs  of  strength,  and  produce  an  increase  of  thickening
but  when  from  within,  the  same  quantity  of  pressure  will  produce  waste
for  the  first  effect  of  the  pressure  from  without  is  the  disposition  to
thicken,  which  is  rather  an  operation  of  strength;  but  if  it  exceeds  the
stimulus  of  thickening,  then  the  pressure  becomes  an  irritator,  and  the
power  appears  to  give  way  to  it,  and  absorption  of  the  parts  pressed  takes
place,  so  that  nature  very  readily  takes  on  those  steps  which  are  to  get  rid
of  an  extraneous  body,  but  appears  not  only  not  ready  to  let  extraneous
bodies  enter  the  body,  but  endeavours  to  exclude  them,  by  increasing  the
thickness  of  the  parts.

Many  parts  of  our  solids  are  more  susceptible  of  being  absorbed,  espe-
cially by  ulceration,  than  others,  even  under  the  same  or  similar  circum-
stances, while  the  same  part  shall  vary  its  susceptibility  according  to  cir-
cumstances.

The  cellular  and  adipose  membranes  are  very  particularly  susceptible
of  being  absorbed,  which  is  proved  by  muscles,  tendons,  ligaments,  nerves
and  blood  vessels  being  found  frequently  deprived  of  their  connecting
membrane  and  fat,  especially  in  abscesses,  so  that  ulceration  often  takes  a
roundabout  course  to  get  to  the  skin,  following  the  track  of  the  cellular
membrane;  and  the  skin  itself,  when  the  pressure  is  from  within,  is  much
less  susceptible  of  ulceration  than  the  cellular  and  adipose  membrane,
which  retards  the  progress  of  abscesses,  when  they  are  so  far  advanced,
and  also  becomes  the  cause  of  the  skin's  hanging  over  spreading  ulcers,
which  are  spreading  from  the  same  cause,  more  especially  too,  if  the  part
ulcerating  is  an  original  part. Ulceration  never  takes  place  on  investing


aa§  The  ulcerative  inflammation',

membranes  of  circumscribed  cavities,  excepting  suppuration  has  taken
place;  and,  indeed,  ulceration  in  such  parts  would  be  a  sure  forerunner  of
suppuration.

New  formed  parts,  or  such  as  cannot  be  said  to  constitute  part  of  the
original  animal,  as  healed  sores,  calluses  of  bones,  especially  those  in  con-
sequence of  compound  fractures,  admit  more  readily  of  absorption,  espe-
cially the  progressive,  than  those  parts  which  were  originally  formed  ■  this
arises  probably  from  the  principle  of  weakness,  and  it  is  from  this  too,
that  all  adventitious  new  matter,  as  tumors,  are  more  readily  absorbed
than  even  that  which  is  a  substitute  for  the  old.  Thus  we  have  tumors
more  readily  absorbed  than  a  callus  of  a  bone,  union  of  a  tendon,  etc.  be-
cause they  have  still  less  powers  than  those  which  are  substitutes  for
parts  originally  formed.

Ulceration  in  consequence  of  death  in  an  external  part,  takes  place
soonest  on  the  external  edge  between  the  dead  and  the  living.  This  is
visible  in  the  sloughing  of  parts ;  for  we  may  observe  that  sloughs  from
caustics,  bruises,  mortifications,  etc.  always  begin  at  the  external  edge.

An  internal  pressure  produced  by  an  extraneous  body,  acts  equally
on  every  side  of  the  surrounding  parts,  and  therefore  every  part  being
pressed  alike,  ought,  from  this  cause  alone,  to  produce  absorption  of
the  surrounding  parts  equally  on  all  sides  ;  supposing  the  parts  them-
selves similar  in  structure,  or  which  is  the  same,  equally  susceptible  of
being  absorbed ;  but  we  find  that  one  side  only  of  the  surrounding  liv-
ing parts  is  susceptible  pf  this  irritation,  therefore  one  side  only  is  ab-
sorbed; and  this  is  always  the  side  which  is  next  to  the  external  surface
of  the  body.  We,  therefore,  have  always  extraneous  bodies  of  every
kind,  determined  to  the  skin,  and  on  that  side  to  which  the  extraneous
body  is  nearest,  without  having  any  effect,  or  producing  the  least  de-
struction of  any  of  the  other  surrounding  parts.  From  this  cause  we
find  abscesses,  etc.  whose  seat  is  in,  or  near  the  centre  of  a  part,  readily
determined  to  the  surface  on  the  one  side,  and  not  on  the  other;  and
whenever  the  lead  is  once  taken,  it  immediately  goes  on.  But  as  some
parts,  from  their  structure,  are  more  susceptible  of  this  irritation  than
others,  we  find  that  those  parts  composed  of  such  structure,  are  often


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  449

absorbed,  although  they  are  not  in  the  shortest  road  to  the  skin  •  this
structure  is  the  cellular  membrane,  as  will  be  taken  notice  of  hereafter.

We  find  the  same  principle  in  the  progress  of  tumors ;  for  although
every  part  surrounding  a  tumor  is  equally  pressed,  yet  the  interstitial  ab-
sorption only  takes  place  on  that  side  next  the  external  surface,  by  which
means  the  tumor  is,  as  it  were,  led  to  the  skin  ;  from  hence  we  find  that
absorption  of  whole  parts  more  readily  takes  place,  to  allow  an  extrane-
ous substance  to  pass  out  of  the  body,  than  it  will  to  allow  one  to  pass  in.

Thus  we  see,  that  the  slight  pressure  produced  by  matter  on  the  inside
of  an  abscess  has  a  great  effect,  and  the  matter  is  brought  much  faster  to
the  skin  (although  very  deep)  than  it  would  by  the  same  quantity  of  pres-
sure applied  from  without  j  and,  indeed,  so  slight  a  pressure  from  with-
out would  rather  tend  to  have  an  opposite  effect,  namely,  that  of  thicken-
ing.

The  reason  of  this  is  evident ;  one  is,  a  readiness  in  the  parts  to  be  freed
from  a  disease  already  existing ;  the  other  is,  a  backwardness  in  the  parts  to
admit  a  disease.  This  principle,  therefore,  in  the  animal  ceconomy  pro-
duces one  of  the  most  curious  phenomena  in  the  whole  process  of  ulce-
ration, viz.  the  susceptibility  which  the  parts  lying  between  an  extrane-
ous body  and  the  skin  have  to  ulcerate,  while  all  the  other  sides  of  the
abscess  are  not  irritated  to  ulceration  ;  and  the  necessity  there  is  that  it
should  be  so,  must  be  very  striking;  for  if  ulceration  went  on  equally  on
all  sides  of  an  abscess,  it  must  increase  to  a  most  enormous  size,  and  too
great  a  quantity  of  our  solids  must  necessarily  be  destroyed.

Bones,  we  have  observed,  are  also  subject  to  similar  circumstances  of
ulceration;  for  whenever  an  abscess  forms  in  the  centre  of  a  bone,  or  an
internal  exfoliation  has  taken  place,  the  extraneous  body  acts  upon  the
internal  surface  of  th?  cavity,  and  produces  ulceration.

If  the  matter  or  dead  piece  of  bone  is  nearer  one  side  than  the  other,
ulceration  takes  place  on  that  side  only ;  and  here  too  the  provision  of
nature  in  abscesses  comes  in,  for  the  adhesive  inflammation  extends  itself
on  the  outside  in  proportion  as  ulceration  extends  itself  on  the  inside  of
the  cavity,  and  as  ulceration  approaches  to  the  surface  of  the  bone,
the  adhesive  disposition  is  given  to  the  periosteum,  then  to  the  cellular

3  M


45.o  The  ulcerative  inflammation,

membrane,  etc.  And  what  is  very  curious,  this  adhesive  inflammation
assumes  the  ossifying  disposition,  which  I  have  called  the  ossific  inflam-
mation, and  appears  as  a  spreading  ossification,  in  the  same  manner  as  in
the  callus  of  a  simple  fracture.

The  consequence  of  these  two  processes  taking  place  together  in  bones
is  very  singular,  for  the  ulcerative  process  destroying  the  inside  of  a  bone
while  the  ossifying  makes  addition  to  its  outside,  the  bone  often  increases-
to  a  prodigious  size,  as  in  cases  of  spinas  ventosa? ;  but  in  the  end  the  ul-
ceration on  the  inside  gets  the  better,  and  the  matter  makes  its  escape.

Nature  has  not  only  made  what  might  be  called  an  instinctive  provi-
sion in  the  parts  to  remove  themselves,  so  as  to  bring  extraneous  bodies  to
the  skin  for  their  exit,  and  thereby,  from  this  principle,  has  guarded  the
deeper  seated  parts  ;  but  has  also  guarded  all  passages  or  outlets,  where,
from  reasoning,  we  might  suppose  no  great  mischief  could  arise  from
bringing  extraneous  bodies  thither  ;  and  in  many  cases  a  seeming  advan-
tage would  be  gained;  such  passages  appearing  to  be  more  convenient  for
the  exit  of  such  matter,  and  likely  to  produce  less  visible  mischief  in  pro-
curing them.

Thus  a  tumor  in  the  cheek,  close  on  the  internal  membrane  of  the
mouth,  and  some  way  from  the  skin,  shall  in  its  growth  push  externally,
especially  if  there  is  matter  in  it,  and  in  time  come  in  contact  with  the
skin  and  adhere  to  it,  while  it  shall  have  made  no  closer  connexion  with
the  skin  of  the  mouth  ;  if  it  should  suppurate,  and  more  especially  if  it
b°.  of  a  scrofulous  kind,  which  is  slow  in  its  progress,  it  will  break  ex-
ternally; we  even  see  abscesses  in  the  gums  opening  externally,  where
the  matter  has  been  obliged  to  go  a  considerable  way  to  get  to  the  skin.

The  same  guard  is  set  over  the  cavity  of  the  nose  ;  if  an  abscess  forms
in  the  antrum,  frontal  sinus  or  saccus  lacrimalis,  all  of  which  are  nearer  to
the  cavity  of  the  nose  than  the  external  surface  of  the  body,  ulceration
does  not  follow  this  shortest  way,  which  would  be  directly  into  the  nose,
but  leads  the  matter  to  the  nearest  external  surface.

I  have  seen  an  abscess  in  the  frontal  sinus,  first  attended  with  great  pain
in  the  part,  then  with  inflammations  on  the  whole  forehead,  at  last  mat-
ter has  been  felt  under  the  akin ;  and  on  being  opened  it  has  led  into  one


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  451

or  both  sinuses,  and  almost  the  whole  bone  has  exfoliated.  For  such  an
abscess,  the  nearest  passage  would  have  been  directly  into  the  nose.  Ab-
scess in  the  lacrimal  sac,  forming  what  is  called  the  fistula  lacrimalis,
arises  also  from  the  same  cause;  a  curious  circumstance  takes  place  here ;
but  whether  peculiar  to  this  part  or  not,  I  do  not  yet  know.  Besides
the  disposition  for  ulceration  externally  at  the  inner  corner  of  the  eye,
there  is  a  defence  set  up  upon  the  inside,  so  that  the  membrane  of  the
nose  thickens  very  considerably;  how  far  a  thickening  takes  place  on  the
inside  of  the  nose,  opposite  to  the  antrum,  in  abcesses  of  that  cavity,  or
how  far  it  is  an  universal  principle  in  other  passages,  I  have  not  been  able
to  learn,  but  am  inclined  to  believe  it  is  not  universal.  From  this  prin-
ciple we  can  see  why  openings  made  into  these  passages  to  make  the  mat-
ter come  that  way  are  more  unsuccessful,  than  reasoning  (without  the
knowledge  of  this  principle)  would  lead  us  to  believe;  the  opening,  there-
fore, should  not  be  made  on  the  inside  (even  where  we  can  do  it)  except-
ing the  matter  is  very  near,  or  else  the  opening  should  be  made  very  large ;
and  probably,  in  such  cases,  it  may  be  necessary  to  take  out  a  piece,  so  as
to  prevent  the  uniting  process,  which  is  here  very  strong.

Illustrations  will  be  given  in  other  passages,  when  treating  of  ulcera-
tion in  general  tending  to  the  external  surface.


III.  OF  INTERSTITIAL  ABSORPTION.

Interstitial  absorption,  I  observed,  was  of  two  kinds,  with  respect
to  effect,  or  rather  had  two  stages.  The  first  was,  where  it  took  place
only  in  a  part,  as  in  the  wasting  of  a  limb  in  consequence  of  its  being
rendered  useless,  whether  from  disease  in  a  joint,  a  broken  tendon,  or
the  dividing  of  a  nerve  whereby  its  influence  is  cut  off  -3  or  where  it  takes
place  in  the  whole  body,  in  consequence  of  some  disease,  as  in  acute
fever,  hectic  fever,  diabetes,  atrophy,  or  the  like.  The  second  is  the  ab-
sorption of  a  whole  part,  where  not  a  vistige  is  left.  This  would  seem
to  be  of  two  kinds ;  one,  where  it  is  only  a  consequence  of  another  dis-


452  The  ulcerative  Inflammation \

ease,  and  is  a  necessary  and  useful  effect  of  that  disease,  as  in  assisting  in
bringing  parts  to  the  surface  ;  but  the  other  appears  to  arise  from  a  dis-
ease in  the  part  itself;  as  the  total  decay  of  the  alveoli,  without  any  dis-
ease in  the  teeth  or  gums,  which  in  the  end  suffer;  as  also  a  total  wasting
of  a  testicle,  the  absorption  of  a  callus,  etc.  It  is  the  first  of  these  two
kinds  which  is  most  to  my  present  purpose,  and  deserves  our  particular  at-
tention. It  takes  place  in  a  thousand  instances ;  we  find  it  gradually
taking  place  in  the  part  of  the  body  which  happens  to  lie  between  incysted
tumors,  and  the  external  surface,  when  they  are  making  their  way  to  the
skin.  This  absorption  is  commonly  slow  in  its  progrees,  so  much  so,  as
even  to  make  the  ultimate  effect,  although  considerable,  not  sensible  till  a
certain  length  of  time  has  elapsed.

This  mode  of  removing  parts,  appears  to  arise  from  pressure,  as  in  the
former ;  but  here  some  principles  are  reversed. The  contents  of  an  in-
cysted tumor  do  not  give  the  stimulus  of  removal  to  that  side  of  the  syst
nearest  to  the  external  surface,  as  happens  in  an  abscess,  so  as  to  produce
a  removal  of  the  surface  pressed  by  its  contents,  which  would  be  the  pro-
gressive ulceration,  as  in  our  first  division ;  but  the  tumor  gives  the  sti-
mulus to  the  sound  parts,  between  it  and  the  skin,  and  an  absorption
of  those  parts  takes  place,  similar  to  that  which  I  suppose  takes  place
in  the  removal  of  calluses  of  bones,  from  weakness. We  find  when-
ever an  incysted  tumor  is  formed  in  the  cellular  membrane,  it  in  time
makes  its  approaches  towards  the  skin,  by  the  cellular  membrane  and  other
parts  between  it  and  the  skin  being  absorbed,  so  that  the  whole  substance
between  the  cyst  and  skin  becomes  thinner  and  thinner,  till  the  cyst  and
the  external  skin  meet  or  come  in  contact,  and  then  inflammation  begins
to  take  place;  for  as the  parts  are  now  soon  to  be  exposed,  inflam-
mation takes  place  to  produce  a  quicker  absorption,  which  borders  often
upon  ulceration. The  mode  of  action  in  this  last  case  may  be,  in  one
respect,  very  similar  to  the  foregoing  solid  tumor,  for  besides  the  intersti-
tial absorption,  the  cyst  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  tumor  acting  upon,  or
stimulating  the  parts  between  it  and  the  skin ;  therefore  the  tumor  causes
absorption  of  the  contiguous  cellular  membrane,  upon  which  it  presses.
This  process  of  interstitial  absorption  of  parts  is  very  evident,  even  in  com-


The  ulcerative  inflammation,  450

mon  abscess ;  where  a  progressive  absorption  is  going  on,  it  is  assisted  by
this.

I  have  already  observed,  that  the  interstitial  absorption  is  not  attended
with,  nor  produces  suppuration.


IV.  OF  THE  PROGRESSIVE  ABSORPTION.

The  first  or  principal  mode  of  this  action,  is  the  removing  of  those  sur-
faces that  are  immediately  contiguous  to  the  irritating  causes  which  is  an
absorption  of  necessity.  These  causes,  I  have  observed,  are  of  three  kinds ;
one,  pressure  j  another,  irritating  substances  ;  and  the  third,  considerable
inflammation  on  a  weak  part,  especially  those  new-formed  parts  that  be-
come a  substitute  for  the  old.  Absorption,  from  pressure,  is  the  removal
of  the  part  pressed,  which  may  arise  from  a  number  of  causes.  There
are  tumors,  which,  by  pressing  upon  neighbouring  parts,  produce  it ;  the
pressure  of  the  blood  in  aneurisms  produces  it,  etc.  also  that  surface  of
an  abscess  which  is  in  contact  with  the  pus,  or  any  other  extraneous
body;  or  the  ulceration  of  that  part  of  the  surface  of  the  body,  which  is
in  contact  with  a  body  pressing,  as  the  buttocks  or  hips  of  those  who
lie  long  upon  their  backs.  The  heels  of  many  people,  who  also  lie  long
in  the  same  position,  as  is  the  case  with  those  who  are  under  the  cure  of
a  fracture  of  the  leg ;  in  which  case  it  seems  to  be  a  substitute  for  mor-
tification, and  is  rather  a  proof  of  the  strength  of  the  patient ;  for  if  very
weak  constitutionally,  the  same  parts  certainly  mortify ;  as  also  the  con-
stant pressure  of  chains  on  the  legs  of  prisoners ;  harness  on  the  breasts  of
horses.

The  second  of  this  cause  of  absorption  is  the  action  of  irritating  sub-
stances, such  as  the  tears  passing  constantly  over  the  cheeks ;  as  also  many
irritating  medicines,  producing  too  much  action,  and  probably  at  the  same
time  weakening  the  parts.  The  third  is,  the  formation  of  an  ulcer,  or
sore,  on  a  surface,  in  consequence  of  some  disease,  which  has  been  the
cause  of  inflammation. Bones  are  subject  to  the  same  effect  from  pres-


454  The  ulcerative  Inflammation.

sure,  as  the  soft  parts ;  as  in  consequence  of  aneurisms  ;  as  also  from  the
pressure  from  tumors :  likewise  in  caseo  of  the  spina  ventosa,  where  in
some  there  is  nothing  to  be  found  in  the  cavity  of  the  swelling,  but  blood
coagulated  ;  in  others,  a  grumous  or  curdly  substance.  This  blood,  or
substance,  increasing,  continues  the  pressure,  and  the  inside  of  the  bone  is
in  time  absorbed.

I  have  already  observed,  that  the  progressive  absorption  is  divisible  into
two  kinds  ;  one  without  suppuration,  the  other  with.  I  shall  now  ob-
serve, that  the  absorption  which  does  not  produce  suppuration,  may  take
place,  either  from  pressure  made  by  sound  parts,  upon  diseased  parts,  or
by  diseased  upon  sound  parts;  as  the  effect  that  the  pressure  of  the  coagu-
lated blood  has  in  aneurisms,  the  moving  blood  in  the  same,  which  is  a
sound  part,  contained  in  diseased  arteries  not  capable  of  supporting  the
pressure  of  the  moving  blood;  as  also  many  tumors,  which  are  diseased
parts,  pressing  upon  natural  sound  parts,  and  these  diseased  parts  are
simply  endowed  with  life,  which  I  apprehend  makes  some  difference  in  the
effects  respecting  the  formation  of pus ;  also  uncommon  pressure  made  by
such  substances  as  are  not  endowed  with  any  irritating  quality,  sufficient
to  produce  the  suppurative  inflammation,  as  a  piece  of  glass,  a  lead  bul-
let, etc.  all  of  which  I  shall  now  more  fully  explain.

Of  this  first  division,  viz.  from  pressure  without  suppuration,  we  have
several  instances;  in  aneurisms,  especially  when  they  are  in  the  aorta,  and
principally  at  the  curve  •  and  when  arrived  at  a  considerable  size,  so  as  to
press  against  the  surrounding  parts,  particularly  against  the  back-bone,
as  also  against  the  sternum;  all  of  which  will  be  according  to  the  situ-
ation of  the  aneurism;  we  find  in  such  cases,  that  from  the  dilatation  of
the  artery  (which  arises  from  the  force  of  the  heart)  the  artery  is  pressed
against  those  bones,  and  that  the  substance  of  the  artery  in  the  part  pressed
is  taken  into  the  constitution.  This  absorption  begins  at  the  external  sur-
face of  the  artery,  where  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  bone,  and  conti-
nues tfyere  till  the  whole  artery  is  absorbed  ;  then  the  bone  itself  comes  in
contact  with  the  circulating  blood,  and  not  being  naturally  intended  to  be
washed  by  moving  blood,  the  bone  or  bones  are  also  absorbed  from  this
pressure,  and motion of  the  blood  against  them. The  adhesive  or


T6e  ulcerative  inflammation.  455

strengthening  disposition  takes  place  in  the  surrounding  parts,  and  is  of
great  service  here,  as  it  unites  the  circumference  of  the  unabsorbed  part
of  the  artery  to  the  surrounding  parts  ;  as  also  the  cellular  membrane  be-
yond the  surface  of  absorption,  (when  in  soft  parts)  similar  to  the  prece-
ding adhesive  inflammation  going  before  ulceration  in  an  abscess;  but  it  is
here  much  stronger,  for  strength  is  wanted  as  well  as  adhesion  while  it
is  dilating  ;  so  that  a  cavity  of  some  strength  for  the  moving  blood  is
always  kept  entire,  and  no  extravasation  can  take  place,  nor  can  the  parts
readily  give  way.

Another  instance  of  this  absorption  occurs  in  those  cases  where  living
tumors  make  their  way  to  the  skin  without  the  formation  of  an  abscess.  I
once  saw  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  in  a  Highland  soldier,  in  the  Dutch
service,  who  had  a  solid  tumor  formed,  either  in  the  substance  of  the  brain,
or,  what  is  more  probable,  upon  it,  viz.  in  the  pia  mater,  for  it  seemed  to
be  covered  by  that  membrane:  the  tumor  was  oblong,  above  an  inch  thick,
and  two  or  more  inches  long;  it  was  sunk  near  its  whole  length  into  the
brain,  seemingly  by  the  simple  effects  of  pressure;  but  the  outer  end  of  it,
by  pressing  against  the  dura  mater,  had  produced  the  absorbing  disposition
in  that  membrane,  so  that  this  membrane  was  entirely  gone  at  that  part.

The  same  irritation  from  pressure  had  been  given  to  the  scull,  which
also  was  absorbed  at  this  part;  after  which,  the  same  disposition  was  con^
tinued  on  to  the  scalp.

As  these  respective  parts  gave  way,  the  tumor  was  pushed  further  and  fur-
ther out,  so  that  its  outer  end  came  to  be  in  this  new  passage  the  absorbents
were  making  for  it  in  the  scalp,  by  which  it  probably  would  have  been  dis-
charged in  time,  if  the  man  had  lived ;  but  it  was  so  connected  with  the  vital
parts,  that  the  man  died  before  the  parts  could  relieve  themselves;  while  all
these  exterior  parts  were  in  a  state  of  absorption,  the  internal  parts  which
pressed  upon  the  inner  end  of  the  tumor,  and  which  pressure  was  sufficient
to  push  it  out,  did  not  in  the  least  ulcerate,  nor  did  the  tumor  itself,  which
was  pressed  upon  all  sides,  in  the  least  give  way  in  its  substance.  No
matter  was  to  be  observed  here  from  either  the  dura  mater,  the  uncon-
nected edge  of  the  bones  of  the  scull,  nor  from  that  part  of  the  scalp
which  had  given  way ;  and,  perhaps,  the  reason  was,  the  tumor  being  a


456  The  ulcerative  inflammation.

living  part,  and  not  an  extraneous  one.  The  general  effect  was,  however,
similar  to  the  progress  of  an  abscess,  insomuch  that  it  was  on  that  side
nearest  to  the  external  surface  of  the  body  that  the  irritation  for  absorption
took  place.

This  first  species  of  the  absorption  of  whole  parts  is  seldom  or  never  aU
tended  with  pain.  Its  progress  is  so  very  slow,  as  to  keep  pace  with  our
sensations,  and  in  many  cases  it  is  not  even  attended  with  inflammation.

I  believe  that  this  absorption  seldom  or  ever  affects  the  constitution,
although,  in  some  cases  it  takes  its  rise  from  affections  of  the  constitution,
as  in  the  cases  of  the  absorption  of  callus.


V.  OF  ABSORPTION  ATTENDED  WITH  SUPPURATION,  WHICH  I  HAVE

CALLED  ULCERATION.

I  shall  now  give  an  account  of  that  part  of  the  actions  of  the  absorb-
ing system,  which  I  call  ulceration,  and  which  is  the  second  of  our  first
division,  respecting  the  formation  of  pus,  viz.  that  which  is  connected
with  the  formation  of  that  fluid,  being  either  a  consequence  of  it,  or  pro-
ducing it,  and  is  that  which  in  all  cases  constitutes  an  ulcer.  It  is  this
which  principally  constitutes  the  progressive  absorption  *.

This  differs  from  the  foregoing  in  some  circumstances  of  its  operations.
It  either  takes  place  in  consequence  of  suppuration  already  begun,  and  then
the  pus  acts  as  an  extraneous  body,  capable  of  producing  pressure ;  or
absorption  attacks  external  surfaces  from  particular  irritations  or  weakness,
in  which  case  suppuration,  forming  an  ulcer,  must  follow,  let  the  cause
of  that  breach  or  loss  of  substance  be  what  it  may.

*  I  have  given  it  the  term  ulceration,  because  ulcer  is  a  word  in  use  to  express  a  sore,  and
it  is  by  this  process  that  many  ulcers  are  formed.  The  operations  produced  in  ulceration,
have  not  hitherto  been  in  the  least  understood,  therefore  a  very  erroneous  cause  of  these  ope-
rations has  been  always  supposed.  It  has  always  been  supposed  that  those  solids  which  were
visibly  gone,  were  dissolved  into  pus :  from  whence  arose  the  idea  of  matter  being  composed
of  solids  and  fluids,  which  we  have  endeavoured  to  refute.


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  457

In  order  to  produce  ulceration  from  pressure,  I  may  again  take  notice,
that  it  requires  a  much  greater  pressure  from  without  than  from  within ;
and  when  it  is  from  within,  the  ulceration  is  quicker,  when  near  to  the
skin,  then  when  deep  or  far  from  it ;  the  nearer  to  the  skin,  the  in-
flammation more  readily  takes  place;  and  I  have  also  observed,  that  in-
flammation, although  it  takes  place  in  deep  seated  parts,  yet  it  seldom  or
never  extends  deeper,  but  approaches  towards  the  external  surface;  and  as-
inflammation  seems  to  proceed  and  is  essential  to  this  process,  we  see  the
reason  why  it  should  take  place  sooner  if  near  to  the  skin,  and  go  on  faster
the  nearer  it  comes  to  it.

The  process  of  ulceration  which  brings  matter  to  the  external  surface  is
not  wholly  the  absorption  of  the  inner  surface  of  the  abscess,  for  there  is
an  interior  or  insterstitial  absorption  of  the  parts  lying  between  the  inner
surface  of  the  abscess  and  the  skin,  similar  to  the  approach  of  incysted  tu-
mors, as  has  been  described.  And  besides  this  assistance,  I  have  already
observed,  there  is  a  relaxing  and  elongating  process  carried  on  between  the
abscess  and  the  skin ;  and  at  those  parts  only  where  the  matter  appears
to  point.

This  process  of  ulceration,  or  absorption,  with  suppuration,  is  almost
constantly  attended  by  inflammation ;  but  it  cannot  be  called  an  original
inflammation,  but  a  consequent,  which  gave  rise  to  the  term  ulcerative
inflammation.  It  is  always  preceded  by  the  adhesive  inflammation,  and
perhaps  it  is  simply  this  inflammation  which  attends  it;  we  find  the  ad-
hesions produced  answering  very  wise  purposes  ;  for  although  the  adhe-
sive inflammation  has  preceded  the  suppurative,  and  of  course  all  the  parts
surrounding  the  abscess  are  united,  yet,  if  this  union  of  the  parts  has  not
extended  to  the  skin,  where  the  abscess  or  matter  is  to  be  discharged,
in  such  a  case,  wherever  the  ulceration  has  proceeded  beyond  the  adhe-
sions there  the  matter  will  come  into  unadhering  parts;  the  consequence
of  which  will  be,  that  the  fluid,  or  matter,  will  diffuse  itself  into  the
cellular  membrane  of  the  part,  and  from  thence  over  the  whole  body,  as  in
the  erysipellatous  suppuration  ;  but  to  prevent  this  effect,  the  adhesive  in-
flammation takes  the  lead  of  ulceration. There  are  many  other  causes  of

3  N


458  *£he  ulcerative  inflammation*

ulceration,  which  take  place  on  surfaces,  where  we  do  not  see  the  same
necessity  for  it  ;  when  the  matter  formed  can  be,  and  is  discharged  with-
out it ;  such  parts  are  many  old  sores  ;  the  inside  of  the  stomach  and  in-
testines, and  indeed  all  the  surfaces  abovementioned,  which  do  not  admit
readily  of  the  adhesive  inflammation ;  under  some  circumstances  admit  of
the  ulcerative.  This  effect  would  appear  to  arise  from  the  violence  of  the
inflammation,  the  parts  being  so  weakened,  either  by  it,  or  some  former  dis-
ease, that  they  can  hardly  support  themselves  ;  for  we  find  in  salivations,
where  the  whole  force  of  the  mercury  has  been  determined  to  the  mouth,
they  have  become  weakened  by  long  and  violent  action ;  the  gums  and  in-
side of  the  mouth  will  ulcerate ;  also,  from  the  same  weakening  disposi-
tion, the  gums  will  ulcerate  in  bad  scurvies  j  therefore  weakness  joined  with
inflammation,  or  violence  of  action,  appears  to  be  the  immediate  cause  in
such  cases.

The  effect  then  of  irritation,  as  above  described,  is  to  produce  first  the
adhesive  inflammation  in  such  parts  as  will  readily  admit  of  it,  and  if  that
has  not  the  intended  effect,  the  suppurative  takes  place,  and  then  the  ulce-
ration comes  on  to  lead  the  matter  already  formed  to  the  skin,  if  it  is
confined.

The  natural  consequence  of  suppuration  in  such  parts,  is  the  growth  of
new  flesh,  called  granulations,  which  are  to  repair  the  loss  the  parts  sus-
tained by  the  injury  done;  but  in  all  outlets,  where  the  adhesive  would
be  hurtful,  the  irritation  first  only  produces  the  suppurative  inflammation;
but  if  carried  further,  the  adhesive  will  take  place,  as  has  been  described ;
and,  as  in  such  parts  the  matter  formed  has  an  outlet,  ulceration  is  also
avoided;  and,  as  in  such  cases  no  parts  are  destroyed,  granulations  are  also
excluded.

There  appears  to  be  a  curious  circumstance  attending  ulceration,  which
is  the  readiness  with  which  it  seems  to  absorb  every  other  substance
applied  to  it,  as  well  as  the  body  itself;  at  least  this  appears  to  be  the  case
with  the  small-pox  after  inoculation  ;  as  also  the  veneral  chancre ;  whe-
ther arising  from  the  absorbents  at  the  time  being  in  the  act  of  absorbing,
or  whether  they  promiscuously  absorb  what  is  applied,  along  with  the
part  themselves. In  such  cases  it  might  be  a  question  also,  whether  the


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  4.50

parts  of  the  body  which  they  do  absorb  have  the  same  disposition  with  the
pus  of  that  part,  as  in  the  cancer,  therefore  contaminate  the  constitu-
tion, as  in  the  small-pox  and  venereal  disease,  as  readily  as  if  it  was  the
pus.

From  what  has  been  observed,  it  must  appear  that  any  irritation  which
is  so  great  as  to  destroy  suddenly  the  natural  operations  of  any  one  part,
and  the  effect  of  which  is  so  long  continued  as  to  oblige,  the  parts  to  act  for
their  own  relief,  produces  in  some  parts,  first  the  adhesive  inflammation  j
and  if  the  cause  be  increased,  or  continue  still  longer,  the  suppurative
state  takes  place,  and  all  the  other  consequences,  as  ulceration  ;  or,  if  in  the
other  parts,  as  secreting  surfaces,  then  the  suppurative  takes  place  immedi-
ately ;  and  if  too  violent,  the  adhesive  will  succeed ;  or  if  parts  are  very  much
weakened,  the  ulcerative  will  immediately  succeed  the  adhesive,  and  then
suppuration  will  be  the  consequence.

This  species  of  ulceration  in  general  gives  considerable  pain,  which  pain
is  commonly  distinguished  by  the  name  of  soreness;  this  is  the  sensation
arising  from  cutting  with  an  instrument,  which  operation  is  very  similar  to
ulceration ;  but  this  pain  does  not  attend  all  ulcerations,  for  there  are  some
of  a  specific  kind,  which  give  little  or  no  pain,  such  as  the  scrofula;  but
even  in  this  disease,  when  the  ulceration  proceeds  pretty  fast,  it  gives  often
considerable  pain;  therefore  the  pain  may  be  in  some  degree  proportioned
to  the  quickness  of  its  operation.

The  greatest  pain  which  in  general  attends  this  operation  arises  from
those  ulcerations  which  are  formed  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  the  matter
of  an  abscess  to  the  skin;  as  also  where  ulceration  begins  upon  a  surface,
or  is  increasing  a  sore.  Whether  the  increase  of  pain  arises  from  the
ulcerative  inflammation  singly,  or  from  the  adhesive  and  ulcerative  going
on  together  in  the  same  point,  is  not  easily  determined;  but  in  some  cases
these  three  are  pretty  rapid  in  their  progress,  and  it  is  more  than  probable
that  the  pain  arises  from  all  these  causes.

In  those  cases  where  ulceration  is  employed  in  separating  a  dead  part,
such  as  sloughing,  exfoliation,  etc.  it  is  seldom  attended  with  pain;  per-
haps it  may  not  be  easy  to  assign  a  cause  for  this.


460  ¥he  ulcerative  Inflammation.

The  effects  that  ulceration  has  upon  the  constitution  I  have  mentioned,
with  the  effects  that  other  local  complaints  have  upon  it.

It  is  easy  to  distinguish  between  a  sore  that  is  ulcerating,  and  one  which
is  standing  still,  or  granulating.

The  ulcerating  sore  is  made  up  of  little  cavities  or  hollows,  and  the
edge  of  the  skin  is  scolloped  or  notched;  is  thin,  turned  a  little  out,  and
overhangs,  more  or  less,  the  sore.  The  sore  is  always  foul,  being  pro-
bably composed  of  parts  not  completely  absorbed ;  and  discharges  a  thin
matter.

But  when  the  ulceration  stops,  the  edge  of  the  skin  becomes  regular,
smooth,  a  little  rounded  or  turned  in,  and  of  a  purple  colour,  covered  with
a  semi-transparent  white.


VI.  OF  THE  RELAXING  PROCESS.


Besides  these  two  modes  of  removing  whole  parts,  acting  singly  or
together,  there  is  an  operation  totally  distinct  from  either,  and  this  is  a
relaxing  and  elongating  process,  carried  on  between  the  abscess  and  the
skin,  and  at  those  parts  only  where  the  matter  appears  to  point.  It  is
possible  that  this  relaxing,  elongating,  or  weakening  process  may  arise  in
some  degree  from  the  absorption  of  the  interior  parts;  but  there  is  certainly
something  more,  for  the  skin  that  covers  an  abscess  is  always  looser  than
a  part  that  gives  way  from  mere  mechanical  distention,  excepting  the  in-
crease of  the  abscess  is  very  rapid.

That  parts  relax,  or  elongate,  without  mechanical  force,  but  from  par-
ticular stimuli,  is  evident  in  the  female  parts  of  generation,  just  before
the  birth  of  the  fcetus  ;  they  become  relaxed  prior  to  any  pressure.  The
old  women  in  the  country  can  tell  when  a  hen  is  going  to  lay,  from  the
parts  becoming  loose  about  the  anus.

That  this  relaxing  process  takes  place  between  an  abscess  and  the  skin
is  evident  in  all  cases,  but  was  more  demonstratively  so  in  the  following
case  than  commonly  can  be  observed  where  an  increase  of  surface  takes


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  46 1

place  without  the  visible  loss  of  substance,  for  here  both  could  be  exactly
ascertained ;  and,  indeed,  no  abscess  could  swell  outwards,  excepting  by
distention,  without  it.

In  the  following  case  this  process  was  particularly  evident.

A  lad  about  thirteen  years  of  age,  was  attacked  with  a  violent
inflammation  in  his  belly,  without  any  apparent  cause.  The  usual  means
were  used,  but  without  effect.  His  belly  began  to  swell  in  a  few  days
after  the  attack,  and  his  skin  became  cold  and  clammy,  especially  his
feet  and  hands.  Once,  when  he  made  water,  it  was  transparent  like  spring
water,  with  a  little  cloud  of  mucus.  In  several  places  of  the  belly,  there
appeared  a  pointing,  as  if  from  matter;  one  of  those,  which  was  just  below
the  sternum,  became  pretty  large,  and  discoloured  with  a  red  tint.  Al-
though there  was  not  any  undulation  or  perfect  fluctuation  (there  not
being  fluid  enough  for  such  a  feel)  yet  it  was  plain  there  was  a  fluid,  and
most  probably  from  the  pointings,  it  was  matter  in  consequence  of
inflammation,  and  that  it  was  producing  ulceration  on  the  inside  of  the
abdomen  for  its  exit;  therefore  it  was  thought  advisable,  as  early  as  pos-
sible, to  open  the  belly  at  one  of  those  parts.  I  made  a  small  opening
into  the  pointing  part,  just  below  the  sternum,  hardly  an  inch  long:  when
I  was  performing  the  operation,  I  saw  plainly  the  head  of  the  rectus  muscle,
which  I  cut  through  in  the  direction  of  its  fibres.  There  was  immedi-
ately discharged  by  this  wound  about  two  or  three  quarts  of  a  thin  bloody
matter.  The  swelling  of  the  abdomen  subsided  of  course ;  his  pulse
began  to  rise  and  become  more  full  and  soft ;  and  his  extremities  became
warmer ;  he  was  ordered  bark,  etc.  but  he  lived  only  about  sixty  hours
after  the  operation.

On  opening  his  abdomen  after  death  we  found  little  or  no  matter  lying
loose;  all  had  made  its  escape  through  the  wound.  The  whole  intestines,
stomach,  and  liver,  were  united  by  a  very  thick  covering  of  the  coagulating
lymph,  which  also  passed  into  all  the  interstices  between  them,  by  which
means  they  were  all  united  into  one  mass :  the  liver  also  adhered  to  the  dia-
phragm, but  none  of  the  viscera  adhered  to  the  inside  of  the  belly  on  its  fore
part,  for  there  the  matter  had  given  the  stimulus  for  ulceration,  which  pre-
vents all  adhesions. The  process  of  ulceration  had  gone  on  so  far  as  to  have


462  The  ulcerative  inflammation,

destroyed  the  whole  of  the  peritoneum  on  the  fore  part  of  the  abdomen,
and  the  transversales,  and  recti  muscles,  were  cleanly  dissected  on  their
inside.

The  tendons  of  the  lateral  muscles  that  pass  behind  the  heads  of  the
recti,  were  in  rags,  partly  gone,  and  partly  in  the  form  of  a  slough.

From  this  view  of  the  case,  we  must  see  how  nature  had  guarded  all
the  most  essential  parts.  In  the  time  of  the  adhesive  stage,  she  had
covered  all  the  intestines  with  a  coat  of  coagulating  lymph,  so  asto  guard
them  ;  and  this,  probably,  upon  two  principles,  one,  from  their  being
canals ;  and  therefore  loath  to  admit  of  penetration  in  that  way;  the
other,  from  their  being  more  internal  than  the  parietes  of  the  abdomen ;
one  side  is  therefore  thickened  for  their  defence,  while  the  other  is  thinned
for  the  relief  of  the  part.

Here  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  had  assumed  all  the  properties  of  an
abscess,  but  it  was  so  connected  with  the  vital  parts,  which  also  suffered
much  in  the  inflammation,  that  the  patient  could  not  support  the  neces-
sary processes  towards  what  would  be  called  a  radical  cure  in  many  other
parts ;  and  indeed,  considering  the  mischief  done  to  the  abdomen  and  its
viscera,  it  is  astonishing  he  lived  so  long.

The  most  curious  circumstance  that  happened,  was  the  appearance  of
pointing  in  several  places ;  for  why  one  part  of  the  abdomen  should  have
pointed  more  than  another  is  not  easily  accounted  for,  since  every  part  of
the  anterior  portion  was  nearly  equally  thin,  each  part  was  equally  in-
volved in  the  abscess,  and  the  ulceration  had  not  yet  begun  with  any  of
the  muscles.  To  account  for  this,  let  us  suppose  that  one,  two,  or  three
parts  (by  some  accident)  were  more  susceptible  of  the  ulcerative  stimulus
than  the  others,  and  that  the  parts  were  ready  to  give  way  ;  but  although
these  parts  which  were  pointing,  were  the  places  where  ulceration  would
have  gone  on  brisker,  yet  it  had  not  proceeded  further  here  than  in  any
other  part ;  it  had  only  gone  through  the  peritoneum,  and  the  tendons  of
the  broad  muscles ;  and  the  recti  muscles  were  sound  and  perfect  at  the
place  where  I  made  the  opening,  which  was  the  most  protuberent  of  any  ;
therefore  this  pointing  did  not  appear  to  arise  from  weakness  or  thinness  of
this  part;  and,  even  supposing  that  the  pointing  was  an  effect  of  weakness,


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  463

it  would  imply  a  great  deal  of  pressure  on  the  inside,  (which  at  least  was
not  the  case  here)  and  simple  pressure,  although  a  hundred  times  greater,
which  we  often  see  take  place  in  dropsies,  would  not  produce  a  pointing,
if  not  attended  with  some  specific  power.

If  pressure  then  was  not  sufficient  to  produce  this  effect  in  the  present
case,  and  if  the  parts  which  pointed  were  as  mechanically  firm  as  at  any
other,  to  what  other  cause  can  we  attribute  the  distention  of  this  part,
but  to  the  weakening,  elongating,  and  relaxing  process,  which  I  have
already  described.

This  observation  of  the  relaxing  process  going  on  in  the  substance  of
the  parts  where  it  points,  is  verified  in  a  thousand  instances  :  suppose  a
large  abscess  in  the  thigh,  only  covered  by  the  skin  and  adipose  mem-
brane, which  shall  go  on  for  months  without  producing  ulceration,  and  of
course  not  point  any  where,  but  shall  be  a  smooth,  even,  and  uniform  sur-
face, let  it  receive  the  stimulus  of  ulceration  in  any  one  part,  that  part
will  immediately  begin  to  point,  although  it  may  be  thicker  there  than  at
some  other  parts  of  the  same  abscess.

The  pressure  necessary  to  allow  extraneous  matter  to  make  its  escape,
need  not  be  great ;  for  in  many  abscesses  which  have  been  opened,  or
have  opened  of  themselves,  but  not  at  the  most  depending  part,  so  that
the  matter  is  allowed  to  stagnate  at  the  lower  part  of  the  cavity,  making  a
very  slight  pressure,  we  find  that  this  alone  is  sufficient  to  produce  ulce-
ration in  that  part,  and  of  course  a  fresh  opening  is  produced,  more  espe-
cially if  near  the  skin ;  this  we  see  often  take  place  in  abscesses  of  milk
breasts,  when  the  opening  is  not  at  a  depending  part,  and  appears  to  be
common  in  the  fistula  in  ano ;  for  it  frequently  happens  that  the  ulce-
ration goes  on  at  first  towards  the  gut ;  but  before  this  has  taken  place,
ulceration  has  gone  on  some  way  by  the  side  of  it,  to  bring  the  matter
externally,  which  weight  of  matter  is  alone  sufficient  to  continue  the  same
process.


464  ^je  ulcerative  inflammation.


VII.  OF  THE  INTENTION  OF  ABSORPTION  OF  THE  BODY  IN  DISEASE.

This,  like  every  thing  else  in  nature,  involves  in  it  two  consequences,
the  one  beneficial,  the  other  hurtful;  both  of  which  this  has  in  a  con-
siderable degree :  however,  if  we  understood  thoroughly  all  the  remote
causes  we  should  probably  see  its  utility  in  every  case,  and  that  these  effects,
however  bad  in  appearance,  yet  are  necessary,  and  of  course  in  the  end
salutary.  The  use  arising  from  what  may  be  called  the  natural  absorp-
tion of  parts,  such  as  the  forming  or  modelling  process,  as  also  the
absorption  of  parts  become  unfit  for  the  new  mode  of  life,  as  the  absorp-
tion of  the  thymus  gland,  etc.  is  involved  in  its  necessity,  and  belongs  to
the  natural  history  of  the  animal;  but  that  arising  from  disease  is  directly
to  the  present  purpose.  In  the  history  I  have  just  given,  its  use  must,  I
apprehend,  be  evident ;  for  we  plainly  see,  in  each  mode  of  absorption,  it
often  produces  very  salutary  effects  ;  and  we  may  say,  that  although  it
often  arises  from  disease,  yet  its  operations  and  effects  are  often  not  at  all
a  disease  •  and,  probably,  in  those  cases  where  we  cannot  assign  a  cause,  as
in  wasting  of  parts,  atrophy,  etc.  yet  it  is  most  probable  that  its  use  is
considerable.  It  is  likely,  that  under  such  a  disease,  or  state  of  body,  or
parts,  it  would  be  hurtful  to  have  them  full  and  strong ;  where  it  pro-
produces  a  total  waste  of  a  part,  its  utility  is  probably  not  so  evident;  but
in  the  progressive  absorption,  where  it  is  leading  bodies  externally,  or  in
consequence  of  suppuration,  where  it  is  bringing  matter  externally,  its  use
is  plain  ;  or  even  in  the  formation  of  an  ulcer,  or  the  spreading  of  an
ulcer,  its  use  may  be  considerable.  I  have  formerly  called  it  the  natural
surgeon  -,  and  where  it  can  do  its  business  it  is  in  most  cases  preferable  to
art :  this  is  so  evident  in  many  cases,  that  it  has  been  a  constant  practice
to  attempt  to  promote  it,  in  bringing  abscesses  to  the  surface,  and  in  the
exfoliation  of  bone,  etc.  and  although  not  accounted  for  upon  the  principle
pf  absorption,  yet  the  effect  was  visible,  and  its  use  allowed.


The  ulcerative  inflammation,  465


VIII.  THE  MODES  OF  PROMOTING  ABSORPTION.

The  history  that  was  given  of  the  causes  of  absorption,  in  some  de-
gree explains  the  modes  of  promoting  it ;  but  as  there  were  some  natural
causes  which  we  cannot  imitate,  it  is  principally  those  that  can  be  ren-
dered useful  that  we  are  to  take  notice  of  in  this  place.

To  promote  absorption  of  the  body  itself,  is  no  difficult  operation  ;  it
is  only  to  lessen  the  supply,  and  increase  the  waste,  which  last  is  often
done  by  medicine  •>  or  to  take  such  things  as  will  render  the  supply  less
efficacious,  as  vinegar  or  soap ;  but  probably  these  act  principally  on  the
fat :  to  promote  absorption  of  diseased  parts,  or  parts  increased,  or  parts
newly  formed,  is  not  so  easy  a  task,  although  the  latter  may  be  the
most  easy  of  the  whole;  for  I  have  asserted,  that  newly  formed  parts  are
weaker  in  their  living  powers  than  the  original  formed  parts  ;  this,  in
some  degree,  gives  us  a  hint ;  for  if  we  have  a  mode  of  producing  a  waste  of
the  whole  original  body,  under  this  general  waste,  new  formed  parts  must
suffer  in  a  degree  proportional  to  their  weakness  j  and  therefore  will  suffer
a  diminution  in  the  same  proportion  ;  but  this  is  too  often  not  sufficient,
or  at  least  what  would  be  sufficient  for  the  disease  would  be  too  great
for  the  constitution  to  bear:  however,  we  find  in  particular  cases,  that  this
practice  has  some  effect ;  probably  the  best  debilitating  medicine  is  mer-
cury, and  it  probably  may  act  in  more  ways  than  one.  It  may  promote
absorption  from  a  peculiar  stimulus,  producing  necessity,  or  a  state  under
which  the  parts  cannot  exist.  Electricity,  and  most  other  stimulents,  pro-
bably act  in  the  same  manner ;  for  we  find  that  violent  inflammation  is
often  a  cause.  Death  in  a  part  is  sure  to  promote  absorption,  in  order  to
produce  a  separation  of  the  dead  parts:  and  we  even  find  that  a  part  being
diseased  gives  a  tendency  to  separation,  and  only  requires  a  considerable
inflammation  to  promote  it,  such  as  warts  coming  away  in  consequence  of
inflammation.  A  diseased  part  has  such  power  of  giving  the  proper  sti-
mulus  to  the  adjacent  sound  part,  that  if  injured,  or  rendered  dead  in  part
by  the  application  of  a  caustic,  for  instance,  the  sound  part  underneath
will  begin  to  relax,  and  shew  more  distinctly  the  limits  or  boundaries  o£

30


2p66  .23fl2  ulcerative  inflammation,

the  disease;  so  that  a  separation  of  the  diseased  parts  begins  to  take  place,
although  the  caustic  has  not  reached  nearly  so  far,  and  may  give  us  an
intimation  of  the  extent  of  the  disease,  which  we  could  not  get  before.
It  is  in  some  measure  upon  this  principle  that  arsenic  removes  tumors
which  extends  beyond  the  immediate  effect  of  the  medicine.

Pressure  is  one  of  the  causes  of  absorption  in  general,  particularly  the
progressive,  which,  in  the  resolution  of  parts,  is  not  the  mode  wanted;
but  it  also  assists  in  producing1  the  interstitial ;  and  if  it  could  be  made  to
produce  the  second  of  the  interstitial,  viz.  absorption  of  the  whole,  as  in
the  total  decay  of  the  thymus  gland,  then  it  would  be  sufficient  in  those
cases  where  it  could  be  applied  :  but  the  pressure  must  be  applied  with
great  care ;  for  too  much  will  either  thicken  or  ulcerate,  which  last  may
be  a  mode  of  absorption  we  do  not  want  :  however,  these  effects  will
happen  according  to  circumstances ;  for  I  have  an  idea,  that  entirely  new
formed  parts,  as  tumors,  will  not  be  made  to  thicken  by  pressure,  there-
fore may  be  pressed  with  all  the  force  the  natural  surrounding  parts  will
allow.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  many  cases  where  we  would  wish
to  prevent  absorption;  but  when  this  is  the  case,  we  should  be  certain  that
the  part  which  was  to  have  been  absorbed  is  such  as  can  be  rendered
useful  afterwards ;  of  which  I  have  my  doubts  in  many  cases.


IX.  ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  ULCERATION.

Now  that  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  give  ideas  of  these  effects  of  in-
flammation, viz,  adhesion,  suppuration,  and  ulceration,  let  me  next  men-
tion some  cases  which  frequently  occur,  as  illustrations,  which  will  give  a
perfect  idea  of  these  three  inflammations :  and,  for  the  clearer  understand-
ing them,  I  shall  illustrate  them  upon  the  inflammation,  suppuration,  and
ulceration  of  the  large  circumscribed  cavities.  For  instance,  an  inflam-
mation attacks  the  external  coat  of  an  intestine ;  the  first  stage  of  this
inflammation  produces  adhesions  between  it  and  the  peritoneum  lining  the
abdominal  muscles : if  the  inflammation does  not  stop  at  this  stage,


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  467

ftn  abscess  is  formed  in  the  middle  of  these  adhesions,  and  the  matter  act1?
as  an  extraneous  body  ;  the  abscess  increasing  in  size  from  the  accumu-
lation of  matter,  a  mechanical  pressure  is  kept  up,  which  irritates,  and
the  side  next  the  skin  is  only  susceptible  of  the  irritation ;  this  irritation
not  destroying  the  disposition  to  form  matter,  suppuration  is  still  continued,
and  the-  ulcerative  inflammation  takes  place.

If  suppuration  began  in  more  parts  of  the  adhesions  than  one,  they  are
commonly  united  into  one  abscess ;  an  absorption  of  the  parts  between
the  abscess  and  the  skin  takes  place,  and  the  matter  is  led  on  to  the  exter-
nal surface  of  the  body,  where  it  is  at  last  discharged.

If  the  disposition  for  ulceration  was  equal  on  every  side  of  the  abscess,
it  must  open  into  the  intestine,  which  is  seldom  the  case,  although  it
sometimes  does ;  for  the  same  precautions  are  not  taken  here  as  in  many
other  situations;  for  in  some  others,  as  in  the  nose,  in  the  case  of  an
abscess  of  the  lacrimal  sack*  the  passage  is  thickened  towards  the  nose.
'In  the -case  above-described,  however,  the  abdominal  muscles,  fat,  and
skin,  are  removed,  rather  than  the  coats  of  the  intestine.  Cases  of  this
kind  have  come  under  my  own  observation.

In  this  case,  if  adhesions  had  not  preceded  ulceration,  the  matter  must
liave  been  diffused  over  the  whole  cavity  of  the  belly ;  if  the  adhesive  in-
flammation had  not  likewise  gone  before  the  ulceration  in  the  abdominal
muscles,  etc.  the  matter  would  have  found  a  free  passage  from  the  abscess
into  the  cellular  membrane  of  the  abdomen,  as  soon  as  the  ulceration  had
got  through  the  first  adhesions,  as  is  often  the  case  in  erysipelatous  suppu-
rations.

Abscesses  between  the  lungs  and  the  pleura,  in  the  liver,  gall-bladder,
etc.  rise  to  the  surface  from  the  same  cause;  also  in  lumbar  abscesses,
where  one  would  at  first  imagine  the  readiest  place  of  opening  would  be
the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  or  gut  j  the  parts  nearest  to  the  skin  are  re-
moved, and  the  matter  passes  out  that  way  ;  however,  in  abscesses  so  very
deep,  it  does  not  always  happen  that  one  side  only  is  susceptible  of  the
irritation,  and  we  shall  find  that  the  matter  is  taking  different  courses.

Abscesses  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs  sometimes  differ  from  the  above-
described;  for  they  sometimes  open  into  the  aiV-cells:  it  is,  because  the


468  ffbe  ulcerative  inflammation*

adhesive  Inflammation  finds  it  difficult  to  unite  the  air-cells,  and  branches
of  the  trachea,  (as  was  described  in  treating  of  that  inflammation)  and  also
in  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  it  may  be  difficult  to  say  where  it  can  take
a  lead  externally,  from  which,  probably,  the  air-cells  become  similar  to  an
external  surface,  and  then  ulceration  takes  place  on  that  side  of  the  ab-
scess which  is  nearest  to  the  cells  ;  therefore  we  find  that  the  matter  gets
very  readily  into  the  air-cells,  and  from  thence  into  the  trachea.

That  the  air-cells  do  not  take  on  the  adhesive  state  is  evident  in  most
abscesses  in  this  part ;  for  we  find  in  most  of  those  cases  that  the  air-»
cells  are  exposed,  as  also  the  branches  of  the  trachea,  and  the  parts  of  the
lungs  which  compose  this  abscess  have  not  the  firmness  and  solidity
which  the  adhesive  inflammation  generally  produces  in  those  parts  where
it  takes  place.

Thus  too  we  find  it  going  on  in  large  abscesses,  even  after  they  have
been  opened,  but  are  so  situated  or  circumstanced  as  to  have  some  part  of
the  abscess  on  that  side  immediately  under  the  skin  pressed  by  some  other
part  of  the  body  which  lies  underneath.  For  instance,  when  a  large
abscess  forms  on  the  outer,  and  upper  part  of  the  thigh,  opposite  the  great
trochanter,  which  is  a  very  common  complaint,  and  an  opening,  is-  made
into  it,  or  it  bursts  below,  or  on  the  side  of  that  bone,  but  not  directly
opposite  to  the  trochanter  itself,  in  such  cases  it  frequently  happens,
that  the  pressure  of  the  trochanter  on  the  inside  of  the  abscess,  viz.  the
cellular  and  adipose  membrane,  and  the  skin  covering  the  trochanter,
that  this  pressure  produces  ulceration  of  these  parts  ;  which  process  is
continued  on  through  the  skin,  and  makes  a  second  opening  directly  upoa
the  trochanter.

It  is  curious  to  remark,  how  these  processes  of  nature  fulfil  their  ap-
pointed purposes,  and  go  on  no  further ;  for  any  young  flesh,  or  granulations,
which  may  have  formed  upon  the  trochanter,  which  very  often  happens
before  this  ulceration  is  completed,  yet  these  do  not  ulcerate,  although  the
pressure  was  as  great,  or  greater  upon  them  than  it  was  upon  the  parts
which  gave  way.

This  is  upon  the  principle,  that  pressure  from  without  has  not  the  same
effect  as  from  within. The  fistula  laurimelis  is  another  strong  proof  of


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  469

ulceration  only  taking  place  towards  the  external  surface,  and  securing
the  deeper  seated  parts  ;  as  also  the  ulceration  in  consequence  of  matter  in
the  frontal  sinuses.

An  effect  of  the  same  kind  we  have  observed  in  milk-breasts.  In  these
cases  the  suppuration  commonly  begins  in  many  distinct  portions  of  the
inflamed  parts,  so  that  it  is  not  one  large  circumscribed  abscess,  but  many
separate  sinuses  are  formed,  all  of  which  generally  communicate  :  now  it
usually  happens,  that  only  one  of  these  points  externally;  which  being
either  opened  or  allowed  to  break,  the  whole  of  the  matter  is  to  be  dis-
charged this  way  ;  but  it  frequently  happens,  that  the  matter  does  not
find  a  ready  outlet  by  this  opening,  and  then  one  or  more  of  these  different
sinuses  make  distinct  openings  for  themselves  ;  whicli  shews  how  very
easily  the  slight  pressure  of  such  a  trifling  confinement  of  matter  can  pro-
duce the  ulcerative  inflammation.  Ulceration  is  therefore  no  more  than
an  operation  of  nature  to  remove  parts  out  of  the  way  of  all  such  pressure
as  the  parts  cannot  support ;  and  accordingly  it  begins  where  the  greatest
pressure  is  felt,  joined  with  the  nature  of  the  parts  and  its  vicinity  to  the
skin.

It  is  curious  to  observe  that  the  ulcerative  process  has  no  power  over
the  cuticle,  so  that  when  the  matter  has  got  to  that  part  it  stops,  and
cannot  make  its  way  through,  till  the  cuticle  bursts  by  distention;  but  in
general  the  cuticle  is  so  thin  as  to  give  but  very  little  trouble*;  however,

*  This  is  the  reason  why  many  abscesses  in  the  palms  of  the  hands,  soles  of  the  feet,  fore
part  of  the  fingers,  and  about  the  nails,  commonly  called  whitloes,  etc.  more  especially  in
working  people,  give  so  much  pain  in  the  time  of  inflammation,  and  are  so  long  in  breaking,
even  after  the  matter  has  got  through  the  cutis  to  the  cuticle  j  the  thickness  of  the  cuticle,
as  also  the  rigidity  of  the  nail,  acting  in  those  cases  like  a  tight  bandage,  which  does  not  ajlow
them  to  swell  or  give  way  to  the  extravasation ;  for  in  the  cuticle  there  is  not  the  relaxing
power,  which  adds  considerably  to  the  pain  arising  from  the  inflammation ;  but  when  the
abscess  has  reached  to  this  thick  cuticle  it  has  no  power  of  irritation,  and  therefore  acts  only
by  distention;  and  this  is  in  most  cases  so  considerable,  as  to  produce  a  separation  of  die  cu-
ticle from  the  cutis,  for  a  considerable  way  round  the  abscess;  for  I  observed,  when  on
inflammation,  that  it  commonly  produced  a  separation  of  the  cuticle  j  all  of  which  circum-
stances taken  together,  make  these  complaints  much  more  painful  than  a  similar  sized  abscess
in  any  other  soft  part.  The  application  of  poultices,  in  these  cases,  is  of  more"  benefit
than in any ether,  because here they can  act  mechanically,  viz, the moisture being


q~a  The  ulcerative  inflammation.

in  many  places  it  is  so  thick  as  to  be  the  cause  of  very  troublesome  con-
sequences.

Thus  far  I  have  considered  ulceration  as  arising  from  visible  irritations,
joined  with  a  susceptibility  of  the  parts  for  such  particular  irritation;  but,
besides  those  above-described,  we  often  have  instances  of  ulceration  taking
place  from  a  disposition  in  a  part,  and  where  perhaps  no  reason  can  be
assigned,  but  weakness  in  the  part.  I  observed  before,  that  some  parts  of
the  body  were  more  susceptible  of  ulceration  than  others.  I  then  spoke  of
original  parts-,  but  I  now  remark  that,  newly  formed  parts  are  much  more
susceptible  of  ulceration  than  the  original;  such  as  cicatrices,  granulations,
calluses,  etc.  for  we  find  this  disposition  often  taking  place  in  old  cicatrices
from  very  slight  causes ;  such  as  irregularity  in  the  way  of  life,  or  violent
exercise,  which  is  seen  every  day  in  our  hospitals,  where  the  parts  seem
incapable  of  supporting  themselves.  Remarkable  instances  of  this  are
recorded  in  Anson's  Voyages,  where  the  habit  was  so  much  debilitated,  as
to  allow  all  the  old  sores  to  ulcerate,  or  break  out  anew:  the  calluses  were
absorbed  and  taken  into  the  circulation ;  and  we  also  find  that,  all  these
parts  perform  the  operation  of  sloughing  when  dead,  much  sooner  than
original  parts.

Now  it  is  evident,  in  these  cases  mentioned  in  Anson's  Voyages,  that

imbibed  by  the  cuticle,  as  in  a  sponge,  and  thereby  softening  the  cuticle,  by  which  means  it
becomes  larger  in  its  dimensions,  and  less  durable  in  its  texture.  These  cases  should  be
opened  as  soon  as  possible,  to  avoid  the  pain  arising  from  distention,  and  the  separation  of
the  cuticle ;  when  it  is  conceived  it  means  to  point  at  any  one  part,  paring  off  the  thick  cuticle
near  the  cutis,  is  allowing  the  matter  to  make  its  escape  more  readily,  when  it  has  got  through
the  cutis.  There  is  a  circumstance  which  almost  always  attends  the  opening  such  an  abscess,
viz.  the  soft  parts  underneath  push  out  through  the  opening  in  the  cuticle,  like  a  fungus,
which,  when  irritated  from  any  accident,  give  a  greater  idea  of  soreness  perhaps  than  any
other  morbid  part  of  the  machine  ever  does  :  this  is  owing  to  the  surrounding  belts  of  cuticle
not  having  given  way  to  the  increase  of  the  parts  underneath,  by  which  means  they  are
squeezed  out  of  this  small  opening,  like  paint  out  of  a  bladder.  It  is  a  common  practice  to
cat  this  down  by  escharotics,  as  if  it  was  a  diseased  fungus;  but  this  additional  pain  is  very
unnecessary,  as  the  destroying  a  part  which  has  only  escaped  from  pressure,  cannot  in  the  least
affect  that  which  is  within;  and  by  simply  poulticing  till  the  inflammation,  and  cf course  the
■tumefaction,  subsides,  these  protruded  parts  are  gradually  drawn  into  their  original  situ-
ations.


The  ulcerative  inflammation.  471

the  whole  frame  of  body  Was  weakened  by  the  hardships  suffered  in  this
expedition ;  and  that  the  young,  or  new  formed  substances  would  suffer
in  a  greater  decree,  arising  from  their  being  less  firm  and  fixed  than  that
which  had  been  an  original  formation,  and  subsisted  from  the  first;  and,
as  no  repaired  parts  are  endowed  with  the  powers  of  action  or  resistance,
equal  to  an  original  part,  it  is  no  wonder  that  this  new  flesh,  sharing  in
the  general  debility,  became  incapable  of  supporting  its  texture :  perhaps
a  very  sense  of  this  debility  proved  an  irritation,  or  the  cause  of  that  irri-
tation which  produced  the  absorption  of  parts ;  however  that  may  be,  it
is  a  general  fact  that,  parts  which  are  not  originally  formed,  commonly
give  way  sooner  in  depravations  of  the  habit :  in  like  circumstances,  also,
old  sores  that  are  healing,  will  break  out,  spread,  and  undo,  in  twenty-four
hours,  as  much  of  the  parts  as  had  been  healing  in  so  many  weeks.

All  these  observations  tend  to  prove,  that  new  formed  parts  are  not  able
to  resist  the  power  of  many  diseases,  and  to  support  themselves  under  so
many  shocks,  as  parts  originally  formed  -,  which  will  be  still  further
illustrated,  in  treating  of  the  power  of  absorption.

I  observed  that,  although  a  part  is  losing  ground  or  ulcerating,  yet  it
continues  suppurating ;  for  while  a  matter-forming  surface  is  ulcerating,
(whether  an  original  formed  part  of  the  body,  such  as  in  most  abscesses,
or  a  new  formed  substance,  such  as  granulations)  we  find  that  it  still
secretes  pus.

In  such  cases  the  adhesive  inflammation  proceeds  very  rapidly,  and
would  seem  to  prepare  the  parts  as  it  goes  for  immediate  suppuration  the
moment  they  are  exposed.


[  473  ]

CHAPTER  Vil.

GRANULATIONS.


We  come  now  to  trace  the  operations  of  nature  in  bringing  parts
whose  disposition,  action,  aud  structure,  had  been  preternaturally  altered,
either  by  accident,  or  diseased  dispositions,  as  nearly  as  possible,  to  their
original  state.  In  doing;  this  we  are  to  consider  the  constitution,  and  the
parts  as  free  from  disease ;  because  all  actions  which  tend  to  the  resto-
ration of  parts  are  salutary  ;  the  animal  powers  being  entirely  employed
in  repairing  the  loss,  and  the  injury,  sustained  both  from  the  cause,  and
arising  from  the  course  of  the  immediate  effects,  viz.  inflammation,  sup-
puration, and  ulceration  :  now  such  operations  cannot  certainly  be  looked
upon  as  morbid.

Nature  having  carried  these  operations  for  reparation  so  far,  as  the  form-
ation of  pus,  she,  in  such  cases,  endeavours  immediately  to  set  about  the
next  order  of  actions,  which  is  the  formation  of  new  matter,  upon  such
suppurating  surfaces  as  naturally  admit  of  it,  viz.  where  there  has  been
a  breach  of  solids,  so  that  we  find,  following,  and  going  hand  in  hand
with  suppuration,  the  formation  of  new  solids,  which  constitute  the  com-
mon surfaces  of  a  sore.  This  process  is  called  granulating,  or  incarnation ;
and  the  substance  formed,  is  called  granulation.

Granulations  have,  I  believe,  been  generally  supposed  to  be  a  conse-
quence of,  or  always  an  attendent  on  suppuration  :  but  the  formation  of
granulations  is  not  confined  to  a  breach  of  solids  where  the  parts  have  been
allowed  to  suppurate,  as  either  from  accident,  or  a  breach  of  the  solids  in
consequence  of  an  abscess;  but  it 'takes  place  under  other  circumstances ;
for  instance,  when  the  first  and  second  bond  of  union  has  failed,  as  in.
simple  fractures,  which  will  be  noticed  hereafter.

3P


474  Granulations,

Suppuration,  I  observed,  arose  in  consequence  of  an  injury  having  been
done  to  the  solids,  so  as  to  prevent  them,  for  some  time,  from  carrying
on  their  natural  functions ;  tnd  I  also  observed  that,  it  was  immaterial
whether  this  injury  had  exposed  their  surfaces,  as  in  cases  of  accidents,  and
wounds,  or  whether  the  surfaces  were  not  exposed,  as  in  cases  of  abscesses
in  general;  for  in  either  of  them,  suppuration  would  equally  take  place;
I  likewise  observed  that,  it  was  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  a
breach  in  the  continuity  of  parts  for  suppuration  to  take  place  in  many
cases,  because  all  secreting  surfaces  were  capable  of  suppuration ;  but  this
last  seems  not  to  be  so  commonly  the  case  with  granulations.  I  believe
that  no  internal  canal  will  granulate,  in  consequence  of  suppuration,  ex-
cept there  has  been  a  breach  of  surface,  and  then  it  is  not  the  natural  sur-
face which  granulates,  but  the  cellular  membrane,  etc. as  in  other  parts.

Wounds  that  are  kept  exposed  do  not  granulate  till  inflammation  is
over,  and  suppuration  has  fully  taken  place ;  for  as  the  suppurative  in-
flammation constantly  follows  when  wounds  come  to  be  under  such  cir-
cumstances, it  would  seem  to  be  in  such  cases  a  leading  and  necessary  pro-
cess for  disposing  the  vessels  to  granulation.

Setting  out  then  with  the  supposition  that,  this  inflammation  is  in
general  necessary,  under  the  above  circumstances,  for  disposing  the  ves-
sels to  form  granulations,  we  shall  at  once  see  how  it  may  operate  in  the
same  manner  whether  it  arises  spontaneously  from  a  wound,  the  laceration
of  parts,  mortification,  bruise,  caustic,  or  in  short  any  other  power  which
destroys  or  exposes  the  innumerable  internal  cells,  or  surfaces,  so  as  to
prevent  their  carrying  on  their  natural  functions.

Few  surfaces,  in  consequence  of  abscesses,  granulate  till  they  are  ex-
posed ;  so  that  few  or  no  abscesses  granulate  till  they  are  opened,  either  of
themselves  or  by  art;  and  therefore  in  an  abscess,  even  of  very  long  stand-
ing, we  seldom  or  ever  find  granulations.  In  abscesses,  after  they  have
been  opened,  there  is  generally  one  surface  that  is  more  disposed  to  granu-
late than  the  others,  which  is  the  surface  next  to  the  centre  of  the  body,  in
which  the  suppuration  took  place.  The  surface  next  to  the  skin  hardly
ever  has  the  disposition  to  granulate :  indeed,  before  opening,  its  action
was  that  x>f  ulceration,  the  very  reverse  of  the  other :  but,  even  after  open-


Granulations,  47$

ing,  that  side  under  the  skin  hardly  granulates,  or  at  least  not  readily.
I  may  farther  observe  that,  exposure  is  so  necessary  to  granulation,  even
on  such  surfaces  as  arise  from  a  broken  continuity  of  parts,  that  if  the
abscess  is  very  deep  seated,  they  will  not  granulate  kindly,  without  being
freely  exposed,  which  alone  often  becomes  a  cause  why  deep  seated  ab-
scesses do  not  heal  so  readily,  and  often  become  fistulous.

Upon  the  same  principle  of  granulations  forming  more  readily  upon  that
surface  which  is  next  to  the  centre,  or  opposite  to  the  surface  of  the  body,  is
to  be  considered  their  tendency  to  the  skin.  Granulations  always  tend  to
the  skin,  which  is  exactly  similar  to  vegetation ;  for  plants  always  grow  from
the  centre  of  the  earth  towards  the  surface  ;  and  this  principle  was  taken
notice  of  when  we  were  treating  of  abscesses  coming  towards  the  skin.


I.  OF  GRANULATIONS,  INDEPENDENT  OF  SUPPURATION.

The  formation  of  granulations,  I  have  observed,  is  not  wholly  con-
fined to  a  breach  made  in  the  solids,  either  by  external  violence  and  ex-
posure, or  in  consequence  of  a  breach  in  the  solids,  which  had  been  pro-
duced by  suppuration  and  ulceration,  and  afterwards  exposed  ;  for  parts
are  capable  of  forming  granulations,  or  what  I  suppose  to  be  the  same
thing,  new  animal  matter,  where  a  breach  has  been  made  internally,  and
where  it  ought  to  have  healed  by  the  first  intention ;  but  the  parts  being
baulked  in  that  operation,  often  do  not  reach  so  far  as  suppuration,  so  as
to  produce  the  most  common  cause  of  granulation.  The  first  instance  of
the  kind  that  gave  me  this  idea,  was  in  a  man  who  died  in  St.  George's
Hospital.

January  1777.  A  man  about  fifty  years  of  age,  fell  and  broke  his  thigh-
bone, nearly  across,  and  about  six  inches  above  the  lower  end.  He  was
taken  into  St.  George's  Hospital ;  the  thigh  was  bound  up,  and  put  into
splints,  etc.  The  union  between  the  two  bones  did  not  seem  to  take
place  in  the  usual  time.  He  was  taken  ill  with  a  complaint  in  his  chest,
which  he  had  been  subject  to  before,  and  died  between  three  and  four  weeks
after  the  accident.


476  Granulations*

On  examining  the  parts  after  death,  there  were  found  little  or  no  effects
of  inflammation  in  the  soft  parts  surrounding  the  broken  bones,  except
close  to  the  bones  where  the  adhesive  inflammation  had  taken  place  only
in  a  small  degree.

The  bones  were  found  to  ride  considerably,  viz.  near  three  inches.

The  cavity  made  in  the  soft  parts,  in  consequence  of  the  laceration  made
by  the  riding  of  the  bones,  had  its  parietes  thickened,  and  pretty  solid,
by  means  of  the  adhesive  inflammation,  although  not  so  much  as  would
have  been  the  case,  if  the  parts  had  been  better  disposed  for  inflammation :
and  some  parts  had  become  bony.  There  hardly  was  found  within  this
cavity  any  extravasated  blood,  or  coagulating  lymph,  except  a  few  pretty
loose  fibres  like  strings,  which  were  visibly  the  remains  of  the  extravasated
blood.

From  these  appearances  this  cavity  had  evidently  lost  its  first  bond  of
union,  viz.  the  extravasated  blood,  which  took  jplace  from  the  ruptured
vessels,  and  probably  the  second  had  never  taken  place,  viz.  the  coagu-
lating lymph,  in  consequence  of  the  adhesive  inflammation :  however,  there
was  an  attempt  towards  an  union,  for  the  surrounding  soft  parts,  we  have
observed,  had  taken  on  the  adhesive,  and  ossific  inflammation  ;  so  that
iii  time  there  might  have  been  formed  in  the  surrounding  soft  parts  a
bony  case,  which  would  have  united  the  two  bones;  but  the  parts  being
deprived  of  the  two  common  modes  of  union,  they  were  led  to  a  third.

From  the  ends  of  the  bones,  and  some  parts  of  their  surface,  as  well  as
from  the  inner  surface  of  the  soft  parts,  there  was  formed  new  flesh,  simi-
lar to  granulations.

The  hollow  ends -of  the  bones  were  filled  with  this  matter,  which  was
rising  beyond  the  common  surface  -of  the  bone ;  and  in  some  places  adhe-
sion had  taken  place  between  it  and  the  surrounding  parts,  with  which
it  had  come  in  contact.  The  same  appearance,  which  this  new  flesh
had  in  this  case,  I  have  several  times  seen  in  joints,  both  on  the  ends  of
the  bones,  and  on  the  inside  of  the  capsular  ligament,  but  never  before  un-
derstood how  it  was  formed  :  hence  we  find  that  granulations  can,  and  do
arise  in  parts  that  are  not  exposed. This  is  what  I  have  long  suspected


Granulations*  WJ

to  be  the  case  in  the  union  of  the  fractured  patella,  and  this  fact  confirms
me  more  in  that  opinion.

Here  then  we  are  shewn  that,  the  cause  of  granulation,  or  the  forming  of
new'flesh  for  union  (independent  of  extravasation,  or  the  adhesive  inflam-
mation) is  more  extensive  in  its  effects  than  we  were  formerly  acquainted
with ;  and  that  granulations,  or  new  flesh,  arise  in  all  cases  from  the  first
and  second  bond  of  union  being  lost  in  the  part,  (which  indeed  seldom
happens,  except  from  exposure)  it  therefore  makes  no  difference,  whether
the  first  and  second  bond  of  union  escape  through  an  opening  made  in
the  skin,  as  in  a  compound  fracture,  or  it  loses  its  living  powers,  as  in
the  present  case,  and  as  I  suppose  to  be  the  case  in  a  fracture  of  the  patella,
which  obliges  the  absorbents  to  take  it  up  as  an  extraneous  body.


II.  THE  NATURE  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  GRANULATIONS.

Granulations,  and  this  new  formed  substance,  are  an  accretion  of
animal  matter  upon  the  wounded  or  exposed  surface :  they  are  formed  by
an  exudation  of  the  coagulating  lymph  from  the  vessels,  into  which  new
substance  both  the  old  vessels  very  probably  extend,  and  also  entirely  new
ones  form,  so  that  the  granulations  come  to  be  very  vascular,  and  indeed
they  are  more  so  than  almost  any  other  animal  substance.  That  this  is
the  case,  is  seen  in  sores  every  day.  I  have  often  been  able  to  trace  the
growth  and  vascularity  of  this  new  substance.  I  have  seen  upon  a  sore
a  white  substance,  exactly  similar  in  every  visible  respect  to  coagulating
lymph.  I  have  not  attempted  to  wipe  it  off,  and  the  next  day  of  dressing
I  have  found  this  very  substance  vascular;  for  by  wiping  or  touching  it
with  a  probe,  it  has  bled  freely.  I  have  observed  the  same  appearance  on
the  surface  of  a  bone  that  has  been  laid  bare.  I  once  scraped  off  some  of
the  external  surface  of  a  bone  of  the  foot,  to  see  if  the  surface  would  gra-
nulate. I  remarked  the  following  day  that,  the  surface  of  the  bone  was
covered  with  a  whitish  substance,  having  a  tinge  of  blue ; when  I  passed


478  Granulations,

my  probe  into  it,  I  did  not  feel  the  bone  bare,  but  only  its  resistance.  I
conceived  this  substance  to  be  coagulating  lymph,  thrown  out  from  inflam-
mation, and  that  it  would  be  forced  off  when  suppuration  came  on  ;  but
on  the  succeeding  day  I  found  it  vascular,  and  appearing  like  healthy
granulations

The  vessels  of  granulations  pass  from  the  original  parts,  whatever  these
are,  to  the  basis  of  the  granulations  ;  from  thence  towards  their  external
surface,  in  pretty  regular  parallel  lines,  and  would  almost  appear  to  ter-
minate there.

The  surface  of  this  new  substance,  or  granulations,  continues  to  have
the  same  disposition  for  the  secretion  of  pus,  as  the  parts  from  which  they
were  produced ;  it  is  therefore  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  the  nature  of
the  vessels  does  not  alter  by  forming  the  granulations ;  but  that  they  were
completely  changed  for  the  purpose  before  the  granulations  began  to
form,  and  that  these  granulations  are  a  consequence  of  a  change  then
produced  upon  them.

Their  surfaces  are  very  convex,  the  reverse  of  ulceration,  having  a  great
many  points,  or  small  eminences,  so  as  to  appear  rough  :  and  the  smaller
these  points  are,  the  more  healthly  we  find  the  granulations.

The  colour  of  healthy  granulations,  is  a  deep  florid  red,  which  would
make  us  suspect  that  the  colour  was  principally  owing  to  the  arterial
blood*;  but  it  only  shews  a  brisk  circulation  in  them,  the  blood  not  hav-
ing time  to  become  dark.

When  naturally  of  a  livid  red,  they  are  commonly  unhealthy  and  shew
a  languid  circulation,  which  appearance  often  comes  on  in  granulations
of  the  limbs  from  the  position  of  the  body,  as  is  evident  from  the  follow-
ing case.

A  stout,  healthy,  young  man,  had  his  leg  considerably  torn,  and  it
formed  a  broad  sore ;  when  healing  it  was  some  days  of  a  florid  red,  and
on  others  of  a  purple  hue :  wondering  what  this  could  be  owing  to,  he
told  me,  when  he  stood  for  a  few  minutes  it  always  changed  from  the

*  I  once  began  to  suspect  that  the  air  might  have  some  influence  upon  the  blood,  when
circulating  in  the  vessels,  but  from  its  losing  that  florid  colour  in  sores  of  the  legs  by  standing
erect,  I  gave  up  that  idea.


Granulations,  479

scarlet  to  the  modena.  I  made  him  stand  up,  and  found  it  soon  changed:
this  plainly  shews  that,  these  new  formed  vessels  were  not  able  to  support
the  increased  column  of  blood,  and  to  act  upon  it,  which  proves  that  a
stagnation  of  blood  was  produced,  sufficient  to  allow  of  the  change  in  the
colour,  and  most  probably  both  in  the  arteries  and  veins.

These  sores  never  heal  so  fist  as  the  others  ;  whether  it  is  occasioned
by  the  position  of  the  body,  or  the  nature  of  the  sore  itself,  but  most
frequently  so  in  cases  of  the  last-mentioned  kind.  As  the  position  of  the
body  is  capable  of  producing  such  an  effect,  it  shews  us  the  reason  why
sore  legs  are  so  backward  in  healing,  when  the  person  is  allowed  to  stand
or  walk.

Granulations  when  healthy,  and  on  an  exposed  or  flat  surface,  rise
nearly  even  with  the  surface  of  the  surrounding  skin,  and  often  a  little
higher;  and  in  this  state  they  are  always  of  a  florid  red  ;  but  when  they  ex-
ceed this,  and  take  on  a  growing  disposition,  they  are  then  unhealthy,  be-
come soft,  and  spongy,  and  without  any  disposition  to  skin.  Granulations
are  always  of  the  same  disposition  with  the  parts  upon  which  they  are
formed,  and  take  on  the  same  mode  of  action.  If  it  is  a  diseased  part,
they  are  diseased ;  and  if  the  disease  is  of  any  specific  kind,  they  are  also
of  the  same  kind,  and  of  course  produce  matter  of  the  same  kind,  which
I  observed  when  on  pus.

Granulations  have  the  disposition  to  unite  with  one  another  when  sound,
or  healthy;  the  great  intention  of  which  is,  to  produce  the  union  of  parts,
somewhat  similar  to  that  by  the  first  intention,  or  the  adhesive  inflamma-
tion, although  possibly  not  by  the  same  means.

The  granulations  having  a  disposition  to  unite  with  each  other  upon
coming  into  contact,  without  the  appearance  of  any  intermediate  animal
substance,  perhaps  is  in  the  following  manner.  When  two  sound  granu-
lations approach  together,  the  mouths  of  the  secreting  vessels  of  the  one
coming  to  oppose  the  mouths  of  similar  vessels  of  the  other,  they  are
stimulated  into  action,  which  is  mutual ;  so  that  a  kind  of  sympathetic
attraction  takes  place,  and  as  they  are  solids,  the  attraction  of  cohesion
is  established  between  them ;  this  has  been  termed  inosculation.  The
vessels  thus  joined,  are altered from secreting  to circulating ; or  it


480  Granulations .

may  be  in  this  way,  viz.  the  circulatory  vessels  come  to  open  upon  the
surface,  and  there  unite  with  one  another,  and  the  two  become  one  sub-
tance;  or  it  may  be  asked,  do  they  throw  out  coagulating  lymph,  when
they  come  into  contact,  and  have  a  disposition  to  heal  ?  and  does  this  be-
come vascular,  in  which  the  vessels  may  inosculate,  similar  to  union  by  the
first,  or  second  intention  ?

I  have  seen  two  granulations  on  the  head,  viz.  one  from  the  dura
mater,  (after  trepanning)  and  the  other  from  the  scalp,  unite  over  the  bare
bone  which  was  between  them,  so  strongly  in  twenty-four  hours,  that
they  required  some  force  to  separate  them,  and  when  separated  they  bled.

The  inner  surface  of  the  cutis  in  an  abscess,  or  sore,  does  not  only,  not
readily  granulate,  as  has  been  mentioned,  but  it  does  not  readily  unite
with  the  granulations  underneath.  The  final  intention  of  both  seems  to
be,  that  the  mouth  of  a  sore  which  is  seldom  so  much  in  a  diseased  state,
should  have  a  natural  principle  which  attends  disease,  to  put  it  upon  a
footing  with  the  disease  which  is  underneath  ;  therefore,  when  abscesses
are  allowed  to  become  as  thin  as  possible  before  they  are  opened,  this  pro-
portion between  the  sound  skin  and  the  disease  is  better  preserved,  and
the  parts  are  not  so  apt  to  turn  fistulous.

When  the  parts  are  unsound,  and  of  course  the  granulations  formed
upon  them  unsound,  we  have  not  this  disposition  for  union,  but  a  smooth
surface  is  formed  somewhat  similar  to  many  natural  internal  surfaces  of
the  body,  and  such  as  have  no  tendency  to  granulate;  which  continues  to
secrete  a  matter  expressive  of  the  sore  which  it  lubricates,  and  in  some  mea-
sure prevents  the  union  of  the  granulations.  I  imagine,  for  instance,  that
the  internal  surface  of  a  fistulous  ulcer  is  in  some  degree  similar  to  the  inner
surface  of  the  urethra,  when  it  is  forming  the  discharge  commonly  called  a
gleet.  Such  sores  have  therefore  no  disposition  in  their  granulations  to
unite,  and  nothing  can  produce  an  union  between  them,  but  altering  the
disposition  of  these  granulations  by  exciting  a  considerable  inflammation,
and  probably  ulceration,  so  as  to  form  new  granulations,  and  by  these
means,  give  them  a  chance  of  falling  into  a  sound  state.

Granulations  are  not  endowed  with  the  same  powers  as  parts  originally
formed. In  this  respect  they  are  similar  to  all  new  formed-parts ;  and


Granulations,  481

it  is  from  this  cause  that  changes  for  the  worse  are  so  easily  effected.
They  more  readily  fall  into  ulceration,  and  mortification,  than  originally
formed  parts  ;  and  from  their  readiness  to  ulcerate,  they  separate  sloughs
more  quickly.

The  granulations  not  only  shew  the  state  of  the  part  in  which  they  are
formed,  or  the  state  in  which  they  are  themselves,  but  they  shew  how  far
the  constitution  is  affected  by  many  diseases.  The  chief  of  those  habits
which  affect  the  granulations  in  consequence  of  the  constitution,  are,  I
believe,  the  indolent  and  irritable  habits,  but  principally  fevers;  and  these
must  be  such  as  produce  universal  irritation  in  the  constitution-

The  unsound  appearances  of  the  granulations  shew  to  what  a  stand
the  animal  powers  are  put  on  such  occasions,  which  does  not  appear  so
visibly  in  the  originally  formed  parts  ;  it  is  therefore  evident,  that  the
powers  of  the  granulations  are  much  weaker  than  those  of  the  original
parts.


III.  LONGEVITY  OF  GRANULATIONS.

Granulations  are  not  only  weaker  in  performing  the  natural  or
common  functions  of  the  parts  to  which  they  belong,  but  they  would
appear  often  to  be  formed  with  only  stated  periods  of  life,  and  those  much
shorter  than  the  life  of  the  part  on  which  they  are  formed.  This  is  most
remarkable  in  the  extremities;  but  where  they  are  capable  of  going  through
all  their  operations,  as  cicatrization,  their  life  then  seems  to  be  not  so
limited :  they  are  probably  then  acquiring  new  life,  or  longevity  every
day  ;  but  while  in  a  state  of  granulation,  we  find  them  often  dying  with-
out any  visible  cause:  thus,  a  person  shall  have  a  sore  upon  the  leg,  which
shall  granulate  readily,  the  granulations  shall  appear  healthy,  the  skin
shall  be  forming  round  the  edges,  and  all  shall  be  promising  well,  when
■all  at  once  the  granulations  shall  become  livid,  lose  their  life,  and  imme-
diately slough  off;  or,  in  some  cases,  ulceration  shall  in  part  take  place,
and  both  together  shall  destroy  the  granulations;  and  probably  where

3  Q_


48  2  Granulations'.

ulceration  wholly  takes  place,  it  may  be  owing  to  the  same  cause.  New
granulations  shall  immediately  arise  as  before,  and  go  through  the  same
process ;  this  shall  happen  three  or  four  times  in  the  same  person,  and  pro-
bably for  ever,  if  some  alteration  in  the  nature  of  the  parts  be  not  pro-
duced. This  circumstance  of  the  difference  in  longevity  of  granulations
in  different  people,  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  difference  in  longevity  of
different  animals.

In  cases  of  short  lived  granulations,  I  have  tried  various  modes  of  treat-
ment, both  local  and  constitutional,  to  render  the  life  of  these  granula-
tions longer;  but  without  success.

It  would  appear  from  what  has  been  said  of  suppuration  and  granula-
tions, that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  they  should  take  place  in  wounds
which  are  not  allowed  to  unite  by  the  first  intention,  before  union  and
cicatrization  can  take  place.  Although  this  in  general  is  the  case,  yet  in
small  wounds,  such  as  considerable  scratches,  or  where  there  is  a  piece  of
skin  rubbed  off,  we  find  that  by  the  blood  being  suffered  to  coagulate  upon
the  sore,  and  form  a  scab,  which  is  allowed  to  remain,  the  sore  will  only
be  attended  by  the  adhesive  inflammation,  and  will  skin  over  without  ever
suppurating;  where  a  small  caustic  has  been  applied,  we  find  also,  by
allowing  the  slough  to  dry  or  scab,  that  when  this  is  completed  the  scab
will  drop  off,  and  the  parts  shall  be  skinned  ;  but  if  the  blood  has  not
been  allowed  to  coagulate  and  dry,  or  the  slough  has  been  kept  moist,  the
sore  will  suppurate  and  granulate.

We  even  see  in  small  sores,  which  are  perfectly  healthy,  and  suppura-
ting, that  if  the  matter  be  allowed  to  dry  upon  them,  the  suppuration  will
stop,  and  the  skin  form  under  the  scab;  the  small-pox  is  a  striking  proof
of  this,  which  was  fully  treated  of  in  a  former  part  of  the  work.

A  blister  whose  cuticle  is  not  removed,  is  similar  to  a. scab.  It  does  not
allow  of  suppuration.  If  a  separation  takes  place  between  the  cutis  and
cuticle,  and  the  cuticle  be  not  removed,  nothing  will  be  collected  through
the  whole  course,  and  a  new  cuticle  will  be  formed  ;  but  if  the  cuticle  be
removed,  a  greater  degree  of  inflammation  will  come  on,  and  suppura-
tion will  certainly  take  place..


Granulations,  483

IV.  OF  THE  CONTRACTION  OF  GRANULATIONS.

Immediately  upon  the  formation  of  the  granulations,  cicatrization
would  appear  to  be  in  view.  The  parts  which  had  receded,  in  consequence
of  a  breach  being  made  into  them,  by  their  natural  elasticity,  and  pro-
bably by  muscular  contraction,  now  begin  to  be  brought  together  by  this
new  substance  ;  and  it  being  endowed  with  such  properties,  they  soon
begin  to  contract,  which  is  a  sign  that  cicatrization  is  to  follow.  The
contraction  takes  place  in  every  point,  but  principally  from  edge  to  edge,
which  brings  the  circumference  of  the  sore  towards  the  centre ;  so  that
the  sore  becomes  smaller  and  smaller,  although  there  is  little  or  no  new
skin  formed.

The  contracting  tendency  is  in  some  degree  proportioned  to  the  general
healing  disposition  of  the  sore,  and  the  looseness  of  the  parts  on  which
they  are  formed  j  for  when  it  has  not  a  tendency  to  skin,  the  granulations
do  not  so  readily  contract,  and  therefore  contracting  and  skinning  are  pro-
bably effects  of  one  cause.  The  granulations  too  being  formed  upon  a
pretty  fixed  surface,  which  is  a  consequence  of  inflammation,  are  in  some
degree  retarded  in  their  contraction  from  this  cause ;  but  probably  this
does  not  act  so  much  upon  a  mechanical  principle  as  we  at  first  might
imagine  ;  for  such  a  state  of  parts  in  some  degree  lessens  the  disposition
for  this  process,  but  this  state  is  every  day  altering,  and  in  proportion  as
the  tumefaction  subsides.  Granulations  are  also  retarded  in  their  con-
traction, from  a  mechanical  cause,  when  they  are  formed  on  parts  naturally
fixed,  such  as  a  bone;  for  instance,  on  the  skull,  the  bone,  etc.  of  the  shin,
for  there  the  granulations  cannot  greatly  contract*.

In  cases  where  there  has  been  a  loss  of  substance,  making  a  hollow
sore,  and  the  contraction  has  begun,  and  advanced  pretty  far,  before  the
granulations  have  had  time  to  rise  as  high  as  the  skin,  in  such  cases  the
edges  of  the  skin  are  generally  drawn  down,  and  tucked  in  by  it,  in  the
hollow  direction  of  the  surface  of  the  sore.

*  This  observation  should  direct  us  in  operations  on  those  parts,  to  save  as  much  skin  as
possible.


4§4-  Granulations.

If  it  is  a  cavity,  or  abscess,  which  is  granulating,  with  only  a  small
opening,  as  in  many  that  have  not  been  freely  opened,  the  whole  circum-
ference contracts,  like  the  bladder  of  urine,  till  little  or  no  cavity  is  left  -,
and  if  any  cavity  is  remaining,  when  they  cannot  contract  any  further,
they  unite  with  the  opposite  granulations,  in  the  manner  above-described.

This  contraction  in  the  granulations  continues  till  the  whole  is  healed,
or  skinned  over;  but  their  greatest  power  is  at  the  beginning,  at  least'their
greatest  effect  is  a.t  the  beginning  ;  one  cause  of  which  is  that,  the  resist-
ance to  their  contraction  in  the  surrounding  parts  is  then  least.

The  contractile  power  can  be  assisted  by  art,  which  is  a  further  proof
that  there  is  a  resistance  to  be  overcome.

The  art  generally  made  use  of  is  that  of  bandages,  which  tend  to  push,
draw,  or  keep  the  skin  near  to  the  sore  which  is  healing  ;  but  this  assist-
ance need  not  be  given,  or  is  at  least  not  so  necessary,  till  the  granulations
are  formed,  and  the  contractile  power  has  taken  place  :  however,  it  may
not  be  amiss  to  practise  it  from  the  very  beginning,  as  by  bringing  the
parts  near  to  their  natural  position  the  adhesive  inflammation  will  fix  them
there;  they  will  therefore  not  recede  so  much  afterwards,  and  there  will
be  less  necessity  for  the  contractile  powers  of  the  granulations.

Besides  the  contractile  powers  of  the  granulations,  there  is  also  a  simi-
lar power  in  the  surrounding  edge  of  the  cicatrizing  skin,  which  assists  the
contraction  of  the  granulations,  and  is  generally  more  considerable  than
that  of  the  granulations  themselves,  drawing  the  mouth  of  the  wound  to-
gether like  a  purse ;  this  is  frequently  so  great,  as  to  occasion  the  skin  to
grasp  the  granulations  which  rise  above  the  surface,  and  is  very  visible  in
sugar-loaf  stumps,  where  the  projection  of  the  sore  is  to  be  considered  as
above  the  level  of  the  skin.

This  contractile  power  of  the  skin  is  confined  principally  to  the  very  edge
where  it  is  cicatrizing;  and,  I  believe,  is  in  those  very  granulations  which
have  already  cicatrized  ;  for  the  natural,  or  original  skin  surrounding  this
edge  does  not  contract,  or  at  least  not  nearly  so  much,  as  appears  by  its
being  thrown  into  folds,  and  plaits,  while  the  new  skin  is  smooth  and
shining.  This  circumstance  of  the  original  surrounding  skin  not  hav-
ing the  power  of  contraction, makes  round  wounds  longer  in  healing


Granulations.  485

than  long  ones ;  for  it  is  much  easier  for  the  granulations,  and  the  edge
of  the  skin,  to  bring  the  sides  of  an  oblong  cavity  together,  than  the
sides  of  a  circle  ;  the  circumference  of  a  circle  not  being  capable  of  being
brought  to  a  point.

Whether  this  contraction  of  the  granulations  is  owing  to  an  approxi-
mation of  all  the  parts,  by  their  muscular  contraction,  like  that  of  a  worm,
while  they  lose  in  substance  as  they  contract;  or  if  they  lose  without  any
muscular  contraction  by  the  particles  being  absorbed,  so  as  to  form
interstices,  (which  I  have  called  interstitial  absorption)  and  the  sides  after-
wards fall  together,  is  not  exactly  determined,  and  perhaps  both  take
place.

The  uses  arising  from  the  contraction  of  the  granulations  are  various.
It  facilitates  the  healing  of  a  sore,  as  there  are  two  operations  going  on  at
the  same  time,  viz.  contraction  and  skinning.

It  avoids  the  formation  of  much  new  skin,  an  effect  very  evident  in  all
sores  which  are  healed,  especially  in  sound  parts.

In  amputation  of  a  thick  thigh  (which  is  naturally  seven,  eight,  or  more
inches  diameter  before  the  operation)  the  surface  of  the  sore  is  of  the  same
diameter ;  for  the  receding  of  the  skin  here  does  not  increase  its  surface,
as  it  does  in  a  cut  on  a  plane;  yet  in  this  case,  the  cicatrix  shall  be  no
broader  than  a  crown  piece.  This  can  be  effected  by  the  contractile  power
of  the  granulations,  for  it  is  bringing  the  skin  within  its  natural  bounds.

The  advantage  arising  from  this  is  very  evident,  for  it  is  with  the  skin,
as  it  is  with  all  other  parts  of  the  body,  viz.  that  those  parts  which  were
originally  formed  are  much  fitter  for  the  purposes  of  life,  than  those  that
are  newly  formed,  and  not  nearly  so  liable  to  ulceration.

After  the  whole  is  skinned,  we  find  that  the  substance  which  is  the
remains  of  the  granulations  on  which  the  new  skin  is  formed,  still  continues
to  contract,  till  hardly  any  thing  more  is  left  than  what  the  new  skin
stands  upon.  This  is  a  very  small  part,  in  comparision  with  the  first-
formed  granulations,  and  it  in  time  loses  most  of  its  apparent  vessels,  be-
comes white,  and  ligamentous.  For  we  may  observe  that,  all  new-healed
sores  are  redder  than  the  common  skin,  but  in  time  they  become  much
whiter.


486  Granulations.

As  the  granulations  contract,  the  surrounding  old  skin  is  stretched  to
cover  the  part  which  had  been  deprived  of  skin,  and  this  is  at  first  little
more  than  bringing  the  skin  to  its  old  position,  which  had  receded  when
the  breach  was  first  made ;  but  afterwards  it  becomes  considerably  more,
so  as  to  stretch,  or  oblige  the  old  skin  to  elongate;  from  which  we  might
ask  ihe  following  question  :

Does  the  surrounding  skin  in  the  healing  of  a  sore  lengthen  hy  growth,
or  does  it  lengthen  by  stretching  only  ?  I  think  that  the  former  is  most
probable ;  and  if  this  is  the  case,  I  should  call  this  process  interstitial
growth,  similar  to  the  growth  of  the  ears  of  the  people  in  the  Eastern
islands,  particularly  as  it  is  an  opposite  effect  to  interstitial  absorption.

Granulations  appear  to  have  other  powers  of  action  besides  simply  their
ceconomy  tending  to  a  cure.  They  have  power  of  action  in  the  whole,
so  as  to  produce  other  operations,  and  even  to  affect  other  matter.  I  con-
ceive that  a  deep  wound,  such  as  a  gun-shot  wound,  advanced  to  suppur-
ation, and  granulation,  and  also  a  fistula,  becomes  in  some  degree  similar
to  an  execretory  duct,  having  the  powers  of  a  peristaltic  motion  from  the
bottom  towards  the  opening  externally.  Thus  we  find  that  whatever  ex-
traneous body  is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  the  sore,  is  by  degrees  conducted
to  the  skin,  although  the  bottom  of  the  sore,  or  fistula,  is  of  the  same  depth.
This  effect  in  such  sores  does  not  arise  from  the  granulations  forming  at
the  bottom,  and  gradually  raising  the  extraneous  body  as  they  form,  (which
is  commonly  the  case  with  exfoliations  and  sloughs)  but  we  find  extrane-
ous bodies  come  to  the  skin  when  the  bottom  of  the  wound  is  not  granu-
lating.


[487]

CHAPTER  VIII.
OF  SKINNING.


When  a  sore  begins  to  heal,  we  find  that  the  surrounding  old  skin,
close  to  the  granulations  (which  had  been  in  a  state  of  inflammation,
having  probably  a  red  shining  surface,  as  if  excoriated,  and  rather  rag-
ged) now  becomes  smooth,  and  rounded  with  a  whitish  cast,  as  if  cov-
ered with  something  white,  and  the  nearer  to  the  cicatrizing  edge,  the
more  white  it  is.  This  is,  I  believe,  a  beginning  cuticle,  which  appear-
ance is  probably  as  early  a  symptom  of  healing,  and  as  much  to  be
depended  upon  as  any ;  so  that  the  disposition  in  the  granulations  for  heal-
ing is  manifested  in  the  surrounding  skin  ;  and  while  the  sore  retains  its  red
edge  all  round,  for  perhaps  a  quarter,  or  half  of  an  inch  in  breadth,  we
may  be  certain  it  is  not  a  healing  sore,  and  is  what  may  be  called,  an  ir-
ritable sore.

Skin  is  a  very  different  substance,  with  respect  to  texture,  from  the  gran-
ulations upon  which  it  is  formed  ;  but  whether  it  is  an  addition  of  new
matter,  viz.  a  new-formed  substance  upon  the  granulations  being  pro-
duced by  them,  or  a  change  in  the  surface  of  the  granulations  themselves,
is  not  easily  determined.  In  either  case,  however,  a  change  must  take
place  in  the  disposition  of  the  vessels,  either  to  alter  the  structure  of  the
granulations,  or  to  form  new  parts  upon  them.

One  would  at  first  be  inclined  to  the  former  of  these  opinions,  as  we  have
a  clearer  idea  of  the  formation  of  a  new  substance,  than  such  an  alteration
in  the  old.  We  find  the  new  skin  most  commonly  taking  its  rise  from
the  surrounding  old  skin,  as  if  elongated  from  it  j  but  this  is  not  always
the  case.  In  very  large  sores,  but  principally  old  ulcers,  where  the  edges
of  the  surrounding  skin  have  but  little  tendency  to  contract,  or  the  eel-


488  Of  skinning.

lular  membrane  underneath  to  yield,  as  well  as  the  old  skin  having  but  lit-
tle disposition  to  skinning  in  itself,  a  cicatrizing  disposition  cannot  be
communicated  from  it  to  the  nearest  granulations  by  continued  sympathy.
In  such  cases  new  skin  forms  in  different  parts  of  the  ulcer,  standing  on
the  surface  of  the  granulations,  like  little  islands.  This,  I  believe,  never
takes  place  in  parts  the  first  time  of  their  being  sore,  nor  in  sores  which
have  a  strong  propensity  to  skin.

Skinning  is  somewhat  like  chrystalization,  it  requires  a  surface  to  shoot
from,  and  the  edge  of  the  skin  all  round  would  appear  to  be  this  surface.

Whatever  change  the  granulations  undergo  to  form  skin,  they  may  in
general  be  said  to  be  guided  to  it  by  the  surrounding  skin,  which  gives
this  disposition  to  the  surface  of  the  adjoining  granulations  ;  as  adjacent
bones  give  an  ossifying  disposition  to  the  granulations  that  are  formed
upon  them.  This  may  arise  from  sympathy ;  and  if  it  does,  I  should  call
it  continued  sympathy.  But  when  the  old  skin  is  unsound,  and  not  able
to  communicate  this  disposition,  then  the  granulations  sometimes  of  them-
selves acquire  it,,  and  new  skin  begins  to  form  where  that  disposition  is
strongest  in  them,  so  that  the  granulations  may  be  ready  to  form  new
skin,  if  the  surrounding  skin  be  not  in  a  condition  to  give  the  disposi-
tion. It  would  appear,  however,  that  the  circumference  of  the  sore
generally  has  the  strongest  disposition  to  skin,  even  although  the  sur-
rounding skin  does  not  assist ;  for  in  many  old  sores  no  new  skin  shall
shoot  from  the  surrounding  skin,  or  be  continued,  as  it  were,  from  the  old;,
and  yet  a  circle  of  new  skin  shall  form,  making  a  circle  within  the  old,
and,  as  it  were,  detached  from  it.

Skinning  is  a  process  in  which  nature  is  always  a  great  ceconomist,
without  a  single  exception  :  this,  however,  may  probably  arise  from  the
granulations  being  always  of  the  nature  of  the  parts  on  which  they  are
formed,  and  from  seldom  being  formed  on  parts  that  are  the  least  of  the
nature  of  the  skin,  they  have  therefore  no  strong  disposition  to  form  skin..
What  would  seem  to  make  this  observation  more  probable,  is,  that  if  the
cutis  is  only  in  part  destroyed,  as  by  a  hurt,  or  caustic,  which  has  not  gone
quite  through  the  cutis  to  the  cellular  membrane  underneath,  a  new
cutis  will  form  immediately  on  the  granulations,  and  in  many  cases  it  will


■

Of  skinning.  489

form  as  fast  as  the  slough  will  separate  ;  the  reason  is,  because  the  cutis
has  a  stronger  tendency  to  form  cutis  than  any  other  part,  and  in  many
cases  it  may  be  said  to  form  it  from  almost  every  point.

We  nexer  find  that  the  new-formed  skin  is  so  large  as  the  sore  was,  on
which  it  is  formed;  this,  I  have  already  observed,  is  brought  about  by  the
contraction  of  the  granulations,  which  in  some  measure  is  in  proportion  to
the  quantity  of  surrounding  old  skin,  attended  with  the  least  resistance.

If  the  sore  is  in  a  part  where  the  surrounding  skin  is  loose,  as  in  the
scrotum,  then  the  contractile  power  of  the  granulations  being  not  at  all  pre-
vented, but  allowed  full  scope,  a  very  little  new  skin  is  formed;  whereas,
if  the  sore  is  on  any  other  part,  where  the  skin  is  not  loose,  such  as  the
scalp,  shin-bone,  etc.  in  that  case,  the  new  skin  is  nearly  as  large  as  the
Sore.

This  we  find  to  be  the  case  also  in  parts  which  are  so  swelled  as  to
render  the  skin  tight,  such  as  the  scrotum,  when  under  the  distention  of  a
hydrocele,  and  which  sometimes  happens  where  a  caustic  has  proved  in-
effectual ;  we  then  find  the  new  skin  as  extensive  as  in  any  other  parts
equally  distended.  The  same  thing  takes  place  in  white  swellings  of  the
joint  of  the  knee  ;  for  if  a  sore  is  made  upon  such  a  part,  as  is  frequently
done  by  the  application  of  caustics,  we  find  that  the  new -skin  is  nearly  of
the  same  size  as  the  original  sore.  The  general  principle  is  also  very  ob-
servable after  amputations  of  the  limbs;  for  if  much  old  skin  has  been
saved,  we  find  the  cicatrix  small,  while  on  the  other  hand,  if  such  care  has
not  been  taken,  the  cicatrix  is  proportionably  large.

The  new  skin  is  at  first  commonly  on  the  same  level  with  the  old,  and
if  there  has  not  been  much  loss  of  substance,  or  the-  disease  is  not  very
deep  seated,  it  continues  its  position ;  but  this  does  not  appear  to  be  the
case  with  scalds  and  burns,  for  they  frequently  heal  with  a  cicatrix,  higher
than  the  skin,  although  the  granulations  have  been  kept  even  with  the
skin.  It  would  appear  in  these  cases  that  a  tumefaction  of  the  parts,
which  were  the  granulations,  takes  place  after  cicatrization.

Sometimes  granulations  cicatrize  while  higher  than  the  common  sur-
rounding skin,  but  then  thev  are  such  as  have  been  long  in  that  position,

3  R


490  Of 'skinning ,

as  is  the  case  in  some  issues :  I  have  seen  the  granulations  surrounding
a  pea  rise  considerably  above  the  skin,  near  half-a-crown  in  breadth,  and
skin  over,  all  but  the  hole  in  which  the  pea  lay,  the  whole  looking  like  a
tumor.


I.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  NEW  CUTIS.

The  new-formed  cutis  is  neither  so  yielding  nor  so  elastic  as'the  ori-
ginal is,  and  is  also  less  moveable  upon  the  part  to  which  it  is  attached,
or  upon  which  it  is  formed.  This  last  circumstance  is  owing  to  its  basis
being  granulations,  which  are  in  some  degree  fixed  upon  parts  united  by
the  adhesive  inflammation;  and  more  particularly  so,  when  the  granula-
tions arise  from  a  fixed  part,  such  as  a  bone;  the  new  skin  formed  upon
them  being  also  fixed  in  proportion.

It  is,  however,  constantly  becoming  more  and  more  flexible  in  itself,
and  likewise  more  loosly  attached,  owing  to  the  mechanical  motion  to
which  the  parts  are  subject  afterwards.  The  more  flexible  and  loose  the
parts  become,  it  is  so  much  the  better,  as  flexibility,  or  the  yielding  of  the
parts,  preserves  it  from  the  effects  of  many  accidents.  Parts  which  have
been  thickened  in  consequence  of  inflammation,  such  as  the  surrounding
parts  of  new  skin  have  always  a  less  internal  power  of  action  in  them,  than
parts  which  have  never  been  inflamed.  This  arises  from, the  adventitious
substance  thrown  out  in  the  time  of  inflammation,  being  a  clog  upon  the
operations  of  the  original;  and  the  new  matter  not  being  endowed  with
the  same  powers,  the  part  affected,  taken  as  a  whole,  is  by  these  means
considerably  weakened.

Motion  given  to  the  part  so  affected,  must  he  mechanical ;  but  that
motion  becomes  a  stimulant  to  the  parts  moved,  that  they  cannot  exist
under  such  motion  without  adapting  the  structure  of  the  parts  to  it,  and
this  sets  the  absorbents  to  work,  or  they  receive  the  stimulus  of  neces-
sity, and  absorb  all  the  adventitious  or  rather  superfluous  substance ;  by
which  means  the  parts  are  as  much  as  possible  reduced  to  their  original
texture.


Of  skinning*  491

Medicines  have  not  the  powers  we  could  wish  in  many  such  cases;
mercury,  however,  appears  to  have  the  power  of  producing  a  similar  sti-
mulus to  motion,  and  should  be  made  use  of  where  a  mechanical  stimulus
cannot  be  applied;  and,  I  believe,  when  joined  with  camphire,  its  powers
of  producing  absorption  are  increased ;  when  both  medicine  and  mecha-
nical means  can  be  used,  so  much  the  more  benefit  will  ensue.

When  every  thing  else  fails,  electricity  might  be  tried.  It  has  been  the
cause  of  absorption  of  tumors.  It  has  reduced  the  swellings  of  many
joints  in  consequence  of  sprains,  and  thereby  allowed  of  the  freedom
of  motion.

The  new-formed  cutis  is  at  first  very  thin  and  extremely  tender,  but
afterwards  becomes  firmer  and  thicker  :  it  is  a  smooth  continued  skin,
not  formed  with  those  insensible  indentations  which  are  observed  in  the
natural  or  original  skin,  and  by  which  the  original  admits  of  any  disten-
tion the  cellular  membrane  will  allow  of,  as  is  experienced  in  many
dropsies,  white  swellings  in  the  joints,  etc.  This  is  proved  by  steeping  a
piece  of  dead  skin,  with  a  cicatrix  in  it,  in  water  to  make  the  cuticle  sepa-
rate from  the  cutis  ;  there  we  find  that  the  new-formed  cuticle  becomes
but  little  larger  by  such  a  process,  which  plainly  shews,  that  the  new-
formed  cutis  upon  which  this  cuticle  was  formed,  has  a  pretty  smooth  con-
tinued surface,  and  not  that  soft  unequal  surface  which  distinguishes  the
original  cutis.

This  new  cutis,  and  indeed  all  the  substance  which  had  been  formerly
granulations,  is  not  nearly  so  strong,  nor  endowed  with  such  lasting  and
proper  actions,  as  the  originally  formed  parts.  The  living  principle  it-
self is  also  not  nearly  so  active;  for  when  an  old  sore  once  breaks  out,
it  continues  to  yield  till  almost  the  whole  of  the  new-formed  matter  has
been  absorbed  or  mortified;  as  has  been  already  explained.

The  young  cutis  is  extremely  full  of  vessels,  which  afterwards,,  in  a
great  measure,  either  become  lymphatic  or  impervious,  or  are  taken  into
the  constitution,  so  that  the  skin  and  granulations  underneath  are  at  last
fr^Q  from  visible  vessels,  and  become  white.

The  surrounding  original  cutis,  being  drawn  towards  a  centre  by  the
contraction  of  granulations,  to  avoid  as  much  as  possible-the  formation  of


492  Of  skinning,

new  skin  is  thrown  into  loose  folds,  while  the  new  looks  like  a  piece  of
skin  upon  the  stretch,  and  the  whole  appears  as  if  a  piece  of  skin  had
been  sewed  into  a  hole  by  much  too  large  for  it;  and  therefore  it  had  been
necessary  to  throw  the  surrounding  old  skin  into  folds,  or  gather  the  sur-
rounding skin,  in  order  to  bring  it  in  contact  with  the  new.  The  new
cutis  of  a  sore,  I  believe,  never  acquires  a  muscular  structure ;  nor  does  it
grow  larger  than  the  sore  which  it  covers,  so  as  to  be  thrown  into
wrinkles  similar  to  the  old;  and  therefore  has  always  that  stretched,
shining  appearance.


II.  OF  THE  NEW  CUTICLE.


It  does  not  appear  to  be  so  difficult  a  process  for  the  cutis  to  form
cuticle,  as  it  is  for  the  granulations  to  form  cutis;  for  we  find  in  general,
that  wherever  there  is  a  new  cutis  formed,  it  is  covered  with  a  cuticle :
and  in  cases  of  blisters,  or  any  other  cause  which  may  have  deprived  the
cutis  of  its  cuticle,  we  find  that  the  cuticle  is  soon  restored.  We  are  to
observe,  however,  that  in  such  cases  it  is  a  sound,  original  cutis,  forming
its  own  cuticle,  and  having  the  whole  power  of  forming  the  cuticle,  the
surrounding  cuticle  itself  having  no  power  of  action  of  this  kind :  every
point  of  cutis  is  forming  cuticle,  so  that  it  is  forming  equally  every  where
at  once  ;  whereas  I  observed  that,  the  formation  of  the  cutis  was  princi-
pally progressive  from  the  surrounding  cutis.

It  is  at  first  very  thin,  and  partakes  more  of  a  pulpy  than  a  horny  sub-
stance ;  as  it  gets  stronger,  it  becomes  smooth  and  shining,  and  is  much
more  transparent  than  original  cuticle,  which  shews  more  the  colour  of
the  rete  mucosum.  This  account  relates  to  the  cuticle  of  sound  parts
which  had  gone  through  all  the  operations  of  health,  but  where  there  is
a  retardation  in  the  healing  we  find  that  the  cuticle  is,  in  some  cases,,
backward  in  forming,  and  in  others  it  shall  be  formed  very  thick,  so  as  to
make  it  necessary  to  be  removed,  it  appearing  to  be  a  clog  upon  the  cutis,
retarding  the  progress  of  its  formation*


Of  skinning,  493

III.  OF  THE  RETE  MUCOSUM.

The  rete  mucosum  is  later  in  forming  than  the  cuticle,  and  in  some  cases
never  forms  at  all :  this  is  best  known  in  blacks,  who  have  been  either
wounded  or  blistered,  for  the  cicatrix  in  the  black  is  a  considerable  time
before  it  becomes  dark  ;  and  in  one  black  who  came  under  my  observa-
vation,  a  sore  which  had  been  upon  his  leg  when  young,  remained  white
when  he  was  old.  After  blisters  too,  the  part  blistered  remains  white  for
some  time  after  the  cuticle  is  completely  formed:  however,  in  many
cicatrices  of  blacks,  we  find  them  even  darker  than  any  other  part  of  the
skin.


t  495  1


CHAPTER  IX.

EFFECTS  OF  INFLAMMATION,  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES
ON  THE  CONSTITUTION


1  he  constitutional  affections  arising  from  inflammation  arc  immediate,
and  remote.

The  immediate  affections  have  been  already  considered,  viz\  the  sym-
pathetic fever,  and  also  the  nervous.  I  shall  now  treat  of  the  remote,
viz.  the  hectic,  and  dissolution,  which  arise  from  the  state  of  the  local
affection  at  the  time;  the  inflammation  not  being  able  to  go  through  all
the  salutary  steps  that  have  been  described.  We  have  diseases,  however,
sometimes  accompanying  those  salutary  processes,  although  we  should  na-
turally conclude,  from  the  foregoing  account,  that  the  suppurative  inflam-
mation and  suppuration  itself  should  produce  no  change  in  the  constitu-
tion, but  what  was  attendant  upon  the  inflammation,  and  might  be  sup-
posed, perhaps,  somewhat  necessary  to  it;  and  that  when  inflammation
had  subsided,  and  a  kind  suppuration  come  on,  the  constitution  should  be
left  in  a  sound  state,  because  it  would  now  appear  that  all  the  future
processes  were  settled,  and  a  constitution  that  was  capable  of  doing  this,
was  also  capable  of  going  through  all  the  succeeding  operations,  as  they
are  only  actions  of  restoration  ;  but  we  find  sometimes  the  contrary,  and
the  condition  in  which  the  constitution  is  either  left,  or  which  it  after-
wards takes  on,  proves  often  much  more  hurtful  than  the  inflammation
itself.

It  appears  in  many  cases  that,  the  inflammation,  the  attendant  fever,  the
going  off  of  these,  and  the  commencement  and  continuance  of  the  sup-
puration, produce  in  many  persons  a  change  in  the  constitution,  giving  a
disposition  to  symptoms,  which  aje  called  nervous. The  locked  jaw  is


49  6 Effects  of  inflammation,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution.

often  the  effect  of  this  leading  cause,  as  well  as  hysterics,  spasms  upon  the
muscles  of  respiration,  and  great  restlessness,  which  often  prove  fatal  to  the
patient;  there  are,  likewise,  signs  of  great  and  universal  debility,  or  signs
of  dissolution  in  the  patient,  all  of  which  appear  to  be  increased  by  a  con-
tinuance of  the  suppuration.  Each  of  these  diseases  are  well  marked,  and
it  would  appear  that  the  locked  jaw,  hysterics,  spasms,  and  great  restless-
ness, are  of  the  nervous  kind,  and  do  not  appear  to  arise  from  such  a  con-
stitution, as  is  not  equal  to  overcome  the  cause;  for  the  cause  which
produced  them  being  removed,  the  effects  are  going  on  towards  health  now,
as  well  as  before ;  and  if  the  patient  dies  of  any  of  those  diseases,  it  is  not
from  the  cause,  nor  from  the  immediate  effect,  viz.  the  local  disease,  but
from  the  effect  which  the  preceding  operations,  joined  with  the  healing,
have  on  some  constitutions.  They  all  seem  to  derive  their  origin  from  the
same  root,  viz.  from  all  the  foregoing  processes,  which  we  have  been
describing;  but  they  are  altogether  too  extensive  for  our  present  subject.


I.  OF  THE  HECTIC.


I  have  now  described  the  injuries  of  which  inflammation  is  a  conse-
quence; the  progress  of  that  action  in  different  parts;  its  effects  on  the
constitution ;  together  with  the  mode  of  treatment  of  both,  and  have  carried
it  through  it?  various  steps  to  a  perfect  restoration.  I  have  also  already
mentioned,  that  the  act  of  absorption  affects  some  constitutions ;  but  I
shall  now  take  notice,  that  nature  is  not  always  equal  to  those  salutary  pro-
cesses, and  hence  the  constitution  sometimes  becomes  particularly  affected,
producing  symptoms  different  from  those  formerly  described,  and  which
have  been  called  the  hectic.

This  disease  is  one  of  our  remote  constitutional  sympathetic  affections,
and  appears  to  arise  from  a  very  different  origin  from  the  other  sympa-
thizing effects  beforementioned.  When  it  is  a  consequence  of  a  local
disease,  it  has  commonly  been  preceeded  by  the  first  process  of  the  for-
mer, viz.  inflammation  and  suppuration,  but  has  not  been  able  to  accom-


Effects  of  inflammation.,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution. 497

-plish  granulation  and  cicatrization,  so  as  to  complete  the  cure.  It  may
be  said  to  be  a  constitution  now  become  affected  with  a  local  disease  or
irritation,  which  the  constitution  is  conscious  of,  and  of  which  it  cannot
relieve  itself,  and  cannot  cure  ;  for  while  the  inflammation  lasts,  which  is
only  preparatory,  and  an  immediate  effect  of  most  injuries,  and  in  parts
which  can  only  affect  the  constitution,  so  as  to  call  up  its  powers,  there
can  be  no  hectic.

We  should  distinguish  well  between  a  hectic  arising  from  a  local  com-
plaint entirely,  where  the  constitution  is.  good,,  but  only  disturbed  by  too
great  an  irritation  ;  and  a  hectic  arising  principally  from  the  badness  of  the
constitution,  which  does  not  dispose  the  parts  for  a  healing  state ;  for  in  the
first  it  is  only  necessary  to  remove  the  part  (if  removable)  and  then  all
will  do  well  ;  but  in  the  other  we  gain  nothing  by  a  removal,  except  the
wound  made  by  the  operation  is  much  less,,  and  much  more  easily  put
into  a  local  method  of  cure ;  so  that  this  bad  constitution  falls  less  under
this,  (the  operation  taken  into  the  account)  than  under  the  former  state  ;
but  all  this  depends  on,  nice  discrimination,.

The  hectic  comes  oa  at  very  different  periods  after  the  inflammation,
and  commencement  of  suppuration,  owing  to  a  variety  of  circumstances.
First,  some  constitutions  much  more  easily  fall  into  this  state  than  others,
having  less  powers  of  resistance..  The  quantity  of  incurable  disease  must
be  such  as  can  affect  the  constitution,  and  in  whatever  situation,  or  in
whatever  parts,  it  will  be  always  as  to  the  quantity  of  disease  in  those
situations  or  parts  in.  the  constitution,  which  will  make  the  time  to  vary
very  considerably.  In  many  diseases  it  would  appear,  from  the  manner
of  coming  on,,  that  they  retard  the  conamencement  of  the  hectic,  such  as
lumbar  abscesses.  But  when  such  abscesses  are  put  into  that  state,  in
which  the  constitution  is  to  make  its  efforts  towards  a  cure,  but  is  not
equal  to  the  task,  then  the  hectic  commences.

It  takes  its  rise  from  a  variety  of  causes,  but  which  I  shall  divide  into'
two  species,  with  regard  to  diseased  parts,  viz.  the  parts  vital,  and  the
parts  not  vital.  The  only  difference  between  these  two,  is,  probably,
merely  in  time,  with  respect  to  its  coming  on,  and  its  progress  when  come

3s


49  3 Effects  of  inflammation,  audits  consequences  on  the  constitution.

on:  bat  what  is  very  similar  to  the  disease  of  a  vital  part,  is  quantity  of
incurable  disease.

The  causes  of  hectic,  arising  from  diseases  of  the  vital  parts,  may  be
many,  of  which  a  great  proportion  would  not  produce  the  hectic  if  they
were  in  any  other  part  of  the  body  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  the  formation
of  tumors,  either  in,  or  so  as  to  press  upon  some  vital  part,  or  a  part
whose  functions  are  immediately connected  with  life. Schirri  in  the
stomach,  mesenteric  glands,  which  tumors  any  where  else  would  not  pro-
duce the  hectic ;  many  complaints  too  of  vital  parts,  as  diseased  lungs,
liver,  etc.  all  of  these  produce  the  hectic,  and  much  sooner  than  if  the
parts were  not  vital. In  many  cases  where  those  causes  of  the  hectic
come  on  quickly,  it  frequently  follows  so  quick  upon  the  sympathetic
fever,  that  the  one  seems  to  run  into  the  other:  this  I  have  often  seen  m
the  lumbar  abscess. They  also  produce  symptoms  according  to  the  nature
of  the  part  injured,  as  coughs,  when  in  the  lungs  ;  sickness  and  vomiting,
when  in  the  stomach  ; and  probably  bring  on  many  other  complaints,
as  dropsies,  jaundice,  etc.  but  which  are  not  peculiar  to  the  hectic.

When  the  hectic  arises  from  a  disease  in  a  part  not  vital,  it  sooner  or
later  commences,  according  as  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  parts  to  heal,  or
continue  the  disease.  If  far  from  the  source  of  the  circulation,  with  the
same  quantity  of  disease,  it  will  come  on  sooner.  When  in  parts  not  vital,
it  is  generally  in  those  parts  where  so  great  a  quantity  of  disease  can  take
place,  (without  the  power  of  being  diminished  in  size,  as  is  the  case  with
the  diseases  in  most  joints*)  as  to  affect  the  constitution,  and  also  in  such
parts  as  have  naturally  but  little  powers  to  heal;  we  must  at  the  same
time  include  parts  that  are  well-disposed  to  take  on  such  specific  diseases
as  are  not  readily  cured  in  any  situation  ;  such  parts  are  principally  the
larger  joints,  both  of  the  trunk  and  extremities;  but  in  the  small  joints
of  the  toes  and  fingers,  although  the  same  local  effects  take  place,  as  in
the  larger,  yet  the  constitution  is  not  made  sensible  of  it;  we  therefore
find  a  scrofulous  joint  of  a  toe  or  finger  going  on  for  years,  without  afFect-
thc  constitution.

*  The  cavity  of  a  joint  is  such,  as  not  readily  to  become  smaller  under  disease,  as  in  the
soft  parts,  which  was  described  in  the  contraction  of  sores.


Effects  of  inflammation,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution. 499'

The  ankle,  wrist,  elbow,  and  even  the  shoulder,  may  be  affected  much
longer  than  either  the  knee,  hip-joint,  or  loins,  before  the  constitution
sympathizes  with  their  want  of  powers  to  heal.

Although  the  hectic  commonly  arises  from  some  incurable  local  disease
of  a  vital  part,  or  of  a  common  part  when  of  some  magnitude,  yet  it  is
possible  for  it  to  be  an  original  disease  in  the  constitution  :  the  constitu-
tion may  fall  into  the  same  mode  of  action,  without  any  local  cause
whatever,  at  least  that  we  know  of.

Hectic  may  be  said  to  be  a  slow  mode  of  dissolution  :  the  general
symptoms  are  those  of  a  low,  or  slow  fever,  attended  with  weakness,  but
more  with  the  action  of  weakness  than  real  weakness ;  for,  upon  the
removal  of  the  hectic  cause,  the  action  of  strength  is  immediately  pro-
duced, as  well  as  every  natural  function,  however  much  it  was  decreased
before.

The  particular  symptoms  are  debility;  a  small,  quick,  and  sharp  pulse  ;
the  blood  forsaking  the  skin;  loss  of  appetite;  often  rejection  of  all  ali-
ment by  the  stomach;  wasting;  a  great  readiness  to  be  thrown  into
sweats  ;  sweating  spontaneously  when  in  bed ;  frequently  a  constitutional
purging  ;  the  water  clear.

This  disease  has  been,  and  is  still  in  general  laid  to  the  charge  of  the
absorption  of  pus  into  the  constitution  from  a  sore  ;  but  I  have  long
imagined  that  an  absorption  of  pus  has  been  too  much  blamed  as  the
cause  of  many  of  the  bad  symptoms  which  frequently  attack  people  who
have  sores.

First,  this  symptom  almost  constantly  attends  suppuration  when  in,
particular  parts,  such  as  the  vital  parts,  as  well  as  many  inflammations
before  actual  suppuration  has  taken  place,  as  in  many  of  the  larger  joints,
called  white  swellings  ;  while  the  same  kind  and  quantity  of  inflamma-
tion and  suppuration  in  any  of  the  fleshy  parts,  and  especially  such  of  them
as  are  near  the  source  of  the  circulation,  have  in  general  no  such  effect  \
in  those  cases,  therefore,  it  is  only  an  effect  upon  the  constitution  pro-
duced by  a  local  complaint,  having  a  peculiar  property,  which  I  shall  now
consider.

I  observed,  that  with  all  diseases  of  vital  parts,  the  constitution  sym-r


i;6o Effects  of  inflammation,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution.

pathized  more  readily  than  with  diseases  of  any  other  parts  ;  and  also,
that  all  diseases  of  vital  parts  are  more  difficult  of  cure  in  general  than
those  which  are  not  vital,  I  have  observed,  likewise,  that  all  the  diseases
of  bones,  ligaments,  and  tendons,  affected  the  constitution  more  readily
than  those  of  muscles,  skin,  cellular  membrane,  etc.  and  we  find  that
the  same  general  principles  are  followed  in  the  universal  remote  sympathy,
produced  by  local  diseases  of  those  parts.

When  the  disease  is  in  vital  parts,  and  is  such  as  not  to  kill  by  its  first
constitutional  effects,  the  constitution  then  becomes  teazed  with  a  com-
plaint which  is  disturbing  the  necessary  actions  of  health,  the  parts  being
vital ;  there  is,  besides,  the  universal  sympathy,  with  a  disease  which  gives
the  irritation  of  being  incurable.

In  the  large  joints  it  continues  to  harrass  the  constitution  with  a  dis-
ease, where  the  parts  have  no  power,  or  what  is  more  probable,  hive  no
disposition  to  produce  a  salutary  inflammation  and  suppuration;  the  con-
stitution, therefore,  is  also  irritated  with  an  incurable  disease.

This  is  the  theory  of  the  cause  of  the  hectic,  which  will  be  further
illustrated  :  but  now  let  us  consider  how  far  the  idea  of  the  absorption  of
matter  may  be  a  cause.

If  the  absorption  of  matter  always  produced  such  symptoms,  I  do  not
see  how  any  patient,  who  has  a  large  sore,  could  possibly  escape  this  dis-
ease; because  we  have  as  yet  no  reason  to  suppose,  that  any  one  sore  has
more  power  of  absorption  than  another.

If  in  those  cases  where  there  is  an  hectic  constitution,  the  absorption  is
really  greater  than  when  the  habit  is  healthy,  it  will  be  difficult  to  deter-
mine whether  this  increase  of  absorption  is  a  cause,  or  an  effect.

If  it  be  a  cause,  it  must  arise  from  a  particular  disposition  in  the  sore  to
absorb  more  at  one  time  than  common,  even  while  it  was  in  a  healthy
state;  for  the  sore  must  be  healthy  and  then  absorb,  which  hurts  the
constitution;  moreover,  as  the  sore  is  a  part  of  that  constitution,  it  must
of  course  be  affected  in  turn  ;  and  what  reason  we  have  to  suppose  that  a
healthy  sore  of  a  healthy  constitution  should  begin  to  absorb  more  at  one
time  than  another,  I  must  own  I  cannot  discover.  If  this  increase  of  ab-
sorption does  not  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  sore,  it  must  then  take


Effects  of  inflammation,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution. 501

its  rise  from  the  constitution  ;  and  if  so,  there  is  then  a  peculiarity  in  the
constitution,  so  that  the  whole  of  the  symptoms  cannot  arise  entirely  from
the  absorption  of  matter  as  a  cause,  but  must  depend  on  a  peculiar  consti-
tution, and  absorption  combined.

If  absorption  of  matter  produced  such  violent  effects  as  are  commonly
ascribed  to  it,  (which,  indeed,  are  never  of  the  inflammatory  kind,  but  of
the  hectic)  why  does  not  the  venereal  matter  do  the  same  ?  We  often
know  that  absorption  is  going  on  by  the  progress  of  buboes;  and  I  have
known  a  large  bubo,  which  was  just  ready  to  break,  absorbed  from
a  £qw  days  sickness  at  sea,  while  the  person  continued  at  sea  for  twenty-
four  days  after ;  yet,  in  such  cases,  no  symptoms  appear  till  the  matter
begins  to  have  its  specific  effects,  and  these  very  symptoms  are  not  similar
to  those  which  are  called  hectic.  From  reasoning,  we  ought  to  expect
that  the  venereal  matter  would  act  with  greater  violence  than  the  com-
mon matter  from  a  healthy  sore.  Although  matter  too  is  frequently
formed  on  the  inside  of  the  veins,  in  cases  of  inflammation  of  their  cavi-
ties*, and  this  matter  cannot  fail  of  getting  into  the  circulation,  yet  in
these  cases  we  have  not  the  hectic  disposition,  but  only  the  inflammatory,
and  sometimes  death.  We  likewise  find  very  large  collections  of  matter,
which  have  been  produced  without  visible  inflammation,  such  as  many  of
the  scrofulous  kind,  and  which  are  wholly  absorbed,  even  in  a  very  short
time,  yet  no  bad  symptoms  follow  -f.

We  may,  therefore,  from  hence  conclude,  that  the  absorption  of  pus
from  a  sore  into  the  circulation,  cannot  be  a  cause  of  so  much  mischief  as
is  generally  supposed;  and  if  it  was  owing  to  matter  in  the  constitution,
I  do  not  see  how  these  symptoms  could  ever  cease,  till  suppuration  ceased,
which  does  not  readily  happen  in  such  constitutions,  their  sores  being
tedious  in  healing.  We  find,  however,  that  such  patients  often  get  well
of  the  hectic  before  suppuration  ceases,  even  when  no  medicine  was  given  ;
and  in  the  case  of  veins,  there  is  great  reason  to  believe,  that  after  all  the
bad  symptoms  are  removed,  suppuration  is  still  going  on,  as  we  find  it  so

*  Vide  Transactions  of  a  Society  for  the  Improvement  of  medical  and  chirurgical  Know-
ledge.

t  It  m,iy,  however,  be  objected  to  this,  that  this  is  not  true  matter,  or  pus;  but  it  may  be
necessary  to  shew,  that  the  one  affects  the  constitution  ujpn  abforption  more  than  the  other.


502 Effects  of  Inflammation,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution,

in  a  sore;  pus  may,  therefore,  still  pass  into  the  constitution  from  the  veins,
and  yet  the  hectic  may  not  be  produced,  which  would  certainly  be  the
case  if  those  bad  symptoms  were  occasioned  by  the  matter  getting  into  the
circulation.

But  I  very  much  doubt  the  fact  of  absorption  going  on  more  in  one  sore
than  another;  and  if  ever  it  does  I  think  it  is  of  no  consequence;  lam
much  more  inclined  to  believe,  that  this  hectic  disposition  arises  from  the
effect  which  irritation  of  a  vital  organ,  and  some  other  parts,  such  as
joints,  (being  either  incurable  in  themselves,  or  being  so  to  the  constitu-
tion for  a  time)  have  on  the  constitution.

We  may  remark,  that  in  large  abscesses  which  have  not  been  preceded
by  inflammation,  the  hectic  disposition  seldom  or  never  comes  on  till  after
they  are  opened,  (although  they  may  have  been  forming  matter  for  months);
but  in  such  cases,  the  disposition  often  comes  on  soon  after  opening,  and  in
others,  very  late.  Till  the  stimulus  for  restoring  parts  is  given,  no  such
effect  can  take  place;  and  if  the  parts  are  well-disposed  to  heal  no  hectic
disposition  comes  on,  neither  is  the  constitution  at  all  affected.  In  diseased
joints  also,  which  are  attended  with  inflammation,  if  the  parts  were  capable
of  taking  on  a  salutary  inflammation,  we  should  have  only  the  first  sym-
pathetic fever;  but  as  they  seldom  are  capable  of  doing  this,  the  consti-
tution becomes  teazed  with  a  complaint,  not  taking  on  the  immediate
and  salutary  steps  towards  a  cure.  In  the  venereal  disease  too,  where  we
know  that  the  venereal  matter  has  got  into  the  constitution,  and  that  the
matter  is  producing  its  specific  effects,  yet  no  hectic  comes  on,  till  the
constitution  is  harrassed  with  an  incurable  disease,  and  this  not  till  long
after  all  the  parts  are  healed,  with  regard  to  recent  disease,  and  no
matter  is  formed  for  further  absorption.  That  absorption  does  take  place
in  sores,  we  have  reason  to  believe,  and  upon  this  fact  a  mode  of  dres-
sing sores  has  been  advised.  The  following  is  a  remarkable  instance  of
it  in  a  bubo  :  a  young  man  had  a  chancre  and  three  buboes,  one  of
which  appeared  when  the  other  two  were  almost  cured.  This  was
very  large,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  belly.  When  it  had  suppurated,  and
was  pretty  near  breaking,  it  diminished  very  quickly,  and  in  two  or  three
days  was  entirely  gone. While  this  was  going  on,  he  observed  his  urine


Effects  of  inflammation,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution, 503

wheyish  and  thick,  while  making  it,  which  went  entirely  off  when  the
bubo  had  subsided.  Before  the  bubo  began  to  subside,  he  was  rather
mending  in  his  health,  which  continued  to  mend,  nor  did  the  diminution
of  the  bubo  alter  the  state  of  his  health.

The  hectic,  from  what  has  been  said,  appears  in  some  measure  to  de-
pend on  the  parts  being  stimulated  to  produce  an  effect  which  is  beyond
their  powers  :  that  this  stimulus  is  sooner  or  later  in  taking  place  in  dif-
ferent cases,  and  that  the  constitution  becomes  affected  by  it.  The  hectic
disposition  arises  from  diseased  lungs,  lumbar  abscesses,  white  swellings,
scrofulous  joints,  etc.


II.  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  HECTIC.

We  have  as  yet,  I  am  afraid,  no  cure  for  any  of  the  consequences
above  related;  I  believe  that  depends  in  the  cure  of  the  cause,  viz.  the
local  complaint,  or  in  its  removal ;  the  effects,  I  fear,  are  not  to  be  cured.
Strengtheners,  and  what  are  called  antiseptics,  are  recommended.

Strengthened  are  proposed  on  account  of  the  debility  which  has
taken  place.

Antiseptics  have  been  employed  from  an  idea  that  pus,  when  absorbed,
gives  the  blood  a  tendency  to  putrefaction.  To  prevent  both  of  these
effects  from  taking  place,  the  same  medicines  are  however  recommended.
These  are  bark  and  wine.

Bark  will,  in  most  cases,  only  assist  in  supporting  a  constitution.  I
should  suppose  it  impossible  to  cure  a  disease  of  the  constitution  till  the
cause  be  removed;  however,  it  may  be  supposed  that  these  medicines  may
make  the  constitution  less  susceptible  of  the  disease,  and  may  also  con-
tribute to  lessen  the  cause,  by  disposing  the  local  complaints  to  heal:
but  where  the  hectic  arises  from  specific  disease;  as  for  instance,  if  a
hectic  disposition  comes  on  from  a  venereal  disposition,  bark  will  enable
the  constitution  to  support  it  better  than  it  otherwise  could  have  done,  but
can  never  remove  it.

Wine,  I  am  fearful,  rather  dees  harm  if  it  increases  the  actions  of  the


504. Effects  of  inflammation,  and  lis  consequences  on  the  constitution.

machine  without  giving  strength,  a  thing  carefully  to  be  avoided  :  how-
ever, I  have  not  yet  made  up  my  mind  about  wine.

When  the  hectic  arises  from  local  diseases,  in  such  parts  as  the  con-
stitution can  bear  a  removal  of,  then  the  diseased  part  should  be  re-
moved, viz.  when  it  arises  from  some  incurable  disease  in  an  extremitv,
and  although  all  the  symptoms  above-described  should  have  already  taken
place,  we  shall  find,  that  upon  a  removal  of  the  limb  the  symptoms  will
abate  almost  immediately.  I  have  known  a  hectic  pulse  at  one  hundred
and  twenty  sink  to  ninety  in  a  few  hours,  upon  the  removal  of  the  hectic
cause.  I  have  known  persons  sleep  sound  the  first  night  without  an
opiate,  who  had  not  slept  tolerably  for  weeks  before.  I  have  known  cold
sweats  siop  immediately,  as  well  as  those  called  colliquitive.  I  have
known  a  purging  immediately  stop,  upon  the  removal  of  the  hectic  cause,
and  the  urine  drop  its  sediment.  It  is  possible  too,  that  the  pain  in  the
operation,  and  the  sympathetic  affection  of  the  constitution  may  assist  in
these  salutary  effects.  It  is  an  action  diametrically  opposite  to  the  hectic,
and  may  be  said  to  bring  back  tne  constitution  to  a  natural  state.


III.  OF  DISSOLUTION.


Dissolution  is  the  last  stage  of  all,  and  is  common  to,  or  an  imme-
diate consequence  of  all  diseases,  whether  local  or  constitutional.  A  man
shall  not  recover  of  a  fever,  whether  original  or  sympathetic,  but  shall  move
into  the  last  stage,  or  dissolution.  It  shall  take  place  in  the  second  stage
of  a  disease,  where  the  state  of  constitution  and  parts  appears  to  be  formed
out  of  the  first ;  as  for  instance,  a  man  shall  lose  his  leg,  especially  if
above  the  knee;  or  have  a  very  bad  compound  fracture  in  the  leg;  the  first
constitutional  symptoms  shall  have  been  violent,  but  all  shall  appear  to
have  been  got  the  better  of,  and  there  shall  be  hopes  of  recovery,  when
suddenly  he  shall  be  attacked  with  a  shivering  fit,  which  shall  not  per-
form all  its  actions,  viz.  shall  not  produce  the  hot  fit  and  sweat,  but
<shall  continue  a  kind  of  irregular  hot  fit,  attended  with  loss  of  appetite,


"Effects  of  inflammation ,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution. 505

quick,  low.  pulse,  eyes  sunk,  and  the  person  shall  die  in  a  few  days.  Or
he  shall  go  into  the  common  diseased  symptoms  of  the  second  stage,  viz.
the  nervous,  with  many  of  its  effects,  as  the  tetanus,  and  dissolution
shall  also  be  a  consequence.  Or  if  the  local  disease  does  not  or  cannot
heal,  and  is  such  as  to  affect  the  constitution,  it  then  brings  on  the
hectic,  and  sooner  or  later  dissolution  takes  place  ;  for  the  hectic  is  an
action  of  disease,  and  of  a  particular  kind;  but  dissolution  is  giving  way  to
disease  of  every  kind,  therefore  has  no  determined  form  arising  from  the
nature  of  the  preced  ng  disease.

It  has  been  supposed,  that  this  disease  arises  also  from  the  sbsorption
of  matter.  It  appears  to  be  in  many  cases  an  effect  arising  from  violent
and  long  continued  inflammations  and  suppurations,  although  not  in-
curable in  themselves ;  (therefore,  in  those  respects,  not  similar  to  the
hectic)  and  which  in  many  instances  are  known  to  produce  the  greatest
changes  in  the  constitution.  Such  often  arise  from  very  bad  compound
fractures,  from  amputations  of  the  extremities,  especially  the  lower,  and
more  particularly  the  thigh,  in  which  cases  the  sympathetic  fever  has  run
high,  which  would  appear  to  be  necessary,  or  preparatory  ;  but  in  the
hectic,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  constitution  should  have  suffered  at  all
in  the  first  stages  of  the  disease  ;  dissolution  seems  to  be  more  connected
with  what  is  past,  than  with  the  present  alone,  which  is  the  reverse  of
the  hectic.  We  never  find  this  disease  take  place  in  consequence  of  small
wounds,  or  such  wounds  as  have  affected  the  constitution  but  little  in  its
first  stages  j  but  which  may  affect  the  constitution  much  in  its  second,  such
as  small  wounds  producing  the  lock  jaw.  It  would  appear  to  take  place
in  our  hospitals  more  generally  than  in  private  houses,  and  more  readily  in
large  cities  than  in  the  country.  We  shall  find  that  the  hectic  and  this
are  by  no  means  the  same  disease,  differing  exceedingly  in  their  causes,  and
in  many  of  their  effects;  for  in  the  cases  of  compound  fractures  and  am-
putations, we  find  the  constitution  often  capable  of  going  through  the  in-
flammatory and  sympathetic  fever,  producing  suppuration  and  granulation,
as  well  as  continuing  the  production  of  these  for  some  time,  yet  sinking
under  them  at  last,  and  often  immediately,  without  a  seeming  cause.
This  effect  will  more  readily  take  place,  if  the  person  was  in  full  health  -

3  T


506 Effects  of 'inflammation ,  and  Its  consequences  on  the  constitution,

before  the  accident  or  operation,  than  if  he  had  been  somewhat  accustom-
ed to  the  other,  or  true  hectic  j  for  the  symptoms  of  dissolution  seldom  or
never  take  place,  if  the  violence  committed  has  been  to  get  rid  of  a  hectic
cause.  It  sometimes  takes  place  early,  in  consequence  of  local  injury,
and  would  seem  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  sympathetic  fever ;  as  if  the
constitution  was  not  able  to  relieve  itself  of  the  general  affection,  or  that  the
parts  could  net  go  into  the  true  suppurative  disposition.  We  see  this  fre-
quently after  removing  a  limb,  especially  in  the  lower  extremity,  and  after
cutting  for  the  stone  in  very  fat  men,  above  the  middle  age,  and  who  have
lived  will.

The  first  symptoms  are  generally  those  of  the  stomach,  which  produce
shivering:  vomiting  immediately  follows,  if  not  an  immediate  attendant;
there  is  great  oppression  and  anxiety,  the  persons  conceiving  they  must
die.  There  is  a  small  quick  pulse ;  perhaps  bleeding  from  the  whole
surface  of  the  sore,  often  mortification,  with  every  sign  of  dissolution  in
the  countenance  ;  as  it  arises  with  the  symptoms  of  death,  its  termination
is  pretty  quick.  Here  is  a  very  fatal  disease  taking  place ;  in  some  almost
immediately,  when  all  appeared  to  be  within  the  power  of  the  machine,
and  theiefore  cannot  immediately  arise  from  the  sore  itself;  for  it  is  very
common  after  such  operations  as  usually  do  well ;  but  the  hectic  always
takes  place  in  consequence  of  those  sores  which  seldom  or  never  get  well
in  any  case ;  yet  the  sore  certainly  assists  in  bringing  on  dissolution,  because
we  never  see  the  disease  take  place  v/hen  the  sore  is  healed,  nor  in  those
where  the  constitution  seems  not  to  be  equal  to  the  task,  as  is  the  cause
of  the  hectic.

The  hectic  is  much  slower  in  its  progress,  and  seems  to  be  a  simple  and
an  immediate  effect,  arising  from  a  continued  cause  which  is  local  -3  by
removing  the  cause,  therefore,  the  effect  ceases,  and  the  havoc  made  upon
the  constitution  is  soon  restored;  persons,  therefore,  do  much  better  in
consequence  of  the  hectic  having  in  some  degree  taken  place,  prior  to
the  removal  of  the  cause.  But  dissolution  is  a  change  of  the  constitution
in  consequence  of  causes  which  now  do  not  wholly  exist,  and  in  many
cases  it  does  not  take  place  till  the  constitution  appears  to  be  capable
easily  of  performing  all  its  functions,  and  a  removal  of  the  parts  does  not


Effects  of  inflammation ,  and  its  consequences  on  the  constitution, 507

relieve,  as  in  the  hectic  \  for  dissolution  does  not  depend  for  its  contin-
uance upon  the  presence  of  the  disease.

Death  or  dissolution,  appears  not  to  be  going  on  equally  fast  in  every
vital  part;  for  we  shall  have  many  people  very  near  their  termination,  yet
some  vital  actions  shall  be  good,  and  tolerably  strong;  and  if  it  is  a  visible
action,  and  life  depends  much  upon  this  action,  the  patients  shall  not
appear  to  be  so  near  their  end  as  they  really  are :  thus  I  have  seen  dying
people  whose  pulse  was  full  and  strong  as  usual,  on  the  day  previous  to
their  death,  but  it  has  sunk  almost  at  once,  and  then  become  extremely
quick,  with  a  thrill :  on  such  occasions  it  shall  rise  again,  making  a
strong  effort,  and  after  a  short  time,  a  moisture  shall  pobably  come  on
the  skin,  which  shall  in  this  state  of  pulse  be  warm ;  but  upon  the
sinking  of  the  pulse,  shall  become  cold  and  clammy  :  breathing  shall  be-
come very  imperfect,  almost  like  short  catchings,  and  the  person  shall
soon  die.

It  would  appear  in  many  cases,  that  disease  has  produced  such  weak-
ness at  last,  as  to  destroy  itself:  we  shall  even  see  the  symptoms,  or  con-
sequences of  disease,  get  well  before  death.  A  gentlewoman,  who  was
above  seventy-five,  was  anasarcous  all  over  :  the  abdomen  was  very  full  and
large ;  she  made  but  very  little  water ;  her  breathing  was  so  difficult  as
to  make  her  purple  in  the  face,  so  that  most  probably  there  was  water  in
the  chest  5  her  pulse  was  extremely  irregular;  fluttering,  trembling,  in-
termitting and  small.  Her  legs  were  punctured  with  a  lancet,  and  dis-
charged very  freely  for  more  that  three  weeks,  which  emptied  the  cellular
membrane  of  the  body,  as  well  as  in  some  degree  the  abdomen  •  the
breathing  became  free  and  easy,  so  that  we  supposed  the  water  in  the  chest
was  absorbed ;  the  pulse  became  regular,  soft,  and  fuller,  and  the  appetite  in
some  degree  mended;  in  which  state  she  seemed  free  from  disease,  having
only  some  of  the  consequences  still  remaining.  The  quantity  of  urine
increased  to  the  natural  quantity  ;  but  notwithstanding  actual  disease
seemed  to  be  gone,  yet  she  became  weaker  and  weaker,  in  which  state
she  existed  for  near  a  month,  and  died.  Some  days  prior  to  death,  a  purple
and  then  a  livid  appearance  came  upon  the  legs,  with  some  spots  of  ex-
travasated  blood  above  where  the  punctures  had  been  made,  on  which


508 Effects  of  inflammation,  and  its- consequences  on  the  constitution.

blisters  arose,  at  first  filled  with  serum,  then  with  bloody  serum,  all  of
them  threatening  mortification.

Even  when  in  the  state  of  approaching  death,  we  often  find  a  soft,  quiet,
and  regular  pulse,  having  not  the  least  degree  of  irritability  in  it,  and  this
when  there  is  every  other  sign  of  approaching  death  ;  such  as  entire  loss
of  appetite,  no  rest,  hickup,  the  feet  cold,  and  partial  cold,  clammy
sweats,  etc.

A  lady  appeared  to  have  lost  all  diseased  action,  only  the  consequences
of  disease  remaining,  viz.  weakness,  with  swelled  legs  ;  she  made  little  or
no  water  ;  at  length  she  became  so  weak,  as  hardly  to  articulate;  she  lay
in  a  kind  of  doze,  was  only  roused  to  impression,  and  only  took  food
by  spoonsfuls  when  desired  ;  the  pulse  so  small  as  hardly  to  be  felt :  her
extremities  were  cold,  and  she  had  all  the  signs  of  approaching  disso-
lution, which  took  place  ;  yet  within  thirty-six  hours  before  she  died,
the  whole  water  in  her  legs  and  thighs  was  taken  up,  her  urine  increased,
and  about  ten  hours  previous  to  her  death,  the  legs,  etc.  were  as  small  as
ever.  As  I  consider  the  dropsy  to  be  a  disease,  and  not  simply  weakness,
which  this  case  would  in  some  measure  shew  from  the  result,  I  should
wish  to  ask,  whether  the  absorption  of  water  was  not  owing  to  the  dis-
ease being  gone,  and  whether  the  disease  being  gone,  the  absorbents  did
not  set  to  work?  If  so,  then  dissolution  may  be  a  cessation  of  disease,  and
persons  die  of  weakness  simply  ;  or  simply,  either  the  want  of  powers  to
act,  or  the  want  of  that  stimulus  of  necessity  to  act,  by  which  means  a
cessation  of  action  takes  place.

Since  bodies  of  persons  who  die  suddenly,  and  even  by  violent  death,  as
well  as  those  who  die  soon  after  a  considerable  operation,  are  not  capable  of
being  preserved  so  long  as  those  who  have  been  ill  for  some  time;  and
as  those  who  have  a  considerable  operation  performed  upon  them,  as  the
amputation  of  a  leg,  do  not  so  readily  recover  as  those  who  have  been
long  ill,  may  not  the  more  ready  production  of  death,  and  the  more  ready
production  of  putrefaction  be  owing  to  the  same  principle  ?  one  more
readily  running  into  the  action  of  death,  as  also  more  readily  into  the  ac-
tion of  putrefaction  ;  but  it  is  very  probable  that  the  action  producing
quick  putrefaction,  is  an  action  prior  to  absolute  death.


[  5°9  ]

PART  III.

CHAPTER  I.
THE  TREATMENT  OF  ABSCESSES.


I  have  endeavoured  to  lay  down  the  general  principles  of  suppuration,
which  principles  of  themselves  lead  to  a  general  method  of  cure ;  but  as  it  is
only  the  proper  application  of  art,  to  those  principles  which  completes  the
surgeon,  and  since  it  is  the  most  difficult  part  to  apply  our  knowledge  of
first  principles  to  practice  with  readiness,  especially  when  there  appear
some  peculiarities,  it  will  be  necessary  to  bring  the  beginner  from  first
principles  to  the  practical  part.

Abscesses  are  in  general  consequences  of  spontaneous  inflammation,
but  not  always  so ;  for  they  may  be  consequences  of  some  violence,  as
strains  or  bruises  from  some  external  -violence,  which  has  hurt  deeper
seated  parts  than  the  skin  over  them,  which  inflame  and  form  an  abscess,
as  was  described  in  treating  of  accidents ;  as  also  from  the  introduction
of  extraneous  bodies,  over  which  the  parts  have  healed.  Even  when  they
appear  to  be  spontaneous,  they  arise  from  so  many  causes,  and  from
thence  have  so  many  dispositions,  or  are  of  so  many  kinds,  that  in  o-eneral
they  become  one  of  the  greatest  objects  in  surgery  ;  because,  from  these
circumstances,  they  require  a  vast  variety  in  the  manner  of  treatment,

I  do  not  mean  at  present  to  enter  into  a  full  discussion  of  the  cause,  ef-
fect, and  cure  of  every  abscess,  because  that  would  be  treating  of  every  dis-
ease which  is  capable  of  producing  such  complaints,  many  of  which  would
come  under  the  article  of  specific  diseases,  which  must  be  treated  of  sepa-


5 1  o  The  treatment  of  abscesses.

rately;  yet  I  mean  here  to  lay  down  such  general  surgical  rules  for  their
treatment  and  many  of  their  consequences,  as  will  includeal  most  every
kind  of  disease  of  this  kind,  considered  as  an  abscess  simply;  so  that  the
specific  treatment  of  any  specific  abscess  will  be  principally  confined  to
the  medicinal  treatment  of  the  part  and  the  constitution ;  thereby  the  treat-
ment of  the  local  complaint  so  produced,  abstracted  from  the  specific
disposition,  will  for  the  most  part  come  under  our  general  rules.

As  most  spontaneous  suppurations,  from  whatever  cause,  are  deeper
seated  than  the  surface  of  the  body,  such  of  course  must  form  what  are
called  abscesses,  or  collections  of  pus ;  therefore  we  have  abscesses  of  all
depths,  from  the  pimple  in  the  skin  to  the  boil ;  and  from  the  boil  to
deep-seated  abscesses,  among  the  muscles,  or  in  any  other  deep-seated  part.

Abscesses  are  commonly  formed  where  matter  is  found,  especially  the
more  superficial  ones,  and  such  may  be  justly  called  abscesses  of  this  part;
but  collections  of  matter  are  often  found  in  parts  where  not  formed,  more
especially  in  the  deeper  seated  ones,  the  matter  moving  from  the  seat
where  it  was  formed  to  some  more  depending  part,  or  having  met  with
some  obstruction  in  its  course,  it  takes  another  direction  and  therefore
may  be  called  an  abscess  in  this  part ;  and  I  shall  call  them  so  in  my
descriptions  of  them  ;  I  believe  such  abscesses  do  not  arise  from  inflam-
mation, but  are  of  the  scrofulous  kind,  and  therefore  not  so  much  to  our
present  purpose.

It  will  be  difficult  to  divide  abscesses  into  absolutely  distinct  classes  ;
but,  similar  to  inflammation,  they  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds,  the  sound
and  the  unsound  j  for  I  imagine  these  two  first  principles  might  lead  to
the  method  of  cure  j  but  at  present  I  only  mean  to  lay  down  the  principles
of  an  abscess.

The  appearances  which  distinguish  the  sound  from  the  unsound  abscess
are  several ;  although  there  are  many  abscesses  of  particular  kinds  that
give  little  or  no  information.  They  often  differ  from  one  another  in  their
first  appearance,  from  the  kind  of  inflammation,  as  also  in  their  course,
but  more  particularly  in  their  efforts  toward  a  cure.

Thus  we  judge  of  the  consequences  of  the  small-pox,  from  the  first
appearance  of  the  arm  after  innoculation ;  for  if  the  beginning  inflamma-


The  treatment  of  abscesses.  5 1 1

tion  is  small,  pretty  much  circumscribed,  and  of  the  florid  red  with  some
rising,  then  we  may  in  our  own  minds  expect  a  good  kind ;  the  same
upon  the  first  appearance  of  the  small-pox  themselves ;  as  also  the  first
appearance  of  a  chancre,  etc.  or  almost  of  any  other  disease,  either  beginning
with,  or  attended  by  inflammation ;  for  it  is  by  the  kind  of  inflammation
we  are  tojudge  of  the  future  event.

It  might  be  thought  almost  unnecessary  here  to  treat  of  sound  ab-
scesses, because  in  such  our  first  principles  will  readily  take  place,  and
often  little  or  no  assistance  is  required ;  but  abscesses  may  be  attended
with  circumstances  which  may  retard  the  cure,  and  which  have  nothing
to  do  with  unsoundness ;  such  as  extraneous  bodies  in  sound  parts,  and
these  will  most  probably  come  under  our  general  principles  of  cure  ;
that  is,  require  something  to  be  done,  because  they  will,  in  many  cases,
relieve  themselves  of  the  extraneous  matter,  and  then  they  require  but
little  assistance.


I.  THE  PROGRESS  OF  ABSCESSES  TO  THE  SKIN.

What  I  mean  by  a  sound  abscess,  is,  where  there  is  a  sound  consti-
tution, the  parts  affected  having  all  the  disposition  and  powers  to  heal ;
those  dispositions  and  powers  allowed  to  take  place,  which  will  take  place
more  readily  if  in  structutes  of  the  body  which  have  naturally  a  ready  dis-
position to  heal;  so  situated  in  the  body  as  to  be  able  to  support  its  ac-
tions, and  not  of  a  specific  kind,  for  which  we  have  no  cure ;  for  any  spe-
cific disease,  for  which  we  have  a  cure,  will  come  within  our  first  divi-
sion*.

The  inflammation  in  a  sound  and  active  part,  and  of  a  sound  constitu-
tion, in  general  is  pretty  violent,  attended  from  the  very  beginning  with  a
considerable  deal  of  pain-j~,  suppuration  takes  place  quickly;  the  parts

*  Viz.  If  a  veneral  abscess  has  its  specific  quality  destroyed,  it  admits  of  cure  as  readily
as  any  other,  and  the  same  treatment  becomes  necessary.
•J-  Vide  Symptoms  of  Suppurative  Inflammation.


512  The  treatment  of  abscesses,

between  the  abscess  and  the  skin  are  readily  affected,  and  ulceration  goes
on  fast,  the  skin  becomes  of  the  florid  red,  the  matter  comes  soon  to  it,
especially  at  a  point  *,  and  it  bursts ;  all  this  is  done  with  great  rapidity.

These  symptoms  show  such  a  degree  of  health  in  the  constitutio  and
the  parts,  that  little  is  necessary  for  the  surgeon  to  do  in  the  first  stages  of
the  disease.

Poultices  are  recommended  in  such  cases  to  assist  that  disposition
which  the  parts  have  to  give  way  between  the  skin  and  the  abscess ;  but
I  have  already  observed,  that  they  certainly  can  have  no  effect  of  this  kind;
however,  they  have  their  uses  when  the  inflammation  has  reached  the
skin,  for  they  keep  it  soft,  allow  the  cuticle  to  distend,  and  give  way  to
the  swelling  underneath  ;  which  eases  the  patient •>  warmth  and  moisture
act  in  many  cases  as  sedatives  to  our  sensations,  although  not  always;
and  the  distinction  between  those  where  they  give  ease,  and  where  they
rather  give  pain,  I  have  not  been  able  to  make  out.

As  an  abscess  of  the  healthy  kind  requires  but  little  surgical  treatment,
between  its  commencement  and  opening,  it  also  requires  but  very  little
attention  afterwards  for  the  cure,  or  the  restoring  the  parts.

It  depends  on  the  operation  of  the  powers,  or  abilities  the  machine  is
in  possession  of  more  than  any  assistance  the  surgeon  can  give  ;  however,
abscesses  may  have  other  circumstances  attending  them,  besides  soundness
and  unsoundness,  which  will  require  surgical  treatment ;  such  as  the  ex-
traction of  exfoliated  bones,  which  by  their  stay  retard  the  cure.  Far-
ther, as  few  inflammations  arise  in  perfectly  sound  parts  and  constitu-
tions, it  will  generally  be  necessary  to  treat  them  in  some  degree  as  if

*  This  very  appearance  makes  a  material  difference  between  an  abscess  arising  from  brisk
inflammation,  and  one  that  is  slow  in  its  progress;  it  is  fo  remarkable,  that  I  have  seen  this
effect  where  the  matter  was  at  such  distance  as  not  to  be  felt  in  the  least,  and  where  I  have
doubted  whether  there  was  matter  or  not,  almost  conceiving  that  it  preceded  suppuration.
It  certainly  has  this  effect  long  before  there  is  any  distention :  besides  this,  of  a  pointing
taking  place,  there  is  another  effect  of  deep  suppurations  in  consequence  of  inflammation,
which  is  an  cedematQus  appearance,  or  thickening  of  the  superficial  parts.  This  was  taken
notice  of  by  Le  Dran,  in  internal  abscess  of  the  abdomen,  where  adhesions  had  taken  place
between  the  suppurating  part  and  parietes  of  the  abdomen,  and  by  Mr.  Pott,  in  suppuration  of
the  brain  j  whether  in  such  there  is  a  pointing  I  do  not  know.


The  treatment  of  abscesses.  $  1 3

they  had  an  unsound  tendency,  and  also  according  to  other  circumstances;
as  no  abscess  can  set  about  a  cure  till  the  matter  is  discharged,  the  first
process,  therefore,  is  the  discharge  of  the  matter;  but  simply  discharge  is
not  always  sufficient ;  therefore  it  becomes  necessary  to  consider  whe-
ther or  not,  almost  in  every  case  it  would  not  be  proper  to  do  more ;  and
I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  whatever  would  in  general  assist  an  un-
sound abscess,  would  also  do  the  same  to  a  sound  one  ;  but  this  prac-
tice should  be  followed  with  great  caution,  and  not  carried  too  far  ;  for
in  many  it  will  be  perfectly  unnecessary,  therefore  it  should  not  be  prac-
tised ;  in  others  it  will  only  be  necessary  in  part ;  besides,  in  many  cases
it  may  do  harm,  for  many  abscesses  may  have  tolerable  dispositions  under
the  present  treatment,  yet  may  be  in  such  a  state  as  very  readily  to  fall
into  an  unsound  one,  of  some  kind  or  other,  when  too  much  violence  is
committed;  some  having  a  tendency  to  irritability.  On  the  other  hand,
our  practice  may  fall  short  of  the  intention,  as  many  parts  have  a  strong
tendency  to  indolence;  and  if  the  stimulating  method  is  applied  to  the  first
it  would  be  unlucky,  and  vice  versa.

It  will  be  generally  more  in  the  power  of  the  parts  to  perform  a  cure  if
certain  operations  are  done,  which  even  dispose  the  most  active  and  healthy
disposition,  both  of  constitution  and  of  parts  to  heal  sooner;  but  this  does
not  hold  of  the  irritable.  The  first  of  these  operations  will  be  the  mode
of  exposing  abscesses,  by  opening  them  sufficiently,  which  will  make  any
particular  treatment  afterwards,  either  less  necessary,  or  more  easy  of  ap-
plication, if  necessary ;  so  that  the  first  principle  of  the  cure,  even  of  sound
abscesses,  may  be  the  freedom  of  opening  them  in  the  beginning;  however,
the  more  sound  they  are,  there  is  the  less  necessity  for  such  treatment ;
for  if  it  does  not  give  new  powers  to  the  parts,  it  keeps  up  those  of  which
they  are  already  in  possession,  and  obliges  them  to  go  on  towards  a  cure;
for  the  living  principle  in  parts  seems  uneasy  under  the  circumstance
of  exposure,  and  of  having  no  skin,  more  especially  sound  parts,  there-
fore is  roused  to  action,  acting  with  a  view  to  cover  the  part.  It  has  no
alternative ;  and  as  I  have  just  now  observed  that  few  spontaneous  ab-
scesses take  place  from  so  slight  a  cause  as  simple  violence  produces,  there
must  be  a  something  to  be  got  the  better  of. This  is,  perhaps,  as  well

3  U


514  The  treatment  of  abscesses

illustrated  in  the  fistula  in  ano,  as  in  any  other;  for  without  dividing  along
the  gut  to  the  bottom,  which  is  where  the  disease  is,  and  where  the  abscess
formed,  it  seldom  or  never  heals ;  however,  all  this  will  be  according  to
circumstances,  for  if  the  suppuration  is  quick  and  comes  fast  to  the  skin,
the  parts  will  heal  in  the  same  proportion  more  readily,  either  with  or
without  opening;  therefore,  in  such  instances,  it  is  not  so  necessary  to
open  freely,  though  as  it  is  not  the  method  nature  commonly  takes,  it  has
by  many  been  objected  to;  but  let  us  observe,  that  where  an  abscess  opens
or  itself  by  a  small  orifice,  the  parts  are  commonly  very  sound  where  the
opening  is,  although  the  bottom  may  be  diseased ;  but  if  it  be  diseased
where  it  opens,  then  ulceration  commonly  takes  place  at  this  orifice,
which  effects  what  should  be  done  by  art.  To  illustrate  that  a  large  open
ing  is  not  detrimental  to  the  healing  of  a  sore,  let  us  observe  that  there  is
no  difference  between  an  abscess  opened  largely,  and  a  wound  in  conse-
quence of  an  operation  which  is  not  healed  by  the  first  intention,  such  as
an  amputation,  etc.  for  in  such  cases  there  is  a  breach  in  the  continuity  ot
the  parts  communicating  with  the  skin,  as  large,  if  not  larger,  than  at
the  bottom,  and  it  heals  readily  ;  we  endeavour,  however,  to  remedy  this
as  much  as  possible  by  saving  skin,  which,  in  some  degree,  answers  to  a
small  opening  ;  and  we  may  also  observe  that  where  there  is  only  a  small
opening  leading  to  a  large  cavity,  which  is  to  suppurate,  as  in  the  case  of
an  hydrocele  treated  by  a  caustic  or  sea  ton,  (which,  when  come  to  sup-
puration, is  in  all  respects  similar  to  an  abscess)  that  the  whole  so  far  as
suppuration  extends,  heals  equally  well  with  those  that  are  wholly  ex-
posed ;  but  I  do  not  know  that  they  do  better  ;  and  where  the  sack  is  not
very  sound,  I  do  believe  they  do  not  do  so  well,  as  when  more  fully  en-
larged; and  we  may  also  observe,  that  opening  largely  in  the  scrotum  is
not  subject  to  the  same  inconvenience  as  in  many  other  parts,  for  here  there
is  so  much  loose  skin  as  to  remove  any  retardment  to  the  healing  that
might  arise  in  other  parts  from  opening  largely  ;  however,  after  viewing
this  in  every  light,  there  seems  but  little  advantage  gained  in  the  one  way
or  the  other.  The  opening  more  or  less  freely  must  be  directed  by  some
other  circumstance,  by  which  the  surgeon  must  be  guided.

But  as  most  abscesses  owe  some  of  their  size  to  distention,  and  as  this


'•The  treatment  of  abscesses.  5-15

will  be  more  or  less  according  to  circumstances,  it  becomes  necessary  to
distinguish  the  one  kind  from  the  other,  for  the  one  will  require  a  freer
opening  than  the  other.

Abscesses  in  soft  parts  will  owe  more  of  their  size  to  distention  than
those  in  hard  parts,  such  as  bones,  joints,  etc.

Abscesses  in  soft  parts,  not  connected  with  the  hard,  will  owe  more  of
their  size  to  distention  than  those  in  soft  parts  connected  with  the  hurd  ;
for  instance,  an  abscess  in  the  calf  of  the  leg,  thick  of  the  thigh,  buttock,
etc.  will  owe  more  of  its  size  to  distention  than  an  abscess  on  the  shin-
bone,  on  the  head,  etc.  Therefore  an  abscess,  whose  size  is  in  some  de-
gree owing  to  distention,  need  not  be  so  freely  opened  as  one  that  is  not  ;
because,  when  the  distention  is  taken  off  by  the  discharge  of  the  pus,  the
parts  will  contract,  or  fall  into  their  natural  position,  which  cannot  &o
easily  happen  in  the  other  case.  Besides,  the  granulations  will  also  be
allowed  to  contract  in  the  one  much  more  than  the  other.  However,
we  find  many  abscesses  healing  very  readily  without  any  other  opening
than  what  was  at  first  made  by  ulceration,  and  this  will  be  more  readily
effected  if  the  abscess  has  been  allowed  to  break  of  itself ;  which,  I  sliaU
now  more  fully  explain.


II.  OF  THE  TIME  WHEN  ABSCESSES  SHOULD  BE  OPENED.

The  natural  process  that  abscesses  are  obliged  to  go  through  for  the
discharge  of  their  contents  is  in,  general  the  most  proper,  and  it  is,  so  much
so,  as  to  be  in  most  cases  allowed  to  go  on  j  and  this  process  becomes
more  necessary  in  unsound  abscesses  than  in  sound  ones,,  as  it  exposes
them  more  fully,  from  ulceration  having  destroyed  more  of  the  parts  be-
tween the  seat  of  the  abscess  and  the  external  parts.

As  abscesses,  wherever  formed,  must  increase  as  thev  approach  the  sfdwfe,
and  therefore  increase  that  part  of  their  cavity  next  to  the  skin,  fasterjban
at  the  bottom,  so  that  they  become  in  some  degree  tapering  towards  the;


5 1 6  TAe  treatment  of  abscesses,

bottom,  with  a  wide  part  immediately  under  the  skin,  and  this  will  be
more  or  less  so,  according  to  its  depth,  its  meeting  with  different  sub-
substances,  which  give  a  resistance  to  the  pus,  or  its  coming  fast  or
slowly  to  the  skin.

This  shape  of  the  abscess,  when  allowed  to  take  place  is  well  adapted
for  healing,  for  it  puts  the  bottom,  which  is  the  seat  of  the  disease,  more
upon  a  footing  with  the  mouth  of  the  abscess,  than  it  otherwise  could  be.
When  these  two  are  not  well  proportioned,  there  is  a  retardment  in  the
cure ;  for  as  the  bottom,  or  part  where  the  abscess  begun,  is  more  or  less  in
a  diseased  state,  and  as  the  parts  between  the  seat  of  the  abscess  and  the  ex-
ternal surface  are  sound  parts,  having  only  allowed  a  passage  for  the  pus,
they  of  course  have  a  stronger  disposition  to  heal  than  the  bottom  has ;
and  we  commonly  find  this  to  be  the  case.

If  there  could  be  made  at  any  time  a  difference  in  the  powers  of  healing
between  the  mouth  of  the  abscess  and  its  bottom,  it  ought  to  be  made  the
most  defective  at  the  mouth  of  the  abscess,  as  that  part  is  the  easiest  of
management.  To  have  this  effect  produced  as  much  as  possible,  abscesses
should  be  allowed  to  go  on  till  they  break  or  open  of  themselves  •  for  al-
though abscesses  in  general  only  open  by  a  small  orifice,  more  especially
when  sound,  yet  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  skin  over  the  general  cavity
of  the  abscess  is  in  such  cases  so  much  thinned  as  to  have  but  very  little
disposition  to  heal,  and  is  often  so  much  so,  as  to  ulcerate  and  make
a  free  opening;  and  if  it  does  not,  an  opening  is  more  easily  procured  by
art.

It  is  a  curious  circumstance  in  the  ceconomy  of  abscess,  that  those  that
have  the  best  dispositions  to  heal  come  fastest  to  the  skin  ;  the  lead
takes  place  almost  at  a  point,  it  does  not  swell  so  much  into  that  conical
form,  above-described,  not  being  under  the  same  necessity  in  point  of
healing,  and  it  opens  by  a  small  orifice ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  there
is  an  indolence  in  the  progress  of  the  abscess,  it  will  spread  more,  or  dis-
tend the  surrounding  parts  from  their  not  being  so  firmly  united  by  in-
flammation in  the  one,  as  they  were  in  the  other ;  nor  will  ulceration  so
readily  take  the  lead,  and  it  will  come  to  the  skin  by  a  broad  surface,  so
06  to  thin  a  large  portion  of  the  skin. But  abscesses  should  only  be  al-


¥he  treatment  of  abscesses.  5 1 7

lowed  to  open  of  themselves  where  the  confinement  of  the  matter  can  do
no  mischief,  which  will  generally  be  in  such  as  ought  to  heal  up  from  the
bottom  ;  but  in  the  reduction  of  circumscribed  cavities  to  the  state  of  an
abscess,  it  will  be  in  most  cases  proper  to  open  early,  as  abscesses  of  the
abdomen  or  thorax  ;  those  within  the  cranium ;  those  of  the  eye  ;  and
those  in  joints.

In  the  abscess  of  the  tunica  vaginalis  testis  it  would  be  better  to  let  it
open  of  itself,  as  it  should  be  allowed  to  heal  up  from  the  bottom,  similar
to  an  abscess  in  the  cellular  membrane.

If  it  should  be  unnecessary  to  open  freely,  or  if  from  circumstances  this
should  be  impossible,  it  will  in  either  case  be  very  proper  to  make  the
opening  which  is  necessary  or  practicable  at  the  most  depending  part,  with
a  view  to  remove  the  pressure  arising  from  the  matter  collected,  which  is
commonly  called  confinement  or  lodgment  of  matter,  which  will  other-
wise happen  ;  for  I  shall  observe,  that  a  very  small  pressure  on  that  side
of  the  abscess,  next  to  the  skin,  may  produce  ulceration  there;  and
although  this  pressure  in  many  cases  might  not  be  so  great  as  to  produce
ulceration  at  the  bottom  of  the  abscess,  yet  it  may  be  so  great  as  to  pre-
vent granulations  from  forming  on  that  side,  and  thereby  retard  the  cure,
as  no  union  can  take  place  but  by  means  of  granulations ;  or  if  it  should
not  prevent  granulations  from  forming,  yet  it  might  retard  their  growth,  so
that  the  cure  would  be  more  tedious  than  if  the  pressure  did  not  exist;  and
this  retardation  will  be  greatest  where  the  pressure  is  the  greatest,  which
will  be  at  the  most  depending  part  of  the  abscess;  so  that  its  upper  part
will  readily  heal  to  a  small  point,  and  be  reduced  to  the  state  of  a  fistula.

But  it  is  not  always  possible  to  open  at  the  most  depending  part  of  an
abscess,  and  when  possible,  often  very  improper.  When  impossible,  per-
haps, nothing  more  can  be  done  than  to  evacuate  the  matte;  as  often  as
necessary,  and  by  gentle  pressure  keep  the  sides  of  the  sinus  together,  to
allow  their  growing  into  one  another;  but  the  situation  will  not  in  all
cases  allow  this.

The  inexpediency  of  opening  at  the  most  depending  part  of  an  abscess
will  in  general  arise  from  the  distance  between  the  matter  and  the  skin  at


5 1 8  The  treatment  of  abscesses.

this  part,  for  if  the  abscess  is  pretty  deeply  seated,  and  points  at  a  part  su-
perior to  that  of  its  seat,  which  it  sometimes  does  from  the  parts  above,
being  such  as  more  easily  give  way,  in  such  a  case  it  will  be  proper  to
open  it  where  it  points  j  for  instance,  if  an  abscess  is  formed  in  the  centre
of  the  breast,  and  opens  at  the  upper  part,  (which  is  often  the  case)  it
would  be  improper  to  cut  through  the  lower  half,  to  allow  the  matter  to
pass  that  way,  although  it  may  make  its  way  there  afterwards,  from  the
pressure  of  the  matter,  as  was  just  now  observed ;  which  I  have  seen
happen  more  than  once.

If  an  abscess  forms  on  the  upper  part  of  the  foot,  it  is  improper  to  open
through  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  get  at  the  most  depending  part  of  the  ab-
scess ;  for  besides  cutting  such  a  depth  of  sound  parts,  which  is  an  ob-
jection, it  would  be  destroying  a  great  many  useful  parts.  It  would  also
be  impossible  to  keep  it  open,  the  sound  parts  having  such  a  disposition  to
heal  ;  and  it  would  be  contradictory  to  my  first  position,  which  was  to
have  parts  as  thin  as  possible  before  they  are  opened,  in  order  to  destroy  the
healing  disposition  there*.

As  in  such  cases,  the  place  where  the  matter  threatens  to  open  a  passage
for  Jtjsejf,  is  where  the  future  opening  is  most  likely  to  be,  and  as  the  situ-
ation is  disadvantageous  to  the  healing  of  the  seat  of  the  abscess,  it  will  be
more  necessary  to  let  it  first  open  of  itself,  because  the  abscess  just  under
the  skin  will  be  increased  in  width,  as  was  observed,  and  then  to  dilate  it
as  freely  as  may  be  thought  necessary;  for  by  allowing  abscesses  to  "open
qf  themselves,  the  opening  has  a  less  disposition  to  heal  than  if  it  had
.been  opened  early  by  art,  therefore  is  more  desirable  in  such  situations.

*  One  would  .imagine  that  this  las,t  caution  was  hardly  necessary;  but  I  once  saw  a  case
v.'i'-vc  it  was  advised  upon  the  general  principles  of  opening  in  the  most  depending  part.


The  treatment  of  abscesses.  5 1 9

III.  OF  THE  METHODS  OF  OPENING  ABSCESSES,  AND  TREATING

THEM  AFTERWARDS.

All  abscesses,  I  have  already  observed,  will  open  of  themselves,  ex-
cepting where  the  matter  is  re-absorbed;  and  I  have  also  observed,  that  in
general  they  ought  to  be  allowed  to  open  of  themselves,  excepting  some
particular  circumstance  calls  for  an  early  opening;  but  when  the  skin  over
the  abscess  is  very  thin,  it  is  not  of  so  much  consequence  whether  it  is
allowed  to  open  of  itself,  or  is  opened  at  first  by  art.

In  large  abscesses  it  will  generally  be  necessary  to  open  them  by  art,
whether  they  have  opened  of  themselves  or  not ;  for  the  natural  opening
will  seldom  be  sufficient  for  the  complete  cure  ;  and  although  it  may  be
sufficient  for  the  free  discharge  of  the  matter,  yet  they  will  heal  much
more  readily  if  sufficiently  opened;  for  the  thin  skin  over  the  cavity  gra-
nulates but  indifferently,  and  therefore  unites  but  slowly  with  the  parts
underneath.  Where  the  skin  is  very  thin,  loose,  and  much  of  it,  it  may
be  necessary  to  remove  an  oval  piece  from  the  centre,  where  it  is  generally
thinnest.  A  question  naturally  occurs,  in  what  way  should  these  be
opened  ?

The  methods  recommended  and  used  are  by  incision  and  caustic.  In-
cision may  or  may  not  remove  a  piece  of  the  skin,  but  the  caustic  always
will.  I  believe,  as  a  general  practice,  there  is  no  preference  to  be  given  to
either;  but  under  circumstances,  the  incision  is  best;  for  instance,  where
there  is  but  little  skin  to  spare,  as  on  the  shin,  scalp,  etc.  but  where  there
is  skin  to  spare,  either  arising  from  situation,  as  in  the  scrotum,  or  where
a  great  deal  of  skin  was  thinned,  as  in  a  great  extent  of  inflammation  and
suppuration  under  the  skin,  a  caustic  will  answer  equally  well ;  therefore
I  should  be  very  apt  to  be  directed  by  my  patients,  if  they  had  any  fears  or
opinions  about  the  matter;  for  some  have  a  terror  at  the  idea  of  a  cutting
instrument,  while  others  hate  the  idea  of  a  continued  pain.  If  a  caustic
is  approved  of,  then  I  should  prefer  the  lapis  infernalis,  or  scepticus,  to  the
common  caustic  ;  the  method  of  application  I  described,  when  speaking  of
the  methods  of  producing  death  by  art:  but  if  left  entirely  to  myself,  I
should  prefer  the  incision  to  the  caustic,  because  it  is  immediately  done.


520  The  treatment  of  abscesses.

If  an  abscess  is  allowed  to  open  of  itself,  and this  opening  is  not  en-
larged, no  dressing  is  necessary,  nor  any  thing  but  to  keep  the  surround-
ing parts  clean; the continuation  of  the  poultice,  which  was  before  ap-
plied, (if  convenient)  is  perhaps  as  good  an  application  as any  ; and
when  the  tenderness  arising  from  inflammation  is  over,  then  lint and  a
pledget  ;  but  an  abscess  opened  by  a  cutting  instrument,  may  be  called
a  mixed  case,  being  both  a  wound  and  a  sore,  and  is  more  of  the  nature
of  a  fresh  wound  in  proportion  to  the  thickness  of  the  parts  cut ;  and
therefore  the  dressing  should  be  somewhat  similar  to that  of  a  fresh
wound. It  is  necessary  that  something  should  be  put  into  the  opening,
to  .keep  it  from  healing  by  the  first  intention  ;  if  it  is  lint,  it  should  be
dipt  in  some  salve,  which  will  answer  better  than  lint  alone,  as  it  will
allow  of  more  early  extraction ;  for  such  sores  should  be  dressed  the  se-
cond time  the  next  day,  or  the  second  day  at  latest ;  because  there  is  a
suppurating  sore  at  the  bottom,  and  the  pus  requires  being  discharged
much  sooner  than  if  wholly  either  a  fresh  wound  or  a  circumscribed  ca-
vity, which  is  to  suppurate,  as  the  tunica  vaginalis  in  the  case  of  the  ra-
dical cure  of  the  hydrocele. This  pus  keeps  the  lint  (if  dressed  with
lint)  moist,  so  that  it  does  not  dry,  as  in  fresh  wounds  in  common. When
the  cut  edges  have  come  to  suppuration,  which  will  be  in  a  few  days,
then  the  dressing  afterwards  may  be  as  simple  as  possible,  for  nature  will  in
general  perform  the  cure.

If  the  abscess  has  been  opened  by  caustic,  and  the  slough  is  either  cut
out,  or  allowed  to  slough  out,  then  it  is  to  be  considered  as  an  entire  sup-
purating sore,  and  may  be  dressed  accordingly;  perhaps  dry  lint  is  as  good
as  any  thing,  till  the  nature  of  the  sore  is  known ;  if  of  a  good  kind,  the  same
dressing  may  be  continued,  but  if  not,  then  it  must  be  dressed  accordingly;
for  nature  cannot  always  perform  a  cure;  for  parts  which  were  at  first
sound,  or  appeared  so,  from  their  readiness  to  go  through  the  first  stages,
will  subsequently  take  on  every  species  of  disease,  whether  from  indo-
lence, from  irritability,  from  scrofulous,  or  other  dispositions  which  in  some
cases  are  produced  from  the  nature  of  the  parts  diseased,  such  as  bone,
ligament,  etc.


[  52i  1


PART  IV.

CHAPTER  I.
OF  GUN-SHOT  BOUNDS.


VJun-shot  wounds  may  be  said  to  be  an  effect  of  a  modern  improve-
ment in  offence  and  defence,  unknown  in  the  former  mode  of  war,  which
is  still  practised  where  European  improvements  are  not  known ;  and  it  is
curious  to  observe  that  fire-arms  and  spirits  are  the  first  of  our  refine-
ments that  are  adopted  in  uncivilized  countries;  and,  indeed,  for  ages  they
have  been  the  only  objects  that  have  been  at  all  noticed  or  sought  after
by  rude  nations.  It  was  not  till  the  fourteenth  century  that  gunpowder
was  made,  or  rather  compounded ;  but  it  was  not,  till  afterwards,  applied
to  the  purpose  of  projecting  bodies.  But  even  now,  the  wounds  received
in  war  are  not  all  gun-shot  wounds :  some,  therefore,  are  similar  in  many
respects  to  those  received  in  former  times.

The  knowledge  of  the  effect  of  gunpowder,  and  its-  application  to  the
art  of  war,  or  the  projection  of  bodies  for  the  destruction  of  men,  has  been
in  some  degree  accompanied  by  improvements  in  the  arts  and  sciences
in  general,  and  among  others,  that  of  surgery,  in  which,  art,  the  heal-
ing of  wounds  so  produced,  makes  a  material  part.  In  France,  more
especially,  the  study  of  both  were  carried  to  considerable  lengths;  but
though  the  art  of  destruction  has  been  there  improved  and  illustrated  by
writings,  it  is  rather  surprising  that  the  art  of  healing  should  not  have
been  equally  illustrated  in  the  same  manner.  Little  has  been  written  on
this  subect,  although,  perhaps,  when  we  take  every  circumstance  into

3*


?22  Of  gun-shot  wounds.

consideration,  it  requires  particular  discussion;  and  what  has  been  written
is  so  superficial,  that  it  deserves  but  little  attention.  Practice,  not  pre-
cept, seemed  to  be  the  guide  of  all  who  studied  in  this  branch;  and,  if  we
observe  the  practice  hitherto  pursued,  we  shall  find  it  very  confined,  being
hardly  reduced  to  the  common  rules  of  surgery,  and  therefore  it  was  hardly
necessary  for  a  man  to  be  a  surgeon  to  practice  in  the  army.


I.  THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  GUN-SHOT  WOUNDS  AND  COMMON

WOUNDS.

Gun-shot  wounds  are  named,  as  is  evident,  from  the  manner  in  which
they  are  produced.  From  the  frequency  of  their  happening  in  the  time
of  battle  to  a  set  of  men  appropriated  for  war,  both  by  sea  and  land  :  and
from  the  appointment  of  particular  surgeons  for  their  cure,  they  have  been
considered  apart  from  other  wounds,  and  are  now  become  almost  a  dis-
tinct branch  of surgery.

Gun-shot  wounds  are  made  by  the  projection  of  hard  obtuse  bodies,  the
greatest  number  of  which  are  musket-balls ;  for  cannon-balls,  pieces  of
shells  and  stones  from  ramparts  in  sieges,  or  splinters  of  wood,  etc.  when
on  board  of  a  ship  in  an  engagement  at  sea,  can  hardly  have  their  effects
ranked  among  gun-shot  wounds,  they  will  come  in  more  properly  with
wounds  in  general.  As  the  wounds  themselves  made  by  those  very  dif-
ferent modes  will  in  general  differ  yery  considerably;  any  peculiarity  that
may  be  necessary  in  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  from  those  made
by  cannon-balls,  shells,  etc.  or  even  common  wounds,  will  generally  be-
long to  those  made  by  musket-balls.

The  whole  of  gun-shot  wounds  will  come  within  the  definition  of  ac-
cidents. They  are  a  recent  violence  committed  on  the  body;  but  they
often  become  the  cause  of,  or  degenerate  into  a  thousand  complaints,
which  are  the  objects  of  surgery  or  physic,  many  of  which  are  common  to
accidents  in  general,  and  to  many  other  diseases;  of  this  kind  are  abscesses,
ulcerating  bones,  fistulse ;  but  some  are  peculiar  to  gun-shot  wounds,  as


Of  gun-shot  wounds.  523'

calculi  in  the  bladder  from  the  ball  entering  that  viscus,  consumption
from  wounds  in  the  lungs,  which  I  believe  rarely  happens  •  for  I  cannot
say  I  ever  saw  a  case  where  such  an  effect  took  place.  But  it  is  the  recent
state  in  which  they  are  distinguished,  and  in  which  they  are  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  distinct  object  of  treatment.

Wounds  of  this  kind  vary  from  one  another,  which  will  happen  ac-
cording to  circumstances ;  these  variations  will  be  in  general  according  to
the  kind  of  body  projected,  the  velocity  of  the  body,  with  the  nature  and
peculiarities  of  the  parts  injured.  The  kind  of  body  projected,  I  have  ob-
served, is  principally  musket-balls,  sometimes  cannon-balls,  sometimes
pieces  of  broken  shells,  and  very  often  on  board  of  ship,  splinters  of
wood.  Indeed,  the  effects  of  cannon-balls  on  different  parts  of  the  ship,
either  the  containing  parts,  as  the  hull  of  the  ship  itself,  or  the  contained,
are  the  principal  causes  of  wounds  in  the  sailor;  for  a  cannon-ball  must
go  through  the  timbers  of  the  ship  before  it  can  do  more  execution  than
simply  as  a  ball,  (which  makes  it  a  spent  ball)  and  which  splinters  the
inside  of  the  ship  very  considerably,  and  moves  other  bodies  in  the  ship,
neither  of  which  it  would  do  if  moving  with  sufficient  velocity;  musket
or  cannon-balls  seldom  doing  immediate  injury  to  those  of  that  profession.
The  wounds  produced  by  the  three  last  bodies  will  be  more  li;  e  many
common  and  violent  accidents,  attended  with  much  contusion  and  lace-
ration of  parts.

Gun-shot  wounds,  from  whatever  cause,  whether  from  a  musket-ball,
cannon-ball,  or  shell,  etc.  are  in  general  contused  wounds,  from  which
contusion  there  is  most  commonly  a  part  of  the  solids  surrounding  the
wound  deadened,  as  the  projecting  body  forced  its  way  through  these  solids,
which  is  afterwards  thrown  off  in  form  of  a  slough,  and  which  prevents
such  wounds  from  healing  by  the  first  intention,  or  by  means  of  the  ad-
hesive inflammation,  from  which  circumstance  most  of  them  must  be  al-
lowed to  suppurate.  This  does  not  always  take  place  equally  in  every
gun-shot  wound,  nor  in  every  part  of  the  same  wound;  and  the  difference
commonly  arises  from  the  variety  in  the  velocity  of  the  body  projected  •  for
we  find  in  many  cases,  where  the  ball  has  passed  with  little  velocity,
which  is  often  the  case  with  balls,  even  at  their  entrance,  but  most  com-


r  2  &  Of  gun-shot  wounds.

monly  at  the  part  last  wounded  by  the  ball,  that  the  wounds  are  often
healed  by  the  first  intention.

Gun-shot  wounds,  from  the  circumstance  of  commonly  having  a  part
killed,  in  general  do  not  inflame  so  readily  as  those  from  other  accidents ;
this  backwardness  to  inflame  will  be  in  the  proportion  that  the  quantity  of
deadened  parts  bear  to  the  extent  of  the  wound  ;  from  which  circum-
stance the  inflammation  is  later  in  coming  on,  more  especially  when  a
ball  passes  through  a  fleshy  part  with  great  velocity  ;  because  there  will
be  a  great  deal  deadened,  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  wound ;  there-
fore inflammation  in  gun-shot  wounds  is  less  than  in  wounds  in  general,
where  the  same  quantity  of  mischief  has  been  done;  and  this,  also,  is  in
an  inverse  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  the  parts  deadened,  as  I  have  al-
ready explained  in  my  introduction  to  inflammation,  viz.  that  inflamma-
tion is  less,  where  parts  are  to  slough,  than  where  parts  have  been  destroyed
by  other  mean's.  On  the  other  hand,  where  the  ball  has  fractured  some
bone,  -which  fracture  in  the  bone  has  done  considerable  mischief  to  the
soft  parts,  independent  of  the  ball,  then  there  will  be  nearly  as  quick  in-
flammation as  in  a  compound  fracture  of  the  same  bone,  because  the
deadened  part  bears  no  proportion  to  the  laceration  or  wound  in  general.

From  this  circumstance,  of  a  part  being  often  deadened,  a  gun-shot
wound  is  often  not  completely  understood  at  first ;  for  it  is  at  first,  in
many  cases,  impossible  to  know  what  parts  are  killed,  whether  bone,  ten-
don, or  soft  part,  till  the  deadened  part  has  separated,  which  often  makes
it  a  much  more  complicated  wound  than  at  first  was  known  or  imagined;
:for  it  very  often  happens,  that  some  viscus,  or  a  part  of  some  viscus,  or  a
part  of  a  large  artery,  or  even  a  bone,  has  been  killed  by  the  blow,  which
does  not  show  itself  till  the  slough  comes  away.  If,  for  instance,  it  is  a
part  of  an  intestine  that  has  received  a  contusion,  so  as  to  kill  it,  and  which
is. to  slough,  a  new  symptom  will  most  probably  appear  from  the  sloughs
being  separated,  the  contents  of  the  intestine  will  most  probably  come
through  the  wound;  and  probably  the  same  thing  will  happen  when  any
other  containing  viscus  is  in  part  deadened;  but  those  cases  will  not  be  so
dangerous,  as  if  the  same  loss  had  been  produced  at  first,  for  by  this  time  all
/  oaimunication  will  be  cut  oft"  between  the  containing  and  contained  parts;


Of  gun-shot  wounds.  525

fror  will  it  be  so  dangerous  as  when  a  considerable  blood-vessel  is  deadened ;
for  in  this  case,  when  the  slough  comes  off,  the  blood,  getting  a  free
passage  into  the  wound,  as  also  out  of  it,  probably  death  will  immedi-
ately follow.  If  this  artery  is  internal,  nothing  can  be  done  ;  if  in  an  ex-
tremity, the  vessel  may  be  either  taken  up,  or  probably  amputation  may
be  necessary  to  save  the  person's  life ;  therefore  an  early  attention  should
be  paid  to  accidents,  where  such  an  event  is  possible.  In  case  of  a  bone
being  deadened,  an  exfoliation  takes  place.

Gun-shot  wounds  are  often  such  as  do  much  mischief  to  vital  parts,  the
effects  of  which  will  be  according  to  the  nature  of  the  parts  wounded,
and  the  violence  of  the  wound;  and  also  to  parts,  the  soundness  of  which
are  essential  either  to  the  health  of  the  whole,  or  to  the  uses  of  the  parts
wounded  ;  such  as  some  viscus,  whose  contents  are  voided  through  the
opening,  or  joints,  the  disposition  of  which  is  slow  to  heal,  and  whose
uses  are  impeded  when  healed.

Gun-shot  wounds  often  admit  of  being  classed  with  the  small  and  deep
seated  wounds,  which  are  always  of  a  particular  kind  respecting  the  cure.

The  variety  of  circumstances  attending  gun-shot  wounds  is  almost  end-
less ;  the  following  case  may'be  given  as  an  example.

An  officer  in  the  navy  was  wounded  by  a  pistol-ball,  in  the  right  side,
about  the  last  rib;  it  entered  about  five  inches  from  the  navel,  and  ap-
peared on  the  inside  of  the  skin  about  two  inches  from  the  spinal  process,
having  passed,  I  believe,  in  among  the  abdominal  muscles.  The  only  re-
remarkable  thing  that  occurred  was,  that  the  cellular  membrane  for  some
way  about  the  passage  of  the  ball  was  oedemaious,  and  when  I  cut  out  the
ball,  air  came  out  with  it.


II.  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  EFFECTS  ARISING  FROM  THE  DIFFERENCE
IN  THE  VELOCITY  OF  THE  BALL.

Many  of  the  varieties  between  one  gun-shot  wound  and  another,  arise
from  the  difference  in  the  velocity  of  the  body  projected-,  and  they  arc
principally  the  following.


526  Of  gun-shot  wounds.

If  the  velocity  of  the  ball  is  small,  then  the  mischief  is  less  in  all  of
them  ;  there  is  not  so  great  a  chance  of  their  being  compounded  with  frac-
tures of  the  bones,  etc.  but  if  the  velocity  is  sufficient  to  break  the  bone
it  hits,  the  bone  will  be  much  more  splintered  than  if  the  velocity  had
been  very  considerable-  for  where  the  velocity  is  very  great,  the  ball,  as  it
were,  takes  a  piece  out;  however,  all  this  will  also  vary  according  to  the
hardness  of  the  bone.  In  a  hard  bone  the  splinters  will  be  the  most  fre-
quent.

When  the  velocity  is  small,  the  direction  of  the  wound  produced  by
the  ball,  will,  in  common,  not  be  so  strait,  therefore  its  direction  not  so
readily  ascertained,  arising  from  the  easy  turn  of  the  ball.

When  the  velocity  is  small,  the  deadened  part  or  slough  is  always  less ;
for  with  a  small  velocity,  a  ball  would  seem  only  to  divide  parts,  while
when  the  velocity  is  great,  the  contrary  must  happen  ;  from  this  circum-
stance it  is,  that  the  slough  is  larger  at  that  orifice  where  the  ball  enters
than  where  it  comes  out ;  and  if  the  ball  meets  with  a  great  deal  of  resist-
ance in  its  paflage  through,  there  will  very- probably  be  no  slough  at  all
at  its  exit,  which  will  be  therefore  only  a  lacerated  wound.

The  greater  the  velocity  of  the  ball,  the  cleaner  it  wounds  the  parts,
so  much  so  as  almost  to  be  similar  to  a  cut  with  a  (harp  instrument ;  from
which  circumstance  it  might  be  imagined,  that  there  should  be  a  smaller
slough  ;  but  I  suspect,  that  a  certain  velocity  given  to  the  best  cutting  in-
strument, would  produce  a  slough  on  the  cut  edges  of  the  divided  parts ;
for  the  divided  parts  not  giving  way  equally  to  the  velocity  of  the  dividing
body,  must  of  course  be  proportionally  bruised.

Gun-shot  wounds  are  attended  with  less  bleeding  than  most  others;
however,  some  will  be  attended  with  this  symptom  more  than  others,
even  in  the  same  part ;  this  arises  from  the  manner  in  which  the  wound  is
produced:  bleeding  arises  from  a  vessel  being  cut  or  broken;  but  the  free-
dom of  bleeding  arises  from  the  manner  in  which  this  is  done  :  if  the  ar-
tery is  cut  directly  across,  and  it  is  done  by  a  ball  passing  with  a  consider-
able velocity,  it  will  bleed  pretty  freely ;  if  bruised,  and  in  some  degree
torn,  then  it  will  bleed  less.  When  the  velocity  of  the  ball  is  small,  the
vessels  will  be  principally  torn,  for  they  will  have  time  to  stretch  before


Of  gun-shot  wounds.  527

the  continuity  of  their  parts  gives  way  ;  but  if  it  is  great,  they  will  bleed
more  freely,  because  velocity  will  make  up  for  want  of  sharpness.

According  to  the  velocity  of  the  ball  so  is  the  direction.  When  the  ve-
locity is  great,  the  direction  of  the  ball  will  be  in  general  more  in  a  strait
line  than  when  it  is  small;  for  under  such  circumstances  the  ball  more
easily  overcomes  obstructions,  and  therefore  passes  on  in  its  first  di-
rection.

Velocity  in  the  ball  makes  parts  less  capable  of  heah'ng,  than  when  it
moves  with  a  small  velocity ;  therefore  gun-shot  wounds  in  pretty  thick
parts  are  in  general  later  of  healing  at  the  orifice  where  the  ball  enters,
than  at  the  orifice  where  it  passes  out;  because  it  becomes  in  some  degree
a  spent  ball,  the  part  having  less  slough,  being  only  torn,  which  will  often
admit  of  being  healed  by  the  first  intention.

In  cases  where  the  ball  passes  through,  and  in  such  a  direction  as  to  have
one  orifice  more  depending  than  the  other,  I  have  always  found  that  the
depending  orifice  healed  soonest,  and  more  certainly  so  if  the  ball  came
out  that  way,  and  also  if  the  ball  had  been  pretty  much  spent  in  its  pas-
sage; therefore  it  will  require  art  to  keep  the  depending  orifice  open,  if
thought  necessary  ;  but  this  circumstance  of  its  being  a  spent  ball,  will  not
always  happen,  because  if  the  person  is  near  the  gun  when  fired,  the  velo-
city of  the  ball  will  be  very  little  diminished  in  its  progress  through  the  soft
parts;  and  therefore  it  will  have  nearly  the  same  velocity  on  both  sides.

This  fact  of  the  lower  orifice  healing  soonest,  is  common  to  all  wounds,
and  I  believe  is  owing' to  the  tumefaction  which  generally  arises  from  the
extravasated  fluid  always  descending  to  the  lower  part,  and  being  retarded
at  the  lower  orifice,  it  is  as  it  were  stopped  there,  and  presses  the  sides
of  the  wound  together,  obliging  it  to  heal,  if  the  parts  have  not  been
deadened;  this  is  evidently  the  case  after  the  introduction  of  the  seaton  in
the  hydrocele,  especially  if  the  two  orifices  of  the  seaton  are  at  some
distance;  but  in  the  hydrocele  there  is  a  more  striking  reason  for  it ;  for
in  this  disease,  the  extravasated  fluids  are  wholly  detained  about  the  lower
orifice,  as  there  is  no  depending  part  for  the  fluid  to  descend  to.


528  Of  Gun-shot  wounds.

III.  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF  GUN-SHOT  WOUNDS.

Gun-shot  wounds  may  be  divided  into  the  simple,  and  the  com-
pound. Simple,  when  the  ball  passes  into,  or  through  the  soft  parts  only:
the  compound  will  be  according  to  the  other  parts  wounded.

The  first  species  of  compound,  are  those  attended  with  fractures  of  the
bones,  or  with  the  wound  of  some  large  artery.

The  second  species  of  compound  wounds  is,  where  the  ball  penetrates
into  some  of  the  larger  circumscribed  cavities.  This  last,  or  penetrating
wound,  may  be  doubly  complicated,  or  may  be  divided  into  two.  First,
simply  penetrating  ;  and,  secondly,  where  some  viscus  or  contained  part,
as  the  brain,  lungs,  heart,  abdominal  visera,  etc.  is  injured  ;  all  which
cases  will  be  taken  notice  of  in  their  proper  places.


[  529  ]

CHAPTER  II.
OF  THE  TREATMENT  OF  GUN-SHOT  WOUNDS.


It  has  been  hitherto  recommended,  and  universally  practised  by  almost
every  surgeon,  to  open  immediately  upon  their  being  received,  or  as  soon
as  possible,  the  external  orifice  of  all  gun-shot  wounds  made  by  musket-
balls  ;  so  much  has  this  practice  been  recommended,  that  they  have  made
no  discrimination  between  one  gun-shot  wound  and  another ;  this  would
appear  to  have  arisen,  and  to  be  still  continued,  from  an  opinion  that
gun-shot  wounds  have  a  something  peculiar  to  them,  and  of  course  are
different  from  all  other  wounds,  and  that  this  peculiarity  is  removed  by
the  opening ;  I  own  that  I  do  not  see  any  peculiarity.  The  most  pro-
bable way  of  accounting  for  the  first  introduction  of  this  practice,  is  from
the  wound  in  general  being  small,  and  nearly  of  a  size  from  one  end  to
the  other  j  also  the  frequency  of  extraneous  bodies  being  forced  into
these  wounds  by  the  ball,  or  the  ball  itself  remaining  there;  for  the  way
in  which  these  wounds  are  made,  is  by  the  introduction  of  an  extrane-
ous body  which  is  left  there,  if  it  has  not  made  its  way  through,  so  that
the  immediate  cause  of  the  wound  makes  a  lodgment  for  itself;  often  car-
rying before  it  cloathes,  and  even  the  parts  of  the  body  wounded,  such  as  the
skin,  etc.  from  hence  it  would  naturally  appear  at  first  view,  that  there  was
an:immediate  necessity  to  search  after  those  extraneous  bodies,  which  very
probably  led  the  surgeon  to  do  it ;  and  in  general  the  impossibility  of  find-
ing  them,  and  even  of  extracting  them  when  found,  without  dilatation,  gave
the  first  idea  of  opening  the  mouths  of  the  wounds;  but,  from  experiencej
they  altered  this  practice  in  part,  and  became  not  so  desirous  of  searching
after  these  extraneous  bodies ;  for  they  found  that  it  was  oftener  im possi-
ble to  find  them  than  could  at  first  have  been  imagined,  and  whenfound  that

Y


6


^30  Of  the  treatment  of  gun- shot  wounds.

it  was  not  possible  to  extract  them,  and  that  afterwards  these  bodies
were  brought  to  the  skin  by  the  parts  themselves,  and  those  that  could
not  be  brought  to  the  external  surface  in  this  way,  were  such  as  gave
little  or  no  trouble  afterwards,  such  as  balls ;  yet  they  altered  this  prac-
tice only  so  far  as  respected  the  attempt  to  extract  extraneous  bodies,  for
when  they  found  from  experience,  that  it  was  not  necessary  nor  possible
to  extract  these  immediately,  yet  they  did  not  see  that  it  therefore  was  not
necessary  to  take  the  previous  or  leading  steps  towards  it.

The  circumstance  I  have  mentioned,  of  gun-shot  wounds  being  con-
tused, obliges  most  of  them  to  suppurate,  because  in  such  cases  there  is
more  or  less  of  a  slough  to  be  thrown  off,  especially  at  the  orifice  made
by  the  entrance  of  the  ball;  there  is,  therefore,  a  freer  passage  for  the
matter,  or  any  other  extraneous  substance,  than  the  same  sized  wound
would  have,  if  made  by  a  clean  cutting  instrument,  even  if  not  allowed  to
heal  by  the  first  intention,

From  all  which,  if  there  is  no  peculiarity*  in  a  gun-shot  wound,  I
think  this  of  dilating  them  as  a  general  practice  should  be  rejected  at
once,  even  were  it  only  for  this  reason,  that  few  gun-shot  wounds  are
alike,  and  therefore  the  same  practice  cannot  apply  to  all.

This  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds  is  diametrically  opposite  to  a  prin-
ciple which  is  generally  adopted  in  other  cases,  although  not  understood
as  a  general  rule,  which  is,  that  very  few  wounds  of  any  kind  require  sur-
gical treatment  at  their  commencement,  excepting  with  an  opposite  view
from  the  above,  viz.  to  heal  them  by  the  first  intention.

It  is  contrary  to  all  the  rules  of  surgery  founded  on  our  knowledge  of
the  animal  ceconomy  to  enlarge  wounds  simply  as  wounds ;  no  wound,
let  it  be  ever  so  small,  should  be  made  larger,  excepting  when  preparatory
to  something  else,  which  will  imply  a  complicated  wound,  and  which  is
to  be  treated  accordingly  ;  it  should  not  be  opened  because  it  is  a  wound,
but  because  there  is  something  necessary  to  be  done,  which  cannot  be  ex-
ecuted unless  the  wound  is  enlarged.

This  is  common  surgery,  and  ought  also  to  be  military  surgery  respect*,
ing  gun-shot  wounds.


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.  $%t

As  a  proof  of  the  inutility  of  opening  gun-shot  wounds  as  a  general
practice,  I  shall  mention  the  cases  of  four  Frenchmen,  and  a  British  sol-
dier, wounded  on  the  day  of  the  landing  of  our  army  on  the  island  of  Bel-
lisle;  and  as  this  neglect  rather  arose  from  accident  than  design,  there  is  no
merit  claimed  from  the  mode  of  treatment.

Case  I.  A.  B.  was  wounded  in  the  thigh  by  two  balls,  one  went
quite  through,  the  other  lodged  somewhere  in  the  .thigh,  and  was  not
found  while  he  was  under  our  care.

II.  B.  C.  was  shot  through  the  chest ;  he  spit  blood  for  some  little
time.

III.  C.  D.  was  shot  through  the  joint  of  the  knee :  the  ball  entered  at
the  outer  edge  of  the  patella,  crossed  the  joint  under  that  bone,  and  came
out  through  the  inner  condyle  of  the  os  femoris.

IV.  D.  E.  was  shot  in  the  arm :  the  ball  entered  at  the  inside  of  the  in-
sertion of  the  deltoid  muscle,  passed  towards  the  head  of  the  os  humeri's,
then  between  the  scapula  and  ribs,  and  lodged  between  the  basis  of  the
scapula  and  spinal  processes,  and  was  afterwards  extracted.  The  man's
arm  was  extended  horizontally  when  the  ball  entered,  which  accounts  for
this  direction.

These  four  men  had  not  any  thing  done  to  their  wounds  for  four  days
after  receiving  them,  as  they  had  hid  themselves  in  a  farm-house  all  that
time  after  we  had  taken  possession  of  the  island;  and  when  they  were
brought  to  the  hospital,  their  wounds  were  only  dressed  superficially,  and
they  all  got  well.

A  grenadier  of  the  30th  regiment  was  shot  through  the  arm,  the  ball
seemed  to  pass  between  the  biceps  muscle  and  the  bone ;  he  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  French.  The  arm  swelled  considerably,  they  fomented
it  freely,  and  a  superficial  dressing  only  was  applied.  About  a  fort-
night after  the  accident  he  made  his  escape,  and  came  to  our  hospital;  but
by  that  time  the  swelling  had  quite  subsided,  and  the  wounds  healed;
there  only  remained  a  stiffness  in  the  joint  of  the  elbow,  which  went  off
by  moving  it.


533  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds*


L  OF  THE  PROPRIETY  OF  DILATING  GUN-SHOT  WOUNDS.

I  t  would  be  absurd  for  any  one  to  suppose  that  there  is  never  occasion
to  dilate  gun-shot  wounds  at  all  ;  but  it  is  certain  there  are  very  few  in
which  it  is  necessary.  It  will  be  impossible  to  determine  by  any  general
description  what  those  are  that  ought  to  be  opened,  and  what  those  are
that  ought  not,  that  must  be  left  in  a  great  measure  to  the  discretion  of
the  surgeon,  when  once  he  is  master  of  the  arguments  on  both  sides.

Some  general  rules  may  be  given  with  regard  to  the  more  simple  cases ;
but  with  regard  to  the  more  complicated,  the  particular  circumstances  of
each  case  are  the  only  guide;  and  they  must  be  treated  according  to  the
general  principles  of  surgery.

Let  us  first  give  an  idea  of  the  wound  that  would  appear  to  receive  no
benefit  from  being  dilated ; and  first  of  the  most  simple  wounds.

If  a  ball  passes  through  a  fleshy  part  where  it  can  hurt  no  bone  in  its
way,  such  as  the  thick  of  the  thigh,  I  own,  in  such  a  simple  wound,  I
see  no  reason  for  opening  it;  because  I  see  no  purpose  that  can  be  an-
swered by  it,  except  the  shortning  of  the  depth  of  the  wound  made  by
the  ball,  which  can  be  productive  of  no  benefit.  If  the  ball  does  not  pass
through,  and  is  not  to  be  found,  opening  can  be  of  as  little  service.

If  the  opening  in  the  skin  should  be  objected  to,  as  being  too  small,
and  thereby  forming  an  obstruction  to  the  exit  of  the  slough,  etc.  I
think  that  in  general  it  is  not ;  for  the  skin  is  kept  open  by  its  own  elas-
ticity, as  we  see  in  all  wounds  ;  this  elasticity,  muscles  and  many  other
parts  have  not  ;  and  in  general  the  opening  made  by  a  ball  is  much
larger  than  those  made  by  pointed  instruments ;  for  I  have  already  ob-
served, that  there  is  often  a  piece  of  the  skin  carried  in  before  the  ball,
especially  if  it  passed  with  considerable  velocity,  besides  the  circular  slough ;
so  that  there  is  really  in  such  cases  a  greater  loss  of  substance  ;  there-
fore, whatever  matter  or  extraneous  body  there  is,  when  it  comes  to  the
skin,  it  will  find  a  free  passage  out. Nor  does  the  wound  in  the  skin  in


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds;  533

general  heal  sooner  than  the  bottom ;  and,  indeed,  in  many  cases  not  so
soon,  because  the  skin  is  generally  the  part  that  has  suffered  most.

However,  this  is  not  an  absolute  rule,  for  the  skin  sometimes  heals  first  j
but  I  have  found  this  to  be  the  case  as  often  where  openings  had  been
made,  as  in  those  where  they  had  not;  and  this  will  depend  upon  cir-
cumstances or  peculiarities ;  such  as  the  bottom  being  at  a  considerable
distance,  with  extraneous  bodies,  and  having  no  disposition  to  heal,  tend-
ing to  a  fistula;  and  I  have  observed  in  those  cases,  that  the  wound  or
opening  made  by  the  surgeon  generally  skinned  to  a  small  hole  before  the
bottom  of  the  wound  was  closed,  which  brings  it  to  the  state  it  would
have  been  in,  if  it  had  not  been  dilated  at  all,  especially  if  there  are  ex-
traneous bodies  still  remaining;  for  an  extraneous  body  causes  and  keeps
up  the  secretion  of  matter,,  or  rather  keeps  up  the  disease  at  the  bottom  of
the  wound,  by  which  means  the  healing  disposition  of  its  mouth  is-  irt
some  degree  destroyed.

Let  me  state  a  case  of  this  last  description.  Suppose  a  wound  made
with  a  ball ;  that  wound  (from  circumstances)  is  not  to  heal  in  six
months,  because  the  extraneous  bodies,  etc.  cannot  be  extracted,  or  work
out  sooner,  or  some  other  circumstance  prevents  the  cure  in  a  shorter  time;
open  that  wound  as  freely  as  may  be  thought  necessary,,  I  will  engage
that  it  will  be  in  a  month's  time  in  the  same  state  with  a  similar  wound
that  has  not  been  opened,  so  that  the  whole  advantage  (if  there  is  any)
must  be  before  it  comes  tathis  state  ;  but  it  is  very  seldom  that  any  thing-
of  consequence  can  be  done  in  that  time,  because  the  extraneous  bodies
do  not  come  out  at  first  so  readily  as  they  do  at  last,  for  the  inflamma-
tion and  tumefaction,  which  extends  beyond  that  very  opening,  gene-
rally keeps  them  in;  and  if  the  wound  is  opened  on  their  account  at  first,
it  ought  to  be  continued  to  the  very  last.  Upon  the  same  principle,  open-
ing on  account  of  extraneous  bodies  at  first  cannot  be  of  so  much  service,
as  opening  some  time  after  ;  for  the  suppuration,  with  its  leading  causes,
viz.  inflammation  and  sloughing,  all  along  the  passage  of  the  ball,  makes
the  passage  itself  much  more  determined  and  more  easily  followed;  for
the  want  of  which,  few  extraneous  bodies  are  ever  extracted  at  the  be-
ginning, excepting  what  are  superficial,  small,  and  loose.


5J4  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.

If  the  extraneous  bodies  are  broken  bones,  it  seldom  happens  that  they
are  entirely  detached,  and  therefore  must  loosen  before  they  can  come
away  ;  also  the  bones  in  many  cases  are  rendered  dead,  either  by  the  blow
or  by  being  exposed,  which  must  exfoliate,  and  this  requires  some  time;
for  in  gun-shot  wounds,  where  bones  are  either  bruised  or  broke,  there  is
most  commonly  an  exfoliation,  because  some  part  of  the  bone  is  deadened,
similar  to  the  slough  in  the  soft  parts.

A  reason  given  for  opening  gun-shot  wounds  is,  that  it  takes  off  the
tention  arising  from  the  inflammation,  and  gives  the  part  liberty  ;  this
would  be  very  good  practice  if  tention  or  inflammation  were  not  a  conse-
sequence  of  wounds  ;  or  it  would  be  very  good  practice,  if  they  could
prove  that  the  effects  from  dilating  a  part  that  was  already  wounded  were
very  different,  if  not  quite  the  reverse  of  those  of  the  first  wound;  but  as
this  must  always  be  considered  as  an  extention  of  the  first  mischief,  we
must  suppose  it  to  produce  an  increase  of  the  effects  arising  from  that
mischief;  therefore  this  practice  is  contradictory  to  common  sense  and
common  observation.

They  are  principally  the  compound  wounds  that  require  surgical  ope-
rations, and  certain  precautions  are  necessary  with  regard  to  them,  which
I  shall  here  lay  down.

As  the  dilatation  of  gun-shot  wounds  is  a  violence,  it  will  be  necessary
to  consider  well  what  relief  can  be  given  to  the  parts  or  patient  by  such  an
operation;  and  whether  without  it  more  mischief  would  ensue;  it  should
also  be  considered  what  is  the  proper  time  for  dilating.

But  it  will  be  almost  impossible  to  state  what  wound  ought,  and  what
ought  not  be  opened;  this  must  always  be  determined  by  the  surgeon,
after  he  is  acquainted  with  the  true  state  of  the  case  and  the  general  prin-
ciples j  but  from  what  has  been  already  said,  we  may  in  some  measure
judge  what  those  wounds  are  that  should  be  opened,  in  order  to  produce
either  immediate  relief,  or  to  assist  in  the  cure:  we  must  have  some  other
views  than  those  objected  to,  we  must  see  plainly  something  to  be  done
for  the  relief  of  the  patient  by  this  opening,  which  cannot  be  procured
without  it,  and  if  not  procured,  that  the  part  cannot  heal,  or  that  the
patient  most  probably  must  loose  his  life.


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds  53$

The  practice  to  be  recommended  here  will  be  exactly  similar  to  the  com-
mon practice  of  surgery,  without  paying  any  attention  to  the  cause  as  a
gun-shot  wound.

One  of  the  principal  points  of  practice  will  be  to  determine  at  what  pe-
riod of  time  the  dilatation  should  be  made.

First,  if  the  wound  should  be  a  slight  one,  and  should  require  opening,  it
will  be  better  to  do  it  at  the  beginning,  before  inflammation  comes on  ;
for  the  inflammation,  in  consequence  of  both,  will  be  slight ;  but  in  slight
cases  dilatation  will  never  be  necessary,  except  to  allow  of  the  extraction  of
some  extraneous  body  that  is  near. But  if  the  wound  is  a  considerable  one,
and  it  should  appear  upon  consideration,  that  you  cannot  relieve  imme-
diately any  particular  part,  or  the  constitution,  then  you  can  gain no-
thing by  opening  immediately,  but  will  only  increase  the  inflammation,
and  in  some  cases  the  inflammation  arising  from  the  accident  and  opening
together,  may  be  too  much  for  the  patient ;  under  this  last  circumstance,  it
would  be  more  advisable  to  wait  till  the  first  inflammation  ceases,  by  which
means  the  patient  will  stand  a  much  better  chance  of  a  cure,  if  not  of  his
life  ;  therefore  it  is  much  better  to  divide  the  inflammations ;  however,  it
is  possible  that  the  inflammation  may  arise  from  some  circumstance  in  the
wound,  which  could  be  removed  by  opening  it ;  for  instance,  a  ball,  or
broken  bone  pressing  upon  some  part  whose  actions  are  either  essential  to
the  life  of  the  part  or  the  whole,  as  some  large  artery,  nerve,  or  vital  part;
in  such  the  case  will  determine  for  itself.

On  the  other  hand,  it  may,  in  many  cases  be  better  to  remove  the  whole
by.  an  operation,  when  in  such  parts  as  will  admit  of  it,  which  will  be
taken  notice  of.

Secondly,  if  an  artery  is  wounded,  where  the  patient  is  likely  to  become
either  too  weak,  or  to  loose  his  life  from  the  loss  of  blood;  then,  certainly
the  vessel  is  to  be  tied,  and  most  probably  this  cannot  be  done  without
previously  opening  the  external  parts,  and  often  freely.

Or  thirdly,  in  a  wound  of  the  head,  where  there  is  reason  to  suspect  a
fracture  of  the  scull,  it  is  necessary  to  open  the  scalp,  as  in  any  other  com-
mon injury  done  to  the  head  where  there  was  reason  to  suspect  a  fracture,


c  ;6  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,

and  when  opened,  if  a  fracture  is  found,  it  is  to  be  treated  as  any  other
fractured  scull.

Fourthly,  where  there  are  fractured  bones  in  any  part  of  the  body  that
can  be  immediately  extracted  with  advantage,  and  which  would  do  much
mischief  if  left,  this  becomes  a  compound  fracture  wherever  it  is,  and  it
makes  no  difference  in  the  treatment,  whether  the  wound  in  the  skin  was
made  by  a  ball,  or  the  bone  itself,  at  least  where  the  compound  fracture  is
allowed  to  suppurate;  for  there  is  often  a  possibility  of  treating  a  com-
pound fracture  as  a  simple  one,  which  gun-shot  fractures,  if  I  may  be
allowed  the  expression,  seldom  will  allow  of;  but  where  the  compound
fracture  must  suppurate,  there  they  are  very  similar.  However,  there
have  been  instances  where  a  fracture  of  the  thigh-bone  made  by  a  ball
has  healed  in  the  same  way  as  a  compound  simple  fracture.

Fifthly,  where  there  is  some  extraneous  body  which  can  with  very
little  trouble  be  extracted,  and  where  the  mischief  by  delay  will  probably
be  greater  than  that  ar-king  from  the  dilatation.

Sixthly,  where  some  internal  part  is  misplaced,  which  can  be  replaced
immediately  in  its  former  position,  such  as  in  wounds  in  the  belly,  where
some  of  the  viscera  are  protruded.,  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  perform
the  operation  of  gastroraphia;  which  is  to  be  done  in  this  case  in  the
6ame  manner  as  if  the  accident  arose  from  any  other  cause;  but  the
treatment  should  be  different ;  for  gun-shot  cases  cannot  heal  by  the  first
jntention,  on  account  of  the  slough  that  is  to  ensue.

Or,,  seventhly,  when  some  vital  part  is  pressed,  so  that  its  functions  are
lost  or  much  impaired,  such  as  will  often  happen  from  fractures  of  the
scull,  fractures  of  the  ribs,  sternum,  etc.  in  short,  when  any  thing  can  be
done  to  the  part  after  the  opening  is  made  for  the  present  relief  of  the
patient,  or  the  future  good  arising  from  it.  If  none  of  these  circumstances
has  happened,  then  I  think  we  should  be  very  quiet.  Balls  that  enter  any
of -the  larger  cavities,  such  as  the  abdomen  or  thorax,  need  not  have  their
wounds  dilated,  except  something  else  is  necessary  to  be  done  to  the
contained  parts*  for  it  is  impossible  to  follow  the  ball  ;  therefore  they  are
commonly  not  opened,  and  yet  we  find  them  do  very  well.

Balls  that  enter  any  part  where  they  cannot  be  followed,  such  as  into


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.  $37

the  bones  of  the  face  need  not  have  the  wound  in  the  skin  in  the  least
enlarged,  as  it  can  give  no  assistance  to  the  other  part  of  the  wound,  which
is  a  bony  canal.  The  following  cases  are  strongly  in  proof  of  this,  being
respectively  instances  of  both  modes  of  practice.

CASE  FIRST.

I  was  sent  for  to  an  officer  who  was  wounded  in  the  cheek  by  a  ball,
and  who  had  all  the  symptoms  of  an  injured  brain  ;  upon  examining  the
parts,  I  found  that  the  ball  had  passed  directly  backwards  through  the
cheek-bone ;  therefore,  from  the  symptoms  and  from  the  direction  of  the
wound,  I  suspected  that  the  ball  had  gone  through  the  basis  of  the  scull
into  the  brain,  or  at  least  had  produced  a  depression  of  the  scull  there:  I
enlarged  the  external  wound,  and  with  my  fingers  could  feel  the  coronoid
process  of  the  lower  jaw ;  I  found  that  the  ball  had  not  entered  the  scull,
but  had  struck  against  it  about  the  temporal  process  of  the  sphenoid  bone,
which  it  had  broke,  and  afterwards  passed  down  on  the  inside  of  the  lower
jaw.  With  small  forceps  I  extracted  all  I  could  of  the  loose  pieces  of
bone ;  he  soon  recovered  from  his  stupor,  and  also  from  his  wound.
The  ball  afterwards  caused  an  inflammation  at  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,
and  was  extracted.  The  good  which  I  proposed  by  opening  and  search-
ing for  extraneous  bodies  and  loose  pieces  of  bone  was  the  relieving  of  the
brain  ;  but  as  the  ball  had  not  entered  the  scull,  and  as  none  of  the  bones
had  been  driven  into  the  brain,  it  is  most  probable  that  I  did  no  good  by
my  opening ;  but  that  I  could  not  foresee.

CASE SECOND.

An  officer  received  a  wound  by  a  ball  in  the  cheek,  (which  in  this  case
was  on  the  opposite  side)  the  wound  led  backwards,  as  in  the  other  ;  by
putting  my  finger  into  the  wound  I  felt  the  coronoid  process  of  the  lower
jaw,  as  in  the  former;  but  he  had  no  symptoms  of  an  injured  brain;  I
therefore  advised  not  to  open  it,  because  the  reason  for  opening  in  the  pre-
ceding case  did  not  exist  here  ;  my  advice  was  complied  with,  and  the
wound  did  well,  and  rather  better  than  the  former,  by  healing  sooner.
The  ball  was  never  found,  so  far  as  I  know.

7 Z


558  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,

The  present  practice  is  not  to  regard  the  balls  themselves,  and  seldom
or  ever  to  dilate  upon  their  account,  nor  even  to  search  much  after  them
when  the  woundis  dilated,  which  shews  that  opening  is  not  necessary,  or
at  least  not  made  upon  account  of  extraneous  bodies.

A

This  practice  has  arisen  from  experience;  for  it  was  found  that  balls,
when  obliged  to  be  left,  seldom  or  eyer  did  any  harm  when  at  rest,  and
when  not  in  a  vital  part;  for  balls  have  been  known  to  lie  in  the  body  for
years,  and  are  often  never  found  at  all,  and  yet  the  person  has  found  no-
inconvenience.

This  knowledge  of  the  want  of  power  in  balls  to  promote  inflam-
mation when  left  in  the  body,  arose  from  the  difficulty  of  rinding  them,
or  extracting  them  when  found;  and  therefore  in  many  cases  they  were
obliged  to  leave  them.

One  reason  for  not  readily  finding  the  ball  at  first  is,  because  the  parts
are  only  torn  and  divided,  without  any  loss  of  substance,  (till  the  slough
comes  off)  by  which  means  the  parts  collapse  and  fall  into  their  places
again,  which  makes  it  difficult  to  pass  any  thing  in  the  direction  of  the
ball,  or  even  to  know  its  direction.  The  different  courses  they  take,  by
being  turned  aside  by  some  resisting  body,  add  also  to  the  difficulty;  as  will
be  explained.

But  the  course  of  a  ball,  if  not  perpendicular,  but  passing  obliquely  and
not  very  deep  a  little  way  under  the  skin,  probably  an  inch  or  more,  is
easv  to  be  traced  through  its  whole  course,  for  the  skin  over  the  whole
passage  of  the  ball  generally  is  marked  by  a  reddish  line.  I  have  seen
this  redness,  even  when  the  ball  has  gone  pretty  deep;  it  has  none  of  the
appearances  of  inflammation,  nor  of  extravasation,  for  extravasation  is  of
a  darker  colour,  and  what  it  is  owing  to,  I  have  not  been  able  to  dis-
cover. I  can  conceive  it  to  be  something  similar  to  a  blush;  only  the
small  vessels  allowing  the  red  particles  of  the  blood  to  flow  more  easily.


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.  539

II.  OF  THE  STRANGE  COURSE  OF  SOME  BALLS.

The  difficulty  of  finding  balls,  I  have  just  observed,  often  arises  from
the  irregular  course  they  take.  The  regularity  of  the  passage  of  a  ball
will  in  general  be  in  proportion  to  its  velocity,  and  want  of  resistance;
for  balls  are  turned  aside  in  an  inverse  proportion  to  the  force  that  they
come  with  ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  we  seldom  find  them  take  a  strait
course  ;  for  if  they  are  spent  balls,  the  soft  parts  alone  are  capable  of
turning  them;  and  if  they  come  with  a  considerable  velocity,  it  is  a  chance
they  may  hit  some  bone  obliquely,  and  then  they  are  also  turned  aside,  for
any  body  that  gives  a  ball  the  least  oblique  resistance,  throws  it  out  of
its  direct  course;  therefore,  the  balls  that  do  not  pass  through  and  through
(which  are  the  only  ones  that  are  searched  after)  will  be  in  general  spent
ones,  excepting  those  that  come  directly  against  some  considerable  bone,
as  the  thigh-bone,  etc.  As  a  proof  that  balls  are  easily  thrown  off  ob-
liquely, we  often  find  that  a  ball  shall  enter  the  skin  of  the  breast  obliquely,
and  afterwards  shall  pass  almost  round  the  whole  body  under  the  skin.
The  skin  here  is  strong  enough  to  stop  the  balls  coming  out  again,  so  that
it  turns  it  inwards,  which  meeting  with  the  ribs,  it  is  again  turned  out
against  the  skin,  and  so  on,  alternately,  as  long  as  it  has  force  to  go  on;  how,
ever,  in  many  cases,  the  ball  goes  a  little  way  after  it  has  passed  through
the  skin,  and  when  it  meets  with  any  hard  body  on  that  side  next  the
centre  of  the  body,  such  as  a  rib,  its  course  is  directed  outwards,  and  it
pierces  the  skin  a  second  time ;  but  the  velocity  of  such  balls  must  have
been  considerable.

I  have  seen,  a  ball  pass  in  at  one  side  of  the  shin-bone,  and  run  across  it
under  the  skin,  without  either  cutting  the  skin  across,  or  hurting  the  bone;
which  shows  that  the  volocity  could  not  be  great;  for  we  know  that  there
is  not  sufficient  room  between  these  two  parts  in  a  natural  state  for  a
ball  to  pass ;  but  the  ball,  after  it  had  got  under  the  skin,  where  there  was
room  for  it  to  cover  itself,  then  came  against  the  tibia,  which  threw  it
outwards,  and  the  skin  counteracting,  it  only  raised  the  skin  from  the
tibia,  and  passed  on  between  them  j  but  if  this  ball  had  had  a  sufficient


540  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,

velocity,  it  would  have  either  cut  the  skin  across,  or  taken  a  piece  out  of
the  bone,  or  most  probably  both.

Another  circumstance  in  favour  of  the  uncertainty  of  their  direction  is,
that  the  parts  wounded  are  often  not  in  the  same  position  that  they  were
when  they  received  the  ball.  The  French  soldier  who  was  wounded  in
the  arm,  was  a  striking  instance  of  this.  The  ball  entered  the  arm  about
its  middle,  on  the  inside  of  the  biceps  muscle,  and  it  was  extracted  from
between  the  two  scapulas,  close  on  one  side  of  the  spinal  process  of  the
back-bone.  The  reason  of  this  strange  course,  I  have  already  observed  in
the  case,  was  owing  to  his  having  had  his  arm  stretched  out  horizontally  at
the  time  he  was  wounded,  and  the  ball  pissed  on  in  a  strait  line.

These  uncertainties  in  the  direction  of  the  balls  abovementioned,  have
made  the  common  bullet-forceps  almost  useless  ;  yet  forceps  are  not  to
be  entirely  thrown  aside,  for  it  will  often  happen,  that  a  ball  will  be  found
to  lie  pretty  near  the  external  wound,  which,  if  the  ball  was  removed,  would
heal,  probably,  by  the  first  intention ;  for  in  such  superficial  wounds  they
must  have  passed  with  little  velocity;  or  if  there  was  a  part  killed,  it  would
heal  immediately  ;  but  if  there  is  a  slough,  this  is  best  done  after  all  in-
flammation, and  the  separation  of  the  slough  is  over,  for  then  the  passage
of  the  ball  is  better  ascertained,  in  consequence  of  the  surrounding  adhe-
sive inflammation ;  and,  moreover,  the  granulations  are  beginning  to  push
the  extraneous  body  towards  the  surface  ;  but  the  operation  of  ulcera-
tion, which  brings  it  to  the  skin,  being  often  too  slow,  the  ball,  etc.  had
better  be  extracted,  and  even  the  part  might  be  dilated.  However,  I
would  be  very  cautious  how  far  I  carried  this  practice,  and  only  do  it
when  all  circumstances  favoured.

For  the  same  reasons  probes  are  become  of  little  use  ;  indeed,  I  think
that  they  should  never  be  used  but  by  way  of  satisfaction,  in  knowing
sometimes  what  mischief  is  done  ;  we  can  perhaps  feel  if  a  bone  is
touched,  or  if  a  ball  is  near,  etc.  but  when  all  this  is  known,  it  is  an  hun-
dred to  one  if  we  can  vary  our  practice  in  consequence  of  it.  If  the
wound  will  admit  of  it,  the  finger  is  the  best  instrument.

In  cases  where  the  ball  passes  a  considerable  way  under  the  skin,  and
near  to  it,  I  think  it  would  be  adviseable  to  make  an  opening  midway  be-


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  54.1

tween  the  two  orifices  which  were  made  by  the  ball  (especially  when  the
orifices  are  at  a  very  great  distance)  that  fractured  bones,  or  extraneous
bodies  may  now,  or  hereafter  be  better  extracted;  for  if  this  is  not  done,
we  have  often  an  abscess  forming  between  them;  which,  indeed,  answers
the  same  purpose,  and  often  better ;  but  sometimes  it  should  not  be  de-
layed for  such  an  event  to  take  place.

Where  the  ball  has  passed  immediately  under  the  skin,  as  in  the  case
where  the  ball  passed  between  the  skin  and  tibia,  it  will  be  often  proper
to  open  the  whole  length  of  the  passage  of  the  ball,  the  necessity  of
which  I  think  arises  from  the  skin  not  so  readily  uniting  with  the  parts
underneath,  as  muscles  do  with  one  another.

Although  we  have  given  up  in  a  great  measure  the  practice  of  search-
ing after  the  ball,  broken  bones,  or  any  other  extraneous  bodies,  yet  it
often  happens  that  a  ball  shall  pass  on  till  it  comes  in  contact  with  the
skin  of  some  other  part,  and  where  it  can  be  readily  felt;  the  question  is,
should  such  a  ball  be  cut  out  ?  if  the  skin  is  bruised  by  the  ball  coming
against  it,  so  that  we  may  imagine  that  this  part  will  slough  off,  in  that
case,  I  see  nothing  to  hinder  opening  it,  because  the  part  is  dead  ;  there-
fore no  more  inflammation  can  arise  from  the  opening  than  otherwise
would  take  place  upon  allowing  the  slough  to  be  thrown  off;  while,  on.
the  other  hand,  I  should  also  suppose  as  little  good  to  arise  from  it,  be-
cause the  ball  will  come  out  of  itself  when  the  part  sloughs  off;  however,
it  may  be  suspected  that  before  the  slough  falls  off,  the  ball  may  so  alter
its  situation,  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  extract  it  by  that  opening;  haw-
ever,  I  should  very  much  suspect  the  ball  altering  its  course  under  such
circumstances,  for  if  the  skin  was  so  much  bruised  as  to  slough,  inflam-
mation would  soon  come  on,  and  confine  the  ball  to  that  place  ;  how-
ever, it  always  gives  comfort  to  the  patient  to  have  the  ball  extracted.
Eut  if  the  ball  is  only  to  be  felt,  and  the  skin  quite  sound,  I  would  in  that
case  advise  letting  it  alone,  till  the  wound  made  by  the  entrance  of  the
ball  had  inflamed  and  was  suppurating;  my  reasons  for  it  are  these  :

First,  we  find  that  most  wounds  get  well  when  the  ball  is  left  in  (ex-
cepting it  has  done  other  mischief  than  simply  passing  through  the  soft
parts)  and  that  very  little  inflammation  attends  the  wound  where  the  ball


54-2  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.

lodges,  only  that  where  it  enters;  the  inflammation  not  arising  so  much
from  the  injury  done  by  the  ball,  as  from  the  parts  being  there  exposed
to  the  suppurative  inflammation,  if  it  is  immediately  removed.  There  is
always  a  greater  chance  of  a  slough  where  the  ball  enters  than  where  it
rests,  arising  from  the  greater  velocity  of  the  ball;  for,  beyond  where  the
slough  is,  the  parts  unite  by  the  first  intention.

Secondly,  in  those  cases  where  the  ball  passes  through  and  through,
we  have  two  inflammations,  one  at  each  orifice,  instead  of  the  one  at  the
entrance;  or  a  continued  inflammation  through  and  through,  if  the  ball
has  passed  with  great  velocity.  Where  the  ball  makes  its  exit,  the
inflammation  passes  further  along  the  passage  of  the  ball,  than  when  the
wound  has  been  healed  up  to  the  ball,  and  then  cut  out  afterwards;  so
that  by  opening  immediately,  the  irritation  will  be  extended  further,  and
of  course  the  disposition  for  healing  will  be  prevented.

If  this  is  the  case,  I  think,  that  two  wounds  should  not  be  made  at  the
same  time  ;  and  what  convinces  me  more  of  it  is,  that  I  have  seen  cases
where  the  balls  were  not  found  at  first,  nor  even  till  after  the  patients  had
got  well  of  their  wounds  ;  and  these  balls  were  found  very  near  the  skin.
They  gave  no  trouble  (or  else  they  would  have  been  found  sooner);  no  in-
flammation came  upon  the  parts,  and  they  were  afterwards  extracted  and
did  well.

Again,  I  have  seen  cases  where  the  balls  were  found  at  first,  and  cut
out  immediately,  which  were  similar  to  balls  passing  through  and  through;
the  same  inflammation  came  on  the  cut  wounds  that  came  on  the  wounds
made  by  the  entrance  of  the  ball.


III.  PENETRATING  WOUNDS  OF  THE  ABDOMEN.

Wounds  leading  into  the  different  cavities  of  the  body  are  very  com-
mon in  the  army,  and  in  a  great  measure  peculiar  to  war;  they  are  mostly
gun-shot  wounds,  but  not  always  ;  some  being  made  with  sharp-pointed
weapons,  as  swords,  bayonets,  etc.  they  are  pretty  similar  in  whatever  way


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds .  543

they  are  made;  and  I  have  given  them  a  name  expressive  of  the  nature  of
the  wound.  I  shall  not  take  notice  of  any  of  this  kind,  but  those  which
penetrate  into  the  larger  cavities,  as  the  abdomen,  thorax,  and  scull ;  but
those  into  the  scull  are  made  most  commonly  by  balls,  shells,  etc.

These  wounds  become  more  or  less  dangerous,  according  to  the  mischief
done  to  the  contents  of  the  cavity  into  which  they  penetrate.

These  wounds  may  be  distinguished  according  as  they  are  simply  pene-
trating, without  extending  to  the  contained  parts,  or,  as  they  affect  these
parts;  and  the  event  of  these  two  kinds  of  wounds  is  very  different;  for  in
the  first,  little  danger  is  to  be  expected  if  properly  treated  ;  but  in  the
second,  the  success  will  be  very  uncertain ;  for  very  often  nothing  can  be
done  for  the  patient  under  such  wounds ;  and  very  often  a  good  deal  of
art  can  be  made  use  of  with  advantage.

Wounds  of  the  parietes  of  the  abdomen,  not  immediately  inflicted  on
such  a  viscus  as  has  the  power  of  containing  other  matter,  will  in  general
do  well,  let  the  instrument  that  made  the  wound  be  what  it  will  *.  There
will  be  a  great  difference,  however,  should  that  instrument  be  a  ball  pas-
sing with  great  velocity,  for  in  this  case  a  slough  will  be  produced.  But
if  it  should  pass  with  little  velocity,  then  there  will  be  less  sloughing,
and  the  parts  will  in  some  degree  heal  by  the  first  intention,  similar  to
those  made  by  a  cutting  instrument ;  but  although  the  ball  has  passed
with  such  velocity  as  to  produce  a  slough,  yet  that  wound  shall  do  well,
for  the  adhesive  inflammation  will  take  place  on  the  peritonaeum  all  round
the  wound,  which  will  exclude  the  general  cavity  from  taking  part  in  the
inflammation,  although  the  ball  has  not  only  penetrated,  but  has  wound-
ed parts  which  are  not  immediately  essential  to  life,  such  as  the  epiploon,
mesentery,  etc.  and  perhaps  gone  quite  through  the  body  ;  yet  it  is  to  be
observed,  that  wherever  there  is  a  wound,  and  whatever  solid  viscus  may
be  penetrated,  the  surfaces  in  contact,  surrounding  every  orifice,  will  unite
by  the  adhesive  inflammation,  so  as  to  exclude  entirely  the  general  cavity,,
by  which  means  there  is  one  continued  canal  wherever  the  ball  or  instru-

*  What  I  mean  by  a  containing,  viscus,  is  a  viscus  that  contains  some  foreign  matter,  as  the
Stomach,  bladder,  ureters,  gall-bladder,  etc.  to  which  I  may  add  blood-vessels.


544  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.

ment  has  passed  ;  or  if  any  extraneous  body  should  have  been  carried  in,
such  as  clothes,  etc.  they  will  also  be  included  in  these  adhesions,  and  both
these  and  the  slough  will  be  conducted  to  the  external  surface  by  either
orifice.

All  wounds  that  enter  the  belly,  which  have  injured  some  viscus,  are  to
be  treated  according  to  the  nature  of  the  wounded  part,  with  its  compli-
cations ;  which  will  be  many,  because  the  belly  contains  more  parts
of  very  dissimilar  uses  than  any  other  cavity  in  the  body;  each  of  which
will  produce  symptoms  peculiar  to  itself,  and  the  nature  of  the  wound.

The  wounding  of  the  several  viscera  will  often  produce  what  may  be
called  immediate  and  secondary  symptoms,  which  will  be  peculiar  to
themselves,  besides  what  are  common  to  simple  wounds,  such  as  bleeding,
which  is  immediate;  and  inflammation  and  suppuration,  which  are  secon-
dary. Sensations  alone  will  often  lead  to  the  viscus  wounded,  and  this  is
frequently  one  of  the  first  symptoms.

The  immediate  symptoms  arising  from  wounds  in  the  different  viscera
are  as  follows  :

From  a  wound  in  the  liver  there  will  be  pain  in  the  part,  of  the  sickly
or  depressing  kind  -y  and  if  it  is  in  the  right  lobe,  there  will  be  a  delusive
pain  in  the  right  shoulder,  or  in  the  left  shoulder,  from  a  wound  in  the  left
lobe.

A  wound  in  the  stomach  will  produce  great  sickness  and  vomiting  of
blood,  and  sometimes  a  delirium  ;  a  case  of  which  I  once  saw  in  a  sol-
dier in  Portugal,  who  was  stabbed  into  the  stomach  with  a  stiletto  by  a
Portuguese.

Blood  in  the  stools  will  arise  from  a  wound  in  the  intestines,  and  according
to  the  intestine  wounded,  it  will  be  more  or  less  pure ;  if  the  blood  is  from
a  high  part  of  an  intestine  it  will  be  mixed  with  foeces,  and  of  a  dark  colour ;
if  low,  as  the  colon,  the  blood  will  be  less  mixed,  and  give  the  tinge  of  blood;
and  the  pain  or  sensation  will  be  more  or  less  acute,  according  to  the  in-
testine wounded :  more  of  the  sickly  pain,  the  higher  the  intestine,  and
anore  acute  the  lower.  There  will  be  bloody  urine  from  a  wound  in  the
kidnies  or  bladder ;  and  if  made  by  shot  or  ball,  and  a  lodgment  made,


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.  54  $

these  bodies  will  sometimes  become  the  cause  of  a  stone. The  sensation
will  be  trifling.

A  wound  of  the  spleen  will  produce  no  symptoms  that  I  know  of,  ex-
cepting, probably,  sickness,  from  its  connexion  with  the  nerves  belong-/
ing  to  the  stomach,  etc.

Extravasations  of  blood  into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  will  take  place,
more  or  less,  in  all  penetrating  wounds,  and  more  especially  if  some
viscus  is  wounded,  as  they  are  all  extremely  vascular ;  and  this  will  prove
dangerous,  or  not,  according  to  the  quantity.

These  are  the  immediate  and  general  symptoms  upon  such  parts  being
wounded  ;  but  other  symptoms  may  arise  in  consequence  of  some  of  those
viscera  being  wounded,  which  require  particular  attention. There  may
be  wounds  of  the  liver  and  spleen,  which  produce  no  symptoms  but  what
«re  immediate,  and  may  soon  take  on  the  healing  disposition;  but  wounds
in  those  viscera  which  contain  extraneous  matter,  such  as  the  stomach,
intestines,  kidnies,  ureters,  and  bladder,  may  produce  secondary  symp-
toms of  a  distinctive  kind. If  the  injury  is  done  by  a  ball  to  any  of  those
viscera,  the  effect  may  be  of  two  kinds;  one  where  it  makes  a  wound,  as
stated  above,  the  other  where  it  only  produces  death  in  a  part  of  any  of
them; these  will  produce  very  different  effects. The  first  will  most  pro-
bably be  always  dangerous ; the  second  will  hardly  ever be  so. The
first  is,  where  the  ball  has  wounded  some  one  of  the  abovementioned  vis-
cera in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  produce  the  symptoms  already  described,
but  produce  one  common  to  them  all,  viz.  their  contents  or  extraneous
matter  immediately  escaping  into  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen. Such  cases
will  seldom  or  ever  do  well,  as  their  effect  will  hinder  the  abovementioned
adhesions  taking  place. The  consequence  of  this  will  be,  that  universal
inflammation  on  the  peritonaeum  will  take  place,  attended  with  great  pain,
tension,  and  death. But  all  this  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  quantity
of  wound  in  the  part,  and  quantity  of  contents  capable  of  escaping  into
the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  ;  for  if  the  wound  is  small,  and  the  bowels  not
full,  then  adhesions  may  take  place  all  round  the  wound,  which  will  con-
fine the  contained  matter,  and  make  it  go  on  in  its  right  channel. These
adhesions  may  take  place  very  early,  as  the  following  case  shews.-

4A


546  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.

The  case  of  an  officer  who  died  of  a  wound  which  he  received  in  a
duel.

On  Thursday  morning,  the  4th  of  September,  1783,  about  seven  o'clock,
an  officer  fought  a  duel  in  the  Ring  in  Hyde-park,  in  which  he  exchanged
three  shot  with  his  antagonist,  whose  last  shot  struck  him  on  the  right
.side,  just  below  the  last  rib,  and  appeared  under  the  skin  on  the  oppo-
site side,  exactly  in  the  corresponding  place,  and  was  immediately  cut  out
by  Mr.  Grant.

About  three  hours  after  receiving  this  wound,  I  saw  him  with  Mr.
Grant.  He  was  pretty  quiet,  not  in  much  pain,  rather  low,  pulse  not
quick,  nor  full,  and  a  sleepy  languidness  in  the  eye,  which  made  me  sus-
pect something  more  than  a  common  wound.  He  then  had  had  neither
a  stool  nor  made  water,  therefore  it  could  not  be  said  what  viscera  might
be  wounded.  His  belly  had  been  fomented,  a  clyster  of  warm  water  was  or-
dered, and  a  draught  with  confec:  card:  as  a  cordial,  with  twenty  drops  of
laudanum,  to  procure  sleep,  as  he  wished  to  have  some.  We  saw  him
again  at  three  o'clock  ;  the  draught  had  come  up.  Had  no  stool  from  the
clyster,  nor  any  sleep ;  had  made  water,  and  no  blood  being  found  in  it,
we  conjectured  that  the  kidnies,  etc.  were  not  hurt.  He  was  now  rather
lower,  pulse  smaller,  more  restless,  a  good  deal  of  tension  in  the  belly,
which  made  him  uneasy,  and  made  him  wish  to  have  a  stool.  It  was  at
first  imagined  that  this  tension  might  be  owing  to  extravasated  blood ;
but  on  patting  the  belly,  especially  along  the  course  of  the  transverse  arch
of  the  colon,  it  plainly  gave  the  sound  and  vibration  of  air,  therefore  we
wished  to  procure  a  motion,  to  see  if  we  could  not  by  that  means  have
some  of  that  air  expelled  ;  we  wished,  also,  to  repeat  the  cordial  and  the
opium,  but  the  stomach  was  become  now  too  irritable  to  contain  any
thing,  and  was  at  times  vomiting,  independent  of  any  thing  he  took  ;
a  clyster  was  given,  but  nothing  returned  or  came  away.  We  saw  him
again  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.  His  pulse  was  now  low  and  more
frequent  ;  coldness  at  times ;  vomiting  .very  frequent,  which  appeared
to  be  chiefly  bile,  with  small  bits  of  something  that  was  of  some  con-
sistence j  the  belly  very  tense,  which  made  him  extremely  uneasy;  no
stool. From  nothing  passing  downwards,  and  the  colon  continuing  to


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds  547

fill,  we  began  to  suspect  that  it  was  becoming  paralitic,  probably,  from
the  ball  having  divided  some  of  its  nerves.

Fumes  of  tobacco  by  clyster  were  proposed,  but  we  were  loath  to  use  it
too  hastily,  as  it  would  tend  to  increase  the  disease,  if  it  did  not  relieve  j
however,  we  were  prepared  for  it.

Mr.  Grant  stayed  with  him  the  whole  night;  all  the  above  symptoms
continued  increasing,  and  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  he  died,  viz..
about  twenty-four  hours  after  receiving  the  wound.

He  was  opened  next  day  at  ten  o'clock,  twenty-seven  hours  after  death,
when  we  found  the  body  considerably  putrid,  although  the  weather  was
cold  for  the  season,  the  blood  having  transuded  all  over  the  face,  neck,
shoulders  and  breast,  with  a  bloody  fluid  coming  out  of  his  mouth,  with-
an  offensive  smell ; below  this  the  body  was  not  so  far  gone.

On  opening  the  abdomen,  a  good  deal  of  putrid  air  rushed  out;  then  we
observed  a  good  deal  of  fluid  blood,  principally  on  each  side  of  the  ab-
domen, with  some  coagulum  upon  the  intestines  ;  when  sponged  up  it
might  be  about  a  quart.

The  small  intestines  were  slightly  inflamed  in  many  places,  and  there
adhered. We  immediately  searched  for  the  passage  of  the  ball.

On  searching  for  the  course  of  the  ball,  we  found  that  it  had  passed  di-
rectly in,  pierced  the  peritonaeum,  entered  again  the  peritonaeum,  where  it
attaches  the  colon  to  the  loins,  passed  behind  the  ascending  colon,  and
just  appeared  at  the  right  side  of  the  root  of  the  mesentery  where  the  colon
is  attached ;  passed  behind  the  root  of  the  mesentery,  and  entered  the  lower
turn  of  the  duodenum  as  it  crosses  the  spine;  then  passed  out  of  that  gut
on  the  left  of  the  mesentery,  and  in  its  course  to  the  left  side,  it  went
through  the  jejunum,  about  a  foot  from  its  beginning,  then  through  be-
tween two  folds  of  the  lower  part  of  the  jejunum,  taking  a  piece  out  of  each,
then  passed  before  the  descending  part  of  the  colon,  and  pierced  the  peri-
tonaeum of  the  left  side,  as  also  some  of  the  muscles,  but  not  the  skin,
and  was  immediately  cut  out,  exactly  in  the  same  place  on  the  left,  where
it  entered  out  the  right ;  so  it  must  have  passed  perfectly  in  an  horizontal
direction.

There  was  no  appearance  of  extravasation  of  any  of  the  contents  of  the


548  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,

intestines  loose  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen.  The  intestines  in  many
places  were  adhering  to  one  another,  especially  near  to  the  wounds,  which
adhesions,  were  recent,  and  of  course  very  slight  ;  yet  they  shewed  a  ready
disposition  for  union,  to  prevent  the  secondary  symptoms,  or  what  may  be
called  the  consequent,  which  would  also  prove  fatal.

There  was  little  or  no  fluid in  the  small  intestines ; but  there  was  a
good  deal  of  substance  in  consistence  like  faeces,  in  broken  pieces,  about
the  size  of  a  nut  through  the  whole  track  of  the  intestine,  even  in  the  sto-
mach, which  he  vomited  up;  but  in  the  upper  end  of  the  jejunum,  as  also-
in  the  duodenum,  there  was  some  fluid  mixed  with  the  other; but  that  fluid
seemed  to  be  rather  bile. If  this  solid  part  was  excrement  then  the  valve
of  the  colon  must  not  have  done  its  duty. Was  all  the  thin  part  absorbed
to  hinder  extravasation  into  the  belly  ?  or  was  it  all  brought  back  into  the
stomach  to  be  vomited  up  ?  There  was  a  good  deal  of  air  in  the  ascending,,
but  more  especially  in  the  transverse  turn  of  the  colon.
This  case  admits  of  several  observations  and  queries.
First, the  lowness  and  gradual  sinking,  with  the  vomiting  without
blood,  bespoke  wounded  intestines,  and  those  pretty  high  up. It  shews
how  ready  nature  is  to  secure  all  unnatural  passages,  according  to  the  ne-
cessity.

Query,  what  could  be  the  cause  of  his  having  no  stool,  even  from  the
clyster  ?  Were  the  intestines  inclinable  to  be  quiet  under  such  circum-
stances? Would  not  he  have  lived  if  the  immediate  mischief  had  not  been
too  much  ?  I  think  that  if  the  immediate  cause  of  death  bad  not  been  so
violent,  nature  would  have  secured  the  parts  from  the  secondary,  viz.  the
extravasation  of  the  fceces.

What  is  the  best  practice  where  it  is  supposed  an  intestine  may  be
wounded  ?  I  should  suppose  the  very  best  practice  would  be,  to  be  quiet
and  do  nothing,  except  bleeding,  which  in  cases  of  wounded  intestines  is
seldom  necessary.

As  he  was  extremely  thirsty,  and  could  not  retain  any  thing  in  his  sto-
mach, which  if  he  could,  it  would  have  been  probably  productive  of
mischief,  by  giving  a  greater  chance  of  extravasation  ;  would  not  the


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  54^

tepid  bath  have  been  of  service,  to  have  allowed  of  fluids  to  enter  the  con-
stitution ?

It  is  very  possible  that  a  wound  of  the  gall-bladder,  but  more  readily  of
the  ductus  communis,  and  also  of  the  pancreatic  duct,  will  produce  the
same  effects,  although  not  so  quickly ;  and  it  may  be  observed,  that  a
wound  in  them  could  not  be  benefited  by  any  adhesions  that  could  take
place,  because  the  secreted  fluids  could  never,  most  probably,  get  into  the
right  channel  again,  and  would  therefore  be  the  cause  of  keeping  the  ex-
ternal wound  open,  to* discharge  the  contents,  as  we  find  to  be  the  case  in.
the  disease,  called  fistula  lacrimalis;  as  also  when  the  duct  of  the  parotid
gland  is  divided.

Of  parts  that  have  been  only  deadened.

Wounds  will  be  very  similar  to  the  abovestated  penetrating  wounds,  but
they  will  differ  from  them  in  effects,  arising  from  a  slough  separating  from
a  containing  viscus,-  for  whenever  the  slough  comes  away,  the  extraneous
or  contained  matter  of  that  viscus  will  escape  by  the  wound ;  such  as-
the  contents  of  the  stomach,  intestines,  ureters,  bladder,  etc.  the  two'
last  of  which  will  be  similar,  or  the  slough  may  escape  by  either  of  these
outlets  ;  whereas,  in  the  last  kind  of  wounds,  any  of  the  contents  that
could  possibly  escape  would  immediately  pass-  into  the  cavity  of  the  ab-
domen.

The  periods  of  these  symptoms  appearing  after  the  accident,  will  be
according  to  the  time  of  separation  ;  which  may  be  in  eight,  ten,  twelve,
or  fourteen  days.

This  new  symptom,  although  in  general  very  disagreeable,  will  not  be
dangerous  *,  for  all  the  danger  is  over  before  it  can  appear  ;  but  that  the
orifice  should  afterwards  continue,  and  become  either  an  artificial  anus,  or
urethra,  is  a  thing  to  be  avoided;  though  they  commonly  close  up,  and  the
contents  are  directed  the  right  way;  in  such  case,  nothing  is  to  be  done,  but
dressing  the  wound  superficially,  and  when  the  contents  of  the  wounded
viscus  becomes  less,  we  may  hope  for  a  cure.

*  How  far  the  contents  of  the  stomach  escaping  through  a  wound  might  not  be  attended
-with  bad  consequences,  I  cannot  pretend  to  fay.


$$o  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.

■ The  following  case  explains  the  foregoing  remarks.

A  young  gentleman  was  shot  through  the  body.  The  musket  was
loaded  with  three  balls,  but  there  were  only  two  orifices  where  they  en-
tered, and  also  only  two  where  they  came  out,  one  of  the  balls  having
followed  one  of  the  others;  that  there  were  three  that  went  through  him
was  evident,  for  they  afterwards  made  three  holes  in  the  wainscot  behind
him,  but  two  very  near  one  another.

The  balls  entered  upon  the  left  side  of  the  navel,  one  a  little  farther  out
than  the  other,  and  they  came  out  behind,  pretty  near  the  spinal  processes,
about  the  superior  vertebrae  of  the  loins.  From  the  closeness  of  the  gun  to
the  man  when  fired,  which  of  course  made  it  pass  with  great  velocity,  as
also  from  the  direction  of  the  innermost,  which  we  supposed  to  be  the
double  one,  we  were  pretty  certain  that  it  had  penetrated  the  cavity  of  the
abdomen,  but  could  not  be  so  certain  of  the  course  of  the  other.

The  first  water  he  made  after  the  accident  was  bloody,  from  which  we
knew  the  kidney  was  wounded;  but  that  symptom  soon  left  him.  He  had
no  blood  in  his  stools,  from  which  we  concluded  that  none  of  the  intes-
tines were  wounded  ;  and  no  symptoms  of  extravasation  of  the  contents  of
any  viscus  taking  place,  such  as  the  symptoms  of  inflammation  of  the  pe-
ritonaeum, we  were  still  more  confirmed  in  our  opinion.

The  symptomatic  fever  did  not  run  higher  than  could  have  been  ex-
pected; nor  was  there  more  pain  in  the  track  of  the  ball  than  might  be
imagined.

These  consequent  symptoms  of  the  immediate  injury  abated  as  soon  as
could  be  expected;  and  in  less  than  a  fortnight,  I  pronounced  him  out  of
danger  from  the  wound  ;  for  no  immediate  secondary  symptoms  having
taken  place,  I  concluded  that  whatever  cavities  the  balls  had  entered,  there
the  surrounding  parts  had  adhered,  so  that  the  passage  of  the  ball  was  by
this  means  become  a  complete  canal  ;  and  therefore  that  neither  any  ex-
traneous bodies  that  had  been  carried  in  with  the  balls,  and  had  not  been
carried  through,  nor  any  slough  that  might  separate  from  the  sides  of
the  canal,  nor  the  matter  formed  in  it,  could  now  get  into  the  cavity  of
the  abdomen,  but  must  be  conducted  to  the  external  surface  of  the  body,


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  551

either  through  the  wounds,  or  from  an  abscess  forming  for  itself,  which
would  work  its  own  exit  somewhere.

But  this  conclusion  was  supposed  to  be  too  hasty,  and  soon  after  a  new
symptom  arose,  which  alarmed  those  who  did  not  see  the  propriety  of  my
reasoning ;  which  was  some  fceces  coming  through  the  wound ;  this  new
symptom  did  not  alter  my  opinion,  respecting  the  whole  operations  of  na-
ture to  secure  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  but  it  confirmed  it,  (if  a  further
confirmation  had  been  necessary)  and  therefore  I  conceived  it  could  not
affect  life;  but  as  I  saw  the  possibility  of  this  wound  becoming  an  artificial
anus,  I  was  sorry  for  it.  It  was  not  difficult  to  account  for  the  cause  of
this  new  symptom ;  it  was  plain  that  an  intestine,  (the  descending  part  of
the  colon  most  probably)  had  only  received  a  bruise  from  the  ball,  but  suf-
ficient to  kill  it  at  this  part,  and  till  the  separation  of  the  slough  had  taken
place,  that  both  the  intestine  and  canal  were  still  complete,  and  there-
fore did  not  communicate  with  each  other  ;  but  when  the  slough  was
thrown  off,  the  two  were  laid  into  one  at  this  part,  therefore  the  contents
of  the  intestine  got  into  the  wound,  and  the  matter  from  the  wound  might
have  got  into  the  intestine.  However,  this  symptom  gradually  decreased,
by  (we  may  suppose)  the  gradual  contraction  of  this  opening,  and  an
entire  stop  to  the  course  of  the  fceces  took  place,  and  the  wounds  healed
very  kindly  up.

But  the  inflammation,  the  sympathetic  fever,  the  reducing  treatment,
and  the  spare  regimen,  all  tended  to  weaken  him  very  much.


IV.  OF  PENETRATING  WOUNDS  IN  THE  CHEST.

Little  notice  has  been  taken  of  wounds  in  the  chest  and  lungs;  in-
deed it  would  appear  at  first,  that  little  or  nothing  could  be  done ;  yet,  in
,  many  cases  a  great  deal  may  be  done  for  the  good  of  the  patient.

It  is  possible  a  wound  in  the  chest  may  be  of  the  first  kind,  viz.  only
penetrating;  yet  from  circumstances  may  prove  fatal,  as  will  be  explain-
ed in  the  second  or  complicated,  viz.  a  wound  of  the  lungs.


552.  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.

It  is  pretty  well  kaown,  that  wounds  of  the  lungs (abstracted  fronv
other  mischief) are  not  mortal. I  have  seen  several  cases  where  the
patient  has  got  well  after  being  shot  quite  through  the  body  and  lungs,
while  from  a  very  small  wound  made  by  a sword  or  bayonet  into  the
lungs, the  patients  have  died;  from  which  I  should  readily  suppose,  that
a  wound  in  the  lungs  from  a  ball,  would  in  general  do  better  than a
wound in the  same part with a pointed instrument ; and this dif-
ference in  effects  would  appear  in  many  cases  to  arise  from  the  difference
in  the  quantity  of  blood  extravasated; because  the  bleeding  from  a  ball  is
very  inconsiderable  in  comparison  to  that  from  a  cut;  and  there  is  there-
fore a  less  chance  of  extravasated  blood,  either  in  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,
or  the  cells  of  the  lungs;  another  circumstance  that  favours  the  gun-shot
wounds  in  these  parts,  is,  that  they  seldom  heal  up  externally  by  the  first
intention,  on  account  of  the  slough,  especially  at  the  wound  made  by  the
entrance  of  the  ball,  so  that  the  external  wound  remains  open  for  a  con-
siderable time,  by  which  means  any  extravasated  matter  may  escape ; but
even  this  has  often  its  disadvantages,  for  by  keeping  open  the  external
wound,  which  leads  into  the  cavity,  we  give  a  chance  to  produce  the  sup-
purative inflammation  through  the  whole  surface  of  that  cavity,  which
most  probably  would  prove  fatal, and  which  would  be  equally  so  if  no
viscus  was  wounded  ;  but  it  would  appear  that  the  cavity  of  the.  thorax
does  not  so  readily  fall  into  this  inflammation  from  a  gun-shot  wound  as
we  should  at  first  imagine;  nor  can  we  suppose  that  the  adhesive  inflam-
mation readily  takes  place  between  the  lungs  and  pleura  round  the  orifice,
as  we  described  in  the  wounds  of  the  abdomen,  because  these  parts  are  not
under  the  same  circumstances  that  other  contained,  and  containing  parts
are;  for  in  every  other  case,  the  contained  and  containing  have  the  same
degree  of  flexibility,  or  proportion  in  fize. The  brain  and  the  scull  have
not  the  same  flexibility,  but  they  bear  the  same  proportion  in  iize. From
this  circumstance, the  lungs  immediately  collapse,  when  either  wounded
themselves  or  when  a  wound  is  made  into  the  chest,  and  not  allowed  to
heal  by  the  first  intention,  and  become  by  much  too  small  for  the  cavity
of  the  thorax,  which  space,  must  be  filled  either  with  air  or  blood,  or  both-,
therefore  adhesion  cannot  readily  take  place;  but  it  very  often  happens


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  "wounds.  $$%

that  the  lungs  have  previously  adhered,  which  will  frequently  be  an  ad-
vantage.

In  the  cases  of  stabs,  especially  if  with  a  sharp  instrument,  the  vessels
will  bleed  freely,  but  the  external  wound  will  collapse,  and  cut  off  all  ex-
ternal communication.  If  the  lungs  are  wounded  in  the  same' manner,
we  must  expect  a  considerable  bleeding  from  them,  this  bleeding  will  be
in  the  general  cavity  of  the  thorax  (if  the  lungs  at  this  part  have  not  pre-
viously adhered  there)  and  likewise  into  the  cells  of  the' lungs  or  bronchea,
which  will  be  known  by  producing  a  cough,  and  in  coiisequence  of  it
a  bleeding  at  the  mouth;  for  the  blood  that  is  extravasated  into  the  air-
cells  of  the  lungs,  will  be  coughed  up  by  the  trachea,  and  by  that  means:
will  become  a  certain  symptom  of  the  lungs  being'  wounded;  but  that
which  gets  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  cannot  escape,  and  therefore  must
remain  till  the  absorbents  take  it  up-  which  they  will  do,  if  it  is  only  in
small  quantity;  but  if  in  large  quantity,  this;  extravasated' blbod:  will  pro-
duce symptoms  of  another  kind.  '  '  "*  *
- The  symptoms  of  these  accidents  are,

First,  a  great  lowness,  which  proceeds  from  the  nature  of  the  parts'
wounded,  and  perhaps  a  fainting  from  the  quantity  of  blood  lost  to  the
circulation ;  but  this  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  quantity,  and  quickness5
with  which  it  was  lost.  A  load  in  the  breast  will  be  felt,  but  more
from  a  sensation  of  this  kind,  than  from  any  real  weight;  and  a  consider-
able difficulty  in  breathing.

This  difficulty  in  breathing  will  arise  from  the  pain  the  patient  will
have  in  expanding  the  lungs  in  inspiration,  and  will  also  proceed  from
the  muscles  of  respiration  of  that  side  being  wounded,  and  this  will
dontinue  for  some  time,  from  the  succeeding  inflammation;  it  will  hin-
der the  expansion  of  the  thorax  on  that  side,  and  of  course  in  some  degree
of  the  other  side;  as  we  have  not  the  power  of  raising  one  side  without
raising  the  other*;  and  if  wounded  by  a  cutting  instrument,  the  lungs  of
that  fide  not  being  able  to  expand  fully,  by  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  being
r  •  ■ •■ ■

*  I  have  often  thought  it  a  great  pity,  that  we  dp  not  accustom  ourselves  to  move  one  side  ■
of  our  thorax  independant  of  the  other,  as  we  from  habit  move  one  eye-lid  independant  of
the  other*

4  B


554  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds.

in  part  filled  with blood,  will  also  give  the  symptoms  of  difficulty  of
breathing.

The  patient  will  not  be  able  to  lie  down,  but  must  sit  upright,  that
the  position  may  allow  of  the  descent  of  the  diaphragm,  to  give  room  in
the  chest ;  all  which  symptoms  were  strongly  marked  in  the  following
case.

A  person  received  a  stab  behind  the  left  breast  with  a  small  sword  ;  the
wound  in  the  skin  was  very  small.  He  was  almost  immediately  seized
with  a  considerable  discharge  of  blood  from  the  lungs,  to  near  a  quart,
by  the  mouth,  which  shewed  that  the  lungs  were  considerably  wounded,
for  from  the  situation  of  the  external  wound  we  were  sure  that  the  stomach
could  not  be  injured.  His  breathing  soon  became  difficult  and  painful,
and  his  pulse  quick  ;  he  was  bled  ;  these  symptoms  increased  so  fast,  that
every  one  thought  him  dying.  He  could  only  lie  on  his  back,  for  if  he
lay  on  the  sound  side,  he  could  not  breathe  in  the  least,  and  the  pain  would
not  let  him  lie  on  the  unsound  side  ;  the  easiest  position  was  an  erect  pos-
ture, which  obliged  him  to  sit  in  a  chair  for  several  days;  when  he  cough-
ed he  was  in  great  pain,  very  seldom  spit  with  the  cough,  and  never  dis-
charged any  blood  after  the  second  day,  by  which  we  supposed  that  the
bleeding  was  stopped  in  the  lungs.

While  the  parts  were  in  a  state  of  inflammation  he  was  in  great  pain,
his  breathing  excessively  quick,  and  his  pulse  hard  and  extremely  quick ;
but  as  the  inflammation  went  off,  he  drew  his  breath  in  longer  strokes,
his  pain  became  less,  and  his  pulse  not  so  quick  nor  so  hard  -,  but  this
last  circumstance  varied  as  he  moved  his  body,  coughed,  or  put  himself
into  a  passion,  which  he  often  did.

I  suspected  from  both  the  wound  and  its  effects,  that  there  was  a  good
deal  of  extravasated  blood  in  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  j  for  I  considered
that  the  blood  which  got  out  of  the  vessels  of  the  lungs  into  the  wound  in
the  lungs,  would  find  a  readier  passage  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  than
into  the  cells  of  the  lungs  ;  and,  indeed,  every  attempt  to  the  dilatation  of
the  thorax  would  rather  act  as  a  sucker  upon  the  mouth  of  the  wound  in
the  lungs,  as  the  pressure  of  the  external  air  was  taken  off  by  that  means  ;
I  proposed  the  operation  for  the  empyema,  because  the  extravasated  blood


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wot/no's,  55$

must  compress  the  lungs  of  that  side,  and  hinder  their  expansion,  and  like-
wise irritate,  and  at  last  might  produce  inflammation.  He  continued  for
some  days  with  little  variation,  but  upon  the  whole  seemed  getting  better;
but  the  day  before  he  died,  he  became  worse  in  his  breathing,  which  wc
imputed  to  his  stirring  too  much,  and  was  rather  better  on  tl*.  day  that
he  did  die:  just  before  death  he  was  taken  with  a  sort  of  suffocation,  and
in  half  an  hour  he  died.

Through  his  whole  illness  he  had  a  moist  skin,  and  sometimes  sweat
profusely,  at  last  his  legs  swelled.

At  first  he  only  took  a  spermaceti  mixture  with  a  little  opium,  which
gave  him  relief;  I  wanted  to  increase  the  opium,  but  it  was  objected  to,
for  fear  it  should  bind  the  chest  too  much,  as  it  often  does  in  asthmas,
therefore  it  was  given  with  the  squills.  On  the  day  that  he  died,  we
ordered  him  the  bark  with  a  sudorific.

As  this  was  very  different  from  a  common  asthma,  and  the  difficulty  of
breathing  arising  entirely  from  the  inflammation  of  the  intercostal  muscles
and  lungs,  and  likewise  from  having  but  one  lung,  I  thought  it  advise-
able  to  give  opium  in  this  case,  as  it  would  take  off  the  irritation  of  the
inflamed  parts,  and  therefore  allow  a  greater  stretch  or  expansion  ;  espe-
cially as  we  found  whenever  it  was  given,  that  it  gave  relief,  and  produced
these  effects.

One  might  at  first  wonder  why  he  should  breathe  with  such  difficulty,
as  he  had  one  side  whole  or  sound ;  for  I  have  seen  people  breathe  pretty
freely  who  have  had  but  one  side  to  expand ;  but  when  we  confider  the
case,  we  can  easily  account  for  this.

After  death  we  opened  him;  on  raising  the  sternum  I  cut  into  the  cavity
of  the  thorax,  and  a  great  deal  of  blood  gushed  out  at  the  incision;  we
sponged  out  of  the  left  side  of  the  thorax  above  three  quarts  of  fluid  blood;
the  coagulum  appeared  to  have  been  attracted  to  the  sides  of  the  cavity  every
where,  as  if  it  had  been  furred  over  with  the  coagulating  lymph  which  was
no  where  floating  in  the  fluid;  but  most  probably  the  extravasated  blood
had  never  coagulated,  and  this  thick  buff  crust  was  an  exudation  of  coa-
gulating lymph  from  the  lungs  and  pleura  which  covers  the  ribs,  as  in  all
inflammations;  if  so,  this  is  another  instance,  besides  that  of  the  infkm-


$  $  0  Of  the  4 real ment  z>f  gun-sUi  it&Hfifa

mation  of  veins,  in  which  the  coagulating  lymph  coagulates  immediately
upon  being  thrown  upon  the  surface,  for  if  it  had  not,  it  then  must  have
mixed  with  the  blood  in  the  chest,  and  only  been  found  floating  there.
. .  The  lungs  were  collapsed  into  a  very  small  substance,  and  therefore
firmer  thrui  common  ;  we  observed  the  wound  in  them  which  corresponded,
to  the  wound  in  the  pleura;  I  introduced  a  probe  into  the  wound  in  the'
lungs,  which  passed  near  four  inches,  but  was  not  certain  whether  it  did:
not  make  some  way  for  itself  y  however,  I  traced  the  wound  by  opening  the
lungs,  and  could  easily  distinguish  the  wounded  part  by  the  coagulated;
blood  that  lay  in  it.

I  found  the  heart  and  inside  of  the- pericardium  inflamed,  and  their  sur-
face  furred  over  with  coagulating  lymph,  similar  to  that  on  the  lungs.  The
lun<rs  of  the.  right  side  had  also  become  a  little  inflamed  on  their  anterior;
edges.  •  i .  .-'O

Wounds  in  the  lungs  generally  become  a  cause  of  a  quick  pulse;  this
likewise  may  arise  in  some  degree  from  the  lungs  being  so  immediately,
concerned  in  the  circulation,  that  any  thing  that  gives  a  check  to  the
blood's  fvec  motion  through  them,  may  afFecl:  the  heart.  But  the  pulse
becomes  hard,  which  arises  from  the  nature  of  the  inflammation  that  at-
tends, and  also  from  the  wound  being  in  a  vital  part.

In  the  cases  arising  from  balls,  nothing  in  general  is  to  be  done  but  to*
keep  quiet,  and  dress  the  wounds  superficially;  for  any  extr'avasated  blood
that  might  have  got  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  will  generally  make  its
escape  by  the  external  wound,  as  also  any  matter  from  suppuration. But
in  the  cases  of  wounds  made  by  cutting  instruments,  and  where  there  i&>
reason  to  suspect  a  considerable  quantity  of  blood  in  the  cavity  of  the
thorax,  then  we  may  ask  what  should  be  done?  and  the  natural  answer
is,  that  the  operation  for  the  empyema  should  be  performed. This  ope-
ration will  relieve  the  patient  and  bring  the  disease  to  the  simple  wound,'
and  somewhat  nearer  to  the  gun-shot  wound ;  it  should  be  performed  as'
soon  as  possible,  before  the  blood  can  have  time  to  coagulate ;  for  the  coa-'
gulum  of  the  blood  may  be  with  difficulty  extracted.  .. ,

i The  enlargement  of  the  wound  already  made  will  often  answer;  but  if


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds*  byy,

that  is  In  such  a  situation  as  to  forbid  dilatation,  then  the  common  direc-
tions for  the  empyema  are  to  be  followed  here.

-  When  all  symptoms  appear,  and  we  have  great  reason  to  suppose  a  con-
siderable extravasation  of  blood  into  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  I  think  that
we  should  not  hesitate  in  performing  the  operation  for  the  empyema.


V.  OF  CONCUSSIONS  AND  FRACTURES  OF  THE  SCULL.

These  injuries,  in  consequence  of  a  musquet-ball,  differ  in  nothing
from  the  same  accidents  arising  from  any  other  cause,  excepting  the
lodgment  of  the  ball,  which  I  imagine  will  require  no  peculiar  mode  of*
treatment.


VI.  OF  WOUNDS  COMPOUNDED  WITH  FRACTURED  BONES,  OR  CON-
TAINING EXTRANEOUS  BODIES.

:  The  compound  gun-shot  wounds,  where  bones  are  broke,  or  where1
there  are  extraneous  bodies  that  continue  the  irritation,  similar  to  com-
pound fractures,  seldom  or  ever  heal  at  once,  or  by  regular  degrees,  as  in
the  former,  but  generally  heal  very  quick  at  first,  upon  the  going  off  of
the  inflammation,  similar  to  the  healing  of  simple  gun-shot  wounds  ;  but'
when  healed  so  far,  as  to  be  affected  by  the  extraneous  bodies,  then  they'
become  slow  in  their  progress,  till  at  last  they  come  to  a  stand,  or  become
fistulous  j  in  which  state  they  continue  till  the  irritating  cause  is  removed  y
and  this  takes  place  even  if  the  dilatation  should  have  been  made  at  first
as  large  as  could  be  thought  necessary ;  so  that  the  opening  at  first,  in
such  cases,  can  only  let  out  those  extraneous  bodies  or  detached  -  bones,'
that  are  perfectly  loose,  or  become  loose  while  the  wound  continues  large  ;-
however,  even  this  can  only  take  place  in  superficial  wounds;  but  in  those
that  are  deep,  or  where  there  is  an,  exfoliation  to  take  place,  the  dilated


558  Of  the  treatment  of  gunshot  •wounds,

part  always  heals  up  long  before  they  are  fit  to  make  their  exit  ;  but  be-
fore this  happens,  the  parts  often  acquire  an  indolent  diseased  state,  and
even  when  all  extraneous  bodies  are  extracted,  the  parts  do  not  readily
heal.

When  a  wound  comes  to  this  stage,  surgeons  generally  put  in  sponge
or  other  tents  into  the  opening,  or  apply  some  corroding  medicine  to  keep
it  open,  and  also  with  a  view  to  make  it  wider;  but  this  practice  is  un-
necessary, as  a  wound  in  such  a  state  seldom  heals  entirely  over,  nor  do
tents  add  much  to  the  width  of  the  wound,  and  always  confine  the  matter
between  the  two  dressings.

Where  an  exfoliation  is  expected,  it  is  generally  better  to  expose  as
much  of  the  bone  as  possible  ;  it  keeps  up  a  kind  of  inflammation,  which
I  imagine  gives  a  disposition  for  this  process.  This  can  only  be  done
where  the  bone  is  pretty  superficial;  but  in  cases  where  the  separation
has  already  taken  place,  and  it  is  now  to  make  its  way  to  the  skin,  like
any  other  extraneous  substance,  then,  instead  of  the  practice  of  sponge
tents,  to  keep  the  orifice  in  the  skin  open,  it  would  be  often  better  in  such
cases,  to  let  the  whole  heal  over,  because  the  extraneous  body  would  form
an  abscess  round  itself,  which  would  enlarge  the  cavity,  and  produce  the
ulcerative  inflammation  quicker  towards  the  surface ;  and  when  that  was
opened,  the  extraneous  body  could  be  with  more  ease  extracted,  or  would
come  out  of  itself;  but  this  method  of  healing  the  mouths  of  fistulous
sores  is  not  always  practicable.

If  this  last  practice  has  no  inconveniences  attending  it,  it  has  this  ad-
vantage, that  the  patient  has  not  the  disagreeable  trouble  of  having  a  sore
to  dress  every  day,  till  the  extraneous  body  comes  away,  which  I  think  is
no  small  consideration.  This  practice,  however,  is  not  to  be  followed
in  every  case ;  for  instance,  if  the  wound  should  communicate  with  a
joint,  as  is  common  to  most  sores  in  the  foot  and  hand,  where  the  bones
are  diseased,  it  would  be,  in  such  cases,  very  imprudent  to  allow  the  wound
to  heal,  as  the  confined  matter  would  get  more  readily  into  the  different
joints^  and  increase  the  disease  ;  there  may  be  other  causes  to  forbid  this,
as  a  general  practice.

If  wounds  are  to  be  kept  open  at  their  mouths,  whose  bottoms  have  not


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  559

a  disposition  to  heal,  they  should  be  kept  open  to  that  bottom ;  because,
whenever  they  do  heal  at  their  mouths,  it  is  most  commonly  owing  to
their  sides  underneath  first  uniting  ;  for  the  skin  will  seldom  unite  when
all  beyond  it  is  open.

In  wounds  that  become  fistulous,  where  there  is  no  extraneous  body,
there  is  always  a  diseased  bottom,  which  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  having
the  same  effect  as  an  extraneous  substance.  To  alter  this  diseased  dispo-
sition, they  should  be  opened  freely,  as  large  openings  produce  quick  in-
flammation, quick  suppuration,  and  quick  granulations,  which  are  ge-
nerally sound  when  they  arise  from  such  a  cause  j  on  the  other  hand,>
letting  such  wounds  heal  at  their  mouths,  has  often  a  salutary  effect,  as  it
becomes  a  means  of  destroying  this  diseased  part  by  the  formation  of  an-
abscess  there,  and  in  general,  there  can  be  no  better  way  of  coming  at  a
part  or  extraneous  body,  than  by  the  formation  of  an  abscess  there.  It  is  a
natural  way  of  opening  to  relieve  diseased  parts;  but  we  often  find  in  prac-
tice, that  this  method  is  not  sufficient,  either  for  the  extraction  of  extra-
neous bodies,  or  to  expose  the  diseased  bottom,  excepting  these  abscesses
are  opened  very  largely  by  art,  so  as  to  expose  the  whole  of  the  diseased
parts  or  extraneous  body. ■


VII.  OF  THE  TIME  PROPER  FOR  REMOVING  INCURABLE  PARTS.

Many  gun-shot  wounds  are  at  the  very  first  evidently  incurable,  whe-
ther in  a  part  that  cannot  be  removed,  or  in  one  that  will  admit  of  being
removed.  When  such  wounds  are  in  parts  that  will  not  admit  of  a  removal
of  the  parts  injured,  then  nothing  can  be  done  by  surgery ;  but  when  in  a
part  that  can  be  removed,  then  a  removal  of  the  injured  part  is  to  be  put
in  practice  y  but  even  this  is  to  be  under  certain  restrictions  -,  perhaps  it
should  not  be  done  immediately  upon  the  receiving  of  the  injurv,  except-
ing where  a  considerable  blood-vessel  is  wounded,  so  as  to  endanger  the
life  of  the  person,  and  that  it  absolutely  cannot  be  taken  up ;  or  it  is  sus~


OT


Of  the  treatment  of  gun -shot  wounds.


pected  that  the  inflammation,  in  consequence  of. the  accident  will  kill*
£>y  which  means  you  have  only  the  inflammation  in  consequence  of  the
amputation;  but  this  is  a  bad  resourse,  especially  if  it  is  a  lower  extremity
that  is  to  be  amputated,  and  which  is  perhaps  the  only  part  that  can  be
removed  of  which  the  inflammation  will  kill.

How  far  the  same  practice  is  to  be  followed  in  cases  which  we  may  sup-
pose will  not  kill ;  but  that  the  part  is  so  hurt,  as  to  all  appearance  not
to  be  in  the  power  of  surgery  to  save,  I  will  not  now  determine.  This  is
a  very  different  case  from  the  former,  and  its  consequences  depend  more
upon  contingences,  so  that  the  part  should  be  removed  only  when  the  state
of  the  patient  in  other  respects  will  admit  of  it ;  but  this  is  seldom  the
case,  for  few  people  in  full  health  are  in  that  state,  and  still  less  so  those
who  are  usually  the  subjects  of  gun-shot  wounds ;  the  situation  they  are
in  at  the  time,  from  the  hurry  of  mind,  makes  it  here  in  general  to  be  the.
very  worst  practice;  it  will  in  general,  therefore,  be  much  better  to  wait
till  the  inflammation,  and  all  the  effects  of  both  the  irritation  and  inflam-
mation shall  be  gone  off.

If  these  things  are  not  sufficiently  attended  to,  and  the  first  inflamma-
tion, as  in  the  first  stated  case,  (for  instance,  that  which  is  likely  to
prove  mortal)  is  allowed  to  go  on,  the  patient  will  most  probably  loose  his
life  ;  or  if  the  first  inflammation  is  such  as  is  likely  to  go  off,  according
to  the  last  stated  case,  then  we  should  allow  it  to  go  off  before  we  ope-
rate, and  not  run  the  risk  of  producing  death  by  an  operation  ;  for  I  have
already  observed,  few  can  support  the  consequences  of  the  loss  of  a  lower
extremity  when  in  full  health  and  vigour  :  we  know  that  a  violent  inflam-
mation will  in  few  hours  alter  the  healthy  disposition,  and  give  a  turn  to
the  constitution,  especially  if  a  considerable  quantity  of  blood  has  been
lost,  which  most  probably  will  be  the  case  where  both  accident  and  ope-
ration immediately  succeed  one  another.

The  patient  under  such  circumstances  becomes  low,  simply  by  the  ani-
mal life  loosing  its  powers,  .and  hardly  ever  recovers  afterwards.

After  considering  the  curative  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  and  other
accidents  common  to  the  soldier,  as  also  the  sailor,  let  us  further  con-
eider  the  treatment  of  those  patients,  whose  wounds  at  the  very  first  ap-


Of  the  treatment  of  gunshot  wounds,  561

pear  to  be  incurable,  when  they  are  in  parts  that  will  admit  of  being  re-
moved.

The  operation  itself  is  the  same  as  in  other  cases,  and  the  only  subjects
of  peculiar  consideration  here  are  the  situation  of  the  patient,  and  the
proper  time  for  performing  the  operation  after  the  injury.

I  have  already  given  some  directions  with  regard  to  the  proper  time  of
operating,  in  treating  upon  the  dilatation  of  gun-shot  wounds,  which  are
in  some  degree  applicable  here ;  but  we  shall  consider  this  now  more  fully,
as  the  proper  time  of  removing  a  part  is  often  much  shorter  than  that  of
dilating.

Amputation  of  an  extremity  is  almost  the  only  operation  that  can,  and
is  performed  immediately  on  receiving  the  injury.

As  these  injuries  in  the  soldier  are  generally  received  at  a  distance  from
all  care,  excepting  what  may  be  called  chirurgical,  it  is  proper  we  should
consider  how  far  the  one  should  be  practised  without  the  other.  In  ge-
neral, surgeons  have  not  endeavoured  to  delay  it  till  the  patient  has  been
housed,  and  put  in  the  way  of  a  cure;  and,  therefore,  it  has  been  a  com-
mon practice  to  amputate  on  the  field  of  battle ;  nothing  can  be  more  im-
proper than  this  practice,  for  the  following  reasons.  In  such  a  situation
it  is  almost  impossible  for  a  surgeon,  in  many  instances,  to  make  himself
sufficiently  master  of  the  case,  so  as  to  perform  so  capital  an  operation  with
propriety;  and  it  admits  of  dispute,  whether  at  any  time,  and  in  any  place,
amputation  should  be  performed  before  the  first  inflammation  is  over :
when  a  case  is  so  violent  as  not  to  admit  of  a  cure  in  any  situation,  it  is  a
chance  if  the  patient  will  be  able  to  bear  the  consequent  inflammation,
therefore,  in  such  a  case  it  might  appear,  at  first  sight,  that  the  best  prac-
tice would  be  to  amputate  at  the  very  first ;  but  if  the  patient  is  not  able
to  support  the  inflammation  arising  from  the  accident,  it  is  more  than
probable  he  would  not  be  able  to  support  the  amputation  and  its  con-
sequences :  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  case  is  such  as  will  admit  of  being
brought  through  the  first  inflammation,  although  not  curable,  we  should
certainly  allow  of  it,  for  we  may  be  assured,  that  the  patient  will  be  better
able  to  bear  the  second.

If  the  chances  are  so  even,  where  common  circumstances  in  life  favour

4C


5  ft  2  Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  ivciwds.

the  amputation,  how  must  it  be  where  they  do  not  ?  how  must  it  be  with
a  man,  whose  mind  is  in  the  height  of  agitation,  arising  from  fatigue,  fear,
distress,  etc.?  These  circumstances  must  add  greatly  to  the  consequent
mischief,  and  cast  the  balance  much  in  favor  of  forbearance^

If  it  should  be  said,  that  agreeable  to  my  argument,  the  same  circum-f
stances  of  agitation  will  render  the  accident  itself  more  dangerous  ?  I  an-
swer, that  the  amputation  is  a  violence  superadded  to  the  injury  ;  there-
fore, heightens  the  danger,  and  when  the  injury  alone  proves  fatal,  it  is
by  slower  means.

In  the  first  case,  it  is  only  inflammation  ;  in  the  second,  it  is  inflamma-
tion, loss  of  substance,  and  most  probably  loss  of  more  blood,  as  it  is  to
be  supposed  that  a  good  deal  has  been  lost  from  the  accident,  not  to  men-
tion the  awkward  manner  in  which  it  must  be  done.

The  only  thing  that  can  be  said  in  favour  of  amputation  on  the  field  of
battle  is,  that  the  patient  may  be  moved  with  more  ease  without  a  limb*
than  with  a  shattered  one ;  however,  experience  is  the  best  guide  ;  and  I
believe  it  is  universally  allowed  by  those  whom  we  are  to  esteem  the  best-
judges,  those  who  have  had  opportunity  of  making  comparative  obser-
vations, with  men  who  have  been  wounded  in  the  same  battle,  some
where  amputation  had  been  performed  immediately,  and  others  where
it  had  been  left  till  all  circumstances  favoured  the  operation ;  it.  has-been
found  that  few  did  well  who  had  their  limbs  cut  off  on  the  held  of  battle;
while  a  much  greater  proportion  have  done  well,  in  similar  cases,  who
were  allowed  to  go  on  till  the  first  inflammation  was  over,  and  underwent
amputation  afterwards.

There  will  be  exceptions  to  the  above  observations,  which  must  be  in
a  great  measure  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  surgeon  ;  but  a  few  of  these
objections  may  be  mentioned,  so  as  to  give  a  general  idea  of  what  is  meant.
First,  it  is  of  less  consequence,  whichsoever  way  it  is  treated,  if  the  part
to  be  amputated  is  an  upper  extremity  ;  but  it  may  be  observed,  that  there
will  be  little  occasion  in  general  to  amputate  an  upper  extremity  upon  the
field,  because  there  will  be  less  danger  in  moving  such  a  patient,  than  if
the  injury  had  happened  to  the  lower.

Secondly,  if  the  parts  are  very  much  torn,  so  that  the  limb  only  hangs


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  563

by  a  small  connexion,  then  the  circumstance  of  the  loss  of  «o  much  sub-
stance to  the  constitution  cannot  be  an  objection,  as  it  takes  place  from
the  accident ;  and,  indeed,  every  thing  that  can  possibly  attend  an  ampu-
tation ;  therefore,  in  many  cases,  it  may  be  more  convenient  to  remove
the  whole.  In  many  cases  it  may  be  necessary  to  perform  the  operation  to
get  at  blood-vessels,  which  may  be  bleeding  too  freely;  for  the  searching
after  them  may  do  more  mischief  than  the  operation.

I  have  already  observed,  that  gun-shot  wounds  do  not  bleed  so  freely  as
those  made  by  cutting  instruments,  and  are,  therefore,  attended  with  less
danger  of  that  kind  ;  however,  it  may  often  happen,  that  a  considerable
vessel  shall  be  divided,  and  a  considerable  bleeding  take  place;  in  such
cases  no  time  is  to  be  lost,  the  vessels  must  be  taken  up  to  prevent  a
greater  evil :  this  operation  may,  in  many  cases,  be  attended  with  con-
siderable trouble,  especially  as  it  will,  in  general,  be  on  the  field  of  action.
Here  the  sailor  has  the  advantage  of  the  soldier.

It  will  also  be  immediately  necessary  on  the  field  to  replace  many  parts
that  would  destroy  the  patient  if  their  restoration  was  delayed,  such  as  the
bowels  or  lungs  protruding  out  of  their  cavities;  to  remove  large  bodies,
such  as  a  piece  of  shell  sticking  in  the  flesh,  which  would  give  great  pain,
and  do  mischief  by  moving  the  whole  together.

Very  little  can  be  done  to  relieve  the  brain  in  such  a  situation.


VIII.  OF  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.

Bleeding  is  recommended  in  gun-shot  wounds,  and  in  such  a  man-
ner, as  if  of  more  service  in  them  than  wounds  in  general ;  but  I  do
not  see  this  necessity  more  than  in  other  wounds  that  have  done  the  same
mischief,  and  where  the  same  inflammation,  and  other  consequences  are
expected.

Bleeding  is  certainly  to  be  used  here,  as  in  all  wounds  where  there  is  a
strong  and  full  habit,  and  where  we  expect  considerable  inflammation
and  symptomatic  fever;  but  if  it  is  such  a  gun-shot  wound,  as  not  to  pro-


564


Of  the  treatment  of  gunshot  "wounds.


duce  considerable  effects,  either  local  or  constitutional,  I  would  not  bleed
merely  because  it  is  a  gun-shot  wound;  and  from  what  I  have  seen,  I  think
that  inflammation,  etc.  does  not  run  so  high  in  these  wounds,  as  I  should
have  at  first  expected.  I  believe  this  is  the  case  with  all  contused  wounds,
where  death  in  the  part  is  a  consequence  :  a  contused  wound  is  somewhat
similar  to  the  effects  of  a  caustic  ;  for  while  the  separation  of  the  dead
part  is  forming,  the  suppurative  inflammation  is  retarded,  and  therefore
not  so  violent;  but  this  can  only  be  said  of  those  wounds  which  are  not
complicated  with  any  other  injury,  except  what  was  produced  by  the  balls
passing  through  soft  parts  •  for  if  a  bone  is  broke,  it  will  inflame  like  any
other  compound  fracture.

It  is  often  of  service  in  the  time  of  inflammation  to  bleed  in  the  part
with  leeches,  or  by  punctures  with  a  lancet ;  this  helps  to  empty  the  ves-
sels of  the  part  to  lessen  the  inflammation  sooner,  and  of  course  to  pro-
mote suppuration;  but  I  must  own  that  bleeding  must  be  used  with  great
caution,  where  inflammation  and  fever  run  very  high,  for  to  reduce  the
patient  equal  to  the  action  at  the  time  (which,  whether  an  increased
action,  or  an  acquired  one,  is  only  temporary)  will  be  reducing  him  often
too  much  for  the  constitution  to  support  life,  when  this  action  ceases ;
for  the  very  worst  thing  that  can  happen,  is  the  patient  being  reduced  too
low ;  we  often  afterwards  find  more  difficulty  in  keeping  up  with  cor-
dials, bark,  etc.  than  we  find  in  lowering  ;  and  we  may  avail  ourselves
of  observing  those  who  have  lost  considerable  quantities  of  blood  from
the  accident,  which  is  always  immediate,  and  we  find  too,  that  a  se-
cond bleeding,  by  some  other  accident,  although  very  small  in  quantity,
often  destroys  our  patient  very  quickly  ;  but  this  will  in  a  great  measure
depend  upon  the  seat  of  the  injury  ;  for  in  cases  of  great  violence  done  to
some  parts  of  our  body,  bleeding  answers  better  than  in  others,  because
the  symptoms  of  dissolution,  and  dissolution  itself,  come  on  sooner  from
mischief  done  to  some  parts,  than  when  it  is  done  to  others.

A  man  will  bear  bleeding  better  after  an  amputation  of  the  arm  than
leg;  better  after  a  compound  fracture  of  the  arm  than  the  leg;  he  will  bear
bleeding  better  after  an  injury  done  to  the  head,  chest,  the  lungs,  etc.
than  to  either  the  arm  or  leg.


Of  the  treatment  of  gun-shot  wounds,  565

Wc  find  that  injuries  done  to  inactive  parts,  such  as  joints,  do  worse,
and  are  more  susceptible  of  irritation  than  those  in  fleshy  parts  of  the  same
situation.

It  would  appear  upon  the  whole,  that  the  decay  of  animal  life  is  sooner
brought  on,  when  the  inflammation  is  in  a  part  whose  circulation  is  not  so
strong,  and  where  the  nervous  influence,  or  the  force  of  the  circulation  is
far  removed.

Bark  is  greatly  recommended  in  gun-shot  wounds,  and  with  good  rea-
son ;  but  it  is  ordered  indiscriminately  to  all  patients  that  have  received
such  wounds,  whatever  the  symptoms  or  constitution  of  the  patient  may
be.  That  there  is  no  better  medicine  for  wounds  in  general ;  not  only
when  the  inflammation  is  gone  off,  but  in  the  time  of  inflammation,  if  the
the  patient  is  rather  low;  and,  indeed,  before  it  comes  on,  experience  daily
shews.  Bark,  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  strengthener,  or  regulator  of  the
system,  and  an  antispasmodic,  both  of  which  destroy  irritation  ;  the  bark.
and  gentle  bleedings,  when  the  pulse  begins  to  rise,  are  the  best  treat-
ment that  I  know  of  in  inflammations  that  arise  either  from  accidents  or
operations ;  one  lessens  the  volume  of  the  blood,  and  the  increased  animal
powers  at  the  time,  which  makes  the  circulation  more  free  -y  so  that  the
heart  labours  less,  and  simple  circulation  goes  on  more  freely;  the  other
gives  to  the  blood  that  which  makes  it  less  irritating ;  makes  the  blood-
vessels do  their  proper  offices,  and  gives  to  the  nerves  their  proper  sensa-
tions>  which,  take  off  the  fever*


Tlate I.


Fig.  i.


Fig.  2.


Fig.  3.


: , ,:'(


'/■


" '.  //,;//,-,, .,,-,///!.


i  5*7  I


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES,


PLATE  FIRST.


In  this  plate  is  represented  the  embrio  of  the  chick  in  the  incubated  egg,
at  three  different  stages  of  its  formation,  beginning  with  the  earliest  visible
appearanceof  distinct  organization.  The  preparations  from  which  these
figures  are  taken  form  part  of  a  complete  series,  contained  in  Mr.  Hun-
ter's collection  of  comparative  anatomy.  They  are  meant  to  illustrate
two  positions  laid  down-in  this  work,  viz.  That  the  blood  is  formed  be-
fore the  vessels,  and  when  coagulated,  the  vessels  appear  to  arise;  that
when  new  vessels  are  produced  in  a  part,  they  are  not  always  elonga-
tions from  4he  original  ones,  but  vessels  newly  formed,  which  afterwards
open  a  communication  with  the  original.

FIGURE  I.

In  this  figure  the  only  parts  that  are  distinctly  formed,  are  two  blood-
vessels j  on  each  side  of  these  is  a  row  of  small  dots  or  specks  of  coagulated
blood,  which  are  afterwards  to  become  blood-vessels.

FIGURE II.

Tile  formation  of  the  embrio  is  further  advanced,  vessels  appear  to  be
rising  up  spontaneously  in  different  parts  of  the  membrane  -y  and  the  specks,
out  of  which  they  are  produced,  are  in  many  parts  very  evident.

FIGURE III.

The  number  of  blood-vessels  is  very  considerably  increased;  they  now
form  a  regular  system  of  vessels,  composed  of  larger  trunks,  and  a  vast
number  of  ramifications  going  off  from  them.


[568]


PLATE  SECOND.

This  plate  represents  a  section  of  the  human  uterus  in  the  first  month
after  impregnation.  The  uterus  itself  is  a  little  enlarged  in  size,  and
thickened  in  its  substance  ;  its  cavity  every  where  lined  with  a  coagulum
of  blood,  having  a  smooth  internal  surface,  but  adhering  firmly  to  the
uterus.

The  arteries  are  injected  to  shew  that  it  is  uncommonly  vascular,  and
vessels  are  found  to  be  injected  in  different  parts  of  the  coagulum.

The  object  of  this  plate  is  to  shew  the  readiness  with  which  vessels  are
formed  in  coagulated  blood,  when  attached  to  a  living  surface,  and  its
vascularity  being  to  answer  useful  purposes  in  the  machine ;  of  which  this
is  a  remarkable  instance,  as  it  is  to  form  the  outer  membrane  of  the  foetus
or  the  connecting  medium  between  it  and  the  uterus.

FIGURE  I.

A  longitudinal  section  of  the  uterus,  in  which  the  cavity  is  exposed.

A.  The  os  tincae  projecting  into  the  vagina,  of  which  there  is  a  small
portion,  to  shew  the  length  to  which  the  os  tineas  projects.

BB.  The  cervix  uteri.

CCC.  The  coagulated  blood  smooth  upon  its  internal  surface,  although
extremely  irregular.

DD.  The  cut  surface  of  the  substance  of  the  uterus,  which  has  so  inti-
mate a  connexion  with  the  coagulum  that  the  one  appears  to  be  con-
tinued into  the  other.  The  laminated  appearance  is  produced  by  the
section  of  enlarged  veins  in  a  collapsed  state,  which  are  extremely
numerous.

FIGURE II.

Is  a  thin  slice  of  the  substance  of  the  uterus  and  the  coagulum  adhering
to  it,  dried,  and  viewed  in  a  microscope,  to  shew  the  vascularity  of  the  ute-
rus, whose  vessels  are  distinctly  seen,  continued  into  the  coagulum,  and
passing  about  halfway  through  its  substance.


/'/n/r //


Fig.  I.


Fig.  2  .


■■I


111111111111^^
IsHtllllllllllBI


'' ,, •  '/,-i  /t<-n •rin/.i.


PlaA III


Fig.  2.


*p?g


//. '  /;,// ,/,/.


■  ■</„//,,,  .„■„//,


[5«9]


PLATE  THIRD.

This  represents  a  front  view  of  the  human  testicle,  upon  the  body  of
which  is  a  coagulum  of  blood  adhering  to  it.  For  the  better  under-
standing this  plate  it  will  be  necessary  to  give  at  length  the  history  of  the
case.

A  man  came  into  St.  George's  Plospital  with  an  hydrocele,  for  which
he  was  tapped  with  a  lancet.  When  the  water  was  evacuated,  the  tes-
ticle was  larger  to  the  feel  than  common,  and  in  a  month  the  tunica  va-
ginalis was  as  much  distended  as  before  the  operation.  The  radical  cure
was  now  determined  upon  ;  the  tunica  vaginalis  was  slit  open,  but  the
testicle  being  enlarged  it  was  thought  proper  to  extract  it.  Upon  the
body  of  the  testicle  was  found  a  coagulum  of  blood,  resembling  a  leech  in
appearance,  and  in  the  angle  between  the  testicle  and  epididymis,  was
another  smaller  one ;  at  some  parts  it  adhered  to  the  testicle  and  epidi-
dymis and  at  others  it  was  loose  from  both.

The  adhesion  of  the  large  coagulum  was  firm,  although  it  admitted  of  a
separation,  which  was  made  at  one  end;  when  separated,  fibres  were  plainly
seen  running  between  it  and  the  testicle.  The  adhesions  of  the  small
coagulum  were  in  many  places  still  firmer.  This  blood  had  been  extra-
vasated  by  the  puncture  made  with  the  lancet  in  drawing  off  the  water,
and  had  fallen  down  upon  the  testicle,  where  it  coagulated.

Over  the  whole  surface  of  the  tunica  vaginalis  there  were  vessels  filled
with  blood,  and  clots  of  extravasated  blood  in  different  parts.

figure  r.
The  testicle,  with  the  tunica  vaginalis  slit  open,  exposing  its  surface.
AA. The  body  of  the  testicle.

B.  A small  hydatid arising  from  its  surface,  which  occurs  not  unfre-

quently in  that  situation,  viz.  just  where  the  epididymis  takes  its
origin  from  the  testicle.

C.  The smaller  coagulum  lying  in  the  angle  between  the  body  of  the

testicle  and  the  epididymis.

4D


[  57°  ]

D.  The  large  coagulum  adhering  to  the  body  of  the  testicle.
EEE.  The  tunica  vaginal  is  turned  back.

FIGURE II.

A  portion  of  the  tunica  vaginalis  magnified  to  shew  the  appearance  of
its  vessels,  and  of  the  small  specks  of  extravasated  blood  in  different  parts.


P/afe .  JV


8k


i


v//  w.


//. '■//,//,■„ ;.■„//,


iS7*  ]


PLATE  FOURTH.

In  this  plate  we  have  a  different  view  of  the  same  testicle,  after  the  ves-
sels were  injected,  very  much  magnified,  by  which  means  they  were  ren-
dered more  conspicuous.  The  whole  surface  of  the  testicle  now  appeared
to  be  a  layer  of  coagulating  lymph  become  vascular.

The  surface  of  adhesion  of  the  larger  coagulum  was  injected  for  about
one-twentieth  part  of  an  inch,  and  extremely  full  of  distinct  vessels.

The  smaller  coagulum  was  in  many  places  injected  through  and
through,  in  others  only  for  a  little  way  along  the  surfaceof  adhesion.

A  A.  The  layer  of  coagulating  lymph  covering  the  testicle.

B.  The  hydatid.

CCC.  The  smaller  coagulum  more  exposed  than  in  plate  third  and  the
vessels  running  upon  different  parts  distinctly  seen.  The  lower  por-
tion is  detached  at  one  end,  and  was  only  vascular  at  the  neck,  by
which  it  adhered.

DD.  The  large  coagulum.

EEE.  The  tunica  vaginalis  turned  back.


[  m  ]


PLATE  FIFTH.

Represents  t>vo  rabbits'  ears,  one  in  the  natural  state,  the  other  in  an
inflamed  state,  in  consequence  of  having  been  frozen  and  thawed.

The  vessels  are  injected,  and  as  they  belonged  to  the  same  head,  the
force  applied,  and  other  circumstances  must  have  been  exactly  similar.

The  difference  in  the  size  of  the  vessels,  and  the  difference  in  the  thick-
ness of  the  ears  themselves,  is  very  evident  ;  but  there  was  an  opacity  in
the  inflamed  ear  compared  with  the  other,  which  it  was  not  possible  to
express.

FIGURE I.

The  ear  in  its  natural  state.
AA.  The  projecting  part  of  the  ear.
B.  That  part  which  is  covered  by  the  skin  of  the  head.
CCC,  The  principal  arterial  trunk.


FIGURE II,

The  inflamed  ear.
A  A.  B.  CCC.  represent  the  same  parts  as  in  figure  one.
D.  A  branch  rather  larger  than  the  trunk,  not  distinguishable  in  the  na-
tural state  of  the  ear.


P/ate  v


Fia I.


Fi>t  2.


<T  '■  \  '■


// -//'■,■//,■„  ,,,;,//,


J'y.J.


Fia.2.


m.


//.://; /A;, «C„A


[  $71  ]


PLATE  SIXTH.

FIGURE  I.

A  portion  of  the  ilium  taken  from  the  intestines  of  an  ass.  The  intes-
tine was  in  a  state  of  inflammation,  and  shews  the  internal  surface  of  the
gut  partly  covered  by  a  layer  of  coagulating  lymph  thrown  out  by  the
great  degree  of  inflammation  which  the  parts  had  undergone.

The  internal  membrane  was  extremely  vascular,  and  when  injected,
vessels  were  seen  in  portions  of  the  coagulating  lymph,

A  A.  The  inner  surface  of  the  intestine,

BB.  The  coagulating  lymph  which  adhered  to  it.

FIGURE II.

The  peritoneal  coat  of  a  portion  of  the  human  intestine,  in  an  inflamed
state,  to  shew  its  vascularity,  and  to  shew  a  small  portion  of  coagulating
lymph  attached  to  it  by  a  narrow  neck,  which  is  supplied  with  vessels
from  it.


[  574]


PLATE  SEVENTH.

A  ramifying  portion  of  coagulating  lymph  coughed  up  from  the  lungs.
The  history  of  the  case  is  as  follows :

A  man,  aged  twenty-two,  naturally  healthy,  had  his  constitution  much
weakened  by  a  severe  course  of  mercury,  which  brought  on  a  very  violent
cough  ;  he  expectorated  a  quantity  of  mucus,  often  mixed  with  blood.
His  pulse  became  so  irregular  as  not  to  be  counted,  and  he  generally  felt
a  cutting  pain  in  his  chest.

In  a  fortnight  from  this  attack  he  began  coughing  up  small  pieces  of
coagulating  lymph,  like  worms ;  these  always  produced  a  fit  of  coughing
in  their  expulsion,  and  left  an  excessive  soreness  in  some  part  of  the  chest;
these  portions  were  very  numerous,  increased  in  size,  and  had  a  branching
appearance  ;  the  fits  of  coughing  became  also  more  violent.  The  spe-
cimen here  represented  was  one  of  the  largest ;  as  they  increased  in  size,
the  fits  became  less  frequent,  and  at  length  disappeared,  and  the  man  got
well.  The  patient  was  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Saumarez,  of  Newington
Butts,  who  gave  the  preparation  to  Mr.  Hunter.


Pta& VII


r%g  mm


•"_


mi


//


H .  ■//;//,,, .,,„//


Plate  VIII.


■  /.  • /*/  / ,  // ,/,■/ ,


' ■  ■  '/c,  //, ■// .),-,,  //,


[  575  ]


PLATE  EIGHTH.

This  represents  the  uterus  and  vagina  of  an  ass,  on  which  the  experi-
ments were  made  to  produce  inflammation  upon  its  internal  surface.  The
inflammation  was  followed  by  an  exudation  of  coagulating  lymph,  an
effect  which  is  only  produced  on  the  inner  surface  of  a  canal  opening  ex-
ternally by  inflammation  in  its  greatest  degree  of  violence.

The  vagina  is  slit  open  on  the  opposite  side  to  that  represented  in  this
plate,  and  the  uterus  is  opened  on  the  exposed  side,  shewing  a  coagulum,
the  end  of  which  is  in  the  beginning  of  the  horn ,  the  other  horn  is  not
opened.

A.  The  vagina  slit  on  the  opposite  side.

BB.  The  common  uterus  slit  open,  which  exposes  the  coagulum.
CC.  One  of  the  horns  of  the  uterus  slit  open  at  its  junction  with  the  com-
mon cavity,  in  which  lay  the  extreme  end  of  the  coagulum.
D.  The  other  horn  unopened.

EEEE.  The  coagulum  hanging  down  from  the  vagina,  to  which  it  ad-
hered, but  loose  at  the  lower  extremity.
