Popular Romances of the West of England, First Series (Robert Hunt, 1865; public domain)
===============================================================================
First series of Hunt's Cornish folklore — the Mermaid of Zennor and other sea-legends, drolls, and superstitions of old Cornwall. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/popularromances00huntgoog).

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/


1


POPULAR   ROMANCES

OF  THE  '  y  ^

WEST   OF  ENGLAND;

on,

61Jr  €m\Ml

COLLECTED   AND   EDITED   BY

ROBERT    HUNT,     F.R.S.


FIRST    SERIES.


LONDON :
JOHN   CAMDEN   IIOTTEN,  PICCADILLY.

1865.

[liigitt  of  Tramlatiofi  is  reserved.'}


J

"  '  Have  you  any  stories  like  tbat,  gudewife?'  1

"  'Ah,'  she  said;  'there  were  plenty  of  people  that  could  tell  those  stories jj

to  hear  them  telling  them  over  the  fire  at  night;  but  people  is  so  changed  wijj

that  they  care  for  nothing.' "  ;


6^6V  <^y


LOSrON:    JOHK  CAMDEN  HOTTEN,  PICCADILLY.


ft        .  i


263,  Hampstead  Road,  N.W.,
Jpril  iSthy   1865.

Dear  Mr.  Hotten,

I  have  received  your  note,  in  which  you  express  a  doubt  as  to
whether  some  portion  of  the  public  will  understand  my  representation
of  the  Giant  "  Bolster."

To  all  such  persons,  I  would  beg  of  them  to  reflect  that  if  a
Giant  could  stride  6  miles  across  a  country  he  must  be  12  miles  in
height,  according  to  the  proportions  of  the  human  figure.

In  order  to  get  a  sight  of  the  head  of  such  a  Giant,  the  spectator
must  be  distant  a  mile  or  two  from  the  figure.  This  would,  by
adding  half  the  "  stride**  and  above  1 1  miles  perpendicular,  place
the  spectator  about  1 5  miles  distant  from  the  Giant's  head,  which
head,  in  proportion  to  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  would  be  about
three-quarters  of  a  mile,  measuring  from  the  chin  to  the  crown  of
the  head.

Now  let  any  one  calculate,  according  to  the  laws  of  perspective,
what  size  such  a  head  would  be  at  such  a  distance.

To  give  a  little  insight  into  the  matter  of  perspective,  let  any
one  imagine  that  they  are  looking  down  a  street,  1 5  miles  long,  of
large  houses,  and  then  calculate  what  size  the  last  house  would  be  at
the  further  end  of  the  street ;  and  it  must  therefore  be  recollected
that  every  part  of  such  a  huge  body  must  lessen  in  the  same  way —
body  and  lunbs — smaller  by  degrees,  if  not  beautifUly  less.

I  selected  this  subject  from  my  friend  Robert  Hunt's  work  as
one  of  the  numerous  proofs,  which  are  shown  in  both  the  volumes,
of  the  horrible  dark  ignorance  of  the  Early  Ages — a  large  amount
of  which  ignorance  and  darkness,  I  am  sorry  to  find,  still  remains.

I  hope  that  these  few  lines  will  explain  satisfactorily  why  Giant
**  Bolster"  has  been  thus  displayed  by.

Yours  truly,

GEORGE    CRUIKSHANK.

P.S. — The  first  time  tl^t  I  put  a  very  large  figure  in  j)erspective
was  about  40  years  back,  in  illustrating  that  part  of  "  Paradise  Lost"
where  Milton  describes  Satan  as

"Prone  on  the  flood,  extended  long  and  large,
Lay  floating  many  a  rood."

This  I  never  published,  but  possibly  I  may  do  so  one  of  these  days.


CONTENTS.


PAOt.

ISTBODUCnOK, vii

THE  GIANTS.

1.  The  Age  of  the  GiantBy 3

2.  Corineus  and  Gogmagog, .15

a  The  Giants  of  the  Mount, 18

4.  The  Key  of  the  Giant's  Castle, 20

6.  The  Bival  Giants, 21

6w  The  Giants  of  Trencrom  or  Trecrobhen, 22

7.  The  Giants  at  Pky, 25

&  Holibum  of  the  Cairn, 26

a  The  Giant  of  Nancledry, 28

10.  Trebiggan  the  Giant, 28

IL  The  Lord  of  Pengersmck  and  the  Giant  of  St  Michaers  Mount,     .  29

12.  The  Giant  of  St  Michaers  Mount  loses  his  Wife,      .        .        .        .  dO

13.  Tom  and  the  Giant  Blunderbuss;  or.  The  Wheel  and  Exe  Fight,    .  31

14.  Tom  the  Giant— his  Wife  Jane,  and  Jack  the  Tinkeard,         .        .  37
Ifiw  How  Tom  and  the  Tinkeard  found  the  Tin,  and  how  it  led  to

MorvaFair, 46

16.  The  Giant  of  Morva, 65

17.  The  Giant  Bolster, 56

18.  The  Hack  and  Cast, 58

19.  The  Giant  Wrath,  or  Balph, 59

90.  Ordulph  ^e  Giant, 60

THEFAIBIES.

IL  Tlie  Elfin  Creed  of  Cornwall, 63

S.  Kimiiig  a  Fairy, 69

8.  Changelings,                            71

9C.  ThALort  Child, 72

Su  AKatiTePfgi^Story, 74

96.  TlM  Night-Riders, >«        .  74

V.  TlM  Fairy  Tools;  or.  Barker's  Ejiee, 75

&  13iePlikiM  in  the  Cellar, 76


iv  Contents.


29.  The  Spriggans  of  Trencrom  Hill,    .        .        .        .  \

30.  The  Fairy  Miners— the  Knockers,

31.  The  Spriggan's  Chad,

32.  The  Pisldes' Changeling,         .......

33.  The  Pixies  of  Dartmoor,

34.  The  Fairy  Fair  in  Germoe,

35.  St  Margery  and  the  Piskies,

36.  The  Fairy  Revels  on  the  "  Gump,"  St  Just,  ...

37.  The  Fairy  Funeral,

38.  The  Fairy  Revel,

39.  Betty  Stogs  and  Jan  the  Mounster,        ....

40.  The  Four-leaved  Clover, |

41.  The  Fairy  Ointment,

42.  How  Joan  Lost  the  Sight  of  her  %e,    ....

43.  The  Old  Woman  who  Turned  her  Shift,

44.  The  Fairy  Widower, ^

45.  The  Small  People's  Gardens,

46.  St  Levan  Fairies, '

47.  The  Adventure  of  Cherry  of  Zennor,      ....

.48.  Anne  Jefferies  and  the  Fairies,

49.  The  Piskie  Threshers,

60.  The  Muryan's  Bank,


TBEGEAGLE.


51.  The  Demon  Tregeagle,  .

62.  Jahn  Tergagle  the  Steward,

63.  DosmeryPool,

64.  The  Wish  Hounds,

65.  Cheney's  Hounds,  .


THE  XEBXAIDS.


66.  Morva  or  Morveth,
57.  Merrymaids  and  Merrymen,
68.  The  Mermaid  of  Padstow,
69?  The  Mermaid's  Rock,      .

60.  The  Mermaid  of  Seaton,

61.  The  Old  Man  of  Cury,     .

62.  The  Mermaid's  Vengeance,


THE  BOOKS.

63;  Cromlech  and  Druid  Stones,  .
^  The  Logan  or  Loging  Rock,    .


Contents.  v

PAOB

^  Mincamber,  Main- Amber,  or  Ambrose's  Stone,    ....  189

66.  ZennorCoits, 190

67.  The  M6n-an-Tol, 191

68.  The  Crick  Stone  in  Morva, 191

69.  The  Dancing  Stones,  the  Hurlers,  &c., 192

70.  The  Nine  Maids,  or  Virgin  Sisters, 194

71.  The  Twelve-o'Clock  Stone, 195

72.  The  Men-Scryfa, 196

7a  Table-Men— The  Saxon  Kings' Visit  to  the  Land*s-End,     .        .  197

74.  Merlyn's  Prophecies,     .        .        .* 198

75.  The  Armed  Knight,      .        .        .        .     ^ 199

76.  The  Irish  Lady, ' 200

77.  The  Devil's  Doorway, 202

7&  Piper's  Hole,  Scilly, 202

79.  The  Devil's  Coits,  &c., 203

80.  King  Arthur's  Stone, 204

8L  The  Ck>ck-Orow  Stone, 205

LOST  CITIES.

82.  Lost  Lands, 207

83L  The  Tradition  of  the  Lyonesse  or  Lethowsow,      ....  208

84.  Chidden  Point  and  the  Silver  Table, 213

85.  ThePadstow"Hobby-Horse,"' 213

86.  St  Michael's  Mount— The  White  Rock  in  the  Wood,    ...  214

87.  GwavasLake, 218

88.  The  City  of  Langarrow  or  Langona, 220

89.  The  Sands  at  Lelant  and  Phillack, 223

90.  "The  Island,"  St  Ives, 224

9L  The  Chapel  Bock,  Perran-Porth, 225

FIBE  W0B8HIP.

92.  Bomances  of  Fire  Worship, 227

93w  Baal  Fires, 229

94.  The  Garrack  Zans,  or  Holy  Bock, 231

96i  Fire  Ordeal  for  the  Cure  of  Disease, 232

96.  Burning  Animals  Alive, 237

DXKOHS  AHD  8FECTBE8.

97.  Tbe  Hooting  Cairn, 241

96L  Jago's  Demon, £45

99L  Ptoter  the  Devil, 24^

lOQL  DMdo  and  hia  Dogs, Mf;


VI  Contents.


lOL  The  Devil  and  his  Dandy-Dogs,    .        .        .        .

102.  The  Spectral  Coach,      ........

103.  Sir  Francis  Drake  and  his  Demon,        .        .        .        .

104.  The  Parson  and  Clerk,

105.  The  Haunted  Widower,

106.  The  Spectre  Bridegroom,      ,

107.  Duffy  and  the  Devil,

108.  The  Lovers  of  Porthangwartha,

109.  The  Ghost  of  Bosewame,

110.  The  Suicide's  Spearman,       .     ^

111.  The  Suicide's  Ghost,

112.  The"Ha-af"aFace, \

113.  The  Warning,

114.  Laying  a  Ghost,

116.  A  Flying  Spirit,

116.  The  Execution  and  Wedding,

117.  The  Lugger  of  Croft  Pasco  Pool,

APPENDIX.


A.  The  Poem  of  the  Wrestling,  ....

B.  Shara  and  Sheela,

—  The  Hag's  Bed  near  Fermoy,  ....

C.  Geese  Dancing — Guise  Dancing — Guizards,    .

—  "  Goose  Dancing,"

D.  Wayland  Smith,

E.  The  Wonderful  Cobbler  of  Wellington, .

F.  St  Piran's-Day  and  Picrous-Day,    .

G.  Moses  Pitt's  Letter  respecting  Anne  Jefferies,
H.  The  Bargest,  or  Spectre-Hound,     .

L  The  Mermaid's  Vengeance,     ....

K.  Kock  Masses,  Celtic,

L.  Ambrosial  PetrcB,


INTRODUCTION.


jIHE  beginning  of  this  collection  of  Popular  Ro-
mances may  be  truly  said  to  date  from  my  early
childhood.  I  remember  with  what  anticipations
of  pleasure,  half  a  century  since,  I  stitched  to-
gether a  few  sheets  of  paper,  and  carefully  pasted  them  into
the  back  of  an  old  book.  This  was  preparatory  to  a  visit
I  was  about  to  make  with  my  mother  to  Bodmin,  about
which  town  many  strange  stories  were  told,  and  my  pur-
pose was  to  record  them.  My  memory  retains  dim  shadows,
of  a  wild  tale,  of  Hender  the  Huntsman  of  Lanhydrock;
of  a  narrative  of  streams  having  been  poisoned  by  the
monks  ;  and  of  a  legend  of  a  devil  who  played  many
strange  pranks  with  the  tower  which  stands  on  a  neigh-
bouring hilL  I  have,  within  the  last  year,  endeavoured  to
recover  those  stories,  but  in  vain.  The  living  people  appear
to  have  forgotten  them  ;  my  juvenile  note-book  has  long  been
lost ;  those  traditions  are,  it  is  to  be  feared,  gone  for  ever.

Fifteen  years  passed  away-^about  six  of  them  at  school
in  Cornwall,  and  nine  of  them  in  close  labour  in  London,
— ^when  failing  health  compelled  my  return  to  the  West  -of
England.  Having  spent  about  a  month  on  the  borders  of
Dartmoor,  and  wandered  over  that  wild  region  of  Granite


viii  Introduction.

Tors,  gathering  up  its  traditions,— ere  yet  Mrs  Bray*
thought  of  doing  so, — I  resolved  on  walking  through  C
wall  Thirty-five  years  since,  on  a  beautiful  spring  mon
I  landed  at  Saltash,  from  the  very  ancient  passage-boat,  t»
in  those  days  conveyed  men  and  women,  carts  and  cattle,  ai
the  river  Tamar,  where  now  that  triumph  of  engineering
Albert  Bridge,  gracefully  spans  its  waters.  Sending  mj
forward  to  Liskeard  by  a  van,  my  wanderings  commen
my  purpose  being  to  visit  each  relic  of  Old  Cornwall,  an
gather  up  every  existing  tale  of  its  ancient  people,
months  were  delightfully  spent  in  this  way ;  and  in
period  a  large  number  of  the  romances  and  superstil
which  are  published  in  these  volumes  were  collected, '
many  more,  which  have  been  weeded  out  of  the  coUectic
worthless.

During  the  few  weeks  which  were  spent  on  the  borde:
DAtmoor,  accidental  circumstances  placed  me  in  the
centre  of  a  circle  who  believed  "there  were  gianfs  on
earth  in  those  days"  to  which  the  "old  people"  belon
and  who  were  convinced  that  to  turn  a  coat-sleeve  <
stocking  prevented  the  piskies  from  misleading  man
woman.  I  drank  deeply  from  the  stream  of  legendary
which  was  at  that  time  flowing,  as  from  a  well  of  li^
waters,  over

"  Devonia's  dreary  Alps ;  "f

and  longed  to  renew  my  acquaintance  with  the  wild  t

•  Mrs  Bray  collected  her  "  Traditions,  Legends,  and  Superstitioi
Devonshire  "  in  1835,  and  they  were  published  in  1838.  This  work  pi
tame  that  even  at  that  time  the  old-world  stories  were  perishing  like
shadows  on  the  mist  before  the  rising  sun.  .  Many  wild  tales  which  I  h
in  1829  appear  to  have  been  lost  in  1835.

+  Canington's  "  Dartmoor."


Introduction.  ix

of  Cornwall,  which  had  either  terrified  or  amused  me  when
a  child.

My  acquaintance  with  the  fairies  commenced  at  an  early
date.  When  a  very  boy,  I  have  often  been  taken  by  a  ro-
mantic young  lady,  who  lives  in  my  memory

"  So  bright,  so  fair,  so  wild,"  *

to  seek /or  the  fairies  on  Lelant  Towans.  The  maiden  and
the  boy  frequently  sat  for  hours,  entranced  by  the  stories  of
an  old  woman,  who  lived  in  a  cottage  on  the  edge  of  the
blown  sandhills  of  that  region.  Thus  were  received  my
earliest  lessons  in  fairy  mythology.

From  early  youth  accidental  circumstances  have  led  to
my  acquiring  a  taste  for  collecting  the  waifs  floating  upon
the  sea  of  time,  which  tell  us  something  of  those  ancient
peoples  who  have  not  a  written  history.  The  rude  tradi-
tions of  a  race  who  appear  to  have  possessed  much  nativ#
intelligence,  minds  wildly  poetical,  and  great  fertility  of
imagination,  united  with  a  deep  feeling  for  the  mysteries  by
which  life  is  girdled,  especially  interested  me.  By  the
operation  of  causes  beyond  my  control,  I  was  removed  from
the  groove  of  ordinary  trade  and  placed  in  a  position  of
considerable  responsibility,  in  connexion  with  one  of  the
most  useful  institutions  of  ComwalL-|-  To  nurse  the  germs
of  genius  to  maturity — to  seek  those  gems  "  of  purest  ray
serene,"  which  the  dark,  though  not  "  unfathomed  caves"  of
the  Cornish  mines  might  produce  —  and  to  reward  every
effort  of  human  industry,  was  the  purpose  of  this  institution.
As  its  secretary,  my  duties,  as  well  as  my  inclination,  took  me
often  into  the  mining  and  agricultural  districts,  and  brought

*  Colttidge.  t  The  Royal  Cornwall  Polytechnio  Society.


X  Introduction,

me  into  intimate  relation  with  the  miners  and  the  peai
The  bold  shores  of  St  Just — the  dark  and  rock-cla<
of  Morva,  Zennor,  and  St  Ives — ^the  barren  regions
Agnes — ^the  sandy  undulations  of  Perranzabuloe — the
tracts  of  Gwennap — the  howling  moorlands  of  St  i
and  Bodmin — and,  indeed  every  district  in  which  thei
a  mine  became  familiar  ground.  Away  from  the  to^
a  period  when  the  means  of  commxmication  were  fe^
those  few  tedious,  primitive  manners  still  lingered.  ]
tion  was  not  then,  as  now,  the  fashion.  Church-school
few  and  far  between  ;  and  Wesleyan  Methodism — all
it  was  infusing  truth  and  goodness  amongst  the  pe
had  not  yet  become  conscious  of  the  importance  of  pi
educating  the  young.  Always  delighting  in  populai
no  opportunity  of  hearing  them  was  ever  lost.  Seate«
three-legged  stool,  or  in  a  "  timberen  settle,"  near  the  I
heath-fire  on  the  hearth,  have  I  elicited  the  old  sto
which  the  people  were  beginning  to  be  ashamed.  I
in  a  level,  after  the  toil  of  climbing  from  the  depth
mine,  in  close  companionship  with  the  homely  min
superstitions,  and  the  tales  which  he  had  heard  frc
grandfather,  Tiave  been  confided  to  me.

To  the  present  hour  my  duties  take  me  constant!
the  most  remote  districts  of  Cornwall  and  Devon,  s«
as  boy  and  as  man,  I  have  possessed  the  best  possible
tunities  for  gathering  up  the  folk-lore  of  a  people
but  a  few  generations  since,  had  a  language  peculiarl;
own.*     A  people,  who,  like  all  the  Celts,  cling  with  i

♦  "  The  Cornish  dialect,  one  of  the  three  branches  of  the  old  Britii
greater  affinity  with  the  Breton  or  Armorican  dialect  of  Brittany
does  with  the  Welsh,  although  it  properly  forms  the  link  of  union '


Introduction.  xi

affection  to  the  memories  of  the  past,  and  who  even  now
regard  with  jealousy  the  introduction  of  any  novelty,  and
accept  improvements  slowly.

The  store  of  old-world  stories  which  had  been  collected
under  the  circumstances  described,  would,  perhaps,  never
have  taken  their  present  form,  if  Mr  Thomas  Wright  had
not  shewn  the  value  of  studying  the  Cyclopean  Walls  of  the
promontory  beyond  Penzance,  popularly  called  "The
Giant's  Hedges," — and  if  Mr  J.  0.  Halliwellhad  not  told  us
that  his  "Ramhles  in  Western  Cornwall,  by  the  Footsteps  of
the  Oicmts"  had  led  him  to  attempt  "  to  remove  part  of  a
veil  beyond  which  lies  hid  a  curious  episode  in  the  history  "
of  an  ancient  people.

In  writing  of  the  giants,  the  fairies,  and  the  spectral
bands,  I  have  often  asked  myself,  How  is  it  possible  to
account  for  the  enduring  life  of  these  romantic  tales,  under
the  constantly-repressing  influences  of  Christian  teaching,

the  Celtic  dialect  of  France  and  that  of  the  Cambrian  hills.  The  nature
of  its  InflezionB,  both  in  letters  and  in  tenses  and  cases,  is,  generally  speak-
ing, alike,  aUowance  being  made  for  dialectic  variations  arising  from  the
nature  of  the  country  in  which  the  dialect  is  spoken."  The  above  quota-
tion is  from  the  remarkable  book,  published  by  Bagster  &  Sons,  ''  The
Bible  of  every  Land :  A  History  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  iif  every  Language
and  Dialect  into  which  Translations  have  been  made."  Preceding  the  above
quotation,  I  find  it  stated  that  "  Dolly  Pentreath,  who  died  at  Penzance  in
1778,  aged  102,  was  then  said  to  be  the  only  person  in  Cornwall  who  could
tpettk  the  aboriginal  idiom  of  that  province  of  ancient  Britain."  This  old
woman  died  at  Mousehole,  and  was  buried  in  the  churchyard  of  Paul.  Over
ber  grave  Prince  Lucien  Bonaparte  has  recently  placed  an  inscribed  granite
obeliflk.  Polwhele  and  some  others  have  doubted  the  statement  made  by
DainM  Bairington,  that  Dolly  was  the  last  person  who  could  speak  Cor-
nish. As  they  contend,  many  other  men  and  women  may,  a  hundred  years
e,  have  known  the  tongue,  but  no  writer  has  produced  good  evidence  to
r  tiiat  any  person  habitually  spoke  the  language,  which  Harrington
I  OS  WIS  the  case  with  Dolly  Pentreath.


xii  Introduction.

and  of  the  advances  of  civilisation  ?    I  have,  to  some  6
satisfied  myself  by  such  a  reply  as  the  following : —

Those  things  which  make  a  strong  impression  on  the
of  the  child  are  rarely  obliterated  by  the  education  tl^
which  he  advances  to  maturity,  and  they  exert  the
fluences  upon  the  man  in  advanced  age.  A  tale  of  i
related  by  an  ignorant  nurse,  rivets  the  attention  •
infant  mind,  and  its  details  are  engraven  on  the  me
The  *' bogle,''  or  ''bogie/'  with  which  the  child  is  te;
into  quiet  by  some  thoughtless  servant,  remains  a  dii
unpleasant  reality  to  shake  the  nerves  of  the  philosi
Things  like  these, — seeing  that  existence  is  surround
clouds  of  mystery, — ^become  a  Power  which  will,  eve
anon  through  life,  exert  considerable  control  over  our  ai
As  it  is  with  the  individual,  so  is  it  with  the  race  to
that  individual  belongs.  When  our  Celtic  ancestors —
very  darkness  of  their  ignorance — were  taught,  througl
fears,  a  Pantheistic  religion,  and  saw  a  god  in  every^
phenomenon : — ^when  not  merely  the  atmospheric  chafl
the  aspects  of  the  starry  sky — ^and  the  peculiarities  ap]
in  the  sun  and  moon,  were  watched  with  fearful  an:
but  when  the  trembling  of  a  rock — ^the  bubbling  of  a  j
— the  agitation  of  the  forest  leaves — ^and  the  flight  of  i
were  charged  with  sentences  of  life  and  death : — ^the
moulded  the  Celtic  mind,  and  the  early  impressions
never  been  entirely  obliterated.  ''There  were  madd
orgies  amongst  the  sacred  rites  of  the,  Britons  ;  orgies
whilst  they  reminded  one  writer  of  the  Bacchic  danci
minded  another  of  the  worship  of  Demeter."*

The  Eomans  came  and  possessed  the  land.     Even  t


Introduction.  xiii

most  westerly  promontory,  we  have  evidences  of  their  rule,
and  indications  of  their  superiority.  The  Saxons  overcame
the  Danmonii — Athelstane  drove  the  Cornish  beyond  the
Tamar,  and  planted  his  banner  on  the  Scilly  Islands ; — and
this  Teutonic  people  diffused  their  religion  and  their  customs
over  the  West*  The  Dane  followed  upon  the  Saxon,  and
he  has  left  his  earthworks,  in  evidence  of  his  possession,  upon
the  Cornish  hills.-f-  The  Norman  conquerors  eventually  took
possession  of  our  island,  and  several  of  the  existing  families
of  Cornwall  can  speak  of  ancestors  who  won  their  lands  by
&vour  of  William,  the  Duke  of  Normandy.

Notwithstanding  the  influences  which  can  be — not  very
obscurely — traced  of  Koman  and  Saxon,  Danish  and  Nor-
man civilisations,  the  Celtic  superstitions  lingered  on ; — ^varied
perhaps  in  their  clothing,  but  in  all  essentials  the  same.
Those  wild  dreams  which  swayed  with  irresistible  force
the  skin-clad  Britain  of  the  Cornish  hills,  have  not  yet
entirely  lost  their  power,  where  even  the  National  and  the
British  Schools  are  busy  with  the  people,  and  Mechanics'
Institutions  are  diffusing  the  truths  of  science.  In  the  in-
jEancy  of  the  race,  terror  was  the  moving  power:  in  the
matority  of  the  people,  the  dark  shadow  still  sometimes  rises,
like  a  spectre,  partially  eclipsing  the  mild  radiance  of  that
Christian  truth  which  shines  upon  the  land.

*  ^Athelstane  (987)  handled  them  yet  more  extremely,  for  he  drove
tham  out  of  ExcuAtx,  where,  tUl  then,  they  bare  equal  sway  with  the
8aauMi%  aad  left  them  only  the  narrow  angle  on  the  west  of  Tamar  river
for  their  inheritance,  which  hath  ever  since  beene  their  fatall  bound."
— Camm,  p.  96.

f  **  And  divers  round  holds  on  the  tops  of  hills ;  some  single,  some
dkmble,  and  treble  trenched,  which  are  termed  Ccutdlan  Denis  or  Danis,
at  nyiad  by  the  Danes  when  they  were  destyned  to  become  our  scourge."


xiv  Introduction,  r

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Cornwall  has,  until  a
period,  maintained  a  somewhat  singular  isolation.  En
with  many  persons,  appeared  to  terminate  on  the  sh<
the  river  Tamar ;  and  the  wreckers  of  the  coasts,  ai
miners  of  the  hills,  were  equally  regarded  as  indicati:
semi-civilisation  of  this  county.  The  diflSculties  of  1
ling  in  Cornwall  were  great  A  clergyman  writing  in
says,  "  Our  object  was  now  to  obtain  a  passage  tc
without  losing  sight  of  the  noble  sea.  Saddle-horses
render  the  difficulty  of  this  route  a  pleasure,  but  wi
carriage  it  is  deemed  impracticable."*  Again  he  tells
was  with  his  guide  ''  five  hours  coming  the  eleven  mile
Loo  to  LostwithieL"  Within  my  own  memory,  the  or
means  of  travelling  from  Penzance  to  Plymouth  w»
van  called  a  "  kitterine,"  and  three  days  were  occup
the  journey.  There  was,  in  later  years,  a  mail-coach,  b
luxury  of  this  conveyance  was,  eten  then,  reserved  f
wealthier  classes.  This  difficulty  of  transit  in  a  greai
sure  explains  the  seclusion  of  the  people  up  to  a  compan
recent  period ;  and  to  it  we  certainly  owe  the  preser
of  their  primitive  character,  and  most  of  the  material
found  in  these  volumes.  At  one  period  indeed — bu
earlier  than  the  days  of  kitterines — ^we  find  the  C
people,  as  a  body,  curiously,  but  completely,  cut  oflF,
river  Tamar,  from  their  countrymen.  They  were
informed  of  the  active  life  of  the  world  beyond  th(
the  travelling  historian  only,  who,  as  he  also  sought  to
the  people,  was  called  "the  droll-teller."

The  wandering  minstrel,  story-teller,  and  news-n

*  A  Tour  to  the  West  of  England  in  1788.    By  the  Rev.  S.  Sha^
London,  1789.


Introduction.  xv

appears  to  Iiaye  been  an  old  institution  amongst  the  Gomish.
Indeed  Carew,  in  his  "Survey  of  Cornwall,"  tells  us  that
"the  last  of  the  Wideslades,  whose  estates  were  forfeited  in
Ae  Eebellion,  was  called  Sir  Tristram.    He  led  a  walking
life  with  his  harp  to  gentlemen's  houses/'    As  the  news-
paper gradually  found  its  way  into  this  western  coxmty,  (the
first  one  circulated    in    Cornwall  being  the   Sherhourm
Mercury^  the  occupation  of  this  representative  of  the  bards
was  taken  away  ;  but  he  has  only  become  extinct  within  the
last  twenty  years.     These  old  men  wandered  constantly
from  house  to  house,   finding   a  hearty  welcome  at  all
Board  and  bed  were  readily  found  them,  their  only  payment
being  a  song  or  a  droU,  (story.)    A  gentleman,  to  whom  I
am  mider  many  obligations,  writes : —

"  The  only  wandering  droll-teller  whom  I  well  remember
was  an  old  blind  man,  from  the  parish  of  Cury, — I  think,  as
he  used  to  tell  many  stories  about  the  clever  doings  of  the
conjurer  Luty  of  that  place,  and  by  that  means  procure  the
conjurer  milch  practice  from  the  people  of  the  west.  The
old  man  had  been  a  soldier  in  his  youth,  and  had  a  small
pension  at  the  time  he  went  over  the  country,  accompanied
by  a  boy  and  dog.  He  neither  begged  nor  offered  anything
for  sale,  but  was  sure  of  a  welcome  to  bed  and  board  in
every  house  he  called  at.  He  would  seldom  stop  in  the  same
house  more  than  one  night,  not  because  he  had  exhausted
his  stories,  or  'eaten  his  welcome,'  but  because  it  required
all  hb  time  to  visit  his  acquaintances,  once  in  the  year.  The
old  man  was  called  Uncle  Anthony  James.  (Uncle  is  a
term  of  respect  which  was  very  commonly  applied  to  aged
men,  by  their  junionf,  in  Cornwall  Aunt,  (A'nt  or  Ann,)
as  A'nt  Sally  or  Ann'  Jenney,  was  used  in  the  same  manner
iriien  addressing  aged  women.)


XVI  Introduction.

■  "  Uncle  Anthony  James  used  to  arrive  every  yea
Leven  parish  about  the  end  of  August.  Soon  s
reached  my  father's  house,  he  would  stretch  himself
*  chimney-stool/  and  sleep  until  supper-time.  Wl
old  man  had  finished  his  frugal  meal  of  bread  aii
he  would  tune  his  fiddle  and  ask  if  '  missus '  would
hear  him  sing  her  favourite  ballad.  As  soon  as  i
mother  told  him  how  pleased  she  would  be,  Uncle  i
would  go  through  the  'woeful  hunting,'  (* Chevy
from  beginning  to  end,  accompanied  by  the  boy  i
fiddle.  I  expect  the  air  was  his  own  composition,  f
verse  was  a  different  tune.  The  young  were  then  grat
hearing  the  'streams'  (strains)  of  ' Lovely  Nancy,'
in  three  parts.*  I  never  saw  this  baUad  published
is  a  very  romantic  old  thing,  almost  as  long  as
Chase.*    Another  favourite  was  : —

'Cold  blows  the  wind  to-day,  sweetheart ;

Cold  are  the  drops  of  rain ;
The  first  truelove  that  ever  I  had
In  the  green  wood  he  was  slain.

*  'Twas  down  in  the  garden-green,  sweetheart.

Where  you  and  I  did  walk ;
The  fairest  flower  that  in  the  garden  grew
Is  withered  to  a  stalk.

'The  stalk  will  bear  no  leaves,  sweetheart;
The  flowers  will  ne'er  return ;
And  since  my  truelove  is  dead  and  gone.
What  can  I  do  but  mourn  ?

'  A  twelvemonth  and  a  day  being  gone,
The  spirit  rose  and  spoke—

♦  Carew,  in  his  "Survey  of   Cornwall,"  makes  especial  me
« three  men's  songs,"  as  being  peculiar  to  this  county.


Introduction.  xvii

"  My  body  is  clay  cold,  sweetheart ;

My  breatl^mells  heavy  and  strong ;
And  if  you  kiss  my  lily-white  lips.

Your  time  will  not  be  long."  *

**Then  follows  a  stormy  kind  of  duet  between  the  maiden
and  her  lover  s  ghost,  who  tries  to  persuade  the  maid  to  ac-
company him  to  the  world  of  shadows.  Uncle  Anthony  had
also  a  knack  of  turning  Scotch  and  Irish  songs  into  Cornish
ditties.  '  Barbara  Allan '  he  managed  in  the  following  way,
and  few  knew  but  that  he  had  composed  the  song  : —

*  In  Cornwall  I  was  bom  and  bred,
In  Cornwall  was  my  dweUing ;
And  there  I  courted  a  pretty  maid.
Her  name  was  Ann  Tremellan.*

*'  The  old  man  had  the  '  Babes  in  the  Wood '  for  religious
folks ;  but  he  avoided  the  '  Conorums,'  as  he  called  the
Methodists.  Yet  the  grand  resource  was  the  stories  in  which
the  supernatural  bore  great  part.  The  story  I  told  you  about
the  ancestors  of  the  conjurer  Luty  finding  the  mermaid,
who  gave  them  the  power  to  break  the  spell  of  witchcraft,
was  one  of  this  old  man's  tales,  which  he  seemed  to  believe ;
and  he  regarded  the  conjurer  with  as  much  respect  as  the
bard  might  the  priest  in  olden  time.  I  have  a  dim  recol-
lection of  another  old  droU-teller,  called  Billy  Frost,  in  St
Just,  who  used  to  go  round  to  the  feasts  in  the  neighbouring
parishes,  and  be  well  entertained  at  the  public-houses  for  the
sake  of  his  drolls."

In  1829  there  still  existed  two  of  those  droll-tellers,  and
from  them  were  obtained  a  few  of  the  stories  here  preserved.

These  wanderers  perpetuated  the  traditions  of  the  old
inhabitants ;  but  they  modified  the  stories,  according  to  the
activity  of  their  fancy,  to  please  their  auditors.    Not  merely


xviii  Introduction.

this :  they  without  doubt  introduced  the  names  of  p
remembered  by  the  villagers  ;  and  when  they  knew  t
man  had  incurred  the  hatred  of  his  neighbours,  they
him  do  duty  as  a  demon,  or  placed  him  in  no  ver
viable  relation  with  the  devil  The  legends  of  Tregeag]
illustrations  of  this.  The  man  who  has  gained  the  not(
of  being  attached  to  a  tale  as  old  as  that  of  Orestes, — ^
magistrate  in  Cornwall  two  hundred  years  since.  The
of  the  murderess  of  Ludgvan  and  her  lover  is  another,  \
very  modem,  example  of  the  process  by  which  recent  e
are  interwoven  with  very  ancient  superstitions.*

When  the  task  of  arranging  my  romances  was  comme
I  found  that  the  traditions  of  Devonshire  as  far  ea
Exeter — the  tract  of  country  which  was  known  as  "
monium,"  or  even  more  recently  as  "  Old  Cornwall " — ^1
striking  family  resemblance.  My  collection  then  receive
name  it  bears,  as  embracing  the  district  ordinarily  kno^
the  West  of  England.  Although  I  have  avoided  repe
any  of  the  traditions  which  are  to  be  found  in  Mrs  I
books,  I  have  not  altered  my  title  ;  for  the  examples  of
lore  given  in  these  volumes  belong  strictly  to  "  Old  (
wall/'

There  are  some  points  of  peculiar  interest  connected
the  Dartmoor  traditions,  indicating,  as  I  conceive,  a  p
Saxon  origin,  deserving  an  attention  which  they  hav(
yet  received.

Childe's  Tomb,  in  one  of  the  dreariest  portions  oJ

♦  I  find  in  CampbeU's  "Popular   Tales  of  the  West  Highlands'
ticular  mention  made  of  numerous  historical  events  which  have  tak<
forms  of  ancient  legends.     "There  is  popular  history  of  events
really  happened  within  the  last  five  centuries.'*


Introduction.  xix

moor,  is  a  large  cross  of  granite.  This  Childe,  lord  of  the
manor  of  Plymstock*,  was  benighted  on  the  moor  in  a  snow-
storm ;  he  killed  his  horse,  and  got  within  its  body  for
warmth,  having  first  written  in  blood  on  a  granite  slab,  near
which  he  was  found,  dead, —

**  The  first  that  finds  and  brings  me  to  my  grave.
The  lands  of  Plymstock  he  shall  have."

The  Benedictine  monks  of  Tavistock  are  said  to  have
foond  the  body,  and  thus  secured  their  right  to  the  lands.
This  is  without  doubt  an  old  Saxon  legend,  modified,  as  it
has  been  handed  down  from  age  to  age.  Wistman's  Wood,
with  its  "  hundred  oaks  one  hundred  yards  high," — a  rem-
nant of  the  old  Dartmoor  Forest, — is  the  very  home  of  the
Vfisk  hounds,  which  hunt  so  fiercely  over  the  Moor ;  and
this  Wistman  appears  to  have  been  some  demon  creature,
whose  name  alone  remains.  Mr  Kemble  gives  Witsc,  or
Wise,  as  one  of  the  names  of  Odin.  Here  we  have  a  similar
name  given  to  a  strange  wood  in  Devonshire,  associated  with
wild  superstitions ;  and  whish,  or  whisht,  is  a  common  term
for  that  weird  sorrow  which  is  associated  with  mysterious
causea

The  stone  circles,  the  stone  avenues,  and  the  rock  tribu-
nals,—  of  which  Crockem  Tor  furnishes  us  with  a  fine
example, — have  yet  tales  to  tell,  which  would  well  repay
any  labour  that  might  be  bestowed  upon  them.  Ancient
British  rule  gave  way  to  Saxon  power,  and  probably  there
was  no  tract  in  England  less  known  to  the  Komans  than
Dartmoor.  Thus  we  may  expect  to  find  the  paganism  of
the  Briton  and  the  rude  Christianity  of  the  Saxon,  shadowed
out  in  the  remaining  legends  of  Dartmoor.


XX  Introduction,

**  Crocker,  Conwys,  and  Coplestone,
When  the  Conqueror  came^  were  found  at  home,"

is  an  old  Devonshire  rhyme.  Those  names  are  assoi
with  many  a  moorland  tradition,  and  indicate  their  {
origin.

It  may  appear  strange  to  many  that  having  dealt  wil
superstitions  of  the  Cornish  people,  no  mention  has
made  of  the  Divining  Eod,  (the  "  Dowdng  Rod,"  »
called,)  and  its  nse  in  the  discovery  of  mineral  lodes,
has  been  avoided,  in  the  first  place,  because  any  mc
of  the  practice  of  "  dowzing"  would  lead  to  a  discussio
which  this  work  is  ^ot  intended ;  and,  in  the  second
because  the  use  of  the  hazel-twig  is  not  Cornish.  The  i
ing  or  dowzing  rod  is  certainly  not  older  than  the  Gk
miners,  who  were  brought  over  by  Queen  Elizabeth  to
the  Cornish  to  work  their  mines,  one  of  whom,  called  &
was,  some  time  Warden  of  the  Stannaries.  Indeed,  th
good  reason  for  believing  that  the  use  of  this  wand
more  recent  date,  and,  consequently,  removed  fron
periods  which  are  sought  to  be  illustrated  by  this  colle
The  Divining  Eod  belongs  no  more  to  them  than  d
modern  mysteries  of  twirling  hats,  of  teaching  tables  to
and, — in  their  wooden  way, — to  talk.

The  giant  stories,  prefaced  with  the  -often-told  U
Gogmagog,  are  of  a  character  peculiarly  their  own.
do  not  appear  to  resemble  the  giants  described  in  Mr  C
beirs  "Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands;"  but  it
be  admitted  that  there  are  some  indications  of  a  con
origin  between  those  of  Cromarty  and  of  Cornwall.  I
Dasent's  translation  of  Asbjomsen,  and  Moe*s  collecti<
^'  Norse  Tales,"  the  giant  is  not  like  oui'  native  friends.


Introduction.  xxi

we  venture  to  believe  that  the  Cornish  giant  is  a  true  Celt,
or  may  he  not  belong  to  an  earlier  race  ?  He  was  fond  of
home,  and  we  have  no  record  of  his  ever  having  passed
beyond  the  wilds  of  Dartmoor.  The  giants  of  Lancashire,
of  Cheshire,  and  Shropshire  have  a  family  likeness,  and  are,
no  doubt,  closely  related;  but  if  they  are  cousins  to  the
Cornish  giants,  they  are  cousins  far  removed.  Dr  Latham,
in  his  "Ethnology  of  the  British  Islands,"  says,  "Tradition,
too,  indicates  the  existence  of  an  old  march  or  debatable
land ;  for  south  of  Eugby  begins  the  scene  of  the  deeds  of
Guy,  Earl  of  Warwick,  the  slayer  of  the  dun  cow."  The
large  bone  which  is  shewn  in  Redcliff  Church,  Bristol,  is
the  last  indication  of  the  dun  cow  in  the  south.  As  this
marvellons  cow  moved  within  prescribed  limits,  so  was  it
with  the  giants  of  Old  Cornwall

The  fairies  of  Cornwall  do  not  exhibit  the  same  marked
individuality.  Allowing  for  the  influences  of  physical  con-
ditions, they  are  clearly  seen  to  be  an  oflfshoot  from  the
conunon  stock.  Yet  they  have  several  local  peculiarities,
and  possess  names  which  are  especially  their  own.

A  few  of  the  more  popular  legends  of  the  Cornish  saints
are  preserved,  for  the  purpose  of  shewing  how  enduringly  the
first  impressions  of  power,  as  exhibited  by  the  earliest  mis-
sionaries, have  remained  fixed  amongst  the  people  ;  this
being  due  mainly  to  the  mental  operation  of  associating
mental  power  and  physical  strength  with  external  things
in  the  relations  of  cause  and  effect

I  cannot  but  consider  myself  fortunate  in  having  collected
these  traditions  thirty-five  years  ago.  They  could  not  be
coUected  now.  Mr  J.  0.  Ualliwell  speaks  of  the  difficulties
lie  experienced  in  his  endeavours  to  obtain  a  story.     The


xxii  Introduction.

common  people  think  they  will  be  laughed  at
tell  their  "ould  drolls"  to  a  stranger.  Beyond  thi
of  the  stories  have  died  out  with  those  who  told  th(
the  autumn  of  1862,  being  very  desirous  of  gettin
example  of  folk-lore  which  existed  in  the  remote  pai
Zennor  and  Morva,  I  employed  the  late  C.  Taylor  Si
"  some  time  rural  postman  from  St  Ives  to  Zennor/'
author  of  "The  Chief  of  Barat-Anac,"  to  hunt  c
district.  This  he  did  with  especial  care,  and  the  re
his  labours  are  included  in  those  pages.  The  postn
poet,  although  he  spent  many  days  and  nights  ami
peasantry,  failed  to  procure  stories  which  had  been  \
without  hesitation,  thirty  years  before.

When  it  was  known  that  I  was  engaged  in  prepa
publication  a  work  on  the  Traditions  and  Supersti
Cornwall,  numerous  contributions,  from  much- valued
and  from  strangers  interested  in  the  preservation  <
characteristics  of  the  West  of  England  were  sent
From  these,  some  stories  have  been  selected,  but  by
larger  number  were  modifications  of   stories  alrea(
My  obligations  and  thanks  are,  nevertheless,  due  to  i
there  are  two  gentlemen  to  whom  acknowledgments
this  are  necessary.     These  are  Mr  T.  Q.  Couch,  w
already  published  examples  of  the  folk-lore  of  Polpe
the  neighbourhood,  who  has  communicated  several  •
stories,  and  Mr  W.  Botterell  of   Caerwyn,  a  native
Leven,  who  possesses  a  greater  knowledge  of  the  ho
stories  of  the  Land's-End  district  than  any  man  livin
Botterell  has,  with  much  labour,  supplied  me  with  gl
from  his  store,  and  his  stories  have  been  incorporated, :
cases,  as  he  told  them.     Beyond  this,  it  was  satisfac


Introduction.  xxiii

have  the  correctness  of  many  in  my  own  collection  confirmed
by  so  reliable  an  authority.  Without  the  assistance  which
this  gentleman  has  given,  the  West  Cornwall  stories  would
not  have  possessed  the  interest  which  will  be  found  to  belong
to  them.

One  word  on  the  subject  of  arrangement.  In  the  First
Series  are  arranged  all  such  stories  as  appear  to  belong  to
the  most  ancient  inhabitants  of  these  islands.  It  is  true
that  many  of  them,  as  they  are  now  told,  assume  a  mediaeval,
or  even  a  modern  character.  This  is  the  natural  result  of
the  passage  of  a  tradition  or  myth  from  one  generation  to
another.  The  customs  of  the  age  in  which  the  story  is  told
are  interpolated — for  the  purpose  of  rendering  them  intel-
ligible to  the  listeners — and  thus  they  are  constantly  chang-
ing their  exterior  form.  I  am,  however,  disposed  to  believe
that  the  spirit  of  all  the  romances  included  in  this  series,
shews  them  to  have  originated  before  the  Christian  era.  The
romances  of  the  Second  Series  belong  certainly  to  the  his-
toric period,  though  the  dates  of  many  of  them  are  exceed-
ingly problematical

All  the  stories  given  in  these  volumes  are  the  genuine
household  tales  of  the  people.  The  only  liberties  which
have  been  taken  with  them,  has  been  to  alter  them  from  the
vernacular — in  which  they  were  for  the  most  part  related — into
modem  language.  This  applies  to  every  romance  but  one.
"The  Mermaid's  Vengeance"  is  a  combination  of  three  stories,
having  no  doubt  a  common  origin,  but  varying  considerably
in  their  details.  They  were  too  much  alike  to  bear  repeating ;
consequently  it  was  thought  best  to  throw  them  into  one  tale,
which  should  preserve  the  peculiarities  of  all  This  has
been  done  with  much  care ;  and  even  the  songs  given  pre-


xkiv  Introduction.

serve  lines  which  are  said  by  the  fishennen — froi
the  stories  were  obtained — to  have  been  sung  by  t
maids.

The  traditions  which  are  told,  the  superstitions  w
spoken  of,  and  the  customs  which  are  described
volumes,  may  be  regarded  as  true  types  of  the
Cornish  mythology,  and  genuine  examples  of  the  ;
and  customs  of  a  people  who  will  not  readily  devii
the  rules  taught  them  by  their  fathers.

Romances  such  as  these  have  floated  down  to  us  i
upon  the  ocean.  We  gather  a  fragment  here  and
ment  there,  and  at  length,  it  may  be,  we  learn  so
of  the  name  and  character  of  the  vessel  when  it  was  i
with  life,  and  obtain  a  shadowy  image  of  the  pec
have  perished.

Hoping  to  have  been  successful  in  saving  a  few  inl
fragments  of  the  unwritten  records  of  a  peculiar  ]
labours  are  submitted  to  the  world.  The  pleasure  c
ing  the  past  has  fully  repaid  me  for  the  labour  of  ai
the  Traditions  of  Old  Cornwall,


EGBERT  H


GooNLAZE  House,  St  Agnes,
September  23, 1864.


ROMANCES  AND  SUPERSTITIONS


OF  THE


MYTHIC  AGES.


Iffrfinm.


THE  GIANTS.


"  Of  Titan's  monstrous  race
Only  some  few  disturbed  that  happy  place.
Raw  hides  they  wore  for  clothes,  their  drink  was  blood.
Hocks  were  their  dining-rooms,  their  prey  their  food,
Caverns  their  lodging,  and  their  bed  their  grove,
Their  cup  some  hollow  trunk."

'—ffavUan's  "  Architrenium"  translated  in  Gough's  '


POPULAR  ROMANCES
OF   THE  WEST   OF  ENGLAND.


THE  AGE  OP  THE  GIANTS,

"  Eald  enta  geweorc
Idlu  stodon." — The  Wanderer,    Exeter  Book,

"  The  old  works  of  giants
Stood  desolate."— Thomas  Wright.


IT


wandering  over  some  of  the  uncultivated  tracts
which  still  maintain  their  wildness,  austerely  and
sullenly,  against  the  march  of  cultivation,  we  are
certain  of  finding  rude  masses  of  rock  which  have
so;ne  relation  to  the  giants.  The  giant's  hand,  or  the  giant's
chair,  or,  it  may  be,  the  giant's  punch-bowl,  excites  your
curiosity.  What  were  the  mental  peculiarities  of  the  people
who  fixed  so  permanently  those  names  on  fantastic  rock-
misses?  What  are  the  conditions — ^mental  or  otherwise —
necessary  for  the  preservation  of  these  ideas  ?  are  questions
vfaich  I  have  often  asked  myself  when  wandering  amidst  the
Tors  of  Dartmoor,  and  when  seated  upon  the  granite  masses
which  spread  themselves  so  strangely,  yet  so  picturesquely,
Ofer  CSam  Brea  and  other  rocky  hills  in  Cornwall  When
fieitioiis  of  this  kind  are  continually  recurring,  the  mind


4  Romances  of  the  Giants,

naturally  "works  out  some  reply,  which  satisfies  at  least
and  it  consequently  not  unfrequently  reposes  content!
a  fallacy  as  baseless  as  the  giant-spectre  of  the  mc
mists.  This  may  possibly  be  the  condition  at  which
arrived,  and  many  of  my  readers  may  smile  at  my  c
It  is  not  in  my  nature  to  work  without  some  hypo
but  I  endeavour  to  hold  it  as  loosely  as  possible,  that
be  yielded  up  readily  the  moment  a  mpre  promising
is  bom,  whoever  may  be  its  parent — wherever  its
place.

Giants,  and  every  form  of  giant-idea,  belong  to  tb
of  nature.  I  have  never  discovered  the  slightest  inc
of  the  existence  of  a  tradition  of  giants,  of  the  true  lej
type,  in  a  fertile  valley  or  in  a  well-cultivated  plain,
ever  there  yet  linger  the  faint  shadows  of  the  lej
giant,  there  the  country  still  retains  much  of  its  natii
ness,  and  the  inhabitants  have,  to  a  great  extent,  pi
their  primitive  character.  In  other  words,  they  ha
tured  a  gloomy  imagination,  and  permitted  ignor
continue  its  melancholy  delusions.  The  untaught  e
every  age,  looks  upon  the  grander  phenomena  of
with  feelings  of  terror,  and  endeavours  to  explai
by  the  aid  of  those  errors  which  have  been  perj
from  father  to  son  since  the  days  when  the  pr
superstition  sought  to  rule  the  minds  of  men  by
their  fears.

I  shall  have  to  tell,  by  and  by,  the  story  of  a  s
giant,  who  could  bestride  the  lovely  river  which  flows
the  luxuriant  valley  of  Tavistock,  where,  also,  the  ii
traveller  is  shewn  his  grave.  The  giant's  grave  in
churchyard  is  familiar  to  me ;  and  in,  or  near,  man
turesque  village,  shadowed  by  noble  trees,  and  surrou
richly-clothed  fields,  I  can  point  to  mounds,  and  tc


The  Land  of  the  Giants.  5

which  are  said  to  be  the  resting-places  of  giants.  These,  how-
ever, will  invariably  be  found  to  be  rude  monuments  to
ordinary  men,  who  were  possessed  of  more  wealth,  intelligence,
conrage,  or  strength,  than  their  fellows  :  men  who  have  been
the  objects  of  hero-worship,  but  whose  names  have  perished
amidst  the  wrecks  of  time.  It  may  be  argued  that  these
village  giants  are  crieations  of  the  same  character  as  those  of
the  true  legendary  type,  and  that  both  result  from  analogous
operations  in  the  human  mind.  It  may  be  so ;  but  how
vastly  different  must  have  been  the  constitution  of  those
minds  to  which  we  owe  the  creations  of  the  Titans  of  our
mountains  and  the  large  men  of  our  lowlands.  Had  I  the
learning  necessary  for  the  task  of  shewing  that  our  legendary
giant  is  of  Oriental  origin,  I  have  not  the  required  leisure  to
pursue  that  inquiry  to  its  end ;  and  I  leave  it  to  abler  men,
eontenting  myself,  and,  let  me  hope,  satisfying  my  readers,
by  stadying  the  subject  in  its  more  simple  aspects.

I  find,  over  a  tract  of  country  extending  from  the  eastern
edge  of  Dutrtmoor  to  the  Land's-End — and  even  beyond  it,  to
the  Scilly  Islands — curious  relics  of  the  giants.  This  district
is  in  many  respects  a  peculiar  one.  The  physical  features  of
the  country  are  broadly  marked ;  and,  even  after  the  civilis-
ing influences  of  centuries,  wild  nature  contests  with  man,
11^  often  maintains,  her  supremacy.  On  one  hand  we  see
industry  taking  possession  of  the  hills,  and  holding  them  firm
in  its  ameliorating  grasp :  on  the  other,  we  find  the  sterile
moor  and  the  rock-spread  region  still  resisting  successfully
tfie  influences  of  man  and  his  appliances.  When  I  travel
into  other  parts  of  the  British  Isles,  and  reach  a  district
kaving  the  same  general  features,  I  usually  discover  some
oaUtanding  memory  of  the  giants,  often,  it  must  be  admitted,
bint  and  ill-defined.  The  gianii,  Tarquin,  almost  forgotten
amidat  the  whir  of  spindles,  "  who  had  his  dwelling  in  a  well-


6  Romances  of  the  Giants.

fortified  castle  near  Manchester,  on  the  site  of  what
known  by  the  name  of  Castlefield,"  and  Carados,

'*  A  mighty  giant,  just  pull'd  down,
Who  lived  ne*  Shrewsbury's  fair  town,"

may  be  quoted  as  examples  of  the  fading  myths  *

I  therefore  draw  the  conclusion  that  those  large  m
humanity  — of  whom  Saturn  devouring  his  own  i
would  seem  to  be  the  parental  type — can  exist  bnlj
memories  of  those  races  who  are  bom  and  live  am
sublime  phenomena  of  nature.

On  the  rugged  mountain,  overspread  with  rocks
appear  themselves  to  be  the  ruins  of  some  Cyclop©
amidst  which  the  tempests  play,  still  harmless  in  their :
here,  where  the  breezes  of  spring  and  summer  whistle
some  new  delight — ^where  the  autumnal  winds  mum
wildest  music,  or  make  the  saddest  wail ;  and  the
storms,  as  if  joyous  in  their  strength,  shout  in  v(
thunder  from  cairn  to  cairn; — ^here  does  the  giant
On  the  beetling  cliff,  where  coming  tempests  delight
those  predicating  moanings,  which  tell  of  the  coming
winds  and  waves ; — on  rocks  which  have  frowned  f
on  the  angry  sea,  and  in  caverns  which  mock,  by  re]
the  sounds  of  air  and  water — ^be  they  joyous  as  the  ^
birds,  or  wild  and  solemn  as  the  howl  of  savages  ab
dead ; — ^here  does  the  giant  dwell !

In  the  valley,  too,  has  he  sometimes  fixed  his  hon
the  giant  has  usually  retired  from  business  when  he
the  hills.  Even  here  we  miss  not  the  old  assoc
Huge  boulders  are  spread  on  every  side;  rock-mas

*  See  "  Popular  Traditions  of  Lancashire,"  by  J.  Roby,  Esq., !
Bohn,  1843.


The  Giants  of  Danmonium.  7

overgrown  with  furze,  ferns,  mosses,  and  heaths;  and  torrents
rash  from  the  hills,  bringing,  as  it  were,  their  native  music
with  them.  Wherever,  indeed,  the  giants  have  made  a  home,
we  find  a  place  remarkable  for  the  grand  scale  on  which  the
works  of  nature  are  displayed.

The  giants  of  Danmonium  —  as  that  region  was  once
named  to  which  I  have  confined  my  inquiries — will  be
found  to  be  a  marked  race.  They  appear  to  bear  about
them  the  characteristics  of  the  giants  of  the  East.  They
have  the  peculiarities  which  may  be  studied  in  those  true
Oriental  Titans,  Gog  and  Magog,  who  still  preside  so  grimly
and  giantly  at  our  City  feasts.  They  have  none  of  that
stony,  cold-hearted  character  which  marks  the  giants  of
Scandinavia;  and  although  Mr  Keightley*  would  connect
the  mighty  Thor  with  the  no  less  mighty  giants  of  the  Ara-
bian stories^  I  think  it  can  be  shewn  that  all  those  of  the
West  of  England  resemble  their  northern  brethren  only  in
the  manner  in  which  the  sensual  monsters  succumb  to
the  slightest  exercise  of  thought.

Mr  J.'O.  HaUiwell  appears  to  have  been  a  little  surprised
U  discovering^  during  a  very  short  residence  in  the  West
of  ComwaU^  that  the  Land's-End  district  was  "anciently  the
chosen  land  of  the  giants ;"  that  it  was  ''  beyond  all  other
the  &vourite  abode  and  the  land  of  the  English  giants."
Peculiarly  fitted  for  the  inquiry  as  Mr  HaUiwell  is,  by  his
life-long  studies,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  he  spent  so  brief
a  period  amidst  "  what  still  remains  of  these  memorials  of  a
X^an  race.''t

*  Tiles  and  Popular  Fictions :  their  Resemblance  and  Transmission
froat  Oouiitiy  to  Country.    By  Thomas  Keightley.    1 834.

i*  BamWfw  in  Western  ComwaU  by  the  Footsteps  of  the  Giants,  with
JfolM  OB  the  Celtio  Remains  of  the  Land's-End  District,  and  the  Islands
sfSdDy.    ^7  J.  0.  HaUiwell,  F.R.S.    1861.


8  Romances  of  the  Giants.

Who  were  the  giants?    Whence  came  they?*
myself  these  questions  when,  seated  in  the  Giant'i
I  have  looked  down  upon  a  wide  expanse  of  "fdrzy
over  which  were  scattered  in  picturesque  confusL
masses  of  granite  rocks,  every  one  of  them  stan
monumental  grandeur,  inscribed  by  the  finger  of  t
with  memorials  of  this  mighty  race.    Did  Cormeli
Cormoran  really  build  St  MichaeFs  Mount.    Did  T
bore  walk  the  land,  inspiring  terror  by  his  extreii
ness?    Did  Bolster  persecute  the  blessed  St  Ague
she  was  compelled  by  stratagem  to  destroy  him'
indeed,  our  British  Titans  play  at  quoits  and  marb
huge  rocks  ?    Is  it  a  fact  that  all  the  giants  died
after  Corineus  overthrew  Gog  Magog  on  Plymout
Let  us,  if  only  for  amusement — and  to  give  to
work  some  appearance  of  research — examine  a  ft
quated  authorities,  who  may  be  said — ^in  their  own  i»
directly  to  answer  those  questions.

M.  Pezron,  D.D.,  and  abbot  of  La  Charmoye,
strange  book,  "  The  Antiquities  of  Nations,"  which
was  "  Englished  by  Mr  Jones."f

In  his  Epistle  Dedicatory  to  Charles  Lord  Halifas
ing  of  the  "  Famous  Pezron,''  Mr  Jones  asks,  "  W
ever  any  before  Him  that  attempted  to  Trace  th€
of  the  Geltce,  who  with  Great  Probability  of  Truth,  \
same  People,  and  spoke  the  same  Language,  as  (

*  That  these  Titans  lived  down  to  historic  times  is  sugj
the  following : —

"  Guy,  Earl  of  Warwick,  fought  at  the  request  of  Athelstan
with  Colbrand,  a  Danish  giant,  and  slew  hiin." — Gilbert,  quotii
who  again  quotes  Walter  of  Exeter.    VoL  iv.,  p.  111.

t  The   Antiquities    of    Nations :  more  particularly  of  the
Gauls,  taken  to  be  originally  the    same  People  as    our   An<
tains.


The  Sons  of  the  Titans.  9

cient  Britains  did^  and  their  Descendants  continue  to  do
to  this  Day,  so  high  as  Gomer  and  the  Oamarians  i "

This  authority,  with  a  great  display  of  learning,  proves
that  Qomer,  the  eldest  son  of  Japhet,  was  the  chief  of  the
Gomarians,  and  that  these  Gomarians  afterwards  were  called
Galatians,  or  Gauls.  We  further  learn  from  him  that  a
section  of  the  Gomarians  were  called  Sacse,  and  that  the
Sacse  went  into  Phrygia^  and  afterwards  assumed  the  name
of  Titans.  This  race,  "and  especially  the  Princes  that
commanded  them,  exceeded  all  others  in  Bulk  and  Strength
of  Body ;  and  hence  it  is  that  they  have  been  looked  upon  to
be  terrible  people,  and,  as  it  were.  Giants.  The  Scripture
itself,  the  Bule  of  Truth,  even  gives  such  an  Idea  as  tM? ,
of  those  famous  and  potent  men,  who,  according  to  it,  ruled
over  all  the  Earth.  Jvdith,  speaking  of  them  in  her  fine
Song,  called  them  Giants  the  sons  of  the  Titans.*  And  the
Prophet  Isaiah  informs  us,  also,  that  these  Giants  were
anciently  Masters  of  the  World.''

This  mighty  race  dwelt  in  mountains,  woods,  and  rough
and  inaccessible  places,  and  "they  lay  in  the  Hollows  of
Valleys  and  the  like  Places  of  Shelter  and  retirement,  be-
cause they  had  no  Houses  in  those  Times."  The  learned
abbot  proceeds,  exerting  all  his  powers  to  prove  that  the
Titans  were  the  true  Celtse — ^that  a  people  of  Greece  were
the  descendants  of  the  Titans — that  Gomer  was  "  the  true
stock  of  the  Gauls" — and  that  Magog,  his  brother,  "is
also  looked  upon  to  be  the  Origui  of  the  Scythians,  or
People  of  Oreat  Tartary/'f

To  seize  on  another  authority,  who  appears  to  connect

*  Judith  xvi  7 :  '*  Neither  the  sons  of  the  Titans  Bxnite  him,  nor
hi^  giants  set  upon  him."

f  Those  who  are  curious  in  this  matter  may  examine  also  "Qommi
«r,  A  brief  Analysis  of  the  Language  and  Knowledge  of  the  Anfliflnt
Cjmrj,   fif  John  Williams,  AM.,  Oxon.,  Archdeacon  of  Cardigan.'*


lo  Romances  of  the  Giants.

the  Oriental  with  the  British  cromlech,  and  through
the  people  whose  remains  they  cover,  we  will  quote  '.
D.  Clarke,  who  describes*  a  Cyclopean  structure  visit
him  near  Kiel,  consisting  of  three  upright  stones,  supp
horizontally  an  enormous  slab  of  granite.     After  me
ing  several  cromlechs  of  a  similar   character,   and
*' stupendous  vestiges  of  Cyclopean  architecture,"   he
— "There  is  nothing  Gothic  about  them — nothing  i
ing  the  Cimbri  or  the  Fra/nks,  or  the  old  Saxons — but  ]
the  ancient  Oaviish,  the  ancient  British,  and  the  ai
Irish;  and  if  this  be  admitted,  they  were  Titan-CeltB
Giants  of  the  sacred,  and  the  Cyclops  of  the  he
historians.''      I  Q,m  informed  that  Mr  Christy  has
examined  several  cromlechs  in  Algeria :  beneath  eac
found  a  human  skeleton.

Such  may  be  presumed  to  be  the  sources  from  ^
sprang  the  giants  of  Cornwall,  whose  labours — of  which
still  remain — ^prove  them  to  have  been  a  race  by  the  a
whom

'*  In  stature  the  taU  Amazon
Had  stood  a  pigmy's  height."

Everything  they  have  left  us  informs  us  that  they
men  who

"  Would  have  ta*en
Achilles  by  the  hair,  and  bent  his  neck.
Or  with  a  finger  stay'd  Ixion's  wheeL"t

With  these  evidences,  who  then  dares  say  that  the  5
iheans,  who,  under  the  reign  of  Bardus,  peopled  this  is
were  not  subdued  by  Alhion,  a  giant,  son  of  Neptune,  "
called  the  land  after  his  own  name,  and  reigned  fourty-

♦  Travels  in  Various  Countries  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  vo
p.  59.
t  Hyperion.    By  John  Keats.


Works  of  the  Giants.  1 1

years.**  Let  us  not  forget  the  evidence  also  given  by
Milton  in  his  "  Lycidas/'  when  he  asks,  in  his  poetic  sorrow,
if  his  friend

"  Sleep'st  by  the  fable  of  Bellerus  old,
Where  the  great  Yision  of  the  guarded  Mount
Looks  towards  Namancos  and  Bayona's  hold."

Bellerion  was  the  name  formerly  given  to  the  promontory  of
the  LandVEnd.  It  was  the  home  of  a  mighty  giant,  after
whom,  in  all  probability,  the  headland  was  called,  f

Tradition  throws  a  faint  light  back  into  those  remote
ages,  and  informs  us  that  Cyclopean  walls,  vast  earthworks,
and  strangely-piled  masses  of  rock,  which  still  remain,  im-
perishable monuments  of  animal  power,  in  various  parts  of
the  ancient  Danmonium,  were  the  works  of  the  giants.
With  the  true  history  of  Jack  the  Giant-Killer — of  him  of
the  Bean-Stalk — and  some  others,  we  are  all  acquainted.
We  listened  to  those  histories  ere  yet  the  dark  seed  of  that
troublesome  weed — doubt  —  had  germinated.  They  were
poured  forth  from  loving  lips  into  believing  ears ;  and  often
in  the  sleep  of  innocency,  have  we  buried  our  heads  in  the
maternal  bosom,  to  hide  the  horrid  visage  of  some  Cormoran
Blnnderbore,  or  Thunderbore,  and  escape  the  giant's  toils.
By  this  process  the  stories  were  imprinted  on  memory's

*  The  History  of  Britain.    By  John  Milton.    2d  edition,  1678.

t  KeighUey,  who  of  all  men  should  have  traced  this  Bellerus  to  his
home,  in  his  "Life  of  Milton"  confuses  St  Michael's  Mount  and  the
Lind'ftSnd,  and  "  conceives  the  giant  Bellerus  to  have  been  an  invention
of  Milton's."  The  evidence  of  the  ''  History  of  Britain  "  shews  with  how
■nidi  diligence  the  legendary  lore  which  existed  in  1678  had  been  sought
ooi  by  the  poet;  and  his  grand  epic  proves  with  how  much  reverence
Miltoii  itadied  our  own  mythology.  I  could  lead  the  reader  to  twenty
phees  anraiid  the  Land's-End  which  were  not  discovered  even  by  Mr  J.  O.
HiDiweU  when  rambling  <'  In  Western  Cornwall  by  the  Footsteps  of  the
Qtasli,^  upon  which  Bellerus,  although  he  has  not  left  his  name,  has  left
a  \m%  enduring  record.


12  Romances  of  the  Giants.

tablets  with  an  indelible  ink,  and  for  long  years,  the
and  water — ^which  is  employed  by  the  pioneers  in  th
March  of  Intellect — has  been  used  almost  in  vain,  N<
standing  the  influences  which  have  been  brought  t<
with  no  kindly  spirit,  upon  the  old-world  tales,  we  ha
lingering,  though  in  ruins,  the  evidences  by  which  the
supported.  Mr  Thomas  Wright,  in  his  "Memoir  <
Local  Legends  of  Shropshire,'*  quotes  from  (and  tra
his  quotation)  an  Anglo-Saxon  poem,  which  bears  tl
of  "  The  Ruin,"  in  the  "  Exeter  Book :  "—

"  Wondrous  is  this  wall-stone.
The  fates  have  broken  it.
Have  burst  the  burgh-place  ;
The  work  of  giants  is  perishing."

From  the  Land's-End*  to  the  eastern  edge  of  Dar
the  perishing  works  of  the  giants — ^wondrous  wall-stc
are  yet  to  be  found.  In  many  instances  the  only  reca
which  we  can  mark  the  homes  of  the  giants  are  the  :
which  yet  cling  to  the  rocks  on  the  hills  where  they
The  Giant's  Cradle,  on  Trecrobben  Hill,  reminds  us  •
great  man's  infancy,  as  does  also  the  Giant's  Spoon,  wl
near  it.  The  giant  of  Trecrobben  was,  beyond  quest
temperate  one,  as  the  Giant's  Well,  without  the  walls  <
castle,  incontestably  proves.  But  what  shall  we  say  <
neighbour,  who  dwelt  at  Beersheba,  where  the  Giant's
is  still  suggestive  of  imbibitions  deep.  The  monun
mass  of  granite  on  Dartmoor,  known  as  Bowerman*s^
may  hand  down  to  us  the  resting-place  and  name  of  a

*  "  Not  far  from  the  land's  ende  there  is  a  little  village  called  Trt
— in  English,  the  Towne  of  the  Giants  Orave, — near  whereunto,  and
memory,  (as  I  have  been  informed,)  certain  workmen,  searching  for !
discovered  a  long  square  vault,  which  contained  the  bones  of  an  ex
bigge  carkas,  and  verified  this  Etimology  of  the  name.*' — Carevf$
of  Comioall,


The  Giant's  Grave.  13

whose  nose  was  the  index  of  his  vice ;  though  Carrington,
in  his  poem  of  "  Dartmoor,"  supposes  these  rocks  to  be

"  A  granite  god, —
To  whom,  in  days  long  flown,  the  suppliant  knee
In  trembling  homage  bow'd."

Let  those,  however,  who  are  curious  in  this  problem  visit
the  granite  idol;  when,  as  Carrington  assures  us,  he  will
find  that  the  inhabitants  of

"  The  hamlets  near
Have  legends  rude  connected  with  the  spot,
(Wild  swept  by  every  wind,)  on  which  he  stands,
The  Giant  of  the  Moor."

Of  the  last  resting-places  of  the  giants  there  are  many.
Mardon,  on  Dartmoor,  has  a  QianSs  Grave*  and  from  that
rude  region,  travelling  westward,  we  find  these  graves — prov-
ing the  mortality  of  even  this  Titan  race — rising  on  many  a
moor  and  mountain,  until,  crossing  the  sea,  we  see  numer-
ous giants'  graves  in  the  Scilly  Islands;  as  though  they  had
been  the  favourite  resting-places  of  the  descendants  of  those
who  dreamed  of  yet  more  western  lands,  beneath  the  setting
sun,  which  were,  even  to  them,  "  the  Islands  of  the  Blest."  f

«  See  Shortt's  Collection,  p.  28.

f  Mr  Augustus  Smith,  in  the  Reports  of  the  Royal  Institution  of  Com-
waD,  has  described  one  of  the  graves  opened  by  him  during  a  visit  paid  by
Ae  Cambrian  Archseological  Society  to  the  Scilly  Isles.
Hugh  Miller,  in  his  "  Scenes  and  Legends  of  the  North  of  Scotland,'*
\  us  a  story  of  the  giants  of  Cromarty,  which  shews  us  that  they  were
dy  related  to  the  giants  of  ComwalL  Moreover,  from  him  we
mething  of  the  parentage  of  our  giants,  for  we  presume  the  Scot-
tuh  myth  may  be  applied  with  equal  truth  to  the  Titans  of  the  south.
"  IHodetian,  king  of  Syria,  say  the  historians,  had  thirty-three  daughters,
who^  like  the  daughters  of  Danaus,  kiUed  their  husbands  on  their  wedding
■i|^  The  king,  their  father,  in  abhorrence  of  their  crime,  crowded  them
aU  into  a  ahip,  which  he  abandoned  to  the  mercy  of  the  waves,  and  which
wm  drifted  by  tides  and  winds,  until  it  arrived  on  the  coast  of  Britain,
I  vniiihabited  island.  There  they  lived  solitary,  subsisting  on  roots
I  bcRiei,  the  natural  produce  of  the  soil,  until  an  order  of  demons,  be-


L..


14  Romances  of  the  Giants.

There  is  scarcely  a  pile  of  rocks  around  our  westen
upon  which  the  giants  have  not  left  their  impress,  j
Pedden-Penwith  we  have  the  Giant's  Chair;  at  Cam  Bo
we  see  the  Giant's  Pulpit.  If  we  advance  nearer  to  the
even  the  small  mass  of  rocks  behind  Street-an-Noa
Penzance,  called  Tolcame,  has  the  mark  of  the  Giant'
The  priests,  however,  in  the  season  of  their  rule,  strove  1
terate  the  memories  of  those  great  pagans.  They  cox
the  footprint  at  Tolcame — and  similar  indentations  ela
— ^into  the  mark  of  the  devil's  hoof,  when  he  stam]
rage  at  the  escape  of  a  sinner,  who  threw  himself  frc
rock,  strong  in  faith,  into  the  arms  of  the  Church.  Ii
recent  times,  this  footmark  has  been  attributed  to  thi
jumping  with  joy  as  he  flew  off,  from  this  spot,  with
unfortunate  miller,  who  had  lost  his  soul  by  mixing
clay  with  his  flour.  The  metamorphosis  of  ancient
into  modem  devils  is  a  curious  feature  in  our  inquirj
Lemorna  we  have  the  Giant's  Cave.   On  Gulval  Caim  ti

coming  enamoured  of  them,  took  them  for  their  wives ;  and  a  \
giants,  who  must  be  regarded  as  the  true  aborigines  of  the  con
indeed  the  demons  have  not  a  prior  claim,  were  the  fruits  of  tho
riages.  Less  fortunate,  however,  than  even  their  prototypes,  the  C
the  whole  tribe  was  extirpated  a  few  years  after  by  Brutus,  the  pa
who,  with  a  valour  to  which  mere  bulk  could  render  no  effectual  real
overthrew  Gog,  Magog,  and  Termagol,  and  a  whole  host  of  othei
names  equally  terrible."  The  Cromarty  legends  give  accounts  of
derous  stone  flung  from  the  point  of  a  spindle  across  Dornoch  Firti
of  another  yet  larger,  still  to  be  seen,  a  few  miles  from  Dingwall,
was  thrown  equally  far,  and  which  bears  the  impress  of  the  giant's
and  thumb.  Also,  they  tell  us  of  the  cailliach-more,  or  great  womai
"  from  a  pannier  filled  with  earth  and  stones,  which  she  carried  on  he
formed  almost  aU  the  hills  of  Ross-shire."  The  Sutars,  as  the  pi
tories  of  Cromarty  are  named,  served  as  the  work-stools  of  two
who  were  shoemakers,  or  soutars,  and  hence,  says  Hugh  Miller, ''  in  ]
of  time  the  name  soutar  was  transferred  by  a  common  metonymy
the  craftsmen  to  their  stools,  the  two  promontories,  and  by  this
they  have  ever  since  been  distinguished/'


Corineus  and  Gogmagog.  1 5

also  the  giant's  mark,  which  the  magic  of  Sir  H.  Davy's
science  could  not  dispel*  On  Cam  Brea  are  no  end  of  evi-
dences of  these  Titans — the  Giant's  Hand  rivalling  in  size  any
of  the  monstrous  monuments  of  the  Egyptian  goda  Thus,  in
nearly  every  part  of  the  country  where  granite  rocks  prevail,
the  monuments  of  the  giants  may  be  found.  Why  do  the
giants  shew  such  a  preference  for  granite  ?  At  Looe,  indeed,
the  Giant's  Hedge  is  a  vast  earthwork ;  but  this  is  an  excep-
tion,-f-  unless  the  Bolster  in  St  Agnes  is  a  giant's  work.  In
pursuing  the  dim  lights  which  yet  remain  to  guide  us  to  the
history  of  the  giants,  we  must  not  forget  the  record  of  the
Faial  Wrestling  on  Plymouth  Hoe.


CORINEUS  AND  GOQMAGOQ.

WHO  can  dare  question  such  an  authority  as  John  Milton  ?
In  his  "History  of  Britain,  that  part  especially  now  called
England.  From  the  first  Traditional  beginning  continued  to
the  Norman  Conquest.  Collected  out  of  the  antientest  and
best  authors  thereof,"  he  gives  us  the  story  of  Brutus  and  of
Corineus,  "who  with  the  battele  Ax  which  he  was  wont  to
manage  against  the  Tyrrhen  Oiants,  is  said  to  have  done
marvells."  With  the  adventures  of  these  heroes  in  Africa
and  in  Aquitania  we  have  little  concern.  They  suffer  severe
defeats;  and  then  "Brutus,  finding  now  his  powers  much
iessn'd,  and  this  not  yet  the  place  foretold  him,  leaves  Aqui-
tain,  and  with  an  easy  course  arriving  at  Totness  in  Dev'n-
Aire,  quickly  perceivs  heer  to  be  the  promis'd  end  of  his
labours."  The  following  matters  interest  us  more  closely :  J —

•  Sir  H.  Davy,  when  a  youth,  would  frequently  steal  to  Qulval  Cairn,
■ad  in  its  solitade  pursue  his  studies.

f  See  Daries  Oilbert^s  History,  vol.  iv.,  p.  29.

X  For  adiacoMion  of  the  question  relative  to  Brutus,  see  Gough^s  ^*  Cam-
dn'f  BriUimia»"  vol  i,  pp.  xlix.  to  Iv.


i6  Romances  of  the  Giants.

"  The  Hand,  not  yet  Britain,  but  Albion,  was  in  a  i
desert  and  inhospitable^  kept  only  by  a  remnant  of  i
whose  excessive  Force  and  Tyrannic  had  consumed  tl
Them  Brutns  destroies,  and  to  his  people  divides  tb
which,  with  some  reference  to  his  own  name,  he  them
calls  Britain,  To  Corineus,  Cornwall,  as  now  we
fell  by  lot ;  the  rather  by  him  lik't,  for  that  the  hugest
in  Rocks  and  Caves  were  said  to  lurk  still  there ;  whic
of  Monsters  to  deal  with  was  his  old  exercise.

"  And  heer,  with  leave  bespok'n  to  recite  a  grand
though  dignify'd  by  our  best  Poets :  While  Brutus,  on
tain  Festival  day,  solemnly  kept  on  that  shoar  where  1
landed,  {Totness,)  was  with  the  People  in  great  jolli
mirth,  a  crew  of  these  savages,  breaking  in  upon  them,
on  the  sudden  another  sort  of  Game  than  at  such  a  m
was  expected.    But  at  length  by  many  hands  overcome
magog,  the  hugest,  in  hight  twelve  cubits,  is  reserved
that  with  him  Corineus,  who  desired  nothing  more,
try  his  strength,  whom  in  a  Wrestle  the  Giant  catchinj
with  a  terrible  hugg  broke  three  of  his  Ribs :  Neverl
Corineus,  enraged,  heaving  him  up  by  main  force,  and
shoulders  bearing  him  to  the  next  high  rock,  threw  bin
long  all  shattered  into  the  sea,  and  left  his  name  on  th
called  ever  since  Langoemagog,  which  is  to  say,  the  C
Leap."    The  same  story  has  been  somewhat  diflferentl;
although  there  is  but  little  variation  in  the  main  inci
When  Brutus  and  Corineus,  with  their  Trojan  hosts,  1
at  Plymouth,  these  chiefs  wisely  sent  parties  into  the  ii
to  explore  the  country,  and  to  learn  something  of  the  j
At  the  end  of  the  first  day,  all  the  soldiers  who  had
sent  out  as  exploring   parties,  returned  in  great  1
pursued  by  several  terrific  giants.    Brutus  and  Coi
were  not^  however,  to  be  terrified  by  the  immense  a


The  Giant's  Wrestling.  1 7

their  enemies,  nor  by  the  horrid  noises  which  they  made,
hiding  to  strike  terror  into  the  armed  hosts.  These  chieftains
rallied  their  hosts,  and  marched  to  meet  the  giants,  hurling
their  spears  and  flinging  their  darts  against  their  huge  bodies.
The  assault  was  so  unexpected  that  the  giants  gave  way,  and
eventnally  fled  to  the  hills  of  Dartmoor.  Gogmagog,  the
captain  of  the  giants,  who  was  sadly  wounded  in  the  leg,  and,
unable  to  proceed,  hid  himself  in  a  bog ;  but  there,  by  the
light  of  the  moon,  he  was  found  by  the  Trojan  soldiers,
bound  with  strong  cords,  and  carried  back  to  the  Hoe  at
Plymouth,  where  the  camp  was.  Gogmagog  was  treated
nobly  by  his  victors,  and  his  wounds  were  speedily  healed.
Bmtus  desired  to  make  terms  with  the  giants ;  and  it  was  at
length  proposed  by  Ctogmagog  to  try  a  fall  with  the  strongest
in  the  host,  and  that  whoever  came  off  the  conqueror  should
be  proclaimed  king  of  Cornwall,  and  hold  possession  of  all
the  western  land.  Gorineus  at  once  accepted  the  challenge
of  the  monster.     Notwithstanding,  the  giant,

"  Though  bent  with  woes^
FuU  eighteen  feet  in  height  he  rose ;
His  hair,  exposed  to  sun  and  wind,
Like  wither'd  heath,  his  head  entwined,"

and  that  Gorineus  was  but  little  above  the  ordinary  size  of
man,  the  Trojan  chief  felt  sure  of  a  victory.  The  day  for
the  wrestling  was  fixed.  The  huge  Gogmagog  was  allowed
to  send  for  the  giants,  and  they  assembled  on  one  side  of  a
deaied  space  on  Plymouth  Hoe,  while  the  Trojan  soldiers
oeeopied  the  other.  All  arms  were  thrown  aside;  and
frootiDg  each  other,  naked  to  the  waist,  stood  the  most
lotdly  of  the  giants,  and  the  most  noble  of  men.  The  con-
flict was  long,  and  it  appeared  for  some  time  doubtful.
Brute  strength  was  exerted  on  one  side,  and  trained  skill
on  the  other.  At  length  Gorineus  succeeded  in  seizing
*  Iff  Skbdb.  B


1 8  Romances  of  the  Giants,

Gogmagog  by  the  girdle,  and  by  regularly-repeated  ii
he  made  the  monster  undulate  like  a  tree  shaken  by  a
storm,  until  at  length,  gathering  all  his  strength  into  on
the  giant  was  forced  to  his  back  on  the  ground,  th
shaking  with  his  weight,  and  the  air  echoing  with  the  1
of  his  mighty  groan,  as  the  breath  was  forced  from  h
by  the  terrible  momentum  of  his  fall  There  lay  th
and  there  were  all  the  other  giants,  appalled  at  the
which  they  could  not  understand,  but  which  convince
that  there  was  something  superior  to  mere  animal  si
Corineus  breathed  for  a  minute,  then  he  rushed  u]
prostrate  foe,  and  seizing  him  by  the  legs,  he  dragg
to  the  edge  of  the  cliff,  and  precipitated  him  into  i
The  giant  fell  on  the  rocks  below,  and  his  body  was
into  fragments  by  the  fall ;  while  the

"  Fretted  flood
RoU'd  frothy  waves  of  purple  blood."

"  Gogmagog's  leap  "  has  been  preserved  near  the  spo
now  presents  a  fortress  to  the  foes  of  Britain ;  and  tl
those  "who  say  that,  at  the  last  digging  on  the  Haw
foundation  of  the  citadel  of  Plymouth,  the  great  ja
teeth  therein  found  were  those  of  Gogmagog/'*

THE  GIANTS  OP  THE  MOUNT.

THE  history  of  the  redoubtable  Jack  proves  that  St  M
Mount  was  the  abode  of  the  giant  Cormelian,  or
name  is  sometimes  given,  Cormoran.  We  are  told  ho
destroyed  the  giant,  and  the  story  ends.  Now,  the  int(
part  which  has  been  forgotten  in  the  narrative  is  not  oi
Cormoran  lived  on,  but  that  he  built  the  Mount,  hi
ing  place.     St  Michael's  Mount,  as  is  tolerably  well

*  See  Appendix  (A)  for  the  ''Poem  of  the  Wrestling,"  &c


The  Giants  of  the  Mount.  19

is  an  island  at  each  rise  of  the  tide — the  distance  between  it
and  the  mainland  being  a  little  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile.
In  the  days  of  the  giants,  however,  it  was  some  six  miles
firom  the  sea,  and  was  known  as  the  White  Rock  in  the
Wood,  or  in  Cornish,  "Carreg  luz  en  kuz."  Of  the  evi-
dences in  favour  of  this,  more  will  be  said,  when  the  tradi-
tions connected  with  physical  phenomena  are  dealt  with.  In
this  wood  the  giant  desired  to  build  his  home,  and  to  rear  it
above  the  trees,  that  he  might  from  the  top  keep  watch  over
the  neighbouring  country.  Any  person  carefully  observing
the  structure  of  the  granite  rocks  will  notice  their  tendency
to  a  cubical  form.  These  stones  were  carefully  selected  by
the  giant  from  the  granite  of  the  neighbouring  hills,  and  he
was  for  a  long  period  employed  in  carrying,  and  piling,  those
huge  masses,  one  on  the  other,  in  which  labour  he  compelled
his  wife  to  aid  him.  It  has  been  suggested,  with  much  show
of  probability,  that  the  confusion  of  the  two  names  alluded
to  has  arisen  from  the  fact  that  the  giant  was  called  Cor-
moran,  and  that  the  name  of  his  wife  was  Cormelian ;  at  all
events,  there  is  no  harm  in  adopting  this  hypothesis.  The
toil  of  lifting  those  granitic  masses  from  their  primitive  beds,
and  of  carrying  them  through  the  forest,  was  excessive.  It
would  seem  that  the  heaviest  burthens  were  imposed  upon
Cormelian,  and  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  carrying  those
rocky  masses  in  her  apron.  At  a  short  distance  from  the
•  White  Rock,"  which  was  now  approaching  completion,  there
oists  large  masses  of  Greenstone  rock.  Cormelian  saw  no
leaaon  why  one  description  of  stone  would  not  do  as  well  as
another ;  and  one  day,  when  the  giant  Cormoran  was  sleeping,
die  Inroke  off  a  vast  mass  of  the  Greenstone  rock,  and,  taking
it  in  her  apron,  hastened  towards  the  artificial  hill  with  it,
koping  to  place  it,  without  being  observed  by  Cormoran.
Wken,  lumever,  Cormelian  was  within  a  short  distance  of


I


20  Romances  of  the  Giants.

the  "  White  Eock,"  the  giant  awoke,  and  presently  pe
that  his  wife  was,  contrary  to  his  wishes,  carrying  i
stone  instead  of  a  white  one.  In  great  wrath  he
followed  her,  and,  with  a  dreadful  imprecation,  gave
kick.  Her  apron-string  broke,  and  the  stone  fell
sand.  There  it  has  ever  since  remained,  no  human
being  sufficient  to  remove  it.  The  giantess  died,  %
mass  of  Greenstone,  resting,  as  it  does,  on  Clay  Slat€
became  her  monument.  In  more  recent  days,  wh
light  of  Christianity  was  dawning  on  the  land,  this :
rock  was  still  rendered  sacred :  "  a  lytle  chapel  "*
been  built  on  it ;  and  to  this  day  it  is  usually  known  a
Chapel  Eock."t


THE  KEY  OP  THE  GIANTS  CASTLK

THE  giant's  castle  at  Treryn,  remarkable  as  a  gra
ample  of  truly  British  Cyclopean  architecture,  wj
by  the  power  of  enchantment  The  giant  to  whom  all  t
of  his  race  were  indebted  for  this  stronghold  was  ii
way  a  remarkable  mortal  He  was  stronger  than  anj
giant,  and  he  was  a  mighty  necromancer.  He  sat
promontory  of  Treryn,  and  by  the  power  of  his  will  h
pelled  the  castle  to  rise  out  of  the  sea.  It  is  only  kep
present  position  by  virtue  of  a  magic  key.  This,  th<
placed  in  a  holed  rock,  known  as  the  Giant's  Lock,  and
ever  this  key,  a  large  round  stone,  can  be  taken  out
lock,  the  promontory  of  Treryn  and  its  castle  will  dis
beneath  the  waters.  There  are  not  many  people  who
even  a  sight  of  this  wonderful  key.  You  must  pass
tide  along  a  Granite  ledge,  scarcely  wide  enough  for

♦  Leland.

t  See  Appendix  (B)  for  the  Irish  legend  of  Shara  and  Shec


The  Rival  Giants.  2 1

to  stand  on.  If  you  happen  to  make  a  false  step,  you  must
be  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks  below.  Well,  having  got
over  safely,  you  come  to  a  pointed  rock  with  a  hole  in  it ;
tliis  is  the  castle  lock.  Put  your  hand  deep  into  the  hole,
and  you  will  find  at  the  bottom  a  large  egg-shaped  stone,
which  is  easily  moved  in  any  direction.  You  will  feel  cer-
tain that  you  can  take  it  out, — but  try !  Try  as  you  may,
you  will  find  it  will  not  pass  through  the  hole;  yet  no  one
can  doubt  but  that  it  once  went  in.

Lieut.  Goldsmith  dissolved  one  bit  of  superstition  by  fool-
ishly throwing  the  fatal  Logan  stone  from  off  its  bearing ;
but  no  one  has  ever  yet  succeeded  in  removing  the  key
of  the  giant's  castle  from  the  hole  in  which  the  necromancer
Lb  said  to  have  placed  it  when  he  was  dying.

THE  EIVAL  GIANTS.

THOSE  who  have  visited  the  Logan  rock  will  be  familiar
with  the  several  groups  which  form  the  Treryn  promon-
tory. Treryn  Castle,  an  anoient  British  fortress,  the  Cyclopean
walls  of  which,  and  its  outer  earthwork,  can  still  be  traced,
was  the  dwelling  of  a  famous  giant  and  his  wife.  I  have
heard  it  said  that  he  gave  his  name  to  this  place,  but  that  is
af  eourse  doubtful  This  giant  was  chief  of  a  numerous
band,  and  by  his  daring  he  held  possession,  against  the
giants  of  the  Mount,  of  all  the  lands  west  of  Penzance.
Amoogst  the  hosts  who  owned  allegiance  to  him,  was  a
lemarkable  fine  young  fellow,  who  had  his  abode  in  a  cave,
in  the  pile  of  rocks  upon  which  the  Logan  rock  stands.
Hus  jroung  giant  grew  too  fond  of  the  giantess,  and  it  would
ippear  that  the  lady  was  not  unfisivourably  inclined  towards
Urn.  Of  their  love  passes,  however,  we  know  nothing.
Tiadition  has  only  told  us  that  the  giantess  was  one  day


L


22  Romances  of  the  Giants.

reclining  on  the  rock  still  known  as  the  Giant  Lady's
while  the  good  old  giant  was  dosing  in  the  Giant'j
which  stands  near  it,  when  the  young  and  wicked  lovi
behind  his  chief  and  stabbed  him  in  the  belly  with  a
The  giant  fell  over  the  rocks  to  the  level  ridge  below,  an
he  lay,  rapidly  pouring  out  his  life-blood.  From  this  s
young  murderer  kicked  him  into  the  sea,  ere  yet  his  1
quite  extinct,  and  he  perished  in  the  waters.

The  guilty  pair  took  possession  of  Treryn  Castle,  a
are  told,  lived  happily  for  many  years.


THE  QIANTS  OP  TEENCROM.  OR  TRECROBBEN.

THE  rough  granite  hill  of  Trecrobben  rises  in
savage  grandeur  from  the  wooded  lands  which  fc
park  of  Trevetha,  close  by  the  picturesque  village  of
Prom  the  summit  of  this  hill  may  be  surveyed  one
most  striking  panoramic  views  in  ComwalL  The  <
declines,  rather  rapidly,  but  still  with  a  pleasing  c
towards  the  sea  on  the  southern  side.  From  the
plain,  which  extends  from  Marazion  to  Penzance,
stretch  out  two  arms  of  land,  one  on  the  eastern  s
wards  the  Lizard  Point,  and  the  other  on  the  weste
towards  Mousehole  and  Lemoma,  which  embrace  as
that  fine  expanse  of  water  known  as  the  Mount's  Bay
most  striking  object,  "  set  in  the  silver  sea,"  is  the
midical  hill  St  Michael's  Mount,  crowned  with  the  "
an  unhappy  mixture  of  church,  castle,  and  modern  d^
house,  which,  nevertheless,  from  its  very  incongruities
picturesque  appearance  when  viewed  &om  a  distance.
Ung  amidst  the  Greenstone  rocks,  sheltered  by  "th

*  Mr  Halliwell  infers  from  this  that  the  story  is  Saxon.    See  ''
jDgs  in  the  Footsteps  of  the  Qiants.**


The  Giants  of  Trecrobben.  23

Mount,"  is  the  irregular  town  of  Marazion,  or  Market- Jew;
and,  balancing  this,  on  the  western  side  of  "  the  Green,"  Pen-
zance displays  her  more  important  buildings,  framed  by  the
beautifully  fertile  country  by  which  the  town  is  surrounded.

The  high  lands  to  the  westward  of  Penzance,  with  the
fishing  villages  of  Newlyn  and  Mousehole,  the  church  of
Paul  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,  and  the  engine-house  belong-
ing to  a  mine  at  its  base,  have  much  quiet  beauty  under  some
aspects  of  light, — the  yet  more  western  hills  shutting  out
the  Land*s-End  from  the  observer's  eye.

Looking  from  Trencrom  (this  is  the  more  common  name)
to  the  south-east,  the  fine  hills  of  Tregoning  and  Godolphin,
— ^both  of  which  have  given  names  to  two  ancient  Cornish
families, — ^mark  the  southern  boundary  of  a  district  famed
for  its  mineral  wealth.  Looking  eastward,  Garn  Brea
Hill,  with  its  ancient  castle  and  its  modem  monument,
stands  up  from  the  table -land  in  rugged  grandeur.  This
hill,  "  a  merry  place,  'tis  said,  in  days  of  yore," — ^when  British
villages  were  spread  amidst  the  mighty  cairns,  and  Cyclo-
pean walls  sheltered  the  inhabitants, — rises  to  mark  the  most
productive  piece  of  mining-ground,  of  the  same  area,  to  be
found  in  the  world.  Around  the  towns  of  Camborne  and
Bedruth  are  seen  hundreds  of  miners'  cottages,  and  scores  of
tall  chimneys,  telling  of  the  mechanical  appliances  which  are
brought  to  bear  upon  the  extraction  of  tin  and  copper  from
the  earth.  Beyond  this  thickly-peopled  region  the  eye  wan-
ders yet  eastward,  and  eventually  reposes  on  the  series  of
granite  hills  which  rise  beyond  St  Austell  and  stretch  north-
ward,— ^the  two  highest  hills  in  Cornwall,  which  are  known
as  Boughtor  and  Brownwhilly,  being  in  this  range.

Let  the  observer  now  turn  his  face  northward,  and  a  new
and  varied  scene  lies  before  him.  Within  two  miles  the
waters  of  St  Ives'  Bay  break  against  the  clifis.    On  the  left


24  Romances  of  the  Giants.

is  the  creek  of  Hayle,  which  has  been  fashioned
energy  of  man  into  a  useful  harbour,  and  given  rise
foundation  of  two  extensive  iron-foundries.     Betwee
and  the  sea  are  the  hills  of  blown  sand,  which  have  ev
the  homes  of  the  Fairy  people.    The  lighthouse  of  C
stands,  a  humble  companion,  to  balance  in  this  ba;
"  Mount,"  which  adorns  the  bay,  washing  the  souther
of  this  "  narrow  neck  of  land"     Godrevy  marks  the
of  sand  extending  to  the  eastward.     To  the  north  the
become  more  and  more  rugged,  culminating  in  St
Beacon, — a  hill  of  graceful  form  rising  somewhat  raj
a  considerable  elevation.    From  this  the  "beetling
stretch  away  northward,  until  the  bold  promontory  1
Head  closes  the  scene,  appropriately  displaying  anol
those  fine  examples  of  humanity — ^a  lighthouse.

To  the  left,  towards  the  sea,  rises  the  cenotaph  of
an  eccentric  man,  who  evidently  sought  to  secure  some  i
tality  by  this  building,  and  the  silly  ceremonials  carr
around  it ;  the  due  performance  of  which  he  has  secured
quests  to  the  Corporation  of  St  Ives.  Around  this  the  i
district  of  St  Ives  is  seen,  and  her  fishing-boats  dotting  1
give  evidence  of  another  industry  of  vast  importance
town  and  neighbourhood.  Westward  of  St  Ives,  hilL
brown  and  rugged  than  any  which  have  yet  been  v
stretch  away  to  Zennor,  Morva,  and  St  Just,  and  these
ing  the  scene  beneath  our  feet,  shut  out  from  us  the
of  the  Land's-End.

On  the  summit  of  this  hill,  which  is  only  surpaa
savage  grandeur  by  Carn  Brea,  the  giants  built  a  castle
four  entrances  to  which  still  remain  in  Cyclopean  ma
ness  to  attest  the  Herculean  powers  by  which  such  n
blocks  were  piled  upon  each  other.  There  the  giant
tains  dwelt  in  awful  state.  Along  the  serpentine  road,
ing  up  the  hill  to  the  principal  gateway,  they  dragged


The  Giants  at  Play.  25

captives,  and  on  the  great  flat  rocks  within  the  castle  they
sacrificed  them.  Almost  every  rock  stUl  bears  some  name
connected  with  the  giants — '^a  race  may  perish,  but  the
name  endures/'  The  treasures  of  the  giants  who  dwelt
here  are  said  to  have  been  buried  in  the  days  of  their
troubles,  when  they  were  perishing  before  the  ccmquerors
of  their  land.  Their  gold  and  jewels  were  hidden  deep  in
the  granite  caves  of  this  hill,  and  secured  by  spells  as  potent
as  tiiose  which  Merlin  placed  upon  his  "hoarded  treasures.**
They  are  securely  preserved,  even  to  the  present  day,  and
carefully  guarded  from  man  by  the  Spriggans,  or  Trolls^  of
whom  we  have  to  speak  in  another  page.


THE  GIANTS  AT  PLAY.

r  several  parts  of  Cornwall  there  are  evidences  that  these
Titans  were  a  sportive  race.  Huge  rocks  are  {^reserved
to  shew  where  they  played  at  trap-ball,  at  hurling,  and  other
athletic  games.  The  giants  of  Trecrobben  and  St  Miehaers
Mount  often  met  for  a  game  at  bob-buttons.  The  Mount
was  the  "  bob,"  on  which  flat  masses  of  granite  were  placed
to  serve  as  buttons,  and  Trecrobben  hill  was  the  '^  mit,"  or
the  qx)!  from  which  the  throw  was  made.  This  order  was
sometimes  reversed.  On  the  outside  of  St  Michael's  Mount,
many  a  granite  slab  which  had  been  knocked  ofl*  the  ''  bob  **
is  yet  to  be  found ;  and  numerous  piles  of  rough  cubical
masses  of  the  same  rock,  said  to  be  the  granite  of  Trecrobben
Hill,^  shew  how  eagerly  the  game  was  played.

*  Mr  O.  Halliwell,  who  carefully  followed  in  the  *"  Footsteps  of  the
Qiaati^''  relerriog  to  this  game  as  played  by  them,  says  : —

**  DoabtleMly  the  Qiant's  Chair  on  Trink  Hill  was  frequently  used  dur-
lag  the  progress  of  the  game,  ncxr  is  it  improbable  that  the  Giant's
W«D  was  also  in  requiiition.  Here,  then,  were  at  hand  opportunities
lor  rest  mod  refreshment — ^the  circumstances  of  the  various  traditions
mrftj^g  weQ  with,  and  in  fact,  demonstrating  the  truth  of  each  other."


26  Romances  of  the  Giants.

Trecrobben  Hill  was  well  chosen  by  the  giants  as
of  their  castle.  From  it  they  surveyed  the  country  <
oide ;  and  friend  or  enemy  was  seen  at  a  considera
tance,  as  he  approached  the  guarded  spot.  It  is  as
tradition  can  make  it,  that  Trecrobben  was  the  cen
region  full  of  giants.  On  Lescudjack  Hill,  close  to  P(
there  is  "  The  Giant's  Round,"  evidently  the  scene  of
sanguinary  conflict,  since  the  Cornish  antiquarian  ai
Borlase  informs  us,  that  Lesgud-zhek  signifies  the
of  the  bloody  field."  On  the  cairn  at  Gulval  are
impressions  on  the  rocks,  all  referable  to  the  giai
Madron  there  is  the  celebrated  "Giant's  Cave;"  \
well-known  Lanyon  cromlech  is  reported  by  some  to
"Giant's  Coit,"  while  others  declare  it  to  be  the  "
Table."  Cairn  Galva,  again,  is  celebrated  for  its
and,  indeed,  every  hill  within  sight  has  some  mo
preserving  the  memory  of  those,  "  the  Titans  fierce.'*

HOLIBURN  OP  THE  CAIEN.*

HOLIBURN,  according  to  tradition,  was  a  very  amia
somewhat  sociable  gentleman ;  but,  like  his  bi
he  loved  to  dwell  amongst  the  rocks  of  Cairn  Galva.  B
his  home  in  this  remote  region,  and  relied  for  his  sup
the  gifts  of  sheep  and  oxen  from  the  farmers  around-
retum,  protecting  them  from  the  predatory  incursioni
less  conscientious  giants  of  Trecrobben.  It  is  said
fought  many  a  battle  in  the  defence  of  his  friends,  and
injured  but  one  of  his  neighbours  during  his  long  li

*  '^  Somewhere  amongst  the  rocks  in  this  cairn  is  the  Giant's  <
ages  long  gone  by  the  abode  of  a  giant  named  Holibum." — Ha:
Mr  HalliweU  was  fortunate  in  securing  a  name.  I  have  often
the  giant  in  question,  but  I  never  heard  his  name.


Holiburn  of  the  Cairn.  2  7

This  was,  however,  purely  an  accident.  The  giant  was  at
play  with  the  human  pigmies,  and  in  the  excitement  of  the
moment,  being  delighted  at  the  capital  game  made  by  a  fine
yomig  peasant,  he  tapped  him  on  the  head,  and  scattered  his
brains  on  the  grass.  I  once  heard  that  Holiburn  had  mar-
ried a  farmer's  daughter,  and  that  a  very  fine  race,  still  bear-
ing a  name  not  very  dissimilar,  was  the  result  of  this  union.
Holiburn,  like  his  brethren,  was  remarkably  fond  of  quoits ;
indeed,  go  where  we  will  within  the  Land's-End  District,  the
"  Giant's  Quoit"  is  still  shewn.  Other — shall  we  call  them
household — ^relics  of  the  giants  occur.  From  Cairn  Galva  to
Zennor  we  find  a  series  of  ''Giant's  Chairs;"  and,  careful  to
preserve  each  remarkable  relic  of  this  interesting  race,  here  is
also  the  "  Giant's  Dinner-Plate."  That  St  Ives,  too,  was  not
without  its  giant,  although  the  record  of  his  name  is  lost,  is
evident  from  the  fact  that  a  tooth,  an  inch  broad,  was  taken
from  a  "  Giant's  Grave."*

^  The  following  extract  from  a  note  written  by  the  late  Zennor  post-
man and  poet^  ahews  how  enduringlj  the  giants  have  left  their  names  on
the  rodu  of  Cornwall : —

^Some  districtB  in  Cornwall  were  said  to  have  been  peopled  in
oldeii  timee  by  giants,  and  even  Zennor  District  possesses  the  largest
quoit — three  Logan  rooks — ^whilst  Trecrobben  hill  still  exhibits  the  Bowl
m  which  the  Giants  of  the  West  used  to  wash.    The  large  granite  boulder

naar  to  the  residence  of  the  Rev.  Mr  S ,  curate  of  Morva,  is  said  to

be  the  Giant's  Dinner-plate.  Further  down  the  hill,  and  hard  by  the
Zemior  vicarage,  the  seats  of  the  giants  are  still  shewn  by  the  inhabit-
ante.  Indeed,  so  strong  is  the  belief  that  giants  inhabited  the  hills
of  the  west,  that  a  young  lady  in  this  neighbourhood  assayed,  a  month
or  two  ago,  to  deliver  a  lecture,  or  address,  on  the  subject,  taking  for  her
tezt^  'There  were  giants  in  those  days.'  But  the  giants  were  not  im-
mortal ;  coIosmJ  as  were  their  frames,  they  too  had  to  '  sleep  with  their
fitheri/  Whether  Jack  the  Giant-killer  took  any  part  in  ridding  the
eerth  of  this  wonderful  race  of  men  we  cannot  positively  state,  but  thus
mnoh  k  certain  :  the  giants  were  succeeded  by  a  numerous  race  of  small
people,  and  ao  tmall  as  not  to  be  observable  by  the  eye."


28  Romances  of  the  Giants.


THE  GIAin:  OP  KANCLEDRT.

IN  Nancledry  Bottoms,  about  a  mile  from  the  fame
Castle-an-Dinas,  there  stood  at  one  time  a  tb
house  near  the  brook  which  runs  murmuring  down  the
Eather  more  than  thirty  years  since,  some  mouldering  '
(mud)  walls,  indicating  the  existence  at  one  time  of  \
dwelling,  were  pointed  to  as  the  former  residence  of  a  t
giant.  He  appears  to  have  led  a  solitary  life,  and  t<
lived  principally  on  little  children,  whom  he  is  said  t<
swallowed  whole.  His  strength  was  indicated  by  i
huge  masses  of  granite  which  were  scattered  aroui
Bottoms,  and  in  the  neighbouring  fields.  These  were  c
by  him  in  his  pockets,  to  defend  himself  from  the  gii
Trecrobben,  with  whom  he  appears  to  have  been  o
friendly  terms.  This  giant  is  note-worthy  as  the  on]
recorded  who  lived  in  a  house.


TEEBIGQAN  THE  GIANT.

TREBEGEAN  is  the  name  of  a  village  near  the  L
End.    This  name,  as  we  have  already  stated,  sij
the  town  of  the  giant's  grave.     The  giant's  existence
confirmed  by  the  discovery  of  a  vault  and  some  large
in  it,  on  this  spot.*

Trebiggan  divides  with  Tregeagle  the  honourable  in
tality  of  being  employed  to  frighten  children  into  v
Often  have  I  heard  the  unruly  urchins  of  this  neighboui
threatened  with  Trebiggan.  They  are  told  that  Treb:
was  a  vast  man,  with  arms  so  long  that  he  could  take
out  of  the  ships  passing  by  the  Land's-End,  and  place

*  See  Heath's  Description  of  Cornwall,  1750.


Pengerswick  and  the  Giant.  z$

on  theLongships;  but,  that  sometimes  he  would,  having  had
his  fun  with  them,  good-humouredly  place  them  on  board
their  shipis  or  boats  again.  He  is  said  to  have  dined  every
day  on  little  children,  Who  were  generally  fried  on  a  large
flat  rock  which  stood  at  a  little  distance  from  his  cave.


THE  LOED  OP  PENGERSWICK  AND  THE  GIANT  OP  ST
MICHAEL'S  MOUNT.

THE  giant  who  dwelt  on  St  Michael's  Mount  had  grown
Tery  old,  and  had  lost  all  his  teeth ;  still  he  was  the  terror
of  the  neighbouring  villages.  The  horrid  old  monster — who
had  but  one  eye,  and  that  one  in  the  middle  of  his  forehead
— would,  whenever  he  required  food — ^which  was  pretty  often
— walk  or  wade  across  to  Market-Jew,  as  the  tide  might  be,
select  the  best  cow  in  the  neighbourhood,  and,  swinging  it
over  his  shoulders,  return  to  his  island.  This  giant  had  often
taken  cattle  from  the  Pengerswick  estate ;  and  one  day  he
thought  he  should  like  another  of  this  choice  breed.  Accord-
ingly, away  he  went,  across  the  sea,  to  Pengerswick  cove.
The  giant  did  not  know  that  the  lord  of  Pengerswick  had
returned  from  the  East,  a  Hf^tster  of  '' white- witchcraft,"  or
magia  The  lord  had  seen  the  giant  coming,  and  he  began
to  work  his  spells.  The  giant  was  bewildered,  yet  he  knew
not  how.  At  last,  after  much  trouble,  he  caught  a  fine  calf,
tied  its  four  feet  together,  passed  his  great  head  between  the
fine  and  hind  legs,  and,  with  the  calf  hanging  on  his  shoul-
dec8»  he  trode  in  joy  towards  the  shore.  He  wandered  on  in
perfect  unconsciousness  of  the  path,  and  eventually  he  found
Jihwaftlf  on  the  precipitous  edge  of  the  great,  black  rock  which
ftill  marks  the  western  side  of  Pengerswick  cove.  As  if  the
rock  had  beetf  a  magnet,  the  giant  was  chained  fast.  He
twifted,  turned,  and  struggled  in  vain.    He  found  himself


30  Romances  of  the  Giants.

gradually  becoming  stiff,  so  that  at  last  he  could  :
move  hand  nor  foot ;  yet  were  his  senses  more  keen]
than  ever.  The  giant  had  to  remain  thus,  during
winter's  night,  with  the  calf  bleating,  as  never  calf  1
before,  into  his  ear.  In  the  morning,  when  the  eii<
thought  he  had  punished  the  giant  sufficiently,  he  m
his  mare,  and  rode  down  to  the  shore.  He  disenchant
giant,  by  giving  him  a  severe  horsewhipping,  and  h
made  him  drop  the  calf.  He  continued  to  flog  the
until  he  leapt  off  the  rock  into  the  sea,  through  wl
great  agony  he  waded  to  the  Mount ;  and  from  that
this  he  has  never  ventured  on  the  mainland.

We  learn,  however,  from  undoubted  authority,  tha
time  after  this,  Tom,  the  giant  of  Lelant,  visited  the
on  the  Mount,  and,  finding  him  half-starved,  he  t0(
aunt  Nancy  from  Gulval  to  see  his  friend,  with  a  large  \
of  butter  and  eggs.  The  old  giant  was  exceedingly  {
see  the  farmer's  wife,  bought  all  her  store  at  a  very  ea
gant  price,  and  bargained  and  paid  in  advance  for  mon
had  a  store  of  wealth  in  the  caverns  of  the  Mount,
knowing  old  woman  kept  him  well  supplied  as  long
giant  had  money  to  pay  her;  |jpd  aunt  Nancy's  fami
came  the  wealthiest  in  the  parish  of  GulvaL

THE  GIANT  OP  ST  MICHAEL'S  MOUNT  LOSES  HIS  W]

THE  giant  on  the  Mount  and  the  giant  on  Trecrobbei
were  very  friendly.  They  had  only  one  cobbling-ha
between  them,  which  they  would  throw  from  one  t
other,  as  either  required  it.  One  day  the  giant  o
Mount  wanted  the  hammer  in  a  great  hurry,  so  he  sha
'*  Holloa,  up  there !  Trecrobben,  throw  us  down  the
mer,  woost  a'?"


Tom  and  the  Giant  Blunderbuss,  3 1

"  To  be  sure,"  sings  out  Trecrobben ;  *'  here !  look  out,
and  catch  'm."

Now,  nothing  would  do  but  the  giant's  wife,  who  was  very
near-sighted,  must  run  out  of  her  cave  to  see  Trecrobben
throw  the  hammer.  She  had  no  hat  on;  and  coming  at
once  out  into  the  light,  she  could  not  distinguish  objects.
Consequently,  she  did  not  see  the  hammer  coming  through
die  air,  and  received  it  between  her  eyes.  The  force  with
which  it  was  flung  was  so  great  that  the  massive  bone  of
the  forehead  of  the  giantess  was  crushed,  and  she  fell  dead
at  the  giant's  feet.  You  may  be  sure  there  was  a  great  to-
do  between  the  two  giants.  They  sat  wailing  over  the  dead
body,  and  with  their  sighs  they  produced  a  tempest  These
were  unavailing  to  restore  the  old  lady,  and  all  they  had  to
do  was  to  bury  her.  Some  say  they  lifted  the  Chapel  Eock
and  put  her  xmder  it,  others,  that  she  is  buried  beneath  the
casfle  court,  while  some — ^no  doubt  the  giants'  detractors —
declare  that  they  rolled  the  body  down  into  the  sea,  and
took  no  more  heed  of  it.


TOM  AND  THE  GIANT  BLUNgEBBPSS ;  OB,  THE  WHEEL  AND
EXB%IGHT.*

A  YOUNG  giant,  who  does  not  appear  to  have  been  known
by  any  other  name  than  Tom,  lived  somewhere  westward
of  Hayle,  probably  in  Lelant.    Tom  would  eat  as  much  meat

^  Tha  siinilarity  of  thiB  story  to  the  weU-known  tale  of  ''  Tom  Hicka-
titoift**  wiU  strike  every  one.  It  might  be  supposed  that  tlie  old  story  of
tfM  fltroog  man  of  the  Isle  of  Ely  had  been  read  by  some  Cornish  man  and
I  to  the  local  peculiarities.  This  may  possibly  have  been  the  case,
\  I  do  not  think  it  probable.  I  first  heard  the  story  from  a  miner  on  the
I  of  Ding-Dong  Mine  during  my  earliest  tour  in  search  of  old  stories.
I  hsf»  mioe  learned  that  it  was  a  common  story  with  the  St  lyes  nurses,
>  told  it  to  amuse  or  terrify  their  children.  Recently,  I  have  had  the
tilo  eommmdoated  to  me  by  a  friend,  who  got  it  from  a  fanner


32  Romances  of  the  Giants.

as  three  men,  Mid  when  he  was  in  the  humour  he  cc
as  much  work  as  half-a-dozen.  Howbeit,  Tom  was
fellow,  and  spent  most  of  his  time  wandering  abo
parish  with  his  hands  in  his  pockets.  Occasionall;
would  have  an  industrious  fit ;  then,  if  he  foimd  any
neighbours  hedging,  he  would  turn  to  and  roll  in
largest  rocks  from  over  the  fields,  for  "grounders.'**
was  the  only  work  Tom  took  delight  in ;  he  was  wont
he  could  feel  his  strength  about  such  work  as  that,
didn't  appear  so  very  big  a  man  in  those  days  when  a
were  twice  the  size  they  are  now.  He  was  about  foi
from  shoidder  to  shoulder,  square  built,  and  straight
way  down  from  shoulders  to  cheens,  (loins.)

Tom's  old  mother  was  constantly  telling  her  idle
do  something  to  earn  his  food,  but  the  boy  couldn't  fii
job  to  his  mind  for  a  long  time.  At  last  he  undert
drive  a  brewer's  wain,  in  the  hope  of  getting  into  pic
strong  drink,  and  he  went  to  live  in  Market-Jew,  whc
brewery  was.  The  first  day  he  was  so  employed,  h
going  to  St  Ives  with  his  load  of  beer,  and  on  the  re
saw  half  a  score  of  men  trying  to  lift  a  fallen  tree  oi

living  in  Lelant.  This  story  is  confinedtto  the  parishes  of  Lelant,  \
Sancreed,  Towednach,  Morva,  and  Zennor.  Mr  Halliwell  thii
adventures  of  Tom  Hickathnft  are  connected  with  '*  some  of  the  ii
tions  in  the  Isle  of  Ely,  such  as  that  of  Herewood  described  in  'V^
*  Essays,'  ii.  91."  Kow,  Herewood  the  Saxon  is  said  to  have  taken
in  the  extreme  part  of  Cornwall,  and  we  are  told  of  many  roma]
ventures,  chiefly  in  connexion  with  the  beautiful  daughter  of  ,
Cornish  chief.  .  May  it  not  be,  that  h^e  we  have  the  origin  of  the  e
it  is  told  in  Lincolnshire  and  in  Cornwall  ?

*  In  making  the  really  Cyclopean  hedges  whijch  prevail  in  some  j
Cornwall,  the  large  boulders  of  granite,  or  other  stones,  which  lie  sc
on  the  moors  are  used  for  the  foundation.  Indeed,  one  purpose,
very  important  one,  served  by  those  hedges,  has  been  the  removal
stones  &om  the  ground  which  has  been  enclosed,  and  the  disposal
stones  so  removed.


Tom  and  the  Giant  Blunderbuss.  33

"draw."    It  was,  however,  more  than  the  whole  of  them
could  do.

"Stand  dear,"  shouts  Tom,

He  put  his  hands,  one  on  each  side  of  the  tree,  and  lifted  it
on  the  "draw,"  without  so  much  as  saying  *'  Ho !"  to  his  oxen,
or  looking  behind  him.  The  feat  was  performed  in  Lud-
gyan  Lees,  and  a  little  further  on  was  a  giant's  place  divert-
ing the  road,  which  should  have  gone  straight  to  St  Ives  but
for  it.  This  place  was  hedged  in  with  great  rocks,  which  no
ten  men  of  these  times  could  move.  They  call  them  the
Giant's  Hedges  to  the  present  day.  There  was  a  gate  on
that  side  of  the  giant's  farm  which  was  nearest  Market- Jew,
and  another  on  that  side  which  joined  the  highway  leading
on  to  St  Ives.  Tom  looked  at  the  gate  for  some  time,  half
disposed  to  drive  through,  but  eventually  he  decided  on  pro-
ceeding by  the  ordinary  road.  When,  however,  Tom  was
coming  back  from  St  Ives  with  his  empty  wain,  his  courage
screwed  up  by  the  influence  of  some  three  or  four  gallons  of
strong  beer,  which  he  had  drunk,  he  began  to  reason  with
himself  thus : —

"The  king's  highway  ought  not  to  be  twisting  and  turn-
ing like  an  angle-twitcL*  It  should  go  straight  through
here.  What  right  has  the  giant  to  keep  his  place  closed,
stopping  honester  men,  than  he  ever  was,  longer  on  the  road
home  ?  If  everybody  were  of  my  mind,  the  road  would  soon
be  opened.  Faith,  I  '11  drive  througL  He  wouldn't  eat  tne,
I  sapposa  My  old  mammy  never  told  me  I  was  to  come  to
my  end  that  way.  They  say  the  giant  has  had  scores  of
wives.  What  becomes  of  them  nobody  can  tell;  yet  there
are  always  more  ready  to  supply  their  place.  Well,  that 's
no  business  of  mine.  I  never  met  the  man  to  make  me  turn
btck  yet ;  so  come  along,  Neat  and  Comely/'  shouts  Tom  to  the

*  A  worm.
IsrSiBiES.  C


34  Romances  of  the  Giants.

oxen^  opening  the  great  gate  for  them  to  pass  throngh
went  Tom  without  seeing  anything  of  the  giant  or  o1
body  else  except  the  fat  cattle  of  all  sorts  in  the
After  driving  about  a  mile,  Tom  came  to  a  pair  of  ga
a  high  wall,  which  was  close  to  and  surrounding  the  j
castle.  There  was  no  passing  round  those,  as  deep  c
full  of  water,  were  on  either  side  of  these  gates.  So  al
went  Tom.  The  huge  gates  creaked  on  their  hanging
the  wheels  of  Tom's  wain  rattled  on  over  the  causey
little  ugly  midgan  of  a  cur  began  to  bark,  and  out  ta
giant,  a  great  ugly  unshapely  fellow,  all  head  and  ston

*'  You  impudent  little  villain,"  roared  the  giant,  "  to
into  my  grounds,  disturbing  my  afternoon's  njq).
business  have  you  here?"

"  I  am  on  the  road,"  says  Tom,  *'  and  you— ^nor  a
man  than  you — shan't  put  me  back.    You  ha'  no  rf
build  your  hedges  across  what  used  to  be  the  king's
way,  and  shall  be  again."

"  I  shan't  bemean  myself  to  talk  with  such  a  little
blackguard  as  thee  art,"  said  the  giant ;  "  I  '11  get  a  twi
drive  thee  out  faster  than  thee  came  in."

"  Well,"  says  Tom,  "  you  may  keep  your  breath  t<
your  porridge ;  but,  if  that  *s  the  game  you  are  up  to,
play  at  that  as  well  as  you."

The  giant  had  pulled  up  a  young  elm-tree,  about  tweni
high  or  so,  and  he  began  stripping  the  small  branches
the  head  of  the  tree,  as  he  came  up  the  bil^  gaping  (ya^
all  the  time,  as  if  he  were  half  asleep.  Tom,  seeing  wl
was  up  to,  upset  his  wain.  This  he  did  without  the
moving,  as  the  tuntsy  (pole)  turned  round  in  the  ring  (
yoke.  He  then  slipped  off  the  further  wheel  in  a
hauled  out  the  exe  (axle-tree)  fast  in  the  other  wheel,  a(
♦  Causeway,  pavement.


Tom  Kills  the  Giant  35

the  giant  came  up.  (In  old  time  the  axle  was  made  to  work
in  gadgeons  under  the  carts  or  wains.)

•'Now  then,"  says  Tom,  "fair  play  for  the  buttons.  If
you  can  beat  me,  I  '11  go  back.  The  exe  and  wheel  is  my
sword  and  buckler,  which  I  '11  match  against  your  elm  tree."
Then  Tom  began  whistling.

The  giant  got  round,  the  uphill  side,  lifted  his  tree,  and
tOTe  towards  Tom  without  saying  a  word,  as  if  he  would
cleave  him  from  head  to  heeL

Tom  lifted  the  axle-tree,  with  the  wheel,  up,  to  guard  off  the
blow  of  the  giant's  twig — the  giant  being  in  such  a  towering
passion  to  hear  Tom  coolly  whistling  all  the  time,  that  he
couldn't  steady  himself.  He  missed  Tom's  head,  struck  the
edge  of  the  wheel,  and,  the  ground  being  slippery,  the  giant
fell  upon  his  face  on  the  ground.  Tom  might  have  driven  the
"  exe  *  through  him  as  he  lay  sprawling  in  the  mud,  and  so
have  nailed  him  to  the  earth ;  but  no,  not  he !  Tom  would
nther  be  killed  than  not  fight  fair,  so  he  just  tickled  the
giant  under  the  ribs  with  the  end  of  the  "  exe."  "  Come,
get  up,''  says  Tom,  "  let 's  have  another  turn."  The  giant  rose
very  slowly,  as  if  he  were  scarcely  able  to  stand,  bent  double,
supporting  himself  on  his  twig.  He  was  only  dodging —
the  great  cowardly  skulk — ^to  get  the  uphill  side  again,
and  take  Tom  unawares ;  but  he  was  waiting  with  his  right
hand  grasping  the  "*  exe,"  the  wheel  resting  on  the  ground.
Quick  as  lightning,  the  giant  raised  his  tree.  Tom  fetched
him  a  heavy  kick  on  the  shins,  he  slipped,  fell  forward,  and
Tom  80  held  the  ''  exe,"  that  it  passed  through  his  body  like
a  qnt     Good  Lord,  how  the  giant  roared !

*  Thee  stop  thy  bleating,"  says  Tom.  "  Stand  quiet  a
moment  Let's  draw  the  exe  out  of  thy  body,  and  I  '11  give
Aee  a  chance  for  another  round.  Thee  doesn't  deserve  it,
because  thee  aren't  playing  fair."


36  Romances  of  the  Giants.

Tom  turned  the  giant  over,  laid  hold  of  the  wheel
dragged  out  the  "  exe."  In  doing  this  he  was  nearly  U
with  the  blood  that  spouted  out  of  the  hole.  Blundi
rolled  on  the  ground  like  an  empty  sack,  roaring  anu
the  time  in  great  agony.

"  Stop  thy  bleating,"  says  Tom,  "  and  put  thy  hands
hole  the  '  exe'  has  made  in  thee,  to  keep  in  the  blood,  1
can  cut  a  turf  to  stop  up  the  place,  and  thee  wiU'stdo  agaii

As  Tom  was  plugging  the  wound  with  the  turfs,  the
groaned  and  said,  "  It 's  all  no  good ;  I  shall  kick  the  b
I  feel  myself  going  round  land ;  but  with  my  last  1
I  '11  do  thee  good,  because  I  like  thee  better  than  an
else  I  ever  met  with,  for  thy  fair  play  and  courage,
more  thee  wouldst  beat  me,  the  better  I  should  like  th
have  no  near  relations.  There  is  heaps  of  gold,  silver,  0
and  tin  down  in  the  vaults  of  the  castle,  guarded  t
dogs.  Mind  their  names  are  Catchem  and  Tearem.
call  them  by  these  names  and  they'll  let  thee  pass,
land  from  this  to  the  sea  is  all  mine.  There  is  more  h
oxen,  cows,  sheep,  goats,  and  deer,  than  thee  canst  •
Take  them  all,  only  bury  me  decent."

"  Did  you  kill  all  your  wives  1 "  asked  Tom.

"  No,''  sighed  the  giant,  "  they  died  natural  Doi
them  abuse  me  after  death.     I  like  thee  as  a  brother."

"  Cheer  up,"  says  Tom,  ''  you  '11  do  again."

He  then  tried  to  raise  the  giant  up,  but  the  plug  c
slipped  from  the  wound,  and  all  was  over.

Tom  put  the  wheel  and  axle  in  order,  turned  ov<
wain,  and  drove  home  to  Market-Jew.  The  brewer  wa
prised,  and  well  pleased  to  see  Tom  back  so  earlj
offered  him  good  wages  to  stop  for  the  year.

"  I  must  leave  this  very  night,"  says  Tom,  "  for  n
granfer,  who  lived  up  in  the  high  countries,  is  dead.


Tom  the  Giant  and  the  Tinkeard.  37

his  nearest  relation.  He  lived  all  alone.  He 's  left  me  all
his  money  and  lands,  so  I  must  go  and  bury  my  old  granfer
this  very  night/*  The  brewer  was  about  to  pay  him  for  his
day's  work — "  Oh,  never  mind  that/'  says  Tom,  ^  I  '11  give
up  that  for  as  much  beer  as  I  can  drink  with  supper/'

After  supper  Tom  went  and  took  possession  of  the  giant's
castle  and  lands — nobody  the  wiser  except  a  little  woman,  the
giant's  last  wife,  who  came  &om  some  place  not  far  from  the
castle.  Some  name  Crowlas,  some  Tregender,  others  Bougie-
here,  as  the  place  where  she  dwelt.  Howbeit,  she  knew  all
about  the  giant's  overthrow,  and  thought  it  the  wisest  course
to  "take  up"  at  once  with  Tom  ;  and,  she  being  a  tidy  body,
Tom  was  by  no  means  unwilling.  Tom  and  this  woman
took  possession  of  the  castle.  They  buried  the  giant  down
in  the  Bottom,  and  placed  a  block  of  granite  to  keep  him
down.  They  gave  the  carcass  of  a  sheep  to  Catchem  and
Tearem,  visited  the  caves  of  the  castle,  found  lots  of  trea-
sure, and  fairly  got  mto  the  giant's  shoes.


TOM  THE  GIANT-HIS  WIPE  JANE,  AND  JACK  THE  TINKEAED,
AS  TOLD  BY  THE  "  DROLLS/'  ♦

11/ MEN  Tom  and  his  wife  had  settled  themselves  in  the

f  f      giant's  castle,  they  took  good  care  not  to  allow  any  one

to  make  a  king's  highway  across  their  grounds.    Tom  made

^  In  Bome  of  the  old  peese  dancez  (guise  dances  from  danae-diguiser)  the
giiot  Blunderbuss  and  Tom  performed  a  very  active  part.  Blunderbuss
WM  always  a  big-bellied  fellow — his  smock-frock  being  well  stuffed  with
straw.  He  fought  with  a  tree,  and  the  other  giant  with  the  wheel  and
mzlet.  The  giant  is  destroyed,  as  in  the  story,  by  falling  on  the  axle.  The
tinktr,  of  whom  we  have  yet  to  tell,  with  his  unfailing  coat  of  darkness,
cooMs  in  and  beats  Tom,  imtil  Jane  comes  out  with  the  broom  and  beats
the  tinker ;  and  then, — as  in  nearly  all  these  rude  plays, — St  Qeorge  and  the
Turidih  knight  come  in ;  but  they  have  no  part  in  the  real  story  of  the
t  note,  page  46.    Appendix  (C.)


38  Romances  of  the  Giants.

the  hedges  higher,  and  the  gates  stronger  than  ever,  1
claimed  all  the  run  of  land  on  the  sea  side,  and  encio
Tom's  wife,  Jane,  was  a  wonderful  cleanly  body — the
seemed  to  be  always  fresh  swept  and  sanded,  while  1
pewter  plates  and  platters  shone  like  silver.  She
quarrelled  with  Tom ;  except  when  he  came  in  from  h€
covered  with  mud;  then  in  a^  pet  she  would  threaten
home  to  her  mother.  Jane  was  very  famous  for  her  1
and'cheese,  and  I%m  became  no  less  so  for  his  fine  bn
cattle,  so  that  he  fared  luxuriously,  and  all  went  on  1m
enough  with  Tom  and  his  wife.  They  had  plenty  of  chi
and  these  were  such  fine  healthy  babies,  that  it  took  t
three  of  the  best  cows  to  feed  them,  when  but  a  few  *'
old.  Tom  and  Jane  thought  that  they  had  all  that  p
the  world  to  themselves,  and  that  no  one  could  scale
hedges  or  break  through  their  gates.  They  soon  found
mistake.  Tom  was  working  one  morning,  not  far  froi
gate,  on  the  Market- Jew  side  of  hi?  property,  whe
heard  a  terrible  rattle  upon  the  bars.  Running  up,  h(
a  man  with  a  hammer  smashing  away,  and  presently  (
went  the  bars,  and  in  walked  a  travelling  tinkeard,
his  bag  of  tools  on  his  back.

"  Holla !  where  are  you  b(5und  for?"  says  Tom.

"  Bound  to  see  if  the  giant,  whom  they  say  lives  up
wouldn't  let  a  body  pass  through  where  the  road  ought  to
says  the  Tinkeard.

"  Oh !  ay !  are  you  ? "  says  Tom.

"  He  must  be  a  better  man  than  I  am  who  stops
says  the  tinkeard.     "  As  you  are  a  fine  stout  chap,  I  02
you  are  the  giant's  eldest  son.     I  see  you  are  hed|
That 's  what  all  the  people  complain  of.     You  are  hed
in  all  the  country.''

"  Well,"  says  Tom,  "  if  I  m  his  son,  I  can  take  my  c


^he  Tinkeard  teaches  Tom  Single-stick.      39

part  any  way ;  and  we'll  have  fair  play  too.  I  don't  desire
better  fun  than  to  try  my  strength  with  somebody  that  is  a
maXL  Come  on.  Any  way  you  like — naked  fists,  single-
8tick»  wrestUng,  bowling,  slinging,  or  throwing  the  quoits."

"  Very  well,''  says  the  tinkeard,  "111  match  my  black  thorn
stick  against  anything  in  the  way  of  timber  that  you  can
nuse  on  this  place.'"

TcHn  took  the  bar  which  the  tinker  had  broken  from  the
gate,  and  said,  '^  1 11  try  this  piece  of  elm  if  you  don't  think
it  too  heavy.''

"  Don't  care  if  it 's  heavier.    Come  on ! "

The  tinkeard  took  the  thorn-stick  in  the  middle,  and
made  it  fly  round  Tom's  head  so  fast  that  he  couldn't  see  it.
It  looked  like  a  wheel  whizzing  round  his  ears,  and  Tom
soon  got  a  bloody  nose  and  two  black  eyes.  Tom's  blows
had  no  effect  on  the  tinkeard,  because  he  wore  such  a  coat
as  was  never  seen  in  the  West  Country  before.  It  was  made
out  of  a  shaggy  black  bull's  hide^  dressed  whole  with  the  hair
on.  The  skin  of  the  fore  legs  made  the  sleeves,  the  hind
quarters  only  were  cut,  pieces  being  let  in  to  make  the  spread
of  the  skirts,  while  the  neck  and  skin  of  the  head  formed  a
8C^  of  hood.  The  whole  appeared  as  hard  as  iron ;  and
when  Tom  hit  the  tinkeard,  it  sounded,  as  if  the  coat  roared,
like  thunder.  They  fought  until  Tom  got  very  hungry,  and
he  found  he  had  the  worst  of  it.  ''  I  believe  thee  art  the
devil,  and  no  man,"  says  Tom.  "  Let's  see  thy  feet  before
tliee  dost  taste  any  more  of  my  blood."

The  tinkeard  shewed  Tom  that  he  had  no  cloven  foot,  and
Udd  hiiti  that  it  depended  more  on  handiness  than  strength
to  conquer  with  the  single-stick ;  and  that  a  small  man  with
aeieiiee  could  beat  a  big  man  with  nona  The  tinkeard  then
took  the  clumsy  bar  of  the  gate  from  Tom,  gave  him  his  own
lif^t  and  tough  black-thorn,  and  proceeded  to  teach  him  t^


40  Romances  of  the  Giants.  %

make  the  easiest  passes,  cuts,   &c.      Whilst  the  t^
were  thus  engaged,  Jane  had  prepared  the  dinner,  anc
her  husband  three  times.      She  wondered  what  co
keeping  Tom,  as  he  was  always  ready  to  run  to  his
at  the  first  call    At  length  she  went  out  of  the  C8
seek  for  him,  and  surprised  she  was,  and — ^if  truth  n
told — rather  glad  to  see  another  man  inside  the  gates,
no  one  had  gassed  for  years.    Jane  found  Tom  ai
tinkeard  tolerable  friends  by  this  time,  and  she  begge
both  to  come  in  to  dinner,  saying  to  the  tinkeard  1i
wished  she  had  something  better  to  set  before  him
was  vexed  that  Tom  hadn't  sent  her  word,  that  she
have  prepared  something  better  than  the  everlasting  b
pease ;  and  vowed  she  would  give  him  a  more  savoury  n
supper,  if  she  had  to  go  to  the  hills  for  a  sheep  or  a  kid .
At  length  the  men  were  seated  at  the  board,  which  g
beneath  the  huge  piece  of  boiled  beef,  with  mounti
pease-pudding,  and  they  soon  got  fairly  to  work.    Jai
went  to  the  cellar,  and  tapped  a  barrel  of  the  stronger
which  was  intended  to  have  been  kept  for  a  tide  (feast
the  meat,  Tom  ate  twice  as  much  as  the  tinkeard,  an*
the  can  of  ale  he  took  double  draughts.     The  tinkej
heartily,  but  not  voraciously ;  and,  for  those  days,  he  y
hard  drinker.     Consequently,  as  soon  as  dinner  waj
Tom  fell  back  against  the  wall,  and  was  quickly  snorinj
tempest.    His  custom  was  to  sleep  two  or  three  houn
every  meal.    The  tinkeard  was  no  sleepy-head,  so  he  tol
to  bring  him  all  her  pots  and  pans  which  required  mc
and  he  would  put  them  in  order.     He  seated  himself  \
a  vast  pile,  and  was  soon  at  work.     The  louder  Tom  £
the  more  Jack  rattled  and  hammered  away  at  the  k
and  ere  Tom  was  awake,  he  had  restored  Jane's  c<
vessels  to  something  like  condition.


Tom  Taught  to  Bend  the  Bow,  41

At  length  Tom  awoke,  and,  feeling  very  sore,  he  begged
the  tinkeard  to  put  off  until  to-morrow  a  wrestling-match
which  they  had  tialked  of  before  dinner.  The  tinkeard,  nothing
loath,  agreed;  so  Tom  took  him  up  to  the  topmost  towetof
the  castle,  to  shew  him  his  lands  and  his  cattle.  For  miles
and  miles,  further  over  the  hill  than  the  eye  could  reach,
except  on  the  southern  side,  everything  belonged  to  Tom.
In  this  tower  they  found  a  long  and  strong  bow.  Tom  said
none  but  the  old  giant  could  bend  it.  He  had  often  tried,  and
fretted  because  he  could  not  bring  the  string  to  the  notch.
The  tinkeard  took  the  bow ;  he  placed  one  end  to  his  toe,
and,  by  what  appeared  like  sleight-of-hand  to  Tom,  he  bent
the  bow,  brought  the  string  to  the  notch,  sent  the  arrow  oft
— ^thwang, — ^and  shot  a  hare  so  far  away,  that  it  could  hardly
be  seen  from  the  heath  and  ferns.  Tom  was  surprised,  until
the  tinkeard  shewed  him  how  to  bend  the  bow,  more  by
handiness  than  strength,  and  again  he  killed  a  kid  which
was  springing  from  rock  to  rock  on  the  cairns  far  away.
The  hare  and  kid  were  brought  home,  cooked  for  supper,
and  the  tinkeard  was  invited  to  stop  all  night.

The  story  ordinarily  rambles  on,  telling  of  the  increasing
friendship  between  the  three,  and  giving  the  tinkeard's  story
of  himself,  which  was  so  interesting  to  Tom  and  Jane,  that
they  stayed  up  nearly  all  night  to  hear  it.  He  told  how  he
WIS  bom  and  bred  in  a  country  far  away — more  than  a
score  days'  journey  from  this  land,  far  to  the  north  and  east
of  this,  from  which  it  was  divided  by  a  large  river.  This
liTer  the  tinkeard  had  swam  across;  then,  there  was  a
week's  journey  in  a  land  of  hills  and  cairns,  which  were
covered  with  snow  a  great  part  of  the  year.  In  this  land
tbere  were  many  giants,  who  digged  for  tin  and  other  trea-
nres.  With  these  giants  he  had  lived  and  worked, — they
always  treated  him  well ;  indeed,  he  always  found  the  bigger


42  Romances  of  the  Giants.

the  man  the  more  gentle.  Half  the  evil  that's  toL
them  by  the  cowardly  fools  who  fear  to  go  near
fgJse.  Many,  many  more  strange  things  did  the  t
telL  Amongst  other  matters,  he  spoke  of  wise  m
came  from  a  city  at  no  great  distance  from  this  lan<
for  the  purpose  of  buying  the  tin  from  the  giants,  ai
left  them  tools,  and  other  things,  that  the  diggers  reqi
exchange.  One  of  these  merchants  took  a  fancy  to  '
keard,  named  him  Jack — ^he  had  no  name  previous!
removed  him  to  the  city,  where  Jack  was  taught  hi
and  many  other  crafts.  The  tinkeard  had  left  that  ci
months  since,  and  worked  his  way  down  to  Mark
Being  there  he  heard  of  the  giant,  and  he  resolved  t
his  acquaintance.    The  rest  has  been  told.

While  this,  which  was  a  long  story,  was  being  toL
the  tinkeard  was  enjoying  Jane's  new  barley-bread
honey  and  cream,  which  he  moistened  with  met
"Good  night,  Tom,"  says  he  at  last,  "you  see  yo
lived  all  your  days  like  a  lord  on  his  lands,  and  kn
thing.  I  never  knew  father  or  mother,  never  had  a  h
call  my  own.  All  the  better  for  me,  too.  K I  had  po
one,  I  would  never  have  known  one-thousandth  part  c
I  have  learned  by  wandering  up  and  down  in  the  wori

Morning  came ;  and,  after  breakfast,  Tom  proposed
"  a  hitch"  on  the  grass  in  the  castle  court  Jack  kn-
thing  of  wrestling;  so  he  told  Tom  he  had  never  pra
but  still  he  would  try  his  strength.  Tom  put  the  tii
on  his  back  at  every  "  hitch,'*  but  he  took  all  the  c
could  not  to  hurt  him.  At  last  the  tinkeard  cri
quarter,  and  declared  Tom  to  be  best  man.

Jane  had  made  a  veal  and  parsley  pie,  and  put  it  d(
bake,  when,  being  at  leisure,  she  came  out  to  see  the
Now,  it  must  be  remembered  the  tinkeard  had  brokeii


'' A  Cow's  CouranC  43

the  gate^  and  no  one  had  thought  of  repairing  it,  or  closing
the  opening.  Two  men  of  Tregender  were  coming  home
from  Bal,*  and,  passing  the  giant's  gate,  they  thought  it  very
strange  tiiat  it  should  be  broken  down.  After  consulting  for
some  time^  they  summoned  all  their  courage,  and — ^it  must  be
confessed,  with  fear  and  trembling — ^they  crawled  into  the
grounds^  and  proceeded  towards  the  castle.  Now,  no  one  in
that  country  except  Tom  and  Jane  knew  that  the  old  giaiit
was  dead.

The  two  men  turned  round  a  comer  and  saw  three  very
large  children  playing.  The  baby,  a  year  old,  was  riding  an
old  buck  goat  about  the  field.  The  two  elder  children,  Tom
Veani*  and  young  Jane,  were  mounted  on  a  bull,  back  to
back,  one  holding  on  by  the  horns,  and  the  other  by  the  tail,
galloping  round  the  field  like  mad,  followed  by  the  cows  and
dogs, — a  regular  "  cow's  courant."

"Lord,  you/'  says  one  of  the  men  to  the  other,  "what
dodi  a'  think  of  that  for  a  change  ?"

''  But  to  think/'  says  the  other,  ''  that  the  old  giant  should
ever  have  a  wife  and  young  children  here,  and  the  people
knaw  nothing  about  it"

"Why,  don't  everybody  say  that  he  ate  all  his  wives  and
chil'ren  too.    What  lies  people  tell,  don't  they,  you  ? "

"  Le  's  go  a  little  further ;  he  won't  eat  we,  I  suppose."

*ni  throw  my  pick  and  sho'el  down  the  throat  of  an,  as
•OOQ  as  a'  do  open  as  [his]  jaws."

''Look  you,"  now  shouts  the  other,  "  you  come  roimd  a
iHik  further:  just  peep  round  the  comer  and  thee  meest  see
(j^  fellows  wrestling,  and  a  woman  looking  on."

*Oui  I  believe  my  eyes,  you?  Don't  that  woman  look
WMthing  like  Jane  I  used  to  be  courson  of?"

*  Bopolar  name  for  a  mine :  ''  BcHf  a  place  of  digging— JJoZcw,  to  dig." —

f  VeS/n,  a  term  of  endearment


44  Romances  of  the  Giants.

The  miners  satisfied  themselves  that  it  was  Ja
enough,  and  quietly  beat  a  retreat.  Soon  was  St  ]
state  of  excitement ;  and  all  Jane's  cousins,  believi
the  accounts  given  by  the  miners  that  Jane  was
resolved  to  pay  her  a  visit.  These  visits  worb
confusion  in  Tom's  castle  and  family.  He  and
quarrel,  but  the  tinkeard  is  the  never-failing  frie:
tiiiis  part  of  the  story  is  an  uninteresting  account
weather  friends.

Jack  the  Tinkeard  taught  Tom  how  to  till  his  gi
a  proper  manner.    He  had  hitherto  contented  him
gathering  wild  herbs, — such  as  nettles,  wild  beet,
elecampane,  various  kinds  of  lentils,  and  chick  or
Jack  now  planted  a  garden  for  his  friends, — ^the  first
wall, — and  they  grew  all  kinds  of  good  vegetable
tinkeard  also  taught  Jane  to  make  malt  and  to  bn
hitherto  they  had  been  content  with  barley  wort,  wl
often  sour.     Jack  would  take  the  children  and  coUe
herbs  to  make  the  beer  keep,  such  as  the  alehoof,  (groi
mugwort,  bannell,  (the  broom,)  agrimony,  centuar
sage,  bettony,  and  pellitory.    Jane's  beer  was  now
the  choicest  of  drinks,  and  her  St  Ives  cousins  cou
have  enough  of  it     Tom  delighted  in  it,  and  ofte
enough  to  bewilder  his  senses.

Tom  had  followed  the  example  of  the  old  giant,  ai
his  cattle  by  flinging  rocks  at  them.  The  giant's  '
are  seen  to  this  day  scattered  all  over  the  countrj
gave  Tom  a  knife  of  the  keenest  edge  and  finest  tem
taught  him  how  to  slaughter  the  beasts.  When  a
to  be  skinned,  he  instructed  Tom  how  to  take  the
whole  from  the  fore  legs,  by  unjointing  the  should
to  remove  it  entirely  clear  of  grain,  and  without  the
scratch.     In  addition  to  all  this,  Tomy  Vean,  (who  ^


Tcm  yealaus  of  the  Tinieard.  45


old,  bat  bigger  than  maoj  at  ten,)  must
an  the  Tiitaes  which  belonged  to  the
Tl  So  a  bmD  calf  »-skin  was  pat  on  to  the  bor,  aiid
hmtt  kod  qiedal  imtzuetknu,  how  she  was  to  allow  the  coat
»  irj  Qtk  his  back,  and  tan  and  dress  it  in  a  pecoliar  waj.
He  din  tkns  tzeated  would  shrink  and  thicken  op  ontil  it
eaae  to  his  liaspt.  Kobod  j  can  teQ  how  {MPond  the  yoang
ToBi  wws  of  his  ooat  when  all  was  dcme,  though  the  poor
btf  lafciuimndi  in  the  doing:

r,  Jadk.  the  Unheard  desired  the  intmsion  of  strangos

did  Tom  and  Jane;  so  he  set  to  woik  to  repair

\  which  he  had  biokai  down.     He  not  only  did  this,

■iui<JiiUd  a  cszioas  latch  with  the  bobbin;  it  was  so

.that  BO  iteanger  ooold  find  the  right  aid  of  it,  and

'  palled  at  aaj  other  part,  the  latch  was  only  closed  the

While  he  was  at  wcsk  a  swarm  of  Jane's  St  Itcs

him ;  they  mistoc^  Jack  for  Tom,  and

cmt  how  the  ddldren,  who  were  playing  near  him,

father.    Jadt  **  padayed '^  with  them  nntil  he

[Ibs  task,  and  then  he  closed  the  gate  in  their


of  this  character  is  related  by  the  "  drolls  f

MB  WXB  me  rrryrXann  of  constant  ahemations  of  fpafftiag

is  little  of  norehy  in  the  stc»7,  nntil  at

sriaes  between  Tom  and  his  wife,  who  is

by  the  hBihand  to  be  on  too  intimate  t^ms  with

the  UnkeanL    Hie  resok  of  this  is,  that  Jane  goes

to  Cropwlaa,  fi^bts  with  her  mother,  old  Jenny,  becanae

Tom,  which  Jane  will  not  allow  in  bo*  prE»-

Whole  yet  at  Crowias  another  boy  is  bom  called

and,  as  the  txm  was  not  at  hand  as  when  she  was  in

he  was  nsrsed  by  a  goat,  and  it  is  said  a  class  of

are  yet  known  as  the  Zennor  goat&


46  Romances  of  the  Giants.


HOW  TOM  AND  THE  TINKEARD*  POUND  THE  TIN,  AH]
IT  LED  TO  MOEVA  FAIB.

II /'HEN  Tom  had  fairly  thrown  the  tinkeard  in  the
T  T      ling  match,  which,  it  must  be  remembered,  wi
by  the  miners  of  Tregender,  at  which  Tom  was  much  p
although  he  did  not  express  his  pleasure,  it  was  settle
Tom  was  the  best  man.    This  was  sealed  over  a  baa
strong  ale,  and  a  game  of  quoits  was  proposed,  whil
was  taking  up  the  dinner.     Tom  had  often  wisha
never  more  so  than  now,  that  the  green  sloping
against  the  inside  of  the  castle  walls  had  not  been
that  he  might  have  a  fair  fling  of  the  quoits  from  €
end  of  the  court.    Tom's  third  throw  in  this  game
very  strong  one,  and  the  quoit  cut  a  great  piece  o

*  I  have  preserved  the  pronunciation  of  this  word  which  was  o
in  ComwaU  between  twenty  and  thirty  years  since,  and  which  still  ]
in  some  of  the  outlying  districts.

In  Webster's  English  Dictionary  we  find  tinker  oddly  enough  k
from  the  Welch  tincerz,  the  ringer,  from  tinciaw,  to  ring,  "  a  me
brass  kettles,  pans,  and  the  like."  The  word  being  so  obviously  tw
or  tin-cerdd,— the  original  having  been  in  aU  probability  staen,  or
cerdd,  a  worker  in  tin.  The  Gaelic  stiU  retains  "  ceard  "  and  "  cai
represent  the  English  smith.*

In  the  present  case,  we  have  to  deal,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  nc
the  modem  tinker,  but  the  ancient  worker  in  tin,  as  is  shewn  in  th
sion  of  the  legend,  although  the  story  has  suffered  some  modem  coin
and  Jack  is  made  to  mend  Jane's  pots  and  pans.

The  old  Cornish  saying

Stean  San  Agnes  an  qytdla  stean  in  Kemow,
St  Agnes*  tin  is  the  best  tin  in  Cornwall,

gives  the  original  Cornish  term  for  tin.

Jack  the  Tinkeard  partakes  of  the  character  of  Wayland  Smith  in

of  his  peculiarities.     See  Appendix  (D.)

*  Gomer ;  or,  A  Brief  Analysis  of  the  Language  and  Knowledge  of  the  J
Cymry.    By  John  Williams,  A.M.,  Ozon.


They  Discover  the  Tin.  47

from  the  banks,  laying  bare  many  gray-looking  stones,  small
rounded  balls,  and  black  sandy  stuff.

"  Look  here  you,  Jack,"  says  Tom, "  whatever  could  possess
the  old  fools  of  giants  to  heap  up  such  a  lot  of  black  and
gray  mining-stones  against  the  wall  ?  wherever  could  they
have  found  them  all  ?"

Jack  carefully  looked  at  the  stuff  thus  laid  bare,  clapped
his  hands  together,  and  shouted,

"  By  the  gods,  it 's  all  the  richest  tin ! "
Now  Tom,  poor  easy-going  soul,  ''didn't  knaw  tin ;"  so  he
could  scarcely  believe  Jack,  though  Jack  had  told  him  that
he  came  from  a  tin  country.

"  Why,  Tom,"  says  Jack,  <*  thee  art  a  made  man.  If  these
banks  are  all  tin,  there  is  enough  here  to  buy  aU  the  land,
and  all  the  houses,  from  sea  to  sea."

•*  What  do  I  care  for  the  tin ;  haven't  I  all  a  man  can
dedre?  My  lands  are  all  stocked  with  sheep  and  horned
cattle.  We  shall  never  lack  the  best  beef  and  mutton,  and
ve  want  no  better  than  our  honest  homespun."

Jane  now  made  her  appearance,  announcing  that  dinner
VIS  ready.  She  was  surprised  at  seeing  so  much  tin,  but
Ae  didn't  say  anything.  She  thought  may  be  she  would  get
anew  gown  out  of  it,  and  go  down  to  St  Ives  fair.  Nel-
vithfltanding  that  Tom  and  Jane  professed  to  treat  lightly
the  discovery  of  the  tin,  it  was  clear  they  thought  deeply
about  it,  and  their  thoughts  spoiled  their  appetites.  It  was
evidently  an  accession  of  wealth  which  they  could  not  under-
bid.

Tom  said  he  didn't  know  how  to  dress  tin,  it  was  of  little
aae  to  him.  Jack  offered  to  dress  it  for  the  market  on
Tom  told  him  he  might  take  as  much  as  he  had  a
to  for  what  he  cared.  After  dinner,  the  giant  tried  to
do^  but  could  not  get  a  snore  for  the  soul  of  him.    There-


48  Romances  of  the  Giants.

fore,  lie  walked  out  into  the  court,  to  get  some  fresh  air
said,  but  in  reality  to  look  at  the  tin.  Jane  saw  how  i
Tom  was,  so  she  unhung  his  bows  and  arrows,  and  to
he  must  away  to  the  hills  to  get  some  kids  and  hares.

"  I  shan't  trouble  myself  with  the  bows  and  arrowa
Tom ;  "  all  I  want  are  the  slings  Jack  and  I  have
pockets.     Stones  are  plenty  enough,  hit  or  miss,  no  11
and  we  needn't  be  at  the  trouble  to  gather  up  the
again."

Off  went  Tom  and  Jack,  followed  by  young  Tom  anc
to  the  Towednack  and  Zennor  hills.  They  "soon  ki
down  as  many  kids,  hares,  and  rabbits  as  they  desired  ;
caught  some  colts,  placed  the  children  on  two  of  the:
the  game  on  the  others,  and  home  they  went  Oi
return,  whilst  waiting  for  supper.  Jack  wandered  arou
castle,  and  was  struck  by  seeing  a  window  which  he  h
before  observed.  Jack  was  resolved  to  discover  the  tk
which  this  window  belonged,  so  he  very  carefully  i
its  position,  and  then  threw  his  hammer  in  through  \
he  might  be  certain  of  the  spot  when  he  found  tl
inside  of  the  castle.  The  next  day,  after  dinner,
Tom  was  having  his  snooze.  Jack  took  Jane  with  hi
they  commenced  a  search  for  the  hammer  near  th
where  Jack  supposed  the  window  should  be,  but  they  i
signs  of  one  in  any  part  of  the  walls.  They  discoverec
ever,  a  strangely-fashioned,  worm-eaten  oak  hanging
They  carefully  examined  this,  but  found  nothing,  i
Jack,  striking  the  back  of  it  with  his  fist,  was  com
from  the  sound,  that  the  wall  behind  it  was  hollow
and  Jane  went  steadily  to  work,  and  with  some  exertio
moved  the  press  aside,  and  disclosed  a  stone  door.  They<
this,  and  there  was  Jack's  hammer  lying  amidst  a  ]
bones,  evidently  the  relics  of  some  of  old  Blunderbuss'


The  Brewer  of  Market-Jew.  49

whom  he  had  imprisoned  in  the  w^U,  and  who  had  perished
thera  Jane  was  in  a  great  fright,  and  blessed  her  good
fortune  that  she  had  escaped  a.  similar  end.  Jack,  however,
soon  consoled  her  by  shewing  her  the  splendid  dresses  which
were  here,  and  the  gold  chains,  rings,  and  bracelets,  with
diamonds  and  other  jewels,  which  were  scattered  around.
It  was  agreed  that  Tom,  for  the  present,  should  be  kept  in
ignorance  of  all  this.  Tom  awoke,  his  head  full  of  the  tin.
He  consulted  with  Jack  and  Jane.  They  duly  agreed  to
keep  their  secret,  and  resolved  that  they  would  set  to  work
tiie  very  next  day  to  prepare  some  of  the  tin  stuff  for  sale.
Tom  as  yet  scarcely  believed  in  his  wealth,  which  was  mag-
nified as  much  as  possible  by  Jack,  to  bewilder  him.  How-
ever, several  sacks  of  tin  were  duly  dressed,  and  Tom  and
Jack  started  with  them  for  Market-Jew,  Tom  whispering  to
Jack  before  he  left  the  castle,  that  they  would  bring  home
a  caak  of  the  brewer's  best  ale  with  'em.  "  It  is  a  lot  better
than  what  Jane  brews  with  her  old-fashioned  yerbes;  but
don't 'e  tell  her  so."

The  brewer  of  Market-Jew  was  also  mayor,  and,  as  it
appears^  tin-smelter,  or  tin  merchant.  To  him,  therefore,
Tom  went  with  his  black  tin;*  and  received  not  only  his  cask
of  beer,  but  such  an  amount  of  golden  coin — all  of  it  being  a
foieign  coinage — as  convinced  him  that  Jack  had  not  de-
ceived him.  This  brewer  is  reputed  to  have  been  an  exceed-
ii^  honest  and  kind-hearted  man,  beloved  by  alL  It  was
lis  practice,  when  any  of  the  townspeople  came  before
luDy  begging  him  to  settle  their  disputes, — even  when  they
'limbed''  one  another, — to  shut  them  up  in  the  brewery-yard,
live  them  as  much  beer  as  they  could  drink,  and  keep  them
ttoe  imtil  they  became  good  frienda  Owing  to  this  prac-
tiea  he  seldom  had  enough  beer  to  sell,  and  was  frequently

♦"-Biac*ri»>"Tinore.


50  Romances  of  the  Giants.

troubled  to  pay  for  his  barley.  'This  brewer,  who  1
puted  to  be  "  the  best  mayor  that  ever  was,  since  the  c:
of  gray  cats,"  gave  rise,  from  the  above  practice  of
the  proverb  still  in  daily  use :  ''  Standing,  like  the  nu
Market-Jew,  in  his  own  light"

The  mayor  was  always  fat  and  jolly.  He  was  an  c
favourite,  too,  with  the  Lord  of  Pengerswick,  who  is  b
to  have  helped  him  out  of  many  troubles.  He  had  bon
tin  of  Tom  and  Jack,  such  a  bargain,  that  he  resolved  i
some  sport,  so  a  barrel  of  beer  was  broached  in  th<
and  the  crier  was  sent  round  the  town  to  call  all  banc
"  courant "  (merry-making.)  They  came,  you  may  1
tain,  in  crowds.  There  was  wrestling,  hurling, — the
of  the  Green  from  Market-Jew  to  Chyandour,  an(
again, — ^throwing  quoits,  and  slinging.  Some  amused
selves  in  pure  wantonness  by  slinging  stones  over  the  I
so  that  the  old  giant,  who  lived  there,  was  afraid  t
above  ground,  lest  his  only  eye  should  get  knocks
The  games  were  kept  up  right  merrily  until  dusk ;  w
rode  the  Lord  of  Pengerswick  on  his  enchanted  mare,
colt  by  her  side.  The  brewer  introduced  Tom  and  Ja
soon  they  became  the  best  of  friends.  Tom  invited  P<
wick  to  his  castle,  and  they  resolved  to  go  home  a
and  make  a  night  of  it.  Pengerswick  gave  Tom  the  q6.
by  some  magic  power,  as  soon  as  he  mounted  this '
ful  animal,  he  found  himself  at  home,  and  the  loi
brewer,  and  Jack  with  him.  How  this  was  brought
Tom  could  never  tell,  but  Jack  appeared  to  be  in  the
Tom  was  amazed  and  delighted  to  find  Jane  dressed
queen,  in  silks  and  diamonds,  and  the  children  arraye
manner  well  becoming  the  dignity  of  their  mother.

Jane,  as  soon  as  Tom  and  Jack  had  left  her,  had  proca
the  room  in  the  wall,  and  with  much  care  removed  the ,


Tom  and  the  Tinkeard.  5 1

gold,  u^d  dresses^  caring  little,  as  she  afterwards  said,  for  the
dead  bones,  although  they  rattled  as  she  shock,  them  out  of
the  robes.  In  a  little  time  she  had  all  the  dresses  in  thei
nuun  court  of  the  castle,  and  having  well  beaten  and  brushed
them,  she  selected  the  finest — those  she  now  wore — and  put
the  rest  aside  for  other  grand  occasions.

The  condescension  of  the  great  lord  of  Pengerswick  was
something  wonderful  He  kissed  Jane  until  Tom  was  almost
jealons,  and  the  great  lord  romped  about  the  court  of  the
castle  with  the  children.  Tom  was,  on  the  whole,  however,
delighted  with  the  attention  paid  to  his  wife  by  a  real  lord,
but  our  clear-headed  Jack  saw  through  it  all,  and  took
measures  accordingly.

Pengerswick  tried  hard  to  learn  the  secret  of  the  stores  of
tin,  but  he  was  foiled  by  the  tinkeard  on  every  tack.  You
may  well  suppose  how  desirous  he  was  of  getting  Jack  out  of
the  way^  and  eventually  he  began  to  try  his  spells  upon  him.
The  power  of  his  necromancy  was  such,  that  all  in  the  castle
were  fixed  in  sleep  as  rigid  as  stones,  save  Jack.  All  that
the  enchanter  could  do,  produced  no  efiect  on  him.  He  sat
q[oietly  looking  on,  occasionally  humming  some  old  troll,
ind  now  and  then  whistling  to  shew  his  unconcern.  At  last
Pengerswick  became  enraged,  and  he  drew  from  his  breast  a
dagger  and  slyly  struck  at  Jack.  The  dagger,  which  was  of
die  finest  Eastern  steel,  was  bent  like  a  piece  of  soft  iron
against  Jack's  black  hide.
•Art  thou  the  devil?"  exclaimed  Pengerswick.
*  As  he 's  a  friend  of  yours,"  says  Jack,  '*  you  should  know
hia  countenance."

"Devil  or  no  devil,"  roared  Pengerswick,  "you  cannot  re-
aiit  this,"  and  he  held  before  Jack  a  curiously-shaped  piece
ef  polished  steel
Jack  only  smiled,  and  quietly  unfastening  his  cow's  hide


52  Romances  of  the  Giants.

he  opened  it.     The  cross,  like  a  star  of  fire,  was  reflo
a  mirror  under  Jack's  coat,  and  it  fell  from  Penger
grasp.   Jack  seized  it,  and  tmning  it  full  upon  the  eno
the  proud  lord  sank  trembling  to  the  ground,  piteou
ploring  Jack  to  spare  his  life,  and  let  him  go  free,
bade  the  prostrate  lord  rise  from  the  ground.     He
him  out  of  the  castle,  and  sent  the  vicious  mare  aft<
Thus  he  saved  Tom  and  his  family  from  the  power
great  enchanter.     In  a  little  time  the  sleep  which  hac
upon  them  passed  away,  and  they  awoke,  as  though  fi:
effects  of  a  drunken  frolic.    The  brewer  hurried  hoi
Tom  and  Jack  set  to  work  to  dress  their  tin.    Toi
Jane's  relations  and  friends  flocked  around  them,  bt
said,  "  Summer  flies  are  only  seen  in  the  sunshine,"
shortly  after  this  put  their  friendship  to  the  test,  by  k
ing  to  them  the  idea  that  Tom  had  spent  all  his
These  new  friends  dropped  off  when  they  thought  the;
get  no  more,  and  Tom  and  Jane  were  thoroughly  disgust
their  summer  friends  and  selfish  relations.     The  ti
established  himself  firmly  as  an  inmate  of  the  castl
more  was  said  about  the  right  of  the  public  to  make  s
highway  through  the  castle  grounds.     He  aided  \
hedging  in  the   waste  lands,   and  very  carefully  \
the  gates  against  all  intruders.     In  fact,  he  also  quite
his  politics.

Jack  had  a  desire  to  go  home  to  Dartmoor  to
mother,  who  had  sent  to  tell  him  that  the  old  giai
was  near  death.  He  started  at  once,  on  foot
wished  him  to  have  Pengerswick's  colt,  but  Jack  pi
his  legs.  It  would  be  too  long  a  tale  to  tell  the  s
his  travels.  He  killed  serpents  and  wild  beasts  in  the
and  when  he  came  to  rivers  he  had  but  to  take  off  hi
gather  up  the  skirts  of  it  with  a  string,  and  stretch  <


Tom  and  the  Tinkeard,  53

body  with  a  few  sticks, — thus  forming  a  cobble, — ^launch  it
on  the  water,  and  paddle  himself  across.     He  reached  home.
The  old  giant  was  at  his  last  gasp.     Jack  made  him  give
everything  to  his  mother  before  he  breathed  his  last.     When
he  died.  Jack  carefully  buried  him.     He  then  settled  all  mat-
ters for  his  mother,  and  returned  to  the  West  Country  again.
Tom's  daughter  became  of  marriageable  years,  and  Jack
wished  to  have  her  for  a  wife.     Tom,  however,  would  not
consent  to  this,  unless  he  got  rid  of  a  troublesome  old  giant
who  lived  on  one  of  the  hills  in  Morva,  which  was  the  only
bit  of  ground  between  Hayle  and  St  Just  which  Tom  did  not
possess.    The  people  of  Morva  were  kept  in  great  fear  by
this  giant,  who  made  them  bring  him  the  best  of  everything.
He  was  a  very  savage  old  creature,  and  took  exceeding  de-
light in  destroying  every  one's  happiness.     Some  of  Tom's
cousins  lived  in  Morva,  and  young  Tom  fell  in  love  with
<me  of  his  Morva  cousins  seven  times  removed,  and  by
Ja(^s  persuasion,  they  were  allowed  by  Tom  and  Jane  to
many.     It  was  proclaimed  by  Jack  all  round  the  country
that  great  games  would  come  off  on  the  day  of  the  wedding.
He  had  even  the  impudence  to  stick  a  bill  on  the  giant's
door,  stating  the  prizes  which  would  be  given  to  the  best
games.     The  happy  day  arrived,  and,  as  the  custom  then
ins,  the  marriage  was  to  take  place  at  sundown.    A  host  of
people  from  all  parts  were  assembled,  and  under  the  influence
of  Jack  and  Tom,  the  games  were  kept  up  in  great  spirit.
Jack  and  Tom,  by  and  by,  amused  themselves  by  pitching
qnrits  at  the  giant's  house  on  the  top  of  the  hill.     The  old
^t  came  out  and  roared  like  thunder.    All  the  young  men
were  about  to  fly,  but  Jack  called  them  a  lot  of  scurvy  cow-
tids,  and  stayed  their  flight.     Jack  made  faces  at  the  giant,
md  challenged  him  to  come  down  and  fight  him.    The  old
mooater  thought  he  could  eat  Jack,  and  presently  began  to


54  Romances  of  the  Giants.

run  down  the  hill, — ^when,  lo !  he  disappeared  Wl
people  saw  that  the  giant  was  gone,  they  took  conraj
ran  up  the  hill  after  Jack,  who  called  on  them  to  folia

There  was  a  vast  hole  in  the  earth,  and  there,  at  tl
torn  of  it,  lay  the  giant,  crushed  by  his  own  weight,  gi
like  a  volcano  and  shaking  like  an  earthquake.

Jack  knew  there  was  an  adit  level  driven  into  the  h
he  had  quietly,  and  at  night,  worked  away  the  roof
particular  part,  until  he  left  only  a  mere  shell  of  rock
so  it  was,  that,  as  the  giant  passed  over  this  spot^  the  \
gave  way.  Heavy  rocks  were  thrown  down  the  hole
giant,  and  there  his  bones  are  said  to  lie  to  this  day.

Jack  was  married  at  once  to  young  Jane,  her  1
Tom  to  the  Morva  girl,  and  great  were  the  rej<
From  all  parts  of  the  country  came  in  the  wrestle
never  since  the  days  of  Gogmagog  had  there  been  su
rific  struggliB  between  strong  men.  Quoits  were  ]
and  some  of  the  throws  of  Tom  and  the  Tinkeard  a
shewn  to  attest  the  wonderful  prowess  of  this  pair.  I
was  played  over  the  wild  hills  of  those  northern  shor
they  rung  and  echoed  then,  as  they  have  often  rui
echoed  since,  with  the  brave  cry,  "  Ouare  wheag  yw
teag"  which  has  been  translated  into  "  Fair  play  is  gooc
— an  honourable  trait  in  the  character  of  our  Celtic  f
All  this  took  place  on  a  Sunday,  and  was  the  origin  of
feast  and  Morva  fair.  We  are,  of  course,  astonished
finding  some  evidence  of  direct  punishment  for  these  ol
such  as  that  which  was  inflicted  on  the  hurlers  at  Tb
This  has,  however,  been  explained  on  the  principle  tl
people  were  merely  rejoicing  at  the  accomplishment  of
holy  act,  and  that  a  good  deed  demanded  a  good  day.*

•  See  Appendix  (E)  for  Mr  Wright's  story  of  "  The  Wonderful
of  WeUington.".


The  Giant  of  Morva.  55

THE  GIANT  OP  MORVA.*

rthe  Oiant's  Field  in  Morva  still  stand  some  granite  frag-
ments which  once  constituted  the  Giant's  House.  From
this  we  see  the  Giant's  Castle  at  Bosprenis,  and  the  Giant's
Cradle,  thus  perpetuating  the  infancy  of  the  great  man,  and
his  subsequent  power.  The  quoits  used  by  this  giant  are
immerous  indeed.  This  great  man,  on  the  1st  day  of  August,
would  walk  up  to  Bosprenis  Croft,  and  there  perform  some
magical  rites,  which  were  either  never  known,  or  they  have  been
forgotten.  On  this  day, — for  when  thus  engaged  the  giant
was  harmless, — thousands  of  people  would  congregate  to  get
a  glimpse  of  the  monster ;  and  as  he  passed  them, — all  being
seated  on  the  stone  hedges, — every  one  drank  "  to  the  health
of  Mr  Giant"  At  length  the  giant  died,  but  the  gathering  on
the  1st  of  August  has  never  been  given  up,  or  rather,  the
day  shifts,  and  is  made  to  agree  with  Morva  feast,  which
18  held  on  the  first  Sunday  in  August.

A  Morva  farmer  writes, — "  A  quarter  of  an  acre  would
not  hold  the  horses  ridden  to  the  fair, — the  hedges  being
covered  by  the  visitors,  who  drink  and  carouse  as  in  former
timea     Morva  fair  is,  however,  dying  out."

The  parish-clerk  informed  me  that  the  giant  had  twenty
KniB ;  that  he  was  the  first  settler  in  these  parts ;  and  that
he  planted  his  children  all  round  the  coast  It  was  his  cus-
tom to  bring  all  lus  family  together  on  the  1st  of  August,
and  hence  the  origin  of  the  fair.  Whichever  may  be  the
true  account  (^  the  cause  which  established  the  fair  and  the
feasl^  these  romances  clearly  establish  the  fact  that  the  giants
were  at  the  bottom  of  it.

*  The  above  notioes  were  collected  for  me  in  Morva  by  tlfe  late  C.
n^rlor  Stepbena,  autbor  of  ''  The  Chief  of  Barat-Anac,"  and  '*  some  time
nnl  portmin  from  St  Ives  to  Zennor."  Their  connexion  with  the  tradi-
Ikae  s/L  Jaek  and  Tom  will  be  evident  to  every  reader.


56  Romances  of  the  Giants.

THE  GIANT  BOLSTER,

THIS  mighty  man  held  especial  possession  of  the  1
merly  known  as  Came  Bury-anaoht  or  Bv/ry-^
"the  spar  stone  grave,*'  sometimes  called  St  Ague
and  8t  Agnes'  Pestis,  but  which  is  now  named,  fo
use  made  of  the  hiU  dming  the  long  war,  St  Agnes'  ]
He  has  left  his  name  to  a  very  interesting,  and  undoi
most  ancient  earthwork,  which  still  exists  at  the  base
hill,  and  evidently  extended  from  Trevaunance  Pc
Chapel  Forth,  enclosiiSlfe  the  most  important  tin  distric
Agnes.    This  is  constantly  called  "  The  Bolster  *

Bolijter  must  have  been  of  enormous  size:  since  it  u
that  he  could  stand  with  one  foot  on  St  Agnes  Beac
the  other  on  Cam  Brea ;  these  hills  being  distant,  as  t
flies,  six  miles,  his  immensity  will  be  clear  to  all.  Ii
of  this,  there  still  exists,  in  the  valley  running  upwarc
Chapel  Forth,  a  stone  in  which  may  yet  be  seen  the  i
sion  of  the  giant's  fingers.  On  one  occasion,  Bolstei
enjoying  his  usual  stride  from  the  Beacon  to  Cam  Bi
thirsty,  and  stooped  to  drink  out  of  the  well  at  Chapel
resting,  while  he  did  so,  on  the  above-mentioned  ston^
hear  but  little  of  the  wives  of  our  giants ;  but  Bolstei
wife,  who  was  made  to  labour  hard  by  her  tyrannical  hi
On  the  top  of  St  Agnes'  Beacon  there  yet  exist  the  evi
of  the  useless  labours  to  which  this  unfortunate  giantc
doomed,  in  grouped  masses  of  small  stones.  These,  it :
have  all  been  gathered  from  an  estate  at  the  foot  of  tl
immediately  adjoining  the  village  of  St  Agnes.  Thi
is  to  the  present  day  remarkable  for  its  freedom  from  .
though  situated  amidst  several  others  which,  like  most
reclaimed  from  the  moors  of  this  district,  have  sto:
abundance  mixed  with  the  soil.     Whenever  Bolstc


^


The  Giant  Bolster.  57

angry  with  his  wife,  he  compelled  her  to  pick  stones,  and  to
cany  them  in  her  apron  to  the  top  of  the  hilL  There  is
some  confusion  in  the  history  of  this  giant,  and  of  the
blessed  St  Agnes,  to  whom  the  chmrch  is  dedicated.  They
are  supposed  to  have  lived  at  the  same  time,  which,  accord-
ing to  onr  views,  is  scarcely  probable,  believing,  as  we  do,
that  no  giants  existed  long  after  their  defeat  at  Plymouth
by  Brutus  and  Corineus.  There  may  have  been  an  earlier
saint  of  the  same  name ;  or  may  not  Saint  Enns  or  Anns,  the
popular  name  of  this  parish,  indicate  some  other  lady?

Be  this  as  it  may,  the  giant  Bolster  became  deeply  in  love
with  St  Agnes,  who  is  reputed  to  have  been  singularly  beau-
tiful, and  a  pattern  woman  of  virtue.  The  giant  allowed  the
lady  no  repose.  He  followed  her  incessantly,  proclaiming
his  love,  and  filling  the  air  with  the  tempests  of  his  sighs
and  groans.  St  Agnes  lectured  Bolster  in  vain  on  the  im-
propriety of  his  conduct,  he  being  already  a  married  man.
This  availed  not;  her  prayers  to  him  to  relieve  her  from
hb  importunities  were  also  in  vain.  The  persecuted  lady,
finding  there  was  no  release  for  her,  while  this  monster
existed,  resolved  to  be  rid  of  him  at  any  cost,  and  eventu-
ally succeeded  by  the  following  stratagem : — ^Agnes  appeared
at  length,  to  be  persuaded  of  the  intensity  of  the  giant's  love,
but  she  told  him  she  required  yet  one  small  proof  more.
There  exists  at  Chapel  Forth  a  hole  in  the  cliff  at  the  termi-
natioii  of  the  valley.  If  Bolster  would  fill  this  hole  with  his
Uood,  the  lady  would  no  longer  look  coldly  on  him.  This  huge
bertrider-of-the-hills  thought  that  it  was  an  easy  thing  which
was  required  of  him,  and  felt  that  he  could  fill  many  such
holes,  and  be  none  the  weaker  for  the  loss  of  blood.  Conse-
qinenily,  stretching  his  great  arm  across  the  hole,  he  plunged
a  knife  into  a  vein,  and  a  torrent  of  gore  issued  forth.  Roar-
ing and  seething,  the  blood  fell  to  the  bottom,  and  the  giant


58  Romances  of  the  Giants.

expected  in  a  few  minutes  to  see  the  test  of  his  d
made  evident,  in  the  filling  of  the  hola  It  requires
more  blood  than  Bolster  had  supposed ;  still  it  mui
short  time  be  filled,  so '  he  bled  on.  Hour  after  he
blood  flowed  from  the  vein,  yet  the  hole  was  not
Eventually  the  giant  fainted  &om  exhaustion.  The  si
of  life  within  his  mighty  frame  enabled  him  to  rally,
had  no  power  to  lift  himself  from  the  ground,  and
unable  to  stanch  the  wound  which  he  had  made,
it  was  that,  after  many  throes,  the  giant  Bolster  died  1
The  cunning  saint,  in  proposing  this  task  to  Bolst
well  aware  that  the  hole  opened  at  the  bottom  into  t
and  that  as  rapidly  as  the  blood  flowed  into  the  hole
from  it,  and  did

'<  The  multitudinous  seas  incarnadine,
Making  the  green  one  red."

Thus  the  lady  got  rid  of  her  hated  lover;  Mrs  Bolst
released,  and  the  district  freed  from  the  presence  of  a  i
The  hole  at  Chapel  Forth  still  retains  the  evidences
truth  of  this  tradition,  in  the  red  stain  which  mar!
track  down  which  flowed  the  giant's  blood.

There  is  another  tradition,  in  some  respects  reser
this  one,  respecting  a  giant  who  dwelt  at  Goran,  o
south  coast.

THE  HACK  AND  CAST.

IN  the  parish  of  Goran  is  an  entrenchment  running
cliff  to  cliff,  and  cutting  off  about  a  hundred  a(
coarse  ground.  This  is  about  twenty  feet  broad,  and  tf
four  feet  high  in  most  places.

Marvellous  as  it  may  appear,  tradition  assures  us  th$


The  Giant  Wrath.  59

the  work  of  a  giants  and  that  he  performed  the  task  in
a  flingle  night  This  fortification  has  long  been  known  as
Thifoa,  Vo9a,  and  the  Hack  and  Cast.

The  giant  who  lived  on  the  promontory  was  the  terror  of
the  neighbourhood^  and  great  were  the  rejoicings  in  Gk)ran
when  his  death  was  accomplished  through  a  stratagem  by  a
neighbouring  doctor.

The  giant  fell  ill  through  eating  some  food — children
or  otherwise — ^to  satisfy  his  voracity,  which  had  disturbed
his  stomacL  His  roars  and  groans  were  heard  for  miles,  and
great  was  the  terror  throughout  the  neighbourhood.  A  mes-
senger^  however,  soon  arrived  at  the  residence  of  the  doctor
of  Uie  parish,  and  he  bravely  resolved  to  obey  the  summons
of  the  giant,  and  visit  him.  He  found  the  giant  rolling  on
the  ground  with  pain,  and  he  at  once  determined  to  rid  the
worlds  if  possible,  of  the  monster.

He  told  him  that  he  must  be  bled.  The  giant  submitted,
and  the  doctor  moreover  said  that,  to  insure  relief,  a
large  hole  in  the  cHff  must  be  filled  with  the  blood.  The
ipant  lay  on  the  ground,  his  arm  extended  over  the  hole,  and
the  blood  flowing,  a  torrent,  into  it  Believed  by  the  loss  of
Uood,  he  permitted  the  stream  to  flow  on,  until  he  at  last
became  so  weak,  that  the  doctor  kicked  him  over  the  cliff,
and  killed  hint  The  well  known  promontory  of  The
Dead  Man,  or  Dodman,  is  so  called  from  the  dead  giant
The  spot  on  which  he  fell  is  the  "  Giant's  House,''  and  the
hde  has  ever  since  been  most  favourable  to  the  growth  of
ifj.

THE  GIANT  WRATH.  OB  RALPH.

NOT  £»  from  Portreath  there  exists  a  remarkable  fissure,  or
gorge,  on  the  coast,  formed  by  the  wearing  out,  through
Ibe  action  of  the  sea^  of  a  channel  of  ground  softer  than  that


6o  Romances  of  the  Giants.

which  exists  on  either  side  of  it.  This  is  generally
as  Ralph's  Cupboard ;  and  one  tale  is,  that  Ralph
famous  smuggler,  who  would  run  his  little  vessel,  even
nights,  into  the  shelter  aflforded  by  this  gorge,  and  safi
his  goods.  Another  is,  that  it  was  formerly  a  cavern  ii
dwelt  Wrath — a  huge  giant — ^who  was  the  terror
fishermen.  Sailing  from  St  Ives,  they  ever  avoided  tl
board ;  as  they  said,  "  Nothing  ever  came  out  of  it  wh
unfortunate  enough  to  get  into  it."  Wrath  is  repi
have  watched  for  those  who  were  drifted  towards  hi
board  by  currents,  or  driven  in  by  storms.  It  is  sa
wading  out  to  sea,  he  tied  the  boats  to  his  girdle,  and
walked  back  to  his  den,  making,  of  course,  all  the
men  his  prey.  The  roof  of  the  cavern  is  supposed  t
fallen  in  after  the  death  of  the  giant,  leaving  the  open
as  we  now  see  it.


OEDULPH  THE  GIAUT.

THIS  Tavistock  Sampson  is  far  removed  from  our  i
legendary  giant ;  yet  we  perceive  in  the  stories
dulph  precisely  the  same  process  as  that  which  has  giv
mortality  to  Blunderbuss  and  others.    In  the  church
monastery  of  Tavistock,  built  by  Orgar  in  960,  and
crated  by  St  Eumon,  was  buried  Orgar,  and  also  1
Edulf,  or  Ordulph,  to  whom,  by  some  writers,  the  f<
tion   of  the  abbey  is  attributed.     Ordulph  was  a  n
giant  size,  and  possessing  most  remarkable  strength
once  appeared  before  the  gates  of  the  city  of  Exe
company  with  King  Edward,  and  demanded  admission
demand  was  not  immediately  complied  with.     He  tore
the  bars  of  the  portcullis  with  his  hands — ^burst  ope
gates  with  his  foot  —  rent  the  locks  and  bolts  asun


Ordulph  the  Giant.  6i

and  broke  down  a  considerable  portion  of  the  wall — ^walking
into  the  city  over  the  ruins,  and  occasioning  great  alarm
amidst  the  inhabitants.

The  king  is  said  to  have  attributed  this  extraordinary  feat
of  strength  to  the  chieftain's  having  entered  into  a  compact
with  the  devil ;  and  the  people  generally  believed  the  king
to  be  correct

At  Tavistock,  it  was  the  custom  of  Ordulph  to  stand  with
one  foot  on  either  side  of  the  Tavy,  which  is  about  twenty
feet  wide,  and  having  the  wild  beasts  driven  in  from  the
Dartmoor  forests,  he  would, — ^with  the  seemingly  insignificant
blows  of  a  small  knife, — strike  their  heads  off  into  the
stream.*

*  l^lliam  of  Malmesbury  tells  us  that  both  father  and  son  were  buried
at  TaTistock,  which  is  thus  described : — ''  Est  in  Domnonia  csenobium  mona-
dioniiii,  juxta  Tau  fluvium,  quod  Tauistock  vocator ;  quod  per  Ordgarum,
eomitem  Domnoniensem,  patrem  Mfrida,  qui  f uit  uxor  regis  Edgari,  sur-
gaodi  exordium,  per  Livingum  episcopum,  cresendi  accepit  auspicium;
k>ei]s,  amsenus  opportunitate  nemorum,  captura  copiosa  piscum,  EcclesisB
eongruente  fabrica,  fluvialibus  rivis  per  officinas  monachorum  decurrenti-
buii^  qui  Buo  impetu  efifiisi,  quidquid  invenerint  superflum,  portant  in  ezi.
tom."    Quoted  by  Pedler  in  his  ''  Episcopate  of  Cornwall."

Mrs  Bray,  in  her  "  Traditions,  Legends,  Superstitions,  and  Sketches  of
Derooahire,''  says, — ''  But  notwithstanding  the  superiority  of  his  strength
and  itatore,  Ordulph  died  in  the  flower  of  his  age.  He  gave  orders  to  be
buried  at  bis  abbey  at  Herton,  in  Dorsetshire ;  but  was  interred  in  or  near
Ike  Abbey  Church  of  Tavistock,  where  a  mausoleum  or  tomb  of  vast  dimen-
don,  was  erected  to  his  memory,  which  is  represented  to  have  been  visited
M  a  wonder.    '  The  thigh-bone  of  Ordulph  is  still  preserved  in  Tavistock


THE  FAIRIES.


"  Elves,  urchins,  goblins  aU,  and  little  fairyeB.'*— if (wi  Pranket.

"  I  do  wander  everywhere.
Swifter  than  the  moone's  sphere;
And  I  serve  the  fairy  queen.
To  dew  her  orbs  upon  the  green." — Shakesfeabb.

**  By  the  moon  we  sport  and  play;
With  the  night  begins  our  day ;
As  we  dance  the  dew  doth  fall —
Trip  it  little  urchins  all;
Lightly  as  the  little  bee,
Two  by  two,  and  three  by  three.
And  about  go  we,  and  about  go  we."

— Lyue,  Maydea*  MetamorphoseL


ROMANCES  OF  THE   FAIRIES.


TEE  ELFIN  CBEED  OF  CORNWALL.

**  To  thee  the  fairy  state
I  with  discretion  dedicate ;
Because  thou  prizest  things  that  are
Curious  and  unfamiliar."

Ob€Ton*9  Feast,— 'RovEBU  Herbick.


|0  the  "Fairy  Mythology"  of  Thomas  Keightley,  I
must  refer  all  those  who  are  desirous  of  examining
the  metamorphoses  which  this  family  of  spiritual
beings  imdergo^  in  passing  from  one  country  to
another.  My  business  is  with  the  Cornish  branch  of  this
extensive  family,  and  I  shall  be  in  a  position  to  shew  that,
notwithstanding  Mr  Keightley  has  entirely  excluded  Corn-
wall from  consideration,  there  exists,  even  to  the  present
day,  a  remarkable  fairy  mythology  in  that  county.  Be-
tween thirty  and  forty  years  since,  ere  yet  the  influences
of  our  practical  education  had  disturbed  the  poetical
education  of  the  people,  every  hill  and  valley,  every  tree,
8hm|b,  and  flower,  was  peopled  with  spiritual  creations,
deriving  their  characteristics  from  the  physical  peculiarities
*Dudst  which  they  were  bom.    Extending  over  the  whole


64  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

district  which  was  formerly  known  as  Danmonimn* — c
cing  not  only  Cornwall,  bnt  Devonshire,  to  the  easten
of  Dartmoor, — we  find  a  mythology,  which  varies  but  li
its  main  features.  Beyond  an  imaginary  line,  drawi
north-westerly  direction  from  the  mouth  of  the  Teign
rise  of  the  Torridge,  the  curiously  wild  and  distingu
superstitions  of  the  "  Cornwallers  "t  fade  away,  and  w
those  which  are  common  to  Somersetshire  and  the
fertile  counties  of  mid-England.

The  Piscy  or  Pixy  of  East  Devon  and  Somersetshi
different  creature  from  his  cousin  of  a  similar  name  in'
wall.  The  former  is  a  mischievous,  but  in  all  resj
very  harmless  creation,  who  appears  to  live  a  rollickii
amidst  the  luxuriant  scenes  of  those  beautiful  counties,
latter,  the  piskies  of  Cornwall,  appear  to  have  then
sharpened  by  their  necessities,  and  may  be  likened  i
keen  and  cujming  "Arab"  boy  of  the  London  stre<
seen  in  contrast,  with  the  clever  child,  who  has  been  rea
every  comfort  of  a  well-regulated  home.  A  gentlemai
known  in  the  literary  world  of  London,  very  recentl
me,  that  he  once  saw  in  Devonshire  a  troop  of  fairic
was  a  breezy  summer  afternoon,  and  these  beautiful
creatures  were  floating  on  the  circling  zephyrs  up  the  e
a  sunlit  hill,  and  fantastically  playing

"  Where  ozlips  and  the  noddiDg  violet  grow."

They  are  truly  the  fairies  of  "  Midsummer  Night's  Di

*  "  If  Alfred,  as  is  probable,  fixed  the  limits  of  Devon  where  the
eastern  boundary  was,  between  the  Belgse  and  Durotriges  on  the  ea
Danmonii  on  the  west,  ancient  ComwaU  will  have  included  aU  De
well  as  what  is  west  of  the  Tamar." — CamderCi  Britannia,    Qou^
i,  p.  1.

t  "  The  'Cornwallers*  overpowered  by  the  Saxons/' — CawdaCz  Bri
vol  i,  p.  cxxxix.


ike  Elfin  Creed  of  Cornwall.  65

They  liannt  the  most  rural  and  romantic  spots^  and  they
gather

**  On  hill^  in  dale,  forest  or  mead.
By  paved  fountain,  or  by  ruBhy  brook.
Or  on  the  beached  margent  of  the  sea,
To  dance  their  ringlets  to  the  whistling  wind/'

No  such  fairies  are  ever  met  with  on  Dartmoor.  A  few,
judging  from  Mrs  Bray's  tales,*  may  have  been  tempted
into  the  lovely  valley  of  the  Tavy,  but  certainly  they  never
crossed  tiie  Tamar.  The  darker  shades  in  the  character  of
the  Cornish  fairy,  almost  dispose  me  to  conclude  that  they
belong  to  an  older  family  than  those  of  Devonshire.

It  should  be  understood  that  there  are  in  Cornwall  five
varieties  of  the  fsdry  family,  clearly  distinguishable —

1.  The  Small  People.

2.  The  Spriggans.

3.  Pisldes,  or  Pigseys.

4.  The  Buccas,  Bockles,  or  Knockers.

5.  Hie  Browneys.

Of  the  SmaU  People  I  have  heard  two  accoimts.  Indeed,
it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  the  tradition  of  their  origin  does
not  apply  to  tiie  whole  five  branches  of  this  ancient  family.
The  Small  People  are  believed  by  some  to  be  the  spirits  of
tte  people  who  inhabited  Cornwall  many  thousands  of  years
igo— 4ong,  long  before  the  birth  of  Christ  That  they  were
M  good  enough  to  inherit  the  joys  of  Heaven,  but  that  they
Vtte  too  good  to  be  condemned  to  eternal  firea  They  were
Hid  to  be  ''poor  innocents,"  (this  phrase  is  now  applied  to
dfydiildren.)  When  they  first  came  into  this  land  they
Vtte  mnch  larger  than  they  are  now,  but  ever  since  the  birth
of  Christ  they  have  been  getting  smaller  and  smaller.  Eventu-
dy  they  will  turn  into  muryans,  (ants,)  and  at  last  be  lost

*  Tnditioni,  Legends,  Superstitions,  and  Sketches  of  Deyonshire,  on
thtBotdera  of  the  Tamar  and  the  Tavy,  by  Mrs  Bray.

I0S1BOB.  ^


66  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

from  the  face  of  the  earth.  These  Small  People
ceedingly  playful  amongst  themselves,  but  they  are
demure  when  they  know  that  any  human  eye  see
They  commonly  aid  those  people  to  whom  they  take  \
and,  frequently,  they  have  been  known  to  perform  t
friendly  acts  towards  men  and  women.  The  above
corresponds  with  the  popular  belief  in  Ireland,  n
"that  the  fairies  are  a  portion  of  the  fallen  ange
being  less  guilty  than  the  rest,  were  not  driven  to  1
were  suffered  to  dwell  on  earth/'*  In  Cornwall,  as  in
another  popular  creed  is,  that  the  fairies  are  Druids
ing — because  they  will  not  give  up  their  idolatries—
and  smaller.  These  Small  People  in  many  things  clo
semble  the  Elves  of  Scandinavia.

The  Spriggans  are  quite  a  different  class  of  bein
some  respects  they  appear  to  be  offshoots  from  the  fi
the  Trolls  of  Sweden  and  Denmark.  The  Spriggj
found  only  about  the  cairns,  coits  or  cromlechs,  bun
detached  stones,  with  which  it  is  unlucky  for  mo:
meddle.  A  correspondent  writes  : — "  This  is  know
they  were  a  remarkably  mischievous  and  thievish  tri
ever  a  house  was  robbed,  a  child  stolen,  cattle  carrier
or  a  building  demolished,  it  was  the  work  of  the  Spi
Whatever  commotion  took  place  in  earth,  air,  or  ^
was  all  put  down  as  the  work  of  these  spirits.  W]
the  giants  have  been,  there  the  Spriggans  have  bee
It  is  usually  considered  that  they  are  the  ghosts
giants ;  certainly,  from  many  of  their  feats,  we  mui
pose  them  to  possess  a  giant's  strength.  The  Spi
have  the  charge  of  buried  treasure."

The  Piskie.     This  fairy  is  a  most  mischievous  an
imsociable  sprite.     His  favourite  fun  is  to  entice  peop

♦  See  Keightley's  "  Fairy  Mythology."


The  Elfin  Creed  of  Cornwall.  6  7

the  bogs  by  appearing  like  the  light  from  a  cottage  window,
or  as  a  man  carrying  a  lantern.  The  Rskie  partakes,  in
many  respects,  of  the  character  of  the  Spriggan.  So  wide-
spread were  their  depredations,  and  so  annoying  their  tricks,
.  that  it  at  one  time  was  necessary  to  select  persons  whose
aeuteness  and  ready  tact  were  a  match  for  these  quick-witted
wanderers,  and  many  a  clever  man  has  become  famous  for
his  power  to  give  charms  against  Pigseys.  It  does  not  ap-
pear, however,  that  anything  remarkable  was  required  of  the
deyer  man.  "  No  Pigsey  could  harm  a  man  if  his  coat  were
bside-out,  and  it  became  a  very  common  practice  for  per-
Mms  who  had  to  go  from  village  to  village  by  night,  to  wear
iheir  jacket  or  cloak  so  turned,  ostensibly  to  prevent  the  dew
from  taking  the  shine  off  the  cloth,  but  in  reality  to  render
tiiem  safe  from  the  Pigseys/'*

They  must  have  been  a  merry  lot,  since  to  "laugh  like  a
Rdde  "  is  a  popular  saying.    These  little  fellows  were  great
flagaes  to  the  farmers,  riding  their  colts  and  chasing  their  cows.
The  Buccas  or  Knockers, — ^These  are  the  sprites  of  the
nines,  and  correspond  to  the  Kobals  of  the  German  mines,
tile  Dnergars,  and  the  Trolls.     They  are  said  to  be  the  souls
of  the  Jews  who  formerly  worked  the  tin-mines  of  Cornwall.
Ikcj  are  not  allowed  to  rest  because  of  their  wicked  prac-
tinners,  and  they  share  in  the  general  curse  which
it  people  believe  still  hangs  on  this  race.
Browney. — ^This  spirit  was  purely  of  the  household.

CSomish  had  formerly  a  great  belief  in  piskays  or  fairies.    If  a

happened  to  lose  his  way,  he  immediately  concluded  he  was

led."    To  dispel  the  charm  with  which  the  "  piskay-led  "  traveUer

;led,  nothing  was  deemed  sufficient  but  that  of  his  turning  one

nrments  inside-out.    This  generally  f  eU  upon  one  of  his  stockings ;

Us  precaution  had  been  taken  before  the  commencement  of  the

/,  it  was  foUy  believed  that  no  such  delusion  would  have  happened.

ami  EUehM  Hiitory  of  Cornwall,  p.  97.


68  Romances  of  the  Fairies.  \

t

Ejndly  and  good,  he  devoted  his  every  care  to  \A
family  with  whom  he  had  taken  up  his  abode.    The  |
has  fled,  owing  to  his  being  brought  into  very  clofli^
with  the  schoohnaster,  and  he  is  only  sunmioned  nj
the  occasion  of  the  swarming  of  the  bees.  3^en  tiU
mistress  or  maid  seizes  a  bell-metal,  or  a  tin  pan,  ai
ing  it,  she  calls  "Browney,  Browney!"  as  loud  as
until  the  good  Browney  compels  the  bees  to  settla   '
Mr  Thoms  has  noticed  that  in  Cornwall  "the  moil
some  regard  as  departed  souls,  others  as  fairies,  ai
Pisgiesy    This  is  somewhat  too  generally  exprea
belief  respecting  the  moth,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  coi
one  or  two  varieties  only.    Mr  Couch  informs  us
local  name,  around  Polperro,  of  the  weasel  is  Fairy.
we  have  evidence  of  some  sort  of  metempsychosis  ami
elf  family.    Moths,  ants,  and  weasels  it  would  seen
forms  taken  by  those  wandering  spirits.    We  read  i
Corbet,  whose  work  was  published  in  1648,  and
printed  many  years  after  by  Bishop  Percy, —

"  The  fairies
Were  of  the  old  profession,
Their  songs  were  Ave  Maries,
Their  dances  were  procession.
But  now,  alas !  they  all  are  dead,
Or  gone  beyond  the  seas,
Or,  further,  for  religion  fled.
Or  else  they  take  their  ease."

Other  writers  have  supposed  that  at  the  time  of
formation  the  fairies  departed  from  the  land.  This  hj
is  not  warranted  by  evidence.  It  is  possible  that  t
have  taken  possession  of  some  of  the  inferior  creat
they  are  certainly  still  to  be  found  in  those  regioi
lie  beyond  the  reach  of  the  railway-giant,  with  .
mouth;  or,  of  that  electric  spirit,  who,  travellinj


Nursing  a  Fairy.  69

mysterious  wires^  can  beat  the  wildest  elf  that  ever  moanted
"night-steeda"

NURSING  A  PAIRY.

A  THRIFTY  housewife  lived  on  one  of  the  hills  between
Zennor  Church-town  and  St  Ives.  One  night  a  gentle-
man came  to  her  cottage,  and  told  her  he  had  marked  her  clean-
liness and  her  care :  that  he  had  a  child  whom  he  desired
to  have  brought  up  with  much  tenderness,  and  he  had  fixed
on  her.  She  should  be  very  handsomely  rewarded  for  her
trouble,  and  he  shewed  her  a  considerable  quantity  of  gdl^en
eoin.  Well,  she  agreed,  and  away  she  went  with  the  gentle-
man to  fetch  this  child.  When  they  came  to  the  side  of
Zennor  hill,  the  gentleman  told  the  woman  he  must  blind-
fold her,  and  she,  good,  easy  soul,  having  heard  of  such
tilings,  £uicied  this  was  some  rich  man's  child,  and  that  the
lesidence  of  its  mother  was  not  to  be  known,  so  she  gave
berself  great  credit  for  cunning  in  quietly  submitting.  They
vilked  on  some  considerable  distance.  When  they  stopped
the  handkerchief  was  taken  from  her  eyes,  and  she  found
konelf  in  a  magnificent  room,  with  a  table  spread  with  the
ttost  expensive  luxuries,  in  the  way  of  game,  fruits,  and
winea  She  was  told  to  eat,  and  she  did  so  with  some
twkwardness,  and  not  a  little  trembling.  She  was  surprised
Alt  so  large  a  feast  should  have  been  spread  for  so  small  a
pir^, — only  herself  and  the  master.  At  last,  having  en-
J0)«i  luxuries  such  as  she  never  tasted  before  or  since;  a
dierbell  was  rung,  and  a  troop  of  servants  came  in,  bearing
*  cot  covered  with  satin,  in  which  was  sleeping  the  most
kintifal  babe  that  human  eyes  ever  gazed  on.  She  was
5  Ud  this  child  was  to  be  committed  to  her  charge;  she
Andd  not  jnmt  for  anything ;  but  she  was  to  obey  certain
j     liWi    She  was  not  to  teach  the  child  the  Lord's  Prayer ;


70  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

she  was  not  to  wash  it  after  sundown :  she  was  to
it  every  morning  in  water,  which  she  would  find  in  i
ewer  placed    in  the  child's  room:    this  was   not
touched  by  any  one  but  herself,  and  she  was  to  be
not  to  wash  her  own  face  in  this  water.     In  all  otl
spects  she  was  to  treat  the  child  as  one  of  her  ow
dren.     The  woman  was  blinded  again,  and  the  child
been  placed  in  her  arms,  away  she  trudged,  guided
mysterious  father.    When  out  on  the  road,  the  bands
removed  from  her  eyes,  and  she  found  she  had  a  smal
in  her  arms,  not  remarkably  good  looking,  with  very
piercing  eyes,  and  but  ordinarily  dressed.     However,
gain  is  a  bargain  ;  so  she  resolved  to  make  the  best
and  she  presented  the  babe  to  her  husband,  telling  1
much  of  the  story  as  she  thought  it  prudent  to  tnu
with.    For  years  the  child  was  with  this  couple.    Thej
wanted  for  anything ;  meat,  and  even  wines,  were  pr<
— as  most  people  thought, — by  wishing  for  them ;  c
ready-made,  were  on  the  child's  bed  when  required ;  a
charmed  water  was  always  in  the  magic  ewer.     Th(
boy  grew  active  and  strong.     He  was  remarkably  wi]
very  tractable,  and  he  appeared  to  have  a  real  regard  i
"big  mammy,"  as  he  called  the  woman.     Sometim-
thought  the  child  was  mad.     He  would  run,  and  lea
scream,  as  though  he  were  playing  with  scores  of  boys,
no  soul  was  near  him.     The  woman  had  never  see
father  since  the  child  had  been  with  them;  but  ever  and
money  was  conveyed  to  them  in  some  mysterious  m
One  morning,  when  washing  the  boy,  this  good  womar
had  often  observed  how  bright  the  water  made  the  £
the  child,  was  tempted  to  try  if  it  would  improve  hei
beauty.     So  directing  the  boy's  attention  to  some  birds
ing  on  a  tree  outside  the  window,  she  splashed  some  c


Changelings.  71

water  np  into  her  face.  Most  of  it  went  into  her  eja  She
doaed  it  instinctively,  and  upon  opening  it,  she  saw  a  num-
ber of  little  people  gathered  round  her  and  playing  with  the
boy.  She  said  not  a  word,  though  her  fear  was  great ;  and
she  continued  to  see  the  world  of  small  people  surrounding
the  world  of  ordinary  men  and  women,  being  with  them,  but
not  of  them.  She  now  knew  who  the  boy's  playmates  were,
and  she  often  wished  to  speak  to  the  beautiful  creatures  of
the  invisible  world  who  were  his  real  companions ;  but  she
was  discreet,  and  kept  silence.

Curious  robberies  had  been  from  time  to  time  committed
in  St  Ives  market,  and  although  the  most  careful  watch  had
been  kept^  the  things  disappeared,  and  no  thief  detected.
One  day  our  good  housewife  was  at  the  market,  and  to  her
soiprise  she  saw  the  father  of  her  nursling.  Without  cere-
rncmy  she  ran  up  to  him, — at  a  moment  when  he  was  putting
some  choice  fruit  by  stealth  into  his  pocket, — and  spoke  to
bint  "  So,  thou  seest  me,  dost  thou?"  "To  be  sure  I  do,
and  know  'ee  too,"  replied  the  woman.  "  Shut  this  eye,"
potting  his  finger  on  her  left  eye.  ''  Canst  see  me  now?"
,  "Yes,  I  tell  'ee,  and  know  'ee  too,"  again  said  the  woman.

^  Water  for  elf,  not  water  for  self;
You've  lost  your  eye,  your  phild,  and  yourself,"

and  the  gentleman.  From  that  hour  she  was  blind  in  the
light  eye.  When  she  got  home  the  boy  was  gone.  She
gnered  sadly,  but  she  never  saw  him  more,  and  this  once
k^  couple  became  poor  and  wretched.


CHANOELINOS.

A  CORRESPONDENT,  to  whom  I  am  much  indebted
Ua  many  curious  examples  of  the  folk-lore  of  the
t  P<o(Ie  in  the  remote  districts  to  the  west  of  Penzance,


72  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

says,  in  reference  to  some  stories  of  faiiy  change!
"I  never  knew  but  one  child  that  had  been  kept
Spriggans  more  than  three  days.  It  was  always  comp]
sickly,  and  weakly,  and  had  the  veryfa4>e  of  a  chanff
It  has  been  my  fortune,  some  thirty  or  forty  years  a
have  seen  several  children  of  whom  it  had  been  wh
amongst  the  peasantry  that  they  were  changelings.  I
case  they  have  been  sad  examples  of  the  influence  of
teric  disease — the  countenance  much  altered — the
glassy  and  sunk  in  their  sockets — ^the  nose  sharpenc
cheeks  of  a  marble  whiteness,  imless  when  they  were
with  hectic  fever — the  lips  sometimes  swollen  and  of
red  colour,  and  small  ulcers  not  unfrequently  at  the
of  the  mouth.  The  wasted  frame,  with  sometime
mous  swellings,  and  the  unnatural  abdominal  enlar
which  accompanies  disease  of  mesenteric  glands,  gives
sad,  and  often  a  most  imnatural  appearance  to  the  8
The  intense  ignorance  which  existed  in  many  of  t
tricts  visited  by  me,  at  the  period  named,  has  been
dispelled  by  the  civilising  influences  of  Wesleyanism.
sequently,  when  a  scrofulous  child  is  found  in  a  fan
no  longer  hear  of  its  being  a  changeling ;  but,  within  a '
cent  period,  I  have  heard  it  said  that  such  afflicted  child]
been  "  ill-wished.'*

THE  LOST  CHILD.

IN  the  little  hamlet  of  Treonike,  in  the  parish  of  St
has  long  Kngered  the  story  of  a  lost  child,  who  was
.  quently  found.   All  the  stories  agree  in  referring  the  abc
of  the  child  to  supernatural  agency,  .and  in  some  cas<
referred  to  the  "  Small  People  or  Piskies," — ^in  others
amiable  spiritual  creatures.     Mr  Hals*  has  given  one  \
*  See  Daviea  Gilbert's  Parochial  History  of  ComwalL


The  Lost  Child.  73

of  this  story,  which  differs  in  some  respects  from  the  tale
as  I  heard  it,  from  an  old  woman  some  thirty  years  since,
^o  then  lived  in  this  parish.     Her  tale  was  to  the  following
effect    It  was  a  lovely  evening,  and  the  little  boy  was  gather-
ing flowers  in  the  fields,  near  a  wood.    The  child  was  charmed
by  hearing  some  beautiful  music,  which  he  at  first  mistook
for  the  song  of  birds ;  but,  being  a  sharp  boy,  he  was  not
long  deceived,  and  he  went  towards  the  wood  to  ascertain
from  whence  the  melodious  sounds  came.    When  he  reached
the  verge  of  the  wood,  the  music  was  of  so  exquisite  a  char-
acter, that  he  was  compelled  to  follow  the  sound,  which
^ypeared  to  travel  before  him.    Lured  in  this  way,  the  boy
penetrated  to  the  dark  centre  of  the  grove,  and  here,  meet-
ing with  some  difficulties,  owing  to  the  thick  growth  of
nnderwood,  he  paused,  and  began  to  think  of  returning.
The  music,  however,  became  more  ravishing  than  before,  and
some  invisible  being  appeared  to  crush  down  all  the  low  and
tangled  plants,  thus  forming  for  him  a  passage,  over  which  he
passed  without  any  difficulty.     At  length  he  found  himself
<m  the  edge  of  a  small  lake,  and,  greatly  to  his  astonishment,
the  darkness  of  night  was  around  him,  but  the  heavens  were
thick  with  stars.     The  music  ceased,  and,  wearied  with  his
wanderings,  the  boy  fell  asleep  on  a  bed  of  ferns.     He
lelated,  on  his  restoration  to  his  parents,  that  he  was  taken
by  a  beautiful  lady  through  palaces  of  the  most  gorgeous
description.     Pillars  of  glass  supported  arches  which  glis-
tened with  every  colour,  and  these  were  hung  with  crystals
br  exceeding  anything  which  were  ever  seen  in  the  caverns
rf  a  Cornish  mine.     It  is,  however,  stated  that  many  days
passed  away  before  the  child  was  found  by  his   friends,
ud  that  at  length  he  was  discovered  one  lovdly  morning
>fe(ghig  on  the  bed  of  ferns,  on  which  he  was  supposed
^  life  fallen  asleep  on  the  first   adventurous  evening.


74  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

There  was  no  reason  given  by  the  narrator  why  the  boj
"  spirited  away  *'  in  the  first  instance,  or  why  he  was  retii
Her  impression  was,  that  some  sprites,  pleased  with  the  c
innocence  and  beauty,  had  entranced  him.  That
asleep  he  had  been  carried  through  the  waters  to  the
abodes  beneath  them ;  and  she  felt  assured  that  a  chi
treated  would  be  kept  under  the  especial  guardianship  c
sprites  for  ever  afterwards.  Of  this,  however,  trac
leaves  us  in  ignorance.


A  NATIVE  PIGSEY  STOEY.


D


to  a  West-Country  miner.

"  What  ov  it  ?  **  asked  the  miner.

"Well,  that  'ere  boss  he*n  been  ridden  to  death  a'mo
the  pigsies  again.''

"  Pigsies ! "  said  the  miner ;  "  thee  don't  bleve  in
do'ee?"

"  Ees  I  do ;  but  I  specks  you  're  a  West  Country  b
ain't  ee  ?  If  you  'd  a  had  youm  bosses  wrode  to  death  k
nite,  you  'd  tell  another  tayl,  I  reckon.  But  as  sure  as
living,  the  pigsies  do  ride  on  'em  whenever  they''
mind  to."

THE  NiaHT-RIDERS.

I  WAS  on  a  visit  when  a  boy  at  a  farm-house  situ
near  Fowey  river.  Well  do  I  remember  the  fai
with  much  sorrow  telling  us  one  morning  at  breakfast,
"  the  piskie  people  had  been  riding  Tom  again ; "  and
he  regarded  as  certainly  leading  to  the  destruction  c
fine  young  horse.  I  was  taken  to  the  stable  to  see
horse.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  the  animal  was  m
distressed,  and  refused  to  eat  his  food.    The  mane  was  i


The  Fairy  Tools  ;  or,  Barker's  Knee.        75

to  be  knotted  into  fairy  stirrups ;  and  Mr told  me  that

he  had  no  doubt  at  least  twenty  small  people  had  sat  upon
the  horse's  neck.  He  even  assured  me  that  one  of  his  men
had  seen  them  urging  the  horse  to  his  utmost  speed  round
and  round  one  of  his  fields.


THE  PAIEY  TOOLS;  OE,  BARKER'S  KNEE.

THE  buccas  or  knockers  are  believed  to  inhabit  the  rocks,
caves,  adits,  and  wells  of  Cornwall.  In  the  parish
of  Towednack  there  was  a  well  where  those  industrious  small
people  might  every  day  be  heard  busy  at  their  labours — dig-
ging with  pickaxe  and  shovel  I  said,  every  day.  No ;  on
Christmas-day — on  the  Jews'  Sabbath — on  Easter-day — and
on  All-Saints'  day — no  work  was  done.  Why  our  little
friends  held  those  days  in  reverence  has  never  been  told  me.
Any  one,  by  placing  his  ear  on  the  ground  at  the  mouth  of
this  well,  could  distinctly  hear  the  little  people  at  work.

There  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  a  great  hulking  fellow,

irho  would  rather  do  anything  than  work,  and  who  refused

to  believe  anything  he  heard.    He  had  been  told  of  the  Fairy

'Well — ^he  said  it  was  "all  a  dream."    But  since  the  good

people  around  him  reiterated  their  belief  in  the  fairies  of  the

^eily  he  said  he  'd  find  it  all  out     So  day  after  day,  Barker

^-tiiat  was  this  hulk's  name — ^would  lie  down  amidst  the

fans  growing  around  the  mouth  of  the  well,  and,  basking  in

tte  sunshine,  listen  and  watch.     He  soon  heard  pick  and

•hovel,  and  chit-chat,  and  merry  laughter.    Well,  "  he  'd  see

tte  out  of  all  this,"  he  told  his  neighbours.     Day  after  day,

^  week  after  week,  this  fellow  was  at  his  post    Nothing

i^^tolted  from  his  watching.    At  last  he  learned  to  distinguish

^  wofds  used  by  the  busy  workers.    He  discoiviKed  that

^  aei  of  labourers  worked  eight  hours,  and  that,  on  leading.


76  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

they  hid  their  tools.  They  made  no  secret  of  this ;  an
evening  he  heard  one  say,  he  should  place  his  tools  in  \
in  the  rock ;  another,  that  he  should  put  his  under  the
and  another  said,  he  should  leave  his  tools  on  Barker' i
He  started  on  hearing  his  own  name.  At  that  mon
heavy  weight  fell  on  the  man's  knee ;  he  felt  excessive
and  roared  to  have  the  cursed  things  taken  away.  Hi
were  answered  by  laughter.  To  the  day  of  his  death  1
had  a  stiff  knee ;  he  was  laughed  at  by  all  the  parish
"Barker's  knee"  became  a  proverb.

THE  PISKIES  m  THE  CELLAE.

THE  following  story,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  \
Q.  Couch,  will  remind  the  reader  of  "  The  Cluri
and  "The  Haunted  Cellar,"  in  "Fairy  Legends  and  \
tions  of  the  South  of  Ireland."  By  T.  Crofton  Crokei
On  the  Thursday  immediately  preceding  Christmai
(year  not  recorded,)  were  assembled  at  "The  Eising
the  captain  and  men  of  a  Stream  Work*  in  the  Couse  1
This  Couse  was  a  flat  alluvial  moor,  broken  by  gigantic
hUls,  the  work  of  many  a  generation  of  tinners.  On
half  inclined,  on  looking  at  the  turmoiled  ground,  to  I:
with  them  that  the  tin  grew  in  successive  crops,  for
years  of  turning  and  searching,  there  was  still  enough  ]
give  the  landlord  his  dole,  and  to  furnish  wages  to
dozen  Streamers.  This  night  was  a  festival  observ
honour  of  one  Picrous,'^  and  intended  to  celebrate  thi
covery  of  tin  on  this  day  by  a  man  of  that  name.  The
is  still  kept,  though  the  observance  has  dwindled  to  a  s
and  its  attendant  merry-making.

*  A  **  Stream  Work"  is  a  place  where  tin  is  obtained  from  th
deposits.    "  Streamers"  are  the  tinners  who  wash  out  the  tin.
t  Picrous  day  is  still  kept  up  in  Lumilyan.    See  Appendix  (F.)


The  Piskies  in  the  Cellar.  "jy

Our  story  has  especially  to  do  with  the  adventures  of  one
of  the  party,  John  Sturtridge,  who,  well-primed  with  ale,
started  on  his  homeward  way  for  Luxulyan  Church-town.
John  had  got  as  far  as  Tregarden  Down  without  any  mishap
worth  recording,  when,  alas !  he  happed  upon  a  party  of  the
little  people,  who  were  at  their  sports  in  the  shelter  of  a  huge
granite  boulder.  Assailed  by  shouts  of  derisive  laughter,  he
hastened  on  frightened  and  bewildered,  but  the  Down,  well-
known  from  early  experience,  became  like  ground  untrodden,
and  after  long  trial  no  gate  or  stile  was  to  be  found.  He
was  getting  vexed,  as  well  as  puzzled,  when  a  chorus  of  tiny
voices  shouted,  "Ho !  and  away  for  Par  Beach!"  John  re-
peated the  shont,  and  was  in  an  instant  caught  np,  and  in
a  twinkling  found  himself  on  the  sands  of  Far.  A  brief
dance,  and  the  cry  was  given,  "Ho!  and  away  for  Squire
Tremain's  cellar  V*  A  repetition  of  the  Piskie  cry  found  John
with  his  elfish  companions  in  the  cellars  at  Heligan,  where
was  beer  and  wiue  galore.  It  need  not. be  said  that  he
availed  himself  of  his  opportunities.  The  mixture  of  all  the
good  liquors  so  affected  him  that,  alas !  he  forgot  in  time  to
catch  up  the  next  cry  of  "  Ho !  and  away  for  Par  Beach ! "  In
Ae  nioming  John  was  found  by  the  butler,  groping  and
tombling  among  butts  and  barrels,  very  much  muddled  with
the  squire's  good  drink.  His  strange  story,  very  incoherently
told,  was  not  credited  by  the  squire,  who  committed  him  to
jail  for  the  burglary,  and  in  due  time  he  was  convicted  and
sentenced  to  death?

The  morning  of  his  execution  arrived ;  a  large  crowd  had
assembled,  and  John  was  standing  under  the  gallows  tree,
^^fhen  a  commotion  was  observed  in  the  crowd,  and  a  little
lady  of  commanding  mien  made  her  way  through  the  open-
ing throng  to  the  scaffold.  In  a  shrill,  sweet  voice,  which
Wlobn  recognised,  she  cried,  "Ho!  and  away  for  France!"


78  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

Which  being  replied  to,  he  was  rapt  from  the  offic
justice,  leaving  them  and  the  multitude  mute  with  i
and  disappointment.

THE  SPRIGGANS  OP  TRENCROM  HILL.

IT  is  not  many  years  since  a  man,  who  thought  1
fully  informed  as  to  the  spot  in  which  a  crock
giant's  gold  was  buried,  proceeded  on  one  fine  moo
night  to  this  enchanted  hill,  and  with  spade  and  pick
menced  his  search.  He  proceeded  for  some  time  w
interruption,  and  it  became  evident  to  him  that  the  tr
was  not  far  off.  The  sky  was  rapidly  covered  with  the
est  clouds,  shutting  out  the  brilliant  light  of  the  moon, —
had  previously  gemmed  each  cairn, — and  leaving  the
seeker  in  total  and  unearthly  darkness.  The  wind  ros
roared  terrifically  amidst  the  rocks ;  but  this  was  soon  dn
amidst  the  fearful  crashes  of  thunder,  which  followed  in
succession,  the  flashes  of  lightning.  By  its  light  the  ma
ceived  that  the  spriggans  were  coming  out  in  swarms
all  the  rocks.  They  were  in  countless  numbers ;  and  altl
they  were  small  at  first,  they  rapidly  increased  in  size,
eventually  they  assumed  an  almost  giant  form,  lookii
the  while,  as  he  afterwards  said,  "  as  ugly  as  if  they  i
eat  him."  How  this  poor  man  escaped  is  unknown,  bi
is  said  to  have  been  so  frightened  that  he  took  to  his
and  was  not  able  to  work  for  a  long  time.


THE  FAIRY  MINERS-THE  KNOCKERS.

T   Ransom  Mine   the   "Knockers"  were   always
active  in  their  subterranean  operations.     In  every
of  the  mine  their  "knockings"  were  heard,  but  most


A'


The  Spriggatis  Child.  79

cially  were  they  busy  in  one  .particular  "end."  There  was  a
general  impression  that  great  wealth  must  exist  at  this  part
of  the  "lode."  Yet,  notwithstanding  the  inducements  of
very  high  "tribute"  were  held  out  to  the  miners,  no  pair  of
men  could  be  found  brave  enough  to  venture  on  the  ground
of  the  "  Bockles."  An  old  man  and  his  son,  called  Tren-
with,  who  lived  near  Bosprenis,  went  out  one  midsummer
eve,  about  midnight,  and  watched  until  they  saw  the  "Smae
People "  bringing  up  the  shining  ore.  It  is  said  they  were
possessed  of  some  secret  by  which  they  could  communicate
with  the  fairy  people.  Be  this  as  it  may,  they  told  the
little  miners  that  they  would  save  them  all  the  trouble  of
breaking  down  the  ore,  that  they  would  bring  "  to  grass  "  for
them,  one-tenth  of  the  "  richest  stuff,"  and  leave  it  properly
dressed,  if  they  would  quietly  give  them  up  this  end.  An
agreement  of  some  kind  was  come  to.  The  old  man  and  his  son
took  the  "pitch,"  and  in  a  short  time  realised  much  wealth.
The  old  man  never  failed  to  keep  to  his  bargain,  and  leave
the  tenth  of  the  ore  for  his  friends.  He  died.  The  son  was
ayaricious  and  selfish.  He  sought  to  cheat  the  Knockers,
bat  he  ruined  himself  by  so  doing.  The  ''lode"  failed;
nothing  answered  with  him;  disappointed,  he  took  to  drink,
squandered  all  the  money  his  father  had  made,  and  died  a
beggar.


THE  SPRIOGAN'S  CHILD.

AS  TOLD  BY  A  COBNISH  DROLL.

I'LL  tell  you  a  tale,  an  you  've  patience  to  hear  an,
'Bout  the  Spriggans,  that  swarm  round  Partinney  still-
You  knew  Janey  Tregeer,  who  lives  in  Brea  Yean,
In  the  village  just  under  the  Chapel-Hill.


8o  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

One  artemoon  she  went  out  for  to  reap.

And  left  the  child  in  the  cradle  asleep  :

Janey  took  good  care  to  cover  the  fire ; —

Tum'd  down  the  brandis  on  the  baking-ire        (ironj

Swept  up  the  ashes  on  the  hearthstone.

And  so  left  the  child  in  the  house  all  alone —

The  boys  had  aJl  on  'em  gone  away.

Some  to  work,  and  some  to  play.

Janey  work'd  in  the  field  as  gay  as  a  lark.

And  when  she  came  home  it  was  nearly  dark ;

The  f urst  thing  she  saw  when  she  open'd  the  door

Was  the  cradle  upset — ^all  the  straw  on  the  floor.

But  no  child  in  sight —

She  searched  all  round —

Still  no  child  was  found :

And  it  got  dark  night.

So  great  was  Jane's  fright.

That  for  more  than  an  hour

She  hadn't  the  power
To  strike  a  light.


However,  she  kindled  the  fire  at  last,
And  threw  in  a  faggot  to  make  a  blast
As  she  stooped  over  the  wood-comer  stone,
She  heard  a  sound  'tween  a  cry  and  a  moan-^
It  clearly  came  from  a  bundle  of  ferns —

The  two  bigger  boys*  bed —
And  there,  sure  enough, — as  frighten'd  she  turns,
Janey  saw  the  child's  head.

'Twaa  very  queer.    How  the  child  got  there,

Nobody  could  say ;
Yet  ever  since  that  day,  the  babe  pined  away —
It  was  at  all  times  crying,  or  sucking,  or  eating,
And  blinking  and  peeping,  when  it  ought  to  be  sleepinj
But  seldom  it  closed  its  eye§.
Jane  said  for  a  child  it  look'd  too  wise-
That  she  thought  it  a  changeHng
She  didn't  disguise —
And  often  and  often  she  gave  it  a  beating,
To  stop— but  she  couldn't— its  cussed  bleating.


Tfie  Spriggatis  Child.  8r

Janey  resolved  to  work  the  spell,

And  whene'er  she  could  stay,
She  bath'd  the  brat  in  the  Chapel  Well—

Which  he  thought  rare  play.

On  the  three  first  Wednesdays  in  flow'ry  May
She  plunged  it  deep  at  the  dawn  of  day —
Pass'd  it  slowly  three  times  against  the  sun.
Went  three  times  round, — and  when  all  was  done,
The  imp  of  a  child  roar'd  aloud  for  fun.
No  tongue  can  tell

The  trouble  it  gave  her
To  dip  the  shaver.
And  work  the  spelL

From  Brea  to  Chapel-Uny  is  a  mile  or  more.
And  surely  it  tried  Janey's  patience  sore
To  trudge  forth  and  back  from  the  Chapel  Well,
With  this  brat  on  her  back,  to  work  the  spelL

She  wish'd  it  dead ;  but  it  wouldn't  die :
It  ate  its  bread,  it  would  pine  and  cry;
And  Janey  was  nearly  beside  herself
With  this  plague  of  her  life — this  wicked  elf.

Well,  one  rainy  day, — as  it  rains  in  May,

Janey  set  out  with  the  child  in  her  arms

Once  more  to  work  the  holy  charms.
When  very  close  to  the  top  of  the  hill,

Where  she  was  sure  there  was  nobody  near.

She  heard  the  strangest  voice  in  her  ear.
Saying  these  words,  quite  clear  and  shrill —
'  Tredrill,  TredriU/  thy  wife  and  children  greet  thee  well"

Oh,  Janey's  heart-strings  were  like  to  crack.
When  up  spake  the  thing  in  her  arms,  good  lack ! —
"  For  wife  or  child  little  care  I,

They  may  laugh.

Or  tiiiey  may  cry, —

While  milk  I  quaff.

When  I  am  dry —

€^  of  my  pap  my  fill

Whenever  I  will,


1


82  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

On  the  Dowdy's  back  ride^
With  my  .legs  astride,
When  we  work  the  spell
At  the  Chapel  Well"


Janey  dropp'd  the  cussed  thing  on  the  ground.
And  tum'd  round,  and  round,  and  round ;
Tou  may  be  sure  she  was  in  a  fright
To  hear  the  sound,  and  nobody  in  sight.
And  to  hear  a  child  talk
Months  before  it  could  walk.
She  has  said  o'er  and  o'er.

And  I  am  sure  you  can't  wonder,-
'Twouldn't  frighten  her  more.
Had  the  rocks  burst  asunder.
And  the  earth  belch'd  forth  thunder.

When  Janey  at  length  got  over  the  fright.
From  hearing  the  sound  and  nobody  in  sight.
And  the  brat  which  lay  crying,  as  if  it  was  dying.
Talking  out  like  a  man  of  his  wife  and  his  child,
She  felt  all  be-dazzled  as  if  she  was  wild —
Took  the  brat  by  the  arm,  flung  it  over  her  shoulder —
Wouldn't  believe  it  her  child  if  the  parson  had  told  her
Thought  the  devil  was  in  it.

As  she  ran  the  hill  down.
Without  stopping  a  minute

Till  she  came  to  Brea  town.

The  old  women  came  out,  and  all  on  'em  agreed
'Twas  the  strangest  thing  that  ever  they  seed ;
They  stood  in  a  row,  and  each  one  had  a  word —
'Twas  the  wonderf  ull'st  story  that  ever  they  heard ;
'Twas  a  spriggan's  brat — they  were  all  sure  of  that —
No  more  like  Jane's  child  than  an  old  ram-cat.
She  must  beat  it  black,  she  must  beat  it  blue.
Bruise  its  body  all  o'er  with  the  heel  of  her  shoe-
Then  lay  it  alone  beneath  the  church  stile.
And  keep  out  of  hearing  and  sight  for  a  while —
When  every  one  said,  as  every  one  thought.
That  Janey's  child  would  again  be  brought :
Some  said  'twould  be  living — some  said  'twould  be  dead—
But  the  Spriggan's  base  brat  she  no  longer  need  dread.


The  Spriggan's  Child.  83

Jane  beat  the  babe  black.
And  she  beat  the  babe  blue.

On  the  ashes'  pile  before  the  door ;

And  she  would  have  beaten  it  ten  times  more.
But  out  of  her  hand  she  lost  her  shoe,
Struck  away  all  at  once— by  she  couldn't  tell  who.

The  brat  had  roar'd — it  could  roar  no  more —

So  they  carried  it  off  to  the  old  church  stile,
And  laid  it  under  the  stones — some  swore

That  when  placed  on  the  earth  it  was  seen  to  smile —
Then  all  tum'd  back,  and  kept  far  out  of  sight : —

And  Janey  declared  she  was  almost  wild ;
But  they  kept  her  back  till  the  turn  o'  the  night.

When  she  rush'd  to  the  church  and  found  her  own  child

'Twas  there,  sure  enough,  her  own  dear  child : —

But  when  first  she  saw  it.

She  did  not  know  it —
It  look'd  so  frightened — ^it  seemed  so  wild.

Then  the  old  women  said,

If  it  keeps  its  wits,
We  're  sadly  afraid

The  poor  babe  will  have  fits.

A  friend  writes  me : — "  I  saw  an  accdunt  in  a  newspaper
tUe  other  day  of  an  Irishwoman  who  was  brought  before  the
**^agistrates,  in  New  York,  for  causing  the  death  of  a  child
*>y  making  it  stand  on  hot  coals,  to  try  if  it  were  her  own
^^ijy-begotten  child,  or  a  changeling.  I  think  the  notion
^•^  that  her  own  child  would  stand  fire,  but  an  imp  would
either  die,  to  all  appearance,  or  be  spirited  away.  This  is
^nch  worse  than  the  plan  of  the  woman  of  Brea  Vean,  who
iHit  the  brat  on  the  ashes'  pile,  and  beat  it  black  with  the
^toom."*

•  "The  Father  of  Eighteen  Elves,"  in  ''Legends  of  Iceland,"  is,  in
*U  itiohief  features,  similar  to  this  story,  even  to  the  beating  him  with-
^^  BMrej.  "  loelandic  Legends.  CoUected  by  John  Amason :  Trana-
^iftid  by  George  E.  J.  Powell  and  Eirikur  Magmisson."    Bentley,  1864.


84  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

THE  PISKIES'  CHANGELINO.

THIS  story  is  told  by  Mr  T.  Q.  Couch,  as  an  ezamp
the   folk-lore  of  a  Cornish  village  in  "Notes
Queries,"  under  the  name  of  "Coleman  Gray  :" —

"  There  is  a  farm-house  of  some  antiquity  with  whid
family  have  a  close  connexion;  and  it  is  this  circumsti
more  than  any  other,  that  has  rendered  this  tradition
ceming  it  more  interesting  to  us,  and  better  rememb
than  many  other  equally  romantic  and  authentic.  Qof
this  house,  one  day,  a  little  miserable-looking  bantling
discovered  alone,  unknown,  and  incapable  of  making  its  w
understood.  It  was  instantly  remembered,  by  the  fii
that  this  was  the  way  in  which  the  piskies  were  accustc
to  deal  with  those  infants  of  their  race  for  whom  they  so
human  protection ;  and  it  would  have  been  an  awful  ci«
stance  if  such  a  one  were  not  received  by  the  individui
visited.  The  anger  of  the  piskies  would  be  certain,  and  «
direful  calamity  must  be  the  result ;  whereas  a  kind  wel(
would  probably  be  attended  with  great  good  fortuna
miserable  plight  of  this  stranger,  therefore,  attracted  ai
tion  and  sympathy.  The  little  unconscious  one  was  adm
as  one  of  the  family.  Its  health  was  speedily  restored,
its  renewed  strength,  activity,  intelligence,  and  good  him:
caused  it  to  become  a  general  favourite.  It  is  true
stranger  was  often  found  to  indulge  in  odd  freaks  ;  but
was  accounted  for  by  a  recollection  of  its  pedigree,  w
was  not  doubted  to  be  of  the  piskie  order.  So,  the  fa
prospered,  and  had  banished  the  thought  that  the  founc
would  ever  leave  them.  There  was  to  the  front  door  of
house,  a  hatch,  which  is  a  half-door,  that  is  kept  closed  1
the  whole  door  behind  it  is  open,  and  it  then  serves
guard  against  the  intrusion  of  dogs,  hogs,  and  ducks,  -^


The  Pixies  of  Dartmoor.  8  5

air  and  light  are  freely  admitted.  This  little  being  was  one
day  leaning  over  the  top  of  this  hatch^  and  looking  wistfully
outward,  when  a  clear  voice  was  heard  to  proceed  from  a
neighbouring  part  of  the  tovmpldce,  calling, '  Coleman  Gray,
Coleman  Gray ! '  The  piskie  immediately  started  up,  and  with
a  sudden  laugh,  clapped  its  hands,  exclaiming,  'Aha,  my
daddy  is  come ! '  It  was  gone  in  a  moment,  never  to  be
seen  again."


THE  PIXIES  OP  DAETMOOE.

THERE  is  a  celebrated  piskie  haunt  at  Costellas  in  Corn-
wall, (says  Mrs  Bray,)  where  they  have  been  seen  sitting
in  a  ring — the  men  smoking  after  the  most  approved  fashion
of  the  Dutch  burgomaster,  and  the  women  spinning,  perhaps
in  emulation  of  the  frugal  vrow.

I  never  heard  of  this  place.  Like  the  rest  of  the  "good
people,"  piskies  are  fond  of  music,  and  the  sound  of  their
"harp  and  pipe  and  symphony,"  is  occasionally  heard  at
nightfalL  It  is  said  that  a  man  once  passing  one  of  the
piakie  rings,  and  hearing  them  dancing  and  singing  within
it^  threw  a  large  stone  into  the  midst  of  the  circle,  when
the  music  at  once  ceased  and  a  dreadful  shriek  arose.

The  appearance  of  the  picvies  of  Dartmoor  is  said  to
resemble  that  of  a  bale  or  bundle  of  rags.  In  this  shape
they  decoy  children  to  their  unreal  pleasure.  A  woman,  on
the  northern  borders  of  the  moor,  was  returning  home  late
on  a  dark  evening,  accompanied  by  two  children,  and  carry-
ing a  third  in  her  arms,  when,  on  arriving  at  her  own  door,
•lie  found  one  missing.  Her  neighbours,  with  lanthoms,
immediately  set  out  in  quest  of  the  lost  child ;  whom  they
foond  sitting  under  a  large  oak-tree,  well-known  to  be  a
fafonrite  haunt  of  the  pixies.    He  declared  that  he  had  been


86  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

led  away  by  two  large  bundles  of  rags,  which  had  renu
with  him  until  the  lights  appeared,  when  they  immedi
vanished.*

The  pixies  of  Dartmoor,  notwithstanding  their  di
character,  aided  occasionally  in  household  work.  A  wai
woman  was  one  morning  greatly  surprised  on  coming  <
stairs  to  find  all  her  clothes  neatly  washed  and  folded,
watched  the  next  evening,  and  observed  a  pixie  in  the  a
performing  this  kind  oflBce  for  her :  but  she  was  ragged
mean  in  appearance,  and  Betty's  gratitude  was  suffid
great  to  induce  her  to  prepare  a  yellow  petticoat  and  x
cap  for  the  obliging  pixie.


THE  PAIEY  PAIR  IN  GEEMOE.

BAL  LANE  in  Germoe  was  a  notorious  place  for  pii
One  night  Daniel  Champion  and  his  comrade  can
Godolphin  Bridge, — they  were  a  little  bit  "  over-took ''
liquor.  They  said  that  when  they  came  to  "Bal  Lane,"
found  it  covered  all  over  from  end  to  end,  and  the  £
People  holding  a  fair  there  with  all  sorts  of  mere
disc — the  prettiest  sight  they  ever  met  witL  Chan
was  sure  he  saw  his  child  there ;  for  a  few  nights  befor<
child  in  the  evening,  was  as  beautiful  a  one  as  coul
seen  anywhere,  but  in  the  morning  was  changed  for  oi
ugly  and  wizened  as  could  be ;  and  he  was  sure  the  £
People  had  done  it.  Next  day,  telling  the  story  at  <
Gothal,  his  comrade  was  knocked  backward,  thrown  int<
bob-pit,  and  just  killed.  Obliged  to  be  carried  to  his  h
Champion  followed,  and  was  telling  of  their  adventure

*  For  additional  information  respecting  the  pixies  of  the  banks  <
Tamar  and  the  Tavy,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Mrs  Bray's  "  Tradi
Legends,  Superstitions,  and  Sketches  of  Devonshire."


Sf  Margery  and  the  Piskies.  87

the  Small  People,  when  one  said,  "Don't  speak  about  them;
they're  wicked  spiteful  devils."  No  sooner  were  the  words
littered  than  the  speaker  was  thrown  clean  over  stairs  and
bruised  dreadfully, — ^a  convincing  proof  to  all  present  of  the
reality  of  the  existence  of  the  Small  Folka


ST  MAEGEBT  AND  THE  PISKIES.

11/E  have  no  reliable  information  of  the  birth,  parentage,
T  T  or  education  of  Margery  Daw,  but  we  have  a  nursery
rhyme  which  clearly  indicates  that  she  must  have  been  a
doven — ^perhaps  an  ancient  picture  of  a  literary  lady,  who
was  by  her  sad  habit  reduced  to  extreme  necessity.
See  saw,  Margeiy  Daw,

dearly  indicates  a  lazy  woman  rocking  herself,  either  in  deep
thought,  or  for  want  of  thought

Sold  her  bed  and  lay  on  the  straw;

this  was  stage  the  first  of  her  degradation.

She  sold  her  straw  and  lay  in  the  smut,

the  second  and  final  stage,  which  may  well  induce  the  poet
to  inquire

Was  not  she  a  dirty  slut  ?

Another  version  of  Margery's  story  is  more  distinct  as  to
her  end:*-

Seesaw,

Margery  Daw,  ,

Sold  her  bed

And  lay  on  the  straw ;

She  sold  her  straw,

And  lay  upon  hay,

SoimsHm  came

And  carried  her  away.

A  friend,  in  writing  to  me  on  this  dirty  Cornish  saint,  is
dispoeed  to  regard  St  Margery  Daw  as  a  very  devout  Roman
GrthoBc,  and  to  refer  the  version  of  her  story  which  I  have


88  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

given  first,  to  the  strong  feeling  shewn  by  many  Protei
against  those  pioii3  women  who  rejected  the  finery  €
world,  and  submitted  for  the  sake  of  their  souls  to  tho6
vations  which  formed  at  one  time  the  severe  rule  of  oa
tual  life.  Margery  and  the  fairies  are  supposed  to
left  England  together  at  the  time  of  the  Bef ormation,  b
has  left  her  name  to  several  Cornish  mines.


THE  PAIET  REVELS  ON  THE  "GUMP,"  ST  JUST.

LONG  has  the  Gump  been  the  reputed  playground  c
Small  People.  Many  of  the  good  old  people  wan
mitted  to  witness  their  revels,  and  for  years  they
delighted  their  grandchildren  with  tales  of  the  songs
have  heard,  and  of  the  sights  they  have  seen.  To  mi
their  friends  those  fairies  have  given  small  but  va]
presents ;  but  woe  to  the  man  or  woman  who  would
to  intrude  upon  the  ground  occupied  by  them  at  the  ti
their  high  festivals.  There  was  a  covetous  old  hunks
Just — never  mind  his  name,  he  was  severely  punishe
that  suffice — ^well,  this  old  fellow  had  heard  so  much  c
riches  displayed  by  the  little  people,  when  holding  h<
on  the  Gump,  that  he  resolved  to  get  some  of  the
sures.  He  learned  all  he  could  learn  from  his  neighl
but  kept  his  intention  to  himself.  It  was  during  the  lu
moon — ^the  night  was  a  softened  day — and  everything  a'
on  such  a  night  should  have  been  in  harmony  with  its
brilliancy.  But  here  was  a  dark  soul  passing  along,  mi
a  small  eclipse  with  his  black  shadow.  The  old  man
towards  the  rendezvous  of  the  "good  people,"  as  some
fond  of  calling  them,  anxiously  looking  out  for  the  trea
which  he  coveted.  At  length,  when  he  had  not  advance
on  the  Gump,  he  heard  music  of  the  most  ravishing  kind


The  Fairy  Revels  on  the  "  Gumpr  89

influence  was  of  a  singularly  mysterions  character.    As  the
notes  were  solemn  and  slow,  or  quick  and  gay,  the  old  mm
was  moved  from  tears  to  laughter ;  and  on  more  than  one
occasion  he  was  compelled  to  dance  in  obedience  to  the  time.
Notwithstanding  that  he  was  almost  bewildered  by  the
whirling  motion  to  which  he  was  compelled,  the  old  man
''kept  his  wits  awake,"  and  waited  his  opportunity  to  seize
some  fairy  treasure ;  but  as  yet  nothing  remarkable  had  pre-
sented itself.    The  music  appeared  to  surround  him,  and,  as
he  thought,  to  come  closer  to  him  than  it  was  at  first ;  and
although  its  sound  led  him  to  believe  that  the  musicians  were
on  the  surEstce,  he  was  impressed  with  an  idea  that  they  were
really  beneath  the  earth.    Eventually  there  was  a  crash  of
aoond,  startling  beyond  description,  and  the  hill  before  him
(^lened.      All  was    now  a- blaze  with  variously -coloured
li^ts.    Every  blade  of  grass  was  hung  with  lamps^  and
eveiy  furze  bush  was  illuminated  with  stars.     Out  from  the
opening  in  the  hill  marched  a  host  of  spriggans,  as  if  to  clear
the  road.   Thai  came  an  immense  number  of  musicians  play-
ing on  every  kind  of  instrument     These  were  followed  by
Uoq>  after  troop  of  soldiers,  each  troop  beariag  aloft  their  ban-
ner, which  appeared  to  spread  itself,  to  display  its  blazonry,
iridiont  the  assistance  of  any  breeze.    All  these  arranged
ttonselves  in  order  over  the  ground,  some  here  and  some
tboa    One  thing  was  not  at  all  to  our  friend's  liking;
iBwal  hundreds  of  the  most  grotesque  of  the  spriggans
pheed  themselves  so  as  to  enclose  the  spot  on  which  he  was
teMUng.    Yet^  as  they  were  none  of  them  higher  than  his
Aoe-tie,  he  thought  he  could  "  squash  "  them  easily  with  his
loot  if  they  were  up  to  any  mischief,  and  so  he  consoled  him-
Mlt    This  vast  array  having  disposed  of  themselves,  first
CHB6  a  crowd  of  servants  bearing  vessels  of  silver  and  vessels
^  gold,  goblets  cut  out  of  diamonds,  rubies,  and  other


90  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

precious  stones.     There  were  others  laden,  almost  U
flowing,  with  the  richest  meats,  pastry,  preserves,  and
Presently  the  ground  was  covered  with  tables,  and
thing  was  arranged  in  the  most  systematic  order^^^
party  falling  back  as  they  disposed  of  their  burdens.

The  brilliancy  of  the  scene  nearly  overpowered  ti
man ;  but,  when  he  was  least  prepared  for  it,  the  iUi
tion  became  a  thousand  times  more  intense.  Out  <
hill  were  crowding  thousands  upon  thousands  of
ladies  and  gentlemen,  arrayed  in  the  most  costly
He  thought  there  would  be  no  end  to  the  comiing  i
By  and  by,  however,  the  music  suddenly  changed,  aa
harmonious  sounds  which  fell  upon  his  ears  appeared  1
new  life  to  every  sense.  His  eyes  were  clearer,  hj
quicker,  and  his  sense  of  smell  more  exqxdsite.

The  odours  of  flowers,  more  delicious  than  any  he  hi
smelt,  filled  the  air.  He  saw,  without  any  disturbing  m
the  brilliant  beauty  of  the  thousands  of  ladies  who  wei
upon  the  Gump ;  and  their  voices  were  united  in  on<
of  song,  which  was  clear  as  silver  bells — ^a  hymeneal
phony  of  the  utmost  delicacy.  The  words  were  in  a  lai
unknown  to  him,  but  he  saw  they  were  directed  tow
new  group  now  emerging  from  the  hill.

First  came  a  great  number  of  female  children  clothed
whitest  gauze,  strewing  flowers  on  the  Gump.  These  wi
dead  or  cut  flowers,  for  the  moment  they  touched  the  {
they  took  root  and  grew.  These  were  followed  by  an  c
large  number  of  boys,  holding  in  their  hands  shells
appeared  to  be  strung  like  harps,  and  from  whid
brought  forth  murmurs  of  melody,  such  as  angels  onlj
hope  to  hear  and  live.  Then  came — and  there  was  i
to  their  coming — ^line  upon  line  of  little  men  clothed  in
and  gold,  and  by  and  by  a  forest  of  banners,  which,  at


I


The  Fairy  Revels  on  the  **  Gumpr  91

nal,  were  all  furled   Then,  seated  on  thrones,  carried  upon  a
platform  above  the  heads  of  the  men,  came  a  young  prince  and
princess  who  blazed  with  beauty  and  jewels,  as  if  they  were
sons  amidst  a  skyey  host  of  stars.     There  was  much  cere-
monial marching  to  and  fro,  but  eventually  the  platform
was  placed  upon  a  mound  on  the  Gump,  which  was  now
tnmsf ormed  into  a  hillock  of  roses  and  lilies ;  and  around
this  an  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  walked,  bowing,  and  each
one  saying  something  to  the  princess  and  the  prince, — passing
onward  and  taking  their  seats  at  the  tables.    Although  no
man  could  count  the  number  of  this  fairy  host,  there  was  no
confasion ;  all  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  found,  as  if  by  instinct,
their  places.    When  all  were  seated,  a  signal  was  given  by
the  prince ;  servants  in  splendid  liveries  placed  tables  crowded
with  goldplate  and  good  things  on  the  platform,  and  every
one,  the  prince  and  princess  included,  began  to  feast  with  a
trilL    Well,  thought  the  old  man,  now  is  my  time ;  if  I  could
ooly  cnwl  np  to  the  prince's  table,  I  should  have  a  catch
Hire  enough,  and  become  a  rich  man  for  life.     With  his
greedy  mind  fixed  on  this  one  object,  and  unobservant  of
eierything  else,  he  crouched  down,  as  though  by  so  doing  he
eodd  escape  observation,  and  very  slowly  and  stealthily  ad-
naeed  amongst  the  revellers.    He  never  saw  that  thousands
of  qiriggans  had  thrown  little  strings  about  him,  and  that
ttey  still  held  the  ends  of  the  threads.    The  presence  of  this
idlsh  old  mortal  did  not  in  any  way  discompose  the  assem-
%;  they  ate  and  drank  and  were  as  merry  as  though  no
baan  eye  was  looking  on  them.    The  old  man  was  won-
dmos  cautious  lest  he  should  disturb  the  feasters,  conse-
^fftStj  %  long  time  was  spent  in  getting,  as  he  desired,  to
the  back  of  the  mound.    At  length  he  reached  the  desired
ipot^  and,  to  his  surprise,  all  was  dark  and  gloomy  behind
Uaiybiit  in  firont  of  the  mound  all  was  a  blaze  of  light


92  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

Crawling  like  a  serpent  on  his  belly,  trembling  with  \
the  old  man  advanced  close  to  the  prince  and  princoi
was  somewhat  startled  to  find,  as  he  looked  out  o
mound,  that  every  one  of  the  thousands  of  eyes  in  thi
titude  was  fixed  on  his.  He  gazed  a  while,  all  the  time
ing  his  courage  up ;  then,  as  a  boy  who  would  catch  a
fly,  he  took  off  his"  hat  and  carefully  raised  it,  so  as  1
the  prince,  the  princess,  and  their  costly  table,  and
about  to  close  it  upon  them,  a  shrill  whistle  was  hei
old  man's  hand  was  fixed  powerless  in  the  air,  and
thing  became  dark  around  him.

Whir!  whir!  whir!  as  if  a  flight  of  bees  were
him,  buzzed  in  his  ears.  Every  limb,  from  head  1
was  as  if  stuck  full  of  pins  and  pinched  with  tweezei
could  not  move,  he  was  chained  to  the  ground.  1
means  he  had  rolled  down  the  mound,  and  lisiy  on  h
with  his  arms  outstretched,  arms  and  legs  being  sect
magic  chains  to  the  earth ;  therefore,  although  he  i
great  agony,  he  could  not  stir,  and,  strange  enou
tongue  appeared  tied  by  cords  so  that  he  could  n
He  had  lain,  no  one  can  tell  how  long,  in  this  sad
when  he  felt  as  if  a  number  of  insects  were  runnii
him,  and  by  the  light  of  the  moon  he  saw  standing
nose  one  of  the  spriggans,  who  looked  exceedingly
small  dragon-fly.  This  little  monster  stamped  and  j
with  great  delight ;  and  having  had  his  own  fun  upon  1
vated  piece  of  humanity,  he  laughed  most  outrageous
shouted,  ''Away,  away,  I  smell  the  day!"  Upon  ti
army  of  small  people,  who  had  taken  possession  of
man's  body,  moved  quickly  away,  and  left  our  disa
hero  alone  on  the  Gump.  Bewildered,  or,  as  he  s«
deviled,  he  lay  still  to  gather  up  his  thoughts.  At
the  sun  arose,  and  then  he  found  that  he  had  been


The  Fairy  Funeral.  93

the  gronnd  by  myriads  of  gossamer  webs,  which  were  now
covered  with  dew,  and  glistened  like  diamonds  in  the  sun-
shina

He  ehook  himself,  and  was  free.  He  rose  wet,  cold,  and
ashamed.  Sulkily  he  made  his  way  to  his  home.  It  was  a
long  time  before  his  fidends  could  learn  from  the  old  man
where  he  had  passed  the  night,  but,  by  slow  degrees,  they
gpithered  the  story  I  have  related  to  you.


THE  PAIEY  PUNERAL.

THIS  and  two  or  three  other  bits  of  folk-lore   were
communicated  to  the  AthencBum  by  me,  when  Am-
brose Merton  (Mr  Thoms)  solicited  such  contributions.

The  parish  church  of  Lelant  is  curiously  situated  amidst
\SQb  of  blown  sand,  near  the  entrance  of  the  creek  of  Hayle.
The  sandy  waste  around  the  church  is  called  the  Towen ;
ttid  ibis  place  was  long  the  scene  of  the  midnight  gambols
4  fhe  Small  People.    In  the  adjoining  Tillage — or,  as  it  is
ciDed  in  Cornwall,  the  "  church-town  " — ^lived  an  old  woman
vho  had  been,  according  to  her  own  statement,  a  frequent
vitaess  to  the  use  made  by  the  fairies  of  the  Towen.     Her
bthaiid,  also,  had  seen  some  extraordinary  scenes  on  the
Me  spoL     From  her, — to  me,  oft-repeated  description, — I
get  the  following  tale : — It  was  the  fishing  season ;  and
Bduvd  had  been  to  St  Ives  for  some  fish.     He  was  re-
laden  with  pilchards,  on   a   beautiful   moonlight
;  and  as  he  ascended  the  hill  from  St  Ives,  he  thought
hi  heard  the  bell  of  Lelant  church  tolling.    Upon  a  nearer
ifMMiL  he  saw  lights  in  the  church ;  and  most  distinctly
ttjMDell  toll — ^not  with  its  usual  clear  sound,  but  dull
lilhsavy  as  if  it  had  been  muffled,  scarcely  awakening  any
eAa    lUchard  walked  towards  the  church,  and  cautiously,


94  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

but  not  without  fear,  approaching  one  of  the  ¥i
looked  in.  At  first  he  could  not  perceive  any  one
nor  discover  whence  the  light  came  by  which  everytl
so  distinctly  illuminated.  At  length  he  saw,  mbvin
the  centre  aisle,  a  funeral  procession.  The  little  peo
crowded  the  aisle,  although  they  ail  looked  very  so
were  not  dressed  in  any  mourning  garments — so  far
they  wore  wreaths  of  little  roses,  and  carried  branchi
blossoming  myrtle.  Eichard  beheld  the  bier  borne
six — ^whether  men  or  women  he  could  not  tell — ^but
that  the  face  of  the  corpse  was  that  of  a  beautiful
smaller  than  the  smallest  child's  dolL  It  was,  Richi
"  as  if  it  were  a  dead  seraph," — so  very  lovely  did  ii
to  him.  The  body  was  covered  with  white  flowers,
hair,  like  gold  threads,  was  tangled  amongst  the  b
The  body  was  placed  within  tiie  altar ;  and  then
party  of  men,  with  picks  and  spades,  began  to  dig
hole  close  by  the  sacramental  table.  Their  task  beii
pleted,  others,  with  great  care,  removed  the  body  an<
it  in  the  hole.  The  entire  company  crowded  aroun<
to  catch  a  parting  glimpse  of  that  beautiful  corpse,
it  was  placed  in  the  earth.  As  it  was  lowered  i
ground,  they  began  to  tear  off  their  flowers  and  brei
branches  of  myrtle,  crying,  "  Our  queen  is  dead  !  on
is  dead ! "  At  length  one  of  the  men  who  had  dug  tl
threw  a  shovelful  of  earth  upon  the  body ;  and  th
of  the  fairy  host  so  alarmed  Eichard,  that  he  invol
joined  in  it.  In  a  moment  all  the  lights  were  extinj
and  the  fairies  were  heard  flying  in  great  constem
every  direction.  Many  of  them  brushed  past  the
man,  and,  shrieking,  pierced  him  with  sharp  insti
He  was  compelled  to  save  hia  life  hy  the  most  rapid  ^


Betty  Stogs  and  yan  the  Mounster.         95


THE  FAIRY  REVEL.

EICHAKD  also  once  witnessed  a  fairy  revel  in  the  Towen
— ^upon  which  tables  were  spread,  with  the  utmost
pfofiision  of  gold  and  silver  ornaments^  and  firuits  and
ikmera  Eichard,  however,  according  to  the  statement  of
•*  Aunt  Alcey,"  (the  name  by  which  his  wife  was  familiarly
called,)  very  foolishly  interrupted  the  feast  by  some  excla-
mation of  surprise ;  whereas,  had  he  but  touched  the  end  of
a  table  with  his  finger,  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the
biiy  host  to  have  removed  an  article,  as  that  which  has  been
touched  by  mortal  fingers  becomes  to  them  accursed.  As  it
was,  the  lovely  vision  faded  before  the  eyes  of  the  astonished
labourer.

BETTY  STOGS  AND  JAN  THE  MOTJNSTER.

rthe  **  high  countries,"  as  the  parishes  of  Morva,  Zennor,
and  Towednack  are  called,  there  has  long  existed  a  tradi-
tion that  the  children  of  dirty,  la2y,  "couseying"  women
tie  often  taken  away  by  the  Small  People,  carefully  cleansed,
and  then  returned — of  course  all  the  more  beautiful  for  being
Vtthedby  the  fairies  in  morning  dew.  This  notion  has  evi-
dnt^  prevailed  for  many  ages,  and,  like  many  an  old  tradi-
tfan,  it  has  been  remodelled  in  each  generation  to  adapt  it  to
tte  eoiuutions  of  the  time.  The  following  is  but  slightly  modi-
iedin  its  principal  characteristics  from  a  story,  somewhat
nmely  told  and  greatly  extended,  by  an  old  woman  in  Morva.
A  woman,  up  the  higher  side,  called  Betty  Stogs,  very  nearly
Wfe  her  baby  a  few  months  ago.  Stogs  was  only  a  nick-
ittn^  hat  every  one  knew  her  by  that  and  no  other.  It  was
ifm  to  her  because  she  was  so  imtidy  about  the  feet  and
If^  She  could  not  darn  a  hole  in  her  stocking — the  lazy
4kI  opnld  never  knit  one»    Betty  was  always  pulling  the


96  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

legs  of  her  stockings  down  under  her  feet,  that  the  h
her  heels  might  not  be  seen — ^as  long  as  the  tops  won]
nnder  the  garter — ^and  she  often  gartered  half-way  do
leg  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  case.  Betty  was  rei
in  Towednack,  at  no  great  distance  from  Wheal  Be
which  Bal  the  old  man,  her  father,  worked.  He  also
a  few  acres  of  land,  and,  ''out  of  care,"  he  and  his  di
worked  on  it  The  old  people  used  to  say — they  woulc
the  poor  innocent  chield  to  work  to  Bal,  for  fear  th
rough  heathens  from  Lelant  might  overcome  her ;  a
kept  her  at  home,  and  the  old  man  would  brag  how  hii
could  cut  furze  and  turf  Instead  of  staying  at  home
evenings,  Betty  was  always  racing  round  the  lanes  t
meetings ;  for  she  had  been  a  "  professor  ever  since  8
a  cheeld."  Betty  was  an  only  child,  and  the  old  peop
saved  a  little  money,  and  they  hoped  some  one  "  abo
common  "  would  marry  her.  In  Higher  Side  there  1
man  called  Jan  the  Mounster,  (monster,)  and,  tempted
bit  of  money,  he  resolved  to  lay  himself  out  to  catch
Jan  became  a  converted  character — ^he  met  in  the  sam
with  Betty,  and  expressed  himself  as  being  *'  so  fond
means  of  grace."  Things  went  on  in  this  way  for
time,  and  it  was  found  that  Betty  "  had  met  with  a  i
tune."  The  old  people  were  now  in  a  great  hurry  to
their  daughter,  and  promised  Jan  money  enough  to  bu;
of  cheene,  (china,)  and  lots  of  beautiful  dome,  (earthen
but  mounster  required  more  than  this,  and  fought  ofl
left  the  "people,"  that  he  mightn't  be  read  out  He  £
was  heartily  sick  of  the  lot,  told  strange  stories  abou
doings,  and  became  as  bad  a  character  as  ever.  Tin
vanced,  and  Betty's  mother — ^who  was  herself  a  wret
dirty  woman,  and,  as  people  said,  too  fond  of  the  "  dj
drink  " — saw  that  she  must  lose  no  chance  of  makir


Betty  Stogs  and  Jan  the  Mounster.         97

daughter  an  honest  woman.  So  she  went  to  Penzance  and
bought  a  new  bed — a  real  four-poster — a  new  dresser>  painted
bright  lead  and  liver  colour — an  eight-day  clock,  in  a  painted
mahogany  case — a  mass  of  beautiful  dome — and  a  glass
milk-cup.  When  all  these  things  were  ranged  in  a  cottage,
Jan  was  well  enough  pleased  with  them,  and  hung  his  "  great
turnip  of  a  watch "  up  in  the  middle  of  the  dresser,  to  see
how  it  would  look  When  he  had  satisfied  himself,  he  told
tlie  old  woman  he  would  marry  Betty  out  of  hand,  if  she
would  give  them  their  great,  pretty,  bright,  warmiag-pan
to  hang  opposite  the  door.  This  was  soon  settled,  and  Jan
the  Mounster  and  Betty  Stogs  were  married.

In  a  little  time  the  voices  of  a  baby  was  heard  in  Jan's
ooltage,  but  the  poor  child  had  no  cradle,  only  a  ''  costan/'  (a
straw  and  bramble  basket ;)  and,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary
canaes  of  neglect,  another  cause  was  introduced — Betty  took
to  drink.  A  great,  nasty  suss  of  a  woman,  who  went  about
pietending  to  sell  crochet-work,  but  in  reality  to  sell  gin —
vliich  she  kept  in  a  bottle  under  the  dirty  rags,  which  she
caDed  *'  the  most  bcftutiful  croshar  work  collars  and  cuffs  that
tU  die  ladies  in  the  towns  and  up  the  country  wear  on  Sun-
days and  high  holidays  "—^formed  a  close  acquaintance  with
Jin's  wifa  The  result  was,  things  went  from  bad  to  worse.*
Jin  was  discontented,  and  went  to  Bal  and  returned  from
Bal  always  a  sullen  man.  One  day  Betty  had  to  bake  some
held— she  had  never  before  done  so,  as  her  mother  had
Arays  attended  to  that  job.  Jan  had  left  his  watch  hang-
ing to  the  dresser,  that  Betty  might  know  the  time.  All
itnt  well  till  the  middle  of  the  day ;  and,  just  as 'the  bread
^U  ready  to  put  down,  in  came  the  crochet  woman.  First
Ita^f  had  a  noggin  of  gin — she  then  had  her  fortune  told —
>ii  because  she  was  promised  no  end  of  good  luck  and  the
iMidsomest  children  in  the  country,  and  Jan  the  best  luck
larSianB.  G


98  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

in  tribute-pitches,  the  kettle  was  boiled,  and  some  pen
for  the  fortune-teller.

All  this  time  the  dough  was  forgotten,  and  it  was
sour  and  heavy.  At  last,  when  the  woman  went  a^
lump  of  sour  "  leven  "  was  put  down  to  baka  The  n€
child  got  troublesome,  and  as  Jan  would  be  home  <
supper,  Betty  was  in  a  great  hurry  to  get  things  doi
quiet  the  child,  she  gave  it  Jan's  watch ;  and,  that  11
be  the  better  pleased,  she  opened  it,  "  that  the  deaj
might  see  the  pretty  little  wheels  spinning  round."
short  time  the  "  machine  "  was  thrown  down  in  the
and  it,  of  course,  stopped.  Betty,  at  last,  wished  t<
the  time ;  she  then  found  the  watch  clogged  full  of  di
put  the  thing  to  rights  she  washed  it  out  in  the  kettle
water,  which  had  not  been*  changed  for  two  or  thre
and  was  thick  with  salt  pilchard  bones,  and  potatc
She  did  her  best  to  clean  the  watch,  for  she  was  now
afraid  of  Jan,  and*  she  wiped  all  the  little  wheels,  as
she  could  reach,  with  the  comer  of  the  dish  cloth,  1
confounded  thing  would  not  go.  She  had  to  bake  th
by  guess;  and,  therefore,  when  she  took  it  up,  it
black  as  soot,  and  as  hard  as  a  stone.

Jan  came  home ;  and  you  may  judge  the  temper
in  at  finding  things  as  they  were,  and  his  watch  s
Betty  swore  to  the  deepest  that  she  had  never  taken  tl
into  her  hands.  Next  morning  Jan  got  up  early  tc
Bal;  and  taking  the  burnt  loaf,  he  tried  to  cut  it
knife,  but  it  was  in  vain — as  well  try  to  cut  a  stone
he  tried  the  dag,  (axe,)  and  Mounster  said  it  strook  fi
the  dag  never  made  the  least  mark  in  the  crust.  Tl
fellow  had  to  go  to  his  work  without  his  breakfast,
depend  upon  the  share  of  a  comrade's  fuggun  for  dim

Next  day,  Friday,  was  pay-day,  and  Jan  having  \


Betty  Stogs  and  yan  the  Mounster.         99

pay,  went  to  St  Ives  for  bread,  and  took  the  precious  watch
with  him  to  be  set  to  rights.  The  watchmaker  soon  found
oat  the  complaint ;  here  was  a  bit  of  fish  bone,  there  a  piece
of  potato  paring ;  in  one  tooth  a  piece  of  worsted  from  a
dish-cloth,  in  another  a  particle  of  straw,  and  ashes  every-
where.

The  murder  was  out;  and  that  night  Jan,  having  first
dnmk  to  excess  in  St  Ives,  went  home  and  nearly  murdered
his  wife.  From  this  time  Jan  was  drunk  every  day,  and
Betty  was  so  as  often  as  she  could  get  gin.  The  poor  child
was  left  half  the  day  to  suck  his  thumbs,  and  to  tumble  and
toes  on  the  filthy  rags  in  the  old  costan,  without  any  one  to
kx>k  after  it.
One  day  Betty  was  in  a  "courseying"  mood,  and  went
I  from  house  to  house,  wherever  she  could  find  a  woman  idle
enough  to  gossip  with  her.  Betty  stayed  away  till  dark —
it  was  Jan's  last  core  by  day — ^and  the  poor  child  was  left
lU  alone.

When  she  came  home  she  was  surprised  not  to  hear  the
(tid,  bat  she  thought  it  might  have  cried  itself  to  sleep;  and
WIS  not  concerned.  At  last,  having  lit  the  candle  she  looked
ia  the  costan,  and  there  was  no  child  to  be  seen.  Betty
toirehed  about,  in  and  out,  every  place  she  could  think  of ;
•Bl  there  were  no  signs  of  the  child.  This  pretty  well
sobered  Betty,  and  she  remembered  that  she  had  to  unlock
tte  door  to  get  into  the  cottage.

While  yet  full  of  fear  and  trembling  to  meet  her  husband,
'tti  came  home  from  BaL  He  was,  of  course,  told  that  his
''croom  of  a  chield  was  lost."  He  didn't  believe  a  word  of
Hit  Betty  told  him,  but  he  went  about  and  called  up  all
^aeighbours,  who  joined  him  in  the  search.  They  spent
^lug^t  in  examining  every  spot  around  the  house,  and  in
^village — all  in  vain.


I  oo  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

After  daybreak  they  were  all  assembled  in  deep  and
nest  consultation,  when  the  cat  came  running  into  the  I
with  her  tail  on  end,  and  mewing  anxiously.  She  ran
and  back  round  a  brake  of  furze,  const^uatly  crying,  as :
wished  the  people  to  follow  her.  After  a  long  time  som
thought  of  going  after  the  cat,  and  in  the  middle  c
furze-brake,  on  a  beautiful  green  soft  spot  of  mossy  j
was  the  baby  sleeping,  *'as  sweet  as  a  little  nut,"  wn
carefully  up  in  some  old  dry  gowns,  and  all  its  clothes
and  dry.  When  they  unwrapped  the  child,  they  foui
was  covered  over  with  bright  flowers,  as  we  place  them  i
a  babe  in  the  cofi&Q.  He  had  a  bunch  of  violets  in  hii
little  hands,  and  there  were  wall-flowers  and  primrosei
balm,  and  mint,  spread  over  his  body.  The  furze  was
all  around,  so  that  no  cold  wind  could  reach  the  x
Every  one  declared  that  the  child  never  looked  so  banc
before.  It  was  plain  enough,  said  the  old  women,  tha
Small  People  had  taken  the  child  and  washed  it  froi
to  toe ;  that  their  task  of  cleansing  the  babe  was  a  lonj
and  that  the  sun  arose  before  they  could  finish  it ;  thai
had  placed  the  child  where  it  was  found,  intending  to  ti
away  the  next  night.

They  were  never  known  to  come  for  the  babe,  but
one  said  that  this  affair  worked  a  great  change  in
Stogs  and  in  Jan  the  Mounster.   The  cottage  was  kept
the  child  clean ;  and  its  father  and  mother  drank  les;
lived  happier  for  ever  afterwards.

THE  POUR-LEAVED  CLOVER.

liTOT  many  years  since  a  farmer  lived  in  Bosfrancan
J3l  Burrien,  who  had  a  very  fine  red  and  white  cow  <
Daisey.      The  cow  was  always  fat,  with  her  dewlapi


The  Four-Leaved  Clover.  loi

udder  sweeping  the  grass.     Daisey  held  her  milk  from  calf
to  calf ;  had  an  udder  like  a  bucket,  yet  she  would  never
yield  more  than  a  gallon  or  so  of  milk,  when  one  might
plainly  see  that  she  had  still  at  least  two  gallons  more  in  her
odder.     All  at  once,  when  the  milk  was  in  full  flow,  she
would  give  a  gentle  bleat,  coch  up  her  ears,  and  the  milk
would  stop  at  once.     If  the  milk-maid  tried  to  get  any  more
from  her  after  that,  she  would  up  foot,  kick  the  bucket,  and
spill  all  the  milk,  yet  stand  as  still  as  a  stock,  and  keep
chewing  her  cud  all  the  time.  Everybody  would  have  thought
the  cow  bewitched,  if  she  hadn't  been  always  fat  and  held
her  milk  all  the  year  round ;  besides,  everything  prospered
with  the  farmer,  and  all  the  other  cows  had  more  milk
than  any  of  the  neighbours'.    No  one  could  tell  what  the
deuce  could  be  the  matter  with  Daisey;  and  they  tried  to
drive  her  to  Burrien  Church-town  fair,  that  they  might  be
rid  of  her,  as  she  was  always  fit  for  the  butchers.     All
the  men  and  boys  on  the  farm  couldn't  get  her  to  Church-
town.     As   fast  as   they  drove   her  up  Alsie  Lane,  she
would  take    down  Cotneywilley,   through  by  the   Crean,
down  the  Bottoms,  and  up  the  GiUey,  and  be  in  the  field
agiin  before  the  men  and  boys  would  be  half  way  home.

One  midsummer's  day  in  the  evening,'  the  maid  was  later
ttan  usual  milking,  as  she  had  been  down  to  Penberth  to  the
fumes.  The  stars  were  beginning  to  blink  when  she  finished
kr  task.  Daisey  was  the  last  cow  milked,  and  the  bucket  was
to  foil  she  could  scarcely  lift  it  to  her  head.  Before  rising
bom  the  milking  stool,  the  maid  plucked  up  a  handful  of
grass  and  clover  to  put  in  the  head  of  her  hat,  that  she  might
Cttiyihe  bucket  the  steadier.  She  had  no  sooner  placed  the
Ul  on  her  head,  than  she  saw  himdreds  and  thousands  of
BbiII  People  swarming  in  all  directions  about  the  cow,  and
^ping  their  hands  into  the  milk,  taking  it  out  on  the  clover


1 02  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

blossoms  and  sucking  them.  The  grass  and  clover,  \
blossom,  reached  to  the  cow's  belly.  Hundreds  of  the
creatures  ran  up  the  long  grass  and  clover  stems,  with  bi
cups,  lady's  smocks,  convolvuluses,  and  foxglove  flowc
catch  the  milk  that  Daisey  let  flow  from  her  four  teats
a  shower,  among  them.  Right  under  the  cow's  udde
maid  saw  one  much  larger  than  the  others,  lying  o
back,  with  his  heels  cocked  up  to  the  cow's  belly.  She
he  must  be  a  Piskie,  because  he  was  laughing,  with  his  u
open  from  ear  to  ear.  The  little  ones  were  running  u]
down  his  legs,  filling  their  cups,  and  emptying  them  inl
Piskie's  mouth.  Hundreds  of  others  were  on  Daisey'a
scratching  her  rump,  and  tickling  her  round  the  horn
behind  the  ears.  Others  were  smoothing  down  ever]
of  her  shining  coat  into  its  place.

The  milk-maid  wasn't  much  startled  to  see  them,  a
had  so  often  heard  of  fairies,  and  rather  wished  to  see  1
She  could  have  stayed  for  hours,  she  said,  to  look  at
dancing  about  among  the  clover,  which  they  hardly  ben
more  than  the  dew-drops.

The  cows  were  in  the  field  called  Park-an-Ventan,
under  the  house.  Her  mistress  came  out  into  the  gj
between  the  field  and  the  house,  and  called  to  know  wha
keeping  the  maid  so  long.  When  the  maid  told  wha
had  seen,  her  mistress  said  she  couldn't  believe  her  unlea
had  found  a  four-leaved  grass.  Then  the  maid  thoug
the  handful  of  grass  in  the  head  of  her  hat.  In  looku
over  by  the  candle  light,  she  found  a  bunch  of  three-l<
grass,  and  one  stem  with  four  leaves.  ^Sh^  knew  th
was  nothing  strange  that  she  should  see  the  Small  Pc
but  they  didn't  know  what  plan  to  take  to  get  rid  of  t
so  that  they  might  have  the  whole  of  Daisey's  milk
the  mistress  told  her  mother  about  it.     Her  mother  w


The  Fairy  Ointment,  103

veiy  notable  old  dame,  who  lived  in  the  Churchtown.  The
old  woman  knew  all  about  witches^  fairies,  and  such  things;
was  not^d  for  being  a  sharp,  careful  old  body;  for  when  she
happened  to  break  the  eye  of  her  stocking  darning  needle,
she  would  take  it  to  the  blacksmith  that  he  might  put  a  new
eye  to  it  The  smith  always  charged  her  twopence.  She
would  rather  pay  that  than  throw  it  away.

Our  Betty  told  her  daughter  that  everybody  knowed  that
the  Small  People  couldn't  abide  the  smell  of  fish,  nor  the  sav-
our of  salt  or  grease ;  and  advised  her  to  rub  the  cow's  udder
with  fish  brine  to  drive  the  Small  People  away.    Well,  she  did
what  her  mammy  told  her  to  do.    Better  she  had  let  it  alone.
From  that  time  Daisey  would  yield  all  her  milk,  but  she
hadn't  the  half,  nor  quarter,  so  much  as  before,  but  took  up
her  ndder,  so  that  one  could  hardly  see  it  below  her  flanks.
Every  evening,  as  soon  as  the  stars  began  to  twinkle,  the
cow  would  go  round  the  fields  bleating  and  crying  as  if  she
had  lost  her  calf ;  she  became  hair-pitched,  and  pined  away  to
dun  uid  bone  before  the  next  Burrien  fair,  when  she  was
driven  to  Churchtown  and  sold  for  next  to  nothing.     I  don't
kaow  what  became  of  her  afterwards ;  but  nothing  throve
with  the  farmer,  after  his  wife  had  driven  the  Small  People
away,  as  it  did  before.

THE  PAIEY  OINTMENT.

T|jrANY  years  since,  there  lived  as  housekeeper  with  a  cele-
^ijj.  brated  squire,  whose  name  is  associated  with  the  history
Of  his  native  country,  one  Nancy  Tregier.  There  were  many
tkeealiarities  about  Nancy ;  and  she  was,  being  a  favourite
'^witfa  her  master,  allowed  to  do  much  as  she  pleased.  She
"^^18  in  fact  a  petted,  and,  consequently,  a  spoiled  servant
^^an^  left  Pendeen  one  Saturday  afternoon  to  walk  to  Pen-


104  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

zance,  for  the  purpose  of  baying  a  pair  of  shoes.     Ther
an  old  woman,  Jenny  Trayer,  living  in  Pendeen  Cove-
had  the  reputation  of  being  a  witch — or,  as  some  ]
mildly  put  it,  "who  had  strange  dealings;"  and  wit
Nancy  desired,  for  sundry  reasons,  best  known  to  hers
keep  on  the  closest  of  terms.     So  on  this  Saturday,  1
first  called  on  the  old  woman  to  inquire  if  she  wish
have  anything  brought  home  from  Penzance.     Ton
husband  of  Nancy's  friend,  did  no  work;  but  now  and
he  would  go  to  sea  for  an  hour  or  two  and  fish.    It  i
everybody  gave  Jenny  just  what  she  asked  for  her  fisi
of  pure  fear.     Sometimes  they  had  a  "venture"  wit
smugglers,  who,  in  those  days,  carried  on  a  roaring
in  Pendeen  Cove.     The  old  Squire  was  a  justice ;   b
winked  very  hard,  and  didn't  know  anything  abouj
smugglers.     Indeed,  some  ill-natured  people, — ^and  thei
always  such  to  be  found  in  any  nook  or  comer, — said  I
often  took  her  master  home  a  choice  bottle  of  Cogniac;
a  case  of  "  Hollands "  now  and  then ;  and  especially
there  was  to  be  a  particularly  "  great  run,"  there  were
beautiful  silk  handkerchiefs  to  be  seen  at  the  Squire's,
this  is  beyond  our  story.     When  Nancy  went  into  Je
cottage,  Tom  was  there,  and  right  busy  was  she   in
paring  some  ointment  and  touching  her  husband's  eyes
it:  this  Jenny  tried  to  hide  in  the  mouth  of  the  ov(
the  side  of  the  chimney.     Tom  got  up  and  said  he  muj
off,  and  left  the  two  women  together.     After  a  few
compliments,  Jenny  said  that  Nancy  must  have  somethii
drink  before  she  started  for  Penzance,  fifnd  she  went  t(
spence  for  the  bottles.     Nancy,  ever  curious,  seized
moment,  dipped  her  finger  into  the  pot  of  green  ointn
and,  thinking  it  was  good  for  the  eyes,  she  just  touched
right  eye  with  it  before  Jenny  returned.    They  then  to


The  Fairy  Ointment  105

horn  or  two  together,  and  being  thus  spliced,  Nancy  started
for  Penzance.

Penzance  market  was  in  those*  days  entirely  in  the  street ;

cren  the  old  market-house  had  not  yet  an  existence.    Nancy

walked  about  doing  a  little  business  and  a  great  deal  of

gossiping   when  amongst  the  standings  in^  Market   Jew

Street,  whom  should  Nancy  see  but  Tom  Trayer,  picking  off

the  standings,  shoes,  stockings,  hanks  of  yam,  and  pewter

spoons, — ^indeed  some  of  all  the  sorts  of  things  which  were  for

ttle.     Nancy  walked  up  to  him,  and  taking  him  by  the  arm

said,  "  Tom !  ar'then't  ashamed  to  be  here  carrying  on  such

a  game  ?    However  thee  canst  have  the  impudence,  I  can't

diink,  to  be  picking  the  things  from  the  standings  and

potting  them  in  thy  pocket  in  broad  daylight,  and  the  people

lU  around  thee."    Tom  looked  very  much  surprised  when

Nancy  spoke  to  him.    At  last  he  said, ''  Is  that  you,  Nancy

—which  eye  can  you  see  me  upon?"    Nancy  shut  her  left

eye*  tiiis  made  no  difference,  she  then  shut  her  right  eye,

JUidy  greatly  to  her  surprise,  she  saw  all  the  people  but  she

no  longer  saw  Tom.     She  opened  her  right  eye  and  there

^ras  Tom  as  before.     She  winked,  and  winked,  and  was

surprised  you  may  be  sure  to  find  that  she  could  not  see

^om  with  either  eye.     "  Now  Nancy,"  said  Tom,  "  right  or

"Well,**  said  Nancy,  "*tis  strange;    but  there  is

•cMnetiiing  wrong  with  my  left  eye."  •

"  Oh,  then,  you  see  me  with  the  right,  do  you."
Then  Tom  put  his  finger  on  her  right  eye,  and  from  that
^^Mment  she  was  blind  on  that  side.

On  her  way  honfe,  Nancy  was  always  going  off  the  road
I  her  blind  side ;  but  the  hedges  kept  her  from  wandering
Rr  away.    On  the  downs  near  Pendeen  there  were  no  hedges,

*  The  tile,  '^Nuning  a  Fany,**  (page  71,)  where  a  Bimilar  inoident  oo-
»%  will  be  femembered.


io6  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

so  Nancy  wandered  into  a  furze  brake, — anight  came  oi
could  not  find  her  way  out,  and  she  was  found  in  i
next  morning  fast  asleep.  The  old  Squire  was  out  hu
in  the  early  morning,  according  to  his  usual  custom
passing  along  the  road  leading  to  Gamyorth,  he  s
woman's  knitting  work  hanging  on  a  bramble,  and  the
from  the  stocking  leading  away  into  the  brake.  He
the  yam  in  his  hand  and  followed  it  until  he  came  t
old  woman,  who  had  the  ball  in  her  pocket.  Whei
Squire  awakened  the  old  woman,  she  told  him  the
which  I  have  told  you.  Her  master,  however,  said  tb
didn't  believe  she  had  been  into  Penzance  at  all,  but
she  had  stayed  in  the  Cove  and  got  drunk :  that  when
night  came  she  had  endeavoured  to  find  her  way  home-
her  road — fallen  down  and  probed  her  eye  out  on  a
bush,  and  then  gone  off  in  drunken  unconsciousness.  !K
told  her  master  that  he  was  no  better  than  an  unbelii
heathen,  and  to  the  day  of  her  death  she  protested  that
Trayer  put  her  eye  out  Jenny's  ointment  is  said  to
been  made  with  a  four-leaved  clover,  gathered  at  a  ce
time  of  the  moon.  This  rendered  Fairyland  visible,
made  men  invisible.

Another  version  of  this  story,  varying  in  a  few  de
was  given  me  by  a  gentleman  a  native  of  St  Levan.
as  follows : —


HOW  JOAN  LOST  THE  SIGHT  OP  HER  EYE.

JOAN  was  housekeeper  to  Squire  Lovell,  and  was  celebrated  fo
beautiful  knitting.     One  Saturday  afternoon  Joan  wished  to
Penzance  to  buy  a  pair  of  shoes  for  herself,  and  some  things  f<
Squire.     So  the  weather  being  particularly  fine,  away  she  trudged.

Joan  dearly  loved  a  bit  of  gossip,  and  always  sought  for  company,
knew  Betty  Trenance  was  always  ready  for  a  jaunt :  to  be  sure,  efvei}


How  Joan  Lost  the  Sight  of  her  Eye.     107

I  Betty  was  a  witch ;  but,  says  Joan,  ^'  Witch  or  no  witch,  she  shall  go ;
\  oompany  ia  better  than  none."
Away  went  Joan  to  Lemoma,  where  Betty  lived.  Arrived  at  Betty's
Oorttege,  she  peeped  through  the  latch- hole,  (the  finger-hole,)  and  saw  Betty
X"ixl>biiig  8ome  green  ointment  on  the  children's  eyes.  She  watched  till
"Hctlj  Trenance  had  finished,  and  noticed  that  she  put  the  salve  on  the
JTiiier  end  of  the  chimney  stool,  and  covered  it  over  with  a  rag.

Joan  went  in,  and  Betty  was  delighted  sure  enough,  to  see  her,  and  sent
^li.e  dhildren  out  of  the  way.  But  Betty  couldn't  walk  to  Penzance,  she
'Vras  suffering  pain  and  she  had  been  taking  milk  and  suet,  and  brandy  and
ri&e^  and  she  must  have  some  more.  So  away  went  Betty  to  the  other
room  for  the  bottle.

Joao  seized  the  moment,  and  taking  a  very  small  bit  of  the  ointment  on
\kmt  finger,  she  touched  her  right  eye  with  it.  Betty  came  with  the  bottle,
mud  Joan  had  a  drink ;  when  she  looked  round  she  was  surprised  to  see
^lia  house  Bwarming  with  small  people.  They  were  playing  all  sorts  of
pKimks  on  the  key-beams  and  rafters.  Some  were  swinging  on  cobwebs,
\  riding  the  mice,  and  others  were  chasing  them  into  and  out  of
I  boles  in  the  thatch.  Joan  was  surprised  at  the  sight,  and  thought  she
susi  have  a  four-leaved  clover  about  her.

However,  without  stopping  to  take  much  drink,  she  started  alone  for
'•wiMWW      She  had  wasted,  as  it  was,  so  much  time,  that  it  was  nearly
:  when  she  reached  the  market.
After  having  made  her  purchases,  and  as  she  was  about  to  leave  the
y  who  should  Joan  spy  but  Betty's  husband,  Tom  Trenance.    There
I  was,  stealing  about  in  the  shadows,  picking  from  the  standings,  shoes  and
from  one,  hanks  of  yam  from  another,  pewter  spoons  from  a
"^Wbd,  and  so  on.     He  stuffed  these  things  into  capacious  pockets,  and  yet
» one  i^ypeared  to  notice  Tom.
Joao  went  forth  to  him.

"Aren't  ye  ashamed  to  be  here  in  the  dark  carrying  on  such  a  game  ?"
*  It  that  you,  Dame  Joan,"  says  Tom ;  ''  which  eye  can  you  see  me
ponf"
After  winking,  Joan  said  she  could  see  Tom  plain  enough  with  her

keye.
She  had  no  sooner  said  the  word  than  Tom  Trenance  pointed  his  finger
fc  her  eye,  and  she  lost  the  sight  of  it  from  that  hour.
"  The  work  of  the  world  "  had  Joan  to  find  her  way  out  of  Penzance,
n't  keep  the  road,  she  was  always  tumbling  into  the  ditch  on  her
When  near  the  Fougou,  poor  Joan,  who  was  so  weary  that  she
1  sosroely  drag  one  leg  after  the  other,  prayed  that  she  might  find  a
\  old  horse  on  which  she  might  ride  home.
Tbm  desire  was  instantly  granted.    There,  by  the  roadside,  stood  an  old
«qy  while  hcnse,  spanned  with  its  halter.


io8  Romances  of  the  Fairies,

Joan  untied  the  halter  from  the  legs  and  placed  it  on  the  head
horse ;  she  got  on  the  hedge,  and  seated  herself  on  the  horse's  back.

There  she  was  mounted,  "  Gee  wup,  gee  wup ;  k'up,  k'up,  k'np.'
horse  would  not  budge.  Busy  were  Joan's  heels  rattling  against  i
of  the  poor  horse,  and  thwack,  thwack  went  a  thorn  stick  over  his  it
by  and  by  the  old  blind  brute  began  to  walk.  Joan  beat^  and  kick
k'uped,  and  coaxed,  the  horse  went  but  little  faster  until  it  got  to  i
of  thehilL

Then  away,  away,  like  the  wind  it  went  through  Toldava  Lanes,
swelled  Qut  untH  the  horse  became  as  high  as  the  tower.  Over  he^
ditches,  across  all  the  comers  that  came  into  the  road,  on  went  thf
Joan  held  on  by  the  mane  with  both  hands,  and  shouted,  *^  Woa
woey  1  *'  until  she  could  shout  no  longer.

At  length  they  came  to  Toldava  Moor;  the  "ugly  brute"  took  lig^
down  towards  the  fowling  pool,  when  Joan  fearing  he  might  plunge
drown  her,  let  go  her  hold.

The  wind  was  blowing  so  strong,  and  the  pair  were  going  so  &8t  \
it,  that  Joan  was  lifted  off,  over  the  hind  quarters  of  the  horse,  andl
she  fell  soft  on  the  rushes  at  the  very  edge  of  the  fowling  pool.

When  she  looked  up,  Joan  saw  whatever  she  had  been  riding
down  the  "  bottom  "  in  a  blaze  of  fire,  and  the  devil  riding  after,  wi
of  men,  horses,  and  hounds,  all  without  heads.  All  the  mariceting  wi
and  in  getting  through  the  bogs,  Joan  had  her  shoes  dragged  from  ht
At  last  she  got  to  Trove  Bottoms,  and  seeing  the  Boug^  (sheep-houe
clambered  over  the  hedge  as  she  best  could;  got  into  it,  and  laying
down  amongst  the  sheep  she  soon  fell  fast  asleep,  thoroughly  wearie

She  would  have  slept  for  a  week,  I  believe,  if  she  had  not  been  dist
But,  according  to  custom  on  Sunday  morning,  the  Squire  and  hi
came  out  to  the  Downs  to  span  the  sheep,  and  there,  greatly  to  the
prise,  they  found  her.

They  got  the  miserable  woman  home  between  them.  The  I
charged  her  with  having  got  drunk,  and  said  her  eye  had  been  scr
out  by  a  furze  bush ;  but  Joan  never  wandered  from  her  story,  and
day  of  .her  death  she  told  it  to  all  young  women,  warning  them  nfi
meddle  with  "  Fairy  Salve."


THE  OLD  WOMAN  WHO  TUENED  HER  SHIFT.

IN  a  lone  house — situated  not  far  from  the  hill  on  ^
now  stands  Knill's  Steeple,  as  it  is  called, — which
then  known  as  Chyanwheal,  or  the  House  on  the  J
lived  a  lone  woman,  the  widow  of  a  miner,  said  to


The  Old  Woman  who  Turned  her  Shift.  109

killed  in  one  of  the  very  ancient  "coffens,"  as  the
open  mine  workings  existing  in  this  hill  are '  termed.  A
^^B^^ilhige  now  bears  this  name,  but  it  has  derived  it  from  this
loaie  house.  Whether  it  was  that  they  presumed  upon  her
soHtade,  or  whether  the  old  lady  had  given  them  some
Uxdacement^  is  not  now  known,  but  the  spriggans  of  Tren-
OKtmi  Hill  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting  almost  every  night
in.  her  cottage  to  divide  their  plunder.  The  old  woman
"Osnally  slept,  or  at  least  she  pretended  to  sleep  during  the
"viait  of  the  spriggans.  When  they  left,  they  always  placed
^  small  coin  on  the  table  by  her  bedside,  and  with  this
ix^deed  the  old  woman  was  enabled  to  provide  herself  with
x^ot  merely  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  to  add  thereto  a  few  of
'^bose  things  which  were  luxuries  to  one  in  her  position.
^"Jie  old  lady,  however,  was  not  satisfied  with  this.  She
^ewdved  to  bide  her  time,  and  when  the  spriggans  had  an
'ttjKkiuaally  large  amount  of  plunder,  to  make  herself  rich  at
Ovice  and  for  ever  at  their  expense.  Such  a  time  at  last
^^xrived.  The  spriggans  had  gathered,  we  know  not  how,
^ftimch  valuable  gold  and  jewellery.  It  gleamed  and  glistened
^>&  the  floor,  and  the  old  woman  in  bed,  looked  on  with  a
\  covetous  eye.  After  a  while,  it  appears,  the  spriggans
^cre  not  able  to  settle  the  question  of  division  with  their
amicability.  The  little  thieves  began  to  quarrel
^^nopggt  themselves.

Now,  thought  the  old  woman,  is  my  time.     Therefore

l^^viddling  herself  up  imder  the  bedclothes,  she  very  adroitly

^^^mtrived  to  turn  her  shift,  and  having  completed  the  unfail-

^^  charm,  she  jumped  from  her  bed,  placed  her  hand  on  a

^old  cup,  and  exclaimed,  '*  Thee  shusn't  hae  one  on  'em!"*

In  affright  the  spriggans  all  scampered  away,  leaving  their
Molcn  treasure  behind  them.  The  last  and  boldest  of  the
*|riggaii«y  however,  swept  his  hand  over  the  old  woman's  only


no  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

garment  as  he  left  the  house.  The  old  woman,  now  wc
removed  in  a  little  time,  from  Chyanwheal  to  St  Ives,  \
the  surprise  of  every  one,  purchased  property  and  live
a  gentlewoman.  Whenever,  however,  she  put  on  the
which  had  secured  her  her  wealth,  she  was  tortured  b
endurance.  The  doctors  and  all  the  learned  people
hard  names  to  describe  her  pains,  but  the  wise  women
all  along  that  they  came  of  the  spriggans.


THE  PAIEY  WIDOWEE.  ^

NOT  many  years  since  a  very  pretty  girl  called  «
Permuen  lived  in  Towednack.  She  was  of
parents  and  lived  in  service.  There  was  a  good  ix
romance,  or  what  the  old  people  called,  nonsense  in  J
She  was  always  smartly  dressed,  and  she  would  ar
wild  flowers  very  gracefully  in  her  hair.  As  a  conseqi
Jenny  attracted  much  of  the  attention  of  the  young
and  again,  as  a  consequence,  a  great  deal  of  envy  froB
young  women.  Jenny  was,  no  doubt,  vain ;  and  her  vj
which  most  vain  persons  will  say  is  not  usual,  was  a(
panied  by  a  considerable  amount  of  weakness  on  any
connected  with  her  person.  Jenny  loved  flattery,  and  1
a  poor  uneducated  girl,  she  had  not  the  genius  nece
to  disguise  her  frailty.  When  any  man  told  her  she
lovely,  she  quite  admitted  the  truth  of  the  assertion  b;
pleased  looks.  When  any  woman  told  her  not  to  be  si
fool  as  to  believe  such  nonsense,  her  lips,  and  eyes
seemed  to  say  you  are  only  jealous  of  me,  and  if  there  i
pool  of  water  near,  nature's  mirror  was  speedily  consult
prove  to  herself  that  she.  was  really  the  best-looking  gi
the  parish.  Well,  one  day  Jenny,  who  had  been  for  some
out  of  a  situation,  was  sent  by  her  mother  down  to  the  I


f


\


The  Fairy  Widower.  1 1 1

parishes  to  "look  for  a  place/'    Jenny  went  on  merrily

enough  until  she  came  to  the  fom*  cross  roads  on  the  Lady

Downs,  when  she  discovered  that  she  knew  not  which  road

to  take.     She'looked  first  one  way  and  then  another,  and  she

.,     Wt  fairly,  puzzled,  so  she  sat  down  on  a  boulder  of  granite,

md  began^  in  pure  want  of  thought,  to  break  oflf  the  beauti-

fel  fronds  of  ferns  which  grew  abundantly  around  the  spot

Ae  had  chosen.     It  is  hard  to  say  what  her  intentions  were,

whether  to  go  on,  to  return,  or  to  remain  where  she  was,  so

utterly  indifferent  did  Jenny  appear.     Some  say  she  was

entirely  lost  in  wild  dreams  of  self-glorification.     However,

die  had  not  sat  loDg  on  this  granite  stone,  when  hearing  a

^oice  near  her,  she  turned  round  and  saw  a  young  man.

"  Well,  young  woman,"  says  he,  "  and  what  are  you  after  ?  *'

"  I  am  after  a  place,  sir,"  says  she.

"  And  what  kind  of  a  place  do  you  want,  my  pretty  young

^^oman?"   says  he,  with  the  most  winning  smile  in  the

World.

"  I  am  not  particular,  sir,**  says  Jenny ;  "  I  can  make  myself
S^enerally  useful"

"Indeed,"  says  the  stranger;  "do  you  think  you  could
^€Xjk  after  a  widower  with  one  little  boy  ?"
"  I  am  very  fond  of  children,"  says  Jenny.
"  Well,  then,"  says  the  widower,  **  I  wish  to  hire  for  a
and  a  day  a  young  woman  of  your  age,  to  take  charge
my  little  boy."

"And  where  do  you  live?"  inquired  Jenny.
"Not  far  from  here,"  said  the  man;  "will  you  go  with
and  see?"

"An  it  please  you  to  shew  me,"  said  Jenny.
"But  first,  Jenny  Permuen," — Jenny  stared  when  she
^Qand  the  stranger  knew  her  name.    He  was  evidently  an
^tiie  stranger  in  the  parish,  and  how  could  he  have  learnt


112  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

her  name,  she  thought  So  ahe  looked  at  him  som<
astonished  "Oh  1  I  see,  you  suppose  I  didn't  know
but  do  you  think  a  young  widower  could  pass  th]
Towednack  and  not  be  struck  with  such*  a  pretty
Beside,"  he  said,  "I  watched  you  one  day  dressing
hair  in  one  of  my  ponds,  and  stealing  some  of  my  i
scented  violets  to  put  in  those  lovely  tresses.  Now, «
Permuen,  will  you  take  the  place  V

"  For  a  year  and  a  day  V  asked  Jenny.

''  Yes,  and  if  we  are  pleased  with  each  other  then,  ^
renew  the  engagement."

"  Wages,"  said  Jenny.

The  widower  rattled  the  gold  in  his  breeches  pocket

"  Wages !  well,  whatever  you  like  to  ask,"  said  the  n

Jenny  was  charmed ;  all  sorts  of  visions  rose  befor
eyes,  and  without  hesitation  she  said, —

"  Well,  I  '11  take  the  place,  sir ;  when  must  I  come  ?*

"  I  require  you  now — ^my  little  boy  is  very  unhappj
I  think  you  can  make  him  happy  again.  You  '11  coi
once?"

"But  mother"

"  Never  mind  mother,  I  '11  send  word  to  her."

"  But  my  clothes."

"  The  clothes  you  have  will  be  all  you  require,  am
put  you  in  a  much  gayer  livery  soon."

"  Well,  then,"  says  Jane,  "  'tis  a  bargain  "

"  Not  yet,"  says  the  man ;  "  I  've  got  a  way  of  my
and  you  must  swear  my  oath."

Jenny  looked  frightened.

"  You  need  not  be  alarmed,"  said  the  man  very  ki
"  I  only  wish  you  to  kiss  that  fern-leaf  which  you  ha
your  hand,  and  say,  '  For  a  year  and  a  day  I  promi
stay.'"


The  Fairy  Widower.  113

^  Is  that  all  ?"  said  Jenny ;  so  she  kissed  the  f  em-leaf  and
aid, —

**  For  a  year  and  a  day
I  promise  to  stay.**

'Without  another  word  he  walked  forward  on  the  road
reading  eastward.  Jenny  followed  him — she  thought  it
strange  that  her  new  master  never  opened  his  lips  to  her
tU  the  way,  and  she  grew  very  tired  with  walking.  Still
onward  and  onward  he  went,  and  Jenny  was  sadly  weary
and  her  feet  dreadfully  sore.  At  last  poor  Jenny  began  to
cry.    He  heard  her  sob  and  looked  round.

"  Tired  are  you,  poor  girl  ?  sit  down — sit  down,"  says  the
nan ;  and  he  took  her  by  the  hand  and  led  her  to  a  mossy
biiik.  His  kindness  completely  overcame  her,  and  she  burst
into  a  flood  of  tears.  He  allowed  her  to  cry  for  a  few
Bunutes,  then  taking  a  bunch  of  leaves  from  the  bottom  of
fte  bank,  he  said,  "  Now  I  must  dry  your  eyes,  Jenny."

Eb  passed  the  bunch  of  leaves  rapidly  first  over  one  and
tken  over  the  other  eye.

The  tears  were  gone.  Her  weariness  had  departed.  She
{dt  herself  moving,  yet  she  did  not  know  that  she  had  moved
from  the  bank.  The  ground  appeared  to  open,  and  they
vere  passing  very  rapidly  under  the  earth.  At  last  there
Visa  pause.

*  Here  we  are,  Jenny,"  said  he,  "  there  is  yet  a  tear  of
iQQow  on  your  eyelids,  and  no  human  tears  can  enter  our
koBies^  let  'me  wipe  them  away.''  Again  Jenny's  eyes  were
Washed  with  the  small  leaves  as  before,  and,  lo!  before
W  was  such  a  country  as  she  had  never  seen  previously.
ttU  and  valley  were  covered  with  flowers,  strangely  varied
k  eokmr,  but  combining  into  a  most  harmonious  whole ;
10  that  the  region  appeared  sown  with  gems  which  glittered
iaaUght  as  brilliant  as  that  of  the  summer  sun,  yet  as  mild


.i


I J  4  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

as  the  moonlight.  There  were  rivers  clearer  than  any
she  had  ever  seen  on  the  granite  hills,  and  waterfal
fountains;  while  everywhere  ladies  and  gentlemen  dref
green  and  gold  were  walking,  or  sporting,  or  reposi
banks  of  flowers,  singing  songs  or  telling  stories.  <
was  a  beautiful  world.

"  Here  we  are  at  home,"  said  Jenny's  master;  and  sti
enough  he  too  was  changed ;  he  was  the  most  beautifo
man  she  had  ever  seen,  and  he  wore  a  green  tilke
covered  with  ornaments  of  gold.  "Now/'  said  he
"  I  must  introduce  you  to  your  little  charge."  He  led
into  a  noble  mansion  in  which  all  the  furniture  was  c
and  ivory,  inlaid  with  gold  and  silver,  and  studdec
emeralds.  After  passing  through  many  rooms,  die}
at  length  to  one  which  was  hung  all  over  with  lace,  as
the  finest  cobweb,  most  beautifully  worked  with  flon
and,  in  the  middle  of  this  room  was  a  little  cot  made
some  beautiful  sea-shell,  which  reflected  so  many  (
that  Jenny  could  scarcely  bear  to  look  at  it.  She  was
the  side  of  this,  and  she  saw,  as  she  said,  "  One  of
sweetest  angels  sleeping  there."  The  little  boy  if
beautiful  that  she  was  ravished  with  delight.

"  This  is  your  charge,"  said  the  father ;  "  I  am  the  k
this  land,  and  I  have  my  own  reasons  for  wishing  my
know  something  of  human  nature.  Now  you  have  n
to  do  but  to  wash  and  dress  the  boy  when  he  wakes,  \
him  to  walk  in  the  garden,  and  to  put  him  to  bed  wl
is  weary."

Jenny  entered  on  her  duties,  and  gave,  and  contini
give,  satisfaction.  She  loved  the  darling  little  boy,  a
appeared  to  love  her,  and  the  time  passed  away  wi
tonishing  rapidity.

Somehow  or  other  she  had  never  thought  of  her  m


k


The  Fairy  Widower.  115

She  liad  never  thought  of  her  home  at  alL  She  was  happy
and  in  luzuiy,  and  never  reckoned  the  passing  of  time.

Howsoever  happiness  may  blind  us  to  the  fact,  the  hours
and  days  move  onward.  The  period  for  which  Jenny  had
bonnd  herself  was  gone,  and  one  morning  she  awoke  and
all  was  changed.  She  was  sleeping  in  her  own  bed  in  her
mother's  cottage.  Everything  was  strange  to  her,  and  she
appeared  strange  to  everybody.  Numerous  old  gossips  were
called  in  to  see  Jenny,  and  to  all  Jenny  told  her  strange
tale  alike.  One  day,  old  Mary  Calineck  of  Zennor  came,
and  she  heard,  as  all  the  others  had  done,  the  story  of  the
ndower,  and  the  baby,  and  the  beautiful  country.  Some  of
ike  old  crones  who  were  there  at  the  time,  said  the  girl  was
"gone  dean  daft"  Mary  looked  very  wise,  "  Crook  your
tfiD,  Jenny,"  said  she.

Jenny  sat  up  in  the  bed  and  bent  her  arm^  resting  her
band  on  her  hip.

"  Now  say,  I  hope  my  arm  may  never  come  uncrooked  if
I  have  told  ye  a  word  of  a  lie."

**!  hope  my  arm  may  never  come  uncrooked  if  I  have  told
ye  a  word  of  a  lie,"  repeated  Jenny.

"Uncrook  your  arm,"  said  Mary.

Jenny  stretched  out  her  arm.

"ft  is  truth  the  girl  is  telling,"  said  Mary,  "  and  she  has
l^een  carried  by  the  Small  People  to  some  of  their  countries
^ttier  the  hills."

^'WnSl  the  girl  ever  come  right  in  her  mind?"  asked  her
lHodier.

''All  in  good  time,"  said  Mary;  ''and  if  she  will  but  be
I  have  no  doubt  but  her  master  will  take  care  that
t|»  never  wants."

Howbeit,  Jenny  did  not  get  on  very  well  in  the  world.
She  married  and  was  discontented  and  far  from  happy.


1 1 6  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

Some  said  she  always  pined  after  the  faiiy  widower.  Of
said  they  were  sure  she  had  misbehaved  herseli^  or
would  have  brought  back  lots  of  gold.  If  Jemiy  had
dreamt  all  this,  while  she  was  sitting  picking  ferns  ox
granite  bonlder,  she  had  certainly  had  a  yeiy  six
adventura

THE  SMALL  PEOPLE'S  GABDENS.

IF  the  adventurous  traveller  who  visits  the  Land's-
district,  will  go  down  as  far  as  he  can  on  the  south-
side  of  the  Logan  Bock  Cairn,  and  look  over ;  he  will  8
little  sheltered  places  between  the  cairns,  close  down  tc
water's  edge,  beautifully  green  spots  with  here  and  there  i
ferns  and  clifiT-pinks.  These  are  the  gardens  of  the  S
People,  or,  as  they  are  called  by  ^e  natives,  Small  ]
They  are  beautiful  little  creatures,  who  appear  to  pass  i
of  constant  enjoyment  amongst  their  own  fiavourite  fio^
They  are  harmless,  and  if  man  does  not  meddle  with  1
when  they  are  holding  their  fairs, — which  are  indeed  higl
tivals, — the  Small  Folk  never  interfere  with  man  or  anyt
belonging  to  him.  They  are  known  to  do  much  good,  k
ciaJly  when  they  discover  a  case  of  oppressed  poverty ;  but
do  it  in  their  own  way.  They  love  to  do  good  for  its
sake,  and  the  publication  of  it,  in  any  way,  draws  downl
censure,  and  sometimes  severe  anger,  on  the  object  who
was  their  purpose  to  serve.  To  prove  that  those  lovely  1
creatures  are  no  dream,  I  may  quote  the  words  of  a  nati?
St  Levan : —

"  As  I  was  saying,  when  I  have  been  to  sea  close  u:
the  cliffs,  of  a  fine  summer's  night,  I  have  heard  the  swei
of  music,  and  seen  hundreds  of  little  lights  moving  a]
amongst  what  looked  like  flowers.  Ay,  and  they
flowers  too,  for  you  may  smell  the  sweet  scent  far  out  at


Si  Levan  Fairies.  1 1 7

Indeed  I  have  heard  many  of  the  old  men  say^  that  they  have
smelt  the  9weet  perfume,  and  heard  the  music  from  the  fairy
gardens  of  the  Castle,  when  more  than  a  mile  from  the  shore."
Strangely  enough,  you  can  find  no  flowers  but  the  sea-pinks
in  these  lovely  green  places  by  day,  yet  they  have  been
described  by  those  who  have  seen  them  in  the  midsummer
moonlight  as  being  covered  with  flowers  of  every  colour,  all
of  them  far  more  brilliant  than  any  blossoms  seen  in  any
mortal  garden.

ST  LEVIN  FAIRIES.

rLRS  since, — ^the  time  is  passed  now, — ^the  Green  outside
the  gate  at  the  end  of  Trezidder  Lane,  was  a  favourite
{laoe  with  the  Small  Folks  on  which  to  hold  their  fairs.
One  might  often  see  the  rings  in  the  grass,  which  they  made
in  dancing,  where  they  footed  it.  Mr  Trezillian  was  return-
n^  late  one  night  from  Penzance ;  when  "he  came  near  the
gite  he  saw  a  number  of  little  creatures  spinning  round  and
loimd.  The  sight  made  him  light-headed,  but  he  could  not
ittiak  the  desire  to  be  amongst  them,  so  he  got  off*  his  horse.
h  a  moment  they  were  all  over  him  like  a  swarm  of  bees,
«id  he  felt  as  if  they  were  sticking  needles  and  pins  into
His  horse  ran  off  and  he  didn't  know  what  to  do,  till,
Vgood  luck,  he  thought  of  what  he  had  often  heard,  so  he
teaed  his  glove  inside  out,  threw  it  amongst  the  Small
lA;  and  ere  the  glove  reached  the  ground  they  were  all
Mr  Trezillian  had  now  to  find  his  horse,  and  the
hudHFolk,  still  determining  to  lead  him  a  dance,  bewildered
km.  His  was  piskie-led,  and  he  could  not  find  out  where
kiras  until  broad  daylight.  Then  he  saw  he  was  not  a
koidied  yards  from  the  place  at  which  he  had  left  his  horse.
Ot  looking  round  the  spot  where  he  had  seen  the  Small  Folk
,  he  foimd  a  pair  of  very  small  silver  knee-buckles


1 1 8  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

of  a  most  ancient  shape,  which,  no  doubt,  some  little  ge
man  must  have  lost  when  he  was  punishing  tlie  fai
Those  who  knew  the  families,  will  well  remember  the
silver  buckles,  which  were  kept  for  some  time  at  Treii
and  some  time  at  Baftra.

Down  in  Penberth  Cove  lived  an  old  woman  who  wi
especial  favourite  with  these  little  people.  She  was  a
old  creature,  and  had  been  for  many  years  bed-ri
These  Small  Folk  were  Ker  only  company.  Her  reli
dropped  in  once  a  day,  rendei^d  her  the  little  aid  sh
quired,  and  left  food  by  the  bed-side.  But  day  by  daj
all  the  day  long,  the  Small  Folk  vied  with  each  oth
amuse  her.  The  men,  she  related,  were  for  the  most
dressed  in  green,  with  a  red  or  a  blue  cap  and  a  fea
"  They  look  for  all  the  world  like  little  sodgers.'*  k
the  ladies, — ^you  should  have  heard  the  old  woman  t(
the  gay  ladies,  with  their  feathers,  hooped  petticoats
furbelows,  trains  and  fans,  and  what  saucy  little  crea
they  were  with  the  men!  No  sooner  was  the  old  woma
alone  than  in  they  came  and  began  their  frolics,  dancinj
the  rafters  and  key-beams,  swinging  by  the  cobweb«
rope-dancers,  catching  the  mice  and  riding  them  in  an
through  the  holes  in  the  thatch.  When  one  party  got
another  party  came,  and  by  daylight  and  even  by  moon
the  old  bed-ridden  creature  never  wanted  amusement.

THE  ADVENTURE  OP  CHERRY  OP  ZENNOB.'

THIS  may  be  regarded  as  another  version  of  the  stc
the  Fairy  Widower : — Old  Honey  lived  with  his
and  family  in  a  little  hut  of  two  rooms  and  a  "  talfat,'
the  cliflf  side  of  Trereen  in  Zennor.     The  old  couple  ha<
*  Talfat  is  a  half  floor  at  one  end  of  a  cottage  on  which  a  bed  is  \


The  Adventure  of  Cherry  of  Zennor.      119

a  floore  of  children,  who  wer«  all  reared  in  this  place.  They
lived  as  they  best  could  on  the  produce  of  a  few  acres  of
gronnd,  which  were  too  poor  to  ^eep  even  a  goat  in  good
heart  The  heaps  of  crogans  (limpet-shells)  about  the  hut,
led  one  to  believe  that  their  chief  food  was  limpets  and
gweans,  (periwinkles.)  They  had,  however,  fish  and  potatoes
most  days,  and  pork  and  broth,  now  and  then  of  a  Sunday.
At  CSiristmas  and  the  Feast  they  had  white  bread.  There
was  not  a  healthier  nor  a  handsomer  family  in  the  parish
than  Old  Honey'a  "We  are,  iowever,  only  concerned  with
(me  of  them,  his  daughter  Cherry.  Cherry  could  run  as  fast
as  a  hare,  and  was  ever  full  of  frolic  and  mischie£

Whenever  the  miller's  boy  came  into  the  "  town,"  tied  his
hme  to  the  furze  rick  and  cal]^d  in  to  see  if  any  one  de-
nied to  send  com  to  the  miU,  Cherry  would  jump  on  to  its
liek  and  gallop  off  to  the  cliff.  When  the  miller's  boy  gave
ehaae,  and  she  could  ride  no  further  over  the  edge  of  that
lodqr  coast,  she  would  take  to  the  cairns,  and  the  swiftest
dog  could  not  catch  her  much  less  the  miller's  boy.

Soon  after  Cherry  got  into  her  teens  she  became  very
diKontented,  because  year  after  year  her  mother  had  been
framising  her  a  new  frock  that  she  might  go  off  as  smart  as
theiest^  "  three  on  one  horse  to  Morva  fair."*  As  certain
tt  the  time  came  round  the  money  was  wanting,  so  Cherry
hd  nothing  decent.  She  could  neither  go  to  fair,  nor  to
<iQich,  nor  to  meeting.

Cheny  was  sixteen.  One  of  her  playmates  had  a  new
diess  smartly  trimmed  with  ribbons,  and  she  told  Cheny
how  she  had  been  to  Nancledry  to  the  preaching,  and  how
Ae  had  ever  so  many  sweethearts  who  brought  her  homa
lb  pot  the  volatile  Cherry  in  a  fever  of  desire.  She
ildiied  to  her   mother   she  would   go  off  to  the  "low

•  A  Corniah  proverb.


1 20  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

cotmtries"*  to  seek  for  serv^,  that  she  might  get  ,
clothes  like  other  girls.

Her  mother  wished  her  to  go  to  Towednack  thai
might  have  the  chance  of  seeing  her  now  and  then
Sunday.

"No,  no!"  said  Cherry,  "I'll  never  go  to  live  ii
parish  where  the  cow  ate  the  bell-rope,  and  where  they
fish  and  taties  (potatoes)  every  day,  and  conger-pie
Sunday,  for  a  change/'

One  fine  morning  Cherry  tied  up  a  few  things  in  a  bi
and  prepared  to  start.  She  promised  her  father  tha
would  get  service  as  near  home  as  she  could,  and  come  \
at  the  earliest  opportunity.  The  old  man  said  she
bewitched,  charged  her  t<\  take  care  she  wasn't  ci
away  by  either  the  sailors  or  pirates,  and  allowed  b
depart.  Cherry  took  the  road  leading  to  Ludgvan
Gulval.  When  she  lost  sight  of  the  chimneys  of  Tn
she  got  out  of  heart  and  had  a  great  mind  to  go  home  1
But  she  went  on.

At  length  she  came  to  the  "  four  cross  roads  "  on  the
Downs,  sat  herself  down  on  a  stone  by  the  road-side
cried  to  think  of  her  home,  which  she  might  never  see  i

Her  crying  at  last  came  to  an  end,  and  she  resolved
home  and  make  the  best  of  it.

When  she  dried  her  eyes  and  held  up  her  head  she
surprised  to  see  a  gentleman  coming  towards  her; — ^foi
couldn't  think  where  he  came  from  ;  no  one  was  to  be
on  the  Downs  a  few  minutes  before.

The  gentleman  wished  her  "  good  morning,"  inquirec
road  to  Towednack,  and  asked  Cherry  where  she  was  go

Cherry  told  the  gentleman  that  she  had  left  home

*  The  terms  "high"  and  " low  countries,' '  are  applied  respectiy
the  hills  and  the  valleys  of  the  country  about  Towednack  and  Zennoi


The  Adventure  of  Cherry  of  Zennor.       121

morning  to  look  for  service,  but  that  her  heart  had  failed
her^  and  she  was  going  back  over  the  hUls  to  Zennor  again.

'*  I  never  expected  to  meet  with  such  luck  as  this,"  said
the  gentleman.  "  I  left  home  this  morning  to  seek  for  a  nice
dean  girl  to  keep  house  for  me^  and  here  you  are/'

He  then  told  Cherry  that  he  had  been  recently  left  a
widower,  and  that  he  had  one  dear  little  boy,  of  whom  Cherry
might  have  charge.  Cherry  was  the  very  girl  that  would
rait  him.  She  was  handsome  and  cleanly.  He  could  see
that  her  clothes  were  so  mended  that  the  first  piece  could
not  be  discovered ;  yet  she  was  as  sweet  as  a  rose,  and  all
the  water  in  the  sea  could  not  make  her  cleaner.  Poor
Cherry  said  "  Yes,  sir,''  to  everything,  yet  she  did  not  under-
Btand  one  quarter  part  of  what  the  gentleman  said.  Her
mother  had  instructed  her  to  say  "  Yes,  sir,''  to  the  parson,
or  any  gentleman,  when,  like  herself,  she  did  not  understand
fhent  The  gentleman  told  her  he  lived  but  a  short  way  off,
down  in  the  low  countries ;  that  she  would  have  very  little
to  do  but  milk  the  cow  and  look  after  the  baby ;  so  Cherry
consented  to  go  with  him.

Away  they  went ;  he  talking  so  kindly  that  Cherry  had
no  notion  how  time  was  moving,  and  she  quite  forgot  the
distance  she  had  walked.

At  length  they  were  in  lanes,  so  shaded  with  trees  that  a
diecker  of  sunshine  scarcely  gleamed  on  the  road.  As  far
as  she  could  see,  all  was  trees  and  flowers.  Sweet  briars  and
honejrsuckles  perfumed  the  air,  and  the  reddest  of  ripe  apples
hong  from  the  trees  over  the  lane.

Then  they  came  to  a  stream  of  water  as  clear  as  crys-
td,  which  ran  across  the  lane.  It  was,  however,  very
daik»  and  Cherry  paused  to  see  how  she  should  cross  the
river.  The  gentleman  put  his  arm  around  her  waist  and
cairied  her  over,  so  that  she  did  not  wet  her  feet


122  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

The  lane  was  getting  darker  and  darker,  and  narrower
narrower,  and  they  seemed  to  be  going  rapidly  down
Cherry  took  firm  hold  of  the  gentleman's  arm,  and  thou
as  he  had  been  so  kind  to  her,  she  could  go  with  him  to
world's  end.

After  walking  a  little  farther,  the  gentleman  opened  a
which  led  into  a  beautiful  garden,  and  said,  '^  Cherry,
dear,  this  is  the  place  we  live  in/'

Cherry  could  scarcely  believe  her  eyes.  She  had  n
seen  anything  approaching  this  place  for  beauty.  Flo^
of  every  dye  were  around  her;  fruits  of  all  kinds  1
above  her;  and  the  birds,  sweeter  of  song  than  any  ahe
ever  heard,  burst  out  into  a  chorus  of  rejoicing.  She
heard  granny  tell  of  enchanted  places.  Could  this  be  oil
them  ?  No.  The  gentleman  was  as  big  as  the  parson ;
now  a  little  boy  came  running  down  the  garden  walk  sh
ing,  "  Papa,  papa.'*

The  child  appeared,  from  his  size,  to  be  about  two  or  i
years  of  age;  but  there  was  a  singular  look  of  age  about  1
His  eyes  were  brilliant  and  piercing,  and  he  had  a  cr
expression.   As  Cherry  said,  "  He  could  look  anybody  doi

Before  Cherry  could  speak  to  the  child,  a  very  old  <
boned,  ugly-looking  woman  made  her  appearance,  and  s
ing  the  child  by  the  arm,  dragged  him  into  the  ho
mumbling  and  scolding.  Before,  however,  she  was  lost  s:
of,  the  old  hag  cast  one  look  at  Cherry,  which  shot  thro
her  heart  "  like  a  gimblet."

Seeing  Cherry  somewhat  disconcerted,  the  master  explai
that  the  old  woman  was  his  late  wife's  grandmother :  \
she  would  remain  with  them  until  Cherry  knew  her  w«
and  no  longer,  for  she  was  old  and  ill-tempered,  and  n
go.  At  length,  having  feasted  her  eyes  on  the  garden,  Chi
was  taken  into  the  house,  and  this  was  yet  more  beaati


The  Adventure  of  Cherry  of  Zennor.      123

Rowers  of  every  kind  grew  everywhere,  and  the  sun  seemed
to  shine  everywhere,  and  yet  she  did  not  see  the  sun.

Annt  Pradence — so  was  the  old  woman  named — spread  a

table  in  a  moment  with  a  great  variety  of  nice  things,  and

Cherry  made  a  hearty  supper.     She  was  now  directed  to  go

to  "bed,  in  a  chamber  at  the  top  of  the  house,  in  which  the

child  was  to  sleep  also.     Prudence  directed  Cherry  to  keep

her  eyes  closed,  whether  she  could  sleep  or  not,  as  she  might,

perchance,  see  things  which  she  would  not  like.     She  was

iiot  to  speak  to  the  child  all  night.     She  was  to  rise  at  break

of  day ;  then  take  the  boy  to  a  spring  in  the  garden,  wash

hincfc,  and  anoint  his  eyes  with  an  ointment,  which  she  would

fittcl  in  a  crystal  box  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock,  but  she  was  not,

on.  ^ny  account,  to  touch  her  own  eyes  with  it.   Then  Cherry

was  to  call  the  cow;  and  having  taken  a  bucket  full  of  milk,

*o.    <iraw  a  bowl  of  the  last  milk  for  the  boy's  breakfast.

Cti^rry  was  dying  with  curiosity.     She  several  times  began

^    <luestion  the  child,  but  he  always  stopped  her  with,  "  I  'U

^H  Aunt  Prudence."     According  to  her  orders.  Cherry  was

^t>  in  the  morning  early.    The  little  boy  conducted  the  girl

*^  the  spring,  which  flowed  in  crystal  purity  from  a  granite

if^^k,  which  was  covered  with  ivy  and  beautiful  mosses.    The

<!^liild  was  duly  washed,  and  his  eyes  duly  anointed.     Cherry

s^ir  no  cow,  but  her  little  charge  said  she  must  call  the  cow.

"Pruit!  pruit!  pruit!"  called  Cherry,  just  as  she  would

call  the  cows  at  home ;  when,  lo !  a  beautiful  great  cow  came

from  amongst  the  trees,  and  stood  on  the  bank  beside  Cherry.

Cherry  had  no  sooner  placed  her  hands  on  the  cow's  teats

than  four  streams  of  milk  flowed  down  and  soon  filled  the

backet     The  boy's  bowl  was  then  filled,  and  he  drank  it.

This  being  done,  the  cow  quietly  wa&ed  away,  and  Cherry

returned  to  the  house  to  be  instructed  in  her  daily  work.

The  old  woman.  Prudence,  gave  Cherry  a  capital  break-


1 24  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

fast,  and  then  informed  her  that  she  must  keep  to  the  kite
and  attend  to  her  work  there — ^to  scald  the  milk,  make
bntter,  and  clean  all  the  j)latters  and  bowls  with  water
gard,  (gravel  sand.)  Cherry  was  charged  to  avoid  curio
She  was  not  to  go  into  any  other  part  of  flie  house ;  she
not  to  try  and  open  any  locked  doors.

After  her  ordinary  work  was  done  on  the  second  day,
master  required  Cherry  to  help  him  in  the  garden,  to  pick
apples  and  pears,  and  to  weed  the  leeks  and  onions.

Glad  was  Cherry  to  get  but  of  the  old  woman's  si
Aunt  Prudence  always  sat  with  one  eye  onher  knittings
the  other  boring  through  poor  Cherry.  Now  and  then  si
grumble,  *'  I  knew  Eobin  would  bring  down  some  fool  i
Zennor — ^better  for  both  that  she  had  tarried  away."

Cherry  and  her  master  got  on  famously,  and  when
Cherry  had  finished  weeding  a.  bed,  her  master  would  ;
her  a  kiss  to  shew  her  how  pleased  he  was.

After  a  few  days,  old  Aunt  Prudence  took  Cherry  :
those  parts  of  the  house  which  she  had  never  seen.     1
passed  through  a  long  dark  passage.     Cherry  was  then  n:
to  take  off  her  shoes ;  and  they  entered  a  room,  the  f
of  which  was  like  glass,  and  all  round,  perched  on  the  shel
and  on  the  floor,  were  people,  big  and  small,  turned  to  stc
Of  some,  there  were  only  the  head  and  shoulders,  the  a
being  cut  off ;  others  were  perfect.    Cherry  told  the  old  woi
she  "wouldn't  cum  ony  furder  for  the  wurld."     She  thou
from  the  first  she  was  got  into  a  land  of  Small  People
derground,  only  master  was  like  other  men ;  but  now
know'd  she  was  with  the  conjurors,  who  had  turned  all  tk
people  to  stone.     She  had  heard  talk  on  'em  up  in  Zeni
and  she  knew  they  might  at  any  moment  wake  up  and
her.

Old  Prudence  laughed  at  Cherry,  and  drove  her  on,


The  Adventure  of  Cherry  of  Zennor.       125

sisted  upon  her  rubbing  up  a  box,  "  like  a  coflBn  on  six  legs/'
until  she  could  see  her  face  in  it.  Well,  Cherry  did  not
want  for  courage,  so  she  began  to  rubHnth  a  will ;  the  old
woman  standing  by^  knitting  all  the  time,  calling  out  every
now  and  then,  " Rub!  rub !  rub  1  Harder  and  faster  V  At
length  Cherry  got  desperate,  and  giving  a  violent  rub  at  one
of  the  comers,  she  nearly  upset  the  box.  When,  0  Lor !
it  gave  out  such  a  doleful,  unearthly  sound,  that  Cherry
thought  all  the  stone-people  were  coming  to  life,  and  with
her  fright  she  fell  down  in  a  fit.  The  master  heard  all  this
noise,  and  came  in  to  inquire  into  the  cause  of  the  hubbub.
He  was  in  great  wrath,  kicked  old  Prudence  out  of  the  house
for  taking  Cherry  into  that  shut  up  room,  carried  Cherry
into  the  kitchen,  and  soon,  with  some  cordial,  recovered  her
seitees.  Cherry  could  not  remember  what  had  happened ;
but  she  knew  there  was  something  fearful  in  the  other  part
of  the  house.  But  Cherry  was  mistress  now — old  Aimt  Pru-
dence was  gone.  Her  master  was  so  kind  and  loving  that  a
y^  passed  by  like  a  summer  day.  Occasionally  her  master
Jfift  home  for  a  season ;  then  he  would  return  and  spend  much
time  in  the  enchanted  apartments,  and  Cherry  was  certain
she  had  heard  him  talking  to  the  stone  people.  Cherry  had
^erything  the  human  heart  could  desire ;  but  she  was  not
'^ppy;  she  would  know  more  of  the  place  and  the  people.
Cherry  had  discovered  that  the  ointment  made  the  little  boy!s
9^  bright  and  strange,  and  she  thought  often  that  he  saw
^ore  than  she  did ;  she  would  try ;  yes,  she  would !

Well,  next  morning  the  child  was  washed,  his  eyes  an-
.  ^ted,  and  the  cow  milked ;  she  sent  the  boy  to  gather
«er  some  flowers  in  the  garden,  and  taking  a  "  crum "  of
ointment,  she  put  it  into  her  eye.  Oh,  her  eye  would  be
"^^ed  out  of  her  head !  Cherry  ran  to  the  pool  beneath  the
^^  to  waidi  her  burning  eye ;  when  lo !  she  saw  at  the


126  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

bottom  of  the  water,  hundreds  of  little  people,  mostly  It
playing, — ^and  there  was  her  master,  as  small  as  the  ofc
playing  with  them.  Everything  now  looked  diffluent  a
the  place.  Small  people  were  everywhere,  hiding  in
flowers  sparkling  with  diamonds,  swinging  in  the  treea^
running  and  leaping  under  and  over  the  blades  of  g
The  master  never  shewed  himself  above  the  water  all  day
at  night  he  rode  up  to  the  house  like  the  handsome  gentle
she  had  seen  before.  He  went  to  the  enchanted  chan
and  Cherry  soon  heard  the  most  beautiful  music.

In  the  morning,  her  master  was  off,  dressed  as  if  to  f<
the  hounds.  He  returned  at  night,  left  Cherry  to  herself
proceeded  at  once  to  his  private  apartments.  Thus  il
day  after  day,  until  Cherry  could  stand  it  no  longer.  S<
peeped  through  the  key-hole,  and  saw  her  master  with
of  ladies,  singing ;  while  one  dressed  like  a  queen  was  ]
ing  on  the  coflBn.  Oh,  how  madly  jealous  Cherry  bee
when  she  saw  her  master  kiss  this  lovely  lady.  How
the  next  day,  the  master  remained  at  home  to  gather  i
Cherry  was  to  help  him,  and  when,  as  usual,  he  looke
kiss  her,  she  slapped  his  face,  and  told  him  to  kiss
Small  People,  like  himself,  with  whom  he  played  unde:
water.  So  he  found  out  that  Cherry  had  used  the
ment.  With  much  sorrow,  he  told  her  she  must  go  hon
that  he  would  have  no  spy  on  his  actions,  and  that  a
Prudence  must  come  back.  Long  before  day.  Cherry
called  by  her  master.  He  gave  her  lots  of  clothes  and  <
things ; — took  her  bundle  in  one  hand,  and  a  lantern  in
other,  and  bade  her  follow  him.  They  went  on  for  kile
miles,  all  the  time  going  up  hill,  through  knes,  and  .na
passages.  When  they  came  at  last  on  level  ground,'  it
near  daybreak.  He  kissed  Cherry,  told  her  she  was
ished  for  her  idle  curiosity ;  but  that  he  would,  if  she


Anne  yefferies  and  the  Fairies,  127

Iiayed  weD^  come  sometimes  on  the  Lady  Downs  to  see  her.
Saying  this,  he  disappeared.  The  sun  rose,  and  there  was
Cherry  seated  on  a  granite  stone,  without  a  soul  within  miles
of  her, — a  desolate  moor  having  taken  the  place  of  a  smfling
garden.  Long,  long  did  Cherry  sit  in  sorrow,  but  at  last
aheiliought  she  would  go  home.

Her  parents  had  supposed  her  dead,  and  when  they  saw
her,  they  believed  her  to  be  her  own  ghost.  Cherry  told  her
story,  which  every  one  doubted,  but  Cherry  never  varied  her
tale^  and  at  last  every  one  believed  it.  They  say  Cherry  was
never  afterwards  right  in  her  head,  and  on  moonlight  nights^
until  she  died,  she  would  wander  on  to  the  Lady  Downs  to
look  for  her  master.


•  ANNE  JEFFEBIES  AND  THE  FAIBIES.

ANNE  JEFFERIES  was  the  daughter  of  a  poor  labouring
man,  who  lived  in  the  parish  of  St  Teath.    She  was  born
in  1626,  and  is  supposed  to  have  died  in  1698.

When  she  was  nineteen  years  old,  Anne,  who  was  a  remark-
ably sharp  and  clever  girl,  went  to  live  as  a  servant  in  the
Ivnily  of  Mr  Moses  Pitt  Anne  was  an  unusuaUy  bold  girl,
and  would  do  things  which  even  boys  feared  to  attempt.  Of
coone,  in  those  days  every  one  believed  in  fairies,  and  every-
iMMty  feared  those  little  airy  beings.  They  were  constantly
tiie  talk  of  the  people,  and  this  set  Anne  longing  anxiously
la  have  an  interview  with  some  of  thefli.  So  Anne  was  often
dKoad  after  sun-down,  turning  up  the  fern  leaves,  and  look-
ing into  the  bells  of  the  foxglove  to  find  a  fairy,  singing  all
Ihetune —  «*

^  Faiiy  lair  and  fairy  bright.
Come  and  be  my  dioaen  sprite."

She  nmr  allowed  a  moonlight  night  to  pass  without  going


128  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

down  into  the  valley,  and  walking  against  the  stream,  t
ing—

''  Moon  shines  brighiy  waters  ran  dear,
I  am  here,  but  where 's  my  fairy  dear!"

The  fairies  were  a  long  time  trying  this  poor  girl;  for,  as
told  her  afterwards,  they  never  lost  sight  of  her ;  but  1
they  wonld  be,  looking  on  when  she  was  seeking  them,
they  would  run  from  frond  to  frond  of  the  ferns,  wheq
was  turning  them  up  in  her  anxious  search.

One  day  Anne,  having  finished  her  moming^s  wor^
sitting  in  the  arbour  in  her  master's  garden,  when  she£u
she  heard  some  one  moving  aside  the  branches,  as  tb
endeavouring  to  look  in  upon  her ;  and  she  thought  it  ]
be  her  sweetheart,  so  she  resolved  to  take  no  notice,  i
went  on  steadily  with  her  work,  no  sound  was  heard  bu
regular  beat  of  the  knitting  needles  one  upon  the  o
Presently  she  heard  a  suppressed  laugh,  and  then  aga
rustle  amidst  the  branches.  The  back  of  the  arbour
towards  the  lane,  and  to  enter  the  garden  it  was  necessa
walk  down  the  lane  to  the  gate,  which  was,  however
many  yards  off.

Click,  click  went  the  needles,  click,  click,  click.  At
Anne  began  to  feel  vexed  that  the  intruder  did  not  shew
self,  and  she  pettishly  said,  half  aloud —

"  You  may  stay  there  till  the  kueney  *  grows  on  the
ere  I  '11  come  to  'ee."

There  was  immediately  a  peculiar  ringing  and  very  mu
laugh.  Anne  knew  this  was  not  her  lover's  laugh,  and
felt  afraid.  But  it  was  bright  day,  and  she  assured  he
that  no  one  would  do  her  any  mischief,  as  she  knew  hersc
be  a  general  favourite  in  the  parish.  Presently  Anne  f  el
sured  that  the  garden  gate  had  been  carefully  opened  and  a

*  Mobs  or  mildew.


Anne  Jefferies  and  the  Fairies.  1 29

dosed,  so  she  waited  anxiously  the  result.  In  a  few  moments
the  perceived  at  the  entrance  of  the  arbour,  six  little  men,  all
lothed  very  handsomely  in  green.  They  were  beautiful
:tUe  figures,  and  had  very  charming  faces,  and  such  bright
fes.  The  grandest  of  these  little  visitors,  who  wore  a  red
gather  in  his  cap,  advanced  in  front  of  the  others,  and,  mak-
ig  a  most  polite  bow  to  Anne,  addressed  her  familiarly  in
lie  kindest  words.
This  gentleman  looked  so  sweetly  on  Anne  that  she  was
harmed  beyond  measure,  and  she  put  down  her  hand  as  if
0  shake  hands  with  her  little  friend,  when  he  jumped  into
ler  palm,  and  she  lifted  him  into  her  lap.  He  then,  without
ay  more  ado,  clambered  upon  her  bosom  and  neck,  and
>egan  kissing  her.  Anne  never  felt  so  charmed  in  her  life,  as
prhile  this  one  little  gentleman  was  playing  with  her ;  but
piesently  he  called  his  companions,  and  they  all  clambered
op  by  her  dress,  as  best  they  could,  and  kissed  her  neck,  her
lips,  and  her  eyes.  One  of  them  ran  his  fingers  over  her
cjes,  and  she  felt  as  if  they  had  been  pricked  with  a
pin.  Suddenly  Anne  became^ blind,  and  she  felt  herself
ufairled  through  the  air  at  a  great  rate.  By  and  by,  one  of
her  little  companions  said  something  which  sounded  like
••Tear  away,"  and  lo  !  Anne  had  her  sight  at  once  restored.
She  was  in  one  of  the  most  beautiful  places — temples  and
iNdaces  of  gold  and  silver.  Trees  laden  with  fruits  and
flowers.  LiJces  full  of  gold  and  silver  fish,  and  the  air  full
of  birds  of  the  sweetest  song,  and  the  most  brilliant  colours.
Bondreds  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  were  walking  about.
Hundreds  more  were  idling  in  the  most  luxuriant  bowers,
Ibe  fragrance  of  the  flowers  oppressing  them  with  a  sense  of
ddidous  repose.  Hundreds  were  also  dancing,  or  engaged
in  sports  of  various  kinds.  Anne  was,  however,  surprised  to
ftid  tUfc  these  happy  people  were  no  longer  the  small  people
IsrSuon.  1


1 3p  Romances  of  the  Fairies.

she  had  previoasly  seen.  There  was  now  no  more  thai
difference  usually  seen  in  a  crowd,  between  their  heighi
her  own.  Anne  found  herself  arrayed  in  the  most  1
decorated  clothes.  So  grand,  indeed,  did  she  appear
she  doubted  her  identify.  Anne  was  constantly  attend
her  six  friends ;  but  the  finest  gentleman,  who  was  thi
to  address  her,  continued  her  favourite,  at  which  the  i
appeared  to  be  very  jealous.  Eventually  Anne  an
favourite  contrived  to  separate  themselves,  and  they  r
into  some  most  lovely  gardens,  where  they  were  hidd<
the  luxuriance  of  the  flowers.  Lovingly  did  they  pas
time,  and  Anne  desired  that  this  should  continue  for
However,  when  they  were  at  the  happiest,  there  was  he
great  noise,  and  presently  the  five  other  fairies  at  the  hett
great  crowd  came  after  them  in  a  violent  rage.  Her  lover
his  swdrd  to  defend  her,  but  this  was  soon  beaten  dowi
he  lay  wounded  at  her  feet.  Then  the  fairy  who  had  bl
her,  again  placed  his  hands  upon  her  eyes,  and  all  was
She  heard  strange  noises,  and  felt  herself  whirled  abou
about ;  and  as  if  a  thousand  ilies  were  buzzing  around
At  length  her  eyes  were  opened,  and  Anne  found  1
on  the  ground  in  the  arbour  where  jshe  had  been  sitti
the  morning,  and  many  anxious  faces  were  around  h
conceiving  that  she  was  recovering  from  a  convulsion  f

THE  PISKIE  THRESHERS.

MANY  an  industrious  farmer  can  speak  of  the  assis
which  he  has  received  from  the  piskies.      Mr
Couch  tells  a  story  of  this  kind  so  well  that  no  otl
required."f*    Long,  long  ago,  before  threshing-machines
thought  of,  the  farmer  who  resided  at  C ,  in  going  1

♦  See  Moses  Pitt's  Letter,  Appendix  (G.)  t  See  NoUi  and  (


The  Muryans  Bank,  131

le  day,  was  surprised  at  the  extraordinary  quantity  of
at  had  been  threshed  the  previous  night,  as  well  as  to
r  the  mysterious  agency  by  which  it  was  eflfected.  His
;y  led  him  to  inquire  into  the  matter;  so  at  night,
he  moon  was  up,  he  crept  stealthily  to  the  bam  door,
3king  through  a  chink,  saw  a  little  fellow,  clad  in  a
1  suit  of  green,  wielding  the  "dreshel"  (flail)  with
hing  vigour,  and  beating  the  floor  with  blows  so  rapid
le  eye  could  not  follow  the  motion  of  the  implement,
rmer  slunk  away  unperceived,  and  went  to  bed,  where

a  long  while  awake,  thinking  in  what  way  he  could

ew  his  gratitude  to  the  piskie  for  such  an  important

He  came  to  the  conclusion  at  length,  that,  as  the

bUow's  clothes  were  getting  very  old  and  ragged,  the

a  new  suit  would  be  a  proper  way  to  lessen  the  pbli-
;  and,  accordingly,  on  the  morrow  he  had  a  suit,  of
made,  of  what  was  supposed  to  be  the  proper  size,
he  carried  early  in  the  evening  to  the  bam,  and  left

piskie's  acceptance.  At  night  the  farmer  stole  to  the
rain  to  see  how  his  gift  was  taken.  He  was  just  in
>  see  the  elf  put  on  the  suit,  which  was  no  sooner
)lished  than,  looking  down  on  himself  admiringly,  he

"  Piskie  fine,  and  piskie  gay,
Piskie  now  will  fly  away."

THE  iniRTAN'S  BANK.

ant  is  called  by  the  peasantry  a  Muryan.  Believing
bat  they  are  the  Small  People  in  their  state  of  decay
AT  the  earth,  it  is  deemed  most  unlucky  to  destroy  a
of  ants.  If  you  place  a  piece  of  tin  in  a  bank  of
118  at  a  certain  age  of  the  moon,  it  will  be  turned  into


TREGEAGLE.


''  In  Comwaile's  fair  land,  bye  the  poole  on  the  moore    '.
Tr^geagle  the  wicked  did  dwelL  "

Tregeagle  or  Doznuxre  Pool^Bj  John  Pehwi


ROMANCES  OF  TEEGEAGLE.


THE  DEMON  TBEQEAQLE.

**  Thrice  he  began  to  tell  his  doleful  tale,
And  thrice  the  sighs  did  swallow  up  his  voice."

Thomas  Saokyillb.

|H0  has  not  heard  of  the  wild  spirit  Tregeagle  ?
He  haunts  equally  the  moor,  the  rocky  coasts,
and  the  blown  sand-hills,  of  ComwalL  From
north  to  south,  from  east  to  west,  this  doomed
Riit  is  heard  of,  and  to  the  day  of  judgment  he  is  doomed
►  wander,  pursued  by  avenging  fiends.  For  ever  endea-
yuring  to  perform  some  task  by  which  he  hopes  to  secure
spooe,  and  being  for  ever  defeated.  Who  has  not  heard  the
Qfwling  of  Tregeagle?  When  the  storms  come  with  all
bar  strength  from  the  Atlantic,  and  urge  themselves  upon
be  rocks  around  the  Land's-End,  the  howls  of  the  spirit  are
nder  than  the  roaring^  of  the  winds.  When  calms  rest
rfon  the  ocean,  and  the  waves  can  scarcely  form  upon  the
Qflliiig  waters,  low  wailings  creep  along  the  coast.  These
W  Ae  wailings  of  this  wandering  souL  When  midnight  is
lA  tiie  moor,  or  on  the  mountains,  and  the  night  winds
I  amidst  the  rugged  cairns,  the  shrieks  of  Tregeagle  are


134  Romances  of  Tregeagle.

distinctly  heard.  We  know^  then,  that  he  is  pursued  li
demon  dogs^  and  that  till  daybreak  he  mnst  fly  wil
speed  before  them.  The  voice  of  Tregeagle  is  every?
and  yet  he  is  unseen  by  human  eye.  Every  reader  n
once  perceive  that  Tregeagle  belongs  to  the  mytholog
the  oldest  nations,  and  that  the  traditions  of  this  wand
spirit  in  Cornwall,  which  centre  upon  one  tyrannical  n
trate,  are  but  the  appropriation  of  stories,  which  bda
every  age  and  country.    Tradition  thus  tells  Tregeagle'i

There  are  some  men  who  appear  to  be  from  their  1
given  over  to  the  will  of  tormenting  demons.  Such  i
was  Tregeagle.  He  is  as  old  as  the  hills,  yet  there  are:
circumstances  in  the  story  of  his  life  which  appear  \
move  him  &om  this  remote  antiquity.  Modem  legends  i
him  to  belong  to  comparatively  modem  times,  and  say
without  doubt,  he  was  one  of  the  Tregeagles  who  once  c
Trevorder  near  Bodmin.  We  have  not,  however,  much  oo(
to  trouble  ourselves  with  the  man  or  his  life ;  it  is  with  the
and  the  subsequent  existence  of  a  myth  that  we  are  cona

Certain  it  is  that  the  man  Tregeagle  was   diabol
wicked.     He  seems  to  have  been  urged  on  from  one
to  another  until  the  cup  of  sin  was  overflowing.

Tregeagle  was  wealthy  beyond  most  men  of  his  time
his  wealth  purchased  for  him  that  immunity,  whicl
Church,  in  her  degenerate  days,  too  often  accorded  to
who  could  aid,  with  their  gold  or  power,  the  sensual  j
hood.  As  a  magistrate,  he  was  tjrrannical  and  unjusi
many  an  innocent  man  was  wantonly  sacrificed  by  hii
the  purpose  of  hiding  his  own  dark  deeds.  As  a  lan(
he  was  rapacious  and  unscrupulous,  and  frequently  s
volved  his  tenants  in  his  toils,  that  they  could  not  esca]
grasp.  The  stain  of  secret  murder  clings  to  his  memoi];
he  is  said  to  have  sacrificed  a  sister  whose  goodness


The  Dead  Tregeagle.  135

between  him  and  his  demon  passions ;  his  wife  and  children
perished  victims  to  his  cruelties.  At  length  death  drew  near
to  relieve  the  land  of  a  monster  whose  name  was  a  terror  to
«11  who  heard  it.  Devils  waited  to  secure  the  soul  they  had
won,  and  Tregeagle  in  terror  gave  to  the  priesthood  wealth,
that  they  might  fight  with  them  and  save  his  soul  &om
eternal  fire.  Desperate  was  the  struggle,  but  the  powerful
exorcisms  of  the  banded  brotherhood  of  a  neighbouring
monastery,  drove  back  the  evil  ones,  and  Tregeagle  slept  with
his  fathers,  safe  in  the  custody  of  the  churchmen  who  buried
him  with  high  honours  in  St  Breock  Church.  They  sang
ehants  and  read  prayers  above  his  grave,  to  secure  the  soul
which  they  thought  they  had  saved.  But  Tregeagle  was  not
filled  to  rest.  Satan  desired  still  to  gain  possession  of  such
a  gigantic  sinner,  and  we  can  only  refer  what  ensued  to  the
inflaence  of  the  wicked  spiritings  of  his  ministers.

A  dispute  arose  between  two  wealthy  families  respecting
the  ownership  of  extensive  lands  around  Bodmin.  The
qiieetion  had  been  rendered  more  difficult  by  the  nefarious
ocmduct  of  Tregeagle,  who  had  acted  as  steward  to  one  of
the  claimants,  and  who  had  destroyed  ancient  deeds,  forged
others,  and  indeed  made  it  appear  that  he  was  the  real  pro-
prietor of  the  domain.  Large  portions  of  the  land  Tregeagle
hid  sold,  and  other  parts  were  leased  upon  long  terms,  he
having  received  all  the  money  and  appropriated  it.  His
death  led  to  inquiries,  and  then  the  transactions  were  gra-
dnally  brought  to  light  Involving,  as  this  did,  large  sums
of  money — ^and  indeed  it  was  a  question  upon  which  turned
the  future  well-doing  or  ruin  of  a  family — it  was  fought  by
Ae  lawyers  with  great  pertinacity.  The  legal  questions  had
been  argued  several  times  before  the  judges  at  the  assizes.
The  trials  had  been  deferred,  new  trials  had  been  sought  for
nd  granted,  and  every  possible  plan  known  to  the  lawyers


136  Romances  of  Tregeagle.

for  postponing  the  settlement  of  a  suit  had  been  tried,
day  was  at  length  fixed,  upon  which  a  final  decision  n
be  come  to,  and  a  special  jury  was  sworn  to  administer,
tice  between  the  contending  parties.    Witnesses  innui
able  were  examined  as  to  the  validity  of  a  certain  deed,
the  balance  of  evidence  was  equally  suspended.    The  jn
was  about  to  sum  up  the  case  and  refer  the  question  to
jury,  when  the  defendant  in  the  case,  coming  into  court,  ]
claimed  aloud  that  he  had  yet  another  witness  to  prod
There  was  a  strange  silence  in  the  judgment-halL    It  was
that  something  chilling  to  the  soul  was  amongst  them,
there  was  a  simultaneous  throb  of  terror  as  Tregeagle
led  into  the  witness-box.

When  the  awe-struck  assembly  had  recovered,  the  law;
for  the  defendant  commenced  their  examination,  which
long  and  terrible.  The  result,  however,  was  the  disclosur
an  involved  system  of  fraud,  of  which  the  honest  defend
had  been  the  victim,  and  the  jury  unhesitatingly  gav
verdict  in  his  favour.

The  trial  over,  every  one  expected  to  see  the  spectre  ^
ness  removed.  There,  however,  he  stood  powerless  to
although  he  evidently  desired  to  do  so.  Spirits  of  darki
were  waiting  to  bear  him  away,  but  some  spell  of  holii
prevented  them  from  touching  him.  There  was  a  struj
with  the  good  and  the  evil  angels  for  this  sinner's  soul, ;
the  assembled  court  appeared  frozen  with  horror.  At  len
the  judge  with  dignity  commanded  the  defendant  to  rem
his  witness.

"  To  bring  him  from  the  grave  has  been  to  me  so  dreac
a  task,  that  I  leave  him  to  your  care,  and  that  of  the  Pri
by  whom  he  was  so  beloved."  Having  said  this,  the  defe
ant  left  the  court.

The  churchmen  were  called  in,  and  long  were  the  delibc


Tregeagle  at  Dosmery  Pool.  137

tions  between  them  and  the  lawyers,  as  to  the  best  mode  of
diflposing  of  Tregeagle.

They  could  resign  him  to  the  devil  at  once,  but  by  long
brial,  the  worst  of  crimes  might  be  absolved,  and  as  good
drarchmen  they  could  not  sacrifice  a  human  souL  The  only
bhing  was  to  give  the  spirit  some  task,  difficult  beyond  the
power  of  human  nature,  which  might  be  extended  far  into
eternity.  Time  might  thus  gradually  soften  the  obdurate
Krai,  which  still  retained  ail  the  black  dyes  of  the  sins  done
in  the  flesh,  that  by  infinitely  slow  degrees  repentance  might
scert  its  softening  power.  The  spell  therefore  put  upon
Fr^eagle  was,  that  as  long  as  he  was  employed  on  some
endless  assigned  task,  there  should  be  hope  of  salvation,  and
that  he  should  be  secure  from  the  assaults  of  the  devil  as  long
as  he  laboured  steadily.  A  moment's  rest  was  &tal ;  labour
unresting,  and  for  ever,  was  his  doom.

One  of  the  lawyers  remembering  that  Dosmery  Pool  was
bottomless,  and  that  a  thorn  bush  which  had  been  flung  into
it,  but  a  few  weeks  before,  had  made  its  appearance  in  Fal-
mouth harbour,  proposed  that  Tregeagle  might  be  employed
to  empty  this  profound  lake.  Then  one  of  the  churchmen,
to  make  the  task  yet  more  enduring,  proposed  that  it  should
be  performed  by  the  ^aid  of  a  limpet  shell  having  a  hole
init

This  was  agreed  to,  and  the  required  incantations  were
chdy  made.  Bound  by  mystical  spells,  Tregeagle  was  re-
idoved  to  the  dark  moors,  and  duly  set  to  work.  Year  after
y<ear  passed  by,  and  there  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,
^rm  and  shine,  Tregeagle  was  bending  over  the  dark  water,
WOfking  hard  with  his  perforated  shell ;  yet  the  pool  remained
tt  the  same  level

His  old  enemy  the  devil  kept  a  careful  eye  on  the  doomed
one,  resolving,  if  possible,  to  secure  so  choice  an  example  of


138  Romances  of  Tregeagle.

evil  Often  did  he  raise  tempests  sufficiently  wild,  as  he  e
posed,  to  drive  Tregeagle  from  his  work,  knowing  that  if
failed  for  a  season  to  labour,  he  could  seize  and  secure  I
These  were  long  tried  in  vain ;  but  at  length  an  auspid
hour  presented  itself.

Nature  was  at  war  with  herself,  the  elements  had  lost  ti
balance,  and  there  was  a  terrific  struggle  to  recover  it.  Ii(
nings  flashed,  and  coiled  like  fiery  snakes  around  the  re
of  Eoughtor.  Fire-balls  fell  on  the  desert  moors  and  hi
in  the  accursed  lake.  Thunders  pealed  through  the  heav
and  echoed  from  hill  to  hill ;  an  earthquake  shook  the  a
earth,  and  terror  was  on  all  living.  The  winds  arose
raged  with  A  fury  which  was  irresistible,  and  hail  beal
mercilessly  on  all  things,  that  it  spread  death  around.  L
did  Tregeagle  stand  the  "pelting  of  the  pitiless  storm,"
at  length  he  yielded  to  its  force  and  fled.  The  demonf
crowds  were  at  his  heels.  He  doubled,  however,  on  his  {
suers  and  returned  to  the  lake ;  but  so  rapid  were  they,  1
he  could  not  rest  the  required  moment  to  dip  his  shell  in
now  seething  waters.

Three  times  he  fled  round  the  lake,  and  the  evil  ones  j
sued  him.  Then,  feeling  that  there  was  no  safety  for  1
near  Dosmery  Pool,  he  sprang  swifter  than  the  wind  aci
it,  shrieking  with  agony,  and  thus, — since  the  devils  can
cross  water,  and  were  obliged  to  go  round  the  lake,-
^ained  on  them  and  fled  over  the  moor.

Away,  away  went  Tregeagle,  faster  and  faster  the  d
spirits  pursuing,  and  they  had  nearly  overtaken  him,  w]
he  saw  Roach  Eock  and  its  chapel  before  him.  He  rusl
up  the  rocks,  with  giant  power  clambered  to  the  east
window,  and  dashed  his  head  through  it,  thus  securing
shelter  of  its  sanctity.  The  defeated  demons  retired,  1
long  and  loud  were  their  wild  wailings  in  the  air.     The


Tregeagh  at  Roach  Rock.  1 39

habitants  of  the  moors  and  of  the  neighbouring  towns  slept
not  a  wink  that  night.

Tregeagle  was  safe,  his  head  was  within  the  holy  church,
though  his  body  was  exposed  on  a  bare  rock  to  the  storm.
Earnest  were  the  prayers  of  the  blessed  hermit  in  his  cell
on  the  rock,  to  be  relieved  jfrom  his  nocturnal  and  sinful
visitor.

In  vain  were  the  recluse's  prayers.  Day  after  day,  as  he
knelt  at  the  altar,  the  ghastly  head  of  the  doomed  sinner
grinned  horridly  down  upon  him.  Every  holy  ejaculation
fell  upon  Tregeagle's  ear  like  molten  iron.  He  writhed  and
shrieked  xmder  the  torture;  but  legions  of  devils  filled
the  air,  ready  to  seize  him,  if  for  a  moment  he  withdrew  his
head  from  the  sanctuary.  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  the  little
chapel  on  the  rock  was  rendered  a  scene  of  sad  confusion  by
the  interruptions  which  Tregeagle  caused.  Men  trembled
with  fear  at  his  agonising  cries,  and  women  swooned.  At
length  the  place  was  deserted,  and  even  the  saint  of  the
rock  was  wasting  to  death  by  the  constant  perturbation  in
which  he  was  kept  by  the  xmholy  spirit,  and  the  demons  who,
like  carrion  birds,  swarmed  around  the  holy  cairn.  Things
sonld  not  go  on  thus.  The  monks  of  Bodmin  and  the  priests
from  the  neighbouring  churches  gathered  together,  and  the
result  of  their  long  and  anxious  deliberations,  was,  that  Tre-
geagle, guarded  by  two  saints,  should  be  taken  to  the  north
XMtst,  near  Padstow,  and  employed  in  making  trusses  of  sand,
md  ropes  of  sand,  with  which  to  bind  them.  By  powerful
ipell,  Tregeagle  was  removed  from  Boach,  and  fixed  upon  the
sandy  shores  of  the  Padstow  district.  Sinners  are  seldom
permitted  to  enjoy  any  peace  of  souL  As  the  ball  of  sand
pew  into  form,  the  tides  rose,  and  the  breakers  spread  out
the  sands  again  a  level  sheet ;  again  was  it  packed  together
and  again  washed  away.    Toil!  toil!  toil!  day  and  night


140  Romances  of  Tregeagle.

unrestingly,  sand  on  sand  grew  with  each  hour,  and  nil
lessly  the  ball  was  swept,  by  one  blow  of  a  sea  wave,  alo
the  shore.

The  cries  of  Tregeagle  were  dreadful ;  and  as  the  destn
tion  of  the  sand  heap  was  constantly  recurring,  a  constat
increasing  despair  gained  the  mastery  over  hope,  and  t
ravings  of  the  baffled  soul  were  louder  than  the  roarings
the  winter  tempest.

Baffled  in  making  trusses  of  sand,  Tregeagle  seized  up
the  lose  particles  and  began  to  spin  them  into  a  rope.  La
and  patiently  did  he  pursue  his  task,  and  hope  once  mc
rose  like  a  star  out  of  the  midnight  darkness  of  despair,
rope  was  forming,  when  a  storm  came  up  with  all  its  fa
from  the  Atlantic,  and  swept  the  particles  of  sand  away  on
the  hills.

The  inhabitants  of  Fadstow  had  seldom  any  rest,  j
every  tide  the  bowlings  of  Tregeagle  banished  sleep  fro
each  eye.  But  now  so  fearful  were  the  sounds  of  tl
doomed  soul,  in  the  madness  of  the  struggle  between  ho]
and  despair,  that  the  people  fled  the  town,  and  clustered  up(
the  neighbouring  plains,  praying,  as  with  one  voice,  to  1
relieved  from  the  sad  presence  of  this  monster.

St  Petroc,  moved  by  the  tears  and  petitions  of  the  peopl
resolved  to  remove  the  spirit ;  and  by  the  intense  eames
ness  of  his  prayers,  after  long  wrestling,  he  subdued  Tr
geagle  to  his  will  Having  chained  him  with  the  bonds  whic
the  saints  had  forged  with  his  own  hands,  every  link  of  whic
had  been  welded  with  a  prayer,  St  Petroc  led  the  spirit  awa
from  the  north  coast,  and  stealthily  placed  him  on  the  soud
em  shores.

In  those  days  Ella's  Town,  now  Helston,  was  a  flourishin
port.    Ships  sailed  into  the  estuary,  up  to  the  town,  and  the


Tregeagle  at  Loo  Pool.  141

brought  all  sorts  of  merchandise,  and  returned  with  cargoes
ef  tin  from  the  mines  of  Breage  and  Wendron.

The  wily  monk  placed  his  charge  at  Bareppa,  and  there
condemned  him  to  carry  sacks  of  sand  across  the  estuary  of
the  Loo,  and  to  empty  them  at  Porthleven,  until  the  beach
was  clean  down  to  the  rocks.  The  priest  was  a  good  observer.
He  knew  that  the  sweep  of  the  tide  was  from  Trewavas
Head  round  the  coast  towards  the  Lizard,  and  that  the  sand
would  be  carried  back  steadily  and  speedily  as  fast  as  the
spirit  could  remove  it.

Long  did  Tregeagle  labour;  and,  of  course,  in  vain.  His
struggles  were  giant-like  to  perform  his  task,  but  he  saw  the
sands  return  as  regularly  as  he  removed  them.  The  suffer-
ings of  the  poor  fishermen  who  inhabited  the  coast  around
Porthleven  were  great.  As  the  bowlings  of  Tregeagle  dis-
turbed the  dwellers  in  Padstow,  so  did  they  now  distress
those  toil-worn  men.

**  When  sorrow  is  highest.
Belief  is  nighest."

And  a  mischievous  demon-watcher,  in  pure  wantonness,
brought  that  relief  to  those  fishers  of  the  sea.

Tregeagle  was  laden  with  a  sack  of  sand  of  enormous  size,
and  was  wading  across  the  mouth  off  the  estuary,  when  one
of  those  wicked  devils,  who  were  kept  ever  near  Tregeagle,
in  very  idleness  tripped  up  the  heavily-laden  spirit.  The  sea
was  raging  with  the  irritation  of  a  passing  storm ;  and  as
Tregeagle  fell,  the  sack  was  seized  by  the  waves,  and  its
contents  poured  out  across  this  arm  of  the  sea.

There,  to  this  day,  it  rests  a  bar  of  sand,  fatally  destroying
the  harbour  of  Ella's  Town.  The  rage  of  the  inhabitants  of
this  seaport, — ^now  destroyed, — ^was  great ;  and  with  all  their
priests,  away  they  went  to  the  Loo  Bar,  and  assailed  their


142  Romances  of  Tregeagle.

destroyer.  Against  human  anger  Tregeagle  was  proof.  1
shock  of  tongues  fell  harmlessly  on  his  ear,  and  the  assa
of  human  weapons  was  xmavailing.

By  the  aid  of  the  priests,  and  faith-inspired  prayers,  1
bonds  were  once  more  placed  upon  Tregeagle ;  and  he  li
by  the  force  of  bell,  book,  and  candle,  sent  to  the  Land's-B
There  he  would  find  no  harbour  to  destroy,  and  but  1
people  to  terrify.  His  task  was  to  sweep  the  sands  fp
Porthcumow  Cove  round  the  headland  called  Tol-Peden-P
with,  into  Nanjisal  Cove.  Those  who  know  that  rugj
headland,  with  its  cubical  masses  of  granite,  piled  in  Tita
grandeur  one  upon  another,  will  appreciate  the  task;  i
when  to  all  the  difficulties  are  added  the  strong  sweep  of '
Atlantic  current, — that  portion  of  the  Gulf-stream  wh
washes  our  southern  shores, — it  will  be  evident  that  the  n
ancholy  spirit  has,  indeed,  a  task  which  must  endure  ui
the  world  shall  end.

Even  until  to-day  is  Tregeagle  labouring  at  his  task,
calms  his  wailing  is  heard ;  and  those  sounds  which  so
call  the  "  soughing  of  the  wind,"  are  known  to  be  the  moj
ings  of  Tregeagle ;  while  the  coming  storms  are  predicai
by  the  fearful  roarings  of  this  condemned  mortal.

JAHN  TERGAGLE  THE  STEWARD.

THERE  are  numerous  versions  of  this  legend,  and  sundry  stateme
made  as  to  the  man  who  is  supposed  to  have  achieved  the  no  ▼
envious  immortality  which  he  enjoys.
One  or  two  of  these  may  interest  the  reader.

The  following  very  characteristic  narrative,  from  a  much-esteemed  i
respondent,  gives  several  incidents  which  have  not  a  place  in  the  legend
I  have  related  it,  which  comprehends  the  explanation  given  for  the  appc
ance  of  Tregeagle  at  so  many  different  parts  of  the  county.

The  Tregeagle,  of  whom  mention  occurs  in  the  writings  of  Cornish  legs
ary  authors,  was  a  real  person :  a  member  of  a  respectable  family,  resid
during  the  seventeenth  century,  at  Trevorder,  in  the  parish  of  St  Brae


yahh  Tergagle  the  Steward.  14  j

ntical  probably  with  a  John  Tregeagle  whose  tombstone  may  yet
in  the  parish  church  there,  close  to  the  chancel.
»ring  one  day  amid  the  venerable  arches  of  that  same  church,  the
*,  a  native  of  the  parish,  encountered,  near  a  small^^transept  called
border  aisle,  the  sexton,  a  man  then  perhaps  of  about  eighty  years  of
le  conversation  turning  not  unnaturally  on  the  "illustrious  dead,"  the
:  was  gratified  in  receiving  from  the  lips  of  the  old  man  the  follow-
racteristic  specimen  of  folk-lore,  the  greater  part  of  ^hich  has  re-
clearly  imprinted  in  his  memory  after  a  lapse  of  many  years ;  though
iks  he  has  had  to  supply  the  very  last  sentence  of  all  from  the  general
tradition]  here  and  there  he  may  have  had  to  supply  a  few  ex-
IS : —
«B8  Jahn  Tergagle,  I  've  a  heerd  mun  tell,  sir,  he  was  a  steward  to  a

1  a  man  came  fore  to  the  court  and  paid  az  rent :  and  Jahn  Ter-

dn't  put  no  cross  to  as  name  in  the  books.

1  after  that  Tergagle  daied :  and  the  lord  came  down  to  look  after

( :  and  when  he  zeed  the  books,  he  zeed  this  man's  name  that  there

10  cross  to  ut.

I  he  zent  for  the  man,  and  axed  'n  for  az  rent :  and  the  man  zaid

aid  az  rent :  and  the  lord  said  he  hadn't,  there  wam't  no  cross  to  az

I  the  books,  and  he  tould'n  that  he  'd  have  the  law  for'n  if  he  didn't

1  the  man,  he  didn't  know  what  to  do  :  and  he  went  vore  to  the
r  of  Simonward ;  f  and  the  minister  axed  'n  if  he  'd  a  got  faith :  and
1,  he  hadn't  got  faith,  and  he  was  obliged  for  to  come  homewards

1  after  that  the  'Zaizes  was  coming  naigh,and  he  was  becoming  afeerd

3ugh  :  and  he  went  vore  to  the  minister  again,  and  tould  'n  he  'd  a

h;  the  minister  might  do  whatever  a  laiked.

1  the  minister  draed  a  ring  out  on  the  floor :  and  he  caaled  out  droe

Tahn  Tergagle,  Jahn  Tergagle,  Jahn  Tergagle !  and  (I  've  a  heerd  the

en  tell  ut,  sir)  theess  Jahn  Tergagle  stood  before  mun  in  the  middle

ing.

1  he  went  vore  wi'  mun  to  the  Ezaizes,  and  gave  az  evidence  and

ow  this  man  had  a  paid  az  rent ;  and  the  lord  he  was  oast.

1  after  that  they  was  come  back  to  their  own  house,  theess  Jahn

e  he  gave  mun  a  brave  deal  of  trouble ;  he  was  knackin'  about  the

nd  wouldn't  laive  mun  alone  at  alL

1  they  went  vore  to  the  minister,  and  axed  he  for  to  lay  un.

1  the  minister  zaid,  thicky  t  was  their  look  out ;  they'd  a  brought  'n

l^^c,  aUndlord.  t  St  BrewaM.

ky,  ootrocUy  written  thilke,  i.  i.,  the  Uka,  a  true  word  frequent  iQ  ChaoMr.


144  Romances  of  Tregeagie.

up,  and  they  was  to  gett  'n  down  again  the  best  way  they  could.  Anc
a  heerd  the  ould  men  tell  ut»  sir.  The  minister  he  got  dree  hv
pound  for  a  layin  of  un  again.

'*  And  first,  a  was  bound  to  the  old  epping  stock*  up  to  CShuiehfco
and  after  that  a  was  bound  to  the  ould  oyen  in  T'evurder;  James  1
down  to  Wadebridge,  he  was  there  when  they  did  open  at

**  And  after  that  a  was  bound  to  Dozmaiy  pool ;  and  they  do  «q
there  he  ez  sow  emptying  of  it  out  with  a  lampet-shelly  with  a
in  the  bottom  of  ut."

This  is  a  very  ancient  idea,  and  was  one  of  the  torments  of  the  ob
Tartarus.  The  treacherous  daughters  of  Danaus  being  condemned  tl
to  empty  Lethe  with  a  bottomless  vessel : —

'*  Bt  Danai  proles  VeneriB  qvuB  nmnma  hmit.
In  cava  Lethsoas  solia  portat  aquas."

Dosmare  Pool  is  a  small  lake  or  tarn  on  the  Bodmin  Moors,  a  fit  I
sentative  of  Lethe,  with  its  black  water  and  desolate  environs.        J.

Another  correspondent  to  whom  I  am  much  indebted  for  valoaUe
on  the  folk-lore  of  the  Land's-£nd  district,  sends  me  the  folli
version : —

You  may  know  the  story  better  than  I  do ;  however,  1 11  give  yo

west-country  version.    A  man  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Redruth,  1 1

(I  have  almost  forgotten  the  story,)  lent  a  sum  of  money  to  another  wi

receiving  bond  or  note,  and  the  transaction  was  witnessed  by  Tregagli

died  before  the  money  was  paid  back.    When  the  lender  demande

money,  the  borrower  denied  having  received  it.    He  was  brought  i

court  of  justice,  when  the  man  denied  on  oath  that  he  ever  borrowe

money,  and  declared  that  if  Tregagle  saw  any  such  thing  take  phu

wished  that  Tregagle  would  come  and  declare  it.  The  words  were  no  i

out  of  his  mouth  than  Tregagle  stood  before  him,  and  told  him  that  i

easy  to  bring  him,  but  that  he  should  not  find  it  so  easy  to  put  him ;

Tregagle  followed  the  man  day  and  night,  wouldn't  let  him  have  i

ment's  rest,  until  he  got  all  the  parsons,  conjurors,  and  other  wise

together,  to  lay  him.      The  wise   ones   accomplished  this  for  a

time  by  binding  the  spirit  to  empty  Dosmery  (or  Dorsmery)  pool  ?

crogan,  (limpet  shell.)  He  soon  finished  Uie  job  and  came  to  tiie  man  i

who  sent  for  Parson  Corker,  of  Burrian,  who  was  a  noted  hand  for  1

spirits,  driving  the  devil  from  the  bedside  of  old  villains,  and  other  kiz

jobs  of  the  same  kind.    When  the  parson  came  into  the  room  wit)

spirit  and  the  man,  the  first  thing  the  parson  did,  was  to  draw  a  cird

place  the  man  to  stand  within  it ;  the  spirit  took  the  form  of  a  bladL

and  (roared  as  you  may  still  hear  Tregagle  roar  in  Qenvor  Cove  bef

*  Perhaps  Uppingstock,  an  erection  of  stone  steps  for  the  farmers'  wives  to )
their  horses  by.
t  Not  Ohiirchtown,  but  Churoht6wn.


Tr$gea^le  at  Genvor  Cove.  145

northerly  storm)  did  all  he.  could  to  get  at  the  man  with  his  horns  and
kools.  The  parson  continued' readizig  all  the  time.  At  first  the  reading
leemed  to  make  him  more  furious,  but  little  by  little  he  became  as  gjpjntle
••  i  lamby  and  allowed  the  parson  to  do  what  he  would  with  him,  and  #i^
MBted  at  last  to  go  to  Glenvor  Cove,  (in  Escols  Cliff,)  and  make  a  truss  of
■and,  which  he  waa  to  carry  above  a  certain  rock  in  Escols  Cliff.  He  was
many  years  trying^  i without  being  able  to  accomplish  this  piece  of  work,
until  it  came  to  a  very  cq|d  winter,  when  Tregagle,  by  taking  water  from
the  stream  near  by,  and  pouring  over  the  sand,  caused  it  to  freeze  together,
80  that  he  finished  the  task,  came  back  to  the  man  and  would  have  tosn
him  in  pieces,  but  the  man  happened  to  have  a  child  in  his  arms,  so  the
q>irit  couldn't  harm  him.  The  man  sent  for  the  parson  without  delay ;  Parson
Corker  couldn't  manage  him  alone,  this  time;  had  to  get  some  more  par-
sons  to  help, — ^very  difficult  job ; — bound  Tregagle  at  last  to  the  same  task,
and  not  to  go  near  the  fresh  water.  He  is  still  there,  making  his  truss  of
iuid  and  spinning;  sand  ropes  to  bind  it.  What  some  people  take  to  be  the
**  wOxng  of  ihe  northern  deves  "  (cliffs)  is  the  roaring  of  Tregagle  because
there  is  a  storm  coming  from  tfie  north  to  scatter  his  sand.*         W.  B.

*  In  ooimezkHi  with  the  inoident  given  of  Tregeagle  and  the  child,  the  following  is
Interestixig  :—

I  find  in  the  Temple  Bar  MeLgatoMt  for  January  1862,  ''The  Autobiography  of  an
Bvll  Spirit,"  professing  to  be  an  examination  of  a  sti-ange  stoiy  related  by  Dr  Justinus
Ksmer.  In  this  a  woman  is  possessed  by  a  devil  or  sometimes  by  devils.  *'  Some-
times a  legion  of  fiends  appeared  to  take  possession  of  her,  and  the  clamour  on  such
eecarions  is  compared  to  that  of  a  pack  of  hoimds.  Amid  all  these  horrors  her  con*
flnement  ooeurred,  which  was  the  means  of  procuring  her  some  respite,  as  the  demon
^nPMzed  to  have  no  power  over  her  while  her  innocent  babe  was  in  her  arms."  To
fliSs  the  author  adds  the  following  note  :—

'tthis  ancient  gen#al  and  beautlftil  superstitian  is  graphically  illustrated  in  'the
lagend  of  Swardowski,  the  FoUsh  Faust.  Satan,  weary  of  the  services  the  magician
li  continually  requiring  at  his  hands,  decoys  him  to  a  house  in  Cracow,  where,  for
some  unexplained  reason,  he  expects  to  have  him  at  a  disadvantage.  Fat  on  his
'Koard  by  the  indiscretion  of  a  flock  of  ravens  and  owls,  who  cannot  suppress  theit
satisfaction  at  seeing  him  enter  the  house,  Swardowski  snatches  a  new-bom  child
ihnn  the  cradle  and  paces  the  room  with  it  in  his  arms.  In  rushes  the  devil,  as
tsRible  as  horns,  tail,  and  hoofs  can  make  him ;  but  confronted  with  the  infant,
leeoUs  and  colh^wes  vMtamUr.  This  suggests  to  him  the  propriety  of  iesorting  to
"moral  suasion ;"  and  after  a  while  he  thus  addresses  the  magician,—*'  Thou  art  a
futleman,  and  knowest  that  verbum  nobile  debd  esse  stabile,**  Swardowski  feels  that
be  cannot  break  his  word  of  honour  as  a  gentleman,  replaces  the  child  in  the  cradle,
and  flies  up  the  chimney  with  his  companion.  In  the  confusion  of  his  faculties,
bowever,  the  demon  would  seem  to  have  mistaken  the  way ;  at  all  events,  the  pair
fly  upwards  instead  of  downwards,— Swardowski  lustily  intoning  a  hymn  till  sud-
denly he  finds  his  companionftone,  and  himself  fixed  at  an  immeasiu*able  height  in
the  air,  and  hears  a  voice  above  him  saying,  "  Thus  shalt  thou  hang  until  the  day  of
Judgment  I"  He  has,  however,  changed  one  of  his  disciples  into  a  spider,  and  ia  in
the  habit  of  letting  bim  down  to  c<dlect  the  news  of  earth.  When,  therefore,  we  see
any  floating  threads  of  gossamer,  we  may  suspect  that  "  a  chiel's  amang  ua  taking
notes,"  though  it  is  not  equally  probabl^;tliat  he  will  ever  "  pront  them."

IbsSbbibb.  K


146  Romances  of  Tremagle.


DOSMEBT  FOOL.

MR  BOND,  in  his  "  Topographical  and  ffistorical  Sk€
of  the  Boroughs  of  East  and  West  Looe/'  writes  *
pool  is  distant  from  Looe  about  twelve  miles  o£
Carew  says : —

'  Bosmeiy  Pool  amid  the  moores.

On  top  stands  of  a  hill
More  than  a  mile  about,  no  streams
It  empt,  nor  any  fill.*

It  is  a  lake  of  fresh  water  about  a  mile  in  circumfei
the  only  one  in  Cornwall,  (unless  the  Loe  Pool  near  ED
may  be  deemed  such,)  and  probably  takes  its  name
Dome-Mer,  sweet  or  fresh-swater  sea.  It  is  about  eig
ten  feet  deep  in  many  parts.  The  notion  entertaini
some  of  there  being  a  whirlpool  in  its  middle,  I  can  c<
diet,  having,  some  years  ago,  passed  all  over  in  a  boat
kept  there."

Such  is  Mr  Bond's  evidence ;  but  this  is  nothing  com
with  the  popular  belief,  which  declares  the  pool  to  be  bo
less;  and  beyond  this,  is  it  not  known  to  every  man  of
that  a  thorn-bush  thrown  into  Dosmery  Pool  has  su:
the  middle  of  it,  and  after  some  time,  has  come  up  ii
mouth  Harbour  ?

Notwithstanding  that  Carew  says  that  "no  strea
empt,  nor  any  fill,"  James  MicheU  in  his  parochial  h
of  St  Neot's,  says, — "  It  is  situate  on  a  small  stream
St  Neot's  Eiver,  a  branch  of  the  Fowey,  which  ris
Dosmare  Pool."

There  is  a  ballad,  ''  Tregeagle,  or  Dozmari  PooU
Andente  Cornishe  Legende,  in  two  parts;*'  by  John
warne.  He  has  given  a  somewhat  different  version  c
legend  from  any  I  have  heard,  and  in  the  ballad  verj


Dosmery  Pool.  147

siderable  liberties  have  been  taken.  It  must,  however,  be
admitted,  that  nearly  aU  the  Incidents  introduced  in  the
poem  are  to  be  found  in  some  of  the  many  stories  current
amongst  the  peasantry.

Speaking  of  Dozmarfe  Pool,  Mr  Penwame  says : —

"  There  is  a  popular  story  attached  to  this  lake,  ridiculous
enough  as  most  of  those  tales  are.  It  is,  that  a  person  of
the  name  of  Tregeagle,  who  had  been  a  rich  and  powerful
man  but  very  wicked,  guilty  of  murder  and  other  heinous
dimes,  lived  near  this  place ;  and  that,  after  his  death,  his
spirit  haunted  the  neighbourhood,  but  was  at  length  exorcised
and  laid  to  rest  in  Dozmar^  Pool.  But  having  in  his  life-
time, in  order  to  enjoy  the  good  things  of  this  world,  dis-
posed of  his  soul  and  body  to  the  devil,  his  infernal
majesty  takes  great  pleasure  in  tormenting  him,  by  impos-
ing on  him  difficult  tasks ;  such  as  spinning  a  rope  of  sand,
dipping  out  the  pool  with  a  limpet  shell,  &c.,  and  at  times
amuses  himself  with  himting  him  over  the  moors  with  his
hell  hounds,  at  which  time  Tregeagle  is  heard  to  roar  and
howl  in  almost  dreadful  manner,  so  that  'roaring  or  howling
Ike  Tregeagle,'  is  a  common  expression  amongst  the  vulgar
In  Cornwall.  Such  is  the  foundation  on  which  is  built  the
following  tale.  The  author  has  given  it  an  ancient  dress  as
best  suited  to  the  subject."

Tregeagle,  in  the  ballad,  is  a  shepherd  dwelling  "  bye  the
poole  on  the  moore."  He  was  ambitious  and  unscrupulous.
"  I  wish  for  all  that  I  see !"  was  his  exclamation,  when  "  a
figure  gigantick  "  is  seen  "  midst  the  gloom  of  the  night"

This  spirit  offers  Tregeagle,  in  exchange  for  his  soul,  all
that  he  desires  for  one  hundred  years.  Tregeagle  does  not
hesitate.

" 'A  bargaine !  a  bargaine  !'  he  said  aloude;
<  At  my  lot  I  will  never  repine ;


148  Romances  of  Tregeagle.

I  sweare  to  observe  it,  I  sweare  by  the  roode.
And  am  readye  to  seale  and  to  sygne  with,  my  bLoode,
Both  my  soul  and  my  body  are  thine.' "

Tregeagle  is  thrown  into  a  trance,  from  which  he  ai
to  find  himself  ''  cloathed  in  gorgeous  attyre,"  and  masl
a  wide  domain  of  great  beauty.

''  Where  Dozmare  lake  its  darke  waters  did  roll,

A  castle  now  reared  its  heade,
Wythe  manye  a  turrete  soe  statelye  and  talle;
And  many  a  warden  dyd  walke  on  its  waUe,

All  splendidly  cloathed  in  redde."

Surrounded  with  all  that  is  supposed  to  minister  t
enjoyment  of  a  sensual  life,  time  passes  on,  and  ''  Tre|
ne'er  notyc'd  its  flyghte."  Yet  we  are  told  "he  nu
each  day  with  some  damnable  deed."  In  the  midst  c
vicious  career  he  is  returning  home  through  a  violent  8
and  he  is  accosted  by  a  damsel  on  a  white  horse  and  a
page  by  her  side,  who  craves  his  protection.  Tregeagle
this  beautiful  maiden  to  his  castle.  The  page  is  mai
tell  the  lady's  story ;  she  is  called  Goonhylda,  and  i
daughter  of  "  Earl  Cornwaill,"  living  in  Launceston,  or,
was  then  called,  "  Dunevyd  Castle."  Engaged  in  the
sures  of  the  hunt,  the  lady  and  her  page  are  lost  and
taken  by  the  storm.  Tregeagle,  as  the  storm  rages  savf
makes  them  his  "  guests  for  the  nyghte,"  promising  to
a  *'  quicke  messenger "  to  inform  her  father  of  her  w
abouts.     At  the  same  time,

"  If  that  the  coimtenance  speaketh  the  mynde,
Dark  deeds  he  revolved  in  hys  breaste."

The  earl  hears  nothing  of  his  daughter;  and  having  pj

a  miserable  night  he  sets  forth  in  the  morning,  "  Wyth

knyghtes,  and  esquyers,  and  serving  men  all,"  in  searc

his  child,  and

"  At  length  to  the  plaine  he  emerged  from  the  woode.
For  a  father,  alas,  what  a  syghte !


Dosmery  Pool.  149


There  lay  her  &yre  garments  all  xlrenched  in  blood.
Her  palfreye  all  tbm  in  the  dark  crimson  floode.
By  the  ravenous  beasts  of  the  nyghte."

is  a  delasion  caused  by  enchantment ;  Goonhylda  still
Tregeagle  offers  himself  to  Goonhylda,  who  rejects  his
^th  scorn,  and  desires  to  leave  the  castla  Tregeagle
r  informs  her  that  shet  cannot  quit  the  place ;  Qoonhylda
bens  him  with  her  father's  vengeance.  She  is  a  prisoner,
er  page  contrives  to  make  his  escape,  and  in  the  evening
»  at  Launceston  Castle  gate.  The  Earl  of  Cornwall
Qg  from  the  page  that  his  daughter  lives  and  is  a  -
ler,  arms  himself  and  all  his  retainers —

**  And  ere  the  greye  mome  peep*d  the  eastern  hills  o'er.
At  Tregeagle's  gate  sounded  hys  home."

»gle  will  not  obey  the  summons,  but  suddenly ''  they
ie  the  Black  Hunter's  dread  voyce  in  the  wynde  V*

They  heard  hys  curste  heU  houndes  runn  yelping  behynde.
And  his  steede  thimdered  loude  on  the  eare ! "

gentleman  in  black,  shakes  the  castle  with  his  cry,
ne  forth  Sir  Tregeagle,  come  forth  and  submit  to  thy
'  Of  course  he  comes  forth,  and  "the  rede  bodte  of
eaunce  shot  forth  wyth  a  glare,  and  strooke  him  a  corpse
egrounde!"

"  Then  from  the  black  corpse  a  pale  spectre  appear*d.
And  hyed  him  away  through  the  night."

ihylda  is  of  course  found  uninjured,  and  taken  home  by
arl.    The  castle  disappears  and  Dozmare  Pool  reappears ;

**  Stylle  as  the  traveller  pursues  hys  lone  waye.

In  horroure  at  nyghte  o*er  the  waste,
He  hears  Syr  Tregeagle  with  shrieks  rushe  awaye,
He  hears  the  Black  Hunter  pursuing  his  preye,

And  ihrynkes  at  hys  bugle's  dread  blaste."


150  Romances  of  Tregeagle.


THE  WISH  HOUNDS.

THE  tradition  of  the  Midnight  Hunter  and  his  hea
hounds^  always,  in  Cornwall,  associated  with  Tr^
prevails  everywhere.

The  Abbot's  Way  on  Dartmoor,  an  ancient  road  t
extends  into  Cornwall,  is  said  to  be  the  favourite  con
ground  of  "  the  wish  or  wisked  hounds  of  Dartmoor,"  c
also  the  "  yell-hounds,"  and  the  "  yeth-hounds."  The  \
of  the  Dewerstone  is  also  the  place  of  their  midnight  ]
ings.  Once  I  was  told  at  Jump,  that  Sir  Francis  I
drove  a  hearse  into  Plymouth  at  night  with  headless  h
and  that  he  was  followed  by  a  pack  of  "  yelling  hou
without  heads.  If  dogs  hear  the  cry  of  the  wish  he
they  aU  die.  May  it  not  be  that  "  wish  "  is  connected
the  west  country  word  "  whist,"  meaning  more  than  ord
melancholy,  a  sorrow  which  has  something  weird  surrc
ingit?

*'  And  then  he  sought  the  dark-green  lane,
Whose  willows  moum'd  the  faded  year.
Sighing  (I  heard  the  love-lom  swain)
*  Wishness  /  oh,  toishness,  walketh  here.*  '*

The  Wishful  Swain  of  Devon. — By  Polwh

The  author  adds  in  a  note,  "  An  expression  used  b
vulgar  in  the  north  of  Devon,  to  express  local  melanc
There  is  something  sublime  in  this  impersonation  of  1
ness."  The  expression  is  as  common  in  Cornwall  as  it
Devonshire.

Mr  Kemble  has  the  following  incorrect  remarks  on
word : — "  In  Devonshire  to  this  day  all  magical  or  si
natural  dealings  go  under  the  common  name  of  wisht
Can  this  have  any  reference  to  Woden's  name  *  wyse  V  "
Polwhele's  note  gives  the  true  meaning  of  the  word.


Chen^' s  Hounds.  151

r  Kemble's  idea  is  supported  by  the  fact^  that  ''  there  are
^ishanger,  (Wisehangre  or  Woden's  Meadow,)  one  about
or  miles  south-west  of  Wanborough  in  Surrey,  and  another
tar  Gloucester."*  And  we  find  also,  "  south-east  of  Pixhill
Tedstone,  Delamere,  there  are  Wishmoor  and  Inksmoor
ar  Sapey  Bridge  in  Whitboum.'*  -f"


CHENEY'S  HOUNDS.

N  the  parish  of  St  Teath  a  pack  of  hounds  was  once  kept
by  an  old  squire  named  Cheney.  How  he  or  they  died
cannot  learn ;  but  on  "  Cheney  Downs  "  the  ghosts  of  the
)g8  are  sometimes  seen,  and  often  heard,  in  rough  weather.
In  the  western  parishes  of  the  county,  I  can  name  several
laces  which  are  said  to  be  haunted  by  the  "  wish  hounds."  J

*  Kemble's  Saxons  in  England,  vol.  i.  p.  346.  'Wistman's  Wood  on
urtmoor,  no  doubt  derives  its  name  from  its  extraordinary  character,
itfrington,  in  his  "  Dartmoor,'*  weU  describes  its  oaks : —

'<|But  of  this  groTO,
ThiB  pigmy  groye,  not  one  has  dimb'd  the  air,
So  emulously  that  its  loftiest  branch
Haj  brush  the  traveller's  brow.    The  twisted  roots
Haye  dasp'd,  in  search  of  nourishment,  the  rocks.
And  strsflp^bd  wide,  and  pierced  the  stony  soil."

"  Around  the  boughs,
Hoaxy  and  feeble,  and  around  the  trunks
With  grasp  destructive  feeding  on  the  life
That  lingers  yet,  the  ivy  winds,  and  moss
Of  growth  enormous."
DartmooTf  a  ducriptioe  poem,  Ity  N.  T.  Cabrinoton,  1826.    Murray.

t  Tbe  BritLsh,  Roman,  and  Saxon  Antiquities  and  Folk-lore  of  Wor-
^trtenhire,  by  Jabez  Allies.

X  See  Athenmm,  No.  1018,  March  27|  1847.  See  Appendix  H  for
VotM  oo  the  Baboibt.


THE  MERMAIDS.


**  One  Friday  morning  we  set  sail,  J

And  when  not  far  from  land,  T

We  all  espied  a  fair  mermaid

With  a  comb  and  glaas  in  her  hand.
The  stormy  winds  they  did  blow,"  &c.


ROMANCES  OF  THE  MERMAIDS.


H0B7A  OB  HOBVETE,  (Sea-dsnghters-)


HH    be


**  Toa  dwell  not  on  land,  but  in  the  flood.
Which  would  not  with  me  agree/'

--JDtJce  Magniu  amd  the  Mermaid.— -SmAUJm,

parish  of  this  name  is  situated  on  the  north-
west coast  of  Cornwall, — ^the  parish  of  St  Just
being  on  its  western  borders,  and  that  of  Zennor
on  the  east,  between  it  and  St  Ives.  The  Cornish
historian  Tonkin  says,  "Morva  signifies  Locus  Maritimus,  a
[dace  near  the  sea,  as  this  parish  is.  The  name  is  sometimes
irritten  Marveth,  implying  much  the  same  sense.'"

The  similarity  of  this  name  to  ''  Morgan,**  secMimnen,  and
'  Morverch,"  seordatighters,  which  Mr  Eeightley  has  shewn
14  IB  applied  to  the  mermaids  of  the  Breton  ballads,  is  not  a
ittle  carious.  There  are  several  stories  current  in  this  parish
^f  ladies  seen  on  the  rocks,  of  ladies  going  off  from  the  shore
o  peculiar  isolated  rocks,  at  special  sea^sons,  and  of  ladies
fitting  weeping  and  wailing  on  the  shore.  Mr  Blight,  in  hia
'  Week  at  the  Land's-End,"  speaking  of  the  church  in  the
idjmning  parish,  Zennor,  which  still  remains  in  nearly  its
[vimitive  condition,  whereas  Morva  church  is  a  modem
ttmcture,  says, — "  Some  of  the  bench  ends  were  carved ;  on


1 54  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

one  is  a  strange  figure  of  a  merwmA,  which  to  many  mi(
seem  out  of  character  in  a  church."  (Mr  Blight  gives
drawing  of  this  bench  end.)  This  is  followed  by  a  qnotati
bearing  the  initials  K  S.  H.,  which  it  is  presumed  \
those  of  the  Eev.  R  S.  Hawker,  of  Morwenstow.

"The  fishermen  who  were  the  ancestors  of  the  Char
came  from  the  Galilean  waters  to  haul  for  men.  We,  be
to  God  at  the  font,  are  children  of  the  water.  Therefore
the  early  symbolism  of  the  Church  was  of  and  from  the  8
The  carvure  of  the  early  arches  was  taken  from  the  sea  a
its  creatures.  Fish,  dolphins,  mermen,  and  mermaidB  aboa
in  the  early  types,  transferred  to  wood  and  stona'*

Surely  the  poet  of  "  the  Western  Shore  "  might  have  (
plamed  the  fact  of  the  figures  of  mermaids  being  carved
the  bench  ends  of  some  of  the  old  churches  with  less  difficnl
had  he  remembered  that  nearly  all  the  churches  on  the  ca
of  Cornwall  were  built  by  and  for  fishermen,  to  whom  I
superstitions  of  mermen  and  mermaidens  had  the  f amilian
of  a  creed.

The  intimate  connexion  between  the  inhabitants  of  Brittai
of  Cornwall,  and  of  Wales,  would  appear  to  lead  to  the  co
elusion  that  the  Breton  word  Morverch,  or  mermaid,  had  mu
to  do  with  the  name  of  this  parish,  Morva, — of  Morvel,  ne
Liskeard;  and  probably  of  Morwenstow,  of  which  the  vi«
Mr  Hawker,  writes, — "  My  glebe  occupies  a  position  of  wi
and  singular  beauty.  Its  western  boundary  is  the  sea^  skirt
by  tall  and  tremendous  clifis,  and  near  their  brink,  with.t
exquisite  taste  of  ecclesiastical  antiquity,  is  placed  the  churc
The  original  and  proper  designation  of  the  parish  is  Morwe
stow — that  is,  Morwenna's  Stow,  or  station ;  but  it  has  be<
corrupted  by  recent  usage,  like  many  other  local  names.'*


Merrymaids  and  Merry  men.  155

MEBBYMAIDS  AND  MEBBYMEN.

THE  "merry-maids"  of  the  Cornish  fishermen  and  sailors
possess  the  well-recognised  features  of  the  mermaid.
The  Breton  ballad,  quoted  by  Mr  Keightley,  relating  to  the
Morgan  («ea-«;omen)  and  the  Morverch  (sea-daughters)  pecu-
culiarly  adapts  itself  to  the  Cornish  merry-maid.

"  Fisher,  hast  thou  seen  the  mermaid  combing  her  hair,
yellow  as  gold,  by  the  noontide  sun,  at  the  edge  of  the
water?"

"  I  have  seen  the  fair  mermaid ;  I  have  also  heard  her
singing  her  songs  plaintive  as  the  waves."

The  Irish  legends  make  us  acquainted  with  the  amours  of
men  with  those  sea-sirens.  We  learn  that  the  Merrows  or
Momachs  came  occasionally  from  the  sea,  and  interested
themselves  in  the  affairs  of  man.  Amongst  the  fragments
which  have  been  gathered,  here  a  pebble  and  there  a  pebble,
along  the  Western  coast,  will  be  found  similar  narratives.

The  sirens  of  the  iEgean  Sea — probably  the  parents  of
the  mediaeval  mermaid — possess  in  a  pre-eminent  degree  the
beauty  and  the  falsehood  of  all  the  race.  Like  all  other
things,  even  those  mythical  creations  take  colour  from  that
they  work  in,  like  the  dyer's  hand.  The  Italian  mermaid  is
the  true  creature  of  the  romance  of  the  sunny  south,  while
the  lady  of  our  own  southern  seas,  although  she  possesses
much  in  common  with  her  Mediterranean  sister,  has  less
poetry,  but  more  hfman  sympathy.  The  following  stories
read  in  connexion  with  those  given  by  Mr  Keightley  and
by  Mr  Croker  will  shew  this.*

*  See  ''  The  Fairy  Family  :  a  Series  of  Ballads  and  Metrical  Tales,  mus-
trating  the  Fairy  Mythology  of  Europe,"  Longman,  1857 ;  "  The  Fairy
Mythology,  Illustratiye  of  the  Romance  and  Superstitions  of  Various
Countries^"  by  Thomas  Keightley;  and  '*  Irish  Fairy  Legends,''  by  Crofton
Croker.


156  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

When  five-and-thirty  years  since  I  spent  several  nights
a  fisherman's  cottage  on  a  south-western  coast,  I  was  treat
to  many  a  "  long  yam  "  respecting  mermaids  seen  by  t
father  and  his  sons  in  the  southern  ocean.  The  appearan
of  those  creatures  on  our  own  shores,  they  said,  was  rai
but  still  they  knew  they  had  been  seen.  From  them  I  leaiii
of  more  than  one  family  who  have  received  mysterious  pow«
from  the  sea-nymphs ;  and  I  have  since  heard  that  membc
of  those  families  still  live,  and  that  they  intimate  to  th
credulous  friends,  their  firm  belief  that  this  power,  which  th
say  has  been  transmitted  to  them,  was  derived,  by  some  01
of  their  ancestors,  from  merman  or  mermaiden.

Usually  those  creatures  are  associated  with  some  call
trophe ;  but  they  are  now  and  then  spoken  of  as  the  ben
factors  of  man.

One  word  more.  The  story  of  *'2%e  if  ermaid'^Fengreana
has  been  produced  from  three  versions  of  evidently  fl
same  legend,  which  differed  in  many  respects  one  from  tl
other,  yet  agreeing  in  the  main  with  each  other.  The  fir
I  heard  at  the  Lizard,  or  rather  at  Coverach  ;  the  second  i
Sennen  Cove,  near  the  Land's-End ;  the  third  at  Perranzabalo
I  have  preferred  the  last  locality,  as  being  peculiarly  fitte
for  the  home  of  a  mermaid  story,  and  because  the  old  ma
who  told  the  tale  there  was  far  more  graphic  in  his  incidenta
and  these  were  strung  more  closely  together  than  either  <
the  other  stories*

*  The  following  extract  from  a  letter  from  an  esteemed  correspondei
fihews  the  existence  of  a  belief  in  those  fabled  creations  of  the  ooei
amongst  an  extensive  class  of  the  labouring  population  of  ComwaU.  Th«
is  so  much  that  is  characteristic  in  my  correspondent's  letter  that  it
worth  preserving  as  supporting  the  evidence  of  the  existing  belief  : —

**  I  had  the  chance  of  seeing  what  many  of  our  natives  firmly  beUttfi
to  be  that  family.  Some  fourteen  years  ago  I  found  myself  with  abo
fifty  emigrants,  in  the  Gulf  of  St  Lawrence,  on  board  the  old  tub  i2eaol
iwm,  Captain  Davies,  commander.     We  were  shrouded  in  a  fog  so  tliii


The  Mermaid  of  Pads  tow.  1 5  7


THE  IDBBMAID  OF  FADSTOW.

TELE  port  of  Padstow  has  a  good  natural  harbour^  so  far
as  rocky  area  goes,  but  it  is  so  choked  up  with  drifting
sands  as  to  be  nearly  useless.  A  peasant  recently  thus  ex^-
plained  the  cause.  He  told  how  "  it  was  once  deep  water  for
the  largest  vessel,  and  under  the  care  of  a  merry-maid — as
he  called  her ;  but  one  day,  as  she  was  sporting  on  the  sur-
face, a  fellow  with  a  gun  shot  at  her.  "  She  dived  for  a
moment ;  but  re-appearing,  raised  her  right  arm,  and  vowed
that  henceforth  the  harbour  should  be  desolate."  "  And,"
added  the  old  man,  "  it  always  will  be  so.  We  have  had
commissions,  and  I  know  not  what,  about  converting  this
place  into  a  harbour  of  refuge.    A  harbour  of  refuge  would

thafc  you  might  cut  it  like  a  cheese,  almost  all  the  way  from  the  Bauks  to
AnliooBtL  One  morning,  soon  after  sunrise,  when  near  that  island,  the
fog  as  thick  as  night  overhead,  at  times  would  rise  and  full  on  the  shore
like  the  tantalising  stage  curtain.  All  at  once  there  was  a  clear  opening
j^joX  through  the  dense  clouds  which  rested  on  the  water  that  gave  us  a
gUmpae  of  the  shore,  with  the  rocks  covered  with  what  to  us  appeared
very  strange  creatures.  In  a  minute,  the  hue  and  cry  from  stem  to  stem,
among  aU  the  cousin  Johnys,  was  *  What  are  they,  you  ?  What  are  they,
youf  Somebody  gave  the  word  mermaids.  Old  men,  women,  and
children,  that  hadn't  been  out  of  their  bunks  for  weeks,  tore  on  deck  to
see  the  mermaids,  when,  alas !  the  curtain  dropped  or  rather  closed,  and
the  fair  were  lost  to  sight,  but  to  memory  dear ;  for  all  the  way  to  Quebec
those  not  lucky  enough  to  see  the  sight  bothered  the  others  out  of  their
lives  to  know  how  they  looked,  and  if  we  saw  the  comb  and  glass  in
their  hands.  The  captain  might  as  well  save  his  breath  as  tell  them  that
the  creatures  they  saw  on  the  rocks  were  seals,  walruses,  and  sea-calves.
*  Koft  yet.  Captain  dear,  you  won't  come  that  over  me  at  all ;  no,  not  by  a
long  chalk  !  no,  not  at  all,  I  can  tell  'e  !  I  know  there  are  mermaids  in
the  sea ;  have  heard  many  say  so  who  have  seen  them  too  !  but  as  for  sea-
calveB,  I  ain't  such  a  calf  nor  donkey  neither  as  to  believe  ut — there  may  be
a  lew  of  what  we  call  soils  (seals)  for  all  I  know ;  perhaps  so,  but  the  rest
wen  mermaidens.'  No  doubt  centuries  hence  this  story  of  the  mermaidens
will  be  handed  down,  with  many  additions,  in  the  log-huts  of  the  Western
StatM.**


158  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

be  a  great  blessing,  but  not  all  the  Government  commissii
in  the  world  could  keep  the  sand  out,  or  make  the  harh
deep  enough  to  swim  a  frigate,  unless  the  parsons  can  f
out  the  way  to  take  up  the  merrymaid's  curse."

Another  tale  refers  the  choking  up  of  this  harbour  to
bad  spirit  Tregeagle.


THE  MERMAID'S  BOCE.

TO  the  westward  of  the  beautiful  Cove  of  Lemoma  i
rock  which  has  through  all  time  borne  the  above  nai
I  have  never  been  enabled  to  learn  any  special  story  in  0
nexion  with  this  rock.  There  exists  the  popular  fancy  c
lady  shewing  herself  here  previous  to  a  storm — ^with,
course,  the  invariable  comb  and  glass.  She  is  said  to  hi
been  heard  singing  most  plaintively  before  a  wreck,  1
that,  all  along  the  shore,  the  spirits  have  echoed  her  in  1
moaning  voices  *  Young  men  are  said  to  have  swam  oflF
the  rock,  lured  by  the  songs  which  they  heard,  but  they  h
never  returned.  Have  we  not  in  this  a  dim  shadow  of
story  of  the  Sirens?

THE  MEBMAID  OP  SEATON.

I^EAK  Looe, — that  is,  between  Down  Derry  and  Looe,
Xl      there  is  a  little  sand-beach  called  "  Seaton."

Tradition  tells  us  that  here  once  stood  a  goodly  co
mercial  town  bearing  this  name,  and  that  when  it  was  in
pride,  Plymouth  was  but  a  small  fishing  village.

*  The  undulations  of  the  air,  travelling  with  more  rapidity  than
ciurents,  reach  our  shores  long  before  the  tempest  by  which  they  have  b
established  in  the  centre  of  the  Atlantic,  and  by  producing  a  low  moan
sound,  "the  soughing  of  the  wind,"  predicates  the  storms.     The  **mo
of  Tregeagle ''  is  another  expression  indicating  the  same  phenomenon.


The  Old  Man  of  Cury.  1 59

The  town  of  Seaton  is  said  to  have  been  overwhelmed
with  sand  at  an  early  period,  the  catastrophe  having  been
brought  about, — as  in  the  case  of  the  filling  up  of  Fadstow
harbour, — by  the  curse  of  a  mermaid,  who  had  suffered  some
injury  from  the  sailors  who  belonged  to  this  port.  Beyond
tlus  I  have  been  imable  to  glean  any  story  worth  preserving.


THE  OLD  MAN  OP  CUBY.

MORE  than  a  hundred  years  since,  on  a  fine  summer  day^
when  the  sun  shone  brilliantly  from  a  cloudless  sky,
an  old  man  from  the  parish  of  Cury,  or,  as  it  was  called  in
olden  time,  Gorantyn,  was  walking  on  the  sands  in  one  of  the
coves  near  the  Lizard  Point.     The  old  man  was  meditating,
or  at  least  he  was  walking  onward,  either  thinking  deeply,
or  not  thinking  at  all — ^that  is,  he  was  "lost  in  thought" —
when  suddenly  he  came  upon  a  rock  on  which  was  sitting
a  beautiful  girl  with  fair  hair,  so  long  that  it  covered  her
entire  person.     On  the  in-shore  side  of  the  rock  was  a  pool
of  the  most  transparent  water,  which  had  been  left  by  the
seceding  tide  in  the  sandy  hollow  the  waters  had  scooped  out.
TThis  young  creature  was  so  absorbed  in  her  occupation, —
arranging  her  hair  in  the  watery  mirror,  or  in  admiration  of
Iier  own  lovely  face,  that  she  was  unconscious  of  an  intruder.
The  old  man  stood  looking  at  her  for  some  time  ere  he
xiade  up  his  mind  how  to  act    At  length  he  resolved  to
«peak  to  the  maiden.     "What  cheer,  young  one?''  he  said ;
^  what  art  thee  doing  there  by  thyself,  then,  this  time  o'  day  ?"
As  soon  as  she  heard  the  voice,  she  slid  off  the  rock  entirely
under  the  water.    The  old  man  could  not  tell  what  to  make
of  it    He  thought  the  girl  would  drown  herself,  so  he  ran
on  to  the  rock  to  render  her  assistance,  conceiving  that  in
her  flight  at  being  found  naked  by  a  man  she  had  fallen


1 60  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

into  the  pool,  and  possibly  it  was  deep  enough  to  diown
He  looked  into  the  water,  and,  sure  enough,  he  could  m
out  the  head  and  shoulders  of  a  woman,  and  long  hair  floal
like  fine  seaweeds  all  over  the  pond,  hiding  what  appet
to  him  to  be  a  fish's  taiL  He  could  not,  however,  see  i
thing  distinctly,  owing  to  the  abundance  of  hair  fleal
around  the  figure.  The  old  man  had  heard  of  memu
from  the  fishermen  of  Gunwalloe ;  so  he  conceived  this  1
must  be  one,  and  he  was  at  first  very  much  frightened,
saw  that  the  young  lady  was  quite  as  much  terrified  ai
was,  and  that,  from  shame  or  fear,  she  endeavoured  to  I
herself  in  the  crevices  of  the  rock,  and  bury  herself  un
the  sea-weeds.

Summoning  courage,  at  last  the  dd  man  addressed  1
"Donate  be  afraid,  my  dear.  You  needn't  mind  me
wouldn't  do  ye  any  harm.  I'm  an  old  man,  and  wouk
hurt  ye  any  more  than  your  grandfather."

After  he  had  talked  in  this  soothing  strain  for  some  tii
the  young  lady  took  courage,  and  raised  her  head  above
water.     She  was  crying  bitterly,  and,  as  soon  as  she  co
speak,  she  begged  the  old  man  to  go  away.

"  I  must  know,  my  dearie,  something  about  ye,  nov
have  caught  ye.  It  is  not  every  day  that  an  old  man  catc'
a  merry  maid,  and  I  have  heard  some  strange  tales  of  you  wa
ladies.  Now,  my  dear,  don'te  be  afraid,  I  would  not  huri
single  hair  of  that  beautiful  head.  How  came  ye  here
After  some  further  coaxing  she  told  the  old  man  the  folic
ing  story : — She  and  her  husband  and  little  ones  had  Ix
busy  at  sea  all  the  morning,  and  they  were  very  tired  w
swimming  in  the  hot  sun  ;  so  the  merman  proposed  that  tl
should  retire  to  a  cavern,  which  they  were  in  the  habit
visiting  in  Kynance  Cove.  Away  they  all  swam,  and  entei
the  cavern  at  mid-tide.   As  there  was  some  nice  soft  weed,  a


The  Old  Man  of  Cury.  i6r

ave  was  deliciously  cool,  the  merman  was  disposed  to
,  and  told  them  not  to  wake  him  until  the  rise  of  the  tide.
ras  soon  fast  asleep,  snoring  most  Instily.  The  children
;  out  and  were  playing  on  the  lovely  sands  ;  so  the  mer-
.  thought  she  should  like  to  look  at  the  world  a  little,
looked  with  delight  on  the  children  rolling  to  and  fro
e  shallow  waves,  and  she  laughed  heartily  at  the.  crabs
ing  in  their  own  funny  way.  "  The  scent  from  the  flowers
s  down  over  the  cliffs  so  sweetly,"  said  she,  "  that  I  longed
t  nearer  the  lovely  things  which  yielded  those  rich  odours,
[  floated  on  from  rock  to  rock  imtil  I  came  to  this  one ;
finding  that  I  could  not  proceed  any  further,  I  thought
old  seize  the  opportunity  of  dressing  my  hair.''  She
A  her  fingers  through  those  beautiful  locks,  and  shook
a  number  of  small  crabs,  and  much  broken  sea-weed,
went  on  to  say  that  she  had  sat  on  the  rock  amusing
df,  until  the  voice  of  a  mortal  terrified  her,  and  until
she  had  no  idea  that  the  sea  was  so  far  out,  and  a  long
Mur  of  sand  between  her  and  it  '' What  shall  I  do !  what
I  do !  Oh,  I  'd  give  the  world  to  get  out  to  sea.  Oh^
rhatshallldor

le  old  man  endeavoured  to  console  her ;  but  his  attempts
in  vain.  She  told  him  her  husband  would  ''  carry  on ''
.  dreadfully  if  he  awoke  and  found  her  absent,  and  he
d  be  certain  of  awaking  at  the  turn  of  the  tide,  as  that
his  dinner  time.  He  was  very  savage  when  he  was
^,  and  would  as  soon  eat  the  children  as  not,  if  there
no  other  food  at  hand.  He  was  also  dreadfully  jealou£f,
if  she  was  not  at  his  side  when  he  awoke,  he  would  at
suspect  her  of  having  run  off  with  some  other  merman,
begged  the  old  man  to  bear  her  out  to  sea.  If  he
d  but  do  so,  she  would  procure  him  any  three  things  he
d  wish  for.  Her  entreaties  at  length  prevailed ;  and,  ac-
Uf  SiBm.  li


1 6  2  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

cording  to  her  desire,  the  old  nian  knelt  down  on  the  rook  i
his  back  towards  her.  She  clasped  her  fair  arms  aromu
neck,  and  locked  her  long  finny  fingers  together  on  his  th]
He  got  up  from  the  rock  with  his  burthen,  and  carried
mermaid  thus  across  the  sands.  As  she  rode  in  this  *
she  asked  the  old  man  to  tell  her  what  he  dedred.

"I  will  not  wish,''  said  he,  "for  silver  or  gold,  but
me  the  power  to  do  good  to  my  neighbours :  first,  to  b
the  spells  of  witchcraft ;  next,  to  charm  away  diseases ;
thirdly,  to  discover  thieves,  and  restore  stolen  goods.*'

All  this  she  promised  he  should  possess ;  but  he  i
come  to  a  half-tide  rock  on  another  day,  and  she  would
struct  him  how  to  accomplish  the  three  things  he  des
They  had  reached  the  water,  and  taking  her  comb  from
hair,  she  gave  it  to  the  old  man,  telling  him  he  had  bat  to  c
the  water  and  call  her  at  any  time,  and  she  would  ooia
him.  The  mermaid  loosened  her  grasp,  and  sliding  off  tb
man's  back  into  the  sea,  she  waved  him  a  kiss  and  disappei
At  the  appointed  time  the  old  man  was  at  the  half-tide  roc
known  to  the  present  time  as  the  Mermaid's  rock, — and
was  he  instructed  in  many  mysteries.  Amongst  other)
learned  to  break  the  spells  of  witches  from  man  or  Ix
to  prepare  a  vessel  of  water,  in  which  to  shew  to  anj/
who  had  property  stolen,  the  face  of  the  thief ;  to  cl
shingles,  tetters,  St  Antony's  fire,  and  St  Vitus's  dance ;
he  learnt  also  all  the  mysteries  of  bramble  leaves,  and
like.

The  mermaid  had  a  woman's  curiosity,  and  she  persu
her  old  friend  to  take  her  to  some  secret  place,  from  \f
she  could  see  more  of  the  dry  land,  and  of  the  funny  p(
who  lived  on  it,  "  and  had  their  tails  split,  so  that  they  c
walk."  On  taking  the  mermaid  back  to  the  sea,  she  wi
her  friend  to  visit  her  abode,  and  promised  even  to  make


The  Mermaid' s  Vengeance.  163

jTOimg  if  he  would  do  so,  which  favour  the  old  gentleman  re-
spectfully declined.  A  family,  well  known  in  CornwaU,  have
F<Nr  some  generations  exerciied  the  power  of  charming,  &c.
rhey  account  for  the  possession  of  this  power  in  the  manner
related.  Some  remote  great-grandfather  was  the  individual
irho  received  the  mermaid's  comb,  which  they  retain  to  the
present  day,  and  shew  as  evidence  of  the  truth  of  their
being  supematurally  endowed.  Some  people  are  unbeliev-
ing enough  to  say  the  comb  is  only  a  part  of  a  shark's  jaw.
So^tical  people  are  never  lovable  people.


THE  MERMAIFS  VENGEANCE.*

rone  of  the  deep  valleys  of  the  parish  of  Perranzabuloe,
which  are  remarkable  for  their  fertility,  ai^d  especially,
for  the  abundance  of  fruit  which  the  orchards  produce,  lived
indays  long  ago; — amidst  a  rudely-civilised  people, — afarmer's
labourer,  his  wife,  with  one  child,  a  daughter.  The  man  and
vtnnan  were  equally  industrious.  The  neatly  whitewashed
VilLs  of  their  mud-built  cottage,  the  well  kept  gravelled  paths,
ttd  carefuUy-weeded  beds  of  their  small  garden,  in  which
flowers  were  cultivated  for  ornament,  and  vegetables  for  use,
imdaimed  at  once  the  character  of  the  inmates.  In  contrast
lith  the  neighbouring  cottages,  this  one,  although  smaller
{ban  many  others,  had  a  superior  aspect,  and  the  occupiers
rf  it  exhibited  a  strong  contrast  to  those  peasants  and  miners
ttddst  whom  they  dwelt

Pauialuna,  as  the  man  was  called,  or  Penna  the  Proud,  as
he  was,  in  no  very  friendly  spirit,  named  by  his  less  thought-

•  Sereral  Tersions  of  the  following  story  have  been  given  me.  The  gene-
al  ide*  of  the  tale  belongs  to  the  north  coast ;  but  the  fact  of  mermaidenB
MUi^  imiooenta  under  their  charge  was  common  around  the  Lizard,  and
iisoae  olthe  ooyes  near  the  Laad's-£nd.


1 64  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

fill  and  more  impulsive  fellows^  was,  as  we  have  said,  a  f am
labourer.  His  master  was  a  wealthy  yeoman^  and  he,  a
many  years'  experience,  was  so*  convinced  of  the  excee(
industry  and  sterling  honesty  of  Penna,  that  he  made
the  manager  of  an  outlying  farm  in  this  parish,  under
hind,  (or  hine, — the  Saxon  pronunciation  is  still  retainec
the  west  of  England,)  or  general  supervisor  of  this
numerous  other  extensive  farms.

Penna  was  too  great  a  favourite  with  the  Squire  to '
favourite  of  the  hind's;  he  was  evidently  jealous  of  him,
from  not  being  himself  a  mail  of  very  strict  principlei
hated  the  unobtrusive  goodness  of  his  underling,  and  was
stantly  on  the  watch  to  discover  some  cause  of  complaint
was  not,  however,  often  that  he  was  successful  in  this.  E
task  committed  to  tha  care  of  Penna,  and  he  was  often ;
posely  overtasked,  was  executed  with  great  care  and  despi
With  the  wife  of  Penna,  however,  the  case  was  unfortuzu
dififerent.  Honour  Penna  was  as  industrious  as  her  hush
and  to  him  she  was  in  all  respects  a  helpmate.  She
however,  naturally  a  proud  spirit,  and  this  had  been  en
raged  in  her  youth  by  her  parents.  Honour  was  very  pi
as  a  girl,  and,  indeed,  she  retained  much  beauty  as  a  woi
The  only  education  she  received  was  the  wild  one  of
perience,  and  this  within  a  very  narrow  circle.  She  g
an  ignorant  girl,  amongst  ignorant  men  and  women,  fe
them  being  able  to  write  their  names,  and  scarcely  ai
them  to  read.  There  was  much  native  grace  about  her,
she  was  flattered  by  the  young  men,  and  envied  by  the  y(
women,  of  the  village, — the  envy  and  the  flattery  I
equally  pleasant  to  her.  In  the  same  village  was  bom,
brought  up,  Tom  Chenalls,  who  had,  in  the  course  of  y
become  hind  to  the  Squire.  Tom,  as  a  young  man,  had  <
expressed  himself  fond  of  Honour,  but  he  was  always


The  Mermaid! s  Vengeance.  165

tastefnl  to  the  village  maiden,  and  eventually,  while  yet  young,
she  was  married  to  Pennaluna,  who  came  from  the  southern
coast,  bringing  with  him  the  recommendation  of  being  a
stranger,  and  an  exceedingly  hard-working  man,  who  was
certain  to  earn  bread,  and  something  more,  for  his  wife  and
family.  In  the  relations  in  which  these  people  were  now
placed  towards  each  other,  Chenalls  had  the  opportunity  of
acting  ungenerously  towards  the  Pennas.  The  man  bore
this  uncomplainingly^  but  the  woman  frequently  quarrelled
with  him  whom  she  felt  was  an  enemy,  and  whom  she  still
r^arded  but  as  her  equal  Chenalls  was  a  skilled  farmer,
and  hence  was  of  considerable  value  to  the  Squire;  but
although  he  was  endured  for  his  farming  knowledge  and  his
business  habits,  he  was  never  a  favourite  with  his  employer.
Penna,  on  the  contrary,  was  an  especial  favourite,  and  the
evidences  of  this  were  so  often  brought  strikingly  under
the  observation  of  Chenalls,  that  it  increased  the  irritation
of  his  hate,  for  it  amounted  to  that  For  years  things  went
on  thus.  There  was  the  tranquil  suffering  of  an  oppressed
spirit  manifested  in  Penna — ^the  angry  words  and  actions  of
his  wife  towards  the  oppressor, — and,  at  the  same  time,  as  she
with  much  fondness  studied  to  make  their  humble  home  com-
fortable for  her  husband,  she  reviled  him  not  unfrequently
for  the  meek  spirit  with  which  he  endured  his  petty,  but  still
tiding,  wrongs.  The  hind  dared  not  venture  on  any  positive
act  of  wrong  towards  those  people,  yet  he  lost  no  chance  of
annoying  them,  knowing  that  the  Squire's  partiality  for
Fienna  would  not  allow  him  to  venture  beyond  certain  bounds,
efen  in  this  direction.

Penna's  solace  was  his  daughter.  She  had  now  reached
her  eighteenth  year,  and  with  the  well-developed  form  of  a
woman,  she  united  the  simplicity  of  a  child.  Selina,  as  she
named,  was  in  many  respects  beautifuL    Her  features


1 66  Rotnances  of  the  Mermaids.  .

were  regular,  and  had  they  been  lighted  np  with  more  me
fire,  they  would  have  been  beautiful;  but  the  constant  rejM
the  want  of  animation,  lefb  her  face  merely  a  pretty  •
Her  skin  was  beautifully  white,  and  transparent  to  the  1
veins  which  traced  their  ways  beneath  it,  to  the  verge  of
delicacy  which  indicates  disease;  but  it  did  not  pass  i
verge.  Selina  was  full  of  health,  as  her  well-moulded  f
at  once  shewed,  and  her  clear  blue  eye  distinctly  told,
times  there  was  a  lovely  tint  upon  the  cheek — ^not  the  he
of  consumptive  beauty, — ^but  a  pure  rosy  dye,  suflFused  by
healthy  life  stream,  when  it  flowed  the  fastest.

The  village  gossips,  who  were  always  busy  with  t
neighbours,  said  strange  things  of  this  girL  Indeed,  it
commonly  reported  that  the  real  child  of  the  Pennas  wi
remarkably  plain  child,  in  every  respect  a  different  bi
from  Selina.  The  striking  difference  between  the  in&nt
the  woman  was  variously  explained  by  the  knowing  o
Two  stories  were,  however,  current  for  miles  around
country.  One  was,  that  Selina's  mother  was  constantly  i
gathering  dew  in  the  morning,  with  which  to  wash  her  cl
and  that  the  fairies  on  the  Towens  had,  in  pure  malice,  ai
her  in  giving  a  temporary  beauty  to  the  girl,  that  it  mi
lead  to  her  betrayal  into  crime.  Why  this  malice,  was  n<
clearly  made  out.

The  other  stoiy  was,  that  Honour  Penna  constantly  bat
the  child  in  a  certain  pool,  amidst  the  arched  rocks
Perran,  which  was  a  favourite  resort  of  the  mermai
that  on  one  occasion  the  child,  as  if  in  a  paroxysm  of^
leapt  from  her  arms  into  the  water,  and  disappeared.  '
mother,  as  may  well  be  supposed,  suffered  a  momentary  ag«
of  terror ;  but  presently  the  babe  syram  up  to  the  surface
the  water,  its  little  face  more  bright  and  beautiful  than
had  ever  been  before.    Great  was  the  mother's  joy,  and  alsc


The  Mermaid^ s  Vengeance.  167

as  the  gossips  say — great  her  surprise  at  the  sudden  change
in  the  appearance  of  her  offspring.  The  mother  knew  no
di£Eerence  in  the  child  whom  she  pressed  lovingly  to  her
bosom,  but  all  the  aged  crones  in  the  parish  declared  it  to
be  a  changeling.  This  tale  lived  its  day;  but,  as  the  girl
grew  on  to  womanhood,  and  shewed  none  of  the  special
qualifications  belonging  either  to  fairies  or  mermaids,  it  was
almost  forgotten.  The  uncomplaining  father  had  solace  for
all  his  sufferings  in  wandering  over  the  beautiful  sands  with
his  daughter.  Whether  it  was  when  the  summer  seas  fell
in  musical  undulations  on  the  shore,  or  when,  stirred  by  the
winter  tempests,  the  great  Atlantic  waves  came  up  in  gran-
deur, and  lashed  the  resisting  sands  in  giant  rage,  those  two
Ajoyed  the  solitude;  Hour  after  hour,  from  t]ie  setting  sun
time^  until  the  dear  cold  moon  flooded  the  ocean  with  her
miles  of  light,  would  the  father  and  child  walk  these  sands.
Ihey  seemed  never  to  weary  of  them  and  the  ocean.

Almost  every  morning,  throughout  the  milder  seasons,
Selina  was  in  the  habit  of  bathing,  and  wild  tales  were  told
of  the  frantic  joy  with  which  she  would  play  with  the
breaking  billows.  Sometimes  floating  ovei;  and  almost
dancing  on  the  cre&sts  of  the  waves,  at  other  times  rushing
Under  them,  and  allowing  the  breaking  waters  to  beat  her  to
tte  sands,  as  though  they  were  loving  arms,  endeavouring  to
«iGarele  her  form.  Certain  it  is,  that  Selina  greatly  enjoyed
lier  bath,  but  all  the  rest  must  be  regarded  as  the  creations
^  the  imagination.  The  most  eager  to  give  a  construction
^unfavourable  to  the  simple  mortality  of  the  maiden  was,  how-
ever, eompelled  to  acknowledge  that  there  was  no  evidence
in  her  general  conduct  to  support  their  surmises.  Selina,
as  aa  only  child,  fared  the  fate  of  others  who  are  unfortu-
nately 80  placed,  and  was,  as  the  phrase  is,  spoiled.  She
eertidiily  was  allowed  to  follow  her  own  inclinations  without


1 68  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

any  check.  Still  her  inclinations  were  boonded  to  worl
in  the  garden,  and  to  leading  her  father  to  the  sea-sh
Honour  Penna,  sometimes^  it  is  true,  did  complain  1
Selina  could  not  be  trusted  with  the  most  ordinary  dome
duty.  Beyond  this,  there  was  one  other  cause  of  grief,  i
was,  the  increasing  dislike  which  Selina  exhibited  towi
entering  a  church.  The  girl,  notwithstanding  the  const
excuses  of  being  sick,  suffering  from  headache,  having  a  ]
in  her  side,  and  the  like,  was  often  taken,  notwithstanding
her  mother  to  the  church.  It  is  said  that  she  always  si
dered  as  she  passed  the  church  stile,  and  again  on  step]
from  the  porch  into  the  church  itself.  When  once  witiiin
house  of  prayer  she  evinced  no  peculiar  liking  or  dislik
observing  re^ectfully  all  the  rules  during  the  performi
of  the  church  service,  and  generally  sleeping,  or  seeminf
sleep,  during  the  sermon.  Selina  Pennaluna  had  reached
eighteenth  year ;  she  was  admired  by  many  of  the  young  i
of  the  parish,  but,  as  if  surrounded  by  a  spell,  she  appe«
to  keep  them  all  at  a  distance  from  her.  About  this  tim
nephew  to  the  Squire,  ayoung  soldier, — ^who  had  beenwoun
in  the  wars, — came  into  Cornwall  to  heal  his  wounds,  \
recover  health,  which  had  suffered  in  a  trying  campaign.
This  young  man,  Walter  Trewoofe,  was  a  rare  specimei
manhood.  Even  now,  shattered  as  he  was  by  the  combi
influences  of  wounds,  an  unhealthy  climate,  and  dissipat
he  could  not  but  be  admired  for  fineness  of  form,  digi
of  carriage,  and  masculine  beauty.  It  was,  however,  but
evident,  that  this  young  man  was  his  own  idol,  and  thai
expected  every  one  to  bow  down  with  him,  and  worship
His  uncle  was  proud  of  Walter,  and  although  the  old  gen
man  could  not  fail  to  see  many  faults,  yet  he  regan
them  as  the  follies  of  youth,  and  trusted  to  their  correct
with  the  increase  of  years  and  experience.     Walter,  who  \


The  Mermaid's  Vengeance.  169

really  suffering  severely,  was  ordered  by  his  surgeon,  at  first,
to  take  short  walks  on   the  sea-shore,  and,  as  he  gained
strength,  to  bathe.     He  was  usually  driven  in  his  uncle's
pony  carriage  to  the  edge  of  the  sands.    Then  dismounting
he  would  walk  for  a  short  time,  and  quickly  wearying,  return
in  his  carriage  to  the  luxuriant  couches  at  the  manor-house.
On  some  of  those  occasions  Walter  had  observed  the  father
and  daughter  taking  their  solitary  ramble.     He  was  struck
with  the  quiet  beauty  of  the  girl,  and  seized  an  early  oppor-
tunity of  stopping  Penna  to  make  some  general  inquiry  re-
electing the  bold  and  beautiful  coast    From  time  to  time
they  thus  met,  and  it  would  have  been  evident  to  any  ob-
server that  Walter  did  not  so  soon  weary  of  the  sands  as
formerly,  and  that  Selina  was  not  displeased  with  the  flatter-
ing things  he  said  to  her.     Although  the  young  soldier  had
hitherto  led  a  wild  life,  it  would  appear  as  if  for  a  consider-
able period  the  presence  of  goodness  had  repressed  every
tendency  to  evil  in  his  ill-regulated  heart     He  continued,
therefore,  for  some  time  playing  with  his  own  feelings  and
those  of  the  childlike  being  who  presented'  so  much  of
tomance — combined  with  the  most  homely  tameness — of
character.    Selina,  it  is  true,  had  never  yet  seen  Walter  ex-
fsept  in  the  presence  of  her  father,  and  it  is  questionable
if  ahe  had  ever  for  one  moment  had  a  warmer  feeling  than
^liat  of  the  mere  pleasure — a  silent  pride — that  a  gentleman*
^l<mee  so  handsome,  so  refined,  and  the  nephew  of  her  father's
^KiiMter,  should  pay  her  any  attention.    Evil  eyes  were  watch-
ing with  wicked  earnestness  the  growth  of  passion,  and  de-
signing hearts  were  beating  quicker  with  a  consciousness
that  they  should  eventually  rejoice  in  the  downfall  of  in-
nocence.     Tom  Chenalls  hoped  that  he  might  achieve   a
trtnmph,  if   he  could  but  once   asperse   the  character  of
Selina.    He  took  his  measures  accordingly.    Having  noticed


1 70  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

the  change  in  the  general  conduct  of  his  master's  nephc
he  argued  that  this  was  due  to  the  refining  influence  oi
pure  mind,  acting  on  one  more  than  ordinarily  impressic
able  to  either  evil  or  good.

Walter  rapidly  recovered  health,  and  with  renewed  stten{
the  manly  energy  of  his  character  began  to  develop  itsi
He  delighted  in  horse  exercise,  and  Chenalls  had  always  \
best  horse  on  the  farms  at  his  disposal  He  was  a  good  sh
and  Chenalls  was  his  guide  to  the  best  shooting  groun
He  sometimes  fished,  and  Chenalls  knew  exactly  where  \
choicest  trout  and  the  richest  salmon  were  to  be  found.
fact  Chenalls  entered  so  fully  into  the  tastes  of  the  yon
man,  that  Walter  found  him  absolutely  necessary  to  him
secure  the  enjoyments  of  a  country  life.

Having  established  this  close  intimacy,  Chenalls  never  li
an  opportunity  of  talking  with  Walter  respecting  Selina  Pem
He  soon  satisfied  himself  that  Walter,  like  most  other  yon
men  who  had  led  a  dissipated  life,  had  but  a  very  1
estimate  of  women  generally.  Acting  upon  this,  he  at  fi
insinuated  that  Selina's  innocence  was  but  a  mask^  and
length  he  boldly  assured  Walter  that  the  cottage  girl  was
be  won  by  him  with  a  few  words,  and  that  then  he  mij
put  her  aside  at  any  time  as  a  prize  to  some  low-bom  p(
sant.  Chenalls  never  failed  to  impress  on  Walter  the  neo
sity  of  keeping  his  uncle  in  the  most  perfect  darkness,  a
of  blinding  the  eyes  of  Selina's  parents.  Penna  was^—
thought  Chenalls, — easily  managed,  but  there  was  more
be  feared  from  the  wife.  Walter,  however,  with  much  ai
fice,  having  introduced  himself  to  Honour  Penna,  emploj
the  magic  of  that  flattery,  which,  being  properly  appK<
seldom  fails  to  work  its  way  to  the  heart  of  a  weak-mind
woman.  He  became  an  especial  favourite  with  Honour,  a
the  blinded  mother  was  ever  pleased  at  the  attention  1


TheMermaicCs  Vengeance.  171

stowed  with  so  little  assumption, — as  she  thought, — of  pride,
on  her  daughter,  by  one  so  much  above  them.  Walter  even-
tiudly  succeeded  in  separating  occasionally,  though  not  often,
Penna  and  his  daughter.  The  witching  whispers  of  unholy
love  were  poured  into  the  trusting  ear.  Guileless  herself,
this  child-woman  suspected  no  guile  in  others,  least  of  all  in
one  whom  she  had  been  taught  to  look  upon  as  a  superior
being  to  herself.  Amongst  the  villagers,  the  constant  atten-
tion of  Walter  Trewoofe  was  the  subject  of  gossip,  and  many
an  old  proverb  was  quoted  by  the  elder  women,  ill-naturedly,
and  implying  that  evil  must  come  of  this  intimacy.  Tom
Chenalls  was  now  employed  by  Walter  to  contrive  some
means  by  which  he  could  remove  Penna  for  a  period  from
homa  He  was  not  long  in  doing  this.  He  lent  every  power
of  his  wicked  nature  to  aid  the  evil  designs  of  the  young
soldier^  and  thus  he  brought  about  that  separation  of  father
and  child  which  ended  in  her  ruin.

Near  the  Land's-End  the  squire  possessed  some  farms,  and
one  of  them  was  reported  to  be  in  such  a  state  of  extreme  ne-
^ect,  tiirough  the  drunkenness  and  cojisequent  idleness  of  the
tenant,  that  Chenalls  soon  obtained  permission  to  take  the
fium  from  this  occupier,  which  he  did  in  the  most  unscru-
poloos  disregard  for  law  or  right.  It  was  then  suggested
that  the  only  plan  by  which  a  desirable  occupier  could  be
found,  would  be  to  get  the  farm  and  farm-buildings  into
good  condition,  and  that  Penna,  of  all  men,  would  be  the
man  to  bring  this  quickly  about.  The  squire  wa^  pleased
with  the  plan.  Penna  was  sent  for  by  him,  and  was  proud
of  the  confidence  which  his  master  reposed  in  him.  There
wu  some  sorrow  on  his  leaving  home.  He  subsequently
laid  that  he  had  had  many  warnings  not  to  go,  but  he  felt
that  he  dared  not  disoblige  a  master  who  had  trusted  him  so
hi^— 60  he  went.


172  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

Walter  needed  not  any  urging  on  the  part  of  Chena
though  he  was  always  ready  to  apply  the  spur  when  th
was  the  least  evidence  of  the  sense  of  right  asserting  ite
in  the  young  man's  bosom.  Week  after  week  passed
Walter  had  rendered  himself  a  necessity  to  Selina.  Withi
her  admirer  the  world  was  cold  and  colourless.  With  li
all  was  sunshine  and  glowing  tints.

Three  months  passed  thus  away — ^and  during  that  peri
it  had  only  been  possible  for  Penna  to  visit  his  ha
twice.  The  father  felt  that  something  like  a  spirit  of  <
stood  between  him  and  his  daughter.  There  was  no  0
ward  evidence  of  any  change,  but  there  was  an  inward  sei
— ^undefined,  yet  deeply  felt — ^like  an  overpowering  feu
that  some  wrong  had  been  done.  On  parting,  Penna  silen
but  earnestly  prayed  that  the  deep  dread  might  be  remoY
from  his  mind.  There  was  an  aged  fisherman,  who  reaic
in  a  small  cottage  built  on  the  sands,  who  possessed  all  1
superstitions  of  his  class.  This  old  man  had  formed
father's  liking  for  this  simple-hearted  maiden,  and  he  had  p
suaded  himself  that  there  really  was  some  foundation
the  tales  which  the  gossips  told.  To  the  fisherman,  Wal
Trewoofe  was  an  evil  genius.  He  declared  that  no  g(
ever  came  to  him,  if  he  met  Walter  when  he  was  about  to
to  sea.  With  this  feeling  he  curiously  watched  the  you
man  and  maiden,  and  he,  in  after  days,  stated  his  convict
that  he  had  seen  "  merry-maidens  "  rising  from  the  depth
the  waters,  and  fioating  under  the  billows  to  watch  Sei
and  her  lover.  He  has  also  been  heard  to  say,  that  on  m-
than  one  occasion  Walter  himself  had  been  terrified  by  sig
and  sounds.  Certain,  however,  it  is,  these  were  insufficic
and  the  might  of  evil  passions  were  more  powerful  than  i
of  the  protecting  influences  of  the  unseen  world.

Another  three  months  had  gone  by,  and  Walter  Trewo


The  Mermaid's  Vengeance.  1 73

had  disappeared  from  Perranzabuloa  He  had  launched  into
the  gay  world  of  the  metropolis,  and  rarely,  if  ever,  dreamed
of  the  deep  sorrow  which  was  weighing  down  the  heart  he
had  betrayed.  Penna  returned  home — ^his  task  was  done —
and  ChenaUs  had  no  reason  for  keeping  him  any  longer  from
his  wife  and  daughter.  Clouds  gathered  slowly,  but  unre-
mittingly around  him.  His  daughter  retired  into  herself,
no  longer  as  of  old  reposing  her  whole  soul  on  her  father's
heart.  His  wife  was  somewhat  changed  too — she  had  some
secret  in  her  heart  which  she  feared  to  telL  The  home  he
had  left  was  not  the  home  to  which  he  had  returned.  It  soon
became  evident  that  some  shock  had  shaken  the  delicate
frame  of  his  daughter.  She  pined  rapidly ;  and  Penna  was
awakened  to  a  knowledge  of  the  cause  by  the  rude  rejoicing
of  Chenalls,  who  declared  "  that  all  people  who  kept  them-
selves so  much  above  other  people  were  sure  to  be  pulled
down/'  On  one  occasion  he  so  far  tempted  Penna  with
sneers,  at  his  having  hoped  to  secure  the  young  squire  for  a
son-in-law,  that  the  long-enduring  man  broke  forth  and  ad-
ministered a  severe  blow  upon  his  tormentor.  This  was  duly
reported  to  the  squire,  and  added  thereto  was  a  magnified
story  of  a  trap  which  had  been  set  by  the  Pennas  to  catch
yoang  Walter.  It  was  represented  that  even  now  they  in-
tended to  press  their  claims,  on  account  of  grievous  wrongs
upon  ihem,  whereas  it  could  be  proved  that  Walter  was
guiltless — ^that  he  was  indeed  the  innocent  victim  of  design-
ing people,  who  thought  to  make  money  out  of  their  assumed
misfortune.  The  squire  made  his  inquiries,  and  there  were
not  a  few  who  eagerly  seized  the  opportunity  to  gain  the
friendship  of  Chenalls  by  representing  this  family  to  have
been  hypocrites  of  the  deepest  dye ;  and  the  poor  girl  espe-
cially was  now  loaded  with  a  weight  of  iniquities  of  which  she
had  no  knowledge.    All  this  ended  in  the  dismissal  of  Penna


1 74  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.  *

from  the  Squire's  service,  and  in  his  being  deprived  of  I
cottage  in  which  he  had  taken  so  much  pride.  Althon
thrown  out  upon  the  world  a  disgraced  man,  Penna  fac
his  difficulties  manfully.  He  cast  ofl^  as  it  were,  the  prii
tive  simplicity  of  his  character,  and  evidently  worked  wiU
firm  resolve  to  beat  down  his  sorrows.  He  was  too  good
workman  to  remain  long  unemployed;  and  although  ]
new  home  was  not  his  happy  home  as  of  old,  there  was
repining  heard  from  his  lips.  Weaker  and  weaker  gr
Selina,  and  it  soon  became  evident  to  all  that  if  she  cai
from  a  spirit  world,  to  a  spirit  world  she  must  soon  retm
Grief  filled  the  hearts  of  her  paraits — ^it  prostrated  1
mother,  but  the  effects  of  severe  labour,  and  the  efforts  <rf
settled  mind,  appeared  to  tranquillise  the  breast  of  her  fatb
Time  passed  on,  the  wounds  of  the  soul  grew  deeper,  and  tlx
lay,  on  a  low  bed,  from  which  she  had  not  strength  to  mo
the  fragile  form  of  youth,  with  the  countenance  of  aga  T
body  was  almost  powerless,  but  there  beamed  from  the  c
the  evidences  of  a  spirit  getting  free  from  the  chains  of  ch

The  dying  girl  was  sensible  of  the  presence  of  creatio
other  than  mortal,  and  with  these  she  appeared  to  he
converse,  and  to  derive  solace  from  the  communion.  Pen
and  his  wife  alternately  watched  through  the  night  hou
by  the  side  of  their  loved  child,  and  anxiously  did  they  ma
the  moment  when  the  tide  turned,  in  the  full  belief  that  si
would  be  taken  from  them,  when  the  waters  of  the  ocei
began  to  recede  from  the  shore.  Thus  days  passed  on,  ai
eventually  the  sunlight  of  a  summer  morning  shone  .
through  the  small  window  of  this  humble  cottage, — on  a  d«
mother — and  a  living  babe.

The  dead  was  buried  in  the  churchyard  on  the  sands,  ai
the  living  went  on  their  ways,  some  rejoicingly  and  some :
sorrow.


The  MermaicTs  Vengeance.  175

Once  more  Walter  Trewoofe  appeared  in  Perran-on-the-
sands.     Penna  would  have  sacrificed  him  to  his  hatred,  he
emphatically  protested  that  he  had  lived  only  to  do  so ;  but
the  good  priest  of  the  Oratory  contrived  to  lay  the  devil
who  had  possession,  and  to  convince  Penna  that  the  Lord
would,  in  His  own  good  time,  and  in  His  own  way,  avenge  the
Utter  wrong.      Tom  Chenalls  had  his  hour  of  triumph,
bat  from  the  day  on  which  Selina  died  everything  went
wrong.     The  crops  failed,  the  cattle  died,  hay-stacks  and
eom-ricks  caught  fire,  cows  slipped  their  calves,  horses  fell
lame,(Hr  stumbled,  and  broke  their  knees, — a  succession  of  evils
steadily  pursued  him.    Trials  find  but  a  short  resting-place
with  the  good ;  they  may  be  bowed  to  the  earth  with  the
weight  of  a  sudden  sorrow,  but  they  look  to  heaven,  and
their  elasticity  is  restored.     The  evil-minded  are  crushed  at
once,  and  grovel  on  the  ground  in   irremediable  misery.
That, Chenalls  fled  to  drink  in  his  troubles  appeared  but
the  natural  result  to  a  man  of  his  character.     This  unfitted
him  for  his  duties,  and  he  was  eventually  dismissed  from  his
utoation.     Notwithstanding  that  the  Squire  refused  to  listen
to  the  appeals  in  favour  of  Chenalls,  which  were  urged  upon
him  by  Walter,  and  that  indeed  he  forbade  his  nephew  to
eonntenance   "the   scotrndrel**  in    any   way,  Walter  still
continued  his  friend.    By  his  means  Tom  Chenalls  secured
a  small  cottage  on  the  clifi^,  and  around  it  a  little  cultivated
ground,  the  produce  of  which  was  his  only  visible  means  of
sopport     That  lonely  cottage  was  the  scene,  however,  of
drunken  carousals,  and  there  the  vicious  young  men,  and  the
no  less  vicious  young  women  of  the  district,  went  after  night-
fall, and  kept  "  high  carnival "  of  sin.    Walter  Trewoofe  came
frequently  amongst  them ;  and  as  his  purse  usually  defrayed
the  costs  of  a  debauch,  he  was  regarded  by  all  with  especial
favoar.


1 76  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

One  midnight,  Walter,  who  had  been  dancing  and  drib
ing  for  some  hours,  left  the  cottage  wearied  with  his  excea
and  although  not  drunk,  he  was  much  excited  with  wine.  ]
pathway  lay  along  the  edge  of  the  cliffs,  amidst  bashes
furze  and  heath,  and  through  seyeral  irregular,  zig-zag  wi
There  were  lateral  paths  striking  off  from  one  side  of  the  m
path,  and  leading  down  to  the  sea-shore.  Although  it  \
moonlight,  without  being  actually  aware  of  the  error,  Wal
wandered  into  one  of  those ;  and  before  he  was  awake  to
mistake,  he  found  himself  on  the  sands.  He  cursed
stupidity,  and  uttering  a  blasphemous  oath  he  turned
retrace  his  steps.

The  most  exquisite  music  which  ever  flowed  from  hun
lips  fell  on  his  ear ;  he  paused  to  listen,  and,  collecting
unbalanced  thoughts,  he  discovered  that  it  was  the  voice
a  woman  singing  a  melancholy  dirge, —

^  The  stars  are  beautiful,  when  bright

They  are  mirrored  in  the  sea;
But  they  are  pale,  beside  that  light

Which  was  so  beautiful  to  me.
My  angel  child,  my  earth-bom  girl,

From  all  your  kindred  riven.
By  the  base  deeds  of  a  selfish  churl.

And  to  a  sand-grave  driven.
How  shall  I  win  thee  back  to  ocean  ?

How  canst  thou  quit  thy  grave,
To  share  again  the  sweet  emotion

Of  gliding  through  the  wave."

Walter,  led  by  the  melancholy  song,  advanced  slowly  alo
the  sands.  He  discovered  that  the  sweet,  soft  sounds  pi
ceeded  from  the  other  side  of  a  mass  of  rocks,  which  p
ject  far  out  oVer  the  sands,  and  that  now,  at  low  water,  th(
was  no  difficulty  in  walking  around  it.  Without  hesitati
he  did  so,  and  he  beheld,  sitting  at  the  mouth  of  a  cav«
one  of  the  most  beautiful  women  he  had  ever  beheld.    S


The  Mermaid's  Vengeance.  177

itinned  her  song,  looking  upwards  to  the  stars,  not  appear-
;  to  notice  the  rntmsion  of  a  stranger.  Walter  stopped,
I  gazed  on  the  lovely  image  before  him  with  admiration
I  wonder,  mingled  with  something  of  terror.  He  dared
;  speak,  but  fixed,  as  if  by  magic,  he  stood"  gazing  on.
;er  a  few  minutes,  the  maiden  suddenly  perceiving  that  a
n  was  near  her,  uttered  a  piercing  shriek,  and  made  as  if
3y  into  the  cavern.  Walter  sprang  forward  and  seized
•  by  the  arm,  exclaiming,  "  Not  yet,  my  pretty  maiden,
.  yet"

She  stood  still  in  the  position  of  flight,  with  one  arm
and  her,  grasped  by  Walter,  and  turning  round  her  head,
dark  eyes  beamed  with  unnatural  lustre  upon  him.
pressionable  he  had  ever  been,  but  never  had  he  ex-
ienced  anything  so  entrancing,  and  at  the  same  time  so
nfdl,  as  that  gaze.  It  was  Selina's  face  looking  lovingly
)n  him,  but  it  seemed  to  possess  some  new  power — a  might
mind  from  which  he  felt  it  was  impossible  for  him  to
s^pe.  Walter  slackened  his  hold,  and  slowly  allowed  the
1  to  £all  from  his  hand.  The  maiden  turned  frdly  round
)n  hiin.  *'Go!"  she  said.  He  could  not  move.  "Go,
a !"  she  repeated.    He  was  powerless.

'*  Go  to  the  grave  where  the  sinleas  one  sleepeth  I
Bring  her  cold  corse  where  her  guarding  one  weepeth;
Look  on  her,  love  her  again,  ay  I  betray  her,
And  wreathe  with  false  smiles  the  pale  face  of  her  slayer.
Go,  go  1  now,  and  feel  the  full  force  of  my  sorrow  1
For  the  glut  of  my  vengeance  there  cometh  a  morrow."

Iter  was  statue-like,  and  he  awoke  from  this  trance-like
IB  only  when  the  waves  washed  his  feet,  and  he  became
ire  that  even  now,  it  was  only  by  wading  through  the
iers  that  he  could  return  around  the  point  of  rocks.  He
I  alone.    He  called ;  no  one  answered.    He  sought  wildly

IflXSUDBB.  M


1 78  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

as  far  as  he  now  dared,  amidst  the  rocks,  bat  the  lo^
woman  was  nowhere  to  be  discovered.

There  was  no  real  danger  on  such  a  night  as  this ;  the
fore  Walter  walked  fearlessly  through  the  gentle  waves^  f
recovered  the  pathway  up  from  the  sands.  More  than  a
he  thought  he  heard  a  rejoicing  laugh,  which  was  echoed
the  rocks,  but  no  one  was  to  be  seen.  Walter  reached
home  and  bed,  but  he  found  no  sleep ;  and  in  the  mom:
he  arose,  with  a  sense  of  wretchedness  which  was  entir
new  to  him.  He  feared  to  make  any  one  of  his  rough  co
panions  a  confidant,  although  he  felt  this  would  have
lieved  his  heart.  He  therefore  nursed  the  wound  which
now  felt,  until  a  bitter  remorse  clouded  his  existence.  Ai
some  days,  he  was  impelled  to  visit  the  grave  of  the  lost  0
and  in  the  fulness  of  the  most  selfish  sorrow,  he  sat  on  1
sands  and  shed  tears.  The  priest  of  the  Oratory  pbsen
him,  and  knowing  Walter  Trewoofe,  hesitated  not  to  inqa
into  his  cause  of  sorrow.  His  heart  was  opened  to  the  h
man,  and  the  strange  tale  was  told — the  only  result  being,  tl
the  priest  felt  satisfied  it  was  but  a  vivid  dream,  which  1
resulted  from  a  brain  over-excited  by  drink.  He,  howe^
counselled  the  young  man,  giving  him  some  religious  instn
tion,  and  dismissed  him  with  his  blessing.  There  was  re)
in  this.  For  some  days  Walter  did  not  venture  to  visit  \
old  haunt,  the  cottage  of  Chenalls.  Since  he  could  not
lost  to  his  companions  without  greatly  curtailing  their  vicic
enjoyments;  he  was  hunted  up  by  Chenalls,  and  again  enti(
within  the  circle.  His  absence  was  explained  on  the  plea
illness.  Walter  was,  however,  an  altered  man ;  there  was  i
the  same  boisterous  hilarity  as  formerly.  He  no  lonj
abandoned  himself  without  restraint  to  the  enjoyments
the  time.  If  he  ever,  led  on  by  his  thoughtless  and  roug
natured  friends,  assumed  for  a  moment  his  usual  mirth,


The  Mermaid's  Vengeance.  1 79

iras  checked  by  some  invisible  power.  On  such  occasions  he
¥Oiild  turn  deadly  pale,  look  anxiously  {u*ound,  and  fall  back,
IS  if  ready  to  faint,  on  the  nearest  seat  Under  these  in-
luences,  he  lost  health.  His  uncle,  who  was  really  attached
x>  his  nephew,  although  he  regretted  his  dissolute  conduct,
)ecaine  now  seriously  alarmed.  Physicians  were  consulted
n  vain ;  the  young  man  pined,  and  the  old  gossips  came  to
iie  conclusion  that  Walter  Trewoofe  was  ill-wished,  and
diere  was  a  general  feeling  that  Penna  or  his  wife  was  at
the  bottom  of  it.  Walter  living  really  on  one  idea,  and  that
cme,  the  beautiful  face,  which  was,  and  yet  was  not,  that  of
Selina»  resolved  again  to  explore  the  spot  on  which  he  had
met  this  strange  being,  of  whom  nothing  could  be  learned
by  any  of  the  covert  inquiries  he  made.  He  lingered  long
ere  he  could  resolve  on  the  task ;  but  wearied,  worn  by  the
oppression  of  one  xmdefined  idea;,  in  which  an  intensity  of
bve  was  mixed  with  a  shudclering  fear,  he  at  last  gathered
sufficient  courage  to  seize  an  opportunity  for  again  going  to
the  cavern.  On  this  occasion  there  being  no  moon,  the
night  was  dark,  but  the  stars  shone  brightly  from  a  sky,
doadless,  save  a  dark  mist  which  hung  heavily  over  the
western  horizon.  Every  spot  of  ground  being  familiar  to
him,  who,  boy  and  man,  had  traced  it  over  many  times^  the
partial  darkness  presented  no  difficulty.  Walter  had  scarcely
retched  the  level  sands,  which  were  left  hard  by  the  retiring
tide,  than  he  heard  again  the  same  magical  voice  as  befora
But  now  the  song  was  a  joyous  one,  the  burthen  of  it  being —

''  Join  aU  hands —

Might  and  main.
Weave  the  sands.

Form  a  chain.
He,  my  lover,

Comes  again!"

He  could  not  entirely  dissuade  himself  but  that  he  heard


1 80  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

this  repeated  by  many  voices ;  but  he  put  the  thought  as
referring  it,  as  well  he  might,  to  the  numerous  echoes  £1
the  cavernous  openings  in  the  cliffs.

He  reached  the  eastern  side  of  the  dark  Qiass  of  rocks,  fi
the  point  of  which  the  tide  was  slowly  subsiding.  The  a
had  ceased,  and  a  low  moaning  sound — ^the  soughing  of
vrind — ^passedalong  the  shore.  Walter  trembled  with  fear,}
was  on  the  point  of  returning,  when  a  most  flute-like  mun
rose  from  the  other  side  of  the  rocky  barrier,  which  was  pi
ently  moulded  into  words —

"  From  your  couch  of  glistering  pearly
Slowly,  softly,  come  away.
Our  sweet  earth-child,  lovely  girl.
Died  this  day, — died  this  day."

Memory  told  Walter  that  truly  was  it  the  anniversaij
Selina  Pennaluna's  death,  and  to  him  every  gentle  wave  i
ing  on  the  shore  sang,  or  mumiured —

"  Died  this  day, — died  this  day."
The  sand  was  left  dry  around)vthe  point  of  the  rocks,  1
Walter,  impelled  by  a  power  which  he  could  not  cont
walked  onward.  The  moment  he  appeared  on  the  west
side  of  the  rock,  a  wild  laugh  burst  into  the  air  as  if  &
the  deep  cavern  before  him,  at  the  entrance  of  which  sat
same  beautiful  being  whom  he  had  formerly  met.  There  1
now  an  expression  of  rare  joy  on  her  face,  her  eyes  glistei
with  delight,  and  she  extended  her  arms,  as  if  to  welcome  h

"  Was  it  ever  your  wont  to  move  so  slowly  towards  y
loved  one?''

Walter  heard  it  was  Selina's  voice.  He  saw  it  was  Selii
features ;  but  he  was  conscious  it  was  not  Selina's  form.

"  Come,  sit  beside  me,  Walter,  and  let  us  talk  of  loi
He  sat  down  without  a  word,  and  looked  into  the  maid(
face  with  a  vacant  expression  of  fondness.    Presently  ;


The  Mermaid's  Vengeance.  i8i

placed  her  hand  upon  his  heart,  a  shudder  passed  through
his  frame ;  but  having  passed,  he  felt  no  more  pain,  but  a
rare  intensity  of  delight.  The  maiden  wreathed  her  arm
around  his  neck,  drew  Walter  towards  her,  and  then  he  re-
membered how  often  he  had  acted  thus  towards  Selina.  She
bent  over  him  and  looked  into  his  eyes.  In  his  mind's
mirror  he  saw  himself  looking  thus  into  the  eyes  of  his  be-
trayed one.

"  You  loved  her  once  ? "  said  the  maiden.

"I  did  indeed,"  answered  Walter,  with  a  sigh.

"As  you  loved  her,  so  I  love  you,''  said  the  maiden,  with  a
smile  which  shot  like  a  poisoned  dart  through  Walter's  heart.
She  Uf  ted  the  young  man's  head  lovingly  between  her  hands,
and  bending  over  him,  pressed  her  lips  upon  and  kissed  his
forehead.  Walter  curiously  felt  that  although  he  was  the
kissed,  yet  that  he  was  the  kisser.

"  Kisses,"  she  said,  "  are  as  true  at  sea  as  they  are  false  on
land.  You  men  kiss  the  earth-born  maidens  to  betray  them.
The  kiss  of  a  sea-child  is  the  seal  of  constancy.  You  are
mine  till  death."

•'Death !"  almost  shrieked  Walter.

A  full  consciousness  of  his  situation  now  broke  upon
Walter.  He  had  heard  the  tales  of  the  gossips  respecting
the  mermaid  origin  of  Selina ;  but  he  had  laughed  at  them
as  an  idle  fancy.  He  now  felt  they  were  true.  For  hours
Waller  was  compelled  to  sit  by  the  side  of  his  beautiful  tor-
mentor, every  word  of  assumed  love  and  rapture,  being  a  tor-
ture of  the  most  exquisite  kind  to  him.  He  could  not  escape
feom  the  arms  which  were  wound  around  him.  He  saw  the
tide  rising  rapidly.  He  heard  the  deep  voice  of  the  winds
coming  over  the  sea  from  the  far  west.  He  saw  that  which
appeared  at  first  as  a  dark  mist,  shape  itself  into  a  denBe  black
mass  of  cloud,  and  rise  rigidly  over  the  star-bedecked  space


1 8  2  Romances  of  the  Mermaids.

above  hinL  He  saw  by  tbe  brilliant  edge  of  light  wMch
casionally  frmged  the  clouds  that  they  were  deeply  duy
with  thunder.  There  was  something  sublime  in  the  stx
motion  of  the  storm ;  and  now  the  roll  of  the  waves,  w]
had  been  disturbed  in  the  Atlantic,  reached  our  shores
the  breakers  fell  thunderingly  within  a  few  feet  of  Walter
his  companion.  Paroxysms  of  terror  shook  him,  and  \
each  convulsion  he  felt  himself  grasped  with  still  more  ard
and  pressed  so  closely  to  the  maiden's  bosom,  that  he  h(
her  heart  dancing  of  joy.

At  length  his  terrors  gave  birth  to  words,  and  he  impl(
her  to  let  him  go.

''The  kiss  of  the  sea-child  is  the  seal  of  constan
Walter  vehemently  implored  forgiveness.  He  confessed
deep  iniquity.     He  promised  a  life  of  penitence.

"  Give  me  back  the  dead,"  said  the  maiden  bitterly ;
she  planted  another  kiss,  which  seemed  to  pierce  his  braii
its  coldness,  upon  his  forehead.

The  waves  rolled  around  the  rock  on  which  they  sat ;  t
washed  their  seat.     Walter  was  still  in  the  female's  grasp,
she  lifted  him  to  a  higher  ledge.     The  storm  approacl
Lightnings  struck  down  from  the  heavens  into  the  sands,
thunders  roared  along  the  iron  cliffs.     The  mighty  w?
grew  yet  more  rash,  and  washed  up  to  this  strange  pair,  y
now  sat  on  the  highest  pinnacle  of  the  pile  of  rocks.     Walt
terrors  nearly  overcame  him ;  but  he  was  i*oused  by  a  Uq
stream  of  fire,  which  positively  hissed  by  him,  followed
mediately  by  a  crash  of  thunder,  which  shook  the  solid  ea
Tom  Chenall's  cottage  on  the  cliff  burst  into  a  blaze,  \
Walter  saw  from  his  place  amidst  the  raging  waters,  a  crc
of  male  and  female  roisterers,  rush  terrified  out  upon  the  he*
to  be  driven  back  by  the  pelting  storm.    The  climax  of  hori
appeared  to  surround  Walter.  He  longed  to  end  it  in  death,  1


The  Mermaid's  Vengeance.  183

mid  not  die.  His  senses  were  quickened.  He  saw  his
ed  companion  and  evil  adviser  struck  to  the  groond,  a
ed  heap  of  ashes,  by  a  lightning  stroke,  and  at  the  same
ent  he  and  his  companion  were  borne  off  the  rock  on  the
>f  a  mountainous  wave,  on  which  he  floated;  the  woman
ing  him  by  the  hair  of  his  head,  and  singing  in  a  rejoic-
roice,  which  was  like  a  silver  bell  heard  amidst  the  deep
bellowings  of  the  storm, —

"  C<)me  away,  come  away —
0*er  the  waters  wild.
Our  earth-bom  child
Died  thia  day,  died  this  day.

"  Come  away,  come  away —
The  tempest  loud
Weaves  the  shroud
For  him  who  did  betray.

**  Come  away,  come  away —
Beneath  the  wave
Lieth  the  grave
Of  him  we  slay,  him  we  slay.

"  Come  away,  come  away —
He  shall  not  rest
In  earth's  own  breast
For  many  a  day,  many  a  day.

**  Come  away,  come  away —
By  billows  tost
From  coast  to  coast,
like  deserted  boat
His  corse  shall  float
Aroimd  the  bay,  around  the  bay."

ads  of  voices  on  that  wretched  night  were  heard  amidst
roar  of  the  storm.  The  waves  were  seen  covered  with
iltitudinous  host,  who  were  tossing  from  one  to  the
r  the  dying  Walter  Trewoofe,  whose  false  heart  thus  en-
1  the  vengeance  of  the  mermaid,  who  had,  in  the  fondness
T  soul,  made  the  innocent  child  of  humble  parents  the
of  her  adoption.    Appendix  (I.)


THE  ROCKS.


<<  Among  these  rocks  and  stones^  methinks  I  see
More  than  the  heedless  impress  that  belongs
To  lonely  nature's  casual  work':  they  bear
A  semblance  strange  of  power  intelligent.
And  of  design  not  wholly  worn  away."

The  Excursion — ^Wordsworth.


ROMANCES  OF  THE  ROCKS,


CBOMLECH  AKD  DBUID  STONES.

**  Surely  there  is  a  hidden  power  that  reigns
'Mid  the  lone  majesty  of  untamed  nature,
Controlling  sober  reason."

Caractacia — ^William  Mason.

is  a  common  belief  amongst  the  peasantry  over
every  part  of  Cornwall,  that  no  human  power
can  remove  any  of  those  stones  which  have  been
rendered  sacred  to  them  by  traditionary  romance,
ay  a  time  have  I  been  told  that  certain  stones  had  been
lOved  by  day,  but  that  they  always  returned  by  night  to
ir  original  positions,  and  that  the  parties  who  had  dared
Amper  with  those  sacred  stones  were  punished  in  some
\  When  the  rash  commander  of  a  revenue  cutter  landed
li  a  party  of  Ms  men  and  overturned  the  Logan  Rock,  to
ve  the  folly  of  the  prevalent  superstition,  he  did  but  little
rice  in  dispelling  an  old  belief,  but  proved  himself  to  be  a
for  his  pains.

could  desire,  for  the  preservation  of  many  of  our  Celtic
tains,  that  we  could  impress  the  educated  clatees  with  a
ilar  reverence  for  the  few  relics  which  are  left  to  us  of  an
Lent  and  a  peculiar  people,  of  whose  history  we  know  so
e,  and  from  whose  remains  we  might,  by  careful  study.


1 86  Romances  of  the  Rocks.

learn  so  much.  Those  poised  stones  and  perforated  ro
must  be  of  high  antiquity^  for  we  find  the  Anglo-Sas
making  laws  to  prevent  the  British  people  &om  pnrsu
their  old  pagan  practices.*

The  geologist,  looking  upon  the  Logan  stones  and  ot
curiously -formed  rock  masses,  dismisses  at  once  from
mind^  the  idea  of  their  having  been  formed  by  the  hand
man,  and  hastily  sets  aside  the  tradition  that  the  Druid  e
employed  them,  or  that  the  old  Celt  ever  regarded  them  w
reverence.  There  cannot  be  a  doubt,  but  that  many  hi
masses  of  granite  are,  by  atmospheric  causes,  now  slow]|y  pa
ing  into  the  condition  required  for  the  formation  of  a  Log
rock.  It  is  possible  that  in  some  cases  the  "  weatherin
may  have  gone  on  so  uniformly  aroimd  the  stone,  as  to  pc
it  so  exactly  that  the  thrust  of  a  chUd  will  shake  a  m
many  tons  in  weight

The. result,  however,  of  my  own  observations,  made  w
much  curiosity  and  considerable  care,  has  been  to  convi
me,  that  in  by  far  the  greatest  number  of  instances  the  (J
integration,  though  general  around  the  line  of  a  "  bed  wa
or  horizontal  joint,  has  gone  on  rapidly  on  the  side  expof
to  the  beat  of  the  weather,  while  the  opposite  extremity  1
been  but  slightly  worn;  consequently,  the  stones  have
tendency  to  be  depressed  on  the  sheltered  side.  With
little  labour  man  could  correct  this  natural  defect,  and  wi
a  little  skill  make  a  poised  stone.  We  have  incontrovgrtil
evidence  that  certain  poised  stones  have  been  regard(
through  long  periods  of  time,  as  of  a  sacred  charact
Whether  these  stones  were  used  by  the  Druids,  or  men

*  **  Perforated  stones  must  once  have  been  common  in  England,  a
probably  in  Scotland  also,  as  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws  repeatedly  denoui
similar  superstitious  practices." — The  Archaeology  and  Prehistoric  Aim
of  Scotland,  p.  97.      Daniel  Wilson.


Cromlech  and  Druid  Stones.  187

that  the  ignorant  people  supposed  them  to  have  some  pecu-
liar virtue,  I  care  not.  The  earliest  inhabitants  of  Cornwall,
probably  Celts  *  were  possessed  with  some  idea  that  these
stones  were  connected  with  the  mysteries  of  existence  ;  and
from  father  to  son,  for  centuries,  notwithstanding  the  .intro-
duction of  Christianity,  these  stones  have  maintained  their
mxred  character.  Therefore,  may  we  not  infer  that  the
leaders  of  the  people  availed  themselves  of  this  feeling ;  and
finding  many  rocks  of  a  gigantic  size,  upon  which  nature  had
b^un  the  work,  they  completed  them,  and  used  the  mighty
moviag  masses  to  impress  with  terror — the  principle  by  which
they  ruled — the  untaught,  but  poetically-constituted,  minds
of  the  people.  Dr  Borlase  has  been  laughed  at  for  finding
rock-basins,  the  works  of  the  Druids,  in  every  granitic  mass.
At  the  same  time,  those  who  laugh  have  failed  to  examine
those  rock-masses  with  unprejudiced  care,  and  hence  they
have  erred  as  wildly  as  did  the  Cornish  antiquary,  but  in  a
contrary  direction.  Hundreds  of  depressions  are  being  formed
by  the  winds  and  rains  upon  the  faces  of  the  granite  rocks.
With  these  no  Druid  ever  perplexed  himself  or  his  people.
Bat  there  are  numerous  hollows  to  be  found  in  large  flat
rocks  which  have  unmistakably  been  formed,  if  not  entirely,
partly,  by  the  hands  of  man.  The  Sacrificing  Rock  on  Cam
Biea  is  a  remarkable  example.  The  larger  hollows  on  the
Men-rock,  in  Constantine,  several  basins  in  the  Logan  Rock
group,  and  at  Cam  Boscawen,  may  be  referred  to  as  other
examples.  With  these  remarks,  I  proceed  to  notice  a  few  of
the  most  remarkable  rock-masses  with  which  tradition  has
associated  some  tale.

*  **  A  Celtio  race,  however,  continued  to  occupy  the  primeval  diBtricts
ci  ComwaU,  and  preserved,  almost  to  our  own  day,  a  distinct  dialect  of  the
Oillio  Umgae,"— Prehistoric  AnnaU  of  Scotland,  p.  195.  Daniel  Wilson.
0M  Appendix  (K.X  The  CeUt.


1 88  Romances  of  the  Rocks.


THE  LOQAN  OB  LOQINO  BOCE.*

MODRED,  in  Mason's  "  Caractacus,'*  addressing  Vellinus
and  Elidurns,  says : —

"Thither,  youths.
Turn  your  astoiUBh'd  eyes ;  behold  yon  huge
And  unhewn  sphere  of  living  adamant.
Which,  poised  by  magic,  rests  its  central  weight
On  yonder  pointed  rock :  firm  as  it  seems^
Such  is  the  strange  and  virtuous  property.
It  moves  obsequious  to  the  gentlest  touch
Of  him  whose  breath  is  pure ;  but  to  a  traitor.
Though  even  a  giant's  prowess  nerved  his  arm.
It  stands  as  fixt  as  Snowdon."

This  faithfully  preserves  the  traditionary  idea  of  the  pur-
poses to  which  this,  in  every  way,  remarkable  rock  was
devoted.

Up  to  the  time  when  Lieutenant  Goldsmith,  on  the  8th  of
April  1824,  slid  the  rock  off  from  its  support,  to  prove  the
falsehood  of  Dr  Borlase's  statement,  that  '*  it  is  morally4m-
possible  that  any  lever,  or,  indeed,  force,  however  applied  in
a  mechanical  way,  can  remove  it  from  its  present  position,"
the  Logan  Eock  was  believed  to  cure  children,  who  were
rocked  upon  it  at  certain  seasons,  of  several  diseases ;  but
the  charm  is  broken,  although  the  rock  is  restored.-}-

*  "  It  may  be  observed  that  I  have  always  used  the  words  Loging  Rock
for  the  celebrated  stone  at  Trereen  Dinas.  Much  learned  research  seems
to  have  been  idly  expended  on  the  supposed  name,  *  Logan  Rock/  To  hg
is  a  verb  in  general  use  throughout  Cornwall,  for  vibrating  or  rolling  like
a  drunken  man ;  and  an  is  frequently  heard  in  provincial  pronunciation  for
ing,  characteristic  of  the  modem  present  participle.  The  Loging  Rock  is,
therefore,  strictly  descriptive  of  its  peculiar  motion." — Davits  Gilbert.

+  When  this  great  natural  curiosity  was,  as  it  was  thought,  destroyed,
the  public  wrath  was  excited,  and  appeased  only  by  the  conciliatory  spirit
manifested  by  Mr  Davies  Gilbert,  who  persuaded  the  Lords  of  the  Admi-
ralty to  lend  Lieutenant  Goldsmith  the  required  apparatus  for  replacing  it.
Mr  D.  Gilbert  found  the  money ;  and  after  making  the  necessary  arrange-
ments,  on  the  2d  of  November  1824,  Goldsmith  "  had  the  glory  ^


Mincambery  Main-amber.  189


HINCAHBEB,  UAIN-AMBEB,  OB  AMBBOSE'S  STONE.

A  MIGHTY  Logan  Stone  was  poised  and  blessed  by  Am-
brose Merlin,  not  far  from  Penzanca  "  So  great/'  says
Drayton  in  his  " Polyalbion,"  "that  many  men's  united
strength  cannot  remove  it,  yet  with  one  finger  you  may
wag  it"

Merlm  proclaimed  that  this  stone  should  stand  until
England  had  no  king ;  and  Scawen  tells  us, —

"Here,  too,  we  may  add  what  wrong  another  sort  of
strangers  have  done  to  us,  especially  in  the  civil  wars,  and  in  par-
ticular by  the  destroying  of  Mincamber,  a  famous  monument,
being  a  rock  of  infinite  weight,  which,  as  a  burden,  was  laid
apon  other  great  stones,  and  yet  so  equally  thereon  poised
up  by  nature  only,  that  a  little  child  could  instantly  move  it,
but  no  one  man,  or  many,  remove  it  This  natural  monu-
ment all  travellers  that  came  that  way  desired  to  behold ;
bat  in  the  time  of  Oliver's  usurpation,  when  all  monumen-
tal things  became  despicable,  one  Shrubsall,  one  of  Oliver's
heroes,  then  governor  of  Fendennes,  by  labour  and  much  ado,
eanaed  to  be  undermined  and  thrown  down,  to  the  great  grief
of  the  country,  but  to  his  own  great  glory,  as  he  thought ;
doing  it,  as  he  said,  with  a  small  cane  in  his  hand.  I  myself
have  heard  him  to  boast  of  this  act,  being  a  prisoner  under
him."*

So  was  Merlin's  prophecy  fulfilled


\  tliis  immenBe  rock  in  its  natural  position."    The  glory  of  Gold-
L  and  of  Shrubsall,  who  overturned  another  lai^  Logan  Rock,  is  cer-
taiallj  one  not  to  be  desired.

*  **  AwJben  or  Main  Aniben,  which  signify  anointed  or  consecrated
flkoiiM."'«-C  8,  QUbertf  Hktorical  Survey.  See  also  Scawen's  '*Disser-
tsUoii  on  the  ^jomish  Language,"  Stukeley's  **  Stonehenge,"  and  Jabez
AIOmfB  "  Woroettenhire."    Appendix  (L.),  Pctroi  Ambrotia.


1 90  Romances  of  the  Rocks.


ZENNOB  corrs.

C  TAYLOR  STEPHENS,  lately  deceased,  who  was  foi
t  some  time  the  mral  postman  of  Zennor,  sought,  in  hii
poem,  "  The  Chief  of  Barat-Anac,"  to  embody  in  a  story  sonu
descriptions  of  the  Zennor  coits  and  other  rock  curiosities.

I  employed  this  man  for  some  weeks  to  gather  up  for  m
all  that  remained  of  legendary  lore  in  Zennor  and  Morva
He  did  his  work  well ;  and  from  his  knowledge  of  the  people
he  learnt  more  from  them  than  any  other  man  could  have  done
The  results  of  his  labours  are  scattered  through  these  volumei

C.  Taylor  Stephens  wrote  me  on  the  subject  of  the  crom
lechs  as  follows : —

Superstitious  belief  respecting  the  Qumts.

"  I  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Stennor  in  1859,  and  by  accident  cam
across  the  Zennor  cromlech,  and  was  struck  with  the  mode  of  its  consfanM
tion,  (not  having  heard  of  its  existence  before,)  and  thinking  it  bore  Bom
resemblance  to  the  Druidical  altars  I  had  read  of,  I  inquired  of  a  grou]
of  persons  who  were  gathered  round  the  village  smithery  whether  any  om
could  tell  me  anything  respecting  the  heap  of  stones  on  the  top  of  the  hiD
Several  were  in  total  ignorance  of  their  existence.  One  said,  '  Tea  caal'c
the  gient's  kite ;  thas  all  I  knaw/  At  last,  one  more  thoughtful,  and  om
who,  I  found  out,  was  considered  the  wiseacre  and  oracle  of  the  village
looked  up  and  gave  me  this  important  piece  of  information, — *  Them  en
rocks  were  put  there  afore  you  nor  me  was  boem  or  thoft  ov ;  but  whc
don  it  es  a  puzler  to  everybody  in  Sunnur  (Zennor.)  I  de  bleve  these
put  up  theer  wen  thes  ere  wurld  wus  maade ;  but  wether  they  wus  or  nc
don't  very  much  mattur  by  hal  akounts.  Thes  I'd  knaw,  that  nobody  caani
take  car  em  awa ;  if  anybody  was  too,  they  *d  be  brot  there  agin.  He*
an  ef  they  wus  tuk'd  awa  wone  nite,  theys  shur  to  be  hal  rite  up  top  o'  tl
hil  fust  thing  in  morenin.  But  I  caant  tel  ee  s'  much  as  Passen  can ;  ed
you'd  zea  he,  he  'd  tel  he  hal  about  et.' "

In  one  of  the  notes  received  from  the  poet  and  postman
he  gives  a  curious  instance  of  the  many  parts  a  man  played
in  those  remote  districts  but  a  few  years  since : —

"  My  venerable  grandpapa  was  well  known  by  all  the  old


The  Crick  Stone  in  Morva.  191

people,  for  he  was  not  only  a  local  preacher,  but  a  charmer,
a  botanist^  a  veterinaiy  surgeon,  a  secretary  to  a  burial  and
8iek  benefit  society,  and,  moreover,  the  blacksmith  of  the
neighbourhood."

THE  mSN-AN-TOL.

"VTOT  more  than  two  miles  from  Penzance  stands  the  cele-
131  brated  cromlech  of  Lanyon — often  pronounced  L^nine.
This,  like  all  the  other  cromlechs,  marks,  no  doubt,  the  resting*
place  of  a  British  chieftain,  many  of  whose  followers  repose
within  a  short  distance  of  this,  the  principal  monument.

Beyond  the  village  of  Lanyon,  on  a  "furzy  down,"  stands
the  M6n-an-tol,  or  the  "  holed  stona"  For  some  purpose —
it  is  in  vain  to  speculate  on  it  now — ^the  bardic  priesthood
employed  this  stone,  and  probably  the  superstition  which
attaches  to  it  may  indicate  its  ancient  uses.

If  scrofulous  children  are  passed  wsked  through  the  MSn-
an-tol  three  times,  and  then  drawn  on  the  grass  three  times
against  the  sun,  it  is  felt  by  the  faithful  that  much  has  been
done  towards  insuring  a  speedy  cure.  Even  men  and  women
irbo  have  been  afflicted  with  spinal  diseases,  or  who  have
suffered  from  scrofolous  taint,  have  been  drawn  through  this
magic  stone,  which  all  declare  still  retains  its  ancient  virtues.
If  two  brass  pins  are  carefully  laid  across  each  other  on
the  top  edge  of  this  stone,  any  question  put  to  the  rock  wHl
be  answered,  by  the  pins  acquiring,  through  some  unknown
agenqr,  a  peculiar  motion.


THE  CRICK  STONE  IN  MOEVA.

raay  one  suffering  from  a  ''  crick  in  the  back  *'  can  pass
through  this  forked  rock,  on  the  borders  of  Zennor  and
]forv%  without  touching  the  stone,  he  is  certain  of  being


192  Romances  of  t/ie  Rocks.

cured.  This  is  but  a  substitute  for  the  holed  stone,  whic
it  is  admitted,  has  much  more  virtue  than  the  forked  stcHi

In  various  parts  of  the  county  there  are,  amongst  I
granitic  masses,  rocks  which  have  fallen  across  each  oib
leaving  small  openings,  or  there  are  holes,  low  and  narro
extending  under  a  pile  of  rocks.  In  nearly  every  case  of  tl
kind,  we  find  it  is  popularly  stated,  that  any  one  sufferii
from  rheumatism  or  lumbago  would  be  cured  if  he  crawi
through  the  openings.  In  some  cases,  nine  times  are  insist
on  "  to  make  the  charm  complete.**

Mrs  Bray,  in  her  "  Traditions-of  Devonshire,**  gives  seva
examples  of  the  prevalence  of  this  superstition  over  t!
granitic  district  of  Dartmoor.*


THE  DANCING  STONES.  THE  HUELEES.  &c.

IN  many  parts  of.  Cornwall  we  find,  more  or  less  perfei
circles  of  stone,  which  the  learned  ascribe  to  the  Drnit
Tradition,  and  the  common  people,  who  have  faith  in  all  th
their  fathers  have  taught  them,  tell  us  another  tale.  The
stones  are  everlasting  marks  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  beii
maidens  or  men,  who  were  changed  into  stone  for  sob
wicked  profanation  of  the  Sabbath-day.  These  monuments
impiety  are  scattered  over  the  county ;  they  are  to  be  f oun
indeed,  to  the  extremity  of  Old  Cornwall,  many  of  tho
circles  being  upon  Dartmoor.  It  is  not  necessary  to  nan
them  all  Every  purpose  will  be  served  if  the  tourist
directed  to  those  which  lie  more  directly  in  the  route  whi(
is  usually  prescribed.  In  the  parish  of  Burian  are  il
''Dawns  Myin"  or  Men — the  dancing  stones— common

*  **  Creeping  under  tolmens  for  the  cure  of  diseases  is  still  practised
Ireland,  and  also  in  the  East,  as  is  shewn  by  Mrs  Colonel  Elwood  in  h
Travels."— C?en«^cman*«  Magazine,  July  1831.


The  Dancing  S tones y  the  Hurlers,  &c.     193

called  "  The  Merry  Maidens ;'-  and  near  them  are  two  granite
pillars,  named  the  "Pipers.*'  One  Sabbath  evening  some
of  the  thoughtless  maidens  of  the  neighbouring  village,
instead  of  attending  vespers,  strayed  into  the  fields,  and
two  evil  spirits,  assuming  the  guise  of  pipers,  began  to
play  some  dance  tunes.  The  young  people  yielded  to  the
temptation;  and,  forgetting  the  holy  day,  commenced
dancing.  The  excitement  increased  with  the  exercise,
and  soon  the  music  and  the  dance  became  extremely  wild ;
when,  lo,  a  flash  of  lightning  from  the  clear  sky  transfixed
them  all,  the  tempters  and  the  tempted,  and  there  in  stone
they  stand.

The  celebrated  circle  of  nineteen  stones, — which  is  seen  on
the  road  to  the  Land's-End, — known  as  the  "  Boscawen-An
circle,"  is  another  example.  The  "Nine  Maids,"  or  the
"  Virgin  Sisters,**  in  Stithians,  and  other  "  Nine  Maids,"  or,
as  called  in  Cornish,  Naw-whoors,  in  St  Colomb-Major
parish,  should  also  be  seen,  in  the  hope  of  impressing  the
moral  lesson  they  convey  yet  more  strongly  on  the  mind.*

*  The  following  quotations  are  from  Davies  Gilbert.  It  must  not  be
forgotten  that  this  gentleman  was  President  of  the  Boyal  Society,  and
ikerrfcre  a  sceptic  in  local  traditionary  story : —

**  On  the  south-west  part  of  the  parish  of  Stithians,  towards  Gwendron,
tra  stiU  to  be  seen  nine  stones  set  perpendicularly  erect  in  the  earth,  in  a
direct  manner,  about  ten  feet  apart,  called  the  Nine  Maids,  probably  set  up
there  in  nemory  of  nine  religious  sisters  or  nuns  in  that  place  before  the
fifth  century ;  not  women  turned  into  stone/  as  the  English  name  implies,
and  as  the  country  people  thereabout  will  tell  you."

*•  The  Nine  Maids — in  Cornish,  Naw-voz,  alifu  the  nine  sisters — in  Cor-
nish, Naw-whoors — which  very  name  informs  us  that  they  were  sepulchral
•tonea,  erected  in  memory  either  of  nine  natural,  or  spiritual  sisters,  of
aoma  religious  house,  and  not  so  many  maids  turned  into  stones  for  dancing
on  the  Sobbath-day,  as  the  country  people  will  tell  you.  Those  stones  are
aei  in  order  by  a  line,  as  is  such  another  monument,  also  called  the  Nine
,  in  Gwendron,  by  the  highway,  about  twenty-five  feet  distance  from
I  other."
IfiSfiEBIBS.  N


1 94  Romances  of  the  Rocks.

The  three  circles,  which  are  seen  on  the  moors  not  fer
from  the  Cheesewring,  in  the  parish  tf  St  deer,  are  also
notable  examples  of  the  punishment  of  Sabbath-breaking.
These  are  called  the  "  Hurlers,"  and  they  preserve  the  posi-
tion in  which  the  several  parties  stood  in  the  full  excitement
of  the  game  of  hurling,  when,  for  the  crime  of  profaning
the  Sabbath,  they  were  changed  into  stone  *


THE  NINE  MAIDS,  OR  VIRGIN  SISTERS.

"VTINE  "  Moor  Stones "  are  set  up  near  the  road  in  the
Xl  parish  of  Gwendron,  or  Wendron,  to  which  the  above
name  is  given.  The  perpendicular  blocks  of  granite  have
evidently  been  placed,  with  much  labour,  in  their  present
position.  Tradition  says  they  indicate  the  graves  of  nine
sisters.  Hals  appears  to  think  some  nuns  were  buried  here.
From  one  person  only,  I  heard  the  old  story  of  the  stones
having  been  metamorphosed  maidens.  Other  groups  of
stone  might  be  named,  as  Eosemedery,  Tregaseal,  Bosked-

*  "  With  respect  to  the  stones  called  the  *  Hurlers '  being  once  men,  I
will  say  with  Hals,  *  Did  but  the  ball  which  these  Hurlers  used  when  flesh
and  blood,  appear  directly  over  them,  immovably  pendant  in  the  air,  one
might  be  apt  to  credit  some  little  of  the  tale ;  *  but  as  this  is  not  the  case,
I  must  add  my  belief  of  their  being  erected  by  the  Druids  for  some  pur-
pose or  other — probably  a  court  of  justice ;  long  subsequent  to  which  erec-
tion, however,  they  may  have  served  as  a  goal  for  hurl-players."— Topo-
graphical  and  Historical  Sketches  of  the  Boroughs  of  East  and  West  Love,  hf
Thomas  Bond.

May  we  not  address  Mr  Bond,  "  0  ye  of  little  faith "  ?  A  very  small
amount  of  which  would  have  found  the  ball,  fixed  as  a  boulder  of  granite,
not  as  it  passed  through  the  air,  but  as  it  rolled  along  the  ground.

That  an  ancient  priesthood,  endeavouring  to  reach  the  minds  of  an  ig-
norant people  through  their  sensations,  should  endeavour  to  persuade  the
old  Celtic  population  that  God's  vengeance  had  fallen  on  the  Sabbath-
breaker,  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  Up  to  a  very  recent  period,  hurling
matches  usually  came  off  on  the  Sunday. — See  "  Hurling  "  in  the  chapter
on  Cornish  Customs.


The  Twelve-o'clock  Stone.  195

nan,  Botallack,  Tredinek,  and  Crowlas,  in  the  west,  to  which
the  same  story  extends,  and  many  others  in  the  eastern  parts
of  the  connty ;  but  it  cannot  be  necessary.


THE  TWELVE-O'CLOCK  STONE.

FMBERS  of  people  would  formerly  visit  a  remarkable
Logan  stone,  near  Nancledrea,  which  had  been,  by  super-
natural power,  impressed  with  some  peculiar  sense  at  mid-
night Although  it  was  quite  impossible  to  move  this  stone
during  daylight,  or  indeed  by  human  power  at  any  other  time,
it  would  rock  like  a  cradle  exactly  at  midnight.  Many  a  child
has  been  cured  of  rickets  by  being  placed  naked  at  this  hour
on  the  twelve-o'clock  stone.  If,  however,  the  child  was
**  misbegotten,"  or,  if  it  was  the  offspring  of  dissolute  parents,
the  stone  would  not  move,  and  consequently  no  cure  was
effected.  On  the  Cuckoo  Hill,  eastward  of  Nancledrea,  there
stood,  but  a  few  years  since,  two  piles  of  rocks  about  eight
feet  apart,  and  these  were  united  by  a  large  flat  stone  care-
fully placed  upon  them, — thus  forming  a  doorway  which
was,  as  my  informant  told  me,  "  large  and  high  enough  to
drive  a  horse  and  cart  through."  It  was  formerly  the  cus-
tom to  march  in  procession  through  this  "doorway"  in
golDg  to  the  twelve-o'clock  stone.

The  stone-mason  has,  however,  been  busy  hereabout ;
and  every  mass  of  granite,  whether  rendered  notorious  by
the  Giants  or  holy  by  the  Druids,  if  found  to  be  of  the  size
required,  has  been  removed.*

*  Tlie  foUowing  are  a  few  of  the  interesting  remains  of  old  Cornwall,
wUeh  have  entirely  disappeared  from  this  neighbourhood  within  a  few


Between  St  lyes  and  Zennor,  on  the  lower  road  over  Tregarthen  downs
fliood  a  Logan  rock.    An  old  man,  perhaps  ninety  years  of  age,  told  me  he


1 96  Romances  of  the  Rocks.

THE  MEN-SCETFA.

AT  the  entrance  to  Penzance  rises,  rather  abruptly,  a  bS
crowned  with  a  very  remarkable  earthwork.    It
known  as  Castle  Lesgudzhek,  or,  the  "  Castle  of  the  Blooi
Field,"  to  this  day.

Tradition,  our  only  guide,  tells  us  that  this  castle  was  (M
of  the  strong  places  of  a  British  king,  in  the  third  or  fouii
century  ;  that  a  rival  chieftain,  from  the  eastern  part
Danmonium,  besieged  him.  The  defence  was  long  and  de
perate.  The  besiegers,  wearying  of  the  unsuccessful  td
retired  at  length  to  the  plains  of  Gulval ;  and  that  the  b
sieged  left  his  castle,  and  gave  his  enemies  battle  on  tl
plain  which  extends  from  Penzance  to  Marazion.  Tl
"bloody  field"  remained  in  possession  of  the  chieftain
Lesgudzhek,  aud  the  leader  of  the  eastern  men  was  killx
near  where  he  was  buried.  The  Mefa  Scryfa,  or  inscrib
stone,  was  raised  over  his  grave, — ^its  height,  nine  fee
beinoj  the  exact  heis^ht  of  the  defeated  warrior.

had  often  logged  it,  and  that  it  would  make  a  noise  which  could  he  hen
for  miles.

At  Balnoon,  between  Nancledrea  and  Knill's  Steeple,  some  miners  cai
upon  **  two  slabs  of  granite  cemented  together,"  which  covered  a  wall
grave  three  feet  square — an  ancient  kistvean.  In  it  they  found  an  eartiu
ware  vessel  containing  some  black  earth,  and  a  leaden  spoon.  The  spo
was  given  to  Mr  Praed  of  Trevetha,  and  may  possibly  be  in  the  possessi
of  the  present  proprietor.     The  kistvean  was  utterly  destroyed.

At  Brunnion,  not  far  from  St  Ives,  in  the  garden  attached  to  the  hoi
which  is  occupied  by  the  Hoskings,  is  an  arched  doorway  of  careful
worked  granite.  Tradition  saith  this  doorway  belonged  to  an  ancit
church,  and  that  the  present  garden  was  the  burial-ground.  Close  by,
Treverrack,  is  a  field  known  as  the  *'  Chapel  Field,"  in  which  the  plough
constantly  turning  up  stones  which  have  been  carefully  chiselled.

In  Bosprenis  Croft  there  was  a  very  large  coit  or  cromlech.  It  is  s
to  have  been  fifteen  feet  square,  and  not  more  than  one  foot  thick  in  a
part.  This  was  broken  in  two  parts  some  years  since,  and  taken  to  P<
zance  to  form  the  beds  for  two  ovens.


Table-Men.  197

EIALOBEAN  CUNOVAL  PIL

is  engraven  on  the  block ;  thus  handing  to  us  the  name  of
the  unfortunate  warrior,  who  was  probably  the  son  of  the
hero  from  whom  Giilval  draws  its  name;  and  if  so,  may
we  not  suppose  that  he  was  but  endeavouring  to  recover  the
possessions  which  once  belonged  to  his  parent.


TABLE-M&J.

THE  SAXON  king's  VISIT  TO  THE  LAND'S-END.

AT  a  short  distance  from  Sennen  church,  and  near  the  end
of  a  cottage,  is  a  block  of  granite,  nearly  eight  feet
long,  and  about  three  feet  high.  This  rock  is  known  as  the
Table-men,  or  Table-main,  which  appears  to  signify  the  stone
tabia  At  Bosavern,  in  St  Just,  is  a  somewhat  similar  flat
stone ;  and  the  same  story  attaches  to  each.

It  is  to  the  effect  that  some  Saxon  kings  used  the  stone
as  a  dining-table.  The  number  has  been  variously  stated ;
some  traditions  fixing  on  three  kings,  others  on  seven.  Hals
is  far  more  explicit ;  for,  as  he  says,  on  the  authority  of  the
thronide  of  Samuel  Daniell,  they  were —

Ethelbert,  5th  king  of  Kent ;

Cissa,  2d  king  of  the  South  Saxons ;

Kingills,  6th  king  of  the  West  Saxons ;

Sebert,  3d  king  of  the  East  Saxons ;

Ethelfred,  7th  king  of  the  Northumbers ;

Penda»  5th  king  of  the  Mercians ;

Sigebert,  6th  king  of  the  East  Angles, — who  all  flourished
about  the  year  600.

At  a  point  where  the  four  parishes  of  Zennor,  Morvah,
Gulval,  and  Madron  meet,  is  a  flat  stone  with  a  cross  cut  on
it    The  Saxon  kings  are  also  said  to  have  dined  on  this.


1 98  Romances  of  the  Rocks.

The  only  tradition  which  is  known  amongst  the  peasant
of  Sennen  is,  that  Prince  Arthur  and  the  kings  who  aid
him  against  the  Danes,  in  the  great  battle  fought  near  Vella
Drucher,  dined  on  the  Table-mfin ;  after  which  they  defeat
the  Danes.

MEELYN'S  PEOPHECIES.

PROPHECIES  by  Merlyn  are  tolerably  prevalent  in  Coi
wall.     The  character  of  these  may  be  known  by  one
two  examples —

"  Aga  syth  tyer,  war  and  meyne  Merlyn
Ara  neb  syth  Leakey  Paul,  Penzance  hag  Newlyn."

This  has  been  translated —

"  There  shall  land  on  the  stone  of  Merlyn,
Those  who  shall  bum  Paul,  Penzance,  and  Newlyn."

This  prophecy  is  supposed  to  have  been  accomplished  wb
the  Spaniards,  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  landed  at  Mow
hole,  a  fishing  village  in  the  Mount's  Bay.  Near  tl
pier  at  Mousehole  is  still  a  rock  called  "  Merlyn  Car,"
'*  Merlyn's  Kock,''  and  not  far  from  it  another,  called  "  t
Spaniard."

THE  LEVAN  STONE.

This  bisected  mass  of  granite  has  been  already  noticed
connexion  with  St  Levan.

"  When,  with  panniers  astride,
A  pack-horse  can  ride
Through  the  Levan  Stone,
The  worid  will  be  done."

THE  RAME  HEAD  AND  THE  DODMAN.

Meryln  is  said  to  have  pronounced  the  following  prophec
standing  near  St  German's  Grotto  on  the  shores  of  Whitsan

Bay  :—

"  When  the  Rame  Head  and  Dodman  meet,
Man  and  woman  will  have  cause  to  greet."


The  Armed  Knight.  199


THE  ARMED  KNIGHT.

,,  A  T  low  water  there  is  to  be  seen,  off  the  Land*s-End,  to-
il, wards  the  Scilly  Island,  (probably  so  called  from  the
abundance  of^eel  or  conger  fishes  caught  there,  which  are
called  sillys,  or  lillis,)  for  a  mile  or  more,  a  dangerous  strag
of  ragged  rocks,  amongst  which  the  Atlantic  Sea,  and  the
waves  of  St  George's  and  the  British  Channel  meeting,
make  a  dreadful  bellowing  and  rumbling  noise  at  half  ebb
and  half  flood,  which  let  seamen  take  notice  of  to  avoid
them.

"  Of  old,  there  was  one  of  those  rocks  more  notable  than
the  rest,  which  tradition  saith  was  ninety  feet  above  the  flux
and  reflux  of  the  sea,  with  an  iron  spire  at  the  top  thereof,
which  was  overturned  or  thrown  down  in  a  violent  storm,
1647,  and  the  rock  was  broken  in  three  pieces.  This  iron
spire,  as  the  additions  to  Camden's  "  Britannia"  inform  us,
was  thought  to  have  been  erected  by  the  Eomans,  or  set  up
as  a  trophy  there  by  King  Athelstan,  when  he  first  con-
quered the  Scilly  Islands,  (which  was  in  those  parts ;)  but  it
is  not  very  probable  such  a  piece  of  iron,  ia  this  salt  sea  and
air,  without  being  consumed  by  rust,  could  endure  so  long  a
tima  However  it  is  or  was,  certain  I  am  it  commonly  was
called  in  Cornish,  An  Marogeth  Arvowed,  i.e,  the  Armed
Knight ;  for  what  reason  I  know  not,  except  erected  by,  or
in  memory  of  some  armed  knight;  as  also  Came-an-peul,
ift,  the  spile,  spire,  or  javelin  rock.  Again,  remember  silly
lilly,  is  in  Cornish  and  Armoric  language,  a  conger  fish,
or  fishes,  from  whence  Scilly  Islands  is  probably  denomi-
nated, as  elsewhere  noted."  *  Mr  Blight  says  this  rock  is  also
called  Ghiela,  or  Guelaz, — the  "  rock  easily  seen."

*  Hala,  in  Gilbert* b  "  Hiatory  of  Cornwall,'*  vol  iii  p.  43.


200  Romances  of  the  Rocks.


THE  lEISH  LADY.

l^EAR  Pedn-men-dw,  the  "Headland  of  Black  Rock''
Xl  a  curiously-shaped  rock,  known  as  tly  Irish  Lai
In  days  long  ago  some  adventurous  sailors  from  Irela
were  shipwrecked  at  night  on  this  rock,  and  every  s(
perished,  save  a  lady,  who  was  seen  in  the  morning  sitti
on  the  top  of  the  rock.  The  storm  was  still  raging,  and
was  quite  impossible  to  render  this  solitary  suflTerer  a
assistance.  Days  and  nights  passed  away  ;  the  peo]
watched  the  dying  woman  from  the  shore,  but  they  cox
not  reach  her.  At  length  they  saw  that  her  suflFerings  w(
at  an  end ;  and  at  last  the  dead  body  was  washed  into  t
sea.  Often,  when  the  winds  and  waves  are  high,  the€sh'
men  see  a  lady  tranquilly  sitting  on  this  rock,  mth  a  n
in  her  mouth;  to  shew,  it  may  be  presumed,  her  perfect  :
difference  to  the  ragings  of  tempests.*

*  This  kind  of  tradition  is  not  uncommon.     The  following  is  a  We
form  of  it : —

GWENNO'S  STEEPLE.
•
Among  the  numerous  irregular  caves  at  the  western  end  of  Ogofat
one  which    has  derived  the  name  of  Tfynnon   Gwenno,    (the   well
Gwenno,)  from  the  following  tradition,  kindly  given  to  us  by  Mr  Johi
The  water  which   still   occupies  its  lower  part,  was,  in  days  of  y«
reputed  to  possess  medicinal  qualities,  which  attracted  numerous  bath
from  the  surrounding  districts.     Among  these  a  fair  maid,  named  Gw(
lian,  or,  for  brevity,  Gwenno,  was  induced,  on  an  imfortunate  day,  to  expl
the  recesses  of  the  cavern  beyond  a  frowning  rock,  which  had  always  b
the  prescribed  limit  to  the  progress  of  the  bathers.     She  passed  beneatl
and  was  no  more  seen.     She  had  been  seized  by  some  superhuman  pov
as  a  warning  to  others  not  to  invade  those  mysterious  penetralia.     I
still,  on  stormy  nights,  the  spirit  of  Gweullian  is  seen  to  hover  over  a  Ic
crag  which  rises  near  the  entrance  of  the  now  deserted  cave,  and  bears
name  of  Cloch  ty  Gwenno,  or  Gwenno's  Steeple. — Note  on  the  Gogqfau
Ogofau  Mine*    Memoirs  of  Geological  Survey,  voL  i.  p.  482.


Gwennds  Steeple.  201

Sir  Humphrey  Davy  wrote  a  poem  on  this  tradition.
le  following  is  an  extract  from  it : —

"  Where  yon  dark  cliff*  o'erehadows  the  blue  main,
Theora  died  amidst  the  stormy  waves,
And  on  its  feet  the  sea-dews  wash'd  her  corpse,
And  the  wild  breath  of  storms  shook  her  black  locks.
Young  was  Theora ;  bluer  was  her  eye
Than  the  bright  azure  of  the  moonlight  night ;
Fair  was  her  cheek,  as  is  the  ocean  cloud
Red  with  the  morning  ray.

"  Amidst  the  groves,
And  greens,  and  nodding  rocks  that  overhang
The  gray  Eillamey  pass'd  her  morning  days,
Bright  with  the  beams  of  joy.

"To  solitude,
To  nature,  and  to  Gk)d,  she  gave  her  youth ;
Hence  were  her  passions  tuned  to  harmony.
Her  azure  eye  oft  glisten'd  with  the  tear
Of  sensibility,  and  her  soft  cheek
Qlow*d  with  the  blush  of  rapture.    Hence  she  loved
To  wander  Wdst  the  green  wood  silver'd  o'er
By  the  bright  moonbeam.    Hence  she  loved  the  rocks,
Crown'd  with  the  nodding  ivy,  and  the  lake
Fair  with  the  purple  morning,  and  the  sea
Expansive,  mingling  with  the  arched  sky.

'*  Dark  in  the  midnight  cloud.
When  the  wild  blast  upon  its  pinions  bore
The  dying  shrieks  of  Erin's  injured  sons.
She  'scaped  the  murderer's  arm.t

"  The  British  bark
Bore  her  across  the  ocean.     From  the  west
The  whirlwind  rose,  the  fire-fraught  clouds  of  heaven
Were  mingled  with  the  wave.     The  shatter'd  bark
Sunk  at  thy  feet,  Bolerium,  and  the  white  surge
Closed  on  green  Erin's  daughter."

— Paris's  Lift  of  Sir  Humphrty  Davy^  p.  88.

» A  roek  near  the  Lands-End  oaUed  the  *' Irish  Lady."

f  The  Iilah  lady  was  shipwrecked  at  the  Land's- End  about  the  time  of  the  mas-
9«  of  the  Irish  Prgiwtants  by  the  CathoUos,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  First  So
f  Diavj— th«  tztdltkii  is  very  old.


202  Romances  of  the  Rocks.

THE  DEVIL'S  DOOEWAY.

IN  the  slate  (Killas)  formations  behind  Polperro  is  a  goo
example  of  2i,fault  The  geologist,  in  the  pride  of  h
knowledge,  refers  this  to  some  movement  of  the  solid  ma
— a  rending  of  the  rocks,  produced  either  by  the  actic
of  some  subterranean  force  lifting  the  earth-crust,  or  by
depression  of  one  division  of  the  rocks.  The  gray-beardc
wisdom  of  our  grandfathers  led  them  to  a  conclusion  wi(iel
different  from  this.

The  mighty  ruler  of  the  realms  of  darkness,  who  is  kno^
to  have  an  especial  fondness  for  rides  at  midnight,  ''  to  «
how  his  little  ones  thrive,"  ascending  from  his  subterranea
country,  chose  this  spot  as  his  point  of  egress.

As  he  arose  from  below  in  his  fiery  car,  drawn  by
gigantic  jet  black  steed,  the  rocks  gave  way  before  him,  an
the  rent  at  Polperro  remains  to  this  day  to  convince  all  ui
believers.  Not  only  this,  as  his  Satanic  majesty  buK
through  the  slate  rocks,  his  horse,  delighted  with  the  airs  (
this  upper  world,  reared  in  wild  triumph,  and,  planting  agai
his  hoof  upon  the  ground,  made  these  islands  shake  as  wit
an  earthquake ;  and  he  left  the  deep  impression  of  his  burnin
foot  behind.  There,  any  unbeliever  may  see  the  hoof-shape-
pool,  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  wisdom  of  the  days  gone  b}

PIPER'S  HOLE,  SCILLY.

ON  the  banks  of  Peninnis  in  St  Mary's  is  Piper's  Hole
which  communicates,  as  tradition  saith,  with  th
island  of  Tresco,  where  another  orifice  known  by  the  sam<
name  is  seen.  Going  in  at  the  orifice  at  Peninnis  Banks  ii
St  Mary's,  it  is  above  man's  height,  and  of  as  much  spaci
in  its  breadth,  but  grows  lower  and  narrower  further  in  :  i
little  beyond  which  entrance  appear  rocky  basins,  or  reser


204  Romances  of  the  Rocks.

On  the  other  hand  we  find,  amidst  the  rocks  of  the  she
and  the  hills,  numerous  devil's  coits,  plenty  of  devil's  fo(
steps,  with  devil's  bellows,  devil's  frying-pans,  devil's  ovei
and  devil's  caves  in  abundance.  Of  course,  on  Dartmoor,  sii
the  devil  remained  in  Devonshire,  we  might  expect  to  fi
such  evidences  of  his  presence.  The  devil's  frying-pan
Mistor  is  well  known,  and  nearly  every  granite  tor  presen
some  impression  of  this  melancholy  wandering  wicked  one

KINQ  AETHUE'S  STONE.

IN  the  western  part  of  Cornwall,  all  the  marks  of  any  pec
liar  kind  found  on  the  rocks  are  referred  either  to  t
giants  or  the  devil.  In  the  eastern  part  of  the  coxmty  sn
markings  are  almost  always  attributed  to  Arthur.  Not  \
from  the  Devil's  Coit  is  St  Columb,  on  the  edge  of  the  Qa
moor,  there  is  a  large  stone,  upon  which  are  deeply-i]
pressed  marks,  which  a  little  fancy  may  convert  into  t
marks  of  four  horse-shoes.  This  is  "  King  Arthur's  Ston
and  these  marks  were  made  by  the  horse  upon  which  t
British  king  rode  when  he  resided  at  Castle  Denis,  a
hunted  on  these  moors.  King  Arthur's  beds,  and  chai
and  caves,  are  frequently  to  be  met  with.  The  Gian
Coits,  and  many  traditions  of  these  will  be  found  in  t
section  devoted  to  the  giant  romances,  are  probably  mon
ments  of  the  earliest  types  of  rock  mythology.  Those
Arthur  belong  to  the  period  when  the  Britons  were  so  1
advanced  in  civilisation  as  to  war  under  experienced  rulei
and  those  which  are  appropriated  by  the  devil  are  evident
instances  of  the  influence  of  priestcraft  on  the  minds  of ;
impressible  people.*

*  Another  example  of  like  stories  in  Wales  may  be  interesting : —
"  Five  juvenile  saints,  on  their  pilgrimage  to  the  celebrated  shrine


The  Cock-Crow  Stone.  205


THE  COCK-CfiOW  STONE.

A  ROCK  of  white  marble  (?)  with  many  rock  basins  on  its
snrface  lies  in  Looe  harbour,  under  Saunder's  Lane,
and  is  now  covered  by  every  tide.  This  stone  once  stood  on
the  top  of  an  elevated  rock  near  it,  and  when  in  this  posi-
tion, whenever  it  heard  a  cock  crow  in  the  neighbouring
farm-yard  of  Hay,  it  turned  round  three  times.

The  topmost  stone  of  that  curious  pile  of  rocks  in  the  parish
of  St  Cleer,  known  as  the  Cheesewring,  is  gifted  in  like
manner.  Even  now  the  poultry-yards  are  very  distant,  but
in  ancient  days  the  cocks  must  have  crowed  most  lustily,  to
have  produced  vibrations  on  either  the  sensitive  rock  or  the
tympanum  of  man.

St  David,  emaciated  with  hunger,  and  exhausted  with  fatigue,  here  re-
clined themselves  to  rest,  and  reposed  their  weary  heads  on  this  ponder-
oos  piUow;  their  eyes  were  soon  closed  by  the  powerful  hand  of  sleep,  and
they  were  no  longer  able  to  resist,  by  the  force  of  prayer,  the  artifices  of
their  foes.  The  sky  was  suddenly  overwhelmed  with  clouds — the  thunder
rolled — ^the  lightning  flashed,  and  the  rain  poured  in  torrents.  The  storm
increased  in  vehemence;  aU  nature  became  chilled  with  cold,  and  even
Piety  and  Charity  felt  its  efifects.  The  drops  of  rain  were  soon  congealed
into  enormous  hailstones,  which,  by  the  force  of  the  wind,  were  driven
with  so  much  violence  against  the  heads  of  the  weary  pilgrims  as  to  affix
them  to  their  pillow,  and  the  vestiges  they  left  are  still  discernible.  Being
borne  away  in  triumph  by  the  malignant  sorcerer  who  inhabits  the  hollows
of  these  hills,  they  were  concealed  in  the  innermost  recesses  of  his  cavern,
where  they  are  destined  to  remain  asleep,  boimd  in  the  irrefragable  chain
of  enchantment  until  that  happy  period  shaU  arrive  when  the  diocese  shall
be  blessed  with  a  pious  bishop,  for  when  that  happens,  no  doubt  Merlin
himself,  the  enemy  of  malignant  sorcerers,  will  be  disenchanted,  and  he
will  come  and  restore  to  liberty  the  dormant  saints,  when  they  will  imme-
diately engage  in  the  patriotic  work  of  reforming  the  Welsh." — From  the
Emgluk  Works  of  the  late  Rev,  Eleazor  Williams,  quoted  by  Warington  W.
Smjth,  M.A.     Memoirs  of  the  Geological  Sur\'ey,  vol.  L  p.  480.


LOST  CITIES.


"  Between  Land's-End  and  Scilly  rocks
Sunk  lies  a  town  that  ocean  mocks.

Where  breathes  the  man  that  would  not  weep
O'er  such  fine  climes  beneath  the  deep  ? "

— Historical  Records  of  Ancient  Cornwall. — Thomas  i


ROMANCES  OF  LOST  CITIES.


LOST  LANDS.


**  And  oh !  how  short  ar»  human  schemes  !
Here  ended  all  our  golden  dreams."

Jonathan  Swift.

ilHE  notion  of  cities  and  extensive  tracts  of  culti-
vated country  being  under  the  waters  of  the
ocean  and  of  lakes  appears  to  have  existed  from
all  time.  In  the  "Arabian  Nights'*  we  have
bant  references  to  lands  under  the  sea ;  and  in  the  tradi-
iry  stories  of  all  Celtic  people  the  same  idea  presents

•  in  some  form  or  other.  Mr  Campbell  appears  to  con-
d  stories  of  mermaids  with  those  traditions  which  have

origin  in  actual  physical  changes.    They  appear  to  me
ive  little  relation  to  each  other.*

I  addition  to  the  traditions  given  of  large  tracts  of  land
h  have  been  lost  in  the  sea,  I  have  given  those  which
e  to  cities,  or  towns,  or  churches  which  have  been  buried
16  sands.  These  traditions  are  of  the  same  general  char-
bis  subject  deserves  a  much  more  careful  investigation

it  has  yet  received.    I  hope  simply  to  draw  attention  to

*  See  Weet  Highland  Tales,  by  J.  F.  Campbell    Vol  ill  p.  410.


2o8  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

the  subject,  and  to  shew  that  those  dim  traditions  point  to
some  buried  trutL  They  are  like  the  buried  lights  which  aw
supposed  to  indicate  the  resting-places  of  the  dead.


THE  TRADITION  OP  THE  LYONESSE  OE  LETHOWSOW.

THOSE  who  may  stand  on  the  extreme  point  of  the  Land's-
End,  and,  looking  over  that  space  where  the  waters  ol
the  Atlantic  mix  with  those  of  the  British  Channel,  see  ii
the  far  distance  the  Scilly  Islands,  will  have  to  call  upcH
their  imagination  to  conceive  that  these  broad  waters  rol
over  a  country  which  has  existed  within  historic  tima

A  region  of  extreme  fertility,  we  are  told,  once  united  th
Scilly  Islands  with  Western  Cornwall  A  people,  known  «
the  Silures,  inhabited  this  tract, — which  has  been  called  ih
Lyonesse,  or  sometimes  Lethowsow, — ^who  were  remarkaU
for  their  industry  and  their  piety.  No  less  than  Vk
churches  stood  over  that  region,  which  is  now  a  waste  a
waters  ;  and  the  rocks  called  the  Seven  Stones  are  said  t(
mark  the  place  of  a  large  city.  Even  tradition  is  silent  oi
the  character  of  this  great  cataclysm.  We  have  only  on(
hint — and  we  know  not  its  value — ^which  appears  to  she^
that  the  deluge  was  comparatively  gradual.  One  of  th(
ancestors  of  the  Trevilians  is  said  to  have  had  time  to  remov(
his  family  and  his  cattle  ;  but  at  last  he  had  to  fly  himsel
with  all  the  speed  which  a  fleet  horse  could  give  him.  Fron
this  it  might  appear  that,  though  gradual  at  first,  the  waters
having  broken  down  the  barriers,  burst  over  the  whole  a'
last  with  uncontrolled  fury.  A  small,  but  very  ancient,  or»
tory,  "  Chapel  Idne,"  or  the  "  Narrow  Chapel,"  formerly  stow
in  Sennen  Cove.  It  is  said  to  have  been  founded  by  om
Lord  of  Goonhilly,  who  owned  a  portion  of  the  Lyonesse,  oi
the  occasion  of  his  escape  from  the  flood.     By  this  war  o;


The  Tradition  of  the  Lyonesse.  209

waters  seyeral  large  towns  were  destroyed,  and  an  immense
number  of  the  inhabitants  perished.

In  the  absence  of  full  traditional  evidence,  it  will  not  be
uninteresting  to  gather  together  the  fragmentary  statements
which  exist  in  the  writings  of  historians  and  others : —

"  The  number  of  parish  churches  lost  is  so  astonishingly  great  as  to
baffle  the  power  of  eyidence,  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  conviction.  I,
therefore,  take  upon  me  to  reduce  the  number  from  140  to  40, — ^to  cut  oflF
what  any  dash  of  Worcester's  pen  might  casually  have  created,  the  first
figure.** — WhUaken'i  Supplement  to  PolwheU*8  History  of  Cornwall.

The  Saxon  Chronicle  says  the  Lionesse  was  destroyed  on  the  11th  of
November  1099.

"  On  the  third  of  the  Nones  of  November  (1099)  the  sea  overflowed  the
ihore,  destroying  towns  and  drowning  many  persons  and  innumerable  oxen
and  sheep." — The  Chronicle  of  Florence  of  Worcester,  translated  by  Thomas
Poretter,  A.M.    Bohn,  1854.

Solinus  (cap.  22)  applies  Siluria  to  the  country  lying  west  of  the  Land*8-
End.  His  words  are,  "  Siliuram  quoque  insulam  ab  ora  quam  gens  Bri-
tamiA  Dunmonii  tenent,  turbidum  fretum  distinguit."

"  There  is  a  tradition  that  there  formerly  existed  a  large  tract  of  land
between  the  Land's-End  and  the  Scilly  Islands,  called  the  Lioness,  which
WM  destroyed  by  an  inundation  of  the  sea.  One  of  the  family  of  Trevilian,
DOW  residing  in  Somerset,  but  originally  Cornish,  saved  himself  by  the
SKistance  of  his  horse  at  the  time  of  this  inundation ;  and  it  is  reported
thftt  the  arms  of  this  family  were  taken  from  his  fortunate  escape,  to  com-
memorate his  providential  preservation." — Drew  and  Hitchin*s  Cornwall.

**  A  cave  is  pointed  out  in  Perranuthnoe,  where  the  ancestor  of  the
Trerelyans  is  said  to  have  been  borne  on  shore,  by  the  strength  of  his
hone,  from  the  destruction  of  the  Lionesse  country  west  of  the  Land's-
End.  The  Trevelyan  family  are  too  old,  too  honourable,  and  now  too
much  distinguished  by  science,  for  them  to  covet  any  addition  of  honour
through  the  medium  of  fabulous  history.

"  It  is  recorded  in  the  Saxon  Chronicle  that,  in  the  year  1099,  there  was  so
very  high  a  tide,  and  the  damage  so  great  in  consequence,  that  men  re-
membered not  the  like  to  have  ever  happened  before,  and  the  same  day
was  the  first  of  the  new  moon.  Stow,  who  wrote  his  History  of  England
about  the  year  1580,  notices  the  great  tide  of  1099,  when  he  says,  *  The
Ma  brake  in  over  the  banks  of  the  Thames  and  other  ryvers,  drowning
many  towns  and  much  people,  with  innumerable  numbers  of  oxen  and
theepe ;  at  which  time  the  lands  in  Kent,  that  sometime  belonged  to  Duke
Qodwyne,  Earle  of  Kent,  were  covered  with  sandes  and  drowned,  which  are
l8i  Skbixs.  0


2 1  o  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

to  this  day  called  Qodwyne  Sandes.'  On  the  slender  foundation  of  these
alluvial  catastrophes,  Florence  of  Worcester  either  invented,  or,  with  more
than  monkish  credulity,  received  the  tale  of  a  whole  district  heing  en-
gulfed, not  at  some  remote  geological  period,  but  in  what  may  be  con-
sidered as  the  recent  times  of  authentic  history,  after  the  existence  of
systematic  registers  and  records ;  a  district  covered,  as  he  states,  by  a  city
and  by  a  hundred  and  forty  churches,  with  their  accompanying  villages,
farms,  &c.,  an  event  that  must  have  shaken  the  whole  of  Europe ;  and,  to
increase  the  wonder,  a  gentleman,  accidentally  on  horseback,  is  carried  by
this  animal  to  the  neighbouring  shore  of  Whitsand  Bay,  or  twenty  miles
further  off,  to  Perranuthnoe,  through  a  sea  which  had  swallowed  an  entire
country,  and  from  which  the  largest  of  modem  vessels  could  not  possibly
have  escaped.  This  idle  tale,  related  by  one  vmter  after  another,  has  sJmost
reached  our  own  times.  The  editor  remembers  a  female  relation  of  a  for-
mer vicar  of  St  Erth  who,  instructed  by  a  dream,  prepared  decoctionB  of
various  herbs  and,  repairing  to  the  Land's-End,  poured  them  into  the  set,
with  certain  incantations,  expecting  to  see  the  Lionesse  country  rise  imme-
diately out  of  the  water,  having  all  its  inhabitants  alive,  notwithstanding
their  long  submersion.     But

*  Perchance  some  form  was  unobserved.
Perchance  in  prayer  or  faith  she  swerved.'

No  country  appeared,  and  although  the  love  of  marvellous  events  and  of
tales  exciting  the  passions  seems  not  to  have  diminished  in  recent  time^
yet  the  editor  is  unaware  of  any  subsequent  attempt  having  been  made  to
rescue  those  unfortunate  people  from  their  protracted  state  of  suspended
animation." — The,  Parochial  History  of  Cornwall,  by  Davies  Gilbert,  vol
ill.  pp.  109,  110.

"  Although  a  sweep  of  ocean,  twenty^^even  miles  in  breadth,  separates
at  present  the  Land's-End  from  the  Scilly  Islands,  there  can  yet  be  little
doubt  of  their  having  been  heretofore  united  to  each  other  by  the  main-
land. The  records  of  history,  indeed,  do  not  rise  so  high  as  the  era  when
this  disjunction  was  first  effected ;  but  we  have  documents  yet  remaining
which  prove  to  us  that  this  strait  must  have  been  considerably  widened,
and  the  number  of  the  Scilly  Islands  greatly  increased  within  the  last  six-
teen or  seventeen  centuries,  by  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic  (receding  prob-
ably from  the  coast  of  America)  pressing  towards  this  coast  of  Britain,
accumulating  upon  Bolerium,  and  overwhelming  part  of  the  western
shores  of  Cornwall.

"  Strabo  expressly  tells  us  that  the  Cassiterides  (so  called  from  the  Greek
name  of  tin,  there  produced)  were  in  his  time  only  ten  in  number;
whereas  they  are  now  divided  into  a  hundred  and  forty  rocky  islets.  Soli-
nus  also  makes  mention  of  a  large  and  respectable  island,  called  Silura,


The  Tradition  of  the  Lyonesse.  2 1  x

evidently  the  Scilly  of  present  times,  lying  on  Damnonian  or  Cornish
coast,  and  separated  from  the  mainland  by  a  strait  turbulent  and  danger-
ous— a  character  which  sufficiently  marks  the  compression  of  its  waters.
And  William  of  Worcester,  an  author  of  our  own  country,  thirteen  centu-
ries after  Solinus,  states,  with  a  degree  of  positive  exactness,  stamping
authenticity  upon  its  recital,  that  between  Mount's  Bay  and  the  Scilly
Islands  there  had  been  woods,  and  meadows,  and  arable  lands,  and  140
parish  churches,  which,  before  his  time,  were  submerged  by  the  ocean.
Uninterrupted  tradition  since  this  period,  which  subsists  to  the  present
day  vigorous  and  particular,  authenticates  his  account,  and  leaves  no
doubt  upon  the  mind  that  a  vast  tract  of  land,  which  stretched  anciently
from  the  eastern  shore  of  Mount's  Bay  to  the  north-western  rock  of  Scilly,
(with  the  exception  of  the  narrow  strait  flowing  between  the  Long-ships
and  Land*s-End,)  has,  since  the  age  of  Strabo  and  Solinus,  and  previous
to  that  of  William  of  Worcester,  been  overwhelmed  and  usurped  by  the
waves  of  the  sea.  .  *  .  The  depth  of  the  water  at  the  Land's-End  is  about
eleven  fethoms ;  at  the  Long-ships,  eight ;  to  the  north  of  them,  twenty  ;
to  the  south,  thirty ;  and  twenty-five,  twenty,  and  fifteen  fathoms  between
them  and  the  north-west  of  Scilly.  The  shallowest  water  occurs  in  the
mid-space  between  Cornwall  and  the  Isles." — A  Tour  through  ComwaXl  in
the  Autumn  of  1808,  by  the  Rev.  Richard  Warner.

"Yet  the  cause  of  that  inundation,  which  destroyed  much  of  these
Islands,  (the  Scilly  Islands,)  might  reach  also  to  the  Cornish  shores,  is  ex-
tremely probable,  there  being  several  evidences  of  a  like  subsidence  of  the
land  in  the  Mount's  Bay.  The  principal  anchoring-place,  called  a  lake,  is
now  a  haven,  or  open  harbour.  The  Mount,  from  its  Cornish  name,  we
must  conclude  to  have  stood  formerly  in  a  wood,  but  now,  at  full  tide,  is
half  a  mile  from  the  sea,  and  not  a  tree  near  it ;  and  in  the  sandy  beach
betwixt  the  Mount  and  Penzance,  where  the  sands  have  been  dispersed  by
violent  high  tides,  I  have  seen  the  trunks  of  several  large  trees  in  their
natural  position." — Rorlase,  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  xlviii.  part  1.

•*  That  Cornwall  once  extended  farther  west  may  be  inferred  from  hence,
that  about  midway  between  the  Land's-End  and  Scilly  are  rocks  called
in  Cormsh  Lethoteaow  ;  by  the  English,  Seven-ztones.

'*  The  Cornish  call  the  places  within  the  stones  Tregva, — ie.,  a  dwelling ;
— and  it  has  been  reported  that  windows  and  other  stufif  have  been  fished
up,  and  that  fishermen  still  see  tops  of  houses  under  water.  From  the
LandVEnd  to  Scilly,  a  tract  of  thirty  miles,  is  an  equal  depth  of  water,
and  the  bottom  of  the  sea  a  plain  level  surface.  St  Michael's  Mount  is
called  in  Cornish,  Careg  cowte  in  dowse — ie.,  the  hoary  rock  in  the  wood.
Laige  trees  with  roots  and  bodies  have  been  driven  in  by  the  sea  of  late
years  between  St  Michael's  Mount  and  Penzance ;  and  tradition  says  that,
•fc  the  time  of  the  inundation  which  made  the  separation,  one  Trevtlyan


2 1 2  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

swam  from  thence  on  horseback ;  and  in  memory  thereof  the  family,  now
in  Somersetshire,  bears  gules  a  horse  argent,  from  a  less  wavy  argent,  and
azure,  issuing  out  of  a  sea  proper." — QougKa  Camden,  voL  i.  p.  16.

'^  The  flats,  which  stretched  from  one  island  to  another,  are  plain  evi-
dences of  a  former  union  subsisting  between  mai|y  now  distinct  islands.
The  flats  between  Trescaw,  Brdhar,  and  Sampson  are  quite  dry  at  a  spring-
tide, and  men  easily  pass  dry-shod  from  one  island  to  another  over  sand-
banks, (where,  upon  the  shifting  of  the  sands,  walls  and  ruins  are  fre-
quently discovered,)  upon  which,  at  full  sea,  there  are  ten  and  twelve  feet
of  water.  From  the  southern  side  of  St  Martin,  there  stretches  out  a
large  shOal  towards  Trescaw  and  St  Mary's ;  and  from  St  Mary's  a  flat,
called  Sandy-bar,  shoots  away  to  meet  it ;  and  between  these  two  shoala
there  are  but  four  feet  of  water  in  the  channel  called  Crow  Sound, — all
strong  argimients  that  those  islands  were  once  one  continued  tract  of  land,
though  now,  as  to  their  low  lands,  overrun  with  the  sea  and  sand.  'The
Isles  Cassiterides'  (says  Strabo,  Qeo.,  lib.  5)  *  are  ten  in  number,  doae
to  one  another.  One  of  them  is  desert  and  unpeopled;  the  rest  aie
inhabited.'  But  see  how  the  sea  has  multiplied  these  islands ;  there  are
now  one  himdred  and  forty.  Into  so  many  fragments  are  they  divided;
and  yet  there  are  but  six  inhabited.' — An  Account  of  the  Ch'eat  Alteratm
which  the  Islands  of  Scylley  have  undergone,  tkc,  by  the  Rev.  Wm.  Borlase,
M.A.y  F.RS^  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  xlviii.  part  1.

"  The  Cornish  land,  from  Plymouth,  discovers  itself  to  be  devoured
more  and  more  to  the  westward,  according  to  the  aforesaid  tradition  of  the
tract  of  the  Lionesse,  being  encroached  upon  above  half  the  present  dis-
taDce  from  the  Land's-End  to  Scilly ;  whence  it  is  probable  that  the  low
isthmus  once  joining  Scilly  and  the  Lionesse  was  first  encroached  upon  in
the  same  manner.  The  projecting  land  being  exposed  to  the  concurrence
of  the  tides  from  the  Irish,  the  Bristol,  and  British  Channels,  by  whose
violence  and  impetuosity,  increased  by  the  winds,  the  loose  earth  of  the
Gulf-rock  might  be  worn  away,  leaving  the  resistible  substance  behind,
standing  as  it  is  in  the  middle  way  betwixt  Scilly  and  Cornwall." — A  Na-
tural and  Historical  Account  of  the  Islands  of  Scilly,  by  Robert  Heath.

The  following  notices  are  gathered  from  other  local  traditions : —

"  From  Rame-head  to  the  two  Looes  very  fertile  valleys  are  stated  to
have  extended  at  least  a  league  southwards,  over  a  tract  now  covered  with
sea ;  and  around  the  coast  in  many  places,  we  are  assured,  in  twelve  feet
of  water,  trees  are  to  be  seen  in  the  sea."

"  The  Black  Rock  in  Falmouth  harbour  is  stated  to  have  been  a  large
island,  which  was  surrounded  by  the  sea  only  at  high  water."

"  Six  miles  south  of  St  Michael's  Mount  waved,  from  Clement's  Isle  to
Cudden  Rock,  a  wood."


The Padstow  " Hobby-Horse''  2 1 3

CUDDEN  POINT  AND  THE  SILVEE  TABLE.

THIS  point  is  situated  in  the  parish  of  Perranuthnoe ;  the
parish,  it  will  be  remembered,  into  which  Trelawney
escaped,  aided  by  the  fleetness  of  his  horse,  from  the  deluge
which  buried  the  lands  between  this  and  the  Scilly  Isles.

At  the  low  water  of  spring-tides,  the  children  from  all  the
neighbourhood  flock  to  the  sands  around  this  point,  in  the
hope  of  finding  treasure,  which  they  believe  is  buried  in  the
sands  beneath  the  sea,  and  which  is,  it  is  said,  occasionally
discovered.  Amongst  other  things,  an  especial  search  is
made  for  a  silver  table,  which  was  lost  by  a  very  wealthy
lord,  by  some  said  to  be  the  old  Lord  Pengerswick,  who
enriched  himself  by  grinding  down  the  poor.  On  one
occasion,  when  the  calmness  of  summer,  the  clearness  of  the
skies,  and  the  tranquillity  of  the  waters,  invited  the  luxu-
rious to  the  enjoyments  of  the  sea,  this  magnate,  with  a
party  of  gay  and  thoughtless  friends,  was  floating  in  a  beau-
tiful boat  lazily  with  the  tide,  and  feasting  from  numerous
luxuries  spread  on  a  silver  table.  Suddenly — no  one  lived  to
tell  the  cause — ^the  boat  sank  in  the  calm,  transparent  waters ;
and,  long  after  the  event,  the  fishermen  would  tell  of  sounds
of  revelry  heard  from  beneath  the  waters,  and  some  have
said  they  have  seen  these  wicked  ones  still  seated  around  the
silver  table.

THE  PADSTOW  "  HOBBY-HOfiSE."

AT  the  time  of  the  spring  festival,  which  is  observed  at
Helston  as  a  revel  in  honour,  probably,  of  Flora,  and
hence  called  the  "  Furry  day,"  and  by  the  blowing  of  horns
and  gathering  of  the  '*  May  "  in  St  Ives  and  other  places,  the
people  of  Padstow  were  a  few  years  since  in  the  habit  of


214  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

riding  the  "hobby-horse"  to  water.  This  hobby-horse  was,
after  it  had  been  taken  round  the  town,  submerged  in  the
sea.  The  old  people  said,  it  was  once  believed  that  this
ceremony  preserved  the  cattle  of  the  inhabitants  from  disease
and  death.  The  appearance  of  a  white  horse  escaping  from
the  flood,  which  buried  the  Lionesse,  is  told  at  several  points,
on  both  the  north  and  south  coast,  and  the  riding  of  the
hobby-horse  probably  belongs  to  this  tradition.  In  supporl
of  this  idea,  we  must  not  forget  the  mermaid  story  associated
with  the  harbour  of  Padetow.

The  water-horse  is  a  truly  Celtic  tradition.  We  have  it  in
the  "  Arabian  Nights,"  and  in  the  stories  of  all  countries  in
the  south  of  Europe.  Mr  Campbell,  "West  Highland  Tales,'
says  he  finds  the  horse  brought  prominently  forward  in  th(
Breton  legends,  and  that  animal  figures  largely  in  the  tra-
ditions of  Scotland  and  Ireland.

Has  the  miner's  phrase — "a  horse  in  the  lode,"  applied
to  a  mass  of  unproductive  ground  in  the  middle  of  a  minera
lode ;  or,  "  Black  Jack  rides  a  good  horse,"  signifying  thai
zinc  ore  gives  good  promise  for  copper — anything  to  do  will
these  traditions  ?


ST  MICHAEL'S  MOUNT-THE  WHITE  ROCK  IN  THE  WOOD.

*' An  old  legend  of  St  Michael  speaketh  of  a  tounelet  in  this  part,  (be
tween  Pensandes  and  Mousehole,)  now  defaced,  and  lying  under  the  water.'
— Leland's  Itinerary.

ALEEADY  it  has  been  told  how  St  Michael's  Mount  wai
built  by  the  giants.  So  much  for  its  Titanic  origin
The  tradition  that  the  Mount  was  formerly  called  in  ok
Cornish,  Gareg-luz  en  kuz*  and  that  it  rose  from  the  midst
of  an  extensive  forest,  is  very  prevalent.     "  A  forest  is  sup-

*  Or  Careg  Cowes  m  Clowse.


6y  MichaeVs  Mount.  215

posed  to  have  extended  along  the  coast  to  St  MichaeFs
Mounts  which  was  described  as  a  'hoare  rock  in  a  wood/
and  stood  five  or  six  miles  from  the  sea.  The  bay  was  said
to  have  been  a  plain  of  five  or  six  miles  in  extent,  formed
into  parishes,  each  having  its  church,  and  laid  out  in  mea-
dows, corn-fields,  and  woods."  *  A  similar  tradition  attaches
itself  to  Mont  St  Michel,  in  Normandy.

By  and  by,  when  the  Saxon  rule  was  extended  into  Corn-
wall, this  remarkable  hill  is  seized  npon,  in  common  with
many  other  such  hills,  as  the  residence  of  some  anchorite.
This  holy  recluse  is  visited  by  St  Michael,  who  had  an
especial  fondness  for  hill  churches,  and  the  hermit  is  directed
to  build  a  church  on  the  summit,  and  dedicate  it  to  St  Michael.

"  In  evile  howre  thou  hentst  in  bond,
Thus  holy  hills  to  blame ;
For  sacred  unto  saints  they  stand,

And  of  them  have  their  name.
St  Michael's  Mount,  who  does  not  know,
That  wards  the  western  coast."

Spenser.

Milton,  in  his  delicately  beautiful  poem  of  Lycidas,  makes

especial  allusion  to  this  monkish  legend : —

"  Where'er  thy  bones  are  hurl'd.
Whether  beyond  the  stormy  Hebrides,
Where  thou,  perhaps,  under  the  whelming  tide,
Visitst  the  bottom  of  the  monstrous  world,
Or,  whether,  thou,  to  our  moist  vows  denied,
Sleep'st  by  the  fable  of  Bellerus  old,f
Where  the  great  vision  of  the  guarded  mount,
Look  towards  Namancos,  and  Bayona's  hold ;
Look  homeward,  angel,  now,  and  melt  with  ruth,
And,  0  ye  dolphins,  waft  the  hapless  youth.*'

Milton's  Lycidat.

Warner,  in  his  Tour  through  Cornwall,  with  much  assurap-

•  T.  T.  BUght.

'f  Tha  name  Bolerium  has  been  especially  given  to  the  Land's-End,  but
I  ii  ft  cove  near  the  Lizard  now  called  Polurrian  or  Polerium.


2 1 6  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

tion  of  learning,  attempts  to  explain  these  lines.  He  tells  ns
that  the  Land's-End  was  called  Bell&riwm,  ''  so  named  from
Bellerus,  a  Cornish  giant.  No  such  giant  ever  existed  in
Cornish  fable,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained.  It  is  far  more
probable  that  Milton  used  the  poet's  licence,  and,  from  the
name  of  the  Land's-End  Bellerium,  created  'the  fable  of
Bellerus  old.' "  What  follows  in  Warner  is  worth  extract-
ing:—

*' We  learn  from  Caston's  Golden  Legende,  under  the  history
of  the  Angel  Michael,  that,  '  Th'  apparacyon  of  this  angell
is  manyfold.  The  f yrst  is  when  he  appeared  in  Mount  of
Gargan,  &c.,'  (edit.  1493,  foL  cclxxxii.  a.)  William  of  Wor-
cester, who  wrote  his  travels  over  England  about  1490,  says,
in  describing  St  Michael's  Mount,  there  was  an  '  Apparicio
Sancti  Michaelis  in  monte  Tumba  antea  vocato  Le  Sore
Rok  in  the  Wodd/  (Itinerar.,  edit.  Cantab,  1778,  p.  lOi)
The  Hoar  Rock  in  the  Wood  is  this  Mount  or  Rock  of  St
Michael,  anciently  covered  with  thick  wood,  as  we  leam
from  Drayton  and  Carew.  There  is  still  a  tradition,  that
a  vision  of  St  Michael  seated  on  this  crag,  or  St  Michael's
Chair,  appeared  to  some  hermits ;  and  that  this  circumstance
occasioned  the  foundation  of  the  monastery  dedicated  to  St
Michael  And  hence  this  place  was  long  renowned  for  its
sanctity,  and  the  object  of  frequent  pilgrimages.  Carew
quotes  some  old  rhymes  much  to  our  purpose,  p.  154,
ut  supra : —

*  Who  knows  not  Mighel's  Mount  and  Chaire,
The  pilgrim's  holy  vaunt  ?  *

Nor  should  it  be  forgot  that  this  monastery  was  a  cell  to
another  on  a  St  MichaeFs  Mount  in  Normandy,  where  was
also  a  vision  of  St  Michael  But  to  apply  what  has  been
said  to  Milton.  This  great  vision  is  the  famous  apparition
of  St  Michael,  whom  he,  with  much  sublimity  of  imagina-


6y  MichaeVs  Mount  2 1 7

tion,  supposes  to  be  still  throned  on  this  lofty  crag  of  St
Michael's  Mount  in  Cornwall,  looking  towards  the  Spanish
coast.  The  guarded  mount  on  which  this  great  vision  ap-
peared is  simply  the  fortified  mount,  implying  the  fortress
above  mentioned.  And  let  us  observe,  that  Mount  is  the
peculiar  appropriated  appellation  of  this  promontory.  So
in  Daniel's  Panegyricke  on  the  King,  st.  19,  'From  Dover
totheMount/"— P.  180.

"In  the  very  comer  is  MichaeVs  Mount,  which  gives
name  to  the  bay  (the  Mount's  Bay)  anciently  called  Dinsol,
as  in  the  book  of  Landaff,  called  by  the  inhabitants  Careg-
Catuse,  or  the  Gray  Bock — in  Saxon,  Mychelyroz,  or  Michael's
Place."*

From  Hals,  Tonkin,  and  Gilbert,  we  learn  yet  further  that
"  St  Michael's  Mount  is  so  called,  because  our  fathers,  the
Britons,  believed  that  the  appearance  of  the  archangel  St
Michael  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  495  was  in  this  place ;
though  in  other  countries  they  believe  diflFerently."

"Edward  the  Confessor,  finding  the  place  already  cele-
brated for  its  holiness,  founded  an  abbey  of  Bened^tine
monks,  A.D.  1044,  and  also  a  chapel,  which  still  stand,  part
of  which  is  now  converted  into  a  dwelling-house.  Upon  the
tower  of  the  chapel  is  the  celebrated  Kader  Migell, — i.e.,
Michaers  Chair, — a  seat  artificially  cut  in  the  stone,  very
dangerous  in  the  access,  therefore  holy  for  the  adventura

"  *  Who  knows  not  Mighel's  Mount  and  Chaire,
The  pilgrim's  holy  vaunt  ;
Both  land  and  island  twice  a  day.
Both  fort  and  port  of  haunt  ? '  *'

It  is  supposed  by  many  persons  to  have  been  placed  there
for  the  pilgrims  to  complete  their  devotions  at  the  Mount,
by  sitting  in  this  chair,  and  shewing  themselves  to  the
*  Oough's  Camden  a  Britannia,  vol  i.  p.  4.


2 1 8  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

country  around  as  pilgrims.  St  Kenna,  doubtless  the  same
as  St  Keyna,  once  visited  this  Mount, — although  the  time  of
her  visitation  is  not  precisely  known, — and  she  imparted  the
very  same  virtue  to  the  chair  as  she  bestowed  on  St  Keyna's
Well  It  is  whichever,  man  or  wife,  sits  in  this  chair  first
shall  rule  through  live,  and  as  it  requires  great  resolution
and  steadiness  of  head  to  obtain  the  seat,  one  may  be  in-
clined to  anticipate  the  supposed  eflFect  with  greater  certainty
from  its  achievement,  than  from  drinking  water  from  St
Keyna's  Well.

It  is  not  pleasant  to  destroy  the  romance  of  ages,  but
honesty  compels  me  to  pronounce  this  so-called  chair  to  be
nothing  more  than  the  remains  of  a  stone  lantern,  built  at
the  south-western  angle  of  the  tower.  The  good  monks,
without  doubt,  placing  a  light  therein,  it  could  be  seen  by
the  fishermen  far  off  at  sea ;  and  probably  they  received  some
tribute  of  either  fish  or  money  for  the  support  of  this  useful
guide  to  the  shore.

It  is  evident,  from  the  following  passage  in  Carew's  Sur-
vey, that  the  *'  chair  ''  formerly  was  not  within  the  building
at  all,  but  on  some  rocks  without  the  walls  : —

*'  A  little  without  the  castle  there  is  a  bad  seat  in  a  craggy
place  called  St  Michaers  Chaire,  somewhat  dangerous  for
accesse,  and  therefore  holy  for  the  adventure."  *

GWAVAS  LAKE.

ON  the  western  side  of  the  Mount's  Bay,  between  the
fishing-towns  of  Newlyn  and  Mousehole,  is  the  well-
known  anchoring-place  known  by  the  above  name.     It  is
not  a  little  curious  that  any  part  of  the  ocean  should  have
been  called  a  lake.     Tradition,  however,  helps  us  to  an  ex-
*  Carew,  p.  154.


Gwavas  Lake.  219

planation.  Between  the  land  on  the  western  side  of  the
bay,  and  St  Michael's  Mount  on  the  eastern  side,  there,  at
one  time,  extended  a  forest  of  beech-trees.  Within  this
forest,  on  the  western  side,  was  a  large  lake,  and  ,on  its
banks  a  hermitage.  The  saint  of  the  lake  was  celebrated
far  and  near  for  his  holiness,  and  his  small  oratory  was
constantly  resorted  to  by  the  diseased  in  body  and  the
afflicted  in  mind.  None  ever  came  in  the  true  spirit  who
failed  to  find  relief.  The  prayers  of  the  saint  and  the  waters
of  the  lake  removed  the  severest  pains  from  the  limbs  and
the  deepest  sorrows  from  the  mind.  The  young  were
strengthened  and  the  old  revived  by  their  influences.  The
great  flood,  however,  which  separated  the  Islands  ot  Scilly
from  England,  submerged  the  forest,  and  destroyed  the
lands  enclosing  this  lovely  and  almost  holy  lake,  burying
beneath  the  waters,  church  and  houses,  and  destroying  alike
the  people  and  the  priest.  Those  who  survived  this  sad
catastrophe  built  a  church  on  the  hill,  and  dedicated  it  to
the  saint  of  the  lake, — or  in  Cornish,  St  Pol, — modernised
into  St  Paul*

In  support  of  this  tradition,  we  may  see,  of  a  fine  summer
day,  when  the  tide  is  low  and  the  waters  clear,  the  remains
of  a  forest  in  the  line  passing  from  St  Michael's  Mount  to
Gwavas.  At  neap-tides  the  author  has  gathered  beech-nuts
from  the  sands  below  Chyandour,  and  cut  the  wood  from
the  trees  embedded  in  the  sand."f-

^  Qwavas  Lake.  It  is  said  that  within  historic  times,  tithes,  or  an
eqaivalent  for  them,  were  coUected  from  the  land  which  surrounded  this
lake.  I  have  been  informed  that  the  parish  books  of  St  Paul  record  the
collection  6f  tithes  from  lands  which  have  disappeared.  I  applied  for
information  on  this  point  to  the  rector  of  the  parish,  but  he  has  not  yet
fkroured  me  with  a  reply.

i*  I  have  passed  in  a  boat  from  St  Michael's  Mount  to  Penzance  on  a
mnuner  day,  when  the  waters  were  very  clear,  and  the  tide  low,  and  seen
bhe  black  masses  of  trees  in  the  white  sands  extending  far  out  into'  the


2  20  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.


THE  cm  OP  LANGARROW  OR  LANGONA/

WE'  cannot  say  how  many  years  since,  but  once  there
stood  on  the  northern  shores  of  Cornwall,  extending
over  all  that  country  between  the  Gannell  and  Perranporth,
a  large  city  called  Langarrow  or  Langona.  The  sand-hills
which  now  extend  over  this  part  of  the  coast,  cover  that  great
city,  and  the  memory  of  the  sad  and  sudden  catastrophe  still
lingers  among  the  peasantry.  So  settled  is  tradition,  that
no  other  time  than  900  years  since  is  ever  mentioned  as  the
period  at  which  Langarrow  was  buried.  This  city  in  its  prime
is  said  to  have  been  the  largest  in  England,  and  to  have  had
seven  churches,  which  were  alike  remarkable  for  their  beauty
and  their  size.  The  inhabitants  were  wealthy,  and  according
to  received  accounts,  they  drew  their  wealth,  from  a  large
tract  of  level  land,  thickly  wooded  in  some  parts,  and  highly
cultivated  in  others, — from  the  sea,  which  was  overflowing

bay.  On  one  occasion,  while  I  was  at  school  at  Penzance,  after  a  violent
equinoctial  gale,  large  trunks  of  trees  were  thrown  up  on  the  shore,  just
beyond  Chyandour,  and  then  with  the  other  boys,  I  went  at  the  lowest  of
the  tide,  far  out  over  the  sands,  and  saw  scores  of  trees  embedded  in  the
sands.  We  gathered  nuts — they  were  beech-nuts — and  leaves  in  abund-
ance. It  is  not  a  little  remarkable, — if  it  be  true,  as  I  am  informed  it  is,—
that  the  trees  found  in  the  Pentuan  Stream  Works,  under  some  fifty  or
sixty  feet  of  sand  and  silt,  are  beech-trees,  and  that  they  were  destroyed
when  the  fruit  was  upon  them.  I  learn,  that  not  far  from  Hull  in  York-
shire there  exists  a  submerged  forest,  where  also  the  beech-trees  evidently
perished  in  the  autumn.  In  Cardigan  Bay  a  large  tract  of  country  is  said
to  have  been  lost.  May  not  all  these  traditions  and  evidences  relate  to
one  great  cataclysm  ?  See  "  A  Week  at  the  Land's-End,"  by  J.  T.  Blight
for  an  account  of  the  submerged  wood  near  Lariggan  Rocks,  between
Penzance  and  Newlyn.

*  "  The  vicarage  church  of  Crantock  is  commonly  called  Languna  or
Langona, — that  is  to  say,  the  hay  temple  or  church, — and  is  suitable  to  its
name,  situate  in  a  large  hay-meadow  of  rich  land,  containing  about  three
acres,  where,  by  ancient  custom,  the  vicar's  cattle  aU  pasture  over  the  dead
bodies  interred  therein." — //a?s,  as  givm  hy  Gilbert,


The  City  of  Langarrow.  221

¥ith  fish  of  all  kinds, — and  from  mines,  which  yielded  them
kbondance  of  tin  and  lead.

To  this  remote  city,  in  those  days,  criminals  were  trans-
ported from  other  parts  of  Britain.  They  were  made  to
wrork  in  the  mines  on  the  coast,  in  constructing  a  new  har-
bour in  the  Gannell,  and  clearing  it  of  sand,  so  that  ships  of
large  burden  could  in  those  days  sail  far  inland.  Numer-
ous curious  excavations  in  the  rocks,  on  either  side  of  this
estuary,  are  still  pointed  out  as  being  evidences  of  the  works
of  the  convicts.  This  portion  of  the  population  of  Lan-
garrow were  not  allowed  to  dwell  within  the  city.  The  con-
victs and  their  families  had  to  construct  huts  or  dig  caves  on
the  wild  moors  of  this  unsheltered  northern  shore,  and  to  this
day  evidences  of  their  existence  are  found  under  the  sand,
in  heaps  of  wood-ashes,  amidst  which  are  discovered  con-
siderable quantities  of  mussel  and  cockle-shells,  which  we
may  suppose  was  their  principal  food.  As  far  as  I  know,
these  are  the  first  indications  of  anything  resembling  the
Kjokkenmoddings,  or  refuse-heaps  of  Denmark,  which  have
been  discovered  in  this  country.

For  a  long  period  this  city  flourished  in  its  prime,  and  its
inhabitants  were  in  the  enjoyment  of  every  luxury  which
industry  could  obtain  or  wealth  could  purchase.  Sin,  in
many  of  its  worst  forms,  was  however  present  amongst  the
people.  The  convicts  sent  to  Langarrow  were  of  the  vilest.
They  were  long  kept  widely  separated ;  but  use  breeds  fami-
liarity, and  gradually  the  more  designing  of  the  convicts
persuaded  their  masters  to  employ  them  within  the  city.
The  result  of  this  was,  after  a  few  years,  an  amalgamation
of  the  two  classes  of  the  population.  The  daughters  of
Langarrow  were  married  to  the  criminals,  and  thus  crime
became  the  familiar  spirit  of  the  place.  The  progress  of  this
may  have  been  slow — the  result  was,  however,  sure,  and


22  2  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

eventually,  when  vice  was  dominant,  and  the  whole  popi
lation  sunk  in  sensual  pleasures,  the  anger  of  the  Loi
fell  upon  them.  A  storm  of  unusual  violence  arose,  ai
continued  blowing,  without  intermitting  its  violence  for  oi
moment,  for  three  days  and  nights.  In  that  period  the  hi)
of  blown  sand  extending,  with  few  intervals,  from  Crantcx
to  Perran  were  formed,  burying  the  city,  its  churches,  an
its  inhabitants  in  a  common  grave.  To  the  present  tin
those  sand-hills  stand  a  monument  of  God's  wrath;  andi
several  places  we  certainly  find  considerable  quantities  <
bleached  human  bones,  which  are  to  many  strong  evideiM
of  the  correctness  of  tradition.

Crantock  was,  according  to  tradition,  once  a  trading  toir
and  it  then  had  a  religious  house,  with  a  dean  and  nine  pit
bends.  The  Gannell  filling  up  ruined  the  town.  This  mu
have  happened  when  Langarrow  was  destroyed.

On  Gwithian  Sands  the  remains  of  what  is  supposed  I
have  been  a  church  has  been  discovered,  and  according  t
Hals  and  Gilbert,  a  similar  tradition  exists  here  of  a  buri€
town.     Gilbert  writes  thus : —

"  There  has  always  existed  a  traditional  account  of  the  inundation  of  sai
in  this  parish,  corroborated  by  the  ecclesiastical  valuations,  which  are  f
too  high  for  the  actual  extent  of  the  land,  and  also  said  to  be  confimn
by  documents  preserved  in  the  Arundel  family,  carrying  ba(5k  the  coi
mencement  of  the  evil  nearly  to  the  period  of  their  acquiring  the  pi
perty.

"  With  respect  to  more  recent  inundations,  Mr  Hockin  states  to  1
Lysons,  that  the  Barton  of  Upton,  one  of  the  principal  farms,  was  sudden
overwhelmed ;  that  his  great-grandfather  remembered  the  occupier  residii
in  the  farmhouse,  which  was  nearly  buried  in  one  night,  the  family  beii
obliged  to  make  their  escape  through  the  chamber  windows ;  and  that
consequence  of  the  wind  producing  a  shifting  of  the  sand,  in  the  winter  '
1808-9,  the  house,  after  having  disappeared  for  more  than  a  century,  can
again  to  view.

*'  The  rector  further  stated  that  he  himself  remembered  two  fields  beii
lost  at  Gwithian,  and  that  they  are  now  covered  with  sand  to  the  depth  •


The  Sands  at  Lelant  and  Phillack.       223

>r  twelve  feet,  and  that  the  church-town  would  have  been  also  lost,  if
tarish  officers  had  not  promptly  resorted  to  the  expedient  of  planting
es.  These  stop  the  complete  progress  of  sand,  and  greatly  facilitate  the
th  of  other  vegetation  on  the  surface,  so  as  to  create  a  thin  turf.  The
ska  of  sand  exhibit  a  model  in  miniature  of  the  Alps." — Oilbertj  vol.
149.


THE  SANDS  AT  LELANT  AND  PHILLACK.

tIESE  is  a  tradition  that  Lelant  and  Phillack  towans  were
all  meadow-land,  and  that  the  whole  was  covered  with
1  in  a  single  night.  Also  that  the  low  tract  of  land
jnded  on  both  sides  of  Hayle  far  beyond  the  present  bar,
hat  the  sea  has  swallowed  up  some  hundreds  of  acres.
I  people  say,  that  the  site  of  the  ancient  church  and  village
jelant,  was  somewhere  seaward  of  the  Black  Rock ; — the
ient  burial-ground  has  been  long  washed  away, — and  that
aan  teeth  are  still  frequently  found  on  the  shore  after  a
it  undertoe,  that  takes  the  sand  out  to  sea.  Many  cir-
istances  seem  to  confirm  the  probability  of  the  tradition.
5  sand  was  drifting  inland  at  such  a  rate  before  the
1-like  plant  called  by  the  present  inhabitants  the  spire
I  planted,  that  the  whole  of  the  land  about  the  village
lid  have  been  rendered  worthless  ere  this,  but  for  the  stabil-
given  to  it.  The  land  from  which  the  sand  has  been  cleared,
the  sea-side  of  the  church,  has  evidently  been  ploughed,
.he  furrows  are  quite  apparent  between  the  ridges.  They
that  there  was  a  market  held  in  Lelant  when  St  Ives
i  scarcely  a  village.  Lelant  being  the  mother  church,
lid  seem  to  prove  this.  One  can  easily  understand  how
strge  tract  of  land  of  the  nature  of  that  under  Lelant
d-hills  would  be  washed  away  in  a  comparatively  short
e,  as  the  soil  at  the  low- water  level  is  a  marly  clay.  This
onstantly  being  washed  down  by  high  tides,  and  car-
l  away  by  the  undercurrent,  as  it  contains  no  stone  to


224  Romances  of  Lost  Cities.

form  a  pebbly  beach,  and  therefore  there  is  nothing  left
to  protect  the  shore.


"THE  ISLAND,"  STIVES.

THE  so-called  island  is  now  a  peninsular  mass  of  Clay  Slate
rocks,  interpenetrated  by  very  hard  Trappean  masses.
Between  this  and  the  town  of  St  Ives  is  a  low  neck  of  land,
which  consists  chiefly  of  sand  and  gravel,  with  some  masses
of  Clay  Slate  broken  into  small  angular  fragments.  Qa
either  side  of  this  neck  of  land  are  good  examples  of  raised
beaches.  Everything,  therefore,  favours  the  tradition  which
is  preserved  in  the  name.

One  statement  is,  that  "  The  Island'*  was  hroughJt  infrm
the  sea;  another,  that  it  rose  out  of  the  sea : —

''  This  town,  as  Mr  Camden  saith,  was  formerly  called  PendeniB  or
Pendimes,  the  head  fort,  fortress,  or  fortified  place,  probabty  from  the
little  island  here,  containing  about  six  acres  of  ground,  on  which  there
stands  the  ruins  of  a  little  old  fortification  and  a  chapeL" — ffals'  Cornwall.

"  On  the  island  (or  peninsula)  work  of  St  Ives  standeth  the  ruins  of  an
old  chapel,  wherein  God  was  duly  worshipped  by  our  ancestors  the  Britons,
before  the  Church  of  St  Ives  was  erected  or  endowed." — Tonkins  Comioall.

The  beach  on  one  side  of  the  peninsula  is  called  Porthmew,
that  on  the  other  Porthgwidden ;  and  the  name  of  the  street
between  them  is  *'  Chyranchy,"  said  to  signify  "  the  place  of
the  breach,"  pointing,  it  might  appear,  to  the  action  of  the
sea  in  wearing  out  the  softer  ground.

"Chyanchy"  is  another  mode  of  pronouncing  this  name,
"  Chyan"  signifying  a  house.  Hence  the  name,  it  is  thought
by  some,  was  given  when  two  houses  (chy-an-chy)  stood  alone
on  the  spot.*

*  Chyanwheal,  the  house  on  the  mine,  is  near  St  Ives.  Chi/andour,  the
house  on  the  rock,  adjoins  Penzance.


The  Chapel'Rock  of  Perran-Porth.         225

THE  CHAPEL  ROCE!,  PERMN-PORTH.

THIS  is  one  of  Ihe  rocks — of  which  many  exist — around
the  Cornish  coast,  upon  which,  at  one  time,  there  stood
in  all  probability,  a  small  chapel  or  oratory.  This  rock  is
left  dry  at  every  tide,  but  stands  far  out  in  the  sea  at  high
water.  A  curious  fancy  exists  with  respect  to  it.  It  is  said
that  this  rock  can  be  approached  on  dry  sand  every  day  at
eleven  o'clock  throughout  the  year.  There  is  no  truth  in
this  statement,  but  strangers  are  gravely  assured  that  this
is  the  fact.  From  this  rock  to  the  sandy  peninsula  which
runs  out  in  the  '*porth,"  or  port,  is  about  five  hundred
yards — those,  it  is  said,  were,  at  one  time,  connected  by
cultivated  land.  From  the  circumstance  that  the  evidences
of  a  burial-place  have  been  found  on  the  little  peninsula,
it  appears  highly  probable  that  the  island  and  it  have  been
dosely  connected  as  church  and  graveyard.  Tradition  refers
the  destruction  of  the  land  to  certain  storms  or  convulsions
which  swept  away  the  country,  for  a  mile  or  two  out  at  sea,
marked  by  a  line  drawn  from  the  rocks  off  St  Agnes,  known
as  "  The  Man  and  his  Man,"  and  "  Carters'  rock,"  which  is
off  Penhale  point.


IsrSsRiB.


FIRE  WORSHIP.


"Safely  hid
Beneath  the  purple  pall  of  sacrifice,
Did  sleep  our  holy  fire,  nor  saw  the  air,
Till  to  that  pass  we  came,  where  whUom.  Brute
Planted  his  five  hoar  altars.    To  our  rites
Then  swift  we  hasted,  and  in  one  short  moment
The  rocky  piles  were  clothed  with  livid  flame."

Caractacu8—Wm  Mason,  M.A.


ROMANCES  OF  FIRE   WORSHIP.


"  An  angel  who  at  last  in  sight
Of  both  my  parents  all  in  flames  ascended
From  off  the  altar,  where  an  offering  biim'd^
As  in  a  fiery  column  charioting
His  god-Uke  presence."

Samson  Agonistes^'^iLTOiif,


IT  would  not  be  profitable  to  pursue  the  inquiry  into
the  value  of  the  numerous  hypotheses  which  have
been  from  time  to  time  raised  in  support  of  the
assertion  that  a  system  of  Fire  Worship  prevailed
amongst  the  Britons  of  old  CornwalL

There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  writings  of  Borlase,
and  other  earnest  thinkers  of  his  class,  have  done  much  to
perpetuate  the  belief  in  the  existence  oif  a  Druidical  priest-
hood in  Cornwall,  who  had  their  altars  on  the  hills, — ^who
made  the  huge  piles  of  granite  rocks  the  instruments  of  their
worship, — and  who  availed  themselves  of  the  hollows  formed
in  those  rocks  by  nature,  to  procure  the  unpolluted  waters
from  heaven,  with  which  to  wash  away  sins.

The  antiquary  has  too  frequently  placed  himself  in  the
unfortunate  position  of  Jonathan  Oldbuck  amidst  the  an-
cient fortifications  at  the  Kaim  of  Kinprunes,  when  he  was
80  rudely  checked  in  his  theory  by  Edie  Ochiltree,  who  would


2  28  Romances  of  Fire  Worship.

insist  on  it  that  he  did  "  mind  the  biggin'  o'  't."  But  the
modem  historian  and  philosopher  has  gone  as  &r  wrong  in
the  contrary  direction.  The  antiquaries  formerly  insisted  that
all  the  natural  basins  formed  in  the  granite  rocks  were  of
Dmidic  origin,  and  all  the  Logan  stones  the  result  of  Druid
labours.  The  geologists  and  historians  now  declare  them,
one  and  all,  to  be  the  result  of  disintegration,  produced  by
ordinary  atmospheric  causes.  Both  are,  I  presume  to  think,
wrong.  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  I  can  point  to  rock-basins
upon  which  the  hands  of  man  have  been  busy,  and  to  Logan
stones  in  which  he  has,  for  his  own  purposes,  aided  natura

In  the  Sacrificing  Kock  on  Cam  Brae  are  a  series  of
hollows  so  deeply  cut,  and  so  entirely  unlike  anything  se^
on  any  of  the  other  rocks  on  that  remarkable  hill,  although
ordinary  rock-basins  are  numerous,  that  I  am  disposed  to
believe  in  the  tradition  which  gives  it  its  name.  On  the
Main  or  Men  Rock  in  Constantino,  I  see,  in  like  manner,
evidences  of  the  works  of  man,  side  by  side  with  those  of
nature.  The  disintegration  produced  by  the  accumulation
of  water,  at  first  in  small  quantities  in  a  little  hollow  on  the
face  of  a  rock,  is  a  curious  process.  The  first  action  is  the
separation  of  a  few  particles,  or  small  crystals,  of  quartz  or
mica.  These  repose  beneath  the  small  deposit  of  water  until,
by  the  beating  of  the  rains  and  the  action  of  the  winds,  they
are  made  to  serve  as  grinding  materials,  and  carry  on  the  work
of  weathering.  Th6  basins  thus  formed  have  a  regular  cur-
vature, which  does  not  belong  to  those  deeper  basins  to  which
I  have  referred.  The  question,  however,  before  us  is,  Have
we  any  evidences,  traditional  or  otherwise,  which  go  to  sup-
port the  belief  that  the  Phoenicians,  or  any  other  people,  in-
troduced the  worship  of  Fire  into  this  country  ?

The  influences  of  education,  and  the  zeal  with  which  reli-
gious teachers  have  penetrated  into  the  remotest  districts  and


Baal  Fires.  229

taught  the  truth,  have  banished  nearly  every  relic  of  this
ancient  idolatry.  But  still  amidst  the  dead  ashes  a  faint
spark  occasionally  appears,  to  tell  us  that  at  one  time  our
forefathers  did  use  the  rocks  as  altars,  on  which  they  kindled
sacrificial  fires ;  and  that  they  had  their  periods  of  solemn
feast,  when  every  hill  blazed  with  the  emblem  of  life  and
dissolution.  A  few  examples  of  these  pale  sparks  will  not
be  without  value.

BAAL  FIRES.

OF  these  Cornish  Midsummer  Fires  an  account  is  given
by  a  correspondent  in  Hone's  "Year  Book,"  which  I
quote  entire,  not  because  I  can  agree  with  the  writer  in  all
his  views,  but  because  he  places  the  main  question  in  a  fair
light  :—

"  An  immemorial  and  peculiar  custom  prevails  on  the  sea-coast  of  the
weBtem  extremity  of  Cornwall,  of  kindling  large  bonfires  on  the  Eve  of
June  24;  and  on  the  next  day  the  country  people,  assembling  in  great
crowda,  amuse  themselves  with  excursions  on  the  water.  I  cannot  help
thinking  it  the  remains  of  an  ancient  Druidical  festival,  celebrated  on  mid-
•ommer-day,  to  implore  the  friendly  influence  of  Heaven  on  their  fields,
compounded  with  that  of  the  first  of  May,  when  the  Druids  kindled  large
fires  on  aU  their  sacred  places,  and  on  the  tops  of  aU  their  cairns,  in  honour
of  Bel,  or  Belinus,  the  name  by  which  they  distinguished  the  sun,  whose  re-
Tolying  course  had  again  clothed  the  earth  with  beauty,  and  diffused  joy
and  gladness  through  the  creation.  Their  water  parties  on  the  24th  prove
that  ihey  consider  the  summer  season  as  now  so  fully  established  that  they
ave  not  afraid  to  commit  themselves  to  the  mercy  of  the  waves.  If  we  re-
flect on  the  rooted  animosity  which  subsisted  between  the  Romans  and  the
Druids,  and  that  the  latter,  on  beiug  expelled  from  their  former  residences,
found,  together  with  the  miserable  remnants  of  the  Britons,  an  asylum  iu  the
naturaUy  fortified  parts  of  the  island,  we  shall  not  be  surprised  at  their  cus-
iomshaving  been  faintly  handed  down  through  such  a  long  succession  of  ages.
That  Cornwall  was  one  of  their  retreats  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  nu-
merous remains  of  their  circular  temples,  cromlechs,  cairns,  &c.  Even  in
the  eleventh  century,  when  Christianity  was  become  the  national  religion,
the  people  were  so  attached  to  their  ancient  superstitions,  that  we  find  a
law  of  Canute  the  Great  strictly  prohibiting  all  his  subjects  from  ]>aying


230  Romances  of  Fire  Worship.

adoration  to  the  sun,  moon^  sacred  groves  and  woods,  Iiallowed  IuHb  and
fountains.  If,  then,  this  propensity  to  idolatry  could  not  be  rooted  out  of
those  parts  of  the  kingdom,  exposed  to  the  continual  influx  of  foreigners,
and  the  horrors  of  frequent  war,  how  much  more  must  it  have  flourished
in  Cornwall  and  those  parts  where  the  Druids  long  preserved  their  autho-
rity and  influence  ?  It  may  therefore  be  fairly  inferred  that,  from  thar
remote  situation,  and  comparative  insignificancy  with  the  rest  of  England,
they  preserved  those  religious  ceremonies  unmolested;  and,  corrupted  u
they  must  naturally  be  by  long  usage  and  tradition,  yet  are  handed  down
to  us  to  this  day  with  evident  marks  of  a  Druidical  origin."  *

In  Hone's  "  Every-Day  Book "  will  be  found  several  ac-
counts of  festivals  which  may  be  referred  to  Baal  worship.

Mr  Kichard  Edmonds,  a  native  of  Penzance,  has  given  us
a  very  faithful  description  of  the  proceedings  at  Penzance
on  Midsummer -eve.  Although  that  gentleman  states  his
belief  in  the  true  Celtic  origin  of  this  remarkable  mode  (rf
celebrating  the  midsummer  festival,  his  description  leads  us
to  suppose  that  it  is  distinctly  Koman  : —

*^  It  is  the  immemorial  usage  in  P.enzance  and  the  neighbouring  towns
and  villages,  to  kindle  bonfires  and  torches  on  Midsummer-eve ;  and  on
Midsummer-day  to  hold  a  fair  on  Penzance  quay,  where  the  country  folks
assemble  from  the  adjoining  parishes  in  great  numbers  to  make  excursions
on  the  water.  St  Peter 's-eve  is  distinguished  by  a  similar  display  of  bon-
fires and  torches,  although  the  *  quay-fair '  on  St  Peter's-day  has  been  dis-
continued upwards  of  forty  years.

"  On  these  eves  a  line  of  tar-barrels,  relieved  occasionally  by  large  bon-
fires, is  seen  in  the  centre  of  each  of  the  principal  streets  in  Penzance.  On
either  side  of  this  line  young  men  and  women  pass  up  and  down,  swinging
round  their  heads  heavy  torches  made  of  large  pieces  of  folded  canvas
steeped  in  tar,  and  nailed  to  the  ends  of  sticks  between  three  and  four
feet  long ;  the  flames  of  some  of  these  almost  equal  those  of  the  tar-barrels.
Rows  of  lighted  candles  also,  when  the  air  is  calm,  are  fixed  outside  the
windows  or  along  the  sides  of  the  streets.  In  St  Just  and  other  mining
parishes  the  young  miners,  mimicking  their  fathers'  employments,  bore  rows
of  holes  in  the  rocks,  load  them  with  gunpowder,  and  explode  them  in
rapid  succession  by  trains  of  the  same  substance.     As  the  holes  are  not

*  In  Ireland,  May-day  is  called  la  na  Bealtina,  and  the  eve  of  May  is  neen  na  Bed-
Una, — the  day  and  eve  of  Baal  fires.  Seeing  the  intimate  relation  of  the  inhabitants
of  Cornwall  and  those  of  Ireland,  especially  of  the  southern  counties,  may  we  not
infer  that  the  bonfires  of  May  and  those  of  Midsummer  have  a  similar  origin?


The  G arrack  Zans,  or  Holy  Rock.        231

deep  enough  to  split  the  rocks  the  same  little  batteries  serve  for  many
years.  On  these  nights  Mount's  Bay  has  a  most  animating  appearance,
although  not  equal  to  what  was  annually  witnessed  at  the  beginning  of  the
present  century,  when  the  whole  coast,  from  the  Land's-End  to  the
Lizard,  wherever  a  town  or  village  existed,  was  lighted  up  with  these  sta-
tionary or  moving  fires.  In  the  early  part  of  the  evening,  children  may
be  seen  wearing  wreaths  of  flowers, — a  custom  in  all  probability  originating
from  the  ancient  use  of  these  ornaments  when  they  danced  around  the
fires.  At  the  close  of  the  fireworks  in  Penzance,  a  great  number  of  persons
of  both  sexes,  chiefly  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  quay,  used  always,
until  within  the  last  few  years,  to  join  hand  in  hand,  forming  a  long  string,
and  run  through  the  streets,  playing  "  thread  the  needle,"  heedless  of  the
fireworks  showered  upon  them,  and  oftentimes  leaping  over  the  yet  glowing
embers.  I  have  on  these  occasions  seen  boys  following  one  another,  jump-
ing through  fiames  higher  than  themselves.  But  whilst  this  is  now  done
innocently  in  every  sense  of  the  word,  we  all  know  that  the  passing  of
children  through  fire  was  a  very  common  act  of  idolatry ;  and  the  heathen
believed  that  all  persons,  and  all  living  things,  submitted  to  this  ordeal,
would  be  preserved  from  evil  throughout  the  ensuing  year,  j^  similar
blessing  was  supposed  to  be  imparted  to  their  fields  by  running  around
them  with  flaming  torches." — Richard  Edmonds — The  Land*8-End  Du-
trictf  p.  66.


THE  GARRACK  ZANS,  OR  HOLY  ROCK.

A  FEW  years — really  but  a  few  years  since — the  stone
altars  on  which  the  first  inhabitants  of  these  islands  lit
their  holy  fires  had  yet  a  place  amongst  us.  In  the  village
of  Roskestall  stood  one  such  altar ;  in  Treen  was  to  be  found
another.  These  huge  masses  of  rock,  rendered  sacred  by  the
memories  surrounding  them,  have  been  wantonly  removed,
and  employed  in  most  cases  in  furnishing  pillars  at  the
"grand  entrances"  of  the  houses  of  the  squire  farmers  of  the
Land's-End  district ;  or  they  have  been  yet  more  rudely
served,  and  are  to  be  found  at  the  entrance  to  a  pigsty,  or
in  the  gate-posts  to  a  potatoe-field.

The  extinction  of  several  of  the  old  families  is,  to  the
present  day,  ascribed  by  the  peasantry,  to  the  unholy  act  of
removing  or  breaking  up  of  the  Garrack  Zans  in  the  village


232  Romances  of  Fire  Worship.

of  Escols.  The  rock  in  the  village  of  Mayon  was  called  in-
differently tahle-mayon,  (mon,)  or  the  Garrack  Zans.  Within
our  memory  is  the  gathering  of  the  villagers  around  the  Holy
Rock.  It  was  their  custom,  when  anything  was  stolen,  or  a
misdemeanour  committed,  to  light  a  fire  on  this  altar,  and
when  the  faggots  were  in  full  blaze,  all  those  who  sought  to
prove  their  innocence  took  a  bumiog  stick  from  the  rock
and  spat  on  the  blazing  end.  If  they  could  extinguish  the  fire
by  spitting  on  the  stick,  they  were  declared  innocent ;  but  if
the  mouth  was  so  dry  as  not  to  generate  sufficient  moisture
to  be  heard  ''frizzing"  on  it,  that  unfortunate  individual
was  suspected,  if  not  declared,  to  be  guilty.*  The  Mid-
summer bonfire  was  first  lighted  on  the  rock  in  Escols,  next
on  the  Chapel  Hill ;  then  all  the  other  beacon  hills  were  soon
ablaze?  Many  superstitious  rites  were  formerly  performed
on  the  Garrack  Zans,  which  are  only  found  now  as  the
amusements  of  young  people  on  the  eves  of  St  Agnes  and
Midsummer.


PIEE  ORDEAL  FOR  THE  CURE  OP  DISEASE.

A  MINER,  who  was  also  a  small  farmer,  living  in  Zennor,
once  consulted  me  on  the  condition  of  his  daughter,
a  little  girl  about  five  or  six  years  of  age.  This  child  was
evidently  suffering  from  some  scrofulous  taint.  She  was
of  a  delicate  complexion,  with,  usually,  a  hectic  flush  on  her
cheeks ;  the  skin  being  particularly  fine,  and  so  transparent
that  the  course  of  the  veins  was  marked  by  deep  blue  lines.
This  little  girl  had  long  suffered  from  indolent  tumours,

*  Boys  at  school,  to  prove  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  any  charge,  will  take
a  stick  from  the  fire  and  practise  upon  it  in  the  same  manner.  May  not
the  custom  of  joining  hands  and  passing  through  the  embers  of  a  dying  bon-
fire, for  good  luck,  be  a  vestige  of  the  same  ritual  ?


Fire  Ordeal  for  the  Cure  of  Disease.       233

forming  on  the  gknds  in  various  parts  of  the  body ;  and,
as  her  father  said,  "  they  had  taken  her  to  all  the  doctors  in
the  country  round,  and  the  child  got  worse  and  worse/'

I  prescribed  for  this  child ;  and  for  two  or  three  weeks
she  was  brought  into  Penzance  on  the  market-day,  that  I
might  observe  the  influence  of 'the  remedial  agent  which  I
was  employing.  Right  or  wrong,  however,  the  little  girl  was
evidently  benefited  by  the  medicine  I  recommended.

Suddenly  my  patient  was  removed  from  my  care,  and
many  months  passed  away  without  my  seeing  either  the
child  or  the  fether.  Eventually  I  met  the  parent  in  the
market-place,  and  after  some  commonplace  remarks,  he  in-
formed me,  on  my  inquiring  for  his  daughter,  that  she  was
cured.  I  expressed  satisfaction  at  hearing  this,  and  inquired
why  he  had  not  brought  the  child  to  me  again.  After  some
hesitation  he  said  he  had  discovered  what  ailed  the  child — ''she
was  overhokedr  Requiring  some  explanation  of  this,  I  got
possession  of  his  story,  which  was  to  the  following  purpose : —

At  a  short  distance  from  their  farm  there  resided  an  old
woman  who  was  feared  by  her  neighbours,  owing  to  her
savage  and  uncontrollable  temper,  and  who  hated  all  around
her  in  consequence  of  the  system  of  ill-usage  to  which
during  a  long  life  she  had  been  subjected.

I  have  visited  this  miserable  creature  in  her  home.  A
stone-built  hut  in  the  wildest  part  of  the  bleak  coast,  form-
ing but  one  room,  was  her  dwelling.  The  door  was  rotten
through  age,  and  the  two  small  windows,  neither  of  them
more  than  eighteen  inches  long  by  twelve  inches  wide,  which
had  once  been  glazed,  had  been  broken  to  pieces,  and  the
holes  were  filled  in  with  old  rags.  Consequently,  when  the
door  was  closed,  the  hovel  would  have  been  dark  ;  but  for  the
light  which  descended  the  hole  in  the  roof,  which  we  must
call  a  chimney^  and  that  which  gained  admission  through  the


234  Romances  of  Fire  Worship.

cracks  in  the  door — these  gave  a  tolerable  amount  of  illumi-
nation.

A  low  truckle-bed  in  one  comer,  with  very  scanty,  dirty,
and  ragged  covering, — a  small  round  table,  roughly  made,
and  standing  on  four  square  legs, — a  log  of  wood,  and  a
three-legged  stool,  formed,  with  one  exception,  all  the  furni-
ture in  the  place.  This  exception  was  the  "  dresser."  Those
who  are  not  acquainted  with  western  England  will  require  to
be  told  that  no  dwelling,  however  poor,  is  regarded  as  com-
plete without  the  set  of  framed  shelves  and  drawers,  which
constitute  the  dresser.

This  old  woman's  dresser  was  painted  white  and  blue,  and
on  its  shelves  were  cups  and  saucers,  a  few  plates,  one  or
two  dishes,  and  some  mugs.  Here  was  an  orderly  arrange-
ment,  and  a  tolerably  clean  display,  strangely  contrasting
with  the  dirt  and  disorder  of  everything  around.  At  the
period  of  my  visit  this  old  woman  was  seated  on  the  block
of  wood,  with  her  naked  arms  folded  before  her,  roddng
herself  to  and  fro.  Margery  Penwarne,  for  so  she  was
called,  though  usually  spoken  of  as  "An',"  or  Aunt
''  Madge,"  must  have  been  nearly  eighty  years  old.  Her
hair  was  an  iron  gray,  and  it  struggled  out  from  under  a
cotton  cap,  which  had  once  been  white,  in  long  thin  locka
Her  eyebrows  were  long  enough  to  fall  over  her  disagreeable
gray  eyes  ;  and  this,  with  the  accumulation  of  long  hair
around  her  toothless  mouth,  gave  her  a  most  repulsive  ap-
pearance. There  were  still  living  two  or  three  old  people
who  had  known  Margery  in  her  youth,  and  they  spoke  of
her  as  having  been  a  pretty  girl.  The  general  idea  evidently
being  that  she  had  sold  her  soul  to  the  devil,  and  that  it
was  the  influence  of  her  evil  mind  which  gave  her  so
wretched  an  aspect.

From  Margery  I  had  a  long  story  of  the  wrongs  she  suf-


Fire  Ordeal  for  the  Cure  of  Disease.       235

fered,  and  I  believe  this  sad  example  of  humanity,  may  be
regarded  as  an  instance  of  the  reaction  of  uncontrolled  pas-
sion. Ignorant  in  the  extreme  herself,  and  dwelling  amongst
a  class  of  people  who  were  at  that  time  but  little  superior  to
her  in  any  respect,  Margery  succeeded  in  exerting  much
power  over  them  by  her  violence.  In  addition  to  this,  she
was  more  industrious  than  her  neighbours,  of  which  her
small  farm  bore  the  evidences.  Violence  begat  its  like,  and
where  Margery,  by  her  energy,  became  the  apparent  con-
queror, she  called  into  play  all  kinds  of  low  cunning  against
herself,  and  was  always,  in  the  end,  the  sufferer.  Her  crops
were  injured,  her  pigs  died  suddenly,  her  fowls  were  killed,
and  even  her  donkeys  were  lamed.

As  age  crept  on,  the  power  to  provide  the  necessities  of
life  failed  her,  and  she  had,  at  the  time  I  speak  of,  been
receiving  pay  from  the  parish  for  many  years.  With  age
Margery's  infirmities  of  temper  increased.  She  had  long
been  used  by  the  mothers  of  the  parish  as  a  means  for
frightening  the  children.  Their  tears  were  stopped  more
readily  by  a  threat,  "  1 11  give  'e  to  An'  Madge,"  than  by
any  other  means ;  and  good  conduct  was  insured  if  An*
Madge  was  to  be  sent  for  "to  tak'  'e  away."  From  this
state  she  passed  into  another  stage.  Margery,  from  being  a
terror  to  the  young,  became  the  fear  of  the  old.  No  one
would  dare  refuse  her  a  drop  of  milk,  a  few  potatoes,  or  any
of  those  trifles  which  she  almost  demanded  from  her  neigh-
bours, every  one  trembling  lest  she  should  exert  her  evil  eye,
or  vent  her  curses  upon  them.

This  was  the  being  who  had  "overlooked"  the  miner's
daughter.  He  told  me  that  the  cause  of  this  was  that  he
caught  Margery  stealing  some  straw,  and  that  he  "kicked
her  out  of  the  yard."

The  gossips  of  the  parish  had  for  some  time  insisted


236  Romances  of  Fire  Worship.

upon  the  fact  that  the  chUd  had  been  ill-wished,  and  that
she  never  would  be  better  until  "  the  spell  was  taken  oflf  her/'
The  father,  who  was  in  many  respects  a  sensible  man,  would
not  for  a  long  period  hear  of  this,  but  the  reiteration  of  the
assertion  at  length  compelled  him  to  give  way,  and  he  con-
sulted some  "  knowing  man  "  in  the  parish  of  St  Just

It  was  then  formally  announced  that  the  girl  could  never
recover  unless  three  burning  sticks  were  taken  from  the
hearth  of  the  "  overlooker,"  and  the  child  was  made  to  walk
three  times  over  them,  when  they  were  laid  across  on  the
ground,  and  then  quench  the  fire  with  water.

The  father  had  no  doubt  respecting  the  "overlooker/'
his  quarrel  with  Madge  determined  this  in  his  mind ;  but
there  were  many  difficulties  in  carrying  out  the  prescribed
means  for  eflPecting  the  cure.  Without  exposing  themselves
to  the  violence  of  the  old  woman  it  was  impossible,  and  there
was  some  fear  that  in  forcibly  entering  her  dwelling  they
might  be  brought  *'  under  the  law,"  with  which  Margery  had
often  threatened  the  people.

It  was  found,  however,  that  nothing  could  be  done  for
the  child  if  they  neglected  this,  and  the  father  and  two  or
three  friends,  resolved  to  brave  alike  the  old  woman  and
the  law.

One  evening,  the  smoke,  mixed  with  sparks,  arising  from
the  hole  in  the  roof  of  Margery's  cottage,  informed  them
that  the  evil  crone  was  preparing  her  supper,  and  as  she
evidently  was  burning  dry  furze,  now  was  the  time  to  pro-
cure the  three  blazing  sticks.  Accordingly  three  men  and
the  little  girl  hurried  to  the  hovel.  The  door  was  closed,
but,  not  being  secured  on  the  inside,  the  father  opened  it.
As  they  had  planned,  his  two  companions  rushed  in,  and,
without  a  word,  seized  the  old  woman,  who  fell  from  her
block  to  the  floor,  to  which,  with  unnecessary  violence,  they


Burning  A  nimals  A  live.  237

pinned  her,  she  screaming  with  "  the  shriek  of  a  goshawk."
In  the  meantime  the  parent  dragged  three  blazing  pieces  of
furze  from  the  hearth,  hastened  to  the  door,  laid  them
one  across  the  other,  and  then,  without  losing  a  moment,
forced  the  trembling  child  across  the  fire  three  times,  and
compelled  her  to  perform  the  other  necessary  portion  of  the
ordeal  by  which  the  spell  was  to  be  broken.

Margery,  weak,  aged,  and  violent,  was  soon  exhausted,  and
she  probably  fainted.  I  was,  however,  informed  by  the  man,
that  as  the  fire  was  quenched  in  the  sticks,  the  flames  which
appeared  to  kindle  in  her  eyes  gradually  died  away : — that  all
the  colour  forsook  her  lips,  and  that  at  last  she  murmured,
"  My  heart!  my  heart !  bring  me  the  girl,  and  I  '11  purge  her
of  the  spell ; "  upon  which  they  left  her  as  though  dead,  upon
the  rough  earth  floor  on  which  she  had  fallen.

Many  other  examples  might  have  been  given  of  the  exist-
ence of  a  belief  in  the  "  virtue  of  fire,"  as  I  have  heard  it
expressed.

BUENING  ANIMALS  ALIVE.

THERE  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  a  belief  prevailed  until
a  very  recent  period,  amongst  the  small  farmers  in  the
districts  remote  from  towns,  in  Cornwall,  that  a  living  sac-
rifice appeased  the  wrath  of  God.  This  sacrifice  must  be
by  fire;  and  I  have  heard  it  argued  that  the  Bible  gave
them  warranty  for  this  belief.

The  accompanying  notes,  from  Hone's  "  Every-Day  Book,"
and  from  Drew  and  Hitchin's  "  Cornwall,"  prove  the  preva-
lence— at  least  at  the  commencement  of  this  century — of
this  idea.  I  have  lately  been  informed  that  within  the  last
few  years  a  calf  has  been  thus  sacrificed  by  a  farmer,  in  a
district  where  churches,  chapels,  and  schools  abound.


238  Romances  of  Fire  Worship.

The  burning  of  blood,  drawn  from  a  diseased  animal,
has  been  a  very  common  mode  of  appeasing  the  spirits  of
disease.

''  There  are  too  many  obvious  traces  of  the  £act  to  doubt  its  truth,  thai
the  makiug  of  bonfires,  and  the  leaping  through  them,  are  vestiges  of  the
ancient  worship  of  the  heathen  god  Bal ;  and  therefore  it  is,  with  pro-
priety, that  the  editor  of  "Time's  Telescope"  adduces  a  recent  occur
rence  from  Drew  and  Hitchin's  "History  of  Cornwall,"  as  a  probable
remnant  of  pagan  superstition  in  that  country.  He  presumes  that  the
vulgar  notion  which  gave  rise  to  it  was  derived  from  the  Druidical  sacrifice
of  beasts :  '  An  ignorant  old  farmer  in  Cornwall,  having  met  with  some
severe  losses  in  his  cattle  about  the  year  1800,  was  much  afflicted  with  his
misfortunes.  To  stop  the  growing  evil,  he  applied  to  the  farriers  in  his
neighbourhood,  but  unfortunately  he  applied  in  vain.  The  malady  still
continuing,  and  all  remedies  failing,  he  thought  it  necessary  to  have
recourse  to  some  extraordinary  measure.  Accordingly,  on  consulting  with
some  of  his  neighboius,  equally  ignorant  with  himself,  and  evidently  not
less  barbarous,  they  recalled  to  their  recollections  a  tale,  which  tradition
had  handed  down  from  remote  antiquity,  that  the  calamity  would  not
cease  until  he  had  actually  humed  alive  the  finest  calf  which  he  had  upon
his  farm;  but  that,  when  this  sacrifice  was  made,  the  murrain  would
afflict  his  cattle  no  more.  The  old  farmer,  influenced  by  this  counsel,
resolved  immediately  on  reducing  it  to  practice;  that,  by  making  the
detestable  experiment,  he  might  secure  an  advantage  which  the  whisperers
of  tradition,  and  the  advice  of  his  neighbours,  had  conspired  to  assure
him  would  follow.  He  accordingly  called  several  of  his  friends  together
on  an  appointed  day,  and  having  lighted  a  large  fire,  brought  forth  his  beat
calf,  and  without  ceremony  or  remorse,  pushed  it  into  the  flames.  The
innocent  victim,  on  feeling  the  intolerable  heat,  endeavoured  to  escape;
but  this  was  in  vain.  The  barbarians  that  surrounded  the  fire  were  armed
with  pitchforks,  or  pikes,  as  in  Cornwall  they  are  generally  called;  and,
as  the  burning  victim  endeavoured  to  escape  from  death,  with  these
instruments  of  cruelty  the  wretches  pushed  back  the  tortured  animal  into
the  flames.  In  this  state,  amidst  the  wounds  of  pitchforks,  the  shouts  of
imfeeling  ignorance  and  cruelty,  and  the  corrosion  of  flames,  the  dying
victim  poured  out  its  expiring  groan,  and  was  consumed  to  ashes.  It  is
scarcely  possible  to  reflect  on  this  instance  of  superstitious  barbarity
without  tracing  a  kind  of  resemblance  between  it  and  the  ancient  sacrifices
of  the  Druids.  This  calf  was  sacrificed  to  fortune,  ov  good  luck,  to  avert
impending  calamity,  and  to  insure  future  prosperity,  and  was  selected  by
the  farmer  as  the  finest  among  his  herd.'  Every  intelligent  native  of
Cornwall  ^Yill  perceive  that  this  extract  from  the  history  of  his  county  is


Burning  A  nimals  A  live.  239

here  made  for  the  purpose  of  shammg  the  brutally  ignorant,  if  it  be
poBsible,  into  humanity/'*

The  remarks  in  Drew  and  Hitchin  are  as  follows : —

"  There  is  a  tradition  in  Cornwall^  which  has  been  handed  down  from
remote  antiquity,  that  farmers  may  prevent  any  calamity  by  burning  alive
the  finest  calf  they  possess.  This  was  so  fully  believed,  that  even  as  late
as  the  year  1800,  an  ignorant  old  farmer,  having  met  with  some  severe
loflses  in  his  cattle,  determined,  on  being  advised  by  some  neighbours  not
less  barbarous  than  himself,  to  try  this  remedy.  He  accordingly,  on  an
appointed  day,  called  his  friends  together,  lighted  a  large  fire,  brought
forth  his  beat  calf,  and  without  ceremony  or  remorse,  pushed  it  into  the
flames."

•  Burning  a  Calf  Alive.— Hone's  **Bvery-Day  Book,"  June  24,  p.  431.


[While  correcting  these  sheets,  I  am  informed  of  two  re-
cent instances  of  this  superstition.  One  of  them  was  the
sacrifice  of  a  calf  by  a  farmer,  near  Portreath,  for  the  pur-
pose of  removing  a  disease  which  had  long  followed  his
horses  and  his  cows.  The  other  was  the  burning  of  a  living
lamb,  to  save,  as  the  farmer  said,  "his  flock  from  spells
which  had  been  cast  on  "em."]


DEMONS  AND  SPECTRES.


''  A  ghost,  shi'ouded  and  folded  up
In  its  own  formless  horror."

The  Cenci—SmsLLEJ.

"  I  woke ;  it  was  the  midnight  hour.
The  clock  was  echoing  in  the  tower ;
But  though  my  slumber  was  gone  by,
This  dream  it  would  not  pass  away —
It  seems  to  live  upon  my  eye  !  "

Christahd —  Coleridgi.


OMANCES  OF  DEMONS,  SPECTRES,  &c.


THE  HOOTma  CAIEN.

"  On  either  hand,  to  left  to  right,
Heath,  pasture,  stream,  and  lake.
Glanced  dazzling  by,  too  swift  for  sight.

The  thundering  bridges  quake.
'  Dost  fear,  my  loye  ?    The  moon  shines  bright.
Hurrah  I  The  dead  ride  swift  to-night.
And  art  thou  of  the  dead  afraid  ?'
*  Oh  I  no ;  but  name  them  not — the  dead/  "

— B0boeb'8  Leonora,  Hertcketi  Trarulatum.

||AIRN  Kenidzhek,  pronounced  Kenidjack,  signify
Hooting  Cairn,  is  on  the  north  road  from  St
Just  to  Penzance,  and  is  strikingly  distinguished
from  other  hills  by  its  rugged  character.  Hoary
aes,  bleached  by  the  sunshine  of  ages,  are  reared  in  fan-
tic  confusion.  The  spirits  of  the  Celts,  possibly  the  spirits
i  yet  older  people,  dwell  amidst  those  rocks.  Within  the
dow  of  this  hill  are  mounds  and  barrows,  and  mystic
;les,  and  holed  stones,  and  rude  altars,  still  telling  of  the
t  The  dead  hold  undisputed  possession  of  all  around ;
ploughshare  has  dared  to  invade  this  sacred  spot,  and
ry  eflFort  made  by  modem  man  to  mark  his  sway  is  indi-
m1  by  its  ruin.    Nothing  but  what  the  Briton  planted

18TS£BI£S.  Q


242        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres^  etc.

remains,  and,  if  tales  tell  true,  it  is  probable  long  years  must
pass  before  the  Englishman  can  banish  the  Celtic  powers
who  here  hold  sovereign  sway.

"  A  weird  tract  is  that  of  Kenidzhek  and  the  Gump,  and
of  ill  repute.  The  old,  half-starved  horses  on  the  conmion,
with  their  hides  grown  rusty  brown,  like  dried  and  withered
grass  by  exposure,  are  ridden  by  the  archfiend  at  night  He
is  said  to  hunt  lost  souls  over  this  heath ;  and  an  old  stile
hard  by  bears  an  evil  name,  for  there  the  souls  are  sure  to
be  caught,  none  being  able  to  get  bver  it  The  people  tell  of
midnight  fights  by  demons,  and  of  a  shadowy  fonn  holding
a  lantern  to  the  combatants.** — Blight,

One  of  the  tales  which  I  have  heard  may  be  given  as  a
strange  mixture  of  the  Celtic  and  the  monastic  legend.

Two  miners  who  had  been  working  in  one  of  the  now
abandoned  mines  in  Morvah,  had,  their  labours  being  over,
been,  as  was  common,  "half-pinting''  in  the  public-house  in
Morvah  Church- town.  It  was  after  dark,  but  not  late;
they  were  very  quiet  men,  and  not  drunk.  They  had  walked
on,  talking  of  the  prospects  of  the  mine,  and  speculating  on
the  promise  of  certain  "pitches,"  and  were  now  on  the
Common,  at  the  base  of  the  Hooting  Cairn.  No  miner  ever
passed  within  the  shadow  of  Cairn  Kenidzhek  who  dared  to
indulge  in  any  frivolous  talk :  at  least,  thirty  years  since,  the
influence  akin  to  fear  was  very  potent  upon  all.

Well,  our  two  friends  became  silent,  and  trudged  with  a
firm,  a  resolved,  footstep  onward.

There  was  but  little  wind,  yet  a  low  moaning  sound  came
from  the  cairn,  which  now  and  then  arose  into  a  hoot  The
night  was  dark,  yet  a  strange  gleaming  light  rendered  the
rocks  on  the  cairn  visible,  and  both  the  miners  fancied  they
saw  gigantic  forms  passing  in  and  about  the  intricate  rocks.
Presently  they  heard  a  horse  galloping  at  no  great  distance


The  Hooting  Cairn,    "  243

behind  them.  They  turned  and  saw,  mounted  on  a  horse
which  they  knew  very  well,  since  the  bony  brute  had  often
worked  the  "whim'*  on  their  mine,  a  dark  man  robed  in  a
black  gown,  and  a  hood  over  his  head,  partly  covering  his
face.

"Hallo!  hallo'/'  shouted  they,  fearing  the  rider  would
ride  over  them.

"  Hallo  to  you,''  answered  a  gruff  voice.

"Where  be'st  goen  then?''  asked  the  bravest  of  the
miners.

"Up  to  the  cairn  to  see  the  wrastling,"  answered  the
rider ;  "  come  along !  come  along ! "

Horse  and  rider  rushed  by  the  two  miners,  and,  they
could  never  tell  why,  but  they  found  themselves  compelled
to  follow.

They  did  not  appear  to  exert  themselves,  but  without
much  effort  they  kept  up  with  the  galloping  horse.  Now
and  then  the  dark  rider  motioned  them  onward  with  his  hand,
but  he  spoke  not.  At  length  the  miners  arrived  at  a  mass
of  rocks  near  the  base  of  the  hill,  which  stopped  their  way,
and,  since  it  was  dark,  they  knew  not  how  to  get  past  them.
Presently  they  saw  the  rider  ascending  the  hill,  regardless  of
the  masses  of  rock;  passing  unconcernedly  over  all,  and,
MB  it  seemed  to  them,  the  man,  the  horse,  and  the  rocks  were
engaged  in  a  "three  man's  song,"*  the  chorus  to  which  was
a  piercing  hoot.  A  great  number  of  uncouth  figures  were
gathering  together,  coming,  as  it  seemed,  out  of  the  rocks
themselves.  They  were  men  of  great  size  and  strength,
with  savage  faces,  rendered  more  terrible  by  the  masses  of
nnoombed  hair  which  hung  about  them,  and  the  colours  with
which  they  had  painted  their  cheeks.    The  plain  in  front  of

*  **  They  hftve  also  Comiah  three  men's  songs,  cunningly  contriyed  for
ihm  ditfy,  and  pleasant  for  the  note." — Carew,  p.  72.


244        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres y  etc.

the  rocks  which  had  checked  the  miners'  progress  was  evi-
dently to  be  the  wrestling  ground.  Here  gathered  those
monstrous-looking  men,  all  anxiety,  making  a  strange  noisa
It  was  not  long  ere  they  saw  the  rider,  who  was  now  on  foot^
descending  the  hill  with  two  giants  of  men,  more  terriMe
than  any  they  had  yet  seen.

A  circle  was  formed ;  the  rider,  who  had  thrown  ofif  his
black  gown,  and  discovered  to  the  miners  that  he  was  no
other  than  Old  Nick,  placed  the  two  men,  and  seated  himself
in  a  very  odd  manner  upon  the  ground.

The  miners  declared  the  wrestlers  were  no  other  than  two
devils,  although  the  horns  and  tail  were  wanting.  There
was  a  shout,  which,  as  if  it  indicated  that  the  light  was  in-
sufficient, was  answered  by  the  squatting  demon,  by  flashing
from  his  eyes  two  beams  of  fire,  which  shed  an  unearthly
glow  over  everything.  To  it  the  wrestlers  went^  and  better
men  were  never  seen  to  the  west  of  Penzance.  At  length
one  of  them,  straining  hard  for  the  mastery,  lifted  his  anta-
gonist fairly  high  in  the  air,  and  flung  him  to  the  ground,  a
fair  back  fall.  The  rocks  trembled,  and  the  ground  seemed
to  thunder  with  the  force  of  the  fall.  Old  Nick  still  sat
quietly  looking  on,  and  notwithstanding  the  defeated  wrestler
lay  as  one  dead,  no  one  went  near  him.  All  crowded  around
the  victor,  and  shouted  like  so  many  wild  beasts.  The  love
of  fair  play  was  strong  in  the  hearts  of  the  miners ;  they
scorned  the  idea  of  deserting  a  fallen  foe ;  so  they  scrambled
over  the  rocks,  and  made  for  the  prostrate  giant,  for  so,  for
size,  he  might  well  be  called.  He  was  in  a  dreadful  strait.
Whether  his  bones  were  smashed  or  not  by  the  fall,  they
could  not  tell,  but  he  appeared  ''  passing  away."  The  elder
miner  had  long  been  a  professor  of  religion.  It  is  true  he
had  fallen  back ;  but  still  he  knew  the  right  road.  He
thought,  therefore,  that  even  a  devil  might  repent,  and  he


yago's  Demon.  245

whispered  in  the  ear  of  the  dying  man  the  Christian's
hope.

K  a  thunderbolt  had  fallen  amongst  them,  it  could  not
have  produced  such  an  effect  as  this.  The  rocks  shook  with
an  earthquake ;  everything  became  pitchy  dark ;  there  was
a  noise  of  rushing  hither  and  thither,  and  all  were  gone,
dying  man  and  all,  they  knew  not  whither.  The  two  miners,
terrified  beyond  measure,  clung  to  each  other  on  their  knees,
and  while  in  this  position  they  saw,  as  if  in  the  air,  the  two
blazing  eyes  of  the  demon  passing  away  into  the  west,  and
at  last  disappear  in  a  dreadfully  black  cloud.  These  two
men  were,  although  they  knew  the  ground  perfectly  well,
inextiicably  lost ;  so,  after  vainly  endeavouring  to  find  the
right  road  off  the  Common,  they  lay  down  in  each  other's
arms  under  a  mass  of  granite  rock,  praying  that  they  might
be  protected  till  the  light  of  day  removed  the  spell  which
was  upon  them.


JAGO'S  DEMON.

THE  vicar  of  Wendron,  who  bore  the  name  of  Jago,  ap-
pears to  have  had  strange  intercourse  with  the  invisible
world;  or,  rather,  the  primitive  people  of  this  district  believe
him  to  have  possessed  supernatural  powers.  Any  one  visit-
ing the  parish  of  Wendron  will  be  struck  with  many  distin-
guishing features  in  its  inhabitants.  It  would  appear  as  if
a  strange  people  had  settled  down  amidst  the  races  already
inhabiting  the  spot,  and  that  they  had  studiously  avoided
«ny  intimate  connexion  with  their  neighbours.  The  dialect
of  the  Wendron  people  is  unlike  any  other  in  Cornwall,  and
there  are  many  customs  existing  amongst  them  which  are
not  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  county.  Until  of  late
years,  the  inhabitants  of  Wendron  were  quite  uneducated; —


246        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  etc.

hence  the  readiness  with  which  they  associate  ancient  super-
stitions with  comparatively  modem  individuals.

The  Reverend  Mr  Jago  was  no  doubt  a  man  who  im-
pressed this  people  with  the  powers  of  his  knowledge.
Hence  we  are  told  that  no  spirit  walking  the  earth  could
resist  the  spells  laid  upon  him  by  Jago.  By  his  prayers—
or  powers — many  a  night  wanderer  has  been  put  back  into
his  grave,  and  so  confined  that  the  poor  ghost  could  never
again  get  loose.  To  the  evil-disposed  Mr  Jago  was  a  terror.
All  Wendron  believed  that  every  act  was  visible  to  the  par-
son at  the  moment  it  was  done — day  or  night  it  mattered
not.  He  has  been  known  to  pick  a  thief  at  once  out  of  a
crowd,  and  criminal  men  or  women  could  not  endure  the
glance  of  his  eye.  Many  a  person  has  at  once  confessed  to
guilty  deeds  of  which  they  have  been  suspected  the  moment
they  have  been  brought  before  Mr  Jago.

We  are  told  that  he  had  spirits  continually  waiting  upon
him,  though  invisible  until  he  desired  them  to  appear.  The
parson  rode  far  and  wide  over  the  moorland  of  his  parish.
He  never  took  a  groom  with  him;  for  the  moment  he
alighted  from  his  horse,  he  had  only  to  strike  the  earth  with
his  whip,  and  up  came  a  demon-groom  to  take  charge  of  the
steed.

PETER  THE  DEVIL.

THE  church  at  Altarnun  is  said  to  have  been  built  from
the  remains  of  an  ancient  nunnery  which  had  been
founded  in  the  early  days  of  Christianity  by  the  saint  to
whom  it  was  dedicated.

There  was  a  peculiar  sanctity  about  all  that  surrounded
this  little  church  and  its  holy  well,  and  few  were  unfaithful
enough  to  scoff  at  any  of  the  holy  traditions  of  the  sacred
place.


Dando  and  his  Dogs,  247

About  the  time  of  Charles  II.,  an  under-clerk  or  deacon
of  this  church  was  called  Peter,  and  he  is  said  to  have  been
a  man  of  exceedingly  bad  character.  He  scoflfed  at  holy
things,  and — ^unless  he  was  belied — ^he  made  use  of  his  posi-
tion for  merely  temporal  benefit,  and  was  not  remarkable
for  his  honesty.  He  was,  moreover,  the  terror  of  the  neigh-
bourhood. Common  report  insisting  on  it  that  Peter  had
been  known  to  disentomb  the  dead,  whether  for  the  purpose
of  stealing  rings  and  other  trinkets  which  may  have  been
buried,  as  some  said,  or  for  the  purpose  of  renewing  his
youth,  as  others  suggested,  by  mysterious  contact  with  the
dead,  was  not  clearly  made  out.  He  was  invariably  called
Peter  Jowle,  or  Joule — that  is,  Peter  the  DeviL  At  the  age
of  a  hundred  he  was  a  gray-headed,  toothless  man;  but
then,  by  some  diabolical  incantation,  he  is  said  to  have
caused  new  black  hairs  to  spring  forth  amongst  those  which
were  white  with  age,  and  then  also  new  teeth  grew  in  his
jaws.  Peter  is  said  to  have  died  when  he  was  more  than  a
hundred  and  fifty  years  old.

DANDO  AND  HIS  DOGS.

IN  the  neighbourhood  of  the  lovely  village  of  St  Germans
formerly  lived  a  priest,  connected  with  the  old  priory
church  of  this  parish,  whose  life  does  not  appear  to  have
been  quite  consistent  with  his  vows.

He  lived  the  life  of  the  traditional  "jolly  friar."  He  ate
and  drank  of  the  best  the  land  could  give  him,  or  money
buy;  and  it  is  said  that  his  indulgences  extended  far  beyond
the  ordinary  limits  of  good  living.  The  priest  Dando  was,
notwithstanding  all  his  vices,  a  man  liked  by  the  people.
He  was  good-natured,  and  therefore  bUnd  to  many  of  their
sins.     Indeed,  he  threw  a  cloak  over  his  own  iniquities.


248        Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres ,  etc.

which  was  inscribed  "charity,"  and  he  freely  forgave  all
those  who  came  to  his  confessional.

As  a  man  increases  in  years  he  becomes  more  deeply
dyed  with  the  polluted  waters  through  which  he  may  have
waded.  It  rarely  happens  that  an  old  sinner  is  ever  a  re-
pentant one,  until  the  decay  of  nature  has  reduced  him  to  a
state  of  second  childhood.  As  long  as  health'  allows  him  to
enjoy  the  sensualities  of  life,  he  continues  to  gratify  his  pas-
sions, regardless  of  the  cost.  He  becomes  more  selfish,  and
his  own  gratification  is  the  rule  of  his  existence.  So  it  has
ever  been,  and  so  was  it  with  Dando.

The  sinful  priest  was  a  capital  huntsman,  and  scoured  the
country  far  and  near  in  pursuit  of  game,  which  was  in  those
days  abundant  and  varied  over  this  well-wooded  district.
Dando,  in  the  eagerness  of  the  chase,  paid  no  regard  to  any
*:ind  of  property.  Many  a  corn-field  has  been  trampled
down,  and  many  a  cottage  garden  destroyed  by  the  horses
and  dogs  which  this  impetuous  hunter  would  lead  unthink-
ingly over  them.  Curses  deep,  though  not  loud,  would  fol-
low the  old  man,  as  even  those  who  suflfered  by  his  excesses
were  still  in  fear  of  his  priestly  power.

Any  man  may  sell  his  soul  to  the  devil  without  going
through  the  stereotyped  process  of  signing  a  deed  with  his
blood.  Give  up  your  soul  to  Satan's  darling  sins,  and  he
will  help  you  for  a  season,  until  he  has  his  chains  carefully
wound  around  you,  when  the  links  are  suddenly  closed,  and
lie  seizes  his  victim,  who  has  no  power  to  resist

Dando  worsliipped  the  sensual  gods  which  he  had  created,
and  his  external  worship  of  the  God  of  truth  became  every
year,  more  and  more,  a  hypocritical  lie.  The  devil  looked
carefully  after  his  prize.  Of  course,  to  catch  a  dignitary  of
the  church  was  a  thing  to  cause  rejoicings  amongst  the  lost;
and  Dando  was  carefully  lured  to  the  undoing  of  his  soul.


Dando  and  his  Dogs.  249

Health  and  wealth  were  secured  to  him,  and  by  and  by  the
measure  of  his  sins  was  full,  and  he  was  left  the  victim  to
■  self-indulgences — a  doomed  man.  With  increasing  years,
and  the  immunities  he  enjoyed,  Dando  became  itoore  reck-
less. Wine  and  wassail,  a  board  groaning  with  dishes  which
stimulated  the  sated  appetite,  and  the  company  of  both
sexes  of  dissolute  habits,  exhausted  his  nights.  His  days
were  devoted  to  the  pursuits  of  the  field;  and  to  maintain
the  required  excitement,  ardent  drinks  were  supplied  him  by
his  wicked  companions.  It  mattered  not  to  Dando, — ^provided
the  day  was  an  auspicious  one,  if  the  scent  would  lie  on  the
ground, — even  on  the  Sabbath,  horses  and  hounds  were
ordered  out,  and  the  priest  would  be  seen  in  full  cry.

One  Sabbath  morning,  Dando  and  his  riotous  rout  were
hunting  over  the  Earth  estate;  game  was  plenty,  and  sport
first-rate.     Exhausted  with  a  long  and  eager  run,  Dando
ealled  for  drink.     He  had  already  exhausted  the  flasks  of
the  attendant  hunters.
"  Drink^  I  say;  give  me  drink,"  he  cried.
"  Whence  can  we  get  it?"  asked  one  of  the  gang.
"  Go  to  hell  for  it,  if  you  can't  get  it  on  Earth,"  said  the
priest,  with  a  bitter  laugh  at  his  own  joke  on  the  Earth
estate.

At  the  moment,  a  dashing  hunter,  who  had  mingled  with
the  throng  unobserved,  came  forward,  and  presented  a  richly-
mounted  flask  to  Dando,  saying, —

''  Here  is  some  choice  liquor  distilled  in  the  establishment
you  speak  of.  It  will  warm  and  revive  you,  I  'U  warrant.
Drink  deep ;  friend,  drink."

Dando  drank  deep;  the  flask  appeared  to  cling  to  his
lips.  The  strange  hunter  looked  on  with  a  rejoicing  yet
malignant  expression ; — a  wicked  smile  playing  over  an  other-
wise tranquil  face.


250        Romances  of  Demons y  Spectres y  etc.

By  and  by  Dando  fetched  a  deep  sigh,  and  removed  the
flask,  exclaiming,  "  By  hell !  that  was  a  drink  indeed.  Do
the  gods  drink  such  nectar?"

"  Devils  do,"  said  the  hunter.

"  An  they  do,  I  wish  I  were  one,"  said  Dando,  who  now
rocked  to  and  fro  in  a  state  of  thorough  intoxication,  "me-
thinks  the  drink  is  very  like ^"  The  impious  expres-
sion died  upon  his  lips.

Looking  round  with  a  half -idiotic  stare,  Dando  saw  that
his  new  friend  had  appropriated  several  head  of  game.  Not-
withstanding his  stupid  intoxication,  his  selfishness  asserted
its  power,  and  he  seized  the  game,  exclaiming,  in  a  guttural,
half-smothered  voice,  "  None  of  these  are  thine."

*'  What  I  catch  I  keep,"  said  the  hunter.

"  By  all  the  devils  they  're  mine,"  stammered  Dando.

The  hunter  quietly  bowed.

Dando's  wrath  burst  at  once  into  a  burning  flame,  uncon-
trolled by  reason.  He  rolled  himself  off  his  horse,  and
rushed,  staggering  as  he  went,  at  the  steed  of  his  unknown
friend,  uttering  most  frightful  oaths  and  curses.

The  strange  hunter's  horse  was  a  splendid  creature,  black
as  night,  and  its  eyes  gleamed  like  the  brightest  stars,  with
unnatural  lustre.  The  horse  was  turned  adroitly  aside,  and
Dando  fell  to  the  earth  with  much  force.  The  fall  appeared
to  add  to  his  fury,  and  he  roared  with  rage.  Aided  by  his
attendants,  he  was  speedily  on  his  legs,  and  again  at  the  side
of  the  hunter,  who  shook  with  laughter,  shaking  the  game
in  derision,  and  quietly  uttering,  "  They  *re  mine."

"  I  '11  go  to  hell  after  them,  but  I  '11  get  them  from  thee,"
shouted  Dando.

"  So  thou  shalt,"  said  the  hunter;  and  seizing  Dando  by
the  collar,  he  lifted  him  from  the  ground,  and  placed  him,  as
though  he  were  a  child,  before  him  on  the  horse.


The  Devil  and  his  Dandy-Dogs.  2  5^  i

With  a  dash — ^the  horse  passed  down  the  hill,  its  hoofs
striking  fire  at  every  tread,  and  the  dogs,  barking  furiously,
followed  impetuously.  These  strange  riders  reached  the  banks
of  the  Lynher,  and  with  a  terrific  leap,  the  horse  and  its
riders,  followed  by  the  hounds,  went  out  far  in  its  waters,
disappearing  at  length  in  a  blaze  of  fire,  which  caused  the
stream  to  boil  for  a  moment,  and  then  the  waters  flowed  on
as  tranquilly  as  ever  over  the  doomed  priest.  All  this  hap-
pened in  the  sight  of  the  assembled  peasantry.  Dando  never
more  was  seen,  and  his  fearful  death  was  received  as  a  warn-
ing by  many,  who  gave  gifts  to  the  church.  One  amongst
them  carved  a  chair  for  the  bishop,  and  on  it  he  represented
Dando  and  his  dogs,  that  the  memory  of  his  wickedness
might  be  always  renewed.'  There,  in  St  German's  church,
stands  to  this  day  the  chair,  and  all  who  doubt  the  truth  of
this  tradition  may  view  the  story  carved  in  enduring  oak.
If  they  please,  they  can  sit  in  the  chair  until  their  faith
is  so  far  quickened  that  they  become  true  believers.  On
Sunday  mornings  early,  the  dogs  of  the  priest  have  been
often  heard  as  if  in  eager  pursuit  of  game.  Chene/s  hounds
and  the  Wish  bounds  of  Dartmoor  are  but  other  versions  of
the  same  legend.*

Mr  T.  Q.  Couch,  in  his  Folk  Lore  of  a  Cornish  Village,
tells  the  story  in  a  somewhat  different  form.

THE  DEVIL  AND  HIS  DANDY-DOGS.

"  A  POOR  herdsman  was  journeying  homeward  across  the  moors  one
^  windy  night,  when  he  heard  at  a  distance  among  the  Tors  the  bay-
ing of  hounds,  which  he  soon  recognised  as  the  dismal  chorus  of  the
dandy-dogs.  It  was  three  or  four  mUes  to  his  house;  and  very  much
ilarmed,  he  hurried  onward  as  fast  as  the  treacherous  nature  of  the  soil
ind  the  uncertainty  of  the  path  would  allow ;  but,  alas !  the  melancholy
yelping  of  the  hounds,  and  the  dismal  holloa  of  the  hunter  came  nearer
lad  nearer.  After  a  considerable  run,  they  had  so  gained  upon  him,  that
*  See  pHge  150,  and  Appendix  (H)  TKt  Bargest.


252        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  etc.

on  looking  back, — oh  horror!  he  could  distincily  see  hunter  and  dogs.  The
former  was  terrible  to  look  at,  and  had  tiie  usual  complement  of  tavjocMi^
horns,  and  tail,  accorded  by  common  consent  to  the  legendary  deviL  He
was  black,  of  course,  and  carried  in  his  hand  a  long  hunting-pole.  The
dogs,  a  numerous  pack,  blackened  the  small  patch  of  moor  that  was  Tidble;
each  snorting  fire,  and  uttering  a  yelp  of  an  indescribably  frightful  tone.
No  cottage,  rock,  or  tree  was  near  to  give  the  herdsman  shelter,  and  no-
thing apparently  remained  to  him  but  to  abandon  himself  to  their  faiy,
when  a  happy  thought  suddenly  flashed  upon  him,  and  suggested  a  re-
source. Just  as  they  were  about  to  rush  upon  him,  he  fell  on  his  knees  in
prayer.  There  was  strange  power  in  the  holy  words  he  uttered :  for  imme-
.diately,  as  if  resistance  had  been  offered,  the  hell-hounds  stood  at  bay,
howling  more  dismally  than  ever,  and  the  hunter  shouted,  '  Bo  ShroTe/
which  (says  my  informant)  means  in  the  old  language, '  iht  hoy  frayt!  at
which  they  all  drew  off  on  some  other  pursuit  and  disappeared.

THE  SPECTRAL  COACH*

"  You  have  heard  of  such  a  spirit,  and  well  you  know
The  superstitious,  idle-headed  eld
Received  and  did  deliver  to  our  age
This  tale  of  Heme  the  Hunter  for  a  truth."

Merry  Wives  op  Windsor.

THE  old  vicarage-house  at  Talland,  as  seen  from  the  Looe
road,  its  low  roof  and  gray  walls  peeping  prettily  from
between  the  dense  boughs  of  ash  and  elm  that  environed  it,
was  as  picturesque  an  object  as  you  could  desire  to  see.  The
seclusion  of  its  situation  was  enhanced  by  the  character  of
the  house  itself.  It  was  an  odd-looking,  old-fashioned  build-
ing, erected  apparently  in  an  age  when  asceticism  and  self-
denial  were  more  in  vogue  than  at  present,  with  a  stem
disregard  of  the  comfort  of  the  inhabitant,  and  in  utter  con-
tempt of  received  principles  of  taste.  As  if  not  secure
enough  in  its  retirement,  a  high  wall,  enclosing  a  courtelage
in  front,  effectually  protected  its  inmates  from  the  prying
passenger,  and  only  revealed  the  upper  part  of  the  house,
with  its  small  Gothic  windows,  its  slated  roof,  and  heavy

*  Contributed  by  T.  Q.  Couch,  Esq.


The  Spectral  Coach.  253

chimneys  partly  hidden  by  the  evergreen  shrubs  which  grew
in  the  enclosure.  Such  was  it  until  its  removal  a  few  years
since ;  and  such  was  it  as  it  lay  sweetly  in  the  shadows  of  an
autumnal  evening  oue  huncked  and  thirty  years  ago,  when
a  stranger  in  the  garb  of  a  country  labourer  knocked  hesi-
tatingly at  the  wicket  gate  which  conducted  to  the  court.
After  a  little  delay  a  servant-girl  appeared,  and  finding  that
the  countryman  bore  a  message  to  the  vicar,  admitted  him
within  the  walls,  and  conducted  him  along  a  paved  passage
to  the  little,  low,  damp  parlour  where  sat  the  good  man.  The
Bey.  Mr  Dodge  was  in  many  respects  a  remarkable  man.
You  would  have  judged  as  much  of  him  as  he  sat  before  the
fire  in  his  high-back  chair,  in  an  attitude  of  thought,  arrang-
ing, it  may  have  been,  the  heads  of  his  next  Sabbath's  dis-
course. His  heavy  eyebrows,  throwing  into  shade  his
spacious  eyes,  and  indeed  the  whole  contour  of  his  face,
marked  him  as  a  man  of  great  firmness  of  character  and  of
much  moral  and  personal  courage.  His  suit  of  sober  black
and  full-bottomed  periwig  also  added  to  his  dignity,  and
gave  him  an  appearance  of  greater  age.  He  was  then  verging
on  sixty.  The  time  and  the  place  gave  him  abundant  exer-
cise for  the  qualities  we  have  mentioned,  for  many  of  bis
parishioners  obtained  their  livelihood  by  the  contraband
trade,  and  were  mostly  men  of  unscrupulous  and  daring
character,  little  likely  to  bear  with  patience,  reflections  on  the
dishonesty  of  their  calling.  Nevertheless  the  vicar  was  fear-
less in  reprehending  it,  and  his  frank  exhortations  were,  at
least,  listened  to  on  account  of  the  simple  honesty  of  the
man,  and  his  well-known  kindness  of  heart.  The  eccentricity
of  bis  life,  too,  had  a  wonderful  efiect  in  procuring  him  the
respect,  not  to  say  the  awe,  of  a  people  superstitious  in  a
more  than  ordinary  degree.  Ghosts  in  those  days  had  more
freedom  accorded  them,  or  had  more  business  with  the  visible


254        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  etc.

world  than  at  present ;  and  the  parson  was  frequently  re-
quired by  his  parishioners  to  draw  from  the  uneasy  spirit
the  dread  secret  which  troubled  it,  or  by  the  aid  of  the  solemn
prayers  of  the  church  to  set  it  at  rest  for  ever.  Mr  Dodge
had  a  fame  as  an  exorcist,  which  was  not  confined  to  the
bounds  of  his  parish,  nor  limited  to  the  age  in  which  he
lived.

"Well,  my  good  man,  what  brings  you  hither?"  said  the
clergyman  to  the  messenger.

"A  letter,  may  it  please  your  reverence,  from  Mr  Mills  of
Lanreath,"  said  the  countryman,  handing  him  a  letter.

Mr  Dodge  opened  it  and  read  as  follows  : —

"  My  dear  brother  Dodge, — I  have  ventured  to  trouble  you,  at  the
earnest  request  of  my  parishioners,  with  a  matter,  of  which  some  particih
lars  have  doubtless  reached  you,  and  which  has  caused,  and  is  cansiii^
much  terror  in  my  neighbourhood.  For  its  fuller  explication,  I  will  be  lo
tedious  as  to  recount  to  you  the  whole  of  this  strange  story  as  it  has
reached  my  ears,  for  as  yet  I  have  not  satisfied  my  eyes  of  its  truth.  It
has  been  told  me  by  men  of  honest  and  good  report,  (witnesses  of  a  portion
of  what  they  relate,)  with  such  strong  assurances,  that  it  behoves  us  to  look
more  closely  into  the  matter.  There  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  this  village
a  barren  bit  of  moor  which  had  no  owner,  or  rather  more  than  one,  for
the  lords  of  the  adjoining  manors  debated  its  ownership  between  them-
selves, and  both  determined  to  take  it  from  the  poor,  who  have  for  many
years  past  regarded  it  as  a  common.  And  truly,  it  is  little  to  the  credit  of
these  gentlemen,  that  they  should  strive  for  a  thing  so  worthless  as  scarce
to  bear  the  cost  of  law,  and  yet  of  no  mean  value  to  poor  labouring  people.
The  two  litigants,  however,  contested  it  with  as  much  violence  as  if  it  had
been  a  field  of  great  price,  and  especially  one,  an  old  man,  (whose  thoughts
should  have  been  less  set  on  earthly  possessions,  which  he  was  soon  to
leave,)  had  so  set  his  heart  on  the  success  of  his  suit,  that  the  lo^s  of  it,  a
few  years  back,  is  said  to  have  much  hastened  his  deith.  Nor,  indeed,
after  death,  if  current  reports  are  worthy  of  credit,  does  he  quit  his  claim
to  it ;  for  at  night-time  his  apparition  is  seen  on  the  moor,  to  the  great  terror
of  the  neighbouring  villagers.  A  public  path  leads  by  at  no  great  distance
from  the  spot,  and  on  divers  occasions  has  the  labourer,  returning  from  his
work,  been  frightened  nigh  unto  lunacy  by  sight  and  sounds  of  a  very
dreadful  character.  The  appearance  is  said  to  be  that  of  a  man  habited  in
black,  driving  a  carriage  drawn  by  headless  horses.     This  is,  I  avow,  very


The  Spectral  Coach.  255

mmireUons  to  believe^  but  it  has  had  so  much  credible  testimony,  and  has
gained  so  many  believers  in  my  parish,  that  some  steps  seem  necessary  to
•Day  the  excitement  it  causes.  I  have  been  applied  to  for  this  purpose,
and  my  present  business  is  to  ask  your  assistance  in  this  matter,  either  to
reMSore  the  minds  of  the  country  people  if  it  be  only  a  simple  terror ;  or,
if  there  be  truth  in  it,  to  set  the  troubled  spirit  of  the  man  at  rest  My
messenger,  who  Is  an  industrious^  trustworthy  man,  will  give  you  more
mfonnation  if  it  be  needed,  for,  from  report,  he  is  acquainted  with  most
of  the  circumstances,  and  will  bring  back  your  advice  and  promise  of  as-
nstanoe.

"Not  doubting  of  your  help  herein,  I  do  with  my  very  hearty  com-
mendation commit  you  to  God's  protection  and  blessing,  and  am,

**  Your  very  loving  brother,
'VAbbaham  Mills."


This  remarkable  note  was  read  and  re-read,  while  the
countryman  sat  watching  its  effects  on  the  parson's  coun-
tenance, and  was  surprised  that  it  changed  not  from  its
usual  sedate  and  settled  character.  Turning  at  length  to
the  man,  Mr  Dodge  inquired,  "Are  you,  then,  acquainted
with  my  good  friend  Mills  ? "

"  I  should  know  him,  sir,"  replied  the  messenger,  "  having
been  sexton  to  the  parish  for  fourteen  years,  and  being,  with
my  family,  much  beholden  to  the  kindness  of  the  rector."

**  You  are  also  not  without  some  knowledge  of  the  circum-
stances related  in  this  letter.  Have  you  been  an  eye-witness
to  any  of  those  strange  sights  ?  "

•*  For  myself,  sir,  I  have  been  on  the  road  at  all  hours  of
the  night  and  day,  and  never  did  I  see  anything  which  I
could  call  worse  than  myself.  One  night  my  wife  and  I
were  awoke  by  the  rattle  of  wheels,  which  was  also  heard
by  some  of  our  neighbours,  and  we  are  all  assured  that  it
could  have  been  no  other  than  the  black  coach.  We  have
every  day  such  stories  told  in  the  villages  by  so  many  credit-
able persons,  that  it  would  not  be  proper  in  a  plain,  ignorant
man  like  me  to  doubt  it."


^36        Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres ,  etc.

"And  how  &r,'*  asked  the  clergyman,  ''is  the  moor  from
Lanreath?"

"About  two  miles,  and  please  your  reverence.  The  whole
parish  is  so  frightened,  that  few  will  venture  &r  after  night-
fall, for  it  has  of  late  come  much  nearer  the  village.  A  man
who  is  esteemed  a  sensible  and  pious  man  by  many,  though
^tV  fti^  Anabaptist  in  principle,  went  a  few  weeks  back  to  the
moor  ('tis  called  Blackadon)  at  midnight,  in  order  to  lay  the
spirit,  being  requested  thereto  by  his  neighbours,  and  he  was
so  alarmed  at  what  he  saw,  that  he  hath  been  somewhat
mazed  ever  since:"

"A  fitting  punishment  for  his  presumption,  if  it  hath  not
quite  demented  him,"  said  the  parson.  "  These  persons  are
like  those  addressed  by  St  Chrysostom,  fitly  called  the
golden-mouthed,  who  said,  '  Miserable  wretches  that  ye  be !
ye  cannot  expel  a  flea,  much  less  a  devil ! '  It  will  be  well
if  it  serves  no  other  purpose  but  to  bring  back  these  stray
sheep  to  the  fold  of  the  Church.  So  this  story  has  gained
much  belief  in  the  parish  ? "

''  Most  believe  it,  sir,  as.  rightly  they  should,  what  hath  so
many  witnesses,"  said  the  sexton,  "though  there  be  some,
chiefly  young  men,  who  set  up  for  being  wiser  than  their
fathers,  and  refuse  to  credit  it,  though  it  be  sworn  to  on  the
book."'

"  If  those  things  are  disbelieved,  friend,"  said  the  parson,
"and  without  inquiry,  which  your  disbeliever  is  ever  the
first  to  shrink  from,  of  what  worth  is  human  testimony  1
That  ghosts  have  returned  to  the  earth,  either  for  the  dis-
covery of  murder,  or  to  make  restitution  for  other  injustice
committed  in  the  flesh,  or  compelled  thereto  by  the  incanta-
tions of  sorcery,  or  to  communicate  tidings  from  another
world,  has  been  testified  to  in  all  ages,  and  many  are  the
accounts  which  have  been  left  us  both  in  sacred  and  profane


The  Spectral  Coach.  257

authors.  Did  not  Brutus,  when  in  Asia,  as  is  related  by
Plutarch,  see  "

Just  at  this  moment  the  parson*s  handmaid  announced  that
a  person  waited  on  him  in  the  kitchen, — or  the  good  clergy-
man would  probably  have  detailed  all  those  cases  in  history,
general  and  biblical,  with  which  his  reading  had  acquainted
him,  not  much,  we  fear,  to  the  edification  and  comfort  of
the  sexton,  who  had  to  return  to  Lanreath,  a  long  and  dreary
road,  after  nightfalL  So,  instead,  he  directed  the  girl  to
take  him  with  her,  and  give  him  such  refreshment  as  he
needed,  and  in  the  meanwhile  he  prepared  a  note  in  answer
to  Mr  Mills,  informing  him  that  on  the  morrow  he  was  to
visit  some  sick  persons  in  his  parish,  but  that  on  the  follow-
ing evening  he  should  be  ready  to  proceed  with  him  to  the
moor.

On  the  night  appointed  the  two  clergymen  left  the  Lan-
reath rectory  on  horseback,  and  reached  the  moor  at  eleven
o'clock.  Bleak  and  dismal  did  it  look  by  day,  but  then
there  was  the  distant  landscape  dotted  over  with  pretty
homesteads  to  relieve  its  desolation.  Now,  nothing  was  seen
but  the  black  patch  of  sterile  moor  on  which  they  stood,
nothing  heard  but  the  wind  as  it  swept  in  gusts  across  the
bare  hill,  and  howled  dismally  through  a  stunted  grove  of
trees  that  grew  in  a  glen  below  them,  except  the  occasional
baying  of  dogs  from  the  farmhouses  in  the  distance.  That
they  felt  at  ease,  is  more  than  could  be  expected  of  them  ;
bat  as  it  would  have  shewn  a  lack  of  faith  in  the  protection
of  Heaven,  which  it  would  have  been  imseemly  in  men  of
their  holy  caUmg  to  exhibit,  they  managed  to  conceal  from
eadi  other  their  uneasiness.  Leading  their  horses,  they  trod
to  and  fro  through  the  damp  fern  and  heath  with  firmness
in  their  steps,  and  upheld  each  other  by  remarks  on  the
power  of  that  Great  Being  whose  ministers  they  were,  and


258       Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  eU.

the  might  of  whose  name  they  were  there  to  make  maniftBt
Still  slowly  and  dismally  passed  the  time  as  they  Gonvened,
and  anon  stopped  to  look  through  the  darkness  fixr  the  ap-
proach of  their  ghostly  visitor.  In  vain.  Though  thenii^
was  as  dark  and  murk^  as  ghost  could  wiah,  tfae  ceaob
and  its  driver  came  not.

After  a  considerable  stay,  the  two  deigymai  eonsnUed
together,  and  determined  that  it  was  useless  to  watch  any
longer  for  that  night,  but  that  they  wonld  meet  on
other,  when  perhaps  it  might  "J^lease  his  ghostship  to  1
Accordingly,  with  a  few  words  of  leaye-taking,  they  1
ated,  Mr  Mills  for  the  rectory,  wd  Mr  Dodg^  by  a  ahoifrzids
across  the  moor,  which  shortened  his  jonmejr  by  half  a  mik^
for  the  vicarage  at  Talland.

The  vicar  rode  on  at  an  ambling  pac^  which  his  good
mare  sustained  np  hill  and  down  vale  without  urging.  Aft
the  bottom  of  a  deep  valley,  however,  about  a  mile  from
Blackadon,  the  animal  became  very  uneasy,  pricked  up  h«r
ears,  snorted,  and  moved  from  side  to  side  of  the  road,  as  if
something  stood  iq  the  path  before  her.  The  parson  tight-
ened the  reins,  and  applied  whip  and  spur  to  her  sides,  but
the  animal,  usually  docile,  became  very  unruly,  made  several
attempts  to  turn,  and,  when  prevented,  threw  herself  upon
her  haunches.  Whip  and  spur  were  applied  again  and  agam,
to  no  other  purpose  than  to  add  to  the  horse's  terror.  To
the  rider  nothing  was  apparent  which  could  account  for  llie
sudden  restiveness  of  his  beast.  He  dismounted,  and  at-
tempted in  turns  to  lead  or  drag  her,  but  both  were  imprac-
ticable, and  attended  with  no  small  risk  of  snapping  the
reins.  She  was  remounted  with  great  difiSculiy,  and  another
attempt  was  made  to  urge  her  forward,  with  the  like  want  of
success.  At  length  the  eccentric  clergyman,  judging  it  to  be
some  special  signal  from  Heaven,  which  it  would  be  dangerous


The  Spectral  Coach.  259

to  neglect,  threw  the  reins  on  the  neck  of  his  steed,  which,
wheeling  suddenly  round,  started  backward  in  a  direction
towards  the  moor,  at  a  pace  which  rendered  the  parson's  seat
neither  a  pleasant  nor  a  safe  one.  In  an  astonishingly  short
space  of  time  they  were  once  more  at  Blackadon.

By  this  time  the  bare  outline  of  the  moor  was  broken  by
a  large  black  group  of  objects,  which  the  darkness  of  the
night  prevented  the  parson  from  defining.  On  approaching
this  unaccountable  appearance,  the  mare  was  seized  with
fresh  fury,  and  it  was  with  considerable  diflSculty  that  she
eoold  be  brought  to  face  this  new  cause  of  fright.  In  the
pauses  of  the  horse's  prancing,  the  vicar  discovered  to  his
horror  the  much-dreaded  spectacle  of  the  black  coach  and
the  headless  steeds,  and,  terrible  to  relate,  his  friend  Mr
Mills  lying  prostrate  on  the  ground  before  the  sable  driver.
Little  time  was  left  him  to  call  up  his  courage  for  this  fearful
emergency ;  for  just  as  the  vicar  began  to  give  utterance  to
the  earnest  prayers  which  struggled  to  his  lips,  the  spectre
shouted,  "Dodge  is  come!  I  must  begone!"  and  forthwith
leaped  into  his  chariot,  and  disappeared  across  the  moor.

The  fury  of  the  mare  now  subsided,  and  Mr  Dodge  was
enabled  to  approach  his  friend,  who  was  lying  motionless
and  speechless,  with  his  face  buried  in  the  heather.

Meanwhile  the  rector's  horse,  which  had  taken  fright  at
the  apparition,  and  had  thrown  his  rider  to  the  ground  on
or  near  the  spot  where  we  have  left  him  lying,  made  home-
ward at  a  furious  speed,  and  stopped  not  until  he  had
reached  his  stable  door.  The  sound  of  his  hoofs  as  he  gal-
loped madly  tj^rough  the  village  awoke  the  cottagers,  many
of  whom  had  been  some  hours  in  their  beds.  Many  eager
faces,  staring  with  aflfright,  gathered  round  the  rectory,  and
added,  by  their  various  conjectures,  to  the  terror  and  appre-
hensioDS  of  the  family.


26o        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  etc.

The  villagers,  gathering  conrage  as  their  numbers  in-
creased, agreed  to  go  in  search  of  the  missing  clergyman,
and  started  off  in  a  compact  body,  a  few  on  horseback,  but
the  greater  number  on  foot,  in  the  direction  of  Blackadon.
There  they  discovered  their  rector,  supported  in  the  arms  of
Parson  Dodge,  and  recovered  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  speak.
Still  there  was  a  wildness  in  his  eye,  and  an  incoherency  in
his  speech,  that  shewed  that  his  reason  was,  at  least,  tempo-
rarily unsettled  by  the  fright.  In  this  condition  he  was
taken  to  his  home,  followed  by  his  reverend  companion.

Here  ended  this  strange  adventure ;  for  Mr  Mills  soon
completely  regained  his  reason.  Parson  Dodge  got  safely
back  to  Talland,  and  from  that  time  to  this  nothing  has  been
heard  or  seen  of  the  black  ghost  or  his  chariot*

SIE  FRANCIS  DRAKE  AND  HIS  DEMON.

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE— who  appears  to  have  been
especially  befriended  by  his  demon — is  said  to  drive  at
niglit  a  black  hearse  drawn  by  headless  horses,  and  urged  on
by  running  devils  and  yelping,  headless  dogs,  through  Jump,
on  the  road  from  Tavistock  to  Plymouth.

♦  The  Parson  Dodge,  whose  adventure  is  related,  was  vicar  of  Talland
from  1713  till  his  death.  So  that  the  name  as  well  as  the  story  is  true  to
tradition.  Bond  ("  History  of  East  and  West  Love  ")  says  of  him  :  **  About
a  century  since  the  Rev.  Richard  Dodge  was  vicar  of  this  pariah  of  Tal-
land, and  was,  by  traditionary  account,  a  very  singular  man.  He  had  the
reputation  of  being  deeply  skilled  in  the  black  art,  and  would  raise  ghosts,
or  send  them  into  the  Dead  Sea,  at  the  nod  of  his  head.  The  common
people,  not  only  in  his  own  parish,  but  throughout  the  neighbourhood,
stood  in  the  greatest  awe  of  him,  and  to  meet  him  on  the  highway  at  mid-
night produced  the  utmost  horror ;  he  waa  then  driving  about  the  evil
spirits ;  many  t)f  them  were  seen,  in  all  sorts  of  shapes,  flying  and  running
before  him,  and  ho  pursuing  them  with  his  whip  in  a  most  daring  manner.
Not  unfroquontly  he  would  be  seen  in  the  churchyard  at  dead  of  night
to  the  terror  of  passers-by.  He  was  a  worthy  man,  and  much  respected,
but  had  his  eccentricities."


Sir  Francis  Drake  and  his  Demon.        26 1

Sir  Francis,  according  to  tradition,  was  enabled  to  destroy
the  Spanish  armada  by  the  aid  of  the  devil  The  old  admiral
went  to  Devil's  Point,  a  well-known  promontory  jutting  into
Plymouth  Sound.  He  there  cut  pieces  of  wood  into  the
water,  and  by  the  power  of  magic  and  the  assistance  of  his
demon  these  became  at  once  well-armed  gunboats.

The  Queen,  Elizabeth,  gave  Sir  Francis  Drake,  Buckland
Abbey;  and  on  every  hand  we  hear  of  Drake  and  his
familiars.

An  extensive  building  attached  to  the  abbey — which  was
no  doubt  used  as  bams  and  stables  after  the  place  had  been
deprived  of  its  religious  character — ^was  said  to  have  been
built  by  the  devil  in  three  nights.  After  the  first  night,  the
butler,  astonished  at  the  work  done,  resolved  to  watch  and
see  how  it  was  performed.  Consequently,  on  the  second
night,  he  mounted  into  a  large  tree,  and  hid  himself  between
the  forks  of  its  five  branches.  At  midnight  the  devil  came,
driving  several  teams  of  oxen  ;  and  as  some  of  them  were
lazy,  he  plucked  this  tree  from  the  ground  and  used  it  as  a
goad.  The  poor  butler  lost  his  senses,  and  never  recovered
them.

Dral^e  constructed  the  Channel,  carrying  the  waters  from
Dartmoor  to  Plymouth.  Tradition  says  he  went  with  his
demon  to  Dartmoor,  walked  into  Plymouth,  and  the  waters
followed  him.*  Even  now, — as  old  Betty  Donithorne,  for-
merly the  housekeeper  at  Buckland  Abbey,  told  me, — ^if  the
warrior  hears  the  drum  which  hangs  in  the  hall  of  the
abbey,  and  which  accompanied  him  round  the  world,  he
rises  and  has  a  revel

Some  few  years  since  a  small  box  was  found  in  a  closet

•  "  Here  Sir  Francis  Drake  first  extended  the  point  of  that  liquid  line
wherewith  (as  an  emulator  of  the  sunnes  glorie)  he  encompassed  the  world."
— Tkt  Survey  of  Comtcallf  Carew,


262        Romances  of  Demons  y  Spectres ^  etc.

which  had  been  long  closed,  containing,  it  is  supposed,  family
papers.  This  was  to  be  sent  to  the  residence  of  the  in-
heritor of  this  property.  The  carri^e  was  at  the  abbey
door,  and  a  man  easily  lifted  the  box  into  it  The  owner
having  taken  his  seat,  the  coachman  attempted  to  start  his
horses,  but  in  vain.  They  would  not — ^they  could  not  move.
More  horses  were  brought,  and  then  the  heavy  farm-horses,
and  eventually  all  the  oxen.  They  were  powerless  to  start
the  carriage.  At  length  a  mysterious  voice  was  heard,  de-
claring that  the  box  could  never  be  moved  from  Bnckland
Abbey.  It  was  taken  from  the  carriage  easily  by  one  man,
and  a  pair  of  horses  galloped  off  with  the  carriage.


N


THE  PAESON  AND  CLERK.

EAR  Dawlish  stand,  out  in  the  sea,  two  rocks,  of  Eed
Sandstone  conglomerate,  to  which  the  above  name  is


Seeing  that  this  forms  a  part  of  Old  Cornwall,  I  do  not
go  beyond  my  limits  in  telling  the  true  story  of  these
singular  rocks.

The  Bishop  of  Exeter  was  sick  unto  death  at  Dawlisb.
An  ambitious  priest,  from  the  East,  frequently  rode  with  his
clerk  to  make  anxious  inquiries  after  the  condition  of  the
dying  bishop.  It  is  whispered  that  this  priest  had  great
hopes  of  occupying  the  bishop's  throne  in  Exeter  Cathedral

The  clerk  was  usually  the  priest's  guide ;  but  somehow
or  other,  on  a  particularly  stormy  night,  he  lost  the  road,
and  they  were  wandering  over  Haldon.  Excessively  angry
was  the  priest,  and  very  provoking  was  the  clerk.  He  led
his  master  this  way  and  that  way,  but  they  were  yet  upon
the  elevated  country  of  Haldon.

At  length  the  priest,  in  a  great  rage,  exclaimed,  "  I  would


The  Parson  and  Clerk.  263

rather  have  the  devil  for  a  guide  than  you."  Presently  the
clatter  of  horse's  hoofs  were  heard,  and  a  peasant,  on  a  moor
pony  rode  up.  The  priest  told  of  his  condition,  and  the
peasant  volunteered  to  guide  them.  On  rode  peasant,  priest,
and  derk,  and  presently  they  were  at  Dawlish.  The  night
was  tempestuous,  the  ride  had  quickened  the  appetite  of  the
priest,  and  he  was  wet  through, — therefore,  when  his  friend
asked  him  to  supper,  as  they  approached  an  old  ruined  house,
through  the  windows  of  which  bright  lights  were  shining,
there  was  no  hesitation  in  accepting  the  invitation.

There  were  a  host  of  friends  gathered  together — a  strange,
wild-looking  lot  of  men.  But  as  the  tables  were  laden  with
substantial  dishes,  and  black-jacks  were  standing  thick
around,  the  parson,  and  the  clerk  too,  soon  made  friends
with  aU.

They  ate  and  drank,  and  became  most  irreligiously  up-
roarious. The  parson  sang  hunting  songs,  and  songs  in
praise  of  a  certain  old  gentleman,  with  whom  a  priest  should
not  have  maintained  any  acquaintance.  These  were  very
highly  appreciated,  and  every  man  joined  loudly  in  the
choruses.  Night  wore  away,  and  at  last  news  was  brought
that  the  bishop  was  dead.  This  appeared  to  rouse  up  the
parson,  who  was  only  too  eager  to  get  the  first  intelligent,
and  go  to  work  to  secure  the  hope  of  his  ambition. '  So
master  and  man  mounted  their  horses,  and  bade  adieu  to
their  hilarious  friends.

They  were  yet  at  the  door  of  the  mansion — somehow  oir
other  the  horses  did  not  appear  disposed  to  move.  They
were  whipped  and  spurred,  but  to  no  purpose.

**  The  devil 's  in  the  horses,"  said  the  priest

"  I  b'lieve  he  is,"  said  the  clerk.

**  Devil  or  no  devil,  they  shall  go,"  said  the  parson,  cutting
his  horse  madly  with  his  heavy  whip.


264        Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres,  etc.

There  was  a  roar  of  unearthly  laughter*

The  priest  looked  round — his  drinking  friends  were  all
turned  into  demons,  wild  with  glee,  and  the  peasant  guide
was  an  arch  little  devil,  looking  on  with  a  marvellously
curious  twinkle  in  his  eyes.  The  noise  of  waters  was  around
them ;  and  now  the  priest  discovered  that  the  mansion  had
disappeared,  and  that  waves  beat  heavy  upon  his  horse's
flanks,  and  rushed  over  the  smaller  horse  of  his  man.

Eepentance  was  too  late.

In  the  morning  following  this  stormy  niglit,  two  horses
were  found  straying  on  the  sands  at  Dawlish ;  and  clingmg
with  the  grasp  of  death  to  two  rocks,  were  found  the  parson
and  the  clerk.  There  stand  the  rocks,  to  which  the  devfl
had  given  the  forms  of  horses — an  enduring  monument  to
all  generations.


THE  HAUNTED  WIDOWER.

ALABOUEING  MAN,  very  shortly  after  his  wife's
death,  sent  to  a  servant  girl,  living  at  the  time,  in  a
small  shipping  port,  requesting  her  to  come  to  the  inn  to
him.  The  girl  went,  and  over  a  "ha'  pint"  she  agreed  to
accept  him  as  her  husband.

All  went  on  pleasantly  enough  for  a  time.  One  evening
the  man  met  the  girl.  He  was  silent  for  some  time  and
sorrowful,  but  at  length  he  told  her,  his  wife  had  come  back.

"What  do'st  mean ?"  asked  the  girl ;  "have  'e  seen  hur?"

"  Naw,  I  han't  seed  her."

"Why,  how  do'st  knaw  it  is  her  then?"

The  poor  man  explained  to  her,  that  at  night,  when  in
bed,  she  would  come  to  the  side  of  it,  and  "flop"  his  face;
and  there  was  no  mistaking  her  "flop."


The  Spectre  Bridegroom.  265

"  So  you  knawed  her  flop,  did  'e  ?"  asked  the  girL

"  Ay,  it  couldn't  be  mistook."

"  If  she  do  hunt  thee,"  said  the  girl,  "  she  '11  hunt  me ;
and  if  she  do  flop  'e,  she'll  flop  me, — so  it  must  be  off
atween  us."

The  unfortunate  flop  of  the  dead  wife  prevented  the  man
from  securing  a  living  one.


THE  SPECTRE  BRIDEGROOM.

LONG,  long  ago  a  farmer  named  Lenine  lived  in  Boscean.
He  had  but  one  son,  Frank  Lenine,  who  was  indulged
into  waywardness  by  both  his  parents.  In  addition  to  the
fann  servants,  there  was  one,  a  young  girl,  Nancy  Trenoweth,
who  especially  assisted  Mrs  Lenine  in  all  the  various  duties
of  a  small  farmhouse.

Nancy  Trenoweth  was  very  pretty^  and  although  perfectly
uneducated,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  now  employ  the  term
education,  she  possessed  many  native  graces,  and  she  had
acquired  much  knowledge,  really  useful  to  one  whose  aspira-
tions would  probably  never  rise  higher  than  to  be  mistress
of  a  farm  of  a  few  acres.  Educated  by  parents  who  had
certainly  never  seen  the  world  beyond  Penzance,  her  ideas
of  the  world  were  limited  to  a  few  miles  around  the  Land's-
End.  But  although  her  book  of  nature  was  a  small  one,  it
had  deeply  impressed  her  mind  with  its  influences.  The
wild  waste,  the  small  but  fertile  valley,  the  rugged  hills,  with
their  crowns  of  cairns,  the  moors  rich  in  the  golden  furze
and  the  purple  heath,  the  sea-beaten  cliffs  and  the  silver
sands,  were  the  pages  she  had  studied,  under  the  guid-
ance of  a  mother  who  conceived,  in  the  sublimity  of  her
ignorance,  that  everything  in  nature  was  the  home  of  some
spirit  form*      The  soul  of  the  girl  was  imbued  with  the


266        Romances  of  Demons y  Spectres^  etc.

deeply  religious  dye  of  her  mother's  mind,  whose  religion
was  only  a  sense  of  an  unknown  world  immediately  beyond
our  own.  The  elder  Nancy  Trenoweth,  exerted  over  the
villagers  around  her  considerable  power.  They  did  not
exactly  fear  her.  She  was  was  too  free  from  evil  for  that;
but  they  were  conscious  of  a  mental  superiority,  and  yielded
without  complaining  to  her  sway.

The  result  of  this  was,  that  the  younger  Nancy,  although
compelled  to  service,  always  exhibited  some  pride,  from  a
feeling  that  her  mother  was  a  superior  woman  to  any  around
her.

She  never  felt  herself  inferior  to  her  master  atid  mistress,
yet  she  complained  not  of  being  in  subjection  to  them.
There  were  so  many  interesting  features  in  the  character  of
this  young  servant  girl  that  she  became  in  many  respects
like  a  daughter  to  her  mistress.  There  was  no  broad  line  of
division  in  those  days,  in  even  the  manorial  hall,  between
the  lord  and  his  domestics,  and  still  less  defined  was  the
position  of  the  employer  and  the  employed  in  a  small  farm-
house. Consequent  on  this  condition  of  things,  Frank
Lenine  and  Nancy  were  thrown  as  much  together  as  if  they
had  been  brother  and  sister.  Frank  was  rarely  checked  in
anything  by  his  over-fond  parents,  who  were  especially  proud
of  their  son,  since  he  was  regarded  as  the  handsomest  young
man  in  the  parish.  Frank  conceived  a  very  warm  attach-
ment for  Nancy,  and  she  was  not  a  little  proud  of  her  lover.
Although  it  was  evident  to  all  the  parish  that  Frank  and
Nancy  were  seriously  devoted  to  each  other,  the  young
man's  parents  were  blind  to  it,  and  were  taken  by  surprise
when  one  day  Frank  asked  his  father  and  mother  to  consent
to  his  marrying  Nancy.

The  Lenines  had  allowed  their  son  to  have  his  own  way
from  his  youth  up ;  and  now,  in  a  matter  which  brought


The  Spectre  Bridegroom.  267

into  play  the  strongest  of  human  feelings,  they  were  angry
because  he  refused  to  bend  to  their  wills.

The  old  man  felt  it  would  be  a  degradation  for  a  Lenine
to  marry  a  Trenoweth,  and,  in  the  most  unreasoning'manner,
he  resolved  it  should  never  be.

The  first  act  was  to  send  Nancy  home  to  Alsia  Mill,  where
her  parents  resided ;  the  next  was  an  imperious  command  to
his  son  never  again  to  see  the  girl

The  commands  of  the  old  are  generally  powerless  upon
the  young  where  the  affairs  of  the  heart  are  concerned.  So
were  they  upon  Frank  He  who  was  rarely  seen  of  an  even-
ing beyond  the  garden  of  his  father's  cottage,  was  now  as
constantly  absent  from  his  home.  The  house,  which  was
wont  to  be  a  pleasant  one,  was  strangely  altered.  A  gloom
had  fallen  over  all  things  ;  the  father  and  son  rarely  met  as
friends — the  mother  and  her  boy  had  now  a  feeling  of  re-
serve. Often  there  were  angry  altercations  between  the
&ther  and  son,  and  the  mother  felt  she  could  not  become
the  defender  of  her  boy,  in  his  open  acts  of  disobedience,
his  bold  defiance  of  his  parents'  commands.

Barely  an  evening  passed  that  did  not  find  Nancy  and
Frank  together  in  some  retired  nook.  The  Holy  Well  was
a  &vourite  meeting-place,  and  here  the  most  solemn  vows
were  made.  Locks  of  hair  were  exchanged;  a  wedding-
ring,'  taken  from  the  finger  of  a  corpse,  was  broken,  when
they  vowed  that  they  would  be  united  either  dead  or  alive ;
and  they  even  climbed  at  night  the  granite-pile  at  Treryn,
and  swore  by  the  Logan  Rock  the  same  strong  vow.

Time  passed  onward  thus  unhappily,  and  as  the  result  of
the  endeavours  to  quench  out  the  passion  by  force,  it  grew
stronger  under  the  repressing  power,  and,  like  imprisoned
steam,  eventually  burst  through  all  restraint.

Nancy's  parents  discovered  at  length  that  moonlight  meet-


268       Romances  ofDemons^  Spectres,  etc.

ings  between  two  untrained,  impnlsiye  youths,  had  a  natmal
result^  and  they  were  now  doubly  earnest  in  their  endeavoms
to  compel  Frank  to  many  thdr  dangbter.

The  elder  Lenine  could  not  be  brought  to  consent  to  fUii^
and  he  firmly  resolved  to  remove  his  son  entirely  from  what
he  considered  the  hateful  influences  of  the  Trenowetha  He
resolved  to  go  to  Plymouth,  to  take  his  son  with  him,  and,  if
possibly  to  send  him  away  to  sea^  hoping  thus  to  wean  him
from  his  folly,  as  he  considered  this  love-madness.  FKanli^
poor  fellow,  with  the  best  intentions,  was  not  eapaUe  of  any
sustained  effort,  and  consequently  he  at  length  succnmbed
to  his  father ;  and,  to  escape  his  persecution,  he  entend  a
ship  bound  for  India,  and  bade  adieu  to  his  native  land.
.  Frank  could  not  write,  and  this  happened  in  days  iHieft
letters  could  be  forwarded  only  with  extreme  difficulty,  eon-
sequently  Nancy  never  heard  &om  her  lover.

A  babe  had  been  bom  into  a  troublesome  world,  and  the
infant  became  a  real  solace  to  the  young  mother.  As  the
child  grew,  it  became  an  especial  favourite  with  its  grand-
mother; the  elder  Nancy  rejoiced  over  the  little  prattler,  and
forgot  her  cause  of  sorrow.  Young  Nancy  lived  for  her  child,
and  on  the  memory  of  its  father.  Subdued  in  spirit  she  was,
but  her  aflaiction  had  given  force  to  her  character,  and  she
had  been  heard  to  declare  that  wherever  Frank  might  be,
she  was  ever  present  with  him,  whatever  might  be  the
temptations  of  the  hour,  that  her  influence  was  all  powerful
over  him  for  good.  She  felt  that  no  distance  could  separate
their  souls,  that  no  time  could  be  long  enough  to  destroy  the
bond  between  them.

A  period  of  distress  fell  upon  the  Trenoweths,  and  it  was
necessary  that  Nancy  should  leave  her  home  once  more,  and
go  again  into  service.  Her  mother  took  charge  of  the  bab^
and  she  found  a  situation  in  the  village  of  Elmyall,  in  the


The  Spectre  Bridegroom.  269

parish  of  Paul.  Nancy,  like  her  mother,  contrived  by  force
of  character  to  maintain  an  ascendancy  amongst  her  com-
panions. She  had  formed  an  acquaintance,  which  certainly
never  grew  into  friendship,  with  some  of  the  daughters  of
the  small  farmers  around.  These  girls  were  all  full  of  the
superstitions  of  the  time  and  place.

The  winter  was  coming  on,  and  nearly  three  years  had
passed  away  since  Frank  Lenine  left  his  country.  As  yet
there  was  no  sign.  Nor  father,  nor  mother,  nor  maiden  had
heard  of  him,  and  they  all  sorrowed  over  his  absence.  The
Lenines  desired  to  have  Nancy's  child,  but  the  Trenoweths
would  not  part  with  it.  They  went  so  far  even  as  to  en-
deavour to  persuade  Nancy  to  live  again  with  them,  but
Nancy  was  not  at  all  disposed  to  submit  to  their  wishes.

It  was  Allhallows'-eve,  and  two  of  Nancy's  companions
persuaded  her, — no  very  difficult  task, — to  go  with  them  and
sow  hemp-seed.

At  midnight  the  three  maidens  stole  out  unperceived  into
Eimyall  town-place  to  perform  their  incantation.  Nancy
was  the  first  to  sow,  the  others  being  less  bold  than  she.

Boldly  she  advanced,  saying,  as  she  scattered  the  seed, —

*'  Hemp -seed  I  sow  thee.
Hemp-seed  grow  thee ;
And  he  who  wiU  my  true  love  be,
Come  after  me
And  shaw  thee.'*

This  was  repeated  three  times,  when,  looking  back  over
her  left  shoulder,  she  saw  Lenine ;  but  he  looked  so  angry  that
she  shrieked  with  fear,  and  broke  the  spell.  One  of  the
other  girls,  however,  resolved  now  to  make  trial  of  the  spell,
and  the  result  of  her  labours  was  the  vision  of  a  white  coffin.
Fear  now  fell  on  all,  and  they  went  home  sorrowful,  to  spend,
each  one,  a  sleepness  night.


2  70        Romances  of  Demons y  Spectres,  etc.

November  came  with  its  storms,  and  during  one  terrific
night  a  large  vessel  was  thrown  upon  the  rocks  in  Bemow-
hall  Cliff,  and,  beaten  by  the  impetuous  waves,  she  was  soon
in  pieces.  Amongst  the  bodies  of  the  crew  washed  ashore,
nearly  all  of  whom  had  perished,  was  Frank  Lenine.  He
was  not  dead  when  found,  but  the  only  words  he  lived  to
speak  were  begging  the  people  to  send  for  Nancy  Trenoweth,
that  he  might  make  her  his  wife  before  he  died.

Kapidly  sinking,  Frank  was  borne  by  his  friends  on  a
litter  to  Boscean,  but  he  died  as  he  reached  the  town-place.
His  parents,  overwhelmed  in  their  own  sorrows,  thought
nothing  of  Nancy,  and  without  her  knowing  that  Lenine  had
returned,  the  poor  fellow  was  laid  in  his  last  bed,  in  Burian
Churchyard.

On  the  night  of  the  funeral,  Nancy  went,  as  was  her
custom,  to  lock  the  door  of  the  house,  and  as  was  her
custom  too,  she  looked  out  into  the  night  At  this  instant  a
horseman  rode  up  in  hot  haste,  called  her  by  name,  and
hailed  her  in  a  voice  that  made  her  blooi  boiL

The  voice  was  the  voice  of  Lenine.  She  could  never
forget  that ;  and  the  horse  she  now  saw  was  her  sweetheart's
favourite  colt,  on  which  he  had  often  ridden  at  night  to  Alsia.

The  rider  was  imperfectly  seen ;  but  he  looked  very  sorrow-
ful, and  deathly  pale,  still  Nancy  knew  him  to  be  Frank
Lenine.

He  told  her  that  he  had  just  arrived  home,  and  that  the
first  moment  he  was  at  liberty  he  had  taken  horse  to  fetch
his  loved  one,  and  to  make  her  his  bride.

Nancy's  excitement  was  so  great,  that  she  was  easily  per-
suaded to  spring  on  the  horse  behind  him,  that  they  might
reach  his  home  before  the  morning.

When  she  took  Lenine's  hand  a  cold  shiver  passed  through
her,  and  as  she  grasped  his  waist  to  secure  herself  in  her


The  Spectre  Bridegroom.  271

seat,  her  ann  became  as  stiff  as  ice.  She  lost  all  power  of
speech,  and  suffered  deep  fear,  yet  she  knew  not  why.  The
moon  had  arisen,  and  now  burst  out  in  a  full  flood  of  light,
through  the  heavy  clouds  which  had  obscured  it.  The  horse
pursued  its  journey  with  great  rapidity,  and  whenever  in
weariness  it  slackened  its  speed,  the  peculiar  voice  of  the
rider  aroused  its  drooping  energies.  Beyond  this  no  word
was  spoken  since  Nancy  had  mounted  behind  her  lover.
They  now  came  to  Trove  Bottom,  where  there  was  no  bridge
at  that  time ;  they  dashed  into  the  river.  The  moon  shone
full  in  their  faces.  Nancy  looked  into  the  stream,  and  saw
that  the  rider  was  in  a  shroud  and  other  grave-clothes.  She
now  knew  that  she  was  being  carried  away  by  a  spirit,  yet
she  had  no  power  to  save  herself ;  indeed,  the  inclination  to
do  so  did  not  exist

On  went  the  horse  at  a  furious  pace,  until  they  came  to
the  blacksmith's  shop,  near  Burian  Church-town,  when  she
knew  by  the  light  from  the  forge  fire  thrown  across  the  road
that  the  smith  was  still  at  his  labours.  She  now  recovered
speech.  "  Save  me  !  save  me  !  save  me ! "  she  cried  with  all
her  might  The  smith  sprang  from  the  door  of  the  smithy,
with  a  red-hot  iron  in  his  hand,  and  as  the  horse  rushed  by,
caught  the  woman's  dress,  and  pulled  her  to  the  ground.
The  spirit,  however,  also  seized  Nancy's  dress  in  one  hand,
and  his  grasp  was  like  that  of  a  vice.  The  horse  passed  like
the  wind,  and  Nancy  and  the  smith  were  pulled  down  as  far
as  the  old  Alms-houses,  near  the  churchyard.  Here  the
horse  for  a  moment  stopped.  The  smith  seized  that  moment,
and  with  his  hot  iron  burned  off  the  dress  from  the  rider's
hand,  thus  saving  Nancy,  more  dead  than  alive  \  while  the
rider  passed  over  the  wall  of  the  churchyard,  and  vanished
on  the  grave  in  which  Len^e  had  been  laid  but  a  few  hours
be^ora


272        Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres,  etc.

The  smith  took  Nancy  into  his  shop,  and  he  soon  aroused
some  of  his  neighbours,  who  took  the  poor  girl  back  to
Alsia.  Her  parents  laid  her  on  her  bed.  She  spoke  no
word,  but  to  ask  for  her  child,  to  request  her  mother  to  give
up  her  child  to  Lenine*s  parents,  and  her  desire  to  be  buried
in  his  grave.  Before  the  morning  light  fell  on  the  world
Nancy  had  breathed  her  last  breath.

A  horse  was  seen  that  night  to  pass  through  the  Churcli-
town  like  a  ball  from  a  musket,  and  in  the  morning  Lenine's
colt  was  found  dead  in  Bemowhall  Cliff,  covered  with  foam,
its  eyes  forced  from  its  head,  and  its  swollen  tongue  hanging
out  of  its  mouth.  On  Lenine's  grave  was  found  the  piece  of
Nancy's  dress  which  was  left  in  the  spirit's  hand  when  the
smith  burnt  her  from  his  grasp.

It  is  said  that  one  or  two  of  the  sailors  who  survived  the
wreck  related  after  the  funeral,  how,  on  the  30th  of  October,
at  night,  Lenine  was  like  one  mad ;  they  could  scarcely  keep
him  in  the  ship.  He  seemed  more  asleep  than  awake,  and,
after  great  excitement,  he  fell  as  if  dead  upon  the  deck,  and
lay  so  for  hours.  When  he  came  to  himself,  he  told  them
that  he  had  been  taken  to  the  village  of  Kimyall,  and  that
if  he  ever  married  the  woman  who  had  cast  the  spell,  he
would  make  her  suffer  the  longest  day  she  had  to  live  for
drawing  his  soul  out  of  his  body.

Poor  Nancy  was  buried  in  Lenine's  grave,  and  her  com-
panion in  sowing  hemp-seed,  who  saw  the  white  cofl^,  slept
beside  her  within  the  year.

This  story  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  the  "  Lenore "
of  Burger,  which  remarkable  ballad  can  scarcely  have  found
its  way,  even  yet,  to  Boscean.


Duffy  and  the  Devil.  273

DUFFY  AND  THE  DEVIL.*

MANY  of  the  superstitions  of  our  ancestors  are  preserved
in  quaint,  irregular  rhymes,  the  recitation  of  which  was
the  amusement  of  the  people  in  the  long  nights  of  winter.
These  were  sung,  or  rather  said,  in  a  monotone,  by  the  pro-
fessional Drolls,  who  doubtless  added  such  things  as  they
fancied  would  increase  the  interest  of  the  story  to  the  listeners.
Especially  were  they  fond  of  introducing  known  characters
on  the  scene,  and  of  mixing  up  events  which  had  occurred
within  the  memory  of  the  old  people,  with  the  more  ancient
legend.  The  following  story,  or  rather  parts  of  it,  formed
the  subject  of  one  of  the  Cornish  Christmas  plays.  When  I
was  a  boy,  I  well  remember  being  much  delighted  with  the
coarse  acting  of  a  set  of  Christmas  players,  who  exhibited  in
the  "  great  hall "  of  a  farmhouse  at  which  I  was  visiting,  and
who  gave  us  the  principal  incidents  of  Dufiy  and  the  Devil
Terrytop ;  one  of  the  company  doing  the  part  of  Chorus,  and
filling  up  by  rude  descriptions — often  in  rhyme — the  parts
which  the  players  could  not  represent.

It  was  in  cider-making  time.  Squire  Level  of  Trove,  or,
more  correctly,  Trewoof,  rode  up  to  Burian  Church-town  to

•  The  incidents  of  thia  aiory  are  strikingly  similar  to  those  in  "  Rumpel-
$tUzcken."  The  maiden  in  that  tale  has  to  spin  straw  into  gold  thread,  and
•he,  like  Duffy,  has  to  discover  the  name  of  the  spirit  who  has  befriended  her.

Mr  Robert  Chambers,  in  his  ''Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,"  has  a
faiiy  tale  in  which  the  fairy  threatens  the  mother  that  she  will  have  her
"  lad  bairn"  unless  "ye  can  tell  me  my  right  name."  The  anxious  mother
takes  a  walk  in  the  wood,  and  she  hears  the  fairy  singing —

"  Little  kens  our  gude  dame  at  hame
That  *  Wbuppity  Stoorie'  ia  my  name."*

Of  course,  when  the  fairy  comes  to  claim  the  ''  lad  bairn,"  she  is  addressed
as  "  Whuppity  Stoorie,"  and  she  at  once  disappears.

In  "Who  Built  Reynir  Church?'*  in  the  "Icelandic  Legends**  of  J^ojT
Amaaon,  the  story  turns  on  the  discovery  of  the  name  of  the  builder. —
"  Icelandic  Legends,"  p.  49.

IstSxbies.  S


2  74        Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres,  etc.

procure  help.  Boys  and  maidens  were  in  request,  some  to
gather  the  apples  from  the  trees,  others  to  carry  them  to  the
cider-milL  Passing  along  the  village  as  hastily  as  the
dignity  of  a  squire  would  allow  him,  his  attention  was
drawn  to  a  great  noise — scolding  in  a  shrill  treble  voice,  and
crying — proceeding  from  Janey  Chygwin's  door.  The  squire
rode  up  to  the  cottage,  and  he  saw  the  old  woman  beatmg
her  step-daughter  Duffy  about  the  head  with  the  skirt  of  her
swing-tail  gown,  in  which  she  had  been  carrying  out  the
ashes.  She  made  such  a  dust,  that  the  squire  was  nearly
choked  and  almost  blinded  with  the  wood  ashes.

"What  cheer,  Janey?"  cries  the  squire;  "what's  the  to-
do  with  you  and  Duffy?"

"  Oh,  the  lazy  hussy ! "  shouts  Janey,  "  is  all  her  time  cour-
seying  and  courranting  with  the  boys  I  she  will  never  stayitt
to  boil  the  porridge,  knit  the  stockings,  or  spin  the  yam."

"Don't  believe  her,  your  honour,"  exclaims  Dufl^;  "my
knitting  and  spinning  is  the  best  in  the  parish."

The  war  of  tongues  continued  in  this  strain  for  some
time,  the  old  squire  looking  calmly  on,  and  resolving  in  his
mind  to  take  Duffy  home  with  him  to  Trove,  her  appearance
evidently  pleasing  him  greatly.  Squire  Lovel  left  the  old
and  young  woman  to  do  the  best  they  could,  and  went  round
the  village  to  complete  his  hiring.  When  he  returned,  peace
had  been  declared  between  them  ;  but  when  Lovel  expressed
his  desire  to  take  Duffy  home  to  his  house  to  help  the  house-
keeper to  do  the  spinning,  "A  pretty  spinner  she  is!"
shouted  old  Janey  at  the  top  of  her  voice.  "  Try  me,  your
honour,"  said  Duffy,  curtsying  very  low ;  "  my  yarns  are  the
best  in  the  parish."

"  We  11  soon  try  that,"  said  the  squire ;  "  Janey  will  be
glad  to  get  quits  of  thee,  I  see,  and  thou  It  be  nothing  loth
to  leave  her ;  so  jump  up  behind  me,  Duflfy."


Duffy  and  the  Devil.  275

No  sooner  said  than  done.  The  maid  Duffy,  without
ceremony,  mounted  behind  the  squire  on  the  horse,  and  they
jogged  silently  down  to  Trove.

Squire  Lovel's  old  housekeeper  was  almost  blind — one
eye  had  been  put  out  by  an  angry  old  wizard,  and  through
sympathy  she  was  rapidly  losing  the  power  of  seeing  with
the  other.

This  old  dame  was  consequently  very  glad  of  some  one
to  help  her  in  spinning  and  knitting.

The  introduction  over,  the  housekeeper  takes  Duflfy  up
into  the  garret  where  the  wool  was  kept,  and  where  the
spinning  was  done  in  the  summer,  and  requests  her  to  com-
mence her  work.

The  truth  must  be  told ;  Duflfy  was  an  idle  slut,  she  could
^either  knit  nor  spin.  Well,  here  she  was  left  alone,  and,
of  course,  expected  to  produce  a  good  specimen  of  her  work.

The  garret  was  piled  from  the  floor  to  the  key-beams  with
fleeces  of  wool.  Duflfy  looked  despairingly  at  them,  and
then  sat  herself  down  on  the  "  turn  " — the  spinning-wheel —
and  cried  out,

**  Curse  the  spinning  and  knitting  !  The  devil  may  spin
md  knit  for  the  squire  for  what  I  care."

Scarcely  had  Dufiy  spoken  these  words  than  she  heard  a
nutling  noise  behind  some  woolpacks,  and  forth  walked  a
jueer-looking  little  man,  with  a  remarkable  pair  of  eyes,
irhich  seemed  to  send  out  flashes  of  light.  There  was  some-
khing.  uncommonly  knowing  in  the  twist  of  his  mouth,  and
bis  curved  nose  had  an  air  of  curious  intelligence.  He  was
dressed  in  black,  and  moved  towards  Duffy  with  a  jaimty  air,
knocking  something  against  the  floor  at  every  step 'he  took.

"  Duffy  dear,**  said  this  little  gentleman,  "  I  '11  do  all  the
Sfonning  and  knitting  for  thee."

**  Thank  'e/*  says  Duffy,  quite  astonished.


276       Romances  o/Denums^  Spectres,  etc.

'' Dnffir  dear,  a  lady  shall  70a  be.''

<<  Thank  'e,  your  honour,"  smiled  Dnfff.

''But,  Du%  dear,  remember/  coaxing)^  said  the  queer
litde  man, — "^  remember — ^that  for  allUiKftt  the  end  of  three
years,  you  must  go  with  me,  unless  you  can  find  out  ay
nama"

Ihdfy  was  not  the  least  bit  fri^tened,  nor  did  she  heflh
tate  bng,  but  presently  struck  a  baxgain  with  her  kind  Inft
unknown  friend,  who  told  her  she  had  only  to  wish,  and  liir
every  wish  should  be  fulfilled ;  and  as  for  the  spinning  sad
knitting,  she  would  find  all  she  required  under  the  Uaek
ram's  fleece.  #        .  «

He  then  departed.  How,  Ihdfy  could  not  teU,  but  in  a
moment  the  queer  little  gentlenian  was  gon&

Dufi^  sung  in  idleness,  and  slept  xmtil  it  was  time  for  kr
to  make  her  appearance.  So  she  wished  for  «;Kme  yani%  anA
looking  under  the  black  fleece  she  found  them.      ^

Those  were  shewn  by  the  housekeeper  to  the  squire^  and
both  declared  "  they  had  never  seen  such  beautiful  yams."

The  next  day  Duffy  was  to  knit  this  yam  into  stockings.
Duffy  idled,  as  only  professed  idlers  can  idle ;  but  in  due
time,  as  if  she  had  been. excessively  industrious,  she  produced
a  pair  of  stockings  for  the  old  squiiu

If  the  yam  was  beautiful,  the  stockings  were  beyond  all
praise.     They  were  as  fine  as  silk,  and  as  strong  as  leather.

Squire  Lovel  soon  gave  them  a  trial ;  and  when  he  came
home  at  night  after  hunting,  he  declared  he  would  never
wear  any  other  than  Duffy's  stockings.  He  had  wandered
all  day  through  brake  and  briar,  furze  and  brambles,  there
was  not  a  scratch  on  his  legs,  and  he  was  as  dry  as  a  bone.
There  was  no  end  to  his  praise  of  Duffy's  stockings,

Dufiy  had  a  rare  time  of  it  now — she  coiild  do  what  she
pleased,  and  rove  where  she  willed.


Duffy  and  the  Devil,  277

She  was  dancing  on  the  mill-bed  half  the  day,  with  all
the  gossiping  women  who  brought  their  grist  to  be  ground.

In  those  "  good  old  times  "  the  ladies  of  the  parish  would
take  their  com  to  mill,  and  serge  the  flour  themselves.
When  a  few  of  them  met  together,  they  would  either  tell
stories^  or  dance  whilst  the  com  was  grinding.  Sometimes
the  dance  would  be  on  the  mill-bed,  sometimes  out  on  the
green.  On  some  occasions  the  miller's  fiddle  would  be  in
request,  at  others  the  "  crowd  "  *  was  made  to  do  the  duty  of
a  tambourine.

So  Dufiy  was  always  finding  excuses  to  go  to  mill,  and
many  "a  round"  would  she  dance  with  the  best  people  in
the  parish.

Old  Bet,  the  miller's  wife,  was  a  witch,  and  she  found  out
who  did  Dufiy's  work  for  her.  Dufiy  and  old  Bet  were
always  the  best  of  friends,  and  she  never  told  any  one  about
Duff's  knitting  friend,  nor  did  she  ever  say  a  word  about
the  stockings  being  unfinished.  There  was  always  a  stitch
dawn.

On  Sundays  the  people  went  to  Burian  Church,  from  all
parts^  to  look  at  the  squire's  stockings  ;  and  the  old  squire
would  stop  at  the  Cross,  proud  enough  to  shew  them.  He
could  hunt

**  Through  brambles  and  furze  in  aU  sorts  of  weather ;
His  old  shanks  were  as  sound  as  if  bound  up  in  leather."

Dufiy  was  now  sought  after  by  all  the  young  men  of  the
country ;  and  at  last  the  squire,  fearing  to  lose  a  pretty  girl,
and  one  who  was  so  useful  to  him,  married  her  himself,  and
she  became,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  time  and  place.
Lady  Lovel ;  but  she  was  commonly  known  by  her  neigh-
boor^  as  the  Dufiy  Lady.

•  Crowd, — a  sieve  covered  with  sheep-skin.


ayS       Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres^  etc.

laAj  Lovd  kept  the  devil  haid  at  work.  Stoc^rngs,  all
sorts  of  fine  underclothing,  bedding,  and  much  omamentd
work,  the  like  of  which  was  never  seen,  was  produced  at
command,  and  passed  off  as  her  own.

Daf^  passed  a  meny  tune  of  it,  but  somehow  or  otiier
she  was  never  happy  when  she  was  compelled  to  play  the
lady.  She  passed  much  more  of  her  time  with  the  old  crone
at  the  mill  than  in  the  drawing-room  at  Trove.  The  sqime
sported  and  drank,  and  cared  little  about  Dxdfy,  so  long  a^
she  provided  him  with  knitted  garments.

The  three  years  were  nearly  at  an  end.  I>u%  had  trkd
every  plan  to  find  out  the  devil's  name,  but  had  failed  in
all

She  began  to  fear  that  she  should  have  to  go  off  with  her
queer  friend,  and  Dufi^  became  melancholy.  Old. Bet  en-
deavoured to  rouse  her,  persuading  her  that  she  could,  km
her  long  experience,  and  many  dealings  with  the  imps  of
darkness,  at  the  last  moment  put  her  in  the  way  of  escaping
her  doom.

Duffy  went  day  after  day  to  her  garret,  and  there  each  day
was  the  devil  gibing  and  jeering  till  she  was  almost  mad

There  was  but  another  day.  Bet  was  seriously  consulted
now,  and,  as  good  as  her  word,  she  promised  to  use  her
power.

Duffy  Lady  was  to  bring  down  to  the  mill  that  very  even-
ing a  jack  of  the  strongest  beer  she  had  in  the  cellar.  She
was  not  to  go  to  bed  until  the  squire  returned  from  hunting,
no  matter  how  late,  and  she  was  to  make  no  remark  in  reply
to  anything  the  squire  might  tell  her.

The  jack  of  beer  was  duly  carried  to  the  mill,  and  DvSj
returned  home  very  melancholy  to  wait  up  for  the  squire.

No  sooner  had  Lady  Level  left  the  mill  than  old  Bet
came  out  with  the  "crowd"  over  her  shoulders,  and  the


Duffy  and  the  Devil.  2  79

blackjack  in  her  hand.  She  shut  the  door,  and  turned  the
water  oflF  the  mill-wheel, — threw  her  red  cloak  about  her,
and  away.

She  was  seen  by  her  neighbours  going  towards  Boleit.  A
man  saw  the  old  woman  trudging  past  the  Pipers,  and
through  the  Dawnse  Main  into  the  downSj  but  there  he  lost
sight  of  her,  and  no  one  could  tell  where  old  Bet  was  gone
to  at  that  time  0'  night.

Duffy  waited  long  and  anxiously.  By  and  by  the  dogs
came  home  alone.  They  were  covered  with  foam,  their
tongues-  were  hanging  out  of  their  mouths,  and  all  the
servants  said  they  must  have  met  the  devil's  hounds  with-
out heads.

Duflfy  was  seriously  alarmed.  Midnight  came  but  no
squire.  At  last  he  arrived,  but  like  a  crazy,  crack-brained
man,  he  kept  singing,

"  Here  *8  to  the  devil,
With  his  wooden  pick  and  shovel."

He  was  neither  drunk  nor  frightened,  but  wild  with  some
strange  excitement  After  a  long  time  Squire  Lovel  sat
down,  and  began,  "  My  dear  Duffy,  you  haven't  smiled  this
long  time ;  but  now  1 11  tell  *e  something  that  would  make
ye  laugh  if  ye  're  dying.  If  you  'd  seen  what  I  've  seen  to-
night, ha,  ha,  ha!

"  Here  *8  to  the  devil,
With  his  wooden  pick  and  shovel."

True  to  her  orders,  Duffy  said  not  a  word,  but  allowed  the
squire  to  ramble  on  as  he  pleased.  At  length  he  told  her
the  following  story  of  his  adventures,  with  interruptions
which  have  not  been  retained,  and  with  numerous  coarse
expressions  which  are  best  forgotten : —


28o        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  etc.

THE  squire's  story  OP  THE  MEETING  OP  THE  WITCHES
IN  THE  FUGOE  HOLE.

"  DuflPy  dear,  I  left  home  at  break  of  day  this  morning.
I  hunted  all  the  moors  from  Trove  to  Trevider,  and  never
started  a  hare  all  the  livelong  day.     I  determined  to  hunt
all  night,  but  that  I  'd  have  a  brace  to  bring  home.     So,  at
nightfall  I  went  down  Lemoma  Bottoms,  then  up  Brene
Downses,  and  as  we  passed  the  Dawnse  Main  up  started  a
hare,  as  fine  a  hare  as  ever  was  seen.     She  passed  the  Pipers,
down  through  the  Keens,  in  the  mouth  of  the  dogs  half  the
time,  yet  they  couldn't  catch  her  at  alL    As  fine  a  chase  as
ever  was  seen,  until  she  took  into  the  Fugoe  Hole.*  In  went
the  dogs  after  her,  and  I  followed,  the  owl»  and  bats  flying
round  my  head.     On  we  went,  through  water  and  mud,  a
mile  or  more,  I  'm  quite  certain.     I  didn't  know  the  place
was  so  long  before.     At  last  we  came  to  a  broad  pool  of
water,  when  the  dogs  lost  the  scent,  and  ran  back  past  me
howling  and  jowling,  terrified  almost  to  death !     A  little
further  on  I  turned  round  a  corner,  and  saw  a  glimmering
fire  on  the  other  side  the  water,  and  there  were  St  Leven
witches  in  scores.     Some  were  riding  on  ragwort,  some  on
brooms,  some  were  floating  on  their  three-legged  stools,  and
some,  who  had  been  milking  the  little  good  cows  in  Wales,

*  There  is  a  tradition  firmly  believed  on  the  lower  side  of  Burian,  that
the  Fugoe  Hole  extends  from  the  cliffs  under  ground  so  far  that  the  end  of
it  is  under  the  parlour  of  the  Tremewen's  house  in  Trove,  which  is  the
only  remaining  portion  of  the  old  mansion  of  the  Lovels.

Here  the  witches  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting  the  devil,  and  holding
thdir  Sabbath.  Often  his  dark  highness  has  been  heard  piping,  while  the
witches  danced  to  his  music.

A  pool  of  water  some  distance  from  the  entrance  prevents  any  adven-
turer from  exploring  the  "  Hole  "  to  its  termination.

Hares  often  take  refuge  in  the  Fugoe  Hole,  from  which  they  have  never
been  known  to  return.


Duffy  and  the  Devil.  281

had  come  back  astride  of  the  largest  leeks  they  could  find.
Amongst  the  rest  there  was  our  Bet  of  the  Mill,  with  her
•  crowd'  in  her  hand,  and  my  own  blackjack  slung  across
her  shoulders.

"  In  a  short  time  the  witches  gathered  round  the  fire,  and
blowed  it  up,  after  a  strange  fashion,  till  it  burned  up  into  a
brilliant  blue  flame.  Then  I  saw  amongst  the  rest  a  queer
little  man  in  black,  with  a  long  forked  tail,  which  he  held
high  in  the  air  and  twirled  around.  Bet  struck  her  'crowd'
as  soon  as  he  appeared,  and  beat  up  the  tune,

*  Here  'b  to  the  devil,
With  his  wooden  pick  and  shovel.
Digging  tin  by  the  bushel.
With  his  tail  cock'd  up  ! '

Then  the  queer  little  devil  and  all  danced  like  the  wind,  and
went  faster  and  faster,  making  such  a  clatter,  *  as  if  they
had  on  each  foot  a  pewter  platter.'

"  Every  time  the  man  in  black  came  round  by  old  Bet,  he
took  a  good  pull  from  my  own  blackjack,  till  at  last,  as  if
he  had  been  drinking  my  best  beer,  he  seemed  to  have  lost
his  head,  when  he  jumped  up  and  down,  turned  round  and
Toond,  and  roaring  with  laughter,  sung,

*  Duffy,  my  lady,  you  'U  never  know — what  ? —
That  my  name  is  Terrytop,  Terrytop — top  1  * "

When  the  squire  sung  those  lines,  he  stopped  suddenly,
thinking  that  Dufiy  was  going  to  die.  She  turned  pale  and
red,  and  pale  again.  However,  Duffy  said  nothing,  and  the
squire  proceeded : —

"  After  the  dance,  all  the  witches  made  a  ring  around  the

fire,  and  again  blew  it  up,  until  the  blue  flames  reached  the  top

*  of  the  '  Zawn.*  *  Then  the  devil  danced  through  and  through

the  fire,  and  springing  ever  and  anon  amongst  the  witches,

*  ZaMcn — a  cayernous  gorge.


282        Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres y  etc.

kicked  them  soundly.  At  last — ^I  was  shaking  with  laughter
at  the  fun — I  shouted,  *GrO  it,  Old  Nick!'  and,  lo,  the  lights
went  out,  and  I  had  to  fly  with  all  my  speed,  for  every  one  of
the  witches  were  after  me.  I  scampered  home  somehow,  and
here  I  am.  Why  don't  you  laugh,  Duflfy  ? "  Duflfy  did  laugh,
and  laugh  right  heartily  now,  and  when  tired  of  their  fun,
the  squire  and  the  lady  went  to  bed.

The  three  years  were  up  within  an  hour.  Duffy  had  willed
for  an  abundant  supply  of  knitted  things,  and  filled  every
chest  in  the  house.  She  was  in  the  best  chamber  trying  to
cram  some  more  stockings  into  a  big  chest,  when  the  queer
little  man  in  black  appeared  before  her.

"Well,  Duffy,  my  dear,^'  said  he,  "I  have  been  to  my
word,  and  served  you  truly  for  three  years  as  we  agreed,  so
now  I  hope  you  will  go  with  me,  and  make  no  objection."
He  bowed  very  obsequiously,  almost  to  the  ground,  and  re-
garded Duffy  Lady  with  a  very  offensive  leer.

"  I  fear,"  smiled  Duffy,  *'  that  your  country  is  rather  warm,
and  might  spoil  my  fair  complexion."

"  It  is  not  so  hot  as  some  people  say,  Duffy,"  was  his
reply;  "  but  come  along,  I  've  kept  my  word,  and  of  course
a  lady  of  your  standing  will  keep  your  word  also.  Can  you
tell  me  my  name  ?  "

Duffy  curtsied,  and  smilingly  said,  "  You  have  behaved
like  a  true  gentleman  ;  yet  I  wouldn't  like  to  go  so  far."
The  devil  frowned,  and  approached  as  if  he  would  lay  forcible
hands  upon  her.     "  Maybe  your  name  is  Lucifer  ? "

He  stamped  his  foot  and  grinned  horridly.  "Lucifer!
Lucifer  !  He  's  no  other  than  a  servant  to  me  in  my  own
country."  Suddenly  calming  again,  he  said,  quietly,  "  Luci-
fer !  I  would  scarcely  be  seen  speaking  to  him  at  court.
But  come  along.  When  I  spin  for  ladies  I  expect  honour-
able treatment  at  their  hands.      You/ve  two  guesses  more.


Duffy  and  tlie  Devil.  283

But  they  're  of  little  use ;  my  name  is  not  generally  known
on  earth."

"  Perhaps,"  smiled  Duflfy  again,  "  my  lord's  name  is  Beel-
zebub?"

How  he  grinned,  and  his  sides  shook  with  convulsive  joy.
"  Beelzebub  V  says  he;  "  why,  he's  little  better  than  the  other,
a  common  devil  he.  I  believe  he 's  some  sort  of  a  cousin — a
Cornish  cousin,  you  know/'

"I  hope  your  honour,"  curtsied  DuflFy,  "wiU  not  take
oflFence.     Impute  my  mistake  to  ignorance/'

Our  Demon  was  rampant  with  joy ;  he  danced  around
Duflfy"  with  delight,  and  was,  seeing  that  she  hesitated,  about
to  seize  her  somewhat  roughly.

"  Stop !  stop !"  shouts  Duffy;  "perhaps  you  will  be  honest
enough  to  admit  that  your  name  is  Terrytop  ? "

The  gentleman  in  black  looked  at  Duflfy,  and  she  steadily
looked  him  in  the  face.  "  Terrytop  !  deny  it  if  you  dare/'
says  she.

"  A  gentleman  never  denies  his  name,"  replied  Terrytop,
drawing  himself  up  with  much  dignity.  "  I  did  not  expect
to  be  beaten  by  a  young  minx  like  you,  Duffy;  but  the  plea-
sure of  your  company  is  merely  postponed."  With  this
Terrytop  departed  in  fire  and  smoke,  and  all  the  devil's  knit-
ting suddenly  turned  to  ashes.

Squire  Lovel  was  out  hunting,  away  far  on  the  moors;  the
day  was  cold  and  the  winds  piercing.  Suddenly  the  stockings
dropped  from  his  legs  and  the  homespun  from  his  back,  so  that
he  came  home  with  nothing  on  but  his  shirt  and  his  shoes,
almost  dead  with  cold.  All  this  was  attributed  by  the  squire
to  the  influence  of  old  Bet,  who,  he  thought,  had  punished
him  for  pursuing  her  with  his  dogs  when  she  had  assumed
the  form  of  a  hare.

The  story,  as  toliby  the  Drolls,  now  rambles  on.    Duffy


284       Romances  of  Demons y  Spectres y  etc.

cannot  furnish  stockings.  The  squire  is  very  wroth.  There
are  many  quarrels — mutual  recriminations.  Duffy's  old
sweetheart  is  called  in  to  beat  the  squire,  and  eventually
peace  is  procured,  by  a  stratagem  of  old  Bet's,  which  would
rather  shock  the  sense  of  propriety  in  these  our  days.


THE  LOVERS  OP  PORTHANGWAETHA.*

THE  names  of  the  youth  and  maiden  who  fixed  the  term
of  the  Lover's  Cove  upon  this  retired  spot  have  passed
from  the  memory  of  man.  A  simple  story  however  remains,
the  mere  fragment,  without  doubt,  of  a  longer  and  more
ancient  tale.

The  course  of  love  with  this  humble  pair  did  not  run
smooth.  On  one  side  or  the  other  the  parents  were  de-
cidedly opposed  to  the  intimacy  which  existed,  and,  by  their
persecutions,  they  so  far  succeeded,  that  the  young  man  was
compelled  to  emigrate  to  some  far  distant  land.

In  this  cove  the  lovers  met  for  the  last  time  in  life,  and
vowed  under  the  light  of  the  full  moon,  that  living  or  dead
they  would  meet  at  the  end  of  three  years.

The  young  woman  remained  with  her  friends — the  young
man  went  to  the  Indies.  Time  passed  on,  and  the  three
years,  which  had  been  years  of  melancholy  to  both,  were
expiring.

One  moonlight  night,  when  the  sea  was  tranquil  as  a
mirror,  an  old  crone  sat  on  the  edge  of  the  cliff  "  making  her
charms."  She  saw  a  figure — she  was  sure  it  was  a  spirit,
very  like  the  village  maiden — descend  into  the  cove,  and  seat
herself  upon  a  rock,  around  two-thirds  of  which  the  light
waves  were  rippling.  On  this  rock  sat  the  maiden,  looking
anxiously  out  over  the  sea,  until,  from  the  rising  of  the  tide,
*  This  is  said  to  mean  The  Lover's  Cove.


The  Lovers  of  Porthangwartha.  285

she  was  completely  surrounded.  The  old  woman  called  but
in  vain ;  the  maiden  was  unconscious  of  any  voice.  Th6re
she  sat,  and  the  tide  was  rising  rapidly  around  her.  The  old
woman,  now  seeing  the  danger  in  which  she  was,  resolved  to
go  down  into  the  cove,  and,  if  possible,  awaken  the  maiden
to  a  sense  of  her  danger.  To  do  this,  it  was  necessary  to  go
round  a  projecting  pile  of  rocks.  While  doing  this,  she  lost
sight  of  the  object  of  her  interest,  and  much  was  her  sur-
prise, when  she  again  saw  the  maiden,  to  perceive  a  young
sailor  by  her  side,  with  his  arm  around  her  waist.  Conceiv-
ing that  help  had  arrived,  the  old  woman  sat  herself  down
on  the  slope  of  the  descending  path,  and  resolved  patiently
to  await  the  arrival  of  the  pair  on  shore,  and  then  to  rate
the  girl  soundly.

She  sat  watching  this  loving  and  lovely  pair,  lighted  as
they  were  on  the  black  rock  by  a  full  flood  of  moonshine.
There  they  sat,  and  the  tide  rose  and  washed  around  them.
Never  were  boy  and  girl  so  mad,  and  at  last  the  terrified  old
woman  shrieked  with  excitement.  Suddenly  they  appeared
to  float  off  upon  the  waters.  She  thought  she  heard  their
voices ;  but  there  was  no  sound  of  terror.  Instead  of  it  a
tranquil  murmuring  music,  like  the  voice  of  doves,  singing,

''  I  am  thine,
Thou  art  mine,

Beyond  control ;
In  the  wave
Be  the  grave
Of  heart  and  soul.'*

Down,  down  into  the  sea  passed  the  lovers.  Awe-struck,
the  old  woman  looked  on,  until,  as  she  said,  "  At  last  they
turned  roimd,  looked  me  full  in  the  face,  smiling  like  angels,
and,  kissing  each  other,  sank  to  rise  no  more."

They  tell  us  that  the  body  of  the  young  woman  was


286         Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  etc.

found  a  day  or  two  after  in  a  neighbouring  cove,  and  that
intelligence  eventually  reached  England  that  the  young  man
had  been  killed  on  this  very  night.


THE  GHOST  OP  ROSEWARNE.

""nZEKIEL  GROSSE,  gent.,  attorney- at -law,''  bought
Xli  the  lands  of  Rosewame  from  one  of  the  De  Rose-
wames,  who  had  become  involved  in  difficulties  by  endea-
vouring, without  sufficient  means,  to  support  the  dignity  of
his  family.  There  is  reason  for  believing  that  Ezekiel  was
the  legal  adviser  of  this  unfortunate  Rosewarne,  and  that  he
was  not  over-honest  in  his  transactions  with  his  client.
However  this  may  be,  Ezekiel  Grosse  had  scarcely  made
Rosewame  his  dwelling-place,  before  he  was  alarmed  by
noises,  at  first  of  an  unearthly  character,  and  subsequently,
one  very  dark  night,  by  the  appearance  of  the  ghost  himself
in  the  form  of  a  worn  and  aged  man.  The  first  appearance
was  in  the  park,  but  he  subsequently  repeated  his  visits  in
the  house,  but  always  after  dark.  Ezekiel  Grosse  was  not  a
man  to  be  terrified  at  trifles,  and  for  some  time  he  paid  but
slight  attention  to  his  nocturnal  visitor.  Howbeit  the  repe-
tition of  visits,  and  certain  mysterious  indications  on  the  part
of  the  spectre,  became  annoying  to  EzekieL  One  night,  when
seated  in  his  office  examining  some  deeds,  and  being  rather
irritable,  having  lost  an  important  suit,  his  visitor  ap-
proached him,  making  some  strange  indications  which  the
lawyer  could  not  understand.  Ezekiel  suddenly  exclaimed,
*'  In  the  name  of  God,  what  wantest  thou?"

"  To  shew  thee,  Ezekiel  Grosse,  where  the  gold  for  which
thou  longest  lies  buried."

No   one  ever  lived  upon  whom  the  greed  of  gold  was
stronger  than  on   Ezekiel,  yet  he  hesitated  now  that  his


The  Ghost  of  Rosewarne.  287

spectral  friend  had  spoken  so  plainly,  and  trembled  in  every
limb  as  the  ghost  slowly  delivered  himself  in  sepulchral
tones  of  this  telling  speech.

The  lawyer  looked  fixedly  on  the  spectre ;  but  he  dared
not  utter  a  word.  He  longed  to  obtain  possession  of  the.
secret,  yet  he  feared  to  ask  him  where  he  was  to  find  this
treasure.  The  spectre  looked  as  fixedly  at  the  poor  trem-
bling lawyer,  as  if  enjoying  the  sight  of  his  terror.  At
length,  lifting  his  finger,  he  beckoned  Ezekiel  to  follow  him,
turning  at  the  same  time  to  leave  the  room.  Ezekiel  was
glued  to  his  seat ;  he  could  not  exert  strength  enough  to
move,  although  he  desired  to  do  so.

"  Come !"  said  the  ghost,  in  a  hollow  voice.  The  lawyer
was  powerless  to  come.

'*  Gtold !"  exclaimed  the  old  mau,  in  a  whining  tone,  though
in  a  louder  key.

*•  Where  ?"  gasped  Ezekiel

"  Follow  me,  and  I  will  shew  thee,"  said  the  ghost.  Eze-
kiel endeavoured  to  rise;  but  it  was  in  vain.

"I  command  thee,  come!"  almost  shrieked  the  ghost.
Ezekiel  felt  that  he  was  compelled  to  follow  his  friend;  and
by  some  supernatural  power  rather  than  his  own,  he  fol-
lowed the  spectre  out  of  the  room,  and  through  the  hall,
into  the  park

They  passed  onward  through  the  night — the  ghost  gliding
before  the  lawyer,  and  guiding  him  by  a  peculiar  phospho-
rescent light,  which  appeared  to  glow  from  every  part  of  the
form,  until  they  arrived  at  a  little  dell,  and  had  reached  a
small  cairn  formed  of  granite  boulders.  By  this  the  spectre
rested ;  and  when  Ezekiel  bad  approached  it,  and  was  stand-
ing on  fce  other  side  of  the  cairn,  still  trembling,  the  aged
man,  looking  fixedly  in  his  face,  said,  in  low  tones,

•*  Ezekiel  Grosse,  thou  longest  for  gold,  as  I  did.    I  won


288         RomanQes  of  Demons,  Spectres^  etc,

the  glittering  prize,  but  I  could  not  enjoy  it  Heaps  of  trea-
sure are  buried  beneath  those  stones ;  it  is  thine,  if  thou
diggest  for  it  Win  the  gold,  EzekieL  Glitter  with  the
wicked  ones  of  the  world;  and  when  thou  art  the  most
joyous,  I  will  look  in  upon  thy  happiness."  The  ghost  then
disappeared,  and  as  soon  as  Grosse  could  recover  himself
from  the  extreme  trepidation, — tte  result  of  mixed  feelings,
— ^he  looked  about  him,  and  finding  himself  alone,  he  ex*
claimed,  "  Ghost  or  devil,  I  will  soon  prove  whether  or  not
thou  liest !"  Ezekiel  is  said  to  have  heard  a  laugh,  echoing
between  the  hills,  as  he  said  those  words.

The  lawyer  noted  well  the  spot ;  returned  to  his  house ;
pondered  on  all  the  circumstances  of  his  case;  and  even-
tually resolved  to  seize  the  earliest  opportunity,  when  he
might  do  so  unobserved,  of  removing  the  stones,  and  exam-
ining the  ground  beneath  them.

A  few  nights  after  this,  Ezekiel  went  to  the  little  cairn,
and  by  the  aid  of  a  crowbar,  he  soon  overturned  the  stones,
and  laid  the  ground  bare.  He  then  commenced  digging,
and  had  not  proceeded  far  when  his  spade  struck  against
some  other  metal.  He  carefully  cleared  away  the  earth,  and
he  then  felt — for  he  could  not  see,  having  no  light  with  him
— that  he  had  uncovered  a  metallic  urn  of  some  kind.  He
found  it  quite  impossible  to  lift  it,  and  he  was  therefore
compelled  to  cover  it  up  again,  and  to  replace  the  stones
sufficiently  to  hide  it  from  the  observation  of  any  chance
wanderer.

The  next  night  Ezekiel  found  that  this  urn,  which  was  of
bronze,  contained  gold  coins  of  a  very  ancient  date.  He
loaded  himself  with  his  treasure,  and  returned  home.  From
time  to  time,  at  night,  as  Ezekiel  found  he  could  do  so  with-
out exciting  the  suspicions  of  his  servants,  he  visited  the
urn,  and  thus  by  degrees  removed  all  the  treasure  to  Kose-


The  Ghost  of  Rosewame.  289

wame  house.  There  was  nothing  in  the  series  of  circum-
stances which  had  surrounded  Ezekiel  which  he  could  less
understand  than  the  fact,  that  the  ghost  of  the  old  man  had
left  oflF  troubling  him  from  the  moment  when  he  had  dis-
closed to  him  the  hiding-place  of  this  treasure.

The  neighbouring  gentry  could  not  but  observe  the  rapid
improvements  which  Ezekiel  Grosse  made  in  his  mansion,
his  grounds,  in  his  personal  appearance,  and  indeed  in  every-
thing by  which  he  was  surrounded.  In  a  short  time  he
abandoned  the  law,  and  led  in  every  respect  the  life  of  a
country  gentlemaa  He  ostentatiously  paraded  his  power  to
procure  all  earthly  enjoyments,  and,  in  spite  of  his  notori-
ously bad  character,  he  succeeded  in  drawing  many  of  the
landed  proprietors  around  him.

Things  went  well  with  Ezekiel.  The  man  who  could  in
those  days  visit  London  in  his  own  carriage  and  four  was
not  without  a  large  circle  of  flatterers.  The  lawyer  who  had
struggled  hard,  in  the  outset  of  life,  to  secure  wealth,  and
who  did  not  always  employ  the  most  honest  means  for  doing
80,  now  found  himself  the  centre  of  a  circle  to  whom  he
could  preach  honesty,  and  receive  from  them  expressions  of
the  admiration  in  which  the  world  holds  the  possessor  of
gold.  His  old  tricks  were  forgotten,  and  he  was  put  in
places  of  honour.  This  state  of  things  continued  for  some
time;  indeed,  Grosse's  entertainments  became  more  and
more  splendid,  and  his  revels  more  and  more  seductive  to
those  he  admitted  to  share  them  with  him.  The  Lord  of
Rosewame  was  the  Lord  of  the  West.  To  him  every  one
bowed  the  knee :  he  walked  the  Earth  as  the  proud  possessor
of  a  large  share  of  the  planet

It  was  Christmas-eve,  and  a  large  gathering  there  was  at
Rosewame.  In  the  hall  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  were  in
the  full  enjoyment  of  the  dance,  and  in  the  kitchen  all  the
18T  Skbies.  T


290        Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres,  etc.

tenantry  and  the  servants  were  emulating  their  superiors.
Ever3rthing  went  joyously;  and  when  mirth  was  in  M
swing,  and  Ezekiel  felt  to  the  full  the  influence  of  wealth,  it
appeared  as  if  in  one  moment  the  chill  of  death  had  falki
over  every  one.  The  dancers  paused,  and  looked  one  at
another,  each  one  struck  with  the  other's  paleness;  and
there,  in  the  middle  of  the  hall,  every  one  saw  a  strange  oM
man  looking  angrily,  but  in  silence,  at  Ezekiel  Qrosse,  who
was  fixed  in  terror,  blank  as  a  statue.

No  one  had  seen  this  old  man  enter  the  hall,  yet  there  he
was  in  the  midst  of  them.  It  was  but  for  a  minute,  and  he
was  gone.  Ezekiel,  as  if  a  frozen  torrent  of  water  had
thawed  in  an  instant,  roared  with  impetuous  laughter.

"  What  do  you  think  of  that  for  a  Christmas  play  ?  There
was  an  old  Father  Christmas  for  you!  Ha,  ha»  ha^  ha!
How  frightened  you  aU  look!  Butler,  order  the  men  to
hand  round  the  spiced  wines !  On  with  the  dancing;  my
friends !  It  was  only  a  trick,  ay,  and  a  clever  one,  which  I
have  put  upon  you.     On  with  your  dancing,  my  friends !"

Notwithstanding  his  boisterous  attempts  to  restore  the
spirit  of  the  evening,  Ezekiel  could  not  succeed.  There  was
an  influence  stronger  than  any  which  he  could  command ;
and  one  by  one,  framing  sundry  excuses,  his  guests  took
their  departure,  every  one  of  them  satisfied  that  all  was  not
right  at  Rosewarne.

From  that  Christmas-eve  Grosse  was  a  changed  man.
He  tried  to  be  bis  former  self ;  but  it  was  in  vain.  Again
and  again  he  called  his  gay  companions  around  hira  ;  -but  at
every  feast  there  appeared  one  more  than  was  desired.  An
aged  man — weird  beyond  measure — took  his  place  at  the
table  in  the  middle  of  the  feast ;  and  although  he  spoke  not,
he  exerted  a  miraculous  power  over  all  No  one  dared  to
move ;   no  one  ventured  to  speak.     Occasionally  Ezekiel


The  Ghost  of  Rosewarne.  291

assumed  an  appearance  of  courage,  whicli  he  felt  not ;  rallied
his  guests,  and  made  sundry  excuses  for  the  presence  of  his
aged  friend,  whom  he  represented  as  having  a  mental  in-
firmity, as  being  deaf  and  dumb.  On  all  such  occasions  the
old  man  rose  from  the  table,  and  looking  at  the  host,  laughed
a  demoniac  laugh  of  joy,  and  departed  as  quietly  as  he  came.

The  natural  consequence  of  this  was  that  Ezekiel  Grosse's
friends  feU  away  from  him,  and  he  became  a  lonely  nian,
amidst  his  vast  possessions — ^his  only  companion  being  his
faitihful  clerk,  John  Call.

The  persecuting  presence  of  the  spectre  became  more  and
more  constant;  and  wherever  the  poor  lawyer  went,  there
was  the  aged  man  at  his  side.  From  being  one  of  the  finest
men  in  the  county,  he  became  a  miserably  attenuated  and
bowed  old  man.  Misery  was  stamped  on  every  feature-
terror  was  indicated  in  every  movement.  At  length  he
appears  to  have  besought  his  ghostly  attendant  to  free  him
of  his  presence.  It  was  long  before -the  ghost  would  listen
to  any  terms;  but  when  Ezekiel  at  length  agreed  to  sur-
render the  whole  of  his  wealth  to  any  one  whom  the  spectre
might  indicate,  he  obtained  a  promise  that  upon  this  being
carried  out,  in  a  perfectly  legal  manner,  in  favour  of  John
Call,  that  he  should  no  longer  be  haunted.

This  was,  after  numerous  struggleS  on  the  part  of  Ezekiel
to  retain  his  property,  or  at  least  some  portion  of  it,  legally
settled,  and  John  Call  became  possessor  of  Bosewame  and
the  adjoining  lands.  Grosse  was  then  informed  that  this  evil
spirit  was  one  of  the  ancestors  of  the  Bosewame,  from  whom
by  his  fraudulent  dealings  he  obtained  the  place,  and  that
he  was  allowed  to  visit  the  earth  again  for  the  purpose  of
inflicting  the  most  condign  punishment  on  the  avaricious
lawyer.  His  avarice  had  been  gratified,  his  pride  had  been
pampered  to  the  highest ;  and  then  he  was  made  a  pitiful


292         Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres,  etc.

spectacle,  at  whom  all  men  pointed,  and  no  one  pitied.  He
lived  on  in  misery,  but  it  was  for  a  short  time.  He  was
found  dead ;  and  the  country  people  ever  said  that  his
death  was  a  violent  one ;  they  spoke  of  marks  on  his  body,
and  some  even  asserted  that  the  spectre  of  De  Rosewame
waa  seen  rejoicing  amidst  a  crowd  of  devils,  as  they  bore
the  spirit  of  Ezekiel  over  Cam  Brea.
Hals  thus  quaintly  tells  this  story : —

"  Roswarne,  in  this  parish,  gave  to  its  owner  the  name  of  De  Roswame,
one  of  which  tribe  sold  those  lands,  temp.  James  I.,  to  Ezekiel  GroBse,
gent.,  attomey-at-law,  who  made  it  his  dwelling,  and  in  this  place  got  a
great  estate  by  the  inferior  practice  of  the  law ;  but  much  more,  as  tradi-
tion saith,  by  means  of  a  spirit  or  apparition  tliat  haunted  him  in  this
place,  till  he  spake  to  it,  (for  it  is  notable  that  sort  of  things  caUed  appari-
tions are  such  proud  gentry,  that  they  never  speak  first ;)  whereupoD  it
discovered  to 'him  where  much  treasure  lay  hid  in  this  mansion,  which,
according  to  the  (honest)  ghost's  direction,  he  found,  to  his  great  enriching.
After  which,  this  phantasm  or  spectrum  became  so  troublesome  and  dire-
ful to  him,  day  and  night,  that  it  forced  him  to  forsake  this  place,  (as  rich,
it  seems,  as  this  devil  could  make  him,)  and  to  quit  his  claim  thereto,  by
giving  or  selling  it  to  his  clerk,  John  Call ;  whose  son,  John  Call,  gent,
sold  it  again  to  Robert  Hooker,  gent.,  attorney-at-law,  now  in  possession
thereof.  The  arms  of  Call  were,  in  a  field  three  trumpets — in  allusion  to
the  name  in  English ;  but  in  Cornish-British,  '  call,'  *  cal,*  signifies  any
hard,  flinty,  or  obdurate  matter  or  thing,  and  *hirgorue*  is  a  trumpet."  *


THE  SUICIDE'S  SPEARMAN.    .

A  FAMILY  of  the  name  of  Spearman  has  lived  in  Corn-
wall for  many  ages,  their  native  centre  having  been
somewhere  between  Ludgven  and  St  Ives.

Years  long  ago,  an  unfortunate  man,  weary  of  life,  de-
stroyed himself  ;  and  the  rude  laws  of  a  remote  age,  carry-
ing out,  as  they  thought,  human  punishments  even  after
death,  decreed  that  the  body  should  be  buried  at  the  four
cross-roads,  and  quicklime  poured  on  the  corpse.

♦  See  Gilbert's  "Parochial  History  of  Cornwall,"  1838,  vol.  i.  p.  162.


The  Suicide 's  Ghost,  293

Superstition  stepped  in,  and  tiomewhat  changed  the  order
of  burial  To  prevent  the  dead  man  irom  "  walking/*  and
becoming  a  terror  to  all  his  neighbours,  the  coflBn  was  to  be
turned  upside  down,  and  a  spear  was  to  be  driven  through
it  and  the  body,  so  as  to  pin  it  to  the  ground.

It  was  with  some  difficulty  that  a  man  could  be  found  to
perform  this  task.  At  length,  however,  a  blacksmith  under-
took it.  He  made  the  spear ;  and  after  the  coffin  was  pro-
perly placed,  he  drove  his  spear-headed  iron  bar  through  it.
From  that  day  he  was  called  "  the  spearman,"  and  his  de-
scendants have  never  lost  the  name.

In  making  a  new  road  not  many  years  smce,  the  coffin
and  spear  were  found,  and  removed.  From  that  time  several
old  men  and  women  have  declared  that  the  self-murderer
"  walks  the  eartL"


THE  SUICIDE'S  GHOST.

ON  the  bleak  road  between  Helston  and  Wendron  Church-
town,  at  its  highest  and  wildest  spot,  three  roads  meel
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  latter  place.  Here,  at
"  Three  Cross,"  as  the  place  is  called,  years  ago,  when  the
Downs  being  unenclosed,  it  was  more  desolate  than  it  is
even  now,  a  poor  suicide,  named  "Tucker,"  was  buried.
Few  liked  to  pass  up  Row's  Lane,  leading  there,  after  night-
fall ;  for  Tucker's  shade  had  more  than  once  been  seen.
One  man,  however,  valiant  in  his  cups,  on  his  return  from
Helston  market,  cracked  his  whip,  and  shouted  lustily,
"  Arise,  Tucker !"  as  he  passed  the  place.  It  is  said  Tucker
did  arise,  and  fixed  himself  on  the  saddle  behind  the  man
as  he  rode  on  horseback,  and  accompanied  him — how  far  it
is  not  said.  This  was  often  repeated,  UDtil  the  spirit,  be-
coming angry,  refused  any  more  to  quit  his  disturber,  and


294        Romances  of  Demons y  Spectres ^  etc.

contmtied  to  trouble  him,  till  "  Parscm  Jago  "  was  called  in
to  use  kis  skill,  which  was  found  effectual,  in  *' laying''
Tucker's  spirit  to  rest.


THE  "HA-AP"  APACE.

JAMES  BERRYMAN  said,  "Fa^ather  took  a  house  doim
to  Lelant,  whear  we  lived  for  a  bra'  bit.  Very  often
after  I  ben  in  bed,  our  ould  cat  wud  tear  up,  coover  its  ars
like  a  nia-aged  thing,  jump  uppon  the  bed,  and  dig  her  ould
hed  under  the  clothes,  as  if  she  wud  git  doun  to  bottom,
and  jest  after,  a  man's  face,  with  a  light  round  im,  wud
cum  in ;  'twas  ha-af  a  face  like,  and  it  wud  stop  at  the
bottom  of  the  bed.  I  Ve  sen  it  many  times ;  and  fii-ather,
though  he  didn't  say  nothin*,  was  glad  enough  to  leave  the
place.  I  was  tould  that  the  house  belonged  to  an  ould  man,
and  that  two  rich  gentlemen,  brothers,  who  lived  close  by,
wanted  the  place,  and  put  on  law,  and  got  the  place  from
the  poor  ould  man.  When  they  war  goin'  to  turn  un  out,
the  poor  fellow  stopped  and  looked  round  crying,  and  then
fell  down  in  a  fit,  was  put  to  bed,  and  died  in  the  house ;
and  'twas  he,  they  said,  that  used  to  come  back."


THE  WARIHNG.

THE  following  instance  is  given  me,  as  from  the  party  to
whom  it  happened,  "  a  respectable  person,  of  undoubted
veracity."  "  When  a  young  man,  fearing  and  caring  for  no
one,  I  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting  Sancreed  from  Penzance,
and  of  returning  in  the  evening.  One  night  I  took  up  my  hat
to  return,  and  went  out  at  the  door.  It  was  a  most  beautiful
night,  when,  without  the  most  remote  assignable  reason,  I  was
seized  in  a  manner  I  never  experienced  either  before  or  since.


Laying  a  Ghost.  295

I  was  absolutely  "  terror-stricken,"  so  that  I  was  compelled-
to  turn  back  to  the  house,  a  thing  I  had  never  done  before,
and  say,  "  I  must  remain  here  for  the  night."  I  could  never
account  for  it ;  and  without  caring  to  be  called  superstitious,
have  regarded  it  as  a  special  interposition  of  Providence.  It
was  reported  that  shortly  before  a  lad,  who  had  driven  home
a  farmer's  daughter  to  her  father's  house  in  the  neighbour-
hood, had  suddenly  been  missed,  and  no  clue  to  his  where-
abouts had  ever  been  found.  About  four  or  six  weeks  after  my
adventure  a  gang  of  sheep-stealers,  who  had  carried  on  their
depradations  for  a  long  time  previous,  were  discovered  in  the
neighbourhood ;  their  abode,  indeed,  adjoined  the  road  from
Sancreed  to  Penzance,  and  I  cannot  help  believing  it  pro-
bable, that  had  I  returned  that  night  I  should  have  encoun-
tered the  gang,  and  perhaps  lost  my  life.  Years  afterwards,
one  of  the  gang  confessed  that  the  boy  had  come  suddenly
upon  them  during  one  of  their  nefarious  expeditions.  He  was
seized,  and  injudiciously  said,  "  Well,  you  .may  get  off  once
or  twice,  but  you  're  sure  to  be  hanged  in  the  end."  "  Thee
shan't  help  to  do  it,"  said  one,  and  the  poor  boy  was  mur*
dered,  and  his  body  thrown  into  a  neighbouring  shaft     '

UYINQ  A  GHOST.

"  rpO  the  ignorance  of  men  in  our  age  in  this  particular
jL  and  mysterious  part  of  philosophy  and  religion, —
namely,  the  communication  between  spirits  and  men, — ^not
one  scholar  out  of  ten  thousand,  though  otherwise  of  excel-
lent learning,  knows  anjrthing  of  it,  or  the  way  how  to
manage  it  This  ignorance  breeds  fear  and  abhorrence  of
that  which  otherwise  might  be  of  incomparable  benefit  to
mankind."

Such  is  the  concluding  paragraph  of  ''  An  Account  of  an


296         Romances  of  Demons^  Spectres^  etc.   •

Apparition,  attested  by  the  Rev.  Wm.  Ruddell,  Minister  at
Launceston,  in  Cornwall,"  1665.

A  schoolboy  was  haunted  by  Dorothy  Dingley,  we  know
not  why,  but  the  boy  pined.  He  was  thought  to  be  in  love;
but  when,  at  the  wishes  of  his  friends,  the  parson  questioned
him,  he  told  him  of  his  ghostly  visitor,  and  he  took  the
parson  to  the  field  in  which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  meeting
the  apparition ;  and  the  reverend  gentleman  himself  saw  the
spectral  Dorothy,  and  afterwards  he  shewed  her  to  the  boy's
father  and  mother.  Then  comes  the  story  of  the  laying.
"The  next  morning  being  Thursday,  I  went  out  very
early  by  myself,  and  walked  for  about  an  hour  s  space  in
meditation  and  prayer  in  the  field  next  adjoining  to  the
Quartiles.  Soon  after  five,  I  stepped  over  the  stile  into  the
disturbed  field,  and  had  not  gone  above  thirty  or  forty  paces
before  the  ghost  appeared  at  the  further  stile.  I  spoke  to  it
with  a  loud  voice,  in  some  such  sentences  as  the  way  of  these
dealings  directed  me ;  whereupon  it  approached,  but  slowly,
and  when  I  came  near  it  it  moved  not.  I  spoke  again,  and
it  answered  again  in  a  voice  which  was  neither  very  audible
nor  intelligible.  I  was  not  the  least  terrified,  therefore  I
persisted  until  it  spake  again,  and  gave  me  satisfaction.  But
the  work  could  not  be  finished  at  this  time ;  wherefore  the
same  evening,  an  hour  after  sunset,  it  met  me  again,  near
the  same  place,  and  after  a  few  words  on  each  side  it  quietly
vanished,  and  neither  doth  appear  since,  nor  ever  will  more,
to  any  man's  disturbance."  *

A  PLYING  SPIRIT.

ABOUT  the  year  1761  a  pinnacle  was  thrown  down,  by
lightning,  from  the  tower  of  the  church  at  Ludgvan.  The

*  "  Historical  Survey  of  Cornwall,''  C.  S.  Gilbert.


The  Execution  and  Wedding.  297

effect  was  then  universally  imputed  to  the  vengeance  of  a
perturbed  spirit,  exorcised  from  Treassow,  and  passing  east-
ward, towards  the  usual  place  of  banishment — the  Red
Sea.

The  following  story  is  given  as  a  remarkable  example  of
the  manner  in  which  very  recent  events  become  connected
with  exceedingly  old  superstitious  ideas.  The  tales  of  Treg-
eagle  have  shewn  us  how  the  name  of  a  man  who  lived
about  two  centuries  since  is  made  to  do  duty  as  a  demon
belonging  to  the  pagan  times.  In  this  story  we  have  the
name  of  a  woman  who  lived  about  the  commencement  of  the
present  century,  associated  with  a  legend  belonging  to  the
earliest  ages.


THE  EXECUTION  AND  WEDDING.  *

A  WOMAN,  who  had  lived  in  Ludgvan,  was  executed  at
Bodmin  for  the  murder  of  her  husband.  There  was
but  little  doubt  that  she  had  been  urged  on  to  the  diabolical
deed  by  a  horse-dealer,  known  as  Yorkshire  Jack,  with  whom,
for  a  long  period,  she  was  generally  supposed  to  have  been
criminally  acquainted.

Now,  it  will  be  remembered 'that  this  really  happened
within  the  present  century.  One  morning,  during  my  re-
sidence in  Penzance,  an  old  woman  from  Ludgvan  called
on  me  with  some  trifling  message.  "While  she  was  waiting
for  my  answer,  I  made  some  ordinary  remark  about  the
weather.

"  It 's  all  owing  to  Sarah  Polgrain,"  said  she.

"  Sarah  Polgrain,"  said  I ;  "  and  who  is  Sarah  Polgrain  ?  **

Then  the  voluble  old  lady  told  me  the  whole  story  of  the


298         Romances  of  Demons,  Spectres,  etc.

poisoning,  with  which  we  need  not,  at  present,  concern  our-
selves. By  and  by  the  tale  grew  especially  interesting,  and
there  I  resume  it.

Sarah  had  begged  that  Yorkshire  Jack  might  accompany
her  to  the  scaffold  when  she  was  led  forth  to  execution.  This
was  granted ;  and  on  the  dreadful  morning,  there  stood  this
unholy  pair,  the  fatal  beam  on  which  the  woman's  body  was
in  a  few  minutes  to  swing,  before  them.

They  kissed  each  other,  and  whispered  words  passed  be-
tween them.

The  executioner  intimated  that  the  moment  of  execution
had  arrived,  and  that  they  must  part.  Sarah  Folgrain,  look-
ing earnestly  into  the  man's  eyes,  said,

"You  will?"

Yorkshire  Jack  replied,  "  I  will ! "  and  they  separated
The  man  retired  amongst  the  crowd,  the  woman  was  soon  a
dead  corpse,  pendulating  in  the  wind.

Years  passed  on,  Yorkshire  Jack  was  never  the  same  man
as  before,  his  whole  bearing  was  altered.  His  bold,  his
dashing  air  deserted  him.  He  walked,  or  rather  wandered,
slowly  about  the  streets  of  the  town,  or  the  lanes  of  the
country.  He  constantly  moved  his  head  from  side  to  side,
looking  first  over  one,  and  then  over  the  other,  shoulder,  as
though  dreading  that  some  one  was  following  him.

The  stout  man  became  thin,  his  ruddy  cheeks  more  pale,
and  his  eyes  sunken.

At  length  he  disappeared,  and  it  was  discovered— for
Yorkshire  Jack  had  made  a  confidant  of  some  Ludgvan
man — that  he  had  pledged  himself,  ''living  or  dead,  to
become  the  husband  of  Sarah  Polgrain,  after  the  lapse  of
years.''

To  escape,  if  possible,  from  himself,  Jack  had  gone  to
sea  in  the  merchant  service.


The  Lugger  of  Croft  Pasco  Pool.         299

Well,  the  period  had  arrived  when  this  unholy  promise
was  to  be  fidfiUed.  Yorkshire  Jack  was  returning  from  the
Mediterranean  in  a  fruit-ship.  He  was  met  by  the  devil
and  Sarah  Folgrain  far  out  at  sea,  off  the  Land's-End.  Jack
would  not  accompany  them  willingly,  so  they  followed  the
ship  for  days,  during  all  which  time  she  was  involved  in  a
storm.  Eventually  Jack  was  washed  from  the  deck,  by  such
a  wave  as  the  oldest  sailor  had  never  seen ;  and  presently,
amidst  loud  thunders  and  flashing  lightnings,  riding  as  it
were  in  a  black  cloud,  three  figures  were  seen  passing  on-
ward. These  were  the  devil,  Sarah  Polgrain,  and  Yorkshire
Jack  ;  and  this  was  the  cause  of  the  storm.

"  It  is  all  true,  as  you  may  learn  if  you  will  inquire,*'  said
the  old  woman ;  "  for  many  of  her  kin  live  in  Church-
town.*'

THE  LUGGER  OP  CROFT  PASCO  POOL.

IN  the  midst  of  the  dreary  waste  of  Gomhilly,  which
occupies  a  large  portion  of  the  Lizard  promontory,  is  a
large  piece  of  water  known  as  "  Croft  Pasco  Pool,"  where  it
is  said  at  night  the  form  of  a  ghostly  vessel  may  be  seen
floating  with  lug-sails  spread.  A  more  dreary,  weird  spot
could  hardly  be  selected  for  a  witches'  meeting;  and  the
Lizard  folks  were  always — a  fact — careful  to  be  back  before
dark,  preferring  to  suffer  inconvenience,  to  risking  a  sight  of
the  ghostly  lugger.  Unbelieving  people  attributed  the  origin
of  the  tradition  to  a  white  horse  seen  in  a  dim  twilight
standing  in  the  shallow  water;  but  this  was  indignantly
rejected  by  the  mass  of  the  residents.


APPENDIX


APPENDIX.


(A.)

THE  POEM  OF  THE  WEESTLINQ/

rmaj  be  her^  remarked  as  something  more  than  acci-
dental, that  Magog  is  a  well-known  Oriental  giant,  that
Gog  and  Magog  figure  in  the  Guildhall  of  London,  and  that
Gogmagog  was  the  champion  selected  for  a  trial  of  strength
with  Corineus.

"  AmoDgst  the  ragged  Cleeves  those  monstrotiB  giants  sought :
Who  (of  their  dreadful  kind)  t*  appal  the  Trojans  brought
Great  Oogmagog,  an  oake  that  by  the  roots  could  teare;
So  mighty  were  (that  time)  the  men  who  lived  there :
But,  for  the  use  of  armes  he  did  not  understand,
(Except  some  rock  or  tree,  that  coming  next  to  hand.
He  nused  out  of  the  earth  to  execute  his  rage,)
He  challenge  makes  for  strength,  and  o£fereth  there  his  gage,
Which  Corin  taketh  up,  to  answer  by  and  by.
Upon  this  Sonne  of  eartii  his  utmost  power  to  try.

All^  doubtful  to  which  part  the  victory  should  goe.
Upon  that  loftie  place  at  PlimmotUh,  called  the  Boef
Those  mightie  wrastlers  met ;  with  many  an  iref ull  looke,
Who  threat'ned  as  the  one  hold  of  the  other  tooke  :
But,  grappled,  glowing  fire  shines  in  their  sparkling  eyes.
And,  whikt  at  length  of  arme  one  from  the  other  lyes,
Their  lusty  sinewes  swell  like  cables,  as  they  strive
Their  feet  such  trampling  make,  as  though  they  forced  to  drive
A  thunder  out  of  earth,  whioh  stagger'd  with  the  weight ;
Thus  either  s  utmost  force  urged  to  the  greatest  height,
Whilst  one  upon  his  hips  the  other  seeks  to  lift.
And  th'  adverse  (by  a  turn)  doth  from  his  cunning  shift.
Their  short-fetcht  troubled  breath  a  hollow  noise  doth  m»k9.
Like  bellows  of  a  foi^.    Then  Corin  up  doth  take
The  giant  'twixt  the  groins ;  and  voiding  of  his  hold,
•  From  Drayton's  "PolyolbioiL''


304    '  Appendix.

(Before  his  combroufl  feet  he  well  reooyer  cotild>)

Pitoht  headlong  from  the  hill;  as  when  a  m&n  doth  throw

An  axtree,  that  with  alight  deliver*d  from  the  toe

Boots  up  the  yielding  earth,  so  that  his  violent  foil

Shook  Neptune  with  such  strength  as  shoulderM  bim  withal ;

Tha^  where  the  taonstrous  waves  like  mountainA  lato  did  etaiulf

!niej|  leapt  out  of  the  place,  and  left  the  bared  aand

To  gaee  upon  wide  heaven,  so  great  a  blow  it  gave.

For  which  the  cooll][uering  Brute  on  Coricetifl  braT«

This  horn  of  land  bestow'd,  and  markt  it  with  his  name

Of  Corin,  Comwal  call'd  to  his  immortal  fame."  *

ii  1750  Kobert  Heath  published  his  "Natural  and  Sk- 1
torical  Account  of  the  Islands  of  Scilly/'  to  which  was  added
"A  (Jeneral  Account  of  ConiwalL''    From  paragraphs  in    |
this  work  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  figures  of  the  wrestlers    ;
cut  out  in  the  tyf  on  Plymouth  Hoe,  then  existed.

"  The  activity  of  the  Cornish  and  DemnsMre  men,  beyond
oiharai,  in  the  faculty  of  Wrestling,  seems  to  derive  their
^Pedigree  from  that  grand  Wrestler,  Corinem.  That  there
has  been  such  a  giant  as  Gogmagog,  opposed  by  Cormea%  '
the  inhabitants  of  Plymouth  shew  you  a  Portraiture  of  two
Men,  one  bigger  than  the  other,  with  Clubs  in  their  hands,
cut  out  upon  the  iTaw-ground,  which  have  been  renewed  by
order  of  the  Place,  as  they  wear  out ;  and  a  steep  cliflF  being
near,  over  which  the  giant  might  be  thrown,  are  said  to
point  out  together  the  Probability  of  the  Fact."

In  the  "  Dissertation,  on  the  Cornish  Tongue,"  by  William
Scawen,  Vice- Warden  of  the  Stannaries,  we  find  the  follow-
ing passage:  "I  cannot  affirm  with  so  much  reason,  as
some  of  our  neighbours  have  done  with  confidence,  who  say
that  at  the  last  digging  on  the  Haw  for  the  foundation  of  the
citadel  of  Plymouth,  the  great  jaws  and  teeth  therein  found
were  those  of  Gogmagog,  who  was  there  said  to  be  thrown
down  by  Corineus,  whom  some  will  have  to  be  the  founder  of
the  Cornish ;  "f*  nor  am  I  able  to  assert  that  some  instruments

•  See  also  Hogg's  "  Records  of  Ancient  Cornwall."

+  This  note  is  by  the  editor,  Mr  Davies  Gilbert :  "  These  bones  must
evidently  have  been  found  in  a  cavern,  the  nature  of  which  has  been  most
ably  ascertained  and  described  by  Dr  Buckland  and  the  Rev.  Richard  Han-
nah, who  examined  other  caverns  of  precisely  the  same  nature,  comprising
bones  of  various  larger  mammalia,  in  the  limestone  formation  not  far  from
Plymouth."

Thus  we  see  the  poetical  belief  of  one  age  destroyed  by  the  positive


Shara  and  Sheela.  305

of  war  in  brass,  and  huge  limbs  and  portraitures  of  persons
long  ago,  as  some  say  that  have  been  in  some  of  the  western
parishes,  were  parts  of  giants  or  other  great  men,  who  had
formerly  had  their  being  there.*'


(B.)

SHAEA  AND  SHEELA.

AFTER  the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  at  Cork,  I
spent  some  days  visiting,  with  two  friends,  the  various
spots  of  interest  ill  the  south  of  Ireland.  At  Fermoy,  the
name  given  to  a  somewhat  curious  cromlech,  "The  Hag's
Bed,"  interested  me.  I  was  at  some  trouble  to  learn  the
origin  of  the  name,  and  fortunately  our  car-driver  succeeded
in  finding  an  old  man,  who  gave  me  the  desired  information.
As  there  is  some  (although  a  remote)  analogy  between  this
legend  and  that  of  the  Chapel  Rock,  I  give  it  as  I  heard  it

On  yonder  hill  there  lived,  in  days  gone  by,  a  giant  and  a
giantess.  They  were  called  Shara  and  Sheela.  One  day
Shara  returned  from  his  labours  (wood-cutting)  in  the
forest,  and  finding  no  dinner  ready  he  was  exceeding  angry,
and  in  his  passion  gave  Sheela  a  severe  wound  with  his  axe
on  the  shoulder.  His  passion  was  assuaged  as  soon  as  he
saw  the  blood  of  his  wife,  and  he  carefully  bound  up  the
wound  and  nursed  her  for  many  weeks  with  great  care.
Sheela  did  not,  however,  forgive  Shara  for  the  injury  he  had
inflicted  on  her.  She  brooded  on  her  wrong.  Eventually
she  was  so  far  recovered  that  Shara  was  able  to  leave  her ;
and  their  stock  of  wood  having  fallen  short,  he  proceeded  to
the  forest  for  a  fresh  supply.  Sheela  watched  her  husband
as  he  descended  the  hiU,  and,  full  of  wrath,  she  seized  her
bed,  and,  as  he  was  wading  through  the  river,  she  flung  it
after  him  with  a  dreadful  imprecation.     The  devil  changed

philosophy  of  the  next.  Happily,  we  move  in  all  things  by  waves ;  the
system  of  undulations  prevails  in  every  operation,  mental  and  physical.
Amidst  the  relics  of  the  mammalia  of  the  Devonshire  caves  we  are  now
discovering  the  unmistakable  remains  of  man  and  his  works.  Stone
knives,  spear-heads,  axes,  and  hammers  speak  of  an  ancient  race ;  and  may
there  not  have  been  "  ginnU  in  the  earth  in  tho$e  day$,  and  aUo  after  that  r'
18TSERIB3.  U


Appetidix,


306


the  bed  into  stone  in  its  passage  through  the  air.     It  fell  m
the  ^nt,  crashed  him,  and  to  this  day  he  rests  beneath  the
Hag  s  Bed.   In  tlie  soUtnde  which  she  had  made,  she  repeuted
her  crime,  but  she  never  forgave  herself  the  sin.     She  sat  on
the  hill-top,  the  melancholy  monument  of  desolation,  bewail-
ing her  husband's  loss,  and  the  country  around  echoed  with
her  lamentations.     "  Bad  as  Shaia  was,  it  is  worse  to  be  with-  j
out  him  r  was  her  constant  cry.     Eventually  she  died  of  ex-|
cess  of  grief,  her  last  words  being,  "  Bad  as  Shara  was,  it  is  |
worle  to  be  without  him !"     ''  And/'  said  the  old  man,  finish-  j
ing  his  story,  "  whenever  any  trouble  is  coming  upon  It^  j
land  the  voice  of  Sheek  is  heard  upon  the  hill  still  repeat-  j
ing  her  melancholy  lamentation."


THE  HAG'S  BED  NEAR  FEEMOT,

*'  "YpBAR  Fermoy  is  a  very  peculiar  variety  of  these  early!
J[3|     structures,  being  an  oblong  building  constructed  with]
large  blocks  of  limestone  of  the  locality.     It  contains  an  in-i
temal  chamber,  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  long,  five  feet
wide,  and  at  the  present  time  about  four  feefc  high  ;  the  side
walls  are  near  five  feet  thick,  constructed  with  two  rows  of
upright  stones  on  edge,  and  the  interior  is  filled  with  smaller
stones,  forming  a  wall ;  the  front  has  only  a  row  of  thin  up-
right stones,  but  fitting  nearly  close  together ;  the  covering
stones  rest  on  rude  horizontal  stones,  which  are  placed  on
the  wall  before  described,  and  which  would  appear  to  have
been  of  insufficient  height,  and  on  those  are  three  large  cover-
ing stones,  one  of  which  is  about  eighteen  feet  long."*

*  Practical  Geology  and  Ancient  Arcldtectiire  of  Ireland.     By  Geoiige
Wilkinson,  architect.


Geese  Dancing — Guise  Dancing — Guizards.    307

(C.)

GEESE  DANCING-GUISE  DANCING-GUIZAEDS.

"  rpHE  doings  of  i\ie  guizards — that  is,  masquers — fonn  a
X.  conspicuous  feature  in  the  New  Year's  proceedings
throughout  Scotland.  The  evenings  on  which  these  person-
ages are  understood  to  be  privileged  to  appear  are  those  of
Christmas,  Hogmanay,  New- Year's  day,  and  Handsel  Monday.
Such  boys  as  can  pretend  to  anything  like  a  voice,  have  for  weeks
before  been  thumbing  the  collection  of  excellent  new  songs
which  lies  like  a  bunch  of  rags  in  the  window-sole  ;  and  being
now  able  to  screech  up  "  Barbara  Allan,"  or  the  "  Wee  cot-
house  and  the  wee  kail-yardie,"  they  determine  upon  enact-
ing the  part  of  guizards.  For  this  purpose  they  don  old
shirts  belonging  to  their  fathers,  and  mount  casques  of  brown
paper,  shaped  so  like  a  mitre,  that  I  am  tempted  to  believe
them  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Abbot  of  Unreason ;  attached
to  this  is  a  sheet  of  the  same  paper,  which  falling  down  in
front,  covers  and  conceals  the  whole  face,  except  where  holes
are  made  to  let  through  the  point  of  the  nose,  and  afford
sight  to  the  eyes  and  breath  to  the  mouth.  Each  vocal
guizard  is,  like  a  knight  of  old,  attended  by  a  kind  of  humble
squire,  who  assumes  the  habiliments  of  a  girl,  with  an  old
woman's  cap  and  a  broomstick,  and  is  styled  'Bessie.'
Bessie  is  equal  in  no  respects,  except  that  she  shares  fairly  in
the  proceeds  of  the  enterprise.  She  goes  before  her  prin-
cipd,  opens  all  the  doors  at  which  he  pleases  to  exert  his
singing  powers,  and  busies  herself  during  the  time  of  the
song  in  sweeping  the  floor  with  her  broomstick,  or  in  playing
any  other  antics  that  she  thinks  may  amuse  the  indweUers.
The  common  reward  of  this  entertainment  is  a  halfpenny ;
but  many  churlish  persons  fall  upon  the  unfortunate  guiz-
ards and  beat  them  out  of  the  house.  Let  such  persons,
however,  keep  a  good  watch  over  their  cabbage-gardens  next
Hallowe'en.

''  The  more  important  of  the  guizards  are  of  a  theatrical
character.     There  is  one  rude  and  grotesque  drama  which


3o8  Appendix.

they  are  accustomed  to  perfonn  on  each  of  the  four  above-
mentioned  nights,  and  which,  in  various  fragments  or  versions,
exists  ia  every  part  of  Lowland  Scotland.  The  performers,
who  are  never  less  than  three,  but  sometimes  as  many  as  six,
having  dressed  themselves,  proceed  in  a  band  from  house  to
house,  generally  contenting  themselves  wit^  the  kitchen  for
an  arena,  whither,  in  mansions  presided  over  by  the  spirit
of  good  humour,  the  whole  family  will  resort  to  witness  the
spectacle.  Sir  Walter  Scott,  who  delighted  to  keep  up  old
customs,  and  could  condescend  to  simple  things  without
losing  genuine  dignity,  invariably  had  a  set  of  guizards  to
perform  this  play  before  his  family  both  at  Ashiestiel  and
Abbotsford.  The  editor  has  with  some  difiBculty  obtained
what  appears  a  tolerably  complete  copy."*


0^


"GOOSE-DANCING."

late  years,  at  this  season,  in  the  Islands  of  Scilly,  the
young  people  exercise  a  sort  of  gallantry  called '  goose-
dancing.  .  The  maidens  are  dressed  up  for  young  men,  and
the  young  men  for  maidens  ;  and,  thus  disguised,  they  visit
their  neighbours  in  companies,  where  they  dance  and  make
jokes  upon  what  has  happened  in  the  island,  and  every  one  is
humorously  '  told  their  own/  without  offence  being  taken.  By
this  sort  of  sport,  according  to  yearly  custom  and  toleration,
there  is  a  spirit  of  wit  and  drollery  kept  up  among  the  people.
The  music  and  dancing  done,  they  are  treated  with  liquor,
and  then  they  go  to  the  next  house  ol^tertainment."  +

This  custom  was  by  no  means  conHki  to  the  Islands  of
Scilly,  in  nearly  every  town  and  lar^village  in  Cornwall,
geese-dancing,  —  not  goose-dancing,  —  formed  one  of  the
Christmas  entertainments.  The  term  was  applied  to  the  old
Christmas  plays,  and  indeed  to  any  kind  of  sport,  in  which
characters  were  assumed  by  the  performers  or  disguises  worn.

It  should  be  noted  that  these  sports  are  never  termed
goose,  but  always  geese  or  guise  dancing.

*  Robert  Chambers's  Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,
t  Strutt's  Sports,  p.  307.    Table  Book,  p.  41.


The  Wonderful  Cobbler  of  Wellington.      309

(D.)

WAYLAND  SMITH.

"  TIT-^YLAND  SMITH :  a  Dissertation  on  a  Tradition  of
f  Y  the  Middle  Ages,  from  the  French  of  G.  B.  Depping
and  Francisque  Michel,  with  Additions  by  S.  W.  Singer,  and
the  Amplified  Legend,  by  Oehlenschlager."  Kckering,  1847.
To  this  very  interesting  little  volume  I  would  refer  those
of  my  readers  who  feel  desirous  of  tracing  the  resemblance  of
our  humble  "  Jack  the  Tinkeard,"  with  the  Icelandic  y(duf\d^
the  English  Velovd,  or  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Waylamd  in  "  Ken-
nilworth."

(E)
THE  WONDERFUL  COBBLER  OP  WELLINGTON.

THERE  is  a  considerable  family  likeness  between  the
Tinker  in  this  Cornish  tale  of  the  Giants,  and  the
Wonderful  Cobbler  of  Wellington,  in  Shropshire,  as  related
by  Mr  Thomas  Wright  in  his  interesting  paper  "  On  the
Local  Legends  of  Shropshire."  As  this  story  will  interest
many  readers,  I  quote  it,  as  the  original  paper  is  not  easily
obtained : —

"  Now,  according  to  the  legend,  there  lived  at  this  time,
somewhere,  I  believe,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wellington,  a
wonderful  cobbler,  who  was  so  skilful  in  his  art  that  he
monopolised  the  mending  of  shoes  of  the  inhabitants  of
Shrewsbury,  and  he  used  to  come  at  certain  times  with  sacks
to  carry  home  with  him  the  shoes  which  were  in  need  of  his
handiwork.  Well,  the  giant  set  out  on  his  journey,  carrying
an  immense  spadeful  of  earth,  which  he  intended  to  throw
over  the  devoted  town,  and  bury  all  its  inhabitants  alive ;
but  it  happened  that  he  had  never  seen  Shrewsbury,  and  was
not  well  informed  as  to  the  road,  and  he  had  arrived  near
Wellington  when,  whom  should  he  overtake  but  the  clever
cobbler  labouring  along  under  the  burden  of  two  great  sacks
full  of  worn  shoes  he  was  carrying  home.    The  giant  entered


3IO  Afpmdix.

into  conversation  with  him,  told  him  where  he  was  gfAag,
and  let  out  rather  indiscreetly  tihie  object  of  his  joum^,  bat
confessed  his  ignorance  of  the  road  and  the  distanca  13^
cobbler  had  a  natural  sympathy  with  the  town  of  Shrews-
bury, first,  because  he  was  on  good  terms  widi  the  inhabit-
ants;  and^  secondly,  because,  if  the  towii  wei^  destn^d»
his  own  occupation  would  be  ruined ;  so  he  resobred  to  mt-
wit  thegiant  He  told  Mm,  therefore,  that  he  knew  Shiew»*
bury  very  well — in  fact^  that  he  was  th^i  returning  from  %
and  that  he,  the  giant,  was  in  the  right  track,  but  added,
with  a  look  of  discouragement,  that  it  was  very  £ur  off    The

""  giant,  who  had  ahready  had  a  long  walk,  and  ima^oiad  he
must  have  reached,  the  object  of  his  search,  inqumd-  %kh*
some  surprise  how  many  days  more  it  would  take  to  HaDt

^  thithfir!  The  cobbler  said  he  had  not  counted  the  days,  but
emptying  Ms  two  sacks  on  the  ground,  declared  that  he  had
worn  out  all  those  shoes  on  the  journey^  upon  which  the
giant,  with  a  movement  of  ^disappointment  and  diBga^
threw  the  earth  from  his  spade  on  the  spot  where  it  tmt
fbiltns  the  Wrekin ;  and  seeing  that  some  mould  still  adhered
to  the  spade,  he-pushed  it  off  with  his  foot,  and  it  formed
Ercald  Hill,  which  still  adjoins  its  loftier  neighbour/'

It  is  curious  to  trace  in  every  incident  of  those  stories  the
lesson  taught,  that  trained  skill  can  at  all  times  overcome
mere  brute  force.  These  stories  belong  to  a  very  early  age,
and  they  have  been  the  winter-evening  amusements  of  a
primitive  people,  down  to  a  very  recent  period.  Jack  the
Tinker  figures  in  many  similar  stories;  he  is  invariably
covered  with  his  wonderful  coat,  (similar  to  the  coat  of  dark-
ness in  several  of  our  nursery  tales,)  and  not  unfrequently  he
has  the  shoes  of  swiftness.    .


H


(F.)
ST  PIEAN'S-DAT  AND  PICROUS-DAY.

ONE,  in  his  "  Every-day  Book,"  has  the  following  re-
_     marks  on  St  Piran  : —
"  This  saint,  anciently  of  good  repute  in  Cornwall,  is  not


Si  PiratC S'day  and  Picrous-day.  311

mentioned  by  Butler.  According  to  Porter,  he  was  bom  in
Ireland,  and  became  a  hermit  there.  He  afterwards  came  to
England,  and  settling  at  Cornwall,  had  a  grave  made  for
him,  entered  into  it,  and  dying  on  the  6th  of  March,  *  in  the
glorie  of  a  great  light  and  splendour  that  appeared  at  the
same  instant/  was  buried  at  Padstow.  *He  is  reported,'
says  Porter,  '  to  have  wrought  manie  wonderful  miracles  in
his  lifetime,  which,  because  they  tend  rather  to  breed  an  in-
credulous amazement  in  the  readers  than  move  to  anie
workes  of  virtues  or  pietie,  we  have  willingly  omitted.'  We
have  had  a  specimen  of  such  miracles  as  Father  Porter
deemed  worthy  of  belief ;  those  of  St  Piran  which  would
have  caused  'incredulous  amazement'  in  Porter's  readers
must  have  been  '  passing  wonderful' "

"  St  Piran  8-day  is  said  to  be  a  favourite  with  the  tin-
ners. Having  a  tradition  that  some  secrets  regarding  the
manufacture  of  tin  was  communicated  to  their  ancestors  by
that  saint,  they  leave  the  manufacture  to  shift  for  itself  for
that  day,  and  keep  it  as  a  holiday."*

Mr  T.  Q.  Couch  obligingly  favours  me  with  the  fdlil^iig
note  on  Picrous-day  : —     ,

"  The  second  Thursday  before  Christmas-day  is  a  festival
observed  by  the  tinners  of  the  district  of  Blackmore,  and
known  as  Picrous-day,  It  is  not  at  present  marked  by  any
distinctive  ceremonies,  but  is  the  occasion  of  a  supper  and
much  merry-making.  The  owner  of  the  tin-^ream  contri-
butes a  shilling  a  man  towards  it.  This  is  said  to  be  the  feast
of  the  discovery  of  tin  by  a  man  named  Picrovs,  My  first
impression  was  that  the  day  took  its  name  from  the  circum-
stance of  Si,  pie  forming  the  piice  de  resistance  of  the  supper ;
but  this  explanation  is  not  allowed  by  tinners,  nor  sanc-
tioned by  the  usages  of  the  feast  What  truth  there  may
be  in  the  tradition  of  the  first  tinner,  Picrous,  it  is  now  too
late  to  discover,  but  the  notion  is  worth  recording.  It  has
occurred  to  me  whether,  from  some  similarity  between  the
names,  (not  a  close  one,  I  admit  it,)  the  honours  of  Picrous
may  not  have  been  transferred  to  St  Piran,  who  is  generally
said  to  be  the  patron  saint  of  tinners.  St  Piran  is  not  known
*  Qilbert'i  HiBtory.


3ia  Appendix.

ift  'BbAxBOt^  and  UfrfeitimI  is  on  the  5lli  of  M^fcIl    T\am
tbuMVS  abo  haifealBitiTai  ia  commemorate  the  dkcovgEf.fil


MOSES  nnrs  uiTBt  besfectikg  anns  jeffebies.

^  jL  N  aocoont  of  Axma  liefiTeries,  now  living  in  the  county
A  <Kf  Oonmail^  who  nas  fed  for  six  months  by  a  small
•ort  of  airy  paopk^  caUed  fairies ;  and  of  the  strange  and
wonderfol  emes  aha  perfimned  with  salyes  and  medidnes
dia  xacdrad  fnmi  tibensi,  for  which  she  never  took  one  penny
ctf  bar  patianiB. — 1&  a  letter  from  Mosea  Pitt  to  the  Right
Beverend  Father  in  Qod,  Br  Edward  Fowler,  Lord  Bishop  of
QUmoaater/'

Aiiiio  Jeibrie%  wlio  waa  afterwards  married  to  one  Wll-
Bam  Wanrea,  waa  bom  ia.  the  parish  of  Bt  Toath  in  Decem-
bee  1626,  ''aatd  aha  ia  atUI  UviDg,  1696,  being  now  in  the
70th  jfear  of  her  aga"  From  the  published  narrative,  we
learfl^tkat  Mr  Hampfarey  Martin  was  requested  by  Mr
Moses  Pitt  to  see  and  examine  Anne  in  1693.  Mr  Martin
writes,  "  As  for  Anne  JeflFeries,  I  have  been  with  her  the
greater  part  of  one  day,  and  did  read  to  her  all  that  you
wrote  to  me ;  but  she  would  not  own  anything  of  it,  as  con-
cerning the  fairies,  neither  of  any  of  the  cures  that  she  did.
She  answered,  that  if  her  own  father  were  now  alive,  she
would  not  discover  to  him  those  things  which  did  happen
then  to  her.  I  asked  her  the  reason  why  she  would  not  do
it ;  she  replied,  that  if  she  should  discover  it  to  yoo,  that
you  would  make  books  or  ballads  of  it ;  and  she  said,  that
she  would  not  have  her  name  spread  about  the  country  in
books  or  ballads  of  such  things,  if  she  might  have  five
hundred  pounds  for  it."

Mr  Pitt's  correspondent  goes  on  to  say  that  Anne  was  so
frightened  by  the  visitors  she  had  in  the  arbour  ''  that  she  fell
into  a  kind  of  convulsion  fit.  But  when  we  found  her  in
this  condition  we  brought  her  into  the  house,  and  put  her  to
bed,  and  took  great  care  of  her.    As  soon  as  she  recovered


Moses  Pitt's  Letter,  313

out  of  her  fit,  she  cries  out,  *  They  are  just  gone  out  of  the
window — they  are  just  gone  out  of  the  window.  Do  you
not  see  them?'"  Anne  recovered,  and  "as  soon  as  she  re-
covered a  little  strength,  she  constantly  went  to  churcL"
'*  She  took  mighty  delight  in  devotion,  and  in  hearing  the
Word  of  God  read  and  preached,  although  she  herself  could
not  read."

Anne  eventually  tells  some  portions  of  her  story,  and  cures
numerous  diseases  amongst  the  people,  by  the  powers  she
had  derived  from  the  fairy  world.  "  People  of  all  distempers,
sicknesses,  sores,  and  ages,  came  not  only  so  far  off  as  the
Land's-End,  but  also  from  London,  and  were  cured  by  her.
She  took  no  moneys  of  them,  nor  any  reward,  that  ever  I
knew  or  heard  of,  yet  had  she  moneys  at  all  times,  sufficient
to  supply  her  wants.  She  neither  made  nor  bought  any
medicines  or  salves,  that  ever  I  saw  or  heard  ol,  yet  wanted
them  not  as  she  had  occasion.  Ske  forsook  eating  our
victuals,  and  was  fed  by  these  fairies  from  that  harvest  time
to  the  next  Christmxis-day ;  upon  which  day  she  came  to
our  table,  and  said,  because  it  was  that  day,  she  would  eat
some  roast  beef  with  us,  the  which  she  did — I  myself  being
then  at  the  table."

The  fairies  constantly  attended  upon  Anne,  and  they  ap-
pear to  have  vied  with  each  other  to  win  her  favour.  They
fed  her,  as  we  have  been  already  told ;  and  the  writer  says
that  on  one  occasion  she  "  gave  me  a  piece  of  her  bread,
which  I  did  eat,  and  I  think  it  was  the  most  delicious  bread
that  ever  I  did  eat,  either  before  or  since."  Anne  could
render  herself  invisible  at  will  The  fairies  would  come  and
dance  with  her  in  the  orchard.  She  had  a  silver  cup,  given
at  her  wish  by  the  fairies  to  Mary  Martyn,  when  die  was
about  four  years  of  age.

At  last,  **  one  John  Tregeagle,  Esq.,  who  was  steward  to
John,  Earl  of  Radnor,  being  a  justice  of  peace  in  Cornwall*
sent  his  warrant  for  Anne,  and  sent  her  to  Bodmin  jail,  and
there  kept  her  a  long  time."  The  fairies  had  previously
given  her  notice  that  she  would  be  apprehended

"  She  asked  them  if  she  should  hide  herself.    They  an-


314.  -^iSM*5tr,

swered  no ;  die  AmUL  fear  nothiiii^  bol  go  mtii  Uie  ocm-
stftbla  So  die  irm%  wttk  Ae  eonstable  to  the  justice  and
lie  eenl  her  to  Bodmin  jail^  and  ordered  the  prison-keepo*
tiiat  ehe  ehonld  be  kept*  without  yictuals ;  and  she  was  so
,  kepl^  and  yet  die  lived,  and  that  without  complaining.  But
poor  Anne  lay  in  j«l  for  a  considecabk  iSsm  i^Fter ;  and  also
Justice  Tr^eagle,  who  was  her  great  prosecutor,  kept  Ihst
in  his  house  some  time  as  a  prisoner,  and  that  without
victuals/^  II

We  have  a  curious  example  of  me  fairies  quoting  S(»qH'
ture.  I  am  not  aware  of  another  instance  of  tfai&  Ajbm,
when  seated  with  Ihe  famity,  was  called  three  tsmesL  '^  Of
all  these,  three  caUs  of  the  fairies,  none  heard  dient  hoM
Anna  After  she  had  been  in  her  chamber  some  time»  she
came  to  us  again,  with  a  Bible  in  her  hand,  and  tdki  xm
-  that,  when  sle  came  to  the  fairies,  Ihey  said  to  h&r,  'What  I
has  there  been  some  magistrates  and  ministers  with  you,  and
dissuaded  you  from  coming  any  more  to  us,  saying  we  are
evil  spirits,  and  that  it  was  dl  a  delusion  of  the  devil?
Pray,  desire  them  to  read  that  place  of  Scripture,  in  theKist
Epistle  of  St  John,  chap.  iv.  ver.  1,  'Dearly  beloved,  believe
not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  are  of
God ; '  and  this  place  of  Scripture  was  turned  down  so  in
the  said  Bible.  I  told  your  lordship  before,  Anne  could
not  read.**

Anne  was  at  length  liberated  from  confinement.  She
lived  in  service  near  Padstow,  and  in  process  of  time  mar-
ried William  Warren.

How  honestly  and  simply  does  Moses  conclude  his
story!

"And  now,  my  lord,  if  your  lordship  expects  that  I
should  give  you  an  account  when,  and  upon  what  occasion,
these  fairies  forsook  our  Anne,  I  must  tell  your  lordship
I  am  ignorant  of  that.  She  herself  can  best  tell,  if  she
would  be  prevailed  upon  to  do  so ;  and  the  history  of  it,  and
the  rest  of  the  passages  of  her  life,  would  be  very  acceptable
and  useful  to  the  most  curious  and  inquisitive  part  of  man-
kind."*
*  An  Hiatorical  Survey  of  the  County  of  Cornwall.    C.  S.  Gilbert    1817.


The  Barges ty  or  Spectre-Hound.  315

(H.)

THE  BARGEST,  OR  SPECTRE-HOUND.

IN  the  glossary  to  the  Rev.  Mr  Carr's  "  Horae  Momenta
Carvenae,"  I  find  the  following :  "  Bargest,  a  sprite
that  haunts  towns  and  populous  places.  Belg.  herg,  and
geest,  a  ghost."  I  really  am  not  a  little  amused  at  Mr
Carr's  derivation,  which  is  most  erroneous.  Bargest  is  not
a  town-ghost,  nor  is  it  a  haunter  "  of  towns  and  populous
places ;"  for,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  said  in  general  to  frequent
small  villages  and  hills.  Hence  the  derivation  may  be  herg^
Grerm.  a  hilly  and  geesty  a  ghost — i.e.,  a  hill-ghost ;  but  the
real  derivation  appears  to  me  to  be  hdVy  Germ,  a  hear,  and
geesty  a  ghost — i.e,y  a  bear-ghost,  from  its  appearing  in  the

form  of  a  bear  or  large  dog,  as  Billy  B 's  narrative

shews.

The  appearance  of  the  spectre-hound  is  said  to  precede
a  death.  Like  other  spirits,  Bargest  is  supposed  to  be
unable  to  cross  water  ;  and  in  case  any  of  my  craven  readers
should  ever  chance  to  meet  with  his  ghostship,  it  may  be  as
well  to  say,  that  unless  they  give  him  the  wall,  he  will  tear
them  in  pieces,  or  otherwise  ill-treat  them,  as  he  did  John
Lambert,  who,  refusing  to  let  him  have  the  wall,  was  so
punished  for  his  want  of  manners,  that  he  died  in  a  few
days.


BILLY  B 'S  ADVENTURE.

"  You  see,  sir,  as  how  I'd  been  a  clock-dressing  at  Gur-
ston,  (Grassington,)  and  I'd  staid  rather  lat^  and  maybe  git-
ten  a  lile  sup  o*  spirit ;  but  I  war  far  from  being  drunk,
and  knowed  everything  that  passed.  It  war  about  eleven
o'clock  when  I  left,  and  it  war  at  back  end  o'  t'  year,  and  a
most  admirable  (beautiful)  neet  it  war.  The  moon  war
varra  breet,  and  I  niwer  seed  Kylstone-fell  plainer  in  a*  nay
life.    Now,  you  see,  sir,  I  war  passin'  down  t'  mill  loine,  and


3i6  Appendix.

I  heerd  summut  come  past  me, — brush,  brush,  brush,  wi'
chains  rattling  a'  the  while,  but  I  seed  nothing  ;  and  thowt
I  to  mysel,  now  this  is  a  most  mortal  queer  thing.  And  I
then  stuid  still,  and  luik'd  about  me  ;  but  I  seed  nothing  at
aw,  nobbut  the  two  stane  wa's  on  each  o*  t'  mill  loine.  Then
I  heerd  again  this  brush,  brush,  brush,  wi'  the  chains ;  for
you  see,  sir,  when  I  stuid  still  it  stopped,  and  then,  thowt  I,
this  mun  be  a  Bargest,  that  sae  much  is  said  about ;  and  I
hurried  on  towards  t*  wood  brig ;  for  they  say  as  how  this
Bargest  cannot  cross  a  water ;  but  Lord,  sir,  when  I  gat
o'er  t'  brig,  I  heerd  this  same  thing  again ;  so  it  mud  either
hev  crossed  t'  watter,  or  have  gane  rownd  by  t'  spring  heed!
(about  thirty  miles !)  And  then  I  becam  a  valliant  man,
for  I  war  a  bit  freekn'd  afore ;  and,  thinks  I,  I  '11  turn  and
hev  a  peep  at  this  thing ;  so  I  went  up  Greet  Bank  towards
Linton,  and  heerd  this  brush,  brush,  brush,  wi'  the  chains  a'
the  way,  but  I  seed  nothing ;  then  it  ceased  all  of  a  sudden.
So  I  turned  back  to  go  hame ;  but  I  'd  hardly  reached  the
door  when  I  heerd  again  this  brush,  brush,  brush,  and  the
chains,  going  down  towards  t'  Holin  House ;  and  I  followed
it,  and  the  moon  there  shone  varra  breet,  and  I  seed  its  tail !
,  Then,  thowt  I,  thou  owd  thing,  I  can  say  Ise  seen  thee
now  ;  so  I  '11  away  hame.  When  I  gat  to  t'  door,  there  war
a  grit  thing  like  a  sheep,  but  it  war  larger,  ligging  across
t'  threshold  of  t'  door,  and  it  war  woolly  like ;  and  says  I,
*  Git  up,'  and  it  wouldn't  git  up.  Then  says  I,  '  Stir  thysel,'
and  it  wouldn't  stir  itsel !  And  I  grew  valliant,  and  I  raised
t'  stick  to  baste  it  wi' ;  and  then  it  luik'd  at  me,  and  sich
oies  (eyes)  they  did  glower,  and  war  as  big  as  saucers,  and
like  a  cruelled  ball.  First  there  war  a  red  ring,  then  a
blue  one,  then  a  white  one  ;  and  these  rings  grew  less  and
less  till  they  came  to  a  dot !  Now,  I  war  nane  f eer'd  on  it,
tho'  it  grin'd  at  me  fearfully,  and  I  kept  on  saying  *  Get  up,'
and  *  Stir  thyself,^  and  t'  wife  heerd  as  how  1  war  at  t'  door,
and  she  cam  to  oppen  it ;  and  then  this  thing  gat  up  and
walked  off,  for  it  war  mare  f reef d  o'  t'  wife  than  it  war  o*
me;  and  I  told  the  wife,  and  she  said  it  war  Bargest;  but  I
nivver  seed  it  since — and  that's  a  true  story."*

*  Hone's  Every-day  Book.


Rock  Masses,  Celtic.  317

(I.)
THE  MERMAID'S  VENGEANCE.

"  TNEVITABLE  death  awaits  the  wretch  who  is  seduced  by
Jj^  their  charms.  They  seize  and  drown  the  swimmer,  and
entice  the  child ;  and  when  they  anticipate  that  their  malev-
olence will  be  gratified,  they  are  seen  gaily  darting  over  the
surface  of  the  waters.?

Since  this  tale  has  been  in  type,  my  attention  '\m  been
called  to  an  article  on  the  "  Popular  Mythology  of  the  Middle
Ages,"  by  Sir  F.  Palgrave,  in  the  Quarterly  Review,  No.  44,
1 820.  The  Nixies,  to  whom  the  above  quotation  especially
refers,  are  in  most  respects  like  the  Cornish  mermaida

(K)
BOCK  MASSES.  CELTIC.

*'  rpHE  Celts,  or  KeXrol,  or  KeXral,  were  a  people  of  the

X  origin  of  which  nothing  positive  is  known.  They  oc-
cupied a  great  p«rt  of  Western  Europe  perhaps  in  times
antecedent  to  the  invasion  of  Indo-Germanic  nations.

"The  very  name  Celt  is  of  uncertain  etymology.  Am-
mian  derives  it  from  the  king,  Kelta,  or  CeUa ;  Leibnitz,
from  the  German  gelt,  or  geld,  money ;  Mezerai,  from  the
British  gall,  or  gault,  a  forest ;  Pellontier,  from  the  Tudesk
wallen,  to  wander ;  Latour  d'Auvergne,  ftom  gael,  or  gasU,
yellow,  alluding  to  the  light  hair  of  the  Oalli,  whom  Bochart
identifies  with  Dodanim  (for  Ehodanim)  of  Gen.  x.*

"But  the  name  of  Celt  may  probably  come,  as  Camden
says,  from  gwalth,  a  head  of  hair;  coma,  and  gwalthay,
comatus ;  from  whence  Kekral,  TcCKaral,  or  TdXKoL  Oalli
or  Gauh,  the  Qcedil,  Ccedil,  or  Keile,  and  in  pL  KeiU,  or
Keiltiet,  or  Qaels,  Oasdds,  or  Ouidhdod,  as  the  Irish  call
themselves  and  their  tongue.

"  The  language  called  Celtic  is  divided  into  two  principal

*  ''  And  the  sons  of  Javan ;  Elishah,  and  TarahiBh,  Kittim  and  Dodanim,'*
(Gen.  X.  4.)


3i8  '  Appendix,

branches — viz.,  1.  The  JmA  or  Hibernian,  from  which  the
present  Irish  or  Erse,  and  the  Gaelic  of  Scotland  are  de-
rived. 2.  The  British,  to  which  the  primitive  Gaellic  or
Gallic  are  allied,  and  from  which  are  derived  the  Welsh,  the
Cornish,  and  the  ArmoHc,  or  language  of  Brittany."*

"  The  Welsh,  which  is  the'  relic  of  the  language  of  the
inland  Britons,  or  Caesar's  aborigines,  is  most  probably  akin
to  the  dialect  of  Gallia  Geltica,  and  the  Cornish  to  the  idiom
of  the  Belgse,  who  overran  the  southern  district  of  England,
and  probably  sought  refuge  in  the  west  when  the  Saxons
were  extending  themselves  from  the  eastern  part  of  the

island."  t

But  surely  there  are  indications  of  a  people  inhabiting
Cornwall  long  before  the  Saxons  gained  a  foot  of  ground  in
England  ?

(L.)
AMBROSLE  PETBiB.

IN  connexion  with  the  Bambury  Stone  in  Worcestershire,
Mr  Jabez  Allies  remarks,  and  Dr  Nash  is  of  the  same
opinion,  that  it  was  in  all  probability  originally  Amhury.
He  then  gives  us  several  examples  of  the  occurrence  of  this
name — as  Ambreforde  in  Yorkshire,  Ambrelie  in  Sussex,
Ambresberie  in  Wilts,  Ambresdone  in  Oxfordshire,  and  many
others.*

"The  ancients  distinguished  stones,  erected  with  a  reli-
gious view,  by  the  name  of  amber,  by  which  was  signified
anything  solar  and  divine.f

"Respecting  the  Phoenicians  being  the  founders  of  the
Druidical  discipline  in  Britain,  one  fact  weighs  more  with
me  than  a  thousand  arguments.  I  allude  to  the  Tyrian  coin,
on  which  appear  the  tree,  the  sacred  fire,  the  two  stone
pillars  of  Hercules,  (Thoth,)  and  the  singular  legend,  Tyr.
Col.,  (Colony  of  Tyrians,)  and  the  still  more  remarkable

*  A  History  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  every  Language  and  Dialect
into  which  Translations  have  been  made.    Bagster  and  Sons,  1860.

f  Researches  into  the  Physical  History  of  Mankind.  By  James  Cowles
Prichard,  M.D.,  F.A.S.,  vol.  iii.

t  Allies'  Worcestershire.  §  Bryant's  Ancient  Mythology.


r


AmbrosicB  Petr(B.


319


words  under  the  erect  stones,  AMBVOXIE IIETPE,  (Am-
brosiae  Petrse,)  the  anointed  rocks.  Let  the  reader  remember
the  monkish  traditions  of  Ambrosius,  the  exact  likeness  of
these  pillars,  on  this  coin,  to  the  stones  at  Stonehenge,  the
Ambrosiae  Petrae ;  and  if  he  does  not  think  the  origin  of
Ambrosbury,  or  Amesbury,  was  derived  from  the  Ambrosiae
Petrae,  or  anointed  rocks  of  the  Tyrian  colonists,  he  will
think  the  coincidence  most  remarkable."*

"Main  Anibres,  petrce  ambrosice,  signify  the  stones
anointed  with  holy  oil,  consecrated ;  or,  in  a  general  sense,
a  temple,  altar,  or  place  of  worship/'-f

*  Bowles'  Hermes  Britaimicas.

t  Stukelev,  Stonehenge.  See  Akerman  "On  the  Stone  Worship  of  the
Ancients,  Illustrated  by  their  Coins."  Transactions  of  the  Nomismatio
Society,  January  1838.


END  OF  FIRST  SERIES.


JOHK  CAMOBN  HOTRN,  PKINTKR,  PICCADILLY,  LONDON.


1


y


Miiiiniiini

3  2044  018  072  9E
