Observations on Certain Parts of the Animal Oeconomy
John Hunter (1786)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Hunter's 1786 comparative-anatomy papers — digestion, the lymphatics, the torpedo's electric organs — the research program that made him the father of scientific surgery. First edition. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

OBSERVATIONS


CHR TAIN: PAR T's


ANIMAL CECONOMY.
By JOHN HUNTER.


fOLD AT Ne 13, CASTLE-STREET, LEICESTER-SQUARE.


MDCCLXXXVI.


43156


Bc ee eet
a - ies


ae oF


=
~


Hee,


SIR JOSEPH BANKS, Barr.


ee EN LD OR Tee OY AL SO CLE TY,


Ce Gore CROCS aaeoG,


DEAR SIR,

UE As the following Obfervations
"were made in the Courfe of thofe Purfuits in which you
have fo warmly interefted yourfelf, and promoted with
the moft friendly Affiftance, I fhould os wanting te
Gratitude, were I not to addrefs them to you, as a public


Teftimony of the Friendfhip and Efteem with which I am,
DEAR SIR,
YOUR OBLIGED, AND


LEICESTER-SQUARE, VERY HUMBLE SERVANT,
NOVEMBER, Q, 1786. |


JOHN HUNTER,


Oo oN 1) EVN TE, S.


A DESCRIPTION Of the fituation of the teftis in. the fcetus, with its
defcent into the fcrotum, | page 1


OssERVATIoNns on the glands fituated between the rectum and bladder,


called veficule feminales, 27
AN account of the free martin, 45
AN account of an extraordinary pheafant, ) WS 63
An account of the organ of hearial aes , 69


Aw account of certain receptacles of air in birds, which communicate


with the lungs and Euftachian tube, | 77
EXPERIMENTS and obfervations on animals, with refpect to the power
of producing heat, ; 2. 89
Proposats for the recovery of perfons apparently drowned, LES


{


On


TH Ee (OTN SSN ego,


On the ftructure of the placenta, __ Bee page 127
Obfervations on the placenta of the monkey, _ 136


OzgsERVATIONsS on the Gillaroo trout, commonly called in Ireland the


gizzard trout, 3 at
SoME obfervations on digeftion, = 147


On a fecretion in the crop of breeding pigeons, for the nourifhment of
their young, IgI


On the colour of the pigmentum of the-eye in different animals, 199
The -ufe of the oblique mufcles, 209


A defcription of the nerves which fupply the organ of fmelling, 213
A defcription of fome branches of the fifth pair of nerves, 219


Ran RA eA.


Page 14, line 2, for znvariable, read invariably,

28, 25, for falling a, read falling from a.

63, 23, for principle, read principal.

81, 15, for the humeri, read the os humeri.

88, 1, for freeze, read froze.

101, 1, for affec?, read effect.

118, 19, for principle, read principal.
120, laft line, for roufes and depreffes, read roufe and deprefi.
187, line 13, for /wallows, read they fwallow.


A DESCRIPTION


A DESCRIPTION OF THE SITUATION OF THE
TESTIS IN. THE FOETUS, WITH ITS DESCENT
INTO THE SCROTUM.


Difcovery in any art not only enriches that to which: it immediately

belongs, but elucidates all thofe to which it has any relation. A
knowledge of the conftruction of the human body is eflential to medicine,
therefore every improvement in anatomy muft throw new light on that
branch of fcience; and thefe improvements are more {triking when they
are new; which is well illuftrated by the advantages derived to pathology,
from the difcovery of the lymphatics being the abforbent fyftem ; and is
no lefs evident in the hernia, where the inteftine lies in contact with the
tefticle, which by the difcovery of the original feat of the tefticle is perfectly
explained.

Several years before Haller’s Opufcula Pathologica were publifhed, my
brother informed me, that in examining the contents of the abdomen of a
child, ftill born, about the feventh or eighth month, he found both the
tefticles lying in that cavity, and mentioned the circumftance with fome
degree of furprife. We could never explain this matter to our fatisfaGtion
till the publication of the Opufcula, to which Dr. Hunter alludes, com-

nentaries, page 72, in the following words.

«« In the latter end of the year 1755, when I firft had the pleafure of
reading Baron Haller’s obfervations on the hernia congenita,’ it ftruck my
imagination that the ftate of the teftis in the foetus and its defcent from
the abdomen into the fcrotum would explain feveral things concerning
ruptures and the hydrocele, and particularly that abfervation which Mr.
Sharp had communicated to me, viz. that in ruptures the inteftine is
fometimes in contact with the teftis, I communicated my ideas upon
this fubject to my brother, and defired that he would take every opportu-


* Alberti Halleri Opufcul, Patholog. Laufan, 1755, 8vo. page 53, &c.
B nity


2 OF THE SITUATION OF THE FESTIS IN THE FQ@:TUS.


nity of learning exactly the ftate of the teftis before and after birth, and
the ftate of ruptures in children. We were both convinced that the exa-
mination of thofe facts would anfwer our expectation, and both recollected
having feen appearances in children, that agreed with our fuppofition, but
faw now that we had neglected making the proper ufe of them.

«* In the courfe of the winter, my brother had feveral opportunities of
diffecting fcetufes of different ages, and of making fome drawings of the
parts; and all his obfervations agreed with the ideas I had formed of the
nature of ruptures, and of the origin of the tunica vaginalis propria in the
foetus. But till thofe obfervations were repeated to his fatisfaction, and
_ were fufficiently afcertained, he defired me not to mention the opinion in
my lecture ; and therefore, when treating of the coats of the teftis, and of
the fituation of the hernial fac, &c. I only put in this temporary caution,
that I was then fpeaking of thofe things as they are commonly in adult ~
bodies, and not as they are in the foetus: and at laft, when I was conclu-
ding my lectures for that feafon in the end of April, 1756, with a courfe
of the chirurgical operations, I_gave a very general account of my brother’s
obfervations, and fhewed both the drawing of Fig. I]. which was then
finifhed, and the fubje&t from which it was made.”

The following obfervations on this fubject are taken from my notes,
publifhed by Dr. Hunter, in his commentaries, to which I have fince
added fome practical remarks. be

Until the approach of birth, the teftes of the foetus are lodged within
the cavity of the abdomen, and may therefore be reckoned among the ab-
dominal vifcera. | }

They are fituated immediately below the kidneys, on the forepart of the
pfoze mufcles, and by the fide of the rectum, where this inteftine is paffing
down into the cavity of the pelvis: for in the fcetus the rectum, which is
much larger in proportion to the capacity of the pelvis, than in the full-
grown fubject, lies before the vertebrae lumborum as well as before the os
facrum. Indeed the cafe is pretty much the fame with regard to all the
contents of the pelvis ; that is, their fituation is much higher in the foetus
than in the adult; the figmoeide flexure of the colon, part of the rectum,
the greateft part of the bladder, the fundus uteri, the fallopian tubes,

&c.


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FCETUS. 3


&c. being placed in the foetus above the hollow of the pelvis, in the com-
mon or great abdominal cavity.

‘At this time the fhape or figure of the teftis is much the fame as in
the adult, and its pofition or attitude is the fame as when it is in the fcro-.
tum; that is, one end is placed upwards, the other downwards ; one flat
fide is to the right, the other to the left; and one edge is turned back-
wards, the other forwards. But as the teftis is lefs connected with the
furrounding parts while it is in the loins, its pofition may be a little va-
riable. The moft natural feems to be when the anterior edge is turned |
dire@tly forwards ; but the leaft touch of any thing will throw that edge
either to the right fide, or to the left, and then the flat fide of the teftis is
turned forwards.

It is attached to the pfoas mufcle all along its pofterior edge, except just
at its upper extremity. This attachment is formed by the peritoneum,
which covers the teftis and gives it a fmooth furface, in the fame manner
as it envelopes the other loofe abdominal vifcera. eh

The epididymis lies along the outfide of the pofterior edge of the teftis,
as in older bodies, but is larger in proportion, and adheres backwards to
the pfoas. When the feetus is very young, the adhefion of the teftis and
epididymis to the pfoas is very narrow; and then the teftis is more loofe,
and more projecting: but as the foetus advances in months, the adhefion
of the teftis to the pfoas becomes broader and tighter.

The veflels of the teftis, like thofe of moft parts of the body, commonly
rife from the neareft larger trunks, viz. from the aorta and cava, or from
the emulgents.

The artery generally rifes from the forepart of the aorta, a little below
the emulgent artery ; and often from the emulgent itfelf, efpecially in the
right fide of the body; which may happen the rather, becaufe the trunk
of the aorta is more diftant from the right teftis than from the left: Some-
times, but much more rarely, the {permatic artery {prings from the phrenic,
or from that of the capfula renalis. Befides the artery which rifes from
the aorta, or emulgent, &c. the teftis receives one from the hypogattric
artery, which is fometimes as large as the other. It runs upwards from
its origin, paffing clofe to the vas deferens, in its way to the teftis. The

De Dre. faperior


4 OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN ‘THE FORTUS.


fuperior {permatic artery fometimes pafles before the lower end of the kid-
ney. Both thefe arteries run in a ferpentine direction, making pretty large
but genile turnings; both are fituated behind the peritoneum, and both
run into the pofterior edge of the teitis, between the two reflected laminz
of that membrane, much in the fame manner as the vefiels pafs to the in-
teftines between the two reflected laminz of the mefocolon or mefentery.
7 The veins of the teftis are analogous to its arteries. The fuperior f{per-
matic vein, to begin with its trunk, rifes commonly in the following man-
ner; on the right fide from the trunk of the cava a little below the
emulgent, and on the left fide from the left emulgent vein. The reafon
of this difference between the right and left fpermatic vein, no doubt, is
becaufe the cava is not placed in the middle of the body; fo that by the
rule of ramification, which is obferved in moft parts of the body, the cava
is the neareft large vein of the right fide, and the emulgent is the neareft
large vein of theJeft fide. But the difference is inconfiderable ; and ac-
cordingly we fometimes find the right fpermatic vein coming from the
right emulgent vein, and feveral other varieties, which, fo far as I can
obferve, follow no precife rule. There is likewife a {permatic vein, which
rifes from the internal iliac, and runs up to the teftis with the inferior
{permatic artery. Both the {permatic veins run behind the peritoneum
with their correfponding arteries, and go into the pofterior edge of the
teftis, where they are loft in {mall branches.

The nerves of the teftis, like its blood-veffels, come from the neareft
fource ; that is, from the abdominal plexufes of the intercoftal ; efpecially
the inferior mefenteric plexus. ‘They run to the teftis, attending upon its
blood-veffels, and are difperfed with them through its fubftance. The
teftis therefore, with refpect to its nerves, may be reckoned an abdominal
vifcus ; and this obfervation will hold goad, when applied to the full-
grown fubject, as well as to the foetus; for thofe branches of the lumbar
nerves, which are commonly {aid to be fent to the teftis; pafling through
the tendon of the external oblique mufcle, in reality go not to the teftis
itfelf, but to its exterior coverings, and to the {crotum.

The tefticle receiving its nerves from the plexufes of the intercoftal,
accounts for the ftomach and inteftines fympathifing fo readily with it»

' : and


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FCETUS. re


and its particular fenfation, with the effects arifing in the conftitution upon
~ its being injured.

The epididymis begins at the outer and pofterior part of the upper end
of the teftis, immediately above the entrance of the blood-veffels. ‘There
it is thick, round, and united to the teftis; as it pafles down, it becomes
a little fmaller and more flat, and is only attached backwards to the teftis, ©
or rather indeed to its veffels, for it lies loofe againft the fide of the teftis
forwards ; and at its lower end it is again more firmly attached'to the body
of the teftis ; fo that in the foetus there is a cavity or pouch formed between
the middle part of the teftis, and the middle part of the epididymis, which
is more confiderable than what is commonly obferved in full-grown fub-
jects. As the body grows, the epididymis adheres more clofely to the fide
of the teftis. The greateft part of the epididymis is made up of one con-
voluted canal, which becomes larger in fize and lefs convoluted towards
the lower end of the epididymis, and at laft is manifeftly a fingle tube run-
ning a little ferpentine. That change happens at the lower end of the
teftis, and there the canal takes the name of vas deferens.

This duct is a little convoluted or ferpentine in its whole courfe, but
is lefs fo as it comes nearer, to the bladder; inftead of running upwards
from the lower end of the teftis, as it does at a more advanced period of
life, in the foetus at this age it runs downwards and inwards in its whole
courfe; fo that it goes on almoft in the direction of the epididymis, of
which it is a continuation. It turns inwards from the lower end of the
epididymis, under the lower end of the teftis, and behind the upper end
of a ligament or gubernaculum teftis, which I {hall prefently defcribe ;
then it paffes over the iliac veflels and over the infide of the pfoas muf-
cle, fomewhat higher than in adult bodies; and at laft goes between the
ureter and bladder towards the bafis of the proftate gland,

In thofe animals where the tefticles change*their fituation, the cremafter
muicle, which fhould: be named mufculus teftis, has two very different po-
fitions in the fcetus, and in the adult; the farft of thefe is, the fame as in
thofe animals whofe tefticles remain through life in the cavity of the
abdomen ; we muft therefore conclude that the fame purpofes are anfwered
by this mufcle in the fcetus, as in thofe animals.

The


6. OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FQ£TUS.


he ufe of this mufcle, when the tefticle is in the {crotum, appears to
be evidently that of a fufpenfory : but what purpofe it anfwers in the fcetus,
or in animals whofe tefticles remain in the abdomen, is not eafily imma-
gined, there being no apparent reafon why fuch a mufcle fhould exitt.

The cremafter or mufculus teftis appears to be compofed of the lower
fibres of the obliquus internus and tranfverfalis mufcles in the foetus,
turning upwards inftead of going acrofs to the pubis and {preading upon
the external furface of the gubernaculum immediately under the perito-
neum ; it appears to be loft on the peritoneum, a little way from the
tefticle ; this is more evidently feen in adult fubje€ts who have had a hy-
drocele, or rupture ; in fuch cafes the mufcle becomes ftronger than ufual,
and its fibres can be traced fpreading on the tunica vaginalis, and feem
at laft to be loft upon it near to the lower end of the body of the tefticle.

The nerves which fupply this mufcle are probably branches from the
nerves of the obliquus internus and tranf{verfalis mufcles, for the fame caufe
which throws the abdominal mufcles into action produces a fimilar effe&
on the mufculus teftis, which circum{tance appears to be moft remarkable
in the young fubject. When we cough or act with the abdominal muf-
cles we find the tefticles to be drawn up; the mufculus teftis and abdom-.
inal mufcles obeying the fame command of the will.

At this time of life the teftis is connected in a very particular manner
with the parietes of the abdomen, at that place where in adult bodies the
fpermatic veffels pafs out, and likewife with the fcrotum. This conneétion,
is by means of a fubftance which runs down from the lower end of the
teftis to the fcrotum, and which at prefent I {hall call the ligament, or .
gubernaculum teftis, becaufe it connects the teftis with the {crotum, and
directs ‘its courfe in its defcent. It is of a pyramidal form; its large
bulbous head is upwards and fixed to the lower end of the teftis and
epididymis, and its lower and flender extremity is loft in the cellular mem-
brane of the {crotum. The upper part of this ligament is within the
abdomen, before the pfoas, reaching from the teftis to the groin, or to
where the {permatic veflels begin to pafs through the mufcles. Here the
ligament runs down into the fcrotum precifely in the fame manner as the
’ {permatic veffels pafs down in adult bodies, and is there loft. The lower


par t


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FCETUS. 7


part of the round ligament of the uterus in a foetus very much refembles
this ligament of the teftis; and may be plainly traced down into the
labium, where it is imperceptibly loft. That part of the ligamentum tetftis,
which is within the abdomen, is covered by the peritoneum all round,
except at its pofterior part, which is contiguous to the pfoas, and con-
_ nected with it by the reflected peritonzum, and by the cellular membrane.
It is hard to fay what the ftructure or compofition of this ligament may
be. Itis certainly vafcular and fibrous, and the fibres run in the direétion
of the ligament itfelf. It is covered by the fibres of the cremafter or
mufculus teftis which is placed immediately behind the peritoneum ;
this is not eafily afcertained in the human fubject, but is very evident in
other animals, more efpecially in thofe whofe tefticles remain in the ca-
vity of the abdomen after the animal is full-grown.

In the hedge-hog the teftes continue through life to be lodged within
| the abdomen, in the fame fituation as in the human fcetus ; and they are
faftened by the fame kind of ligament to the infide of the parietes of the
abdomen at the groin. Now, in that animal, I find that the lowermoft
fibres of the internal oblique mufcle, which conftitute the cremafter, are
turned inwards at the place where the {permatic veflels come out in other
animals, making a {mooth edge or lip by their inverfion ; and that then
they mount up in the ligament to the lower end of the teftis. Sometimes
in the human body, and in many other animals, and very often in fheep,
the teftes do not defcend from the cavity of the abdomen till late in life,
or never at all. In the ram, where the teftis is come down into the:
{erotum, the cremafter is a very ftrong mufcle; and, though it be placed
more inwards at its beginning, it paffes down pretty much as it does in
the human body, and is loft on the outfide of the tunica vaginalis ; but in
the ram, whofe teftis remains fufpended in the abdominal cavity, I find
that the fame cremafter exifts, though it is a weaker mufcle ; and inftead
of pafling downwards, as in the former cafe, it turns inwards and up-
wards, and is loft in the peritoneum that covers the ligament which
attaches the teftis to the parietes of the abdomen, and which in this
‘ftate of that animal is about an inch and an half in length. In the


human foetus, while the teftis is retained in the cavity of the abdomen,
the


8 OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FCETUS.


the crematter is fo flender that I cannot trace it to my own {fatisfaction,
either turning up towards the teftis or turning down towards the {crotum,.
Yet from analogy we may conclude that it paffes up to the tefticle, fince
in the adult we find it inferted or loft on the lower part of the tunica va-
ginalis, in the fame manner as in the adult quadruped.

The peritoneum, which covers the teftis and its ligament or guberna-
culum, is firmly united to the furfaces of thofe two bodies ; but all around,
to wit, on the kidney, the pfoas, the iliacus internus, and the lower part
of the abdominal mufcles, that membrane adheres very loofely to all the
furfaces which it covers. Where the peritoneum is continued or reflected
from the abdominal mufcles to the ligament of the teftis, it paffes
firft downwards a little way, as if paffing out of the abdomen, and then
upwards, fo as to cover more of the ligament than what is within the
cavity of the abdomen. At this place the peritoneum is very loofe,
thin in its fubftance, and of a tender gelatinous texture; but all around
the paffage of that ligament the peritoneum is confiderably tighter, thicker,
and of a more firm texture. When the abdominal mufcles are pulled up
fo as to tighten and ftretch the peritoneum, this membrane remains loofe
at the paflage of the ligament, while it is braced or tight all around; and
in that cafe the tight part forms a kind of border or edge around the loofe
. doubled part of the peritoneum, where the teftis is afterwards to pafs. This
loofe part of the peritoneum, like the intro-fufcepted gut, may, by draw-
ing the teftis upwards, be pulled up into the abdomen, and made tight ;
and then there is no appearance of an aperture or paflage down tawards
the fcrotum: but when the fcrotum and ligament are drawn downwards,
the loofe doubled part of the peritoneum defcends with the ligament, and
then there is an aperture from the cavity of the abdomen all around the
forepart of the ligament, which feems ready to receive the teftis. This
aperture becomes Jarger when the teftis defcends lower, as if the pyramidal
or wedge-like ligament was firft drawn down, in order not only to direct
but to make room for the teftis which mutt follow it. In fome feetufes
I found the aperture fo large, that I could puth the teftis into it, as
far as the tendon of the external oblique mufcle. f


From


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FQETUS. 9


From this original fituation within the abdomen the teftis is afterwards
moved to its deftined ftation in the fcrotum. It is the more difficult to
afcertain the exact time of this motion, as we hardly ever know the exact
age of our fubjec&t. According to the obfervations which I have made, it
feems to happen fooner in fome inftances than in others, but generally
about the eighth month. In the feventh month I have commonly found
the teftis in the abdomen, and in the ninth I have as commonly found it
in the upper part of the fecrotum. The defcent being thus early and the
pailage being almoft immediately clofed is the principal means of prevent-
ing the hernia congenita.

At the before mentioned period, the teftis moves downwards till its
lower extremity comes inte contact with the lower part of the abdominal
parietes. By this time the upper part of the ligament, which hitherto
was within the abdomen, has funk downwards, lies in the paflage from
the abdomen to the fcrotum, and lies in that paflage which is afterwards
to receive the teftis. As the teiticle paffes out, it in fome degree inverts the
fituation of the ligament pafling down behind it. What was the anterior
furface of the ligament while in the abdomen now becoming pofterior and
compofing the lower and anterior part of the, tunica vaginalis on which the
mufculus teftis is loft: this is more evident in thofe animals whofe
tefticles readily pafs from the abdomen to the fcrotum. The place where
the ligament is moft confined, and where the teftis meets with moft
obftruction in its defcent, is the ring in the tendon of the external
oblique mufcle; and accordingly I think we fee more men who have
one teftis, or both, lodged immediately within the tendon of that muf-
cle, than who have one or both ftill included in the cavity of the ab-
domen, which I fhall take notice of hereafter.

After the teftis has got quite through the tendon of the external
oblique mufcle, it may ae confidered as pofiefiing its determined ftation ;
though it commonly remains for fome time by the fide of the penis,
and by degrees only defcends to the bottom of the {crotum. And when
the teftis ee defcended entirely into the fcrotum, its ligament is {till con-
nected with it, and lies immediately under it, but is fhortened and com-
prefied.

C | } Having


£0) OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FCETUS.


Having now given an account of the original fituation of the teftes, of
the time of their defcent from the abdomen, and of the route which they
take in their removal to the fcrotum, I fhall in the next place defcribe the
manner in which they carry down the peritoneum with them, and then
explain how that membrane forms the fac of the hernia congenita in fome
bodies, and the tunica vaginalis propria in others.

When the teftis is defcending, and when it has even pafled into the
{crotum, it is ftill covered by the peritoneum, exactly in the fame manner
as when it was within the abdomen ; and the {permatic veflels run down
behind the peritoneum there, as they did when the teftis lay before -the
pfoas mufcle; and that lamella of the peritoneum is united behind with
the teftis, the epididymis, and the {permatic vefiels (befides the vas de-
ferens) as it was in the loins; and the teftis is fixed backwards to the
parts againft which it refts, and is unconnected and loofe forwards, as it
was when in the abdomen. In coming down the teftis brings the peri-
tonzum with it; and the elongation of that membrane, though i in fome
circumftances it be like a common hernial fac, yet in others is very dif
ferent. If we can imagine a common hernial fac reaching to the bottom
of the fcrotum, and covered by the cremafter mufcle, and that the pofte-
rior half of the fac covers, and is united with, the teftis, epididymis,
{permatic veffels, and vas deferens, and that the anterior half of the fac
lies loofe before all thofe parts, it will give a perfect idea of the {tate of
the peritoneum, and of the teftis when it comes firft down into the-
{crotum. The teftis therefore in its defcent does not fall loofe, like the
inteftine or epiploon, into the elongation of the peritoneum ; but it flides:
down from the loins, carrying the peritoneum with it; and both itfelf
and the peritoneum continue to adhere by the cellular rriesrtvean to the:
parts-behind them, as they did when in the loins.. This is a circumftance:
which I think may be eafily underftood ; and yet I fhould fuppofe that.
it may not be {fo very intelligible, becaufe I find ftudents very generally.
puzzled with it, and imagine that, when the teftis comes firft down, it
. fhould be loofe all around, like a piece of the gut or epiploon in a common,
hernia. The ductility of the peritoneum, and its very loofe conneétion
by a flight cellular membrane to the pfoas, and to all the other parts.


around.


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FQTUS. U1


around the teftis, are circumftances which favour its elongation and
defcent into the {crotum with the teftis. This peculiarity of defcent often
takes place in fome of the inteftines;.but it can only happen in thofe
which have adhefions to the loins. ‘This I fufpect to be rather the con-«
fequence of a rupture already formed, than the caufe of the firft forma-
tion of the hernial fac, in which the inteftine lies, and I thould f{uppofe
could only form very gradually. ‘The cacum has been fometimes found
to have defcended into the fcrotum, and to have brought along with it
its adhefions through its whole courfe: the fame thing has happened to
the figmoide flexure of the colon; and I have found the whole of it in
the left fide of the fcrotum, with its adhefions brought down from the
loins. Such herniz cannot be reduced; and in cafe . ftrangulation are
not to be operated upon in the common way; the fac fhould not ‘be
opened, but the ftricture divided, and the newly protruded part reduced.

It is plain from this defcription, that the cavity of the bag, or of the
elongation of the peritoneum, which contains the teftis in the {crotum,
muft at firft communicate with the general cavity of the abdomen, by
an aperture at the infide of the groin. That aperture has exactly the

appearance of a common hernial fac : “the {permatic veflels and vas defe-
rens lie immediately behind it, and a probe pafles readily through it from
the general cavity of the abdomen down to the bottom of the fcrotum.
And if this procefs of the peritoneum be laid open through its whole
length on the forepart, it will be plainly feen to be a continuation of the
peritoneum ; the teftis and epididymis will be feen at the lower part of
it; and the {permatic veflels and the vas deferens will be feen covered by
_ the pofterior part of the bag, in their whole courfe from the groin to the
- teftis.

Thus it is in the human body, wierateeticdas) = Pe ehtly come down;
and thus it is, and continues to be through life, in every quadruped °
which I have examined, where the teftis is in the {crotum; but in the
human bédy the communication between the fac and the cavity of the
abdomen is foon cut off: indeed I believe that the upper part of the fac
naturally begins to contraét as foon as the teftis has paffed through


the mufcles. This opinion is grounded on the following obfervation.
Cia | I have


12 OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FCETUS,


I have feen an inftance where from the age of the fcetus and from every
other mark, it was probable that the ‘teftis was very recently come down,
and yet the upper part of the fac was very narrow: I puthed the teftis
upwards, in order to fee if it could be returned; the attachments of the
teftis eafily admitted of its afcent, and fo did the aperture in the tendon of
the external oblique mufcle ; but the orifice and upper end of the fac would
not, by any means, admit of the teftis being pufhed quite up into the ab-
domen. However this may be, the upper end of the fac certainly con-
tracts, and unites firft, and is quite clofed in a very fhort {pace of time ;
for it is feldom that any aperture remains in.a child born at its full time ;
and this contraction and union is continued downwards till it comes near
the tefticle, where the difpofition for fuch an operation does not exitt,
leaving the lower part of the fac open or loofe, even in the human fubject,
through life, and forms the tunica teftis vaginalis propria, the common
feat of an hydrocele. Many cafes of hydrocele in children feem to prove
that the progrefs of this contraction and union is downwards, for in them
the water commonly extends higher up the chord. than. in the adult,
except in thofe of a confiderable fize; but in fome children this union
feems not to. take place regularly, but is interrupted in the middle, produ-


cing an hydrocele of the chord, which neither communicates with the
abdomen or tunica vaginalis teftis. ‘This contraction and obliteration of


the paffage feems to bea peculiar operation of nature, depending upon
fteady and uniform principles, and not the confequence of inflammation,
or of any thing that is accidental: and therefore, if it is not accomplifhed
at the proper time, the difficulty of bringing about an union of the part is
much greater ; as in children who. have had the fac kept open by. a turn of
the inteftine falling down into the fcrotum immediately after the teftis.
This looks. as if nature, from being baulked. when. fhe was: in the
humour of doing her work, would not, or could not fo eafily do it after-
wards. I fhall readily grant that what has been advanced: here as a proof
of the doctrine, may be explained upon other principles.. This at leaft
is certain, that the clofing of the mouth, and of the neck of the fac, is
peculiar to the human fpecies; and we muft fuppofe the final caufe to
be the prevention of ruptures, to which men are fo much. more liable

| | than.


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FQETUS. 13


than beafts, from their erect ftate of body. In fome cafes the aperture
of the fac is not entirely clofed, allowing a fluid to pafs down and form
a hydrocele, which fluid upon preffure can be fqueezed back into the
belly ; cafes of this kind fometimes give the idea of a gut being pro-
truded, and make it difficult to determine the exaét nature of the cafe.

What is the immediate caufe of the defcent of the teftis from the
loins to the fcrotum? It is evident that it cannot be the compreffive
force of re{piration, becaufe commonly the teftis is in the {crotum before
the child has breathed; that is, the effect has been produced before the
fuppofed caufe has exalted Is the teftis pulled down by the cremafter
mufcle? I can hardly fuppofe that it is; becaufe, if that was the cafe,
I fee no reafon why it fhould not take place in the hedge-hog, as well
as in other quadrupeds; and if the mufculus teftis had this power, it
could not bring it lower than the ring of the mutcle.

Why do the teftes take their blood-veflels from fuch diftant trunks ?
Thofe phyfiologifts, who have puzzled themfelves about the folution of
this queftion, have not confidered, that in the firft formation of the body,,
the teftes are fituated, not in the fcrotum, but immediately below the
kidneys; and that therefore it was very natural that their blood-veffels
fhould rife in the fame manner as thofe of the kidneys, but a little lower.
The great length of the {permatic veflele in the. adult hady will no
doubt occafion a more languid circulation, which, we may fuppofe, was
the intention of nature. :

The fituation of the teftis in the foetus may likewife account for the
contrary directions of the epididymis and of the vas deferens in adult
bodies, though thefe two in reality make only one excretory canal. In
the foetus the epididymis begins. at the upper end of the teftis; and.
it is natural, confidering it as an excretory tube, that it fhould. run.
downwards. And it is-as natural that the reft of the tube, which is
called vas deferens, fhould turn inwards. at the lower end. of the teftis,
becaufe that is its moft direct courfe to the neck of the bladder. Thus
we fee that in the foetus. the excretory duct is always pafling down-
wards. But the te(ftis is directed in its defcent. by the gubernaculum ;
and this is firmly fixed to the lower parts of the ae and epididymis,

and


TA OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FETUS.


and to the beginning of the vas deferens, and thence muft keep thofe
parts invariable in their fituation with refpect to one another: and there-
fore in proportion as the teftis defcends, the vas deferens muft afcend from
the lower end of the teftis ; and it muft, from the paflage through the ab-
dominal mufcles down to the teftis, run parallel with the fpermatic veffels.
The teftis, its coats, and the fpermatic chord, are fo often concerned in
fome of the moft important difeafes and operations of furgery, particularly
in the bubonocele and hydrocele, that their ftructure has been examined
and defcribed by the furgeons, as well as by the anatomifts, of every age.
Yet the defcriptions of the cleareft and beft writers upon the fubject differ
fo much from one another, and many of them differ fo much from what
is obvious and demonftrable by diffection, that it would feem difficult to
account for fuch a variety of opinions. The very different {tate of the
parts in the quadruped, and in the human body, no doubt, muft have oc-
cafioned error and confufion among the writers of more antient times,
when the parts of the human body were defcribed from diflections and ob-
fervations made principally upon brutes: and the circumftances in the
{tructure of the parts, which are peculiar to the foetus, having been im-
perfectly underftood, we may fuppofe, has likewife contributed to make


perplexity and contradiction among authors.
Baron Haller, i in hio Opufeula Patholoyica, has obfer ved, es in infants,


fometimes the inteftine falls down into the {crotum after the teftis, or along
with it, and occafions what he calls the hernia congenita. In fuch a cafe
the hernial fac is formed before the inteftine falls down, as that i ingenious
anatomift has obferved. There are befides two very peculiar circumftan-
ces in a rupture of this kind; the inteftine is always in immediate conta@
with the teftis, and there is no tunica vaginalis propria teftis. The ftruc-
ture of the parts in the feetus explains, in the moft fatisfactory manner,
both thofe circumftances, however extraordinary they muft appear to a
man who is only converfant with the ftructure of the parts in fubjects of
a more advanced age: and indeed it is fo clear that it needs no illuftration.
I may obferve, however that the hernia congenita may happen, not only
by the inteftine falling down to the teftis before the aperture of the fac be

clofed,


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FQ&TUS, 15


clofed, but perhaps afterwards: for when the fac has been but recently
clofed, it feems poflible enough that violence may open it again.

It muft likewife be obvious to every anatomift, who examines the {tate
of the teftis in children of different ages, that the mouth and neck only of
the fac clofe up, and that the lower part of the fac remains loofe around
the teftis, and makes the tunica vaginalis propria. Whence it is plain that
this tunic was originally a part of the elongated peritoneum: and as that
tunic is undoubtedly the feat of the true hydrocele, it is alfo plain that the
hernia congenita and the true hydrocele cannot exift together in the fame
fide of the {crotum ; for when there is a hernia congenita, there is no.
other cavity than that of the hernial fac; and that cavity communi-
cates with the general cavity of the abdowien:

The obfervations, contained in the two laft paragraphs, occurred to
my brother upon reading Baron Haller’s. Opufcula Pathologica, and gave
rife to my inquiries upon this fubject.

Having given an account of the fituation of the: tefticles in the fcetus,
of their defcent, and the circumftances attending it, I fhall next confider
the cafes where this change takes place in one or both tefticles later than
_ the ufual or natural time: and having taken notice of the confequences of

this defcent when it happens at fo late a period, I fhall proceed to mention
thofe cafés in which the tefticles never pafs out of the abdomen.

I have faid, that the early coming down of the tefticles, and clofing of
the mouth of the fac, by ufually taking place before birth, hinder the
defcent of any part of the abdominal vifcera ; but when the tefticles re-
main in their firft fituation beyond this period, thefe advantages are loft ;
a part of the inteftines or epiploon being liable to defcend along with them.
_ The firft or natural procefs, in fome inftances, not having been begun,
or having been interrupted before birth, it becomes afterwards very uncer-
tain when the defcent will be compleated; yet I think the completion
moft frequently happens between the years of two and ten, while the per-
fon is young and growing, being feldom delayed beyond the age of puberty.

It is not eafy to afcertain the caufe of this failure in the defcent of the
tefticle; but i am inclined to fufpec that the fault originates in the tef-
ticles Tisai ; it is however certain that the tefticle which has com-

pleated


16 OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FQ:TUS.


‘pleated its defcent, is the largeft, which is more evident in the quadruped
than in the human fubje&t; as in thefe we can have an opportunity of
examining the parts when we pleafe, and can determine how fmall, in
comparifon with the other, that tefticle is which has exceeded the ufual
time of coming down; it never defcends fo low as the other.

The defcent of that tefticle is very flow, which is not compleated before
birth, often requiring years for that purpofe; it fometimes never reaching
the fcrotum, efpecially the lower part of it. There is oftner I believe an
inequality in the fituation of the two tefticles than is commonly imma-
gined; they are feldom equally low in the fcrotum ; and I am of opinion
that the loweft is the moft vigorous, having taken the lead readily and
come to its place at once: the part where it meets with the greateft
difficulty in its defcent, is in the divifion of the tendon of the external
oblique mufcle, called the ring. |

Hew far an erect pofition of body, the action of the abdominal
mufcles, and the effect produced upon the contents of the abdomen in
breathing, may contribute mechanically to the defcent of the tefticles
when the natural operations of the animal ceconomy have failed, I will
not pretend to decide; but when we fee thefe combined actions produ-
cing an unnatural defcent of a portion of inteftine, we may conceive
that they are likewile capable of contributing to the defcent of the
tefticle.

When the tefticle has remained in the cavity of the abdomen beyond
the ufual time, it is impoffible to fay whether the difpofition for clo-
fing up the paflage, after it has pafled out, is in fome meafure loft or
not; but when it comes down after birth, we can eafily fuppofe fome
portion of inteftine or epiploon more ready to defcend and prevent the clo-
fing of the mouth of the fac, than before the child was born when no fuch
actions had taken place; we fhould therefore watch this defcent of the
tefticle, and endeavour by art to procure that union which the natural’
powers are either not difpofed to perform, or are prevented from compleat-
ing by the defcent of other parts. But art fhould not be ufed too foon,
nor till the tefticle has got a little way below the ring. As this progrefs
is very flow, efpecially when the tefticle is creeping through the ring, a

doubt


OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FQETUS. 17


doubt often arifes in the mind, whether it is better entirely to prevent its
paffage, or to affift it by exercife or other means ; it would certainly be the
beft practice to affift it if that could be done effectually. When it has got
upon the outfide of the tendon it in general can be eafily pufhed up again
into the abdomen ; and in thefe two fituations it will fometimes play back-
wards and forwards, for years, without ever coming low enough to allow
of the ufe of artificial means to prevent its defcent, or to prevent a rupture.
In this cafe it becomes difficult to determine what fhould be done ; but
from what I have feen I fhould be inclined to wait the defcent and give it
every afliftance in my power. Indeed in all cafes I would advife waiting
with patience; for in moft of thofe which I have feen, years have elapfed
from the firft appearance of the tefticle under the ring of the abdominal
mufcle before it has reached that fituation in which we may fafely apply
a trufs. I never perceived that any inconvenience arofe from waiting ; and
the danger, if there is any, may be in fone degree avoided. I-have ivats
recommended moderate, not violent exercife.

When the tefticle has got fome way below the ring then the ary is to
be treated as an inguinal hernia, and a trufs applied upon the ring above
the tefticle ; taking care the tefticle is not injured by it: but as this gene-
tally happens at too early a period for the patients themfelves to be able to
attend to it, it becomes the more neceflary that the furgeon who is em-
ployed fhould be very attentive, and that thofe who have the charge of
their education fhould watch them with particular care.

If it is thought advifable to prevent the tefticle from coming down, a
trufs is equally adapted for that purpofe, as for preventing the de{cent of
an inteftine where there is an hernial fac.

It fometimes happens that one of the tefticles remains in the cavity of
the abdomen through life, never afluming the difpofition to change its
fituation ; when this happens, the perfon naturally concludes that he has
only one tefticle ; and it can only be known that he had two by an exami-
nation of thefe parts after death: it is however poffible in fome inftan-
ces that one may be wanting; but if we are to reafon from analogy,
we mutt fuppofe this very feldom'to be the cafe. As it is a very com~
mon circumf{tance for many ieee to have only one tefticle in the

{crotum,


28 OF THE SITUATION OF THE TESTIS IN THE FCETUS.


{crotum, and in fuch which are killed for food, and from that circum-
{tance come more particularly under obfervation, we in general find the -
other in the cavity of the abdomen; and in fome inftances they are
both found lying in that cavity.

When both tefticles remain through life in the belly, I believe that
they are exceedingly imperfect, and incapable of performing the natural
functions of thofe organs; and this imperfection prevents the difpofition
for their defcent taking place. They are more defective than thofe which
are late in coming into the fcrotum. This is very evident in the quad-
ruped, for in them the tefticle which has reached the fcrotum is con-
fiderably larger than that which remains in the abdomen. It is pro-
bable that it is a tendency towards an hermaphrodite, the tefticle feldom
being well formed. In fuch cafes nothing is to be done by art; as it
is not poffible to give the ftimulus of perfection to fuch tefticles, which
I believe is neceflary to make them affume the difpofition which is re-
quifite for their defcent; and the ring of the external oblique mutcle is
probably lefs liable, in thefe inftances, to allow of the defcent of a
portion of inteftine than where the tefticles have pafied through it;
fuch perfons being perhaps more fecure from accidents of this kind than
if they had been more perfectly formed.

That the defcriptions which I have given may be better undemdem I
have annexed three figures that were carefully taken from nature.


PLATE ‘1,


os an
ane ta ime ise. ath
fe hee


20 Pil Art Tek

QQ The fpermatic arteries running a little ferpentine.

RR The teftes fituated before the pfoe mufcles, a little higher than the
inguina. In this figure the interior edge of the teftis is turned a_
little outwards, to fhow the fpermatic veflels coming forwards to
the pofterior edge of the teftis, in the duplicature of the perito-
nzum: which duplicature connects the teftis, inclofes its vefiels,
and gives it an external fmooth coat, much after the fame manner
as the duplicature of the mefentery connects the inteftine, conveys
its veflels, and gives it a polifhed covering.

The beginning of the epididymis is feen at the upper end of the
teftis, from which it runs down on the outfide (and therefore in this
view behind the body) of the teftis.

SS The vas deferens of each fide paffing acrofs, in a ferpentine courfe,
from the extremity of the epididymis at the outfide of the lower end
of the teftis, and then before the lower part of the ureter, in its way
to the veficula feminalis.

TT What I have called the gubernacula or ligaments of the teftes in a
feetus. On the left fide this ligament is entire, fo that it is feen
going down from the lower end of the teftis, through the ring of

_ the mufcle, into the fcrotum: but on the right fide its upper and
forepart is cut away, that the continuity of the epididymis and vas
deferens may be feen; and no more of the ligament is exhibited
than what is fituated within the cavity of the abdomen.

N. B. The lower part of the ligament, as it is feen in the right fide of
this figure, lies fo loofe in the paffage through the mufcles, and is
there fo loofely covered by the peritoneum, that, when the teftis is
pulled up, more of the ligament is feen within the cavity of the ab-
domen, and then the peritonzum is made tight and {mooth at that
place; but, on the contrary, when the fcrotum is pulled downwards
the lower part of the ligament is dragged fome way down through
the paflage in the mufcles, and the loofe peritoneum is carried along
with it; fo that then there is a {mall elongation of that membrane,
with an orifice from the cavity of the belly, like the mouth of a
{mall hernial fac, on the forepart of the ligament.


PLATE II.


a>


¢


‘ A aes Z
eae mE ita


22 PLA ei


T The external appearance of the fpermatic rope of the left fide.

U The external appearance of the teftis, when its tunica vaginalis, or
procefs of the peritoneum, is a little diftended with air or water
poured into it from the cavity of the abdomen.

V The right teftis, brought fully into view by laying open the procefs of
the peritoneum in its whole length.

W The epididymis of the fame fide.

XX The fpermatic veflels.

Y The vas deferens. N. B. The peritoneum lies before the {permatic
veffels and vas deferens, or covers them within the abdomen; and
its procefs or elongation covers them in the fame manner all the

_ way from the abdominal mufcles downwards; fo that if the intef-
tine flips down after the teftis in a foetus it muft pe placed before
the fpermatic veflels and vas deferens.

Z The ureter.

& The remains of the gubernaculum or ligament High bound and cons
ducted the teftis to the fcrotum.


N. B. It is evident that part of the peritonzum, which in this figure,
is carried down in the form of a hernial fac to a little below the
teftis, lies before the teftis, epididymis, fpermatic veffels, and vas
deferens, and that it covers thofe parts in the fame manner as it
covers the abdominal vifcera, viz. the pofterior part of the fac (fup-
pofing the fac to be cut lengthways into two halves) is united with
them, and gives them a fmooth furface, while the anterior half of
the fac lies loofe before them, and may be removed to fome diftance
from them, as when the fac is diftended with water.


PLATE III.


.7 hoki


Tee ebay A
a ti. nee ie poytt


* a


x een
LP
eA


Jie ag sal
see ba


Aa
¥


PR: i (hie st .


26 PSL SA TENT.


D The mufcles of the thigh cut through at their origin where they arife
from a middle tendon.

E The lower end of the right kidney.

FG The iliac veffels expofed to fhow their fituation.

H_ The remains of the umbilical artery.

I The urinary bladder.

K The body of the right tefticle, with the ramifications of the veins upon
the furface.

L, The epididymis.

M_ The vas deferens.

N_ The veficula, commonly called feminales.


OBSERVATIONS


eae oa


OBSERVATIONS ON THE GLANDS SITUATED
BETWEEN THE RECTUM AND BLADDER,
CALLED VESICULZ SEMINALES.,


HE bags fituated between the bladder and re€tum in the male of
fome animals, which are commonly called veficule feminales, have
been confidered as refervoirs for the femen, fecreted by the tefticles in the
fame manner as the gall-bladder is fuppofed to be a refervoir for the bile.
Phyfiologifts muft have been led to this opinion from obferving that, in
the human fubject their ducts communicate with the vafa deferentia
before their termination in the urethra. This communication was fup-
pofed to allow the femen, when not immedjately wanted, to pafs into
thefe bags from the vafa deferentia by a fpecies of regurgitation. But
more accurate obfervations refpecting their ftructure and contents in the
human fubject, and on fimilar parts in other animals fuppofed to anfwer
the fame purpofe, joined to the circumftance of their not being found in
every clafs, induced me to conclude that this opinion was erroneous.
To throw as much light upon this fubje@t as poffible, I made a number
of experiments, and availed myfelf of every opportunity which offered of
examining whatever could in any way elucidate the point; and from what
I have been able to collect, I think it will appear that they do not ferve
the purpofe of refervoirs of the femen.

To proceed regularly with my inveftigation, I fhall begin by compa-
ring the contents of thefe veficule with the femen as it is emitted from
the penis of a living man: from which comparifon it appears that the
two fecretions are very different in their fenfible properties of colour and
fmell; and although the femen which conftitutes the firft part of the
cHntnIbH is evidently different from the-laft, yet ae part of it is unlike
the mucus found in thefe veficule.

The femen firft difcharged from the living body is of a bluith white


colour, in confiftence like cream, and fimilar to what is found in the
m2 vata


28 ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULA SEMINALES.


vafa deferentia after death: while that which follows is fomewhat like
the common mucus of the nofe, but lefs vifcid. 'The femen becomes
more fluid upon expofure to the air, particularly that firft thrown out ;
which is the very reverfe of what happens to fecretions in general. The
{mell of the femen is maukifh and unpleafant, exactly refembling that of
the farina of the Spanith chefnut. The tafte is at firft infipid ; yet there
is fomewhat of pungency in it, which after fome little time ftimulates
and excites a degree of warmth in the mouth. The fluid contained in
thefe veficulz, in a dead body, is of a brownifh colour, and often varies
in its confiftence in different parts of the bag, as if not well mixed. Its
{mell does not refemble that of the femen ; and it does not become more
fluid by being expofed to the air.

It may however be objected, that the contents of the veficule are ge-
nerally found in a putrid ftate, and have by that means undergone a —
change in their fenfible properties. But the objection is readily obviated
by comparing this fluid with that in the vafa deferentia as it comes from
the tefticles of the fame dead body, between which there appears to be
no refemblance. To be ftill more certain of the nature of the contents of
thefe veficule, than was poffible from the examination of bodies which
had been dead fome time, I took an opportunity of opening a man im-
mediately after his death, who had been killed by a cannon-ball. The
fluid in the veficule was of a lighter colour than is ufually found in men
who have been dead a confiderable time; but it was not by any means
like the femen either in colour or fmell. In another man who died in-
ftantaneoufly, in confequence of falling a confiderable height, and whofe
body I infpected foon after the accident, I found the contents of the
veficule of a lightifh whey colour, having nothing of the {mell of femen;
and in fo fluid a ftate as to run out on cutting into them. . | .

I have likewife examined with attention a mucus which fame men
difcharge upon {training hard while at ftool, or after throwing out the
laft drops of urine, an action which requires a confiderable exertion of the
parts. ‘This difcharge is generally called a feminal weaknefs, and is ©
I believe commonly fuppofed to be the femen*; but in all the cafes of


@ Vide Treatife on the Venereal Difeafe, page 197. i
this


ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICUL SEMINALES. 29


this kind in which I have been confulted, it nearly refembled the con-
tents of the veficule in the dead body; perhaps not quite of fo deep a
colour. I endeavoured in vain to perfuade a gentleman who had this
complaint, that the difcharge was not feminal; till by examining his
own femen, and comparing it with that mucus, he was convinced of the
difference. This gentleman had the power of emitting the femen in the
fame quantity as ufual, immediately after the mucus had been difcharged,
which is a further proof that this fluid is not femen.* |
In this country eunuchs feldom come under our examination. We
have fometimes however opportunities of opening the bodies of thofe
-who have, in confequence of difeafe or accident, loft one or both tefticles ;
and feveral fubjects of this kind I have infpected after death. Perfons
who have only loft one tefticle are more to our prefent purpofe than
thofe who have been deprived of both. For it is to be prefumed that
fuch men have afterwards had connection with women, and confequently
had the action of emiffion, which muft have emptied the veficulz of the
caftrated fide, if thefe had contained femen; andas they could not be |
replenifhed, they fhould have been found empty after death. We have -
alfo in fuch cafes an opportunity of making comparative obfervations
between the veficule of the perfect and thofe of the imperfect fide. In
the eunuch fuch emiffions never can happen ; for the tefticles being gone,
the natural and leading ftimulus is loft ; therefore if in them the veficule
were found full after death, it might be fuppofed to be the femen which
they had received from the tefticles before caftration, and which had
remained there ever fince. ‘But as caftration is in fuch cafes ufually per-
formed on children, this circumftance fhould rather be confidered as a
proof that they fecrete their own mucus; yet it is probable they will
neither be fo large nor fo full in them as in the perfect man; for I am of
opinion that they are connected with generation ; and that if the confti-
tution is deprived of that power, they will not grow to the full fize.
But where only one tefticle is removed, its lofs does not in the leaft affect


* The difcharge was truly fuppofed to be the contents of the veficula ; and it being
imagined that thofe contained femen, according to this reafoning, the difcharge muft be


feminal. ;
generation,


=


30 ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULZ SEMINALES.


generation, therefore does not produce any change in the veficula of that
fide from which the tefticle is taken,; becaufe the veficula does not depend
upon the tefticle for its fecretion, but upon the conftitution, and the perfon
being capable of the action of generation.

A man who was under my care in St. George’s Hofpital for a venereak
complaint, died there, and was difcovered to have loft his right tefticle.
From the cicatrix being hardly obfervable, it muft have been removed
fome confiderable time before his death ; and the complaint for which he
was received into the hofpital is a convincing proof that he had connec-
tion with women after that period.

I infpected the body in the prefence of Mr. Hodges, the houfe- cited
and feveral of the pupils of the hofpital. Upon diffeéting out and exa-
mining the contents of the pelvis, with the penis and {crotum, I found
that the vas deferens of the right fide was fmaller and firmer in its tex-
ture than the other, efpecially at that end next to the abdominal rings,
near to the part that had been cut through in the operation. ‘The cel-
lular membrane furrounding the duc on the right fide was not fo koofe as
on the left ; neither were the veffels which ramified on the right veficula
fo full of blood. But upon opening the veficulz, both appeared to be
filled with a kind of mucus fimilar to that which is found in other dead
bodies ; and the veficula of the right fide was rather larger than that on
the left. Whatever therefore may be the real ufe of thefe veficule, we
have a proof from this diffeCtion, that in the human fubject they do not
contain the femen.

In a man who died in St. Genre’ s Hofpital with a very large bubono-
cele, the tefticle of that fide was difcovered to have almoft loft its natural
texture from the preflure of the hernial fac; and upon examining the —
tefticle with attention, there was no appearance of vas deferens till we
came near the bladder, where it was almoft as large as ufual. The vefi-
cula of that fide was found to be as full as the other, and to contain the
fame kind of mucus.

I extirpated the left tefticle of a Frenchman on account of its being
difeafed. He was a married man, and died about a: year afterwards,
having been extremely ill for feveral months before his death. On ex-

- amining


ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULA SEMINALES. 31


amining the body, the veficule were both found nearly full; more efpe-
cially that of the left fide, which I fuppofe might be accidental. But
upon examining the vas deferens of the left fide, where it lies along the
fide of this bag, and where it has a fimilar ftructure with the veficule,
I found it filled with the fame kind of mucus; and this I believe is.
always the cafe, whether the tefticle has been removed or not.

A young man, a coachman, who had a difeafe in his left tefticle, had
it removed, at St. George’s Hofpital, by Mr. Walker, in Auguft 1785 ;
and in February 1786 he returned again to the hofpital, on account of
uncommon pains all over him, and for which he requefted to be put into
the warm bath. But as he was going from the ward to the bath he
dropped down and died almoft immediately. The body was infpected,
with a view to difcover the caufe of his death ; and upon an examination
of the veficule, the bag of the left fide was as full as that on the right ;
and the contents in both were exaétly fimilar.

In diffecting a male-fubject, in the year 1755, for a fide! view of the
contents of the pelvis, I found a bag on the left fide, lying contiguous to
the peritonzum, juft on the fide of the pelvis where the internal iliac
veffels divide above the angle of reflection of the peritoneum at the union
of the bladder and rectum. The left vas deferens was feen paffing on
to this bag; and what is very fingular, that of the right, or oppofite
fide, croffed the bladder near its union with the rectum. to join it, I
traced the left vas deferens down to the tefticle; but on following the
right through the ring of the external oblique mufcle, I difcovered that
it terminated at once, about an inch from its paffage out of the abdomen,
in a blunt point, which was impervious. On examining the f{permatic
chord from this point to the tefticle, [ could not find any vas deferens ;
but by beginning at the tefticle, and tracing the epididymis from its
origin about half way along where it lies upon the body of the tefticle,
I found that it at firft became ftraight, and foon after feemed to terminate
in a point. The canal at this part was fo large as to allow of being
filled with quickfilver, which however did not pafs far, fo that a portion


of the epididymis was wanting ; and the vas deferens for nearly the whole
; length


32 ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULA SEMINALES.


length of the fpermatic chord of the right fide.* On the left fide the
vas deferens begun where the epididymis commonly terminates ; and there
was a deficiency of nearly an inch of the extremity of the epididymis.’ I
then diffected the bag above mentioned, which proved to be the two ve-
ficule ; for by blowing air from one vas deferens, I could only inflate
half of it; and from the other vas deferens, the other half. ‘They con-
tained the mucus commonly found in thefe bags; but upon the moft
accurate examination I could difcover no duct leading from them to the
proftate gland, nor any remains of one.

In this fubject it was evident that there was no communication between
the vas deferens and epididymis ; nor between thefe bags and the urethra.
The caput gallinaginis had the common appearance; but there were no
orifices to be feen. ‘The tefticles were very found, and the ducts from
them to the epididymis were very manifeft and full of femen.‘


@ Vide plate I, fig. 1. » Vide plate I, fig. 2.

© As the femen, in confequence of this preternatural formation of parts, could not be
conveyed to the urethra in the ufual way, I conceived it poffible that there might be another
unnatural conftru€tion to make up for the deficiency in the vas deferens, and therefore exa-
mined it very carefully to fee if there were no fupernumerary vafa deferentia. I was led to
do this more particularly from often finding parts refembling them where they could anfwer
no kind of purpofe.. By a fupernumerary vas deferens, I mean.a fmall du@t which fometimes
arifes from the epididymis, and pafles up the fpermatic chord along with the vas deferens,
and commonly terminates in a blind end, near to which it is fometimes a little enlarged. I
never found this duct go on to the urethra; but in fome inftances have feen it accompany the
vas deferens as far as the brim of the pelvis. There is no abfolute proof that this is a fuper-
numerary vas deferens ; but as we find the ducts of glands in general very fubje& to fingu-
Jarities, and that there are frequently fupernumerary ducts, there being often two ureters to
one kidney, fometimies diftinét from beginning to end; at other times both arifing from one
pelvis. Thefe duds, arifing from the epididymis, I am inclined to believe, from analogy, are
of a nature fimilar to the double ureters. “They refemble the.vas deferens, as being contin-
uations of fome of the tubes of the epididymis ; are conyoluted where they come off from it $
and afterwards become a {traight canal, pafling along with it for fome way, when they are
eommonly obliterated.

The idea of their being for the purpofe of returning the fuperfluous femen to the circula-
tion is certainly erroneous, from their being fo feldom met with, and fo very feldom continued
further than the brim of the pelvis.


From


ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULA SEMINALES. or


From thefe circumftances we have a prefumptive proof, that the femen
can be abforbed in the body of the tefticle, and in the epididymis ; and
that the veficule fecrete a mucus which they are capable of abforbing
when it cannot be made ufe of. We may likewife infer from what has.
been faid, that the femen is not retained in refervoirs after it is fecreted,
and kept there till it is ufed; but that it is fecreted at the time in con-.
fequence of certain Sesten of the mind {timulating the tefticles to
this action: for we find, that if lafcivious ideas are excited in the mind,
and the paroxyfm is afterwards prevented from coming on, the tefticles.
become painful and {welled from the quantity of femen fecreted and the
encteafed aGtion of the vefiels ; which pain and {welling is removed im-
mediately upon the paroxy{m being brought on and the femen evacuated ;
but if that does not take place, the action of the veffels is fill kept up,
and the pain in the tefticles will in general continue till the paroxyfin and
evacuation of the femen is brought on, which renders the ac complete ;
without which a {top cannot be put to the action of the veffels that pro-
duce the fecretion, nor the parts be allowed to fall back into their natural
ftate. There is at this time no fenfation of any kind felt in the feat of
' the veficule feminales. The pain in the tefticles, in confequence of being
filled with femen and the action being incomplete, is fometimes fo con-
fiderable as to make it neceflary to produce an evacuation of the femen to
relieve the patient. |

It may be obferved, in fupport of this opinion, that thefe bags are as
full of mucus in bodies much emaciated, where the perfon has died from
a lingering difeafe, as in ftrong robuft bodies where death has happened
from violence or acute difeafes; and they are nearly as full in the old
as in the young ; which moft probably would not be the cafe if they
contained femen. ‘Thefe facts, taken from the human {fubjed, are, I
think, fufficient to eftablifh the opinion which I have laid down; but
for the fatisfaction of others, I fhall give fuch facts and obfervations as
have occurred in my diffection of other animals; confining myfelf to.
thofe which tend to clear up the point in: queftion.. i

Thefe veficule are not fimilar either in fhape or contents in any two

genera of animals which I have diffected ; and they differ more in fize,
. ft according


34 ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULZ SEMINALES.


according to the bulk of the animal, than any other parts whofe ufes in
different animals are the fame; while the femen in moft of thofe which I
have examined may be faid to be fimilar. 7

The analogy which obtains between thefe bags ad the gall-bladder,
in the human fubject, by no means holds equally good when applied to
other animals. In the horfe they are two bags like fmall urinary blad-
ders, almoft loofe and pendulous, with a partial coat from the perito-

neum, under which there are two layers of mufcular fibres; they are
' thicker in their coats at the fundus than any other part, and appear there
to be glandular. Their openings into the urethra are very large; and
although they open clofe to the vafa deferentia, do not communicate
with them. The feptum between the two ducts is not continued on
quite to the urethra, fo that they cannot, in ftrict language, be faid to
enter that paffage feparately ; but there is not length of common du@&
fufficient to admit of regurgitation from the vafa deferentia into thefe bags.
They are not of the fame fize in the gelding and in the ftone-horfe, being
largeft in the laft. Their contents in both are exactly fimilar, and nearly
equal in quantity; but in no way refembling the femen emitted by the
{tone-horfe in the coitus, or what is found in the vas deferens after death.

In the boar thefe bags are extremely large, and divided into cells of a
confiderable fize ; or they may more properly be faid to form ramifications
clofely connected with one another, and having a large canal or du@
common to the whole. The ducts contain a whitifh fluid, very unlike
what is found in the vafa deferentia of the fame animal, with which they
have not the leaft communication.

In the rat the bags are large and flat, with ferrated edges, and lie fome
way within the abdomen, containing a thick afh coloured mucus, nearly
of the confiftence of foft cheefe, very different from what is found in the
vafa deferentia of the fame animal, with which they do not communicate.

In the beaver the bags are convoluted; their ducts have no communi-
cation with the vafa deferentia ; .but both the one and the other open on
the veru montanum. - |

In the Guinea-pig they are compofed of long cylindrical tubes, and lie —
in the cavity of the belly ; are fmooth on their external furface, and do

not


ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULZ SEMINALES. 35


not communicate with the vafa deferentia. They contain a thick bluith
tranfparent fubftance which is fofteft near the fundus, and becomes firmer
towards the openings into the urethra, where it is as folid as common
_cheefe. From this circumftance, and what is obferved in the horfe, the
fundus would appear to be the part which fecretes this fubftance, which
is very different in colour -and confiftence from the contents of the‘ vafa
_deferentia, and is often found in broken pieces in the urethra.

To be more certain that the fubftance contained in thefe bags was not _
the fecretion of the tefticle, I extracted one of the tefticles of a Guinea-.
pig; and fix months afterwards gave it the female. As foon as the action.
of copulation was over, (in which all the parts containing femen fhould.
naturally have emptied themfelves) I killed the animal, and upon exami-
nation found the veficula of the perfect fide, and that of the fide from
which the tefticle had been removed, both filled with a fubftance in every.
refpect fimilar. It will fcarcely be alledged that this fubftance had been |
contained in the bag before the extirpation of the tefticle; nor could it be
femen, which muft have been all thrown out in the previous connection
with the female.

To afcertain that the contents of the veficulz are not difcharged into.
the vagina of the female, with the femen in the act of emiffion, I killed
a female Guinea-pig as foon as the male had left her, and examined with
attention what was.contained in the vagina and uterus; in neither could
I find any of the mucus of the veficule, which from its firmnefs mutt.
have been eafily detected.

In the hedge-hog thefe bags are very large, being twice the fize: of
the veficule in the human fubject.

Many animals have no fuch bags, and I believe they are wanting in.
the greater part of that clafs which live chiefly upon animal food : they
are however to be found in fome of them; and the hedge-hog is an.
example. There is. no apparent difference in the tefticles,. vafa deferen-
tia, or femen. of the animals which have veficulz and. of. thofe which
have none; and the mode of copulation, as far as thefe bags can be con-.
cerned, is very fimilar in both.


F 2 In


36 ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULA SEMINALES.


In birds, as far as I have yet obferved, there is nothing analogous to
thefe bags; and yet there appears to be no difference between the mode
of copulation of the drake and the bull, or ram; and it is natural to
fuppofe that if the veficule were refervoirs of: Brieas they would be more
néceflary in birds ; the power of repeating the act of copulation being in
them infinitely greater than in quadrupeds: and indeed we find that in
birds there are refervoirs which will account for this power; the vafa
deferentia being enlarged juft before they open into the rectum, probably
to anfwer that intention. As birds have no urethra, but fimply a groove,
as the drake and gander; and many are even without a groove, as the
common fowl, it was ablolutely neceflary there fhould be fuch a refervoir
fomewhere.

What I have obferved of the refervoir of birds is equally applicable to
amphibious animals and to that order of fifh called rays.

From the above obfervations I think we may fairly conclude that thefe
veficule are not for the purpofe of containing femen ; the fingle circum-
ftance of their ducts being united to thofe of the unbetes in the human
fubject not appearing fufficient to fet afide the many facts which are con
tradictory to fuch an opinion.

Having endeavoured to fhow that the ufe of thefe veficule has homer
been mifunderftood, the following obfervations will tend to prove that -
they are fubfervient to generation, though their particular ufe is not yet
difcovered ; and for the better underftanding this part of the fubje& I
fhall premife the following facts. :

Animals have their natural feelings raifed or increafed in proportion as
the parts connected with fuch feelings are formed, and are in a ftate to
act; and the difpofition for action in thefe parts is alfo in proportion to
their formation and the excitement of fuch feelings. But that thefe feel-
ings may be duly excited, it is neceflary that the animal and the parts
fhould be healthy, in good condition, and in a certain degree of heat
fuitable to that clafs to which the animal belongs. As in moft parts of
' the globe the feafons vary in their temperature; the cold in fome of
them is fo confiderable as to prevent thofe feelings or difpofitions in
animals from taking place; and in many fituations the general influence


of


ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULZ SEMINALES. a4


of the cold upon them is fo great, as during its continuance to deprive
them of thefe feelings and eab Gets and to render them, for the time,
unfit for the purpofes of generation."

The tefticle becomes at this feafon {mall, a fact very obvious in birds,.
of which the fparrow may be produced as a proof: for if a cock-fparrow
is killed in the winter, before the days have begun to lengthen, the tefti-
cle will be found very fmall’; but if that organ is examined at different
times in other {parrows, as the warmth of the weather increafes, and if
this examination is continued to the breeding feafon, the difference in
the fize of the tefticle will be very ftriking.© This circumftance is not
peculiar to. birds, but is common, as far as I yet know, to all animals
which have their feafons of copulation. In the buck we find the tefticles
are reduced to a very fmall fize in the winter; but in the land-moufe,
mole, &c. this diminution is ftill more remarkable. Thofe animals,
on the contrary, who are not in a ftate of nature, have no fuch change
take place in their tefticles; and from not being much affected by feafons
are confequently always in good condition, and in that ftate to which
other animals that are left to themfelves can only attain in the warmer
feafon. Therefore in man, who is in the ftate we have defcribed, the
tefticles are nearly of the fame fize in winter as in fummer: and nearly,
_ though not exactly, the fame thing may be obferved in the horfe, ram,
&c. thefe animals having their feafons in a given degree.

The variation above taken notice of is not confined to the tefticles, but
alfo extends to the parts which are connected with them. For in thofe
animals that have their feafons for propagation, the moft diftinétly marked,
as the land-moufe, mole, &c. the veficulez are hardly difcernible in the
winter ; and in the fpring are very large, varying in fize in a manner
fimilar to the tefticle. It may however be alledged, that the change in
thefe bags might naturally be fuppofed to take place, admitting them
to be feminal refervoirs: but what happens to the proftate gland, which


4 It is not required that the feafon for the copulation of different animals fhould be equall y
warm; for the frog copulates in very cold weather, while the fnake and lizard; which are
alfo cold, fleeping animals, do not copulate till the feafon is warm.


> Vide plate IM, fig. 1. ¢ Vide plate Il. fig. 5. Fi
as


38 ‘ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICUL/ SEMINALES.


has never been fuppofed to contain femen, will take off the force of this
objection ; fince in all the animals which have fuch a gland (and which
have their feafon for propagation) it undergoes a fimilar change. In
the mole the proftate gland in winter is hardly obfervable, but in the
{pring becomes very large and is filled with mucus.

From thefe obfervations it is reafonable to infer that the ufe of the veficu-
le in the animal ceconomy, muft in common, with many other parts, de-
pend upon the tefticles. For the penis, urethra, and all the parts connected
with them are fo far fubfervient to the tefticles, that I am perfuaded few
of them would have exifted if there had been no tefticles in the original
conftruction of the body ; and thefe would have been fo formed as merely
to affift in the expulfion of the urine. To illuftrate this opinion let us
obferve what is the difference between thefe parts in the perfect male,
and in a male that has been deprived of the tefticles when very young, at
an age in which they have had no fuch influence upon the animal cco-
nomy as to effect the growth of the other parts. In the perfect male the
penis is large ; the corpora cavernofa* being capable of dilatation. The:
corpus fpongiofum is very vafcular’; and that part of the canal which
is called the bulb is confiderably enlarged, forming a cavity ; the muf-
culi acceleratores urine, as they are termed, are ftrong and healthy. In
many animals. which have long penifes, they are continued forwards.
to the end of it; and in others they are not extended fo far, but are very
large.

On the contrary, in the caftrated animal the penis is {mall and not
capable of much dilatation ; the corpus fpongiofum is lefs vafcular; the
cavity at the bulb is little larger than the canal of the urethra ; and the


4 The cells of the corpora cavernofa are mufcular, although no fuch appearance is to be
obferved in men: for the penis in ereétion is not at all times equally diftended: the penis in
a cold day is not fo large in ereétion as in a warm one; which probably arifes from a kind of
f{pafm that could not act upon it if it were not mufcular. :

In the horfe, the parts compofing the cells of the penis appear evidently mufcular to the eye ;
and in a horfe juft killed, they contract upon being ftimulated..


» It may not be improper to:obferve that the corpus fpongiof{um urethra, and-glans penis,
are not {pongy or cellular, but made up of a plexus of veins.. This ftru@ure is difcernible in
the human fubject; but much more diftinGly feen in many animals, as the horfe, &c.


mufcles .


ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULE® SEMINALES, 39


mufcles are white, {mall, and have a ligamentous appearance. The fame
obfervations are true if applied to the erectores penis.

The penis of the perfect male is of a fufficient length, when erefied,
to reach to the further end of the vagina of the female. In the caftrated
animal it is much fhorter ; and erections having then become unneceflary,
the parts which fhould project, often adhere to the infide of the prepuce.
The erectores mufcles in the perfect male are ftrong enough to {queeze at
once the blood out of the crura into the body of the penis, fo as to
ftraiten and contract the urethra inftantaneoufly, and the acceleratores
urinz* have fufficient power to throw out the femen that is erednalty ace
cumulated at the bulb for ejection.

The proftate gland”, Cowper’s glands, and the glands along the urethra,
(of which the lacunz are the excretory ducts) in the perfect male are large
and pulpy, fecreting a confiderable quantity of a flimy mucus, which is
falt to the tafte, is moft probably for the purpofe of lubricating thofe
parts, and is only thrown out when in vigour for copulation: while in
the caftrated animal they are fmall, flabby, tough and ligamentous, and
have little fecretion.” From this account a confiderable difference in ap-
pearance is diftinguifhable between the parts connected with generation of
the perfect male, and thofe which remain in one that has been caftrated ;


_4 | hall call thefe mufcles, expulfores feminis, as I apprehend their real ufe to be for the
expulfion of that fecretion: thefe mufcles likewife throw out thofe drops of urine which are
colle&ted in the bulb from the laft contractions of the bladder; and they have been from this
circumftance named, acceleratores urine ; but.if a receptacle had not been neceflary for the
femen, thofe mufcles had probably never exifted, and the laft drops of urine would have been
thrown out by the action of the bladder and urethra, as in fome meafure is the cafe in the
caftrated animal. ‘That the urethra has the power of contraction is evident upon the applica-
tion of any ftimulus; for I have feen the urethra refufe to allow an injection to pafs on: and
in that part where the injection ftopped, a fulnefs was felt which terminated at once: this
contraction is moft probably in the internal membrane.

> ‘The proftate gland is not common to all animals. It is wanting in the bull, buck, and
mott probably I believe in all ruminating animals. In this clafs the coats of the veficule are
much thicker, and more glandular, than in thofe who have proftate glands; it is therefore
natural to fuppofe that the veficule anfwer nearly the fame purpofes as the proftate gland,
The proftate gland, and Cowper’s’ glands, as well as the veficule, are wanting in birds,
in the amphibious animals, and in thofe fifh which have tefticles, as all of the ray kind.
more


40 ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICULZ SEMINALES.


more efpecially if that operation had been performed while the animal was
young. |

If it is objected that the fame changes did not take place in the men
from whom one tefticle had been removed, it may be anfwered, that the
operation was performed late in life ; and one tefticle being left, that was
fufficient to carry on the neceflary actions, and confequently the powers.
remained ; therefore whatever parts had a connection with thefe powers —
would ftill have the ftimulus of perfection given to them.

The difference of appearance of the bulb, and the mufcles, would feem
to point out, that in the perfect male the enlargement of the former is
for the purpofe of a receptacle for the femen; for although I have denied
the veficule to be refervoirs, yet as it was neceflary that the femen fhould
be accumulated fomewhere before ejection, I fhall endeavour to prove
from the mode of copulation in the animals we are moft acquainted with,
that the bulb is intended for this purpofe. Let us therefore give a fhort
account of the different parts concerned in coition, and by obferving the
dependence which they have upon one another, fee how this proof will
come out. ,

The erection of the penis is produced by a {top being put to the return-
ing blood; and this ftoppage is fo complete, that no mechanical preflure
applied to the body of the penis, can force the blood on into the veins.
This erection anfwers two purpofes ; it gives fize and ftrength to the penis,
and it renders the canal of the urethra {maller. ‘The.corpus fpongiofum
of the urethra, and the glans, which is only a continuation of it, are
filled with blood from the fame caufe, but not fo completely as the body
of the penis; fince from them it can be forced out into the veins by
preflure.* This accumulation of blood in the corpus fpongiof{um diminithes.


* In April 1760, in the prefence of Mr. Blount, I laid bare the penis of a dog, almoft

. through its whole length; traced the two veins that came from the glans, (which in this

animal makes the largeft part of the penis) and feparated them from the arteries by difleCtion,,

that I might be able to comprefs them at pleafure without affecting the arteries. I then com- ©

prefied the two veins, and found that the glans and large bulb became full and extended ; but

when I irritated the veins in order to fee if there was any power of contraction in them which.
might occafionally flop the return of the blood, no fuch appearance could be obferved..


the


ON THE GLANDS, CALLED VESICUL SEMINALES. 41


the canal of the urethra fo much, that any preffure upon one part of it
will have a confiderable effect upon the other; not only by leffening its
capacity at the part preffed ; but by forcing the blood forward, the parts
beyond are ftill more diftended, and confequently the canal of the urethra
in that proportion diminifhed. ‘The femen in the time of copulation,
in fuch as remain long in that act, is gradually {queezed along the vafa
deferentia (as it is fecreted) into the bulb; and when the tefticles ceafe
to fecrete, the paroxyfm which is to finifh the whole operation comes on,
the femen acts as a ftimulus to the cavity of the bulb of the urethra, the
mufcles of that-part of the canal are thrown into action ; the moft diftant
fibres probably act firft, and thofe more forward in quick fucceffion ;
the femen is projected with fome force ; the blood in the bulb of the
urethra is by the fame action {queezed forward, but requiring a greater
impulfe to propel it, is rather later than the femen, on which it preffes
from behind; and the corpus fpongiofum being full of blood, aéts almoft
as quick as undulation, in which it is aflifted by the correfponding con-
ftriction of the urethra, fo that the femen is hurried along with a confi-
derable velocity.

From the facts which I have {tated refpeCting the organs of generation,
the obfervations which I have made, and the feries of a€tions which I
have confidered as taking place in the copulation of animals, I think the
following inferences may be fairly drawn.

That the bags, called veficule feminales, are not feminal refervoirs,
but glands fecreting a peculiar mucus ; and that the bulb of the urethra
is, properly {fpeaking, the receptacle of the femen in which it is accumu-
jated previous to ejection.

Although it feems to have been proved that the veficule do not contain
the femen, I have not been able to afcertain their particular ufe ; we may
however be allowed upon the whole to conclude that, they are together,
with other parts, fubfervient to the purpofes of generation.


G ay PLATE


al


[ 42 ]


Ppl nel ae iks coats


HOWS two tefticles with the fpermatic cherie diffected ; in the one
_the vas deferens, in the other a portion of the epididyrals, 3 is wanting.


Fic. t. The right tefticle and foermatic chord. 3

AA The body of the tefticle. ee

BB. The fpermatic chord in which there is no appearance of vas deferens.

C The epididymis, where it takes its origin from the body of the tefticle.

D The abrupt termination of the epididymis, it not. eae continued
~ to the lower end of the tefticle. ;


Fic. 2. The left tefticle.

AA The body of the tefticle.

B The blood-veffels of the tefticle feparated from the vas deferens.

C The origin of the epididymis.

D The termination of the epididymis ; to fhow which the tunica vagi-
nales is removed. a

E The origin of the vas deferens.

F The vas deferens, as it pafles up towards the ring ag the abdominal
muicles.


THE


p. 42.


Plote I. J


Fig. I. Fig Il.


=


SESS
SSSSSSWQ


SSS EX


SSS
—


SS


SSS


SS


——


ERASERS


WY ee


WES:
ge


ffen. Shuliovre ct Ut


Fiale dl .


SSS


y


ty


\
\
\


Ye
al


?


ALLOIL bCtb


Vi” Blea


K coprcdeypeMbel:


i io


€


[' 43 J


THE EXPLANATION OF


Poy A ee


Side view of the pelvis, taken from the fame fubject as plate I, in
which the vafa deferentia did not communicate with the. veficule,


and the veficule did not communicate with the urethra.


A The body of the penis.

B The fymphyfis of the pubis.

C The bladder.

D The left ureter.

EE The re@um.

# The anus. ‘2 ich

G The fphinéter mufele of the anus, alvin fide.
H_ The levator mufcle of the anaes <comned, down.
I The proftate gland.

-K The Cowper’s gland of the left-fide..


im ne ‘The peritoneum, which lined the left ‘fide of the pelvis.
; M The facrum, where it is articulated with the os ileum.


N The left vas deferens.
O The veficule, og


PLATE


2


ae, au}


x eer


ee et


ebiong tine 3


pe ng SE
eitnd Se


EY POE Rees OIE Aree
Wi ede ces ier A sine ;
/* *


i ne,


keys aaa: pete "


3 Raginning of Hearch :


4 Latterend of March


THE nine following papers have been read at the Royal
Society, and publithed in the Philofophical Tranfac-
tions; but in a work of fo general a nature, and of
which phyfiological inquiries make fo {mall a part, the
few facts and obfervations which I have given upon fuch
fubjeéts may probably be overlooked by thofe who are
not members of that fociety. That they may be more
eafily procured by ftudents in medicine, and other
readers, I have, by an application to the Prefident and
Council of the Royal Society, obtained leave to reprint
fuch of them as I confider to be conneéted with the
principles and aétions of the animal ceconomy ; and
I have added fuch obfervations and remarks as have oc-
curred to me fince the time they were read before the


Royal Society.


G ACCOUNT


N


[ 45 J


ACCOUNT OF THE FREE MARTIN.


‘-ENERATION, when produced from a feed, has two caufes
which concur towards its perfection; the one which forms the
feed, the other which gives it the principle of action.

The caufe which forms the feed is called the female, the other caufe
is called the male; but thofe two caufes in general make only a part of
a whole animal, or are rather parts fuperadded to an animal. Probably -
they were firft confidered in animals where thofe parts were feparated, or
in which the female parts were found complete in one animal and the:
male in the other; therefore the terms female and male have been applied
to the whole animal, dividing them into two diftin@ fexes, and the
parts which formed either the one fex or the other were called either
the female or the male parts of generation; but upon a. more perfect
knowledge of animals, and of thofe parts, they were found.in many of
the inferior tribes to be united in the fame animal, which,. from. pofleff-
ing both parts, has got the name of hermaphrodite..

As both male and female parts are natural. to. moft animals, as the
union of them in the fame animal is alfo natural to many, and as: the
feparation of them in diftinct animals is only a circumftance making no


* It may be neceflary for fome of my readers to: have explained to-thenr what T- mean by a
feed. I do fuppofe that the word feed was firft applied to grain, or that which is always
called feed in the vegetable ; which feed is the part of that clafs of vegetables in which the
matter of the young vegetable exifts, or is formed: The principle of arrangement in the
- farina, or male part, fitting the feed for action, ‘being at firft' not known, a falfe analogy
between the vegetable and animal was eftablifhed,, and the- matter fecreted by the teftes
was called the feed: but. from the knowledge. of the diftinct fexes in. the vegetable, it. is
well known:that.the feed is the female production in them,. and that.the principle of arrange-
ment for action is from the male. The fame: operation and principles takes place in many:
orders of animals,. viz. the female produces a feed in which is the matter fitted for the firft
arrangement of the organs of the animal, and which receives the principle. of’ arrangement
fitting them for. action from the male.. |

effential


46 OF THE FREE MARTIN.


effential difference in the parts themfelves, it becomes no great effort or
uncommon play in nature to unite them in thofe animals in which they
are commonly feparated. |

And accordingly we find many of thofe orders of animals, which natu-
rally have them feparate, have them fometimes united.

From this account hermaphrodites may be diviaed into two kinds, the
natural and the unnatural,

The natural hermaphrodite belongs to the inferior and more fimple
genera of animals, of which there are a much greater number than of
the more perfect ; but as animals become more complicated, have more
parts, and each part is more confined to its particular ufe, a feparation of |
the two neceffary powers for generation /have alfo taken place.

The unnatural hermaphrodite, I believe, now and then occurs in
every tribe of animals having diftinét fexes, and is to be met with in all its
gradations, from the diftiné fex to the complete union of the male and
female organs, but is more common in fome than in others.* I fancy it
is moft rarely'to be met with in the human fpecies, never having feen
an inftance. I can fay the fame of dogs and cats, with which laft
however I am lefs acquainted; but in the horfe, afs, fheep, and black
cattle, it is very frequent.

There is one part common to both the male and female organs of
generation in all animals which have the fexes diftint; in the one fex
it is called the penis, in the other the clitoris ; its fpecific ufe in both is
to continue, by its fenfibility, the ation excited in coition till the pa~
roxyfm alters the fenfation.. In the female it probably anfwers no other
purpofe ; but in the male it is more complicated to adapt it for the
purpofe of expelling and condudting the femen that has been fecreted in
confequence of the actions fo excited.

Though the unnatural hermaphrodite be a mixture of both fexes, and
may poffefs the parts peculiar to each in perfection, yet it can not poffefs
in perfection that part which is common to both. For as this common


* Quere: Is there ever in the genera of animals, that are natural hermaphrodites, a fepa-
ration of the two parts forming diftinét fexes? If there is, it may account for the diftinction of
fexes ever having happened.

pact


OF THE FREE MARTIN. 47


part is different:in one fex from what it is in the other, and it is impoffible
for one animal to have both a penis and clitoris ; the part which they have
mutt of courfe partake of both fexes, and confequently render the herma-
phrodite fo far imperfect. But thofe parts which are peculiar to each fex,
may be perfectly joined in the fame animal, which will come. up to
the idea of the trueft hermaphrodite; although it may not be necefiary
that the parts peculiar to the one fex fhould be blended with thofe of the
other, in the fame way that the penis is with the clitoris ; yet this fome-
times happens in parts whofe ufes are equally fimilar, as the tefticle and
ovarium, forming one body with the properties of neither; which as it
approaches nearer to the tefticle or ovarium, will make the animal partake
more of the one fex than the other ; and fome of them, from the famenefs
of their fituation in the two fexes, in many animals may interfere with one
another.

The parts in the female appropriated for the purpofe of fupplying the
young with nourifhment are varioufly placed in different animals. In the -
horfe, black cattle, fheep, and other granivorous animals, their fituation
is between the hind legs, which is alfo the place allotted for the tefticles
of the male of this tribe; (and probably of all thofe in which they come
out of the cavity of the belly) therefore in the hermaphrodite which has
both thefe parts, the tefticles are in fome degree obliged to come down
into the udder, which does not receive them fo readily as the {crotum.

The hermaphrodites, which I have feen, have always appeared externally,
and, at firft view, to be females: this arifes from the penis being the part
principally deficient, and there being an opening behind like the bearing
in the female ; and as the tefticles in fuch hermaphrodites feldom come
down, the udder is left to occupy its proper place. In thofe animals
where the female is preferved for breeding only, as in fheep, goats, pigs,
&c. they are generally kept, from their being fuppofed to be females.

- Among horfes they are very frequent: I have feen feveral, but never
diffeted any. The moft complete was one in which the tefticles had
come down out of the abdomen into the place where the udder fhould
have been, (viz. more forward than the fcrotum) and had the appearance
of an udder, not being fo pendulous as the fcrotum in the perfect male of

fuch


48 OF THE FREE MARTIN.


fuch animals. There were alfo two nipples, of which the male have no
perfect form, being blended in them with the fheath or prepuce, of which
there was none here. The external female parts were exactly fimilar to
thofe of the perfect female ; but inftead of a common-fized clitoris, there
was one about five or fix inches long, which, when erect, ftood almoft
directly backwards.

I procured a foal afs, very fimilar in external appearance to the horfe,
and killed it, to examine the parts. It had two nipples, but the tefticles
were not come down as in the above; owing perhaps to the animal’s
being yet too young.

There was no penis pafling round the pubis to the belly as in the per-
fect male afs.

The external female parts were adie to thofe of the fhe-afs. Within
the entrance of the vagina was placed the clitoris, but much longer than
that of a true female, its length being about five inches. The vagina
was pervious a little further than the opening of the urethra into it, and 3
there it was obliterated; from thence up to the fundus of the uterus
there was no canal. The common uterus was hollow at the fundus, —
or had a cavity in it, and then divided into two horns, which were alfo.
pervious. Beyond the termination of the two horns were placed the
ovaria as in the true female, but I could not find the F allopian tubes.
From the broad ligaments to the edges of which the horns of the uterus
and ovaria were attached, there pafled towards each groin a part fimilar
to the round ligament in the female, which were continued into the
rings of the abdominal mufcles ; but with this difference, that there was
continued with them a procefs or theca of the peritoneum, fimilar to the
tunica vaginalis communis in the male afs, and in thefe thece were found
the tefticles ; but I could not obferve any vafa deferentia pafling from
them.

Here then were scat in the fame animal the parts peculiar to each fex
(although very imperfect) and that part which is common to both, but
different in each, was a kind of medium of that difference.

Something fimilar to the above I have feen in fheep, goats, &c. but I
fhall not at prefent trouble the reader with a defcription of hermaphro-

dites


OF THE FREE MARTIN. 49


dites in general, as it is a very extenfive fubje&, admitting of great variety,
which would make them appear a production of chance, whereas the
intention of this account is to point out a circumftance which takes place
in the production of hermaphrodites in black cattle, which appears
to be almoft an eftablithed principle in the ceconomy of propagation of
that {pecies of animal, and perhaps peculiar to them. |

It is a fact known, and I believe almoft univerfally underftood, that
when a cow brings forth two calves, and one of them a bull-calf, and
the other to appearance a cow, that the cow-calf is unfit for propagation ;.
but the bull-calf becomes a very proper bull. This cow-calf is called in
this country a free martin ; and is juft as well known among the farmers.
as either cow or bull. Although it will appear from the defcription of
this animal, that it is an hermaphrodite, being in no refpect different.
from other hermaphrodites, yet I fhall retain the term free martin, to
diftinguifh the hermaphrodite produced in this way, from thofe which
refemble the hermaphrodite of other animals : for I have reafon to believe.
that in black cattle, fuch a deviation may be produced without the cir-
cumftance of twins ; and even when there are twins, the one a male the
other a female, they may both have the organs of generation perfectly
formed. But when I fpeak of thofe which are not twins, I fhall call them.
hermaphrodites ; the only circumftance worth our notice being a fingu-
larity in the mode of production of the free martin, and its being, as far
as I yet know, peculiar to black cattle. . . val

This calf has all the external marks of a cow-calf fimilar to what’ was
mentioned in the unnatural hermaphrodite, viz. the teats and the external.
female parts, called by farmers the bearing.

When they are preferved it is not for propagation, but for al] the pur-
pofes of an ox or fpayed heifer, viz. to yoke with the oxen, and to fatten.
for the table.’ ‘ | ;

They are known not to breed: they do not fhow the leaft inclination.
for the bull, nor does-the bull ever take the leaft notice: of them.”


4 T need hardly obferve here, that if a.cow has twins, and they are both bull-calves, .that
they are in every refpect perfect: bulls ; or if they are both cow-ealves, .they-are perfect cows.

» Vide Leflie on Hufbandry, p. 98, 99.
ay They


50 OF THE FREE MARTIN.


They very much refemble in form the ox or fpayed.heifer, being con-
fiderably larger than either the bull or the cow, the horns being very
fimilar to the horns of an ox.

The bellow of the free martin is fimilar to that of an ox, having more
refemblance to that of the cow than of the bull. Free martins are very
fufceptible of growing fat with good food. ‘The flefh, like that of the
ox or fpayed heifer, is in common much finer in the fibre than either the
bull or cow; and is fuppofed to exceed that of the ox and heifer in delicacy
of flavour, and bears a higher price at market.

However, it feems that this is not univerfal ; for I was lately informed
by Charles Palmer, Eiq. of Luckley in Berkfhire, that there was a free
martin killed in his neighbourhood, and from the general idea of its being
better meat than common, every neighbour befpoke a piece, which
turned out nearly as bad as bull-beef, at leaft worfe than that of a cow.
Jt is probable that circumftance might arife from this animal having more
the properties of the bull than the cow, as we fhall fee hereafter that
they are fometimes more the one than the other.*. Although what I have
faid with refpect to the productions of free martins is in general true, yet
{ was lately furnifhed with an inftance, by the affliftance of Benjamin
Way, Efq. of Denham, near Uxbridge, who knew that I was anxious
to afcertain this point, that it does not invariably hold good.

One of his cows having produced twins, which were to appearance
male and female, upon a fuppofition that the cow-calf was a free martin,
he obligingly offered either to give it me, or to keep it till it grew up,
that we might determine the fact: as I conceived it to be a free martin,
and was to have the liberty of examining it after death, I defired that he |
would keep it; but unfortunately it died about a month old. Upon
examining the organs: of generation, they appeared to be thofe of the

@ The Romans called the bull taurus : they however talked of taurz in the feminine cender


And Stephen obferves, that it was thought the Romans meant by taura, barren cows, and


called them by this name becaufe they did not conceive. He alfo quotes a paflage from Co-


lumella, lib. vi. cap. 2.2. “ and like the taurze, which occupy the place of fertile cows, fhould
be rejected, or fent away.” He likewife quotes Varro, De re Ruftica, lib. ii. cap. 5. “ The
cow which is barren, is called taura.””. From which we may reafonably conjecture that the
Romans had not the idea of the circumftances of their production.


female,


OF THE FREE MARTIN,


z


day


female, and perfectly formed; but to make this more certain, I procured
thofe parts of a common cow-calf, and compared them together, and
found them exactly alike. This made us regret that the animal had not
lived long enough for us to fee if it would breed ; for the conftruction of
the parts being to appearance perfect, is not fufficient of itfelf to ftamp it
a true or perfect female ; for I can fuppofe that the parts being perfectly
formed, but without the power of propagation, may conftitute the moft
fimple kind of hermaphrodite. It is however moft probable that this was
a perfect female, which is an exception to the common rule ; and if there
are fuch deviations as twins being perfect male and female, why not fup-
pofe, on the other hand, that an hermaphrodite may be produced fingly,
as in other animals ; and I am the more inclined to this opinion,. from
finding a number of hermaphrodites among black cattle, without the cir-
cumftances of their birth being afcertained.

Hermaphrodites are to be met with in fheep; but from the account
’ given of them, I fhould fuppofe that they are not free martins. I have
feen feveral of them which appeared to be imperfect males, having the
penis terminating in the perineum ; the orifice of which appeared like
the bearing in the female. They are not naturally ftimulated to put
themfelves in the pofition of the female when they void their water, fo
that when they pafs it they wet all the furrounding parts, which being
covered with wool, retains the urine, keeps them continually wet, and
gives them a {trong {mell. ‘They are mentioned as both male and female,
which is not reconcileable to the account given of the free martin.

I believe it had never been even conjectured, notwithftanding all thofe
peculiarities, what was the true nature of the free martin.

From the fingularity of the animal, and the account of its production,
I was almoft ready to fuppofe the whole a vulgar error; yet from the
univerfality of the teftimony in its favour, it appeared to have fome foun-
dation ; and therefore I eagerly fought for an opportunity to fee and examine
one. Since when. I have fucceeded in this inguiry, and. have {een feveral ;
the firft of which was one belonging to John Arbuthnot, Efg. of Mitcham,
which was calved in his own farm. He was fo obliging as to allow me
to fatisfy myfelf, by permitting me firft to have a drawing made of the

Hi 2 anima


52 ‘OF THE FREE MARTIN.


animal while-alive, which was executed by Mr. Gilpin ; and after death
to examine the parts. When the drawing was made of Mr. Arbuthnot’s
free martin, John Wells, Efg. of Bickley Farm, near Bromley in Kent,
was prefent, and informed us, that a cow of his had calved two calves,
one of which was a bull-calf and the other a cow-calf. I defired Mr.
Arbuthnot to fpeak to Mr. Wells to keep them, or let me buy them of
him; but from his great defire for natural knowledge he very readily
preferved both till the bull fhewed all the figns of a good bull ; and when
the free martin was killed he allowed me to infpect the parts.

Of all the free martins which I have diffected, I fhall only give the
defcriptions of three, which point out moft diftin@ly the complete free
martin, with the gradations towards the male and female.


THE DESCRIPTION OF THE THREE FREE MARTINS.
Mr. ARBUTHNOT’S FREE MARTIN.


Tue external parts were rather {maller than in the cow. The vagina
pafled on, as in the cow, to the opening of the urethra, and then it
began to contract into a fmall canal, which paffed on to the divifion
of the uterus into the two horns, each horn pafied along the edge of the
broad ligament laterally towards the ovaria.

At the termination of thofe horns were placed both the ovaria and the
tefticles ; both were nearly of the fame fize, which was about as large as
a {mall nutmeg.

To the ovaria I could not find any Fallopian tube.

To the tefticles were vafa deferentia, but they were imperfect. The
left one did not come near the tefticle; the right only came clofe to it,
but did not terminate in a body called the epididymis. They were both
pervious, and opened into the vagina near the opening of the urethra.


@ ‘This animal was feven years old, had been often yoked with the oxen; at other times
went with the cows and bull, but never fhewed any defires for either the one or the other.


On


OF THE FREE MARTIN. 53


On the pofterior furface of the bladder, or between the uterus and
bladder, were the two bags called veficule feminales in the male, but
much fmaller than what they are in the bull: the ducts opened along
with the vafa deferentia. This was more deferving the name of herma-~
phrodite than the two following; for it had a mixture of all the parts,
although all were imperfect.


Mr. WRIGHT'S FREE MARTIN, FIVE YEARS OLD,


Tuis animal had more the appearance and general character of the
ox, or fpayed heifer, than either the bull or cow. ‘The vagina termi-
nated in a blind end, a little way beyond the opening of the urethra,
from which the vagina and uterus were impervious. ‘The uterus at its
extreme part divided into two horns. At the termination of the horns were
placed the tefticles inftead of the ovaria, as is the cafe in the female. The
reafons why I call thofe bodies tefticles, are the following. Firft, they
were more than twenty times larger than the ovaria of the cow, and nearly
the fize of the tefticles of the bull, particularly thofe of the ridgill, or
bull whofe tefticles never come down. Secondly, the fpermatic arteries
were fimilar to thofe of the bull; efpecially of the ridgill. Thirdly, the
cremafter mufcle pafled up from the rings of the abdominal mutfcles to
the tefticles, as it does in the ridgill.*

There were the two bags placed behind the bladder, between it and
the uterus. Their ducts opened into the vagina, a very little way beyond
the opening of the urethra; but there was nothing fimilar to the vafa
deferentia.

As the external parts had more of the cow than the bull, the clitoris,
which may be reckoned an external part, was alfo fimilar to that of the


4 Although I call thefe bodies tefticles for the reafon given, yet they were only imitations
of fuch; for when cut into they had nothing of the ftructure of the tefticle: not being fimilar
to any thing in nature, they had more the appearance of difeafe, From the feeming imperfec-
tion of the animal itfelf, it was not to be fuppofed. that they fhould be tefticles, for then the
animal fhould have partaken of the bull, which it certainly did not.

j COW ;


54 | OF THE FREE MARTIN,


cow ; not at all in a middle ftate between the penis of the bull and the
clitoris of the cow, as I have defcribed in the hermaphrodite horfe. There
were four teats; the glandular part of the udder was but {mall.

This ‘animal cannot be faid to have been a mixture of all the parts of
both fexes, for the clitoris had nothing fimilar to the penis in the male, -
and was different in the cow part, in having nothing fimilar to the ovaria;
nor was the uterus a cavity.


Mr. WELL’sS FREE MARTIN.


Tus animal was never feen to fhow any figns of a defire for the
male, although it went conftantly with one. It looked more like an —
heifer than what they commonly do; but as it was only between three
and four years old when killed, it is very probable that it was not fuffi-
ciently old to have taken the characters of the ox ; however this may be
owing to another circumftance that will be mentioned hereafter.

The teats and udder were finall compared with thofe of an heifer,
but rather larger than in either of the former; the beginning of the
vagina was fimilar to that of the cow, but foon obliterated beyond the
opening of the urethra, as in the laft defcribed. The vagina and uterus
to external appearance was continued, although not pervious ; and the
uterine part divided into two horns, at the end of which were the ovaria.

I could not obferve in this any other body which I could fuppofe to
be the tefticle.

There was on the fide of the uterus an interrupted vas deferens broken.
off in feveral places.

Behind the bladder, or between it and the vagina, were the paak called
veficule feminales; between which were the terminations of the two vafa
deferentia.

The ducts of the bags and the vafa deferentia opened as in the former.

This could not be called an exa& mixture of all the parts of both fexes,
for here was no appearance of tefticles.


The


OF THE FREE MARTIN. 55


The female parts were imperfect, and there was the addition of part
of the vafa deferentia, and the bags called veficule feminales.

This circumftance of having no tefticles, perhaps was the reafon why
it had more the external appearance of an heifer than what they com-
monly have, and more than either of the two former.


PLATE


ee ae Phe 4
ie ae .


Peay FC ha
athe

, a:

4 a” ~
* x é
he - .

*<
- -
+ *
» *
x +
. =

: ;
= 4
*

‘
eax
; :
\
.
;
oy eat
NS
>
\
wv
‘ .
“ .
x Xe
\
Pes
‘
~
:
‘
4
| f

Ya 2 - >
‘ 4

‘ Fe

i
j
we ¢

2


f


a
ss
ee
Te
by
3


a“
%


©


bate TL.


i}
WH
Sy)
Disc ll


Wey)
ih


ee


SSN


—


=


35


| il
Ny,


Y
4


4
444
WA


WU” Bott. det.


as ja |


Pa ne BET


HIS plate fhows the organs of generation of Mr. Arbuthnot’s free
martin, which are almoft a complete mixture of the male and
female; with this ftructure of the parts the external appearances and ge-
neral character of the animal correfponded, it being neither that of the
bull nor cow, but a mixt character.


A The peak of the labia.
BB The two labia.
C The glans clitoridis.
D D The infide of the common vagina.
E E Orifices of the ducts of two glands.
F The orifice of the meatus urinarius.
GG The true vagina.
Hi H Either the contracted vagina, or what may be called uterus.
II The horns of ditto, only pervious a little way. —
K The tight ovarium deprived of its capfula.
L The left ovarium inclofed in its capfula.
M A briftle introduced through the orifice into the capfula.
N The right tefticle..
OOOO “The right vas deftreag
PP The veficule feminales.
QQ The ducts of veficule feminales feen through the vagina.
R Points to the openings of the vafa deferentia and veficule feminales.


‘J : PLATE


‘
t
+
ey
t
R
'
r
’
~
~
o
i
.
‘
\
Xs
~
~
5 3
;
Yn
r
4 y,
i


ayy he . a "4 ota ei inp
: Neer St BF jnF PEALE: wear:


by, ‘ be ie ag te: nets


aaa Se hme i ogtre: ay ie Bek ee
MRCS ett et vicar | hee ry 1:
Ay es i oe A
SRS SES hes


a
noid ~
easy:
. <F . au $. A peers
Fi ese MST SRE
f ra
oh . a Wy ee ; dit i
) , Cee thi at 7 az
, if ‘ Dee Sate s
” be . = zm . Sa ae a
i ‘ nee ary. J 4 ' : aa ae ‘
. ce : EY SOT AIDS Sythe UG,
Wek fe) : a
Se - oH 8 > Kies
x : aia WAEhE-s xf INT SLi e a
MELEE OME OE hoy oe}
: E of = roles TAs Ne too eee
ie <u ; ; :
ee. ‘ Ae La banere 1-3
Lad Sa LG Sag A Pe oe a “
Sa s % : ay
4 ; . Dee
; ‘ ; ‘ 4 r at AM
: eA NGS A thasuiewate
q goutearn ec? eet
- ht oe i .}
vin ré
f ‘ ) > 4
i yee ‘ By
= % Be ees
rave ay
as te oe 1 says eS
; oe Poe SY


biG 2't


*
gone
~


Ar


)


son


Plaka LL.


WW Bald: hel.


a,


\


1aZy
=<.


=
PAS
ee


SS
at
=
==


=


SSS
=


TSS
Ss:


——
SS
Ze


—


—=


——————


—==


——


SS


==


=


=


=


———
——


==


=


SS


—SS


=


=
=


iy) \y

Wh ah

iH \
LH


——


——


EB


AHHH
Hi HY


— SSS 8 =——
SS Zs ZF


MUM thelion rolex


.


[ 59 J


PPA DT EL Th


HIS plate reprefents the organs of generation of Mr. Wright's free

martin, which are more the parts of a bull than thofe of a cow;

and the animal while alive had a good deal the character and look of an
Ox.


A. The peak of the labia.

BB The labia.

C The glans clitoridis. _

DDDD The inner furface of the common vagina.

EE The orifices of the ducts of two glands

F Meatus urinarius. |

GG The inner furface of the true vagina, terminating in a blind end
at: HH.

H_ The termination of the vagina ina blind end.

I III What may be called uterus, but impervious.

K K What may be called horns of the uterus.

LL The tefticles.

M M The fpermatic veffels.

NWN The cremafter mufcles.

OO The veficule feminales.

PP The ducts of the veficule feminales feen through the vagina.

Q_ Points to the ducts of ditto, into which are introduced briftles.


I 2 : PLATE


pained 96! Te aotieid


3


Let ny wih % ad,

ort Bisths
alien: it Sik
atin *aflg a


ie
&


5) o, ah ois de


—
—


y
Hi
i


—


f


Le,
CLLLYY


ge
Lj
Zs


Feate 11.
WB oll. del:


BNE


[61]


Poe T. BR TIE


\HIS plate exhibits a front view of the organs of generation of Mr. —

Wells’s free martin, which are more the parts of a cow than of a
bull, and the animal Hele refembled a young bos very much in its
appearance.


A The clitoris.

BB The crura clitoridis.

C The urethra.

D The bladder.

E The body of the uterus beyond the bladder, nicl is impervious.

F F The horns of ditto, which are alfo impervious. ©

G The left ovarium deprived of its, capfula.

H The right capfula inclofing its ovarium.

I111 Interrupted parts of the vafa deferentia.

K K The fpermatic veffels.

L The gubernaculum of the right fide.

M The beginning of the tunica vaginalis communis, into which is in-
troduced a briftle ta fhow that it is hollow. -

NWN Veffels going behind the bladder.

OO The two ureters.

PP The veficule feminales.


/


ACCOUNT


Bes


Sera
ake


a
“.


ahh


i


A


+y
NGG


Ot


Sa Sin e.g


ACCOUNT OF AN EXTRAORDINARY
PHEASANT.


VERY deviation from that original form and ftructure which gives
the diftinguifhing character to the productions of nature, may not
improperly be called monftrous. According to this acceptation of the
term, the variety of monfters will be found to be infinite. As far as my
knowledge has extended, there is not a fpecies of animals, nay there is
not a fingle part of an animal body which is not fubject to extraordinary
formation. Nor does this appear to be a matter of mere chance ; for it
may be obferved, that every one has a difpofition to deviate from nature
in a manner peculiar to itfelf. It is likewife worthy of remark, that
each fpecies of animals is difpofed to have fupernumerary parts of the
fame kinds, and nearly the fame fort of defects; but every part is not
perhaps fubject to a great variety of forms, each part of each {pecies
having its monftrous form, as it were, originally imprefled on it by the
hand of nature.

It is well known, that there are many orders of animals which have
the two parts defigned for the purpofe of generation different in the fame
fpecies, by which they are diftinguifhed into male and female: but this
is not the only mark of diftinction in many genera of animals ; in the
greateft part the male being diftinguifhed from the female by various
marks. ‘The differences which are found in the parts of generation them-
felves, I fhall call the firft, or principle; and all others depending upon
thefe I fhall call fecondary. The firft belong equally to both; but the
fecondary will be found principally, although not entirely, in the male.

One of the moft general marks is the fuperior ftrength of make in
the male; and another circumftance, perhaps equally fo, is this ftrength
being directed to one part more than to another, which part is that moft
immediately employed in fighting. This difference in external form is
more particularly ftriking in the animals whofe females are of a peaceable

| nature ;


64 OF AN EXTRAORDINARY PHEASANT.


nature ; fuch are the greateft number of thofe which feed onvegetables, and
the marks to difcriminate the fexes are in them very numerous. As the
males of almoft every clafs of animals are probably difpofed to fight, they
are, as I have obferved, ftronger than the females. In many there are
parts folely deftined for that purpofe, as the {purs in the cock, and the
horns in the bull; on which account the ftrength of the bull lies prin-
cipally in his nate that of the cock in his limbs.

In carnivorous animals, whofe prey is often of a kind which it requires :
ftrength to kill, we do not find fuch a difference in the form of the male
and female ; very little being difcernable in that of the dog and bitch ;
in the he or fhe cat; or in the cock and hen of the eagle; a difference
however is often perceivable in the whole or in fome part of their exter-
nal covering ; the mane of the lion, for inftance, diftinguifhing him from —
the lionefs: and the males of fuch animals as neither fight nor feed on
fleth, are diftinguifhable from the female merely by fome> peculiarity in
the covering of their bodies, as the cock and hen in many birds. The
male of the human fpecies is diftinguifhed from the female, both by his
general {trength and his covering, as alfo by a difference of voice.

In thofe orders of animals where the {exes are diftin¢ct, we may not only
obferve the genital organs to be fubjeé&t to a mal-conformation, fimilar to
a mal-conformation in any other part of the animal ; but that an attempt —
is {ometimes made to unite the two parts in one animal body, producing ~
an animal called an unnatural hermaphrodite.

It is my intention at prefent to extend my inquiry on this fubje& no ©
further than to what relates to the refemblance which one fex bears to —
another in thofe diftinguifhing properties which I term fecondary.

The unnatural hermaphrodites appear to be governed by the fame cer-
tain laws by which {uch extraordinary formation of parts is effected ; for .
it is obfervable, that, thefe deviations obtain through a whole fpecies of
animals precifely in the fame manner. I have already given an account
of the free martin, which exhibits a mixture of the two parts of genera~
tion in the fame animal.

We find however, that there is often a change of the fecondary pro-
perties of one fex into thofe of another; the female in fuch re{fpects now

and


OF AN EXTRAOXDINARY PHEASANT. _ 65


and then afluming the peculiarities of the male ; and it may be obferved,
that fome claffes are more liable than others to this change; a fingular
example of which is to be the fubject of the following pages.

I here beg leave to premife, that in animals juft born, or very young,
there are no peculiarities of fhape to diftinguifh one fex from the other,
exclufive of what relates to the organs of generation, and that towards
the age of maturity the difcriminating changes before mentioned appear ;
the male then lofing that refemblance he had to the female in various
fecondary properties.* But that in all animals whicl are not of any diftin¢t
fex, called hermaphrodites, there is no fuch alteration taking place in
their form when they arrive at the age of maturity. It is evidently the
male which at this time in fuch refpects recedes from the female. Every
female being at the age of maturity more like the young of the fame
fpecies than the male is obferved to be; and if the male is deprived of
his teftes when young, he retains more of the original youthful form, and
is therefore more fimilar to the female.

From hence it might be fuppofed, that the female character contains
more truly the fpecific properties of the animal than the male; but the
character of every animal is that which is marked by the properties com-
mon to both fexes, which are found in a natural hermaphrodite, as a
{nail, or an animal of neither fex, as the caftrated male or {payed female.

But where the fexes are feparate, and the animals have two characters,
neither of them can be called the true one; the true diftinguifhing pro-
perties being thofe peculiar to neither fex, as above mentioned, which
are likewife found in the monftrous hermaphrodite. That thefe properties
give the diftinét character of fuch animals is evident, for the caftrated
male and the {payed female have both the fame common properties ;, and”
when I treated of the free martin, which is a monftrous hermaphrodite,
I obferved that it was more like the ox than the cow or bull, fo that the
marks characteriftic of the fpecies which are found in the animal of a


* ‘This is not common to all animals of diftinct fexes ; for in the fifh there is no great dif-
ference, nor in many infeéts, nor in dogs, as has been already obferved ; however, it is con-
fiderable in many quadrupeds, but appears to be moft fo in birds,


K double


66 OF AN EXTRAORDINARY PHEASANT.


double fex, are imitated by depriving the individual animal of its fex by
art, by which means it only preferves the true properties of the {pecies.

In fome animals which have the fecondary properties we have men-
tioned peculiar to the two fexes, there is a deviation from all thofe ge-
neral rules, by a change of thefe fecondary characters ; the female perfect
with refpect to the parts of generation, affuming more or lefs of the fe-
condary character of the male.

This however does not appear to arife from any action which takes —
place at the firft formation of the animal, or grows up with it, but feems
to be one of thofe which is produced at certain periods of life, fimilar to
many common and natural phenomena ; like to what is obferved of the
horns of the ftag, which difier at different ages ; or to the mane of the
lion, which does not grow till after his fifth year, &c.

This change has been obferved in fome of the bird tribe, but principally
in the common pheafant.

It is remarked by thofe who are converfant with this bird, when wild,
that there appears every now and then a hen pheafant with the feathers
of the cock ; and all that they have decided on the fubjec is, that this
animal does not breed; and that its fpurs do not grow. Some years ago
one of thefe was fent to the late Dr. William Hunter, which I examined
and found it to have all the parts of the female peculiar to that bird.
This fpecimen is ftill preferved in Dr. Hunter’s mufeum.

Dr. Pitcairn having received a pheafant of this kind from Sir Thoitas
Harris, fhowed it as a curiofity to Sir Jofeph Banks and Dr. Solander.
I happened to be then prefent, and was defired to examine the bird.
The following was the refult of my examination.

-I found the parts of generation to be truly female: thes were as perfect
as in any hen pheafant that is not in the leaft prepared for laying eggs.
There were both the ovaria and oviduct.

As the obfervations hitherto made have been principally upon birds —
found wild, little of their hiftory can be known; but from what took
place in a hen pheafant in the pofleflion of a friend of Sir Jofeph Banks,
it fhould feem probable that this character arifes from a change at a late
period of the animal’s life, and docs not grow up with it from the be- |


ginuing


OF AN EXTRAORDINARY PHEASANT. 67


‘ginning. This lady had for fome time bred pheafants, and paid parti-
cular attention to them. One of the hens, after having produced feveral
broods, moulted, and the fucceeding feathers were thofe of a cock. This
animal was never afterwards impregnated. Hence it is moft probable,
that all thofe hen pheafants which are found wild, and have the feathers
of a cock, were formerly perfect hens, but have become changed by age,
and perhaps by certain conftitutional circumftances.

I having bought fome pheafants from a dealer in birds, among which
were feveral hens, perceived that one of the hens, the year after, did not
lay, and began to change her feathers ; the year following fhe had nearly
thofe of the cock, but lefs brilliant, efpecially on the head. It is more
than probable this was an old hen, nearly under fimilar circumftances to
thofe before defcribed.

Lady Tynte had a favourite pyed pea-hen which had produced chickens
eight feveral times; having moulted when about eleven years old, the
lady and family were aftonifhed by her difplaying the feathers peculiar to
the other fex, and appearing like a pyed peacock. In this procefs the
tail, which became like that of a cock, appeared firft after moulting.
- In the following year fhe moulted again, and produced fimilar feathers.
In the third year fhe did the fame; then had fpurs refembling thofe of
a cock. She never bred after this change in her plumage, and died in
the following winter during the hard froft, namely, in the winter 1775-6.
This bird is now preferved in the mufeum of Sir Afhton Lever.*

From what has been related of thefe three birds, may it not reafonably
be inferred, that all thofe wild pheafants of the female fex, which are
found refembling the cock, have changed the nature of their feathers at
a certain age? This not only obtains in the birds above mentioned,
but perhaps to a certain degree in every clafs of animals. We find fome-


* It might be fuppofed, that this bird was really a cock which had been changed for a
hen; but the following facts put this matter beyond a doubt. Firft, there was no other
pyed pea-fowl in the country. Secondly, the hen had knobs on her toes, which were the
- fame after her change. ‘Thirdly, fhe was as fmall after the change as before, therefore too
fmall fora cock. Fourthly, fhe was a favourite bird, and was generally fed by the lady, and
ufed to come for her food, which fhe ftill continued to do after the change in the feathers.


K 2 thing


68 OF AN EXTRAORDINARY PHEASANT.


thing fimilar taking place even in the human fpecies: for that increafe of
hair obfervable on the faces of many women in advanced life, is an
approach towards the beard, which is one of the moft mae
fecondary properties of man.

Thus we fee the fexes which at an early period had little to diftinguifh
them from each other, acquiring about the time of puberty fecondary
properties, which clearly characterife the male and female. The male
at this time recedes from the female, and affumes the fecondary proper-
ties of his fex.

The female, at a much later time of life, when the powers of pro-
pagation ceafe, lofes many of her peculiar properties; and may be faid,
except from mere ftructure of parts, to be of no fex; and even recedes
from the original character of the animal, approaching in appearance _
towards the male, or perhaps more properly towards the hermaphrodite,


ACCOUNT


[ 69 J]


ACCOUNT OF THE ORGAN OF HEARING IN
« FISHES.


ATURAL hiftory has ever been confidered as worthy the attention
of the curious philofopher, and therefore has in all ages kept pace
with the other branches of knowledge; and as both arts and fciences have
of late years been cultivated to a degree perhaps beyond what was ever
known before, we find alfo that natural hiftory has not been neglected ;
all Europe appears to be awake to it. In this ifland it has been purfued
with more philofophic ardour than what was ever known in any country.
It has become the ftudy of men poffeffed of affluent fortune, which they
have not only dedicated to the cultivation of this {cience, but have even
rifked their health and lives in purfuit of it, fearching unknown regions
to improve mankind, fettling correfpondences every where, {fo as to bring
in its materials into this country in order to make it the fchool of natural
hiftory. It is no wonder then that a fpirit of inquiry is diffufed through
almoft all ranks of men ; and that thofe who cannot purfue it themfelves,
yet chufing at leaft to Bence by the induftry of others, are eager to be
informed of what is already known.

Thefe reflections induced me to publith this fhort account of the Organ
of Hearing in Fifhes; for though the exiftence of fuch an organ is now
more known, it is ftill a fubject of difpute with many, whether they pof-
fefs that fenfe or not. !

Some time before I quitted my anatomical purfuits in the year 1760,
and went with the army to Bellifle, I had obferved this organ in fithes,
and had the parts expofed and preferved in fpirits. In fome the canals
were filled with coloured injection, which fhowed them to great advantage ;
and in others were fo prepared as to fit them to be kept as dried prepara-
tions.*- My refearches, in that and in every other part of the animal


2 | have injected thefe parts in other animals, both with wax and metals, and the bone
being afterwards corroded in fpirit of fea-falt makes elegant cafts of thefe canals.
ceconomy,


70 OF THE ORGAN OF HEARING IN FISHES.


ceconomy, have been continued ever fince that time; yet Iam ftill in-
clined to confider whatever is uncommon in the ftructure of thefe parts
in fifhes, as only a link in the chain of varieties difplayed in the forma-
tion of this organ of fenfe, in different animals, defcending from the moft
perfect to the moft imperfect, in a regular progreffion.*

As in this age of inveftigation, a hint that fuch an organ exifted would
be fufficient to excite a fpirit of conjecture or inquiry, I was aware
that there would not be’ wanting fome men, who, whether they only
imagined the fact to be true, or really found it to be fo, would be very
ready to believe the difcovery their own, and to affume all the merit of
it ta themfelves. My attention was more ftrongly recalled to this point,
by hearing in converfation that fome anatomifts in France, Germany,
and Italy, had difcovered the organ of hearing in fifhes, and intended to
publith on the fubject. I therefore conceived that it would be only juftice
to myfelf to deliver a fhort account of that organ to the Royal Society, of
which I had made a difcovery more than twenty years before. I have
thought it proper to reprint it here, without adding any thing to what I
had before written on the fubje&t ; referving a more compleat inveftigation
of this part of natural hiftory for a larger work on the the ftructure of
animals, which I one day hope to have it in my power to publith.

I do not intend to give a full account of this organ in any one fith,
or of the varieties in different fifhes, but only of the organ in general ;
thofe therefore who may chufe to purfue this branch of the animal ceco-
nomy may think it deficient in the defcriptive parts. If it was a difficult
tafk to expofe this organ in fithes, I fhould perhaps be led to be more
full in my defcription of it; but there is in fact nothing more eafy.

I may be allowed juft to obferve here, that the clafs called fepia has
the organ of hearing, but fomewhat differently conftructed from what it
is in fifhes.


* The preparations to illuftrate thefe facts have been ever fince fhewn in my collection to
both the curious of this country and foreigners: in fhewing whatever was new, or fup-
pofed to be new, the ears of fifhes were always confidered by meas one important article.


The


OF THE ORGAN OF HEARING IN FISHES. m1


The organ of hearing in fifhes is placed on the fides of the fkull,
or cavity which contains the brain; but the fkull makes no part of
the organ, as it does in the quadruped and the bird, the organ itfelf
being a diftinct and detached part. In fome fifhes the organ is wholly
furrounded by the parts compofing the cavity of the fkull, as in the ray
kind.

In others this organ is in part within the fkull, or that cavity which
contains the brain, as in the falmon, cod, &c. the {kull projecting late-
' rally, and forming a cavity.

The organ of hearing in fifhes appears to increafe with the animal,
for it is nearly in the fame proportion with that of the animal ; which is
not the cafe with the quadruped, &c. the organs being in them nearly
as large in the growing foetus as in the adult.

It is much more fimple in fifhes than in all thofe orders of animals —
which may be reckoned fuperior, fuch as quadrupeds, birds, and amphi-
bious animals ; but there is a regular gradation from the firft of thefe to
fifhes.

It varies in different orders of fithes; but in all it confifts of three
curved tubes which unite with one another; this union forms in fome
only one canal, as in the cod, falmon, ling, &c. and in others a pretty
large cavity, as in the ray kind. In the jack there is an oblong bag,
or blind procefs, which is an addition to thofe canals, and which com-
municates with them at their union. In the cod, &c. this union of the
three tubes ftands upon an oval cavity, and in the jack there are two ; the
additional cavities in thefe fifhes appear to anf{wer the fame purpofe with
the cavity in the ray or cartilaginous fifhes, which is the union of the
three canals. |

The whole organ is compofed of a kind of cartilaginous fubftance,
very hard or firm in fome parts, and which in fome fifhes is crufted over
with a thin bony lamella, fo as not to allow it to collapfe; for as the
fkull does not form any part of thofe canals or cavities, they muft be
compofed of a fubftance capable of keeping its form.


Fach


72, OF THE ORGAN OF HEARING IN FISHES.


Each tube deferibes more than a femi-circle. This refembles in fome
refpect what we find in moft other animals, but differs in the parts being
diftinét from the fkull.*

Two of the femi-circular canals are fimilar to one another, may be
called a pair, and are placed perpendicularly ; the third is not fo long;
in fome it is placed horizontally, uniting as it were the other two at their
ends or terminations. In the fkate this is fomewhat different, being only
united to one of the perpendicular canals. The two femi-circular canals
whofe pofition is perpendicular, are united at one end laterally, forming
one canal; at their other extremities they have no connection with each
other, but are joined to the terminations of the horizontal one, near its
entrance into the common cavity. Near the union of thofe canals into
the common, they are fwelled out into round bags, becoming there
much larger.

In the ray kind they all terminate in one cavity ; and in the cod they
terminate in one canal, placed upon the additional cavity or cavities, in
which there is a bone or bones. In fome there are two bones; and in
the jack, which has two cavities, we find in one of them two bones, and
in the other one; in the ray there is only a chalky fubftance.”

In fome fifthes the external communication, or meatus, enters at the
union of the two perpendicular canals. This is the cafe with all the
ray kind, the external orifice being fmall, and placed on the upper flat
furface of the head; but it is not every genus or fpecies of fifhes that
have the external opening.

The nerves of the ear pafs outwards from the brain, and appear to ter-
minate at once on the external furface of the fwelling of the femi-circular
tubes above defcribed. They do not appear to pafs through thefe fo as
to get on the infide, as is f{uppofed to be the cafe in quadrupeds ; I fhould
therefore very much fufpect, that the lining of the tubes in the quadruped
is not nerve, but a kind of internal periofteum.


2 The turtle and the crocodile have a ftru€ture fomewhat fimilar to this; and the intention
is the fame, for their fkulls make no part of the organ.


. > This chalky fubftance is alfo found in the ears of amphibious animals,


As


OF THE ORGAN OF HEARING IN FISHES. 73


As it is evident that fithes poflefs the organ of hearing, it becomes un-~
neceflary to make or relate any experiment made with live fithes, which
only tends to prove this fact ; but I will mention one experiment to fhow
that founds affect them much, and is one of their guards, as it is in other
animals. In the year 1762, when I was in Portugal, I obferved in a
nobleman’s garden, near Lifbon, a {mall fifh-pond full of different kinds
of fifh. Its bottom was level with the ground, and was made by forming
a bank all round; with a fhrubbery clofe to it. Whilft I was lying on
the bank, obferving the fifth fwimming about, I defired a gentleman, who
was with me, to take a loaded gun and go behind the fhrubs and fire it.
The reafon for going behind the fhrubs was, that there might not be the
leaft reflection of light. The inftant the report was made, the fith feemed —
to be all of one mind, for they vanifhed inftantaneoufly, raifing as it were
a cloud of mud: from the bottom. In about five minutes afterwards they
began to appear, and were feen {wimming about as before.

Geoffroi, who has written on this organ, confiders the ray as in the
clafs of reptiles ; and with that idea has examined their organ of hearing,
He is by no means clear in his defcription, fo that it is almoft impoffible
to follow him ; yet it is but doing him juftice to allow, that he has dif-
covered what is analogous to the three femi-circular canals in other
animals, together with their union into one cavity; and mentions the
chalky fubftance contained in that cavity and the nerves. But it is by no
means clear, that he was acquainted with'the external opening which
leads to thofe canals. He fays the entrance of the organ of hearing (by
which one would fuppofe he means the meatus auditorius externus) is
not eafily difcovered; neither does that which he defcribes correfpond
with the real fituation of the external communication ; we may therefore
_ reafonably conclude that he is defcribing fomething elfe. He is not more
clear in his mode of reafoning on the application of the parts to produce.
the fenfe of hearing. He obferves that the organ of hearing is very im-
perfect in this fpecies of animals ; but fuppofes that to be compenfated by
the medium in which they live, and by which found is conveyed to them
being more denfe than that of the air, by which found is communicated to

L animals


mL OF THE ORGAN OF HEARING IN FISHES.


animals living on the land; and of this idea he is certainly the author,
Monf. Geoffroi cannot indeed be faid to have given:a perfect account of
the organ of hearing-in fifhes, yet on the whole he fhould be confidered
as a difcoverer.. For though he had only made his obfervations on the
ray, as belonging to the clafs of reptiles; yet as it may be properly con-
fidered of the fifth kind, he has a juft claim to the difcovery. Had I
formerly been acquainted with this author’s refearches and pretenfions, I
fhould not have claimed a difcovery to which I had not a prior right;
nor fhould I have held the difcovery of the external communication alone,
an object of confequence enough to induce me to difpute the honour with
Monf. Geoffroi.

In looking over the works of the different authors who have treated of
the organ of hearing in fifhes, I find from a paflage in Willoughby,”
who publifhed prior to Mr. Geoffroi, and indeed is quoted by him, that
my claim, even to the difcovery of the external opening, is not fo ftrong
as I believed it to be; for he mentions an external orifice in the fkate,
contiguous to what he fuppofes the organ of hearing in that fifth. If what
he alludes to is really the external opening of the ear, it gives him a prior
claim to the difcovery of that part of the organ; although from his
account, he cannot be faid to have been acquainted with the organ
itfelf: but as we find in defcribing the external ear of the thornback
that he has evidently miftaken the nofe for it, of which he gives a
tolerable full account, it is very obvious that he was ignorant of the open-
ing into the ear.”

Although profeflor Camper publifhed an account of the organ of
hearing in fifhes fo late as 1774, he did not feem at that time to have
been acquainted with the external opening of the ear in the ray. After
giving a defcription of the organ of hearing in the pike, he makes fome
general obfervations on the fimilarity of this organ in other fithes; but


* Willughbeii Hiftoria Pifcium, Oxonii 1686, lib. iii. cap. viii.
> Lib. iii. cap. xiv,
excepts


OF THE ORGAN OF HEARING IN FISHES. 45


excepts the fhark and ray.*. This exception we might fuppofe alluded to ~
the auditory canal; but further on he explains what he meant by this
exception, and does not mention the external opening in the ray; from
which we may fairly conclude that he was not acquainted with it.”


= J] eft trés-vraifemblable que toutes les autres efpéces de poiflons, tant malacopterygit
qu’ acanthopterygii, aufli-bien que les branchioftegi 8 les chondropterygii d’ Artedi, 4 exception
des fqualis & des raies, ont l’organe de louie conftruit 4 peu pres de la méme fagon; je
n’excepte pas l’efturgeon, quoique M. Klein, idzd. ait donné la defcription du conduit auditif,
page 19, figure 4, Tab. 2, b; ce poiffon étant rare parmi nous, je n’ai eu occafion de l’exa-
miner qu’une feule fois fans avoir trouvé ce conduit.” Memoires Etrangers de l’Academie
des Sciences, 1774, tom. 6, page 190. |

5 « Au contraire, les chiens de mer, les galeis de Rondelet & les poiffons qu’il a décrits,
lib. XII; \es fqualis d’ Artedi & les rates, ont bien ’organe a peu prés de la méme compo-
_ fition, mais il eft enfermé dans une caiffe tout offeufe ou cartilagineufe, ce qui ne fait pas une
différence effentielle; ils entendent donc comme les €glefins, les morues, les baudroyes & les
brochets, en un mot comme tous les autres poiffons non amphibies : M. Geoffroi s’eft trompé
en comparant leurs organes avec celui des reptiles, tels que la vipére, les lézards, &c. qui
entendent le fon comme les quadrupédes, les oifeaux & les amphibies aquatiques, favoir par
le moyen de air & d’un tambour, comme j’ai deffein de le prouver dans une autre occafion.””
Memoires Etrangers de l’Acadamie des Sciences, 1774, tom. 6, page 190.


Eg ACCOUNT


. : i A shat
) f + Riad
a arash : ;
Ae haa, i :
payne ,
- ie


ay Pa? a
by i
sind! i
Ge Er x
2 ‘


i }


C97


ACCOUNT OF CERTAIN RECEPTACLES OF AIR
IN BIRDS, WHICH COMMUNICATE WITH THE
LUNGS AND EUSTACHIAN TUBE.


INCE the account of thefe receptacles was read before the Royal
Society, in the year 1774, I have by the diffections of a number of
birds been able to make fome additional obfervations relative to the extent
of the air-cells which communicate with the lungs in this clafs of ani-
mals. Thefé latter obfervations were not however made in confequence
of any regular defign to inveftigate this fubje@t further. For to have
eftablifhed the principle feemed all that was neceflary, unlefs by general
obfervations’ we could hope to throw more light on the final intention of
this remarkable piece of mechanifm.

Before the period I have mentioned, the communication fubfifting in
birds, between the air-cells of the lungs and other cavities of the body,
had not been clearly explained, nor even much attended to by anatomifts
or natural hiftorians. It is a fingularity of ftruture peculiar to this tribe
of animals; and an account of it, cannot, I imagine, be unacceptable
to the public. ©

It is not my prefent intention to enter into minute defcriptions. of all
‘the particular communications of this fort difcoverable in birds by dif-
fection, but only to mention fuch general facts as will ferve to introduce
the fubject into natural hiftory, and lead to an inquiry into the purpofes
which this ftructure was intended to anfwer.. With this view I thall en-
deavour to give fome idea of the conftruction of the lungs, and of the
air-receptacles in birds; occafionally remarking the circumftances in
which thefe principally différ from what is feen in other animals.

To make this matter more intelligible, I muft previoufly give an idea
of the difference between the particular parts in queftion, and thofe of
other animals who- are, not endowed: with this property; and firft, the
conftruction of the lungs, and then of thofe receptacles.

The


8 OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS.


The mechanifm of the lungs in birds, which renders them fit for ©
conveying air to different parts of the body, confifts principally in certain :
communications. ; “A |

It has been afferted that birds have no diaphragm ; but this opinion —
muft have arifen either from a-want of obfervation, or rom too confined
an idea of a diaphragm’; for there is a moderately ftrong, but thin and
tran{parent, membrane which covers the lower furface of the lungs,
adheres to them, and affords infertion to feveral thin mufcles which arife
from the inner furfaces of the jribs. The ufe of this part feems to be
that of leflening the concavity of |the lungs towards the abdomen, at the
time of in{piration, and thereby aflifting, to, dilate the air-cells for which —
reafon it is to be confidered as anfwering one main purpofe of a dia-
phragm. Befides this attachment of the lungs to the, diaphragm, -they
are alfo connected to the ribs, and to the fides of the vertebre. |

Thefe adhefions are peculiar to this tribe of animals, and are of fin-
gular ufe, nay in fact are abfolutely neceffary.in fuch lungs as.thofe of
birds ; out of which it is intended the air fhould find a;paflage into other
cavities. For if the lungs were loofe in the cavity of the thorax, as is
the cafe in many other animals, thefe cells could not be expanded, -either
by the depreffion of the diaphragm, or the elevation of the ibs ; fince
the air rufhing in to fill up the vacuum produced in. the cavity of the
cheft by thefe actions would take the {treight road from. the . trachea
through thefe paffages, and of confequence would expand no part of the
lungs which lay out of that line, whereby refpiration would be totally
prevented, and an effect produced exa@lly fimilar to what happens in other
animals where the lungs are fo much wounded as to allowt.a free exit to —
the air at that part.


The cells in birds which receive air from the lungs, are to: be found
both in the foft parts, and in the bones ; and have no communication
with the cavity of the common cellular membrane. Some of thefe air-
bags are placed in the larger cavities, as the abdomen ; and others are
{o lodged in the intertftices, as about the breaft, axilla, &c. as at firft to
give the appearance of the common connecting membrane. Some of
them communicate immediately with one another ; and all may be faid


to


OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS. . “9


to have a communication by means of the lungs. They are of very dif-
ferent fizes, juft as beft fuits the particular eurcunsftances of the parts in
which they are placed.

The bones which receive air are of two fea fome, as the fternum,
ribs, and vertebre, have their internal fubftance divided into innumerable
cells, whilft others, as the os humeri, and the os femoris, are hollowed
out into one large canal, with fometimes a few bony columns running
acrofs at the extremities. Bones of this kind may be diftinguifhed from
thofe that do not receive air, by feveral marks: 1ft, By their lefs {pecific
gravity: 2dly, By being le!s vafcular than the others, and therefore —
whiter: 3dly, By their containing little or no oil, and confequently being
more eafily cleaned ; and when cleaned appearing much whiter than com-
mon bones: 4thly, By having no marrow, or even any bloody pulpy fub-
{tance in their cells: 5thly, By not being in general fo hard and firm as
other bones*; and 6thly, By the pafiage that allows the dir to enter
the bones, which can eafily be perceived. In the recent bone we may
readily difcover holes, or openings, not filled with any fuch foft fubftance
as blood-vefiels or nerves ; and it happens that feveral of thefe holes are
placed together, near that end of the bone which is next to the trunk of
the bird ; and are diftinguifhable by having their external edges rounded.
off ; which is not the cafe with the holes through which either nerves or
blood-vefiels pafs into the fabftance of the bone.

When birds break any of the bones which contain air, the farrouiia..
ing parts become emphyfematous.

There are openings in the lungs, by ae they tranfmit air to the
other parts; and the membrane or diaphragm above mentioned is per-
forated in feveral places with holes of a confiderable fize, which admit of
a free communication between the cells of the lungs and the abdomen,
a circumftance which has been frequently noticed. To each of thefe
perforations is joined a diftinct membranous bag, extremely thin and
tranfparent, which being afterwards continued through the whole of the


-* The bones of fome birds are fo foft that they can be fqueezed together with the finger
and thumb; the bones of the extremities however have very folid fides.
abdomen


$00 OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS.


abdomen are attached to the back and fides of that cavity, by which the
bags are kept firm in their proper fituations ; each receiving the air from
their refpective openings. There is no occafion to defcribe here all the
bags, or their attachments, it being fufficient to fay that they extend over
the whole abdomen.

The lungs at the anterior part, contiguous to the fternum, open into
certain membranous cells which lie upon the fides of the pericardium,
and communicate with the cells of the fternum. At the fuperior part
the opening of the lungs is into the large cells of a loofe net work,
through which the trachea, cefophagus, and large veffels pafs as they are
going to and from the heart. When thefe cells are diftended with air,
the fize of that part where they lie is very confiderably increafed, and in
general is a mark of either the paflion of anger or love. It is plainly
feen in the Turkey-cock, the pouting pigeon, &c. and is very vifible in
_ the breaft of a goofe when fhe cackles. Thefe cells communicate with
others in the axilla, under the large pectoral mufcle ; and in fome birds
are {till further extended. In the pelican, for inftance, the fkin of the
breaft is united to the parts underneath by means of thofe cells, which
are pretty equally formed; and when the {kin is removed, the two fepa-
rated furfaces appear as if honey-combed. When thefe cells are diftended,
the fkin is removed to a confiderable diftance, by which means the volume.
is proportionally increafed. In moft birds, I believe in all that fly, thefe
axillary cells communicate with the cavity of the os humeri, by means of
finall openings in the hollow furface near the head of that bone. The
oftrich however is an exception. In fome birds they are continued down —
the wing, where they communicate with the ulna and radius, and in
others they go even as far as the pinions.

The pofterior edges of the lungs (which lie on the fides of the fpine_
and project backwards between the ribs) open into the cells of the bodies
of the vertebra, into thofe of the ribs, the canal of the medulla fpinalis,
the cells of the facrum, and other bones of the pelvis ; from which parts
the air finds a paflage into the cavity of the thigh bone. This takes
place in the greateft number of birds ; but in fome the air is even con-
tinued part of the way down the thighs. This account agrees with what

we


'


- OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS. é 81


we generally find; though fome birds have more, and fome fewer of thefe
communications ; for in the oftrich no air gets into the os humeri, but
it enters into every other part, as defcribed above, and in very large quan-
tities. In the common fowl no air appears to enter any bone except the
os humeri. The wood-cock has no air-cells either in the firft bone of
the wing, or in the thigh bones. On the other hand, in the pelican
the air pafles on to the ulna and radius, and into thofe bones which
anfwer to the carpus and metacarpus of quadrupeds.

Thus the cells of the abdomen, thofe furrounding the pericardium,
thofe fituated at the lower and forepart of the neck, and in the axilla,
thofe in the cellular membrane under the pectoral mufcles, as well as in
that which unites the fkin to the body, all communicate with the lungs,
and are capable of being filled with air ; and again from thefe the cells of
the fternum, ribs, vertebra of the back and loins, bones of the pelvis,
the humeri, the ulna and radius, with the pinions, and thigh bones,
can in’many birds be furnifhed with air.

This fupply of air is not conveyed to the bones folely by means of the
lungs ; for the cells of the bones of the head in fome birds are likewife
fslled with it, of which the owl is a remarkable inftance. In this bird
the diploe between the two plates of the fkull is cellular and admits a
confiderable quantity of air, which is furnifhed by the Euftachian tube.

Some authors confidered the diploe in the cranium of a bird as a con-
tinuation of the mamillary procefs,* and have looked upon it as a circum-
ftance peculiar to finging birds, but this is not really the cafe. The
lower jaw of many birds, but more particularly the pelican, is furnifhed
with air, which is fupplied by means of the Euftachian tube.’
| Thefe


* The only thing fimilar to this communication in birds, of the cells of bones with the
external air, is that which takes place inthe internal ear of quadrupeds, by means of the Euf-
tachian tube.

® When I wrote this account to fend it to the Royal Society, I did not then know by what
means this was done; for in that I faid, ‘ but by what means I do not know;’” that is, I
did not know whether it was conveyed by the trachea, where it pafles along the neck, or
the Euftachian tube. Profeflor Camper, when he did me the honour to-call upon me, was fo

M 7 obliging


82 OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS,


Thefe facts, which had been formerly obferved, led me in the year
1758 to make feveral experiments upon the breathing of birds, to prove
the. free communication between the lungs and the above mentioned parts.

Firft, I made an opening into the belly of a cock, and having intro-
duced a filver canula, tied up the trachea; I found that the animal
breathed by this opening, and might have lived; but by an inflammation.
in the bowels coming on, adhefions were produced, and the communi-
cation cut off.

I next cut the wing through the os humeri, in another fowl, and
tying up the trachea, as in the cock, found that the air paffed to and
from the lungs by the canal in this bone, ‘The fame experiment was
made with the os femoris of a young hawk, and was attended with
nearly the like fuccefs. But the paflage of air through. the parts in
both, efpecially in the laft experiment, was attended with more difficulty
than in the firft; it was indeed fo great as to render it impoffible for the —
animal to live longer than to prove evidently that it breathed through
_ the cut bone.

I have made feveral preparations of thefe cells, by throwing into the
trachea an injection commonly called the corroding injection, which firft
filled the air-cells of the lungs, then all the others, fuch as the cells in
the abdomen, anterior and fuperior part of the cheft, axilla, os humeri,
cells of the back bone and thigh ; then the whole being put into fpirit of
fea-falt, and corroded, the caft of injection came out entire.

The extreme fingularity of thefe communications in birds, put me upon
confidering what might be their final intention. At firft I fufpected that
it might be intended to affift the act of flying, that being the circumftance |
which appears the moft peculiar to birds. It might be of fervice in that
refpect, I thought, by increafing the volume and ftrength with the fame
quantity of matter, and therefore without adding to the weight of the
whole, which indeed would rather be diminifhed by the difference of


obliging as to take fome pains to fhow me, in the lower jaw of the hawk, the hole where the
air entered; which makes me fufpect he did not underftand what I had written. For after
having given the marks by which fuch openings were particularly diftinguifhed, it will hardly
be fuppo‘ed I could fay that I did not know the hole where the air entered.


{pecific


OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS. 83


fpecific gravity between the external and internal air. This opinion was
ftrengthened, by obferving that the feathers of birds contain alfo a confi-
derable quantity of air and in the very part which requires the greateft
ftrength: the analogy to which feems to hold good between this mechanifm
in birds ; and what is difcoverable in moft kinds of fithes, rather favours
this opinion. For thefe have air contained within their bodies, which I
believe is commonly fuppofed to leffen their {pecific gravity, although this
does not appear fo neceflary in fifhes, who move in a much heavier ele-
ment than birds.* But when I found that the oftrich (which is not

intended.


@ Whenwe confider that the elevating and fufpending apparatus is much lefs in fithes than:
in birds, we might reafonably conceive the air in them was intended as‘a kind of equilibrium.
between the fifh and water ; ‘and that progreffive motion was the only thing wanted in the
actions of fifhes. Were we to reafon upon general principles alone, we fhould fuppofe that _
thofe fifhes who have the largeft air-bags fhould have their mufcles of a greater {pecific gra-
vity ; and thofe fifhes that have none, fhould have the lighteft flefh; therefore that the flefh
of a fhark, which has no air-bag, fhould be lighter than that of the falmon and cod, which.
have : but to know how far this, which i neited to be reafonable, was a fact, I made the fol-
lowing experiments.

Experiment x. I took a portion of mufcle of the fhark, cod, and Talmon, of the fame
weight in air; and firft examined how far they occupied the fame fpace, by immerfing them
in water, and obferving the rife or fall of the water upon each of them being feparately im-
merfed jn it.

The fhark occupied the fmalleft fpace, the falmon a little more, and the cod the largeft.

Experiment 2. I then fufpended the fame three portions, upon a level, in a glafs veflel
filled with water about two feet high, and let them all’ go at the fame inftant to fee which
would fall through the water in the fhorteft fpace of time. The fhark got to the bottom
firft, the falmon next, and the cod laft.

_ It is neceffary to obferve that, in both thefe experiments, the difference in bulk, and’in the
times of their falling was very little ;, but however fufficient to afcertain the fact for which the
experiments were inf{tituted.

To fee how far the mufcular flefh of birds was fpecifically lighter than that of a quadruped,
I repeated the above experiments upon a portion of a hind, of a pigeon, and of a theep, but
could difcover no vifible difference in their weight.

It may be obferved, there are two fituations of oil in ffhes; in one it is diffufed through
the body, as in the falmon, herring, &c. In the other it is in the liver, as in all of the ray
kind, cod, &c. and thofe who have it in one part. have none in the other: The liver, in
thofe of the ray kind, is large and extended through the belly; therefore it might be fuppofed
to lighten the body, from oil. being lighter than water. or the flefh; but we have oil in the

M 2 . liver,


4 OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS:


intended to fly) was amply provided with thefe cells; and that the com.
mon fowl, and many others of that clafs, which are endowed with the
faculty of flying, were lefs liberally fupplied with air: when I faw that
the wood-cock, which flies, and is even fuppofed a bird of paflage, was
inferior in this refpect to the oftrich; and that the bat differed not in
ftructure from animals that do not fly, Iwas compelled, by fo many con- *
tradictions to theory, to fuppofe that this fingular mechanifm might be
intended for fome other purpofe.

The next conjecture that offered, was, that thefe parts were to be con-
fidered as an appendage to the lungs ; to which I was led by the analogy
obfervable in amphibious animals. For in the {nake, viper, and many
others of them, the lungs are continued down through the whole belly,
in form of two bags; of which the upper part only can perform the
office of refpiration with any degree of effect; the lower having com-
paratively but few air-veflels. The air muft pafs through this upper
part before it gets to the lower in infpiration, and mutt alfo repafs in ex-
piration, fo that the refpiratory furface has more air applied to it than
what the lungs of themfelves could contain. It cannot however be fup-
pofed, that the air may be made to pafs to and fro in bones as in parts |
which admit of contraction and dilatation ; the purpofe anfwered by thefe
bony cells muft therefore be different ; and perhaps they fhould be con-
fidered as refervoirs of air.- There is in fac a great fimilarity between
birds and that clafs of animals called amphibious ; and although a bird
and a fnake are not the fame in the conftruction of the tefpiratory organs,
yet the circumftance of the air paffing in both beyond the lungs, into the
cavity of the abdomen, naturally leads us to fuppofe, that a ftructure fo
fimilar is defigned in each to a fimilar purpofe. This analogy is {till
further fupported by the lungs in both confifting of large cells: Now
in amphibious animals, the ufe of fuch a conformation of the lungs is
evident ; for it is in confequence of this ftructure that they require to
breathe lefs frequently than others. Even confidering the matter in this


liver of the cod; and in the falmon, &c. there is a great deal of oil diffufed through the

whole; therefore I am affraid we are not yet acquainted with the full effect of the air-bladder

in fifhes.” |
light,


OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS. 85


light, it may ftill, in birds, have fome connection with flying, as that
motion may eafily be imagined to render frequency of refpiration incon-
venient, and a refervoir of air may therefore become fingularly ufeful.
Although we are not to confider this ftructure in birds to be an extention
of lungs, yet I can eafily conceive this accumulation of air to be of great
ufe in refpiration ; for as we obferved in the viper, that the air in its paf-
fage to and from thefe cells, muft certainly have a confiderable effect
upon the blood in the lungs, by allowing a much greater quantity of air
to pafs in a given time than if there was no fuch con{truction of parts."
And this opinion will appear not to be ill founded, if we confider that
both in the bird and the viper, ‘the furface of the lungs is {mall in com-
parifon to what it is in many other animals which have not this extenfion
of cavity. It is alfo a corroborating circum(ftance, that in the fowl the
air could have paffed by a much readier way than through the lungs,
into all the cells about the breaft, neck, axilla, wings, &c. that could —
‘have been filled from the lower end of the trachea, upon which many of
them lie. But the air muft now take a roundabout paflage both in its
way in and in its way out, thofe openings being upon the exterior furface
of the lungs. We muft not however give up the idea of fuch ftruéture
being of ufe in flying; for I believe we may fet it down as a general
rule, that in the birds of longeft and higheft flight, as eagles, this ex-
tenfion, or diffufion of air is carried further than in the others; and this
Opinion is ftrengthened by comparing this ftru@ure with the refpiratory
organs in the flying infects, which are compofed of cells diffufled through
the whole body ; and thefe are extended even into the head and down the
extremities ; while there is no fuch ftru€ture in thofe infects that do not
fly, as the fpider ; but why the pelican fhould be fo amply provided, I
cannot fay, not knowing the natural hiftory of that hird {ufficiently to
be able to judge of this point. Do they carry weights in the large fauces
fo as to require fuch an increafe of body without increafe of weight ?


@ It may perhaps occur to fome that the whole of thefe communicating cells are to be con-
fidered as extended lungs; but I can hardly think that any air which gets beyond the vefi-
culated lungs themfelves is capable of affecting the blood of the animal ; as the other cavities
into which it comes, as well thofe of the foft parts as of the bones, are very little vafcular.

How


86 OF AIR-CELLS IN BIRDS,


How far this conftruction of the refpiratory organs may affift birds in
finging, is deferving of notice ; as the vaft continuance of fong, between .
the breathings, in a Canary-bird, would appear to arife from it. This
is a fubjet however which I fhall not at prefent enter upon.


EXPERIMENTS _


bad Ret rd


EXPERIMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS .ON ANI-
MALS, WITH RESPECT TO THE POWER OF
PRODUCING HEAT.


OME late ingenious experiments and obfervations, publifhed in the
Philofophical Tranfactions, upon a power which animals feem to
poffefs of generating cold, induced me to look over my notes, containing
fome which I had made in the year 1766, indicating an oppofite power in
animals, whereby they are capable of refifting any external cold while alive,
by generating within themfelves a degree of heat fufficient to counteract it.
Thefe experiments were not originally inftituted with any expectation of
the event which refulted from them, but for a very different purpofe ;
which was no other than to fatisfy myfelf, whether an animal could re-
tain life after it was frozen, as had been confidently afferted both of fithes
and fnakes. If I had fucceeded, I meant to have tried the eftects of freez-
ing, on living animals, to a much greater extent than ever can happen
accidentally. For that fnakes and fifhes, after being frozen, have ftill
retained fo much of life, as when thawed to refume their vital actions, is
a fact fo well attefted that we are bound to believe it. JI mention thefe
circumftances, to account for what might otherwife be attributed ta
negligence and inattention; namely, the little nicety that was ufed in
meafuring the precife degree of cold applied in thefe experiments. Ac-
curacy in this particular was not aimed at, as it was of no confequence in
the inquiry more immediately before me. The cold was firft produced
by means of ice and fnow with fal ammoniac or fea-falt, to about the
10° of Fahrenheit’s thermometer: then ice was mixed with fpirit of
nitre; but what degree of cold was thus produced I did not examine.
This cold mixture was made in a tub furrounded-with woollen cloths,
and covered with the fame, to prevent the effects of the heat of the at-
mofphere upon the mixture itfelf, and ta preferve as much as poffible a
cold atmofphere within the vefiel. The animal juices, the blood for ex-
| ample,


$3 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


ample, freeze at 25°; fo that a piece of dead flefh could be frozen in
fuch an atmofphere.


EXPERIMENTS.


I. Tue firft experiment was made on two carp. They were put into
a glafs veffel with common river water, and the veffel put into the freez-
ing mixture ; the water did not freeze faft enough ; and therefore to make
‘it freeze fooner we put in as much cooled {now as to render the whole
thick. The {now round the carp melted: we put in more frefh fnow,
which melted alfo; and this was repeated feveral times, till we grew
tired, and at laft left them covered up in the yard to freeze by the joint
operation of the furrounding mixture and the natural cold of the atmof-
phere. They were frozen at laft, after having exhaufted the whole powers
of life in the production of heat. That this was really the cafe, could
not be known till I had completed that part of the experiment for which
the whole was begun, viz. the thawing of the animals. ‘This was done
very gradually; but the animals did not, with flexibility, recover life.
While in this cold they fhewed figns of great uneafinefs by their violent
motions. NN. B. In fome of thefe experiments; where air was made the
conductor of the cold and heat, that the heat might be more readily
carried off from the-animal, a leaden veffel was ufed. It was fimall for
the fame reafon ; and as it was neceflary for the animal’s refpiration that
the mouth of the veffel fhould communicate with the Open air, it was
made pretty deep, that the cold of the atmofphere round the animal
might not be diminifhed faft by the warmth of the open air, which would
have fpoiled it as a conductor. 2

II. The fecond experiment was upon a dormoufe. The vefiel was
funk in the cold mixture almoft to its edge. The atmofphere round the
animal foon cooled; its breath froze as it came from the mouth; an
hoar-froft gathered on its whifkers, and on all the infide of the veffel ;
and the external points of the hair became covered with the fame. While
this was going on, the animal fhewed figns of great uneafinefs : fometimes
it would coil itfelf into a round form, to preferve its extremities, and: con-

fine


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. 8g


fine its heat; but finding that ineffectual, it then endeavoured to make
its efcape*; its motions became lefs violent by the finking pf the vital
powers ; and its feet were frozen ; but we were not able to keep up the ~
cold a fufficient time to freeze the whole animal, its hair being fo bad a

conductor of heat, that the confumption was not more than the animal

. powers were capable of fupporting.”

III. The third experiment was made upon another dormoufe. From
the failure of the laft experiment I took care that the hair fhould not a
fecond time be an obftruétion to the fuccefs of our experiment. I there-
fore firft made it wet all over, that the heat of the animal might be more
inftantaneoufly carried off; and then it was put into a leaden veffel. The
whole was put into the cold mixture as before. The animal foon gave
figns of its feeling the cold, by repeated attempts to make its efcape.
The breath, and the evaporating water from its body were foon frozen,
and appeared like a hoar-froft on the fides of the veffel, and on its
whifkers ; but while the vigour of life lafted, it defied the approach of
the cold. However, from the hair being wet, and thereby rendered a
good conductor of heat, there was a much greater confumption of it than
in the former experiment. This haftened on a diminution of the power
of producing it. The animal died, and foon became ftiff; upon thaw-
ing it, we found it was quite dead.

IV. The fourth experiment was upon a toad. It was put into water
juft deep enough not to cover its mouth, and the whole was put into a
cold mixture, now between 10° and 15°. It allowed the water to freeze
clofe to it, which as it were, clofed it in; but the animal did not die,
~and therefore was not frozen: however, it hardly ever recovered the ufe
of its limbs. ;


* ‘This fhows, that cold carried to a great degree rather roufes the animal into action than
deprefles it; but it would appear from many circumftances and obfervations, that a certain
degree of cold produces inactivity both in the living and fenfative principle, which will be
further illuftrated hereafter.

»Thefe experiments were made in prefence of Dr. George Fordyce and Dr. Erwin,
teacher of Chymiftry at Glafgow; the latter of. whom came in accidentally in the middle
of our operations,


N Ante Ehe


90 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


V. The fifth experiment was with a f{nail, which froze very foon, in
a cold between 10° and 13°; but thefe two laft experiments were made in
the winter, when the living powers of thofe animals are very weak : they _
might have refifted the cold more ftrongly in the fummer. Why the
animals mentioned in thefe experiments died before they were frozen,
while thofe which are expofed to the atmofphere in very cold climates
do not, is a point I fhall not pretend to determine; not knowing the
difference between the effects of a natural and an artificial cold. It may
be accounted for, by fuppofing that the natural cold in climates in which
animals are found frozen, is fo intenfe as to produce congelation imme-~
diately, before the powers of life are exhaufted; at leaft whether it is,
fo or not is worthy of inquiry. |
It appears from the above experiments, that moft probably the animals
were deprived of life before they were frozen. Secondly, that there was
an exertion or expence of animal powers in refifting the effects of cold,
proportioned to the neceffity. Thirdly, that this exertion was in propor-
tion to the perfection of the animal, and the natural heat proper to each
fpecies, and to each age: It might alfo perhaps depend in fome degree on
other circumftances not Hitherto obferved: for from experiment II. and
III. upon dormice, I found that in thefe animals, which are of a coniti-
tution to retain nearly the fame heat in all temperatures of the air, -it
required the greateft cold I could produce to overcome this refifting
power; while by experiment IV. and V. in the toad and {nail, TRE
natural heat is not always the fame, but is altered very materially accord-
ing to the external heat or cold, this power was exhaufted in a degreé of
cold not exceeding 10° or 15°: and the {nail being the moft imperfect of
the two, its powers of generating heat appeared to be much the weakeft.
That the imperfect animals will allow of a confiderable variation in
their temperature of heat and cold, is proved by the following experi-
ments. ‘The thermometer being at 45°, the ball was introduced by the
mouth into the ftomach of a frog, which had been expofed to the fame
cold. It rofe to 49°. I then placed the frog in an atmofphere made
warm by heated water, where I allowed it to ftay twenty minutes ; and
upon introducing the thermometer into the ftomach, it raifed the quick-
filver


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. te


filver to 64°. But to what degree the more imperfect animals are capa-
ble of being rendered hotter and colder at one time than another, I have
not been able to determine. The torpidity of thefe animals in our winter
is probably owing to the great change wrought in their temperature-by
the external heat and cold. The cold in their bodies is to fuch a degree,
as in a great meafure to put a ftop, while it lafts, to the vital functions ;
while in warmer climates no fuch effect is produced. This variety not
only takes place in animals of different orders; but in fome degree in
the fame animal at different ages, even according to the different ages of
parts in the fame animal ; for an animal is naturally alike old in all its
original parts, yet there are often new ones formed in confequence of
difeafes ; and we find, that thefe new or young parts in animals are not
able to fupport life equally with the old; but as animals are of different
ages, and the fame animal is always growing older, and of courfe more
and more. perfect, they then become more capable of Bree heat
than when they were younger.

This power of generating heat feems to be a property in an animal
while alive. It is a power only of oppofition and refiftance; for. it is
not found to exert itfelf fpontaneoufly and unprovoked’; but muit always
be excited by the energy of fome external frigorific agent, or difeafe. It
does not depend on the motion of the blood, as fome have fuppofed, be-
caule it likewife belongs to animals who have no circulation; and the
nofe of a dog, which is always nearly of the fame heat in all tempera-
tures of the air, is well fupplied with blood: neither can it be faid to
depend upon the nervous fyftem, for it is found in animals that have no
brain or nerves. . It is then moft probable that it arifes from fome other
principle; a principle fo connected with life, that it can, and does, act
independently of circulation, fenfation; and volition ; and is that power
which preferves and regulates the internal machine. This power of
generating heat is in the higheft perfection when the body is in health ; and
in many deviations from that {tate we find that its action is extremely
uncertain and irregular; fometimes rifing higher than the ftandard, and
at other times falling much below it. Inftances of this we have in dif-
ferent difeafes, and even in the fame difeafe, within very fhort intervals

N 2 of


«


92 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


of time. A very remarkable one fell under my own obfervation, in a
gentleman who was feized with an apopleétic fit; and while he lay in-
fenfible in bed, covered with blankets, I found that his whole body
would, in an inftant, become extremely cold in every part, continuing
fo for fome time ; and, as fuddenly, would become extremely hot. While
this was going on alternately, there was no {fenfible alteration in his
pulfe for feveral hours.

Being mafter of the foregoing fact, that animals had a power of gene-~
rating heat, I purfued the fubjeét ftill further ; not fo much with a view
to account for animal heat, as to obferve the different phenomena, with
the variations or difference in different animals. In the courfe of my ex-
periments having found variations in the degree of heat and cold in
the fame experiment, for which I could not account, I fufpected that
this might arife from fome imperfection in the conftruction of the ther-
mometer. I mentioned to Mr. Ramfden my objection to the common
conftruction of that inftrument, and my ideas of one more perfect in ita
nature, and better adapted to the experiments in which I was engaged.
He accordingly made me fome very fimall thermometers, fix or feven
inches long, not above two-twelfths of an inch thick in the ftem ; having
the external diameter of the ball very little larger than that of the ftem,
on which was marked the freezing point. The {tem was embraced by
a fmall ivory fcale fo as to flide upon it eafily, and retain any pofition.
Upon the hollow furface of this fcale were marked the degrees which
were feen through the ftem. By thefe means the fize of the thermome- —
ter was very much reduced, and it could be applied to foft bodies with
much more eafe and certainty, and in many cafes in which the former
ones could not be conveniently ufed; I therefore repeated with it fuch of
my former experiments as had not at firft proved fatisfactory, and found
the degrees of heat very different, not only from what I had expeéted,,
but alfo from what I had found by my former experiments: with the ther=
mometers of the common conftruction. 3

I have obferved above, and find it fupported by every experiment: I
have made on the heat and cold of animals, that the more perfect. have
the greateft power of retaining a certain degree of heat, which may be

called,,


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. 93


called their ftandard heat, and allow of much lefs variation than the more
imperfect animals : however, it will appear from the three experiments
which I am now going to relate, that many, if not all of them, are in-
capable of keeping conftantly to one degree ; but may be altered from
their ftandard heat, either by external applications, or difeafe. How-
ever, thefe variations are much greater below that ftandard than above
it; the perfect animals having a greater power of refifting heat than cold,
fo that they are commonly near their ultimate heat. Indeed we do not
want any other proof of a variation than our own feelings: we are all
fenfible of heat and of cold, which fenfations could not be produced
without an alteration really taking place in the parts affected; and that
alteration could not take place if they did not become actually warmer or
colder. I have often cooled my hands to fuch a degree, that I could
warm them by immerfing them in water juft pumped; therefore my
hands were really colder than the pump-water.

An increafe of abfolute heat muft alter the texture or soften of the
parts, fo as to produce the fenfation which we likewife call heat: and as
that heat is diminifhed, the texture or pofition of the parts is. altered in
a contrary way; and, when carried to a certain degree, becomes the
caufe of the fenfation of cold. Now thefe effects could not take place
in either cafe without an increafe or decreafe of abfolute heat in the part;
heat therefore in its different degrees muft be prefent. When heat is
applied to the furface of the body, the {kin becomes in fome degree heated
according to the application; which may be carried fo far as actually to
burn the living parts: on the contrary, in a cold atmofphere, a man’s
hand may become fo cold as to lofe that fenfation altogether, and change
it for pain. Abfolute heat and cold may be carried fo far as. even to
alter the ftructure of the parts upon which the actions of life depend..

As animals are fubject to variations in. their degrees of heat and-
cold from external applications, they are of courfe, in. this. refpect,. af-
fected in fome meafure like inanimate matter: and therefore, as parts are
elongated or recede from the common mafs,, thefe effects more readily
take place: for inftance, all projecting parts. and extremities, more ef-
pecially toes, fingers, nofes,. ears, combs of fowls, particularly of the

cock,


94 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


cock, are more readily cooled, and are therefore moft fubje& to be affected
by cold. Animals are not only fubject to an increafe and decreafe of
heat, fimilar to inanimate matter; but the tranfition from one to the
other (as far as they admit of it) is nearly as quick. I fhall not however
confine myfelf to fenfation alone, as that is in fome degree regulated by
habit: for a habit of uniformity in the application of heat and cold to
an animal body, renders it more fenfible of the fmalleft variation in either ;

while by the habit of variety it will become, in a proportionable ‘desta :
lefs fufceptible of all fuch fenfations. This is proved every day, in cold
weather, by people who are accuftomed to clothe themfelves warm. In them |
the leaft expofure to cold air, although the effect produced in the fkin is —
perhaps not the hundredth part of a degree, immediately gives the tenfation
of cold, even through the thickeft covering : thofe, on the contrary, who —
have been uféd to go thinly clothed, can bear the variation of fome degrees

without being fenfible of it: of this the hands and feet afford an inftance’
in point; exciting the fenfation of cold when applied to another part of
the body, without having before given to the mind an impreffion of cold

exifting in them. The projecting parts and the extremities are thofe

which admit of the greateft change in their degrees of heat and cold,

without materially affecting the animal, or even its fenfations. I find

that by heat or cold externally applied to fuch parts, the thermometer _
may, in fome degree, be made to rife or fall; but not in an equal pro-
portion as when applied to inanimate matter. Nor are the living parts
cooled or heated in the fame proportion, as appears from the application
of the thermometer to the fkin; for the cuticle is to be confidered as a
dead covering, capable of receiving greater degrees of heat and cold than
the living parts underneath ; and as it might be fufpected that the whole
of the variation was in this covering, to remove any fuch doubt I made
ths following experiments.

Experiment I. I placed the ball of my chewabinast under my tongue,
where it was perfectly covered by all the furrounding parts ; and having
kept it there for fome minutes, I found that it rofe to 97°; but this being
continued, it rofe no higher. I then took feveral pieces of ice, about the
fize of walnuts, and put them in the fame fituation, allowing them only


to


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. 95


melt in part, that the application of cold might be better kept up, occa-
fionally {pitting out the water arifing from the folution: this I continued
for ten minutes, and found, on introducing my thermometer, that it fell
to 77°; fo that the mouth at this part had loft 20° of heat. The ther-
mometer gradually rofe to 97° again ; but did not in this experiment fink
fo low as it would have done in the hand, if a piece of ice had been
held in it for the fame length of time. Perhaps the furface under the
tongue being furrounded with warm parts, renders it next to an impof-
fibility to cool it to any greater degree: but I rather fufpect that fuch
parts as the hand will allow of greater latitude in this refpect, from
having infenfibly acquired the habit of varying the degree of cold, and
becoming of courfe lefs fufceptible of its impreffions.

As a further proof, that the more perfect animals are capable of vary-
ing their heat, in fome meafure, according to the external heat applied,
I thall adduce the following experiments made on the human fubject.

The mouth being a part fo frequently in contaét with the external
atmofphere in the action of breathing, whatever is put into it may be
fuppofed to be influenced by that atmofphere; this will always render an
experiment made in that part, relative to heat and cold, fomewhat uncer-
tain. I imagined that the urethra would anfwer better, becaufe being an
internal cavity it can only be influenced by heat and cold applied to the
external fkin of the parts. I imagined alfo, that whatever effects the ap-
plication of heat and cold might have, they would fooner take place in
_ the urethra, as being a projecting part, than in any other part of the body;
and therefore if living animal matter was mm any degree fubject to the
common laws of matter in this refpect, the urethra would be readily af-
fected: for this reafon I got a perfon who allowed. me to make fuch ex-
periments as I thought neceffary.

- Experiment II. I introduced the ball of my thermometer into. the
urethra about an inch; after it had remained there about a minute,, the
quickfilver rofe only to 92°: at two inches it rofe to 93°; at four inches:
the quickfilver rofe to 94”; and when the ball had got as far as the bulb.
of the urethra, where it was furrounded by warm parts, the quickfilver
rofe to 97°.

Experiment.


“06 | ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


Experiment III. Thefe parts being immerfed for one minute in water,
heated only to 65°, and the thermometer introduced about an inch and 4
half into the urethra, the quickfilver rofe to 79: this was repeated feveral
times with the fame fuccefs. As the urethra ftill appeared to be the part —
of an animal beft calculated for experiments of this kind ; to find if there
was any difference in the quicknefs of the, tranfition of heat and cold in
living and dead parts, and if the extent to which each would go, was
likewife different, I procured a dead penis to make the following com-
parative experiments ; being clearly of opinion that all fuch trials fhould
be as fimilar as poflible, excepting in thofe points where the difference
(if there is any) makes the effential part of the experiment.

Experiment IV. The heat of the penis of a living perfon, an inch
and a half within the urethra, being found exactly g2°; and having
heated the dead one to the fame degree, I had both immerfed in the fame
vefiel, with the water at 50°, where introducing the thermometers dif-
ferent times, I obferved the comparative quicknefs with which they cooled
from g2°.. The dead cooled fooner by only two or three degrees. ‘The
living came down to 58°, andthe dead to 50°. After having continued
the thermometer there fome time longer, it fell no lower. I repeated the
fame experiment feveral times, with the fame fuccefs ; although at one
time there might be a {mall difference in the degrees of heat from that of
another, the heat of the water alfo differing; but the difference in the
refult was nearly proportional in all the three different trials, therefore
the fame conclufions may be drawn from them. In thefe laft experi-

\ments we find very little difference between the cooling of a part of a dead
and of a living body ; but we cannot fuppofe this to take place uniformly
through the whole body, as in that cafe a living man would always be
of the fame degree of heat with the afmofphere in which he lives. The
man not choofing to be cooled lower than 53° or 54°, prevented my fee-
ing if the. powers of generating heat were exerted in a higher degree
when the heat was brought fo low as to threaten deftruction ; but by
fome experiments on mice, which will be related hereafter, it will appear
that the animal powers are roufed to exert themfelves in this refpect when
necefiary.

From


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. 97


From the experiments related I found, that parts of an animal were
capable of being reduced below the common or natural heat ; I therefore
made other experiments, with a view to fee whether the fame parts were
capable of becoming much hotter than the ftandard heat of animals.
The experiments were made in the fame manner as the former, only the
water was now hotter than the natural heat of the animal. .

Experiment V.. The natural heat of the parts being g2°, they were
immerfed for two minutes in water heated to 113°, and the thermometer
being introduced as before, the quickfilver rofe to 100° and a half. This
experiment I alfo-repeated feveral times, but could not raife the heat of
the penis beyond 100° and a half: this was probably owing to the per-
fon not being able at this time to bear the application of water warmer
than 113°. As thefe were only fingle experiments, | made a compara~
tive one with the dead part. |

Experiment VI. Both the living and dead part being immerfed in
water, gradually made warmer and warmer from 100° to 118”, and con-
tinued in this heat for fome minutes, the dead part raifed the thermo-
meter to 114°, while the living raifed it no higher than 102° and a quar-
ter. It was obferved, by the perfon on whom the experiment. was made,
that after the parts had been in the water about a minute, the water did
not feel hot; but on its being agitated it felt fo hot that he could hardly
bear it. Upon applying the thermometer to the fides of the living glans,
the quickfilver immediately fell from 118° to about 104°, while it did
not fall more than a degree when put clofe to the dead ; fo that the living
glans cooled the furrounding water to a certain diftance.*

Experiment VII. The heat of the re€tum in the fame man was 98°
and a half exactly.

In the fecond, third, fourth, fifth, and fixth experiments, an internal
cavity, which is both very vafcular and fenfible, was evidently influenced


* This might furnifh an ufeful hint refpe€ting bathing in water, whether colder or warmer
than the heat of the body : for if intended to be either colder or hotter, it will foon be of the
fame temperature with that of the body; therefore in a large bath, the patient fhould move .
from place to place; and in a fmall one, there fhould be a conftant fucceflion of water of the
intended heat.


O ) by


98 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


by external heat and cold, though only applied to the fkin of the part;
while, in the feventh experiment, another part of the fame body, where
external heat and cold could make little or no impreffion, was of the
ftandard heat. Although it will appear from experiment, that the rectum
is not the warmeft part of an animal; yet, in order to determine how far
the heat could be inereafed by ftimulating the conftitution to a degree
fufficient to quicken the pulfe, I repeated the feventh experiment after
the man had eaten a hearty {upper and drank a bottle of wine, which in-
creafed the pulfe from 73° to 87°, and yet the thermometer only rofe to
98° and a half.

Having formerly made experiments upon dormice in the fleeping feafon,
with a view to fee if there was any alteration in the animal ceconomy at
that time, I found among my notes an account of fome experiments
which appear to our prefent purpofe: but that I might be more certain
of the accuracy of my former experiments, I repeated them with my new
thermometer. |

Experiment VIII. Ina room, in which the air was at between 50”
and 60° of temperature, a {mall opening was made in the belly of a dor-
moufe, of a fufficient fize to admit the ball of my thermometr, which
being introduced into the belly at about the middle of that cavity, rofe to
80°, and no higher,

Experiment IX. ‘The moufe was put into a cold atmofphere of 15°.
above o, and left there for fifteen minutes ; after which the thermometer
being introduced a fecond time, it rofe to 85°.

Experiment X. The moufe was again put into a cold atmofphere
for fifteen minutes ; and the thermometer being again introduced, the
quickfilver rofe to 72° only, but gradually came up to 83°, 84°, and 85°.

Experiment XI, It was put a third time into the cold atmofphere,
and allowed to ftay there for thirty minutes ; the lower part of the moufe
was at the bottom of the difh, and almoft frozen; the whole of the
animal was numbed, and a good deal weakened. When the thermo-
meter was introduced, the heat varied in different parts of the belly; in
the pelvis, near the parts moft expofed to the cold, it was as low as 62°;


>


me's)


.


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. 9g


in the middle, among the inteftines, about 70° ; but near the diaphragm
it rofe to 80°, 82°, 84°, and 85°; fo that in the middle of the body the
heat had decreafed 10°. Finding a variation in different parts of the fame

cavity in the fame animal, I Aguas the fame experiments upon another
dormoufe.

Experiment XII. I took a healthy dormoufe, which had been afleep
from the coldnefs of the atmofphere, and brought it into a room in which
there was a fire (the atmofphere at 64°); I put the thermometer into its
belly, nearly at the middle, between the thorax and pubis, and the
quickfilver rofe to 74° or 75°; when I turned the ball towards the dia-
phragm, it rofe to 80°; and when I applied it to the liver, it rofe to 81°
and a half.

Experiment XIII. The moufe was put into an atmofphere at 20°.
and left there half an hour; when taken out it was very lively, much
more fo than when put in. I introduced the thermometer into the lower
part of the belly, and.it rofe to gi°; and upon turning it up to the liver,
to 93°. ,

Experiment XIV. The animal was put back into the cold atmof-
phere at 30° for an hour, when the thermometer was again introduced
into the belly; at the liver it rofe to 93°; in the pelvis to g2°; it was
ftill.very lively.

_ Experiment XV. It was again put back into the cold denarii at
19°, and left there an hour; the thermometer at the diaphragm was
87°; in the pelvis 83°; but the animal was now lefs lively.

- Experiment XVI. It was put into its cage, and two hours after the
thermometer, placed at the diaphragm, was at 3°.

As I was unable to procure hedge-hogs in the torpid ftate, to afcertain
their heat during that period, I got my friend, Mr. Jenner, furgeon, at
Berkley, to make the fame experiments on that animal, that I might
compare them with thofe in the dormoufe; and his account is as follows.

«‘ Experiment I. In the winter the seep nee at 44°, the heat of a
torpid hedge-hog, in the pelvis, was 45°, and at the diaphragm 48° and
a half.

O 2 Experiment


¥00 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


Experiment I]. The atmofphere 26°, the heat of a torpid hedge-hogs
in the cavity of the abdomen, was reduced {fo low as 30°.

Experiment III. The hedge-hog was expofed to the cold atmofphere
of 26° for two days; and the heat of the rectum was found to be 93°;
the wound in the abdomen being now fo {mall that it would not admit
the thermometer.

A comparative experiment was made with a puppy, the tino at
50°; the heat in the pelvis, as alfo at the diaphragm, was 102°.

In fummer the atmofphere 78°, the heat of the hedge-hog, in an ac-
tive ftate, in the cay of the abdomen, towards the pelvis, was 95°;
at the diaphragm 97°.

We find from thefe experiments, that the heat of an animal is increafed.
under the circumftances of cold, whenever there are aCtions to be carried
on for which heat is neceflary.

In the experiments on the firft dormoufe, the heat of the animal was
80° ; which is below the ftandard heat of the a¢tions of that animal ; and
after being put into the cold mixture, its heat was raifed to 85°. In
the fecond dormoufe the heat was raifed by repeated experiments from
75° to 93°. A queftion naturally occurs here, was the increafe of heat
owing to the animals being put ito a cold atmofphere, and therefore ge-
nerated to refift the cold? Or was it owing to a wound having been made
into the cavity of the abdomen, which required an exertion of the animal
powers to repair the injury; and which actions could not take place
without the neceflary degree of heat ? That it was m confequence of the
wound, appears evident from the experiment made upon the fecond hedge-
hog; for in an atmofphere of 26° of heat, it was in a very torpid ftate,
and did not raife the thermometer higher than 30°; but after being put
back into the cold, and kept there for two days, its heat in the rectum

was 93°; and fo far from being eyes, it was lively, and the bed in
W heh it lay felt warm.

As this animal allowed its heat to come fo low as 30°, when there

was no necefiary action to take place, the inereafed heat cannot be at-
tributed to the effects of cold; but muft be referred to the wound made
into the belly, that called Fant the powers of the animal to repair an


injury


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. I0¥


injury which they could not affect in a degree of heat below the ftandard
heat of the animal ; and this ftimulus of neceffity for aétion caufed an
exertion of the powers of generating heat, even in a degree of cold that
would have otherways brought the animal fo low as 30”.

Why the heat of the dormoufe fhould be fo low as 80°, in an atmof-
phere of between 50° and 60°, is not eafily accounted for, (except upon
the principle of fleep). But I fhould very much fufpect, that fleep, fim-
ply confidered, is out of the queftion, as fleep is an effect that takes.
place in all degrees of heat and cold. In thofe animals where the volun-
tary actions are fufpended by cold, it appears to produce the effect by
acting in a certain degree as a {edative, in confequence of which the ani-
mal faculties are proportionably weakened, but ftill retain, even under
fuch circumftances, the power of carrying on all the funétions of life.
Beyond this point cold feems to act as a f{timulant, and roufes the animal
powers to action for felf-prefervation. It is more than probable, that
moft animals are in this predicament ; and that every order has its degree
of cold by which the voluntary actions muft- be fufpended.

When a man is afleep, he is colder than when awake; and I find, in
general, that the difference is about one degree and an half, fometimes
lefs. But this difference in the degree of cold between fleeping and
waking is not a caufe of fleep, but an effect ; for many difeafes produce’
a much greater degree of cold in the animal, without giving the leaft
tendency to fleep ; therefore the inactivity of animals from cold is different
from fleep. Befides, all the operations of perfect life, as digeftion, fenfa-
tion, écc. are going on in the time of natural fleep, at leaft in the per-
fe animals ; but none of thefe operations are performed in. the torpid
animals. |

To fee how far the refult of thefe experiments upon dormice was pe-
culiar to them, I wifhed to repeat the fame experiments upon common
mice; fer which purpofe I procured two,. one: ftrong and vigorous, the .
other weakened by fafting.

Experiment XVII. The common atmofphere being at 60°, I intro-
duced the thermometer into the abdomen of the ftrong moufe; the ball

being


102 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


being at the diaphragm, the quickfilver was raifed to 99°, but at the
pelvis only to 96° and three quarters.

Here there was a real difference of about 9° in two anita of the
fame fize, in fome degree of the fame genus, and at the fame feafon of
the year, and the atmofphere of nearly the fame temperature.

Experiment XVIII. The fame moufe was put into a cold atmofphere
of 13°, for an hour, and then the thermometer was introduced as before ;
the quickfilver at the diaphragm was raifed to 83°, in the pelvis only
to. 782.

Here the real heat of the animal was diminifhed 16° at the diaphragm,
and 18° in the pelvis. |

Experiment XIX. In order to determine whether an animal that is
weakened has the fame powers, with refpect to preferving heat and ~
cold, as one that is vigorous and ftrong, I introduced the ball of the
thermometer into the belly of the weak moufe; the ball being at the
diaphragm, the quickfilver rofe to 97° ; in the pelvis to 95° : the moufe
being put into an atmofphere as cold as the other, and the thermometer
again introduced, the quickfilver {tood at 79° at the diaphragm, and at
74° in the pelvis.

In this experiment the heat at the diaphragm was diminifhed 18°, in
the pelvis 212.

Here was a diminution of heat in the fecond greater than in the firft,
we may fuppofe proportional to the decreafed power of the animal, arifing
from want of food. :

To determine how far different parts of other animals than thofe
mentioned were of different degrees of heat, I made the following ex-
periments upon a healthy dog.

Experiment XX. The ball of the thermometer being introduced two
inches within the rectum, the quickfilver rofe to 100° and a half exaétly.
The cheft of the dog was then opened, and a wound made into the right
ventricle of the heart, and immediately on the ball being introduced,
the quickfilver rofe to 101° exactly. A wound was next made fome
way into the fubftance of the liver; and the ball being introduced, the
quickfilver rofe to 100° and three quarters. It was next introduced into:

the


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT, 103


the cavity of the ftomach, where it ftood exactly at 101°. All thefe
experiments were made within a few minutes. |

Experiment XXI. The thermometer was introduced into the reCtum
of an ox, and the quickfilver rofe exactly to g9° and a half.

Experiment XXII. This was alfo repeated upon a rabbit, and the
quickfilver rofe to 99° and a half.

From the experiments on mice, and thofe upon the dog, it plainly
appears, that every part of an animal is not of .the fame degree of heat ;
and hence we may reafonably infer, that the heat of the vital parts of
man is greater than either the mouth, rectum, or the urethra.

To determine how far my idea was juft, that the heat of animals
varied in proportion to their imperfections, I made the following expe-
riments upon fowls, which I confidered to be one remove below what
are commonly called quadrupeds.

Experiment XXIII. I introduced the ball of the thermometer fue-
ceflively into the inteftinum rectum of feveral hens, and found that the
quickfilver rofe as high as 103°, 103° and a half, and in one of them
to 104°.

Experiment XXIV. I made the fame experiments on feveral cocks,
and the refult was the fame.

Experiment XXV. To determine if the heat of the hen was increafed
when fhe was prepared for incubation, I repeated the twenty-third ex-
periment upon feveral fitting or clucking hens; in one the quickfilver
rofe to 104°; in the other to 103° and a half, 103°, as in the twenty-
third experiment. |

Experiment XXVI. I placed the bali of the thermometer under the
fame hen, in whofe rectum the quickfilver was raifed to 104, and found
the heat as great as in the rectum. |

Experiment XXVII. Having taken fome of the eggs fron under the
fame hen, where the chick was about three parts formed, I broke a
hole in the fhell, and introducing the ball of the thermometer, found
that the quickfilver rofe to 99° anda half. In fome that were addled,
I found the heat not fo high by two degrees ; fo that the life in the living
egg aflifted in fome degree to fupport its own. heat,

It


104. ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


It may be afked, whether the increafe of three or four degrees of heat,
which is found in the fowl more than in the quadruped, is for the pur-_
pofe of incubation? We found that the heat in the eggs, which was
caufed and fupported by the heat of the fowls, was not above the ftandard ~
of the quadrupeds ; and that it would probably have been ie if the heat
of the hen had not been fo great.

Finding from the above experiments, that fowls were fome degrees
warmer than that clafs commonly called quadrupeds (although certainly
lefs perfect animals) I chofe to continue the experiments upon the fame
principle, and made the following upon thofe of a ftill inferior order.
The next remove from the fowl is thofe commonly called amphibious.

Experiment XXVIII. I took a healthy viper, and introduced the ther-
mometer into its {tomach, and afterwards into its anus; the quickfilver
rofe from 58° (the heat of the atmofphere in which it ae to 68°; fo
that it was 10° warmer than the common atmofphere.

Experiment XXIX. The viper being put into a pan, and the pan
into a cold mixture of about 10° ; after remaining there about ten mi-
nutes, its heat was reduced to 37°. Being allowed to ftay ten minutes
longer, the mixture at 13°, its heat was reduced to 35°. It was con-
tinued ten minutes more in the mixture at 20°, and its heat was reduced
to 31°, nor did it fink lower; its tail beginning to freeze; and the ani-
mal now becoming very weak. It may be remarked, that it cooled
much flower than many of the animals mentioned in the following
experiments. .

The frog being, in its ftructure, more fimilar to the viper than to either
the fowl or fifth, I made the following experiments on that animal.

Experiment XXX. I introduced the ball of the thermometer into its
ftomach, and the quickfilver ftood at 44%. I then put the frog into a ©
cold mixture, and the quickfilver funk to 31°; the animal appeared
almoft dead, but recovered very foon: beyond this point it was not pof= —
fible to leffen the heat, without deftroying the animal. But its decreafe
of heat was quicker than in the viper, although the mixture was nearly
the fame. |

The next experiments were made on fithes. |
Experiment


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. 105


Experiment XXXI. Having afcertained the heat of the water in a
pond, in which there were carp, to be 65° and a half, I took a carp out
of this water, and introduced the thermometer into its ftomach; the
quickfilver rofe to 69° ; fo that the difference between the water and the
fith was only 3° and a half. |

Experiment XXXII. In an eel, the heat in the ftomach, which at
firft was at 37°, funk, after it had been fome time in the cold mixture,
to 31°. The animal at that time appeared dead, but was alive the next
day.

Experiment XXXIII. In a fnail, whofe heat was at 44°, it funk,
after it had been put into the cold mixture, to 31°, and then the animal
froze.

Experiment XXXIV. Several leaches having been put into a bottle,
and the bottle immerfed in the cold mixture, the ball of the thermometer
being placed in the middle of them, the quickfilver funk to 31°; and
by continuing the immerfion for a fufficient time to deftroy life, the
quickfilver rofe to 32°, and then the leaches froze. In all thefe expe-
riments the animals when thawed were found dead.

Finding that the imperfect claffes of animals will bear to have their
heat reduced to that point at which the folids and fluids freeze vehen

dead, but if much below it, death muft be the confequence, I wifhed to
- determine to what degree of heat the animal could be raifed.

Experiment XXXV: A healthy viper was put into an atmofphere of
108°, and allowed to ftay feven minutes, when the heat of the animal
in the {tomach and anus was found to be g2° and a half, beyond which
it could not be raifed in the above heat. The fame experiment was made
upon frogs with nearly the fame refult.

Experiment XXXVI. An eel, very weak, its heat at 44°, which was
nearly that of the atmofphere, was put into water heated to 65°, for fif-
teen minutes; and, upon examination, it was of the fame degree of heat
with the water.

Experiment XXXVII. A tench, whole heat was 41°, was put into
water at 65°, and left there ten minutes; the ball of the thermometer

| P being


106 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


being introduced both into the ftomach and re€tum, the quickfilver rofe
to ss°. Thefe experiments were repeated with nearly the fame refult.

To determine whether life had any power of refifting heat and cold.
in thefe inferior clafles of animals, I made comparative trials between
living and dead ones.

Experiment XXXVIII. Itook a living and a dead tench, and a living
and a dead eel, and put them into warm water; they all received heat
equally faft; and when they were expofed to cold, both the living and
the dead admitted the cold likewife with equal quicknefs.

I had long fufpected, that the principle of life was not wholly confined
to animals, or animal fubftance endowed with vifible organization and
{pontaneous motion ; but I conceived, that the fame principle exifted in
animal fubftances, devoid of apparent organization and motion, where
the power of prefervation was fimply required.

I was led to this notion twenty years ago, when I was making draw-
ings of the growth of the chick in the procefs of incubation. I then ob-
ferved, that whenever an egg was hatched, the yolk (which is not di-
minifhed in the time of incubation) was always perfectly {weet to the
very laft ; and that part of the albumen, which is not expended on the
growth of the animal, fome days before hatching, was alfo perfectly
{weet, although both were kept in a heat of 103°, in the hen’s egg for
three weeks, and in the duck’s for four; but I obferved, that if an egg
was not hatched, that egg became putrid in nearly the fame time wee
any other dead animal matter.

To determine how far eggs would ftand other tefts i a living principle,
I made the following experiments.

Experiment XX XIX. Having put an egg into a cold about o, which
froze it, I then allowed it to thaw; from this procefs I imagined that
the preferving powers of the egg muft be deftroyed. I next put this ege
into the cold mixture, and with it one newly laid; and the difference in
freezing was feven minutes and a half, the frefh one taking fo much
longer time in freezing.

Experiment XL. A new laid egg was put into a cold atmofphere,
fluctuating between 17° and 15°; it took above half an hour to freeze;


but


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. Tor


but when thawed and put into an atmofphere at 25°, it froze in half -
the time. This experiment was repeated feveral times with nearly the
the fame refult.

To determine the comparative heat between a living and a dead eve,
and alfo to determine whether a living egg be fubject to the fame laws
with the more imperfect animals, I made the following experiments.

Experiment XLI. A frefh egg, and one which had been frozen and
thawed, were put into the cold mixture at 15°; the thawed one foon
came to 32°, and began to {well and congeal; the frefh one funk to
29° and a half, and in twenty-five minutes after the dead one, it rofe to
32°, and began to {well and freeze.

The refult of this experiment upon the frefh egg was fimilar to the
above experiments upon the frog, eel, {nail, &c. where life allowed the
heat to be diminifhed two or three degrees below the freezing point, and
then refifted all further decreafe ; but the powers of life were expended
by this exertion, and then the parts froze like any other dead animal
matter.

From thefe experiments it appears, that a frefh egg has the power of
refifting heat, cold, and putrefaction, in a degree equal to many of the
more imperfect animals ; and it is more than probable, this power arifes
from the fame principle in both.

From the circumftance of thofe imperfect animals (upon which I made
my experiments) varying their heat fo readily, we may conclude, that
heat is not fo very effential to life in them as in the more perfect ; although
it be effential to many of the operations, or what may be called the fe-
condary actions of life, fuch as digefting food,* and propagating the fpe-
cies, both which, efpecially the laft, require the greateft powers an ani-
mal can exert. ‘The animals which we call imperfect being commonly
employed in the act of digeftion, we may fuppofe their degree of heat
to be only what that action requires; it not being effentially necef-

fary for the life of the animal that heat fhould ever rife fo high in them


® How far this idea holds good with fifhes I am not certain.
Pe 2 as


) _ ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


as to call forth the powers neceflary for the propagation of the fpe-
cies.* | |

Therefore, whenever thefe imperfect animals are expofed to a cold fo
great as to weaken their powers, and difable them from performing the
firft of thefe fecondary actions, they in fome meafure ceafe to be volun-
tary agents, and remain in a torpid itate during that degree of cold which
always occurs during fome part of the winter in fuch countries as they
inhabit ; and the food of {uch animals not beinz in general produced in
the cold feafon, is a reafon why this torpidity becomes in fome meafure
neceflary.

From this circumftance of the heat of fuch animals being allowed to
fink to the freezing point, or fomewhat lower, and then becoming fta-
tionary ; and the animal not being able to fupport life in a much greater
degree of cold for any length of time, we fee a reafon why they always
endeavour to procure places of abode in the winter where the cold feldom
finks to that point. ‘Thus we find toads burrowing, frogs living under
large ftones, {nails feeking fhelter under ftones and in holes, and fithes
haying recourfe to deep water ; the heat of all which places is generally
above the freezing point in our hardeft frofts ; which however are fome-
times fo fevere, as to kill many whofe habitations are not well chofen.


4 The hedge-hog may be called a truly torpid animal, and we find that its heat is diminifhed
when the actions are not vigorous. From a general review of this whole fubject it would
appear, that a certain degree of heat in the animal is neceflary for its various ceconomical
operations, among which is digeftion ; and that neceflary heat will be according to the nature
of the animal, and probably the nature of the neceflary operations to be performed. A frog
will digeft food when its heat is at 60°, but not when at 35° or 40°; and it is very probable
that, when the heat of the bear, hedge-hog, dormoufe, bat, &c. is reduced to 70°, 75°, or
80°, they lofe their power of digeftion; or rather that the body, in fuch a degree of cold, has
no call upon the ftomach. ‘That animals, in a certain degree of heat, muft always have
food, is further illuftrated by the inftance of bees. The conftruction of a bee is very fimilar
to a fly, a wafp, &c. A fly and a wafp can allow their heat to diminifh as in the fifh, {fnake,
&c. without lofing life, but a bee cannot; therefore a bee is obliged to keep up its heat as
high as what we call its digeftive heat, but not its propagating ; for which purpofe they pro-
vide againft fuch cold as would deprive them even of their digeftive heat, if they had not food
to preferve it.


When


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. 109


When the froft is more intenfe and of longer ftanding than common,
or in countries where the winters are always fevere, there is generally
fnow, and the water freezes: the advantage arifing from thefe two cir-
cumitances are great; the {now ferving as a blanket to the earth, and
the ice to the water.’ |

As all the experiments I ever made upon the beans of animals,
with’a view to fee if it were poflible to reftore the actions of life when
thawed, were made upon whole ones, and as I never faw life return by
thawing,’ I wifhed to fee how far parts were fimilar to the whole in
this refpect; efpecially as it is afferted, and with fome authority, that
parts of a man may be frozen, and afterwards recover: for this purpofe
I made the following experiments upon an animal of the fame order as
ourfelves.

In January 1777, I mixed falt and ice till the cold was about o; on
the fide of the veflel was a hole, through which I introduced the ear of
a rabbit. To carry off the heat as faft as poffible, it was held between
two flat pieces of iron that went further into the mixture. That part


@ Snow and ice are perhaps the worft conductors of heat of any fubftance yet known. In
the firft place, they never allow their own heat to rife above the freezing point, fo that no
heat can pafs through ice or fnow when at 32°, by which means they become an abfolute
barrier to all heat that is at or above that degree ; fo that the heat of the earth, or whatever
fubftance they cover, is retained: but they are conductors of heat below 32°. Perhaps that
power decreafes in proportion‘as the heat decreafes under that point.

In the winter 1776, a froft came on, the furface of the ground was frozen; but a confi-
derable fall of {now fell, and continued feveral weeks; the atmofphere at this time was
often at 15°, but it was allowed to affect the furface of the earth fo inconfiderably, that
the furface of the ground thawed, and the earth retained the heat of 34°, in which beans and
peas grow.

The fame thing took place in a pond where the water was frozen on the furface to a
confiderable thicknefs ; a large quantity of {now fell and covered the ice; the heat of the water
was preferved and thawed the ice, and the fnow at its under furface was found mixed with
the water.

The heat of the water under the fnow was at 35°, in which fifhes lived very well.

It would be worthy of the attention of the philofopher, to inveftigate the caufe of the heat
of the earth, upon what principle it is preferved, &c.


» Vide Phil. Tranf. for the year 1775, vol. LXV. part II. p. 446.
of


TIO ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


of the ear projecting into the veffel became ftiff, and when cut did not
bleed ; and the part cut off by a pair of fciflars, flew from between the
blades like a hard chip.

The ear remained in the mixture nearly an hour: when taken out it
foon thawed, and began to bleed, and became very flaccid, fo as to dou-
ble upon itfelf, having loft its natural elafticity. When out of the
mixture nearly an hour, it became warm, and this warmth increafed to
a confiderable degree, and alfo began to thicken, in confequence of in-
flammation, while the other ear continued in its ufual cold. The day
following the frozen ear was ftill warm ; and two days after it retained
its heat and thicknefs, which continued for many days after.

About a week after this, the mixture being the fame as the former, I
introduced both ears of the fame rabbit through the hole, and froze them
both: the found one however froze firft, probably from its being confi-
derably colder at the beginning. When withdrawn they foon thawed,
and both foon became warm, and the frefh ear thickened as the other
had done before.

Thefe changes in the parts do not always fo quickly take place ; ae on
repeating tl tele experiments on the ear of another rabbit till it became as hard
as a board, it was longer in thawing than in the former experiment, and
much longer before it became warm; however in about two hours it be-
came a little warm, and the day following it was very warm and thickened.

In the {pring 1776, I obferved that the cocks I had in the country
had their combs fmooth with an even edge, and not fo broad as formerly,
appearing as if near one half of them had been cut off. Having inquired
into the caufe of this, my fervant told me, that it had been common

in that winter during the hard froft. He obferved, that they had become
in part dead, and at laft dropped off: alfo, that the comb of one cock
had dropped entirely off; this I did not fee, as by accident he burnt him-
felf to death. I naturally imputed this effect to the combs having been
frozen in the time of the fevere froft; and having, confequently, loft the
life of that part by this operation. J endeavoured to try the folidity of
this reafoning by experiment.

I attempted


ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT. ree


I attempted to freeze the comb of a very large young cock (which
was of a confiderable breadth) but could only freeze the ferrated edges
(which proceffes were full half an inch long) ; the comb itfelf being very
thick and warm refifted the cold. The frozen parts became white and
hard; and when I cut off a little bit it did not bleed, nor did the ani-
mal fhow any figns of pain. I next introduced into the cold mixture
one of his wattles, which was very broad and thin; it froze very readily:
upon thawing both the comb and wattle, they became warm, but were
of a purple colour, having loft the tranfparency which remained in the
other parts of the comb and in the other wattle. ‘The wound in the
comb now bled freely.

Both comb and wattle recovered perfectly in about a month. The
natural colour returned firft neareft to the found parts, increafing gra-
dually till the whole had acquired a healthy appearance.

There was a very material difference in the effect between thofe fowls,
the ferrated edges of whofe combs I fufpeéted to have been frozen in the
winter of 1765-6, for they muft have dropped off. The only way in
which I can account for this difference is, that in thofe fowls the parts
were kept fo long frozen, that the unfrozen or active parts had time to
inflame, and had brought about a feparation of the frozen parts, treating
them exactly as dead, fimilar to a mortified part ; and that before they
thawed, the feparation was {fo far compleated as to deprive them of further
fupport. :

As it is confidently afferted, that fithes are often frozen and come to life
again, and as I had never fucceeded in any of my experiments of this
kind upon whole fifhes, I made fome partial experiments upon this clafs
of animals ; being led to do this by having found a material difference in
the refult of the experiments made upon the whole animal, and of thofe
made only on parts of the more perfect animals.

I froze the tail of a tench (as high as the anus) which became as hard
as a board; when it thawed, that part was whiter than common ; and
when it moved, the whole tail moved as one piece, and the termination.
of the frozen part appeared like the joint on which it moved.


On


‘112 ON ANIMALS PRODUCING HEAT.


On the fame day I froze the tails of two gold fithes till they became as
folid as a piece of wood. They were put into cold water to thaw, and
appeared for fome days to be very well; but that part of the tails which
_ had been frozen had not the natural colour, and the fins of the tails be- _
came ragged. About three weeks after a fur came all over the frozen
parts; their tails became lighter, fo that the fifhes were fufpended in the
water perpendicularly, and they had almoft loft the power of motion ;
at laft they died. The water in which they were kept was New River
water, fhifted every day, and about ten gallons in quantity.

I made fimilar experiments upon an order of animals {till inferior, viz.
‘common earth-worms.

I firft froze the whole of an earth-worm as a ftandard; when shaded
it was perfectly dead.

I then froze the anterior half of another earth-worm ; bus the whole
died.

I next froze the pofterior half of an ach sue the anterior half
lived, and feparated itfelf from the dead part.

From fome of thefe experiments it appears, that the more imperfect
animals are capable of having their heat and cold varied very confiderably,
but not according to the degree of heat or cold of the furrounding me-
dium in which they can fupport life; for they can live in a cold con-
fiderably below the freezing point, and yet the living powers of the ani- ~
mal will not allow their heat to be diminifhed much beyond 32°; and
whenever the furrounding cold brings them fo low, the power of genera-
ting heat takes place; and if the cold is continued, the animals exert
this power till life is deftroyed ; after which they freeze, and are imme-
diately capable of admitting any degree of cold.


EXPLANATION


peng +


ie Mk - pp se tat Pe am mt bas


Mice


. z


[3]


EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE.


_ Thermometer which has the fcale fo conftructed as to admit of
its being introduced into any cavity that can receive the ball. The
fcale is moveable ; but the freezing point is marked on the ftem or glafs.


Ficurel. A front view, expofing the glafs ftem of the thermome-
ter, through which the divifions marked upon the concave furface of the
fliding ivory fcale which embraces it, are very diftinétly feen. |

a The freezing point, which is marked upon the ftem by a fcratch on
the glafs.


Ficurell. A fide view, fhowing the degrees marked near the edge
of the convex fide of the ivory {cale,

The thermometer is to be adjufted for meafuring high or low degrees
of heat, by bringing any number marked upon the fcale oppofite the
freezing point, and counting either upwards or downwards.


Q. PROPOSALS


RSIS SIT Os


Sr ae


yl ae


Dey:
ae:


a


‘ id a | a,


‘ ody i, beabitcr


ee PETER: GRE He oi Smid


a) ie sd Agi “Git


ie yy
pene


Trae
nya nt


nia?


Nees, Aedt eae #8: ) es ut paul sta


MN Das


oo ae ;


sa a We


F me Ei aeraeeie ath Ds r Diss z 3


re
cee v


es Bons nis Lata


Ae ae abyinrdieet ig iqagir wn


[ 115 ]


PROPOSALS FOR THE RECOVERY OF PERSONS
APPARENTLY DROWNED.


AVING been requefted by a principal member of the fociety
eftablifhed for the recovery of perfons apparently drowned, to com-
mit my thoughts on that fubje@t to paper, I readily complied with his
requeft, hoping, that although I have had no opportunities of making
aétual experiments upon drowned perfons, it might be in my power to
throw fome lights on a fubject fo clofely connected with the inquiries
which, for many years, have been my favourite bufinefs and amufement.
I therefore collected together my obfervations and experiments relative to
the lofs and recovery of the actions of life, which I now offer to the
public. The practice is new, and has furnifhed as yet few important
and clear facts. If we judge of the queftion by our general knowledge of
the animal economy, I am afraid that it is fo imperfectly underftood,
that our reafoning from it alone cannot be relied on: neverthelefs, on a
fubject fo interefting to humanity, we muft not be idle; we muft throw
out our obfervations, and reafon as well as we can from the few data we
have, in hopes that the fubject, thus put fairly into the hands of the
public, may in time, by their united endeavours, become perfectly un-
derftood.
I thall confider an- animal, apparently drowned, as not dead; but
that only a fufpenfion of the actions of life has taken place.* This,


@ The difference between a fufpenfion of the actions of life, and abfolute death, is well
illuftrated by the common fnail when drowning. If a {nail is immerfed in water and kept
there, certain voluntary and inftinctive a€tions take place; but after remaining a certain
time covered by the water, all thefe actions ceafe; the animal becomes relaxed, in which
ftate it naturally comes out of the fhell, and the body appears large, giving the full fize of the
animal, but without any motion ; all its actions being fufpended, and continue to be fo till
either the caufe of the fufpenfion is removed, or fome other ftimulus fhall bring the parts into
action; but in this ftate life cannot be preferved for any confiderable length of time; and
when the ftimulus of death takes place, the whole animal is thrown into action, in which con-
tracted ftate abfolute death is produced. A ftate of relaxation fhould therefore (in cafes where
an univerfal violence has not been committed) be confidered as a criterion of life; and even
in them it fhould be for fome time admitted as a probable reafon for fuppofing life ftill to exift.


On } probably


116 OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED.


probably, is the cafe in the beginning of all violent deaths, except
thofe caufed by lightning, electricity, an univerfal fhock, by which ab-
folute death may be inftantaneoufly produced ; or a blow on the ftomach
which appears to act in the fame way, producing abfolute death im-__
mediately: for in all thofe cafes which have fallen under my obferva-
tion, the concomitant circumftances have refembled thofe which attend
death caufed by lightning or electricity; fuch as a total and inftan-
taneous privation of fenfe and mation without convulfions, confequently
without any rigor of mufcles; and the blood remaining uncoagulated ;
differing entirely in thefe ref{pects from what appears in perfons deprived
of fenfe and life by any injury done the brain. It feems only pofiible
to account for this effect of a blow on the ftomach, from the con-
nection fubfifting between this vifcus and every part of the body, at leaft
with vital parts ; the blow moft probably producing inftant see in that
organ, in confequence of which the whole animal dies.’

That I may more fully explain my ideas upon this fubject, it will be
neceflary to {tate {ome propofitions.

Firft, that fo long as the animal retains the powers, though deprived
of the action of life, the caufe of that privation may frequently be re-
moved ; but, when the powers of life are deftroyed, the action ceafes to
be recoverable. Secondly, it is neceflary to mention that I confider part
of the living principle as inherent in the blood.” The laft propofition I
have to eftablith is, that the ftomach fympathizes with every part of an


2 I fhould confider the fituation of a perfon drowned to be fimilar to that of a perfon in a
trance. In both the action of life is fufpended, without the power being deftroyed; but I am
inclined to believe, that a greater proportion of perfons recover from trances than from drown-
ing ; becaufe a trance is the natural effect of a difpofition in the perfon to have the action of
life fufpended for a time ; but drowning being produced by violence, the fufpenfion will more
frequently laft for ever, unlefs the power of life is roufed to aétion by fome applications of art.

» ‘That the living principle is inherent in the blood, is a doctrine which the nature of this
account will not allow me to difcufs: thus much however it may be proper to fay, that it is
founded on the refults of many obfervations and experiments. But it may be thought necef-
fary here to give a definition of what I call the living principle: fo far as I have ufed the term,
I mean to exprefs that principle which preferves the body from diffolution with or without
action, and is the caufe of all its actions.


animal,


OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED. 117


animal, and that every part fympathizes with the ftomach; therefore,
whatever acts upon the ftomach as a cordial, or roufes its natural and
healthy actions, and whatever affects it, fo as to produce debility, has an
immediate effect upon every part of the body. This fympathy is ftrongeft
with the vital parts. Befides this univerfal fympathy- between the fto-
mach and all parts of the body, there are peculiar fympathies ; for in-
ftance, the heart fympathizes immediately with the lungs. If any thing
is received into the lungs, which is a poifon to animal life, fuch as in-
flammable air, volatile vitriolic acid, and many other well known fub-
f{tances, the motion of the heart immediately ceafes, much fooner than if
the trachea had been tied; and from experiments it appears, that any
thing falutary to life, applied to the lungs, will reftore the heart’s action
after it has been at reft fome time.

I fhall divide violent deaths into three kinds. Firft, where a ftop is
only put to the action of life in the animal, but without any irreparable
injury to a vital part; which action, if not reftored in a certain time,
will be irrecoverably loft. The length of that time is fubject to confi-
derable variation, probably depending on circumftances with which we
are at prefent unacquainted. ‘The fecond is, where an injury is done to
a vital part; as by taking away blood till the powers of action are loft ;
or by a wound or preffure on the brain or fpinal marrow, fufficient life
remaining in the folids, if actions could be reftored to the vital parts.
The third is, where abfolute death inftantly takes place in every part, as
is often the cafe in ftrokes of lightning ; in the common method of kill-
ing eels, by throwing them on fome hard fubftance, in fuch manner as
that the whole length of the animal fhall receive the fhock at the fame
- inftant; and, as I believe, happens by a blow on the ftomach; in all
which cafes the mufcles remain flexible.*

How far that may be ftri€tly confidered as a violent death, which is
caufed by affections of the mind, I will not pretend to fay; but if it is to


* On the other hand, when an eel is killed by chopping it into a number of pieces,. the
powers of life are by thofe means roufed into action; and, as every part dies in that. active
ftate, every part is found ftiff after death. ‘This explains the cuftom of cutting fifh into
pieces while yet alive, in order to make them hard, ufually known by the name of crimping.


have


118 OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED.


have a place in that clafs, it muft be ranked with thofe which happen
from lightning, and a blow on the ftomach : and in moft cafes of perfons
drowned, I can eafily conceive the mind to be fo much affected, prior to
the immerfion and in the moment immediately fucceeding it, as to make
a material difference in the power of recovery.

The prefent confideration is, which of the kinds of violent death
drowning comes under? I fuppofe it moft commonly comes under the
firft ; and upon that ground I fhall principally confider the fubject.

The lofs of motion in drowning feems to arife from the lofs of ref-
piration, and the immediate effects which this has upon the other vital
motions of the animal : except what may have arifen from the affections
of the mind ; however, the privation of breathing appears to be the firft
caufe ; and the heart’s motion ceafing, to be the fecond or confequent ;
therefore moft probably the reftoration of breathing is all that is neceffary
to reftore the heart’s motion: for if a fufficiency of life ftill exifts to
produce that effect, we may fuppofe every part equally ready to move the
very inftant in which the a¢tion of the heart takes place, their actions
depending fo much upon it. What makes it very probable, that in re-
covering perfons drowned, the principle effect depends upon air being
thrown into the lungs, is, what happens in the birth of children, when
too much time has been fpent after the interruption of that life which is
peculiar to the foetus; they then lofe altogether the difpofition for the .
new life; and in fuch cafes there being a total fufpenfion of the actions
of life, the child remains to all appearance dead, and would die, if air
were not thrown into its lungs, and by this means the firft principle of
action reftored. To put this in a ftill clearer light, I will give the refult
of fome experiments which I made in the year 1755 upon a dog.

A pair of double bellows were provided, conftructed in fuch a manner
_as by one aétion to throw frefh air into the lungs, and by another to
fuck out again the air which had been thrown in by the former, without
mixing them together. ‘The muzzle of thefe bellows was fixed into the
trachea of a dog, and by working them he was kept perfectly alive.
While this artificial breathing was going on, I took off the fternum of
the dog, and expofed the lungs and heart ; the heart continued to act as

before,


OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED. 119


before, only the frequency of its action was confiderably increafed. I
then ftopped the motion of the bellows, and the heart became gradually
weaker and lefs frequent in its contraction, till it left. off moving alto-
gether: by renewing my operation, the heart begun again to move, at
firft very faintly, and with longer intermiflions ; but by continuing the
artificial breathing its motion became as frequent and as ftrong as before.
This procefs I repeated upon the fame dog ten times, fometimes ftopping
for five, eight, or ten minutes. I obferved that every time I left off
working the bellows, the heart became extremely turgid with blood, and
the blood in the left fide became as dark as that in the right; which
was not the cafe when the bellows were working. Thefe fituations of
the animal appear to me exactly fimilar to drowning.

The lofs of life in drowned perfons has been accounted for, by fuppo-
fing that the blood rendered unfit by want of the action of the air in re-
fpiration, is fent in that vitiated ftate to the brain and other vital parts,
by which means the nerves lofe their effect upon the heart, and the heart
in confequence its motion. This however I am fully convinced is falfe :
firft, from the experiments on the dog, in whofe cafe a large column of
bad blood, viz. all that was contained in the heart and pulmonary veins
was pufhed forward without any ill effect being produced ; and next, from
the recovery of drowned perfons and ftill-born children, which, under
fuch circumftances, never could happen, unlefs a change of the blood
could take place in the brain, prior to the reftoration of the heart’s mo-
tion: thefore the heart’s motion muft depend immediately upon the ap-
plication of fuch air to the lungs, and not upon the effects which air has
upon the blood, and which that blood has upon the vital parts. . Thefe
ate only fecondary operations in the animal ceeconomy. However, if the
affections of the mind have had any fhare in the ceflation of actions in the
heart, that will not be fo eafily reftored as it would otherwife be: therefore
in our attempts to recover perfons drowned, it might be proper to inquire
if there had been time fufficient for the perfon to form any idea of his
fituation, previous to his being plunged into the water. It is more than
probable, in fuch a cafe, that the agitated {tate of mind might aflift in
killing him; and I fhould very much doubt the probability of recovering
| | : fuch


r20 OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED.


fuch a perfon. In the hiftory of thofe who have, and who have not been
recovered, could the difference be affigned to any fuch caufe, it might
lead to fomething ufeful.

It frequently happens in the cafe of Bevis: that affiftance cannot be
procured till a confiderable time after the accident; every moment of
which delay renders recovery more precarious, the chances of which are
not only diminifhed in the parts-where the firft powers of action princi--
pally refide, but alfo in every other part of the body. |

In offering my fentiments on the method of treating perfons who are
apparently drowned, I fhall fay firft, what I would recommend to have
done; fecondly, what I would with might be avoided. |
When affiftance is called in, foon after the immerfion, perhaps blow-
ing air into the lungs may be fufficient to effet a recovery.* But if a
confiderable time, mee as an hour, has been loft, this will feldom be
fufficient ; the heart, in all probability, having by this time loft its nice
connection with the lungs. It will. therefore be proper to apply fuch
ftimulating medicines, as the vapour of volatile alkali, mixed with the
air ; which may eafily be done, by holding fpirits of hartfhorn in a cup
under the receiver of the bellows. I would advife the air and volatile
alkali to be thrown in by the nofe, rather than the mouth, as the laft
mode of adminiftering, by producing ficknefs, is.more likely to deprefs
than roufe the living principle. It will be ftill better ifit can be done by
both noftrils, as applications of this kind to the olfactory nerves are
known to roufe the living principle and put the mufcles of refpiration into
action, and are iene likely to excite the action of the heart: Befides
affections of thefe nerves more immediately affect the living principle, for
while a {trong fmell of very {weet flowers, as orange flowers, fhall in many
caufe fainting, the application of vinegar will immediately reftore the
powers to action again. All perfumes in which there is fome acid, rather
roufes than deprefles, as the fweet-brier, effence of lemon, &c. If during


* Perhaps the dephlogifticated air, defcribed by Dr. Prieftley, may prove more efficacious
than common air. It is eafily procured, and may be preferved in bottles or bladders for that
purpofe. E


the


OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED. Be


the operation of the bellows, the larynx be gently prefled againft the
cefophagus and fpine, it will prevent the ftomach and inteftines being too
much diftended by the air, and leave room for the application of more
effectual ftimuli to thofe parts. This preffure however muft be conducted
with judgment and caution, fo that the trachea and the aperture into the .
larynx may both be left perfectly free. While this bufinefs is going on,
an afliftant fhould prepare bed-cloaths, carefully brought to the proper
degree of heat. I confider heat as congenial with the living principle ;
increafing the neceffity of action it increafes action: cold, on the other
hand, leffens the neceffity, and of courfe the ation is diminifhed ; to a
due proportion of heat, therefore the living principle owes its vigour.
From obfervations and experiments it appears to be a law of nature in
animal bodies, that the degree of external heat fhould bear a propor-
tion to the quantity of life; as it is weakened, this proportion requires
great accuracy in the adjuftment ; while greater powers of life allow it
greater latitudes.*
- Iwas led to make thefe obfervations by attending to perfons who are
froft-bitten ; the efteét of cold in this cafe being that of leflening the living
principle. The powers of action remain as perfect as ever, only weakened;
and heat is the only thing wanting to put thefe powers into action ; yet
heat muft at firft be gradually applied, and proportioned to the quantity of
the living principle; but as that increafes you may increafe the degree of
heat. If this method is not obferved, and too great a degree of heat is
at firft applied, the perfon or part lofesentirely the living principle, and
mortification enfues. ‘This procefs invariably takes place with regard to
men. The fame thing, I am convinced, happens to other animals. If
an eel, for inftance, 1s expofed to a degree of cold fufficiently intenfe to
benumb it till the remains of life are {carcely perceptible, and ftill re-
tained in a cold of about 40° ; this {mall proportion of living principle
will continue for a confiderable time without diminution or increafe ; but


* It is upon thefe principles that cold air is found of fo much fervice to people who are ,
reduced by difeafe, as the confluent {mallpox, and fevers, by diminifhing heat in proportion to
the diminution of life; or leffening the neceility of the body’s producing its own cold.


R if


122 OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED.


if the animal is afterwards placed in a heat about 60°, after fhowing
ftrong figns of returning life, it will die in a few minutes. Nor is this ©
circumftance peculiar to the diminution of life by cold. The fame phe-
nomena take place in animals who have been very much reduced by
hunger. |

If a lizard, or fnake, when it goes to its autumnal hiding place, is not
fufficiently fat, the living powers become, before the feafon permits it
to come out, very confiderably weakened, perhaps fo much as not to be
again reftored. Ifanimals, in fuch a ftate, are expofed to the fun’s rays,
or placed in any fituation which by its warmth would give vigour to
thofe of the fame kind, poffeffed of a larger fhare of life, they will im-
mediately fhow figns of increafed life, but quickly fink under the experi-
ment and die; while others, reduced to the fame degree of weaknefs, as
far as appearances can difcover, will live for many weeks, if kept in a
degree of cold proportioned to the quantity of life they poffefs.

I obferved many years ago, in fome of the colder parts of this ifland,
that when intenfe cold had forced blackbirds or thruthes to take thelter in
out-houfes, any of them that had been caught, and from an ill-judged
compafiion expofed to a confiderable degree of warmth, died very foon.
The reafon of this I did not then underftand; but I am now fatisfied
that it was owing, as in other inftances, to the degree of heat being in-
creafed too fuddenly for the proportion of life remaining in the animal.

From thefe facts it appears, that warmth caufes a greater exertion of
the living powers than cold; and that an animal in a weakly ftate may
be obliged by it to exert a quantity of the action of life fufficient to deftroy
the very powers themfelves.*. The fame effects probably take place even
in perfect health. It appears from experiments made in a heated room,
that a perfon in health, expofed to a great degree of heat, found the ac-
tions of life accelerated fo much as to produce at laft faintnefs and debility.”

If bed-cloaths are put over the drowned perfon fo as fcarce to touch
him, fteam of volatile alkali, or of warm balfams and effential oils, may


* It is upon this principle that parts mortify in confequence of inflammation.


» Vide Phil. Tranf. for the year 1775, vol. 65. p- III-
be


OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED: 123


be thrown under fo as to come in contaét with many parts of his body.
It will certainly prove advantageous if the fame fteams can be conveyed
into the ftomach, as that feat of univerfal fympathy will be roufed by fuch
means. This may be done by a hollow bougie and a fyringe ; but the
operation fhould be performed with all poffible expedition, becaufe the
inftrument, by continuing in the mouth, may produce ficknefs, an effect
I fhould chufe to avoid. Some of the ftimulating fubftances, which are
of a warm nature, and have an immediate effect, may be thrown into the
ftomach in a fluid ftate, viz. as fpirits of hartfhorn, peppermint-water,
juice of horfe-raddifh, and many others which produce a more lafting
ftimulus, as balfams and turpentines, which are found to quicken the
pulfe of a man in health ; but the quantity muft be fmall, as they have
a tendency to produce ficknefs. The fame fteam and fubftances fhould
alfo be thrown up by the anus. The procefs recommended under the
firft head of treatment fhould ftill be continued, while that recommended
under the fecond is putting in practice, as the laft is only an auxiliary to
the firft. The firft, in many cafes, may fucceed alone; but the fecond
without the firft muft, I think, always fail where the powers of life are
confiderably weakened. Motion may poffibly be of fervice, it may at
leaft be tried ; but, as it has lefs effect than any other of the ufually pre-
{cribed ftimuli, it fhould be the laft part of the procefs.*. I would recom-
mend to the operator the fame care in regulating the proportion of every
one of thefe methods, as-I did before in the application of heat ; as every
one of them may poflibly have the fame property of entirely deftroying
the feeble action which they have excited, if adminiftered in ‘too great a
quantity ; inftead therefore of increafing and haftening the operations on
the firft figns of returning life being obferved, as is ufually done, I fhould
with them to be leffened, that their increafe afterwards may be directed,


* Electricity has been known to be of fervice, and fhould be tried when other methods
have failed. It is probably the only method we have of immediately ftimulating the heart 5
all other methods being more by fympathy. I have not mentioned injecting ftimulating fub-
ftances dire€tly into the veins, though it might be fuppofed a proper expedient; becaufe, in
looking over my experiments on that fubjeCt, I found none where animal life received increafe
__ by that method.

Rivg as


“324 OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED.


as nearly as poffible, by the quantity of powers as they arife. As the
heart is commonly the laft part that ceafes to act, it is probably the firft
part that takes on the action of recovery. When it begins to move, I
would advife leflening the application of air to the lungs, and enjoin ob-
ferving with great attention when the mufcles of refpiration begin to act,
that our endeavours may not interfere with their natural exertions ; yet
that we may be ftill ready to affift. I would by all means difcourage
blood-letting ; which I think weakens the animal principle, and life itfelf,
confequently lefiens both the powers and difpofitions to action: and I
would advife to be careful not to call forth any difpofition that might
deprefs, by introducing any thing into the {tomach, which ordinarily cre- -
ates naufea, as that alfo will have a fimilar effect, except it can be carried ©
fo far as to relieve itfelf by exciting vomiting, and would therefore avoid
throwing any thing in by the anus which is likely to produce an evacu-
ation that way, as every fuch evacuation alfo tends to leflen the animal
powers: I have purpofely avoided {peaking of the fumes of tobacco, —
which always produce ficknefs or purging, according as they are applied.
Whoever is appointed for the purpofes of recovering drowned ferfons,
fhould have an affiftant, well acquainted with the methods intended to
be made ufe of; that while the one is going on with the firft and moft —
fimple methods, the other may be preparing what elfe may be neceffary,
fo that no time may be loft between the operations ; and the more fo, as
the firft means recommended, will, in all cafes, affift the fecond, and both
together may often be attended with fuccefs, though each feparately might

have failed. |
A. proper apparatus is alfo effentially neceffary to the inftitution, a de-
{cription of which I here annex. Firft, a pair of bellows, fo contrived
with two. feparate cavities, that by expanding them, when applied to —
the noftrils or mouth of a patient, one cavity may be filled with the
common air, and the other with air fucked out from the lungs; and by
fhutting them again, the common air may be thrown into the lungs, and.
that which is fucked out of the lungs be difcharged into the room. The
pipe of thefe fhould be flexible, in length a foot or a foot and a half, and
at leaft three-eighths ofan inch in width; by this the artificial breathing
may


OF PERSONS APPARENTLY DROWNED, vi


may be continued, while the other operations, except the application of
the ftimuli to the ftomach, are going on,’ which cannot conveniently be
done if the muzzle of the bellows be introduced into the nofe. The end
next the nofe fhould be double, and applied to both noftrils. Secondly,
a fyringe, with a hollow bougie, or flexible catheter, of fufficient length
to go into‘ the ftomach, and convey any {timulating matter into it, with-
out affecting the lungs. Thirdly, a pair of {mall bellows, fuch as are
commonly ufed in throwing fumes of tobacco up the anus, by which
ftimulating fluids, or even fumes may be thrown in.

I fhall conclude this account by propofing, that all who are employed
in this practice be particularly required to keep an accurate journal of the
means ufed, and the degree of fuccefs attending them; whence we may
be furnifhed with facts fufficient to enable us to draw conclufions, on
which a certain practice may hereafter be eftablithed.


ON


Ege ey Ea i


ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA.


HE conneétion between the mother and fcetus in the human fub-
ject, has in every age, in which fcience has been cultivated, called
forth the attention of the anatomift, the phyfiologift, and even the phi-
lofopher ; but both that connection, and the ftructure of the parts which
form the connection, were unknown until about the year 1754. The
fubject is certainly moft interefting, and the difcovery important; and it
is my intention, in the following pages, to give fuch an account of it as
I hope may be acceptable to the public ;* while, at the fame time, I
eftablifh my own claim to the difcovery. But that I may not feem to
arrogate to myfelf more merit than I am entitled to, let me, in juttice
to another perfon, relate what follows.

The late indefatigable Dr. Mc. Kenzie, about the month of May
1754, when affiftant to Dr. Smellie, having procured the body of a
pregnant woman, who had died undelivered at the full term, had injected
both the veins and arteries with particular fuccefs; the veins being filled
with yellow, the arteries with red.”

Having opened the abdomen, and expofed the uterus ; he made an in-
cifion into the fore part, quite through its fubftance, and came to fome-
what having the appearance of an irregular mafs of injected matter,
which afterwards proved to be the placenta. This appearance being new,
he ftopped, and greatly obliged me, by defiring my attendance to examine
_ the parts, in which there appeared fomething fo.uncommon. ‘This ex-
amination was made in his prefence, and in the prefence of feveral other


* This paper was read at the Royal Society; but as the facts had, before that time, been
given to the public, it was not publithed in the Philofophical Tranfa@tions.

® Dr. Mc. Kenzie being then an affiftant to the late Dr. Smellie, his procuring and diflect-
ing this woman, without Dr. Smellie’s knowledge, was the caufe of a feparation between
them: for the leading fteps to fuch a difcovery could not be kept a fecret. The winter fol-
lowing, Dr. Mc. Kenzie began to teach midwifery in the Borough of Southwark.


gentlemen


128 ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA.


gentlemen whofe names I have now forgotten; but I have reafon to
believe that fome are fettled in this country, and I hope will have an
opportunity of perufing this publication."

I firft raifed, with great care, part of the uterus from the irregular
mafs above mentioned ; in doing which I obferved regular pieces of wax
paffing obliquely between it and the uterus, which broke off, leaving part
upon this mafs ; and when they were attentively examined, towards the
uterus, plainly appeared to be a continuation of the veins pafling from it
to this fubftance or placenta.

I likewife obferved other veffels, about the fize of a crow-quill, paffing
in the fame manner, although not fo obliquely ; thefe alfo broke upon
feparating the placenta and uterus, leaving a {mall portion on the furface
of the placenta ; and on examination they were difcovered to be contin-
uations of the arteries of the uterus. My next ftep was to trace thefe
veffels into the fubftance of what appeared placenta, which I firft at-
tempted in a vein ; but that foon loft the regularity of a veflel, by termi-
nating at once upon the furface of the placenta in a very fine fpongy fub-
ftance; the interftices of which were filled with the yellow injected
matter. This termination being new, I repeated the fame kind of exa-
mination on other veins, which always led me to the fame terminations,
never entering the fubftance of the placenta in the form of a veffel. I


@ Tf I fhould be fo fortunate as to have this publication fall into any of thofe gentlemess
hands, I hope they will favour me with their opinion of my ftate of the facts, which led to
the difcovery. .

It may be fufpected by fome, (but none I hope to whom I have the pleafure of being
known) that I am not doing Dr. Mc. Kenzie juftice, and am perhaps fuppreffing fome part
of that fhare of the difcovery to which he is entitled. This idea, (if ever it fhould arife) I
may probably not be able to remove; but I hope it will alfo be feen, that I myfelf have given
rife to it; believing, if I had been fo inclined, that I might have fupprefled Dr. Mc. Kenzie’s |
name altogether, without ever running the hazard of being detected. I was indeed fo tena-
cious of my claim to the difcovery, that I wrote this account in Dr. Mc. Kenzie’s life-time,
with a defign to publifh it ; and often communicated my intentions to Dr. George Fordyce,
who I knew was very intimate with the Door, in confequence of both teaching in the fame
place, and making many experiments together ; therefore he is a kind of Collateral witnefs,
that what I now publifh is the fame account which I gave in Dr. Mc. Kenzie’s life-time.


next


ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA. 126


next examined the arteries, and tracing them in the fame manner toward
the placenta, found that they made a twift, or clofe fpiral turn upon
themfelves, and then were loft on its furface. On a more attentive view, I
perceived that they terminated in the fame way as the veins ; for oppofite
to the mouth of the artery, the fpongy fubftance of the placenta was
readily obferved, and was intermixed with the red injection.

Upon cutting into the placenta, I difcovered in many places of its
fubftance, yellow injection ; in others red, and in many others thefe two
colours mixed. “This fubftance of the placenta, now filled with injec-
tion, had nothing of the vafcular appearance, nor that of extravafation,
but had a regularity in its form which fhowed it to be a natural cellular
{tructure, fitted to be a refervoir for blood.

In fome of the veins leading from the placenta to the uterus, I per-
ceived that the red injection of the arteries, (which had been firft injeted)
had paffed into them out of the fubftance of the placenta, mixing itfelf
with the yellow injection, I alfo obferved, that the f{pongy chorion,
called the decidua, by Dr. Hunter, was very vafcular, its veffels coming
from and returning to the uterus, being filled with the different coloured
injections. |

After having confidered thefe appearances, it was not difficult for me
to determine the real ftructure of the placenta and courfe of the blood in
thefe parts: but the company, prejudiced in favour of former theories,
combated my opinion ; and it was even difputed, whether or not thefe
curling arteries could carry red blood. After having diffected the uterus,
with the placenta and membranes, and made the whole into preparations,
- tending to fhow the above facts, I returned home in the evening, and
communicated what I had difcovered to my brother, Dr. Hunter, who at
firft treated it and me with good humoured raillery ; but on going with
me to Dr. Me. Kenzie’s, was foon convinced. Some of the parts were
given to him, which he afterwards fhowed at his lectures, and prob-
ably they ftill remain in his collection. :

Soon after this time, Dr. Hunter and I procured feveral placentas, to
fee if after delivery the termination of the veins, and the curling arteries,
could be obferved: they were difcernible almoft in every one; and by

9 | puthing


130 ‘ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA.


puthing a pipe into the placenta, we could fill not only its whole fub-
ftance, but alfo the veffels on that furface which was attached to the
uterus.


The facts being now afcertained, and univerfally acknowledged, IT


confider myfelf as having a juft claim to the difcovery of the ftructure of
the placenta, and its communication with the uterus; together with the
ufe arifing from fuch ftru@ure and communication, and of having firft
demonftrated the vafcularity of the {fpongy chorion.

It is not necefiary at prefent to enter into the various opinions which
have been formed on this fubject; becaufe, whatever they were, they
could not be juft, the ftructure of the parts not being known: neither
fhall I endeavour to give a complete defcription of all the parts imme-
diately connected with uterine geftation, but fhall content myfelf with de-


{cribing the ftructure of the placenta, as far as it has any relation to the


uterus and child; and with explaining the connection between the two;
leaving the reader to examine what has been faid upon this fubject by
others, efpecially by Dr. Tiunter, in that very accurate and elaborate
work which he has publifhed on the Gravid Uterus, in which he has.
minutely defcribed, and accurately delineated the parts, without mention


ing the mode of difcovery.
The neceflary connection fubfifting in all animals between the mother:


and foetus, for the nourifhment of the latter, as far as I know, takes:
place in two ways. In fome it is continued, and fubfifts through the
whole term of geftation ; in others the union is foon diffolved, but an.
apparatus is provided, which at once furnifhes what is fufficient for the
fupport of the animal till it comes forth. ;

The firft of thefe are the viviparous, the fecond the oviparous animals,
both of which admit of great variety in the modes by which they pro-.
duce the fame effect.* In the firft divifion is included the human {pecies,


+ It may be remarked here, that the oviparous admit of being diftinguifhed into two clafles,
one where the egg is hatched in the belly, as in the viper, which has been commonly called
viviparous ; the others, where the eggs have been firft laid and then hatched, which is: the
clafs commonly called. oviparous, fuch as all the bird tribe, and, many: others, as fnakes,
lizards, &c.


which |


ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA. 13k


which alone will engage our prefent attention. But before I defcribe this
connection, it may be neceflary that the reader fhould underftand my idea
of generation: I fhall therefore refer him to what I have faid upon that
fubjeét in my account of the free martin.*

Tn the human fpecies the anatomical {truéture of the mother and em-
bryo, relative to fcetation, being wel] known, it will only be neceflary
fully to defcribe the nature of that connection between them, which is
formed by the intermediate fubftance, called placenta. For this purpofe
‘we mutt firft confider the placenta as a common part; next, the uterus.
as belonging to the mother, yet having an immediate connection with
the placenta, from which the nourifhment of the foetus is to be derived ;
which will lead us laftly to a confideration of thofe peculiarities by which
the foetus is to receive its nourifhment, and that conftitute its imme-
diate communication likewife with the placenta. It is the ftructure of
this intermediate fubftance, and its connection with the child and the
uterus of the mother, which have hitherto been fo little underftood ;
and without an accurate knowledge of which, it was impoffible any juft


idea could be formed of its functions.


The placenta is a mafs lying nearly in contact with the uterus ; indeed
it may in fome degree be {aid to be in continuity with a part of its internal
furface. On the fide applied to the uterus the placenta is lobulated,
having deep irregular fiffures ; but all thefe lobes are united into one uni-
form furface next to the child, on which its umbilical veffels ramify.
When we cut into the placenta, its whole fubftance appears to be little elfe
than a net-work, or fpongy mafs, through which the blood veffels of the
feetus ramify, and indeed it feems to be principally formed by the ramifi-
cations of thofe vefiels; exhibiting hardly any appearance of connecting
membrane: but we can hardly fuppofe it to be without fuch a mem-
brane, as there is fo much regularity in its texture. The cells, or inter-
{tices of each lobe communicate with one another, even much more freely


than thofe of the cellular membrane in any other part of the body; fo


that whatever fluid will pais in at one part, readily diffufes itfelf through


* Vide page 45:
Oy 2 or the


132 ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA.


the whole mafs of placenta, and all the cells have a communication at
the common bafe.


This ftrufture of the placenta, its reciprocal communication with the


two bodies with which it is immediately connected, and the ufe arifing
from this arrangement, form the union between the mother and foetus


for the fupport of the latter. Prior to the time I have mentioned above,


anatomifts feem to have been wholly unacquainted with this ftruc-
ture of placenta. By notes taken from Dr. Hunter’s lectures, in the
winter, 1755-6, it appears that he exprefied himfelf in the following
manner.* ‘* The fubftance of the placenta is a flefhy mafs, which


feems to be formed entirely of the vefiels of the umbilical rope.” In -


another part, mentioning the. appearances when injected, he fays, “‘ and
upon a flight putrefa¢tion coming on, you will find the whole appear-
ing like a mafs of veffels” ; then fays, “‘ there is always a white uninjected.
‘fubftance between the veffels, but whether lymphatics or what I cannot
tell.” This uninjected fubftance, mentioned by Dr. Hunter, is what
forms the cellular ftruature.

The placenta feems to be principally compofed of the ramifications of
the veflels of the embryo, and may have been originally formed in con-
fequence of thofe next to the uterus laying hold by a fpecies of animah
attraction of the coagulable lymph which lines the uterus. This might
take place in a manner refembling what happens when the root of a
plant fpreads on the furface of moift bodies ; with this difference, that in
the prefent inftance the veffels form the fabhanes ane which, they.
ramify, as in the cafe of granulations.

At the time, or very probably before the female feed enters the uterus,.
coagulable lymph, from the blood of the mother, is thrown out every
where on its inner furface, either from the ftimulus of impregnation taking
place in the ovarium, or in confequence of the feed being expelled from
it. When the feed has entered the uterus, it attaches itfelf to that


* Thefe quotations were taken from Mr. Galhie’s MS. of Dr. Hunter’s leGtures, who is
one of the gentlemen that favoured Dr. Hunter, upon a former occafion, with the fame ufe of
his notes, Wide Dr. Hunter’s Commentaries.


lymph


ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA. 133


lymph, by which it becomes covered and immediately furrounded.*
This coagulable lymph forms a foft pulpy membrane, the decidua,
which is, I believe, peculiar to the human fpecies, and to monkeys,
having never found it in any other animal. That part which covers the
feed or foetus, where it is not immediately attached to the uterus, and
likewife forms a membrane, was -difcovered by Dr. Hunter, and is
by him called decidua reflexa. ‘The whole’ of this coagulable lymph
continues to be a living part for the time; the veffels of the uterus
ramify upon it; and where the veflels of the foetus form the placenta,
there the veffels of the uterus, after paffing through the decidua, open
into the cellular fubftance of the placenta, as before defcribed. As this
membrane lines the uterus and covers the feed, it is f{tretched out, and
becomes thinner and thinner, as the uterus is diftended by the fetus
growing larger, efpecially that part of it, called decidua reflexa, which
covers the foetus, as there it cannot poflibly acquire any new matter,
except we could fuppofe that the foetus afflifted in the formation of it.
This membrane is moft diftinét where it covers the chorion; for where
it covers the placenta it is blended with coagula in the great veins that
pafs obliquely through it, more efpecially all round the edge where in-
numerable large veins come out; but the chorion and decidua can be
eafily diftinguithed from one another, the decidua being lefs.elaftic.
From the defcription now given, I think we are juftified in fuppofing
the placenta to be formed entirely by the foetus, and the decidua to be
a production of the mother; and an additional proof of both thefe may
be drawn from the circumftance of the decidua pafling between the pla-
centa and uterus. For if-the veflels of the foetus branched into a part of
the decidua, we might conceive the whole placenta to be formed from
that exudation ; the portion of 1t where the veffels had ramified, like the
roots of a plant, becoming thicker than the reft, and forming the "pla-
centa. If that were the cafe, this membrana decidua, when traced from
parts diftinct, and at a diftance from the placenta, fhould be plainly feen


+ This is exaGly fimilar to another operation in the animal ceconomy. If an extraneous
living part is introduced into any cavity, it will be immediately enclofed with coagulable
lymph. Thus we find worms inclofed, hydatids detached, and afterwards inclofed.


paffing


134 ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA.


pafling into its fubftance all round at the edges, as a continuation of it.
But the fact is quite otherways ; for the decidua can be diftin€ly traced
between the placenta and uterus, hardly ever pafling between the lobuli:
the veflels of the fcetus never entering into it, and of courfe none of
them ever coming in abfolute contact with the uterus.

The vefiels of the foetus adhering,. by the intervention of the decidua,
to a certain fpace of the uterus when both are yet fmall, as the uterus
increafes in every part of its furface during the time of uterine geftation,
we mutt fuppofe that this furface of adhefion increafes alfo ; and that by
the elongation of thofe veffels of the fcetus in every direction, this fub-
ftance fhould likewife be increafed in every direction: this is in fome
degree the cafe, yet the placenta does not occupy fo much of the enlarged
furface of the uterus as one at firft would expect.

The vefiels of the uterus in the time of the geftation, are increafed in
fize nearly in a proportion equal to the increafed circumference of the
uterus, and confequently in a proportion much greater than the real in-
creafe of its fubftance. But when we reflect that the uterus ought not
to be confidered as hollow, but as a body nearly folid, on account of
its contents, which derive fupport from this fource; and that a much
greater quantity of blood muft neceflarily pafs than what is required for
the fupport of the vifcus itfelf, we cannot be at a lofs to account for the
greatly increafed fize of its veffels.


The arteries of the uterus which are not immediately employed in con-.


veying nourifhment to it, go on towards the placenta, and proceeding
obliquely between it and the uterus, pafs through the decidua without
tamifying ; juft before they enter the placenta, making two or three clofe
{piral turns upon themfelves, they open at once into its fpongy fubftance
without any diminution of fize, and without pafling beyond the furface
as above defcribed. The intention of thefe fpiral turns would appear to
be that of diminifhing the force of the circulation as it approaches the
fpongy fubftance of the placenta, and is a ftructure which mutt leffen,


the quick motion of the blood in a part where a quick motion of this


fluid was not wanted. The fize of thefe curling arteries at this termina-
tion is about that of a crow’s quill.


The


ON THE. STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA. 135


The veins of the uterus appropriated to bring back the blood from
the placenta, commence from this fpongy fubftance by fuch wide begin-
nings, as are more than equal to the fize of the veins themfelves. - 'Thefe
veins pafs obliquely through the decidua to the uterus, enter its fubftance
obliquely, and immediately communicate with the proper veins of the
uterus. ‘The area of thofe veins bear no proportion to their circumference,
the veins being very much flattened.

This ftructure of parts points out at once the motion of the blood in
the placenta; but as this is a fact but lately afcertained, a juft idea may
perhaps be conveyed by faying, that it is fimilar, as far as we yet know,,
to the blood’s motion through the cavernous fubftance of the penis.

The blood, detached from the common circulation of the mother,
moves through the placenta of the feetus ; and is then returned back into
the courfe of the circulation of the mother to pafs on to the heart.

This ftructure of the placenta, and its conimunication with the uterus,
leads us a ftep further in our knowledge of the connection between the
mother and feetus ; the blood of the mother muft pafs freely into the fub-
ftance of the placenta, and the placenta moft probably will be conftantly
filled ; the turgidity of which will affift to fqueeze the blood into the
mouths of the veins of the uterus, that it may again pafs into the com-
mon circulation of the mother: and as the interftices of the placenta are
of much greater extent than the arteries which convey the blood, the
motion of the blood in that part muft be fo much diminifhed as almoft
to approach to ftagnation ; fo far and no further does the mother appear
to be concerned in this connection.

The feetus has a communication with the placenta of another kind.
The arteries from the foetus. pafs out to a confiderable length, under the
name of the umbilical chord, and when they arrive at the placenta,
ramify upon its furface, fending into its fubftance branches which pafs
through it, and divide into énaltee and fmaller, till at laft they terminate.
in veins; thefe uniting become larger and larger, and end in one, which.
at laft terminates in the proper circulation of the fcetus.

This courfe of veflels, and the blood’s motion in them, is fimilar to the
courte of the veffels and the motion of the blood in other parts of the body..

OBSERVATIONS.


136 ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA.


OBSERVATIONS ON THE PLACENTA OF THE MONKEY,


Monkeys always copulate backwards; this is performed fometimes
when the female is ftanding on all-fours ; and at other times the male
brings her between his thighs when he is fitting, holding her with his
fore paws.

The female has her regular periods for the male, but fhe has commonly
too much complaifance ever to refufe him. They carry this ftill further,
for they receive the male when with young, even when pretty far gone ;
at leaft this was the cafe with the one I am going to give an account of. _

A female monkey, belonging to Mr. Enderfbay, in the fummer 1782, —
had frequently taken the male. ‘The keeper obferved that after the a1ft
of June fhe became lefs lively than ufual, although it was not fufpected —
that the had conceived. However, fome time after, fhe appeared to be
bigger in the belly, which created a fufpicion of her being with young.
ey attention was paid to her, and great care was taken of her. She
went on gradually increafing in fize, and at laft fomething was obferved
to move in her belly at particular times, and the motion could even-be
felt through the abdominal mufcles. She became indolent, and did not
like to leap or perform her ufual feats of aétivity. Towards the latter
part of the time they perceived the breaft and nipple to have become ra-
ther fuller ; and that a kind of water could be fqueezed out at the nipple. —
Some time before fhe brought forth, fhe became red about the hips and
pofteriors ; which rednefs extended to the infide of the thighs, and it:
was now certain fhe was with young. I defired that fhe might be parti-
cularly attended to when there were figns of approaching delivery, both
on her own account and that of the young one, and requefted the after-
birth might be carefully preferved, as that part would affift to afcertain
the mode of uterine geftation. Thefe directions were attentively followed;
and when in labour it was obferved, that fhe had regular pains; that
when the young one was in part come into the world, fhe affifted herfelf
with her fore paws; and that it came with the hind parts firft. This

) happened


_ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA. 137


happened on the 15th of December 1782, in all about fix months after
conception; and when fhe brought forth her young one, it fhowed
figns of life, but died immediately, owing probably to the unfavourable
mode of its being brought into the world. When delivered, the took the
young one up, and although it was dead, clafped it to her breaft.

The after-birth was preferved entire, and was perfectly fit for exami-
nation. It confifted of placenta, with the membranes and navel ftring,
which all very much refembled the correfponding parts in the human
fubject, as will now be defcribed.

The placenta had the appearance of being divided into two oblong
bodies, united by their edges, each terminating in an obtufe point at the
other end, which were of courfe at fome little diftance from one another. -

It is probable, that thefe two points were placed towards the openings
of the Fallopian tubes, where the uterus affumes a form refembling two
obtufe horns. |

The two lobes above mentioned, were made up of fmaller ones,
united clofely at their edges, which were more apparent and diftiné at
fome parts than at others. Some of thefe lobes were divided by fiffures:
which feem to be derived from one centre; while there were others. near
the edges, pafling in a different direction: in which fiffures. are placed
veins or finufes that receives the blood laterally from the lobes. The fub-
ftance of the placenta feems to be cellular, as in the human fubject ; this
ftructure allows a communication to. be kept up between different parts:
of each lobe, and the finufes allowing of a communication between the
different lobes of which the placenta is compofed, and the blood pafies
into the fiffures before it enters the veins ; in which refpect it differs. from
the human placenta.

The arteries from the uterus, on the furface of the placenta, were
vifible, but too fmall to be injected;. I cannot therefore fay how they
treminated in the placenta.

The principal veins in general arofe from the fiflures beginning from.
the furface, as in the human placenta ; but befides thefe, there were other
fmall ones, all which we may fuppofe pafs through the decidua and:

v3 enter:


138 ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE PLACENTA.


enter the fubfance of the uterus, moft probably in the fame way as in
the human.

The membranes are the amnios, the chorion, and the membrana dees
dua. Thefe appear to be very much the fame as in the human, except —
that the decidua is confiderably thicker, efpecially where it ie between
the uterus and the placenta.

The navel ftring in the monkey is not proportionally fo ee as in the
human ; and is very much, and very regularly twifted.

There is no urachus, and of courfe no allantois, not even the {mall
ligament that appears to be a drawing in of the bladder at its attachment
to tne navel, the bladder here being rounded,


EXPLANATION


F


Le agen TO


[ m1 ]


OBSERVATIONS ON THE GILLAROO TROUT,
COMMONLY CALLED IN IRELAND THE
GIZZARD TROUT. |


NE of the digeftive organs of this trout being fo very remarkable

as to have given name to the fifth, and to be looked upon as its
diftinouifhing characteriftic ; it will be neceffary to take a general view of
the varieties in the digeftive organs of animals, to be able to determine
what place the ftomach of this particular trout holds among them, and
to throw fome light upon the queftion, whether its refemblance to. a
gizzard be fuch, as to render the name of gizzard trout a proper appel-
lation. For this purpofe let me ftate fome general fatts. Food of ani-
mals may be divided into two kinds, what does, and what does not,
require maftication to facilitate digeition. All animal food is of this
latter kind. But grain, and many other fubftances which ferve for ali-
ment, require a previous grinding or trituration; and therefore animals
which live on fuch food are furnifhed with organs for that purpofe.
Granivorous quadrupeds have the two powers, for maftication and di-
geftion, feparate or diftinct from one another ; the firft being executed by
a fet of teeth of a particular form, which ferve as fo many grindftones for
reducing their food to a powder, before they convey it into the ftomach
for digeftion. When fo prepared, it is, with regard to the digeftive
power, rendered fimilar to animal food: therefore in many fuch animals
the ftomach is fimilar- to that of the carnivorus; and whenever the
ftomach in granivorous quadrupeds departs from this general rule, there: —
is a fingularity in the operations of digeftion. Such birds as live upon
food, for the digeftion of which trituration is indifpenfably neceflary,
have the powers of maftication and digeftion united in one part, the giz-
zatd ; which is peculiarly conftructed for that purpofe. In granivorous.
birds therefore one fingle organ anfwers both to the teeth and ftomach
of granivorous quadrupeds, and confequently the gizzard alone of birds.
a NIP: wil


142 ON THE GILLAROO TROUT.


will point out the food of the fpecies as clearly as the teeth and ftomach
together do in thofe animals in which the two offices of maftication and
an digeftion are not joined together in the fame part.

As it appears then to be the difference of the ftomachs only, that fits
birds for their different kinds of food, it is evident that every gradation of
ftomach mutt be found among them, from the true gizzard which is one
extreme, to the mere membranous ftomach which is the other ; fince the
food of different {pecies is of every different kind, from the hardeft grain
to the fofteft animal matter. In confequence of this, it muft be as diffi-
cult to determine the exact limits of the two different conftructions, to
which the names of gizzard and {tomach fpecifically belong, as, in any
other cafe, to diftinguifh proximate f{teps in the flow and imperceptible
gradations of nature.

The two extremes of true gizzard, and membranous ftomach, are eafily
defined; but they run fo into each other, that the end of one and the
beginning of the other are quite imperceptible. Similar gradations are
obferved in the food ; the kinds fuited to the two extremes mixing toge-
ther in different proportions, adapted to the intermediate ftates of ftomach.

A true gizzard is compofed of two ftrong mufcles placed oppofite, and
acting upon each other, as two broad grindftones. Thefe mufcles are
joined together at their fides by a middle tendon, into which the mufcular
fibres are inferted, and which forms the narrow anterior and pofterior fides
of the flat quadrangular cavity, in which the grinding is performed. The
upper end of this cavity is filled up by the termination of the cefophagus,
and the beginning of the inteftine. The lower end confifts of a thin
mufcular bag connecting the edges of the two mufcles together.

By thefe two fofter and flexible fubftances being thus interpofed be-
tween the two ftrong grinding mufcles, a double advantage is gained ; for
whilft one gives an eafy paflage to the cefophagus and gut, they both act,
in fome degree, as a hinge, on which the two mufcles may be faid to
move, by means of the middle tendon allowing of a free motion of the
grinding furfaces on each other, which is neceflary for the comminution
of food. '

The


ON THE GILLAROO TROUT. 143


The two flat lateral fides of the grinding cavity are lined with a thick
horny fubftance fimilar to a hard and thick cuticle: the narrow anterior
and pofterior tendinous parts are alfo lined with a cuticle, but not fo
{trong as the former: this horny fubftance is gradually loft at one end
in a very thin cuticle, which lines the paffages of the cefophagus and
inteftine for a little way ; and at the other end is loft in the fame manner
in the membranous bag.

The two large mufcles may be confidered as a pair of jaws, whofe
teeth are taken in occafionally, being {mall rough ftones or pebbles which
the animal {fwallows : and from the feeling on the tongue, it can diftin-
guifh fuch of thefe as are proper, from thofe which are fmooth or other-
ways unfit for the purpofe, which laft it inftantly drops out of its mouth.

Some birds, with gizzards, have a craw or crop alfo, which ferves as
a refervoir, and for foftening the grain; but as all of them have not this
organ, it is not to our prefent purpofe. :

There are other animals befides that clafs of birds, which mafticate
their food in their ftomach, but their teeth are placed there by nature :
crabs and lobfters are of this kind.

The gradation from gizzard to ftomach is made by the mufcular fides
becoming weaker and weaker, and the food keeps pace with this change,
varying gradually from vegetable to animal. In one point of view there-
fore food may be confidered as a firft principle, with re{pect to which the
digeftive powers, with their appendages, are as fecondary parts, being
adapted to and determined by the food, as the primary object.

We find then that in granivorous animals of all forts, there is an ap-
paratus for the maftication of the food, although of different kinds and
differently placed. But in true carnivorous animals of whatever tribe,
maftication is not fo neceflary, and therefore they have no apparatus for
that purpofe. The teeth of fuch quadrupeds, as are carnivorous, ferve
chiefly to procure food and prepare it for deglutition. The fame thing
holds in the true carnivorous bird, the office of whofe beak and talons is
to procure the aliment, and fit it for deglutition, correfponding in this
refpect to the teeth of the others. Applying this to fith, it feems, at firft
fight, that there is no occafion in them for that variety of ftructure in the

digeftive


144 ON THE GILLAROO TROUT.


digeftive organs, which is found in the before mentioned quadrupeds and
birds ; the food of fith being principally of one fort, namely, animal,
which however with regard to the digeftive powers, is to be diftinguifhed
into two kinds, viz. commion foft fifth and fhell-fifh. Such fith as live
on the firft kind, have like the carnivorous quadrupeds and birds, no
apparatus for maftication ; their teeth being intended merely for catching
the food and fitting it to be fwallowed. But the fhells of the fecond
kind of food render fome degree of mafticating power neceflary, and ac-
cordingly we find in certain fith a ftructure fuited to this purpofe.

Thus the mouth of the wolf-fith is almoft paved with teeth, by means
of which it can break any fhells to pieces, and fo effectually difengage
the food for digeftion, that though it lives upon fuch hard food, the
ftomach does not differ from that of other fifth : the organs of maftication
and digeftion therefore in this animal exactly correfpond to thofe of many
granivorous quadrupeds.

~ Other fith, on the contrary, approach nearer to the ftruture of birds,

in having their ftomach furnifhed with fome degree of mafticating power;
this in many is very imperfect, compared with the gizzards of fowls,
though perhaps the difference is fuch only as the difference of food will
properly allow: for in thofe fifh who have this power, the food being
ftill animal; and in general but imperfectly covered with the fhell, it per-
haps wants only to be broken ; however, in the bulla lignaria of Lin-
nzus, this apparatus is more perfect, confifting of two bones, which we
muft fuppofe capable of grinding hard fhells; whereas the food of
granivorous birds requires to be ground into a kind of meal.

Of all the fith I have feen, the mullet is the cleareft inftance of this
firudture ; its ftrong mufcular ftomach being evidently adapted, like the
gizzard of birds, to the two offices of maftication and digeftion. The
ftomach of the fifh now before us holds the fecond place.

But ftill neither of thofe ftomachs can be juftly ranked as gizzards,
fince they want fome of the moft effential characters, viz. a power and
motion fitted for grinding, and the horny cuticle. ‘The ftomach of the
Gillaroo trout is however more circum{fcribed than that of moft fith, better
adapted for {mall food, and endued with fufficient ftrength to break the

thells.


ON THE GILLAROO TROUT. 145
fhells of fmall fhell-fith ; which will moft probably be beit done by


having more than one in the ftomach at a time, and alfo by taking pretty
large and {mooth {tones into the ftomach, which will anfwer the purpofe
of breaking; but not fo well that of grinding; nor will they hurt the
ftomach as they are fmooth, when {wallowed; but this ftomach can
{carcely pofiefs any power of grinding, as the whole cavity is lined with
a fine villous coat, the internal furface of which appears every where to
be digeftive, and by no means fitted for maftication. |

The ftomach of the Englifh trout is exactly of the fame {pecies with
that of the Gillaroo, but its coat is not fo thick by two-thirds. How
far this difference in thicknefs of ftomach is fufficient to make a diftine
{pecies, or barely a variety of the fame, is only to be determined by expe-
riment.”

The cefophagus in the trout is confiderably longer and fmaller than
in many other claffes of fith.

The inteftines are fimilar to thofe of the falmon, herring, {prat, Bcc.

The pancreas is appendiculated.° |

The teeth fhow them to be fith of prey.

So far as we are led to determine by analogy, we muft not confider
the ftomach of this fifh as a gizzard, but as a true {tomach.


* The Enelith trout fwallows fhell-fifh, and alfo pretty large {mooth ftones, which ferve
as kind of fhell-breakers.


> Viz. Take fome Gillaroo trout, male and female, and put them into water in which
there are no trout, to fee if they continue the fame.


* I chufe to give this name to the pancreas from its appearance.


SOME


en Re
ty Lille he


ae.
> <7 ©


ur hae ae
POUCA bie


es de


“ge han


C 147 J]


SOME OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


HE paper which I formerly prefented to the Royal Society, on
the ftomach being digefted after death, and which was publithed in
1772, in the 62" volume of the Philofophical TranfaGtions, feems to have
attracted the attention of Spallanzani, and others. I fhall therefore make
fome remarks upon the experiments and opinions of thofe ‘gentlemen ;
compare them with thofe of Reaumur, and give fome general faéts and
obfervations of my own upon digeftion, and fhall conclude by adding a
copy of the above mentioned paper, with the hope that others will take up
the fubject in a more enlarged point of view, and profecute an inquiry which
is of fo much confequence in the inveftigation of the operations of the ani-
mal economy. I cannot, at prefent, {pare {ufficient time to give my opinions
-at large on this fubject, with all the experiments and obfervations I have
made upon it; but as foon as I have leifure I fhall lay them before the public.
The difcovery of parts has been a principal object in the refearches of
the young or practical anatomift ; butche connection, arrangement, mode
of action, and ufes of the whole, or of particular organs, have more com-
monly been referved for the confideration of thofe whofe views were
extended further; and whofe powers of reafoning had been enlarged by
habits of obfervation and inquiry. Curious and fpeculative men have
likewife made attempts in this way, often without being fufficiently ac-
quainted with the ftructure of the parts they were about to confider; and
confequently ignorant of their relations and connections with one another.
They have not been contented to fpeculate concerning thofe which were
moft obvious, which might have led to ufeful knowledge; but directed
by what beft fuited their fancy, they have principally attempted the moft
obfcure and intricate. Generation, or the mode of continuing the {pecies,
and digeftion, or the means of preferving the individual, have been with
them the great objects of inquiry ; but it does not appear that they have
been very fuccefsful.. Digeftion, as being one of the moft important ope-
rations of the animal ceconomy, and moft obvious in its effects, fupplies
U a number


@


148 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION,


a number of facts to affift in afcertaining its powers; yet little has been
hitherto made out towards inveftigating the various circumftances under
which it is performed.

The mode of dividing the food, for the increafe of its furface in fome
animals, fuggefted one method of explaining the procefs of digeftion ;
and the fecretion of a juice, having the power of converting vegetable
and animal matter into a fluid proper for the purpofes of nutrition,
furnifhed another. Both thefe opinions have had their advocates; and
while one party-contended for a mechanical power, fuppofed to exift in
the’ gizzard, the other had recourfe to a chymical power; and thefe laft
confidered fermentation as the great agent in digeftion: but as they were
rather fpeculative philofophers, than practical anatomifts, they have
frequently been mifled with refpe&t to the very faéts and obfervations
whofe refult was to decide the truth of their opinions. What, for inftance,
does it explain in digeftion, that the force of the gizzard of a turkey is
found equal to four hundred and feventy-three pounds ? Does it afford a
better folution of our doubts, than we fhould derive from determining
the force of the mill that grinds the wheat into flour? Or, on the other
hand, will the moft correct idea of. fermentation enable us to account for
the various phenomena in the operation of digeftion ? But we can have no
very high idea of experiments made by gentlemen and prve/s, who, for
want of anatomical knowledge, have not been able to purfue their rea~
foning even beyond the fimple experiment itfelf.

The great object fhould have been, an endeavour to difcover the uni-
verfal agent in digeftion : for the digeftive organ is evidently conftructed
ina different manner in different animals; the mechanical power for the
divifion of the food not being univerfal; and thofe gentlemen who
confidered this power in the gizzard as the immediate caufe of digeftion,
forgot that the fame effect was produced in other clafles of animals, with
a different {tructure of ftomach, by means of the grinding teeth. Thus
while the gizzard favoured the theory of the mechanical reafoner, that
idea was again deftroyed by the membranous ftructure of the ftomach in
many animals, which at the fame time fupplied the chymift with argu-
ments in favour of the procefs of fermentation.


It


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 149


It is indeed a more difficult matter than thofe gentlemen imagine, to
acquire on this fubject a knowledge fuiticiently accurate, to be able to
explain a procefs fo complicated as that of digeftion. There are in
Nature’s operations always two obvious extremes ; and the mind of man
eagerly adopts that which accords with fome principle he is fond of, and
with which he is beft acquainted ; but the intermediate connetions and
gradations being lefs ftriking, do not fo forcibly affect the fuperficial —
inquirer.

It happens unfortunately that thofe who from the nature of their edu-
cation are beft qualified to inveftigate the intricacies, and improve our
Knowledge of the animal ceconomy, are compelled to get their living by
the practice of a profeflion which is conftant employment. The only
idle profeffional men are thofe of the church ; and we therefore frequently
fee them becoming philofophers and phyfiologifts, as it were inftin@ively,
without having had that kind of education which might dire&t their pur-
fuits. Experiments, it is true, may be made by fuch men; but they
muft not be complicated, nor having any immediate relation to a branch
of knowledge, with which they cannot be much acquainted ; and ex-
periments fo made, will feldom go further than perhaps to explain a
fingle fact. They may look through microfcopes and examine the red
globules of blood; they may view animalcule and give us a candid rela-~
tion of what they fee ; but fhould not prefume to carry their reafoning

Yinto a fcience of which they can know nothing ; or hope to throw light
on a fubject which it is impoflible they can underftand. It fhould be
remembered, that nothing in nature ftands alone; but that every art
and fcience has a relation to fome other art or {cience, and that it requires
a knowledge of thefe others, as far as this connection takes place, to
enable us to become perfect in that which engages our particular atten-
tion.

Thefe obfervations are seal to all thofe who have made experi-
ments to explain digeftion. The mechanical powers being eafily under-
{tood, thofe who confidered digeftion mechanically have in general ex-
plained their effects juftly, as. ‘far as they ‘applied to the gizzard; but
their powers of reafoning went no further, and they fuppofed thete effects

U 2 to


150 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


to be digeftion. But thefe who took it up chymically being lefs ac-
quainted with chymiftry, and totally ignorant of the principles of the
animal ceconomy, have erroneoufly referred the operations of the animal
machine to the laws of chymiftry.

The firft inquirers into digeftion were ftruck only by the extremes, -
- the gizzard, and membranous ftomach, paying no regard to the grada-
tions leading from the one to the other; which if properly examined would
have aflifted them more effeCtually to explain the functions of the ftomach.

Vallifneri, confidering the power of the gizzard in one view only,
imagined it would be as liable to be affected by the mechanical powers
neceflary for digeftion, as the grain which was to be digefted ; therefore

fuppofed the exiftence of a folvent: but he is entitled to no merit from
this idea, as the premifes are falfe: however, this opinion of Vallifneri
fet Reaumur to work, and has been the means of bringing feveral curious
facts to light. His experiments were firft made with a view to contra-
dict that idea; and were therefore made upon birds that had gizzards,
as beft adapted to his purpofe. In this purfuit he only attended to thofe
parts of the experiments which beft accorded with his own opinion ; yet
carefully guarded againft every poffible accident that might affect their
accuracy. If trituration was the immediate caufe of digeftion, his
making experiments on the gizzards of birds was unneceflary ; it would
have been fufficient to have examined the food after it had been mafti-
eated by the teeth of animals who have grinders; for the teeth and »
gizzard anfwer one and the fame purpofe: but the circumftance of ©
animals who matticate their food in their mouth, having alfo a ftomach,
fhould have taught, that there was fomething more in digeftion than
trituration. .

Reaumur’s firft experiments were made to afcertain the ftrength of the
gizzard, with its effects; to prove that fharp cutting fubftances, when
fwallowed, in no way injured its internal coat ; and that the common food.
of the bird was not diffolved when guarded againft its action. Yet. after
all thefe proofs he feems to doubt, and fays, ‘‘ are we to conclude that
grinding alone is fufficient to conyert the grain and other aliment into a
matter proper for the nutrition of the animal, without undergoing any

) other


j OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 151


other preparation? Several reafons feem to oppofe this; trituration
alone might reduce the grain into a flour; but flour alone is not chyle.”
‘‘* From the fmell of the aliment (one from the gizzards of birds)
are we not led to conclude that it undergoes a fermentation? This
fmell may be faid to arife from the liquor with which the aliment is
mixed; but is it likely that juices do not difpofe to fermentation,
fuch fubftances in which it is fo eafily excited? Flour made into a pafte
and fruit, require little more than heat to make them ferment.” From
thefe very experiments made with a view to prove that digeftion is carried
on by trituration, Reaumur was led to fuppofe a folvent. But as
there are fome birds whofe ftomachs do not feem fufficiently {trong to
have the power of trituration, he {elected the buzzard, as being of that
kind, and the fitteft, for the fubject of his experiments, from the cir-
cumftance of its throwing up whatever is folid and indigeftible ; therefore
without killing the bird, he could know the refult, and repeat the -expe-
riment as often as he thought neceflary.

From the ftomach in the buzzard being incapable of trituration, he:
concluded that a folvent was neceflary for digeftion ; but to. preclude all
mechanical effects of the ftomach, in his experiments, he employed tin
tubes filled with meat, which, after the tubes had remained. twenty-four
hours in the ftomach of the buzzard, was reduced to three-fourths of its
fize was like threads, and was neither putrid, four, nor volatile, but infipid.
On this effect he made his remarks, which are very pertinent. In another
experiment which was more accurate and conclufive, he is convinced of
the action of a folvent.. He then tried the foft bones of young animals,
and found they were digefted ; and that though the hard bones were not.
acted on fo readily ; yet by returning the fame bones feveral times into
the ftomach, they, were at laft digefted.

Reauimur was next anxious to know, if fuch birds as were intended:
by nature to live upon meat, could alfo digeft vegetables ; but the refult
was not fo fatisfactory. He gave bread to Hie buzza iy which upon
being returned had the appearance of having been. chewed. He next,
tried a piece of a ripe pear; which, after having been twenty-four hours
in the ftomach it had loft fome of its weight, and had the appearance of

~ being


152 | OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


being boiled or baked ; and thence he concludes that its powers are too
weak to digeft vegetables fo as to nourifh the animal.
"To afcertain the nature of this liquor which had fuch powers, he tafted
the jelly to which the meat and bone had been reduced, conceiving it muft_
be well impregnated with this fluid, but could only diftinguifh a bitter or
faltith tafte. To have an opportunity of more fully determining the nature
of this folvent, he made his buzzard {wallow {mall tubes filled with
{ponge, which imbibed fifty grains of this liquor, having the fame tafte
as the jelly, and changing blue paper to a red. He tried the effects of
this liguor on meat out of the body, with comparative experiments in
water ; and after twenty-four hours, the meat in the water was become
putrid; but that in the liquor from the ftomach was only foftened, not .
diffolved. To fee how far the analogy held good in membranous ftomachs,
he gave two bones to a dog, which being killed after twenty-fix hours,
they were found leffened in fize, and become as foft as horn. He found
that the ftomach of the dog did not alter the fhape of any of his tubes.

He conveyed grafs and hay, enclofed in tubes, into the ftomachs of
ruminating animals, which were not digefted, but appeared as if mace-
rated.

Let us enumerate the experiments and facts made out by Reaumur.

The gizzard was not hurt by aciing upon glafs, which it ground toa
powder.

The ftomach, or gizzard, had hardly any vifible motion.

The force of the an was afcertained.

The fize of the flenes found in the gizzard was in proportion to the
_ fize of the bird.

The ftomach of a buzzard digefted bone; from which he concluded |
the gaftric juice has a folvent power ; but it did not digeft bread, although
it acted in a flight degree on fruit.

- He made experiments with the gaftric juice.

The juice in the ruminating animals ftomachs produced no effee on
hay-or grafs, when inclofed in tubes.

Reaumur’s experiments, although not compleat, yet paved the way
for future inveftigation ; and Spallanzani proceeding on the fame ground,


has


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 153


thas confirmed them by his own, and has filled up feveral blanks not
compleatly made cut by Reaumur; for in fome inftances Reaumur gave
up the point too foon, efpecially in the experiments refpecting the buz-
zard’s power of digefting vegetables. Reaumur did not poffefs general
knowledge fufficient to direct him in his purfuits, which neceflarily con-
fined him to what he was moft mafter of, the mere making experiments.
He was neither an anatomift, nor a phyfiologift; nor can he be faid to
have been perfectly juft in his defcription of parts, having confidered the
crop, and the cefophagus leading from it to the gizzard, as being two
diftin& ftomachs. This however is only to be fet down as a piece of
anatomical ignorance, not affecting the fubject in the leaft. Spallanzani
is alfo incorrect in his anatomical knowledge; but it muft be owned,
that hi® experiments, as far as they go, are in themfelves conclufive;
but like all mere makers of experiments, he is not fatisfied. with thofe
which are clear and decifive, but multiplies them moft unneceffarily,
without varying them to elucidate other and effential parts of the fame
fubject. I think we may fet it down as an axiom, that experiments
{fhould not be often repeated, which merely tend to eftablifh a principle
already known and admitted; but that the next {tep fhould be, the ap-
plication of that principle to ufeful purpofes. If Spallanzani had em-
ployed half his time in this way, and had confidered digeftion under all
the various ftates of the body and ftomach, with all the varieties of food,
both natural and artificial, he had employed his time much better than _
in making experiments without end.

The food of moft animals being compofed either of vegetables, ani-
mals, or both, and a folvent admitted as an agent in digeftion ; it only
remained to prove, that the effect of the procefs of digeftion, was to
produce from thefe various fubftances, an animal matter, fimilar in all
animals who live on fuch fubftances. But the application of principles
requires more than fimply the knowledge of the principle itfelf; and
therefore thofe who cannot reafon from analogy, or draw general conclu-
fions from a few convincing facts ; and who require to have every relative
conclufion or inference proved by an experiment, however unneceflary or
fatiguing to the reader, muft be pleafed with Spallanzani; but he mutt

tire


154 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


tire even thofe whom he informed, and much more thofe who only read
his works in expectation of fomething new. Reaumur, feermed indeed
willing to give up the idea of trituration being the fole caufe of digef-
tion ; but Spallanzani perfifts in proving that it is not performed by |
trituration. |

To make comparative experiments upon the digeftive power of different
animals, they fhould be under the fame circumftances relative to digeftion:
they fhould be equal in age ; for the growing eat more than the full-grown,
and of courfe digeft fafter ; and this point therefore can be beft afcertained
in each clafs of animals, by feleCting thofe which have attained their full-
srowth. They fhould be equa! in fatnefs, for this makes a very material dif-
ference in the powers of digeftion in the fame animal ; and they fhould be
equal in health ; winich laft circumftance, of all others, probably makes the
greateft difference in the powers of the ftomach. In comparing animals
of the fame clafs, the atmofphere fhould likewife be of the fame tem-
perature ; for the different clafles of animals are varioufly affected by the
fame degree of heat. Experiments made upon fnakes and lizards in
the winter, will differ greatly from. thofe made in the fummer, while
fimilar experiments made on dogs will have nearly the fame refult in both
_ feafons. Nor will the powers of the ftomach be found equal in the fame
clafs ; for fleeping animals, of the quadruped kind, as hedge-hogs, do
not digeft in the winter, but in the fummer only ; therefore the conclu-
fions to be drawn from experiments made refpeCting the digeftive powers
in one, are not at all applicable to thofe made in the other feafon.

Spallanzani obferved that the {nake digefted food fafter in June, when —
the heat was at 82° and 83°, than in April, when it was only 60°;
from whence he concludes, that heat affifts digeftion; but this heat is
not the immediate, but the remote caufe of the increafed power: heat
having produced in the animal greater neceflity for nourifhment ; and of
courfe greater powers; gaftric juice was therefore fecreted fafter or in
greater quantity.

As a proof that heat does not act as an immediate, but only as a re-
mote caufe in aflifting digeftion, I fhall mention the effect it produced

upon


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 155


upon a hedge-hog, the fubject of Mr. Jenner’s third experiment on the
heat of that animal, related in the former part of this volume’.

« The hedge-hog, while the heat of the ftomach was at 30°, had
neither defire for food, nor power of digefting it; but when increafed
by inflammation in the abdomen to 93°, the eal feized a toad which
happened to be in the room; and upon being offered fome bread and
milk, it immediately eat it. The heat roufed up the actions of the ani-
mal ceconomy; and the parts being unable to carry on- thefe ations
without being fupplied with nourifhment, the ftomach was ftimulated to
digeft, to afford them that fupply.”

Spallanzani alfo mentions the flow digeftion in ferpents, and quotes
Bomare ; who gives an account of a ferpent at Martinico, which after
having retained a chicken in its ftomach for three months, it was not
completely digefted, the feathers ftill adhering to the fkin®. The truth
of this faét I fhould very much doubt, efpecially in fo warm a climate
as that of Martinico; where I muft fuppofe the digeftive powers to be
conftantly wanted; unlefs in Martinico, as in colder climates, there is a
torpid feafon, in which the act of digeftion is not neceflary: but in
that cafe the ferpent would not have {wallowed the chicken. When at
Bellifle, in the beginning of the winter 1761-2, I conveyed worms, and
pieces of meat, down the throats of lizards when they were going into
winter quarters, keeping them afterwards in a cool place. On opening
them at different periods, I always found the fubftances which I had in-
troduced, entire, and without any alteration: fometimes they were in the
ftomach ; ‘at other times they had paffed into the inteftine ; and fome of
the lizards that were allowed to live, voided them towards the fpring,
with but very little alteration in their ftructure. So that digeftion is
regulated by the other actions of the body. Warmth requiring action
fuitable to that warmth ; the body requiring nourifhment fuitable to that
action ; and the ftomach being called upon, obeys.

Spallanzani has made feveral attempts to prove what few will fubfcribe
to; that ftones in the gizzards of birds are of no ufe towards the break-


4 Vide page 100, > Bomare Dict. d’Hiftoire Nat. .
pare ing


156 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


ing or grinding down the grain ; and that they are picked up accidentally.
Thefe ftones have long been fuppofed to anfwer the purpofes of tritura-
tion: they have been confidered as an affiftance to the ftomach, in-the
manner of teeth, and of courfe neceffary for digeftion. Spallanzani com-
bats this opinion ; but as ftones are univerfally found in gizzards, he found
it neceflary to.account for the mode of their being conveyed there, and at-
tributes it*to chance. But we find that the gizzards which have moft
occafion for them, and are moft able to ufe them, are likewife beft fup-
plied with them: to corroborate which facts, may be added what we
obferved before, that in the larger gizzards are to be found the largeft
pebbles. Ina turkey, two hundred were found; in a goofe, a thoufand ;
which could not depend entirely upon chance. In trying whether the {tones
were of fervice, Spallanzani put tubes, needles, and Jancets, in gizzards in
which there were but very few ftones, and found them broken; but in this
xperiment they had been forty-eight hours in the gizzards; whereas in
the former experiments with the fame kind of tubes, thirty-fix hours was
the longeft time ; in another eighteen hours ; and in another the breaking —
of thofe fubftances was begun in lefs than two hours ; therefore the ex-
periments were not perfeétly fair, as the times were not equal. “What he
thinks the moft conclufive, is where he had taken care there fhould be no
{tones, yet the hard indigeftible fubftances were acted upon much in the
fame way as when there were ftones ; but in this experiment he does not
give the time, which is very accurately {tated in moft of the others.

He found that the inner furface of the ftomach was not hurt by fuch
fubftances. Indeed it is fcarcely poffible for the inner coat of the ftomach
of a fowl to be pierced by fharp pointed fubftances ; its quantity of mo-
tion being fo inconfiderable, as hardly to make a body pafs through its
inner coat. But the principal reafon is, that this motion being lateral,
it does not prefs perpendicularly to its axis, but is one furface fliding
in a contrary direction to another; and this not in a ftraight, but in a
circular direction, as will be explained hereafter.

In’ confidering the ftrength of the gizzard, and its probable effects
when compared with the human ftomach, it muft appear that the giz-
zard is in itlelf very fit for trituration ; we are not however to conclude


that


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION, 157


that ftones are entirely ufelefs; for if we compare the ftrength of the
mutceles of the jaws of animals who mafticate their food,- with thofe of birds
who de not, we fhall fay that the parts are well calculated for the purpofe
of maftication, yet we are not from thence to infer that the teeth in fuch jaws -
_ are ufelefs, even although we have proof that the gums do the bufinefs when
the teeth are gone. If {tones are of ufe, which we may reafonably conclude
they are, birds have an advantage over animals having teeth, fo far as ftones
are always to be found, while the teeth are not renewed: he concludes,
«« That we have at length a decifion of the famous queftion concerning
the ufe of thefe pebbles, fo long agitated by authors; it appearing that
they are not at all neceflary for the trituration of the firmeft food, &c.” but
fays, <‘ He will, however, not deny that when put in motion by the gaftric
mufcles, they are capable of producing fome effects on the contents of
the ftomach.” Now if we conftantly find in an organ fubftances which
can only be fubfervient to the functions of that organ, fhould we deny
them that ufe, although the part can do its office without them ?

To account for pebbles being found in the gizzards of birds, he fup-
pofes them picked up by chance, or by their not diftinguifhing between
food and dtones. It appears fingular, that only thofe which have giz-
zards fhould be fo ftupid: he owns, that Redi and himfelf found that
birds died of hunger, without having picked up more {tones than ufual,
which we might fuppofe would not have been the cafe if they had no
choice; nor can ftones be confounded with the grain on which thefe birds
feed.

The ftones aflift in grinding down the grain, and by feparating its parts
allow the gaftric juice to come more readily in contact with it; they alfo
rub off the digefted furface, by which means the remainder is fooner brought
into contact wath the gaftric juice. |

It has been mentioned, that the motion of the gizzard is hardly a
fervable, and cannot be felt by the hand; but for the purpofe of tritura-
tion that is not neceflary; for its cavity is very {mall, and adapted to
its contents, which it muft always be, or it cannot poflibly grind; and
therefore they require but little motion to affect them. A {welling and
collapfing, like the motion of the heart, would have no effect. ‘The ex-

Ae? tent


158 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


tent of motion in grind-ftones need not be the tenth of an inch, if their
motion is alternate and in contrary directions. But although the mo-
tion of the gizzard is hardly vifible, yet we may be made very fenfible of
its action by putting the ear to the fides of a fowl while it is grinding its
food, when we can hear the {tones moving upon one another.

It may be remarked, that the motion of the whole inteftinal canal,
from the fauces to the anus, is naturally fo flow, as not to be excited into
quick motion. The food paffes flowly along the cefophagus ; and even
in that of a man, fluids which might be expected to act by their own
gravity, defcend but flowly. I imagine, however, we may be certain
that the efophagus has always a regular contraction ; and that the lower
parts muft. relax in progreffion, as it contraéts above; fo that no pofi-
tion of the body makes any difference in this action.

Upon expofing the ftomach in living animals, we do not find it much
agitated or affected ; not even by handling or being irritated. The fame
thing may be obferved in the whole tract of inteftines ; and we find that:
when the feces are expelled by the action of the gut alone, that this ex-
pulfion is flow; the ftomach and rectum, however, can be emptied at
once; but this is done by the abdominal and other mufcles. ~We know
that the action of vomiting is performed entirely by the diaphragm and ab-
dominal mufcles ; and we know by the fame action the contents of the
rectum can be expelled.

We need not feek for another power to empty the ftomach in vomiting,
thefe mufcles being often capable of forcing the bowels themfelves out
of the abdomen, producing a rupture. It is not neceflary the ftomach
itfelf fhould act violently to produce an evacuation of its contents ; nor
is it even neceffary it fhould at at all. Since the lungs do not aé& in
the leaft of themfelves, to throw up any extraneous matter; and a cough
to the lungs is fimilar to a vomit to the ftomach. The mufcles of ref-
piration are the active parts in emptying the lungs, and ad both natu-
rally and preternaturally. The mufcles of the thorax and abdomen do
not act naturally on the contents of the abdomen, but often act preter-
naturally, producing an evacuation from its vifcera.


There


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 159


There is treafon to believe that the natural motion in all ftomachs is ree
gular. What makes me of this opinion, is that appearance which takes
place in the ftomach of animals who are covered with hair, and who
lick their own bodies ; and of fuch as feed on whole animals, who are
likewife covered with hair. In the calf, for inftance, who licks his {kin
with his tongue, and {wallows whatever is attached to the rough furface
of that organ, balls of hair are often found in the cavity of the fto-
mach; on examining their furface, the hairs in each hemifphere feem to
arife from a centre, and to have the fame direction, which is circular,
and correfponding to what would appear to be the axis of this motion,
refembling what we fee in different parts of the fkin of animals whofe
hair take different turns. This regularity in the direction of the hair, in
fuch balls, could not be produced if there was not a regular motion in
the ftomach. ‘This motion is alfo proved in the dog; for I have feen a
ball of this kind, that had been thrown up from a dog’s {ftomach, where
the fame regularity in the turns of the hair was very evident and com-
pleat. The fame motion feems alfo to take place in the bird kind: in
the cuckoo, for inftance, which in certain feafons lives on caterpillars,
fome of whom have hairs of a confiderable length on their bodies, the
ends of thefe are found fticking in the inner horny coat of the ftomach or
gizzard, while the hairs themfelves are laid flat on its furface ; not in
every direction, which would be the cafe if there was. no regular motion,
but all one way, arifing from a central point placed in the middle of the
horny part; and this appearance on the furface of both fides of the giz-
zard correfponding. ‘Thefe two facts prove, in my opinion, a regular and
circular motion taking place in the gizzard and membranous ftomach ;
and therefore, moft probably, fomething fimilar is carried on. in all the
various kinds of tomachs. Indeed this motion in the ftomach is fo con-
fiderable, than when there is no horny defence, we find the coats of the
ftomach fometimes pierced by hard pointed bodies. Thus the cows who
feed on the grafs of bleaching grounds have their ftomachs, efpecially
the fecond, ftuck full of pins; and fifth who prey upon, and {wallow
other fifh entire, often have their ftomachs pierced by the bones.

| Spallanzant


160 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


Spallanzani calls the inner coat, cartilaginous ; whereas, in fact, it is
a horny fubftance, forming an inner cuticle, but differing in fome refpects
from the common cuticle. ‘This horny fubftance not only differs in ftruc-
ture from the common cuticle, but in its attachment, from both cuticle,
nails, and hoofs. The cutis, where it is covered by fuch fubftances, has @
vaft number of villi on its furface, which pafs into correfponding perforations
in the cuticle, by which ftruure of parts, when the cuticle, nails, or hoofs
are feparated, their inner furface appears to be full of fmall perforations ;
and the cutis from which they have been removed is villous ; and thefe villi
are more numerous in fome parts than in others, where the fenfe of touch
is required to be delicate or acute., But the inner lining of the gizzard is
juft the reverfe; that furface of the horny fubftance which is in contact
with the gizzard being villous ; and when feparated, the inner furface of
the gizzard appears perforated. Thefe villi are the laft formed parts of
Shis horny fubftance, or are the fibres of which the horny coat is com-
pofed. Itis probable, that this horny fubftance takes the form of villi
that it may be more firmly connected with the inner furface of the
ftomach ; there being no occafion for acute fenfation in the ftomach.

We may remark here, that the experiments made on the digeftion of
ruminating animals have been deficient, which arifes from this procefs in.
them being more complicated than in the ftomachs of other animals ;
requiring attention to be paid to certain circumftances, which cannot
take place in ftomachs of only one cavity. 3

The circumftance mentioned by Spallanzani, of the ruminating ani-
mals voiding the tubes, fhows that they are not careful the whole food
fhould be returned into the mouth to be chewed a fecond time ; for if
they were, the tubes would certainly come up likewife, and would as
certainly be thrown out of their mouths as improper to be chewed,
which very often happened. But it was hardly neceflary to make expe-
riments to afcertain, whether ruminating animals digefted meat, when
we know that in fome cold countries, the cattle are fed on dried fith;
and moft animals eat their own fecondines: indeed the circumftance of
animals living upon both animal and vegetable food might have taught
us, that the mode of digefting both (whatever it is) was the fame;


therefore


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 161


therefore it could only be necefiary to difcover that mode; except we
abfurdly conceive, that two different modes might take place in the fame
ftomach at the fame time.

Spallanzani gives the opinion of authors refpecting digeftion; and fo
anxious is he to combat the idea of its being fermentation, that he
will hardly allow that fermentation ever takes place in the ftomach.
That fermentation can go on in the ftomach, there is no doubt; but
when this happens it arifes from the powers of digeftion being defec-
tive. It is often found that milk, vegetables of all kinds, wine, and
whatever has fugar in its compofition, become much fooner four in
fome ftomachs, than they would, if left to undergo a {pontaneous
change out of the body: and even fpirits, in certain {tomachs, almoft
immediately degenerate into a very ftrong acid. I am inclined to fuppofe,
that it is the fugar which is converted into {pirit, and the {pirit into
acid ; confequently a glafs of brandy, from being much ftronger, becaufe
lefs diluted, moft probably contains as much matter, likely to become acid,
as half a pint of wine. In other fubftances, befides thofe mentioned
above, the fermentative procefs (unlefs prevented by that of . digeftion)
appears to begin fooner in the {tomach, than out of the body. All oily
fubftances, particularly butter, very foon become rancid after being
taken into the ftomach ; and this rancidity is the effect of the firft pro-
cefs of the fermentation of oil. Mr. Sieffert has been able to reftore
rancid oils to their original fweetnefs, by adding to them their due quan-
tity of fixed air*; the lofs of which I confider as the firft procefs in this
fermentation, fimilar to what happens in the fermentation of animal and
vegetable fubftances. ,

Animal food does not fo readily ferment in the ftomach, when com-
bined with vegetables, as when it is not ; for the vegetables running more
quickly into fermentation, preferve the meat from putrefaction. Put a
piece of meat and fome fugar,-or bread, into water, and let them ftand in
a warm place, the bread and fugar will begin to ferment, the water will
become four, and the meat be preferved: but the acid becoming weaker,


@ Phyfical and chymical Effays by Sir Tobern Bergman.


162 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


as the fermentation advances towards the putrefactive, the meat at laft
begins to acquire the fame putrid difpofition. Of this Sir John Pringle
was not aware in making his experiments on this fubject. Yet this lait
part of the procefs cannot, I think, take place in the ftomach; for a
fucceffion of acids will be formed, by which the meat will be preferved
{weet till it is digefted: the formation of this acid in the ftomach, moft
probably, not preventing the digeftion of thofe fubftances which are in-
capable of being rendered acid. |

Bread allowed to remain in the ftomach of a dog for eight hours, is
fo much changed, that it will not run into the vinous fermentation ; but
when taken out and kept in a warm place, becomes putrid: its putre-
faction, however, is not fo quick as a folution of meat that has been in
the ftomach for the fame length of time. Similar effects are produced
when milk and bread are the food adminiftered; and probably the
gaftric juice, when in fufficient quantity, will always prevent the vinous
fermentation.

Spallanzani’s next trials were to determine, whether the gaftric juice
had the power of recovering meat already putrid ; a fact which might have
been proved by one experiment. For if very putrid meat is given to a
dog, and the dog killed after fome time, the meat will be found fweet,
and all putrefaction at an end. Therefore his allowing frefh meat to
continue a longer or fhorter time in the ftomach was immaterial, as it
could not betes putrid.

It appears from the above facts, that the ftomach has not fo much »
power in preventing the acetous fermentation in vegetables, as in cor-
recting the putrefactive difpofition in animal fubftances. For although
this cannot be certainly known in thofe who eat both animal and vege-
table food, yet it does not appear that the putrefaction of animal fub-
{tances (where nothing elfe is eaten) takes place fo quickly in the ftomach,
as the change which is produced in vegetables; the acetous difpofition
is therefore either ftronger than the putrefactive, or it more readily takes
place.

It may be admitted as an axiom, that two proceffes cannot go on at
the fame time, in the fame part, of any fubflance; therefore, neither ve-

getable


‘ere


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. | 6


getable nor animal fubftances can undergo their fpontaneous changes,
while digeftion is going on in them; a procefs fuperior in power to
that of fermentation. But if the digeftive power is not perfect, then
the vinous and acetous fermentation will take place in the vegetable,
and the putrefactive in the food of thofe animals which live wholly on


_ fleth. The gaftric juice therefore preferves vegetables from: running into


fermentation, and animal fubftances from putrefaction; not from any
antifeptic quality in the juice, but, by making them go through another
procefs, prevents the fpontaneous change from taking place. In moft
ftomachs there is an acid, even although the animal has lived upon meat
for many weeks; this, however, is not always the cafe, therefore we
muft fuppofe it is only formed occafionally. Whether the ftomach has
a power of immediately fecreting this acid, or firft fecretes a fugar which
afterwards becomes acid, is not eafily afcertained : but I fhould be inclin-
ed to fuppofe, from analogy, the laft to be the cafe; for animals in health
feem to have the power of fecreting fugar, as we find in the milk, and
fometimes in the urine, from difeafe. The acid prevails fometimes to
fo great a degree, as to become a difeafe, attended with very difagreeable
fymptoms, the ftomach converting all fubftances which have a tendency ta
become acid, into that form: the fugar of vegetables, and in fome ftomachs
even vinous {fpirits, turning deni into acid. ‘To afcertain whether
there is an acid naturally in the ftomach, it will be proper to examine
the contents before the birth, when the digeftive organs are perfect, and


when no acid can have been produced by difeafe, or any thing that has


been fwallowed. In the flink calf, near the full time, there is no acid
found in the ftomach; although the contents have the fame coagulating
powers with thofe of animals who have fucked.

As we find ftomavchs poflefled of a power of diffolving the whole fub-
ftance of a bone, if is reafonable to fuppofe that its earth is deftroyed by
the acid in the ftomach.

The ftomach appears not only to be capable of generating an acid, but
alfo to have the power of producing air ; but the laft effect, I believe, arifes
from difeafe in that vifcus. It may be difficult to account for the forma-
tion of this air; andas the ftomach is a refervoir for fubftances difpofed to

ns ferment


164 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


ferment, it might be fuppofed to arife from the food going inte that pro-
cefs: but this, in my opinion, will not account for the vaft quantity of
air frequently thrown up from fome ftomachs, even where food has not.
been {wallowed for a confiderable time, and where digeftion appeared to
have been compleated ; which we muft conclude to have been the cafe,
from the food not having difagreed with either {tomach or bowels, and from
the ftools being good. When the gout falls on the ftomach, the quan-
tity of air thrown up is often immenfe. The fame thing may be obferved
in fome cafes which are commonly called nervous ; yet the procefs of
digeftion will not account for this formation of air, as no air is to be
found* in healthy ftomachs; neither is it to be accounted for from a
defect in digeftion, as that would probably be produétive of worfe con-
fequences. _ |

I am inclined to believe that the ftomach has a power of forming air or
letting it loofe from the blood, as a kind of fecretion: we can give no
abfolute proof of this taking place in the {tomach, as it may in all cafes
be referred to a defect in digeftion: but we have inftances of air being found
in other cavities, where no fecondary caufe can be affigned. Ihave been —
informed of air being detected in the uterus or vagina, without the perfons
themfelves knowing any thing of it, except by not having at the time of its
pafling the fame power to prevent its efcape, as when it is in the rectum;
from which circumftance they were always alarmed leaft it might make
a noife in its paflage. This fact being fo extraordinary, rendered me
fomewhat incredulous ; but made me more inquifitive, with the hope of
being enabled to afcertain and account for it; and thofe of whom I have
been led to inquire, have always made the natural diftinction, between air
pafling from the vagina, and by the anus; that from the anus they feel
and can retain ; but that in the vagina they cannot; nor are they fenfible
of it till it paffes. A woman, whom I attended with the late Sir John
Pringle, informed us of this fact; but mentioned it only as a difagreeable
thing. I was anxious to determine, if there were any communication


* In all my experiments on digeftion, in dogs, I have never been able to dete& any air
in the cavity of the ftomach.
between


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. | 165


between the vagina and rectum, and was allowed to examine, but dif
covered nothing uncommon in the ftructure of thefe parts. She’ died
fome time after ; and being permitted to open the body, I found no dif-
eafe either in the vagina or uterus. Since that time I have taken op-
portunities of inquiring of a number of women, concerning this cir-
cumftance, and by three or four have been informed exadtly of the fame
fa&, with all the circumftances abovementioned: how far they are to be
relied upon I will not pretend to determine. I have likewife found air in
the cellular membrane, in fome gun-fhot wounds that had pafled fome
way under the fkin, without being able to account for its being there by
any mechanical effect of the ball.

That air, is either formed from the blood, or let loofe by fome ation of
the veflels both naturally and from difeafe, is an undeniable fa@. We
find air formed in fome fifhes to anfwer natural purpofes; for in thofe
fifhes whofe air-bladders do not communicate externally (many of which
there are) we muft fuppofe it to have been formed there. We alfo find
it in animals after death; and I havea piece of inteftine of a hog which
has a number of air-bladders upon it*. I have often feen fuch veficles
on the edges of the lungs; but thefe may be fuppofed to have been
kind of aneurifmal air-cells filled from the trachea, which may poffibly
be the cafe; but they are circumfcribed and impervious, fo that in the
{tate we find them, they have no communication with the external air. In
one inftance I have difcovered air in an abfcefs, which could not have
been received from the external air; nor could it have arifen from putre-
faction ; the cafe is as follow:

A lady, about forty years of age, had been afflicted with complaints
in the bladder and parts connected with it. From the fymptoms, her
difeafe was fuppofed by fome to be the {tone ; but upon examination no
{tone was found. She had alfo an umbilical hernia, for which I had been
confulted. She grew gradually worfe; and from being a lufty became a -
thin woman. A {mall tumor appeared in the groin, and the {kin over it
became red, fimilar to an abfcefs when the matter is beginning to point


* Vide Plate.
a2 externally ;


1G Se OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.
externally ; but before her death this fubfided. A few days before the


died, I was defired to examine a fwelling on the lower and right-fide
of the belly, extending nearly from the navel to the fpine of the ilium
on the right-fide, and almoft of the fame width. It was a tenfe f{well-
ing, but evidently contained air, and could be made to found almoft
like a drum. It had come on within a very few weeks, and I felt my-
felf puzzled to account for it, there being clearly no connection. between
that tumor and the umbilical hernia. I was inclined to fuppofe it to
be a ventral hernia, containing the cezcum and part of the colon, filled
with air. But as fhe had ftools; as there were no fymptoms of a—
{trangulated gut, nor any uneafinefs in the bowels, as I could not make
the air recede, but felt it as if confined to that part, I own I could not
conjecture what the cafe really was.” The woman dying in a few days,
I was permitted to examine the body. That I might not interfere with the
tumor, or umbilical hernia, I made an opening into the abdomen on the
tight-fide of the linea alba; and on examining the cavity of the ab-
domen, found-every thing natural, except a {mall portion of the epiploon
adhering to the infide of the navel; but oppofite to the tumor, the
parietes of the abdomen were in a natural ftate. On preffing the
tumor by the hand, air was heard to make its efcape; but whether by
the vagina or anus was at firft doubtful. On examining with more at-
tention, it was difcovered to come from between the two labia. I now
opened the tumor externally, and let out the air, which was not in the |
leaft putrid, and was contained in a fac tolerably {mooth on its infide,
made up of compreffed cellular membrane, the abdominal. mufcles and
tendons forming the pofterior furface, which extended as low as the in-
ferior edge of Poupart’s ligament. "The contents of the abdomen were
tolerably found ; but when I infpected the vifcera contained in the pelvis,
they were found adhering to each other; the bladder to the body of the
uterus ; the broad ligaments and ovaria, to the uterus; and on exa-
mining thefe adhefions, I got into a cavity between the bladder, uterus,
and vagina, on the right-fide fomething like an abfcefs. From the right-
. fide of this cavity there was a canal afcending to the brim of the pelvis,
in the courfe of the round ligament, as far as to the going out of the iliac ©

| veffels,


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 167


veflels, which it feemed to accompany, and when it paffled from behind
Poupart’s ligament, communicated with the tumor abovementioned. I next
endeavoured to difcover if there were any communication. between the rec-
tum and the abfcefs, but could find none, the gut appearing to be quite
found. Having removed the whole contents of the pelvis, with the
canal leading to Poupart’s ligament, and the ligament itfelf, with fuch of
the abdominal mufcles as compofed part of the fac, I found both the
rectum and vagina perfectly found.. The uterus had.a polypus forming
on its infide; neither the rectum nor uterus had any connection with
the abfcefs ; but there was a {mall communication between the abfcefs
and the bladder; that portion of the bladder which made part of the
abfcefs being very much difeafed.

From this hiftory of the appearances of the tumor before death, and
the particular account I have given of the difleGtion, the reader may be
able to make his own obfervations, and draw his own conclufions relative
to the origin of the air. It certainly appeared to have been formed in
this bag ; and it was only towards the latter end of her life that it could
have made its efcape into the cavity of the bladder ; for it was not poffible
to fqueeze the air out of the tumor, when I firft faw her ; but juft before
death it became more flaccid. It could not be formed or let loofe in con-
fequence of putrefaction, for the air itfelf was free from any fmell ; and
although the cavity between the vagina and bladder had on its internal
furface the irregular ulcerated appearance of an abfcefs, yet that on the
abdomen had not, was tolerably fmooth, and had rather the appearance
of having been formed in confequence of fome foreign matter accumula-
ting there. ;

This circumftance, of an animal having the power of forming air, or
feparating it from the juices by a kind of fecretion, appears at firit view
to be fupported by the experiments of Dr. Ingen-houfz’*,

The Dr. obferved that, when we immerfe our bodies ‘‘ in a cold or
warm bath ;” or, ‘* By plunging the hand and arm even in cold water,”
that globules of air foon appear upon the fkin: and to be certain of the


4 Exp‘ upon Vegetables; proving their great Power of purifying the common Air, &c.
alr


168 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


air coming from the body, he took all the neceffary precautions to pre-
vent the external air being carried into the water along with the body,
which would certainly be a confequence, if the body or part were im-
merfed quickly, or when dried. But although his experiments feem to
prove this opinion, yet I imagine there is a circumftance the Dr. did
not attend to at the time, which renders them very fallacious; for he-
did not confider that water, commonly, contains a great deal of air ;
therefore the globules of air might as readily come from the water as
from the body ; this circumftance makes it neceflary to afcertain, by ex--
periment, from whence the air comes which is attached to the body when
immerfed in water.

Water takes up air in proportion to its coldnefs, until it lofes the pro-
perty of water and becomes folid: upon this principle we may account
for globules of air being found attached to the {kin when a part of the
body is immerfed in water colder than itfelf; for when we immerfe the
whole body we increafe the heat of the water, efpecially that next to the
fkin ; and if we immerfe only a part, as an arm, it being commonly in
a fmaller quantity of water, the water immediately furrounding it is alfo
warmed, As a proof that, it is the air from the water, and not from
the furface of the body*, it matters not what the fubftance is that is im-
moerfed, if it is but warmer than the water ; for a piece of iron heated to
about 150°, immerfed in water about 70°, will warm the water in con-
tact with it fo as to make it part with its air. This effect of heat is


= “ Count de Milly, in the Berlin Tranfadtions for the year 1777, publifhed experiments
to fhow that there is an excretion of air; or, as it is termed, ‘ an aerial tranfpiration,’ from
the whole furface of the human body during bathing in warm water: but Dr. Pearfon found,

on repeating thefe experiments, that there was no appearance of aerial bubbles on the furface
_ of the cuticle during bathing in warm water that had been previoufly boiled, fo as to expel
the air ufually mixed and united to river, and {pring-water. During bathing in the bath of
Buxton, the human body, after being immerfed, and kept at reft in it for fome time, is
covered with air-like bubbles ; but thefe bubbles appear, in the fame manner, on any folid
body whatever that may be placed in it. It is therefore fuppofed that the attraction to the
human body of the air, commonly fufpended in water, efpecially when heated to the tempera~
ture of a warm-water bath, has been miftaken for an excretion of air from the cuticle.”


further


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 169


further proved, by making an experiment, with only this difference, that
the iron is to be ten degrees colder than the water; in this cafe little
or no air will be feparated, and of courfe no bubbles be obferved. The
bubbles of air do not appear to arife entirely from the degree of warmth
of the water, but alfo in fome meafure from a folid body being immerfed
in it, which appears to have a power of attracting the air, whofe affinity
to the water is now weakened by heat ; for fmply heating the water to
the fame degree will not feparate the air, as we find, by experiment, that
no bubbles are produced : and this power of attracting the air appears, in
fome meafure, to depend upon the folidity of the body immerfed ; at leaft,
bodies have a greater number of bubbles in proportion to their folidity :
for upon making comparative experiments between iron, {tone, wood,
and cork, the air feparated from the water upon the furface of the iron
and {tone is in confiderable quantity; that upon the wood very fall,
and fcarcely any at all upon the cork.

It is perhaps impoffible to determine, with abfolute certainty, the feat
of digeftion ; but it is more than probable it is principally in the ftomach:
this, however, will not be equally the cafe in all animals. We may
venture to affirm that, in the long contracted cefophagus of the quad-
ruped, digeftion does not take place; and that the fecretion of this
part is a flimy mucus, poflefled of no power fimilar to: that of the
gaftric juice, being only intended to promote the eafy paflage of the
food; while the lower end of the cefophagus in birds is exceedingly
glandular, fecretes the principal part of the gaftric juice, and is a
fubftitute for the deficiency of the fecretion in the ftomach of this
clafs of animals, which in fome is lined with a horny fubftance, and in
others with a cuticle. But even in birds, the feat of digeftion is chiefly
in the ftomach ; the juice fecreted in the lower part of the cefophagus be-
ing conveyed into that cavity. The mucus fecreted by the other parts of
the cefophagus, fuch as the crop in thofe who have one, has no fuch
power. It is poflible, however, that digeftion may go on in the lower
part of the cefophagus ; for if any digeftible fubftance fhould be retained
in it, as may happen in many of thofe who receive whole animals into
the ftomach, as the gull and heron, who {wallow fnakes and fifh entire,
the


179 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION,


the tails of which may remain in the cefophagus till the head is digefted ;
in fuch a cafe the tail itfelf may likewife be ated upon. As a further
proof that digeftion is carried on principally in the ftomach, let us obferve
what happens to the yolk of an egg in the bird newly hatched. The
yolk is not in the leaft confumed in the time of incubation ; it appears
to be referved for the nourifhment of the chick, between the time of

hatching, and its either being fupplied with food by its parents, or being |
able to procure it for itfelf; for we find, that although the yolk pafies
into the gut at fome diftance from the ftomach, yet it is carried up to
the ftomach to be digefted; and I have even feen it in the crop, being re-
tained there till wanted. ;

In thofe animals whofe ftomach confifts of feveral cavities, the precife
place where digeftion is carried on, has not been afcertained. I think, how-
ever, it may es fet down as a fact, that digeftion goes on in the fourth cavity.
This is beft proved by feeding the iirc with a fubftance that does not
require any kind of ertia elon for digeftion, fuch as milk. Let a
calf be killed about half an hour after it has fucked its mother, we fhall
find the whole milk, in the fourth cavity, firmly coagulated, and formed
into a ball; while the firft, fecond, and third cavities, contain only fuch
food as requires maftication, and what other preparation is neceffary to fit
it for digeftion; fuch animals have the power of conveying the food from
the cefophagus, either to the firft or fourth cavity, according to the na-
ture of the food; and for this purpofe there is a groove leading directly
from the cefophagus to the fourth flomach, which I fuppofe can be con-
verted into a canal when wanted.

It is probable that digeftion is likewife carried on in the duodenum, ef-
pecially in its upper part; which may arife from two caufes; one, the
inteftine moft probably fecreting the fame juice with the fotinane 7 ake
other, fome of the gaftric juice, and alfo part of the food, having pafled
into the inteftine before it had been converted into chyle.

Although the ftomach is the feat of digeftion, it is not folely appt
ated to that purpofe: in many animals it is not to be confidered as only
a digefting bag or bags, but in part as a refervoir for food. This is moft
remarkable in the ruminating animals, where the firft tomach or bag is

merely


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 171


merely a refervoir, and in this refpect is analogous toa crop. It is the -
fame in the porpus, and, I believe, in moft animals of this clafs : although
it cannot be fuppofed that they return the food, as they have not the power


to mafticate. In fome animals, who do not ruminate, there is not the


fame neceflity for diftinét pouches; the ftomach therefore confifts either
of one bag, fingly ; or with appendages, as in the pecari. But the whole
of this bag is not endowed with the property of fecreting the gaftric juice,
there being a part whofe ftrudture is very different from that appropriated
to digeftion, which is covered by a cuticle, as in the firft, fecond, and
third ftomach of the ruminating animals, and in the firft ftomach of the
porpus. The pecari, the common hog, and the rat, are inftances of
this. This circumftance takes place, in a fmaller degree, in the horfe.’
This increafe of the cavity of the ftomach, and its having appendages,
beyond what is neceffary for digeftion alone, is peculiar to thofe animals
who take in more food than what is immediately wanted, or which re-
quires a certain degree of preparation prior to digeftion. ‘The crop in the
eagle is of the firft kind; and the crop in the gallinaceous fowls, and
the firft ftomach in the ruminating animals and porpus, is of the fecond.
It is the difpofition of fuch animals to fill thefe cavities, and the quan-
tity they contain, makes them feldomer require being filled ; it is prob-
ably the fenfation produced from this fulnefs which gives fatisfaction to
the animal, and takes off-the further defire for food, fimilar to what hap-
pens from filling the ftomach itfelf of other animals, who having no fuch
provifion, are longer and oftener employed in purfuit of food.

I fhould be apt to fuppofe the power of the gaftric juice to coagulate
milk and fome other animal mucilages*, is a teft of the ftomach being the


. feat of digeftion ; for although milk may be coagulated by other fubftances,
yet when found in that ftate in the ftomach, it is probably for the purpofe |


of digeftion ; as milk, and many other natural fubftances, require being co-


* Milk is the fubftance commonly known to be coagulated by the gaftric juice : but I find
that it has alfo the fame power over the white of an egg. Give to a dog fome raw egg, and
kill him half an hour after he has fwallowed it, the egg will be found coagulated in his
f{tomach, the fame as if boiled ; the cryftalline humour, in the ftomachs of fifhes, is likewife
found coagulated as if boiled. |


Z agulated


r72 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


agulated before they can be digefted. I have found this coagulating power
in the ftomach of every animal which I have examined for that purpofe,
from the moft perfect down to reptiles; and thefe appendages which I
have confidered only as refervoirs preparatory to digeftion, as the. firft
ftomach in the ruminating animal, and the crop in birds, have no fuch
power. |

The gaftric juice is a fluid fomewhat tranfparent, and a little faltith o
brackifh to the tafte. Whether this faltifhnefs is effential, or only ac-
cidental, is not eafily determined. Indeed, there are very few of our
fecretions which have not fome fait in them; for it is found in the tears,
the faliva, the fecretion of the glans penis, of the glands of the urethra,
and in the firft and the laft milk fecreted in the udders of animals. 7H
_ I fhould not be inclined to fuppofe that there is any acid in the gaftric
juice as a component or effential part of it, although an acid is very com-
monly found, even when no vegetable matter has been introduced into
the ftomach*. The acid-is increafed in fome difeafes, and in others
the difpofition to form it may be deftroyed ; which may be the reafon
why, bya kind of inftintive principle, many girls are fond of eating
four fruit, and of drinking vinegar; while others, on the contrary, from
a different caufe, often eat chalk, lime, and other fubftances of that
kind: but the acid not being always found, it is not yet determined on
what occafions it is formed, or in what manner it is deftroyed.


* The only trial to which I ever put the gaftric juice, (to afcertain if it was acid) was
with the fyrup of violets ; and in many of the trials the colour of the mixture was changed to
red: but it is neceflary for the accuracy of the experiment, which is to determine this fact,
that the animal fhould not be fed upon vegetables for fome time before the trial is made, they
being liable to become in fome degree four ; therefore it is hardly fair to make the experi-
ment on the contents of the ftomach of animals who live upon vegetables. In many trials of
this kind, we may be deceived, and led to fuppofe an alkali. For certain animal fecretions
being of a yellow caft, when fuch are mixed with the fyrup of violets, the mixture is changed
toa green, The truth of the experiment may, however, be known by adding a little acid;
for if the green has been produced merely by a mechanical mixture, it will become imme-—
diately a fcarlet, by being then a mixture of red and yellow; but if the fecretion is not only
of a yellow colour, but of an alkaline nature, it will alfo continue green ; and by adding a
little more acid than what faturates the alkali, the colour will then become that of orange.


The


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. | 173°


The procefs of digeftion differs from every other natural operation in
-the change of bodies. It is by no means fermentation, though it may
fomewhat refemble it. For fermentation is a fpontaneous procefs, and
is that natural fucceflion of changes by which vegetable and animal
matter is reduced to earth ; Acifoie muft be widely different from dige{~
tion, which converts both animal and vegetable fubftances into ie
in the formation of which there cannot be a decompofition, fimilar to
fermentation.

Digeftion is very different from chymical folution, which is only an
union of bodies by elective attraction, not a real change of the fubftances
themfelves, but of their properties. But digeftion is an affimilating
procefs, and in this refpect is fomewhat fimilar in its action to morbid
poifons. It is a fpecies of generation, two fubftances making a third ;
but the curious-circumftance is its converting both vegetable and animal
_ matter into the fame kind of fubftance or compound, which no chymi-
cal procefs can effect. The chyle is compounded of the gaftric juice,
and digeftible fubftances when perfectly converted ; and it is probable that
the quantity of gaftric juice is nearly equal to that part of the food that
is really converted into chyle;. if fo, it demonftrates the neceflity of
a very quick fecretion, to fupply a quantity fo very confiderable ; but it
is not loft to the conftitution.

The progrefs of the converfion of food into chyle, is often well feen in
the ftomach of animals at different times after feeding, or even in the
fame meal. Fithes are good fubjects on which to make obfervations for
this purpofe, as they {wallow their food whole; that food is commonly
fifh, and often. too large to be completely admitted into the ftomach.
As they do not mafticate their food, it is not adapted to the cavity of the
ftomach ; and we therefore often find part of it lying in the cefophagus,
a circumftance from which the comparative progrefs of digeftion becomes
more obvious. ,

It may alfo be well obferved in the ftomach of a dog, in which the
whole that it contains has been {wallowed at the fame time. In the great
end the food will be but little altered ; towards the middle, more; and
towards the pylorus, will be fimilar to what is found in the duodenum,

Agia) From


bs)


174 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


From the ftructure of the ftomach in ruminating animals, they are
badly adapted to affift our inquiries on this fubject ; becaufe whatever is
fwallowed in a hard folid form, and unfit for digeftion, requiring to be
ruminated, as metalic balls, will often be thrown out when returned —
into the mouth to be mafticated; or it may lie a long time in the firft
ftomach without being either thrown up or pafied into the fourth, as I
have frequently feen ; therefore the chance of its getting into the fourth
ftomach in a proper time to fit it for the object of an experiment, being
very uncertain, no great light can be derived from trials on animals of
this clafs. —

Live or frefh vegetables, when taken into the ftomach, are firft killed,
-by which a flabbinefs in their texture is produced, as if boiled, and then
they begin to be acted upon by the gaftric juice.

Meat appears to undergo no change, as preparatory to digeftion, but
feems at once to fubmit to its union with the gaftric juice: for after it has
been acted upon, firft, it appears to lofe its texture ; then becomes cineri--
tious in colour ; next gelatinous; and laft, chyle. The firft change made
upon milk, and fome other fecretions, as the yolk and white of an egg,
is coagulation ; after which the gaftric juice begins to acquire a power
of union with them.

The firft change which is produced. on neni fubftances, out of the
body, when either expofed to heat, or becoming putrid, is fimilar to the
fecond of the three changes which takes place in digeftion, and is only
preparatory to the complete change, whether digeftion or putrefaction.

It appears from many experiments, that the digefted or animalized
part, when carried into the inteftine, is attracted by, or clings to its
villous coat as if entangled among the villi; while the excrementitious
part, fuch as bile, is found lying unconnected in the gut, .as if feparated
from the other.

The food of moft animals confifts either of vegetable or animal fub- —
{tances ; and vegetables feem intended to fupport one clafs, with a view
to its being the food of another. Although there are claffes of animals
intended to fubfift on each particular kind of food, yet they do not all


invariably keep to the fame kind in every ftage of life; many being nou-
rifhed


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 175


rifhed by animal food when young, that afterwards live on vegetables :
which circumftance will be more fully pect) when treating of the firft
food of pigeons.

All ftomachs do not equally digeft the fame fubftance, although it be
their natural food. The caterpillar digefts the exprefled juice, but not
- the fubftance ; while other animals are capable of diffolving the whole.
Some animals, as the common cattle, can feed on a variety of vegetables
although they may have a preference; but there are others that will
hardly eat more than of one kind: This is the cafe with infects in ge-~
neral, and the filk-worm will fcarcely touch any thing but mulberry-
leaves. I believe thofe that live upon animal food are not fo reftricted |
in their choice.

It is probable that, all. animal and vegetable fubftances are easily,
capable of being digefted, if equally foft in their texture ; but fome being
much firmer in that refpect, and others alfo united with indigenible mat-
ter, as the earth in bones, they more {trongly refift the powers of
the gaftric juice, therefore mattication, and trituration, become neceflary
to bring them to a fimilar confiftence. But fubftances may be rendered
too foft; for a fluid is difficult of digeftion: we may obferve that,
nature has given us very few fluids as articles of food; and to render
thofe few fitter for the action of the digeftive powers, a coagulating prin-
ciple is provided to give them fome degree of folidity*. It is not eafy to
affign a reafon for a fluid ftate being unfavorable to digeftion; more par-
ticularly as it feems effential to fermentation and chymical folution. The
_-necefiary degree of folidity is, I thould fuppofe, that of curd, or what is
produced by the coagulation of animal mucilages, as of the white of
an egg; but this is only fuppofition, founded on the idea that nature’s
general principles are right, all the correfponding parts being adapted to
one another, except when monftrous, either in form or action.

Matftication is the effect of a mechanical power, produced by parts par-
ticularly provided for that purpofe, which are of various kinds, fitted for


* The circumftance of the cryftalline humour, which is folid, being coagulated, prior to
its being digefted, renders it probable that all animal fubftances go through that procefs; and


that the lofs of texture, which they undergo, arifes from coagulation.
| that


176 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION,


that fort of food the animal is by nature intended to live upon; and may
be imitated with equal advantage by many other pieces of mechanifm,
The mafticating powers are of three kinds. The firft is that which
merely fits the fabn tance for deglutition, as in the lion, and many other
carnivorous animals ; and in the ruminating tribe renders the food fit to be —
fwallowed, to ‘undergo that preparation in the firft ftomach which‘is ne-
ceffary before it is further mafticated for digeftion. The fecond is, that
which not only fits the food for deglutition, but expofes it to the action.
of the gaftric juice, by breaking the fhells or hufks in which the nou-
_ rifhment is contained and defended from the powers of digeftion. And —
the third is, that which bruifes and divides the food by chewing, before
it is received into the ftomach, as happens to moft vegetables; which
maftication, although of confiderable fervice, is not apf necefiary.
It however Geeiies great faving in food. |
The hufk, of all the feeds ng plants, although a vooeeue fubftance, _
appears to be indigeftible in a natural ftate ; heiies this arifes from
the nature of the hufk-itfelf, or from its compacinefs, I am not quite
certain, but am inclined to fuppofe the laft; as we find the cocoa,
which is only a hufk, is digeftible when ground to a powder and well
boiled. We know likewife, that cuticle, horn, hair, and feathers, although
animal fubftances, are not affected, in the firft inftance, by the gaftric
juice ; yet if reduced in Papin’s digeftor to a jelly, that jelly can be acted
upon in the ftomach; we mutt therefore fuppofe that, a certain natural —
degree of folidity in animal and vegetable fubftances renders them indi-
geftible. "This compactnefs in the hufk feems to be intended to preferve,
while underground, the farinaceous part of the feed, in which the living
principle is placed, as the hufk has probably no other power of refifting
putrefaction but what arifes from its texture. Whatever may be the ufe
of the hufk, it muft be connected with the vegetative procefs of the plant.
The fame purpofe of prefervation is probably anfwered by the fhells of
all ova. Although hufks are not capable of being diffolved in the
gaftric juice, yet they allow of tranfudation, and the ined is in fome de-
gree affected by it, which is known by its {welling in the ftomach ; yet
it can only take up a certain proportion of it, but not fufficient to con-
vert


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 177


vert it into chyle, the gaftric juice having no power of aétion upon the
huiks themfelves. |

The effential oils of vegetables and animals are indigeftible ; but are
foluble either in the gaftric juice or chyle, by which means they become
medicinal, from their {timulating powers. he efleatial oil of vegetables,
but more particularly that of animals, would feem to pervade the very fub-
{tance of thofe animals whofe food contains much of this oil. Thus we
find fea-birds, whofe conftant food is fifth, tafte very ftrongly of fith ;
and thofe who live on that kind of food, only during certain times of the
year, as the wild duck, have that tafte only at fuch feafons. This fact is
~ fo well known, that it was hardly neceflary to put it to the teft of an
experiment ; yet I took two ducks, and fed one with barley, the other
with fprats, for about a month, and killed both at the iame time ; when
they were dreffed, the one fed wholly with fprats was hardly eatable, it
tafted fo ftrongly of fith.

Although bones are in part compofed of animal (ebteniee, and fo far
digeftible, yet they require ftronger powers of digeftion than common
meat, from the animal fubftance being guarded by the earth. Thus the
animal part of a bone is lefs readily foluble in an alkali than flefh, or
even the animal part when deprived of its earth by an acid; nor will a
bone fubmit to putrefaction fo readily as meat, being aialatded, by the cal-
carious earth ; therefore animals who live upon Lab and {wallow them
whole, as the heron, more eafily digeft bone than thofe who are not ac-
cuftomed to fwallow bones, as the crow and magpye, who ey
only pick the flefh.

The degree of eafe, or the contrary, with which aabitanies are digefted,
will not only arife from a difference in folidity, but from a difference in
the ftructure of the parts themfelves. Brain, liver, mufcle, and tendon,
are digeftible in the order here put down.

There is not only a difference in the degree of readinefs with which
the various kinds of natural food are digefted ; but thefe can alfo be made
to undergo changes by art, that render them ftill more eafy of digeftion.
For it appears that both boiled and. roafted, and even putrid, meat is
eafier of digeftion than raw ; at leaft I have found it fo in my experi-

ments.


178 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


ments. This may be fuppofed to arife in the two firft, from their juices be-
ing coagulated ; but will not hold good with regard to the putrid. A raw
egg is thought more eafy of digeftion than an egg hard boiled, although
the raw one muft be coagulated-in the ftomach before it can be digefted.
It may be obferved, that what is eafy of digeftion in one ftomach will not —
be fo in another; in which laft cafe the ftomachs, I believe, are not
healthy.

The whole of the food in many animals appears not to be digefted,
the fubftance in part being found in the feces; for if a dog is fed .
with tallow, his excrements will confit of a Givens firm unctuous
ftbftance ; fo that the cil is only digefted in part. This circumftance of
fome part of the food, though digeftible, not being a¢ted upon by the
gaftric juice, may arife from two caufes ; firft, many parts of vegetables
being too firm-in texture to be digefted in the fame time with the other.
food, are therefore carried along in a ctude ftate, together with the chyle,
into the duodenum ; and fecondly, from the ftomach at the time being
fo much difordered as to-digeft imperfectly. We know that food may
lie a confiderable time in the ftomach, when difeafed, without being
digefted. Food has been retained in the ftomach twenty-four hours, and
thrown up without being in the leaft altered; the animal at the time
not requiring nourifhment, as is the cafe with thofe who go to reft in the
‘winter.

The powers of digeflion may, in fome inftances, be afeonatnea by the
appearance of the excrement, in which if the food appear not to be much
altered, we may conclude, that this power has had little or no influence
on it. Thus the excrement of a flea, that has lived on blood, is nearly to
appearance pure blood, not having even loft its colour. |

Animals eat in proportion to the quantity of nourifhment contained in —
the food, of which the ftomach, from inftinét, appears to be fenfible;
and alfo in proportion to the powers of converting what they eat into
chyle. A catérpillar, perhaps, eats more in proportion to its fize than
any other animal that lives on the fame kind of food; not having the
power of diffolving the ea only of extraCting a juice or infufion

from


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 179


from it; for the bit of leaf comes away entire, being coiled up and harden-
ed; but by being put into water unfolds like tea.

There are few animals that do not eat animal food in fome form or
other ; while there are many who do not eat vegetables at all; and
therefore the difhculty to make the herbivorous eat meat, is not fo great,
as to make the carnivorous eat vegetables.. Where there is an in-
ftinctive principle in an.animal, directing it either to the one fpecies of
food or the other, the animal will certainly die, rather than break
through that natural law, but may be made to violate every natural
principle by artificial means. ‘That the hawk tribe can be made to
feed upon bread, I have known thefe thirty years; for to a tame kite
I firft gave fat, which it eat very readily ; then tallow and butter ; and
afterwards {mall balls of bread rolled in fat or butter, and by decreaf-
ing the fat gradually, it at laft eat bread alone, and feemed to thrive
as well as when fed with meat. This, however, produced a difference in
the confiftence of the excrements; when it eat meat they were thin,
and it had the power of throwing them to fome diftance ; but when it
eat bread, they became firmer in texture, and dropped like the excre-
ment of a common fowl. Spallanzani attempted, in vain, to make an
eagle eat bread by itfelf ; but by enclofing the bread in meat, fo as to
deceive the eagle, the bread was f{wallowed, and digefted in the ftomach.

The excrements of animals we may fuppofe to be that part of the com-
mon food which is indigeftible ; and as food is either animal or vegetable,
each of which is adapted to diftin@ claffes of animals, it is natural to
believe that the excrementitious part of each will be different; and where
the animal feeds upon both, that the excrement will be of a mixed na-
ture; although this appears probable, it is only true in fome degree ;
for other circumftances muft be attended to, as. the mode of digeftion,
and whether the animal has a cecum and colon, with their peculiar
form, all which varieties have a connection with the changes the food
undergoes. Vegetable food produces more excrement than animal, and
this according to the kind or parts of vegetables. The woody parts and
hutks, which are indigeftible, produce the moft; the true farinaceous
Et the leaft; why there fhould be any at all from the farinaceous, and

Aa animal


a6 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


animal fubftance, except what had eluded the aétion of the digeftive or-
gans, is not eafily accounted for.

All feces have a tendency to putrefaction, but leaft in thofe animals -
who feed on vegetables. Indeed, the excrement from vegetable food
alone, could hardly ever become putrid if it was not mixed with the —
mucus of the inteftines ; and would even then be kept {weet by the ten-
dency which undigefted vegetables have to take on the vinous and acetous
fermentation. _ But the faeces of thofe which live entirely on animal food,
in general very foon become putrid; and indeed often before they are
voided : however, fuch animals have either no cecum or colon; or if
they have, it is very fhort, fo that the excrement is not long retained,
therefore has lefs time to become putrid. When the feces {tagnate fo as
to take on either the vinous or putrefactive fermentation, air is let loofe,
which will be according to the nature of the fermentation ; moft proba-
bly, from the vegetable it will be fixed, and from the animal, inflammable
air. ‘

The feces of moft animals are tinged by the bile, which in fome
gives them a yellowifh green colour; in the bird they are generally
green, but fometimes white, from being mixed with the urine. The
feces of the maggot appear to be loaded with bile; for befides being
yellow, they are extremely bitter, which is known by eating the kernel
of a nut that has a maggot in it. Some kinds of food, when not wholly
digefted, give a tinge to the feces, as grafs to the excrement of cows.

Thofe animals which feed upon vegetables alone, commonly have their
feeces fomewhat folid ; but this will vary according to the ftate of the ve-
getable, whether green or dried; therefore the kind of faeces would feem to
depend on the nature of the indigeftible part of the food, and muft vary
according to the digeftive powers in different animals: an animal that
feeds upon grafs, has the feeces much fofter than the fame animal when
fed on the fame kind of grafs made into hay, the feces of the herbivorous
animals being fofter in the fummer than the winter: but green vege-
table food does not produce foft feces in all animals ; for the caterpillar,
which lives upon the leaves of vegetables, has its faces almoft dry ;- and
we find in fome ruminating animals, as fheep, that the difference in the

faeces


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION, 181


feces, during fummer and winter, is inconfiderable. Moft quadrupeds,
and birds, that live principally upon vegetables, have their ceca large,
and the colon long, as many of the ruminating animals. Some have
the colon both long and large, as the horfe, and the rat tribe; which
circumftance has confiderable effects on the feces, allowing them to be-
come dry: in a few of the ruminating animals, and of the rat kind, they
are formed into {mall portions.

The feces of quadrupeds, that live upon animal food, are mana only
foft, and in birds, are fluid; but in fuch as live on both animals and vege-
tables, they are in A a mixt nature, and will be more or lefs
foft, according to the food. If a dog is fed entirely on animal fubftance,
its feces will be foft; if wholly on vegetable, as bread, they will be-
come fo hard as to be expelled with difficulty. |

Spallanzani made fome experiments, to prove that digettion i ig carried
on after death ; but they are not fo conduéted as to peel oue with the
appearances in the dead body. An experiment, although it may be very
well and accurately made, fo far as the experiment goes, if it does not
preferve a clofe connection with the purpofe for which it was made, the
‘conclufions to be drawn from it cannot correfpond with the intention.
This ‘is exactly the cafe with the experiments of Spallanzani, which al-
though they prove, that meat was digefted in the ftomach after the
animal was killed, (which no one doubted) yet are not at all calculated
ta fhow that the ftomach itfelf may be digefted. In fact, the mode in
which they were managed, rather tended to prevent that effect from
taking place, the gaftric juice having fubftances introduced on which it ©
could aét, was lefs likely to affect the coats of the ftomach. That the
digeftion was not carried on merely by the gaftric juice fecreted before
death, is evident from his own account, fome of the food which had
been introduced and digefted, being found in the duodenum ; a thing that
could not have happened, if a ceffation of the actions of life in the inyo-
luntary parts had taken place when vifible lite terminated, There had
been an action, and moft probably a fecretion, in the ftomach. The
only experiment that can be made with any probability of a decided refult
is, to kill the animal while the ftomach is empty, and ob{erve what af-

| Atal 2 terwards


182 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


terwards takes place. There are very few ftomachs that have not, when
examined after death, fome of the inner villous coat deftroyed ; which
may have been done ue the gaftric juice in the ducts of the glands which
fecrete it.

Dr. Stevens, in an inaugural differtation, publifhed at Edinburgh 1777s
gives a number of experiments on digeftion, fome of which are well de-
vifed, to afcertain the fubftances that are eafieft of digeftion, the thing
in faét more wanted, than the caufe of that procefs; but many of
his experiments, more efpecially thofe on ruminating animals, are not
made with fufficient accuracy. How the chopped hay and pot-herbs
came to be fo much changed in the firft ftomach of a ruminating ani- —
mal I cannot conceive, as I have reafon to believe it has not the leaft
power of digefting ; and fhould doubt very much that hay could have
been wholly digefted in any ftomach. His experiment which was made
on fubftances out of the body, proves that the gaftric juice is not able
in all cafes to prevent the vinous and acetous fermentation in vegetables ;
which circumftance I believe often takes place in the living body, when
the ftomach is weak. He feems to be in fome apprehenfion for the fafety
of the ftomach itfelf, from the action of fo powerful a folvent as the
gaftric juice: he is inclined, however, to fuppofe that the living powers
of the animal may be a guard againft fuch effects; but is ftill difpofed
to fear that, in all cafes thefe may not be fufficient.

The living power, in the ftomach, muft be indeed very weak to allow
of its being digefted; and in that cafe I fufpect the fecretion of the
gaftric juice would be - defective, as to prevent fuch effects being pro-
duced.

Dr. Stevens gives two cafes, with the diffeCtion, to prove that the living
ftomach has not always the power to refift the action of the gaftric
juice : but he has not made it clear, that thofe very ftomachs might not
have been digefted after death. The appearance of the edges of the
hole fhould have’ been more particularly defcribed ; for if it took place
before death, it is probable it was owing to ulceration, which I have
fometimes feen. Men fhould be very accurate in afcertaining faéts,
before they advance them, efpecially when thefe are either to overturn a

received


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 183


received opinion, or to eftablifh a new one. As to the fad, of living
animals being fwallowed and digefted, no frefh proofs are neceflary, as we
are eating oyfters every day ; but this does not prove that they are digefted
while alive. In his experiments made on ruminating animals, and the
dog, as the vegetables were not fo readily digefted as the meat, he concludes,
«Tt is poflible every {pecies of animal has its peculiar gaftric liquor,
capable of diflolving certain fubftances only”; which is certainly not true.

Mr. Senebier relates {ome experiments made by Mr. Goffe, upon him-
felf, and which hardly contain any thing, except a curious conjecture
of Mr. Senebier’s, that diftention of the ftomach is the caufe of the
fecretion of the gaftric liquor. He mentions the fubftances, both animal
_ and vegetable, which are not digeftible ; then thofe difficult of digeftion ;
afterwards thofe eafily digefted ; alfo what fubftances facilitate digeftion ;
and what retard it; but if we are to judge of thefe facts from the experi-
ments he has made to afcertain them, I am inclined to believe they have
not been made with fufficient accuracy to be depended upon.


ON THE DIGESTION OF THE STOMACH AFTER DEATH.


Tue following account, of the Stomach being digefted after Death,
was drawn up at the defire of the late Sir John Pringle, when he was
prefident of the Royal Society ; and the circumi{tance which led to this
is as follow: I was opening, in his prefence, the body of a patient of
his own, where the ftomach was in part diffolved, which appeared to
him very unaccountable, as there had been no previous fymptom that
could have led him to fufpe&t any difeafe in the ftomach. I took that
opportunity of giving him my ideas refpecting it; and told him that, I
had long been making experiments on digeftion, and confidered this as
one of the facts which proved a converting power in the gaftric juice. I
mentioned my intention of publifhing the whole of my obfervations on
this fubje& at fome future period; but he defired me to give this fact
by itfelf, with my remarks, as it would prove that there is a folvent
power in the ftomach, and be of ufe in the examination of dead bodies.

An


1a hee OBSERVATIONS ON Nee bh


An accurate knowledge of the appearances in animal bodies that die of
a violent death, that is, in perfect health, or in a found ftate, ought to
be confidered as a neceffary foundation for judging of the ftate of the
body in thofe that are difeafed.

But as an animal body undergoes changes after death, or when dead,
it has never been fufficiently confidered what thofe changes are ; and till
this be done, it is impoflible we fhould judge accurately of the appear-
ances in dead bodies. The difeafes which the living body undergoes
(mortification excepted) are always connected with the living principle,
and are not in the leaft fimilar to what may be called difeafes or changes
in the dead body: without this knowledge, our judgment of the appear-
ances in dead bodies muft often be very imperfect, or very erroneous ;
we may fee appearances which are natural, and may fuppofe them to
have arifen from difeafe; we may fee difeafed parts, and fuppofe them in
a natural ftate ; and we may fuppofe a circumftance to have exifted before
death, which was really a confequence of it; or we may imagine it to be
a natural change after death, when it was truly a difeafe of the living
body. It is eafy to fee therefore, how a man in this ftate of ignorance
muft blunder, when he comes to connect the appearances in a dead body
with the fymptoms that were obferved in life; and indeed, all the ufe-
fulnefs of opening dead bodies depends upon the judgment and fagacity |
with which this fort of comparifon is made.

There is a cafe of a mixed nature, which can neither be reckoned a
procefs of the living body, nor of the dead ; it participates of both, inaf{-
much as its caufe arifes from life, and the effect cannot take place till
after death. To render this more intelligible, it will be neceflary to give
fome general ideas concerning the caufe and effects.

An animal fubftance, when joined with the living principle, cannot
undergo, any change in its properties but as an animal; this principle
always acting and preferving the fubftance, poffefled of it from diffolu-
tion, and from being changed according to the natural changes which
other fubftances undergo.

There are a great many powers in nature, which the living principle
does not enable the animal matter, with which it is combined, to refift,

V1Z.


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. 185


viz. the mechanical and moft of the ftrongeft chymical folvents. It ren-
ders it however capable of refifting the powers of fermentation, digeftion,
and perhaps feveral others, which are well known to aé& on this fame
matter, when deprived of the living principle, and entirely to decompofe
it. The number of powers, which thus act differently on the living and
dead animal fubftance, is not afcertained: we fhall take notice of two,
which can only affect this {ubftance when deprived of the living princi: —
ple; which are, putrefaction and digeftion. Putrefaétion is an effect
which arifes {pontaneoufly ; digeftion is an effect of another principle
acting upon it, and fhall here be confidered a little more particularly.

Animals, or parts of animals, poffeffed of the living principle, when
taken into the ftomach, are not in the leaft affected by the powers of that
vifcus, fo long as the animal principle remains ; hence it is that we find
animals of various kinds living in the ftomach, or even hatched and bred
there: but the moment that any of thofe lofe the living principle, they
become fubject to the digeftive powers of the ftomach. If it were pof- |
fible for a man’s hand, for example, to be introduced into the ftomach
of a living animal, and kept there for fome confiderable time, it would
be found, that the difflolvent powers of the ftomach could have no effect
upon it; but if the fame hand were feparated from the body, and intro-
duced into the fame {ftomach, we fhould then find that the ftomach would
immediately act upon it.

Indeed, if this were not the cafe, we fhould find that the ftomach it-
felf ought to have been made of indigeftible materials; for if the living
principle was not capable of preferving animal fubftances from undergo-
ing that procefs, the {tomach itfelf would be digefted.

But we find on the contrary, that the ftomach, which at one inftant,
that is, while '‘poffefled of the living principle, was capable of refifting
the digeftive powers which it contained, the next moment, viz. when
deprived of the living principle, is itfelf capable of being digefted, either
by the digeftive powers of other ftomachs, or by the remains of that
power which it had of digefting other things.

From thefe obfervations we are led to account for an appearance which
we often find in the. ftomachs of dead bodies ; and at the famé time they

throw


186 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


throw a confiderable light upon the nature of digeftion. The appearance
which has been hinted at, is a diffolution of the ftomach at its greateft
extremity ; in confequence of which, there is frequently a confiderable
_ apperture made in that vifcus. The edges of this opening appear to be
half diffolved, very much like that kind of diffolution which flefhy parts
undergo when half digefted in a living ftomach, or when diffolved by a
cauftic alkali, viz. pulp tender, and ragged.

In thefe cafes, the contents of the ftomach are generally found loofe
in the cavity of the abdomen, about the fpleen and diaphragm. In many
fubjects this digeftive power extends much further than through the
ftomach. I have often found, that after it had diffolved the ftomach at
the ufual place, the contents of the ftomach had come into contact with
the fpleen and diaphragm, had partly diffolved the adjacent fide of the
{pleen, and had diffolved the diaphragm quite through; fo that the con-
tents of the ftomach were found in the cavity of the thorax, and had even
affected the lungs in a fmall degree.

There are very few dead bodies in which the ftomach is not, at its
great end, in fome degree digefted ; and one who is acquainted with dif-
fe€tions, can eafily trace the gradations from the fmalleft to the greateft.

To be fenfible of this effect, nothing more is neceflary than to com-
pare the inner furface of the great end of the ftomach with any other
part of the inner furface; what is found will appear foft, fpongy, and
granulated, and without diftinct blood-veffels, opake and thick ; while
the other will appear fmooth, thin, and more tranfparent ; and the vef-
fels will be feen ramifying in its fubftance, and upon {queezing the blood
which they contain from the larger branches to the {maller, it will be
found to pafs out at the digefted ends of the veffels, and appear like drops
on the inner furface.

Thefe appearances I had often feen, ae I do fuppofe that they had
been feen by others; but I was at a lofs to account for them; at firft,
I fuppofed them to have been produced during life, and was therefore dif-
pofed to look upon them as the caufe of death ; but I never found that
they had any connection with the fymptoms: and I was ftill more at a
lofs to account for thefe appearances, when I found that they were moft


frequent


OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION. | 187


frequent in thofe who died of violent deaths, which made me fufpect that
the true caufe was not even imagined*:

At this time I was employed in making many experiments upon digef-
tion, in different animals, all of which were killed, at different times,
after being fed with various kinds of food ; fome of them were not opened
immediately after death, and in'fome of them I found the’ appearances
abovedefcribed in thé ftomach. For purfuing the inguiry about digef-
tion, I procured the ftomachs of a vaft variety of fithes, which all die of
violent deaths, and may be faid to die in perfect health, with their
ftomachs commonly full. In them we fee the progrefs of digeftion moft
diftin€@tly ; for as they (wallow their food whole, that is, without matfti-
cation, and ‘fwallow fifh that are much larger than the digefting part
of the ftomach can contain, the fhape of the fifh which {wallows being
very favourable for this inquiry, we find in many inftances the part {wal-
lowed, which is lodged in the digefting part of the ftomach, is more or
lefs diffolved, while that which remains in the cefophagus is perfectly
found: and in many of thefe I found, that the digefting part of the
{tomach was itfelf reduced to the fame diflolved {tate as the digefted part
of the food.

Being employed upon this fubject, and therefore enabled to account
more readily for appearances which had any connection with it, and ob-
ferving that the half-diffolved parts of the ftomach, were fimilar to the


* The firft time that I had occafion to obferve this appearance, in fuch as died fuddenly
from violence in the living body, and in whom therefore I could not eafily fuppofe it to be
the effect of difeafe, was in a man who had his fkull fractured, by one blow of a poker.
Juft before this accident, he had been in perfect health, and had taken a hearty fupper of
cold meat, cheefe, bread, and ale. Upon opening the abdomen, I found that the ftomach,
though it ftill contained a good deal, was diffolved at its great end, and a confiderable part
of thefe its contents lay loofe in the general cavity of the belly; a circumftance which
puzzled me very much. ‘The fecond inftance was in a man who died at St. George’s Hof-
pital, a few hours after receiving a blow on his head, which fractured his fkully From thefe
two cafes, among various conjectures about fo ftrange an appearance, I began to fufpect it
might be peculiar to cafes of fractured fkull; and therefore} wheenver I had an opportunity,
I examined the ftomach of every perfon who died from that accident; but I found many of
them which had not this appearance. I afterwards met with the fame appearance in a man
who had beenhanged. es

Bb half-


188 OBSERVATIONS ON DIGESTION.


half-digefted food; it immediately ftruck me, that it was the procefs~
of digeftion going on after death ; and that the ftomach, being dead, was
no longer capable of refifting the powers of that menftruum, which it-
felf had formed fer the digeftion of food. With this idea, I fet about
making experiments to produce thefe appearances at pleafure, which
would have taught us how long the animal ought to live after feeding,
and how long it fhould remain after death before it 1s opened ; and
above all, to find out the method of producing the greateft digeftive power
in the living {tomach.

Thefe appearances throw confiderable light on the principles of digef—
tion, and fhow, that it is neither a mechanical power, nor contraCtions of
the ftomach, nor heat, but fomething fecreted in the coats of the ftomach,
and thrown into its cavity, which there animalifes the food, or affimi-
lates it to the nature of the blood. The power of this juice is confined
or limited to certain fubftances, efpecially of the vegetable and animal
kingdoms ; and although this menftruum is capable of acting independ-
ently of the ftomach, yet it is indebted to that vifcus for its continyance.


EXPLANATION


Lliatle


U'Dicll det.


)


Wo Shelton tafe,


Still heel’ oe i


[ 189 ]


EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE.


Portion of inteftine of a hog, the peritoneal coat of which is covered
in feveral places with fmall pellucid cyfts, containing air.

It was fent to me by my friend Mr. Jenner, furgeon, at Berkley, who
informed me, that this appearance is found very frequently upon the in-
teftines of hogs that are killed in the fummer months,

A The portion of the mefentery.
B The portion of inateftine on which the air-cells are fituated.


Bb2 » ON


IST NORRE ¢


le


Fade te


amy at
hit


[ x91 J.


ON A SECRETION IN THE CROP OF BREED-
ING PIGEONS, FOR THE NOURISHMENT OF
THEIR YOUNG.


HE nourifhment of animals admits, perhaps, of as much variety

in the mode in which it is performed, as any circumftance con-
nected with their ceconomy ; whether we confider their numerous tribes,
the different ftages through which every animal pafles, or the food adapted
to the fupport of each, in their diftinét conditions and fituations. We
are likewife to include in this view, that endlefs variety, in the means by
which this food is procured, according to the clafs of the animal and the
particular ftage of its exiftence. If the food was the fame through every
period; of the life of an animal; if every individual of a tribe lived on
the fame kind, and procured it by the fame mode, our fpeculations would
then admit of a regular arrangement.- But when we {ee that the food
adapted to one ftage of an animal’s life is rejected at another ; and that
animals of one clafs are in fome refpects fimilar to thofe of another,
having hardly any food peculiar to themfelves, the fubject becomes fo
complicated, that it is. not furprifing if we are at a lofs to arrange the
various modes by which animals are nourifhed.

Animal life may not improperly be divided into three ftates, or {tages.
The firft comprehends the production of the animal and its growth in the
fcetal ftate: the fecond commences when it emerges from that ftate, by what
is called the birth ; yet for a certain time muft, either mediately or im-
mediately, depend on the parent for fupport: the third, may be faid to
take place when the animal is fit and at liberty to act for itfelf. The firft
and third ftages are perhaps common to all animals ; but there are fome
claffes, as fifhes, fpiders, &c. which feem to have no fecond ftage, but
pafs. directly from the firft, to what is the third in other animals. Of
thofe requiring a fecond ftage, the polypus and the viviparous animals

continue


192 THE SECRETION IN THE CROP OF BREEDING PIGEONS.


continue to derive their nourifhment immediately from the parent; while
the oviparous are for fome time fupported by a fubftance originally formed
with them, and referved for that purpofe.

There is infinite variety in the means by which nature provides for the
fupport of the young in this fecond ftage of animal life. In many infects —
it is effected by the female inftin@tively depofiting the egg, or whatever
contains the rudiments of the animal, in fuch a fituation that, when
hatched, it may be within reach of proper food: others, as the bee and
blackbeetle, collect a quantity of peculiar fubftance, which both ferves as —
a nidus for the egg, and nourifhment for the maggot, when the embryo
arrives at that ftate. Moft birds, and many of the bee tribe, collect food
for their young ; when at a more advanced period, the tafk of feeding
them is performed by both male and female, with an exception in the
common bee, the young ones of which are not fed by either parent, but
by the working bees, who act the part of the nurfe. There is likewife
a number of animals capable of fupplying nourifhment proper for their
offspring, during this fecond ftage, immediately from their own bodies ;
which mode of nourifhment has hitherto been fuppofed to be peculiar to
that clafs of animals which Linneus calls Mammalia; nor has it, J
imagine, been even fufpected to belong to any other.

I have, however, in my inquiries concerning the various modes in
which young animals are nourifhed, difcovered that all of the dove kind
are endowed with a fimilar power. ‘Ihe young pigeon, like the young
quadruped, till it is capable of digefting the common food of its kind, is
fed with a fubftance fecreted for that purpofe by the parent animal: not
as in the Mammalia by the female alone; but alfo by the male, which,
perhaps, furnifhes this nutriment in a degree ftill more abundant. It is a
common property of birds, that both male and female are equally em-
ployed in hatching, and in feeding their young in the fecond ftage; but
this particular mode of nourifhment, by means of a fubftance fecreted in
their own bodies, is peculiar to certain kinds, and is carried on in the crop.

Befides the dove kind, I have fome reafon to fuppofe parrots to be
endowed with the fame,faculty, as they have the power of throwing up
the contents of the crop, and feeding one another. F have feen the cock


“K eu paroquet
se


THE SECRETION IN THE CROP OF BREEDING PIGEONS. 193
paroquet regularly feed the hen, by firft filling his own crop, and then


fupplying her from his beak. Parrots, macaws, cockatoos, &c. when
they are very fond of the perfon who feeds them, may likewife be ob-
ferved to have the action of throwing up the food, and often do it. The
cock pigeon, when he carefies the hen, performs the fame kind of aétion
as when he feeds his young; but I do not know, if at this time, he:
throws up any thing from the crop.

During incubation, the coats of the crop, in the pigeon, are dedenily
enlarged and thickened, like what happens to the udder of females of
the clafs Mammalia, in the term of uterine geftation. On comparing the
ftate of the crop when the bird is not fitting, with its appearance during
incubation, the difference is very remarkable. In the firft cafe it is thin
and membranous ; but by the time the young are about to be hatched,
the whole, except what lies on the trachea, becomes thickened, and takes
on a glandular appearance, having its internal furface very irregular*.
It is likewife evidently more vafcular than in its former ftate, that it may
convey a quantity of blood, fufficient for the fecretion of this fubftance,
which is to nourifh the young brood for fome days after they are hatched.

Whatever may be the confiftence of this fubftance, when juft fecreted,
it moft probably very foon coagulates into a granulated white curd; for
in fuch a form I have always found it in the crop; and if an old
- pigeon is killed juft as the young ones are hatching, the crop will be
found as above defcribed, and in its cavity pieces of white curd mixed
with fome of the common food of the pigeon, fuch as barley, beans,
&c. If we allow either of the parents to feed the young, its crop,
when examined, will be difcovered to contain the fame curdled fubftance;
which paffes from thence into the ftomach, where it is to be digefted.

The young pigeon is fed for fome time with this fubftance only, and
about the third day, fome of the common food is found mingled with
it; and as the pigeon grows older, the proportion of common food is
increafed ; fo that by the time it is feven, eight, or nine days old, the
- fecretion of the curd ceafes in the old ones, and of courfe no more will


4 Vide Plate II,
be


194 THE SECRETION IN THE CROP OF BREEDING PIGEONS,


be found in the crop of the young. It isa curious fact, that the parent
pigeon has at firft a power to throw up this curd without any mixture
of common food, although afterwards both are thrown up according to
the proportion required for the young ones. |
[ have called this fubftance curd, not as being literally fo, but as refem-
bling that more than any thing I know: it may, however, have a greater
refemblance to‘curd, than we are perhaps aware of ; for neither this fe-
cretion, nor curd, from which the whey has been preffed, feem to contain.
any fugar, and do not run into the acetous fermentation. ‘The property
of coagulating is confined to the fubftance itfelf, as it produces no fuch
effect when mixed with milk.’
_ This fecretion in the pigeon, like all other animal fubftances, scan
putrid by ftanding ; though not fo readily as either blood or meat, it
refifting putrefaétion for a confiderable time; neither will curd, much
prefied, become putrid fo foon as either blood or meat.


PLATE


Plate 1:


\\\ \
\


\\\
Qs \
\AN\S


\


\


he


Uhr


"G3 ot. Hel,


rn)


Mt


elton wud ‘eat


i: .


~


[195 ]


Regi PAN 0) eT,


HE crop, taken from a pigeon when it had no young ones.
The crop in the pigeon is probably more in the middle of the neck
than in any other bird, being two equal bags, as it were, pafling out,
laterally, from the cefophagus ; while in moft other birds it is a little on
one fide. The cefophapus of thofe birds who have crops, may be divided
into two, a fuperior and inferior. The fuperior is that which leads from
the mouth to the crop; the inferior, from the crop ‘to the gizzard.
The crop was inverted and diftended with {pirits. It fhows the
appearance of its\internal furface. |


A The‘inner furface of the fuperior cefophagus.

BB The infide of the two projecting bags of the crop.

E The inferior cefophagus, leading from the crop to the gizzard.

DDDD Glands fituated on the lower part of the crop, and continued
into the inferior cefophagus.

E A glandular ftructure upon the inner furface of this cefophagus, juft
before it terminates in the gizzard, for the purpofe of fecreting a
fubftance analogous to the gaftric liquor.


Ce hn PU ARE


Plate IT


Vi" Lell. debs
4


ntl


SEA:
ANS
NS


ue ¥
Wi: AY he \ \
N\ Nh


MA)
si “anh


‘
\\


9 UEPSielon ees ye


»


sae:


be t99e Jos


Bane) (Topas II,


HE crop, from a male pigeon, while the female was breeding, to
fhow the change which takes place at that time, on its internal
furface, for the purpofe of fecreting a fubftance which is to nourifh the
young. |
The crop is prepared in-the fame way as in Plate I; and the only dif-
ference in the appearance is the glandular ftructure on the inner furface


of the two lateral projeCting bags, which is not feen at any other time.


Gacy 2 ) ON


i


} Par
PASM PT AGy OME
A Se st be “f
yy


we


Jia es
Pts


v >I"
bake


at


[ 199 ]


ON THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF
THE EYE IN DIFFERENT ANIMALS.


N the eyes of all animals which I have examined, there is a fubftance
approaching to the nature and appearance of a membrane, called the
pigmentum, which lines the choroid coat, and is fomewhat fimilar to the
rete mucofum which lies under the cuticle in the human body; and there
is alfo fome of the fame kind of fubftance diffufed through the cellular
membrane, which unites the choroid with the {clerotic coat. My inten-
tion, at prefent, is only to communicate the obfervations I have made
on this fubftance, and its ufe, confining myfelf to the confideration of
that portion which lines the tunica choroides in the clafs Mammalia and
in birds: in doing this I fhall alfo take notice of the difference of
colour occurring in animals of the fame fpecies. Although the appear-
ance of this fubftance in the eyes of fome fifhes might illuftrate the
fubject, we cannot avail ourfelves of it, as we are not -fufficiently ac-
quainted with the effects of light on the eyes of that clafs of animals.
The propagation or continuance of animals in their diftinct claffes, is
an eftablifhed law of nature; and, in a general way, is preferved with a
tolerable degree of uniformity: but in the individuals of each fpecies,
varieties are every day produced in colour, fhape, fize, and difpofition.
Some of thefe changes are permanent with refpect to the propagation of
the animal ; becoming fo far a part of its nature as to be continued in ‘

the offspring. |
‘Animals living in a free and natural ftate are fubje& to few deviations
from their fpecific charaéter ; but Nature is lefs uniform in its operations
when influenced by culture*, Confiderable varieties are produced under
fuch


* From the variations produced by culture, it would appear, that the animal is fo fufcep-


tible of impreffion, as to vary Nature’s actions; and this is even carried into propagation.
Whether


200 ON THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE.


fuch circumftances ; of which the moft frequent are changes in the co-
lour. Thefe changes are always, I believe, from the dark to the lighter
tints; and the alteration is very gradual in certain fpecies, requiring in
the Canary-bird feveral generations ; while in the crow, moufe, &c. it
is completed in one. But this change is not always to white, though
{till approaching nearer to it in the young, than in the parent; being
fometimes to dun, at others to fpotted, of all the various fhades between
the two extremes. As this alteration in colour is conftantly from dark
to lighter, may we not reafonably infer, that in all animals fubject to
fuch variation, the darkeft of the fpecies fhould be reckoned neareft to
the original ; and that where there are black of that kind, the whole have
been originally black. Without this fuppofition, it will be impoffible, on
the principle I have ftated, to account for individuals of any clafs being
black. Every fuch variety may be confidered as arifing in the cultivated
ftate of animals ; but whether, if left to themfelves, they would in time
refume their orieinal appearance, I do not know’.

The colour of the pigmentum of the eye always coment I be-
lieve, with that of the hair and fkin, efpecially if the animal be only of
one colour; but is principally determined by the'hair; and the moft
general colour isa very dark brown, approaching to black, from whence
it had the name, nigrum pigmentum‘. The colour differs in different
clafies of anirnals, often in the fame clafs, and even in the fame fpecies.
In the human fpecies it is moft commonly dark ; in the ferret kind always
light: and its difference of colour in the fame fpecies is evident from the
variety obfervable in the eyes of different people. ‘There is even a difference
of colour in the fame eye in many claffes of animals; in all of the cat
and dog kind, and perhaps in moft part of the granivorous. In fome it is


Whether this takes place at the very firft union of the principles of the two parents, fo as to
derive its exiftence from both; or, whether it takes its formation from the mother, after the
firft formation of the embryo, are, perhaps, not eafily determined.


» In vegetables, I believe, it invariably holds good, that however improved by culture, if
neglected, they foon degenerate into their firft ftate.


¢ As the colour of this membrane correfponds with the colour of the {kin and hair of he
perfon, it is probable that the people, among whom it firft got the name, were dark.


partly |


ON THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE, 201


partly black, and partly of the appearance of polifhed filver : and in many
clafles, the variation from dark is of two colours; for in the cow, in
fheep, deer, horfes, and I believe in all animals feeding on grafs, there
are, in the fame eye, certain portions of it white, and others of a fine
green colour. The difference in colour of this pigmentum, in the eyes of
different animals of the fame {pecies, is very remarkable; in the human
fpecies it is of all the different fhades between black and almoft white ;
and the fame variety is feen in rabbits, mice, crows, blackbirds, &c.
but in thefe it is of one colour only in the fame eye. Every fpecies is, -
perhaps, fubject to fuch variations ; and fome of thefe deviations are fo
_ extraordinary, as with propriety to be denominated monftrous’.

The variation in the colour of the pigmentum in different f{pecies of
animals, feems to depend on a fixed law of nature; but the varieties
which are met with in the fame fpecies are much lefs conftant, being
merely different fhades, approaching to black or white. But the extra-
ordinary circumftance is, its being fometimes unufually lighter in indivi-
duals of the fame fpecies, and this difference is fometimes {tarting up in
the offspring without any hereditary principle to account for it.

_ The human fpecies is a ftriking example of the colour of the pigmen-
tum correfponding with that of the fkin and hair; and though the {kin
and hair of one perfon differs very confiderably from the fkin and hair of
another, yet it is not in fo great a degree as in many animals. There
are cattle perfectly white, white fheep, white dogs, white cats, and rab-
bits ; but there are few of the human fpecies that we can {fay are per-
fectly white. They rather pafs from the black into the brown, red, and
even light yellow; and we find this pigmentum, although only of one co-
lour, varying through all the different correfponding fhades. In the African
negro, the blacknefs of whofe hair and fkin are great diftinguifhing cha-


* Perhaps the word, monftrous, is too ftrong, or not exactly juft. It certainly may be laid
down as one of the principles or laws of Nature, to deviate under certain circumftances, It
may alfo be obferved, that it is neither neceffary, nor does it follow, that all deviations from
the original muft be a falling off; it appears juft the contrary, therefore we may fuppofe that
Nature is improving its works; or, at leaft, has eftablifhed the principle of improvement
in the body as well as in the mind,

. racteriftics,


-


202 ON THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE.


racteriftics, this pigmentum is alfo very black. In the mulatto, who has
not the fkin fo dark as the African, but the hair nearly as black, this -
pigmentum is of a fhade not quite fo deep, yet {till does not approach
fo near to the middle tint as the {kin, rather following the colour of the
hair. In people of a-fwarthy complexion, as Indians, Turks, Tartars,
Moors, &c. we find the hair always of a jet black, and this fubftance
of a much darker brown than in thofe that are fair. In thofe of very dark
complexions, and having very black hair, although defcended from fair
parents, the fame thing holds good. There are few fpecies of animals,
or even individuals of a f{pecies, whofe bodies are only of one colour.
Crows, and fome others, are exceptions; but the greateft number are of two
or more, being varioufly {potted or ftreaked, either with different colours,
or with fhades of the fame. Many {fpecies are conftantly lighter in fome
parts of the body than in others; and, with a few exceptions,’ animals
are generally lighter, as to CSE on the lower, or what may be called
the foreparts, than on the upper or backparts. The fair man or woman
may {trictly be confidered as a {potted or variegated animal. In many
perfons, the hair of the head, eyebrows, eyelafhes, beard, and hair on
the pubes, all vary in colour. The hair of the three firft may be called
feetal, and are oftener all of the fame, than of a different colour; the
*two laft are to be confidered as adult hair, and are commonly alike in
colour, which yet frequently varies from that of the foetus; the laft is
more liable to change its colour than the other ; and the change is gener-
ally that of growing darker, efpecially on the head and the eyelafhes*.
This difference in the colour of the hair, on different parts of the body,
is not fo obfervable in thofe nations who are dark or fwarthy, as in
people inhabiting many of the northern climates.

In animals which are variegated, let us obferve the colour of this pig-
mentum, and we fhall find it regulated by fome general principle, and
correfponding with the colour of the eyelafhes. The magpie, for in-
ftance, is nearly one-third or fourth part white ; and the two colours, if
blended, would make the compound grey ; but the eyelafhes being black,


* The hair growing grey, is not in the leaft to the prefent purpofe.


the


OF THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE, 203


the pigmentum is black alfo. We fometimes meet with people whofe
fkin and hair ‘are very white, and yet the iris is dark, which is a fign of
a dark pigmentum ; but if we examine more carefully, we fhall alfo find
that the eyelafhes are dark, although the eyelids may be the colour of
the common hair.

As the colour of the iris in the human fpecies is probably a prefump-
tive, though not a certain fign of the colour of this pigmentum, we may
be led to fuppofe that in thofe who have the iris in one eye different from
that of the other, this fubftance will likewife differ: but this I cannot
determine, never having examined the eyes of any perfon with fuch a
peculiarity, It is not an uncommon circumftance in fome {fpecies of
animals ; the Angola cat feldom having the colour of the iris the fame in
both eyes.

In people remarkably fair, whether they are of a race that is naturally
fo, or what may be called monftrous in refpect to colour, as white A‘thi-
opians, ftill we find this pigmentum following the colour of the {kin and
hair ; being in fome of a light brown, and in others almoft white, ac-
cording to the colour of the hair in fuch people.

All foals are of the fame colour; and whatever that may be, as they
grow older it generally becomes lighter; therefore the pigmentum in
them is almoft always of the fame colour, and does not feem to change
with the hair. This change, however, is only in the hair, and not in
the fkin ; the fkin of a white or grey horfe being as dark as the fkin of a
black one: yet there is a cream-coloured breed which has the fkin of the
fame colour, whofe foals are alfo of a cream-colour; and by inf{pecting
the parts not covered with hair, fuch as the mouth, anus, fheath, &c.
thefe, and the pigmentum of the eyes of fuch horfes, are found of a
cream-colour likewife.

In the pigmentum of the rabbit kind, there are all the degrees of dark
and light, correfponding with the colour of the hair; yet there feem to
be exceptions to this rule in fome white rabbits with black eyes, and
therefore with black pigmentum ; but in all fuch there is either a cir-
cle of black hair furrounding the eye, or the eyelafhes, and the {kin
fotming the edge of the lid, is alfa black. In many white cattle, this is

Dd alfo


2.04 OF THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE.


alfo obfervable ; and in that breed of dogs, called Danes, fome have the
hair furrounding one eye black, while the hair furrounding the other is
white ; and the iris of the one is often lighter than Het of the other.
This circumftance, of the iris of one eye being lighter in colour than that
of the other, is a common thing in the human {pecies ; and fometimes
only one-half of the iris is light, without any difference in the colour of
the eyelafh, or eyebrow. Whether this difference in the colour of the iris
of the two eyes, in the fame animal, is owing to the pigmentum being
different in colour, I do not know; although I rather fufpect itis fome-
thing fimilar to the white iris in horfes, which makes them what is
called wall-eyed. |

The variation of colour appears moft remarkable when a white ftarts up,
either where the whole {pecies is black, as in the crow or blackbird; or
where only a certain part of the fpecies is black, (but permanently fo) as
a white child born of black parents; and a perfe€tly white child whofe
hair is white, and who has the pigmentum alfo white, though born of
parents who are fair, fhould as much be confidered as a play of Nature as
the others. All thefe lufus nature; fuch as the white negro, the pure
white child of fair parents, the white crow, the white blackbird, white
mice, &c. have likewife a white pigmentum correfponding with the co-
lour of the hair, feathers, and fkin. !

Befides the circumftance of animals of the fame fpecies differing from
one another in colour, there are fome diftin@ {pecies which are, as far as
we know, always of a light colour, and in them too this pigmentum is
white ; the animal I allude to is the ferret. -

When the pigmentum is of more than one colour in the fame eye,
the lighter portion is always placed at the bottom of the eye, in the
fhape of a halfmoon, with the circular arch upwards ; the ftraight line, —
or diameter, paffing almoft horizontally juft acrofs the lower edge of the
optic nerve, fo that the end of the nerve is within this lighter coloured
part, which makes a kind of femicircular fweep above the nerve. This
{hape is peculiar to the cat, lion, dog, and moft of the carnivorous tribe ;
in the herbivorous, the upper edge being irregular ; however, in the fall
the light part of this pigmentum is equally difpofed all round the optie


nerve,


OF THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE. 205


nerve, and is, on the whole, broader than it is commonly found in
quadrupeds. How far this increafed furface is an approach towards the
fith kind, in which it is wholly of this metallic white, I will not pre-
tend to fay ; but it is probable that, as the animal is to fee under water
as well as in the air, its being circular, may be for its better correfpond-
ing with the form of the eyelids, which open equally all round; this
feems alfo to correfpond with what is obfervable in fifhes, as they are
without eyelids. |

The colour of the pigmentum, whether white, or green, or both, has
always a bright furface, appearing like polifhed metal; which ap-
pearance, animal fubftance is very capable of taking on, ‘as we {ce in
hair, feathers, filk, &c. .

After having taken notice of the various colours of this pigmentum in.
different animals, both where permanent, and where it appears to be a
play of Nature, let us next examine what effect it has upon -vifion, in both
cafes ; whether thefe effects. are fimilar, or if one cafe illuftrates the
other. a

It may be afferted as an undoubted fact, that the light which falls on
the retina, covering a white pigmentum, has more effect than when it
falls on the retina which covers a dark one: which is known by com-
paring the vifion of thofe of the fame {pecies who have the pigmentum
wholly dark, with thofe who have it perfectly white; and fomething
_ may be learned, by a fimilar comparifon of animals who have it only in

part white, with thofe which have it entirely dark, although they are of
different fpecies, as itis reafonable, from analogy, to fuppofe that fome
fuch effect is produced in the eye which is poffefled of both.

I thall firft confider the effect produced when the white or light colour
makes only part of the pigmentum. This will lead me to obferve, that
all animals having the pigmentum diverfified, though they are capable of
bearing as much light as others, and can fee as perfectly when light is in an
equal degree; can likewife fee very diftinétly when the light is much lefs
than ferves the purpofes of animals having it wholly dark. May we not,
therefore, afcribe this advantage to the pigmentum being partly white?
One might be almoft tempted to fuppofe, that fuch animals have a power

Dd.2 of


206 OF THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE.


of prefenting the different parts of the eye to the light, according to the
quantity of light required ; or of moving the chryftalline humour higher
or lower: but we are at prefent unacquainted with any power in the eye
by which thefe actions can be performed. |

We may obferve that when a cat or dog looks at us in the twilight,
the whole pupil is inlarged and illuminated ; but in a full light that there
is no fuch appearance. It is plain there muft be a reflexion of light from
the bottom of the eye, to produce the above effect ; efpecially as the light
reflected is always of the colour of the pigmentum in fuch animals; in
the cow it is a light green.

I thall fecondly, confider thofe which have the whole pigmentum of
a white colour, whether it is accidental or natural, and which fee much
better in the dark, or with lefs light than thofe in which it is of a dark
colour: of the firft of thefe I fhall take my inftance from the human
{fpecies ; of the fecond, the ferret will ferve as an example.

Thofe of the human fpecies, who have the pigmentum of a light colour,
fee much better with a lefs degree of light than thofe who have it dark ;
and this in proportion to their fairnefs: for when the hair is quite white,
they cannot fee at all in open day, without knitting their eyebrows, and
keeping the eyelids almoft-fhut. In many of thefe inftances there is
an univerfal glare of light from the pupil, tinged with a fhade of red ;
this colour, moft probably, arifes from the blood in the veflels of the
choroid coat ; I have obferved that the pigmentum is thinneft when it
is light; fo that fome of the light, which is reflected from the point
of vifion, would feem to be thrown all over the inner furface of the eye;
which being white, or rather a reddifh white, the light appears to be
again refleéted from fide to fide’. This feemed to be the cafe in a boy
at Shepperton, when about three years of age, and of whom I have a
portrait, to fhow that appearance. He is now about thirteen years of
age: the common light of the day is ftill too much for him; the twi-


@ How far this is really the cafe, I do not abfolutely fay. For whatever light comes
through the pupil, muft be reflected from the point of vifion ; but I conceived I faw the light
paffing through the fubftance of the iris.

: light


OF THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE. 207


light is lefs offenfive. When in a room, he turns his eyes from the win-
dow; and when made to expofe his face to the light, or when out in the
open air, he knits his eyebrows, half fhuts his eyelids, and bends his head
forwards, or a little down: yet the light appears lefs obnoxious to him
now than formerly, probably from habit. Such perfons appear to be
nearer fighted than people in common ; but I apprehend that arifes from
the pofition into which the eyelids and brows are thrown, which not
only in a great degree excludes the light, making the object faint in pro-
portion to the contraction of the pupil and fhade made by the eyelids and
eyebrows ; but at the fame time fits the eye to fee near objects: for if
we nearly clofe our eyelids, and knit our eyebrows, we can fee a fmall
object much nearer than if we did not perform fuch adtions ; and it will
make above a foot difference in the focal diftance of the eye. In many
rabbits who have white eyelafhes, and in white mice, the pigmentum is
entirely white. The fame thing is to be obferved in a certain diftiné {pe-
cies of animals, the ferret, which we have adduced as an example of the
pigmentum being naturally white: thefe animals being intended to fee
in the dark, and their mode of life not expofing them to the light, they
are liable, in a much greater degree, to be affected by ftrong light.

If it is allowed as probable that, in animals having the pigmentum >
diverfified, the object to be viewed is thrown upon the lighter coloured
portion ; how does it happen that fuch are able to bear the light better
than thofe who have the pigmentum altogether of a light colour? Perhaps
it is not the illuminated object itfelf that is offenfive to the retina ; but
that diffufion of light in the one kind of eye, which does not happen in
the other.

Having ftated the facts, and the general effect arifing from the diverfi-
fied pigmentum, let us next confider the manner in which the effeét is
produced ;—That fuch animals fee better with little light, than thofe
which have the pigmentum wholly black.

Let us here fuppofe the retina to be the organ of fight; and that by
the rays which fall upon it being properly refracted, it gives or conveys
to the mind an idea of a diftinét object, correfponding with the fenfation
of touch. This is the moft common and fimple manner in which vifion

is


2.08 OF THE COLOUR OF THE PIGMENTUM OF THE EYE.


is performed, and is that mode which takes place where the pigmentum
is black, or nearly fo; and where the greateft quantity .of external Ks
ts required.

The retina, although fomewhat opaque, is yet fo tranfparent as to
allow a confiderable quantity of light to pais through it. For if this was.
not the cafe, there could not be thofe differences in the appearance of the
eye which I have been defcribing. The rays which pafs through, we may
fuppofe, do or do not give fenfation in their paflage; and we may alfo fup-
pofe, that only thofe which ftrike againft the retina are the caufe of fen-
{ation :, but this is not the prefent inquiry ; the rays which pafs through
the retina, are what I am alone to confider; which falling upon the
pigmentum, are there difpofed of according to the reflecting powers
of that fubftance. If the pigmeatum is black, the rays will then be.
abforbed and entirely loft; therefore in fuch eyes, vifion can receive
no affiftance from it; and confequently a confiderable quantity of light


is required to produce diftinét vifion: but in thofe who have fome part


of this pigmentum white, we find that the rays of light which pats
through the retina, are reflected back again; and in this cafe it is not
unnatural to fuppofe that the reflected rays, in their paffage back, will
ftrike againft the retina and increafe the power of vifion. It is evident —
that a confiderable portion pafles forwards through the retina, which, I _
fufpect, is partly loft on the inner furface of the lateral and forepart
of the eye, where the pigmentum is black, while the remainder pafles
through the pupil, and is again thrown-on the obje@ looked at. The
next thing to be confidered is, whether the fhape of the eye is fuch, as
will throw the rays, which paffed through the retina, back upon that mem-
brane, in the fame or nearly in the fame place as that through which they
originally came. ‘The eye being a fphere, or approaching to that figure,
makes it probable. But whether the curve is fuch as will reflect the rays
exactly in the fame direction, is not fo eafily determined. If the curve be
a true one, then the rays that are not ob{truéted in their return by the re-
tina, muft pafs forwards through the pupil ; and being refracted in their
paffage through the chryftalline humour, will be fent out of the eye in
the fame lines in which they entered, and be thrown on the very object

from


THE USE OF THE OBLIQUE MUSCLES. 209)


from whence they came. This feems to be in a great meafure the cafe,
by the confiderable degree of illumination from the cat’s eyes. If the
rays, reflected from the light part of the pigmentum, fhould not, in their
return, ftrike exactly on the fame points in the retina, through which
they firft paffed; yet if they are thrown nearly on the fame place it will
be fufficient ; for we know that our fenfations are not capable of con-


_ yeying to the mind mathematical exactnefs. And the fame circumftance


will be a fufficient anfwer, fhould it be objected that the time loft in the
paffing and repafling of the rays may prevent diftinét vifion; for it is
known, that if an illumined body is made to move quickly in a circle, it


7 will appear to the eye a circle of fire.


* '


THE USE OF THE OBLIQUE MUSCLES.


Musc tes are the active parts in an animal body, producing different
effects, according to the circumftances in which they are placed; and
moft parts requiring a variety of motions, it became neceflary to have a
variety of mufcles fuited to thefe motions. |

The funtion of a mufcle depends on the contraction of its Ghires: and
the moft general effect produced by this contraction, is to move ean one
part of the body upon another: but we may obferve, that when motion,
in a part, is performed by one fet of mufcles, there are other mufcles em-
ployed in regulating that motion: as happens in moft joints. And ina
whole part, deftined to a variety of motion, and compofed. of {maller parts,
intended likewife to have their diftinét motions, we find mufcles appro-
priated for the purpofe of keeping fome of thofe parts fixed in a particular
pofition, while the whole part is to be moved by other mufcles, according
to the nature of the action to be performed. This will, perhaps, be beft
illuftrated by attending to what takes place in the eye, confidering it as
part of the head.

The eye being an organ of fenfe, which is to receive impreflions from
without, it was neceffary it fhould be able to give its motions that kind of


direCtion from one body to another, as would permit its being imprefied
Ky


210 THE USE OF THE OBLIQUE MUSCLES.


by the various furrounding objects ; and it was alfo neceffary, that there
fhould be a power capable of keeping the eye fixed, when our body or
head was in motion.

For the better underftanding this action of pointing the eye towards
objects under the various circumftances of vifion, it will be necef-
fary to mention, that the eye is furnifhed with mufcles, fome of which
in the quadruped, bird, amphibia, and fifhes, are called ftraight, from
their being placed in the direction of, or parallel to, the axis of the eye :-
and two, I believe, have always been named oblique. Of the ftraight,
fome animals have more than others. ‘There are four ftraight mufcles
which are common to moft animals; and thofe which have more, have
the additional mufcles inferted immediately in the eyeball, on its pofterior
furface, and furrounding the optic nerve. ‘The four f{traight mufcles, which
are common to all quadrupeds, pafs further forwards, and are rather
inferted towards the anterior furface of the eye. For vifion, at large, it
was not only neceflary that the eye fhould be capable of moving from
object to object, but alfo neceflary that there fhould be a power to keep
it fixed on any one object the mind might be attentive to; therefore the
mufcles are formed fo as not ‘only to be able to move the eye from object
to object, but likewife to keep its point of vifion fixed upon any particular
one, while the eye is moving progreflively with the head or body. This
is the ufe of thefe mufcles, when the parts from whence they arife are kept
fixed refpecting the objects the eye is pointed to; but it is often neceflary
while the eye is fixed upon a particular object, that the eyeball, and the —
head in which it is fixed, fhould fhift their fituation refpecting that object;
and this would alter the direction of the eye, if the mufcles had not the
power of taking up an action that produces a contrary effect, that is,
keeping the point of infertion of the mufcles as the fixed point, by caufing
their fibres to contract according as the origins of the mufcles vary their
pofition refpecting the object. From all which we find thefe three modes
of action produced ; firft, the eye moving from one fixed objet to ano-
ther; then the eye moving along with an object in motion ; and laft,
the eye keeping its axis to an object, although the whole eye, and the
head, of which it makes a part, are in motion. From either of thefe

motions


THE USE OF THE OBLIQUE MUSCLES. 211


motions taking place fingly, or being combined, the eye is always
kept towards its object. In the two firft modes of aétion, the origins
of the mufcles are fixed points refpecting the object; and in the laft,

the object becomes as it were the centre of motion, or fixed point, com-
manding the dire€tion of+ the aétions of the eye, as the north com-
mands the direction of the needle, let the box in which it is placed be
moved in what direClion it may. ° Thefe two firft modes of ation are
performed by the ftraight mufcles ; for the head being a fixed point, they
are capable of moving the eye up and down, from right to left, with all the
intermediate motions, which taken together conftitute a circular move-
ment; or when the eye is to become the fixed point, then the head itfelf
performs the circular movement. Thence appears the neceffity why the
object, the axis of the eye, and the point of fenfation, fhould all three be
in the fame ftraight line. But this does not take place in all movements
of that whole of which the eye makes a part; for befides thofe which we
have already taken notice of, the head is capable of a motion from
_fhoulder to fhoulder, the axis of which is through the axis of the two
eyes, from the fore to the backpart. It fhould be here obferved, that for
diftin&t vifion, the object muft be fixed refpecting the pupil of the eye,
and not in the leaft allowed to move over its furface*. To prevent any
progreflive motion of the object over the retina of the eye, either from
the motion of the object itfelf, or of the head in fome of the motions of
that part, the ftraight mufcles are provided as has been explained ; but
the effects which would arife from fome other motion of the head, as from


# Optical writers feem to have been entirely ignorant of this ; for they not only fuppofe
diftine vifion compatible with the objet having a motion over the different parts of the
retina, but even explain the effeéts which wanted be produced 7 it on Sha mind of the ob-
ferver. Keill makes the following obfervation :

<¢ Since opticks teach us, that every body, which is vifible, has by means of the rays which
_ proceed from that object, its image painted on the bottom of the eye, or retina; it follows,
that thofe objects will feem to be moved, whofe images are moved on the retina, that is,
which pafs over fucceffively the different parts of the retina, whilft the eye is fuppofed to be
at reft: but thofe objects will be looked upon as being at reft whofe images always occupy
the fame part of the retina, that is, when the motion of thofe images are not perceived in the
bottom of the eye.” Keill’s Introduction to Natural Philofophy, page 79.

Pee fhoulder


212 THE USE OF THE OBLIQUE MUSCLES.


{houlder to fhoulder, cannot be corrected by the action of the ftraight
mufcles, therefore the oblique mufcles are provided. ‘Thus when we
look at an object, and at the fame time move our heads to either fhoul-
der, it is moving in the arch of a circle whofe centre is the neck; and
of courfe the eyes would have the fame quantity of motion on this
axis, if the oblique mufcles did not fix them upon the object. When
the head is moved towards the right-fhoulder, the fuperior oblique
mufcle of the right-fide aéts and keeps the right-eye fixed on the object ;
and a fimilar effect is produced upon the left-eye by the action of its
inferior oblique mufcle; when the head moves in a contrary direction,
the other oblique mufcles produce the fame effect. This motion of the
head may, however, be to a greater extent than can be counteracted
by the action of the oblique mufcles. Thus, for inftance, while the
head is on the left-fhoulder, the eyes may be fixed upon an objec,
and continue looking at it while the head is moved to the right-fhoulder, —
which fweep of the head produces a greater effect upon the eyeballs
than can be counteracted by the action of the oblique mufcles; and
in this cafe we find that the oblique mufcles let go the eye, fo that it
immediately returns into its natural fituation in the orbit. Whether this
is performed by the natural elafticity of the parts; or whether the anta-
gonift oblique mufcles take up the a¢tion and reinftate the eye, I do not
know. If the head ftill continues its motion in the fame direction, then —
the fame oblique mufcles begin to act anew, and go on aéting, fo as
to keep the eyes fixed on the object: as this motion of the head feldom —
takes place uncombined with its other motions, fome of the ftraight and
oblique mufcles will be employed at the fame time, according as the
motions are compounded.


A DESCRIPTION


(7213) J


A DESCRIPTION OF THE NERVES WHICH
SUPPLY THE ORGAN OF SMELLING.


HE nerves being in themfelves perhaps the moft difficult parts of

an animal body to diffec&t, becomes a reafon why we are ftill un-
acquainted with many of their minuter ramifications: yet if a knowledge
of thefe, together with that of their origin, union and reunion, is at all
connected with their phyfiology, the more accurately they are inveftigated,
the more perfectly will the functions of the nerves be underftood. I have
no doubt, if their phyfiology was fufficiently known, but we fhould find
the diftribution and complication of nerves fo immediately connected with
their particular ufes, as readily to explain many of thofe peculiarities for
which it is now fo difficult to account. What naturally leads to this
opinion is, the origins and number of nerves being conftantly the fame ;
and particular nerves being invariably deftined for particular parts. The
fourth and fixth pair of nerves are remarkable inftances of this; and
wwe may reafonably conclude, that every part has its particular branch
allotted to it; and that however complicated the diftribution may be,
the complication is always regular. There are fome nerves which have a
_ peculiarity in their courfe, as the recurrent and chorda tympani; and
others which are appropriated to particular fenfations, as thofe which go
to four of the organs of fenfe, feeing, hearing, fmelling, and tafting; and
fome parts of the body having peculiar fenfations, (as the ftomach and
penis) we may, without impropriety, include the fifth, or fenfe of feel-
ing. This general uniformity, in courfe, conneCtion and diftribution, will
lead us to fuppofe that there may be fome other purpofe to be anfwered’
more than mere mechanical convenience. For many variations have
been defcribed in the difleGtions of nerves, which I believe to have arifen
from the blunders of the anatomift, rather than from any irregularity
Jo tee ? in


214 THE NERVES OF THE ORGAN OF SMELLING.


their number, mode of ramifying, courfe, diftribution, or connection* with
each other. We obferve no fuch uniformity in veflels carrying fluids;
but find particular purpofes anfwered by varying their origin and diftri-
bution: the pulmonary artery anfwers a very different purpofe in the
circulation of the blood, from that of the aorta ; yet both arife from the
fame fource, the heart.. The courfe of the arteries is fuch as will con-
vey the blood moft conveniently, and therefore not fo neceffary it fhould
be uniform; it not being very material to a part by what channel the
blood is conveyed ; though, in particular inftances, certain purpofes may
be anfwered by a peculiarity in origin and. diftribution, as happens in
the tefticle of quadrupeds.. This obfervation refpecting arteries is like-
wife applicable to veins, and {till more to the abforbent veffels, in which
laft, regularity is even lefs effential than in the veins. Whoever, there-
fore, difcovers a new artery, vein, or lymphatic, ‘adds little to the ftock
of phyfiological knowledge ; but he who difcovers a new nerve, or fur-
nifhes a more accurate defcription of the diftribution of thofe already
known, affords us information in thofe points which are moft likely to
lead to an accurate knowledge of the nervous fyftem: for if we confider -
how various are the origins of the nerves, although all arifing from the
brain, and how different the circumftances attending them, we muft
fuppofe a variety of ufes to arife out of this peculiar ftru¢ture. Indeed
if we reflect on the actions arifing immediately from the will, and affec-
tions of the mind, we mutt fee that the origin, connection, and diftri-
bution of the nerves, muft be exact, as there are parts whofe actions
immediately depend upon fuch circumftances. The brain may be faid to
have an intelligence with the body; but no fuch intercourfe fubfifts
between the different parts of the body and the heart.


@ Here it is to be underftood I do not mean lateral connection; fuch as two branches
uniting into one chord and then dividing ; or a branch goirig to a part, either fingle or double,
for ftill it is the fame nerve; or whether a branch unites with another a little fooner or a
little later, for ftill it is the fame branch. Such effects may arife more from a variety in.
the fhape of the bodies they belong to, than any variety in the nerves themfelves.


In


THE NERVES OF THE ORGAN OF SMELLING. Aes


In the fummer of 1754, I employed myfelf principally in diflecting
the nerves pafling out of the fkull ; in doing which I was, of courfe, led
to trace many of their connections with thofe from the medulla {pinalis ;
and was affifted by Dr. Smith, then purfuing his ftudies in London’.
The better to trace thefe nerves through the foramina of the fkull,
I fteeped the head in a weakned acid of fea-falt till the bones were ren-
dered foft, and that the parts might be as firm as poflible, and at the
fame time free from any tendency to. putrefaction ; efpecially as it was-
fummer, the acid was not diluted with water, but with fpirit. When.
the bones were rendered foft, I purfued my intention, and in the courfe
of the diflection difcovered the firft pair of nerves ; and having made a
preparation of the parts in which they were found, I immediately had
drawings made from them, with a view to have prefented the account to
the Royal Society, but other purfuits prevented it’. Engravings were
afterwards made from thefe drawings ; and the preparation was repeatedly
fhown by Dr. Hunter, in his courfes of anatomy, who, at the fame
time, pointed out that alteration in the mode of reafoning upon thofe
nerves, which would naturally arife from this difcovery. In this diffeCtion
I found feveral nerves, principally from the fifth pair, going to and loft
upon the membrane of the nofe; but fuppofe thofe have nothing to do
with the fenfe of {melling ; for it is more than probable, that what may
be called organs of fenfe, have particular nerves, whofe mode of action
is different from that-of nerves producing common fenfation; and alfe


@ Dr. Smith was afterwards teacher in chymiftry and anatomy, in the univerfity of Oxford ;.
is now Savilian profeffor of geometry, and lecturer in phyfiology. This account of the firft
pair of nerves, as alfo of the branches of the fifth, is taken from the original defcription
written by him, ‘and taken from my difiection when I was tracing them.


-> Dr. Scarpa, profeflor of anatomy at Pavia, while in London, in 1782, acquainted me
that he had diffected the ramifications of the olfactory nerves ; and that on his return to Italy
he meant to publifh an account of them. At this time I fhowed him my drawings and en-

“gravings. I have lately been informed that he has publifhed his account, but have not met
with it: I have, however, feen one of his engravings, which was executed in London, and
is very elegant. It only Rais thofe on the feptum narium, whofe minutenefs is rather car-
ried further than the power of diffection, and the ramifications are more regular than we find,
them in Nature.

different


216 THE NERVES OF THE ORGAN OF SMELLING,


different from one another; and that thé nerves on which the peculiar
functions of each of the organs of fenfe depend, are not fupplied from
different parts of the brain. The organ of fight has its peculiar nerve;
fo has that of hearing ; and probably that of {melling likewife ; and, on
the fame principle, we may fuppofe the organ of tafte to have a peculiar
nerve. Although thefe organs of fenfe may likewife have nerves from
different parts of the brain; yet it is moft probable fuch nerves are
only for the common fenfations of the part, and other purpofes anfwered
by nerves. Thus we find nerves from different origins going to the
parts compofing the organ of fight, which are not at all concerned in
the immediate act of vifion; it is alfo probable, although not fo de-
monftrable, that the parts compofing the ear have nerves belonging to
them fimply as a part of the body, and not as the organ of a particular.
fenfe: and if we carry this analogy to the nofe, we fhall find a nerve,
which we may call the peculiar neve of that fenfe ; and the other nerves
of this part, derived from other origins, which only convey common fen-
fation, we may fuppofe are only intended for, the common actions of the —
part. This mode of reafoning is equally applicable to the organ of
tafte; and if the opinion of peculiar nerves going to particular organs
of fenfe, be well founded, then the reafon is evident why the nofe,
as a part of our body, fhould have nerves in common with other parts,
befides thefe peculiar nerves ; and as the membrane of the nofe is of con-
fiderable extent, and has a great deal of common fenfation, we may fup-
pofe the nerves fent to this part, for that purpofe, will not be few in
‘number. It is upon this principle the fifth pair of nerves may be fuppofed
to fupply the eye and nofe in common with other parts; and, upon the
fame principle, it is more than probable, that every nerve fo affected as
to communicate fenfation, in whatever part of the nerve the impreffion
is made, always gives the fame fenfation as if affected at the common feat
of the fenfation of that particular nerve’. :
i The
I knew a gentleman who had the nerves which go to the glans penis completely deftroyed
by mortification, almoft as high as the union’of the penis with the pubes ; and at the edge of
the old {kin, at the root of the penis, where the nerves terminated, was the peculiar fenfation


of


THE NERVES OF THE ORGAN OF SMELLING. 217


The firft pair of nerves arriving at the part of its deftination as foon
as it efcapes from the fkull, and immediately ramifying, has rendered
its diftribution more obfcure than that of the others, wl:ofe courfe to
the part to which they are allotted is vifible and to be traced. As the
body of the nerve, while within the fkull, is pulpy and compofed of
the brain itfelf, it eafily breaks off at the very divifion and exit of the
{mall branches; it therefore becomes impoflible to trace them, as we
ufually do other nerves; and they have by moft phyfiologifts been con-
fidered as never forming chords, but going on in their pulpy form to be
diftributed on the membrane of the nofe, in a mode fomewhat fimilar to
that of the optic nerve ; and to what is commonly fuppofed to take place
with refpect to the portio mollis of the feventh pair. Winflow has fug-
gefted an idea, that the firft pair forms chords ; but it is only as an affer-
tion; and not having defcribed them, that alone was not fufficient to
alter the former mode at reafoning.

Haller, who is to be confidered as the lateft anatomift and phy-
fiologift, who has publifhed on the fubject, on whom we can depend,
fays, ‘“‘ That the firft pair of nerves makes its way into the nofe, covered
by the pia mater only, very little altered from what it was when within
the cavity of the fkull*.” This fhows that Haller retained the old idea
concerning thefe nerves: but we fhall find that they become firm chords
immediately upon piercing the dura mater and cribriform plate of the
ethmoid bone.

The firft pair, while within the fkull, differs in fome refpects from all
other nerves; firftly, it feems to be made up of a cortical and medullary
fubftance, while the others appear to confift of medullary alone; and


of the glans penis ; and the fenfation of the glans itfelf was now only common fenfation ;
therefore the glans has, probably, different nerves, and thofe for common fenfation may come
through the body of the penis to the glans.

A ferjeant of marines who had loft the glans, and the greater part of the body of the penis,
upon being afked, if he ever felt thofe fenfations which are peculiar to the glans, declared,
that upon rubbing the end of the ftump, it gave him exactly the fenfation which friction upon
the glans produced, and was followed by an emiffion of the femen.

* Elementa Phyfiologiz, vol. 5. page 151.
fecondly,


218 THE NERVES OF THE ORGAN OF SMELLING.


fecondly, it is different, in that it does not feem to be compofed of
fafciculi, and has but one covering from the pia mater invefting~ the
whole nerve ; whereas other nerves appear to have a covering round each
fafciculus; and this is probably the reafon why the firft pair is weaker
while within the fkull, than the others. Its form is fomewhat trian-
gular, having three edges, from its lying in a groove, made by two
convolutions of the brain. Its courfe is forwards, a little upwards and
inwards, and where it lies upon the cribriform plate of the ethmoid
bone, becomes fomewhat larger and divides into a great many branches,
like fo many roots, anf{wering to the number of holes in that plate, ex-
cept one for a branch of the fifth pair; but thefe divifions we cannot
fee, they being covered by the body of the nerve, which cannot be
raifed without breaking off the fmall branches at their origins. ~ As
the branches of the nerve pafs through this bone, they feem to take
procefles from the dura mater along with them; they then become
firm chords, fimilar to other nerves. Thefe branches, after they have
got through the bone, form themfelves into two planes or divifions,
one pafling on the feptum, the other on the turbinated bones. ‘Thefe
of the feptum narium, in their paflage to the nofe, are firft continued
a little way down, in bony canals of the perpendicular lamella of the
ethmoid bone; which holes become fmall grooves in that bone; and
thofe on the oppofite fide being more numerous and {maller, pafs down
in fmall holes that are on the infide plate of the ethmoid bone, which
holes are likewife continued into grooves, for a little way, upon that
plate. When thefe branches get upon the membrane of the nofe, they
fubdivide into.a great many fmaller ones, which are fomewhat flattened,
and.are only to be feen on that fide of the membrane that adheres to the
bones, not being vifible at all on the other; fo that the diffection of thefe
nerves is no more than feparating the membrane and bone from each
other. They can hardly-be diffected all round ; and the further they are
traced upon the membrane the fainter they become, and growing fmaller,
they fink deeper and deeper into the membrane to get on its outer furface,
where we muft fuppofe they terminate. Thofe upon the feptum pais

down.


OF SOME BRANCHES OF THE FIFTH PAIR OF NERVES. 219


down a little radiated, and the branches, efpecially at the upper part, or at
their firft fetting out, join one another. Thofe on the fide next the an-
trum, when they have reached the membrane of the nofe, in their courfe
to the fuperior turbinated bone, form a very confiderable network or
plexus ; and when they reach that bone, do not all go round its convex
curvated pendulous edge to the concave fide; but fome paffing through
the fubftance of that bone, get immediately upon it;, which is the
reafon why we find fo many holes in that bone. It is difficult to
trace them further; but it is reafonable to fuppofe that they go through
the inferior turbinated bone in the fame manner, fince we find fimilar
holes there.


A DESCRIPTION OF SOME BRANCHES OF THE FIFTH
PAIR OF NERVES.


In tracing the courfe of the olfactory nerves, I alfo difcovered feveral
branches of the fifth pair, not commonly known, particularly two that
were fuppofed to go to the membrane of the nofe for the fenfe of fmell-
ing; but which only pafs through that organ to their place of defti-
nation. The firft is a fmall nerve from the frft branch of the fifth pair ;
or, according to Winflow, the nervus ophthalmicus Willifii ; which
fmall nerve is called by Winflow, the nafal. This branch, after having
paffed out of the fkull into the orbit, re-enters the cranium through the
foramen orbitarium anterius, and gets on the cribriform plate of the eth-
moid bone; from thence it pafles down through one of the anterior holes
of the cribriform plate, and after having continued its courfe in a groove
on the nafal procefs of the frontal-bone, it runs forward and downward
in a fimilar groove on the infide of the os nafi; from thence getting on
the outfide of the cavity of the nofe, it runs along the cartilaginous part
of the ala, and near the extremity of the nofe mounts up upon the tip of
the ala,‘ and then dipping down between the two ale, is loft on the an-
- terior extremity of the cartilaginous feptum. In its courfe it fends feveral


{mall filaments into the ale.
F f The


2.2.0 OF SOME BRANCHES OF THE FIFTH PAIR OF NERVES.


The fecond, is a branch of the fuperior maxillary nerve; for that
nerve having pafied through the foramen rotundum, divides and fends off
feveral branches, one of which paffes backwards and inwards, through
the foramen commune, between the orbitar procefs of the palate, and the
root of the ala of the fphenoid bone, a branch of which gets into a fif-
fure, and feems. to feparate the root of the ala from the body of the
{phenoid bone, where that bone makes the roof of the nofe. This branch
then pafles along the under furface of the body of the {phenoid bone, in
its way to the feptum narium, and getting upon that part, pafies along
between its membranes and the bone: by courfe is downwards, and for-
wards towards the foramen incifivum, throu gh which it pafles and is loft
in the gum behind the firft dentes incifores, ae on the membrane of the
roof of the mouth at that part.

There is another branch of the fuperior maxillary nerve, which comes
off from. a large branch that is going down to the mouth uvula, &c.
and this branch, with its divifion into two, has been defcribed by pro--
feflor Meckel of Berlin ; but after tracing one of thefe into the portio dura,
he purfued the fearch no further. ‘This branch of the fuperior maxillary
nerve pafles back through the foramen pterigoideum, accompanies the caro-
tid artery as it pafies acrofs the pofterior edge of the foramen, and there
divides into two branches; one of which pafies down along with the
carotid artery, through the bafis of the fkull, and proceeding in a con-
trary direction to the courfe of the artery, in contact with that branch of
the cervical ganglion that pafies up with the carotid artery to join the
fixth pair; then joins the firft cervical ganglion. The other branch _
decuffates that artery on its upper furface, and getting upon the an-
terior fide of the petrous portion of the temporal bone, then enters a _
{mall hole near the bottom of that large one which affords a paffage to the
feventh pair of nerves, joining the portio dura, juft where that nerve
makes its firft turn, paffes along with it through what is called the aque-
duct. This nerve, compofed of portio dura, and the branch of the fifth
pair, fends off, in the adult, the chorda tympani before its exit from the
fkull; and in the foetus, immediately after. The termination of the

; branch


OF SOME BRANCHES OF THE FIFTH PAIR OF NERVES. 221


branch, ®alled chorda tympani, I fhall not defcribe; I am almoft certain
it is not a branch of the feventh pair of nerves, but the laft-defcribed
branch from the fifth pair; for I think I have been able to feparate this
branch from the portio dura, and have found it lead to the chorda tympa-
ni; perhaps, is continued into it; but this is a point very difficult to de-
termine, as the portio dura is a very compact nerve, and not fo fafciculated
as fome others are ; however this may-be, it is.very reafonable to fuppofe
that the chorda tympani is a branch of the fifth pair, as it goes to join
another branch arifing from the fame trunk.


Bite PLATE


P2283.


—=—=


Plate I.


EN


LV heimeds {2 ded:


[ 223 ]


Pe AG TE 1
HE IAS or firft pair of nerves, as they are feen upon the
membrane of the feptum narium.


The bony feptum 1 is removed to expofe the nerves of the tight noftril,
as they pafs at firtt between the membrane and bone,


A The os frontis.


~  B The frontal finus. ©


C The cartilaginous part of the feptum narium.

**** The cut edge, from which the feptum has been feparated all round.

D The furface of the common {fkin, where it is loft 1 in the membrane
of the nofe.

E The upper lip.

F Part of the alveolar procefs of the maxillary bone next the fymphyfis.

G The roof of the mouth.

H The bony palate.

I The uvula, and palatum molle.

_K The upper part of the fauces.

L_ The opening of the Euftachian tube.

M The cuneiform procefs of the os occipitis.

N The infide of the cuneiform procefs, near the foramen magnum oe-
cipitale.

O The pofterior clinoid procefs.

P The fphenoid finus, with its rene

~Q The fella Turcica.

R The crifta galli. :

SS The membrane of the right noftril that tine d the feptum ; the feptum
being removed.

T A branch of the fifth pair of nerves, that comes through the foramen
commune, or {pheno- palatinum.

UUU The firft pair of nerves, having pafled through the cribriform
plate of the ethmoid bone, ramifying on the membrane of the feptum.
