Patronages, G.


*
*
RE


N /in Scotland are occaſioning ſuch heat
AWAY and contention, *tis ſurprizing to
bed ſo many of the Gentlemen of

s Scotland ſtanding as idle Spectators
of the Flame, when it does not actually touch
themſelves, in the immediate Settlement of their
own: Pariſh- Churches, taking no ſteps to pre-
vent the Piſorder in general, by a new Law.
The Matter is left almoſt wholly to the Clergy,
and-a few Gentlemen who happen to be much
under their influence, as if this were an Affait


in which the Clergy alone are concerned: while


yet 'tis manifeſt that the Intereſt of che Gentle
men of Scotland is much more concerned than
that of the Clergy : and they are generally ſen-


ſible of it when it is repreſented to them.
. b A 2 — T he


Xa; HEN the Settlement of the Churches


*


7 1
(( 200) |
The raſh imprudent Schemes purſued by
ſome weak Zealots of the Church, have con-


tributed not a little to make wiſe Men averſe |


from concurring with them: bur this ſhould not
hinder their contributing what they can for ob-
taining a wiſe Regulation of this matter, different
from that purſued by the Zealots. I apprehend


that many of the Gentlemen are not yet fully


apprized of the miſerable State of this matter,


according to the preſent Laws; and of the fa-
ral- Conſequences to be apprehended, if theſe


Laws continue unrepealed. Others lie ſtill in
this affair from a baſe Indifference about the
| Intereſts of their Country, or from a ſervile
Caution of offending thoſe in Power, by taking


any Steps to which, they are not preyiouſly com -


manded.; leſt they- ſhould lofe any little Places
or Penſions they hold, or loſe their diſtant Hopes
of ſuch Advantages: While yet they won't do


the ingenuous friendly office of repreſenting


faithfully to Men in Power, what the Nation in
general expects from them; the granting of


Which, would really ſettle their Intereſt in the


hearts of a great Majority of the Gentry, as well
as of the Clergy, and Populace. 1


The following Conſiderations are humbly of-
fered to the Gentlemen of Scotland; firſt, on the
preſent, State of Patronages, and the Conſe-
quences to be apprehended, if the Laws conti-
nue as they are; and next are offered ſome
Thoughts upon the Importance of thoſe, Rights,


which the Gentlemen of Scotland have loſt by
theſe Laws, | RE


a »
.
tt aw” a + 0
> " » -
——U— .
: ,


w 4 —


SA te 3d fibcs 5,7 Bi


1. To apprehend well the preſent State of
Patronages, we muſt reſume this matter from
the Reformation. At that remarkable Period,

the whole Temporalities of the Church were re-

ſumed by the Crown and Parliament: and ſoon
after; anew Maintenance was ſettled for Miniſters,
in; about 960 Pariſh-Churches. Yer in that ir-
regular haſty Settlement the Patronages were
not aboliſhed by Law: The Patrons therefore
of the old, ſplendid, Popiſh Livings, ſtill claimed

a Patronage in the new- ſettled, poor Stipends
for Pariſh-Miniſters. The Lords, or Gentlemen,
who got from the Crown Grants of the Superi-
orities and Lands of old Abbeys, claimed alſo
the Patronage of all the Churches which were
in the Gifts of thoſe Abbeys, during Popery.
The King too claimed the old Patronage of the
Crown, and thoſe of any Ecclæſiaſtick Corporations
not granted away. The Scotch Biſhops, whenſo-
ever they came in, claimed the Patronages be-
longing in times of Popery to the Popiſh Sees.
But upon the Reformation, the Eccleſiaſtick
Laws, or Acts of Aſſembly, confirmed alſo in
Parliament, required, in order to a Settlement
of a Miniſter, ſome Concurrence of the Congre-
gation, of the Heretors and Kirk-Seſſion, before
a Presbytery could regularly ordain or inſtall the
Miniſter preſented. Frequent Confuſions, no
doubt, were occaſioned by the jarring of the Pa-
trons with the Presbyteries, or Heretors; But
the final Deciſion of all ſuch Debates in the Set-
tlement of Churches, was by Act of Parliament,
James VI. Anno 1567, committed to the Gene-
ral Aſſembly. 3 e |

Thus Matters continued to the Year 1649,
. when by AR of Parliament Patronages * |

. i


5 (a3.
liſhed intirely, and the Election or Nomination
of Miniſters was committed to the Kirk-Seſions,
or Elders; who, in thoſe days of univerſal So-


briety, and, outward Appearance at leaſt, of


Religion among the Presbyterians, were generally


the Gentlemen or Heretors of beſt Conditiom in
the Pariſhes, who were in Communion with the
Church. After the Reſtoration of King Charles IT,
along with Epiſcopacy Patronages returned, yet
under the old Laws; and all Debates were finally
determinable by the General Aſſemblies, which,
even under Epiſcopacy, were the Supreme Ecele-
flaſtick Court. Thus they continued “till! the
Revolution, when the Presbyterian Model was
reſtored by Act of Parliament.

The Presbyterian Parliament after the Revo-
 totion, An. 1690 Act 23. did firſt abrogate all


Laws eſtabliſning the Right-of Patronage and


* paſs, annul, and make void, chat Power alto-

* gether; committing to the Heretors and El.
ders in the Country, and to Magiſtrutes, Toto
Council, and Elders, in Burroughs, the Right öf
electing the Miniſters. And then by a ſubſequent
Act, vis. the 29th of the ſame Seſſion, veſted all
the Saperiorities and Rights of the Scotch Biſhops,
in the Crown. Sure they never intended to in
clude among them that Right of Patronage, which
by a former Act was aboliſhed altogether. There


muſt be ſome other Foundation for this Claim of


the Crown, if there be any at all. The Patron-
ages of the Biſhops, were they to ſubſiſt at all,
ſhould more naturally have gone, with their o-
ther Ecolefiaſtick Powers, to the ſeveral Presby-


teries; as that Right now devolves, by any neg.


lect of any Patron, to the Presbytery.


Thus :


672


Thus Matters continued in a very peaceable
eaſy manner till the Year 17113 when the late
Queen's Miniſtry, intending to defeat the Hano-
wer Succeſſion, took all methods ta harraſs ſuch


aà⁊lã⁊s were firmly attach'd to it, which the Presby-


terian Gentry and Clergy ever were, both from
Principle and Intereſt. An Act therefore was
obtained, reſtoring Patrons to their Power, tha?
in the moſt direct Oppoſition to the Articles of
Union, and the publick Faith of the Nation then
given, in that ſacred Treaty, upon which is found-
ed his Majeſty's Title to the Crown of Scotland,
and the very Parliament of Great-Britain itſelf.
This Treaty, as ſacredly and ſolemnly ſecured
to the Church of Scotland all its Rights and Pri-
vileges, and all the Laws, as they then were, in
its favour, to continue unalterable for ever, as it
ſecured any thing elſe whatſoever, _ |
By this AR, however, in 1711, the King is
now in poſſeſſion of the Patronage of aboye 550
Churches, out of 930: having not only the old
Patronage of the Crown, but many Patronages
acquired at the Reformation, not yet alienated;
all the Patronages of the fourteen Biſhops 3 and
all the Patronages of the Lords forfeited in 1715 3
and theſe Patronages may all be uſed for any ſuch
Purpoſes. as the Miniſters of State ſhall adviſe. -
Of the remaining Churches not in the King's
Gift, there are near 200 in the Patronage of
ſome Lords, who ſometimes have not one foot
of Land in the Pariſhes, nor any Rents or Inte-
reſt whatſoever in them, or at beſt, but ſame tri-
kling few Duty, or free Tiends; and this by vir-
tue of ſome old Grant to their Anceſtors, of the
Superiorities of ſome Abbeys or Convents; or
py their retaining this, among ſome other de
8 | ; | | | pe-


„
Superiorities over Lands, which their Anceſtors
have ſquandered away ſome” Ages ago. The
Magiſtrates of ſome few Burroughs are Patrons
of ſome of their Churches. But there are not
150 Pariſhes in Scotland, where the Patronage is
in any Gentleman of conſiderable Eſtate, or na-
tural Intereſt in the Pariſhes, to whom it is of a-
ny real conſequence, as to himſelf, whether the
Miniſter be a Perſon of Sobriety, Diligence, or
good Abilities in his Office, or not.
The Miſchiefs of Patronage are but heginning
to appear. The Patrons cannot yet ſucceſsfully
preſent Men of bad Morals, or make Simoniacal
Bargains, tho? ſome Attempts of this kind are
talked of. The Presbyteries, and ſome Heretors,
are not yet tame enough to quit their Rights al-
together; Settlements upon Preſentations are
often retarded, and. ſometimes defeated : The
Preſentations are not yet current ſaleable Goods
a filly, vicious, or groſsly imprudent Preſentee,
may be defeated. The Gentry, tho! too indg-
lent about the Affair in general, or about the ob-
taining a new Law, yet when a Settlement, con-
trary to their Inclinations, is a forcing upon them
in their own Pariſhes, ſhew abundant Zeal in the
particular Caſe. *Tis deplorable that the Po-
pulace, who have little Judgment about the Abi-
lities of Men, generally pitch upon as weak Can-
didates as the Patrons do, nay, ſometimes upon
worſe: And the Gentlemen who oppoſe the Pa-
tron muſt join them, and allow them greater


Power than in proportion to their Abilities of dif-
cernment. Men muſt not ſubdivide into Parties,
who are oppoſing a ſuperior Power. The Preſ-
byteries getierally too oppo; a Preſentation, un.
leſß they can bring a tolerable *


oo þ ADE Is


Ht


the Pariſh 3 ſometimes chiefly regarding the He-


retors, and ſometimes the Elders alſo and Peo-
ple, There are 1 yet great Struggles in
this Matter. But if the Humour increaſes among


the Gentry of deſpiſing their own Right in this


Matter; and if along with their Rights, thoſe of
the Presbyteries, and other Church-Judicatories,
tho? confirmed by Acts of Parliament, muſt be


given up to gratify the Patrons, the Presbyte-


ries and Elders thus deſerted by the Gentlemen,
will ſoon be wearied out, eſpecially if Deciſions
of the Lords of the Seſſion run againft them:
Then at laſt every Preſentation will paſs current,


and take effect, without Oppoſition ; and when


this happens the natural Effects of ſuch a Settle-
ment of Patronage will appear deplorable, f


Inſtead of ſtudying Sobriety of Manners, Pi-
ety, Diligence or Literature, one or other of


which Qualities are now neceſſary to recommend
the Candidates to the Favour of Heretors, Elders,
or Presbytery, the Candidates ſole ſtudy will be


to ſtand right in Politicks, to make his Zeal for


the Miniſtry of State conſpicuous, or by all ſer=


vile compliance with the Humour of ſome great
Lord who has many Churches in his Gift, whe-


ther that Humour be virtuous or vicious, to ſes
cure a Preſentation from him. a


When a Patron, or one much in favour with


a Patron, or with a Miniſter of State happens
to be mercenary and covetous there will be
Bribes and Purchaſes in the caſe. A Man of Li-
terature of a Gentlemanly Education, can afford
nothing for a ſmall Stipend, the whole of which
cannot maintain him in the way of Life he muſt
lead, or provide him with Books for his further
Improvement, The poor illiterate Wretch,


. WM


Can} -

who. never was accuſtomed to a better way of
Life than a Plough-man, who deſires no Books,
or learned Converſation, or Society with Gentle-
men, he is the ſure Purchaſer ; he can ſubſiſt on
twenty or thirty Pounds per annum; to him this
is a ſufficient Living, nay his Condition is raiſed;
he can allow the other half of his Stipend to run
on for eight or ten Years to diſcharge the Simo-
niacal Debt. In better Livings of 90 or 100 J.
per annum the Bargain may be better: the Price
may be three or four hundred Pounds Sterling;
a Sum not deſpicable to ſome very honourable
Families in Scotland, or great Court-Favourites.
One muſt expect, whenever Preſentations take
effect without obſtruction, that this will be the
caſe ordinarily in this Country, where there is ſo
much Indigence; and then the Scatch Clergy will
be the moſt deſpicable Set of Church- men in

Chriſtendom. | |

Many of the Gentry who depend on the preſen
Muiniſters of State, and have their Favour, are
very keen in the Cauſe of Patronages: tis the
Power of their Patrons they ate ſupporting. Lit-
tle do they think of the Inconſtancy of Power, or
Favour at Court, what they now are building
up, may hereafter be the Support and Defence of
their Enemies, upon a Change of Favour, The
Enemies to the preſent Miniſtry, however many
of them appear keen for the Repeal of the Patro-
nage Act, yet would be grieved if it ſucceeded
under the preſent Miniſtry ; they well know how
popular an Act it would be to reſtore ſo valuable
a Right to the Body of the Gentry.in Scotland :
they know that the whole Odium of the Refuſal
will {till fall upon thoſe in Power and thoſe only.
No Artifice the Miniſters of State can * will

| = | creen


nn)
ſcreen them from it; if the Bill is defeated it is
by their means, however they may allow a Friend
or two to vote for it. They could eaſily carry
the Bill without Expence or Trouble if they
pleaſed, when ſo many of the State-Oppoſition
are moving for it. A Lord or two may deſire to
be heard by their Lawyers againſt the Bill, but
tis well known that if the Court were hearty for
it theſe very Lords, rather than loſe their Places
or Penſions, would be the firſt Movers for the
Repeal. The Repeal indeed would diminiſn a
little, and but a very little, the Power of the
preſent Miniſtry to oblige Friends by a Preſen-
tation from the Crown now and then. But till the
Heretors, Elders, People, and Clergy have forgot-
ten more thoroughly their ancient Right this Pow-
is not ſo very conſiderable. It may indeed here-
after become pretty great, and obtain to ſome
future Miniſters perhaps four or five Years Pur-
_ Chaſe of near two thirds of the Church-Reve-
nues of Scotland as they fall vacant. |


Tis ſubmitted to all impartial Men whether has


that Act in 1711 was not the moſt direct Breach
of the moſt ſolemn publick Faith in the Articles

of Union? And whether it can be very glorious
' In the Miniſters or Friends of a Proteſtant Prince
of the Hanover-Line, to retain that Claim, ſo op-
preſſive to the Church of Scotland, which was in-
troduced by the Enemies of that illuſtrious Fami-
ly, on purpoſe to diſtreſs and raiſe Diſſenſions in
the Church of Scotland, becauſe of their ſteady
Adherence to their Succeſſion, when it was in
great Danger. |


II. As to the Importance of thoſe Rights the. |
Gentlemen of Scotland are deprived of by _
B 2 W


{ (-12
Law reſtoring Patronages: Rights are of impor -
tance, according to Men's Notions of Life : what
affects Religion is of Importance to the Religious:
but to all Men it is of Importance to have ſome
Power to ſerve their Friends, or the Men they


eſteem and love. Suppoſe a Man of Fortune


void of all Religion or regard to Piety and Vir-
tue, yet he muſt deſire ſuch Power of every kind.
Would not any Gentleman think himſelf highly


injured, were he deprived of his Right of voting
in the Meetings of the Shire, about chuſing the


Collectors of the Seſs, or any other civil Matters?
And yet this is but one Vote among 30 or 60


Votes, or perhaps 90 or 100, in chuſing to Pla-


ces of ſmall Profit. What is it then when the
whole Gentry of a Nation, or at laſt ninety · nine
in a hundred, loſe their Votes, and all Influence
in Elections to Places of greater Value, in Elec-
tions Where each one had a Vote among eighteen


or twenty Voters, nay, ſometimes among far
fewer? This is the caſe as to Elections of Pariſh-


Miniſters. What is it to have the Votes of al-
moſt all who have any natural Concern in ſuch
Matters ſtruck off; to have near two thirds of
ſuch Places diſpoſed of by a Miniſter of State, or


ſome Favourite of his, while the beſt Gentlemen


in the Country are mere Cyphers in this Matter
which ſo nearly concerns them; and the remain


ing third part of ſuch Places in the Gift of a


few Lords and Gentlemen who often have no E-
ſtate or Intereſt in the Pariſhes? The moſt diſa-
greeable Man, who has perhaps affronted a Gen-
tleman, may be ſettled under his Noſe as a Spy
upon him, by a Court Intereſt; or by ſome diſ-


affected Lord, becauſe of the Gentleman's good


Affection to the King and his Miniſtry. *Tis fur-
„ 1 prizing


( I'3 )
prizing that the Gentry of Scotland are not more
aware of the Conſequences of all this, as a civil
Matter, abſtracted from all religious Conſidera-
tions.

As to thoſe who have ſome Regards for Reli-
gion, they cannot be at a loſs in ſeeing the Miſ-
Chiefs which muſt ariſe in a little time from the
- preſent Laws, Let Divines inſiſt on Arguments

from Scripture, and the innumerable ſevere Ca-
nons in the early and leſs corrupt Ages of the
Church: I ſuggeſt only Thoughts of common
Prudence. | de
Can a Miniſter of State at London know the

Characters of our Probationers for the Miniſt
in the Church ? Is it to be expected that his De-
pendents and Favourites, in ſolicicing by his
means for a regal Preſentation, will ordinaril
regard conſcientiouſly the moral Charactets and
Abilities of the Candidates? Is there no danger
of ſecret Contracts of a very infamous nature? If
a Candidate is related to one who has ſome Votes
in the Shire for Members of Parliament, or has
great Intereſt in a Burrough, mayn't he gene-
rally obtain a regal Preſentation from a Miniſter
of State without any regard to Merit? nay may
not Men of Intereſt in Shires or Burroughs make
conditional Sales of ſuch Preſentations? *Tis
certain there may be- ſome Abuſe made, ſome
_ Miſtakes may happen upon the beſt Schemes of

Church-Settlements: But let any Man of common
Candour conſider whether rhe Dangers of Pre-
ſentation of worthleſs, immoral, or weak mean
Men be not incomparably greater according to
the preſent State of Patronages, than in almoſt any
Scheme which was ever deviſed. If Minifters are
to bechoſen by the Men of Property in the *

: EC ra


*
—_


5 (14)
ral Pariſhes, in conjunction with the Elders as
Repreſentatives of the People, is there any ſuch
Hope of Succels to a vicious or deſpicable Crea-
ture? How hardly will a number of Perſons ſome-
way concerned in the Character of their Miniſter,
be either unacquainted with it or concur in e-
lecting an infamous Candidate? Can Miniſters of
State or great Lords living at London, or in re-
mote parts of Scotland, have ſuch Opportunities
of Information, or ſuch Intereſt in ſettling agreea-
ble diligent wiſe Men? Can a Simoniacal Bargain
be a Secret which 1s contracted with ten or a do-
zen of Electors? There's no Compariſon in theſe
points. Would Heretors, Elders, Presbytery,
or People, ever have choſen that Fornication- Hero
who is lately excommunicated ? *Tis well known
that Kirk-Seſſion, Presbytery, Synod, and Peo-
ple, long oppoſed his Settlement, till at laſt the
want of legal Proof of relevant Immoralities, and
the great Deference to that truly noble and great
Lord the Patron, brought them to a ſort of un-
willing Compliance. When ſuch an Inſtance
happened by the Preſentation of that moſt noble
Lord, whoſe hereditary Good-will and Affection
to the Church of Scotland, whoſe Superiority
to all baſe Temptations of Money are ſo —
known, what may be dreaded from many other
Patrons of very different Charafters?

Is it nothing to the Gentlemen of Scotland to
tranſmit, along with their Lands, to their Heirs
a natural hereditary Influence among their Neigh-
bours, by which they can reward any wiſe inge-
nious ſober Scholar, who by faithful Diligence as
2 Tutor, has formed the Minds of their Heirs to
Knowledge and Virtue? What when a worthy
Kinſman takes to that way of Life in the —


8 0


( 11 *


If a Gentleman's Relations are unworthy or vi-
cious, unfit for that ſacred Office, Men of E-


ſtates won't get the Concurrence of other Here-
tors and Elders or the Presbytery. But when
the Kinſman is really worthy and pious, is it no-
thing to have ſome Influence in obtaining to him
a comfortable Support? Muſt this whole Power
be confined to the King and ſeven or eight Lords ?


As to the few Burroughs where Magiſtrates and


Council are now Patrons of their own Churches,
or of ſome of them, they have their own Friends
to take care of : Country Gentlemen cannot have
any Expectation from them. Is it the true Scotch
Spirit to love to be Suppliants for every thing, to
cringe to Men in Power rather than to have a na-
tural Power of their own, a few Beneficia Populi,
to be obtained by their Favour ? |

Is it to be expected that Men of Fortune, thus
deprived of what was eſtabliſhed to them as their
Right by the moſt ſolemn Faith of the moſt ſo- -
lemn Treaty incorporating two Nations, will
think themſelves concerned to regard or to fup-


port the Credit and Influence of Preachers forced |


upon them without their Conſent? And when Mi-
niſters are thus neglected by Men of Fortune in
the Pariſh, and perhaps affronted (as the Paſſions
of Men in a juſt Cauſe may often lead them far-
ther than they ought) is it to be expected that


| Maniſters won't ſoon too be deſpiſed by the Popu-


lace, and loſe all Influence with them as to any
thing of Piety or Virtue in their Manners? I need
not enlarge upon theſe Miſchiefs ; they are abun-


dantly known in ſome Places already; and all


who have any regard to Religion muſt think it
a Matter of Conſequence to prevent them for the


future.


In


(46) ...


In whatever light we conlider this Matter, it


can't appear as a thing indifferent. Is it not of


ſome Importance to Gentlemen to have a Mini-
ſter capable of entertaining them agreeably in


: 323 with rational and edifying Diſcourſes? |


it nothing to Gentlemen particularly to ſuch
as reſide in the Country, to have a Minifter they


could make a Friend of, a Man of Letters and


good Senſe one of ſocial virtuous Diſpoſitions of
Mind, who hath had the Advantage of a liberal
Education and not only knows Books but Men
and good Company? Would not a Gentleman
alſo value one who underſtands and teaches the
true Principles of Religion and Morality to his
Children his Family his Tenants and all his
Neighbourhood, and who does what he can by
his Life and Doctrine to form their Tempers
and Lives in the moſt effectual Manner for pro-
moting their own Happineſs, and being good


12 Members of Society; one who is capable of giv-


ing wiſe Advices, reconciling Variances, promo-


ting Peace and Love, and hath a juft Influence


for advancing theſe good Ends? Abſtracting e-


ven from Chriſtianity and a future State, don't


theſe things well deſerve the Care and Attention
of any Gentleman of Thought and Conduct. And
is it not therefore of ſome Conſequence to have


ſome Influence in their Pariſhes in the Choice of a |


right Miniſter? And if we ſuppoſe that Gentlemen
have a real Regard to Piety and our holy Chriſtian
Religion, as God be thanked there are ſtill many


ſuch in Scotland, they have ſtill much more Rea-


ton to be ſollicitous in this Matter. 5
1 ſhall not ſay much of the preſent Bill in de-
pendence, or other Schemes propoſed, T is plain


the Bill propoſed would effectually .
. of


I :


of theſe Evils which ariſe from Patronage, If it
took place Settlements would generally be ac-
cording to the Inclinations of the principal Men
of Intereſt in each Pariſh, who could give moſt
Credit and Influence to the Miniſter, and con-
tribute moſt to his Encouragement in his Work,
and theſe Men of Intereſt generally ſpeaking
would bring the Tenants and inferior People a-
long with them, ſo that unhappy Debates and
Diviſions about Settlements would be in a great
meaſure prevented. There are few Pariſhes in
which there would not be ten or twelve Electors;
there generally would be three times that num-
ber, The People would be reprefented by the


Elders, and hold a like Eccleſiaſtick Liberty to


that they have in civil Matters. Simony would
be generally impracticable. Immoral or weak
Men could have ſmall hopes of Admiſſion. |
If that Bill paſſed I ſhould not doubt of ſee-


ing a great Improvement among the Scotch Cler-
gy in a few Years. More of the younger Sons


of Gentlemen would ſtudy Divinity, and ſuch
would have better Hopes of being ſoon admitted
into Livings, Their better Education and In-
tereſt, with their Patrimonys, would obtain more


Eſteem and Influence among the Gentry as well
as among the People. They might be impro-


ving Companions, Inſtructors, Adviſers to the


better ſort in general, particularly to young Gen-


tlemen in their Education and Conduct in Life.
Nor would the Sons of Gentlemen have any
reaſon to deſpiſe this way of Life. To every wife
and-vertuous Man this Office muſt appear to be
of the moſt uſeful Tendency, wherein a Man
may at leaſt propoſe to do as much Good to his
 Fellow-Creatures, as in any other of the middle
© E Stations


*
*


( 483 en :
Stations of Life whatſoever ; and therefore it has
the juſteſt Claim to Eſteem and Reſpect among
Mankind. And it maybeſaid in general that
bad as we are it muſt be owing to the preſent
Misbehaviour of Clergymen themſelves if they
want as much Regard (among People at leaſt of
ordinary Thought and Diſcretion) as they ought
reaſonably to deſire. And though indeed their
Livings be but ſmall in compariſon of thoſe in
the neighbouring Countries, or rather that they

re more equally divided and no very great
Benefices among them, yet ſuch as they are they
don't ſeem to be below, even in a civil Account,
Gentlemen's younger Sons, or even the eldeſt


Sons of many of them. At a moderate Compu-


tation one with another including Glebes and
Manſes they may be reckoned about Eighty
Pounds per annum. Pray how few Gentlemen's
Sons make more in their different Ways of Life,
even thoſe of our other learned Profeſſions, Law-
yers, Attorneys, Phyſicians, Surgeons, how few
of them would not chearfully give their yearly
Profits by their Buſineſs for Eighty Pounds ?
Where one makes more in Sco land, I believe
I may venture to ſay three make leſs, And what


is a great Advantage to Miniſters is that what


they have is ſure, at leaſt not expoſed to ſuch
terrible Viciflitudes or ſuch pry Circum-
ſtances as the Fortunes of moſt other People are.


Beſides much depends upon that Sobriety and
Regularity of Life both at home and abroad
which their Character in a particular manner re-
quires, and enables them to live better upon their
Stipends, than moſt other People in a different
Way, upon the like Sum and a good deal mores :


2


* = T7 CT EE Er 0” "> bd — 1 2. TT. IF


0


> .


(19)
If Gentlemen's: Sons were educated this way
a ſtop would naturally be put to Lads of mean
Parentage and Circumſtances directing their
Views to the Miniſtry, none of whom indeed


ſhould be encouraged or recommended by Gen-


tlemen or Miniſters and puſh'd through Schools
and Colleges as too many fince the Revolution
have been, unleſs there be evidently ſomething
uncommonly bright and promiſing in their Ge-
nius. For the Intereſts of Religion and Virtue
and the reaſonable Credit and Influence of the
Clergy for doing Good, I wiſh that much more
Caution may be uſed this way for the future,
For this Reaſon it is to be defired that ſome
Regulation were made about Burſaries, that ſome


were ſuppreſſed altogether, and two, three, or


four others were joined in one, to be a handſome
Encouragement not below any young Man of
real Merit. Some Method I hope will be fallen
upon for this. But in the mean time it is one
thing indeed that very much recommends this
Bill to me, that by putting Settlements chiefly


into the hands of the principal Men of Intereſt
in the Pariſhes, it will encourage a greater num-


ber of virtuous and ſtudious young Gentlemen to


take to this way of Life, which is contemptible _


upon no account, if it be not perhaps thought
ſo by reaſon of ſo many People of very mean
Birth and Fortune having got into it. And this
is what I think very well deſerves the Conſidera-
tion of the Scotch Gentry, thoſe particularly of
the middle kind, and ſhould alſo excite the Con-


cern of all thoſe who wiſh well to the Advance-


ment of all valuable and uſeful Improvements
among the Clergy, | | |
| C2 | There


(20)

There have been many sther Schemes propo-
ſed about the Settlement of Churches, every one
of which is liable to Inconyeniencies, and I am
far from thinking the onE'propoſed in the Bill


zs altogether free of them. Yet I would prefer
it to the moſt J have ſeen, particularly to ſuch


as put it wholly or chiefly in the hands of the
Populace. Inſtead of many Reaſons I ſhall only
name one why I would do ſo, viz. that the Po-
pulace are by no means the fitteſt and beſt
Judges of miniſterial Qualifications. Preaching
tor inſtance is one main thing to be noticed in a
right Choice, Now what kind of Preachers are


they whom the Vulgar chiefly admire? Why


chiefly thoſe who ſtrike their outward Senſes tn
the ſtrongeſt manner, ſuch as have the molt
noiſy and ſtrange Vociferation, uſe the moſt vi-
olent Action and Geſtures ; or ſuch as declaim
moſt againſt Superiors in Church and State, and
ſhew the warmeſt Zeal about little things. They
may live well enough with Miniſters of another


Character. But ſuch Clergymen as theſe: now


deſcribed will be generally the greateſt Idols of
the Populace, though they are poſſeſſed of little


Learning, Senſe, or Moderation, or any other


good Qualities, Now if the Choice of Miniſters


were chiefly in the Vulgar, I would be much a-


fraid this would be one bad Effe& among others,
that it would be too violent a Temptation to
Preachers in order to gain the Applauſe of the
Electors to ſuit themſelves to their mean and


depraved Taſte. A Habit of this kind is ſoon


contracted, and the Effect of it very charming
to many Minds, and indeed it is a much more
eaſy Task than to gain the rational Approbation
of Gentlemen of Virtue and Diſcernment. But


"+ alan


3
. =
W = *.
3
2x0
2 5


— WH 9
«4
7


Cc OT. "9 ©


A o&


TS
alas need I'fay of what vaſt Prejudice this would
be to all-elegant and valuable Studies? and what


is much more to be conſidered a very great Loſs


to the Intereſts of true Religion and Virtue ?
But not to argue upon other Schemes, it maz
be of more uſe to notice that by Men's diſa-
greeing about the different Schemes in any good
Deſign, the whole is often defeated. It were


heartily to be wiſhed that all would unite in the


one already propoſed in Parliament, even though


they don't think it the beſt poſſible. No Scheme
will prevent all Inconveniences; and none will


ever ſucceed which does not allow a great Influ-
ence to the Gentlemen of Eſtates. Tis a grand
Advance to remove once the old inveterate E-


vil of Patronage; Amendments may perhaps be


more eaſily obtained hereafter, if they are found
neceſſary, *Tis ſtrange Folly to be contriving


varieties of Schemes while it is yet ſo uncertain
whether any Alteration is really intended by thoſe


who alone can accompliſh it. I can't but ſuf- |


pect all as Enemies in their hearts to this Re-


peal who are not willing to accept that Bill with
all Gratitude to God and our Civil Governours,
whatever better Plans they may fancy: and


ſetting a- foot unpracticable Schemes, ſuch as
cannot be expected from the Legiſlature, muſt


be a Stratagem of the ſecret Enemies of the
whole Deſign, by which weak honeſt Men are


to be defeated of the Advantage deſired.


Honeſt Men who wiſh well to the Country
and King, and to the Church of Scotland,


ſhould not upon any Delay of their Requeſts


run violently againſt the King, or thoſe he thinks
fit to employ. Enemies of che Church may in-
ſtigate them to this Conduct, on purpoſe to de-

„ feat


men are ſolicitous to have their Sons ſober and


( 22 ) .
feat the Repeal of Patronages. This Conduct
oftner flows from a faFinus ambitions Spirit, than
from real Love to aur Country. But ' tis hoped


the Friends of the Adminiſtration will ſeriouſly


conſider the Danger to the Country from ſuch
continual Ferments; the terrible Evils to be


feared from the Patronages when they come to
take effect without Oppoſition; the Corruptions
of the Clergy, and the neglect of Religion and


Sobriety of Manners among the People, when
unreſtrained by a Clergy, grown deſpicable or


\ hateful to them: and the Advantages which


would accrue to the body of the Gentry from
obtaining their old Right again; while yet the
Patrons if they are Men of Eſtates in the Pa-
riſhes would ſtil!l have an Influence almoſt equal
to Patronage, of a more neighbourly and gain-
ly fart. It theſe things be well conſidered and
repreſented to the Miniſtry by thoſe who ſtand
well with them, ſuch Applications could not


well want Succeſs.


At the Quarterly Meetings of the Shires are
there none on the Court- Side, wha have ſuch


Regard for their Country and Church, as to
concert proper Repreſentations, or Petitions a-


bout this Matter? Muſt every thing Popular,
every Motion in favour of the Country, of the
Body of the Gentry, of the Church, ever take
its riſe among Gentlemen diſaffected to the Ad-
miniſt ration? 7 rh to b 3x ad 07-

I might mention many other Conſiderations
to ſhew that *tis of conſequence to Gentlemen to
countenance the Clergy of Scatland more than
they do; to improve their Condition; to chuſe

en of Learning and Manners. Moſt Gentle-


vir-


4 83-3


virtuous, and yet where Religion, and thoſe em-


plöwuXyed in religious Offices, are ſo generally neg-


le&ted and deſpiſed, the young Gentry will ever
look upon Sobriety, and Virtue, and Piety,
as Qualities neceſſary only in the Mob, or che
Teachers of the mean Populace.

Were Clergymen pleading for more Power,
or great Augmentations of their Livings by
burdening further the Gentlemen's Eſtates, the
Laity ſhould be on their guard. But when the
point aimed at is the enlarging the Power of
the body of the Landed-Gentlemen, 'tis ſtrange
that any of the Gentry ſhould oppoſe them, or
refuſe their Concurrenee, except thoſe few who
have great Patronage themſelves, +

The direct pleading for Patronages in Scot-
land 1s fo odious to all Men of Piety, that nor
one of the Clergy, not a King's Chaplain, or
Politician-Clergyman among them dared to open
his mouth in favour of them in their Aſſem-
blies or Synods, how much ſoever ſome ſuch are
ſuſpected to favour them ſecretly, through Con-
fidence in their Court-Favour; in hopes to get.
regal Preſentations vo Couſins and Tools of their
own. All honeſt Men among the Clergy ab-
hor them; though the high Spirit (I call it fo
rather than Price) of ſome of them makes
them lie by, - oat of Indignation that ſome
weak hot Men "Taye got a greater Following
among the Populace, nd greater Influence in
Synods and Aſſemblies. I hope good and wiſe
Men will conquer this low Reſentment, and be
no longer inactive in ſo good a Cauſe, the Suc-
ceſs of which is their hearts deſire and Prayer
to God; though they ſhould not have the Glo zy
among che Populace of any Succeſs which may


enſue,


4


4 *


enſue, or of any honeſt Efforts whether they
ſucceed or not. A faithful Repreſentation from
ſome of the wiſer and calmer Men in the
Church would contribute much more to ad-
— the Defign than the Clamours of Multi-


7 —
1 £ 1 L Fo 93. "x «
8 4 4 4 5 p F ; :
I * _ 5
n *
q y 4 .
1 * _ 4 «
*
* % . "
4 :
1 f
* 1
1
- +>
8 ; 7
: i
* £
» * 1 3
646 * P 4


oy


*
„


* * * 4 "=
* —
* +
* 1 a * % £*
8 - 6 y a %
4 %
z 4 Py 0
A *
-7 1 Fl x
i Wh 27571
D *
* U
3 A
* 1
4 + 3 Þ " *
4 ot * o * * © *
\ >
. 7 by
Ta 5 2 F
*e 1 — on E
2 * 3 *
*
*
4, *
5 *
.
4
- * . *
” „
* 14 82
*
1 3
; * /
. : . * "
So; $a ; *
* } : = : : - 2
* * 1 5 1 # 2 *
3 ERS. * "os
x : * 4
