Life and Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley, Vol. II (Thomas Henry Huxley (Leonard Huxley, ed.), 1900)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1900 Macmillan edition, ed. Leonard Huxley (https://archive.org/details/lifeandletterst04huxlgoog). Huxley's life and letters, Vol. II — the later battles over science, education, and the Metaphysical Society, with full index.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


STANFORD 


LIBRARIES 


The  Jackson  E.  Reynolds  Book  Fund 


LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
THOMAS    HENRY   HUXLEY 


■:■-  r^r 


.^88i  ,yioI1lO  jiiitJioM  ijinoijii/I  jri;  i;. 


Portrait  after  the  Painting  by  the  Hon.  John  Collier 
in  the  National  Portrait  Gallery,  i88^. 


LIFE  AND  LETTERS 


OF 


THOMAS  HENRY  HUXLEY 


BY    HIS  SON 


LEONARD   HUXLEY 


IN  r^VO   VOLUMES 


VOL.    II 


NEW    YORK 
D.    APPLETON    AND   COMPANY 

1900 


Copyright,  1900, 
By  D.  APPLETON  AND  COMPANY. 


J 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTKR 
I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XL 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 


PAGB 

879) I 

881) 21 

882) 40 

883) 52 

884) 70 

884-1885) 84 

885) Ill 

886) 129 

886) 146 

887) 160 

887) 189 

888) 198 

888) 214 

889) 230 

889) 252 

890-1891) 274 

890-1891) 294 

892) 314 

892) 338 

892) 351 

893) 365 

894) 393 

895) 418 

V 


vi  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY 

CHAPTER  PAGB 

XXIV 427 

XXV.  (1895) 449 

Appendix  I 473 

Appendix  II 478 

Appendix  III 480 

Appendix  IV 499 

Index 505 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


FACING 
PAGE 

Portrait  after  the  Painting  by  the  Hon.  John  Collier  in  the 

National  Portrait  Gallery,  1883      .        .        .         Frontispiece 
Portrait  from  a  Photograph  by  H.  Huxley,  about  1881      .        .       18 
Portrait  from  a  Photograph  by  Downey,  1890    ....    270 
Photogravure  after  a  Photograph  of  the  Residence  of  Thomas 

H.  Huxley,  at  Hodeslea,  England 294 

The  Study  at  Hodeslea — from  a  Water-colour  by   Reginald 

Barrett 310 

Portrait  from  a  Photograph  by  Mayall,  1893  ....  374 
Facsimile  of  a  Sketch,  Pithecanthropus  erectus  .  .  .  .417 
Portrait  with  his  Grandson,  from  a  Photograph  by  Kent  and 

Lacey,  1895 460 

•  • 

Vll 


CHAPTER   I 

1879 

Much  of  the  work  noted  down  for  1878  reappears  in 
my  father's  list  for  1879.  He  was  still  at  work  upon,  or 
meditating  his  Crayfish,  his  Introduction  to  Psychology,  the 
Spirula  Memoir,  and  a  new  edition  of  the  Elementary  Physi- 
ology. Professor  H.  N.  Martin  writes  about  the  changes 
necessary  for  adapting  the  "  Practical  Biology  "  to  American 
needs;  the  article  on  Harvey  was  waiting  to  be  put  into 
permanent  form.  Besides  giving  an  address  at  the  Working 
Men's  College,  he  lectured  on  Sensation  and  the  Uniformity 
of  the  Sensiferous  Organs  (Coll.  Ess.  vi.),  at  the  Royal  In- 
stitution, Friday  evening,  March  7 ;  and  on  Snakes,  both  at 
the  Zoological  Gardens,  June  5,  and  at  the  London  Insti- 
tution, December  i.  On  February  3  he  read  a  paper  at  the 
Royal  Society  on  "  The  Characters  of  the  Pelvis  in  the 
Mammalia,  and  the  Conclusions  respecting  the  Origin  of 
Mammals  which  may  be  based  on  them  " ;  and  published  in 
Nature  for  November  6  a  paper  on  "  Certain  Errors  Re- 
specting the  Structure  of  the  Heart,  attributed  to  Aristotle." 

Great  interest  attaches  to  this  paper.  He  had  always 
wondered  how  Aristotle,  in  dissecting  a  heart,  had  come  to 
assert  that  it  contained  only  three  chambers ;  and  the  desire 
to  see  for  himself  what  stood  in  the  original,  uncommented 
on  by  translators  who  were  not  themselves  anatomists,  was 
one  of  the  chief  reasons  (I  think  the  wish  to  read  the  Greek 
Testament  in  the  original  was  another)  which  operated  in 
making  him  take  up  the  study  of  Greek  late  in  middle  life. 
His  practice  was  to  read  in  his  book  until  he  had  come  to 
ten  new  words;  these  he  looked  out,  parsed,  and  wrote 
37  I 


2  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

down  together  with  their  chief  derivatives.  This  was  his 
daily  portion. 

When  at  last  he  grappled  with  the  passage  in  question, 
he  found  that  Aristotle  had  correctly  described  what  he  saw 
under  the  special  conditions  of  his  dissection,  when  the  right 
auricle  actually  appears  as  he  described  it,  an  enlargement 
of  the  "  great  vein."  So  that  this,  at  least,  ought  to  be 
removed  from  the  list  of  Aristotle's  errors.  The  same  is 
shown  to  be  the  case  with  his  statements  about  respiration. 
His  own  estimate  of  Aristotle  as  a  physiologist  is  between 
the  panegyric  of  Cuvier  and  the  depreciation  of  Lewes,  "  he 
carried  science  a  step  beyond  the  point  at  which  he  found  it ; 
a  meritorious,  but  not  a  miraculous,  achievement."  And  it 
will  interest  scholars  to  know  that  from  his  own  experience 
as  a  lecturer,  Huxley  was  inclined  to  favour  the  theory  that 
the  original  manuscripts  of  the  Historia  Animalium,  with 
their  mingled  accuracy  and  absurdity,  were  notes  taken  by 
some  of  his  students.  This  essay  was  reprinted  in  Science 
and  Culture,  p.  i8o. 

This  year  he  brought  out  his  second  volume  of  essays  on 
various  subjects,  written  from  1870  to  1878,  under  the  title 
of  Critiques  and  Addresses,  and  later  in  the  year,  his  long- 
delayed  and  now  entirely  recast  Introductory  Primer  in  the 
Science  Primer  Series. 

6  Barnepark  Terrace,  Teignmouth, 
Sept.  12,  1879. 

My  dear  Roscoe — I  send  you  by  this  post  my  long-promised 
Primer,  and  a  like  set  of  sheets  goes  to  Stewart.* 

You  will  see  that  it  is  quite  different  from  my  first  sketch, 
Geikie's  primer  having  cut  me  out  of  that  line — ^but  /  think  it 
much  better. 

You  will  see  that  the  idea  is  to  develop  Science  out  of  com- 
mon observation,  and  to  lead  up  to  Physics,  Chemistry,  Biology, 
and  Psychology. 

I  want  the  thing  to  be  good  as  far  as  it  goes,  so  don't  spare 
criticism. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Best  remembrances  from  us  all,  which  we  are  jolly. 

*  Balfour  Stewart,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  Owens  Col- 
lege, Manchester. 


i879  ASSOCIATION   OF   LIBERAL   THINKERS  3 

To  his  Other  duties  he  now  added  that  of  a  Governor  of 
Eton  College,  a  post  which  he  held  till  1888,  when,  after 
doing  what  he  could  to  advance  progressive  ideas  of  educa- 
tion, and  in  particular,  getting  a  scheme  adopted  for  making 
drawing  part  of  the  regular  curriculum,  ill-health  compelled 
him  to  resign. 

As  for  other  pressure  of  work  (he  writes  to  Dr.  Dohrn, 
February  16),  with  the  exception  of  the  Zoological  Society,  I 
never  have  anything  to  do  with  the  affairs  of  any  society  but 
the  Royal  now — I  find  the  latter  takes  up  all  my  disposable 
time.  .  .  .  Take  comfort  from  me.  I  find  53  to  be  a  very  youth- 
ful period  of  existence.  I  have  been  better  physically,  and 
worked  harder  mentally,  this  last  twelvemonth  than  in  any 
year  of  my  life.  So  a  mere  boy,  not  yet  40  like  you,  may  look 
to  the  future  hopefully. 

From  about  this  time  dates  the  inception  of  a  short-lived 
society,  to  be  called  the  Association  of  Liberal  Thinkers. 
It  had  first  taken  shape  in  the  course  of  a  conversation  at 
Prof.  W.  K.  Clifford's  house;  the  chief  promoter  and  or- 
ganiser being  a  well-known  Theistic  preacher,  while  on  the 
council  were  men  of  science,  critics,  and  scholars  in  various 
branches  of  learning.  Huxley  was  chosen  President,  and 
the  first  meeting  of  officers  and  council  took  place  at  his 
house  on  January  25. 

Professor  G.  J.  Romanes  was  asked  to  join,  but  refused 
on  the  ground  that  even  if  the  negations  which  he  supposed 
the  society  would  promulgate,  were  true,  it  was  not  expe- 
dient to  offer  them  to  the  multitude.  To  this  Huxley  wrote 
the  following  reply  (January  2,  1879) : — 

Many  thanks  for  your  letter.  I  think  it  is  desirable  to  ex- 
plain that  our  Society  is  by  no  means  intended  to  constitute  a 
propaganda  of  negations,  but  rather  to  serve  as  a  centre  of  free 
thought. 

Of  course  I  have  not  a  word  to  say  in  respect  of  your  de- 
cision. I  quite  appreciate  your  view  of  the  matter,  though  it  is 
diametrically  opposed  to  my  own  conviction  that  the  more 
rapidly  truth  is  spread  among  mankind  the  better  it  will  be 
for  them. 

Only  let  us  be  sure  that  it  is  truth. 


I  A  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  I 


* 


However,  a  course  of  action  was  proposed  which  by  no 
means  commended  itself  to  several  members  of  the  council 
Tyndall  begs  Huxley  "  not  to  commit  us  to  a  venture  of  the 
kind  unless  you  see  clearly  that  it  meets  a  public  need,  and 
that  it  will  be  worked  by  able  men,"  and  on  February  6  the 
latter  writes — 

After  careful  consideration  of  the  whole  circumstances  of 
the  case,  I  have  definitely  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  it  is  not 
expedient  to  go  on  with  the  undertaking. 

I  therefore  resign  my  Presidency,  and  I  will  ask  you  to  be 
so  good  as  to  intimate  my  withdrawal  from  the  association  to 
my  colleagues. 

In  spite  of  having  long  ago  "  burned  his  ships "  with 
regard  to  both  the  great  Universities,  Huxley  was  agreeably 
surprised  by  a  new  sign  of  the  times  from  Cambridge.  The 
University  now  followed  up  its  recognition  of  Darwin  two 
years  before,  by  offering  Huxley  an  honorary  degree,  an 
event  of  which  he  wrote  to  Professor  Baynes  on  June  9 : — 

I  shall  be  glorious  in  a  red  gown  at  Cambridge  to-morrow, 
and  hereafter  look  to  be  treated  as  a  person  of  respectability. 

I  have  done  my  best  to  avoid  that  misfortune,  but  it's  of 
no  use. 

A  curious  coincidence  occurred  here.  Mr.  Sandys,  the 
public  orator,*  in  his  speech  presenting  him  for  the  degree, 
picked  out  one  of  his  characteristics  for  description  in  the 

*  The  speech  delivered  by  the  public  orator  on  this  occasion  (June 
10,  1879)  ran  as  follows  : — Academi  inter  silvas  qui  verum  quaerunt, 
non  modo  ipsi  veritatis  lumine  vitam  banc  umbratilem  illustrare 
conantur,  sed  illustrissimum  quemque  veritatis  investigatorem  aliunde 
delatum  ea  qua  par  est  comitate  excipiunt.  Adest  vir  cui  in  veritate 
exploranda  ampla  sane  provincia  contigit,  qui  sive  in  animantium 
sive  in  arborum  et  herbarum  genere  quicquid  vivit  investigat,  ipsum 
illud  vivere  quid  sit,  quali  ex  origine  natum  sit :  qui  exquirit  quae 
cognationis  necessitudo  inter  priores  illas  viventium  species  et  has 
quae  etiam  nunc  supersunt,  intercedat.  Olim  in  Oceano  Australi,  ubi 
rectis  **oculis  monstra  natantia"  vidit,  victoriam  prope  primam,  velut 
alter  Perseus,  a  Medusa  reportavit ;  varias  deinceps  animantium 
formas  quasi  ab  ipsa  Gorgone  in  saxum  versas  sagacitate  singular! 
explicavit ;  vitae  denique  universae  explorandae  vitam  suam  totam 
dedicavit.    Physicorum  inter  principes  diu  honoratus,  idem  (ut  verbum 


i879  "TENAX  PROPOSITI"  5 

Horatian  phrase,  "  Propositi  tenax."  Now  this  was  the 
family  motto;  and  Huxley  wrote  to  point  out  the  coin- 
cidence:— 

Science  and  Art  Department, 
South  Kensington,  June  11,  1879. 

My  dear  Mr.  Sandys — I  beg  your  acceptance  of  the  inclosed 
photograph,  which  is  certainly  the  best  ever  executed  of  me. 

And  by  way  of  a  memento  of  the  claim  which  you  established 
not  only  to  the  eloquence  but  also  the  insight  of  a  prophet,  I  have 
added  an  impression  of  the  seal  with  "  Tenax  propositi "  writ 
plain,  if  not  large.  As  I  mentioned  to  you,  it  belonged  to  my 
eldest  brother,  who  has  been  dead  for  many  years.  I  trust  that 
the  Heralds'  College  may  be  as  well  satisfied  as  he  was  about 
his  right  to  the  coat  of  arms  and  crest. 

My  own  genealogical  inquiries  have  taken  me  so  far  back 
that  I. confess  the  later  stages  do  not  interest  me. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  British  Association  met  at  Sheffield  in  1879,  and 
Huxley  took  this  occasion  to  "  eat  the  leek  "  in  the  matter 
of  Bathybius  (see  vol.  i.  p.  318).  It  must  be  remembered 
that  his  original  interpretation  of  the  phenomenon  did  not 
involve  any  new  theory  of  the  origin  of  life,  and  was  not 
put  forward  because  of  its  supposed  harmony  with  Darwin's 
speculations.* 

mutuemur  a  Cartesio  illo  cujus  laudes  ipse  in  hac  urbe  quondam 
praedicavit)  etiam  **metaphysica"  honore  debito  prosecutus  est. 
Ilium  demum  liberaliter  educatum  esse  existimat  qui  cum  ceteris 
animi  et  corporis  dotibus  instructus  sit,  turn  praesertim  quicquid  turpe 
sit  oderit,  quicquid  sive.in  arte  sive  in  rerum  natura  pulchrum  sit 
diligat;  neque  tamen  ipse  (ut  ait  Aristoteles)  "animalium  parum 
pulchrorum  contemplationem  fastidio  puerili  reform idat "  ;  sed  in  per- 
petua  animantium  serie  hominis  vestigia  perscrutari  conatus,  satis 
ampla  liberalitate  in  universa  rerum  natura  *'humani  nihil  a  se  alie- 
num  putat."  Duco  ad  vos  virum  intrepidum,  facundum,  propositi 
tenacem,  Thomam  Henricum  Huxley. 

*  **  That  which  interested  me  in  the  matter  was  the  apparent  anal- 
ogy of  Bathybius  with  other  well-known  forms  of  lower  life,  such  as 
the  Plasmodia  of  the  Myxomycetes  and  the  Rhizopods.  Speculative 
hopes  or  fears  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter ;  and  if  Bathybius 
were  brought  up  alive  from  the  bottom  of  the  Atlantic  to-morrow,  the 
fact  would  not  have  the  slightest  bearing,  that  I  can  discern,  upon 
Mr.  Darwin's  speculations,  or  upon  any  of  the  disputed  problems  of 


6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

In  supporting  a  vote  of  thanks  to  Dr.  Allman,  the  Presi- 
dent, for  his  address,  he  said  (see  Nature^  Aug.  28,  1879)  • — 

I  will  ask  you  to  allow  me  to  say  one  word  rather  upon  my  • 
own  account,  in  order  to  prevent  a  misconception  which,  I  think, 
might  arise,  and  which  I  should  regret  if  it  did  arise.  I  daresay 
that  no  one  in  this  room,  who  has  attained  middle  life,  has  been 
so  fortunate  as  to  reach  that  age  without  being  obliged,  now 
and  then,  to  look  back  upon  some  acquaintance,  or,  it  may  be, 
intimate  ally  of  his  youth,  who  has  not  quite  verified  the 
promises  of  that  youth.  Nay,  let  us  suppose  he  has  done  quite 
the  reverse,  and  has  become  a  very  questionable  sort  of  char- 
acter, and  a  person  whose  acquaintance  does  not  seem  quite  so 
desirable  as  it  was  in  those  young  days ;  his  way  and  yours  have 
separated;  you  have  not  heard  much  about  him;  but  eminently 
trustworthy  persons  have  assured  you  he  has  done  this,  that, 
or  the  other ;  and  is  more  or  less  of  a  black  sheep,  in  fact.  The 
President,  in  an  early  part  of  his  address,  alluded  to  a  certain 
thing — I  hardly  know  whether  I  ought  to  call  it  a  thing  or  not 
— of  which  he  gave  you  the  name  Bathybius,  and  he  stated,  with 
perfect  justice,  that  I  had  brought  that  thing  into  notice ;  at  any 
rate,  indeed,  I  christened  it,  and  I  am,  in  a  certain  sense,  its 
earliest  friend.  For  some  time  after  that  interesting  Bathybius 
was  launched  into  the  world,  a  number  of  admirable  persons 
took  the  little  thing  by  the  hand,  and  made  very  much  of  it, 
and  as  the  President  was  good  enough  to  tell  you,  I  am  glad 
to  be  able  to  repeat  and  verify  all  the  statements,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  which  I  had  ventured  to  make  about  it.  And  so  things 
went  on,  and  I  thought  my  young  friend  Bathybius  would  turn 
out  a  credit  to  me.  But  I  am  sorry  to  say,  as  time  has  gone  on, 
he  has  not  altogether  verified  the  promise  of  his  youth. 

In  the  first  place,  as  the  President  told  you,  he  could  not  be 
found  when  he  was  wanted;  and  in  the  second  place,  when  he 
was  found,  all  sorts  of  things  were  said  about  him.  Indeed, 
I  regret  to  be  obliged  to  tell  you  that  some  persons  of  severe 
minds  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  was  nothing  but  simply  a 
gelatinous  precipitate  of  slime,  which  had  carried  down  organic 
matter.  If  that  is  so,  I  am  very  sorry  for  it,  for  whoever  may 
have  joined  in  this  error,  I  am  undoubtedly  primarily  responsible 
for  it.  But  I  do  not  know  at  the  present  time  of  my  own  know- 
ledge how  the  matter  stands.    Nothing  would  please  me  more 

biology.     It  would   merely  be  one  elementary  organism   the  more 
added  to  the  thousands  already  known."    {ColL  Ess,  v.  154.) 


i879  LETTER   TO  SKELTON  7 

than  to  investigate  the  matter  afresh  in  the  way  it  ought  to  be 
investigated,  but  that  would  require  a  voyage  of  some  time, 
and  the  investigation  of  this  thing  in  its  native  haunts  is  a  kind 
of  work  for  which,  for  many  years  past,  I  have  had  no  oppor- 
tunity, and  which  I  do  not  think  I  am  very  likely  to  enjoy  again. 
Therefore  my  own  judgment  is  in  an  absolute  state  of  sus- 
pension about  it.  I  can  only  assure  you  what  has  been  said 
about  this  friend  of  mine,  but  I  cannot  say  whether  what  is  said 
is  justified  or  not.  But  I  feel  very  happy  about  the  matter. 
There  is  one  thing  about  us  men  of  science,  and  that  is,  no  one 
who  has  the  greatest  prejudice  against  science  can  venture  to 
say  that  we  ever  endeavour  to  conceal  each  other's  mistakes. 
And,  therefore,  I  rest  in  the  most  entire  and  complete  confidence 
that  if  this  should  happen  to  be  a  blunder  of  mine,  some  day  or 
other  it  will  be  carefully  exposed  by  somebody.  But  pray  let  me 
remind  you  whether  all  this  story  about  Bathybius  be  right  or 
wrong,  makes  not  the  slightest  difference  to  the  general  argu- 
ment of  the  remarkable  address  put  before  you  to-night.  All  the 
statements  your  President  has  made  are  just  as  true,  as  pro- 
foundly true,  as  if  this  little  eccentric  Bathybius  did  not  exist 
at  all. 

Several  letters  of  miscellaneous  interest  may  be  quoted. 
The  following  acknowledges  the  receipt  of  Essays  in 
Romance: — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  London,  N.W., 

January  1879. 

My  dear  Skelton — Being  the  most  procrastinating  letter- 
writer  in  existence,  I  thought,  or  pretended  to  think,  when  I 
received  your  Essays  in  Romance  that  it  would  not  be  decent 
to  thank  you  until  I  had  read  the  book.  And  when  I  had  done 
myself  that  pleasure,  I  further  pretended  to  think  that  it  would 
be  much  better  to  wait  till  I  could  send  you  my  Hume  book, 
which,  as  it  contains  a  biography,  is  the  nearest  approach  to  a 
work  of  fiction  of  which  I  have  yet  been  guilty. 

The  "  Hume  "  was  sent,  and  I  hope  reached  you  a  week 
ago,  and  as  my  conscience  just  now  inquired  in  a  very  sneering 
and  unpleasant  tone  whether  I  had  any  further  pretence  for 
not  writing  on  hand,  I  thought  I  might  as  well  stop  her  mouth 
at  once. 

You  will  see  oddly  enough  that  I  have  answered  your  ques- 
tion about  dreams  in  a  sort  of  way  on  page  96.* 

*  Cp.  Essays  in  Romance y  p.  329  ;  Huxley's  Humey  p.  96. 


8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

You  will  get  nothing  but  praise  for  your  book,  and  I  shall  be 
vilipended  for  mine.  Is  that  fact,  or  is  it  not  an  evidence  of  a 
special  Providence  and  Divine  Government? 

Pray  remember  me  very  kindly  to  Mrs.  Skelton.  I  hope  your 
interrupted  visit  will  yet  become  a  fact.  We  have  a  clean  bill 
of  health  now. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Scottish  University  Commission, 

31  Queen  Street,  Edinburgh,  April  2,  1879. 

My  dear  Skelton — I  shall  be  delighted  to  dine  with  you  on 
Wednesday,  and  take  part  in  any  discussion  ei titer  moral  or 
immoral  that  may  be  started. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

March  15,  1879. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Tyndall — ^Your  hearty  letter  is  as  good  as  a 
bottle  of  the  best  sunshine.  Yes,  I  will  lunch  with  you  on  Friday 
with  pleasure,  and  Jess  proposes  to  attend  on  the  occasion.  .  .  . 
Her  husband  is  in  Gloucester,  and  so  doesn't  count.  The  absurd 
creature  declares  she  must  go  back  to  him  on  Saturday — stuff 
and  sentiment.  She  has  only  been  here  six  or  seven  weeks. 
There  is  nothing  said  in  Scripture  about  a  wife  cleaving  to  her 
husband ! — With  all  our  loves,  ever  yours  very  sincerely, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  next  is  to  his  son,  then  at  St.  Andrews  University, 
on  winning  a  scholarship  tenable  at  Oxford. 

South  Kensington,  April  21,  1879. 

My  dear  Boy — I  was  very  glad  to  get  your  good  news  this 

morning,  and  I  need  not  tell  you  whether  M was  pleased  or 

not. 

But  the  light  of  nature  doth  not  inform  us  of  the  value  and 
duration  of  the  "  Guthrie  " — and  from  a  low  and  material  point 
of  view  I  should  like  to  be  informed  on  that  subject.  However, 
this  is  "  mere  matter  of  detail "  as  the  Irishman  said  when  he 
was  asked  how  he  had  killed  his  landlord.  The  pleasure  to  us  is 
that  you  have  made  good  use  of  your  opportunities,  and  finished 
this  first  stage  of  your  journey  so  creditably. 

I  am  about  to  write  to  the  Master  of  Balliol  for  advice  as  to 
your  future  proceedings.  In  the  meanwhile,  go  in  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  your  holiday  with  a  light  heart.  You  have  earned  it. 
— Ever  your  loving  father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


i879  LETTERS  g 

The  following,  to  Mrs.  Clifford,  was  called  forth  by  a 
hitch  in  respect  to  the  grant  to  her  of  a  Civil  List  pension 
after  the  death  of  her  husband : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  July  19,  1879. 
My  dear  Lucy — I  am  just  off  to  Gloucester  to  fetch  M- 


back,  and  I  shall  have  a  long  talk  with  that  sage  little  woman 
over  your  letter. 

In  the  meanwhile  keep  quiet  and  do  nothing.  I  feel  the  force 
of  what  you  say  very  strongly — so  strongly,  in  fact,  that  I  must 
morally  ice  myself  and  get  my  judgment  clear  and  cool  before  I 
advise  you  what  is  to  be  done. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  you  have  been  so  ill.  For  the 
present  dismiss  the  matter  from  your  thoughts  and  give  your 
mind  to  getting  better.  Leave  it  all  to  be  turned  over  in  the 
mind  of  that  cold-blooded,  worldly,  cynical  old  fellow,  who  signs 
himself — Your  affectionate  Pater. 

The  last  is  to  Mr.  Edward  Clodd,  on  receiving  his  book 
Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Abbey  Road,  N.W., 

Dec,  21,  1879. 

My  dear  Mr.  Clodd — I  have  been  spending  all  this  Sunday 
afternoon  over  the  book  you  have  been  kind  enough  to  send  me, 
and  being  a  swift  reader,  I  have  travelled  honestly  from  cover 
to  cover. 

It  is  the  book  I  have  been  longing  to  see ;  in  spirit,  matter 
and  form  it  appears  to  me  to  be  exactly  what  people  like  myself 
have  been  wanting.  For  though  for  the  last  quarter  of  a  century 
I  have  done  all  that  lay  in  my  power  to  oppose  and  destroy  the 
idolatrous  accretions  of  Judaism  and  Christianity,  I  have  never 
had  the  slightest  sympathy  with  those  who,  as  the  Germans  say, 
would  "  throw  the  child  away  along  with  the  bath  " — and  when 
I  was  a  member  of  the  London  School  Board  I  fought  for  the 
retention  of  the  Bible,  to  the  great  scandal  of  some  of  my 
Liberal  friends — who  can't  make  out  to  this  day  whether  I  was 
a  hypocrite,  or  simply  a  fool  on  that  occasion. 

But  my  meaning  was  that  the  mass  of  the  people  should  not 
be  deprived  of  the  one  great  literature  which  is  open  to  them 
— not  shut  out  from  the  perception  of  their  relations  with  the 
whole  past  history  of  civilised  mankind — not  excluded  from  such 
a  view  of  Judaism  and  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  that  which  at  last 
you  have  given  us. 


10  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  I 

I  cannot  doubt  that  your  work  will  have  a  great  success  not 
only  in  the  grosser,  but  the  better  sense  of  the  word. — I  am 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  winter  of  1879-80  was  memorable  for  its  prolonged 
spell  of  cold  weather.  One  result  of  this  may  be  traced  in 
a  New  Year's  letter  from  Huxley  to  his  eldest  daughter. 
"  I  have  had  a  capital  holiday — mostly  in  bed — ^but  I  don't 
feel  so  grateful  for  it  as  I  might  do."  To  be  forced  to  avoid 
the  many  interruptions  and  distractions  of  his  life  in  London, 
which  claimed  the  greater  part  of  his  time,  he  would  regard 
as  an  unmixed  blessing;  as  he  once  said  feelingly  to  Pro- 
fessor Marsh,  "  If  I  could  only  break  my  leg,  what  a  lot  of 
scientific  work  I  could  do ! "  But  he  was  less  grateful  for 
having  entire  inaction  forced  upon  him. 

However,  he  was  soon  about  again,  and  wrote  as  follows 
in  answer  to  a  letter  from  Sir  Thomas  (afterwards  Lord) 
Farrer,  which  called  his  attention,  as  an  old  Fishery  Com- 
missioner, to  a  recent  report  on  the  sea-fisheries. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Jan,  9,  1880. 

My  dear  Farrer — I  shall  be  delighted  to  take  a  dive  into  the 
unfathomable  depths  of  official  folly;  but  your  promised  docu- 
ment has  not  reached  me. 

Your  astonishment  at  the  tenacity  of  life  of  fallacies,  permit 
me  to  say,  is  shockingly  unphysiological.  They,  like  other  low 
organisms,  are  independent  of  brains,  and  only  wriggle  the  more, 
the  more  they  are  smitten  on  the  place  where  the  brains  ought 
to  be — I  don't  know  B.,  but  I  am  convinced  that  A.  has  nothing 
but  a  spinal  cord,  devoid  of  any  cerebral  development.  Would 
Mr.  Cross  give  him  up  for  purposes  of  experiment  ?  Lingen  and 
you  might  perhaps  be  got  to  join  in  a  memorial  to  that  effect. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  fresh  chapter  of  research,  the  results  of  which  he  now 
began  to  give  to  the  public,  was  the  history  of  the  Dog. 
On  April  6  and  13  he  lectured  at  the  Royal  Institution 
"  On  Dogs  and  the  Problems  connected  with  them  " — ^their 
relation  to  other  animals,  and  the  problem  of  the  origin  of 
the  domestic  dog,  and  the  dog-like  animals  in  general.  As 
so  often  before,  these  lectures  were  the  outcome  of  the  care- 


V 


i88o  DOGS  AND   THEIR   HISTORY  n 

ful  preparation  of  a  course  of  instruction  for  his  students. 
The  dog  had  been  selected  as  one  of  the  types  of  mammahan 
structure  upon  which  laboratory  work  was  to  be  done. 
Huxley's  own  dissections  had  led  him  on  to  a  complete 
survey  of  the  genus,  both  wild  and  domestic.  As  he  writes 
to  Darwin  on  May  lo: — 

I  wish  it  were  riot  such  a  long  story  that  I  could  tell  you  all 
about  the  dogs.  They  will  make  out  such  a  case  for  "  Dar- 
winismus"  as  never  was.  From  the  South  American  dogs  at 
the  bottom  (C.  vetulus,  cancrivorus,  etc.)  to  the  wolves  at  the 
top,  there  is  a  regular  gradual  progression,  the  range  of  varia- 
tion of  each  "  species  "  overlapping  the  ranges  of  those  below 
and  above.  Moreover,  as  to  the  domestic  dogs,  I  think  I  can 
prove  that  the  small  dogs  are  modified  jackals,  and  the  big  dogs 
ditto  wolves.  I  have  been  getting  capital  material  from  India, 
and  working  the  whole  affair  out  on  the  basis  of  measurements 
of  skulls  and  teeth. 

However,  my  paper  for  the  Zoological  Society  is  finished, 
and  I  hope  soon  to  send  you  a  copy  of  it  .  .  . 

Unfortunately  he  never  found  time  to  complete  his  work 
for  final  publication  in  book  form,  and  the  rough,  unfin- 
ished notes  are  all  that  remain  of  his  work,  beyond  two 
monographs  "  On  the  Epipubis  in  the  Dog  and  Fox " 
{Proc,  Roy,  Soc.  xxx.  162-63),  and  "  On  the  Cranial  and 
Dental  Characters  of  the  Canidae  "  (Proc.  ZooL  Soc.  1880, 
pp.  238-288). 

The  following  letters  deal  with  the  collection  of  speci- 
mens for  examination : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Jan.  17,  1880. 

My  dear  Flower — I  happened  to  get  hold  of  two  foxes  this 
week — a  fine  dog  fox  and  his  vixen  wife;  and  among  other 
things,  I  have  been  looking  up  Cowper*s  glands,  the  supposed 
absence  of  which  in  the  dogs  has  always  "gone  agin'  me." 
Moreover,  I  have  found  them  (or  their  representatives)  in  the 
shape  of  two  small  sacs,  which  open  by  conspicuous  apertures 
into  the  urethra  immediately  behind  the  bulb.  If  your  Icticyon 
was  a  male,  I  commend  this  point  to  your  notice. 

Item, — If  you  have  not  already  begun  to  macerate  him,  do 
look  for  the  "  marsupial  '*  iibro-cartilages,  which  I  have  men- 
tioned in  my  "  Manual,"  but  the  existence  of  which  blasphemers 


12  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CHAP.  I 

have  denied.  I  found  them  again  at  once  in  both  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Vulpes.  You  spot  them  immediately  by  the  pectineus  which  is 
attached  to  them. 

The  dog-fox's  caecum  is  so  different  from  the  vixen's  that 
Gray  would  have  made  distinct  genera  of  them. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  ^    H    Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  May  2,  1880. 

My  dear  Fayrer — I  am  greatly  obliged  for  the  skulls,  and  I 
hope  you  will  offer  my  best  thanks  to  your  son  for  the  trouble 
he  has  taken  in  getting  them. 

The  "  fox  "  is  especially  interesting  because  it  is  not  a  fox, 
by  any  manner  of  means,  but  a  big  jackal  with  some  interesting 
points  of  approximation  towards  the  cuons. 

I  do  not  see  any  locality  given  along  with  the  specimens. 
Can  you  supply  it? 

I  have  got  together  some  very  curious  evidence  of  the 
wider  range  of  variability  of  the  Indian  jackal,  and  the  "  fox  " 
which  your  son  has  sent  is  the  most  extreme  form  in  one  direc- 
tion I  have  met  with. 

I  wish  I  could  get  some  examples  from  the  Bombay  and 
Madras  Presidencies  and  from  Ceylon,  as  well  as  from  Central 
India.  Almost  all  I  have  seen  yet  are  from  Bengal. — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  t.  H.  Huxley. 

Between  the  two  lectures  on  the  Dog,  mentioned  above, 
on  April  9,  Huxley  delivered  a  Friday  evening  discourse,  at 
the  same  place,  "  On  the  Coming  of  Age  of  the  Origin  of 
Species  "  (Coll.  Ess,  ii.  227).  Reviewing  the  history  of  the 
theory  of  evolution  in  the  twenty-one  years  that  had  elapsed 
since  the  Origin  of  Species  first  saw  the  light  in  1859,  ^^ 
did  not  merely  dwell  on  the  immense  influence  the  "  Origin  " 
had  exercised  upon  every  field  of  biological  inquiry.  "  Mere 
insanities  and  inanities  have  before  now  swollen  to  porten- 
tous size  in  the  course  of  twenty  years."  "  History  warns 
us  that  it  is  the  customary  fate  of  new  truths  to  begin  as 
heresies,  and  to  end  as  superstitions."  There  was  actual 
danger  lest  a  new  generation  should ."  accept  the  main  doc- 
trines of  the  Origin  of  Species  with  as  little  reflection,  and 
it  may  be  with  as  little  justification,  as  so  many  of  our  con- 
temporaries, years  ago,  rejected  them." 


i88o    COMING  OF  AGE  OF   THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES       13 

So  dire  a  consummation,  he  declared,  must  be  prevented 
by  unflinching  criticism,  the  essence  of  the  scientific  spirit, 
"  for  the  scientific  spirit  is  of  more  value  than  its  products, 
and  irrationally  held  truths  may  be  more  harmful  than 
reasoned  errors." 

What,  then,  were  the  facts  which  justified  so  great  a 
change  as  had  taken  place,  which  had  removed  some  of  the 
most  important  qualifications  under  which  he  himself  had 
accepted  the  theory?  He  proceeded  to  enumerate  the 
"  crushing  accumulation  of  evidence  "  during  this  period, 
which  had  proved  the  imperfection  of  the  geological  record ; 
had  filled  up  enormous  gaps,  such  as  those  between  birds 
and  reptiles,  vertebrates  and  invertebrates,  flowering  and 
flowerless  plants,  or  the  lowest  forms  of  animal  and  plant 
life.  More:  paleontology  alone  has  effected  so  much — ^the 
fact  that  evolution  has  taken  place  is  so  irresistibly  forced 
upon  the  mind  by  the  study  of  the  Tertiary  mammalia 
brought  to  light  since  1859,  that  "  if  the  doctrine  of  evolu- 
tion had  not  existed,  paleontologists  must  have  invented  it." 
He  further  developed  the  subject  by  reading  before  the 
Zoological  Society  a  paper  "  On  the  Application  of  the  Laws 
of  Evolution  to  the  Arrangement  of  the  Vertebrata,  and 
more  particularly  of  the  Mammalia"  {Proc,  Z.  5*.  1880, 
pp.  649-662).  In  reply  to  Darwin's  letter  thanking  him 
for  the  "  Coming  of  Age  "  (Lije  and  Letters,  iii.  24),  he  wrote 
on  May  10: — 

My  dear  Darwin — You  are  the  cheeriest  letter-writer  I 
know,  and  always  help  a  man  to  think  the  best  of  his  doings. 

I  hope  you  do  not  imagine  because  I  had  nothing  to  say 
about  "  Natural  Selection,"  that  I  am  at  all  weak  of  faith  on 
that  article.  On  the  contrary,  I  live  in  hope  that  as  palaeon- 
tologists work  more  and  more  in  the  manner  of  that  "  second 
Daniel  come  to  judgment,"  that  wise  young  man  M.  Filhal,  we 
shall  arrive  at  a  crushing  accumulation  of  evidence  in  that 
direction  also.  But  the  first  thing  seems  to  me  to  be  to  drive 
the  fact  of  evolution  into  people's  heads;  when  that  is  once 
safe,  the  rest  will  come  easy. 

I  hear  that  ce  cher  X.  is  yelping  about  again ;  but  in  spite  of 
your  provocative  messages  (which  Rachel  retailed  with  great 
glee),  I  am  not  going  to  attack  him  nor  anybody  else. 


14 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 


Another  popular  lecture  on  a  zoological  subject  was  that 
of  July  I  on  "  Cuttlefish  and  Squids,"  the  last  of  the  "  Davis  " 
lectures  given  by  him  at  the  Zoological  Gardens. 

More  important  were  two  other  essays  delivered  this 
year.  The  "  Method  of  Zadig"  (Coll.  Ess,  iv.  i),  an  address 
at  the  Working  Men's  College,  takes  for  its  text  Voltaire's 
story  of  the  philosopher  at  the  Oriental  court,  who,  by 
taking  note  of  trivial  indications,  obtains  a  perilous  knowl- 
edge of  things,  which  his  neighbours  ascribe  either  to 
thievery  or  magic.  This  introduces  a  discourse  on  the 
identity  of  the  methods  of  science  and  of  the  judgments  of 
common  life,  a  fact  which,  twenty-six  years  before,  he  had 
briefly  stated  in  the  words,  "  Science  is  nothing  but  trained 
and  organised  common  sense  "  (ColL  Ess,  iii.  45). 

The  other  is  "  Science  and  Culture  "  (Coll.  Ess.  iii.  134), 
which  was  delivered  on  October  i,  as  the  opening  address 
of  the  Josiah  Mason  College  at  Birmingham,  and  gave  its 
name  to  a  volume  of  essays  published  in  the  following  year. 
Here  was  a  great  school  founded  by  a  successful  ironworker, 
which  was  designed  to  give  an  education  at  once  practical 
and  liberal,  such  as  the  experience  of  its  founder  approved, 
to  young  men  who  meant  to  embark  upon  practical  life. 
A  "  mere  "  literary  training — i.e.  in  the  classical  languages — 
was  excluded,  but  not  so  the  study  of  English  literature  and 
modem  languages.  The  greatest  stress  was  laid  on  training 
in  the  scientific  theory  and  practice  on  which  depend  the 
future  of  the  great  manufactures  of  the  north. 

The  question  dealt  with  in  this  address  is  whether  such 
an  education  can  give  the  culture  demanded  of  an  educated 
man  to-day.  The  answer  is  emphatically  Yes.  English 
literature  is  a  field  of  culture  second  to  none,  and  for  solely 
literary  purposes,  a  thorough  knowledge  of  it,  backed  by 
some  other  modem  language,  will  amply  suffice.  Combined 
with  this,  a  knowledge  of  modem  science,  its  principles  and 
results,  which  have  so  profoundly  modified  society  and  have 
created  modern  civilisation,  will  give  a  "  criticism  of  life," 
as  Matthew  Arnold  defined  culture,  unattainable  by  any 
form  of  education  which  neglects  it.  In  short,  although  the 
"  culture  "  of  former  periods  might  be  purely  literary,  that 


i88o  CIVIL  LIST   PENSION   FOR  WALLACE  15 

of  to-day  must  be  based,  to  a  great  extent,  upon  natural 
science. 

This  autumn  several  letters  passed  between  him  and 
Darwin.  The  latter,  contrary  to  his  usual  custom,  wrote  a 
letter  to  Nature,  in  reply  to  an  unfair  attack  which  had 
been  made  upon  evolution  by  Sir  Wyville  Thomson  in  his 
Introduction  to  The  Voyage  of  the  Challenger  (see  Darwin, 
Life  and  Letters,  iii.  242),  and  asked  Huxley  to  look  over 
the  concluding  sentences  of  the  letter,  and  to  decide  whether 
they  should  go  with  the  rest  to  the  printer  or  not.  "  My 
request,"  he  writes  (Nov.  5),  "  will  not  cost  you  much 
trouble — i,e.  to  read  two  pages — ^for  I  know  that  you  can 
decide  at  once."  Huxley  struck  them  out,  replying  on  the 
14th,  "  Your  pinned-on  paragraph  was  so  good  that,  if  I  had 
written  it  myself,  I  should  have  been  unable  to  refrain  from 
sending  it  on  to  the  printer.  But  it  is  much  easier  to  be 
virtuous  on  other  people's  account;  and  though  Thomson 
deserved  it  and  more,  I  thought  it  would  be  better  to  re- 
frain. If  I  say  a  savage  thing,  it  is  only  '  pretty  Fanny's 
way ' ;  but  if  you  do,  it  is  not  likely  to  be  forgotten." 

The  rest  of  this  correspondence  has  to  do  with  a  plan  of 
Darwin's,  generous  as  ever,  to  obtain  a  Civil  List  pension  for 
the  veteran  naturalist,  Wallace,  whose  magnificent  work  for 
science  had  brought  him  but  little  material  return.  He 
wrote  to  consult  Huxley  as  to  what  steps  had  best  be  taken ; 
the  latter  replied  in  the  letter  of  November  14 : — 

The  papers  in  re  Wallace  have  arrived,  and  I  lose  no  time  in 
assuring  you  that  all  my  "might,  amity,  and  authority,"  as 
Essex  said  when  that  sneak  Bacon  asked  him  for  a  favour,  shall 
be  exercised  as  you  wish. 

On  December  11  he  sends  Darwin  the  draft  of  a 
memorial  on  the  subject,  and  on  the  28th  suggests  that 
the  best  way  of  moving  the  official  world  would  be  for 
Darwin  himself  to  send  the  memorial,  with  a  note  of  his  own, 
to  Mr.  Gladstone,  who  was  then  Prime  Minister  and  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury : — 

Mr.  G.  can  do  a  thing  gracefully  when  he  is  so  minded,  and 
unless  I  greatly  mistake,  he  will  be  so  minded  if  you  write 
to  him. 


1 6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

The  result  was  all  that  could  be  hoped.  On  January  7 
Darwin  writes :  —  "  Hurrah !  hurrah !  read  the  enclosed. 
Was  it  not  extracJrdinarily  kind  of  Mr.  Gladstone  to  write 
himself  at  the  present  time  ?  .  .  .  I  have  written  to  Wallace. 
He  owes  much  to  you.  Had  it  not  been  for  your  advice 
and  assistance,  I  should  never  have  had  courage  to  go  on." 

The  rest  of  the  letter  to  Darwin  of  Dec.  28  is  charac- 
teristic of  his  own  view  of  life.  He  was  no  pessimist  any 
more  than  he  was  a  professed  optimist.  If  the  vast  amount 
of  inevitable  suffering  precluded  the  one  view,  the  gratuitous 
pleasures,  so  to  speak,  of  life,  preclude  the  other.  Life 
properly  lived  is  worth  living,  and  would  be  even  if  a 
malevolent  fate  had  decreed  that  one  should  suffer,  say,  the 
pangs  of  toothache  two  hours  out  of  every  twenty-four.  So 
he  writes : — 

We  have  had  all  the  chicks  (and  the  husbands  of  such  as 
are  therewith  provided)  round  the  Christmas  table  once  more, 
and  a  pleasant  sight  they  were,  though  I  say  it  that  shouldn't. 
Only  the  grand-daughter  left  out,  the  young  woman  not  having 
reached  the  age  when  change  and  society  are  valuable. 

I  don't  know  what  you  think  about  anniversaries.  I  like 
them,  being  always  minded  to  drink  my  cup  of  life  to  the  bottom, 
and  take  my  chance  of  the  sweets  and  bitters.  Infinite  benevo- 
lence need  not  have  invented  pain  and  sorrow  at  all — infinite 
malevolence  would  very  easily  have  deprived  us  of  the  large 
measure  of  content  and  happiness  that  falls  to  our  lot.  After 
all,  Butler's  Analogy  is  unassailable,  and  there  is  nothing  in 
theological  dogmas  more  contradictory  to  our  moral  sense,  than 
is  to  be  found  in  the  facts  of  Nature.  From  which,  however, 
the  Bishop's  conclusion  that  the  dogmas  are  true  doesn't  follow. 

The  following  is  to  his  Edinburgh  friend  Dr.  Skelton, 
whose  appreciation  of  his  frequent  companionship  had  found 
outspoken  expression  in  the  pages  of  The  Crookit  Meg, 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  J\rov.  14,  1880. 

My  dear  Skelton — When  the  Crooked  Meg  reached  me  I 
made  up  my  mind  that  it  would  be  a  shame  to  send  the  empty 
acknowledgment  which  I  give  (or  don't  give)  for  most  books 
that  reach  me. 

But  I  am  over  head  and  ears  in  work — time  utterly  wasted 


i88o  LETTERS 


17 


in  mer^  knowledge  getting  and  giving — and  for  six  weeks  not 
an  hour  for  real  edification  with  a  wholesome  story. 

But  this  Sunday  afternoon  being,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  as 
beastly  a  November  day  as  you  shall  see,  I  have  atteaded  to 
my  spiritual  side  and  been  visited  by  a  blessing  in  the  shape  of 
some  very  pretty  and  unexpected  words  anent  mysel'.* 

In  truth,  it  is  a  right  excellent  story,  though,  distinctly  in  love 
with  Eppie,  I  can  only  wonder  how  you  had  the  heart  to  treat 
her  so  ill.  A  g^rl  like  that  should  have  had  two  husbands — one 
"  wisely  ranged  for  show  "  and  t'other  de  par  amours. 

Don't  ruin  me  with  Mrs.  Skelton  by  repeating  this,  but 
please  remember  me  very  kindly  to  her. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  letter  to  Tyndall  was  called  forth  by  an 
incident  in  connection  with  the  starting  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century.  Huxley  had  promised  to  help  the  editor  by  look- 
ing over  the  proofs  of  a  monthly  article  on  contemporary 
science.  But  his  advertised  position  as  merely  adviser  in 
this  to  the  editor  was  overlooked  by  some  who  resented 
what  they  supposed  to  be  his  assumption  of  the  role  of 
critic  in  general  to  his  fellow-workers  in  science.  At  a 
meeting  of  the  x  Club,  Tyndall  made  a  jesting  allusion 
to  this ;  Huxley,  however,  thought  the  mere  suggestion  too 
grave  for  a. joke,  and  replied  with  all  seriousness  to  clear 
himself  from  the  possibility  of  such  misconception.  And 
the  same  evening  he  wrote  to  Tyndall : — 

*  The  passage  referred  to  stands  on  p.  72  of  The  Crookit  Meg,  and 
describes  the  village  naturalist  and  philosopher,  Adam  Meldrum, 
*'  who  in  his  working  hours  cobbled  old  boats,  and  knew  by  heart  the 
plays  of  Shakespeare  and  the  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica  of  Sir  Thomas 
Browne." 

**  For  the  rest  it  will  be  enough  to  add  that  this  long,  gaunt,  bony 
cobbler  of  old  boats  was — was — (may  I  take  the  liberty,  Mr.  Pro- 
fessor?) a  village  Huxley  of  the  year  One.  The  colourless  brilliancy 
of  the  great  teacher's  style,  the  easy  facility  with  which  the  drop  of 
light  forms  itself  into  a  perfect  sphere  as  it  falls  from  his  pen,  belong 
indeed  to  a  consummate  master  of  the  art  of  expression,  which  Adam 
of  course  was  not ;  but  the  mental  lucidity,  justice,  and  balance,  as 
well  as  the  reserve  of  power,  and  the  Shakespearian  gaiety  of  touch, 
which  made  the  old  man  one  of  the  most  delightful  companions  in  the 
world,  were  essentially  Huxleian." 
38 


1 8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  i 

AxHENiEUM  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W., 
Dec.  2,  1880. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  must  tell  you  the  ins  and  outs  of  this 
Nineteenth  Century  business.  I  was  anxious  to  help  Knowles 
when  he  started  the  journal,  and  at  his  earnest  and  pressing 
request  I  agreed  to  do  what  I  have  done.  But  being  quite  aware 
of  the  misinterpretation  to  which  I  should  be  liable  if  my  name 
"  sans  phrase  "  were  attached  to  the  article,  I  insisted  upon  the 
exact  words  which  you  will  find  at  the  head  of  it;  and  which 
seemed,  and  still  seem  to  me,  to  define  my  position  as  a  mere 
adviser  of  the  editor. 

Moreover,  by  diligently  excluding  any  expression  of  opinion 
on  the  part  of  the  writers  of  the  compilation,  I  thought  that 
nobody  could  possibly  suspect  me  of  assuming  the  position  of 
an  authority  even  on  the  subjects  with  which  I  may  be  sup- 
posed to  be  acquainted,  let  alone  those  such  as  physics  and 
chemistry,  of  which  I  know  no  more  than  anyone  of  the  public 
may  know. 

Therefore  your  remarks  came  upon  me  to-night  with  the 
sort  of  painful  surprise  which  a  man  feels  who  is  accused  of 
the  particular  sin  of  which  he  flatters  himself  he  is  especially 
not  guilty,  and  "  roused  my  corruption  "  as  the  Scotch  have  it. 
But  there  is  no  need  to  say  anything  about  that,  for  you  were 
generous  and  good  as  Ihave  always  found  you.  Only  I  pray 
you,  if  hereafter  it  strikes  you  that  any  doing  of  mine  should  be 
altered  or  amended,  tell  me  yourself  and  privately,  and  I  promise 
you  a  very  patient  listener,  and  what  is  more  a  Very  thankful 
one. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Tyndall  replied  with  no  less  frankness,  thanking  him  for 
the  friendly  promptitude  of  his  letter,  and  explaining  that 
he  had  meant  to  speak  privately  on  the  matter,  but  had 
been  forestalled  by  the  subject  coming  up  when  it  did. 
And  he  wound  up  by  declaring  that  it  would  be  too  absurd 
to  admit  the  power  of  such  an  occasion  "  to  put  even  a 
momentary  strain  upon  the  cable  which  has  held  us  together 
for  nine  and  twenty  years." 

At  the  very  end  of  the  year,  George  Eliot  died.  A 
proposal  was  immediately  set  on  foot  to  inter  her  remains 
in  Westminster  Abbey,  and  various  men  of  letters  pressed 
the  matter  on  the  Dean,  who  was  unwilling  to  stir  without 
a  very  strong  and  general  expression  of  opinion.    To  Mr. 


s.- 


i88o  DEATH  OF  GEORGE  ELIOT 


19^ 


Herbert  Spencer,  who  had  urged  him  to  join  in  memorialis- 
ing the  Dean,  Huxley  replied  as  follows: — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec.  27,  1880. 

My  dear  Spencer — ^Your  telegram  which  reached  me  on 
Friday  evening  caused  me  great  perplexity,  inasmuch  as  I  had 
just  been  talking  with  Morley,  and  agreeing  with  him  that  the 
proposal  for  a  funeral  in  Westminster  Abbey  had  a  very  ques- 
tionable look  to  us,  who  desired  nothing  so  much  as  that  peace 
and  honour  should  attend  George  Eliot  to  her  grave. 

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  proposal  will  be  bitterly 
opposed,  possibly  (as  happened  in  Mill's  case  with  less  provoca- 
tion), with  the  raking. up  of  past  histories,  about  which  the 
opinion  even  of  those  who  have  least  the  desire  or  the  right  to 
be  Pharisaical  is  strongly  divided,  and  which  had  better  be  for- 
gotten. 

With  respect  to  putting  pressure  on  the  Dean  of  West- 
minster, I  have  to  consider  that  he  has  some  confidence  in  me, 
and  before  asking  him  to  do  something  for  which  he  is  pretty 
sure  to  be  violently  assailed,  I  have  to  ask  myself  whether  I 
really  think  it  a  right  thing  for  a  man  in  his  position  to  do. 

Now  I  cannot  say  I  do.  However  much  I  may  lament  the 
circumstance,  Westminster  Abbey  is  a  Christian  Church  and 
not  a  Pantheon,  and  the  Dean  thereof  is  officially  a  Christian 
priest,  and  we  ask  him  to  bestow  exceptional  Christian  honours 
by  this  burial  in  the  Abbey.  George  Eliot  is  known  not  only 
as  a  great  writer,  but  as  a  person  whose  life  and  opinions  were 
in  notorious  antagonism  to  Christian  practice  in  regard  to  mar- 
riage, and  Christian  theory  in  regard  to  dogma.  How  am  I  to 
tell  the  Dean  that  I  think  he  ought  to  read  over  the  body  of  a 
person  who  did  not  repent  of  what  the  Church  considers  mortal 
sin,  a  service  not  one  solitary  proposition  in  which  she  would 
have  accepted  for  truth  while  she  was  alive?  How  am  I  to 
urge  him  to  do  that  which,  if  I  were  in  his  place,  I  should  most 
emphatically  refuse  to  do? 

You  tell  me  that  Mrs.  Cross  wished  for  the  funeral  in  the 
Abbey.  While  I  desire  to  entertain  the  greatest  respect  for  her 
wishes,  I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  it.  I  do  not  understand  the 
feeling  which  could  create  such  a  desire  on  any  personal 
grounds,  save  those  of  affection,  and  the  natural  yearning  to  be 
near  even  in  death  to  those  whom  we  have  loved.  And  on 
public  grounds  the  wish  is  still  less  intelligible  to  me.  One 
cannot  eat  one's  cake  and  have  it  too.    Those  who  elect  to  be 


20  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  I 

free  in  thought  and  deed  must  not  hanker  after  the  rewards,  if 
they  are  to  be  so  called,  which  the  world  offers  to  those  who 
put  up  with  its  fetters. 

Thus,  however  I  look  at  the  proposal  it  seems  to  me  to  be 
^  a  profound  mistake,  and  I  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  it. 

I  shall  be  deeply  grieved  if  this  resolution  is  ascribed  to  any 
other  motives  than  those  which  I  have  set  forth  at  more  length 
i  than  I  intended. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


;  # 


CHAPTER   II 
1881 

The  last  ten  years  had  found  Huxley  gradually  involved 
more  and  more  in  official  duties.  Now,  with  the  beginning 
of  1 88 1,  he  became  yet  more  deeply  engrossed  in  practical 
and  administrative  work,  more  completely  cut  off  from  his 
favourite  investigations,  by  his  appointment  to  an  Inspector- 
ship of  Fisheries,  in  succession  to  the  late  Frank  Buckland. 
It  is  almost  pathetic  to  note  how  he  snatched  at  any  spare 
moments  for  biological  research.  No  sooner  was  a  long 
afternoon's  work  at  the  Home  Office  done,  than,  as  Professor 
Howes  relates,  he  would  often  take  a  hansom  to  the  labora- 
tory at  South  Kensington,  and  spend  a  last  half-hour  at  his 
dissections  before  going  home. 

The  Inspectorship,  which  was  worth  £700  a  year,  he 
held  in  addition  to  his  post  at  South  Kensington,  the  official 
description  of  which  now  underwent  another  change.  In 
the  first  place,  his  official  connection  with  the  Survey  ap- 
pears to  have  ceased  this  year,  the  last  report  made  by  him 
being  in  1881.  His  name,  however,  still  appeared  in  con- 
nection with  the  post  of  Naturalist  until  his  retirement  in 
1885,  and  it  was  understood  that  his  services  continued  to 
be  available  if  required.  Next,  in  October  of  this  year,  the 
Royal  School  of  Mines  was  incorporated  with  the  newly 
established  Normal  School— or  as  it  was  called  in  1890, 
Royal  College  of  Science,  and  the  title  of  Lecturer  on  Gen- 
eral Natural  History  was  suppressed,  and  Huxley  became 
Professor  of  Biology  and  Dean  of  the  College  at  a  salary 
of  £800,  for  it  was  arranged  on  his  appointment  to  the  In- 
spectorship, that  he  should  not  receive  the  salary  attached 
to  the  post  of  Dean.    Thus  the  Treasury  saved  £200  a  year. 

21 


22  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  ii 

As  Professor  of  Biology,  he  was  under  the  Lord  Presi- 
dent of  the  Council;  as  Inspector  of  Fisheries,  under  the 
Board  of  Trade ;  hence  some  time  passed  in  arranging  the 
claims  of  the  two  departments  before  the  appointment  was 
officially  made  known,  as  may  be  gathered  from  the  fol- 
lowing letters : — 

To  Sir  John  Donnelly 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec,  27,  1880. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  tried  hard  to  have  a  bad  cold  last 
night,  and  though  I  blocked  him  with  quinine  I  think  I  may  as 
well  give  myself  the  benefit  of  the  Bank  Holiday  and  keep  the 
house  to-day. 

There  is  a  chance  of  your  getting  early  salmon  yet.  I  wrote 
to  decline  the  post  on  Friday,  but  on  Saturday  evening  the 
Home  Secretary  sent  a  note  asking  to  see  me  yesterday.  As 
he  had  re-opened  the  question  of  course  I  felt  justified  in  stating 
all  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  case  as  personal  to  myself  and  my 
rather  complicated  official  position.  .  .  .  He  entered  into  the 
affair  with  a  warmth  and  readiness  which  very  agreeably  sur- 
prised me,  and  he  proposes  making  such  arrangements  as  will 
not  oblige  me  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  weirs  or  the 
actual  inspection.  Under  these  circumstances  the  post  would 
be  lovely — if  I  can  hold  it  along  with  the  other  things.  And 
of  his  own  motion  the  Home  Secretary  is  going  to  write  to  Lord 
Spencer  about  it  to  see  if  he  cannot  carry  the  whole  thing 
through. 

If  this  could  be  managed  I  could  get  great  things  done  in 
the  matter  of  fish  culture  and  fish  diseases  at  South  Kensington, 
if  poor  dear  X.*s  rattle  trappery  could  be  turned  to  proper 
account,  without  in  any  way  interfering  with  the  work  of  the 
School. 

At  any  rate,  my  book  stands  not  to  lose,  and  may  win — the 
innocence  of  the  dove  is  not  always  divorced  from  the  wisdom 
of  the  sarpent.     [Sketch  of  the  "  Sarpent."] 

To  Lord  Farrer 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Jan.  18,  t88i. 
My  dear  Farrer — I  have  waited  a  day  or  two  before  thank- 
ing you  for  your  very  kind  letter,  in  the  hope  that  I  might  be 
able  to  speak  as  one  knowing  where  he  is. 


i88i  WORK  AS  FISHERY  INSPECTOR  23 

But  as  I  am  still,  in  an  official  sense,  nowhere,  I  will  not 
delay  any  longer. 

I  had  never  thought  of  the  post,  but  the  Home  Secretary 
offered  it  to  me  in  a  very  kind  and  considerate  manner,  and  after 
some  hesitation  I  accepted  it.  But  some  adjustment  had  to  be 
made  between  my  master,  the  Lord  President,  and  the  Treasury ; 
and  although  everybody  seems  disposed  to  be  very  good  to  me, 
the  business  is  not  yet  finally  settled.  Whence  the  newspapers 
get  their  information  I  don't  know — ^but  it  is  always  wrong  in 
these  matters. 

As  you  know  I  have  had  a  good  apprenticeship  to  the  work  * 
— and  I  hope  to  be  of  some  use;  of  the  few  innocent  pleasures 
left  to  men  past  middle  life — the  jamming  common-sense  down 
the  throats  of  fools  is  perhaps  the  keenest. 

May  we  do  some  joint  business  in  that  way! — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  HIS  Eldest  Son 

Feb,  14,  1 88 1. 

I  have  entered  upon  my  new  duties  as  Fishery  Inspector,  but 
you  are  not  to  expect  salmon  to  be  much  cheaper  just  yet. 

My  colleague  and  I  have  rooms  at  the  Home  Office,  and  I 
find  there  is  more  occupation  than  I  expected,  but  no  serious 
labour. 

Every  now  and  then  I  shall  have  to  spend  a  few  days  in 
the  country,  holding  inquiries,  and  as  salmon  rivers  are  all  in 
picturesque  parts  of  the  country,  I  shall  not  object  to  that  part 
of  the  business. 

The  duties  of  the  new  office  were  partly  scientific,  partly 
administrative.  On  the  one  hand,  the  natural  history  and 
diseases  of  fish  had  to  be  investigated;  on  the  other,  regula- 
tions had  to  be  carried  out,  weirs  and  salmon  passes  ap- 
proved, disputes  settled,  reports  written.  I  find  for  instance, 
that  apart  from  the  work  in  London,  visits  of  inspection 
in  all  parts  of  the  country  took  up  twenty-eight  days  between 
March  and  September  this  year. 

Sir  Spencer  Walpole,  who  was  his  colleague  for  some 
years,  has  kindly  given  me  an  account  of  their  work  to- 
gether. 

*  He  had  already  served  on  two  Fishery  Commissions,  1862  and 
1864-5. 


^j 


24  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ii 

Early  in  1881,  Sir  William  Harcourt  appointed  Professor 
Huxley  one  of  Her  Majesty's  Inspectors  of  Fisheries.  The 
office  had  become  vacant  through  the  untimely  death,  in  the 
preceding  December,  of  the  late  Mr.  Frank  Buckland.  Under 
an  Act,  passed  twenty  years  before,  the  charge  of  the  English 
Salmon  Fisheries  had  been  placed  under  the  Home  Office,  and 
the  Secretary  of  State  had  been  authorised  to  appoint  two  In- 
spectors to  aid  him  in  administering  the  law.  The  functions  of 
the  Home  Office  and  of  the  Inspectors  were  originally  simple, 
but  they  had  been  enlarged  by  an  Act  passed  in  1873,  which 
conferred  on  local  conservators  elaborate  powers  of  making 
bye-laws  for  the  development  and  preservation  of  the  Fisheries. 
These  bye-laws  required  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  State, 
who  was  necessarily  dependent  on  the  advice  of  his  Inspectors 
in  either  allowing  or  disallowing  them. 

In  addition  to  the  nominal  duties  of  the  Inspectors,  they 
became — by  virtue  of  their  position — the  advisers  of  the  Govern- 
ment on  all  questions  connected  with  the  Sea  Fisheries  of  Great 
Britain.  These  fisheries  are  nominally  under  the  Board  of 
Trade,  but,  as  this  Board  at  that  time  had  no  machinery  at  its 
disposal  for  the  purpose,  it  naturally  relied  on  the  advice  of  the 
Home  Office  Inspectors  in  all  questions  of  difficulty,  on  which 
their  experience  enabled  them  to  speak  with  authority. 

For  duties  such  as  these,  which  have  been  thus  briefly  de- 
scribed. Professor  Huxley  had  obvious  qualifications.  On  all 
subjects  relating  to  the  Natural  History  of  Fish  he  spoke  with 
decisive  authority.  But,  in  addition  to  his  scientific  attain- 
ments, from  1863  to  1865  he  had  been  a  member  of  the  Com- 
mission which  had  conducted  an  elaborate  investigation  into 
the  condition  of  the  Fisheries  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  had 
taken  a  large  share  in  the  preparation  of  a  Report,  which — ^not- 
withstanding recent  changes  in  law  and  policy — remains  the 
ablest  and  most  exhaustive  document  which  has  ever  been  laid 
before  Parliament  on  the  subject. 

This  protracted  investigation  had  convinced  Professor  Hux- 
ley that  the  supply  of  fish  in  the  deep  sea  was  practically  inex- 
haustible; and  that,  however  much  it  might  be  necessary  to 
enforce  the  police  of  the  seas  by  protecting  particular  classes 
of  sea  fishermen  from  injury  done  to  their  instruments  by  the 
operations  of  other  classes,  the  primary  duty  of  the  legislature 
was  to  develop  sea  fishing,  and  not  to  place  restrictions  on  sea 
fishermen  for  any  fears  of  an  exhaustion  of  fish. 

His  scientific  training,  moreover,   made  him  ridicule  the 


i88i  WORK  AS   FISHERY  INSPECTOR  25 

modern  notion  that  it  was  possible  to  stock  the  sea  by  artificial 
methods.  He  wrote  to  me,  when  th€  Fisheries  Exhibition  of 
1883  was  in  contemplation,  "  You  may  have  seen  that  we  have 

a  new  Fish  Culture  Society.     C talked  gravely  about  our 

stocking  the  North  Sea  with  cod!  After  that  I  suppose  we 
shall  take  up  herrings:  and  I  mean  to  propose  whales,  which, 
as  all  the  world  knows,  are  terribly  over  fished  I "  And  after 
the  exhibition  was  over  he  wrote  to  me  again,  with  reference 
to  a  report  which  the  Commission  had  asked  me  to  draw  up :  "I 
have  just  finished  reading  your  report,  which  has  given  me  a 
world  of  satisfaction.  .  .  .  I  am  particularly  glad  that  you  have 
put  in  a  word  of  warning  to  the  fish  culturists.*'  * 

He  was  not,  however,  equally  certain  that  particular  areas  of 
Sea  Shore  might  not  be  exhausted  by  our  fishing.  He  extended 
in  1883  an  order  which  Mr.  Buckland  and  I  had  made  in  1879 
for  restricting  the  taking  of  crabs  and  lobsters  on  the  coast  of 
Norfolk,  and  he  wrote  to  me  on  that  occasion :  "  I  was  at 
Cromer  and  Sheringham  last  week,  holding  an  enquiry  for  the 
Board  of  Trade  about  the  working  of  your  order  of  1879.  Ac- 
cording to  all  accounts,  the  crabs  have  multiplied  threefold  in 
1881  and  1882.  Whether  this  is  post  hoc  or  propter  hoc  is  more 
than  I  should  like  to  say.  But  at  any  rate,  this  is  a  very  good 
prima  facie  case  for  continuing  the  order,  and  I  shall  report 
accordingly.  Anyhow,  the  conditions  are  very  favourable  for  a 
long-continued  experiment  in  the  effects  of  regulation,  and,  ten 
years  hence,  there  will  be  some  means  of  judging  of  the  value 
of  these  restrictions." 

If,  however,  Professor  Huxley  was  strongly  opposed  to  un- 
necessary interference  with  the  labours  of  sea  fishermen,  he 
was  well  aware  of  the  necessity  of  protecting  migratory  fish 
like  salmon,  against  over-fishing:  and  his  reports  for  1882  and 
1883 — in  which  he  gave  elaborate  accounts  of  the  results  of 
legislation  on  the  Tyne  and  on  the  Severn — show  that  he  keenly 
appreciated  the  necessity  of  regulating  the  Salmon  Fisheries. 

It  so  happened  that  at  the  time  of  his  appointment,  many 
of  our  important  rivers  were  visited  by  "  Saprolegnia  ferax," 

*  When  I  was  asked  to  write  the  report  on  this  Commission,  I  said 
that  I  would  do  so  if  Sir  E.  Birkbeck,  its  chairman,  and  Professor 
Huxley,  both  met  me  to  discuss  the  points  to  be  noticed.  The  meet- 
ing duly  took  place ;  and  I  opened  it  by  asking  what  was  the  chief 
lesson  to  be  drawn  from  the  exhibition?  "Well,"  said  Professor 
Huxley,  *'  the  chief  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  the  exhibition  is  that 
London  is  in  want  of  some  open  air  amusement  on  summer  evenings." 


26  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  li 

the  fungoid  growth  which  became  popularly  known  as  Salmon 
Disea3e.  Professor  Huxley  gave  much  time  to  the  study  of 
the  conditions  under  which  the  fungus  flourished:  he  devoted 
much  space  in  his  earlier  reports  to  the  subject:  and  he  read 
a  paper  upon  it  at  a  remarkable  meeting  of  the  Royal  Society 
in  the  summer  of  1881.  He  took  a  keen  interest  in  these  in- 
vestigations, and  he  wrote  to  me  from  North  Wales,  at  the  end 
of  1 88 1,  "  The  salmon  brought  to  me  here  have  not  been  so 
badly  diseased  as  I  could  have  wished,  and  the  fungus  dies  so 
rapidly  out  of  the  water  that  only  one  specimen  furnished  me 
with  materials  in  lively  condition.  These  I  have  cultivated: 
and  to  my  great  satisfaction  have  got  some  flies  infected.  With 
nine  precious  muscoid  corpses,  more  or  less  ornamented  with  a 
lovely  fur  trimming  of  Saproleg^ia,  I  shall  return  to  London 
to-morrow,  and  shall  be  ready  in  a  short  time,  I  hope,  to  furnish 
Salmon  Disease  wholesale,  retail,  or  for  exportation." 

In  carrying  out  the  duties  of  our  office.  Professor  Huxley 
and  I  were  necessarily  thrown  into  very  close  communication. 
There  were  few  days  in  which  we  did  not  pass  some  time  in 
each  other's  company:  there  were  many  weeks  in  which  we 
travelled  together  through  the  river  basins  of  this  country.  I 
think  that  I  am  justified  in  saying  that  official  intercourse 
ripened  into  warm  personal  friendship,  and  that,  for  the  many 
months  in  which  we  served  together,  we  lived  on  terms  of 
intimacy  which  are  rare  even  among  colleagues  or  even  among 
friends. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that,  as  a  companion,  Professor  Huxley 
was  the  most  delightful  of  men.  Those  who  have  met  him  in 
society,  or  enjoyed  the  hospitality  of  his  house,  must  have  been 
conscious  of  the  singular  charm  of  a  conversation,  which  was 
founded  on  knowledge,  enlarged  by  memory,  and  brightened  by 
humour.  But,  admirable  as  he  was  in  society,  no  one  could 
have  realised  the  full  charm  of  his  company  who  had  not  con- 
versed with  him  alone.  He  had  the  rare  art  of  placing  men, 
whose  knowledge  and  intellect  were  inferior  to  his  own,  at  their 
ease.  He  knew  how  to  draw  out  all  that  was  best  in  the  com- 
panion who  suited  him;  and  he  had  equal  pleasure  in  giving 
and  receiving.  Our  conversation  ranged  over  every  subject. 
We  discussed  together  the  grave  problems  of  man  and  his 
destiny;  we  disputed  on  the  minor  complications  of  modern 
politics ;  we  criticised  one  another's  literary  judgments ;  and  we 
laughed  over  the  stories  which  we  told  one  another,  and  of 
which  Professor  Huxley  had  an  inexhaustible  fund. 


i88i  WORK  AS  FISHERY  INSPECTOR 


27 


In  conversation  Professor  Huxley  displayed  the  quality 
which  distinguished  him  both  as  a  writer  and  a  public  speaker. 
He  invariably  used  the  right  words  in  the  right  sense.  Those 
who  are  jointly  responsible — as  he  and  I  were  often  jointly 
responsible — for  some  written  document,  have  exceptional  op- 
portunities of  observing  this  quality.  Professor  Huxley  could 
always  put  his  finger  on  a  wrong  word,  and  he  always  instinc- 
tively chose  the  right  one.  It  was  this  qualification — a  much 
rarer  one  than  people  imagine — which  made  Professor  Huxley's 
essays  clear  to  the  meanest  understanding,  and  which  made  him, 
in  my  judgment,  the  greatest  master  of  prose  of  his  time.  The 
same  quality  was  equally  observable  in  his  spoken  speech.  I 
happened  to  be  present  at  the  anniversary  dinner  of  the  Royal 
Society,  at  which  Professor  Huxley  made  his  last  speech.  And, 
as  he  gave  an  admirable  account  of  the  share  which  he  had 
taken  in  defending  Mr.  Darwin  against  his  critics,  I  overheard 
the  present  Prime  Minister  *  say,  "  What  a  beautiful  speaker 
he  is." 

In  1882,  the  duties  of  another  appointment  forced  me  to 
resign  the  Inspectorship,  which  I  had  held  for  so  long:  and 
thenceforward  my  residence  in  the  Isle  of  Man  gave  me  fewer 
opportunities  of  seeing  Professor  Huxley:  our  friendship,  how- 
ever, remained  unbroken;  and  occasional  visits  to  London  gave 
me  many  opportunities  of  renewing  it.  He  retained  his  own 
appointment  as  Inspector  for  more  than  three  years  after  my 
resignation.  He  served,  during  the  closing  months  of  his  offi- 
cialship,  on  a  Royal  Commission  on  trawling,  over  which  the 
late  Lord  Dalhousie  presided.  But  his  health  broke  down  before 
the  commissioners  issued  their  report,  and  he  was  ordered 
abroad.  It  so  happened  that  in  the  spring  of  1885  I  was  staying 
at  Florence,  when  Professor  and  Mrs.  Huxley  passed  through 
it  on  their  way  home.  He  had  at  that  time  seen  none  of  his 
old  friends,  and  was  only  slowly  regaining  strength.  After  his 
severe  illness  Mrs.  Huxley  encouraged  me  to  take  him  out  for 
many  short  walks,  and  I  did  my  best  to  cheer  him  in  his  de- 
pressed condition.  He  did  not  then  think  that  he  had  ten  years 
of — on  the  whole — happy  life  before  him.  He  told  me  that  he 
was  about  to  retire  from  all  his  work,  and  he  added,  that  he 
had  never  enjoyed  the  Inspectorship  after  I  had  left  it.  I  am 
happy  in  believing  that  the  remark  was  due  to  the  depression 
from  which  he  was  suffering,  for  he  had  written  to  me  two 


*  Lord  Salisbury. 


28  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ii 

years  ago,  "  The  office  would  be  quite  perfect,  if  they  did  not 
want  an  annual  report.  I  can't  go  in  for  a  disquisition  on  river 
basins  after  the  manner  of  Buckland,  and  you  have  exhausted 
the  other  topics.  I  polished  off  the  Salmon  Disease  pretty  fully 
last  year,  so  what  the  deuce  am  I  to  write  about  ?  " 

I  saw  Professor  Huxley  for  the  last  time  on  the  Christmas 
day  before  his  death.  I  spent  some  hours  with  him,  with  no 
other  companions  than  Mrs.  Huxley  and  my  daughter.  I  had 
never  seen  him  brighter  or  happier,  and  his  rich,  playful  and 
sympathetic  talk  vividly  recalled  the  many  brilliant  hours  which 
I  had  passed  in  his  company  some  twelve  or  thirteen  years 
before. 

One  word  more.  No  one  could  have  known  Professor  Hux- 
ley intimately  without  recognising  that  he  delighted  in  combat. 
He  was  never  happier  than  when  he  was  engaged  in  argument 
or  controversy,  and  he  loved  to  select  antagonists  worthy  of  his 
steel.  The  first  public  enquiry  which  we  held  together  was 
attended  by  a  great  nobleman,  whom  Professor  Huxley  did  not 
know  by  sight,  but  who  rose  at  the  commencement  of  our  pro- 
ceedings to  offer  some  suggestions.  Professor  Huxley  directed 
him  to  sit  down,  and  not  interrupt  the  business.  I  told  my  col- 
league in  a  whisper  whom  he  was  interrupting.  And  I  was 
amused,  as  we  walked  away  to  luncheon  together,*  by  his  quaint 
remark  to  me,  "  We  have  begun  very  well,  we  have  sat  upon  a 
duke."  * 

If,  however,  a  love  of  argument  and  controversy  occasionally 
led  him  into  hot  water,  I  do  not  think  that  his  polemical  tenden- 
cies ever  cost  him  a  friend.  His  antagonists  must  have  recog- 
nised the  fairness  of  his  methods,  and  must  have  been  susceptible 
to  the  charm  of  the  man.  The  high  example  whfch  he  set  in 
controversy,  moreover,  was  equally  visible  in  his  ordinary  life. 
Of  all  the  men  I  have  ever  known,  his  ideas  and  his  standard 
were — on  the  whole — ^the  highest.  He  recognised  that  the  fact 
of  his  religious  views  imposed  on  him  the  duty  of  living  the  most 
upright  of  lives,  and  I  am  very  much  of  the  opinion  of  a  little 

*  Of  this  he  wrote  home  on  March  15,  1881 :  **  Somebody  produced 
the  Punch  yesterday  and  showed  it  to  me,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of 

the  Duke  of ,  who  has  attended  our  two  meetings.     I  nearly  had 

a  shindy  with  him  at  starting,  but  sweetness  and  light  (in  my  person) 
carried  the  day."  This  Punch  contained  the  cartoon  of  Huxley  in 
nautical  costume  riding  on  a  salmon ;  contrary  to  the  custom  of 
Punchy  it  made  an  unfair  hit  in  appending  to  his  name  the  letters 
£  s.  d.     Never  was  any  one  who  deserved  the  imputation  less. 


i88i  WORK  AS  FISHERY  INSPECTOR 


29 


child,  now  grown  into  an  accomplished  woman,  who,  when  she 
was  told  that  Professor  Huxley  had  no  hope  of  future  rewards, 
and  no  fear  of  future  punishments,  emphatically  declared: 
"Then  I  think  Professor  Huxley  is  the  best  man  I  have  ever 
known." 

Extracts  from  his  letters  home  give  some  further  idea  of 
the  kind  of  work  entailed.  Thus  in  March  and  again  in  May 
he  was  in  Wales,  and  writes : — 

Cromffyratellionptrroch,  May  24. 

Mr.  Barrington's  very  pretty  place  about  five  miles  from 
Abergavenny,  wherein  I  write,  may  or  may  not  have  the  name 
which  I  have  written  on  at  the  top  of  the  page,  as  it  is  Welsh ; 
however  it  is  probably  that  or  something  like  it.  I  forgot  to 
enquire. 

We  are  having  the  loveliest  weather,  and  yesterday  went 
looking  up  weirs  with  more  or  less  absurd  passes  up  a  charming 
valley  not  far  hence.  It  is  just  seven  o'clock,  and  we  are  going 
to  breakfast  and  start  at  eight  to  fit  in  with  the  tides  of  the 
Severn.  It  is  not  exactly  clear  where  we  shall  be  to-night.  .  .  . 
Now  I  must  go  to  breakfast,  for  I  got  up  at  six.  Figures 
vous  ga. 

May  29 — Hereford, — We  are  favoured  by  the  weather  again, 
though  it  is  bitter  cold  under  the  bright  sunshine.  We  stopped 
at  Worcester  yesterday,  and  I  went  to  examine  some  weirs  hard 
by.  This  involved  three  or  four  miles'  country  walking,  and 
was  all  to  the  good.  If  the  Inspector  business  were  all  of  this 
sort  it  would  be  all  that  fancy  painted  it.  We  shall  have  a  long 
sitting  to-day.  .  .  .  [He  fears  to  be  detained  into  the  night  by 
"  over-fluent  witnesses."] 

In  April  he  spent  several  days  at  Norwich,  in  connection 
with  the  National  Fishery  Exhibition  held  there. 

April  19. — We  had  a  gala  day  yesterday.  .  .  .  The  exhi- 
bition of  all  manner  of  fish  and  fishing  apparatus  was  ready,  for 
a  wonder,  and  looked  very  well.  The  Prince  and  Princess 
arrived,  and  we  had  the  usual  address  and  reply  and  march 
through.  Afterwards  a  mighty  dejeuner  in  the  St.  Andrew's 
Hall — a  fine  old  place  looking  its  best.  I  was  just  opposite  the 
Princess,  and  I  could  not  help  looking  at  her  with  wonderment. 
She  looked  so  fresh  and  girlish.  She  came  and  talked  to  me 
afterwards  in  a  very  pleasant  simple  way. 


30  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ii 

Walpole  and  I  went  in  with  our  host  yesterday  afternoon 
and  started  to  return  on  the  understanding  that  he  should  pick 
us  up  a  few  miles  out.  Of  course  we  took  the  wrong  road,  and 
walked  all  the  way,  some  eight  miles  or  so.  However,  it  did  us 
good,  and  after  a  champagne  lunch  we  thought  we  could  not  do 
better  than  repeat  the  operation  yesterday. 

I  feel  quite  set  up  by  finding  that  after  standing  about  for 
hours  I  can  walk  eight  miles  without  any  particular  fatigue. 
Life  in  the  old  dog  yet !  Walpole  is  a  capital  companion — ^knows 
a  great  many  things,  and  talks  well  about  them,  so  we  get  over 
the  ground  pleasantly. 

April  20, — There  was  a  long  day  of  it  yesterday  looking  over 
things  in  the  Exhibition  till  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  then  a 
mighty  dinner  in  St.  Andrew's  Hall  given  by  a  Piscatorial  So- 
ciety of  which  my  host  is  President.  It  was  a  weary  sitting  of 
five  hours  with  innumerable  speeches.  Of  course  I  had  to  say 
"  a  few  words,"  and  if  I  can  get  a  copy  of  the  papers  I  will  send 
them  to  you.  I  flatter  myself  they  were  words  of  wisdom,  though 
hardly  likely  to  contribute  to  my  popularity  among  the  fishermen. 

On  the  2 1st  he  gave  an  address  on  the  Herring.  To 
describe  the  characteristics  of  this  fish  in  the  Eastern  Coun- 
ties, he  says,  might  seem  like  carrying  coals  to  Newcastle ; 
nevertheless  the  fisherman's  knowledge  is  not  the  same  as 
that  of  the  man  of  science,  and  includes  none  but  the  vaguest 
notions  of  the  ways  of  life  of  the  fish  and  the  singularities 
of  its  organisation  which  perplexed  biologists.  His  own 
study  of  the  problems  connected  with  the  herring  had  begun 
nineteen  years  before,  when  he  served  on  the  first  of  his 
two  Fisher}'  Commissions;  and  one  of  his  chief  objects  in 
this  address  was  to  insist  upon  a  fact,  borne  out  partly  by 
the  inquiries  of  the  Commission,  partly  by  later  investiga- 
tions in  Europe  and  America,  which  it  was  difficult  to  make 
people  appreciate,  namely,  the  impossibility  of  man's  fish-  / 
eries  affecting  the  numbers  of  the  herring  to  any  appreci-  ' 
able  extent,  a  year's  catch  not  amounting  to  the  estimated 
number  of  a  single  shoal ;  while  the  flatfish  and  cod  fisheries 
remove  many  of  the  most  destructive  enemies  of  the  herring. 
Those  who  had  not  studied  the  question  in  this  light  would 
say  that  "  it  stands  to  reason  "  that  vast  fisheries  must  tend 
to  exterminate  the  fish;  apropos  of  which,  he  made  his 


i88i  SALMON   DISEASE  3 1 

well-known  remark  that  in  questions  of  biology  "  if  any  one 
tells  me  *  it  stands  to  reason '  that  such  and  such  things 
must  happen,  I  generally  find  reason  to  doubt  the  safety  of 
his  standing." 

This  year,  also,  he  began  the  investigations  which  com- 
pleted former  inquiries  into  the  subject,  and  finally  eluci- 
dated the  nature  of  the  salmon  disease.  The  last  link  in  the 
chain  of  evidence  which  proved  its  identity  with  a  fungoid 
disease  of  flies,  was  not  reached  until  March  1883 ;  and  on 
July  3  following  he  delivered  a  full  account  of  the  disease, 
its  nature  and  origin,  in  an  address  at  the  Fisheries  Exhibi- 
tion in  London. 

In  1881,  then,  at  the  end  of  December,  he  went  to  North 
Wales  to  study  on  the  fresh  fish,  the  nature  of  the  epidemic 
of  salmon  disease  which  had  broken  out  in  the  Conwav, 
in  spite  of  being  in  such  bad  health  that  he  was  persuaded 
to  let  his  younger  son  come  and  look  after  him.  But  this 
was  only  a  passing  premonition  of  the  breakdown  which 
was  to  come  upon  him  three  years  after. 

One  year's  work  as  Inspector  was  very  like  another.  In 
1882,  for  instance,  on  January  21,  he  is  at  Berwick,  "  voice- 
less but  jolly  " ;  in  the  spring  he  had  to  attend  a  Fisheries 
Exhibition  in  Edinburgh,  and  writes : — 

April  12. — We  have  opened  our  Exhibition,  and  I  have  been 
standing  about  looking  at  the  contents  until  my  back  is  broken. 

April  13. — The  weather  here  is  villainous — a  regular  Edin- 
burgh "  coorse  day."  I  have  seen  all  I  wanted  to  see  of  the 
Exhibition,  eaten  two  heavy  dinners,  one  with  Primrose  and 
one  with  Young,  and  want  to  get  home.  Walpole  and  I  are 
dining  domestically  at  home  this  evening,  having  virtuously 
refused  all  invitations. 

In  June  he  was  in  Hampshire;  on  July  25  he  writes 
from  Tynemouth : — 

I  reached  here  about  5  o'clock,  and  found  the  bailiff  or  what- 
ever they  call  him  of  the  Board  of  Conservators,  awaiting  me 
with  a  boat  at  my  disposal.  So  we  went  off  to  look  at  what  they 
call  "  The  Playground  " — ^two  bays  in  which  the  salmon  coming 
from  the  sea  rest  and  disport  themselves  until  a  fresh  comes 
down  the  river  and  they  find  it  convenient  to  ascend.    Harbottle 


32  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ii 

bailiff  in  question  is  greatly  disturbed  at  the  amount  of  poaching 
that  goes  on  in  the  playground,  and  unfolded  his  griefs  to  me  at 
length.  It  was  a  lovely  evening,  very  calm,  and  I  enjoyed  my 
boat  expedition.  To-morrow  there  is  to  be  another  to  see  the 
operations  of  a  steam  trawler,  which  in  all  probability  I  shall 
not  enjoy  so  much.    I  shall  take  a  light  breakfast. 

These  were  the  pleasanter  parts  of  the  work.  The  less 
pleasant  was  sitting  all  day  in  a  crowded  court,  hearing  a 
disputed  case  of  fishing  rights,  or  examining  witnesses  who 
stuck  firmly  to  views  about  fish  which  had  long  been  ex- 
ploded by  careful  observation.  But  on  the  whole  he  enjoyed 
it,  although  it  took  him  away  from  research  in  other  depart- 
ments. This  summer,  on  the  death  of  Professor  Rolleston, 
he  was  sounded  on  the  question  whether  he  would  consent 
to  accept  the  Linacre  Professorship  of  Physiology  at  Oxford. 
He  wrote  to  the  Warden  of  Merton : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  June  22,  1881. 
My  dear  Brodrick — Many  thanks  for  your  letter.  I  can 
give  you  my  reply  at  once,  as  my  attention  has  already  been 
called  to  the  question  you  ask;  and  it  is  that  I  do  not  see  my 
way  to  leaving  London  for  Oxford.  My  reasons  for  arriving 
at  this  conclusion  are  various.  I  am  getting  oldj  and  you  should 
have  a  man  in  full  vigour.  I"  doubt  whether  the  psychical  atmos- 
phere of  Oxford  would  suit  me,  and  still  more,  whether  I  should 
suit  it  after  a  life  spent  in  the  absolute  freedom  of  London.  And 
last,  but  by  no  means  least,  for  a  man  with  five  children  to 
launch  into  the  world,  the  change  would  involve  a  most  serious 
loss  of  income.  No  doubt  there  are  great  attractions  on  the 
other  side;  and,  if  I  had  been  ten  years  younger,  I  should  have 
been  sorely  tempted  to  go  to  Oxford,  if  the  University  would 
have  had  me.  But  things  being  as  they  are,  I  do  not  see  my 
way  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  which  I  have  reached. 

The  same  feeling  finds  expression  in  a  letter  to  Professor 
(afterwards  Sir  William)  Flower,  who  was  also  approached 
on  the  same  subject,  and  similarly  determined  to  remain 
in  London. 

July  21,  1881. 

My  dear  Flower — I  am  by  no  means  surprised,  and  except 
for  the  sake  of  the  University,  not  sorry  that  you  have  re- 
nounced the  Linacre. 


\ 


i88i  DEATH   OF   DEAN   STANLEY 


33 


Life  is  like  walking  along  a  crowded  street — there  always 
seem  to  be  fewer  obstacles  to  getting  along  on  the  opposite  pave- 
ment— and  yet,  if  one  crosses  over,  matters  are  rarely  mended. 

I  assure  you  it  is  a  great  comfort  to  me  to  think  that  you 
will  stay  in  London  and  help  in  keeping  things  straight  in  this 
world  of  crookedness. 

I  have  thought  a  good  deal  about ,  but  it  would  never  do. 

No  one  could  value  his  excellent  qualities  of  all  kinds,  and  real 
genius  in  some  directions,  more  than  I  do;  but,  in  my  judgment, 
nobody  could  be  less  fitted  to  do  the  work  which  ought  to  be 

done  in  Oxford I  mean  to  give  biological  science  a  status  in 

the  eyes  of  the  Dons,  and  to  force  them  to  acknowledge  it  as  a 
part  of  general  education.  Moreover,  his  knowledge,  vast  and 
minute  as  it  is  in  some  directions,  is  very  imperfect  in  others, 
and  the  attempt  to  qualify  himself  for  the  post  would  take  him 
away  from  the  investigations,  which  are  his  delight  and  for 
which  he  is  specially  fitted.  ... 

I  was  very  much  interested  in  your  account  of  the  poor  dear 
Dean's  illness.  I  called  on  Thursday  morning,  meeting  Jowett 
and  Grove  at  the  door,  and  we  went  in  and  heard  such  an 
account  of  his  state  that  I  had  hopes  he  might  pull  through. 
We  shall  not  see  his  like  again. 

The  last  time  I  had  a  long  talk  with  him  was  about  the 
proposal  to  bury  George  Eliot  in  the  Abbey,  and  a  curious  reve- 
lation of  the  extraordinary  catholicity  and  undaunted  courage 
of  the  man  it  was.  He  would  have  done  it  had  it  been  pressed 
upon  him  by  a  strong  representation. 

I  see  he  is  to  be  buried  on  Monday,  and  I  suppose  and  hope 
I  shall  have  the  opportunity  of  attending. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  letter  refers  to  the  death  of  his  old  friend  Dean 
Stanley.  The  Dean  had  long  kept  in  touch  with  the  leaders 
of  scientific  thought,  and  it  is  deeply  interesting  to  know 
that  on  her  death-bed,  five  years  before,  his  wife  said  to  him 
as  one  of  her  parting  counsels,  "  Do  not  lose  sight  of  the 
men  of  science,  and  do  not  let  them  lose  sight  of  you." 
"  And  then,"  writes  Stanley  to  Tyndall,  "  she  named  yourself 
and  Huxley." 

Strangely  enough,  the  death  of  the  Dean  involved  an- 
other invitation  to  Huxley  to  quit  London  for  Oxford.  By 
the  appointment  of  Dean  Bradley  to  Westminster,  the  Mas- 
39 


34 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ii 


tership  of  University  College  was  left  vacant.  Huxley,  who 
was  so  far  connected  with  the  college  that  he  had  examined 
there  for  a  science  Fellowship,  was  asked  if  he  would  accept 
it,  but  after  careful  consideration  declined.  He  writes  to 
his  son,  who  had  heard  rumours  of  the  affair  in  Oxford : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Nov,  4,  1881. 

My  dear  Lens — There  is  truth  in  the  rumour;  in  so  far  as 
this  that  I  was  asked  if  I  would  allow  myself  to  be  nominated 
for  the  Mastership  of  University,  that  I  took  the  question  into 
serious  consideration  and  finally  declined. 

But  I  was  asked  to  consider  the  communication  made  to  me 
confidential,  and  I  observed  the  condition  strictly.  The  leakage 
must  have  taken  place  among  my  Oxford  friends,  and  is  their 
responsibility,  but  at  the  same  time  I  would  rather  you  did  not 
contribute  to  rumour  on  the  subject.  Of  course  I  should  have 
told  you  if  I  had  not  been  bound  to  reticence. 

I  was  greatly  tempted  for  a  short  time  by  the  prospect  of 
rest,  but  when  I  came  to  look  into  the  matter  closely  there  were 
many  disadvantages.  I  do  not  think  I  am  cut  out  for  a  Don 
nor  your  mother  for  a  Donness — ^we  have  had  thirty  years'  free- 
dom in  London,  and  are  too  old  to  put  in  harness. 

Moreover,  in  a  monetary  sense  I  should  have  lost  rather 
than  gained. 

My  astonishment  at  the  proposal  was  unfeigned,  and  I  begin 
to  think  I  may  yet  be  a  Bishop. — Ever  your  loving  father, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

His  other  occupations  this  year  were  the  Medical  Acts 
Commission,  which  sat  until  the  following  year,  and  the 
International  Medical  Congress. 

The  Congress  detained  him  in  London  this  summer  later 
than  usual.  It  lasted  from  the  3rd  to  the  9th  of  August, 
on  which  day  he  delivered  a  concluding  address  on  "  The 
Connection  of  the  Biological  Sciences  with  Medicine  "  (ColL 
Ess,  iii.  p.  347).  He  showed  how  medicine  was  gradually 
raised  from  mere  empiricism  and  based  upon  true  patho- 
logical principles,  through  the  independent  growth  of  physi- 
ological knowledge,  and  its  correlation  to  chemistry  and 
physics.  "  It  is  a  peculiarity,"  he  remarks,  "  of  the  physical 
sciences  that  they  are  independent  in  proportion  as  they 
are  imperfect."     Yet  "  there  could  be  no  real  science  of 


i88i  INTERNATIONAL   MEDICAL  CONGRESS 


35 


pathology  until  the  science  of  physiology  had  reached  a  de- 
gree of  perfection  unattained,  and  indeed  unattainable,  until 
quite  recent  times."  Historically  speaking,  modern  physi- 
ology, he  pointed  out,  began  with  Descartes'  attempt  to 
explain  bodily  phenomena  on  purely  physical  principles; 
but  the  Cartesian  notion  of  one  controlling  central  mechan- 
ism had  to  give  way  before  the  proof  of  varied  activities 
residing  in  various  tissues,  until  the  cell-theory  united  some- 
thing of  either  view.  "  The  body  is  a  machine  of  the  nature 
of  an  army,  not  that  of  a  watch  or  of  a  hydraulic  appara- 
tus." On  this  analogy,  diseases  are  derangements  either  of 
the  physiological  units  of  the  body,  or  of  their  co-ordinating 
machinery:  and  the  future  of  medicine  depends  on  exact 
knowledge  of  these  derangements  and  of  the  precise  altera- 
tion of  the  conditions  by  the  administration  of  drugs  or 
other  treatment,  which  will  redress  those  derangements  with- 
out disturbing  the  rest  of  the  body. 

A  few  extracts  from  letters  to  his  wife  describe  his  oc- 
cupation at  the  Congress,  which  involved  too  much  "  soci- 
ety "  for  his  liking. 

August  4. — The  Congress  began  with  great  eclat  yesterday, 
and  the  latter  part  of  Paget's  address  was  particularly  fine. 
After,  there  was  the  lunch  at  the  Pagets'  with  the  two  Royalties. 
After  that,  an  address  by  Virchow.  After  that,  dinner  at  San- 
derson's, with  a  confused  splutter  of  German  to  the  neighbours 
on  my  right.  After  that  a  tremendous  soiree  at  South  Kensing- 
ton, from  which  I  escaped  as  soon  as  I  could,  and  got  home  at 
midnight.  There  is  a  confounded  Lord  Mayor's  dinner  this 
evening  ("  the  usual  turtle  and  speeches  to  the  infinite  bewilder- 
ment and  delight  of  the  foreigners,"  August  6),  and  to-morrow 
a  dinner  at  the  Physiological  Society.  But  I  have  got  off  the 
•  Kew  party,  and  mean  to  go  quietly  down  to  the  Spottiswoodes 
li.ei  at  Sevenoaks]  on  Saturday  afternoon,  and  get  out  of  the 
way  of  everything  except  the  College  of  Surgeons'  soiree,  till 
Tuesday.    Commend  me  for  my  prudence. 

On  the  5th  he  was  busy  all  day  with  Government  Com- 
mittees, only  returning  to  correct  proofs  of  his  address 
before  the  social  functions  of  the  evening.  Next  morning 
he  writes: — 


36  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ii 

I  have  been  toiling  at  my  address  this  morning.  It  is  all 
printed,  but  I  must  turn  it  inside  out,  and  make  a  speech  of  it  if 
I  am  to  make  any  impression  on  the  audience  in  St.  James*  Hall. 
Confound  all  such  bobberies. 

August  9. — I  got  through  my  address  to-day  as  well  as  I 
ever  did  anything.  There  was  a  large  audience,  as  it  was  the 
final  meeting  of  the  Congress,  and  to  my  surprise  I  found  myself 
in  excellent  voice  and  vigour.  So  there  is  life  in  the  old  dog 
yet.  But  I  am  greatly  relieved  it  is  over,  as  I  have  been  getting 
rather  shaky. 

When  the  Medical  Congress  was  over,  he  joined  his 
family  at  Grasmere  for  the  rest  of  August.  In  September 
he  attended  the  British  Association  at  York,  where  he  read 
a  paper  on  the  "  Rise  and  Progress  of  Paleontology,"  and 
ended  the  month  with  fishery  business  at  Aberystwith  and 
Carmarthen. 

The  above  paper  is  to  be  found  in  Collected  Essays,  iv. 
p.  24.  In  it  he  concludes  an  historical  survey  of  the  views 
held  about  fossils  by  a  comparison  of  the  opposite  hy- 
potheses upon  which  the  vast  store  of  recently  accumulated 
facts  may  be  interpreted;  and  declaring  for  the  hypothesis 
of  evolution,  repeats  the  remarkable  words  of  the  "  Coming 
of  Age  of  the  Origin  of  Species,"  that  "  the  paleontological 
discoveries  of  the  last  decade  are  so  completely  ia  accord- 
ance with  the  requirements  of  this  hypothesis  that,  if  it 
had  not  existed,  the  paleontologist  would  have  had  to  in- 
vent it." 

In  February  died  Thomas  Carlyle.  Mention  has  al- 
ready been  made  of  the  influence  of  his  writings  upon 
Huxley  in  strengthening  and  fixing  once  for  all,  at  the 
very  outset  of  his  career,  that  hatred  of  shams  and  love 
of  veracity,  which  were  to  be  the  chief  principle  of  his 
whole  life.  It  was  an  obligation  he  never  forgot,  and 
for  this,  if  for  nothing  else,  he  was  ready  to  join  in  a 
memorial  to  the  man.  In  reply  to  a  request  for  his  sup- 
port in  so  doing,  he  wrote  to  Lord  Stanley  of  Alderley 
on  March  9: — 

Anything  I  can  do  to  help  in  raising  a  memorial  to  Carlyle 
shall  be  most  willingly  done.    Few  men  can  have  dissented  more 


i88i  FORGETFULNESS  37 

strongly  from  his  way  of  looking  at  things  than  I ;  but  I  should 
not  yield  to  the  most  devoted  of  his  followers  in  gratitude  for 
the  bracing  wholesome  influence  of  his  writings  when,  as  a  very 
young  man,  I  was  essaying  without  rudder  or  compass  to  strike 
out  a  course  for  myself. 

Mention  has  already  been  made  (p.  31)  of  his  ill-health 
at  the  end  of  the  year,  which  was  perhaps  a  premonition  of 
the  breakdown  of  1883.  An  indication  of  the  same  kind 
may  be  found  in  the  following  letter  to  Mrs.  Tyndall,  who 
had  forwarded  a  document  which  Dr.  Tyndall  had  meant  to 
send  himself  with  an  explanatory  note. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  March  25,  1881. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Tyndall — But  where  is  his  last  note  to  me  ? 
That  is  the  question  on  which  I  have  been  anxiously  hoping  for 
light  since  I  received  yours  and  the  inclosure,  which  contains 
such  a  very  sensible  proposition  that  I  should  like  to  know  how 
it  came  into  existence,  abiogenetically  or  otherwise. 

As  I  am  by  way  of  forgetting  ever)rthing  myself  just  now, 
it  is  a  comfort  to  me  to  believe  that  Tyndall  has  forgotten  he 
forgot  to  send  the  letter  of  which  he  forgot  the  inclosure.  The 
force  of  disremembering  could  no  further  go. — In  affectionate 
bewilderment,  ever  yours,  ^   jj.  Huxley. 

His  general  view  of  his  health,  however,  was  much  more 
optimistic,  as  appears  from  a  letter  to  Mrs.  May  (wife  of  the 
friend  of  his  boyhood)  about  her  son,  whose  strength  had 
been  sapped  by  typhoid  fever,  and  who  had  gone  out  to 
the  Cape  to  recruit. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  June  10,  1881. 

My  dear  Mrs.  May — I  promised  your  daughter  the  other 
day  that  I  would  send  you  the  Bishop  of  Natal's  letter  to  me. 
Unfortunately  I  had  mislaid  it,  and  it  only  turned  up  just  now 
when  I  was  making  one  of  my  periodical  clearances  in  the  chaos 
of  papers  that  accumulates  on  my  table. 

You  will  be  pleased  to  see  how  fully  the  good  Bishop  appre- 
ciates Stuart's  excellent  qualities,  and  as  to  the  physical  part 
of  the  business,  though  it  is  sad  enough  that  a  young  man  should 
be  impeded  in  this  way,  I  think  you  should  be  hopeful.  Delicate 
young  people  often  turn  out  strong  old  people — I  was  a  thread 


38  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ii 

paper  of  a  boy  myself,  and  now  I  am  an  extremely  tough  old 
personage.  .  .  . 

With  our  united  kind  regards  to  Mr.  May  and  yourself — 
Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  t.  H.  Huxley. 

Perhaps  if  he  had  been  able  each  year  to  carry  out  the 
wish  expressed  in  the  following  letter,  which  covered  an 
introduction  to  Dr.  Tyndall  at  his  house  on  the  Bel  Alp,  the 
breakdown  of  1883  might  have  been  averted. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  London,  N.W.. 
July  5  (1881  ?) 

My  dear  Skelton — It  is  a  great  deal  more  than  I  would  say 
for  everybody,  but  I  am  sure  Tyndall  will  be  very  much  obliged 
to  me  for  making  you  known  to  him;  and  if  you,  insignificant 
male  creature,  how  very  much  more  for  the  opportunity  of 
knowing  Mrs.  Skelton ! 

For  which  last  pretty  speech  I  hope  the  lady  will  make  a 
prettier  curtsey.  So  go  boldly  across  the  Aletsch,  and  if  they 
have  a  knocker  (which  I  doubt),  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened 
unto  you. 

I  wish  I  were  going  to  be  there  too ;  but  Royal  Commissions 
are  a  kind  of  endemic  in  my  constitution,  and  I  have  a  very  bad 
one  just  now.* 

With  kind  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Skelton — Ever  yours  very 

faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  ecclesiastical  sound  of  his  new  title  of  Dean  of  the 
College  of  Science  afforded  him  a  good  deal  of  amusement. 
He  writes  from  Grasmere,  where  he  had  joined  his  family 
for  the  summer  vacation : — 

Aug,  18,  1881. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  am  astonished  that  you  don't  know 
that  a  letter  to  a  Dean  ought  to  be  addressed  "  The  Very  Revd." 
I  don't  generally  stand  much  upon  etiquette,  but  when  my  sacred 
character  is  touched  I  draw  the  line. 

We  had  athletics  here  yesterday,  and  as  it  was  a  lovely  day, 
all  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland  sent  contingents  to  see  the 
fun.  .  .  . 

*  The  Medical  Acts  Commission^  1881-2. 


i88i  LETTER   TO   DONNELLY 


39 


This  would  be  a  grand  place  if  it  were  drier,  but  the  rain  it 
raineth  every  day — yesterday  being  the  only  really  fine  day  since 
our  arrival. 

However,  we  all  thrive,  so  I  suppose  we  are  adapting  our- 
selves to  the  medium,  and  shall  be  scaly  and  finny  before  long. 

Haven^t  you  done  with  Babylon  yet?  It  is  high  time  you 
were  out  of  it. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


CHAPTER   III 
1882 

The  year  1882  was  a  dark  year  for  English  science.  It 
was  marked  by  the  death  of  both  Charles  Darwin  and  of 
Francis  Balfour,  the  young  investigator,  of  whom  Huxley 
once  said,  "  He  is  the  only  man  who  can  carry  out  my 
work."  The  one  was  the  inevitable  end  of  a  great  career, 
in  the  fulness  of  time;  the  other  was  one  of  those  losses 
which  are  the  more  deplorable  as  they  seem  unnecessary, 
the  result  of  a  chance  slip,  in  all  the  vigour  of  youth.  I 
remember  his  coming  to  our  house  just  before  setting  out 
on  his  fatal  visit  to  Switzerland,  and  my  mother  begging 
him  to  be  careful  about  risking  so  valuable  a  life  as  his  in 
dangerous  ascents.  He  laughingly  replied  that  he  only 
wanted  to  conquer  one  little  peak  on  Mont  Blanc.  A  few 
days  later  came  the  news  of  his  fatal  fall  upon  the  precipices 
of  the  Aiguille  Blanche.  Since  the  death  of  Edward  Forbes, 
no  loss  outside  the  circle  of  his  family  had  affected  my 
father  so  deeply.  For  three  days  he  was  utterly  prostrated, 
and  was  scarcely  able  either  to  eat  or  sleep. 

There  was  indeed  a  subtle  affinity  between  the  two  men. 
My  mother,  who  was  greatly  attached  to  Francis  Balfour, 
said  once  to  Sir  M.  Foster,  "  He  has  not  got  the  dash  and 
verve,  but  otherwise  he  reminds  me  curiously  of  what  my 
husband  was  in  his  *  Rattlesnake '  days.'*  "  How  strange," 
replied  Sir  Michael,  "  when  he  first  came  to  the  front,  Lan- 
kester  wrote  asking  me,  *  Who  is  this  man  Balfour  you  are 
always  talking  about  ?  *  and  I  answered,  *  Well,  I  can  only 
describe  him  by  saying  he  is  a  younger  Huxley.' " 

Writing  to  Dr.  Dohrn  on  September  24,  Huxley  says : — 
40 


k^^ 


i882  DEATH   OF  CHARLES   DARWIN 


41 


Heavy  blows  have  fallen  upon  me  this  year  in  losing  Darwin 
and  Balfour,  the  best  of  the  old  and  the  best  of  the  young.  I  am 
beginning  to  feel  older  than  my  age  myself,  and  if  Balfour  had 
lived  I  should  have  cleared  out  of  the  way  as  soon  as  possible, 
feeling  that  the  future  of  Zoological  Science  in  this  country  was 
very  safe  in  his  hands.  As  it  is,  I  am  afraid  I  may  still  be  of 
use  for  some  years,  and  shall  be  unable  to  sing  my  "  Nunc 
dimittis  "  with  a  good  conscience. 

Darwin  was  in  correspondence  with  him  till  quite  near 
the  end;  having  received  the  volume  Science  and  Culture, 
he  wrote  on  January  12,  1882 : — 

With  respect  to  automatism,*  I  wish  that  you  could  review 
yourself  in  the  old,  and,  of  course,  forgotten,  trenchant  style, 
and  then  you  would  have  [to]  answer  yourself  with  equal  in- 
cisiveness;  and  thus,  by  Jove,  you  might  go  on  ad  infinitum  to 
the  joy  and  instruction  of  the  world. 

And  again  on  March  27 : — 

Your  most  kind  letter  has  been  a  real  cordial  to  me.  .  .  . 
Once  again  accept  my  cordial  thanks,  my  dear  old  friend.  I 
wish  to  God  there  were  more  automata  in  the  world  like  you. 

Darwin  died  on  April  19,  and  a  brief  notice  being  re- 
quired for  the  forthcoming  number  of  Nature  on  the  27th, 
Huxley  made  shift  to  write  a  brief  article,  which  is  printed 
in  the  Collected  Essays,  ii.  p.  244.  But  as  neither  he  nor  Sir 
Joseph  Hooker  could  at  the  moment  undertake  a  regular 
obituary  notice,  this  was  entrusted  to  Professor  Romanes, 
to  whom  the  following  letters  were  written. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  April  26,  1882. 

My  dear  Romanes — Thank  you  for  your  hearty  letter.  I 
spent  many  hours  over  the  few  paragraphs  I  sent  to  Nature,  in 
trying  to  express  what  all  who  thoroughly  knew  and  therefore 
loved  Darwin,  must  feel  in  language  which  should  be  absolutely 
free  from  rhetoric  or  exaggeration. 

I  have  done  my  best,  and  the  sad  thing  is  that  I  cannot  look 
for  those  cheery  notes  he  used  to  send  me  in  old  times,  when  I 
had  written  anything  that  pleased  him. 

*  The  allusion  is  to  the  1874  address  on  **  Animals  as  Automata," 
which  was  reprinted  in  Science  and  Culture, 


42 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  in 


In  case  we  should  miss  one  another  to-day,  let  me  say  that 
it  is  impossible  for  me  to  undertake  the  obituary  in  Nature.  I 
have  a  conglomeration  of  business  of  various  kinds  upon  my 
hands  just  now.  I  am  sure  it  will  be  very  safe  in  your  hands. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Pray  do  what  you  will  with  what  I  have  written  in  Nature. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Ma}^  9,  1882. 

My  dear  Romanes — I  feel  it  very  difficult  to  offer  any  useful 
criticism  on  what  you  have  written  about  Darwin,  because, 
although  it  does  not  quite  please  me,  I  cannot  exactly  say  how 
I  think  it  might  be  improved.  My  own  way  is  to  write  and  re- 
write things,  until  by  some  sort  of  instinctive  process  they  ac- 
quire the  condensation  and  symmetry  which  satisfies  me.  And 
I  really  could  not  say  how  my  original  drafts  are  improved 
until  they  somehow  improve  themselves. 

Two  things  however  strike  me.  I  think  there  is  too  much 
of  the  letter  about  Henslow.  I  should  be  disposed  to  quote  only 
the  most  characteristic  passages. 

The  other  point  is  that  I  think  strength  would  be  given  to 
your  panegyric  by  a  little  pruning  here  and  there. 

I  am  not  likely  to  take  a  low  view  of  Darwin's  position  in 
the  history  of  science,  but  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  Buffon 
and  Lamarck  would  run  him  hard  in  both  genius  and  fertility. 
In  breadth  of  view  and  in  extent  of  knowledge  these  two  men 
were  giants,  though  we  are  apt  to  forget  their  services.  Von 
Bar  was  another  man  of  the  same  stamp ;  Cuvier,  in  a  somewhat 
lower  rank,  another ;  and  J.  Mtiller  another. 

"  Colossal "  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  the  right  epithet  for 
Darwin's  intellect.  He  had  a  clear  rapid  intelligence,  a  great 
memory,  a  vivid  imagination,  and  what  made  his  greatness  was 
the  strict  subordination  of  all  these  to  his  love  of  truth. 

But  you  will  be  tired  of  my  carping,  and  you  had  much 
better  write  what  seems  right  and  just  to  yourself. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Two  scientific  papers  published  this  year  were  on  sub- 
jects connected  with  his  work  on  the  fisheries,  one  "  A 
contribution  to  the  Pathology  of  the  Epidemic  known  as 
the  *  Salmon  Disease ' "  read  before  the  Royal  Society  on 
the  occasion  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  being  admitted  a  Fellow 
(February  21;  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  xxxiii.  pp.  381-389);  the 


i882  MEDICAL  ACTS  COMMISSION  43 

Other  on  "  Saprolegnia  in  relation  to  the  Salmon  Disease  " 
(Quarterly  Journal  of  Microscopical  Science,  xxii.  pp.  31 1-333). 
A  third,  at  the  Zoological  Society,  was  on  the  "  Respiratory 
Organs  of  Apteryx  "  (Proc.  Z.  S.  1882,  pp.  560-569).  He 
delivered  an  address  before  the  Liverpool  Institution  on 
"  Science  and  Art  in  Relation  to  Education  "  (Coll,  Ess.  iii. 
p.  160),  and  was  busy  with  the  Medical  Acts  Commission, 
which  reported  this  year. 

The  aim  of  this  Commission  *  was  to  level  up  the  varying 
qualifications  bestowed  by  nearly  a  score  of  different  licens- 
ing bodies  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  to  establish  some 
central  control  by  the  State  over  the  licensing  of  medical 
practitioners. 

The  report  recommended  the  establishments  of  Boards 
in  each  division  of  the  United  Kingdom  containing  repre- 
sentatives of  all  the  medical  bodies  in  the  division.  These 
boards  would  register  students,  and  admit  to  a  final  examina- 
tion those  who  had  passed  the  preliminary  and  minor  ex- 
aminations at  the  various  universities  and  other  bodies 
already  granting  degrees  and  qualifications.  Candidates 
who  passed  this  final  examination  would  be  licensed  by  the 
General  Medical  Council,  a  body  to  be  elected  no  longer  by 
the  separate  bodies  interested  in  medical  education,  but  by 
the  Divisional  Boards. 

The  report  rejected  a  scheme  for  joint  examination  by 
the  existing  bodies,  assisted  by  outside  examiners  appointed 
by  a  central  authority,  on  the  ground  of  difficulty  and  ex- 
pense, as  well  as  one  for  a  separate  State  examination.  It 
also  provided  for  compensation  from  the  fees  to  be  paid  by 
the  candidates  to  existing  bodies  whose  revenues  might 
suffer  from  the  new  scheme. 

To  this  majority  report,  six  of  the  eleven  Commissioners 
appended  separate  reports,  suggesting  other  methods  for 
carrying  out  the  desired  end.  Among  the  latter  was  Hux- 
ley, who  gave  his  reasons  for  dissenting  from  the  principle 
assumed  by  his  colleagues,  though  he  had  signed  the  main 

*  For  a  fuller  account  of  thi^  Commission  and  the  part  played  in  it 
by  Huxley,  see  his  "  State  and  Medical  Education  "  {Co//.  Ess.  iii.  323), 
published  1884. 


44  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  hi 

report  as  embodying  the  best  means  of  carrying  out  a  re- 
form, that  principle  being  granted. 

"  The  State  examination,"  he  thought,  "  was  ideally 
best,  but  for  many  reasons  impossible/'  But  the  "  con- 
joint scheme  "  recommended  in  the  report  appeared  to  pun- 
ish the  efficient  medical  authorities  for  the  abuses  of  the 
inefficient.  Moreover,  if  the  examiners  of  the  Divisional 
Board  did  not  affiliate  themselves  to  any  medical  authority, 
the  compensation  to  be  provided  would  be  very  heavy;  if 
they  did,  "  either  they  will  affiliate  without  further  exami- 
nation, which  will  give  them  the  pretence  of  a  further 
qualification,  without  any  corresponding  reality,  or  they 
will  affiliate  in  examination,  in  which  case  the  new  ex- 
'amination  deprecated  by  the  general  voice  of  the  profes- 
sion will  be  added,  and  any  real  difference  between  the 
plan  proposed  and  the  '  State  examination '  scheme  will 
vanish." 

The  compensation  proposed,  too,  would  chiefly  fall  to  the 
discredited  bodies,  who  had  neglected  their  duties. 

The  scheme  (he  writes  in  his  report),  which  I  ventured  to 
suggest  is  of  extreme  simplicity;  and  while  I  cannot  but  think 
that  it  would  prove  thoroughly  efficient,  it  interferes  with  no 
fair  vested  interest  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  a  claim  for 
compensation,  and  it  inflicts  no  burden  either  in  the  way  of 
taxation  or  extra  examination  on  the  medical  profession. 

This  proposal  is,  that  if  any  examining  body  satisfies  the 
Medical  Council  (or  other  State  authority),  that  it  requires  full 
and  efficient  instruction  and  examination  in  the  three  branches 
of  medicine,  surgery,  and  midwifery;  and  if  it  admits  a  certain 
number  of  coadjutor  examiners  appointed  by  the  State  au- 
thority, the  certificate  of  that  authority  shall  give  admission  to 
the  Medical  Register. 

I  submit  that  while  the  adopting  this  proposal  would  secure 
a  practically  uniform  minimum  standard  of  examination,  it 
would  leave  free  play  to  the  individuality  of  the  various  existing 
or  future  universities  and  medical  corporations;  that  the  reve- 
nues of  such  bodies  derived  from  medical  examinations  would 
thenceforth  increase  or  diminish  in  the  ratio  of  their  deserts; 
that  a  really  efficient  inspection  of  the  examinations  would  be 
secured,  and  that  no  one  could  come  upon  the  register  without  a 
complete  qualification. 


i882  HUXLEY  AT   LYNTON  45 

That  there  was  no  difficulty  in  this  scheme  was  shown 
by  the  experience  of  the  Scotch  Universities;  and  the  ex- 
pense would  be  less  than  the  proposed  compensation  tax. 

The  chief  part  of  the  summer  vacation  Huxley  spent  at 
Lynton,  on  the  north  coast  of  Devonshire.  "  The  Happy 
Family,"  he  writes  to  Dr.  Dohm,  "  has  been  spending  its 
vacation  in  this  pretty  place,  eighteen  miles  of  up  hill  and 
down  dale  from  any  railway."  It  was  a  country  made  for 
the  long  rambles  he  delighted  in  after  the  morning's  due 
allowance  of  writing.  And  although  he  generally  preferred 
complete  quiet  on  his  holidays,  with  perfect  freedom  from  all 
social  exigencies,  these  weeks  of  rest  were  rendered  all  the 
pleasanter  by  the  unstudied  and  unexacting  friendliness  of 
the  family  party  which  centred  around  Mr.  and  Mrs.  F. 
Bailey  of  Lee  Abbey  hard  by — Lady  Tenterden,  the  Julius, 
and  the  Henry  Pollocks,  the  latter  old  friends  of  ours. 

Though  his  holiday  was  curtailed  at  either  end,  he  was 
greatly  set  up  by  it,  and  writes  to  chaff  his  son-in-law  for 
taking  too  little  rest — 

I  was  glad  to  hear  that  F.  had  stood  his  fortnight's  holiday 
so  well ;  three  weeks  might  have  knocked  him  up ! 

On  the  same  day,  September  26,  he  wrote  the  letter  to 
Dr.  Dohm,  mentioned  above,  answering  two  inquiries — one 
as  to  arrangements  for  exhibiting  at  the  Fisheries  Exhibition 
to  be  held  in  London  the  following  year,  the  other  as  to 
whether  England  would  follow  the  example  of  Germany  and 
Italy  in  sending  naval  officers  to  the  Zoological  Station  at 
Naples  to  be  instructed  in  catching  and  preserving  marine 
animals  for  the  purposes  of  scientific  research. 

With  respect  to  question  No.  2,  I  am  afraid  my  answer  must 
be  less  hopeful.  So  far  as  the  British  Admiralty  is  represented 
by  the  ordinary  British  admiral,  the  only  reply  to  such  a  proposi- 
tion as  you  make  that  I  should  expect  would  be  that  he  (the 
British  admiral,  to  wit)  would  see  you  d  d  first.  However, 
I  will  speak  of  the  matter  to  the  Hydrographer,  who  really  is 
interested  in  science,  at  the  first  opportunity. 

For  many  years  before  this,  and  until  the  end  of  his 
life,  there  was  another  side  to  his  correspondence  which 
deserves  mention. 


46  LIFE   OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ill 

I  wish  that  more  of  the  queer  letters,  which  arrived  in 
never-failing  streams,  had  been  preserved.  A  favourite  type 
was  the  anonymous  letter.  It  prayed  fervently,  over  four 
pages,  that  the  Almighty  would  send  him  down  quick  into 
the  pit,  and  was  usually  signed  simply  "  A  Lady."  Others 
came  from  cranks  of  every  species:  the  man  who  demon- 
strated that  the  world  was  flat,  or  that  the  atmosphere  had 
no  weight — ^an  easy  proof,  for  you  weigh  a  bottle  full  of  air ; 
then  break  it  to  pieces,  so  that  it  holds  nothing ;  weigh  the 
pieces,  and  they  are  the  same  weight  as  the  whole  bottle 
full  of  air!  Or,  again,  that  the  optical  law  of  equality  be- 
tween the  angle  of  incidence  and  the  angle  of  reflection  is 
a  delusion,  whence  it  follows  that  all  our  established  latitudes 
are  incorrect,  and  the  difference  of  temperature  between 
Labrador  and  Ireland,  nominally  on  the  same  parallel,  is 
easily  accounted  for.  Then  came  the  suggestions  of  little 
pieces  of  work  that  might  so  easily  be  undertaken  by  a  man 
of  Huxley's  capacity,  learning,  and  energy.  Enormous 
manuscripts  were  sent  him  with  a  request  that  he  would 
write  a  careful  criticism  of  them,  and  arrange  for  their 
publication  in  the  proceedings  of  some  learned  society  or 
first-rate  magazine.  One  of  the  most  delightful  came  this 
year.  A  doctor  in  India,  having  just  read  John  Ingksant, 
begged  Professor  Huxley  to  do  for  Science  what  Mr. 
Shorthouse  had  done  for  the  Church  of  England.  As  for 
the  material  difficulties  in  the  way  of  getting  such  a  book 
written  in  the  midst  of  other  work,  the  ingenious  doctor 
suggested  the  use  of  a  phonograph  driven  by  a  gas-engine. 
The  great  thoughts  dictated  into  it  from  the  comfort  of  an 
armchair,  could  easily  be  worked  up  into  novel  shape  by 
a  collaborator. 

India,  again,  provided  the  following  application  of  1885, 
made  in  all  seriousness  by  a  youthful  Punjaubee  with 
scientific  aspirations,  who  feared  to  be  forced  into  the  law. 
After  an  intimate  account  of  his  life,  he  modestly  appeals 
for  a  post  in  some  scientific  institution,  where  he  may  get 
his  food,  do  experiments  three  or  four  hours  a  day,  and 
learn  English.  Latterly  his  mental  activity  had  been  very 
great : — "  I  have  been  contemplating,"  he  says,  "  to  give  a 


i8S2  LETTERS  FROM   CRANKS  47 

new  system  of  Political  Economy  to  the  world.  I  have 
questioned,  perhaps  with  success,  the  validity  of  some  of 
the  fundamental  doctrines  of  H.  Spencer's  synthetic  philos- 
ophy," and  so  on. 

Another  remarkable  communication  is  a  reply-paid  tele- 
gram from  the  States,  in  1892,  which  ran  as  follows : — 

Unless  all  reason  and  all  nature  have  deceived  me,  I  have 
found  the  truth.  It  is  my  intention  to  cross  the  ocean  to  consult 
with  those  who  have  helped  me  most  to  find  it.  Shall  I  be 
welcome?  Please  answer  at  my  expense,  and  God  grant  we  all 
meet  in  life  on  earth. 

Another,  of  British  origin  this  time,  was  from  a  man 
who  had  to  read  a  paper  before  a  local  Literary  Society  on 
the  momentous  question,  "  Where  are  we  ? "  so  he  sent 
round  a  circular  to  various  authorities  to  reinforce  his  own 
opinions  on  the  six  heads  into  which  he  proposed  to  divide 
his  discourse,  viz. : 

Where  are  we  in  Space? 

Science  ? 
Politics  ? 
Commerce  ? 
Sociology  ? 
Theology  ? 

The  writer  received  an  answer,  and  a  mild  one : 

Any  adequate  reply  to  your  inquiry  would  be  of  the  nature 
of^a  treatise,  and  that,  I  regret,  I  cannot  undertake  to  write. 

Two  letters  of  this  year  touch  on  Irish  affairs,  in  which 
he  was  always  interested,  having  withal  a  certain  first-hand 
knowledge  of  the  people  and  the  country  they  lived  in,  from 
his  visits  there,  both  as  a  Fishery  Commissioner  and  on 
other  occasions.  He  writes  warmly  to  the  historian  who 
treated  of  Ireland  without  prejudice  or  rancour. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  April  16,  1882. 

My  dear  Lecky — Accept  my  best  thanks  for  your  two  vol- 
umes, which  I  found  on  my  return  from  Scotland  yesterday. 

I  can  give  no  better  evidence  of  my  appreciation  of  their 
contents  than  by  the  confession  that  they  have  caused  me  to 


48  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  hi 

neglect  my  proper  business  all  yesterday  evening  and  all 
to-day. 

The  section  devoted  to  Irish  affairs  is  a  model  of  lucidity, 
and  bears  on  its  face  the  stamp  of  justice  and  fair  dealing.  It 
is  a  most  worthy  continuation  of  the  chapter  on  the  same  sub- 
ject in  the  first  volume,  and  that  is  giving  high  praise. 

You  see  I  write  as  if  I  knew  something  about  the  subject, 
but  you  are  responsible  for  creating  the  delusion. 

With  kindest  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Lecky — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  few  weeks  later,  the  murder  of  Lord  Frederick 
Cavendish  sent  a  thrill  of  horror  throughout  England. 
Huxley  was  as  deeply  moved  as  any,  but  wrote  calmly  of 
the  situation. 

To  HIS  Eldest  Son 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  9,  1882. 

My  dear  Leonard  —  Best  thanks  for  your  good  wishes.* 
Notwithstanding  the  disease  of  A.D.,  which  always  proves  mor- 
tal sooner  or  later,  I  am  in  excellent  case.  .  .  . 

I  knew  both  Lord  F.  Cavendish  and  his  wife  and  Mr.  Burke. 
I  have  never  been  able  to  get  poor  Lady  Frederick  out  of  my 
head  since  the  news  arrived. 

The  public  mind  has  been  more  stirred  than  by  anything 
since  the  Indian  Mutiny.  But  if  the  Government  keep  their 
heads  cool,  great  good  may  come  out  of  the  evil,  horrible  as  it 
is.  The  Fenians  have  reckoned  on  creating  an  irreparable  breach 
between  England  and  Ireland.  It  should  be  our  business  to  dis- 
appoint them  first  and  extirpate  them  afterwards.  But  the  news- 
paper writers  make  me  sick,  especially  the  Times, — Ever  your 
affectionate  father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

It  is  interesting,  also,  to  see  how  he  appeared  about  this 
time  to  one  of  a  younger  generation,  acute,  indeed,  and 
discriminating,  but  predisposed  by  circumstances  and  up- 
bringing to  regard  him  at  first  with  curiosity  rather  than 
sympathy.  For  this  account  I  am  indebted  to  one  who  has 
the  habit,  so  laudable  in  good  hands,  of  keeping  a  journal 
of  events  and  conversations.  I  have  every  confidence  in  the 
substantial  accuracy  of  so  well  trained  a  reporter. 

*  For  his  birthday,  May  4. 


i882  A   PAGE   FROM   A   PRIVATE   DIARY 


49 


Extract  from  Journal 

Nov.  25,  1882. 

In  the  evening  we  dined  at  the *s,  chiefly  a  family  party 

with  the  addition  of  Professor  Huxley  and  his  wife  and  ourselves. 
Much  lively  conversation,  after  dinner,  begun  among  the  ladies, 
but  continued  after  the  gentlemen  appeared,  on  the  subjects  of 
Truth,  Education,  and  Women's  Rights,  or,  more  strictly  speak- 
ing, women's  capabilities.  Our  hostess  (Lady )  was,  if  pos- 
sible, more  vehement  and  paradoxical  than  her  wont,  and  vigor- 
ously maintained  that  truth  was  no  virtue  in  itself,  but  must  be 
inculcated  for  expediency's  sake.  The  opposite  view  found  a 
champion  in  Professor  Huxley,  who  described  himself  as  "  al- 
most a  fanatic  for  the  sanctity  of  truth."    Lady urged  that 

truth  was  often  a  very  selfish  virtue,  and  that  a  man  of  noble 
and  unselfish  character  might  lie  for  the  sake  of  a  friend,  to 
which  some  one  replied  that  after  a  course  of  this  unself- 
ish lying  the  noble  character  was  pretty  sure  to  deteriorate, 
while  the  Professor  laughingly  suggested  that  the  owner  had 
a  good  chance  of  finding  himself  landed  ultimately  in  Botany 
Bay. 

The  celebrated  instance  of  John  Inglesant's  perjury  for  the 
sake  of  Charles  L  was  then  brought  forward,  and  it  was  this 
which  led  Professor  Huxley  to  say  that  in  his  judgment  no  one 
had  the  right  passively  to  submit  to  a  false  accusation,  and  that 
"  moral  suicide  "  was  as  blameworthy  as  physical  suicide.  "  He 
may  refuse  to  commit  another,  but  he  ought  not  to  allow  himself 
to  be  believed  worse  than  he  actually  is.  It  is  a  loss  to  the  world 
of  moral  force,  which  cannot  be  afforded." 

.  .  .  Then  as  regards  women's  powers.  The  Professor  said 
he  did  not  believe  in  their  ever  succeeding  in  a  competition  with 
men.  Then  he  went  on : — "  I  can't  help  looking  at  women  with 
something  of  the  eye  of  a  physiologist.  Twenty  years  ago  I 
thought  the  womanhood  of  England  was  going  to  the  dogs," 
but  now,  he  said,  he  observed  a  wonderful  change  for  the  better. 
We  asked  to  what  he  attributed  it.  Was  it  to  lawn  tennis  and 
the  greater  variety  of  bodily  exercises  ?  "  Partly,"  he  answered, 
"  but  much  more  to  their  having  more  pursuits — ^more  to  in- 
terest them  and  to  occupy  their  thoughts  and  time." 

The  following  letter  bears  upon  the  question  of  employ- 
ing retired  engineer  officers  in  administrative  posts  in  the 

Science  and  Art  Department : — 
40 


50 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  hi 


The  Rookery,  Lynton,  Sept.  19,  1882. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Your  letter  seems  to  have  arrived  here 
the  very  day  I  left  for  Whitby,  whither  I  had  to  betake  myself 
to  inspect  a  weir,  so  I  did  not  get  it  until  my  return  last  night. 

I  am  extremely  sorry  to  hear  of  the  possibility  of  Martin's 
giving  up  his  post.  He  took  so  much  interest  in  the  work  and 
was  so  very  pleasant  to  deal  with,  that  I  do  not  think  we  shall 
easily  find  any  one  to  replace  him. 

If  you  will  find  another  R.E.  at  all  like  him,  in  Heaven's 
name  catch  him  and  put  him  in,  job  or  no  job. 

The  objection  to  a  small  clerk  is  that  we  want  somebody 
who  knows  how  to  deal  with  men,  and  especially  young  men  on 
the  one  hand,  and  especially  cantankerous  (more  or  less)  old 
scientific  buffers  on  the  other. 

The  objection  to  a  man  of  science  is  that  (i)  we  want  a  man 
of  business  and  not  a  m.s.,  and  (2)  that  no  man  scientifically 
worth  having  that  I  know  of  is  likely  to  take  such  an  office. 

"  As  at  present  advised  "  I  am  all  for  an  R.E.,  so  I  cannot 
have  the  pleasure  even  of  trying  to  convert  you. 

With  our  united  kindest  regards — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  return  next  Monday. 

Two  letters  of  thanks  follow,  one  at  the  beginning  of  the 
year  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  for  the  gift  of  a  very  fine 
photograph  of  himself ;  the  other,  at  the  end  of  the  year,  to 
Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  John)  Skelton,  for  his  book  on  Mary 
Queen  of  Scots  and  the  Casket  Letters. 

As  to  the  former,  it  must  be  premised  that  Mr.  Spencer 
abhorred  exaggeration  and  inexact  talk,  and  would  ruth- 
lessly prick  the  airy  bubbles  which  endued  the  conversation 
of  the  daughters  of  the  house  with  more  buoyancy  than 
strict  logic,  a  gift  which,  he  averred,  was  denied  to  woman. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Jan,  25,  1882. 
My  dear  Spencer — Best  thanks  for  the  photograph.  It  is 
very  good,  though  there  is  just  a  touch  of  severity  in  the  eye. 
We  shall  hang  it  up  in  the  dining-room,  and  if  anybody  is  guilty 
of  exaggerated  expressions  or  bad  logic  (five  womenkind  habit- 
ually sit  round  that  table),  I  trust  they  will  feel  that  that  eye 
is  upon  them. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


i882  LETTER  TO  SKELTON 


51 


4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  Dec.  31,  1882. 

My  dear  Skelton — If  I  may  not  thank  you  for  the  book  you 
have  been  kind  enough  to  send  me,  I  may  at  anyrate  wish  you 
and  Mrs.  Skelton  a  happy  New  Year  and  many  on  'em. 

I  am  going  to  read  your  vindication  of  Mary  Stuart  as  soon 
as  I  can.    Hitherto  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  have  classed  her  with 

Eve,  Helen,  Cleopatra,  Delilah,  and  sundry  other  glorious s 

who  have  lured  men  to  their  destruction. 

But  I  am  open  to  conviction,  and  ready  to  believe  that  she 
blew  up  her  husband  only  a  little  more  thoroughly  than  other 
women  do,  by  reason  of  her  keener  perception  of  logic. — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  ^_  ^_  ^^^^^^^ 


CHAPTER   IV 

1883 

The  pressure  of  official  work,  which  had  been  constantly 
growing  since  1880,  reached  its  highest  point  in  1883.  Only 
one  scientific  memoir*  was  published  by  him  this  year, 
and  then  no  more  for  the  next  four  years.  The  intervals 
of  lecturing  and  examining  were  chiefly  filled  by  fishery 
business,  from  which,  according  to  his  usual  custom  when 
immersed  in  any  investigation,  he  chose  the  subject,  "  Oys- 
ters and  the  Oyster  Question,"  both  for  his  Friday  evening 
discourse  at  the  Royal  Institution  on  May  11,  and  for  his 
course  to  Working  Men  between  Jan.  8  and  Feb.  12. 

There  are  the  usual  notes  of  all  seasons  at  all  parts  of 
England.  A  deserted  hotel  at  Cromer  in  January  was  un- 
inviting. 

My  windows  look  out  on  a  wintry  sea,  and  it  is  bitter  cold. 
Notwithstanding,  a  large  number  of  the  aquatic  gentlemen  to 
whom  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  listening,  by  and  by,  are 
loafing  against  the  railings  opposite,  as  only  fishermen  can  loaf. 

In  April  he  had  been  ill,  and  his  wife  begged  him  to  put 
off  some  business  which  had  to  be  done  at  York.  But 
unless  absolutely  ordered  to  bed  by  his  doctor,  nothing 
would  induce  him  to  put  personal  convenience  before  pub- 
lic duty.    However,  he  took  his  son  to  look  after  him. 

I  am  none  the  worse  for  my  journey  (he  writes  from  York), 
rather  the  better ;  so  Clark  is  justified,  and  I  should  have  failed 


♦  Contributions  to  Morphology,  Ichthyopsida,  No.  2.  On  the  Ovi- 
ducts of  Osmerus ;  with  remarks  on  the  relations  of  the  Teleostean 
with  the  Ganoid  Fishes  (Proc,  2^ol.  Sac.  1883,  pp.  132-139). 

52 


■k-^PVM^M 


i883  FISHERY  BUSINESS  53 

in  my  duty  if  I  had  not  come.    H.  looks  after  me  almost  as  well 
as  you  could  do. 

To  make  amends,  fishery  business  in  the  west  country 
during  a  fine  summer  had  **  a  good  deal  of  holiday  in  it/* 
though  a  cross  journey  at  the  beginning  of  August  from 
Abergavenny  to  Totness  made  him  write : — 

If  ever  (except  to-morrow,  by  the  way)  I  travel  within 
measurable  distance  of  a  Bank  Holiday  by  the  Great  Western, 
may  jackasses  sit  on  my  g^randmother's  g^ave. 

As  the  business  connected  with  the  Inspectorship  had 
been  enlarged  in  the  preceding  years  by  exhibitions  at  Nor- 
wich and  Edinburgh,  so  it  was  enlarged  this  year,  and  to 
a  still  greater  extent,  by  the  Fisheries  Exhibition  in  London. 
This  involved  upon  him  as  Commissioner,  not  only  the  or- 
ganisation of  the  Conference  on  Fish  Diseases  and  the  paper 
on  the  Diseases  of  Fish  already  mentioned,  but  adminis- 
tration, committee  meetings,  and  more — a,  speech  on  behalf 
of  the  Commissioners  in  reply  to  the  welcome  given  them 
by  the  Prince  of  Wales  at  the  opening  of  the  exhibition. 
On  the  following  day  he  expressed  his  feelings  at  this  mode 
of  spending  his  time  in  a  letter  to  Sir  M.  Foster. 

I  am  dog-tired  with  yesterday's  function.  Had  to  be  at  the 
Exhibition  in  full  fig  at  10  a.m.,  and  did  not  get  home  from  the 
Fishmongers'  dinner  till  1.20  this  morning. 

Will  you  tell  me  what  all  this  has  to  do  with  my  business  in 
life,  and  why  the  last  fragments  of  a  misspent  life  that  are  left 
to  me  are  to  be  frittered  away  in  all  this  drivel? — Yours 
savagely,  T.  H.  H. 

Later  in  the  year,  also,  he  had  to  serve  on  another  Fish- 
ery Commission  much  against  his  will,  though  on  the  un- 
derstanding that,  in  view  of  his  other  engagements,  he  need 
not  attend  all  the  sittings. 

A  more  satisfactory  result  of  the  Exhibition  was  that  he 
found  himself  brought  into  close  contact  with  several  of  the 
great  city  companies,  whose  enormous  resources  he  had 
long  been  trying,  not  without  some  success,  to  enlist  on 
behalf  of  technical  and  scientific  education. 


54  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

Among  these  may  be  noted  the  Fishmongers,  the  Mer- 
cers, who  had  already  interested  themselves  in  technical 
education,  and  gave  their  hall  for  the  meetings  of  the  City 
and  Guilds  Council,  of  which  Huxley  was  an  active  member ; 
the  Clothworkers,  in  whose  schools  he  distributed  the  prizes 
this  year;  and,  not  least,  the  Salters,  who  presented  him 
with  their  freedom  on  November  13.  Their  master,  Mr. 
J.  W.  Clark,  writing  in  August,  after  Huxley  had  accepted 
their  proposal,  says :  "  I  think  you  must  admit  that  the 
City  Companies  have  yielded  liberally  to  the  gentle  com- 
pression you  have  exercised  on  them.  So  far  from  helping 
you  to  act  the  traitor,  we  propose  to  legitimise  your  claim 
for  education,  which  several  of  us  shall  be  willing  to  unite 
with  you  in  promoting  "  (see  vol.  i,  p.  508). 

The  crowning  addition,  however,  to  Huxley's  official 
work  was  the  Presidency  of  the  Royal  Society.  He  had 
resigned  the  Secretaryship  in  1880,  after  holding  office  for 
nine  years  under  three  Presidents  —  Airy,  Hooker,  and 
Spottiswoode.  Spottiswoode,  like  Hooker,  was  a  member 
of  the  X  Club,  and  was  regarded  with  great  affection  and 
respect  by  Huxley,  who  in  1887  wrote  of  him  to  Mr.  John 
Morley : — 

It  is  quite  absurd  you  don't  know  Spottiswoode,  and  I  shall 
do  both  him  and  you  a  good  turn  by  bringing  you  together.  He 
is  one  of  my  best  friends,  and  comes  under  the  Ai  class  of 
"  people  with  whom  you  may  go  tiger-hunting." 

On  June  7,  writing  to  Professor  (afterwards  Sir  E.) 
Frankland,  he  says : — 

You  will  have  heard  that  Spottiswoode  is  seriously  ill.  The 
physicians  suspect  typhoid,  but  are  not  quite  certain.  I  called 
this  morning,  and  hear  that  he  remains  much  as  he  has  been  for 
the  last  two  or  three  days.  So  many  of  our  friends  have  dropped 
away  in  the  course  of  the  last  two  years  that  I  am  perhaps 
morbidly  anxious  about  Spottiswoode,  but  there  is  no  question 
that  his  condition  is  such  as  to  cause  grave  anxiety. 

But  by  the  end  of  the  month  his  fears  were  realised. 
Consequently  it  devolved  upon  the  Council  of  the  Royal 
Society  to  elect  one  of  their  own  body  to  hold  office  until 


i883    ELECTED  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  ROYAL  SOCIETY       55 

the  St.  Andrew's  Day  following,  when  a  regular  President 
would  be  elected  at  a  general  meeting  of  the  Society. 

Huxley  himself  had  no  wish  to  stand.  He  writes  to 
Sir  M.  Foster  on  June  2y,  announcing  Spottiswoode's  death, 
which  had  taken  place  that  morning: — 

It  is  very  grievous  in  all  ways.  Only  the  other  day  he  and  I 
were  talking  of  the  almost  miraculous  way  in  which  the  x  Club 
had  held  together  without  a  break  for  some  18  years,  and  little 
did  either  of  us  suspect  that  he  would  be  the  first  to  go. 

A  heavy  responsibility  falls  on  you  in  the  Royal  Society.  It 
strikes  me  you  will  have  to  call  another  meeting  of  the  Council 
before  the  recess  for  the  consideration  of  the  question  of  the 
Presidency.  It  is  hateful  to  talk  of  these  things,  but  I  want  you 
to  form  some  notion  of  what  had  best  be  done  as  you  come  up 
to-morrow. 

is  a  possibility,  but  none  of  the  other  officers  I  think. 

Indeed,  he  wished  to  diminish  his  official  distractions 
rather  than  to  increase  them.  His  health  was  unlikely  to 
stand  any  additional  strain,  and  he  longed  to  devote  the 
remainder  of  his  working  years  to  his  unfinished  scientific 
researches.  But  he  felt  very  strongly  that  the  President 
of  the  Royal  Society  ought  to  be  chosen  for  his  eminence 
in  science,  not  on  account  of  social  position,  or  of  wealth, 
even  though  the  wealth  might  have  been  acquired  through 
the  applications  of  science.  The  acknowledgment  of  this 
principle  had  led  some  years  back  to  the  great  revolution 
from  within,  which  succeeded  in  making  the  Society  the 
living  centre  and  representative  of  science  for  the  whole 
country,  and  he  was  above  all  things  anxious  that  the  prin- 
ciple should  be  maintained.  He  was  assured,  however,  from 
several  quarters  that  unless  he  allowed  himself  to  be  put 
forward,  there  was  danger  lest  the  principle  should  be  dis- 
regarded. 

Moved  by  these  considerations  of  public  necessity,  he 
unwillingly  consented  to  be  nominated,  but  only  to  fill  the 
vacancy  till  the  general  meeting,  when  the  whole  Society 
could  make  a  new  choice.  Yet  even  this  limitation  seemed 
difficult  to  maintain  in  the  face  of  the  widely  expressed 
desire  that  he  would  then  stand  for  the  usual  period  of  five 


56  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

years.  "  The  worst  of  it  is,"  he  wrote  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on 
July  2,  "  that  I  see  myself  gravitating  towards  the  Presi- 
dency en  permanence,  that  is  to  say,  for  the  ordinary  period. 

And  that  is  what  I  by  no  means  desired.    has  been 

at  me  (as  a  sort  of  deputation,  he  told  me,  from  a  lot  of 
the  younger  men)  to  stand.  However,  I  suppose  there  is 
no  need  to  come  to  any  decision  yet." 

The  following  letters,  in  reply  to  congratulations  on  his 
election,  illustrate  his  attitude  of  mind  in  the  affair : — 

To  THE  Warden  of  Merton 

HiNDHEAD, /«/>/  8,  1883. 

My  dear  Brodrick — I  do  not  get  so  many  pleasant  letters 
that  I  can  afford  to  leave  the  senders  of  such  things  un thanked. 

I  am  very  much  obliged  for  your  congratulations,  and  I  may 
say  that  I  accepted  the  office  inter  alia  for  the  purpose  of  getting 
people  to  believe  that  such  places  may  be  properly  held  by  people 
who  have  neither  riches  nor  station — who  want  nothing  that 
statesmen  can  give — and  who  care  for  nothing  except  upholding 
the  dignity  and  the  freedom  of  science. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  Sir  W.  H.  Flower,  F.R.S. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /«/>/  7,  1883. 

My  dear  Flower — I  am  overwhelmed  by  the  kind  letters  I 
get  from  all  sides,  and  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  particularly  value 
yours. 

A  month  ago  I  said  that  I  ought  not,  could  not,  and  would 
hot  take  the  Presidency  under  any  circumstances  whatever.  My 
wife  was  dead  against  it,  and  you  know  how  hen-pecked  I  am. 

Even  when  I  was  asked  to  take  the  Presidency  to  the  end 
of  the  year  and  agreed,  I  stipulated  for  my  freedom  next  St. 
Andrew's  Day. 

But  such  strong  representations  were  made  to  me  by  some 
of  the  younger  men  about  the  dangers  of  the  situation,  that  at 
the  last  moment  almost  I  changed  my  mind. 

However,  I  wanted  it  to  be  clearly  understood  that  the 
Council  and  the  Society  are,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  perfectly 
free  to  put  somebody  else  in  my  place  next  November.  All  I 
stipulate  for  is  that  my  successor  shall  be  a  man  of  science. 

I  will  not,  if  I  can  help  it,  allow  the  chair  of  the  Royal  So- 


1883    ELECTED  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  ROYAL  SOCIETY       57 

ciety  to  become  the  apanage  of  rich  men,  or  have  the  noble  old 
Society  exploited  by  enterprising  commercial  gents  who  make 
their  profit  out  of  the  application  of  science. 

Mrs.  President  was  not  pleased — quite  the  contrary — ^but  she 
is  mollified  by  the  kindly  expressions,  public  and  private,  which 
have  received  the  election. 

And  there  are  none  which  we  both  value  more  than  yours. 
(I  see  I  said  that  before,  but  I  can't  say  it  too  often.) — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HlNDHEAD,y«/K  8,  1883. 

My  dear  Flower — Many  thanks  for  your  comforting  letter. 
When  I  am  fairly  committed  to  anything  I  generally  have  a  cold 
fit — and  your  judgment  that  I  have  done  right  is  "  grateful  and 
comforting  '*  like  Epps'  Cocoa.  It  is  not  so  much  work  as  dis- 
traction that  is  involved;  and  though  it  may  put  a  stop  to  my 
purely  scientific  work  for  a  while,  I  don't  know  that  I  could  be 
better  employed  in  the  interests  of  science  than  in  trying  to 
keep  the  Royal  Society  straight. 

My  wife  was  very  much  against  it  at  first— rand  indeed  when 
I  was  first  spoken  to  I  declared  that  I  would  not  go  on  after 
next  St.  Andrew's  Day.  But  a  good  deal  of  pressure  was 
brought  to  bear  by  some  of  my  friends,  and  if  the  Fellows  don't 
turn  me  out  I  shall  say  with  MacMahon,  "  J'y  suis  et  j'y  reste." 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

We  have  run  down  here  for  a  day,  but  are  back  to-morrow. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /w/k  id,  1883. 

My  dear  Spencer — What  an  agreeable  surprise  your  letter 
has  been.  I  have  been  expecting  the  most  awful  scolding  for 
taking  more  work,  and  behold  as  sweetly  congratulatory  an 
epistle  as  a  man  could  wish. 

Three  weeks  ago  I  swore  by  all  my  gods  that  I  would  not 
take  the  offer  at  any  price,  but  I  suppose  the  infusion  of  Theism 
was  too  homoeopathic  for  the  oath  to  bind. 

Go  on  sleeping,  my  dear  friend.  If  you  are  so  amiable  with 
three  nights,  what  will  you  be  with  three  weeks  ? 

What  a  shame  no  rain  is  sent  you.  You  will  be  speaking 
about  Providence  as  I  heard  of  a  Yankee  doing  the  other  day 
— "  Wal,  sir,  I  guess  he's  good ;  but  he's  careless." 

I  think  there  is  a  good  deal  in  that  view  of  the  government 
of  the  world. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


58  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 


To  HIS  Eldest  Daughter 

4  Marlborough  'Pi.PlCE.,  July  14,  1883. 

Dearest  Jess — I  am  not  sure  either  whether  my  accession  to 
the  Presidency  is  a  matter  for  congratulation.  Honour  and 
glory  are  all  very  fine,  but  on  the  whole  I  prefer  peace  and 
quietness,  and  three  weeks  ago  I  declared  I  would  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it. 

But  there  are  a  good  many  circumstances  in  the  present 
state  of  affairs  which  weighed  heavily  in  the  scale,  and  so  I 
made  up  my  mind  to  try  the  experiment. 

If  I  don't  suit  the  office  or  the  office  don't  suit  me,  there  is  a 
way  out  every  30th  of  November. 

There  was  more  work  connected  with  the  Secretaryship^ 
but  there  is  more  trouble  and  responsibility  and  distraction  in 
the  Presidency. 

I  am  amused  with  your  account  of  your  way  of  governing 
your  headstrong  boy.  I  find  the  way  of  governing  headstrong 
men  to  be  very  similar,  and  I  believe  it  is  by  practising  the 
method  that  I  get  the  measure  of  success  with  which  people 
credit  me. 

But  they  are  often  very  fractious,  and  it  is  a  bother  for  a 
man  who  was  meant  for  a  student. 

Poor  Spottiswoode's  death  was  a  great  blow  to  me.  Never 
was  a  better  man,  and  I  hoped  he  would  stop  where  he  was  for 
the  next  ten  years.  .  .  . — Ever  your  loving  father, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  finally  decided  that  the  question  of  standing  again  in 
November  must  depend  on  whether  this  course  was  likely 
to  cause  division  in  the  ranks  of  the  Society.  He  earnestly 
desired  to  avoid  anything  like  a  contest  for  scientific  hon- 
ours ;  *  he  was  almost  morbidly  anxious  that  the  temporary 
choice  of  himself  should  not  be  interpreted  as  binding  the 
electors  in  any  way. 

*  As  he  wrote  a  little  later  : — **  I  have  never  competed  in  the  way 
of  honour  in  my  life,  and  I  cannot  allow  myself  to  be  even  thought  of 
as  in  such  a  position  now,  where,  with  all  respect  to  the  honour  and 
glory,  they  do  not  appear  to  me  to  be  in  any  way  equivalent  to  the 
burden.  And  I  am  not  at  ail  sure  that  I  may  not  be  able  to  serve  the 
right  cause  outside  the  Chair  rather  than  in  it.' 


»» 


i883  PRESIDENT   OF   THE   ROYAL  SOCIETY  59 

I  g^ve  the  following  letters  to  show  his  sensitiveness  on 
every  question  of  honour  and  of  public  advantage : — 

Brechin  Castle,  Brechin,  N.B., 
Sept,  19,  1883. 

My  dear  Foster — We  got  here  yesterday.  The  Commission 
does  not  meet  till  next  week,  so  like  the  historical  donkey  of 
Jeshurun  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  wax  fat  and  kick  in  this 
excellent  pasture. 

At  odd  times  lately  my  mind  has  been  a  good  deal  exercised 
about  the  Royal  Society.  I  am  quite  willing  to  go  on  in  the 
chair  if  the  Council  and  the  Society  wish  it.  But  it  is  quite 
possible  that  the  Council  who  chose  me  when  the  choice  was 
limited  to  their  own  body,  might  be  disposed  to  select  some  one 
else  when  the  range  of  choice  is  extended  to  the  whole  body  of 
the  Society.  And  I  am  very  anxious  that  the  Council  should  be 
made  to  understand,  when  the  question  comes  forward  for  dis- 
cussion after  the  recess,  that  the  fact  of  present  tenancy  consti- 
tutes no  claim  in  my  eyes. 

The  difficulty  is,  how  is  this  to  be  done?  I  cannot  ask  the 
Council  to  do  as  they  please,  without  reference  to  me,  because 
I  am  bound  to  assume  that  that  is  what  they  will  do,  and  it 
would  be  an  impertinence  to  assume  the  contrary. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  should  at  once  decline  to  be  put  in 
nomination  again,  if  it  could  be  said  that  by  doing  so  I  had 
practically  forced  myself  either  upon  the  Council  or  upon  the 
Society. 

Heaven  be  praised  I  have  not  many  enemies,  but  the  two  or 
three  with  whom  I  have  to  reckon  don't  stick  at  trifles,  and  I 
should  not  like  by  any  inadvertence  to  give  them  a  handle. 

I  have  had  some  thought  of  writing  a  letter  to  Evans,*  such 
as  he  could  read  to  the  Council  at  the  first  meeting  in  October, 
at  which  I  need  not  be  present. 

The  subject  could  then  be  freely  discussed,  without  any  vot- 
ing or  resolution  on  the  minutes,  and  the  officers  could  let  me 
know  whether  in  their  judgment  it  is  expedient  I  should  be 
nominated  or  not. 

In  the  last  case  I  should  withdraw  on  the  ground  of  my 
other  occupations — which,  in  fact,  is  a  very  real  obstacle,  and 
one  which  looms  large  in  my  fits  of  blue-devils,  which  have 
been  more  frequent  of  late  than  they  should  be  in  holiday  time. 

♦  Sir  John  Evans,  K.C.B.,  then  Treasurer  of  the  Royal  Society. 


6o  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

Now,  will  you  turn  all  this  over  in  your  mind  ?  Perhaps  you 
might  talk  it  over  with  Stokes. 

Of  course  I  am  very  sensible  of  the  honour  of  being  P.R.S., 
but  I  should  be  much  more  sensible  of  the  dishonour  of  being 
in  that  place  by  a  fluke,  or  in  any  other  way,  than  by  the  free 
choice  of  the  Council  and  Society. 

In  fact  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  I  am  morbidly  sensitive 
on  the  last  point ;  and  so,  instead  of  acting  on  my  own  impulse, 
as  I  have  been  tempted  to  do,  I  submit  myself  to  your  worship's 
wisdom. 

I  am  not  sure  that  I  should  not  have  been  wiser  if  I  had 
stuck  to  my  original  intention  of  holding  office  only  till  St. 
Andrew's  Day. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Secretary  of  State,  Home  Department, 

Oct.  3,  1883. 

My  dear  Foster — There  was  an  Irish  bricklayer  who  once 
bet  a  hodman  he  would  not  carry  him  up  to  the  top  of  an  ex- 
ceeding high  ladder  in  his  hod.  The  hodman  did  it,  but  Paddy 
said,  "  I  had  great  hopes,  now,  ye*d  let  me  fall  just  about  six 
rounds  from  the  top." 

I  told  the  story  before  when  I  was  up  for  the  School  Board, 
but  it  is  so  applicable  to  the  present  case  that  I  can't  help  coming 
out  with  it  again. 

If  you,  dear  good  hodman,  would  have  but  let  me  fall ! 

However,  as  the  thing  is  to  be,  it  is  very  pleasant  to  find 
Evans  and  Williamson  and  you  so  hearty  in  the  process  of  ele- 
vation, and  in  spite  of  blue-devils  I  will  do  my  best  to  "  do  my 
duty  in  the  state  of  life  I*m  called  to." 

But  I  believe  you  never  had  the  advantage  of  learning  the 
Church  Catechism. 

If  there  is  any  good  in  what  is  done  you  certainly  deserve 
the  credit  of  it,  for  nothing  but  your  letter  stopped  me  from 
kicking  over  the  traces  at  once.  Do  you  see  how  Evolution  is 
getting  made  into  a  bolus  and  oiled  outside  for  the  ecclesiastical 
swallow?* — Ever  thine,  Thomas,  P.R.S. 

The  same  feeling  appears  in  his  anxiety  as  President  to 
avoid  the  slightest  appearance  of  committing  the  Society  to 

*  This  refers  to  papers  read  before  the  Church  Congress  that  year 
by  Messrs.  W.  H.  Flower  and  Legros  Clarke. 


i883  THE   SUNDAY  SOCIETY  6l 

debatable  opinions  which  he  supported  as  a  private  indi- 
vidual. Thus,  although  he  had  "  personally,  politically,  and 
philosophically  "  no  liking  for  Charies  Bradlaugh,  he  ob- 
jected on  general  grounds  to  the  exclusion  of  Mrs.  Besant 
and  Miss  Bradlaugh  from  the  classes  at  University  College, 
and  had  signed  a  memorial  in  their  favour.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  did  not  wish  it  to  be  asserted  that  the  Royal  Society, 
through  its  President,  had  thrown  its  influence  into  what 
was  really  a  social  and  political,  not  a  scientific  question. 
He  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on  July  i8 : — 

It  is  very  unlucky  for  me  that  I  signed  the  memorial  request^ 
ing  the  Council  of  University  College  to  reconsider  their  de- 
cision about  Mrs.  Besant  and  Miss  Bradlaugh  when  I  was  quite 
innocent  of  my  possibility  of  holding  the  P.R.S. 

I  must  go  to  the  meeting  of  members  to-day  and  define  my 
position  in  the  matter  with  more  care,  under  the  circumstances. 

Mrs.  Besant  was  a  student  in  my  teacher's  class  here  last 
year,  and  a  very  well-conducted  lady-like  person;  but  I  have 
never  been  able  to  get  hold  of  the  "  Fruits  of  Philosophy,"  and 
do  not  know  to  what  doctrine  she  has  committed  herself. 

They  seem  to  have  excluded  Miss  Bradlaugh  simply  on  the 
noscitur  a  sociis  principle. 

It  will  need  all  the  dexterity  I  possess  to  stand  up  for  the 
principle  of  religious  and  philosophical  freedom,  without  giving 
other  people  a  hold  for  saying  that  I  have  identified  myself  with 
Bradlaugh. 

It  was  the  same  a  little  later  with  the  Sunday  Society, 
which  had  offered  him  its  presidency.  He  writes  to  the 
Hon.  Sec.  on  Feb.  ii,  1884: — 

I  regret  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  accept  the  office  which 
the  Sunday  Society  honours  me  by  offering. 

It  is  not  merely  a  disinclination  to  add  to  the  work  which 
already  falls  to  my  share  which  leads  me  to  say  this.  So  long 
as  I  am  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  I  shall  feel  bound  to 
abstain  from  taking  any  prominent  part  in  public  movements  as 
to  the  propriety  of  which  the  opinions  of  the  Fellows  of  the 
Society  differ  widely. 

My  own  opinions  on  the  Sunday  question  are  exactly  what 
they  were  five- and- twenty  years  ago.  They  had  not  been  hid 
under  a  bushel,  and  I  should  not  have  accepted  my  present  office 


62  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

if  I  had  felt  that  so  doing  debarred  me  from  reiterating  them 
whenever  it  may  be  necessary  to  do  so. 

But  that  is  a  different  matter  from  taking  a  step  which  would, 
in  the  eyes  of  the  public,  commit  the  Royal  Society,  through  its 
President,  to  one  side  of  the  controversy  in  which  you  are 
engaged,  and  in  which  I,  personally,  hope  you  may  succeed  as 
warmly  as  ever  I  did. 

One  other  piece  of  work  during  the  first  half  of  the  year 
remains  to  be  mentioned,  namely,  the  Rede  Lecture,  de- 
livered at  Cambridge  on  June  12.  This  was  a  discourse 
on  Evolution,  based  upon  the  consideration  of  the  Pearly 
Nautilus. 

He  first  traced  the  evolution  of  the  individual  from  the 
ovum,  and  replied  to  the  three  usual  objections  raised  tc 
evolution,  that  it  is  impossible,  immoral,  and  contrary  to  the 
argument  of  design,  by  replying  to  the  first,  that  it  does 
occur  in  every  individual ;  to  the  second,  that  the  morality 
which  opposes  itself  to  truth  commits  suicide;  and  to  the 
third  that  Paley  —  the  most  interesting  Sunday  reading 
allowed  him  when  a  boy — had  long  since  answered  this 
objection. 

Then  he  proceeded  to  discuss  the  evolution  of  the  100 
species,  all  extinct  but  two,  of  Nautilus.  The  alternative 
theory  of  new  construction,  a  hundred  times  over,  is  opposed 
alike  to  tradition  and  to  sane  science.  On  the  other  hand, 
evolution,  tested  by  paleontology,  proves  a  sound  hypothe- 
sis. The  great  difficulty  of  science  is  in  tracing  every  event 
to  those  causes  which  are  in  present  operation;  the  hy- 
pothesis of  evolution  is  analogous  to  what  is  going  on  now. 

The  summer  was  passed  at  Milford,  near  Godalming,  in 
a  house  at  the  very  edge  of  the  heather  country  which 
from  there  stretches  unbroken  past  Hindhead  and  into 
Wolmer  Forest.  So  well  did  he  like  the  place  that  he 
took  it  again  the  following  year.  But  his  holiday  was  like 
to  have  been  spoilt  at  the  beginning  by  the  strain  of  an 
absurd  misadventure  which  involved  much  fatigue  and 
more  anxiety. 

I  came  back  only  last  night  (he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on 
August  I )  from  Paris,  where  I  sped  on  Sunday  night,  in  a  horrid 


i883  AT   MILFORD  63 

State  of  alarm  from  a  cursed  blundering  telegram  which  led  me 
to  believe  that  Leonard  (you  know  he  got  his  first  class  to  our 
great  joy)  who  had  left  for  the  continent  on  Saturday,  was  ill 
or  had  had  an  accident. 

It  was  indeed  a  hurried  journey.  On  receipt  of  the 
telegram,  he  rushed  to  Victoria  only  to  miss  the  night  mail. 
The  booking-clerk  suggested  that  he  should  drive  to  London 
Bridge,  take  train  to  Lewes,  and  thence  take  a  fly  to  New- 
haven,  where  he  ought  to  catch  a  later  boat.  The  problem 
was  to  catch  the  London  Bridge  train.  There  was  barely 
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  but  thanks  to  a  good  horse  and  the 
Sunday  absence  of  traffic,  the  thing  was  done,  establishing, 
I  believe,  what  the  modem  mind  delights  in,  a  record  in 
cab-driving.  Happily  the  anxiety  at  not  finding  his  son  in 
Paris  was  soon  allayed  by  another  telegram  from  home, 
where  his  son-in-law,  the  innocent  sender  of  the  original 
message,  had  meanwhile  arrived.  He  writes  to  Sir  M. 
Foster : — 

Judging  by  my  scrawl,  which  is  worse  than  usual,  I  should 
say  the  anxiety  had  left  its  mark,  but  I  am  none  the  worse 
otherwise. 

This  was  indeed  the  case.  Other  letters  to  Sir  M.  Foster 
show  that  he  was  unusually  well,  perhaps  because  he  was 
really  making  holiday  to  some  extent.  Thus  on  August 
16,  he  writes : — 

This  is  a  lovely  country,  and  I  have  been  reading  novels  and 
walking  about  for  the  last  four  days.  I  must  be  all  right,  wind 
and  limb,  for  I  walked  over  twenty  miles  the  day  before  yester- 
day, and  except  a  blister  on  one  heel,  was  none  the  worse. 

And  again  on  September  12 : — 

Have  been  very  lazy  lately,  which  means  that  I  have  done  a 
great  many  things  that  I  need  not  have  done,  and  have  left  un- 
done those  which  I  ought  to  have  done.  Nowadays  that  seems 
to  me  to  be  the  real  definition  of  a  holiday. 

For  once  he  was  not  doing  very  much  holiday  work, 
though  he  was  filing  at  the  Rede  Lecture  to  get  it  into  shape 
for  publication.    The  examinations  for  the  Science  and  Art 


64  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

Department  were  over,  and  indeed  he  writes  to  Sir  M. 
Foster : — 

Don't  bother  your  head  about  the  balance — ^now  or  here- 
after. To  tell  you  the  truth  I  do  so  little  in  the  Examiner  busi- 
ness that  I  am  getting  ashamed  of  taking  even  the  retaining  fee, 
and  you  will  do  me  a  favour  if  you  will  ease  my  conscience. 

A  week  of  fishery  business  in  South  Wales  and  Devon 
had  "  a  good  deal  of  holiday  in  it."    For  the  rest — 

I  have  just  been  put  on  Senate  of  University  of  London 
[a  Crown  nomination],  I  tried  hard  to  get  Lord  Granville  to  let 
me  off — in  fact  I  told  him  I  could  not  attend  the  meetings  except 
now  and  then,  but  there  was  no  escape.  I  must  have  a  talk  with 
you  about  what  is  to  be  done  there. 

Item. — There  is  a  new  Fishery  Commission  that  I  also 
strongly  objected  to,  but  had  to  cave  in  so  far  as  I  agreed  to 
attend  some  meetings  in  latter  half  of  September. 

On  this  occasion  Lord  Granville  had  written  back : — 

II  Carlton  House  Terrace,  July  28,  1883. 

My  dear  Professor  Huxley — Clay,  the  great  whist  player, 
once  made  a  mistake  and  said  to  his  partner,  "  My  brain  is 
softening,"  the  latter  answered,  "  Never  mind,  I  will  give  you 
£10,000  down  for  it,  just  as  it  is."  , 

On  that  principle  and  backed  up  by  Paget  I  shall  write  to 
Harcourt  on  Monday. — Yours  sincerely,  Granville. 

The  Commission  of  course  cut  short  the  stay  at  Milford, 
and  on  September  12,  he  writes : — 

We  shall  leave  this  on  Friday  as  my  wife  has  some  fal-lals  to 
look  after  before  we  start  for  the  north  on  Monday. 

The  worst  of  it  is  that  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  the  Com- 
mission will  meet  and  do  any  work.  However  I  am  pledged  to 
go  and  I  daresay  that  Brechin  Castle  is  a  very  pleasant  place  to 
stay  in. 

Lastly,  he  was  thinking  over  the  obituary  notice  of  Dar- 
win which  he  had  undertaken  to  write  for  the  Royal  So- 
ciety— ^though  it  did  not  appear  till  1888 — ^that  on  F.  Balfour 
being  written  by  Sir  M.  Foster. 


1883  LETTERS   TO   SIR   M.  FOSTER  65 

HiGHCROFT  House,  Milford,  Godalming, 

Aug.  27,  1883. 

My  dear  Foster — I  do  not  see  anything  to  add  or  alter  to 
what  you  have  said  about  Balfour,  except  to  get  rid  of  that 
terrible  word  "  urinogenital,"  which  he  invented,  and  I  believe 
I  once  adopted,  out  of  mere  sympathy  I  suppose. 

Darwin  is  on  my  mind,  and  I  will  see  what  can  be  done  here 
by  and  by.  Up  to  the  present  I  have  been  filing  away  at  the 
Rede  Lecture.  I  believe  that  getting  things  into  shape  takes  me 
more  and  more  trouble  as  I  get  older — whether  it  is  a  loss  of 
faculty  or  an  increase  of  fastidiousness  I  can't  say — ^but  at  any 
rate  it  costs  me  more  time  and  trouble  to  get  things  finished — 
and  when  they  are  done  I  should  prefer  burning  to  publishing 
them. 

Haven't  you  any  suggestions  to  oflFer  for  Anniversary  ad- 
dress? I  think  the  Secretaries  ought  to  draw  it  up,  like  a 
Queen's  speech. 

Mind  we  have  a  talk  some  day  about  University  of  London. 
I  suppose  you  want  an  English  Sorbonne.  I  have  thought  of  it 
at  times,  but  the  Philistines  are  strong. 

Weather  jolly,  but  altogether  too  hot  for  anything  but  lying 
on  the  grass  "  under  the  tegmination  of  the  patulous  fage,"  as 
the  poet  observes. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  remaining  letters  of  this  year  are  for  the  most  part 
on  Royal  Society  business,  some  of  which,  touching  the 
anniversary  dinner,  may  be  quoted : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Nov.  10,  1883. 

My  dear  Foster —  ...  I  have  been  trying  to  get  some 
political  and  other  swells  to  come  to  the  dinner.  Lord  Mayor 
is  coming — ^thought  I  would  ask  him  on  account  of  City  and 
Guilds  business — Lord  Chancellor,  probably,  Courtney,  M.P., 
promised,  and  I  made  the  greatest  blunder  I  ever  made  in  all 
my  life  by  thoughtlessly  writing  to  ask  Chamberlain  (!!!) 
utterly  forgetting  the  row  with  TyndalL* 

By  the  mercy  of  Providence  he  can't  come  this  year,  though 
I  must  ask  him  next  (if  I  am  not  kicked  out  for  my  sins  before 
that),  as  he  is  anxious  to  come.  Science  ought  to  be  in  league 
with  the  Radicals.  .  .  .  Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  Concerning  the  Lighthouses. 
41 


66  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

He  had  made  prompt  confession  as  soon  as  he  discovered 
his  mistake,  to  Tyndall  himself,  who  ultimately  came  to 
the  dinner  and  proposed  the  health  of  his  old  friend  Hirst. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Nov.  9,  1883. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  have  been  going  to  write  to  you  for 
two  or  three  days  to  ask  you  to  propose  Hirst's  health  as  Royal 
Medallist  on  the  30th  November.  I  am  sure  your  doing  so 
would  give  an  extra  value  to  the  medal  to  him. 

But  now  I  realise  the  position  of  those  poor  devils  I  have 
seen  in  lunatic  asylums  and  who  believed  they  have  committed 
the  unforgivable  sin.  It  came  upon  me  suddenly  in  Waterloo 
Place  this  evening,  that  I  had  done  so;  and  I  went  straight  to 
the  Royal  Institution  to  make  confession,  and  if  possible  get 
absolution.  But  I  heard  you  had  gone  to  Hindhead,  and  so  I 
write. 

Yesterday  I  was  sending  some  invitations  to  the  dinner  on 
the  30th,  and  thinking  to  please  the  Society  I  made  a  shot  at 
some  ministers.  The  only  two  I  know  much  about  are  Harcourt 
and  Chamberlain,  and  the  devil  (in  whom  I  now  firmly  believe) 
put  it  into  my  head  to  write  to  both. 

The  enormous  stupidity  of  which  I  had  been  guilty  in  asking 
Chamberlain  under  the  circumstances,  and  the  sort  of  construc- 
tion you  and  others  might  put  upon  it,  never  entered  my  head 
till  this  afternoon.  It  really  made  me  ill,  and  I  went  straight 
to  find  you.  If  Providence  is  good  to  me  the  letter  will  mis- 
carry and  he  won't  come.  But  anyhow  I  want  you  to  know  that 
I  have  been  idiotically  stupid,  and  that  I  wish  the  Presidency 
and  the  dinner  and  everything  connected  with  it  at  the  bottom 
of  the  sea,  if  you  are  as  much  disgusted  with  me  as  you  have 
a  perfect  right  to  be. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley; 

The  following  refers  to  a  newly-founded  society  at 
Newcastle,  which  had  invited  him  to  become  one  of  its 
vice-presidents : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  Dec,  30,  1883. 

My  dear  Morley — The  Newcastle  people  wrote  to  me  some 
time  ago  telling  me  that  Sir  W.  Armstrong  was  going  to  be  their 
President.  Armstrong  is  an  old  friend  of  mine,  so  I  wrote  to 
him  to  make  inquiries.  He  told  me  that  he  was  not  going  to 
be  President,  and  knew  nothing  about  the  people  who  were 


i883  LETTERS  67 

getting  up  the  Society.  So  I  declined  to  have  anything  to  do 
with  it. 

However,  the  case  is  altered  now  that  you  are  in  the  swim. 
You  have  no  gods  to  swear  by,  unfortunately;  but  if  you  will 
affirm,  in  the  name  of  X,  that  under  no  circumstances  shall  I  be 
called  upon  to  do  anything,  they  may  have  my  name  among  the 
V.-P.*s  and  much  good  may  it  do  them. 

All  our  good  wishes  to  you  and  yours.  The  great  thing  one 
has  to  wish  for  as  time  goes  on  is  vigour  as  long  as  one  lives, 
and  death  as  soon  as  vigour  flags. 

It  is  a  curious  thing  that  I  find  my  dislike  to  the  thought  of 
extinction  increasing  as  I  get  older  and  nearer  the  goal. 

It  flashes  across  me  at  all  sorts  of  times  with  a  sort  of  horror 
that  in  1900  I  shall  probably  know  no  more  of  what  is  going  on 
than  I  did  in  1800.  I  had  sooner  be  in  hell  a  good  deal — at  any 
rate  in  one  of  the  upper  circles,  where  the  climate  and  com- 
pany are  not  too  trying.  I  wonder  if  you  are  plagued  in  this 
way. — Ever  yours,  T    H    H 

The  following  letters,  to  his  family  or  to  intimate  friends, 
are  in  lighter  vein.  The  first  is  to  Sir  M.  Foster ;  the  con- 
cluding item  of  information  in  reply  to  several  enquiries. 
The  Royal  Society  wished  some  borings  made  in  Egypt  to 
determine  the  depth  of  the  stratum  of  Nile  mud : — 

The  Egyptian  exploration  society  is  wholly  archaeological — 
at  least  from  the  cut  of  it  I  have  no  doubt  it  is  so— and  they 
want  all  their  money  to  find  out  the  pawnbrokers'  shops  which 
Israel  kept  in  Pithom  and  Rameses — and  then  went  off  with  the 
pledges. 

This  is  the  real  reason  why  Pharaoh  and  his  host  pursued 
them;  and  then  Moses  and  Aaron  bribed  the  post-boys  to  take 
out  the  linch-pins. 

That  is  the  real  story  of  the  Exodus — as  detailed  in  a  recent- 
ly discovered  papyrus  which  neither  Brugsch  nor  Maspero  have 
as  yet  got  hold  of. 

To  HIS  Youngest  Daughter 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  April  12,  1883. 

Dearest  Pabelunza — I  was  quite  overcome  to-day  to  find 
that  you  had  vanished  without  a  parting  embrace  to  your  "  faded 


68  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

but  fascinating "  *  parent.  I  clean  forgot  you  were  going  to 
leave  this  peaceful  village  for  the  whirl  of  Gloucester  dissipa- 
tion this  morning — and  the  traces  of  weeping  on  your  visage, 
which  should  have  reminded  me  of  our  imminent  parting,  were 
absent. 

My  dear,  I  should  like  to  have  given  you  some  good  coun- 
sel. You  are  but  a  simple  village  maiden  —  don't  be  taken 
by  the  appearance  of  anybody.  Consult  your  father — inclos- 
ing photograph  and  measurement  (in  inches) — in  any  case  of 
difficulty. 

Also  give  my  love  to  the  matron  your  sister,  and  tell  her  to 
look  sharp  after  you.  Treat  her  with  more  respect  than  you  do 
your  venerable  P. — ^whose  life  will  be  gloom  hidden  by  a  film 
of  heartless  jests  till  you  return. 

Item. — Kisses  to  Ria  and  Co. — Your  desolated  Pater. 


To  HIS  Eldest  Daughter 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  6,  1883. 

Dearest  Jess — Best  thanks  for  your  good  wishes — consider- 
ing all  things  I  am  a  hale  old  gentleman.  But  I  had  to  speak 
last  night  at  the  Academy  dinner,  and  either  that  or  the  quantity 
of  cigars  I  smoked,  following  the  bad  example  of  our  friend 
"  Wales,"  has  left  me  rather  shaky  to-day.  It  was  trying,  be- 
cause Jack's  capital  portrait  was  hanging  just  behind  me — ^and 
somebody  remarked  that  it  was  a  better  likeness  of  me  than  I 
was.    If  you  begin  to  think  of  that  it  is  rather  confusing. 

I  am  grieved  to  have  such  accounts  of  Ethel,  and  have  lec- 
tured her  accordingly.  She  threatens  reprisals  on  you — and 
altogether  is  in  a  more  saucy  and  irrepressible  state  than  when 
she  left. 

M —  is  still  in  bed,  though  better — I  am  afraid  she  won't 
be  able  to  go  to  Court  next  week.  You  see  we  are  getting 
grand. 

I  hear  great  accounts  of  the  children  (Ria  and  Buzzer)  and 
mean  to  cut  out  T'other  Governor  when  you  bring  them  up. 

As  we  did  not  see  Fred  the  other  day,  the  family  is  inclined 
to  think  that  the  salmon  disagreed  with  him ! — Ever  your  loving 
father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


*  A  fragment  of  feminine  conversation  overheard  at  the  Dublin 
meeting  of  the  British  Association,  1878.  "Oh,  there  comes  Pro- 
fessor Huxley  :  faded,  but  still  fascinating." 


i883  LETTER   TO   MRS.    TYNDALL  69 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  10,  1883. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Tyndall  —  If  you  will  give  me  a  bit  of 
mutton  at  one  o'clock  I  shall  be  very  much  your  debtor,  but  as 
I  have  business  to  attend  to  afterwards  at  the  Home  Office  I 
must  stipulate  that  my  intellect  be  not  imperilled  by  those  seduc- 
tive evil  genii  who  are  apt  to  make  their  appearance  at  your 
lunch  table.* 

M.  is  getting  better,  but  I  cannot  let  her  be  out  at  night  yet. 
She  thinks  she  is  to  be  allowed  to  go  to  the  International  Ex- 
hibition business  on  Saturday;  but  if  the  temperature  does  not 
rise  very  considerably  I  shall  have  two  words  to  say  to  that. — 
Ever  yours  very  sincerely,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  shall  be  alone.  Do  you  think  that  I  am  "  subdued  to  that  I 
work  in,"  and  like  an  oyster,  carry  my  brood  about  beneath  my 
mantle  ? 

*  This  is  accompanied  by  a  sketch  of  a  champagne  bottle  in  the 
character  of  a  demon. 


CHAPTER   V 
1884 

From  this  time  forward  the  burden  of  ill-health  grew 
slowly  and  steadily.  Dyspepsia  and  the  hypochondriacal 
depression  which  follows  in  its  train,  again  attacked  Huxley 
as  they  had  attacked  him  twelve  years  before,  though  this 
time  the  physical  misery  was  perhaps  less.  His  energy  was 
sapped;  when  his  official  work  was  over,  he  could  hardly 
bring  himself  to  renew  the  investigations  in  which  he  had 
always  delighted.  To  stoop  over  the  microscope  was  a 
physical  discomfort;  he  began  to  devote  himself  more  ex- 
clusively to  the  reading  of  philosophy  and  critical  theology. 
This  was  the  time  of  which  Sir  M.  Foster  writes  that  "  there 
was  something  working  in  him  which  made  his  hand,  when 
turned  to  anatomical  science,  so  heavy  that  he  could  not 
lift  it.  Not  even  that  which  was  so  strong  within  him, 
the  duty  of  fulfilling  a  promise,  could  bring  him  to  the 
work." 

Up  to  the  beginning  of  October,  he  went  on  with  his 
official  work,  the  lectures  at  South  Kensington,  the  business 
as  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  ex  officio  Trustee  of 
the  British  Museum;  the  duties  connected  with  the  In- 
spectorship of  Fisheries,  the  City  and  Guilds  Technical 
Education  Committee,  and  the  University  of  London,  and 
delivered  the  opening  address  at  the  London  Hospital  Medi- 
cal School,  on  "  The  State  and  the  Medical  Profession  " 
(Coll.  Ess.  iii.  323),  his  health  meanwhile  growing  less  and 
less  satisfactory.  He  dropped  minor  offices,  such  as  the 
Presidency  of  the  National  Association  of  Science  Teach- 
70 


i884  LETTER  TO  SIR   HENRY  ROSCOE  71 

ers,  which,  he  considered,  needed  more  careful  supervision 
than  he  was  able  to  give,  and  meditated  retiring  from  part 
at  least  of  his  main  duties,  when  he  was  ordered  abroad 
at  a  moment's  notice  for  first  one,  then  another,  and  yet  a 
third  period  of  two  months.  But  he  did  not  definitely  re- 
tire until  this  rest  had  proved  ineffectual  to  fit  him  again 
for  active  work. 

The  President  of  the  Royal  Society  is,  as  mentioned 
above,  an  ex  officio  Trustee  of  the  British  Museum,  so  that 
now,  as  again  in  1888,  circumstances  at  length  brought 
about  the  state  of  affairs  which  Huxley  had  once  indicated — 
half-jestingly — ^to  Robert  Lowe,  who  inquired  of  him  what 
would  be  the  best  course  to  adopt  with  respect  to  the  Natural 
History  collections  of  the  British  Museum : — "  Make  me  a 
Trustee  and  Flower  director."  At  this  moment,  the  ques- 
tion of  an  official  residence  for  the  Director  of  the  Natural 
History  Museum  was  under  discussion  with  the  Treasury, 
and  he  writes : — 

Fed.  29,  1884. 

My  dear  Flower — I  am  particularly  glad  to  hear  your  news. 
"Villa  qui  parle  et  femme  qui  ecoute  se  rendent,"  says  the 
wicked  proverb — and  it  is  true  of  Chancellors  of  the  Exchequer. 
—Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  ^  ^  Huxley. 

A  pendent  to  this  is  a  letter  of  congratulation  to  Sir 
Henry  Roscoe  on  his  knighthood: — 

Science  and  Art  Department,  S.K., 
July  7.  1884. 

My  dear  Roscoe — I  am  very  glad  to  see  that  the  Govern- 
ment has  had  the  grace  to  make  some  acknowledgment  of  their 
obligation  to  you,  and  I  wish  you  and  "  my  lady  "  long  enjoy- 
ment of  your  honours.  I  don't  know  if  you  are  gazetted  yet, 
so  I  don't  indicate  them  outside. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

PS. — I  wrote  some  weeks  ago  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Na- 
tional Association  of  Science  Teachers  to  say  that  I  must  give 
up  the  Presidency.  I  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Asso- 
ciation wants  sharp  looking  after,  and  that  I  can't  undertake 
that  business. 


72  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 

PS,  2. — Shall  I  tell  you  what  your  great  affliction  hence- 
forward will  be?  It  will  be  to  hear  yourself  called  Sr'enery 
Roscoe  by  the  flunkies  who  announce  you. 

Her  Ladyship  will  please  take  note  of  this  crumpled  rose 
leaf — I  am  sure  of  its  annoying  her. 

The  following  letter,  with  its  comparison  of  life  to  a 
whirlpool  and  its  acknowledgment  of  the  widespread  tend- 
ency in  mankind  to  make  idols,  was  written  in  answer  to 
some  enquiries  from  Lady  Welby : — 

April  8,  1884. 

Your  letter  requires  consideration,  and  I  have  had  very  little 
leisure  lately.  Whether  motion  disintegrates  or  integrates  is,  I 
apprehend,  a  question  of  conditions.  A  whirlpool  in  a  stream 
may  remain  in  the  same  spot  for  any  imaginable  time.  Yet  it 
is  the  effect  of  the  motion  of  the  particles  of  the  water  in  that 
spot  which  continually  integrate  themselves  into  the  whirlpool 
and  disintegrate  themselves  from  it.  The  whirlpool  is  perma- 
nent while  the  conditions  last,  though  its  constituents  incessantly 
change.  Living  bodies  are  just  such  whirlpools.  Matter  sets 
into  them  in  the  shape  of  food, — sets  out  of  them  in  the  shape 
of  waste  products.  Their  individuality  lies  in  the  constant 
maintenance  of  a  characteristic  form,  not  in  the  preservation 
of  material  identity.  I  do  not  know  anything  about  "  vitality  " 
except  as  a  name  for  certain  phenomena  like  "  electricity  "  or 
"  gravitation."  As  you  get  deeper  into  scientific  questions  you 
will  find  that  "  Name  ist  Schall  und  Rauch  "  even  more  em- 
phatically than  Faust  says  it  is  in  Theology.  Most  of  us  are 
idolators,  and  ascribe  divine  powers  to  the  abstractions  "  Force," 
"  Gravity,"  "  Vitality,"  which  our  own  brains  have  created.  I 
do  not  know  anything  about  "  inert "  things  in  nature.  If  we 
reduce  the  world  to  matter  and  motion,  the  matter  is  not 
"  inert,"  inasmuch  as  the  same  amount  of  motion  affects  differ- 
ent kinds  of  matter  in  different  ways.  To  go  back  to  my  own 
illustration.  The  fabric  of  the  watch  is  not  inert,  every  particle 
of  it  is  in  violent  and  rapid  motion,  and  the  winding-up  simply 
perturbs  the  whole  infinitely  complicated  system  in  a  particular 
fashion.  Equilibrium  means  death,  because  life  is  a  succession 
of  changes,  while  a  changing  equilibrium  is  a  contradiction  in 
terms.  I  am  not  at  all  clear  that  a  living  being  is  comparable 
to  a  machine  running  down.  On  this  side  of  the  question  the 
whirlpool  affords  a  better  parallel  than  the  watch.  If  you  dam 
the  stream  above  or  below,  the  whirlpool  dies ;  just  as  the  living 


i884  ON   FISHERY   BUSINESS  73 

being  does  if  you  cut  off  its  food,  or  choke  it  with  its  own  waste 
products.  And  if  you  alter  the  sides  or  bottom  of  the  stream 
you  may  kill  the  whirlpool,  just  as  you  kill  the  animal  by  inter- 
fering with  its  structure.  Heat  and  oxidation  as  a  source  of 
heat  appear  to  supply  energy  to  the  living  machine,  the  molecu- 
lar structure  of  the  germ  furnishing  the  "  sides  and  bottom  of 
the  stream,"  that  is,  determining  the  results  which  the  energy 
supplied  shall  produce. 

Mr.  Ashby  writes  like  a  man  who  knows  what  he  is  talking 
about.  His  exposition  appears  to  me  to  be  essentially  sound 
and  extremely  well  put.  I  wish  there  were  more  sanitary  offi- 
cers of  the  same  stamp.  Mr.  Spencer  is  a  very  admirable 
writer,  and  I  set  great  store  by  his  works.  But  we  are  very  old 
friends,  and  he  has  endured  me  as  a  sort  of  "  deviFs-advocate  " 
for  thirty-odd  years.  He  thinks  that  if  I  can  pick  no  holes  in 
what  he  says  he  is  safe.  But  I  pick  a  great  many  holes,  and  we 
agree  to  differ. 

Between  April  and  September,  Fishery  business  took 
him  out  of  London  for  no  less  than  forty-three  days,  first 
to  Cornwall,  then  in  May  to  Brixham,  in  June  to  Cum- 
berland and  Yorkshire,  in  July  to  Chester,  and  in  Sep- 
tember to  South  Devon,  Cornwall,  and  Wales.  A  few 
extracts  from  his  letters  home  may  be  given.  Just  be- 
fore starting,  he  writes  from  Marlborough  Place  to  Ro- 
gate,  where  his  wife  and  one  of  his  daughters  were 
staying : — 

April  8. — The  weather  turned  wonderfully  muggy  here  this 
morning,  and  turned  me  into  wet  paper.  But  I  contrived  to 
make  a  "  neat  and  appropriate  "  in  presenting  old  Hird  with  his 
testimonial.  Fayrer  and  I  were  students  under  him  forty  years 
ago,  and  as  we  stood  together  it  was  a  question  which  was  the 
greyest  old  chap. 

April  14. — I  have  almost  given  up  reading  the  Egyptian 
news,  I  am  so  disgusted  with  the  whole  business.  I  saw  several 
pieces  of  land  to  let  for  building  purposes  about  Falmouth,  but 
did  not  buy  any.  (This  was  to  twit  his  wife  with  her  constant 
desire  that  he  should  buy  a  bit  of  land  in  the  country  to  settle 
upon  in  their  old  age.) 

April  18. — You  don't  say  when  you  go  back,  so  I  direct  this 
to  Rogate.  I  shall  expect  to  see  you  quite  set  up.  We  must 
begin  to  think  seriously  about  getting  out  of  the  hurly-burly  a 


74  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  v 

year  or  two  hence,  and  having  an  Indian  summer  together  in 
peace  and  quietness. 

April  15,  Sunday,  Falmouth, — I  went  out  at  ten  o'clock  this 
morning,  and  did  not  get  back  till  near  seven.  But  I  got  a  cup 
of  tea  and  some  bread  and  butter  in  a  country  village,  and  by  the 
help  of  that  and  many  pipes  supported  nature.  There  was  a 
bitter  east  wind  blowing,  but  the  day  was  lovely  otherwise,  and 
by  judicious  dodging  in  coves  and  creeks  and  sandy  bays,  I 
escaped  the  wind  and  absorbed  a  prodigious  quantity  of  sun- 
shine. 

I  took  a  volume  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Em- 
pire with  me.  I  had  not  read  the  famous  15th  and  i6th  chapters 
for  ages,  and  I  lay  on  the  sands  and  enjoyed  them  properly.  A 
lady  came  and  spoke  to  me  as  I  returned,  who  knew  L.  at 
Oxford  very  well — can't  recollect  her  ndme — and  her  father  and 
mother  are  here,  and  I  have  just  been  spending  an  hour  with 
them.  Also  a  man  who  sat  by  me  at  dinner  knew  me  from 
Jack's  portrait.  So  my  incognito  is  not  very  good.  I  feel  quite 
set  up  by  my  day's  wanderings. 

May  II,  Torquay. — We  went  over  to  Brixham  yesterday  to 
hold  an  inquiry,  getting  back  here  to  an  eight-o'clock  or  nearer 
nine  dinner.  .  .  .  Dalhousie  has  discovered  that  the  officer  now 
in  command  of  the  Britannia  is  somebody  whom  he  does  not 
know,  so  he  gave  up  going  to  Dartmouth  and  agreed  to  have  a 
lazy  day  here.  It  is  the  most  exquisite  summer  weather  you  can 
imagine,  and  I  have  been  basking  in  the  sun  all  the  morning 
and  dreamily  looking  over  the  view  of  the  lovely  bay  which  is 
looking  its  best — but  take  it  all  round  it  does  not  come  up  to 
Lynton.  Dalhousie  is  more  likeable  than  ever,  and  I  am  just 
going  out  for  a  stroll  with  him. 

June  24. — I  left  Keswick  this  morning  for  Cockermouth, 
took  the  chair  at  my  meeting  punctually  at  twelve,  sat  six  mortal 
hours  listening  to  evidence,  nine-tenths  of  which  was  super- 
fluous— and  turning  my  lawyer  faculty  to  account  in  sifting  the 
grains  of  fact  out  of  the  other  tenth. 

June  25,  Leeds. —  . . .  We  had  a  long  drive  to  a  village  called 
Harewood  on  the  Wharfe.  There  is  a  big  Lord  lives  there — 
Earl  of  Harewood — and  he  and  his  ancestors  must  have  taken 
great  care  of  their  tenants,  for  the  labourers'  houses  are  the  best 
I  ever  saw.  ...  I  cut  out  the  enclosed  from  the  Standard  the 
other  day  to  amuse  you,  but  have  forgotten  to  send  it  before.* 

*  Apparently  announcing  that  he  was  about  to  accept  a  title.     I 
have  not  been  able  to  trace  the  paragraph.- 


iM^a. 


i884  LETTER  TO  FOSTER  75 

I  think  we  will  be  "  Markishes,"  the  lower  grades  are  getting 
common. 

June  2y, —  ...  I  had  a  long  day's  inspection  of  the  Wharfe 
yesterday,  attended  a  meeting  of  the  landed  proprietors  at  Ottley 
to  tell  them  what  they  must  do  if  they  would  get  salmon  up 
their  river.  ... 

I  shall  leave  here  to-morrow  morning,  go  on  to  Skipton, 
whence  seven  or  eight  miles'  drive  will  take  me  to  Linton  where 
there  is  an  obstruction  in  the  river  I  want  to  see.  In  the  after- 
noon I  shall  come  home  from  Skipton,  but  I  don't  know  exactly 
by  what  train.  As  far  as  I  see,  I  ought  to  be  home  by  about 
10.30,  and  you  may  have  something  light  for  supper,  as  the 
"  course  of  true  feeding  is  not  likely  to  run  smooth " — to- 
morrow. 

In  August  he  went  again  to  the  corner  of  Surrey  which 
he  had  enjoyed  so  much  the  year  before.  Here,  in  the 
intervals  of  suffering  under  the  hands  of  the  dentist,  he 
worked  at  preparing  a  new  edition  of  the  Elementary 
Physiology  with  Sir  M.  Foster,  alternating  with  fresh 
studies  in  critical  theology. 

The  following  letters  reflect  his  occupations  at  this  time, 
together  with  his  desire,  strongly  combated  by  his  friend,  of 
resigning  the  Presidency  of  the  Royal  Society  immediately. 

HiGHCROFT  House,  Milford, 

GODALMING,  Aug,  9,   1 884. 

My  dear  Foster — I  had  to  go  up  to  town  on  Friday,  and 
yesterday  I  went  and  had  all  my  remaining  teeth  out,  and  came 
down  here  again  with  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  I  was  really  drunk 
and  incapable,  however  respectable  I  might  look  outwardly. 
At  present  I  can't  eat  at  all,  and  /  can*t  smoke  with  any  comfort. 
For  once  I  don't  mind  using  italics. 

Item. — I  send  the  two  cuts. 

Heaven  be  praised !  I  had  brought  down  no  copy  of  Physi- 
ology with  me,  so  could  not  attend  to^our  proof.  Got  it  yester- 
day, so  I  am  now  at  your  mercy. 

But  I  have  gone  over  the  proofs  now,  and  send  you  a  deuce 
of  a  lot  of  suggestions. 

Just  think  over  additions  to  smell  and  taste  to  bring  these 
into  harmony. 

The  Saints  salute  you.  I  am  principally  occupied  in  study- 
ing the  Gospels. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


76  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 

HiGHCROFT  House,  Milford, 

GODALMING,  Aug.  26,   1 884. 

Dearly  Beloved — I  have  been  going  over  the  ear  chapter 
this  morning,  and,  as  you  will  see,  have  suggested  some  addi- 
tions. Those  about  the  lamina  spiralis  are  certainly  necessary 
— illus.  substitution  of  trihedral  for  triangular.*  I  want  also 
very  much  to  get  into  heads  of  students  that  in  sensation  it  is 
all  modes  of  motion  up  to  and  in  sensorium,  and  that  the  genera- 
tion of  feeling  is  the  specific  reaction  of  a  particle  of  the  sen- 
sorium when  stimulated,  just  as  contraction,  etc.,  is  the  specific 
reaction  of  a  muscular  fibre  when  stimulated  by  its  nerve.  The 
psychologists  make  the  fools  of  themselves  they  do  because  they 
have  never  mastered  this  elementary  fact.  But  I  am  not  sure 
whether  I  have  put  it  well,  and  I  wish  you  would  give  your  mind 
to  it.  As  for  me  I  have  not  had  much  mind  to  give  lately — a 
fortnight's  spoon-meat  reduced  me  to  inanity,  and  I  am  only  just 
picking  up  again.  However,  I  walked  ten  miles  yesterday  after- 
noon, so  there  is  not  much  the  matter. 

I  will  see  what  I  can  do  with  the  histology  business.f  I 
wanted  to  re-write  it,  but  I  am  not  sure  yet  whether  I  shall  be 
able. 

Between  ourselves,  I  have  pretty  well  made  up  my  mind  to 
clear  out  of  everything  next  year,  R.S.  included.  I  loathe  the 
thought  of  wasting  any  more  of  my  life  in  endless  distractions 
— and  so  long  as  I  live  in  London  tfiere  is  no  escape  for  me.  I 
have  half  a  mind  to  live  abroad  for  six  months  in  the  year. — 
Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

I  enclose  letter  from  Deutsch  lunatic  to  go  before  Council 
and  be  answered  by  Foreign  Secretary. 

HiGHCROFT  House,  Milford, 

GODALMING,  Aug.  29,  1884. 

Dearly  Beloved — I  enclose  the  proofs,  having  mustered  up 
volition  enough  to  go  over  them  at  once.  I  think  the  alterations 
will  be  great  improvements.  I  see  you  interpret  yourself  about 
the  movements  of  the  larynx. 

As  to  the  histology,  I  shall  have  a  shot  at  it,  but  if  I  do  not 

*  On  Sept.  8,  he  writes  : — *'  I  have  been  laughing  over  my  *  trihe- 
dron.*    It  is  a  regular  bull." 

f  "Most  of  our  examinees"  (he  writes  on  Sept.  5)  "have  not  a 
notion  of  what  histology  means  at  present.  I  think  it  will  be  good 
for  other  folks  to  get  it  into  their  heads  that  it  is  not  all  sections  and 
carmine." 


i884  LETTER   TO   FOSTER  'j'j 

send  you  MS.  in  a  week's  time,  go  ahead.  I  am  perplexed  about 
the  illustrations,  but  I  see  nothing  for  it  but  to  have  new  ones 
in  all  the  cases  which  you  have  marked.  Have  you  anybody  in 
Cambridge  who  can  draw  the  things  from  preparations? 

You  are  like  Trochu  with  your  "  plan,"  and  I  am  anxious  to 
learn  it.  But  have  you  reflected,  ist,  that  I  am  getting  deafer 
and  deafer,  and  that  I  cannot  hear  what  is  said  at  the  council 
table  and  in  the  Society's  rooms  half  the  time  people  are  speak- 
ing? and  2nd,  that  so  long  as  I  am  President,  so  long  must  I  be 
at  the  beck  and  call  of  everything  that  turns  up  in  relation  to 
the  interests  of  science.  So  long  as  I  am  in  the  chair,  I  cannot 
be  a  faineant  or  refuse  to  do  anything  and  everything  incidental 
to  the  position. 

My  notion  is  to  get  away  for  six  months,  so  as  to  break  with 
the  "  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil "  of  London,  for  all  which 
I  have  conceived  a  perfect  loathing.  Six  months  is  long  enough 
for  anybody  to  be  forgotten  twice  over  by  everybody  but  per- 
sonal friends. 

I  am  contemplating  a  winter  in  Italy,  but  I  shall  keep  on  my 
house  for  Harry's  sake  and  as  a  pied  a  terre  in  London,  and  in 
the  summer  come  and  look  at  you  at  Burlington  House,  as  the 
old  soap-boiler  used  to  visit  the  factory.  I  shall  feel  like  the 
man  out  of  whom  the  legion  of  devils  departed  when  he  looked 
at  the  gambades  of  the  two  thousand  pigs  going  at  express  speed 
for  the  waters  of  Tiberias. 

By  the  way,  did  you  ever  read  that  preposterous  and  im- 
moral story  carefully?  It  is  one  of  the  best  attested  of  the 
miracles.  .  .  . 

When  I  have  retired  from  the  chair  (which  I  must  not 
scandalise)  I  shall  write  a  lay  sermon  on  the  text.  It  will  be 
impressive. 

My  wife  sends  her  love,  and  says  she  has  her  eye  on  you. 
She  is  all  for  retirement. — Ever  yours. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  of  poor  Mangles'  death,  but  I  sup- 
pose there  was  no  other  chance.  T.  H.  H. 

In  September  he  hails  with  delight  some  intermission  of 
the  constant  depression  under  which  he  has  been  labouring, 
and  writes : — 

So  long  as  I  sit  still  and  write  or  read  I  am  all  right,  other- 
wise not  good  for  much,  which  is  odd,  considering  that  I  eat, 
drink,  and  sleep  like  a  top.    I  suppose  that  everybody  starts  with 


78  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 

a  certain  capital  of  life-stuff,  and  that  expensive  habits  have 
reduced  mine. 

And  again: — 

I  have  been  very  shaky  for  the  last  few  weeks,  but  I  am 
picking  up  again,  and  hope  to  come  up  smiling  for  the  winter's 
punishment. 

There  was  nothing  to  drink  last  night,  so  I  had  some  tea! 
with  my  dinner — smoked  a  pipe  or  two— slept  better  than  usual, 
and  woke  without  blue  devils  for  the  first  time  for  a  week ! ! ! 
Query,  is  that  the  effect  of  tea  or  baccy  ?  I  shall  try  them  again. 
We  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  especially  in  the  stom- 
ach— ^which  is  altogether  past  finding  out. 

Still,  his  humour  would  flash  out  in  the  midst  of  his 
troubles;  he  writes  in  answer  to  a  string  of  semi-official 
enquiries  from  Sir  J.  Donnelly: — 

HiGHCROFT  House,  Milford,  Godalming. 
Sir — In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  9th  Aug.  (666),  I  have 
the  honour  to  state — 

1.  That  I  am  here. 

2.  That  I  have  (a)  had  all  my  teeth  out;  (b)  partially 
sprained  my  right  thumb;  (c)  am  very  hot;  (d)  can't 
smoke  with  comfort;  whence  I  may  leave  even  official 
intelligence  to  construct  an  answer  to  your  second  in- 
quiry. 

3.  Your  third  question  is  already  answered  under  2a.  Not 
writing  might  be  accounted  for  by  2&,  but  unfortunately 
the  sprain  is  not  bad  enough — and  "  laziness,  sheer  lazi- 
ness "  is  the  proper  answer. 

I  am  prepared  to  take  a  solemn  affidavit  that  I  told  you  and 
Macgregor  where  I  was  coming  many  times,  and  moreover  that 
I  distinctly  formed  the  intention  of  leaving  my  address  in  writ- 
ing— according  to  those  official  instructions  which  I  always 
fulfil. 

If  the  intention  was  not  carried  out,  its  blood  be  upon  its 
own  head — I  wash  my  hands  of  it,  as  Pilate  did. 

4.  As  to  the  question  whether  I  want  my  letters  I  can  sin- 
cerely declare  that  I  don't — would  in  fact  much  rather  not 
see  them.  But  I  suppose  for  all  that  they  had  better  be 
sent. 

5.  I  hope  Macgregor's  question  is  not  a  hard  one — spoon- 
meat  does  not  carry  you  beyond  words  of  one  syllable. 


i884  LETTERS  79 

On  Friday  I  signalised  my  last  dinner  for  the  next  three 
weeks  by  going  to  meet  the  G.O.M.  I  sat  next  him,  and  he 
was  as  lively  as  a  bird. 

Very  sorry  to  hear  about  your  house.  You  will  have  to  set 
up  a  van  with  a  brass  knocker  and  anchor  on  our  common. — 
Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

By  the  beginning  of  September  he  had  made  up  his 
mind  that  he  ought  before  long  to  retire  from  active  life. 
The  first  person  to  be  told  of  his  resolution  was  the  head 
of  the  Science  and  Art  Department,  with  whom  he  had 
worked  so  long  at  South  Kensington. 

HiGHCROFT  House,  Milford,  Godalming, 

Sept,  3,  1884. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  was  very  glad  to  have  news  of  you 
yesterday.  I  gather  you  are  thriving,  notwithstanding  the  ap- 
palling title  of  your  place  of  refuge.  I  should  have  preferred 
"  blow  the  cold  "  to  "  Cold  blow  " — ^but  there  is  no  accounting 
for  tastes. 

I  have  been  going  and  going  to  write  to  you  for  a  week 
past  to  tell  you  of  a  notion  that  has  been  maturing  in  my  mind 
for  some  time,  and  that  I  ought  to  let  you  know  of  before  any- 
body else.  I  find  myself  distinctly  aged — tired  out  body  and 
soul,  and  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  fairly  afraid  of  the  work 
that  lies  before  me  in  the  next  nine  months.  Physically,  I  have 
nothing  much  to  complain  of  except  weariness — and  for  purely 
mental  work,  I  think  I  am  good  for  something  yet.  I  am  morally 
and  mentally  sick  of  society  and  societies — committees,  councils 
— bother  about  details  and  general  worry  and  waste  of  time. 

I  feel  as  if  more  than  another  year  of  it  would  be  the  death 
of  me.  Next  May  I  shall  be  sixty,  and  have  been  thirty-one 
mortal  years  in  my  present  office  in  the  School.  Surely  I  may 
sing  my  nunc  dimittis  with  a  good  conscience.  I  am  strongly 
inclined  to  announce  to  the  Royal  Society  in  November  that  the 
chair  will  be  vacant  that  day  twelvemonth — ^to  resign  my  Govern- 
ment posts  at  midsummer,  and  go  away  and  spend  the  winter 
in  Italy — so  that  I  may  be  out  of  reach  of  all  the  turmoil  of 
London. 

The  only  thing  I  don't  like  is  the  notion  of  leaving  you  with- 
out such  support  as  I  can  give  in  the  School.  No  one  knows 
better  than  I  do  how  completely  it  is  your  work  and  how  gal- 
lantly you  have  borne  the  trouble  and  responsibility  connected 


8d  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 

with  it.  But  what  am  I  to  do?  I  must  give  up  all  or  nothing 
— and  I  shall  certainly  come  to  grief  if  I  do  not  have  a  long  rest. 

Pray  tell  me  what  you  think  about  it  all. 

My  wife  has  written  to  Mrs.  Donnelly  and  told  her  the  news. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Read  Hobbes  if  you  want  to  get  hard  sense  in  good  English. 

HiGHCROFT  House,  Milford,  Godalming, 

Sept.  ID,  1884. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Many  thanks  for  your  kind  letter.  I 
feel  rather  like  a  deserter,  and  am  glad  of  any  crumbs  of  com- 
fort. 

Cartwright  has  done  wonders  for  me,  and  I  can  already 
eat  most  things  (I  draw  the  line  at  tough  crusts).  I  have  not 
even  my  old  enemy,  dyspepsia — ^but  eat,  drink,  and  sleep  like 
a  top. 

And  withal  I  am  as  tired  as  if  I  were  hard  at  work,  and  shirk 
walking. 

So  far  as  I  can  make  out  there  is  not  the  slightest  sign  of 
organic  disease  anywhere,  but  I  will  get  Clark  to  overhaul  me 
when  I  go  back  to  town.  Sometimes  I  am  inclined  to  suspect 
that  it  is  all  sham  and  laziness — ^but  then  why  the  deuce  should 
I  want  to  sham  and  be  lazy. 

Somebody  started  a  charming  theory  years  ago — that  as  you 
get  older  and  lose  volition,  primitive  evil  tendencies,  heretofore 
mastered,  come  out  and  show  themselves.  A  nice  prospect  for 
venerable  old  gentlemen ! 

Perhaps  my  crust  of  industry  is  denuded,  and  the  primitive 
rock  of  sloth  is  cropping  out. 

But  enough  of  this  egotistical  invalidism. 

How  wonderfully  Gordon  is  holding  his  own.  I  should  like 
to  see  him  lick  the  Mahdi  into  fits  before  Wolseley  gets  up.  You 
despise  the  Jews,  but  Gordon  is  more  like  one  of  the  Maccabees 
of  Bar-Kochba  than  any  sort  of  modern  man. 

My  wife  sends  love  to  both  of  you,  and  says  you  are  (in 
feminine  language)  "  a  dear  thing  in  friends." — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Home  Office,  Sept.  18,  1884. 

My  dear  Donnelly — We  have  struck  our  camp  at  Milford, 

and  I  am  going  down  to  Devonshire  and  Cornwall  to-morrow 

— partly  on  Fishery  business,  partly  to  see  if  I  can  shake  myself 

straighter  by  change  of  air,    I  am  possessed  by  seven  devils — not 


i884  LETTERS  gl 

only  blue,  but  of  the  deepest  indigo — and  I  shall  try  to  transplant 
them  into  a  herd  of  Cornish  swine. 

The  only  thing  that  comforts  me  is  Gordon's  telegrams.  Did 
ever  a  poor  devil  of  a  Government  have  such  a  subordinate 
before?  He  is  the  most  refreshing  personality  of  this  genera- 
tion. 

I  shall  be  back  by  30th  September — and  I  hope  in  better  con- 
dition for  harness  than  now. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Replying  to  General  Donnelly's  arguments  against  his 
resigning  all  his  official  posts,  he  writes : — 

Dartmouth,  Sept.  21,  1884. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Your  letters,  having  made  a  journey 
to  Penzance  (where  I  told  my  wife  I  should  go  last  Friday,  but 
did  not,  and  brought  up  here  instead)  turned  up  this  morning. 

I  am  glad  to  have  seen  Lord  Carlingford's  letter,  and  I  am 
very  much  obliged  to  him  for  his  kind  expressions.  Assuredly 
I  will  not  decide  hastily. 

Now  for  your  letter — I  am  all  for  letters  in  these  matters. 
Not  that  we  are  either  of  us  "  impatient  and  irritable  listeners  " 
— oh  dear,  no  I  "I  have  my  faults,"  as  the  miser  said,  "  but 
avarice  is  not  one  of  them  " — and  we  have  our  faults  too,  but 
notoriously  they  lie  in  the  direction  of  long-suffering  and  apathy. 

Nevertheless  there  is  a  good  deal  to  be  said  for  writing. 
Mine  is  itself  a  discipline  in  patience  for  my  correspondent. 

Imprimis.  I  scorn  all  your  chaff  about  Society.  My  great 
object  for  years  has  been  to  keep  out  of  it,  not  to  go  into  it.  Just 
you  wait  till  the  Misses  Donnelly  grow  up — I  trust  there  may 
be  five  or  ten  of  them — and  see  what  will  happen  to  you.  But 
apart  from  this,  so  long  as  I  live  in  London,  so  long  will  it  be 
practically  impossible  for  me  to  keep  out  of  dining  and  giving 
of  dinners — and  you  know  that  just  as  well  as  I  do. 

2nd.  I  mean  to  give  up  the  Presidency,  but  don't  see  my  way 
to  doing  so  next  St.  Andrew's  Day.  I  wish  I  could — ^but  I  must 
deal  fairly  by  the  Society. 

3rd.  The  suggestion  of  the  holiday  at  Christmas  is  the  most 
sensible  thing  you  have  said.  I  could  get  six  weeks  under  the 
new  arrangement  (Botany ,  January  and  half  February)  without 
interfering  with  my  lectures  at  all.  But  then  there  is  the  blessed 
Home  Office  to  consider.  There  might  be  civil  war  between  the 
net  men  and  the  rod  men  in  six  weeks,  all  over  the  country, 
without  my  mild  influence. 
42 


4w 


82  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 

4th.  I  must  g^ve  up  my  Inspectorship.  The  mere  thought 
of  having  to  occupy  myself  with  the  squabbles  of  these  idiots 
of  country  squireens  and  poachers  makes  me  sick — and  is,  I 
believe,  the  chief  cause  of  the  morbid  state  of  my  mucous  mem- 
branes. 

All  this  week  shall  I  be  occupied  in  hearing  one  Jackass  con- 
tradict another  Jackass  about  questions  which  are  of  no  im- 
portance. 

I  would  almost  as  soon  be  in  the  House  of  Commons. 

Now  see  how  reasonable  I  am.  I  agree  with  you  (a)  that  I 
must  get  out  of  the  hurly-burly  of  society;  (b)  that  I  must  get 
out  of  the  Presidency;  (c)  that  I  must  get  out  of  the  Inspector- 
ship, or  rather  I  agree  with  myself  on  that  matter,  you  having 
expressed  no  opinion. 

That  being  so,  it  seems  to  me  that  I  must,  willy-nilly,  g^ve  up 
S.K.  For — and  here  is  the  point  you  had  in  your  mind  when  you 
lamented  your  possible  impatience  about  something  I  might  say 
— I  swear  by  all  the  gods  that  are  not  mine,  nothing  shall  induce 
me  to  apply  to  the  Treasury  for  anything  but  the  pound  of  flesh 
to  which  I  am  entitled. 

Nothing  ever  disgusted  me  more  than  being  the  subject  of  a 
battle  with  the  Treasury  over  the  H.O.  appointment — which  I 
should  have  thrown  up  if  I  could  have  done  so  with  decency  to 
Harcourt. 

It's  just  as  well  for  me  I  couldn't,  but  it  left  a  nasty  taste. 

I  don't  want  to  leave  the  School,  and  should  be  very  glad  to 
remain  as  Dean,  for  many  reasons.  But  what  I  don't  see  is  how 
I  am  to  do  that  and  make  my  escape  from  the  thousand  and 
one  entanglements — which  seem  to  me  to  come  upon  me  quite 
irrespectively  of  any  office  I  hold — or  how  I  am  to  go  on  living 
in  London  as  a  (financially)  decayed  philosopher. 

I  really  see  nothing  for  it  but  to  take  my  pension  and  go  and 
spend  the  winter  of  1885-86  in  Italy.  I  hear  one  can  be  a  regular 
swell  there  on  £1000  a  year. 

Six  months'  absence  is  oblivion,  and  I  shall  take  to  a  new 
line  of  work,  and  one  which  will  greatly  meet  your  approval. 

As  to  X I  am  not  a-going  to — not  being  given  to  hope- 
less enterprises.  That  rough  customer  at  Dublin  is  the  only 
man  who  occurs  to  me.  I  can't  think  of  his  name,  but  that  is 
part  of  my  general  unfitness. 

....  I  suppose  I  shall  chaff  somebody  on  my  death-bed. 
But  I  am  out  of  heart  to  think  of  the  end  of  the  lunches  in  the 
sacred  corner. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


i884  PROPOSED   RETIREMENT  83 

On  the  2 1  St  he  writes  home  about  the  steps  he  had 
begun  to  take  with  respect  to  giving  up  part  of  his  official 
work. 

I  have  had  a  long  letter  from  Donnelly.  He  had  told  Lord 
Carlingford  of  my  plans,  and  incloses  a  letter  from  Lord  Car- 
lingford  to  him,  trusting  I  will  not  hastily  decide,  and  with  some 
pretty  phrases  about  "  support  and  honour  "  I  give  to  the  School. 
Donnelly  is  very  anxious  I  should  hold  on  to  the  School,  if  only 
as  Dean,  and  wants  me  in  any  case  to  take  two  months'  holiday 
at  Christmas.  Of  course  he  looks  on  the  R.S.  as  the  root  of  all 
evil.  Foster  per  contra  looks  on  the  School  as  the  deuce,  but 
would  have  me  stick  by  the  Royal  Society  like  grim  death. 

The  only  moral  obligation  that  weighs  with  me  is  that  which 
I  feel  under,  to  deal  fairly  by  Donnelly  and  the  School.  You 
must  not  argue  against  this,  as  rightly  or  wrongly  I  am  certain 
that  if  I  deserted  the  School  hastily,  or  if  I  did  not  do  all  that 
I  can  to  requite  Donnelly  for  the  plucky  way  in  which  he  has 
stood  by  it  and  me  for  the  last  dozen  years,  I  should*  never  shake 
off  the  feeling  that  I  had  behaved  badly.  And  as  I  am  much 
given  to  brooding  over  my  misdeeds,  I  don't  want  you  to  in- 
crease the  number  of  my  hell-hounds.  You  must  help  me  in 
this  .  .  .  and  if  I  am  Quixotic,  play  Sancho  for  the  nonce. 


CHAPTER   VI 

1884-85 

Towards  the  end  of  September  he  went  to  the  West 
country  to  try  to  improve  his  health  before  the  session 
began  again  in  London.  Thus  he  writes,  on  Sept.  26,  to 
Mr.  W.  F.  Collier,  who  had  invited  him  to  Horrabridge,  and 
on  the  27th  to  Sir  M.  Foster : — 

FowEY,  Sept,  26,  1884. 

Many  tlfenks  for  the  kind  offer  in  your  letter,  which  has 
followed  me  here.  But  I  have  not  been  on  the  track  you  might 
naturally  have  supposed  I  had  followed.  I  have  been  trying  to 
combine  hygiene  with  business,  and  betook  myself,  in  the  first 
place,  to  Dartmouth,  afterwards  to  Totnes,  and  then  came  on 
here.  From  this  base  of  operations  I  could  easily  reach  all  my 
places  of  meeting.  To-morrow  I  have  to  go  to  Bodmin,  but  I 
shall  return  here,  and  if  the  weather  is  fine  (raining  cats  and 
dogs  at  present),  I  may  remain  a  day  or  two  to  take  in  stock 
of  fresh  air  before  commencing  the  London  campaign. 

I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  your  health  has  improved  so 
much.  You  must  feel  quite  proud  to  be  such  an  interesting 
"  case."  If  I  set  a  good  example  myself  I  would  venture  to 
warn  you  against  spending  five  shillings*  worth  of  strength  on 
the  ground  of  improvement  to  the  extent  of  half-a-crown. 

I  am  not  quite  clear  as  to  the  extent  to  which  my  children 
have  colonised  Woodtown  at  present.  But  it  seems  to  me  that 
there  must  be  three  or  four  Huxleys  (free  or  in  combination,  as 
the  chemists  say)  about  the  premises.  Please  give  them  the 
paternal  benediction ;  and  with  very  kind  remembrances  to  Mrs. 
Collier,  etc. 

FowEY  Hotel,  Fowey,  Cornwall, 
Sept.  27,  1884. 

My  dear  Foster — I  return  your  proof,  with  a  few  trifling 
suggestions  here  and  there.  .  .  . 

84 


i884  ILL-HEALTH  85 

I  fancy  we  may  regard  the  award  as  practically  settled,  and 
a  very  good  award  it  will  be. 

The  address  is  beginning  to  loom  in  the  distance.  I  have  half 
a  mind  to  devote  some  part  of  it  to  a  sketch  of  the  recent  novel- 
ties in  histology  touching  the  nucleus  question  and  molecular 
physiology. 

My  wife  sent  me  your  letter.  By  all  means  let  us  have  a 
confabulation  as  soon  as  I  get  back  and  settle  what  is  to  be  done 
with  the  "  aged  P." 

I  am  not  sure  that  I  shall  be  at  home  before  the  end  of  the 
week.  My  lectures  do  not  begin  till  next  week,  and  the  faithful 
Howes  can  start  the  practical  work  without  me,  so  that  if  I  find 
myself  picking  up  any  good  in  these  parts,  I  shall  probably  linger 
here  or  hereabouts.  But  a  good  deal  will  depend  on  the  weather 
— inside  as  well  as  outside.  I  am  convinced  that  the  prophet 
Jeremiah  (whose  works  I  have  been  studying)  must  have  been 
a  flatulent  dyspeptic — there  is  so  much  agreement  between  his 
views  and  mine. — Ever  yours,.  T.  H.  Huxley. 

But  the  net  result  of  this  holiday  is  summed  up  in  a 
note,  of  October  5,  to  Sir  M.  Foster: — 

I  got  better  while  I  was  in  Cornwall  and  Wales,  and,  at 
present,  I  don't  think  there  is  anything  the  matter  with  me  ex- 
cept a  profound  disinclination  to  work.  I  never  before  knew 
the  proper  sense  of  the  term  "  vis  inertiae." 

And  writing  in  the  same  strain  to  Sir  J.  Evans,  he 
adds : — 

But  I  have  a  notion  that  if  I  do  not  take  a  long  spell  of 
absolute  rest  before  long  I  shall  come  to  grief.  However,  get- 
ting into  harness  again  may  prove  a  tonic — it  often  does,  e,g. 
in  the  case  of  cab-horses. 

Three  days  later  he  found  himself  ordered  to  leave  Eng- 
land immediately,  under  pain  of  a  hopeless  breakdown. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct.  8,  1884. 

My  dear  Foster — We  shall  be  very  glad  to  see  you  on  Fri- 
day. I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  had  better  put  myself  in 
Clark's  hands  again,  and  he  has  been  here  this  evening  over- 
hauling me  for  an  hour. 

He  says  there  is  nothing  wrong  except  a  slight  affection  of 
the  liver  and  general  nervous  depression,  but  that  if  I  go  on  the 


86  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

latter  will  get  steadily  worse  and  become  troublesome.  He 
insists  on  my  going  away  to  the  South  and  doing  nothing  but 
amuse  myself  for  three  or  four  months. 

This  is  the  devil  to  pay,  but  I  cannot  honestly  say  that  I 
think  he  is  wrong.  Moreover,  I  promised  the  wife  to  abide  by 
his  decision. 

We  will  talk  over  what  is  to  be  done. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

ATHENiEUM  Club,  Oct.  13,  1884. 

My  dear  Morley — I  heartily  wish  I  could  be  with  you  on 
the  25th,  but  it  is  oLiter  visum  to  somebody,  whether  Dis  or 
Diabolis,  I  can't  say. 

The  fact  is,  the  day  after  I  saw  you  I  had  to  put  myself  in 
Clark's  hands,  and  he  ordered  me  to  knock  off  work  and  go  and 
amuse  myself  for  three  or  four  months,  under  penalties  of  an 
unpleasant  kind. 

So  I  am  off  to  Venice  next  Wednesday.  It  is  the  only  toler- 
ably warm  place  accessible  to  any  one  whose  wife  will  not  let 
him  go  within  reach  of  cholera  just  at  present. 

If  I  am  a  good  boy  I  am  to  come  back  all  sound,  as  there  is 
nothing  organic  the  matter;  but  I  have  had  enough  of  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  and  shall  extricate  myself  from 
that  Trinity  as  soon  as  may  be.  Perhaps  I  may  get  within 
measurable  distance  of  Berkeley  {English  Men  of  Letters,  ed. 
J.M.)  before  I  die! — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

ATHENiBUM  Club,  October  18,  1884. 

My  dear  Foster — Best  thanks  for  your  letter  and  route.  I 
am  giving  you  a  frightful  quantity  of  trouble;  but,  as  the  old 
woman  (Irish)  said  to  my  wife,  when  she  gave  her  a  pair  of 
my  old  trousers  for  her  husband,  "  I  hope  it  may  be  made  up  to 
ye  in  a  better  world." 

She  is  clear,  and  I  am  clear,  that  there  is  no  reason  on  my 
part  for  not  holding  on  if  the  Society  really  wishes  I  should. 
But,  of  course,  I  must  make  it  easy  for  the  Council  to  get  rid 
of  a  faineant  President,  if  they  prefer  that  course. 

I  wrote  to  Evans  an  unofficial  letter  two  days  ago,  and  have 
had  a  very  kind,  straightforward  letter  from  him.  He  is  quite 
against  my  resignation.  I  shall  see  him  this  afternoon  here. 
I  had  to  go  to  my  office  (Fishery). 


i884  SENT   TO   ITALY  8/ 

Clark's  course  of  physic  is  lightening  my  abdominal  troubles, 
but  I  am  preposterously  weak  with  a  kind  of  shabby  broken- 
down  indifference  to  everything. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  H. 

The  "  Indian  summer  "  *  to  which  he  looked  forward 
was  not  to  be  reached  without  passing  through  a  season 
of  more  than  equinoctial  storms  and  tempests.  His  career 
had  reached  its  highest  point  only  to  be  threatened  with 
a  speedy  close.  He  himself  did  not  expect  more  than  two 
or  three  years'  longer  lease  of  life,  and  went  by  easy  stages 
to  Venice,  where  he  spent  eight  days.  "  No  place,"  he 
writes,  "  could  be  better  fitted  for  a  poor  devil  as  sick  in 
body  and  mind  as  I  was  when  I  got  there." 

Venice  itself  (he  writes  to  Dr.  Foster)  just  suited  me.  I 
chartered  a  capital  gondolier,  and  spent  most  of  my  time  explor- 
ing the  Lagoons.  Especially  I  paid  a  daily  visit  to  the  Lido, 
and  filled  my  lungs  with  the  sea  air,  and  rejoiced  in  the  absence 
of  stinks.  For  Venice  is  like  her  population  (at  least  the  male 
part  of  it),  handsome  but  odorous.  Did  you  notice  how  hand- 
some the  young  men  are  and  how  little  beauty  there  is  among 
the  women  ? 

I  stayed  eight  days  in  Venice  and  then  returned  by  easy 
stages  first  to  Padua,  where  I  wanted  to  see  Giotto's  work,  then 
to  Verona,  and  then  here  (Lugano).  Verona  delighted  me  more 
than  anything  I  have  seen,  and  we  will  spend  two  other  days 
there  as  we  go  back. 

As  for  myself,  I  really  have  no  positive  complaint  now.  I 
eat  well  and  I  sleep  well,  and  I  should  begin  to  think  I  was 
malingering,  if  it  were  not  for  a  sort  of  weariness  and  dead- 
ness  that  hangs  about  me,  accompanied  by  a  curious  nervous 
irritability. 

I  expect  that  this  is  the  upshot  of  the  terrible  anxiety  I  have 
had  about  my  daughter  M . 

I  would  give  a  great  deal  to  be  able  to  escape  facing  the 
wedding,  for  my  nervous  system  is  in  the  condition  of  that  of 
a  frog  under  opium. 

But  my  R.  must  not  go  off  without  the  paternal  benediction. 

For  the  first  three  weeks  he  was  alone,  his  wife  staying 
to  make  preparations  for  the  third  daughter's  wedding  on 

*  See  page  74. 


88  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

November  6th,  for  which  occasion  he  was  to  return,  after- 
wards taking  her  abroad  with  him.  Unfortunately,  just  as 
he  started,  news  was  brought  him  at  the  railway  station  that 
his  second  daughter,  whose  brilliant  gifts  and  happy  mar- 
riage seemed  to  promise  everything  for  her  future,  had  been 
stricken  by  the  beginnings  of  an  insidious  and,  as  he  too 
truly  feared,  hopeless  disease.  Nothing  could  have  more 
retarded  his  own  recovery.  It  was  a  bitter  grief,  referred 
to  only  in  his  most  intimate  letters,  and,  indeed,  for  a  time 
kept  secret  even  from  the  other  members  of  the  family. 
Nothing  was  to  throw  a  shade  over  the  brightness  of  the 
approaching  wedding. 

But  on  his  way  home,  he  writes  of  that  journey : — 

I  had  to  bear  my  incubus,  not  knowing  what  might  come 
next,  until  I  reached  Luzern,  when  I  telegraphed  for  intelli- 
gence, and  had  my  mind  set  at  ease  as  to  the  measures  which 
were  being  adopted. 

I  am  a  tough  subject,  and  have  learned  to  bear  a  good  deal 
without  crying  out;  but  those  four-and-twenty  hours  between 
London  and  Luzern  have  taugbt  me  that  I  have  yet  a  good  deal 
to  learn  in  the  way  of  "  grinning  and  bearing." 

And  although  he  writes,  "  I  would  give  a  good  deal  not 
to  face  a  lot  of  people  next  week,"  ..."  I  have  the  feelings 
of  a  wounded  wild  beast  and  hate  the  sight  of  all  but  my 
best  friends,"  he  hid  away  his  feelings,  and  made  this  the 
occasion  for  a  very  witty  speech,  of  which,  alas !  I  remember 
nothing  but  a  delightfully  mixed  polyglot  exordium  in 
French,  German,  and  Italian,  the  result,  he  declared,  of  his 
recent  excursion  to  foreign  parts,  which  had  obliterated  the 
recollection  of  his  native  speech. 

During  his  second  absence  he  appointed  his  young- 
est daughter  secretary  to  look  after  necessary  correspond- 
ence, about  which  he  forwarded  instructions  from  time  to 
time. 

The  chief  matters  of  interest  in  the  letters  of  this  period 
are  accounts  of  health  and  travel,  sometimes  serious,  more 
often  jesting,  for  the  letters  were  generally  written  in  the  ' 
bright  intervals  between  his  dark  days:  business  of  the 
Royal  Society,  and  the  publication  of  the  new  edition  of 


I884  LETTERS   FROM    ITALY  89 

the  Lessons  in  Elementary  Physiology,  upon  which  he  and 
Dr.  Foster  had  been  at  work  during  the  autumn.  But  the 
four  months  abroad  were  not  productive  of  very  great  good ; 
the  weather  was  unpropitious  for  an  invalid — "  as  usual,  a 
quite  unusual  season  " — ^while  his  mind  was  oppressed  by 
the  reports  of  his  daughter's  illness.  Under  these  circum- 
stances recovery  was  slow  and  travel  comfortless;  all  the 
Englishman's  love  of  home  breaks  out  in  his  letter  of  April 
8,  when  he  set  foot  again  on  English  soil. 

Hotel  de  Londres,  Verona,  Nov.  18,  1884. 
Dearest   Babs — i.  Why,   indeed,   do  they  ask   for  more? 
Wait  till  they  send  a  letter  of  explanation,  and  then  say  that  I 
am  out  of  the  country  and  not  expected  back  for  several  years. 

2.  I  wholly  decline  to  send  in  any  name  to  Athenaeum.  But 
don't  mention  it. 

3.  Society  of  Arts  be  bothered,  also 

4.  Write,  to  Science  and  Art  Club  to  engage  three  of  the 
prettiest  girls  as  partners  for  the  evening.  They  will  look  very 
nice  as  wallflowers. 

5.  Penny  dinners?  declined  with  thanks. 

6.  Ask  the  meeting  of  Herts  N.H.  Society  to  come  here  after 
next  Thursday,  when  we  shall  be  in  Bologna. 

Business  first,  my  sweet  girl  secretary  with  the  curly  front ; 
and  now  for  private  affairs,  though  as  your  mother  is  covering 
reams  with  them,  I  can  only  mention  a  few  of  the  more  impor- 
tant which  she  will  forget. 

.  The  first  is  that  she  has  a  habit  of  hiding  my  shirts  so  that 
I  am  unable  to  find  them  when  we  go  away,  and  the  chamber- 
maid comes  rushing  after  us  with  the  garment  shamefully  dis- 
played. 

The  second  is  that  she  will  cover  all  the  room  with  her 
things,  and  I  am  obliged  to  establish  a  military  frontier  on  the 
table. 

The  third  is  that  she  insists  on  my  buying  an  Italian  cloak. 
So  you  will  see  your  venerable  pater  equipped  in  this  wise.* 
Except  in  these  two  particulars,  she  behaves  fairly  well  to  me. 

In  point  of  climate,  so  far,  Italy  has  turned  out  a  fraud. 
We  dare  not  face  Venice,  and  Mr.  Fenili  will  weep  over  my  de- 
fection; but  that  is  better  than  that  we  should  cough  over  his 
satisfaction. 

*  Sketch  of  a  cloaked  figure  like  a  brigand  of  melodrama. 


90 


LIFE   OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  VI 


I  am  quite  pleased  to  hear  of  the  theological  turn  of  the 
family.  It  must  be  a  drop  of  blood  from  one  of  your  eight 
great-grandfathers,  for  none  of  your  ancestors  that  I  have 
known  would  have  developed  in  this  way. 

.  .  .  Best  love  to  Nettie  and  Harry.  Tell  the  former  that 
cabbages  do  not  cost  5s.  apiece,  and  the  latter  that  11  p.m.  is  the 
cloture. — Ever  your  affectionate  Pater. 

Hotel  Britannique,  Naples,  JSTov.  30,  1884. 

^Y  DEAR  Foster — Which  being  St.  Andrew's  Day,  I  think 
the  expatriated  P.  ought  to  give  you  some  account  of  himself. 

We  had  a  prosperous  journey  to  Locarno,  but  there  plumped 
into  bitter  cold  weather,  and  got  chilled  to  the  bone  as  the  only 
guests  in  the  big  hotel,  though  they  did  their  best  to  make  us 
comfortable.  I  made  a  shot  at  bronchitis,  but  happily  failed, 
and  got  all  right  again. 

Pallanza  was  as  bad.  At  Milan  temperature  at  noon  39°  F., 
freezing  at  night.  Verona  much  the  same.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, we  concluded  to  give  up  Venice  and  made  for  Bologna. 
There  found  it  rather  colder.  Next  Ravenna,  where  it  snowed. 
However,  we  made  ourselves  comfortable  in  the  queer  hotel,  and 
rejoiced  in  the  mosaics  of  that  sepulchral  marsh. 

At  Bologna  I  had  assurances  that  the  Sicilian  quarantine 
was  going  to  be  taken  off  at  once,  and  as  the  reports  of  the  rail- 
way travelling  and  hotels  in  Calabria  were  not  encouraging,  I 
determined  to  make  for  Naples,  or  rather,  by  way  of  extra  cau- 
tion, for  Castellamare.  All  the  way  to  Ancona  the  Apennines 
were  covered  with  snow,  and  much  of  the  plain  also.  Twenty 
miles  north  of  Ancona,  however,  the  weather  changed  to  warm 
summer,  and  we  rejoiced  accordingly.  At  Foggia  I  found  that 
the  one  decent  hotel  that  used  to  exist  was  non-extant,  so  we 
went  on  to  Naples. 

Arriving  at  10.30  very  tired,  got  humbugged  by  a  lying 
Neapolitan,  who  palmed  himself  off  as  the  commissaire  of  the 
Hotel  Bristol,  and  took  us  into  an  omnibus  belonging  to  another 
hotel,  that  of  the  British  being,  as  he  said,  "broke."  After  a 
drive  of  three  miles  or  so  got  to  the  Bristol  and  found  it  shut 
up!  After  a  series  of  advientures  and  a  good  deal  of  strong 
language  on  my  part,  knocked  up  the  people  here,  who  took  us 
in,  though  the  hotel  was  in  reality  shut  up  like  most  of  those  in 
Naples.* 

*  Owing  to  the  cholera  and  consequent  dearth  of  travellers. 


^ 


i884  LETTERS   FROM    ITALY  ,  gi 

As  usual  the  weather  is  "  unusual " — hot  in  the  sun,  cold 
round  the  corner  and  at  night.  Moreover,  I  found  by  yester- 
day's paper  that  the  beastly  Sicilians  won't  give  up  their  ten 
days*  quarantine.  So  all  chance  of  getting  to  Catania  or  Palermo 
is  gone.  I  am  not  sure  whether  we  shall  stay  here  for  some 
time  or  go  to  Rome,  but  at  any  rate  we  shall  be  here  a  week. 

Dohrn  is  away  getting  subsidies  in  Germany  for  his  new 
ship.  We  inspected  the  Aquarium  this  morning.  Eisig  and 
Mayer  are  in  charge.  Madame  is  a  good  deal  altered  in  the 
course  of  the  twelve  years  that  have  elapsed  since  I  saw  her, 
but  says  she  is  much  better  than  she  was. 

As  for  myself,  I  got  very  much  better  when  in  North  Italy  in 
spite  of  the  piercing  cold.  But  the  fatigue  of  the  journey  from 
Ancona  here,  and  the  worry  at  the  end  of  it,  did  me  no  good,  and 
I  have  been  seedy  for  a  day  or  two.    However,  I  am  picking  up. 

I  see  one  has  to  be  very  careful  here.  We  had  a  lovely  drive 
yesterday  out  Pausilippo,  but  the  wife  got  chilled  and  was  shaky 
this  morning.  However,  we  got  very  good  news  of  our  daughter 
this  evening,  and  that  has  set  us  both  up. 

My  blessing  for  to-morrow  will  reach  you  after  date.  Let 
us  hear  how  everything  went  off. 

Your  return  in  May  project  is  really  impracticable  on  ac- 
count of  the  Fishery  Report.  I  cannot  be  so  long  absent  from 
the  Home  Office  whatever  I  might  manage  with  S.K. 

With  our  love  to  Mrs.  Foster  and  you — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  letter,  as  he  says  a  week  later,  was  written  when 
he  "  was  rather  down  in  the  mouth  from  the  wretched 
cold  weather,  and  the  wife  being  laid  up  with  a  bad  cold," 
besides  his  own  ailments. 

I  find  I  have  to  be  very  careful  about  night  air,  but  nothing 
does  me  so  much  good  as  six  or  seven  miles*  walk  between 
breakfast  and  lunch — at  a  good  sharp  pace.  So  I  conclude  that 
there  cannot  be  much  the  matter,  and  yet  I  am  always  on  the 
edge,  so  to  speak,  of  that  infernal  hypochondria. 

We  have  settled  down  here  very  comfortably,  and  I  do  not 
think  we  shall  care  to  go  any  further  south.  Madame  Dohrn 
and  all  the  people  at  the  stazione  are  very  kind,  and  want  to  do 
all  sorts  of  things  for  us.  The  other  day  we  went  in  the  launch 
to  Capri,  intending  next  day  to  go  to  Amalfi.  But  it  threatened 
bad  weather,  so  we  returned  in  the  evening.      The  journey 


92 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 


knocked  us  both  up,  and  we  had  to  get  out  of  another  projected 
excursion  to  Ischia  to-day.  The  fact  is,  I  get  infinitely  tired 
with  talking  to  people  and  can't  stand  any  deviation  from  regular 
and  extremely  lazy  habits.  Fancy  my  being  always  in  bed  by 
ten  o'clock  and  breakfasting  at  nine ! 

On  the  loth,  writing  to  Sir  John  Evans,  who  as  Vice- 
President,  was  acting  in  his  stead  at  the  Royal  Society, 
he  says: — 

In  spite  of  snow  on  the  ground  we  had  three  or  four  days  at 
Ravenna — which  is  the  most  interesting  deadly  lively  sepulchre 
of  a  place  I  was  ever  in  in  my  life.  The  evolution  of  modern 
from  ancient  art  is  all  there  in  a  nutshell.  ... 

I  lead  an  altogether  animal  life,  except  that  I  have  renewed 
my  old  love  for  Italian.  At  present  I  am  rejoicing  in  the  Auto- 
biography of  that  delightful  sinner,  Benvenuto  Cellini.  I  have 
some  notion  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  science  somewhere.  In 
fact  I  am  fitting  myself  for  Neapolitan  nobility. 

To  HIS  Youngest  Daughter 

Hotel  Britannique,  Naples,  Dec,  22,  1884. 

But  we  have  had  no  letters  from  home  for  a  week.  .  .• . 
Moreover,  if  we  don't  hear  to-day  or  to-morrow  we  shall  begin 
to  speculate  on  the  probability  of  an  earthquake  having  swal- 
lowed up  4  M.*  P.  "  with  all  the  young  barbarians  at  play — And 
I  their  sire  trying  to  get  a  Roman  holiday"  (Byron).  For  we 
are  going  to  Rome  to-morrow,  having  had  enough  of  Naples, 
the  general  effect  of  which  city  is  such  as  would  be  produced  by 
the  sight  of  a  beautiful  woman  who  had  not  washed  or  dressed 
her  hair  for  a  month.  Climate,  on  the  whole,  more  variable 
than  that  of  London. 

We  had  a  lovely  drive  three  days  ago  to  Cumae,  a  perfect 
summer's  day;  since  then  sunshine,  heat,  cold  wind,  calms  all 
durcheinander,  with  thunder  and  lightning  last  night  to  complete 
the  variety. 

The  thermometer  and  barometer  are  not  fixed  to  the  walls 
here,  as  they  would  be  jerked  off  by  the  sudden  changes.  At 
first,  it  is  odd  to  see  them  dancing  about  the  hall.  But  you  soon 
get  used  to  it,  and  the  porter  sees  that  they  don't  break  them- 
selves. 

With  love  to  Nettie  and  Harry,  and  hopes  that  the  pudding 
will  be  good — Ever  your  loving  father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


■iiWta 


i885  LETTER   FROM    ROME  qj 

In  January  1885  he  went  to  Rome,  whence  he  writes : — 

Hotel  Victoria,  Via  dei  due  Macelli, 
Rome,  Jan.  8,  1885. 

My  dear  Foster — We  have  been  here  a  fortnight  very  well 
lodged — south  aspect,  fireplace,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  essentials 
except  sunshine.  Of  this  last  there  is  not  much  more  than  in 
England,  and  the  grey  skies  day  after  day  are  worthy  of  our 
native  land.  Sometimes  it  rains  cats  and  dogs  all  day  by  way 
of  a  change — as  on  Christmas  Day — ^but  it  is  not  cold.  "  Quite 
exceptional  weather,"  they  tell  us,  but  that  seems  to  be  the  rule 
everywhere.  We  have  done  a  respectable  amount  of  gallery- 
slaving,  and  I  have  been  amusing  myself  by  picking  up  the 
topography  of  ancient  Rome.  I  was  going  to  say  Pagan  Rome, 
but  the  inappropriateness  of  the  distinction  strikes  me,  papal 
Rome  being  much  more  stupidly  and  childishly  pagan  than  im- 
perial. I  never  saw  a  sadder  sight  than  the  kissing  a  wretched 
bedizened  doll  of  a  Bambino  that  went  on  in  the  Ara  Coeli  on 
Twelfth  day.  Your  puritan  soul  would  have  longed  to  arise 
and  slay.  .  .  . 

As  to  myself,  though  it  is  a  very  unsatisfactory  subject  and 
one  I  am  very  tired  of  bothering  my  friends  about,  I  am  like  the 
farmer  at  the  rent-dinner,  and  don't  find  myself  much  "  for- 
rarder."  That  is  to  say,  I  am  well  for  a  few  days  and  then  all 
adrift,  and  have  to  put  myself  right  by  dosing  with  Clark's  pills, 
which  are  really  invaluable.  They  will  make  me4)elieve  in  those 
pills  I  saw  advertised  in  my  youth,  and  which  among  other 
things  were  warranted  to  cure  "  the  indecision  of  juries."  I 
really  can't  make  out  my  own  condition.  I  walked  seven  or 
eight  miles  this  morning  over  Monte  Mario  and  out  on  the  Cam- 
pagna  without  any  particular  fatigue,  and  yesterday  I  was  as 
miserable  as  an  owl  in  sunshine.  Something  perhaps  must  be 
put  down  to  the  relapse  which  our  poor  girl  had  a  week  ago, 
and  which  became  known  to  us  in  a  terrible  way.  She  had 
apparently  quite  recovered,  and  arrangements  were  made  for 
their  going  abroad,  and  now  everything  is  upset.  I  warned 
her  husband  that  this  was  very  likely,  but  did  not  sufficiently 
take  the  warning  to  myself. 

You  are  taking  a  world  of  trouble  for  me,  and  Donnelly 
writes  I  am  to  do  as  I  like  so  far  as  they  are  concerned.  I  have 
heard  nothing  from  the  Home  Office,  and  I  suppose  it  would  be 
proper  for  me  to  write  if  I  want  any  more  leave.  I  really  hardly 
know  what  to  do.    I  can't  say  I  feel  very  fit  for  the  hurly-burly 


94 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 


of  London  just  now,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  the  wholesomest 
thing  for  me  would  not  be  at  all  costs  to  get  back  to  some  en- 
grossing work.  If  my  poor  girl  were  well,  I  could  perhaps  make 
something  of  the  dolce  far  niente,  but  at  present  one's  mind  runs 
to  her  when  it  is  not  busy  in  something  else. 

I  expect  we  shall  be  here  a  week  or  ten  days  more — at  any 
rate,  this  address  is  safe — afterwards  to  Florence. 

What  am  I  to  do  in  the  Riviera?  Here  and  at  Florence 
there  is  always  some  distraction.  You  see  the  problem  is 
complex. 

My  wife,  who  is  very  lively,  thanks  you  for  your  letter 
(which  I  have  answered)  and  joiYis  with  me  in  love  to  Mrs. 
Foster  and  yourself. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

Writing  on  the  same  day  to  Sir  J.  Evans,  he  proposed 
a  considerable  alteration  in  the  duties  of  the  Assistant 
Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society. 

You  know  that  I  served  a  seven  years'  apprenticeship  as 
Secretary,  and  that  experience  gave  me  very  solid  grounds  for 
the  conviction  that,  with  the  present  arrangements,  a  great  deal 
of  the  time  of  the  Secretaries  is  wasted  over  the  almost  me- 
chanical drudgery  of  proof-reading. 

He  suggests  new  arrangements,  and  proceeds: — 

At  the  same  time  it  would  be  very  important  to  adopt  some 
arrangements  by  which  the  Transactions  papers  can  be  printed 
independently  of  one  another. 

Why  should  not  the  papers  be  paged  independently  and  be 
numbered  for  each  year  ?  Thus — "  Huxley.  Idleness  and  In- 
capacity in  Italy.    Phil.  Trans.  1885.    VI." 

People  grumble  at  the  delay  in  publication,  and  are  quite 
right  in  doing  so,  though  it  is  impossible  under  the  present  sys- 
tem to  be  more  expeditious,  and  it  is  not  every  senior  secretary 
who  would  slave  at  the  work  as  Stokes  does.  .  .  . 

But  it  is  carrying  coals  to  Newcastle  to  talk  of  such  business 
arrangements  as  these  to  you. 

The  only  thing  I  am  strong  about,  is  the  folly  of  going  on 
cutting  blocks  with  our  Secretarial  razors  any  longer. 

I  am  afraid  I  cannot  give  a  very  good  account  of  myself. 

The  truth  of  the  answer  to  Mallock's  question  "  Is  life  worth 
living?" — that  depends  on  the  liver — is  being  strongly  enforced 
upon  me  in  the  hepatic  sense  of  liver,  and  I  must  confess  myself 
fit  for  very  little.    A  week  hence  we  shall  migrate  to  Florence 


iAi*HlHiaH^Wil^B«*MI 


i885  LETTERS   FROM   ROME  95 

and  try  the  effect  of  the  more  bracing  air.  The  Pincio  is  the 
only  part  of  Rome  that  is  fit  to  live  in,  and  unfortunately  the 
Government  does  not  offer  to  build  me  a  house  there. 

However,  I  have  got  a  great  deal  of  enjoyment  out  of  ancient 
Rome — papal  Rome  is  too  brutally  pagan  (and  in  the  worst  pos- 
sible taste  too)  for  me. 

To  HIS  Daughter,  Mrs.  Roller 

Jan,  II,  1885. 

We  have  now  had  nearly  three  weeks  in  Rome.    I  am  sick  of 

churches,  galleries,  and  museums,  and  meanly  make  M go 

and  see  them  and  tell  me  about  them.  As  we  are  one  flesh,  it 
is  just  the  same  as  if  I  had  seen  them. 

Since  the  time  of  Constantine  there  has  been  nothing  but 
tawdry  rubbish  in  the  shape  of  architecture  * — the  hopeless  bad 
taste  of  the  Papists  is  a  source  of  continual  gratification  to  me 
as  a  good  Protestant  (and  something  more).  As  for  the  skies, 
they  are  as  changeable  as  those  of  England — the  only  advantage 
is  the  absence  of  frost  and  snow — (raining  cats  and  dogs  this 
Sunday  morning). 

But  down  to  the  time  of  Constantine,  Rome  is  endlessly  in- 
teresting, and  if  I  were  well  I  should  like  to  spend  some  months 
in  exploring  it.  As  it  is,  I  do  very  little,  though  I  have  con- 
trived to  pick  up  all  I  want  to  know  about  Pagan  Rome  and  the 
Catacombs,  which  last  are  my  especial  weakness. 

My  master  and  physician  is  bothered  a  good  deal  with 
eczema — otherwise  very  lively.  All  the  chief  collections  in 
Rome  are  provided  with  a  pair  of  her  spectacles,  which  she 
leaves  behind.  Several  new  opticians*  shops  are  set  up  on  the 
strength  of  the  purchases  in  this  line  she  is  necessitated  to  make. 

I  want  to  be  back  at  work,  but  I  am  horribly  afraid  I  should 
be  no  good  yet.  We  are  thinking  of  going  to  Florence  at  the  end 
of  this  week  to  see  what  the  drier  and  colder  air  there  will  do. 

With  our  dear  love  to  you  all — we  are  wae  for  a  sight  of 
you. — Ever  your  loving  father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Hotel  Victoria,  Via  dei  due  Macelli, 
Jan.  16,  1885. 

My  dear  Foster — It  seems  to  me  that  I  am  giving  my 
friends  a  word  of  trouble.  .  .  . 

I  have  had  a  bad  week  of  it,  and  the  night  before  last  was 

*  For  his  appreciation  of  the  great  dome  of  the  Pantheon,  see  p.  134. 


96  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

under  the  impression  that  I  was  about  to  succumb  shortly  to  a 
complication  of  maladies,  and  moreover,  that  a  wooden  box  that 
my  wife  had  just  had  made  would  cost  thousands  of  pounds  in 
the  way  of  payment  for  extra  luggage  before  we  reached  home. 
I  do  not  know  which  hypochondriacal  possession  was  the  most 
depressing.  I  can  laugh  at  it  now,  but  I  really  was  extraordi- 
'  narily  weak  and  ill. 

We  had  made  up  our  minds  to  bolt  from  Rome  to  Florence 
at  once,  when  I  suddenly  got  better,  and  to-day  am  all  right.  So 
as  we  hear  of  snow  at  Florence  we  shall  stop  where  we  are.  It 
has  been  raining  cats  and  dogs  here,  and  the  Tiber  rose  40  feet 
and  inundated  the  low  grounds.  But  "cantabit  elevatus";  it 
can't  touch  us,  and  at  any  rate  the  streets  are  washed  clean. 

The  climate  is  mild  here.  We  have  a  capital  room  and  all 
the  sunshine  that  is  to  be  had,  plus  a  good  fire  when  needful, 
and  at  worst  one  can  always  get  a  breezy  walk  on  the  Pincio 
hard  by. 

However,  about  the  leave.  Am  I  to  do  anything  or  nothing  ? 
I  am  dying  to  get  back  to  steady  occupation  and  English  food, 
and  the  sort  of  regimen  one  can  maintain  in  one's  own  house. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  stand  in  fear  of  the  bitter  cold  of  February 
and  early  March,  and  still  more  of  the  thousand  and  one  worries 
of  London  outside  one's  work.  So  I  suppose  it  will  be  better 
if  I  keep  away  till  Easter,  or  at  any  rate  to  the  end  of  March. 
But  I  must  hear  something  definite  from  the  H.O.  I  have 
written  to  Donnelly  to  the  same  effect.  My  poor  Marian's  re- 
lapse did  not  do  us  any  good,  for  all  that  I  expected  it.  How- 
ever, the  last  accounts  are  very  favourable. 

I  wrote  to  Evans  the  other  day  about  a  re-arrangement  of 
the  duties  of  the  Secretary  and  Assistant  Secretary.  I  thought 
it  was  better  to  write  to  him  than  to  you  on  that  subject,  and  I 
begged  him  to  discuss  the  matter  with  the  officers.  It  is  quite 
absurd  that  Stokes  and  you  should  waste  your  time  in  press 
drudgery. 

We  are  very  prudent  here,^  and  the  climate  suits  us  both, 
especially  my  wife,  who  is  so  vigorous  that  I  depute  her  to  go 
and  see  the  Palazzi,  and  tell  me  all  about  them  when  she  comes 
back.  Old  Rome  is  endlessly  interesting  to  me,  and  I  can  always 
potter  about  and  find  occupation.  I  think  I  shall  turn  antiquary 
— it's  just  the  occupation  for  a  decayed  naturalist,  though  you 
need  not  tell  the  Treasurer  I  say  so. 

With  our  love  to  Mrs.  Foster  and  yourself — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  H. 


■toW^ilaWi     !■'        1    f    '  I       ^       "*■■ 


i885  LETTERS  FROM   ROME  97 

Hotel  Victoria,  Rome,  Via  dei  due  Macelli, 

Jan.  18,  1885. 

My  dear  Donnelly  —  Official  sentence  of  exile  for  two 
months  more  (up  to  May  12)  arrived  yesterday.  So  if  my  lords 
will  be  so  kind  as  to  concur  I  shall  be  able  to  disport  myself  with 
a  clear  conscience.  I  hope  their  lordships  won't  think  that  I 
am  taking  things  too  easy  in  not  making  a  regular  application, 
and  I  will  do  so  if  you  think  it  better.  But  if  it  had  rested  with 
me  I  think  I  should  have  got  back  in  February  and  taken  my 
chance.  That  energetic  woman  that  owns  me,  and  Michael 
Foster,  however,  have  taken  the  game  out  of  my  hands,  and  I 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  submit. 

On  the  whole  I  feel  it  is  wise.  I  shall  have  more  chance  if  I 
escape  not  only  the  cold  but  the  bother  of  London  for  a  couple 
of  months  more. 

I  was  very  bad  a  week  ago,  but  I  have  taken  to  dosing  myself 
with  quinine,  and  either  that  or  something  else  has  given  me  a 
spurt  for  the  last  two  days,  so  that  I  have  been  more  myself  than 
any  time  since  I  left,  and  begin  to  think  that  there  is  life  in  the  old 
dog  yet.  If  one  could  only  have  some  fine  weather !  To-day  there 
is  the  first  real  sunshine  we  have  been  favoured  with  for  a  week. 

We  are  just  back  from  a  great  function  at  St.  Peter's.  It  is 
the  festa  of  St.  Peter's  chair,  and  the  ex-dragoon  Cardinal  How- 
ard has  been  fugleman  in  the  devout  adorations  addressed  to 
that  venerable  article  of  furniture,  which,  as  you  ought  to  know, 
but  probably  don't,  is  inclosed  in  a  bronze  double  and  perched  up 
in  a  shrine  of  the  worst  possible  taste  in  the  Tribuna  of  St. 
Peter's.  The  display  of  man-millinery  and  lace  was  enough  to 
fill  the  lightest-minded  woman  with  envy,  and  a  general  concert 
— some  of  the  music  very  good — prevented  us  from  feeling  dull, 
while  the  ci-devant  guardsman — big,  burly,  and  bullet-headed 
— ^made  God  and  then  eat  him.*  I  must  have  a  strong  strain  of 
Puritan  blood  in  me  somewhere,  for  I  am  possessed  with  a  desire 
to  arise  and  slay  the  whole  brood  of  idolators  whenever  I  assist 
at  one  of  these  ceremonies.  You  will  observe  that  I  am  decid- 
edly better,  and  have  a  capacity  for  a  good  hatred  still. 

The  last  news  about  Gordon  is  delightful.  The  chances  are 
he  will  rescue  Wolseley  yet. 

With  our  love — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  A  reminiscence  of  Browning  in  "  The  Bishop  Orders  his  Tomb  "  : — 

And  then  how  I  shall  lie  through  centuries, 
And  hear  the  blessed  mutter  of  the  mass, 
And  see  God  made  and  eaten  all  day  long. 
43 


gS  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 


To  HIS  Eldest  Son 

Rome, /fl».  20,  1885. 

I  need  hardly  tell  you  that  I  find  Rome  wonderfully  interest- 
ing, and  the  attraction  increases  the  longer  one  stays.  I  am 
obliged  to  take  care  of  myself  and  do  but  little  in  the  way  of 
sight-seeing,  but  by  directing  one's  attention  to  particular  ob- 
jects one  can  learn  a  great  deal  without  much  trouble.  I  begin 
to  understand  Old  Rome  pretty  well,  and  I  am  quite  learned  in 
the  Catacombs,  which  suit  me,  as  a  kind  of  Christian  fossils 
out  of  which  one  can  reconstruct  the  body  of  the  primitive 
Church.  She  was  a  simple  maiden  enough  and  vastly  more 
attractive  than  the  bedizened  old  harridan  of  the  modern  Papacy, 
so  smothered  under  the  old  clothes  of  Paganism  which  she  has 
been  appropriating  for  the  last  fifteen  centuries  that  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  would  not  know  her  if  he  met  her. 

I  have  been  to  several  great  papistical  functions — among 
others  to  the  festa  of  the  Cathedra  Petri  in  St.  Peter's  last  Sun- 
day, and  I  confess  I  am  unable  to  understand  how  grown  men 
can  lend  themselves  to  such  elaborate  tomfooleries — nothing  but 
mere  fetish  worship— in  forms  of  execrably  bad  taste,  devised, 
one  would  think,  by  a  college  of  ecclesiastical  man-milliners  for 
the  delectation  of  school-girls.  It  is  curious  to  notice  that  intel- 
lectual and  aesthetic  degradation  go  hand  in  hand.  Yoii  have 
only  to  go  from  the  Pantheon  to  St.  Peter's  to  understand  the 
great  abyss  which  lies  between  the  Roman  of  paganism  and  the 
Roman  of  the  papacy.  I  have  seen  nothing  grander  than 
Agrippa's  work — the  popes  have  stripped  it  to  adorn  their  own 
petrified  lies,  but  in  its  nakedness  it  has  a  dignity  with  which 
there  is  nothing  to  compare  in  the  ill-proportioned,  worse  deco- 
rated tawdry  stone  mountain  on  the  Vatican. 

The  best  thing,  from  an  aesthetic  point  of  view,  that  could  be 
done'  with  Rome  would  be  to  destroy  everything  except  St.  Paolo 
fuor  le  Mure,  of  later  date  than  the  fourth  century. 

But  you  will  have  had  enough  of  my  scrawl,  and  your 
mother  wants  to  add  something.  She  is  in  great  force,  and  is 
gone  prospecting  to  some  Palazzo  or  other  to  tell  me  if  it  is 
worth  seeing. — Ever  your  loving  father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Hotel  Victoria,  Rome,  Via  dei  due  Macelli, 

/an.  25,  1885. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Best  thanks  for  the  telegram  which 
arrived  the  day  before  yesterday  and  set  my  mind  at  ease. 


.,■  -■ >■  ,... 


i885  LETTERS  FROM   ROME 


99 


I  have  been  screwing  up  the  old  machine  which  I  inhabit, 
first  with  quinine  and  now  with  a  form  of  strychnia  (which 
Clark  told  me  to  take)  for  the  last  week,  and  I  have  improved 
a  good  deal  whether  post  hoc  or  propter  hoc  in  the  present  un- 
certainty of  medical  science  I  decline  to  give  any  opinion. 

The  weather  is  very  cold  for  Rome — ^ice  an  eighth  of  an  inch 
thick  in  the  Ludovisi  Garden  the  other  morning,  and  every  night 
it  freezes,  but  mostly  fine  sunshine  in  the  day.  (This  is  a  re- 
markable sentence  in  point  of  grammar,  but  never  mind.)  The 
day  before  yesterday  we  came  out  on  the  Campagna,  and  it  then 
was  as  fresh  and  bracing  a  breeze  as  you  could  get  in  North- 
umberland. 

We  are  very  comfortable  and  quiet  here,  and  I  hold  on — till  it 
gets  warmer.  I  am  told  that  Florence  is  detestable  at  present. 
As  for  London,  our  accounts  make  us  shiver  and  cough. 

News  about  the  dynamiting  gentry  just  arrived.  A  little 
more  mischief  and  there  will  be  an  Irish  massacre  in  some  of 
our  great  towns.  If  an  Irish  Parnellite  member  were  to  be 
shot  for  every  explosion  I  believe  the  thing  would  soon  stop. 
It  would  be  quite  just,  as  they  are  practically  accessories. 

I  think would  do  it  if  he  were  Prime  Minister.  Noth- 
ing like  a  thorough  Radical  for  arbitrary  acts  of  power ! 

I  must  be  getting  better,  as  my  disgust  at  science  has  ceased, 
and  I  have  begun  to  potter  about  Roman  geology  and  prehistoric 
work.  You  may  be  glad  to  learn  that  there  is  no  evidence  that 
the  prehistoric  Romans  had  Roman  noses.  But  as  I  cannot  find 
any  particular  prevalence  of  [them]  among  the  modern — or 
ancient  except  for  Csesar — Romani,  the  fact  is  not  so  interesting 
as  it  might  appear,  and  I  would  not  advise  you  to  tell of  it. 

Behold  a  Goak — feeble,  but  promising  of  better  things. 

My  wife  unites  with  me  with  love  to  Mrs.  Donnelly  and 
yourself. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  letter  refers  to  the  fourth  edition  of  the 
Lessons  in  Elementary  Physiology ,  in  the  preparation  of  which 
Dr.  Foster  had  been  helping  during  the  summer: — 

Hotel  Victoria,  Rome,  Via  dei  due  Macelli, 

Fed.  I,  1885. 

My  dear  Foster — Anything  more  disgraceful  than  the  way 
in  which  I  have  left  your  letter  of  more  than  a  fortnight  ago 
unanswered,  I  don't  know.  I  thought  the  wife  had  written  about 
the  leave  (and  she  thought  I  had,  as  she  has  told  you)  but  I 


lOO  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

knew  I  had  not  answered  the  questions  about  the  title,  still  less 
considered  the  awful  incubus  (  X  10,000  dinners  by  hepatic  deep 
objection)  of  the  preface. 

There  is  such  a  thing  as  justice  in  this  world — not  much  of 
it,  but  still  some — and  it  is  partly  on  that  ground  and  partly 
because  I  want  you,  in  view  of  future  eventualities,  to  have  a 
copyright  in  the  book,  that  I  proposed  we  should  join  our  names. 

Of  course,  if  you  would  really  rather  not,  for  any  good 
reason  you  may  have,  I  have  nothing  further  to  say.  But  I 
don't  think  that  the  sentimental  reason  is  a  good  one,  and  unless 
you  have  a  better,  I  wish  you  would  let  the  original  proposal 
stand. 

However,  having  stated  the  case  afresh  I  leave  it  for  you 
to  say  yes  or  no,  and  shall  abide  by  your  decision  without  further 
discussion. 

As  to  the  Preface.  If  I  am  to  write  it,  please  send  me  the 
old  Preface.  I  think  the  book  was  published  in  1864,  or  was  it 
1866  ?  *  and  it  ought  to  be  come  of  age  or  nearly  so. 

You  might  send  me  the  histological  chapter,  not  that  I  am 
going  to  alter  anything,  but  I  should  like  to  see  how  it  looks.  I 
will  knock  the  preface  off  at  once,  as  soon  as  I  hear  from  you. 

The  fact  is,  I  have  been  much  better  in  the  course  of  the 
last  few  days.  The  weather  has  been  very  sunshiny  but  cool 
and  bracing,  and  I  have  taken  to  quinine.  Tried  Clark's  strych- 
nine, but  it  did  not  answer  so  well. 

I  am  in  hopes  that  I  have  taken  a  turn  for  the  better,  and 
that  there  may  yet  be  the  making  of  something  better  than  a 
growling  hypochondriacal  old  invalid  about  me.  But  I  am  most 
sincerely  glad  that  I  am  not  obliged  to  be  back  10  days  hence 
— there  is  not  much  capital  accumulated  yet. 

I  find  that  the  Italians  have  been  doing  an  immense  deal  in 
prehistoric  archaeology  of  late  years,  and  far  more  valuable  work 
than  I  imagined.  But  it  is  very  difficult  to  get  at,  and  as 
Loescher's  head  man  told  me.  the  other  day  when  I  asked  for  an 
Italian  book  published  in  Rome,  "  Well,  you  see  it  is  so  difficult 
to  get  Roman  books  in  Rome." 

I  am  ashamed  to  be  here  two  months  without  paying  my 
respects  to  the  Lincei,  and  I  am  going  to-day.  The  unaccount- 
able creatures  meet  at  i  o'clock — lunch  time ! 

Best  love  from  my  wife  and  self  to  Mrs.  Foster  and  yourself. 
— Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  In  1866. 


i885  LETTERS   FROM   ROME  jqi 

Rome,  Feb,  14,  1885. 

My  dear  Foster — VoxUl  the  preface — a  work  of  great 
labour !  and  which  you  may  polish  and  alter  as  you  like,  all  hut 
the  last  paragraph.  You  see  I  have  caved  in.  I  like  your  asking 
to  have  your  own  way  "  for  once."  My  wife  takes  the  same 
line,  does  whatever  she  pleases,  and  then  declares  I  leave  her  no 
initiative. 

If  I  talk  of  public  affairs,  I  shall  simply  fall  a-blaspheming. 
I  see  the  Times  holds  out  about  Gordon,  and  does  not  believe  he 
is  killed.  Poor  fellow  !  I  wish  I  could  believe  that  his  own  con- 
viction (as  he  told  me)  is  true,  and  that  death  only  means  a 
larger  government  for  him  to  administer.  Anyhow,  it  is  better 
to  wind  up  that  way  than  to  go  growling  out  one's  existence  as 
a  ventose  hypochondriac,  dependent  upon  the  condition  of  a  few 
square  inches  of  mucous  membrane  for  one's  heaven  or  hell. 

As  to  private  affairs,  I  think  I  am  getting  solidly,  but  very 
slowly,  better.  In  fact,  I  can't  say  there  is  much  the  matter 
with  me,  except  that  I  am  weaker  than  I  ought  to  be,  and  that 

a  sort  of  weary  indolence  hangs  about  me  like  a  fog.    M is 

wonderfully  better,  and  her  husband  has  taken  a  house  for  them 
at  Norwood.  If  I  could  be  rejoiced  at  anything,  I  should  be  at 
that;  but  it  seems  to  me  as  if  since  that  awful  journey  when 
I  first  left  England,  "  the  springs  was  broke,"  as  that  vagabond 
tout  said  at  Naples. 

It  has  turned  very  cold  here,  and  we  are  uncertain  when  to 
leave  for  Florence,  but  probably  nekt  week.  The  Carnival  is  the 
most  entirely  childish  bosh  I  have  ever  met  with  among  grown 
people.  Want  to  finish  this  now  for  post,  but  will  write  again 
speedily.  Moseley's  proposition  is  entirely  to  my  mind,  and  I 
have  often  talked  of  it.  The  R.S.  rooms  ought  to  be  house-of- 
call  and  quasi-club  for  all  F.R.S.  in  London. 

Wife  is  bonny,  barring  a  cold.  It  is  as  much  as  I  can  do  to 
prevent  her  sporting  a  mask  and  domino ! 

With  best  love — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

Hotel  Victoria,  Rome,  Via  dei  due  Macelli, 

Fed.  16,  1885. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  have  had  it  on  my  mind  to  write  to 
you  for  the  last  week — ever  since  the  hideous  news  about  Gor- 
don reached  us.  But  partly  from  a  faint  hope  that  his  wonderful 
fortune  might  yet  have  stood  him  in  good  stead,  and  partly 
because  there  is  no  great  satisfaction  in  howling  with  rage,  I 
have  abstained. 


I02  LIFE   OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

Poor  fellow !  I  wonder  if  he  has  entered  upon  the  "  larger 
sphere  of  action  "  which  he  told  me  was  reserved  for  him  in  case 
of  such  a  trifling  accident  as  death.  Of  all  the  people  whom  I 
have  met  with  in  my  life,  he  and  Darwin  are  the  two  in  whom 
I  have  found  something  bigger  than  ordinary  humanity — an 
unequalled  simplicity  and  directness  of  purpose — a  sublime  un- 
selfishness. 

Horrible  as  it  is  to  us,  I  imagine  that  the  manner  of  his 
death  was  not  unwelcome  to  himself.  Better  wear  out  than 
rust  out,  and  better  break  than  wear  out.  The  pity  is  that  he 
could  not  know  the  feeling  of  his  countrymen  about  him. 

I  shall  be  curious  to  see  what  defence  the  superingenious 
Premier  has  to  offer  for  himself  in  Parliament.  I  suppose,  as 
usual,  the  question  will  drift  into  a  brutal  party  fight,  when  the 
furious  imbecility  of  the  Tories  will  lead  them  to  spoil  their 
case.  That  is  where  we  are;  on  the  one  side,  timid  imbecility 
"  waiting  for  instructions  from  the  constituencies " ;  furious 
imbecility  on  the  other,  looking  out  for  party  advantage.  Oh ! 
for  a  few  months  of  William  Pitt. 

I  see  you  think  there  may  be  some  hope  that  Gordon  has 
escaped  yet.  I  am  afraid  the  last  telegram  from  Wolseley  was 
decisive.  We  have  been  watching  the  news  with  the  greatest 
anxiety,  and  it  has  seemed  only  to  get  blacker  and  blacker. 

[Touching  a  determined  effort  to  alter  the  management  of 
certain  Technical  Education  business.] 

I  trust  he  may  succeed,  and  that  the  unfitness  of  these  people 
to  be  trusted  with  anything  may  be  demonstrated.  I  regret  I 
am  not  able  to  help  in  the  good  work.  Get  the  thing  out  of 
their  hands  as  fast  as  possible.  The  prospect  of  being  revenged 
for  all  the  beastly  dinners  I  sat  out  and  all  the  weary  discussions 
I  attended  to  on  purpose,  really  puts  a  little  life  into  me. 
Apropos  of  that,  I  am  better  in  various  ways,  but  curiously  weak 
and  washed  out;  and  I  am  afraid  that  not  even  the  prospect  of 
a  fight  would  screw  me  up  for  long.  I  don^t  understand  it,  un- 
less I  have  some  organic  disease  of  which  nobody  can  find  any 
trace  (and  in  which  I  do  not  believe  myself),  or  unless  the  ter- 
rible trouble  we  have  had  has  accelerated  the  advent  of  old  age. 
I  rather  suspect  that  the  last  speculation  is  nearest  the  truth. 
You  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  my  poor  girl  is  wonderfully  better, 
and,  indeed,  to  all  appearance  quite  well.  They  are  living 
quietly  at  Norwood. 

I  shall  be  back  certainly  by  the  I2th  April,  probably  before. 


i885  LETTERS   FROM   SIENA  103 

We  have  found  very  good  quarters  here,  and  have  waited  for 
the  weather  to  get  warmer  before  moving;  but  at  last  we  have 
made  up  our  minds  to  begin  nomadising  again  next  Friday.  We 
go  to  Florence,  taking  Siena,  and  probably  Pisa,  on  our  way, 
and  reaching  Florence  some  time  next  week.  Address — Hotel 
Milano,  Via  Cerretani. 

For  the  last  week  the  Carnival  has  been  going  on.  It  strikes 
me  as  the  most  elaborate  and  dreariest  tomfoolery  I  have  ever 
seen,  but  I  doubt  if  I  am  in  the  humour  to  judge  it  fairly.  It  is 
only  just  to  say  that  it  entertains  my  vigorous  wife  immensely. 
I  have  been  expecting  to  see  her  in  mask  and  domino,  but  hap- 
pily this  is  the  last  day,  and  there  is  no  sign  of  any  yet.  I  have 
never  seen  any  one  so  much  benefited  by  rest  and  change  as  she 
is,  and  that  is  a  good  thing  for  both  of  us. 

After  Florence  we  shall  probably  make  our  way  to  Venice, 
and  come  home  by  the  Lago  di  Garda  and  Germany.  But  I  will 
let  you  know  when  our  plans  are  settled. 

With  best  love  from  we  two  to  you  two — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


To  HIS  Youngest  Daughter 

Siena,  Feb.  23,  1885. 

Dearest  Ethel — The  cutting  you  sent  me  contains  one  of 
the  numerous  "  goaks  "  of  a  Yankee  performing  donkey  who  is 
allowed  to  disport  himself  in  one  of  the  New  York  papers.  I 
confess  it  is  difficult  to  see  the  point  of  the  joke,  but  there  is  one 
if  you  look  close.  I  don't  think  you  need  trouble  to  enlighten 
the  simple  inquirer.  He  probably  only  wanted  the  indignant 
autograph  which  he  won't  get. 

The  Parker  Museum  must  take  care  of  itself.  The  public 
ought  to  support  it,  not  the  men  of  science. 

As  a  grandfather,  I  am  ashamed  of  my  friends  who  are  of 
the  same  standing ;  but  I  think  they  would  take  it  as  a  liberty  if, 
in  accordance  with  your  wish,  I  were  to  write  to  expostulate. 

After  your  mother  had  exhausted  the  joys  of  the  Carnival, 
she  permitted  me  to  leave  Rome  for  this  place,  where  we  arrived 
last  Friday  evening.  My  impression  is  that  if  we  had  stayed 
in  Rome  much  longer  we  should  never  have  left.  There  is  some- 
thing idle  and  afternoony  about  the  air  which  whittles  away 
one's  resolution. 

The  change  here  is  wonderfully  to  the  good.  We  are 
perched  more  than  a  thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  looking  over 


104  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

the  Tuscan  hills  for  twenty  or  thirty  miles  every  way.  It  is 
warm  enough  to  sit  with  the  window  wide  open  and  yet  the  air 
is  purer  and  more  bracing  than  in  any  place  we  have  visited. 
Moreover,  the  hotel  (Grande  Albergo)  is  very  comfortable. 

Then  there  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  cathedrals  to  be 
seen  in  all  North  Italy — free  from  all  the  gaudy  finery  and 
atrocious  bad  taste  which  have  afflicted  me  all  over  South  Italy. 
The  town  is  the  quaintest  place  imaginable — built  of  narrow- 
streets  on  several  steep  hills  to  start  with,  and  then  apparently 
stirred  up  with  a  poker  to  prevent  monotony  of  effect. 

Moreover,  there  is  Catherine  of  Siena,  of  whom  I  am  read- 
ing a  delightful  Catholic  life  by  an  Italian  father  of  the  Oratory. 
She  died  500  years  ago,  but  she  was  one  of  twenty-five  children, 
and  I  think  some  of  them  must  have  settled  in  Kent  and  allied 
themselves  with  the  Heathorns.  Otherwise,  I  don't  see  why  her 
method  of  writing  to  the  Pope  should  have  been  so  much  like 
the  way  my  daughters  (especially  the  youngest)  write  to  their 
holy  father. 

I  wish  she  had  not  had  the  stigmata — I  am  afraid  there  must 
have  been  a  leetle  humbug  about  the  business — otherwise  she 
was  a  very  remarkable  person,  and  you  need  not  be  ashamed 
of  the  relationship. 

I  suppose  we  shall  get  to  Florence  some  time  this  week ;  the 
address  was  sent  to  you  before  we  left  Rome — Hotel  Milano, 
Via  Cerretti.  But  I  am  loth  to  leave  this  lovely  air  in  which, 
I  do  believe,  I  am  going  to  pick  up  at  last.  The  misfortune  is 
that  we  did  not  intend  to  stay  here  more  than  three  days,  and  so 
had  letters  sent  to  Florence.  Everybody  told  us  it  would  be  very 
cold,  and,  as  usual,  everybody  told  taradiddles. 

M.  unites  in  fondest  love  to  you  all.  —  Ever  your  loving 
father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  HIS  Son 

Siena,  Feb.  25,  1885. 
...  If  you  had  taken  to  physical  science  it  would  have  been 
delightful  to  me  for  us  to  have  worked  together,  and  I  am  half 
inclined  to  take  to  history  that  I  may  earn  that  pleasure.  I  could 
give  you  some  capital  wrinkles  about  the  physical  geography 
and  prehistoric  history  (excuse  bull)  of  Italy  for  a  Roman  His- 
tory primer !  Joking  apart,  I  believe  that  history  might  be,  and 
ought  to  be,  taught  in  a  new  fashion  so  as  to  make  the  meaning 
of  it  as  a  process  of  evolution — intelligible  to  the  young.  The 
Italians  have  been  doing  wonders  in  the  last  twenty  years  in 


1885  LETTERS  FROM  FLORENCE  1*05 

prehistoric  archaeology,  and  I  have  been  greatly  interested  in 
acquainting  myself  with  the  general  results  of  their  work. 

We  moved  here  last  Friday,  and  only  regret  that  the  reports 
of  the  weather  prevented  us  from  coming  sooner.  More  than 
1000  ft.  above  the  sea,  in  the  midst  of  a  beautiful  hill  country, 
and  with  the  clearest  and  purest  air  we  have  met  with  in  Italy, 
Siena  is  perfectly  charming.  The  window  is  wide  open  and  I 
look  out  upon  a  vast  panorama,  something  like  that  of  the 
Surrey  hills,  only  on  a  larger  scale — "  Raw  Siena,"  "  Burnt 
Siena,"  in  the  foreground,  where  the  colour  of  the  soil  is  not 
hidden  by  the  sage  green  olive  foliage,  purple  mountains  in  the 
distance. 

The  old  town  itself  is  a  marvel  of  picturesque  crookedness, 
and  the  cathedral  a  marvel.  M.  and  I  have  been  devoting  our- 
selves this  morning  to  St.  Catarina  and  Sodoma^s  pictures. 

I  am  reading  a  very  interesting  life  of  her  by  Capecelatro, 
and,  if  my  liver  continues  out  of  order,  may  yet  turn  Dominican. 

However,  the  place  seems  to  be  doing  me  good,  and  I  may 
yet,  like  another  person,  decline  to  be  a  monk. 

To  HIS  Daughter,  Mrs.  Roller 

March  8. 
The  great  merit  of  Rome  is  that  you  have  never  seen  the  end 
of  it.  M.  and  I  have  not  worked  very  hard  at  our  galleries  and 
churches,  but  I  have  got  so  far  as  a  commencing  dislike  for  the 
fine  arts  generally.  Perhaps  after  a  week  or  two  I  shall  take  to 
science  out  of  sheer  weariness. 

Hotel  de  Milano,  Florence,  March  12,  1885. 

My  dear  Foster — My  wife  and  I  send  you  our  hearty  good 
wishes  (antedated  by  four  days).  I  am  not  sure  we  ought  not 
to  offer  our  best  thanks  to  your  mother  for  providing  us  with 
as  staunch  a  friend  as  people  ever  were  blessed  with.  It  is 
possible  that  she  did  not  consider  that  point  nine  and  forty 
years  ago ;  but  we  are  just  as  grateful  as  if  she  had  gone  through 
it  all  on  our  own  account. 

We  start  on  our  way  homeward  to-morrow  or  next  day,  by 
Bologna  to  Venice,  and  then  to  England  by  the  way  we  came — 
taking  it  easy.  The  Brenner  is  a  long  way  round  and  I  hear 
very  cold.  I  think  we  may  stay  a  few  days  at  Lugano,  which  I 
liked  very  much  when  there  before.  Florence  is  very  charming, 
but  there  is  not  much  to  be  said  for  the  climate.  My  wife  has 
been  bothered  with  sore  throat,  to  which  she  is  especially  liable, 


I06  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

ever  since  we  have  been  here.  Old  residents  console  her  with 
the  remark  that  Florentine  sore  throat  is  a  regular  thing  in  the 
spring.  The  alternations  of  heat  and  cold  are  detestable.  So  we 
stand  thus — Naples,  bad  for  both — Rome,  good  for  her,  bad  for 
me — Florence,  bad  for  her,  baddish  for  me.  Venice  has  to  be 
tried,  but  stinks  and  mosquitoes  are  sure  to  render  it  impos- 
sible as  soon  as  the  weather  is  warm.  Siena  is  the  only  place 
that  suited  both  of  us,  and  I  don't  think  that  would  exactly 
answer  to  live  in.  Nothing  like  foreign  travel  for  making  one 
content  with  home. 

I  shall  have  to  find  a  country  lot  suited  to  my  fortunes  when 
I  am  paid  off.  Couldn't  you  let  us  have  your  gardener's  cottage  ? 
My  wife  understands  poultry  and  I  shall  probably  have  sufficient 
strength  to  open  the  gate  and  touch  my  hat  to  the  Dons  as  they 
drive  up.  I  am  afraid  E.  is  not  steady  enough  for  waiting-maid 
or  I  would  offer  her  services. 

...  I  am  rejoiced  to  hear  that  the  lessons  and  the  questions 
are  launched.  They  loom  large  to  me  as  gigantic  undertakings, 
in  which  a  dim  and  speculative  memory  suggests  I  once  took 
part,  but  probably  it  is  a  solar  myth,  and  I  am  too  sluggish  to 
feel  much  compunction  for  the  extra  trouble  you  have  had. 

Perhaps  I  shall  revive  when  my  foot  is  on  my  native  heath 
in  the  shady  groves  of  the  Evangelist.* 

My  wife  is  out  photograph  hunting — ^nothing  diminishes  her 
activity— otherwise  she  would  join  in  love  and  good  wishes  to 
Mrs.  Foster  and  yourself. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  two  worst  and  most  depressing  periods  of  this  vain 
pilgrimage  in  pursuit  of  health,  were  the  stay  at  Rome  and 
at  Florence.  At  the  latter  town  he  was  inexpressibly  ill 
and  weak ;  but  his  daily  life  was  brightened  by  the  sympathy 
and  active  kindness  of  Sir  Spencer  Walpole,  who  would 
take  him  out  for  short  walks,  talking  as  little  as  possible, 
and  shield  him  from  the  well-meant  but  tactless  attentions 
of  visitors  who  would  try  to  "  rouse  him  and  do  him  good  " 
by  long  talks  on  scientific  questions. 

His  physical  condition,  indeed,  was  little  improved. 

As  for  my  unsatisfactory  carcase  (he  writes  on  March  6, 
to  Sir  J.  Donnelly),  there  seems  nothing  the  matter  with  it  now 
except  that  the  brute  objects  to  work.     I  eat  well,  drink  well, 

*  St.  John's  Wood. 


i885  LETTERS  FROM   FLORENCE  107 

sleep  well,  and  have  no  earthly  ache,  pain  or  discomfort.  I  can 
walk  for  a  couple  of  hours  or  more  without  fatigue.  But  half 
an  hour's  talking  wearies  me  inexpressibly,  and  "  saying  a  few 
words,"  would  finish  me  for  the  day.  For  all  that,  I  do  not  mean 
to  confess  myself  finally  beaten  till  I  have  had  another  try. 

That  is  to  say,  he  was  still  bent  upon  delivering  his 
regular  course  of  lectures  at  South  Kensington  as  soon  as 
he  returned,  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  his  wife  and 
his  friends. 

In  the  same  letter  he  contrasts  Florence  with  Siena  and 
its  "  fresh,  elastic  air,"  its  "  lovely  country  that  reminds  one 
of  a  magnified  version  of  the  Surrey  weald."  The  Floren- 
tine climate  was  trying.*  "  And  then  there  is  the  awful 
burden  of  those  miles  of  *  treasures  of  art.'  "  He  had  been 
to  the  Uffizii ;  "  and  there  is  the  Pitti  staring  me  in  the  face 
like  drear  fate.  Why  can't  I  have  the  moral  courage  to 
come  back  and  say  I  haven't  seen  it  ?  I  should  be  the  most 
distinguished  of  men." 

There  is  another  reference  to  Gordon : — 

What  an  awful  muddle  you  are  all  in  in  the  bright  little, 
tight  little  island.  I  hate  the  sight  of  the  English  papers.  The 
only  good  thing  that  has  met  my  eye  lately  is  a  proposal  to  raise 
a  memorial  to  Gordon.  I  want  to  join  in  whatever  is  done,  and 
unless  it  will  be  time  enough  when  I  return,  I  shall  be  glad  if 
you  will  put  me  down  for  £5  to  whatever  is  the  right  scheme. 

The  following  to  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Roller,  describes  the 
stay  in  Florence. 

Hotel  de  Milano,  Florence,  March  7,  1885. 
We  have  been  here  more  than  a  week  and  have  discovered 
two  things,  first  that  the  wonderful  "  art  treasures,'*  of  which 


*  A  week  later  he  writes  to  Sir  J.  Evans — "  I  begin  to  look  forward 
with  great  satisfaction  to  the  equability  of  English  weather — to  that 
dear  little  island  where  doors  and  windows  shut  close — where  fires 
warm  without  suffocating — where  the  chief  business  of  the  population 
in  the  streets  is  something  else  than  expectoration — and  where  I  shall 
never  see  fowl  with  salad  again. 

"You  perceive  I  am  getting  better  by  this  prolonged  growl.  .  .  . 
But  half  an  hour's  talking  knocks  me  up,  and  I  am  such  an  effete 
creature  that  I  think  of  writing  myself  p.  R.  S.  with  a  small  p." 


I08  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

all  the  world  has  heard,  are  a  sore  burden  to  the  conscience  if 
you  don't  go  to  see  them,  and  an  aXvful  trial  to  the  back  and 
legs  if  you  do;  and  thirdly,  that  the  climate  is  productive  of  a 
peculiar  kind  of  relaxed  throat.  M/s  throat  discovered  it,  but 
on  enquiry,  it  proved  to  be  a  law  of  nature,  at  least,  so  the  oldest 
inhabitants  say.    We  called  on  them  to-day. 

But  it  is  a  lovely  place  for  all  that,  far  better  than  Rome  as  a 
place  to  live  in,  and  full  of  interesting  things.  We  had  a  morn- 
ing at  the  Uffizii  the  other  day,  and  came  back  with  minds  en- 
larged and  backs  broken.  To-morrow  we  contemplate  attacking 
the  Pitti,  and  doubt  not  the  result  will  be  similar.  By  the  end 
of  the  week  our  minds  will  probably  [be]  so  large,  and  the  small 
of  the  back  so  small  that  we  should  probably  break  if  we  stayed 
any  longer,  so  think  it  prudent  to  be  off  to  Venice.  Which  Fri- 
day is  the  day  we  go,  reaching  Venice  Saturday  or  Sunday. 
Pension  Suisse,  Canal  Grande,  as  before.  And  mind  we  have 
letters  waiting  for  us  there,  or  your  affectionate  Pater  will 
emulate  the  historical  "  cocky." 

I  got  much  better  at  Siena,  probably  the  result  of  the  medici- 
nal nature  of  the  city,  the  name  of  which,  as  a  well-instructed 
girl  like  you  knows,  is  derived  from  the  senna,  which  grows  wild 
there,  and  gives  the  soil  its  peculiar  pigmentary  character. 

But  unfortunately  I  forgot  to  bring  any  with  me,  and  the 
effect  went  off  during  the  first  few  days  of  our  residence  here, 
when  I  was,  as  the  Italians  say,  "  molto  basso  nel  bocca."  How- 
ever I  am  picking  up  again  now,  and  if  people  wouldn't  call 
upon  us,  I  feel  there  might  be  a  chance  for  me. 

I  except  from  that  remark  altogether  the  dear  Walpoles  who 
are  here  and  as  nice  as  ever.  Mrs.  Walpole's  mother  and  sister 
live  here,  and  the  W.'s  are  on  a  visit  to  them  but  leave  on 
Wednesday.    They  go  to  Venice,  but  only  for  two  or  three  days. 

We  shall  probably  stay  about  a  fortnight  in  Venice,  and  then 
make  our  way  back  by  easy  stages  to  London.  We  are  wae  to 
see  you  all  again. 

Doctor  M [Mrs.  Huxley]  has  just  been  called  in  to  a 

case  of  sore  throat  in  the  person  of  a  young  lady  here,  and  is 
quite  happy.  The  young  lady  probably  will  not  be,  when  she 
finds  herself  converted  into  a  sort  of  inverted  mustard-pot,  with 
the  mustard  outside !  She  is  one  of  a  very  nice  family  of  girls, 
who  (by  contrast)  remind  us  of  our  own. — Ever  your  loving 
(to  all)  father.  Pater. 

Mrs.  M has  just  insisted  on  seeing  this  letter. 


i885  AT   SAN   REMO  lOg 

To  HIS  Youngest  Daughter 

Hotel  Beau  S^jour,  San  Remo,  March  30,  1885. 

Dearest  Babs — We  could  not  stand  "  beautiful  Venice  the 
pride  of  the  sea  "  any  longer.  It  blew  and  rained  and  colded  for 
eight-and-forty  hours  consecutively.  Everybody  said  it  was  a 
most  exceptional  season,  but  that  did  not  make  us  any  warmer 
or  prevent  your  mother  from  catching  an  awful  cold.  So  as 
soon  as  she  got  better  we  packed  up  and  betook  ourselves  here 
by  way  of  Milan  and  Genoa.  At  Milan  it  was  so  like  London 
on  a  wet  day,  that  except  for  the  want  of  smoke  we  might  have 
been  in  our  dear  native  land.  At  Genoa  we  arrived  late  one 
afternoon  and  were  off  early  in  the  morning — but  by  dint  of 
taking  a  tram  after  dinner  (not  a  dram)  and  going  there  and 
back  again  we  are  able  to  say  we  have  seen  that  city  of  palaces. 
The  basements  we  saw  through  the  tram  windows  by  mixed 
light  of  gas  and  moon  may  in  fact  all  have  belonged  to  palaces. 
We  are  not  in  a  position  to  say  they  did  not. 

The  quick  train  from  Genoa  here  is  believed  to  go  fully 
twenty-five  miles  an  hour,  but  starts  at  7  a.m.,  but  the  early 
morning  air  being  bad  for  the  health,  we  took  the  slow  train  at 
9.30,  and  got  here  some  time  in  the  afternoon.  But  mind  you 
it  is  a  full  eighty  miles,  and  when  we  were  at  full  speed  be- 
tween the  stations — very  few  donkeys  could  have  gone  faster. 
But  the  coast  scenery  is  very  pretty,  and  we  didn^t  mind. 

Here  we  are  very  well  off  and  as  nearly  warm  as  I  expect  to 
be  before  reaching  England.  You  can  sit  out  in  the  sun  with 
satisfaction,  though  there  is  a  little  knife-edge  of  wind  just  to 
remind  us  of  Florence.  Everybody,  however,  tells  us  it  is  quite 
an  exceptional  season,  and  that  it  ought  to  be  the  most  balmy  air 
imaginable.  Besides  there  are  no  end  of  date-palms  and  cac- 
tuses and  aloes  and  odorous  flowers  in  the  garden — and  the 
loveliest  purple  sea  you  can  imagine. 

Well,  we  shall  stop  ^ome  days  and  give  San  Remo  a  chance 
— at  least  a  week,  unless  the  weather  turns  bad. 

As  to  your  postcards  which  have  been  sent  on  from  Venice 
and  are  really  shabby,  I  am  not  going  to  any  dinners  whatsoever, 
either  Middle  Temple  or  Academy.  Just  write  to  both  that 
"  Mr.  H.  regrets  he  is  unable  to  accept  the  invitation  with  which 
hav£  honoured  him."  * 


*  *'  It's  like  putting  the  shutters  up,"  he  said  sadly  to  his  wife, 
when  he  felt  unable  to  attend  the  Royal  Academy  dinner  as  he  had 
done  for  many  years. 


no  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

I  have  really  nothing  the  matter  with  me  now — ^but  my  stock 
of  strength  is  not  great,  and  I  can't  afford  to  spend  any  on 
dinners. 

The  blessedest  thing  now  will  be  to  have  done  with  the 
nomadic  life  of  the  last  five  months — and  see  your  ugly  faces 
(so  like  their  dear  father)  again.  I  believe  it  will  be  the  best 
possible  tonic  for  me. 

M has  not  got  rid  of  her  cold  yet,  but  a  few  warm  days 

here  will,  I  hope,  set  her  up. 

I  met  Lady  Whitworth  on  the  esplanade  to-day — she  is  here 
with  Sir  Joseph,  and  this  afternoon  we  went  to  call  on  her.  The 
poor  old  man  is  very  feeble  and  greatly  altered  since  I  saw 
him  last. 

Write  here  on  receiving  this.  We  shall  take  easy  stages 
home,  but  I  don't  know  that  I  shall  be  able  to  give  you  any 
address. 

M sends  heaps  of  love  to  all   (including  Charles*) — 

Ever  your  loving  father,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Tell  the  "  Micropholis  "  man  that  it  is  a  fossil  lizard  with  an 
armour  of  small  scales. 

*  The  cat. 


CHAPTER   VII 

i88s 

On  April  8,  he  landed  at  Folkestone,  and  stayed  there 
a  day  or  two  before  going  to  London.  Writing  to  Sir 
J.  Donnelly,  he  remarks  with  great  satisfaction  at  getting 
home : — 

We  got  here  this  afternoon  after  a  rather  shady  passage 
from  Boulogne,  with  a  strong  north  wind  in  our  teeth  all  the 
way,  and  rain  galore.  For  all  that,  it  is  the  pleasantest  journey 
I  have  made  for  a  long  time — so  pleasant  to  see  one's  own  dear 
native  mud  again.    There  is  no  foreign  mud  to  come  near  it. 

And  on  the  same  day  he  sums  up  to  Sir  M.  Foster  the 
amount  of  good  he  has  gained  from  his  expedition,  and 
the  amount  of  good  any  patient  is  likely  to  get  from 
travel : — 

As  for  myself  I  have  nothing  very  satisfactory  to  say.  By 
the  oddest  chance  we  met  Andrew  Clark  in  the  boat,  and  he  says 
I  am  a  very  bad  colour — ^which  I  take  it  is  the  outward  and 
visible  sign  of  the  inward  and  carnal  state.  I  may  sum  that  up 
by  saying  that  there  is  nothing  the  matter  but  weakness  and  in- 
disposition to  do  anything,  together  with  a  perfect  genius  for 
making  mountains  out  of  molehills. 

After  two  or  three  fine  days  at  Venice,  we  have  had  nothing 
but  wet  or  cold— or  hot  and  cold  at  the  same  time,  as  in  that 
prodigious  imposture  the  Riviera.  Of  course  it  was  the  same 
story  everywhere,  "  perfectly  unexampled  season." 

Moral. — If  you  are  perfectly  well  and  strong,  brave  Italy — 
but  in  search  of  health  stop  at  home. 

It  has  been  raining  cats  and  dogs,  and  Folkestone  is  what 

III 


112  *       LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vn 

some  people  would  call  dreary.    I  could  go  and  roll  in  the  mud 
with  satisfaction  that  it  is  English  mud. 

It  will  be  jolly  to  see  you  again.  Wife  unites  in  love. — Ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  return  home  was  not  only  a  great  pleasure ;  it  gave 
him  a  fillip  for  the  time,  and  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster, 
April  12: — 

It  is  very  jolly  to  be  home,  and  I  feel  better  already.  Clark 
has  just  been  here  overhauling  me,  and  feels  very  confident  that 
he  shall  screw  me  up. 

I  have  renounced  dining  out  and  smoking  (!!!)  by  way  of 
preliminaries.  God  only  knows  whether  I  shall  be  permitted 
more  than  the  smell  of  a  mutton  chop  for  dinner.  But  I  have 
great  faith  in  Andrew,  who  set  me  straight  before  when  other 
"  physicians'  aid  was  vain." 

But  his  energy  was  fitful ;  lassitude  and  depression  again 
invaded  him.  He  was  warned  by  Sir  Andrew  Clark  to  lay 
aside  all  the  burden  of  his  work.  Accordingly,  early  in 
May,  just  after  his  sixtieth  birthday,  he  sent  in  his  formal 
resignation  of  the  Professorship  of  Biology,  and  the  In- 
spectorship of  Salmon  Fisheries;  while  a  few  days  later  he 
laid  his  resignation  of  the  Presidency  before  the  Council  of 
the  Royal  Society.  By  the  latter  he  was  begged  to  defer 
his  final  decision,  but  his  health  gave  no  promise  of  suffi- 
cient amendment  before  the  decisive  Council  meeting  in 
October. 

He  writes  on  May  27 : — 

I  am  convinced  that  what  with  my  perennial  weariness  and 
my  deafness  I  ought  to  go,  whatever  my  kind  friends  may  say. 

A  curious  effect  of  his  illness  was  that  for  the  first  time 
in  his  life  he  began  to  shrink  involuntarily  from  assuming 
responsibilities  and  from  appearing  on  public  occasions ;  thus 
he  writes  on  June  16: — 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  the  perkiness  of  last  week  *  was  only 
a  spurt,  and  I  have  been  in  a  disgusting  state  of  blue  devils  lately. 
Can't  make  out  what  it  is,  for  I  really  have  nothing  the  matter, 

*  i.e.  at  the  unveiling  of  the  Darwin  statue  at  South  Kensington. 
See  p.  120. 


i885  CONTINUED   ILL-HEALTH  113 

except  a  strong  tendency  to  put  the  most  evil  construction  upon 
eveiything. 

I  am  fairly  dreading  to-morrow  [f.^.  receiving  the  D.C.L. 
degree  at  Oxford  *]  but  why  I  don't  know — ^probably  an  attack 
of  modesty  come  on  late  in  life  and  consequently  severe. 

Very  likely  it  will  do  me  good  and  make  me  "  fit "  for  Thurs- 
day [i,e.  Coimcil  and  ordinary  meetings  of  Royal  Society]. 

And  a  month  later: — 

I  have  been  idling  in  the  country  for  two  or  three  days — 
but  like  the  woman  with  the  issue,  "  I  am  not  better  but  rather 
worse  " — ^blue  devils  and  funk — funk  and  blue  devils.  Liver,  I 
expect.  [An  ailment  of  which  he  says  to  Prof.  Marsh,  "  I  rather 
wish  I  had  some  respectable  disease — it  would  be  livelier."] 

And  again : — 

Everybody  tells  me  I  look  so  much  better,  that  I  am  really 
ashamed  to  go  growling  about,  and  confess  that  I  am  continually 
in  a  blue  funk  and  hate  the  thought  of  any  work — especially  of 
scientific  or  anything  requiring  prolonged  attention. 

At  the  end  of  July  he  writes  to  Sir  W.  Flower — 

4  Marlborough  Place, /k/k  27,  1885. 

My  dear  Flower — I  am  particularly  glad  to  hear  that  things 
went  right  on  Saturday,  as  my  conscience  rather  pricked  me  for 
my  desertion  of  the  meeting.f  But  it  was  the  only  chance  we 
had  of  seeing  our  young  married  couple  before  the  vacation — 
and  you  will  rapidly  arrive  at  a  comprehension  of  the  cogency  of 
that  argument  now. 

I  will  think  well  of  your  kind  words  about  the  Presidency. 
If  I  could  only  get  rid  of  my  eternal  hypochondria  the  work  of 
the  R.S.  would  seem  little  enough.  At  present,  I  am  afraid  of 
everything  that  involves  responsibility  to  a  degree  that  is  simply 
ridiculous.  I  only  wish  I  could  shirk  the  inquiries  I  am  going 
off  to  hold  in  Devonshire ! 

P.R.S.  in  a  continual  blue  funk  is  not  likely  to  be  either 
dignified  or  useful ;  and  unless  I  am  in  a  better  frame  of  mind 
in  October  I  am  afraid  I  shall  have  to  go. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  few  weeks  at  Filey  in  August  did  him  some  good  at 
first ;  and  he  writes  cheerfully  of  his  lodgings  in  "  a  place 

*  See  p.  118.  t  British  Museum  Trustees,  July  25. 

44 


1 14  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vn 

with  the  worst-fitting  doors  and  windows,  and  the  hardest 
chairs,  sofas,  and  beds  known  to  my  experience." 
He  continues : — 

I  am  decidedly  picking  up.  The  air  here  is  wonderful,  and 
as  we  can  set  good  cookery  against  hard  lying  (I  don't  mean  in 
the  Munchausen  line)  the  consequent  appetite  becomes  a  mild 
source  of  gratification.  Also,  I  have  not  met  with  more  than 
two  people  who  knew  me,  and  that  in  my  present  state  is  a 
negative  gratification  of  the  highest  order. 

Later  on  he  tried  Bournemouth;  being  no  better,  he 
thought  of  an  entirely  new  remedy. 

The  only  thing  I  am  inclined  to  do  is  to  write  a  book  on 
Miracles.  I  think  it  might  do  good  and  unload  my  biliary 
system. 

In  this  state  of  indecision,  so  unnatural  to  him,  he  writes 
to  Sir  M.  Foster: — 

I  am  anything  but  clear  as  to  the  course  I  had  best  take 
myself.  While  undoubtedly  much  better  in  general  health,  I 
am  in  a  curious  state  of  discouragement,  and  I  should  like  noth- 
ing better  than  to  remain  buried  here  (Bournemouth)  or  any- 
where else,  out  of  the  way  of  trouble  and  responsibility.  It  dis- 
tresses me  to  think  that  I  shall  have  to  say  something  definite 
about  the  Presidency  at  the  meeting  of  Council  in  October. 

Finally  on  October  20,  he  writes : — 

I  think  the  lowest  point  of  my  curve  of  ups  and  downs  is 
gradually  rising — but  I  have  by  no  means  reached  the  point 
when  I  can  cheerfully  face  anything.  I  got  over  the  Board  of 
Visitors  (two  hours  and  a  half)  better  than  I  expected,  but  my 
deafness  was  a  horrid  nuisance. 

I  believe  the  strings  of  the  old  fiddle  will  tighten  up  a  good 
deal,  if  I  abstain  from  attempting  to  play  upon  the  instrument 
at  present  —  but  that  a  few  jigs  now  will  probably  ruin  that 
chance. 

But  I  will  say  my  final  word  at  our  meeting  next  week.  I 
would  rather  step  down  from  the  chair  than  dribble  out  of  it. 
Even  the  devil  is  in  the  habit  of  departing  with  a  "  melodious 
twang,"  and  I  like  the  precedent. 

So  at  the  Anniversary  meeting  on  November  30,  he 
definitely  announced  in  his  last   Presidential   address   his 


i885  RETIREMENT  I  1 5 

resignation  of  that  "  honourable  office "  which  he  could 
no  longer  retain  *'  with  due  regard  to  the  interests  of 
the  Society,  and  perhaps,  I  may  add,  of  self-preserva- 
tion." 

I  am  happy  to  say  (he  continued)  that  I  have  good  reason 
to  believe  that,  with  prolonged  rest — by  which  I  do  not  mean 
idleness,  but  release  from  distraction  and  complete  freedom  from 
those  lethal  agencies  which  are  commonly  known  as  the  pleas- 
ures of  society — I  may  yet  regain  so  much  strength  as  is  com- 
patible with  advancing  years.  But  in  order  to  do  so,  I  must, 
for  a  long  time  yet,  be  content  to  lead  a  more  or  less  anchoritic 
life.  Now  it  is  not  fitting  that  your  President  should  be  a  hermit, 
and  it  becomes  me,  who  have  received  so  much  kindness  and 
consideration  from  the  Society,  to  be  particularly  careful  that 
no  sense  of  personal  gratification  should  delude  me  into  holding 
the  office  of  its  representative  one  moment  after  reason  and  con- 
science have  pointed  out  my  incapacity  to  discharge  the  serious 
duties  which  devolve  upon  the  President,  with  some  approach  to 
efficiency. 

I  beg  leave,  therefore,  with  much  gratitude  for  the  crowning 
honour  of  my  life  which  you  have  conferred  upon  me,  to  be  per- 
mitted to  vacate  the  chair  of  the  Society  as  soon  as  the  business 
of  this  meeting  is  at  an  end. 

The  settlement  of  the  terms  of  the  pension  upon  which, 
after  thirty-one  years  of  service  under  Government,  he  re- 
tired from  his  Professorship  at  South  Kensington  and  the 
Inspectorship  of  Fisheries,  took  a  considerable  time.  The 
chiefs  of  his  own  department,  that  of  Education,  wished 
him  to  retire  upon  full  pay,  £1500  (see  p.  21).  The  Treas- 
ury were  more  economical.  It  was  the  middle  of  June 
before  the  pension  they  proposed  of  £1200  was  promised; 
the  end  of  July  before  he  knew  what  conditions  were  at- 
tached to  it. 

On  June  20,  he  writes  to  Mr.  Mundella,  Vice-President 
of  the  Council : — 

My  dear  Mundella — Accept  my  warmest  thanks  for  your 
good  wishes,  and  for  all  the  trouble  you  have  taken  on  my 
behalf.  I  am  quite  ashamed  to  have  been  the  occasion  of  so 
much  negotiation. 

Until  I  see  the  Treasury  letter,  I  am  unable  to  judge  what 


Il6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vil 

the  £1200  may  really  mean,*  but  whatever  the  result,  I  shall 
never  forget  the  kindness  with  which  my  chiefs  have  fought  my 
battle. — I  am,  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

On  July  16,  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster : — 

The  blessed  Treasury  can't  make  up  their  minds  whether  I 
am  to  be  asked  to  stay  on  as  Dean  or  not,  and  till  they  do,  I 
can't  shake  off  any  of  my  fetters. 

Early  in  the  year  he  had  written  to  Sir  John  Donnelly 
of  the  necessity  of  resigning : — 

Nevertheless  (he  added),  it  will  be  a  sad  day  for  me  when 
I  find  myself  no  longer  entitled  to  take  part  in  the  work  of  the 
schools  in  which  you  and  I  have  so  long  been  interested. 

But  that  "  sad  day  **  was  not  to  come  yet.  His  con- 
nection with  the  Royal  College  of  Science  was  not  entirely 
severed.  He  was  asked  to  continue,  as  Honorary  Dean,  a 
general  supervision  of  the  work  he  had  done  so  much  to 
organise,  and  he  kept  the  title  of  Professor  of  Biology,  his 
successors  in  the  practical  work  of  the  chair  being  desig- 
nated Assistant  Professors. 

"  I  retain,"  he  writes,  "  general  superintendence  as  part 
of  the  great  unpaid." 

It  is  a  comfort  (he  writes  to  his  son),  to  have  got  the  thing 
settled.  My  great  desire  at  present  is  to  be  idle,  and  I  am  now 
idle  with  a  good  conscience. 

Later  in  the  year,  however,  a  change  of  Ministry  having 
taken  place,  he  was  offered  a  Civil  List  Pension  of  £300  a 
year  by  Lord  Iddesleigh.     He  replied  accepting  it : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Nov.  24,  1885. 

My  dear  Lord  Iddesleigh  —  Your  letters  of  the  20th 
November  reached  me  only  last  night,  and  I  hasten  to  thank 
you  for  both  of  them.  I  am  particularly  obliged  for  your  kind 
reception  of  what  I  ventured  to  say  about  the  deserts  of  my  old 
friend  Sir  Joseph  Hooker. 

With  respect  to  your  Lordship's  offer  to  submit  my  name  to 
Her  Majesty  for  a  Civil  List  Pension,  I  can  but  accept  a  pro- 

*  i,e,  whether  he  was  to  draw  his  salary  of  ;f  200  as  Dean  or  not. 


i885  RETIREMENT  II7 

posal  which  is  in  itself  an  honour,  and  which  is  rendered  ex- 
tremely gratifying  to  me  by  the  great  kindness  of  the  expressions 
in  which  you  have  been  pleased  to  embody  it. 

I  am  happy  to  say  that  I  am  getting  steadily  better  at  last, 
and  under  the  regime  of  "  peace  with  honour  "  that  now  seems  to 
have  fallen  to  my  lot,  I  may  fairly  hope  yet  to  do  a  good  stroke 
of  work  or  two. — I  remain,  my  dear  Lord  Iddesleigh,  faithfully 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Nov.  24,  1885. 

My  dear  Donnelly  —  I  believe  you  have  been  at  work 
again ! 

Lord  Iddesleigh  has  written  to  me  to  ask  if  I  will  be  recom- 
mended for  a  Civil  List  Pension  of  £300  a  year,  a  very  pretty 
letter,  not  at  all  like  the  Treasury  masterpiece  you  admired  so 
much. 

Didn't  see  why  I  should  not  accept,  and  have  accepted  ac- 
cordingly. When  the  announcement  comes  out  the  Liberals 
will  say  the  Tory  Govt,  have  paid  me  for  attacking  the  G.O.M. ! 
to  a  dead  certainty. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Five  days  later  he  replies  to  the  congratulations  of 
Mr.  Eckersley  (whose  son  had  married  Huxley's  third 
daughter) : — 

.  .  .  Lord  Iddesleigh's  letter  offering  to  submit  my  name 
for  an  honorary  pension  was  a  complete  surprise. 

My  chiefs  in  the  late  Government  wished  to  retire  me  on  full 
pay,  but  the  Treasury  did  not  see  their  way  to  it,  and  cut  off 
£300  a  year.  Naturally  I  am  not  sorry  to  have  the  loss  made 
good,  but  the  way  the  thing  was  done  is  perhaps  the  pleasantest 
part  of  it. 

There  was  a  certain  grim  appropriateness  in  his  "  official 
death  "  following  hard  upon  his  sixtieth  birthday,  for  sixty 
was  the  age  at  which  he  had  long  declared  that  men  of 
science  ought  to  be  strangled,  lest  age  should  harden  them 
against  the  reception  of  new  truths,  and  make  them  into 
clogs  upon  progress,  the  worse,  in  proportion  to  the  influ- 
ence they  had  deservedly  won.  This  is  the  allusion  in  a 
birthday  letter  from  Sir  M.  Foster: — 

Reverend  Sir — So  the  "  day  of  strangulation  "  has  arrived 
at  last,  and  with  it  the  humble  petition  of  your  friends  that  you 


Il8  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

may  be  induced  to  defer  the  "  happy  dispatch  "  for,  say  at  least 
ten  years,  when  the  subject  may  again  come  up  for  considera- 
tion. For  your  petitioners  are  respectfully  inclined  to  think  that 
if  your  sixty  ship  may  be  induced  so  far  to  become  an  apostle  as 
to  give  up  the  fishery  business,  and  be  led  to  leave  the  Black 
Board  at  S.K.  to  others,  the  t'other  side  sixty  years,  may  after 
all  be  the  best  years  of  your  life.  In  any  case  they  would  desire 
to  bring  under  your  notice  the  fact  that  they  feel  they  want  you 
as  much  as  ever  they  did, — Ever  thine,  M.  F. 

Reference  has  been  made  to  the  fact  that  the  honorary 
degree  of  D.C.L.  was  conferred  this  May  upon  Huxley  by 
the  University  of  Oxford.  The  Universities  of  the  sister 
kingdoms  had  been  the  first  thus  to  recognise  his  work; 
and  after  Aberdeen  and  Dublin,  Cambridge,  where  natural 
science  had  earlier  established  a  firm  foothold,  showed  the 
way  to  Oxford.  Indeed,  it  was  not  until  his  regular  scien- 
tific career  was  at  an  end,  that  the  University  of  Oxford 
opened  its  portals  to  him.  So,  as  he  wrote  to  Professor 
Bartholomew  Price  on  May  20,  in  answer  to  the  invitation, 
"  It  will  be  a  sort  of  apotheosis  coincident  with  my  official 
death,  which  is  imminent.  In  fact,  I  am  dead  already,  only 
the  Treasury  Charon  has  not  yet  settled  the  conditions  upon 
which  I  am  to  be  ferried  over  to  the  other  side." 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  his  connection  with  the 
Royal  Society,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  give  a  last  exam- 
ple of  the  straightforward  way  in  which  he  dealt  with  a 
delicate  point  whether  to  vote  or  not  to  vote  for  his  friend 
Sir  Andrew  Clark  who  had  been  proposed  for  election  to 
the  Society.  It  occurred  just  after  his  return  from  abroad ; 
he  explains  his  action  to  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  who  had  urged 
caution  on  hearing  a  partial  account  of  the  proceedings. 

South  Kensington,  April  25,  1885. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  don't  see  very  well  how  I  could  have 
been  more  cautious  than  I  have  been.  I  knew  nothing  of  Clark's 
candidature  until  I  saw  his  name  in  the  list;  and  if  he  or  his 
proposer  had  consulted  me,  I  should  have  advised  delay,  because 

I  knew  very  well  there  would  be  a  great  push  made  for this 

year. 

Being  there,  however,  it  seemed  to  me  only  just  to  say  that 


i885  ROYAL   SOCIETY  ADMINISTRATION  ng 

which  is  certainly  true,  namely,  that  Clark  has  just  the  same 
claim  as  half  a  dozen  doctors  who  have  been  admitted  without 
question,  e,g.  Gull,  Jenner,  Risdon  Bennett,  on  the  sole  ground 
of  standing  in  the  profession.  And  I  think  that  so  long  as  that 
claim  is  admitted,  it  will  be  unjust  not  to  admit  Clark. 

So  I  said  what  you  heard ;  but  I  was  so  careful  not  to  press 
unduly  upon  the  Council,  that  I  warned  them  of  the  possible 
prejudice  arising  from  my  own  personal  obligations  to  Clark's 
skill,  and  I  went  so  far  as  not  to  put  his  name  in  the  first  list 
myself,  a  step  which  I  now  regret. 

If  this  is  not  caution  enough,  I  should  like  to  know  what  is  ? 
As  Clive  said  when  he  came  back  from  India,  "  By  God,  sir,  I 
am  astonished  at  my  own  moderation !  " 

If  it  is  not  right  to  make  a  man  a  fellow  because  he  holds  a 
first-class  place  as  a  practitioner  of  medicine  as  the  R.S.  has 
done  since  I  have  known  it,  let  us  abolish  the  practice.  But  then 
let  us  also  in  justice  refuse  to  recognise  the  half-and-half  claims, 
those  of  the  people  who  are  third-rate  as  practitioners,  and  hang 
on  to  the  skirts  of  science  without  doing  anything  in  it. 

Several  of  your  and  my  younger  scientific  friends  are  bent 

on  bringing  in  their  chum ,  and  Clark's  candidature  is  very 

inconvenient  to  them.  Hence  I  suspect  some  of  the  "  outspoken 
aversion  "  and  criticism  of  Clark's  claims  you  have  heard. 

I  am  quite  willing  to  sacrifice  my  friend  for  a  principle,  but 

not  for  somebody  else's  friend,  and  I  mean  to  vote  for  Clark; 

though  I  am  not  going  to  try  to  force  my  notion  down  any  one 

else's  throat. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  _  __  __ 

•^  T.  H.  Huxley. 

On  the  same  subject  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster : — 

Obedience  be  hanged.  It  would  not  lie  in  my  mouth,  as  the 
lawyers  say,  to  object  to  anybody's  getting  his  own  way  if 
he  can. 

If  Clark  had  not  been  a  personal  friend  of  mine  I  should  not 
have  hesitated  a  moment  about  deciding  in  his  favour.  Under 
the  circumstances  it  was  quite  clear  what  I  should  do  if  I  were 
forced  to  decide,  and  I  thought  it  would  have  been  kindly  and 
courteous  to  the  President  if  he  had  been  let  off  the  necessity 
of  making  a  decision  which  was  obviously  disagreeable  to  him. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  wished  to  fix  the  responsibility 
of  what  happened  on  him,  I  am  glad  that  he  had  the  opportunity 
of  accepting  it.  I  never  was  more  clear  as  to  what  was  the 
right  thing  to  do. 


I20  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

So  also  at  other  times;  he  writes  in  September  to  Sir 
M.  Foster,  the  Secretary,  with  reference  to  evening  gather- 
ings at  which  smoking  should  be  permitted. 

Bournemouth,  Sept.  17,  1885. 

I  am  not  at  all  sure  that  I  can  give  my  blessing  to  the 
"Tabagie."  When  I  heard  of  it  I  had  great  doubts  as  to  its 
being  a  wise  move.  It  is  not  the  question  of  "  smoke  "  so  much, 
as  the  principle  of  having  meetings  in  the  Society's  rooms, 
which  are  not  practically  (whatever  they  may  be  theoretically), 
open  to  all  the  fellows,  and  which  will  certainly  be  regarded  as 
the  quasi-private  parties  of  one  of  the  officers.  You  will  have 
all  sorts  of  jealousies  roused,  and  talk  of  a  clique,  etc. 

When  I  was  Secretary  the  one  thing  I  was  most  careful  to 
avoid  was  the  appearance  of  desiring  to  exert  any  special  influ- 
ence. But  there  was  a  jealousy  of  the  x  Club,  and  only  the 
other  day,  to  my  great  amusement,  I  was  talking  to  an  influ- 
ential member  of  the  Royal  Society  Club  about  the  possibility 
of  fusing  it  with  the  Phil.  Club,  and  he  said,  forgetting  I  was 
a  member  of  the  latter :  "  Oh  !  we  don't  want  any  of  those  wire- 
pullers !  "    Poor  dear  innocent  duU-as-ditchwater  Phil.  Club  I 

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  unveiling  of  the 
Darwin  statue  at  South  Kensington  on  June  9,  when,  as 
President  of  the  Royal  Society,  Huxley  delivered  an  address 
in  the  name  of  the  Memorial  Committee,  on  handing  over 
the  statue  of  Darwin  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales,  as  rep- 
resentative of  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum.  The' 
concluding  words  of  the  speech  deserve  quotation : — 

We  do  not  piake  this  request  \i.e.  to  accept  the  statue]  for 
the  mere  sake  of  perpetuating  a  memory;  for  so  long  as  men 
occupy  themselves  with  the  pursuit  of  truth,  the  name  of  Darwin 
runs  no  more  risk  of  oblivion  than  does  that  of  Copernicus,  or 
that  of  Harvey. 

Nor,  most  assuredly,  do  we  ask  you  to  preserve  the  statue  in 
its  cynosural  position  in  this  entrance  hall  of  our  National 
Museum  of  Natural  History  as  evidence  that  Mr.  Darwin's 
views  have  received  your  official  sanction ;  for  science  does  not 
recognise  such  sanctions,  and  commits  suicide  when  it  adopts  a 
creed. 

No,  we  beg  you  to  cherish  this  memorial  as  a  symbol  by 
which,  as  generation  after  generation  of  students  enter  yonder 


i885  THE   DARWIN   STATUE  121 

door,  they  shall  be  reminded  of  the  ideal  according  to  which 
they  must  shape  their  lives,  if  they  would  turn  to  the  best  ac- 
count the  opportunities  offered  by  the  great  institution  under 
your  charge. 

Nor  was  this  his  only  word  about  Darwin.  Somewhat 
later,  Professor  Mivart  sent  him  the  proofs  of  an  article  on 
Darwin,  asking  for  his  criticism,  and  received  the  following 
reply,  which  describes  better  than  almost  any  other  docu- 
ment, the  nature  of  the  tie  which  united  Darwin  and  his 
friends,  and  incidentally  touches  the  question  of  Galileo's 
recantation : — 

Nov,  12,  1885. 

My  dear  Mr.  Mivart — I  return  your  proof  with  many 
thanks  for  your  courtesy  in  sending  it.  I  fully  appreciate  the 
good  feeling  shown  in  what  you  have  written,  but  as  you  ask 
my  opinion,  I  had  better  say  frankly  that  my  experience  of  Dar- 
win is  widely  different  from  yours  as  expressed  in  the  passages 
marked  with  pencil.  I  have  often  remarked  that  I  never  knew 
any  one  of  his  intellectual  rank  who  showed  himself  so  tolerant 
to  opponents,  great  and  small,  as  Darwin  did.  Sensitive  he 
was  in  the  sense  of  being  too  ready  to  be  depressed  by  adverse 
comment,  but  I  never  knew  any  one  less  easily  hurt  by  fair 
criticism,  or  who  less  needed  to  be  soothed  by  those  who  opposed 
him  with  good  reason. 

I  am  sure  I  tried  his  patience  often  enough,  without  ever 
eliciting  more  than  a  "  Well  there's  a  good  deal  in  what  you  say ; 
but — "  and  then  followed  something  which  nine  times  out  of  ten 
showed  he  had  gone  deeper  into  the  business  than  I  had. 

I  cannot  agree  with  you,  again,  that  the  acceptance  of  Dar- 
win's views  was  in  any  way  influenced  by  the  strong  affection 
entertained  for  him  by  many  of  his  friends.  What  that  affection 
really  did  was  to  lead  those  of  his  friends  who  had  seen  good 
reason  for  his  views  to  take  much  more  trouble  in  his  defence 
and  support,  and  to  strike  out  much  harder  at  his  adversary 
than  they  would  otherwise  have  done.  This  is  pardonable  if 
not  justifiable — that  which  you  suggest  would  to  my  mind  be 
neither. 

I  am  so  ignorant  of  what  has  been  going  on  during  the  last 
twelvemonth,  that  I  know  nothing  of  your  controversy  with 
Romanes.  If  he  is  going  to  show  the  evolution  of  intellect  from 
sense,  he  is  the  man  for  whom  I  have  been  waiting,  as  Kant 
says. 


122  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

In  your  paper  about  scientific  freedom,  which  I  read  some 
time  ago  with  much  interest,  you  alluded  to  a  book  or  arti- 
cle by  Father  Roberts  on  the  Galileo  business.  Will  you 
kindly  send  me  a  postcard  to  say  where  and  when  it  was  pub- 
lished ? 

I  looked  into  the  matter  when  I  was  in  Italy,  and  I  arrived 
at  the  conclusion  that  the  Pope  and  the  College  of  Cardinals  had 
rather  the  best  of  it.  It  would  complete  the  paradox  if  Father 
Roberts  should  help  me  to  see  the  error  of  my  ways. — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

August  and  September,  as  said  above,  were  spent  in 
England,  though  with  little  good  effect.  Filey  was  not  a 
success  for  either  himself  or  his  wife.  Bournemouth,  where 
they  joined  their  eldest  daughter  and  her  family,  offered  a 
"  temperature  much  more  to  the  taste  of  both  of  us,"  and 
at  least  undid  the  mischief  done  by  the  wet  and  cold  of 
the  north. 

The  mean  line  of  health  was  gradually  rising;  it  was  a 
great  relief  to  be  free  at  length  from  administrative  distrac- 
tions, while  the  retiring  pensions  removed  the  necessity  of 
daily  toil.  By  nature  he  was  like  the  friend  whom  he 
described  as  "  the  man  to  become  hipped  to  death  without 
incessant  activity  of  some  sort  or  other.  I  am  sure  that  the 
habit  of  incessant  work  into  which  we  all  drift  is  as  bad  in 
its  way  as  dram-drinking.  In  time  you  cannot  be  comfort- 
able without  the  stimulus."  But  the  variety  of  interests 
which  filled  his  mind  prevented  him  from  feeling  the  void 
of  inaction  after  a  busy  life.  And  just  as  he  was  at  the 
turning-point  in  health,  he  received  a  fillip  which  started 
him  again  into  vigorous  activity — the  mental  tonic  bracing 
up  his  body  and  clearing  away  the  depression  and  languor 
which  had  so  long  beset  him. 

The  lively  fillip  came  in  the  shape  of  an  article  in  the 
November  Nineteenth  Century,  by  Mr.  Gladstone,  in  which 
he  attacked  the  position  taken  up  by  Dr.  Reville  in  his 
Prolegomena  to  the  History  of  Religions,  and  in  particular, 
attempted  to  show  that  the  order  of  creation  given  in 
Genesis  i.,  is  supported  by  the  evidence  of  science.  This 
article,   Huxley  used   humorously   to   say,   so   stirred   his 


i885  CONTROVERSY  WITH   MR.  GLADSTONE  123 

bile  as  to  set  his  liver  right  at  once;  and  though  he 
denied  the  soft  impeachment  that  the  ensuing  fight  was 
what  had  set  him  up,  the  marvellous  curative  effects  of 
a  Gladstonian  dose,  a  remedy  unknown  to  the  pharma- 
copoeia, became  a  household  word  among  family  and 
friends. 

His  own  reply,  "  The  Interpreters  of  Genesis  and  the 
Interpreters  of  Nature,"  appeared  in  the  December  number 
of  the  Nineteenth  Century  {Collected  Essays,  iv.  p.  139).  In 
January  1886  Mr.  Gladstone  responded  with  his  "  Proem 
to  Genesis,"  which  was  met  in  February  by  "  Mr.  Glad- 
stone and  Genesis "  (Collected  Essays^  iv.  p.  164).  Not 
only  did  he  show  that  science  offers  no  support  to  the  "  four- 
fold "  or  the  "  fivefold  "  or  any  other  order  obtained  from 
Genesis  by  Mr.  Gladstone,  but  in  a  note  appended  to  his 
second  article  he  gives  what  he  takes  to  be  the  proper 
sense  of  the  **  Mosaic "  narrative  of  the  Creation  (iv.  p. 
195),  not  allowing  the  succession  of  phenomena  to  repre- 
sent an  evolutionary  notion,  as  suggested,  of  a  progress 
from  lower  to  higher  in  the  scale  of  being,  a  notion  as- 
suredly not  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  but  deducing  this 
order  from  such  ideas  as,  putting  aside  our  present  knowl- 
edge of  nature,  we  may  reasonably  believe  him  to  have 
held. 

A  vast  subsidiary  controversy  sprang  up  in  the  Times 
on  Biblical  exegetics;  where  these  touched  him  at  all,  as, 
for  instance,  when  it  was  put  to  him  whether  the  differ- 
ence between  the  "  Rehmes  "  of  Genesis  and  "  Sheh-retz  " 
of  Leviticus,  both  translated  "  creeping  things,"  did  not  in- 
validate his  argument  as  to  the  identity  of  such  "  creeping 
things,"  he  had  examined  the  point  already,  and  surprised 
his  interrogator,  who  appeared  to  have  raised  a  very  pretty 
dilemma,  by  promptly  referring  him  to  a  well-known  He- 
brew commentator. 

Several  letters  refer  to  this  passage  of  arms.  On  De- 
cember 4,  he  writes  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer : — 

Do  read  my  polishing  off  of  the  G.O.M.  I  am  proud  of  it  as 
a  work  of  art,  and  as  evidence  that  the  volcano  is  not  yet  ex- 
hausted. 


124 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 


To  Lord  Farrer 


4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec,  6,  1885. 

My  dear  Farrer — From  a  scientific  point  of  view  Glad- 
stone's article  was  undoubtedly  not  worth  powder  and  shot. 
But,  on  personal  grounds,  the  perusal  of  it  sent  me  blaspheming 
about  the  house  with  the  first  healthy  expression  of  wrath  known 
for  a  couple  of  years — to  my  wife's  great  alarm — and  I  should 
have  "  busted  up  "  if  I  had  not  given  vent  to  my  indignation ; 
and  secondly,  all  orthodoxy  was  gloating  over  the  slap  in  the 
face  which  tfie  G.O.M.  had  administered  to  science  in  the  person 
of  Reville. 

The  ignorance  of  the  so-called  educated  classes  in  this 
country  is  stupendous,  and  in  the  hands  of  people  like  Gladstone 
it  is  a  political  force.  Since  I  became  an  official  of  the  Royal 
Society,  good  taste  seemed  to  me  to  dictate  silence  about  matters 
on  which  there  is  "  great  division  among  us."  But  now  I  have 
recovered  my  freedom,  and  I  am  greatly  minded  to  begin  stirring 
the  fire  afresh. 

Within  the  last  month  I  have  picked  up  wonderfully.  If 
dear  old  Darwin  were  alive  he  would  say  it  is  because  I  have 
had  a  fight,  but  in  truth  the  fight  is  consequence  and  not  cause. 
I  am  infinitely  relieved  by  getting  rid  of  the  eternal  strain  of 
the  past  thirty  years,  and  hope  to  get  some  good  work  done  yet 
before  I  die,  so  make  ready  for  the  part  of  the  judicious  bottle- 
holder  which  I  have  always  found  you. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  ya«.  13,  1886. 

My  dear  Farrer — My  contribution  to  the  next  round  was 
finished  and  sent  to  Knowles  a  week  ago.  I  confess  it  to  have 
been  a  work  of  supererogation ;  but  the  extreme  shiftiness  of  my 
antagonist  provoked  me,  and  I  was  tempted  to  pin  him  and  dis- 
sect him  as  an  anatomico-psychological  exercise.  May  it  be 
accounted  unto  me  for  righteousness,  though  I  laughed  so  much 
over  the  operation  that  I  deserve  no  credit. 

I  think  your  notion  is  a  very  good  one,  and  I  am  not  sure 
that  I  shall  not  try  to  carry  it  out  some  day.  In  the  meanwhile, 
however,  I  am  bent  upon  an  enterprise  which  I  think  still  more 
important. 

After  I  have  done  with  the  reconcilers,  I  will  see  whether 
theology  cannot  be  told  her  place  rather  more  plainly  than  she 
has  yet  been  dealt  with. 


i886  CONTROVERSY  WITH   MR.  GLADSTONE 


125 


Howeverj  this  between  ourselves,  I  am  seriously  anxious  to 
use  what  little  stuff  remains  to  me  well,  and  I  am  not  sure  that 
I  can  do  better  service  anywhere  than  in  this  line,  though  I 
don't  mean  to  have  any  more  controversy  if  I  can  help  it. 

(Don't  laugh  and  repeat  Darwin's  wickedness.) — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

However,  this  "  contribution  to  the  next  round  "  seemed 

to  the  editor  rather  too  pungent  in  tone.     Accordingly 

Huxley  revised  it,  the  letters  which  follow  describing  the 

process : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,/a».  15,  1886. 

My  dear  KnowleS: — I  will  be  with  you  at  1.30.  I  spent  three 
mortal  hours  this  morning  taming  my  wild  cat.  He  is  now  cas- 
trated; his  teeth  are  filed;  his  claws  are  cut;  he  is  taught  to 
swear  like  a  "  mieu  " ;  and  to  spit  like  a  cough ;  and  when  he  is 
turned  out  of  the  bag  you  won't  know  him  from  a  tame  rabbit. 
— Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,/fl».  20,  1886. 

My  dear  Knowles — Here  is  the  debonnaire  animal  finally 
titivated,  and  I  quite  agree,  much  improved,  though  I  mourn  the 
loss  of  some  of  the  spice.  But  it  is  an  awful  smash  as  it  stands 
— worse  than  the  first,  I  think. 

I  shall  send  you  the  MS.  of  the  Evolution  of  Theology  to- 
day or  to-morrow.  It  will  not  do  to  divide  it,  as  I  want  the 
reader  to  have  an  apergu  of  the  whole  process  from  Samuel  of 
Israel  to  Sammy  of  Oxford. 

I  am  afraid  it  will  make  thirty  or  thirty-five  pages,  but  it  is 
really  very  interesting,  though  I  say  it  as  shouldn't. 

Please  have  it  set  up  in  slip,  though,  as  it  is  written  after  the 
manner  of  a  judge's  charge,  the  corrections  will  not  be  so  exten- 
sive, nor  the  strength  of  language  so  well  calculated  to  make  a 
judicious  editor's  hair  stand  on  end,  as  was  the  case  with  the 
enclosed  (in  its  unregenerate  state). — Ever  yours  very  truly, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Some  time  later,  on  September  14,  1890,  writing  to 
Mr.  Hyde  Clarke,  the  philologist,  who  was  ten  years  his 
senior,  he  remarks  on  his  object  in  undertaking  this  con- 
troversy:— 

I  am  glad  to  see  that  you  are  as  active-minded  as  ever.  I 
have  no  doubt  there  is  a  great  deal  in  what  you  say  about  the 


126  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

origin  of  the  myths  in  Genesis.  But  my  sole  point  is  to  get  the 
people  who  persist  in  regarding  them  as  statements  of  fact  to 
understand  that  they  are  fools. 

The  process  is  laborious,  and  not  yet  very  fruitful  of  the 
desired  conviction. 


To  Sir  Joseph  Prestwich 

4  NIarlborough  Place,  N.W.,/a»«ary  i6,  1886. 

My  dear  Prestwich — ^Accept  my  best  thanks  for  the  volume 
of  your  Geology,  which  has  just  reached  me. 

I  envy  the  vigour  which  has  led  you  to  tackle  such  a  task, 
and  I  have  no  doubt  that  when  I  turn  to  your  book  for  informa- 
tion I  shall  find  reason  for  more  envy  in  the  thoroughness  with 
which  the  task  is  done. 

I  see  Mr.  Gladstone  has  been  trying  to  wrest  your  scripture 
to  his  own  purposes,  but  it  is  no  good.  Neither  the  fourfold 
nor  the  fivefold  nor  the  sixfold  order  will  wash. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  Professor  Poulton  * 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Feb.  19,  1886. 

Dear  Mr.  Poulton — I  return  herewith  the  number  of  the 
Expositor  with  many  thanks.  Canon  Driver's  article  contains  as 
clear  and  candid  a  statemetj;it  as  I  could  wish  of  the  position  of 
the  Pentateuchal  cosmogony  from  his  point  of  view.  If  he  more 
thoroughly  understood  the  actual  nature  of  paleontological  suc- 
cession— I  mean  the  species  by  species  replacement  of  old  forms 
by  new, — and  if  he  more  fully  appreciated  the  great  gulf  fixed 
between  the  ideas  of  "  creation "  and  of  "  evolution,"  I  think 
he  would  see  (i)  that  the  Pentateuch  and  science  are  more 
hopelessly  at  variance  than  even  he  imagines,  and  (2)  that  the 
Pentateuchal  cosmogony  does  not  come  so  near  the  facts  of  the 
case  as  some  other  ancient  cosmogonies,  notably  those  of  the 
old  Greek  philosophers. 

Practically,  Canon  Driver,  as  a  theologian  and  Hebrew 
scholar,  gives  up  the  physical  truth  of  the  Pentateuchal  cos- 
mogony altogether.  All  the  more  wonderful  to  me,  therefore, 
is  the  way  in  which  he  holds  on  to  it  as  embodying  theological 
truth.    So  far  as  this  question  is  concerned,  on  all  points  which 

*  Hope  Professor  of  Zoology  at  Oxford. 


i885  SCIENCE  AT   OXFORD  127 

can  be  tested,  the  Pentateuchal  writer  states  that  which  is  not 
true.  What,  therefore,  is  his  authority  on  the  matter— creation 
by  a  Deity — ^which  cannot  be  tested  ?  What  sort  of  "  inspira- 
tion" is  that  which  leads  to  the  promulgation  of  a  fable  as 
divine  truth,  which  forces  those  who  believe  in  tjiat  inspiration 
to  hold  on,  like  g^im  death,  to  the  literal  truth  of  the  fable,  which 
demoralises  them  in  seeking  for  all  sorts  of  sophistical  shifts  to 
bolster  up  the  fable,  and  which  finally  is  discredited  and  repudi- 
ated when  the  fable  is  finally  proved  to  be  a  fable?  If  Satan 
had  wished  to  devise  the  best  means  of  discrediting  "  Revela- 
tion "  he  could  not  have  done  better. 

Have  you  not  forgotten  to  mention  the  leg  of  Archaeopteryx 
as  a  characteristically  bird-like  structure?  It  is  so,  and  it  is  to 
be  recollected  that  at  present  we  know  nothing  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  skeletons  of  the  older  mesozoic  mammals— only  teeth 
and  jaws.  What  the  shoulder-girdle  of  Stereognathus  might  be 
like  is  uncertain. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  letters  have  a  curious  interest  as  showing 
what,  in  the  eyes  of  a  supporter  of  educational  progress, 
ipight  and  might  not  be  done  at  Oxford  to  help  on  scientific 
education : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec.  21,  1885. 

My  dear  Master* — I  have  been  talking  to  some  of  my 
friends  about  stimulating  the  Royal  Society  to  address  the  Uni- 
versities on  the  subject  of  giving  greater  weight  to  scientific 
acquirements,  and  if  I  find  that  there  is  a  better  prospect  than  I 
had  hoped  for  of  getting  President  and  Council  to  move.  But  I 
am  not  quite  sure  about  the  course  which  it  will  be  wisest  for 
us  to  adopt,  and  I  beg  a  little  counsel  on  that  matter. 

I  presume  that  we  had  better  state  our  wishes  in  the  form  of 
a  letter  to  the  Vice-Chancellor,  and  that  we  may  prudently  ask 
for  the  substitution  for  modern  languages  (especially  German) 
and  elementary  science  for  some  of  the  subjects  at  present  re- 
quired in  the  literary  part  of  the  examinations  of  the  scientific 
and  medical  faculties.  If  we  could  gain  this  much  it  would  be 
a  great  step,  not  only  in  itself,  but  in  its  reaction  on  the  schools. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

'■'  ~  '     ^'   ■'■"'■'       '  ■  '    '  I  I     ■  ■■  y  ^^^^^^ 

*  This  is  from  the  first  draft  of  the  letter.  Huxley's  letters  to 
Jowett  were  destroyed  by  Jowett's  orders,  together  with  the  rest  of  his 
correspondence. 


128  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec,  26,  1885. 

My  dear  Foster — Please  read  the  enclosed  letter  from 
Jowett  (confidentially).  I  had  suggested  the  possibility  of 
diminishing  the  Greek  and  Latin  for  the  science  and  medical 
people,  but  that,  you  see,  he  won't  have.  But  he  is  prepared  to 
load  the  classical  people  with  science  by  way  of  making  things 
fair. 

It  may  be  worth  our  while  to  go  in  for  this,  and  trust  to  time 
for  the  other.    What  say  you  ? 

Merry  Christmas  to  you.  The  G.O.M.  is  going  to  reply,  so 
I  am  likely  to  have  a  happy  New  Year !  I  expect  some  fun,  and 
I  mean  to  make  it  an  occasion  for  some  good  earnest. — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

So  ends  1885,  and  with  it  closes  another  definite  period 
of  Huxley's  life.  Free  from  official  burdens  and  official 
restraints,  he  was  at  liberty  to  speak  out  on  any  subject ;  his 
strength  for  work  was  less  indeed,  but  his  time  was  his  own ; 
there  was  hope  that  he  might  still  recover  his  health  for  a 
few  more  years.  And  though  the  ranks  of  his  friends  were 
beginning  to  thin,  though  he  writes  (May  20,  to  Professor 
Bartholomew  Price) : — 

The  "  gaps  "  are  terrible  accompaniments  of  advancing  life. 
It  is  only  with  age  that  one  realises  the  full  truth  of  Goethe's 
quatrain : — 

Eine  Bruche  ist  ein  jeder  Tag,  etc. 

And  again: — 

The  X  Club  is  going  to  smithereens,  as  if  a  charge  of  dyna- 
mite had  been  exploded  in  the  midst  of  it.  Busk  is  slowly  fading 
away.  Tyndall  is,  I  fear,  in  a  bad  way,  and  I  am  very  anxious 
about  Hooker. 

Still  the  club  hung  together  for  many  years,  and  outside 
it  were  other  devoted  friends,  who  would  have  echoed  Dr. 
Foster's  good  wishes  on  the  last  day  of  the  year : — 

A  Happy  New  Year !  and  many  of  them,  and  may  you  more 
and  more  demonstrate  the  folly  of  strangling  men  at  sixty. 


CHAPTER   VIII 
1886 

The  controversy  with  Mr.  Gladstone  indicates  the  nature 
of  the  subject  that  Huxley  took  up  for  the  employment  of 
his  newly  obtained  leisure.  Chequered  as  this  leisure  was 
all  through  the  year  by  constant  illness,  which  drove  him 
again  and  again  to  the  warmth  of  Bournemouth  or  the  brisk 
airs  of  the  Yorkshire  moors  in  default  of  the  sovereign  medi- 
cine of  the  Alps,  he  managed  to  write  two  more  controversial 
articles  this  year,  besides  a  long  account  of  the  "  Progress 
of  Science,"  for  Mr.  T.  Humphry  Ward's  book  on  The 
Reign  of  Queen  Victoria,  which  was  to  celebrate  the  Jubilee 
year  1887.  Examinations — for  the  last  time,  however — the 
meetings  of  the  Eton  Governing  Body,  the  business  of  the 
Science  Schools,  the  Senate  of  the  London  University,  the 
Marine  Biological  Association,  the  Council  of  the  Royal 
Society,  and  a  round  dozen  of  subsidiary  committees,  all 
claimed  his  attention.  Even  when  driven  out  of  town  by 
his  bad  health  he  would  come  up  for  a  few  days  at  a  time 
to  attend  necessary  meetings. 

One  of  the  few  references  of  this  period  to  biological 
research  is  contained  in  a  letter  to  Professor  Pelseneer  of 
Ghent,  a  student  of  the  Mollusca,  who  afterwards  completed 
for  Huxley  the  long  unfinished  monograph  on  **  Spirula  *' 
for  the  Challenger  Report. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /an.  8,  1886. 
Dear  Sir — Accept  my  best  thanks  for  the  present  of  your 
publications.    As  you  may  imagine  I  find  that  on  the  cretaceous 
crustaceans  very  interesting.     It  was  a  rare  chance  to  find  the 
branchiae  preserved. 

45  129 


I30 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 


I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  send  you  a  copy  of  my  memoir  on  the 
morphology  of  the  Mollusca.  It  shows  signs  of  age  outside,  but 
I  beg  you  to  remember  that  it  is  33  years  old. 

I  am  rejoiced  to  think  you  find  it  still  worth  consulting.  It 
has  always  been  my  intention  to  return  to  the  subject  some  day, 
and  to  try  to  justify  my  old  conclusions — as  I  think  they  may 
be  justified. 

But  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  my  intention  will  now  ever 
be  carried  into  effect. — I  am  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Mr.  Gladstone's  second  article  appeared  in  the  January 
number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,  To  this  the  following 
letter  refers : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  ^.W.,/an.  21,  1886. 

My  dear  Skelton — Thanks  for  your  capital  bit  of  chaff.  I 
took  a  thought  and  began  to  mend  (as  Burns*  friend  and  my 
prototype  (G.O.M.)  is  not  yet  recorded  to  have  done)  about  a 
couple  of  months  ago,  and  then  Gladstone's  first  article  caused 
such  a  flow  of  bile  that  I  have  been  the  better  for  it  ever  since. 

I  need  not  tell  you  I  am  entirely  crushed  by  his  reply — still 
the  worm  will  turn  and  there  is  a  faint  squeak  (as  of  a  rat  in 
the  mouth  of  a  terrier)  about  to  be  heard  in  the  next  Nine- 
teenth, 

But  seriously,  it  is  to  me  a  grave  thing  that  the  destinies  of 
this  country  should  at  present  be  seriously  influenced  by  a  man, 
who,  whatever  he  may  be  in  the  affairs  of  which  I  am  no  judge 
— is  nothing  but  a  copious  shuffler,  in  those  which  I  do  under- 
stand.— With  best  wishes  to  Mrs.  Skelton  and  yourself,  ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

With  the  article  in  the  February  number  of  the  Nine- 
teenth Century,  he  concluded  his  tilt  with  Mr.  Gladstone 
upon  the  interpretation  of  Genesis.  His  supposed  "  unjaded 
appetite "  for  controversy  was  already  satiated ;  and  he 
begged  leave  to  retire  from  "  that  '  atmosphere  of  conten- 
tion '  in  which  Mr.  Gladstone  has  been  able  to  live,  alert 
and  vigorous  beyond  the  common  race  of  men,  as  if  it  were 
purest  mountain  air,"  for  the  "  Elysium  "  of  scientific  debate, 
which  "  suits  my  less  robust  constitution  better.'*  A  vain 
hope.  Little  as  he  liked  controversy  at  bottom,  in  spite 
of  the  skill — it  must  be  allowed,  at  times,  a  pleasurable 


i886  THE   EVOLUTION   OF   THEOLOGY 


131 


skill — in  using  the  weapons  of  debate,  he  was  not  to  avoid 
it  any  more  than  he  was  to  avoid  the  east  wind  when  he 
went  to  Bournemouth  from  early  in  February  till  the  end 
of  March,  of  which  he  writes  on  February  23 : — 

The  "  English  Naples "  is  rather  Florentine  so  far  as  a 
bitter  cold  east  wind  rather  below  than  above  o°C.  goes,  but 
from  all  I  hear  it  is  a  deal  better  than  London,  and  I  am  pick- 
ing up  in  spite  of  it.  I  wish  I  were  a  Holothuria,  and  could  get 
on  without  my  viscera.    I  should  do  splendidly  then. 

Here  he  wrote  a  long  article  on  the  "  Evolution  of 
Theology  "  (Collected  Essays,  iv.  287)  which  appeared  in  the 
March  and  April  numbers  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,  It 
was  a  positive  statement  of  the  views  he  had  arrived  at, 
which  underlay  the  very  partial — ^and  therefore  misleading 
— exposition  of  them  possible  in  controversy.  He  dealt  with 
the  subject,  not  with  reference  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of 
the  notions  under  review,  but  purely  as  a  question  of  anthro- 
pology, "  a  department  of  biology  to  which  I  have  at  vari- 
ous times  given  a  good  deal  of  attention."  Starting  with 
the  familiar  ground  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  he  thus  ex- 
plains the  paleontological  method  he  proposes  to  adopt : — 

In  the  venerable  record  of  ancient  life,  miscalled  a  book, 
when  it  is  really  a  library  comparable  to  a  selection  of  works 
from  English  literature  between  the  times  of  Beda  and  those  of 
Milton,  we  have  the  stratified  deposits  (often  confused  and  even 
with  their  natural  order  inverted)  left  by  the  stream  of  the 
intellectual  and  moral  life  of  Israel  during  many  centuries.  And, 
embedded  in  these  strata,  there  are  numerous  remains  of  forms 
of  thought  which  once  lived,  and  which,  though  often  unfor- 
tunately mere  fragments,  are  of  priceless  value  to  the  anthro- 
pologist. Our  task  is  to  rescue  these  from -their  relatively  un- 
important surroundings,  and  by  careful  comparison  with  exist- 
ing forms  of  theology  to  make  the  dead  world  which  they  record 
live  again. 

A  subsequent  letter  to  Professor  Lewis  Campbell,  bears 
upon  this  essay.  It  was  written  in  answer  to  an  enquiry 
prompted  by  the  comparison  here  drawn  between  the  primi- 
tive spiritual  theories  of  the  books  of  Judges  and  Samuel, 
and  the  very  similar  development  of  ideas  among  the  Ton- 


132 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 


gans,  as  described  by  Mariner,  who  lived  many  years  among 
the  natives. 

HODESLEA,  Oct,  lO,  1894. 

My  dear  Campbell — I  took  a  good  deal  of  trouble  years  ago 
to  satisfy  myself  about  the  point  you  mention,  and  I  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  Mariner  was  eminently  trustworthy,  and  that 
Martin  was  not  only  an  honest,  but  a  shrewd  and  rather  critical, 
reporter.  The  story  he  tells  about  testing  Mariner's  version  of 
King  Theebaw's  oration  shows  his  frame  of  mind  (and  is  very 
interesting  otherwise  in  relation  to  oral  tradition). 

I  have  a  lot  of  books  about  Polynesia,  but  of  all  I  possess 
and  have  read,  Mariner  is  to  my  mind  the  most  trustworthy. 

The  missionaries  are  apt  to  colour  everything,  and  they 
never  have  the  chance  of  knowing  the  interior  life  as  Mariner 
knew  it.  It  was  this  conviction  that  led  me  to  make  Mariner  my 
cheval  de  bataille  in  "  Evolution  of  Theology." 

I  am  giving  a  great  deal  of  trouble — ill  for  the  last  week, 
and  at  present  with  a  sharp  lumbago!  so  nice!  With  our  love 
to  Mrs.  Campbell  and  yourself — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

The  circumstances  under  which  the  following  letter  was 
written  are  these.  The  activity  bf  the  Home  Rulers  and 
the  lethargy  of  Unionists  had  caused  one  side  only  of  the 
great  question  then  agitating  English  politics,  to  be  repre- 
sented in  the  American  press,  with  the  result  that  the  funds 
of  the  Nationalists  were  swelled  by  subscriptions  from 
persons  who  might  have  acted  otherwise  if  the  argu- 
ments on  the  other  side  had  been  adequately  laid  before 
them. 

Mr.  Albert  Grey,  M.P.,  therefore  had  arranged  for  a 
series  of  clear,  forcible  pronouncements  from  strong  repre- 
sentative Englishmen  against  a  separate  Parliament,  to  be 
cabled  over  to  New  York  to  a  syndicate  of  influential  news- 
papers, and  his  American  advisers  desired  that  the  opening 
statement  should  be  from  Huxley. 

Although  it  will  be  seen  from  the  letter  that  he  would 
not  undertake  this  task,  Mr.  Grey  showed  the  letter  to  one 
or  two  of  the  leading  Liberal  Unionists  to  strengthen  their 
hands,  and  begged  permission  to  publish  it  for  the  benefit 
of  the  whole  party.  Accordingly,  it  appeared  in  the  Times 
of  April  13,  1886. 


i886  HOME   RULE 


133 


Casalini,  W.  Bournemouth,  March  21,  1886. 

Dear  Mr.  Grey — I  am  as  much  opposed  to  the  Home  Rule 
scheme  as  any  one  can  possibly  be,  and  if  I  were  a  political  man 
I  would  Hght  against  it  as  long  as  I  had  any  breath  left  in  me ; 
but  I  have  carefully  kept  out  of  the  political  field  all  my  life, 
and  it  is  too  late  for  me  now  to  think  of  entering  it. 

Anxious  watching  of  the  course  of  affairs  for  many  years 
past  has  persuaded  me  that  nothing  short  of  some  sharp  and 
sweeping  national  misfortune  will  convince  the  majority  of  our 
countrymen  that  government  by  average  opinion  is  merely  a 
circuitous  method  of  going  to  the. devil;  and  that  those  who 
profess  to  lead  but  in  fact  slavishly  follow  this  average  opinion 
are  simply  the  fastest  runners  and  the  loudest  squeakers  of  the 
herd  which  is  rushing  blindly  down  to  its  destruction. 

It  is  the  electorate,  and  especially  the  Liberal  electorate, 
which  is  responsible  for  the  present  state  of  things.  It  has  no 
political  education.  It  knows  well  enough  that  2  and  2  won't 
make  5  in  a  ledger,  and  that  sentimental  stealing  in  private  life 
is  not  to  be  tolerated ;  but  it  has  not  been  taught  the  great  lesson 
in  history  that  there  are  like  verities  in  national  life,  and  hence 
it  easily  falls  a  prey  to  any  clever  and  copious  fallacy-monger 
who  appeals  to  its  great  heart  instead  of  reminding  it  of  its  weak 
head. 

Politicians  have  gone  on  flattering  and  cajoling  this  chaos 
of  political  incompetence  until  the  just  penalty  of  believing 
their  own  fictions  has  befallen  them,  and  the  average  member  of 
Parliament  is  conscientiously  convinced  that  it  is  his  duty,  not 
to  act  for  his  constituents  to  the  best  of  his  judgment,  but  to  do 
exactly  what  they,  or  rather  the  small  minority  which  drives 
them,  tells  him  to  do. 

Have  we  a  real  statesman?  a  man  of  the  calibre  of  Pitt  or 
Burke,  to  say  nothing  of  Strafford  or  Pym,  who  will  stand  up 
and  tell  his  countrymen  that  this  disruption  of  the  union  is 
nothing  but  a  cowardly  wickedness — an  act  bad  in  itself,  fraught 
with  immeasurable  evil — especially  to  the  people  of  Ireland; 
and  that  if  it  cost  his  political  existence,  or  his  head,  for  that 
matter,  he  is  prepared  to  take  any  and  every  honest  means  of 
preventing  the  mischief  ? 

I  see  no  sign  of  any.  And  if  such  a  man  should  come  to  the 
front  what  chance  is  there  of  his  receiving  loyal  and  continuous 
support  from  a  majority  of  the  House  of  Commons?  I  see  no 
sign  of  any. 

There  was  a  time  when  the  political  madness  of  one  party 


134  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 

was  sure  to  be  checked  by  the  sanity,  or  at  any  rate  the  jealousy 
of  the  other.  At  the  last  election  I  should  have  voted  for  the 
Conservatives  (for  the  first  time  in  my  life)  had  it  not  been  for 
Lord  Randolph  Churchill;  but  I  thought  that  by  thus  jumping 
out  of  the  Gladstonian  frying-pan  into  the  Churchillian  fire  I 
should  not  mend  matters,  so  I  abstained  altogether. 

Mr.  Parnell  has  great  qualities.  For  the  first  time  the  Irish 
malcontents  have  a  leader  who  is  not  eloquent,  but  who  is 
honest;  who  knows  what  he  wants  and  faces  the  risks  involved 
in  getting  it.  Our  poor  Right  Honourable  Rhetoricians  are 
no  match  for  this  man  who  understands  realities.  I  believe 
also  that  Mr.  Parneirs  success  will  destroy  the  English  poli- 
ticians who  -permit  themselves  to  be  his  instruments,  as  soon 
as  bitter  experience  of  the  consequences  has  brought  English- 
men and  Scotchmen  (and  I  will  add  Irishmen)  to  their 
senses. 

I  suppose  one  ought  not  to  be  sorry  for  that  result,  but  there 
are  men  among  them  over  whose  fall  all  will  lament. — I  am, 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Some  of  the  newspapers  took  these  concluding  para- 
graphs to  imply  support  of  Parnell,  so  that  at  the  end  of 
June  he  writes: — 

The  Tribune  man  seems  to  have  less  intelligence  than  might 
be  expected.  I  spoke  approvingly  of  the  way  in  which  Parnell 
had  carried  out  his  policy,  which  is  rather  different  from  ap- 
proving the  policy  itself. 

But  these  newspaper  scribes  don't  take  the  trouble  to  under- 
stand what  they  read. 

While  at  Bournemouth  he  also  finfshed  and  sent  off  to 
the  Youth's  Companion,  an  American  paper,  an  article  on 
the  evolution  of  certain  types  of  the  house,  called  "  From 
the  Hut  to  the  Pantheon."  Beginning  with  a  description 
of  the  Pantheon,  that  characteristically  Roman  work  with 
its  vast  dome,  so  strongly  built  that  it  is  the  only  great 
dome  remaining  without  a  flaw : — 

For  a  long  time  (he  says)  I  was  perplexed  to  know  what  it 
was  about  the  proportions  of  the  interior  of  the  Pantheon  which 
gave  me  such  a  different  feeling  from  that  made  by  any  other 
domed  space  I  had  ever  entered. 


i886  LETTER   TO   H.  SPENCER 


135 


The  secret  of  this  he  finds  in  the  broad  and  simple 
design  peculiar  to  the  building,  and  then  shows  in  detail 
how 

the  round  hut,  the  -^des  Vestae,  and  the  Pantheon  are  so  many 
stages  in  a  process  of  architectural  evolution  which  was  effected 
between  the  first  beginnings  of  Roman  history  and  the  Au- 
gustan age. 

The  relation  between  the  beehive  hut,  the  terremare,  and 
the  pile-dwellings  of  Italy  lead  to  many  suggestive  bits  of 
early  anthropology,  which,  it  may  be  hoped,  bore  fruit  in 
the  minds  of  some  of  his  youthful  readers. 

We  find  him  also  reading  over  proofs  for  Mr.  Herbert 
Spencer,  who,  although  he  might  hesitate  to  ask  for  his 
criticism  with  respect  to  a  subject  on  which  they  had  a 
"  standing  difference,"  still 

concluded  that  to  break  through  the  long-standing  usage,  in  pur- 
suance of  which  I  have  habitually  submitted  my  biological  writ- 
ing to  your  castigation,  and  so  often  profited  by  so  doing,  would 
seem  like  a  distrust  of  your  candour — a  distrust  which  I  cannot 
entertain. 

So  he  wrote  in  January;  and  on  March  19  he  wrote 
again,  with  another  set  of  proofs — 

Tou jours  I'audace !  More  proofs  to  look  over.  Don't  write 
a  critical  essay,  only  marginal  notes.  Perhaps  you  will  say,  like 
the  Roman  poet  to  the  poetaster  who  asked  him  to  erase  any 
passages  he  did  not  like,  and  who  replied,  "  One  erasure  will 
suffice  " — perhaps  you  will  say,  "  There  needs  only  one  marginal 
note." 

To  this  he  received  answer: — 

Casalini,  W.  Bournemouth,  March  11,  1886. 

My  dear  Spencer — More  power  to  your  elbow !  You  will 
find  my  blessing  at  the  end  of  the  proof. 

But  please  look  very  carefully  at  some  comments  which  are 
not  merely  sceptical  criticisms,  but  deal  with  matters  of  fact. 

I  see  the  difference  between  us  on  the  speculative  question 
lies  in  the  conception  of  the  primitive  protoplasm.  I  conceive 
it  as  a  mechanism  set  going  by  heat — as  a  sort  of  active  crystal 
with  the  capacity  of  giving  rise  to  a  great  number  of  pseudo- 
morphs;  and  I  conceive  that  external  conditions  favour  one  or 


136 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 


the  other  pseudomorph,  but  leave  the  fundamental  mechanism 
untouched. 

You  appear  to  me  to  suppose  that  external  conditions  modify 
the  machinery,  as  if  by  transferring  a  flour-mill  into  a  forest  you 
could  make  it  into  a  saw-mill.  I  am  too  much  of  a  sceptic  to 
deny  the  possibility  of  anything — especially  as  I  am  now  so 
much  occupied  with  theology — ^but  I  don't  see  my  way  to  your 
conclusion. 

And  that  is  all  the  more  reason  why  I  don't  want  to  stop 
you  from  working  it  out,  or  rather  to  make  the  "  one  erasure" 
you  suggest.  For  as  to  stopping  you,  "  ten  on  me  might,"  as  the 
navvy  said  to  the  little  special  constable  who  threatened  to  take 
him  into  custody. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Warmth  and  sea-fogs  here  for  a  variety. 

One  more  letter  may  be  given  from  this  time  at  Bourne- 
mouth— a  letter  to  his  eldest  daughter  on  the  loss  of  her 
infant  son : — 

Casalini,  W.  Bournemouth,  March  2,  1886. 

It's  very  sad  to  lose  your  child  just  when  he  was  beginning 
to  bind  himself  to  you,  and  I  don't  know  that  it  is  much  consola- 
tion to  reflect  that  the  longer  he  had  wound  himself  up  in  your 
heartstrings  the  worse  the  tear  would  have  been,  which  seems 
to  have  been  inevitable  sooner  or  later.  One  does  not  weigh  and 
measure  these  things  while  grief  is  fresh,  and  in  my  experience 
a  deep  plunge  into  the  waters  of  sorrow  is  the  hopefullest  way  of 
getting  through  them  on  to  one's  daily  road  of  life  again.  No 
one  can  help  another  very  much  in  these  crises  of  life ;  but  love 
and  sympathy  count  for  something,  and  you  know,  dear  child, 
that  you  have  these  in  fullest  measure  from  us. 

On  coming  up  to  London  in  April  he  was  very  busy, 
among  other  things,  with  a  proposal  that  the  Marine  Biologi- 
cal Association,  of  which  he  was  President,  should  urge  the 
Government  to  appoint  a  scientific  adviser  to  the  Fishery 
Board.  A  letter  of  his  on  this  subject  had  appeared  in 
the  Times  for  March  30.  There  seemed  to  him,  with  his 
practical  experience  of  official  work,  insuperable  objections 
to  the  status  of  such  an  officer.  Above  all,  he  would  be  a 
representative  of  science  in  name,  without  any  responsibility 
to  the  body  of  scientific  men  in  the  country.     Some  of  his 


i886  SCIENCE   AND   THE   FISHERY   BOARD 


137 


younger  colleagues  on  the  Council,  who  had  not  enjoyed 
the  same  experience,  thought  that  he  had  set  aside  their 
expressions  of  opinion  too  brusquely,  and  begged  Sir  M. 
Foster,  as  at  once  a  close  friend  of  his,  and  one  to  whose 
opinion  he  paid  great  respect,  to  make  representations  to 
him  on  their  behalf,  which  he  did  in  writing,  being  kept 
at  home  by  a  cold.  To  this  letter,  in  which  his  friend  begged 
him  not  to  be  vexed  at  a  very  plain  statement  of  the  other 
point  of  view,  but  to  make  it  possible  for  the  younger  men 
to  continue  to  follow  his  lead,  he  replied: — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  April  5,  1886. 

My  dear  Foster — Mrs.  Foster  is  quite  right  in  looking  sharp 
after  your  colds,  which  is  very  generous  of  me  to  say,  as  I  am 
down  in  the  mouth  and  should  have  been  cheered  by  a  chat. 

I  am  very  glad  to  know  what  our  younger  friends  are  think- 
ing about.  I  made  up  my  mind  to  some  such  result  of  the  action 
I  have  thought  it  necessary  to  take.  But  I  have  no  ambition  to 
lead,  and  no  desire  to  drive  them,  and  if  we  can't  agree,  the  best 
way  will  be  to  go  our  ways  separately.  ... 

Heaven  forbid  that  I  should  restrain  anybody  from  express- 
ing any  opinion  in  the  world.  But  it  is  so  obvious  to  me  that 
not  one  of  our  friends  has  the  smallest  notion  of  what  adminis- 
tration in  fishery  questions  means,  or  of  the  danger  of  creating 
a  scientific  Frankenstein  in  that  which  he  is  clamouring  for,  that 
I  suppose  I  have  been  over-anxious  to  prevent  mischief,  and 
seemed  domineering. 

Well,  I  shall  mend  my  ways.  I  must  be  getting  to  be  an  old 
savage  if  you  think  it  risky  to  write  anything  to  me. — Ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

But  he  did  not  stay  long  in  London.  By  April  20  he 
was  oflf  to  Ilkley,  where  he  expected  to  stay  **  for  a  week 
or  two,  perhaps  longer."  On  the  24th  he  writes  to  Sir  M. 
Foster : — 

I  was  beginning  to  get  wrong  before  we  left  Bournemouth, 
and  went  steadily  down  after  our  return  to  London,  so  that  I  had 

to  call  in  a  very  shrewd  fellow  who  attends  my  daughter  M . 

Last  Monday  he  told  me  that  more  physicking  was  no  good,  and 
that  I  had  better  be  off  here,  and  see  what  exercise  and  the  fresh 
air  of  the  moors  would  do  for  me.  So  here  I  came,  and  mean  to 
give  the  place  a  fair  trial. 


138 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 


I  do  a  minimum  of  ten  miles  per  diem  without  fatigue,  and 
as  I  eat,  drink,  and  sleep  well,  there  ought  to  be  nothing  the 
matter  with  me.  Why,  under  these  circumstances,  I  should 
never  feel  honestly  cheerful,  or  know  any  other  desire  than  that 
of  running  away  and  hiding  myself,  I  don't  know.  No  explana- 
tion is  to  be  found  even  in  Foster's  Physiology !  The  only  thing 
my  demon  can't  stand  is  sharp  walking,  and  I  will  give  him  a 
dose  of  that  remedy  when  once  I  get  into  trim. 

Indeed  he  was  so  much  better  even  after  a  single  day  at 
Ilkley,  that  he  writes  home: — 

It  really  seems  to  me  that  I  am  an  impostor  for  running 
away,  and  I  can  hardly  believe  that  I  felt  so  ill  and  miserable 
four-and-twenty  hours  ago. 

And  on  the  28th  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster : — 

I  have  been  improving  wonderfully  in  the  last  few  days. 
Yesterday  I  walked  to  Bolton  Abbey,  the  Strid,  etc.,  and  back, 
which  is  a  matter  of  sixteen  miles,  without  being  particularly 
tired,  though  the  afternoon  sun  was  as  hot  as  midsummer. 

It  is  the  old  story — a  case  of  candle-snuff — some  infernal 
compound  that  won't  get  burnt  up  without  more  oxygenation 
than  is  to  be  had  under  ordinary  conditions.  .  .  . 

I  want  to  be  back  and  doing  something,  and  yet  have  a 
notion  that  I  should  be  wiser  if  I  stopped  here  a  few  weeks  and 
burnt  up  my  rubbish  effectually.  A  good  deal  will  depend  upon 
whether  I  can  get  my  wife  to  join  me  or  not.  She  has  had  a 
world  of  worry  lately. 

As  to  his  fortunate  choice  of  an  hotel,  **  I  made  up  my 
mind,'*  he  writes,  "  to  come  to  this  hotel  merely  because 
Bradshaw  said  it  was  on  the  edge  of  the  moor — but  for 
once  acting  on  an  advertisement  turned  out  well."  The 
moor  ran  up  six  or  seven  hundred  feet  just  outside  the 
garden,  and  the  hotel  itself  was  well  outside  and  above  the 
town  and  the  crowd  of  visitors.  Here,  with  the  exception 
of  a  day  or  two  in  May  and  a  fortnight  at  the  beginning 
of  June,  he  stayed  till  July,  living  as  far  as  possible  an 
outdoor  life,  and  getting  through  a  fair  amount  of  cor- 
respondence. 

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  he  should  long  remain 


1886  AT   ILKLEY 


139 


unknown,  and  he  was  sometimes  touched,  more  often  bored, 
by  the  forms  which  this  recognition  took.  Thus  two  days 
after  his  arrival  he  writes  home: — 

Sitting  opposite  to  me  at  the  table  d'hote  here  is  a  nice  old 
Scotch  lady.  People  have  found  out  my  name  here  by  this  time, 
and  yesterday  she  introduced  herself  to  me,  and  expressed  great 
gratitude  for  the  advice  I  gave  to  a  son  of  hers  two  or  three 
years  ago.  I  had  great  difficulty  in  recollecting  anything  at  all 
about  the  matter,  but  it  seems  the  youngster  wanted  to  go  to 
Africa,  and  I  advised  him  not  to,  at  anyrate  at  present.  How- 
ever, the  poor  fellow  went,  and  died,  and  they  seem  to  have 
found  a  minute  account  of  his  interview  with  me  in  his  diary. 

But  all  were  not  of  this  kind.  On  the  26th  he 
writes : — 

I  took  a  three  hours'  walk  over  the  moors  this  morning  with 
nothing  but  grouse  and  peewits  for  company,  and  it  was  per- 
fectly delicious.  I  am  beginning  to  forget  that  I  have  a  liver, 
and  even  feel  mildly  disposed  to  the  two  fools  of  women  between 
whom  I  have  to  sit  every  meal. 

2yth, —  ...  I  wish  you  would  come  here  if  only  for  a  few 
days — ^it  would  do  you  a  world  of  good  after  your  anxiety  and 
wear  and  tear  for  the  last  week.  And  you  say  you  are  feeling 
weak.  Please  come  and  let  me  take  care  of  you  a  bit;  I  am 
sure  the  lovely  air  here  would  set  you  up.  I  feel  better  than  I 
have  for  months.  .  .  . 

The  country  is  lovely,  and  in  a  few  days  more  all  the  leaves 
will  be  out.  You  can  almost  hear  them  bursting  Now  come 
down  on  Saturday  and  rejoice  the  "  sair  een  "  of  your  old  hus- 
band who  is  wearying  for  you. 

Another  extract  from  the  same  correspondence  expresses 
his  detestation  for  a  gross  breach  of  confidence : — 

April  22. —  ...  I  have  given  Mr. a  pretty  smart  set- 
ting down  for  sending  me  Ruskin's  letter  to  him !  It  really  is 
iniquitous  that  such  things  should  be  done.    Ruskin  has  a  right 

to  say  anything  he  likes  in  a  private  letter,  and must  be  a 

perfect  cad  to  send  it  on  to  me. 

The  following  letter  on  the  ideal  of  a  Paleontological 
Museum  is  a  specialised  and  improved  version  of  his  earlier 
schemes  on  the  same  subject: — 


I40 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 


4  Marlborough  Place,  May  3,  1886. 

My  dear  Foster — I  cannot  find  Hughes*  letter,  and  fancy  I 
must  have  destroyed  it.  So  I  cannot  satisfy  Newton  as  to  the 
exact  terms  of  his  question. 

But  I  am  quite  clear  that  my  answer  was  not  meant  to 
recommend  any  particular  course  for  Cambridge,  when  I  know 
nothing  about  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case,  but  re- 
ferred to  what  I  should  like  to  do  if  I  had  carte  blanche. 

It  is  as  plain  as  the  nose  on  one's  face  (mine  is  said  to  be 
very  plain)  that  Zoological  and  Botanical  collections  should 
illustrate  (i)  Morphology,  (2)  Geographical  Distribution,  (3) 
Geological  Succession. 

It  is  also  obvious  to  me  that  the  morphological  series  ought 
to  contain  examples  of  all  the  extinct  types  in  their  proper 
places.  But  I  think  it  will  be  no  less  plain  to  any  one  who  has 
had  anything  to  do  with  Geology  and  Paleontology  that  the  great 
mass  of  fossils  is  to  be  most  conveniently  arranged  stratigraph- 
ically.  The  Jermyn  St.  Museum  affords  an  example  of  the  strati- 
graphical  arrangement. 

I  do  not  know  that  there  is  anywhere  a  collection  arranged 
according  to  Provinces  of  Geographical  Distribution.  It  would 
be  a  great  credit  to  Cambridge  to  set  the  example  of  having  one. 

If  I  had  a  free  hand  in  Cambridge  or  anywhere  else  I  should 
build  (A)  a  Museum,  open  to  the  public,  and  containing  three 
strictly  limited  and  selected  collections;  one  morphologically, 
one  geographically,  and  one  stratigraphically  arranged ;  and  (  B  ) 
a  series  of  annexes  arranged  for  storage  and  working  purposes 
to  contain  the  material  which  is  of  no  use  to  any  but  specialists. 
I  am  convinced  that  this  is  the  only  plan  by  which  the  wants  of 
ordinary  people  can  be  supplied  efficiently,  while  ample  room  is 
afforded  for  additions  to  any  extent  without  large  expense  in 
building. 

On  the  present  plan  or  no  plan,  Museums  are  built  at  great 
cost,  and  in  a  few  years  are  choked  for  want  of  room. 

If  you  have  the  opportunity,  I  wish  you  would  explain  that 
I  gave  no  opinion  as  to  what  might  or  might  not  be  expedient 
under  present  circumstances  at  Cambridge.  I  do  not  want  to 
seem  meddlesome. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Don't  forget  Cayley. 

N.B. — As  my  meaning  seems  to  have  been  misunderstood  I 
wish,  if  you  have  the  chance,  you  would  make  it  clear  that  I  do 
not  want  three  brick  and  mortar  museums  —  but  one  pubhc 


i886  LETTER  TO  SIR   M.  FOSTER 


141 


museum — containing  a  threefold  collection  of  typical  forms,  a 
biological  Trinity  in  Unity  in  fact 

It  mig^t  conciliate  the  clerics  if  you  adopted  this  illustration. 
But  as  your  own,  mind.  I  should  not  like  them  to  think  me 
capable  of  it 

However,  even  Ilkley  was  not  an  infallible  cure.  Thus 
he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster: — 

May  17. — I  am  ashamed  of  myself  for  not  going  to  town  to 
attend  the  Gov.  Grant  Committee  and  Council,  but  I  find  I  had 
better  stop  here  till  the  end  of  the  month,  when  I  must  return 
for  a  while  anyhow. 

I  have  improved  very  much  here,  and  so  long  as  I  take  heaps 
of  exercise  every  day  I  have  nothing  to  complain  of  beyond  a  fit 
of  blue  devils  when  I  wake  in  the  morning. 

But  I  don't  want  to  do  any  manner  of  work,  still  less  any 
manner  of  play,  such  as  is  going  on  in  London  at  this  time  of 
year,  and  I  think  I  am  wise  to  keep  out  of  it  as  long  as  I  can. 

I  wish  I  knew  what  is  the  matter  with  me.  I  feel  always 
just  on  the  verge  of  becoming  an  absurd  old  hypochondriac,  and 
as  if  it  only  wanted  a  touch  to  send  me  over. 

May  27. —  .  .  .  The  blue  devils  worry  me  far  less  than  they 
did.  If  there  were  any  herd  of  swine  here  I  might  cast  them 
out  altogether,  but  I  expect  they  would  not  go  into  blackfaced 
sheep. 

I  am  disposed  to  stop,  not  more  than  ten  days  in  London,  but 
to  come  back  here  and  bring  some  work  with  me.  In  fact  I  do 
not  know  that  I  should  return  yet  if  it  were  not  that  I  do  not 
wish  to  miss  our  usual  visit  to  Balliol,  and  that  my  Spanish 
daughter  is  coming  home  for  a  few  months.  .  .  . 

I  am  overwhelmed  at  being  taken  at  my  word  about  scientific 
federation.*  "  Something  will  transpire  "  as  old  Gutzlaff  \  said 
when  he  flogged  plaintiff,  defendant  and  witnesses  in  an  obscure 
case. 

PS. — I  have  had  an  invitation  from to  sign  "  without 

committing  myself  to   details "   an   approbation   of  his  grand 
scheme.  %    A  stupendous  array  of  names  appear  thus  committed 

*  i.e.  a  federation  between  the  Royal  Society  and  scientific  societies 
in  the  colonies. 

f  This  worthy  appears  to  have  been  an  admiral  on  the  China  sta- 
tion about  1840. 

X  For  the  reorganisation  of  the  Fisheries  Department. 


142 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 


to  the  "  principle  of  the  Bill."    I  prefer  to  be  the  Hartington  of 
the  situation. 

During  this  first  stay  in  London  he  wrote  twice  to  Mr. 
Herbert  Spencer,  from  whom  he  had,  according  to  custom, 
received  some  proofs  to  read.  The  first  set  were  from  his 
autobiography;  after  twice  reading  Huxley  had  merely 
marked  a  couple  of  paragraphs  containing  personal  refer- 
ences which  might  possibly  be  objectionable  "  to  the  *  heirs, 
administrators  and  assigns,'  if  there  are  any,  or  to  the  people 
themselves  if  they  are  living  still."    He  continues,  June  i : — 

You  will  be  quite  taken  aback  at  getting  a  proof  from  me 
with  so  few  criticisms,  but  even  I  am  not  so  perverse  as  to 
think  that  I  can  improve  your  own  story  of  your  own  life ! 

I  notice  a  curious  thing.  If  Ransom  *  had  not  overworked 
himself,  I  should  probably  not  be  writing  this  letter. 

For  if  he  had  worked  less  hard  I  might  have  been  first  and 
he  second  at  the  Examination  at  the  University  of  London  in 
1845.  In  which  case  I  should  have  obtained  the  Exhibition, 
should  not  have  gone  into  the  navy,  and  should  have  forsaken 
science  for  practice.  .  .  . 

Again  on  June  4 : — 

My  dear  Spencer — Here's  a  screed  for  you !  I  wish  you 
well  through  it. 

Mind,  I  have  no  a  priori  objection  to  the  transmission  of 
functional  modifications  whatever.  In  fact,  as  I  told  you,  I 
should  rather  like  it  to  be  true. 

But  I  argued  against  the  assumption  (with  Darwin  as  I  do 
with  you)  of  the  operation  of  a  factor  which,  if  you  forgive  me 
for  saying  so,  seems  as  far  off  support  by  trustworthy  evidence 
now  as  ever  it  was. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

On  the  same  day  he  wrote  to  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  John) 
Skelton : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  London,  N.W., 
June  4,  1886. 

My  dear  Skelton — A  civil  question  deserves  a  civil  answer 
— Yes.  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  know — nobody  better — "  what  it  is 
to  be  unfit  for  work."     I  have  been  trying  to  emerge  from  that 

*  Dr.  Ransom  of  Nottingham. 


1886  THE   ETON   SYSTEM 


143 


condition,  first  at  Bournemouth,  and  then  at  Ilkley,  for  the  last 
five  months,  with  such  small  success  that  I  fijid  a  few  days  in 
London  knocks  me  up,  and  I  go  back  to  the  Yorkshire  moors 
next  week. 

We  have  no  water-hens  there — ^nothing  but  peewits,  larks, 
and  occasional  grouse — ^but  the  air  and  water  are  of  the  best, 
and  the  hills  quite  high  enough  to  bring  one's  muscles  into  play. 

I  suppose  that  Nebuchadnezzar  was  quite  happy  so  long  as 
be  grazed  and  kept  clear  of  Babylon;  if  so,  I  can  hold  him  for 
my  Scripture  parallel. 

I  wish  I  could  accept  your  moral  No.  2,  but  there  is  amaz- 
ingly little  evidence  of  "  reverential  care  for  unoffending  cre- 
ation "  in  the  arrangements  of  nature,  that  I  can  discover.  If 
our  ears  were  sharp  enough  to  hear  all  the  cries  of  pain  that 
are  uttered  in  the  earth  by  men  and  beasts,  we  should  be  deaf- 
ened by  one  continuous  scream ! 

And  yet  the  wealth  of  superfluous  loveliness  in  the  world 
condemns  pessimism.    It  is  a  hopeless  riddle. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Please  remember  me  to  Mrs.  Skelton. 

The  election  of  a  new  Headmaster  at  Eton,  where  he 
was  a  member  of  the  Governing  Body,  was  a  matter  of  no 
small  concern  to  him  at  this  moment.  Some  parts  of  the 
existing  system  seemed  impossible  to  alter,  though  a  reform 
in  the  actual  scheme  and  scope  of  teaching  seemed  to  him 
both  possible  and  necessary  for  the  future  well-being  of  the 
school.    He  writes  to  his  eldest  son  on  July  6,  1886: — 

The  whole  system  of  paying  the  Eton  masters  by  the  profits 
of  the  boarding-houses  they  keep  is  detestable  to  my  mind,  but 
any  attempt  to  alter  it  would  be  fatal. 

...  I  look  to  the  new  appointment  with  great  anxiety.  It 
will  make  or  mar  Eton.  If  the  new  Headmaster  has  the  capacity 
to  grasp  the  fact  that  the  world  has  altered  a  good  deal  since  the 
Eton  system  was  invented,  and  if  he  has  the  sense  to  adapt  Eton 
to  the  new  state  of  things,  without  letting  go  that  which  was 
good  in  the  old  system,  Eton  may  become  the  finest  public  school 
in  the  country. 

If  on  the  contrary  he  is  merely  a  vigorous  representative  of 
the  old  system  pure  and  simple,  the  school  will  go  to  the  dogs. 

I  think  it  is  not  unlikely  that  there  may  be  a  battle  in  the 
Governing  Body  over  the  business,  and  that  I  shall  be  on  the 


144 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 


losing  side.    But  I  am  used  to  that,  and  shall  do  what  I  think 
right  nevertheless. 

The  same  letter  contains  his  reply  to  a  suggestion  that 
he  should  join  a  society  whose  object  was  to  prevent  a  rail- 
way from  being  run  right  through  the  Lake  district. 

I  am  not  much  inclined  to  join  the  "  Lake  District  Defence 
Society."  I  value  natural  beauty  as  much  as  most  people — indeed 
I  value  it  so  much,  and  think  so  highly  of  its  influence  that  I 
would  make  beautiful  scenery  accessible  to  all  the  world,  if  I 
could.  If  any  engineering  or  mining  work  is  projected,  which 
will  really  destroy  the  beauty  of  the  Lakes,  I  will  certainly 
oppose  it,  but  I  am  not  disposed,  as  Goschen  said,  to  "  give  a 
blank  cheque  "  to  a  Defence  Society,  the  force  of  which  is  pretty 
certain  to  be  wielded  by  the  most  irrational  fanatics  among  its 
members. 

Only  the  other  day  I  walked  the  whole  length  of  Bassen- 
thwaite  from  Keswick  and  back,  and  I  cannot  say  that  the  little 
line  of  rails  which  runs  along  the  lake,  now  coming  into  view 
and  now  disappearing,  interfered  with  my  keen  enjoyment  of 
the  beauty  of  the  lake  any  more  than  the  macadamised  road  did. 
And  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  railway  I  should  not  have  been 
able  to  make  Keswick  my  headquarters,  and  I  should  have  lost 
my  day's  delight. 

People's  sense  of  beauty  should  be  more  robust.  I  have  had 
apocalyptic  visions  looking  down  Oxford  Street  at  a  sunset 
before  now. — Ever,  dear  lad,  your  loving  father, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

After  this  he  took  his  wife  to  Harrogate,  "just  like 
Clapham  Common  on  a  great  scale,"  where  she  was  ordered 
to  drink  the  waters.  For  himself,  it  was  as  good  as  Ilkley, 
seeing  that  he  needed  "  nothing  but  fresh  air  and  exercise, 
and  just  as  much  work  that  interests  me  as  will  keep  my 
mind  from  getting  *  blue  mouldy.'  "  The  work  in  this  case 
was  the  chapter  in  the  Life  of  Charles  Darwin,  which  he 
had  promised  Mr.  F.  Darwin  to  finish  before  going  abroad. 

On  July  lo,  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on  the  rejection 
of  the  Home  Rule  Bill : — 

The  smashing  of  the  G.O.M.  appears  to  be  pretty  complete, 
though  he  has  unfortunately  enough  left  to  give  him  the  means 
of  playing  an  ugly  game  of  obstruction  in  the  next  Parliament. 


i886  LETTER   TO   SIR   M.  FOSTER  145 

You  have  taken  the  shine  out  of  my  exultation  at  Lubbock's 
majority — ^though  I  confess  I  was  disheartened  to  see  so  many 
educated  men  going  in  for  the  disruption  policy.  If  it  were  not 
for  Randolph  I  should  turn  Tory,  but  that  fellow  will  some  day 
oust  Salisbury  as  Dizzy  ousted  old  Derby,  and  sell  his  party  to 
Pamell  or  anybody  else  who  makes  a  good  bid. 

We  are  flourishing  on  the  whole.  Sulphide  of  wife  joins 
with  me  in  love. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

On  the  2 1st  he  writes: — 

The  formation  of  Huxley  sulphide  will  be  brought  to  a 
sudden  termination  to-morrow  when  we  return  to  London.  The 
process  has  certainly  done  my  wife  a  great  deal  of  good  and  I 
wish  it  could  have  gone  on  a  week  or  two  longer,  but  our  old 
arrangements  are  upset  and  we  must  start  with  the  chicks  for 
Switzerland  on  fhe  27th,  that  is  next  Tuesday. 


46 


CHAPTER   IX 
1886 

The  earlier  start  was  decided  upon  for  the  sake  of  one 
of  his  daughters,  who  had  been  ill.  He  went  first  to  Evo- 
lena,  but  the  place  did  not  suit  him,  and  four  days  after 
his  arrival  went  on  to  Arolla,  whence  he,  writes  on  Au- 
gust 3  :— 

We  reached  Evolena  on  Thursday  last.  .  .  .  We  had 
glorious  weather  Thursday  and  Friday,  and  the  latter  day  (hav- 
ing both  been  told  carefully  to  avoid  over-exertion),  the  wife 
and  I  strolled,  quite  unintentionally,  as  far  as  the  Glacier  de 
Ferpecle  and  back  again.  Luckily  the  wife  is  none  the  worse, 
and  indeed,  I  think  I  was  the  more  tired  of  the  two.  But  we 
saw  at  once  that  Evolena  was  a  mistake  for  our  purpose,  and 
were  confirmed  in  that  opinion  by  a  deluge  of  rain  on  Saturday. 
The  hotel  is  down  in  a  hole  at  the  tail  of  a  dirty  Swiss  village, 
and  only  redeemed  by  very  good  cooking.  So,  Sunday  being 
fine,  I,  E.  and  H.  started  up  here  to  prospect,  18  miles  up  and 
down,  and  2000  feet  to  climb,  and  did  it  beautifully.  It  is  just 
the  place  for  us,  at  the  tail  of  a  glacier  in  the  midst  of  a  splendid 
amphitheatre  of  11-12000  feet  snow  heights,  and  yet  not  bare 
and  waste,  any  quantity  of  stone-pines  growing  about.  ...  I 
rather  long  for  the  flesh-pots  of  Evolena — cooking  here  being 
decidedly  rudimentary — otherwise  we  are  very  well  off. 

The  keen  air  of  six  thousand  feet  above  sea  level  worked 
wonders  with  the  invalids.  The  lassitude  of  the  last  two 
years  was  swept  away,  and  Huxley  came  home  eager  for 
active  life.  Here  too  it  was  that,  for  occupation,  he  took  up 
the  study  of  gentians;  the  beginning  of  that  love  of  his 
garden  which  was  so  great  a  delight  to  him  in  his  last  years. 
On  his  return  home  he  writes : — 
146 


i8S6  IN  AROLLA 


147 


4  Marlborough  Place,  Stpt,  10,  1886. 

My  dear  Foster — We  got  back  last  evening  after  a  very 
successful  trip.  Arolla  suited  us  all  to  a  T,  and  we  are  all  in 
great  force.  As  for  me,  I  have  not  known  of  the  existence  of 
my  liver,  and  except  for  the  fact  that  I  found  fifteen  or  sixteen 
miles  with  a  couple  of  thousand  feet  up  and  down  quite  enough, 
I  could  have  deluded  myself  into  the  fond  imagination  that  I 
was  twenty  years  younger. 

By  way  of  amusement  I  bought  a  Swiss  Flora  in  Lausanne 
and  took  to  botanising — and  my  devotion  to  the  gentians  led  the 
Bishop  of  Chichester — a  dear  old  man,  who  paid  us  (that  is  the 
hotel)  a  visit — to  declare  that  I  sought  the  "Ur-gentian"  as  a 
kind  of  Holy  Grail.  The  only  interruption  to  our  felicity  was 
the  death  of  a  poor  fellow,  who  was  brought  down  on  a  gfuide*s 
back  from  an  expedition  he  ought  not  to  have  undertaken,  and 
whom  I  did  my  best  to  keep  alive  one  night.  But  rapid  pleuritic 
effusion  finished  him  the  next  morning,  in  spite  of  (I  hope 
not  in  consequence  of)  such  medical  treatment  as  I  could 
give  him. 

I  see  you  had  a  great  meeting  at  Birmingham,  but  I  know 
not  details.  The  delegation  to  Sydney  is  not  a  bad  idea,  but 
why  on  earth  have  they  arranged  that  it  shall  arrive  in  the 
middle  of  the  hot  weather  ?  Speechifying  with  the  thermometer 
at  90°  in  the  shade  will  try  the  nerves  of  the  delegates,  I  can 
tell  them. 

I  shall  remain  quietly  here  and  see  whether  I  can  stand 
London.  I  hope  I  may,  for  the  oestrus  of  work  is  upon  me — for 
the  first  time  this  couple  of  years.  Let  me  have  some  news  of 
you.    With  our  love  to  your  wife  and  you — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  Sept.  14,  1886. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  hear  that  some  of  your  alguazils 
were  looking  after  me  yesterday,  so  I  had  better  give  myself  up 
at  once — hoping  it  will  be  considered  in  the  sentence. 

The  fact  is  I  have  been  going  to  write  to  you  ever  since  we 
came  back  last  Thursday  evening,  but  I  had  about  fifty  other 
letters  to  write  and  got  sick  of  the  operation. 

We  are  all  in  great  force,  and  as  for  me,  I  never  expected  a 
year  ago  to  be  as  well  as  I  am.  I  require  to  look  in  the  glass 
and  study  the  crows'  feet  and  the  increasing  snow  cap  on  the 
summit  of  my  Tete  noire  (as  it  once  was),  to  convince  myself 
I  am  not  twenty  years  younger. 


148  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ix 

How  long  it  will  last  I  don't  feel  sure,  but  I  am  going  to  give 
London  as  little  chance  as  possible. 

I  trust  you  have  all  been  thriving  to  a  like  extent.  Scott  * 
wrote  to  me  the  other  day  wanting  to  take  his  advanced  flock 
(2 — one,  I  believe,  a  ewe-lamb)  to  Kew.  I  told  him  I  had  no 
objection,  but  he  had  better  consult  you. 

I  have  not  been  to  S.K.  yet — as  I  have  a  devil  (botanical — ) 
and  must  satisfy  him  before  doing  anything  else.  It's  the  great- 
est sign  of  amendment  that  I  have  gone  in  for  science  afresh. 
When  I  am  ill  (and  consequently  venomous),  nothing  satisfies 
me  but  gnawing  at  theology ;  it's  a  sort  of  crib-biting. 

Our  love  to  Mrs.  Donnelly.  I  suppose  G.H.f  is  by  this  time 
a  kind  of  Daniel  Lambert  physically  and  Solomon  mentally — ^my 
blessing  to  him. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

As  a  sequel  to  the  sad  event  mentioned  in  the  former 
letter,  the  relations  of  the  young  man  who  had  died  so 
suddenly  at  Arolla  wished  to  offer  Huxley  some  gift  in 
grateful  recognition  of  the  kindness  he  had  shown  to  the 
poor  fellow;  but  being  unable  to  fix  upon  any  suitable 
object,  begged  him  to  accept  a  considerable  sum  of  money 
and  expend  it  on  any  object  he  pleased  as  a  memento.  To 
this  he  replied,  November  21,  1886: — 

I  am  very  much  obliged  for  the  kindly  recognition  of  my 
unfortunately  unavailing  efforts  to  be  of  service  to  your  brother- 
in-law  which  is  contained  in  your  letter. 

But  I  and  those  who  right  willingly  helped  me  did  nothing 
more  than  our  plain  duty  in  such  a  case;  and  though  I  fully 

appreciate  the  motives  which  actuate  Mrs.  and  yourself 

and  friends,  and  would  gladly  accept  any  trifle  as  a  memento  of 
my  poor  friend  (I  call  him  so,  for  we  really  struck  up  a  great 
friendship  in  our  twelve  hours'  acquaintance),  I  could  not  with 
any  comfort  use  the  very  handsome  cheque  you  offer. 

Let  me  propose  a  compromise.  As  you  will  see  by  the  en- 
closed paper,  a  colleague  of  mine  has  just  died  leaving  widow 
and  children  in  very  poor  circumstances.  Contribute  something 
to  the  fund  which  is  being  raised  for  their  benefit,  and  I  shall 
consider  it  as  the  most  agreeable  present  you  could  possibly 
make  to  me. 

*  Assistant  Professor  of  Botany  at  the  Royal  College  of  Science, 
f  Gordon  Huxley  Donnelly,  Sir  John's  son. 


i886  OCCUPATIONS   OF   THE  AUTUMN 


149 


And  if  you  wish  me  to  have  a  personal  memento  of  our 
friend,  send  me  a  pipe  that  belonged  to  him.  I  am  greatly  de- 
voted to  tobacco,  and  will  put  it  in  a  place  of  honour  in  my 
battery  of  pipes. 

The  bracing  effects  of  AroUa  enabled  him  to  stay  two 
months  in  town  before  again  retiring  to  Ilkley  to  be 
"  screwed  up."  He  had  on  the  stocks  his  Gentian  Paper 
and  the  chapter  for  the  Darwin  Life,  besides  the  chapter 
on  the  Progress  of  Science  for  the  Reign  of  Victoria,  all 
of  which  he  finished  off  this  autumn;  he  was  busy  with 
Technical  Education,  and  the  Egyptian  borings  which  were 
being  carried  out  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Royal 
Society.  Finally  he  was  induced  by  a  "  diabolical  plot " 
on  the  part  of  Mr.  Spencer  to  read,  and  in  consequence  to 
answer,  an  article  in  the  Fortnightly  for  November  by  Mr. 
Lilly  on  "  Materialism  and  Morality."  These  are  the  chief 
points  with  which  the  following  correspondence  is  con- 
cerned. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Sept.  16,  1886. 

My  dear  Foster — I  enclose  the  Report*  and  have  nothing 
to  suggest  except  a  quibble  at  p.  4.  If  you  take  a  stick  in  your 
hand  you  may  feel  lots  of  things  and  determine  their  form,  etc., 
with  the  other  end  of  it,  but  surely  the  stick  is  properly  said  to 
be  insensible.  D°.  with  the  teeth.  I  feel  very  well  with  mine 
(which  are  paid  for)  but  they  are  surely  not  sensible?  Old 
Tomes  once  published  the  opinion  that  the  contents  of  the 
dentine  tubules  were  sensory  nerves,  on  the  ground  of  our  feel- 
ing so  distinctly  through  our  teeth.  He  forgot  the  blind  man's 
stick.  Indeed  the  reference  of  sensation  to  the  end  of  a  stick 
is  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  psychological  facts. 

It  is  extraordinary  how  those  dogs  of  examinees  return  to 
their  vomit.  Almost  all  the  obstinate  fictions  you  mention  are 
of  a  quarter  of  a  century  date.  Only  then  they  were  dominant 
and  epidemic — now  they  are  sporadic. 

I  wish  Pasteur  or  somebody  would  find  some  microbe 
with  which  the  rising  generation  could  be  protected  against 
them. 

*  The  Annual  Report  of  the  Examiners  in  Physiology  under  the 
Science  and  Art  Department,  which,  being  still  an  Examiner,  he  had 
to  sign. 


150 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ix 


We  shall  have  to  re-arrange  the  Examination  business — ^this 
partner  having  made  his  fortune  and  retiring  from  firm.  Think 
over  what  is  to  be  done. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

You  don't  happen  to  grow  gentians  in  your  Alpine  region, 
do  you  ? 

Of  his  formal  responsibility  for  the  examinations  he  had 
written  earlier  in  the  year: — 

Wells  House,  Ilkley,/««^  15,  1886. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  think  it  is  just  as  well  that  you  could 
not  lay  your  hands  on  ink,  for  if  you  had  you  would  only  have 
blacked  them.     (N.B.   This  is  a  goak.) 

You  know  we  resolved  that  it  was  as  well  that  I  should  go 
on  as  Examiner  (unpaid)  this  year.  But  I  rather  repent  me  of 
it — for  although  I  could  be  of  use  over  the  questions,  I  have  had 
nothing  to  do  with  checking  the  results  of  the  Examination 
except  in  honours,  and  I  suspect  that  Foster's  young  Cambridge 
allies  tend  always  to  screw  the  standard  up. 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  I  had  much  better  be  out  of  it 
next  year.  The  attempt  to  look  over  examination  papers  now 
would  reduce  the  little  brains  I  have  left  to  mere  pulp — and,  on 
the  other  hand,  if  there  is  any  row  about  results,  it  is  not  de- 
sirable that  I  should  have  to  say  that  I  have  not  seen  the  an- 
swers. 

When  I  go  you  will  probably  get  seven  devils  worse  than  the 
first — but  that  is  not  the  fault  of  the  first  devil. 

I  am  picking  up  here  wonderfully  in  spite  of  the  bad  weather. 
It  rained  hard  yesterday  and  blew  ditto — to-day  it  is  blowing 
dittoes — ^but  there  is  sunshine  between  the  rain  and  squalls. 

I  hope  you  are  better  off.  What  an  outlandish  name 
"  Tetronila."  I  don't  believe  you  have  spelt  it  right.  With  best 
regards  to  Mrs.  Donnelly  and  my  godson. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Sept  16,  1886. 
My  dear  Hooker — I  have  sucked  Grisebach's  brains,  looked 
up  Flora  B.  Americana,  and  F,  Antarctica  and  New  Zealand, 
and  picked  about  in  other  quarters.  I  found  I  knew  as  much  as 
Grisebach  had  to  tell  me  (and  more)  about  lutea,  purpureo- 
punctata,  acaulis,  campestris,  and  the  verna  lot,  which  are  all  I 
got  hold  of  at  Arolla.  But  he  is  very  good  in  all  but  classifica- 
tion, which  is  logically  "  without  form  and  void,  and  darkness 
on  the  face  of  it." 


i886  LETTERS   TO   HOOKER 


151 


I  shall  have  to  verify  lots  of  statements  about  gentians  I  have 
not  seen,  but  at  present  the  general  results  are  very  curious  and 
interesting.  The  species  fall  into  four  groups,  one  primary  least 
differentiated — three,  specialised. 

I.  Lobes  of  corolla  fringed.  2.  Coronate.  3.  Interlobate 
(i.e.  not  the  "  plica  "  between  the  proper  petals). 

Now  the  interesting  point  is  that  the  Antarctic  species  are 
all  primary  and  so  are  the  great  majority  of  the  Andean  forms. 
Lutea  is  the  only  old-world  primary,  unless  the  Himalayan 
Moorcroftiana  belongs  here.  The  Arctic  forms  are  also  primary, 
but  the  petals  more  extensively  united. 

The  specialised  types  are  all  Arctogeal  with  the  exception  of 
half  a  dozen  or  so  Andean  species  including  prostrata. 

There  is  a  strange  general  parallelism  with  the  cray-fishes ! 
which  also  have  their  primary  forms  in  Australia  and  New 
Zealand,  avoid  E.  S.  America  and  Africa,  and  become  most  dif- 
ferentiated in  Arctogsea.  But  there  are  also  differences  in 
detail. 

It  strikes  me  that  this  is  uncommonly  interesting;  but,  of 
course,  all  the  information  about  the  structure  of  the  flowers, 
etc.,  I  get  at  second  hand,  wants  verifying. 

Have  you  done  the  gentians  of  your  Flora  Indica  yet?  Do 
look  at  them  from  this  point  of  view. 

I  cannot  make  out  what  Grisebach  means  by  his  division  of 
Qiondrophylla.  What  is  a  "  cartilaginous  "  margin  to  a  leaf  ? — 
"  Folia  margine  cartilaginea!  "  He  has  a  lot  of  Indian  sp.  under 
this  head. 

I  send  you  a  rough  scheme  I  have  drawn  up.  Please  let  me 
have  it  back.  Any  annotations  thankfully  received.  Shan't 
apologise  for  bothering  you. 

I  hope  the  pension  is  settled  at  last. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Sepi.  22,  1886. 
My  dear  Hooker — I  have  written  to  Lubbock  a  long  screed 
stating  my  views  *  with  unmistakable  distinctness  as  politeful 
as  may  be,  and  asking  him,  if  he  thought  well,  to  send  them  on 
to  whomsoever  it  may  concern.  As  old  Gutzlaff  f  used  to  say 
when  he  wanted  to  get  evidence  from  a  Chinee — "  Gif  him  four 

*  Referring  to  the  relations  between  the  S.  K.  department  and  the 
City  and  Guilds  Committee  on  Technical  Education, 
t  See  p.  141. 


Coronatae. 

Interlobatae. 

IS 

2 

4 

32 

5 

21 

152  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ix 

dozen,  someting  vill  transpire."  At  any  rate  the  Chinee  tran- 
spired, and  I  hope  some  official  will. 

Here  beginneth  more  gentian  craze. 

I  have  not  examined  Mo  or  croft,  yet,  but  if  the  figfure  in 
Roxb.  is  trustworthy  it's  a  primary  and  no  mistake.  I  can't 
understand  your  admitting  Amarellae  without  coronae.  The 
presence  of  a  corona  is  part  of  the  definition  of  the  amarella 
group,  and  an  amarella  without  a  corona  is  a  primary  ipso  facto. 

Taking  the  facts  as  I  have  got  them  in  the  rough,  and  sub- 
ject to  minor  verifications,  the  contrast  between  the  Andean, 
Himalayan,  and  Caucasian  Gentian  Florae  is  very  striking. 

Simplices.  Ciliatae. 

Andes  27  o  (?) 

Himalayas  i  {Moorcroft,)  o 

Caucasus  Pyrenees   2  {lutea  2 

(all  one)  umbellaid) 

I  don't  think  Ciliatae  worth  anything  as  a  division.  I  took  it 
as  it  stood. 

It  is  clear  that  migration  helps  nothing,  as  between  the  old- 
world  and  S.  American  Florae.  It  is  the  case  of  the  Tapirs 
(Andean  and  Sino-Malayan)  over  again.  Relics  of  a  tertiary 
Flora  which  once  extended  from  S.  America  to  Eurasia  through 
N.  America  (by  the  west,  probably). 

I  see  a  book  by  Engler  on  the  development  of  Floras  since 
tertiary  epoch.    Probably  the  beggar  has  the  idea. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

GODALMING,   Sept.  25,  1886. 

My  dear  Foster — We  are  here  till  to-morrow  on  a  visit  to 
Leonard,  seeing  how  the  young  folks  keep  house. 

I  brought  the  Egyptian  report  down  with  me.  It  is  very  im- 
portant, and  in  itself  justifies  the  expenditure.  Any  day  next 
(that  is  to  say  this)  week  that  you  like  I  can  see  Col.  Turner. 
If  you  and  Evans  can  arrange  a  day  I  don't  think  we  need  mind 
the  rest  of  the  Committee.  We  must  get  at  least  two  other  bor- 
ings ten  or  fifteen  miles  off,  if  possible  on  the  same  parallel,  by 
hook  or  by  crook.  It  will  tell  us  more  about  the  Nile  valley  than 
has  ever  been  known.  That  Italian  fellow  who  published  sec- 
tions must  have  lied  considerably. 

Touching  gentians,  I  have  not  examined  your  specimen  yet, 
but  it  certainly  did  not  look  like  Andrewsii.  You  talk  of  having 
acaulis  in  your  garden.    That  is  one  of  the  species  I  worked  out 


1886  WORK   ON   THE   GENTIANS  153 

most  carefully  at  Arolla,  but  its  flowering  time  was  almost  over, 
and  I  only  got  two  full-blown  specimens  to  work  at.  If  you 
have  any  in  flower  and  don't  mind  sacrificing  one  with  a  bit  of 
the  rhizoma,  and  would  put  it  in  spirit  for  me,  I  could  settle  one 
or  two  points  still  wanting.  Whisky  will  do,  and  you  \till  be 
all  the  better  for  not  drinking  the  whisky ! 

The  distributional  facts,  when  you  work  them  in  connection 
with  morphology,  are  lovely.  We  put  up  with  Donnelly  on  our 
way  here.  He  has  taken  a  cottage  at  Felday,  eleven  miles  from 
hence,  in  lovely  country — on  lease.  I  shall  have  to  set  up  a 
country  residence  some  day,  but  as  all  my  friends  declare  their 
own  locality  best,  I  find  a  decision  hard.  And  it  is  a  bore  to  be 
tied  to  one  place. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct,  20,  1886. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  wish  you  would  not  mind  the  trouble 
of  looking  through  the  enclosed  chapter  which  I  have  written  at 
F.  Darwin's  request,  and  tell  me  what  you  think  of  it.  F.  D. 
thinks  I  am  hard  upon  the  "  Quarterly  Article,"  but  I  read  it 
afresh  and  it  is  absolutely  scandalous.  The  anonymous  vilifiers 
of  the  present  day  will  be  none  the  worse  for  being  reminded 
that  they  may  yet  hang  in  chains.  I  expect,  from  all  I  hear, 
that  Gosse  has  had  very  hard  measure,  and  you  may  see  that 
Cotter  Morison  (who  is  a  very  good  authority)  says  that  the 
Reviewer  is  quite  wrong  about  the  Harrington  business,  of 
which  he  makes  so  much. 

It  occurs  to  me  that  it  might  be  well  to  add  a  paragraph  or 
two  about  the  two  chief  objections  made  formerly  and  now  to 
Darwin,  the  one,  that  it  is  introducing  "  chance  "  as  a  factor  in 
nature,  and  the  other  that  it  is  atheistic. 

Both  assertions  are  utter  bosh.  None  but  parsons  believe  in 
"  chance  " ;  and  the  philosophical  difficulties  of  Theism  now  are 
neither  greater  nor  less  than  they  have  been  ever  since  Theism 
was  invented. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

Old  experience,  indeed,  made  him  sympathise  so  much 
with  Mr.  Edmund  Gosse  for  his  treatment  in  a  celebrated 
literary  controversy,  that  he  wrote  him  the  following  letter : — 

Oct  22,  1886. 
Dear  Sir — I  beg  leave  to  offer  you  my  best  thanks  for  your 
letter  to  the  AthencBum,  which  I  have  just  read,  and  to  congratu- 
late you  on  the  force  and  completeness  of  your  answer  to  your 
assailant. 


154 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ix 


It  is  rarely  worth  while  to  notice  criticism,  but  when  a  good 
chance  of  exposing  one  of  these  anonymous  libellers  who  dis- 
grace literature  occurs,  it  is  a  public  duty  to  avail  oneself  of  it. 

Oddly  enough,  I  have  recently  been  performing  a  similar 
"  haufe  oeuvre."  The  most  violent,  base,  and  ignorant  of  all  the 
attacks  on  Darwin  at  the  time  of  the  publication  of  the  "  Origin 
of  Species  "  appeared  in  the  Quarterly  Review  of  that  time ;  and 
I  have  built  the  reviewer  a  gibbet  as  high  as  Haman's. 

All  good  men  and  true  should  combine  to  stop  this  system  of 
literary  moonlighting. — I  am  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

As  for  the  incitement  to  answer  Mr.  Lilly,  Mr.  Spencer 
writes  from  Brighton  on  November  3: — 

I  have  no  doubt  your  combative  instincts  have  been  stirred 
within  you  as  you  read  Mr.  Lilly's  article,  "  Materialism  and 
Morality,"  in  which  you  and  I  are  dealt  with  after  the  ordinary 
fashion  popular  with  the  theologians,  who  practically  say,  "  You 
shall  be  materialists  whether  you  like  it  or  not."  I  should  not  be 
sorry  if  you  yielded  to  those  promptings  of  your  combative  in- 
stinct. Now  that  you  are  a  man  of  leisure  there  is  no  reason 
why  you  should  not  undertake  any  amount  of  fighting,  providing 
always  that  you  can  find  foemen  worthy  of  your  steel.  .  .  . 

I  remember  that  last  year  you  found  intellectual  warfare 
good  for  your  health,  so  I  have  no  qualms  of  conscience  in  mak- 
ing the  suggestion. 

To  this  he  replies  on  the  7th : — 

Your  stimulation  of  my  combative  instincts  is  downright 
wicked.  I  will  not  look  at  the  Fortnightly  article  lest  I  succumb 
to  temptation.  At  least  not  yet.  The  truth  is  that  these  cursed 
irons  of  mine,  that  have  always  given  me  so  much  trouble,  will 
put  themselves  in  the  fire,  when  I  am  not  thinking  about  them. 
There  are  three  or  four  already. 

On  November  21  Mr.  Spencer  sends  him  more  proofs 
of  his  autobiography,  dealing  with  his  early  life : — 

See  what  it  is  to  be  known  as  an  omnivorous  reader — ^you 
get  no  mercy  shown  you.  A  man  who  is  ready  for  anything, 
from  a  fairy  tale  to  a  volume  of  metaphysics,  is  naturally  one  who 
will  make  nothing  of  a  fragment  of  a  friend's  autobiography ! 

To  this  he  replies  on  the  25th :— 


i886  LETTERS   TO   H.  SPENCER 


155 


4  Marlborough  Place,  Nov.  25,  1886. 

My  dear  Spencer — In  spite  of  all  prohibition  I  must  write 
to  you  about  two  things.  First,  as  to  the  proof  returned  here- 
with— I  really  have  no  criticisms  to  make  (miracles,  after  all, 
may  not  be  incredible).  I  have  read  your  account  of  your  boy- 
hood with  great  interest,  and  I  find  nothing  there  which  does 
not  contribute  to  the  understanding  of  the  man.  No  doubt  about 
the  truth  of  evolution  in  your  own  case. 

Another  point  which  has  interested  me  immensely  is  the 
curious  similarity  to  many  recollections  of  my  own  boyish  nature 
which  I  find,  especially  in  the  matter  of  demanding  a  reason 
for  things  and  having  no  respect  for  authority. 

But  I  was  more  docile,  and  could  remember  anything  I  had 
a  mind  to  learn,  whether  it  was  rational  or  irrational,  only  in  the 
latter  case  I  hadn't  the  mind. 

But  you  were  infinitely  better  off  than  I  in  the  matter  of 
education.  I  had  two  years  of  a  Pandemonium  of  a  school  (be- 
tween 8  and  10)  and  after  that  neither  help  nor  sympathy  in  any 
intellectual  direction  till  I  reached  manhood.  Good  heavens ! 
if  I  had  had  a  father  and  uncle  who  troubled  themselves  about 
my  education  as  yours  did  about  your  training,  I  might  say  as 
Bethell  said  of  his  possibilities  had  he  come  under  Jowett, 
"  There  is  no  knowing  to  what  eminence  I  might  not  have 
attained."  Your  account  of  them  gives  me  the  impression  that 
they  were  remarkable  persons.  Men  of  that  force  of  character, 
if  they  had  been  less  wise  and  self-restrained,  would  have  played 
the  deuce  with  the  abnormal  chicken  hatched  among  them. 

The  second  matter  is  that  your  diabolical  plot  against  Lilly 
has  succeeded — vide  the  next  number  of  the  Fortnightly*  I 
was  fool  enough  to  read  his  article,  and  the  rest  followed.  But 
I  do  not  think  I  should  have  troubled  myself  if  the  opportunity 
had  not  been  good  for  clearing  off  a  lot  of  old  scores. 

The  bad  weather  for  the  last  ten  days  has  shown  me  that 
I  want  screwing  up,  and  I  am  off  to  Ilkley  on  Saturday  for  a 
week  or  two.  Ilkley  Wells  House  will  be  my  address.  I  should 
like  to  know  that  you  are  picking  up  again. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

And  again  on  December  13 : — 

I  am  very  glad  to  have  news  of  you  which  on  the  whole  is 
not  unsatisfactory.     Your  conclusion  as  to  the  doctors  is  one 


*  Science  and  Morals,  Co//.  Ess.  ix.  117. 


156  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ix 

I  don't  mind  telling  you  in  confidence  I  arrived  at  some  time 
ago.  .  .  • 

I  am  glad  you  liked  my  treatment  of  Mr.  Lilly.  ...  I  quite 
agree  with  you  that  the  thing  was  worth  doing  for  the  sake  of 
the  public. 

I  have  in  hand  another  bottle  of  the  same  vintage  about 
Modern  Realism  and  the  abuse  of  the  word  Law,  suggested  by  a 
report  I  read  the  other  day  of  one  of  Liddon*s  sermons.* 

The  nonsense  these  great  divines  talk  when  they  venture  to 
meddle  with  science  is  really  appalling. 

Don't  be  alarmed  about  the  history  of  Victorian  science.f 
I  am  happily  limited  to  the  leng^i  of  a  review  article  or  there- 
abouts, and  it  is  (I  am  happy  to  say  it  is  nearly  done)  more  of 
an  essay  on  the  history  of  science,  bringing  out  the  broad  fea- 
tures of  the  contrast  between  past  and  present,  than  the  history 
itself.  It  seemed  to  me  that  this  was  the  only  way  of  dealing 
with  such  a  subject  in  a  book  intended  for  the  general  public. 

The  article  "  Science  and  Morals  "  was  not  only  a  sat- 
isfaction to  himself,  but  a  success  with  the  readers  of  the 
Fortnightly.    To  his  wife  he  writes: — 

December  2. — Have  you  had  the  Fortnightly?  How  does 
my  painting  of  the  Lilly  look  ? 

December  8. — Harris  .  .  .  says  that  my  article  "  simply 
made  the  December  number,"  which  pretty  piece  of  gratitude 
means  a  lively  sense  of  favours  to  come. 

December  13. — I  had  a  letter  from  Spencer  yesterday  chuck- 
ling over  the  success  of  his  setting  me  on  Lilly. 

Ilkley  had  a  wonderful  eflFect  upon  him.  "  It  is  quite 
absurd,"  he  writes  after  24  hours  there,  "  but  I  am  wonder- 
fully better  already."  His  regimen  was  of  the  simplest, 
save  perhaps  on  one  point.  "  Clark  told  me,"  he  says  with 
the  utmost  gravity,  '*  always  to  drink  tea  and  eat  hot  cake 
at  4.30.  I  have  persevered,  however  against  my  will,  and 
last  night  had  no  dreams,  but  slept  like  a  top."  Two  hours' 
writing  in  the  morning  were  followed  by  two  hours'  sharp 
walking ;  in  the  afternoon  he  first  took  two  hours'  walking 
or  strolling  if  the  weather  were  decent ;  "  then  Clark's  pre- 
scription diligently  taken  "  {Le.  tea  and  a  pipe)  and  a  couple 

*  *'  Pseudo-Scientific  Realism,"  Coll.  Ess.  iv.  59.  f  See  p.  149. 


i8S6  ADMINISTRATIVE   INSIGHT  157 

of  hours  more  writing ;  after  dinner  reading  and  to  bed 
before  eleven. 

I  am  working  away  (he  writes)  in  a  leisurely  comfortable 
manner  at  my  chapter  for  Ward's  Jubilee  book,  and  have  got  the 
first  few  pages  done,  which  is  always  my  greatest  trouble. 

December  8.—  .  .  .  Canon  Milman  wrote  to  me  to  come  to 
the  opening  of  the  New  Buildings  for  Sion  College,  which  the 
Prince  is  going  to  preside  over  on  the  15th.  I  had  half  a  mind 
to  accept,  if  only  for  the  drollery  of  finding  myself  among  a 
solemn  convocation  of  the  city  clergy.  However,  I  thought  it 
would  be  opening  the  floodgates,  and  I  prudently  declined. 

One  more  letter  may  perhaps  be  quoted  as  illustrating 
the  clearness  of  vision  in  administrative  matters  which  made 
it  impossible  for  him  to  sit  quietly  by  and  see  a  tactical 
blunder  being  committed,  even  though  his  formal  position 
might  not  seem  to  warrant  his  interference.  This  is  his 
apologia  for  such  a  step. 

£>ec.  16,  1886. 

My  dear  Foster — On  thinking  over  this  morning's  Com- 
mittee work,*  it  strikes  my  conscience  that  being  neither  Presi- 
dent or  Chairman  nor  officer  I  took  command  of  the  boat  in  a 
way  that  was  hardly  justifiable. 

But  it  occurred  to  me  that  our  sagacious for  once  was 

going  astray  and  playing  into 's  hands,  without  clearly  seeing 

what  he  was  doing,  and  I  bethought  me  of  "  salus  Societatis 
suprema  lex,"  and  made  up  my  mind  to  stop  the  muddle  we 
were  getting  into  at  all  costs.  I  hope  he  was  not  disgusted  nor 
you  either.  X.  ought  to  have  cut  in,  but  he  did  not  seem  in- 
clined to  do  so. 

I  am  clearly  convinced  it  was  the  right  thing  to  do — anyhow. 
— Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

The  chronicle  of  the  year  may  fitly  close  with  a  letter 
from  Ilkley  to  Dr.  Dohrn,  apropos  of  his  recommendation 
of  a  candidate  for  a  biological  professorship.  The  "  honest 
sixpence  got  by  hard  labour,"  refers  to  a  tour  in  the  High- 
lands which  he  had  once  taken  with  Dr.  Dohrn,  when,  on  a 
rough  day,  they  were  being  rowed  across  Loch  Leven  to 
Mary  Stuart's  castle.    The  boatman,  unable  to  make  head 

*  Some  Committee  of  the  Royal  Society. 


158  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ix 

single-handed  against  the  wind,  asked  them  each  to  take  an 
oar;  but  when  they  landed  and  Huxley  tendered  the  fare, 
the  honest  fellow  gave  him  back  two  sixpences,  saying,  "  I 
canna  tak*  it:  you  have  wrocht  as  hard  as  I."  Each  took 
a  coin;  and  Huxley  remarked  that  this  was  the  first  six- 
pence he  had  earned  by  manual  labour.  Dr.  Dohrn,  I  be- 
lieve, still  carries  his  sixpence  in  memory  of  the  occasion. 

Wells  House,  Ilkley,  Yorkshire,  Dec.  i,  1886. 

My  dear  Dohrn — You  see  by  my  address  that  I  am  en 
retraite,  for  a  time.  As  good  catholics  withdraw  from  the  world 
now  and  then  for  the  sake  of  their  souls — so  I,  for  the  sake  of 
my  body  (and  chiefly  of  my  liver)  have  retired  for  a  fortnight 
or  so  to  the  Yorkshire  moors — the  nearest  place  to  London 
where  I  can  find  dry  air  1500  feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  sort  of 
uphill  exercise  which  routs  out  all  the  unoxygenated  crannies 
of  my  organism.  Hard  frost  has  set  in,  and  I  had  a  walk  over 
the  moorland  which  would  have  made  all  the  blood  of  the  Ost- 
see  pirates — ^which  I  doubt  not  you  have  inherited — alive,  and 
cleared  off  the  fumes  of  that  detestable  Capua  to  which  you  are 
condemned.  I  should  like  to  have  seen  the  nose  of  one  [of] 
your  Neapolitan  nobilissimes  after  half-an-hour's  exposure  to 
the  north  wind,  clear  and  sharp  as  a  razor,  which  very  likely 
looked  down  on  Loch  Leven  a  few  hours  ago. 

Ah  well !  "  fuimus  " — I  am  amused  at  the  difficulty  you  find 
in  taking  up  the  position  of  a  "  grave  and  reverend  senior  " ; 
because  I  can  by  no  means  accustom  myself  to  the  like  dignity. 
In  spite  of  my  grey  hairs  "  age  hath  not  cooled  the  Douglas 
blood "  altogether,  and  I  have  a  gratifying  sense  that  (liver 
permitting)  I  am  still  capable  of  much  folly.    All  this,  however, 

has  not  much  to  do  with  poor  Dr. to  whom,  I  am  sorry  to 

say,  your  letter  could  do  no  good,  as  it  arrived  after  my  col- 
leagues and  I  had  settled  the  business. 

But  there  were  a  number  of  strong  candidates  who  had  not 
much  chance.  If  it  is  open  to  me  to  serve  him  hereafter,  how- 
ever, your  letter  will  be  of  use  to  him,  for  I  know  you  do  not 
recommend  men  lightly. 

After  some  eighteen  months  of  misery — the  first  thing  that 
did  me  any  good  was  coming  here.  But  I  was  completely  set  up 
by  six  or  seven  weeks  at  Arolla  in  the  Valais.  The  hotel  was 
6400  feet  up,  and  the  wife  and  daughters  and  I  spent  most  of 
pur  time  in  scrambling  about  the  2000  feet  between  that  and  the 


i886  LETTER   TO   DOHRN 


159 


snow.  Six  months  ago  I  had  made  up  my  mind  to  be  an  invalid, 
but  at  Arolla  I  walked  as  well  as  I  did  when  you  and  I  made 
pilgrimages — and  earned  the  only  honest  sixpence  (I,  at  any 
rate)  ever  got  for  hard  labour.  Three  months  in  London 
brought  me  down  again,  so  I  came  here  to  be  "  mended." 

You  know  English  literature  so  well  that  perhaps  you  have 
read  Wordsworth's  "  White  Doe  of  Rylstone."  I  am  in  that 
country,  within  walk  of  Bolton  Abbey. 

Please  remember  me  very  kindly  to  the  Sig^ora — and  thank 
her  for  copying  the  letter  in  such  a  charmingly  legible  hand.  I 
wish  mine  were  like  it. 

If  I  am  alive  we  shall  go  to  Arolla  next  summer.  Could  we 
not  meet  there?    It  is  a  fair  half-way. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


CHAPTER   X 
1887 

The  first  half  of  1887,  like  that  of  the  preceding  year, 
was  chequered  by  constant  returns  of  ill-health.  "  As  one 
gets  older,"  he  writes  in  a  New  Year's  letter  to  Sir  J.  Don- 
nelly, "  hopes  for  oneself  get  more  moderate,  and  I  shall 
be  content  if  next  year  is  no  worse  than  the  last.  Blessed 
are  the  poor  in  spirit ! "  The  good  effects  of  the  visit  to 
Arolla  had  not  outlasted  the  winter,  and  from  the  end  ®f 
February  he  was  obliged  to  alternate  between  London  and 
the  Isle  of  Wight. 

Nevertheless,  he  managed  to  attend  to  a  good  deal  of 
business  in  the  intervals  between  his  periodic  flights  to  the 
country,  for  he  continued  to  serve  on  the  Royal  Society 
Council,  to  do  some  of  the  examining  work  at  South  Ken- 
sington, and  to  fight  for  the  establishment  of  adequate  Tech- 
nical Education  in  England.  He  attended  the  Senate  and 
various  committees  of  the  London  University  and  of  the 
Marine  Biological  Association. 

Several  letters  refer  to  the  proposal — it  was  the  Jubilee 
year — to  commemorate  the  occasion  by  the  establishment 
of  the  Imperial  Institute.  To  this  he  gladly  gave  his  sup- 
port; not  indeed  to  the  merely  social  side;  but  in  the  oppor- 
tunity of  organising  the  practical  applications  of  science  to 
industry  he  saw  the  key  to  success  in  the  industrial  war 
of  the  future.  Seconding  the  resolution  proposed  by  Lord 
Rothschild  at  the  Mansion  House  meeting  on  January  12, 
he  spoke  of  the  relation  of  industry  to  science — the  two  great 
developments  of  this  century.  Formerly  practical  men 
looked  askance  at  science,  "  but  within  the  last  thirty  years, 
more  particularly,"  continues  the  report  in  Nature  (vol. 
160 


1887  THE   IMPERIAL  INSTITUTE  i6l 

xxxiii.  p.  265)  "  that  state  of  things  had  entirely  changed. 
There  began  in  the  first  place  a  slight  flirtation  between 
science  and  industry,  and  that  flirtation  had  grown  into  an 
intimacy,  he  might  almost  say  courtship,  until  those  who 
watched  the  signs  of  the  times  saw  that  it  was  high  time 
that  the  young  people  married  and  set  up  an  establishment 
for  themselves.  This  great  scheme,  from  his  point  of  view, 
was  the  public  and  ceremonial  marriage  of  science  and  in- 
dustry." 

Proceeding  to  speak  of  the  contrast  between  militarism 
and  industrialism,  he  asked  whether,  after  all,  modern  in- 
dustry was  not  war  under  the  forms  of  peace.  The  differ- 
ence was  the  difference  between  modern  and  ancient  war, 
consisting  in  the  use  of  scientific  weapons,  of  organisation 
and  information.  The  country,  he  concluded,  had  dropped 
astern  in  the  race  for  want  of  special  education  which  was 
obtained  elsewhere  by  the  artisan.  The  only  possible  chance 
for  keeping  the  industry  of  England  at  the  head  of  the  world 
was  through  organisation. 

Writing  on  January  18,  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  who 
had  sent  him  some  proofs  of  his  Autobiography  to  look 
through,  he  says: — 

I  see  that  your  proofs  have  been  in  my  hands  longer  than  I 
thought  for.  But  you  may  have  seen  that  I  have  been  "  star- 
ring "  at  the  Mansion  House. 

This  was  not  exactly  one  of  those  bits  of  over-easiness  to 
pressure  with  which  you  reproach  me — but  the  resultant  of  a 
composition  of  pressures,  one  of  which  was  the  conviction  that 
the  "  Institute  "  might  be  made  into  something  very  useful  and 
greatly  wanted — if  only  the  projectors  could  be  made  to  believe 
that  they  had  always  intended  to  do  that  which  your  humble 
servant  wants  done — that  is  the  establishment  of  a  sort  of  Royal 
Society  for  the  improvement  of  industrial  knowledge  and  an 
industrial  university — by  voluntary  association. 

I  hope  my  virtue  may  be  its  own  reward.  For  except  being 
knocked  up  for  a  day  or  two  by  the  unwonted  effort,  I  doubt 
whether  there  will  be  any  other.  The  thing  has  fallen  flat  as  a 
pancake,  and  I  greatly  doubt  whether  any  good  will  come  of  it. 
Except  a  fine  in  the  shape  of  a  subscription,  I  hope  to  escape 
further  punishment  for  my  efforts  to  be  of  use. 
47 


1 62  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

However,  this  was  only  the  beginning  of  his  campaign. 

On  January  27,  a  letter  from  him  appeared  in  the  Times, 
guarding  against  a  wrong  interpretation  of  his  speech,  in 
the  general  uncertainty  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  proposers 
of  the  scheme. 

I  had  no  intention  (he  writes)  of  expressing  any  enthusi- 
asm on  behalf  of  the  establishment  of  a  vast  permianent  bazaar. 
I  am  not  competent  to  estimate  the  real  utility  of  these  great 
shows.  What  I  do  see  very  clearly  is  that  they  involve  difficul- 
ties of  site,  huge  working  expenses,  the  potentiality  of  endless 
squabbles,  and  apparently  the  cheapening  of  knighthood. 

As  for  the  site  proposed  at  South  Kensington,  "  the 
arguments  used  in  its  favour  in  the  report  would  be  con- 
clusive if  the  dry  light  of  reason  were  the  sole  guide  of 
human  action."  But  it  would  alienate  other  powerful  and 
wealthy  bodies,  which  were  interested  in  the  Central  In- 
stitute of  the  City  and  Guilds  Technical  Institute,  "  which 
looks  so  portly  outside  and  is  so  very  much  starved  inside." 

He  wrote  again  to  the  Times  on  March  21 : — 

The  Central  Institute  is  undoubtedly  a  splendid  monument  of 
the  munificence  of  the  city.  But  munificence  without  method 
may  arrive  at  results  indistinguishably  similar  to  those  of  stingi- 
ness. I  have  been  blamed  for  saying  that  the  Central  Institute 
is  "  starved."  Yet  a  man  who  has  only  half  as  much  food  as  he 
needs  is  indubitably  starved,  even  though  his  short  rations  con- 
sist of  ortolans  and  are  served  upon  gold  plate. 

Only  half  the  plan  of  operations  as  drawn  up  by  the 
Committee  was,  or  could  be,  carried  out  on  existing  funds. 

The  later  part  of  his  letter  was  printed  by  the  Com- 
mittee as  defining  the  functions  of  the  new  Institute: — 

That  with  which  I  did  intend  to  express  my  strong  sympathy 
was  the  intention  which  I  thought  I  discerned  to  establish  some- 
thing which  should  play  the  same  part  in  regard  to  the  advance- 
ment of  industrial  knowledge  which  has  been  played  in  regard 
to  science  and  learning  in  general,  in  these  realms,  by  the  Royal 
Society  and  the  Universities.  ...  I  pictured  the  Imperial  In- 
stitute to  myself  as  a  house  of  call  for  all  those  who  are  con- 
cerned in  the  advancement  of  industry;  as  a  place  in  which 
the  home-keeping  industrial  could  find  out  all  he  wants  to  know 


i887  THE   IMPERIAL   INSTITUTE  163 

about  colonial  industry  and  the  colonist  about  home  industry; 
as  a  sort  of  neutral  ground  on  which  the  capitalist  and  the 
artisan  would  be  equally  welcome ;  as  a  centre  of  intercommuni- 
cation in  which  they  might  enter  into  friendly  discussion  of 
the  problems  at  issue  between  them,  and,  perchance,  arrive  at 
a  friendly  solution  of  them.  I  imagined  it  a  place  in  which 
the  fullest  stores  of  industrial  knowledge  would  be  made  acces- 
sible to  the  public;  in  which  the  higher  questions  of  commerce 
and  industry  would  be  systematically  studied  and  elucidated; 
and  where,  as  in  an  industrial  university,  the  whole  technical 
education  of  the  country  might  find  its  centre  and  crown.  If 
I  earnestly  desire  to  see  such  an  institution  created,  it  is  not 
because  I  think  that  or  anything  else  will  put  an  end  to  pauper- 
ism and  want — as  somebody  has  absurdly  suggested, — but  be- 
cause I  believe  it  will  supply  a  foundation  for  that  scientific 
organisation  of  our  industries  which  the  changed  conditions  of 
the  times  render  indispensable  to  their  prosperity.  I  do  not 
think  I  am  far  wrong  in  assuming  that  we  are  entering,  indeed, 
have  already  entered,  upon  the  most  serious  struggle  for  exist- 
ence to  which  this  country  has  ever  been  committed.  The  latter 
years  of  the  century  promise  to  see  us  embarked  in  an  industrial 
war  of  far  more  serious  import  than  the  military  wars  of  its 
opening  years.  On  the  east,  the  most  systematically  instructed 
and  best-informed  people  in  Europe  are  our  competitors ;  on  the 
west,  an  energetic  off-shoot  of  our  own  stock,  grown  bigger  than 
its  parent,  enters  upon  the  struggle  possessed  of  natural  re- 
sources to  which  we  can  make  no  pretension,  and  with  every 
prospect  of  soon  possessing  that  cheap  labour  by  which  they 
may  be  effectually  utilised.  Many  circumstances  tend  to  justify 
the  hope  that  we  may  hold  our  own  if  we  are  careful  to  "  organ- 
ise victory."  But  to  those  who  reflect  seriously  on  the  prospects 
of  the  population  of  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  —  should  the 
time  ever  arrive  when  the  goods  which  are  produced  by  their 
labour  and  their  skill  are  to  be  had  cheaper  elsewhere  —  to 
those  who  remember  the  cotton  famine  and  reflect  how  much 
worse  a  customer  famine  would  be,  the  situation  appears  very 
grave. 

On  February  19  and  22,  he  wrote  again  to  the  Times 
declaring  against  the  South  Kensington  site.  It  was  too 
far  from  the  heart  of  commercial  organisation  in  the  city, 
and  the  city  people  were  preparing  to  found  a  similar  in- 
stitution of  their  own.    He  therefore  wished  to  prevent  the 


164  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

Imperial  Institute  from  becoming  a  weak  and  unworthy 
memorial  of  the  reign. 

A  final  letter  to  the  Times  on  March  21,  was  evoked  by 
the  fact  that  Lord  Hartington,  in  giving  away  the  prizes  at 
the  Polytechnic  Y.M.C.A.,  had  adopted  Huxley's  position 
as  defined  in  his  speech,  and  declared  that  science  ought 
to  be  aided  on  precisely  the  same  grounds  on  which  we 
aid  the  army  and  navy. 

In  this  letter  he  asks,  how  do  we  stand  prepared  for  the 
task  thus  imperatively  set  us?  We  have  the  machinery 
for  providing  instruction  and  information,  and  for  catching 
capable  men,  but  both  in  a  disjointed  condition — "  all  mere 
torsos — fine,  but  fragmentary."  "The  ladder  from  the 
School  Board  to  the  Universities,  about  which  I  dreamed 
dreams  many  years  ago,  has  not  yet  acquired  much  more 
substantiality  than  the  ladder  of  Jacob's  vision,"  but  the 
Science  and  Art  Department,  the  Normal  School  of  Science, 
and  the  Central  Institute  only  want  the  means  to  carry  out 
the  recommendations  already  made  by  impartial  and  inde- 
pendent authority.  "  Economy  does  not  lie  in  sparing 
money,  but  in  spending  it  wisely." 

He  concluded  with  an  appeal  to  Lord  Hartington  to 
take  up  this  task  of  organising  industrial  education  and 
bring  it  to  a  happy  issue. 

A  proposal  was  also  made  to  the  Royal  Society  to  co- 
operate, and  Sir  M.  Foster  writes  on  February  19 :  "  We 
have  appointed  a  Committee  to  consider  and  draw  up  a 
draft  reply  with  a  view  of  the  R.S.  following  up  your  letter." 

To  this  Huxley  replied  on  the  22nd : — 

.  .  .  My  opinion  is  that  the  R.S.  has  no  right  to  spend  its 
money  or  pledge  its  credit  for  any  but  scientific  objects,  and  that 
we  have  nothing  to  do  with  sending  round  the  hat  for  other 
purposes. 

The  project  of  the  Institute  Committee  as  it  stands  con- 
nected with  the  South  Kensington  site — is  condemned  by  all 
the  city  people  and  will  receive  none  but  the  most  grudging  sup- 
port from  them.  They  are  going  to  set  up  what  will  be  prac- 
tically an  Institute  of  their  own  in  the  city. 

The  thing  is  already  a  failure.    I  daresay  it  will  go  on  and 


i887  TECHNICAL  EDUCATION  165 

be  varnished  into  a  simulacrum  of  success — ^to  become  eventually 
a  ghost  like  the  Albert  Hall  or  revive  as  a  tea  gjarden. 

The  following  letter  also  touches  upon  the  function  of 
the  Institute  from  the  commercial  side: — 

4  Marlboroush  Place,  Feb.  20,  1887. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Mr.  Law's  suggestion  gives  admirable 
definition  to  the  notions  that  were  floating  in  my  mind  when  I 
wrote  in  my  letter  to  the  Times,  that  I  imagined  the  Institute 
would  be  a  "  place  in  which  the  fullest  stores  of  industrial 
knowledge  would  be  made  accessible  to  the  public."  A  man  of 
business  who  wants,  to  know  anything  about  the  prospects  of 
trade  with  say,  Boorioboola-gha  {vide  Bleak  House)  ought  to 
be  able  to  look  into  the  Institute  and  find  there  somebody,  who 
will  at  once  fish  out  for  him  among  the  documents  in  the  place 
all  that  is  known  about  Boorioboola. 

But  a  Commercial  Intelligence  Department  is  not  all  that  is 
wanted,  vide  valuable  letter  aforesaid. 

I  hope  your  appetite  for  the  breakfast  was  none  the  worse 
for  last  night's  doings — ^mine  was  rather  improved,  but  I  am 
dog-tired. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  return  Miss 's  note.     She  evidently  thinks  my  cage  is 

labelled  "  These  animals  bite." 

Later  in  the  year,  the  following  letters  show  him  con- 
tinuing the  campaign.  But  an  attack  of  pleurisy,  which 
began  the  very  day  of  the  Jubilee,  prevented  him  from 
coming  to  speak  at  a  meeting  upon  Technical  Education. 
In  the  autumn,  however,  he  spoke  on  the  subject  at  Man- 
chester, and  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  city  "  go 
solid,"  as  he  expressed  it,  for  technical  education.  The  cir- 
cumstances of  this  visit  are  given  later. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  May  i,  1887. 
My  dear  Roscoe — I  met  Lord  Hartington  at  the  Academy 
Dinner  last  night  and  took  the  opportunity  of  urging  upon  him 
the  importance  of  following  up  his  technical  education  speech. 
He  told  me  he  had  been  in  communication  with  you  about  the 
matter,  and  he  seemed  to  me  to  be  very  well  disposed  to  your 
plans. 


1 66  LIFE   OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

I  may  go  on  crying  in  the  wilderness  until  I  am  hoarse,  with 
no  result,  but  if  he  and  you  and  Mundella  will  take  it  up,  some- 
thing may  be  done. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /w/?^  28,  1887. 

My  dear  Roscoe — Dbnnelly  was  here  on  Sunday  and  was 
quite  right  up  to  date.  I  felt  I  ought  to  be  better,  and  could  not 
make  out  why  the  deuce  I  was  riot.  Yesterday  the  mischief 
came  out.  There  is  a  touch  of  pleurisy — which  has  been  covered 
by  the  muscular  rheumatism. 

So  I  am  relegated  to  bed  and  told  to  stop  there — with  the 
company  of  cataplasms  to  keep  me  lively. 

I  do  not  think  the  attack  in  any  way  serious — ^but  M.  PI. 
is  a  gentleman  not  to  be  trifled  with,  when  you  are  over  sixty, 
and  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  obey  my  doctor's  orders. 

Pray  do  not  suppose  I  would  be  stopped  by  a  trifle,  if  my 
coming  to  the  meeting  *  would  really  have  been  of  use.  I  hope 
you  will  say  how  grieved  I  am  to  be  absent. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /««<?  29,  1887. 

My  dear  Roscoe — I  have  scrawled  a  variety  of  comments  on 
the  paper  you  sent  me.    Deal  with  them  as  you  think  fit. 

Ever  since  I  was  on  the  London  School  Board  I  have  seen 
that  the  key  of  the  position  is  in  the  Sectarian  Training  Colleges 
and  that  wretched  imposture,  the  pupil  teacher  system.  As  to 
the  former  Delendae  sunt  no  truce  or  pact  to  be  made  with  them, 
either  Church  or  Dissenting.  Half  the  time  of  their  students 
is  occupied  with  grinding  into  their  minds  their  tweedle-dum 
and  tweedle-dee  theological  idiocies,  and  the  other  half  in  cram- 
ming them  with  boluses  of  other  things  to  be  duly  spat  out  on 
examination  day.  Whatever  is  done  do  not  let  us  be  deluded  by 
any  promises  of  theirs  to  hook  on  science  or  technical  teaching 
to  their  present  work. 

I  am  greatly  disgusted  that  I  cannot  come  to  Tyndall's  din- 
ner to-night  f — ^but  my  brother-in-law's  death  would  have 
stopped  me  (the  funeral  to-day) — even  if  my  doctor  had  not 
forbidden  me  to  leave  my  bed.  He  says  I  have  some  pleuritic 
effusion  on  one  side  and  must  mind  my  P's  and  Q's. — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  ,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  Of  July  I,  on  Technical  Education.  f  ^^^  P-  I77' 


i887      SCIENCE   AND   PSEUDO-SCIENTIFIC   REALISM         167 

A  good  deal  of  correspondence  at  this  time  with  Sir 
M.  Foster  relates  to  the  examination  of  the  Science  and 
Art  Department.  He  was  still  Dean,  it  will  be  remembered, 
of  the  Royal  College  of  Science,  and  further  kept  up  his 
connection  with  the  Department  by  acting  in  an  honorary 
capacity  as  Examiner,  setting  questipns,  but  less  and  less 
looking  over  papers,  acting  as  the  channel  for  official  com- 
munications, as  when  he  writes  (April  24),  "  I  send  you 
some  Department  documents — nothing  alarming,  only  more 
worry  for  the  Asst.  Examiners,  and  that  we  do  not  mind '' ; 
and  finally  signing  the  Report.  But  to  do  this  after  taking 
so  small  a  share  in  the  actual  work  of  examining,  grew 
more  and  more  repugnant  to  him,  till  on  October  12  he 
writes : — 

I  will  read  the  Report  and  sign  it  if  need  be — though  there 
really  must  be  some  fresh  arrangement. 

Of  course  I  have  entire  confidence  in  your  judgment  about 
the  examination,  but  I  have  a  mortal  horror  of  putting  my  name 
to  things  I  do  not  know  of  my  own  knowledge. 

In  addition  to  these  occupations,  he  wrote  a  short  paper 
upon  a  fossil,  Ceratochelys,  which  was  read  at  the  Royal 
Society  on  March  31;  while  on  April  7  he  read  at  the 
Linnean  (Botany:  vol.  xxiv.  pp.  101-124),  his  paper,  "  The 
Gentians :  Notes  and  Queries,"  which  had  sprung  from  his 
holiday  amusement  at  Arolla. 

Philosophy,  however,  claimed  most  of  his  energies.  The 
campaign  begun  in  answer  to  the  incursion  of  Mr.  Lilly 
was  continued  in  the  article  "  Science  and  Pseudo-Scientific 
Realism  '*  (Coll.  Essays,  v.  59-89)  which  appeared  in  the 
Nineteenth  Century  for  February  1887.  The  text  for  this 
discourse  was  the  report  of  a  sermon  by  Canon  Liddon, 
in  which  that  eminent  preacher  spoke  of  catastrophes  as 
the  antithesis  of  physical  law,  yet  possible  inasmuch  as  a 
"  lower  law  "  may  be  "  suspended  "  by  the  "  intervention 
of  a  higher,"  a  mode  of  reasoning  which  he  applied  to  the 
possibility  of  miracles  such  as  that  of  Cana. 

The  man  of  science  was  up  in  arms  against  this  incar- 
nation of  abstract  terms,  and  offered  a  solemn  protest  against 
that  modern  recrudescence  of  ancient  realism  which  speaks 


l68  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

of  "  laws  of  nature  "  as  though  they  were  independent  enti- 
ties, agents,  and  efficient  causes  of  that  which  happens,  in- 
stead of  simply  our  name  for  observed  successions  of  facts. 

Carefully  as  all  personalities /had  been  avoided  in  this 
article,  it  called  forth  a  lively  reply  from  the  Duke  of 
Argyll,  rebuking  him  for  venturing  to  criticise  the  preacher,  • 
whose  name  was  now  brought  forward  for  the  first  time,  and 
raising  a  number  of  other  questions,  philosophical,  geologi- 
cal, and  biological,  to  which  Huxley  rejoined  with  some 
selections  from  the  authentic  history  of  these  points  in 
"  Science  and  Pseudo-Science  "  (Nineteenth  Century,  April 
1887,  ColL  Essays,  v.  90-125). 

Moreover,  judging  from  the  vivacity  of  the  Duke's  reply 
that  some  of  the  shafts  of  the  first  article  must  have  struck 
nearer  home  than  the  pulpit  of  St.  Paul's,  he  was  induced 
to  read  "  The  Reign  of  Law,"  the  second  chapter  of  which, 
dealing  with  the  nature  of  "  Law,"  he  now  criticised  sharply 
as  "  a  sort  of  *  summa  '  of  pseudo-scientific  philosophy,"  with 
its  confusions  of  law  and  necessity,  law  and  force,  "  law  in 
the  sense,  not  merely  of  a  rule,  but  of  a  cause." 

He  wound  up  with  some  banter  upon  the  Duke's  picture 
of  a  scientific  Reign  of  Terror,  whereby,  it  seemed,  all  men 
of  science  were  compelled  to  accept  the  Darwinian  faith, 
and  against  which  Huxley  himself  was  preparing  to  rebel, 
as  if, 

forsooth,  I  am  supposed  to  be  waiting  for  the  signal  of  "  revolt," 
which  some  fiery  spirits  among  these  young  men  are  to  raise 
before  I  dare  express  my  real  opinions  concerning  questions 
about  which  we  older  men  had  to  fight  in  the  teeth  of  fierce 
opposition  and  obloquy — of  something  which  might  almost  justify 
even  the  grandiloquent  epithet  of  a  Reign  of  Terror — before  our 
excellent  successors  had  left  school. 

Here  for  a  while  the  debate  ceased.  But  in  the  Sep- 
tember number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,  the  Duke  of 
Argyll  returned  to  the  fray  with  an  article  called  "  A  Great 
Lesson,"  in  which  he  attempted  to  offer  evidence  in  support 
of  his  assertions  concerning  the  scientific  reign  of  terror. 
The  two  chief  pieces  of  evidence  adduced  were  Bathybius 
and  Dr.  (now  Sir  J.)  Murray's  theory  of  coral  reefs.    The 


i887  AN   EPISCOPAL  TRILOGY  169 

former  was  instanced  as  a  blunder  due  to  the  desire  of 
finding  support  for  the  Darwinian  theory  in  the  existence 
of  this  widespread  primordial  life;  the  latter  as  a  case  in 
which  a  new  theory  had  been  systematically  burked,  for 
fear  of  damaging  the  infallibility  of  Darwin,  who  had  pro- 
pounded a  different  theory  of  coral  reefs ! 

Huxley's  reply  to  this  was  contained  in  the  latter  half 
of  an  article  which  appeared  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for 
November  1887,  under  the  title  of  "  Science  and  the  Bish- 
ops "  (reprinted  both  in  Controverted  Questions  and  in  the 
Collected  Essays,  v.  126,  as  "  An  Episcopal  Trilogy "). 
Preaching  at  Manchester  this  autumn,  during  the  meeting 
of  the  British  Association,  the  Bishops  of  Carlisle,  Bedford, 
and  Manchester  had  spoken  of  science  not  only  with  knowl- 
edge, but  in  the  spirit  of  equity  and  generosity.  "  These 
sermons,"  he  exclaims,  "  are  what  the  Germans  call  Epoche- 
machend ! " 

How  often  was  it  my  fate  (he  continues),  a  quarter  of  a 
century  ago,  to  see  the  whole  artillery  of  the  pulpit  brought  to 
bear  upon  the  doctrine  of  evolution  and  its  supporters !  Anyone 
unaccustomed  to  the  amenities  of  ecclesiastical  controversy 
would  have  thought  we  were  too  wicked  to  be  permitted  to  live. 

After  thus  welcoming  these  episcopal  advances,  he  once 
more  repudiated  the  d  priori  argument  against  the  efficacy 
of  prayer,  the  theme  of  one  of  the  three  sermons,  and  then 
proceeded  to  discuss  another  sermon  of  a  dignitary  of  the 
Church,  which  had  been  sent  to  him  by  an  unknown  cor- 
respondent, for  "  there  seems  to  be  an  impression  abroad — 
I  do  not  desire  to  give  any  countenance  to  it — ^that  I  am 
fond  of  reading  sermons." 

Now  this  preacher  was  of  a  very  different  mind  from 
the  three  bishops.  Instead  of  dwelling  upon  the  "  supreme 
importance  of  the  purely  spiritual  in  our  faith,"  he  warned 
his  hearers  against  dropping  oflF  any  of  the  miraculous  in- 
tegument of  their  religion.  "  Christianity  is  essentially 
miraculous,  and  falls  to  the  ground  if  miracles  be  impossi- 
ble." He  was  uncompromisingly  opposed  to  any  accom- 
modation with  advancing  knowledge,  or  with  the  high 
standard  of  veracity,  enforced  by  the  nature  of  their  pur- 


I70  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

suits,  in  which  Huxley  found  the  only  difference  between 
scientific  men  and  any  other  class  of  the  community. 

But  it  was  not  merely  this  misrepresentation  of  science 
on  its  speculative  side  which  Huxley  deplored;  he  was 
roused  to  indignation  by  an  attack  on  its  morality.  The 
preacher  reiterated  the  charge  brought  forward  in  the 
"  Great  Lesson,"  that  Dr.  Murray's  theory  of  coral  reefs 
had  been  actually  suppressed  for  two  years,  and  that  by  the 
advice  of  those  who  accepted  it,  for  fear  of  upsetting  the 
infallibility  of  the  great  master. 

Hereupon  he  turned  in  downright  earnest  upon  the 
originator  of  the  assertion,  who,  he  considered,  had  no  more 
than  the  amateur's  knowledge  of  the  subject.  A  plain 
statement  of  the  facts  was  refutation  enough.  The  new 
theories,  he  pointed  out,  had  been  widely  discussed;  they 
had  been  adopted  by  some  geologists,  although  Darwin  him- 
self had  not  been  converted,  and  after  careful  and  prolonged 
re-examination  of  the  question,  Professor  Dana,  the  greatest 
living  authority  on  coral  reefs,  had  rejected  them.  As  Pro- 
fessor Judd  said,  "  If  this  be  a  '  conspiracy  of  silence,'  where, 
alas !  can  the  geological  speculator  seek  for  fame  ?  "  Any 
warning  not  to  publish  in  haste  was  but  advice  to  a  still 
unknown  man  not  to  attack  a  seemingly  well-established 
theory  without  making  sure  of  his  ground.* 

As  for  the  Bathybius  myth,  Huxley  pointed  out  that 
his  announcement  of  the  discovery  had  been  simply  a  state- 
ment of  the  actual  facts,  and  that  so  far  from  seeing  in  it 
a  confirmation  of  Darwinian  hypotheses,  he  was  careful  to 
warn  his  readers  "  to  keep  the  questions  of  fact  and  the 
questions  of  interpretation  well  apart."  "  That  which  in- 
terested me  in  the  matter,"  he  says,  "  was  the  apparent  anal- 
ogy of  Bathybius  with  other  well-known  forms  of  lower 
life,"  ..."  if  Bathybius  were  brought  up  alive  from  the 
bottom  of  the  Atlantic  to-morrow,  the  fact  would  not  have 
the  slightest  bearing,  that  I  can  discern,  upon  Mr.  Darwin's 
speculations,  or  upon  any  of  the  disputed  problems  of  biol- 
ogy."    And  as  for  his  "  eating  the  leek  "  afterwards,  his 

*  Letter  in  N^ature. 


i887  THE   BATHYBIUS   MYTH  jyi 

ironical  account  of  it  is  an  instance  of  how  the  adoption 
of  a  plain,  straightforward  course  can  be  described  without 
egotism. 

The  most  considerable  difference  I  note  among  men  (he 
concludes)  is  not  in  their  readiness  to  fall  into  error,  but  in  their 
readiness  to  acknowledge  these  inevitable  lapses. 

As  the  Duke  in  a  subsequent  article  did  not  unequivo- 
cally withdraw  his  statements,  Huxley  declined  to  continue 
public  controversy  with  him. 

Three  years  later,  writing  (October  lo,  1890)  to  Sir  J. 
Donnelly  apropos  of  an  article  by  Mr.  Mallock  in  the  Nine- 
teenth Century,  which  made  use  of  the  "  Bathybius  myth,'^ 
he  says: — 

Bathybius  is  far  too  convenient  a  stick  to  beat  this  dog  with 
to  be  ever  given  up,  however  many  lies  may  be  needful  to  make 
the  weapon  effectual. 

I  told  the  whole  story  in  my  reply  to  the  Duke  of  Argyll, 
but  of  course  the  pack  give  tongue  just  as  loudly  as  ever.  Cleri- 
cally-minded people  cannot  be  accurate,  even  the  liberals. 

I  give  here  the  letter  sent  to  the  "  unknown  corre- 
spondent "  in  question,  who  had  called  his  attention  to  the 
fourth  of  these  sermons. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Sept.  30,  1887. 

I  have  but  just  returned  to  England  after  two  months*  ab- 
sence, and  in  the  course  of  clearing  off  a  vast  accumulation  of 
letters,  I  have  come  upon  yours. 

The  Duke  of  Argyll  has  been  making  capital  out  of  the  same 
circumstances  as  those  referred  to  by  the  Bishop.  I  believe  that 
the  interpretation  put  upon  the  facts  by  both  is  wholly  mislead- 
ing and  erroneous. 

It  is  quite  preposterous  to  suppose  that  the  men  of  science  of 
this  or  any  other  country  have  the  slightest  disposition  to  sup- 
port any  view  which  may  have  been  enunciated  by  one  of  their 
colleagues,  however  distinguished,  if  good  grounds  are  shown 
for  believing  it  to  be  erroneous. 

When  Mr.  Murray  arrived  at  his  conclusions  I  have  no 
doubt  he  was  advised  to  make  his  ground  sure  before  he  attacked 
a  generalisation  which  appeared  so  well  founded  as  that  of  Mr. 
Darwin  respecting  coral  reefs. 


172 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 


If  he  had  consulted  me  I  should  have  given  him  that  advice 
myself,  for  his  own  sake.  And  whoever  advised  him,  in  that 
sense,  in  my  opinion  did  wisely. 

But  the  theologians  cannot  get  it  out  of  their  heads,  that 
as  they  have  creeds,  to  which  they  must  stick  at  all  hazards,  so 
have  the  men  of  science.  There  is  no  more  ridiculous  delusion. 
We,  at  any  rate,  hold  ourselves  morally  bound  to  "  try  all  things 
and  hold  fast  to  that  which  is  good  " ;  and  among  public  bene- 
factors, we  reckon  him  who  explodes  old  error,  as  next  in  rank 
to  him  who  discovers  new  truth. 

You  are  at  liberty  to  make  any  use  you  please  of  this  letter. 

Two  letters  on  kindred  subjects  may  appropriately  fol- 
low in  this  place.  Thanking  M.  Henri  Gadeau  de  Kerville 
for  his  "  Causeries  sur  le  Transformisme,"  he  writes 
(Feb.  I)  :— 

Dear  Sir — Accept  my  best  thanks  for  your  interesting 
"  causeries,"  which  seem  to  me  to  give  a  very  clear  view  of  the 
present  state  of  the  evolution  doctrine  as  applied  to  biology. 

There  is  a  statement  on  p.  87  "Apres  sa  mort  Lamarck  fut 
completement  oublie,"  which  may  be  true  for  France  but  cer- 
tainly is  not  so  for  England.  From  1830  onwards  for  more  than 
forty  years  LyelFs  "  Principles  of  Geology  "  was  one  of  the  most 
widely  read  scientific  books  in  this  country,  and  it  contains  an 
elaborate  criticism  of  Lamarck's  views.  Moreover,  they  were 
largely  debated  during  the  controversies  which  arose  out  of  the 
publication  of  the  "Vestiges  of  Creation*'  in  1844  or  thereabouts. 
We  are  certainly  not  guilty  of  any  neglect  of  Lamarck  on  this 
side  of  the  Channel. 

If  I  may  make  another  criticism  it  is  that,  to  my  mind, 
atheism  is,  on  purely  philosophical  grounds,  untenable.  That 
there  is  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  such  a  being  as  the  God 
of  the  theologians  is  true  enough ;  but  strictly  scientific  reason- 
ing can  take  us  no  further.  Where  we  know  nothing  we  can 
neither  affirm  nor  deny  with  propriety. 

The  other  is  in  answer  to  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  enclosing 
a  few  lines  on  the  principal  representatives  of  modern  sci- 
ence, which  he  had  asked  for. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  /une  16,  1887. 
My  dear  Bishop  of  Ripon — I  shall  be  very  glad  if  I  can  be 
of  any  use  to  you  now  and  always.    But  it  is  not  an  easy  task  to 


i887  LETTER   TO   THE   BISHOP  OF   RIPON  173 

put  into  half-a-dozen  sentences,  up  to  the  level  of  your  vigorous 
English,  a  statement  that  shall  be  unassailable  from  the  point  of 
view  of  a  scientific  fault-finder — which  shall  be  intelligible  to 
the  general  public  and  yet  accurate. 

I  have  made  several  attempts  and  enclose  the  final  result. 
I  think  the  substance  is  all  right,  and  though  the  form  might 
certainly  be  improved,  I  leave  that  to  you.  When  I  get  to  a 
certain  point  of  tinkering  my  phrases  I  have  to  put  them  aside 
for  a  day  or  two. 

Will  you  allow  me  to  suggest  that  it  might  be  better  not  to 
name  any  living  man?  The  temple  of  modern  science  has  been 
the  work  of  many  labourers  not  only  in  our  own  but  in  other 
countries.  Some  have  been  more  busy  in  shaping  and  laying  the 
stones,  some  in  keeping  off  the  Sanballats,  some  prophetwise  in 
indicating  the  course  of  the  science  of  the  future.  It  would  be 
hard  to  say  who  has  done  best  service.  As  regards  Dr.  Joule, 
for  example,  no  doubt  he  did  more  than  any  one  to  give  the  doc- 
trine of  the  conservation  of  energy  precise  expression,  but 
Mayer  and  others  run  him  hard. 

Of  deceased  Englishmen  who  belong  to  the  first  half  of  the 
Victorian  epoch,  I  should  say  that  Faraday,  Lyell,  and  Darwin 
had  exerted  the  greatest  influence,  and  all  three  were  models 
of  the  highest  and  best  class  of  physical  philosophers. 

As  for  me,  in  part  from  force  of  circumstance  and  in  part 
from  a  conviction  I  could  be  of  most  use  in  that  way,  I  have 
played  the  part  of  something  between  maid-of-all-work  and 
gladiator-general  for  Science,  and  deserve  no  such  prominence 
as  your  kindness  has  assigned  to  me. — With  our  united  kind 
regards  to  Mrs.  Carpenter  and  yourself,  ever  yours  very  faith- 

^^"y^  T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  brief  note,  also,  to  Lady  Welby,  dated  July  25,  is 
characteristic  of  his  attitude  towards  unverified  speculation. 

I  have  looked  through  the  paper  you  have  sent  me,  but  I 
cannot  undertake  to  give  any  judgment  upon  it.  Speculations 
such  as  you  deal  with  are  quite  out  of  my  way.  I  get  lost  the 
moment  I  lose  touch  of  valid  fact  and  incontrovertible  demon- 
stration and  find  myself  wandering  among  large  propositions, 
which  may  be  quite  true  but  which  would  involve  me  in  months 
of  work  if  I  were  to  set  myself  seriously  to  find  out  whether, 
and  in  what  sense,  they  are  true.  Moreover,  at  present,  what 
little  energy  I  possess  is  mortgaged  to  quite  other  occupations. 


174 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 


The  following  letter  was  in  answer  to  a  request  which 
I  was  commissioned  to  forward  him,  that  he  would  consent 
to  serve  on  an  honorary  committee  of  the  Societe  des  Pro- 
fesseurs  de  Frangais  en  Angleterre. 

Jan.  17,  1887. 

I  quite  forgot  to  say  anything  about  the  Comite  d'honneur, 
and  as  you  justly  remark  in  the  present  strained  state  of  foreign 
politics  the  consequences  may  be  serious.  Please  tell  your  col- 
league that  I  shall  be  "  proud  an*  'appy."  You  need  not  tell  him 
that  my  pride  and  happiness  are  contingent  on  having  nothing  to 
do  for  the  honour. 

In  the  meantime,  the  ups  and  downs  of  his  health  are 
reflected  in  various  letters  of  these  six  months.  Much  set 
up  by  his  stay  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  he  writes  from  Shanklin 
on  April  1 1  to  Sir  E.  Frankland,  describing  the  last  meeting 
of  the  X  Club,  which  the  latter  had  not  been  able  to  attend, 
as  he  was  staying  in  the  Riviera : — 

Hooker,  Tyndall,  and  I  alone  turned  up  last  Thursday.  Lub- 
bock had  gone  to  High  Elms  about  used  up  by  the  House  of 
Commons,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  Hirst. 

Tyndall  seemed  quite  himself  again.  In  fact,  we  three  old 
fogies  voted  unanimously  that  we  were  ready  to  pit  ourselves 
against  any  three  youngsters  of  the  present  generation  in  walk- 
ing, climbing,  or  head-work,  and  give  them  odds. 

I  hope  you  are  in  the  same  comfortable  frame  of  mind. 

I  had  no  notion  that  Mentone  had  suffered  so  seriously  in 
the  earthquake  of  1887.  Moral  for  architects:  read  your  Bible 
and  build  your  house  upon  the  rock. 

The  sky  and  sea  here  may  be  fairly  matched  against  Mentone 
or  any  other  of  your  Mediterranean  places.  Also  the  east  wind, 
which  has  been  blowing  steadily  for  ten  days,  and  is  nearly  as 
keen  as  the  Tramontana.  Only  in  consequence  of  the  long  cold 
and  drought  not  a  leaf  is  out. 

Shanklin,  indeed,  suited  him  so  well  that  he  had  half  a 
mind  to  settle  there.  "  There  are  plenty  of  sites  for  build- 
ing," he  writes  home  in  February,  "  but  I  have  not  thought 
of  commencing  a  house  yet."  However,  he  gave  up  the 
idea;  Shanklin  was  too  far  from  town. 

But  though  he  was  well  enough  as  long  as  he  kept  out 
of  London,  a  return  to  his  life  there  was  not  possible  for  any 


i887  AN   ENGLISH   POUR  LE  MERITE  175 

considerable  time.  On  May  19,  just  before  a  visit  to  Mr. 
F.  Darwin  at  Cambridge,  I  find  that  he  went  down  to  St. 
Albans  for  a  couple  of  days,  to  walk ;  and  on  the  27th  he 
betook  himself,  terribly  ill  and  broken  down,  to  the  Saver- 
nake  Forest  Hotel,  in  hopes  of  getting  *'  screwed  up."  This 
"  turned  out  a  capital  speculation,  a  charming  spick-and- 
span  little  country  hostelry  with  great  trees  in  front."  But 
the  weather  was  persistently  bad,  "  the  screws  got  looser 
rather  than  tighter,"  and  again  he  was  compelled  to  stay 
away  from  the  x, 

A  week  later,  however,  he  writes: — 

The  weather  has  been  detestable,  and  I  got  no  good  till 
yesterday,  which  was  happily  fine.  Ditto  to-day,  so  I  am  picking 
up,  and  shall  return  to-morrow,  as,  like  an  idiot  as  I  am,  I 
promised  to  take  the  chair  at  a  public  meeting  about  a  Free 
Library  for  Marylebone  on  Tuesday  evening. 

I   wonder  if  you  know  this  country.     I  find  it  charming. 

On  the  same  day  as  that  which  was  fixed  for  the  meeting 
in  favour  of  the  Free  Library,  he  had  a  very  interesting 
interview  with  the  Premier,  of  which  he  left  the  following 
notes,  written  at  the  Athenaeum  immediately  after : — 

June  7,  1887. 

Called  on  Lord  Salisbury  by  appointment  at  3  p.m.,  and  had 
twenty  minutes'  talk  with  him  about  the  "  matter  of  some  public 
interest "  mentioned  in  his  letter  of  the  (29th). 

This  turned  out  to  be  a  proposal  for  the  formal  recognition 
of  distinguished  services  in  Science,  Letters,  and  Art  by  the 
institution  of  some  sort  of  order  analogous  to  the  Pour  le  Mcrite. 
Lord  Salisbury  spoke  of  the  anomalous  present  mode  of  dis- 
tributing honours,  intimated  that  the  Queen  desired  to  establish 
a  better  system,  and  asked  my  opinion. 

I  said  that  I  should  like  to  separate  my  personal  opinion  from 
that  which  I  believed  to  obtain  among  the  majority  of  scientific 
men ;  that  I  thought  many  of  the  latter  were  much  discontented 
with  the  present  state  of  affairs,  and  would  highly  approve  of 
such  a  proposal  as  Lord  Salisbury  shadowed  forth. 

That,  so  far  as  my  own  personal  feeling  was  concerned,  it 
was  opposed  to  anything  of  the  kind  for  Science.  I  said  that  in 
Science  we  had  two  advantages — first,  that  a  man's  work  is 
demonstrably  either  good  or  bad ;  and  secondly,  that  the  "  con- 


176  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

temporary  posterity  "  of  foreigners  judges  us,  and  rewards  good 
work  by  membership  of  Academies  and  so  forth. 

In  Art,  if  a  man  chooses  to  call  Raphael  a  dauber,  you  can't 
prove  he  is  wrong;  and  literary  work  is  just  as  hard  to  judge. 

I  then  spoke  of  the  dangers  to  which  science  is  exposed  by 
the  undue  prominence  and  weight  of  men  who  successfully  apply 
scientific  knowledge  to  practical  purposes — engineers,  chemical 
inventors,  etc.  etc. ;  said  it  appeared  to  me  that  a  Minister  having 
such  order  at  his  disposal  would  find  it  very  difficult  to  resist  the 
pressure  brought  by  such  people  as  against  the  man  of  high 
science  who  had  not  happened  to  have  done  anything  to  strike 
the  popular  mind. 

Discussed  the  possibility  of  submission  of  names  by  some- 
body for  the  approval  and  choice  of  the  Crown.  For  Science, 
I  thought  the  R.S.  Council  might  discharge  that  duty  very  fairly. 
I  thought  that  the  Academy  of  Berlin  presented  people  for  the 
Pour  le  Merite,  but  Lord  S.  thought  not. 

In  the  course  of  conversation  I  spoke  of  Hooker's  case  as  a 
glaring  example  of  the  wrong  way  of  treating  distinguished  men. 
Observed  that  though  I  did  not  personally  care  for  or  desire  the 
institution  of  such  honorary  order,  yet  I  thought  it  was  a  mis- 
take in  policy  for  the  Crown  as  the  fountain  of  honour  to  fail 
in  recognition  of  that  which  deserves  honour  in  the  world  of 
Science,  Letters,  and  Art. 

Lord  Salisbury  smilingly  summed  up.  "  Well,  it  seems  that 
you  don't  desire  the  establishment  of  such  an  order,  but  that  if 
you  were  in  my  place  you  would  establish  it,"  to  which  I  as- 
sented. 

Said  he  had  spoken  to  Leighton,  who  thought  well  of  the 
project. 

It  was  not  long,  however,  before  he  received  imperative 
notice  to  quit  town  with  all  celerity.  He  fell  ill  with  what 
turned  out  to  be  pleurisy ;  and  after  recruiting  at  Ilkley,  went 
again  to  Switzerland. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /une  27,  1887. 

My  dear  Foster —  ...  I  am  very  sorry  that  it  will  be  im- 
possible for  me  to  attend  [the  meeting  of  committee  down  for 
the  following  Wednesday].  If  I  am  well  enough  to  leave  the 
house  I  must  go  into  the  country  that  day  to  attend  the  funeral 
of  my  wife's  brother-in-law  and  my  very  old  friend  Fanning, 
of  whom  I  may  have  spoken  to  you.  He  has  been  slowly  sink- 
ing for  some  time,  and  this  morning  we  had  news  of  his  death. 


i887  A  DINNER   TO  TYNDALL  177 

Things  have  been  very  crooked  for  me  lately.  I  had  a  con- 
glomerate of  engagements  of  various  degrees  of  importance  in 
the  latter  half  of  last  week,  and  had  to  forego  them  all,  by  reason 
of  a  devil  in  the  shape  of  muscular  rheumatism  of  one  side, 
which  entered  me  last  Wednesday,  and  refuses  to  be  wholly 
exorcised  (I  believe  it  is  my  Jubilee  Honour).*  Along  with  it, 
and  I  suppose  the  cause  of  it,  a  regular  liver  upset.  I  am  very 
seedy  yet,  and  even  if  Fanning's  death  had  not  occurred  I  doubt 
if  I  should  have  been  ready  to  face  the  Tyndall  dinner. 

The  reference  to  this  "  Tyndall  dinner  "  is  explained  in 
the  following  letters,  which  also  refer  to  a  meeting  of  the 
London  University,  in  which  the  projects  of  reform  which 
he  himself  supported  met  with  a  smart  rebuff. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  13,  1887. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  of  your  gout, 
but  they  say  when  it  comes  out  at  the  toes  it  flies  from  the  better 
parts,  and  that  is  to  the  good. 

There  is  no  sort  of  reason  why  unsatisfied  curiosity  should 
continue  to  disturb  your  domestic  hearth;  your  wife  will  have 
the  gout  too  if  it  goes  on.    "  They  "  can't  bear  the  strain. 

The  history  of  the  whole  business  is  this.  A  day  or  two 
before  I  spoke  to  you,  Lockyer  told  me  that  various  people  had 
been  talking  about  the  propriety  of  recognising  your  life-long 
work  in  some  way  or  other;  that,  as  you  would  not  have  any- 
thing else,  a  dinner  had  been  suggested,  and  finally  asked  me 
to  inquire  whether  you  would  accept  that  expression  of  good- 
will.   Of  course  I  said  I  would,  and  I  asked  accordingly. 

After  you  had  assented  I  spoke  to  several  of  our  friends  who 
were  at  the  Athenaeum,  and  wrote  to  Lockyer.  I  believe  a  strong 
committee  is  forming,  and  that  we  shall  have  a  scientific  jubila- 
tion on  a  large  scale;  but  I  have  purposely  kept  in  the  back- 
ground, and  confined  myself,  like  Bismarck,  to  the  business  of 
"  honest  broker." 

But  of  course  nothing  (beyond  preliminaries)  can  be  done 
till  you  name  the  day,  and  at  this  time  of  year  it  is  needful  to 

*  On  the  same  day  he  describes  this  to  Sir  J.  Evans : — **  I  have 
hardly  been  out  of  the  house  as  far  as  my  garden,  and  not  much  off 
my  bed  or  sofa  since  I  saw  you  last.  I  have  had  an  affection  of  the 
muscles  of  one  side  of  my  body,  the  proper  name  of  which  I  do  not 
know,  but  the  similitude  thereof  is  a  bird  of  prey  periodically  digging 
in  his  claws  and  stopping  your  breath  in  a  playful  way." 
48 


178  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

look  well  ahead  if  a  big  room  is  to  be  secured.  So  if  you  can 
possibly  settle  that  point,  pray  do. 

There  seems  to  have  been  some  oversight  on  my  wife's  part 
about  the  invitation,  but  she  is  stating  her  own  case.  We  go  on 
a  visit  to  Mrs.  Darwin  to  Cambridge  on  Saturday  week,  and  the 
Saturday  after  that  I  am  bound  to  be  at  Eton. 

Moreover,  I  have  sacrificed  to  the  public  Moloch  so  far  as  to 
promise  to  take  the  chair  at  a  public  meeting  in  favour  of  a  Free 
Library  for  Marylebone  on  the  7th.  As  Wednesday's  work  at 
the  Geological  Society  and  the  soiree  knocked  me  up  all  yester- 
day, I  shall  be  about  finished  I  expect  on  the  8th.  If  you  are 
going  to  be  at  Hindhead  after  that,  and  would  have  us  for  a  day, 
it  would  be  jolly;  but  I  cannot  be  away  long,  as  I  have  some 
work  to  finish  before  I  go  abroad. 

I  never  was  so  uncomfortable  in  my  life,  I  think,  as  on 

Wednesday  when  L was  speaking,  just  in  front  of  me,  at 

the  University.  Of  course  I  was  in  entire  sympathy  with  the 
tenor  of  his  speech,  but  I  was  no  less  certain  of  the  impolicy  of 
giving  a  chance  to  such  a  master  of  polished  putting-down  as 
the  Chancellor.  You  know  Mrs.  Carlyle  said  that  Owen's  sweet- 
ness reminded  her  of  sugar  of  lead.  Granville's  was  that  plus 
butter  of  antimony! — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

N,B, — Don't  swear,  but  get  Mrs.  Tyndall,  who  is  patient  and 
good-tempered,  to  read  this  long  screed. 

May  18,  1887. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  was  very  glad  to  get  your  letter 
yesterday  morning,  and  I  conveyed  your  alteration  at  once  to 
Riicker,  who  is  acting  as  secretary.  I  asked  him  to  communi- 
cate with  you  directly  to  save  time. 

I  hear  that  the  proposal  has  been  received  very  warmly  by 
all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  and  that  is  quite  apart  from  any 
action  of  your  closer  personal  friends.  Personally  I  am  rather 
of  your  mind  about  the  "  dozen  or  score  "  of  the  faithful.  But 
as  that  was  by  no  means  to  the  mind  of  those  who  started  the 
project,  and,  moreover,  might  have  given  rise  to  some  heart- 
burning, I  have  not  thought  it  desirable  to  meddle  with  the 
process  of  spontaneous  combustion.  So  look  out  for  a  big  bon- 
fire somewhere  in  the  middle  of  June !  I  have  a  hideous  cold, 
and  can  only  hope  that  the  bracing  air  of  Cambridge,  where 
we  go  on  Saturday,  may  set  me  right. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 


i887  LETTERS   FROM    ILKLEY  ijg 

To  recover  from  his  pleuritic  "Jubilee  Honour"  he 
went  for  a  fortnight  Quly  11-25)  ^o  Hkley,  which  had  done 
him  so  much  good  before,  intending  to  proceed  to  Switzer- 
land as  soon  as  he  conveniently  could. 

Ilkley,  July  15,  1887. 

My  dear  Foster — I  was  very  much  fatigued  by  the  journey 
here,  but  the  move  was  good,  and  I  am  certainly  mending, 
though  not  so  fast  as  I  could  wish.  I  expect  some  adhesions 
are  interfering  with  my  bellows.  As  soon  as  I  am  fit  to  travel 
I  am  thinking  of  going  to  Lugano,  and  thence  to  Monte  Gene- 
roso.  The  travelling  is  easy  to  Lugano,  and  I  know  the  latter 
place. 

My  notion  is  I  had  better  for  the  present  avoid  the  chances 
of  a  wet,  cold  week  in  the  high  places. 

M.B.A.*  ...  As  to  the  employment  of  the  Grant,  I  think  it 
ought  to  be  on  something  definite  and  limited.  The  Pilchard 
question  would  be  an  excellent  one  to  take  up. 

seems  to  have  a  notion  of  employing  it  on  some  geo- 
logical survey  of  Plymouth  Sound,  work  that  would  take  years 
and  years  to  do  properly,  and  nothing  in  the  way  of  clear  result 
to  show. 

I  hope  to  be  in  London  on  my  way  abroad  in  less  than  ten 
days*  time,  and  will  let  you  know. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

And  on  the  same  day  to  Sir  J.  Donnelly : — 

I  expect  .  .  .  that  I  shall  have  a  slow  convalescence.  Lucky 
it  is  no  worse ! 

Much  fighting  I  am  likely  to  do  for  the  Unionist  cause  or 
any  other !  But  don't  take  me  for  one  of  the  enrages.  If  any- 
body will  show  me  a  way  by  which  the  Irish  may  attain  all  they 
want  without  playing  the  devil  with  us,  I  am  ready  to  give  them 
their  own  talking-shop  or  anything  else. 

But  that  is  as  much  writing  as  I  can  sit  up  and  do  all  at 
once. 

*  Marine  Biological  Association. 


CHAPTER   XI 

1887 

On  the  last  day  of  July  he  left  England  for  Switzer- 
land, and  did  not  return  till  the  end  of  September.  A  sec- 
ond visit  to  Arolla  worked  a  great  change  in  him.  He 
renewed  his  Gentian  studies  also,  with  unflagging  ardour. 
The  following  letters  give  some  idea  of  his  doings  and 
interests : — 

Hotel  du  Mont  Collon,  Arolla,  Switzerland, 

Aug.  28,  1887. 

My  dear  Foster — I  know  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  I 
consider  myself  completely  set  up  again.  We  went  to  the  Made- 
raner  Thai  and  stayed  a  week  there.  But  I  got  no  good  out  of 
it.  It  is  charmingly  pretty,  but  damp ;  and,  moreover,  the  hotel 
was  50  per  cent  too  full  of  people,  mainly  Deutschers,  and  we 
had  to  turn  out  into  the  open  air  after  dinner  because  the  salon 
and  fumoir  were  full  of  beds.  So,  in  spite  of  all  prudential  con- 
siderations, I  made  up  my  mind  to  come  here.  We  travelled 
over  the  Furca,  and  had  a  capital  journey  to  Evolena.  Thence 
I  came  on  muleback  (to  my  great  disgust,  but  I  could  not  walk 
a  bit  uphill)  here.  I  began  to  get  better  at  once;  and  in  spite  of 
a  heavy  snowfall  and  arctic  weather  a  week  ago,  I  have  done 
nothing  but  mend.  We  have  glorious  weather  now,  and  I  can 
take  almost  as  long  walks  as  last  year. 

We  have  some  Cambridge  people  here :  Dr.  Peile  of  Qirist's 
and  his  family.  Also  Nettleship  of  Oxford.  What  is  the  myth 
about  the  Darwin  tree  in  the  Pall  Mall  ?  *  Dr.  Peile  believes  it 
to  be  all  a  flam. 

*  "  A  tree  planted  yesterday  in  the  centre  of  the  circular  grass-plot 
in  the  first  court  of  Christ's  College,  in  Darwin's  honour,  was  *  spir- 
ited' away  at  night." — P.M.G.  August  23,  1887. 
180 


-1 1:. 


-k.u 


i887  LETTERS   FROM   SWITZERLAND  igl 

Forel  has  just  been  paying  a  visit  to  the  Arolla  glacier  for 
the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  internal  temperature.  He  told 
me  he  much  desired  to  have  a  copy  of  the  Report  of  the  Krakatoa 
Committee.  If  it  is  published,  will  you  have  a  copy  sent  to  him  ? 
He  is  Professor  at  Lausanne,  and  a  very  good  man. 

Our  stay  here  will  depend  on  the  weather.  At  present  it  is 
perfect.  I  do  not  suppose  we  shall  leave  before  7th  or  8th  of 
September,  and  we  shall  get  home  by  easy  stages  not  much 
before  the  end  of  the  month. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Madder  than  ever  on  Gentians. 

The  following  is  in  reply  to  Sir  E.  Frankland's  enquiries 
with  reference  to  the  reported  presence  of  fish  in  the  reser- 
voirs of  one  of  the  water-companies. 

Hotel  Righi  Vaudois,  Glion,  Sept.  16,  1887. 

We  left  Arolla  about  ten  days  ago,  and  after  staying  a  day 
at  St.  Maurice  in  consequence  of  my  wife's  indisposition,  came 
on  here  where  your  letter  just  received  has  followed  me.  I  am 
happy  to  say  I  am  quite  set  up  again,  and  as  I  can  manage  my 
1500  or  2000  feet  as  well  as  ever,  I  may  be  pretty  clear  that  my 
pleurisy  has  not  left  my  lung  sticking  anywhere. 

I  will  take  your  enquiries  seriatim,  (i)  The  faith  of  your 
small  boyhood  is  justified.  Eels  do  wander  overland,  especially 
in  the  wet  stormy  nights  they  prefer  for  migration.  But  so  far 
as  I  know  this  is  the  habit  only  of  good-sized,  downwardly-mov-  s 
ing  eels.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  minute  fry  take  to  the  land 
on  their  journey  upwards. 

(2)  Male  eels  are  now  well  known.  I  have  gone  over  the 
evidence  myself  and  examined  many.  But  the  reproductive 
organs  of  both  sexes  remain  undeveloped  in  fresh  water — just 
the  contrary  of  salmon,  in  which  they  remain  undeveloped  in 
salt  water. 

(3)  So  far  as  I  know,  no  eel  with  fully-developed  repro- 
ductive organs  has  yet  been  seen.  Their  matrimonial  operations 
go  on  in  the  sea  where  they  spend  their  honeymoon,'  and  we 
only  know  the  result  in  the  shape  of  the  myriads  of  thread-like 
eel-lets,  which  migrate  up  in  the  well-known  "  eel-fare." 

(4)  On  general  principles  of  eel-life  I  think  it  possible  that 
the  Inspector's  theory  may  be  correct.  But  your  story  about  the 
roach  is  a  poser.  They  certainly  do  not  take  to  walking  abroad. 
It  reminds  me  of  the  story  of  the  Irish  milk-woman  who  was 


1 82  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

confronted  with  a  stickleback  found  in  the  milk.  "  Sure,  then, 
it  must  have  been  bad  for  the  poor  cow  when  that  came  through 
her  teat." 

Surely  the  Inspector  cannot  have  overlooked  such  a  crucial 
fact  as  the  presence  of  other  fish  in  the  reservoirs  ? 

We  shall  be  here  another  week,  and  then  move  slowly  back 
to  London. "  I  am  loth  to  leave  this  place,  which  is  very  beautiful 
with  splendid  air  and  charming  walks  in  all  directions — ^two  or 
three  thousand  feet  up  if  you  like. 

Hotel  Righi  Vaudois,  Glion,  Switzerland, 

Sept.  i6,  1887. 

My  dear  Donnelly — We  left  Arolla  for  this  place  ten  days 
ago,  but  my  wife  fell  ill,  and  we  had  to  stay  a  day  at  St.  Maurice. 
She  has  been  more  or  less  out  of  sorts  ever  since  until  to-day. 
However,  I  hope  now  she  is  all  right  again. 

This  is  a  very  charming  place  at  the  east  end  of  the  Lake  of 
Geneva — 1500  feet  above  the  lake — and  you  can  walk  3000  feet 
higher  up  if  you  like. 

What  they  call  a  "  funicular  railway "  hauls  you  up  a 
gradient  of  i  in  if  from  the  station  on  the  shore  in  ten  minutes. 
At  first  the  sensation  on  looking  down  is  queer,  but  you  soon 
think  nothing  of  it.  The  air  is  very  fine,  the  weather  lovely, 
the  feeding  unexceptionable,  and  the  only  drawback  consists  in 
the  "  javelins,"  as  old  Francis  Head  used  to  call  them — stinks  of 
such  wonderful  crusted  flavour  that  they  must  have  been  many 
years  in  bottle.  But  this  is  a  speciality  of  all  furrin  parts  that 
I  have  ever  visited. 

I  am  very  well  and  extremely  lazy  so  far  as  my  head  goes 
— ^legs  I  am  willing  to  use  to  any  extent  up  hill  or  down  dale. 
They  wanted  me  to  go  and  speechify  at  Keighley  in  the  middle 
of  October,  but  I  could  not  get  permission  from  the  authorities. 
Moreover,  I  really  mean  to  keep  quiet  and  abstain  even  from 
good  words  (few  or  many)  next  session.  My  wife  joins  with 
me  in  love  to  Mrs.  Donnelly  and  yourself. 

She  thought  she  had  written,  but  doubts  whether  in  the 
multitude  of  her  letters  she  did  not  forget. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

From  Glion  also  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster : — 

I  have  been  doing  some  very  good  work  on  the  Gentians  in 
the  interests  of  the  business  of  being  idle. 

The  same  subject  recurs  in  the  next  letter: — 


i887  LETTERS   FROM   SWITZERLAND  183 

Hotel  Righi  Vaudois,  Glion,  Switzerland, 

Sept,  21,  1887. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  saw  in  the  Times  yesterday  the  an- 
nouncement of  Mr.  Symonds'  death.  I  suppose  the  deliverance 
from  so  painful  a  malady  as  heart-disease  is  hardly  to  be 
lamented  in  one  sense;  but  these  increasing  gaps  in  one's  inti- 
mate circle  are  very  saddening,  and  we  feel  for  Lady  Hooker 
and  you.  My  wife  has  been  greatly  depressed  by  hearing  of 
Mrs.  Carpenter*s  fatal  disorder.  One  cannot  go  away  for  a  few 
weeks  without  finding  somebody  gone  on  one's  return. 

I  got  no  good  at  the  Maderaner  Thai,  so  we  migrated  to  our 
old  quarters  at  Arolla,  and  there  I  picked  up  in  no  time,  and 
in  a  fortnight  could  walk  as  well  as  ever.  So  if  there  are  any 
adhesions  they  are  pretty  well  stretched  by  this  time. 

I  have  been  at  the  Gentians  again,  and  worked  out  the  de- 
velopment of  the  flower  in  G.  purpurea  and  G,  campestris.  The 
results  are  very  pretty.  They  both  start  from  a  thalamifloral 
condition,  then  become  corollifloral,  G,  purpurea  at  first  re- 
sembling G,  lutea  and  G,  campestris,  an  Ophelia,  and  then 
specialise  to  the  Ptychantha  and  Stephanantha  forms  respec- 
tively. 

In  G,  campestris  there  is  another  very  curious  thing.  The 
anthers  are  at  first  introrse,  but  just  before  the  bud  opens  they 
assume  this  position  [sketch]  and  then  turn  right  over  and  be- 
come extrorse.  In  G,  purpurea  this  does  not  happen,  but  the 
anthers  are  made  to  open  outwards  by  their  union  on  the  inner 
side  of  the  slits  of  dehiscence. 

There  are  several  other  curious  bits  of  morphology  that  have 
turned  up,  but  I  reserve  them  for  our  meeting. 

Beyond  pottering  away  at  my  Gentians  and  doing  a  little 
with  that  extraordinary  Cynanchum  I  have  been  splendidly  idle. 
After  three  weeks  of  the  ascetic  life  of  Arolla,  we  came  here  to 
acclimatise  ourselves  to  lower  levels  and  to  fatten  up.  I  go 
straight  through  the  table  d'hote  at  each  meal,  and  know  not 
indigestion. 

My  wife  has  fared  not  so  well,  but  she  is  all  right  again 
now.  We  go  home  by  easy  stages,  and  expect  to  be  in  Marlbor- 
ough Place  on  Tuesday. 

With  all  our  best  wishes  to  Lady  Hooker  and  yourself — 
Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  second  visit  to  Arolla  did  as  much  good  as  the  first. 
Though  unable  to  stay  more  than  a  week  or  two  in  London 


1 84  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

itself,  he  was  greatly  invigorated.  His  renewed  strength 
enabled  him  to  carry  out  vigorously  such  work  as  he  had 
put  his  hand  to,  and  still  more,  to  endure  one  of  the  greatest 
sorrows  of  his  whole  life  which  was  to  befall  him  this 
autumn  in  the  death  of  his  daughter  Marian. 

The  controversy  which  fell  to  his  share  immediately  upon 
his  return,  has  already  been  mentioned  (p.  i68).  This  was 
all  part  of  the  war  for  science  which  he  took  as  his  neces- 
sary portion  in  life ;  but  he  would  not  plunge  into  any  other 
forms  of  controversy,  however  interesting.  So  he  writes 
to  his  son,  who  had  conveyed  him  a  message  from  the 
editor  of  a  political  review : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct.  19,  1887. 

No  political  article  from  me !  I  have  had  to  blow  off  my 
indignation  incidentally  now  and  then  lest  worse  might  befall 
me,  but  as  to  serious  political  controversy,  I  have  other  fish  to 
fry.  Such  influence  as  I  possess  may  be  most  usefully  employed 
in  promoting  various  educational  movements  now  afoot,  and 
I  do  not  want  to  bar  myself  from  working  with  men  of  all 
political  parties. 

So  excuse  me  in  the  prettiest  language  at  your  command 
to  Mr.  A. 

Nevertheless  politics  very  soon  drew  him  into  a  new 
conflict,  in  defence,  be  it  said,  of  science  against  the  possi- 
ble contamination  of  political  influences.  Prof,  (now  Sir) 
G.  G.  Stokes,  his  successor  in  the  chair  of  the  Royal  Society, 
accepted  an  invitation  from  the  University  of  Cambridge  to 
stand  for  election  as  their  member  of  Parliament,  and  was 
duly  elected.  This  was  a  step  to  which  many  Fellows  of 
the  Royal  Society,  and  Huxley  in  especial,  objected  very 
strongly.  Properly  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  both  offices  at 
once  was,  in  his  opinion,  impossible.  It  might  seem  for  the 
moment  an  advantage  that  the  accredited  head  of  the  sci- 
entific world  should  represent  its  interests  officially  in  Par- 
liament ;  but  the  precedent  was  full  of  danger.  Science  being 
essentially  of  no  party,  it  was  especially  needful  for  such 
a  representative  of  science  to  keep  free  from  all  possible 
entanglements ;  to  avoid  committing  science,  as  it  were,  offi- 
cially to  the  policy  of  a  party,  or,  as  its  inevitable  conse- 


i8S7  SCIENCE   AND   POLITICS  185 

quence,  introducing  political  consideiaticHis  into  the  choice 
of  a  future  President. 

During  his  own  tenure  of  the  Presidency  Huxley  had 
carefully  abstained  from  any  official  connection  with  societies 
or  public  movements  on  which  the  feeling  of  the  Royal 
Society  was  divided,  lest  as  a  body  it  might  seem  commit- 
ted  by  the  person  and  name  of  its  President,  He  thought 
it  a  mistake  that  his  successor  should  even  be  President 
of  the  Victoria  Institute. 

Thus  there  is  a  good  deal  in  his  correspondence  bear- 
ing on  this  matter.  He  WTites  on  November  6  to  Sir  J. 
Hooker : — 

I  am  extremely  exercised  in  my  mind  about  Stokes*  going 
into  Parliament  (as  a  strong  party  man,  moreover)  while  still 
P.R.S.  I  do  not  know  what  you  may  think  about  it,  but  to  my 
mind  it  is  utterly  wrong — and  degrading  to  the  Society — ^by  in- 
troducing politics  into  its  affairs. 

And  on  the  same  day  to  Sir  M.  Foster: — 

I  think  it  is  extremely  improper  for  the  President  of  the 
R.S.  to  accept  a  position  as  a  party  politician.  As  a  Unionist  I 
should  vote  for  him  if  I  had  a  vote  for  Cambridge  University, 
but  for  all  that  I  think  it  is  most  lamentable  that  the  Presidency 
of  the  Society  should  be  dragged  into  party  mud. 

When  I  was  President  I  refused  to  take  the  Presidency  of 
the  Sunday  League,  because  of  the  division  of  opinion  on  the 
subject.  Now  we  are  being  connected  with  the  Victoria  Insti- 
tute, and  sucked  into  the  slough  of  politics. 

These  considerations  weighed  heavily  with  several  both 
of  the  older  and  the  younger  members  of  the  Society ;  but 
the  majority  were  indifferent  to  the  dangers  of  the  precedent. 
The  Council  could  not  discuss  the  matter;  they  waited  in 
vain  for  an  official  announcement  of  his  election  from  the 
President,  while  he,  as  it  turned  out,  expected  them  to 
broach  the  subject. 

Various  proposals  were  discussed;  but  it  seemed  best 
that,  as  a  preliminary  to  further  action,  an  editorial  article 
written  by  Huxley  should  be  inserted  in  Nature^  indicating 
what  was  felt  by  a  section  of  the  Society,  and  suggesting 


1 86  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

that  resignation  of  one  of  the  two  offices  was  the  right  solu- 
tion of  the  difficulty. 

Finally,  it  seemed  that  perhaps,  after  all,  a  "  masterly 
inactivity  "  was  the  best  line  of  action.  Without  risk  of  an 
authoritative  decision  of  the  Society  "  the  wrong  way,"  out 
of  personal  regard  for  the  President,  the  question  would  be 
solved  for  him  by  actual  experience  of  work  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  where  he  would  doubtless  discover  that  he 
must  "  renounce  either  science,  or  politics,  or  existence." 

This  campaign,  however,  against  a  principle,  was  carried 
on  without  any  personal  feeling.  The  perfect  simplicity  of 
the  President's  attitude  would  have  disarmed  the  hottest 
opponent,  and  indeed  Huxley  took  occasion  to  write  him 
the  following  letter,  in  reference  to  which  he  writes  to  Dr. 
Foster : — "  I  hate  doing  things  in  the  dark  and  could  not 
stand  it  any  longer." 

Dec.  I,  1887. 

My  dear  Stokes — When  we  met  in  the  hall  of  the  Athe- 
naeum on  Monday  evening  I  was  on  the  point  of  speaking  to 
you  on  a  somewhat  delicate  topic ;  namely,  my  responsibility  for 
the  leading  article  on  the  Presidency  of  R.S.  and  politics  which 
appeared  a  fortnight  ago  in  Nature,  But  I  was  restrained  by 
the  reflection  that  I  had  no  right  to  say  anything  about  the 
matter  without  the  consent  of  the  Editor  of  Nature,  I  have 
obtained  that  consent,  and  I  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of 
availing  myself  of  my  freedom. 

I  should  have  greatly  preferred  to  sign  the  article,  and  its 
anonymity  is  due  to  nothing  but  my  strong  desire  to  avoid  the 
introduction  of  any  personal  irrelevancies  into  the  discussion  of 
a  very  grave  question  of  principle. 

I  may  add  that  as  you  are  quite  certain  to  vote  in  the  way 
that  I  think  right  on  the  only  political  questions  which  greatly 
interest  me,  my  action  has  not  been,  and  cannot  be,  in  any  way 
affected  by  political  feeling. 

And  as  there  is  no  one  of  whom  I  have  a  higher  opinion 
as  a  man  of  science — no  one  whom  I  should  be  more  glad  to 
serve  under,  and  to  support  year  after  year  in  the  Chair  of  the 
Society,  and  no  one  for  whom  I  entertain  feelings  of  more  sin- 
cere friendship — I  trust  you  will  believe  that,  if  there  is  a  word 
in  the  article  which  appears  inconsistent  with  these  feelings,  it 
is  there  by  oversight,  and  is  sincerely  regretted. 


i887  SCIENCE  AND   POLITICS  187 

During  the  thirty  odd  years  we  have  known  one  another, 
we  have  often  had  stout  battles  without  loss  of  mutual  kind- 
ness. My  chief  object  in  troubling  you  with  this  letter  is  to 
express  the  hope  that,  whatever  happens,  this  state  of  things  may 
continue. — I  am,  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

PS, — I  am  still  of  opinion  that  it  is  better  that  my  author- 
ship should  not  be  officially  recognised,  but  you  are,  of  course, 
free  to  use  the  information  I  have  given  you  in  any  way  you 
may  think  fit. 

To  this  the  President  returned  a  very  frank  and  friendly 
reply ;  saying  he  had  never  dreamed  of  any  incompatibility 
existing  between  the  two  offices,  and  urging  that  the  Presi- 
dency ought  not  to  constrain  a  man  to  give  up  his  ordinary 
duties  as  a  citizen.    He  concludes : — 

And  now  I  have  stated  my  case  as  it  appears  to  myself;  let 
me  assure  you  that  nothing  that  has  passed  tends  at  all  to  dimin- 
ish my  friendship  towards  you.  My  wife  heard  last  night  that 
the  article  was  yours,  and  told  me  so.  I  rather  thought  it  must 
have  been  written  by  some  hot  Gladstonian.  It  seems,  however, 
that  her  informant  was  right.  She  wishes  me  to  tell  you  that 
she  replied  to  her  informant  that  she  felt  quite  sure  that  if  you 
wrote  it,  it  was  because  you  thought  it. 

To  which  Huxley  replied : — 

I  am  much  obliged  for  your  letter,  which  is  just  such  as  I 
felt  sure  you  would  write. 

Pray  thank  Mrs.  Stokes  for  her  kind  message.  I  am  very 
grateful  for  her  confidence  in  my  uprightness  of  intention. 

We  must  agree  to  differ. 

It  may  be  needful  for  me  and  those  who  agree  with  me  to 
place  our  opinions  on  record;  but  you  may  depend  upon  it  that 
nothing  will  be  done  which  can  suggest  any  lack  of  friendship 
or  respect  for  our  President. 

It  will  be  seen  from  this  correspondence  and  the  letter 
to  Sir  J.  Donnelly  of  July  15  (p.  179),  that  Huxley  was  a 
staunch  Unionist.  Not  that  he  considered  the  actual  course 
of  English  rule  there  ideal ;  his  main  point  was  that  under 
the  circumstances  the  establishment  of  Home  Rule  was  a 
distinct  betrayal  of  trust,  considering  that  on  the  strength 
of  Government  promises,  an  immense  number  of  persons 


l88  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

had  entered  into  contracts,  had  bought  land,  and  staked  their 
fortunes  in  Ireland,  who  would  be  ruined  by  the  establish- 
ment of  Home  Rule.  Moreover,  he  held  that  the  right  of 
self-preservation  entitled  a  nation  to  refuse  to  establish  at 
its  very  gates  a  power  which  could,  and  perhaps  would,  be 
a  danger  to  its  own  existence.  Of  the  capacity  of  the  Irish 
peasant  for  self-government  he  had  no  high  opinion,  and 
what  he  had  seen  of  the  country,  and  especially  the  great 
central  plain,  in  his  frequent  visits  to  Ireland,  convinced  him 
that  the  balance  between  subsistence  and  population  would 
speedily  create  a  new  agrarian  question,  whatever  political 
schemes  were  introduced.  This  was  one  of  "  the  only  politi- 
cal questions  which  interested  him." 

Towards  the  end  of  October  he  left  London  for  Hastings, 
partly  for  his  own,  but  still  more  for  his  wife's  sake,  as  she 
was  far  from  well.  He  was  still  busy  with  one  or  two  Royal 
Society  Committees,  and  came  up  to  town  occasionally  to 
attend  their  meetings,  especially  those  dealing  with  the 
borings  in  the  Delta,  and  with  Antarctic  exploration.  Thus 
he  writes : — 

II    EVERSFIELD    PlACE,  HASTINGS,   Oct,  3I,  1887. 

My  dear  Foster — We  have  been  here  for  the  last  week,  and 
are  likely  to  be  here  for  some  time,  as  my  wife,  though  mending, 
is  getting  on  but  slowly,  and  she  will  be  as  well  out  of  London 
through  beastly  November.  I  shall  be  up  on  Thursday  and 
return  on  Friday,  but  I  do  not  want  to  be  away  longer,  as  it  is 
lonesome  for  the  wife. 

I  quite  agree  to  what  you  propose  on  Committee,  so  I  need 
not  be  there.  Very  glad  to  hear  that  the  Council  "  very  much 
applauded  what  we  had  done,"  and  hope  we  shall  get  the  £500. 

I  don't  believe  a  word  in  increasing  whale  fishery,  but  scien- 
tifically, the  Antarctic  expedition  would,  or  might  be  very  in- 
teresting, and  if  the  colonies  will  do  their  part,  I  think  we  ought 
to  do  ours. 

You  won't  want  me  at  that  Committee  either.  Hope  to  see 
you  on  Thursday. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Hideous  pen ! 

But  he  did  not  come  up  that  Thursday.  His  wife  was 
for  a  time  too  ill  to  be  left,  and  he  winds  up  his  letter  of 
November  2  to  Dr.  Foster  with  the  reflection: — 


i887  THE   COPLEY   MEDAL  1 89 

Mail  is  born  to  trouble  as  the  sparks,  etc. — ^but  when  you 
have  come  to  my  time  of  life  you  will  say  as  I  do — Lucky  it  is 
no  worse. 

November  6. — I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  the  £500  is 
granted,  and  I  will  see  to  what  is  next  to  be  done  as  soon  as  I 
can.  Also  I  am  very  glad  to  find  you  don't  want  my  valuable 
service  on  Council  R.S.  I  repented  me  of  my  offer  when  I 
thought  how  little  I  might  be  able  to  attend. 

One  thing,  however,  afforded  him  great  pleasure  at  this 
time.  He  writes  on  November  6  to  his  old  friend,  Sir  J. 
Hooker : — 

I  write  just  to  say  what  infinite  satisfaction  the  award  of 
the-  Copley  Medal  to  you  has  given  me.  If  you  were  not  my 
dear  old  friend,  it  would  rejoice  me  as  a  mere  matter  of  justice 

— of  which  there  is  none  too  much  in  this  " rum  world," 

as  Whitworth*s  friend  called  it. 

To  the  reply  that  the  award  was  not  according  to  rule, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  the  turn  for  the  medal  to  be  awarded 
in  another  branch  of  science,  he  rejoins: — 

I  had  forgotten  all  about  the  business — ^but  he  had  done 
nothing  to  deserve  the  Copley,  and  all  I  can  say  is  that  if  the 
present  award  is  contrary  to  law,  the  "  law's  a  hass  "  as  Mr. 
Bumble  said.    But  I  don't  believe  that  it  is. 

He  replies  also  on  November  5  to  a  clerical  correspond- 
ent who  had  written  to  him  on  the  distinction  between 
shehretz  and  rehmes,  and  accused  him  of  "  wilful  blindness  " 
in  his  theological  controversy  of  1886: — 

Let  me  assure  you  that  it  is  not  my  way  to  set  my  face 
against  being  convinced  by  evidence. 

I  really  cannot  hold  myself  to  be  responsible  for  the  transla- 
tors of  the  Revised  Version  of  the  O.T.  If  I  had  given  a 
translation  of  the  passage  to  which  you  refer  on  my  own  au- 
thority, any  mistake  would  be  mine,  and  I  should  be  bound  to 
acknowledge  it.    As  I  did  not,  I  have  nothing  to  admit.    I  have 

every  respect  for  your  and  Mr.  's  authority  as  Hebraists, 

but  I  have  noticed  that  Hebrew  scholars  are  apt  to  hold  very 

divergent  views,  and  before  admitting  either  your  or  Mr. 's 

interpretation,  I  should  like  to  see  the  question  fully  discussed. 

If,  when  the  discussion  is  concluded,  the  balance  of  authority 


1 


igo 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CHAP,  xi 


is  against  the  revised  version,  I  will  carefully  consider  how  far 
the  needful  alterations  may  affect  the  substance  of  the  one  pas- 
sage in  my  reply  to  Mr.  Gladstone  which  is  affected  by  it. 

At  present  I  am  by  no  means  clear  that  it  will  make  much 
difference,  and  in  no  case  will  the  main  lines  of  my  argument 
as  to  the  antagonism  between  modem  science  and  the  Pentateuch 
be  affected.  The  statements  I  have  made  are  public  property. 
If  you  think  they  are  in  any  way  erroneous  I  must  ask  you  to 
take  upon  yourself  the  same  amount  of  responsibility  as  I  have 
done,  and  submit  your  objection  to  the  same  ordeal. 

There  is  nothing  like  this  test  for  reducing  things  to  their 
true  proportions,  and  if  you  try  it,  you  will  probably  discover, 
not  without  some  discomfort,  that  you  really  had  no  reason  to 
ascribe  wilful  blindness  to  those  who  do  not  agree  with  you. 

He  was  now  preparing  to  complete  his  campaign  of  the 
spring  on  technical  education  by  delivering  an  address  to 
the  Technical  Education  Association  at  Manchester  on 
November  29,  and  looked  forward  to  attending  the  anni- 
versary meeting  of  the  Royal  Society  on  his  way  home  next 
day,  and  seeing  the  Copley  medal  conferred  upon  his  old 
friend,  Sir  J.  Hooker.  However,  unexpected  trouble  befell 
him.  First  he  was  much  alarmed  about  his  wife,  who  had 
been  ill  more  or  less  ever  since  leaving  Arolla.  Happily  it 
turned  out  that  there  was  nothing  worse  than  could  be  set 
right  by  a  slight  operation.  But  nothing  had  been  done 
when  news  came  of  the  sudden  death  of  his  second  daughter 
on  November  19.  "  I  have  no  heart  for  anything  just  now,'* 
he  writes;  nevertheless,  he  forced  himself  to  fulfil  this  im- 
portant engagement  at  Manchester,  and  in  the  end  the 
necessity  of  bracing  himself  for  the  undertaking  acted  on 
him  as  a  tonic. 

It  is  a  trifle,  perhaps,  but  a  trifle  significant  of  the  dis- 
turbance of  mind  that  could  override  so  firmly  fixed  a 
habit,  that  the  two  first  letters  he  wrote  after  receiving  the 
news  are  undated;  almost  the  only  omission  of  the  sort  I 
have  found  in  all  his  letters  of  the  last  twenty-five  years  of 
his  life. 

His  daughter's  long  illness  had  left  him  without  hope 
for  months  past,  but  this,  as  he  confessed,  did  not  mend 
matters  much.     In  his  letters  to  his  two  most  intimate 


i887  DEATH   OF   HIS   DAUGHTER  191 

friends,  he  recalls  her  brilliant  promise,  her  happy  marriage, 
her  "  faculty  for  art,  which  some  of  the  best  artists  have  told 
me  amounted  to  genius."  But  he  was  naturally  reticent  in 
these  matters,  and  would  hardly  write  of  his  own  griefs 
unbidden  even  to  old  friends. 

85  Marina,  St.  Leonards,  Nov.  21,  1887. 

My  dear  Spencer— You  will  not  have  forgotten  my  bright 
g^rl  Marian,  who  married  so  happily  and  with  such  bright  pros- 
pects half  a  dozen  years  ago  ?  , 

Well,  she  died  three  days  ago  of  a  sudden  attack  of  pneu- 
monia, which  carried  her  off  almost  without  warning.  And  I 
cannot  convey  to  you  a  sense  of  the  terrible  sufferings  of  the 
last  three  years  better  than  by  saying  that  I,  her  father,  who 
loved  her  well,  am  glad  that  the  end  has  come  thus.  .  .  . 

My  poor  wife  is  well-nigh  crushed  .by  the  blow.  For  though 
I  had  lost  hope,  it  was  not  in  the  nature  of  things  that  she 
should. 

Don*t  answer  this — I  have  half  a  mind  to  tear  it  up — for 
when  one  is  in  a  pool  of  trouble  there  is  no  sort  of  good  in 
splashing  other  people. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

As  for  his  plans,  he  writes  to  Sir  J.  Hooker  on  Novem- 
ber 21 : — 

I  had  set  my  heart  on  seeing  you  get  the  Copley  on  the  30th. 
In  fact,  I  made  the  Manchester  people,  to  whom  I  had  made  a 
promise  to  go  down  and  address  the  Technical  Education  Asso- 
ciation, change  their  day  to  the  29th  for  that  reason. 

I  cannot  leave  them-  in  the  lurch  after  stirring  up  the  busi- 
ness in  the  way  I  have  done,  and  I  must  go  and  give  my  address. 
But  I  must  get  back  to  my  poor  wife  as  fast  as  I  can,  and  I  can- 
not face  any  more  publicity  than  that  which  it  would  be  cowardly 
to  shirk  just  now.  So  I  shall  not  be  at  the  Society  except  in  the 
spirit. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

And  again  to  Sir  M.  Foster: — 

You  cannot  be  more  sorry  than  I  am  that  I  am  going  to 
Manchester,  but  I  am  not  proud  of  chalking  up  "  no  popery " 
and  running  away — for  all  Evans'  and  your  chaff — and,  having 
done  a  good  deal  to  stir  up  the  Technical  Education  business 
and  the  formation  of  the  Association,  I  cannot  leave  them  in 
the  lurch  when  they  urgently  ask  for  my  services.  .  .  . 


192  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

The  Delta  business  mtist  wait  till  after  the  30th.  I  have  no 
heart  for  anything  just  now. 

The  letters  following  were  written  in  answer  to  letters 
of  sympathy. 

85  Marina,  St.  Leonards,  Nov.  25,  1887. 

My  dear  Mr.  Clodd — ^Let  me  thank  you  on  my  wife's  behalf 
and  my  own  for  your  very  kind  and  sympathetic  letter. 

My  poor  child's  death  is  the  end  of  more  than  three  years  of 
suffering  on  her  part,  and  deep  anxiety  on  ours.  I  suppose 
we  olight  to  rejoice  that  the  end  has  come,  on  the  whole,  so 
mercifully.  But  I  find  that  even  I,  who  knew  better,  hoped 
against  hope,  and  my  poor  wife,  who  was  unfortunately  already 
very  ill,  is  quite  heartbroken.  Otherwise,  she  would  have  re- 
plied herself  to  your  very  kind  letter. 

She  has  never  yet  learned  the  art  of  sparing  herself,  and  I 
find  it  hard  work  to  teach  her. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

In  the  same  strain  he  writes  to  Dr.  Dyster : — 

Rationally  we  must  admit  that  it  is  best  so.  But  then,  what- 
ever Linnaeus  may  say,  man  is  not  a  rational  animal — especially 
in  his  parental  capacity. 

85  Marina,  St.  Leonards,  Nov.  25,  1887. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  really  must  thank  yovi  very  heartily 
for  your  letter.  It  went  to  our  hearts  and  did  us  good,  and  I 
know  you  will  like  to  learn  that  you  have  helped  us  in  this 
grievous  time. 

My  wife  is  better,  but  fit  for  very  little ;  and  I  do  not  let  her 
write  a  letter  even,  if  I  can  help  it.  But  it  is  a  great  deal  harder 
to  keep  her  from  doing  what  she  thinks  her  duty  than  to  get 
most  other  people  to  do  what  plainly  is  their  duty. 

With  our  kindest  love  and  thanks  to  all  of  you — Ever,  my 
dear  Knowles,  yours  very  faithfully,       ,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Yes,  you  are  quite  right  about  "  loyal."  I  love  my  friends 
and  hate  my  enemies,  which  may  not  be  in  accordance  with  the 
Gospel,  but  I  have  found  it  a  good  wearing  creed  for  honest 
men. 

The  "  Address  on  behalf  of  the  National  Association  for 
the  Promotion  of  Technical  Education,"  first  published  in 
the  ensuing  number  of  Science  and  Art,  and  reprinted  in 


i887  TECHNICAL  EDUCATION  193 

Collected  Essays,  iii.  427-451,  was  duly  delivered  in  Man- 
chester, and  produced  a  considerable  effect. 
He  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster,  December  i : — 

I  am  glad  I  resisted  the  strong  temptation  to  shirk  the  busi- 
ness. Manchester  has  gone  solid  for  technical  education,  and 
if  the  idiotic  London  papers,  instead  of  giving  half  a  dozen  lines 
of  my  speech,  had  mentioned  the  solid  contributions  to  the  work 
announced  at  the  meeting,  they  would  have  enabled  you  to 
understand  its  importance. 

...  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  having  got  through  a  hard 
bit  of  work,  and  am  none  the  worse  physically — rather  the  better 
for  having  to  pull  myself  together. 

And  to  Sir  J.  Hooker: — 

85  Marina,  St.  Leonards,  Dec.  4,  1887. 

My  dear  Hooker — x  =  Sf  6.30.  I  meant  to  have  written 
to  you  all  to  put  off  the  x  till  next  Thursday,  when  I  could  attend, 
but  I  have  been  so  bedevilled  I  forgot  it.  I  shall  ask  for  a  bill 
of  indemnity. 

I  was  rather  used  up  yesterday,  but  am  picking  up.  In  fact 
my  Manchester  journey  convinced  me  that  there  was  more  stuff 
left  than  I  thought  for.  I  travelled  400  miles,  and  made  a  speech 
of  fifty  minutes  in  a  hot,  crowded  room,  all  in  about  twelve 
hours,  and  was  none  the  worse.  Manchester,  Liverpool,  and 
Newcastle  have  now  gone  in  for  technical  education  on  a  grand 
scale,  and  the  work  is  practically  done.    Nunc  Dimittis! 

I  hear  great  things  of  your  speech  at  the  dinner.  I  wish  I 
could  have  been  there  to  hear  it.  .  .  . 

Of  the  two  following  letters,  one  refers  to  the  account 
of  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker's  work  in  connection  with  the  award 
of  the  Copley  medal ;  the  other,  to  Hooker  himself,  touches 
a  botanical  problem  in  which  Huxley  was  interested. 

St.  Leonards,  ATov.  25,  1887. 

My  dear  Foster —  ...  I  forget  whether  in  the  notice  of 

Hooker's  work  you  showed  me  there  was  any  allusion  made  to 

that  remarkable  account  of  the  Diatoms  in  Antarctic  ice,  to 

which  I  once  drew  special  attention,  but  Heaven  knows  where? 

Dyer  perhaps  may  recollect  all  about  the  account  in  the 

Flora  Antarctica,  if  I  mistake  not.    I  have,  always  looked  upon 

Hooker's  insight  into  the  importance  of  these  things  and  their 

49 


194 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR    HUXLEY  chap,  xi 


skeletons  as  a  remarkable  piece  of  inquiry — anticipative  of  sub- 
sequent deep  sea  work. 

Best  thanks  for  taking  so  much  trouble  about  H .    Pray 

tell  him  if  ever  you  write  that  I  have  not  answered  his  letter 
only  because  I  awaited  your  reply.  He  may  think  my  silence 
uncivil.  .  .  . — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec.  29,  1887. 

Where  is  the  fullest  information  about  distribution  of  Co- 
niferse  ?    Of  course  I  have  looked  at  Genera  PL  and  De  Candolle. 

I  have  been  trying  to  make  out  whether  structure  or  climate 
or  paleontology  throw  any  light  on  their  distribution — and  am 
drawing  complete  blank.  Why  the  deuce  are  there  no  Conifers 
but  Podocarpus  and  Widringtonias  in  all  Africa  south  of  the 
Sahara?  And  why  the  double  deuce  are  about  three-quarters 
of  the  genera  huddled  together  in  Japan  and  N.  China  ? 

I  am  puzzling  over  this  group  because  the  paleontological 
record  is  comparatively  so  good. 

I  am  beginning  to  suspect  that  present  distribution  is  an 
affair  rather  of  denudation  than  migration. 

Sequoia!  Taxodium!  Widringtonia!  Araucaria!  all  in  Eu- 
rope, in  Mesozoic  and  Tertiary. 

The  following  letters  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  were  writ- 
ten as  sets  of  proofs  of  his  Autobiography  arrived.  That 
to  Sir  J.  Skelton  was  to  thank  him  for  his  book  on  Mait- 
land  of  Lethington,  the  Scotch  statesman  of  the  time  of  Queen 
Mary. 

/an.  18,  1887. 

(The  first  part  of  this  letter  is  given  on  p.  161.) 

My  dear  Spencer — I  see  that  your  proofs  have  been  in  my 
hands  longer  than  I  thought  for.  But  you  may  have  seen  that  I 
have  been  "  starring  "  at  the  Mansion  House.  .  .  . 

I  am  immensely  tickled  with  your  review  of  your  own  book. 
That  is  something  most  originally  Spencerian.  I  have  hardly 
any  suggestions  to  make,  except  in  what  you  say  about  the 
Rattlesnake  work  and  my  position  on  board. 

Her  proper  business  was  the  survey  of  the  so-called  "  inner 
passage  "  between  the  Barrier  Reef  and  the  east  coast  of  Aus- 
tralia ;  the  New  Guinea  work  was  a  hors  d'cxuvre,  and  dealt  with 
only  a  small  part  of  the  southern  coast. 

Macgillivray  was  naturalist — I  was  actually  Assistant- Sur- 


i887  LETTER   TO   MR.  SPENCER  195 

geon  and  nothing  else.  But  I  was  recommended  to  Stanley  by 
Sir  John  Richardson,  my  senior  officer  at  Haslar,  on  account  of 
my  scientific  proclivities.  But  scientific  work  was  no  part  of 
my  duty.  How  odd  it  is  to  look  back  through  the  vista  of  years ! 
Reading  your  account  of  me,  I  had  the  sensation  of  studying  a 
fly  in  amber.  I  had  utterly  forgotten  the  particular  circum- 
stance that  brought  us  together.  Considering  what  wilful  tykes 
we  both  are  (you  particularly),  I  think  it  is  a  great  credit  to 
both  of  us  that  we  are  firmer  friends  now  than  we  were  then. 
Your  kindly  words  have  given  me  much  pleasure. 

This  is  a  deuce  of  a  long  letter  to  inflict  upon  you,  but  there 

is  more  coming.    The  other  day  a  Miss ,  a  very  good,  busy 

woman  of  whom  I  and  my  wife  have  known  a  little  for  some 
years,  sent  me  a  proposal  of  the  committee  of  a  body  calling 
itself  the  London  Liberty  League  (I  think)  that  I  should  accept 
the  position  of  one  of  three  honorary  something  or  others,  you 
and  Mrs.  Fawcett  being  the  other  two. 

Now  you  may  be  sure  that  I  should  be  glad  enough  to  be 
associated  with  you  in  anything;  but  considering  the  innumer- 
able battles  we  have  fought  over  education,  vaccination,  and  so 
on,  it  seemed  to  me  that  if  the  programme  of  the  League  were 
wide  enough  to  take  us  both  for  figure-heads,  it  must  be  so 
elastic  as  to  verge  upon  infinite  extensibility;  and  that  one  or 
other  of  us  would  be  in  a  false  position. 

So  I  wrote  to  ^iss to  that  effect,  and  the  matter  then 

dropped. 

Misrepresentation  is  so  rife  in  this  world  that  it  struck  me 
I  had  better  te.Il  you  exactly  what  happened. 

On  the  whole,  your  account  of  your  own  condition  is  en- 
couraging ;  not  going  back  is  next  door  to  going  forward.  Any- 
how, you  have  contrived  to  do  a  lot  of  writing. 

We  are  all  pretty  flourishing,  and  if  my  wife  does  not  get 
worn  out  with  cooks  falling  ill  and  other  domestic  worries,  I 
shall  be  content. 

Now  this  really  is  the  end. — Ever  yours  very  truly, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  London,  N.W., 
March  7,  1887. 

My  dear  Skelton — Wretch  that  I  am,  I  see  that  I  have 
never  had  the  grace  to  thank  you  for  Maitland  of  Lethington 
which  reached  me  I  do  not  choose  to  remember  how  long  ago, 
and  which  I  read  straight  off  with  lively  satisfaction. 


196 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 


There  is  a  paragraph  in  your  preface,  which  I  meant  to  have 
charged  you  with  having  plagiarised  from  an  article  of  mine, 
which  had  not  appeared  when  I  got  your  book.  In  that  Her- 
mitage of  yours  you  are  up  to  any  Codesicobuddhistotelepathic 
dodge ! 

It  is  about  the  value  of  practical  discipline  to  historians. 
Half  of  them  know  nothing  of  life,  and  still  less  of  government 
and  the  ways  of  men. 

I  am  quite  useless,  but  have  vitality  enough  to  kick  and 
scratch  a  little  when  prodded. 

I  am  at  present  engaged  on  a  series  of  experiments  on  the 

thickness  of  skin  of  that  wonderful  little  wind-bag .    The 

way  that  second-rate  amateur  poses  as  a  man  of  science,  having 
authority  as  a  sort  of  papistical  Scotch  dominie,  bred  a  minister, 
but  stickit,  really  "  rouses  my  corruption."  What  a  good  phrase 
that  is !  I  am  cursed  with  a  lot  of  it,  and  any  fool  can  strike 
ile. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley.* 

Please  remember  me  very  kindly  to  Mrs.  Skelton. 

II    EVERSFIELD    PlACE,  HASTINGS,  Nov,  1 8,   1887. 

My  dear  Spencer — I  was  very  glad  to  get  your  letter  this 
morning.  I  heard  all  about  you  from  Hirst  before  I  left  London, 
now  nearly  a  month  ago,  and  I  promised  myself  that  instead  of 
bothering  you  with  a  letter  I  would  run  over  from  here  and  pay 
you  a  visit. 

Unfortunately,  my  wife,  who  had  been  ill  more  or  less 
ever  since  we  left  Arolla  and  came  here  on  Clark's  advice, 
had  an  attack  one  night,  which  frightened  me  a  good  deal, 
though  it  luckily  turned  out  to  arise  from  easily  remediable 
causes. 

Under  these  circumstances  you  will  understand  how  I  have 
not  made  my  proposed  journey  to  Brighton. 

I  am  rejoiced  to  hear  of  your  move.  I  believe  in  the  skill  of 
Dr.  B.  Potter  and  her  understanding  of  the  case  more  than  I  do 
in  all  the  doctors  and  yourself  put  together.  Please  offer  my 
respectful  homage  to  that  eminent  practitioner. 

You  see  people  won't  let  me  alone,  and  I  have  had  to  tell 
the  Duke  to  "  keep  on  board  his  own  ship,"  as  the  Quaker  said, 
once  more.    I  seek  peace,  but  do  not  ensue  it. 

*  This  letter  is  one  of  the  twelve  from  T.  H.  H.  already  published 
by  Sir  John  Skelton  in  his  Table  Talk  of  Shirley,  p.  295  sq. 


i887  LETTERS  TO   MR.  SPENCER  197 

Send  any  quantity  of  proofs,  they  are  a  good  sign.  By  the 
way,  we  move  to  85  Marina,  St.  Leonards,  to-morrow. 

Wife  sends  her  kind  regards. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

85  Marina,  St.  Leonards,  Dec,  1887. 

My  dear  Spencer — I  have  nothing  to  criticise  in  the  en- 
closed except  that  the  itineraries  seem  to  me  rather  superfluous. 

I  am  glad  to  find  that  you  forget  things  that  have  happened 
to  you  as  completely  as  I  do.  I  should  cut  almost  as  bad  a 
figure  as  "  Sir  Roger  "  if  I  were  cross-examined  about  my  past 
life. 

Your  allusion  to  sending  me  the  proofs  made  me  laugh  by 
reminding  me  of  a  particularly  insolent  criticism  with  which 
I  once  favoured  you :  "  No  objection  except  to  the  whole." 

It  was  some  piece  of  diabolical  dialectics,  in  which  I  could 
pick  no  hole,  if  the  premises  were  granted — and  even  then  could 
be  questioned  only  by  an  ultra-sceptic ! 

Do  you  see  that  the  American  Association  of  Authors  has 
adopted  a  Resolution,  which  is  a  complete  endorsement  of  my 
view  of  the  stamp-swindle? 

We  have  got  our  operation  over,  and  my  wife  is  going  on 
very  well.  Overmuch  anxiety  has  been  telling  on  me,  but  I  shall 
throw  it  off. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


CHAPTER   XII 
1888 

Huxley  had  returned  to  town  before  Christmas,  for 
the  house  in  St.  John's  Wood  was  still  the  rallying-point 
for  the  family,  although  his  elder  children  were  now  mar- 
ried and  dispersed.  But  he  did  not  stay  long.  "  Wife  won- 
derfully better,"  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on  January  8, 
"  self  as  melancholy  as  a  pelican  in  the  wilderness."  He 
meant  to  have  left  London  on  the  i6th,  but  his  depressed 
condition  proved  to  be  the  beginning  of  a  second  attack  of 
pleurisy,  and  he  was  unable  to  start  for  Bournemouth  till 
the  24th.  ' 

Here,  however,  his  recovery  was  very  slow.  He  was 
unable  to  come  up  to  the  first  meeting  of  the  x  Club.  "  I 
trust,"  he  writes,  "  I  shall  be  able  to  be  at  the  next  x — ^but  I 
am  getting  on  very  slowly.  I  can't  walk  above  a  couple  of 
miles  without  being  exhausted,  and  talking  for  twenty  min- 
utes has  the  same  effect.    I  suppose  it  is  all  Anno  Domini." 

But  he  had  a  pleasant  visit  from  one  of  the  x,  and 
writes : — 

Casalini,  West  Cliff,  Bournemouth,  Jan.  29,  1888. 

My  dear  Hooker — Spencer  was  here  an  hour  ago  as  lively 
as  a  cricket.  He  is  going  back  to  town  on  Tuesday  to  plunge 
into  the  dissipations  of  the  Metropolis.  I  expect  he  will  insist 
on  your  all  going  to  Evans'  (or  whatever  represents  that  place 
to  our  descendants)  after  the  x. 

Bellows  very  creaky — took  me  six  weeks  to  get  them  mended 
last  time,  so  I  suppose  I  may  expect  as  long  now. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

As  appears  from  the  letters  which  follow,  he  had  been 
busied  with  writing  an  article  for  the  Nineteenth  Century,  for 

igS 


i888  THE    "STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE 


»» 


199 


February,  on  the  "  Struggle  for  Existence,"  *  which  on  the 
one  hand  ran  counter  to  some  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's 
theories  of  society ;  and  on  the  other,  is  noticeable  as  briefly 
enunciating  the  main  thesis  of  his  **  Romanes  Lecture " 
of  1893. 

85  Marina,  St.  Lepnards,  Dec.  13,  1887. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  have  to  go  to  town  to-morrow  for  a 
day,  so  that  puts  an  end  to  the  possibility  of  getting  my  screed 
ready  for  January.  Altogether  it  will  be  better  to  let  it  stand 
over. 

I  do  not  know  whence  the  copyright  extract  came,  except 
that,  as  Putnam's  name  was  on  the  envelope,  I  suppose  they 
sent  it. 

Pearsall  Smith's  practice  is  a  wonderful  commentary  on  his 
theory.  Distribute  the  contents  of  the  baker's  shop  gratis — it 
will  give  people  a  taste  for  bread ! 

Great  is  humbug,  and  it  will  prevail,  unless  the  people  who 
do  not  like  it  hit  hard.  The  beast  has  no  brains,  but  you  can 
knock  the  heart  out  of  him. — Ever  yours  very  truly, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /an.  9,  1888. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Here  is  my  proof.  Will  you  mind 
running  your  eye  over  it? 

The  article  is  long,  and  partly  for  that  reason  and  partly 
because  the  general  public  wants  principles  rather  than  details, 
I  have  condensed  the  practical  half. 

H.  Spencer  and  "  Jus  "  will  be  in  a  white  rage  with  me. — 
Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  Professor  Frankland,  February  6 : — 

I  am  glad  you  like  my  article.  There  is  no  doubt  it  is  rather 
like  a  tadpole,  with  a  very  big  head  and  a  rather  thin  tail.  But 
the  subject  is  a  ticklish  one  to  deal  with,  and  I  deliberately  left 
a  good  deal  suggested  rather  than  expressed. 

Casalini,  West  Cliff,  Bournemouth,  Fed.  9,  1888. 
My  dear  Donnelly — No  !  I  don't  think  softening  has  begun 
yet — vide  "  Nature  "  this  week.f    I  am  glad  you  found  the  article 

*  Co//.  Ess.  ix.  195. 

t  Nature  (xxxvii.  337)  for  February  9,  1888  :  review  of  his  article  in 
the  Nineteenth  Century  on  the  "  Industrial  Struggle  for  Existence." 


200  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

worth  a  second  go.  I  took  a  vast  of  trouble  (as  the  country  folks 
say)  about  it.  I  am  afraid  it  has  made  Spencer  very  angry — 
but  he  knows  I  think  he  has  been  doing  mischief  this  long  time. 

Bellows  to  mend !  Bellows  to  mend  I  I  am  getting  very 
tired  of  it.  If  I  walk  two  or  three  miles,  however  slowly,  I  am 
regularly  done  for  at  the  end  of  it.  I  expect  there  has  been 
more  mischief  than  I  thought  for. 

How  about  the  Bill  ? — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

However,  he  and  Mr.  Spencer  wrote  .their  minds  to  each 
other  on  the  subject,  and  as  Huxley  remarks  with  reference 
to  this  occasion,  "  the  process  does  us  both  good,  and  in  no 
way  interferes  with  our  friendship." 

The  letter  immediately  following,  to  Mr.  Romanes, 
answers  an  enquiry  about  a  passage  quoted  from  Huxley's 
writings  by  Professor  Schurman  in  his  Ethical  Import  of 
Darwinism.  This  passage,  made  up  of  sentences  from  two 
different  essays,  runs  as  follows: — 

It  is  quite  conceivable  that  every  species  tends  to  produce 
varieties  of  a  limited  number  and  kind,  and  that  the  effect  of 
natural  selection  is  to  favour  the  development  of  some  of  these, 
while  it  opposes  the  development  of  others  along  their  prede- 
termined line  of  modification.*  A  whale  does  not  tend  to  vary 
in  the  direction  of  producing  feathers,  nor  a  bird  in  the  direction 
of  producing  whalebone.f 

"  On  the  strength  of  these  extracts  "  (writes  Mr.  Romanes), 
"  Schurman  represents  you  *  to  presuppose  design,  since  develop- 
ment takes  place  along  certain  predetermined  lines  of  modifica- 
tion.' But  as  he  does  not  give  references,  and  as  I  do  not  remem- 
ber the  passages,  I  cannot  consult  the  context,  which  I  fancy 
must  give  a  different  colouring  to  the  extracts." 

4  Marlborough  Place,  /an.  5,  1888. 

My  dear  Romanes — They  say  that  liars  ought  to  have  long 
memories.  I  am  sure  authors  ought  to.  I  could  not  at  first 
remember  where  the  passage  Schurman  quotes  occurs,  but  I 
did  find  it  in  the  Encyclopcedia  Britannica  article  on  "  Evolu- 
tion," *  reprinted  in  Science  and  Culture,  p.  307. 

But  I  do  not  find  anything  about  the  "  whale  "  here.    Never- 

*  Col/.  Ess.  ii.  223. 

t  In  "Mr.  Darwin's  Critics,"  1871  ;  Coll.  Ess.  ii.  181. 


1888  THE  ARGUMENT  FROM   DESIGN  20I 

theless  I  have  a  consciousness  of  having  said  something  of  the 
kind  somewhere,* 

If  you  look  at  the  whole  passage,  you  will  see  that  there  is 
not  the  least  intention  on  my  part  to  presuppose  design. 

If  you  break  a  piece  of  Iceland  spar  with  a  hammer,  all  the 
pieces  will  have  shapes  of  a  certain  kind,  but  that  does  not  imply 
that  the  Iceland  spar  was  constructed  for  the  purpose  of  break- 
ing up  in  this  way  when  struck.  The  atomic  theory  implies  that 
of  all  possible  compounds  of  A  and  B  only  those  will  actually 
exist  in  which  the  proportions  of  A  and  B  by  weight  bear  a  cer- 
tain ntunerical  ratio.  But  it  is  mere  arguing  in  a  circle  to  say 
that  the  fact  being  so  is  evidence  that  it  was  designed  to  be  so. 

I  am  not  going  to  take  any  more  notice  of  the  everlasting 

D ,  as  you  appropriately  call  him,  until  he  has  withdrawn  his 

slanders.  .  .  . 

Pray  give  him  a  dressing — it  will  be  one  of  those  rare  com- 
binations of  duty  and  pleasure. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  was,  moreover,  constantly  interested  in  schemes  for 
the  reform  of  the  scientific  work  of  the  London  University, 
and  for  the  enlargement  of  the  scope  and  usefulness  of  the 
Royal  Society.  As  for  the  latter,  a  proposal  had  been  made 
for  federation  with  colonial  scientific  societies,  which  was 
opposed  by  some  of  his  friends  in  the  x  Club ;  and  he  writes 
to  Sir  E.  Frankland  on  Feb^uary  3 : — 

I  am  very  sorry  you  are  all  against  Evans'  scheme.  I  am 
for  it.  I  think  it  a  very  good  proposal,  and  after  all  the  talk, 
I  do  not  want  tc  see  the  Society  look  foolish  by  doing  nothing. 

You  are  a  lot  of  obstructive  old  Tories  and  want  routing 
out.  If  I  were  only  younger  and  less  indisposed  to  any  sort  of 
exertion,  I  would  rout  you  out  finely  I 

With  respect  to  the  former,  it  had  been  proposed  that 
medical  degrees  should  be  conferred,  not  by  the  university, 
but  by  a  union  of  the  several  colleges  concerned.  He 
writes : — 

4  Marlborough  Place, /«:».  11,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — I  send  back  the  "  Heathen  Deutscheree's  " 
(whose  ways  are  dark)  letter  lest  I  forget  it  to-morrow. 

Meanwhile  perpend  these  two  things : — 

*  In  ♦•  Mr.  Darwin's  Critics,"  1871 ;  Coll.  Ess.  li.  i8i. 


202  LIFE   OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

1.  United  Colleges  propose  to  give  just  as  good  an  examina- 
tion and  require  as  much  qualification  as  the  Scotch  Universities. 
Why  then  give  their  degree  a  distinguishing  mark? 

2.  "  Academical  distinctions  "  in  medicine  are  all  humbug. 
You  are  making  a  medical  technical  school  at  Cambridge — and 
quite  right  too.  The  United  Colleges,  if  they  do  their  business 
properly,  will  confer  just  as  much,  or  as  little  "  academical  dis- 
tinction "  as  Cambridge  by  their  degree. 

3.  The  Fellowship  of  the  College  of  Surgeons  is  in  every 
sense  as  much  an  "  academical  distinction  "  as  the  Masterships 
in  Surgery  or  Doctorate  of  Medicine  of  the  Scotch  and  English 
Universities. 

4.  You  may  as  well  cry  for  the  moon  as  ask  my  colleagues 
in  the  Senate  to  meddle  seriously  with  the  Matriculation.  They 
are  possessed  by  the  devil  that  cries  continually,  "  There  is  only 
the  Liberal  education,  and  Greek  and  Latin  are  his  prophets." 

At  Bournemouth  he  also  applied  himself  to  writing  the 
Darwin  obituary  notice  for  the  Royal  Society,  a  labour  of 
love  which  he  had  long  felt  unequal  to  undertaking.  The 
MS.  was  finally  sent  off  to  the  printer's  on  April  6,  unlike 
the  still  longer  unfinished  memoir  on  Spirula,  to  which  al- 
lusion is  made  here,  among  other  business  of  the  Challenger 
Committee,  of  which  he  was  a  member. 

On  February  12  he  writes  to  Sir  J.  Evans: — 

Spirula  is  a  horrid  burden  on  my  conscience — but  nobody 
could  make  head  or  tail  of  the  business  but  myself. 

That  and  Darwin's  obituary  are  the  chief  subjects  of  my 
meditations  when  I  wake  in  the  night.  But  I  do  not  get  much 
"  forrarder,"  and  I  am  afraid  I  shall  not  until  I  get  back  to 
London. 

Bournemouth,  Fed.  14,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — No  doubt  the  Treasury  will  jump  at  any 
proposition  which  relieves  them  from  further  expense — ^but  I 
cannot  say  I  like  the  notion  of  leaving  some  of  the  most  impor- 
tant results  of  the  Challenger  voyage  to  be  published  elsewhere 
than  in  the  official  record.  .  .  . 

Evans  made  a  deft  allusion  to  Spirula,  like  a  powder  between 
two  dabs  of  jam.  At  present  I  have  no  moral  sense,  but  it  may 
awake  as  the  days  get  longer. 

I  have  been  reading  the  Origin  slowly  again  for  the  nth 
time,  with  the  view  of  picking  out  the  essentials  of  the  argu- 


1888  WORKING  AT   THE   DARWIN   OBITUARY  203 

ment,  for  the  obituary  notice.  Nothing  entertains  me  more  than 
to  hear  people  call  it  easy  reading. 

Exposition  was  not  Darwin's  forte  —  and  his  English  is 
sometimes  wonderful.  But  there  is  a  marvellous  dumb  sa- 
gacity about  him — like  that  of  a  sort  of  miraculous  dog— and 
he  gets  to  the  truth  by  ways  as  dark  as  those  of  the  Heathen 
Chinee. 

I  am  getting  quite  sick  of  all  the  "  paper  philosophers,"  as 
old  Galileo  called  them,  who  are  trying  to  stand  upon  Darwin^s 
shoulders  and  look  bigger  than  he,  when  in  point  of  real  knowl- 
edge they  are  not  fit  to  black  his  shoes.    It  is  just  as  well  I  am 

collapsed  or  I  believe  I  should  break  out  with  a  final  "  Fiir  Dar- 

•    ft 
wm. 

I  will  think  of  you  when  I  get  as  far  as  the  fossils.  At 
present  I  am  poking  over  P.  sylvestris  and  P,  pinnata  in  the 
intervals  of  weariness. 

My  wife  joins  with  me  in  love  to  you  both. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Snow  and  cold  winds  here.  Hope  you  are  as  badly  off  at 
Cambridge. 

Bournemouth,  Peh.  21,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — We  have  had  nothing  but  frost  and  snow 
here  lately,  and  at  present  half  a  gale  of  the  bitterest  north-easter 
I  have  felt  since  we  were  at  Florence  is  raging.* 

I  believe  I  am  getting  better,  as  I  have  noticed  that  at  a  par- 
ticular stage  of  my  convalescence  from  any  sort  of  illness  I  pass 
throu^  a  condition  in  which  things  in  general  appear  damnable 
and  I  myself  an  entire  failure.  If  that  is  a  sign  of  returning 
health  you  may  look  upon  my  restoration  as  certain. 

If  it  is  only  Murray's  speculations  he  wants  to  publish  sepa- 
rately, I  should  say  by  all  means  let  him.  But  the  facts,  whether 
advanced  by  him  or  other  people,  ought  all  to  be  in  the  official 
record.    I  agree  we  can't  stir. 

I  scented  the  "  goak."  How  confoundedly  proud  you  are  of 
it!    In  former  days  I  have  been  known  to  joke  myself. 

I  will  look  after  the  questions  if  you  like.  In  my  present 
state  of  mind  I  shall  be  a  capital  critic — on  Dizzy's  views  of 
critics.  .  .  . — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 


♦Similarly  to  Sir  J.  Evans  on  the  28th—"  I  ^et  my  strenf^th  back 
but  slowly,  and  think  of  migrating  to  Greenland  or  Spitzbcrgen  for  a 
milder  climate. 


204 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 


This  year  Huxley  was  appointed  a  Trustee  of  the  British 
Museum,  an  office  which  he  had  held  ex  officio  from  1883 
to  1885,  as  President  of  the  Royal  Society. 

This  is  referred  to  in  the  following  letter  of  March  9 : — 

My  dear  Hooker — Having  nothing  to  do  plays  the  devil 
with  doing  anything,  and  I  suppose  that  is  why  I  have  been  so 
long  about  answering  your  letter. 

There  is  nothing  the  matter  with  me  now  except  want  of 
strength.  I  am  tired  out  with  a  three-mile  walk,  and  my  voice 
goes  if  I  talk  for  any  time.  I  do  not  suppose  I  shall  do  much 
good  till  I  get  into  high  and  dry  air,  and  it  is  too  early  for  Swit- 
zerland yet.  .  .  . 

You  see  I  was  honoured  and  gloried  by  a  trusteeship  of  the 
B.M.*  These  things,  I  suppose,  normally  come  when  one  is 
worn-out.  When  Lowe  was  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  I  had 
a  long  talk  with  him  about  the  affairs  of  the  Nat.  Hist.  Museum, 
and  I  told  him  that  he  had  better  put  Flower  at  the  head  of  it 
and  make  me  a  trustee  to  back  him.  Bobby  no  doubt  thought  the 
suggestion  cheeky,  but  it  is  odd  that  the  thing  has  come  about 
now  that  I  don't  care  for  it,  and  desire  nothing  better  than  to 
be  out  of  every  description  of  bother  and  responsibility. 

Have  not  Lady  Hooker  and  you  yet  learned  that  a  large 
country  house  is  of  all  places  the  most  detestable  in  cold 
weather?  The  neuralgia  was  a  mild  and  kindly  hint  of  Provi- 
dence not  to  do  it  again,  but  I  am  rejoiced  it  has  vanished. 

Pronouns  got  mixed  somehow. 

With  our  kindest  regards — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

More  last  words: — What  little  faculty  I  have  has  been  be- 
stowed on  the  obituary  of  Darwin  for  R.S.  lately.  I  have  been 
trying  to  make  it  an  account  of  his  intellectual  progress,  and  I 
hope  it  will  have  some  interest.  Among  other  things  I  have 
been  trying  to  set  out  the  argument  of  the  "  Origin  of  Species," 
and  reading  the  book  for  the  «th  time  for  that  purpose.  It  is 
one  of  the  hardest  books  to  understand  thoroughly  that  I  know 
of,  and  I  suppose  that  is  the  reason  why  even  people  like  Ro- 
manes get  so  hopelessly  wrong. 

*  Replying  on  the  2nd  to  Sir  John  Evans'  congratulations,  he  says  : 
— "  It  is  some  months  since  Lord  Salisbury  made  the  proposal  to  me, 
and  I  was  beginning  to  wonder  what  had  happened — whether  Cantuar 
had  put  his  foot  down  for  example,  and  objected  to  bad  company." 


1888  ARGUMENT   OF   THE   ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES         205 

If  you  don't  mind,  I  should  be  glad  if  you  would  run  your 
eye  over  the  thing  when  I  get  as  far  as  the  proof  stage — Lord 
knows  when  that  will  be. 

A  few  day3  later  he  wrote  again  on  the  same  subject, 
after  reading  the  obituary  of  Asa  Gray,  the  first  American 
supporter  of  Darwin's  theory. 

March  23. — I  suppose  Dana  has  sent  you  his  obituary  of  Asa 
Gray. 

The  most  curious  feature  I  note  in  it  is  that  neither  of  them 
seems  to  have  mastered  the  principles  of  Darwin's  theory.  See 
the  bottom  of  p.  19  and  the  top  of  p.  20.  As  I  understand  Dar- 
win there  is  nothing  "  Anti-Darwinian "  in  either  of  the  two 
doctrines  mentioned. 

Darwin  has  left  the  causes  of  variation  and  the  question 
whether  it  is  limited  or  directed  by  external  conditions  perfectly 
open. 

The  only  serious  work  I  have  been  attempting  lately  is  Dar- 
win's obituary.  I  do  a  little  every  day,  but  get  on  very  slowly. 
I  have  read  the  life  and  letters  all  through  again,  and  the  Origin 
for  the  sixth  or  seventh  time,  becoming  confirmed  in  my  opinion 
that  it  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  books  to  exhaust  that  ever 
was  written. 

I  have  a  notion  of  writing  out  the  argument  of  the  Origin  in 
systematic  shape  as  a  sort  of  primer  of  Darwinismus,  I  have 
not  much  stuff  left  in  me,  and  it  would  be  as  good  a  way  of  using 
what  there  is  as  I  know  of.    What  do  you  think? — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

In  reply  to  this  Sir  J.  Hooker  was  inclined  to  make  the 
biographer  alone  responsible  for  the  confusion  noted  in  the 
obituary  of  Asa  Gray.     He  writes : — 

March  27,  1888. 

Dear  Huxley — Dana's  Gray  arrived  yesterday,  and  I  turned 
to  pp.  19,  20.  I  see  nothing  Anti-Darwinian  in  the  passages, 
and  I  do  not  gather  from  them  that  Gray  did. 

I  did  not  follow  Gray  into  his  later  comments  on  Darwinism, 
and  I  never  read  his  Darwiniana.  My  recollection  of  his  attitude 
after  acceptance  of  the  doctrine,  and  during  the  first  few  years 
of  his  active  promulgation  of  it,  is  that  he  understood  it  clearly, 
but  sought  to  harmonise  it  with  his  prepossessions,  without  dis- 
turbing its  physical  principles  in  any  way. 


2o6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

He  certainly  showed  far  more  knowledge  and  appreciation 
of  the  contents  of  the  Origin  than  any  of  the  reviewers  and 
than  any  of  the  commentators,  yourself  excepted. 

Latterly  he  got  deeper  and  deeper  into  theological  and  meta- 
physical wanderings,  and  finally  formulated  his  ideas  in  an 
illogical  fashion. 

...  Be  all  this  as  it  may,  Dana  seems  to  be  in  a  muddle  on 
p.  20,  and  quite  a  self-sought  one. — Ever  yours, 

J.  D.  Hooker. 

The  following  is  a  letter  of  thanks  to  Mrs.  Humphry 
Ward  for  her  novel  Robert  Elsmere, 

Bournemouth,  March  15,  1888. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Ward — My  wife  thanked  you  for  your  book 
which  you  were  so  kind  as  to  send  us.  But  that  was  grace 
before  meat,  which  lacks  the  "  physical  basis  "  of  after-thanks- 
giving— and  I  am  going  to  supplement  it,  after  my  most  excel- 
lent repast. 

I  am  not  going  to  praise  the  charming  style,  because  that 
was  in  the  blood  and  you  deserve  no  sort  of  credit  for  it.  Be- 
sides, I  should  be  stepping  beyond  my  last.  But  as  an  observer 
of  the  human  ant-hill— quite  impartial  by  this  time — I  think  your 
picture  of  one  of  the  deeper  aspects  of  our  troubled  time  ad- 
mirable. 

You  are  very  hard  on  the  philosophers.  I  do  not  know 
whether  Langham  or  the  Squire  is  the  more  unpleasant — but  I 
have  a  great  deal  of  sympathy  with  the  latter,  so  I  hope  he 
is  not  the  worst. 

If  I  may  say  so,  I  think  the  picture  of  Catherine  is  the  gem 
of  the  book.  She  reminds  me  of  her  namesake  of  Siena — and 
would  as  little  have  failed  in  any  duty,  however  gruesome.  You 
remember  Sodoma's  picture. 

Once  more,  many  thanks  for  a  great  pleasure. 

My  wife  sends  her  love. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Meanwhile,  he  had  been  making  no  progress  towards 
health;  indeed,  was  going  slowly  downhill.  He  makes  fun 
of  his  condition  when  writing  to  condole  with  Mr.  Spencer 
on  falling  ill  again  after  the  unwonted  spell  of  activity  al- 
ready mentioned ;  but  a  few  weeks  later  discovered  the  cause 
of  his  weakness  and  depression  in  an  affection  of  the  heart. 


i888  RENEWED   ILL-HEALTH  207 

This  was  not  immediately  dangerous,  though  he  looked  a 
complete  wreck.  His  letters  from  April  onwards  show  how 
he  was  forced  to  give  up  almost  every  form  of  occupation, 
and  even  to  postpone  his  visit  to  Switzerland,  until  he  had 
been  patched  up  enough  to  bear  the  journey. 

Casalini,  West  Cliff,  Bournemouth,  March  9,  1888. 

My  dear  Spencer — I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  from  Hooker 
that  you  have  been  unwell  again.  You  see  if  young  men  from 
the  country  will  go  plunging  into  the  dissipations  of  the  me- 
tropolis nemesis  follows. 

Until  two  days  ago,  the  weathercocks  never  overstepped 
N.  on  the  one  side  and  E.  on  the  other  ever  since  you  left.  Then 
they  went  west  with  sunshine  and  most  enjoyable  softness — ^but 
next  S.  with  a  gale  and  rain — all  ablowin*  and  agrowin'  at  this 
present. 

I  have  nothing  to  complain  of  so  long  as  I  do  nothing;  but 
although  my  hair  has  grown  with  its  usual  rapidity  I  differ  from 
Samson  in  the  absence  of  a  concurrent  return  of  strength.  Per- 
haps that  is  because  a  male  hairdresser,  and  no  Delilah,  cut  it 
last !    But  I  waste  Biblical  allusions  upon  you. 

My  wife  and  Nettie,  who  is  on  a  visit,  join  with  me  in  best 
wishes. 

Please  let  me  have  a  line  to  say  how  you  are — Gladstonianly 
on  a  post-card. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Bournemouth,  April  7,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — "Let  thy  servant's  face  be  white  before 
thee."    The  obituary  of  Darwin  went  to  Rix  *  yesterday !    It  is 
not  for  lack  of  painstaking  if  it  is  not  worth  much,  but  I  have 
been  in  a  bad  vein  for  work  of  any  kind,  and  I  thought  I  should    « 
never  get  even  this  simple  matter  ended. 

I  have  been  bothered  with  praecordial  uneasiness  and  inter- 
mittent pulse  ever  since  I  have  been  here,  and  at  last  I  got  tired 
of  it  and  went  home  the  day  before  yesterday  to  get  carefully 
overhauled.  Hames  tells  me  there  is  weakness  and  some  en- 
largement of  the  left  ventricle,  which  is  pretty  much  what  I 
expected.    Luckily  the  valves  are  all  right. 

I  am  to  go  and  devote  myself  to  coaxing  the  left  v.  wall  to 
thicken  pro  rata — among  the  mountains,  and  to  have  nothing  to 
do  with  any  public  functions  or  other  exciting  bedevilments. 

*  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society. 


2o8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

So  the  International  Geological  Congress  will  not  have  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  its  Honorary  President  in  September.  I  am 
disgusted  at  having  to  break  an  engagement,  but  I  cannot  deny 
that  Hames  is  right.  At  present  the  mere  notion  of  the  thing 
puts  me  in  a  funk. 

I  wish  I  could  get  out  of  the  chair  of  the  M.B.A.  also.  .  .  . 
I  know  that  you  and  Evans  and  Dyer  will  do  your  best,  but  you 
are  all  eaten  up  with  other  occupations. 

Just  turn  it  over  in  your  mind — there's  a  dear  good  fellow — 
just  as  if  you  hadn't  any  other  occupations. 

With  which  eminently  reasonable  and  unselfish  request  be- 
lieve me — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

Bournemouth,  April  lo,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — I  send  by  this  post  the  last — I  hope  for 

your  sake  and  for  that  of  the  recording  angel — of  .*     I 

agree  to  all  Brady's  suggestions. 

With  all  our  tinkering  I  feel  inclined  to  wind  up  the  affair 
after  the  manner  of  Mr.  Shandy's  summing  [up]  of  the  discus- 
sion about  Tristram's  breeches — "  And  when  he  has  got  'em 
he'll  look  a  beast  in  'em." — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

April  12.    To  the  same: — 

I  am  quite  willing  to  remain  at  the  M.B.A.  till  the  opening. 
If  Evans  will  be  President  I  shall  be  happy. 

is  a  very  good  man,  but  you  must  not  expect  too  much 

of  the  "  wild-cat "  element,  which  is  so  useful  in  the  world,  in 
him. 

I  am  disgusted  with  myself  for  letting  everything  go  by  the 
run,  but  there  is  no  help  for  it.  The  least  thing  bowls  me  over 
M  just  now. 

Casalini,  West  Cliff,  Bournemouth,  April  12,  1888. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  plead  not  guilty .f  It  was  agreed  at  the 
last  meeting  that  there  should  be  none  in  April — I  suppose  by 
reason  of  Easter,  so  I  sent  no  notice.  This  is  what  Frankland 
told  me  in  his  letter  of  the  2nd.  However,  I  see  you  were 
present,  so  I  can't  make  it  out. 

My  continual  absence  makes  me  a  shocking  bad  Treasurer, 

*  The  **  Heathen  Deutscheree"  of  p.  201.  A  paper  of  his,  contrib- 
uted to  the  Royal  Society,  had  been  under  revision. 

f  In  the  matter  of  sending  out  no  notices  for  a  meeting  of  the  x 
Club. 


i888         DEATH  OF  MATTHEW  ARNOLD 


209 


and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  things  will  be  worse  instead  of  better. 
Ever  since  this  last  pleuritic  business  I  have  been  troubled  with 
praecordial  uneasiness.  [After  an  account  of  his  symptoms  he 
continues]  So  I  am  off  (with  my  wife)  to  Switzerland  at  the 
end  of  this  month,  and  shall  be  away  all  the  summer.  We  have 
not  seen  the  Engadine  and  Tyrol  yet,  so  we  shall  probably  make 
a  long  circuit.  It  is  a  horrid  nuisance  to  be  exiled  in  this 
fashion.  I  have  hardly  been  at  home  one  month  in  the  last  ten. 
But  it  is  of  no  use  to  growl. 

Under  these  circumstances,  would  you  mind  looking  after 
the  X  while  I  am  away  ?  There  is  nothing  to  do  but  to  send  the 
notices  on  Saturday  previous  to  the  meeting. 

I  am  very  grieved  to  hear  about  Hirst — though  to  say  truth, 
the  way  he  has  held  out  for  so  long  has  been  a  marvel  to  me. 
The  last  news  I  had  of  Spencer  was  not  satisfactory. 

Eheu  !  the  "  Table  Round  "  is  breaking  up.  It's  a  great  pity; 
we  were  such  pleasant  fellows,  weren't  we? — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Casalini,  West  Cliff,  Bournemouth,  April  18,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — I  am  cheered  by  your  likingj^of  the  notice 
of  Darwin.  I  read  the  "  Life  and  Letters,"  and  the  "  Origin," 
Krause's  "  Life,"  and  some  other  things  over  again  in  order  to 
do  it.  But  I  have  not  much  go  in  me,  and  I  was  a  scandalous 
long  time  pottering  over  the  writing. 

I  have  sent  the  proof  back  with  a  variety  of  interpolations. 
I  would  have  brought  the  "  Spirula  "  notes  down  here  to  see 
what  I  could  do,  but  I  felt  pretty  sure  that  if  I  brought  two 
things  I  should  not  do  one.  Nobody  could  do  anything  with  it 
but  myself.  I  will  try  what  I  can  do  when  I  go  to  town.  How 
much  time  is  there  before  the  wind-up  of  the  Challenger? 

We  go  up  to  town  Monday  next,  and  I  am  thinking  of  being 
off  the  Monday  following  (Ap.  30).  I  have  come  to  the  same 
conclusion  as  yourself,  that  Glion  would  be  better  than  Grindel- 
wald.  I  should  like  very  much  to  see  you.  Just  drop  me  a  line 
to  say  when  you  are  likely  to  turn  up. 

Poor  Arnold's  death  *  has  been  a  great.shock — rather  for  his 
wife  than  himself — I  mean  on  her  account  than  his.  I  have 
always  thought  sudden  death  to  be  the  best  of  all  for  oneself, 
but  under  such  circumstances  it  is  terrible  for  those  who  are 

*  Matthew  Arnold  died  suddenly  of  heart  disease  at  Liverpool, 
where  he  had  gone  to  meet  his  daughter  on  her  return  from  America. 
50 


2IO  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

left.  Arnold  told  me  years  ago  that  he  had  heart  disease.  I  do 
not  suppose  there  is  any  likelihood  of  an  immediate  catastrophe 
in  my  own  case.  I  should  not  go  abroad  if  there  were.  Imagine 
the  horror  of  leaving  one's  wife  to  fight  all  the  difficulties  of 
sudden  Euthanasia  in  a  Swiss  hotel !  I  saw  enough  of  that 
two  years  ago  at  Arolla. — Ever  yours,  t^  tt  tt 

1.  rl.  rlUXLEY. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  April  25,  1888. 

My  dear  Hooker^ — ^AU  my  beautiful  Swiss  plans  are  knocked 
on  the  head — at  any  rate  for  the  present — in  favour  of  hori- 
zontality  and  Digitalis  here.  The  journey  up  on  Monday  demon- 
strated that  travelling,  at  present,  was  impracticable. 

Hames  is  sanguine  I  shall  get  right  with  rest,  and  I  am  quite 
satisfied  with  his  opinion,  but  for  the  sake  of  my  belongings  he 
thinks  it  right  to  have  Clark's  opinion  to  fortify  him. 

It  is  a  bore  to  be  converted  into  a  troublesome  invalid  even 
for  a  few  weeks,  but  I  comfort  myself  with  my  usual  reflection 
on  the  chances  of  life,  "  Lucky  it  is  no  worse."  Any  impatience 
would  have  been  checked  by  what  I  heard  about  Moseley  this 
morning — ^that  he  has  sunk  into  hopeless  idiocy.  A  man  in  the 
prime  of  life ! — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  4,  1888. 

My  dear  Hooker — Best  thanks  for  your  note  and  queries. 

I  remember  hearing  what  you  say  about  Darwin's  father 
long  ago,  I  am  not  sure  from  what  source.  But  if  you  look  at 
p.  20  of  the  Life  and  Letters  you  will  see  that  D.  himself  says  his 
father's  mind  "  was  not  scientific."  I  have  altered  the  passage 
so  as  to  use  these  exact  words. 

I  used  "  malice  "  rather  in  the  French  sense,  which  is  more 
innocent  than  ours,  but  "  irony  "  would  be  better  if  "  malice  "  in 
any  way  suggests  malignity.  "  Chaff  "  is  unfortunately  beneath 
the  dignity  of  an  R.S.  obituary. 

I  am  going  to  add  a  short  note  about  Erasmus  Darwin's 
views. 

It  is  a  great  comfort  to  me  that  you  like  the  thing.  I  am 
getting  nervous  over  possible  senility — 63  to-day,  and  nothing 
of  your  evergreen  ways  about  me. 

I  am  decidedly  mending,  chiefly  to  all  appearance  by  allow- 
ing myself  to  be  stuffed  with  meat  and  drink  like  a  Strasburg 
goose.  I  am  also  very  much  afraid  that  abolishing  tobacco  has 
had  something  to  do  with  my  amendment. 


1888  LETTERS  2 1 1 

But  I  am  mindful  of  your  maxim — ^keep  a  tight  hold  over 
your  doctor. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

PS.  I. — Can't  say  I  have  sacrificed  anything  to  penmanship, 
and  am  not  at  all  sure  about  lucidity ! 

PS,  2. — It  is  "  Friday  '* — there  is  a  dot  over  the  i — reopened 
my  letter  to  crow ! 

The  following  letter  to  Mr.  Spencer  is  in  answer  to  a 
note  of  condolence  on  his  illness,  in  which  the  following 
passage  occurs: — 

I  was  grieved  to  hear  of  so  serious  an  evil  as  that  which 
[Hirst]  named.  It  is  very  depressing  to  find  one's  friends  as 
well  as  one's  self  passing  more  and  more  into  invalid  life. 

Well,  we  always  have  one  consolation,  such  as  it  is,  that  we 
have  made  our  lives  of  some  service  in  the  world,  and  that,  in 
fact,  we  are  suffering  from  doing  too  much  for  our  fellows. 
Such  thoughts  do  not  go  far  in  the  way  of  mitigation,  but  they 
are  better  than  nothing. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  8,  i888. 

My  dear  Spencer — ^I  have  been  on  the  point  of  writing  to 
you,  but  put  it  off  for  lack  of  anything  cheerful  to  say. 

After  I  had  recovered  from  my  pleurisy,  I  could  not  think 
why  my  strength  did  not  come  back.  It  turns  out  that  there  is 
some  weakness  and  dilatation  of  the  heart,  but  luckily  no  valvu- 
lar mischief.  I  am  condemned  to  the  life  of  a  prize  pig — physical 
and  mental  idleness,  and  corporeal  stuffing  with  meat  and  drink, 
and  I  am  certainly  improving  under  the  regimen. 

I  am  told  I  have  a  fair  chance  of  getting  all  right  again. 
But  I  take  it  as  a  pretty  broad  hint  to  be  quiet  for  the  rest  of 
my  days.  At  present  I  have  to  be  very  quiet,  and  I  spend  most 
of  my  time  on  my  back. 

You  and  I,  my  dear  friend,  have  had  our  innings,  and  carry 
our  bats  out  while  our  side  is  winning.  One  could  not  reason- 
ably ask  for  more.  And  considering  the  infinite  possibilities  of 
physical  and  moral  suffering  which  beset  us,  I,  for  my  part,  am 
well  pleased  that  things  are  no  worse. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,///«^  i,  i888. 
My  dear  Knowles — I  have  been  living  the  life  of  a  prize 
pig  for  the  last  six  weeks — no  exercise,  much  meat  and  drink. 


212  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

and  as  few  manifestations  of  intelligence  as  possible,  for  the 
purpose  of  persuading  my  heart  to  return  to  its  duty. 

I  am  astonished  to  find  that  there  is  a  kick  left  in  me — even 
when  your  friend  Krapotkin  pitches  into  me  without  the  smallest 
justification.    Vide  XIX.,  June,  p.  820. 

Just  look  at  XIX.,  February,  p.  168.  I  say,  "At  the  present 
time,  the  produce  of  the  soil  does  not  suffice,"  etc. 

I  did  not  say  a  word  about  the  capabilities  of  the  soil  if,  as 
part  and  parcel  of  a  political  and  social  revolution  on  the  grand- 
est scale,  we  all  took  to  spade  husbandry. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  did  try  to  find  out  a  year  or  two  ago, 
whether  the  soil  of  these  islands  could,  under  any  circumstances, 
feed  its  present  population  with  wheat.  I  could  not  get  any 
definite  information,  but  I  understood  Caird  to  think  that  it 
could. 

In  my  argument,  however,  the  question  is  of  no  moment. 
There  must  be  some  limit  to  the  production  of  food  by  a  given 
area,  and  there  is  none  to  population. 

What  a  stimulus  vanity  is ! — nothing  but  the  vain  dislike  of 
being  thought  in  the  wrong  would  have  induced  me  to  trouble 
myself  or  bore  you  with  this  letter.     Bother  Krapotkin ! 

I  think  his  article  very  interesting  and  important  never- 
theless. 

I  am  getting  better,  but  very  slowly. — Ever  yours  very  truly, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

In  reply,  Mr.  Knowles  begged  him  to  come  to  lunch 
and  a  quiet  talk,  and  further  suggested,  "  as  an  entirely  un- 
biassed person,''  that  he  ought  to  answer  Krapotkin's  errors 
in  the  Nineteenth  Century,  and  not  only  in  a  private  letter 
behind  his  back. 

The  answer  is  as  follows: — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,///«^  3,  1888. 

My  dear  Knowles — Your  invitation  is  tantalising.  I  wish 
I  could  accept  it.  But  it  is  now  some  six  weeks  that  my  ex- 
cursions have  been  limited  to  a  daily  drive.  The  rest  of  my 
time  I  spend  on  the  flat  of  my  back,  eating,  drinking,  and  doing 
absolutely  nothing  besides,  except  taking  iron  and  digitalis. 

I  meant  to  have  gone  abroad  a  month  ago,  but  it  turned  out 
that  my  heart  was  out  of  order,  and  though  I  am  getting  better, 
progress  is  slow,  and  I  do  not  suppose  1  shall  get  away  for  some 
weeks  yet. 


1888  LETTERS  213 

I  have  neither  brains  nor  nerves,  and  the  very  thought  of 
controversy  puts  me  in  a  blue  funk ! 

My  doctors  prophesy  good  things,  as  there  is  no  valvular 
disease,  only  dilatation.  But  for  the  present  I  must  subscribe 
myself  (from  an  editorial  point  of  view) — Your  worthless  and 
useless  and  bad-hearted  friend,  T.  H.  Huxley, 

The  British  Association  was  to  meet  at  Plymouth  this 
year;  and  Mr.  W.  F.  Collier  (an  uncle  of  John  Collier,  his 
son-in-law)  invited  Huxley  and  any  friend  of  his  to  be  his 
guest  at  Horrabridge. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  June  13,  1888. 

My  dear  Mr.  Collier — It  would  have  been  a  great  pleasure 
to  me  to  be  your  guest  once  more,  but  the  Fates  won't  have  it 
this  time. 

Dame  Nature  has  given  me  a  broad  hint  that  I  have  had  my 
innings,  and,  for  the  rest  of  my  time,  must  be  content  to  look  on 
at  the  players. 

It  is  not  given  to  all  of  us  to  defy  the  doctors  and  go  in  for 
a  new  lease,  as  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  are  doing.  I  declare  that 
your  open  invitation  to  any  friend  of  mine  is  the  most  touching 
mark  of  confidence  I  ever  received.  I  am  going  to  send  it  to 
my  great  ally  Michael  Foster,  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society. 
I  do  not  know  whether  he  has  made  any  other  arrangements, 
and  I  am  not  quite  sure  whether  he  and  his  wife  are  going  to 
Plymouth.  But  I  hope  they  may  be  able  to  accept,  for  you  will 
certainly  like  them,  and  they  will  certainly  like  you.  I  will  ask 
him  to  write  directly  to  you  to  save  time. 

With  very  kind  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Collier — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  forgot  to  say  that  I  am  mending  as  fast  as  I  can  expect 
to  do. 


CHAPTER   XIII 
1888 

It  was  not  till  June  23  that  Huxley  was  patched  up 
sufficiently  by  the  doctors  for  him  to  start  for  the  Engadine. 
His  first  stage  was  to  Lugano;  the  second  by  Menaggio 
and  Colico  to  Chiavenna;  the  third  to  the  Maloja.  The 
summer  visitors  who  saw  him  arrive  so  feeble  that  he  could 
scarcely  walk  a  hundred  yards  on  the  level,  murmured  that 
it  was  a  shame  to  send  out  an  old  man  to  die  there.  Their 
surprise  was  the  greater  when,  after  a  couple  of  months, 
they  saw  him  walking  his  ten  miles  and  going  up  two 
thousand  feet  without  difficulty.  As  far  as  his  heart  was 
concerned,  the  experiment  of  sending  him  to  the  mountains 
was  perfectly  justified.  With  returning  strength  he  threw 
himself  once  more  into  the  pursuit  of  gentians,  being  es- 
pecially interested  in  their  distribution  and  hybridism,  and 
the  possibility  of  natural  hybrids  explaining  the  apparent 
connecting  links  between  species.  No  doubt,  too,  he  felt 
some  gratification  in  learning  from  his  friend  Mr.  (now 
Sir  W.)  Thiselton  Dyer,  that  the  results  he  had  already 
obtained  in  pursuing  this  hobby  had  been  of  real  value : — 

Your  important  paper  "  On  Alpine  Gentians  "  (writes  the 
latter)  has  begun  to  attract  the  attention  of  botanists.  It  has 
led  Baillon,  who  is  the  most  acute  of  the  French  people,  to 
make  some  observations  of  his  own. 

At  the  Maloja  he  stayed  twelve  weeks,  but  it  was  not 
until  nearly  two  months  had  elapsed  that  he  could  write 
of  any  decided  improvement,  although  even  then  his  an- 
ticipations  for   the   future   were   of   the    gloomiest.      The 
214 


1888  AT   MALOJA  21$ 

"  secret "  alluded  to  in  the  following  letter  is  the  destined 
award  to  him  of  the  Copley  medal : — 

Hotel  Kursaal,  Maloja, 
Ober  Engadine,  Aug.  17,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — I  know  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  that,  at 
last,  I  can  report  favourably  of  my  progress.  The  first  six  weeks 
of  our  stay  here  the  weather  was  cold,  foggy,  wet,  and  windy 
— in  short,  everything  that  it  should  not  be.  If  the  hotel  had  not 
been  as  it  is,  about  the  most  comfortable  in  Switzerland,  I  do 
not  know  what  I  should  have  done.  As  it  was,  I  got  a  very 
bad  attack  of  "  liver,"  which  laid  me  up  for  ten  days  or  so.  A 
Brighton  doctor — Bluett  by  name^  and  well  up  to  his  work — 
kindly  looked  after  me. 

With  the  early  days  of  August  the  weather  changed  for  the 
better,  and  for  the  last  fortnight  we  have  had  perfect  summer — 
day  after  day.  I  soon  picked  up  my  walking  power,  and  one  day 
got  up  to  Lake  Longhin,  about  2000  feet  up.  That  was  by  way 
of  an  experiment,  and  I  was  none  the  worse  for  it,  but  usually 
my  walks  are  of  a  more  modest  description.  To-day  we  are  all 
clouds  and  rain,  and  my  courage  is  down  to  zero,  with  precordial 
discomfort.  It  seems  to  me  that  my  heart  is  quite  strong  enough 
to  do  all  that  can 'reasonably  be  required  of  it — if  all  the  rest 
of  the  machinery  is  in  good  order,  and  the  outside  conditions 
are  favourable.  But  the  poor  old  pump  cannot  contend  with 
grit  or  want  of  oil  anywhere. 

I  mean  to  stay  here  as  long  as  I  can;  they  say  it  is  often 
very  fine  up  to  the  middle  of  September.  Then  we  shall  migrate 
lower,  probably  on  the  Italian  side,  and  get  home  most  likely  in 
October.  But  I  really  am  very  much  puzzled  to  know  what 
to  do. 

My  wife  has  not  been  very  well  lately,  and  Ethel  has  con- 
trived to  sprain  her  ankle  at  lawn-tennis.  Collier  has  had  to  go 
to  Naples,  but  we  expect  him  back  in  a  few  days. 

With  our  united  love  to  Mrs.  Foster  and  yourself — Ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  was  very  pleased  to  hear  of  a  secret  my  wife  communicated 
to  me.  So  long  as  I  was  of  any  use,  I  did  not  care  much  about 
having  the  fact  recognised,  but  now  that  I  am  used  up  I  like  the 
feather  in  my  cap.    "  Fuimus."    Let  us  have  some  news  of  you. 

Sir  M.  Foster,  who  was  kept  in  England  by  the  British 
Association  till  September  10,  wrote  that  he  was  going 


2i6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY   -         chap,  xiii 

abroad  for  the  rest  of  September,  and  proposed  to  spend 
some  time  at  Menaggio,  whence  he  hoped  to  effect  a  meet- 
ing. He  winds  up  with  a  jest  at  his  recent  unusual  occu- 
pation : — "  I  have  had  no  end  of  righteousness  accounted 
to  me  for  helping  ta  entertain  Bishops  at  Cambridge." 
Hence  the  postscript  in  reply : — 

Hotel  Kursaal,  Maloja,  Sept.  2,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — A  sharp  fall  of  snow  has  settled  our 
minds,  which  have  been  long  wavering  about  future  plans,  and 
we  leave  this  for  Menaggio,  Hotel  Vittoria,  on  Thursday  next, 
6th.* 

All  the  wiseacres  tell  us  that  there  are  fresher  breezes  (vento 
di  Lecco)  at  Menaggio  than  anywhere  else  in  the  Como  country, 
and  at  any  rate  we  are  going  to  try  whether  we  can  exist  there. 
If  it  does  not  answer,  we  will  leave  a  note  for  you  there  to  say 
where  we  are  gone.    It  would  be  very  jolly  to  forgather. 

I  am  sorry  to  leave  this  most  comfortable  of  hotels,  but  I 
do  not  think  that  cold  would  suit  either  of  us.  I  am  marvellously 
well  so  long  as  I  am  taking  sharp  exercise,  and  I  do  my  nine 
or  ten  miles  without  fatigue.  It  is  only  when  I  am  quiet  that 
I  know  that  I  have  a  heart. 

I  do  not  feel  at  all  sure  how  matters  may  be  4000  feet 
lower,  but  what  I  have  gained  is  all  to  the  good  in  the  way  of 
general  health.  In  spite  of  all  the  bad  weather  we  have  had, 
I  have  nothing  but  praise  for  this  place — the  air  is  splendid, 
excellent  walks  for  invalids,  capital  drainage,  and  the  easiest 
to  reach  of  all  places  6000  feet  up. 

My  wife  sends  her  love,  and  thanks  Mrs.  Foster  for  her 
letter,  and  looks  forward  to  meeting  her. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Wash  yourself  clean  of  all  that  episcopal  contamination  or 
you  may  infect  me ! 

But  adverse  circumstances  prevented  the  meeting. 

Hotel  Kursaal,  Maloja,  Sept.  24,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — As  ill  luck  would  have  it,  we  went  over 
to  Pont  Resina  to-day  (for  the  first  time),  and  have  only  just 
got  back  (5.30).     I  have  just  telegraphed  to  you. 

All  our  plans  have  been  upset  by  the  Fohn  wind,  which  gave 
us  four  days'  continuous  downpour  here — upset  the  roads,  and 

*  He  did  not  ultimately  leave  till  the  22nd. 


i888  LETTER  TO  FOSTER 


217 


flooded  the  Chiavenna-Colico  Railway.  We  hear  that  the  latter 
is  not  yet  repaired. 

I  was  going  to  write  to  you  at  the  Vittoria,  but  thought  you 
could  have  hardly  got  there  yet.  We  took  rooms  there  a  week 
ago,  and  then  had  to  countermand  them.  If  there  are  any  letters 
kicking  about  for  us,  will  you  ask  them  to  send  them  on  ? 

By  way  of  an  additional  complication  my  poor  wife  gave 
herself  an  unlucky  strain  this  morning,  and  even  if  the  railway 
is  mended  I  do  not  think  she  will  be  fit  to  travel  for  two  or 
three  days.    We  are  very  disappointed.    What  is  to  be  done? 

I  am  wonderfully  better.  So  long  as  I  am  taking  active 
exercise  and  the  weather  is  dry,  I  am  quite  comfortable,  and 
only  discover  that  I  have  a  heart  when  I  am  kept  quiet  by  bad 
weather  or  get  my  liver  out  of  order.  Here  I  can  walk  nine 
or  ten  miles  up  hill  and  down  dale  without  difficulty  or  fatigue. 
What  I  may  be  able  to  do  elsewhere  is  doubtful. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

It  would  do  you  and  Mrs.  Foster  a  great  deal  of  good  to 
come  up  here.    Not  out  of  your  way  at  all !    Oh  dear  no ! 

Zurich,  Oct.  4,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — I  should  have  written  to  you  at  Stresa, 
but  I  had  mislaid  your  postcard,  and  it  did  not  turn  up  till  too 
late. 

We  made  up  our  minds  after  all  that  we  would  as  soon  not 
go  down  to  the  Lakes — where  the  ground  would  be  drying  up 
after  the  inundations — so  we  went  the  other  way  over  the  Julier 
to  Tiefenkasten,  and  from  T.  to  Ragatz,  where  we  stayed  a 
week.  Ragatz  was  hot  and  steamy  at  first — cold  and  steamy 
afterwards — ^but  earlier  in  the  season,  I  should  think,  it  would 
be  pleasant. 

Last  Monday  we  migrated  here,  and  have  had  the  vilest 
weather  until  to-day.    All  yesterday  it  rained  cats  and  dogs. 

To-day  we  are  off  to  Neuhausen  (Schweitzerhof)  to  have  a 
look  at  the  Rhine  falls.  If  it  is  pleasant  we  may  stop  there  a 
few  days.  Then  we  go  to  Stuttgart,  on  our  way  to  Nuremberg, 
which  neither  of  us  have  seen.  We  shall  be  at  the  "  Bavarian 
Hotel,"  and  a  letter  will  catch  us  there,  if  you  have  anything  to 
say,  I  daresay  up  to  the  middle  of  the  month.  After  that  Frank- 
fort, and  then  home. 

We  do  not  find  long  railway  journeys  very  good  for  either 
of  us,  and  I  am  trying  to  keep  within  six  hours  at  a  stretch. 


i 


2i8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xiii 

I  am  not  so  vigorous  as  I  was  at  Maloja,  but  still  infinitely 
better  than  when  I  left  England. 

I  hope  the  mosquitoes  left  something  of  you  in  Venice. 
When  I  was  there  in  October  there  were  none ! 

My  wife  joins  with  me  in  love  to  Mrs.  Foster  and  yourself. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Some  friendly  chaff  in  Sir  M.  Foster's  reply  to  the  latter 
contains  at  least  a  real  indication  of  the  way  in  which  Huxley 
became  the  centre  of  the  little  society  at  the  Maloja : — 

You  may  reflect  that  you  have  done  the  English  tourists  a 
good  service  this  summer.  At  most  table  d'hotes  in  the  Lakes  I 
overheard  people  talking  about  the  joys  of  Maloja,  and  giving 
themselves  great  airs  on  account  of  their  intimacy  with  "  Pro- 
fessor Huxley  " ! ! 

But  indeed  he  made  several  friends  here,  notably  one  in 
an  unexpected  quarter.  This  was  Father  Steffens,  Professor 
of  Palaeography  in  Freiburg  University,  resident  Catholic 
priest  at  Maloja  in  the  summer,  with  whom  he  had  many 
discussions,  and  whose  real  knowledge  of  the  critical  ques- 
tions confronting  Christian  theology  he  used  to  contrast 
with  the  frequent  ignorance  and  occasional  rudeness  of  the 
English  representatives  of  that  science  who  came  to  the 
hotel. 

A  letter  to  Mr.  Spencer  from  Ragatz  shows  him  on  his 
return  journey : — 

In  fact,  so  long  as  I  was  taking  rather  sharp  exercise  in  sun- 
shine I  felt  quite  well,  and  I  could  walk  as  well  as  any  time  these 
ten  years.  It  needed  damp  cold  weather  to  remind  me  that  my 
pumping  apparatus  was  not  to  be  depended  upon  under  unfa- 
vourable conditions.  Four  thousand  feet  descent  has  impressed 
that  fact  still  more  forcibly  upon  me,  and  I  am  quite  at  sea  as  to 
what  it  will  be  best  to  do  when  we  return.  Quite  certainly, 
however,  we  shall  not  go  to  Bournemouth.  I  like  the  place, 
but  the  air  is  too  soft  and  moist  for  either  of  us. 

I  should  be  very  glad  if  we  could  be  within  reach  of  you 
and  help  to  cheer  you  up,  but  I  cannot  say  anything  definite 
at  present  about  our  winter  doings.  .  .  . 

My  wife  sends  her  kindest  regards.  She  is  much  better  than 
when  we  left,  which  is  lucky  for  me,  as  I  have  no  mind,  and 


i888  A  FUTILE   "WARNING 


»» 


2ig 


could  not  make  it  up  if  I  had  any.    The  only  rigour  I  have  is 
in  my  legs,  and  that  only  when  the  sun  shines. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  curious  incident  on  this  journey  deserves  recording, 
as  an  instance  of  a  futile  "  warning."  On  the  night  of 
October  6-7,  Huxley  woke  in  the  night  and  seemed  to 
hear  an  inward  voice  say,  "  Don't  go  to  Stuttgart  and 
Nuremberg;  go  straight  home."  All  he  did  was  to  make 
a  note  of  the  occurrence  and  carry  out  his  original  plan^ 
whereupon  nothing  happened. 

The  following  to  his  youngest  daughter,  who  had  gon^ 
back  earlier  from  the  Maloja,  refers  to  her  success  in  win- 
ning the  prize  for  modelling  at  the  Slade  School  of  Art 

ScHWEiTZERHOF,  Neuhausen,  Oct,  7,  1888. 

Dearest  Babs — I  will  sit  to  you  like  "Pater  on  a  monument 
smiling  at  grief  "  for  the  medallion.  As  to  the  photographs,  I 
will  try  to  get  them  done  to  order  either  at  Stuttgart  or  Nurem-t 
berg,  if  we  stay  at  either  place  long  enough.  But  I  am  inclined 
to  think  they  had  better  be  done  at  home,  and  then  you  could 
adjust  the  length  of  the  caoutchouc  visage  to  suit  your  artistic 
convenience. 

We  have  been  crowing  and  flapping  our  wings  over  the 
medal  and  trimmings.  The  only  thing  I  lament  is  that  "your 
father's  influence  "  was  not  brought  to  bear ;  there  is  no  telling 
what  you  might  have  got  if  it  had  been.    Thoughtless — very ! ! 

So  sorry  we  did  not  come  here  instead  of  stopping  at  Ragatz. 
The  falls  are  really  fine,  and  the  surrounding  country  a  wide  table- 
land, with  the  great  snowy  peaks  of  the  Oberland  on  the  horizon. 
Last  evening  we  had  a  brilliant  sunset,  and  the  mountains  were 
lighted  up  with  the  most  delicate  rosy  blush  you  can  imagine. 

To-day  it  rains  cats  and  dogs  again.  You  will  have  seen  in 
the  papers  that  the  Rhine  and  the  Aar  and  the  Rhone  and  the 
Arve  are  all  in  flood.  There  is  more  water  here  in  the  falls  than 
there  has  been  these  ten  years.  However,  we  have  got  to  go, 
as  the  hotel  shuts  up  to-morrow,  and  there  seems  a  good  chance 
of  reaching  Stuttgart  without  water  in  the  carriage. 

Long  railway  journeys  do  not  seem  to  suit  either  of  us,  and 
we  have  fixed  the  maximum  at  six  hours.  I  expect  W^  shall  be 
home  sometime  in  the  third  week  of  this  rtionth. 

Love  to  Hal  and  anybody  else  who  may  be  at  home. — Ever 
your  Pater, 


220  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xiii 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct,  20,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — We  got  back  on  Thursday,  and  had  a  very 
good  passage,  and  took  it  easy  by  staying  the  night  at  Dover. 
The  "  Lord  Warden  "  gave  us  the  worst  dinner  we  have  had  for 
four  months,  at  double  the  price  of  the  good  dinners.  I  wonder 
why  we  cannot  manage  these  things  better  in  England. 

We  are  both  very  glad  to  be  at  home  again,  and  trust  we 
may  be  allowed  to  enjoy  our  own  house  for  a  while.  But,  oh 
dear,  the  air  is  not  Malojal !  not  even  at  Hampstead,  whither 
I  walked  yesterday,  and  the  pump  labours  accordingly. 

I  found  the  first  part  of  the  fifth  edition  of  the  Text-book 
among  the  two  or  three  cwt.  of  letters  and  books  which  had 
accumulated  during  four  months.    Gratulire ! 

By  the  way,  S.  K.  has  sent  me  some  inquiry  about  Examina- 
tions, which  I  treat  with  contempt,  as  doubtless  you  have  a  dupli- 
cate.— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

On  October  25  he  announces  his  return  to  Sir  Joseph 
Hooker,  and  laments  his  loss  of  vigour  at  the  sea-level : — 

Hames  won't  let  me  stay  here  in  November,  and  I  think  we 
shall  go  to  Brighton.  Unless  on  the  flat  of  my  back,  in  bed,  I 
shall  not  have  been  at  home  a  month  all  this  year. 

I  have  been  utterly  idle.  There  was  a  lovely  case  of  hybrid- 
ism, Gentiana  lutea  and  G,  punctata,  in  a  little  island  in  the  lake 
of  Sils;  but  I  fell  ill  and  was  confined  to  bed  just  after  I  found 
it  out.  It  would  be  very  interesting  if  somebody  would  work 
out  Distribution  five  miles  round  the  Maloja  as  a  centre.  There 
are  the  most  curious  local  differences. 

You  asked  me  to  send  you  a  copy  of  my  obituary  of  Darwin. 
So  I  put  one  herewith,  though  no  doubt  you  have  seen  it  in 
Proc,  R.  S. 

I  should  like  to  know  what  you  think  of  xvii-xxii.  If  ever 
I  am  able  to  do  anything  again  I  will  enlarge  on  these  heads. 

In  these  pages  of  the  Obituary  Notice  (Proc,  Roy,  Soc. 
XLIV.,  No.  269)  he  endeavours 

to  separate  the  substance  of  the  theory  from  its  accidents,  and  to 
show  that  a  variety,  not  only  of  hostile  comments,  but  of  friendly 
would-be  improvements  lose  their  raison  d'etre  to  the  careful 
student.  .  .  . 

It  is  not  essential  to  Darwin's  theory  that  anything  more 
should  be  assumed  than  the  facts  of  heredity,  variation,  and  un- 
limited multiplication;  and  the  validity  of  the  deductive  reason- 


i888  LETTER   TO   HOOKER  221 

ing  as  to  the  effect  of  the  last  (that  is,  of  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence which  it  involves)  upon  the  varieties  resulting  from  the 
operation  of  the  former.  Nor  is  it  essential  that  one  should  take 
up  any  particular  position  in  regard  to  the  mode  of  variation, 
whether,  for  example,  it  takes  place  per  saltum  or  gradually; 
whether  it  is  definite  in  character  or  indefinite.  Still  less  are 
those  who  accept  the  theory  bound  to  any  particular  views  as  to 
the  causes  of  heredity  or  of  variation. 

The  remaining  letters  of  the  year  trace  the  gradual  bet- 
tering of  health,  from  the  "  no  improvement "  of  October 
to  the  almost  complete  disappearance  of  bad  s^ptoms  in 
December.  He  had  renounced  Brighton,  which  he  detested, 
in  favour  of  Eastbourne,  where  the  keen  air  of  the  downs 
and  the  daily  walk  over  Beachy  Head  acted  as  a  tolerable 
substitute  for  the  Alps.  Though  he  would  not  miss  the 
anniversary  meeting  of  the  Royal  Society,  when  he  was  to 
receive  the  Copley  medal,  one  more  link  binding  him  to 
his  old  friend  Hooker,  he  did  not  venture  to  stay  for  the 
dinner  in  the  evening. 

This  autumn  also  he  resigned  his  place  on  the  board  of 
Governors  of  Eton  College.  "  I  think  it  must  be  a  year 
and  a  half,"  he  writes,  "  since  I  attended  a  meeting,  and 
I  am  not  likely  to  do  better  in  the  future." 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct.  28,  1888. 

My  dear  Hooker — Best  thanks  for  your  suggestion  about 
the  cottage,  viz.  "  that  before  you  decide  on  Brighton  Mrs. 
Huxley  should  come  down  and  look  at  the  cottage  below  my 
house  "  at  Sunningdale,  but  I  do  not  see  my  way  to  adopting 
it.  A  house,  however  small,  involves  servants  and  ties  one  to 
one  place.  The  conditions  that  suit  me  do  not  seem  to  be  found 
anywhere  but  in  the  high  Alps,  and  I  can't  afford  to  keep  a 
second  house  in  the  country  and  pass  the  summer  in  Switzer- 
land as  well. 

We  are  going  to  Brighton  (not  because  we  love  it,  quite 
t'other)  on  account  of  the  fine  weather  that  is  to  be  had  there 
in  November  and  December.  We  shall  be  back  for  some  weeks 
about  Christmas,  and  then  get  away  somewhere  else — Malvern 
possibly — out  of  the  east  winds  of  February  and  March. 

I  do  not  like  this  nomadic  life  at  all,  but  it  appears  to  be 
Hobson's  choice  between  that  and  none. 


^; 


222  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiii 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  you  are  troubled  by  your  ears.  I  am  so 
deaf  that  I  begin  to  fight  shy  of  society.  It  irritates  me  not  to 
hear ;  it  irritates  me  still  more  to  be  spoken  to  as  if  I  were  deaf, 
•and  the  absurdity  of  being  irritated  on  the  last  ground  irritates 
me  still  more. 

I  wish  you  would  start  that  business  of  giving  a  competent 
young  botanist  with  good  legs  £ioo  to  go  and  study  distribution 
in  the  Engadine — from  the  Maloja  as  centre — in  a  circle  of  a 
radius  of  eight  or  ten  miles.  The  distribution  of  the  four  prin- 
cipal conifers,  Arolla,  pine  larch,  mountain  pine  and  spruce, 
is  most  curious,  the  why  and  wherefore  nowise  apparent. 

I  am  very  sorry  I  cannot  be  at  x  on  Thursday,  but  they 
won't  let  me  be  out  at  night  at  present. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct.  28,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — No  fear  of  my  trying  to  stop  in  London. 
Hames  won't  have  it.  He  came  and  overhauled  me  the  other 
day.  As  I  expected,  the  original  mischief  is  just  as  it  was.  One 
does  not  get  rid  either  of  dilatation  or  its  results  at  my  time  of 
life.  The  only  thing  is  to  keep  the  pipes  clear  by  good  conditions 
of  existence. 

After  endless  discussion  we  have  settled  on  Brighton  for 
November  and  December.  It  is  a  hateful  place  to  my  mind,  but 
there  is  more  chance  of  sunshine  there  (at  this  time)  than  any- 
where else.  We  shall  come  up  for  a  week  or  two  on  this  side 
of  Christmas,  and  then  get  away  somewhere  else  out  of  the  way 
of  the  east  winds  of  February  and  March. 

I  do  not  think  that  the  Hazlemere  country  would  do  for  us, 
nor  indeed  any  country  place  so  long  as  we  cannot  regularly  set 
up  house. 

Heaven  knows  I  don't  want  to  bother  about  anything  at 

present.     But  I  should  like  to  convince  that  he  does  not 

yet  understand  the  elements  of  [his  subject].    What  a  copious 
inkspilling  cuttlefish  of  a  writer  he  is ! — Ever  yours, 

T,  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  London,  N.W., 
Nov.  2,  1888. 

My  dear  Skelton — Best  thanks  for  the  second  volume  of 
Maitland  of  Lethington.  I  have  been  in  the  Engadine  for  the 
last  four  months,  trying  to  repair  the  crazy  old  "  home  I  live 
in,"  and  meeting  with  more  success  than  I  hoped  for  when  I 
left  home. 


i888  THE    '* CASKET   LETTERS" 


223 


Your  volume  turned  up  amidst  a  mountain  of  accumulated 
books,  papers,  and  letters,  and  I  can  only  hope  it  has  not  been 
too  long  without  acknowledgment. 

I  have  been  much  interested  in  your  argument  about  the 
"  Casket  letters."  The  comparison  of  Crawford's  deposition 
with  the  Queen's  letter  leaves  no  sort  of  doubt  that  the  writer 
of  one  had  the  other  before  him;  and  under  the  circumstances 
I  do  not  see  how  it  can  be  doubted  that  the  Queen's  letter  is 
forged. 

But  though  thus  Wholly  agreeing  with  you  in  substance,  I 
cannot  help  thinking  that  your  language  on  p.  341  may  be  seri- 
ously pecked  at. 

My  experience  of  reporters  leads  me  to  think  that  there 
would  be  no  discrepancy  at  all  comparable  to  that  between  the 
two  accounts,  and  I  speak  from  the  woeful  memories  of  the 
many  Royal  Commissions  I  have  wearied  over.  The  accuracy 
of  a  good  modern  reporter  is  really  wonderful. 

And  I  do  not  think  that  "  the  two  documents  were  drawn  by 
the  same  hand."  I  should  say  that  the  writer  of  the  letter  had 
Crawford's  deposition  before  him,  and  made  what  he  considered 
improvements  here  and  there. 

You  will  say  this  letter  is  like  Falstaff's  reckoning,  with 
but  a  pennyworth  of  thanks  to  this  monstrous  quantity  of 
pecking. 

But  the  gratitude  is  solid  and  the  criticism  mere  two  dimen^ 
sion  stuff.    It  is  a  charming  book. 

With  kind  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Skelton — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

ID  SouTHCLiFF  Terrace,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  9,  1 888. 

My  dear  Foster — ^We  came  here  on  Tuesday,  on  which  day, 
by  ill  luck,  the  east  wind  also  started,  and  has  been  blowing  half 
a  gale  ever  since.  We  are  in  the  last  house  but  one  to  the  west, 
and  as  high  up  as  we  dare  go — looking  out  on  the  sea.  The  first 
day  we  had  to  hold  on  to  our  chairs  to  prevent  being  blown  away 
in  the  sitting-room,  but  we  have  hired  a  screen  and  can  now 
croon  over  the  fire  without  danger. 

A  prioriy  the  conditions  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  promis- 
ing for  two  people,  one  of  whom  is  liable  to  bronchitis  and  rheu- 
matism and  the  other  to  pleurisy,  but,  as  I  am  so  fond  of  rubbing 
into  Herbert  Spencer,  a  priori  reasonings  are  mostly  bosh,  and 
we  are  thriving. 

With  three  coats  on  I  find  the  air  on  Beachy  Head  eminently 


224  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiii 

refreshing,  and  there  is  so  much  light  in  the  southern  quarter 
just  now,  that  we  confidently  hope  to  see  the  sun  once  more  in 
the  course  of  a  few  days. 

As  I  told  you  in  my  official  letter,  I  am  going  up  for  the 
30th.  But  I  am  in  a  quandary  about  the  dinner,  partly  by  reason 
of  the  inevitable  speech,  and  partly  the  long  sitting.  I  should 
very  much  like  to  attend,  and  I  think  I  could  go  through  with 
it.  On  the  other  hand,  my  wife  declares  it  would  be  very  im- 
prudent, and  I  am  not  quite  sure  she  is  wrong.  I  wish  you 
would  tell  me  exactly  what  you  think  about  the  matter. 

The  way  I  pick  up  directly  I  get  into  good  air  makes  me 
suspect  myself  of  malingering,  and  yet  I  certainly  had  grown 
very  seedy  in  London  before  we  left. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

10  SouTHCLiFF  Terrace,  Eastboui^ne,  Nov.  13,  1888. 

My  dear  Foster — We  are  very  sorry  to  hear  about  Michael 
Junior.*  Experto  crede;  of  all  anxieties  the  hardest  to  bear  is 
that  about  one's  children.  But  considering  the  way  you  got  off 
yourself  and  have  become  the  hearty  and  bucolic  person  you  are, 
I  think  you  ought  to  be  cheery.  Everybody  speaks  well  of  the 
youngster,  and  he  is  bound  to  behave  himself  well  and  get  strong 
as  swiftly  as  possible. 

Though  very  loth,  I  give  up  the  dinner.  But  unless  I  am  on 
my  back  I  shall  turn  up  at  the  meeting.  I  think  that  is  a  com- 
promise very  creditable  to  my  prudence. 

Though  it  is  blowing  a  gale  of  wind  from  S.W.  to-day  there 
is  real  sunshine,  and  it  is  fairly  warm.  I  am  very  glad  we  came 
here  instead  of  that  beastly  Brighton. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

10  SouTHCLiFF  Terrace,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  15,  1888. 

My  dear  Evans — I  am  very  sorry  to  have  missed  you.     I 

told  my  doctor  that  while  the  weather  was  bad  it  was  of  no  use 

to  go  away,  and  when  it  was  fine  I  might  just  as  well  stop  at 

home ;  but  he  did  not  see  the  force  of  my  reasoning,  and  packed 

us  off  here. 

The  award  of  the  Copley  is  a  kindness  I  feel  very  much.  .  .  . 


*  Sir  M.  Foster's  son  was  threatened  with  lung  trouble,  and  was 
ordered  to  live  abroad.  He  proposed  to  carry  his  medical  experience 
to  the  Maloja  and  practise  there  during  the  summer.  Huxley  offered 
to  give  him  some  introductions. 


i888  RECEIVES   THE  COPLEY  MEDAL 


225 


The  Congress  *  seems  to  have  gone  off  excellently.  I  con- 
sider that  my  own  performance  of  the  part  of  dummy  was  dis- 
tinguished. 

So  the  Lawes  business  is  fairly  settled  at  last !  "  Lawes 
Deo,"  as  the  Claimant  might  have  said.  But  the* pun  will  be 
stale,  as  you  doubtless  have  already  made  all  possible  epigrams 
and  punnigrams  on  the  topic. 

My  wife  joins  with  me  in  the  kindest  regards  to  Mrs.  Evans 
and  yourself.  If  Mrs.  Evans  had  only  come  up  to  the  Maloja, 
she  would  have  had  real  winter  and  no  cold. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

10  SouTHCLiFF  Terrace,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  15,  1888. 

My  dear  Hooker — You  would  have  it  that  the  R.S.  broke 
the  law  in  giving  you  the  Copley,  and  they  certainly  violated 
custom  in  giving  it  to  me  the  year  following.  Who  ever  heard 
of  two  biologers  getting  it  one  after  another  ?  It  is  very  pleasant 
to  have  our  niches  in  the  Pantheon  close  together.  It  is  getting 
on  for  forty  years  since  we  were  first  "  acquent,"  and  consider- 
ing with  what  a  very  considerable  dose  of  tenacity,  vivacity, 
and  that  glorious  firmness  (which  the  beasts  who  don't  like  us 
call  obstinacy)  we  are  both  endowed,  the  fact  that  we  have  never 
had  the  shadow  of  a  shade  of  a  quarrel  is  more  to  our  credit 
than  being  ex-Presidents  and  Copley  medallists. 

But  we  have  had  a  masonic  bond  in  both  being  well  salted 
in  early  life.  I  have  always  felt  I  owed  a  great  deal  to  my 
acquaintance  with  the  realities  of  things  gained  [in]  the  old 
Rattlesnake. 

I  am  getting  on  pretty  well  here,  though  the  weather  has 
been  mostly  bad.  All  being  well  I  shall  attend  the  meeting  of 
the  Society  on  the  30th,  but  not  the  dinner.  I  am  very  sorry 
to  miss  the  latter,  but  I  dare  not  face  the  fatigue  and  the  chances 
of  a  third  dose  of  pleurisy. 

My  wife  sends  kindest  regards  and  thanks  for  your  con- 
gratulations.— Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

ID   SOUTHCLIFF   TeRRACE,  EaSTBOURNE,  Nov.  I7,  1888. 

My  dear  Flower —  .  .  .  Many  thanks  for  taking  my 
troublesomeness  in  good  part.  My  friend  will  be  greatly  con- 
soled to  know  that  you  have  the  poor  man  "  in  your  eye." 

*  The  International  Geological  Congress,  at  which  he  was  to  have 
presided. 

51 


226  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiii 

Schoolmaster,  naturalist,  and  coal  merchant  used  to  be  the  three 
refuges  for  the  incompetent.  Schoolmaster  is  rapidly  being 
eliminated,  so  I  suppose  the  pressure  on  Natural  History  and 
coals  will  increase. 

I  am  glad  you  have  got  the  Civil  Service  Commissioners  to 
listen  to  common  sense.  I  had  an  awful  battle  with  them 
(through  the  Department)  over  Newton,  who  is  now  in  your 
paleontological  department.  If  I  recollect  rightly,  they  exam- 
ined him  inter  alia  on  the  working  of  the  Poor  Laws ! 

The  Royal  Society  has  dealt  very  kindly  with  me.  They 
patted  me  on  the  back  when  I  started  thirty-seven  years  ago, 
and  it  was  a  great  encouragement.  They  give  me  their  best, 
now  that  my  race  is  run,  and  it  is  a  great  consolation.  At  the 
far  end  of  life  all  one's  work  looks  so  uncommonly  small,  that 
the  good  opinion  of  one's  contemporaries  acquires  a  new  value. 

We  have  a  summer's  day,  and  I  am  writing  before  an  open 
window !  Yesterday  it  blew  great  guns. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  letter  to  Lady  Welby,  the  point  of  which 
is  that  to  be  "  morally  convinced  "  is  not  the  same  thing  as 
to  offer  scientific  proof,  refers  to  an  article  in  the  Church 
Quarterly  for  October  called  "  Truthfulness  in  Science  and 
Religion,"  evoked  by  Huxley's  Nineteenth  Century  article  on 
"  Science  and  the  Bishops.*' 

JVov.  27,  1888. 

Dear  Lady  Welby — Many  thanks  for  the  article  in  the 
Church  Quarterly,  which  I  return  herewith.  I  am  not  disposed 
to  bestow  any  particular  attention  upon  it ;  as  the  writer,  though 
evidently  a  fair-minded  man,  appears  to  me  to  be  entangled  in 
a  hopeless  intellectual  muddle,  and  one  which  has  no  novelty. 
Christian  beliefs  profess  to  be  based  upon  historical  facts.  If 
there  was  no  such  person  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  if  His 
biography  given  in  the  Gospels  is  a  fiction,  Christianity  vanishes. 

Now  the  inquiry  into  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  matter  of 
history  is  just  as  much  a  question  of  pure  science  as  the  inquiry 
into  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  matter  of  geology,  and  the  value 
of  evidence  in  the  two  cases  must  be  tested  in  the  same  way.  If 
any  one  tells  me  that  the  evidence  of  the  existence  of  man  in 
the  miocene  epoch  is  as  good  as  that  upon  which  I  frequently 
act  every  day  of  my  life,  I  reply  that  this  is  quite  true,  but  that 
it  is  no  sort  of  reason  for  believing  in  the  existence  of  miocene 
man. 


i888  LETTER   TO   PROF.  RAY   LANKESTER  227 

Surely  no  one  but  a  born  fool  can  fail  to  be  aware  that  we 
constantly,  and  in  very  grave  conjunctions,  are  obliged  to  act 
upon  extremely  bad  evidence,  and  that  very  often  we  suffer  all 
sorts  of  penalties  in  consequence.  And  surely  one  must  be  some- 
thing worse  than  a  born  fool  to  pretend  that  such  decision  under 
the  pressure  of  the  enigmas  of  life  ought  to  have  the  smallest 
influence  in  those  judgments  which  are  made  with  due  and  suffi- 
cient deliberation.  You  will  see  that  these  considerations  go  to 
the  root  of  the  whole  matter.  I  regret  that  I  cannot  discuss  the 
question  more  at  length  and  dea^l  with  sundry  topics  put  forward 
in  your  letter.    At  present  writing  is  a  burden  to  me. 

A  letter  to  Professor  Ray  Lankester  mixes  grave  and 
gay  in  a  little  homily,  edged  by  personal  experience,  on  the 
virtues  and  vices  of  combativeness. 

10  SouTHCLiFF,  Eastbourne,  Dec.  6,  i8i58. 

I  think  it  would  be  a  very  good  thing  both  for  you  and  for 
Oxford  if  you  went  there.  Oxford  science  certainly  wants 
stirring  up,  and  notwithstanding  your  increase  in  years  and 
wisdom,  I  think  you  would  bear  just  a  little  more  stoning* 
down,  so  that  the  conditions  for  a  transfer  of  energy  are  ex- 
cellent ! 

Seriously,  I  wish  you  would  let  an  old  man,  who  has  had  his 
share  of  fighting,  remind  you  that  battles,  like  hypotheses,  are 
not  to  be  multiplied  beyond  necessity.  Science  might  say  to  you 
as  the  Staffordshire  collier's  wife  said  to  her  husband  at  the 
fair,  "  Get  thee  foighten  done  and  come  whoam."  You  have  a 
fair  expectation  of  ripe  vigour  for  twenty  years ;  just  think  what 
may  be  done  with  that  capital. 

No  use  to  iu  quoque  me.  Under  the  circumstances  of  the 
time,  warfare  has  been  my  business  and  duty. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Two  m6re  letters  of  the  year  refer  to  the  South  Kensing- 
ton examinations,  for  which  Huxley  was  still  nominally 
responsible.  As  before,  we  see  him  reluctant  to  sign  the 
report  upon  papers  which  he  had  not  himself  examined; 
yet  at  the  same  time  doing  all  that  lay  in  his  power  to 
assist  by  criticising  the  questions  and  thinking  out  the 
scheme  of  teaching  on  which  the  examination  was  to  be 

*  i.e.  '*  holystoning,"  as  the  decks  of  a  man-of-war. 


228  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xih 

based.  He  replies  to  some  proposed  changes  in  a  letter  to 
Sir  M.  Foster  of  December  12: — 

I  am  very  sorry  I  cannot  agree  with  your  clients  about  the 
examination.  They  should  recollect  the  late  Master  of  Trinity's 
aphorism  that  even  the  youngest  of  us  is  not  infallible. 

I  know  exactly  upon  what  principles  I  am  going,  and  so  far 
as  I  am  at  present  informed  that  advantage  is  peculiar  to  my 
side.  Two  points  I  am  quite  clear  about— one  is  the  exclusion 
of  Amphioxus,  and  the  other  the  retention  of  so  much  of  the 
Bird  as  will  necessitate  a  knowledge  of  Sauropsidan  skeletal  char- 
acters and  the  elements  of  skeletal  homologies  in  skull  and  limbs. 

I  have  taken  a  good  deal  of  pains  over  drawing  up  a  new 
syllabus — including  dogfish — and  making  room  for  it  by  exclud- 
ing Amphioxus  and  all  of  bird  except  skeleton.  I  have  added 
Lamprey  (cranial  and  spinal  skeleton,  not  face  cartilages),  so 
that  the  intelligent  student  may  know  what  a  notochord  means 
before  he  goes  to  embryology.  I  have  excluded  Distoma  and 
kept  Helix. 

The  Committee  must  now  settle  the  matter.  I  have  done 
with  it. 

On  December  2y  he  writes: — 

I  have  been  thinking  over  the  Examinership  business  with- 
out coming  to  any  very  satisfactory  result.  The  present  state 
of  things  is  not  satisfactory  so  far  as  I  am  concerned.  I  do  not 
like  to  appear  to  be  doing  what  I  am  not  doing. 

would  of  course  be  the  successor  indicated,  if  he  had 

not  so  carefully  cut  his  own  throat  as  an  Examiner.  .  .  .  He 
would  be  bringing  an  action  against  the  Lord  President  before 
he  had  been  three  years  in  office !  ...  As  I  told  Forster,  when 
he  was  Vice-President,  the  whole  value  of  the  Exr.  system  de- 
pends on  the  way  the  examiners  do  their  work.  I  have  the 
gravest  doubt  about steadily  plodding  through  the  disgust- 
ful weariness  of  it  as  you  and  I  have  done,  or  observing  any 
regulation  that  did  not  suit  his  fancy. 

With  this  may  be  compared  the  letter  of  May  19,  1889, 
to  Sir  J.  Donnelly,  when  he  finally  resolved  to  give  up  the 
"  sleeping  partnership  "  in  the  examination. 

His  last  letter  of  the  year  was  written  to  Sir  J.  Hooker, 
when  transferring  to  him  the  "  archives  "  of  the  x  Club,  as 
the  new  Treasurer. 


i888  IMPROVED   HEALTH 


229 


4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec.  29,  1888. 

My  dear  Hooker — All  good,  wishes  to  you  and  yours,  and 
many  of  'em. 

Thanks  for  the  cheque.  You  are  very  confiding  to  send  it 
without  looking  at  the  account.  But  I  have  packed  up  the 
"  Archives,"  which  poor  dear  Busk  handed  over  to  me,  and  will 
leave  them  at  the  Athenaeum  for  you.  Among  them  you  will 
find  the  account  book.  There  are  two  or  three  cases,  whep  I 
was  absent,  in  which  the  names  are  not  down.  I  have  no  doubt 
Frankland  gave  them  to  me  by  letter,  but  the  book  was  at  home 
and  they  never  got  set  down.    Peccavi! 

I  have  been  picking  up  in  the  most  astonishing  way  during 
the  last  fortnight  or  three  weeks  at  Eastbourne.  My  doctor, 
Hames,  carefully  examined  my  heart  yesterday,  and  told  me 
that  though  some  slight  indications  were  left,  he  should  have 
thought  nothing  of  them  if  he  had  not  followed  the  whole  his- 
tory of  the  case.  With  fresh  air  and  exercise  and  careful  avoid- 
ance of  cold  and  night  air  I  am  to  be  all  right  again  in  a  few 
months. 

I  am  not  fond  of  coddling;  but  as  Paddy  gave  his  pig  the 
best  corner  in  his  cabin — because  "  shure,  he  paid  the  rint " — 
I  feel  bound  to  take  care  of  myself  as  a  household  animal  of 
value,  to  say  nothing  of  any  other  grounds.  So,  much  as  I 
should  like  to  be  with  you  all  on  the  3rd,  I  must  defer  to  the 
taboo. 

The  wife  got  a  nasty  bronchitic  cold  as  soon  as  she  came  up. 
She  is  much  better  now.  But  I  shall  be  glad  to  get  her  down 
to  Eastbourne  again. 

Except  that,  we  are  all  very  flourishing,  as  I  hope  you  are. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

1889 

The  events  to  be  chronicled  in  this  year  are,  as  might 
be  expected,  either  domestic  or  literary.  The  letters  are 
full  of  allusions  to  his  long  controversy  in  defence  of  Agnos- 
ticism, mainly  with  Dr.  Wace,  who  had  declared  the  use  of 
the  name  to  be  a  "  mere  evasion  "  on  the  part  of  those 
who  ought  to  be  dubbed  infidels;  to  the  building  of  the 
new  house  at  Eastbourne,  and  to  the  marriage  in  quick 
succession  of  his  two  youngest  daughters,  whereby,  indeed, 
the  giving  up  of  the  house  in  London  and  definite  departure 
from  London  was  made  possible. 

All  the  early  part  of  the  year,  till  he  found  it  necessary 
to  go  to  Switzerland  again,  he  stayed  unwillingly  in  East- 
bourne, from  time  to  time  running  up  to  town,  or  having 
son  or  daughter  to  stay  with  him  for  a  week,  his  wife  being 
too  busy  to  leave  town,  with  the  double  preparations  for 
the  weddings  on  hand,  so  that  he  writes  to  her :  "  I  feel 
worse  than  the  *  cowardly  agnostic '  I  am  said  to  be — for 
J  leaving  you  to  face  your  botherations  alone."  One  can 
*  picture  him  still  firm  of  tread,  with  grizzled  head  a  little 
stooped  from  his  square  shoulders,  pacing  the  sea  wall  with 
long  strides,  or  renewing  somewhat  of  his  strength  as  it 
again  began  to  fail,  in  the  keener  air  of  the  downs,  warmly 
defended  against  chill  by  a  big  cap — for  he  had  been  suffer- 
ing from  his  ears — and  a  long  rough  coat.  He  writes 
(February  22) :  "  I  have  bought  a  cap  with  flaps  to  pro- 
tect my  ears.  I  look  more  '  doggy '  than  ever."  And  on 
March  3: — 
230 


1889         MARRIAGE  OF   HIS  YOUNGEST   DAUGHTER         23 1 

We  have  had  a  lovely  day,  quite  an  Italian  sky  and  sea,  with 
a  good  deal  of  Florentine  east  wind.  I  walked  up  to  the  Signal 
House,  and  was  greatly  amused  by  a  young  sheep-dog  whose 
master  could  hardly  get  him  away  from  circling  round  me  and 
staring  at  me  with  a  short  dissatisfied  bark  every  now  and  then. 
It  is  the  undressed  wool  of  my  coat  bothers  all  the  dogs.  They 
can't  understand  why  a  creature  which  smells  so  like  a  sheep, 
should  walk  on  its  hind  legs.  I  wish  I  could  have  relieved  that 
dog's  mind,  but  I  did  not  see  my  way  to  an  explanation. 

From  this  time  on,  the  effects  of  several  years'  com- 
parative rest  became  more  perceptible.  His  slowly  return- 
ing vigour  was  no  longer  sapped  by  the  unceasing  strain 
of  multifarious  occupations.  And  if  his  recurrent  ill-health 
sometimes  seems  too  strongly  insisted  on,  it  must  be  re- 
membered that  he  had  always  worked  at  the  extreme  limit 
of  his  powers — the  limit,  as  he  used  regretfully  to  say, 
imposed  on  his  brain  by  his  other  organs — and  that  after 
his  first  breakdown  he  was  never  very  far  from  a  second. 
When  this  finally  came  in  1884,  his  forces  were  so  far  spent 
that  he  never  expected  to  recover  as  he  did. 

In  the  marriage  this  year  of  his  youngest  daughter, 
Huxley  was  doomed  to  experience  the  momentary  little 
twinge  which  will  sometimes  come  to  the  supporter  of  an 
unpopular  principle  when  he  first  puts  it  into  practice  among 
his  own  belongings. 

Athenaeum  Clvb, /an.  14,  1889. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  have  left  the  x  **  Archives  "  here  for 
you.  I  left  them  on  my  table  by  mischance  when  I  came  here  on 
the  X  day. 

I  have  a  piece  of  family  news  for  you.  My  youngest  daugh- 
ter Ethel  is  going  to  marry  John  Collier. 

I  have  always  been  a  great  advocate  for  the  triumph  of 
common  sense  and  justice  in  the  "  Deceased  Wife's  Sister " 
business — and  only  now  discover,  that  I  had  a  sneaking  hope 
that  all  of  my  own  daughters  would  escape  that  experiment ! 

They  are  quite  suited  to  one  another  and  I  would  not  wish 
a  better  match  for  her.  And  whatever  annoyances  and  social 
pin-pricks  may  come  in  Ethel's  way,  I  know  nobody  less  likely 
to  care  about  them. 

We  shall  have  to  go  to  Norway,  I  believe,  to  get  the  business 
done. 


232 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 


In  the  meantime,  my  wife  (who  has  been  laid  up  with  bron- 
chitic  cold  ever  since  we  came  home)  and  I  have  had  as  much 
London  as  we  can  stand,  and  are  off  to-morrow  to  Eastbourne 
again,  but  to  more  sheltered  quarters. 

I  hope  Lady  Hooker  and  you  are  thriving.  Don't  conceal 
the  news  from  her,  as  my  wife  is  always  accusing  me  of  doing. 
— Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  Mr.  W.  F.  Collier 

4  Marlborough  Place,  yiz«.  24,  1889. 

Many  thanks  for  your  kind  letter.  I  have  as  strong  an 
affection  for  Jack  as  if  he  were  my  own  son,  and  I  have  felt 
very  keenly  the  ruin  we  involuntarily  brought  upon  him — by  our 
poor  darling's  terrible  illness  and  death.  So  that  if  I  had  not 
already  done  my  best  to  aid  and  abet  other  people  in  disregarding 
the  disabilities  imposed  by  the  present  monstrous  state  of  the 
law,  I  should  have  felt  bound  to  go  as  far  as  I  could  towards 
mending  his  life.  Ethel  is  just  suited  to  him.  ...  Of  course  I 
could  have  wished  that  she  should  be  spared  the  petty  annoy- 
ances which  she  must  occasionally  expect.  But  I  know  of  no 
one  less  likely  to  care  for  them. 

Your  Shakespere  parable  *  is  charming — but  I  am  afraid 
it  must  be  put  among  the  endless  things  that  are  read  in  to  the 
"  divine  Williams  "  as  the  Frenchman  called  him. 

There  was  no  knowledge  of  the  sexes  of  plants  in  Shake- 
spere's  time,  barring  some  vague  suggestion  about  figs  and  dates. 
Even  in  the  i8th  century,  after  Linnaeus,  the  observations  of 
Sprengel,  who  was  a  man  of  genius,  and  first  properly  explained 
the  action  of  insects,  were  set  aside  and  forgotten. 

I  take  it  that  Shakespere  is  really  alluding  to  the  "  enforced 
chastity"  of  Dian  (the  moon).  The  poets  ignore  that  little 
Endymion  business  when  they  like  ! 

I  have  recovered  in  such  an  extraordinary  fashion  that  I 
can  plume  myself  on  being  an  "  interesting  case,"  though  I  am 
not  going  to  compete  with  you  in  that  line.     And  if  you  look 

*  The  second  part  of  the  latter  replies  to  the  question  whether 
Shakespeare  had  any  notion  of  the  existence  of  the  sexes  in  plants 
and  the  part  played  in  their  fertilisation  by  insects,  which,  of  course, 
would  be  prevented  from  visiting  them  by  rainy  weather,  when  he 
wrote  in  the  Midsummer  Nighfs  Dream — 

The  moon,  methinks,  looks  with  a  waten'  eye, 
And  when  she  weeps,  weeps  every  little  flower. 
Lamenting  some  enforced  chastity. 


i889  DECEASED  WIFE'S  SISTER   BILL  233 

at  the  February  Nineteenth  I  hope  you  will  think  that  my  brains 
are  none  the  worse.  But  perhaps  that  conceited  speech  is  evi- 
dence that  they  are. 

We  came  to  town  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  Nettie's 
fiance,  and  I  am  happy  to  say  the  family  takes  to  him.  When 
it  does  not  take  to  anybody,  it  is  the  worse  for  that  anybody. 

So,  before  long,  my  house  will  be  empty,  and  as  my  wife  and 
I  cannot  live  in  London,  I  think  we  shall  pitch  our  tent  in  East- 
bourne. Good  Jack  offers  to  give  us  a  pied  d  terre  when  we 
come  to  town.  To-day  we  are  off  to  Eastbourne  again.  Carry 
off  Harry,  who  is  done  up  from  too  zealous  Hospital  work. 
However,  it  is  nothing  serious. 

The  following  is  in  reply  to  a  request  that  he  would 
write  a  letter,  as  he  describes  it  elsewhere,  "about  the  wife's 
sister  business — for  the  edification  of  the  peers." 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
March  12,  1889. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  feel  "downright  mean,"  as  the 
Yankees  say,  that  I  have  not  done  for  the  sake  of  right  and 
justice  what  I  am  moved  to  do  now  that  I  have  a  personal  in- 
terest in  the  matter  of  the  directest  kind;  and  I  rather  expect 
that  will  be  thrown  in  my  teeth  if  my  name  is  at  the  bottom  of 
anything  I  write. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  loathe  anonymity.  However,  we  can 
take  time  to  consider  that  point. 

Anyhow  I  will  set  to  work  on  the  concoction  of  a  letter,  if 
you  will  supply  me  with  the  materials  which  will  enable  me  to 
be  thoroughly  posted  up  in  the  facts. 

I  have  just  received  your  second  letter.  Pity  you  could  not 
stay  over  yesterday — it  was  very  fine. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  letter  in  question  is  as  follows : — 

April  30,  1889. 

Dear  Lord  Hartington — I  am  assured  by  those  who  know 
more  about  the  political  world  than  I  do,  that  if  Lord  Salisbury 
would  hold  his  hand  and  let  his  party  do  as  they  like  about  the 
D.W.S.  Bill  which  is  to  come  on  next  week,  it  would  pass.  Con- 
sidering the  irritation  against  the  bishops  and  a  certain  portion 
of  the  lay  peers  among  a  number  of  people  who  have  the  means 
of  making  themselves  heard  and  felt,  which  is  kept  up  and 


rt 


234 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 


aggravated,  as  time  goes  on,  by  the  action  of  the  Upper  House 
in  repeatedly  snubbing  the  Lower,  about  this  question,  I  should 
have  thought  it  (from  a  Conservative  point  of  view)  good 
policy  to  heal  the  sore. 

The  talk  of  Class  v.  Mass  is  generally  mere  clap-trap;  but, 
in  this  case,  there  is  really  no  doubt  that  a  fraction  of  the  Classes 
stands  in  the  way  of  the  fulfilment  of  a  very  reasonable  demand 
on  the  part  of  the  Masses. 

A  clear-headed  man  like  Lord  Salisbury  would  surely  see 
this  if  it  were  properly  pressed  on  his  attention. 

I  do  not  presume  to  say  whether  it  is  practicable  or  con- 
venient for  the  Leader  of  the  Liberal  Unionist  party  to  take  any 
steps  in  this  direction;  and  I  should  hardly  have  ventured  to 
ask  you  to  take  this  suggestion  into  consideration  if  the  in- 
terest I  have  always  taken  in  the  D.W.S.  Bill  had  not  recently 
been  quickened  by  the  marriage  of  one  of  my  daughters  as  a 
Deceased  Wife's  Sister. — I  am,  etc. 

Meantime  the  effect  of  Eastbourne,  which  Sir  John 
Donnelly  had  induced  him  to  try,  was  indeed  wonderful. 
He  found  in  it  the  place  he  had  so  long  been  looking  for. 
References  to  his  health  read  very  differently  from  those 
of  previous  years.  He  walked  up  Beachy  Head  regularly 
without  suffering  from  any  heart  symptoms.  And  though 
Beachy  Head  was  not  the  same  thing  as  the  Alps,  it  made 
a  very  efficient  substitute  for  a  while,  and  it  was  not  till 
April  that  the  need  of  change  began  to  make  itself  felt. 
And  so  he  made  up  his  mind  to  listen  no  more  to  the  eager 
friends  who  wished  him  to  pitch  his  tent  near  them  at  either 
end  of  Surrey,  but  to  settle  down  at  Eastbourne,  and,  by 
preference,  to  build  a  house  of  the  size  and  on  the  spot  that 
suited  himself,  rather  than  to  take  any  existing  house  lower 
down  in  the  town.  He  must  have  been  a  trifle  irritated  by 
unsolicited  advice  when  he  wrote  the  following: — 

It  is  very  odd  that  people  won't  give  one  credit  for  common 
sense.  We  have  tried  one  winter  here,  and  if  we  tried  another 
we  should  be  just  as  much  dependent  upon  the  experience  of 
longer  residents  as  ever  we  were.  However,  as  I  told  X.  I  was 
going  to  settle  matters  to-morrow,  there  won't  be  any  oppor- 
tunity for  discussing  that  topic  when  he  comes.  If  we  had  taken 
W.'s  house,  somebody  would  have  immediately  told  us  that  we 


i889  DEFENCE   OF  AGNOSTICISM  235 

had  chosen  the  dampest  site  in  winter  and  the  stuffiest  in  sum- 
mer, and  where,  moreover,  the  sewage  has  to  be  pumped  up  into 
the  main  drain. 

He  finally  decided  upon  a  site  on  the  high  ground  near 
Beachy  Head,  a  little  way  back  from  the  sea  front,  at  the 
corner  of  the  Staveley  and  Buxton  Roads,  with  a  guarantee 
from  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's  agent  that  no  house  should 
be  built  at  the  contiguous  end  of  the  adjoining  plot  of  land 
in  the  Buxton  Road,  a  plot  which  he  himself  afterwards 
bought.  The  principal  rooms  were  planned  for  the  back  of 
the  house,  looking  S.W.  Qver  open  gardens  to  the  long  line 
of  downs  which  culminate  in  Beachy  Head,  but  with  due 
provision  against  southerly  gales  and  excess  of  sunshine. 

On  May  29  the  builder's  contract  was  accepted,  and  for 
the  rest  of  the  year  the  progress  of  the  house,  which  was 
designed  by  his  son-in-law,  F.  W.  Waller,  afforded  a  con- 
stant interest. 

Meantime,  with  the  improvement  in  his  general  health, 
the  old  appetite  for  work  returned  with  increased  and  un- 
wonted zest.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life  he  declares  that 
he  enjoyed  the  process  of  writing.  As  he  wrote  somewhat 
later  to  his  newly  married  daughter  from  Eastbourne,  where 
he  had  gone  again  very  weary  the  day  after  her  wedding: 
"  Luckily  the  bishops  and  clergy  won't  let  me  alone,  so  I 
have  been  able  to  keep  myself  pretty  well  amused  in  reply- 
ing." The  work  which  came  to  him  so  easily  and  pleasur- 
ably  was  the  defence  of  his  attitude  of  agnosticism  against 
the  onslaught  made  upon  it  at  the  previous  Church  Con- 
gress by  Dr.  Wace,  the  Principal  of  King's  College,  London, 
and  followed  up  by  articles  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  from 
the  pen  of  Mr.  Frederic  Harrison  and  Mr.  Laing,  the  effect 
of  which  upon  him  he  describes  to  Mr.  Knowles  on  De- 
cember 30,  1888 : — 

I  have  been  stirred  up  to  the  boiling  pitch  by  Wace,  Laing, 
and  Harrison  in  re  Agnosticism,  and  I  really  can't  keep  the  lid 
down  any  longer.  Are  you  minded  to  admit  a  goring  article 
into  the  February  Nineteenth  f 

As  for  his  health,  he  adds : — 


236  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

I  have  amended  wonderfully  in  the  course  of  the  last  six 
weeks,  and  my  doctor  tells  me  I  am  going  to  be  completely 
patched  up — seams  caulked  and  made  seaworthy,  so  the  old  hulk 
may  make  another  cruise. 

We  shall  see.  At  any  rate  I  have  been  able  and  willing  to 
write  lately,  and  that  is  more  than  I  can  say  for  myself  for  the 
first  three-quarters  of  the  year. 

...  I  was  so  pleased  to  see  you  were  in  trouble  about  your 
house.    Good  for  you  to  have  a  taste  of  it  for  yourself. 

To  this  controversy  he  contributed  four  articles;  three 
directly  in  defence  of  Agnosticism,  the  fourth  on  the  value 
of  the  underlying  question  of  testimony  to  the  miracu- 
lous. 

The  first  article,  "  Agnosticism,"  appeared  in  the  Febru- 
ary number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.  No  sooner  was  this 
finished  than  he  began  a  fresh  piece  of  work,  "  which,"  he 
writes,  "  is  all  about  miracles,  and  will  be  rather  amusing." 
This,  on  the  "  Value  of  Testimony  to  the  Miraculous,"  ap- 
peared in  the  following  number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century, 
It  did  not  form  part  of  the  controversy  on  hand,  though 
it  bore  indirectly  upon  the  first  principles  of  agnosticism. 
The  question  at  issue,  he  urges,  is  not  the  possibility  of 
miracles,  but  the  evidence  to  their  occurrence,  and  if  from 
preconceptions  or  ignorance  the  evidence  be  worthless  the 
historical  reality  of  the  facts  attested  vanishes.  The  cardinal 
point,  then,  "  is  completely,  as  the  author  of  Robert  Elsmere 
says,  the  value  of  testimony." 

The  March  number  also  contained  replies  from  Dr.  Wace 
and  Bishop  Magee  on  the  main  question,  and  an  article  by 
Mrs.  Humphry  Ward  on  a  kindred  subject  to  his  own, 
"  The  New  Reformation."  Of  these  he  writes  on  Febru- 
ary 2y: — 

The  Bishop  and  Wace  are  hammering  away  in  the  Nine- 
teenth.  Mrs.  Ward's  article  very  good,  and  practically  an  an- 
swer to  Wace.    Won't  I  stir  them  up  by  and  by  ! 

And  a  few  days  later: — 

Mrs.  Ward's  service  consists  in  her  very  clear  and  clever 
exposition  of  critical  results  and  methods. 


i889  DEFENCE  OF  AGNOSTICISM  237 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
Feb.  29,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  have  just  been  delighted  with  Mrs. 
Ward's  article.  She  has  swept  away  the  greater  part  of  Wace's 
sophistries  as  a  dexterous  and  strong-wristed  housemaid  sweeps 
away  cobwebs  with  her  broom,  and  saved  a  lot  of  time. 

What  in  the  world  does  the  Bishop  mean  by  saying  that  I 
have  called  Qiristianity  "  sorry  stuff  "  (p.  370)  ?  To  my  knowl- 
edge I  never  so  much  as  thought  anything  of  the  kind,  let  alone 
saying  it. 

I  shall  challenge  him  very  sharply  about  this,  and  if,  as  I 
believe,  he  has  no  justification  for  his  statement,  my  opinion  of 
him  will  be  very  considerably  lowered. 

Wace  has  given  me  a  lovely  opening  by  his  profession  of 
belief  in  the  devils  going  into  the  swine.  I  rather  hoped  I  should 
get  this  out  of  him. 

I  find  people  are  watching  the  game  with  great  interest,  and 
if  it  should  be  possible  for  me  to  give  a  little  shove  to  the  "  New 
Reformation  "  I  shall  think  the  fag  end  of  my  life  well  spent. 

After  all,  the  reproach  made  to  the  English  people  that  "  they 
care  for  nothing  but  religion  and  politics  "  is  rather  to  their 
credit.  In  the  long  run  these  are  the  two  things  that  ought  to 
interest  a  man  more  than  any  others. 

I  have  been  much  bothered  with  ear-ache  lately,  but  if  all 
goes  well  I  will  send  you  a  screed  by  the  middle  of  March. 

Snowing  hard !  They  have  had  more  snow  within  the  last 
month  than  they  have  known  for  ten  years  here. — Ever  yours 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  set  to  work  immediately,  and  within  ten  day  de- 
spatched his  second  contribution,  "  Agnosticism,  a  Rejoin- 
der," which  appeared  in  the  April  number  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century, 

On  March  3  he  writes : — 

I  am  possessed  by  a  writing  demon,  and  have  pretty  well 
finished  in  the  rough  another  article  for  Knowles,  whose  mouth 
is  wide  open  for  it. 

And  on  the  9th : — 

I  sent  off  another  article  to  Knowles  last  night — a  regular 
facer  for  the  clericals.  You  can't  think  how  I  enjoy  writing 
now  for  the  first  time  in  my  life. 


238  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

He  writes  at  greater  length  to  Mr.  Knowles: — 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
March  10,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — There's  a  Divinity  that  shapes  the  ends 
(of  envelopes!)  rough-hew  them  how  we  will.  This  time  I 
went  and  bought  the  strongest  to  be  had,  and  sealed  him  up 
with  wax  in  the  shop.  I  put  no  note  inside,  meaning  to  write 
to  you  afterwards,  and  then  I  forgot  to  do  so. 

I  can't  understand  Peterborough  nohow.  However,  so  far  as 
the  weakness  of  the  flesh  would  permit  me  to  abstain  from  smit- 
ing him  and  his  brother  Amalekite,  I  have  tried  to  turn  the  tide 
of  battle  to  matters  of  more  importance. 

The  pith  of  my  article  is  the  proposition  that  Christ  was  not 
a  Christian.  I  have  not  ventured  to  state  my  thesis  exactly  in 
that  form — fearing  the  Editor — but,  in  a  mild  and  proper  way, 
I  flatter  myself  I  have  demonstrated  it.  Really,  when  I  come  to 
think  of  the  claims  made  by  orthodox  Christianity  on  the  one 
hand,  and  of  the  total  absence  of  foundation  for  them  on  the 
other,  I  find  it  hard  to  abstain  from  using  a  phrase  which 
shocked  me  very  much  when  Strauss  first  applied  it  to  the  Resur- 
rection, "  Welthistorischer  Humbug !  " 

I  don't  think  I  have  ever  seen  the  portrait  you  speak  of.  I 
remember  the  artist — a  clever  fellow,  whose  name,  of  course,  I 
forget — but  I  do  not  think  I  saw  his  finished  work.  Some  of 
these  days  I  will  ask  to  see  it. 

I  was  pretty  well  finished  after  the  wedding,  and  bolted  here 
the  next  day.  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  could  not  get  my  wife  to 
come  with  me.  H  she  does  not  knock  up  I  shall  be  pleasantly 
surprised.  The  young  couple  are  flourishing  in  Paris.  I  like 
what  I  have  seen  of  him  very  much. 

What  is  the  "  Cloister  scheme  "  ?  *  Recollect  how  far  away 
I  am  from  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  d . 

Are  you  and  Mrs.  Knowles  going  to  imitate  the  example  of 
Eginhard  and  Emma?  What  good  pictures  you  will  have  in 
your  monastery  church  ! — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 
And  again,  a  few  days  later: — 

*  It  referred  to  a  plan  for  using  the  cloisters  of  Westminster  Abbey 
to  receive  the  monuments  of  distinguished  men,  so  as  to  avoid  the 
necessity  of  enlarging  the  Abbejr  itscii. 


i889  CITATION   OF   NEWMAN  239 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
March  15,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  am  sending  my  proof  back  to  Spottis- 
woode's.  I  did  not  think  the  MS.  would  make  so  much,  and  I 
am  afraid  it  has  lengthened  in  the  process  of  correction. 

You  have  a  reader  in  your  printer's  office  who  provides  me 
with  jokes.  Last  time  he  corrected,  where  my  MS.  spoke  of  the 
pigs  as  unwilling  "  porters  "  of  the  devils,  into  "  porkers."  And 
this  time,  when  I,  writing  about  the  Lord's  Prayer,  say  "cur- 
rent formula,"  he  has  it  "  canting  formula."  If  only  Peterbor- 
ough had  got  hold  of  that !  And  I  am  capable  of  overlooking 
anything  in  a  proof. 

You  see  we  have  got  to  big  questions  now,  and  if  these  are 
once  fairly  before  the  general  mind  all  the  King's  horses  and 
all  the  King's  men  won't  put  the  orthodox  Humpty  Dumpty 
where  he  was  before. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

After  the  article  came  out  he  wrote  again  to  Mr. 
Knowles : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  April  14,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  am  going  to  try  and  stop  here,  deso- 
late as  the  house  is  now  all  the  chicks  have  flown,  for  the  next 
fortnight.  Your  talk  of  the  inclemency  of  Torquay  is  delight- 
fully consoling.     London  has  been  vile. 

I  am  glad  you  are  going  to  let  Wace  have  another  "go." 
My  object,  as  you  know,  in  the  whole  business  has  been  to  rouse 
people  to  think.  ... 

Considering  that  I  got  named  in  the  House  of  Commons 
last  night  as  an  example  of  a  temperate  and  well-behaved  blas- 
phemer,* I  think  I  am  attaining  my  object. 

Of  course  I  go  for  a  last  word,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  whatever  Wace  may  say,  it  may  be  best  to  get  out  of  the 
region  of  controversy  as  far  as  possible  and  hammer  in  two  big 
nails — (i)  that  the  Demonology  of  Christianity  shows. that  its 
founders  knew  no  more  about  the  spiritual  world  than  anybody 
else,  and  (2)  that  Newman's  doctrine  of  "Development"  is 
true  to  an  extent  of  which  the  Cardinal  did  not  dream. 

*  In  the  debate  upon  the  Religious  Prosecutions  Abolition  Bill, 
Mr.  Addison  said  "the  last  article  by  Professor  Huxley  in  \Xi^  Nine- 
teenth Century  showed  that  opinion  was  free  when  it  was  honestly 
expressed." — Times,  April  14. 


240 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 


I  have  been  reading  some  of  his  works  lately,  and  I  under- 
stand now  why  Kingsley  accused  him  of  growing  dishonesty. 

After  an  hour  or  two  of  him  I  began  to  lose  sight  of  the 
distinction  between  truth  and  falsehood. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

If  you  are  at  home  any  day  next  week  I  will  look  in  for  a 
chat. 

The  controversy  was  completed  by  a  third  article, 
"  Agnosticism  and  Christianity,"  in  the  June  number  of  the 
Nineteenth  Century.  There  was  a  humorous  aspect  of  this 
article  which  tickled  his  fancy  immensely,  for  he  drove  home 
his  previous  arguments  by  means  of  an  authority  whom 
his  adversaries  could  not  neglect,  though  he  was  the  last 
man  they  could  have  expected  to  see  brought  up  against 
them  in  this  connection — Cardinal  Newman.  There  is  no 
better  evidence  for  ancient  than  for  modern  miracles,  lie  says 
in  effect ;  let  us  therefore  accept  the  teachings  of  the  Church 
which  maintains  a  continuous  tradition  on  the  subject.  But 
there  is  a  very  different  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the 
same  premises ;  all  may  be  regarded  as  equally  doubtful,  and 
so  he  writes  on  May  30  to  Sir  J.  Hooker : — 

By  the  way,  I  want  you  to  enjoy  my  wind-up  with  Wace  in 
this  month's  Nineteenth  in  the  reading  as  much  as  I  have  in 
the  writing.  It's  as  full  of  malice  *  as  an  egg  is  full  of  meat, 
and  my  satisfaction  in  making  Newman  my  accomplice  has  been 
unutterable.  That  man  is  the  slipperiest  sophist  I  have  ever 
met  with.    Kingsley  was  entirely  right  about  him. 

Now  for  peace  and  quietness  till  after  the  next  Church 
Congress ! 

Three  other  letters  to  Mr.  Knowles  refer  to  this  article. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  A/ay  4,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  am  at  the  end  of  my  London  tether, 
and  we  go  to  Eastbourne  (3  Jevington  Gardens  again)  on  Mon- 
day. 

I  have  been  working  hard  to  finish  my  paper,  and  shall  send 
it  to  you  before  I  go. 

*  i.e.  in  the  French  sense  of  the  word. 


i889  CONTROVERSY  WITH   BISHOP   MAGEE  24I 

I  am  astonished  at  its  meekness.  Being  reviled,  I  revile 
not;  not  an  exception,  I  believe,  can  be  taken  to  the  wording  of 
one  of  the  venomous  paragraphs  in  which  the  paper  abounds. 
And  I  perceive  the  truth  of  a  profound  reflection  I  have  often 
made,  that  reviling  is  often  morally  superior  to  not  reviling. 

I  give  up  Peterborough.  His  "  Explanation "  is  neither 
straightforward,  nor  courteous,  nor  prudent.  Of  which  last 
fact,  it  may  be,  he  will  be  convinced  when  he  reads  my  acknowl- 
edgment of  his  favours,  which  is  soft,  not  with  the  softness  of 
the  answer  which  turneth  away  wrath,  but  with  that  of  the 
pillow  which  smothered  Desdemona. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  shall  try  to  stand  an  hour  or  two  of  the  Academy  dinner, 
and  hope  it  won't  knock  me  up. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.Ay.,  May  6,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — If  I  had  not  gone  to  the  Academy  din- 
ner I  might  have  kept  my  promise  about  sending  you  my  paper 
to-day.  I  indulged  in  no  gastronomic  indiscretions,  and  came 
away  after  H.R.H.'s  speech,  but  I  was  dead  beat  all  yesterday, 
nevertheless. 

We  are  off  to  Eastbourne,  and  I  will  send  the  MS.  from 
there;  there  is  very  little  to  do. 

Such  a  waste !  I  shall  have  to  omit  a  paragraph  that  was 
really  a  masterpiece. 

For  who  should  I  come  upon  in  one  of  the  rooms  but  the 
Bishop !  As  we  shook  hands,  he  asked  whether  that  was  before 
the  fight  or  after ;  and  I  answered,  "  A  little  of  both."  Then  we 
spoke  our  minds  pretty  plainly;  and  then  we  agreed  to  bury  the 
hatchet.* 

So  yesterday  I  tore  up  the  paragraph.  It  was  so  appropriate 
I  could  not  even  save  it  up  for  somebody  else ! — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
May  22,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  sent  back  my  proof  last  evening.  I 
shall  be  in  town  Friday  afternoon  to  Monday  morning  next, 
having  a  lot  of  things  to  do.  So  you  may  as  well  let  me  see 
a  revise  of  the  whole.     Did  you  not  say  to  me,  "  sitting  by  a 

*  As  he  says  {Coll,  Ess.  v.  210),  this  chance  meeting  ended  "  a  tem- 
porary misunderstanding  with  a  man  of  rare  ability,  candour,  and  wit, 
for  whom  I  entertained  a  great  liking  and  no  less  respect." 

52 


242  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

sea-coal  fire"  (I  say  nothing  about  a  "parcel  gilt  goblet"), 
that  this  screed  was  to  be  the  "  last  word  "  ?  I  don't  mind  how 
long  it  goes  on  so  long  as  I  have  the  last  word.  But  you  must 
expect  nothing  from  me  for  the  next  three  or  four  months. 
We  shall  be  off  abroad,  not  later  than  the  8th  June,  and  among 
the  everlasting  hills,  a  fico  for  your  controversies !  Wace's 
paper  shall  be  waste  paper  for  me.  Oh !  This  is  a  "  goak  " 
which  Peterborough  would  not  understand. 

I  think  you  are  right  about  the  wine  and  water  business — 
I  had  my  doubts — but  it  was  too  tempting.  All  the  teetotallers 
would  have  been  on  my  side. 

There  is  no  more  curious  example  of  the  influence  of  educa- 
tion than  the  respect  with  which  this  poor  bit  of  conjuring  is 
regarded.  Your  genuine  pietist  would  find  a  mystical  sense  in 
thimblerig.  I  trust  you  have  properly  enjoyed  the  extracts  from 
Newman.  That  a  man  of  his  intellect  should  be  brought  down 
.  to  the  utterance  of  such  drivel — by  Papistry,  is  one  of  the  strong- 
est of  arguments  against  that  damnable  perverter  of  mankind, 
I  know  of. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  t-  tt  tt 

1 .  xl.  xlUXLEY. 

Shortly  afterwards,  he  received  a  long  and  rambling 
letter  in  connection  with  this  subject.  Referring  to  the 
passage  in  the  first  article,  "  the  apostolic  injunction  to 
'suffer  fools,  gladly '  should  be  the  rule  of  life  of  a  true 
agnostic,"  the  writer  began  by  begging  him  "  to  *  suffer 
gladly '  one  fool  more,"  and  after  several  pages  wound  up 
with  a  variation  of  the  same  phrase.  It  being  impossible 
to  give  any  valid  answer  to  his  hypothetical  inquiries, 
Huxley  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  take  the  opening 
thus  offered  him,  and  replied : — 

Sir — I  beg  leave  to  acknowledge  your  letter.  I  have  com- 
plied with  the  request  preferred  in  its  opening  paragraph. — 
Faithfully  yours,  ^  ^   ^^^^^^ 

The  following  letter  also  arises  out  of  this  controversy : — 

Its  occasion  (writes  Mr.  Taylor)  was  one  which  I  had 
written  on  seeing  an  article  in  which  he  referred  to  the  Persian 
sect  of  the  Babis.  I  had  read  with  much  interest  the  account 
of  it  in  Count  Gobineau's  book,  and  was  much  struck  with  the 
points  of  likeness  to  the  foundation  of  Christianity,  and  the 


i889       LETTER  TO  MR.  ROBERT  TAYLOR        243 

contrast  between  the  subsequent  history  of  the  two;  I  asked 
myself  how,  given  the  points  of  similarity,  to  account  for  the 
contrast;  is  it  due  to  the  Divine  within  the  one,  or  the  human 
surroundings?  This  question  I  put  to  Professor  Huxley,  with 
many  apologies  for  intruding  on  his  leisure,  and  a  special  re- 
quest that  he  .would  not  suffer  himself  to  be  further  troubled 
by  any  reply. 

To  Mr.  Robert  Taylor 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,/une  3,  1889. 

Sir — In  looking  through  a  mass  of  papers,  before  I  leave 
England  for  some  months  among  the  mountains  in  search  of 
health,  I  have  come  upon  your  letter  of  7th  March.  As  a  rule  I 
find  that  out  of  the  innumerable  letters  addressed  to  me,  the  only 
ones  I  wish  to  answer  are  those  the  writers  of  which  are  con- 
siderate enough  to  ask  that  they  may  receive  no  reply,  and  yours 
is  no  exception. 

The  question  you  put  is  very  much  to  the  purpose :  a  proper 
and  full  answer  would  take  up  many  pages;  but  it  will  suffice 
to  furnish  the  heads  to  be  filled  up  by  your  own  knowledge. 

1.  The  Church  founded  by  Jesus  has  not  made  its  way;  has 
not  permeated  the  world — ^but  did  become  extinct  in  the  country 
of  its  birth — as  Nazarenism  and  Ebionism. 

2.  The  Church  that  did  make  its  way  and  coalesced  with  the 
State  in  the  4th  century  had  no  more  to  do  with  the  Church 
founded  by  Jesus  than  Ultramontanism  has  with  Quakerism. 
It  is  Alexandrian  Judaism  and  Neoplatonistic  mystagogy,  and 
as  much  of  the  old  idolatry  and  demonology  as  could  be  got  in 
under  new  or  old  names. 

3.  Paul  has  said  that  the  Law  was  schoolmaster  to  Christ 
with  more  truth  than  he  knew.  Throughout  the  Empire  the 
synagogues  had  their  cloud  of  Gentile  hangers-on — those  who 
"  feared  God " — and  who  were  fully  prepared  to  accept  a 
Christianity,  which  was  merely  an  expurgated  Judaism  and  the 
belief  in  Jesus  as  the  Messiah. 

4.  The  Christian  "  Sodalitia "  were  not  merely  religious 
bodies,  but  friendly  societies,  burial  societies,  and  guilds.  They 
hung  together  for  all  purposes — the  mob  hated  them  as  it  now 
hates  the  Jews  in  Eastern  Europe,  because  they  were  more 
frugal,  more  industrious,  and  lived  better  lives  than  their  neigh- 
bours, while  they  stuck  together  like  Scotchmen. 

If  these  things  are  so — and  I  appeal  to  your  knowledge  of 


244 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 


history  that  they  are  so — ^what  has  the  success  of  Christianity  to 
do  with  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  story  of  Jesus? — I  am, 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  letter  was  written  in  reply  to  one  from 
Mr.  Clodd  on  the  first  of  the  articles  in  this  controversy. 
This  article,  it  must  be  remembered,  not  only  replied  to 
Dr.  Wace's  attack,  but  at  the  same  time  bantered  Mr. 
Frederic  Harrison's  pretensions  on  behalf  of  Positivism  at 
the  expense  alike  of  Christianity  and  Agnosticism. 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne 
Feb,  19,  1889. 

My  dear  Mr.  Clodd — I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for 
your  cheery  and  appreciative  letter.  If  I  do  not  empty  all  Har- 
rison's vials  of  wrath  I  shall  be  astonished !  But  of  all  the 
sickening  humbugs  in  the  world,  the  sham  pietism  of  the  Posi- 
tivists  is  to  me  the  most  offensive. 

I  have  long  been  wanting  to  say  my  say  about  these  ques- 
tions, but  my  hands  were  too  full.  This  time  last  year  I  was 
so  ill  that  I  thought  to  myself,  with  Hamlet,  "  the  rest  is  silence." 
But  my  wiry  constitution  has  unexpectedly  weathered  the  storm, 
and  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  with  renunciation  of  the 
devil  and  all  his  works  {i.e,  public  speaking,  dining  and  being 
dined,  etc.)  my  faculties  may  be  unimpaired  for  a  good  spell  yet. 
And  whether  my  lease  is  long  or  short,  I  mean  to  devote  them 
to  the  work  I  began  in  the  paper  on  the  Evolution  of  Theology. 

You  will  see  in  the  next  Nineteenth  a  paper  on  the  Evidence 
of  Miracles,  which  I  think  will  be  to  your  mind. 

Hutton  is  beginning  to  drivel.*  There  really  is  no  other 
word  for  it. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  THE  Same 

4  Marlborough  Place,  April  15,  1889. 
My  dear  Mr.  Clodd— The  adventurous  Mr.  C.  wrote  to  me 
some  time  ago.    I  expressed  my  regret  that  I  could  do  nothing 

*  This  refers  to  an  article  in  the  Spectator  on  "  Professor  Huxley 
and  Agnosticism,"  Feb.  9,  1889,  which  suggests,  with  regard  to 
demoniac  possession,  that  the  old  doctrine  of  one  spirit  driving  out 
another  is  as  good  as  any  new  explanation,  and  fortifies  this  conclu- 
sion by  a  reference  to  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism. 


i889  AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  245 

for  the  evolution  of  tent-pegs.     What  wonderful  people  there 
are  in  the  world ! 

Many  thanks  for  calling  my  attention  to  "  Antiqua  Mater." 
I  will  look  it  up.  I  have  such  a  rooted  objection  to  returning 
books,  that  I  never  borrow  one  or  allow  anybody  to  lend  me 
one  if  I  can  help  it. 

I  hear  that  Wace  is  to  have  another  innings,  and  I  am  very 
glad  of  it,  as  it  will  give  me  the  opportunity  of  putting  the  case 
once  more  as  a  connected  argument. 

It  is  Baur's  great  merit  to  have  seen  that  the  key  to  the 
problem  of  Christianity  lies  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  No 
doubt  he  and  his  followers  rather  overdid  the  thing,  but  that  is 
always  the  way  with  those  who  take  up  a  new  idea. 

I  have  had  for  some  time  the  notion  of  dealing  with  the 
"Three  great  myths" — i.  Creation;  2.  Fall;  3.  Deluge;  but  I 
suspect  I  am  getting  to  the  end  of  my  tether  physically,  and 
shall  have  to  start  for  the  Engadine  in  another  month's  time. 

Many  thanks  for  your  congratulations  about  my  daughter's 
marriage.  No  two  people  could  be  better  suited  for  one  another, 
and  there  is  a  charming  little  grand-daughter  of  the  first  mar- 
riage to  be  cared  for. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

One  more  piece  of  writing  dates  from  this  time.  He 
writes  to  his  wife  on  March  2 : — 

A  man  who  is  bringing  out  a  series  of  portraits  of  celebrities, 
with  a  sketch  of  their  career  attached,  has  bothered  me  out  of  my 
life  for  something  to  go  with  my  portrait,  and  to  escape  the 
abominable  bad  taste  of  some  of  the  notices,  I  have  done  that. 
I  shall  show  it  you  before  it  goes  back  to  Engel  in  proof. 

This  sketch  of  his  life  is  the  brief  autobiography  which 
is  printed  at  the  beginning  of  vol  i.  of  the  Collected  Essays. 
He  was  often  pressed,  both  by  friends  and  by  strangers,  to 
give  them  some  more  autobiography ;  but  moved  either  by 
dislike  of  any  approach  to  egotism,  or  by  the  knowledge  that 
if  biography  is  liable  to  give  a  false  impression,  autobiog- 
raphy may  leave  one  still  more  false,  he  constantly  refused 
to  do  so  especially  so  long  as  he  had  capacity  for  useful  work. 
I  found,  however,  among  his  papers,  an  entirely  different 
sketch  of  his  early  life,  half-a-dozen  sheets  describing  the 
time  he  spent  in  the  East  end,  with  an  almost  Carlylese 


246  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

sense  of  the  horrible  disproportions  of  life.  I  cannot  tell 
whether  this  was  a  first  draft  for  the  present  autobiography, 
or  the  beginnings  of  a  larger  undertaking. 

Several  letters  of  miscellaneous  interest  were  written 
before  the  move  to  the  Engadine  took  place.  They  touch 
on  such  points  as  the  excessive  growth  of  scientific  clubs, 
the  use  of  alcohol  for  brain  workers,  advice  to  one  who  was 
not  likely  to  "  suffer  fools  gladly  "  about  applying  for  the 
assistant  secretaryship  of  the  British  Association,  and  the 
question  of  the  effects  of  the  destruction  of  immature  fish, 
besides  personal  matters. 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
March  22,  1889. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  suppose  the  question  of  amalgamation 
with  the  Royal  is  to  be  discussed  at  the  Phil.  Club.  The  sooner 
something  of  the  kind  takes  place  the  better.  There  is  really  no 
raison  d'etre  left  for  the  Phil.  Club,  and  considering  the  hard 
work  of  scientific  men  in  these  days,  clubs  are  like  hypotheses, 
not  to  be  multiplied  beyond  necessity. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  March  26,  1889. 

My  dear  Hooker — The  only  science  to  which  X.  has  con- 
tributed, so  far  as  I  know,  is  the  science  of  self-advertisement; 
and  of  that  he  is  a  master. 

When  you  and  I  were  youngsters,  we  thought  it  the  great 
thing  to  exorcise  the  aristocratic  flunkeyism  which  reigned  in 
the  R.S. — the  danger  now  is  that  of  the  entry  of  seven  devils 
worse  than  the  first,  in  the  shape  of  rich  engineers,  chemical 
traders,  and  "experts"  (who  have  sold  their  souls  for  a  good 
price),  and  who  find  it  helps  them  to  appear  to  the  public  as  if 
they  were  men  of  science. 

If  the  Phil.  Club  had  kept  pure,  it  might  have  acted  as  a 
check  upon  the  intrusion  of  the  mere  trading  element.  But  there 
seems  to  be  no  reason  now  against  Jack  and  Tom  and  Harry 
getting  in,  and  the  thing  has  become  an  imposture. 

So  I  go  with  you  for  extinction,  before  we  begin  to  drag  in 
the  mud. 

I  wish  I  could  take  some  more  active  part  in  what  is  going 
on.  I  am  anxious  about  the  Society  altogether.  But  though  I 
am  wonderfully  well  so  long  as  I  live  like  a  hermit,  and  get  out 


i889  ALCOHOL  AND. BRAIN  WORK  247 

into  the  air  of  the  Downs,  either  London,  or  bother,  and  still 
more  both  combined,  intimate  respectfully  but  firmly,  that  my 
margin  is  of  the  narrowest. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  is  to  his  daughter  in  Paris.  Of  course  it 
was  the  Tuileries,  not  the  Louvre,  which  was  destroyed  in 
1871 :— 

I  think  you  are  quite  right  about  French  women.  They  are 
like  French  dishes,  uncommonly  well  cooked  and  sent  up,  but 
what  the  dickens  they  are  made  of  is  a  mystery.  Not  but  what 
all  womankind  are  mysteries,  but  there  are  mysteries  of  godli- 
ness and  mysteries  of  iniquity. 

Have  you  been  to  see  the  sculptures  in  the  Louvre? — dear 
me,  I  forgot  the  Louvre's  fate.  I  wonder  where  the  sculpture 
is  ?  I  used  to  think  it  the  best  thing  in  the  way  of  art  in  Paris. 
There  was  a  youthful  Bacchus  who  was  the  main  support  of 
my  thesis  as  to  the  greater  beauty  of  the  male  figure ! 

Probably  I  had  better  conclude. 


To  Mr.  E.  T.  Collings  (of  Bolton) 

4  Marlborough  Place,  April  g,  1889. 

Dear  Sir — I  understand  that  you  ask  me  what  I  think  about 
"  alcohol  as  a  stimulant  to  the  brain  in  mental  work  "  ? 

Speaking  for  myself  (and  perhaps  I  may  add  for  persons  of 
my  temperament),  I  can  say,  without  hesitation,  that  I  would 
just  as  soon  take  a  dose  of  arsenic  as  I  would  of  alcohol,  under 
such  circumstances.  Indeed  on  the  whole,  I  should  think  the 
arsenic  safer,  less  likely  to  lead  to  physical  and  moral  degrada- 
tion. It  would  be  better  to  die  outright  than  to  be  alcoholised 
before  death. 

If  a  man  cannot  do  brain  work  without  stimulants  of  any 
kind,  he  had  better  turn  to  hand  work — ^it  is  an  indication  on 
Nature's  part  that  she  did  not  mean  him  to  be  a  head  worker. 

The  circumstances  of  my  life  have  led  me  to  experience  all 
sorts  of  conditions  in  regard  to  alcohol,  from  total  abstinence 
to  nearly  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  and  my  clear  conviction  is 
the  less  the  better,  though  I  by  no  means  feel  called  upon  to 
forego  the  comforting  and  cheering  effect  of  a  little. 

But  for  no  conceivable  consideration  would  I  use  it  to  whip 
up  a  tired  or  sluggish  brain.    Indeed,  for  me  there  is  no  working 


248  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

time  so  good  as  between  breakfast  and  lunch,  when  there  is  not 
a  trace  of  alcohol  in  my  composition. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  6,  1889. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  meant  to  have  turned  up  at  the  x  on 
Thursday,  but  I  was  unwell  and,  moreover,  worried  and  bothered 
about  Collier's  illness  at  Venice,  and  awaiting  telegram  I  sent 
there.  He  has  contrived  to  get  scarlatina,  but  I  hope  he  will 
get  safe  through  it,  as  he  seems  to  be  going  on  well.  We  were 
getting  ready  to  go  out  until  we  were  reassured  on  that  point. 

I  thought  I  would  go  to  the  Academy  dinner  on  Saturday, 
and  that  if  I  did  not  eat  and  drink  and  came  away  early,  I  might 
venture. 

It  was  pleasant  enough  to  have  a  glimpse  of  the  world,  the 
flesh  (on  the  walls,  nude!),  and  the  devil  (there  were  several 
Bishops),  but  oh,  dear!  how  done  I  was  yesterday. 

However,  we  are  off  to  Eastbourne  to-day,  and  I  hope  to 
wash  three  weeks'  London  out  of  me  before  long.  I  think  we 
shall  go  to  Maloja  again  early  in  June.: — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Capital  portrait  in  the  New  Gallery,  when  I  looked  in  for 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  on  Saturday — only  you  never  were  quite 
so  fat  in  the  cheeks,  and  I  don't  believe  you  have  got  such  a 
splendid  fur-coat ! 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
May  22,  1889. 

...  As  to  the  Assistant  Secretaryship  of  the  British  Asso- 
ciation, I  have  turned  it  over  a  great  deal  in  my  mind  since 
your  letter  reached  me,  and  I  really  cannot  convince  myself  that 
you  would  suit  it  or  it  would  suit  you.  I  have  not  heard  who 
are  candidates  or  anything  about  it,  and  I  am  not  going  to  take 
any  part  in  the  election.  But  looking  at  the  thing  solely  from 
the  point  of  view  of  your  interests,  I  should  strongly  advise  you 
against  taking  it,  even  if  it  were  offered. 

My  pet  aphorism  "  suffer  fools  gladly  "  should  be  the  guide 
of  the  Assistant  Secretary,  who,  during  the  fortnight  of  his 
activity,  has  more  little  vanities  and  rivalries  to  smooth  over 
and  conciliate  than  other  people  meet  with  in  a  lifetime.  Now 
you  do  not  "  suffer  fools  gladly  " ;  on  the  contrary,  you  "  gladly 
make  fools  suffer."  I  do  not  say  you  are  wrong — No  iu  quoque 
— but  that  is  where  the  danger  of  the  explosion  lies — not  in 
regard  to  the  larger  business  of  the  Association. 


i889  DOING  BATTLE  WITH   THE  CLERICALS  249 

The  risk  is  great  and  the  £300  a  year  is  not  worth  it.  Foster 
knows  all  about  the  place;  ask  him  if  I  am  not  right. 

Many  thanks  for  the  suggestion  about  Spirula.  But  the 
matter  is  in  a  state  in  which  no  one  can  be  of  any  use  but  my- 
self. At  present  I  am  at  the  end  of  my  tether  and  I  mean  to 
be  off  to  the  Engadine  a  fortnight  hence — most  likely  not  to 
return  before  October. 

Not  even  the  sweet  voice  of will  lure  me  from  my  re- 
tirement. The  Academy  dinner  knocked  me  up  for  three  days, 
though  I  drank  no  wine,  ate  very  little,  and  vanished  after  the 
Prince  of  Wales'  speech.  The  truth  is  I  have  very  little  margin 
of  strength  to  go  upon  even  now,  though  I  am  marvellously 
better  than  I  was. 

I  am  very  glad  that  you  see  the  importance  of  doing  battle 
with  the  clericals.  I  am  astounded  at  the  narrowness  of  view 
of  many  of  our  colleagues  on  this  point.  They  shut  their  eyes 
to  the  obstacles  which  clericalism  raises  in  every  direction 
against  scientific  ways  of  thinking,  which  are  even  more  impor- 
tant than  scientific  discoveries. 

I  desire  that  the  next  generation  may  be  less  fettered  by  the 
gross  and  stupid  superstitions  of  orthodoxy  than  mine  has  been. 
And  I  shall  be  well  satisfied  if  I  can  succeed  to  however  small 
an  extent  in  bringing  about  that  result. — I  am,  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  25,  1889. 

My  dear  Lankester — I  cannot  attend  the  Council  meeting 
on  the  29th.  I  have  a  meeting  of  the  Trustees  of  the  British 
Museum  to-day,  and  to  be  examined  by  a  Committee  on  Monday, 
and  as  the  sudden  heat  half  kills  me  I  shall  be  fit  for  nothing  but 
to  slink  off  to  Eastbourne  again. 

However,  I  do  hope  the  Council  will  be  very  careful  what 
they  say  or  do  about  the  immature  fish  question.  The  thing  has 
been  discussed  over  and  over  again  ad  nauseam^  and  I  doubt  if 
there  is  anything  to  be  added  to  the  evidence  in  the  blue-books. 

The  idee  Hxe  of  the  British  public,  fishermen,  M.P.'s  and 
ignorant  persons  generally  is  that  all  small  fish,  if  you  do  not 
catch  them,  grow  up  into  big  fish.  They  cannot  be  got  to  under- 
stand that  the  wholesale  destruction  of  the  immature  is  the 
necessary  part  of  the  general  order  of  things,  from  codfish  to 
men. 

You  seem  to  have  some  very  interesting  things  to  talk  about 
at  the  Royal  Institution. 


250  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

Do  you  see  any  chance  of  educating  the  white  corpuscles  of 
the  human  race  to  destroy  the  theological  bacteria  which  are 
bred  in  parsons  ? — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
May  19,  1889. 

My  dear  Donnelly  —  The  Vice-President's  letter  has 
brought  home  to  me  one  thing  very  clearly,  and  that  is,  that  I 
had  no  business  to  sign  the  Report.  Of  course  he  has  a  right 
to  hold  me  responsible  for  a  document  to  which  my  name  is 
attached,  and  I  should  look  more  like  a  fool  than  I  ever  wish 
to  do,  if  I  had  to  tell  him  that  I  had  taken  the  thing  entirely 
on  trust.  I  have  always  objected  to  the  sleeping  partnership  in 
the  Examination;  and  unless  it  can  be  made  quite  clear  that  I 
am  nothing  but  a  "  consulting  doctor,"  I  really  must  get  out  of 
it  entirely. 

Of  course  I  cannot  say  whether  the  Report  is  justified  by  the 
facts  or  not,  when  I  do  not  know  anything  about  them.  But 
from  my  experience  of  what  the  state  of  things  used  to  be,  I 
should  say  that  it  is,  in  all  probability,  fair. 

The  faults  mentioned  are  exactly  those  which  always  have 
made  their  appearance,  and  I  expect  always  will  do  so,  and  I 
do  not  see  why  the  attention  of  the  teachers  should  not  as  con- 
stantly be  directed  to  them.  You  talk  of  Eton.  Well,  the  reports 
of  the  Examiners  to  the  governing  body,  year  after  year,  had 
the  same  unpleasing  monotony,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  there 
is  any  educational  body,  from  the  Universities  downwards,  which 
would  come  out  much  better,  if  the  Examiners'  reports  were 
published  and  if  they  did  their  duty. 

I  am  unable  to  see  my  way  (and  I  suppose  you  are)  to  any 
better  method  of  State  encouragement  of  science  teaching  than 
payment  by  results.  The  great  and  manifest  evil  of  that  system, 
however,  is  the  steady  pressure  which  it  exerts  in  the  develop- 
ment of  every  description  of  sham  teaching.  And  the  only  check 
upon  this  kind  of  swindling  the  public  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  the 
hands  of  the  Examiners.  I  told  Mr.  Forster  so,  ages  ago,  when 
he  talked  to  me  about  the  gradual  increase  of  the  expenditure, 
and  I  have  been  confirmed  in  my  opinion  by  all  subsequent  ex- 
perience. What  the  people  who  read  the  reports  may  say,  I 
should  not  care  one  2d.  d — if  I  had  to  administer  the  thing. 

Nine  out  of  ten  of  them  are  incompetent  to  form  any  opinion 
on  an  educational  subject;  and  as  a  mere  matter  of  policy,  I 


i889  LETTER   TO   DONNELLY  251 

should,  in  dealing  with  them,  be  only  too  glad  to  be  able  to  make 
it  clear  that  some  of  the  defects  and  shortcomings  inherent  in 
this  (as  in  all  systems)  had  been  disguised,  and  that  even  the 
most  fractious  of  Examiners  had  said  their  say  without  let  or 
hindrance. 

It  is  the  nature  of  the  system  which  seems  to  me  to  demand 
as  a  corrective  incessant  and  severe  watchfulness  on  the  part 
of  the  Examiners,  and  I  see  no  harm  if  they  a  little  overdo  the 
thing  in  this  direction,  for  every  sham  they  let  through  is  an 
encouragement  to  other  shams  and  pot-teaching  in  general. 

And  if  the  "  great  heart "  of  the  people  and  its  thick  head 
can't  be  got  to  appreciate  honesty,  why  the  sooner  we  shut  up 
the  better.  Ireland  may  be  for  the  Irish,  but  science  teaching 
is  not  for  the  sake  of  science  teachers. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


CHAPTER   XV 

1889 

From  the  middle  of  June  to  the  middle  of  September, 
Huxley  was  in  Switzerland,  first  at  Monte  Generoso,  then-, 
when  the  weather  became  more  settled,  at  the  Maloja.  Here, 
as  his  letters  show,  he  "  rejuvenated  "  to  such  an  extent 
that  Sir  Henry  Thompson,  who  was  at  the  Maloja,  scoffed 
at  the  idea  of  his  ever  having  had  dilated  heart. 

Monte  Generoso,  Tessin,  Suisse,  June  25,  1889. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  am  quite  agreed  with  the  proposed 
arrangements  for  the  x,  and  hope  I  shall  show  better  in  the 
register  of  attendance  next  session. 

When  I  am  striding  about  the  hills  here  I  really  feel  as  if 
my  invalidism  were  a  mere  piece  of  malingering.  When  I  am 
well  I  can  walk  up  hill  and  down  dale  as  well  as  I  did  twenty 
years  ago.  But  my  margin  is  abominably  narrow,  and  I  am  at 
the  mercy  of  "  liver  and  lights."  Sitting  up  for  long  and  din- 
ing are  questions  of  margin. 

I  do  not  know  if  you  have  been  here.  We  are  close  on  4000 
feet  up  and  look  straight  over  the  great  plain  of  N.  Italy  on  the 
one  side  and  to  a  great  hemicycle  of  mountains,  Monte  Rosa 
among  them,  on  the  other.  I  do  not  know  anything  more  beauti- 
ful in  its  way.  But  the  whole  time  we  have  been  here  the 
weather  has  been  extraordinary.  On  the  average,  about  two 
thunderstorms  per  diem,  I  am  sure  that  a  good  meteorologist 
might  study  the  place  with  advantage.  The  barometer  has  not 
varied  three-twentieths  of  an  inch  the  whole  time,  notwith- 
standing the  storms. 

I  hear  the  weather  has  been  bad  all  over  Switzerland,  but  it 
is  not  high  and  dry  enough  for  me  here,  and  we  shall  be  off  to 
the  Maloja  on  Saturday  next,  and  shall  stay  there  till  we  return 
somewhere  in  September.  Collier  and  Ethel  will  join  us  there 
in  August.  He  is  none  the  worse  for  his  scarlatina. 
252 


i889  WRITES   FROM   THE   MALOJA  253 

"  Aged  Botanist !  "  marry  come  up !  *  I  should  like  to  know 
of  a  younger  spark.  The  first  time  I  heard  myself  called  "  the 
old  gentleman  "  was  years  ago  when  we  were  in  South  Devon. 
A  half-drunken  Devonian  had  made  himself  very  offensive,  in 
the  compartment  in  which  my  wife  and  I  were  travelling,  and 
got  some  "  simple  Saxon  "  from  me,  accompanied,  I  doubt  not, 
by  an  awful  scowl.    "  Ain't  the  old  gentleman  in  a  rage,"  says  he. 

I  am  very  glad  to  hear  of  Reggie's  success,  and  my  wife 
joins  with  me  in  congratulations.  It  is  a  comfort  to  see  one's 
shoots  planted  out  and  taking  root,  though  the  idea  that  one's 
cares  and  anxieties  about  them  are  diminished,  we  find  to  be 
an  illusion. 

I  inclose  cheque  for  my  contributions  due  and  to  come.f  If 
I  go  to  Davy's  Locker  before  October,  the  latter  may  go  for  con- 
» solation  champagne ! — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  writes  from  the  Maloja  on  August  16  to  Sir  M. 
Foster,  who  had  been  sitting  on  the  Vaccination  Com- 
mission : — 

I  wonder  how  you  are  prospering,  whether  you  have  vaccina- 
tion or  anti-vaccination  on  the  brain;  or  whether  the  gods  have 
prospered  you  so  far  as  to  send  you  on  a  holiday.  We  have  been 
here  since  the  beginning  of  July.  Monte  Generoso  proved  lovely 
— but  electrical.  We  had  on  the  average  three  thunderstorms 
every  two  days.  Bellagio  was  as  hot  as  the  tropics,  and  we 
stayed  only  a  day,  and  came  on  here — where,  whatever  else  may 
happen,  it  is  never  too  hot.  The  weather  has  been  good  and  I 
have  profited  immensely,  and  at  present  I  do  not  know  whether 
I  have  a  heart  or  not.  But  I  have  to  look  very  sharp  after  my 
liver.  H.  Thompson,  who  has  been  here  with  his  son  Herbert 
(clever  fellow,  by  the  way),  treats  the  notion  that  I  ever  had  a 
dilated  heart  with  scorn !  Oh  these  doctors !  they  are  worse 
than  theologians. 

And  again  on  August  31 : — 

I  walked  eighteen  miles  three  or  four  days  ago,  and  I  think 
nothing  of  one  or  two  thousand  feet  up !  I  hope  this  state  of 
things  will  last  at  the  sea-level. 

*  Sir  J.  Hooker  jestingly  congratulated  him  on  taking  up  botany 
in  his  old  age.  t  For  the  x  Club. 


254  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

I  am  always  glad  to  hear  of  and  from  you,  but  I  have  not 
been  idle  long  enough  to  forget  what  being  busy  means,  so  don't 
let  your  conscience  worry  you  about  answering  my  letters. 

...  X.  is,  I  am  afraid,  more  or  less  of  an  ass.  The  opposi- 
tion he  and  his  friends  have  been  making  to  the  Technical  Bill 
is  quite  unintelligible  to  me.  Y.  may  be,  and  I  rather  think  is, 
a  knave,  but  he  is  no  fool ;  and  if  I  mistake  not  he  is  minded  to 
kick  the  ultra-radical  stool  down  now  that  he  has  mounted  by 
it.  Make  friends  of  that  Mammon  of  unrighteousness  and 
swamp  the  sentimentalists. 

...  I  despise  your  insinuations.  All  my  friends  here  have 
been  theological — Bishop,  Chief  Rabbi,  and  Catholic  Professor. 
None  of  your  Maybrick  discussors. 

On  June  25  he  wrote  to  Professor  Ray  Lankester,  en- 
closing a  letter  to  be  read  at  a  meeting  called  by  the  Lord 
Mayor,  on  July  i,  to  hear  statements  from  men  of  science 
with  regard  to  the  recent  increase  of  rabies  in  this  country, 
and  the  efficiency  of  the  treatment  discovered  by  M.  Pasteur 
for  the  prevention  of  hydrophobia. 

I  quote  the  latter  from  the  report  in  Nature  for  July  4 : — 

Monte  Generoso,  Tessin,  Suisse, /««^  25,  1889. 

My  dear  Lankester — I  inclose  herewith  a  letter  for  the 
Lord  Mayor  and  a  cheque  for  £5  as  my  subscription.  I  wish  I 
could  make  the  letter  shorter,  but  it  is  pretty  much  "  pemmican  " 
already.  However,  it  does  not  much  matter  being  read  if  it  only 
gets  into  print. 

It  is  uncommonly  good  of  the  Lord  Mayor  to  stand  up  for 
Science,  in  the  teeth  of  the  row  the  anti-vivisection  pack — dogs 
and  doggesses — are  making. 

May  his  shadow  never  be  less. 

We  shall  be  off  to  the  Maloja  at  the  end  of  this  week,  if  the 
weather  mends.  Thunderstorms  here  every  day,  and  sometimes 
two  or  three  a  day  for  the  last  ten  days. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

Monte  Generoso,  Switzerland,  Jzme  25,  1889. 
My  Lord  Mayor — I  greatly  regret  my  inability  to  be  present 
at  the  meeting  which  is  to  be  held,  under  your  Lordship's 
auspices,  in  reference  to  M.  Pasteur  and  his  Institute.  The  un- 
remitting labours  of  that  eminent  Frenchman  during  the  last 
half-century  have  yielded  rich  harvests  of  new  truths,  and  are 


i889  PASTEUR'S  WORK  255 

models  of  exact  and  refined  research.  As  such  they  deserve,  and 
have  received,  all  the  honours  which  those  who  are  the  best 
judges  of  their  purely  scientific  merits  are  able  to  bestow.  But 
it  so  happens  that  these  subtle  and  patient  searchings  out  of  the 
ways  of  the  infinitely  little— of  the  swarming  life  where  the 
creature  that  measures  one-thousandth  part  of  an  inch  is  a  giant 
— ^have  also  yielded  results  of  supreme  practical  importance. 
The  path  of  M.  Pasteur's  investigations  is  strewed  with  g^fts  of 
vast  monetary  value  to  the  silk  trades,  the  brewer,  and  the  wine 
merchant.  And  this  being  so,  it  might  well  be  a  proper  and 
graceful  act  on  the  part  of  the  representatives  of  trade  and  com- 
merce in  its  greatest  centre  to  make  some  public  recognition 
of  M.  Pasteur's  services,  even  if  there  were  nothing  further 
to  be  said  about  them.  But  there  is  much  more  to  be  said. 
M.  Pasteur's  direct  and  indirect  contributions  to  our  knowl- 
edge of  the  causes  of  diseased  states,  and  of  the  means  of  pre- 
venting their  recurrence,  are  not  measurable  by  money  values, 
but  by  those  of  healthy  life  and  diminished  suffering  to  men. 
Medicine,  surgery,  and  hygiene  have  all  been  powerfully  affected 
by  M.  Pasteur's  work,  which  has  culminated  in  his  method  of 
treating  hydrophobia.  I  cannot  conceive  that  any  competently 
instructed  person  can  consider  M.  Pasteur's  labours  in  this  direc- 
tion without  arriving  at  the  conclusion  that,  if  any  man  has 
earned  the  praise  and  honour  of  his  fellows,  he  has.  I  find  it 
no  less  difficult  to  imagine  that  our  wealthy  country  should  be 
other  than  ashamed  to  continue  to  allow  its  citizens  to  profit  by 
the  treatment  freely  given  at  the  Institute  without  contributing 
to  its  support.  Opposition  to  the  proposals  which  your  Lord- 
ship sanctions  would  be  equally  inconceivable  if  it  arose  out  of 
nothing  but  the  facts  of  the  case  thus  presented.  But  the  opposi- 
tion which,  as  I  see  from  the  English  papers,  is  threatened  has 
really  for  the  most  part  nothing  to  do  either  with  M.  Pasteur's 
merits  or  with  the  efficacy  of  his  method  of  treating  hydro- 
phobia. It  proceeds  partly  from  the  fanatics  of  laissez  faire, 
who  think  it  better  to  rot  and  die  than  to  be  kept  whole  and 
lively  by  State  interference,  partly  from  the  blind  opponents 
of  properly  conducted  physiological  experimentation,  who  prefer 
that  men  should  suffer  than  rabbits  or  dogs,  and  partly  from 
those  who  for  other  but  not  less  powerful  motives  hate  every- 
thing which  contributes  to  prove  the  value  of  strictly  scientific 
methods  of  enquiry  in  all  those  questions  which  affect  the  wel- 
fare of  society.  I  sincerely  trust  that  the  good  sense  of  the 
meeting  over  which  your  Lordship  will  preside  will  preserve  it 


256  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

from  being  influenced  by  those  unworthy  antagonisms,  and  that 
the  just  and  benevolent  enterprise  you  have  undertaken  may 
have  a  happy  issue.  —  I  am,  my  Lord  Mayor,  your  obedient 
servant,  Thomas  H.  Huxley. 

Hotel  Kursaal,  Maloja,  Haute  Engadine, 

July  8,  1889. 

My  dear  Lankester — Many  thanks  for  your  letter.  I  was 
rather  anxious  as  to  the  result  of  the  meeting,  knowing  the 
malice  and  subtlety  of  the  Philistines,  but  as  it  turned  out  they 
were  effectually  snubbed.  I  was  glad  to  see  your  allusion  to 
Coleridge's  impertinences.  It  will  teach  him  to  think  twice  be- 
fore he  abuses  his  position  again.  I  do  not  understand  Stead's 
position  in  the  Pall  Mall.    He  snarls  but  does  not  bite. 

I  am  glad  that  the  audience  (I  judge  from  the  Times  report) 
seemed  to  make  the  points  of  my  letter,  and  live  in  hope  that 
when  I  see  last  week's  Spectator  I  shall  find  Hutton  frantic. 

This  morning  a  letter  marked  "  Immediate "  reached  me 
from  Bourne,  date  July  3.  I  am  afraid  he  does  not  read  the 
papers  or  he  would  have  known  it  was  of  no  use  to  appeal  to 
me  in  an  emergency.  I  am  writing  to  him. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

On  his  return  to  England,  however,  a  fortnight  of 
London,  interrupted  though  it  was  by  a  brief  visit  to  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Humphry  Ward  at  the  delightful  old  house  of 
Great  Hampden,  was  as  much  as  he  could  stand.  "  I  begin 
to  discover,'*  he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster,  "  I  have  a  heart 
again,  a  circumstance  of  which  I  had  no  reminder  at  the 
Maloja."  So  he  retreated  at  once  to  Eastbourne,  which 
had  done  him  so  much  good  before. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Se/>f.  24,  1889. 

My  dear  Hooker — How's  a'  wi'  ye?  We  came  back  from 
the  Engadine  early  in  the  month,  and  are  off  to  Eastbourne  to- 
morrow. I  rejuvenate  in  Switzerland  and  senescate  (if  there  is 
no  such  verb,  there  ought  to  be)  in  London,  and  the  sooner  I 
am  out  of  it  the  better. 

When  are  you  going  to  have  an  jr  ?  I  cannot  make  out  what 
has  become  of  Spencer,  except  that  he  is  somewhere  in  Scot- 
land.— Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

We  shall  be  at  our  old  quarters — 3  Jevington  Gardens,  East- 
bourne— from  to-morrow  onwards. 


1889  LETTERS  257 

The  next  letter  shows  once  more  the  value  he  set  upon 
botanical  evidence  in  the  question  of  the  influence  of  con- 
ditions in  the  process  of  evolution. 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
Sept,  29,  1889. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  hope  to  be  with  you  at  the  Athenaeum 
on  Thursday.  It  does  one  good  to  hear  of  your  being  in  such 
good  working  order.  My  knowledge  of  orchids  is  infinitesimally 
small,  but  there  were  some  eight  or  nine  species  plentiful  in  the 
Engadine,  and  I  learned  enough  to  appreciate  the  difficulties. 
Why  do  not  some  of  these  people  who  talk  about  the  direct 
influence  of  conditions  try  to  explain  the  structure  of  orchids  on 
that  tack  ?  Orchids  at  any  rate  can't  try  to  improve  themselves 
in  taking  shots  at  insects'  heads  with  pollen  bags — as  Lamarck's 
Giraffes  tried  to  stretch  their  necks ! 

Balfour's  ballon  d'essai*  (I  do  not  believe  it  could  have 
been  anything  more)  is  the  only  big  blunder  he  has  made,  and 
it  passes  my  comprehension  why  he  should  have  made  it.  But 
he  seems  to  have  dropped  it  again  like  the  proverbial  hot  potato. 
If  he  had  not,  he  would  have  hopelessly  destroyed  the  Unionist 
party. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

At  the  end  of  the  year  he  thanks  Lord  Tennyson  for 
his  gift  of  "  Demeter." 

Z>ec,  26,  1889. 

My  dear  Tennyson — Accept  my  best  thanks  for  your  very 
kind  present  of  "  Demeter."  I  have  not  had  a  Christmas  Box 
I  valued  so  much  for  many  a  long  year.  I  envy  your  vigour,  and 
am  ashamed  of  myself  beside  you  for  being  turned  out  to  grass. 
I  kick  up  my  heels  now  and  then,  and  have  a  gallop  round  the 
paddt)ck,  but  it  does  not  come  to  much. 

With  best  wishes  to  you,  and,  if  Lady  Tennyson  has  not 
forgotten  me  altogether,  to  her  also — Believe  me,  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  discussion  in  the  Times  this  autumn,  in  which  he 
joined,  was  of  unexpected  moment  to  him,  inasmuch  as  it 
was  the  starting-point  for  no  fewer  than  four  essays  in 
political  philosophy,  which  appeared  the  following  year  in 
the  Nineteenth  Century. 

*  i.e.  touching  a  proposed  Roman  Catholic  University  for  Ireland. 
53 


258  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

The  correspondence  referred  to  arose  out  of  the  heckling 
of  Mr.  John  Morley  by  one  of  his  constituents  at  Newcastle 
in  November  1889.  The  heckler  questioned  him  concern- 
ing private  property  in  land,  quoting  some  early  dicta  from 
the  "  Social  Statics  "  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  which  denied 
the  justice  of  such  ownership.  Comments  and  explanations 
ensued  in  the  Times;  Mr.  Spencer  declared  that  he  had 
since  partly  altered  that  view,  showing  that  contract  has  in 
part  superseded  force  as  the  ground  of  ownership ;  and  that 
in  any  case  it  referred  to  the  idea  of  absolute  ethics,  and 
not  to  relative  or  practical  politics. 

Huxley  entered  first  into  the  correspondence  to  point 
out  present  and  perilous  applications  of  the  absolute  in 
contemporary  politics.  Touching  on  a  State  guarantee  of 
the  title  to  land,  he  asks  if  there  is  any  moral  right  for 
confiscation: — In  Ireland,  he  says,  confiscation  is  justified 
by  the  appeal  to  wrongs  inflicted  a  century  ago ;  in  England 
the  theorems  of  "  absolute  political  ethics  "  are  in  danger 
of  being  employed  to  make  this  generation  of  land-owners 
responsible  for  the  misdeeds  of  William  the  Conqueror  and 
his  followers.     (Times,  November  12.) 

His  remaining  share  in  the  discussion  consisted  of  a 
brief  passage  of  arms  with  Mr.  Spencer  on  the  main  ques- 
tion,* and  a  reply  to  another  correspondent,  f  which  brings 
forward  an  argument  enlarged  upon  in  one  of  the  essays, 
viz.  that  if  the  land  belongs  to  all  men  equally,  why  should 
one  nation  claim  one  portion  rather  than  another?  For 
several  ownership  is  just  as  much  an  infringement  of  the 
world's  ownership  as  is  personal  ownership.  Moreover, 
history  shows  that  land  was  originally  held  in  several  owner- 
ship, and  that  not  of  the  nation,  but  of  the  village  com- 
munity. 

These  signs  of  renewed  vigour  induced  Mr.  Knowles 
to  write  him  a  "  begging  letter,"  proposing  an  article  for 
the  Nineteenth  Century  either  in  commendation  of  Bishop 
Magee's  recent  utterances — it  would  be  fine  for  eulogy  to 
come  from  such  a  quarter  after  the  recent  encounter — or 

*  November  18.  f  November  21. 


1889  "THE  ABSOLUTE   IN   PRACTICAL  LIFE"  259 

on  the  general  subject  of  which  his  Times  letters  dealt  with 

a  part. 

Huxley's  choice  was  for  the  latter.  Writing  on  Novem- 
ber 21,  he  says: — 

Now  as  to  the  article.  I  have  only  hesitated  because  I  want 
to  get  out  a  new  volume  of  essays,  and  I  am  writing  an  introduc- 
tion which  gives  me  an  immensity  of  trouble.  I  had  made  up  my 
mind  to  get  it  done  by  Christmas,  and  if  I  write  for  you  it  won't 
be.  However,  if  you  don't  mind  leaving  it  open  till  the  end  of 
this  month,  I  will  see  what  can  be  done  in  the  way  of  a  screed 
about,  say,  "  The  Absolute  in  Practical  Life."  The  Bishop 
would  come  in  excellently;  he  deserves  all  praises,  and  my  only 
hesitation  about  singing  them  is  that  the  conjunction  between 
the  "  Infidel "  and  the  Churchman  is  just  what  the  blatant  plat- 
form Dissenters  who  had  been  at  him  would  like.  I  don't  want 
to  serve  the  Bishop,  for  whom  I  have  a  great  liking  and  respect, 
as  the  bear  served  his  sleeping  master,  when  he  smashed  his 
nose  in  driving  an  unfortunate  fly  away ! 

By  the  way,  has  the  Bishop  published  his  speech  or  sermon  ? 
I  have  only  seen  a  newspaper  report. 

Soon  after  this,  he  proposed  to  come  to  town  and  talk 
over  the  article  with  Mr.  Knowles.  The  latter  sent  him 
a  telegram — reply  paid — asking  him  to  fix  a  day.  The 
answer  named  a  day  of  the  week  and  a  day  of  the  month 
which  did  not  agree;  whereupon  Mr.  Knowles  wrote  by 
the  safer  medium  of  the  post  for  an  explanation,  thinking 
that  the  post-office  clerks  must  have  bungled  the  message, 
and  received  the  following  reply : — 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
JVov.  26,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — May  jackasses  sit  upon  the  graves  of 
all  telegraph  clerks  !  But  the  boys  are  worse,  and  I  shall  have  to 
write  to  the  P.-M.-General  about  the  little  wretch  who  brought 
your  telegram  the  other  day,  when  my  mind  was  deeply  absorbed 
in  the  concoction  of  an  article  for  the  Review  of  our  age. 

The  creature  read  my  answer,  for  he  made  me  pay  three 
half-pence  extra  (I  believe  he  spent  it  on  toffy),  and  yet  was 
so  stupid  as  not  to  see  that  meaning  to  fix  next  Monday  or  Tues- 
day, I  opened  my  diary  to  give  the  dates  in  order  that  there 
should  be  no  mistake,  and  found  Monday  28  and  Tuesday  29. 


26o  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

And  I  suppose  the  little  beast  would  say  he  did  not  know  I 
opened  it  in  October  instead  of  November ! 

I  hate  such  mean  ways.  Hang  all  telegraph  boys ! — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Monday,  December  2,  if  you  have  nothing  against  it,  and 
lunch  if  Mrs.  Knowles  will  give  me  some. 

The  article  was  finished  by  the  middle  of  December 
and  duly  sent  to  the  editor,  under  the  title  of  "  Rousseau 
and  Rousseauism."  But  fearing  that  this  title  would 
scarcely  attract  attention  among  the  working  men  for  whom 
it  was  specially  designed,  Mr.  Knowles  suggested  instead 
the  "  Natural  Inequality  of  Men,"  under  which  name  it 
actually  appeared  in  January.  So,  too,  in  the  case  of  a 
companion  article  in  March,  the  editorial  pen  was  re- 
sponsible for  the  change  from  the  arid  possibilities  of 
"  Capital  and  Labour "  to  the  more  attractive  title  of 
"  Capital  the  Mother  of  Labour." 

With  regard  to  this  article  and  a  further  project  of 
extending  his  discussion  of  the  subject,  he  writes: — 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne, 
Dec,  14,  1889. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  am  very  glad  you  think  the  article 
will  go.  It  is  longer  than  I  intended,  but  I  cannot  accuse  myself 
of  having  wasted  words,  and  I  have  left  out  several  things  that 
might  have  been  said,  but  which  can  come  in  by  and  by. 

As  to  title,  do  as  you  like,  but  that  you  propose  does  not 
seem  to  me  quite  to  hit  the  mark.  "  Political  Humbug :  Liberty 
and  Equality,"  struck  me  as  adequate,  but  my  wife  declares  it 
is  improper.  "  Political  Fictions  "  might  be  supposed  to  refer 
to  Dizzie's  novels !  How  about  "  The  Politics  of  the  Imagina- 
tion :  Liberty  and  Inequality  "  ? 

I  should  like  to  have  some  general  title  that  would  do  for  the 
"  letters  "  which  I  see  I  shall  have  to  write.  I  think  I  will  make 
six  of  them  after  the  fashion  of  my  "  Working  Men's  Lectures," 
as  thus:  (i)  Liberty  and  Equality;  (2)  Rights  of  Man;  (3) 
Property;  (4)  Malthus;  (5)  Government,  the  province  of  the 
State;  (6)  Law-making  and  Law-breaking. 

I  understand  you  will  let  me  republish  them,  as  soon  as  the 
last  is  out,  in  a  cheap  form.  I  am  not  sure  I  will  not  put  them 
in  the  form  of  "  Lectures  "  rather  than  "  Letters." 


i889         ESSAYS   IN   THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY        26 1 

Did  you  ever  read  Henry  George*s  book  "  Progress  and 
Poverty  "  ?  It  is  more  damneder  nonsense  than  poor  Rousseau's 
blether.  And  to  think  of  the  popularity  of  the  book!  But  I 
ought  to  be  grateful,  as  I  can  cut  and  come  again  at  this  wonder- 
ful dish. 

The  mischief  of  it  is  I  do  not  see  how  I  am  to,  finish  the 
introduction  to  my  Essays,  unless  I  put  off  sending  you  a  second 
dose  until  March. 

I  will  send  back  the  revise  as  quickly  as  possible. — Ever 
yours  very  truly,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

You  do  not  tell  me  that  there  is  anything  to  which  Spencer 
can  object,  so  I  suppose  there  is  nothing. 

And  in  an  undated  letter  to  Sir  J.  Hooker,  he  says : — 

I  am  glad  you  think  well  of  the  "  Human  Inequality  "  paper. 
My  wife  has  persuaded  me  to  follow  it  up  with  a  view  to  mak- 
ing a  sort  of  "  Primer  of  Politics  "  for  the  masses — by  and  by. 
"  There's  no  telling  what  you  may  come  to,  my  boy,"  said  the 
Bishop  who  reproved  his  son  for  staring  at  John  Kemble,  and  I 
may  be  a  pamphleteer  yet !  But  really  it  is  time  that  somebody 
should  treat  the  people  to  common  sense. 

However,  immediately  after  the  appearance  of  this  first 
article  on  Human  Inequality,  he  changed  his  mind  about 
the  Letters  to  Working  Men,  and  resolved  to  continue  what 
he  had  to  say  in  the  form  of  essays  in  the  Nineteenth 
Century. 

He  then  judged  it  not  unprofitable  to  call  public  at- 
tention to  the  fallacies  which  first  found  their  way  into 
practical  politics  through  the  disciples  of  Rousseau;  one 
of  those  speculators  of  whom  he  remarks  (i.  312)  that 
"  busied  with  deduction  from  their  ideal '  ought  to  be,'  they 
overlooked  the  '  what  has  been,'  the  *  what  is,'  and  the 
*  what  can  be.' "  "  Many  a  long  year  ago,"  he  says  in 
Natural  Rights  and  Political  Rights  (i.  336),  "  I  fondly  im- 
agined that  Hume  and  Kant  and  Hamilton  having  slain 
the  *  Absolute,'  the  thing  must,  in  decency,  decease.  Yet, 
at  the  present  time,  the  same  hypostatised  negation,  some- 
times thinly  disguised  under  a  new  name,  goes  about  in 
broad  daylight,  in  company  with  the  dogmas  of  absolute 
ethics,  political  and  other,  and  seems  to  be  as  lively  as 


262  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

ever."  This  was  to  his  mind  one  of  those  instances  of  wrong 
thinking  which  lead  to  wrong  acting — the  postulating  a 
general  principle  based  upon  insufficient  data,  and  the  de- 
duction from  i^of  many  and  far-reaching  practical  conse- 
quences. This  he  had  always  strongly  opposed.  His  essay 
of  1871,  "Administrative  Nihilism,"  was  directed  against 
a  priori  individualism;  and  now  he  proceeded  to  restate 
the  arguments  against  a  priori  political  reasoning  in  gen- 
eral, which  seemed  to  have  been  forgotten  or  overlooked, 
especially  by  the  advocates  of  compulsory  socialism.  And 
here  it  is  possible  to  show  in  some  detail  the  care  he  took, 
as  was  his  way,  to  refresh  his  knowledge  and  bring  it  up 
to  date,  before  writing  on  any  special  point.  It  is  interest- 
ing to  see  how  thoroughly  he  went  to  work,  even  in  a 
subject  with  which  he  was  already  fairly  acquainted.  As 
in  the  controversy  of  1889  I  find  a  list  of  near  a  score  of 
books  consulted,  so  here  one  note-book  contains  an  analysis 
of  the  origin  and  early  course  of  the  French  Revolution, 
especially  in  relation  to  the  speculations  of  the  theorists; 
the  declaration  of  the  rights  of  man  in  1789  is  followed  by 
parallels  from  Mably's  Droits  et  Devoirs  du  Citoyen  and  De 
la  Legislation,  and  by  a  full  transcript  of  the  1793  Declara- 
tion, with  notes  on  Robespierre's  speech  at  the  Convention 
a  fortnight  later.  There  are  copious  notes  from  Dunoyer, 
who  is  quoted  in  the  article,  while  the  references  to  Roc- 
quain's  Esprit  Revolutionniare  led  to  an  English  translation 
of  the  work  being  undertaken,  to  which  he  contributed 
a  short  preface  in  1891. 

It  was  the  same  with  other  studies.  He  loved  to  vis- 
ualise his  object  clearly.  The  framework  of  what  he  wished 
to  say  would  always  be  drawn  out  first.  In  any  historical 
matter  he  always  worked  with  a  map.  In  natural  history 
he  well  knew  the  importance  of  studying  distribution  and 
its  bearing  upon  other  problems ;  in  civil  history  he  would 
draw  maps  to  illustrate  either  the  conditions  of  a  period  or 
the  spread  of  a  civilising  nation.  For  instance,  among 
sketches  of  the  sort  which  remain,  I  have  one  of  the  Hel- 
lenic world,  marked  oflf  in  25-mile  circles  from  Delos  as 
centre ;  and  a  similar  one  for  the  Phoenician  world,  starting 


i889  ESSAYS  ON   POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY  263 

from  Tyre.  Sketch  maps  of  Palestine  and  Mesopotamia, 
with  notes  from  the  best  authorities  on  the  geography  of 
the  two  countries,  belong  in  all  probability  to  the  articles 
on  "  The  Flood  "  and  "  Hasisadra's  Adventii^e."  To  realise 
clearly  the  size,  position,  and  relation  of  the  parts  to  the 
whole,  was  the  mechanical  instinct  of  the  engineer  which 
was  so  strong  in  him. 

The  four  articles  which  followed  in  quick  succession  on 
"  The  Natural  Inequality  of  Man,"  "  Natural  and  Political 
Rights,"  "  Capital  the  Mother  of  Labour,"  and  "  Govern- 
ment," appeared  in  the  January,  February,  March,  and 
May  numbers  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,  and,  as  was  said 
above,  are  directed  against  a  priori  reasoning  in  social 
philosophy.  The  first,  which  appeared  simultaneously  with 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  article  on  "Justice"  in  the  Nine- 
teenth Century,  assails,  on  the  ground  of  fact  and  history, 
the  dictum  that  men  are  bom  free  and  equal,  and  have 
a  natural  right  to  freedom  and  equality,  so  that  property 
and  political  rights  are  a  matter  of  contract.  History  de- 
nies that  they  thus  originated ;  and,  in  fact,  "  proclaim 
human  equality  as  loudly  as  you  like.  Witless  will  serve 
his  brother."  Yet,  in  justice  to  Rousseau  and  the  influ- 
ence he  wielded,  he  adds: — 

It  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  what  we  call  rational  grounds 
for  our  beliefs  are  often  extremely  irrational  attempts  to  justify 
our  instincts. 

Thus  if,  in  their  plain  and  obvious  sense,  the  doctrines 
which  Rousseau  advanced  are  so  easily  upset,  it  is  probable  that 
he  had  in  his  mind  something  which  is  different  from  that 
sense. 

When  they  sought  speculative  grounds  to  justify  the 
empirical  truth 

that  it  is  desirable,  in  the  interests  of  society,  that  all  men  should 
be  as  free  as  possible,  consistently  with  those  interests,  and  that 
they  should  all  be  equally  bound  by  the  ethical  and  legal  obli- 
gations which  are  essential  to  social  existence,  "  the  philoso- 
phers," as  is  the  fashion  of  speculators,  scorned  to  remain  on 
the  safe  if  humble  ground  of  experience,  and  preferred  to 
prophesy  from  the  sublime  cloudland  of  the  a  priori. 


264  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

The  second  of  these  articles  is  an  examination  of  Henry 
George's  doctrines  as  set  forth  in  Progress  and  Poverty. 
His  relation  to  the  physiocrats  is  shown  in  a  preliminary 
analysis  of  the  term  "  natural  rights  which  have  no  wrongs," 
and  are  antecedent  to  morality,  from  which  analysis  are 
drawn  the  results  of  confounding  natural  with  moral  rights. 

Here  again  is  the  note  of  justice  to  an  argument  in  an 
unsound  shape  (p.  369) :  "  There  is  no  greater  mistake 
than  the  hasty  conclusion  that  opinions  are  worthless  be- 
cause they  are  badly  argued."  And  a  trifling  abatement 
of  the  universal  and  exclusive  form  of  Henry  George's 
principle  may  make  it  true,  while  even  unamended  it  may 
lead  to  opposite  conclusions — to  the  justification  of  several 
ownership  in  land  as  well  as  in  any  other  form  of  property. 

The  third  essay  of  the  series,  "  Capital  the  Mother  of 
Labour  "  (Coll  Ess.  ix.  147),  was  an  application  of  biologi- 
cal methods  to  social  problems,  designed  to  show  that  the 
extreme  claims  of  labour  as  against  capital  are  ill-founded. 

In  the  last  article,  "  Government,"  he  traces  the  two 
extreme  developments  of  absolute  ethics,  as  shown  in  an- 
archy and  regimentation,  or  unrestrained  individualism  and 
compulsory  socialism.  The  key  to  the  position,  of  course, 
lies  in  the  examination  of  the  premises  upon  which  these 
superstructures  are  raised,  and  history  shows  that — 

So  far  from  the  preservation  of  liberty  and  property  and  the 
securing  of  equal  rights  being  the  chief  and  most  conspicuous 
object  aimed  at  by  the  archaic  politics  of  which  we  know  any- 
thing, it  would  be  a  good  deal  nearer  the  truth  to  say  that  they 
were  federated  absolute  monarchies,  the  chief  purpose  of  which 
was  the  maintenance  of  an  established  church  for  the  worship 
of  the  family  ancestors. 

These  articles  stirred  up  critics  of  every  sort  and  kind ; 
socialists  who  denounced  him  as  an  individualist,  land 
nationahsers  who  had  not  realised  the  difference  between 
communal  and  national  ownership,  or  men  who  denounced 
him  as  an  arm-chair  cynic,  careless  of  the  poor  and  ignorant 
of  the  meaning  of  labour.  Mr.  Spencer  considered  the  chief 
attack  to  be  directed  against  his  position;  the  regimental 
sociaHsts  as  against  theirs,  and 


1889  ESSAYS  ON   POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY  265 

as  an  attempt  to  justify  those  who,  content  with  the  present,  are 
opposed  to  all  endeavours  to  bring  about  any  fundamental 
change  in  our  social  arrangements  {ib,  p.  423). 

So  far  from  this,  he  continues: — 

Those  who  have  had  the  patience  to  follow  me  to  the  end 
will,  I  trust,  have  become  aware  that  my  aim  has  been  altogether 
different.  Even  the  best  of  modern  civilisations  appears  to  me 
to  exhibit  a  condition  of  mankind  which  neither  embodies  any 
worthy  ideal  nor  even  possesses  the  merit  of  stability.  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  express  my  opinion  that,  if  there  is  no  hope  of  a 
large  improvement  of  the  condition  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
human  family;  if  it  is  true  that  the  increase  of  knowledge,  the 
winning  of  a  greater  dominion  over  Nature  which  is  its  con- 
sequence, and  the  wealth  which  follows  upon  that  dominion, 
are  to  make  no  difference  in  the  extent  and  the  intensity  of 
Want,  with  its  concomitant  physical  and  moral  degradation, 
among  the  masses  of  the  people,  I  should  hail  the  advent  of 
some  kindly  comet,  which  would  sweep  the  whole  affair  away, 
as  a  desirable  consummation.  What  profits  it  to  the  human 
Prometheus  that  he  has  stolen  the  fire  of  heaven  to  be  his 
servant,  and  that  the  spirits  of  the  earth  and  of  the  air  obey  him, 
if  the  vulture  of  pauperism  is  eternally  to  tear  his  very  vitals  and 
keep  him  on  the  brink  of  destruction  ? 

Assuredly,  if  I  believed  that  any  of  the  schemes  hitherto 
proposed  for  bringing  about  social  amelioration  were  likely  to 
attain  their  end,  I  should  think  what  remains  to  me  of  life  well 
spent  in  furthering  it.  But  my  interest  in  these  questions  did 
not  begin  the  day  before  yesterday;  and,  whether  right  or 
wrong,  it  is  no  hasty  conclusion  of  mine  that  we  have  small 
chance  of  doing  rightly  in  this  matter  (or  indeed  in  any  other) 
unless  we  think  rightly.  Further,  that  we  shall  never  think 
rightly  in  politics  until  we  have  cleared  our  minds  of  delusions, 
and  more  especially  of  the  philosophical  delusions  which,  as  I 
have  endeavoured  to  show,  have  infested  political  thought  for 
centuries.  My  main  purpose  has  been  to  contribute  my  mite 
towards  this  essential  preliminary  operation.  Ground  must  be 
cleared  and  levelled  before  a  building  can  be  properly  com- 
menced; the  labour  of  the  navvy  is  as  necessary  as  that  of  the 
architect,  however  much  less  honoured;  and  it  has  been  my 
humble  endeavour  to  grub  up  those  old  stumps  of  the  a  priori 
which  stand  in  the  way  of  the  very  foundations  of  a  sane  politi- 
cal philosophy.    To  those  who  think  that  questions  of  the  kind 


266  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

I  have  been  discussing  have  merely  an  academic  interest,  let 
me  suggest  once  more  that  a  century  ago  Robespierre  and  St. 
Just  proved  that  the  way  of  j^nswering  them  may  have  ex- 
tremely practical  consequences. 

Without  pretending  to  offer  any  off-hand  solution  for  so 
vast  a  problem,  he  suggests  two  points  in  conclusion.  One, 
that  in  considering  the  matter  we  should  proceed  from  the 
known  to  the  unknown,  and  take  warning  from  the  results 
of  either  extreme  in  self-government  or  the  government 
of  a  family ;  the  other,  that  the  central  point  is  "  the  fact 
that  the  natural  order  of  things — ^the  order,  that  is  to  say, 
as  unmodified  by  human  effort — does  not  tend  to  bring 
about  what  we  understand  as  welfare."  The  population 
question  has  first  to  be  faced. 

The  following  letters  cover  the  period  up  to  the  trip 
to  the  Canaries,  already  alluded  to : — 

3  Jevington  Gardens.  Eastbourne, 
Jan.  6,  1890. 

My  dear  Foster — That  capital  photograph  reached  me  just 
as  we  were  going  up  to  town  (invited  for  the  holidays  by  our 
parents),  and  I  put  it  in  my  bag  to  remind  me  to  write  to  you. 
Need  I  say  that  I  brought  it  back  again  without  having  had  the 
grace  to  send  a  line  of  thanks?  By  way  of  making  my  peace, 
I  have  told  the  Fine  Art  Society  to  send  you  a  copy  of  the  en- 
graving of  my  sweet  self.  I  have  not  had  it  framed — firstly, 
because  it  is  a  hideous  nuisance  to  be  obliged  to  hang  a  frame 
one  may  not  like ;  and  secondly,  because  by  possibility  you  might 
like  some  other  portrait  better,  in  which  case,  if  you  will  tell 
me,  I  will  send  that  other.  I  should  like  you  to  have  something 
by  way  of  reminder  of  T.  H.  H. 

When  Harry*  has  done  his  work  at  Barfs  at  the  end  of 
March  I  am  going  to  give  him  a  run  before  he  settles  down  to 
practice.  Probably  we  shall  go  to  the  Canaries.  I  hear  that  the 
man  who  knows  most  about  them  is  Dr.  Guillemard,  a  Cam- 
bridge man.  "  Kennst  du  ihn  wohl  ?  "  Perhaps  he  might  give 
me  a  wrinkle. 

With  our  united  best  wishes  to  you  all — Ever  yours  very 

faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


*  His  younger  son. 


1 889  LETTERS  26/ 

Eastbourne,  Jan,  13,  i8go. 

My  dear  Hooker —  .  .  .  We  missed  you  on  the  2nd,  though 
you  were  quite  right  not  to  come  in  that  beastly  weather. 

My  boy  Harry  has  had  a  very  sharp  attack  of  influenza  at 
Bartholomew's,  and  came  down  to  us  to  convalesce  a  week  ago, 
very  much  pulled  down.    I  hope  you  will  keep  clear  of  it. 

H/s  work  at  the  hospital  is  over  at  the  end  of  March,  and 
before  the  influenza  business  I  was  going  to  give  him  a  run  for 
a  month  or  six  weeks  before  he  settled  down  to  practice.  We 
shall  go  to  the  Canaries  as  soon  in  April  as  possible.  Are  you 
minded  to  take  a  look  at  Teneriffe?  Only  4J  days'  sea — good 
ships. — Ever  yours  affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

However,  Sir  J.  Hooker  was  unable  to  join  "  the  ex- 
cursion to  the  Isles  of  the  Blest." 

Eastbourne, /«».  27,  1890. 

My  dear  Foster — People  have  been  at  me  to  publish  my 
notice  of  Darwin  in  P,R,S,  in  a  separate  form. 

If  you  have  no  objection,  will  you  apply  to  the  Council  for 
me  for  the  requisite  permission  ? 

But  if  you  do  see  any  objection,  I  would  rather  not  make 
the  request. 

I  think  if  I  republish  it  I  will  add  the  Times  article  of  1859 
to  it.    Omega  and  Alpha ! 

Hope  you  are  flourishing.  We  shall  be  up  for  a  few  days 
next  week. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Eastbourne, /rtif.  31,  1890. 

My  dear  Foster — Mind  you  let  me  know  what  points  you 
think  want  expanding  in  the  Darwin  obituary  when  we  meet. 

We  go  to  town  on  Tuesday  for  a  few  days,  and  I  will  meet 
you  anywhere  or  anywhen  you  like.  Could  you  come  and  dine 
with  us  at  4  P.M.  on  Thursday?  If  so,  please  let  me  know  at 
once,  that  E.  may  kill  the  fatted  calf. 

Harry  has  been  and  gone  and  done  it.  We  heard  he  had 
gone  to  Yorkshire,  and  were  anxious,  thinking  that  at  the  very 
least  a  relapse  after  his  influenza  (which  he  had  sharply)  had 
occurred. 

But  the  complaint  was  one  with  more  serious  sequelae  still. 
Don't  know  the  young  lady,  but  the  youth  has  a  wise  head  on 
his  shoulders,  and  though  that  did  not  prevent  Solomon  from 
overdoing  the  business,  I  have  every  faith  in  his  choice. 


268  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

Dr.  Guillemard  has  kindly  sent  me  a  lot  of  valuable  informa- 
tion ;  but  as  I  suggested  to  my  boy  yesterday,  he  may  find  York- 
shire air  more  wholesome  than  that  of  the  Canaries,  and  it  is 
ten  to  one  we  don't  go  after  all. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

To  HIS  Younger  Son 

Eastbourne,  yaw.  30,  1890. 
You  DEAR  OLD  HUMBUG  OF  A  BoY  —  Here  we  have  been 
mourning  over  the  relapse  of  influenza,  which  alone,  as  we  said, 
could  have  torn  you  from  your  duties,  and  all  the  while  it  was 
nothing  but  an  attack  of  palpitation  such  as  young  people  are 
liable  to  and  seem  none  the  worse  for  after  all.  We  are  as 
happy  that  you  are  happy  as  you  can  be  yourself,  though  from 
your  letter  that  seems  saying  a  great  deal.  I  am  prepared  to  be 
the  young  lady's  slave;  pray  tell  her  that  I  am  a  model  father- 
in-law,  with  my  love.  (By  the  way,  you  might  mention  her 
name;  it  is  a  miserable  detail,  I  know,  but  would  be  interesting.) 
Please  add  that  she  is  humbly  solicited  to  grant  leave  of  absence 
for  the  Teneriffe  trip,  unless  she  thinks  Northallerton  air  more 
invigorating. — Ever  your  loving  dad,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

On  April  3,  accompanied  by  his  son,  he  left  London 
on  board  the  Aorangu  At  Plymouth  he  had  time  to  meet 
his  friend  W.  F.  Collier,  and  to  visit  the  Zoological  Station, 
while,  "  to  my  great  satisfaction,"  he  writes,  "  I  received  a 
revise  (ue,  of  '  Capital  the  Mother  of  Labour ')  for  the  May 
Nineteenth  Century — from  Knowles.  They  must  have  looked 
sharp  at  the  printing-office." 

It  did  not  take  him  long  to  recover  his  sea-legs,  and  he 
thoroughly  enjoyed  even  the  rougher  days  when  the  roll- 
ing of  the  ship  was  too  much  for  other  people.  The  day 
before  reaching  Teneriffe  he  writes : — 

I  have  not  felt  so  well  for  a  long  time.  I  do  nothing,  have 
a  prodigious  appetite,  and  Harry  declares  I  am  getting  fat  in  the 
face. 

Santa  Cruz  was  reached  early  on  April  10,  and  in  the 
afternoon  he  proceeded  to  Laguna,  which  he  made  his 
headquarters  for  a  week.  That  day  he  walked  10  miles, 
the  next  15,  and  the  third  20  in  the  course  of  the  day. 
He  notes  finding  the  characteristic  Euphorbia  and  Heaths 


i889  THE  CANARIES  269 

of  the  Canaries ;  notes,  too,  one  or  two  visitations  of  dys- 
pepsia from  indigestible  food.    He  writes  from  Laguna : — 

From  all  that  people  with  whom  we  meet  tell  me,  I  gather 
that  the  usual  massive  lies  about  health  resorts  pervade  the 
accounts  of  Teneriffe.  Santa  Cruz  would  reduce  me  to  jelly  in 
a  week,  and  I  hear  that  Orotava  is  worse — stifling.  Guimar, 
whither  we  go  to-morrow,  is  warranted  to  be  dry  and  everlast- 
ing sunshine.  We  shall  see.  One  of  the  people  staying  in  the 
house  said  they  had  rain  there  for  a  fortnight  together.  ...  I 
am  all  right  now,  and  walked  some  15  miles  up  hill  and  down 
dale  to-day,  and  I  am  not  more  than  comfortably  tired.  How- 
ever, I  am  not  going  to  try  the  peak.  I  find  it  cannot  be  done 
without  a  night  out  at  a  considerable  height  when  the  ther- 
mometer commonly  goes  down  below  freezing,  and  I  am  not 
going  to  run  that  risk  for  the  chance  of  seeing  even  the  famous 
shadows. 

By  some  mischance,  no  letters  from  home  reached  him 
till  the  26th,  and  he  writes  from  Guimar  on  the  23rd : — 

A  lady  who  lives  here  told  me  yesterday  that  a  post-mistress 
at  one  place  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  off  the  stamps  and  turn- 
ing the  letters  on  one  side !  But  that  luckily  is  not  a  particular 
dodge  with  ours. 

We  drove  over  here  on  the  17th.  It  is  a  very  picturesque 
place  1000  feet  up  in  the  midst  of  a  great  amphitheatre  of  high 
hills,  facing  north,  orange-trees  laden  with  fruit,  date  palms  and 
bananas  are  in  the  garden,  and  there  is  lovely  sunshine  all  day 
long.  Altogether  the  climate  is  far  the  best  I  have  found  any- 
where here,  and  the  house,  which  is  that  of  a  Spanish  Marquesa, 
only  opened  as  a  hotel  this  winter,  is  very  comfortable.  I  am 
sitting  with  the  window  wide  open  at  nine  o'clock  at  night,  and 
the  stars  flash  as  if  the  sky  were  Australian. 

On  Saturday  we  had  a  splendid  excursion  up  to  the  top  of 
the  pass  that  leads  from  here  up  to  the  other  side  of  the  island. 
Road  in  the  proper  sense  there  was  none,  and  the  track  in- 
credibly bad,  worse  than  any  Alpine  path  owing  to  the  loose 
irregular  stones.  The  mules,  however,  pick  their  way  like  cats, 
and  you  have  only  to  hold  on.  The  pass  is  6000  feet  high,  and 
we  ascended  still  higher.  Fortune  favoured  us.  It  was  a  lovely 
day  and  the  clouds  lay  m  a  great  sheet  a  thousand  feet  below. 
The  peak,  clear  in  the  blue  sky,  rose  up  bare  and  majestic  5000 
feet  out  of  as  desolate  a  desert  clothed  with  the  stiff  retama 


270  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

shrubs  (a  sort  of  broom)  as  you  can  well  imagine.  It  took 
us  three  hours  and  a  half  to  get  up,  passing  for  a  good  deal  of 
the  time  through  a  kind  of  low  brush  of  white  and  red  cistuses 
in  full  bloom.  We  saw  Palma  on  one  side,  and  Grand  Canary 
on  the  other,  beyond  the  layer  of  clouds  which  enveloped  all 
the  lower  part  of  the  island.  Coming  down  was  worse  than 
going  up,  and  we  walked  a  good  part  of  the  way,  getting  back 
about  six.    About  seven  hours  in  the  saddle  and  walking. 

You  never  saw  anything  like  the  improvement  in  Harry. 
He  is  burnt  deep  red;  he  says  my  nose  is  of  the  same  hue,  and 
at  the  end  of  the  journey  he  raced  Gurilio,  our  guide,  who 
understands  no  word  of  English  any  more  than  we  do  Spanish, 
but  we  are  quite  intimate  nevertheless.* 

He  reiterates  his  distress  at  not  getting  letters  from  his 
wife :  "  Certainly  I  will  never  run  the  risk  of  being  so  long 
without — never  again."  When,  after  all,  the  delayed  letters 
reached  him  on  his  way  back  from  the  expedition  to  the 
Canadas,  thanks  to  a  traveller  who  brought  them  up  from 
Laguna,  he  writes  (April  24) : — 

Catch  me  going  out  of  reach  of  letters  again.  I  have  been 
horribly  anxious.  Nobody — children  or  any  one  else — can  be 
to  me  what  you  are.  Ulysses  preferred  his  old  woman  to  im- 
mortality, and  this  absence  has  led  me  to  see  that  he  was  as 
wise  in  that  as  in  other  things.  .  .  . 

Here  is  a  novel  description  of  an  hotel  at  Puerto 
Orotava : — 

It  is  very  pretty  to  look  at,  but  all  draughts.  I  compare  it 
to  the  air  of  a  big  wash-house  with  all  the  doors  open,  and  it 
was  agreed  that  the  likeness  was  exact. 

I  have  no  account  of  the  visit  to  the  Canadas,  "the 
one  thing  worth  seeing  there."  But  on  May  2  he  sailed 
for  Madeira  by  the  Germany  feeling  already  "  ten  years 
younger  "  for  his  holiday.     On  the  3rd  he  writes : — 

*  My  brother  indeed  averred  that  his  language  of  signs  was  far 
more  effectual  than  the  Spanish,  which  my  father  persisted  in  trying 
upon  the  inhabitants.  This  guide,  by  the  way,  was  very  sceptical  as 
to  any  Englishman  being  equal  to  walking  the  seventeen  miles,  much 
less  beating  him  in  a  race  over  the  stony  track.  His  experience  was 
entirely  limited  to  invalids. 


Portrait  from  a  Photograph  by  Downey,  1890. 


i889  THE  CANARIES  27 1 

The  last  time  I  was  in  this  place  was  in  1846.  All  my  life 
lies  between  the  two  visits.  I  was  then  twenty-one  and  a  half, 
and  I  shall  be  sixty-five  to-morrow.  The  place  looks  to  me  to 
have. grown  a  good  deal,  but  I  believe  it  is  chiefly  English  resi- 
dents whose  villas  dot  the  hill.  There  were  no  woods  forty- 
four  years  ago.  Now  there  is  one,  I  am  told,  to  Camera  do 
Lobos  nearly  five  miles  long.  That  is  the  measure  of  Portu- 
guese progress  in  half  a  century.  Moreover,  the  men  have 
left  off  wearing  their  pigtail  caps  and  the  women  their  hoods. 


To  HIS  Youngest  Daughter 

Bella  Vista  Hotel,  Punch al,  May  6,  1890. 

Dearest  Babs — This  comes  wishing  you  many  happy  re- 
turns of  the  day,  though  a  little  late  in  the  arrival.  Harry  sends 
his  love,  and  desires  me  to  say  that  he  took  care  to  write  a  letter 
which  should  arrive  in  time,  but  unfortunately  forgot  to  men- 
tion the  birthday  in  it!  So  I  think,  on  the  whole,  I  have  the 
pull  of  him.  We  ought  to  be  back  about  the  i8th  or  19th,  as  I 
have  put  my  name  down  for  places  in  the  Conway  Castle,  which 
is  to  call  here  on  the  12th,  and  I  do  not  suppose  she  will  be  full. 
In  the  meanwhile,  we  shall  fill  up  the  time  by  a  trip  to  the  other 
side  of  the  island,  on  which  we  start  to-morrow  morning  at 
7.30.  You  have  to  take  your  own  provisions  and  rugs  to  sleep 
upon  and  under,  as  the  fleas  Ui  has  are  said  to  be  unusually  fine 
and  active.  We  start  quite  a  procession  with  a  couple  of  horses, 
a  guide,  and  two  men  (owners  of  the  nags)  to  carry  the  bag- 
gage; and  I  suspect  that  before  to-morrow  night  we  shall  have 
made  acquaintance  with  some  remarkably  bad  apologies  for 
roads.  But  the  horses  here  seem  to  prefer  going  up  bad  stair- 
cases at  speed  (with  a  man  hanging  on  by  the  tail  to  steer),  and 
if  you  only  stick  to  them  they  land  you  all  right.  I  have  de- 
veloped so  much  prowess  in  this  line  that  I  think  of  coming 
out  in  the  character  of  Buffalo  Bill  on  my  return.  Hands  and 
face  of  both  of  us  are  done  to  a  good  burnt  sienna,  and  a  few 
hours  more  or  less  in  the  saddle  don't  count.  I  do  not  think 
either  of  us  have  been  so  well  for  years. 

You  will  have  heard  of  our  doings  in  Teneriffe  from  M . 

The  Canadas  there  is  the  one  thing  worth  seeing,  altogether 
unique.  As  a  health  resort  I  should  say  the  place  is  a  fraud — 
always  excepting  Guimar — and  that,  excellent  for  people  in  good 
health,  is  wholly  unfit  for  a  real  invalid,  who  must  either  go  up- 
hill or  downhill  over  the  worst  of  roads  if  he  leaves  the  hotel. 


272  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

The  air  here  is  like  that  of  South  Devon  at  its  best — ^very 
soft,  but  not  stifling  as  at  Orotava.  We  had  a  capital  expedition 
yesterday  to  the  Grand  Corral — the  ancient  volcanic  crater,  in 
the  middle  of  the  island  with  walls  some  3000  feet  high  all 
scarred  and  furrowed  by  ravines,  and  overgrown  with  rich  vege- 
tation. There  is  a  little  village  at  the  bottom  of  it  which  I 
should  esteem  as  a  retreat  if  I  wished  to  be  out  of  sight  and 
hearing  of  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  this  world.  By  the  way, 
I  have  been  pretty  well  out  of  hearing  of  everything  as  it  is, 

for  I  only  had  three  letters  from  M while  we  were  in  Tene- 

riffe,  and  not  one  here  up  to  this  date.  After  I  had  made  all 
my  arrangements  to  start  to-morrow  I  heard  that  a  mail  would 
be  in  at  noon.  So  the  letters  will  have  to  follow  us  in  the  after- 
noon by  one  of  the  men,  who  will  wait  for  them. 

We  went  to-day  to  lunch  with  Mr.  Blandy,  the  head  of  the 
principal  shipping  agency  here,  whose  wife  is  the  daughter  of 

my  successor  at  the  Fishery  Office.    has  called  upon  me. 

What  an  effusive  bore  he  is !  But  I  believe  he  was  very  kind 
to  poor  Clifford,  and  restrained  my  unregenerate  impatience  of 
that  kind  of  creature. 

Well,  our  trip  has  done  us  both  a  world  of  good;  but  I  am 
getting  homesick,  and  shall  rejoice  to  be  back  again.  I  hope  that 
Joyce  is  flourishing,  and  Jack  satisfied  with  the  hanging  of  his 
pictures,  and  that  a  millionaire  has  insisted  on  buying  the  picture 
and  adding  a  bonus.  Our  best  love  to  you  all. — Ever  your  lov- 
ing Pater. 

Don't  know  M *s  whereabouts.     But  if  she  is  with  you, 

say  I  wrote  her  a  long  screed  (No.  8)  and  posted  it  to-day — 
with  my  love  as  a  model  husband  and  complete  letter-writer. 

On  returning  home  he  found  that  the  Linnean  medal 
had  been  awarded  him. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  May  18,  1890. 
My  dear  Hooker — How's  a'  wi'  you  ?  My  boy  and  I  came 
back  from  Madeira  yesterday  in  great  feather.  As  for  myself, 
riding  about  on  mules,  or  horses,  for  six  to  ten  hours  at  a  stretch 
— burning  in  sun  or  soaking  in  rain — over  the  most  entirely 
breakneck  roads  and  tracts  I  have  ever  made  acquaintance  with, 
except  perhaps  in  Morocco — ^has  proved  a  most  excellent  tonic, 
cathartic,  and  alterative  all  in  one.  Existence  of  heart  and 
stomach  are  matters  of  faith,  not  of  knowledge,  with  me  at 
present.      I  hope  it  may  last,  and  I  have  had  such  a  sickener 


i889  RETURN   FROM   THE  CANARIES  273 

of  invalidism  that  my  intention  is  to  keep  severely  out  of  all 
imprudences. 

But  what  is  a  man  to  do  if  his  friends  take  advantage  of 
his  absence,  and  go  giving  him  gold  medals  behind  his  back? 
That  you  have  been  an  accomplice  in  this  nefarious  plot — mine 
own  familiar  friend  whom  I  trusted  and  trust — is  not  to  be 
denied.  Well,  it  is  very  pleasant  to  have  toil  that  is  now  all 
ancient  history  remembered,  and  I  shall  go  to  the  meeting  and 
the  dinner  and  make  my  speech  in  spite  of  as  many  possible 
devils  of  dyspepsia  as  there  are  plates  and  dishes  on  the  table. 

We  were  lucky  in  getting  in  for  nothing  worse  than  heavy 
rolling,  either  out  or  in.  Teneriffe  is  well  worth  seeing.  The 
Canadas  is  something  quite  by  itself,  a  bit  of  Egypt  6000  feet  up 
with  a  bare  volcanic  cone,  or  rather  long  barrow  sticking  up 
6000  feet  in  the  middle  of  it. 

Otherwise,  Madeira  is  vastly  superior.  I  rode  across  from 
Funchal  to  Sao  Vicente,  up  to  Paul  da  Serra,  then  along  the 
coast  to  Santa  Anna,  and  back  from  Sta.  Anna  to  Funchal.  I 
have  seen  nothing  comparable  except  in  Mauritius,  nor  anything 
anywhere  like  the  road  by  the  cliffs  from  Sao  Vicente  to  Sta. 
Anna.  Lucky  for  me  that  my  ancient  nautical  habit  of  sticking 
on  to  a  horse  came  back.  A  good  deal  of  the  road  is  like  a  bad 
staircase,  with  no  particular  banisters,  and  a  well  of  1000  feet 
with  the  sea  at  the  bottom.  Your  heart  would  rejoice  over  the 
great  heaths.  I  saw  one,  the  bole  of  which  split  into  nearly 
equal  trunks;  and  one  of  these  was  just  a  metre  in  circumfer- 
ence, and  had  a  head  as  big  as  a  moderate-sized  ash.  Gorse  in 
full  flower,  up  to  12  or  15  feet  high.  On  the  whole  a  singular 
absence  of  flowering  herbs  except  Cinerarias  and,  especially  in 
Teneriffe,  Echium.  I  did  not  chance  to  sec  a  Euphorbia  in 
Madeira,  though  I  believe  there  are  some.  In  Teneriffe  they  are 
everywhere  in  queer  shapes,  and  there  was  a  thing  that  mim- 
icked the  commonest  Euphorbia  but  had  no  milk,  which  I  will 
ask  you  about  when  I  see  you.  The  Euphorbias  were  all  in 
flower,  but  this  thing  had  none.  But  you  will  have  had  enough 
of  my  scrawl. — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


54 


CHAPTER   XVI 

1890-91 

Three  letters  of  the  first  half  of  the  year  may  con- 
veniently be  placed  here.  The  first  is  to  Tyndall,  who  had 
just  been  delivering  an  anti-Gladstonian  speech  at  Belfast. 
The  opening  reference  must  be  to  some  newspaper  para- 
graph which  I  have  not  been  able  to  trace,  just  as  the 
second  is  to  a  paragraph  in  1876,  not  long  after  Tyndall's 
marriage,  which  described  Huxley  as  starting  for  America 
with  his  titled  bride. 

3  Jevington  Gardens,  Eastbourne. 
Feb,  24,  1890. 

My  dear  Tyndall — Put  down  the  three  half-pints  and  the 
two  dozen  to  the  partnership  account.  Ever  since  the  "  titled 
bride  "  business  I  have  given  up  the  struggle  against  the  popular 
belief  that  you  and  I  constitute  a  firm. 

It's  very  hard  on  me  in  the  decline  of  life  to  have  a  lively 
young  partner  who  thinks  nothing  of  rushing  six  or  seven  hun- 
dred miles  to  perform  a  war-dance  on  the  sainted  G.O.M.,  and 
takes  the  scalp  of  Historicus  as  a  hors  d'ccuvre. 

All  of  which  doubtless  goes  down  to  my  account  just  as  my 
poor  innocent  articles  confer  a  reputation  for  long-suffering 
mildness  on  you. 

Well !  well !  there  is  no  justice  in  this  world  !  With  our  best 
love  to  you  both — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

(The  confusion  in  the  popular  mind  continued  steadily, 
so  that  at  last,  when  Tyndall  died,  Huxley  received  the 
doubtful  honour  of  a  funeral  sermon.) 

Dr.  Pelseneer,  to  whom  the  next  letter  is  addressed,  is  a 
Belgian  morphologist,  and  an  authority  upon  the  Mollusca. 
He  it  was  who  afterwards  completed  Huxley's  unfinished 
memoir  on  Spirula  for  the  Challenger  report. 

274 


iSgo  AFFINITIES  OF   THE   MOLLUSCA  275 

4  Marlborough  Place,  y««^  10,  1890. 

Dear  Dr.  Pelseneer — I  gave  directions  yesterday  for  the 
packing  up  and  sending  to  your  address  of  the  specimens  of 
Trigonia,  and  I  trust  that  they  will  reach  you  safely. 

I  am  rejoiced  that  you  are  about  to  take  up  the  subject.  I 
was  but  a  beginner  when  I  worked  at  Trigonia,  and  I  had  always 
promised  myself  that  T  would  try  to  make  good  the  many  de- 
ficiencies of  my  little  sketch.  But  three  or  four  years  ago  my 
health  gave  way  completely,  and  though  I  have  recovered  (no 
less  to  my  own  astonishment  than  to  that  of  the  doctors)  I  am 
compelled  to  live  out  of  London  and  to  abstain  from  all  work 
which  involves  much  labour. 

Thus  science  has  got  so  far  ahead  of  me  that  I  hesitate  to 
say  much  about  a  difficult  morphological  question — all  the  more, 
as  old  men  like  myself  should  be  on  their  guard  against  over- 
much tenderness  for  their  own  speculations.  And  I  am  con- 
scious of  a  great  tenderness  for  those  contained  in  my  ancient 
memoir  on  the  "  Morphology  of  the  Cephalous  Mollusca."  Cer- 
tainly I  am  entirely  disposed  to  agree  with  you  that  the  Gastero- 
pods  and  the  Lamellibranchs  spring  from  a  common  root — 
nearly  represented  by  the  Chiton — especially  by  a  hypothetical 
Chiton  with  one  shell  plate. 

I  always  thought  Nucula  the  key  to  the  Lamellibranchs,  and 
I  am  very  glad  you  have  come  to  that  conclusion  on  such  much 
better  evidence. — I  am,  dear  Dr.  Pelseneer,  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Towards  the  end  of  June  he  went  for  a  week  to  Salis- 
bury, taking  long  walks  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  ex- 
ploring the  town  and  cathedral,  which  he  confessed  himself 
ashamed  never  to  have  seen  before. 

He  characteristically  fixes  its  date  in  his  memory  by 

noting  that  the  main  part  of  it  was  completed  when  Dante 

was  a  year  old. 

The  White  Hart,  Salisbury, /ww^  22,  1890. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Couldn't  stand  any  more  London,  so 
bolted  here  yesterday  morning,  and  here  I  shall  probably  stop 
for  the  next  few  days. 

I  have  been  trying  any  time  the  last  thirty  years  to  see 
Stonehenge,  and  this  time  I  mean  to  do  it.  I  should  have  gone 
to-day,  but  the  weather  was  not  promising,  so  I  spent  my  Sunday 
morning  in  Old  Sarum — that  blessed  old  tumulus  with  nine  (or 
was  it  eleven?)  burgesses  that  used  to  send  two  members  to 


276  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

Parliament  when  I  was  a  child.  Really  you  Radicals  are  of 
some  use  after  all ! 

Poor  old  Smyth's  *  death  is  just  what  I  expected,  though  1 
did  not  think  the  catastrophe  was  so  imminent. 

Peace  be  with  him;  he  never  did  justice  to  his  very  consid- 
erable abilities,  but  he  was  a  good  fellow  and  a  fine  old  crusted 
Conservative. 

I  suppose  it  will  be  necessary  to  declare  the  vacancy  and 
put  somebody  in  his  place  before  long. 

I  learned  before  I  started  that  Smyth  was  to  be  buried  in 
Cornwall,  so  there  is  no  question  of  attending  at  his  funeral. 

I  am  the  last  of  the  original  Jermyn  Street  gang  left  in  the 
school  now — Ultimus  Romanorum  ! — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  trip  was  taken  by  way  of  a  holiday  after  the 
writing  of  an  article,  which  appeared  in  the  Nineteenth 
Century  for  July  1890.  It  was  called  "  The  Lights  of  the 
Church  and  the  Light  of  Science,"  and  may  be  considered 
as  written  in  fulfilment  of  the  plan  spoken  of  in  the  letter 
to  Mr.  Clodd  (p.  245).  Its  subject  was  the  necessary  de- 
pendence of  Christian  theology  upon  the  historical  accuracy 
of  the  Old  Testament;  its  occasion,  the  publication  of  a 
sermon  in  which,  as  a  counterblast  to  Lux  Mundi,  Canon 
Liddon  declared  that  accuracy  to  be  sanctioned  by  the  use 
made  of  the  Old  Testament  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  bade 
his  hearers  close  their  ears  against  any  suggestions  impair- 
ing the  credit  of  those  Jewish  Scriptures  which  have  re- 
ceived the  stamp  of  his  Divine  authority. 

Pointing  out  that,  as  in  other  branches  of  history,  so 
here  the  historical  accuracy  of  early  tradition  was  aban- 
doned even  by  conservative  critics,  who  at  all  understood 
the  nature  of  the  problems  involved,  Huxley  proceeded  to 
examine  the  story  of  the  Flood,  and  to  show  that  the 
difficulties  were  little  less  in  treating  it — like  the  recon- 
cilers— as  a  partial  than  as  a  universal  deluge.     Then  he 

*  Warington  Wilkinson  Smyth  (1817-1890),  the  geologist  and  min- 
eralogist. In  1851  he  was  appointed  Lecturer  on  Mining  and  Min- 
eralogy at  the  Royal  School  of  Mines.  After  the  lectureships  were 
separated  in  1881,  he  retained  the  former  until  his  death.  He  was 
knighted  in  1887. 


189a  BABBAGE'S  CALCULATING  MACHINE  277 

discussed  the  origin  of  the  story,  and  criticised  the  attempt 
of  the  essayist  in  Lux  Mundi  to  treat  this  and  similar  stories 
as  "  types,"  which  must  be  valueless  if  typical  of  no  under- 
lying reality.  These  things  are  of  moment  in  speculative 
thought,  for  if  Adam  be  not  an  historical  character,  if  the 
story  of  the  Fall  be  but  a  type,  the  basis  of  Pauline  the- 
ology is  shaken ;  they  are  of  moment  practically,  for  it  is 
the  story  of  the  Creation  which  is  referred  to  in  the  "  speech 
(Matt.  xix.  s)  unhappily  famous  for  the  legal  oppression 
to  which  it  has  been  wrongfully  forced  to  lend  itself "  in 
the  marriage  laws. 

In  July  1890,  Sir  J.  G.  T.  Sinclair  wrote  to  him,  call- 
ing his  attention  to  a  statement  of  Babbage's  that  after  a 
certain  point  his  famous  calculating  machine,  contrary  to 
all  expectation,  suddenly  introduced  a  new  principle  of 
numeration  into  a  series  of  numbers,*  and  asking  what 

*  Extract  from  Babbage's  Ninth  Bridgewater  Treatise. 

Babbage  shows  that  a  calculating  machii^  can  be  constructed 
which,  after  working  in  a  correct  and  orderly  manner  up  to  100,000,- 
000,  then  leaps,  and  instead  of  continuing  the  chain  of  numbers 
unbroken,  goes  at  once  to  100,010,002.  "The  law  which  seemed  at 
first  to  govern  the  series  failed  at  the  hundred  million  and  second 
term.  This  term  is  larger  than  we  expected  by  10,000.  The  law  thus 
changes — 

100,000,001  100,100,005 

100.010.002  100,150,006 

100.030.003  100,210,007 

100.060.004  100,280,008 

For  a  hundred  or  even  a  thousand  terms  they  continued  to  follow  the 
new  law  relating  to  the  triangular  numbers,  but  after  watching  them 
for  2761  terms  we  find  that  this  law  fails  at  the  2762nd  term. 

If  we  continue  to  observe  we  shall  discover  another  law  then  com- 
ing into  action  which  also  is  different,  dependent,  but  in  a  different 
manner,  on  triangular  numbers  because  a  number  of  points  agreeing 
with  their  term  may  be  placed  in  the  form  of  a  triangle,  thus — 


(one,  three,  six,  ten). 
This  will  continue  through  about   1430  terms,   when  a  new  law  is 
again  introduced  over  about  950  terms,  and  this  too,  like  its  prede- 
cessors, fails  and  gives  place  to  other  laws  which  appear  at  different 
intervals." 


278  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

effect  this  phenomenon  had  upon  the  theory  of  Induction. 
Huxley  replied  as  follows : — 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne, /«/k  21,  i8go. 

Dear  Sir — I  knew  Mr.  Babbage,  and  am  quite  sure  that  he 
was  not  the  man  to  say  anything  on  the  topic  of  calculating 
machines  which  he  could  not  justify. 

I  do  not  see  that  what  he  says  affects  the  philosophy  of  in- 
duction as  rightly  understood.  No  induction,  however  broad  its 
basis,  can  confer  certainty — in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  The 
experience  of  the  whole  human  race  through  innumerable  years 
has  shown  that  stones  unsupported  fall  to  the  ground,  but  that 
does  not  make  it  certain  that  any  day  next  week  unsupported 
stones  will  not  move  the  other  way.  All  that  it  does  justify  is 
the  very  strong  expectation,  which  hitherto  has  been  invariably 
verified,  that  they  will  do  just  the  contrary. 

Only  one  absolute  certainty  is  possible  to  man — namely,  that 
at  any  given  moment  the  feeling  which  he  has  exists. 

All  other  so-called  certainties  are  beliefs  of  greater  or  less 
intensity. 

Do  not  suppose  that  I  am  following  Abernethy*s  famous 
prescription,  "  take  my  pills,"  if  I  refer  you  to  an  essay  of  mine 
on  "  Descartes,"  and  a  little  book  on  Hume,  for  the  fuller  dis- 
cussion of  these  points.  Hume's  argument  against  miracles 
turns  altogether  on  the  fallacy  that  induction  can  give  certainty 
in  the  strict  sense. 

We  poor  mortals  have  to  be  content  with  hope  and  belief  in 
all  matters  past  and  present — our  sole  certainty  is  momentary. 
— I  am  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Sir  J.  G.  T.  Sinclair,  Bart. 

Except  for  a  last  visit  to  London  to  pack  his  books, 
which  proved  a  heavier  undertaking  than  he  had  reckoned 
upon,  Huxley  did  not  leave  Eastbourne  this  autumn,  re- 
fusing Sir  J.  Donnelly's  hospitable  invitation  to  stay  with 
him  in  Surrey  during  the  move,  of  which  he  exclaims: — 

Thank  Heaven  that  is  my  last  move  —  except  to  a  still 
smaller  residence  of  a  subterranean  character ! 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Sept.  19,  1890. 

My  dear  Donnelly — And  my  books — and  watch-dog  busi- 
ness generally? 

How  is  that  to  be  transacted  whether  as  in-patient  or  out- 
patient at  Firdale?    Much  hospitality  hath  made  thee  mad. 


iSgo  MEDICAL  EDUCATION  279 

Seriously,  it's  not  to  be  done  nohow.  What  between  papers 
that  don't  come,  and  profligate  bracket  manufacturers  who  keep 
you  waiting  for  months  and  then  send  the  wrong  things — and 
a  general  tendency  of  everybody  to  do  nothing  right  or  some- 
thing wrong — it  is  as  much  as  the  two  of  us  will  do— -to  get  in, 
and  all  in  the  course  of  the  next  three  weeks. 

Of  course  my  wife  has  no  business  to  go  to  London  to  super- 
intend the  packing — ^but  I  should  like  to  see  anybody  stop  her. 
However,  she  has  got  the  faithful  Minnie  to  do  the  actual 
work;  and  swears  by  all  her  Gods  and  Goddesses  she  will  only 
direct. 

It  will  only  make  her  unhappy  if  I  did  not  make  pretend  to 
believe,  and  hope  no  harm  may  come  of  it. — Tout  d  vous, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Another  discussion  which  sprang  up  in  the  Times,  upon 
Medical  Education,  evoked  a  letter  from  him  {Times,  Au- 
gust 7),  urging  that  the  preliminary  training  ought  to  be 
much  more  thorough  and  exact.  The  student  at  his  first 
coming  is  so  completely  habituated  to  learn  only  from  books 
or  oral  teaching,  that  the  attempt  to  learn  from  things  and 
to  get  his  knowledge  at  first  hand  is  something  new  and 
strange.  Thus  a  large>J>roportion  of  medical  students  spend 
much  of  their  first  year  in  learning  how  to  learn,  and  when 
they  have  done  that,  in  acquiring  the  preliminary  scientific 
knowledge,  with  which,  under  any  rational  system  of  educa- 
tion, they  would  have  come  provided. 

He  urged,  too,  that  they  should  have  received  a  proper 
literary  education  instead  of  a  sham  acquaintance  with 
Latin,  and  insisted,  as  he  had  so  often  done,  on  the  literary 
wealth  of  their  own  language. 

Every  one  has  his  own  ideas  of  what  a  liberal  education 
ought  to  include,  and  a  correspondent  wrote  to  ask  him, 
among  other  things,  whether  he  did  not  think  the  higher 
mathematics  ought  to  be  included.    He  replied : — 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Aug.  16,  1890. 

I  think  mathematical  training  highly  desirable,  but  advanced 
mathematics,  I  am  afraid,  would  be  too  great  a  burden  in  pro- 
portion to  its  utility,  to  the  ordinary  student. 

I  fully  agree  with  you  that  the  incapacity  of  teachers  is  the 
weak  point  in  the  London  schools.    But  what  is  to  be  expected 


28o  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

when  a  man  accepts  a  lectureship  in  a  medical  school  simply  as 
a  grappUng-iron  by  which  he  may  hold  on  until  he  gets  a  hos- 
pital appointment? 

Medical  education  in  London  will  never  be  what  it  ought  to 
be,  until  the  "  Institutes  of  Medicine,"  as  the  Scotch  call  them, 
are  taught  in  only  two  or  three  well-found  institutions — while 
the  hospital  schools  are  confined  to  the  teaching  of  practical 
medicine,  surgery,  obstetrics,  and  so  on. 

The  following  letters  illustrate  Huxley's  keenness  to 
correct  any  misrepresentation  of  his  opinions  from  a  weighty 
source,  and  the  way  in  which,  without  abating  his  just 
claims,  he  could  make  the  peace  gracefully. 

In  October  Dr.  Abbott  delivered  an  address  on  "  Illu- 
sions," in  which,  without,  of  course,  mentioning  names,  he 
drew  an  unmistakable  picture  of  Huxley  as  a  thorough  pes- 
simist. A  very  brief  report  appeared  in  the  Times  of  Octo- 
ber 9,  together  with  a  leading  article  upon  the  subject. 
Huxley  thereupon  wrote  to  the  Times  a  letter  which  throws 
light  both  upon  his  early  days  and  his  later  opinions : — 

The  article  on  "  Illusions  "  in  the  Times  of  to-day  induces 
me  to  notice  the  remarkable  exemplification  of  them  to  which 
you  have  drawn  public  attention.  The  Rev.  Dr.  Abbott  has 
pointed  the  moral  of  his  discourse  by  a  reference  to  a  living 
man,  the  delicacy  of  which  will  be  widely  and  justly  appreciated. 
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  I  am  acquainted  with  this  person, 
somewhat  intimately,  though  I  can  by  no  means  call  myself  his 
best  friend — far  from  it. 

If  I  am  right,  I  can  affirm  that  this  poor  fellow  did  not  escape 
from  the  "  narrow  school  in  which  he  was  brought  up  "  at  nine- 
teen, but  more  than  two  years  later;  and,  as  he  pursued  his 
studies  in  London,  perhaps  he  had  as  much  opportunities  for 
"  fruitful  converse  with  friends  and  equals,"  to  say  nothing  of 
superiors,  as  he  would  have  enjoyed  elsewhere. 

Moreover,  whether  the  naval  officers  with  whom  he  con- 
sorted were  book-learned  or  not,  they  were  emphatically  men, 
trained  to  face  realities  and  to  have  a  wholesome  contempt  for 
mere  talkers.  Any  one  of  them  was  worth  a  wilderness  of 
phrase-crammed  undergraduates.  Indeed,  I  have  heard  my  mis- 
guided acquaintance  declare  that  he  regards  his  four  years' 
training  under  the  hard  conditions  and  the  sharp  discipline  of 
his  cruise  as  an  education  of  inestimable  value. 


1890  REPLY  TO   DR.  ABBOTT  28 1 

As  to  being  a  "  keen-witted  pessimist  out  and  out,"  the  Rev. 
Dr.  Abbott's  "  horrid  example  "  has  shown  me  the  following  sen- 
tence : — "  Pessimism  is  as  little  consonant  with  the  facts  of 
sentient  existence  as  optimism."  He  says  he  published  it  in 
1888,  in  an  article  on  "  Industrial  Development,"  to  be  seen  in 
the  Nineteenth  Century.  But  no  doubt  this  is  another  illusion. 
No  superior  person,  brought  up  "  in  the  Universities,"  to  boot, 
could  possibly  have  invented  a  myth  so  circumstantial. 

The  end  of  the  correspondence  was  quite  amicable. 
Dr.  Abbott  explained  that  he  had  taken  his  facts  from  the 
recently  published  "  Autobiography,"  and  that  the  reporters 
had  wonderfully  altered  what  he  really  said  by  large  omis- 
sions. In  a  second  letter  {Times,  October  11)  Huxley 
says : — 

I  am  much  obliged  to  Dr.  Abbott  for  his  courteous  explana- 
tion. I  myself  have  suffered  so  many  things  at  the  hands  of  so 
many  reporters — of  whom  it  may  too  often  be  said  that  their 
"  faith,  unfaithful,  makes  them  falsely  true  " — that  I  can  fully 
enter  into  what  his  feelings  must  have  been  when  he  contem- 
plated the  picture  of  his  discourse,  in  which  the  lights  on  "  raw 
midshipmen,"  "  pessimist  out  and  out,"  "  devil  take  the  hind- 
most," and  "  Heine's  dragoon,"  were  so  high,  while  the  "  good 
things  "  he  was  kind  enough  to  say  about  me  lay  in  the  deep 
shadow  of  the  invisible.  And  I  can  assure  Dr.  Abbott  that  I 
should  not  have  dreamed  of  noticing  the  report  of  his  interest- 
ing lecture,  which  I  read  when  it  appeared,  had  it  not  been  made 
the  subject  of  the  leading  article  which  drew  the  attention  of 
all  the  world  to  it  on  the  following  day. 

I  was  well  aware  that  Dr.  Abbott  must  have  founded  his 
remarks  on  the  brief  notice  of  my  life  which  (without  my  knowl- 
edge) has  been  thrust  into  its  present  ridiculous  position  among 
biographies  of  eminent  musicians;  and  most  undoubtedly  any- 
thing I  have  said  there  is  public  property.  But  erroneous  sup- 
positions imaginatively  connected  with  what  I  have  said  appear 
to  me  to  stand  upon  a  different  footing,  especially  when  they  are 
interspersed  with  remarks  injurious  to  my  early  friends.  Some 
of  the  "  raw  midshipmen  and  unlearned  naval  officers  "  of  whom 
Dr.  Abbott  speaks,  in  terms  which  he  certainly  did  not  find  in 
my  "  autobiography,"  are,  I  am  glad  to  say,  still  alive,  and  are 
performing,  or  have  performed,  valuable  services  to  their  coun- 
try.   I  wonder  what  Dr.  Abbott  would  think,  and  perhaps  say. 


282  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

if  his  youthful   University  friends  were  spoken  of  as  "  raw 
curates  and  unlearned  country  squires." 

When  David  Hume's  housemaid  was  wroth  because  some- 
body chalked  up  "  St.  David's  "  on  his  house,  the  philosopher  is 
said  to  have  remarked, — "  Never  mind,  lassie,  better  men  than 
I  have  been  made  saints  of  before  now."  And,  perhaps,  if  I  had 
recollected  that  "better  men  than  I  have  been  made  texts  of 
before  now,"  a  slight  flavour  of  wrath  which  may  be  perceptible 
would  have  vanished  from  my  first  letter.  If  Dr.  Abbott  has 
found  any  phrase  of  mine  too  strong,  I  beg  him  to  set  it  against 
"  out  and  out  pessimists  "  and  "  Heine's  dragoon,"  and  let  us  cry 
quits.    He  is  the  last  person  with  whom  I  should  wish  to  quarrel. 

Two  interesting  criticisms  of  books  follow;  one  The 
First  Three  Gospels,  by  the  Rev.  Estlin  Carpenter ;  the  other 
on  Use  and  Disuse,  directed  against  the  doctrine  of  use- 
inheritance,  by  Mr.  Piatt  Ball,  who  not  only  sent  the  book 
but  appealed  to  him  for  advice  as  to  his  future  course  in 
undertaking  a  larger  work  on  the  evolution  of  man. 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Oct.  ii,  1890. 

My  dear  Mr.  Carpenter — ^Accept  my  best  thanks  for  The 
First  Three  Gospels,  which  strikes  me  as  an  admirable  exposi- 
tion of  the  case,  full,  clear,  and  calm.  Indeed  the  latter  quality 
gives  it  here  and  there  a  touch  of  humour.  You  say  the  most 
damaging  things  in  a  way  so  gentle  that  the  orthodox  reader 
must  feel  like  the  eels  who  were  skinned  by  the  fair  Molly — ^lost 
between  pain  and  admiration. 

I  am  certainly  glad  to  see  that  the  book  has  reached  a  second 
edition ;  it  will  do  yeoman's  service  to  the  cause  of  right  reason. 

A  quondam  friend  of  mine  was  in  the  habit  of  sending  me 
his  proofs,  and  I  sometimes  wrote  on  them  "  no  objection  except 
to  the  whole  " ;  and  I  am  afraid  that  you  will  think  what  I  am 
about  to  say  comes  to  pretty  much  the  same  thing — at  least  if 
I  am  right  in  the  supposition  that  a  passage  in  your  first  preface 
(p.  vii.)  states  your  fundamental  position,  and  that  you  conceive 
that  when  criticism  has  done  its  uttermost  there  still  remains 
evidence  that  the  personality  of  Jesus  was  the  leading  cause — 
the  conditio  sine  qua  non — of  the  evolution  of  Christianity  from 
Judaism. 

I  long  thought  so,  and  having  a  strong  dislike  to  belittle  the 
heroic  figures  of  history,  I  held  by  the  notion  as  long  as  I  could, 
but  I  find  it  melting  away. 


iSgo  USE  AND  DISUSE  283 

I  cannot  see  that  the  moral  and  religious  ideal  of  early 
Christianity  is  new— on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  to  me  to  be 
implicitly  and  explicitly  contained  in  the  early  prophetic  Judaism 
and  the  later  Hellenised  Judaism ;  and  though  it  is  quite  true  that 
the  new  vitality  of  the  old  ideal  manifested  in  early  Christianity 
demands  "  an  adequate  historic  cause,"  I  would  suggest  that  the 
word  "  cause  "  may  mislead  if  it  is  not  carefully  defined. 

Medical  philosophy  draws  a  most  useful  and  necessary  dis- 
tinction between  "  exciting  "  and  "  predisposing  '*  causes — and 
nowhere  is  it  more  needful  to  keep  this  distinction  in  mind  than 
in  history — and  especially  in  estimating  the  action  of  individuals 
on  the  course  of  human  affairs.  Platonic  and  Stoical  philosophy 
— prophetic  liberalism — the  strong  democratic  socialism  of  the 
Jewish  political  system — the  existence  of  innumerable  sodalities 
for  religious  and  social  purposes — ^had  thrown  the  ancient  world 
into  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium.  With  such  predisposing 
causes  at  work,  the  exciting  cause  of  enormous  changes  might 
be  relatively  insignificant.  The  powder  was  there  —  a  child 
might  throw  the  match  which  should  blow  up  the  whole  concern. 

I  do  not  want  to  seem  irreverent,  still  less  depreciatory,  of 
noble  men,  but  it  strikes  me  that  in  the  present  case  the  Naza- 
renes  were  the  match  and  Paul  the  child. 

An  ingrained  habit  of  trying  to  explain  the  unknown  by  the 
known  leads  me  to  find  the  key  to  Nazarenism  in  Quakerism, 
it  is  impossible  to  read  the  early  history  of  the  Friends  without 
seeing  that  George  Fox  was  a  person  who  exerted  extraordinary 
influence  over  the  men  with  whom  he  came  in  contact ;  and  it  is 
equally  impossible  (at  least  for  me)  to  discover  in  his  copious 
remains  an  original  thought. 

Yet  what  with  the  corruption  of  the  Stuarts,  the  Phariseeism 
of  the  Puritans,  and  the  Sadduceeism  of  the  Church,  England 
was  in  such  a  state,  that  before  his  death  he  had  gathered  about 
him  a  vast  body  of  devoted  followers,  whose  patient  endurance 
of  persecution  is  a  marvel.  Moreover,  the  Quakers  have  exer- 
cised a  prodigious  influence  on  later  English  life. 

But  I  have  scribbled  a  great  deal  too  much  already.  You 
will  see  what  I  mean. 


To  Mr.  W.  Platt  Ball 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Oct,  27,  1890. 
Dear   Sir — I   have   been   through   your   book,   which   has 
greatly  interested  me,  at  a  hand-gallop ;  and  I  have  by  no  means 


284  ^^^^   ^^   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

given  it  the  attention  it  deserves.  But  the  day  after  to-morrow 
I  shall  be  going  into  a  new  house  here,  and  it  may  be  some  time 
before  I  settle  down  to  work  in  it — so  that  I  prefer  to  seem 
hasty,  rather  than  indifferent  to  your  book  and  still  more  to  your 
letter. 

As  to  the  book,  in  the  first  place.  The  only  criticism  I  have 
to  offer — ^in  the  ordinary  drepeciatory  sense  of  the  word — is 
that  pp.  128-137  seem  to  me  to  require  reconsideration,  partly 
from  a  substantial  and  partly  from  a  tactical  point  of  view. 
There  is  much  that  is  disputable  on  the  one  hand,  and  not  neces- 
sary to  your  argument  on  the  other. 

Otherwise  it  seems  to  me  that  the  case  could  hardly  be 
better  stated.  Here  are  a  few  notes  and  queries  that  have  oc- 
curred to  me. 

P.  41.  Extinction  of  Tasmanians — rather  due  to  the  British 
colonist,  who  was  the  main  agent  of  their  extirpation,  I  fancy. 

P.  67.  Birds*  sternums  are  a  great  deal  more  than  surfaces 
of  origin  for  the  pectoral  muscles — e.g,  movable  lid  of  respira- 
tory bellows.    This  not  taken  into  account  by  Darwin. 

P.  85.  "  Inferiority  of  senses  of  Europeans  "  is,  I  believe,  a 
pure  delusion.  Prof.  Marsh  told  me  of  feats  of  American  trap- 
pers equal  to  any  savage  doings.  It  is  a  question  of  attention. 
Consider  wool-sorters,  tea-tasters,  shepherds  who  know  every 
sheep  personally,  etc.  etc. 

P.  85.  I  do  not  understand  about  the  infant's  sole ;  since  all 
men  become  bipeds,  all  must  exert  pressure  on  sole.  There  is 
no  disuse. 

P.  88.  Has  not  "  muscardine  "  been  substituted  for  "  pe- 
brine  "  ?  I  have  always  considered  this  a  very  striking  case. 
Here  is  apparent  inheritance  of  a  diseased  state  through  the 
mother  only,  quite  inexplicable  till  Pasteur  discovered  the 
rationale. 

P.  155.  Have  you  considered  that  State  Socialism  (for 
which  I  have  little  enough  love)  may  be  a  product  of  Natural 
Selection?  The  societies  of  Bees  and  Ants  exhibit  socialism 
in  excelsis. 

The  unlucky  substitution  of  "  survival  of  fittest  "  for  "  nat- 
ural selection  "  has  done  much  harm  in  consequence  of  the  am- 
biguity of  "  fittest  "  —  which  many  take  to  mean  "  best  "  or 
"  highest  *' — whereas  natural  selection  may  work  towards  degra- 
dation vide  epizoa. 

You  do  not  refer  to  the  male  mamma — which  becomes  func- 
tional once  in  many  million  cases,  see  the  curious  records  of 


1890  LETTER   TO   MR.  PLATT   BALL  285 

Gynaecomasty.  Here  practical  disuse  in  the  male  ever  since  the 
origin  of  the  mammalia  has  not  abolished  the  mamma  or  de- 
stroyed its  functional  potentiality  in  extremely  rare  cases. 

I  absolutely  disbelieve  in  use-inheritance  as  the  evidence 
stands.  Spencer  is  bound  to  it  a  priori — ^his  psychology  goes  to 
pieocs  without  it. 

Now  as  to  the  letter.  I  am  no  pessimist — ^but  also  no  opti- 
mist. The  world  might  be  much  worse,  and  it  might  be  much 
better.  Of  moral  purpose  I  see  no  trace  in  Nature.  That  is  an 
article  of  exclusively  human  manufacture — and  very  much  to 
our  credit. 

If  you  will  accept  the  results  of  the  experience  of  an  old 
man  who  has  had  a  very  chequered  existence — and  has  nothing 
to  hope  for  except  a  few  years  of  quiet  downhill — there  is  noth- 
ing of  permanent  value  (putting  aside  a  few  human  affections), 
nothing  that  satisfies  quiet  reflection— except  the  sense  of  having 
worked  according  to  one's  capacity  and  light,  to  make  things 
clear  and  get  rid  of  cant  and  shams  of  all  sorts.  That  was  the 
lesson  I  learned  from  Carlyle's  books  when  I  was  a  boy,  and  it 
has  stuck  by  me  all  my  life. 

Therefore,  my  advice  to  you  is  go  ahead.  You  may  make 
more  of  failing  to  get  money,  and  of  succeeding  in  getting  abuse 
— until  such  time  in  your  life  as  (if  you  are  teachable)  you  have 
ceased  to  care  much  about  either.  The  job  you  propose  to  under- 
take is  a  big  one  and  will  tax  all  your  energies  and  all  your 
patience. 

But,  if  it  were  my  case,  I  should  take  my  chance  of  failing 
in  a  worthy  task  rather  than  of  succeeding  in  lower  things. 

And  if  at  any  time  I  can  be  of  use  to  you  (even  to  the  an- 
swering of  letters)  let  me  know.  But  in  truth  I  am  getting  rusty 
in  science — from  disuse. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

P.S, — Yes — Mr.  Gladstone  has  dug  up  the  hatchet.  We 
shall  see  who  gets  the  scalps. 

By  the  way,  you  have  not  referred  to  plants,  which  are  a 
stronghold  for  you.  What  is  the  good  of  use  inheritance,  say, 
in  orchids? 

The  interests  which  had  formerly  been  divided  between 
biology  and  other  branches  of  science  and  philosophy,  were 
diverted  from  the  one  channel  only  to  run  stronger  in  the 
rest.    Stagnation  was  the  one  thing  impossible  to  him ;  his 


286  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

rest  was  mental  activity  without  excessive  physical  fatigue ; 
and  he  felt  he  still  had  a  useful  purpose  to  serve,  as  a  friend 
put  it,  in  patrolling  his  beat  with  a  vigilant  eye  to  the  loose 
characters  of  thought.  Thus  he  writes  on  September  29  to 
Sir  J.  Hooker : — 

I  wish  quietude  of  mind  were  possible  to  me.  But  without 
something  to  do  that  amuses  me  and  does  not  involve  too  much 
labour,  I  become  quite  unendurable — to  myself  and  everybody 
else. 

Providence  has,  I  believe,  specially  devolved  on  Gladstone, 
Gore,  and  Co.  the  function  of  keeping  "  'ome  *appy  "  for  me. 

I  really  can't  give  up  tormenting  ces  droles. 

However,  I  have  been  toiling  at  a  tremendously  scientific 
article  about  the  "  Aryan  question "  absolutely  devoid  of  blas- 
phemy. 

This  article  appeared  in  the  November  number  of  the 
Nineteenth  Century  {Coll.  Essays,  vii,  271)  and  treats  the 
question  from  a  biological  point  of  view,  with  the  warning 
to  readers  that  it  is  essentially  a  speculation  based  upon 
facts,  but  not  assuredly  proved.  It  starts  from  the  racial 
characteristics  of  skull  and  stature,  not  from  simply  philo- 
logical considerations,  and  arrives  at  a  form  of  the  "  Sar- 
matian "  theory  of  Aryan  origins.  And  for  fear  lest  he 
should  be  supposed  to  take  sides  in  the  question  of  race 
and  language,  or  race  and  civilisation,  he  remarks : — 

The  combination  of  swarthiness  with  stature  above  the  aver- 
age and  a  long  skull,  confer  upon  me  the  serene  impartiality  of 
a  mongrel. 

The  Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Au^.  12,  1890. 

My  dear  Evans — I  have  read  your  address  returned  here- 
with with  a  great  deal  of  interest,  as  I  happen  to  have  been 
amusing  myself  lately  with  reviewing  the  "  Aryan "  question 
according  to  the  new  lights  (or  darknesses). 

I  have  only  two  or  three  remarks  to  offer  on  the  places  I 
have  marked  A  and  B. 

As  to  A,  I  would  not  state  the  case  so  strongly  against  the 
probabilities  of  finding  pliocene  man.  A  pliocene  Homo  skeleton 
might  analogically  be  expected  to  differ  no  more  from  that  of 
modern  men  than  the  CEningen  Canis  from  modern  Canes,  or 
pliocene  horses   from  modern  horses.     If  so,  he  would  most 


iSgo  THE  ARYAN   QUESTION  287 

undoubtedly  be  a  man — genus  Homo — even  if  you  made  him  a 
distinct  species.  For  my  part  I  should  by  no  means  be  aston- 
ished to  find  the  genus  Homo  represented  in  the  Miocene,  say 
the  Neanderthal  man  with  rather  smaller  brain  capacity,  longer 
arms  and  more  movable  great  toe,  but  at  most  specifically  dif- 
ferent. 

As  to  B,  I  rather  think  there  were  people  who  fought  the 
fallacy  of  language  being  a  test  of  race  before  Broca — among 
them  thy  servant — who  got  into  considerable  hot  water  on  that 
subject  for  a  lecture  on  the  forefathers  and  forerunners  of 
the  English  people,  delivered  in  1870.  Taylor  says  that  Cuno 
was  the  first  to  insist  upon  the  proposition  that  race  is  not  co- 
extensive with  language  in  1871.  That  is  all  stuflf.  The  same 
thesis  had  been  maintained  before  I  took  it  up,  but  I  cannot 
remember  by  whom. 

Won't  you  refer  to  the  Blackmore  Museum?  I  was  very 
much  struck  with  it  when  at  Salisbury  the  other  day. 

Hope  they  gave  you  a  better  lunch  at  Gloucester  than  we  did 
here.  We'll  treat  you  better  next  time  in  our  own  den.  With 
the  wife's  kindest  regards — ^Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  remark  in  a  preceding  letter  about  "  Gladstone, 
Gore,  and  Co."  turned  out  to  be  prophetic  as  well  as  retro- 
spective. Mr.  Gladstone  published  this  autumn  in  Good 
Words  his  "  Impregnable  Rock  of  Holy  Scripture,"  con- 
taining an  attack  upon  Huxley's  position  as  taken  up  in 
their  previous  controversy  of  1889. 

The  debate  now  turned  upon  the  story  of  the  Gadarene 
swine.  The  question  at  issue  was  not,  at  first  sight,  one 
of  vital  importance,  and  one  critic  at  least  remarked  that 
at  their  age  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Professor  Huxley  might 
be  better  occupied  than  in  fighting  over  the  Gadarene 
pigs  :— 

If  these  two  famous  swine  were  the  only  parties  to  the  suit, 
I  for  my  part  (writes  Huxley,  Coll.  Essays,  v.  414)  should  fully 
admit  the  justice  of  the  rebuke.  But  the  real  issue  (he  con- 
tends) is  whether  the  men  of  the  nineteenth  century  are  to  adopt 
the  demonology  of  the  men  of  the  first  century,  as  divinely  re- 
vealed truth,  or  to  reject  it  as  degrading  falsity. 

A  lively  encounter  followed : — 


288  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvl 

The  G.O.M.  is  not  murdered  (he  writes  on  November  20), 
only  "  fillipped  with  a  three-man  beetle,"  as  the  fat  knight  has  it. 

This  refers  to  the  forthcoming  article  in  the  December 
Nineteenth  Century,  "  The  Keepers  of  the  Herd  of  Swine," 
which  was  followed  in  March  1891  by  "  Mr.  Gladstone's 
Controversial  Methods  "  (see  Coll.  Essays,  v.  366  sqq,),  the 
rejoinder  to  Mr.  Gladstone's  reply  in  February. 

The  scope  of  this  controversy  was  enlarged  by  the  inter- 
vention in  the  January  Nineteenth  Century  of  the  Duke  of 
Argyll,  to  whom  he  devoted  the  concluding  paragraphs  of 
his  March  article.  But  it  was  scarcely  well  under  way 
when  another,  accompanied  by  much  greater  effusion  of  ink 
and  passion,  sprang  up  in  the  columns  of  the  Times.  His 
share  in  it,  published  in  1891  as  a  pamphlet  under  the  title 
of  "  Social  Diseases  and  Worse  Remedies,"  is  to  be  found 
in  Coll.  Essays,  ix.  237. 

I  have  a  new  row  on  hand  in  re  Salvation  Army  (he  writes 

on  December  2)  !     It's  all  Mrs.  's  fault;  she  offered  the 

money. 

In  fact,  a  lady  who  was  preparing  to  subscribe  £1000 
to  "  General "  Booth's  "  Darkest  England  "  scheme,  begged 
Huxley  first  to  give  her  his  opinion  of  the  scheme  and 
the  likelihood  of  its  being  properly  carried  out.  A  careful 
examination  of  "  Darkest  England  "  and  other  authorities 
on  the  subject  convinced  him  that  it  was  most  unwise  to 
create  an  organisation  whose  absolute  obedience  to  an  irre- 
sponsible leader  might  some  day  become  a  serious  danger 
to  the  State ;  that  the  reforms  proposed  were  already  being 
undertaken  by  other  bodies,  which  would  be  crippled  if 
this  scheme  were  floated;  and  that  the  financial  arrange- 
ments of  the  Army  were  not  such  as  provide  guarantees 
for  the  proper  administration  of  the  funds  subscribed : — 

And  if  the  thing  goes  on  much  longer,  if  Booth  establishes 
his  Bank,  you  will  have  a  crash  some  of  these  fine  days,  com- 
parable only  to  Law's  Mississippi  business,  but  unfortunately 
ruining  only  the  poor. 

On  the  same  day  he  writes  to  his  eldest  son : — 


1890  THE  SALVATION  ARMY  289 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Dec,  8»  1890. 

Attacking  the  Salvation  Army  may  look  like  the  advance  of 
a  forlorn  hope,  but  this  old  dog  has  never  yet  let  go  after  fixing 
his  teeth  into  anything  or  anybody,  and  he  is  not  going  to  begin 
now.  And  it  is  only  a  question  of  holding  on.  Looking  at 
Plumptre's  letter  exposing  the  Bank  swindle. 

The  Times,  too,  is  behaving  like  a  brick.  This  world  is  not 
a  very  lovely  place,  but  down  at  the  bottom,  as  oldCarlyle 
preached,  veracity  does  really  lie,  and  will  show  itself  if  people 
won't  be  impatient. 

No  sooner  had  he  begun  to  express  these  opinions  in 
the  columns  of  the  Times  than  additional  information  of 
all  kinds  poured  in  upon  him,  especially  from  within  the 
Army,  much  of  it  private  for  fear  of  injury  to  the  writers 
if  it  were  discovered  that  they  had  written  to  expose  abuses ; 
indeed  in  one  case  the  writer  had  thought  better  of  even 
appending  his  signature  to  his  letter,  and  had  cut  off  his 
name  from  the  foot  of  it,  alleging  that  correspondence  was 
not  inviolable.  So  far  were  these  persons  from  feeling  hos- 
tility to  the  organisation  to  which  they  belonged,  that  one 
at  least  hailed  the  Professor  as  the  divinely-appointed  re- 
deemer of  the  Army,  whose  criticism  was  to  bring  it  back 
to  its  pristine  purity. 

To  HIS  Elder  Son 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Jan,  8,  1891. 

Dear  Lens — It  is  very  jolly  to  think  of  J.  and  you  paying 
us  a  visit.  It  is  proper,  also,  the  eldest  son  should  hansel  the 
house. 

Is  the  Mr.  Sidgwick  who  took  up  the  cudgels  for  me  so 
gallantly  in  the  St,  lames'  one  of  your  Sidgwicks  ?  If  so,  I  wish 
you  would  thank  him  on  my  account.  (The  letter  was  capital.)* 
Generally  people  like  me  to  pull  the  chestnuts  out  of  the  fire  for 

*  Mr.  William .  C.  Sidgwick  had  written  (January  4)  an  indignant 
letter  to  protest  against  the  heading  of  an  article  in  the  Speaker ^  **  Pro- 
fessor Huxley  as  Titus  Oates."  "To  this  monster  of  iniquity  the 
Speaker  compares  an  honourable  English  gentleman,  because  he  has 
ventured  to  dissuade  his  countrymen  from  giving  money  to  Mr.  Wil- 
liam Booth.  .  .  .  Mr.  Huxley's  views  on  theology  may  be  wrong,  but 
nobody  doubts  that  he  honestly  holds  them  ;  they  do  not  bring  Mr. 

55 


290  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

them,  but  don't  care  to  take  any  share  in  the  burning  of  the 
fingers. 

But  the  Boothites  are  hard  hit,  and  may  be  allowed  to 
cry  out. 

I  begin  to  think  that  they  must  be  right  in  saying  that  the 
Devil  is  at  work  to  destroy  them.  No  other  theory  sufficiently 
accounts  for  the  way  they  play  into  my  hands.  Poor  Clibborn- 
Booth  has  a  long — columns  long — ^letter  in  the  Times  to-day,  in 
which,  all  unbeknownst  to  himself,  he  proves  my  case. 

I  do  believe  it  is  a  veritable  case  of  the  herd  of  swine,  and 
I  shall  have  to  admit  the  probability  of  that  miracle. 

Love  to  J.  and  Co.  from  us  all. — Ever  your  affectionate 

Pater. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  yiz«.  ii,  1891. 

My  dear  Mr.  Clodd — I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  the 
number  of  the  St.  James's  Gazette,  which  I  had  not  seen.  The 
leading  article  expresses  exactly  the  same  conclusions  as  those 
at  which  I  had  myself  arrived  from  the  study  of  the  deed  of 
1878.  But  of  course  I  was  not  going  to  entangle  myself  in  a 
legal  discussion.  However,  I  have  reason  to  know  that  the 
question  will  be  dealt  with  by  a  highly  qualified  legal  expert 
before  long.  The  more  I  see  of  the  operations  of  headquarters 
the  worse  they  look.  I  get  some  of  my  most  valuable  informa- 
tion and  heartiest  encouragement  from  officers  of  the  Salvation 
Army ;  and  I  knew,  in  this  way,  of  Smith's  resignation  a  couple 
of  days  before  it  was  announced !  But  the  poor  fellows  are  so 
afraid  of  spies  and  consequent  persecution,  that  some  implore 
me  not  to  notice  their  letters,  and  all  pledge  me  to  secrecy.  So 
that  I  am  Vice-Fontanelle  with  my  hand  full  of  truth,  while  I 
can  only  open  my  little  finger. 

It  is  a  case  of  one  down  and  t'other  come  on,  just  now. 

" "  will  get  his  deserts  in  due  time.     But,  oh  dear,  what  a 

waste  of  time  for  a  man  who  has  not  much  to  look  to.  No; 
"  waste  "  is  the  wrong  word ;  it's  useful,  but  I  wish  that  some- 
body else  would  do  it  and  leave  me  to  my  books. 

My  wife  desires  her  kind  regards.  I  am  happy  to  say  she  is 
now  remarkably  well.  If  you  are  this  way,  pray  look  in  at  our 
Hermitage. — Yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Huxley  wealth  and  honours,  nor  do  they  cause  the  murder  of  the 
innocent.  To  insinuate  a  resemblance  which  you  dare  not  state 
openly  is  an  outrage  on  common  decency.  ..." 


i8go  LETTERS  29 1 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  y<f7«.  30,  1891. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  trust  I  have  done  with  Booth  and  Co. 
at  last.  What  an  ass  a  man  is  to  try  to  prevent  his  fellow- 
creatures  from  being  humbugged !  Surely  I  am  old  enough  to 
know  better.  I  have  not  been  so  well  abused  for  an  age.  It's 
quite  like  old  times. 

And  now  I  have  to  settle  accounts  with  the  duke  and  the 
G.O.M.  I  wonder  when  the  wicked  will  let  me  be  at  peace. — 
Ever  yours  affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Other  letters  touch  upon  the  politics  of  the  hour,  espe- 
cially upon  the  sudden  and  dramatic  fall  of  Parnell.  He 
could  not  but  admire  the  power  and  determination  of  the 
man,  and  his  political  methods,  an  admiration  rashly  inter- 
preted by  some  journalist  as  admiration  of  the  objects  to 
which  these  political  methods  were  applied.    (See  p.  134.) 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  26,  1890. 

My  dear  Lecky — Very  many  thanks  for  your  two  volumes, 
which  I  rejoice  to  have,  especially  as  a  present  from  you.  I  waj 
only  waiting  until  we  were  settled  in  our  new  house — as  I  hope 
we  shall  be  this  time  next  week — to  add  them  to  the  set  which 
already  adorn  my  shelves,  and  I  promise  myself  soon  to  enjoy 
the  reading  of  them. 

The  Unionist  cause  is  looking  up.  What  a  strange  thing  it 
is  that  the  Irish  malcontents  are  always  sold,  one  way  or  the 
other,  by  their  leaders. 

I  wonder  if  the  G.O.M.  ever  swears !  Pity  if  he  can't  have 
that  relief  just  now. 

With  our  united  kind  regards  to  Mrs.  Lecky  and  yourself — 
Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  29,  1890. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  have  filled  up  and  sent  your  and  my 
copies  of  entry  for  Athenaeum. 

Carpenter  has  written  the  best  popular  statement  I  know  of, 
of  the  results  of  criticism,  in  a  little  book  called  The  First  Three 
Gospels,  which  is  well  worth  reading.    [See  p.  282.] 

I  have  promised  to  go  to  R.S.  dinner  and  propose  Stokes* 
health  on  Monday,  but  if  the  weather  holds  out  as  Arctic  as  it 
is  now,  I  shall  not  dare  to  venture.  The  driving  east  wind, 
blowing  the  snow  before  it  here,  has  been  awful ;  for  ten  years 
they  have  had  nothing  like  it.    I  am  glad  to  say  that  my  little 


292 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 


house  turns  out  to  be  warm.  We  go  in  next  Wednesday,  and  I 
fear  I  cannot  be  in  town  on  Thursday  even  if  the  weather 
permits. 

I  have  had  pleurisy  that  was  dangerous  and  not  painful, 
then  p.  that  was  painful  and  not  dangerous;  there  is  only  one 
further  combination,  and  I  don't  want  that. 

Politics  now  are  immensely  interesting.  There  must  be  a 
depth  of  blackguardism  in  me,  for  I  cannot  help  admiring  Par- 
nell.  I  prophesy  that  it  is  Gladstone  who  will  retire  for  a  while, 
and  then  come  back  to  Parnell's  heel  like  a  whipped  hound.  His 
letter  was  carefully  full  of  loopholes. — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Dec,  2,  1890. 

My  dear  Hooker —  .  .  .  The  question  of  questions  now  is 
whether  the  Unionists  will  have  the  sense  to  carry  a  measure 
settling  the  land  question  at  once.  If  they  do  that,  I  do  not  be- 
lieve it  will  be  in  the  power  of  man  to  stir  them  further.  And 
my  belief  is  that  Parnell  will  be  quite  content  with  that  solution. 
He  does  not  want  to  be  made  a  nonentity  by  Davitt  or  the  Irish 
Americans. 

But  what  ingrained  liars  they  all  are !  That  is  the  bottom 
of  all  Irish  trouble.  Fancy  Healy  and  Sexton  going  to  Dublin 
to  swear  eternal  fidelity  to  their  leader,  and  now  openly  declaring 
that  they  only  did  so  because  they  believed  he  would  resign. — 
Ever  yours  affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Jan,  ID,  i8gi. 

My  DEAR  Foster — I  am  trying  to  bring  the  Booth  business  to 
an  end  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  but  it's  like  getting  a  wolf  by 
the  ears;  you  can't  let  him  go  exactly  when  you  like. 

But  the  result  is  quite  worth  the  trouble.  Booth,  Stead, 
Tillett,  Manning  and  Co.  have  their  little  game  spoilt  for  the 
present. 

You  cannot  imagine  the  quantity  of  letters  I  get  from  the 
Salvation  Army  subordinates,  thanking  me  and  telling  me  all 
sorts  of  stories  in  strict  confidence.  The  poor  devils  are  fright- 
ened out  of  their  lives  by  headquarter  spies.  Some  beg  me  not 
to  reply,  as  their  letters  are  opened. 

I  knew  that  saints  were  not  bad  hands  at  lying  before;  but 
these  Booth  people  beat  Banagher. 

Then  there  is awaits  skinning,  and  I  believe  the  G.O.M. 

is  to  be  upon  me  !    Oh  for  a  quiet  life. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


iSgo  SICK   OF  CONTROVERSY  293 

But  by  February  17  the  Booth  business  was  over,  the 
final  rejoinder  to  Mr.  Gladstone  sent  to  press ;  and  he  writes 
to  Sir  J.  Hooker : — 

Please  the  pigs,  I  have  now  done  with  them — wiped  my 
mouth,  and  am  going  to  be  good — till  next  time. 

But  in  truth  I  am  as  sick  of  controversy  as  a  confectioner's 
boy  of  tarts. 

I  rather  think  I  shall  set  up  as  a  political  prophet.  Gladstone 
and  all  the  rest  are  coming  to  heel  to  their  master. 

Years  ago  one  of  the  present  leaders  of  the  anti-Parnellites 
said  to  me :  "  Gladstone  is  always  in  the  hands  of  somebody 
stronger  than  himself;  formerly  it  was  Bright,  now  it  is  Par- 
nell." 


CHAPTER   XVII 
1890-91 

The  new  house  at  Eastbourne  has  been  several  times 
referred  to.  As  usually  happens,  the  move  was  considerably 
delayed  by  the  slowness  of  the  workmen ;  it  did  not  actually 
take  place  till  the  beginning  of  December. 

He  writes  to  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Roller,  who  also  had 
just  moved  into  a  new  house : — 

You  have  all  my  sympathies  on  the  buy,  buy  question.  I 
never  knew  before  that  when  you  go  into  a  new  house  money 
runs  out  at  the  heels  of  your  boots.  On  former  occasions,  I  have 
been  too  busy  to  observe  the  fact.  But  I  am  convinced  now  that 
it  is  a  law  of  nature. 

The  origin  of  the  name  given  to  the  house  appears  from 
the  following  letter: — 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  Oct.  15,  1890. 

My  dear  Foster  —  Best  thanks  for  the  third  part  of  the 
"  Physiology,"  which  I  found  when  I  ran  up  to  town  for  a  day 
or  two  last  week.    What  a  grind  that  book  must  be  ! 

How*s  a*  wi*  you?    Let  me  have  a  line. 

We  ought  to  have  been  in  our  house  a  month  ago,  but  fitters, 
paperers,  and  polishers  are  like  bugs  or  cockroaches,  you  may 
easily  get  'em  in,  but  getting  'em  out  is  the  deuce.  However,  I 
hope  to  clear  them  out  by  the  end  of  this  week,  and  get  in  by 
the  end  of  next  week. 

One  is  obliged  to  have  names  for  houses  here.  Mine  will  be 
"  Hodeslea,"  which  is  as  near  as  I  can  go  to  "  Hodesleia,"  the 
poetical  original  shape  of  my  very  ugly  name. 

There  was  a  noble  scion  of  the  house  of  Huxley  of  Huxley 
who,  having  burgled  and  done  other  wrong  things  (temp.  Henry 

294 


I   • 


cfe"  ^ 

— • 


I,  ^ 

ft       «> 


■•  ^ 


iSgo      GIFT   TO   THE   ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF  SCIENCE       295 

IV.),  asked  for  benefit  of  clergy.  I  expect  they  gave  it  him,  not 
in  the  way  he  wanted,  but  in  the  way  they  would  like  to  "  bene- 
fit "  a  later  member  of  the  family. 

[Rough  sketch  of  one  priest  hauling  the  rope  taut  over  the 
gallows,  while  another  holds  a  crucifix  before  the  suspended 
criminal.] 

Between  this  gentleman  and  my  grandfather  there  is  un- 
fortunately a  complete  blank,  but  I  have  none  the  less  faith  in 
him  as  my  ancestor. 

My  wife,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  in  town — superintending  pack- 
ing up — no  stopping  her.  I  have  been  very  uneasy  about  her 
at  times,  and  shall  be  glad  when  we  are  quietly  settled  down. 
With  kindest  regards  to  Mrs.  Foster — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

His  own  principal  task  was  in  getting  his  library  ready 
for  the  move. 

Most  of  my  time  (he  writes  on  November  16)  for  the  last 
fortnight  has  been  spent  in  arranging  books  and  tearing  up 
papers  till  my  back  aches  and  my  fingers  are  sore. 

However,  he  did  not  take  all  his  books  with  him.  There 
was  a  quantity  of  biological  works  of  all  sorts  which  had 
accumulated  in  his  library  and  which  he  was  not  likely  to 
use  again;  these  he  offered  as  a  parting  gift  to  the  Royal 
College  of  Science.  On  December  8,  the  Registrar  conveys 
to  him  the  thanks  of  the  Council  for  "  the  valuable  library 
of  biological  works,"  and  further  informs  him  that  it  was 
resolved — 

That  the  library  shall  be  kept  in  the  room  formerly  occupied 
by  the  Dean,  which  shall  be  called  "  The  Huxley  Laboratory  for 
Biological  Research,"  and  be  devoted  to  the  prosecution  of 
original  researches  in  Biological  Science,  with  which  the  name 
of  Professor  Huxley  is  inseparably  associated. 

Huxley  replied  as  follows: — 

Dear  Registrar — I  beg  you  convey  my  hearty  thanks  to  the 
Council  for  the  great  kindness  of  the  minute  and  resolution 
which  you  have  sent  me.  My  mind  has  never  been  greatly  set 
on  posthumous  fame;  but  there  is  no  way  of  keeping  memory 
green  which  I  should  like  so  well  as  that  which  they  have 
adopted  towards  me. 


296  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

It  has  been  my  fate  to  receive  a  good  deal  more  vilipending 
than  (I  hope)  I  deserve.  If  my  colleagues,  with  whom  I  have 
worked  so  long,  put  too  high  a  value  upon  my  services,  perhaps 
the  result  may  be  not  far  off  justice. — Yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

In  addition  to  the  directly  controversial  articles  in  the 
early  part  of  the  year,  two  other  articles  on  controversial 
subjects  belong  to  1891.  "  Hasisadra's  Adventure,"  pub- 
lished in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  June,  completed  his 
long-contemplated  examination  of  the  Flood  myth.  In  this 
he  first  discussed  the  Babylonian  form  of  the  legend  re- 
corded upon  the  clay  tablets  of  Assurbanipal — a  simpler  and 
less  exaggerated  form  as  befits  an  earlier  version,  and  in  its 
physical  details  keeping  much  nearer  to  the  bounds  of  prob- 
ability. 

The  greater  part  of  the  article,  however,  is  devoted  to  a 
wider  question — How  far  does  geological  and  geographical 
evidence  bear  witness  to  the  consequences  which  must  have 
ensued  from  a  universal  flood,  or  even  from  one  limited  to 
the  countries  of  Mesopotamia?  And  he  comes  to  the  con- 
clusion that  these  very  countries  have  been  singularly  free 
from  any  great  changes  of  the  kind  for  long  geological 
periods. 

The  sarcastic  references  in  this  article  to  those  singular 
reasoners  who  take  the  possibility  of  an  occurrence  to  be 
the  same  as  scientific  testimony  to  the  fact  of  its  occurrence, 
lead  up,  more  or  less,  to  the  subject  of  an  essay,  "  Possi- 
bilities and  Impossibilities,"  which  appeared  in  the  Agnostic 
Annual  for  1892,  actually  published  in  October  1891,  and 
to  be  found  in  Collected  Essays,  v.  192. 

This  was  a  restatement  of  the  fundamental  principles  of 
the  agnostic  position,  arising  out  of  the  controversies  of  the 
last  two  years  upon  the  demonology  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  miraculous  is  not  to  be  denied  as  impossible ;  as  Hume 
said,  "  Whatever  is  intelligible  and  can  be  distinctly  con- 
ceived implies  no  contradiction,  and  can  never  be  proved 
false  by  any  demonstrative  argument  or  abstract  reasoning 
a  priori/'  and  these  combinations  of  phenomena  are  per- 
fectly conceivable.     Moreover,  in  the  progress  of  knowl- 


1891  IMPOSSIBILITIES  AND   IMPROBABILITIES  297 

edge,  the  miracles  of  to-day  may  be  science  of  to-morrow. 
Improbable  they  are,  certainly,  by  all  experience,  and  there- 
fore they  require  specially  strong  evidence.  But  this  is 
precisely  what  they  lack;  the  evidence  to  them,  when  ex- 
amined, turns  out  to  be  of  doubtful  value. 

I  am  anxious  (he  says)  to  bring  about  a  clear  understanding 
of  the  difference  between  "  impossibilities  "  and  "  improbabili- 
ties," because  mistakes  on  this  point  lay  us  open  to  the  attacks 
of  ecclesiastical  apologists  of  the  type  of  the  late  Cardinal  New- 
man. .  *  • 

When  it  is  rightly  stated,  the  Agnostic  view  of  "  miracles  " 
is,  in  my  judgment,  unassailable.  We  are  not  justified  in  the 
a  priori  assertion  that  the  order  of  nature,  as  experience  has 
revealed  it  to  us,  cannot  change.  In  arguing  about  the  miracu- 
lous, the  assumption  is  illegitimate,  because  it  involves  the  whole 
point  in  dispute.  Furthermore,  it  is  an  assumption  which  takes 
us  beyond  the  range  of  our  faculties.  Obviously,  no  amount  of 
past  experience  can  warrant  us  in  anything  more  than  a  corre- 
spondingly strong  expectation  for  the  present  and  future.  We 
find,  practically,  that  expectations,  based  upon  careful  observa- 
tions of  past  events,  are,  as  a  rule,  trustworthy.  We  should  be 
foolish  indeed  not  to  follow  the  only  guide  we  have  through  life. 
But,  for  all  that,  our  highest  and  surest  generalisations  remain 
on  the  level  of  justifiable  expectations ;  that  is,  very  high  proba- 
bilities. For  my  part,  I  am  unable  to  conceive  of  an  intelli- 
gence shaped  on  the  model  of  that  of  men,  however  superior  it 
might  be,  which  could  be  any  better  off  than  our  own  in  this 
respect ;  that  is,  which  could  possess  logically  justifiable  grounds 
for  certainty  about  the  constancy  of  the  order  of  things,  and 
therefore  be  in  a  position  to  declare  that  such  and  such  events 
are  impossible.  Some  of  the  old  mythologies  recognised  this 
clearly  enough.  Beyond  and  above  Zeus  and  Odin,  there  lay  the 
unknown  and  inscrutable  Fate  which,  one  day  or  other,  would 
crumple  up  them  and  the  world  they  ruled  to  give  place  to  a 
new  order  of  things. 

I  sincerely  hope  that  I  shall  not  be  accused  of  Pyrrhonism, 
or  of  any  desire  to  weaken  the  foundations  of  rational  certainty. 
I  have  merely  desired  to  point  out  that  rational  certainty  is  one 
thing,  and  talk  about  "  impossibilities,"  or  "  violation  of  natural 
laws,"  another.  Rational  certainty  rests  upon  two  grounds :  the 
one  that  the  evidence  in  favour  of  a  given  statement  is  as  good 
as  it  can  be ;  the  other,  that  such  evidence  is  plainly  insufficient. 


298  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

In  the  former  case,  the  statement  is  to  be  taken  as  true,  in  the 
latter  as  untrue;  until  something  arises  to  modify  the  verdict, 
which,  however  properly  reached,  may  always  be  more  or  less 
wrong,  the  best  information  being  never  complete,  and  the  best 
reasoning  being  liable  to  fallacy. 

To  quarrel  with  the  uncertainty  that  besets  us  in  intellectual 
affairs  would  be  about  as  reasonable  as  to  object  to  live  one's 
life,  with  due  thought  for  the  morrow,  because  no  man  can  be 
sure  he  will  be  alive  an  hour  hence.  Such  are  the  conditions 
imposed  upon  us  by  nature,  and  we  have  to  make  the  best  of 
them.  And  I  think  that  the  greatest  mistake  those  of  us  who  are 
interested  in  the  progress  of  free  thought  can  make  is  to  over- 
look these  limitations,  and  to  deck  ourselves  with  the  dogmatic 
feathers  which  are  the  traditional  adornment  of  our  oppo- 
nents. Let  us  be  content  with  rational  certainty,  leaving  irra- 
tional certainties  to  those  who  like  to  muddle  their  minds 
with  them. 

As  for  the  difficulty  of  believing  miracles  in  themselves, 
he  gives  in  this  paper  several  examples  of  a  favourite  saying 
of  his,  that  Science  offers  us  much  greater  marvels  than  the 
miracles  of  theology;  only  the  evidence  for  them  is  very 
different. 

The  following  letter  was  written  in  acknowledgment  of 
a  paper  by  the  Rev.  E.  McClure,  which  endeiavoured  to  place 
the  belief  in  an  individual  permanence  upon  the  grounds 
that  we  know  of  no  leakage  anywhere  in  nature ;  that  matter 
is  not  a  source,  but  a  transmitter  of  energy;  and  that  the 
brain,  so  far  from  originating  thought,  is  a  mere  machine 
responsive  to  something  external  to  itself,  a  revealer  of 
something  which  it  does  not  produce,  like  a  musical  instru- 
ment. This  "  something  '*  is  the  universal  of  thought,  which 
is  identified  with  the  general  Adyo?  of  the  fourth  gospel. 
Moral  perfection  consists  in  assimilation  to  this;  sin  is  the 
falling  short  of  perfect  revealing  of  the  eternal  Aoyos. 

Huxley's  reply  interested  his  correspondent  not  only  for 
the  brief  opinion  on  the  philosophic  question,  but  for  the 
personal  touch  in  the  explanation  of  the  motives  which  had 
guided  his  life-work,  and  his  "  kind  feeling  towards  such  of 
the  clergy  as  endeavoured  to  seek  honestly  for  a  natural 
basis  to  their  faith." 


iSgi  LETTER   TO  DR.  McCLURE  299 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  17,  1891. 

Dear  Mr.  McClure  —  I  am  very  much  obliged  for  your 
letter,  which  belongs  to  a  different  category  from  most  of  those 
which  I  receive  from  your  side  of  the  hedge  that,  unfortunately, 
separates  thinking  men. 

So  far  as  I  know  myself,  after  making  due  deduction  for  the 
ambition  of  youth  and  a  fiery  temper,  which  ought  to  (but  un- 
fortunately does  not)  get  cooler  with  age,  my  sole  motive  is  to 
get  at  the  truth  in  all  things. 

I  do  not  care  one  straw  about  fame,  present  or  posthumous, 
and  I  loathe  notoriety,  but  I  do  care  to  have  that  desire  manifest 
and  recognised.  ^ 

Your  paper  deals  with  a  problem  which  has  profoundly  in- 
terested me  for  years,  but  which  I  take  to  be  insoluble.  It  would 
need  a  book  for  full  discussion.  But  I  offer  a  remark  only  on 
two  points. 

The  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy  tells  neither  one 
way  nor  the  other.  Energy  is  the  cause  of  movement  of  body, 
\,e,  things  having  mass.  States  of  consciousness  have  no  mass, 
even  if  they  can  be  conceded  to  be  movable.  Therefore  even  if 
they  are  caused  by  molecular  movements,  they  would  not  in  any 
way  affect  the  store  of  energy. 

Physical  causation  need  not  be  the  only  kind  of  causation, 
and  when  Cabanis  said  that  thought  was  a  function  of  the  brain, 
in  the  same  way  as  bile  secretion  is  a  function  of  the  liver,  he 
blundered  philosophically.  Bile  is  a  product  of  the  transforma- 
tion of  material  energy.  But  in  the  mathematical  sense  of  the 
word  "  function,"  thought  may  be  a  function  of  the  brain.  That 
is  to  say,  it  may  arise  only  when  certain  physical  particles  take 
on  a  certain  order. 

By  way  of  a  coarse  analogy,  consider  a  parallel-sided  piece 
of  glass  through  which  light  passes.  It  forms  no  picture.  Shape 
it  so  as  to  be  bi-convex,  and  a  picture  appears  in  its  focus. 

Is  not  the  formation  of  the  picture  a  "  function "  of  the 
piece  of  glass  thus  shaped  ? 

So,  from  your  own  point  of  view,  suppose  a  mind-stuff — Xoyoi 
— a  noumenal  cosmic  light  such  as  is  shadowed  in  the  fourth 
gospel.  The  brain  of  a  dog  will  convert  it  into  one  set  of 
phenomenal  pictures,  and  the  brain  of  a  man  into  another.  But 
in  both  cases  the  result  is  the  consequence  of  the  way  in  which 
the  respective  brains  perform  their  "  functions." 

Yet  one  point. 

The  actions  we  call  sinful  are  as  much  the  consequence  of 


300 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 


the  order  of  nature  as  those  we  call  virtuous.  They  are  part  and 
parcel  of  the  struggle  for  existence  through  which  all  living 
things  have  passed,  and  they  have  become  sins  because  man 
alone  seeks  a  higher  life  in  voluntary  association. 

Therefore  the  instrument  has  never  been  marred;  on  the 
contrary,  we  are  trying  to  get  music  out  of  harps,  sacbuts,  and 
psalteries,  which  never  were  in  tune  and  seemingly  never  will 
be. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Few  years  passed  without  some  utterance  from  Huxley 
on  the  subject  of  education,  especially  scientific  education. 
This  year  we  have  a  letter  to  Professor  Ray  Lankester 
touching  the  science  teaching  at  Oxford. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  ya«.  28,  1891. 

Dear  Lankester — I  met  Foster  at  the  Athenaeum  when  1 
was  in  town  last  week,  and  we  had  some  talk  about  your  "  very 
gentle  "  stirring  of  the  Oxford  pudding.  I  asked  him  to  let  you 
know  when  occasion  offered,  that  (as  I  had  already  said  to 
Burdon  Sanderson)  I  drew  a  clear  line  apud  biology  between 
the  medical  student  and  the  science  student. 

With  respect  to  the  former,  I  consider  it  ought  to  be  kept 
within  strict  limits,  and  made  simply  a  Vorschule  to  human 
anatomy  and  physiology. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  man  who  is  going  out  in  natural 
science  ought  to  have  a  much  larger  dose,  especially  in  the  direc- 
tion of  morphology.  However,  from  what  I  understand  from 
Foster,  there  seems  a  doubt  about  the  "  going  out "  in  Natural 
Science,  so  I  had  better  confine  myself  to  the  medicos.  Their 
burden  is  already  so  heavy  that  I  do  not  want  to  see  it  increased 
by  a  needless  weight  even  of  elementary  biology. 

Very  many  thanks  for  the  "  Zoological  articles "  just  ar- 
rived.— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Don't  write  to  the  Times  about  anything ;  look  at  the  trouble 
that  comes  upon  a  harmless  man  for  two  months,  in  consequence. 

The  following  letter,  which  I  quote  from  the  Yorkshire 
Herald  of  April  11,  1891,  was  written  in  answer  to  some 
enquiries  from  Mr.  J.  Harrison,  who  read  a  paper  on  Tech- 
nical Education  as  applied  to  Agriculture,  before  the  Eas- 
ingwold  Agricultural  Club : — 

I  am  afraid  that  my  opinion  upon  the  subject  of  your  enquiry 
is  worth  very  little — my  ignorance  of  practical  agriculture  being 


jSqi  science  and  AGRICULTURE  301 

profound.  However,  there  are  some  general  principles  which 
apply  to  all  technical  training;  the  first  of  these,  I  think,  is  that 
practice  is  to  be  learned  only  by  practice.  The  farmer  must  be 
made  by  and  through  farm  work.  I  believe  I  might  be  able  to 
give  you  a  fair  account  of  a  bean  plant  and  of  the  manner  and 
condition  of  its  growth,  but  if  I  were  to  try  to  raise  a  crop  of 
beans,  your  club  would  probably  laugh  consumedly  at  the  result. 
Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  you  practical  people  would  be  all 
the  better  for  the  scientific  knowledge  which  does  not  enable 
me  to  grow  beans.  It  would  keep  you  from  attempting  hope- 
less experiments,  and  would  enable  you  to  take  advantage  of  the 
innumerable  hints  which  Dame  Nature  gives  to  people  who  live 
in  direct  contact  with  things.  And  this  leads  me  to  the  second 
general  principle  which  I  think  applies  to  all  technical  teaching 
for  school-boys  and  school-girls,  and  that  is,  that  they  should 
be  led  from  the  observation  of  the  commonest  facts  to  general 
scientific  truths.  If  I  were  called  upon  to  frame  a  course  of 
elementary  instruction  preparatory  to  agriculture,  I  am  not  sure 
that  I  should  attempt  chemistry,  or  botany,  or  physiology  or 
geology,  as  such.  It  is  a  method  fraught  with  the  danger  of 
spending  too  much  time  and  attention  on  abstraction  and  theo- 
ries, on  words  and  notions  instead  of  things.  The  history  of  a 
bean,  of  a  grain  of  wheat,  of  a  turnip,  of  a  sheep,  of  a  pig,  or 
of  a  cow  properly  treated — ^with  the  introduction  of  the  ele- 
ments of  chemistry,  physiology,  and  so  on  as  they  come  in — 
would  give  all  the  elementary  science  which  is  needed  for  the 
comprehension  of  the  processes  of  agriculture  in  a  form  easily 
assimilated  by  the  youthful  mind,  which  loathes  everything  in 
the  shape  of  long  words  and  abstract  notions,  and  small  blame 
to  it.  I  am  afraid  I  shall  not  have  helped  you  very  much,  but  I 
believe  that  my  suggestions,  rough  as  they  are,  are  in  the  right 
direction. 

The  perversion  of  the  new  Chair  of  English  Literature 
at  Oxford  to  "  Middle  English  '*  philology  was  the  occasion 
of  the  following  letter,  which  appeared  in  the  Pall  Mall 
Gazette  of  October  22,  1891 : — 

I  fully  agree  with  you  that  the  relation  of  our  Universities 
to  the  study  of  English  literature  is  a  matter  of  great  public 
importance;  and  I  have  more  than  once  taken  occasion  to  ex- 
press my  conviction — Firstly,  that  the  works  of  our  great  Eng- 
lish writers  are  pre-eminently  worthy  of  being  systematically 
studied  in  our  schools  and  universities  as  literature ;  and  second- 


302  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

ly,  that  the  establishment  of  professional  chairs,  of  philology, 
under  the  name  of  literature,  may  be  a  profit  to  science,  but  is 
really  a  fraud  practised  upon  letters. 

That  a  young  Englishman  may  be  turned  out  of  one  of  our 
universities,  "  epopt  and  perfect "  so  far  as  their  system  takes 
him,  and  yet  ignorant  of  the  noble  literature  which  has  grown 
up  in  those  islands  during  the  last  three  centuries,  no  less  than 
of  the  development  of  the  philosophical  and  political  ideas  which 
have  most  profoundly  influenced  modern  civilisation,  is  a  fact 
in  the  history  of  the  nineteenth  century  which  the  twentieth 
will  find  hard  to  believe;  though,  perhaps,  it  is  not  more  in- 
credible than  our  current  superstition  that  whoso  wishes  to  write 
and  speak  English  well  should  mould  his  style  after  the  models 
furnished  by  classical  antiquity.  For  my  part,  I  venture  to 
doubt  the  wisdom  of  attempting  to  mould  one's  style  by  any  other 
process  than  that  of  striving  after  the  clear  and  forcible  expres- 
sion of  definite  conceptions;  in  which  process  the  Glassian  pre- 
cept, "  first  catch  your  definite  conceptions,"  is  probably  the 
most  difficult  to  obey.  But  still  I  mark  among  distinguished 
contemporary  speakers  and  writers  of  English,  saturated  with 
antiquity,  not  a  few  to  whom,  it  seems  to  me,  the  study  of 
Hobbes  might  have  taught  dignity;  of  Swift,  concision  and 
clearness;  of  Goldsmith  and  Defoe,  simplicity. 

Well,  among  a  hundred  young  men  whose  university  career 
is  finished,  is  there  one  whose  attention  has  ever  been  directed 
by  his  literary  instructors  to  a  page  of  Hobbes,  or  Swift,  or 
Goldsmith,  or  Defoe?  In  my  boyhood  we  were  familiar  with 
Robinson  Crusoe,  The  Vicar  of  Wakefield,  and  Gulliver's 
Travels;  and  though  the  mysteries  of  "  Middle  English  "  were 
hidden  from  us,  my  impression  is  we  ran  less  chance  of  learning 
to  write  and  speak  the  "  middling  English  "  of  popular  orators 
and  headmasters  than  if  we  had  been  perfect  in  such  mysteries 
and  ignorant  of  those  three  masterpieces.  It  has  been  the  fash- 
ion to  decry  the  eighteenth  century,  as  young  fops  laugh  at  their 
fathers.  But  we  were  there  in  germ ;  and  a  "  Professor  of 
Eighteenth  Century  History  and  Literature "  who  knew  his 
business  might  tell  young  Englishmen  more  of  that  which  it  is 
profoundly  important  they  should  know,  but  which  at  present 
remains  hidden  from  them,  than  any  other  instructor;  and,  in- 
cidentally, they  would  learn  to  know  good  English  when  they 
see  or  hear  it — perhaps  even  to  discriminate  between  slipshod 
copiousness  and  true  eloquence,  and  that  alone  would  be  a  great 
gain. 


1891  LETTERS  303 

The  remaining  letters  of  the  year  are  of  miscellaneous 
interest.  They  show  him  happily  established  in  his  retreat 
at  Eastbourne  in  very  fair  health,  on  his  guard  against  any 
further  repetition  of  his  "  jubilee  honour  "  in  the  shape  of 
his  old  enemy  pleurisy ;  unable  to  escape  the  more  insidious 
attacks  of  influenza,  but  well  enough  on  the  whole  to  be  in 
constant  good  spirits. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  ya«.  13,  1891. 

My  dear  Skelton — Many  thanks  to  you  for  reminding  me 
that  there  are  such  things  as  "  Summer  Isles  "  in  the  universe. 
The  memory  of  them  has  been  pretty  well  blotted  out  here  for 
the  last  seven  weeks.  You  see  some  people  can  retire  to  "  Her- 
mitages "  as  well  as  other  people ;  and  though  even  Argyll  cum 
Gladstone  powers  of  self-deception  could  not  persuade  me  that 
the  view  from  my  window  is  as  good  as  that  from  yours,  yet  I 
do  see  a  fine  wavy  chalk  down  with  "  cwms  "  and  soft  turfy 
ridges,  over  which  an  old  fellow  can  stride  as  far  as  his  legs  are 
good  to  carry  him. 

The  fact  is,  that  I  discovered  that  staying  in  London  any 
longer  meant  for  me  a  very  short  life,  and  by  no  means  a  merry 
one.  So  I  got  my  son-in-law  to  build  me  a  cottage  here,  where 
my  wife  and  I  may  go  down-hill  quietly  together,  and  "  make 
our  sowls  "  as  the  Irish  say,  solaced  by  an  occasional  visit  from 
children  and  grandchildren. 

The  deuce  of  it  is,  that  however  much  the  weary  want  to  be 
at  rest  the  wicked  won't  cease  from  troubling.  Hence  the  occa- 
sional skirmishes  and  alarms  which  may  lead  my  friends  to  mis- 
doubt my  absolute  detachment  from  sublunary  affairs.  Perhaps 
peace  dwells  only  among  the  fork-tailed  Petrels ! 

I  trust  Mrs.  Skelton  and  you  are  flourishing,  and  that 
trouble  will  keep  far  from  the  hospitable  doors  of  Braid  through 
the  New  Year. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

No  sooner  had  he  settled  down  in  his  new  country  home, 
than  a  strange  piece  of  good  fortune,  such  as  happens  more 
often  in  a  story-book  than  in  real  life,  enabled  him  at  one 
stroke  to  double  his  little  estate,  to  keep  off  the  unwelcome 
approach  of  the  speculative  builder,  and  to  give  himself 
scope  for  the  newly-discovered  delights  of  the  garden.  The 
sale  of  the  house  in  Marlborough  Place  covered  the  greater 


304  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

part  of  the  cost  of  Hodeslea;  but  almost  on  the  very  day 
on  which  the  sale  was  concluded,  he  became  the  possessor 
of  another  house  at  Worthing  by  the  death  of  Mr.  Anthony 
Rich,  the  well-known  antiquarian.  An  old  man,  almost 
alone  in  the  world,  his  admiration  for  the  great  work  done 
recently  in  natural  science  had  long  since  led  him  to  devise 
his  property  to  Darwin  and  Huxley,  to  the  one  his  private 
fortune,  to  the  other  his  house  and  its  contents,  notably  a 
very  interesting  library. 

As  a  matter  of  feeling,  Huxley  was  greatly  disinclined 
to  part  with  this  house,  Chapel  Croft,  as  soon  as  it  had  come 
into  his  hands.  A  year  earlier,  he  might  have  made  it  his 
home;  but  now  he  had  settled  down  at  Eastbourne,  and 
Chapel  Croft,  as  it  stood,  was  unlikely  to  find  a  tenant. 
Accordingly  he  sold  it  early  in  July,  and  with  the  proceeds 
bought  the  piece  of  land  adjoining  his  house.  Thus  he 
writes  to  Sir  J.  Hooker : — 

Hodeslea,  Eastbourne,  May  17,  1891. 

My  dear  Hooker — My  estate  is  somewhat  of  a  white  ele- 
phant. There  is  about  a  couple  of  acres  of  ground  well  situated 
and  half  of  it  in  the  shape  of  a  very  pretty  lawn  and  shrubbery, 
but  unluckily,  in  building  the  house,  dear  old  Rich  thought  of 
his  own  convenience  and  not  mine  (very  wrong  of  him!),  and 
I  cannot  conceive  anybody  but  an  old  bachelor  or  old  maid  living 
in  it.  I  do  not  believe  anybody  would  take  it  as  it  stands.  No 
doubt  the  site  is  valuable,  and  it  would  be  well  worth  while  to 
anybody  with  plenty  of  cash  to  spare  to  build  on  to  the  house  and 
make  it  useful.  But  I  neither  have  the  cash,  nor  do  I  want  the 
bother.  However,  Waller  is  going  to  look  at  the  place  for  me 
and  see  what  can  be  done.  It  seems  hardly  decent  to  sell  it  at 
once ;  and  moreover  the  value  is  likely  to  increase.  I  suppose  at 
present  it  is  worth  £2000,  but  that  is  only  a  guess. 

Apropos  of  naval  portrait  gallery,  can  you  tell  me  if  there 
is  a  portrait  of  old  John  Richardson  anywhere  extant  ?  I  always 
look  upon  him  as  the  founder  of  my  fortunes,  and  I  want  to 
hang  him  up  (just  over  your  head)  on  my  chimney  breast. 
Voici !  [sketch  showing  the  position  of  the  pictures  above  the 
fireplace]  : — 

By  your  fruits  ye  shall  judge  them !  My  cold  was  influenza, 
I  have  been  in  the  most  preposterously  weak  state  ever  since; 


iSqi  letters  .  305 

and  at  last  my  wife  lost  patience  and  called  in  the  doctor,  who  is 
screwing  me  up  with  nux  vomica. 

Sound  wind  and  limb  otherwise. — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

And  again  on  July  3 : — 

I  have  just  been  offered  £2800  for  Anthony  Rich's  place  and 
have  accepted  it.  It  is  probably  worth  £3000,  but  if  I  were  to 
have  it  on  my  hands  and  sell  by  auction  I  should  get  no  more  out 
of  the  transaction. 

I  am  greatly  inclined  to  put  some  of  the  money  into  a  piece 
of  land — a  Naboth's  vineyard — in  front  of  my  house  and  turn 
horticulturist.    I  find  nailing  up  creepers  a  delightful  occupation. 

In  the  same  letter  he  describes  two  meetings  with  old 
friends : — 

Last  Friday  I  ran  down  to  Hindhead  to  see  Tyndall.  He 
was  very  much  better  than  I  hoped  to  find  him,  after  such  a  long 
and  serious  illness,  quite  bright  and  "  Tyndalloid,"  and  not  aged 
as  I  feared  he  would  be.  .  .  .  The  local  doctor  happened  to  be 
there  during  my  visit  and  spoke  very  confidently  of  his  speedy 
recovery.  The  leg  is  all  right  again,  and  he  even  talks  of  Swit- 
zerland, but  I  begged  Mrs.  Tyndall  to  persuade  him  to  keep 
quiet  and  within  reach  of  home  and  skilled  medical  attendance. 

Saturday  to  Monday  we  were  at  Down,  after  six  or  seven 
years'  interruption  of  our  wonted  visits.  It  was  very  pleasant  if 
rather  sad.  Mrs.  Darwin  is  wonderfully  well — naturally  aged — 
but  quite  bright  and  cheerful  as  usual.  Old  Par  slow  turned  up 
on  Sunday,  just  eighty,  but  still  fairly  hale.    Fuimus  fuimus! 

[Parslow  was  the  old  butler  who  had  been  in  Mr.  Darwin's 
service  for  many  years.] 

To  HIS  Daughter,  Mrs.  Roller 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  May  5,  1891. 

You  dear  people  must  have  entered  into  a  conspiracy,  as  I 
had  letters  from  all  yesterday.  I  have  never  been  so  set  up 
before,  and  begin  to  think  that  fathers  (like  port)  must  improve 
in  quality  with  age.  (No  irreverent  jokes  about  their  getting 
crusty,  Miss.) 

Julian  and  Joyce  taken  together  may  perhaps  give  a  faint 
idea  of  my  perfections  as  a  child.  I  have  not  only  a  distinct 
recollection  of  being  noticed  on  the  score  of  my  good  looks,  but 
56 


3o6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

my  mother  used  to  remind  me  painfully  of  them  in  my  later 
years,  looking  at  me  mournfully  and  saying,  "  And  you  were 
such  a  pretty  boy !  " 

Much  as  he  would  have  liked  to  visit  the  Maloja  again 
this  year,  the  state  of  his  wife's  health  forbade  such  a  long 
journey.  He  writes  just  after  his  attack  of  influenza  to  Sir 
M.  Foster,  who  had  been  suffering  in  the  same  way : — 

HoDESLEA,  May  12,  1891. 

My  dear  Foster — I  was  very  glad  to  hear  from  you.  Pray 
don't  get  attempting  to  do  anything  before  you  are  set  up  again. 

I  am  in  a  ridiculous  state  of  weakness,  and  bless  my  stars 
that  I  have  nothing  to  do.    I  find  it  troublesome  to  do  even  that. 

I  wish  ballooning  had  advanced  so  far  as  to  take  people  to 
Maloja,  for  I  do  not  think  my  wife  ought  to  undertake  such  a 
journey,  and  yet  I  believe  the  high  air  would  do  us  both  more 
good  than  anything  else.  .  .  . 

The  University  of  London  scheme  appears  to  be  coming  to 
grief,  as  I  never  doubted  it  would. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

So  instead  of  going  abroad,  he  stayed  in  Eastbourne 
till  the  end  of  August,  receiving  a  short  visit  from  his  old 
friend  Jowett,  who,  though  sadly  enfeebled  by  age,  still  per- 
sisted in  travelling  by  himself,  and  a  longer  visit  from  his 
elder  son  and  his  family.  But  from  September  11  to  the 
26th  he  and  his  wife  made  a  trip  through  the  west  country, 
starting  from  Salisbury,  which  had  so  delighted  him  the 
year  before,  and  proceeding  by  way  of  the  Wye  valley,  which 
they  had  not  visited  since  their  honeymoon,  to  Llangollen. 
The  first  stage  on  the  return  journey  was  Chester,  whence 
they  made  pious  pilgrimage  to  the  cradle  of  his  name.  Old 
Huxley  Hall,  some  9  miles  from  Chester.  Incorporated 
with  a  modern  farm-house,  and  forming  the  present  kitchen, 
are  some  solid  stone  walls,  part  of  the  old  manor-house,  now 
no  longer  belonging  to  any  one  of  the  name.  From  here 
they  went  to  Coventry,  where  he  had  lived  as  a  boy,  and 
found  the  house  which  his  father  had  occupied  still  standing. 

A  letter  to  an  old  pupil  contains  reflections  upon  the 
years  of  work  to  which  he  had  devoted  so  much  of  his 
energies. 


iSqi  letter   to   professor   PARKER  307 

To  Professor  T.  Jeffery  Parker,  Otago 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Aug,  11,  1891. 

My  dear  Parker — It  is  a  long  time  since  your  letter  reached 
me,  but  I  was  so  unwise  as  to  put  off  answering  it  until  the  book 
arrived  and  I  had  read  it.  The  book  did  not  reach  me  for  a  long 
time,  and  what  with  one  thing  and  another  I  have  but  just 
finished  it.  I  assure  you  I  am  very  proud  of  having  my  name 
connected  with  such  a  thorough  piece  of  work,  no  less  than 
touched  by  the  kindness  of  the  dedication. 

Looking  back  from  the  aged  point  of  view,  the  life  which 
cost  so  much  wear  and  tear  in  the  living  seems  to  have  effected 
very  little,  and  it  is  cheering  to  be  reminded  that  one  has  been 
of  some  use. 

Some  years  of  continued  ill-health,  involving  constant  travel- 
ling about  in  search  of  better  conditions  than  London  affords, 
and  long  periods  of  prostration,  have  driven  me  quite  out  of 
touch  with  science.  And  indeed  except  for  a  certain  toughness 
of  constitution  I  should  have  been  driven  out  of  touch  with  ter- 
restrial things  altogether. 

It  is  almost  indecent  in  a  man  at  my  time  of  life  who  has  had 
two  attacks  of  pleurisy,  followed  by  a  dilated  heart,  to  be  not 
only  above  ground  but  fairly  vigorous  again.  However,  I  am 
obliged  to  mind  my  P's  and  Q*s;  avoid  everything  like  hard 
work,  and  live  in  good  air. 

The  last  condition  we  have  achieved  by  setting  up  a  house 
close  to  the  downs  here ;  and  I  begin  to  think  with  Candide  that 
"  cultivons  notre  jardin  "  comprises  the  whole  duty  of  man. 

I  was  just  out  of  the  way  of  hearing  anything  about  the 
University  College  chair;  and  indeed,  beyond  attending  the 
Council  of  the  school  when  necessary,  and  meetings  of  Trustees 
of  the  British  Museum,  I  rarely  go  to  London. 

I  have  had  my  innings,  and  it  is  now  for  the  younger  genera- 
tion to  have  theirs. — With  best  wishes,  ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

As  for  being  no  longer  in  touch  with  the  world  of  sci- 
ence, he  says  the  same  thing  in  a  note  to  Sir  M.  Foster,  for- 
warding an  inquiry  after  a  scientific  teacher  (August  i). 

Please  read  the  enclosed,  and  if  you  know  of  anybody  suit- 
able please  send  his  name  to  Mr.  Thomas. 

I  have  told  him  that  I  am  out  of  the  way  of  knowing,  and 


3o8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

that  you  are  physiologically  omniscient,  so  don't  belie  the  char- 
acter ! 

This  year  a  number  of  Huxley's  essays  were  translated 
into  French.  Nature  for  July  23,  1891  (vol.  xliv,  p.  ^y2), 
notes  the  publication  of  "  Les  Sciences  Naturelles  et  TEdu- 
cation,"  with  a  short  preface  by  himself,  dwelling  upon  the 
astonishing  advance  which  had  been  made  in  the  recogni- 
tion of  science  as  an  instrument  of  education,  but  warning 
the  younger  generation  that  the  battle  is  only  half  won,  and 
bidding  them  beware  of  relaxing  their  efforts  before  the 
place  of  science  is  entirely  assured.  In  the  issue  for  Decem- 
ber 31  {Nature^  46,  397),  is  a  notice  of  "  La  Place  de 
I'Homme  dans  la  Nature,"  a  re-issue  of  a  translation  of 
more  than  twenty  years  before,  together  with  three  ethno- 
logical essays,  newly  translated  by  M.  H.  de  Varigny,  to 
whom  the  following  letters  are  addressed. 

To  H.  DE  Varigny 

May  17,  1891. 

I  am  writing  to  my  publishers  to  send  you  Lay  Sermons, 
Critiques,  Science  and  Culture,  and  American  Addresses,  pray 
accept  them  in  expression  of  my  thanks  for  the  pains  you  are 
taking  about  the  translation.  Man's  Place  in  Nature  has  been 
out  of  print  for  years,  so  I  cannot  supply  it. 

I  am  quite  conscious  that  the  condensed  and  idiomatic  Eng- 
lish into  which  I  always  try  to  put  my  thoughts  must  present 
many  difficulties  to  a  translator.  But  a  friend  of  mine  who  is  a 
much  better  French  scholar  than  I  am,  and  who  looked  over  two 
or  three  of  the  essays,  told  me  he  thought  you  had  been  remark- 
ably successful. 

The  fact  is  that  I  have  a  great  love  and  respect  for  my  native 
tongue,  and  take  great  pains  to  use  it  properly.  Sometimes  I 
write  essays  half-a-dozen  times  before  I  can  get  them  into  the 
proper  shape;  and  I  believe  I  become  more  fastidious  as  I  grow 
older. 

November  25,  1891. 

I  am  very  glad  you  have  found  your  task  pleasant,  for  I  am 
afraid  it  must  have  cost  you  a  good  deal  of  trouble  to  put  my 
ideas  into  the  excellent  French  dress  with  which  you  have  pro- 
vided them.  It  fits  so  well  that  I  feel  almost  as  if  I  might  be 
a  candidate  for  a  seat  among  the  immortal  forty ! 


1891  FRENCH   TRANSLATIONS  OF   HIS  WORKS  309 

As  to  the  new  volume  you  shall  have  the  refusal  of  it  if  you 
care  to  have  it  But  I  have  my  doubts  about  its  acceptability  to 
a  French  public  which  I  imagine  knows  little  about  Bibliolatry 
and  the  ways  of  Protestant  clericalism,  and  cares  less. 

These  essays  represent  a  controversy  which  has  been  going 
on  for  five  or  six  years  about  Genesis,  the  deluge,  the  miracle 
of  the  herd  of  swine,  and  the  miraculous  generally,  between 
Gladstone,  the  ecclesiastical  principal  of  King's  College,  various 
bishops,  the  writer  of  Lux  Mundi,  that  spoilt  Scotch  minister 
the  Duke  of  Argyll,  and  myself. 

My  object  has  been  to  stir  up  my  countrymen  to  think  about 
these  things ;  and  the  only  use  of  controversy  is  that  it  appeals 
to  their  love  of  fighting,  and  secures  their  attention. 

I  shall  be  very  glad  to  have  your  book  on  Experimental  Evo- 
lution, I  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  obtaining  experimental 
proof  of  the  possibility  of  obtaining  virtually  infertile  breeds 
from  a  common  stock  in  i860  (in  one  of  the  essays  you  have 
translated).  Mr.  Tegetmeier  made  a  number  of  experiments 
with  pigeons  some  years  ago,  but  could  obtain  not  the  least  ap- 
proximation to  infertility. 

From  the  first,  I  told  Darwin  this  was  the  weak  point  of  his 
case  from  the  point  of  view  of  scientific  logic.  But,  in  this 
matter,  we  are  just  where  we  were  thirty  years  ago,  and  I  am 
very  glad  you  are  going  to  call  attention  to  the  subject. 

Sending  a  copy  of  the  translation  soon  after  to  Sir  J. 
Hooker,  he  writes : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne, /flr«.  11,  1892. 

My  dear  Hooker — We  have  been  in  the  middle  of  snow  for 
the  last  foui  days.  I  shall  not  venture  to  London,  and  if  you 
deserve  the  family  title  of  the  "  judicious,"  I  don't  think  you  will 
either. 

I  send  you  by  this  post  a  volume  of  the  French  translation 
of  a  collection  of  my  essays  about  Darwinism  and  Evolution, 
1860-76,  for  which  I  have  written  a  brief  preface.  I  was  really 
proud  of  myself  wnen  I  discovered  on  re-reading  them  that  I 
had  nothing  to  alter. 

What  times  those  days  were  !  Fuimus  1 — Ever  yours  affec- 
tionately, T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  same  subject  of  experimental  evolution  reappears 
in  a  letter  to  Professor  Romanes  of  April  29.  A  project 
was  on  foot  for  founding  an  institution  in  which  experi- 


3IO 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 


ments  bearing  upon  the  Darwinian  theory  could  be  carried 
out.  After  congratulating  Professor  Romanes  upon  his  re- 
cent election  to  the  Athenaeum  Club,  he  proceeds : — 

In  a  review  of  Darwin's  Origin  published  in  the  Westminster 
for  i860  (Lay  Sermons,  pp.  323-24),  you  will  see  that  I  insisted 
on  the  logical  incompleteness  of  the  theory  so  long  as  it  was  not 
backed  by  experimental  proof  that  the  cause  assumed  was  com- 
petent to  produce  all  the  effects  required.  See  also  Lectures  to 
Working  Men,  1863,  pp.  146,  147.)  In  fact,  Darwin  used  to 
reproach  me  sometimes  for  my  pertinacious  insistence  on  the 
need  of  experimental  verification. 

But  I  hope  you  are  going  to  choose  some  other  title  than 
"  Institut  transformiste,"  which  implies  that  the  Institute  is 
pledged  to  a  foregone  conclusion,  that  it  is  a  workshop  devoted 
to  the  production  of  a  particular  kind  of  article.  Moreover,  I 
should  say  that  as  a  matter  of  prudence,  you  had  better  keep 
clear  of  the  word  "  experimental."  Would  not  "  Biological  Ob- 
servatory" serve  the  turn?  Of  course  it  does  not  exclude  ex- 
periment any  more  than  "  Astronomical  Observatory  "  excludes 
spectrum  analysis. 

Please  think  over  this.  My  objection  to  "  Transformist "  is 
very  strong. 

In  August  his  youngest  daughter  wrote  to  him  to  find 
out  the  nature  of  various  "  objects  of  the  sea-shore  "  which 
she  had  found  on  the  beach  in  South  Wales.  His  answers 
make  one  wish  that  there  had  been  more  questions. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  At/g.  14,  1891. 
Dearest  Babs — i.  "  Ornary  "  or  not  "  ornary  "  B  is  merely 
A  turned  upside  down  and  viewed  with  the  imperfect  apprecia- 
tion of  the  mere  artistic  eye ! 

2.  Your  little  yellow  things  are,  I  expect,  egg-cases  of  dog 
whelks.  You  will  find  a  lot  of  small  eggs  inside  them,  one  or 
two  of  which  grow  faster  than  the  rest,  and  eat  up  their  weaker 
brothers  and  sisters. 

The  dog  whelk  is  common  on  the  shores.  If  you  look  for 
something  like  this  [sketch  of  a  terrier  coming  out  of  a  whelk 
shell],  you  will  be  sure  to  recognise  it. 

3.  Starfish  are  not  born  in  their  proper  shape  and  don^t 
come  from  your  whitish  yellow  lumps.  The  thing  that  comes 
out  of  a  starfish  egg  is  something  like  this  [sketch],  and  swims 


1891  OBJECTS  OF   THE  SEA-SHORE  311 

about  by  its  cilia.    The  starfish  proper  is  formed  inside,  and  it 
is  carried  on  its  back  this-uns. 

Finally  starfish  drops  off  carrying  with  it  t'other  one's  stom- 
ach, so  that  the  subsequent  proceedings  interest  t'other  one  no 
more.  • 

4.  The  ropy  sand  tubes  that  make  a  sort  of  banks  and  reefs 
are  houses  of  worms,  that  they  build  up  out  of  sand,  shells,  and 
slime.    If  you  knock  a  lot  to  pieces  you  will  find  worms  inside. 

5.  Now,  how  do  I  know  what  the  rooks  eat?  But  there  are 
a  lot  of  unconsidered  trifles  about,  and  if  you  get  a  good  tele- 
scope and  watch,  you  will  have  a  glimpse  as  they  hover  between 
sand  and  rooks'  beaks. 

It  has  been  blowing  more  or  less  of  a  gale  here  from  the 
west  for  weeks — usually  cold,  often  foggy — so  that  it  seems  as 
if  summer  were  going  to  be  late,  probably  about  November. 

But  we  thrive  fairly  well.  L.  and  J.  and  their  chicks  are 
here  and  seem  to  stand  the  inclemency  of  the  weather  pretty 
fairly.    The  children  are  very  entertaining. 

M has  been  a  little  complaining,  but  is  as  active  as 

usual. 

My  love  to  Joyce,  and  tell  her  I  am  glad  to  hear  she  has 
not  forgotten  her  astronomy. 

In  answer  to  your  enquiry,  Leonard  says  that  Trevenen  has 
twenty-five  teeth.  I  have  a  sort  of  notion  this  can  be  hardly 
accurate,  but  never  having  been  a  mother  can't  presume  to  say. 
— Our  best  love  to  you  all. — Ever  your  loving  Pater. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Aug,  26,  1891. 

Dearest  Babs — 'Pears  to  me  your  friend  is  a  squid  or  pen- 
and-ink  fish.  Loligo  among  the  learned.  Probably  Loligo  media 
which  I  have  taken  in  that  region.  They  have  ten  tentacles 
with  suckers  round  their  heads,  two  much  longer  than  the  others. 
They  are  close  to  cuttle-fish,  but  have  a  thin  horny  shell  inside 
them  instead  of  the  "  cuttle-bone."  If  you  can  get  one  by  itself 
in  a  tub  of  water,  it  is  pretty  to  see  how  they  blush  all  over  and 
go  pale  again,  owing  to  little  colour-bags  in  the  skin,  which  ex- 
pand and  contract.  Doubtless  they  took  you  for  a  heron,  under 
the  circumstances  [sketch  of  a  wader]. 

With  slight  intervals  it  has  been  blowing  a  gale  from  the 
west  here  for  some  months,  the  memory  of  man  indeed  goeth  not 
back  to  the  calm.  I  have  not  been  really  warm  more  than  two 
days  this  so-called  summer.  And  everybody  prophesied  we 
should  be  roasted  alive  here  in  summer. 


312  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

We  are  all  flourishing,  and  send  our  best  love  to  Jack  and 
you.  Tell  Joyce  the  wallflowers  have  grown  quite  high  in  her 
garden. — Ever  your  loving  Pater. 

Politics  are  not  often  touched  upon  in  the  letters  of  this 
period,  but  an  extract  from  a  letter  of  October  25,  1891,  is 
of  interest  as  giving  his  reason  for  supporting  a  Unionist 
Government,  many  of  whose  tendencies  he  was  far  from 
sympathising  with— 

The  extract  from  the  Guardian  is  wonderful.  The  Glad- 
stonian  tee-to- turn  cannot  have  many  more  revolutions  to  make. 
The  only  thing  left  for  him  now,  is  to  turn  Agnostic,  declare 
Homer  to  be  an  old  bloke  of  a  ballad-monger,  and  agitate  for 
the  prohibition  of  the  study  of  Greek  in  all  universities.  .  .  . 

It  is  just  because  I  do  not  want  to  see  our  children  involved 
in  civil  war  that  I  postpone  all  political  considerations  to  keep- 
ing up  a  Unionist  Government. 

I  may  be  quite  wrong;  but  right  or  wrong,  it  is  no  question 
of  party.  "  Rads  delight  not  me  nor  Tories  neither,"  as  Hamlet 
does  not  say. 

The  following  letter  to  Sir  M.  Foster  shows  how  little 
Huxley  was  now  able  to  do  in  the  way  of  public  business 
without  being  knocked  up : — 

HODESLEA,  Oct.  20,  1891. 

My  dear  Foster — If  I  had  known  the  nature  of  the  proceed- 
ings at  the  College  of  Physicians  yesterday,  I  should  have 
braved  the  tedium  of  listening  to  a  lecture  I  could  not  hear  in 
order  to  see  you  decorated.  Clark  had  made  a  point  of  my  going 
to  the  dinner,*  and,  worse  luck,  I  had  to  "  say  a  few  words  " 
after  it,  with  the  result  that  I  am  entirely  washed  out  to-day,  and 
only  able  to  send  you  the  feeblest  of  congratulations. — Ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  same  thing  appears  in  the  following  to  Sir  W.  H. 
Flower,  which  is  also  interesting  for  his  opinion  on  the 
question  of  promotion  by  seniority : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Oct.  23,  1891. 
My  dear  Flower — My  "  next  worst  thing  "  was  promoting  a 
weak  man  to  a  place  of  responsibility  in  lieu  of  a  strong  one,  on 
the  mere  ground  of  seniority. 

*  i.e.  at  the  College  of  Physicians. 


iSqi  seniority  and   PROMOTION  313 

Caeteris  paribus,  or  with  even  approximate  equality  of  quali- 
fications, no  doubt  seniority  ought  to  count;  but  it  is  mere  ruin 
to  any  service  to  let  it  interfere  with  the  promotion  of  men  of 
marked  superiority,  especially  in  the  case  of  offices  which  in- 
volve much  responsibility. 

I  suppose  as  trustee  I  may  requisition  a  copy  of  Woodward's 
Catalogue.  I  should  like  to  look  a  little  more  <:arefully  at  it.  .  .  . 
We  are  none  the  worse  for  cur  pleasant  glimpse  of  the  world 
(and  his  wife)  at  your  house;  but  I  find  that  speechifying  at 
public  dinners  is  one  of  the  luxuries  that  I  must  utterly  deny 
myself.  It  will  take  me  three  weeks'  quiet  to  get  over  my  esca- 
pade.-Ever  yours  very  faithfully.  ^_  jj_  ^^^^^^^ 


CHAPTER   XVIII 
1892 

The  revival  of  part  of  the  former  controversy  which  he 
had  had  with  Mr.  Gladstone  upon  the  story  of  creation, 
made  a  warlike  beginning  of  an  otherwise  very  peaceful 
year.  Since  the  middle  of  December  a  great  correspond- 
ence had  been  going  on  in  the  TimeSy  consequent  upon  the 
famous  manifesto  of  the  thirty-eight  Anglican  clergy  touch- 
ing the  question  of  inspiration  and  the  infallibility  of  the 
Bible.  Criticism,  whether  "  higher  "  or  otherwise,  defended 
on  the  one  side,  was  unsparingly  denounced  on  the  other. 
After  about  a  month  of  this  correspondence,  Huxley's  name 
was  mentioned  as  one  of  these  critics;  whereupon  he  was 
attacked  by  one  of  the  disputants  for  "  misleading  the  pub- 
lic "  by  his  assertion  in  the  original  controversy  that  while 
reptiles  appear  in  the  geological  record  before  birds,  Gene- 
sis affirms  the  contrary;  the  critic  declaring  that  the  word 
for  "  creeping  things  "  (rehmes)  created  on  the  sixth  day, 
does  not  refer  to  reptiles,  which  are  covered  by  the  "  mov- 
ing creatures  "  (shehretz)  used  of  the  first  appearance  of 
animal  life. 

It  is  interesting  to  see  how,  in  his  reply,  Huxley  took 
care  to  keep  the  main  points  at  issue  separate  from  the 
subordinate  and  unimportant  ones.  His  answer  is  broken 
up  into  four  letters.  The  first  {Times,  January  26)  rehearses 
the  original  issue  between  himself  and  Mr.  Gladstone ; 
wherein  both  sides  agreed  that  the  creation  of  the  sixth  day 
included  reptiles,  so  that,  formally  at  least,  his  position  was 
secure,  though  there  was  also  a  broader  ground  of  differ- 
ence to  be  considered.     Before  proceeding  further,  he  asks 

314 


1892  FURTHER   CONTROVERSY  ON   GENESIS  315 

his  critic  whether  he  admits  the  existence  of  the  contra- 
diction involved,  and  if  not,  to  state  his  reasons  therefor. 
These  reasons  were  again  given  on  February  i  as  the  new 
interpretation  of  the  two  Hebrew  words  already  referred  to, 
an  interpretation,  by  the  way,  which  makes  the  same  word 
stand  both  for  "  the  vast  and  various  population  of  the  wa- 
ters "  and  "  for  such  land  animals  as  mice,  weasels,  and 
lizards,  great  and  small." 

On  February  3  appeared  the  second  letter,  in  which,  set- 
ting aside  the  particular  form  which  his  argument  against 
Mr.  Gladstone  had  taken,  he  described  the  broad  differences 
between  the  teachings  of  Genesis  and  the  teachings  of  evo- 
lution. He  left  the  minor  details  as  to  the  interpretation 
of  the  words  in  dispute,  which  did  not  really  affect  the  main 
argument,  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  next  letter  of  February  4. 
It  was  a  question  with  which  he  had  long  been  familiar,  as 
twenty  years  before  he  had,  at  Dr.  Kalisch's  request,  gone 
over  the  proofs  of  his  Commentary  on  Leviticus. 

The  letter  of  February  3  is  as  follows: — 

While  desirous  to  waste  neither  your  space  nor  my  own  time 
upon  mere  misrepresentations  of  what  I  have  said  elsewhere 
about  the  relations  between  modern  science  and  the  so-called 
"  Mosaic"  cosmogony,  it  seems  needful  that  I  should  ask  for 
the  opportunity  of  stating  the  case  once  more,  as  briefly  and 
fairly  as  I  can. 

I  conceive  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  to  teach — (i)  that  the 
species  of  plants  and  animals  owe  their  origin  to  supernatural 
acts  of  creation;  (2)  that  these  acts  took  place  at  such  times 
and  in  such  a  manner  that  all  the  plants  were  created  first,  all 
the  aquatic  and  aerial  animals  (notably  birds)  next,  and  all 
terrestrial  animals  last.  I  am  not  aware  that  any  Hebrew 
scholar  denies  that  these  propositions  agree  with  the  natural 
sense  of  the  text.  Sixty  years  ago  I  was  taught,  as  most  people 
were  then  taught,  that  they  are  guaranteed  by  Divine  authority. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  my  judgment,  natural  science  teaches 
no  less  distinctly — (i)  that  the  species  of  animals  and  plants 
have  originated  by  a  process  of  natural  evolution;  (2)  that  this 
process  has  taken  place  in  such  a  manner  that  the  species  of 
animals  and  plants,  respectively,  have  come  into  existence  one 
after  another  throughout  the  whole  period  since  they  began  to 
exist  on  the  earth ;  that  the  species  of  plants  and  animals  known 


3l6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

to  us  are,  as  a  whole,  neither  older  nor  younger  the  one  than  the 
other. 

The  same  holds  good  of  aquatic  and  aerial  species,  as  a 
whole,  compared  with  terrestrial  species ;  but  birds  appear  in  the 
geological  record  later  than  terrestrial  reptiles,  and  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  they  were  evolved  from  the  latter. 

Until  it  is  shown  that  the  first  two  propositions  are  not  con- 
tained in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis,  and  that  the  second  pair 
are  not  justified  by  the  present  condition  of  our  knowledge,  I 
must  continue  to  maintain  that  natural  science  and  the  "Mosaic" 
account  of  the  origin  of  animals  and  plants  are  in  irreconcilable 
antagonism. 

As  I  greatly  desire  that  this  broad  issue  should  not  be  ob- 
scured by  the  discussion  of  minor  points,  I  propose  to  defer 
what  I  may  have  to  say  about  the  great  "  shehretz "  and 
"  rehmes  "  question  till  to-morrow. 

On  February  1 1  he  wrote  once  more,  again  taking  cer- 
tain broader  aspects  of  the  problem  presented  by  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis.  He  expressed  his  belief,  as  he  had 
expressed  it  in  1869,  that  theism  is  not  logically  an- 
tagonistic to  evolution.  If,  he  continues,  the  account  in 
Genesis,  as  Philo  of  Alexandria  held,  is  only  a  poem  or 
allegory,  where  is  the  proof  that  any  one  non-natural  inter- 
pretation is  the  right  one  ?  and  he  concludes  by  pointing  out 
the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  those  who,  like  the  famous 
thirty-eight,  assert  the  infallibility  of  the  Bible  as  guaranteed 
by  the  infallibility  of  the  Church. 

Apart  from  letters  and  occasional  controversy,  he  pub- 
lished this  year  only  one  magazine  article  and  a  single  vol- 
ume of  collected  essays,  though  he  was  busy  preparing  the 
Romanes  Lecture  for  1893,  the  more  so  because  there  was 
some  chance  that  Mr.  Gladstone  would  be  unable  to  deliver 
the  first  of  the  lectures  in  1892,  and  Huxley  had  promised 
to  be  ready  to  take  his  place  if  necessary. 

The  volume  (called  Controverted  Qtiestions)  which  ap- 
peared in  1892,  was  a  collection  of  the  essays  of  the  last  few 
years,  mainly  controversial,  or  as  he  playfully  called  them, 
"  endeavours  to  defend  a  cherished  cause,"  dealing  with 
agnosticism  and  the  demonological  and  miraculous  element 
in  Christianity.    That  they  were  controversial  in  tone  no  one 


1892  CONTROVERTED   QUESTIONS  317 

lamented  more  than  himself;  and  as  in  the  letter  to  M.  de 
Varigny,  of  November  25,  1891,  so  here  in  the  prologue 
he  apologises  for  the  fact. 

This  prologue, — of  which  he  writes  to  a  friend,  "  It  cost 
me  more  time  and  pains  than  any  equal  number  of  pages 
I  have  ever  written," — was  designed  to  indicate  the  main 
question,  various  aspects  of  which  are  dealt  with  by  these 
seemingly  disconnected  essays. 

The  historical  evolution  of  humanity  (he  writes),  which  is 
generally,  and  I  venture  to  think  not  unreasonably,  regarded  as 
progress,  has  been,  and  is  being,  accompanied  by  a  co-ordinate 
elimination  of  the  supernatural  from  its  originally  large  occu- 
pation of  men's  thought.  The  question — How  far  is  this  process 
to  go?  is,  in  my  apprehension,  the  controverted  question  of  our 
time. 

This  movement,  marked  by  the  claim  for  the  freedom  of 
private  judgment,  which  first  came  to  its  fulness  in  the 
Renascence,  is  here  sketched  out,  rising  or  sinking  by  turns 
under  the  pressure  of  social  and  political  vicissitudes,  from 
WicliFs  earliest  proposal  to  reduce  the  Supernaturalism  of 
Christianity  within  the  limits  sanctioned  by  the  Scriptures, 
down  to  the  manifesto  in  the  previous  year  of  the  thirty- 
eight  Anglican  divines  in  defence  of  biblical  infallibility, 
which  practically  ends  in  an  appeal  to  the  very  principle 
they  reject. 

But  he  does  not  content  himself  with  pointing  out  the 
destructive  effects  of  criticism  upon  the  evidence  in  favour 
of  a  "  supernature  " — "  The  present  incarnation  of  the  spirit 
of  the  Renascence,"  he  writes,  "  differs  from  its  predecessor 
in  the  eighteenth  century,  in  that  it  builds  up,  as  well  as 
pulls  down.  That  of  which  it  has  laid  the  foundation,  of 
which  it  is  already  raising  the  superstructure,  is  the  doctrine 
of  evolution,"  a  doctrine  that  "  is  no  speculation,  but  a  gen- 
eralisation of  certain  facts,  which  may  be  observed  by  any 
one  who  will  take  the  necessary  trouble."  And  in  a  short 
dozen  pages  he  sketches  out  that  common  body  of  estab- 
lished truths  "  to  which  it  is  his  confident  belief  that  *  all 
future  philosophical  and  theological  speculations  will  have 
to  accommodate  themselves.' 


> » 


3i8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

There  is  no  need  to  recapitulate  these ;  they  may  be  read 
in  Science  and  Christian  Tradition,  the  fifth  volume  of  the 
Collected  Essays,  but  it  is  worth  noticing  that  in  conclusion, 
after  rejecting  "  a  great  many  supernaturalistic  theories  and 
legends  which  have  no  better  foundations  than  those  of 
heathenism,"  he  declares  himself  as  far  from  wishing  to 
"  throw  the  Bible  aside  as  so  much  waste  paper  "  as  he  was 
at  the  establishment  of  the  School  Board  in  1870.  As  Eng- 
lish literature,  as  world-old  history,  as  moral  teaching,  as 
the  Magna  Charta  of  the  poor  and  of  the  oppressed,  the 
most  democratic  book  in  the  world,  he  could  not  spare  it. 
**  I  do  not  say,"  he  adds,  "  that  even  the  highest  biblical  ideal 
is  exclusive  of  others  or  needs  no  supplement.  But  I  do  be- 
lieve that  the  human  race  is  not  yet,  possibly  may  never  be, 
in  a  position  to  dispense  with  it." 

It  was  this  volume  that  led  to  the  writing  of  the  maga- 
zine article  referred  to  above.  The  republication  in  it  of  the 
"  Agnosticism,"  originally  written  in  reply  to  an  article  of 
Mr.  Frederic  Harrison's,  induced  the  latter  to  disclaim  in 
the  Fortnightly  Review  the  intimate  connection  assumed  to 
exist  between  his  views  and  the  system  of  Positivism  de- 
tailed by  Comte,  and  at  the  same  time  to  oflfer  the  olive 
branch  to  his  former  opponent.  But  while  gratefully  ac- 
cepting the  goodwill  implied  in  the  oflfer,  Huxley  still  de- 
clared himself  unable  to  "  give  his  assent  to  a  single  doctrine 
which  is  the  peculiar  property  of  Positivism,  old  or  new," 
nor  to  agree  with  Mr.  Harrison  when  he  wanted 

to  persuade  us  that  agnosticism  is  only  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles 
of  the  Positivist  temple;  and  that  those  who  profess  ignorance 
about  the  proper  solution  of  certain  speculative  problems  ought 
to  call  themselves  Positivists  of  the  Gate,  if  it  happens  that 
they  also  take  a  lively  interest  in  social  and  political  questions. 

This  essay,  "  An  Apologetic  Irenicon,"  contains  more 
than  one  passage  of  personal  interest,  which  are  the  more 
worth  quoting  here,  as  the  essay  has  not  been  republished. 
It  was  to  have  been  included  in  a  tenth  volume  of  collected 
Essays,  along  with  a  number  of  others  which  he  projected, 
but  never  wrote. 


1892  "AN   APOLOGETIC   IRENICON"  319 

Thus,  begging  the  Positivists  not  to  regard  him  as  a  rival 
or  competitor  in  the  business  of  instructing  the  human  race, 
he  says : — 

I  aspire  to  no  such  elevated  and  difficult  situation.  I  declare 
myself  not  only  undesirous  of  it,  but  deeply  conscious  of  a  con- 
stitutional unfitness  for  it.  Age  and  hygienic  necessities  bind 
me  to  a  somewhat  anchoritic  life  in  pure  air,  with  abundant 
leisure  to  meditate  upon  the  wisdom  of  Candide's  sage  aphorism, 
"  Cultivons  notre  jardin" — especially  if  the  term  garden  may 
be  taken  broadly  and  applied  to  the  stony  and  weed-grown 
ground  within  my  skull,  as  well  as  to  a  few  perches  of  more 
promising  chalk  down  outside  it.  In  addition  to  these  effectual 
bars  to  any  of  the  ambitious  pretensions  ascribed  to  me,  there  is 
another:  of  all  possible  positions  that  of  master  of  a  school,  or 
leader  of  a  sect,  or  chief  of  a  party,  appears  to  me  to  be  the 
most  undesirable;  in  fact,  the  average  British  matron  cannot 
look  upon  followers  with  a  more  evil  eye  than  I  do.  Such 
acquaintance  with  the  history  of  thought  as  I  possess,  has  taught 
me  to  regard  schools,  parties,  and  sects,  as  arrangements,  the 
usual  effect  of  which  is  to  perpetuate  all  that  is  worst  and 
feeblest  in  the  master's,  leader's,  or  founder's  work;  or  else,  as 
in  some  cases,  to  upset  it  altogether;  as  a  sort  of  hydrants  for 
extinguishing  the  fire  of  genius,  and  for  stifling  the  flame  of 
high  aspirations,  the  kindling  of  which  has  been  the  chief,  per- 
haps the  only,  merit  of  the  protagonist  of  the  movement.  I 
have  always  been,  am,  and  propose  to  remain  a  mere  scholar. 
All  that  I  have  ever  proposed  to  myself  is  to  say,  this  and  this 
have  I  learned;  thus  and  thus  have  I  learned  it:  go  thou  and 
learn  better ;  but  do  not  thrust  on  my  shoulders  the  responsibility 
for  your  own  laziness  if  you  elect  to  take,  on  my  authority,  con- 
clusions, the  value  of  which  you  ought  to  have  tested  for  your- 
self. 

Again,  replying  to  the  reproach  that  all  his  public  utter- 
ances had  been  of  a  negative  character,  that  the  great  prob- 
lems of  human  life  had  been  entirely  left  out  of  his  purview, 
he  defends  once  more  the  work  of  the  man  who  clears  the 
ground  for  the  builders'  to  come  after  him : — 

There  is  endless  backwoodsman's  work  yet  to  be  done.  If 
"  those  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait,"  still  more  do  those 
who  sweep  and  cleanse;  and  if  any  man  elect  to  give  his  strength 
to  the  weeder's  and  scavenger's  occupation,  I  remain  of  the  opin- 


320  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

ion  that  his  service  should  be  counted  acceptable,  and  that  no 
one  has  a  right  to  ask  more  of  him  than  faithful  performance  of 
the  duties  he  has  undertaken.  I  venture  to  count  it  an  improb- 
able suggestion  that  any  such  person — a  man,  let  us  say,  who  has 
well-nigh  reached  his  threescore  years  and  ten,  and  has  gradu- 
ated in  all  the  faculties  of  human  relationships;  who  has  taken 
his  share  in  all  the  deep  joys  and  deeper  anxieties  which  cling 
about  them;  who  has  felt  the  burden  of  young  lives  entrusted 
to  his  care,  and  has  stood  alone  with  his  dead  before  the  abyss 
of  the  eternal — ^has  never  had  a  thought  beyond  negative  criti- 
cism. It  seems  to  me  incredible  that  such  an  one  can  have  done 
his  day's  work,  always  with  a  light  heart,  with  no  sense  of 
responsibility,  no  terror  of  that  which  may  appear  when  the 
factitious  veil  of  Isis — the  thick  web  of  fiction  man  has  woven 
round  nature — is  stripped  off. 

Challenged  to  state  his  "  mental  bias,  pro  or  con/'  with 
regard  to  such  matters  as  Creation,  Providence,  etc.,  he  re- 
iterates his  words  written  thirty-two  years  before : — 

So  far  back  as  i860  I  wrote : — 

"  The  doctrine  of  special  creation  owes  its  existence  very 
largely  to  the  supposed  necessity  of  making  science  accord  with 
the  Hebrew  cosmogony ; "  and  that  the  hypothesis  of  special 
creation  is,  in  my  judgment,  a  "  mere  specious  mask  for  our 
ignorance."    Not  content  with  negation,  I  said : — 

"  Harmonious  order  governing  eternally  continuous  prog- 
ress; the  web  and  woof  of  matter  and  force  interweaving  by 
slow  degrees,  without  a  broken  thread,  that  veil  which  lies  be- 
tween us  and  the  infinite;  that  universe  which  alone  we  know, 
or  can  know;  such  is  the  picture  which  science  draws  of  the 
world." 

.  .  .  Every  reader  of  Goethe  will  know  that  the  second  is 
little  more  than  a  paraphrase  of  the  well-known  utterance  of  the 
"  Zeitgeist "  in  Faust,  which  surely  is  something  more  than  a 
mere  negation  of  the  clumsy  anthropomorphism  of  special  cre- 
ation. 

Follows  a  query  about  "  Providence,"  my  answer  to  which 
must  depend  upon  what  my  questioner  means  by  that  substan- 
tive, whether  alone,  or  qualified  by  the  adjective  "  moral." 

H  the  doctrine  of  a  Providence  is  to  be  taken  as  the  expres- 
sion, in  a  way  "  to  be  understanded  of  the  people,"  of  the  total 
exclusion  of  chance  from  a  place  even  in  the  most  insignificant 
corner  of  Nature,  if  it  means  the  strong  conviction  that  the 


l892  FORECAST   OF   THE   ROMANES   LECTURE  321 

cosmic  process  is  rational,  and  the  faith  that,  throughout  all 
duration,  unbroken  order  has  reigned  in  the  universe,  I  not  only 
accept  it,  but  I  am  disposed  to  think  it  the  most  important  of  all 
truths.  As  it  is  of  more  consequence  for  a  citizen  to  know  the 
law  than  to  be  personally  acquainted  with  the  features  of  those 
who  will  surely  carry  it  into  effect,  so  this  very  positive  doc- 
trine of  Providence,  in  the  sense  defined,  seems  to  me  far  more 
important  than  all  the  theorems  of  speculative  theology.  If, 
further,  the  doctrine  is  held  to  imply  that,  in  some  indefinitely 
remote  past  aeon,  the  cosmic  process  was  set  going  by  some 
entity  possessed  of  intelligence  and  foresight,  similar  to  our  own 
in  kind,  however  superior  in  degree,  if,  consequently,  it  is  held 
that  every  event,  not  merely  in  our  planetary  speck,  but  in  un- 
told millions  of  other  worlds,  was  foreknown  before  these  worlds 
were,  scientific  thought,  so  far  as  I  know  anything  about  it,  has 
nothing  to  say  against  that  hypothesis.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  anthro- 
pomorphic rendering  of  the  doctrine  of  evolution. 

It  may  be  so,  but  the  evidence  accessible  to  us  is,  to  my  mind, 
wholly  insufficient  to  warrant  either  a  positive  or  a  negative  con- 
clusion. 

He  remarks  in  passing  upon  the  entire  exclusion  of 
special "  providences  by  this  conception  of  a  universal 
Providence."     As  for  "  moral  "  providence : — 


it 


So  far  as  mankind  has  acquired  the  conviction  that  the 
observance  of  certain  rules  of  conduct  is  essential  to  the  main- 
tenance of  social  existence,  it  may  be  proper  to  say  that  "  Provi- 
dence," operating  through  men,  has  generated  morality.  Within 
the  limits  of  a  fraction  of  a  fraction  of  the  living  world,  there- 
fore, there  is  a  "  moral "  providence.  Through  this  small  plot 
of  an  infinitesimal  fragment  of  the  universe  there  runs  a 
"  stream  of  tendency  towards  righteousness."  But  outside  the 
very  rudimentary  germ  of  a  garden  of  Eden,  thus  watered,  I  am 
unable  to  discover  any  "  moral "  purpose,  or  anything  but  a 
stream  of  purpose  towards  the  consummation  of  the  cosmic 
process,  chiefly  by  means  of  the  struggle  for  existence,  which  is 
no  more  righteous  or  unrighteous  than  the  operation  of  any 
other  mechanism. 

This,  of  course,  is  the  underlying  principle  of  the  Ro- 
manes Lecture,  upon  which  he  was  still  at  work.    It  is  more 
specifically  expressed  in  the  succeeding  paragraph: — 
57 


322 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 


I  hear  much  of  the  "  ethics  of  evolution."  I  apprehend  that, 
in  the  broadest  sense  of  the  term  "  evolution,"  there  neither  is, 
nor  can  be,  any  such  thing.  The  notion  that  the  doctrine  of 
evolution  can  furnish  a  foundation  for  morals  seems  to  me  to 
be  an  illusion  which  has  arisen  from  the  unfortunate  ambiguity 
of  the  term  "  fittest "  in  the  formula,  "  survival  of  the  fittest." 
We  commonly  use  "  fittest "  in  a  good  sense,  with  an  understood 
connotation  of  "  best " ;  and  "  best "  we  are  apt  to  take  in  its 
ethical  sense.  But  the  "  fittest "  which  survives  in  the  struggle 
fo^  existence  may  be,  and  often  is,  the  ethically  worst. 

Another  paragraph  explains  the  sense  in  which  he  used 
to  say  that  the  Romanes  Lecture  was  a  very  orthodox  dis- 
course on  the  text,  "  Satan,  the  Prince  of  this  world  " : — 

It  is  the  secret  of  the  superiority  of  the  best  theological 
teachers  to  the  majority  of  flieir  opponents  that  they  substan- 
tially recognise  these  realities  of  things,  however  strange  the 
forms  in  which  they  clothe  their  conceptions.  The  doctrines  of 
predestination,  of  original  sin,  of  the  innate  depravity  of  man 
and  the  evil  fate  of  the  greater  part  of  the  race,  of  the  primacy 
of  Satan  in  this  world,  of  the  essential  vileness  of  matter,  of  a 
malevolent  Demiurgus  subordinate  to  a  benevolent  Almighty, 
who  has  only  lately  revealed  himself,  faulty  as  they  are,  appear 
to  me  to  be  vastly  nearer  the  truth  than  the  "  liberal "  popular 
illusions  that  babies  are  all  born  good,  and  that  the  example  of 
a  corrupt  society  is  responsible  for  their  failure  to  remain  so; 
that  it  is  given  to  everybody  to  reach  the  ethical  ideal  if  he  will 
only  try;  that  all  partial  evil  is  universal  good,  and  other  opti- 
mistic figments,  such  as  that  which  represents  "  Providence " 
under  the  guise  of  a  paternal  philanthropist,  and  bids  us  believe 
that  everything  will  come  right  (according  to  our  notions)  at 
last. 

As  to  "  Immortality  "  again  [he  refers  his  critic  to  his  book 
on  "Hume"].  I  do  not  think  I  need  return  to  "subjective" 
immortality,  but  it  may  be  well  to  add  that  I  am  a  very  strong 
believer  in  the  punishment  of  certain  kinds  of  actions,  not  only 
in  the  present,  but  in  all  the  future  a  man  can  have,  be  it  long 
or  short.  Therefore  in  hell,  for  I  suppose  that  all  men  with  a 
clear  sense  of  right  and  wrong  (and  I  am  not  sure  that  any 
others  deserve  such  punishment)  have  now  and  then  "  de- 
scended into  hell "  and  stopped  there  quite  long  enough  to  know 
what  infinite  punishment  means.  And  if  a  genuine,  not  merely 
subjective,  immortality  awaits  us,  I  conceive  that,  without  some 


1892  THE  BASIS  OF   MORALITY  323 

such  change  as  that  depicted  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  first 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  immortality  must  be  eternal  misery. 
The  fate  of  Swift*s  Struldbrugs  seems  to  me  not  more  horrible 
than  that  of  a  mind  imprisoned  for  ever  within  the  Aamtnantia 
nuBnia  of  inextinguishable  memories. 

Further,  it  may  be  well  to  remember  that  the  highest  level 
of  moral  aspiration  recorded  in  history  was  reached  by  a  few 
ancient  Jews — Micah,  Isaiah,  and  the  rest — ^who  took  no  count 
whatever  of  what  might  or  might  not  happen  to  them  after 
death.  It  is  not  obvious  to  me  why  the  same  point  should  not 
by  and  by  be  reached  by  the  Gentiles. 

He  admits  that  the  generality  of  mankind  will  not  be 
satisfied  to  be  told  that  there  are  some  topics  about  which 
we  know  nothing  now,  and  do  not  seem  likely  ever  to  be  able 
to  know  more ;  and,  consequently,  that  in  the  long-run  the 
world  will  turn  to  those  who  profess  to  have  conclusions : — 

And  that  is  the  pity  of  it.  As  in  the  past,  so,  I  fear,  through 
a  very  long  future,  the  multitude  will  continue  to  turn  to  those 
who  are  ready  to  feed  it  with  the  viands  its  soul  lusteth  after; 
who  will  offer  mental  peace  where  there  is  no  peace,  and  lap  it 
in  the  luxury  of  pleasant  delusions. 

To  missionaries  of  the  Neo-Positivist,  as  to  those  of  other 
professed  solutions  of  insoluble  mysteries,  whose  souls  are  bound 
up  in  the  success  of  their  sectarian  propaganda,  no  doubt,  it 
must  be  very  disheartening  if  the  "  world,"  for  whose  assent 
and  approbation  they  sue,  stops  its  ears  and  turns  its  back  upon 
them.  But  what  does  it  signify  to  any  one  who  does  not  happen 
to  be  a  missionary  of  any  sect,  philosophical  or  religious,  and 
who,  if  he  were,  would  have  no  sermon  to  preach  except  from 
the  text  with  which  Descartes,  to  go  no  further  back,  furnished 
us  two  centuries  since?  I  am  very  sorry  if  people  will  not 
listen  to  those  who  rehearse  before  them  the  best  lessons  they 
have  been  able  to  learn,  but  that  is  their  business,  not  mine.  Be- 
lief in  majorities  is  not  rooted  in  my  breast,  and  if  all  the  world 
were  against  me  the  fact  might  warn  me  to  revise  and  criticise 
my  opinions,  but  would  not  in  itself  supply  a  ghost  of  a  reason 
for  forsaking  them.  For  myself  I  say  deliberately,  it  is  better 
to  have  a  millstone  tied  round  the  neck  and  be  *hrown  into  the 
sea  than  to  share  the  enterprises  of  those  to  whom  the  world 
has  turned,  and  will  turn,  because  they  minister  to  its  weak- 
nesses and  cover  up  the  awful  realities  which  it  shudders  to 
look  at. 


324  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

A  letter  to  Mr.  W.  P.  Clayton  also  discusses  the  basis 
of  morality. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  5,  1892. 

Dear  Sir — I  well  remember  the  interview  to  which  you 
refer,  and  I  should  have  replied  to  your  letter  sooner,  but  during 
the  last  few  weeks  I  have  been  very  busy. 

Moral  duty  consists  in  the  observance  of  those  rules  of  con- 
duct which  contribute  to  the  welfare  of  society,  and  by  implica- 
tion, of  the  individuals  who  compose  it. 

The  end  of  society  is  peace  and  mutual  protection,  so  that 
the  individual  may  reach  the  fullest  and  highest  life  attainable 
by  man.  The  rules  of  conduct  by  which  this  end  is  to  be  attained 
are  discoverable — like  the  other  so-called  laws  of  Nature — ^by 
observation  and  experiment,  and  only  in  that  way. 

Some  thousands  of  years  of  such  experience  have  led  to  the 
generalisations,  that  stealing  and  murder,  for  example,  are  in- 
consistent with  the  ends  of  society.  There  is  no  more  doubt 
that  they  are  so  than  that  unsupported  stones  tend  to  fall.  The 
man  who  steals  or  murders,  breaks  his  implied  contract  with 
society,  and  forfeits  all  protection.  He  becomes  an  outlaw, 
to  be  dealt  with  as  any  other  feral  creature.  Criminal  law  indi- 
cates the  ways  which  have  proved  most  convenient  for  dealing 
with  him. 

All  this  would  be  true  if  men  had  no  "  moral  sense  "  at  all, 
just  as  there  are  rules  of  perspective  which  must  be  strictly 
observed  by  a  draughtsman,  and  are  quite  independent  of  his 
having  any  artistic  sense. 

The  moral  sense  is  a  very  complex  affair — dependent  in  part 
upon  associations  of  pleasure  and  pain,  approbation  and  disap- 
probation formed  by  education  in  early  youth,  but  in  part  also 
on  an  innate  sense  of  moral  beauty  and  ugliness  (how  origi- 
nated need  not  be  discussed),  which  is  possessed  by  some  people 
in  great  strength,  while  some  are  totally  devoid  of  it — just  as 
some  children  draw,  or  are  enchanted  by  music  while  mere 
infants,  while  others  do  not  know  "  Cherry  Ripe  "  from  "  Rule 
Britannia,"  nor  can  represent  the  form  of  the  simplest  thing  to 
the  end  of  their  lives. 

Now  for  this  last  sort  of  people  there  is  no  reason  why  they 
should  discharge  any  moral  duty,  except  from  fear  of  punish- 
ment in  all  its  grades,  from  mere  disapprobation  to  hanging, 
and  the  duty  of  society  is  to  see  that  they  live  under  wholesome 
fear  of  such  punishment  short,  sharp,  and  decisive. 

For  the  people  with  a  keen  innate  sense  of  moral  beauty 


1892  THE   BASIS  OF   MORALITY  325 

there  is  no  need  of  any  other  motive.  What  they  want  is  knowl- 
edge of  the  things  they  may  do  and  must  leave  undone,  if  the 
welfare  of  society  is  to  be  attained.  Good  people  so  often  forget 
this  that  some  of  them  occasionally  require  hanging  almost  as 
much  as  the  bad. 

If  you  ask  why  the  moral  inner  sense  is  to  be  (under  due 
limitations)  obeyed;  why  the  few  who  are  steered  by  it  move 
the  mass  in  whom  it  is  weak?  I  can  only  reply  by  putting 
another  question — Why  do  the  few  in  whom  the  sense  of  beauty 
is  strong — Shakespere,  RaflFaele,  Beethoven,  carry  the  less  en- 
dowed multitude  away  ?  But  they  do,  and  always  will.  People 
who  overlook  that  fact  attend  neither  to  history  nor  to  what 
goes  on  about  them. 

Benjamin  Franklin  was  a  shrewd,  excellent,  kindly  man.  I 
have  a  great  respect  for  him.  The  force  of  genial  common- 
sense  respectability  could  no  further  go.  George  Fox  was  the 
very  antipodes  of  all  this,  and  yet  one  understands  how  he  came 
to  move  the  world  of  his  day,  and  Franklin  did  not. 

As  to  whether  we  can  all  fulfil  the  moral  law,  I  should  say, 
hardly  any  of  us.  Some  of  us  are  utterly  incapable  of  fulfilling 
its  plainest  dictates.  As  there  are  men  born  physically  cripples 
and  intellectually  idiots,  so  there  are  some  who  are  moral  crip- 
ples and  idiots,  and  can  be  kept  straight  not  even  by  punish- 
ment. For  these  people  there  is  nothing  but  shutting  up,  or 
extirpation. — I  am,  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  peaceful  aspect  of  this  article  seems  to  have  veiled 
to  most  readers  the  unbroken  nature  of  his  defence,  and  he 
writes  to  his  son-in-law,  the  Hon.  John  Collier,  suggesting 
an  alteration  in  the  title  of  the  essay : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  8,  1892. 

My  dear  Jack — It  is  delightful  to  find  a  reader  who  "twigs" 
every  point  as  acutely  as  your  brother  has  done.  I  told  some- 
body— was  it  you? — I  rather  wished  the  printer  would  substi- 
tute o  for  e  in  Irenicon.  So  far  as  I  have  seen  any  notices,  the 
British  critic  (what  a  dull  ass  he  is)  appears  to  have  been  seri- 
ously struck  by  my  sweetness  of  temper. 

I  sent  you  the  article  yesterday,  so  you  will  judge  for  your- 
self.— With  love,  ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

You  should  see  the  place  I  am  claiming  for  Art  in  the  Uni- 
versity.   I  do  believe  something  will  grow  out  of  my  plan,  which 


326  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

has  made  all  the  dry  bones  rattle.  It  is  coming  on  for  discus- 
sion in  the  Senate,  and  I  shall  be  coming  to  you  to  have  my 
wounds  dressed  after  the  fight.    Don't  know  the  day  yet. 

This  allusion  to  the  place  of  Art  in  the  University  refers 
to  the  proposed  reorganisation  of  the  London  University. 

Since  the  year  1887  the  question  of  establishing  a 
Teaching  University  for  London  had  become  more  and 
more  pressing.  London  contained  many  isolated  teaching 
bodies  of  various  kinds — University  College,  King's  Col- 
lege, the  Royal  College  of  Science,  the  Medical  Schools, 
Bedford  College,  and  so  forth,  while  the  London  University 
was  only  an  examining  body.  Clearly  these  scattered  bodies 
needed  organising ;  the  educational  forces  of  the  metropolis 
were  disintegrated ;  much  teaching — and  this  was  especially 
true  of  the  medical  schools — ^that  could  have  been  better 
done  and  better  paid  in  a  single  institution,  was  split  up 
among  several,  non^  of  which,  perhaps,  could  offer  suffi- 
cient inducement  to  keep  the  best  men  permanently. 

The  most  burning  question  was,  whether  these  bodies 
should  be  united  into  a  new  university,  with  power  to 
grant  degrees  of  its  own,  or  should  combine  with  the  exist- 
ing University  of  London,  so  that  the  latter  would  become 
a  teaching  as  well  as  an  examining  body.  And  if  so,  there 
was  the  additional  question  as  to  the  form  which  this  com- 
bination should  take — whether  federation,  for  example,  or 
absorption. 

The  whole  question  had  been  referred  to  a  Royal  Com- 
mission by  the  Government  of  Lord  Salisbury.  The  results 
were  seen  in  the  charter  for  a  Gresham  University,  embody- 
ing the  former  alternative,  and  in  the  introduction  into  Par- 
liament of  a  Bill  to  carry  this  scheme  into  effect.  But  this 
action  had  only  been  promoted  by  some  of  the  bodies  in- 
terested, and  was  strongly  opposed  by  other  bodies,  as  well 
as  by  many  teachers  who  were  interested  in  university  re- 
form. 

Thus  at  the  end  of  February,  Huxley  was  invited,  as  a 
Governor  of  University  College,  to  sign  a  protest  against  the 
provisions  of  the  Charter  for  a  Teaching  University  then 
before  Parliament,  especially  in  so  far  as  it  was  proposed 


1892  LETTER   TO   PROFESSOR   WELDON  327 

to  establish  a  second  examining  body  in  London.  The 
signatories  also  begged  the  Government  to  grant  further 
enquiry  before  legislating  on  the  subject. 

The  protest,  which  received  over  100  signatures  of 
weight,  contributed  something  towards  the  rejection  of  the 
Bill  in  the  House  of  Commons.  It  became  possible  to  hope 
that  there  might  be  established  in  London  a  University 
which  should  be  something  more  than  a  mere  collection  of 
teachers,  having  as  their  only  bond  of  union  the  preparation 
of  students  for  a  common  examination.  It  was  proposed  to 
form  an  association  to  assist  in  the  promotion  of  a  teaching 
university  for  the  metropolis ;  but  the  first  draft  of  a  scheme 
to  reconcile  the  complication  of  interests  and  ideals  involved 
led  Huxley  to  express  himself  as  follows : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  27,  1892. 

Dear  Professor  Weldon  * — I  am  sorry  to  have  kept  you 
waiting  so  long  for  an  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  17th:  but 
your  proposal  required  a  good  deal  of  consideration,  and  I  have 
had  a  variety  of  distractions. 

So  long  as  I  am  a  member  of  the  Senate  of  the  University 
of  London,  I  do  not  think  I  can  with  propriety  join  any  Asso- 
ciation which  proposes  to  meddle  with  it.  Moreover,  though  I 
have  a  good  deal  of  sympathy  with  the  ends  of  the  Association, 
I  have  my  doubts  about  many  propositions  set  forth  in  your 
draft. 

I  took  part  in  the  discussions  preliminary  to  Lord  Justice 
Fry*s  scheme,  and  I  was  so  convinced  that  that  scheme  would 
be  wrecked  amidst  the  complication  of  interests  and  ideals  that 
claimed  consideration,  that  I  gave  up  attending  to  it.  In  fact, 
living  so  much  out  of  the  world  now,  and  being  sadly  deaf,  I 
am  really  unfit  to  intervene  in  business  of  this  kind. 

Worse  still,  I  am  conscious  that  my  own  ideal  is,  for  the 
present  at  any  rate,  hopelessly  impracticable.  I  should  cut  away 
medicine,  law,  and  theology  as  technical  specialities  in  charge 
of  corporations  which  might  be  left  to  settle  (in  the  case  of 
medicine,  in  accordance  with  the  State)  the  terms  on  which 
they  grant  degrees. 

The  university  or  universities  should  be  learning  and  teach- 

*  Then  at  University  College,  London ;  now  Linacre  Professor  of 
Physiology  at  Oxford. 


328  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

ing  bodies  devoted  to  art  (literary  and  other),  history,  philoso- 
phy, and  science,  where  any  one  who  wanted  to  learn  all  that 
is  known  about  these  matters  should  find  people  who  could  teach 
him  and  put  him  in  the  way  of  learning  for  himself. 

That  is  what  the  world  will  want  one  day  or  other,  as  a 
supplement  to  all  manner  of  high  schools  and  technical  insti- 
tutions in  which  young  people  get  decently  educated  and  learn 
to  earn  their  bread — such  as  our  present  universities. 

It  will  be  a  place  for  men  to  get  knowledge;  and  not  for 
boys  and  adolescents  to  get  degrees. 

I  wish  I  could  get  the  younger  men  like  yourself  to  see  that 
this  is  the  goal  which  they  may  reach,  and  in  the  meanwhile  to 
take  care  that  no  such  Philistine  compromise  as  is  possible  at 
present,  becomes  too  strong  to  survive  a  sharp  shake. — I  am, 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  sketches  his  ideal  of  a  modern  university,  and  espe- 
cially of  its  relation  to  the  Medical  Schools,  in  a  letter  to 
Professor  Ray  Lankester  of  April  1 1 : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  April  ii,  1892. 

My  dear  Lankester — We  have  been  having  ten  days  of 
sunshine,  and  I  have  been  correspondingly  lazy,  especially  about 
letter-writing.  This,  however,  is  my  notion;  that  unless  people 
clearly  understand  that  the  university  of  the  future  is  to  be  a 
very  different  thing  from  the  university  of  the  past,  they  had 
better  put  off  meddling  for  another  generation. 

The  mediaeval  university  looked  backwards :  it  professed  to 
be  a  storehouse  of  old  knowledge,  and  except  in  the  way  of 
dialectic  cobweb-spinning,  its  professors  had  nothing  to  do  with 
novelties.  Of  the  historical  and  physical  (natural)  sciences, 
of  criticism  and  laboratory  practice,  it  knew  nothing.  Oral 
teaching  was  of  supreme  importance  on  account  of  the  cost  and 
rarity  of  manuscripts. 

The  modern  university  looks  forward,  and  is  a  factory  of 
new  knowledge :  its  professors  have  to  be  at  the  top  of  the  wave 
of  progress.  Research  and  criticism  must  be  the  breath  of  their 
nostrils;  laboratory  work  the  main  business  of  the  scientific 
student ;  books  his  main  helpers. 

The  lecture,  however,  in  the  hands  of  an  able  man  will  still 
have  the  utmost  importance  in  stimulating  and  giving  facts  and 
principles  their  proper  relative  prominence. 

I  think  we  should  get  pretty  nearly  what  is  wanted  by  graft- 


1892  LONDON   UNIVERSITY   REFORM  329 

ing  a  College  de  France  on  to  the  University  of  London,  subsi- 
dising University  College  and  King's  College  (if  it  will  get  rid 
of  its  tests,  not  otherwise),  and  setting  up  two  or  three  more 
such  bodies  in  other  parts  of  London.  (  Scotland,  with  a  smaller 
population  than  London,  has  four  complete  universities!) 

I  should  hand  over  the  whole  business  of  medical  education 
and  graduation  to  a  medical  universitas  to  be  constituted  by  the 
royal  colleges  and  medical  schools,  whose  doings,  of  course, 
would  be  checked  by  the  Medical  Council. 

Our  side  has  been  too  apt  to  look  upon  medical  schools  as 
feeders  for  Science.  They  have  been  so,  but  to  their  detriment 
as  medical  schools.  And  now  that  so  many  opportunities  for 
purely  scientific  training  are  afforded,  there  is  no  reason  they 
should  remain  so. 

The  problem  of  the  Medical  University  is  to  make  an  aver- 
age man  into  a  good  practical  doctor  before  he  is  twenty-two, 
and  with  not  more  expense  than  can  be  afforded  by  the  class 
from  which  doctors  are  recruited,  or  than  will  be  rewarded  by 
the  prospect  of  an  income  of  £400  to  £500  a  year. 

It  is  not  right  to  sacrifice  such  men,  and  the  public  on  whom 
they  practise,  for  the  prospect  of  making  i  per  cent  of  medical 
students  into  men  of  science. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

An  undated  draft  in  his  own  handwriting  (probably  the 
draft  of  a  speech  delivered  the  first  time  he  came  to  the 
committee  as  President,  October  26)  expands  the  same  idea 
as  to  the  modern  requirements  of  the  University : — 

The  cardinal  fact  in  the  University  question  appears  to  me 
to  be  this:  that  the  student  to  whose  wants  the  mediaeval  Uni- 
versity was  adjusted,  looked  to  the  past  and  sought  book-learn- 
ing, while  the  modern  looks  to  the  future  and  seeks  the  knowl- 
edge of  things. 

The  mediaeval  view  was  that  alt  knowledge  worth  having 
was  explicitly  or  implicitly  contained  in  various  ancient  writ- 
ings; in  the  Scriptures,  in  the  writings  of  the  greater  Greeks, 
and  those  of  the  Christian  Fathers.  Whatever  apparent  novelty 
they  put  forward,  was  professedly  obtained  by  deduction  from 
ancient  data. 

The  modern  knows  that  the  only  source  of  real  knowledge 
lies  in  the  application  of  scientific  methods  of  inquiry  to  the 
ascertainment  of  the  facts  of  existence;  that  the  ascertainable 


330 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 


is  infinitely  greater  than  the  ascertained,  and  that  the  chief  busi- 
ness of  the  teacher  is  not  so  much  to  make  scholars  as  to  train 
pioneers. 

From  this  point  of  view,  the  University  occupies  a  position 
altogether  independent  of  that  of  the  coping-stone  of  schools 
for  general  education,  combined  with  technical  schools  of  The- 
ology, Law,  and  Medicine.  It  is  not  primarily  an  institution  for 
testing  the  work  of  schoolmasters,  or  for  ascertaining  the  fit- 
ness of  young  men  to  be  curates,  lawyers,  or  doctors. 

It  is  an  institution  in  which  a  man  who  claims  to  devote 
himself  to  Science  or  Art,  should  be  able  to  find  some  one  who 
can  teach  him  what  is  already  known,  and  train  him  in  the 
methods  of  knowing  more. 

I  include  under  Art, — Literature,  the  pictorial  and  plastic 
art  with  Architecture,  and  Music;  and  under  Science, — Logic, 
Philosophy,  Philology,  Mathematics,  and  the  Physical  Sciences. 

The  question  of  the  connection  of  the  High  Schools  for 
general  education,  and  of  the  technical  schools  of  Theology, 
Law,  Medicine,  Engineering,  Art,  Music,  and  so  on,  with  the 
University  is  a  matter  of  practical  detail.  Probably  the  teach- 
ing of  the  subjects  which  stand  in  the  relation  of  preliminaries 
to  technical  teaching  and  final  studies  in  higher  general  educa- 
tion in  the  University  would  be  utilised  by  the  colleges  and  tech- 
nical schools. 

All  that  I  have  to  say  on  this  subject  is,  that  I  see  no  reason 
why  the  existing  University  of  London  should  not  be  completed 
in  the  sense  I  have  defined  by  grafting  upon  it  a  professoriate 
with  the  appropriate  means  and  api)liances,  which  would  supply 
London  with  the  analogue  of  the  Ecole  des  hautes  fitudes  and 
the  College  de  France  in  Paris,  and  of  the  Laboratories  with 
the  Professor  Extraordinarius  and  Privat  Docenten  in  the  Ger- 
man Universities. 

A  new  Commission  was  promised  to  look  into  the  whole 
question  of  the  London  University.  This  is  referred  to  in 
a  letter  to  Sir  J.  Donnelly  of  March  30,  1892 : — 

Unless  you  want  to  kill  Foster,  don't  suggest  him  for  the 
Commission.    He  is  on  one  already. 

The  whole  affair  is  a  perfect  muddle  of  competing  crude 
projects  and  vested  interests,  and  is  likely  to  end  in  a  worse 
muddle,  as  anything  but  a  patch  up  is,  I  believe,  outside  prac- 
tical politics  at  present. 

If  I  had  carte  blanche,  I  should  cut  away  the  technical 


1892  LONDON    UNIVERSITY   REFORM  331 

"  Faculties  "  of  Medicine,  Law,  and  Theology,  and  set  up  first- 
class  chairs  in  Literature,  Art,  Philosophy,  and  pure  Science 
— a  sort  of  combination  of  Sorbonne  (without  Theology)  and 
College  de  France. 

Thank  Heaven  I  have  never  been  asked  to  say  anything, 
and  my  chimseras  remain  in  petto.    They  would  be  scouted. 

On  the  other  hand,  he  was  most  anxious  to  keep  the 
School  of  Science  at  South  Kensington  entirely  independ- 
ent.   He  writes  again  on  May  26 : — 

I  trust  Riicker  and  Thorpe  are  convinced  by  this  time  that  I 
knew  what  I  was  talking  about  when  I  told  them,  months  ago, 
that  there  would  be  an  effort  to  hook  us  into  the  new  University 
hotch-potch. 

I  am  ready  to  oppose  any  such  project  tooth  and  nail.  I 
have  not  been  striving  these  thirty  years  to  get  Science  clear 
of  their  schoolmastering  sham-literary  peddling  to  give  up  the 
game  without  a  fight.    I  hope  my  Lords  will  be  staunch. 

I  am  glad  my  opinion  is  already  on  record. 

And  similarly  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on  October  30 : — 

You  will  have  to  come  to  London  and  set  up  physiology  at 
the  Royal  College  of  Science.  It  is  the  only  place  in  Great 
Britain  in  which  scientific  teaching  is  trammelled  neither  by 
parsons  nor  by  litterateurs.  I  have  always  implored  Donnelly 
to  keep  us  clear  of  any  connection  with  a  University  of  any 
kind,  sort,  or  description,  and  I  tried  to  instil  the  same  lesson 
into  the  doctors  the  other  day.  But  the  "  liberal  education " 
cant  is  an  obsession  of  too  many  of  them. 

A  further  step  was  taken  in  June,  when  he  was  sent 
a  new  draft  of  proposals,  afterwards  adopted  by  the  above- 
mentioned  general  meeting  of  the  Association  in  March, 
1893,  sketching  a  constitution  for  a  new  university,  and 
asking  for  the  appointment  of  a  Statutory  Commission  to 
carry  it  out.  The  University  thus  constituted  was  to  be 
governed  by  a  Court,  half  of  which  should  consist  of  uni- 
versity professors  *  ;  it  was  to  include  such  faculties  as 

*  "  As  for  a  government  by  professors  only"  (he  writes  in  the 
Times  of  Dec.  6,  1892),  '*the  fact  of  their  being  specialists  is  against 
them.  Most  of  them  are  broad-minded,  practical  men  ;  some  are  good 
administrators.     But,  unfortunately,  there  is  among  them,  as  in  other 


332  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

Law,  Engineering,  Medicine,  while  it  was  to  bring  into  con- 
nection the  various  teaching  bodies  scattered  over  London. 
The  proposers  themselves  recognised  that  the  scheme  was 
not  ideal,  but  a  compromise  which  at  least  would  not  ham- 
per further  progress,  and  would  supersede  the  Gresham 
scheme,  which  they  regarded  as  a  barrier  to  all  future  aca- 
demic reform. 

The  Association  as  thus  constituted  Huxley  now  joined, 
and  was  immediately  asked  to  accept  the  Presidency, 
not  that  he  should  do  any  more  militant  work  than 
he  was  disposed  to  attempt,  but  simply  that  he  should 
sit  like  Moltke  in  his  tent  and  keep  an  eye  on  the  cam- 
paign. 

He  felt  it  almost  a  point  of  honour  not  to  refuse  his 
best  services  to  a  cause  he  had  always  had  at  heart,  though 
he  wrote : — 

There  are  some  points  in  which  I  go  further  than  your  pro- 
posals, but  they  are  so  much,  to  my  mind,  in  the  right  direction 
that  I  gladly  support  them. 

And  again : — 

The  Association  scheme  is  undoubtedly  a  compromise — ^but 
it  is  a  compromise  which  takes  us  the  right  way,  while  the 
former  schemes  led  nowhere  except  to  chaos. 

He  writes  to  Sir  W.  H.  Flower: — 

professions,  a  fair  sprinkling  of  one-idea*d  fanatics,  ignorant  of  the 
commonest  conventions  of  official  relation,  and  content  with  nothing 
if  they  cannot  get  everything  their  own  way.  It  is  these  persons 
who,  with  the  very  highest  and  purest  intentions,  would  ruin  any 
administrative  body  unless  they  were  counterpoised  by  non-profes- 
sional, common-sense  members  of  recognised  weight  and  authority  in 
the  conduct  of  affairs."  Furthermore,  against  the  adoption  of  a  Ger- 
man university  system,  he  continues,  "  In  holding  up  the  University 
of  Berlin  as  our  model,  I  think  you  fail  to  attach  sufficient  weight  to 
the  considerations  that  there  is  no  Minister  of  Public  Instruction  in 
these  realms  ;  that  a  great  many  of  us  would  rather  have  no  university 
at  all  than  one  under  the  control  of  such  a  minister,  and  whose  high- 
est representatives  might  come  to  be,  not  the  fittest  men,  but  those 
who  stood  foremost  in  the  good  graces  of  the  powers  that  be,  whether 
Demos,  Ministry,  or  Sovereign." 


1892  LONDON   UNIVERSITY   REFORM  333 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  yi/«<r  27,  1892. 

My  dear  Flower — I  had  quite  given  up  the  hope  that  any- 
thing but  some  wretched  compromise  would  come  of  the  Univer- 
sity Commission,  when  I  found,  to  my  surprise,  no  less  than 
gratification,  that  a  strong  party  among  the  younger  men  were 
vigorously  taking  the  matter  up  in  the  right  (that  is,  my)  sense. 

In  spite  of  all  my  good  resolves  to  be  a  "  hermit  old  in 
mossy  cell,"  I  have  enlisted — for  ambulance  service  if  nothing 
better. 

The  move  is  too  important  to  spare  oneself  if  one  can  be  of 
any  good. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Of  his  work  in  this  position  Professor  Karl  Pearson  says, 
in  a  letter  to  me : — 

Professor  Huxley  gallantly  came  to  lead  a  somewhat  forlorn 
hope, — that  of  establishing  a  really  great  university  in  London. 
He  worked,  as  may  naturally  be  supposed,  with  energy  and  per- 
sistence, and  one,  who  like  myself  was  not  in  full  sympathy  with 
the  lines  he  took,  can  but  admire  the  vigour  he  threw  into  the 
movement.  Nothing  came  of  it  practically;  .  .  .  but  Professor 
Huxley^s  leadership  did,  at  any  rate,  a  great  deal  to  unite  the 
London  teachc^rs,  and  raise  their  ideal  of  a  true  university,  while 
at  the  same  time  helping  to  repress  the  self-interests  of  many 
persons  and  institutions  which  had  been  before  very  much  to  the 
front. 

Clearly  this  is  the  sort  of  thing  referred  to  in  a  letter  of 
December  20 : — 

Got  through  the  Association  business  very  well,  but  had  to 
show  that  I  am  the  kind  of  head  that  does  not  lend  itself  to 
wagging  by  the  tail. 

The  Senate  of  the  University  of  London  showed  practi- 
cal unanimity  in  accepting  the  idea  of  taking  on  teaching 
functions  if  the  Commission  should  think  it  desirable, 
though  the  Medical  Schools  were  still  desirous  of  getting 
their  degree  granted  on  the  mere  license  examination  of  the 
Royal  Colleges,  without  any  evidence  of  general  culture  or 
academical  training,  and  on  July  28  Huxley  writes : — 

The  decision  of  the  representatives  of  the  Medical  Schools 
is  just  such  as  I  should  have  expected.  I  always  told  my  col- 
leagues in  the  Senate  of  the  University  of  London  that  such 


334 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 


was  their  view,  and  that,  in  the  words  of  Pears*  advertisement, 
they  "  would  not  be  happy  till  they  got  it." 

And  they  won't  get  it  unless  the  medical  examining  bodies 
are  connected  into  a  distinct  degree-giving  body. 

In  the  course  of  the  autumn  matters  seemed  to  be  pro- 
gressing.   He  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster,  November  9 : — 

I  am  delighted  to  say  that  Paget  has  taken  up  the  game,  and 
I  am  going  to  a  committee  of  the  University  this  day  week  to  try 
my  powers  of  persuasion.  If  the  Senate  can  only  be  got  to  see 
where  salvation  lies  and  strike  hard  without  any  fooling  over 
details,  we  shall  do  a  great  stroke  of  business  for  the  future 
generations  of  Londoners. 

And  by  the  end  of  the  year  he  writes : — 

I  think  we  are  going  to  get  something  done,  as  the  Senate 
of  the  U.L.  has  come  into  line  with  us,  and  I  hope  University 
College  will  do  the  same. 

Meanwhile  he  was  asked  if  he  would  appear  before  the 
Commission  and  give  evidence — ^to  "  talk  without  interroga- 
tion "  so  as  to  convince  the  Commission  of  the  inadequacy 
of  the  teaching  of  science  in  general  and  of  the  absence  of 
means  and  appliances  for  the  higher  teaching.  This  he  did 
early  in  January  1893,  representing  partly  his  own  views, 
partly  those  of  the  Association,  to  whom  he  read  what  he 
proposed  to  say,  before  being  authorised  to  speak  on  their 
behalf. 

His  position  is  finally  defined  by  the  following  letter : — 

Feb.  9,  1893. 

Dear  Professor  Weldon — I  wish  anything  I  have  said  or 
shall  say  about  the  organisation  of  the  new  University  to  be 
taken  in  connection  with  the  following  postulates  which  I  con- 
ceive to  be  of  primary  importance : 

1.  The  New  University  is  not  to  be  a  separate  body  from 
the  present  University  of  London. 

2.  All  persons  giving  academic  instruction  of  a  certain  rank 
are  to  be  "  University  Professors." 

3.  The  Senate  is  to  contain  a  large  proportion  of  representa- 
tives of  the  "  University  Professors  "  with  a  limited  term  of 
office  (say  five  years). 


i893  LONDON    UNIVERSITY   REFORM  335 

4.  The  University  chest  is  to  receive  all  fees  and  other  funds 
for  University  purposes;  and  the  Professors  are  to  be  paid  out 
of  it,  according  to  work  done  for  the  University — thus  putting 
an  end  to  the  present  commercial  competition  of  teaching  insti- 
tutions. 

5.  In  all  questions  of  Teaching,  Examination,  and  Discipline 
the  authority  of  the  Senate  is  to  be  supreme — (saving. appeal  to 
the  Privy  Council). 

Your  questions  will  be  readily  answered  if  these  postulates 
are  kept  in  view. 

In  the  case  you  put,  the  temptation  to  rivalry  would  not 
exist ;  and  I  should  imagine  that  the  Senate  would  refuse  funds 
for  the  purpose  of  duplicating  an  existing  Institution,  unless 
very  strong  grounds  for  so  doing  could  be  shown.  In  short, 
they  would  adopt  the  plan  which  commends  itself  to  you. 

That  to  which  I  am  utterly  opposed  is  the  creation  of  an 
Established  Church  Scientific,  with  a  hierarchical  organisation 
and  a  professorial  Episcopate.  I  am  fully  agreed  with  you  that 
all  trading  competition  between  different  teaching  institutions 
is  a  thing  to  be  abolished  (see  No.  4  above). 

On  the  other  hand,  intellectual  competition  is  a  very  good 
thing,  and  perfect  freedom  of  learning  and  teaching  the  best  of 
all  things. 

If  you  put  a  physical,  chemical,  or  biological  bishop  at  the 
head  of  the  teachers  of  those  sciences  in  London,  you  will  do 
your  best  to  destroy  that  freedom.  My  bar  to  any  catastrophe 
of  that  sort  lies  in  No.  3.  Let  us  take  the  case  of  Biology.  I 
suppose  there  will  be,  at  least,  half  a  dozen  Professoriates  in 
different  branches  of  this  subject;  each  Professor  will  be  giving 
the  same  amount  of  time  and  energy  to  University  work,  and 
will  deserve  the  same  pay.  Each,  if  he  is  worth  his  salt,  will 
be  a  man  holding  his  own  views  on  general  questions,  and  hav- 
ing as  good  a  right  as  any  other  to  be  heard.  Why  is  one  to  be 
given  a  higher  rank  and  vastly  greater  practical  influence  than 
all  the  rest  ?  Why  should  not  each  be  a  "  University  Professor  " 
and  have  his  turn  on  the  Senate  in  influencing  the  general  policy 
of  the  University?  The  nature  of  things  drives  men  more  and 
more  into  the  position  of  specialists.  Why  should  one  specialist 
represent  a  whole  branch  of  science  better  than  another,  in 
Council  or  in  Administration  ? 

I  am  afraid  we  cannot  build  upon  the  analogy  of  Cambridge. 
In  the  first  place  London  is  not  Cambridge;  and,  in  the  second, 
Michael  Fosters  do  not  grow  on  every  bush. 


336 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 


The  besetting  sin  of  able  men  is  impatience  oi  contradiction 
and  of  criticism.  Even  those  who  do  their  best  to  resist  the 
temptation,  yield  to  it  almost  unconsciously  and  become  the  tools 
of  toadies  and  flatterers.  "  Authorities,"  "  disciples,"  and 
"  schools  "  are  the  curse  of  science ;  and  do  more  to  interfere 
with  the  work  of  the  scientific  spirit  than  all  its  enemies. 

Thus  you  will  understand  why  I  have  so  strongly  opposed 
"  absorption."  No  one  can  feel  more  strongly  than  I  the  need  of 
getting  the  present  chaos  into  order  and  putting  an  end  to  the 
absurd  waste  of  money  and  energy.  But  I  believe  that  end  may 
be  attained  by  the  method  of  unification  which  I  have  suggested ; 
without  bringing  in  its  train  the  evils  which  will  inevitably  flow 
from  "  absorptive  "  regimentation. 

What  I  want  to  see  is  such  an  organisation  of  the  means 
and  appliances  of  University  instruction  in  all  its  branches,  as 
will  conduce  to  the  largest  possible  freedom  of  research,  learn- 
ing, and  teaching.  And  if  anybody  will  show  me  a  better  way 
to  that  end  than  through  the  measures  I  have  suggested,  I  will 
gladly  leave  all  and  follow  him. — I  am  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

P,S. — Will  you  be  so  kind  as  to  let  Professor  Lankester  see 
this  letter,  as  I  am  writing  to  him  and  shirk  the  labour  of  going 
over  the  whole  ground  again. 

His  last  public  activity,  indeed,  was  on  behalf  of  Univer- 
sity reform,  when  in  January  1895  he  represented  not  only 
the  Association,  but,  in  the  enforced  absence  of  Sir  James 
Paget,  the  Senate  of  the  University  also,  on  a  deputation 
to  Lord  Rosebery,  then  Prime  Minister,  to  whom  he  wrote 
asking  if  he  were  willing  to  receive  such  a  deputation. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Dec.  4,  1894. 

Dear  Lord  Rosebery — A  number  of  scientific  people,  in  fact 
I  think  I  may  say  all  the  leading  men  of  science,  and  especially 
teachers  in  the  country,  are  very  anxious  to  see  the  University  of 
London  reorganised  upon  the  general  principles  set  forth  in  the 
Report  of  the  last  Royal  Commission. 

To  this  end  nothing  is  wanted  but  the  institution  of  a  strong 
Statutory  Commission ;  and  we  have  all  been  hoping  that  a  Bill 
would  be  introduced  for  that  purpose. 

It  is  rumoured  that  there  are  lions  in  the  path.  But  even 
lions  are  occasionally  induced  to  retreat  by  the  sight  of  a  large 


i894  LONDON   UNIVERSITY  REFORM  337 

body  of  beaters.  And  some  of  us  think  that  such  a  deputation 
as  would  willingly  wait  on  you,  might  hasten  the  desired  move- 
ment. 

We  proposed  something  of  the  kind  to  Mr.  Acland  months 
ago,  but  nothing  has  come  of  the  suggestion — not,  I  am  sure, 
from  any  want  of  good  will  to  our  cause  on  his  part. 

Within  the  last  few  days  I  have  been  so  strongly  urged  to 
bring  the  matter  before  you,  that  in  spite  of  some  doubts  as  to 
the  propriety  of  going  beyond  my  immediate  chief  the  V.P.  even 
in  my  private  capacity  I  venture  to  make  this  appeal. — I  am, 
dear  Lord  Rosebery,  faithfully  yours, 

Thos.  H.  Huxley. 


58 


CHAPTER  XIX 
1892 

Several  letters  of  this  year  touch  on  educational  sub- 
jects. The  following  advice  as  to  the  best  training  for  a  boy 
in  science,  was  addressed  to  Mr.  Briton  Riviere,  R.A. : — 

HODESLEA,  y««^   19,  1892. 

My  dear  Riviere — Touching  the  training  of  your  boy  who 
wants  to  go  in  for  science,  I  expect  you  will  have  to  make  a 
compromise  between  that  which  is  theoretically  desirable  and 
that  which  is  practically  most  advantageous,  things  being  as 
they  are. 

Though  I  say  it  that  shouldn't,  I  don't  believe  there  is  so 
good  a  training  in  physical  science  to  be  got  anywhere  as  in  our 
College  at  South  Kensington.  But  Bernard  could  hardly  with 
advantage  take  this  up  until  he  is  seventeen  at  least.  What  he 
would  profit  by  most  as  a  preliminary,  is  training  in  the  habit 
of  expressing  himself  well  and  clearly  in  English;  training  in 
mathematics  and  the  elements  of  physical  science ;  in  French  and 
German,  so  as  to  read  those  languages  easily — especially  Ger- 
man; in  drawing — not  for  hifalutin  art,  of  which  he  will  prob- 
ably have  enough  in  the*  blood — but  accurate  dry  reproduction 
of  form— one  of  the  best  disciplines  of  the  powers  of  observation 
extant. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  way  of  practical  advantage  in 
any  career,  there  is  a  great  deal  to  be  said  for  sending  a  clever 
boy  to  Oxford  or  Cambridge.  There  are  not  only  the  exhibitions 
and  scholarships,  but  there  is  the  rubbing  shoulders  with  the 
coming  generation  which  puts  a  man  in  touch  with  his  contem- 
poraries as  hardly  anything  else  can  do.  A  very  good  scientific 
education  is  to  be  had  at  both  Cambridge  and  Oxford,  especially 
Cambridge  now. 

In  the  case  of  sending  to  the  university,  putting  through 

338 


1892     THE  STATE  AND  INTERMEDIATE  EDUCATION     335 

the  Latin  and  Greek  mill  will  be  indispensable.  And  if  he  is 
not  going  to  make  the  classics  a  serious  study,  diere  will  be  a 
serious  waste  of  time  and  energy. 

So  much  in  all  these  matters  depends  on  the  x  contained  in 
the  boy  himselL  If  he  has  the  physical  and  mental  energy  to 
make  a  mark  in  science,  I  should  drive  him  straight  at  science, 
taking  care  that  he  got  a  literary  training  through  English, 
French,  and  German.  An  average  capacity,  on  die  other  hand, 
may  be  immensely  helped  by  university  means  of  flotation. 

But  who  in  the  world  is  to  say  how  the  x  will  turn  out, 
before  the  real  strain  begins?  One  might  as  well  prophesy  the 
effect  of  a  glass  of  "  hot-widi "  when  die  relative  quantities  of 
brandy,  water,  and  sugar  are  unknown.  I  am  sure  die  large 
quantity  of  brandy  and  the  very  small  quantity  of  sugar  in  my 
composition  were  suspected  neither  by  myself,  nor  any  one  else, 
until  the  rows  into  which  wicked  men  persisted  in  involving 
me  began ! 

And  that  reminds  me  that  I  forgot  to  tell  the  publishers  to 
send  you  a  copy  of  my  last  peace-offering,  and  that  one  will  be 
sent  you  by  to-morrow's  post.  There  is  nothing  new  except  the 
prologue,  the  sweet  reasonableness  of  which  will,  I  hope,  meet 
your  approbation. 

It  is  not  my  fault  if  you  have  had  to  toil  through  this  fright- 
fully long  screed;  Mrs.  Riviere,  to  whom  our  love,  said  you 
wanted  it.  "  Tu  Fas  voulu,  Georges  Dandin." — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  deals  with  State  intervention  in  inter- 
mediate education : — 

(For  Sunday  morning's  leisure,  or  take  it  to  church  and  read 
it  in  your  hat.) 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Oct,  i,  189a. 

My  dear  Donnelly — Best  thanks  for  sending  on  my  letter. 
I  do  not  suppose  it  will  do  much  good,  but,  at  any  rate,  I  thought 
I  ought  to  try  to  prevent  their  making  a  mess  of  medical  edu- 
cation. 

I  like  what  I  have  seen  of  Acland.  He  seemed  to  have  both 
intelligence  and  volition. 

As  to  intermediate  education  I  have  never  favoured  the 
notion  of  State  intervention  in  this  direction. 

I  think  there  are  only  two  valid  grounds  for  State  meddling 
with  education:  the  one  the  danger  to  the  community  which 


340 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xix 


arises  from  dense  ignorance;  the  other,  the  advantage  to  the 
community  of  giving  capable  men  the  chance  of  utilising  their 
capacity. 

The  first  furnishes  the  justification  for  compulsory  ele- 
mentary education.  If  a  child  is  taught  reading,  writing,  draw- 
ing, and  handiwork  of  some  kind ;  the  elements  of  mathematics, 
physics,  and  history,  and  I  should  add  of  political  economy  and 
geography ;  books  will  furnish  him  with  everything  he  can  pos- 
sibly need  to  make  him  a  competent  citizen  in  any  rank  of  life. 

If  with  such  a  start,  he  has  not  the  capacity  to  get  all  he 
needs  out  of  books,  let  him  stop  where  he  is.  Blow  him  up  with 
intermediate  education  as  much  as  you  like,  you  will  only  do 
the  fellow  a  mischief  and  lift  him  into  a  place  for  which  he  has 
no  real  qualification.  People  never  will  recollect,  that  mere 
learning  and  mere  cleverness  are  of  next  to  no  value  in  life, 
while  energy  and  intellectual  grip,  the  things  that  are  inborn 
and  cannot  be  taught,  are  everything. 

The  technical  education  act  goes  a  long  way  to  meet  the 
second  claim  of  the  State;  so  far  as  scientific  and  industrial 
capacities  are  concerned.  In  a  few  years  there  will  be  no  reason 
why  any  potential  Whitworth  or  Faraday,  in  the  three  king- 
doms, should  not  readily  obtain  the  best  education  that  is  to 
be  had,  scientific  or  technical.  The  same  will  hold  good  for  Art. 
So  the  question  that  arises  seems  to  me  to  be  whether  the  State 
ought  or  ought  not  to  do  something  of  the  same  kind  for  Litera- 
ture, Philosophy,  History,  and  Philology. 

I  am  inclined  to  think  not,  on  the  ground  that  the  univer- 
sities and  public  schools  ought  to  do  this  very  work,  and  that 
as  soon  as  they  cease  to  be  clericalised  seminaries  they  probably 
will  do  it. 

If  the  present  government  would  only  give  up  their  Irish 
fad — and  bring  in  a  bill  to  make  it  penal  for  any  parson  to  hold 
any  office  in  a  public  school  or  university  or  to  presume  to  teach 
outside  the  pulpit — they  should  have  my  valuable  support ! 

I  should  not  wonder  if  Gladstone's  mind  is  open  on  the  sub- 
ject. Pity  I  am  not  sufficiently  a  persona  grata  with  him  to 
offer  to  go  to  Hawarden  and  discuss  it. 

I  quite  agree  with  you,  therefore,  that  it  will  play  the  deuce 
if  intermediate  education  is  fossilised  as  it  would  be  by  any  Act 
prepared  under  present  influences.  The  most  I  should  like  to 
see  done,  would  be  to  help  the  youth  of  special  literary,  linguistic 
and  so  forth,  capacity,  to  get  the  best  training  in  their  special 
line. 


1892  ON   SCIENTIFIC  ASPIRATIONS  341 

It  was  lucky  we  did  not  go  to  you.  My  Wife  got  an  awful 
dose  of  neuralgia  and  general  upset,  and  was  laid  up  at  the 
Hotel.  The  house  was  not  quite  finished  inside,  but  we  came 
in  on  Tuesday,  and  she  has  been  getting  better  ever  since  in 
spite  of  the  gale. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  of  the  recurrence  of  influenza.  It  is  a 
beastly  thing.  Lord  Justice  Bowen  told  me  he  has  had  it  every 
time  it  has  been  in  the  country.  You  must  come  and  try  East- 
bourne air  as  soon  as  we  are  settled.  With  our  love  to  you  and 
Mrs.  Donnelly — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Better  be  careful,  I  return  all  letters  on  which  R.H.  is  not 
in  full. 

The  next  is  to  a  young  man  with  aspirations  after  an 
intellectual  career,  who  asked  his  advice  as  to  the  propriety 
of  throwing  up  his  business,  and  plunging  into  literature  or 
science : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  5,  1892. 

Dear  Sir — I  am  very  sorry  that  the  pressure  of  other  occu- 
pations has  prevented  me  from  sending  an  earlier  reply  to  your 
letter. 

In  my  opinion  a  man*s  first  duty  is  to  find  a  way  of  support- 
ing himself,  thereby  relieving  other  people  of  the  necessity  of 
supporting  him.  Moreover,  the  learning  to  do  work  of  prac- 
tical value  in  the  world,  in  an  exact  and  careful  manner,  is  of 
itself  a  very  important  education,  the  effects  of  which  make 
themselves  felt  in  all  other  pursuits.  The  habit  of  doing  that 
which  you  do  not  care  about  when  you  would  much  rather  be 
doing  something  else,  is  invaluable.  It  would  have  saved  me  a 
frightful  waste  of  time  if  I  had  ever  had  it  drilled  into  me  in 
youth. 

Success  in  any  scientific  career  requires  an  unusual  equip- 
ment of  capacity,  industry,  and  energy.  If  you  possess  that 
equipment  you  will  find  leisure  enough  after  your  daily  com- 
mercial work  is  over,  to  make  an  opening  in  the  scientific  ranks 
for  yourself.  If  you  do  not,  you  had  better  stick  to  commerce. 
Nothing  is  less  to  be  desired  than  the  fate  of  a  young  man,  who, 
as  the  Scotch  proverb  says,  in  "  trying  to  make  a  spoon  spoils  a 
horn,"  and  becomes  a  mere  hanger-on  in  literature  or  in  science, 
when  he  might  have  been  a  useful  and  a  valuable  member  of 
Society  in  other  occupations. 

I  think  that  your  father  ought  to  see  this  letter.  —  Yours 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


342 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xix 


The  last  of  the  series,  addressed  to  the  secretary  of  a 
free-thought  association,  expresses  his  firmly  rooted  disgust 
at  the  use  of  mere  ribaldry  in  attacking  the  theological 
husks  which  enclose  a  religious  ideal. 

May  22,  1892. 

Dear  Sir — I  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  comply  with  the 
wish  of  your  committee.  For  one  thing,  I  am  engaged  in  work 
which  I  do  not  care  to  interrupt,  and  for  another,  I  always 
make  it  a  rule  in  these  matters  to  "  fight  for  my  own  hand."  1 
do  not  desire  that  anyone  should  share  my  responsibility  for 
what  I  think  fit  to  say,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  be  responsible  for 
the  opinions  and  modes  of  expression  of  other  persons. 

I  do  not  say  this  with  any  reference  to  Mr. ,  who  is  a 

sober  and  careful  writer.  But  both  as  a  matter  of  principle  and 
one  of  policy,  I  strongly  demur  to  a  great  deal  of  what  appears 
as  "  free  thought  **  literature,  and  I  object  to  be  in  any  way 
connected  with  it.  Heterodox  ribaldry  disgusts  me,  I  confess, 
rather  more  than  orthodox  fanaticism.  It  is  at  once  so  easy; 
so  stupid;  such  a  complete  anachronism  in  England,  and  so 
thoroughly  calculated  to  disgust  and  repel  the  very  thoughtful 
and  serious  people  whom  it  ought  to  be  the  great  aim  to  attract. 
Old  Noll  knew  what  he  was  about  when  he  said  that  it  was  of 
no  use  to  try  to  fight  the  gentlemen  of  England  with  tapsters 
and  serving-men.  It  is  quite  as  hopeless  to  fight  Christianity 
with  scurrility.    We  want  a  regiment  of  Ironsides. 

This  summer  brought  Huxley  a  most  unexpected  dis- 
tinction in  the  shape  of  admission  to  the  Privy  Council. 
Mention  has  already  been  made  (Vol.  I.  p.  386)  of  his  rea- 
sons for  refusing  to  accept  a  title  for  distinction  in  science, 
apart  from  departmental  administration.  The  proper  recog- 
nition of  science,  he  maintained,  lay  in  the  professional  rec- 
ognition of  a  man^s  work  by  his  peers  in  science,  the  mem- 
bers of  the  learned  societies  of  his  own  and  other  countries. 

But,  as  has  been  said,  the  Privy  Councillorship  was  an 
office,  not  a  title,  although  with  a  title  attaching  to  the  office ; 
and  in  theory,  at  least,  a  scientific  Privy  Councillor  might 
some  day  play  an  important  part  as  an  accredited  repre- 
sentative of  science,  to  be  consulted  officially  by  the  Govern- 
ment, should  occasion  arise. 

Of  a  selection  of  letters  on  the  subject,  mostly  answers 


# 


1892  CREATED  A  PRIVY  COUNCILLOR  343 

to  congratulations,  I  place  first  the  one  to  Sir  M.  Foster, 
which  gives  the  fullest  account  of  the  affair. 

Con-y-Gkdal  Hotel,  Barmouth,  Aug,  23, 1892. 

My  dear  Foster — I  am  very  glad  you  think  I  have  done 
rightly  about  the  P.C.;  but  in  fact  I  could  hardly  help  myself. 

Years  and  years  ago  I  was  talking  to  Donnelly  about  these 
things,  and  told  him  that  so  far  as  myself  was  concerned,  I 
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  official  decorations— didn't  object 
to  other  people  having  them,  especially  heads  of  offices,  like 
Hooker  and  Flower — ^but  preferred  to  keep  clear  myself.  But 
I  added  that  there  was  one  thing  I  did  not  mind  telling  him, 
because  no  English  Government  would  ever  act  upon  my  opinion 
— ^and  that  was  that  the  P,C.  was  a  fit  and  proper  recognition 
for  science  and  letters.  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  has  kept  this 
in  mind  ever  since — ^in  fact  Lord  Salisbury's  letter  (which  was 
very  handsome)  showed  he  had  been  told  of  my  obiter  dictum. 
Donnelly  was  the  first  channel  of  inquiry  whether  I  would  ac- 
cept, and  was  very  strong  that  I  should. 

So  you  see  if  I  had  wished  to  refuse  it,  it  would  have  been 
difficult  and  ungracious.  But,  on  the  whole,  I  thought  the 
precedent  good.  Play  fair  tells  me  he  tried  to  get  it  done  in  the 
case  of  Faraday  and  Babbage  thirty  years  ago,  and  the  thing 
broke  down.  Moreover  a  wicked  sense  of  the  comedy  of  ad- 
vancing such  a  pernicious  heretic,  helped  a  good  deal. 

The  worst  of  it  is,  I  have  just  had  a  summons  to  go  to 
Osborne  on  Thursday  and  it  is  as  much  as  I  shall  be  able 
to  do. 

We  have  been  in  South  Wales,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  Colliers,  and  are  on  our  way  to  the  Wallers  for  the  Festival 
week  at  Gloucester.  We  hope  to  get  back  to  Eastbourne  in  the 
latter  half  of  September  and  find  the  house  clean  swept  and 
garnished.  After  that,  by  the  way,  it  is  not  nice  to  say  that  we 
shall  hope  to  have  a  visit  from  Mrs.  Foster  and  you. 

With  our  love  to  you  both — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  am  glad  you  are  resting,  but  oh,  why  another  Congress  I 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  y««^  21,  1892. 

My  dear  Donnelly — You  have  been  and  done  me  at  last, 
you  betrayer  of  confidence.  This  is  what  comes  of  confiding 
one's  pet  weakness  to  a  bosom-friend ! 

But  I  can't  deny  my  own  words,  or  the  accuracy  of  your 


344 


% 

LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xix 


devil  of  a  memory — and,  moreover,  I  think  the  precedent  of 
great  importance. 

I  have  always  been  dead  against  orders  of  merit  and  the 
like,  but  I  think  that  men  of  letters  and  science  who  have  been 
of  use  to  the  nation  (Lord  knows  if  I  have)  may  fairly  be 
ranked  among  its  nominal  or  actual  councillors. 

As  for  yourself  it  is  only  one  more  kindness  on  the  top  of 
a  heap  so  big  I  shall  say  nothing  about  it. 

Mrs.  Right  Honourable  sends  her  love  to  you  both,  and 
promises  not  to  be  proud. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Con-y-Gedal  Hotel,  Barmouth,  Aug.  20,  1892. 

My  dear  Donnelly — I  began  to  think  that  Lord  Salisbury 
had  thought  better  of  it — (I  should  not  have  been  surprised  at 
all  if  he  had)  and  was  going  to  leave  me  a  P.P.C.  instead  of  a 
P.C.  when  the  announcement  appeared  yesterday. 

This  morning,  however,  I  received  his  own  letter  (dated 
the  i6th),  which  had  been  following  me  about.  A  very  nice 
letter  it  is  too— he  does  the  thing  handsomely  while  he  is 
a1)out  it. 

Well,  I  think  the  thing  is  good  for  science ;  I  am  not  such  a 
self  humbug  as  to  pretend  that  my  vanity  is  not  pleasantly 
tickled ;  but  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  aspect  of  the  affair  more 
pleasant  to  me,  than  the  evidence  it  affords  of  the  strength  of 
our  old  friendship.  Because  with  all  respect  for  my  noble 
friends,  deuce  a  one  would  ever  have  thought  of  it,  unless  you 
had  not  only  put  it — ^but  rubbed  it — into  their  heads. 

I  have  not  forgotten  that  private  and  confidential  document 
that  you  were  so  disgusted  to  find  had  been  delivered  to  me ! 
You  have  tried  it  on  before — so  don't  deny  it. 

But  bless  my  soul,  how  profound  is  old  Cole*s  remark  about 
the  humour  of  public  affairs.  To  think  of  a  Conservative  Gov- 
ernment— pride  of  the  Church — going  out  of  its  way  to  honour 
one  not  only  of  the  wicked,  but  of  the  notoriousest  and  plain- 
spoken  wickedness.  My  wife  and  I  drove  over  to  Dolgelly  yes- 
terday— do  you  know  it?  one  of  the  loveliest  things  in  the  three 
kingdoms — and  every  now  and  then  had  a  laugh  over  this  very 
quaint  aspect  of  the  affair. 

Can  you  tell  me  what  I  shall  have  to  do  in  the  dim  and  dis- 
tant future?  I  suppose  I  shall  have  to  go  and  swear  somewhere 
(I  am  always  ready  to  do  that  on  occasion).  Is  admission  to 
the  awful  presence  of  H.M.  involved?     Shall  I  have  to  rig  up 


1892  CREATED  A  PRIVY  COUNCILLOR  345 

again  in  that  Court  suit,  which  I  hoped  was  permanently  laid 
up  in  lavender?    Resolve  me  these  things. 

We  shall  be  here  I  expect  at  least  another  week;  and  bring 
up  at  Gloucester  about  the  3rd  September.  Hope  to  get  back 
to  Hodeslea  latter  part  of  September. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker 

Aug.  20. 
You  will  have  seen  that  I  have  been  made  a  P.C.  If  I  had 
been  offered  to  be  made  a  police  constable  I  could  not  have  been 
more  flabbergasted  than  I  was  when  the  proposition  came  to  me 
a  few  weeks  ago.  I  will  tell  you  the  story  of  how  it  all  came 
about  when  we  meet.  The  Archbishopric  of  Canterbury  is  the 
only  object  of  ambition  that  remains  to  me.  Come  and  be  Suf- 
fragan; there  is  plenty  of  room  at  Lambeth  and  a  capital 
garden  I 

To  HIS  Youngest  Daughter 

Con-y-Gedal  Hotel,  Barmouth,  Aug.  22,  1892. 

Dearest  Babs — If  Lord  Salisbury  had  known  my  address, 

M and  I  should  have  had  our  little  joke  out  before  leaving 

Saundersfoot,*  as  the  letter  was  dated  i6th.  It  must  be  a  month 
since  Lord  Cranbrook  desired  Donnelly  to  find  out  if  I  would 
accept  the  P.C,  and  as  I  heard  no  more  about  it  up  to  the  time 
of  dissolution,  I  imagined  there  was  a  hitch  somewhere.  And 
really,  the  more  I  think  of  it  the  queerer  does  it  seem,  that  a 
Tory  and  Church  Government  should  have  delighted  to  honour 
the  worst- famed  heretic  in  the  three  kingdoms. 

I  am  sure  Donnelly  has  been  at  the  bottom  of  it,  as  he  is 
the  only  person  to  whom  I  ever  spoke  of  the  fitness  of  the  P.C. 
for  men  of  science  and  letters. 

The  queer  thing  is  that  his  chief  and  Lord  Salisbury  listened 
to  the  suggestion. 

Tell  Jack  he  is  simply  snuffed  out — ^younger  sons  of  peers 
go  with  the  herd  of  Barts.  and  knights  I  believe.  But  a  table 
of  precedence  is  not  to  be  had  for  love  or  money — and  my  anx- 
iety is  wearing. 

This  place  is  as  perfectly  delightful  as  Aberystwith  was 
t'other.  .  .  .  With  best  love  to  you  all — Ever  your 

Pater. 


*  Where  he  had  been  staying  with  his  daughter. 


346  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xix 


To  Mrs.  W.  K.  Clifford 

Con-y-Gedal  Hotel,  Barmouth,  Aug.  22,  1892. 

My  dear  Lucy — I  am  glad  to  think  that  it  is  the  honours 
that  blush  and  not  the  recipient^  for  I  am  past  that  form  of 
vascular  congestion. 

It  was  known  that  the  only  peerage  I  would  accept  was  a 
spiritual  one;  and  as  H.M.  shares  the  not  unnatural  prejudice 
which  led  her  illustrious  predecessor  (now  some  time  dead)  to 
object  to  give  a  bishopric  to  Dean  Swift,  it  was  thought  she 
could  not  stand  the  promotion  of  Dean  Huxley ;  would  see  * 
him  in  fact  .  .  . 

Lord  S.  apologised  for  not  pressing  the  matter,  but  pointed 
out  that,  as  Evolutionism  is  rapidly  gaining  ground  among 
the  people  who  have  votes,  it  was  probable,  if  not  certain, 
that  his  eminent  successor  (whose  mind  is  always  open)  would 
become  a  hot  evolutionist  before  the  expiration  of  the 
eight  months'  office  which  Lord  S.  (who  needs  rest)  means 
to  allow  him.  And  when  eminent  successor  goes  out,  my 
bishopric  will  be  among  the  Dissolution  Honours.  \i  H.M. 
objects  she  will  be  threatened  with  the  immediate  abolition  of 
the  H.  of  Lords,  and  the  institution  of  a  social  democratic  fed- 
eration of  counties,  each  with  an  army,  navy,  and  diplomatic 
service  of  its  own. 

I  know  you  like  to  have  the  latest  accurate  intelligence,  but 
this  really  must  be  considered  confidential.  As  a  P.C.  I  might 
lose  my  head  for  letting  out  State  secrets. — Ever  your  affec- 
tionate Pater. 

To  Sir  Joseph  Fayrer 

Con-y-Gedal  Hotel,  Barmouth,  Wales, 
Aug.  28,  1892. 

It  is  very  pleasant  to  get  the  congratulations  of  an  old  friend 
like  yourself.  As  we  went  to  Osborne  the  other  day  I  looked 
at  the  old  Victory  and  remembered  that  six  and  forty  years 
ago  I  went  up  her  side  to  report  myself  on  appointment,  as 
a  poor  devil  of  an  assistant  surgeon.  And  I  should  not  have 
got  that  far  if  you  had  not  put  it  into  my  head  to  apply  to 
Burnett. 

*  This  is  a  pun. 


i892  THE   PRIVY  COUNCILLORSHIP  347 


To  Sir  Joseph  Prestwich 

Con-y-Gedal  Hotel,  Barmouth,  Aug,  31,  189a. 
My  dear  Prestwich — Best  thanks  for  your  congratulations. 
As  I  have  certainly  got  more  than  my  temporal  deserts,  the  other 
"  half  "  you  speak  of  can  be  nothing  less  than  a  bishopric !  May 
you  live  to  see  that  dignity  conferred;  and  go  on  writing  such 
capital  papers  as  the  last  you  sent  me,  until  I  write  myself  your 
Right  Revd.  as  well  as  Right  Honble.  old  friend, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


To  Sir  W.  H.  Flower 

Con-y-Gedal  Hotel,  Barmouth,  Aug,  31,  1892. 

My  dear  Flower — Many  thanks  for  your  congratulations, 
with  Lady  Flower's  postscript  not  forgotten.  I  should  have  an- 
swered you  letter  sooner,  but  I  had  to  go  to  Osborne  last  week 
in  a  hurry,  kiss  hands  and  do  my  swearing.  It  was  very  funny 
that  the  Gladstone  P.C.'s  had  the  pleasure  of  welcoming  the 
Salisbury  P.C.'s  among  their  first  official  acts ! 

I  will  gladly  come  to  as  many  meetings  of  the  Trustees  as  I. 
can.  Only  you  must  not  expect  me  in  very  severe  weather  like 
that  so  common  last  year.  My  first  attack  of  pleurisy  was  dan- 
gerous and  not  painful ;  the  second  was  painful  and  not  danger- 
ous; the  third  will  probably  be  both  painful  and  dangerous,  and 
my  commander-in-chief  (who  has  a  right  to  be  heard  in  such 
matters)  will  not  let  me  run  the  risk  of  it. 

But  I  have  marked  down  Oct.  22  and  Nov.  24,  and  nothing 
short  of  snow  shall  stop  me. 

As  to  what  you  want  to  do,  getting  butter  out  of  a  dog*s 
mouth  is  an  easier  job  than  getting  patronage  out  of  that  of  a 
lawyer  or  an  ecclesiastic.  But  I  am  always  good  for  a  forlorn 
hope,  and  we  will  have  a  try. 

We  shall  not  be  back  at  Eastbourne  till  the  latter  half  of 
September,  and  I  doubt  if  we  shall  get  into  our  house  even  then. 
We  leave  this  for  Gloucester,  where  we  are  going  to  spend  the 
festival  week  with  my  daughter  to-morrow. — With  our  love  to 
you  both,  ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  see  a  report  that  Owen  is  sinking.  Poor  old  man ;  it  seems 
queer  that  just  as  I  am  hoist  to  the  top  of  my  tree  he  should 
be  going  underground.    But  at  88  life  cannot  be  worth  much. 


348  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xix 


To  Mr.  W.  F.  Collier 

Con-y-Gedal  Hotel,  Barmouth  Water, 
Aug.  31,  1892. 

Accept  my  wife's  and  my  hearty  thanks  for  your  kind  con- 
gratulations. When  I  was  a  mere  boy  I  took  for  motto  of  an 
essay,  "  What  is  honour  ?  Who  hath  it  ?  He  that  died  o' 
Wednesday,"  and  although  I  have  my  full  share  of  ambition  ^ 
and  vanity,  I  doubt  not,  yet  Falstaff's  philosophical  observa- 
tion has  dominated  my  mind  and  acted  as  a  sort  of  perpetual 
refrigerator  to  these  passions.  So  I  have  gone  my  own  way, 
sought  for  none  of  these  things  and  expected  none  —  and  it 
would  seem  that  the  deepest  schemer's  policy  could  not  have 
answered  better.  We  must  have  a  new  Beatitude,  "  Blessed  is 
the  man  who  expecteth  nothing,"  without  its  ordinary  appendix. 

I  tell  Jack*  I  have  worked  hard  for  a  dignity  which  will 
enable  me  to  put  down  his  aristocratic  swaggering. 

It  took  some  time,  however,  to  get  used  to  the  title,  and 
it  was  October  before  he  wrote : — 

The  feeling  that  "  The  Right  Honble."  on  my  letters  is  a 
piece  of  chaff  is  wearing  off,  and  I  hope  to  get  used  to  my  ap- 
pendix in  time. 

The  "  very  quaint "  ceremony  of  kissing  hands  is  de- 
scribed at  some  length  in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Huxley  from 
London  on  his  way  back  from  Osborne : — 

Great  Western  Hotel,  Aug.  25,  1892,  6.40  p.m. 

I  have  just  got  back  from  Osborne,  and  I  find  there  are  a  few 
minutes  to  send  you  a  letter — by  the  help  of  the  extra  halfpenny. 
First-rate  weather  there  and  back,  a  special  train,  carriage  with 
postillions  at  the  Osborne  landing-place,  and  a  grand  procession 
of  officers  of  the  new  household  and  P.C.'s  therein.  Then  wait- 
ing about  while  the  various  "  sticks  "  were  delivered. 

Then  we  were  shown  into  the  presence  chamber  where  the 
Queen  sat  at  a  table.  We  knelt  as  if  we  were  going  to  say  our 
prayers,  holding  a  testament  between  two,  while  the  Clerk  of 
the  Council  read  an  oath  of  which  I  heard  not  a  word.  We  each 
advanced  to  the  Queen,  knelt  and  kissed  her  hand,  retired  back- 
wards, and  got  sworn  over  again  (Lord  knows  what  I  promised 

*  His  son-in-law,  Hon.  John  Collier. 


1892  THE   PRIVY  COUNCILLORSHIP  345 

and  vowed  this  time  also).  Then  we  shook  hands  with  all  the 
P.C/s  present,  including  Lord  Lome,  and  so  exit  backwards. 
It  was  all  very  curious.  .  .  . 

After  that  a  capital  lunch  and  back  we  came.  Ribblesdale 
and  several  other  people  I  knew  were  of  the  party,  and  I  found 
it  very  pleasant  talking  with  him  and  Jesse  Collings,  who  is  a 
very  interesting  man. 

"  Oh,"  he  said,  "  how  I  wish  my  poor  mother,  who  was  a 
labouring  woman — a  great  noble  woman — ^and  brought  us  nine 
all  up  in  right  ways,  could  have  been  alive."  Very  human  and 
good  and  dignified  too,  I  thought 

He  also  used  to  tell  how  he  was  caught  out  when  he 
thought  to  make  use  of  the  opportunity  to  secure  a  close 
view  of  the  Queen.  Looking  up,  he  found  her  eyes  fixed 
upon  him ;  Her  Majesty  had  clearly  taken  the  opportunity 
to  do  the  same  by  him. 

Regarding  the  Privy  Councillorship  as  an  exceptional 
honour  for  science,  over  and  above  any  recognition  of  his 
personal  services,  which  he  thought  amply  met  by  the  Civil 
List  pension  specially  conferred  upon  him  as  an  honour  at 
his  retirement  from  the  public  service,  IJuxley  was  no  little 
vexed  at  an  article  in  Nature  for  August  25  (vol.  xlvi.  p. 
397),  reproaching  the  Government  for  allowing  him  to 
leave  the  public  service  six  years  before,  without  recog- 
nition. Accordingly  he  wrote  to  Sir  J.  Donnelly  on 
August  2y : — 

It  is  very  unfair  to  both  Liberal  and  Conservative  Govern- 
ments, who  did  much  more  for  me  than  I  expected,  and  I  feel 
that  I  ought  to  contradict  the  statement  without  loss  of  time. 

So  I  have  written  the  inclosed  letter  for  publication  in 
Nature,  But  as  it  is  always  a  delicate  business  to  meddle  with 
official  matters,  I  wish  you  would  see  if  I  have  said  anything 
more  than  I  ought  to  say  in  the  latter  half  of  the  letter.  If  so, 
please  strike  it  out,  and  let  the  first  half  go. 

I  had  a  narrow  shave  to  get  down  to  Osborne  and  kiss  hands 
on  Thursday.    What  a  quaint  ceremony  it  is ! 

The  humour  of  the  situation  was  that  we  three  hot  Union- 
ists, White  Ridley,  Jesse  Collings,  and  I,  were  escorted  by  the 
whole  Gladstonian  household. 

And  again  on  August  30 : — 


3SO 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap.xix 


In  the  interview  I  had  with  Lord  Salisbury  on  the  subject 
of  an  order  of  merit — ^ages  ago* — ^I  expressly  gave  him  to 
understand  that  I  considered  myself  otit  of  the  running — having 
already  received  more  than  I  had  any  right  to  expect  And 
when  he  has  gone  out  of  his  way  to  do  honour  to  science,  it  is 
stupid  of  Nature  to  strike  the  discordant  note. 

His  letter  appeared  in  Nature  of  September  i  (vol.  xlvi. 
p.  416).  In  it  he  declared  that  both  Lord  Salisbury's  and 
Mr.  Gladstone's  Governments  had  given  him  substantial 
recognition;  that  Lord  Iddesleigh  had  put  the  Civil  List 
pension  expressly  as  an  honour ;  and  finally,  that  he  himself 
placed  this  last  honour  in  the  category  of  '' unearned. in- 
crements." 

♦  See  p.  175. 


CHAPTER  XX 
1892 

The  following  letters  are  mainly  of  personal  interest; 
some  merely  illustrate  the  humorous  turn  he  would  give 
to  his  more  intimate  correspondence ;  others  strike  a  more 
serious  note,  especially  those  to  friends  whose  powers  were 
threatened  by  overwork  or  ill-health. 

With  these  may  fitly  come  two  other  letters;  one  to  a 
friend  on  his  re-marriage,  the  other  to  his  daughter,  in  reply 
to  a  birthday  letter. 

My  wife  and  I  send  our  warmest  good  wishes  to  your  future 
wife  and  yourself.  I  cannot  but  think  that  those  who  are  parted 
from  us,  if  they  have  cognisance  of  what  goes  on  in  this  world, 
must  rejoice  over  everything  that  renders  life  better  and  brighter 
for  the  sojourners  in  it— especially  of  those  who  are  dear  to 
them.    At  least,  that  would  be  my  feeling. 

Please  commend  us  to  Miss ,  and  beg  her  not  to  put  us 

on  the  "  Index,"  because  we  count  ourselves  among  your  oldest 
and  warmest  friends. 

To  HIS  Daughter,  Mrs.  Roller 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  May  5,  1892. 

It  was  very  pleasant  to'  get  your  birthday  letter  and  the 
photograph,  which  is  charming. 

The  love  you  children  show  us,  warms  our  old  age  better 
than  the  sun. 

For  myself,  the  sting  of  remembering  troops  of  follies  and 
errors,  is  best  alleviated  by  the  thought  that  they  may  make  me 
better  able  to  help  those  who  have  to  go  through  like  experi- 
ences, and  who  are  so  dear  to  me  that  I  would  willingly  pay  an 
even  heavier  price,  to  be  of  use.  Depend  upon  it,  that  con- 
founded "  just  man  who  needed  no  repentance  "  was  a  very  poor 

351 


352 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  XX 


sort  of  a  father.  But  perhaps  his  daughters  were  "just  women  " 
of  the  same  type;  and  the  family  circle  as  warm  as  the  interior 
of  an  ice-pail. 

A  certain  artist,  who  wanted  to  have  Huxley  sit  to  him, 
tried  to  manage  the  matter  through  his  son-in-law,  Hon.  J. 
Collier,  to  whom  the  following  is  addressed : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  yb«.  27,  1892. 

My  dear  Jack — Inclosed  is  a  letter  for  you.  Will  you  com- 
mit the  indiscretion  of  sending  it  on  to  Mr.  A.  B.  if  you  see  no 
reason  to  the  contrary? 

I  hope  the  subsequent  proceedings  will  interest  you  no  more. 

I  am  sorry  you  have  been  so  bothered  by  the  critter — ^but  in 
point  of  pertinacity  he  has  met  his  match.  (I  have  no  objection 
to  your  saying  that  your  father-in-law  is  a  brute,  if  you  think 
that  will  soften  his  disappointment.) 

Here  the  weather  has  been  tropical.  The  bananas  in  the 
new  garden  are  nearly  ripe,  and  the  cocoanuts  are  coming  on. 
But  of  course  you  expect  this,  for  if  it  is  unbearably  sunny  in 
London  what  must  it  be  here  ? 

.  All  our  loves  to  all  of  you. — Ever  yours  affectionately. 

Pater. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Feb.  i,  1892. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  hear  you  have  influenza  rampaging 
about  the  Camp ;  *  and  I  want  to  point  out  to  you  that  if  you 
want  a  regular  bad  bout  of  it,  the  best  thing  you  can  do  is  to 
go  home  next  Thursday  evening,  at  ten  o'clock  at  night,  and 
plunge  into  the  thick  of  the  microbes,  tired  and  chilled. 

If  you  don't  get  it  then,  you  will,  at  any  rate,  have  the  satis- 
faction of  feeling  that  you  have  done  your  best ! 

I  am  going  to  the  x,  but  then  you  see  I  fly  straight  after 
dinner  to  Collier's  per  cab,  and  there  is  no  particular  microbe 
army  in  Eton  Avenue  lying  in  wait  for  me. 

Either  let  me  see  after  the  dinner,  or  sleep  in  town,  and  don't 
worry. — Yours  affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Feb.  19,  1892. 
My  dear  Hooker — I  have  just  received  a  notice  that  Hirst's 
funeral  is  to-morrow.    But  we  are  in  the  midst  of  the  bitterest 
easterly  gale  and  snowfall  we  have  had  all  the  winter,  and  there 
is  no  sign  of  the  weather  mending. 

*  The  name  of  Sir  J.  Hooker's  house  at  Sunningdale. 


1892  LETTERS  .  353 

Neither  you  nor  I  have  any  business  to  commit  suicide  for 
that  which  after  all  is  a  mere  sign  of  the  affection  we  have  no 
need  to  prove  for  our  dear  old  friend,  and  the  chances  are  that 
half  an  hour  cold  chapel  and  grave-side  on  a  day  like  this  would 
finish  us. 

I  write  this  not  that  I  imagine  you  would  think  of  going, 
but  because  my  last  note  spoke  so  decidedly  of  my  own  intention. 

But  who  could  have  anticipated  this  sudden  reversion  to 
Arctic  conditions? — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDKSLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  18,  1892. 

My  dear  Donnelly — My  wife  got  better  and  was  out  for  a 
while  yesterday,  but  she  is  knocked  up  again  to-day. 

It  would  have  been  very  pleasant  to  see  you  both,  but  you 
must  not  come  down  till  we  get  fixed  with  a  new  cook  and  maid, 
as  I  believe  we  are  to  be  in  a  week  or  so.  None  of  your  hotel- 
going  ! 

I  mourn  over  the  departure  of  the  present  cookie — I  believe 
she  is  going  for  no  other  reason  than  that  she  is  afraid  the  house 
will  fall  on  such  ungodly  people  as  we  are,  and  involve  her  in 
the  ruins.  That  is  the  modern  martyrdom — you  don't  roast 
infidels,  but  people  who  can  roast  go  to  the  pious. 

Lovely  day  to-day,  nothing  but  east  wind  to  remind  one  it  is 
not  summer. — Crocuses  coming  out  at  last. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  April  3,  1892. 

My  dear  Hooker — As  I  so  often  tell  my  wife,  "  your  con- 
founded sense  of  duty  will  be  the  ruin  of  you."  You  really, 
club  or  no  club,  had  no  business  to  be  travelling  in  such  a  bitter 
east  wind.  However,  I  hope  the  recent  sunshine  has  set  you 
up  again. 

Barring  snow  or  any  other  catastrophe,  I  will  be  at  "the 
Club"  dinner  on  the  26th  and  help  elect  the  P.R.S.  I  don't 
think  I  go  more  than  once  a  year,  and  like  you  I  find  the  smaller 
the  pleasanter  meetings. 

I  was  very  sorry  to  see  Bowman's  death.  What  a  first-rate 
man  of  science  he  would  have  been  if  the  Professorship  at 
King's  College  had  been  £1000  a  year.  But  it  was  mere  starva- 
tion when  he  held  it. 

I  am  glad  to  say  that  my  wife  is  much  better — ^thank  yours 
for  her  very  kind  sympathy.  I  was  very  down  the  last  time  I 
wrote  to  you. — Ever  yours  affectionately,         T.  H.  Huxley. 

59 


354 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CHAP,  xx 


HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  27,  1892. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  had  to  run  up  to  town  on  Friday  and 
forgot  your  letter.  The  ;r  is  a  puzzle — I  will  stick  by  the  ship 
as  long  as  you  do,  depend  upon  that.  I  fear  we  can  hardly 
expect  to  see  dear  old  Tyndall  there  again.  As  for  myself,  I 
dare  not  venture  when  snow  is  on  the  ground,  as  on  the  last 
two  occasions.  And  now,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  there  is  another 
possible  impediment  in  my  wife's  state  of  health. 

I  have  had  a  very  anxious  time  of  it  altogether  lately.  But 
sich  is  life  1 

My  sagacious  granddaughter  Joyce  (gone  home  now)  ob- 
served to  her  grandmother  some  time  ago — "  I  don't  want  to 
grow  up."  "Why  don't  you  want  to  grow  up?"-  "Because  I 
notice  that  grown-up  people  have  a  great  deal  of  trouble."  Sa- 
gacious philosopheress  of  7 ! — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Hodeslea,  y««/  27,  1892. 

My  dear  Foster — My  wife  has  been  writing  to  Mrs.  Foster 
to  arrange  for  your  visit,  which  will  be  heartily  welcome. 

Now  I  don't  want  to  croak.  No  one  knows  better  than 
I,  the. fatal  necessity  for  any  one  in  your  position:  more  than 
that,  the  duty  in  many  cases  of  plunging  into  public  functions, 
and  all  the  guttle,  guzzle,  and  gammon  therewith  connected. 

But  do  let  me  hold  myself  up  as  the  horrid  example  of  what 
comes  of  that  sort  of  thing  for  men  who  have  to  work  as  you  are 
doing  and  I  have  done.  To  be  sure  you  are  a  "  lungy  "  man 
and  I  am  a  "  livery  "  man,  so  that  your  chances  of  escaping 
candle-snuff  accumulations  with  melancholic  prostration  are 
much  better.  Nevertheless  take  care.  The  pitcher  is  a  very 
valuable  piece  of  crockery,  and  I  don't  want  to  live  to  see  it 
cracked  by  going  to  the  well  once  too  often. 

I  am  in  great  spirits  about  the  new  University  movement, 
and  have  told  the  rising  generation  that  this  old  hulk  is  ready 
to  be  towed  out  into  line  of  battle,  if  they  think  fit,  which  is 
more  commendable  to  my  public  spirit  than  my  prudence. — Ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  y««^  20,  1892. 

My  dear  Romanes — My  wife  and  I,  no  less  than  the  Hook- 
ers who  have  been  paying  us  a  short  visit,  were  very  much 
grieved  to  hear  that  such  serious  trouble  has  befallen  you. 

In  such  cases  as  yours  (as  I  am  sure  your  doctors  have  told 
you)  hygienic  conditions  are  everything — good  air  and  idleness. 


1892  LETTERS  355 

construed  strictly,  among  the  chief.  You  should  do  as  I  have 
done — set  up  a  garden  and  water  it  yourself  for  two  hours  every 
day,  besides  pottering  about  to  see  how  things  grow  (or  don't 
grow  this  weather)  for  a  couple  more. 

Sundry  box-trees,  the  majority  of  which  have  been  getting 
browner  every  day  since  I  planted  them  three  months  ago,  have 
interested  me  almost  as  much  as  the  general  election.  They 
typify  the  Empire  with  the  G.O.M.  at  work  at  the  root  of  it! 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Oct,  18,  1892. 

My  dear  Romanes — I  throw  dust  and  ashes  on  my  head  for 
having  left  your  letter  almost  a  week  unanswered..  But  I  went 
to  Tennyson's  funeral ;  and  since  then  my  whole  mind  has  been 
given  to  finishing  the  reply  forced  upon  me  by  Harrison's  article 
in  the  Fortnightly,  and  I  have  let  correspondence  slide.  I  think 
it  will  entertain  you  when  it  appears  in  November — and  perhaps 
interest — ^by  the  adumbration  of  the  line  I  mean  to  take  if  ever 
that  "  Romanes  "  Lecture  at  Oxford  comes  off. 

As  to  Madeira — I  do  not  think  you  could  do  better.  You 
can  have  as  much. quiet  there  as  in  Venice,  for  there  are  next 
to  no  carts  or  carriages.  I  was  at  an  excellent  hotel,  the  "  Bona 
Vista,"  kept  by  an  Englishman  in  excellent  order,  and  delight- 
fully situated  on  the  heights  outside  Funchal.  When  once  ac- 
climatised and  able  to  bear  moderate  fatigue,  I  should  say  noth- 
ing would  be  more  delightful  and  invigorating  than  to  take  tents 
and  make  the  round  of  the  island.  There  is  nothing  I  have 
seen  anywhere  which  surpasses  the  cliff  scenery  of  the  north 
side,  or  on  the  way  thither,  the  forest  of  heaths  as  big  as  syca- 
mores. 

There  is  a  matter  of  natural  history  which  might  occupy 
without  fatiguing  you,  and  especially  without  calling  for  any 
great  use  of  the  eyes.  That  is  the  effect  of  Madeiran  climate  on 
English  plants  transported  there — and  the  way  in  which  the 
latter  are  beating  the  natives.  There  is  a  Doctor  who  has  lots  of 
information  on  the  topic.  You  may  trust  anything  but  his  physic. 

[The  rest  of  the  letter  gives  details  about  scientific  litera- 
ture touching  Madeira.] 

A  piece  of  advice  to  his  son  anent  building  a  house : — 

Sept.  22,  1892. 

Lastly  and  biggestly,  don't  promise  anything,  agree  to  any- 
thing, nor  sign  anything  (swear  you  are  an  "illiterate  voter" 


356  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

rather  than  this  last)  without  advice — or  you  may  find  yourself 
in  a  legal  quagmire.  Builders,  as  a  rule,  are  on  a  level  with 
horsedealers  in  point  of  honesty — I  could  tell  you  some  pretty 
stories  from  my  small  experience  of  them. 

The  next,  to  Lord  Farrer,  is  apropos  of  quite  an  exten- 
sive correspondence  in  the  Times  as  to  the  correct  reading 
of  the  well-known  lines  about  the  missionary  and  the  casso- 
wary, to  which  both  Huxley  and  Lord  Farrer  had  contrib- 
uted their  own  reminiscences. 

HODESLEA,   Oct.  15,  1892. 

My  dear  Farrer — 

If  jfou  were  a  missionary 

In  the  heat  of  Timbuctoo 

You'd  wear  nought  but  a  nice  and  airy 

Pair  of  bands — p'raps  cassock  too. 

Don't  you  see  the  fine  touch  of  local  colour  in  my  version ! 
Is  it  not  obvious  to  everybody  who  understands  the  methods  of 
high  a  priori  criticism  that  this  consideration  entirely  outweighs 
the  merely  empirical  fact  that  your  version  dates  back  to  1837 
— ^which  I  must  admit  is  before  my  adolescence?  It  is  obvious 
to  the  meanest  capacity  that  mine  must  be  the  original  text  in 
"  Idee,"  whatever  your  wretched  "  Wirklichkeit "  may  have  to 
say  to  the  matter. 

And  where,  I  should  like  to  know,  is  a  glimmer  of  a  scintilla 
of  a  hint  that  the  missionary  was  a  dissenter?  I  claim  him  for 
my  dear  National  Church. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  is  about  a  document  which  he  had  for- 
gotten that  he  wrote  : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  A^ov.  24,  1892. 

My  dear  Donnelly — It  is  obvious  that  you  have  somebody 
in  the  Department  who  is  an  adept  in  the  imitation  of  hand- 
writing. 

As  there  is  no  way  of  proving  a  negative,  and  I  am  too  loyal 
to  raise  a  scandal,  I  will  just  father  the  scrawl. 

Positively,  I  had  forgotten  all  about  the  business.  I  suppose 
because  I  did  not  hear  who  was  appointed.  It  would  be  a  good 
argument  for  turning  people  out  of  office  after  65  !  But  I  have 
always  had  rather  too  much  of  the  lawyer  faculty  of  forgetting 
things  when  they  are  done  with. 


1892  LETTERS  357 

It  was  very  jolly  to  have  you  here,  and  on  principles  of 
Christian  benevolence  you  must  not  be  so  long  in  coming  again. 
— Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  do  not  remember  being  guilty  of  paying  postage — but  that 
doesn't  count  for  much. 

The  following  is  an  answer  to  one  of  the  unexpected 
inquiries  which  would  arrive  from  all  quarters.  A  member 
of  one  of  the  religious  orders  working  in  the  Church  of 
England,  wrote  for  an  authoritative  statement  on  the  fol- 
lowing point,  suggested  by  passages  in  section  5  of  Chapter 
I.  of  the  "  Elementary  Physiology  "  : — When  the  Blessed 
Sacrament,  consisting,  temporarily  and  mundanely  speak- 
ing, of  a  wheaten  wafer  and  some  wine,  is  received  after 
about  seven  hours'  fast,  is  it  or  is  it  not  "  voided  like  other 
meats  "  ?  In  other  words,  does  it  not  become  completely 
absorbed  for  the  sustenance  of  the  body  ? 

Huxley's  help  in  this  physiological  question — and  his 
answer  was  to  be  used  in  polemical  discussion — was  sought 
because  an  answer  from  him  would  be  decisive  and  would 
obviate  the  repetition  of  statements  which  to  a  Catholic  were 
painfully  irreverent. 

HoDESLEA,  Feb.  3,  1892. 

Sir — I  regret  that  you  have  had  to  wait  so  long  for  a  reply 
to  your  letter  of  the  27th.  Your  question  required  careful  con- 
sideration, and  I  have  been  much  occupied  with  other  matters. 

Vou  ask  (i),  whether  the  sacramental  bread  is  or  is  not 
"  voided  like  other  meats  "  ? 

That  depends  on  what  you  mean,  firstly  by  "  voided,"  and, 
secondly,  by  "other  meats."  Suppose  any  "meat"  (I  take  the 
word  to  include  drink)  to  contain  no  indigestible  residuum,  there 
need  not  be  anything  "  voided  "  at  all — if  by  "  voiding  "  is  meant 
expulsion  from  the  lower  intestine. 

Such  a  meat  might  be  "completely  absorbed  for  the  sus- 
tenance of  the  body."  Nevertheless,  its  elements,  in  fresh  com- 
binations, would  be  eventually  "  voided  "  through  other  chan- 
nels, e.g.  the  lungs  and  kidneys.  Thus  I  should  say  that  under 
normal  circumstances  all  "  meats  "  (that  is  to  say,  the  material 
substance  of  them)  are  voided  sooner  or  later. 

Now,  as  to  the  particular  case  of  the  sacramental  wafer  and 
wine.     Taking  their  composition  and  the  circumstances  of  ad- 


358  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

ministration  to  be  as  you  state  them,  it  is  my  opinion  that  a 
small  residuum  will  be  left  undigested,  and  will  be  voided  by  the 
intestine,  while  by  far  the  greater  part  will  be  absorbed  and 
eventually  "  voided  "  by  the  lungs,  skin,  and  kidneys. 

If  anyone  asserts  that  the  wafer  and  wine  are  voided  by  the 
intestine  as  such,  that  the  "  pure  flour  and  water  "  of  which  the 
wafer  consists  pass  out  unchanged,  I  am  of  opinion  he  is  in  error. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  anyone  maintains  that  the  material 
substance  of  the  wafer  persists,  while  its  accidents  change,  within 
the  body,  and  that  this  identical  substance  is  sooner  or  later 
voided,  I  do  not  see  how  he  is  to  be  driven  out  of  that  position 
by  any  scientific  reasoning.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe  that  the  elementary  particles  of  the  wafer  and 
of  the  wine  which  enter  the  body  never  lose  their  identity,  or 
even  alter  their  mass.  If  one  could  see  one  of  the  atoms  of 
carbon  which  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  wafer,  I  con- 
ceive it  could  be  followed  the  whole  way — from  the  mouth  to 
the  organ  by  which  it  escapes — ^just  as  a  bit  of  floating  char- 
coal might  be  followed  into,  through,  and  out  of  a  whirlpool. 

On  October  6,  1892,  died  Lord  Tennyson.  In  the  course 
of  his  busy  life,  Huxley  had  not  been  thrown  very  closely 
into  contact  with  him ;  they  would  meet  at  the  Metaphysical 
Society,  of  which  Tennyson  was  a  silent  member;  and  in 
the  Life  of  Tennyson  two  occasions  are  recorded  on  which 
Huxley  visited  him : — 

Nov.  II,  1871. — Mr.  Huxley  and  Mr.  Knowles  arrived  here 
(Aldworth)  on  a  visit.  Mr.  Huxley  was  charming.  We  had 
much  talk.  He  was  chivalrous,  wide,  and  earnest,  so  that  one 
could  not  but  enjoy  talking  with  him.  There  was  a  discussion 
on  George  Eliot's  humility.  Huxley  and  A.  both  thought  her  a 
humble  woman,  despite  a  dogmatic  manner  of  assertion  that  had 
come  upon  her  latterly  in  her  writings.     (Op.  cit.  ii.  no.) 

March  17,  1873. — Professor  Tyndall  and  Mr.  Huxley  called. 
Mr.  Huxley  seemed  to  be  universal  in  his  interest,  and  to  have 
keen  enjoyment  of  life.  He  spoke  of /«  Memoriam.  (Ibid.  ii.  143.) 

With  this  may  be  compared  one  of  Mr.  Wilfrid  Ward's 
reminiscences  (Nineteenth  Century y  August  1896). 

"  Huxley  once  spoke  strongly  of  the  insight  into  scien- 
tific method  shown  in  Tennyson's  In  Memoriam,  and  pro- 
nounced it  to  be  quite  equal  to  that  of  the  greatest  experts." 


1892  DEATH  OF   TENNYSON  j^jg 

This  view  of  Tennyson  appears  again  in  a  letter  to  Sir 
M.  Foster,  the  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society : — 

Was  not  Tennyson  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society?  If  so, 
should  not  the  President  and  Council  take  some  notice  of  his 
death  and  delegate  some  one  to  the  funeral  to  represent  them? 
Very  likely  you  have  thought  of  it  already. 

He  was  the  only  modern  poet,  in  fact  I  think  the  only  po^t 
since  the  time  of  Lucretius,  who  has  taken  the  trouble  to  under- 
stand the  work  and  tendency  of  the  men  of  science. 

But  this  was  not  the  only  side  from  which  he  regarded 
poetry.  He  had  a  keen  sense  for  beauty,  the  artistic  per- 
fection of  expression,  whether  in  poetry,  prose,  or  conversa- 
tion. Tennyson's  talk  he  described  thus :  "  Doric  beauty  is 
its  characteristic — perfect  simplicity,  without  any  ornament 
or  anything  artificial."  And  again,  to  quote  Mr.  Wilfrid 
Ward's  reminiscences : — 

Tennyson  he  considered  the  greatest  English  master  of 
melody  except  Spenser  and  Keats.  I  told  him  of  Tennyson's 
insensibility  to  music,  and  he  replied  that  it  was  curious  that 
scientific  men,  as  a  rule,  had  more  appreciation  of  music  than 
poets  or  men  of  letters.  He  told  me  of  one  long  talk  he  had  had 
with  Tennyson,  and  added  that  immortality  was  the  one  dogma 
to  which  Tennyson  was  passionately  devoted. 

Of  Browning,  Huxley  said :  "  He  really  has  music  in  him. 
Read  his  poem  The  Thrush  and  you  will  see  it.  Tennyson  said 
to  me,"  he  added,  "  that  Browning  had  plenty  of  music  in  him, 
but  he  could  not  get  it  out" 

Eastbourne,  Oct  15,  1892. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  think  you  will  like  to  hear  that  the 
funeral  yesterday  lacked  nothing  to  make  it  worthy  of  the  dead 
or  the  living. 

Bright  sunshine  streamed  through  the  windows  of  the  nave, 
while  the  choir  was  in  half  gloom,  and  as  each  shaft  of  light 
illuminated  the  flower-covered  bier  as  it  slowly  travelled  on, 
one  thought  of  the  bright  succession  of  his  works  between  the 
darkness  before  and  the  darkness  after.  I  am  glad  to  say  that 
the  Royal  Society  was  represented  by  four  of  its  chief  officers, 
and  nine  of  the  commonalty,  including  myself.  Tennyson  has 
a  right  to  that,  as  the  first  poet  since  Lucretius  who  has  under- 
stood the  drift  of  science. 


360 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 


We  have  heard  nothing  of  you  and  your  wife  for  ages.  Ask 
her  to  give  us  news,  good  news  I  hope,  of  both. 

My  wife  is  better  than  she  was,  and  joins  with  me  in  love. — 
Ever  yours  affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

On  his  way  home  from  the  funeral  in  Westminster 
Abbey,  Huxley  passed  the  time  in  the  train  by  shaping  out 
some  lines  on  the  dead  poet,  the  form  of  them  suggested 
partly  by  some  verses  of  his  wife's,  partly  by  Schiller's 

Gib  diesen  Todten  mir  heraus, 
Ich  muss  ihn  wieder  haben,* 

which  came  back  to  his  mind  in  the  Abbey.  The  lines  were 
published  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  November  1892. 
He  declared  that  he  deserved  no  credit  for  the  verses ;  they 
merely  came  to  him  in  the  train. 

His  own  comparison  of  them  with  the  sheaf  of  professed 
poets'  odes  which  also  appeared  in  the  same  magazine, 
comes  in  a  letter  to  his  wife,  to  whom  he  sent  the  poem 
as  soon  as  it  appeared  in  print. 

I  know  you  want  to  see  the  poem,  so  I  have  cut  it  and  the 
rest  out  of  the  Nineteenth  just  arrived,  and  sent  it. 

If  I  were  to  pass  judgment  upon  it  in  comparison  with  the 
others,  I  should  say,  that  as  to  style  it  is  hammered,  and  as  to 
feeling  human. 

They  are  castings  of  much  prettier  pattern  and  of  mainly 
poetico-classical  educated-class  sentiment.  I  do  not  think  there 
is  a  line  of  mine  one  of  my  old  working-class  audience  would 
have  boggled  over.  I  would  give  a  penny  for  John  Burns' 
thoughts  about  it.  (N.B. — Highly  impartial  and  valuable  criti- 
cism.) 

He  also  wrote  to  Professor  Romanes,  who  had  been 
moved  by  this  new  departure  to  send  him  a  volume  of  his 
own  poems : — 

HODESLEA,  JVoV.  3,   1892. 

My  dear  Romanes — I  must  send  you  a  line  to  thank  you 
very  much  for  your  volume  of  poems.  A  swift  glance  shows  me 
much  that  has  my  strong  sympathy — notably  "  Pater  loquitur," 
which  I  shall  read  to  my  wife  as  soon  as  I  get  her  back.    Against 

*  Don  Carlos,  Sc.  ix. 


1892  DEATH   OF   SIR   R.  OWEN  361 

all  troubles  (and  I  have  had  my  share)  I  weigh  a  wife-comrade 
"  treu  und  fest "  in  all  emergencies. 

I  have  a  great  respect  for  the  Nazarenism  of  Jesus — ^very 
little  for  later  "  Christianity."  But  the  only  religion  that  ap- 
peals to  me  is  prophetic  Judaism.  Add  to  it  something  from  the 
best  Stoics  and  something  from  Spinoza  and  something  from 
Goethe,  and  there  is  a  religion  for  men.  Some  of  these  days  I 
think  I  will  make  a  cento  out  of  the  works  of  these  people. 

I  find  it  hard  enough  to  write  decent  prose  and  have  usually 
stuck  to  that.  The  "  Gib  diesen  Todten  "  I  am  hardly  respon- 
sible for,  as  it  did  itself  coming  down  here  in  the  train  after 
Tennyson's  funeral.  The  notion  came  into  my  head  in  the 
Abbey. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  winter  also  Sir  R.  Owen  died,  and  was  buried  at 
Ham  on  December  23.  The  grave  ends  all  quarrels,  and 
Huxley  intended  to  be  present  at  the  funeral.  But  as  he 
wrote  to  Dr.  Foster  on  the  23rd : — 

I  had  a  hard  morning's  work  at  University  College  yester- 
day, and  what  with  the  meeting  of  the  previous  evening  and  that 
infernal  fog,  I  felt  so  seedy  that  I  made  up  my  mind  to  go 
straight  home  and  be  quiet.  .  .  . 

There  has  been  a  bitter  north-easter  all  day  here,  and  if  the 
like  has  prevailed  at  Ham  I  am  glad  I  kept  out  of  it,  as  I  am  by 
no  means  fit  to  cope  with  anything  of  that  kind  to-day.  I  do  not 
think  I  was  bound  to  offer  myself  up  to  the  manes  of  the  de- 
parted, however  satisfactory  that  might  have  been  to  the  poor 
old  man.    Peace  be  with  him  ! 

But  the  old-standing  personal  differences  between  the 
two  made  it  difficult  for  him  to  decide  what  to  do  with 
regard  to  a  meeting  to  raise  some  memorial  to  the  great 
anatomist.     He  writes  again  to  Sir  M.  Foster,  January  8, 

1893  :— 

What  am  I  to  do  about  the  meeting  about  Owen's  statue  on  the 
2 1  St?  I  do  not  wish  to  pose  either  as  a  humbugging  approver  or 
as  a  sulky  disapproves  The  man  did  honest  work,  enough  to  de- 
serve his  statue,  and  that  is  all  that  concerns  the  public. 

And  on  the  i8th : — 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  I  had  better  attend  the  meeting 
at  all  costs.  But  I  do  not  see  why  I  should  speak  unless  I  am 
called  upon  to  do  so. 


362  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

I  have  no  earthly  objection  to  say  all  that  I  honestly  can  of 
good  about  Owen's  work — and  there  is  much  to  be  said  about 
some  of  it — on  the  contrary,  I  should  be  well  pleased  to  do  so. 

But  I  have  no  reparation  to  make;  if  the  business  were  to 
come  over  again,  I  should  do  as  I  did.  My  opinion  of  the  man's 
character  is  exactly  what  it  was,  and  under  the  circumstances 
there  is  a  sort  of  hypocrisy  about  volunteering  anything,  which 
goes  against  my  grain. 

The  best  position  for  me  would  be  to  be  asked  to  second  the 
resolution  for  the  statue — ^then  the  proposer  would  have  the 
field  of  personal  fiction  and  butter-boat  all  to  himself. 

To  Sir  W.  H.  Flower 

Dec,  28,  1892. 
I  think  you  are  quite  right  in  taking  an  active  share  in  the 
movement  for  the  memorial.    When  a  man  is  dead  and  can  do  no 

merits 
more  harm,  one  must  do  a  sum  in  subtraction,   deserts   and  if 

the  x^s  are  not  all  minus  quantities,  give  him  credit  accordingly. 
But  I  think  that  in  your  appeal,  for  which  the  Committee  will 
be  responsible,  it  is  this  balance  of  solid  scientific  merit  —  a 
good  big  one  in  Owen's  case  after  all  deductions — which  should 
be  alone  referred  to.  If  you  follow  the  example  of  Vanity  Fair 
and  call  him  "  a  simple-minded  man,  who,  had  he  been  other- 
wise, would  long  ago  have  adorned  a  title,"  some  of  us  may 
choke. 

Gladstone,  Samuel  of  Oxford,  and  Owen  belong  to  a  very 
curious  type  of  humanity,  with  many  excellent  and  even  great 
qualities  and  one  fatal  defect — utter  untrustworthiness.  Peace 
be  with  two  of  them,  and  may  the  political  death  of  the  third 
be  speedy  and  painless ! — With  our  united  best  wishes,  ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

And  on  January  22,  1893,  he  writes  of  the  meeting: — 

My  dear  Hooker —  .  .  .  What  queer  corners  one  gets  into 
if  one  only  lives  long  enough !  The  grim  humour  of  the  situa- 
tion when  I  was  seconding  the  proposal  for  a  statue  to  Owen 
yesterday  tickled  me  a  good  deal.  I  do  not  know  how  they  will 
report  me  in  the  Times,  but  if  they  do  it  properly  I  think  you 
will  see  that  I  said  no  word  upon  which  I  could  not  stand  cross- 
examination. 


1892  VIEWS  ON   OWEN'S  WORK  363 

I  chose  the  office  of  seconder  in  order  that  I  might  clearly 
define  my  position  and  stop  the  mouths  of  blasphemers — ^who 
would  have  ascribed  silence  or  absence  to  all  sorts  of  bad  mo- 
tives. 

Whatever  the  man  might  be,  he  did  a  lot  of  first-rate  work, 
and  now  that  he  can  do  no  more  mischief  he  has  a  right  to  his 
wages  for  it. 

If  I  only  live  another  ten  years  I  expect  to  be  made  a  saint 
of  myself.  "  Many  a  better  man  has  been  made  a  saint  of,"  as 
old  David  Hume  said  to  his  housekeeper  when  they  chalked  up 
"  St.  David's  Street "  on  his  wall. 

We  have  been  jogging  along  pretty  well,  but  wife  has  been 
creaky,  and  I  got  done  up  in  a  brutal  London  fog  struggling  with 
the  worse  fog  of  the  New  University. 

I  am  very  glad  you  like  my  poetical  adventure. — Ever  yours 
affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  speech  had  an  unexpected  sequel.  Owen's  grand- 
son was  so  much  struck  by  it  that  he  wrote  asking  Huxley 
to  undertake  a  critical  account  of  his  anatomical  work  for 
the  book — another  most  unexpected  turn  of  events.  It  is 
not  often  that  a  conspicuous  opponent  of  a  man's  specula- 
tions is  asked  to  pass  judgment  upon  his  entire  work.* 

At  the  end  of  the  year  an  anonymous  attack  upon  the 
administration  of  the  Royal  Society  was  the  occasion  for 
some  characteristic  words  on  the  endurance  of  abuse  to  his 
old  friend,  M.  Foster,  then  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society. 

Decs  5,  1892. 

My  dear  Foster — The  braying  of  my  donkey  prevented  me 
from  sending  a  word  of  sympathy  about  the  noise  made  by 
yours.  .  .  .  Let  not  thine  heart  be  vexed  because  of  these  sons 
of  Belial.  It  is  all  sound  and  fury  with  nothing  at  the  bottom 
of  it,  and  will  leave  no  trace  a  year  hence.  I  have  been  abused 
a  deal  worse — without  the  least  effect  on  my  constitution  or  my 
comfort. 

In  fact,  I  am  told  that  Harrison  is  abusing  me  just  now  like 
a  pickpocket  in  the  Fortnightly,  and  I  only  make  the  philo- 
sophical reflection.  No  wonder !  and  doubt  if  the  reading  it  is 
worth  half  a  crown. — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  See  p.  387. 


364  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

The  following  letter  to  Mr.  Clodd,  thanking  him  for  the 
new  edition  of  Bates'  Naturalist  on  the  Atnazons,  helps  to 
remove  a  reproach  sometimes  brought  against  the  Royal 
Society,  in  that  it  ignored  the  claims  of  distinguished  men 
of  Science  to  membership  of  the  Society : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Dec.  9,  1892. 

My  dear  Mr.  Clodd — Many  thanks  for  the  new  edition  of 
"  Bates."  I  was  reading  the  Life  last  night  with  great  interest ; 
some  of  the  letters  you  have  printed  are  admirable. 

Lyell  is  hit  off  to  the  life.  I  never  read  a  more  penetrating 
character-sketch.  Hooker's  letter  of  advice  is  as  sage  as  might 
be  expected  from  a  man  who  practised  what  he  preached  about 
as  much  as  I  have  done.  I  shall  find  material  for  chaff  the  next 
time  my  old  friend  and  I  meet. 

I  think  you  are  a  little  hard  on  the  Trustees  of  the  British 
Museum,  and  especially  on  the  Royal  Society.  The  former  are 
hampered  by  the  Treasury  and  the  Civil  Service  regulations.  If 
a  Bates  turned  up  now  I  doubt  if  one  could  appoint  him,  how- 
ever much  one  wished  it,  unless  he  would  submit  to  some  idiotic 
examination.  As  to  the  Royal  Society,  I  undertake  to  say  that 
Bates  might  have  been  elected  fifteen  years  earlier  if  he  had  so 
pleased.  But  the  Council  cannot  elect  a  man  unless  he  is  pro- 
posed, and  I  always  understood  that  it  was  the  res  angusta 
which  stood  in  the  way. 

It  is  the  same  with  .     (Twenty  years  ago)  the  Royal 

Society  awarded  him  the  Royal  Medal,  which  is  about  as  broad 
an  invitation  to  join  us  as  we  could  well  give  a  man.  In  fact, 
I  do  not  think  he  has  behaved  well  in  quite  ignoring  it.  For- 
merly there  was  a  heavy  entrance  fee  as  well  as  the  annual  sub- 
scription. But  a  dozen  or  fifteen  years  ago  the  more  pecunious 
Fellows  raised  a  large  sum  of  money  for  the  purpose  of  abolish- 
ing this  barrier.  At  present  a  man  has  to  pay  only  £3  a  year 
and  no  entrance.  I  believe  the  publications  of  the  Society, 
which  he  gets,  will  sell  for  more.* 

So  you  see  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  Royal  Society  if  anybody 
who  ought  to  be  in  keeps  out  on  the  score  of  means. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  The  "  Fee  Reduction  Fund."  as  it  is  now  called,  enables  the 
Society  to  relieve  a  Fellow  from  the  payment  even  of  his  annual  fee, 
so  that  being  F.R.S.  costs  him  nothing. 


CHAPTER   XXI 

1893 

The  year  1893  was,  save  for  the  death  of  three  old 
friends,  Andrew  Clark,  Jowett,  and  Tyndall,  one  of  the  most 
tranquil  and  peaceful  in  Huxley's  whole  life.  He  entered 
upon  no  direct  controversy;  he  published  no  magazine 
articles;  to  the  general  misapprehension  of  the  drift  of  his 
Romanes  Lecture  he  only  replied  in  the  comprehensive 
form  of  Prolegomena  to  a  reprint  of  the  lecture.  He  began 
to  publish  his  scattered  essays  in  a  uniform  series,  writing 
an  introduction  to  each  volume.  While  collecting  his 
"  Darwiniana "  for  the  second  volume,  he  wrote  to  Mr. 
Clodd :— 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  18,  1892. 
I  was  looking  through  Man's  Place  in  Nature  the  other  day. 
I  do  not  think  there  is  a  word  I  need  delete,  nor  anything  I  need 
add  except  in  confirmation  and  extension  of  the  doctrine  there 
laid  down.  That  is  great  good  fortune  for  a  book  thirty  years 
old,  and  one  that  a  very  shrewd  friend  of  mine  implored  me  not 
to  publish,  as  it  would  certainly  ruin  all  my  prospects.  I  said, 
like  the  French  fox-hunter  in  Punch,  "  I  shall  try." 

The  shrewd  friend  in  question  was  none  other  than  Sir 
William  Lawrence,  whose  own  experiences  after  publishing 
his  book  On  Man,  "  which  now  might  be  read  in  a  Sunday 
school  without  surprising  anybody,"  are  alluded  to  in  Vol. 
L  p.  191. 

He  had  the  satisfaction  of  passing  on  his  unfinished 
work  upon  Spirula  to  efficient  hands  for  completion;  and 
in  the  way  of  new  occupation,  was  thinking  of  some  day 
"  taking  up  the  threads  of  late  evolutionary  speculation  "  in 

365 


366  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

the  theories  of  Weismann  and  others,*  while  actually  plan- 
ning out  and  reading  for  a  series  of  "  Working-Men's  Lec- 
tures on  the  Bible,"  in  which  he  should  present  to  the 
unlearned  the  results  of  scientific  study  of  the  documents, 
and  do  for  theology  what  he  had  done  for  zoology  thirty 
years  before. 

The  scheme  drawn  out  in  his  note-book  runs  as  fol- 
lows : — 

I.  The  subject  and  the  method  of  treating  it. 
II.  Physical  conditions: — the  place  of  Palestine  in  the 
Old  Worid. 

III.  The  Rise  of  Israel : — ^Judges,  Samuel,  Kings  as  far  as 

Jeroboam  II. 

IV.  The  Fall  of  Israel. 

V.  The  Rise  and  Progress  of  Judaism.    Theocracy. 
VI.  The  Final  Dispersion. 
VII.  Prophetism. 
VIII.  Nazarenism. 
IX.  Christianity. 

X.  Muhammedanism. 
XI.  and  XII.  The  Mythologies. 

Although  this  scheme  was  never  carried  out,  yet  it  was 
constantly  before  Huxley's  mind  during  the  two  years  left 
to  him.  If  Death,  who  had  come  so  near  eight  years  before, 
would  go  on  seeming  to  forget  him,  he  meant  to  use  these 
last  days  of  his  life  in  an  effort  to  illuminate  one  more 
portion  of  the  field  of  knowledge  for  the  world  at  large. 

As  the  physical  strain  of  the  Romanes  Lecture  and  his 
liability  to  loss  of  voice  warned  him  against  any  future 
attempt  to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures,  he  altered  his  design 
and  prepared  to  put  the  substance  of  these  Lectures  to 
Working-Men  into  a  Bible  History  for  young  people.  And 
indeed,  he  had  got  so  far  with  his  preparation,  that  the 
latter  heading  was  down  in  his  list  of  work  for  the  last  year 
of  his  life,  1895.  But  nothing  of  it  was  ever  written.  Until 
the  work  was  actually  begun,  even  the  framework  upon 
which  it  was  to  be  shaped  remained  in  his  mind,  and  the 

*  See  letter  of  September  28,  to  Romanes. 


1893  LETTERS  TO   THE    TIMES  367 

copious  marks  in  his  books  of  reference  were  the  mere 
guide-posts  to  a  strong  memory,  which  retained  not  words 
and  phrases,  but  salient  facts  and  the  knowledge  of  where 
to  find  them  again. 

I  find  only  two  occasions  on  which  he  wrote  to  the  Times 
this  year;  one,  when  the  crusade  was  begun  to  capture  the 
Board  Schools  of  London  for  sectarianism,  and  it  was  sug- 
gested that,  when  on  the  first  School  Board,  he  had  approved 
of  some  such  definite  dogmatic  teaching.  This  he  set  right 
at  once  in  the  following  letter  of  April  28,  with  which  may 
be  compared  the  letter  to  Lord  Farrer  of  November  6, 
1894. 

In  a  leading  article  of  your  issue  to-day  you  state,  with  per- 
fect accuracy,  that  I  supported  the  arrangement  respecting  re- 
ligious instruction  agreed  to  by  the  London  School  Board  in 
1871,  and  hitherto  undisturbed.  But  you  go  on  to  say  that  "  the 
persons  who  framed  the  rule"  intended  it  to  include  definite 
teaching  of  such  theological  dogmas  as  the  Incarnation. 

I  cannot  say  what  may  have  been  in  the  minds  of  the  framers 
of  the  rule ;  but,  assuredly,  if  I  had  dreamed  that  any  such  inter- 
pretation could  fairly  be  put  upon  it,  I  should  have  opposed  the 
arrangement  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 

In  fact,  a  year  before  the  rule  was  framed  I  wrote  an  article 
in  the  Contemporary  Review,  entitled  "  The  Board  Schools — 
what  they  can  do,  and  what  they  may  do,"  in  which  I  argued 
that  the  terms  of  the  Education  Act  excluded  such  teaching  as 
it  is  now  proposed  to  include.  And  I  supported  my  contention 
by  the  following  citation  from  a  speech  delivered  by  Mr.  Forster 
at  the  Birkbeck  Institution  in  1870 : — 

"  I  have  the  fullest  confidence  that  in  the  reading  and  ex- 
plaining of  the  Bible,  what  the  children  will  be  taught  will  be 
the  great  truths  of  Christian  life  and  conduct,  which  all  of  us 
desire  they  should  know,  and  that  no  effort  will  be  made  to 
cram  into  their  poor  little  minds,  theological  dogmas  which  their 
tender  age  prevents  them  from  understanding." 

The  other  was  on  a  lighter,  but  equally  perennial  point 
of  interest,  being  nothing  less  than  the  Sea  Serpent.  In 
the  Times  of  January  11,  he  writes,  that  while  there  is  no 
reason  against  a  fifty-foot  serpent  existing  as  in  Cretaceous 
seas,  still  the  evidence  for  its  existence  is  entirely  incon- 


368  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

elusive.  He  goes  on  to  tell  how  a  scientific  friend's  state- 
ment once  almost  convinced  him  until  he  read  the  quarter- 
master's deposition,  which  was  supposed  to  corroborate  it. 
The  details  made  the  circumstances  alleged  by  the  former 
impossible,  and  on  pointing  this  out,  he  heard  no  more  of 
the  story,  which  was  a  good  example  of  the  mixing  up  of 
observations  with  conclusions  drawn  from  them. 

And  on  the  following  day  he  replies  to  another  such 
detailed  story — 

Admiral  Mellersh  says,  "I  saw  a  huge  snake,  at  least  18  feet 
long,"  and  I  have  no  doubt  he  believes  he  is  simply  stating  a 
matter  of  fact.  Yet  his  assertion  involves  a  hypothesis  of  the 
truth  of  which  I  venture  to  be  exceedingly  doubtful.  How  does 
he  know  that  what  he  saw  was  a  snake  ?  The  neighbourhood  of 
a  creature  of  this  kind,  within  axe-stroke,  is  hardly  conducive  to 
calm  scientific  investigation,  and  I  can  answer  for  it  that  the 
discrimination  of  genuine  sea-snakes  in  their  native  element 
from  long-bodied  fish  is  not  always  easy.  Further,  that  "  back 
fin  "  troubles  me ;  looks,  if  I  may  say  so,  very  fishy. 

If  the  caution  about  mixing  up  observations  with  conclu- 
sions, which  I  ventured  to  give  yesterday,  were  better  attended 
to,  I  think  we  should  hear  very  little  either  about  antiquated 
sea-serpents  or  new  "  mesmerism." 

It  is  perhaps  not  superfluous  to  point  out  that  in  this, 
as  in  other  cases  of  the  marvellous,  he  did  not  merely 
pooh-pooh  a  story  on  the  ground  of  its  antecedent  improba- 
bility, but  rested  his  acceptance  or  rejection  of  it  upon  the 
strength  of  the  evidence  adduced.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
weakness  of  such  evidence  as  was  brought  forward  time 
after  time,  was  a  justification  for  refusing  to  spend  his  time 
in  listening  to  similar  stories  based  on  similar  testimony. 

Among  the  many  journalistic  absurdities  which  fall  in 
the  way  of  celebrities,  two  which  happened  this  year  are 
worth  recording ;  the  one  on  account  of  its  intrinsic  extrava- 
gance, which  succeeded  nevertheless  in  taking  in  quite  a 
number  of  sober  folk :  the  other  on  account  of  the  letter  it 
drew  from  Huxley  about  his  cat.  The  former  appeared  in 
the  shape  of  a  highly-spiced  advertisement  about  certain 
Manx  Mannikins,  which  could  walk,  draw,  play,  in  fact  do 


i893  HIS  CATS  369 

everything  but  speak — were  living  pets  which  might  be  kept 
by  anyone,  and  indeed  Professor  Huxley  was  the  possessor 
of  a  remarkably  fine  pair  of  them.  Apply,  enclosing  stamps 
etc.  Of  course,  the  wonderful  mannikins  were  nothing  more 
than  the  pair  of  hands  Which  anybody  could  dress  up 
according  to  the  instructions  of  the  advertiser;  but  it  was 
astonishing  how  many  estimable  persons  took  them  for 
some  lusus  naturcB.  A  similar  advertisement  in  1880  had 
been  equally  successful,  and  one  exalted  personage  wrote 
by  the  hand  of  a  secretary  to  say  what  pleasure  and  interest 
had  been  excited  by  the  description  of  these  strange  crea- 
tures, and  begging  Professor  Huxley  to  state  if  the  account 
was  true.  Accordingly  on  January  2y  he  writes  to  his  wife, 
who  was  on  a  visit  to  her  daughter : — 

Yesterday  two  ladies  called  to  know  if  they  could  see  the 
Manx  Mannikins.  I  think  of  having  a  board  put  up  to  say  that 
in  the  absence  of  the  Proprietress  the  show  is  closed. 

The  other  incident  was  a  request  for  any  remarks  which 
might  be  of  use  in  an  article  upon  the  Home  Pets  of 
Celebrities.  I  give  the  letter  written  in  answer  to  this,  as 
well  as  descriptions  of  the  same  cat's  goings-on  in  the 
absence  of  its  mistress. 

To  Mr.  J.  G.  KiTTON 

HoDESLEA,  A/>ri/  12,  1893. 

A  long  series  of  cats  has  reigned  over  my  household  for  the 
last  forty  years,  or  thereabouts,  but  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  have 
no  pictorial  or  other  record  of  their  physical  and  moral  excel- 
lencies. 

The  present  occupant  of  the  throne  is  a  large,  young,  grey 
Tabby — Oliver  by  name.  Not  that  he  is  in  any  sense  a  protector, 
for  I  doubt  whether  he  has  the  heart  to  kill  a  mouse.  However, 
I  saw  him  catch  and  eat  the  first  butterfly  of  the  season,  and 
trust  that  this  germ  of  courage,  thus  manifested,  may  develop 
with  age  into  efficient  mousing. 

As  to  sagacity,  I  should  say  that  his  judgment  respecting 
the  warmest  place  and  the  softest  cushion  in  a  room  is  infallible 
— ^his  punctuality  at  meal  times  is  admirable;  and  his  pertinacity 
in  jumping  on  people's  shoulders,  till  they  give  him  some  of  the 
best  of  what  is  going,  indicates  great  firmness. 
60 


370 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 


To  HIS  Youngest  Daughter 


HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  y^«.  8,  1893. 

I  wish  you  would  write  seriously  to  M .      She  is  not 

behaving  well  to  Oliver.  I  have  seen  handsomer  kittens,  but 
few  more  lively,  and  energetically  destructive.     Just  now  he 

scratched  away  at  something  that  M says  cost  13s.  6d.  a 

yard — and  reduced  more  or  less  of  it  to  combings. 

M therefore  excludes  him  from  the  dining-room,  and  all 

those  opportunities  of  higher  education  which  he  would  natu- 
rally have  in  my  house. 

I  have  argued  that  it  is  as  immoral  to  place  13s.  6d.  a  yard- 
nesses  within  reach  of  kittens  as  to  hang  bracelets  and  diamond 
rings  in  the  front  garden.  But  in  vain.  Oliver  is  banished — 
and  the  protector  (not  Oliver.)  is  sat  upon. — In  truth  and  justice 
aid  your  Pa. 

[This  letter  is  embellished  with  fancy  portraits  of 

Oliver  when  most  quiescent  (tail  up;  ready  for  action). 
O.  as  polisher  (tearing  at  the  table  leg). 
O.  as  plate  basket  investigator. 
O.  as  gardener  (destroying  plants  in  a  pot). 
O.  as  stocking  knitter  (a  wild  tangle  of  cat  and  wool). 
O.  as  political  economist  making  good  for  trade  at  13s.  6d.  a 
yard  (pulling  at  a  hassock).] 

The  following  to  Sir  John  Evans  refers  to  a  piece  of 
temporary  forgetfulness. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  19,  1893. 
My  dear  Evans — It  is  curious  what  a  difference  there  is 
between  intentions  and  acts,  especially  in  the  matter  of  sending 
cheques.  The  moment  I  saw  the  project  of  the  Lawes  and  Gil- 
bert testimonial  in  the  Times,  I  sent  my  contribution  in  imagina- 
tion— and  it  is  only  the  arrival  of  this  circular  which  has  waked 
me  up  to  the  necessity  of  supplementing  my  ideal  cheque  by  the 
real  one  inclosed. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Reference  has  been  made  to  the  writing  of  the  Romanes 
Lecture  in  1892.  Mr.  Gladstone  had  already  consented 
to  deliver  the  first  lecture  in  that  year;  and  early  in  the 
summer  Professor  Romanes  sounded  Huxlev  to  find  out 


i893  THE   ROMANES   LECTURE  371 

whether  he  would  undertake  the  second  lecture  for  1893. 
Huxley  suggested  a  possible  bar  in  his  precarious  health; 
but  subject  to  this  possibility,  if  the  Vice-Chancellor  did  not 
regard  it  as  a  complete  disability,  was  willing  to  accept  a 
formal  invitation. 

Professor  Romanes  reassured  him  upon  this  point,  and 
further  begged  him,  if  possible,  to  be  ready  to  stepJ  into  the 
breach  if  Mr.  Gladstone  should  be  prevented  from  lecturing 
in  the  following  autumn.  The  situation  became  irresistible, 
and  the  second  of  the  following  letters  to  Mr.  Romanes 
displays  no  more  hesitation. 

To  Professor  Romanes 

HODESLEA,  y««<f   3,   1892. 

I  should  have  written  to  you  yesterday,  but  the  book  did  not 
arrive  till  this  morning.  Very  many  thanks  for  it.  It  looks 
appetising,  and  I  look  forward  to  the  next  course. 

As  to  the  Oxford  lecture,  "  Verily,  thou  almost  persuadest 
me,"  though  I  thought  I  had  finished  lecturing.  I  really  should 
like  to  do  it ;  but  I  have  a  scruple  about  accepting  an  engagement 
of  this  important  kind,  which  I  might  not  be  able  to  fulfil. 

I  am  astonishingly  restored,  and  have  not  had  a  trace  of 
heart  trouble  for  months.  But  I  am  quite  aware  that  I  am, 
physically  speaking,  on  good  behaviour — and  maintain  my  con- 
dition only  by  taking  an  amount  of  care  which  is  very  distaste- 
ful to  me. 

Furthermore,  my  wife's  health  is,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  ex- 
tremely precarious.  She  was  very  ill  a  fortnight  ago,  and  to 
my  very  great  regret,  as  well  as  hers,  we  are  obliged  to  give  up 
our  intended  visit  to  Balliol  to-morrow.  She  is  quite  unfit  to 
travel,  and  I  cannot  leave  her  here  alone  for  three  days. 

I  think  the  state  of  affairs  ought  to  be  clear  to  the  Vice- 
Chancellor.  If,  in  his  judgment,  it  constitutes  no  hindrance,  and 
he  does  me  the  honour  to  send  the  invitation,  I  shall  accept  it. 

To  THE  Same 

HODESLEA,  y««^  7,  1892. 

I  am  afraid  that  age  hath  not  altogether  cleared  the  spirit  of 
mischief  out  of  my  blood;  and  there  is  something  so  piquant  in 
the  notion  of  my  acting  as  substitute  for  Gladstone  that  I  will 
be  ready  if  necessity  arises. 


372 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 


Of  course  I  will  keep  absolutely  clear  of  Theology.  But  I 
have  long  had  fermenting  in  my  head,  some  notions  about  the 
relations  of  Ethics  and  Evolution  (or  rather  the  absence  of  such 
as  are  commonly  supposed),  which  I  think  will  be  interesting  to 
such  an  audience  as  I  may  expect.  "  Without  prejudice,"  as  the 
lawyers  say,  that  is  the  sort  of  topic  that  occurs  to  me. 

To  THE  Same 

HODESLEA,   Oct.  30,   1892. 

I  had  to  go  to  London  in  the  middle  of  last  week  about  the 
Gresham  University  business,  and  I  trust  I  have  put  a  very  long 
nail  into  the  coffin  of  that  scheme.  For  which  good  service  you 
will  forgive  my  delay  in  replying  to  your  letter.  I  read  all  about 
your  show — why  not  call  it  "  George's  Gorgeous,"  tout  court? 

I  should  think  that  there  is  no  living  man,  who,  on  such  an 
occasion,  could  intend  and  contrive  to  say  so  much  and  so  well 
(in  form)  without  ever  rising  above  the  level  of  antiquarian 
gossip. 

My  lecture  would  have  been  ready  if  the  G.O.M.  had  failed 
you,  but  I  am  very  glad  to  have  six  months'  respite,  as  I  now 
shall  be  able  to  write  and  rewrite  it  to  my  heart's  content. 

I  will  follow  the  Gladstonian  precedent  touching  cap  and 
gown — but  I  trust  the  Vice-Chancellor  will  not  ask  me  to  take 
part  in  a  "  Church  Parade  "  and  read  the  lessons.  I  couldn't — 
really. 

As  to  the  financial  part  of  the  business,  to  tell  you  the  honest 
truth,  I  would  much  rather  not  be  paid  at  all  for  a  piece  of  work 
of  this  kind.  I  am  no  more  averse  to  turning  an  honest  penny 
by  my  brains  than  any  one  else  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things 
— quite  the  contrary ;  but  this  is  not  an  ordinary  occasion.  How- 
ever, this  is  a  pure  matter  of  taste,  and  I  do  not  want  to  set  a 
precedent  which  might  be  inconvenient  to  other  people — so  I 
agree  to  what  you  propose. 

By  the  way,  is  there  any  type-writer  who  is  to  be  trusted  in 
Oxford?  Some  time  ago  I  sent  a  MS.  to  a  London  type-writer, 
and  to  my  great  disgust  I  shortly  afterwards  saw  an  announce- 
ment that  I  was  engaged  on  the  topic. 

On  the  following  day  he  writes  to  his  wife,  who  was 
staying  with  her  youngest  daughter  in  town : — 

The  Vice-Chancellor  has  written  to  me  and  I  have  fixed  May 
—exact  day  by  and  by.    Mrs.  Romanes  has  written  a  crispy  little 


i893  THE   ROMANES   LECTURE  373 

letter  to  remind  us  of  our  promise  to  go  there,  and  I  have  chir- 
rupped  back. 

The  "  chirrup  "  ran  as  follows : — 

HODESLEA,  Nov.  I,  1892. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Romanes — I  have  just  written  to  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  to  say  that  I  hope  to  be  at  his  disposition  any  time 
next  May. 

My  wife  is  "  larking  " — I  am  sorry  to  use  such  a  word,  but 
what  she  is  pleased  to  tell  me  of  her  doings  leaves  me  no  alterna- 
tive— in  London,  whither  I  go  on  Thursday  to  fetch  her  back — 
in  chains,  if  necessary.  But  I  know,  in  the  matter  of  being 
"  taken  in  and  done  for  "  by  your  hospitable  selves,  I  may,  for 
once,  speak  for  her  as  well  as  myself. 

Don't  ask  anybody  above  the  rank  of  a  younger  son  of  a 
Peer — ^because  I  shall  not  be  able  to  go  in  to  dinner  before  him 
or  her — and  that  part  of  my  dignity  is  naturally  what  I  prize 
most. 

Would  you  not  like  me  to  come  in  my  P.C.  suit  ?  All  ablaze 
with  gold,  and  costing  a  sum  with  which  I  could  buy  oh !  so 
many  books ! 

Only  if  your  late  experiences  should  prompt  you  to  instruct 
your  other  guests  not  to  contradict  me — don't.  I  rather  like  it. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Bon  Voyage  !  You  can  tell  Mr.  Jones  *  that  I  will  have  him 
brought  before  the  Privy  Council  and  fined,  as  in  the  good  old 
days,  if  he  does  not  treat  you  properly. 

This  letter  was  afterwards  published  in  Mrs.  Romanes' 
Life  of  her  husband,  and  three  letters  on  that  occasion,  and 
particularly  that  in  which  Huxley  tried  to  guard  her  from 
any  malicious  interpretation  of  his  jests,  are  to  be  found  on 

p.  403. 

On  the  afternoon  of  May   18,    1893,   he   delivered   at 

Oxford  his  Romanes  Lecture,  on  "  Evolution  and  Ethics," 

a  study  of  the  relation  of  ethical  and  evolutionary  theory  in 

the  history  of  philosophy,  the  text  of  which  is  that  while 

morality  is  necessarily  a  part  of  the  order  of  nature,  still  the 

ethical  principle  is  opposed  to  the  self-regarding  principle 

on  which  cosmic  evolution  has  taken  place.     Society  is  a 

*  The  hotel-keeper  in  Madeira. 


374  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

part  of  nature,  but  would  be  dissolved  by  a  return  to  the 
natural  state  of  simple  warfare  among  individuals.  It  fol- 
lows that  ethical  systems  based  on  the  principles  of  cosmic 
evolution  are  not  logically  sound.  A  study  of  the  essays  of 
the  foregoing  ten  years  will  show  that  he  had  more  than 
once  enunciated  this  thesis,  and  it  had  been  one  of  the 
grounds  of  his  long-standing  criticism  of  Mr.  Spencer's 
system. 

Nevertheless,  the  doctrine  seemed  to  take  almost  every- 
body by  surprise.  The  drift  of  the  lecture  was  equally  mis- 
understood by  critics  of  opposite  camps.  Huxley  was  popu- 
larly supposed  to  hold  the  same  views  as  Mn  Spencer — 
for  were  they  not  both  Evolutionists  ?  On  general  attention 
being  called  to  the  existing  difference  between  their  views, 
some  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  Huxley  was  offering  a 
general  recantation  of  evolution,  others  that  he  had  dis- 
carded his  former  theories  of  ethics.  On  the  one  hand  he 
was  branded  as  a  deserter  from  free  thought ;  on  the  other, 
hailed  almost  as  a  convert  to  orthodoxy.  It  was  irritating, 
but  little  more  than  he  had  expected.  The  conditions  of  the 
lecture  forbade  any  reference  to  politics  or  religion ;  hence 
much  had  to  be  left  unsaid,  which  was  supplied  next  year 
in  the  Prolegomena  prefacing  the  re-issue  of  the  lecture. 

After  all  possible  trimming  and  compression,  he  still 
feared  the  lecture  would  be  too  long,  and  would  take  more 
than  an  hour  to  deliver,  especially  if  the  audience  was  likely 
to  be  large,  for  the  numbers  must  be  considered  in  refer- 
ence to  the  speed  of  speaking.  But  he  had  taken  even  more 
pains  than  usual  with  it.  "  The  Lecture,"  he  writes  to  Pro- 
fessor Romanes  on  April  19,  "  has  been  in  type  for  weeks, 
if  not  months,  as  I  have  been  taking  an  immensity  of  trouble 
over  it.  And  I  can  judge  of  nothing  till  it  is  in  type."  But 
this  very  precaution  led  to  unexpected  complications.  When 
the  proposition  to  lecture  was  first  made  to  him,  he  was  not 
sent  a  copy  of  the  statute  ordering  that  publication  in  the 
first  instance  should  lie  with  the  University  Press;  and  in 
view  of  the  proviso  that  "  the  Lecturer  is  free  to  publish  on 
his  own  behalf  in  any  other  form  he  may  like,"  he  had  taken 
Prof.   Romanes'   original  reference  to  publication  by   the 


Portrait  from  a  Photograph  by  Mayall,  1893. 


T  / 


■  »  1 


I 

\ 


J 


4 

J 

4 


f 

J 

4 


i893  THE   ROMANES   LECTURE  375 

Press  to  be  a  subsidiary  request  to  which  he  gladly  assented. 
However,  a  satisfactory  arrangement  was  speedily  arrived 
at  with  the  publishers ;  Huxley  remarking : — 

"  All  I  have  to  say  is,  do  not  let  the  University  be  in  any  way 
a  loser  by  the  change.  If  the  V.-C.  thinks  there  is  any  risk  of 
this,  I  will  gladly  add  to  what  Macmillan  pays.  That  matter 
can  be  settled  between  us.** 

However,  he  had  not  forgotten  the  limitation  of  his  sub- 
ject in  respect  of  religion  and  politics,  and  he  repeatedly 
refers  to  his  careful  avoidance  of  these  topics  as  an  "  egg- 
dance."  And  wishing  to  reassure  Mr.  Romanes  on  this 
head,  he  writes  on  April  22 : — 

There  is  no  allusion  to  politics  in  my  lecture,  nor  to  any 
religion  except  Buddhism,  and  only  to  the  speculative  and  ethical 
side  of  that.  If  people  apply  anything  I  say  about  these  matters 
to  modern  philosophies,  except  evolutionary  speculation,  and 
religions,  that  is  not  my  affair.  To  be  honest,  however,  unless 
I  thought  they  would,  I  should  never  have  taken  all  the  pains  I 
have  bestowed  on  these  36  pages. 

But  these  words  conjured  up  terrible  possibilities,  and 
Mr.  Romanes  wrote  back  in  great  alarm  to  ask  the  exact 
state  of  the  case.  The  two  following  letters  show  that  the 
alarm  was  groundless: — 

HoDESLEA,  April  26,  1893. 

My  dear  Romanes — I  fear,  or  rather  hope,  that  I  have  given 
you  a  very  unnecessary  scare. 

You  may  be  quite  sure,  I  think,  that,  while  I  should  have 
refused  to  give  the  lecture  if  any  pledge  of  a  special  character 
had  been  proposed  to  me,  I  have  felt  very  strongly  bound  to 
you  to  take  the  utmost  care  that  no  shadow  of  a  just  cause  for 
offence  should  be  given,  even  to  the  most  orthodox  of  Dons. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  best  thing  I  can  do  is  to  send  you  the 
lecture  as  it  stands,  notes  and  all.  But  please  return  it  within 
two  days  at  furthest,  and  consider  it  strictly  conHdential  between 
us  two  (I  am  not  excluding  Mrs.  Romanes,  if  she  cares  to  look 
at  the  paper).  No  consideration  would  induce  me  to  give  any 
ground  for  the  notion  that  I  had  submitted  the  lecture  to  anyone 
but  yourself. 

If  there  is  any  phrase  in  the  lecture  which  you  think  likely 
to  get  you  into  trouble,  out  it  shall  come  or  be  modified  in  form. 


376  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

If  the  whole  thing  is  too  much  for  the  Dons*  nerves — I  am 
no  judge  of  their  delicacy — I  am  quite  ready  to  give  up  the 
lecture. 

In  fact  I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  be  able  to  make  myself 
heard  three  weeks  hence,  as  the  influenza  has  left  its  mark  in 
hoarseness  and  pain  in  the  throat  after  speaking. 

So  you  see  if  the  thing  is  altogether  too  wicked  there  is  an 
easy  way  out  of  it. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  April  28,  1893. 

My  DEAR  Romanes — My  mind  is  made  easy  by  such  a  hand- 
some acquittal  from  you  and  the  Lady  Abbess,  your  coadjutor  in 
the  Holy  Office. 

My  wife,  who  is  my  inquisitor  and  confessor  in  ordinary,  has 
gone  over  the  lecture  twice,  without  scenting  a  heresy,  and  if 
she  and  Mrs.  Romanes  fail — a  fico  for  a  mere  male  don's  nose ! 

From  the  point  of  view  of  the  complete  argument,  I  agree 
with  you  about  note  19.  But  the  dangers  of  open  collision  with 
orthodoxy  on  the  one  hand  and  Spencer  on  the  other,  increased 
with  the  square  of  the  enlargement  of  the  final  pages,  and  I  was 
most  anxious  for  giving  no  handle  to  anyone  who  might  like  to 
say  I  had  used  the  lecture  for  purposes  of  attack.  Moreover,  in 
spite  of  all  reduction,  the  lecture  is  too  long  already. 

But  I  think  it  not  improbable  that  in  spite  of  my  meekness 
and  peacefulness,  neither  the  one  side  nor  the  other  will  let  me 
alone.  And  then  you  see,  I  shall  have  an  opportunity  of  making 
things  plain,  under  no  restriction.  You  will  not  be  responsible 
for  anything  said  in  the  second  edition,  nor  can  the  Donniest  of 
Dons  grumble. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  double  negative  is  Shakspearian.  See  Hamlet,  act 
ii.  sc.  2. 

Unfortunately  for  the  entire  success  of  the  lecture,  he 
was  sufifering  from  the  results  of  influenza,  more  especially 
a  loss  of  voice.     He  writes  (April  18) : — 

After  getting  through  the  winter  successfully  I  have  had 
the  ill-fortune  to  be  seized  with  influenza.  I  believe  I  must  have 
got  it  from  the  microbes  haunting  some  of  the  three  hundred 
doctors  at  the  Virchow  dinner.* 

*  On  the  i6th  March. 


1893  THE   ROMANES   LECTURE  377 

I  had  next  to  no  symptoms  except  debility,  and  though  I  am 
much  better  I  cannot  quite  shake  that  off.  As  usual  with  me  it 
affects  my  voice.  I  hope  this  will  get  right  before  this  day  month, 
but  I  expect  I  shall  have  to  nurse  it.  I  do  not  want  to  interfere 
with  any  of  your  hospitable  plans,  and  I  think  if  you  will  ensure 
me  quiet  on  the  morning  of  the  i8th  (I  understand  the  lecture 
is  in  the  afternoon)  it  will  suffice.  After  the  thing  is  over  I  am 
ready  for  anything  from  pitch  and  toss  onwards. 

Two  more  letters  dated  before  the  i8th  of  May  touch  on 
the  circumstances  of  the  lecture.  One  is  to  his  son-in-law, 
John  Collier ;  the  other  to  his  old  friend  Tyndall,  the  last  he 
ever  wrote  him,  and  containing  a  cheery  reference  to  the 
advance  of  old  age. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  May  g,  1893. 

My  dear  Jack —  .  .  .  M is  better,  and  I  am  getting  my 

voice  back.  But  may  St.  Ernulphus*  curse  descend  on  influenza 
microbes !  They  tried  to  work  their  way  out  at  my  nose,  and 
converted  me  into  a  disreputable  Captain  Costigan-looking  per- 
son ten  days  ago.    Now  they  are  working  at  my  lips. 

For  the  credit  of  the  family  I  hope  I  shall  be  more  reputable 
by  the  i8th. 

I  hope  you  will  appreciate  my  dexterity.  The  lecture  is  a 
regular  egg-dance.  That  I  should  discourse  on  Ethics  to  the 
University  of  Oxford  and  say  all  I  want  to  say,  without  a  word 
anybody  can  quarrel  with,  is  decidedly  the  most  piquant  occur- 
rence in  my  career.  .  .  . — Ever  yours  affectionately. 

Pater. 
PS,  to  he  read  first, 

Eastbourne,  May  15,  1893. 

My  dear  Tyndall — There  are  not  many  apples  (and  those 
mostly  of  the  crab  sort)  left  upon  the  old  tree,  but  I  send  you 
the  product  of  the  last  shaking.  Please  keep  it  out  of  any  hands 
but  your  wife's  and  yours  till  Thursday,  when  I  am  to  "  stand 
and  deliver  "  it,  if  I  have  voice  enough,  which  is  doubtful.  The 
sequelae  of  influenza  in  my  case  have  been  mostly  pimples  and 
procrastination,  the  former  largely  on  my  nose,  so  that  I  have 
been  a  spectacle.  Besides  these,  loss  of  voice.  The  pimples  are 
mostly  gone  and  the  procrastination  is  not  much  above  normal, 
but  what  will  happen  when  I  try  to  fill  the  Sheldonian  Theatre 
is  very  doubtful. 

Who  would  have  thought  thirty-three  years  ago,  when  the 
great  "  Sammy "  fight  came  off,  that  the  next  time  I  should 


378 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 


Speak  at  Oxford  would  be  in  succession  to  Gladstone,  on  "  Evo- 
lution and  Ethics  "  as  an  invited  lecturer  ? 

There  was  something  so  quaint  about  the  affair  that  I  really 
could  not  resist,  though  the  wisdom  of  putting  so  much  strain  on 
my  creaky  timbers  is  very  questionable.  Mind  you  wish  me  well 
through  it  at  2.30  on  Thursday. 

I  wish  we  could  have  better  news  of  you.  As  to  dying  by 
inches, that  is  what  we  are  all  doing, my  dear  old  fellow;  the  only 
thing  is  to  establish  a  proper  ratio  between  inch  and  time.  Eight 
years  ago  I  had  good  reason  to  say  the  same  thing  of  myself, 
but  my  inch  has  lengthened  out  in  a  most  extraordinary  way. 
Still  I  confess  we  are  getting  older ;  and  my  dear  wife  has  been 
greatly  shaken  by  repeated  attacks  of  violent  pain  which  seizes 
her  quite  unexpectedly.  I  am  always  glad,  both  on  her  account 
and  my  own,  to  get  back  into  the  quiet  and  good  air  here  as  fast 
as  possible,  and  in  another  year  or  two,  if  I  live  so  long,  I  shall 
clear  out  of  all  engagements  that  take  me  away.  .  .  . 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Not  to  he  answered,  and  you  had  better  get  Mrs.  Tyndall  to 
read  it  to  you  or  you  will  say  naughty  words  about  the  scrawl. 

Sanguine  as  he  had  resolved  to  be  about  the  recovery 
of  his  voice,  his  fear  lest  "  1000  out  of  the  2000  won't  hear  " 
was  very  near  realisation.  The  Sheldonian  Theatre  was 
thronged  before  he  appeared  on  the  platform,  a  striking 
presence  in  his  D.C.L.  robes,  and  looking  very  leonine  with 
his  long  silvery  gray  hair  sweeping  back  in  one  long  wave 
from  his  forehead,  and  the  rugged  squareness  of  his  features 
tempered  by  the  benignity  of  an  old  age  which  has  seen 
much  and  overcome  much.  He  read  the  lecture  from  a 
printed  copy,  not  venturing,  as  he  would  have  liked,  upon 
the  severe  task  of  speaking  it  from  memory,  considering 
its  length  and  the  importance  of  preserving  the  exact  word- 
ing. He  began  in  a  somewhat  low  tone,  nursing  his  voice 
for  the  second  half  of  the  discourse.  From  the  more  distant 
parts  of  the  theatre  came  several  cries  of  "  speak  up  " ;  and 
after  a  time  a  rather  disturbing  migration  of  eager  under- 
graduates began  from  the  galleries  to  the  body  of  the  hall. 
The  latter  part  was  indeed  more  audible  than  the  first ;  still 
a  number  of  the  audience  were  disappointed  in  hearing  im- 
perfectly.    How^ever,  the  lecture  had  a  large  sale;  the  first 


i893  THE   ROMANES  LECTURE  379 

edition  of  2000  was  exhausted  by  the  end  of  the  month; 
and  another  700  in  the  next  ten  days. 

After  leaving  Oxford,  and  paying  a  pleasant  visit  to  one 
of  the  Fannings  (his  wife's  nephew)  at  Tew,  Huxley  in- 
tended to  visit  another  of  the  family,  Mrs.  Crowder,  in  Lin- 
colnshire, but  on  reaching  London  found  himself  dead  beat 
and  had  to  retire  to  Eastbourne,  whence  he  writes  to  Sir  M. 
Foster  and  to  Mr.  Romanes. 

HoDESLEA,  May  26,  1893. 

My  dear  Foster — ^Yonr  letter  has  been  following  me  about. 
I  had  not  got  rid  of  nly  influenza  at  Oxford,  so  the  exertion  and 
the  dinner  parties  together  played  the  deuce  with  me. 

We  had  got  so  far  as  the  Great  Northern  Hotel  on  our  way 
to  some  connections  in  Lincolnshire,  when  I  had  to  give  it  up 
and  retreat  here  to  begin  convalescing  again. 

I  do  not  feel  sure  of  coming  to  the  Harvey  affair  after  all. 
But  if  I  do,  it  will  be  alone,  and  I  think  I  had  better  accept  the 
hospitality  of  the  college ;  which  will  by  no  means  be  so  jolly  as 
Shelford,  but  probably  more  prudent,  considering  the  necessity 
of  dining  out. 

The  fact  is,  my  dear  friend,  I  am  getting  old. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  you  have  been  doing  your  influenza 
also.  It's  a  beastly  thing,  as  I  have  it,  no  symptoms  except  going 
flop. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Nobody  sees  that  the  lecture  is  a  very  orthodox  production 
on  the  text  (if  there  is  such  a  one),  "  Satan  the  Prince  of  this 
world." 

I  think  the  remnant  of  influenza  microbes  must  have  held  a 
meeting  in  my  corpus  after  the  lecture,  and  resolved  to  recon- 
quer the  territory.    But  I  mean  to  beat  the  brutes. 

"  I  shall  be  interested,"  he  writes  to  Mr.  Romanes,  "  in 
the  article  on  the  lecture.  The  papers  have  been  asinine." 
This  was  an  article  which  Mr.  Romanes  had  told  him  was 
about  to  appear  in  the  Oxford  Magazine,  And  on  the  30th 
he  writes  again : — 

Many  thanks  for  the  Oxford  Magazine,  The  writer  of  the 
article  is  about  the  only  critic  I  have  met  with  yet  who  under- 
stands my  drift.  My  wife  says  it  is  a  "  sensible  "  article,  but  her 
classification  is  a  very  simple  one — sensible  articles  are  those 


38o  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

that  contain  praise,  "  stupid "  those  that  show  insensibility  to 
my  merits ! 

Really  I  thought  it  very  sensible,  without  regard  to  the  plums 
in  the  pudding. 

But  the  criticism,  "  sensible  "  not  merely  in  the  humor- 
ous sense,  which  he  most  fully  appreciated  was  that  of 
Professor  Seth,  in  a  lecture  entitled  "  Man  and  Nature." 
He  wrote  to  him  on  October  2^-, — 

Dear  Professor  Seth — ^A  report  of  your  lecture  on  "  Man 
and  Nature  "  has  just  reached  me.  Accept  my  cordial  thanks 
for  defending  me,  and  still  more  for  understanding  me. 

I  really  have  been  unable  to  understand  what  my  critics  have 
been  dreaming  of  when  they  raise  the  objection  that  the  ethical 
process  being  part  of  the  cosmic  process  cannot  be  opposed  to  it. 

They  might  as  well  say  that  artifice  does  not  oppose  nature, 
because  it  is  a  part  of  nature  in  the  broadest  sense. 

However,  it  is  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  "  Romanes  Lec- 
ture" that  no  allusion  shall  be  made  to  religion  or  politics.  I 
had  to  make  my  omelette  without  breaking  any  of  those  eggs, 
and  the  task  was  not  easy. 

The  prince  of  scientific  expositors,  Faraday,  was  once  asked, 
"  How  much  may  a  popular  lecturer  suppose  his  audience 
knows ? "  He  replied  emphatically,  "Nothing"  Mine  was  not 
exactly  a  popular  audience,  but  I  ought  not  to  have  forgotten 
Faraday's  rule. — Yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  letter  of  congratulation  to  Lord  Farrer  on  his  eleva- 
tion to  the  peerage  contains  an  ironical  reference  to  the 
general  tone  of  the  criticisms  on  his  lecture: — 

HODESLEA,  y««^   5,  1893. 

Ci  devant  Citoyen  Petion  (autrefois  le  vertueux) — You 
have  lost  all  chance  of  leading  the  forces  of  the  County  Council 
to  the  attack  of  the  Horse-Guards. 

You  will  become  an  emigre,  and  John  Burns  will  have  to 
content  himself  with  the  heads  of  the  likes  of  me.  As  the 
Jacobins  said  of  Lavoisier,  the  Republic  has  no  need  of  men  of 
science. 

But  this  prospect  need  not  interfere  with  sending  our  hearty 
congratulations  to  Lady  Farrer  and  yourself. 


i893  CRITICISMS   ON   THE   ROMANES   LECTURE  381 

As  for  your  criticisms,  don't  you  know  that  I  am  become  a 
reactionary  and  secret  friend  of  the  clerics? 

My  lecture  is  really  an  effort  to  put  the  Christian  doctrine 
that  Satan  is  the  Prince  of  this  world  upon  a  scientific  founda- 
tion. 

Just  consider  it  in  this  light,  and  you  will  understand  why  I 
was  so  warmly  welcomed  in  Oxford.     (N.B. — The  only  time  I 
spoke  before  was  in  i860,  when  the  great  row  with  Samuel         ^ 
came  off!!) — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  /«/k  15,  1893. 

My  dear  Skelton — I  fear  I  must  admit  that  even  a  Glad- 
stonian  paper  occasionally  tells  the  truth.  They  never  mean  to, 
but  we  all  have  our  lapses  from  the  rule  of  life  we  have  laid 
down  for  ourselves,  and  must  be  charitable. 

The  fact  is,  I  got  influenza  in  the  spring,  and  have  never 
managed  to  shake  right  again,  any  tendency  that  way  being  well 
counteracted  by  the  Romanes  lecture  and  its  accompaniments. 

So  we  are  off  to  the  Maloja  to-morrow.  It  mended  up  the 
shaky  old  heart-pump  five  years  ago,  and  I  hope  will  again. 

I  have  been  in  Orkney,  and  believe  in  the  air,  but  I  cannot 
say  quite  so  much  for  the  scenery.  I  thought  it  just  a  wee  little 
bit,  shall  I  say,  bare  ?    But  then  I  have  a  passion  for  mountains. 

I  shall  be  right  glad  to  know  what  your  H.O.M.*  has  to  say 
about  Ethics  and  Evolution.  You  must  remember  that  my  lec- 
ture was  a  kind  of  egg-dance.  Good  manners  bound  me  over 
to  say  nothing  offensive  to  the  Christians  in  the  amphitheatre 
(I  was  in  the  arena),  and  truthfulness,  on  the  other  hand, 
bound  me  to  say  nothing  that  I  did  not  fully  mean.  Under  these 
circumstances  one  has  to  leave  a  great  many  i's  undotted  and  t's 
uncrossed. 

Pray  remember  me  very  kindly  to  Mrs.  Skelton,  and  believe 
me — ^Yours  ever,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

And  again  on  Oct.  17: — 

Ask  your  Old  Man  of  Hoy  to  be  so  good  as  to  suspend  judg- 
ment until  the  Lecture  appears  again  with  an  appendix  in  that 
collection  of  volumes  the  bulk  of  which  appals  me. 

Didn't  I  see  somewhere  that  you  had  been  made  Poor  Law 

*  The  "Old  Man  of  Hoy,"  a  pseudonym  underwhich  Sir  J.  Skel- 
ton wrote. 


/ 


382  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

pope,  or  something  of  the  sort?  I  congratulate  the  poor  more 
than  I  do  you,  for  it  must  be  a  weary  business  trying  to  mend 
the  irremediable.  (No,  I  am  not  glancing  at  the  whitewashing 
of  Mary.) 

Here  may  be  added  two  later  letters  bearing  in  part 
upon  the  same  subject: — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  23,  1894. 

Dear  Sir — I  ought  to  have  thanked  you  before  now  for  your 
letter  about  Nietzsche's  works,  but  I  have  not  much  working 
time,  and  I  find  letter-writing  a  burden,  which  I  am  always 
trying  to  shirk. 

I  will  look  up  Nietzsche's,  though  I  must  confess  that  the 
profit  I  obtain  from  German  authors  on  speculative  questions 
is  not  usually  great. 

As  men  of  research  in  positive  science  they  are  magnificently 
laborious  and  accurate.  But  most  of  them  have  no  notion  of 
style,  and  seem  to  compose  their  books  with  a  pitchfork. 

There  are  two  very  different  questions  which  people  fail  to 
discriminate.  One  is  whether  evolution  accounts  for  morality, 
the  other  whether  the  principle  of  evolution  in  general  can  be 
adopted  as  an  ethical  principle. 

The  first,  of  course,  I  advocate,  and  have  constantly  insisted 
upon.  The  second  I  deny,  and  reject  all  so-called  evolutional 
ethics  based  upon  it. — I  am  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Thomas  Common,  Esq. 

HoDESLEA,  August  31,  1894. 

Dear  Professor  Seth — I  have  come  to  a  stop  in  the  issue  of 
my  essays  for  the  present,  and  I  venture  to  ask  your  acceptance 
of  the  set  which  I  have  desired  my  publishers  to  send  you. 

I  hope  that  at  present  you  are  away  somewhere,  read- 
ing novels  or  otherwise  idling,  in  whatever  may  be  your  pet 
fashion. 

But  some  day  I  want  you  to  read  the  "  Prolegomena  "  to  the 
reprinted  Romanes  Lecture. 

Lately  I  have  been  re-reading  Spinoza  (much  read  and  little 
understood  in  my  youth). 

But  that  noblest  of  Jews  must  have  planted  no  end  of  germs 
in  my  brains,  for  I  see  that  what  I  have  to  say  is  in  principle 
what  he  had  to  say,  in  modern  language. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 


i893        COMPLETION   OF  THE    '*SPIRULA"   MEMOIR        383 

The  following  letters  with  reference  to  the  long  unfin- 
ished memoir  on  '*  Spirula  "  for  the  Challenger  reports  tell 
their  own  story.  Huxley  was  very  glad  to  find  some  com- 
petent person  to  finish  the  work  which  his  illness  had  in- 
capacitated him  from  completing  himself.  It  had  been  a 
burden  on  his  conscience;  and  now  he  gladly  put  all  his 
plates  and  experience  at  the  disposal  of  Professor  Pelseneer, 
though  he  had  nothing  written  and  would  not  write  any- 
thing. He  had  no  wish  to  claim  even  joint  authorship  for 
the  completed  paper;  when  the  question  was  first  raised, 
he  desired  merely  that  it  should  be  stated  that  such  and  such 
drawings  were  made  by  him ;  but  when  Professor  Pelseneer 
insisted  that  both  names  should  appear  as  joint  authors,  he 
consented  to  this  solution  of  the  question. 

HoDESLEA,  Sept.  17,  1893. 

Dear  Mr.  Murray* — If  the  plates  of  Spirula  could  be 
turned  to  account  a  great  burthen  would  be  taken  off  my  mind. 

Professor  Pelseneer  is  every  way  competent  to  do  justice  to 
the  subject;  and  he  has  just  what  I  needed,  namely  another 
specimen  to  check  and  complete  the  work;  and  besides  that,  the 
physical  capacity  for  dissection  and  close  observation,  of  which 
I  have  had  nothing  left  since  my  long  illness. 

Will  you  be  so  good  as  to  tell  Professor  Pelseneer  that  I 
shall  be  glad  to  place  the  plates  at  his  disposal  and  to  give  him 
all  the  explanations  I  can  of  the  drawings,  whenever  it  may  suit 
his  convenience  to  take  up  the  work  ? 

Nothing  beyond  mere  fragments  remained  of  the  specimen. 
— I  am,  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  return  Pelseneer's  letter. 

Hodeslea,  Se/>t.  30,  1893. 

Dear  Professor  Pelseneer — I  send  herewith  (by  this  post) 
a  full  explanation  of  the  plates  of  Spirula  (including  those  of 
which  you  have  unlettered  copies).  I  trust  you  will  not  be  too 
much  embarrassed  by  my  bad  handwriting,  which  is  a  plague  to 
myself  as  well  as  to  other  people. 

My  hope  is  that  you  will  be  good  enough  to  consider  these 
figures  as  materials  placed  in  your  hands,  to  be  made  useful  in 
the  memoir  on  Spirula,  which  I  trust  you  will  draw  up,  supply- 
ing the  defects  of  my  work  and  checking  its  accuracy. 

*  Now  K.C.B.  ;  Director  of  the  "  Reports  of  the  Challenger:* 


384  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

You  will  observe  that  a  great  deal  remains  to  be  done.  The 
muscular  system  is  untouched;  the  structure  and  nature  of  the 
terminal  circumvallate  papilla  have  to  be  made  out;  the  lingual 
teeth  must  be  re-examined ;  and  the  characters  of  the  male  deter- 
mined. If  I  recollect  rightly,  Owen  published  something  about 
the  last  point. 

If  I  can  be  of  any  service  to  you  in  any  questions  that  arise, 
I  shall  be  very  glad ;  but  as  I  am  putting  the  trouble  of  the  work 
on  your  shoulders,  I  wish  you  to  have  the  credit  of  it. 

So  far  as  I  am  concerned,  all  that  is  needful  is  to  say  that 
such  and  such  drawings  were  made  by  me. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Oct,  12,  1893. 

Dear  Professor  Pelseneer — I  am  very  glad  to  hear  from 
you  that  the  homology  of  the  cephalopod  arms  with  the  gas- 
teropod  foot  is  now  generally  admitted.  When  I  advocated 
that  opinion  in  my  memoir  on  the  "  Morphology  of  the  Cepha- 
lous  Mollusca,"  some  forty  years  ago,  it  was  thought  a  great 
heresy. 

As  to  publication;  I  am  quite  willing  to  agree  to  whatever 
arrangement  you  think  desirable,  so  long  as  you  are  kind  enough 
to  take  all  trouble  (but  that  of  "  consulting  physician  *')  off  my 
shoulders.  Perhaps  putting  both  names  to  the  memoir,  as  you 
suggest,  will  be  the  best  way.  I  cannot  undertake  to  write  any- 
thing, but  if  you  think  I  can  be  of  any  use  as  an  adviser  or  critic, 
do  not  hesitate  to  demand  my  services. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

Although  in  February  he  had  stayed  several  days  in 
town  with  the  Donnellys,  who  "  take  as  much  care  of  me 
as  if  I  were  a  piece  of  old  china,"  and  had  attended  a 
levee  and  a  meeting  of  his  London  University  Association, 
had  listened  with  interest  to  a  lecture  of  Professor  Dewar, 
who  "  made  liquid  oxygen  by  the  pint,"  and  dined  at  Marl- 
borough House,  the  influenza  had  prevented  him  during  the 
spring  from  fulfilling  several  engagements  in  London ;  but 
after  his  return  from  Oxford  he  began  to  recruit  in  the  fine 
weather,  and  found  delightful  occupation  in  putting  up  a 
rockery  in  the  garden  for  his  pet  Alpine  plants. 

In  mid  June  he  writes  to  his  wife,  then  on  a  visit  to 
one  of  her  daughters : — 


i893  INFLUENZA  385 

What  a  little  goose  you  are  to  go  having  bad  dreams  about 
me — who  am  like  a  stalled  ox — browsing  in  idle  comfort — in 
fact,  idle  is  no  word  for  it.  Sloth  is  the  right  epithet.  I  can't 
get  myself  to  do  anything  but  potter  in  the  garden,  which  is 
looking  lovely. 

On  June  21  he  went  to  Cambridge  for  the  Harvey 
Celebration  at  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  and  made  a 
short  speech. 

The  dinner  last  night  (he  writes)  was  a  long  affair,  and  I 
was  the  last  speaker;  but  I  got  through  my  speech  very  well, 
and  was  heard  by  everybody,  I  am  told. 

But  as  is  the  way  with  influenza,  it  was  thrown  off  in 
the  summer  only  to  return  the  next  winter,  and  on  the  eve 
pf  the  Royal  Society  Anniversary  Dinner  he  writes  to  Sir 
M.  Foster: — 

I  am  in  rather  a  shaky  and  toiceless  condition,  and  unless 
I  am  more  up  to  the  njark  to-morrow  morning  I  shall  have  to 
forego  the  dinner,  and,  what  is  worse,  the  chat  with  you  after- 
wards. 

One  consequence  of  the  spring  attack  of  influenza  was 
that  this  year  he  went  once  more  to  the  Maloja,  staying 
there  from  July  21  to  August  25. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  y«/K  9,  1893. 

My  dear  Hooker — What  has  happened  to  the  x  meeting  you 
proposed?  However,  it  does  not  matter  much  to  me  now,  as 
Hames,  who  gave  me  a  thorough  overhauling  in  London,  has 
packed  me  off  to  the  Maloja  again,  and  we  start,  if  we  can,  on 
the  17th. 

It  is  a  great  nuisance,  but  the  dregs  of  influenza  and  the  hot 
weather  between  them  have  brought  the  weakness  of  my  heart 
to  the  front,  and  I  am  gravitating  to  the  condition  in  which  I 
was  five  or  six  years  ago.  So  I  must  try  the  remedy  which  was 
so  effectual  last  time. 

We  are  neither  of  us  very  fit,  and  shall  have  to  be  taken 
charge  of  by  a  courier.    Fancy  coming  to  that ! 

Let  me  be  a  warning  to  you,  my  dear  old  man.  Don't  go 
giving  lectures  at  Oxford  and  making  speeches  at  Cambridge, 
and  above  all  things  don't,  oh  don't  go  getting  influenza,  the 
61 


386  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

microbes  of  which  would  be  seen  under  a  strong  enough  micro- 
scope to  have  this  form. 

[Sketch  of  an  active  little  black  demon.] 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Though  not  so  strikingly  as  before,  the  high  Alpine  air 
was  again  a  wonderful  tonic  to  him.  His  diary  still  con- 
tains a  note  of  occasional  long  walks ;  and  once  more  he  was 
the  centre  of  a  circle  of  friends,  whose  cordial  recollections 
of  their  pleasant  intercourse  afterwards  found  expression  in 
a  lasting  memorial.  Beside  one  of  his  favourite  walks,  a 
narrow  pathway  skirting  the  blue  lakelet  of  Sils,  was  placed 
a  gray  block  of  granite.  The  face  of  this  was  roughly 
smoothed,  and  upon  it  was  cut  the  following  inscription : — 

In  memory  of  the  illustrious  English  Writer  and  Naturalist, 
Thomas  Henry  Huxley,  who  spent  many  summers  at  the  Kur- 
saal,  Maloja. 

In  a  letter  to  Sir  J.  Hooker,  of  October  i,  he  describes 
the  effects  of  his  trip,  and  his  own  surprise  at  being  asked 
to  write  a  critical  account  of  Owen's  work : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Oct.  i,  1893. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  am  no  better  than  a  Gadarene  swine  for 
not  writing  to  you  from  the  Maloja,  but  I  was  too  procrastinat- 
ingly  lazy  to  expend  even  that  amount  of  energy.  I  found  I 
could  walk  as  well  as  ever,  but  unless  I  was  walking  I  was  ever- 
lastingly seedy,  and  the  wife  was  unwell  almost  all  the  time.  I 
am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  coming  home  which  is  the  most 
beneficial  part  of  going  abroad,  for  I  am  remarkably  well  now, 
and  my  wife  is  very  much  better. 

I  trust  the  impaled  and  injudicious  Richard  ♦  is  none  the 
worse.  It  is  wonderful  what  boys  go  through  (also  what  goes 
through  them). 

You  will  get  all  the  volumes  of  my  screeds.  I  was  horrified 
to  find  what  a  lot  of  stuff  there  was — but  don't  acknowledge 
them  unless  the  spirit  moves  you.  ...  I  think  that  on  Natural 
Inequality  of  Man  will  be  to  your  taste. 

Three,  or  thirty,  guesses  and  you  shall  not  guess  what  I  am 
about  to  tell  you. 

*  Sir  J.  Hooker's  youngest  son,  who  had  managed  to  spike  himself 
on  a  fence. 


i893  LETTERS  387 

Rev.  Richard  Owen  has  written  to  me  to  ask  me  to  write  a 
concluding  chapter  for  the  biography  of  his  grandfather — con- 
taining a  "  critical  "  estimate  of  him  and  his  work ! ! !  Says  he 
is  moved  thereto  by  my  speech  at  the  meeting  for  a  memorial. 

There  seemed  nothing  for  me  to  do  but  to  accept  as  far  as 
the  scientific  work  goes.  I  declined  any  personal  estimate  on 
the  ground  that  we  had  met  in  private  society  half  a  dozen  times. 

If  you  don't  mind  being  bothered  I  should  like  to  send  you 
what  I  write  and  have  your  opinion  about  it. 

You  see  Jowett  is  going  or  gone.  I  am  very  sorry  we  were 
obliged  to  give  up  our  annual  visit  to  him  this  year.  But  I  was 
quite  unable  to  stand  the  exertion,  even  if  Hames  had  not 
packed  me  off.    How  one's  old  friends  are  dropping ! 

Romanes  gave  me  a  pitiable  account  of  himself  in  a  letter 
the  other  day.  He  has  had  an  attack  of  hemiplegic  paralysis, 
and  tells  me  he  is  a  mere  wreck.  That  means  that  the  worst 
anticipations  of  his  case  are  being  verified.    It  is  lamentable. 

Take  care  of  yourself,  my  dear  old  friend,  and  with  our  love 
to  you  both,  believe  me,  ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Not  long  after  his  return  he  received  a  letter,  from  a 
certain  G S ,  who  wrote  from  Southampton  detail- 
ing a  number  of  observations  he  had  made  upon  the  organ- 
isms to  be  seen  with  a  magnifying  glass  in  an  infusion  of 
vegetable  matter,  and  as  "  an  ignoramus,"  apologised  for 
any  appearance  of  conceit  in  so  doing,  while  asking  his 
advice  as  to  the  best  means  of  improving  his  scientific 
knowledge.  Huxley  was  much  struck  by  the  tone  of  the 
letter  and  the  description  of  the  experiments,  and  he  wrote 
back : — 

HODESLEA,  NoVi  9,  1893. 

Sir — We  are  all  "  ignoramuses  '*  more  or  less — and  cannot 
reproach  one  another.  If  there  were  any  sign  of  conceit  in  your 
letter,  you  would  not  get  this  reply. 

On  the  contrary,  it  pleases  me.  Your  observations  are  quite 
accurate  and  clearly  described — and  to  be  accurate  in  observa- 
tion and  clear  in  description  is  the  first  step  towards  good  sci- 
entific work. 

You  are  seeing  just  what  the  first  workers  with  the  micro- 
scope saw  a  couple  of  centuries  ago. 

Get  some  such  book  as  Carpenter's  "  On  the  Microscope  " 
and  you  will  see  what  it  all  means. 


388  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

Are  there  no  science  classes  in  Southampton?  There  used 
to  be,  and  I  suppose  is,  a  Hartley  Institute. 

If  you  want  to  consult  books  you  cannot  otherwise  obtain, 
take  this  to  the  librarian,  g^ve  him  my  compliments,  and  say  I 
should  be  very  much  obliged  if  he  would  help  you. — I  am,  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Great  was  Huxley's  astonishment  when  he  learned  in 
reply  that  his  correspondent  was  a  casual  dock  labourer, 
and  had  but  scanty  hours  of  leisure  in  which  to  read  and 
think  and  seek  into  the  recesses  of  nature,  while  his  means 
of  observation  consisted  of  a  toy  microscope  bought  for  a 
shilling  at  a  fair.  Casting  about  for  some  means  of  lending 
the  man  a  helping  hand,  he  bethought  him  of  the  Science 
and  Art  Department,  and  wrote  on  December  30  to  Sir  J. 
Donnelly : — 

The  Department  has  feelers  all  over  England — ^has  it  any- at 
Southampton  ?  And  if  it  has,  could  it  find  out  something  about 
the  writer  of  the  letters  I  enclose  ?  For  a  "  casual  docker  "  they 
are  remarkable ;  and  I  think  when  you  have  read  them  you  will 
not  mind  my  bothering  you  with  them.  (I  really  have  had  the 
grace  to  hesitate.) 

I  have  been  puzzled  what  to  do  for  the  man.  It  is  so  much 
easier  to  do  harm  than  good  by  meddling — and  yet  I  don't  like 
to  leave  him  to  "  casual  docking." 

In  that  first  letter  he  has  got — on  his  own  hook — about  as 
far  as  Buffon  and  Needham  150  years  ago. 

And  later  to  Professor  Howes : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Feb.  12,  1894. 

My  dear  Howes — Best  thanks  for  unearthing  the  volumes 
of  Milne-Edwards.    I  was  afraid  my  set  was  spoiled. 

I  shall  be  still  more  obliged  to  you  if  you  can  hear  of  some- 
thing for  S .  There  is  a  right  good  parson  in  his  neighbour- 
hood, and  from  what  he  tells  me  about  S I  am  confirmed 

in  my  opinion  that  he  is  a  very  exceptional  man,  who  ought 
to  be  at  something  better  than  porter's  work  for  twelve  hours 
a  day. 

The  mischief  is  that  one  never  knows  how  transplanting  a 
tree,  much  less  a  man,  will  answer.  Playing  Providence  is  a 
game  at  which  one  is  very  apt  to  burn  one's  fingers. 


i893  LETTER   TO   THE    SPECTATOR  389 

However,  I  am  going  to  try,  and  hope  at  any  rate  to  do  no 
harm  to  the  man  I  want  to  help. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  was  eventually  offered  more  congenial  occupation 
at  the  Natural  History  Museum  in  South  Kensington,  but 
preferred  not  to  enter  into  the  bonds  of  an  unaccustomed 
office. 

Meanwhile,  through  Sir  John  Donnelly,  Huxley  was 
placed  in  communication  with  the  Rev.  Montague  Powell, 
who,  at  his  request,  called  upon  the  docker;  and  finding 
him  a  man  who  had  read  and  thought  to  an  astonishing 
extent  upon  scientific  problems,  and  had  a  considerable 
acquaintance  with  English  literature,  soon  took  more  than 
a  vicarious  interest  in  him.  Mr.  Powell,  who  kept  Huxley 
informed  of  his  talks  and  correspondence  with  G.  S.,  gives 
a  full  account  of  the  circumstances  in  a  letter  to  the  Spec- 
tator of  July  13,  1895,  from  which  I  quote  the  following 
words : — 

The  Professor's  object  in  writing  was  to  ask  me  how  best 
such  a  man  could  be  helped,  I  being  at  his  special  request  the 
intermediary.  So  I  suggested  in  the  meanwhile  a  microscope 
and  a  few  scientific  books.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days  I  re- 
ceived a  splendid  achromatic  compound  microscope  and  some 
books,  which  I  duly  handed  over  to  my  friend,  telling  him  it  was 
from  an  unknown  hand.  "  Ah,"  he  said,  "  I  know  who  that  must 
be;  it  can  be  no  other  than  the  greatest  of  living  scientists;  it  is 
just  like  him  to  help  a  tyro." 

One  small  incident  of  this  affair  is  perhaps  worth  pre- 
serving as  an  example  of  Huxley's  love  of  a  bantering 
repartee.  In  the  midst  of  the  correspondence  Mr.  Powell 
seems  suddenly  to  have  been  seized  by  an  uneasy  recollec- 
tion that  Huxley  had  lately  received  some  honour  or  title, 
so  he  next  addressed  him  as  "  My  dear  Sir  Thomas."  The 
latter,  not  to  be  outdone,  promptly  replied  with  "  My  dear 
Lord  Bishop  of  the  Solent." 

About  the  same  time  comes  a  letter  to  Mr.  Knowles, 
based  upon  a  paragraph  from  the  gossiping  column  of  some 
newspaper  which  had  come  into  Huxley's  hands: — 


390  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Nov.  9,  1893. 
Gossip  of  the  Town. 

"  Professor  Huxley  receives  200  guineas  for  each  of  his 
articles  for  the  Nineteenth  Century" 

My  dear  Knowles — I  have  always  been  satisfied  with  the 
Nineteenth  Century  in  the  capacity  of  paymaster,  but  I  did  not 
know  how  much  reason  I  had  for  my  satisfaction  till  I  read  the 
above ! 

Totting  up  the  number  of  articles  and  multiplying  by  200  it 
strikes  me  I  shall  be  behaving  very  handsomely  if  I  take  £2000 
for  the  balance  due. 

So  sit  down  quickly,  take  thy  cheque-book,  and  write  five 
score,  and  let  me  have  it  at  breakfast  time  to-morrow.  I  once 
got  a  cheque  for  £1000  at  breakfast,  and  it  ruined  me  morally. 
1  have  always  been  looking  out  for  another. 

I  hope  you  are  all  flourishing.  We  are  the  better  for  Maloja, 
but  more  dependent  on  change  of  weather  and  other  trifles  than 
could  be  wished.  Yet  I  find  myself  outlasting  those  who  started 
in  life  along  with  me.  Poor  Andrew  Clark  and  I  were  at  Haslar 
together  in  1846,  and  he  was  the  younger  by  a  year  and  a  half. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

All  my  time  is  spent  in  the  co-ordination  of  my  eruptions 
when  I  am  an  active  volcano. 

I  hope  you  got  the  volumes  which  I  told  Macmillan  to  send 
you. 

The  following  letter  to  Professor  Romanes,  whose  failing 
eyesight  was  a  premonitory  symptom  of  the  disease  which 
proved  fatal  the  next  year,  reads,  so  to  say,  as  a  solemn 
prelude  to  the  death  of  three  old  friends  this  autumn — of 
Andrew  Clark,  his  old  comrade  at  Haslar,  and  cheery 
physician  for  many  years;  of  Benjamin  Jowett,  Master  of 
Balliol,  whose  acquaintance  he  had  first  made  in  185 1  at 
the  Stanleys'  at  Harrow,  and  with  whom  he  kept  up  an 
intimacy  to  the  end  of  his  life,  visiting  Balliol  once  or  twice 
every  year ;  and,  heaviest  blow,  of  John  Tyndall,  the  friend 
and  comrade  whose  genial  warmth  of  spirit  made  him  almost 
claim  a  brother's  place  in  early  struggles  and  later  success, 
and  whose  sudden  death  was  all  the  more  poignant  for  the 
cruel  touch  of  tragedy  in  the  manner  of  it : — 


i893  DEATH   OF   TYNDALL  391 

HoDESLEA,  Sept.  28,  1893. 

My  dear  Romanes — We  are  very  much  grieved  to  hear  such 
a  bad  account  of  your  health.  Would  that  we  could  achieve 
something  more  to  the  purpose  than  assuring  you  and  Mrs.. 
Romanes  of  our  hearty  sympathy  with  you  both  in  your  troubles. 
I  assure  you,  you  are  much  in  our  thoughts,  which  are  sad 
enough  with  the  news  of  Jowett*s,  I  fear,  fatal  attack. 

I  am  almost  ashamed  to  be  well  and  tolerably  active  when 
young  and  old  friends  are  being  thus  prostrated. 

However,  you  have  youth  on  your  side,  so  do  not  give  up, 
and  wearisome  as  doing  nothing  may  be,  persist  in  it  as  the 
best  of  medicines. 

At  my  time  of  life  one  should  be  always  ready  to  stand  at 
attention  when  the  order  to  march  comes;  but  for  the  rest  I 
think  it  well  to  go  on  doing  what  I  can,  as  if  F.  M.  General 
Death  had  forgotten  me.  That  must  account  for  my  seeming 
presumption  in  thinking  I  may  some  day  "  take  up  the  threads  " 
of  late  evolutionary  speculation. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

My  wife  joins  with  me  in  love  and  kind  wishes  to  you  both. 

At  the  request  of  his  friends,  Huxley  wrote  for  the 
Nineteenth  Century  a  brief  appreciation  of  his  old  comrade 
Tyndall — the  tribute  of  a  friend  to  a  friend — ^and,  difficult 
task  though  it  was,  touched  on  the  closing  scene,  if  only 
from  a  chivalrous  desire  to  do  justice  to  the  long  devotion 
which  accident  had  so  cruelly  wronged : — 

I  am  comforted  (he  writes  to  Sir  J.  Hooker  on  January  3) 
by  your  liking  the  Tyndall  article.  You  are  quite  right,  I  shiv- 
ered over  the  episode  of  the  "last  words,"  but  it  struck  me  as 
the  best  way  of  getting  justice  done  to  her,  so  I  took  a  header. 
I  am  glad  to  see  by  the  newspaper  comments  that  it  does  not 
seem  to  have  shocked  other  people's  sense  of  decency. 

The  funeral  took  place  on  Saturday,  December  9.  There 
was  no  storm  nor  fog  to  make  the  graveside  perilous  for 
the  survivors.  In  the  Haslemere  churchyard  the  winter  sun 
shone  its  brightest,  and  the  moorland  air  was  crisp  with  an 
almost  Alpine  freshness  as  this  lover  of  the  mountains  was 
carried  to  his  last  resting-place.  But  though  he  took  no 
outward  harm  from  that  bright  still  morning,  Huxley  was 


392  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

greatly  shaken  by  the  event :  "  I  was  very  much  used  up/' 
he  writes  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on  his  return  home  two  days 
later,  "  to  my  shame  be  it  said,  far  more  than  my  wife ; " 
and  on  December  30  to  Sir  John  Donnelly : — 

Your  kind  letter  deserved  better  than  to  have  been  left  all 
this  time  without  response,  but  the  fact  is,  I  came  to  grief  the 
day  after  Christmas  Day  (no,  we  did  not  indulge  in  too  much 
champagne).  Lost  my  voice,  and  collapsed  generally,  without 
any  particular  reason,  so  I  went  to  bed  and  stayed  there  as  long 
as  I  could  stand  it,  and  now  I  am  picking  up  again.  The  fact 
is,  I  suppose  I  had  been  running  up  a  little  account  over  poor 
old  Tyndall.  One  does  not  stand  that  sort  of  wear  and  tear  so 
well  as  one  gets  ancient. 

On  the  same  day  he  writes  to  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Dec  30,  1893. 

My  dear  Hooker — You  gave  the  geographers  some  uncom- 
monly sane  advice.  I  observe  that  the  words  about  the  "  stu- 
pendous ice-clad  mountains"  you  saw  were  hardly  out  of  your 

mouth  when coolly  asserts  that  the  Antarctic  continent  is 

a  table-land !  "  comparatively  level  country."  It  really  is  wrong 
that  men  should  be  allowed  to  go  about  loose  who  fill  you  with 
such  a  strong  desire  to  kick  them  as  that  little  man  does. 

I  send  herewith  a  spare  copy  of  Nineteenth  with  my  paper 
about  Tyndall.  It  is  not  exactly  what  I  could  wish,  as  I  was 
hurried  over  it,  and  knocked  up  into  the  bargain,  but  I  have  tried 
to  give  a  fair  view  of  him.    Tell  me  what  you  think  of  it. 

I  have  been  having  a  day  or  two  on  the  sick  list.  Nothing 
discernible  the  matter,  only  flopped,  as  I  did  in  the  spring.  How- 
ever, I  am  picking  up  again.  The  fact  is,  I  have  never  any  blood 
pressure  to  spare,  and  a  small  thing  humbugs  the  pump. 

However,  I  have  some  kicks  left  in  me,  vide  the  preface  to 
the  fourth  vol.  of  Essays;  do.  No.  V.  when  that  appears  in  Feb- 
ruary. 

Now,  my  dear  old  friend,  take  care  of  yourself  in  the  coming 
year  '94.  Fll  stand  by  you  as  long  as  the  fates  will  let  me,  and 
you  must  be  equally  "  Johnnie."  With  our  love  to  Lady  Hooker 
and  yourself — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


CHAPTER   XXII 

1894 

The  completion  early  in  1894  of  the  ninth  volume  of 
Collected  Essays  was  followed  by  a  review  of  them  in  Nature 
(February  i),  from  the  pen  of  Professor  Ray  Lankester, 
emphasising  the  way  in  which  the  writer's  personality  ap- 
pears throughout  the  writing : — 

There  is  probably  no  lover  of  apt  discourse,  of  keen  criti- 
cism, or  of  scientific  doctrine  who  will  not  welcome  the  issue 
of  Professor  Huxley's  Essays  in  the  present  convenient  shape. 
For  my  own  part,  I  know  of  no  writing  which  by  its  mere  form, 
even  apart  from  the  supreme  interest  of  the  matters  with  which 
it  mostly  deals,  gives  me  so  much  pleasure  as  that  of  the  author 
of  these  essays.  In  his  case,  more  than  that  of  his  contempo- 
raries, it  is  strictly  true  that  the  style  is  the  man.  Some  authors 
we  may  admire  for  the  consummate  skill  with  which  they  trans- 
fer to  the  reader  their  thought  without  allowing  him,  even  for  a 
moment,  to  be  conscious  of  their  personality.  In  Professor 
Huxley's  work,  on  the  other  hand,  we  never  miss  his  fascinat- 
ing presence;  now  he  is  gravely  shaking  his  head,  now  com- 
pressing the  lips  with  emphasis,  and  from  time  to  time,  with 
a  quiet  twinkle  of  the  eye,  making  unexpected  apologies  or  pro- 
testing that  he  is  of  a  modest  and  peace-loving  nature.  At  the 
same  time,  one  becomes  accustomed  to  a  rare  and  delightful 
phenomenon.  Everything  which  has  entered  the  author's  brain 
by  eye  or  ear,  whether  of  recondite  philosophy,  biological  fact, 
or  political  programme,  comes  out  again  to  us — clarified,  sifted, 
arranged,  and  vivified  by  its  passage  through  the  logical  machine 
of  his  strong  individuality. 

Of  the  artist  in  him  it  continues : — 

He  deals  with  form  not  only  as  a  mechanical  engineer  in 
partibus  (Huxley's  own  description  of  himself),  but  also  as  an 

393 


394 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 


artist,  a  born  lover  of  form,  a  character  which  others  rec- 
ognise in  him  though  he  does  not  himself  set  it  down  in  his 
analysis. 

The  essay  on  "  Animal  Automatism "  suggested  a 
reminiscence  of  Professor  Lankester's  as  to  the  way  in 
which  it  was  delivered,  and  this  in  turn  led  to  Huxley's 
own  account  of  the  incident  in  the  letter  given  in  Vol.  I. 
p.  444. 

About  the  same  time  there  is  a  letter  acknowledging 
Mr.  Bateson's  book  On  Variation,  which  is  interesting  as 
touching  on  the  latter-day  habit  of  speculation  apart  from 
fact  which  had  begun  to  prevail  in  biology : — 

HoDESLEA,  Fed.  20,  1894. 

My  dear  Mr.  Bateson — I  have  put  off  thanking  you  for  the 
volume  On  Variation  which  you  have  been  so  good  as  to  send 
me  in  the  hope  that  I  should  be  able  to  look  into  it  before 
doing  so. 

But  as  I  find  that  impossible,  beyond  a  hasty  glance,  at  pres- 
ent, I  must  content  myself  with  saying  how  glad  I  am  to  see 
from  that  glance  that  we  are  getting  back  from  the  region  of 
speculation  into  that  of  fact  again. 

There  have  been  threatenings  of  late  that  the  field  of  battle 
of  Evolution  was  being  transferred  to  Nephelococcygia. 

I  see  you  are  inclined  to  advocate  the  possibility  of  consider- 
able "  saltus  "  on  the  part  of  Dame  Nature  in  her  variations. 
I  always  took  the  same  view,  much  to  Mr.  Darwin's  disgust, 
and  we  used  often  to  debate  it. 

If  you  should  come  across  my  article  in  the  Westminster 
(i860)  you  will  find  a  paragraph  on  that  question  near  the  end. 
I  am  writing  to  Macmillan  to  send  you  the  volume. — Yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

By  the  way,  have  you  ever  considered  this  point,  that  the 
variations  of  which  breeders  avail  themselves  are  exactly  those 
which  occur  when  the  previously  wild  stocks  are  subjected  to 
exactly  the  same  conditions? 

The  rest  of  the  first  half  of  the  year  is  not  eventful.  As 
illustrating  the  sort  of  communications  which  constantly 
came  to  him,  I  quote  from  a  letter  to  Sir  J.  Donnelly,  of 
January  1 1 : — 


1894  BANQUET   WITH   THE   PRIME   MINISTER  395 

I  had  a  letter  from  a  fellow  yesterday  morning  who  must 
be  a  lunatic,  to  the  effect  that  he  had  been  reading  my  essays, 
thought  I  was  just  the  man  to  spend  a  month  with,  and  was 
coming  down  by  the  five  o'clock  train,  attended  by  his  seven 
children  and  his  mother-in-law ! 

Frost  being  over,  there  was  lots  of  boiling  water  ready  for 
him,  but  he  did  not  turn  up ! 

Wife  and  servants  expected  nothing  less  than  assassination. 

Later  he  notes  with  dismay  an  invitation  as  a  Privy 
Councillor  to  a  State  evening  party: — 

It  is  at  10.30  P.M.,  just  the  time  this  poor  old  septuagenarian 
goes  to  bed. 

My  swellness  is  an  awful  burden,  for  as  it  is  I  am  going  to 
dine  with  the  Prime  Minister  on  Saturday. 

The  banquet  with  the  Prime  Minister  here  alluded  to 
was  the  occasion  of  a  brief  note  of  apology  to  Lord  Rose- 
bery  for  having  unintentionally  kept  him  waiting : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  May  28,  1894. 

Dear  Lord  Rosebery — I  had  hoped  that  my  difficulties  in 
dealing  with  an  overtight  scabbard  stud,  as  we  sat  down  to 
dinner  on  Saturday,  had  inconvenienced  no  one  but  myself,  until 
it  flashed  across  my  mind  after  I  had  parted  from  you  that,  as 
you  had  observed  them,  it  was  only  too  probable  that  I  had  the 
misfortune  to  keep  you  waiting. 

I  have  been  in  a  state  of  permanent  blush  ever  since,  and  I 
feel  sure  you  will  forgive  me  for  troubling  you  with  this  apology 
as  the  only  remedy  to  which  I  can  look  for  relief  from  that  un- 
wonted affliction. — I  am,  dear  Lord  Rosebery,  yours  very  faith- 
fully, .  T.  H.  Huxley. 

All  through  the  spring  he  had  been  busy  completing 
the  chapter  on  Sir  Richard  Owen's  work,  which  he  had 
been  asked  to  write  by  the  biographer  of  his  old  opponent, 
and  on  February  4  tells  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker : — 

I  am  toiling  over  my  chapter  about  Owen,  and  I  believe  his 
ghost  in  Hades  is  grinning  over  my  difficulties. 

The  thing  that  strikes  me  most  is,  how  he  and  I  and  all  the 
things  we  fought  about  belong  to  antiquity. 

It  is  almost  impertinent  to  trouble  the  modern  world  with 
such  antiquarian  business. 


396 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 


He  sent  the  MS.  to  Sir  M.  Foster  on  June  i6;  the 
book  itself  appeared  in  December.  The  chapter  in  question 
was  restricted  to  a  review  of  the  immense  amount  of  work, 
most  valuable  on  its  positive  side,  done  by  Owen  (compare 
the  letter  of  January  i6,  1893) ;  and  the  review  in  Nature 
remarks  of  it  that  the  criticism  is  "  so  straightforward, 
searching,  and  honest  as  to  leave  nothing  further  to  be 
desired." 

Besides  this  piece  of  work,  he  had  written  early  in  the 
year  a  few  lines  on  the  general  character  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  in  reply  to  a  request,  addressed  to  "  the  most 
illustrious  children  of  the  century,"  for  their  opinion  as  to 
what  name  will  be  given  to  it  by  an  impartial  posterity — 
the  century  of  Comte,  of  Darwin  or  Renan,  of  Edison, 
Pasteur,  or  Gladstone.     He  replied: — 

I  conceive  that  the  leading  characteristic  of  the  nineteenth 
century  has  been  the  rapid  growth  of  the  scientific  spirit,  the 
consequent  application  of  scientific  methods  of  investigation  to 
all  the  problems  with  which  the  human  mind  is  occupied,  and  the 
correlative  rejection  of  traditional  beliefs  which  have  proved 
their  incompetence  to  bear  such  investigation. 

The  activity  of  the  scientific  spirit  has  been  manifested  in 
every  region  of  speculation  and  of  practice. 

Many  of  the  eminent  men  you  njention  have  been  its  effect- 
ive organs  in  their  several  departments. 

But  the  selection  of  any  one  of  these,  whatever  his  merits, 
as  an  adequate  representative  of  the  power  and  majesty  of  the 
scientific  spirit  of  the  age  would  be  a  grievous  mistake. 

Science  reckons  many  prophets,  but  there  is  not  even  a 
promise  of  a  Messiah. 

The  unexampled  increase  in  the  expenditure  of  the 
European  states  upon  their  armaments  led  the  Arbitration 
Alliance  this  year  to  issue  a  memorial  urging  the  Govern- 
ment to  co-operate  with  other  Governments  in  reducing 
naval  and  military  burdens.  Huxley  was  asked  to  sign 
this  memorial,  and  replied  to  the  secretary  as  follows: — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  y««^  21,  1894. 
Dear  Sir — I  have  taken  some  time  to  consider  the  memorial 
to  which  you  have  called  my  attention,  and  I  regret  that  I  do  not 
find  myself  able  to  sign  it. 


i894  BRITISH  ASSOCIATION   AT   OXFORD  397 

Not  that  I  have  the  slightest  doubt  about  the  magnitude  of 
the  evils  which  accrue  from  the  steady  increase  of  European 
armaments;  but  because  I  think  that  this  regrettable  fact  is 
merely  the  superficial  expression  of  social  forces,  the  operation 
of  which  cannot  be  sensibly  affected  by  agreements  between 
Governments. 

In  my  opinion  it  is  a  delusion  to  attribute  the  growth  of 
armaments  to  the  "  exactions  of  militarism."  The  "  exactions 
of  industrialism,"  generated  by  international  commercial  com- 
petition, may,  I  believe,  claim  a  much  larger  share  in  prompting 
that  growth.  Add  to  this  the  French  thirst  for  revenge,  the 
most  just  determination  of  the  German  and  Italian  peoples  to 
assert  their  national  unity;  the  Russian  Panslavonic  fanaticism 
and  desire  for  free  access  to  the  western  seas ;  the  Papacy  stead- 
ily fishing  in  the  troubled  waters  for  the  means  of  recovering 
its  lost  (I  hope  for  ever  lost)  temporal  possessions  and  spiritual 
supremacy ;  the  "  sick  man,"  kept  alive  only  because  each  of 
his  doctors  is  afraid  of  the  other  becoming  his  heir. 

When  I  think  of  the  intensity  of  the  perturbing  agencies 
which  arise  out  of  these  and  other  conditions  of  modern  Euro- 
pean society,  I  confess  that  the  attempt  to  counteract  them  by 
asking  Governments  to  agree  to  a  maximum  military  expendi- 
ture, does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  worth  making;  indeed  I  think 
it  might  do  harm  by  leading  people  to  suppose  that  the  desires 
of  Governments  are  the  chief  agents  in  determining  whether 
peace  or  war  shall  obtain  in  Europe. — I  am,  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Later  in  the  year,  on  August  8,  took  place  the  meeting 
of  the  British  Association  at  Oxford,  noteworthy  for  the 
presidential  address  delivered  by  Lord  Salisbury,  Chancellor 
of  the  University,  in  which  the  doctrine  of  evolution  was 
"  enunciated  as  a  matter  of  course — disputed  by  no  reason- 
able man,"  although  accompanied  by  a  description  of  the 
working  of  the  natural  selection  and  variation  which  ap- 
peared to  the  man  of  science  a  mere  travesty  of  these  doc- 
trines. 

Huxley  had  been  persuaded  to  attend  this  meeting,  the 
more  willingly,  perhaps,  since  his  reception  at  Oxford  the 
year  before  suggested  that  there  would  be  a  special  piquancy 
in  the  contrast  between  this  and  the  last  meeting  of  the 
Association  at  Oxford  in  i860.     He  was  not  disappointed. 


398  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

Details  apart,  the  cardinal  situation  was  reversed.  The 
genius  of  the  place  had  indeed  altered.  The  representatives 
of  the  party,  whose  prophet  had  once  contemptuously  come 
here  to  anathematise  the  "  Origin,"  returned  at  length  to 
the  same  spot  to  admit — if  not  altogether  ungrudgingly — 
the  greatness  of  the  work  accomplished  by  Darwin. 

Once  under  promise  to  go,  he  could  not  escape  without 
the  "  few  words  "  which  he  now  found  so  tiring ;  but  he  took 
the  part  which  assured  him  greatest  freedom,  as  seconder 
of  the  vote  of  thanks  to  the  president  for  his  address.  The 
study  of  an  advance  copy  of  the  address  raised  an  **  almost 
overwhelming  temptation "  to  criticise  certain  statements 
contained  in  it;  but  this  would  have  been  out  of  place  in 
seconding  a  vote  of  thanks;  and  resisting  the  temptation, 
he  only  "  conveyed  criticism,"  as  he  writes  to  Professor 
Lewis  Campbell,  "  in  the  form  of  praise  " :  going  so  far  as 
to  suggest  "  it  might  be  that,  in  listening  to  the  deeply 
interesting  address  of  the  President,  a  thought  had  occasion- 
ally entered  his  mind  how  rich  and  profitable  might  be  the 
discussion  of  that  paper  in  Section  D  "  (Biology).  It  was 
not  exactly  an  off-hand  speech.  Writing  to  Sir  M.  Foster 
for  any  good  report  which  might  appear  in  an  Oxford  paper, 
he  says : — 

I  have  no  notes  of  it.  I  wrote  something  on  Tuesday  night, 
but  this  draft  is  no  good,  as  it  was  metamorphosed  two  or  three 
times  over  on  Wednesday. 

One  who  was  present  and  aware  of  the  whole  situation 
once  described  how  he  marked  the  eyes  of  another  interested 
member  of  the  audience,  who  knew  that  Huxley  was  to 
speak,  but  not  what  he  meant  to  say,  turning  anxiously 
whenever  the  president  reached  a  critical  phrase  in  the  ad- 
dress, to  see  how  he  would  take  it.  But  the  expression  of 
his  face  told  nothing;  only  those  who  knew  him  well  could 
infer  a  suppressed  impatience  from  a  little  twitching  of  his 
foot. 

Of  this  occasion  Professor  Henry  F.  Osborn,  one  of  his 
old  pupils,  writes  in  his  "  Memorial  Tribute  to  Thomas  H. 
Huxley  "  (Transactions  of  the  N.  Y.  Acad.  Soc,  vol.  xv.) : — 


i894  BRITISH   ASSOCIATION   AT   OXFORD  ^gg 

• 

Huxley's  last  public  appearance  was  at  the  meeting  of  the 
British  Association  at  Oxford.  He  had  been  very  urgently  in- 
vited to  attend,  for,  exactly  a  quarter  of  a  century  before,  the 
Association  had  met  at  Oxford,  and  Huxley  had  had  his  famous 
encounter  with  Bishop  Wilberforce.  It  was  felt  that  the  anni- 
versary would  be  an  historic  one,  and  incomplete  without  his 
presence,  and  so  it  proved  to  be.  Huxley's  especial  duty  was  to 
second  the  vote  of  thanks  for  the  Marquis  of  Salisbury's  address 
— one  of  the  invariable  formalities  of  the  opening  meetings  of 
the  Association.  The  meeting  proved  to  be  the  greatest  one  in 
the  history  of  the  Association.  The  Sheldonian  Theatre  was 
packed  with  one  of  the  most  distinguished  scientific  audiences 
ever  brought  together,  and  the  address  of  the  Marquis  was 
worthy  of  the  occasion.  The  whole  tenor  of  it  was  unknown  in 
science.  Passing  from  the  unsolved  problems  of  astronomy, 
chemistry,  and  physics,  he  came  to  biology.  With  delicate  irony 
he  spoke  of  the  "  comforting  wordy  evolution"  and  passing  to 
the  Weismannian  controversy,  implied  that  the  diametrically 
opposed  views  so  frequently  expressed  nowadays  threw  the 
whole  process  of  evolution  into  doubt.  It  was  only  too  evident 
that  the  Marquis  himself  found  no  comfort  in  evolution,  and 
even  entertained  a  suspicion  as  to  its  probability.  It  was  well 
worth  the  whole  journey  to  Oxford  to  watch  Huxley  during  this 
portion  of  the  address.  In  his  red  doctor-of-laws  gown,  placed 
upon  his  shoulders  by  the  very  body  of  men  who  had  once  re- 
ferred to  him  as  "  a  Mr.  Huxley,"  he  sank  deeper  into  his  chair 
upon  the  very  front  of  the  platform  and  restlessly  tapped  his 
foot.  His  situation  was  an  unenviable  one.  He  had  to  thank 
an  ex-Prime  Minister  of  England  and  present  Chancellor  of 
Oxford  University  for  an  address,  the  sentiments  of  which  were 
directly  against  those  he  himself  had  been  maintaining  for 
twenty-five  years.  He  said  afterwards  that  when  the  proofs  of 
the  Marquis's  address  were  put  into  his  hands  the  day  before, 
he  realised  that  he  had  before  him  a  most  delicate  and  difficult 
task.  Lord  Kelvin  (Sir  William  Thomson)  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  living  physicists,  first  moved  the  vote  of  thanks, 
but  his  reception  was  nothing  to  the  tremendous  applause  which 
greeted  Huxley  in  the  heart  of  that  University  whose  cardinal 
principles  he  had  so  long  been  opposing.  Considerable  anxiety 
had  been  felt  by  his  friends  lest  his  voice  should  fail  to  fill  the 
theatre,  for  it  had  signally  failed  during  his  Romanes  Lecture 
delivered  in  Oxford  the  year  before,  but  when  Huxley  arose  he 
reminded  you  of  a  venerable  gladiator  returning  to  the  arena 


400 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 


after  years  of  absence.  He  raised  his  figure  and  his  voice  to 
its  full  height,  and,  with  one  foot  turned  over  the  edge  of  the 
step,  veiled  an  unmistakable  and  vigorous  protest  in  the  most 
gracious  and  dignified  speech  of  thanks. 

Throughout  the  subsequent  special  sessions  of  this  meeting 
Huxley  could  not  appear.  He  gave  the  impression  of  being 
aged  but  not  infirm,  and  no  one  realised  that  he  had  spoken  his 
last  word  as  champion  of  the  law  of  evolution. 

Such  criticism  of  the  address  as  he  actually  expressed 
reappears  in  the  leading  article,  "  Past  and  Present/'  which 
he  wrote  for  Nature  to  celebrate  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary 
of  its  foundation  (Nov.  i,  1894). 

The  essence  of  the  criticism  is  that  with  whatever  demon- 
strations of  hostility  to  parts  of  the  Darwinian  theory  Lord 
Salisbury  covered  the  retreat  of  his  party  from  their  ancient 
positions,  he  admitted  the  validity  of  the  main  points  for 
which  Darwin  contended. 

The  essence  of  this  great  work  (the  Origin  of  Species)  may 
be  stated  summarily  this :  it  affirms  the  mutability  of  species  and 
the  descent  of  living  forms,  separated  by  differences  of  more 
than  varietal  value,  from  one  stock.  That  is  to  say,  it  propounds 
the  doctrine  of  evolution  as  far  as  biology  is  concerned.  So  far, 
we  have  merely  a  re-statement  of  a  doctrine  which,  in  its  most 
general  form,  is  as  old  as  scientific  speculation.  So  far,  we  have 
the  two  theses  which  were  declared  to  be  scientifically  absurd 
and  theologically  damnable  by  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  in  i860. 

It  is  also  of  these  two  fundamental  doctrines  that,  at  the 
meeting  of  the  British  Association  in  1894,  the  Chancellor  of  the 
University  of  Oxford  spoke  as  follows: — 

"  Another  lasting  and  unquestioned  effect  has  resulted  from 
Darwin's  work.  He  has,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  disposed  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  immutability  of  species.  .  .  ." 

"  Few  now  are  found  to  doubt  that  animals  separated  by 
differences  far  exceeding  those  that  distinguished  what  we  know 
as  species  have  yet  descended  from  common  ancestors." 

Undoubtedly,  every  one  conversant  with  the  state  of  bio- 
logical science  is  aware  that  general  opinion  has  long  had  good 
reason  for  making  the  volte  face  thus  indicated.  It  is  also  mere 
justice  to  Darwin  to  say  that  this  "  lasting  and  unquestioned  " 
revolution  is,  in  a  very  real  sense,  his  work.  And  yet  it  is  also 
true  that,  if  all  the  conceptions  promulgated  in  the  Origin  of 


i894  LETTERS  4OI 

Species  which  are  peculiarly  Darwinian  were  swept  away,  the 
theory  of  the  evolution  of  animals  and  plants  would  not  be  in 
the  slightest  degree  shaken. 

The  strain  of  this  single  effort  was  considerable :  "  I  am 
frightfully  tired,"  he  wrote  on  August  11,  "but  the  game 
was  worth  the  candle." 

Letters  to  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker  and  to  Professor  Lewis 
Campbell  contain  his  own  account  of  the  affair.  The  refer- 
ence in  the  latter  to  the  priests  is  in  reply  to  Professor 
Campbeirs  story  of  one  of  Jowett's  last  sayings.  They  had 
been  talking  of  the  collective  power  of  the  priesthood  to 
resist  the  introduction  of  new  ideas;  a  long  pause  ensued, 
and  the  old  man  seemed  to  have  slipped  off  into  a  doze, 
when  he  suddenly  broke  the  silence  by  saying,  "  The  priests 
will  always  be  too  many  for  you." 

The  Spa,  Tunbridge  Wells,  Aug.  12,  1894. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  wish,  as  everybody  wished,  you  had 
been  with  us  on  Wednesday  evening  at  Oxford  when  we  settled 
accounts  for  i860,  and  got  a  receipt  in  full  from  the  Chancellor 
of  the  University,  President  of  the  Association,  and  representa- 
tive of  ecclesiastical  conservatism  and  orthodoxy. 

I  was  officially  asked  to  second  the  vote  of  thanks  for  the 
address,  and  got  a  copy  of  it  the  night  before — ^luckily — for  it 
was  a  kittle  business.  .  .  . 

It  was  very  queer  to  sit  there  and  hear  the  doctrines  you  and 
I  were  damned  for  advocating  thirty-four  years  ago  at  Oxford, 
enunciated  as  matters  of  course  —  disputed  by  no  reasonable 
man ! — in  the  Sheldonian  Theatre  by  the  Chancellor.  .  .  . 

Of  course  there  is  not  much  left  of  me,  and  it  will  take  a 
fortnight's  quiet  at  Eastbourne  (whither  we  return  on  Tuesday 
next)  to  get  right.  But  it  was  a  pleasant  last  flare-up  in  tlie 
socket ! 

With  our  love  to  you  both — Ever  yours  affectionately, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

HODESLEA,  Aug.  18,  1894. 

My  dear  Campbell — I  am  setting  you  a  good  example.  You 
and  I  are  really  too  old  friends  to  go  on  wasting  ink  in  honorary 
prefixes. 

I  had  a  very  difficult  task  at  Oxford.  The  old  Adam,  of 
course,  prompted  the  tearing  of  the  address  to  pieces,  which 
62 


402 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 


would  have  been  a  very  easy  job,  especially  the  latter  half  of 
it.  But  as  that  procedure  would  not  have  harmonised  well  with 
the  function  of  a  seconder  of  a  vote  of  thanks,  and  as,  moreover, 
Lord  S.  was  very  just  and  good  in  his  expressions  about  Dar- 
win, I  had  to  convey  criticism  in  the  shape  of  praise. 

It  was  very  curious  to  me  to  sit  there  and  hear  the  Chancellor 
of  the  University  accept,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  doctrines 
for  which  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  coarsely  anathematised  us 
thirty- four  years  earlier.    E  pur  si  muove! 

I  am  not  afraid  of  the  priests  in  the  long-run.  Scientific 
method  is  the  white  ant  which  will  slowly  but  surely  destroy 
their  fortifications.  And  the  importance  of  scientific  method  in 
modern  practical  life — always  growing  and  increasing — is  the 
guarantee  for  the  gradual  emancipation  of  the  ignorant  upper 
and  lower  classes,  the  former  of  whom  especially  are  the  strength 
of  the  priests. 

My  wife  had  a  very  bad  attack  of  her  old  enemy  some  weeks 
ago,  and  she  thought  she  would  not  be  able  to  go  to  Oxford. 
However,  she  picked  up  in  the  wonderful  elastic  way  she  has, 
and  I  believe  was  less  done-up  than  I  when  we  left  on  the 
Friday  morning.  I  was  glad  the  wife  was  there,  as  the  meeting 
gave  me  a  very  kind  reception,  and  it  was  probably  the  last  flare- 
up  in  the  socket. 

The  Warden  of  Merton  took  great  care  of  us,  but  it  was  sad 
to  think  of  the  vacuity  of  Balliol. 

Please  remember  me  very  kindly  to  Father  Steffens  and  the 
Steeles,  and  will  you  tell  Herr  Walther  we  are  only  waiting  for 
a  balloon  to  visit  the  hotel  again  ? 

With  our  affectionate  regards  to  Mrs.  Campbell  and  yourself 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Here  also  belong  several  letters  of  miscellaneous  interest. 
One  is  to  Mrs.  Lewis  Campbell  at  the  Maloja : — 

HODESLEA,  Aug.  20,  1 894. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Campbell — What  a  pity  I  am  not  a  telepath  ! 
I  might  have  answered  your  inquiry  in  the  letter  I  was  writing 
to  your  husband  yesterday. 

The  flower  I  found  on  the  island  in  Sils  Lake  was  a  cross 
between  Gentiana  lutea  and  Gentiana  punctata — nothing  new, 
but  interesting  in  many  ways  as  a  natural  hybrid. 

As  to  baptising  the  island,  I  am  not  guilty  of  usurping 
ecclesiastical  functions  to  that  extent.    I  have  a  notion  that  the 


i894  LETTERS  403 

island  has  a  name  already,  but  I  cannot  recollect  it.  Walther 
would  know. 

My  wife  had  a  bad  attack,  and  we  were  obliged  to  give  up 
some  visits  we  had  projected.  But  she  got  well  enough  to  go  to 
Oxford  with  me  for  a  couple  of  days,  and  really  stood  the  racket 
better  than  I  did. 

At  present  she  is  fairly  well,  and  I  hope  the  enemy  may  give 
her  a  long  respite.  The  Colliers  come  to  us  at  the  end  of  this 
month,  and  that  will  do  her  good. 

With  our  affectionate  regards  to  you  both  and  remembrances 

to  our  friends — Ever  yours  very  truly,  t>   tt   tt 

1.  rl.  xl. 

The  first  of  the  following  set  refers  to  a  lively  piece  of 
nonsense  which  Huxley  wrote  just  before  going  to  stay  with 
the  Romanes'  at  Oxford  on  the  occasion  of  the  Romanes 
Lecture.*  After  Professor  Romanes'  death,  Mrs.  Romanes 
asked  leave  to  print  it  in  the  biography  of  her  husband.  In 
the  other  letters,  Huxley  gives  his  consent,  but,  with  his 
usual  care  for  the  less  experienced,  tried  to  prevent  any 
malicious  perversion  of  the  fun  which  might  put  her  in  a 
false  position. 

To  Mrs.  Romanes 

HoDESLEA,  Sept.  20,  1894. 

I  do  not  think  I  can  possibly  have  any  objection  to  your 
using  my  letter  if  you  think  it  worth  while — ^but  perhaps  you 
had  better  let  me  look  at  it,  for  I  remember  nothing  about  it — 
and  my  letters  to  people  whom  I  trust  are  sometimes  more  plain- 
spoken  than  polite  about  things  and  men.  You  know  at  first 
there  was  some  talk  of  my  possibly  supplying  Gladstone's  place 
in  case  of  his  failure,  and  I  would  not  be  sure  of  my  politeness 
in  that  quarter ! 

Pray  do  not  suppose  that  your  former  letter  was  other  than 
deeply  interesting  and  touching  to  me.  I  had  more  than  half  a 
mind  to  reply  to  it,  but  hesitated  with  a  man's  horror  of  touch- 
ing a  wound  he  cannot  heal. 

And  then  I  got  a  bad  bout  of  "  liver,"  from  which  I  am  just 
picking  up. 

*  See  p.  373. 


404  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

HODESLEA,   Sept.  22,  1894. 

It's  rather  a  rollicking  epistle,  I  must  say,  but  as  my  wife 
(who  sends  her  love)  says  she  thinks  she  is  the  only  person  who 
has  a  right  to  complain  (and  she  does  not),  I  do  not  know  why 
it  should  not  be  published. 

PS, — I  fancy  very  few  people  will  catch  the  allusion  about 
not  contradicting  me.  But  perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  take 
the  opinion  of  some  impartial  judge  on  that  point. 

I  do  not  care  the  least  on  my  own  account,  but  I  see  my 
words  might  be  twisted  into  meaning  that  you  had  told  me 
something  about  your  previous  guest,  and  that  I  referred  to 
what  you  had  said. 

Of  course  you  had  done  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  as  a  wary 
old  fox,  experienced  sufferer  from  the  dodges  of  the  misrepre- 
sent er,  I  feel  bound  not  to  let  you  get  into  any  trouble  if  I  can 
help  it. 

A  regular  lady's  PS,  this. 

PS, — Letter  returned  herewith. 


To  Mr.  Leslie  Stephen 

HoDESLEA,   Oct.  16,  1894. 

My  dear  Stephen — I  am  very  glad  you  like  to  have  my 
omnium  gatherum,  and  think  the  better  of  it  for  gaining  me  such 
a  pleasant  letter  of  acknowledgment. 

It  is  a  great  loss  to  me  to  be  cut  off  from  all  my  old  friends, 
but  sticking  closely  to  my  hermitage,  with  fresh  air  and  im- 
mense quantities  of  rest,  have  become  the  conditions  of  existence 
for  me,  and  one  must  put  up  with  them. 

I  have  not  paid  all  the  debt  incurred  in  my  Oxford  es- 
capade yet — the  last  "  little  bill "  being  a  sharp  attack  of  lum- 
bago, out  of  which  I  hope  I  have  now  emerged.  But  my 
deafness  alone  should  bar  me  from  decent  society.  I  have 
not  the  moral  courage  to  avoid  making  shots  at  what  people 
say,  so  as  not  to  bore  them;  and  the  results  are  sometimes  dis- 
astrous. 

I  don't  see  there  is  any  real  difference  between  us.  You  are 
charitable  enough  to  overlook  the  general  immorality  of  the 
cosmos  on  the  score  of  its  having  begotten  morality  in  one  small 
part  of  its  domain. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


i894  LETTERS  405 


To  Mr.  G- 


HODESLEA,   Ocf.  31,   1894. 

Dear  Mr.  S "  Liver,"  "  lumbago,"  and  other  small  ills 

the  flesh  is  heir  to,  have  been  making  me  very  lazy  lately,  espe- 
cially about  letter-writingf. 

You  have  got  into  the  depths  where  the  comprehensible  ends 
in  the  incomprehensible — where  the  symbols  which  may  be  used 
with  confidence  so  far  begin  to  get  shaky. 

It  does  not  seem  to  me  absolutely  necessary  that  matter 
should  be  composed  of  solid  particles.  The  "  atoms  "  may  be 
persistent  whirlpools  of  a  continuous  "  substance  " — which  sub- 
stance, if  at  rest,  could  not  affect  us  (all  sensory  impression 
being  dependent  on  motion)  and  consequently  would  for  us  =  o. 
The  evolution  of  matter  would  be  the  getting  under  weigh  of 
this  "  nothing  for  us  "  until  it  became  the  "  something  for  us," 
the  different  motions  of  which  give  us  the  mental  states  we  call 
the  qualities  of  things. 

But  it  needs  a  very  steady  head  to  walk  safely  among  these 
abysses  of  thought,  and  the  only  use  of  letting  the  mind  range 
among  them  is  as  a  corrective  to  the  hasty  dogmatism  of  the 
so-called  materialists,  who  talk  just  as  glibly  of  that  of  which 
they  know  nothing  as  the  most  bigoted  of  the  orthodox. 

Here  also  stand  two  letters  to  Lord  Farrer,  one  before, 
the  other  after,  his  address  at  the  Statistical  Society  on  the 
Relations  between  Morals,  Economics  and  Statistics,  which 
touch  on  several  philosophical  and  social  questions,  always, 
to  his  mind,  intimately  connected,  and  wherein  wrong 
modes  of  thought  indubitably  lead  to  wrong  modes  of  ac- 
tion. Noteworthy  is  a  defence  of  the  fundamental  method 
of  Political  Economy,  however  much  its  limitations  might 
be  forgotten  by  some  of  its  exponents.  The  reference  to 
the  Church  agitation  to  introduce  dogmatic  teaching  into 
the  elementary  schools  has  also  a  lasting  interest. 

HODESLEA,  JVOV.  6,  1894. 

My  dear  Farrer — Whenever  you  get  over  the  optimism  of 
your  youthful  constitution  (I  wish  I  were  endowed  with  that 
blessing)  you  will  see  that  the  Gospels  and  I  are  right  about  the 

*  See  p.  387. 


4o6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

Devil  being  "Prince"  (note  the  distinction — not  "king")  of 
the  Cosmos. 

The  a  priori  road  to  scientific,  political,  and  all  other  doc- 
trine is  H.R.H.  Satan's  invention — it  is  the  intellectual,  broad, 
and  easy  path  which  leadeth  to  Jehannum. 

The  King's  road  is  the  strait  path  of  painful  observation 
and  experiment,  and  few  they  be  that  enter  thereon. 

R.  G.  Latham,  queerest  of  men,  had  singular  flashes  of  in- 
sight now  and  then.  Forty  years  ago  he  gravely  told  me  that 
the  existence  of  the  Established  Church  was  to  his  mind  one  of 
the  best  evidences  of  the  recency  of  the  evolution  of  the  human 
type  from  the  simian. 

How  much  there  is  to  confirm  this  view  in  present  public 
opinion  and  the  intellectual  character  of  those  who  influence  it ! 

It  explains  all  your  difficulties  at  once,  and  I  regret  that  I 
do  not  seem  to  have  mentioned  it  at  any  of  those  mid-day 
symposia  which  were  so  pleasant  when  you  and  I  were  younger. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

P,S, — Apropos  of  Athelstan  Riley  and  his  friends — I  feel 
rather  obliged  to  them.  I  assented  to  the  compromise  (i)  be- 
cause I  felt  that  English  opinion  would  not  let  us  have  the  edu- 
cation of  the  masses  at  any  cheaper  price;  (2)  because,  with  the 
Bible  in  lay  hands,  I  was  satisfied  that  the  teaching  from  it 
would  gradually  become  modified  into  harmony  with  common 
sense. 

I  do  not  doubt  that  this  is  exactly  what  has  happened,  and  is 
the  ground  of  the  alarm  of  the  orthodox. 

But  I  do  not  repent  of  the  compromise  in  the  least.  Twenty 
years  of  reasonably  good  primary  education  is  "  worth  a  mass." 

Moreover  the  Diggleites  stand  to  lose  anyhow,  and  they  will 
lose  most  completely  and  finally  if  they  win  at  the  elections  this 
month.    So  I  am  rather  inclined  to  hope  they  may. 

HoDESLEA,  Staveley  Road,  Eastbourne, 

JVov.  3,  1894. 

My  dear  Mr.  Clodd — They  say  that  the  first  thing  an  Eng- 
lishman does  when  he  is  hard  up  for  money  is  to  abstain  from 
buying  books.  The  first  thing  I  do  when  I  am  liver-y,  lumbagy, 
and  generally  short  of  energy,  is  to  abstain  from  answering 
letters.  And  I  am  only  just  emerging  from  a  good  many  weeks 
of  that  sort  of  flabbiness  and  poverty. 

Many  thanks  for  your  notice  of  Kidd's  book.  Some  vile 
punsters  called  it  an  attempt  to  put  a  Kid  glove  on  the  iron  hand 


i894  LETTERS  ^07 

of  Nature.  I  thought  it  (I  mean  the  book,  not  the  pun)  clever 
from  a  literary  point  of  view,  and  worthless  from  any  other. 
You  will  see  that  I  have  been  giving  Lord  Salisbury  a  Roland 
for  his  Oliver  in  Nature,  But,  as  hinted,  if  we  only  had  been 
in  Section  D ! 

With  my  wife's  and  my  kind  regards  and  remembrances — 
Ever  yours  very  truly,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Athenaeum  Club,  Dec,  19,  1894. 

My  dear  Farrer — I  am  indebted  to  you  for  giving  the 
recording  angel  less  trouble  than  he  might  otherwise  have  had, 
on  account  of  the  worse  than  usual  unpunctuality  of  the  London 
and  Brighton  this  morning.  For  I  have  utilised  the  extra  time 
in  reading  and  thinking  over  your  very  interesting  address. 

Thanks  for  your  protest  against  the  mischievous  a  priori 
method,  which  people  will  not  understand  is  as  gross  an  anach- 
ronism in  social  matters  as  it  would  be  in  Hydrostatics.  The 
so-called  "  Sociology "  is  honeycombed  with  it,  and  it  is  hard 
to  say  who  are  worse,  the  individualists  or  the  collectivists.  But 
in  your  just  wrath  don't  forget  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a 
science  of  social  life,  for  which,  if  the  term  had  not  been  so 
hopelessly  degraded,  Politics  is  the  proper  name. 

Men  are  beings  of  a  certain  constitution,  who,  under  certain 
conditions,  will  as  surely  tend  to  act  in  certain  ways  as  stones 
will  tend  to  fall  if  you  leave  them  unsupported.  The  laws  of 
their  nature  are  as  invariable  as  the  laws  of  gravitation,  only 
the  applications  to  particular  cases  offer  worse  problems  than  the 
case  of  the  three  bodies. 

The  Political  Economists  have  gone  the  right  way  to  work 
— the  way  that  the  physical  philosopher  follows  in  all  complex 
affairs — ^by  tracing  out  the  effects  of  one  great  cause  of  human 
action,  the  desire  of  wealth,  supposing  it  to  be  unchecked. 

If  they,  or  other  people,  have  forgotten  that  there  are  other 
potent  causes  of  action  which  may  interfere  with  this,  it  is  no 
fault  of  scientific  method  but  only  their  own  stupidity. 

Hydrostatics  is  not  a  "  dismal  science,"  because  water  does 
not  always  seek  the  lowest  level — e,g,  from  a  bottle  turned  upside 
down,  if  there  is  a  cork  in  the  neck ! 

There  is  much  need  that  somebody  should  do  for  what  is 
vaguely  called  "  Ethics  "  just  what  the  Political  Economists  have 
done.  Settle  the  question  of  what  will  be  done  under  the  un- 
checked action  of  certain  motives,  and  leave  the  problem  of 
"  ought "  for  subsequent  consideration. 


4o8  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

For,  whatever  they  ought  to  do,  it  is  quite  certain  the  ma- 
jority of  men  will  act  as  if  the  attainment  of  certain  positive 
and  negative  pleasures  were  the  end  of  action. 

We  want  a  science  of  "  Eubiotics  "  to  tell  us  exactly  what 
will  happen  if  human  beings  are  exclusively  actuated  by  the 
desire  of  well-being  in  the  ordinary  sense.  Of  course  the  utili- 
tarians have  laid  the  foundations  of  such  a  science,  with  the 
result  that  the  nicknamer  of  genius  called  this  branch  of  science 
"  pig  philosophy,"  making  just  the  same  blunder  as  when  he 
called  political  economy  "  dismal  science." 

"  Moderate  well-being  "  may  be  no  more  the  worthiest  end 
of  life  than  wealth.  But  if  it  is  the  best  to  be  had  in  this  queer 
world — it  may  be  worth  trying  for. 

But  you  will  begin  to  wish  the  train  had  been  punctual! 

Draw  comfort  from  the  fact  that  if  error  is  always  with  us, 
it  is,  at  any  rate,  remediable.  I  am  more  hopeful  than  when  I 
was  young.  Perhaps  life  (like  matrimony,  as  some  say)  should 
begin  with  a  little  aversion ! — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Some  years  before  this,  a  fund  for  a  "  Darwin  Medal " 
had  been  established  in  memory  of  the  great  naturalist,  the 
medal  to  be  awarded  biennially  for  researches  in  biology. 
With  singular  appropriateness,  the  first  award  was  made  to 
Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  the  joint  propounder  of  the  theory  of 
Natural  Selection,  whose  paper,  entrusted  to  Darwin's  liter- 
ary sponsorship,  caused  the  speedy  publication  of  Darwin's 
own  long-continued  researches  and  speculations.  The  sec- 
ond, with  equal  appropriateness, was  to  Sir  J. D.Hooker, both 
as  a  leader  in  science  and  a  helper  and  adviser  of  Darwin. 

Huxley's  own  view  of  such  scientific  honours  as  medals 
and  diplomas  was  that  they  should  be  employed  to  stimu- 
late for  the  future  rather  than  to  reward  for  the  past;  and 
delighted  as  he  was  at  the  poetic  justice  of  these  two  awards, 
this  justice  once  satisfied,  he  let  his  opinion  be  known  that 
thenceforward  the  Darwin  Medal  ought  to  be  given  only 
to  younger  men.  But  when  this  year  he  found  the  Darwin 
Medal  awarded  to  himself  "  for  his  researches  in  biology 
and  his  long  association  with  Charles  Darwin,"  he  could 
not  but  be  touched  and  gratified  by  this  mark  of  appre- 
ciation from  his  fellow-workers  in  science,  this  association 


i894        SPEECH   AT   THE   ROYAL  SOCIETY  DINNER         409 

in  one  more  scientific  record  with  old  allies  and  true  friends 
— to  "  have  his  niche  in  the  Pantheon  "  next  to  Hooker 
and  near  to  Darwin. 

It  was  a  rare  instance  of  the  fitness  of  things  that  the 
three  men  who  had  done  most  to  develop  and  to  defend 
Darwin's  ideas  should  live  to  stand  first  in  the  list  of  the 
Darwin  medaUists;  and  Huxley  felt  this  to  be  a  natural 
closing  of  a  chapter  in  his  life,  a  fitting  occasion  on  which 
to  bid  farewell  to  public  life  in  the  world  of  science.  Al- 
most at  the  same  moment  another  chapter  in  science 
reached  its  completion  in  the  "  coming  of  age  "  of  Nature, 
3,  journal  which,  when  scientific  interests  at  large  had  grown 
stronger,  had  succeeded  in  realising  his  own  earlier  efforts 
to  found  a  scientific  organ,  and  with  which  he  had  always 
been  closely  associated. 

As  mentioned  above,  he  wrote  for  the  November  number 
an  introductory  article  called  "  Past  and  Present,"  com- 
paring the  state  of  scientific  thought  of  the  day  with  that 
of  twenty-five  years  before,  when  the  journal  was  first 
started.  To  celebrate  the  occasion,  a  dinner  was  to  be  held 
this  same  month  of  all  who  had  been  associated  with 
Nature^  and  this  Huxley  meant  to  attend,  as  well  as  the 
more  important  anniversary  dinner  of  the  Royal  Society 
on  St.  Andrew's  Day. 

I  have  promised  (he  writes  on  November  6  to  Sir  M.  Foster) 
to  go  to  the  Nature  dinner  if  I  possibly  can.  Indeed  I  should  be 
sorry  to  be  away.  As  to  the  R.S.  nothing  short  of  being  confined 
to  bed  will  stop  me.  And  I  shall  be  good  for  a  few  words  after 
dinner. 

Thereafter  I  hope  not  to  appear  again  on  any  stage. 

His  letter  about  the  medal  expresses  his  feelings  as  to 
the  award. 

HODESLEA,  A^OV.  2,   1 894. 

My  dear  Foster — Didn't  I  tell  the  P.R.S.,  Secretaries, 
Treasurer,  and  all  the  Fellows  thereof,  when  I  spake  about 
Hooker  years  ago,  that  thenceforth  the  Darwin  Medal  was  to 
be  given  to  the  young,  and  not  to  useless  old  extinct  volcanoes? 
I  ought  to  be  very  angry  with  you  all  for  coolly  ignoring  my 
wise  counsels. 


410  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

But  whether  it  is  vanity  or  something  a  good  deal  better, 
I  am  not.  One  gets  chill  old  age,  and  it  is  very  pleasant  to  be 
warmed  up  unexpectedly  even  against  one's  injunctions.  More- 
over, my  wife  is  very  pleased,  not  to  say  jubilant ;  and  if  I  were 
made  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  I  should  not  be  able  to  con- 
vince her  that  my  services  to  Theology  were  hardly  of  the  sort 
to  be  rewarded  in  that  fashion. 

I  need  not  say  what  I  think  about  your  action  in  the  matter, 
my  faithful  old  friend.    With  our  love  to  you  both — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  suppose  you  are  all  right  again,  as  you  write  from  the  R.S. 
Liver  permitting  I  shall  attend  meeting  and  dinner.  It  is  very 
odd  that  the  Medal  should  come  along  with  my  pronouncement 
in  Nature,  which  I  hope  you  like.  I  cut  out  rather  a  stinging 
paragraph  at  the  end. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  J\/'ov.  ii,  1894, 

My  dear  Donnelly — Why  on  earth  did  I  not  answer  your 
letter  before?  Echo  (being  Irish)  says,  "Because  of  your  in- 
fernal bad  habit  of  putting  off;  which  is  growing  upon  you,  you 
wretched  old  man." 

Of  course  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  anything  can  be  done  for 

S .    Howes  has  written  to  me  about  him  since  your  letter 

arrived — and  I  am  positively  going  to  answer  his  epistle.  It's 
Sunday  morning,  and  I  feel  good. 

You  will  have  seen  that  the  R.S.  has  been  giving  me  the 
Darwin  Medal,  though  I  gave  as  broad  a  hint  as  was  proper  the 
last  time  I  spoke  at  the  Anniversary,  that  it  ought  to  go  to  the 
young  men.  Nevertheless,  with  the  ordinary  inconsistency  of 
the  so-called  "  rational  animal,"  I  am  well  pleased. 

I  hope  you  will  be  at  the  dinner,  and  would  ask  you  to  be 
my  guest — but  as  I  thought  my  boys  and  boys-in-law  would  like 
to  be  there,  I  have  already  exceeded  my  lawful  powers  of  invita- 
tion and  had  to  get  a  dispensation  from  Michael  Foster. 

I  suppose  I  shall  be  like  a  horse  that  "  stands  at  livery  "  for 
some  time  after — but  it  is  positively  my  last  appearance  on  any 
stage. 

We  were  very  glad  to  hear  from  Lady  Donnelly  that  you 
had  had  a  good  and  effectual  holiday.  With  our  love — Ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  return  Howes'  letter  in  case  you  want  it.  I  see  I  need  not 
write  to  him  again  after  all.    Three  cheers ! 

Please  give  Lady  Donnelly  this.     A  number  of  estimable 


i894        SPEECH   AT   THE    ROYAL  SOCIETY  DINNER         411 

members  of  her  sex  have  flown  at  me  for  writing  what  I  thought 
was  a  highly  complimentary  letter.  But  she  will  be  just,  I 
know. 

"  The  best  of  women  are  apt  to  be  a  little  weak  in  the  great 
practical  arts  of  give-and-take,  and  putting  up  with  a  beating, 
and  a  little  too  strong  in  their  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  govern- 
ment. Men  learn  about  these  things  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
their  business;  women  have  no  chance  in  home  life,  and  the 
boards  and^ councils  will  be  capital  schools  for  them.  Again, 
in  the  public  interest  it  will  be  well ;  women  are  more  naturally 
economical  than  men,  and  have  none  of  our  false  shame  about 
looking  after  pence.  Moreover,  they  don't  job  for  any  but  their 
lovers,  husbands,  and  children,  so  that  we  know  the  worst." 

The  speech  at  the  Royal  Society  Anniversary  dinner — 
which  he  evidently  enjoyed  making — ^was  a  fine  piece  of 
speaking,  and  quite  carried  away  the  audience,  whether  in 
the  gentle  depreciation  of  his  services  to  science,  or  in  his 
profession  of  faith  in  the  methods  of  science  and  the  final 
triumph  of  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  whatever  theories  of 
its  operation  might  be  adopted  or  discarded  in  the  course 
of  further  investigation. 

I  quote  from  the  Times  report  of  the  speech : — 

But  the  most  difficult  task  that  remains  is  that  which  con- 
cerns myself.  It  is  43  years  ago  this  day  since  the  Royal  Society 
did  me  the  honour  to  award  me  a  Royal  medal,  and  thereby 
determined  my  career.  But,  having  long  retired  into  the  posi- 
tion of  a  veteran,  I  confess,  that  I  was  extremely  astonished — 
I  honestly  also  say  that  I  was  extremely  pleased  to  receive  the 
announcement  that  you  had  been  good  enough  to  award  to  me 
the  Darwin  Medal.  But  you  know  the  Royal  Society,  like  all 
things  in  this  world,  is  subject  to  criticism.  I  confess  that  with 
the  ingrained  instincts  of  an  old  official  that  which  arose  in  my 
mind  after  the  reception  of  the  information  that  I  had  been  thus 
distinguished  was  to  start  an- inquiry  which  I  suppose  suggests 
itself  to  every  old  official — How  can  my  Government  be  justi- 
fied ?  In  reflecting  upon  what  had  been  my  own  share  in  what 
are  now  very  largely  ancient  transactions,  it  was  perfectly  ob- 
vious to  me  that  I  had  no  such  claims  as  those  of  Mr.  Wallace. 
It  was  perfectly  clear  to  me  that  I  had  no  such  claims  as  those 
of  my  life-long  friend  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  who  for  25  years 
placed  all  his  great  sources  of  knowledge,  his  sagacity,  his  in- 


412 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 


dustry,  at  the  disposition  of  his  friend  Darwin.  And  really,  I 
begin  to  despair  of  what  possible  answer  could  be  given  to  the 
critics  whom  the  Royal  Society,  meeting  as  it  does  on  Novem- 
ber 30,  has  lately  been  very  apt  to  hear  about  on  December  i. 
Naturally  there  occurred  to  my  mind  that  famous  and  comfort- 
able line,  which  I  suppose  has  helped  so  many  people  under  like 
circumstances,  "  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait."  I 
am  bound  to  confess  that  the  standing  and  waiting,  so  far  as  I 
am  concerned,  to  which  I  refer,  has  been  of  a  somewhat  peculiar 
character.  I  can  only  explain  it,  if  you  will  permit  me  to  nar- 
rate a  story  which  came  to  me  in  my  old  nautical  days,  and 
which,  I  believe,  has  just  as  much  foundation  as  a  good  deal 
of  other  information  which  I  derived  at  the  same  period  from 
the  same  source.  There  was  a  merchant  ship  in  which  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Society  of  Friends  had  taken  passage,  and  that  ship 
was  attacked  by  a  pirate,  and  the  captain  thereupon  put  into 
the  hands  of  the  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends  a  pike,  and 
desired  him  to  take  part  in  the  subsequent  action,  to  which,  as 
you  may  imagine,  the  reply  was  that  he  would  do  nothing  of 
the  kind;  but  he  said  that  he  had  no  objection  to  stand  and  wait 
at  the  gangway.  He  did  stand  and  wait  with  the  pike  in  his 
hands,  and  when  the  pirates  mounted  and  showed  themselves 
coming  on  board  he  thrust  his  pike  with  the  sharp  end  forward 
into  the  persons  who  were  mounting,  and  he  said,  "  Friend, 
keep  on  board  thine  own  ship."  It  is  in  that  sense  that  I  venture 
to  interpret  the  principle  of  standing  and  waiting  to  which  I 
have  referred.  I  was  convinced  as  firmly  as  I  have  ever  been 
convinced  of  anything  in  my  life,  that  the  Origin  of  Species 
was  a  ship  laden  with  a  cargo  of  rich  value,  and  which,  if  she 
were  permitted  to  pursue  her  course,  would  reach  a  veritable 
scientific  Golconda,  and  I  thought  it  my  duty,  however  natu- 
rally averse  I  might  be  to  fighting,  to  bid  those  who  would  dis- 
turb her  beneficent  operations  to  keep  on  board  their  own  ship. 
If  it  has  pleased  the  Royal  Society  to  recognise  such  poor  serv- 
ices as  I  may  have  rendered  in  that  capacity,  I  am  very  glad, 
because  I  am  as  much  convinced  now  as  I  was  34  years  ago  that 
the  theory  propounded  by  Mr.  Darwin — I  mean  that  which  he 
propounded,  not  that  which  has  been  reported  to  be  his  by  too 
many  ill-instructed,  both  friends  and  foes — has  never  yet  been 
shown  to  be  inconsistent  with  any  positive  observations,  and  if 
I  may  use  a  phrase  which  I  know  has  been  objected  to,  and 
which  I  use  in  a  totally  different  sense  from  that  in  which  it 
was  first  proposed  by  its  first  propounder,  I  do  believe  that  on 


1894  LETTERS  413 

all  grounds  of  pure  science  it  "holds  the  field,"  as  the  only 
hypothesis  at  present  before  us  which  has  a  sound  scientific 
foundation.  It  is  quite  possible  that  you  will  apply  to  me  the 
remark  that  has  often  been  applied  to  persons  in  such  a  position 
as  mine,  that  we  are  apt  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  that 
to  which  our  lives  have  been  more  or  less  devoted.  But  I  am 
sincerely  of  opinion  that  the  views  which  were  propounded  by 
Mr.  Darwin  34  years  ago  may  be  understood  hereafter  as  con- 
stituting an  epoch  in  the  intellectual  history  of  the  human  race. 
They  will  modify  the  whole  system  of  our  thought  and  opinion, 
our  most  intimate  convictions.  But  I  do  not  know,  I  do  not 
think  anybody  knows,  whether  the  particular  views  which  he 
held  will  be  hereafter  fortified  by  the  experience  of  the  ages 
which  come  after  us;  but  of  this  thing  I  am  perfectly  certain, 
that  the  present  course  of  things  has  resulted  from  the  feeling 
of  the  smaller  men  who  have  followed  him  that  they  are  incom- 
petent to  bend  the  bow  of  Ulysses,  and  in  consequence  many  of 
them  are  seeking  their  salvation  in  mere  speculation.  Those 
who  wish  to  attain  to  some  clear  and  definite  solution  of  the 
great  problems  which  Mr.  Darwin  was  the  first  person  to  set 
before  us  in  later  times  must  base  themselves  upon  the  facts 
which  are  stated  in  his  great  work,  and,  still  more,  must  pursue 
their  inquiries  by  the  methods  of  which  he  was  so  brilliant  an 
exemplar  throughout  the  whole  of  his  life.  You  must  have  his 
sagacity,  his  untiring  search  after  the  knowledge  of  fact,  his 
readiness  always  to  give  up  a  preconceived  opinion  to  that 
which  was  demonstrably  true,  before  you  can  hope  to  carry  his 
doctrines  to  their  ultimate  issue;  and  whether  the  particular 
form  in  which  he  has  put  them  before  us  may  be  such  as  is 
finally  destined  to  survive  or  not  is  more,  I  venture  to  think, 
than  anybody  is  capable  at  this  present  moment  of  saying.  But 
this  one  thing  is  perfectly  certain — that  it  is  only  by  pursuing 
his  methods,  by  that  wonderful  single-mindedness,  devotion  to 
truth,  readiness  to  sacrifice  all  things  for  the  advance  of  definite 
knowledge,  that  we  can  hope  to  come  any  nearer  than  we  are 
at  present  to  the  truths  which  he  struggled  to  attain. 

To  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Dec.  4,  1894. 
My  dear  old  Man — See  the  respect  I  have  for  your  six 
years  seniority!     I  wished  you  had  been  at  the  dinner,  but 
was  glad  you  were  not.      Especially  as  next  morning  there 


414 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 


was  a  beastly  fog,  out  of  which  I  bolted  home  as  fast  as  pos- 
sible. 

I  shall  have  to  give  up  these  escapades.  They  knock  me  up 
for  a  week  afterwards.  And  really  it  is  a  pity,  just  as  I  have 
got  over  my  horror  of  public  speaking,  and  find  it  very  amusing. 
But  I  suppose  I  should  gravitate  into  a  bore  as  old  fellows  do, 
and  so  it  is  as  well  I  am  kept  out  of  temptation. 

I  will  try  to  remember  what  I  said  at  the  Nature  dinner.* 
I  scolded  the  young  fellows  pretty  sharply  for  their  slovenly 
writing. 

There  will  be  a  tenth  vol.  of  Essays  some  day,  and  an  Index 
rerum.  Do  you  remember  how  you  scolded  me  for  being  too 
speculative  in  my  maiden  lecture  on  Animal  Individuality  forty 
odd  years  ago  ?  "  On  revient  tou jours,"  or,  to  put  it  another 
way,  "  The  dog  returns  to  his  etc.  etc." 

So  I  am  deep  in  philosophy,  grovelling  through  Diogenes 
Laertius — Plutarch's  Placita  and  sich — and  often  wondering 
whether  the  schoolmasters  have  any  better  ground  for  maintain- 
ing that  Greek  is  a  finer  language  than  English  than  the  fact 
that  they  can't  write  the  latter  dialect. 

So  far  as  I  can  see,  my  faculties  are  as  good  (including 
memory  for  anything  that  is  not  useful)  as  they  were  fifty  years 
ago,  but  I  can't  work  long  hours,  or  live  out  of  fresh  air.  Three 
days  of  London  bowls  me  over. 

I  expect  you  are  in  much  the  same  case.  But  you  seem  to  be 
able  to  stoop  over  specimens  in  a  way  impossible  to  me.  It  is 
that  incapacity  has  made  me  give  up  dissection  and  microscopic 
work.  I  do  a  lot  on  my  back,  and  I  can  tell  you  that  the  latter 
posture  is  an  immense  economy  of  strength.  Indeed,  when  my 
head  was  troublesome,  I  used  to  spend  my  time  either  in  active 
outdoor  exercise  or  horizontally. 

The  Stracheys  were  here  the  other  day,  and  it  was  a  great 
pleasure  to  us  to  see  them.  I  think  he  has  had  a  very  close 
shave  with  that  accident.  There  is  nobody  whom  I  should  more 
delight  to  honour — a  right  good  man  all  round — but  I  am  not 
competent  to  judge  of  his  work.  You  are,  and  I  do  not  see  why 
you  should  not  suggest  it.  I  would  give  him  a  medal  for  being 
R.  Strachey,  but  probably  the  Council  would  make  difficulties. 

By  the  way,  do  you  see  the  Times  has  practically  climbed 
down  about  the  R.S. — came  down  backwards  like  a  bear,  growl- 

*  A  brief  report  of  this  speech  is  to  be  found  in  the  British  Medical 
Journal  for  December  8,  1894,  p.  1262. 


1894  LETTERS  415 

ing  all  the  time  ?    I  don't  think  we  shall  have  any  more  first  of 
December  criticisms. 

Lord  help  you  through  all  this  screed.  With  our  love  to  you 
both — Ever  yours  affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Abram,  Abraham  became 

By  will  divine ; 
Let  pickled  Brian's  name 

Be  changed  to  Brine  !  * 

Poetae  Minores, 

Poor  Brian. — Brutal  jest! 

The  following  was  written  to  a  friend  who  had  alluded 
to  his  painful  recollection  of  a  former  occasion  when  he  was 
Huxley's  guest  at  the  anniversary  dinner  of  the  Royal 
Society,  and  was  hastily  summoned  from  it  to  find  his  wife 
dying. 

I  fully  understand  your  feeling  about  the  R.S.  Dinner.  I 
have  not  forgotten  the  occasion  when  you  were  my  guest:  still 
less  my  brief  sight  of  you  when  I  called  the  next  day. 

These  things  are  the  "  lachrymae  rerum " — ^the  abysmal 
griefs  hidden  under  the  current  of  daily  life,  and  seemingly  for- 
gotten, till  now  and  then  they  come  up  to  the  surface — a  flash 
of  agony — ^like  the  fish  that  jumps  in  a  calm  pool. 

One  has  one's  groan  and  goes  to  work  again. 

If  I  knew  of  anything  else  for  it,  I  would  tell  you;  but  all 
my  experience  ends  in  the  questionable  thanksgiving,  "  It's 
lucky  it's  no  worse." 

With  which  bit  of  practical  philosophy,  and  pur  love,  believe 
me,  ever  yours  affectionately,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Before  speaking  of  his  last  piece  of  work,  in  the  vain 
endeavour  to  complete  which,  he  exposed  himself  to  his  old 
enemy,  influenza,  I  shall  give  several  letters  of  miscellane- 
ous interest. 

The  first  is  in  reply  to  Lord  Farrer's  inquiry  as  to  where 
he  could  obtain  a  fuller  account  of  the  subject  tersely  dis- 
cussed in  the  chapter  he  had  contributed  to  the  Life  of 
Owen,  f 

*  Sir  Joseph's  son,  Brian,  had  fallen  into  a  pan  of  brine, 
f  "Which,"  wrote  Lord  Farrer,  "is  just  what  I  wanted  as  an  out- 
line of  the  Biological  and  Morphological  discussion  of  the  last  100 


4l6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

HODESLEA,  yil«.  26,  1895. 

My  dear  Farrer — Miserable  me !  Having  addressed  myself 
to  clear  off  a  heap  of  letters  that  have  been  accumulating,  I  find 
I  have  not  answered  an  enquiry  of  yours  of  nearly  a  month's 
standing.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  cannot  tell  you  of  any  book 
(readable  or  otherwise)  that  will  convert  my  "  pemmican  "  into 
decent  broth  for  you. 

There  are  histories  of  zoology  and  of  philosophical  anatomy, 
but  they  all  of  them  seem  to  me  to  miss  the  point  (which  you 
have  picked  out  of  the  pemmican).  Indeed,  that  is  just  why 
I  took  such  a  lot  of  pains  over  these  50  or  60  pages.  And  I  am 
immensely  tickled  by  the  fact  that  among  all  the  critical  notices 
I  have  seen,  not  a  soul  sees  what  I  have  been  driving  at  as  you 
have  done.  I  really  wish  you  would  write  a  notice  of  it,  just  to 
show  these  Gigadibses  (vide  Right  Rev.  Bloughram)  what  blind 
buzzards  they  are ! 

Enter  a  maid.  "  Please  sir,  Mrs.  Huxley  says  she  would  be 
glad  if  you  would  go  out  in  the  sun."  "  All  right,  Allen."  Anec- 
dote for  your  next  essay  on  Government ! 

The  fact  is,  I  have  been  knocked  up  ever  since  Tuesday, 
when  our  University  Deputation  came  off;  and  my  good  wife 
(who  is  laid  up  herself)  suspects  me  (not  without  reason)  of 
failing  to  take  advantage  of  a  gleam  of  sunshine. 

By  the  way,  can  you  help  us  over  the  University  business? 
Lord  Rosebery  is  favourable,  and  there  is  absolutely  nobody  on 
the  other  side  except  sundry  Philistines,  who,  having  got  their 
degrees,  are  desirous  of  inflating  their  market  value. — Yours 
very  truly,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  next  is  in  answer  to  an  appeal  for  a  subscription, 
from  the  Church  Army. 

/aft.  26,  1895. 

I  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  contribute  to  the  funds  of  the 
Church  Army. 

I  hold  it  to  be  my  duty  to  do  what  I  can  for  the  cases  of 
distress  of  which  I  have  direct  knowledge ;  and  I  am  glad  to  be 
able  now  and  then  to  give  timely  aid  to  the  industrious  and 
worthy  people  with  whom,  as  a  householder,  I  am  brought  into 
personal  relation;  and  who  are  so  often  engaged  in  a  noiseless 
and  unpitied  but  earnest  struggle  to  do  well. 

years.  But  it  is  '  Pemmican  '  to  an  aged  and  enfeebled  digestion.  Is 
there  such  a  thing  as  a  diluted  solution  of  it  in  the  shape  of  any  read- 
able book?" 


'     e^     »«f-«i^   • 


i895  A   REJECTED   MANUSCRIPT  417 

In  my  judgment,  a  domestic  servant,  who  is  perhaps  giving 
half  her  wages  to  support  her  old  parents,  is  more  worthy  of 
help  than  half  a  dozen  Magdalens. 

Under  these  circumstances,  you  will  understand  that  such 
funds  as  are  at  my  disposal  are  already  fully  engaged.  ' 

The  following  is  to  a  gentleman — ^an  American,  I  think 
— ^who  sent  him  a  long  manuscript,  an  extraordinary  farrago 
of  nonsense,  to  fead  and  criticise,  and  help  to  publish.  But 
as  he  seemed  to  have  acted  in  sheer  simplicity,  he  got  an 
answer : — 

HODESLEA,  yiorw.  31,  1895. 

Dear  Sir — I  should  have  been  glad  if  you  had  taken  the 
ordinary,  and,  I  think  convenient  course  of  writing  for  my  per- 
mission before  you  sent  the  essay  which  has  reached  me,  and 
which  I  return  by  this  post.  I  should  then  have  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  telling  you  that  I  do  not  undertake  to  read,  or  take 
any  charge  of  such  matters,  and  we  should  both  have  been 
spared  some  trouble. 

I  the  more  regret  this,  since  being  unwilling  to  return  your 
work  without  examination,  I  have  looked  at  it,  and  feel  bound 
to  give  you  the  following  piece  of  advice,  which  I  fear  may  be 
distasteful,  as  good  counsel  generally  is. 

Lock  up  your  essay.  For  two  years — if  possible,  three — 
read  no  popular  expositions  of  science,  but  devote  yourself  to  a 
course  of  sound  practical  instruction  in  elementary  physics, 
chemistry,  and  biology. 

Then  re-read  your  essay;  do  with  it  as  you  think  best;  and, 
if  possible,  regard  a  little  more  kindly  than  you  are  likely  to  do 
at  present,  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  passage  from  a  letter  to  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker 
refers  to  a  striking  discovery  made  by  Dubois : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  Fed,  14,  1895. 
The  Dutchmen  seem  to  have  turned  up  something  like  the 
"  missing  link  "  in  Java,  according  to  a  paper  I  have  just  re- 
ceived from  Marsh.    I  expect  he  was  a  Socratic  party,  with  his 
hair  rather  low  down  on  his  forehead  and  warty  cheeks. 

Pithecanthropus  erectus  Dubois  (fossil) 

rather  Aino-ish  about  the  body,  small  in  the  calf,  and  cheese- 
cutting  in  the  shins.    Le  voici ! 
63 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

1895 

Two  months  of  almost  continuous  frost,  during  which 
the  thermometer  fell  below  zero,  marked  the  winter  of  iSg^r^ 
95.  Tough,  if  not  strong,  as  Huxley's  constitution  was, 
this  exceptional  cold,  so  lowering  to  the  vitality  of  age, 
accentuated  the  severity  of  the  illness  which  followed  in  the 
train  of  influenza,  and  at  last  undermined  even  his  powers 
of  resistance. 

But  until  the  influenza  seized  him,  he  was  more  than 
usually  vigorous  and  brilliant  He  was  fatigued,  but  not 
more  so  than  he  expected,  by  attending  a  deputation  to  the 
Prime  Minister  in  the  depth  of  January,  and  delivering  a 
speech  on  the  London  University  question ;  and  in  February 
he  was  induced  to  write  a  reply  to  the  attack  upon  agnosti- 
cism contained  in  Mr.  Arthur  Balfour's  Foundations  of 
Belief.  Into  this  he  threw  himself  with  great  energy,  all 
the  more  because  the  notices  in  the  daily  press  were  likely 
to  give  the  reading  public  a  wrong  impression  as  to  its 
polemic  against  his  own  position.  Mr.  Wilfrid  Ward  gives 
an  account  of  a  conversation  with  him  on  this  subject : — 

Some  one  had  sent  me  Mr.  A.  J.  Balfour's  book  on  the 
Foundations  of  Belief  early  in  February  1895.  We  were  very 
full  of  it,  and  it  was  the  theme  of  discussion  on  the  17th  of 
February,  when  two  friends  were  lunching  with  us.  Not  long 
after  luncheon,  Huxley  came  in,  and  seemed  in  extraordinary 
spirits.  He  began  talking  of  Erasmus  and  Luther,  expressing 
a  great  preference  for  Erasmus,  who  would,  he  said,  have  im- 
pregnated the  Church  with  culture,  and  brought  it  abreast  of  the 
thought  of  the  times,  while  Luther  concentrated  attention  on 

418 


i895  THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF  BELIEF  419 

individual  mystical  doctrines.  "  It  was  very  trying  for  Erasmus 
to  be  identified  with  Luther,  from  whom  he  differed  absolutely. 
A  man  ought  to  be  ready  to  endure  persecution  for  what  he 
does  hold;  but  it  is  hard  to  be  persecuted  for  what  you  don't 
hold."  I  said  that  I  thought  his  estimate  of  Erasmus's  attitude 
towards  the  Papacy  coincided  with  Professor  R.  C.  Jebb's.  He 
asked  if  I  could  lend  him  Jebb's  Rede  Lecture  on  the  subject. 
I  said  that  I  had  not  got  it  at  hand,  but  I  added,  "  I  can  lend 
you  another  book,  which  I  think  you  ought  to  read — Balfour's 
Foundations  of  Belief/' 

He  at  once  became  extremely  animated,  and  spoke  of  it  as 
those  who  have  read  his  criticisms,  published  in  the  following 
month,  would  expect.  "  You  need  not  lend  me  that.  I  have 
exercised  my  mind  with  it  a  good  deal  already.  Mr.  Balfour 
ought  to  have  acquainted  himself  with  the  opinions  of  those  he 
attacks.  One  has  no  objection  to  being  abused  for  what  one 
does  hold,  as  I  said  of  Erasmus ;  at  least,  one  is  prepared  to  put 
up  with  it.  An  attack  on  us  by  some  one  who  understood  our 
position  would  do  all  of  us  good — ^myself  included.  But  Mr. 
Balfour  has  acted  like  the  French  in  1870 :  he  has  gone  to  war 
without  any  ordnance  maps,  and  without  having  surveyed  the 
scene  of  the  campaign.  No  human  being  holds  the  opinions 
he  speaks  of  as  '  naturalism.'  He  is  a  good  debater.  He  knows 
the  value  of  a  word.  The  word  '  Naturalism '  has  a  bad  sound 
and  unpleasant  associations.  It  would  tell  against  us  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  so  it  will  with  his  readers.  '  Natural- 
ism *  contrasts  with  *  supernaturalism.'  He  has  not  only  attacked 
us  for  what  we  don't  hold,  but  he  has  been  good  enough  to  draw 
out  a  catechism  for  *  us  wicked  people,'  to  teach  us  what  we 
must  hold." 

It  was  rather  difficult  to  get  him  to  particulars,  but  we  did 
so  by  degrees.  He  said,  "  Balfour  uses  the  word  phenomena  as 
applying  simply  to  the  outer  world  and  not  to  the  inner  world. 
The  only  people  his  attack  would  hold  good  of  would  be  the 
Comtists,  who  deny  that  psychology  is  a  science.  They  may  be 
left  out  of  account.  They  advocate  the  crudest  eighteenth-cen- 
tury materialism.  All  the  empiricists,  from  Locke  onwards, 
make  the  observation  of  the  phenomena  of  the  mind  itself  quite 
separate  from  the  study  of  mere  sensation.  No  man  in  his 
senses  supposes  that  the  sense  of  beauty,  or  the  religious  feel- 
ings (this  with  a  courteous  bow  to  a  priest  who  was  present), 
or  the  sense  of  moral  obligation,  are  to  be  accounted  for  in  terms 
of  sensation,  or  come  to  us  through  sensation."    I  said  that,  as 


420 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiii 


I  understood  it,  I  did  not  think  Mr.  Balfour  supposed  they  would 
acknowledge  the  position  he  ascribed  to  them,  and  that  one  of 
his  complaints  was  that  they  did  not  work  out  their  premises 
to  their  logical  conclusions.  I  added  that  so  far  as  one  of  Mr. 
Balfour's  chief  points  was  concerned — the  existence  of  the 
external  world — Mill  was  almost  the  only  man  on  their  side  in 
this  century  who  had  faced  the  problem  frankly,  and  he  had 
been  driven  to  say  that  all  men  can  know  is  that  there  are 
"  permanent  possibilities  of  sensation."  He  did  not  seem  in- 
clined to  pursue  the  question  of  an  external  world,  but  said 
that  though  Mill's  "  logic  "  was  very  good,  empiricists  were  not 
bound  by  all  his  theories. 

He  characterised  the  book  as  a  very  good  and  even  brilliant 
piece  of  work  from  a  literary  point  of  view;  but  as  a  helpful 
contribution  to  the  great  controversy,  the  most  disappointing  he 
had  ever  read.  I  said,  "There  has  been  no  adverse  criticism  of  it 
yet."  He  answered  with  emphasis,  "  No !  but  there  soon  will  be,** 
"  From  you  ?  "  I  asked.    "  I  let  out  no  secrets,"  was  the  reply. 

He  then  talked  with  great  admiration  and  affection  of  Mr. 
Balfour's  brother,  Francis.  His  early  death,  and  W.  K.  Clif- 
ford's (Huxley  said),  had  been  the  greatest  loss  to  science — 
not  only  in  England,  but  in  the  world — in  our  time.  "  Half  a 
dozen  of  us  old  fogies  could  have  been  better  spared."  He  re- 
membered Frank  Balfour  as  a  boy  at  Eton,  and  saw  his  unusual 
talent  there.  "  Then  my  friend,  Michael  Foster,  took  him  up 
at  Cambridge,  and  found  out  that  he  had  real  genius  for  biology. 
I  used  to  say  there  was  science  in  the  blood,"  but  this  new  book 
of  his  brother's,  he  added,  smiling,  "  shows  I  was  wrong." 

Apropos  to  his  remark  about  the  Comtists,  one  of  the  com- 
pany pointed  out  that  in  later  life  Comte  recognised  a  science 
of  *"  the  individual,"  equivalent  to  what  Huxley  meant  by  psy- 
chology. "  That,"  he  replied,  "  was  due  to  the  influence  of  Clo- 
tilde  de  Vaux.  You  see,"  he  added,  "  with  a  kind  of  Sir  Charles 
Grandison  bow  to  my  wife,  "  what  power  your  sex  may  have." 
As  Huxley  was  going  out  of  the  house,  I  said  to  him  that  Father 
A.  B.  (the  priest  who  had  been  present)  had  not  expected  to 
find  himself  in  his  company.  "  No !  I  trust  he  had  plenty  of 
holy  water  with  him,"  was  the  reply. 

.  .  .  After  he  had  gone,  we  were  all  agreed  as  to  the  ex- 
traordinary vigour  and  brilliancy  he  had  shown.  Some  one 
said,  "  He  is  Hke  a  man  who  is  what  the  Scotch  call  *  fey.'  " 
We  laughed  at  the  idea,  but  we  naturally  recalled  the  remark 
later  on. 


i895  THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF  BELIEF  42 1 

The  story  of  how  the  article  was  written  is  told  in  the 
following  letters.  It  was  suggested  by  Mr.  Knowles,  and 
undertaken  after  perusal  of  the  review  of  the  book  in  the 
Times.  Huxley  intended  to  have  the  article  ready  for  the 
March  number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,  but  it  grew  longer 
than  he  had  meant  it  to  be,  and  partly  for  this  reason,  partly 
for  fear  lest  the  influenza,  then  raging  at  Eastbourne,  might 
prevent  him  from  revising  the  whole  thifig  at  once,  he  di- 
vided it  into  two  instalments.  He  writes  to  one  daughter 
on  March  i : — 

I  suppose  my  time  will  come ;  so  I  am  "  making  hay  while 
the  sun  shines  "  (in  point  of  fact  it  is  raining  and  blowing  a 
gale  outside)  and  finishing  my  counterblast  to  Balfour  before 
it  does  come. 

Love  to  all  you  poor  past  snivellers  from  an  expectant 
sniveller. 

And  to  another : — 

I  think  the  cavalry  charge  in  this  month's  Nineteenth  will 
amuse  you.  The  heavy  artillery  and  the  bayonets  will  be 
brought  into  play  next  month. 

Dean  Stanley  told  me  he  thought  being  made  a  bishop  de- 
stroyed a  man's  moral  courage.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the 
practice  of  the  methods  of  political  leaders  destroys  their  intel- 
lect for  all  serious  purposes. 

No  sooner  was  the  first  part  safely  sent  off  than  the 
contingency  he  had  feared  came  to  pass;  only,  instead  of 
the  influenza  meaning  incapacity  for  a  fortnight,  an  unlucky 
chill  brought  on  bronchitis  and  severe  lung  trouble.*  The 
second  part  of  the  article  was  never  fully  revised  for  press. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  February  8,  1895. 
My   dear   Knowles — Your   telegram   came   before   I   had 
looked  at  to-day's  Times  and  the  article  on  Balfour's  book,  so 
I  answered  with  hesitation. 

*  As  he  wrote  on  February  28  to  Sir  M.  Foster :  "If  I  could  com- 
pound for  a  few  hours'  neuralgia,  I  would  not  mind ;  but  those  long 
weeks  of  debility  make  me  very  shy  of  the  influenza  demon.  Here 
we  are  practically  isolated.  ...  I  once  asked  Gordon  why  he  didn't 
have  the  African  fever.  *  Well,'  he  said,  *  you  see,  fellows  think  they 
shall  have  it,  and  they  do.  I  didn't  think  so,  and  didn't  get  it.'  Ex- 
ercise your  thinking  faculty  to  that  extent." 


422  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiii 

Now  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  job  may  be  well  worth 
doing,  in  that  it  will  give  me  the  opportunity  of  emphasising  the 
distinction  between  the  view  I  hold  and  Spencer's,  and  perhaps 
of  proving  that  Balfour  is  an  agnostic  after  my  own  heart.  So 
please  send  the  book. 

Only  if  this  infernal  weather,  which  shrivels  me  up  soul  and 
body,  lasts,  I  do  not  know  how  long  I  may  be  over  the  business. 
However,  you  tell  me  to  take  my  own  time. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  *  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  February  i8,  1895. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  send  you  by  this  post  an  instalment 
(the  larger  moiety)  of  my  article,  which  I  should  be  glad  to 
have  set  up  at  once  in  slip,  and  sent  to  me  as  speedily  as  may  be. 
The  rest  shall  follow  in  the  course  of  the  next  two  or  three  days. 

I  am  rather  pleased  with  the  thing  myself,  so  it  is  probably 
not  so  very  good !  But  you  will  judge  for  yourself. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Hodeslea,  Eastbourne,  February  19,  1895. 

My  dear  Knowles — We  send  our  best  congratulations  to 
Mrs.  Knowles  and  yourself  on  the  birth  of  a  granddaughter.  I 
forget  whether  you  have  had  any  previous  experience  of  the 
"  Art  d'etre  Grandpere  "  or  not — but  I  can  assure  you,  from  14 
such  experiences,  that  it  is  easy  and  pleasant  of  acquirement, 
and  that  the  objects  of  it  are  veritable  "  articles  de  luxe,"  in- 
volving much  amusement  and  no  sort  of  responsibility  on  the 
part  of  the  possessor^ 

You  shall  have  the  rest  of  my  screed  by  to-morrow's  post. 
— Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  February  20,  1895. 

My  dear  Knowles — Seven  mortal  hours  have  I  been  hard  at 
work  this  day  to  try  to  keep  my  promise  to  you,  and  as  I  find 
that  impossible,  I  have  struck  work  and  will  see  Balfour  and  his 
Foundations,  and  even  that  ark  of  literature  the  Nineteenth,  at 
Ballywack,  before  I  do  any  more. 

But  the  whole  affair  shall  be  sent  by  a  morning's  post  to- 
morrow. I  have  the  proofs.  I  have  found  the  thing  getting 
too  long  for  one  paper,  and  requiring  far  more  care  than  I  could 
put  into  the  next  two  days — so  I  propose  to  divide  it,  if  you  see 
no  objection. 

And  there  is  another  reason  for  this  course.  Influenza  is 
raging  here.     I  hear  of  hundreds  of  cases,  and  if  it  comes  my 


i895  HIS   LAST   ILLNESS  423 

way,  as  it  did  before,  I  go  to  bed  and  stop  there — "  the  world 
forgetting  and  by  the  world  forgot " — until  I  am  killed  or  cured. 
So  you  would  not  get  your  article. 

As  it  stands,  it  is  not  a  bad  gambit.  We  will  play  the  rest 
of  the  game  afterwards,  D.V.  and  K.V. 

Hope  mother  and  baby  are  doing  well. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne, 
February  23,  1895,  12.30  p.m. 

My  dear  Knowles — I  have  just  played  and  won  as  hard  a 
match  against  time  as  I  ever  knew  in  the  days  of  my  youth. 
The  proofs,  happily,  arrived  by  the  first  post,  so  I  got  to  work  at 
them  before  9,  polished  them  off  by  12,  and  put  them  into  the 
post  (myself)  by  12.5.  So  you  ought  to  have  them  by  6  p.m. 
And,  to  make  your  mind  easy,  I  have  just  telegraphed  to  you  to 
say  so.  But,  Lord's  sake!  let  some  careful  eye  run  over  the 
part  of  which  I  have  had  no  revise — for  I  am  "  capable  de  tout " 
in  the  way  of  overlooking  errors. 

I  am  very  glad  you  like  the  thing.  The  second  instalment 
shall  be  no  worse. 

I  grieve  to  say  that  my  estimation  of  Balfour,  as  a  thinker, 
sinks  lower  and  lower,  the  further  I  go. 

God  help  the  people  who  think  his  book  an  important  con- 
tribution to  thought!  The  Gigadibsians  who  say  so  are  past 
divine  assistance ! 

We  are  very  glad  to  hear  the  grandchild  and  mother  are 
getting  on  so  well. — Ever  yours  very  truly, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  8,  1895. 

My  dear  Knowles — The  proofs  have  just  arrived,  but  I  am 
sorry  to  say  that  (I  believe  for  the  first  time  in  our  transactions) 
I  shall  have  to  disappoint  you. 

Just  after  I  had  sent  off  the  MS.  influenza  came  down  upon 
me  with  a  swoop.  I  went  to  bed  and  am  there  still,  with  no 
chance  of  quitting  it  in  a  hurry.  My  wife  is  in  the  same  case ; 
item  one  of  the  maids.  The  house  is  a  hospital,  and  by  great 
good  fortune  we  have  a  capital  nurse. 

Doctors  says  it's  a  mild  type,*  in  which  case  I  wonder  what 

*  '*  But  in  the  matter  of  aches  and  pains,  restless  paroxysms  of 
coughing  and  general  incapacity,  I  can  give  it  a  high  character  for 
efficiency."    (To  M.  Foster,  March  7.) 


424 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxin 


severe  types  may  be  like.     I  find  coughing  continuously   for 
fourteen  hours  or  so  a  queer  kind  of  mildness. 

Could  you  put  in  an  excuse  on  account  of  influenza? 

Can't  write  any  more. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  H. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  March  ig,  1895. 
My  dear  Knowles — I  am  making  use  of  the  pen  of  my  dear 
daughter  and  good  nurse,  in  the  first  place  to  thank  you  for  your 
cheque,  in  the  second  place  to  say  that  you  must  not  look  for 
the  article  this  month.  I  haven't  been  out  of  bed  since  the  ist, 
but  they  are  fighting  a  battle  with  bronchitis  over  my  body. — 
Ever  yours  very  faithfully.  For  T.  H.  H., 

I  Sophy  Huxley. 

The  next  four  months  were  a  period  of  painful  struggle 
against  disease,  borne  with  a  patience  and  gentleness  which 
was  rare  even  in  the  long  experience  of  the  trained  nurses 
who  tended  him.  To  natural  toughness  of  constitution  he 
added  a  power  of  will  unbroken  by  the  long  strain ;  and  for 
the  sake  of  others  to  whom  his  life  meant  so  much,  he  wished 
to  recover  and  willed  to  do  everything  towards  recovery. 
And  so  he  managed  to  throw  off  the  influenza  and  the 
severe  bronchitis  which  attended  it.  What  was  marvellous 
at  his  age,  and  indeed  would  scarcely  have  been  expected  in 
a  young  man,  most  serious  mischief  induced  by  the  bron- 
chitis disappeared.  By  May  he  was  strong  enough  to  walk 
from  the  terrace  to  the  lawn  and  his  beloved  saxifrages, 
and  to  remount  the  steps  to  the  house  without  help. 

But  though  the  original  attack  was  successfully  thrown 
off,  the  lung  trouble  had  affected  the  heart ;  and  in  his 
weakened  state,  renal  mischief  ensued.  Yet  he  held  out 
splendidly,  never  giving  in,  save  for  one  hour  of  utter  pros- 
tration, all  through  this  weary  length  of  sickness.  His  first 
recovery  strengthened  him  in  expecting  to  get  well  from 
the  second  attack.  And  on  June  10  he  writes  brightly 
enough  to  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  June  10,  1895. 

My  dear  old  Friend — It  was  cheering  to  get  your  letter 
and  to  hear  that  you  had  got  through  winter  and  diphtheria 
without  scathe. 

I  can't  say  very  much  for  myself  yet,  but  I  am  carried  down 


i895  HIS   LAST   ILLNESS  425 

to  a  tent  in  the  garden  every  day,  and  live  in  the  fresh  air  all 
I  can.  The  thing  that  keeps  me  back  is  an  irritability  of  the 
stomach  tending  to  the  rejection  of  all  solid  food.  However, 
I  think  I  am  slowly  getting  the  better  of  it — thanks  to  my  con- 
stitutional toughness  and  careful  nursing  and  dieting. 

What  has  Spencer  been  trampling  on  the  "  Pour  le  merite  " 
for,  when  he  accepted  the  Lyncei  ?  I  was  just  writing  to  con- 
gratulate him  when,  by  good  luck,  I  saw  he  had  refused ! 

The  beastly  nausea  which  comes  on  when  I  try  to  do  any- 
thing warns  me  to  stop. 

With  our  love  to  you  both — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  last  time  I  saw  him  was'  on  a  visit  to  Eastbourne 
from  June  22-24.  I  was  astonished  to  find  how  well  he 
looked  in  spite  of  all;  thin,  *  indeed,  but  browned  with  the 
endless  sunshine  of  the  1895  summer  as  he  sat  every  day 
in  the  verandah.  His  voice  was  still  fairly  strong;  he  was 
delighted  to  see  us  about  him,  and  was  cheerful,  even  merry 
at  times.  As  the  nurse  said,  she  could  not  expect  him  to 
recover,  but  he  did  not  look  like  a  dying  man.  When  I 
asked  him  how  he  was,  he  said,  "  A  mere  carcass,  which  has 
to  be  tended  by  other  people."  But  to  the  last  he  looked 
forward  to  recovery.  One  day  he  told  the  nurse  that  the 
doctors  must  be  wrong  about  the  renal  mischief,  for  if  they 
were  right,  he  ought  already  to  be  in  a  state  of  coma.  This 
was  precisely  what  they  found  most  astonishing  in  his  case ; 
it  seemed  as  if  the  mind,  the  strong  nervous  organisation, 
were  triumphing  over  the  shattered  body.  Herein  lay  one 
of  the  chief  hopes  of  ultimate  recovery. 

As  late  as  June  26  he  wrote,  with  shaky  handwriting 
but  indomitable  spirit,  to  relieve  his  old  friend  from  the 
anxiety  he  must  feel  from  the  newspaper  bulletins. 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  y««^  26,  1895. 

My  dear  Hooker — The  pessimistic  reports  of  my  condition 
which  have  got  into  the  papers  may  be  giving  you  unnecessary 
alarm  for  the  condition  of  your  old  comrade.  So  I  send  a  line  to 
tell  you  the  exact  state  of  affairs. 

There  is  kidney  mischief  going  on — and  it  is  accompanied 
by  very  distressing  attacks  of  nausea  and  vomiting,  which  some- 
times last  for  hours  and  make  life  a  burden. 


426  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiii 

However,  strength  keeps  up  very  well  considering,  and  of 
course  all  depends  upon  how  the  renal  business  goes.  At  present 
I  don't  feel  at  all  like  "  sending  in  my  checks,"  and  without 
being  over  sanguine  I  rather  incline  to  think  that  my  native 
toughness  will  get  the  best  of  it — albuminuria  or  otherwise. — 
Ever  your  faithful  friend,  T.  H.  H. 

Misfortunes  never  come  single.  My  son-in-law,  Eckersley, 
died  of  yellow  fever  the  other  day  at  San  Salvador — just  as  he 
was  going  to  take  up  an  appointment  at  Lima  worth  £1200  a 
year.  Rachel  and  her  three  children  have  but  the  slenderest 
provision. 

The  next  two  days  there  was  a  slight  improvement,  but 
on  the  third  morning  the  heart  began  to  fail.  The  great 
pain  subdued  by  anaesthetics,  he  lingered  on  about  seven 
hours,  and  at  half-past  three  on  June  29  passed  away  very 
quietly. 

He  was  buried  at  Finchley,  on  July  4,  beside  his  brother 
George  and  his  little  son  Noel,  under  the  shadow  of  the 
oak,  which  had  grown  up  into  a  stately  young  tree  from 
the  little  sapling  it  had  been  when  the  grave  of  his  first-born 
was  dug  beneath  it,  five  and  thirty  years  before. 

There  was  no  official  ceremony.  An  old  friend,  Mr. 
Llewellyn  Davies,  came  from  Kirby  Lonsdale  to  read  the 
service ;  the  many  friends  who  gathered  at  the  grave-side 
were  there  as  friends  mourning  the  death  of  a  friend,  and 
all  touched  with  the  same  sense  of  personal  loss. 

By  his  special  direction,  three  lines  from  a  poem  written 
by  his  wife,  were  inscribed  upon  his  tombstone — lines  in- 
spired by  his  own  robust  conviction  that,  all  question  of 
the  future  apart,  this  life  as  it  can  be  lived,  pain,  sorrow, 
and  evil  notwithstanding,  is  worth — and  well  worth — 
living : — 

Be  not  afraid,  ye  waiting  hearts  that  weep  ; 
For  still  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep, 
And  if  an  endless  sleep  He  wills,  so  best. 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

He  had  intellect  to  comprehend  his  highest  duty  distinctly,  and 
force  of  character  to  do  it;  which  of  us  dare  ask  for  a  higher 
summary  of  his  life  than  that? 

Such  was  Huxley's  epitaph  upon  Henslow;  it  was  the 
standard  which  he  endeavoured  to  reach  in  his  own  life.  It 
is  the  expression  of  that  passion  for  veracity  which  was 
perhaps  his  strongest  characteristic;  an  uncompromising 
passion  for  truth  in  thought,  which  would  admit  no  particle 
of  self-deception,  no  assertion  beyond  what  could  be  veri- 
fied; for  truth  in  act,  perfect  straightforwardness  and  sin- 
cerity, with  complete  disregard  of  personal  consequences 
for  uttering  unpalatable  fact. 

Truthfulness,  in  his  eyes,  was  the  cardinal  virtue,  with- 
out which  no  stable  society  can  exist.  Conviction,  sin- 
cerity, he  always  respected,  whether  on  his  own  side  or 
against  him.  Clever  men,  he  would  say,  are  as  common 
as  blackberries ;  the  rare  thing  is  to  find  a  good  one.  The 
lie  from  interested  motives  was  only  more  hateful  to  him 
than  the  lie  from  self-delusion  or  foggy  thinking.  With 
this  he  classed  the  "  sin  of  faith,"  as  he  called  it ;  that  form 
of  credence  which  does  not  fulfil  the  duty  of  making  a  right 
use  of  reason;  which  prostitutes  reason  by  giving  assent 
to  propositions  which  are  neither  self-evident  nor  adequately 
proved. 

This  principle  has  always  been  far  from  finding  universal 
acceptance.  One  of  his  theological  opponents  went  so  far 
as  to  affirm  that  a  doctrine  may  be  not  only  held,  but 
dogmatically  insisted  on,  by  a  teacher  who  is,  all  the  time, 
fully  aware  that  science  may  ultimately  prove  it  to  be  quite 
untenable. 

427 


428  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 

His  one  course  went  to  the  opposite  extreme.  In 
teaching,  where  it  was  possible  to  let  the  facts  speak  for 
themselves,  he  did  not  further  urge  their  bearing  upon  wider 
problems.  He  preferred  to  warn  beginners  against  drawing 
superficial  inferences  in  favour  of  his  own  general  theories, 
from  facts  the  real  meaning  of  which  was  not  immediately 
apparent.  Father  Hahn  (S.J.),  who  studied  under  him  in 
1876,  writes : — 

One  day  when  I  was  talking  to  him,  our  conversation  turned 
upon  evolution.  "  There  is  one  thing  about  you  I  cannot  under- 
stand," I  said,  "  and  I  should  like  a  word  in  explanation.  For 
several  months  now  I  have  been  attending  your  course,  and  I 
have  never  heard  you  mention  evolution,  while  in  your  public 
lectures  everywhere  you  openly  proclaim  yourself  an  evolu- 
tionist." * 

Now  it  would  be  impossible  to  imagine  a  better  opportunity 
for  insisting  on  evolution  than  his  lectures  on  comparative  anato- 
my, when  animals  are  set  side  by  side  in  respect  of  the  gradual 
development  of  functions.  But  Huxley  was  so  reserved  on  this 
subject  in  his  lectures  that,  speaking  one  day  of  a  species  form- 
ing a  transition  between  two  others,  he  immediately  added : — 

"  When  I  speak  of  transition  I  do  not  in  the  least  mean  to 
say  that  one  species  turned  into  a  second  to  develop  thereafter 
into  a  third.  What  I  mean  is,  that  the  characters  of  the  second 
are  intermediate  between  those  of  the  two  others.  It  is  as  if  I 
were  to  s^y  that  such  and  such  a  cathedral,  Canterbury,  for  ex- 
ample, is  a  transition  between  York  Minster  and  Westminster 
Abbey.  No  one  would  imagine,  on  hearing  the  word  transition, 
that  a  transmutation  of  these  buildings  actually  took  place  from 
one  into  another." 

But  to  return  to  his  reply : — 

**  Here  in  my  teaching  lectures  (he  said  to  me)  I  have  time 
to  put  the  facts  fully  before  a  trained  audience.  In  my  public 
lectures  I  am  obliged  to  pass  rapidly  over  the  facts,  and  I  put 
forward  my  personal  convictions.  And  it  is  for  this  that  people 
come  to  hear  me." 

As  to  the  question  whether  children  should  be  brought 
up  in  entire  disregard  to  the  beliefs  rejected  by  himself,  but 
still  current  among  the  mass  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  he 


*  Revue  des  Questions  Scientifiques  (Brussels),  for  October  1895. 


XXIV  HIS   NATURAL  TENDENCY   TO  VERACITY  429 

was  of  opinion  that  they  ought  to  know  "  the  mythology 
of  their  time  and  country,"  otherwise  one  would  at  the  best 
tend  to  make  young  prigs  of  them;  but  as  they  grew  up,' 
their  questions  should  be  answered  frankly.* 

The  natural  tendency  to  veracity,  strengthened  by  the 
observation  of  the  opposite  quality  in  one  with  whom  he 
was  early  brought  into  contact,  received  its  decisive  impulse, 
as  has  been  told  before,  from  Carlyle,  whose  writings  con- 
firmed and  established  his  youthful  reader  in  a  hatred  of 
shams  and  make-believes  equal  to  his  own. 

In  his  mind  no  compromise  was  possible  between  truth 
and  untruth,  f  Against  authorities  and  influences  he  pub- 
lished Man's  Place  in  Nature^  though  warned  by  his  friends 
that  to  do  so  meant  ruin  to  his  prospects.  When  he  had 
once  led  the  way  and  challenged  the  upholders  of  conven- 
tional orthodoxy,  others  backed  him  up  with  a  whole 
armoury  of  facts.  But  his  fight  was  as  far  as  possible  for 
the  truth  itself,  for  fact,  not  merely  for  controversial  victory 
or  personal  triumph.  Yet,  as  has  been  said  by  a  repre- 
sentative of  a  very  different  school  of  thought,  who  can 
wonder  that  he  should  have  hit  out  straight  from  the  shoul- 
der, in  reply  to  violent  or  insidious  attacks,  the  stupidity 
of  which  sometimes  merited  scorn  as  well  as  anger? 

In  his  theological  controversies  he  was  no  less  careful  to 
avoid  any  approach  to  mere  abuse  or  ribaldry  such  as  some 
opponents  of  Christian  dogma  indulged  in.  For  this  reason 
he  refused  to  interpose  in  the  well-known  Foote  case.  Dis- 
cussion, he  said,  could  be  carried  on  effectually  without 
deliberate  wounding  of  others'  feelings. 

*  The  wording  of  a  paragraph  in  Professor  Mivart*s  "  Reminis- 
cences "  {Nineteenth  Century ^  December  1897,  p.  993),  tends,  I  think,  to 
leave  a  wrong  impression  on  this  point. 

f  As  he  once  said,  when  urged  to  write  a  more  eulogistic  notice  of 
a  dead  friend  than  he  thought  deserved,  "The  only  serious  tempta- 
tions to  perjury  I  have  ever  known  have  arisen  out  of  the  desire  to  be 
of  some  comfort  to  people  I  cared  for  in  trouble.  If  there  are  such 
things  as  Plato's   'Royal  Lies'  they  are  surely  those  which  one  is 

tempted  to  tell  on  such  occasions.     Mrs. is  such  a  good  devoted 

little  woman,  and  I  am  so  doubtful  about  having  a  soul,  that  it  Seems 
absurd  to  hesitate  to  peril  it  for  her  satisfaction." 


430 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 


As  he  wrote  in  reply  to  an  appeal  for  help  in  this  case 
(March  12,  1883)  :— 

I  have  not  read  the  writings  for  which  Mr.  Foote  was 
prosecuted.  But,  unless  their  nature  has  been  grossly  misrepre- 
sented, I  cannot  say  that  I  feel  disposed  to  intervene  on  his 
behalf. 

I  am  ready  to  go  great  lengths  in  defence  of  freedom  of  dis- 
cussion, but  I  decline  to  admit  that  rightful  freedom  is  attacked, 
when  a  man  is  prevented  from  coarsely  and  brutally  insulting 
his  neighbours'  honest  beliefs. 

I  would  rather  make  an  effort  to  get  legal  penalties  inflicted 
with  equal  rigour  on  some  of  the  anti-scientific  blasphemers — 
who  are  quite  as  coarse  and  unmannerly  in  their  attacks  on 
opinions  worthy  of  all  respect  as  Mr.  Foote  can  possibly  have 
been. 

The  grand  result  of  his  determination  not  to  compromise 
where  truth  was  concerned,  was  the  securing  freedom  of 
thought  and  speech.  One  man  after  another,  looking  back 
on  his  work,  declares  that  if  we  can  say  what  we  think  now, 
it  is  because  he  fought  the  battle  of  freedom.  Not  indeed 
the  battle  of  toleration,  if  toleration  means  toleration  of  error 
for  its  own  sake.  Error,  he  thought,  ought  to  be  extirpated 
by  all  legitimate  means,  and  not  assisted  because  it  is  con- 
scientiously held. 

As  Lord  Hobhouse  wrote,  soon  after  his  death : — 

I  see  now  many  laudatory  notices  of  him  in  papers.  But  I 
have  not  seen,  and  I  think  the  younger  men  do  not  know,  that 
which  (apart  from  science)  I  should  put  forward  as  his  strong- 
est claim  to  reverence  and  gratitude;  and  that  is  the  steadfast 
courage  and  consummate  ability  with  which  he  fought  the  battle 
of  intellectual  freedom,  and  insisted  that  people  should  be 
allowed  to  speak  their  honest  convictions  without  being  op- 
pressed or  slandered  by  the  orthodox.  He  was  one  of  those, 
perhaps  the  very  foremost,  who  won  that  priceless  freedom  for 
us;  and,  as  is  too  common,  people  enter  into  the  labours  of  the 
brave,  and  do  not  even  know  what  their  elders  endured,  or  what 
has  been  done  for  themselves. 

With  this  went  a  proud  independence  of  spirit,  intolerant 
of  patronage,  careless  of  titular  honours,  indifferent  to  the 
accumulation  of  worldly  wealth.     He  cared  little  even  for 


XXIV  THE   HONESTY  OF   HIS   MOTIVES 


431 


recognition  of  his  work ;  "  If  I  had  £400  a  year,"  *  he  ex- 
claimed at  the  outset  of  his  career,  "  I  should  be  content  to 
work  anonymously  for  the  advancement  of  science."  The 
only  recognition  he  considered  worth  having,  was  that  of 
the  scientific  world;  yet  so  little  did  he  seek  it,  so  little 
insist  on  questions  of  priority,  that,  as  Professor  Howes 
tells  me,  there  are  at  South  Kensington  among  the  mass  of 
unpublished  drawings  from  dissections  made  by  him,  many 
which  show  that  he  had  arrived  at  discoveries  which  after- 
wards brought  credit  to  other  investigators. 

He  was  as  ready  to  disclaim  for  himself  any  merits  which 
really  belonged  to  his  predecessors,  whether  philosophical 
or  scientific.  He  was  too  well  read  in  their  works  not  to 
be  aware  of  the  debt  owed  them  by  his  own  generation, 
and  he  reminded  the  world  how  little  the  scientific  insight 
of  Goethe,  for  instance,  or  the  solid  labours  of  Buffon  or 
Reaumur  or  Lamarck,  deserved  oblivion. 

The  only  point  on  which  he  did  not  claim  recognition 
was  the  honesty  of  his  motives.  He  was  incapable  of  doing 
anything  underhand,  and  he  could  not  bear  even  the  appear- 
ance of  such  conduct  towards  his  friends,  or  those  with 
whom  he  had  business  relations.  In  such  cases  he  always 
took  the  bull  by  the  horns,  acknowledged  an  oversight  or 
explained  what  was  capable  of  misunderstanding.  The 
choice  between  Edward  Forbes  and  Hooker  for  the  Royal 
Society's  m^dal,  or  the  explanations  to  Mr.  Spencer  for  not 
joining  a  social  reform  league  of  which  the  latter  was  a 
prominent  member,  will  serve  as  instances. 

The  most  considerable  difference  I  note  among  men  (he 
wrote,)  is  not  in  their  readiness  to  fall  into  error,  but  in  their 
readiness  to  acknowledge  these  inevitable  lapses. 

For  himself,  he  let  no  personal  feelings  stand  in  the  way 
when  fact  negatived  his  theories :  once  convinced  that  they 
were  untenable,  he  gave  up  Bathybius  and  the  European 
origin  of  the  Horse  without  hesitation. 

The  regard  in  which  he  was  held  by  his  friends  was  such 

*  A  sum  which  might  have  supported  a  bachelor,  but  was  entirely 
inadequate  to  the  needs  of  a  large  family. 


432 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 


that  he  was  sometimes  appealed  to  by  both  parties  in  a  dis- 
pute. He  was  a  man  to  be  trusted  with  the  confidence  of 
his  friends.  "  Yes,  you  are  quite  right  about  '  loyal/  "  he 
writes  to  Mr.  Knowles,  "  I  love  my  friends  and  hate  my 
enemies — ^which  may  not  be  in  accordance  with  the  Gospel, 
but  I  have  found  it  a  good  wearing  creed  for  honest  men." 
But  he  only  regarded  as  "  enemies  "  those  whom  he  found 
to  be  double-dealers,  shufflers,  insincere,  untrustworthy;  a 
fair  opponent  he  respected,  and  he  could  agree  to  differ  with 
a  friend  without  altering  his  friendship. 

A  lifelong  impression  of  him  was  thus  summed  up  by 
Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace  :— 

I  find  that  he  was  my  junior  by  two  years,  yet  he  has  always 
seemed  to  me  to  be  the  older,  mainly  no  doubt,  because  from  the 
very  first  time  I  saw  him  (now  more  than  forty  years  ago),  I 
recognised  his  vast  superiority  in  ability,  in  knowledge,  and  in 
all  those  qualities,  that  enable  a  man  to  take  a  foremost  place  in 
the  world.  I  owe  him  thanks  for  much  kindness  and  for  assist- 
ance always  cordially  given,  and  although  we  had  many  differ- 
ences of  opinion,  I  never  received  from  him  a  harsh  or  unkind 
word. 

To  those  who  could  only  judge  him  from  his  contro- 
versial literature,  or  from  a  formal  business  meeting,  he 
often  appeared  hard  and  unsympathetic,  but  never  to  those 
who  saw  beneath  the  surface.  In  personal  intercourse,  if 
he  disliked  a  man — and  a  strong  individuality. has  strong 
likes  and  dislikes — he  would  merely  veil  his  feelings  under 
a  superabundant  politeness  of  the  chilliest  kind;  but  to  any 
one  admitted  to  his  friendship  he  was  sympathy  itself.  And 
thus,  although  I  have  heard  him  say  that  his  friends,  in 
the  fullest  sense  of  the  word,  could  be  reckoned  on  the 
fingers  of  one  hand,  the  impression  he  made  upon  all  who 
came  within  the  circle  of  his  friendship  was  such  that  quite 
a  number  felt  themselves  to  possess  his  intimacy,  and  one 
wrote,  after  his  death :  "  His  many  private  friends  are  al- 
most tempted  to  forget  the  public  loss,  in  thinking  of  the 
qualities  which  so  endeared  him  to  them  all." 

Both  the  speculative  and  the  practical  sides  of  his  in- 
tellect were  strongly  developed.    On  the  one  hand,  he  had 


XXIV  HIS   LOVE  OF   KNOWLEDGE 


433 


an  intense  love  of  knowledge,  the  desire  to  attain  true 
knowledge  of  facts,  and  to  organise  them  in  their  true  rela- 
tions. His  contributions  to  pure  science  never  fail  to  illus- 
trate both  these  tendencies.  His  earlier  researches  brought 
to  light  new  facts  in  animal  life,  and  new  ideas  as  to  the 
affinities  of  the  creatures  he  studied ;  his  later  investigations 
were  coloured  by  Darwin's  views,  and  in  return  contributed 
no  little  direct  evidence  in  favour  of  evolution.  But  while 
the  progress  of  the  evolution  theory  in  England  owed  more 
to  his  clear  and  unwearied  exposition  than  to  any  other 
cause,  while  from  the  first  he  had  indicated  the'  points,  such 
as  the  causes  of  sterility  and  variation,  which  must  be  cleared 
up  by  further  investigation  in  order  to  complete  the  Dar- 
winian theory,  he  did  not  add  another  to  the  many  specu- 
lations since  put  forward. 

On  the  other  hand,  intense  as  was  his  love  of  pure 
knowledge,  it  was  balanced  by  his  unceasing  desire  to  apply 
that  knowledge  in  the  guidance  of  life.  Always  feeling 
that  science  was  not  solely  for  the  men  of  science,  but  for 
the  people,  his  constant  object  was  to  help  the  struggling 
world  to  ideas  which  should  help  them  to  think  truly  and 
so  to  live  rightly.  It  is  still  true,  he  declared,  that  the  people 
perish  for  want  of  knowledge.  "  If  I  am  to  be  remem- 
bered at  all,"  he  writes  (see  Vol.  I.  p.  510),  "  I  should 
like  to  be  remembered  as  one  who  did  his  best  to  help 
the  people."  And  again,  he  says  in  his  Autobiographi- 
cal Sketch,  that  other  marks  of  success  were  as  nothing 
if  he  could  hope  that  he  "  had  somewhat  helped  that 
movement  of  opinion  which  has  been  called  the  New 
Reformation." 

This  kind  of  aim  in  his  work,  of  taking  up  the  most 
fruitful  idea  of  his  time  and  bringing  it  home  to  all,  is 
typified  by  his  remark  as  he  entered  New  York  harbour 
on  his  visit  to  America  in  1876,  and  watched  the  tugs  hard 
at  work  as  they  traversed  the  bay.  "  If  I  were  not  a  man," 
he  said,  "  I  think  I  should  like  to  be  a  tug." 

Two  incidents  may  be  cited  to  show  that  he  did  not 
entirely  fail  of  appreciation  among  those  whom  he  tried  to 
help.     Speaking  of  the  year  1874,  Professor  Mivart  writes 

64 


434  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 

(Reminiscences  of  T.  H.  Huxley,  Nineteenth  Century,  Dec. 
1897) :— 

I  recollect  going  with  him  and  Mr.  John  Westlake,  Q.C.,  to 
a  meeting  of  artisans  in  the  Blackfriars  Road,  to  whom  he  gave 
a  friendly  address.  He  felt  a  strong  interest  in  working-men, 
and  was  much  beloved  by  them.  On  one  occasion,  having  taken 
a  cab  home,  on  his  arrival  there,  when  he  held  out  his  fare  to 
the  cabman,  the  latter  replied,  "  Oh  no,  Professor,  I  have  had 
too  much  pleasure  and  profit  from  hearing  you  lecture  to  take 
any  money  from  your  pocket — ^proud  to  have  driven  you,  sir !  " 

The  other  is  from  a  letter  to  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  of 
September  20,  1892,  from  Mr.  Raymond  Blaythwayt,  on 
"  The  Uses  of  Sentiment " : — 

Only  to-day  I  had  a  most  striking  instance  of  sentiment  come 
beneath  my  notice.  I  was  about  to  enter  my  house,  when  a  plain, 
simply-dressed  working-man  came  up  to  me  with  a  note  in  his 
hand,  and  touching  his  hat,  he  said,  "  I  think  this  is  for  you, 
sir,"  and  then  he  added,  "  Will  you  give  me  the  envelope,  sir, 
as  a  great  favour?"  I  looked  at  it,  and  seeing  it  bore  the 
signature  of  Professor  Huxley,  I  replied,  "  Certainly  I  will ;  but 
why  do  you  ask  for  it  ?  "  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  it's  got  Professor 
Huxley's  signature,  and  it  will  be  something  for  me  to  show  my 
mates  and  keep  for  my  children.  He  have  done  me  and  my 
like  a  lot  of  good ;  no  man  more." 

In  practical  administration,  his  judgment  of  men,  his 
rapid  perception  of  the  essential  points  at  issue,  his  observ- 
ance of  the  necessary  limits  of  official  forms,  combined  with 
the  greatest  possible  elasticity  within  these  limits,  made  him 
extremely  successful. 

As  Professor  (writes  the  late  Professor  Jeffery  Parker), 
Huxley's  rule  was  characterised  by  what  is  undoubtedly  the  best 
policy  for  the  head  of  a  department.  To  a  new  subordinate, 
"  The  General,"  as  he  was  always  called,  was  rather  stern  and 
exacting,  but  when  once  he  was  convinced  that  his  man  was  to 
be  trusted,  he  practically  let  him  take  his  own  course;  never 
interfered  in  matters  of  detail,  accepted  suggestions  with  the 
greatest  courtesy  and  good  humour,  and  was  always  ready  with 
a  kindly  and  humorous  word  of  encouragement  in  times  of  dif- 
ficulty. I  was  once  grumbling  to  him  about  how  hard  it  was 
to  carry  on  the  work  of  the  laboratory  through  a  long  series  of 


i^xiv  AS   A   LECTURER  435 

November  fogs,  "  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days  ap- 
peared." "  Never  mind,  Parker,"  he  said,  instantly  capping  my 
quotation,  "  cast  four  anchors  out  of  the  stern  and  wish  for  day." 

Nothing,  indeed,  better  illustrates  this  willingness  to 
listen  to  suggested  improvements  than  the  inversion  of  the 
order  of  studies  in  the  biological  course  which  he  inaugu- 
rated in  1872,  namely,  the  substitution  of  the  anatomy  of  a 
vertebrate  for  the  microscopic  examination  of  a  unicellular 
organism  as  the  opening  study.  This  was  entirely  Parker's 
doing.  "  As  one  privileged  at  the  time  to  play  a  minor 
part,"  writes  Professor  Howes  {Nature^  January  6,  1898, 
p.  228),  "  I  well  recall  the  determination  in  Parker's  mind 
that  the  change  was  desirable,  and  in  Huxley's,  that  it  was 
not.  Again  and  again  did  Parker  appeal  in  vain,  until  at 
last,  on  the  morning  of  October  2,  1878,  he  triumphed." 

On  his  students  he  made  a  deep  and  lasting  impression. 

His  lectures  (writes  Jeffery  Parker)  were  like  his  writings, 
luminously  clear,  without  the  faintest  disposition  to  descend  to 
the  level  of  his  audience;  eloquent,  but  with  no  trace  of  the 
empty  rhetoric  which  so  often  does  duty  for  that  quality;  full 
of  a  high  seriousness,  but  with  no  suspicion  of  pedantry;  light- 
ened by  an  occasional  epigram  or  flashes  of  caustic  humour, 
but  with  none  of  the  small  jocularity  in  which  it  is  such  a 
temptation  to  a  lecturer  to  indulge.  As  one  listened  to  him  one 
felt  that  comparative  anatomy  was  indeed  worthy  of  the  de- 
votion of  a  life,  and  that  to  solve  a  morphological  problem  was 
as  fine  a  thing  as  to  win  a  battle.  He  was  an  admirable 
draughtsman,  and  his  blackboard  illustrations  were  always  a 
great  feature  of  his  lectures,  especially  when,  to  show  the  rela- 
tion of  two  animal  types,  he  would,  by  a  few  rapid  strokes  and 
smudges,  evolve  the  one  into  the  other  before  our  eyes.  He 
seemed  to  have  a  real  affection  for  some  of  the  specimens  illus- 
trating his  lectures,  and  would  handle  them  in  a  peculiarly  loving 
manner;  when  he  was  lecturing  on  man,  for  instance,  he  would 
sometimes  thrown  his  arm  over  his  shoulder  of  the  skeleton  be- 
side him  and  take  its  hand,  as  if  its  silent  companionship  were 
an  inspiration.  To  me  his  lectures  before  his  small  class  at 
Jermyn  Street  or  South  Kensington  were  almost  more  impres- 
sive than  the  discourses  at  the  Royal  Institution,  where  for  an 
hour  and  a  half  he  poured  forth  a  stream  of  dignified,  earnest, 


436  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 

sincere  words  in  perfect  literary  form,  and  without  the  assist- 
ance of  a  note. 

Another  description  is  from  the  pen  of  an  old  pupil  in 
the  autumn  of  1876,  Professor  H.  Fairfield  Osborn,  of 
Columbia  College : — 

Huxley,  as  a  teacher,  can  never  be  forgotten  by  any  of  his 
students.  He  entered  the  lecture-room  promptly  as  the  clock 
was  striking  nine,*  rather  quickly,  and  with  his  head  bent  for- 
ward "  as  if  oppressive  with  its  mind."  He  usually  glanced 
attention  to  his  class  of  about  ninety,  and  began  speaking  before 
he  reached  his  chair.  He  spoke  between  his  lips,  but  with  per- 
fectly clear  analysis,  with  thorough  interest,  and  with  philosophic 
insight  which  was  far  above  the  average  of  his  students.  He 
used  very  few  charts,  but  handled  the  chalk  with  great  skill, 
sketching  out  the  anatomy  of  an  animal  as  if  it  were  a  trans- 
parent object.  As  in  Darwin's  face,  and  as  in  Erasmus  Dar- 
win's or  Buffon's,  and  many  other  anatomists  with  a  strong 
sense  of  form,  his  eyes  were  heavily  overhung  by  a  projecting 
forehead  and  eyebrows,  and  seemed  at  times  to  look  inward. 
His  lips  were  firm  and  closely  set,  with  the  expression  of  posi- 
tiveness,  and  the  other  feature  which  most  marked  him  was  the 
very  heavy  mass  of  hair  falling  over  his  forehead,  which  he 
would  frequently  stroke  or  toss  back.  Occasionally  he  would 
light  up  the  monotony  of  anatomical  description  by  a  bit  of 
humour. 

Huxley  was  the  father  of  modern  laboratory  instruction ; 
but  in  1879  he  was  so  intensely  engrossed  with  his  own  re- 
searches that  he  very  seldom  came  through  the  laboratory,  which 
was  ably  directed  by  T.  Jeffery  Parker,  assisted  by  Howes  and 
W.  Newton  Parker,  all  of  whom  are  now  professors,  Howes 
having  succeeded  to  Huxley's  chair.  Each  visit,  therefore,  in- 
spired a  certain  amount  of  terror,  which  was  really  unwarranted, 
for  Huxley  always  spoke  in  the  kindest  tones  to  his  students, 
although  sometimes  he  could  not  resist  making  fun  at  their 
expense.  There  was  an  Irish  student  who  sat  in  front  of  me, 
whose  anatomical  drawings  in  water-colour  were  certainly  most 
remarkable  productions.  Huxley,  in  turning  over  his  drawing- 
book,  paused  at  a  large  blur,  under  which  was  carefully  in- 
scribed, "  sheep's  liver,"  and  smilingly  said,  "  I  am  glad  to  know 
that  is  a  liver;  it  reminds  me  as  much  of  Cologne  cathedral  in 

*  In  most  years  the  lectures  began  at  ten. 


XXIV  AS  A   LECTURER 


437 


a  fog  as  of  anything  I  have  ever  seen  before."  Fortunately 
the  nationality  of  the  student  enabled  him  to  fully  appreciate  the 
humour. 

The  same  note  is  sounded  in  Professor  Mivart's  descrip- 
tion of  these  lectures  in  his  Reminiscences : — 

The  great  value  of  Huxley's  anatomical  ideas,  and  the  ad- 
mirable clearness  with  which  he  explained  them,  led  me  in  the 
autumn  of  1861  to  seek  admission  as  a  student  to  his  course  of 
lectures  at  the  School  of  Mines  in  Jermyn  Street.  When  I 
entered  his  small  room  there  to  make  this  request,  he  was  giving 
the  finishing  touches  to  a  dissection  of  part  of  the  nervous  sys- 
tem of  a  skate,  worked  out  for  the  benefit  of  his  students.  He 
welcomed  my  application  with  the  greatest  cordiality,  save  that 
he  insisted  I  should  be  only  an  honorary  student,  or  rather, 
should  assist  at  his  lectures  as  a  friend.  I  availed  myself  of 
his  permission  on  the  very  next  day,  and  subsequently  attended 
almost  all  his  lectures  there  and  elsewhere,  so  that  he  one  day 
said  to  me,  "  I  shall  call  you  my  *  constant  reader.'  "  To  be  such 
a  reader  was  to  me  an  inestimable  privilege,  and  so  I  shall  ever 
consider  it.  I  have  heard  many  men  lecture,  but  I  never  heard 
anyone  lecture  as  did  Professor  Huxley.  He  was  my  very 
ideal  of  a  lecturer.  Distinct  in  utterance,  with  an  agreeable 
voice,  lucid  as  it  was  possible  to  be  in  exposition,  with  admirably 
chosen  language,  sufficiently  rapid,  yet  never  hurried,  often  im- 
pressive in  manner,  yet  never  otherwise  than  completely  natural, 
and  sometimes  allowing  his  audience  a  glimpse  of  that  rich  fund 
of  humour  ever  ready  to  well  forth  when  occasion  permitted, 
sometimes  accompanied  with  an  extra  gleam  in  his  bright  dark 
eyes,  sometimes  expressed  with  a  dryness  and  gravity  of  look 
which  gave  it  a  double  zest. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  first  time  I  saw  him  enter  his  lecture- 
room.  He  came  in  rapidly,  yet  without  bustle,  and  as  the  clock 
struck,  a  brief  glance  at  his  audience  and  then  at  once  to  work. 
He  had  the  excellent  habit  of  beginning  each  lecture  (save,  of 
course,  the  first)  with  a  recapitulation  of  the  main  points  of  the 
preceding  one.  The  course  was  amply  illustrated  by  excellent 
coloured  diagrams,  which,  I  believe,  he  had  made ;  but  still  more 
valuable  were  the  chalk  sketches  he  would  draw  on  the  black- 
board with  admirable  facility,  while  he  was  talking,  his  rapid, 
dexterous  strokes  quickly  building  up  an  organism  in  our  minds, 
simultaneously  through  ear  and  eye.  The  lecture  over,  he  was 
ever  ready  to  answer  questions,  and  I  often  admired  his  patience 


438 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 


in  explaining  points  which  there  was  no  excuse  for  anyone  not 
having  understood. 

Still  more  was  I  struck  with  the  great  pleasure  which  he 
showed  when  he  saw  that  some  special  points  of  his  teaching 
had  not  only  been  comprehended,  but  had  borne  fruit,  by  their 
suggestiveness  in  an  appreciative  mind. 

To  one  point  I  desire  specially  to  bear  witness.  There  were 
persons  who  dreade.d  sending  young  men  to  him,  fearing  lest 
their  young  friends'  religious  beliefs  should  be  upset  by  what 
they  might  hear  said.  For  years  I  attended  his  lectures,  but 
never  once  did  I  hear  him  make  use  of  his  position  as  a  teacher 
to  inculcate,  or  even  hint  at,  his  own  theological  views,  or  to 
depreciate  or  assail  what  might  be  supposed  to  be  the  religion  of 
his  hearers.  No  one  could  have  behaved  more  loyally  in  that 
respect,  and  a  proof  that  I  thought  so  is  that  I  subsequently 
sent  my  own  son  to  be  his  pupil  at  South  Kensington,  where 
his  experience  confirmed  what  had  previously  been  my  own. 

As  to  science,  I  learnt  more  from  him  in  two  years  than 
I  had  acquired  in  any  previous  decade  of  biological  study. 

The  picture  is  completed  by  Professor  Howes  in  the 
Students'  Magazine  of  the  Royal  College  of  Science : — 

As  a  class  lecturer  Huxley  was  facile  princeps,  and  only 
those  who  were  privileged  to  sit  under  him  can  form  a  concep- 
tion of  his  delivery.  Clear,  deliberate,  never  hesitant  nor  un- 
duly emphatic,  never  repetitional,  always  logical,  his  every  word 
told.  Great,  however,  as  were  his  class  lectures,  his  working- 
men's  were  greater.  Huxley  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  "  dis- 
tillatio  per  ascensum  "  of  scientific  knowledge  and  culture,  and 
spared  no  pains  in  approaching  the  artisan  and  so-called  "  work- 
ing classes."  He  gave  the  \yorkmen  of  his  best.  The  substance 
of  his  "  Man's  Place  in  Nature,"  one  of  the  most  successful  and 
popular  of  his  writings,  and  of  his  "  Crayfish,"  perhaps  the  most 
perfect  zoological  treatise  ever  published,  was  first  communi- 
cated to  them.  In  one  of  the  last  conversations  I  had  with  him, 
I  asked  his  views  on  the  desirability  of  discontinuing  the  work- 
men's lectures  at  Jermyn  Street,  since  the  development  of  work- 
ing-men's colleges  and  institutes  is  regarded  by  some  to  have 
rendered  their  continuance  unnecessary.  He  replied,  almost 
with  indignation,  "With  our  central  situation  and  resources, 
we  ought  to  be  in  a  position  to  give  the  workmen  that  which 
they  cannot  get  elsewhere,"  adding  that  he  would  deeply  deplore 
any  such  discontinuance. 


XXIV  AS  A   LECTURER 


439 


And  now,  a  word  or  two  concerning  Huxley's  personal  con- 
duct towards  his  pupils,  hearers,  and  subordinates. 

As  an  examiner  he  was  most  just,  aiming  only  to  ascertain 
the  examinee's  knowledge  of  fundamentals,  his  powers  of  work, 
and  the  manner  in  which  he  had  been  taught.  A  country  school 
lad  came  near  the  boundary  line  in  the  examination ;  though  gen- 
erally weak,  his  worst  fault  was  a  confusion  of  the  parts  of  the 
heart.  In  his  description  of  that  organ  he  had  transposed  the. 
valves.  On  appeal,  Huxley  let  him  through,  observing,  most 
characteristically,  "  Poor  little  beggar,  I  never  got  them  cor- 
rectly myself  until  I  reflected  that  a  bishop  was  never  in  the 
right."  *  Again,  a  student  of  more  advanced  years,  of  the 
"  mugging'"  type,  who  had  come  off  with  flying  colours  in  an 
elementary  examination,  showed  signs  of  uneasiness  as  the  ad- 
vanced one  approached.  "  Stick  an  observation  into  him,"  said 
Huxley.  It  was  stuck,  and  acted  like  a  stiletto,  a  jump  into 
the  air  and  utter  collapse  being  the  result. 

With  his  hearers  Huxley  was  most  sympathetic.  He  always 
assumed  absolute  ignorance  on  their  part,  and  took  nothing  for 
granted.f  When  time  permitted,  he  would  remain  after  a  lec- 
ture to  answer  questions;  and  in  connection  with  his  so  doing 
his  wonderful  power  of  gauging  and  rising  to  a  situation,  once 
came  out  most  forcibly.  Turning  to  a  student,  he  asked,  "  Well, 
I  hope  you  understand  it  all."  "  All,  sir,  but  one  part,  during 
which  you  stood  between  me  and  the  blackboard,"  was  the  reply : 
the  rejoinder,  "  I  did  my  best  to  make  myself  clear,  but  could 
not  render  myself  transparent."  Quick  of  comprehension  and 
of  action,  he  would  stand  no  nonsense.  The  would-be  teacher 
who,  wholly  unfitted  by  nature  for  educational  work,  was  mo- 
mentarily dismissed,  realised  this,  let  us  hope  to  his  advantage. 
And  the  man  suspected  of  taking  notes  of  Huxley's  lectures  for 
publication  unauthorised,  probably  learned  the  lesson  of  his  life, 
on  being  reminded  that,  in  the  first  place,  a  lecture  was  the  prop- 
erty of  the  person  who  delivered  it,  and,  in  the  second,  he  was 
not  the  first  person  who  had  mistaken  aspiration  for  inspiration. 

Though  candid,  Huxley  was  never  unkind.  .  .  . 

Huxley  never  forgot  a  kindly  action,  never  forsook  a  friend, 
nor  allowed  a  labour  to  go  unrewarded.  In  testimony  to  his 
sympathy  to  those  about  him  and  his  self-sacrifice  for  the  cause 
of  science,  it  may  be  stated  that  in  the  old  days,  when  the  pro- 

*  The  **  mitral "  valve  being  on  the  left  side. 

t  This  was  a  maxim  on  lecturing,  adopted  from  Faraday. 


440  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  char 

feasors  took  the  fees  and  disbursed  the  working  expenses  of  the 
laboratories,  he,  doing  this  at  a  loss,  would  refund  the  fees  of 
students  whose  position,  from  friendship  or  special  circum- 
stances, was  exceptional. 

As  for  his  lectures  and  addresses  to  the  public,  they 
used  to  be  thronged  by  crowds  of  attentive  listeners. 

Huxley's  public  addresses  (writes  Professor  Osborn),  al- 
ways gave  me  the  impression  of  being  largely  impromptu;  but 
he  once  told  me :  ^^  I  always  think  out  carefully  every  word  I  am 
going  to  say.  There  is  no  greater  danger  than  the  so-called 
impiration  of  the  moment,  which  leads  you  to  say  something 
which  is  not  exactly  true,  or  which  you  would  regret  after- 
wards.*' 

Mr.  G.  W.  Smalley  has  also  left  a  striking  description 
of  him  as  a  lecturer  in  the  seventies  and  early  eighties* 

I  used  always  to  admire  the  simple  and  business-like  way  in 
which  Huxley  made  his  entry  on  great  occasions.  He  hated  any- 
thing like  display,  and  would  have  none  of  it.  At  the  Royal 
Institution,  more  than  almost  anywhere  else,  the  lecturer,  on 
whom  the  concentric  circles  of  spectators  in  their  steep  amphi- 
theatre look  down,  focuses  the  gaze.  Huxley  never  seemed 
aware  that  anybody  was  looking  at  him.  From  self-conscious- 
ness he  was,  here  as  elsewhere,  singularly  free,  as  from  self- 
assertion.  He  walked  in  through  the  door  on  the  left,  as  if  he 
were  entering  his  own  laboratory.  In  these  days  he  bore 
scarcely  a  mark  of  age.  He  was  in  the  full  vigour  of  manhood 
and  looked  the  man  he  was.  Faultlessly  dressed — the  rule  in 
the  Royal  Institution  is  evening  costume — with  a  firm  step  and 
easy  bearing,  he  took  his  place  apparently  without  a  thought 
of  the  people  who  were  cheering  him.  To  him  it  was  an  anni- 
versary. He  looked,  and  he  probably  was,  the  master.  Sur- 
rounded as  he  was  by  the  celebrities  of  science  and  the  orna- 
ments of  London  drawing-rooms,  there  was  none  who  had  quite 
the  same  kind  of  intellectual  ascendancy  which  belonged  to  him. 
The  square  forehead,  the  square  jaw,  the  tense  lines  of  the 
mouth,  the  deep  flashing  dark  eyes,  the  impression  of  something 
more  than  strength  he  gave  you,  an  impression  of  sincerity,  of 
solid  force,  of  immovability,  yet  with  the  gentleness  arising 
from  the  serene  consciousness  of  his  strength — all  this  belonged 
to  Huxley  and  to  him  alone.  The  first  glance  magnetised  his 
audience.    The  eyes  were  those  of  one  accustomed  to  command, 


XXIV  HIS   METHOD  OF  WORK  441 

of  one  having  authority,  and  not  fearing  on  occasion  to  use  it. 
The  hair  swept  carelessly  away  from  the  broad  forehead  and 
grew  rather  long  behind,  yet  the  length  did  not  suggest,  as  it 
often  does,  effeminacy.  He  was  masculine  in  everything — ^look, 
gesture,  speech.  Sparing  of  gesture,  sparing  of  emphasis,  care- 
less of  mere  rhetorical  or  oratorical  art,  he  had  nevertheless 
the  secret  of  the  highest  art  of  all,  whether  in  oratory  or  what- 
ever else — he  had  simplicity.  The  force  was  in  the  thought 
and  the  diction,  and  he  needed  no  other.  The  voice  was  rather 
deep,  low,  but  quite  audible,  at  times  sonorous,  and  always  full. 
He  used  the  chest-notes.  His  manner  here,  in  the  presence  of 
this  select  and  rather  limited  audience — for  the  theatre  of  the 
Royal  Institution  holds,  I  think,  less  than  a  thousand  people — 
was  exactly  the  same  as  before  a  great  company  whom  he  ad- 
dressed at  (Liverpool),  as  President  of  the  British  Association 
for  the  Advancement  of  Science.  I  remember  going  late  to 
that,  and  having  to  sit  far  back,  yet  hearing  every  word  easily; 
and  there  too  the  feeling  was  the  same,  that  he  had  mastered 
his  audience,  taken  possession  of  them,  and  held  them  to  the 
end  in  an  unrelaxing  grip,  as  a  great  actor  at  his  best  does. 
There  was  nothing  of  the  actor  about  him,  except  that  he  knew 
how  to  stand  still,  but  masterful  he  ever  was. 

Up  to  the  time  of  his  last  illness,  he  regularly  break- 
fasted at  eight,  and  avoided,  as  far  as  possible,  going  out 
to  that  meal,  a  "  detestable  habit "  as  he  called  it,  which  put 
him  off  for  the  whole  day.  He  left  the  house  about  nine, 
and  from  that  time  till  midnight  at  earliest  was  incessantly 
busy.  His  regular  lectures  involved  an  immensity  of  labour, 
for  he  would  never  make  a  statement  in  them  which  he 
had  not  personally  verified  by  experiment.  In  the  Jermyn 
Street  days  he  habitually  made  preparations  to  illustrate 
the  points  on  which  he  was  lecturing,  for  his  students  had 
no  laboratory  in  which  to  work  out  the  things  for  them- 
selves. His  lectures  to  working-men  also  involved  as  much 
careful  preparation  as  the  more  conspicuous  discourses  at 
the  Royal  Institution. 

This  thoroughness  of  preparation  had  no  less  effect  on 
the  teacher  than  on  the  taught.    He  writes  to  an  old  pupil : — 

It  is  pleasant  when  the  "  bread  cast  upon  the  water  "  returns 
after  many  days;  and  if  the  crumbs  given  in  my  lectures  have 


442 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 


had  anything  to  do  with  the  success  on  which  I  congratulate 
you,  I  am  very  glad. 

I  used  to  say  of  my  own  lectures  that  if  nobody  else  learned 
anything  from  them,  I  did ;  because  I  always  took  a  great  deal  of 
pains  over  them.  But  it  is  none  the  less  satisfactory  to  find  that 
there  were  other  learners. 

As  for  the  ordinary  course  of  a  day's  work,  the  more 
fitful  energy  and  useless  mornings  of  the  earliest  period  in 
Londgn  were  soon  left  behind.  He  was  never  one  of  those 
portentously  early  risers  who  do  a  fair  day's  work  before 
other  people  are  up ;  there  was  only  one  period,  about  1873, 
when  he  had  to  be  specially  careful  of  his  health,  and, 
under  Sir  Andrew  Clark's  regime,  took  riding  exercise  for 
an  hour  each  day  before  starting  for  South  Kensington, 
that  he  records  the  fact  of  doing  any  work  before  breakfast, 
and  that  was  letter-writing. 

Much  of  the  day  during  the  session,  and  still  more  when 
his  lectures  were  over,  would  thus  be  spent  in  original  re- 
search, or  in  the  examination  and  description  of  fossils  in 
his  official  duty  as  Paleontologist  to  the  Survey.  As  often 
as  not,  there  would  be  a  sitting  of  some  Royal  Commission 
to  attend;  committees  of  some  learned  society;  meetings 
or  dinners  in  the  evening ;  if  not,  there  would  be  an  article 
to  write  or  proofs  to  correct.  Indeed,  the  greater  part  of 
the  work  by  which  the  world  knows  him  best  was  done 
after  dinner,  and  after  a  long  day's  work  in  the  lecture- 
room  and  laboratory. 

He  possessed  a  wonderful  faculty  for  tearing  out  the 
heart  of  a  book,  reading  it  through  at  a  gallop,  but  knowing 
what  it  said  on  all  the  points  that  interested  him.  Of  verbal 
memory  he  had  very  little ;  in  spite  of  all  his  reading  I 
do  not  believe  he  knew  half  a  dozen  consecutive  lines  of 
poetry  by  heart.  What  he  did  know  was  the  substance  of 
what  an  author  had  written ;  how  it  fitted  into  his  own 
scheme  of  knowledge;  and  where  to  find  any  point  again 
when  he  wished  to  cite  it. 

In  his  biological  studies  his  immense  knowledge  was 
firmly  fixed  in  his  mind  by  practical  investigation ;  as  is 
said  above,  he  would  take  at  second  hand  nothing  for  which 


XXIV  LOVE   OF  ART  443 

he  vouched  in  his  teaching,  and  was  always  ready  to  repeat 
for  himself  the  experiments  of  others,  which  determined 
questions  of  interest  to  him.  The  citations,  analyses,  maps, 
with  which  he  frequently  accompanied  his  reading,  were  all 
part  of  the  same  method  of  acquiring  facts  and  setting  them 
in  order  within  his  mind.  So  careful,  indeed,  was  he  in 
giving  nothing  at  second  hand,  that  one  of  his  scientific 
friends  reproached  him  with  wasting  his  time  upon  un- 
necessary scientific  work,  to  which  competent  investigators 
had  already  given  the  stamp  of  their  authority.     *'  Poor 

,"  was  his  comment  afterwards,  **  if  that  is  his  own 

practice,  his  work  will  never  live."  On  the  literary  side, 
he  was  omnivorous — consuming  everything,  as  Mr.  Spencer 
put  it,  from  fairy  tales  to  the  last  volume  on  metaphysics. 

Unlike  Darwin,  to  whom  scientific  research  was  at 
length  the  only  thing  engrossing  enough  to  make  him 
oblivious  of  his  never-ending  ill-health,  to  the  gradual  ex- 
clusion of  other  interests,  literary  and  artistic,  Huxley  never 
lost  his  delight  in  literature  or  in  art.  He  had  a  keen  eye 
for  a  picture  or  a  piece  of  sculpture,  for,  in  addition  to  the 
draughtsman's  and  anatomist's  sense  of  form,  he  had  a 
strong  sense  of  colour.  To  good  music  he  was  always  sus- 
ceptible.* He  played  no  instrument;  as  a  young  man, 
however,  he  used  to  sing  a  little,  but  his  voice,  though 
true,  was  never  strong.  But  he  had  small  leisure  to  devote 
to  art.  On  his  holidays  he  would  sometimes  sketch  with 
a  firm  and  rapid  touch.  His  illustrations  to  the  Cruise  of 
the  Rattlesnake  show  what  his  untrained  capacities  were. 
But  to  go  to  a  concert  or  opera  was  rare  after  middle  life ; 
to  go  to  the  theatre  rarer  still,  much  as  he  appreciated  a 
good  play.  His  time  was  too  deeply  mortgaged;  and  in 
later  life,  the  deafness  which  grew  upon  him  added  a  new 
difficulty. 

In  poetry  he  was  sensitive  both  to  matter  and  form. 
One  school  of  modern  poetry  he  dismissed  as  "  sensuous 

*  To  one  breaking  in  upon  him  at  certain  afternoon  hours  in  his 
room  at  South  Kensington,  **a  whiff  of  the  pipe"  (writes  Professor 
Howes),  **  and  a  snatch  of  some  choice  melody  or  a  Bach's  fugue,  were 
the  not  infrequent  Welcome." 


444  LI^E  O^  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap. 

caterwauling'':  a  busy  man,  time  and  patience  failed  him 
to  wade  through  the  trivial  discursiveness  of  so  much  of 
Wordsworth's  verse;  thus  unfortunately  he  never  realised 
the  full  value  of  a  poet  in  whom  the  mass  of  ore  bears  so 
large  a  proportion  to  the  pure  metal.  Shelley  was  too 
diffuse  to  be  among  his  first  favourites;  but  for  simple 
beauty,  Keats ;  for  that,  and  for  the  comprehension  of  the 
meaning  of  modem  science,  Tennyson ;  for  strength  and 
feeling.  Browning  as  represented  by  his  earlier  poems. 
These  Were  the  favourites  among  the  modems.  He.  knew 
his  eighteenth-century  classics,  but  knew  better  his  Milton 
and  his  Shakespeare,  to  whom  he  turned  with  ever-increas- 
ing satisfaction,  as  men  do  who  have  lived  a  full  life. 

His  early  acquaintance  with  German  had  given  him  a 
lasting  admiration  of  the  greatest  representatives  of  German 
literature,  Goethe  above  all,  in  whose  writings  he  found  a 
moral  grandeur  to  be  ranked  with  that  of  the  Hebrew 
prophets.  Eager  to  read  Dante  in  the  original,  he  spent 
much  of  his  leisure  on  board  the  Rattlesnake  in  making  out 
the  Italian  with  the  aid  of  a  dictionary,  and  in  this  way  came 
to  know  the  beauties  of  the  Divina  Comtnedia.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  was  a  scientific  interest  which  led  him  in  later  life 
to  take  up  his  Greek,  though  one  use  he  put  it  to  was  to 
read  Homer  in  the  original. 

Though  he  was  a  great  novel-reader,  and,  as  he  grew 
older,  would  always  have  a  novel  ready  to  take  up  for  a 
while  in  the  evening,  his  chief  reading,  in  German  and 
French  as  well  as  English,  was  philosophy  and  history. 

His  recreations  were,  as  a  rule,  literary,  and  consisted 
in  a  change  of  mental  occupation.  The  only  times  I  can 
remember  his  playing  an  outdoor  game  are  in  the  late 
sixties,  when  he  started  his  elder  children  at  cricket  on  the 
common  at  Littlehampton,  and  in  1871  when  he  played  golf 
at  St.  Andrews.  When  first  married,  he  promised  his  wife 
to  reserve  Saturday  afternoons  for  recreation,  and  con- 
stantly went  with  her  to  the  Ella  concerts.  She  persuaded 
him  also  to  take  exercise  by  playing  fives  with  Mr.  Herbert 
Spencer ;  but  the  pressure  of  work  before  long  absorbed  all 
his  time.    In  his  youth  he  was  extremely  fond  of  chess,  and 


XXIV  SUNDAY   EVENING  GATHERINGS 


445 


played  eagerly  with  his  fellow-students  at  Charing  Cross 
Hospital  or  with  his  messmates  on  the  Rattlesnake.  But 
after  he  taught  me  the  game,  somewhere  about  1869  or 
1870,  I  do  not  think  he  ever  found  time  for  it  again. 

His  principal  exercise  was  walking  during  the  holidays. 
In  his  earlier  days  especially,  when  overwrought  by  the 
stress  of  his  life  in  London,  he  used  to  go  off  with  a  friend 
for  a  week's  walking  tour  in  Wales  or  the  Lakes,  in  Brittany 
or  the  Eifel  country,  or  in  summer  for  a  longer  trip  to 
Switzerland.  In  this  way  he  "  burnt  up  the  waste  products," 
as  he  would  say,  of  his  town  life,  and  came  back  fresh  for 
a  new  spell  of  unintermittent  work. 

But,  on  the  whole,  the  amount  of  exercise  he  took  was 
insufficient  for  his  bodily  needs.  Even  the  riding  pre- 
scribed for  him  when  he  first  broke  down,  became  irksome, 
and  was  not  continued  very  long,  although  his  bodily  ma- 
chine was  such  as  could  only  be  kept  in  perfect  working 
order  by  more  exercise  than  he  would  give.  His  physique 
was  not  adapted  to  bum  up  the  waste  without  special 
stimulus.  I  remember  once,  as  he  and  I  were  walking  up 
Beachy  Head,  we  passed  a  man  with  a  splendid  big  chest. 
"  Ah,"  said  my  father  regretfully,  "  if  I  had  only  had  a  chest 
like  that,  what  a  lot  of  work  I  could  have  done." 

When,  in  1872,  he  built  his  new  house  in  Marlborough 
Place,  my  father  bargained  for  two  points;  one,  that  each 
member  of  the  family  should  have  a  corner  of  his  or  her 
own,  where,  as  he  used  to  say,  it  would  be  possible  to 
"  consume  their  own  smoke  " ;  the  other,  that  the  common 
living-rooms  should  be  of  ample  size.  Thus  from  1874 
onwards  he  was  enabled  to  see  something  of  his  many 
friends  who  would  come  as  far  as  St.  John's  Wood  on  a 
Sunday  evening.  No  formal  invitation  for  a  special  day 
was  needed.  The  guests  came,  sometimes  more,  sometimes 
fewer,  as  on  any  ordinary  at-home  day.  There  was  a  simple 
informal  meal  at  6.30  or  7  o'clock,  which  called  itself  by 
no  more  dignified  name  than  high  tea — was,  in  fact,  a  cold 
supper  with  varying  possibilities  in  the  direction  of  dinner 
or  tea.  It  was  a  chance  medley  of  old  and  young — friends 
of  the  parents  and  friends  of  the  children,  but  all  ultimately 


y 


445  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  ckaf. 

centring  round  the  host  himself,  whose  end  of  the  tabk 
never  flag^fed.for  conversation,  grave  or  gay. 

Afterwards  talk  would  go  on  in  the  drawing-room,  or, 
on  warm  summer  evenings,  in  the  garden — nothing  very 
extensive,  but  boasting  a  lawn  with  an  old  sq[>ple-tree  at  the 
further  end,  and  in  the  borders  such  flowers  and  trees  as 
endure  London  air.  Lata*  on,  there  was  almost  sure  to  be 
some  music,  to  which  my  faither  himself  was  devoted.  His 
daughters  sang;  a  musical  friend  would  be  there;  Mr. 
Herbert  Spencer,  a  frequent  visitor,  was  an  authority  00 
music  Once  only  do  I  recollect  any  other  form  of  enter- 
tainment, and  that  was  an  occasion  when  Sir  Henry  Irving, 
then  not  long  established  at  the  Lyceum,  was  present  and 
recited  '^  Eugene  Aram  "  with  great  effect 

In  his  London  LeHers  Mr.  G.  W.  Smalley  "^  has  recorded 
his  impressions  of  these  evenings,  at  which  he  was  often 
presents- 
There  used  to  be  Sunday  evening  dinners  and  parties  in 
Marlborough  Place,  to  winch  people  from  many  other  worlds 
than  those  of  abstract  science  were  bidden;  where  talk  was  to 
be  heard  of  ai  kind  rare  in  any  world  It  was  scientific  at  times, 
but  subdued  to  ti^e  necessities  of  the  occasion;  speculative,  yet 
kept  within  such  bounds  diat  bishop  or  archbbhop  might  have 
listened  without  offence;  political  even,  and  still  not  common- 
place; literary  without  pretence,  and  when  artistic,  free  from 
affectation. 

There  and  elsewhere  Mr.  Huxley  easily  took  the  lead  if  he 
cared  to,  or  if  challenged.  Nobody  was  more  ready  in  a  greater 
variety  of  topics,  and  if  they  were  scientific  it  was  almost  always 
another  who  introduced  them.  Unlike  some  of  his  comrades  of 
the  Royal  Society,  he  was  of  opinion  that  man  does  not  live  by 
science  alone,  and  nothing  came  amiss  to  him.  All  his  life  long 
he  has  been  in  the  front  of  the  battle  that  has  raged  between  sci- 
ence and — ^not  religion,  but  theology  in  its  more  dogmatic  form. 
Even  in  private  the  alarm  of  war  is  sometimes  heard,  and  Mr. 
Huxley  is  not  a  whit  less  formidable  as  a  disputant  across  the 
table  than  with  pen  in  hand.  Yet  an  angry  man  must  be  very 
angry  indeed  before  he  could  be  angry  with  this  adversary.    He 

*  Another  interesting  account  from  the  same  pen  is  to  be  found  in 
the  article  **  Mr.  Huxley,*'  Scribner*s  Magazine^  October  1895. 


XXIV  PERSONAL   IMPRESSIONS  447 

disarmed  his  enemies  with  an  amiable  grace  that  made  defeat 
endurable  if  not  entirely  delightful. 

As  for  his  method  of  handling  scientific  subjects  in 
conversation : — 

He  has  the  same  quality,  the  same  luminous  style  of  exposi- 
tion, with  which  his  printed  books  have  made  all  readers  in 
America  and  England  familiar.  Yet  it  has  more  than  that. 
You  cannot  listen  to  him  without  thinking  more  of  the  speaker 
than  of  his  science,  more  of  the  solid  beautiful  nature  than  of 
the  intellectual  gifts,  more  of  his  manly  simplicity  and  sincerity 
than  of  all  his  knowledge  and  his  long  services. 

But  his  personality  left  the  deepest  impression,  perhaps, 
upon  those  who  studied  under  him  and  worked  with  him 
longest,  before  taking  their  place  elsewhere  in  the  front 
ranks  of  biological  science. 

With  him  (Professor  A.  Hubrecht  *  writes),  we  his  younger 
disciples,  always  felt  that  in  acute  criticism  and  vast  learning 
nobody  surpassed  him,  but  still  what  we  yet  more  admired  than 
his  learning  was  his  wisdom.  It  was  always  a  delight  to  read 
any  new  article  or  essay  from  his  pen,  but  it  was  an  ever  so 
much  higher  delight  to  hear  him  talk  for  five  minutes.  His  was 
the  most  beautiful  and  the  most  manly  intellect  1  ever  knew  of. 

So,  too.  Professor  E.  Ray  Lankester: — 

There  has  been  no  man  or  woman  whom  I  have  met  on  my 
journey  through  life,  whom  1  have  loved  and  regarded  as  1  have 
him,  and  I  feel  that  the  world  has  shrunk  and  become  a  poor 
thing,  now  that  his  splendid  spirit  and  delightful  presence  are 
gone  from  it.  Ever  since  I  was  a  little  boy  he  has  been  my  ideal 
and  hero. 

While  the  late  Jeffery  Parker  concludes  his  Recollec- 
tions with  these  words: — 

Whether  a  professor  is  usually  a  hero  to  his  demonstrator  I 
cannot  say;  I  only  know  that,  looking  back  across  an  interval 
of  many  years  and  a  distance  of  half  the  circumference  of  the 
globe,  1  have  never  ceased  to  be  impressed  with  the  manliness 
and  sincerity  of  his  character,  his  complete  honesty  of  purpose. 


Of  Utrecht  University. 


448  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  crap,  xjot 

hia  hig^  moril  standard.  Us  soom  of  eveiytfaiiig  mean  or  shifty, 
his  firm  determination  to  speak  what  he  held  to  be  trutli  at 
whatever  cost  of  popularity.  And  for  these  things  "  I  loved  the 
man,  and  do  honour  to  his  memory,  on  this  side  idolatry,  as 
much  as  any.'* 

Even  those  ^o  scarcely  knew  him  apart  from  his  books, 
underwent  the  iiifluence  of  that  '"determination  to  speak 
what  he  held  to  be  truth."  I  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to 
quote  in  illustration  two  passa^^es  from  letters  to  myself-— 
(Mie  written  by  a  woman,  the  other  by  a  man; — 

^ '  The  surest-footed  guide '  is  exactly  true,  to  my  feeling. 
Everybody  else,  aniong  the  great,  used  to  disappoint  one  some* 
where.   He— never  I " 

^  He  was  so  splendidly  brave  that  one  can  never  repay  one's 
debt  to  him  for  his  example.  He  made  all  pretence  about  re- 
ligious belief  and  the  kind  of  half-thinking  things  out,  and  put- 
ting t^  in  a  slovenly  way  with  half-formed  conclusions,  seem 
the  base  thing  whidi  it  rodly  is." 


CHAPTER   XXV 

189s 

I  HAVE  often  regretted  that  I  did  not  regularly  take 
notes  of  my  father's  conversation,  which  was  striking,  not 
so  much  for  the  manner  of  it — ^though  that  was  at  once 
copious  and  crisp — ^as  for  the  strength  and  substance  of  what 
he  said.  Yet  the  striking  fact,  the  bit  of  philosophy,  the 
closely  knitted  argument,  were  perfectly  unstudied,  and  as 
in  other  most  interesting  talkers,  dropped  into  the  flow  of 
conversation  as  naturally  as  would  the  more  ordinary  ex- 
periences of  less  richly  stored  minds. 

However,  in  January  1895  I  was  staying  at  Eastbourne, 
and  jotted  down  several  fragments  of  talk  as  nearly  as  I 
could  recollect  them.  Conversation  not  immediately  noted 
down  I  hardly  dare  venture  upon,  save  perhaps  such  an 
unforgettable  phrase  as  this,  which  I  remember  his  using 
one  day  as  we  walked  on  the  hills  near  Great  Hampden : — 
"  It  is  one  of  the  most  saddening  things  in  life  that,  try 
as  we  may,  we  can  never  be  certain  of  making  people  happy, 
whereas  we  can  almost  always  be  certain  of  making  them 
unhappy." 

January  16. — At  lunch  he  spoke  of  Dr.  Louis  Robinson's 
experiments  upon  simian  characteristics  in  new-bom  chil- 
dren. He  himself  had  called  attention  before  to  the  in- 
curved feet  of  infants,  but  the  power  of  hanging  by  the 
hands  was  a  new  and  important  discovery.* 

*  Professor  H.  F.  Osborn  tells  this  story  of  his  : — When  a  fond 
mother  calls  upon  me  to  admire  her  baby,  I  never  fail  to  respond ; 
and  while  cooing  appropriately.  I  take  advantage  of  an  opportunity  to 
gently  ascertain  whether  the  soles  of  its  feet  turn  in,  and  tend  to  sup- 
port my  theory  of  arboreal  descent." 

65  449 


450  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 

He  expressed  his  disgust  with  a  certain  member  of  the 
Psychical  Research  Society  for  his  attitude  towards  spirit- 
ualism :  "  He  doesn't  believe  in  it,  yet  lends  it  the  cover  of 
his  name.  He  is  one  of  the  people  who  talk  of  the  *  possi- 
bility '  of  the  thing,  who  think  the  difficulties  of  disproving 
a  thing  as  good  as  direct  evidence  in  its  favour." 

He  thought  it  hard  to  be  attacked  for  "  the  contempt  of 
the  man  of  science  "  when  he  was  dragged  into  debate  by 
Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  Common  Sense  and  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost, 
he  saying  in  a  very  polite  letter :  "  I  am  content  to  leave 
Mr.  Lang  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost  if  I  may  keep  common 
sense."  "  After  all,"  he  added,  "  when  a  man  has  been 
through  life  and  made  his  judgments,  he  must  have  come 
to  a  decision  that  there  are  some  subjects  it  is  not  worth 
while  going  into." 

January  i8. — I  referred  to  an  article  in  the  last  Nine- 
teenth Century,  and  he  said : — "  As  soon  as  I  saw  it,  I  wrote, 
'  Knowles,  my  friend,  you  don't  draw  me  this  time.  If  a 
man  goes  on  attributing  statements  to  me  which  I  have 
shown  over  and  over  again — giving  chapter  and  verse — to 
be  the  contrary  of  what  I  did  say,  it  is  no  good  saying  any 


more.' " 


But  would  not  this  course  of  silence  leave  the  mass  of 
the  British  public  believing  the  statements  of  the  writer? 

"  The  mass  of  the  public  will  believe  in  ten  years  pre- 
cisely the  opposite  of  what  they  believe  now.  If  a  man  is 
not  a  fool,  it  does  him  no  harm  to  be  believed  one.  If  he 
really  is  a  fool,  it  does  matter.  There  never  was  book  so 
derided  and  scoffed  at  as  my  first  book,  Man's  Place  in 
Nature,  but  it  was  true,  and  I  don't  know  I  was  any  the 
worse  for  the  ridicule. 

"  People  call  nie  fond  of  controversy,  but,  as  a  fact,  for 
the  last  twenty  years  at  all  events,  I  have  never  entered  upon 
a  controversy  without  some  further  purpose  in  view.  As  to 
Gladstone  and  his  Impregnable  Rock,  it  wasn't  worth  attack- 
ing them  for  themselves ;  but  it  was  most  important  at  that 
moment  to  shake  him  in  the  minds  of  sensible  men. 

"  The  movement  of  modern  philosophy  is  back  towards 
the  position  of  the  old  Ionian  philosophers,  but  strengthened 


XXV  TABLE-TALK 


451 


and  clarified  by  sound  scientific  ideas.  If  I  publish  my 
criticism  on  Comte,  I  should  have  to  re-write  it  as  a  sum- 
mary of  philosophical  ideas  from  the  earliest  times.  The 
thread  of  philosophical  development  is  not  on  the  lines 
usually  laid  down  for  it.  It  goes  from  Democritus  and  the 
rest  to  the  Epicureans,  and  then  the  Stoics,  who  tried  to 
reconcile  it  with  popular  theological  ideas,  just  as  was 
done  by  the  Christian  Fathers.  In  the  Middle  Ages  it  was 
entirely  lost  under  the  theological  theories  of  the  time; 
but  reappeared  with  Spinoza,  who,  however,  muddled  it 
up  with  a  lot  of  metaphysics  which  made  him  almost  un- 
intelligible. 

"  Plato  was  the  founder  of  all  the  vague  and  unsound 
thinking  that  has  burdened  philosophy,  deserting  facts  for 
possibilities,  and  then,  after  long  and  beautiful  stories  of 
what  might  be,  telling  you  he  doesn't  quite  believe  them 
himself. 

"  A  certain  time  since  it  was  heresy  to  breathe  a  word 
against  Plato ;  but  I  have  a  nice  story  of  Sir  Henry  Holland. 
He  used  to  have  all  the  rising  young  men  to  breakfast,  and 
turn  out  their  latest  ideas.  One  morning  I  went  to  break- 
fast with  him,  and  we  got  into  very  intimate  conversation, 
when  he  wound  up  by  saying,  '  In  my  opinion  Plato  was 
an  ass !    But  don't  tell  any  one  I  said  so.'  " 

We  talked  on  geographical  teaching;  he  began  by  in- 
sisting on  the  need  of  a  map  of  the  earth  (on  the  true  scale) 
showing  the  insignificance  of  all  elevations  and  depressions 
on  the  surface.  Secondly,  one  should  take  any  place  as 
centre,  and  draw  about  it  circles  of  50  or  100  miles  radius, 
and  see  what  lies  within  them;  and  note  the  extent  of  the 
influence  exerted  by  the  central  point.  At  the  same  time, 
one  should  always  compare  the  British  Isles  to  scale.  For 
instance,  the  -^gean  is  about  as  big  as  Britain;  while  the 
smallness  of  Judaea  is  remarkable.  After  the  Exile,  the  Jew- 
ish part  was  about  as  big  as  the  county  of  Gloucester.  How 
few  boys  realise  this,  though  they  are  taught  classical 
geography. 

"  The  real  chosen  people  were  the  Greeks.  One  of  the 
most  remarkable  things  about  them  is  not  only  the  small- 


452  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 

ness,  but  the  late  rise  of  Attica,  whereas  Magna  Graecia 
flourished  in  the  eighth  century.  The  Greeks  were  doing 
everything — piracy,  trade,  fighting,  expelling  the  Persians. 
Never  was  there  so  large  a  number  of  self-governing  com- 
munities. 

"  They  fell  short  of  the  Jews  in  morality.  How  curious 
is  the  tolerant  attitude  of  Socrates,  like  a  modern  man  of 
the  world  talking  to  a  young  fellow  who  runs  after  the  girls. 
The  Jew,  however  he  fell  short  in  other  respects,  set  himself 
a  certain  standard  in  cleanliness  of  life,  and  would  not  fall 
below  it.  The  more  creditable  to  him,  because  these  vices 
were  the  offspring  of  the  Semitic  races  among  whom  the 
Jew  lived. 

"  There  is  a  curious  similarity  between  the  position  of 
the  Jews  in  ancient  times  and  what  it  is  now.  They  were 
procurers  and  usurers  among  the  Gentiles,  yet  many  of 
them  were  singularly  high-minded  and  pure.  All  too  with 
an  intense  clannishness,  the  secret  of  their  success,  and  a 
sense  of  superiority  to  the  Gentile  which  would  prevent  the 
meanest  Jew  from  sitting  at  table  with  a  proconsul. 

"  The  most  remarkable  achievement  of  the  Jew  was  to 
impose  on  Europe  for  eighteen  centuries  his  own  supersti- 
tions— his  ideas  of  the  supernatural.  Jahveh  was  no  more 
than  Zeus  or  Milcom ;  yet  the  Jew  got  established  the  belief 
in  the  inspiration  of  his  Bible  and  his  Law.  If  I  were  a 
Jew,  I  should  have  the  same  contempt  as  he  has  for  the 
Christian  who  acted  in  this  way  towards  me,  who  took  my 
ideas  and  scorned  me  for  clinging  to  them." 

January  21. — Yesterday  evening  he  again  declared  that 
it  was  very  hard  for  a  man  of  peace  like  himself  to  have 
been  dragged  into  so  many  controversies.  "  I  declare  that 
for  the  last  twenty  years  I  have  never  attacked,  but  always 
fought  in  self-defence,  counting  Darwin,  of  course,  as  part 
of  myself,  for  dear  Darwin  never  could  nor  would  defend 

himself.     Before  that,  I  admit  I  attacked ,  but  I  could 

not  trust  the  man."  A  pause.  *'  No,  there  was  one  other 
case,  when  I  attacked  without  being  directly  assailed,  and 
that  was  Gladstone.  But  it  was  good  for  other  reasons. 
It  has  always  astonished  me  how  a  man  after  fifty  or  sixty 


XXV  TABLE-TALK  453 

years  of  life  among  men  could  be  so  ignorant  of  the  best 
way  to  handle  his  materials.  If  he  had  only  read  Dana,  he 
would  have  found  his  case  much  better  stated  than  ever 
he  stated  it.  He  seemed  never  to  have  read  the  leading 
authorities  on  his  own  side." 

Speaking  of  the  hesitation  shown  by  the  Senate  of  Lon- 
don University  in  grappling  with  a  threatened  obstacle  to 
reform,  he  remarked :  "  It  is  very  strange  how  most  men 
will  do  anything  to  evade  responsibility." 

January  23. — ^At  dinner  the  talk  turned  on  plays.  Mr. 
H.  A.  Jones  had  sent  him  Judah,  which  he  thought  good, 
though  "  there  must  be  some  hostility — except  in  the  very 
greatest  writers — between  the  dramatic  and  the  literary 
faculties.  I  noticed  many  points  I  objected  to,  but  felt  sure 
they  met  with  applause.  Indeed  in  the  theatre  I  have  no- 
ticed that  what  I  thought  the  worst  blots  on  a  piece  in- 
variably brought  down  the  house." 

He  remarked  how  the  French,  in  dramatic  just  as  in 
artistic  matters,  are  so  much  better  than  the  English  in 
composition,  in  avoiding  anything  slipshod  in  the  details, 
though  the  English  artists  draw  just  as  well  and  colour 
perhaps  better. 

The  following  sketch  of  human  character  is  not  actually 
a  fragment  of  conversation,  though  it  might  almost  pass 
for  such ;  it  comes  from  a  letter  to  Mrs.  W.  K.  Cilfford,  of 
February  10,  1895: — 

Men,  my  dear,  are  very  queer  animals,  a  mixture  of  horse- 
nervousness,  ass-stubbornness  and  camel-malice — ^with  an  angel 
bobbing  about  unexpectedly  like  the  apple  in  the  posset,  and 
when  they  can  do  exactly  as  they  please,  they  are  very  hard  to 
drive. 

Whatever  he  talked  of,  his  talk  never  failed  to  impress 
those  who  conversed  with  him.  One  or  two  such  impres- 
sions have  been  recorded.  Mr.  Wilfrid  Ward,  whose  inter- 
ests lie  chiefly  in  philosophy  and  theology,  was  his  neighbour 
at  Eastbourne,  and  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  August 
1896  has  given  various  reminiscences  of  their  friendly  in- 
tercourse. 


454  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 

His  conversation  (he  writes)  was  singularly  finished,  and 
(if  I  may  so  express  it),  clean  cut;  never  long-winded  or  prosy; 
enlivened  by  vivid  illustrations.  He  was  an  excellent  raconteur, 
and  his  stories  had  a  stamp  of  their  own  which  would  have 
made  them  always  and  everywhere  acceptable.  His  sense  of 
humour  and  economy  of  words  would  have  made  it  impossible, 
had  he  lived  to  ninety,  that  they  should  ever  have  been  dispar- 
aged as  symptoms  of  what  has  been  called  "  anecdotage." 

One  drawback  to  conversation,  however,  he  began  to 
complain  of  during  the  later  seventies. 

It  is  a  great  misfortune  (he  remarked  to  Professor  Osborn) 
to  be  deaf  in  only  one  ear.  Every  time  I  dine  out  the  lady  sit- 
ting by  my  good  ear  thinks  I  am  charming,  but  I  make  a  mortal 
enemy  of  the  lady  on  my  deaf  side. 

In  ordinary  conversation  he  never  plunged  at  once  into 
deep  subjects.  His  welcome  to  the  new-comer  was  always 
of  the  simplest  and  most  unstudied.  He  had  no  mannerisms 
nor  affectation  of  phrase.  He  would  begin  at  once  to  talk 
on  everyday  topics;  an  intimate  friend  he  would  perhaps 
rally  upon  some  standing  subject  of  persiflage.  But  the 
subsequent  course  of  conversation  adapted  itself  to  his  com- 
pany. Deeper  subjects  were  reached  soon  enough  by  those 
who  cared  for  them ;  with  others  he  was  quite  happy  to  talk 
of  politics  or  people  or  his  garden,  yet,  whatever  he  touched, 
never  failing  to  infuse  into  it  an  unexpected  interest. 

In  this  connection,  a  typical  story  was  told  me  by  a 
great  friend  of  mine,  whom  we  had  come  to  know  through 
his  marriage  with  an  early  friend  of  the  family.  "  Going  to 
call  at  Hodeslea,"  he  said,  "  I  was  in  some  trepidation, 
because  I  didn't  know  anything  about  science  or  philoso- 
phy ;  but  when  your  mother  began  to  talk  over  old  times 
with  my  wife,  your  father  came  across  the  room  and  sat 
down  by  me,  and  began  to  talk  about  the  dog  which  we 
had  brought  with  us.  From  that  he  got  on  to  the  different 
races  of  dogs  and  their  origin  and  connections,  all  quite 
simply,  and  not  as  though  to  give  information,  but  just  to 
talk  about  something  which  obviously  interested  me.  I 
shall  never  forget  how  extraordinarily  kind  it  was  of  your 
father  to  take  all  this  trouble  in  entertaining  a  complete 


XXV  TABLE-TALK 


455 


Stranger,  and  choosing  a  subject  which  put  me  at  my  ease 
at  once,  while  he  told  me  all  manner  of  new  and  interesting 
things." 

A  few  more  fragments  of  his  conversation  have  been 
preserved — the  following  by  Mr.  Wilfrid  Ward.  Speaking 
of  Tennyson's  conversation,  he  said : — 

Doric  beauty  is  its  characteristic — perfect  simplicity,  with- 
out any  ornament  or  anything  artificial. 

Telling  how  he  had  been  to  a  meeting  of  the  British 
Museum  Trustees,  he  said : — 

After  the  meeting,  Archbishop  Benson  helped  me  on  with 
my  great-coat.  I  was  quite  overcome  by  this  species  of  spiritual 
investiture.  "  Thank  you.  Archbishop,"  1  said,  "  I  feel  as  if  I 
were  receiving  the  pallium,*^ 

Speaking  of  two  men  of  letters,  with  neither  of  whom  he 
sympathised,  he  once  said : — 

Don't  mistake  me.  One  is  a  thinker  and  man  of  letters,  the 
other  is  only  a  literary  man.  Erasmus  was  a  man  of  letters, 
Gigadibs  a  literary  man.  A.B.  is  the  incarnation  of  Gigadibs. 
1  should  call  him  Gigadibsius  Optimus  Maximus. 

Another  time,  referring  to  Dean  Stanley's  historical 
impressionability,  as  militating  against  his  sympathies  with 
Colenso,  he  said : — 

Stanley  could  believe  in  anything  of  which  he  had  seen  the 
supposed  site,  but  was  sceptical  where  he  had  not  seen.  At  a 
breakfast  at  Monckton  Milnes*s,  just  at  the  time  of  the  Colenso 
row,  Milnes  asked  me  my  views  on  the  Pentateuch,  and  I  gave 
them.  Stanley  differed  from  me.  The  account  of  Creation  in 
Genesis  he  dismissed  at  once  as  unhistorical ;  but  the  call  of 
Abraham,  and  the  historical  narrative  of  the  Pentateuch,  he 
accepted.  This  was  because  he  had  seen  Palestine — ^but  he 
wasn't  present  at  the  Creation. 

When  he  and  Stanley  met,  there  was  sure  to  be  a  brisk 
interchange  of  repartee.  One  of  these  occasions,  a  ballot 
night  at  the  Athenaeum,  has  been  recorded  by  the  late  Sir 
W.  H.  Flower:— 


456  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap. 

A  well-known  popular  preacher  of  the  Scotch  Presbjrterian 
Church,  who  had  made  himself  famous  by  predictions  of  the 
speedy  coming  of  the  end  of  the  world,  was  up  for  election.  I 
was  standing  by  Huxley  when  the  Dean,  coming  straight  from 
the  ballot  boxes,  turned  towards  us.  "  Well,"  said  Huxley, 
"  have  you  been  voting  for  C.  ?  "  "  Yes,  indeed  I  have,"  replied 
the  Dean.  "  Oh,  I  thought  the  priests  were  always  opposed  to 
the  prophets,"  said  Huxley.  "  Ah ! "  replied  the  Dean,  with 
that  well-known  twinkle  in  his  eye,  and  the  sweetest  of  smiles, 
"  but  you  see,  I  do  not  believe  in  his  prophecies,  and  some 
people  say  I  am  not  much  of  a  priest." 

A  few  words  as  to  his  home  life  may  perhaps  be  fitly 
introduced  here.  Towards  his  children  he  had  the  same 
union  of  underlying  tenderness  veiled  beneath  inflexible  de- 
termination for  what  was  right,  which  marked  his  inter- 
course with  those  outside  his  family. 

As  children  we  were  fully  conscious  of  this  side  of  his. 
character.  We  felt  our  little  hypocrisies  shrivel  up  before 
him ;  we  felt  a  confidence  in  the  infallible  rectitude  of  his 
moral  judgments  which  inspired  a  kind  of  awe.  His  arbit- 
rament was  instant  and  final,  though  rarely  invoked,  and 
was  perhaps  the  more  tremendous  in  proportion  to  its 
rarity.  This  aspect,  as  if  of  an  oracle  without  appeal,  was 
heightened  in  our  minds  by  the  fact  that  we  saw  but  little 
of  him.  This  was  one  of  the  penalties  of  his  hard-driven 
existence.  In  the  struggle  to  keep  his  head  above  water 
for  the  first  fifteen  or  twenty  years  of  his  married  life,  he 
had  scarcely  any  time  to  devote  to  his  children.  The 
"  lodger,"  as  he  used  to  call  himself  at  one  time,  who  went 
out  early  and  came  back  late,  could  sometimes  spare  half 
an  hour  just  before  or  after  dinner  to  draw  wonderful  pic- 
tures for  the  little  ones,  and  these  were  memorable  occasions. 
I  remember  that  he  used  to  profess  a  horror  of  being  too 
closely  watched,  or  of  receiving  suggestions,  while  he  drew. 
"  Take  care,  take  care,"  he  would  exclaim,  "  or  I  don't 
know  what  it  will  turn  into." 

When  I  was  seven  years  old  I  had  the  misfortune  to  be 
laid  up  with  scarlet  fever,  and  then  his  gift  of  drawing  was 
a  great  solace  to  me.    The  solitary  days — for  I  was  the  first 


XXV  HOME   LIFE 


457 


victim  in  the  family — ^were  very  long,  and  I  looked  forward 
with  intense  interest  to  one  half-hour  after  dinner,  when  he 
would  come  up  and  draw  scenes  from  the  history  of  a  re- 
markable bull-terrier  and  his  family  that  went  to  the  sea- 
side in  a  most  human  and  child-delighting  manner.  I  have 
seldom  suffered  a  greater  disappointment  than  when,  one 
evening,  I  fell  asleep  just  before  this  fairy  half-hour,  and 
lost  it  out  of  my  life. 

In  those  days  he  often  used  to  take  the  three  eldest  of 
us  out  for  a  walk  on  Sunday  afternoons,  sometimes  to  the 
Zoological  Gardens,  more  often  to  the  lanes  and  fields  be- 
tween St.  John's  Wood  and  Hampstead  or  West  End.  For 
then  the  flood  of  bricks  and  mortar  ceased  on  the  Finchley 
Road  just  beyond  the  Swiss  Cottage,  and  the  West  End 
Lane,  winding  solitary  between  its  high  hedges  and  rural 
ditches,  was  quite  like  a  country  road  in  holiday  time,  and 
was  sometimes  gladdened  in  June  with  real  dog-roses,  al- 
though the  church  and  a  few  houses  had  already  begun  to 
encroach  on  the  open  fields  at  the  end  of  the  Abbey  Road. 

My  father  often  used  to  delight  us  with  sea  stories  and 
tales  of  animals,  and  occasionally  with  geological  sketches 
suggested  by  the  gravels  of  Hampstead  Heath.  But  regular 
"  shop  "  he  would  not  talk  to  us,  contrary  to  the  expectation 
of  people  who  have  often  asked  me  whether  we  did  not 
receive  quite  a  scientific  training  from  his  companionship. 

At  the  Christmas  dinner  he  invariably  delighted  the 
children  by  carving  wonderful  beasts,  generally  pigs,  out  of 
orange  peel.  When  the  marriage  of  his  eldest  daughter  had 
taken  her  away  from  this  important  function,  she  was  sent 
the  best  specimen  as  a  reminder. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec,  25,  1878. 

Dearest  Jess — We  have  just  finished  the  mid-day  Christmas 
dinner,  at  which  function  you  were  badly  wanted.  The  inflam- 
mation of  the  pudding  was  highly  successful — in  fact  Vesuvian 
not  to  say  -^tnaic — and  I  have  never  yet  attained  so  high  a  pitch 
in  piggygenesis  as  on  this  occasion. 

The  specimen  I  enclose,  wrapped  in  a  golden  cerecloth,  and 
with  the  remains  of  his  last  dinner  in  the  proper  region,  will 
prove  to  you  the  heights  to  which  the  creative  power  of  the 


4$8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  craf. 

true  artist  may  soar.  I  call  it  a  '^  Piggturne,  or  a  Harmony  in 
Orai^ie  and  White.'' 

Preserve  it,  my  dear  diild,  as  evidence  of  the  paternal 
genius,  when  those  light  and  fugitive  productions  which  are 
huried  in  the  i^losophical  transactions  and  elsewhere  are  for- 
gotten. 

My  hest  wishes  to  Fred  and  you,  and  may  you  succeed  better 
than  I  do  in  keeping  warm. — ^Ever  your  loving  father, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Later  on,  however,  the  younger  children  who  kept  up 
the  home  at  Marlborough  Place  after  the  elder  ones  had 
married  or  gone  out  into  the  world,  enjoyed  more  oppor- 
tunities of  his  ever-meUowing  companionship.  Strongly  as 
he  upheld  the  conventions  when  these  represented  some 
valid  results  of  social  experience,  he  was  always,  ready  to  set 
aside  his  mere  likes  and  dislikes  on  good  cause  shown;  to 
follow  reason  as  against  the  mere  prejudice  of  custom,  even 
his  own. 

Severe  he  mig^t  be  on  occasion,  but  never  harsh.  His 
idea  in  bringing  up  his  children  was  to  accustom  them  as 
eariy  as  possible  to  a  certain  amount  of  independence,  at  the 
same  time  trying  to  make  them  regard  him  as  their  best 
friend. 

This  aspect  of  his  character  is  specially  touched  upon 
by  Mr.  Leslie  Stephen,  in  a  letter  written  to  my  mother  in 
July  189s  :— 

No  one,  I  think,  could  have  more  cordially  admired  Huxley's 
intellectual  vigour  and  unflinching  honesty  than  I.  It  pleases 
me  to  remember  that  I  lately  said  something  of  this  to  him,  and 
that  he  received  what  I  said  most  heartily  and  kindly.  But 
what  now  dwells  most  in  my  mind  is  the  memory  of  old  kind- 
ness, and  of  the  days  when  I  used  to  see  him  with  you  and  his 
children.  I  may  safely  say  that  I  never  came  from  your  house 
without  thinking  how  good  he  is ;  what  a  tender  and  affectionate 
nature  the  man  has !  It  did  me  good  simply  to  see  him.  The 
recollection  is  sweet  to  me  now,  and  I  rejoice  to  think  how 
infinitely  better  you  know  what  I  must  have  been  dull  indeed 
not  more  or  less  to  perceive. 

As  he  wrote  to  his  son  on  his  twenty-first  birthday : — 


XXV  HOME   LIFE  459 

You  will  have  a  son  some  day  yourself,  I  suppose,  and  if  you 
do,  I  can  wish  you  no  greater  satisfaction  than  to  be  able  to  say 
that  he  has  reached  manhood  without  having  given  you  a  serious 
anxiety,  and  that  you  can  look  forward  with  entire  confidence 
to  his  playing  the  man  in  the  battle  of  life.  I  have  tried  to 
make  you  feel  your  responsibilities  and  act  independently  as 
early  as  possible — ^but,  once  for  all,  remember  that  I  am  not  only 
your  father  but  your  nearest  friend,  ready  to  help  you  in  all 
things  reasonable,  and  perhaps  in  a  few  unreasonable. 

This  domestic  happiness  which  struck  others  so  forcibly 
was  one  of  the  vital  realities  of  his  existence.  Without  it 
his  quick  spirit  and  nervous  temperament  could  never  have 
endured  the  long  and  often  embittered  struggle — not  merely 
with  equanimity,  but  with  a  constant  growth  of  sympathy 
for  earnest  humanity,  which,  in  early  days  obscured  from 
view  by  the  turmoil  of  strife,  at  length  became  apparent  to 
all  as  the  tide  of  battle  subsided.  None  realised  more  than 
himself  what  the  sustaining  help  and  comradeship  of  mar- 
ried life  had  wrought  for  him,  alike  in  making  his  life  worth 
living  and  in  making  his  life's  work  possible.  Here  he 
found  the  pivot  of  his  happiness  and  his  strength;  here 
he  recognised  to  the  full  the  care  that  took  upon  itself  all 
possible  burdens  and  left  his  mind  free  for  his  greater 
work. 

He  had  always  a  great  tenderness  for  children.  "  One 
of  my  earliest  recollections  of  him,"  writes  Jeffery  Parker, 
"  is  in  connection  with  a  letter  he  wrote  to  my  father,  on 
the  occasion  of  the  death,  in  infancy,  of  one  of  my  brothers. 
*  Why,'  he  wrote,  '  did  you  not  tell  us  before  that  the  child 
was  named  after  me,  that  we  might  have  made  his  short  life 
happier  by  a  toy  or  two.'  I  never  saw  a  man  more  crushed 
than  he  was  during  the  dangerous  illness  of  one  of  his 
daughters,  and  he  told  me  that,  having  then  to  make  an 
after-dinner  speech,  he  broke  down  for  the  first  time  in  his 
life,  and  for  one  painful  moment  forgot  where  he  was  and 
what  he  had  to  say.  I  can  truly  say  that  I  never  knew  a 
man  whose  way  of  speaking  of  his  family,  or  whose  manner 
in  his  own  home,  was  fuller  of  a  noble,  loving,  and  withal 
playful  courtesy." 


460  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 

After  he  had  retired  to  Eastbourne,  his  grandchildren 
reaped  the  benefit  of  his  greater  leisure.  In  his  age  his  love 
of  children  brimmed  over  with  undiminished  force,  unim- 
peded by  circumstances.  He  would  make  endless  fun  with 
them,  until  one  little  mite,  on  her  first  visit,  with  whom 
her  grandfather  was  trying  to  ingratiate  himself  with  a  vast 
deal  of  nonsense,  exclaimed :  "  Well,  you  are  the  curious'test 
old  man  I  ever  seen.'* 

Another,  somewhat  older,  developed  a  great  liking  for 
astronomy  under  her  grandfather's  tuition.  One  day  a  vis- 
itor, entering  unexpectedly,  was  astonished  to  find  the  pair 
of  them  kneeling  on  the  floor  in  the  hall  before  a  large  sheet 
of  paper,  on  which  the  professor  was  drawing  a  diagram 
of  the  solar  system  on  a  large  scale,  with  a  little  pellet 
and  a  large  ball  to  represent  earth  and  sun,  while  the 
child  was  listening  with  the  closest  attention  to  an  ac- 
count of  the  planets  and  their  movements,  which  he  knew 
so  well  how  to  make  simple  and  precise  without  ever 
being  dull. 

Children  seemed  to  have  a  natural  confidence  in  the 
expression  of  mingled  power  and  sympathy  which,  espe- 
cially in  his  later  years,  irradiated  his  "  square,  wise,  swarthy 
face,"  *  and  proclaimed  to  all  the  sublimation  of  a  broad 
native  humanity  tried  by  adversity  and  struggle  in  the  pur- 
suit of  noble  ends.  It  was  the  confidence  that  an  appeal 
would  not  be  rejected,  whether  for  help  in  distress,  or  for 
the  satisfaction  of  the  child's  natural  desire  for  knowl- 
edge. 

Spirit  and  determination  in  children  always  delighted 
him.  His  grandson  Julian,  a  curly-haired  rogue,  alternately 
cherub  and  pickle,  was  a  source  of  great  amusement  and 
interest  to  him.  The  boy  must  have  been  about  four  years 
old  when  my  father  one  day  came  in  from  the  garden,  where 
he  had  been  diligently  watering  his  favourite  plants  with  a 
big  hose,  and  said :  "  I  Hke  that  chap !     I  like  the  way  he 

*  **  There  never  was  a  face,  I  do  believe"  (wrote  Sir  Walter  Besant 
of  the  portrait  by  John  Collier),  **  wiser,  more  kindly,  more  beautiful 
for  wisdom  and  the  kindliness  of  it,  than  this  of  Huxley." — The 
Queen,  Nov.  16,  1895. 


Portrait  with  his  Grandson,  from  a  Photograph  by 

Kent  and  Lacey,   iSqS- 


i, 


A 


XXV 


THE   WATER  BABIES  461 


looks  you  straight  in  the  face  and  disobeys  you.  I  told  him 
not  to  go  on  the  wet  grass  again.  He  just  looked  up  boldly, 
straight  at  me,  as  much  as  to  say,  *  What  do  you  mean  by 
ordering  me  about  ? '  and  deliberately  walked  on  to  the 
grass." 

The  disobedient  youth  who  so  charmed  his  grandfather's 
heart  was  the  prototype  of  Sandy  in  Mrs.  Humphry  Ward's 
David  Grieve.  When  the  book  came  out  my  father  wrote 
to  the  author :  "  We  are  very  proud  of  Julian's  apotheosis. 
He  is  a  most  delightful  imp,  and  the  way  in  which  he  used 
to  defy  me  on  occasion,  when  he  was  here,  was  quite  refresh- 
ing. The  strength  of  his  conviction  that  people  who  inter- 
fere with  his  freedom  are  certainly  foolish,  probably  wicked, 
is  quite  Gladstonian." 

A  year  after,  when  Julian  had  learned  to  write,  and  was 
reading  the  immortal  Water  Babies,  wherein  fun  is  poked 
at  his  grandfather's  name  among  the  authorities  on  water- 
babies  and  water-beasts  of  every  description,  he  greatly 
desired  more  light  as  to  the  reality  of  water-babies.  There 
is  a  picture  by  Linley  Sambourne,  showing  my  father  and 
Owen  examining  a  bottled  water-baby  under  big  magnify- 
ing glasses.  Here,  then,  was  a  real  authority  to  consult. 
So  he  wrote  a  letter  of  enquiry,  first  anxiously  asking  his 
mother  if  he  would  receive  in  reply  a  **  proper  letter  "  that 
he  could  read  for  himself,  or  a  "  wrong  kind  of  letter  "  that 

must  be  read  to  him. 

» 

Dear  Grandpater — Have  you  seen  a  Waterbaby?    Did  you 

put  it  in  a  bottle?    Did  it  wonder  if  it  could  get  out?    Can  I  see 

it  some  day? — Your  loving  _ 

•^  Julian. 

To  this  he  received  the  following  reply  from  his  grand- 
father, neatly  printed,  letter  by  letter,  very  unlike  the  or- 
derly confusion  with  which  his  pen  usually  rushed  across 
the  paper — time  being  so  short  for  such  a  multitude  of 
writing — to  the  great  perplexity,  often,  of  his  foreign  cor- 
respondents. 


■  it^t  •'■'    »    "i ' 


4fii 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


tTAVILlY  lltAl. 
lAtTieURME. 


/^  </^/«/i 


JL^ 


CA/Tt. 


7« 


^l^^^A 


?fta. 


k4L 


SuJu,     Adoa. 


^  -rc^f  w^is:i- 


liAiy  .     Jhaye    fe^n 


Ba,Ocef     1^^    ^^^ 


CZr*    a^Y^id. 


Vx^bC^s    ^ 


ijo  //^  ^  ;  (>^ 


ftf^  fiaiif  ^/-*^  lA/^^*- 


(VA^  >*<y 


e  tVc  a  batt^&L    i^nU 


XXV 


ttu  BaOu 


THE   WATER  BABIES  463 


ITI 


ixot  yv^    ^^ 


tZf^. 


was  a  ^^^H    ^*^^      ^*'^ 


tva^^^     ^^ 


T(icr<    <**^     Time*.      hcof>^^ 


464  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap. 

(A/ ha     See   a.    ft^a/t^    c(e,a.  C 

anei      ya^e       iA/ho    S^e     V€ 


C:/f& 


LPS. 


tlU        CCLyTHJL      Tni/H^X  . 


When    uovL.    <firo£€^    ^/> 


hait'e,s       Sty/heve     otliey^  p/(lc/i 


Ca  n      fee    ixaTiXty^ 


1 


XXV  THE   WATER  BABIES  465 


Jls/^ 


T)Ad4.u     ■*    /via  mwy 


Cf  A. 


ecHi.  u^tt^    Uirnot- 


^/,y 


«<^- 


Others  of  his  family  would  occasionally  receive  elab- 
orate pieces  of  nonsense,  of  which  I  give  a  couple  of  speci- 
mens.   The  following  is  to  his  youngest  daughter: — 

ATHENiEUM  Club,  May  17,  1892. 
Dearest  Babs — As  I  was  going  along  Upper  Thames  Street 

primary  parenthesis 

just  now,  I  saw  between  Nos.  170  and  211  (but  you  would  like 

to  know  what  I  was  going  along  that  odorous  street  for.    Well, 

it  was  to  enquire  how  the  pen  with  which  I  am  now  writing — 

2nd  p. 

(you  see  it  is  a  new-fangled  fountain  pen,  warranted  to  cure 

2nd  p. 
the  worst  writing  and  always  spell  properly) — ^works,  because  it 

66 


f 


^  LIFE.  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  c^ap, 

would  not  work  properly  this  morning.    And  the  nice  young 

3nl  p. 

woman  who  took  it  from  m&7-(a8  who  should  say  you  old 

3rd  p.  '  4t]il». 

foodie!)  inked  her  own  fingers  enormously  (which  I  told  her 

4th  p. 
I  was  pleased  they  were  her  fingers  rather  than  mine) — ^But 

Sthp. 

she  only  smole.     (Qose  by  was  another  shop  where  they  9cM 

6orjp,  n.  p. 

hose — (mdiarubber,  not  knitted) — (and  warranted' to  let  water 
through,  not  keep  it  out) ;  and  I  asked  for  a  garden  syrii^^e» 
thinking  such  things  likely  to  be  kept  by  hosiers  of  that  sort 
— ^and  Uiey  said  they  had  not  any,  but  found  they  had  a  rent- 

ii<  n.  p« 

nant  cheap  (price  3s.)  which  is  less  than  many  people  pay  for 

end  of  pp., 

the  other  hosiers'  hose)  a  doorpost  at  the  side  of  the  doorway 
of  some  place  of  business  with  this  remarkable  notice :  ruling 

GIBLS  WANTED. 

Don't  you  think  you  had  better  apply  at  once?  Jack  will 
give  you  a  character,  I  am  sure,  on  the  side  of  the  art  of  ruling, 
and  I  will  speak  for  the  science — ^also  of  hereditary  (on  mother's 
side)  instinct. 

Well,  I  am  not  sure  about  the  pen  yet — but  there  is  no  room 
for  any  more. — ^Ever  your  loving  Dad. 

Epistolary  composition  on  the  model  of  a  Gladstonian  speech 
to  a  deputation  on  women's  suffrage. 

The  other  is  to  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Harold  Roller,  who 
had  sent  him  from  abroad  a  friend's  autograph-book  for  a 
signature : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  JVov.  i,  1893. 

The  epistle  of  Thomas  to  the  woman  of  the  house  of  Harold. 

1.  I  said  it  was  an  autograph -book ;  and  so  it  was. 

2.  And  naughty  words  came  to  the  root  of  my  tongue. 

3.  And  the  recording  angel  dipped  his  pen  in  the  ink  and 

squared  his  elbows  to  write. 

4.  But  I  spied  the  hand  of  the  lovely  and  accomplished  but 

vagabond  daughter. 

5.  And  I  smole ;  and  spoke  not ;  nor  uttered  the  naughty  words. 

6.  So  the  recording  angel  was  sold; 

7.  And  was  about  to  suck  his  pen. 

8.  But  I  said  Nay !  give  it  to  me. 


V 


XXV  >  LETTERS   TO   HIS   CHILDREN  467 

9.  And  I  took  the  pen  and  wrote  on  the  book  of  the  Autographs 

letters  pleasant  to  the  eye  and  easy  to  read. 
10.  Such  as  my  printers  know  not:  nor  the  postman — nor  the 
correspondent,  who  riseth  in  his  wrath  and  curseth  over 
my  epistle  ordinary. 

This  to  his  youngest  daughter,  which,  in  jesting  form, 
conveys  a  good  deal  of  sound  sense,  was  the  sequel  to  a 
discussion  as  to  the  advisability  of  a  University  education 
for  her  own  and  another  boy : — 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne,  May  9,  1892. 

Dearest  Babs — Bickers  and  Son  have  abased  themselves, 
and  assure  me  that  they  have  fetched  the  Dicty.  away  and  are 
sending  it  here.    I  shall  believe  them  when  it  arrives. 

As  a  rule,  I  do  not  turn  up  when  I  announce  my  coming, 
but  I  believe  I  shall  be  with  you  about  dinner-time  on  Friday 
next  (13th). 

In  the  meanwhile,  my  good  daughter,  meditate  these  things : 

1.  Parents  not  too  rich  wish  to  send  exceptionally  clever, 
energetic  lad  to  university — before  taking  up  father's  profession 
of  architect. 

2.  E.c.e.l.  will  be  well  taught  classics  at  school — not  well 
taught  in  other  things — will  easily  get  a  scholarship  either  at 
school  or  university.    So  much  in  parents'  pockets. 

3.  E.c.e.l.  will  get  as  much  mathematics,  mechanics,  and  other 
needful  preliminaries  to  architecture,  as  he  wants  (and  a  good 
deal  more  if  he  likes)  at  Oxford.    Excellent  physical  school  there. 

4.  Splendid  Art  museums  at  Oxford. 

5.  Prigs  not  peculiar  to  Oxford. 

6.  Don  Cambridge  would  choke  science  (except  mathe- 
matics) if  it  could  as  willingly  as  Don  Oxford  and  more  so. 

7.  Oxford  always  represents  English  opinion,  in  all  its  ex- 
tremes, better  than  Cambridge. 

8.  Cambridge  better  for  doctors,  Oxford  for  architects, 
poets,  painters,  and  all  that  Bort  of  cattle. 

9.  Lawrence  will  go  to  Oxford  and  become  a  real  scholar, 
which  is  a  great  thing  and  a  noble.  He  will  combine  the  new 
and  the  old,  and  show  how  much  better  the  world  would  have 
been  if  it  had  stuck  to  Hellenism.  You  are  dreaming  of  the 
schoolboy  who  does  not  follow  up  his  work,  or  becomes  a  mere 
poll  man.  Good  enough  for  parsons,  not  for  men.  Lawrence 
will  go  to  Oxford. — Ever  your  aggrawatin'  Pa. 


468  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  CH^ut. 

Like  the  old  Greek  sage  and  statesman,  my  father  might 
have  declared  that  old  age  found  him  ever  learning.  Not 
indeed  with  the  fiery  earnestness  of  his  young  days  of  stress 
and  storm;  but  with  the  steady  advance  of  a  practised 
worker  who  cannot  be  unoccupied  History  and  philoso- 
phy, especially  biblical  criticism,  composed  his  chief  reading 
in  these  later  years. 

Fortune  had  ceased  her  buffets ;  broken  health  was  re- 
stored ;  and  from  his  resting-place  among  his  books  and  his 
plants  he  watched  keenly  the  struggle  which  had  now  passed 
into  other  hands,  still  ready  to  strike  a  blow  if  need  he, 
or  even,  on  rare  occasions,  to  return  to  the  fighting  line, 
as  when  he  became  a  leader  in  the  movement  for  London 
University  reform. 

His  days  at  Eastbourne,  then,  were  full  of  occupation,  if 
not  the  occupation  of  former  days.  The  day  began  as 
early ;  he  never  relaxed  from  the  rule  of  an  eight  o'clock 
breakfast.  Then  a  pipe  and  an  hour  and  a  half  of  letter- 
writing  or  working  at  an  essay.  Then  a  short  expedition 
around  the  garden,  to  inspect  the  creepers,  tend  the  saxi«> 
frages,  or  see  how  the  more  exposed  shrubs  could  best  be 
sheltered  from  the  shrivelling  winds.  The  gravelled  terrace 
immediately  behind  the  house  was  called  the  Quarterdeck ; 
it  was  the  place  for  a  brisk  patrolling  in  uncertain  weather 
or  in  a  north  wind.  In  the  lower  garden  was  a  parallel 
walk  protected  from  the  south  by  a  high  double  hedge  of 
cypress  and  golden  elder,  designed  for  shelter  from  the 
summer  sun  and  southerly  winds. 

Then  would  follow  another  spell  of  work  till  near  one 
o'clock;  the  weather  might  tempt  him  out  again  before 
lunch ;  but  afterwards  he  was  certain  to  be  out  for  an  hour 
or  two  from  half-past  two.  However  hard  it  blew,  and 
Eastbourne  is  seldom  still,  the  tiled  walk  along  the  sea-wall 
always  offered  the  possibility  of  a  constitutional.  But  the 
high  expanse  of  the  Downs  was  his  favourite  walk.  The 
air  of  Beachy  Head,  560  feet  up,  was  an  unfailing  tonic. 
In  the  summer  he  used  to  keep  a  look-out  for  the  little 
flowers  of  the  short,  close  turf  of  the  chalk  which  could 
remind  him  of  his  Alpine  favourites,  in  particular  the  curious 


XXV  LIFE  AT   EASTBOURNE  469 

phyteuma;  and  later  on,  in  the  folds  of  the  hills  where  he 
had  marked  them,  the  English  gentians. 

After  his  walk,  a  cup  of  tea  was  followed  by  more  read- 
ing or  writing  till  seven ;  after  dinner  another  pipe,  and  then 
he  would  return  to  my  mother  in  the  drawing-room,  and 
settle  down  in  his  particular  arm-chair,  with  some  tough 
volume  of  history  or  theology  to  read,  every  now  arid  again 
scoring  a  passage  for  future  reference,  or  jotting  a  brief  note 
on  the  margin.  At  ten  he  would  migrate  to  the  study  for  a 
final  smoke  before  going  to  bed. 

Such  was  his  routine,  broken  by  occasional  visits  to 
town  on  business,  for  he  was  still  Dean  of  the  Royal  Col- 
lege of  Science  and  a  trustee  of  the  British  Museum.  Old 
friends  came  occasionally  to  stay  for  a  few  days,  and  tea- 
time  would  often  bring  one  or  two  of  the  small  circle  of 
friends  whom  he  had  made  in  Eastbourne.  These  also  he 
occasionally  visited,  but  he  scarcely  ever  dined  out.  The 
talking  was  too  tiring. 

The  change  to  Eastbourne  cut  away  a  whole  series  of 
interests,  but  it  imported  a  new  and  very  strong  one  into 
my  father's  life.  His  garden  was  not  only  a  convenient 
ambulatory,  but,  with  its  growing  flowers  and  trees,  became 
a  novel  and  intense  pleasure,  until  he  began  "  to  think  with 
Candide  that  *  Cultivons  notre  jardin '  comprises  the  whole 
duty  of  man."  | 

It  was  strange  that  this  interest  should  have  come  sud- 
denly at  the  end  of  his  life.  Though  he  had  won  the  prize 
in  Lindley's  botanical  class  he  had  never  been  a  field  bot- 
anist till  he  was  attracted  by  the  Swiss  gentians.  As  has 
been  said  before,  his  love  of  nature  had  never  run  to  col- 
lecting either  plants  or  animals.  Mere  "  spider-hunters  and 
hay-naturalists,"  as  a  German  friend  called  them,  he  was 
inclined  to  regard  as  the  camp-followers  of  science.  It  was 
the  engineering  side  of  nature,  the  unity  of  plan  of  animal 
construction,  worked  out  in  infinitely  varying  detail,  which 
engrossed  him.  Walking  once  with  Hooker  in  the  Rhone 
valley,  where  the  grass  was  alive  with  red  and  green  grass- 
hoppers, he  said,  "  I  would  give  anything  to  be  as  interested 
in  them  as  you  are." 


470  LIFfi  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap; 

But  this  feeling,  unknown  to  him  before,  broke  out  in 
his  gentian  work.  He  told  Hooker,  "  I  can't  express  the 
delight  I  have  in  them/'  It  continue^  undiminished  when 
once  he  settled  in  the  new  house  and  laid  out  a  garden. 
His  especial  love  was  for  the  rockery  of  Alpines,  many  of 
which  came  from  Sir  J.  Hooker. 

Here,  then,  he  threw  himself  into  gardening  with  char- 
acteristic ardour.  He  described  his  position  as  a  kind  of 
mean  between  the  science  of  the  botanist  and  the  empiricism 
of  the  working  gardener.  He  had  plenty  to  suggest,  but  his 
gardener,  like  so  many  of  his  tribe,  had  a  rooted  mistrust 
of  any  gardening  lore  culled  from  books.  "  Books  ?  They'll 
say  anything  in  them  books."  And  he  shared,  moreover, 
that  common  superstition,  perhaps  really  based  upon  a  ques- 
tion of  labour,  that  watering  of  flowers,  unnecessary  in  wet 
weather,  is  actively  bad  in  dry.  So  my  father's  chief  occu- 
pation in  the  garden  was  to  march  about  with  a  long  hose, 
watering,  and  watering  especially  his  alpines  in  the  upper 
garden  and  along  the  terraces  l3ring  below  the  house.  The 
saxifrages  and  the  creepers  on  the  house  were  his  favourite 
plants.  When  he  was  not  watering  the  one  he  would  be 
nailing  up  the  other,  for  the  winds  of  Eastbourne  are  re- 
markably boisterous,  and  shrivel  up  what  they  do  not  blow 
down.  "  I  believe  I  shall  take  to  gardening,"  he  writes,  a 
few  months  after  entering  the  new  house,  *'  if  I  live  long 
enough.  I  have  got  so  far  as  to  take  a  lively  interest  in  the 
condition  of  my  shrubs,  which  have  been  awfully  treated  by 
the  long  cold." 

From  this  time  his  letters  contain  many  references  to 
his  garden.  He  is  astonished  when  his  gardener  asks  leave 
to  exhibit  at  the  local  show,  but  delighted  with  his  pluck. 
Hooker  jestingly  sends  him  a  plant  "  which  will  flourish 
on  any  dry,  neglected  bit  of  wall,  so  I  think  it  will  just 
suit  you." 

Great  improvements  have  been  going  on  (he  writes  in  1892), 
and  the  next  time  you  come  you  shall  walk  in  the  "  avenue  "  of 
four  box-trees.  Only  five  are  to  be  had  for  love  or  money  at 
present,  but  there  are  hopes  of  a  sixth,  and  then  the  "  avenue  " 
will  be  full  ten  yards  long !    Figures  vous  qa ! 


XXV  LOVE   FOR  THE   GARDEN  471 

It  was  of  this  he  wrote  on  October  i : — 

Thank  Heaven  we  are  settled  down  again  and  I  can  vibrate 
between  my  beloved  books  and  even  more  beloved  saxifrages. 

The  additions  to  the  house  are  great  improvements  every 
way,  outside  and  in,  and  when  the  conservatory  is  finished  we 
shall  be  quite  palatial;  but,  alas,  of  all  my  box-trees  only  one 
remains  green,  that  is  the  "  amari,"  or  more  properly  "  fusci " 
aliquid. 

Sad  things  will  happen,  however.  Although  the  local 
florists  vowed  that  the  box-trees  would  not  stand  the  winds 
of  Eastbourne,  he  was  set  on  seeing  if  he  could  not  get  them 
to  grow  despite  the  gardeners,  whom  he  had  once  or  twice 
found  false  prophets.  But  this  time  they  were  right.  Vain 
were  watering  and  mulching  and  all  the  arts  of  the  husband- 
man. The  trees  turned  browner  and  browner  every  day, 
and  the  little  avenue  from  terrace  to  terrace  had  to  be 
ignominiously  uprooted  and  removed. 

A  sad  blow  this,  worse  even  than  the  following: — 

A  lovely  clematis  in  full  flower,  which  I  had  spent  hours  in 
nailing  up,  has  just  died  suddenly.  I  am  more  inconsolable  than 
Jonah ! 

He  answers  some  gardening  chaff  of  Sir  Michael 
Foster's : — 

Wait  till  I  cut  you  out  at  the  Horticultural.  I  have  not  made 
up  my  mind  what  to  compete  in  yet.    Look  out  when  I  do ! 

And  when  the  latter  oflfered  to  propose  him  for  that 
Society,  he  replied: — 

Proud  an'  'appy  should  I  be  to  belong  to  the  Horticultural  if 
you  will  see  to  it.  Could  send  specimens  of  nailing  up  creepers 
if  qualification  is  required. 

After  his  long  battlings  for  his  early  loves  of  science  and 
liberty  of  thought,  his  later  love  of  the  tranquil  garden 
seemed  in  harmony  with  the  dignified  rest  from  struggle. 
To  those  who  thought  of  the  past  and  the  present,  there 
was  something  touching  in  the  sight  of  the  old  man  whose 
unquenched  fires  now  lont  a  gentler  glow  to  the  peaceful 


472 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxv 


retirement  he  had  at  length  won  for  himself.  His  latter 
^ys  were  fruitful  and  happy  in  their  unflagging  intellectual 
interests,  set  off  by  the  new  delights  of  the  succidia  altera^ 
that  second  resource  of  hale  old  age  for  many  a  century. 

All  through  his  last  and  prolonged  illness,  from  earliest 
spring  until  midsummer,  he  loved  to  hear  how  the  garden 
was  getting  on,  and  would  ask  after  certain  flowers  and 
plants.  When  the  bitter  cold  spring  was  over  and  the 
warm  weather  came,  he  spent  most  of  the  day  outside,  and 
even  recovered  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  walk  once  into  the 
lower  garden  and  visit  his  favourite  flowers.  These  chil- 
dren of  his  old  age  helped  to  cheer  him  to  the  last 


APPENDIX   I 

As  for  this  unfinished  work,  suggestive  outlines  left  for 
others  to  fill  in,  Professor  Howes  writes  to  me  in  October 
1899: — 

Concerning  the  papers  at  S.K.  which,  as  part  of  the  contents 
of  your  father's  book-shelves,  were  given  by  him  to  the  College, 
and  now  are  arranged,  numbered,  and  registered  in  order  for 
use,  there  is  evidence  that  in  1858  he,  with  his  needles  and  eye- 
glass, had  dissected  and  carefully  figured  the  so-called  pro- 
nephros of  the  Frog's  tadpole,  in  a  manner  which  as  to  accuracy 
of  detail  anticipated  later  discovery.  Again,  in  the  early  '8o's, 
he  had  observed  and  recorded  in  a  drawing  the  prse-pulmonary 
aortic  arch  of  the  Amphibian,  at  a  period  antedating  the  re- 
searches of  Boas,  which  in  connection  with  its  discovery  placed 
the  whole  subject  of  the  morphology  of  the  pulmonary  artery 
of  the  vertebrata  on  its  final  basis,  and  brought  harmony  into 
our  ideas  concerning  it. 

Both  these  subjects  lie  at  the  root  of  modern  advances  in 
vertebrate  morphology. 

Concerning  the  skull,  he  was  in  the  *8o*s  back  to  it  with  a 
will.  His  line  of  attack  was  through  the  lampreys  and  hags  and 
the  higher  cartilaginous  fishes,  and  he  was  following  up  a  revo- 
lutionary conception  (already  hinted  at  in  his  Hunterian  Lec- 
tures in  1864,  and  later  in  a  Royal  Society  paper  on  Amphioxus 
in  1875),  that  the  trabeculse  cranii,  judged  by  their  relation- 
ships to  the  nerves,  may  represent  a  pair  of  prse-oral  visceral 
arches.  In  his  unpublished  notes  there  is  evidence  that  he  was 
bringing  to  the  support  of  this  conclusion  the  discovery  of  a 
supposed  4th  branch  to  the  trigeminal  nerve — ^the  relationships 
of  this  (which  he  proposed  to  term  the  "  hyporhinal "  or  palato- 
nasal  division)  and  the  ophthalmic  (to  have  been  termed  the 
"orbitonasal"*)  to  the  trabecular  arch  and  a  supposed  pra- 

*  A  term  already  applied  by  him  in  1875  to  the  correspondinij  nerve 
in  the  Batrachia.     {Ency.  Brit,  9th  edition,  vol.  i.,  art.  **  Amphibia.") 

473 


474 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


mandihular  visceral  deft,  being  r^;arded  as  repetitional  of  those 
of  the  maxillary  and  mandibular  divisions  to  the  mandibular 
cleft  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  von  Kupffer  is  the  only  observer 
who  has  given  this  startling  conclusion  support,  in  his  famous 
Studieu  (Hf.  I.  Kopf  Adpenser,  Munchen,  1893),  and  frcmi  the 
nature  of  other  recent  work  on  the  genesis  of  parts  of  the 
cranium  hitherto  thought  to  be  wholly  trabecular  in  origin,  it 
might  well  be  further  uphdd.  As  fc^  the  discovery  of  the 
nerve,  I  have  been  lately  mudi  interested  to  find  that  Mr.  E. 
Phelps  Allis,  jun.,  an  investigator  w6o  has  done  grand  work  in 
Cranial  Morpholep,  has  recently  and  independently  arriv^  at 
a  similar  result  It  was  while  working  in  my  laboratory,  ia  July 
last  that  he  mentioned  the  fact  to  me.  Remembering  that  your 
father  had  published  the.  aforementioned  hints  on  the  subject 
and  recalling  conversations  I  had  with  him,  it  occurred  to  nu^ 
to  look  into  his  unpublished  MSS.  (then  bdng  sorted),  if  per-* 
diance  he  had  gone  further.  And,  bdiold!  there  is  a  lengthy 
attempt  to  write  the  matter  up  in  full,  in  which,  among  other 
things,  he  was  seeking  to  show  that,  on  this  basis,  the  mode  of 
termination  of  the  notochord  in  the  Craniata,  and  in  the 
Branchiorto  midae  (in  which  the  trabecular  ardi  is  undiffer- 
entiated), is  readily  explained.  Mr.  Allis's  studied  are  now 
progressing,  and  I  have  arranged  with  him  that  if,  in  the  end, 
his  results  come  sufficiently  close  to  your  father's,  he  shall  give 
his  work  due  recognition  and  publidty. 

Among  his  schemes  of  the  early  '8o's,  there  was  actually 
commenced  a  work  on  the  principles  of  Mammalian  Anatomy 
and  an  Elementary  Treatise  on  the  Vcrtebrata.  The  former 
exists  in  the  shape  of  a  number  of  drawings  with  very  brief 
notes,  the  latter  to  a  slight  extent  only  in  MS.  In  the  former, 
intended  for  the  medical  student  and  as  a  means  of  familiarising 
him  with  the  anatomical  "  tree "  as  distinct  from  its  surgical 
"  leaves,"  your  father  once  again  returned  to  the  skull,  and  he 
leaves  a  scheme  for  a  revised  terminology  of  its  nerve  exits 
worthy  his  best  and  most  clear-headed  endeavours  of  the  past.* 

*  Concerning  this  he  wrote  to  Professor  Howes  in  1890  when  giv- 
ing him  permission  to  denote  two  papers  which  he  was  about  to  pre- 
sent to  the  Zoological  Society,  as  the  first  which  emanated  from  the 
Huxley  Research  Laboratory  : — "  Pray  do  as  you  think  best  about  the 
nomenclature.  I  remember  when  I  began  to  work  at  the  skull  it  seemed 
a  hopeless  problem,  and  years  elapsed  before  I  got  hold  of  the  clue." 

And  six  weeks  later,  he  writes  :  **  You  are  always  welcome  to  turn 
anything  of  mine  to  account,  though  I  vow  I  do  not  just  now  recollect 


APPENDIX  I 


475 


And  well  do  I  remember  how,  in  the  '8o's,  both  in  the  class- 
room and  in  conversation,  he  would  emphasise  the  fact  that  the 
hypoglossus  nerve  roots  of  the  mammal  arise  serially  with  the 
ventral  roots  of  the  spinal  nerves,  little  thinking  that  the  dis- 
covery by  Froriejp,  in  1886,  of  their  dorsal  ganglionated  counter- 
parts, would  establish  the  actual  homology  between  the  two,  and 
by  leading  to  the  conclusion  that  though  actual  vertebrae  do 
not  contribute  to  the  formation  of  the  mammalian  skull,  its 
occipital  region  is  of  truncal  origin,  mark  the  most  revolution- 
ary advance  in  cranial  morphology  since  his  own  of  1856. 

Much  of  the  final  zoological  work  of  his  life  lay  with  the 
Bony  Fishes,  and  he  leaves  unfinished  (indeed  only  just  com- 
menced) a  memoir  embodying  a  new  scheme  of  classification  of 
these,  which  shows  that  he  was  intending  to  do  for  them  what 
he  did  for  Birds  in  the  most  active  period  of  his  career.  It  was 
my  good  fortune  to  have  helped  as  a  hodman  in  the  study  of 
these  creatures,  with  a  view  to  a  Text-book  we  were  to  have 
written  conjointly,  and  as  I  realise  what  he  was  intending  to 
make  out  of  the  dry  facts,  I  am  filled  with  grief  at  the  thought 
of  what  we  must  have  lost.  His  classification  was  based  on  the 
labours  of  years,  as  testified  by  a  vast  accumulation  of  rough 
notes  and  sketches,  and  as  a  conspicuous  feature  of  it  there 
stands  the  embodiment  under  one  head  of  all  those  fishes  having 
the  swim-bladder  in  connection  with  the  auditory  organ  by 
means  of  a  chain  of  ossicles  —  a  revolutionary  arrangement, 
which  later,  in  the  hands  of  the  late  Dr.  Sagemahl,  and  by  his 
introduction  of  the  famous  term — "  Ostariophyseae,"  has  done 
more  than  all  else  of  recent  years  to  clear  the  Ichthyological 
air.  Your  father  had  anticipated  this  unpublished,  and  in  a 
proposal  to  unite  the  Herrings  and  Pikes  into  a  single  group, 
the  "  Clupesoces,"  he  had  further  g^ven  promise  of  a  new  sys- 
tem, based  on  the  study  of  the  structure  of  the  fins,  jaws,  and 
reproductive  organs  of  the  Bony  Fishes,  the  classifications  of 
which  are  still  largely  chaotic,  which  would  have  been  as  revo- 
lutionary as  it  was  rational.  New  terms  both  in  taxonomy  and 
anatomy  were  contemplated,  and  in  part  framed.  His  published 
terms  "  Elasmo-"  and  "  Cysto-arian"  are  the  adjective  form  of 
two — far-reaching  and  significant — which  give  an  idea  of  what 
was  to  have  come.  Similarly,  the  spinose  fin-rays  were  to  have 
been  termed  "  acanthonemes/*  the  branching  and  multiarticulate 


anything  about  the  terms  you  mention.     If  you  were  to  examine  me 
in  my  own  papers  I  believed  should  be  plucked." 


;^76  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

^  arthronemes,**  and  those  of  the  more  elementary  and  **  adipose 
fin  "  type  ''  protonemes  " :  and  had  he  lived  to  complete  the  task, 
I  question  whether  it  would  not  have  excelled  his  earlier  achieve- 
ments. 

The  Rabbit  was  to  have  been  the  subject  of  the  first  of  the 
afore-mentioned  books,  and  in  the  desire  to  get  at  the  full  mean- 
ing of  problems  which  arose  during  its  prc^ess,  he  was  1^  to 
digress  into  a  general  anatomical  survey  of  the  Rodentia,  and 
in  testimony  to  this  there  remain  five  or  six  books  of  rough 
notes  bearing  dates  1880  to  1884,  and  a  series  of  finished  pencil- 
drawings,  which,  as  works  of  art  and  accurate  delineations  of 
fact,  are  among  the  most  finished  productions  of  his  hand.  In 
the  same  manner  his  contemplated  work  upon  the  Vertebrata 
led  him  during  1879-1880  to  renewed  investigation  of  the  anato- 
my of  some  of  the  more  aberrant  orders.  Especially  as  concern- 
ing the  Marsupialia  and  Edentata  was  this  the  case,  and  to  the 
end  in  view  he  secured  living  specimens  of  the  Vulpine  Pha- 
langer,  and  purchased  of  the  Zoolc^cal  Society  the  Sloths  and 
Ant-eaters  which  during  that  period  died  in  their  Gardens. 
These  he  carefully  dissected,  and  he  leaves  among  his  papers  a 
series  of  incomplete  notes  (fullest  as  concerning  the  Phalanger 
and  Cape  Ant-eater  lOrycteropus]  ♦),  which  were  never  fin- 
ished up. 

They  prove  that  he  intended  the  production  of  special  mono- 
graphs on  the  anatomy  of  these  peculiar  mammalian  forms,  as 
he  did  on  members  of  other  orders  which  he  had  less  fully  in- 
vestigated, and  on  the  more  important  groups  of  fishes  alluded 
to  in  the  earlier  part  of  my  letter;  and  there  seems  no  doubt, 
from  the  collocation  of  dates  and  study  of  the  order  of  the 
events,  that  his  memorable  paper  "  On  the  Application  of  the 
Laws  of  Evolution  to  the  arrangement  of  the  Vertebrata,  and 
more  particularly  of  the  Mammalia,"  published  in  the  Proc, 
Zool.  Soc.  for  1880, — the  most  masterly  among  his  scientific 
theses — was  the  direct  outcome  of  this  intention,  the  only  ex- 
pression which  he  gave  to  the  world  of  the  interaction  of  a 
series  of  revolutionary  ideas  and  conceptions  (begotten  of  the 
labours  of  his  closing  years  as  a  working  zoologist)  which  were 


*  I  was  privileged  to  assist  in  the  dissection  of  the  latter  animal, 
and  well  do  I  remember  how,  when  by  means  of  a  blow-pipe  he  had 
inflated  the  bladder,  intent  on  determining  its  limit  of  distensibility, 
the  organ  burst,  with  unpleasant  results,  which  called  forth  the 
remark,  **  I  think  we'll  leave  it  at  that !  "* 


APPENDIX   I 


477 


at  the  period  assuming  shape  in  his  mind.  They  have  done 
more  than  all  else  of  their  period  to  rationalise  the  application 
of  our  knowledge  of  the  Vertebrata,  and  have  now  left  their 
mark  for  all  time  on  the  history  of  progress,  as  embodied  in  our 
classificatory  systems. 

He  was  in  1882  extending  his  important  observations  upon 
the  respiratory  apparatus  from  birds  to  reptiles,  with  results 
which  show  him  to  have  been  keenly  appreciative  of  the  exist- 
ence of  fundamental  points  of  similarity  between  the  Avian  and 
Chelonian  types — a  field  which  has  been  more  recently  inde- 
pendently opened  up  by  Milani. 

Nor  must  it  be  imagined  that  after  the  publication  of  his 
ideal  work  on  the  Crayfishes  in  1880,  he  had  forsaken  the  In- 
vertebrata.  On  the  contrary,  during  the  late  '70's,  and  on  till 
1882,  he  accumulated  a  considerable  number  of  drawings  (as 
usual  with  brief  notes),  on  the  MoUusca.  Some  are  rough, 
others  beautiful  in  every  respect,  and  among  the  more  conspicu- 
ous outcomes  of  the  work  are  some  detailed  observations  on  the 
nervous  system,  and  an  attempt  to  formulate  a  new  terminology 
of  orientation  of  the  Acephalous  Molluscan  body.  The  period 
embraces  that  of  his  research  upon  the  Spirula  of  the  Choi' 
lenger  expedition,  since  published;  and  incidentally  to  this  he 
also  accumulated  a  series  of  valuable  drawings,  with  explana- 
tory notes,  of  Cephalopod  anatomy,  which,  as  accurate  records 
of  fact,  are  unsurpassed. 

As  you  are  aware,  he  was  practically  the  founder  of  the 
Anthropological  Institute.  Here  again,  in  the  late  '6o*s  and 
early  '70's,  he  was  most  clearly  contemplating  a  far-reaching 
inquiry  into  the  physical  anthropology  of  all  races  of  man- 
kind. There  remain  in  testimony  to  this  some  400  to  500 
photographs  (which  I  have  had  carefully  arranged  in  order 
and  registered),  most  of  them  of  the  nude  figure  standing 
erect,  with  the  arm  extended  against  a  scale.  A  desultory 
correspondence  proves  that  in  connection  with  these  he  was 
in  treaty  with  British  residents  and  agents  all  over  the  world, 
with  the  Admiralty  and  naval  officers,  and  that  all  was  being 
done  with  a  fixed  idea  in  view.  He  was  clearly  contemplating 
something  exhaustive  and  definite  which  he  never  fulfilled, 
and  the  method  is  now  the  more  interesting  from  its  being  essen- 
tially the  same  as  that  recently  and  independently  adopted  by 
Mortillet. 

Beyond  this,  your  father's  notes  reveal  numerous  other  indi- 
cations of  matters  and  phases  of  activity,  of  g^eat  interest  in 


4;ra  LIFE  OF  PBLOFESSOJl.  HUXLEY 

thd'r  bearings  on  the  history  aild  prc^ess*  of  contemporary  in- 
vestigation, but  these  are  of  a  detailed  and  wholly  technical 
order. 


APPENDIX   II 

His  administrative  work  as  an  officer  of  the  Royal 
Society  is  described  in  the  following  note  by  Sir  Joseph 
Hooker: — 

Mr.  Huxley  was  appointed  Joint-Secretary  of  the  Royal 
Society,  November  30,  1871,  in  succession  to  Dc  Sharpey,.  Sir 
George  Airy  being  President,  and  Professor  (now  Sir  Georg^e> 
Stokes,  Senior  Secretary.  He  held  the  office  till  November  30, 
1880.  The  duties  of  the  office  are  manifold  and  heavy;  they 
include  attendance  at  all  the  meetings  of  the  Fellows,  and  o£ 
the  councils,  committees,  and  sub-committees  of  the  Society, 
and  especially  the  supervision  of  the  pqnting  and  illustrating^ 
all  papers  on-  biological  subjects  that  are  published  in  the  So- 
ciety's Transactions  and  Proceedings :  the  latter  often  involving 
a  protracted  correspondence  with  the  authors.  To  this  must  be 
added  a  share  in  the  supervision  of  the  staff  of  officers,  of  the 
library  and  correspondence,  and  the  details  of  house-keeping. 

The  appointment  was  well-timed  in  the  interest  of  the  So-r 
ciety,  for  the  experience  he  had  obtained  as  an  officer  in  the  Sur- 
veying Expedition  of  Captain  Stanley  rendered  his  co-operation 
and  advice  of  the  greatest  value  in  the  efforts  which  the  Society 
had  recently  commenced  to  induce  the  Government,  through 
the  Admiralty  especially,  to  undertake  the  physical  and  bio- 
logical exploration  of  the  ocean.  It  was  but  a  few  months 
before  his  appointment  that  he  had  been  placed  upon  a  com- 
mittee of  the  Society,  through  which  H.M.S.  Porcupine  was 
employed  for  this  purpose  in  the  European  seas,  and  negotiations 
had  already  been  commenced  with  the  Admiralty  for  a  voyage 
of  circumnavigation  with  the  same  objects,  which  eventuated 
in  the  Challenger  Expedition. 

^In  the  first  year  of  his  appointment,  the  equipment  of  the 
Challenger,  and  selection  of  its  officers,  was  entrusted  to  the 
Royal  Society,  and  in  the  preparation  of  the  instructions  to  the 
naturalists  Mr.  Huxley  had  a  dominating  responsibility.  In  the 
same  year  a  correspondence  commenced  with  the  India  Office 
on  the  subject  of  deep-sea  dredging  in  the  Indian  Ocean   (it 


APPENDIX   II 


479 


came  to  nothing),  and  another  with  the  Royal  Geographical 
Society  on  that  of  a  North  Polar  Expedition,  which  resulted 
in  the  Nares  Expedition  (1875).  In  1873,  another  with  the 
Admiralty  on  the  advisability  of  appointing  naturalists  to  ac- 
company two  of  the  expeditions  about  to  be  despatched-  for  ob- 
serving the  transit  of  Venus  across  the  sun's  disk  in  Mauritius 
and  Kerguelen,  which  resulted  in  three  naturalists  being  ap- 
pointed. Arduous  as  was  the  correspondence  devolving  on  the 
Biological  Secretary,  through  the  instructing  and  instalment  of 
these  two  expeditions,  it  was  as  nothing  compared  with  the 
official,  demi-official,  and  private,  with  the  Government  and  in- 
dividuals, that  arose  from  the  Government  request  that  the 
Royal  Society  should  arrange  for  the  publication  and  distribu- 
tion of  the  enormous  collections  brought  home  by  the  above- 
named  expedition.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  Mr.  Huxley 
had  a  voice  in  every  detail  of  these  publications.  The  sittings 
of  the  Committee  of  Publication  of  the  Challenger  Expedition 
collections  (of  which  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker  was  chairman,  and  Mr. 
Huxley  the  most  active  member)  were  protracted  from  1876 
to  1895,  and  resulted  in  the  publication  of  fifty  royal  quarto 
volumes,  with  plates,  maps,  sections,  etc.,  the  work  of  seventy- 
six  authors,  every  shilling  of  the  expenditure  on  which  (some 
£50,000)  was  passed  under  the  authority  of  the  Committee  of 
Publication. 

Nor  was  Mr.  Huxley  less  actively  interested  in  the  domestic 
affairs  of  the  Society.  In  1873  the  whole  establishment  was 
translated  from  the  building  subsequently  occupied  by  the  Royal 
Academy  to  that  which  it  now  inhabits  in  the  same  quadrangle ; 
a  flitting  of  library  stuff  and  appurtenances  involving  great  re- 
sponsibilities on  the  officers  for  the  satisfactory  re-establishment 
of  the  whole  institution.  In  1874  a  very  important  alteration 
of  the  bye-laws  was  effected,  whereby  that  which  gave  to  Peers 
the  privilege  of  being  proposed  for  election  as  Fellows,  without 
previous  selection  by  the  Committee  (and  to  which  bye-laws, 
as  may  be  supposed,  Mr.  Huxley  was  especially  repugnant), 
was  replaced  by  one  restricting  that  privilege  to  Privy  Council- 
lors. In  1875  ^^  actively  supported  a  proposition  for  extending 
the  interests  taken  in  the  Soc^iety  by  holding  annually  a  recep- 
tion, to  which  the  lady  friends  of  the  Fellows  who  were  in- 
terested in  science  should  be  invited  to  inspect  an  exhibition  of 
some  of  the  more  recent  inventions,  appliances  and  discoveries 
in  science.  And  in  the  same  year  another  reform  took  place  in 
which  he  was  no  less  interested,  which  was  the  abolition  of  the 


486  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

entrance  fees  for  ordinary  Fdlows,  which  had  proved  a  bar  to 
the  coming  forward  of  men  of  small  incomes,  but  great  emi- 
nence. The  loss  of  income  to  the  Society  from  this  was  met 
by  a  subscription  of  no  less  than  £10,666,  raised  almost  entirely 
tunongst  the  Fellows  themselves  for  the  purpose. 

In  1876  a  responsibility,  that  fell  heavily  on  the  Secretaries, 
^as  the  allotment  annually  of  a  grant  by  the  Treasury  of  £4000, 
to  be  expended,  under  the  direction  of  the  Royal*  and  other 
learned  societies,  on  the  advancement  of  science.  Every  detail 
of  the  business  of  this  grant  is  undertaken  by  a  lai^  committee 
-of  the  Royal  and  other  scientific  societies,  which  meets  in  the 
Society's  rooms,  and  where  all  the  business  connected  with  the 
grant  is  conducted  and  the  records  kept 


APPENDIX   III 

LIST  OF  ESSAYS,  BOOKS,  AND  SCIENTIFIC  MEMOIRS 

BY  T.  H.  HUXLEY 

ESSAYS 

"The  Darwinian  Hjrpothesis."     {Times,  December  26,  1859.) 

Collected  Essays,  ii. 
"  On  the  Educational  Value  of  the  Natural  History  Sciences.*' 

(An  Address  delivered  at  St.  Martin's  Hall,  on  July  22, 
1854,  and  published  as  a  pamphlet  in  that  year.)  Lay 
Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

"  Time  and  Life."     (Macmillan's  Magazine,  December  1859.) 

"The  Origin  of  Species."  {The  Westminster  Review,  April 
i860.)    Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  ii. 

"A  Lobster:  or  the  Study  of  Zoology."  (A  Lecture  delivered 
at  the  South  Kensington  Museum  in  1861,  and  subse- 
quently published  by  the  Department  of  Science  and  Art. 
Original  title,  "  On  the  Study  of  Zoology.")  Lay  Ser- 
mons; Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"  Geological  Contemporaneity  and  Persistent  Types  of  Life." 
(The  Anniversary  Address  to  the  Geological  Society  for 
1862.)    Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  viii. 

*  It  is  often  called  a  grant  to  the  Royal  Society.  This  is  an  error. 
The  Royal  Society,  as  such,  in  no  way  participates  in  this  grant.  The 
Society  makes  grants  from  funds  in  its  own  possession  only. 


APPENDIX   III 


481 


it 


n 


Six  Lectures  to  Working  Men  on  Our  Knowledge  of  the 
Causes  of  the  Phenomena  of  Organic  Nature,  1863."  Col- 
lected Essays,  ii. 
Man's  Place  in  Nature,"  see  List  of  Books.  Republished,  Col- 
lected Essays,  vii. 
Criticisms  on  *  The  Origin  of  Species/ "  (The  Natural 
History  Review,  1864.)  Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Es- 
says, ii. 

"  Emancipation — Black  and  White."  (The  Reader,  May  20, 
1865.)    ^^y  Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

**  On  the  Methods  and  Results  of  Ethnology."  (The  Fortnightly 
Review,  1865.)  Critiques  and  Addresses;  Collected  Es- 
says, vii. 

"  On  the  Advisableness  of  Improving  Natural  Knowledge."  (A 
Lay  Sermon  delivered  in  St.  Martin's  Hall,  January  7, 
1866,  and  subsequently  published  in  the  Fortnightly  Re- 
view,)   Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  i. 

"A  Liberal  Education:  and  where  to  find  it."  (An  Address 
to  the  South  London  Working  Men's  College,  delivered 
January  4,  1868,  and  subsequently  published  in  Macmillan's 
Magazine.)    Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

"  On  a  Piece  of  Chalk."  (A  Lecture  delivered  to  the  working 
men  of  Norwich,  during  the  meeting  of  the  British  Asso- 
ciation, in  1868.  Subsequently  published  in  Macmillan's 
Magazine,)    Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"  On  the  Physical  Basis  of  Life."  (A  Lay  Sermon,  delivered 
in  Edinburgh,  on  Sunday,  November  8,  1868,  at  the  request 
of  the  late  Rev.  James  Cranbrook;  subsequently  published 
in  the  Fortnightly  Review,)  Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Es- 
says, i. 

"  The  Scientific  Aspects  of  Positivism."  (A  Reply  to  Mr.  Con- 
greve's  Attack  upon  the  Preceding  Paper.  Published  in 
the  Fortnightly  Review,  1869.)     Lay  Sermons, 

"  The  Genealogy  of  Animals."  (A  Review  of  Haeckel's  NatUr- 
liche  Schopfungs-Geschichte.  The  Academy,  1869.)  Cri- 
tiques and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  ii. 

"  Geological  Reform."  (The  Anniversary  Address  to  the  Geo- 
logical Society  for  1869.)  Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Es- 
says, viii. 

"  Scientific  Education :  Notes  of  an  After-Dinner  Speech." 
(Delivered  before  the  Liverpool  Philomathic  Society  in 
April  1869,  and  subsequently  published  in  Macmillan's 
Magazine,)     Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

67 


482  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

''  On  Descartes'  VDiscourse  tottdiing  the  Method  of  .using  one's 
Reason  rightly,  and  of  seeking  Scientific  Truth/"  (An 
Address  to  the  Cambridge  Young  Men's  Christian  Society, 
delivered  on  March  24,  1870,  and  subsequently  published 
in  MacmUlan's  Magazine.)  Lay  Sermons;  Collected  Es- 
'  says,  i. 

"  On  some  Fixe4  Points  in  British  Ethnolc^."  (The  Contem- 
porary Review,  July  1870.)  Critiques  and  Addresses;  Col- 
lected Bssays,  vii. 

''  Biogenesis  and  Abiogeneais.?  (The  Presidential  Address  to 
the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science, 
1870.)    Critiques  and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"Paleontolc^  and  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution."  (The  Presi- 
dential Address  to  the  Geological  Society,  1870.)  Critiques 
and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  viii. 

''.On  Medical  Education."  (An  Address  to  the  Students  of  the 
Faculty  of  Medicine  in  University  College,  London,  1870.) 
Critiques  and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

**  On  Coral  and  Coral  Reefs."  (Good  Words,  1870.)  Critiques 
and  Addresses. 

"  The  School  Boards :  What  they,  can  do,  and  what  they  may 
do."    (The  Contemporary  Review,  1870.)     Critiques  and 
.  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

''Administrative  Nihilism."  (An  Address  delivered  to  the 
Members  of  the  Midland  Institute,  on  October  9,  1871,  and 
subsequently  published  in  the  Fortnightly  Review.)  Cri- 
tiques and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  i. 

"  Mr.  Darwin's  Critics."  (The  Contemporary  Review,  Novem- 
ber 1871.)    Critiques  and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  ii. 

"  On  the  Formation  of  Coal."  (A  Lecture  delivered  before  the 
Members  of  the  Bradford  Philosophical  Institution,  and 
subsequently  published  in  the  Contemporary  Review.) 
Critiques  and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"Yeast."  (The  Contemporary  Review,  December  29,  1871.) 
Critiques  and  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"  Bishop  Berkeley  on  the  Metaphysics  of  Sensation."  (Mac- 
millan's  Magazine,  June  1871.)  Critiques  and  Addresses; 
Collected  Essays,  vi. 

"The  Problems  of  the  Deep  Sea"  (1873).    Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"Universities:  Actual  and  Ideal."  (The  Inaugural  Address  of 
the  Lord  Rector  of  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  February 
2"^,  1874.  Contemporary  Review,  1874.)  Science  and 
Culture;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 


a 


tt 


APPENDIX  III  483 

"  Joseph  Priestley."  (An  Address  delivered  on  the  Occasion  of 
the  Presentation  of  a  Statue  of  Priestley  to  the  Town  of 
Birmingham  on  August  i,  1874.)  Science  and  Culture; 
Collected  Essays,  iii. 

"  On  the  Hypothesis  that  Animals  are  Automata,  and  its  His- 
tory." (An  Address  delivered  at  the  Meeting  of  the  Brit- 
ish Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  Bel- 
fast, 1874.)  Science  and  Culture;  Collected  Essays,  i. 
On  some  of  the  Results  of  the  Expedition  of  H.M.S.  Chal- 
lenger" 1875.  Collected  Essays,  viii. 
On  the  Border  Territory  between  the  Animal  and  Vegetable 
Kingdoms."  (An  Evening  Lecture  at  the  Royal  Institu- 
tion, Friday,  January  28,  1876.  Macmillan's  Magazine, 
1876.)    Science  and  Culture;  Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"  Three  Lectures  on  Evolution."  (New  York,  September  18, 
20,  22,  1876.)    American  Addresses;  Collected  Essays,  iv. 

"  On  the  Study  of  Biology."  (A  Lecture  in  connection  with  the 
Loan  Collection  of  Scientific  Apparatus  at  South  Kensing- 
ton Museum,  December  16,  1876.)  American  Addresses; 
Collected  Essays,  iii. 

"  Address  on  University  Education."  (Delivered  at  the  open- 
ing of  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  Sep- 
tember 12,  1876.)  American  Addresses;  Collected  Es- 
says, iii. 

"  Elementary  Instruction  in  Physiology."  (Read  at  the  Meeting 
of  the  Domestic  Economy  Congress  at  Birmingham,  1877.) 
Science  and  Culture;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

"  Technical  Education."  (An  Address  delivered  to  the  Working 
Men's  Club  and  Institute,  December  i,  1877.)  Science  and 
Culture;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

"  Evolution  in  Biology."  (The  Encyclopcedia  Britannica,  ninth 
edition,  vol.  viii.  1878.)  Science  and  Culture;  Collected 
Essays,  ii. 

"  Hume,"  1878.    Collected  Essays,  vi.    See  also  under  "  Books." 

"  On  Sensation  and  the  Unity  of  Structure  of  the  Sensiferous 
Organs."  (An  Evening  Lecture  at  the  Royal  Institution, 
Friday,  March  7,  1879.)  Nineteenth  Century,  April  1879. 
Science  and  Culture;  Collected  Essays,  vi. 

"  Prefatory  Note  to  the  Translation  of  E.  Haeckel's  Freedom 
in  Science  and  Teaching,"  1879.     (Kegan  Paul.) 

"  On  Certain  Errors  respecting  the  Structure  of  the  Heart  at- 
tributed to  Aristotle."  Nature,  November  6,  1879.  Sci- 
ence and  Culture, 


484  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

"  The  Coming  of  Age  of  *  The  Origin  of  Species.'  '*  (An  Even- 
ing Lecture  at  the  Royal  Institution,  Friday,  April  g, 
1880.)    Science  and  Culture;  Collected  Essays,  ii. 

**  On  the  Method  of  Zadig."  (A  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Work- 
ing Men's  College,  Great  Ormond  Street,  i88a  Nine- 
teenth Century,  June  18S0.)  Science  and  Culture;  Col- 
Ucted  Essays,  iv. 

"  Science  and  Culture/'  (An  Address  delivered  at  the  Openin^^ 
of  Sir  Josiah  Mason's  Science  College,  at  Birmingham,  on 
October  i,  1S80.)  Science  and  Culture;  Collected  Es- 
says,  iii. 

''The  Connection  of  the  Biological  Sciences  with  Medicine." 
(An  Address  delivered  at  the  Meeting  of  the  International 
Medical  Congress  in  London,  August  9,  1881.)  Science 
and  Culture;  Collected  Essays,  iii. 

*.*  The  Rise  and  Prc^^ress  of  Paleontology."  (An  Address  deliv- 
ered at  the  Yoiic  Meeting  of  the  British  Association  for 
the  Advancement  of  Science,  1881.)  Controverted  Ques- 
tions; Collected  Essays,  iv. 

"Charles  Darwin."  (Obituary  Notice  in  Nature,  April  1882.) 
Collected  Essays,  ii. 

"  On  Science  and  Art  in  Relation  to  Education."  (An  Address 
to  the  Members  of  the  Liverpool  Institution,  1882.)  Col- 
lected Essays,  iii. 

"  The  State  and  the  Medical  Profe^ipn."  (The  Opening  Ad- 
dress at  the  London  Hospital  Medical  School,  1884.)  Col- 
lected Essays,  iii. 

"  The  Darwin  Memorial."  (A  Speech  delivered  at  the  Unveil- 
ing of  the  Darwin  Statue  at  South  Kensington,  June  9, 
1885.)    Collected  Essays,  ii. 

"  The  Interpreters  of  Genesis  and  the  Interpreters  of  Nature." 
(Nineteenth  Century,  December  1885.)  Controverted 
Questions;  Collected  Essays,  iv. 

"  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Genesis."  (Nineteenth  Century,  February 
1886.)     Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Essays,  iv. 

"  The   Evolution   of  Theology :   An   Anthropological    Study." 
(Nineteenth  Century,  March  and  April  1886.)     Contro- 
verted Questions;  Collected  Essays,  iv. 

"  Science  and  Morals."  (Fortnightly  Review,  November  1886.) 
Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Essays,  ix. 

"  Scientific  and  Pseudo- Scientific  Realism."  (Nineteenth  Cen- 
tury, February  1887.)  Controverted  Questions;  Collected 
Essays,  v. 


APPENDIX  III 


485 


(( 


it 


"  Science  and  Pseudo-Science."     (Nineteenth  Century,  April 
1887.)  Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Essays,  v. 
An    Episcopal    Trilogy."      (Nineteenth    Century,    November 

1887.)     Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Essays,  v. 
Address  on  behalf  of  the  National  Association  for  the  Pro- 
motion  of  Technical  Education"   (1887).      Collected  Es- 
says, iii. 

"The  Progress  of  Science"  (1887).  (Reprinted  from  The 
Reign  of  Queen  Victoria,  by  T.  H.  Ward.)  Collected  Es- 
says, i. 

"Darwin  Obituary."  (Proc,  Roy.  Soc,  1888.)  Collected  Es- 
says, ii. 

"  The  Struggle  for  Existence  in  Human  Society."  (Nineteenth 
Century,  February  1888.)     Collected  Essays,  ix. 

"  Agnosticism."  (Nineteenth  Century,  February  1889.)  Con- 
troverted Questions;  Collected  Essays,  v. 

"  The  Value  of  Witness  to  the  Miraculous."  (Nineteenth  Cen- 
tury, March  1889.)  Controverted  Questions;  Collected 
Essays,  v. 

"  Agnosticism :  A  Rejoinder."  (Nineteenth  Century,  April 
1889.)     Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Essays,  v. 

"  Agnosticism  and  Christianity."  (Nineteenth  Century,  June 
1889.)   Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Essays,  v. 

"  The  Lights  of  the  Church  and  the  Light  of  Science."  (Nine- 
teenth Century,  July  1890.)  Controverted  Questions;  Col- 
lected Essays,  iv. 

"  The  Keepers  of  the  Herd  of  Swine."     (Nineteenth  Century, 
December  1890.)     Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Es- 
says, V. 
Capital,  the  Mother  of  Labour."     (Nineteenth  Century,  March 

1890.)     Collected  Essays,  ix. 
The  Natural  Inequality  of  Men."     (Nineteenth  Century,  Janu- 
ary 1890.)     Collected  Essays,  i. 

"  Natural  Rights  and  Political  Rights."  (Nineteenth  Century, 
February  1890.)     Collected  Essays,  i. 

"  Government :  Anarchy  or  Regimentation."  (Nineteenth  Cen- 
tury, May  1890.)     Collected  Essays,  i. 

"  Autobiography."  (1890,  Collected  Essays,  i.)  This  originally 
appeared  with  a  portrait  in  a  series  of  biographical 
sketches  by  C.  Engel. 

"  The  Aryan  Question."  (Nineteenth  Century,  November 
1890.)     Collected  Esays,  vii. 

"  Illustrations    of    Mr.    Gladstone's    Controversial    Methods." 


ii 


« 


486  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

Nineteenth  Century,  March  1891.)     Controverted  Ques- 
tions; Collected  Essays,  v. 

"  Hasisadra's  Adventure."  (Nineteenth  Century,  June  1891.) 
Controverted  Questions;  Collected  Essays,  iv. 

*'  Possibilities  and  Impossibilities."  (The  Agnostic  Annual  for 
1892.)    1891,  Collected  Essays,  v. 

"  Social  Diseases  and  Worse  Remedies  "  (1891).  Letters  to  the 
Times,  December  1890  and  January  1891.  Published  in 
pamphlet  form  (Macmillan  &  Co.)  1891.  Collected  Es- 
says, ix. 

**An  Apologetic  Irenicon."  (Fortnightly  Review,  November 
1892.) 

"  Prol<^^e  to  *  Controverted  Questions ' "  ( 1892) .  Controverted 
Questions;  Collected  Essays,  v. 

**  Evolution  and  Ethics/'  being  the  Romanes  Lecture  for  1893. 
Also  "  Prolegomena,"  1894.    Collected  Essays,  ix. 

**  Owen's  Position  in  Anatomical  Science/'  being  a  chapter  in  tiie 
Life  of  Sir  Richard  Owen,  by  his  grandson,  the  Rev.  Rich- 
ard Owen  (1894). 

BOOKS 

''Kolliker's  Manual  of  Human  Histology."  (Translated  and 
edited  by  T.  H.  Huxley  and  G.  Busk),  1853. 

"  Evidence  as  to  Man's  Place  in  Nature,"  1863. 

"Lectures  on  the  Elements  of  Comparative  Anatomy"  (one 
volume  only  published),  1864. 

"Elementary  Atlas  of  Comparative  Osteology"  (in  12  plates), 
1864. 

"  Lessons  in  Elementary  Physiology."  First  edition  printed 
1866;  second  edition,  1868;  reprinted  1869,  1870,  1871, 
1872  (twice);  third  edition,  1872;  reprinted  1873,  1874, 
1875,  1876,  1878,  1879,  1881,  1883,  1884  (six  times)  ;  fourth 
edition,  1885;  reprinted  1886,  1888,  1890,  1892,  1893 
(twice),  1896,  1898. 

"  An  Introduction  to  the  Classification  of  Animals,"  1869. 

"  Lay  Sermons,  Addresses,  and  Reviews."  First  edition  printed 
1870;  second  edition,  187 1 ;  reprinted  1871,  1872,  1874, 
1877,  1880,  1883;  third  edition,  1887;  reprinted  1891,  1893, 
(twice),  1895,  1899. 

"  Essays  Selected  from  Lay  Sermons,  Addresses,  and  Reviews." 
First  edition,  1871 ;  reprinted  1874,  1877. 

"  Manual  of  the  Anatomy  of  Vertebrated  Animals,"  1871 
(Churchill). 


APPENDIX   III 


487 


it 


"  Critiques  and  Addresses."      First  edition  printed  1873 ;  re- 
printed 1883  and  1890. 
"  A  Course  of  Practical  Instruction  in  Elementary  Biology." 

By  Prof.  Huxley  and  Dr.  H.  N.  Martin.     First  edition 

printed  1875;  second  edition,  1876;  reprinted  1877  (twice), 

1879  (twice),  1881,  1882,  1883,  1885,  1886  (three  times), 

1887;  third  edition,  edited  by  Messrs.  Howes  and  Scott, 

1887;  reprinted  1889,  1892,  1898. 
"American  Addresses."     First  edition  printed  1877;  reprinted 

1886. 
"  Anatomy  of  Invertebrated  Animals,"  1877. 
"  Physiography."    First  edition,  1877;  reprinted  1877,  1878,  1879, 

1880,  1881,  1882,  1883,  1884,  1885  (three  times),  1887,  1888, 

1890,  1891,  1893,  1897. 
"  Hume."    English  Men  of  Letters  Series.    First  edition  printed 

1878;  reprinted  1879  (twice),  1881,  1886,  1887,  1895. 
The  Crayfish :  an  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Zoology,"  1879. 
Evolution  and  Ethics."     First  edition  printed  1893;  reprinted 

1893   (three  times);  second  edition,  1893;  tbird  edition, 

1893;  reprinted  1894. 
V  Introductory   Science  Primer."     First  edition  printed  1880 ; 

reprinted  1880,  1886,  1888,  1889  (twice),  1893,  1895,  1899. 
"  Science  and  Culture,  and  other  Essays."    First  edition  printed 

1881 ;  reprinted  1882,  1888. 
"  Social  Diseases  and  Worse  Remedies."     First  edition  printed 

1891 ;  reprinted,  with  additions,  1891  (twice). 
"  Essays  on  some  Controverted  Questions."    Printed  in  1892. 
Collected  Essays.    Vol.  I.  "  Method  and  Results."    First  edition 

printed  1893;  reprinted  1894,  1898. 
Vol.  II.  "  Darwiniana."     First  edition  printed  1893 ;  reprinted 

1894. 
Vol.  III.  "  Science  and  Education."    First  edition  printed  1893 ; 

reprinted  1895. 
Vol.    IV.  "  Science    and    Hebrew    Tradition."      First    edition 

printed  1893;  reprinted  1895,  1898. 
Vol.    V.  "  Science    and    Christian    Tradition."      First    edition 

printed  1894;  reprinted  1895,  1897. 
Vol.  VI.    "  Hume,  with  Helps  to  the  Study  of  Berkeley."    First 

edition  printed  1894;  reprinted  1897. 
Vol.  VII.  "  Man's  Place  in  Nature."     First  printed  for  Mac- 

millan  and  Co.  in  1894;  reprinted  1895,  1897. 
Vol.  VIII.  "  Discourses,  Biological  and  Geological."    First  edi- 
tion printed  1894;  reprinted  1896. 


488  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

Vol.  IX.     "  Evolution .  and  Ethics  and  other  Essays/'     First 

edition  printed  i8^;  reprinted  1895,  1898. 
"Scientific  Memoirs/'  vol.  L  printed  1898,  vol.  ii.  printed  1899, 

vols.  iii.  and  iv.  to  follow. 


SCIENTIFIC  MEMOIRS 

"On  a  Hitherto  Undescribed  Structure  in  the  Human  Hair 
Sheath,"  Land.  Medical  Gazette,  i.  1340  (July  1845). 

"Examination  of  the  Corpuscles  of  the  Blood  of  Amphioxus 
Lanceolatus/'  Brit.  Assoc.  Report  (1847),  pt«  ii.  955  Sci. 
Mem.  i. 

"  Description  of  the  Animal  of  Trigonia,"  Proc.  ZooL  Soc.  vol. 
xvii.  (1849),  30-32;  also  in  Ann.  and  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist.  v. 
(1850),  141-143;  Sci.  Mem.  i.  • 

"  On  tibe  Anatomy  and  the  Affinities  of  the  Family  of  the  Me- 
dusae," Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  (1849),  Pt-  "•  4^3  J  -S"^*- 
Mem.  i. 

"  Notes  on  Medusae  and  Polypes,"  Ann.  and  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist. 
vi.  (1850),  66,  67;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 

'*  Observations  sur  la  Circulation  du  Sang  chez  les  MoUusques 
des  Genres  Firole  et  Atlante."  (Extraites  d'une  lettre 
adressee  k  M.  Milne-Edwards.)  Annales  des  Sciences 
NatureUes,  xiv.  (1850),  193-195;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  Observations  upon  the  Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  Salpa  and 
Pyrosoma,"  PhU.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  (1851),  pt.  ii.  567-594; 
also  in  Ann,  and  Mag.  of  Nat,  Hist.  ix.  (1852),  242-244; 
Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  Remarks  upon  Appendicularia  and  Doliolum,  two  Genera  of 
the  Tunicata,"  Phil.  Trans.  Roy,  Soc.  (1851),  pt.  ii.  595- 
606;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  Zoological  Notes  and  Observations  made  on  board  H.M.S. 
Rattlesnake  during  the  years  1848- 1850,"  Ann.  and  Mag. 
Nat.  Hist.  vii.  ser.  ii.  (1851),  304-306,  370-374;  vol.  viii. 
433-442 ;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  Observations  on  the  Genus  Sagitta,"  Brit.  Assoc.  Report 
(1851),  pt.  ii.  y^y  78  (sectional  transactions)  ;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"An  Account  of  Researches  into  the  Anatomy  of  the  Hydro- 
static Acalephae,"  Brit.  Assoc.  Report  (July  1851),  pt.  ii. 
78-80  (sectional  transactions)  ;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  Description  of  a  New  Form  of  Sponge-like  Animal,"  Brit. 
Assoc.  Report  (July  1851),  pt.  ii.  80  (sectional  transac- 
tions) ;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 


APPENDIX  III 


489 


"  Report  upon  the  Researches  of  Prof.  Miiller  into  the  Anatomy 
and  Development  of  the  Echinoderms,"  Ann,  and  Mag,  of 
Nat,  Hist.  ser.  ii.  vol.  viii.  (1851),  1-19;  Sci,  Mem,  i. 

"  Ueber  die  Sexualorgane  der  Diphydae  und  Physophoridae," 
Miiller' s  Archiv  fur  Anatomic,  Physiologic,  und  Wissen- 
schaftliche  Medicin  (1851),  380-384.    Sci.  Mem,  i. 

**Lacinularia  Socialis:  A  Contribution  to  the  Anatomy  and  Phys- 
iology of  the  ^oX\i^r2i,"  Trans, Micr.Soc,  Lond.,  new  series, 
i.  (1853),  1-19J  (Read  December  31,  1851).    Sci,  Mem,  i. 

"Upon  Animal  Individuality,"  Proc,  Roy.  Inst,  i.  (1851-54), 
184-189.  (Abstract  of  a  Friday  evening  discourse  deliv- 
ered on  30th  April  1852.)     Sci,  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Morphology  of  the  Cephalous  Mollusca,  as  Illustrated 
by  the  Anatomy  of  certain  Heteropoda  and  Pteropoda  col- 
lected during  the  voyage  of  H.M.S.  Rattlesnake  in  1846- 
50,"  Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  cxliii.  (1853),  P*^rt  i.  29-66. 
Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  Researches  into  the  Structure  of  the  Ascidians,"  Brit.  Assoc. 
Report  (1852),  part  ii.  76-77.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Anatomy  and  Development  of  Echinococcus  Veterino- 
rum,"  Proc.  Zool.  Soc.  xx.  (1852),  1 10-126.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Identity  of  Structure  of  Plants  and  Animals  " ;  Ab- 
stract of  a  Friday  evening  discourse  delivered  at  the  Royal 
Institution  on  April  15,  1853;  Proc.  Roy.  Inst.  i.  (1851-54), 
298-302;  Edinburgh  New  Phil.  Jour.  liii.  (1852),  172-177. 
Sci.  Mem,  i. 

"  Observations  on  the  Existence  of  Cellulose  in  the  Tunic  of 
Ascidians,"  Quart.  Jour.  Micr.  Sci.  i.  1853 ;  Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Development  of  the  Teeth,  and  on  the  Nature  and  Im- 
port of  Nasmyth's  '  Persistent  Capsule,* "  Quart.  Jour. 
Micr.  Sci.  i.  1853.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"The  Cell-Theory  (Review),"  Brit,  and  For.  Med.  Chir.  Review, 
xii.  (1853),  285-314.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Vascular  System  of  the  Lower  Annulosa,"  Brit.  Assoc. 
Report  (1854),  part  ii.  p.  109.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Common  Plan  of  Animal  Forms."  Abstract  of  a  Fri- 
day evening  discourse  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution 
on  May  12,  1854.)  Proc.  Roy.  Inst.  i.  (1851-54),  444-446. 
Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Structure  and  Relation  of  the  Corpuscula  Tactus  (Tac- 
tile Corpuscles  or  Axile  Corpuscles)  and  of  the  Pacinian 
Bodies,"  Quart.  Jour.  Micr.  Sci.  ii.  (1853),  1-7.  Sci. 
Mem.  i. 


490  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

**  On  the  Ultimate  Structure  and  Relations  of  the  Malpig^ian 
Bodies  of  the  Spleen  and  of  the  Tonsillar  Follicles,''  Quart. 
Jour.  Micr.  Set.  ii.  (1854),  74-82.    Set.  Mem.  u 

**  On  certain  Zoological  Arguments  commonly  adduced  in  favour 
of  the  Hypo^esis  of  the  Progressive  Development  of  Ani- 
mal Life  in  Time."  (Abstract  of  a  Friday  evening  dis- 
course delivered  on  April  ao,  1855.)  Proc.  Roy.  Inst.  ii. 
(1854-58),  82-85.    Set.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  Natural  History  as  Knowledge,  Discipline,  and  Power," 
Roy.  Inst.  Proc.  u.  (1854-58),  187-195.  (Abstract  of  a 
discourse  delivered  on  Friday,  February  15,  1857.)  Set. 
Mem.  i. 

*'  On  the  Present  State  of  Knowledge  as  to  the  Structure  and 
Functions  of  Nerve,"  Proe.  Roy.  Inst.  ii.  (1854-58),  43a- 
437.  (Abstract  of  a  discourse  delivered  on  Friday,  May 
15,  1857.)    Set.  Mem.  i.  . 

(Translation)  "On  Tape  and  Cystic  Worms,"  von  Siebold 
(1857),  for  the  Sydenham  Society. 

"  Contributions  to  leones  Zootomieae,"  by  Victor  Cams  (1857). 

"  On  the  Phenomena  of  Gemmation."  (Abstract  of  a  discourse 
delivered  on  Friday,  May  21,  1858.)  Proe.  Roy.  Inst.  ii. 
(1854-58),  534-538;  SiUiman's  Journal,  xxviii.  (1859), 
206-209.   Set.  Mem.  i. 

"  Contributions  to  the  Anatomy  of  the  Brachiopoda,"  Proe.  Roy. 
Soe.  vii.  (1854-55),  106-117;  241,  242.    Sei.  Mem.  i. 

"On  Hermaphrodite  and  Fissiparous  Species  of  Tubicolar 
Annelidae  (Protula  Dysteri),"  Edin.  New  Phil.  Jour,  i. 
(1855),  1 13-129.    Sci.  Mem,  i. 

"  On  the  Structure  of  Noctiluca  Miliaris,"  Quart.  Jour,  Micr. 
Soc.  ifi.  (1855),  49-54.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Enamel  and  Dentine  of  the  Teeth,"  Quart.  Jour.  Micr. 
Soc.  iii.  (1855),  127-130.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"Memoir  on  *Physalia,"  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  ii.  (1855),  3-5.  Sci, 
Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Anatomy  of  Diphyes,  and  on  the  Unity  of  Composition 
of  the  Diphyidae  and  Physophoridae,  etc.,"  Proc.  Linn, 
Soc.  ii.  (1855),  67-69.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  Tegumentary  Organs,"  The  Cyclopcedia  of  Anatomy  and 
Physiology,  edited  by  Robert  B.  Todd,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  (The 
fascicules  containing  this  article  were  published  between 
August  1855  and  October  1856.)     Sci.  Mem.  i. 

"  On  the  Method  of  Palaeontology,"  Ann.  and  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist, 
xviii.  (1856),  43-54-    ^ci,  Mem.  i. 


APPENDIX  III 


491 


"  Observations  on  the  Structure  and  Affinities  of  Himantop- 

terus/*  Quart.  Jour,  Geol,  Soc,  xii.   (1856),  34-37.     Set. 

Mem,  i, 
"  Further  Observations  on  the  Structure  of  Appendicula  Flabel- 

lum  (Chamisso),"  Quart,  Jour,  Micr,  Soc,  iv.  (1856),  181- 

191.    Sci,  Mem,  i, 
"  Note  on  the  Reproductive  Organs  of  the  Cheilostome  Poly- 

zoa,"  Quart,  Jour,  Micr,  Soc,  iv.  (1856),  191,  192.    Set, 

Mem,  i, 
"  Description   of  a   New   Crustacean    (Pygocephalus   Cooperi, 

Huxley)  from  the  Coal-measures,"  Quart.  Jour,  Geol.  Soc. 

xiii.  (1857),  363-369.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 
"  On  Dysteria,  a  New  Genus  of  Infusoria,"  Quart,  Jour,  Micr. 

Soc,  v.  (1857),  78-82.    Sci,  Mem.  i. 
"  Review  of  Dr.  Hannover's  Memoir :  Ueber  die  Entwickelung 

und  den  Bau  des  Sdugethierzahns*'  Quart.  Jour.  Micr,  Soc. 

V.  (1857),  166-171.    Sci,  Mem.  i. 
"  Letter  to  Mr.  Tyndall  on  the  Structure  of  Glacier  Ice,"  Phil, 

Mag,  xiv.  (1857),  241-260.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 
"  On  Cephalaspis  and  Pteraspis,"  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  xiv. 

(1858),  267-280.    Sci.  Mem.  i. 
"  Observations  on  the  Genus  Pteraspis,"  Brit.  Assoc.  Report 

( 1858),  part  ii.  82,  83.    Sci,  Mem.  i. 
"  On   a   New   Species   of   Plesiosaurus    (P.   Etheridgii)    from 

Street,  near  Glastonbury;  with  Remarks  on  the  Structure 

of  the  Atlas  and  the  Axis  Vertebrae  and  of  the  Cranium 

in  that  Genus,"  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  xiv.  (1853),  281-94. 

Sci,  Mem.  i. 
"  On  the  Theory  of  the  Vertebrate  Skull,"  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  ix. 

(1857-59),   381-457;   Ann,   and  Mag.   of  Nat,   Hist,   iii. 

(1859),  414-39.    Sci.  Mem.  i, 
"  On  the  Structure  and  Motion  of  Glaciers,"  Phil.  Trans.  Roy. 

Soc.  cxlvii.  (1857),  327-346.     (Received  and  read  January 

15,  1857.)    Sci.  Mem,  ii. 
"  On  the  Agamic   Reproduction   and   Morphology  of  Aphis," 

Trans.  Linn.  Soc.  xxii.  (1858),  193-220,  221-236.     (Read 

November  5,  1857.)     Sci.  Mem.  ii. 
"  On  Some  Points  in  the  Anatomy  of  Nautilus  Pompilius,"  Jour. 

Linn.  Soc.  iii.    (1859),    (Zool.),  36-44.      (Read  June  3, 

1858.)     Sci.  Mem.  ii. 
"  On  the  Persistent  Types  of  Animal  Life,"  Proc.  Roy.  Inst,  of 

Great  Britain,  iii.    (1858-62),   151-153.     Friday,  June  3, 

1859.)    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 


492 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


**  On  the  Stagonolq>is  Robertsoni  (Agassiz)  of  the  Elgin  Sand- 
stones; and  on  the  Recency  Discovered  Footmarks  in  the 
Sandstones  of  Cummingstone/'  Quart,  Jour,  GeoL  Soc,  xv. 
(1859),  440-460.    Sci.  Mem.  u, 

"On  Some  Amphibian  and  Reptilian  Remains  from  South 
Africa  and  Australia,"  Quart,  Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  xv.  (1859), 
642-649.    (Read  March  3, 1859.)    Sci.  Mem,  ii. 

*'On  a  New  Species  of  Dicynodon  (D.  Murrayi)  froni  near 
Colesberg,  South  Africa;  and  on  the  Structure  of  the  Skull 
in  the  Dicynodonts,"  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xv.  (1859), 
649-658.    (Read  March  23,  1859.)    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"On  Rhamphoiiiynchus  Bucklandi,  a  Pterosaurian  from  the 
Stonesfield  Slate,"  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xv.  (1859), 
658-670.    (Read  March  23,  1859.)    Sci,  Mem.  ii. 

"On  a  Fossil  Bird  and  a  Fossil  Cetacean  from  New  Zealand/' 
Quart,  Jour,  Geol.  Soc.  xv.  (1859),  670-677.  (Read  March 
23,  1859.)    Sci.  Mem.  ii. 

"On  the  Dermal  Armour  of  Crocodilus  Hastingsiae,"  Quart. 
Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xv.  (1859),  678-680.  (Read  March  23, 
1859.)    Sci.  Mem.  ii. 

"  British  Fossils,"  part  i.  "  On  the  Anatomy  and  Affinities  of  the 
Genus  Pterygotus,"  Mem.  Geol.  Sur.  of  United  Kingdom, 
Monograph  I.  (1859),  ^'3^'    •S'ci.  Mem,  ii. 

"  British  Fossils,"  part  ii.  "  Description  of  the  Species  of  Ptery- 
gotus,"  by  J.  W.  Salter,  F.G.S.,  A.L.S.,  Mem.  GeoL  Sur. 
of  Vnited  Kingdom,  Monograph  I.  (1859),  37-105.  Sci. 
Mem.  ii. 

"On  Dasyceps  Bucklandi  ( Labyrinth odon  Bucklandi,  Lloyd)," 
Mem.  Geol.  Sur.  of  United  Kingdom  (1859),  52-56.  Sci. 
Mem.  ii. 

"  On  a  Fragment  of  a  Lower  Jaw  of  a  Large  Labyrinthodont 
from  Cubbington,"  Mem.  Geol.  Sur.  of  United  Kingdom 
(1859),  56-57.    Sci.  Mem.  ii. 

"  Observations  on  the  Development  of  Some  Parts  of  the  Skele- 
ton of  Fishes,"  Quart.  Jour.  Micr.  Sci.  vii.  (1859),  33-46. 
Sci.  Mem.  ii. 

"  On  the  Dermal  Armour  of  Jacare  and  Caiman,  with  Notes  on 
the  Specific  and  Generic  Characters  of  Recent  Crocodilia," 
Jour.  Linn.  Soc.  iv.  (i860),  (Zool.),  1-28.  (Read  Feb- 
ruary 15,  1859.)    Sci.  Mem.  ii. 

"  On  the  Anatomy  and  Development  of  Pyrosoma,"  Trans.  Linn. 
Soc.  xxiii.  (1862),  193-250.  (Read  December  i,  1859.) 
Sci.  Mem.  ii. 


APPENDIX  III 


493 


"  On  the  Oceanic  Hydrozoa,"  Ray  Soc,  (1859). 

"  On  Species  and  Races,  and  Their  Origin"  (i860),  Proc,  Roy. 
Inst,  iii.  (1858-62),  195-200;  Ann,  and  Mag,  of  Nat,  Hist, 
V.  (i860),  344-346.    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"  On  the  Structure  of  the  Mouth  and  Pharynx  of  the  Scor- 
pion," Quart,  Jour,  Micr,  Sci.  viii.  (i860),  250-254.  Sci, 
Mem,  ii. 

"  On  the  Nature  of  the  Earliest  Stages  of  the  Development  of 
Animals,"  Proc,  Roy,  Inst,  iii.  (1858-62),  315-317.  (Feb- 
ruary 8,  1 86 1.)    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"  On  a  New  Species  of  Macrauchenia  (M.  Boliviensis),"  Quart, 
Jour,  Geol.  Soc,  xvii.  (1861),  73-84.    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"On  Pteraspis  Dunensis  (Archaeoteuthis  Dunensis,  Romer)," 
Quart,  Jour,  Geol,  Soc,  xvii.  (1861),  163-166.  Sci, 
Mem,  ii. 

"  Preliminary  Essay  upon  the  Systematic  Arrangement  of  the 
Fishes  of  the  Devonian  Epoch,"  Mem,  Geol.  Sur,  of  United 
Kingdom,  "  Figures  and  Descriptions  of  British  Organic 
Remains"  (1861,  Decade  x)^  41-46.    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"  Glyptolaemus  Kinnairdi,"  Mem,  Geol.  Sur,  of  United  Kingdom, 
"  Figures  and  Descriptions  of  British  and  Organic  Re- 
mains"  (1861,  Decade  x)y  41-56.    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"  Phaneropleuron  Andersoni,"  Mem.  Geol,  Sur,  of  United  King- 
dom, "  Figures  and  Descriptions  of  British  Organic  Re- 
mains" (1861,  Dec.  x),  47-49.    Sci,  Mem.  ii. 

"  On  the  Zoological  Relations  of  Man  with  the  Lower  Animals," 
Nat.  Hist.  Rev,  (1861),  67-84.    Sci,  Mem.  ii. 

"On  the  Brain  of  Ateles  Paniscus,"  Proc,  Zool,  Soc,  (1861), 
247-260.    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"  On  Fossil  Remains  of  Man,"  Proc,  Roy,  Inst,  (1858-62),  420- 
422.     (February  7,  1862.)     Sci,  Mem,  ii. 

"  Anniversary  Address  to  the  Geological  Society,  1862,"  Quart, 
Jour.  Geol.  Soc,  xviii.  (1862),  xl.-liv*  See  also  in  list  of 
Essays,  "  Geological  Contemporaneity,  etc."    Sci,  Mem.  ii. 

"  On  the  New  Labyrinthodonts  from  the  Edinburgh  Coal-field," 
Quart,  Jour,  Geol,  Soc,  xviii.  (1862),  291-296.  Sci, 
Mem.  ii. 

"  On  a  Stalk-eyed  Crustacean  from  the  Carboniferous  Strata 
near  Paisley,"  Quart.  Jour.  Geol,  Soc,  xviii.  (1862),  420- 
422.    Sci.  Mem.  ii. 

"  On  the  Premolar  Teeth  of  Diprotodon,  and  on  a  New  Species 
of  that  Genus  (D.  Australis),"  Quart,  Jour,  Geol,  Soc. 
xviii.  (1862),  422-427.    Sci,  Mem,  ii. 


494 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


"Description  of  a  New  Specimen  of  Glyptodon  recentiy  ac- 
quired by  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,"  Proc.  Roy.  Soc. 
xii.  (18601-63),  316-326.    Set.  Mem.  ii. 

"  Letter  on  the  Human  Remains  found  in  Shell-mounds ''  (June 
28,  1862),  Trans.  Etkn.  Soc.  ii.  (1863),  265-266.  Set. 
Mem.  ii. 

"  Description  of  Anthracosaurus  Russelli,  a  New  Labyrinthodont 
from  the  Lanarkshire  Coal-field,"  Quart.  Jour.  GeoL  Soc. 
xix.  (1863),  56-68.    Set,  Mem.  ii. 

"  On  a  Collection  of  Vertebrate  Fossils  from  the  Panchet  Rocks, 
Ranigunj,  Bengal,"  Mem.  Geol.  Sur.  of  India;  Palaeon^ 
tologiea  Indica,  ser.  iv.;  Indian  Pretertiary  Vertebrata,  i. 

(1865-85). 

"  Further  Remarks  upon  the  Human  Remains  from  the  Neander- 
thal," Nat.  Hist.  Rev.  (1864),  429-446.    Sei.  Mem.  ii. 
*'  On  the  Angwantibo  (Arctocebus  Calabarenis,  Gray)  of  Old 

Calabar,"  Proe.  Zool.  Soc.  (1864),  314-335.    Sei.  Mem.  ii. 
"  On  the  Cetacean  Fossils  termed  '  Ziphius '  by  Cuvier,  with  a 

Notice  of  a  New  Species  (Belemnoziphius  Compressus) 

from  the  Red  Crag,"  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soe.  xx.  (1864), 

388-396. 
"On  the  Structure  of  the  Belemnitid^,"  Mem.  Geol.  Sur.  of 

United  Kingdom,  Monograph  II.  (1864). 
"  The  Crocbdilian  Remains  found  in  the  Elgin  Sandstones,  with 

Remarks,   etc."  Mem.   Geol.  Sur.   of   United  Kingdom, 

Monograph  III.  (1877). 
"On  the  Osteology  of  the  Genus  Glyptodon"    (1864),   Phil. 

Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  civ.  (1865),  31-70. 
"  On  the  Structure  of  the  Stomach'  in  Desmodus  Rufus,"  Proc. 

Zool.  Soc.  (1865),  386-390. 
"  On  the  Methods  and  Results  of  Ethnology  "  (1865),  Proc.  Roy. 

Inst.  iv.  (1866),  460-463.    See  also  Collected  Essays,  vii. 
"  On  Two  Extreme  Forms  of  Human  Crania,"  Anthropological 

Review,  iv.  (1866),  404-406. 
"  Description  of  Vertebrate  Remains  from  the  Jarrow  Colliery, 

Kilkenny,  Ireland,"  GeoL  Mag.  iii.  (1866),  165-171. 
"  On  some  Remains  of  Large  Dinosaurian  Reptiles  from  the 

Stormberg  Mountains,  South  Africa,"  Phil.  Mag.  xxxii. 

(1866),  474-475;  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xxiii.  (1867),  1-6. 
"  On  a  New  Specimen  of  Telerpeton  Elginense"  (1866),  Quart. 

Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xxiii.  (1867),  77'^4' 
"Notes  on  the  Human  Remains  of  Caithness"  (1866),  in  the 

Prehistoric  Remains  of  Caithness,  by  S.  Laing. 


APPENDIX   III 


495 


On  Two  Widely  Contrasted  Forms  of  the  Human  Cranium/' 
Jour,  Anat.  and  Phys.  u  (1867),  60-77. 

On  Acanthopholis  Horridus,  a  New  Reptile  from  the  Chalk- 
Marl,"  GeoL  Mag,  iv.  (1867),  65-67. 

On  the  Classification  of  Birds ;  and  on  the  Taxonomic  Value  of 
the  Modifications  of  certain  of  the  Cranial  Bones  observ- 
able in  that  Class/*  Proc,  ZooL  Soc.  (1867),  415-472. 

On  the  Animals  which  are  most  nearly  Intermediate  between 
Birds  and  Reptiles/*  Ann,  and  Mag,  of  Nat,  Hist,  ii, 
(1868),  66-75. 

On  Saurosternon  Bainii  and  Pristerodon  M*Kayi,  two  New 
Fossil  Lacertilian  Reptiles  from  South  Africa/*  Geol,  Mag, 
V.  (1868),  201-205. 

Reply  to  Objections  on  my  Classification  of  Birds/*  Ibis,  iv. 
(1868),  357-362. 

On  the  Form  of  the  Cranium  among  the  Patagonians  and 
Fuegians,  with  some  Remarks  upon  American  Crania  in 
general/*  Jour.  Anat,  and  Phys.  ii.  (1868),  253-271. 

On  some  Organisms  living  at  Great  Depths  in  the  North  At- 
lantic Ocean/*  Quart,  Jour,  Micr,  Sci.  viii.  (1868),  203-212. 

Remarks  upon  Archaeopteryx  Lithographica/*  Proc,  Roy,  Soc, 
xvi.  (1868),  243-248. 

On  the  Classification  and  Distribution  of  the  Alectoromorphae 
and  Heteromorphae/*  Proc,  Zool.  Soc.  (1868),  294-319. 

On  Hyperodapedon/'   Quart,  Jour,   Geol.  Soc,  xxv.    (1869), 

138-152. 
On  a  New  Labyrinthodont  (Pholiderpeton  Scutigerum)  from 

Bradford/*  Quart,  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xxv  (1869),  309-310. 

On  the  Upper  Jaw  of  Megalosaurus/*  Quart,  Jour,  Geol,  Soc. 
xxv.  (1869),  311-314- 

Principles  3nd  Methods  of  Paleontology.**  (Written  earlier 
as  the  Introduction  to  the  Collection  of  Fossils  at  Jermyn 
Street.)    Smithsonian  Report  (1869),  363-388. 

On  the  Representatives  of  the  Malleus  and  the  Incus  of  Mam- 
malia in  the  Other  Vertebrata/*  Proc.  Zool.  Soc.  (1869), 
391-407. 

Address  to  the  Geological  Society,  1869,**  Quart,  Jour,  Geol, 
Soc.  xxv.  (1869),  28-53. 

Further  Observations  on  Hyperodapedon,**  Quart,  Jour,  Geol, 
Soc.  xliii.  (1887),  675-693. 

On  the  Ethnology  and  Archaeology  of  India.*'  (Opening  Ad- 
dress of  the  President,  March  9,  1869.)  Jour.  Ethn.  Soc. 
of  London,  i.  (1869),  89-93.     (Delivered  March  9,  1869.) 


496  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

'VOn  the  Ethnology  and  Archaeology  of  North  America,''  ^  (Ad- 
dress of  the  President,  April  13,  1869.)  Jour.  Ethn^  Sac. 
of  London,  i.  (1869),  218-221. 

"On  Hypsilophodon  Foxii,  a  New  Dinosaurian  from  the 
Wealden  of  the  Isle  of  Wig^t"  (1869),  Quart.  Jour.  GeoL 
Soc.  xxvi.  (1870),  3-12. 

'^Further  Evidence  of  the  Affinity  between  the  Dinosaurian 
Reptiles  and  Birds"  (1869),  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xxvi. 
(1870),  12-31. 

**  On  the  Classification  of  the  Dinosauria,  with  Observations  on 
the Dinosauria  of  the  Trias"  (1869),  Qtuiirt.  Jour.  GeoL 
Soc.  xxvi.  (1870),  32-50. 

**  On  the  Geographical  Distribution  of  the  Chief  Modifications 
.  of  Mankind,"  Jour.  Bthn.  Soc.  of  London,  new  series,  ii. 
(1870),  404-412.    (June  7,  1870.) 

**  On  the  Edinology  of  Britain,"  Jour.  Ethn.  Soc.  of  London,  ii. 
•  (1890),  382-384.    (Delivered  May  10,  1870.) 

"  On  a  New  Labyrinthodont  from  Bradford,  with  a  Note  on  its 
Locality  and  Stratigraphical  Position."  By  Louis  C.  MialL 
PhU.  Mag.  xxxix.  (1870),  385.  {Paleontology  and  the 
Doctrine  of  Evolution.) 

"Anniversary  Address  to  Geological  Society,  1870,"  Quart. 
Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  xxvi.  (1870),  29-64.  Collected  Essays, 
viii.  340. 

"Address to  the  British  Association  at  Liverpool,"  Brit.  Assoc. 
Report,  xl.  (1870),  73-89.    Collected  Essays,  viii. 

"  On  the  Milk  Dentition  of  Palaeotherium  Magnum,"  GeoL  Mag. 
vii.  (1870),  153-155- 

"  Triassic  Dinosauria,"  Nature,  i.  (1870),  23-24. 

"On  the  Maxilla  of  Megalosaurus,"  Phil.  Mag.  xxxix.  (1870), 
385-386. 

"  On  the  Relations  of  Penicillium,  Torula,  and  Bacterium," 
Quart.  Jour.  Micr.  Sci.  x.  (1870),  355-362. 

"  On  a  Collection  of  Fossil  Vertebrata  from  the  Jarrow  Colliery, 
County  of  Kilkenny,  Ireland,"  Trans.  Royal  Irish  Acad- 
emy, xxiv.  (1871),  351-370. 

"Yeast,"  Contemporary  Review,  December  1871. 

"  Note  on  the  Development  of  the  Columella  Auris  in  the  Am- 
phibia," Brit.  Assoc.  Report,  1874  (sect.),  141-142;  Na- 
ture, xi.  (1875),  68-69. 

"  On  the  Structure  of  the  Skull  and  of  the  Heart  oi  the  Me- 
nobranchus  Lateralis,"  Proc.  Zool.  Soc.  (1874),  186- 
204. 


APPENDIX  III 


497 


On  the  Hypothesis  that  Animals  are  Automata,  and  its  His- 
tory," Nature,  x.  (1874),  362-366. 

Preliminary  Note  upon  the  Brain  and  Skull  of  Amphioxus 
Lanceolatus"  (1874),  Proc,  Roy.  Soc.  xxiii.  (1875). 

On  the  Bearing  of  the  Distribution  of  the  Portia  Dura  upon 
the  Morphology  of  the  Skull"  (1874),  Proc.  Camb.  Phil, 
Soc.  ii.  (1876),  348-349- 

On  the  Classification  of  the  Animal  Kingdom"  (1874),  Journ. 
Linn,  Soc,  (ZooL)  xii.  (1876),  199-226. 

On  the  Recent  Work  of  the  Challenger  Expedition,  and  its 
Bearing  on  Geological  Problems,"  Proc,  Roy,  Inst,  vii. 

(1875),  354-357- 

On  Stagonolepis  Robertsoni,  and  on  the  Evolution  of  the 
Crocodilia,"  Quart,  Jour,  GeoL  Soc,  xxxi.  (1875),  423-438. 

Contributions  to  Morphology.  Ichthyopsida. — No.  i.  On  Cera- 
dotus  Forsteri,  with  Observations  on  the  Classification  of 
Fishes,"  Proc,  Zool,  Soc,  (1876),  24-59. 

On  the  Position  of  the  Anterior  Nasal  Apertures  in  Lepido- 
siren,"  Proc,  Zool,  Soc,  (1876),  180-181. 

On  the  Nature  of  the  Cranio-Facial  Apparatus  of  Petromy- 
zon,"  Jour,  Anat,  and  Phys.  x.  (1876),  412-429. 

On  the  Evidence  as  to  the  Origin  of  Existing  Vertebrate  Ani- 
mals," Nature,  xiii.  (1876),  388-389,  410-412,  429-430,  467- 
469,  514-516;  xiv.  (1876),  33-34. 

The  Border  Territory  between  the  Animal  and  the  Vegetable 
Kingdoms"  (1876),  Proc.  Roy,  Inst.  viii.  (1879),  28-34. 

On  the  Study  of  Biology,"  Nature,  xv.  (1877),  219-224;  Amer- 
ican Naturalist,  xi.  (1877),  210-221. 

On  the  Geological  History  of  Birds"  (March  2,  1877),  Proc, 
Roy,  Inst.  viii.  347. 

Address  to  the  Anthropological  Department  of  the  British 
Association,  Dublin,  1878.  Informal  Remarks  on  the  Con- 
clusions   of   Anthropology,"   Brit,    Assoc,    Report,    1878, 

573-578. 
On  the  Classification  and  the  Distribution  of  the  Crayfishes," 

Proc,  Zool,  Soc,  (1878),  752-788. 
On  a  New  Arrangement  for  Dissecting  Microscopes"  (1878), 

Journ.  Quekett  Micr,  Club,  v.  (1878-79),  144-145. 
William    Harvey"    (1878),    Proc,    Roy,    Inst.    viii.    (1879), 

485-500. 
On  the  Characters  of  the  Pelvis  in  the  Mammalia,  and  the 

Conclusions  respecting  the  Origin  of  Mammals  which  may 

be  based  on  them,"  Proc,  Roy,  Soc,  xxviii.  (1879),  395-4^5- 
68 


498  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

**  On  Certain  Errors  respecting  the  Structure  of  the  Heart, 
attributed  to  Aristotle"  (1879),  Nature,  xxi.  (1880),  1-5. 
See  also  Science  and  Culture. 

**  Sensation  and  the  Unity  of  Structure  of  Sensiferous  Organs  " 
(1879),  Proc.  Roy.  Inst.  ix.  (1882),  1 15-124.  See  also 
Collected  Essays,  vi. 

**  On  the  Epipuhis  in  the  Dog  and  Fox,"  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  xxx. 
(1880),  162-163. 

*'  On  the  Cranial  and  Dental  Characters  of  the  Canidae,"  Proc. 
Zool.  Soc.  (1880),  238-288. 

''  On  the  Application  of  the  Laws  of  Evolution  to  the  Arrange- 
ment of  the  Vertebrata,  and  more  particularly  of  the  Mam- 
malia/' Proc.  Zool.  Soc.  (1880),  649-662. 

''The  Coming  of  Age  of  'The  Origin  of  Species'"  (1880), 
Proc.  Roy.  Inst.  ix.  (1882),  361-368.  See  also  Collected 
Essays,  ii. 

"The  Herring,"  Nature,  xxiii.  (1881),  607-613. 

**  Address  to  &e  International  Medical  Congress,  London,  1881. 
— ^The  Connection  of  the  Bidogical  Sciences  with  Medi- 
cine," Nature,  xxi  v.  (1881),  342-346. 

"  The  Rise  and  Prc^ess  of  Paleontology,"  Nature,  xxiv.  (1881), 

452-455- 
"  A  Contribution  to  the  Pathology  of  the  Epidemic  known  as  the 

*  Salmon  Disease ' "  (February  21,  1882),  Proc.  Roy:  Soc. 

xxxiii.  (1882),  381-389. 
"On  the  Respiratory  Organs  of  Apteryx,"  Proc,  Zool.  Soc. 

(1882),  560-569. 
"  On  Saprolegnia  in  Relation  to  the  Salmon  Disease,"  Quart, 

Jour,  Micr,  Set,  xxii.  (1882),  311-333. 
"  Contributions  to  Morphology.    Ichthyopsida. — No.  2.    On  the 

Oviducts  of  Osmerus;  with  Remarks  on  the  Relations  of 

the  Teleostean  with  the  Ganoid  Fishes,"  Proc.  ZooL  Soc. 

(1883),  132-139. 
Oysters  and  the  Oyster  Question"  (1883),  Proc.  Roy.  Inst,  x. 

(1884),  336-358. 
Preliminary  Note  on  the  Fossil  Remains  of  a  Chelonian  Rep- 
tile, Ceratochelys  Sthenurus,  from  Lord  Howe's  Island, 
Australia,"  Proc,  Roy,  Soc,  xlvi.  (1887),  232-238,  (Read 
March  31,  1887.) 
"The  Gentians:  Notes  and  Queries"  (April  7,  1887),  Jour. 
Linn.  Soc.  (Botany),  xxiv.  (1888),  101-124. 


<( 


(( 


APPENDIX   IV 


499 


APPENDIX   IV* 
HONOURS,  DEGREES,  SOCIETIES,  Etc. 

Order 
Norwegian  Order  of  the  North  Star,  1873. 

Degrees,  Etc. 

Oxford— Hon.  D.C.L.  1885. 
Cambridge — Hon.  LL.D.  1879. 

Rede  Lecturer,  1883. 
London — First  M.B.  and  Gold  Medal,  1845. 

Examiner  in  Physiology  and  Comparative  Anatomy, 

1857. 
Member  of  Senate,  1883. 
Edinburgh — Hon.  LL.D.  1866.       ' 
Aberdeen — Lord  Rector,  1872. 
Dublin— Hon.  LL.D.  1878. 
Breslau — Hon.  Ph.D.  and  M.A.  1861. 
Wtirzburg— Hon.  M.D.  1882. 
Bologna— Hon.  M.D.  1888. 
Erlangen — Hon.  M.D.  1893. 

Societies — London 

Royal,  1851;  Sec.  1872-81;  Pres.  1883-85;  Royal  Society's 
Medal,  1852;  Copley  Medal,  1888;  Darwin  Medal,  1894. 

Linnean,  1858;  Linnean  Medal,  1890. 

Geological,  1856;  Sec.  1859-62;  Pres.  1869-70;  Wollaston  Medal, 
1876. 

Zoological,  1856. 

Odontological,  1863. 

Ethnological,  1863;  Pres.  1868-70. 

Anthropological  Institute,  1870. 

Medico-Chirurgical,  Hon.  Memb.  1868. 

Medical,  Hon.  Memb.  1873. 

Literary,  1883. 

*  This  list  has  been  compiled  from  such  diplomas  and  letters  as  I 
found  in  my  father's  possession. 


500 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


Pharmaceutical,  Silver  Medal  for  Botany,  1842. 

Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  Member,  1862;  Fellow,  1883;  Hun- 

terian  Professor,  1863-^ 
St  Thomas's  Hospital,  Lecturer  in  Comparative  Anatomy,  1854. 
British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  Pres.  1870 ; 

Pres.  of  Section  D,  1866. 
Royal  Institution,  Fullerian  Lecturer,  1863-67. 
British  Museum,  Trustee,  1888. 

Societies — Provincial,  Colonial  and  Indian 

DuWin  University  Zoological  and  Botanical  Association;  Corr. 

Member,  1859. 
Liverpool  Literary  and  Philosophic  Society,  Hon.  Memb.  1870. 
Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Hon.  Memb. 

1872. 
Odontological  Society  of  Great  Britain,  1862. 
Royal  Irish  Academy,  Hon.  Memb.  1874. 
,  Historical  Society  of  Lanc^ire  and  Cheshire,  Hon.  Memb. 

1875- 
Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  British  Hon.  Fellow,  1876. 

Glasgow  Philosophical  Society,  Hon.  Memb.  1876. 

Literary  and  Antiquarian  Society  of  Perth,  Hon.  Memb.  1876. 

Cambridge  Philosophical  Society,  Hon.  Memb.  1871. 

Hertfordshire  Natural  History  Society,  Hon.  Memb.  1883. 

Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of  Ireland,  Hon.  Memb.  1886. 

New  Zealand  Institute,  Hon.  Memb.  1872. 

Royal  Society  of  New  South  Wales,  Hon.  Memb.  1879,  Clarke 

Medal,  1880. 

Foreign  Societies 

International  Congress  of  Anthropology  and  Prehistoric  Archae- 
ology, Corr.  Memb.  1867. 
International  Geological  Congress  (Pres.)  1888. 

America 

Academy  of  the  Natural  Sciences  of  Philadelphia,  Corr.  Memb. 

1859. 
Odontographic  Society  of  Pennsylvania,  Hon.  Memb.  1865. 
American  Philosophical  Society  of  Philadelphia,  1869. 
Buffalo  Society  of  Natural  Sciences,  Hon.  Memb.  1873. 
New  York  Academy  of  Sciences,  Hon.  Memb.  1876. 


APPENDIX   IV 


501 


Boston  Society  of  Natural  History,  Hon.  Memb.  1877. 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  U.S.A.,  Foreign  Associate, 

1883. 
American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  Foreign  Hon.  Memb. 

1883. 

Austria-Hungary 

Konigliche    Kaiserliche    Geologische    Reichsanstalt    (Vienna), 

Corr.  Memb.  i860. 
K.  K.  Zoologische-botanische  Gesellschaft  in  Wien,  1865. 

Belgium 

Academie  Royale  de  Medecine  de  Belgique,  1874. 
So^te  Geologique  de  Belgique,  Hon.  Memb.  1877. 
Societed* Anthropologic  de  Bruxelles,  Hon.  Memb.  1884. 


Brazil 

Gabineta  Portuguez  de  Leitura  em  Pernambuco,  Corr.  Memb. 
1879. 

Denmark 

Royal  Society  of  Copenhagen,  Fellow,  1876. 

Egypt 
Institut  Egyptien  (Alexandria),  Hon.  Memb.  1861. 

France 

Societe  Imperiale  des  Sciences  Naturelles  de  Cherbourg,  Corr. 
Memb.  1867. 

Institut  de  France ;  "  Correspondant "  in  the  section  of  Physi- 
ology (succeeding  von  Baer),  1879. 

Germany 

Microscopical  Society  of  Giessen,  Hon.  Memb.  1857. 

Imperialis  Academia  Caesariana  Naturae  Curiosorum  (Dres- 
den), 1857. 

Imperial  Literary  and  Scientific  Academy  of  Germany,  1858. 

Royal  Society  of  Sciences  in  Gottingen,  Corr.  Memb.  1862. 

Royal  Bavarian  Academy  of  Literature  and  Science  (Munich), 
For.  Memb.  1863. 


502  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

Royal  Prussi&n  Academy  of  Sciences  (Berlin),  1865. 
|i(edicim9di-naturwisseti8chaftliclie  Gesellschaft  zu  Jena,   For. 

Hon.  Memb.  1868. 
Geographical  Society  of  Berlin,  For.  Memb.  1869. 
Deutscher  Fischerei-Verein,  Corr.  Memb,  1870. 
Berliner  Gesellschaft  fur  Anthropdogie,  Ethnologic,  und  Urge- 

schichte,  Corr.  Memb.  1871. 
Natiirforschende  Gesellschaft  zu  Halle,  1879. 
Senkenbergische     Naturforschende     Gesdlschaft     (Frankfurt 

am  M.)  Corr.  Memb.  1892. 

Holland 

Dutch  Society.of  Sciences  (Haariem),  For.  Memb.  1877. 
Koninklyke  Matuurkundige  Vereenigung  in  Nederlandisch-Indie 

(Batavia),  Corr.  Memb.  1880. 
Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  (Amsterdam),  For.  Memb.  1892. 

Italy 

Societi  Italiana  di  Anthropologia  e  di  Etnologia,  Hon.  Memb. 

1872. 
Academia  de'  Lined  di  Roma,  For.  Memb.  (supplementary), 

1878,  ordinary,  1883. 
Reale  Academia  Valdamense  del  Poggio    (Florence),    Corr. 

Memb.  1883. 
Societa  dei  Naturalisti  in  Modena,  Hon.  Memb.  1886. 
Societa  Italiana  delle  Scienze  (Naples),  For.  Memb.  1892. 
Academia  Scientiarum  Instituti  Bononiensis  (Bologna),  Corr. 

Memb.  1893. 

Portugal 
Academia  Real  das  Sciencias  de  Lisboa,  For.  Corr.  Memb.  1874. 

Russia 

Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences  (St.  Petersburg),  Corr.  Memb. 

1865. 
Societas   Caesarea   Naturae   Curiosorum    (Moscow),   ordinary 

member,  1870,  Hon.  Memb.  1887. 

Sweden 
Societas  Medicorum  Svecana,  Ordinary  Memb.  1866. 


APPENDIX  IV 


503 


ROYAL  COMMISSIONS 

T.  H.  Huxley  served  on  the  following  Royal  or  other 
Commissions : — 

1.  Royal  Commission  on  the  Operation  of  Acts  relating  to 

Trawling   for  Herrings  on  the  Coast  of   Scotland, 
1862. 

2.  Royal  Commission  to  inquire  into  the  Sea  Fisheries  of 

the  United  Kingdom,  1864-65. 

3.  Commission  on  the  Royal  College  of  Science  for  Ireland, 

1866. 

4.  Commission  on  Science  and  Art  Instruction  in  Ireland, 

1868. 

5.  Royal  Commission  upon  the  Administration  and  Opera- 

tion of  the  Contagious  Diseases  Acts,  1870-71. 

6.  Royal  Commission  on  Scientific  Instruction  and  the  Ad- 

vancement of  Science,  1870-75. 

7.  Royal  Commission  on  the  Practice  of  subjecting  Live 

Animals  to  Experiments  for  Scientific  Purposes,  1876. 

8.  Royal  Commission  to  inquire  into  the  Universities  of 

Scotland,  1876-78. 

9.  Royal  Commission  on  the  Medical  Acts,  1881-82. 

10.  Royal  Commission  on  Trawl,   Net,  and  Beam  Trawl 
Fishing,  1884. 


1 

I 
\ 

i 

} 


[ 


INDEX 


A   priori  reasoning,   ii.   223,  296,   406, 

407. 

Abbott,  Dr.  E.  A.,  on  "Illusions"; 
correspondence  in  Times,  ii.  280 
sqq. 

Aberdeen  University,  Huxley  re- 
jected for  chair  at,  i.  86,  116; 
Lord  Rector  of,  i.  417. 
Rectorial  Address  at,  i.  436  sq.;  trans- 
lated into  German,  438;  perils  of 
writing,  484. 

Aberdour,  i.  166. 

Adamson,  Professor,  i.  536  sq. 

Addresses  delivered  under  difficulties, 
i.  444,  500. 

*'  Administrative  Nihilism,"  i.  384, 
396. 

Admiralty,  parsimony  of,  in  1846,  i. 
31;  their  dealings  with  Huxley, 
58,  61,  62,  65  sq.,  77-81,   iOQ,   127. 

Advice  to  would-be  writer  on  scien- 
tific  subjects,   ii.  417. 

Agassiz,  Alexander,  at  x  Club,  i.  279; 
visit  to,  497. 

Agassiz,  Louis,  and  creation,  i.  181; 
on  glaciers,  i.  440. 

Agnosticism,  formulated  in  i860,  i. 
233  sq.;  controversy  on,  ii.  235- 
45;   restated,   296  sq. 

Airy,  Sir  G.  B.,  P.R.S.,  ii.  54. 

Albert,  Prince,  at  British  Association, 
i.  166. 

Alcohol,  use  of,  ii.  247. 

Alford,  Dean,  and  Metaphysical  So- 
ciety, i.  338. 

Allman,  Dr.  George  J.,  on  Huxley's 
leadiiflje:  discovery,  i.  43,  142; 
President  British  Association, 
1879,  ii-  6. 

America,  visit  to,  i.  493-502;  sight  of 
New  York,  494;  at  Yale,  ib.; 
friends,  494-98;   at   Niagara,   498; 


visits  his  sister,  498;  at  Balti- 
more, ib.;  lectures  at  New  York, 
501  sq. 

American  Civil  War,  i.  271;  suggests 
article  **  Emancipation,  Black 
and  White,"  283. 

Amroth,  i.   140. 

Anglesey,  Marquis  of,  at  Wellington's 
funeral,  i.   iii. 

Angus,  Dr.,  on  School  Board,  i.  367. 

Animal  motion,  lecture  on,  i.  165. 

Animals  and  plants,  i.  248. 

**  Animals  as  Automata,"  i.  440,  442 
sq.;  delivered  without  notes,  444. 

Anthropological  Institute  founded,  i. 
284. 

Anthropological  Society  amalgamated 
with  Ethnological,  i.  2S4;  295. 

Anthropologic,  Societe  d*,  of  Paris,  i. 
294,  295. 

Anthropomorphism,  i.  258. 

Ape  question,  at  Oxford,  i.  192-204; 
papers  and  lectures  on,  205  sq.; 
Punch  squib,  206,  215;  at  Edin- 
burgh, 207  sq.;  leads  to  ethnologi- 
cal work,  212  sq.;  conclusion  of, 
214. 

**  Apologetic  Irenicon,"   ii.   318  sq. 

Appletons  and  copyright,  i.  305;  visit 
to,  494. 

Arbitration  Alliance,  letter  to,  on  the 
reduction  of  armaments  and  the 
real   causes  of  war,   ii.  396. 

Archetype  reviewed  by  H.  Spencer,  i. 
172. 

Argyll,  Duke  of,  in  Metaphysical  So- 
ciety, i.  338;  on  "  Law,"  ii.  168; 
reply  to,  168;  on  coral  reef  theo- 
ries, 168-70;  further  controversy 
with,    288. 

Aristotle  compared  with  Darwin,  i. 
515;   certain  errors  attributed  to, 

505 


5o6 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


iL  X  J9.;  tttimste  of  HUT  MSS. 

of,  #. 
Armttrong,  Sir  Alexander,  at  Haiiar, 

i.  a6. 
Amutroag,  Lord,  YisHs  to,  L  ^339,  494, 

5x3;    and    a    Newcastle    aoeietar, 

Arnold,  IC,  letters  to— a  tost  tiiii- 
brella,  i.  334;  Si.  Pmul  and  Protn- 
UmHtiit,  3S3;  on  death  of  his  son, 

Arolk,  first  visit  to,  tt.  146  jf.;  second 
-visit  to,  x8o  Jff. 

Aryans,  origin. of,  ii,  .Jfl& 

AsddiftBS,  new  speeies  oi,  i.  6a;  Doli- 
olmtf  and  Appendicnlarla,  8t;  on 
tiie  structure  o^  ftt;  catalogue  o^ 

A^by,  Mr.,  on  sanitary  work,  ii.  73. 
Ashley,  Hon.  |L,  Viviseetkni  Bill,  i. 

Atai^sm,  defence  of  fht  word,  L  aso. 
Athanasian  Creed,  anecdote,  L  905. 
Adieism  logically  untenable,   i.   a6ob 

443;  ii.  XT*. 
Athenaeum  Qub,  cleeted  to,  L  i6i. 
Augustan  epoch  to  be  beaten  by  an 

English  cfKich,  L  171. 
Automatism,     Darwin     suggests    he 

should  review  himself  on,  ii  41. 
Auvergne,  trip  in,  i.  420  J99.;  glaei»> 

tion  Ui,  422;  prehistoric  skdeton 

at  Le  Puy,  423. 

Babbage,  calculating  machine,  and 
the  theory  of  induction,  ii.  278  sq. 

Bacon,  influence  of,  i.  320;  character, 
ii.  15. 

"  Baconian  Induction,'*  criticism  of, 
i.  520  sq.;  Spedding  on,  521-23. 

Baer,  von,  influence  of,  i.  112,  175; 
his  Copley  Medal,  325;  his  work, 
ii.  42. 

Bailey,  F.,  at  Lynton,  ii.  45. 

Baillon,  led  to  make  fresh  observa- 
tions through  Huxley's  gentian 
paper,  ii.  214. 

Bain,   Professor  A.,   i.  279,  438. 

Balaam-Centaur,   i.  486. 

Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.,  critique  on 
his  Foundations  of  Belief,  ii.  418- 

23. 
Balfour,    Francis,    death    of,    ii.    40; 


obituary,  64;  likeness  to  SBxa^cf, 
40$  looked  to  as  his  s^icoessory 
4x;  opinion  of,  4aow 
Ball,  John,  with  Huxley  at  Belfaat,  L 

MS  *Q' 

Ball,  W.  Piatt,  letter  to--criticise8  his 
Uit  and  DisuMt:  advice  aa  to 
future  work,  ii  sflis. 

Baptism,  i  240. 

"  Barriers,  The  Three,"  i  an. 

Barry,  Bishop,  on  Huxley's  woric  on 
the  Sdhool' Board,  i  s6s,  h^. 

Bastian,  Dr.  H.  Charlton,  <m  ap<Hi- 
taneous  generation,'  i  355,  357. 

Bateson,  Mr.«  letter  to— his  hook  Om 
ForiaSMW  returns  from  speeulatioii 
to  faict:  fialiirs  faeH  MlfMM,  iL  994. 

Ba^ybitts^  i  317  sq,,  ii  5  eg.,  170  jf.; 
not  accepted  in  connection  with 
Darwfai'a  ^>eculations,  5  «.;  '^  ca^ 
iog  ^e  teck"  about,  5  tq, 

Baynes,  Thomas  Spencer,  letters  to 
—Aberdeen  Address,  i  438;  pax^ 
sons  at  Edinburgh  lectures^  ^; 
regime  for  heallh,  479;  arrange-, 
.ments  for  the  BncyehpfduBp  493; 
artides  for  Bneyehpmdia,  4fl|»-88^ 
work  on  Dick  Swiveller'a  prin^ 
dple,  484;  handwriting,  484;  puts 
aside  a  subject  when  d<me  with* 
485?  487;  a  Balaam-Centaur,  486; 
Dean  Stanley's  handwriting,  48SS 
articles  between  H  and  L*,  488; 
sons-in-law,  488;  Biology  con> 
trasted  with  Criticism,  etc.,  486; 
reports  of  his  American  trip, 
502;  Harvey  article,  520. 

Beale,  Professor,  i.   195,   196. 

Beaufort,  Sir  F.  (Hydrographer),  as- 
sistance from,  i.  61,  64,  78,  79. 

Beaumont,  Elie  de,  contradicted  by 
nature,  i.  401. 

Belemnites,  on,  i.  507,  517. 

Bell,  Thomas,  ready  to  help,  i.  65,  68, 
87;  as  man  of  science,  102;  writes 
ofHcial  statement  on  the  award  of 
Royal  Society  Medal  to  Huxley, 
III,  251.  • 

Bence  Jones,  Dr.,  kindness  of,  i.  242; 
would  make  the  Fullerian  Pro- 
fessorship permanent,  314;  friend- 
ly conspiracy,  400  sq. 

Bennett,  Risdon,  and  F.R.S.,   ii.   119. 


INDEX 


507 


Bentham,  G.,  at  x  Club,  i.  279. 

Benvenuto  Cellini,  ii.  92. 

Berkeley,  i.  262;  proposed  book  on, 
ii.  86. 

Berkeley,  Rev.  W.  F.,  mycological 
work,   i.   356  sq. 

Besant,  Mrs.,  exclusion  from  Univer- 
sity College,  ii.  61. 

Besant,  Sir  W.,  tluxley's  face,  ii. 
460  n. 

Bible-reading  in  elementary  schools,  i. 

363.  367-72»  ii-  9»  3i8. 

Biological  teaching,  revolutionised,  i. 
405  sqq.\  Darwin  on,  410. 

Biology,  on  the  study  of,  i.  503. 

Birds,  distention  of  air-cells  in  flight, 
i.  230  sq.\  investigations  into  the 
structure  of,  244;  classification  of, 
306,  307;  toothed,  proposed  lec- 
ture on,  i.  503;  geological  his- 
tory of,  507. 

Birds  and  reptiles,  relations  of,  i.  316, 

323.  3fe. 

Birmingham,  address  on  Priestley,  i. 
408,  410;  opens  Mason  College, 
ii.  14. 

Blackie,  Professor,  goes  with,  to 
Skelton's,  i.  512. 

Blaythwayt,  R.,  "  The  Uses  of  Senti- 
ment," ii.  434. 

Body,  "  a  machine  of  the  nature  of 
an  army,"  ii.  35. 

Bollaert,  i.  217. 

Book,  a  good,  and  fools,  i.  323. 

Booth,  General,  "  Darkest  England  " 
scheme,  ii.  288;  compared  to 
Law's  Mississippi  scheme,  288. 

Bowman,  Sir  William,  retiring  from 
King's  College,  i;   116;   death  of, 

ii.  353- 
Bradlaugh,    Charles,    view    of,    ii.    61 

(cp.  i.  347). 

Bradlaugh,  Miss,  exclusion  from  Uni- 
versity College,  ii.  61. 

Bramwell,  Sir  F.,  on  technical  educa- 
tion, i.  509. 

Brewster,  Sir  David,  criticism  of  Dar- 
win, i.  209. 

Bright,  John,  speeches,  i.  512. 

Bristol  Channel,  report  on  the  recent 
changes  of  level  in,  i.  154. 

British  Association,  at  Southampton: 
Huxley's  first  paper,  i.  30. 


British  Association,  at  Ipswich,  i.  78, 
95  sq. 
at  Belfast,  1852,  i.  86. 
at  Liverpool,   1853,  >•   123. 
at  Aberdeen,  L   166. 
at  Oxford,  i860,  i.  192  sqq. 
at  Nottingham,  i.29S;  science  in  pub- 
lic schools ;  President  Section  D,  ib, 
at   Dundee:   working  men's  lecture 

delivered  by  Tyndall,  i.  313. 
at   Norwich:    Bathybius,   i.   317  sq.\ 
"A   Piece  of  Chalk,"   319;   Dar- 
winism,  tfr. 
at  Exeter,  i.  336. 
at  Liverpool:   Huxley  President,  i. 

356  sq. 
at  Edinburgh,  i.  384. 
at   Belfast,   i.   444  sqq.\   address   on 
Animal     Automatism,     ib.     445; 
paper  on  Columella  auris,  446. 
committee  on  vivisection,  i.  469. 
at   Dublin,   i.   530;   address  on  An- 
thropology, ib. 
at     Sheffield :     Huxley     "  eats     the 
leek  "  about  Bathybius,  ii.  5  sq. 
at    York:    address    on    "  Rise    and 
Progress  of  Paleontology,"  ii.  36. 
at  Plymouth,  invitation  for,  ii.  213. 
at  Oxford,  1894:  speech  on  growing 
acceptance  of  evolution,  ii.  397-402. 
British     Museum,     Natural     History 
Collections,  i.  172;  ex-ofUcio  Trus- 
tee, ii.  71. 
Broca,  P.,  advice  as  to  anthropologi- 
cal scheme,  i.  295;  language  and 
race,  ii.  287. 
Brodie,  Sir  Benjamin,  i.  197,  202. 
Brodie,  Professor  (afterwards  the  sec- 
ond Sir  B.),  i.  195. 
Brodie,  Rev.   P.,  letter  to — ^local  mu- 
seums, i.  147. 
Brodrick,     Hon.     G.,     letter    to,    on 
Linacre  chair,  ii.  32;  visit  to,  402; 
letter    to — reason    for    accepting 
P.R.S.,  5^* 
Brooks,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  meeting  with, 

i.  498. 
Brown,  Alfred,   South  African  geolo- 
gist, i.  296. 
Brown  Sequard  at  Oxford,  i.  211. 
Browning,  his  music,  ii.  359. 
Bruce,  John,  visit  to,  i.  476;  in  Edin- 
burgh, 512. 


5o8 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


Bnmy  Itland,  L  54. 

Bryton,  Dr.»  i  104* 

Bwchner,  L.,  L  417. 

BttdcUuid,  Frank,  tiiccceds  m  Fiibery 
Inspector,  U.  ai. 

Bnekland,  Mn.,  ditooven  «a  Sdiino- 
derm,  i  136. 

BuiFon,  on  atyie,  L  319;  appredstion 
(^  ii  43,  431* 

Bunbtiry,  Sir  C,  i.  i8a» 

Bunsen,  i  iia. 

Bnmett,  Sir  William,  Director^Gen- 
eral  Navy  Medical  Serriee,  inter- 
views with,  L  as*  a7*  &i;  letter 
to,  79. 

Bitms,  John,  and  poem  on  Tennyson, 
ii  360. 

Barton,  Edward,  letter  to— advice 
against  building  disregarded,  L 
41S,  414.  • 

Bnsk,  G.,  stays  with,  t.  xas,  135;  on 
Snowden  with,  iss;  joint  trans- 
lation of  Kdlliker,  171;  alto  L 
S40,  a4Xf  a43»  a?^  a77;  s  Qub, 
ii.  xa8. 

Bntler's  Analogy,  L  zgg,  iL  16. 

Cabanis,  i.  sK6i, 

Cairns,  Professor,  i.  227. 

Calcutta,  museum  appointment,  i.  $»$, 

Calvinism  in  science,  i.  ^sa. 

Campbell,  Professor  Lewis,  letters  to 
— value  of  Mariner's  testimony 
about  the  Tongans,  ii.  132;  Ox- 
ford British  Association,  1894, 
stronghold  of  the  priesthood  in 
opposing  scientific  method,  402. 

Campbell,  Mrs.  L.,  letter  to — hybrid 
gentian  on  a  nameless  island  in 
Sils   Lake,   ii.   402. 

Canaries,  trip  to,  ii.  266-73. 

Cardwell,  Lord,  vivisection  question, 
i  470-72. 

Carlyle,  influence  of,  i.  9,  14,  16,  296, 
297,  ii.  36,  285;  Edinburgh  LL.D. 
witb  Huxley,  i.  296;  hatred  of 
Darwinism,  297;   death  of,  ii.  36. 

Carlyle,  Mrs.,  saying  about  Owen,  ii. 
178. 

Carnarvon,   Lord,  Vivisection   Bill,  i. 

473. 
Carpenter,  Rev.   Estlin,  letter  to — ac- 
knowledges  his   book,    The  First 


Thrwe  CotPels:  historic^  tuaiM  of 
Christianity;  comparison  of  Na»- 
arenisra  witii  Quakerisai,  IL  48*. 

Carpenter,  W.  B.,  approves  of  his 
views,  i  100;  support  for  F.ILS^ 
X04;  dealings  with,  about  tiie 
Registrarsh^  of  London  Univer- 
sity, lai;  at  his  marriage,  140; 
Examiner  at  Londcm  University, 
139;  at  Lamlash  Bay,.  166;  and 
BaUiybius,  318. 

Cams,  Victor,  eoneqx>nds  wilii,  i. 
161;  alto  174,  217;  takes  Wyvfflc 
Thomson's  lectures  in  1874^  47$- 

Casino,  Prince  <^  at  British  Aaao* 
dation,  Ipswidi,  i  97»  SA* 

Cassowary,  rhyme,  iL  $$6, 

Cats,  love  for,  i  57.  . 

Cavendish,  Lord  F.»  assassination  o^ 
ii.48. 

Cdl  theory,  review  of,  L  is»» 

Cett  question,  i.  949  sq. 

Chattmger  expedition,  and  BadtybittSy 
i*  318;  some  results  of,  47s* 

Chamberlain,  Rifl^t  Hon.  Joseph, 
asked  to  Royal  Society  dinner, 
.  ii.  ^  66. 

Chambers,  Robert,  at  Oxford,  i860,  I. 
193,  aooi 

Chamisso,  quoted,  i.  51. 

Chandler,  Dr.,  apprenticed  to,  L  16^ 
18. 

Chapman,  the  publisher,  i.  131. 

Cherubim,  and  terrestrial  creation,  i. 

336  ». 
Chess   player,   nature   compared   to   a 

hidden,  i.  320. 
Chichester,    Bishop    of,    on    Huxley's 

search    after    the    Ur-gentian,    ii. 

147. 

Christian  dogmas,  i.  260. 

Christianity,  "  development "  of,  ii. 
239  sq.,  243  sq.\  demonology  of, 
239;  historical  basis  of,  277;  com- 
parison  with    Quakerism,    283. 

Chrystal,  Professor,  to  help  in  Men 
of  Science  Series,  i.  535. 

Church  Army,  answer  to  appeal  for 
subscription    to,    ii.   416. 

Church,  Established,  and  our  simian 
origin,   ii.   406. 

Churchill,  the  publisher,  i.  92. 

City  and  Guilds  Institute,  i.  508  sq. 


INDEX 


509 


City  Companies  and  education,  i.  509 
sq.,  ii.  54. 

Clark,  Sir  Andrew,  M.D.,  at  Haslar 
i.  26;  successful  treatment  by, 
402,  477,  ii.  442;  meets  on  return 
from  Italy,  ii.  iii;  advises  re- 
tirement, 112;  on  Clifford's  ill- 
ness, i.  537;  election  as  F.R.S., 
ii.  118,  119. 

Clark,  Sir  J.,  help  from,  i.  86. 

Clark,  J.  W.,  Master  of  the  Salters* 
Company,  letter  from — education, 
ii.  54. 

Clarke,  Hyde,  letters  to — Ashantee 
War  and  ethnology:  Huxley  no 
longer  attending  to  anthropolo- 
gy, i.  434;  aim  of  Genesis  con- 
troversy, ii,  126. 

Clarke,  Legros,  evolution  and  the 
Church,  ii.  60  n. 

Clayton,  W.  P.,  letter  to — moral  duty 
and  the  moral  sense:  influence 
of  Franklin  and  Fox  compared, 
ii.  325. 

Clergy  and  physical  science,  i.  330. 

Clericalism,  ii.  249,  401. 

Clerk  Maxwell,  to  help  in  Men  of 
Science  Series,  i.  535  sq. 

Clifford,  W.  K.,  i.  279,  338,  ii.  3;  his 
friends  rally  to,  in  his  illness,  i. 
537;  opinion  of,  ii.  420. 

Clifford,  Mrs.,  letters  to — ^a  difficulty, 
ii.  9;  the  P.C. :  a  spiritual  peer- 
age, ii.  346;  human  nature,  453. 

Clodd,  Edward,  note  on  secular  edu- 
cation, i.  369;  letters  to — ^his  book, 
Jesus  of  Nazareth:  Bible  reading, 
ii.  9;  reply  to  condolence  on  his 
daughter's  death,  192;  Positiv- 
ism: will  devote  his  remaining 
powers  to  theological  questions, 
244;  Baur's  merit:  proposes  work 
on  the  three  great  myths,  245,  cp. 
276;  legal  aspect  of  the  "  Darkest 
England  "  scheme:  controversy 
and  waste  of  time,  290;  new  edi- 
tion of  '*  Bates  "  :  alleged  ig^nor- 
ing  of  distinguished  men  by 
Royal  Society,  364;  Man*s  Place 
after  thirty  years,  365;  answering 
letters:  Kidd  on  Social  Evolu- 
tion: Lord  Salisbury  at  Oxford, 
406. 


Cobden,  Richard,  i.  162;  and  Interna- 
tional College,  291. 

Cole,  Sir  Henry,  the  humour  of  pub- 
lic affairs,  ii.  344. 

Colenso,  Bishop,  Bishop  Wilberforce 
on,  i.  217;  also  258,  279,  ii.  37. 

Coleridge,  Lord,  i.  235;  and  vivisec- 
tion, ii.  256. 

Collected  Essays^  review  of,  by  Pro- 
fessor Ray   Lankester,   ii.   393. 

Collier,  Hon.  John,  letters  to — the 
**  Apologetic  Irenicon  "  :  art  in 
London  University,  ii.  325;  a 
pertinacious  portrait  painter,  352; 
effect  of  influenza  on  personal 
appearance:  the  Romanes  Lec- 
ture an  egg-dance,  377. 

Collier,  Hon.  Mrs.  John,  letters  to 
— a  country  visit,  ii.  68;  secre- 
tarial work:  incidents  of  travel, 
89;  Naples:  violent  changes  of 
weather,  92;  secretarial  work: 
Catherine  of  Siena,  104;  end  of 
Italian  trip,  109;  prize  at  the  Slade 
School:  return  from  Maloja,  219; 
the  Canaries,  271;  objects  of  the 
seashore,  310-11;  the  P.C,  345; 
the  cat,  369-70;  nonsense  letter, 
465;  an   Oxford  training,  467. 

Collier,  W.  F.,  letters  to — proposed 
visit  to,  ii.  84;  a  touching  mark 
of  confidence,  213;  law  of  De- 
ceased Wife's  Sister:  Shake- 
speare and  the  sexes  of  plants, 
231-32;  the  P.C:  "What  is 
honour? ":  a  new  Beatitude, 
348;  visit  to,  268. 

Collings,  E.  T.,  letter  to — alcohol  as 
a  brain  stimulant,  ii.  247. 

Collings,  Right  Hon.  Jesse,  his 
mother  and  the  P.C,  ii.   349. 

Commission,  Medical  Acts,  ii.  34,  43; 
report  of,  43,  44. 

Commission,  Scottish  Universities,  i. 
SI  I  sq.,  525. 

Commissions,  Royal,  i.  347  sq.,  428; 
Fisheries,  216,  252,  257,  269,  274; 
on  Science  and  Art  Instruction, 
324;  on  Science,  420;  on  Trawling, 
ii.   27;   Fishery  of  1883,  64. 

Common,  T.,  letter  to — Nietzsche: 
German  work  and  style:  morality 
and  evolution,  ii.  3S3. 


y' 


510 


UF£  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


Omipantlrtt   aaatoaqr,   letter  on*   i 

vonte*  eriticisBi  ^m*  i.  sn  ^»i  wovM 

need   re-writiiiv>   i   4Sif    tjpieal 

oi  tiie  oenttiry?  396L 
Coaitism,    defined    as    **  Cethotieisni 

witiMNtt  Chiittiaiiity,''  i  jis. 
Coaitists,  opinton  oi,  iL  4X9-je;  u$ 

aUo  Ponthrism. 
Conditio&s,  influence  <^  ti.  i$S,  137. 
Congreve,  contrcrrerey  widi,  L  jas. 
C<mtro^teny,  opinion  o^  L  2fi,  jo^ 

S>^  S^  ii«  ^91;  iffid  friendthip, 

i  414,  ii  186;  escliihurmtinir  effect 

d,  it.  K03,  144,  us,  130,  154;  aim 

of,  ajg,  340;  in  leli-defenoe,  4S3* 
Cantrovtritd  QmsHotu,  ii.  316;  labonr 

of    writing    the    prolofue,    317; 

elimination  of  the  sttpematoral, 

317. 
Cook  (editor  of  Sahtrday  Rttdew),  L 

I9if  a67. 
Cooke,  Dr.,  hit  brother-in4aw,  i  6; 

his  first  instruction  in  medicine, 

16,  35. 
Copley  Medal,  awarded  to  Huxley,  iL 

215. 
Corfield,  R.,  on  Clifford's  illness,  i. 

S37- 
Cork,  rejected  for  chair  at,  L  8& 
Comay,    Professor,    acknowledgment 

from,  i.  305. 
Cornu,  Professor,  at  x  Club,  i.  279. 
Courtney,    Right    Hon.    L.,   at    Royal 

Society  dinner,  ii.  65. 
Coventry,  the  home  of  Thomas  Hux- 
ley, i.  i;  George  Huxley  returns 

to,  6. 
Craniology,  i.  257. 
Cranks,  letters  from,  ii.  46  sq. 
Crayfish,  on  the,  i.   143,  429,  525,  ii.  i. 
Creation,    controversy    on    Genesis    i. 

with   Mr.   Gladstone,   ii.   123  sqq.^ 

130;  also  320. 
Criticism,  a  compliment,  i.   168. 
Croonian  Lecture,  i.  172,  173,  175. 
Cross,     Lord,     letter     to — ^Vivisection 

Commission,  i.  472. 
Crossopterygian  fishes,  i.   164. 
Crowder,  Mrs.,  visit  to,  ii.  379. 
Crum     Brown,       Professor,      induces 

Huxley  to  play  golf,  i.  390. 
Crustacea,  paleozoic,  i.   159. 


Culture,  basis  o^  ii.  14  jy. 
Cunningham,  on  South  Americaa  fo^ 

•il*  L  S» 
Cuno,  language  and  ra^e,  it  jffy. 
CuTier,  Ua  viewa  eontroverted*  i.  1^ 
.  165;  and  his  title,  366;  ^precia- 

tion  o^  ii  4a.  « 

Curler,  tilie  Br^sht  i,  173. 

Dalgaims,  Fatiier,  in  Melsi^hyaieal 
Society,  i  33B, 

Balhott^  Lord»  Presidettt  Soyia 
Commission  on  TrawSiig,  ii.  37. 

Dana,  and  coral  reef  11worie8,iL  iy«| 
misunderstanding-  of  Onrwin  hi 
his  obituary  of  Asa  Gn^,  afas. 

Daphnia,  i  159^ 

Darwin,  Charles,  Hkcwiae  bcgina  hia 
career  at  sea,  L  31;  aa  mtm.  of 
science,  loa,  ms;  saying  abovt 
happiness  and  wofk^  140;  i0i| 
starts  on  the  Origm,  171;  effect 
d  the  OHgm,  t/Mi;  ^m  species 
question  before  i$S9>  182;  tfie 
most  serious  omis^oa  in  the 
Origm,  184;  Huxley  his  "990^ 
end  agent,"  i83f  ag/ri  hia  "hntl^ 
dog,"  391;  and  his  predeoeaaora* 
ax6,  241;  and  .poetry,  34a;  eoa» 
pared  wi^  Lamarck,  MSI  nnd 
spontaneous  generatimi,  j%;  at 
X  Club,  279;  his  opinion  of 
Dohm,  351;  his  generosity,  450; 
**  the  cheeriest  letter- writer  I 
know,"  ii.  13;  letter  to,  obtain- 
ing a  Civil  List  pension  for  Wal- 
lace, 15;  death  of,  40;  notice  of, 
in  Nature^  41 ;  love  for,  ib. ;  in- 
tellect of,  42;  obituary,  65;  com- 
pared to  Gordon,  102;  unveiling 
of  statue,  120;  character  and 
friends,  121;  influence  in  science, 
173;  exposition  not  his  forte,  203; 
dumb  sagacity  of,  ib.;  legacy 
from  A.  Rich,  304;  his  theory 
needs  experimental  proof,  309; 
and  natura  non  facit  saltum^  394; 
typical  of  the  century?  396;  na- 
ture of  his  work,  400;  example 
of,  413;  defence  of,  452. 
Letters  from — the  decisive  critics  of 
the  Origin,  i.  178;  Huxley's  res- 
ervations   in    accepting    the    doc- 


INDEX 


5" 


trine  of  the  Origin,  223;  on  Hux- 
ley's treatment  of  Suarez'  meta- 
physics: intellect  of  Huxley,  392; 
on  new  biological  teaching,  410; 
on  report  of  seance,  456;  autom- 
atism, ii.  41. 
Letters  to — on  the  Origin,  i.  188; 
Edinburgh  lectures,  209,  210;  the 
Cambridge  British  Association, 
213;  on  Man*s  Place:  Atavism, 
220;  that  his  theory  accounts  for 
retrogression  as  well  as  progres- 
sion, 2.?!;  pressure  of  work,  264; 
269;  absorption  in  one  kind  of 
work,  due  to  one's  reputation 
and  one's  children,  270;  "  Criti- 
cisms of  the  Origin,**  273;  Copley 
Medal,  275;  difficulty  of  writing 
a  book,  285;  birth  of  a  son:  work 
in  the  Reader,  286;  sends  booklet, 
ib.;  Darwinism  in  Germany,  287; 
Pangenesis,  289;  laziness:  Hooker 
ill,  290;  memorial  about  Gallegos 
fossils,  297;  new  edition  of 
Origin:  Jamaica  affair,  300;  on 
Positivist  critics,  322,  323;  visit 
from  Darwin,  328;  no  time  to 
read,  329;  loses  sight  of  natural- 
ists *'  by  grace  of  the  dredge," 
335;  South  American  fossils,  ib.', 
Exeter  British  Association,  336; 
societies:  the  Celt  question,  349; 
on  Oxford  D.C.L-,  354;  on  De- 
scent of  Man,  and  Sexual  Selec- 
tion, 386;  inconvenience  of  hav- 
ing four  addresses,  414;  on  a 
friend's  illness,  434;  note  for  the 
Descent  of  Man:  Dohrn's'  Station: 
projected  visit  to  America,  450; 
W.  G.  Ward's  saying  about  Mill, 
451 ;  report  on  spiritualistic  seance, 
452  sq.',  attack  in  Quarterly,  457, 
458;  on  vivisection,  470,  471,  472, 
473;  instructions  for  Polar  expe- 
dition, 481 ;  on  theological  protest, 
505;  his  degree  at  Cambridge, 
S13;  "Coming  of  Age"  of  the 
Origin,  ii.  12;  cuts  out  a  sharp 
retort,  15;  on  Wallace's  pension, 
ih.;  optimism  and  pessimism,  16. 

Darwin,  Mrs.,  visit  to,  ii.  305. 

Darwin,  Miss  E.,  on  Huxley's  books, 
i.  285,  287,  300. 


Darwin,    Francis,    letter    to,    on    the 

British    Association    Meeting    of 

i860,  i.  201;  visit  to,  ii.    175. 
Darwin,  Professor  George,  at  seance, 

i.  452  sq, 
Darwin  tree,  the,  ii.  180. 
Daubeny,    Dr.,    at    Oxford,     i860,    i. 

193,  202,  203. 
Davies,    Rev.    Llewelyn,   at    Huxley's 

funeral,  ii.  426. 
Dayman,  Lieutenant,  formerly  of  the 

Rattlesnake,    i.     95;     on    Atlantic 

mud,  317. 
De  la   Beche,   Sir  Henry,  i.   68;    123, 

124,  143. 
De  Maillet,  i.  215. 
De  Quatrefages,  i.  162. 
Deceased  Wife's  Sister  Bill,  ii.  231-33. 
Derby,  Lord,  i.  79. 
Descartes'      Discourse,      Commentary 

on,  i.  352. 
Design,   ii.   200,   201;   argument  from, 

62. 
Devonian  fishes,  i.  2^. 
**  Devonshire    Man  "    controversy,    i. 

349. 
Dewar,    Professor,    liquid   oxygen,    ii. 

384. 

Dingle,   Mr.,  at   Oxford,    i860,   i.    196. 

Diphtheria,  outbreak  of,  i.  528  sq. 

Docker,  the  scientific,  letter  to,  ii. 
388;  tries  to  help,  ib.  sq.;  letter 
to — atoms  and  the  evolution  of 
matter,  405. 

Dog,  on  the,  i.  429;  projected  work 
on,  525;  problems  connected 
with,  ii.  10;  further  work  on, 
II  sq. 

Dohrn,  Dr.  Anton,  visit  of,  i.  311; 
visit  from,  in  1868,  324;  absent 
from  Naples  on  Huxley's  visit, 
u.  91. 
Letters  to — matrimony :  Tennyson : 
his  kindness  to  children,  i.  313; 
scientific  investigators  and  mu- 
seum work:  family  news:  criti- 
cism of  Kolliker,  325-27;  Calcutta 
Museum:  Kolliker  and  the  or- 
ganon  adamantinae:  family  news, 
327;  a  bad  letter- writer:  Goethe's 
Aphorisms;  Dohrn's  work  and 
English,  350,  351;  marine  stations 
at    Naples   and    Brighton:    spon- 


■1+ 


\ 


$12 


UFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


taacou  fenemtion:  lELwdtj, 
devil's  advocate  to  spceulatofs:  a 
"  T5diterv<dles  Haua,"  j$7,  3S8; 
Brkiali  Aiaociatioe  at  Liverpool: 
Fraiioo-Pnissiaii  War,  jsp;  miero- 
•copes:  Franco-Pnuaiaii  War, 
j6i;  School  Board:  "an  optical 
Sadowa,"  388  ««.;  illnen  of  1871, 
J9S;  tiie  visit  to  Naples:  Ceylon 
Mttseum,  403,  403;  beefsteaks  and 
wives  not  to  be  despised,  403; 
Ceylon  Musetun:  his  fotiier's  ill- 
ness: his  capacity,  404;  invita- 
tion to  Morthoc^  ib*i  books  for 
the  Aquarium,  40s;  fhe  new 
laboratory,  406;  England  not  rep- 
resented at  his  station:  vi^ 
from  von  Baer:  lawsuit:  Kkinen- 
berg  on  Hydra,  490^  431;  sub- 
scriptions for  station:  prefers  his 
German  to  his  Bm^ish:  hesita- 
tion, 431;  his  marriage;  the  sta- 
tion: Darwin's  generosity,  449; 
death  of  Darwin  and  Balfour,  ii. 
41;  naval  officers  and  sdenttfie  re- 
.  search,  45;  healtfi:  age:  earning 
an  honest  sixpence,  158. 

Dohm,  Dr.,  sen.,  L  399;  visit  to,  at 
Naples,  ib.  sq,;  vigour  of,  404. 

Donnelly,  Sir  John,  K.C.B.,  visit  to, 
ii  385. 
Letters  to— vivisection,  L  463-65; 
Fishery  appointment,  ii.  22;  title 
of  Dean:  a  wet  holiday,  38;  re- 
tired officers  in  administrative 
posts,  49;  unofficial  answer  to 
official  inquiries,  78;  proposed 
resignation,  79;  industry  and  age, 
80;  health:  Gordon,  ib.;  reply  to 
arguments  against  resignation, 
81;  extension  of  leave:  festa  of 
St.  Peter's  chair,  97;  coldness  of 
Rome:  repression  of  dynamiters: 
Roman  noses,  99;  Gordon:  pub- 
lic affairs:  technical  education: 
depression:  carnival,  101-103; 
health,  106;  return  from  Italy, 
hi;  Civil  List  pension,  117;  re- 
turn in  good  health  from  Arolla: 
renews  work  at  science  instead 
of  theology,  147-48;  Science  and 
Art  examinations,  150,  250;  age 
moderates    hopes,    160;    Imperial 


Institnte,  16$;  the  Irish  ^pMstloii* 
199;  Qion:  "javeUns,"  zSss  scads 
proof  of  Stn^gU  far  Bsitimictp 
199;  Deceased  Wife's.  Sister  Bill: 
Iwtred  fd  anonymity,  433 ;  Stone- 
heng€:  use  of  Kadicals:  death  of 
Smyth,  a7S>  move  to  Eaadxmme, 
J98;  Lmidott  Univercity  Com- 
misMon  and  reform,  33s;  tbit 
State  and  intermediate  educattont 
339;  fespotts9>le  for  the  Privy 
CoondBorshi^,  343;  hnmoitr  of 
public  affahns,  344;  the  modem 
martsrrdom,  333;  hiculty  of  for- 
getting^ 396;  the  sctentifie  dodcer* 
388;  death  of  Tyndall,  39s;  letter 
from  a  lunatic,  39s;  •  State  even- 
ing party,  395;  procrastiayattoa: 
the  sdenttfie  ^odcer:  Darwin 
Medal,  4x0;  wmnen  in  public  iffe^ 
4X1. 

Draper,  Dr.,  I.  19$. 

Drawing,  Huxley's  Ucidty  lor»  L  4» 
46»397»447< 

Dublin,  LLD.  at,  i.  S9»> 

Duncan,  Dr.  M  atdiews,  visk  to,  L  390^ 

Dyer,  Sir  W.  Thisdton,  helps  in  tiie 
new  sdence  teadiing,  L  407  n,; 
lectures  for  Huxley,  409;  to  help 
in  Men  of  Sdence  Series,  53$; 
letter  from— Gentian  paper,  ii. 
S14;  letter  to— on  Marine  Biologi- 
cal Association,  208. 

Dyster,  Dr.,  letters  to — scientific  Cal- 
vinism, i.  122;  introduction  to 
Kingsley  and  Maurice,  131 ;  re- 
fuses Edinburgh  chair:  coast  sur- 
vey, 132,  133,  134,  135;  approach- 
ing  marriage,  136,  137;  popular 
lectures,  149;  man  not  a  rational 
animal  in  his  parental  capacity, 
ii.  192. 

Ealing,  i.    i. 

Eastbourne,  house  at;  law  of  nature 

about;  origin  of  name,  ii.  294. 
Echinoderms,  on  the  development  of, 

i.  82;  aim  of  paper,  100. 
EchOy  article  in,  i.  512. 
Ecker,    Dr.    A.,    on    his    ethnolog^ical 

work,  i.  294. 
Eckersley,    W.,    letter    to— Civil    List 

pension,  ii.  117. 


INDEX 


513 


Eckersley,  W.  A.,  death  of,  ii.  426. 

Eckhard,  Dr.,  i.  176. 

Ectoderm  and  Endoderm,  discovery 
of,  i.  42,  43;  431. 

Edinburgh,  lectures  at — on  the  Ape 
question,  i.  207  sq.;  on  the  Phys- 
ical Basis  of  Life,  321;  Fishery 
Exhibition,  ii.  31;  refuses  an  un- 
certain post  at,  i.  123;  refuses  to 
succeed  Forbes  there,  126,  129, 
130,  133,  134.  135;  Natural  His- 
tory  courses   at,   475   sq.^   489   sq. 

Edinburgh  University,  hon.  degree,  i. 
296. 

Edison,   typical   of  the   century?   396. 

Education,  the  true  end  of,  i.  320; 
secular,  369,  and  note;  intermedi- 
ate, and  the  State,  ii.  339;  scien- 
tific, for  a  boy,  339,  341. 

Egerton,  Sir  Philip,  his  museum,  i. 
144;  visit  to,  191;  squib  on  the 
ape  question,  207,  215. 

Egyptian  exploration,  ii.  67. 

Ehrenberg,  suspects  Bathybius,  i.  480. 

Eisig,  assistant  to  Dr.   Dohm,  ii.  91. 

Elementary  Physiology,  i.  265,  305,  ii. 
i;  new  edition,  it.  75,  89. 

Eliot,  George,  proposed  burial  in 
Westminster  Abbey,  ii.  19;  Stan- 
ley on,  33. 

Ellicott,  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  in 
Metaphysical    Society,    i.    338. 

Ellis,  Charles,  with  Huxley  in  Egypt, 

i.  399. 
"  Emancipation,    Black    and    White," 

i.  283. 
English  literature,  teaching  of,  letter 

on,  ii.  301. 
English   Men   of  Science   Series  pro- 
jected, i.  534  sqq. 
Enniskillen,  Lord,  i.  217. 
Erasmus,  opinion  of,  ii.  418,  455. 
Erebus  and  Terror,  Hooker  on,  i.  61. 
Erichssen,    Professor,    on   Vivisection 

Commission,  i.  472. 
Ethnological  Society,  President  of,  1. 

284;     presidential     address,     330; 

amalgamation    of    two    societies, 

348. 
Ethnology,  work  on,   i.   213,  214,  269, 

283,  294,  296,  306,  348,  350;  Sir  M. 

Foster  on,  284;  systematic  series 

of  photographs,  330;  definition  of, 

69 


348;  attention  turned  away  from, 
in  1873,  434. 

Eton,  new  Headmaster,  and  future  of, 
ii.  143;  Huxley  a  Governor  of, 
3.  221;  examinations,  250. 

Europeans,  alleged  inferiority  of 
senses  in,  ii.  284. 

Evans,  Sir  J.,  on  Marine  Biological 
Association,  ii.  208. 
Letters  to— getting  in  harness  a 
tonic:  need  of  rest,  ii.  85;  Ra- 
venna: takes  up  Italian  again, 
92;  work  of  Royal  Society  Secre- 
tary, 94;  a  growl  from  Italy,  107 
n.;  description  of  pleurisy,  177  n.; 
delay  over  Spirula  and  Darwin 
obituary,  202;  Copley  Medal: 
Geological  Congress :  punni- 
grams,  224;  pliocene  and  mio- 
cene  man:  language  no  test  of 
race,  286;  a  forgotten  subscrip- 
tion, 370. 

Evolution,  article  for  Encyclopadia,  i. 
487*  513*  lectures  on,  at  New 
York,  501;  demonstrative  evi- 
dence of,  502;  accumulation  of 
evidence  for,  ii.  13;  laws  of,  ap- 
plied to  the  arrangement  of  the 
Vertebrata,  13,  476;  theory  must 
have  been  invented  by  later  pa- 
leontologists, 36;  illustrated  by 
the  Pearly  Nautilus,  62  sq. ;  ex- 
perimental, 309,  310. 

Evolution  and  morality,  ii.  382. 

"  Evolution  of  Theology,"  ii.  131. 

Evolutionary  thought  builds  up  as 
well  as  pulls  down,  ii.-  317. 

Examinership  under  Science  and  Art 
>  Department,     ii.      167     sq.,     228; 
250. 

Exodus,  the  real  story  of,  ii.  67. 

Eyre,  Governor,  i.  300-304. 

Faith,  the  sin  of,  ii.  427. 

Falconer,  Dr.  Hugh,  i.  276. 

Family  motto,   tenax  propositi,  ii.  5. 

Fanning,  Mrs.,  i.  193. 

Fanning,  William,  his  friend  in  Syd- 
ney, i.  39,  40;  death  of,  ii.  176. 

Fanning,    F.,   visit  to,   ii.    379. 

Faraday,  Michael,  interview  with,  i. 
23,  108;  167,  168;  and  titles,  386; 
influence  in  science,  ii.   173;  the 


514 


LIFE  OF  PROF£$SOR  HUXLEY 


knowledge  oi  poptdar  eadieiices, 

Ferrer,  Dcen,  cm  ■cienoe  in  imblie 
•choola,  i.,  agS,  i^;  et  Sion 
House  meeting,  3as*  . 

Fpurrar,  Rer.  Profettor,  jMsoottnt  of  ^e 
Oxford  Britiik  Ateocietion,  s8fe» 
L  19^  JQ3. 

Ferrer,  Lord,  letters  to— officii^  folly: 
f^Qecies  tenecious  .of  life,  ti .  10; 
^sherj  appointment,  23;  (Had- 
stone  oontrorersy:  ignoranee  of 
tiie  so-called  educated  classes,  1S4; 
effect  of  controversy  ^  on  health, 
124;  the  Cassofrary  riiyme,  3$^; 
his  deration  to  the  peerage:  criti- 
dnn  of  Koinanes  Lecture,  ,3319, 
aSo;  tibe  Pevil  Prince  of  .this 
Cosmos:. «  ^rhri  reasoning;  the 
Established  ,  Church  and  .  our 
simian  .  origin:  attadc  on  ■  tiie 
Sdiool  Board  compromise,,  .406; 
the  m  priori  metiiod  an  anachro- 
nism: method  of  the  Pditical 
Economists  and  Eubiotks:  grow- 
ing hopefulness  in  age,  407;  aim 
oi  the  chapter  in  Owen's  Life: 
hint  for  an  ^May  cm  Gor^nment: 
London. University  reform,  416. 

Fawcett,  Professor,  stays  with,  1.  313. 

Fayrer,  Sir  Joseph,  settles  his  career 
for  him,  i  aSt  ^x;  great  antiiropo- 
logical  scheme,  294;  invites  Hux- 
ley to  Calcutta,  ib.;  ethnological 
photographs,  330. 
Letters  to — unable  to  go  to  Calcutta, 
i.  273;  Indian  Canidae,  ii.  12;  the 
P.C.:  career  due  to  his  sugges- 
tion, 346. 

Felixstowe,  visits,  i.  96;  Mrs.  Huxley 
at,  213. 

Fichte,  i.  235. 

Filhal,  M.,  work  on  Natural  Selection, 
ii.  13- 

Fish,  immature,  ii.  249. 

Fisheries,  appointed  Inspector  of,  ii. 
21;  duties,  23  sq.;  deep  sea,  re- 
quire no  protection,  24,  28;  sal- 
mon, protection,  24;  experiments, 

25. 
Fisheries,  Report  on,  i.  159;  old  falla- 
cies in  reports,  ii.  10;  experimental 
station  at  Lamlash  Bay,  i.   166. 


Fishery  busineas,  Ii  s^  99. 

Fishery  Eidiibition,  lesson  o^  ii»  as  «•• 
at  Norwidi,  J9  Jff.;  at  Edmbttri^ 
31;  in  London,  S3* 

Fishes,  devel<qmient  of  the  akeleton 
in,  i  i6«  tq. 

fldimongers*    Company    ai|d    edncn- 
.  tion,  iL  54* 

]?1ske,  John,  visit  to,  i.  497. 

FitzBoy,  Admiral,  Darwhiism  and  tlie 
BiUe,  L  SOI. 

Flood  myth,  ii.  a^  agd, 

Ftourens  reviewed,  L  atjp. 

Ffower,  Sir  W.  H.,  on  die  simian 
brain  at  CambrMige,  iflfo,  L  aa4* 
SOS,  313,  3i6;  on  Huxlesr'a  work 
lor  Hunterian  Lccturea»  a^; 
curator  of  Natural  •  History  .Col- 
Icctfons,  s69;  lAaraeter  o^  .s^; 
Kittgsley  should  get  to .  know 
him,  S98;  evoittiioa  .  and  ;  the 
Churdb,  IL  tio  «. 
Letters  to— examinership  at  CoUege 
of  Surgeons:  IHjon  museum,  L 
JS3;  Hunterian  Lectures,  33s; 
anatomy  of  the  fox,  IL  xi;  Llaa- 
cre  professorsh^,  33;  acceptance 
of  P.R.S.,  56,  57:  "VlUe  qui 
parie,"  etc,  yx;  retirement,  •  113; 
refuges  for  the  incompetent:  Q^ 
Senrioe  Commissioners:  treat-- 
ment  by  the  Royal  Society,  aas; 
promotion  by  seniority,  312;  uni- 
versity reform,  33 ;  the  P.C. : 
Salisbury  P.C.*s  received  by 
Gladstonians  (cp.  350):  kinds  of 
pleurisy:  official  patronage:  ill- 
ness of  Owen,  347;  Owen's  work, 
362. 

Foote  case,  ii.  429. 

Forbes,  Professor  Edward,  introduc- 
tion to,  i.  27 ^  29;  seemingly  forgot- 
ten by,  42;  visits,  64;  support  from 
64,  65,  68,  87,  98;  helps  to  F.R.S., 
•j2t  73;  his  pay,  68;  goes  to  Edin- 
burgh, 93;  life  of  the  Red  Lion 
Club,  94;  writes  notice  of  Huxley, 
98;  on  Huxley's  views,  100;  char- 
acter of,  102,  103,  104,  116,  125, 
128;  is  succeeded  by  Huxley,  117, 
128;  death  of,  125  sq.\  also  108. 
Letters  from — Huxley's  Rattlesnake 
work,  i.  59;  on  Royal  Medal,  109. 


INDEX 


515 


Letters  to — Royal  Medal,  i.  112,  118 
(cp.  ii.  431);  also  123,  124. 

Forbes,  Principal  James,  structure  of 
glaciers,  i.  158,  161;  and  Tyndall, 
440. 

Forel,  Professor,  at  Arolla,  ii.  181. 

Forster,  Right  Hon.  W.  E.,  on  Bible 
teaching,  i.  '369;  vivisection  at 
South  Kensington,  462  sq.;  letter 
to,  446. 

Foster,  Sir  M.,  on  the  spirit  of  Hux- 
ley's early  inquiries,  i.  iii;  on 
his  "  Review  of  the  Cell  Theory," 
152;  and  "Theory  of  the  Verte- 
brate Skull,"  152;  on  the  Oxford 
meeting  of  the  British  Associa- 
tion, 203;  on  Huxley  as  examiner, 
256;  on  his  ethnological  work, 
284;  takes  over  Fullerian  Lec- 
tures, 315;  on  Huxley's  work  on 
birds  and  reptiles,  316,  325;  on 
Huxley  as  Secretary  of  the  Royal 
Society,  383;  takes  over  his  lec- 
tures, 395;  helps  in  the  new  sci- 
ence teaching,  407;  a  New  Year's 
guest,  418;  on  Huxley's  work 
after  1870,  428  sq.;  with  him  at 
Belfast,  444-46;  to  h^Ip  in  Men  of 
Science  Series,  535;  assists  in 
preparing  new  edition  of  Ele- 
mentary Physiology,  ii.  75;  and 
London  University  Commission, 
330;  **  discovery  "  of,  420. 
Letters  from — retirement  at  sixty,  ii. 

117,  128;  society  at  Maloja,  218. 
Letters  to  —  Edinburgh  lectures: 
vivisection:  Bathybius  suspected, 
i.  480;  official  functions  not  his 
business  in  life,  ii.  53;  successor 
to  Spottiswoode,  55;  reluctance  to 
divide  the  Royal  Society  over  his 
election  as  President,  59;  elected, 
60;  support  of  debateable  opin- 
ionswhile  P.R.S.,6i;  handwriting 
and  anxiety,  63;  holiday  defined, 
ib.;  Science  and  Art  examina- 
tions, ib.;  on  Senate  of  London 
University,  64;  obituaries  of  F. 
Balfour  and  Darwin,  ib.;  Royal 
Society  anniversary,  65;  Egyp- 
tian exploration  society,  67;  new 
edition  of  Elementary  Physiology, 
75;   sensation,  76;   resignation  of 


P.R.S.,    76;    swine    miracle,    77; 
health,    78;    proofs:    resignation: 
Jeremiah   and   dyspepsia,   84,   85; 
"vis  inertia,"  85;  ordered  abroad, 
8s,  86;  Venice,  87;   November  in 
Italy,    89,    91,    92;    papal    Rome: 
health,  93;   depression:  will  turn 
antiquary:    Royal    Society    Secre- 
tary,   96;    Elementary    Physiology, 
new  edition:  Italian  archaeology: 
visits  the  Lincei,  100;  preface  to 
Elementary    Physiology:    Gordon's 
idea  of  future  life:  carnival,  loi; 
birthday  wishes:  upshot  of  Italian 
trip:  looks  forward  to  becoming 
a  lodge-keeper:  Elementary  Physi- 
ology published,  105,  106;  returns 
home:    continued    ill-health,    iii- 
114;    impending    retirement,    114; 
medical  men  and  F.R.S.,  119;  so- 
cial   meetings    of    Royal    Society, 
120;    science    at    Oxford,    128;    a 
scientific  Frankenstein,   137;  visit 
to     Ilkley,     ib.;     paleontological 
museum,  140;  renewed  ill-health: 
scientific    federation :    reorganisa- 
tion    of     Fisheries     Department, 
141;  rejection  of  Home  Rule  Bill, 
144;  "  Huxley  sulphide  "  at  Har- 
rogate,    14s;     visit     to     Arolla: 
death  of  a  visitor:  British  Asso- 
ciation   and    Australia:    renewed 
desire  for  work,  147;  transference 
of  sensation:  obstinate  fictions  of 
examinees,    149;    Delta    borings: 
gentians,     begs     specimen:     dis- 
tribution of,  152;  apology  for  in- 
tervention,    157;     Royal     Society 
and    Imperial    Institute   Commit- 
tee, 164;  Science  and  Art  exami- 
nations, 167  sq. ;  pleurisy  his  Jubi- 
lee   honour,    177;    convalescence: 
Marine     Biological     Association, 
179;    Arolla,    180;    gentians    and 
idleness,  182;  the  P.R.S.  and  poli- 
tics,    185;     at     Hastings:     Delta 
borings:     Antarctic    exploration, 
188;  keeps  his  promise  to  speak 
at    Manchester,    in    spite   of   do- 
mestic loss,  191;  technical  educa- 
tion, address  at  Manchester,  193; 
Hooker's  work  on   Diatoms,  ib.: 
London    University   reform,   201; 


\ 


5i6 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


Spkida:  Darwin obituarsr:  "paper 
philoaophersy"  aoa,  103;  peetsUar 
atage  of  cownXtuotacitiChalkngfr 
reporta,  aoa;  Darwin  obituary 
finiahed;  affection  of  tiie  heart: 
an  "  unselfiah  requcat,"  ao7;  an 
amended  paper  oompared  to 
Triatram  Shandy'a  breediea,  ao6; 
a  succeator  in  preaidency  of 
Marine  Biological  Aaaociation, 
ibr,  Darwin  obituary  aattslactory: 
Spirula:  death  of  Matthew  Ar- 
nold, aop;  open  invitation  to, 
aa  a  friend  of  Huxley,  313;  at 
Maloja:  Copley  Medal,  axs;  leavea 
Maloja,  aid;  unable  to  effect  a 
meeting,  <b.;  return  home  from 
Maloja,  aiy,  ai8;  compelled  to 
lire  out  of  London:  a  cuttlefiah 
of  a  writer,  aaa;  climate  of  Eaat- 
boume  and  a  frwri  reaaoning, 
aas;  diildren  and  anxiety:  ataya 
away  from  Royal  Society  dinner, 
aa4;  Science  and  Art  examina- 
tiona,  ayllabua:  aucceaaor  to  Hux- 
ley, aa8;  Monte  Generoao:  his 
health.  Sir  H.  Thompaon  on,  353; 
oppoaitiontoTedinical  Education 
Bill,  354;  aenda  photograph:  pro- 
posed trip  to  the  Canaries,  366; 
reviewa  of  Darwin,  Alpha  and 
Omega,  367;  marriage  and  the 
wisdom  of  Solomon,  ib.\  Booth 
business,  a  wolf  by  the  ears: 
Salvationists  and  spies,  292; 
Physiology  t  Part  3:  name  of 
house:  a  supposed  ancestor  and 
benefit  of  clergy,  294,  295;  Maloja 
accessible  to  him  only  by  bal- 
loon, 306;  physiological  omnis- 
cience, 308;  unequal  to  public 
function,  312;  physiology  un- 
trammelled at  Royal  College  of 
Science,  331;  Senate  of  London 
University  and  reform,  334;  Privy 
Councillorship,  343;  public  func- 
tions and  health,  354;  sympathy 
for  attack  on,  363;  Romanes  Lec- 
ture: Harvey  celebration:  symp- 
toms of  influenza,  379;  weakness 
after  influenza,  385;  Nature  din- 
ner: award  of  Darwin  Medal, 
409;  avoidance  of  influenza:  Gor- 


don and  we  Anricaa  favei,  4^* 

joining  die  Hortfenttncal  Soeteti:, 

471. 
PmmdaHons  a/  B^kft  orMiqiie  on,  u. 

418-33. 
Fox,  George,  inffncncc  o^  M.  'S$$i  aa 

compared  with  Fianldia,  399.. 
Francia,  Dr.  WilUam,  i  84,  lai,  131. 
Franco-Pruasian  War,  i.  399^  ^fo. 
Frankland,  Sir  Edward,  L.  isi»  aTy. 
Lettera  to-^n  M  Cttth»ia8is  Spottia> 

woode'a  iUncaa,  ii  54;  v^onr  of 

"c^d    logiea^s    MentcMi*    enrtib- 

<|uake,  1741  inhits  of  ecia,   ^; 

artide  on  **S*ntgi^  lor  Sxiat- 

ence,"    19^    on    Boyid    Society 

federation  adieBie^  ast » 
Franldin,  B.,  inffuenee  eon^aced  with 

that  of  Fox,  li^  33S* 
Free  tiiought,  vHlmale  sncc<aa  9^  L 

4aS;  tone,  of  aome.  pohHaatfoaa, 

iL  943,4^ 
Freemantie,  Rev.  W.  H.,  tiCCWMH  ol 

the  Oxford  British  Aaao^Mlkm, 

i86q^  i  300;  eontrovcray  witii,  on 

Bible  teaching,  3fiB. 
French,  knowledge  o^  i.  1^ 
Froude,  J.  ^  i'354»  $«f  «i3. 
FuU^rian  Pri^esaorah^,  ,L  m,  ii»;  rea> 

ignation,  314. 

Galbraith,  leavea  ATafwivl  Hilary  Rg- 

view,  i.  225. 
Galileo  >  and  the  Pope,  ii.  122. 
Gallegos  river,  fossils  at,  i.  297,  335. 
Galton,  Sir  D.,  at  x  Club,  i.   279. 
Galton,    F.,    on    Committee    of     the 

Reader,  i.  227. 
Geary,  i.  37. 

Gegenbaur,  Professor,  i.  176. 
Geikie,    Sir  A.,   sends   proofs    of    the 

Primer  to,  i.  412. 
Gemmation,   lecture  on,   i.    151. 
Genesis,  controversy  over,  ii.   123;   re- 
newed in  Times,  314  sq. 
Genius,  men  of,  a  "  sport,"  i.  259;   as 

an  explosive  power,  384. 
Gentians,  study  of,  begun,  ii.  146  sq.; 

continued,  214. 
"  Geological  Contemporaneity,"  i.  220. 
"  Geological  Reform,"  i.  333. 
Geological  Society,  Fellow  of,  i.    161; 

elected  Secretary,  166. 


INDEX 


517 


Geological  Survey,  work  on,  i.   154. 

George,  H.,  Progress  and  Poverty,  ii. 
261,  264. 

German,  knowledge  of,  i.  160,  ii.  444. 

German  speculation,  research  and 
style,  ii.  382. 

Gilman,  Professor  D.  C,  i.  279. 

Glacier  ice,  paper  on,  i.  155. 

Gladstone,  Professor  J.  H.,  account 
of  Huxley's  work  on  the  School 
Board,  i.  364  sq. 

Gladstone,  Right  Hon.  W.  E.,  and 
Metaphysical  Society,  i.  338;  not 
an  expert  in  metaphysics,  341 ;  the 
greatest  intellect  in  Europe,  379; 
reaction  from,  525;  a  graceful  ac- 
tion, ii.  15;  function  of,  286;  at- 
tacks Huxley  in  the  Impregnable 
Rock  of  Holy  Scriptiij^et  287;  swine 
miracle,  288;  and  Parnell,  291-93; 
typical  of  the  century?  396. 
controversy  with,  on  Genesis,  ii.  122 
sqq.;  estimate  of,  130;  letter  on 
— the  ordeal  of  public  criticism, 
190;  revived  by  others,  314  sq. 
second  controversy  with,  ii.  450,  452. 

Goethe,  quoted,  i.  163;  on  "  thatige 
Skepsis,"  181;  his  Aphorisms 
translated  for  the  first  number  of 
Nature,  351;  scientific  insight  of, 
ii.  431. 

Golf,  Huxley  plays,  i.  390. 

Goodsir,  Dr.  John,  as  man  of  science, 
i.  102. 

Gordon,  C.  G.,  ideas  and  character,  ii. 
loi,  102,  107;  why  he  did  not  have 
the  African  fever,  103. 

Gordon,  G.  W.,  executed  by  Eyre,  i. 
300  sq. 

Gore,  Canon,  ii.  286. 

Gosse,  Edmund,  anonymous  review- 
ers, ii.  153. 

Grant,  Dr.,  introduction  to,  i.  27;  as 
man  of  science,  102;  an  early  evo- 
lutionist, 180. 

Grant  (friend  of  Dr.  Dohrn),  i.  431. 

Grant  Duff,  Sir  M.,  letter  from — pos- 
sibilities of  a  political  career  for 
Huxley,  i.  380;  Lord  Rector  of 
Aberdeen,  420. 

Granville,  Lord,  letter  from— appoints 
Huxley  on  London  University 
Senate:    anecdote    of    Clay,    the 


whist  player,  ii.  64;  a  master  of 
polished  putting  down,  178. 

Gray,  Asa,  misunderstanding  of  Dar- 
win, ii.  205;  appreciation  of,  ib. 

Gray,  J.  E.,  introduction  to,  i.  27,  29; 
support  from,  87;  a  zoological 
whirlwind,  171. 

Green,  T.  H.,  i.  195;  account  of  Hux- 
ley's speech  at  Oxford,  199. 

Green,  of  Leeds,  to  help  in  Men  of 
Science  Series,  i.  535. 

Greene,  Professor  R.,  i.  176,  225. 

Gregory,  Sir  W.  H.,  with,  in  Egypt, 
i-  397;  Governor  of  Ceylon,  404. 

Greswell,   Rev.   Richard,  i.  196,  201. 

Grey,  Albert,  M.P.,  letter  to,  on 
Home  Rule,  ii.  132. 

Griffiths,  Mr.,  Secretary  British  Asso- 
ciation, i.  441. 

Grote,  George,  and  titles,  i.  386. 

Grove,  Sir  G.,  a  criticism,  i.  324. 

Gull,  Sir  W.,  and  F.R.S.,  ii.  119. 

Gunther,  Dr.,  i.  448. 

Gutzlaff,  saying  of,  ii.  i4if  151* 

Haeckel,  Professor  Ernst,  his  Gas- 
traea  theory,  dependent  on  Hux- 
ley's discoveries,  i.  43;  Darwin- 
ism in  Germany,  287;  unable  to 
attend  British  Association,  1866, 
208;  and  Bathybius,  317  sq. 
Letters  to — on  reading  Die  Radio- 
Icrien,  i.  255;  dissuades  him  from 
joining  Arctic  expedition:  Dar- 
winism: philological  evidence  in 
ethnology,  287,  288;  on  his  Mor- 
phologie:  controversy,  309;  mar- 
riage: classification  of  birds: 
handwriting,  311;  von  Baer's 
Copley:  reptiles  and  birds,  325; 
translation  of  his  Morphologie :  in- 
fluence  of  children,  327,  328;  no- 
tice of  the  Anthropogenie :  attack 
on  Darwin  in  the  Quarterly :  A mphi- 
oxus  and  the  primitive  vertebrate, 
457;  Rattlesnake  "  collection  "  : 
his  Medusae  unpublished:  Cray- 
fish: Spirula:  his  children,  527. 

Hahn,  Father,  reminiscences  of  Hux- 
ley's impartiality  in  teaching,  ii. 
428. 

Hamilton,  on  the  unconditioned,  i. 
234,  262. 


V5»- 


518 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


Hand,  lecture  on,  i«  s*St  53$. 

Hmrcourt,  Sir  W.,  letter  to,  8ni>i>re»- 
•ioii  of  phjrsiologictl  ejtperiment, 
i  4^. 

Hardwicke,  printel',  L  ats-M' 

Harriaon,  F.,  in  Metaphyaical  Society, 
i.  338;  attacka  agnoaticism,  iL 
ass  sQ'i  oontroveray  with:  the 
"Apologetic  Irenicon,"  3x8  sq.; 
attack  of,  philoaophically  borne, 
363. 

Harriaon,  J.,  letter  to—science  and 
agriculture,  iL  300. 

Hartington,  Lord,  acience  ahould  be 
aided  like  tiie  army  and  nayy,  iL 
164;  technical  education,  i^;  let> 
ter  to— Deceased  Wife'a  Siater 
Bill,  a33. 

Hartismere,  Lord,  Vivisection  Bill,  L 
469. 

Hanrey,  L  ai6;  lecture  on,  sao,  523; 
article   on,    iL    i;    ter^»itenary, 

385  *«. 

Haughton,  Professor  S.,  leavea  Nahh 
ral  History  Review,  L.  22$. 

Hay,  Sir  John,  visit  to,  at  Tangier, 
L  397. 

Head,  Francis,  "javelins,"  iL  xSa. 

Healy,  T.,  and  Pamell,  iL  a^a. 

Heathom,  Henrietta  Anne  {see  Mra. 
T.  "H.  Huxley),  engagement,  L 
39,  40;  description  of,  40;  remote 
prospect  of  marriage,  48,  49;  ar^ 
rives  in  England,  138. 

Heathorn,  Mrs.,  i.  242. 

Helmholtz,  i.  279. 

Helps,  Sir  A.,  i.  279. 

Henslow,  Professor,  i.  96,  97,  160,  195, 
196,  201;  death  of,  243;  relation 
to  Darwin,  ii.  42. 

Herring,  memoir  on,  i.  159;  experi- 
ments as  to  the  spawning  of,  166; 
address  on,  ii.  30. 

Herschel,   Sir  John,  i.  64. 

Hesitation,  no  good  ever  done  by,  i. 

432. 
Hippocampus,  i.  206,  215. 
Hird,  Dr.,  presents  testimonial  to,  ii. 

Hirst,  Thomas  Archer,  i.  243;  and  x 
Club,  2yyt  281,  282;  character  of, 
419;  Royal  Medal,  ii.  66;  illness 
of,  209;  death  of,  352. 


Histology,  wodc  on,  i  199. 
Hiatorical  Aa«>datioa  <rf 


and    €3icdilfc^    piwwittittiffii    to 

Huxley,  L  jfiii. 
Hobhouae,  Lord,  Huxley  accmwi  in- 

tellectaal  freedom,  IL  430^ 
Hockenhsall,  Swanna  <to^  anceator  of 

the  iamily  of  Hmiey,  L  Jk 
Holiday,  work,  L  3^,  513,   S90w  S3>; 

borne  well,  &  4$;  deftnlticMi  o^ 

Holland,  Sir  Henry,  o«  Plafo^  M.  4Si» 
Home  Rule,  tetter  to  A.   Gvqr,   iL 

13a;  a<f9  144,  iMf 
Hooker,  Sir  J.  D«,  kit  case  »  pcwee- 
dent,  L  31,  ^,  64;  m  Iyiwh!ii,*9y; 
at  hia  knaniape^  149;  on  SiMnr- 
dott  widi,  iss;  niatiwii  wMi 
Darwin,  i^;  00  (9«elei^  4b^  19a; 
at  Oxibrd,  fWo^  19s,  aao^  jm»  nan; 
origin  of  fricn^ddp  witfi*  a^a;  le- 
monatrattawlcb  Huok^  Ml  f'^r^'** 
akma  Into  |diilo80piqr,J«n  »  Chrib, 
^  IL  laB;  chtba  not  lor  Ib6  old, 
L  aBa;  with  Huxley  In  Birittnny, 
J08;  Preaident  Britiah  AaaotAm- 
tion,  319;  witfi  Httxi^y  kt  tlHs 
BSfd,  3S3;  preseniatkMi  to,  at 
Liverpool,  360;  on  Hnxl^a  in> 
telleet,  39s;  troubte  wtft'ofidal 
chle^  405,  408,  4Mf  419;  ncocMmt  • 
c»f*trip  to  the  Anrergne,  490  Jfv.; 
receives  Order  of  the  Pole  Star, 
427;  on  Belfast  meeting  of  British 
Association,  432,  445;  unable  to 
write  obituary  of  Darwin,  iL  41; 
P.R.S.,  54;  vigour  of,  174;  his 
treatment  by  Government,  176; 
friendship  with,  225;  Royal  So- 
ciety's Medal,  431;  Huxley's  love 
of  the  garden,  469-71. 
Letters  from — on  his  work  on  micro- 
organisms, i.  356;  Dana's  obitu- 
ary of  Gray,  ii.  205. 
Letters  to — ^his  selection  for  the 
Royal  Medal,  L  119;  E.  Forbes, 
126;  his  approaching  marriage, 
139  (two);  submerged  forest,  140; 
British  Museum  Collections,  144; 
science  in  the  Saturday  Review, 
150;  glacier  paper,  155;  Swiss 
trip,  156;  election  to  Imp.  Acad. 
Caes. :  Fullerian  Lectures,  161;  on 


INDEX 


519 


criticism,  168;  approaching  "  Au- 
gustan Age  **  of  English  science, 
171;  on  his  Flora  of  Tasmania, 
176,  177;  on  naturalists*  fund,  177; 
on  Times  review  of  the  Origin, 
190;  on  the  ape  question,  205; 
on  Punch  squib,  206;  his  absence: 
Edinburgh  lectures,  210;  Hux- 
ley's address  at  Geological  So- 
ciety, 220;  working  men's  lec- 
tures, 1862,  223;  Natural  History 
Review,  225,  226;  future  leaders  of 
science,  239;  christening,  240;  on 
Natural  History  Review  and  ma- 
terialists, 241;  illness  and  death  of 
Henslow,  243,  244;  move  to  Kew: 
a  poor  client,  250,  251;  science 
examinations,  256;  pressure  of 
work,  264;  Science  and  Art  De- 
partment examinations,  274;  Dar- 
win's Copley  Medal,  275;  on  x 
Club,  281,  282. 

Medical  men  and  F.!R.S.,ii.  119; 
distribution  of  gentians,  151,  152; 
Darwin  and  the  Quarterly  review- 
ers: chance  and  atheism,  153; 
death  of  Symonds:  gentians,  183; 
the  P.R.S.  and  politics,  185;  his 
Copley  Medal,  189,  191;  technical 
education  address  at  Manchester, 
193;  distribution  of  Coniferae, 
194;  visit  from  H.  Spencer,  198; 
Trustee  of  the  British  Museum: 
story  about  Lowe:  difficulty  of 
the  Origin,  204;  on  Dana's  obitu- 
ary of  Asa  Gray:  difficulty  of 
the  Origin:  primer  of  Darwin- 
ismus,  204,  205;  X  Club  breaking 
up,  209;  affection  of  the  heart: 
Moselcy's  breakdown,  210;  Dar- 
win obituary,  possible  senility, 
ib.;  hybridism  of  gentians,  220; 
a  nomadic  life  or  none:  deaf- 
ness: botanist  should  study  dis- 
tribution in  the  Engadine,  221, 
222;  visit  from,  before  leaving 
London,  221;  Copley  Medal: 
friendship  and  salt-water  experi- 
ences, 225 ;  X  archives :  a  **  house- 
hold animal  of  value,"  229;  De- 
ceased Wife's  Sister  question, 
231;  raison  d*etre  of  clubs,  246; 
applied    science    and    the    Royal 


Society,  ib.;  Academy  dinner: 
portrait  of  Hooker,  248;  Monte 
Generoso:  called  an  old  gentle- 
man: anxieties  about  children 
when  grown  up:  x  Club  sub- 
scription, 252;  return  froin  Ma- 
loja,  256;  orchids  and  the  influ- 
ence of  conditions:  Balfour  and 
R.  C.  University  for  Ireland, 
257*  possibility  of  becoming  a 
pamphleteer,  261;  proposed  trip 
to  Canaries,  266;  Linnean  Medal: 
trip  to  the  Canaries,  272 ;  quietude 
of  mind  impossible,  theologians 
keep  him  occupied,  286;  abuse 
over  Salvation  Army  affair,  291; 
Carpenter's  First  Three  Gospels: 
varieties  of  pleurisy:  Parnell,  291, 
292;  Parnell  and  his  followers, 
292;  sick  of  controversy:  Glad- 
stone and  his  guides,  293;  Mr. 
Rich's  legacy:  seeks  portrait  of 
John  Richardson,  304,  305;  visits 
to  Tyndall  and  Mrs.  Darwin,  305; 
French  translation  of  essays  on 
Darwinism,  309;  the  Privy  Coun- 
cillorship:  only  remaining  object 
of  ambition,  345;  influenza  and 
the  X,  352;  funeral  of  Hirst,  i6. ; 
his  sense  of  duty :  death  of  Bow- 
man, 353;  X  Club:  his  grandchild 
on  grown-up  people  and  trouble, 
354;  Owen's  work:  Hume  and 
**  being  made  a  saint  of,"  362, 
363;  warning  against  overwork 
and  influenza,  385;  at  Maloja: 
boys  and  their  accidents:  collects 
essays:  writes  chapter  in  Owen's 
Life:  illness  of  friends,  386,  387 
(cp.  39S);  Tyndall's  death:  remi- 
niscences, 391;  the  Antarctic  con- 
tinent: reminiscences  of  Tyndall: 
friendly  words,  392;  chapter  on 
Owen:  a  piece  of  antiquity,  395; 
British  Association  at  Oxford, 
1894,  401;  Darwin  Medal  and 
Nature  dinner:  public  speaking: 
a  tenth  volume  of  essays  pro- 
jected: returns  to  philosophy: 
Greek  and  English:  cause  of  giv- 
ing up  dissecting  work;  charac- 
ter of  R.  Strachey:  Brian  and 
the  brine,  414,  415;   on  Pithecan- 


poiW  ol  bl*  health,   iO. 
Hoolur.  Sir  WniUam,  i.  isti. 
Honibr.  AdnlnU.  i.  3)6. 
Rora*r,  LMBird,  L  M,  oo. 
Hone.  enilntiaB  at,  L  151:   pedign 

knovlcdce  of  the  pedigree  al,  50; 
Howeid,  CmUs*),  &  f7. 
Bowdl.  Geone,  U.P.,  letter  to-" 


Bubrecbt,  ProfeeMr  A.,  inpresiion 

Htaler,  U.  4«r. 
Hon,  lectoKt  at,  L  ajj. 
"*  jvea  ■    Boyal  Med 


k  on,  L  si>-Mi  his 


1   LL.D.,    i. 


Waller,  Mr,. 

Hu^fS,  L.,  Itttrr 

lo-on  winning  a 

Bcholarsbip,    i 

&:    FUhery     .p- 

pointmenl.  24 

on  Mastership  ol 

University   Co 

lege,    Oxford.    34: 

f   Lord   F.   Caven- 

diah,  4B;  pass 

snd  papal  Rome. 

siSi  teachiriE  0 

hislor,:  Siena.  ,04. 

105:  system  a 

Eton;   Lake   DLs- 

trict    Defence 

e  of  Frfnch  teacti- 

««,  ,M^  will  0 

t  write  00  politics. 

184:   SflLation 

Army;   Mr.    Sidg- 

building  s 
twenty- first 
tier,   Noel. 


c  Sptakcr 

birthday,  458. 
1^.   Vy-   death    of. 


1.   T.   H.   (j«  also   H.   A. 
n),  his  chiel  critic.  L  324. 

-draws  the  sword,  i.   70; 


Sch. 


>l  his  rise,  ids;  Royal  K 
lucceeds  Forbes,  11/; 
■  ■     il  ol  Mines,  ib.;  Coast  Sur- 

nd  Edinburgh  chair.  lai-aj; 

ilure  career,  427;  Aberdeen 

Jel fast.  444-46;  Lord  Shaftes- 
460-62;  Edinburgh  lectures. 


burgh,   , 


I    trip,   493; 


INDEX 


521 


Scottish  University  Commission, 
511;  spring  in  Edinburgh,  512; 
article  in  the  EchOt  ib.;  Bright's 
speeches,  ib.;  greatness  of  Reau- 
mur: speech  on  Darwin's  LL.D., 
515;  Prof.  Marsh's  arrival,  530. 

Fishery  duties,  ii.  29  sq.^  31 ;  In- 
ternational Medical  Congress,  35; 
proposed  resignation,  86;  his  stay 
at  Ilkley,  137  sq.;  publication  of 
Science  and  Morals,  156;  effect  of 
Ilkley,  ib.;  from  Savernake,  175; 
from  the  Canaries,  269  sq.;  cere- 
mony of  kissing  hands,  as  P.C., 
348;  good  health  in  1893,  385. 

Huxley,  Thomas,  grandfather  of  T. 
H.  Huxley,  i.   i. 

Huxley,  T.  H.,  incident  at  his  birth, 
i.  3;  his  mother,  likeness  to,  ib.; 
devotion  to,  4;  his  childhood,  ib.; 
faculty  for  drawing,  4,  46,  397,  447; 
school-days,  5  (cp.  ii.  155,  280 
sq.);  cariy  studies,  6-9;  blood- 
poisoning,  8;  learns  German,  9; 
boyish  journal,  10  sqq. ;  at  Rother- 
hithe,  II,  16;  impressed  by  social 
problems,  16;  studies  botany,  18; 
wins  a  medal,  20;  at  Charing 
Cross  Hospital,  21,  22^  23;  his 
first  discovery,  23;  interview 
with  Faraday,  ib.;  career  deter- 
mined by  Fayrer  and  Ransom, 
25,  271,  ii.  142;  enters  the  Navy, 
i.  25;  joins  the  Rattlesnake,  26; 
his  life  on  the  Rattlesnake,  28  sq.; 
at  Madeira,  33;  Rio,  ib.;  cross- 
ing the  line,  34;  the  first  fruits 
of  the  voyage,  36;  at  the  Cape, 
ib.;  Mauritius,  37;  Sydney,  38; 
engaged  to  be  married,  40;  im- 
portance of  his  work  on  the  Me- 
dusae, 42  43;  among  the  Aus- 
tralian aborigines,  45;  with  Ken- 
nedy, 45,  48;  writes  "  Science  at 
Sea,"  50;  leaves  Australia,  56; 
impression  of  missionaries  in 
New  Zealand,  ib.;  at  the  Falk- 
lands,  57;  position  in  Navy,  59; 
returns  home,  60;  scientific  recog- 
nition of,  70;  early  friends  in 
London,  71;  difficulties,  72,  75, 
89-92;  elected  F.R.S.,  72-74; 
misses  the  Royal  Medal,  75;  deal- 


ings of  the  Government  with, 
about  his  Rattlesnake  work,  77  sq., 
108,  127;  list  of  early  papers,  81, 
82;  stands  for  various  professor- 
ships, 83-87,  108;  leaves  the  Navy, 
81;  writes  for  the  Westminster  Re- 
view, 92;  delivers  the  Fullerian 
Lectures,  93,  314;  succeeds  Forbes, 
93;  describes  the  scientific  world 
of  1851,99;  jealousy  of,  104, 105;  his 
first  lecture,  106-108;  receives  the 
Royal  Society's  Medal,  109,  11 1, 
114  (see  also  268);  morning  inca- 
pacity, 113;  people  he  can  deal 
with,  115;  lives  by  his  pen,  116, 
129;  obtains  a  post  in  the  School 
of  Mines,  117;  and  on  the  Geo- 
logical Survey,  118;  openness  of 
dealing  with  his  friends.  Hooker 
and  Forbes,  119;  Carpenter,  121; 
about  a  rejected  memoir,  121  (see 
also  ii.  187,  195,  200);  refuses  un- 
certain position  at  Edinburgh, 
123;  prefers  a  scientific  career  in 
London,  123,  125,  126,  129,  130, 
'33*  13s J  his  principle  of  "hav- 
ing a  row  at  starting,"  130;  mar- 
riage, 139  sq.;  early  work  on  the 
Invertebrata  interrupted,  143; 
paleontological  work,  143;  Brit- 
ish Museum  Collections,  144;  on 
the  value  of  a  hundred  a  year, 
150;  tries  to  organise  a  scientific 
review,  150,  225  sq.  (sec  Natural 
History  Review);  his  wish  to  be- 
come a  physiologist,  151;  writes 
on  the  Cell  Theory  and  the  Skull, 
152;  ill-health  during  the  fifties, 
154;  tour  in  Switzerland,  155  sq.; 
ascends  Mont  Blanc,  157,  170; 
work  on  glaciers,  155,  158;  bal- 
ance-sheet of  work  in  1857,  159; 
apparent  desultoriness  of  his  ear- 
lier work,  160;  begins  the  sys- 
tematic consultation  of  foreign 
writers,  160;  recognition  abroad, 
ib.;  birth  of  his  son  Noel,  162; 
his  aim  in  life,  162;  death  of  his 
son,  163;  position  in  1858,  169; 
ambition,  170;  translation  and  lec- 
turing, 171;  money  and  marriage, 
174;  paleontology  and  anatomy, 
175;  loss  of  priority  through  delay 


\ 


\ 


$22 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


of  "  Oeeuiie  HjdroMM,"  17s,  tfS; 

ence,  177;  effect  on  him  of  the 
Origin,  17S  jgg.;  "snti-pfogreMiTe 
oonfeMion  0^  fidth,"  17S;  one  of 
the  decisire  critics  Of  the  Origim, 
ib.;  "general  agent"  to  Darwin* 
i$3,  J97;  nature  of  his  sap^rt  of 
Darwin,  1813;  as  Darwm's  bull- 
dog, 191;  descent  of  man,  184,  191; 
takes  up  ethnology,  aij;  his  phi- 
losophy  of  life,  ^/S,  443;  lore  of 
philosophjr,  a^;  early  life,  ^37; 
mores  to  Ahlx^  Place,  243;  his 

handwriting*  ^48*  sn»  484,  ^;  on 
matrimony,  249,  311,  313;  diiidren, 
$aB,  ii  as4,  J33;  "Happy  FamUy,** 
L  313;  fondness  lor  mu^  sso; 
health,  s^s;  expedition  to  Switser- 
land,  f^.;  Hunterian  Lectures, 
sS4t  335;  t^  British  Museum, 
J67  (cp.  iL  J04);  oontrorersy,  L 
S71,  sx^  S^  ii*  ^90;  exhilarating 
effect  of  controrersy,  ii.  123-45* 
130,  154;  not  inconsistent  wi& 
frieiidship,  414,  iL  187  (cp.  ii  x8); 
repma^on,  i.  S70»  S71  (cp.  427); 
e^<^o^car  wade,  s8i3;  vein  of 
laziness,  S90;  appcaj^d  to  on  point 
of  honour,  S90;  science  course  for 
International  (College,  S90  jg.;  on 
Indian  anthropological  sdbeme, 
294  sq.;  Edinburgh  degree,  296; 
the  writing  of  elementary  books, 
30s;  Elementary  Physiology ^  ib.\  in- 
cident at  a  working-men's  lecture, 
308;  trip  to  Brittany,  ib.'y  anec- 
dote of  the  cerebellum,  315;  on 
"  eating  the  leek,"  318;  rapidity 
of  thought,  319;  influence  of  his 
style,  320;  the  moralities  of  criti- 
cism, i22t  328;  a  good  book  and 
fools,  323;  turning-point  in  his 
career,  1870,  346;  popular  view  of, 
about  1870,  347;  effect  of  Lay  Ser- 
mons, ib.;  growing  pressure  of 
official  work,  347  sq,  (cp.  428,  ii. 
21) ;  dubbed  "  Pope  "  by  the  Spec- 
tator, 350;  on  evolution  of  the 
horse,  351;  influence  of  Descartes, 
and  scientific  Calvinism,  352  (cp. 
122);  visits  the  Eifel,  354;  his  de- 
gree    of     D.C.L.     opposed,     ib.; 


President  British  Aaaodatioa* 
SSS;  worit  on  ndcro-orsanisais 
and  spoataacotts  gencntioii,  •&. 
Mq,;  continued  work  cm.  micro- 
organisms, 48s;  on  savagery*  359; 
▼istts  the  slums,  ib.i  preaentatioa 
to,  360;  conuncroe  til»  civilise, 
•ft.;  attadn  on  hto  address,  j6d^ 
361;  stands  lor  the  Sdiool  Board, 
3&I  Mq,i  his. programme  316$  sg:; 
<^poses  proposid'to  open  meet- 
ings with  prayer,  $6si  on  Educap 
tion  Onpimitlee;  ^«  4ff-;  reiigioaa 
■  and  secidar  teaddng,  gSf-  sg.; 
letters  on  tiie  compromise  and 
an  "incriminated,  lesaofi,'*  389 
jgg.;  rq^ort  of  Education  Com^ 
mitlee,  37s  sq*;  speedi>on  Ultra- 
montanism,  374  Sf.;  1^  laatiac  in- 
Ihience,  37$;  impressioa  'OB.  I^ 
low-wochers,  376  Jv.;  CTHMMina- 
tkms,  374;  extra  -si^eets*  A.; 
monetary  assistance  offered*  to 
remain  on  School  Bdard,  379; 
sacrifices  invotved  in,  380;  urged 
to  stand  lor  Parliament,  tfc.  j^.; 
Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society, 
3813,  ii  -ISO,  and  Apptn^dx  IL;  on 
CAolZffigirr  Committee,  L  3!^;  sci- 
ence teaching  for  teachers*  384, 
388,  405  sq»;  continues  hia  edu- 
cational campaign,  -384  \s9.;  ideal 
of  a  State  Church,  386;  titles  for 
men  of  science,  i6.  (cp.  ii.  175); 
edits  Science  Primers,  387;  micro- 
scopes, 388,  389;  at  St  Andrews, 
390  sq.;  holiday  work,  ib.;  plays 
golf,  i6.;  on  strong  language,  ib.; 
breakdown  of  1871,  393  sq.;  help 
of  friends,  394;  examines  stores 
at  Gibraltar,  395;  at  Tangier,  396; 
in  Egypt,  397  sq.;  further  treat- 
ment, 402;  new  teaching  in  bi- 
ology, 405;  view  of,  408,  410; 
changes  the  course,  409;  writes 
Elementary  Instruction  in  Biology, 
ib.;  new  house  in  Marlborough 
Place,  412  sq.;  lawsuit,  413;  loan 
from  Tyndall,  415;  mixed  classes 
in  Anatomy,  416;  Lord  Rector  of 
Aberdeen,  417;  trip  to  the  Au- 
vergne,  420  sqq.;  as  travelling 
companion,  421   (cp.  ii.  26);   geo- 


INDEX 


523 


logical  work,  423;  letters  on,  423- 
426;  Order  of  the  Pole  Star,  427; 
a  paternal  gander,  ib.;  his  repu- 
tation and  the  part  he  has  to  play 
in  the  world,  427  (cp-  493.  Sio); 
scientific  work  after  1870,  428, 
429;  precious  half-hours,  428,  ii, 
21;  duty  of  fulfilling  a  promise, 
i.  430,  ii.  70;  learns  to  smoke,  i. 
423  n. ;  attends  Presbyterian  serv- 
ice, 439;  at  Belfast  British  Asso- 
ciation, 442  sqq. ;  on  "  grasping 
the  nettle,"  444;  feeling  about 
vivisection,  466-68  sq.,  472,  473; 
grouse-murder,  485;  Natural  His- 
tory courses  at  Edinburgh,  475 
sq.;  suspects  himself  of  coward- 
ice, 491;  expectation  of  his  visit 
in  America,  493;  a  second  honey- 
moon, ib.;  position  in  the  world 
of  thought,  ib.;  tugs  in  New 
York  harbour,  494;  prefers  the 
contents  of  a  university  to  the 
buildings,  495;  old  opinions  add 
new  truth,  ib.;  at  Niagara,  498; 
meets  his  sister  again,  ib.;  an  ad- 
dress under  difficulties,  500;  lec- 
tures on  Evolution,  501  sq.; 
prophecies  fulfilled,  502;  the  two 
things  he  really  cares  about,  510; 
posthumous  fame,  ib.  (cp.  ii.  295, 
299);  ingrained  laziness  the  bane 
of  his  existence,  513  (cp.  290); 
speech  on  Darwin's  LLD.  at 
Cambridge,  514  sq.,  518;  help  to 
a  distressed  man  of  science,  516; 
"  bottled  life,"  519;  politics  in 
1878,  523  sq.;  projected  Introduc- 
tions to  Zoology,  Mammalia,  An- 
thropology, and  Psychology.  525; 
engrossed  in  the  Invertebrates, 
526  sq.;  affected  by  his  daugh- 
ter's illness,  528,  ii.  88,  94,  95,  102; 
rationality  and  the  parental  ca- 
pacity, 192;  traces  diphtheria,  i. 
528. 

Learns  Greek,  ii.  i;  Governor 
of  Eton  College,  3;  makes  draw- 
ing part  of  the  curriculum,  ib.; 
attends  no  society  except  the 
Royal  and  Zoological,  ib.;  fifty- 
three  a  youthful  age,  ib.;  resigns 
presidency     of     Association     of 


Liberal  Thinkers,  4;  LL.D.  at 
Cambridge,  ib. ;  becomes  a  '*  per- 
son of  respectability,"  ib. ;  **  eats 
the  leek "  over  Bathybius,  5 ; 
advantages  of  breaking  a  leg,  10; 
faith  in  Natural  Selection,  13; 
"  pretty  Fanny's  way,"  15 ;  op- 
timism and  pessimism,  16;  friend- 
ship and  criticism,  18;  further 
involved  in  official  duties,  21;  In- 
spector of  Fisheries,  ib.;  salary, 
ib.;  duties  of  inspectorship  de- 
scribed, 23-32;  conduct  of  meet- 
ings, 28;  as  a  companion,  26  (cp. 
i.  421);  as  a  writer,  27;  as  a 
speaker,  i6. ;  life  uninfluenced  by 
idea  of  future  recompense,  29;  a 
child's  criticism  on,  i6.;  refuses 
to  go  to  Oxford  as  Linacre  Pro- 
fessor, 32,  or  Master  of  Univer- 
sity College,  34;  debt  to  Carlyle, 
36;  health  in  1881,  37;  his  title 
of  Dean,  38;  his  nunc  dimittis 
postponed  by  death  of  F.  Bal- 
four, 41;  his  notion  of  a  holiday, 
45  (cp.  63);  queer  correspond- 
ents, 46  sq.;  table  talk  of,  in  1882, 
49  (cp.  427);  presented  with  the 
freedom  of  the  Salters,  54;  Presi- 
dent Royal  Society,  ib.  sq.;  quali- 
fications for,  55,  56;  reluctance  to 
accept,  55-57,  or  create  division  in 
the  Society,  58,  or  to  commit  it 
to  debatable  opinions,  60-62  (cp. 
ii.  120);  art  of  governing  the 
headstrong,  58;  a  record  in  cab- 
driving,  63;  effect  of  anxiety  on 
handwriting,  ib.;  holiday  defined, 
ib.;  composition  pf  a  presidential 
address,  65;  confesses  himself  to 
Tyndall,  66;  the  thought  of  ex- 
tinction, 67 ;  **  faded  but  fasci- 
nating," 67,  68;  increasing  ill- 
health,  70;  gives  up  anatomy,  ib., 
414;  looks  forward  to  an  "  Indian 
summer,"  74,  87;  re-reads  the 
Decline  and  Fall,  74;  rumoured 
acceptance  of  a  title,  i6. ;  getting 
into  harness  as  a  tonic,  85;  or- 
dered abroad,  t&.;  takes  up  Italian 
again,  92;  papal  and  pagan  Rome, 
93i  9S>  97>  98;  a  decayed  naturalist, 
will  turn  antiquarian,  96;  Radicals 


524  UPE  or  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

•od  trUMnr  acti,  «•;  not  roocd 


ai«,  ifo,  aji;  repljr  t 

on  coral  rcci  iJtcoria,  itf,  ijo: 
tbioki  ol  Tctking  to  SbanUIn, 
1741  M  Savenuke.  175;  "  Aa 
Epiicopal   Trilogy,"    169  if.  1   «c- 


rcelB.  ■: 


s  (heo: 


Bp««Utio 

and  fact.  173;  hono 

ary  comtn 

ttee 

of   French  teac 

cs  free  library  1 

Marylebon 

5,  ttB;  on  titles 

honour,   . 

he  Irish  questio 

ph 

OBOphy     of     Bg 

a  no 

1.1;  death  of  h 

s  second  daughie 

i!>o  ifl.:  p 

per 

Trustee  0 

Bn 

ish  Museum,  » 

INDEX 


525 


lying  truths  of  many  theological 
teachings,    i6. ;    moral    aspiration 
and  the  hope  of  immortality,  323; 
the   world   and   comfortable   doc- 
trines, ib.;  President  of  the  Lon- 
don  University   Reform  Associa- 
tion, 332;  administration,  333;  ap- 
pears  before   London   University 
Commission,   334;    heads    deputa- 
tion to  Prime  Minister,  336;  op- 
poses creation  of  an  Established 
Church   scientific,   335;   letter   on 
scientific  aspirations,  341;  on  free 
thought    ribaldry,    342;    made    a 
Privy  Councillor,  ib.;  the  title  of 
Right    Hon.,   348;    official    recog- 
nition on  leaving  office,  349;  visit 
to   Osborne,   348,   349;   a   friend's 
second   marriage,  351;   friendship 
and    funerals,    353;    the    modern 
martyrdom,  ib.;  source  of  his  ill- 
health,  354;  faculty  of  forgetting, 
356;    on    sacramental    food,    357; 
poem  on  Tennyson's  funeral,  361; 
a  religion  for  men,  ib.;  funerals, 
ib.;  his  part  in   the  memorial  to 
Owen,  361-63,   386,  387;   on  bear- 
ing      attacks,       363;       proposed 
working-men's    lectures    on     the 
Bible,    366;     testimony    and    the 
marvellous,     368;     Manx     manni- 
kins,    ib.;    home    pets,    369;    pay- 
ment for  work   out  of  the   ordi- 
nary, 372, 375 ;  on  dying  by  inches, 
378;   the  approach  of  death,  390; 
description  of  his  personality  in 
Lankester's    review    of    the    Col- 
lected Essays,   393;    letter  from   a 
lunatic,    395;    a    contretemps   at    a 
public    dinner,    ib.;    at    Oxford, 
i894»    397-401;    criticism    of    Lord 
Salisbury,    397,    398;    repeated    in 
Nature,  400,  407,  410;  deafness,  404, 
454;  growing  hopefulness  in  age, 
408;   receives  Darwin  Medal,  ib.; 
speech,  411  sq.;  his  "last  appear- 
ance on  any  stage,"  409,  410;  char- 
acterises   his    work    for    science, 
412  (cp.  173);  late  liking  for  pub- 
lic  speaking,  414;    slovenly   writ- 
ing in  science,  ib.;  life-long  love 
of   philosophy,    ib.;    the    abysmal 
griefs   of   life,   415;    brilliancy    of 


talk  just  before  his  last   illness, 
420;  a  meeting  with  a  priest,  ib.; 
writes   article   on   Foundations   of 
Belief,  421;  proof-reading,  423;  his 
last    illness,    423-26;    passion    for 
veracity,  427  (cp.  429);  absence  of 
dogmatism  in  lectures,  428;  chil- 
dren and   theology,   ib.;   "  Royal 
lies,"  429  n. ;  his  great  work,  se- 
curing   freedom    of    speech,    430; 
carelessness  of  priority,  t&. ;  recog- 
nition of  predecessors,  431;  hon- 
esty,   ib.;    loyalty,    432;     friends 
and  intimates,  ib.;  practical   side 
of  his  work,   433;    how  regarded 
by  working-men,  434;  his  face  de- 
scribed,    by     Professor    Osborn, 
436,   by   Sir   W.    Besant,   460   n.; 
his     lectures     described,     435-41; 
preparation  for  his  lectures,  441; 
ordinary  day's  work,  442;  method, 
ib.;  reading,  442,  443;  memory  for 
facts,  not  words,  443;   delight  in 
literature  and  art,  ib.  sq.;  foreign 
languages,    444;    recreations,    444, 
445;    table    talk    of,    449   sq.;    the 
happiness    of    others,     ib.;     sim- 
ian    characteristics     of     infants, 
ib.;    difficulties    of    disproof    and 
direct     evidence,     450;      Common 
Sense   and    the   Cock   Lane   Ghost, 
ib.;    transient    influence    of    false 
assertions,  ib.;  movement  of  mod- 
ern   philosophy,    ib.;    Plato,    451; 
geographical  teaching,  »&. ;  Greeks 
and   Jews,   451,   452;    his   part   in 
controversy,    452 ;     responsibility, 
453;    dramatic  and  literary  facul- 
ties,    ib.;     French    and    English 
artists,    ib.;    human    nature    de- 
scribed, ib.;  his  manner  of  con- 
versation,    454,     455;     anecdotes 
from,    ib.;    home    life:    relations 
with    his    children,    456-59;    and 
grandchildren,    460H55;    nonsense 
letters,  465,  466;  a  day's  work  in 
later   life,   468;    love   of   his   gar- 
den, 469  sq.;  the   "lodger,"  456; 
sustaining     power     of     a     wife's 
comradeship,    459;    field    botany, 
469. 

Huxley  Hall,  i.  2;  visit  to,  ii.  306. 

Huxley  Island,  i.  46. 


526 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


Hnxlej  laboratorj,  ii.  jgs. 
Hnxlej's  layer,  L  ^ 

I^detleigh,  Lord,  letter  to-CMl  List 

pension,  iL  116. 
Idols,  tendency  to  make,  ti.  73. 

IlUey,  at,  ii  i49»  179* 

lUmsirious,   H.]li.S.,  ordered  to  join, 

i  80. 
Immortality,    i.   a6o,    ii.   sas    (cp.    ii 

aft  6;). 
Immortality  and  tlie  conservation  of 

enersy,  iL  399* 

Imperial  Institute,  ii  160-^ 

Impromptu  speaking,  ii  440. 

Incapacity,  machinery  needed  to  fscili- 
tate  its  descent,  i  J84. 

India,  proposed  visit  to,  i  flSi;  tiie 
shortest  way  home  from,  404;  40& 

Indian  Empire,  i  sa4* 

Individuality,  animal,  i  100,  14a;  lec- 
ture wtf  Jo6» 

Induction,  and  Babbage's  calculating 
madiine,  ii  J78  «g.  ' 

Intellect,  English  aiij^  Italian  tiie 
finest,  i  $66. 

International  College,  i  ago  jg.;  sci- 
ence at,  331* 

International    Medical    Congress,    ii 

34  <«• 
Invertebrata,  lectures  on,  i  317. 
Ireland,  interest  in,  ii.  47,  4B. 

Irish  affairs,  ii.  291,  292;  Pamcirs  re- 
tirement, 292,  293;  the  cause  of 
all  Irish  trouble,  292;  reason  for 
being  a  Unionist,  312. 

Irving,  Sir  Henry,  visit  from,  ii.  446. 

Italian,  ii.  444. 

Italy,  visit  to,  ii.  87-110;  moral  of,  iii. 

Jamaica  Committee,  i.  300-304. 

James,  Margaret,  grandmother  of  T. 
H.  Huxley,  i.  i. 

Jamieson,  Professor  E.,  i.  117.. 

Jean  Paul,  Biography  of  the  Twins, 
i.  51. 

Jebb,  Professor,  on  Erasmus,  ii.  419. 

Jenner,  and  F.R.S.,  ii.  119. 

Jewsbury,  Miss,  friendship  with,  i.441. 

Jex  Blake,  Miss,  letters  to — on  medi- 
cal education  for  women,  i.  415, 
416;   about  her  examination,  449. 

Jodrell,  T.  J.  P.,  good  advice,  i.  95;  at 


s'  Club,.  a79;  wishes   Hux^  to 
visit  Iiniia^  jSt  n. 

Ulm  Ing^nmH  soggesto  a  scientifie 
novel,  ii  46^ 

Johns  Hopldtts  University,  iaaugtoral 
address  at,  i  500. 

Jones,  Rymer,  i  los. 

Jones,  Whartcm,  influence  of  his  teach- 
ing, i  as,  97;  comes  to  hia  first 
lecture,  ioB> 

Joule,  Dr.,his  woik  lor  acienee,  ii  173. 

Jowett,  B.,  sHence  during  opposition 
to  D.C.L.  lor  Huxl^,  i  355;  visit 
from,  ii.  306;  power  of  the  priesl- 
hood,  401;  last  UfaMss  o^  38^. 
Letter  to--sciettce  at  €Mofd»  Ii  ijy, 
laB. 

Judd,  Professor,  theories  ol  coial 
reefin  ii  170W 

Kaliseh,  Dr.,  sM^ogical  part  of  hia 
Commmtory  om  LtpUiaa  revised, 
ii  315. 

Karslake,  Sir  J.  B.,  on  Vivisectioft 
Commission,  i  4srst> 

Kelvin,  Lord,  on  Huxley's  work  In 
support  of  Darwinism,  i^  an. 

Kennedy,  E.  B.,  his  expedition,  i  45, 48. 

Kerville,  H.  G.  de,  letter  to—Conimcy 
.  sur  U  Trtmsformitme:  Lamarck: 
atheism,  Ii  17a. 

Kidd,  B.,  on  Social  Evolution,  ii  406. 

King,  Clarence,  letter  to,  on  Marsh's 
collections,  i.  497. 

King's  College,  London,  rejected  for 
chair  at,  i.  86,  116. 

Kingsley,  Charles,  first  meeting  with, 
i.  131;  opinion  of  Newman,  ii.  240. 
Letters  to — on  his  son  Noel's  death: 
his  philosophy,  i.  233-38;  on  spe- 
cies and  sterility:  anthropomor- 
phism, 258;  intellect  in  man  and 
animals:  genius  a  "  sport  "  : 
Christian  dogmas  criticised,  259; 
matter  and  spirit,  261;  on  prayer, 
266;  Royal  Institution  lecture: 
superstitions  of  men  of  science: 
working-men's  lectures:  original 
sin  and  Darwinism:  whales,  279, 
298;  on  Jamaica  affair,  302,  303; 
on  Comte,  322. 

Kingsley,  Miss,  letters  from  Charles 
Kingsley,  i.  481. 


INDEX 


527 


Kitton,  J.  G.,  letter  to — home  pets,  ii. 

369. 

Klein,  Dr.,  i.  279. 

Kleinenberg,  Dr.,  on  Hydra,  i.  431. 

Knowles,  James,  a  founder  of  Meta- 
physical Society,  i.  337. 
Letters  to — toning  down  a  contro- 
versial article,  ii.  125;  reply  to 
condolence  on  his  daughter's 
death:  a  loyal  friend,  192;  article 
on  the  "  Struggle  for  Existence  " : 
how  to  kill  humbug,  199;  reply 
to  Krapotkin,  212;  refuses  to 
write  a  public  reply,  ib.;  article 
on  "  Natural  Inequality  of  Men," 
258-61;  a  telegram  and  a  tele- 
graph boy,  259;  article  on  **  Ag- 
nosticism," 235;  accused  of  call- 
ing Christianity  sorry  stuff:  help 
to  the  New  Reformation,  237; 
Christ  and  Christianity:  Cloister 
scheme,  238;  printers'  errors,  239; 
aim  in  controversy:  named  as  a 
temperate  blasphemer:  demonol- 
ogy:  development,  239;  reviling 
morally  superior  to  not  reviling, 
241;  explanation  with  Bishop  Ma- 
gee  ends  controversy,  ib,;  the  last 
word:  miracle  of  Cana:  Newman, 
242;  supposed  payment  for  Nine- 
teenth Century  articles,  390;  sug- 
gestion of  article  on  Foundations 
of  Belief:  difference  from  Spen- 
cer's views,  421;  the  first  instal- 
ment of  the  article,  ib. ;  the  "  art 
d'etre  grandpere,"  422;  divides 
the  article,  ib.;  work  against  time 
on  proofs,  423;  rest  of  article 
postponed  through  influenza,  ib.; 
on  friendship,  432. 

Kolliker,  Professor  R.  A.,  corresponds 
with,  i.  162;  translation  of  his 
Histology t  171,  176,  264;  reviewed, 
269;  criticism  of,  327. 

Kowalesky,  his  discoveries  dependent 
on  those  of  Huxley,  i.  43;  on 
Ascidians,  357. 

Krohn,  anticipates  his  work  on  Salpa, 
i.  99. 

Lacaze  du  Thiers,  Dr.,  corresponds 
with,  i.  162;  on  his  handwriting, 
248. 


Ladder,  from  the  gutter  to  the  Uni- 
versity, ii.   164. 

Laing,  S.,  on  Agnosticism,  ii.  235  sq. 

Laishly,  R.,  cites  Huxley  on  secular 
teaching,  i.  369  n. 

Lake  District  Defence  Society,  ii.  144. 

Lamarck,  early  study  of,  i.  180;  Dar- 
win's theory  not  a  modification 
of  his,  215,  but  an  advance  on, 
245;  appreciation  of,  ii.  42,  431; 
not  forgotten  in  England,  172. 

Lamlash  Bay,  naturalists'  station  at, 
i.  166. 

Lang,  Andrew,  Common  Sense  and  the 
Cock  Lane  Ghost,  ii.  450. 

Language,    Italian,    ii.    92. 

Lankester,   Dr.,   Sec.   Ray  Society,  i. 

96,  97'  ' 

Lankester,  Professor  E.  Ray,  on  Hux- 
ley's "  Review  of  the  Cell  Theo- 
ry," i.  152;  with  him  at  Naples, 
400;  illness  of,  402;  on  RoUeston's 
science  teaching,  406  n.,  410; 
helps  in  the  new  science  teach- 
ing, 406,  407;  describes  lectures, 
407;  at  Dohrn's  station,  450;  re- 
view of  Huxley's  Collected  Essays, 
ii.  393;  impression  of  him,  447. 
Letters  to — Lymnaeusas  periwinkles, 
i.  440;  battles,  like  hypotheses, 
not  to  be  multiplied  beyond  ne- 
cessity, ii.  227;  immature  fish, 
249;  Pasteur's  treatment  for 
rabies,  254;  report  of  Pasteur 
meeting,  255;  science  school  at 
Oxford:  trouble  over  Booth  af- 
fair, 300;  ideal  of  a  modem  uni- 
versity, 328. 

Latham,  Dr.  R.  G.,  stands  for  Regis- 
trarship  at  London  University,  i. 
120,  121;  on  the  existence  of  the 
Established  Church,  ii.  406. 

Lathrop,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  meeting  with, 
i.  498. 

Latin  and  culture,  ii.  14. 

Latin  fetish,  i.  437,  ii.  202. 

Latin  in  Board  schools,  i.  373. 

Latin  verses,  i.  298. 

Laugel,  A.  A.,  at  x  Club,  i.  279;  meet- 
ing with,  427. 

Law,  i.  261;  abuse  of  the  word,  ii.  156. 

Lawrence,  Lord,  President  of  School 
Board,  i.  364;  on  Huxley's  retire- 


538 


UPB  OF  PROt'ESSOR  HUXLEY 


Bttmtnlmy  PhfUta,  in. 
U»  Strmmt,  poblWMd,  1.  Mr;  ; 

l*tlt]F    of,    tS^ 


■  PImc  o(  Chalk.  L  M. 

oaCMtldUi,  U.  M- 
M  EdiBboifiiiV  jur-ii. 
ValUflH.  L  IK  w. 
•edwHawl,  I.  A.  SU- 
'  HBotcriaa,  <.*. 


,  London  loMttntkia,  L  iS«,  Jji,  A. 
SBi,  107.  U.  I. 
PeniMot  TypM,  L  tt«. 
BdadoB  of  Ifamto  Ibc  Lower  Ani- 


Soyal   Iiutilntfcm,   L    iSi,  lot,  Jij, 

jSj,  475,  489,  490,  so7i  ii.  >.  sa. 
si  the  School  of  Mines,  i.  iji). 
to  workins-mtn.  i.   150,  iw,  1*1.  "5. 

22a  jfl..  369-  36=.  JBJ.  489- 
St  Zoological  Gardens,  ii.  i,  14. 
Lecluriog-,   warnings   about   his  early 

style,  i.  94.  95- 
Leighton.  Sir  F.,and  literary  honours. 


Liberal  Thinker: 

Lichfield,     naliv 

Hu<ley.  i. 


"  Tk*  U|^  o(  0M  Clnneh  and 


fore  Liverpool  Ii 
President     Britiih 

Lockyer,  Sir  Normal 
□f  the  RtadtT,  i. 

London  Hospital,  nd 
London 


1    at,    < 


I,   SD7. 


Universit 
iSk    ttfl,    ajt;   Mtaaea    «nmiDB- 

doB  Ualmnitr  SivlacM,  U.  sa6-$r- 
liirit  AreMpd— n.  i.  »■ 
oi.t««. 

Lo«c  Bobot  <Loid  UHchroiAe}, 
Olnka  HiulaT  ihoold  ba  at  tlw 
head  of  the  Natural  F' 


i.  167;  * 


c  of  ti 


tish    Mus 


o  be 


Lubbock,   Si 


r  John   (Lord   Avel 

aSJ   at   Oxford.    1860.    .95^ 

ISC  Qub,  378;  with  Hux- 

Brituny,    308;    pre 

at  Liverpool,  360. 


INDEX 


529 


Naharal  History  RtznrWt  226;  opin- 
ion of  Huxley,  217;  description  of 
his  address  at  the  Geological  So> 
ciety,  220. 
Letters  from — on  popular  lectures,  i. 
223,  224;  to  Sir  C.  Bunbury,  spe- 
cies question,  182. 
Letters  to— on  species,  i.  185;  on 
skull  measuring,  212;  on  Man's 
Place,  214;  reply  to  criticisms  as 
to  the  simian  brain:  Darwin 
shows  a  vera  causa  for  evolution, 
215;  simian  brain,  216;  on  wo- 
men's education,  228;  on  Laby- 
rinthodonts,  285;  work  on  fossils, 
especially  from  Spitzbergen,  306. 
Lynton,  holiday  at,  ii.  45. 

Macclesfield,  Samuel  Huxley  mayor 
of,  in  1746,  i.  2. 

Macgillivray,  John,  i.  35,  42,  46. 

Macleay,  Sir  William,  i.  39,  41,  42; 
letter  to,  on  English  scientific 
world,  99. 

M'Clure,  Rev.  E.,  letter  to — motive  to 
get  at  the  truth  in  all  things:  im- 
mortality and  the  conservation  of 
energy:  thought  as  a  "  function  " 
of  the  brain:  origin  of  sin,  ii. 
298,  299. 

MacWilliam,  Dr.,  F.R.S.,  i.  49. 

Magee,  Bishop,  controversy  with,  ii. 
237  sq.t  239,  240;  end  of,  241. 

Malins,  Vice-Chancellor,  remarks  on 
the  suit  brought  against  Huxley, 
i.  413. 

Mallock,  W.  H.,  on  Bathybius,  ii.  170. 

Maloja,  first  visit  to,  ii.  214,  219;  sec- 
ond visit  to,  252  sq.;  third  visit 
to,  385;  memorial  at,  386. 

Manning,  Cardinal,  in  Metaphysical 
Society,  i.  338. 

Man*s  Place  in  Nature,  i.  207,  213,  214, 
215;  criticisms  and  success  of, 
217,  218,  219;  a  friend  begs  him 
not  to  publish,  ii.  365;  ridiculed, 
450. 

Mansel,  Rev.  H.  L.,  i.  234,  262. 

Mantell,  G.  A.,  i.   101. 

Manual  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  i.  92, 
159. 

Manual  of  Invertebrate  Anatomy,  i.  420, 
490- 

70 


Mamtai  of  Vertebrate  Anatomy,  i.  384. 

Marine  Biological  Association,  ii.  136. 

Mariner,  on  Tonga,  ii.  13a. 

Marsh,  Professor  O.  C,  at  jr  Club,  i. 
279;  visit  to,  494  sqq.i  on  Huxley's 
impartiality,  495;  supplies  anec* 
dote  on  advantage  of  breaking  a 
leg,  ii.  10. 
Letter  from— on  Huxley*s  welcome 

to  him  in  England,  i.  530. 
Letters  to— pedigree  of  the  horse,  i. 
495;    later    discoveries,    501,    $oa\ 
his  inexhaustible  boxes,  s^Si  ^^^ 
rival  in  England,  529. 

Marshall,  Mr.,  of  Buffalo,  visit  to,  i. 
498. 

Martin,  H.  N.,  helps  in  the  new  sci- 
ence teaching,  i.  407,  408;  helps 
write  Elementary  Instruction  in 
Biology,  409;  American  edition  of 
the  Practical  Biology,  ii.  i. 

Martineau,  James,  in  Metaphysical 
Society,  i.  338. 

Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  ii.  $>• 

Maskelyne,  Neville  Story,  i.  150,  131. 

Mason  College,  opening  of,  ii.  14. 

Masson,  David,  i.  267;  zt  x  Club,  279. 

Materialism,  i.  241,  261  sq.;  accusation 
of,  321;  a  sort  of  shorthand  ideal- 
ism, 352. 

Maurice,  F.  D.,  first  meeting  with,  i. 
131;  and  the  Working  Men's  Col* 
lege,  149;  hit  philosophy,  238,  263; 
in  Metaphysical  Society,  338. 

Maxwell,  Colonel,  i.  252. 

May,  George  Anderson,  1.  6,  11. 

May,  Mrs.,  letter  to— ill-health  in 
youth,  ii.  37. 

Mayer,  Dr.,  assistant  to  Dr.  Dohm, 
ii.  91. 

Mayer,  J.  R.,  on  conservation  of  ener- 

«y»  H.  173. 

Mayne,  Captain,  of  the  Nassau,  i,  335. 

Medical  education,  ii.  202,  329,  426; 
correspondence  in  Times,  279; 
letter  on  preliminary  liberal  train- 
ing, ib.;  degrees,  333. 

Men  of  science,  the  risks  to  be  faced 
by,  i.  218,  219. 

Mercers'  Company  and  technical  edu- 
cation, ii.   54. 

Metaphysical  Society,  foundation  of, 
i.    336;    Mill's    criticism   of,   338; 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


mutusl  loltnllon,  3n-4i;  HonlCT 

the    name    "agnostic."    ju    in-; 

Prtilosor  H.  Sidgwick,  jm- 
HiUuko-Maclay.  on  fiih-biaioa,  i.  ]j8. 
Milfard,  AE,  it.  62,  75  ff. 
MUl,  J.  S..  snd  Inlematioinl  College, 

Ward,'  347;  burial  oi,  u.  19. 
Miller.    Canon,    on    Huilej'j    retire- 


4Q0    (cp,    34=)  i 

66,  67;  P 
ley.  86. 

Morley,  Sam 

G..    bia  aUCe- 
=.  criticised,  i. 

367. 
Motto    of    Ih 

pOiiti,"  i. 
Moulton,  F., 

Moir,  Dr,  John,  i.  «8. 
Moletehatl,  1.   175. 
HoUuiu,  on  the  Morpbology  oi  t1 
Cephsloai,    i.    gt;    aim    of    th 


in  writing  for  the  magailneB; 
possible  cowardice  in  not 
lishing  paper  on  miraclea, 
on  Pkysiogral'hy.  j";  articl 
the  FsrKighllyi  "  Dr.  I>i«y 
sea  air:  Darwin's  LL.D.,  J17 
invites  him  ior  New  Year'a 


loch'a  Pascal:  Cliftord'a  chari 
ter,  53" ;  thanks  for  Didrret:  wa 
of  a  portrait;  sketch  ol  the  Hur 


Uundello,  Right  Hon.  / 


archiaon,  Sir  Roderick  Impey,  L  SB; 
and  eiperimenlal  statinn,  167,  16S; 
and  ibe  Schlagintwelts,  24};  and 
geological  amateur.  ig6;  on  the 
'■  Physical  Basis  of  Life."  jai. 

Letter    from— on    election    to    Alhe- 


■.  Job 


Nsrea,  Sir  G.,  Polai 


INDEX 


531 


Nashville  visited,  i.  498. 

Nassau,  H.M.S.,  exploring  ship,  i.  297, 

335. 

National  Association  of  Science  Teach- 
ers, resigns  presidency,  ii.  70,  71. 

Natura  non  facit  saltum  not  true  in 
evolution,  i.  186,  189. 

Natural  History  Review,  i.  225  sq.,  241, 
269. 

Natural  Selection,  not  weak  of  faith 
in,  ii.  13;  unlucky  substitution  of 
*'  survival  of  the  fittest  **  for,  284; 
produces   state   socialism,  ib. 

Naturalists'  fund,  i.  177. 

Nature,  translates  Goethe's  Aphorisms 
for  the  first  number,  i.  351 ;  article 
"  Past  and  Present,"  on  twenty- 
fifth  anniversary,  ii.  400,  409; 
after-dinner  speech,  409,  414. 

Nautilus,  i.   159. 

Naval  officers  and  scientific  research, 
ii.  45. 

Neanderthal  skull,  i.  212,  294. 

Necessity,  i.  261. 

Nettleship,  R.  L.,  at  Arolla,  ii.  180. 

Newcastle,  joins  a  society  at,  ii.  66. 

Newman,  J.  H.,  applied  to  for  testi- 
monial, i.  21;  his  doctrine  of  de- 
velopment, ii.  239;  Kingsley's 
opinion  of,  240;  cited  by  Huxley, 
240;  effect  on,  of  Papistry,  242; 
how  to  turn  his  attacks,  297. 

Newport,  George,  i.  76,  99;  as  man  of 
science,  102. 

Newton,  E.  T.,  paleontologist  to  the 
Geological  Survey,  ii.  226. 

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  compared  with 
Ptolemy,  i.  215;  a  "sport,"  259; 
and  his  title,  386. 

Niagara,  i.  498. 

Nicholas,  Dr.,  master  of  Ealing 
School,  i.   I. 

Nicholson,  Dr.,  of  Sydney,  i.  103. 

Nietzsche,  means  to  read,  ii.  382. 

Nordenskiold,  fossils  from  Spitzber- 
gen,  i.  603. 

Northumberland,  Duke  of  (First  Lord 
of   the  Admiralty),    i.    78,    109. 

Norwich,  Fishery  Exhibition  at,  ii. 
29  sq. 

Oakley,  Sir  Herbert,  vicar  of  Eal- 
ing, i.  4. 


Objects  of  the  sea-shore,  letters  on, 
ii.  310,  311. 

Oceanic  Hydroeoa,  i.  81,  82,  143,  159, 
172;  loses  priority  by  delay,  175, 
176;  still  of  use  in  1867,  310. 

Officers,  retired,  in  administrative 
posts,  ii.  49. 

Official  work,  growth  of,  i.  428;  climax 
of,  ii.  52. 

Oken,  his  speculations,  i.   112,  153. 

Oliver,  Professor,  i.  226,  274. 

Opinions  which  cannot  be  held  "with* 
out  grave  personal  sin,"  i.  347. 

Optimism,  i.  236. 

Origin  of  Species,  i.  143,  178;  effect  of 
its  publication,  179;  "  a  flash  of 
light,"  182;  review  in  Times,  189; 
criticism  on  the,  273;  influence 
of,  346;  "  coming  of  age  "  of,  ii. 
12  sq.;  difficulty  of,  204-206;  and 
theory  of  evolution,  400,  401. 

Original  sin  and  Darwinism,  i.  297 
(cp.  ii.  298). 

Orthodox  Christianity,  how  regarded 
by  many  men  of  science,  i.  238, 
258  sq, 

Osbom,  Professor  Henry  Fairfield, 
reminiscences  quoted,  i.  315;  ac-- 
count  of  Huxley  at  Oxford,  1894, 
ii.  398,  399;  description  of  his  lec- 
tures, 435,  436;  impromptu  lectur- 
ing, 440;  simian  characteristics  of 
infants,  story  of  Huxley,  449  n. 

Ossory,  Mr.,  with  Huxley  in  Egypt, 

i.  399. 
Owen,  Sir  Richard,  introduction  to,  i. 
27,  29;  visits,  64;  supports  claims 
of  Huxley,  64,  65,  68,  87;  at  the 
Geological  Club,  68;  his  pay,  74; 
as  man  of  science,  loi;  his  Par- 
thenogenesis, jroi,  100;  civility  of, 
103;  support  for  F.R.S.,  104; 
breach  with,  153;  at  Aberdeen 
British  Association,  166,  168;  his 
morphological  speculations,  171 ; 
the  British  Cuvier,  172,  174;  style 
of,  191;  on  the  Ape  question  at 
Oxford,  194,  200,  206,  207,  215;  at 
Cambridge  British  Association, 
213;  on  air-cells  of  birds  in  flight, 
228;  criticises  Darwin  on  spon- 
taneous generation,  263;  ^;  au- 
thor of  article  on  "  Oken  and  the 


LIPE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLET 


Mkcd  for  bf  Dobim,  4Vt  MMdi 
ca  Hodwr,  4i«i  Mra.  CMtTte*! 

|ti;  itMBc  *»,  )fi,  )i*l  nvlnr  of 


tford,  compmnd  iritfa  Loodoo,  L  f<s, 
iW;  Hnnkr  nfnaw  Unaera  Pro- 
InKnUp.  ■■■;  1m4Md  to  Mccpl 


tine.  U.  St;  iaiUad  to  b«  ■ 
of  Vtirtrmj  CaOcfc,  n,  > 
•etm  D.CI.,  iij,  iiS;  M 
u,  of,  til,  jBo;  iMtW  IMI 


*  H,  L  14a;  "Tl* 
Method  of  Pilcontolosr,"  14J; 
liM  ami  prairm  of.  U.  36;  wonid 


r,  T.  Jeffcry,  on  IIu>ley  and  the 
rsctical  teaching  of  biology,  i. 
16  IB.;   teaching  by   typei,   408; 


padia  work  between  H  and  L.  i. 
4R8;  impression  of  Huxley,  ii.  4471 


jardin  "  the  whole  duty  of  man. 
ii.  30?. 
Parker,    W.    K..    and    the   F.R.S.,    i. 

Letters  to— i.  164;  bids  him  remodel 
his  work  on  the  Sirulbtous  skull. 
igi;    bird    claiaificaiion.   3071   the 


nfr,     jBsi      CHir     B«^ialosic>l 

IdcM  eoBfinwd:  pabUoufoa,  )S(. 

Fdrfa  in  V  '      " 

Hmu  M;  i.  sti. 


>    physiological    experimen 


Physiography,  pub 
in  Germany, 
cialion  of,  il 


i.  438;  "Elementary  I 
of,  and  Shakespeare, 


INDEX 


533 


Political  Economy,  method  of,  ii.  407. 
Pollock,  H.,  at  Lynton,  ii.  45. 
Pollock,  Dr.  Julius,  i.  537;  at  Lynton, 

ii.  45- 
Pollock,  W.  F.,  on  Committee  of  the 

Reader,  i.  227;  and  Tyndall's  ab- 
sence, 420. 
Port  Essington,  i.  46,  47. 
Positivism,  the  scientific  aspects  of,  i. 

322,  323;  ii.  318  sqq. 
Possibilities    and    impossibilities,    ii. 

296  sq. 
Posthumous  fame,  i.  510. 
Poulton,  Professor,  letter  to — Genesis 

and   inspiration:    Canon   Driver's 

criticisms,  ii.  126. 
"  Pour  le  merite,"  i.  427. 
Powell,    Rev.    Montague,    on    Huxley 

and  the  scientific  docker,  ii.  3S9. 
Practical  Biology,  adapted  for  America, 

ii.    I. 
Practical  life  as  a  rule-of-three  sum,  i. 

437- 

Prestwich,  Sir  Joseph,  his  Geology  and 
the  Genesis  controversy,  ii.  126. 
Letters  to — on  presidency  of  Geo- 
logical Society,  i.  334;  the  Privy 
Councillorship :  temporal  and 
other  deserts,  ii.  347. 

Price,  Professor  Bartholomew,  letter 
to — D.C.L.,  ii.  118;  gaps  among 
friends,  128. 

Priesthood,  power  of,  ii.  402. 

Priestley,  address  on,  i.  439,  442. 

Primer,  Introductory,  i.  420,  525,  ii.  2. 

Primrose,  H.,  dines  with,  ii.  31. 
^    Pritchard,   Professor,  and  Metaphysi- 
cal Society,  i.  337. 

Promotion  by  seniority,  ii.  312. 

Protest,  a  theological,  i.  504  sq. 

Providence,  ii.  320,  321. 

Psychology,  projected  introduction  to, 
i.  525,  ii.  I. 

Ptolemy  compared  with  Newton,  i. 
215. 

Punch,  squib  on  the  Ape  question, 
i.  206,  215;  cartoon  of  Huxley,  ii. 
28  n. 

Pupil  teachers,  ii.  166. 

Puritanism,  in  action  and  belief,  i.  353. 

Pusey,  opposes  D.C.L.  for  Froude 
and  Huxley,  i.  354. 

Pye  Smith,  Dr.,  i.  258. 


Pyrosoma,  i.  62;  further  observations 
on,  i.  227. 

Quain,  Dr.  Richard,  President  Royal 
College  of  Surgeons,  i.  336. 

Quakerism,  rise  of,  compared  to  rise 
of  Christianity,  ii.  283. 

Quarterly  Review,  attack  on  Darwin, 
i.  457  sq. 

Quekett,  J.  T.,  unfairly  treated,  i.  loi. 

Radiata,  a  zoological  lumber-room,  i. 
63,   142. 

Ramsay,  Sir  A.  C,  i.  150,  412. 

Rankine,  Professor,  presentation  to, 
at  Liverpool,  i.  360. 

Ransom,  Dr.,  indirectly  determined 
his  career,  ii.  142. 

Rathbone,  P.  H.,  presides  at  the 
Sphinx  Club  dinner  to  Huxley, 
i.  360. 

Rathbone,  W.,  wishes  to  send  Hux- 
ley on  a  visit  to  India,  i.  381. 

Rathke,  i.   152. 

Rattlesnake,  H.M.S.,  enters,  i.  26', 
quarters  on,  28,  30;  life  on,  30 
sq.',  voyage  of,  33  sq.,  44  sq.', 
effect  on  Huxley's  development, 
61;  Voyage  of  the,  reviewed  by 
Huxley,  i.  50  sq. 

Ravenna,  ii.  92. 

Ray  Society,  helps  publish  Huxley's 
early  papers,  i.  81,  97;  translation 
of  Haeckel's  Morphologie,  327. 

Read,  Charles,  on  Huxley's  retire- 
ment from  the  School   Board,  i. 

327. 
Reader,  the,  i.  227. 
Reaumur,  on  the  six-fingered  Maltese, 

i.  185;  appreciation  of,  i.  514.  515; 

ii.   431* 

Reconcilers,  i.  258. 

Red  Lion  Club,  i.  94,  98. 

Rede  Lecture,  on  the  Pearly  Nautilus 
and  Evolution,  ii.  62,  63. 

Reeks,  Trenham,  i.  167;  on  the  temper- 
ature of  a  letter  from  Tyndall,432. 

Reformation,  the  New,  i.  427. 

"  Rehmes,"  ii.  123,  296,  314. 

Reid,  Sir  John  Watt,  at  Haslar,  i. 
^',  advice,  62, 

Religion  and  morality,  defined,  i. 
368  «. 


S34 


UFE  OF  PROFKSOR  HUXLEY 


SdHfioa  lor  mcB,  8.  jft. 
Kcnaa,  typicat  of  Hm  ttatauff  ft  apdl 
ltiiffi4iii  on  riif  if  n   L  Aja. 
Bcptilift,  loMfl,  ncnoiri  «tt,  i.  k|. 
ftetpoMibffitar,  flfaMM  aad,  ft  tu  C^^. 

48I)- 
Eetimnciit*  ft  xu^  its;  at  fhe  age  of 
•ixtj,  sf7;  p«aiioii,  117  iRff«>  <•> 
snaiiis  Hoaomy  Dcui  of  C^cso 
€>f  Sdencab  iii;  CSvil  Xlot  pea- 

Jtirillcy  Dr.,  Iff  fcod  bgr  GiidttottCt 

ft  laa,  xa4. 
Kibaldrjr,  iicterodoz»  ivofM  Ifaaii  off> 

liwdoat  fiittfdfiii,  ft  aia^  499. 
Ridif  AiitiiOiij»  Icga^^  fiPCMtty  ft  304* 
Xltittrdion,  Sir  Jolui,  tdocta  Huadcy 

lor  tdcntifie  exi^e^MoB,  i  af»  J6b 

J9*  letter  to    OB  iVOffc'&HM  dv^ 

ii^  ▼oyife»  tfa;  moolt  afafs,  76; 
los;  leeics  pofUail  o^  ft  904. 

mifjgp   Dr*f   on  'Hoadcy^a   jpetircaMnt 
'    frofli  SdMKd  Board,  L  37s* 

Riley,  Atfadttan,  attadc  on  tiie  oom- 
fMromite,  is.  406. 

R^Km,  Bishop  o^  letter  to-^iroflt  and 
Inflttcnee  of  men  of  adenee*  ft 
173. 

Ririere,  Briton,  RA.,  letter  to  aci- 
ence  training  lor  his  son,  ft  338. 

Roberto,  F&ther,  on  Galileo  and  tiie 
Pope,  ii.  122. 

Robinson,  Dr.  Louis,  simian  charac- 
teristics in  infants,  ii.  449. 

Rogers,  Rev.  William,  at  Sion  House 
meeting,  i.  325;  letter  to — on 
physiography  lectures,  i.   332. 

Roller,  Mrs.,  letters  to — Roman  archi- 
tecture: Catacombs,  ii.  95;  end- 
less sights  of  Rome,  105;  Flor- 
ence, 107;  French  women  and 
French  dishes:  superiority  of  the 
male  figure,  247;  money  and  a 
new  house,  294;  birthday  letters: 
good  looks  as  a  child,  305;  love 
of  children:  the  "just  man  who 
needed  no  repentance "  as  a 
father,  351 ;  **  the  epistle  of 
Thomas,"  466. 

Rolleson,  Professor  G.,  visit  to,  i. 
165;  work  on  the  simian  brain, 
205,  206;  characterised,  225; 
teaches  biology  by  types,  406  n.. 


410;  4eBlli  of;  ft  jai  mimA  t» 
•k 

o^-arfaf<aovpaiar».L  4i4^ 
Roman   CaflioHca  and   plijraical   aci- 


.Proffaaaor  €uj.« 
of  inteileet  from  tenar,  ft  im;  i»> 
lerprelatfona  of'Darwia*  a^  masi 
land  fflnaaa  of,  ft  aii^.    ' 

Ua  «afaaal  tit  Join 
of  i;Acgral  lldakefib 
ft  3;  Ua  obitattry  of  DanHn  lor 
Mianr,  -41,  ^la; 
position  of  deaign  In 


long 

evolvtiont  3m;  fltntaa  of:  Ifpn  df 
the  eaipifo.aiid  Home  RiOa^  i$4. 
353$  odmniMRatioii  of  tfia 
Laetwias  Madaira,3ii$  Ma 
a  vife-comra^:  a  vdigiaii  far 
nuns  l^enngraon  poam^lfia;  tiie 
Bomanea  Leetnre:  a  doiibtlid 
promlae*  39^;  m*^  to  net  aa  ao^ 
stitnte  lor  Gladatone,  0.;  aalloet, 
.Ui 


payment  for  lectnnv  tlu:  Basita  of 
tiM  anblcct,  3M»  37S;  pfood  aeon 
by  Romanes^  375;  dangera  o^  376; 
*illnett  of  irienda:  tibe  appmdh 
of  deatii,  331.. 

Romanes,  Mrs.,  a  "chimtpping"  ac- 
ceptance of  an  invitation,  ii.  373. 
Letter  to — publication  of  the  "  chir- 
rupping  *'  letter:  refrains  from 
"  touching  a  wound  he  cannot 
heal,"  ii.  403;  guards  against  pos- 
sible misrepresentations  in  the 
letter,  404. 

Romanes  Lecture,  theme  of,  antici- 
pated in  the  "  Struggle  for  Exist- 
ence," ii.  199,  322,  355;  special  in- 
ducement, 370;  letters  on,  371, 
372  sq.,  375-79;  criticisms  on,  374, 
380-82;  description  of,  378  sq. 

Rome,  ii.  93-103. 

Roscoe,  Sir  Henry,  letters  to— on  Sci- 
ence Primers,  i.  387;  advice  to 
stay  at  Owens  College,  410;  Brit- 
ish Association  1872:  health: 
Primers,  411,  412;  appointments 
at  Owens  College,  420;  tour  in 
Auvergne,      424;       opening       of 


INDEX 


535 


Owens  College,  433;  on  Men 
of  Science  Series,  535,  536;  sec- 
ond sketch  of  Introductory  Sci- 
ence Primer,  ii.  2;  on  his  knight- 
hood, 71;  attack  of  pleurisy,  166; 
technical  education,  165;  sectarian 
training  colleges,   166. 

Rosebery,  Lord,  letters  to — a  deputa- 
tion on  London  University  re- 
form, ii.  336;  a  contretemps  at  a 
public  dinner,  ii.  395. 

Ross,  Sir  James,  meeting  with,  i.  95. 

Rosse,  Lord,  P.R.S.,  i.  78;  his  help, 
III,  115. 

Rousseau,  ii.  263. 

Royal  College  of  Science,  to  be  kept 
clear  of  new  University  scheme, 
ii.  331  sq. 

Royal  Society,  and  Huxley's  early 
papers,  i.  61,  65,  68,  72,  77,  81; 
elected  Fellow,  73,  104;  nearly  re- 
ceives Royal  Medal,  75;  elected 
on  Council,  87;  Medal,  109,  iii, 
114;  his  work  as  Secretary,  348; 
duties  of  Secretary,  ii.  94,  96; 
resignation  of  Presidency,  76^  79, 
81-83,  115;  admission  of  medical 
men,  119  sq.;  evening  meetings 
and  smoking,  120;  politics  and 
the  Presidency,  184-88;  federation 
scheme,  201;  dealings  with  Hux- 
ley, 226;  alleged  ignoring  of  dis- 
tinguished men,  364;  Fee  Reduc- 
tion Fund,  ib. 

Rucker,  Professor,  and  new  Univer- 
sity scheme,  ii.  331. 

Ruskin,  breach  of  confidence  touch- 
ing a  letter  of  his,  ii.  139. 

Rutherford,  Professor,  helps  in  the 
new  science  teaching,  i.  407. 

Sabine,  Colonel,  i.  87,  98,  113;  and  the 

Schlagintweits,  245;  and  Darwin's 

Copley  Medal,  275. 
Sacramental  food,  ii.  357. 
St.  Andrews,  Lord  Rectorship,  i.  400, 

516. 
St.  Andrews,  sends  his  son  to,  i.  513. 
St.   Thomas'  Hospital,  lectures  at,  i. 

118. 
Salisbury,    Lord,    interview   with,   on 

literary  and  scientific  honours,  ii. 

175;  second  vote  of  thanks  to,  as 


President  of  the  British  Associa- 
tion, 399;  criticism  in  Nature^  400, 

407. 
Salmon  disease,  ii.  26,  31;  Memoir  on, 

42»  43. 

Salmon,  their  "  playground,"  ii.  31. 

Salpa,  i.  62,  82;  aim  of  his  work  on, 
99;  anticipated  in,  100. 

Salters'  Company,  present  Huxley 
with  their  freedom,  ii.  54. 

Salvation  Army  controversy,  origin, 
ii.  288;  progress  of,  289,  290. 

Samuelson,  Mr.,  letter  to,  on  clerical 
attacks,  i.  360. 

Sanderson,  Sir  Burdon,  Vivisection 
Bill,  i.  470,  471;  discussion  with 
Tyndall,  516;  dines  with,  ii.  35. 

Sandon,  Lord,  leaves  School  Board, 
i.  400. 

Sandys,  J.  E.,  his  speech  presenting 
-  Huxley  for  LL.D.  at  Cambridge, 
ii.  4;  letter  to — '*  tenax  pro- 
positi,'* s. 

Satan,  the  prince  of  this  world,  ii. 
322,  379,  381,  406. 

Saturday  Review^  science  in,  i.  150. 

Sauropsida,  i.  316. 

Savages,  interviews  with,  i.  55. 

Savigny,  his  observations  on  Salpa 
supplemented,  i.  62;  his  morpho- 
logical method  adopted,   100. 

Schlagintweit,  the  brothers,   i.  245. 

Schmitz,  Dr.  L.,  head  of  International 
College,  i.  291. 

Schomburgk,   Sir   Richard,   i.   255. 

School  Board,  work  on,  i.  362-80;  his 
campaign  continued  in  "  Admin- 
istrative Nihilism,'*  i.  384;  compro- 
mise, letters  on,  ii.  367;  Diggleite 
attack  on  the  compromise,  406. 

Schurman,  Professor,  on  design  in 
evolution,  ii.  200. 

Science  and  Agriculture,  ii.  300. 

Science  and  Art  Department,  lectures 
for,  i.  119;  value  of  examinations, 
274;  examinations,  ii.  63. 

"  Science  and  Art  in  Relation  to  Edu- 
cation," ii.  43. 

Science  and  creeds,  ii.  172;  and  its 
prophets,  396. 

"  Science  and  Culture,"  ii.  14. 

"  Science  and  Religion,  Truthfulness 
in,"  ii.  22^ 


wJ 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY 


"  SdM«  >t  Sm,"  L  so  h. 

Sin,  oHgin  of,  ii.  aw  (cp.  L  agy). 

Science,  in  public  ichoola,  i.  zm;  in 

Sinclair.   Sir  J.   (5.   T..   letter   to,    on 

Babbage'i    calculating    machine, 

the  grat  ttagcdy  ol.  356;  deiini- 

ii  278. 

Sion  College,  declines  to  attend  open- 

ScieriM,     Biological,     and     Medicine, 

Sioo  House  meeting.  L  3^5  ■>-.  J3r. 

Science  Primeri  begun,  I  iSt- 

Skelton.  Sir  John,  visits,  i.  491.  s<a- 

Science  teaclicn,  need  oI.  i.  »». 

Science  leachins:  acheme  lor  the  In- 

"  Scientific  Education,"  1.  3y. 

pleasBDt  lor  work,  s"3;  biaeraphy 

Staa,    D.    H.,   extend*   lexi-book   on 

writing,  ii.  j;  dinner  and  discus- 

Biology,  i.  409. 

sion,  8;  Tlu  Crmkil  Mrg.  a  rrfer- 

Scott,  John  Godwin,  i.   18, 

Scolt.  Mr^  J.  C.  (Eliia  Huxlc).).  vUit 

to  Tyndall,  38;  Mary  Stnart  and 

to,  i.  498. 

the  Casket  Letters,  jo;  Gladstoae 

Letters  to— prospect*  ol  RaltliiHalte 

voyage,   i.    16.   27;   first  scientific 

memoir,  js:  engagement,  <d;  last 

cruise  and  Kennedy's  expedition. 

47.  48;  return  and  ambitions,  651 

IBS,  '96:  retirement  from  London. 

character  of  Forbes,  103;  death  of 

303;  the  Casket  Letters,  laj;  lim- 

his   molber.     107;    first    lecture: 

itations  of  the  Romanes  Lecture. 

381;    mending    the    irremediable. 

Medal,    1141   people   he   can   deal 

38a- 

Skull.  theory  ol  the  Vertebrate,  i.  ,si. 

ii6t  rounds  the  Cape  Horn  ol  his 

further  investigations.    165,   244. 

Slavery,  i.  :^2. 

Smalley.  G.  W.,  Huxley  in  New  York 

harbour,    L    4941    description    ol 

Se»  serpeul,  letters  on,  ii.  36?,  36S. 

Selhome,   Lord,  in  Mcliphysical   So- 

friends and  Ulk.  446- 

ciety,  i.  33a. 

Sensation,  lecture  on,  ii.  1. 

Sraith.  Sir  William,  i.  =6?;  and  Inter- 

Seth, Professor,  letters  to-thanlts  for 

national  College.  391;  eBect  of  the 

name  "  vivisection."  ts). 

Smith.  Right  Hon.  W,  H.,  Bible-read- 

popular  audiences,    ii.   380;    Pro- 

ing in  schools.  L  367. 

legomena:  Spinoia,  3B1. 

Smyth,   Waringtoo   W„   i.    :ii:    death 

Sexton,  T.,  and  Pamell,  ii.  .gj. 

ol.  ii.  ^. 

Shaftesbury,    Lord,    quotes    Huxley's 

Snakes,  lecture  on,  ii.   1. 

definition  of  religion  and  morali- 

Socialism.   Stale,    and    natural    selcc- 

ty,  i.   3«8  ■.;   charges   him    with 

advocating      vivisections      before 

Societies  and  ladies,  i.  a=8. 

children.  460  iqq.;  letter  from.  461. 

Society  and   societies,   i.   348. 

Sharpey.    Dr.    William,    help    from: 

Society  lor  the  propagation   ol    com- 

Secretary  Royal  Society  till  iBji, 

L  «s,  a:  Vivisection  HUI.  i.  471. 

Society  ol  Arts,  speech  at,  i.  joq. 

Sidgwict,    Wm.    C.    rebuke    to    the 

ii.  a89. 

Spiakcr.  ii.  iSg. 

Species  and  sterility,  i.  257- 

INDEX 


537 


Spectator,  on  '*  Pope  Huxley,"  i.  350. 

Spedding,:  James,,  influence  of  Hux- 
ley's accuracy  in  style,  i.  320; 
letter  from  —  on  Bacon,  522; 
Bacon's  influence  compared  with 
Huxley's,  523. 

Spencer,  Herbert,  and  evolution,  i. 
180;  joins  X  Club,  278,  281;  criti- 
cises **  Administrative  Nihilism,*' 
369;  on  Comte,  323;  "  devil's  ad- 
vocate "  to,  358,  ii.  73;  his  com- 
parison of  the  body  politic  to  the 
body  physical  criticised,  i.  385; 
controversy  not  inconsistent  with 
friendship,  415;  a  regular  New 
Year's  guest,  418,  518;  his  phi- 
losophy found  wanting  by  a 
youthful  Punjaubee,  ii.  46;  vigour 
of,  197;  philosophical  opposition 
to,  199,200;  correspondence  on  ab- 
solute ethics,  258,  259,  264;  his  psy- 
chology based  on  use-inheritance, 
285;  frankness  to,  431;  plays  fives 
with,  444;  fondness  for  music,  446. 
Letters  from — ^will  not  break  through 
custom  of  sending  him  proofs,  ii. 
135;  urges  him  to  answer  Lilly, 
154;  sends  proofs  to  him  as  an 
**  omnivorous  reader,"  154  (cp.  ii. 

443)- 
Letters  to — his  review  of  the  Arche- 
type, i.  173;  First  Principles,  22S, 
229;  distention  of  birds*  air-cells 
during  flight,  230;  animals  and 
plants,  248;  Tyndall's  favourite 
problem:  *'gynopathy,"249;  fond- 
ness for  music,  250;  philosophy, 
262;  patience  in  discussions,  299; 
dry  facts  only  at  Edinburgh  lec- 
tures, 478;  Moses  and  a  visit  to 
town,  479;  on  George  Eliot  and 
Westminster  Abbey,  ii.  19;  thanks 
for  his  photograph,  50;  accept- 
ance of  P.R.S.,  57;  on  Creation 
controversy,  123;  influence  of  con- 
ditions, 135;  reads  proofs  of  his 
Autobiography,  142;  use-inherit- 
ance, ib.;  disinclined  to  reply  to 
Mr.  Lilly,  154;  the  plot  succeeds, 
155;  his  own  boyhood,  ib.;  reply 
to  Mr.  Lilly:  abuse  of  the  word 
"  Law  "  ;  Victorian  science,  156; 
Imperial  Institute,  160;  death  of 


his  daughter,  191;  retrospect  of 
their  first  meeting: ^clears  up  pos- 
sible misunderstanding  about 
London  Liberty  League,  195;  a 
visit  to,  postponed:  defensive 
position  in  controversy,  196;  for- 
getfulness  of  past  events:  a 
sweeping  criticism,  197;  jests  on 
his  recent  activity:  himself  un- 
like Samson,  207;  some  consola- 
tion for  old  age,  211  (bis);  return 
from  Maloja,  218. 

Sphinx  Club,  Liverpool,  dinner  to 
Huxley,  i.  360. 

Spinoza,  memorial  to,  i.  480;  debt  to, 
ii.  382,  451. 

Spiritualism,  experiments  in,  i.  451; 
if  true,  an  additional  argument 
against  suicide,  452;  report  on 
seance,  •&.  sq. 

Spirula,  work  on,  i.  430,  525,  ii.  i,  365, 
383  sq. 

Spitzbergen,  fossils  from,  i.  306. 

Spontaneous*  generation  and  Darwin- 
ism, i.  263,  355  sq.;  recipe  for,  357. 

Spottiswoode,  William,  and  x  Club,  i. 
277,  280;  visit  to,  ii.  35;  character 
of,  54;  death,  55. 

Stanley,  Dean,  i.  338,  486;  handwriting, 
486;  death  of,  ii.  33;  on  George 
Eliot's  funeral,  ib.;  men  of  sci- 
ence, •&.;  on  being  made  a  bishop, 
421 ;  historical  impressionability, 
455;  repartee,  the  priests  and  the 
prophets,  456. 

Stanley,  Lord,  i.  166. 

Stanley,  Lord,  of  Alderley,  memorial 
to  Carlyle,  ii.  36. 

Stanley,  Owen,  captain  of  Rattlesnake, 
i.  26,  27,  29,  32,  so. 

Stanley,  Mrs.  Owen,  i.  58. 

State,  comparison  with  the  body,  i. 
386. 

State,  the,  and  the  medical  profession, 
ii.  70. 

Steffens,  Father,  friendship  with,  ii. 
205,  218. 

Stephen,  Leslie,  in  Metaphysical  So- 
ciety, i.  338;  on  Huxley  and  his 
home  life,  ii.  458. 
Letter  to— sepvation  from  friends: 
deafness:  morality  in  the  cosmos, 
ii.  404. 


538 


LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR    HUXLEY 


Stocki.  John  Ellerton.  i.  19,  CS. 
Stokei.  Sir  G.  G,,  i.  iSj;  priucBtatlon 
to,  at  LiveTpfKil.  360. 
Letlir    from— Fail  iam  en  I    and    ihe 
Presidency  of  Ihe  Rofal  Sociely, 
>L  iSd. 
Letlers  Iq,  iL  18S,  187  (cp.  iM.  '85)- 
Strachey,  E.,  i.  m- 
SlTachey,  Sit  R.,  appreciation  of,   ii. 


rulber: 


B  Resu 


lion  in  agriculture,  i 


Teeth,  wHus  on,  i.  i 
umentary  organ?, 
:o1ogy,  i.  4S9  jfl.; 


1,  Cap  tain,  at  Falkland  li 


;  in  MelBphyaical  Sociely,  337, 
<;  death  of,  it  sgg;  visit!  to, 
;  acientific  Iniight  of,  js8.  3S9: 


Sunday  Society,  unable  to  suppnri 
prominently  while  P.R.S.,  ii.  61. 

Supernatural  iam,  iL  317. 

Sydenham  College,  i.  iS. 

Sydney,  projected  chair  of  Natntal 
History  • 


Lerden,  Lady,  at  Lynti 
Tethea,  on  the  anatomy  o 
[am,    philosophical   dil 


Sylve 


-,  Prof. 


play  golf,  joo- 
Taylor,   Misi   H.,   critici 

miniitrative  Nihilist 
Taylor,    Canon    Isaac,    li 


chers,  lectures  to. 

1.  406* 

hnical    Education, 

addres 

the  School  Board 

ib.i  R 

the    Guilds,    50S: 

City    and    Guilds 

supply  of  teachers 

509;  s 

mson,  Sir  W.  (Lord  Kelvin), 
reconciliation  with  Tyndall,  i.  313. 
Thomson,  Sir  Wyville,  and  Balhyb- 
iua,  i.  3i&i  bia  course  at  Edin- 
burgh taken  by  Huiley,  «j,  480; 
criticism  of  Darwin,  ii.  15. 
rpe.   Professor,  and   new   Univer- 

Tbought,    as    a' "function"    of    the 


INDEX 


539 


Times,  review  of  the  Origin  in,  i.  189. 
Title,  rumoured  acceptance  of,  ii.  74. 
Titles,  for  men  of  science,  i.  386  (cp. 

ii.  175)- 

Todd,  Dr.  R.  B.,  gives  up  professor- 
ship at  King's  College,  i.  116. 

Todd's  Cyclopedia,  writes  for,  i.  151. 

Tollemache,  A.,  at  x  Club,  i.  279. 

Tomes,  Sir  John,  ii.  149. 

Toronto,  stands  for  professorship  at, 
i.  83,  85,  86,  87,  108,  116. 

Training  colleges,  sectarian,  ■  ii.   166. 

Trevelyan,  Sir  C,  Under-Secretary 
Treasury,  i.  79. 

Treviranus,  not  studied  by  Huxley 
before  1859,  i.  180. 

Trigonia,  on  the  animal  of,  i.  81. 

Tnith,  transatlantic  discovery  of,  ii. 
47;  Huxley  a  fanatic  for,  49  (cp. 
298),  427- 

Tug,  story  of,  ii.  433. 

Tulloch,    Principal,   i.   400. 

Turner,  W.,  an  appointment  to  Cal- 
cutta Museum,  i.  325. 

Tyndall,  Mrs.,  letters  to — duties  of  a 
married  daughter,  il.  8;  forgetful- 
ness,  37;  an  invitation  to  lunch, 

69. 
Tyndall,  John,  rejected,  like  Huxley, 
at  Toronto,  i.  85;  Physics  for 
Saturday  Review,  151;  joint  paper 
on  Glacier  Ice,  155;  joins  School 
of  Mines,  168;  on  Committee  of 
the  Reader,  227;  in  Wales  with,  233, 
242;  takes  Waverley  Place  house, 
242;  favourite  problem  in  molecu- 
lar physics,  249;  and  x  Club,  278, 
281,  ii.  128;  receives  Edinburgh 
LL.D.  with  Huxley,  i.  296;  joins 
in  drawing  up  scheme  of  science 
teaching  in  schools,  331,  332;  in 
Metaphysical  Society,  338;  pres- 
entation to,  at  Liverpool,  360;  dis- 
cussion with  B.  Sanderson,  516;  a 
constant  New  Year's  guest,  518; 
action  of  Association  of  Liberal 
Thinkers,  i.  3;  vigour  of,  174; 
visit  to,  305;  death  of,  390,  391. 
Letters  from — ^unable  to  join  in  trip 
to  the  Eifel,  i.  353;  on  clerical 
attacks,  361;  on  proposed  visit  to 
India,  381  n. ;  on  opposition  to 
his  Presidency  of  the  British  As- 


sociation, 432;  wasted  sympathy, 
440. 
Letters  to-ir-Toronto,  i.  85;  elected 
F.R.S.,  ifr.;  on  a  London  career, 
123;  science  reviews  in  Westmin- 
ster, 130,  131;  letter  from  col- 
leagues in  England,  137;  at  his 
marriage,  140;  the  Brenon:  end 
of  Swiss  trip,  158;  on  joining 
School  of  Mines,  168;  friendship, 
ib. ;  a  "  madcap  "  Alpinist,  172 ; 
on  Jamaica  affair,  304;  on  work- 
ing-men's lecture  at  British  Asso- 
ciation: reconciliation  with  Thom- 
son and  Tait,  313,  314;  resignation 
of  Fullerian  lectureship,  314;  re- 
sig^ning  lectureship  at  School  of 
Mines,  327;  Liverpool  British  As- 
sociation, 336;  an  electrical  dis- 
turbance, 354;  his  lecture  at  Liver- 
pool meeting  of  British  Associa- 
tion, 360;  a  letter  to  Nature:  his 
breakdown,  393;  trip  to  Egypt: 
ascent  of  Vesuvius,  398;  the  new 
teaching  of  biology:  •  Hooker's 
affair,  408;  ill-health,  and  the  fine 
air  of  St.  John's  Wood:  Tyndall's 
visit  to  America,  411;  a  loan,  415; 
possibility  of  marriage,  ib.;  the 
New  Year  in  the  new  house,  418; 
Tyndall's  "  English  accent  "  : 
character  of  Hirst,  419;  Lord 
Rector  of  Aberdeen,  ib.;  tour  in 
Auvergne,  420;  controversy  about 
Forbes:  walks  with  his  young 
son,  426;  receives  Order  of  the 
Pole  Star,  427;  opposition  to  his 
Presidency  of  the  British  Asso- 
ciation: a  letter  at  high  tempera- 
ture, 432;  Blauvelt's  '*  Modern 
Skepticism,"  433;  the  Forbes  con- 
troversy, 440;  British  Associa- 
tion at  Belfast,  441;  excuses  for 
undertaking  unnecessary  work, 
ib.;  subject  of  Belfast  address, 
442;  Spinoza  memorial:  pay  at 
Edinburgh,  480;  possible  sons-in- 
law,  481;  examines  micro-organ- 
isms, 482;  offers  to  lecture  for: 
*'  bottled  life,"  519;  on  his  daugh- 
ter's recovery,  529;  to  take  Boyle 
in  English  Men  of  Science 
Series,  537;   own  capacity  as   an 


UFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


FrimdiUp  tad  vi^atam,  ufn- 
ptt  ol  Miatcm  mln  in  Nint- 
Unlh  Cnlmrj,  U.  iS;  a  cooler 
.  lioa,  6fi;  dioBcr  in  hononr  al> 
>77f  *j9i  Lonl  Grunllc'i  ht- 
cud«   tmtttnaa,    ijt;    confiutd 

■74)  Tcna)>foa'i  foocra],  jjj^  jCo; 


M  Qdard:  ^Ijiiw  br  inebca,  jtB. 

"  UalnnitiM,  AcMil  aad  -Idai,"  L 

43«4 
Uninnilr.Jobu  Bopk]Bi,addnH  at: 

"Traataahmi 


Variatko,  tbc  ktj  to  the  Durinian 

tbtoiy,  L  lu. 
Vahgoy.  H.  d^  lalHn  to— hii  caiari 


I  natlTC  tomne,  IL  jiB;  later 


pablic:     cxperimeBtal    pnxil    of 
■peeliic  infertilitjr,  109. 

Verme*.  a  loological  lumber-room,  i. 


ture), 

nflucnct 

Df   th 

RalUcs«akl 

voyage 

IIu 

ley 

work. 

Medical 

»,  ii-  M 

iviKction 
bury's 

i.4594, 

cbargCE, 

■  ;  L 

4l» 

ord 

W.    E. 

Forsn 

K« 

lectuK 

,463  18.; 

nal 

feelings 

on.   466,   471,   47 

:  Bills, 

469  J*. 

m:  fo 

leg 

lalor*,  4?'>i 

experin 

enland 

Drigi 

■esearch. 

«i;  Co 

J*  5»J- 

on. 

473 

Harvey 

/or.  Karl 

i.  i7(i. 

i    Suhm    and    Ceylon 


Wacc    Df  „   Madn    MlwridaM,    i 

Wales,  H.R.H.  Prince  ol,  admitled  I 
Royal  Society,  ii.  4^;  unveils  Da 

Walker,   Alfred,    lelter    to—local    mi 

WalkioH,  his  holiday  recreation,  i.  15 

Waliace,  A.  R..  sUrls  Darwin,  i.   17 

178.   iBj;  Civil  Lid  pension,  ii.    I. 

Letter   from— friendship    with    Huj 


I 


Wall 


,  Mrs 


■w  friend,  i.  47§L  Afghan 


Walpcde,  Sir  Spencer  H.,  VMacctioB 
BUI,  i.  4<0. 

Ward,  Dr.,  U*  iormer  enminer, 
p»a»ed  over  in  fBTonr  U  HbxIct 
for  Royal  Society,  L  loi. 

Ward,  T.  H.,  visit  to,  ii,  «6. 

Ward,  Mri.  T.  H.,  letter  to— thanks 
for  Robirl  Elsmeri,  ii.  xA. 

Ward,  W.,  lablc-Ulk  of  Huxley,  espe- 
cially  on  the  Foundations  of  Bt- 

of  his  talk,  453,  455- 
Ward,    W.    G.,    in    Metaphysical    So- 
ciety,   1.    338,   540;    saying    about 


Vater  Babies,   The,   L   ao6;   letter  to 

Vaugh,  Rev.  Benjamin,  impression  of 
Huxley  on  the  School  Board,  i. 
377  19- 

Velby.    Lady,    letters    to— life    com- 


INDEX 


541 


truthfulness  in  science  and  re- 
ligion, 226. 

Welcker,  Dr.  H.,  on  his  ethnological 
work,  i.  294. 

Weldon,  Professor,  letters  to — ideal  of 
a  modern  university,  ii.  327;  or- 
ganisation of  new  university,  334. 

Wellington,  Duke  of,  funeral,  i.  in; 
on  speaking,  319. 

Westlake,  John,  Q.C,  a  working- 
men's  meeting,  ii.  434. 

Westminster  RevieWt  writes  for,  i.  92, 
129,  231. 

Whales,  i.  298. 

Whewell,  History  of  Scientific  Ideas,  i. 
165. 

Wilberforce,  Bishop,  on  Darwinism, 
i-  i93-95»  i97»  i99.  200,  203,  211, 
217,  238. 

Winmarleigh,  Lord,  on  Vivisection 
Commission,  i.  472. 

Withers,  Rachel,  mother  of  T.  H. 
Huxley,  i.    i.     (See  Huxley.) 

Witness,  the,  on  the  Ape  question,  i. 
208  sq.,  212. 

Wollaston,  T.  V.,  and  species,  i.  182. 

Women,  medical  education  of,  i.  416, 
448;  in  public  life,  ii.  411. 


Women's  education,  i.  228,  283,  448, 
449. 

Woodward,  S.  P.,  and  geological 
amateur,  i.  296. 

Working-Men's  College,  i.  149  (Lec- 
tures. See  Lectures);  ii.  i;  ad- 
dress at,  on  "  Method  of  Zadig," 
14. 

Working-Men's  Institute,  i.  507. 

Wright,  Dr.,  editor  of  Natural  History 
Review,  i.  225,  272. 

X  Club,  founded,  i.  TTfj*,  history,  280- 
82;  compared  to  The  Club,  280; 
jealousy  of,  ii.  120;  gaps  in,   i23. 

Yale,  fossils  in  museum,  i.  494  sq.,  501- 

503. 

Youmans,  Dr.,  at  x  Club,  i.  279;  meet- 
ing with,  305. 

Young,  Lord,  dines  with,  ii.  31. 

Yule,  Commander,  succeeds  Owen 
Stanley,  i.  61. 

"  Zadig,  Method  of,"  ii.  14. 
Zoologrical  Gardens,  i.  507. 
Zoological  Society,  i.  106. 


THE    END 


I* 


Q 


4 

I 


w^^