Life and Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley, Vol. I (Thomas Henry Huxley (Leonard Huxley, ed.), 1900)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1900 Macmillan edition, ed. Leonard Huxley (https://archive.org/details/lifeandletterst07huxlgoog). Huxley's life and letters, Vol. I — Darwin's bulldog on evolution, agnosticism, and Victorian science, in his own correspondence.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF 
THOMAS    HENRY   HUXLEY 


',•  I    -..        ii)"|'     ;■'     =  :i  *  I 


LIFE  AND  LETTERS 


OF 


FHOMAS  HENRY  HUXLEY 


BY   HIS  SON 


LEONARD    HUXLEY 


^^ 


IN  TIVO   VOLUMES 
VOL.    I 


•  •  •  • 

•  •     • 


••  ••• 

•  :  : 
••• 


• « 


•  •     .      ••   ••     •• 

*••    ■«•••     • 

•  '•>•     •••    • 


NEW  YORK   AND   LONDON 

D.  APPLETON   AND   COMPANY 

1916  .     \ 


57i 


Copyright,  1900, 
By  D.  APPLETON  AND  COMPANY. 


258171 


•  •  • 


t 


■  • 


•  • 


k  •  • 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


Vi  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY 

This  was  the  note  he  struck  in  the  appeal  for  intellectual 
sincerity  and  clearness  which  he  made  at  the  end  of  his 
New  York  Lectures  on  Evolution,  The  same  note  domi- 
nates that  letter  to  his  sister — a  Southerner  by  adoption 
— which  gives  his  reading  of  the  real  issue  at  stake  in 
the  great  civil  war.  Slavery  is  bad  for  the  slave,  but  far 
worse  for  the  master,  as  sapping  his  character  and  making 
impossible  that  moral  vigour  of  the  individual  on  which  is 
based  the  collective  vigour  of  the  nation. 

The  interest  with  which  he  followed  the  later  develop- 
ment of  social  problems  need  not  be  dwelt  on  here,  except 
to  say  that  he  watched  their  earlier  maturity  in  America 
as  an  indication  of  the  problems  which  would  afterwards 
call  for  a  solution  in  his  own  country.  His  share  in  treat- 
ing them  was  limited  to  examining  the  principles  of  social 
philosophy  on  which  some  of  the  proposed  remedies  for 
social  troubles  were  based,  and  this  examination  may  be 
found  in  his  Collected  Essays,  But  the  educational  cam- 
paign which  he  carried  on  in  England  had  its  counterpart 
in  America.  It  was  not  only  that  he  was  chosen  to  open 
the  Johns  Hopkins  University  as  the  type  of  a  new  form 
of  education ;  there  and  elsewhere  pupils  of  his  carried  out 
in  America  his  methods  of  teaching  biology,  while  others 
engaged  in  general  education  would  write  testifying  to  the 
influence  of  his  ideas  upon  their  own  methods  of  teaching. 
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  nothing  was  further  from 
his  mind  than  the  desire  to  found  a  school  of  thought.  He 
only  endeavoured  as  a  scholar  and  a  student  to  clear  up 
his  own  thoughts  and  help  others  to  clear  theirs,  whether 
in  the  intellectual  or  the  moral  world.  This  was  the 
help  he  steadfastly  hoped  to  give  the  people,  that  interact- 
ing union  of  intellectual  freedom  and  moral  discernment 
which  may  be  furthered  by  good  education  and  training, 
by  precept  and  example,  that  basis  of  all  social  health  and 
prosperity.  And  if,  as  he  said,  he  would  like  to  be  remem- 
bered as  one  who  had  done  his  best  to  help  the  people, 
he  meant  assuredly  not  the  people  only  of  his  native  land, 
but  the  wider  world  to  whom  his  words  could  be  carried. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  ENGLISH   EDITION 


My  father's  life  was  one  of  so  many  interests,  and  his 
work  was  at  all  times  so  diversified,  that  to  follow  each 
thread  separately,  as  if  he  had  been  engaged  on  that  alone 
for  a  time,  would  be  to  give  a  false  impression  of  his  activity 
and  the  peculiar  character  of  his  labours.  All  through  his 
active  career  he  was  equally  busy  with  research  into  nature, 
with  studies  in  philosophy,  with  teaching  and  administra- 
tive work.  The  real  measure  of  his  energy  can  only  be 
found  when  all  these  are  considered  together.  Without 
this  there  can  be  no  conception  of  the  limitations  imposed 
upon  him  in  his  chosen  life's  work.  The  mere  amount  of 
his  research  is  greatly  magnified  by  the  smallness  of  the 
time  allowed  for  it. 

But  great  as  was  the  impression  left  by  these  researches 
in  purely  scientific  circles,  it  is  not  by  them  alone  that  he 
made  his  impression  upon  the  mass  of  his  contemporaries. 
They  were  chiefly  moved  by  something  over  and  above 
his  wide  knowledge  in  so  many  fields — ^by  his  passionate 
sincerity,  his  interest  not  only  in  pure  knowledge,  but  in 
human  life,  by  his  belief  that  the  interpretation  of  the  book 
of  nature  was  not  to  be  kept  apart  from  the  ultimate  prob- 
lems of  existence;  by  the  love  of  truth,  in  short,  both 
theoretical  and  practical,  which  gave  the  key  to  the  char- 
acter of  the  man  himself. 

Accordingly,  I  have  not  discussed  with  any  fulness  the 
value  of  his  technical  contributions  to  natural  science;  I 
have  not  drawn  up  a  compendium  of  his  philosophical 
views.  One  is  a  work  for  specialists;  the  other  can  be 
gathered  from  his  published  works.  I  have  endeavoured 
rather  to  give  the  public  a  picture,  so  far  as  I  can,  of  the 
man  himself,  of  his  aims  in  the  many  struggles  in  which 
I*  vii 


Viii  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 

he  was  engaged,  of  his  character  and  temperament,  and 
the  circumstances  under  which  his  various  works  were  be- 
gun and  completed. 

So  far  as  possible,  I  have  made  his  letters,  or  extracts 
from  them,  tell  the  story  of  his  life.  If  those  of  any  given 
period  are  diverse  in  tone  and  character,  it  is  simply  because 
they  reflect  an  equal  diversity  of  occupations  and  interests. 
Few  of  the  letters,  however,  are  of  any  great  length ;  many 
are  little  more  than  hurried  notes ;  others,  mainly  of  private 
interest,  supply  a  sentence  here  and  there  to  fill  in  the 
general  outline. 

Moreover,  whenever  circumstances  permit,  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  make  my  own  part  in  the  book  entirely  im- 
personal. My  experience  is  that  the  constant  iteration  by 
the  biographer  of  his  relationship  to  the  subject  of  his 
memoir,  can  become  exasperating  to  the  reader;  so  that 
at  the  risk  of  offending  in  the  opposite  direction,  I  have 
chosen  the  other  course. 

Lastly,  I  have  to  express  my  grateful  thanks  to  all  who 
have  sent  me  letters  or  supplied  information,  and  espe- 
cially to  Dr.  J.  H.  Gladstone,  Sir  Mountstuart  Grant  Duff, 
Professor  Howes,  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  and  Sir 
Spencer  Walpole,  for  their  contributions  to  the  book;  but 
above  all  to  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  and  Sir  Michael  Foster, 
whose  invaluable  help  in  reading  proofs  and  making  sug- 
gestions has  been,  as  it  were,  a  final  labour  of  love  for  the 
memory  of  their  old  friend. 


cc 

INTEN 

TS 

CHAPTSK 

I.    ( 

1825-1842)      .... 

II.    ( 

I84I-I846) 

III.    ( 

I846-I849) 

IV.  ( 

I848-I850)      .... 

V.  ( 

1850-1851) 

•                   « 

VI.  ( 

I85I-I854) 

a 

VII.  ( 

I85I-I853) 

- 

VIII.  ( 

1854)           .     . 

IX.  ( 

1855)      .     .     . 

X.  ( 

I855-I858)     .     . 

XI.  ( 

I857-I858)     .     . 

XII.  ( 

I859-I860) 

XIII.  ( 

1859)      .     . 

XIV.  ( 

I859-I860) 

XV.  ( 

I860-I863) 

XVI.  ( 

1860-I86I) 

XVII.  ( 

I86I-I863) 

XVIII.  ( 

1864)      .     .     , 

XIX.  ( 

1865) 

XX.  ( 

1866) 

XXI.  ( 

1867) 

XXII.  ( 

1868) 

XXIII.  ( 

1869) 

XXIV.  ( 

1870) 

PACE 
I 

16 
31 

44 

94 
"7 
138 
142 

154 
164 

178 
188 
205 
225 

247 
269 
283 

294 
306 

316 

330 

346 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY 


CHAPTER 

XXV.  ( 

XXVL  ( 

XXVIL  ( 

XXVIIL  ( 

XXIX.  ( 

XXX.  ( 

XXXL  ( 

XXXIL  ( 

XXXIIL  ( 


PAGB 

871) 383 

872) 394 

873) 418 

874) 436 

875-1876) 459 

875-1876) 475 

876) 489 

877) 507 

878) 520 


ApT^ENnix 541 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


PACIKO 
PACK 


Portrait  from  a  Daguerrotype  made  in  1846  Frontispiece 

Facsimile  of  Sketch,  "  The  Loves  and  Graces  "        .        .        .8$ 
Portrait  from  a  Photograph  by  Maull  and  Polyblank,  1857  160 

No.  4  Marlborough  Place — from  the  Garden.    After  a  Water-* 

colour  Sketch  by  R.  Huxley 412 

Portrait  from  a  Photograph  by  Elliott  and  Fry;  Steel  Engrav- 
ing in  Nature,  February  5,  1874 436 

xi 


2  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

their  original  home  in  Cheshire.  •Thisiiome  is  represented 
to-day  by  a  farm  in  the  Brojpton'- Hundred,  about  eight 
miles  from  Chester,  called,  J&xley  Hall.  From  this  centre 
Huxleys  spread  to  th&Tieigpbfeouring  villages,  such  as  Over- 
ton and  Ecclestpnv  .'Olotton  and  Duddon,  Tattenhall  and 
Wettenhall;'pth6^s'io 'Chester  and  Brindley  near  Nantwich. 
The  souUnvafd  movement  carries  some  to  the  Welsh  border, 
other-8.  nrf9*^firopshire.  The  Wettenhall  family  established 
tlx«jn*seWes  in  the  fourth  generation  at  Rushall,  and  held 
•  •I.'fencrperty  in  Handsworth  and  Walsall;  the  Brindley  family 
'••;  -sent  a  branch  to  Macclesfield,  whose  representative,  Samuel, 
must  have  been  on  the  town  council  when  the  Young  Pre- 
tender rode  through  on  his  way  to  Derby,  for  he  was  mayor 
in  1746;  while  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  George, 
the  disinherited  heir  of  Brindley,  became  a  merchant  in 
London,  and  purchased  Wyre  Hall  at  Edmonton,  where 
his  descendants  lived  for  four  generations,  his  grandson 
being  knighted  by  Charles  H  in  1663. 

But  my  father  had  no  particular  interest  in  tracing  his 
early  ancestry.  "  My  own  genealogical  inquiries,"  he  said, 
"  have  taken  me  so  far  back  that  I  confess  the  later  stages 
do  not  interest  me."  Towards  the  end  of  his  life,  however, 
my  mother  persuaded  him  to  see  what  could  be  found  out 
about  Huxley  Hall  and  the  origin  of  the  name.  This  proved 
to  be  from  the  manor  of  Huxley  or  Hodesleia,  whereof  one 
Swanus  de  Hockenhull  was  enfeoffed  by  the  abbot  and 
convent  of  St.  Werburgh  in  the  time  of  Richard  I.  Of  the 
grandsons  of  this  Swanus,  the  eldest  kept  the  manor  and 
name  of  Hockenhull  (which  is  still  extant  in  the  Midlands) ; 
the  younger  ones  took  their  name  from  the  other  fief. 

But  the  historian  of  Cheshire  records  the  fact  that  owing 
to  the  respectability  of  the  name,  it  was  unlawfully  assumed 
by  divers  "  losels  and  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  sort,"  and 
my  father,  with  a  fine  show  of  earnestness,  used  to  declare 
that  he  was  certain  the  legitimate  owners  of  the  name  were 
far  too  sober  and  respectable  to  have  produced  such  a 
reprobate  as  himself,  and  one  of  these  "  losels  "  must  be  his 
progenitor. 

Thomas  Henry  Huxley  was  bom  at  Ealing  on  May  4, 


^  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  cMAP.  t 

That  peculiarity  has  been  passed  on  to  me  in  full  strength;  it 
has  often  stood  me  in  good  stead;  it  has  sometimes  played  me 
sad  tricks,  and  it  has  always  been  a  danger.  But,  after  all,  if 
my  time  were  to  come  over  again,  there  is  nothing  I  would  less 
willingly  part  with  than  my  inheritance  of  mother-wit. 

Restless,  talkative,  untiring  to  the  day  of  her  death,  she 
was  at  sixty-six  "  as  active  and  energetic  as  a  young  wom- 
an." His  early  devotion  to  her  was  remarkable.  Describ- 
ing her  to  his  future  wife  he  writes : — 

As  a  child  my  love  for  her  was  a  passion.  I  have  lain  awake 
for  hours  crying  because  I  had  a  morbid  fear  of  her  death ;  her 
approbation  was  my  greatest  reward,  her  displeasure  my  great- 
est punishment. 

I  have  next  to  nothing  to  say  about  my  childhood  (he  con- 
tinues in  the  Autobiography).  In  later  years  my  mother,  look- 
ing at  me  almost  reproachfully,  would  sometimes  say,  "  Ah !  you 
were'such  a  pretty  boy !  "  whence  I  had  no  difficulty  in  conclud- 
ing that  I  had  not  fulfilled  my  early  promise  in  the  matter  of 
looks.  In  fact,  I  have  a  distinct  recollection  of  certain  curls  of 
which  I  was  vain,  and  of  a  conviction  that  I  closely  resembled 
that  handsome,  courtly  gentleman,  Sir  Herbert  Oakley,  who  was 
vicar  of  our  parish,  and  who  was  as  a  god  to  us  country  folk, 
because  he  was  occasionally  visited  by  the  then  Prince  George 
of  Cambridge.  I  remember  turning  my  pinafore  wrong  side 
forwards  in  order  to  represent  a  surplice,  and  preaching  to  my 
mother's  maids  in  the  kitchen  as  nearly  as  possible  in  Sir  Her- 
bert's manner  one  Sunday  morning  when  the  rest  of  the  family 
were  at  church.  That  is  the  earliest  indication  of  the  strong 
clerical  affinities  which  my  friend  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  has 
always  ascribed  to  me,  though  I  fancy  they  have  for  the  most 
part  remained  in  a  latent  state. 

There  remains  no  record  of  his  having  been  a  very  pre- 
cocious child.  Indeed,  it  is  usually  the  eldest  child  whose 
necessary  companionship  with  his  elders  wins  him  this 
reputation.  The  youngest  remains  a  child  among  children 
longer  than  any  other  of  his  brothers  and  sisters. 

One  talent,  however,  displayed  itself  early.  The  faculty 
of  drawing  he  inherited  from  his  father.  But  on  the  queer 
principle  that  training  is  either  unnecessary  to  natural  ca- 
pacity or  even  ruins  it,  he  never  received  regular  instruction 


6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

into  disgrace  and  he  did  not.  We  made  it  up,  and  thereafter  I 
was  unmolested.  One  of  the  greatest  shocks  I  ever  received  in 
my  life  was  to  be  told  a  dozen  years  afterwards  by  the  groom 
who  brought  me  my  horse  in  a  stable-yard  in  Sydney  that  he 
was  my  quondam  antagonist.  He  had  a  long  story  of  family 
misfortune  to  account  for  his  position;  but  at  that  time  it  was 
necessary  to  deal  very  cautiously  with  mysterious  strangers  in 
New  South  Wales,  and  on  inquiry  I  found  that  the  unfortunate 
young  man  had  not  only  been  ''  sent  out/'  but  had  undergone 
more  than  one  colonial  conviction. 

His  brief  school  career  was  happily  cut  short  by  the 
break  up  of  the  Ealing  establishment.  On  the  death  of 
Dr.  Nicholas,  his  sons  attempted  to  carry  on  the  school ;  but 
the  numbers  declined  rapidly,  and  George  Huxley,  about 
1835,  returned  to  his  native  town  of  Coventry,  where  he 
obtained  the  modest  post  of  manager  of  the  Coventry  sav- 
ings bank,  while  his  daughters  eked  out  the  slender  family 
resources  by  keeping  school. 

In  the  meantime  the  boy  Tom,  as  he  was  usually  called, 
got  little  or  no  regular  instruction.  But  he  had  an  inquiring 
mind,  and  a  singularly  early  turn  for  metaphysical  specula- 
tion. He  read  everything  he  could  lay  hands  on  in  his 
father's  library.  Not  satisfied  with  the  ordinary  length  of 
the  day,  he  used,  when  a  boy  of  twelve,  to  light  his  candle 
before  dawn,  pin  a  blanket  round  his  shoulders,  and  sit  up 
in  bed  to  read  Hutton's  Geology,  He  discussed  all  manner 
of  questions  with  his  parents  and  friends,  for  his  quick  and 
eager  mind  made  it  possible  for  him  to  have  friendships 
with  people  considerably  older  than  himself.  Among  these 
may  especially  be  noted  his  medical  brother-in-law,  Dr. 
Cooke  of  Coventry,  who  had  married  his  sister  Ellen  in 
1839,  ^"d  through  whom  he  early  became  interested  in  hu- 
man anatomy ;  and  George  Anderson  May,  at  that  time  in 
business  at  Hinckley  (a  small  weaving  centre  some  dozen 
miles  distant  from  Coventry),  whom  his  friends  who  knew 
him  afterwards  in  the  home  which  he  made  for  himself  on 
the  farm  at  Elford,  near  Tamworth,  will  remember  for  his 
genial  spirit  and  native  love  of  letters.  There  was  a  real 
friendship  between  the  two.    The  boy  of  fifteen  notes  down 


8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap.  I 

of  diverse  living  constructions,  and  the  modifications  of  similar 
apparatuses  to  serve  diverse  ends.  The  extraordinary  attrac- 
tion I  felt  towards  the  study  of  the  intricacies  of  living  struc- 
ture nearly  proved  fatal  to  me  at  the  outset.  I  was  a  mere  boy 
— I  think  between  thirteen  and  fourteen  years  of  age — when  I 
was  taken  by  some  older  student  friends  of  mine  to  the  first 
post-mortem  examination  I  ever  attended.  All  my  life  I  have 
been  most  unforttmately  sensitive  to  the  disagreeables  which 
attend  anatomical  pursuits,  but  on  this  occasion  my  curiosity 
overpowered  all  other  feelings,  and  I  spent  two  o^  three  hours 
in  gratifying  it.  I  did  not  cut  myself,  and  none  of  the  ordinary 
symptoms  of  dissection-poison  supervened,  but  poisoned  I  was 
somehow,  and  I  remember  sinking  into  a  strange  state  of  apathy. 
By  way  of  a  last  chance,  I  was  sent  to  the  care  of  some  good, 
kind  people,  friends  of  my  father's,  who  lived  in  a  farmhouse 
in  the  heart  of  Warwickshire.  I  remember  staggering  from  my 
bed  to  the  window  on  the  bright  spring  morning  after  my 
arrival,  and  throwing  open  the  casement.  Life  seemed  to  come 
back  on  the  wings  of  the  breeze,  and  to  this  day  the  faint  odour 
of  wood-smoke,  like  that  which  floated  across  the  farmyard  in 
the  early  morning,  is  as  good  to  me  as  the  "  sweet  south  upon  a 
bed  of  violets."  I  soon  recovered,  but  for  years  I  suffered  from 
occasional  paroxysms  of  internal  pain,  and  from  that  time  my 
constant  friend,  hypochondriacal  dyspepsia,  commenced  his  half- 
century  of  co-tenancy  of  my  fleshly  tabernacle. 

Some  little  time  after  his  return  from  the  voyage  of  the 
Rattlesnake,  Huxley  succeeded  in  tracing  his  good  Warwick- 
shire friends  again.  A  letter  of  May  ii,  1852,  from  one 
of  them,  Miss  K.  Jaggard,  tells  how  they  had  lost  sight  of 
the  Huxleys  after  their  departure  from  Coventry ;  how  they 
were  themselves  dispersed  by  deaths  marriage,  or  retire- 
ment ;  and  then  proceeds  to  draw  a  lively  sketch  of  the  long 
delicate-looking  lad,  which  clearly  refers  to  this  period  or 
a  little  later. 

My  brother  and  sister  who  were  living  at  Grove  Fields  when 
you  visited  there,  have  now  retired  from  the  cares  of  business, 
and  are  living  very  comfortably  at  Leamington.  ...  I  suppose 
you  remember  Mr.  Joseph  Russell,  who  used  to  live  at  Avon 
Dassett.  He  is  now  married  and  gone  to  live  at  Grove  Fields, 
so  that  it  is  still  occupied  by  a  person  of  the  same  name  as  when 
you  knew  it.    But  it  is  very  much  altered  in  appearance  since 


lO  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

on  September  29,  1840,  it  is  continued  for  a  couple  of  years, 
and  concludes  with  some  vigorous  annotations  in  1845, 
when  the  little  booklet  emerged  from  a  three  years'  oblivion 
at  the  bottom  of  an  old  desk.  Early  as  this  journal  is,  in  it 
the  boy  displays  three  habits  afterwards  characteristic  of 
the  man:  the  habit  of  noting  down  any  striking  thought 
or  saying  he  came  across  in  the  course  of  his  reading:  of 
speculating  on  the  causes  of  things  and  discussing  the  right 
and  wrong  of  existing  institutions ;  and  of  making  scientific 
experiments,  using  them  to  correct  his  theories. 

The  first  entry,  the  heading,  as  it  were,  and  keynote  of 
all  the  rest,  is  a  quotation  from  Novalis: — ".Philosophy  can 
bake  no  bread ;  but  it  can  prove  for  us  God,  freedom,  and 
immortality.  Which,  now,  is  more  practical,  Philosophy  or 
Economy  ? "  The  reference  here  given  is  to  a  German 
edition  of  Novalis,  so  that  it  seems  highly  probable  that  the 
boy  had  learnt  enough  of  the  language  to  translate  a  bit  for 
himself,  though,  as  appears  from  entries  in  184 1,  he  had 
still  to  master  the  grammar  completely. 

In  science,  he  was  much  interested  in  electricity;  he 
makes  a  galvanic  battery  "  in  view  of  'experiment  to  get 
crystallized  carbon.  Got  it  deposited,  but  not  crystallized.'' 
Other  experiments  and  theorizing  upon  them  are  recorded 
in  the  following  year.  Another  entry  showing  the  courage 
of  youth,  deserves  mention  : — 

"  Oct.  5  (1840). — Began  speculating  on  the  cause  of 
colours  at  sunset.  Has  any  explanation  of  them  ever  been 
attempted  ?  "  which  is  supplemented  by  an  extract  "  from 
old  book." 

We  may  also  remark  the  early  note  of  Radicalism  and 
resistance  to  anything  savouring  of  injustice  or  oppression, 
together  with  the  naive  honesty  of  the  admission  that  his 
opinions  may  change  with  years. 

Oct,  25  (at  Hinckley).— Read  Dr.  S.  Smith  on  the  Divine 
Government. — Agree  with  him  partly. — I  should  say  that  a  gen- 
eral belief  in  his  doctrines  would  have  a  very  injurious  effect  on 
morals. 

Nov,  22. — .  .  .  Had  a  long  talk  with  my  mother  and  father 
about  the  right  to  make  Dissenters  pay  church  rates  —  and 


12  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  I 

4.  To  prepare   for   the   Matriculation   Examination   at 

London  University  which  requires  knowledge  of : — 

(a)  Algebra — Geometry  )  did  not  begin  to  read  for 

(b)  Natural  Philosophy  ]      this  till  April. 

(c)  Chemistry. 

(d)  Greek — Latin. 

(e)  English   History   down   to  end  of  seventeenth 

century. 
(/)  Ancient  History. 
English  Grammar. 

5.  To  make  copious  notes  of  all  things  I  read. 

Projects  completed — 

I.  Partly.    2.  Not  at  all.    3  and  5,  stuck  to  these  pretty 

closely. 
4.    (e)  Read  as  far  as  Henry  HL  in  Hume. 

(a)  Evolution  and  involution. 

(b)  Refraction  of  light — Polarisation  partly. 

(c)  Laws    of    combination — must    read    them    over 

again. 

(d)  Nothing. 
(/)  Nothing. 

I  must  get  on  faster  than  this.  I  must  adopt  a  fixed  plan  of 
studies,  for  unless  this  is  done  I  find  time  slips  away  without 
knowing  it — and  let  me  remember  this — that  it  is  better  to  read 
a  little  and  thoroughly,  than  cram  a  crude  undigested  mass  into 
my  head,  though  it  be  great  in  quantity. 

(This  is  about  the  only  resolution  I  have  ever  stuck  to^ 

1845). 

[Well  do  I  remember  how  in  that  little  narrow  surgery  I 

used  to  work  morning  after  morning  and  evening  after  evening 
at  that  insufferably  dry  and  profitless  book,  Hume's  History, 
how  I  worked  against  hope  through  the  series  of  thefts,  rob- 
beries, and  throat-cutting  in  those  three  first  volumes,  and  how 
at  length  I  gave  up  the  task  in  utter  disgust  and  despair. 

Mackintosh's  History^  on  the  other  hand,  I  remember  reading 
with  great  pleasure,  and  also  Guizot's  Civilisation  in  Europe,  the 
scientific  theoretical  form  of  the  latter  especially  pleased  me,  but 
the  want  of  sufficient  knowledge  to  test  his  conclusions  was  a 
great  drawback.     1845]. 

There  follow  notes  of  work  done  in  successive  weeks — 
June  20  to  August  9,  and  September  2y  to  October  4. 


14  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  i 

Under  the  head  of  objective  knowledge  comes  first  Physics, 
including  the  whole  body  of  the  relations  of  inanimate  unorgan- 
ised bodies;  secondly,  Physiology.  Including  the  structure  and 
functions  of  animal  bodies,  including  language  and  Psychology ; 
thirdly  conies  History. 

One  object  for  which  I  have  attempted  to  form  an  arrange- 
ment of  knowledge  is  that  I  may  test  the  amount  of  my  own 
acquirements.  I  shall  form  an  extensive  list  of  subjects  on  this 
plan,  and  as  I  acquire  any  one  of  them  I  shall  strike  it  out  of  the 
list.  May  the  list  soon  get  black !  though  at  present  I  shall 
hardly  be  able,  I  am  afraid,  to  spot  the  paper. 

(A  prophecy !  a  prophecy,  1845  •)• 

April  1842  introduces  a  number  of  quotations,  from 
Carlyle's  Miscellaneous  Writings,  "  Characteristics,"  some 
clear  and  crisp,  others  sinking  into  Carlyle's  own  vein  of 
speculative  mysticism,  eg. 

In  the  mind  as  in  the  body  the  sign  of  health  is  uncon- 


"  111     UJ 

ft 


sciousness. 

ti 


Of  our  thinking  it  is  but  the  upper  surface  that  we  shape 
into  articulate  thought;  underneath  the  region  of  argument  and 
conscious  discourse  lies  the  region  of  meditation." 

"  Genius  is  ever  a  secret  to  itself." 

"  The  healthy  understanding,  we  should  say,  is  neither  the 
argumentative  nor  the  Logical,  but  the  Intuitive,  for  the  end  of 
understanding  is  not  to  prove  and  find  reasons  but  to  know  and 
believe  "(!) 

"  The  ages  of  heroism  are  not  ages  of  Moral  Philosophy. 
Virtue,  when  it  is  philosophised  of,  has  become  aware  of  itself, 
is  sickly  and  beginning  to  decline." 

At  the  same  time  more  electrical  experiments  are  re- 
corded ;  and  theories  are  advanced  with  pros  and  cons  to 
account  for  the  facts  observed. 

The  last  entry  was  made  three  years  later — 

Oct.  1845. — I  have  found  singular  pleasure — ^having  acci- 
dentally raked  this  Biichlein  from  a  corner  of  my  desk — in  look- 
ing over  these  scraps  of  notices  of  my  past  existence ;  an  illus- 
tration of  J.  Paul's  saying  that  a  man  has  but  to  write  down  his 
yesterday's  doings,  and  forthwith  they  appear  surrounded  with 
a  poetic  halo. 

But  after  all,  these  are  but  the  top  skimmings  of  these  five 


1845  EARLY  JOURNAL  1 5 

years'  living.  I  hardly  care  to  look  back  into  the  seething 
depths  of  the  working  and  boiling  mass  that  lay  beneath  all  this 
froth,  and  indeed  I  hardly  know  whether  I  could  give  myself 
any  clear  accotmt  of  it.  Remembrances  of  physical  and  mental 
pain  .  .  .  absence  of  sympathy,  and  thence  a  choking  up  of 
such  few  ideas  as  I  did  form  clearly  within  my  own  mind. 

Grief  too,  yet  at  the  misfortune  of  others,  for  I  have  had  few 
properly  my  own;  so  much  the  worse,  for  in  that  case  I  might 
have  said  or  done  somewhat,  but  here  was  powerless. 

Oh,  Tom,  trouble  not  thyself  about  sympathy ;  thou  hast  two 
stout  legs  and  young,  wherefore  need  a  staff? 

Furthermore,  it  is  twenty  minutes  past  two,  and  time  to  go 
to  bed. 

Btichlein,  it  will  be  long  before  my  secretiveness  remains  so 
quiet  again ;  make  the  most  of  what  thou  hast  got. 


CHAPTER   II 

1841-1846 

The  migration  to  Rotherhithe,  noted  under  date  of  Janu- 
ary 9,  1841,  was  a  fresh  step  in  his  career.  In  1839  both  his 
sisters  married,  and  both  married  doctors.  Dr.  Cooke,  the 
husband  of  the  elder  sister,  who  was  settled  in  Coventry, 
had  begun  to  give  him  some  instruction  in  the  principles 
of  medicine  as  early  as  the  preceding  June.  It  was  now 
arranged  that  he  should  go  as  assistant  to  Mr.  Chandler,  of 
Rotherhithe,  a  practical  preliminary  to  walking  the  hospitals 
and  obtaining  a  medical  degree  in  London.  His  experi- 
ences among  the  poor  in  the  dock  region  of  the  East  of 
London — for  Dr.  Chandler  had  charge  of  the  parish- — sup- 
plied him  with  a  grim  commentary  on  his  diligent  reading 
in  Carlyle.    Looking  back  on  this  period,  he  writes: — 

The  last  recorded  speech  of  Professor  Teufelsdrockh  pro- 
poses the  toast  '  Die  Sache  der  Armen  in  Gottes  und  Teufels- 

namen'  (The  cause  of  the  Poor  in  Heaven's  name  and *s.) 

The  cause  of  the  Poor  is  the  burden  of  Past  and  Present,  Chart- 
ism, and  Latter-Day  Pamphlets.  To  me  .  .  .  this  advocacy  of 
the  cause  of  the  poor  appealed  very  strongly  .  .  .  because  .  .  . 
I  had  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  for  myself  something  of 
the  way  the  poor  live.  Not  much,  indeed,  but  still  enough  to 
give  a  terrible  foundation  of  real  knowledge  to  my  speculations. 

After  telling  how  he  came  to  know  something  of  the 
East  End,  he  proceeds : — 

I  saw  strange  things  there — among  the  rest,  people  who 
came  to  me  for  medical  aid,  and  who  were  really  suffering  from 
nothing  but  slow  starvation.     I  have  not  forgotten — am  not 
16 


l8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  n 

pacity  should  be  caught  and  led  to  a  position  where  it  might 
be  useful  instead  of  dangerous  to  social  order. 

After  some  time,  however,  he  left  Mr.  Chandler  to  join 
his  second  brother-in-law,*  who  had  set  up  in  the  north  of 
London,  and  to  whom  he  was  duly  apprenticed,  as  his 
brother  James  had  been  before  him.  This  change  gave  him 
more  time  and  opportunity  to  pursue  his  medical  education. 
He  attended  lectures  at  the  Sydenham  College,  and,  as  has 
been  seen,  began  to  prepare  for  the  tpatriculation  examina- 
tion of  the  University  of  London.  At  the  Sydenham  Col- 
lege he  met  with  no  little  success,  winning,  besides  certifi- 
cates of  merit  in  other  departments,  a  prize — his  first  prize 
— for  botany.  His  vivid  recollections,  given  below,  of  this 
entry  into  the  scientific  arena  are  taken  from  a  journal  he 
kept  for  his  fiancee  during  his  absence  from  Sydney  on  the 
cruises  of  the  Rattlesnake, 

On  Board  H.M.S.  Rattlesnake,  Christmas  1847. 

Next  summer  it  will  be  six  years  since  I  made  my  first  trial 
in  the  world.  My  first  public  competition,  small  as  it  was,  was 
an  epoch  in  my  life.  I  had  been  attending  (it  was  my  first  sum- 
mer session)  the  botanical  lectures  at  Chelsea.  One  morning  I 
observed  a  notice  stuck  up — a  notice  of  a  public  competition  for 
medals,  etc.,  to  take  place  on  the  ist  August  (if  I  recollect  right). 
It  was  then  the  end  of  May  or  thereabouts.  I  remember  looking 
longingly  at  the  notice,  and  some  one  said  to  me,  "  Why  don't 
you  go  in  and  try  for  it  ?  "  I  laughed  at  the  idea,  for  I  was  very 
young,  and  my  knowledge  somewhat  of  the  vaguest.  Neverthe- 
less I  mentioned  the  matter  to  S.f  when  I  returned  home.  He 
likewise  advised  me  to  try,  and  so  I  determined  I  would.  I  set 
to  work  in  earnest,  and  perse veringly  applied  myself  to  such 
works  as  I  could  lay  my  hands  on,  Lindley's  and  Decandolle's 
Systems  and  the  Annates  des  Sciences  Naturelles  in  the  British 
Museum.  I  tried  to  read  Schleiden,  but  my  German  was  insuf- 
ficient. 

For  a  young  hand  I  worked  really  hard  from  eight  or  nine 
in  the  morning  until  twelve  at  night,  besides  a  long  hot  sum- 
mer's walk  over  to  Chelsea  two  or  three  times  a  week  to  hear 
Lindley.    A  gjeat  part  of  the  time  I  worked  till  sunrise.    The 


♦  John  Godwin  Scott.  f  His  brother-in-law. 


20  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  il 

I  knew  too  well  my  own  deficiencies  to  have  been  either  sur- 
prised or  disappointed  at  failure,  and  L  made  a  point  of  shatter- 
ing all  involuntary  "  castles  in  the  air  "  as  soon  as  possible.  My 
worst  anticipations  were  realised.  One  day  S.  came  to  me  with 
a  sorrowful  expression  of  countenance.  He  had  inquired  of  the 
Beadle  as  to  the  decision,  and  ascertained  on  the  latter's  au- 
thorit}'  that  all  the  successful  candidates  were  University  Col- 
lege men,  whereby,  of  course,  I  was  excluded.  I  said,  "  Very 
well,  the  thing  was  not  to  be  helped,"  put  my  best  face  upon  the 
matter,  and  gave  up  all  thoughts  of  it.  Lizzie,  too,  came  to  com- 
fort me,  and,  I  believe,  felt  it  more  than  I  did.  What  was  my 
surprise  on  returning  home  one  afternoon  to  find  myself  sud- 
denly seized,  and  the  whole  female  household  vehemently  insist- 
ing on  kissing  me.  It  appeared  an  official-looking  letter  had 
arrived  for  me,  and  Lizzie,  as  I  did  not  appear,  could  not  re- 
strain herself  from  opening  it.  I  was  second,  and  was  to  re- 
ceive a  medal  ♦  accordingly,  and  dirie  with  the  guild  on  the  9th 
November  to  have  it  bestowed. 

I  dined  with  the  company,  and  bore  my  share  in  both  pud- 
ding and  praise,  but  the  charm  of  success  lay  in  Lizzie's  warm 
congratulation  and  sympathy.  Since  then  she  always  took  upon 
herself  to  prophesy  touching  the  future  fortunes  of  "  the  boy." 

The  haphazard,  unsystematic  nature  of  preliminary 
medical  study  here  presented  can  not  fail  to  strike  one  with 
wonder.  Thomas  Huxley  was  now  seventeen;  he. had  al- 
ready had  two  years'  "  practice  in  pharmacy  "  as  a  testi- 
monial put  it.  After  a  similar  apprenticeship,  his  brother 
had  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  director  of  the  Gloucester 
Lunatic  Asylum,  and  was  given  by  him  the  post  of  dispenser 
or  "  apothecary,"  which  he  filled  so  satisfactorily  as  to  re- 
ceive a  promise  that  if  he  went  to  London  for  a  couple  of 
years  to  complete  his  medical  training,  a  substitute  should 

♦  Silver  Medal  of  the  Apothecaries*  Society,  gth    November  1842. 
Another  botanical  prize  is  a  book — La  Botaniqtu^  by  A.  Richard — with' 
the  following  inscription  : — 

Thomae  Huxley 

In  Exercitatione  Hotanices 

Apud  Scholam  Collegii  Sydenhamiensis 

Optime  Merenti 

Hunc  librum  dono  dedit 

RiCARDUS  D.  HoBLYN,  Botanices  Professor. 


22  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  Ii 

Looking  back  (he  says)  on  my  "  Lehrjahre,"  I  am  sorry  to 
say  that  I  do  not  think  that  any  account  of  my  doings  as  a 
student  would  tend  to  edification.  In  fact,  I  should  distinctly 
warn  ingenuous  youth  to  avoid  imitating  my  example.  I  worked 
extremely  hard  when  it  pleased  me,  and  when  it  did  not,  which 
was  a  very  frequent  case,  I  was  extremely  idle  (unless  making 
caricatures  of  one's  pastors  and  masters  is  to  be  called  a  branch 
of  industry),  or  else  wasted  my  energies  in  wrong  directions.  I 
read  everything  I  could  lay  hands  upon,  including  novels,  and 
took  up  all  sorts  of  pursuits  to  drop  them  again  quite  as  speedily. 
No  doubt  it  was  very  largely  my  own  fault,  but  the  only  in- 
struction from  which  I  obtained  the  proper  effect  of  education 
was  that  which  I  received  from  Mr.  Wharton  Jones,  who  was 
the  lecturer  on  physiology  at  the  Charing  Cross  School  of  Medi- 
cine. The  extent  and  precision  of  his  knowledge  impressed 
me  greatly,  and  the  severe  exactness  of  his  method  of  lecturing 
was  quite  to  my  taste.  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  ever  felt  so 
much  respect  for  anybody  as  a  teacher  before  or  since.  I 
worked  hard  to  obtain  his  approbation,  and  he  was  extremely 
kind  and  helpful  to  the  youngster  who,  I  am  afraid,  took  up 
more  of  his  time  than  he  had  any  right  to  do.  It  was  he  who 
suggested  the  publication  of  my  first  scientific  paper — a  very 
little  one — in  the  Medical  Gazette  of  1845,  *^"^  most  kindly  cor- 
rected the  literary  faults  which  abounded  in  it,  short  as  it  was; 
for  at  that  time,  and  for  many  years  afterwards,  I  detested  the 
trouble  of  writing,  and  would  take  no  pains  with  it. 

He  never  forgot  his  debt  to  Wharton  Jones,  and  years 
afterwards  was  delighted  at  being  able  to  do  him  a  good 
turn,  by  helping  to  obtain  a  pension  for  him.  But  although 
in  retrospect  he  condemns  the  fitfulness  of  his  energies  and 
his  want  of  system,  which  left  much  to  be  learned  afterwards, 
which  might  with  advantage  have  been  learned  then,  still  it 
was  his  energy  that  struck  his  contemporaries.  I  have  a 
story  from  one  of  them  that  when  the  other  students  used 
to  go  out  into  the  court  of  the  hospital  after  lectures  were 
over,  they  would  invariably  catch  sight  of  young  Huxley's 
dark  head  at  a  certain  window  bent  over  a  microscope  while 
thev  amused  themselves  outside.  The  constant  silhouette 
framed  in  the  outlines  of  the  window  tickled  the  fancy  of 
the  young  fellows,  and  a  wag  amongst  them  dubbed  it  with 
a  name  that  stuck,  **  The  Sign  of  the  Head  and  Microscope." 


24  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  u 

a  letter,  drew  a  plan,  enclosed  the  two  in  an  envelope,  and 
tremblingly  bet6ok  myself  on  the  following  afternoon  to  the 
Royal  Institution. 

"  Is  Dr.  Faraday  here?  "  said  I  to  the  porter.  "  No  sir,  he 
has  just  gone  out"  I  felt  relieved.  "  Be  good  enough  to  give 
him  this  letter,"  and  I  was  hurrying  out  when  a  little  man  in  a 
brown  coat  came  in  at  the  glass  door.  "  Here  is  Dr.  Faraday," 
said  the  man,  and  gave  him  my  letter.  He  turned  to  me  and 
courteously  inquired  what  I  wished.  "  To  submit  to  you  that 
letter,  sir,  if  you  are  not  occupied."  "  My  time  is  always  occu- 
pied, sir,  but  step  this  way,"  and  he  led  me  into  the  museum  or 
library,  for  I  forget  which  it  was,  only  I  know  there  was  a  glass 
case  against  which  we  leant.  He  read  my  letter,  did  not  think 
my  plan  would  answer.  Was  I  acquainted  with  mechanism, 
what  we  call  the  laws  of  motion?  I  saw  all  was  up  with  my 
poor  scheme,  so  after  trying  a  little  to  explain,  in  the  course  of 
which  I  certainly  failed  in  giving  him  a  clear  idea  of  what  I 
would  be  at,  I  thanked  him  for  his  attention,  and  went  off  as 
dissatisfied  as  ever.  The  sense  of  one  part  of  the  conversation 
I  well  recollect.  He  said  "  that  were  the  perpetual  motion  pos- 
sible, it  would  have  occurred  spontaneously  in  nature,  and  would 
have  overpowered  all  other  forces,"  or  words  to  that  effect.  I 
did  not  see  the  force  of  this,  but  did  not  feel  competent  enough 
to  discuss  the  question. 

However,  all  this  exorcised  my  devil,  and  he  has  rarely  come 
to  trouble  me  since.  Some  future  day,  perhaps,  I  may  be  able  to 
call  Faraday's  attention  more  decidedly.  Perge  modo !  "  wie  das 
Gestirn,  ohne  Hast,  ohne  Rast "  (Das  Gestirn  in  a  midshipman's 
berth!). 

In  other  respects  also  his  student's  career  was  a  brilliant 
one.  In  1843  he  won  the  first  chemical  prize,  the  certificate 
stating  that  his  "  extraordinary  diligence  and  success  in  the 
pursuit  of  this  branch  of  science  do  him  infinite  honour." 
At  the  same  time,  he  also  won  the  first  prize  in  the  class  of 
anatomy  and  physiology.  On  the  back  of  Wharton  Jones' 
certificate  is  scribbled  in  pencil :  "  Well,  'tis  no  matter. 
Honour  pricks  me  on.  Yea,  but  how  if  honour  prick  me 
off  when  I  come  on  ?    How  then  ?  " 

Finally,  in  1845  he  went  up  for  his  M.B.  at  London 
University,  and  won  a  gold  medal  for  anatomy  and  physi- 
ology, being  second  in  honours  in  that  section. 


26  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  II 

either  the  first  time  I  attended  him,  as  it  was  my  duty  to  do,  or 
for  some  weeks  afterwards.  I  am  afraid  to  think  of  the  lengths 
to  which  my  tongue  may  have  run  on  the  subject  of  the  churl- 
ishness of  the  chief,  who  was,  in  truth,  one  of  the  kindest- 
hearted  and  most  considerate  of  men.  But  one  day,  as  I  was 
crossing  the  hospital  square,  Sir  John  stopped  me  and  heaped 
coals  of  fire  on  my  head  by  telling  me  that  he  had  tried  to  get 
me  one  of  the  resident  appointments,  much  coveted  by  the  assist- 
ant-surgeons, but  that  Uie  Admiralty  had  put  in  another  man. 
"  However,"  said  he,  "  I  mean  to  keep  you  here  till  I  can  get 
you  something  you  will  like,"  and  turned  upon  his  heel  without 
waiting  for  the  thanks  I  stammered  out  That  explained  how  it 
was  I  had  not  been  packed  off  to  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  like 
some  of  my  juniors,  and  why,  eventually,  I  remained  altogether 
seven  months  at  Haslar. 

After  a  long  interval,  during  which  "  Old  John  "  ignored  my 
existence  almost  as  completely  as  before,  he  stopped  me  again  as 
we  met  in  a  casual  way,  and  describing  the  service  on  which  the 
Rattlesnake  was  likely  to  be  employed,  said  that  Captain  Owen 
Stanley,  who  was  to  command  the  ship,  had  asked  him  to  recom- 
mend an  assistant  surgeon  who  knew  something  of  science; 
would  I  like  that?  Of  course  I  jumped  at  the  offer.  "Very 
well,  I  give  you  leave;  go  to  London  at  once  and  see  Captain 
Stanley."  I  went,  saw  my  future  commander,  who  was  very 
civil  to  me,  and  promised  to  ask  that  I  should  be  appointed  to 
his  ship,  as  in  due  time  I  was.  It  is  a  singular  thing  that  during 
the  few  months  of  my  stay  at  Haslar  I  had  among  my  mess- 
mates two  future  Directors-General  of  the  Medical  Service  of 
the  Navy  (Sir  Alexander  Armstrong  and  Sir  John  Watt-Reid), 
with  the  present  President  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  and 
my  kindest  of  doctors.  Sir  Andrew  Clark. 

A  letter  to  his  eldest  sister,  Lizzie,  dated  from  Haslar 
May  24,  1846,  shows  how  he  regarded  the  prospect  now 
opening  before  him. 

...  As  I  see  no  special  queries  in  your  letter,  I  think  I  shall 
go  on  to  tell  you  what  that  same  way  of  life  is  likely  to  be — my 
fortune  having  already  been  told  for  me  (for  the  next  five  years 
at  least).  I  told  you  in  my  last  that  I  was  likely  to  have  a  perma- 
nency here.  Well,  I  was  recommended  by  Sir  John  Richardson, 
and  should  have  certainly  ha$i  it,  had  not  (luckily)  the  Ad- 
miralty put  in  a  man  of  their  own.    Having  a  good  impudent 


28  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CHAP.  II 

was  delighted  when  I  told  him  about  my  appointment.  Dim 
visions  of  strangely  formed  corpuscles  seemed  to  cross  his  imagi- 
nation like  the  ghosts  of  the  kings  in  Macbeth. 

What  seems  his  head 
The  likeness  of  a  nucleated  cell  has  on. 

« 

The  law's  delays  are  proverbial,  but  on  this  occasion,  as 
on  the  return  of  the  Rattlesnake,  the  Admiralty  seem  to 
have  been  almost  as  proyoking  to  the  eaget  young  surgeon 
as  any  lawyer  could  have  been.  The  appointment  was 
promised  in  May;  it  was  not  made  till  October.  On  the 
6th  of  that  month  there  is  another  letter  to  his  sister,  giving 
fuller  particulars  of  his  prospects  on  the  voyage : — 

My  dearest  Lizzie — ^At  last  I  have  really  got  my  appoint- 
ment and  joined  my  ship.  I  was  so  completely  disgusted  with 
the  many  delays  that  had  occurred  that  I  made  up  my  mind  not 
to  write  to  anybody  again  until  I  had  my  commission  in  my 
hand.  Henceforward,  like  another  Jonah,  my  dwelling-place 
will  be  the  "  inwards  "  of  the  Rattlesnake,  and  upon  the  whole 
I  really  doubt  whether  Jonah  was  much  worse  accommodated,  so 
far  as  room  goes,  than  myself.  My  total  length,  as  you  are  aware, 
is  considerable,  5  feet  11  inches,  possibly,  but  the  height  of  the 
lower  deck  of  the  Rattlesnake,  which  will  be  my  especial  loca- 
tion, is  at  the  outside  4  feet  10  inches.  What  I  am  to  do  with 
the  superfluous  foot  I  cannot  divine.  Happily,  however,  there 
is  a  sort  of  skylight  into  the  berth,  so  that  I  shall  be  able  to  sit 
with  the  body  in  it  and  my  head  out. 

Apart  from  joking,  however,  this  is  not  such  a  great  matter, 
and  it  is  the  only  thing  I  would  see  altered  in  the  whole  affair. 
The  officers,  as  far  as  I  have  seen  them,  are  a  very  gentlemanly, 
excellent  set  of  men,  and  considering  we  are  to  be  together  for 
four  or  five  years,  that  is  a  matter  of  no  small  importance.  I 
am  not  given  to  be  anguine,  but  I  confess  I  expect  a  good  deal 
to  arise  out  of  this  appointment.  In  the  first  place,  surveying 
ships  are  totally  different  from  the  ordinary  run  of  men-of-war. 
The  requisite  discipline  is  kept  up,  but  not  in  the  martinet  style. 
Less  form  is  observed.  From  the  men  who  are  appointed  hav- 
ing more  or  less  scientific  turns,  they  have  more  respect  for 
one  another  than  that  g^ven  by  mere  position  in  the  service, 
and  hence  that  position  is  less  taken  advantage  of.  They  are 
brought  more  into  contact,  and  hence  those  engaged  in  the  sur- 
veying service  almost  proverbially  stick  by  one  another.    To 


30  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ir 

apologise.  Kind  regards  to  the  Doctor  and  kisses  to  the  babbies. 
Write  me  a  long  letter  all  about  yourselves. — Your  aflPect. 
brother,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

One  more  description  to  complete  the  sketch  of  his 
quarters  on  board  the  Rattlesnake.  It  is  from  a  letter  to 
his  mother,  written  at  Plymouth,  where  the  Rattlesnake  put 
in  after  leaving  Portsmouth.  The  comparison  with  the  ordi- 
nary quarters  of  an  assistant-surgeon,  and  the  shifts  to  which 
a  sttidious  man  might  be  put  in  his  endeavour  to  find  a  quiet 
spot  to  work  in,  have  a  flavour  of  Mr.  Midshipman  Easy 
about  them  to  relieve  the  deplorable  reality  of  his  situation : — 

You  will  be  very  glad  to  know  that  I  am  exceedingly  com- 
fortable here.  My  cabin  has  now  got  into  tolerable  order,  and 
what  with  my  books — which  are,  I  am  happy  to  say,  not  a  few 
— my  gay  curtain  and  the  spicy  oilcloth  which  will  be  down  on 
the  floor,  looks  most  respectable.  Furthermore,  although  it  is 
an  unquestionably  dull  day  I  have  suflicient  light  to  write  here, 
without  the  least  trouble,  to  read,  or  even  if  necessary,  to  use 
my  microscope.  I  went  to  see  a  friend  of  mine  on  board  the 
Recruit  the  other  day,  and  truly  I  hugged  myself  when  I  com- 
pared my  position  with  his.  The  berth  where  he  and  seven 
others  eat  their  daily  bread  is  hardly  bigger  than  my  cabin,  ex- 
cept in  height — and,  of  course,  he  has  to  sleep  in  a  hammock. 
My  friend  is  rather  an  eccentric  character,  and,  being  missed 
in  the  ship,  was  discovered  the  other  day  reading  in  the  main- 
top— the  only  place,  as  he  said,  sufficiently  retired  for  study. 
And  this  is  really  no  exaggeration.  If  I  had  no  cabin  I  should 
take  to  drinking  in  a  month. 

It  was  during  this  period  of  waiting  that  he  attended  his 
first  meeting  of  the  British  Association,  which  was  held  in 
1846  at  Southampton.  Here  he  obtained  from  Professor 
Edward  Forbes  one  of  his  living  specimens  of  Amphioxns 
lanceolatus,  and  made  an  examination  of  its  blood.  The 
result  was  a  short  paper  read  at  the  following  meeting  of 
the  Association,*  which  showed  that  in  the  composition  of 
its  blood  this  lowly  vertebrate  approached  very  near  the 
invertebrates. 

*  **  Examination  of  the  Corpuscles  of  the  Blood  of  Amphioxus  lan- 
QeoUtus,"  British  Assmation  /import,  184]^,  ii,  p.  95,  ^pd  ^'.  Mfmmri,  U 


,  CHAPTER    III 

1846-1849 

It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that,  like  two  other  leaders  of 
science,  Charles  Darwin  and  Joseph  Dalton  Hooker,  their 
close  friend  Huxley  began  his  scientific  career  on  board  one 
of  Her  Majesty's  ships.  He  was,  however,  to  learn  how 
little  the  British  Government  of  that  day,  for  all  its.  pro- 
fessions, really  cared  for  the  advancement  of  knowledge.* 
But  of  the  immense  value  to  himself  of  these  years  of  hard 
training,  the  discipline,  the  knowledge  of  men  and  of  the 
capabilities  of  life,  even  without  more  than  the  barest  ne- 
cessities of  existence — of  this  he  often  spoke.  As  he  puts 
it  in  his  Autobiography : — 

Life  on  board  Her  Majesty's  ships  in  those  days  was  a  very 
different  affair  from  what  it  is  now,  and  ours  was  exceptionally 
rough,  as  we  were  often  many  months  without  receiving  letters 
or  seeing  any  civilised  people  but  ourselves.  In  exchange,  we 
had  the  interest  of  being  about  the  last  voyagers,  I  suppose,  to 
whom  it  could  be  possible  to  meet  with  people  who  knew  noth- 

*  The  key  to  this  attitude  on  the  part  of  the  Admiralty  is  to  be 
found  in  the  scathing  description  in  Briggs*  Naval  AdministraHon  from 
tSaj  tc  tSg2,  p.  92,  of  the  ruinous  parsimony  of  either  political  party  at 
this  time  with  regard  to  the  navy — a  policy  the  results  of  which  were 
only  too  apparent  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Crimean  War.  I  quote  a 
couple  of  sentences,  **  The  navy  estimates  were  framed  upon  the  lowest 
scale,  and  reduction  pushed  to  the  very  verge  of  danger.**  *'  Even 
from  a  financial  point  of  view  the  course  pursued  was  the  reverse  of 
economical,  and  ultimately  led  to  wasteful  and  increased  expenditure." 
Thus  the  liberal  professions  of  the  Admiralty  were  not  fulfilled ;  its 
goodwill  gave  the  young  surgeon  three  and  a  half  years  of  leave  froiq 
active  service ;  with  an  obdurate  Treasury,  it  could  do  no  more. 

3» 


3^ 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  hi 


ing  of  firearms — as  we  did  on  the  south  coast  of  New  Guinea 
—and  of  making  acquaintance  with  a  variety  of  interesting 
savage  and  semi-civilised  people.  But,  apart  from  experience  of 
this  kind  and  the  opportunities  offered  for  scientific  work,  to  me, 
personally,  the  cruise  was  extremely  valuable.  It  was  good  for 
me  to  live  under  sharp  discipline;  to  be  down  on  the  realities 
of  existence  by  living  on  bare  necessaries :  to  find  how  extremely 
well  worth  living  life  seemed  to  be  when  one  woke  up  from  a 
night's  rest  on  a  soft  plank,  with  the  sky  for  canopy,  and  cocoa 
and  weevilly  biscuit  the  sole  prospect  for  breakfast;  and,  more 
especially,  to  learn  to  work  for  the  sake  of  what  I  got  for  myself 
out  of  it,  even  if  it  all  went  to  the  bottom  and  I  along  with  it. 
My  brother  officers  were  as  good  fellows  as  sailors  ought  to  be 
and  generally  are,  but,  naturally,  they  neither  knew  nor  cared 
anything  about  my  pursuits,  nor  understood  why  I  should  be  so 
zealous  in  pursuit  of  the  objects  which  my  friends,  the  middies, 
christened  "  Buffons,"  after  the  title  conspicuous  on  a  volume 
of  the  Suites  d  Buffon,  which  stood  on  my  shelf  in  the  chart- 
room. 

On  the  whole,  life  among  the  company  of  officers  was 
satisfactory  enough.*  Huxley's  immediate  superior,  John 
Thompson,  was  a  man  of  sterling  worth ;  and  Captain  Stan- 
ley was  an  excellent  commander,  and  sympathetic  withal. 
Among  Huxley^s  messmates  there  was  only  one,  the  ship's 
clerk,  who  ever  made  himself  actively  disagreeable,  and  a 
quarrel  with  him  only  served  to  bring  into  relief  the  young 
surgeon's  integrity  and  directness  of  action.  After  some 
dispute,  in  which  he  had  been  worsted,  this  gentleman 
sought  to  avenge  himself  by  dropping  mysterious  hints  as 
to  Huxley's  conduct  before  joining  the  ship.  He  had  been 
treasurer  of  his  mess;  there  had  been  trouble  about  the 
accounts,  and  a  scandal  had  barely  been  averted.  This  was 
not  long  in  coming  to  Huxley's  ears.  Furiously  indignant 
as  he  was,  he  did  not  lose  his  self-control;  but  promptly 

*  The  Assistant-Surgeon  messed  in  the  gun-room  with  the  middies. 
A  man  in  the  midst  of  a  lot  of  boys,  wkh  hardly  any  grown-up  com- 
panions, often  has  a  rather  unenviable  position ;  but,  says  Captain 
Heath,  who  was  one  of  these  middies,  Huxley *s  constant  good  spirits 
and  fun,  when  he  was  not  absorbed  in  his  work, -his  freedom  from  any 
assumption  of  superiority  over  them,  made  the  boys  his  good  comrades 
and  allies. 


34 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  hi 


We  ha\c  come  in  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  some  trifling 
repairs,  which,  though  not  essential  to  the  safety  of  the  ship, 
will  nevertheless  naturally  enhance  the  comfort  of  its  inmates. 
This  you  will  understand  when  I  tell  you  that  in  consequence 
of  these  same  defects  I  have  had  water  an  inch  or  two  deep  in 
my  cabin,  wish-washing  about  ever  since  we  left  Madeira. 

We  crossed  the  line  on  the  13th  of  this  month,  and  as  one 
of  the  uninitiated  I  went  through  the  usual  tomfoolery  prac- 
tised on  that  occasion.  The  affair  has  been  too  often  described 
for  me  to  say  anything  about  it.  I  had  the  good  luck  to  be 
ducked  and  shaved  early,  and  of  course  took  particular  care 
to  do  my  best  in  serving  out  the  unhappy  beggars  who  had  to 
follow.  I  enjoyed  the  fun  well  enough  at  the  time,  but  unques- 
tionably it  is  on  all  grounds  a  most  pernicious  custom.  It 
swelled  our  sick  list  to  double  the  usual  amount,  and  one  poor 
fellow,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  died  of  the  effects  of  pleurisy  then 
contracted. 

We  have  been  quite  long  enough  at  sea  now  to  enable  me  to 
judge  how  I  shall  get  on  in  the  ship,  and  to  form  a  very  clear 
idea  of  how  it  fits  me  and  how  I  fit  it.  In  the  first  place  I  am 
exceedingly  well  and  exceedingly  contented  with  my  lot.  My 
opinion  of  the  advantages  lying  open  to  me  increases  rather  than 
otherwise  as  I  see  my  way  about  me.  I  am  on  capital  terms 
with  all  the  superior  officers,  and  I  find  them  ready  to  give  me 
all  facilities.  I  have  a  place  for  my  books  and  microscope  in 
the  chart  room,  and  there  I  sit  and  read  in  the  morning  much 
as  though  I  were  in  my  rooms  in  Agar  Street.  My  immediate 
superior,  Johnny  Thompson,  is  a  long-headed  good  fellow  with- 
out a  morsel  of  humbug  about  him — a  man  whom  I  thoroughly 
respect,  both  morally  and  intellectually.  I  think  it  will  be  my 
fault  if  we  are  not  fast  friends  through  the  commission.  One 
friend  on  board  a  ship  is  as  much  as  anybody  has  a  right  to 
expect. 

It  is  just  the  interval  between  the  sea  and  the  land  breezes, 
the  sea  like  glass,  and  not  a  breath  stirring.  I  shall  become 
soup  if  I  do  not  go  on  deck.  Temp,  in  sun  at  noon  86  in  shade, 
139  in  sun.  N.B. — It  has  been  up  to  89  in  shade,  139  in  sun 
since  this. 

March  28. — I  see  I  concluded  with  a  statement  of  temp. 
Since  then  it  has  been  considerably  better — 140  in  sun ;  however, 
in  the  shade  it  rarely  rises  above  86  or  so,  and  when  the  sea  or 
land  breezes  are  blowing  this  is  rather  pleasant  than  otherwise. 

I  have  been  ashore  two  or  three  times.     The  town  is  like 


36  LIF£  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  m 

In  my  last  letter  I  think  I  mentioned  to  you  that  I. had 
worked  out  and  sent  home  to  the  President  of  the  Linnxan  Soc, 
through  Capt.  Stanley,  an  account  of  Physalia,  or  Portuguese 
man-of-war  as  it  is  called,  an  animal  whose  structure  and  affini- 
ties had  never  been  properly  worked  out.  The  careful  investi- 
gation I  made  gave  rise  to  several  new  ideas  covering  the  whole 
class  of  animals  to  which  this  creature  belongs,  and  these  ideas 
I  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  have  had  many  opportunities  of 
working  out  in  the  course  of  our  subsequent  wanderings,  so  that 
I  am  provided  with  materials  for  a  second  paper  far  more  con- 
siderable in  extent,  and  embracing  an  altogether  wider  field. 
This  second  paper  is  now  partly  in  esse-r-thsLt  is,  written  out — 
and  partly  in  posse — that  is,  in  my  head;  but  I  shall  send  it 
before  leaving.  Its  title  will  be  "  Observations  upon  the  Anato- 
my of  the  Diphydse,  and  upon  the  Unity  of  Organisation  of  the 
Diphydae  and  Physophoridse,"  and  it  will  have  lots  of  figures 
to  illustrate  it.  Now  when  we  return  from  the  north  I  hope  to 
have  collected  materials  for  a  much  bigger  paper  than  either  of 
these,  and  to  which  they  will  serve  as  steps.  If  my  present 
anticipations  turn  out  correct,  this  paper  will  achieve  one  of  the 
great  ends  of  Zoology  and  Anatomy,  viz.  the  reduction  of  two 
or  three  apparently  widely  separated  and  incongruous  groups 
into  modifications  of  the  single  type,  every  step  of  the  reasoning 
being  based  upon  anatomical  facts.  There  I  Think  yourself 
lucky  you  have  only  got  that  to  read  instead  of  the  slight  ab- 
stract of  all  three  papers  with  which  I  had  some  intention  of 
favouring  you.* 

But  five  years  ago  you  threw  a  slipper  after  me  for  luck  on 
my  first  examination,  and  I  must  have  you  to  do  it  for  every- 
thing else. 

At  the  Cape  a  stay  of  a  month  was  made,  from  March  6 
to  April  lo,  and  certain  surveying  work  was  done,  after 
which  the  Rattlesnake  sailed  for  Mauritius.  In  spite  of  the 
fact  that  the  novelty  of  tropical  scenery  had  worn  off,  the 
place  made  a  deep  impression.  He  writes  to  his  mother, 
May  15,  1847:— 

After  a  long  and  somewhat  rough  passage  from  the  Cape,  we 
made  the  highland  of  the  Isle  of  France  on  the  afternoon  of  the 

*  These  papers  are  to  be  found  in  vol.  i.  of  the  Scientific  Memoirs  of 
T.  H.  Huxley,  p.  9. 


38  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  in 

funeral  urn  supported  on  a  pedestal,  and  as  dilapidated  as  the 
rest  of  the  affair.  These  dilapidations,  as  usual,  are  the  work 
of  English  visitors,  relic-hunters,  who  are  as  shameless  here 
as  elsewhere.  I  was  exceedingly  pleased  on  the  whole  with  my 
excursion,  and  when  I  returned  I  made  a  drawing  of  the  place, 
which  I  will  send  some  day  or  other. 

Since  this  I  have  made,  in  company  with  our  purser  and  a 
passenger,  Mr.  King,  a  regular  pedestrian  trip  to  see  some  very 
beautiful  falls  up  the  country. 

Leaving  Mauritius  on  May  17,  they  prolonged  their 
voyage  to  Sydney  by  being  requisitioned  to  take  more 
specie  to  Hobart  Town,  so  that  Sydney  was  not  reached 
until  July  16,  eight  months  since  they  had  had  news  of 
home. 

The  three  months  spent  in  this  first  visit  to  Sydney 
proved  to  be  one  of  the  most  vital  periods  in  the  young 
surgeon's  career.  From  boyhood  up,  vaguely  conscious  of 
unrest,  of  great  powers  within  him  working  to  find  expres-* 
sion,  he  had  yet  been  to  a  certain  extent  driven  in  upon  him- 
self. He  had  been  somewhat  isolated  from  those  of  his  own 
age  by  his  eagerness  for  problems  about  which  they  cared  • 
nothing ;  and  the  tendency  to  solitude,  the  habit  of  outward 
reserve  imposed  upon  an  unusually  warm  nature,  were 
intensified  by  the  fact  that  he  grew  up  in  surroundings  not 
wholly  congenial.  One  member  alone  of  his  family  felt 
with  him  that  complete  and  vivid  sympathy  which  is  so 
necessary  to  the  full  development  of  such  a  nature.  When 
he  was  fourteen  this  sister  married  and  left  home,  but  the 
bond  between  them  was  not  broken.  In  some  ways  it  was 
strengthened  by  the  lad's  love  for  her  children ;  by  his  grief, 
scarcely  less  than  her  own,  at  the  death  of  her  eldest  little 
girl.  Moreover  they  were  brought  into  close  companionship 
for  a  considerable  time  when,  after  his  dismal  period  of 
apprenticeship  at  Rotherhithe — ^to  which  he  could  never 
look  back  without  a  shudder — he  came  to  work  under  her 
husband.  She  had  encouraged  him  in  his  studies;  had 
urged  him  to  work  for  the  Botanical  prize  at  Sydenham 
College;  had  brightened  his  life  with  her  sympathy,  and 
believed  firmly  in  the  brilliant  future  which  awaited  him — a, 


40 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  hi 


Sydney  Harbour,  March  21,  1848. 

...  I  have  deferred  writing  to  you  in  the  hope  of  knowing 
something  from  yourself  of  your  doings  and  whereabouts,  and 
now  that  we  are  on  the  eve  of  departing  for  a  long  cruise  in 
Torres  Straits,  I  will  no  longer  postpone  the  giving  you  some 
account  of  "  was  ist  geschehen  "  on  this  side  of  the  world.  We 
spent  three  months  in  Sydney,  and  a  gay  three  months  of  it  we 
had, — nothing  but  balls  and  parties  the  whole  time.  In  this 
corner  of  the  universe,  where  men  of  war  are  rather  scarce, 
even  the  old  Rattlesnake  is  rather  a  lion,  and  her  officers  are 
esteemed  accordingly.  Besides,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  we  are 
rather  agreeable  people  than  otherwise,  and  can  manage  to  get  up 
a  very  decent  turn-out  on  board  on  occasion.  What  think  you  of 
your  grave,  scientific  brother  turning  out  a  ball-goer  and  doing 
the  "  light  fantastic  "  to  a  great  extent  ?  It  is  a  great  fact,  1 
assure  you.  But  there  is  a  method  in  my  madness.  I  found  it 
exceedingly  disagreeable  to  come  to  a  great  place  like  Sydney 
and  think  there  was  not  a  soul  who  cared  whether  I  was  alive 
or  dead,  so  I  determined  to  go  into  what  society  was  to  be  had 
and  see  if  I  could  not  pick  up  a  friend  or  two  among  the  multi- 
tude of  the  empty  and  frivolous.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  I  have 
had  more  success  than  I  hoped  for  or  deserved,  and  there  are 
now  two  or  three  houses  where  I  can  go  and  feel  myself  at 
home  at  all  times.  But  my  "  home  "  in  Sydney  is  the  house  of 
my  good  friend  Mr.  Fanning,  one  of  the  first  merchants  in  the 
place.  But  thereby  hangs  a  tale  which,  of  all  people  in  the 
world,  I  must  tell  you.  Mrs.  Fanning  has  a  sister,  and  the  dear 
little  sister  and  I  managed  to  fall  in  love  with  one  another  in 
the  most  absurd  manner  after  seeing  one  another — I  will  not 
tell  you  how  few  times,  lest  you  should  laugh.  Do  you  remem- 
ber how  you  used  to  talk  to  me  about  choosing  a  wife  ?  Well, 
I  think  that  my  choice  would  justify  even  your  fastidiousness. 
...  I  think  you  will  understand  how  happy  her  love  ought  to 
and  does  make  me.  I  fear  that  in  this  respect  indeed  the  ad- 
vantage is  on  my  side,  for  my  present  wandering  life  and  uncer- 
tain position  must  necessarily  give  her  many  an  anxious  thought. 
Our  future  is  indeed  none  of  the  clearest.  Three  years  at  the 
very  least  must  elapse  before  the  Rattlesnake  returns  to  Eng- 
land, and  then  unless  I  can  write  myself  into  my  promotion  or 
something  else,  we  shall  be  just  where  we  were.  Nevertheless 
I  have  the  strongest  persuasion  that  four  years  hence  I  shall 
be  married  and  settled  in  England.    We  shall  see. 


42  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ui 

diflFerence  in  our  years,  but  she  is  in  fact  as  much  younger  than 
her  years  as  I  am  older  than  mine.  Next,  as  to  complexion  she 
is  exceedingly  fair,  with  the  Saxon  yellow  hair  and  blue  eyes. 
Then  as  to  face,  I  really  don't  know  whether  she  is  pretty  or  not. 
I  have  never  been  able  to  decide  the  matter  in  my  own  mind. 
Sometimes  I  think  she  is,  and  sometimes  I  wonder  how  the  idea 
ever  came  into  my  head.  Whether  or  not,  her  personal  appear- 
ance has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  hold  she  has  upon  my 
mind,  for  I  have  seen  hundreds  of  prettier  women.  But  I  never 
met  with  so  sweet  a  temper,  so  self-sacrificing  and  affectionate  a 
disposition,  or  so  pure  and  womanly  a  mind,  and  from  the  per- 
fectly intimate  footing  on  which  I  stand  with  her  family  I  have 
plenty  of  opportunities  of  judging.  As  I  tell  her,  the  only  great 
folly  I  am  aware  of  her  being  guilty  of  was  the  leaving  her 
happiness  in  the  hands  of  a  man  like  myself,  struggling  upwards 
and  certain  of  nothing. 

As  to  my  future  intentions  I  can  say  very  little  about  them. 
With  my  present  income,  of  course,  marriage  is  rather  a  bad  look 
out,  but  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  at  all  fair  towards  N.  herself 
to  leave  this  country  without  giving  her  a  wife's  claim  upon 
me.  ...  It  is  very  unlikely  I  shall  ever  remain  in  the  colony. 
Nothing  but  a  very  favourable  chance  could  induce  me  to 
do  so. 

Much  must  depend  upon  how  things  go  in  England.  If  my 
various  papers  meet  with  any  success,  I  may  perhaps  be  able  to 
leave  the  service.  At  present,  however,  I  have  not  heard  a  word 
of  anything  I  have  sent.  Professor  Forbes  has,  I  believe,  pub- 
lished some  of  MacGillivray's  letters  to  him,  but  he  has  appar- 
ently forgotten  to  write  to  MacGillivray  himself,  or  to  me.  So 
I  shall  certainly  send  him  nothing  more,  especially  as  Mr.  Mac- 
Leay  (of  this  place,  and  a  great  man  in  the  naturalist  world) 
has  offered  to  get  anything  of  mine  sent  to  the  Zoological 
Society. 

In  the  paper  mentioned  in  the  letter  of  March  21,  above 
("  On  the  Anatomy  and  Affinities  of  the  Family  of  the 
Medusae  "),  Huxley  aimed  at  **  giving  broad  and  general 
views  of  the  whole  class,  considered  as  organised  upon  a 
given  type,  and  inquiring  into  its  relations  with  other  fam- 
ilies," unlike  previous  observers  whose  patience  and  ability 
had  been  devoted  rather  to  "  stating  matters  of  detail  con- 
cerning particular  genera  and  species."  At  the  outset,  sec- 
tion 8  (Sci.  Mem.,  i.  1 1),  he  states — 


184S  AN   IMPORTANT   DISCOVERY  43 

I  would  wish  to  lay  particular  stress  upon  the  composition  of 
this  (the  stomach)  and  other  organs  of  the  Medusae  out  of  two 
distinct  membranes^  as  I  believe  that  it  is  one  of  the  essential 
peculiarities  of  their  structure,  and  that  a  knowledge  of  the  fact 
is  of  great  importance  in  investigating  their  homologies.  I  will 
call  these  two  membranes  as  such,  and  independently  of  any 
modifications  into  particular  organs,  **  foundation  membranes." 

And  in  section  56  (p.  23)  one  of  the  general  conclusions 
which  he  deduces  from  his  observations,  is 

That  a  Medusa  consists  essentially  of  two  membranes  in- 
closing a  variously-shapM  cavity,  inasmuch  as  its  various  organs 
are  so  composed, 

a  peculiarity  shared  by  certain  other  families  of  zoophytes. 
This  is  the  point  which  that  eminent  authority,  Professor 
G.  J.  Allman,  had  in  his  mind  when  he  wrote  to  call  my 
attention 

to  a  fact  which  has  been  overlooked  in  all  the  notices  I  have 
seen,  and  which  I  regard  as  one  of  the  greatest  claims  of  his 
splendid  work  on  the  recognition  of  zoologists.  I  refer  to  his 
discovery  that  the  body  of  the  Medusae  is  essentially  composed 
of  two  membranes,  an  outer. and  an  inner,  and  his  recognition  of 
these  as  the  homologues  of  the  two  primary  germinal  leaflets 
in  the  vertebrate  embryo.  Now  this  discovery  stands  at  the  very 
basis  of  a  philosophic  zoology,  and  of  a  true  conception  of  the 
affinities  of  animals.  It  is  the  ground  on  which  Hxckel  has 
founded  his  famous  Gastrsa  Theory,  and  without  it  Kowalesky 
could  never  have  announced  his  great  discovery  of  the  affinity 
of  the  Ascidians  and  Vertebrates,  by  which  zoologists  had  been 
startled 


CHAPTER    IV 
1848-1850 

The  whole  cruise  of  the  Rattlesnake  lasted  almost  pre- 
cisely four  years,  her  stay  in  Australian  waters  nearly  three. 
Of  this  time  altogether  eleven  months  were  spent  at  Sydney, 
namely,  July  16  to  October  11,  1847;  January  14  to  Feb- 
ruary 2,  and  March  9  to  April  29,  1848;  January  24  to 
May  8,  1849;  ^"d  February  14  to  May  2,  1850.  The  three 
months  of  the  first  northern  cruise  were  spent  in  the  survey 
of  the  Inshore  Passage — the  passage,  that  is,  within  the 
Great  Barrier  Reef  for  ships  proceeding  from  India  to  Syd- 
ney. In  1848,  while  waiting  for  the  right  season  to  visit 
Torres  Straits,  a  short  cruise  was  made  in  February  and 
March,  to  inspect  the  lighthouses  in  Bass'  Straits.  It  was 
on  this  occasion  that  Huxley  visited  Melbourne,  then  an 
insignificant  town,  before  the  discovery  of  gold  had  brought 
a  rush  of  immigrants. 

The  second  northern  cruise  of  1848,  which  lasted  nine 
months,  had  for  its  object  the  completion  of  the  survey  of 
the  Inner  Passage  as  far  as  New  Guinea  and  the  adjoining 
archipelago.  The  third  cruise  in  1849-50  again  lasted  nine 
months,  and  continued  the  survey  in  Torres  Straits,  the 
Louisiade  archipelago,  and  the  south-eastern  part  of  New 
Guinea.  After  this  the  original  plan  was  to  make  a  fourth 
cruise,  filling  up  the  charts  of  the  Inner  Passage  on  the 
east  coast,  and  surveying  the  straits  of  Alass  between 
Lombok  and  Sumbawa  in  the  Malay  Archipelago;  then, 
instead  of  returning  to  Sydney,  to  proceed  to  Singa- 
pore and  so  home  by  the  Cape.     But  these  plans  were 

44 


46  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  nr 

York  also,  a  white  woman  was  rescued  who  had  been  made 
prisoner  by  the  blacks  from  a  wreck,  and  had  lived  among 
them  for  several  years.  Here,  too,  Huxley  and  MacGilli- 
vray  made  a  trip  inland,  and  were  welcomed  by  a  native 
chief,  who  saw  in  the  former  the  returning  spirit  of  his 
dead  brother. 

Throughout  the  voyage  Huxley  was  busy  with  his 
pencil,  and  many  lithographs  from  his  drawings  illustrate 
the  account  of  the  voyage  afterwards  published.  As  to 
his  scientific  work,  he  was  accumulating  a  large  stock  of 
observations,  but  felt  rather  sore  about  the  papers  which  he 
had  already  sent  home,  for  no  word  had  reached  him  as  to 
their  fate,  not  even  that  they  had  been  received  or  looked 
over  by  Forbes,  to  whom  they  had  been  consigned.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  they  had  not  been  neglected,  as  he  was  to 
find  out  on  his  return;  but  meanwhile  the  state  of  affairs 
was  not  reassuring  to  a  man  whose  dearest  hopes  were 
bound  up  in  the  reception  he  could  win  for  these  and  similar 
researches.  Altogether,  it  was  with  no  little  joy  that  he 
turned  his  back  on  the  sweltering  heat  of  Torres  Straits, 
on  the  great  mountains  of  New  Guinea,  the  Owen  Stanley 
range,  which  had  remained  hidden  from  D'Urville  in  the 
Astrolabe  to  be  discovered  by  the  explorers  on  the  Rattle- 
snake, and  the  far  stretching  archipelago  of  the  Louisiades, 
one  tiny  island  in  which  still  bears  the  name  of  Huxley, 
after  the  assistant-surgeon  of  the  Rattlesnake, 

A  few  extracts  from  letters  of  the  time  will  give  a  more 
vivid  idea  of  what  the  voyage  was  like.  The  first  is  from 
a  letter  to  his  mother,  dated  February  i,  1849: — 

...  I  suppose  you  have  wondered  at  the  long  intervals  of 
my  letters,  but  my  silence  has  been  forced.  I  wrote  from  Rock- 
ingham Bay  in  May,  and  from  Cape  York  in  October.  After 
leaving  the  latter  place  we  have  had  no  communication  with  any 
one  but  the  folks  at  Port  Essing^on,  which  is  a  mere  military 
post,  without  any  certain  means  of  communication  with  Eng- 
land. We  were  ten  weeks  on  our  passage  from  Port  Essington 
to  Sydney  and  touched  nowhere,  so  that  you  may  imagine  we 
were  pretty  well  tired  of  the  sea  by  the  time  we  reached  Port 
Jackson. 


50 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  CBAP.  nr 


(vol.  v.),  in  which,  under  the  title  of  "  Science  at  Sea,"  Hux- 
ley reviewed  the  Voyage  of  the  Rattksnake  by  MacGillivray, 
the  naturalist  to  the  expedition,  which  had  recently  ap- 
peared. This  book  gave  very  few  descriptions  of  the  inci- 
dents and  life  on  board,  and  so  drew  in  many  ways  a  col- 
ourless picture  of  the  expedition.  This  defect  the  reviewer 
sought  to  remedy  by  giving  extracts  from  the  so-called 
"  unpublished  correspondence "  of  one  of  the  officers — 
sketches  apparently  written  for  the  occasion — ^as  well  as 
from  an  equally  unpublished  but  more  real  journal  kept  by 
the  same  hand. 

The  description  of  the  ship  herself,  of  her  inadequate 
equipment  for  the  special  purposes  she  was  to  carry  out,  of 
the  officers*  quiet  contempt  of  scientific  pursuits,  which  not 
even  the  captain's  influence  was  able  to  subdue,  of  the 
illusory  promises  of  help  and  advancement  held  out  by  the 
Admiralty  to  young  investigators,  makes  a  striking  foil  to 
the  spirit  in  which  the  Government  of  thirty  years  later' 
undertook  a  greater  scientific  expedition.  Perhaps  some 
vivid  recollections  of  this  voyage  did  something  to  better  the 
conditions  under  which  the  later  investigators  worked. 

Thus,  p*  lOO : 

In  the  year  1846,  Captain  Owen  Stanley,  a  young  and  zeal- 
ous officer,  of  good  report  for  his  capabilities  as  a  scientific 
surveyor,  was  entrusted  with  the  command  of  the  Rattlesnake, 
a  vessel  of  six-and-twenty  guns,  strong  and  seaworthy,  but  one 
of  that  class  unenviably  distinguished  in  the  war-time  as  a 
"  donkey- frigate."  To  the  laity  it  would  seem  that  a  ship  jour- 
neying to  unknown  regions,  when  the  lives  of  a  couple  of  hun- 
dred men  may,  at  any  moment,  depend  upon  her  handiness  in 
going  about,  so  as  to  avoid  any  suddenly  discovered  danger, 
should  possess  the  best  possible  sailing  powers.  The  Admiralty, 
however,  makes  its  selection  upon  other  principles,  and  explor- 
ing vessels  will  be  invariably  found  to  be  the  slowest,  clumsiest, 
and  in  every  respect  the  most  inconvenient  ships  which  wear 
the  pennant.  In  accordance  with  the  rule,  such  was  the  Rattle- 
snake; and  to  carry  out  the  spirit  of  the  authorities  more  com- 
pletely, she  was  turned  out  of  Portsmouth  dockyard  in  such  a 
disgraceful  state  of  unfitness,  that  her  lower  deck  was  con- 
tinually under  water  during  the  voyage. 


50 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CBAP.  Vf 


(vol.  v.),  in  which,  under  the  title  of  "  Science  at  Sea,"  Hux- 
ley reviewed  the  Voyage  of  the  Rattlesnake  by  MacGillivray, 
the  naturalist  to  the  expedition,  which  had  recently  ap- 
peared. This  book  gave  very  few  descriptions  of  the  inci- 
dents and  life  on  board,  and  so  drew  in  many  ways  a  col- 
ourless picture  of  the  expedition.  This  defect  the  reviewer 
sought  to  remedy  by  giving  extracts  from  the  so-called 
"  unpublished  correspondence "  of  one  of  the  officers — 
sketches  apparently  written  for  the  occasion — ^as  well  as 
from  an  equally  unpublished  but  more  real  journal  kept  by 
the  same  hand. 

The  description  of  the  ship  herself,  of  her  inadequate 
equipment  for  the  special  purposes  she  was  to  carry  out,  of 
the  officers'  quiet  contempt  of  scientific  pursuits,  which  not 
even  the  captain's  influence  was  able  to  subdue,  of  the 
illusory  promises  of  help  and  advancement  held  out  by  the 
Admiralty  to  young  investigators,  makes  a  striking  foil  to 
the  spirit  in  which  the  Government  of  thirty  years  later* 
undertook  a  greater  scientific  expedition.  Perhaps  some 
vivid  recollections  of  this  voyage  did  something  to  better  the 
conditions  under  which  the  later  investigators  worked. 

Thus,  p»  loo : 

In  the  year  1846,  Captain  Owen  Stanley,  a  young  and  zeal- 
ous officer,  of  good  report  for  his  capabilities  as  a  scientific 
surveyor,  was  entrusted  with  the  command  of  the  Rattlesnake, 
a  vessel  of  six-and-twenty  guns,  strong  and  seaworthy,  but  one 
of  that  class  unenviably  distinguished  in  the  war-time  as  a 
"  donkey-frigate."  To  the  laity  it  would  seem  that  a  ship  jour- 
neying to  unknown  regions,  when  the  lives  ot  a  couple  of  hun- 
dred men  may,  at  any  moment,  depend  upon  her  handiness  in 
going  about,  so  as  to  avoid  any  suddenly  discovered  danger, 
should  possess  the  best  possible  sailing  powers.  The  Admiralty, 
however,  makes  its  selection  upon  other  principles,  and  explor- 
ing vessels  will  be  invariably  found  to  be  the  slowest,  clumsiest, 
and  in  every  respect  the  most  inconvenient  ships  which  wear 
the  pennant.  In  accordance  with  the  rule,  such  was  the  Rattle- 
snake; and  to  carry  out  the  spirit  of  the  authorities  more  com- 
pletely, she  was  turned  out  of  Portsmouth  dockyard  in  such  a 
disgraceful  state  of  unfitness,  that  her  lower  deck  was  con- 
tinually under  water  during  the  voyage. 


52 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CHAP.  IV 


be  patient,  and  listen  to  what  I  have  to  say ;  you  will  then,  per- 
haps, be  a  little  more  content  with  your  lot  in  life,  and  a  little 
less  desirous  of  mine.  Of  all  extant  lives,  that  on  board  a  ship- 
of-war  is  the  most  artificial — whether  necessarily  so  or  not  is  a 
question  I  will  not  undertake  to  decide;  but  the  fact  is  indubi- 
table. 

How  utterly  disgusted  you  get  with  one  another !  Little 
peculiarities  which  would  give  a  certain  charm  and  variety  to 
social  intercourse  under  any  other  circumstances,  become 
sources  of  absolute  pain,  and  almost  uncontrollable  irritation, 
when  you  are  shut  up  with  them  day  and  night.  One  good 
friend  and  messmate  of  mine  has  a  peculiar  laugh,  whose  itera- 
tion on  our  last  cruise  nearly  drove  me  insane. 

There  is  no  being  alone  in  a  ship.  Sailors  are  essentially 
gregarious  animals,  and  don't  at  all  understand  the  necessity 
under  which  many  people  labour — I  among  the  rest — of  having 
a  little  solitary  converse  with  oneself  occasionally. 

Then,  to  a  landsman  fresh  from  ordinary  society  and  its 
peculiarly  undemonstrative  ways,  there  is  something  very  won- 
derful about  naval  discipline.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the 
subordination  kept  up  is  more  than  is  necessary,  nor  perhaps  is 
it  in  reality  greater  than  is  to  be  found  in  a  college,  or  a  regi- 
ment, or  a  large  mercantile  house;  but  it  is  made  so  very  ob- 
vious. You  not  only  feel  the  bit,  but  you  see  it;  and  your 
bridle  is  hung  with  bells  to  tell  you  of  its  presence. 

Your  captain  is  a  very  different  person,  in  relation  to  his 
officers,  from  the  colonel  of  a  regiment;  he  is  a  demi-god,  a 
Dalai  lama,  living  in  solitary  state;  sublime,  unapproachable; 
and  the  radiation  of  his  dignity  stretches  through  all  the  other 
members  of  the  nautical  hierarchy;  hence  all  sorts  of  petty 
intrigues,  disputes,  grumblings,  and  jealousies,  which,  to  the 
irreverent  eye  of  an  "  idler,"  give  to  the  whole  little  society 
the  aspect  of  nothing  so  much  as  the  court  of  Prinz  Irenaeus  in 
Kater  Murr's  inestimable  autobiography. 

P.  107  sq, : 

After  describing  the  illusory  promises  of  the  Admiralty 
and  their  grudging  spirit  towards  the  scientific  members  of 
the  expedition,  he  continues : — 

These  are  the  facilities  and  encouragement  to  science 
afforded  by  the  Admiralty;  and  it  cannot  be  wondered  at  if 
the  same  spirit  runs  through  its  subordinate  officers. 


54  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  hot,  for  the  temperature  is  that  at 
which  people  at  home  commonly  take  a  hot  bath.  It  rains  so 
hard  that  we  have  caught  seven  tons  of  water  in  one  day,  and 
it  is  therefore  impossible  to  go  on  deck,  though,  if  one  did,  one's 
condition  would  not  be  much  improved.  A  hot  Scotch  mist 
covers  the  sea  and  hides  the  land,  so  that  no  surveying  can  be 
done;  moving  about  in  the  slightest  degree  causes  a  flood  of 
perspiration  to  pour  out;  all  energ^y  is  completely  gone,  and  if 
I  could  help  it  I  would  not  think  even;  it's  too  hot  The  rain 
awnings  are  spread,  and  we  can  have  no  wind  sails  up;  if  we 
could,  there  is  not  a  breath  of  wind  to  fill  them;  and  conse- 
quently the  lower  and  main  decks  are  utterly  unventilated :  a 
sort  of  solution  of  man  in  steam  fills  them  from  end  to  end,  and 
surrounds  the  lights  with  a  lurid  halo.  It's  too  hot  to  sleep, 
and  my  sole  amusement  consists  in  watching  the  cockroaches, 
which  are  in  a  state  of  intense  excitement  and  happiness.  They 
manifest  these  feelings  in  a  very  remarkable  manner — a  sudden 
unanimous  impulse  seems  to  seize  the  obscene  thousands  which 
usually  lurk  hidden  in  the  corners  of  my  cabin.  Out  they  ruali, 
helter-skelter,  and  run  over  me,  my  table,  and  my  desk;  others, 
more  vigorous,  fly,  quite  regardless  of  consequences,  until  they 
hit  against  something,  upon  which,  half  spreading  their  wings, 
they  make  their  heads  a  pivot  and  spin  round  in  a  circle,  in  a 
manner  which  indicates  a  temporary  aberration  of  the  cock- 
roach mind.  It  is  these  outbreaks  alone  which  rouse  us  from 
our  lassitude.  Knocks  are  heard  resounding  on  all  sides,  and 
each  inhabitant  of  a  cabin,  armed  with  a  slipper,  is  seen  taking 
ample  revenge  upon  the  disturbers  of  his  rest  and  the  destroyers 
of  his  body  and  clothes." 

Here,  on  the  other  hand,  is  an  oasis,  a  bartering  scene  at 
Bruny  Island,  in  the  Louisiade : — 

"  We  landed  at  the  same  place  as  before,  and  this  time  the 
natives  ran  down  prancing  and  gesticulating.  Many  of  them 
had  garlands  of  green  leaves  round  their  heads,  knees,  and 
ankles;  some  wore  long  streamers  depending  from  their  arms 
and  ears  and  floating  in  the  wind  as  they  galloped  along,  shak- 
ing their  spears  and  prancing  just  as  boys  do  when  playing  at 
horses.  They  soon  surrounded  us,  shouting  *  Kelumai !  Ke- 
lumai ! '  (their  word  for  iron),  and  offering  us  all  sorts  of 
things  in  exchange.  One  very  fine  athletic  man,  *  Kai-oo-why- 
who-at'  by  name,  was  perfectly  mad  to  get  an  axe,  and  very 
soon  comprehended  the  arrangements  that  were  made.  Mr. 
Brady  drew  ten  lines  on  the  sand  and  laid  an  axe  down  by  them. 


56  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  iv 

we  ingeniously  coloured  ours  white,  and  were  astonished  to 
see  that  we  were  really  of  that  (to  them)  disgusting  tint  all 
over." 

On  May  2,  1850,  the  Rattksnake  sailed  for  the  last  time 
out  of  Sydney  harbour,  bound  for  England  by  way  of  the 
Horn.  In  spite  of  his  cheerful  anticipations,  Huxley  was 
not  to  see  his  future  wife  again  for  five  years  more,  when  he 
was  at  length  in  a  position  to  bid  her  come  and  join  him. 
During  the  three  years  of  their  engagement  in  Australia, 
they  had  at  least  been  able  to  see  each  other  at  intervals, 
and  to  be  together  for  months  at  a  time.  In  the  long 
periods  of  absence,  also,  they  had  invented  a  device  to  cheat 
the  sense  of  separation.  Each  kept  a  particular  journal,  to 
be  exchanged  when  they  met  again,  and  only  to  be  read, 
day  by  day,  during  the  next  voyage.  But  now  it  was 
very  different,  their  only  means  of  communication  being  the 
slow  agency  of  the  post,  beset  with  endless  possibilities  of 
misunderstanding  when  it  brought  belated  answers  to  ques- 
tions already  months  old  and  out  of  date  in  the  changed 
aspect  of  circumstances.  These  perils,  however,  they 
weathered,  and  it  proves  how  deep  in  the  moral  nature  of 
each  the  bond  between  them  was  rooted,  that  in  the  end 
they  passed  safely  through  the  still  greater  danger  of  im- 
perceptibly growing  estranged  from  one  another  under  the 
influences  of  such  utterly  different  surroundings. 

A  kindly  storm  which  forced  the  old  ship  to  put  into 
the  Bay  of  Islands  to  repair  a  number  of  small  leaks  that 
rendered  the  lower  deck  uninhabitable,  made  it  possible  for 
Huxley  to  send  back  a  letter  that  should  reach  Australia 
in  one  month  instead  of  ten  after  his  departure. 

He  utilized  a  week's  stay  here  characteristically  enough 
in  an  expedition  to  Waimate,  the  chief  missionary  station 
and  the  school  of  the  native  institutions  (a  sort  of  Normal 
School  for  native  teachers),  in  order  to  judge  of  his  own 
inspection  what  missionary  life  was  like. 

I  have  been  greatly  surprised  in  these  good  people  (he 
writes).  I  had  expected  a  good  deal  of  straight-hairedness  (if 
you  understand  the  phrase)  and  methodistical  puritanism,  but 
I  find  it  quite  otherwise.     Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burrows  seem 


58  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  nr 

think  I  shall  go  and  look  them  up  under  pretence  of  making  a 
call.  They  say  that  the  present  winter  is  far  more  savage  than 
the  generality  of  Falkland  Island  winters,  and  it  had  need  be, 
for  I  never  felt  anything  so  bitterly  cold  in  my  life.  The  ther- 
mometer has  been  down  below  22^  and  shallow  parts  of  the  har- 
bour even  have  frozen.  Nothing  to  be  done  ashore.  My  rifle 
lies  idle  in  its  case ;  no  chance  of  a  shot  at  a  bull,  and  one  has  to 
go  away  20  miles  to  get  hold  even  of  the  upland  mtts^  and 
rabbits.  The  only  thing  to  be  done  is  to  eat,  eat,  eat,  and  the 
cold  assists  one  wonderfully  in  that  operation.  You  consume 
a  pound  or  so  of  beefsteaks  at  breakfast  and  then  walk  the 
deck  for  an  appetite  at  dinner,  when  you  take  another  pound  or 
two  of  beef  or  a  goose,  or  some  such  trifle.  By  four  o'clock  it 
is  dark  night,  and  as  it  is  too  cold  to  read  the  only  thing  to  be 
done  is  to  vanish  under  blankets  as  soon  as  possible  and  take 
twelve  or  fourteen  hours*  sleep. 

Mrs.  Stanley's  Bougirigards,*  which  I  have  taken  under  my 
care  during  the  cold  weather,  admire  this  sort  of  thing  exceed- 
ingly and  thrive  under  it,  so  I  suppose  I  ought  to. 

The  journey  from  New  Zealand  here  has  been  upon  the 
whole  favourable;  no  gales — quite  the  reverse — but  light  vari- 
able winds  and  calms.  The  latter  part  of  our  voyage  has,  how- 
ever, been  very  cold,  snow  falling  in  abundance,  and  the  ice 
forming  great  stalactites  about  our  bows.  We  have  seen  no 
icebergs  nor  anything  remarkable.  From  all  I  can  learn  it  is 
most  probable  that  we  shall  leave  in  about  a  week  and  shall  go 
direct  to  England  without  stopping  at  any  other  port.  I  wish 
it  may  be  so.    I  want  to  get  home  and  look  about  me. 

We  have  had  news  up  to  the  end  of  March.  There  is  noth- 
ing of  any  importance  going  on.  By  the  Navy  list  for  April  I 
see  that  I  shall  be  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  middle  of  those 
of  my  own  rank,  ix,  I  shall  have  about  150  above  and  as  many 
below  mc.  This  is  about  what  I  ought  to  expect  in  the  ordinary 
run  of  promotion  in  eight  years,  and  I  have  served  four  and  a 
half  of  that  time.  I  don't  expect  much  in  the  way  of  promotion, 
especially  in  these  economic  times;  but  I  do  not  fear  that  I 
shall  be  able  to  keep  me  in  England  for  at  least  a  year  after 
our  arrival,  in  order  to  publish  my  papers.  The  Admiralty 
have  quite  recently  published  a  distinct  declaration  that  they 
will  consider  scientiflc  attainments  as  a  claim  to  their  notice, 
and  I  expect  to  be  the  flrst  to  remind  them  of  their  promise,  and 

^^^^'^■■^— — ^"^^       »      —  -     ■  ■  ■  ■  ■         ■  ■■■■■!  ■     i.^.^— ^^^^^a^— 

*  The  Australian  love-bird ;  a  small  parrakeet. 


i850  THE  LAST  OF  THE  FALKLANDS  59 

I  will  take  care  to  have  the  reminder  so  backed  that  they  must 
and  shall  take  note  of  it.  Even  if  they  will  not  promote  me  at 
once,  it  would  answer  our  purpose  to  have  an  appointment  to 
some  ship  on  the  home  station  for  a  short  time. 

The  last  of  the  Falklands  was  seen  bn  July  25;  the 
line  was  crossed  in  thirty-six  days;  another  month,  and 
water  running  short,  it  was  found  necessary  to  put  in  at 
the  Azores  for  a  week.  Leaving  Fayal  on  October  5,  the 
Rattlesnake  reached  Plymouth  on  the  23rd,  but  next  day 
proceeded  to  Chatham,  which,  thanks  to  baffling  winds, 
was  not  reached  till  November  9,  when  the  ship  was  paid 
off. 


CHAPTER   V 

1850-1851 

In  the  Huxley  Lecture  for  1898  {Times,  October  4)  Pro- 
fessor Virchow  takes  occasion  to  speak  of  the  effect  of 
Huxley's  service  in  the  Rattlesnake  upon  his  intellectual  de- 
velopment : — 

When  Huxley  himself  left  Charing  Cross  Hospital  in  1846, 
he  had  enjoyed  a  rich  measure  of  instruction  in  anatomy  and 
physiology.  Thus  trained,  he  took  the  post  of  naval  surgeon, 
and  by  the  time  that  he  returned,  four  years  later,  he  had 
become  a  perfect  zoologist  and  a  keen-sighted  ethnologist.  How 
this  was  possible  any  one  will  readily  understand  who  knows 
from  his  own  experience  how  great  the  value  of  personal  ob- 
servation is  for  the  development  of  independent  and  unpreju- 
diced thought.  For  a  young  man  who,  besides  collecting  a  rich 
treasure  of  positive  knowledge,  has  practised  dissection  and 
the  exercise  of  a  critical  judgment,  a  long  sea- voyage  and  a 
peaceful  sojourn  among  entirely  new  surroundings  afford  an  in- 
valuable opportunity  for  original  work  and  deep  reflection. 
Freed  from  the  formalism  of  the  schools,  thrown  upon  the  use 
of  his  own  intellect,  compelled  to  test  each  single  object  as 
regards  properties  and  history,  he  soon  forgets  the  dogmas  of 
the  prevailing  system  and  becomes,  first  a  sceptic,  and  then  an 
investigator.  This  change,  which  did  not  fail  to  affect  Huxley, 
and  through  which  arose  that  Huxley  whom  we  commemorate 
to-day,  is  no  unknown  occurrence  to  one  who  is  acquainted  with 
the  history,  not  only  of  knowledge,  but  also  of  scholars. 

But  he  was  not  destined  to  find  his  subsequent  path 
easy.    Once  in  England,  indeed,  he  did  not  lose  any  time. 
No  sooner  had  the  Rattlesnake  touched  at  Plymouth  than 
60 


62  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap.  ▼ 

In  this  design  he  was  fortified  by  his  old  Haslar  friend. 
Dr.  (afterwards  Sir  John)  Watt  Reid,  who  wrote :  "  They 
cannot,  and,  I  am  sure,  will  not  wish  to  stand  in  your  way 
at  Whitehall."  Meanwhile,  the  first  person,  naturally,  he 
had  thought  of  consulting  was  his  old  chief.  Sir  John 
Richardson,  who  had  great  weight  at  the  Admiralty,  and  to 
him  he  wrote  the  following  letter  before  leaving  Plymouth. 


To  Sir  John  Richardson 

Oct,  31,  1850. 

I  regret  very  much  that  in  consequence  of  our  being  ordered 
to  be  paid  off  at  Chatham,  instead  of  Portsmouth,  as  we  always 
hoped  and  expected,  I  shall  be  unable  to  submit  to  your  inspec- 
tion the  zoological  notes  and  drawings  which  I  have  made  dur- 
ing our  cruise.  They  are  somewhat  numerous  (over  180  sheets 
of  drawings),  and  I  hope  not  altogether  valueless,  since  they 
have  been  made  with  as  great  care  and  attention  as  I  am  master 
of — and  with  a  microscope,  such  as  has  rarely,  if  ever,  made  a 
voyage  round  the  world  before.  A  further  reason  for  indulging 
in  this  hope  consists  in  the  fact  that  they  relate  for  the  most 
part  to  animals  hitherto  very  little  known,  whether  from  their 
rarity  or  from  their  perishable  nature,  and  that  they  bear  upon 
many  curious  physiological  points. 

I  may  thus  classify  and  enumerate  the  observations  I  have 
made — 

1.  Upon  the  organs  of  hearing  and  circulation  in  some  of  the 
transparent  Crustacea,  and  upon  the  structure  of  certain  of  the 
lower  forms  of  Crustacea. 

2.  Upon  some  very  remarkable  new  forms  of  Annelids,  and 
especially  upon  the  much  contested  genus  Sagitta,  which  I  have 
evidence  to  show  is  neither  a  Mollusc  nor  an  Epizoon,  but  an 
Annelid. 

3.  Upon  the  nervous  system  of  certain  Mollusca  hitherto  im- 
perfectly described — upon  what  appears  to  me  to  be  an  urinary 
organ  in  many  of  them — and  upon  the  structure  of  Firola  and 
Atlanta,  of  which  latter  I  have  a  pretty  complete  account. 

4.  Upon  two  perfectly  new  (ordinally  new)  species  of 
Ascidians. 

5.  Upon  Pyrosoma  and  Salpa.  The  former  has  never  been 
described  (I  think)  sisce  Savig^y's  time,  and  he  had  only  speci- 
mens preserved  in  spirits.    I  have  a  great  deal  to  add  and  alter. 


64  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  y 

« 

(i)  of  procuring  a  grant  for  the  publication  of  my  papers,  or 
(2)  should  that  not  be  feasible,  to  obtain  a  nominal  appointment 
(say  to  the  Fis guard  at  Woolwich,  as  in  Dr.  Hooker's  case)  for 
such  time  as  might  be  requisite  for  the  publication  of  my  papers 
and  drawings  in  some  other  way? 

I  shall  see  Professors  Owen  and  Forbes  when  I  reach  Lon- 
don, and  I  have  a  letter  of  introduction  to  Sir  John  Herschel 
(who  has,  I  hear,  a  g^eat  penchant  for  the  towing-net).  Sup- 
posing I  could  do  so,  would  it  be  of  any  use  to  procure  recom- 
mendations from  them  that  my  papers  should  be  published? 

[(Half-erased)  To  Sir  F.  Beaufort  also  I  have  a  letter.] 
Would  it  not  be  proper  also  to  write  to  Sir  W.  Burnett  acquaint- 
ing him  with  my  views,  and  requesting  his  acquiescence  and 
assistance  ? 

Begging  an  answer  at  your  earliest  convenience,  addressed 
either  to  the  Rattlesnake  or  to  my  brother,  I  remain,  your 
obedient  servant,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

41  North  Bank. 

He  received  a  most  friendly  reply  from  **  Old  John." 
He  was  willing  tb  do  all  in  his  power  to  help,  but  could 
recommend  Government  aid  better  if  he  had  seen  the  draw- 
ings. Meantime  a  certificate  should  be  got  from  Forbes, 
the  best  man  in  this  particular  branch  of  science,  backed,  if 
possible,  by  Owen.  He  would  speak  to  some  officials  him- 
self, and  give  Huxley  introductions  to  others,  and  if  he 
could  get  up  to  town,  would  try  to  see  the  collections  and 
add  his  name  to  the  certificate. 

Both  Forbes  and  Owen  were  ready  to  help.  The  former 
wrote  a  most  encouraging  letter,  singling  out  the  character- 
istics which  gave  a  peculiar  value  to  these  papers : — 

I  have  had  very  great  pleasure  in  examining  your  drawings 
of  animals  observed  during  the  voyage  of  the  Rattlesnake,  and 
have  also  fully  availed  myself  of  the  opportunity  of  going  over 
the  collections  made  during  the  course  of  the  survey  upon  which 
you  have  been  engaged.  I  can  say  without  exaggeration  that 
more  important  or  more  complete  zoological  researches  have 
never  been  conducted  during  any  voyage  of  discovery  in  the 
southern  hemisphere.  The  course  you  have  taken  of  directing 
your  attention  mainly  to  impreservable  creatures,  and  to  those 
orders  of  the  animal  kingdom  respecting  which  we  have  least 


66  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  y 

Properly  speaking,  indeed,  we  have  been  at  home  longer,  for 
we  touched  at  Plymouth  and  trod  English  ground  and  saw  Eng- 
lish green  fields  on  the  23rd  of  October,  but  we  were  allowed 
to  remain  only  twenty-four  hours,  and  to  my  great  disgust  were 
ordered  round  to  Chatham  to  be  paid  off.  The  ill-luck  which 
had  made  our  voyage  homeward  so  long  (we  sailed  from  Syd- 
ney on  the  2nd  of  May)  pursued  us  in  the  Channel,  and  we  did 
not  reach  Chatham  until  the  2nd  of  November ;  and  what  do  you 
think  was  one  of  the  first  things  I  did  when  we  reached  Plym- 
outh? Wrote  to  EJiza  K.  asking  news  of  a  certain  naughty 
sister  of  mine,  from  whom  I  had  never  heard,  a  word  since  we 
had  been  away — and  if  perchance  there  should  be  any  letter, 
begging  her  to  forward  it  immediately  to  Chatham.  And  so, 
when  at  length  we  got  there,  I  found  your  kind  long  letter  had 
been  in  England  some  six  or  seven  months ;  but  hearing  of  the 
likelihood  of  our  return,  they  had  very  judiciously  not  sent  it 
to  me. 

Your  letter,  my  poor  Lizzie,  justifies  many  a  heartache  I 
have  had  when  thinking  over  your  lot,  knowing,  as  I  well  do, 
what  emigrant  life  is  in  climates  less  trying  than  that  in  which 
you  live.  I  have  seen  a  good  deal  of  bush  life  in  Australia,  and 
it  enables  me  fully  to  sympathise  with  and  enter  into  every 
particular  you  tell  me — from  the  baking  and  boiling  and  pigs 
squealing,  down  to  that  ferocious  landshark  Mrs.  Gunther,  of 
whose  class  Australia  will  furnish  fine  specimens.  Had  I  been 
at  home,  too,  I  could  have  enlightened  the  good  folks  as  to  the 
means  of  carriage  in  the  colonies,  and  could  have  told  them 
that  the  two  or  twenty  thousand  miles  over  sea  is  the  smallest 
part  of  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  getting  anything  to  people 
living  inland;  as  it  is,  I  think  I  have  done  some  good  in  the 
matter;  their  meaning  was  good  but  their  discretion  small.  But 
the  obtuseness  of  English  in  general  about  anything  out  of  the 
immediate  circle  of  their  own  experience  is  someAing  won- 
derful. 

I  had  heard  here  and  there  fractional  accounts  of  your 
doings  from  Eliza  K.  and  my  mother — not  of  the  most  cheery 
description — and  therefore  I  was  right  glad  to  get  your  letter, 
which,  though  it  tells  of  sorrow  and  misfortune  enough  and' to 
spare,  yet  shows  me  that  the  brave  woman's  heart  you  always 
had,  my  dearest  Lizzie,  is  still  yours,  and  that  you  have  always 
had  the  warm  love  of  those  immediately  around  you,  and  now, 
as  the  doctor's  letter  tells  us,  you  have  one  more  source  of  joy 
and  happiness,  and  this  new  joy  must  efface  the  bitterness — 


68  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 

do.  It  would  be  glorious  to  be  a  voice  working  in  secret  and 
free  from  all  those  personal  motives  that  have  actuated  the  best. 
But,  unfortunately,  one  is  not  a  '*  vox  et  prseterea  nihil/'  but 
with  a  considerable  corporality  attached  which  requires  feeding, 
and  so  while  my  inner  man  is  continually  indulging  in  these 
anchorite  reflections,  the  outer  is  sedulously  elbowing  and  push- 
ing as  if  he  dreamed  of  nothing  but  gold  medals  and  pro- 
fessors' caps. 

I  am  getting  on  very  well — better  I  fear  than  I  deserve. 
One  of  my  papers  was  published  in  1849  i"  ^^^  PhilosophiccU 
Transactions,  another  in  the  Zoological  Transactions,  and  some 
more  may  be  published  in  the  Linncpan  if  I  like — but  I  think  I 
shall  not  like.  Then  I  have  worked  pretty  hard,  and  brought 
home  a  considerable  amount  of  drawings  and  notes  about  new 
or  rare  animals,  all  particularly  nasty  slimy  things,  and  they 
will  most  likely  be  published  as  a  separate  work  by  the  Royal 
Society. 

Owens,  Forbes,  Bell,  and  Sharpey  (the  doctor  will  tell  you 
of  what  weight  these  names  are)  are  all  members  of  the  com- 
mittee which  disposes  of  the  money,  and  are  all  strongly  in 
favour  of  my  "valuable  researches"  (cock-a-doodle-doo!!) 
being  published  by  the  Society.  From  various  circumstances  I 
have  taken  a  better  position  than  I  could  have  expected  among 
these  grandees,  and  I  find  them  all  immensely  civil  and  ready  to 
help  me  on,  tooth  and  nail,  particularly  Prof.  Forbes,  who  is  a 
right  good  fellow,  and  has  taken  a  great  deal  of  trouble  on  my 
behalf.  Owen  volunteered  to  write  to  the  "  First  Lord "  on 
my  behalf,  and  did  so.  Sharpey,  when  I  saw  him,  reminded 
me,  as  he  always  does,  of  my  great  contest  with  Stocks*  (do 
you  remember  throwing  the  shoe?),  and  promised  me  all  the 
assistance  in  his  power.  Prof.  Bell,  who  is  secretary  to  the 
Royal,  and  has  great  influence,  promised  to  help  me  in  every 
way,  and  asked  me  to  dine  with  him  and  meet  a  lot  of  nobs. 
I  take  all  these  things  quite  as  a  matter  of  course,  but  am 
all  the  while  considerably  astonished.  The  other  day  I  dined 
at  the  Geological  Club  and  met  Lyell,  Murchison,  de  la  B[eche] 
Horner,  and  a  lot  more,  and  last  evening  I  dined  with  a  whole 
lot  of  literary  and  scientific  people. 

Owen  was,  in  my  estimation,  great,  from  the  fact  of  his 
smoking  his  cigar  and  singing  his  song  like  a  brick. 

I  tell  you  all  these  things  to  show  you  clearly  how  I  stand. 

*See  p.  19. 


70 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  v 


could  not  get  her  the  bird  with  the  long  tail,  but  that  some  day 
I  will  send  her  some  pictures  of  copper-coloured  gentlemen  with 
great  big  wigs  and  no  trousers,  and  tell  her  her  old  uncle  loves 
her  very  much  and  never  forgets  her  nor  anybody  else. 

God  bless  you,  dearest  Lizzie.  Write  soon.  —  Ever  your 
brother,  Tom. 

Thus  within  a  month  of  landing  in  England,  Huxley 
had  secured  his  footing  in  the  scientific  world.  He  was 
freed  for  the  time  from  the  more  irksome  part  of  his  pro- 
fession ;  his  service  in  the  navy  had  become  a  stepping- 
stone  to  the  pursuits  in  which  his  heart  really  was.  He  had 
long  been  half  in  despair  over  the  work  which  he  had  sent 
out  like  the  dove  from  the  ark,  if  haply  it  might  find  him 
some  standing  ground  in  the  world;  no  news  of  it  had 
reached  him  till  he  was  about  to  start  on  his  homeward 
voyage,  but  he  returned  to  discover  that  at  a  single  stroke 
it  had  placed  him  in  the  front  rank  of  naturalists. 

41  North  Bank,  Regent's  Park, 
Jan.  3,  1851. 

My  progress  (he  writes),*  must  necessarily  be  slow  and  un- 
certain. I  cannot  see  two  steps  forwards.  Much  depends  upon 
myself,  much  upon  circumstances.  Hitherto  all  has  gone  as  well 
as  I  could  wish.  I  have  gained  each  object  that  I  had  set  before 
myself — that  is,  I  have  my  shore  appointment,  I  have  found  a 
means  of  publishing  what  I  have  done  creditably,  and  I  have 
continued  to  come  into  communication  with  some  of  the  first 
men  in  England  in  my  department  of  science.  But,  as  I  have 
found  to  be  the  case  in  all  things  that  are  gained,  from  money 
to  friendship,  it  is  not  so  much  getting  as  keeping.  It  is  by  no 
means  difficult  if  you  are  decently  introduced,  have  tolerably 
agreeable  manners,  and  some  smattering  of  science,  to  take  a 
position  among  these  folks,  but  it  is  a  mighty  different  affair  to 
keep  it  and  turn  it  to  account.  Not  like  the  man  who,  at  the 
Enchanted  Castle,  had  the  courage  to  blow  the  horn  but  not  to 
draw  the  sword,  and  was  consequently  shot  forth  from  the 
mouth  of  the  cave  by  which  he  entered  with  most  ignominious 
haste, — one  must  be  ready  to  fight  immediately  after  one's 
arrival  has  been  announced,  or  be  blown  into  oblivion. 

*  When  not  otherwise  specified,  the  extracts  in  this  chapter  are  from 
letters  to  his  future  wife. 


h 


72  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  v 

him  the  greatest  kindness  throughout  this  period  of  strug- 
gle, and  the  sympathy  and  intellectual  stimulus  he  received 
from  their  society  were  of  the  utmost  help.  They  were  al- 
ways ready  to  welcome  him  at  Greenwich,  and  he  not  only 
often  ran  down  there  for  a  week-end,  but  would  spend  part 
of  his  vacations  with  them  at  Lowestoft  or  Tenby,  where 
naturalists  could  find  plenty  of  occupation. 

But  from  a  worldly  point  of  view,  it  was  too  soon  clear 
that  science  was  sadly  unprofitable.  There  seemed  no 
speedy  prospect  of  making  enough  to  marry  on.  As  early 
as  March  185 1  he  writes: — 

The  difficulties  of  obtaining  a  decent  position  in  England  in 
anything  like  a  reasonable  time  seem  to  me  greater  than  ever 
they  were.  To  attempt  to  live  by  any  scientific  pursuit  is  a 
farce.  Nothing  but  what  is  absolutely  practical  will  go  down 
in  England.  A  man  of  science  may  earn  great  distinction,  but 
not  bread.  He  will  get  invitations  to  all  sorts  of  dinners  and 
conversaziones,  but  not  enough  income  to  pay  his  cab  fare.  A 
man  of  science  in  these  times  is  like  an  Esau  who  sells  his  birth- 
right for  a  mess  of  pottage.  Again,  if  one  turns  to  practice, 
it  is  still  the  old  story — wait;  and  only  after  years  of  working 
like  a  galley-slave  and  intriguing  like  a  courtier  is  there  any 
chance  of  getting  a  decent  livelihood.  I  am  not  at  all  sure 
if  .  .  .  it  would  not  be  the  most  prudent  thing  to  stick  by  the 
Service:  there  at  any  rate  is  certainty  in  health  and  in  sickness. 

Nevertheless  he  was  mightily  encouraged  in  the  work  of 
bringing  out  his  Rattlesnake  papers  by  a  notable  success  in 
a  quarter  where  he  scarcely  dared  to  hope  for  it.  The 
Royal  Society  had  for  some  time  set  itself  to  become  a  body 
of  working  men  of  science;  to  exclude  for  the  future  all 
mere  dilettanti,  and  to  admit  a  limited  number  of  men  whose 
work  was  such  as  to  deserve  recognition.  Thanks  to  the 
initiative  of  Forbes,  he  now  found  this  recognition  accorded 
to  him  on  the  strength  of  his  "  Medusa  "  paper.  He  writes 
in  February : — 

The  F.R.S.  that  you  tell  me  you  dream  of  being  appended  to 
my  name  is  nearer  than  one  might  think,  to  my  no  small  sur- 
prise. ...  I  had  no  idea  that  it  was  at  all  within  my  reach,  until 
I  found  out  the  other  day,  talking  with  Mr.  Bell,  that  my  having 
a  paper  in  the  Transactions  was  one  of  the  best  of  qualifications. 


74  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 

Again,  on  May  4 : — 

I  am  twenty-six  to-day  .  .  .  and  it  reminds  me  that  I  have 
left  you  now  a  whole  year.  It  is  perfectly  frightful  to  think  how 
the  time  is  slipping  by,  and  yet  seems  to  bring  us  no  nearer. 

What  have  I  done  with  my  twenty-sixth  year?  Six  months 
were  spent  at  sea,  and  therefore  may  be  considered  as  so  much 
lost;  and  six  months  I  have  had  in  England.  That,  I  may  say, 
has  not  been  thrown  away  altogether  without  fruit.  I  have  read 
a  good  deal  and  I  have  written  a  good  deal.  I  have  made  some 
valuable  friends,  and  have  found  my  work  more  highly  esti- 
mated than  I  had  ventured  to  hope.  I  must  tell  you  something, 
because  it  will  please  you,  even  if  you  think  me  vain  for 
doing  so. 

I  was  talking  to  Professor  Owen  yesterday,  and  said  that  I 
imagined  I  had  to  thank  him  in  great  measure  for  the  honour  of 
the  F.R.S.  "  No,"  he  said,  "  you  have  nothing  to  thank  but  the 
goodness  of  your  own  work."  For  about  ten  minutes  I  felt 
rather  proud  of  that  speech,  and  shall  keep  it  by  me  whenever 
I  feel  inclined  to  think  myself  a  fool,  and  that  I  have  a  most 
mistaken  notion  of  my  own  capacities.  The  only  use  of  honours 
is  as  an  antidote  to  such  fits  of  the  "  blue  devils."  Of  one  thing, 
however,  which  is  by  no  means  so  agreeable,  my  opportunities 
for  seeing  the  scientific  world  in  England  force  upon  me  every 
day  a  stronger  and  stronger  conviction.  It  is  that  there  is  no 
chance  of  living  by  science.  I  have  been  loth  to  believe  it,  but 
it  is  so.  There  are  not  more  than  four  or  five  offices  in  London 
which  a  Zoologist  or  Comparative  Anatomist  can  hold  and  live 
by.  Owen,  who  has  a  European  reputation,  second  only  to  that 
of  Cuvier,  gets  as  Hunterian  Professor  £300  a  year !  which  is 
less  than  the  salary  of  many  a  bank  clerk.  My  friend  Forbes, 
who  is  a  highly  distinguished  and  a  very  able  man,  gets  the 
same  from  his  office  of  Paleontologist  to  the  Geological  Survey 
of  Great  Britain.  Now,  these  are  first-rate  men — men  who  have 
been  at  work  for  years  laboriously  toiling  upward — men  whose 
abilities,  had  they  turned  them  into  the  many  channels  of  money- 
making,  must  have  made  large  fortunes.  But  the  beauty  of 
Nature  and  the  pursuit  of  Truth  allured  them  into  a  nobler  life 
— and  this  is  the  result.  ...  In  literature  a  man  may  write  for 
magazines  and  reviews,  and  so  support'  himself;  but  not  so  in 
science.  I  could  get  anything  I  write  into  any  of  the  journals 
or  any  of  the  Transactions,  but  I  know  no  means  of  thereby 
earning  five  shillings.    ■  A  man  who  chooses  a  life  of  science 


76 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  v 


Do  you  understand  this  ?  I  know  you  do ;  our  old  oneness  of 
feeling  will  not  desert  us  here.  .  .  . 

To-day  a  most  unexpected  occurrence  came  to  my  know- 
ledge. I  must  tell  you  that  the  Queen  places  at  the  disposal  of 
the  Royal  Society  once  a  year  a  valuable  gold  medal  to  be  g^ven 
to  the  author  of  the  best  paper  upon  either  a  physical,  chemical, 
or  anatomical  or  physiological  subject.  One  of  these  branches 
of  science  is  chosen  by  the  Royal  Society  for  each  year,  and 
therefore  for  any  given  subject — say  anatomy  and  physiology; 
it  becomes  a  triennial  prize,  and  is  given  to  the  best  memoir  in 
the  Transactions  for  three  years. 

It  happens  that  the  Royal  Medal,  as  it  is  called,  is  this  year 
g^ven  in  Anatomy  and  Physiology.  I  had  no  idea  that  I  had  the 
least  chance  of  getting  it,  and  made  no  effort  to  do  so.  But  I 
heard  this  morning  from  a  member  of  the  Council  that  the 
award  was  made  yesterday,  and  that  I  was  within  an  ace  of 
getting  it.  Newport,  a  man  of  high  standing  in  the  scientific 
world,  and  myself  were  the  two  between  whom  the  choice  rested, 
and  eventually  it  was  given  to  him,  on  account  of  his  having  a 
greater  bulk  of  matter  in  his  papers,  so  evenly  did  the  balance 
swing.  Had  I  only  had  the  least  idea  that  I  should  be  selected 
they  should  have  had  enough  and  to  spare  from  me.  However, 
I  do  not  grudge  Newport  his  medal ;  he  is  a  good  and  a  worthy 
competitor,  old  enough  to  be  my  father,  and  has  long  had  a 
high  reputation.  Except  for  its  practical  value  as  a  means  of 
getting  a  position  I  care  little  enough  for  the  medal.  What  I 
do  care  for  is  the  justification  which  the  being  marked  in  this 
position  gives  to  the  course  I  have  taken.  Obstinate  and  self- 
willed  as  I  am  .  .  .  there  are  times  when  grave  doubts  over- 
shadow my  mind,  and  then  such  testimony  as  this  restores  my 
self-confidence. 

To  let  you  know  the  full  force  of  what  I  have  been  saying, 
I  must  tell  you  that  this  "  Royal  Medal "  is  what  such  men  as 
Owen  and  Faraday  are  glad  to  get,  and  is  indeed  one  of  the 
highest  honours  in  England. 

To-day  I  had  the  great  pleasure  of  meeting  my  old  friend  Sir 
John  Richardson  (to  whom  I  was  mainly  indebted  for  my  ap- 
pointment in  the  Rattlesnake).  Since  I  left  England  he  has 
married  a  third  wife,  and  has  taken  a  hand  in  joining  in  search 
of  Franklin  (which  was  more  dreadful?),  like  an  old  hero  as 
he  is ;  but  not  a  feather  of  him  is  altered,  and  he  is  as  grey,  as 
really  kind,  and  as  seemingly  abrupt  and  grim,  as  ever  he  was. 
Such  a  fine  old  polar  bear ! 


CHAPTER  VI 
1851-1854 

The  course  pursued  by  the  Government  in  the  matter  of 
Huxley's  papers  is  curious  and  instructive.  The  Admiralty 
minute  of  1849  ^^^  promised  either  money  assistance  for 
publishing  or  speedy  promotion  as  an  encouragement  to 
scientific  research  in  the  Navy,  especially  by  the  medical 
officers.  On  leave  to  publish  the  scientific  results  of  the 
expedition  being  asked  for,  the  Department  forestalled  any 
request  for  monetary  aid  by  an  intimation  that  none  would 
be  given.  Strong  representations,  however,  from  the  lead- 
ing scientific  authorities  induced  them  to  grant  the  appoint- 
ment to  the  Fisguard  for  six  months. 

The  sequel  shows  how  the  departmental  representatives 
of  science  did  their  best  for  science  in  Huxley's  case,  so  far 
as  in  their  power  lay : — 

June  6,  185 1. — The  other  day  I  received  an  intimation  that 
my  presence  was  required  at  Somerset  House.  I  rather  expected 
the  mandate,  as  six  months'  leave  was  up.  Sir  William  was 
▼cry  civil,  and  told  me  that  the  Commander  of  the  Fisguard  had 
applied  to  the  Admiralty  to  know  what  was  to  be  done  with  me, 
as  my  leave  had  expired.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  go  to  Forrest "  (his 
secretary),  "write  a  letter  to  me,  stating  what  you  want,  and  I 
will  get  it  done  for  you."  So  away  I  went  and  applied  for  an 
indefinite  amount  of  leave,  on  condition  of  reporting  the 
progress  of  my  work  every  six  months,  and  as  I  suppose  I  shall 
get  it,  I  feel  quite  easy  on  that  head. 

In  May  185 1  he  applied  to  the  Royal  Society  for  help 
from  the  Government  Grant  towards  publishing  the  bulk 
of  his  work  as  a  whole,  for  much  of  its  value  would  be  lost 

77 


78  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

if  scattered  fragmentarily  among  the  Transactions  of  vari- 
ous learned  societies.  Personally,  the  members  of  the  com- 
mittee were  very  willing  to  make  the  grant,  but  on  further 
consideration  it  appeared  that  the  money  was  to  be  applied 
for  promoting  research,  not  for  assisting  publication;  and 
moreover,  it  was  desirable  not  to  establish  a  precedent  for 
saddling  the  funds  at  the  disposal  of  the  Society  with  all 
the  publications  which  it  was  the  clear  duty  of  the  Govern- 
ment to  undertake.  On  this  ground  the  application  was 
refused,  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  resolved  that  the  Gov- 
ernment be  formally  asked  to  give  the  necessary  subvention 
towards  bringing  out  these  valuable  papers. 

A  similar  resolution  was  passed  at  the  Ipswich  meeting 
of  the  British  Association  in  July  185 1,  and  at  a  meeting  of 
its  Council  in  March  1852  the  President  declared  himself 
ready  to  carry  it  into  eflFect  by  asking  the  Treasury  for  the 
needful  £300.  But  at  the  July  meeting  he  could  only  re- 
port a  non  possumus  answer  for  the  current  year  (1852)  from 
the  Government,  and  a  resolution  was  passed  recommend- 
ing that  application  on  the  subject  be  renewed  by  the  British 
Association  in  the  following  year. 

Meanwhile,  weary  of  official  delay,  Huxley  had  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  writing  direct  to  the  Duke  of  Northum- 
berland, then  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  whom  he  knew 
to  take  an  interest  in  scientific  research.  At  the  same  time 
he  stirred  Lord  Rosse,  the  President  of  the  Royal  Society, 
to  repeat  his  application  to  the  Treasury.  Although  the 
Admiralty  in  April  1852  again  refused  money  help,  and  bade 
him  apply  to  the  Royal  Society  for  a  portion  of  the  Govern- 
ment Grant  (which  the  latter  had  already  refused  him),  the 
Hydrographer  was  directed  to  make  inquiries  as  to  the  pro- 
priety of  granting  him  an  extension  of  leave.  To  his  ques- 
tion asking  the  exact  amount  of  time  still  required  for  finish- 
ing the  work  of  publication,  Huxley  returned  what  he 
described  as  a  "  savage  reply,"  that  his  experience  of  en- 
gravers led  him  to  think  that  the  plates  could  be  published 
in  eight  or  nine  months  from  the  receipt  of  a  grant;  that 
he  had  reason  to  believe  this  grant  might  soon  be  promised, 
but  that  the  long  delay  was  solely  due  to  the  remissness 


l85»-3        TREASURY  AND  ADMIRALTY  29 

of  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  represent  his  claims  to  the 
Goveminent ;  and  finally,  that  he  must  ask  for  a  year's  ex- 
tension of  leave. 

For  these  expressions  his  conscience  smote  him  when, 
on  June  12,  at  a  soiree  of  the  Royal  Society.  Lord  Rosse 
took  him  aside  and  informed  him  that  he  had  seen  Sir  C. 
Trevelyan,  the  Under  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  who  said 
there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  the  matter  if  it  were  properiy 
laid  before  the  Prime  l^Iinister,  Lord  Derbv.  To  Lord 
Derby  therefore  he  went,  and  wzs  told  that  Mr.  Huxley 
should  go  to  the  Treasury  and  arrange  matters  in  person 
with  Treveh-an.  At  the  same  time  the  indignant  tone  of 
his  letter  to  the  Hydrc^^pher  seemed  to  have  done  good ; 
he  was  invited  to  explain  matters  in  person,  and  was  granted 
the  leave  he  asked  for. 

Everything  now  seemed  to  point  to  a  speedy  solution  of 
his  difficulties.  The  promise  of  a  grant,  of  course,  did 
nothing  immediate,  but  assured  him  a  good  position,  and 
settled  aU  the  scruples  of  the  Admiralty  with  regard  to  time. 
"  You  have  no  notion,"  he  writes,  "  of  the  trouble  the  grant 
has  cost  me.  It  died  a  natural  death  till  I  \^TOte  to  the 
Duke  in  March,  and  brought  it  to  life  again.  The  more 
opposition  there  is,  the  more  determined  I  am  to  carry  it 
throng^."  But  he  was  doomed  to  a  worse  disappointment 
than  before.  Trevelvan  received  him  ver>*  civilly,  but  had 
heard  nothing  on  the  matter  from  Lord  Derby,  and  accord- 
ingly sent  him  in  charge  of  his  pri\'ate  secretary-  to  see  Lord 
Derby's  secretary-.  The  latter  had  seen  no  papers  relating 
to  any  such  matter,  and  supposed  Lord  Derby  had  not 
brought  them  from  St.  James'  Square,  **  but  promised  to 
write  to  me  as  soon  as  anything  was  learnt.  I  look  upon  it 
as  adjourned  sine  dU.""  Parliament  breaking  up  immedi> 
ately  after  gave  the  officials  a  good  excuse  for  doing  nothing 
more. 

When  his  year's  leave  expired  in  June  1853,  he  i*TOte 
the  following  letter  to  Sir  William  Burnett : — 

As  the  period  of  my  leave  of  absence  from  H.M.S.  Fisguard 
is  about  to  expire,  I  have  the  honour  to  report  that  the  duty  on 
which  I  have  been  engaged  has  been  carried  out,  as  far  as  my 


So  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

means  permit,  by  the  publication  of  a  "  Memoir  upon  the  Homol- 
ogies of  the  Cephalous  Mollusca,"  with  four  plates,  which  ap- 
peared in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1852  (published 
1853),  being  the  fourth  memoir  resulting  from  the  observations 
made  during  the  voyage  of  H.M.S.  Rattlesnake  which  has  ap- 
peared in  these  Transactions. 

I  have  the  pleasure  of  being  able  to  add  that  the  President 
and  Council  of  the  Royal  Society  have  considered  these  memoirs 
worthy  of  being  rewarded  by  the  Royal  Medal  in  Physiology 
for  1852,  which  they  did  me  the  honour  to  confer  in  the  Novem- 
ber of  that  year. 

I  regret  that  no  definite  answer  of  any  kind  having  as  yet 
been  given  to  the  strong  representations  which  were  made  by  the 
Presidents  both  of  the  Royal  Society  and  of  the  British  Associa- 
tion in  1852  to  H.M.  Government — representations  which  have 
recently  been  earnestly  repeated — in  order  to  obtain  a  grant  for 
the  purpose  of  publishing  the  remainder  of  these  researches  in 
a  separate  form,  I  have  been  unable  to  proceed  any  further, 
and  I  beg  to  request  a  renewal  of  my  leave  of  absence  from 
H.M.S.  Fisguard,  so  that  if  H.M.  Government  think  fit  to  give 
the  grant  applied  for,  it  may  be  in  my  power  to  make  use  of  it ; 
or^hat,  should  it  be  denied,  I  may  be  enabled  to  find  some  other 
means  of  preventing  the  total  loss  of  the  labour  of  some  years. 

Hereupon  he  was  allowed  six  months  longer,  but  with 
the  intimation  that  no  further  leave  would  be  granted.  A 
final  application  from  the  scientific  authorities  resulted  in 
fresh  inquiries  as  to  the  length  of  time  still  required,  and  the 
deadlock  between  the  two  departments  of  State  being  un- 
changed, he  replied  to  the  same  effect  as  before,  but  to  no 
purpose.  His  formal  application  for  leave  in  January  1854 
was  met  by  orders  to  join  the  Illustrious  at  Portsmouth. 
He  appealed  to  the  Admiralty  that  this  appointment  might 
be  cancelled,  giving  a  brief  summary  of  the  facts,  and 
pointing  out  that  it  was  the  inaction  of  the  Treasury  which 
had  absolutely  prevented  him  from  completing,  his  work. 

I  would  therefore  respectfully  submit  that,  under  these  cir- 
cumstances, my  request  to  be  permitted  to  remain  on  half -pay 
until  the  completion  of  the  publication  of  the  results  of  some 
years'  toil  is  not  wholly  unreasonable.  It  is  the  only  reward  for 
which  I  would  ask  their  Lordships,  and  indeed,  considering  the 
distinct  pledge  given  in  the  minute  to  which  I  have  referred, 


82  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

3.  Report  upon  the  Development  of  the  Echinoderms.  To 
appear  in  the  Annals  for  July. 

4.  On  the  Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  the  Salpae,  with  four 
plates.  Read  at  the  Royal  Society,  and  to  be  published  in  the 
next  part  of  the  Philosophical  Transactions. 

5.  On  two  Genera  of  Ascidians,  Doliolum  and  Appen- 
dicularia,  with  one  plate.  Read  at  the  Royal  Society,  and 
to  be  published  in  the  next  part  of  the  PhilosophiccU  Trans- 
actions. 

6.  On  some  peculiarities  in  the  Circulation  of  the  Mollusca. 
Sent  to  M.  Milne-Edwards,  at  his  request,  to  be  published  in  the 
Annates  des  Sciences. 

7.  On  the  Generative  Organs  of  the  Physophoridae  and 
Diphydae.  Sent  to  Prof.  Miiller  of  Berlin  for  publication  in  his 
Archiv. 

By  the  end  of  the  year  he  had  four  more  to  report: — 
I.  On  the  Hydrostatic  Acalephae;  2.  On  the  genus  Sagitta, 
both  published  in  the  Report  of  the  British  Association  for 
1851 ;  3.  On  Lacinularia  Socialis,  a  contribution  to  the 
anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  Rotifera,  in  the  Transactions 
of  the  Microscopical  Society;  4.  On  Thalassicolla,  a  new 
zoophyte,  in  the  Annals  of  Natural  History.  Next  year  he 
read  before  the  British  Association  a  paper  entitled  "  Re- 
searches into  the  Structure  of  the  Ascidians,"  and  a  very 
important  one  on  the  Morphology  of  the  Cephalous  Mol- 
lusca, afterwards  published  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions. 
In  addition  he  had  prepared  a  great  part  of  his  longer  work 
for  publication ;  out  of  twenty-four  or  twenty-five  plates, 
nineteen  were  rea(}y  for  the  engraver  when  he  wrote  his 
appeal  to  the  Duke  of  Northumberland.  In  this  same  year, 
1852,  he  was  also  awarded  the  Royal  Medal  in  Physiology 
for  the  value  of  his  contributions  to  the  Philosophical  Trans- 
actions. 

In  1853,  besides  seeing  some  of  these  papers  through 
the  press,  he  published  one  on  the  existence  of  Cellulose  in 
the  Tunic  of  Ascidians,  read  before  the  Microscopical  So- 
ciety, and  two  papers  on  the  Structure  of  the  Teeth;  the 
latter,  of  course,  like  a  paper  of  the  previous  year  on  Echi- 
nococcus,  being  distinct  from  the  Rattlesnake  work.  The 
greater  work  on  Oceanic  Hydrozoa,  over  which  the  battle 


86  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

41  North  Bank,  Regent's  Park, 

May  7,  1852. 

My  dear  Tyndall — Allow  me  to  be  one  of  the  first  to  have 
the  pleasure  of  congratulating  you  on  your  new  honours.  I  had 
the  satisfaction  last  night  to  hear  your  name  read  out  as  one  of 
the  selected  of  the  Council  of  the  Royal  Society  for  election  to  the 
Fellowship  this  year,  and  you  are  therefore  as  good  as  elected. 

I  always  made  sure  of  your  success,  but  I  am  not  the  less 
pleased  that  it  is  now  a  fait  accompli, — I  am,  my  dear  Tyndall, 
faithfully  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

PS. — I  have  heard  nothing  of  Toronto,  and  I  begin  to  think 
that  the  whole  aflfair,  University  and  all,  is  a  myth. 

His  hopes  of  the  Colonies  failing,  he  tried  each  of  the 
divisions  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  turn,  with  uniform  ill- 
success;  in  1852-53  at  Aberdeen  and  at  Cork;  in  1853  at 
King's  College,  London.  He  had  great  hopes  of  Aberdeen 
at  first;  the  appointment  lay  with  the  Home  Secretary,  a 
personal  friend  of  Sir  J.  Clark,  who  was  interested  in  Hux- 
ley though  not  personally  acquainted  with  him.  But  no 
sooner  had  he  written  to  urge  the  latter's  claims  than  a 
change  of  ministry  took  place,  and  other  influences  com- 
manded the  field.  It  was  cold  comfort  that  Clark  told  him 
only  to  wait — something  must  turn  up.  There  was  still  a 
great  probability  of  the  Toronto  chair  falling  to  a  Cork 
professor;  so  with  this  in  view,  he  gave  up  a  trip  to  Cha- 
mounix  with  his  brother,  and  attended  the  meeting  of  the 
British  Association  at  Belfast  in  August  1852,  in  order 
to  make  himself  known  to  the  Irish  men  of  science,  for,  as 
his  friends  told  him,  personal  influence  went  for  so  much, 
and  while  most  men's  reputations  were  better  than  them- 
selves, he  might  flatter  himself  that  he  was  better  than  his 
reputation.  But  this,  too,  came  to  nothing,  and  the  King's 
College  appointment  also  went  to  the  candidate  who  was 
backed  by  the  most  powerful  influence. 

A  fatality  seemed  to  dog  his  efforts;  nevertheless  he 
writes  at  the  end  of  1851 : — 

Among  my  scientific  friends  the  monition  I  get  on  all  sides  is 
that  of  Dante's  great  ancestor  to  him — 

Se  tu  segui  la  tua  Stella. 


88  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vi 

with  no  excitement  and  no  occupation  for  the  higher  powers  of 
the  intellect,  with  its  great  aspirations  stifled  and  all  the  great 
problems  of  existence  set  hopelessly  in  the  background,  offers  to 
me  a  prospect  that  would  be  utterly  intolerable  but  for  your 
love.  .  .  .  Sometimes  I  am  half  mad  with  the  notion  of  bury- 
ing all  my  powers  in  a  mere  struggle  for  a  livelihood.  Some- 
times I  am  equally  wild  at  thinking  of  the  long  weary  while  that 
has  passed  since  we  met.  There  are  times  when  I  cannot  bear 
to  think  of  leaving  my  present  pursuits,  when  I  feel  I  should  be 
guilty  of  a  piece  of  cowardly  desertion  from  my  duty  in  doing 
it,  and  there  come  intervals  when  I  would  give  truth  and  sci- 
ence and  all  hopes  to  be  folded  in  your  arms.  ...  I  know  which 
course  is  right,  but  I  never  know  which  I  may  follow;  help 
me  .  .  .  for  there  is  only  one  course  in  which  there  is  either 
hope  or  peace  for  me. 

These  repeated  disappointments  deepened  the  fits  of  de- 
pression which  constantly  assailed  him.  He  was  torn  by 
two  opposing  thoughts.  Was  it  just,  was  it  right,  to  demand 
so  great  a  sacrifice  from  the  woman  who  had  entrusted  her 
future  to  the  uncertain  chances  of  his  fortunes?  Could  he 
ask  her  to  go  on  offering  up  the  best  years  of  her  life  to 
aspirations  of  his  which  were  possibly  chimerical,  or  per- 
haps merely  selfishness  in  disguise,  which  ought  to  yield  to 
more  imperative  duties?  Why  not  clip  the  wings  of  Peg- 
asus, and  descend  to  the  sober,  everyday  jog-trot  after 
plain  bread  and  cheese  like  other  plain  people  ?  Time  after 
time  he  almost  made  up  his  mind  to  throw  science  to  the 
winds;  to  emigrate  and  establish  a  practice  in  Sydney;  to 
try  even  squatting  or  storekeeping.  And  yet  he  knew  only 
too  well  that  with  his  temperament  no  life  would  bring  him 
the  remotest  approach  to  lasting  happiness  and  satisfaction 
except  one  that  gave  scope  to  his  intellectual  passion.  To 
yield  to  the  immediate  pressure  of  circumstances  was  per- 
haps ignoble,  was  even  more  probably  a  surer  road  to  the 
loss  of  happiness  for  himself  and  for  his  wife  than  the 
repeated  and  painful  sacrifices  of  the  present.  With  all 
this,  however,  and  the  more  when  assured  of  her  entire 
confidence  in  his  judgment,  he  could  not  but  feel  a  sense 
of  remorse  that  she  willingly  accepted  the  sacrifice,  and 
feared  that  she  might  have  done  so  rather  to  gratify  his 


90 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vi 


read  her  thoughts  as  to  whether  he  were  right  or  wrong  in 
the  course  he  was  pursuing.  He  appeals  to  her  faith  that 
he  is  choosing  the  nobler  path  in  pursuing  knowledge,  than 
in  turning  aside  to  the  temptation  of  throwing  it  up  for  the 
sake  of  their  speedier  union.  Still  she  was  right  in  claim- 
ing a  share  in  his  work;  but  for  her  his  life  would  have 
been  wasted. 

The  clouds  gathered  very  thickly  about  him  when  in 
April  1852  his  mother  died,  while  his  father  was  hopelessly 
ill.  "  Belief  and  happiness,"  he  writes,  "  seem  to  be  beyond 
the  reach  of  thinking  men  in  these  days,  but  courage  and 
silence  are  left."  Again  the  clouds  lifted,  for  in  October  he 
received  Miss  Heathorn's  "  noble  and  self-sacrificing  letter, 
which  has  given  me  more  comfort  than  anything  for  a  long 
while,"  the  keynote  of  which  was  that  a  man  should  pursue 
those  things  for  which  he  is  most  fitted,  let  them  be  what 
they  will.  He  now  felt  free  to  tell  the  vicissitudes  of 
thought  and  will  he  had  passed  through  this  twelvemonth, 
and  how  the  idea  of  giving  up  all  had  affected  him. 
"  The  spectre  of  a  wasted  life  has  passed  before  me — ^a 
vision  of  that  servant  who  hid  his  talent  in  a  napkin  and 
buried  it." 

Early  in  1853  he  writes  how  much  he  was  cheered  by  his 
sister's  advice  and  encouragement  to  persist  in  the  struggle ; 
but  the  darkest  moment  was  still  to  come.  His  hopes  from 
his  candidature  crumbled  away  one  after  the  other ;  his  leave 
from  the  Admiralty  was  coming  to  an  end,  and  there  was 
small  hope  of  renewing  it ;  the  grant  from  Government  re- 
mained as  unattainable  as  ever ;  the  long  struggle  had  taught 
him  the  full  extent  of  his  powers  only,  it  seemed,  to  end  by 
denying  him  all  opportunity  for  their  use. 

And  so  the  card  house  I  have  been  so  laboriously  building  up 
these  two  years  with  all  manner  of  hard  struggling  will  be 
tumbled  down  again,  and  my  small  light  will  be  ignominiously 
snuflFed  out  like  that  of  better  men.  ...  I  can  submit  if  the  fates 
are  too  strong.  The  world  is  no  better  than  an  arena  of  gladi- 
ators, and  I,  a  stray  savage,  have  been  turned  into  it  to  fight  my 
way  with  my  rude  club  among  the  steel-clad  fighters.  Well,  I 
have  won  my  way  into  the  front  rank,  and  ought  to  be  thankful 


92 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vi 


...  It  is  as  if  all  that  old  life  at  Holmwood  had  merely  been 
a  preparation  for  the  real  life  of  our  love — as  if  we  were  then 
children  ignorant  of  life's  real  purpose — as  if  these  last  months 
had  merely  been  my  old  doubts  over  again,  whether  I  had  rightly 
or  wrongly  interpreted  the  manner  and  the  words  that  had  given 
me  hope.  .  .  . 

We  will  be^in  the  new  loVe  of  woman  and  man,  no  longer 
that  of  boy  and  girl,  conscious  that  we  have  aims  and  pur- 
poses as  well  as  affections,  and  that  if  love  is  sweet  life  is  dread- 
fully stern  and  earnest. 

As  time  went  on  and  no  permanency  offered — although 
a  good  deal  of  writing  fell  in  his  way — ^the  strain  told 
heavily  upon  him.  In  the  autumn  he  was  quite  out  of  sorts, 
body  and  mind,  more  at  war  with  himself  than  he  ever 
was  in  his  life  before.  All  this,  he  writes,  had  darkened  his 
thoughts,  had  made  him  once  more  imagine  a  hopeless  dis- 
crepancy between  the  two  of  them  in  their  ways  of  thinking 
and  objects  in  life.  It  was  not  till  November  1853  that  this 
depression  was  banished  by  the  trust  and  confidence  of  her 
last  letter.  "  I  wish  to  Heaven,"  he  writes,  "  it  had  reached 
me  six  months  ago.  It  would  have  saved  me  a  world  of 
pain  and  error."  But  with  this,  the  worst  period  of  mental 
suffering  was  over,  and  every  haunting  doubt  was  finally 
exorcised.  His  career  was  made  possible  by  the  steady 
faith  which  neither  separation  nor  any  misgiving  nor  its  own 
troubles  could  shake.  And  from  this  point  all  things  began 
to  brighten.  His  health  had  been  restored  by  a  trip  to  the 
Pyrenees  with  his  brother  George  in  September.  He  had 
got  work  that  enabled  him  to  regard  the  Admiralty  and  its 
menaces  with  complete  equanimity ;  a  Manual  of  Compara- 
tive Anutomy,  for  Churchill  the  publisher,  regular  work  on 
the  Westminster*  and  another  book  in  prospect,  "  so  that 
if  I  quit  the  Service  to-morrow,  these  will  give  me  more  than 

*  This  regular  work  was  the  article  on  Contemporary  Science,  which 
in  October  1854  he  got  Tyndall  to  share  with  hinu  For,^&  writes, 
"  To  give  some  account  of  the  books  in  one's  own  department  is  no 
particular  trouble,  and  comes  with  me  under  the  head  of  being  paid 
for  what  I  must,  in  any  case,  do— but  I  neither  will,  nor  can,  go  on 
writing  about  books  in  other  departments,  of  which  I  am  not  com- 
petent to  form  a  judgment  even  if  I  had  the  time  to  give  to  them/' 


1853 


HAPPIER   PROSPECTS 


93 


my  pay  has  been."  And  on  December  7  he  writes  how  he 
has  been  restored  and  revived  by  reading  over  her  last  two 
letters,  and  confesses,  "  I  have  been  unjust  to  the  depth 
and  strength  of  your  devotion,  but  will  never  do  so  again." 
Then  he  tells  all  he  had  gone  through  before  leaving  Eng- 
land in  September  for  his  holiday — how  he  had  resolved 
to  abandon  all  his  special  pursuits  and  take  up  Chemistry, 
for  practical  purposes,  when  first  one  publisher  and  then 
another  asked  him  to  write  for  them,  and  hopes  were  held 
out  to  him  of  being  appointed  to  deliver  the  Fullerian  lec- 
tures at  the  Royal  Institution  for  the  next  three  years ;  while, 
most  important  of  all,  Edward  Forbes  was  likely  before  long, 
to  leave  his  post  at  the  Museum  of  Practical  Geology,  and 
he  had  already  been  spoken  to  by  the  authorities  about  fill- 
ing it.  This  was  worth  some  £200  a  year,  while  he  calcu- 
lated to  make  about  £250  by  his  pen  alone.  "  Therefore  it 
would  be  absurd  to  go  hunting  for  chemical  birds  in  the 
bush  when  I  have  such  in  the  hand." 


CHAPTER   VII 
1851-1853 

Several  letters  dating  from  185 1  to  1853  help  to  fill  up 
the  outlines  of  Huxley's  life  during  those  three  years  of 
struggle.  There  is  a  description  of  the  British  Association 
meeting  at  Ipswich  in  185 1,*  with  the  traditional  touch  of 
gaiety  to  enliven  the  gravity  of  its  proceedings,  and  the  un- 
conventional jollity  of  the  Red  Lion  Club  (a  dining-club  of 
members  of  the  Association),  whose  palmy  days  were  those 
under  the  inspiration  of  the  genial  and  gifted  Forbes.  This 
was  the  meeting  at  which  Huxley  first  began  his  alliance 
with  Tyndall,  with  whom  he  travelled  down  from  town, 
although  he  does  not  mention  his  name  in  this  letter.  With 
Hooker  he  had  already  made  acquaintance;  and  from  this 
time  forwards  the  three  were  closely  bound  together  by 
personal  regard  as  well  as  by  similarity  of  aims  and  interests. 

Then  follow  his  sketch  of  the  English  scientific  world  as 
he  found  it  in  1851,  given  in  his  letter  to  W.  Macleay; 
several  letters  to  his  sister;  the  description  of  his  first  lec- 
ture at  the  Royal  Institution,  which,  though  successful  on 
the  whole,  was  very  different  in  manner  and  delivery  from 
the  clear  and  even  flow  of  his  later  style,  with  the  voice  not 
loud  but  distinct,  the  utterance  never  hurried  beyond  the 
point  of  immediate  comprehension,  but  carrying  the  atten- 
tion of  the  audience  with  it,  eager  to  the  end.  Two  letters 
of  warning  and  remonstrance  against  the  habits  of  lecturing 

*  **  Forbes  advises  me  to  go  down  to  the  meeting  of  the  British  As- 
sociation this  year  and  make  myself  notorious  somehow  or  other. 
Thank  Heaven  I  have  impudence  enough  to  lecture  the  savans  of  Eu- 
rope if  necessary.   Can  you  imagine  me  holding  forth  ?"  (June  6, 1851.) 

94 


98 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 


July  i6,  1851. — I  went  yesterday  to  dine  with  Colonel  Sa- 
bine. We  had  a  long  discourse  about  the  prospects  and  probable 
means  of  existence  of  young  men  trying  to  make  their  way  to 
an  existence  in  the  scientific  world.  I  took,  as  indeed  what  I 
have  seen  has  forced  me  to  take,  rather  the  despairing  side  of 
the  question,  and  said  that  as  it  seemed  to  me  England  did  not 
afford  even  the  means  of  existence  to  young  men  who  were 
willing  to  devote  themselves  to  science.  However,  he  spoke 
cheeringly,  and  advised  me  by  no  means  to  be  hasty,  but  to  wait, 
and  he  doubted  not  that  I  should  succeed.  He  cited  his  own 
case  as  an  instance  of  waiting,  eventually  successful.  Alto- 
gether I  felt  the  better  for  what  he  said.  .  .  . 

There  has  been  a  notice  of  me  in  the  Literary  Gazette  for 
last  week,  much  more  laudatory  than  I  deserve,  from  the  pen  of 
my  friend  Forbes,*  .  .  . 

In  the  same  number  is  a  rich  song  from  the  same  fertile  and 
versatile  pen,  which  was  sung  at  one  of  our  Red  Lion  meetings. 
That  is  why  I  want  you  to  look  at  it,  not  that  you  will  under- 
stand it,  because  it  is  full  of  allusions  to  occurrences  known  only 
in  the  scientific  circles.  At  Ipswich  we  had  a  grand  Red  Lion 
meeting;  about  forty  members  were  present,  and  among  them 
some  of  the  most  distinguished  members  of  the  Association. 
Some  foreigners  were  invited  (the  Prince  of  Canino,  Buona- 
parte's nephew,  among  others),  and  were  not  a  little  astonished 
to  see  the  grave  professors,  whose  English  solemnity  and  gravity 
they  had  doubtless  commented  on  elsewhere,  giving  themselves 
up  to  all  sorts  of  fun.  Among  the  Red  Lions  we  have  a  custom 
(instead  of  cheering)  of  waving  and  wagging  one  coat-tail 
(one  Lion's  tail)  when  we  applaud.  This  seemed  to  strike  the 
Prince's  fancy  amazingly,  and  when  he  got  up  to  return  thanks 
for  his  health  being  drunk,  he  told  us  that  as  he  was  rather 
out  of  practice  in  speaking  English,  he  would  return  thanks 
in  our  fashion,  and  therewith  he  gave  three  mighty  roars  and 
wags,  to  the  no  small  amusement  of  every  one.  He  is  singularly 
like  the  portraits  of  his  uncle,  and  seems  a  very  jolly,  good- 
humoured  old  fellow.  I  believe,  however,  he  is  a  bit  of  a  rip. 
It  was  remarkable  how  proud  the  Quakers  were  of  being  noticed 
by  him. 

*  An  appreciation  of  his  papers  on  the  Physophoridae  and  Sagitta, 
speaking  highly  both  of  his  observations  and  philosophic  power,  in 
the  report  of  the  proceedings  in  Section  D. 


100  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

I  have  been  working  in  all  things  with  a  reference  to  wide 
views  of  zoological  philosophy,  and  the  report  upon  the  Echino- 
derms  is  intended  in  common  with  the  mem.  on  the  Salpae  to 
explain  my  views  of  Individuality  among  the  lower  animals — 
views  which  I  mean  to  illustrate  still  further  and  enunciate  still 
more  clearly  in  my  book  that  is  to  be.*  They  have  met  with 
approval  from  Carpenter,  as  you  will  see  by  the  last  edition  of 
his  Principles  of  Physiology,  and  I  think  that  Forbes  and  some 
others  will  be  very  likely  eventually  to  come  round  to  them,  but 
everything  that  relates  to  abstract  thought  is  at  a  low  ebb  among 
the  mass  of  naturalists  in  this  country. 

In  the  paper  upon  "  Thalassicolla,"  and  in  that  which  I  read 
before  the  British  Association,  as  also  in  one  upon  the  organisa- 
tion of  the  Rotifera,  which  I  am  going  to  have  published  in  the 
Microscopical  Society*s  Transactions,  I  have  been  driving  in 
a  series  of  wedges  into  Cuvier's  Radiata,  and  showing  how  selon 
tnoi  they  ought  to  be  distributed. 

I  am  every  day  becoming  more  and  more  certain  that  you 
were  on  the  right  track  thirty  years  ago  in  your  views  of  the 
order  and  symmetry  to  be  traced  in  the  true  natural  system. 

During  the  next  session  I  mean  to  send  in  a  paper  to  the 
R.S.  upon  the  "  Homologies  of  the  Mollusca,"  which  shall 
astonish  -  them.  I  want  to  get  done  for  the  Mollusca  what 
Savigny  did  for  the  Articulata,  viz.  to  show  how  they  all — 
Cephalopoda,  Gasteropoda,  Pteropoda,  Heteropoda,  etc.  —  are 
organised  on  one  type,  and  how  the  homologous  organs  are 
modified  in  each.  What  with  this  and  the  book,  I  shall  have 
enough  to  do  for  the  next  six  months. 

You  will  doubtless  ask  what  is  the  practical  outlook  of  all 
this?  whether  it  leads  anywhere  in  the  direction  of  bread  and 
cheese  ?    To  this  also  I  can  give  a  tolerably  satisfactory  answer. 

As  you  won't  have  a  Professor  of  Natural  History  at  Syd- 
ney— to  my  great  sorrow — I  have  gone  in  as  a  candidate  for  a 
Professorial  chair  at  the  other  end  of  the  world,  Toronto  in 
Canada.  In  England  there  is  nothing  to  be  done — it  is  the  most 
hopeless  prospect  I  know  of;  of  course  the  Service  offers  noth- 
ing for  me  except  irretrievable  waste  of  time,  and  the  scientific 
appointments  are  so  few  and  so  poor  that  they  are  not  tempt- 
ing. .  .  . 

Had  the  Sydney  University  been  carried  out  as  originally 
proposed,  I  should  certainly  have  become  a  candidate  for  the 

*  He  lectured  on  this  subject  at  the  Royal  Institution  in  1852. 


I02  LIFE  OF  PROFSsJOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

••'    •    * 
•'.    ••• 

mind  not  so  great  as  he  •thyjk«i  himself.  He  can  only  work  in 
the  concrete  from  bp{ie::n»  %one,  in  abstract  reasoning  he  be- 
comes lost — witn^e^*  '^"'f  arthenogenesis  "  which  he  told  me  he 
considered  one:bi'i]f{t  best  things  he  had  done ! 

He  has/hovjever,  been  very  civil  to  me,  and  I  am  as  grate- 
ful as  \  is  'possible  to  be  towards  a  man  with  whom  I  feel  it 
nec^ssarV.to  be  always  on  my  guard. 

•'.  't^^urite  another  being  is  the  other  leader  of  Zoological  Science 
•..,  In 'this  country — I  mean  Edward  Forbes,  Paleontologist  to  the 
.  .*%  *•  "Geological  Survey.    More  especially  a  Zoologist  and  a  Geologist 
••/.    :*•  *     than  a  Comparative  Anatomist,  he  has  more  claims  to  the  title 
of  a  Philosophic  Naturalist  than  any  man  I  know  of  in  England. 
A  man  of  letters  and  an  artist,  he  has  not  merged  the  man  in  the 
man  of  science — he  has  sympathies  for  all,  and  an  earnest,  truth- 
seeking,  thoroughly  genial  disposition  which  win  for  him  your 
affection  as  well  as  your  respect.    Forbes  has  more  influence  by 
his  personal  weight  and  example  upon  the  rising  generation  of 
scientific  naturalists  than  Owen  will  have  if  he  write  from  now 
till  Doomsday. 

Personally  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  him  (though  the  opinion 
I  have  just  expressed  is  that  of  the  world  in  general).  During 
my  absence  he  superintended  the  publication  of  my  paper,  and 
from  the  moment  of  my  arrival  until  now  he  has  given  me  all 
the  help  one  man  can  give  another.  Why  he  should  have  done 
so  I  do  not  know,  as  when  I  left  England  I  had  only  spoken 
to  him  once. 

The  rest  of  the  naturalists  stand  far  below  these  two  in 
learning,  originality,  and  grasp  of  mind.  Goodsir  of  Edinburgh 
should  I  suppose  come  next,  but  he  can't  write  intelligibly.  Dar- 
win might  be  anything  if  he  had  good  health.  Bell  is  a  good  man 
in  all  the  senses  of  the  word,  but  wants  qualities  2  and  3.  New- 
port is  a  laborious  man,  but  wants  i  and  3.  Grant  and  Rymer 
Jones — arcades  atnbo — ^have  mistaken  their  vocation. 

My  old  chief  Richardson  is  a  man  of  men,  but  troubles  him- 
self little  with  anything  but  detail  zoology.  What  think  you  of 
his  getting  married  for  the  third  time  just  before  his  last  ex- 
pedition? I  hardly  know  by  which  step  he  approved  himself 
the  bolder  man. 

I  think  I  have  now  fulfilled  my  promise  of  supplying  you 
with  a  little  scientific  scandal — and  if  this  long  epistle  has  repaid 
your  trouble  in  getting  through  it,  I  am  content. 

Believe  me,  I  have  not  forgotten,  nor  ever  shall  forget,  your 
kindness  to  me  at  a  time  when  a  little  appreciation  and  ehcour- 


I04  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vit 

wards.  This  is  all  as  it  should  be.  I  can  reverence  such  a 
man  and  yet  respect  myself. 

I  have  been  aspiring  to  great  honours  since  I  wrote  to  you 
last,  to  wit  the  F.R.S.,  and  found  no  little  to  my  astonishment 
that  I  had  a  chance  of  it,  and  so  went  in.  I  must  tell  you  that 
they  have  made  the  admission  more  difficult  than  it  used  to  be. 
Candidates  are  not  elected  by  the  Society  alone,  but  fifteen 
only  a  year  are  selected  by  a  committee,  and  then  elected  as  a 
matter  of  course  by  the  Society.  This  year  there  were  thirty- 
eight  candidates.  I  did  not  expect  to  come  in  till  next  year,  but 
I  find  I  am  one  of  the  selected.  I  fancy  I  shall  be  the  junior 
Fellow  by  some  years.  Singularly  enough,  among  the  non- 
selected  candidates  were  Ward,  the  man  who  conducted  the 
Botanical  Honours  Examination  of  Apothecaries'  Hall  nine 
years  ago,  and  Bryson,  the  surgeon  of  the  Fisguard,  i.e.  nomi- 
nally my  immediate  superior,  and  who,  as  he  frequently  acts 
as  Sir  Wm.  Burnett's  deputy,  will  very  likely  examine  me  when 
I  pass  for  Surgeon  R.N.!!  That  is  awkward  and  must  be  an- 
noying to  him,  but  it  is  not  my  fault.  I  did  not  ask  for  a  single 
name  that  appeared  upon  my  certificate.  Owen's  name  and 
Carpenter's,  which  were  to  have  been  appended,  were  not  added. 
Forbes,  my  recommender,  told  me  beforehand  not  to  expect  to 
get  in  this  year,  and  did  not  use  his  influence,  and  so  I  have 
no  intriguing  to  reproach  myself  with  or  to  be  reproached  with. 
The  only  drawback  is  that  it  will  cost  me  £14,  which  is  more 
than  I  can  very  well  afford. 

By  the  way,  I  have  not  told  you  that  after  staying  for  about 
five  months  with  George,  I  found  that  if  I  meant  to  work  in 
earnest  his  home  was  not  the  place,  so,  much  to  my  regret, — 
for  they  made  me  very  happy  there, — I  summoned  resolution 
and  The  Boy's  Own  Book  and  took  a  den  of  my  own,  whence 
I  write  at  present.  You  had  better,  however,  direct  to  George, 
as  I  am  going  to  move  and  don't  know  how  long  I  may  remain 
at  my  next  habitation.  At  present  I  am  living  in  the  Park  Road, 
but  I  find  it  too  noisy  and  am  going  to  St.  Anne's  Gardens,  St. 
John's  Wood,  close  to  my  mother's,  against  whose  forays  I 
shall  have  to  fortify  myself. 

It  was  a  minor  addition  to  his  many  troubles  that  after  a 
time  Huxley  found  a  grudging  and  jealous  spirit  exhibited 
in  some  quarters  towards  his  success,  and  influence  used  to 
prevent  any  further  advance  that  might  endanger  the  exist- 
ing balance  of  power  in  the  scientific  world.    But  this  could 


I06  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vn 

greediness.  And  yet  withal  you  will  smile  at  my  perversity.  I 
have  a  certain  pleasure  in  overcoming  these  obstacles,  and  fight- 
ing these  folks  with  their  own  weapons.  I  do  so  long  to  be  able 
to  trust  men  implicitly.  I  have  such  a  horror  of  all  this  literary 
pettifogging.  I  could  be  so  content  myself,  if  the  necessity  of 
making  a  position  would  allow  it,  to  work  on  anonymously,  but 

I  see  is  determined  not  to  let  either  me  or  any  one  else 

rise  if  he  can  help  it.  Let  him  beware.  On  my  own  subjects 
I  am  his  master,  and  am  quite  ready  to  fight  half  a  dozen 
dragons.  And  although  he  has  a  bitter  pen,  I  flatter  myself  that 
on  occasions  I  can  match  him  in  that  department  also. 

But  I  was  telling  you  how  busy  I  am.  I  am  getting  a 
memoir  ready  for  the  Zoological  Society,  and  working  at  my 
lecture  for  the  Royal  Institution,  which  I  want  to  make  striking 
and  original,  as  it  is  a  good  opportunity,  besides  doing  a  trans- 
lation now  and  then  for  one  of  the  Journals.  Besides  this,  I 
am  working  at  the  British  Museum  to  make  a  catalogue  of  some 
creatures  there.  All  these  things  take  a  world  of  time  and 
labour,  and  yield  next  to  no  direct  profit ;  but  they  bring  me  into 
contact  with  all  sorts  of  men,  in  a  very  independent  position, 
and  I  am  told,  and  indeed  hope,  that  something  must  arise  from 
it.  So  fair  a  prospect  opens  out  before  me  if  I  can  only  wait. 
I  am  beginning  to  know  what  work  means,  and  see  how 
much  more  may  be  done  by  steady,  unceasing,  and  well-directed 
efforts.  I  thrive  upon  it  too.  I  am  as  well  as  ever  I  was  in 
my  life,  and  the  more  I  work  the  better  my  temper  seems  to  be. 

Aprii  30,  1852,  11^  P.M. 

I  have  just  returned  from  giving  my  lecture  *  at  the  Royal 
Institution,  of  which  I  told  you  in  my  last  letter. 

I  had  got  very  nervous  about  it,  and  my  poor  mother's  death 
had  greatly  upset  my  plans  for  working  it  out. 

It  was  the  first  lecture  I  had  ever  given  in  my  life,  and  to 
what  is  considered  the  best  audience  in  London.  As  nothing 
ever  works  up  my  energies  but  a  high  flight,  I  had  chosen  a 
very  difficult  abstract  point,  in  my  view  of  which  I  stand  almost 
alone.  When  I  took  a  glimpse  into  the  theatre  and  saw  it  full 
of  faces,  I  did  feel  most  amazingly  uncomfortable.  I  can  now 
quite  understand  what  it  is  to  be  going  to  be  hanged,  and  noth- 
ing but  the  necessity  of  the  case  prevented  me  from  running 
away. 

*  **  On  Animal  Individuality,"  Scientific  Memoirs^  vol.  i.  p.  146,  cp. 
p.  88,  supra. 


I08  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

May  3,  1852. 

So  much  occupation  has  crowded  upon  me  between  the  be- 
ginning of  this  letter  and  the  present  time  that  I  have  been 
unable  to  finish  it.  I  had  undertaken  to  give  a  lecture  at  the 
Royal  Institution  on  the  30th  April.  It  was  on  a  difficult  sub- 
ject, requiring  a  good  deal  of  thought;  and  as  it  was  my  first 
appearance  and  before  the  best  audience  in  London,  you  may 
imagine  how  anxious  and  nervous  I  was,  and  how  completely  I 
was  obliged  to  abstract  my  thoughts  from  everything  else. 

However,  I  am  happy  to  say  it  is  well  over.  There  was  a 
very  good  audience — Faraday,  Prof.  Forbes,  Dr.  Forbes, 
Wharton  Jones,  and  [a]  whole  lot  of  "  nobs,"  among  my  audi- 
tors. I  had  made  up  my  mind  all  day  to  break  down,  and  then 
go  and  hang  myself  privately.  And  so  you  may  imagine  that 
I  entered  the  theatre  with  a  very  pale  face,  and  a  heart  beating 
like  a  sledge-hammer  nineteen  to  the  dozen.  For  the  first  five 
minutes  I  did  not  know  very  clearly  what  I  was  about,  but  by 
degrees  I  got  possession  of  myself  and  of  my  subject,  and  did 
not  care  for  anybody.  I  have  had  "  golden  opinions  from  all 
sorts  of  men  "  about  it,  so  I  suppose  I  may  tell  you  I  have  suc- 
ceeded. I  don't  think,  however,  that  I  ever  felt  so  thoroughly 
used  up  in  my  life  as  I  did  for  two  days  afterwards.  There  is 
one  comfort,  I  shall  never  be  nervous  again  about  any  audience ; 
but  at  one's  first  attempt,  to  stand  in  the  place  of  Faraday  and 
such  big-wigs  might  excuse  a  little  weakness. 

The  way  is  clear  before  me,  if  my  external  circumstances 
will  only  allow  me  to  persevere;  but  I  fully  expect  that  I  shall 
have  to  g^ve  up  my  dreams. 

Science  in  England  does  everything — ^but  pay.  You  may 
earn  praise  but  not  pudding. 

I  have  helping  hands  held  out  to  me  on  all  sides,  but  there 
is  nothing  to  help  me  to.  Last  year  I  became  a  candidate  for  a 
Professorship  at  Toronto.  I  took  an  infinity  of  trouble  over 
the  thing,  and  got  together  a  mass  of  testimonials  and  recom- 
mendations, much  better  than  I  had  any  right  to  expect.  From 
that  time  to  this  I  have  heard  nothing  of  the  business — a  result 
for  which  I  care  the  less,  as  I  believe  the  chair  will  be  given 
to  a  brother  of  one  of  the  members  of  the  Canadian  ministry, 
who  is,  I  hear,  a  candidate.  Such  a  qualification  as  that  is,  of 
course,  better  than  all  the  testimonials  in  the  world. 

I  think  I  told  you  when  I  last  wrote  that  I  was  expecting  a 
g^ant  from  Government  to  publish  the  chief  part  of  my  work, 
done  while  away.    I  am  expecting  it  still.    I  got  tired  of  waiting 


no  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

As  it  is  I  have  waited  for  official  confirmation  and  a  convenient 
season. 

And  now  ...  shall  I  be  very  naughty  and  make  a  con- 
fession? The  thing  that  a  fortnight  ago  (before  I  got  it)  I 
thought  so  much  of,  I  give  you  my  word  I  do  not  care  a  pin 
for.  I  am  sick  of  it  and  ashamed  of  having  thought  so  much 
of  it,  and  the  congratulations  I  get  give  me  a  sort  of  internal 
sardonic  grin.  I  think  this  has  come  about  partly  because  I 
did  not  get  the  official  confirmation  of  what  I  had  heard  for 
some  days,  and  with  my  habit  of  facing  the  ill  side  of  things 
I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Weld  had  made  a  mistake,  and  I 
went  in  thought  through  the  whole  enormous  mortification  of 
having  to  explain  to  those  whom  I  had  mentioned  it  that  it  was 
quite  a  mistake.  I  found  that  all  this,  when  I  came  to  look  at 
it,  was  by  no  means  so  dreadful  as  it  seemed — quite  bearable  in 
short — and  then  I  laughed  at  myself  and  have  cared  nothing 
about  the  whole  concern  ever  since.  In  truth  ...  I  do  not 
think  that  I  am  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word  ambitious.  I  have 
an  enormous  longing  after  the  highest  and  best  in  all  shapes — 
a  longing  which  haunts  me  and  is  the  demon  which  ever  impels 
me  to  work,  and  will  let  me  have  no  rest  unless  I  am  doing  his 
behests.  The  honours  of  men  I  value  so  far  as  they  are  evi- 
dences of  power,  but  with  the  cynical  mistrust  of  their  judg- 
ment and  my  own  worthiness,  which  always  haunts  me,  I  put 
very  little  faith  in  them.  Their  praise  makes  me  sneer  inwardly. 
God  forgive  me  if  I  do  them  any  great  wrong. 

...  I  feel  and  know  that  all  the  rewards  and  honours  in  the 
world  will  ever  be  worthless  for  me  as  soon  as  they  are  obtained. 
I  know  that  always,  as  now,  they  will  make  me  more  sad  than 
joyful.  I  know  that  nothing  that  could  be  done  would  give  me 
the  pure  and  heartfelt  joy  and  peace  of  mind  that  your  love  has 
given  me,  and,  please  God,  shall  give  for  many  a  long  year  to 
come,  and  yet  my  demon  says  work !  work !  you  shall  not  even 
love  unless  you  work. 

Not  blinded  by  any  vanity,  then,  I  hope  .  .  .  but  viewing 
this  stroke  of  fortune  as  respects  its  public  estimation  only,  I 
think  I  must  look  upon  the  award  of  this  medal  as  the  turning- 
point  of  my  life,  as  the  finger-post  teaching  me  as  clearly  as 
anything  can  what  is  the  true  career  that  lies  open  before  me. 
For  whatever  may  be  my  own  private  estimation  of  it,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  as  to  the  general  feeling  about  this  thing,  and  in 
case  of  my  candidature-  for  any  office  it  would  have  the  very 
greatest  weight    And  as  you  will  have  seen  by  my  last  letter, 


112  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vii 

a  new  spirit  of  anatomical  inquiry,  not  wholly  free*  from  a 
timorous  apprehension  as  to  its  complete  validity."  *  For 
the  difference  between  this  and  the  labours  of  the  greatest 
English  comparative  anatomist  of  the  time,  whose  detailed 
work  was  of  the  highest  value,  but  whose  generalisations 
and  speculations,  based  on  the  philosophy  of  Oken,  proved 
barren  and  fruitless,  lay  in  the  fact  that  Huxley,  led  to  it 
doubtless  by  his  solitary  readings  in  his  Charing  Cross  days, 
had  taken  up  the  method  of  von  Baer  and  Johannes  Miiller, 
then  almost  unknown,  or  at  least  unused  in  England — '*  the 
method  which  led  the  anatomist  to  face  his  problems  in  the 
spirit  in  which  the  physicist  faced  his." 

He  had  been  warned  by  Forbes  not  to  speak  too  strongly 
about  the  dilatoriness  of  the  Government  in  the  matter  of 
the  grant,  so  he  writes :  "  I  will  '  roar  you  like  any  sucking 
dove '  at  the  dinner,  though  I  felt  tempted  otherwise."  On 
December  i  he  tells  how  he  carried  out  this  advice. 

My  dear  Forbes — You  will,  I  know,  like  to  learn  how  I  got 
on  yesterday.  The  President's  address  to  me  had  been  drawn 
up  by  Bell.  It  was,  of  course,  too  flattering,  but  he  had  taken 
hold  of  the  right  points  in  my  work — at  least  I  thought  so. 

Bunsen  spoke  very  well  for  Humboldt. 

There  was  a  capital  congregation  at  the  dinner — sixty  or 
seventy  Fellows  there.  .  .  . 

When  it  came  to  my  turn  to  return  thanks,  I  believe  I  made 
a  very  tolerable  speechification,  at  least  everybody  says  so.  Lord 
Rosse  had  alluded  to  "  science  having  to  take  care  of  itself  in 
this  country,"  and  in  winding  up  I  gave  them  a  small  screed 
upon  that  text.  That  you  may  see  I  kept  your  caution  in  mind, 
I  will  tell  you  as  nearly  as  may  be  what  I  said.  I  told  them 
that  I  could  not  conceive  that  anything  I  had  hitherto  done 
merited  the  honour  of  that  day  (I  looked  so  preciously  meek  over 

*  *•  In  these  papers  (on  the  Medusae)  you  have  for  the  first  time 
fully  developed  their  structure,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  a  rational 
theory  for  their  classification."  *'  In  your  second  paper  *  On  the  Anat- 
omy of  Salpa  and  Pyrosoma,*  the  phenomena,  etc.,  have  received  the 
most  ingenious  and  elaborate  elucidation,  and  have  given  rise  to  a 
process  of  reasoning,  the  results  of  which  can  scarcely  yet  be  antici- 
pated, but  must  bear  in  a  very  important  degree  upon  some  of  the 
most  abstruse  points  of  what  may  be  called  transcendental  physiology.** 
See  I^oya/  Society,  Obituary  Notices,  vol.  lix.  p.  1. 


1 16  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  MUXLEY  cHap.  Vit 

just  about  to  make  another  application  to  the  present  Govern- 
ment on  the  subject  While  this  business  has  been  dragging 
on  of  course  I  have  not  been  idle.  I  have  four  memoirs  (on 
various  matters  in  Comparative  Anatomy)  in  the  Philosophical 
Transactions,  and  they  have  g^ven  me  their  Fellowship  and  one 
of  the  Royal  medals.  I  have  written  a  whole  lot  of  things  for 
the  journals — reviews  for  the  British  and  Foreign  Quarterly 
Medical,  etc.  I  am  one  of  the  editors  of  Taylor's  Scientific 
Memoirs  (German  scientific  translations).  In  conjunction  with 
my  friend  Busk  I  am  translating  a  gpreat  German  book  on  the 
Microscopical  Anatomy  of  Man,  and  I  have  engaged  to  write 
a  long  article  for  Todd's  Cyclopaedia.  Besides  this,  have  read 
two  long  memoirs  at  the  British  Association,  and  have  given 
two  lectures  at  the  Royal  Institution — one  of  them  only  two  days 
ago,  when  I  was  so  ill  with  influenza  I  could  hardly  stand  or 
speak. 

Furthermore,  I  have  been  a  candidate  for  a  Professorship  of 
Natural  History  at  Toronto  (which  is  not  even  yet  decided)  ; 
for  one  at  Aberdeen,  which  has  been  g^ven  against  me;  and  at 
present  I  am  a  candidate  for  the  Professorship  of  Physiology 
at  King's  College,  or,  rather,  for  half  of  it — Todd  having  given 
up,  and  Bowman,  who  remains,  being  willing  to  take  only  half, 
and  that  he  will  soon  give  up.  My  friend  Edward  Forbes — a 
regular  brick,  who  has  backed  me  through  thick  and  thin — 
is  backing  me  for  King's  College,  where  he  is  one  of  the  Pro- 
fessors. My  chance  is,  I  believe,  very  g^ood,  but  nothing  can  be 
more  uncertain  than  the  result  of  the  contest.  If  they  don't 
take  one  of  their  own  men  I  think  they  will  have  me.  It  would 
suit  me  very  well,  and  the  whole  chair  is  worth  £400  a  year,  and 
would  enable  me  to  live. 

Something  I  must  make  up  my  mind  to  do,  and  that  speedily. 
I  can  get  honour  in  Science,  but  it  doesn't  pay,  and  "  honour 
heals  no  wounds."  In  truth  I  am  often  very  weary.  The 
longer  one  lives  the  more  the  ideal  and  the  purpose  vanishes 
out  of  one's  life,  and  I  begin  to  doubt  whether  I  have  done 
wisely  in  giving  vent  to  the  cherished  tendency  towards  Science 
which  has  haunted  me  ever  since  my  childhood.  Had  I  given 
myself  to  Mammon  I  might  have  been  a  respectable  member  of 
society  with  large  watch-seals  by  this  time.  I  think  it  is  very 
likely  that  if  this  Kingfs  College  business  goes  against  me,  I 
may  give  up  the  farce  altogether — ^burn  my  books,  burn  my 
rod,  and  take  to  practice  in  Australia.  It  is  no  use  to  go  on 
kicking  against  the  pricks.  .  .  . 


CHAPTER   VIII 

i8S4 

The  year  1854  marks  the  turning-point  in  Huxley's 
career.  The  desperate  time  of  waiting  came  to  an  end.  By 
the  help  of  his  lectures  and  his  pen,  he  could  at  all  events 
stand  and  wait  independently  of  the  Navy.  He  could  not, 
of  course,  think  of  immediate  marriage,  nor  of  asking  Miss 
Heathorn  to  join  him  in  England ;  but  it  so  happened  that 
her  father  was  already  thinking  of  returning  home,  and 
finally  this  was  determined  upon  just  before  Professor 
Forbes'  translation  to  a  chair  at  Exiinburgh  gave  Huxley 
what  turned  out  to  be  the  long-hoped-for  permanency  in 
London. 

June  3.  1854. 
I  have  often  spoken  to  you  of  my  friend  Edward  Forbes. 
He  has  quite  recently  been  suddenly  appointed  to  a  Professorial 
Chair  in  Eldinburgh,  vacated  by  the  death  of  old  Jamieson.  He 
was  obliged  to  go  down  there  at  once  and  lecture,  and  as  he 
had  just  commenced  his  course  at  the  Government  School  of 
Mines  in  Jermyn  Street,  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  a  substitute. 
He  had  spoken  to  me  of  the  possibility  of  his  being  called  away 
long  ago,  and  had  asked  if  I  would  take  his  place,  to  which, 
of  course,  I  assented,  but  the  whole  affair  was  so  uncertain 
that  I  never  in  any  way  reckoned  upon  it.  Even  at  last  I  did 
not  know  on  the  Monday  whether  I  was  to  go  on  for  him  on 
the  Friday  or  not.  However,  he  did  go  after  giving  two  lec- 
tures, and  on  Friday  the  25th  May  I  took  his  lecture,  and  I 
have  been  going  on  ever  since,  twice  a  week  on  Mondays  and 
Fridays.  Called  upon  so  very  suddenly  to  g^ve  a  course  of  some 
six  and  twenty  lectures,  I  find  it  very  hard  work,  but  I  like  it 
and  I  never  was  in  better  health. 

9  117 


Il8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  viil 

On  July  20,  this  temporary  work,  which  he  had  under- 
taken as  the  friend  of  Forbes,  was  exchanged  for  one  of  the 
permanent  lectureships  formerly  held  by  the  latter.  A  hun- 
dred a  year  for  twenty-six  lectures  was  not  affluence;  it 
would  have  suited  him  better  to  have  had  twice  the  work 
and  twice  the  pay.  But  it  was  his  crossing  of  the  Rubicon, 
and,  strangely  enough,  no  sooner  had  he  gained  this  success 

than  it  was  doubled. 

July  30.  1854. 

I  was  appointed  yesterday  to  a  post  of  £200  a  year.  It  has 
all  come  about  in  the  strangest  way.  I  told  you  how  my  friend 
Forbes  had  been  suddenly  called  away  to  Edinburgh,  and  that 
I  had  suddenly  taken  his  duties — sharp  work  it  has  been  I  can 
tell  you  these  summer  months,  but  it  is  over  and  done  satisfac- 
torily. Forbes  got  £500  a  year,  £200  for  a  double  lectureship, 
£300  for  another  office.  I  took  one  of  the  lectureships,  which 
would  have  given  me  £100  a  year  only,  and  another  man  was  to 
have  the  second  lectureship  and  the  other  office  in  question.  It 
was  so  completely  settled  a  week  ago  that  I  had  written  to  the 
President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  who  makes  the  appointment,  ac- 
cepting mine,  and  the  other  man  had  done  the  same.  Happily  for 
me,  however,  my  new  colleague  was  suddenly  afflicted  with  a 
sort  of  moral  colic,  an  absurd  idea  that  he  could  not  perform 
the  duties  of  his  office,  and  resigned  it.  The  result  is  that  a 
new  man  has  been  appointed  to  the  office  he  left  vacant,  while 
the  lectureship  was  offered  to  me.  Of  course  I  took  it,  and  so 
in  the  course  of  the  week  I  have  seen  my  paid  income  doubled. 
...  So  after  a  short  interval  I  have  become  a  Government 
officer  again,  but  in  rather  a  different  position  I  flatter  my- 
self. I  am  chief  of  my  own  department,  and  my  position  is  con- 
sidered a  very  good  one — as  good  as  anything  of  its  kind  in 
London. 

Furthermore,  on  August  1 1  he  was  "  entrusted  with 
the  Coast  Survey  investigations  under  the  Geological  Sur- 
vey, and  remunerated  by  fee  until  March  31,  1855,  when  he 
was  ranked  as  Naturalist  on  the  Survey  with  an  additional 
salary  of  £200,  afterwards  increased  to  £400,  rising  to  £600 
per  annum,"  as  the  official  statement  has  it. 

Then  in  quick  succession  he  was  offered  in  August  a 
lectureship  on  Comparative  Anatomy  at  St.  Thomas'  Hos- 
pital for  the  following  May  and  June,  and  in  September  he 


I20  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  viii 

injudicious  to  bring  you  forward,  and  that,  as  you  were  named, 
I  for  my  own  part  should  not  have  brought  forward  Forbes  as 
a  candidate;  that  therefore  while  willing  to  speak  up  to  any 
extent  for  Forbes'  positive  merits  and  deserts,  I  would  carefully 
be  understood  to  give  no  opinion  as  to  your  and  his  relative 
standing. 

They  did  not  take  much  by  my  speech  therefore  either  way, 
more  especially  as  I  voted  for  both  of  you. 

I  hate  doing  anything  of  the  kind  "  unbeknownst  "  to  people, 
so  there  is  the  exact  history  of  my  proceedings.  If  I  had  been 
able  to  come  to  the  clear  conclusion  that  the  claims  of  either 
of  you  were  strongly  superior  to  those  of  the  other,  I  think  I 
should  have  had  the  honesty  and  moral  courage  to  "  act  ac- 
cording" but  I  really  had  not,  and  so  there  was  no  part  to  play 
but  that  of  a  sort  of  Vicar  of  Bray. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Forbes'  reply  was  a  letter  which  Huxley,  after  his  friend's 
death,  held  "  among  his  most  precious  possessions."  It 
appeared  without  names  in  the  obituary  notice  of  Forbes  in 
the  Literary  Gazette  for  November  25,  1854,  as  an  example 
of  his  unselfish  generosity : — 

I  heartily  concur  in  the  course  you  have  taken,  and  had  I 
been  placed  as  you  have  been,  would  have  done  exactly  the 
same.  .  .  .  Your  way  of  proceeding  was  as  true  an  act  of  friend- 
ship as  any  that  could  be  performed.  As  to  myself,  I  dream  so 
little  about  medals,  that  the  notion  of  being  on  the  list  never 
entered  my  brain,  even  when  asleep.  If  it  ever  comes  I  shall 
be  pleased  and  thankful ;  if  it  does  not,  it  is  not  the  sort  of  thing 
to  break  my  equanimity.  Indeed,  I  would  always  like  to  see  it 
given  not  as  a  mere  honour,  but  as  a  help  to  a  good  man,  and 
this  it  is  assuredly  in  Hooker's  case.  Government  people  are 
so  ignorant  that  they  require  to  have  merits  drummed  into  their 
heads  by  all  possible  means,  and  Hooker's  getting  the  medal 
may  be  of  real  service  to  him  before  long.  I  am  in  a  snug, 
though  not  an  idle,  nest, — he  has  not  got  his  resting-place  yet. 
And  so,  my  dear  Huxley,  I  trust  that  you  know  me  too  well  to 
think  that  I  am  either  grieved  or  envious,  and  you.  Hooker, 
and  I  are  much  of  the  same  way  of  thinking. 

It  is  interesting  to  record  the  same  scrupulosity  over 
the  election  to  the  Registrarship  of  the  University  of  Lon- 
don in  1856,  when»  having  begun  to  canvass  for  Dr.  Latham 


122  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 

Natural  History  Sciences.*  This,  when  it  came  out  later  as 
a  pamphlet,  he  sent  to  his  Tenby  friend  Dr.  Dyster  (of 
whom  hereafter),  to  whose  criticism  on  one  passage  he  re- 
plied on  October  lo: — 

.  .  .  — I  am  rejoiced  you  liked  my  speechment.  It  was 
written  hastily  and  is,  like  its  speaker,  I  fear,  more  forcible 
than  eloquent,  but  it  can  lay  claim  to  the  merit  of  being  sin- 
cere. 

My  intention  on  p.  28  was  by  no  means  to  express  any  satis- 
faction at  the  worms  being  as  badly  off  as  ourselves,  but  to  show 
that  pain  being  everywhere  is  inevitable,  and  therefore  Hke  all 
other  inevitable  things  to  be  borne.  The  rest  of  it  is  the  product 
of  my  scientific  Calvinism,  which  fell  like  a  shell  at  your  feet 
when  we  were  talking  over  the  fire. 

I  doubt,  or  at  least  I  have  no  confidence  in,  the  doctrine  of 
ultimate  happiness,  and  I  am  more  inclined  to  look  the  opposite 
possibility  fully  in  the  face,  and  if  that  also  be  inevitable,  make 
up  my  mind  to  bear  it  also. 

You  will  tell  me  there  are  better  consolations  than  Stoicism ; 
that  may  be,  but  I  do  not  possess  them,  and  I  have  found  my 
"  grin  and  bear  it "  philosophy  stand  me  in  such  good  stead  in 
my  course  through  oceans  of  disgust  and  chagrin,  that  I  should 
be  loth  to  give  it  up. 

The  summer  of  1854  was  spent  in  company  with  the 
Busks  at  Tenby,  amid  plenty  of  open-air  work  and  in  great 
peace  of  mind,  varied  with  a  short  visit  to  Liverpool  in  order 
to  talk  business  with  his  friend  Forbes,  who  was  eager  that 
Huxley  should  join  him  in  Edinburgh. 

*  The  subsequent  reference  is  to  the  words,  '*  I  cannot  but  think 
that  he  who  finds  a  certain  proportion  of  pain  and  evil  inseparably 
woven  up  in  the  life  of  the  very  worms  will  bear  his  own  share  with 
more  courage  and  submission  ;  and  will,  at  any  rate,  view  with  sus- 
picion those  weakly  amiable  theories  of  the  divine  government,  which 
would  have  us  believe  pain  to  be  an  oversight  and  a  mistake,  to  be 
corrected  by  and  by.**  (Collected  Essays^  iii.  p.  62.)  This  essay  contains 
the  definition  of  science  as  *' trained  and  organised  common  sense,*' 
and  the  reference  to  a  new  **  Peter  Bell**  which  suggested  Miss  May 
Kendairs  spirited  parody  of  Wordsworth  :— 

Primroses  by  the  river's  brim 
Dicotyledons  were  to  him. 
And  tbey  were  nothing  more 


124  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 

what  advice  to  give  you.  When  I  wrote  I  hardly  knew  what 
kind  of  work  you  had  in  your  present  office,  but  Francis  has 
since  enlightened  me.  I  thought  you  had  more  leisure.  One 
thing  is  very  clear — you  must  come  out  of  that.  Your  Pegasus 
is  quite  out  of  place  ploughing.  You  are  using  yourself  up  in 
work  that  comes  to  nothing,  and  so  far  as  I  can  see  cannot  be 
worse  oflF. 

Now  what  are  your  prospects?  Why,  as  I  told  you  before, 
you  have  made  a  succks  here  and  must  profit  by  it.  The  other 
night  your  name  was  mentioned  at  the  Philosophical  Club  (the 
most  influential  scientific  body  in  London)  with  great  praise. 
Gassiot,  who  has  great  influence,  said  in  so  many  words,  "  you 
had  made  your  fortune,"  and  I  frankly  tell  you  I  believe  so  too, 
if  you  can  only  get  over  the  next  three  years.  So  you  see  that 
quoad  position,  like  Quintus  Curtius,  there  is  a  "  fine  opening  " 
ready  for  you,  only  mind  you  don't  spoil  it  by  any  of  your  horrid 
modesty. 

So  much  for  glory — now  for  economics.  I  have  been  try- 
ing to  ferret  out  more  nearly  your  chances  of  a  post,  and  here 
are  my  results  (which,  I  need  not  tell  you,  must  be  kept  to 
yourself). 

At  the  Museum  in  Jermyn  Street,  Play  fair,  Forbes,  Percy 
and  I  think  Sir  Henry  would  do  anything  to  get  you,  and  elimi- 
nate   ;  but,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  probability  of  his 

going  is  so  small  that  it  is  not  worth  your  while  to  reckon  upon 
it.  Nevertheless  it  may  be  comforting  to  you  to  know  that  in 
case  of  anything  happening  these  men  will  help  you  tooth  and 
nail.  Cultivate  Playfair  when  you  have  a  chance — he  is  a  good 
fellow,  wishes  you  well,  has  great  influence,  and  will  have  more. 
Entre  nous,  he  has  just  got  a  new  and  important  post  under 
Government. 

Next,  the  Royal  Institution.  This  is  where,  as  I  told  you, 
you  ought  to  be — looking  to  Faraday's  place.  Have  no  scruple 
about  your  chemical  knowledge ;  you  won't  be  required  to  train  a 
college  of  students  in  abstruse  analyses;  and  if  you  were,  a 
year's  work  would  be  quite  enough  to  put  you  at  ease.  What 
they  want,  and  what  you  have,  are  clear  powers  of  exposition 
— so  clear  that  people  may  think  they  understand  even  if  they 
don't.  That  is  the  secret  of  Faraday's  success,  for  not  a  tithe 
of  the  people  who  go  to  hear  him  really  understand  him. 

However,  I  am  afraid  that  a  delay  must  occur  before  you 
can  get  placed  at  the  Royal  Institution,  as  you  cannot  hold  the 
Professorship  until  you  have  given  a  course  of  lectures  there. 


126  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viu 

to  whom  I  can  feel  obliged,  without  losing  a  particle  of  inde- 
pendence or  self-rjespect. 

The  following  from  a  letter  to  Hooker,  announcing 
Forbes'  death,  is  a  striking  testimony  to  his  worth : — 

I  think  I  have  never  felt  so  crushed  by  anything  before. 
It  is  one  of  those  losses  which  cannot  be  replaced  either  to  the 
private  friend  or  to  science.  To  me  especially  it  is  a  bitter  loss. 
Without  the  aid  and  sympathy  he  has  always  g^ven  me  from 
first  to  last,  I  should  never  have  had  the  courage  to  persevere 
in  the  course  I  have  followed.  And  it  was  one  of  my  greatest 
hopes  that  we  should  work  in  harmony  for  long  years  at  the 
aims  so  dear  to  us  both. 

But  it  is  otherwise,  and  we  who  remain  have  nothing  left 
but  to  bear  the  inevitable  as  we  best  may. 

And  again  a  few  days  later: — 

I  have  had  no  time  to  write  to  you  again  till  now,  but  I  write 
to  say  how  perfectly  you  express  my  own  feeling  about  our  poor 
friend.  One  of  the  first  things  I  thought  of  was  that  medal 
business,*  and  I  never  rejoiced  in  anything  more  than  that  I 
had  not  been  deterred  by  any  moral  cowardice  from  acting  as 
I  did.  ^ 

As  it  is  I  reckon  that  letter  (which  I  will  show  you  some 
day)  among  my  most  precious  possessions. 

Huxley's  last  tribute  .to  his  dead  friend  was  the  organ- 
ising a  memorial  fund,  part  of  which  went  to  getting  a  bust 
of  him  made,  part  to  establishing  an  Edward  Forbes  medal, 
to  be  competed  for  by  the  students  of  his  old  school  in 
Jermyn  Street. 

As  Huxley  had  been  Forbes'  successor  at  Jermyn  Street, 
so  now  he  seemed  to  many  marked  out  to  succeed  him  at 
Edinburgh.    In  November  he  writes  to  Hooker: — 

People  have  been  at  me  about  the  Edinburgh  chair.  If  I 
could  contrive  to  stop  here,  between  you  and  I,  I  would  prefer  it 
to  half  a  dozen  Edinburgh  chairs,  but  there  is  a  mortal  difference 
between  £200  and  £1000  a  year.  I  have  written  to  say  that  if 
the  Professors  can  make  up  their  minds  they  wish  me  to  stand,  I 
will — if  not,  I  will  not.    For  my  own  part,  I  believe  my  chances 

*  p.  iig. 


128  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viii 

to  the  labour  of  translation — and  I  could  get  any  amount  of 
scientific  work  I  wanted  —  so  there  was  a  Hving,  though  a 
scanty  one,  and  amazingly  hard  work  for  it.  My  pen  is  not 
a  very  facile  one^  and  what  I  write  costs  me  a  good  deal  of 
trouble. 

In  the  spring  of  this  year,  however,  a  door  opened.  My 
poor  lost  friend  Professor  Forbes — whose  steady  attachment  and 
aid  had  always  been  of  the  utmost  service  to  me — was  called 
to  fill  the  chair  of  Natural  History  in  Edinburgh  at  a  moment's 
notice.  It  is  a  very  valuable  appointment,  and  he  was  obliged 
to  fill  it  at  once.  Of  course  he  left  a  number  of  vacancies  be- 
hind, among  them  one  at  the  Government  School  of  Mines  in 
Jermyn  Street,  where  he  lectured  on  Natural  History.  I  was 
called  upon  to  take  up  his  lectures  where  he  left  off,  in  the  same 
sudden  way,  and  the  upshot  of  it  all  was  that  I  became  perma- 
nently attached — with  £200  a  year  pay.  In  other  ways  I  can 
make  a  couple  of  hundred  a  year  more  even  now,  and  I  hope 
by-and-by  to  do  better.  In  fact,  a  married  man,  as  I  hope  soon 
to  be,  cannot  live  at  all  in  the  position  which  I  ought  to  occupy 
under  less  than  six  hundred  a  year.  If  I  keep  my  health,  how- 
ever, I  have  every  hope  of  being  able  to  do  this — but,  as  the 
jockeys  say,  the  pace  is  severe.  Nettie  is  coming  over  in  the 
spring,  and  if  I  have  any  luck  at  all,  I  mean  to  have  paid  off 
my  debts  and  to  be  married  by  this  time  next  year.* 

In  the  meanwhile,  strangely  enough — and  very  painfully  for 
me — new  possibilities  have  sprung  up.  My  poor  friend  Forbes 
died  only  a  week  ago,  just  as  he  was  beginning  his  course  and 
entering  upon  as  brilliant  a  career  as  ever  was  opened  to  any 
scientific  man  in  this  country. 

I  cannot  tell  you  how  deeply  this  has  shocked  me.  I  owe  him 
so  much,  I  loved  him  so  well,  and  I  have  so  very  very  few 
friends  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  that  it  has  been  perhaps 

*  He  writes  on  July  21,  1851 : — **  I  commenced  life  upon  nothing  at 
all,  and  I  had  to  borrow  in  the  ordinary  way  from  an  agent  for  the 
necessary  expenses  of  my  outfit.  I  sent  home  a  great  deal  of  money, 
but  notwithstanding,  from  the  beautiful  way  they  have  of  accumu- 
lating interest  and  charges  of  one  description  and  another,  I  found 
myself  £ion  in  debt  when  I  returned — besides  something  to  my  broth- 
er, about  which,  however,  I  do  not  suppose  I  need  trouble  myself  just 
at  present.  As  you  may  imagine,  living  in  London,  my  pay  now 
hardly  keeps  me,  to  say  nothing  of  paying  off  my  old  scores.  I  could 
get  no  account  of  how  things  were  going  on  with  my  agent  while  I 
WM  away,  and  therefore  I  never  could  tell  exactly  bow  I  stood," 


130 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vin 


ends  in  the  book  line,  among  other  things  a  Shakespeare  for 
yourself,  d^ar  Liz. — Believe  me,  ever  your  aflFec.  brother, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

In  December  the  Edinburgh  chair  was  practically  offered 
to  him  undivided ;  but  by  that  time  the  London  authorities 
thought  they  had  better  make  it  worth  his  while  to  stay  at 
Jermyn  Street,  and  with  negotiations  beg^n  for  this  end  he 
refused  to  stand  for  Edinburgh.  In  the  following  spring, 
however,  he  was  again  approached  from  Edinburgh — not  so 
much  to  withdraw  his  refusal  and  again  become  a  candidate, 
as  to  let  it  be  made  known  that  he  would  accept  the  chair 
if  it  were  offered  him.  But  his  position  in  Lx>ndon  was 
now  established;  and  he  preferred  to  live  in  London  on  a 
bare  sufficiency  rather  than  to  enjoy  a  larger  income  away 
from  the  centre  of  things. 

Two  letters  to  Tyndall,  which  refer  to  the  division  of 
labour  in  the  science  reviews  for  the  Westminster  (see  p. 
92),  indicate  very  clearly  the  high  pressure  at  which  Huxley 
had  already  begun  to  work : — 

Tenby,  South  Wales,  Oct.  22,  1854. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  was  rejoiced  to  find  you  entertaining 
my  proposition  at  all.  No  one  believes  how  hard  you  work  more 
than  I,  but  I  was  not  going  to  be  such  a  bad  diplomatist  as  to 
put  that  at  the  head  of  my  letter,  and  if  I  had  thought  that 
what  I  want  you  to  do  involved  any  great  accession  thereto,  I 
think  I  could  not  have  mustered  up  the  face  to  ask  you.  But 
really  and  truly,  so  long  as  it  is  confined  to  our  own  depart- 
ment it  is  no  great  affair.  You  make  me  laugh  at  the  long  face 
you  pull  about  the  duties,  based  on  my  phrase.  The  fact  is,  you 
notice  what  you  like,  and  what  you  do  not  you  leave  undone, 
unless  you  get  an  editorial  request  to  say  something  about  a 
particular  book.  The  whole  affair  is  entirely  in  your  own  hands 
— at  least  it  is  in  mine — as  I  went  upon  my  principle  of  having 
a  row  at  starting.  .  .  . 

Now  here  is  an  equitable  proposition.  Look  at  my  work.  I 
have  a  couple  of  monographs,  odds  and  ends  of  papers  for  jour- 
nals, a  manual  and  some  three  courses  of  lectures  to  provide 
for  this  winter.  "  My  necessities  are  as  great  as  thine,"  as  Sir 
Philip  Sidney  didn't  say,  so  be  a  brick,  split  the  difference,  and 


132 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  viu 


interest  in  marine  zoology  was  the  starting-point  of  a  warm 
friendship  with  the  rising  naturalist,  some  fifteen  years  his 
junior.  He  was  strongly  urged  by  the  younger  man  to 
complete  and  systematise  his  observations  by  taking  in  turn 
all  the  species  of  each  genus  of  annelids  found  at  Tenby, 
and  working  them  up  into  a  series  of  little  monographs 
"  which  would  be  the  best  of  all  possible  foundations  for  a 
History  of  the  British  Annelidae  " : — 

To  Dr.  Dyster 

Jan.  5.  1855. 

[He  begins  by  confessing  "  a  considerable  liberty  "  he  had 
been  taking  with  Oyster's  name,  in  calling  a  joint  discovery  of 
theirs,  which  he  described  in  the  Edinburgh  New  Philosophical 
Journal^  Protula  Dysteri.] 

Are  you  very  savage?  If  so,  you  must  go  and  take  a  walk 
along  the  sands  and  see  the  slant  rays  of  the  sunset  tipping  the 
rollers  as  they  break  on  the  beach ;  that  always  made  even  me  at 
peace  with  all  the  world,  and  a  fortiori  it  will  you. 

Truly,  I  wish  I  had  any  such  source  of  consolation.  Chim- 
ney pots  are  highly  injurious  to  my  morals,  and  my  temper  is 
usually  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  my  horizon. 

I  have  been  swallowing  oceans  of  disgust  lately.  All  sorts 
of  squabbles,  some  made  by  my  own  folly  and  others  by  the 
malice  of  other  people,  and  no  great  sea  and  sky  to  go  out  under, 
and  be  alone  and  forget  it  all. 

You  may  have  seen  my  name  advertised  by  Reeve  as  about 
to  write  a  memoir  of  poor  Forbes,  to  be  prefixed  to  a  collection 
of  his  essays.  I  found  that  to  be  a  mere  bookseller's  dodge  on 
Reeve's  part,  and  when  I  made  the  discovery,  of  course  we  had 
a  battle-royal,  and  I  have  now  wholly  withdrawn  from  it. 

I  find^  however,  that  one's  kind  and  generous  friends  imagine 
it  was  an  electioneering  manoeuvre  on  my  part  for  Edinburgh. 
Imagine  how  satisfactory.  I  forget  whether  I  told  you  that  I 
had  been  asked  to  stand  for  Edinburgh  and  have  done  so. 
Whether  I  shall  be  appointed  or  not  I  do  not  know.    So  far  as 


help),  and  later  to  Charles  Kingsley,  whom  he  first  met  at  the  end  of 
June  1855.  "What  Kingsley  do  you  refer  to?"  he  writes  on  May  6, 
**Alt(m  Locke  Kingsley  or  Photographic  Kingsley?  I  shall  be  right 
glad  to  find  good  men  and  true  anywhere,  and  I  will  take  your  bail  for 
any  man.     But  the  work  must  be  critically  done." 


134  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  vin 

and  if  I  had  obtained  the  Edinburgh  chair,  I  should  have  been 
in  reality  a  mere  pedagogue  and  a  man  of  science  only  in  name. 
Such  were  my  notions,  and  if  I  hesitated  at  all  and  allowed 
myself  to  become  a  candidate,  it  was  only  because  I  have  other 
interests  to  consult  than  my  own.  Intending  to  "  range  myself  " 
one  of  these  days  and  become  a  respectable  member  of  society, 
I  was  bound  to  consider  my  material  interests.  And  so  I  should 
have  been  still  a  candidate  for  Edinburgh  had  not  the  Govern- 
ment here  professed  themselves  unwilling  to  lose  my  services, 
adding  the  *'  material  guarantee  "  of  an  addition  to  my  income, 
which,  though  by  no  means  bringing  it  up  to  the  point  of  Edin- 
burgh, will  still  enable  me  (das  heisst  "us")  to  live  comfort- 
ably here. 

I  must  renounce  the  "  pomps  and  vanities,"  but  all  those 
other  "  lusts  of  the  flesh  "  which  may  beseem  a  gentleman  may 
be  reasonably  gratified. 

Don't  you  think  I  have  been  wise  in  my  Hercules  choice? 
After  all  I  don't  lay  claim  to  any  great  merit,  seeing  it  was  any- 
thing but  certain  I  should  get  Edinburgh. 

The  best  of  all  is  that  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that 
Government  will  carry  out  my  scheme  for  a  coast  survey,  so 
happily  and  pleasantly  begun  at  Tenby  last  year. 

The  final  arrangements  are  almost  complete,  and  I  believe 
you  may  make  up  your  mind  to  have  four  months  of  me  next 
year.  Tenby  shall  be  immortalised  and  Jenkyn  *  converted  into 
a  philosopher.  By  the  way,  I  think  the  best  way  would  be  to 
retain  the  shells  till  I  come.  My  main  purpose  is  to  have  in 
them  a  catalogue  of  what  Tenby  affords. 

Pray  give  my  kind  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Dyster,  and  be- 
lieve me,  ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

April  I,  1855. 

My  dear  Dyster — By  all  that's  good,  your  last  note,  which 
lies  before  me,  has  date  a  month  ago.  I  looked  at  it  just  now, 
and  became  an  April  fool  on  the  instant. 

All  the  winds  of  March,  however,  took  their  course  through 
my  thorax  and  eventuated  in  lectures.  At  least  that  is  all  the 
account  I  can  give  to  myself  of  the  time,  and  an  unprofitable 
account  it  is,  for  everything  but  one's  exchequer. 

So  far  as  knowledge  goes  it  is  mere  prodigality  spending 

*  Jenkyn  was  employed  to  collect  shells,  etc.,  at  Tenby.     He  is 
often  alluded  to  as  **  the  Professor." 


136  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  vm 

AprU  9,  1855. 

My  dear  Dyster  —  I  didn't  by  any  means  mean  to  be  so 
sphinx-like  in  my  letter,  though  you  have  turned  out  an  (Edipus 
of  the  first  water.  True  it  is  that  I  mean  to  ^  range  myself/' 
*'  live  cleanly  and  leave  off  sack,'*  within  the  next  few  months 
— ^that  is  to  say,  if  nothing  happen  to  the  good  ship  which  is  at 
present  bearing  my  fiancee  homewards. 

So  far  as  a  restless  mortal — more  or  less  aweary  of  most 
things — like  myself  can  be  made  happy  by  any  other  human 
being,  I  believe  your  good  wishes  are  safe  of  realisation ;  at  any 
rate,  it  will  be  my  fault  if  they  are  not,  and  I  beg  you  never  to 
imagine  that  I  could  confound  the  piety  of  friendship  with  the 
"  efflorescent  '  variety. 

I  hope  to  marry  in  July,  and  make  my  way  down  to  Tenby 
shortly  afterwards,  and  I  am  ready  to  lay  you  a  wager  that  your 
vaticinations  touching  the  amount  of  work  that  u'aii'l  be  done 
don't  come  true. 

So  much  for  wives — now  for  worms — (I  could  not  for  the 
life  of  me  help  the  alliteration).  I.  as  right  reverend  father  in 
worms  and  Bishop  of  Annelid^e,  do  not  think  I  ought  to  inter- 
fere with  my  most  promising  son.  when  a  channel  opens  itself 
for  the  publication  of  his  labours.    So  do  what  you  will  apropos 

of  J .    If  he  does  not  do  the  worms  any  better  than  he  did 

the  zoophytes,  he  won't  interfere  >**ith  my  plans. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  see  Mrs.  Buckland*s  Echinoderm.  I  think 
it  must  be  a  novelty  by  what  you  say.  She  is  a  very  jolly 
person,  but  I  have  an  unutterable  fear  of  scientific  women. — 
Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

May  6,  1855. 

My  ship  is  not  come  home  but  is  coming,  and  I  have  been 
in  a  state  of  desperation  at  the  continuous  east  winds.  How^- 
ever,  to-day  there  is  a  westerly  gale,  and  if  it  lasts  I  shall 
have  news  soon.  You  may  imagine  that  I  am  in  an  unsat- 
isfactory state  of  mind  between  this  and  lecturing  five  times 
a  week. 

I  beg  to  say  that  the  **  goods  "  I  e.xpect  are  home  produce 
transplanted  for  sent  a  voyage  as  you  do  Madeira),  and  not 
foreign  groHth  by  any  means.  But  it  is  five  years  since  we  met, 
I  am  another  man  altogether,  and  if  my  wife  be  as  much  altered, 
we  shall  need  a  new  introduction.  Correspondence,  however 
active,  is  a  poor  substitute  for  personal  communication  and  teUs 
one  but  little  of  the  inner  life. 


1855  FULLERIAN   LECTURES  1 37 

Finally,  on  the  eve  of  his  marriage  in  July,  Tyndall  con- 
gratulates him  on  being  appointed  to  deliver  the  next  course 
of  Fullerian  Lectures  at  the  Royal  Institution : — 

The  fates  once  seemed  to  point  to  our  connection  in  a  distant 
land:  we  are  now  colleagues  at  home,  and  I  can  claim  you  as 
my  scientific  brother.  May  the  gods  continue  to  drop  fatness 
upon  you,  and  may  your  next  great  step  be  productive  of  all  the 
felicity  which  your  warmest  friends  or  your  own  rebellious  heart 
can  desire. 


CHAPTER   IX 

1855 

Miss  Heathorn  and  her  parents  reached  England  at 
the  beginning  of  May  1855,  and  took  up  their  abode  at  8 
Titchfield  Terrace,  not  far  from  Huxley's  own  lodgings  and 
his  brother's  house.  One  thing,  however,  filled  Huxley  with 
dismay.  Miss  Heathom's  health  had  broken  down  utterly, 
and  she  looked  at  death's  door.  All  through  the  preceding 
year  she  had  been  very  ill ;  she  had  gone  with  friends,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Wise,  to  the  newly  opened  mining-camp  at  Bath- 
urst,  and  she  and  Mrs.  Wise  were  indeed  the  first  women 
to  visit  it ;  returning  to  Sydney  after  rather  a  rough  time, 
she  caught  a  chill,  and  being  wrongly  treated  by  a  doctor 
of  the  blood-letting,  calomel-dosing  school,  she  was  re- 
duced to  a  shadow,  and  only  saved  by  another  practitioner, 
who  reversed  the  treatment  just  in  time. 

In  his  letters  to  her,  Huxley  had  not  at  first  realised 
the  danger  she  had  been  in ;  and  afterwards  tried  to  keep 
her  spirits  up  by  a  cheerful  optimism  that  would  only  look 
forward  to  their  joyful  union  and  many  years  of  unbroken 
happiness  to  atone  for  their  long  parting. 

But  the  reality  alarmed  him.  He  took  her  to  one  of 
the  most  famous  doctors  of  the  day,  as  if  merely  a  patient 
he  was  interested  in.  Then  as  one  member  of  the  profession 
to  another,  he  asked  him  privately  his  opinion  of  the  case. 
"  I  give  her  six  months  of  life,"  said  i^sculapius.  "  Well, 
six  months  or  not,"  replied  Huxley,  "  she  is  going  to  be  my 
wife."  The  doctor  was  mightily  put  out.  "  You  ought  to 
have  told  me  that  before."  Of  course,  the  evasive  answer 
in  such  a  contingency  was  precisely  what  Huxley  wished  to 
138 


I40 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  ix 


It  was  not  a  large  party  that  assembled  at  the  George 
Huxleys  for  the  wedding,  but  all  were  life-long  friends,  in- 
cluding, besides  the  Fanning  clan  and  Mrs.  Griffiths,  an 
old  Australian  ally.  Hooker,  Tyndall,  and  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Carpenter.  There  was  none  present  but  felt  that  abundant 
happiness  was  at  least  well  earned  after  eight  years  of  trial, 
and  still  more  that  its  best  guarantee  was  the  firm  loyalty 
and  devotion  that  had  passed  through  so  many  dangers  of 
absence  and  isolation,  so  many  temptations  to  renounce  the 
ideal  course  under  stress  of  circumstance,  only  to  emerge 
strengthened  and  ennobled  by  the  stem  discipline  of  much 
sacrifice. 

Great  as  was  his  new  happiness,  he  hardly  stood  in  need 
of  Danvin's  word  of  warning :  **  I  hope  your  marriage  will 
not  make  you  idle :  happiness.  I  fear,  is  not  good  for  work." 
Huxley  could  not  sit  idle  for  long.  If  he  had  no  occupation 
on  hand,  something  worth  investigation — and  thorough  in- 
vestigation— was  sure  to  catch  his  eye.  So  he  writes  to 
Hooker  from  Tenby : — 

15  St.  Julian's  Terrace,  Tenby, 
Au^\  16.  1S55. 

Mv  DEAR  Hooker — I  am  so  near  the  end  of  the  honeymoon 
that  I  think  it  can  hardly  be  immodest  if  I  emerge  from  private 
life  and  write  you  a  letter,  more  particularly  as  I  want  to  know 
something.  I  went  yesterday  on  an  expedition  to  see  the  re- 
mains of  a  forest  which  exists  between  tidemarks  at  a  place 
called  Amroth.  near  here. 

So  far  as  I  can  jiulge  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  really 
is  a  case  of  downward  movement.  The  stools  of  the  trees  arc 
in  their  normal  position,  and  their  roots  are  embedded  and  in- 
terwoven in  a  layer  of  stiff  blue  clay,  which  lies  immediately 
beneath  the  superficial  mud  of  the  shore.  Layers  of  leaves, 
too.  are  mixed  up  with  the  clay  in  other  parts,  and  the  bark  of 
some  of  the  trees  is  in  perfect  preservation.  The  condition  of 
the  wood  is  verv  curious.  It  is  like  verv  hard  cheese,  so  that 
you  can  readily  cut  slices  with  a  spade,  and  yet  where  more  of 
the  trunk  has  been  preser\ed  some  parts  are  very  hard.  The 
trees  are.  I  fancy.  Beech  and  Oak.  Could  you  identify  slices  if 
I  were  to  send  vou  some? 

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  here  is  an  opportimity  one  docs 
not  often  have  of  getting  some  information  about  the  action  of 


1855  SEEKS  INFORMATION  I^I 

sea  water  on  wood,  and  on  the  mode  in  which  these  vegetable 
remains  may  become  embedded,  etc.  etc.,  and  I  want  to  get  you 
to  tell  me  where  I  can  find  information  on  submerged  forests  in 
general,  so  as  to  see  to  what  points  one  can  best  direct  one's 
attention,  and  to  suggest  any  inquiries  that  may  strike  yourself. 

I  do  not  see  how  the  stumps  can  occur  in  this  position  with- 
out direct  sinking  of  the  land,  and  that  such  a  sinking  should 
have  occurred  tallies  very  well  with  some  other  facts  which 
I  have  observed  as  to  the  nature  of- the  bottom  at  considerable 
depths  here. 

We  had  the  j oiliest  cruise  in  the  world  by  Oxford,  War- 
wick, Kenilworth,  Stratford,  Malvern,  Ross,  and  the  Wye, 
though  it  was  a  little  rainy,  and  though  my  wife's  strength  sadly 
failed  at  times. 

Still  she  was  on  the  whole  much  better  and  stronger  than 
I  had  any  right  to  expect,  and  although  I  get  frightened  every 
now  and  then,  yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  she  is  steadily 
though  slowly  improving.  I  have  no  fears  for  the  ultimate 
result,  but  her  amendment  will  be  a  work  of  time.  We  have 
really  quite  settled  down  into  Darby  and  Joan,  and  I  beg^n  to 
regard  matrimony  as  the  normal  state  of  man.  It's  wonderful 
how  light  the  house  looks  when  I  come  back  weary  with  a  day's 
boating  to  what  it  used  to  do. 

I  hope  Mrs.  Hooker  is  well  and  about  again.  Pray  g^ve  her 
our  very  kind  regards,  and  believe  me,  my  dear  Hooker,  ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

At  Tenby  he  stayed  on  through  August  and  September, 
continuing  his  occupations  of  the  previous  summer,  dredg- 
ing up  specimens  for  his  microscope,  and  working  partly 
for  his  own  investigations,  partly  for  the  Geological  Survey. 


CHAPTER    X 
1855-1858 

Up  to  his  appointment  at  the  School  of  Mines.  Huxley's 
work  had  been  ahnost  entirely  nior^>hological.  dealing  with 
the  Invertebrates.  His  lirst  investigations,  moreover,  had 
been  directevi  not  to  species-hunting,  but  to  working  out  the 
real  affinities  of  little  known  orders,  and  thereby  evolving 
a  philosophical  classification  from  the  limbo  of  "  Vermes  '* 
and  "  Radiata.'* 

He  had  continiieil  the  same  work  bv  tracing  homologies 
of  development  in  other  classes  of  animals,  such  as  the 
Cephalous  Mollusca.  the  Aniciilata,  and  the  Brachiopods. 
On  these  subjects,  als^.'*.  he  had  a  gixxi  deal  of  correspond- 
ence with  other  investigators  of  the  same  cast  of  mind,  and 
even  when  he  did  not  carry  conviction.  tl:e  impression  made 
bv  his  arjri:ments  mav  be  indeed  irom  the  words  of  Dr.  AH- 
man.  no  mean  auihoritv.  in  a  letter  of  Mav  j.  18^-!: — 

I  hsve  thought  over  vv^ur  arguments  again  and  again,  and 
while  I  arr.  the  more  convinceil  of  their  ingenuiiy,  originality, 
ar"!  jr'-fJSj::/!.  !  yet  feel  a>hamev1  to  confess  th.it  1  too  must  ex- 
clair:  *'  ttr.ax  propositi."  \\"hen  was  it  otherwise  in  con  tro- 
ve rfy  ? 

*7*ther  sp«ec*j'at'.or.s  aHsing  out  of  these  researches  had 
\:*ttzi  given  to  the  ptib'ic  in  the  form  of  lectures,  notably 
:ha:  on  Ar.tmal  Ir.v'.:\ndua!ity  at  the  Royal  Institution  in 
1S52. 

?.-:  after  iSfLi.  Pa!eonioIog>-  anv!  avlministrative  work 
b^^rar.  t:  claim  much  of  the  time  he  would  wiUinclv  have 
be5t:we~d  uron  disi:nc:".v  zoolosrical  research.     His  lectures 

Li2 


144  ^^^^  ^^  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chaf.  x 

writing  of  "  introductions  "  to  each  section  of  the  catalogue, 
which  should  be  a  guide  to  the  students.  The  "  Method  of 
Paleontology "  mentioned  above  served  as  the  prefatory 
essay  to  the  whole  catalogue,  and  was  reprinted  in  1869 
by  the  Smithsonian  Institute  of  Washington  under  the  title 
of  Principles  and  Methods  of  Paleontology. 

This  work  led  to  his  taking  a  lively  interest  in  the 
organisation  of  museums  in  general,  whether  private,  such 
as  Sir  Philip  Egerton's,  which  he  visited  in  1856;  local,  such 
as  Warwick  or  Chester ;  or  central,  such  as  the  British  Mu- 
seum or  that  at  Manchester. 

With  regard  to  the  British  Museum,  the  question  had 
arisen  of  removing  the  Natural  History  collections  from  the 
confined  space  and  dusty  surroundings  of  Great  Russell 
Street.  A  first  memorial  on  the  subject  had  been  signed, 
not  only  by  many  non-scientific  persons,  but  also  by  a 
number  of  botanists,  who  wished  to  see  the  British  Museum 
Herbarium,  etc.,  combined  with  the  more  accessible  and 
more  complete  collections  at  Kew.  Owing  apparently  to  offi- 
cial opposition,  the  Natural  History  sub-committee  of  the 
British  Museum  Trustees  advised  a  treatment  of  the  Botan- 
ical Department  which  commended  itself  to  none  of  the 
leading  botanists.  Consequently  a  number  of  botanists  and 
zoologists  took  counsel  together  and  drew  up  a  fresh  memo- 
rial from  the  strictly  scientific  point  of  view.  Huxley  and 
Hooker  took  an  active  part  in  the  agitation.  "  It  is  no  use," 
writes  the  former  to  his  friend,  *'  putting  any  faith  in  the  old 
buffers,  hardened  as  they  are  in  trespasses  and  sin."  And 
again : — 

I  see  nothing  for  it  but  for  you  and  I  to  constitute  ourselves 
into  a  permanent  "  Committee  of  Public  Safety,"  to  watch  over 
what  is  being  done  and  take  measures  with  the  advice  of  others 

when  necessary.  ...  As  for  and  id  genus  omne,  I  have 

never  expected  anything  but  opposition  from  them.  But  I 
don't  think  it  is  necessary  to  trouble  one's  head  about  such 
opposition.  It  may  be  annoying  and  troublesome,  but  if  we  are 
beaten  by  it  we  deserve  to  be.  We  shall  have  to  wade  through 
oceans  of  trouble  and  abuse,  but  so  long  as  we  gain  our  end, 
I  care  not  a  whistle  whether  the  sweet  voices  of  the  scientific 
mob  are  with  me  or  against  me. 


1^6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  x 

within  twenty  years  the  ideal  here  sketched  was  to  a  great 
extent  realised,  as  any  visitor  to  the  Natural  History  Mu- 
seum at  South  Kensington  can  see  for  himself. 

The  same  principles  are  reiterated  in  his  letter  of  Janu- 
ary 25,  1868,  to  the  Commissioners  of  the  Manchester 
Natural  History  Society,  who  had  asked  his  advice  as  to 
the  erection  of  a  museum.  But  to  the  principles  he  adds  a 
number  of  most  practical  suggestions  as  to  the  actual  struc- 
ture of  the  building,  which  are  briefly  appended  in  abstract. 
The  complement  to  this  is  a  letter  of  1872,  giving  advice 
as  to  a  local  museum  at  Chester,  and  one  of  1859  describ- 
ing the  ideal  catalogue  for  a  geological  museum. 

Jan.  25,  1868. 
The  Commissioners  of  the  Manchester 

Natural  History  Society. 

Scheme  for  a  Museum. 

Objects. — I.  The  public  exhibition  of  a  collection  of  speci- 
mens large  enough  to  illustrate  all  the  most  important  truths 
of  Natural  History,  but  not  so  extensive  as  to  weary  and  con- 
fuse ordinary  visitors. 

2.  The  accessibility  of  this  collection  to  the  public. 

3.  The  conservation  of  all  specimens  not  necessary  for  the 
purpose  defined  in  ( i )  in  a  place  apart. 

4.  The  accessibility  of  all  objects  contained  in  the  museum 
to  the  curator  and  to  scientific  students,  without  interference 
with  the  public  or  by  the  public. 

5.  Thorough  exclusion  of  dust  and  dirt  from  the  specimens. 

6.  A  provision  of  space  for  workrooms,  and,  if  need  be, 
lecture-rooms. 

Principle. — A  big  hall  (350  X  4^  X  30)  with  narrower  halls 
on  either  side,  lighted  from  the  top.  The  central  hall  for  the 
pubHc,  the  others  for  the  curators,  etc.  The  walls,  of  arches 
upon  piers  about  15  ft.  high,  bearing  on  girders  a  gallery  5  ft. 
wide  in  the  public  room,  and  3  ft.  6  in.  in  the  curators*. 

The  cases  should  be  larger  below,  5  ft.  deep,  and  smaller 
above,  2  ft.  deep,  with  glass  fronts  to  the  public,  and  doors  on 
the  curators'  side. 

For  very  large  specimens — e.g.  a  whale — the  case  could 
expand  into  the  curators'  part  without  encroaching  on  the  public 
part,  so  as  to  keep  the  line  of  windows  regular. 


1^8  Life  of  professor  Huxley  chap,  x 

If  I  may  make  a  suggestion  I  should  say  that  a  catalogue  of 
•  your  museum  for  popular  use  should  commence  with  a  sketch 
of  the  topography  and  stratigraphy  of  the  county,  put  into  the 
most  intelligible  language,  and  illustrated  by  reference  to  min- 
eral specimens  in  the  cases,  and  to  the  localities  where  sections 
showing  the  superposition  of  such  and  such  beds  is  to  be  seen. 
After  that  I  think  should  come  a  list  of  the  most  remarkable 
and  interesting  fossils,  with  reference  to  the  cases  where  they 
are  to  be  seen;  and  under  the  head  of  each  a  brief  popular  ac- 
count of  the  kind  of  animal  or  plant  which  the  thing  was  when 
alive,  its  probable  habits,  and  its  meaning  and  importance  as  a 
member  of  the  great  series  of  successive  forms  of  life. — ^Yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  reorganisation  of  the  course  of  studies  at  Jermyn 
Street,  fully  sketched  out  in  the  1857  notebook,  involved 
two  very  serious  additions  to  his  work  over  and  above  what 
was  required  of  him  by  his  appointment  as  Professor.  He 
found  his  students  to  a  great  extent  lacking  in  the  know- 
ledge of  general  principles  necessary  to  the  comprehension 
of  the  special  work  before  them.  To  enable  them  to  make 
the  best  use  of  his  regular  lectures,  he  offered  them  in 
addition  a  preliminar\'  evening  course  of  nine  lectures  each 
Januar>%  which  he  entitled  "  An  Introduction  to  the  Study 
of  the  Collection  of  Fossils  in  the  Museum  of  Practical 
Geolog}'."  These  lectures  summed  up  what  he  afterwards 
named  Physiography,  together  with  a  general  sketch  of 
fossils  and  their  nature,  the  classification  of  animals  and 
plants,  their  distribution  at  various  epochs,  and  the  princi- 
ples on  which  they  are  constructed,  illustrated  by  the  ex- 
amination of  some  animal,  such  as  a  lobster. 

The  regular  lectures,  fifty-seven  in  number,  ran  from 
February  to  April  and  from  April  to  June,  with  fortnightly 
examinations  during  the  latter  period,  six  in  number.  I 
take  the  scheme  from  his  notebook : — '*  After  prolegomena, 
the  physiology'  and  morphology  of  lobster  and  dove;  then 
through  Invertebrates,  Anodon,  Actinia,  and  Vorticella 
Protozoa,  to  Molluscan  types.  Insects,  then  Vertebrates. 
Supplemented  Paleontologically  by  the  demonstrations  of 
the  selected  types  in  the  cases;  twelve  Paleozoic,  twelve 


ISO 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  X 


first  address  at  the  Working  Men's  College  to  an  audience, 
as  he  notes,  of  some  fifty  persons,  including  Maurice  him- 
self. 

Other  work  of  importance  was  connected  with  the  Royal 
Institution.  He  had  been  elected  to  deliver  the  triennial 
course  as  FuUerian  Professor,  and  for  his  subject  in  1856-57 
chose  Physiology  and  Comparative  Anatomy ;  in  1858,  the 
Principles  of  Biology. 

He  was  extremely  glad  of  the  additional  "  grist  to  the 
mill  "  brought  in  by  these  lectures.    As  he  wrote  in  1890 : — 

I  have  good  reason  to  know  what  difference  a  hundred  a 
year  makes  when  your  income  is  not  more  than  four  or  five 
times  that.  I  remember  when  I  was  candidate  for  the  Fullerian 
professorship  some  twenty-three  years  ago,  a  friend  of  mine 
asked  a  wealthy  manager  to  support  me.  He  promised,  but 
asked  the  value  of  the  appointment,  and  when  told,  said,  "  Well, 
but  what's  the  use  of  a  hundred  a  year  to  him  ?  "  I  suppose  he 
paid  his  butler  that. 

A  further  attempt  to  organise  scientific  work  throughout 
the  country  and  make  its  results  generally  known,  dates 
from  this  time.  Huxley,  Hooker,  and  Tyndall  had  dis- 
cussed, early  in  1858,  the  possibility  of  starting  a  Scientific 
Review,  which  should  do  for  science  what  the  Quarterly 
or  the  Westminster  did  for  literature.  The  scheme  was  found 
not  to  be  feasible  at  the  time,  though  it  was  revived  in 
another  form  in  i860;  so  in  the  meanwhile  it  was  arranged 
that  science  should  be  laid  before  the  public  every  fortnight, 
through  the  medium  of  a  scientific  column  in  the  Saturday 
Review.    The  following  letter  bears  on  this  proposal: — 

April  20,  1858. 

My  dear  Hooker — Before  the  dawn  of  the  proposal  for  the 
ever-memorable  though  not-to-be  Scientific  Review,  there  had 
been  some  talk  of  one  or  two  of  us  working  the  public  up  for 
science  through  the  Saturday  Review,  Maskelyne  (you  know 
him,  I  suppose)  was  the  suggester  of  the  scheme,  and  undertook 
to  talk  to  the  Saturday  people  about  it. 

I  thought  the  whole  affair  had  dropped  through,  but  yester- 
day Maskelyne  came  to  me  and  to  Ramsay  with  definite  propo- 
sitions from  the  Saturday  editor. 


152  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  x 

two  contributions  in  1858— one  on  the  general  subject  of 
the  cell  theory,  the  other  on  the  particular  question  of  the 
development  of  the  skull.  "  In  a  striking  '  Review  of  the 
Cell  Theory/  "  says  Sir  M.  Foster,  "  which  appeared  in  the 
British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review  in  1858,  a  paper  which 
more  than  one  young  physiologist  at  the  time  read  with 
delight,  and  which  even  to-day  may  be  studied  with  no 
little  profit,  he,  in  this  subject  as  in  others,  drove  the  sword 
of  rational  inquiry  through  the  heart  of  conceptions,  meta- 
physical and  transcendental,  but  'dominant." 

Of  this  article  Professor  E.  Ray  Lankester  also  writes : — 

.  .  .  Indeed  it  is  a  fundamental  study  in  morphology.  The 
extreme  interest  and  importance  of  the  views  put  forward  in 
that  article  may  be  judged  of  by  the  fact  that  although  it  is 
forty  years  since  it  was  published,  and  although  our  knowledge 
of  cell  structure  has  made  immense  progress  during  those  forty 
years,  yet  the  main  contention  of  that  article,  viz.  that  cells  are 
not  the  cause  but  the  result  of  organisation — ^in  fact,  are,  as  he 
says,  to  the  tide  of  life  what  the  line  of  shells  and  weeds  on  the 
sea-shore  is  to  the  tide  of  the  living  sea — is  even  now  being  re- 
asserted, and  in  a  slightly  modified  form  is  by  very  many  cytolo- 
gists  admitted  as  having  more  truth  in  it  than  the  opposed  view 
and  its  later  outcomes,  to  the  effect  that  the  cell  is  the  unit  of 
life  in  which  and  through  which  alone  living  matter  manifests 
its  activities. 

The  second  was  his  Croonian  Lecture  of  1858,  "  On  the 
Theory  of  the  Vertebrate  Skull,"  in.  which  he  demonstrated 
from  the  embryological  researches  of  Rathke  and  others, 
that  after  the  first  step  the  whole  course  of  development 
in  the  segments  of  the  skull  proceeded  on  different  lines 
from  that  of  the  vertebral  column ;  and  that  Oken's  imagi- 
native theory  of  the  skull  as  modified  vertebrae,  logically 
complete  down  to  a  strict  parallel  between  the  subsidiary 
head-bones  and  the  limbs  attached  to  the  spine,  outran 
the  facts  of  a  definite  structure  common  to  all  vertebrates 
which  he  had  observed.* 

*  **  Following  up  Rathke,  he  strove  to  substitute  for  the  then  domi- 
nant fantastic  doctrines  of  the  homologies  of  the  cranial  elements  ad- 
vocated by  Owen,  sounder  views  based  on  embryological  evidence. 


CHAPTER   XI 
1857-1858 

Throughout  this  period  his  health  was  greatly  tried 
by  the  strain  of  his  work  and  life  in  town.  Headache! 
headache!  is  his  repeated  note  in  the  eariy  part  of  1857, 
and  in  1858  we  find  such  entries  as: — "Feb.  11. — Used 
up.  Hypochondriacal  and  bedevilled."  "  Ditto  12."  "  13. 
— Not  good  for  much."  "  21. — ^Toothache,  incapable  all 
day."  And  again: — "March  30. — Voiceless."  "31. — 
Missed  lecture."  And,  "  April  i. — Unable  to  go  out."  He 
would  come  in  thoroughly  used  up  after  lecturing  twice  on 
the  same  day,  as  frequently  happened,  and  lie  wearily  on 
one  sofa ;  while  his  wife,  whose  health  was  wretched,  matched 
him  on  the  other.  Yet  he  would  go  down  to  a  lecture  feel- 
ing utterly  unable  to  deliver  it,  and,  once  started,  would 
carry  it  through  successfully — at  what  cost  of  nervous  en- 
ergy was  known  only  to  those  two  at  home. 

But  there  was  another  branch  of  work,  that  for  the 
Geological  Survey,  which  occasionally  took  him  out  of 
London,  and  the  open-air  occupation  and  tramping  from 
place  to  place  did  him  no  little  good.  Thus,  through  the 
greater  part  of  September  and  October  1856  he  ranged  the 
coasts  of  the  Bristol  Channel  from  Weston  to  Clovelly,  and 
from  Tenby  to  Swansea,  preparing  a  "  Report  on  the  Recent 
Changes  of  Level  in  the  Bristol  Channel."  "  You  can't 
think,"  he  writes  from  Braunton  on  October  3,  "  how  well 
I  am,  so  long  as  I  walk  eight  or  ten  miles  a  day  and  don't 
work  too  much,  but  I  find  fifteen  or  sixteen  miles  my  limit 
for  comfort." 

For  many  years  after  this  bis  favourite  mode  of  recruit-' 

SS4 


156  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

Berne,  S€pt.  3,  1856. 

I  send  you  a  line  hence,  having  forgotten  to  write  from 
Interlaken,  whence  we  departed  this  morning. 

The  Weissthor  expedition  was  the  most  successful  thing 
you  can  imagine.  We  reached  the  Riffelberg  in  iij  hours,  the 
first  six  being  the  hardest  work  I  ever  had  in  my  life  in  the 
climbing  way,  and  the  last  five  carrying  us  through  the  most 
glorious  sight  I  ever  witnessed.  During  the  latter  part  of  the 
day  there  was  not  a  cloud  on  the  whole  Monte  Rosa  range,  so 
you  may  imagine  what  the  Matterhom  and  the  rest  of  them 
looked  like  from  the  wide  plain  of  nev6  just  below  the  Weissthor. 
It  was  quite  a  new  sensation,  and  I  would  not  have  missed  it 
for  any  amount;  and  besides  this  I  had  an  opportunity  of  ex- 
amining the  nev6  at  a  very  great  height.  A  regularly  stratified 
section,  several  hundred  feet  high,  was  exposed  on  the  Cima  di 
Jazi,  and  I  was  convinced  that  the  Weissthor  would  be  a  capital 
spot  for  making  observations  on  the  neve  and  on  other  correl- 
ative matters.  There  are  no  difficulties  in  the  way  of  getting 
up  to  it  from  the  Zermatt  side,  tough  job  as  it  is  from  Macug- 
naga,  and  we  might  readily  rig  a  tent  under  shelter  of  the  ridge. 
That  would  lick  old  Saussure  into  fits.  All  the  Zermatt  guides 
put  the  S.  Theodul  pass  far  beneath  the  Weissthor  in  point  of 
difficulty;  and  you  may  tell  Mrs.  Hooker  that  they  think  the 
S.  Theodul  easier  than  the  Monte  Moro.  The  best  of  the  joke 
was  that  I  lost  my  way  in  coming  down  the  Riffelberg  to  Zer- 
matt the  same  evening,  so  that  altogether  I  had  a  long  day  of 
it.  The  next  day  I  walked  from  Zermatt  to  Visp  (recovering 
Baedeker  by  the  way),  but  my  shoes  were  so  knocked  to  pieces 
that  I  got  a  blister  on  my  heel.  Next  day  Voiture  to  Susten, 
and  then  over  Gemmi  to  Kandersteg,  and  on  Thursday  my  foot 
was  so  queer  I  was  glad  to  get  a  retour  to  Interlaken.  I  found 
most  interesting  and  complete  evidences  of  old  moraine  deposits 
all  the  way  down  the  Leuk  valley  into  the  Rhone  valley,  and 
I  believe  those  little  hills  beyond  Susten  are  old  terminal  mo- 
raines too.  On  the  other  side  I  followed  moraines  down  to 
Frutigen,  and  great  masses  of  glacial  gravel  with  boulders, 
nearly  to  the  Lake  of  Thun. 

My  wife  is  better,  but  anjrthing  but  strong. 

Chamounix,  Aug.  16,  1857. 
My  wife  sends  me  intelligence  of  the  good  news  you  were 
so  kind  as  to  communicate  to  her.     I  need  not  tell  you  how 
rejoiced  I  am  that  everything  has  gone  on  well,  and  tfiat  your 


Ijg  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

on  its  accustomed  scale  of  magnificence,  but  I  don't  mind  letting 
you  know  I  am  in  the  flesh  and  safe  back. 

The  tour  round  Mont  Blanc  was  a  decided  success;  in  fact, 
I  had  only  to  regret  you  were  not  with  me.  The  grand  glacier 
of  the  AUee  Blanche  and  the  view  of  Mont  Blanc  from  the 
valley  of  Aosta  were  alone  worth  all  the  trouble.  I  had  only 
one  wet  day,  and  that  I  spent  on  the  Brenoa  Glacier;  for,  in 
spite  of  all  good  resolutions  to  the  contrary,  I  cannot  resist 
poking  into  the  glaciers  whenever  I  have  a  chance.  You  will 
be  interested  in  my  results,  which  we  shall  soon,  I  hope,  talk  on 
together  at  length. 

As  I  suspected,  Forbes  has  made  a  most  egregious  blunder. 
What  he  speaks  of  and  figures  as  the  "  structure  "  of  the  Brenon 
is  nothing  but  a  peculiar  arrangement  of  entirely  superficial  dirt 
bands,  dependent  on  the  structure,  but  not  it.  The  true  structure 
is  singularly  beautiful  and  well  marked  in  the  Brenoa,  the  blue 
veins  being  very  close  set,  and  of  course  wholly  invisible  from 
a  distance  of  a  hundred  yards,  which  is  less  than  that  of  the 
spot  whence  Forbes'  view  of  the  (supposed)  structure  is  taken. 

I  saw  another  wonderful  thing  in  La  Brenoa.  About  the 
middle  of  its  length  there  is  a  step  like  this  of  about  20  or  30 
feet  in  height.  In  the  lower  part  (B)  the  structural  planes  are 
vertical;  in  the  upper  (A)  they  dip  at  a  considerable  angle.  I 
thought  I  had  found  a  case  of  unconformability,  indicating  a 
slip  of  one  portion  of  the  glacier  over  another,  but  when  I  came 
to  examine  the  intermediate  region  (X)  carefully,  I  found  the 
structural  planes  at  every  intermediate  angle,  and  consequently 
a  perfect  transition  from  the  one  to  the  other. 

I  returned  by  Aosta,  the  great  St.  Bernard,  and  the  Col  de 
Balme.  Old  Siniond  was  quite  affectionate  in  his  discourse 
nlK>ut  you.  and  seemed  quite  unhappy  because  you  would  not 
borrow  his  money.  He  had  received  your  remittance,  and  asked 
mc  to  tell  you  so.  He  was  distressed  at  having  forgotten  to  get 
a  certificate  from  you.  so  I  said  in  mine  I  was  quite  sure  you 
were  well  satisfieil  with  him. 

On  our  journey  he  displayed  his  characteristic  qualities, 
y«*  Hi»  sais  /»<M  Iwing  the  usual  answer  to  any  topographical  in- 
quiries with  a  total  absence  of  nerve,  and  a  general  conviction 
thttt  distances  were  very  great  and  that  the  weather  would  be 
l>ad.  However,  we  got  on  very  well,  and  I  was  sorry  to  part 
with  him. 

I  came  home  by  way  of  Neuchatel,  paying  a  visit  to  the 
Pi«rr«  4  B6l|  whicd  I  hl^v^  long  >vi$hed  to  se^    My  finandii 


l6o  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chaf.  xi 

Explanatory  Catalogue  to  serve  as  an  introductory  text- 
book to  the  Jermyn  Street  lectures  and  the  paleontological 
demonstrations.  Here,  too,  would  fall  a  proposed  "  Letter 
on  the  Study  of  Comparative  Anatomy,"  to  do  for  those 
subjects  what  Henslow  had  done  in  his  "  Letter "  for 
Botany. 

In  addition  to  the  fact  of  his  being  forced  to  take  up 
Paleontology,  it  was  perhaps  the  philosophic  breadth  of 
view  with  which  he  regarded  his  subject  at  any  time,  and 
the  desire  of  getting  to  the  bottom  of  each  subsidiary  prob- 
lem arising  from  it,  that  made  him  for  many  years  seem 
constantly  to  spring  aside  from  his  own  subject,  to  fly  off 
at  a  tangent  from  the  line  in  which  he  was  assured  of  un- 
rivalled success  did  he  but  devote  to  it  his  undivided  powers. 
But  he  was  prepared  to  endure  the  charge  of  desultori- 
ness  with  equanimity.  In  part,  he  was  still  studying  the 
whole  field  of  biological  science  before  he  would  claim 
to  be  a  master  in  one  department;  in  part,  he  could  not 
yet  tell  to  what  post  he  might  succeed  when  he  left — ^as 
he  fully  expected  to  leave — the  professorship  at  Jermyn 
Street. 

One  characteristic  of  his  early  papers  should  not  pass 
unnoticed.  This  was  his  familiarity  with  the  best  that  had 
been  written  on  his  subjects  abroad  as  well  as  in  England. 
Thoroughness  in  this  respect  was  rendered  easier  by  the  fact 
that  he  read  French  and  German  with  almost  as  much 
facility  as  his  mother  tongue.  "  It  is  true,  of  course,  that 
scientific  men  read  French  and  German  before  the  time  of 
Huxley;  but  the  deliberate  consultation  of  all  the  authori- 
ties available  has  been  maintained  in  historical  succession 
since  Huxley's  earliest  papers,  and  was  absent  in  the  papers 
of  his  early  contemporaries."  * 

About  this  time  his  activity  in  several  branches  of  sci- 
ence began  to  find  recognition  from  scientific  societies  at 
home  and  abroad.  In  1857  he  was  elected  honorary  mem- 
ber of  the  Microscopical  Society  of  Giessen;  and  in  the 
same  year,  of  a  more  important  body,  the  Academy  of 

*  P.  Chalmers  Mitchell  in  Nahtral  Science,  August  1895. 


l62  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xi 

came  in  at  the  head  of  the  poll;  no  other  having,  i.e.  Cobden, 
more  than  eleven. — Yours  well  satisfied, 

Rod.  I.  MuRCHisoN. 

From  this  time  forth  he  corresponded  with  many  foreign 
men  of  science;  in  these  years  particularly  with  Victor 
Carus,  Lacaze  Duthiers,  Kolliker,  and  de  Quatrefages,  in 
reference  to  their  common  interest  in  the  study  of  the  in- 
vertebrates. 

At  home,  the  year  1857  opened  very  brightly  for  Hux- 
ley with  the  birth  of  his  first  child,  a  son,  on  the  eve  of 
the  New  Year.  A  Christmas  child,  the  boy  was  named 
Noel,  and  lived  four  happy  years  to  be  the  very  sunshine 
of  home,  the  object  of  passionate  devotion,  whose  sudden 
loss  struck  deeper  and  more  inefFaceably  than  any  other 
blow  that  befell  Huxley  during  all  his  life. 

As  he  sat  alone  that  December  night,  in  the  little  room 
that  was  his  study  in  the  house  in  Waverley  Place,  waiting 
for  the  event  that  was  to  bring  him  so  much  happiness  and 
so  much  sorrow,  he  made  a  last  entry  in  his  journal,  full  of 
hope  and  resolution.  In  the  blank  space  below  follows  a 
note  of  four  years  later,  when  "  the  ground  seemed  cut  from 
under  his  feet,"  yet  written  with  restraint  and  without  bit- 
terness. 

December  31,  1856.  .  .  .  1856-7-8  must  still  be  "  Lehrjahre" 
to  complete  training  in  principles  of  Histology,  Morphology, 
Physiology,  Zoology,  and  Geology  by  Monographic  Work  in 
each  Department,  i860  will  then  see  me  well  grounded  and 
ready  for  any  special  pursuits  in  either  of  these  branches. 

It  is  impossible  to  map  out  beforehand  how  this  must  be 
done.  I  must  seize  opportunities  as  they  come,  at  the  risk  of 
the  reputation  of  desultoriness. 

In  i860  I  may  fairly  look  forward  to  fifteen  or  twenty  years 
"  Meisterjahre,"  and  with  the  comprehensive  views  my  training 
will  have  given  me,  I  think  it  will  be  possible  in  that  time  to 
give  a  new  and  healthier  direction  to  all  Biological  Science. 

To  smite  all  humbugs,  however  big;  to  give  a  nobler  tone  to 
science;  to  set  an  example  of  abstinence  from  petty  personal 
controversies,  and  of  toleration  for  everything  but  lying;  to  be 
indifferent  as  to  whether  the  work  is  recognised  as  mine  or  not, 
so  long  as  it  is  done: — are  these  my  aims?    i860  will  show. 


1856  BIRTH  AND  DEATH  OF  A  SON  163 

Willst  du  dir  ein  httbsch  Leben  zimmern, 
Musst  dich  ans  Vergangene  nicht  bekUmmern  ; 
Und  ware  dir  auch  was  Verloren, 
Musst  immer  thun  wie  neugeboren. 
Was  jeder  Tag  will,  sollst  du  fragen  ; 
Was  jeder  Tag  will,  wird  er  sagen. 
Musst  dich  an  eigenem  Thun  ergdtzen  ; 
Was  andere  thun,  das  wirst  du  sch^tzen. 
Besonders  keinen  Menschen  hassen 
Und  das  Ubrige  Gott  Qberlassen.* 

Half-past  ten  at  night. 

Waiting  for  my  child.  I  seem  to  fancy  it  the  pledge  that 
all  these  things  shall  be. 

Born  five  minutes  before  twelve.  Thank  God.  New 
Year's  Day,  1857. 

Sept.  20,  i860. 

And  the  same  child,  our  Noel,  our  first-born,  after  being  for 
nearly  four  years  our  delight  and  our  joy,  was  carried  off  by 
scarlet  fever  in  forty-eight  hours.  This  day  week  he  and  I  had 
a  great  romp  together.  On  Friday  his  restless  head,  with  its 
bright  blue  eyes  and  tangled  golden  hair,  tossed  all  day  upon 
his  pillow.  On  Saturday  night  the  fifteenth,  I  carried  him 
here  into  my  study,  and  laid  his  cold  still  body  here  where  I 
write.  Here  too  on  Sunday  night  came  his  mother  and  I  to  that 
holy  leave-taking. 

My  boy  is  gone,  but  in  a  higher  and  a  better  sense  than  was 
in  my  mind  when  I  wrote  four  years  ago  what  stands  above — 
I  feel  that  my  fancy  has  been  fulfilled.  I  say  heartily  and  with- 
out bitterness — Amen,  so  let  it  be. 

*  Wilt  shape  a  noble  life  ?    Then  cast 
No  backward  glances  to  the  past. 
And  what  if  something  still  be  lost? 
Act  as  new-born  in  all  thou  dost. 
What  each  day  wills,  that  shalt  thou  ask  ; 
Each  day  will  tell  its  proper  task  ; 
What  others  do,  that  shalt  thou  prize. 
In  thine  own  work  thy  guerdon  lies. 
This  above  all :  hate  none.     The  rest — 
Leave  it  to  God.     He  knoweth  best. 


CHAPTER   XII 
1859-1860 

The  programme  laid  down  in  1857  was  steadily  carried 
out  through  a  great  part  of  1859.  Huxley  published  nine 
monographs,  chiefly  on  fossil  Reptilia,  in  the  proceedings 
of  the  Geological  Society  and  of  the  Geological  Survey, 
one  on  the  armour  of  crocodiles  at  the  Linnean,  and  "  Ob- 
servations on  the  Development  of  some  Parts  of  the  Skele- 
ton of  Fishes,"  in  the  Journal  of  Microscopical  Science, 

Among  the  former  was  a  paper  on  Stagonolepis,  a 
creature  from  the  Elgin  beds,  which  had  previously  been 
ranked  among  the  fishes.  From  some  new  remains,  which 
he  worked  out  of  the  stone  with  his  own  hands,  Huxley 
made  out  that  this  was  a  reptile  closely  allied  to  the  Croco- 
diles; and  from  this  and  the  affinities  of  another  fossil, 
Hyperodapedon,  from  neighbouring  beds,  determined  the 
geological  age  to  which  the  Elgin  beds  belonged  A  good 
deal  turned  upon  the  nature  of  the  scales  from  the  back  and 
belly  of  this  animal,  and  a  careful  comparison  with  the 
scales  of  modern  crocodiles — a  subject  till  then  little  inves- 
tigated— led  to  the  paper  at  the  Linnean  already  men- 
tioned. 

The  paper  on  fish-development  was  mainly  based  upon 
dissections  of  the  young  of  the  stickleback.  Fishes  had  been 
divided  into  two  classes  according  as  their  tails  are  developed 
evenly  on  either  side  of  the  line  of  the  spine,  which  was  sup- 
posed to  continue  straight  through  the  centre  of  the  tail  (ho- 
mocercal),  or  lopsided,  with  one  tail  fin  larger  than  the  other 
(heterocercal).  This  investigation  showed  that  the  apparently 
even  development  was  only  an  extreme  case  of  lopsidedness, 
164 


l66  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

The  more  I  see  of  the  place  the  more  glad  I  am  that  I  elected 
to  stay  in  London.  I  see  much  to  admire  and  like;  but  I  am 
more  and  more  convinced  that  it  would  not  suit  me  as  a  resi- 
dence. 

Two  more  important  points  remain  to  be  mentioned 
among  the  occupations  of  the  year.  In  January  Huxley 
was  elected  Secretary  of  the  Geological  Society,  and  with 
this  office  began  a  form  of  administrative  work  in  the  scien- 
tific world  which  ceased  only  with  his  resignation  of  the 
Presidency  of  the  Royal  Society  in  1885. 

Part  of  the  summer  Huxley  spent  in  the  North.  On 
August  3  he  went  to  Lamlash  Bay  in  Arran.  Here  Dr. 
Carpenter  had,  in  1855,  discovered  a  convenient  cottage  on 
Holy  Island — the  only  one,  indeed,  on  the  island — well 
suited  for  naturalists;  the  bay  was  calm  and  suitable  both 
for  the  dredge  and  for  keeping  up  a  vivarium.  He  proposed 
that  either  the  Survey  should  rent  the  whole  island  at  a  cost 
of  some  £50,  or,  failing  this,  that  he  would  take  the  cottage 
himself,  if  Huxley  would  join  him  for  two  or  three  seasons 
and  share  the  expense.  Huxley  laid  the  plan  before  Sir 
R.  Murchison,  the  head  of  the  Survey,  who  consented  to  try 
the  plan  for  a  course  of  years,  during  three  months  in  each 
year.  "  But,"  he  added,  "  keep  it  experimental ;  for  there 
are  no  useful  fisheries  such  as  delight  Lord  Stanley."  Here, 
then,  with  an  ascent  of  Goatfell  for  variety  on  the  21st,  a 
month  was  passed  in  trawling,  and  experiments  on  the 
spawning  of  the  herring  appear  to  have  been  continued  for 
him  during  the  winter  in  Bute. 

On  the  29th  Huxley  left  Lamlash  for  a  trip  through 
central  and  southern  Scotland,  continuing  his  geological 
work  for  the  Survey ;  and  wound  up  by  attending  the  meet- 
ing of  the  British  Association  at  Aberdeen,  leaving  his  wife 
and  the  three  children  at  Aberdour,  on  the  Fifeshire  coast. 

From  Aberdeen,  where  Prince  Albert  was  President  of 
the  Association,  Huxley  writes  on  September  15: — 

Owen's  brief  address  on  giving  up  the  presidential  chair  was 
exceedingly  good.  ...  I  shall  be  worked  like  a  horse  here. 
There  are  all  sorts  of  new  materials  from  Elgin,  besides  other 
things,  and  I  daresay  I  shall  have  to  speak  frequently.    In  point 


l68  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

Can't  you  come  up  this  way  as  you  go  to  Aberdeen? — Ever 
yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

PS, — I  thought  I  might  mention  the  Jermyn  Street  matter 
to  Faraday  privately,  and  did  so.  He  seemed  pleased  that  the 
ofTer  had  been  made. 

The  acceptance  of  the  lectureship  at  the  School  of  Mines 
brought  Tyndall  into  the  closest  contact  with  Huxley  for 
the  next  nine  years,  until  he  resigned  his  lectureship  in  1868 
on  succeeding  Faraday  as  superintendent  of  the  Royal  In- 
stitution. 

On  September  17  he  writes : — 

Yesterday  Owen  and  I  foregathered  in  Section  D.  He  read 
a  very  good  and  important  paper,  and  I  got  up  afterwards  and 
spoke  exactly  as  I  thought  about  it,  and  praising  many  parts 
of  it  strongly.  In  his  reply  he  was  unco  civil  and  compli- 
mentary, so  that  the  people  who  had  come  in  hopes  of  a  row 
were  (as  I  intended  they  should  be)  disappointed. 

A  number  of  miscellaneous  letters  of  this  period  are  here 
grouped  together. 

14  Waverlev  Place, /tf«.  30,  1858. 

My  dear  Hooker —  ...  I  wish  you  wouldn't  be  apologetic 
about  criticism  from  people  who  have  a  right  to  criticise.  I 
always  look  upon  any  criticism  as  a  compliment,  not  but  what 
the  old  Adam  in  T.  H.  H.  Tvill  arise  and  fight  vigorously  against 
all  impugnment,  and  irrespective  of  all  odds  in  the  way  of  au- 
thority, but  that  is  the  way  of  the  beast. 

Why  I  value  your  and  Tyndall's  and  Darwin's  friendship  so 
much  is,  among  other  things,  that  you  all  pitch  into  me  when 
necessary.  You  may  depend  upon  it,  however  blue  I  may  look 
when  in  the  wrong,  it's  wrath  with  myself  and  nobody  else. 

To  HIS  Sister 

Thb  Government  School  of  Mines,  Jermyn  St., 

March  27,  1858. 

My  dearest  Lizzie — It  is  a  month  since  your  very  welcome 
letter  reached  me.  I  had  every  inclination  and  every  intention 
to  answer  it  at  once,  but  the  wear  and  tear  of  incessant  occupa- 
tion (for  your  letter  arrived  in  the  midst  of  my  busiest  time) 
has,  I  will  not  say  deprived  me  of  the  leisure,  but  of  that  tone 
of  mind  which  one  wants  for  writing  a  long  letter.      I  fully 


170 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xu 


This  is  the  account  any  third  person  would  give  you  of  what 
I  am  and  of  what  I  am  doing.  He  would  probably  add  that  I 
was  very  ambitious  and  desirous  of  occupying  a  high  place  in 
the  world's  estimation.  Therein,  however,  he  would  be  mis- 
taken. An  income  sufficient  to  place  me  above  care  and  anxiety, 
and  free  scope  to  work,  are  the  only  things  I  have  ever  wished 
for  or  striven  for.  But  one  is  obliged  to  toil  long  and  hard  for 
these,  and  it  is  only  now  that  they  are  coming  within  my  grasp. 
I-  gave  up  the  idea  of  going  to  Edinburgh  because  I  doubted 
whether  leaving  London  was  wise.  Recently  I  have  been 
tempted  to  put  up  for  a  good  physiological  chair  which  is  to 
be  established  at  Oxford;  but  the  Government  propose  to  im- 
prove my  position  at  the  School  of  Mines,  and  there  is  every 
probability  that  I  shall  now  permanently  remain  in  London. 
Indeed,  it  is  high  time  that  I  should  settle  down  to  one  line  of 
work.  Hitherto,  as  you  see  by  the  somewhat  varied  list  of  my 
duties,  etc.,  above,  I  have  been  ranging  over  different  parts  of  a 
very  wide  field.  But  this  apparent  desultoriness  has  been  neces- 
sary, for  I  knew  not  for  what  branch  of  science  I  should  eventu- 
ally have  to  declare  myself.  There  are  very  few  appointments 
open  to  men  of  science  in  this  country,  and  one  must  take  what 
one  can  get  and  be  thankful. 

My  health  was  very  bad  some  years  ago,  and  I  had  great 
fear  of  becoming  a  confirmed  dyspeptic,  but  thanks  to  the  pedes- 
trian tours  in  the  Alps  I  have  taken  for  the  past  two  years,  I  am 
wonderfully  better  this  session,  and  feel  capable  of  any  amount 
of  work.  It  was  in  the  course  of  one  of  these  trips  that  I  went, 
as  you  have  rightly  heard,  half  way  up  Mont  Blanc.  But  I  was 
not  in  training  and  stuck  at  the  Grands  Mulcts,  while  my  three 
companions  went  on.  I  spent  seventeen  hours  alone  on  that 
grand  pinnacle,  the  latter  part  of  the  time  in  great  anxiety,  for 
I  feared  my  friends  were  lost;  and  as  I  had  no  guide  my  own 
neck  would  have  been  in  considerable  jeopardy  in  endeavour- 
ing to  return  amidst  the  maze  of  crevasses  of  the  Glacier  des 
Bois.  But  it  was  glorious  weather  and  the  grandest  scenery 
in  the  world.  In  the  previous  year  I  saw  much  of  the  Bernese 
and  Monte  Rosa  country,  journeying  with  a  great  friend  of  mine 
well  known  as  a  natural  philosopher,  Tyndall,  and  partly  seeking 
health  and  partly  exploring  the  glaciers.  You  will  find  an  arti- 
cle of  mine  on  that  subject  in  the  Westminster  Review  for  1857. 

I  used  at  one  time  to  write  a  good  deal  for  that  Review,  prin- 
cipally the  Quarterly  notice  of  scientific  books.  But  I  never 
write  for  the  Reviews  now,  as  original  work  is  much  more  to 


1/2 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 


As  you  say,  I  have  found  this  a  g^eat  place  for  "  work  of 
price."  I  have  finished  the  "  Oceanic  Hydrozoa "  all  but  the 
bookwork,  for  which  I  must  have  access  to  the  B.M.  Library — 
but  another  week  will  do  him.  My  notes  are  from  eight  to 
twelve  years  old,  and  really  I  often  have  felt  like  the  editor  of 
somebody  else's  posthumous  work. 

Just  now  I  am  busy  over  the  "  Croonian,"  which  must  be 
done  before  I  return.  I  have  been  pulling  at  all  the  arguments 
as  a  spider  does  at  his  threads,  and  I  think  they  are  all  strong. 
If  so  the  thing  will  do  some  good. 

I  am  perplexed  about  the  N.H.  Collections.  The  best  thing, 
I  firmly  believe,  would  be  for  the  Economic  Zoology  and  a  set 
of  well  selected  types  to  go  to  Kensington,  but  I  should  be  sorry 
to  see  the  scientific  collection  placed  under  any  such  auspices  as 
those  which  govern  the  "  Bilers."  I  don't  believe  the  clay  soil 
of  the  Regent's  Park  would  matter  a  fraction — and  to  have  a 
grand  scientific  zoological  and  paleontological  collection  for 
working  purposes  close  to  the  Gardens  where  the  living  beasts 
are,  would  be  a  grand  thing.  I  should  not  wonder  if  the  affair 
is  greatly  discussed  at  the  B.A.  at  Leeds,  and  then,  perhaps, 
light  will  arise. 

Have  you  seen  that  madcap  Tyndall's  letter  in  the  Times? 
Hell  break  his  blessed  neck  some  day,  and  that  will  be  a  great 
hole  in  the  efficiency  of  my  scientific  young  England.  We  mean 
to  return  next  Saturday,  and  somewhere  about  the  i6th  or  17th 
I  shall  go  down  to  York,  where  I  want  to  study  Plesiosaurs.  I 
shall  return  after  the  British  Association.  The  interesting  ques- 
tion arises.  Shall  I  have  a  row  with  the  Great  O.  there?  What 
a  capital  title  that  is  they  give  him  of  the  British  Cuvier.  He 
stands  in  exactly  the  same  relation  to  the  French  as  British 
brandy  to  cognac. — Ever  yours  faithfully,        T.  H.  Huxley. 

Am  I  to  send  the  Gardener's  Chronicle  on,  and  where? 
please.    I  have  mislaid  the  address. 

Jermyn  Street,  Oct.  25,  1858. 

My  dear  Spencer — I  read  your  article  on  the  "  Archetype  " 
the  other  day  with  great  delight,  particularly  the  phrase  which 
puts  the  Owenian  and  Cummingian  interpolations  on  the  same 
footing.    It  is  rayther  strong,  but  quite  just. 

I  do  not  remember  a  word  to  object  to,  but  I  think  I  could 
have  strengthened  your  argument  in  one  or  two  places.  Having 
eaten  the  food,  will  you  let  me  have  back  the  dish  ?    I  am  wind- 


174 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 


When  Nettie  and  I  were  young  fools  we  agreed  we  would 
marry  whenever  we  had  £200  a  year.  Well,  we  have  had  more 
than  twice  that  to  begin  upon,  and  how  it  is  we  have  kept  out  of 
the  Bench  is  a  mystery  to  me.  But  we  have,  and  I  am  inclined 
to  think  that  the  Missus  has  got  a  private  hoard  (out  of  the 
puddings)  for  Noel. 

I  shall  leave  Nettie  to  finish  this  rambling  letter.  In  the 
meanwhile,  my  best  love  to  you  and  yours,  and  mind  you  are  a 
better  correspondent  than  your  affectionate  brother,        Tom. 

To  Professor  Leuckart 

The  Government  School  op  Mines, 
Jermvn  Street,  London,  January  30,  1859. 

My  dear  Sir — Our  mutual  friend,  Dr.  Harley,  informs  me 
that  you  have  expressed  a  wish  to  become  possessed  of  a  sepa- 
rate copy  of  my  lectures,  published  in  the  Medical  Times,  I 
greatly  regret  that  I  have  not  one  to  send  you.  The  publisher 
only  gave  me  half  a  dozen  separate  copies  of  the  numbers  of 
the  journal  in  which  the  Lectures  appeared.  Of  these  I  sent 
one  to  Johannes  Miiller  and  one  to  Professor  Victor  Carus, 
and  the  rest  went  to  other  friends. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  a  mere  fragment  of  what  I  originally 
intended  to  have  published  has  appeared,  the  series  having  been 
concluded  when  I  reached  the  end  of  the  Crustacea.  To  say 
truth,  the  Lectures  were  not  fitted  for  the  journal  in  which  they 
appeared. 

I  did  not  know  that  anyone  in  Germany  had  noticed  them 
until  I  received  the  copy  of  your  Bericht  for  1856,  which  you 
were  kind  enough  to  send  me.  I  owe  you  many  thanks  for  the 
manner  in  which  you  speak  of  them,  and  I  assure  you  it  was  a 
source  of  great  pleasure  and  encouragement  to  me  to  find  so 
competent  a  judge  as  yourself  appreciating  and  sympathising 
with  my  objects. 

Particular  branches  of  zoology  have  been  cultivated  in  this 
country  with  great  success,  as  you  are  well  aware,  but  ten  years 
ago  I  do  not  believe  that  there  were  half  a  dozen  of  my  country- 
men who  had  the  slightest  comprehension  of  morphology,  and  of 
what  you  and  I  should  call  *'  Wissenschaftliche  Zoologie." 

Those  who  thought  about  the  matter  at  all  took  Owen's 
osteological  extravaganzas  for  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  morphological 
speculation. 

I  learned  the  meaning  of  Morphology  and  the  value  of  de- 


176  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xii 

get  no  money  from  the  Government,  and  in  the  meanwhile  you 
and  Kolliker,  Gegenbaur  and  Vogt,  went  to  the  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean  and  made  sad  havoc  with  my  novelties.  Then 
came  occupations  consequent  on  my  appointment  to  the  chair 
I  now  hold;  and  it  was  only  last  autumn  that  I  had  leisure  to 
take  up  the  subject  again. 

However,  the  plates,  which  I  hope  you  will  see  in  a  few 
months  have,  with  two  exceptions,  been  engraved  five  years. 

Pray  make  my  remembrances  to  Dr.  Eckhard.  I  was  sorry 
not  to  have  seen  him  again  in  London. — Ever,  my  dear  Sir,  very 
faithfully  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Prof.  Leuckart. 

At  this  time  Sir  J.  Hooker  was  writing,  as  an  introduc- 
tion to  his  Flora  of  Tasmania^  his  essay  on  the  Flora  of 
Australia,  published  in  1859 — ^  book  which  owed  its  form 
to  the  influence  of  Darwin,  and  in  return  lent  weighty  sup- 
port to  evolutionary  theory  from  the  botanical  side.  He 
sent  his  proofs  for  Huxley  to  read. 

14  Waverley  Place,  N.W.,  April  22,  1859. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  have  read  your  proofs  with  a  great  deal 
of  attention  and  interest.  I  was  greatly  struck  with  the  sug- 
gestions in  the  first  page,  and  the  exposure  of  the  fallacy  "  that 
cultivated  forms  recur  to  wild  types  if  left  alone  "  is  new  to  me 
and  seems  of  vast  importance. 

The  argument  brought  forward  in  the  note  is  very  striking 
and  as  simple  as  the  ^gg  of  Columbus,  when  one  sees  it.  I  have 
marked  one  or  two  passages  which  are  not  quite  clear  to 
me.  .  .  . 

I  have  been  accused  of  writing  papers  composed  of  nothing 
but  heads  of  chapters,  and  I  think  you  tend  the  same  way. 
Please  take  the  trouble  tormake  the  two  lines  I  have  scored  into 
a  paragraph,  so  that  poor  devils  who  are  not  quite  so  well  up 
in  the  subject  as  yourself  may  not  have  to  rack  their  brains  for 
an  hour  to  supply  all  the  links  of  your  chain  of  argument.  .  .  . 

You  see  that  I  am  in  a  carping  humour,  but  the  matter  of 
the  essays  seems  to  me  to  be  so  very  valuable  that  I  am  jealous 
of  the  manner  of  it. 

I  had  a  long  visit  from  Greene  of  Cork  yesterday.  He  is 
very  Irish,  but  very  intelligent  and  well-informed,  and  I  am  in 
hopes  he  will  do  good  service.  He  is  writing  a  little  book  on 
the  Protozoa,  which  (so  far  as  I  have  glanced  over  the  proof 


iS59  LETTERS  Ijj 

sheets  as  jet)  seems  to  show  a  very  piulosopliical  turn  of  nbid. 
It  is  very  satisfactory  to  fiod  the  ideas  one  has  heen  fi^tii^ 
for  b^[iiiiiii^  to  take  rooc 

I  do  nol  suppose  my  own  personal  cootribotioiis  to  sdeace 
will  ever  be  anjrthing  very  grand,  but  I  shall  be  wdl  content  if 
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  1  have  done  something  to  stir  qp 
others. — Ever  yours  ^thfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

To  the  same : — 

^/rrV,  1859. 

My  dear  Hooker  ...  I  pity  you— as  for  the  MSS,  it  is  one 
of  diose  cases  for  which  penances  were  originally  devised. 
What  do  you  say  to  standing  on  your  head  in  the  garden  for 
one  hour  per  diem  for  the  next  week?    It  would  be  a  rehef.  .  •  . 

I  suppose  you  will  be  at  the  Phil.  Qub  next  Monday.  In 
the  meanwhile  don't  let  all  the  flesh  be  worried  off  your  bones 
(there  isn't  much  as  it  is). — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

14  Wa\'erley  Place,  y«/r  29,  1859, 
My  dear  Hooker — I  meant  to  have  written  to  you  yester- 
day, but  things  put  it  out  of  my  head.  If  there  is  to  be  any 
fund  raised  at  all,  I  am  quite  of  your  mind  that  it  should  be  a 
scientific  fund  and  not  a  mere  naturalists*  fund.  Sectarianism 
in  such  matters  is  ridiculous,  and  besides  that,  in  this  particular 
case  it  is  bad  policy.  For  the  word  "  Naturalist "  unfortunately 
includes  a  far  lower  order  of  men  than  chemist,  physicist,  or 
mathematician.  You  don't  call  a  man  a  mathematician  because 
he  has  spent  his  life  in  getting  as  far  as  quadratics ;  but  every 
fool  who  can  make  bad  species  and  worse  genera  is  a  '*  Natural- 
ist " ! — save  the  mark !     Imagine  the  chemists  petitioning  the 

Crown  for  a  Pension  for  P if  he  wanted  one !  and  yet  he 

really  is  a  philosopher  compared  to  poor  dear  A . 

"  Naturalists  "  therefore  are  far  more  likely  to  want  help 
than  any  other  class  of  scientific  men,  and  they  would  be  greatly 
damaging  their  own  interests  if  they  formed  an  exclusive  fund 
for  themselves. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

1859 

In  November  1859  the  Origin  of  Species  was  published, 
and  a  new  direction  was  given  to  Huxley's  activities.  Ever 
since  Darwin  and  Wallace  had  made  their  joint  communica- 
tion to  the  Linnean  Society  in  the  preceding  July,  expecta- 
tion had  been  rife  as  to  the  forthcoming  book.  Huxley 
was  one  of  the  few  privileged  to  learn  Darwin's  argument 
before  it  was  given  to  the  world ;  but  the  greatness  of  the 
book,  mere  instalment  as  it  was  of  the  long  -accumulated 
mass  of  notes,  almost  took  him  by  surprise.  Before  this 
time,  he  had  taken  up  a  thoroughly  agnostic  attitude  with 
regard  to  the  species  question,  for  he  could  not  accept  the 
creational  theory,  yet  sought  in  vain  among  the  transmu- 
tationists  for  any  cause  adequate  to  produce  transmuta- 
tion. He  had  had  many  talks  with  Darwin,  and  though 
ready  enough  to  accept  the  main  point,  maintained  such  a 
critical  attitude  on  many  others,  that  Darwin  was  not  by 
any  means  certain  of  the  effect  the  published  book  would 
produce  upon  him.  Indeed,  in  his  1857  notebook,  I  find 
jotted  down  under  the  head  of  his  paper  on  Pygocephalus 
(read  at  the  Geological  Society),  "  anti-progressive  confes- 
sion of  faith."  Darwin  was  the  more  anxious,  as,  when  he 
first  put  pen  to  paper,  he  had  fixed  in  his  mind  three  judges, 
by  whose  decision  he  determined  mentally  to  abide.  These 
three  were  Lyell,  Hooker,  and  Huxley.  If  these  three  came 
round,  partly  through  the  book,  partly  through  their  own 
reflections,  he  could  feel  that  the  subject  was  safe.  "  No 
one,"  writes  Darwin  on  November  13,  "  has  read  it,  except 
Lyell,  with  whom  I  have  had  much  correspondence. 
178 


l8o  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xlil 

is  impossible.  I  confine  myself  to  what  must  be  regarded  as 
a  modest  and  reasonable  request  for  some  particle  of  evidence 
that  the  existing  species  of  animals  and  plants  did  originate  in 
that  way,  as  a  condition  of  my  belief  in  a  statement  which 
appears  to  me  to  be  highly  improbable. 

And,  by  way  of  being  perfectly  fair,  I  had  exactly  the  same 
'  answer  to  give  to  the  evolutionists  of  1851-58.  Within  the 
ranks  of  the  biologists,  at  that  time,  I  met  with  nobody,  except 
Dr.  Grant  of  University  College,  who  had  a  word  to  say  for 
Evolution — and  his  advocacy  was  not  calculated  to  advance  the 
cause.  Outside  these  ranks,  the  only  person  known  to  me  whose 
knowledge  and  capacity  compelled  respect,  and  who  was,  at  the 
same  time,  a  thorough-going  evolutionist,  was  Mr.  Herbert 
Spencer,  whose  acquaintance  I  made,  I  think,  in  1852,  and  then 
entered  into  the  bonds  of  a  friendship  which,  I  am  happy  to 
think,  has  known  no  interruption.  Many  and  prolonged  were 
the  battles  we  fought  on  this  topic.  But  even  my  friend's  rare 
dialectic  skill  and  copiousness  of  apt  illustration  could  not  drive 
me  from  my  agnostic  position.  I  took  my  stand  upon  two 
grounds: — Firstly,  that  up  to  that  time,  the  evidence  in  favour 
of  transmutation  was  wholly  insufficient;  and  secondly,  that  no 
suggestion  respecting  the  causes  of  transmutation  assumed, 
which  had  been  made,  was  in  any  way  adequate  to  explain  the 
phenomena.  Looking  back  at  the  state  of  knowledge  at  that 
time,  I  really  do  not  see  that  any  other  conclusion  was  justi- 
fiable. 

In  those  days  I  had  never  even  heard  of  Treviranus'  Biolo- 
gie.  However,  I  had  studied  Lamarck  attentively,  and  I  had 
read  the  Vestiges  with  due  care;  but  neither  of  them  afforded 
me  any  good  ground  for  changing  my  negative  and  critical  atti- 
tude. As  for  the  Vestiges,  I  confess  that  the  book  simply  irri- 
tated me  by  the  prodigious  ignorance  and  thoroughly  unscientific 
habit  of  mind  manifested  by  the  writer.  If  it  had  any  influence 
on  me  at  all,  it  set  me  against  Evolution ;  and  the  only  review  I 
ever  have  qualms  of  conscience  about,  on  the  ground  of  need- 
less savagery,  is  one  I  wrote  on  the  Vestiges  while  under  that 
influence.*  .  .  . 

But,  by  a  curious  irony  of  fate,  the  same  influence  which  led 
me  to  put  as  little  faith  in  modern  speculations  on  this  subject  as 
in  the  venerable  traditions  recorded  in  the  first  two  chapters  of 
Genesis,  was  perhaps  more  potent  than  any  other  in  keeping 
alive  a  sort  of  pious  conviction  that  Evolution,  after  all,  would 
turn  out  true.    I  have  recently  read  afresh  the  first  edition  of 

*  See  Appendix. 


l82  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  Xiil 

transitional  forms,  with  all  the  confidence  of  youth  and  imper- 
fect knowledge.  I  was  not  aware,  at  that  time,  that  he  had  then 
been  many  years  brooding  over  the  species-question;  and  the 
humorous  smile  which  accompanied  his  gentle  answer,  that  such 
was  not  altogether  his  view,  long  haunted  and  puzzled  me.  But 
it  would  seem  that  four  or  five  years'  hard  work  had  enabled 
me  to  understand  what  it  meant;  for  Lyell,  writing  to  Sir 
Charles  Bunbury  (under  date  of  April  30,  1856),  says: — 

"  When  Huxley,  Hooker  and  Wollaston  were  at  Darwin's 
last  week,  they  (all  four  of  them)  ran  a  tilt  against  species — 
further,  I  believe,  than  they  are  prepared  to  go." 

I  recollect  nothing  of  this  beyond  the  fact  of  meeting  Mr. 
Wollaston;  and  except  for  Sir  Charles's  distinct  assurance  as 
to  "  all  four,"  I  should  have  thought  my  outrecuidance  was 
probably  a  counterblast  to  Wollaston's  conservatism.  With  re- 
gard to  Hooker,  he  was  already,  like  Voltaire's  Habbakuk,  capa- 
ble de  tout  in  the  way  of  advocating  Evolution. 

As  I  have  already  said,  I  imagine  that  most  of  those  of 
my  contemporaries  who  thought  seriously  about  the  matter, 
were  very  much  in  my  own  state  of  mind — inclined  to  say 
to  both  Mosaists  and  Evolutionists,  "  a  plague  on  both  your 
houses ! "  and  disposed  to  turn  aside  from  an  interminable  and 
apparently  fruitless  discussion,  to  labour  in  the  fertile  fields  of 
ascertainable  fact.  And  I  may  therefore  suppose  that  the  pub- 
lication of  the  Darwin  and  Wallace  paper  in  1858,  and  still  more 
that  of  the  "  Origin  "  in  1859,  had  the  effect  upon  them  of  the 
flash  of  light  which,  to  a  man  who  has  lost  himself  on  a  dark 
night,  suddenly  reveals  a  road  which,  whether  it  takes  him 
straight  home  or  not,  certainly  goes  his  way.  That  which  we 
were  looking  for,  and  could  not  find,  was  a  hypothesis  respect- 
ing the  origin  of  known  organic  forms  which  assumed  the  opera- 
tion of  no  causes  but  such  as  could  be  proved  to  be  actually  at 
work.  We  wanted,  not  to  pin  our  faith  to  that  or  any  other 
speculation,  but  to  get  hold  of  clear  and  definite  conceptions 
which  could  be  brought  face  to  face  with  facts  and  have  their 
validity  tested.  The  "  Origin  "  provided  us  with  the  working 
hypothesis  we  sought.  Moreover,  it  did  the  immense  service  of 
freeing  us  for  ever  from  the  dilemma — Refuse  to  accept  the 
creation  hypothesis,  and  what  have  you  to  propose  that  can  be 
accepted  by  any  cautious  reasoner?  In  1857  I  had  no  answer 
ready,  and  I  do  not  think  that  anyone  else  had.  A  year  later  we 
reproached  ourselves  with  dulness  for  being  perplexed  with  such 
an  inquiry.    My  reflection,  when  I  first  made  myself  master  of 


l84  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiii 

from  letters  .  .  .  and  from  remarks,  the  most  serious  omis- 
sion in  my  book  was  not  explaining  how  it  is,  as  I  believe, 
that  all  forms  do  not  necessarily  advance,  how  there  can 
now  be  simple  organisms  existing."    (May  22,  i860.) 

Huxley's  idea,  then,  was  to  call  attention  to  the  persist- 
ence of  many  types  without  appreciable  progression  during 
geological  time;  to  show  that  this  fact  was  not  explicable 
on  ajny  other  hypothesis  than  that  put  forward  by  Darwin ; 
and  by  paleontological  arguments,  to  pave  the  way  for  con- 
sideration of  the  imperfection  of  the  geological  record. 

Such  were  the  lines  on  which  he  delivered  his  Friday 
evening  lecture  on  "  Persistent  Types  "  at  the  Royal  Insti- 
tution on  June  3,  1859. 

However,  the  chief  part  which  he  took  at  this  time  in 
extending  the  doctrines  of  evolution  was  in  applying  them 
to  his  own  subjects.  Development  and  Vertebrate  Anatomy, 
and  more  particularly  to  the  question  of  the  origin  of 
mankind. 

Of  all  the  burning  questions  connected  with  the  Origin 
of  Species,  this  was  the  most  heated — the  most  surrounded 
by  prejudice  and  passion.  To  touch  it  was  to  court  attack ; 
to  be  exposed  to  endless  scorn,  ridicule,  misrepresentation, 
abuse — almost  to  social  ostracism.  But  the  facts  were  there ; 
the  structural  likenesses  between  the  apes  and  man  had 
already  been  shown ;  and  as  Huxley  warned  Darwin,  "  I 
will  stop  at  no  point  so  long  as  clear  reasoning  will  carry 
me  further." 

Now  two  years  before  the  "  Origin  "  appeared,  the  denial 
of  these  facts  by  a  leading  anatomist  led  Huxley,  as  was  his 
wont,  to  re-investigate  the  question  for  himself  and  satisfy 
himself  one  way  or  the  other.  He  found  that  the  previous 
investigators  were  not  mistaken.  Without  going  out  of  his 
way  to  refute  the  mis-statement  as  publicly  as  it  was  made, 
he  simply  embodied  his  results  in  his  regular  teaching.  But 
the  opportunity  came  unsought.  Fortified  by  his  own  re- 
searches, he  openly  challenged  these  assertions  when  re- 
peated at  the  Oxford  meeting  of  the  British  Association  in 
i860,  and  promised  to  make  good  his  challenge  in  the 
proper  place. 


1 86  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiii 

atom  of  one  element  for  an  atom  of  another  element.  You  may 
in  this  way  produce  a  vast  series  of  modifications — but  each 
modification  is  definite  in  its  composition,  and  there  are  no  tran- 
sitional or  intermediate  steps  between  one  definite  compound  and 
another.  I  have  a  sort  of  notion  that  similar  laws  of  definite 
combination  rule  over  the  modifications  of  organic  bodies,  and 
that  in  passing  from  species  to  species  "  Natura  fecit  saltum." 

All  my  studies  lead  me  to  believe  more  and  more  in  the 
absence  of  any  real  transitions  between  natural  groups,  great 
and  small — but  with  what  we  know  of  the  physiology  of  con- 
ditions [  ?]  this  opinion  seems  to  me  to  be  quite  consistent  with 
transmutation. 

When  I  say  that  no  evidence,  or  hardly  any,  would  justify 
one  in  believing  in  the  rise  of  a  new  species  of  Elephant,  e.g. 
out  of  the  earth,  I  mean  that  such  an  occurrence  would  be  so 
diametrically  contrary  to  all  experience,  so  opposed  to  those 
beliefs  which  are  the  most  constantly  verified  by  experience, 
that  one  would  be  justified  in  believing  either  that  one's  senses 
were  deluded,  or  that  one  had  not  really  got  to  the  bottom  of 
the  phenomenon.  Of  course,  if  one  could  vary  the  conditions, 
if  one  could  take  a  little  silex,  and  by  a  little  hocus-pocus  a  la 
crosse,  galvanise  a  baby  out  of  it  as  often  as  one  pleased,  all 
the  philosopher  could  do  would  be  to  hold  up  his  hands  and  cry, 
**  God  is  great"  But  short  of  evidence  of  this  kind,  I  don't  mean 
to  believe  anything  of  the  kind. 

How  much  evidence  would  you  require  to  believe  that  there 
was  a  time  when  stones  fell  upwards,  or  granite  made  itself  by  a 
spontaneous  rearrangement  of  the  elementary  particles  of  clay 
and  sand?  And  yet  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  these  beliefs 
are  as  nothing  compared  to  those  which  you  would  have  to  over- 
come in  believing  that  complex  organic  beings  made  themselves 
(for  that  is  what  creation  comes  to  in  scientific  language)  out 
of  inorganic  matter. 

I  know  it  will  be  said  that  even  on  the  transmutation  theory, 
the  first  organic  being  must  have  made  itself.  But  there  is  as 
much  difference  between  supposing  the  passage  of  inorganic 
matter  into  an  amoeba,  e.g.,  and  into  an  Elephant,  as  there  is 
between  supposing  that  Portland  stone  might  have  built  itself 
up  into  St.  Paul's,  and  believing  that  the  Giant's  Causeway  may 
have  come  about  by  natural  causes. 

True,  one  must  believe  in  a  beginning  somewhere,  but  sci- 
ence consists  in  not  believing  the  having  reached  that  beginning 
before  one  is  forced  to  do  so. 


i859  LETTER   TO  LYELL  1 87 

It  is  wholly  impossible  to  prove  that  any  phenomenon  what- 
soever is  not  produced  by  the  interposition  of  some  unknown 
cause.  But  philosophy  has  prospered  exactly  as  it  has  disre- 
garded such  possibilities,  and  has  endeavoured  to  resolve  every 
event  by  ordinary  reasoning. 

I  do  not  exactly  see  the  force  of  your  argument  that  we 
are  bound  to  find  fossil  forms  intermediate  between  men  and 
monkeys  in  the  Rocks.  Crocodiles  are  the  highest  reptiles  as 
men  are  the  highest  mammals,  but  we  find  nothing  intermediate 
between  crocodilia  and  lacertilia  in  the  whole  range  of  the 
Mesozoic  rocks.  How  do  we  know  that  Man  is  not  a  persistent 
type?  And  as  for  implements,  at  this  day,  and  as,  I  suppose, 
for  the  last  two  or  three  thousand  years  at  least,  the  savages  of 
Australia  have  made  their  weapons  of  nothing  but  bone  and 
wood.  Why  should  Homo  Eoccnus  or  Ooliticus,  the  fellows 
who  waddied  the  Amphitherium  and  speared  the  Phascolo- 
therium  as  the  Australian  niggers  treat  their  congeners,  have 
been  more  advanced  ? 

I  by  no  means  suppose  that  the  transmutation  hypothesis  is 
proven  or  anything  like  it.  But  I  view  it  as  a  powerful  instru- 
ment of  research.  Follow  it  out,  and  it  will  lead  us  somewhere ; 
while  the  other  notion  is  like  all  the  modifications  of  "  final 
causation,"  a  barren  virgin. 

And  I  would  very  strongly  urge  upon  you  that  it  is  the 
logical  development  of  Uniformitarianism,  and  that  its  adoption 
would  harmonise  the  spirit  of  Paleontology  with  that  of  Physical 
Geology. 


CHAPTER    XIV 

1859-60 

The  "  Origin  "  appeared  in  November.  As  soon  as  he 
had  read  it,  Huxley  wrote  the  following  letter  to  Darwin 
(already  published  in  Life  of  Darwin^  vol.  ii.  p.  231): — 

Jermyn  Street,  W.,  November  23,  1859. 

My  dear  Darwin — I  finished  your  book  yesterday,  a  lucky 
examination  having  furnished  me  with  a  few  hours  of  con- 
tinuous leisure. 

Since  I  read  Von  Bar's  essays,  nine  years  ago,  no  work  on 
Natural  History  Science  I  have  met  with  has  made  so  great 
an  impression  upon  me,  and  I  do  most  heartily  thank  you  for 
the  great  store  of  new  views  you  have  given  me.  Nothing,  I 
think,  can  be  better  than  the  tone  of  the  bOok ;  it  impresses  those 
who  know  about  the  subject.  As.  for  your  doctrine,  I  am  pre- 
pared to  go  to  the  stake,  if  requisite,  in  support  of  Chapter  IX  * 
and  most  parts  of  Chapters  X,  XI,  XII,  and  Chapter  XIII  con- 
tains much  that  is  most  admirable,  but  on  one  or  two  points  I 
enter  a  caveat  until  I  can  see  further  into  all  sides  of  the 
question. 

As  to  the  first  four  chapters,f  I  agree  thoroughly  and  fully 
with  all  the  principles  laid  down  in  them.  I  think  you  have 
demonstrated  a  true  cause  for  the  production  of  species,  and 
have  thrown  the  onus  probandi,  that  species  did  not  arise  in 
the  way  you  suppose,  on  your  adversaries. 

*  Chapter  IX,  The  Imperfection  of  the  Geological  Record ;  X,  The 
Geological  Succession  of  Organic  Beings ;  XI-XII,  Geographical  Dis- 
tribution ;  XIII,  Classification,  Morphology,  Embryology,  and  Rudi- 
mentary Organs. 

f  Chapter  I,  Variation  under  Domestication  ;  II,  Variation  under 
Nature ;  III,  The  Struggle  for  Existence ;  IV,  Operation  of  Natural 
Selection  ;  V,  Laws  of  Variation. 


190 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 


of  giving  the  book  a  fair  chance  with  the  multitudinous  readers 
of  the  Times,  to  make  any  difficulty  about  conditions ;  and  being 
then  very  full  of  the  subject,  I  wrote  the  article  faster,  I  think, 
than  I  ever  wrote  anything  in  my  life,  and  sent  it  to  Mr.  Lucas, 
who  duly  prefixed  his  opening  sentences. 

When  the  article  appeared,  there  was  much  speculation  as 
to  its  authorship.  The  secret  leaked  out  in  time,  as  all  secrets 
will,  but  not  by  my  aid ;  and  then  I  used  to  derive  a  good  deal  of 
innocent  amusement  from  the  vehement  assertions  of  some  of 
my  more  acute  friends,  that  they  knew  it  was  mine  from  the  first 
paragraph ! 

As  the  Times  some  years  since,  referred  to  my  connection 
with  the  review,  I  suppose  there  will  be  no  breach  of  confidence 
in  the  publication  of  this  little  history,  if  you  think  it  worth  the 
space  it  will  occupy. 

The  article  appeared  on  December  26.  Only  Hooker 
was  admitted  into  the  secret.  In  an  undated  note  Huxley 
writes  to  him : — 

I  have  written  the  other  review  you  wot  of,  and  have  handed 
it  over  to  my  friend  to  deal  as  he  likes  with  it.  .  .  .  Darwin  will 
laugh  over  a  letter  that  I  sent  him  this  morning  with  a  vignette 
of  the  Jermyn  Street  "  pet "  ready  to  fight  his  battle,  and  the 
"  judicious  Hooker  "  holding  the  bottle. 

And  on  December  31  he  writes  again : — 

Jermyn  Street,  December  31.  1859. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  have  not  the  least  objection  to  my 
share  in  the  Times  article  being  known,  only  I  should  not  like  to 
have  anything  stated  on  my  authority.  The  fact  is,  that  the  first 
quarter  of  the  first  column  (down  to  "  what  is  a  species,"  etc.)  is 
not  mine,  but  belongs  to  the  man  who  is  the  official  reviewer  for 
the  Times  (my  "  Temporal "  godfather  I  might  call  him). 

The  rest  is  in  my  ipsissima  verba,  and  I  only  wonder  that  it 
turns  out  as  well  as  it  does — for  I  wrote  it  faster  than  ever  I 
wrote  anything  in  my  life.  The  last  column  nearly  as  fast  as 
my  wife  could  read  the  sheets.  But  I  was  thoroughly  in  the 
humour  and  full  of  the  subject.  Of  course  as  a  scientific  review 
the  thing  is  worth  nothing,  but  I  earnestly  hope  it  may  have 
made  some  of  the  educated  mob,  who  derive  their  ideas  from 
the  Times,  reflect.  And  whatever  they  do,  they  shall  respect 
Darwin. 

Pray  give  my  kindest  regards  and  b^5t  wishes  for  the  New 


ig6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

So  "  Dr.  Draper  droned  out  his  paper,  turning  first  to 
the  right  hand  and  then  to  the  left,  of  course  bringing  in  a 
reference  to  the  Origin  of  Species  which  set  the  ball  roll- 
ing." 

An  hour  or  more  that  paper  lasted,  and  then  discus- 
sion began.  The  President  "  wisely  announced  in  limine 
that  none  who  had  not  valid  arguments  to  bring  forward  on 
one  side  or  the  other  would  be  allowed  to  address  the  meet- 
ing ;  a  caution  that  proved  necessary,  for  no  fewer  than  four 
combatants  had  their  utterances  burked  by  him,  because  of 
their  indulgence  in  vague  declamation."  * 

First  spoke  (writes  Professor  Farrarf)  a  layman  from 
Brompton,  who  gave  his  name  as  being  one  of  the  Committee 
of  the  (newly  formed)  Economic  section  of  the  Association. 
He,  in  a  stentorian  voice,  let  off  his  theological  venom.  Then 
jumped  up  Richard  Greswell  X  with  a  thin  voice,  saying  much 
the  same,  but  speaking  as  a  scholar ;  but  we  did  not  merely  want 
any  theological  discussion,  so  we  shouted  them  down.  Then  a 
Mr.  Dingle  got  up  and  tried  to  show  that  Darwin  would  have 
done  much  better  if  he  had  taken  him  into  consultation.  He 
used  the  blackboard  and  began  a  mathematical  demonstration 
on  the  question — "  Let  this  point  A  be  man,  and  let  that  point 
B  be  the  mawnkey."  He  got  no  further;  he  was  shouted  down 
with  cries  of  "  mawnkey."  None  of  these  had  spoken  more  than 
three  minutes.  It  was  when  these  were  shouted  down  that 
Henslow  said  he  must  demand  that  the  discussion  should  rest 
on  scientific  grounds  only. 

Then  there  were  calls  for  the  pishop,  but  he  rose  and  said 
he  understood  his  friend  Professor  Beale  had  something  to  say 
first.  Beale,  who  was  an  excellent  histologist,  spoke  to  the  effect 
that  the  new  theory  ought  to  meet  with  fair  discussion,  but 
added,  with  great  modesty,  that  he  himself  had  not  sufficient 
knowledge  to  discuss  the  subject  adequately.  Then  the  Bishop 
spoke  the  speech  that  you  know,  and  the  question  about  his 
mother  being  an  ape,  or  his  grandmother. 

From  the  scientific  point  of  view,  the  speech  was  of 
small  value.  It  was  evident  from  his  mode  of  handling  the 
subject  that  he  had  been  "  crammed  up  to  the  throat,"  and 

*  Life  o/Darjtnn,  I.e.  \  Canon  of  Durham. 

\  Rev.  Richard  GresweU,  B.D,,  Tutor  of  Worcester  CoHege. 


198  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

did  not  dawn  upon  Sir  Benjamin  until  after  Huxley  had 
completed  his  "  forcible  and  eloquent "  answer  to  the  sci- 
entific part  of  the  Bishop's  argument,  and  proceeded  to 
make  his  famous  retort.* 


I 

/ 


I 
I 

L 


On  this  (continues  the  writer  in  MacmiUan's  Magazine)  Mr. 
Huxley  slowly  and  deliberately  arose.  A  slight  tall  figure,  stern 
and  pale,  very  quiet  and  very  flff^ve,f  he  stood  before  us  and 
spoke  those  tremendous  wordi^-words  which  no  one  seems  sure 
of  now,  nor,  I  think,  could  remember  just  after  they  were  spoken, 
for  their  meaning  took  away  our  breath,  though  it  left  us  in  no 
doubt  as  to  what  it  was.  He  was  not  ashamed  to  have  a  monkey 
for  his  ancestor ;  but  he  would  be  ashamed  to  be  connected  with 
a  man  who  used  great  gifts  to  obscure  the  truth.  No  one 
doubted  his  meaning,  and  the  effect  was  tremendous.  One  lady 
fainted  and  had  to  be  carried  out;  I,  for  one,  jumped  out  of 
my  seat. 

The  fullest  and  probably  most  accurate  account  of  these 
concluding  words  is  the  following,  from  a  letter  of  the  late 

*  The  Athenaum  reports  him  as  saying  that  Darwin's  theory  was 
an  explanation  of  phenomena  in  Natural  History,  as  the  undulatory 
theory  was  of  the  phenomena  of  light.  No  one  objected  to  that  theory 
because  an  undulation  of  light  had  never  been  arrested  and  measured. 
Darwin's  theory  was  an  explanation  of  facts,  and  his  book  was  full  of 
new  facts,  all  bearing  on  his  theory.  Without  asserting  that  every 
part  of  that  theory  had  been  confirmed,  he  maintained  that  it  was  the 
best  explanation  of  the  origin  of  species  which  had  yet  been  offered. 
With  regard  to  the  psychological  distinction  between  men  and  ani- 
mals, man  himself  was  once  a  monad — a  mere  atom,  and  nobody 
could  say  at  what  moment  in  the  history  of  his  development  he 
became  consciously  intelligent.  The  question  was  not  so  much  one 
of  a  transmutation  or  transition  of  species,  as  of  the  production  of 
forms  which  became  permanent. 

Thus  the  short-legged  sheep  of  America  was  not  produced  grad- 
ually, but  originated  in  the  birth  of  an  original  parent  of  the  whole 
stocic,  which  had  been  kept  up  by  a  rigid  system  of  artificial  selec- 
tion. 

f  **  Young,  cool,  quiet,  scientific — scientific  in  fact  and  in  treat- 
ment."— J.  R.  Green.  A  certain  piquancy  must  have  been  added  to 
the  situation  by  the  superficial  resemblance  in  feature  between  the 
two  men,  so  different  in  temperament  and  expression.  Indeed  next 
day  at  Hardwicke,  a  friend  came  up  to  Mr.  Fanning  and  asked  who 
his  guest  was,  saying,  **  Surely  it  is  the  son  of  the  Bishop  of  Ox- 
ford." 


2(50  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

No  doubt  your  father's  words  were  better  than  these,  and 
they  gained  effect  from  his  clear,  deliberate  utterance,  but  in 
outline  and  in  scale  this  represents  truly  what  was  said. 

After  the  commotion  was  over,  "  some  voices  called  for 
Hooker,  and  his  name  having  been  handed  up,  the  President 
invited  him  to  give  his  view  of  the  theory  from  the. Botanical 
side.  This  he  did,  demonstrating  that  the  Bishop,  by  his 
own  showing,  had  never  grasped  the  principles  of  the 
*  Origin,'  and  that  he  was  absolutely  ignorant  of  the  ele- 
ments of  botanical  science.  The  Bishop  made  no  reply, 
and  the  meeting  broke  up."  * 

Account  of  the  Oxford  Meeting  by  the  Rev.  W.  H. 
Freemantle  (in  Charles  Darwin,  his  Life  Told,  &c., 
1892,  p.  238). 

The  Bishop  of  Oxford  attacked  Darwin,  at  first  playfully, 
but  at  last  in  grim  earnest.  It  was  known  that  the  Bishop  had 
written  an  article  against  Darwin  in  the  last  Quarterly  Re- 
view; f  it  was  also  rumoured  that  Professor  Owen  had  been 
staying  at  Cuddesdon  and  had  primed  the  Bishop,  who  was  to 
act  as  mouthpiece  to  the  great  Palaeontologist,  who  did  not  him- 
self dare  to  enter  the  lists.  The  Bishop,  however,  did  not  show 
himself  master  of  the  facts,  and  made  one  serious  blunder.  A 
fact  which  had  been  much  dwelt  on  as  confirmatory  of  Darwin's 
idea  of  variation,  was  that  a  sheep  had  been  born  shortly  before 
in  a  flock  in  the  North  of  England,  having  an  addition  of  one 
to  the  vertebrae  of  the  spine.  The  Bishop  was  declaring  with 
rhetorical  exaggeration  that  there  was  hardly  any  evidence  on 
Darwin's  side.  "  What  have  they  to  bring  forward  ?  **  he  ex- 
claimed. "  Some  rumoured  statement  about  a  long-legged 
sheep."  But  he  passed  on  to  banter :  "  I  should  like  to  ask 
Professor  Huxley,  who  is  sitting  by  me,  and  is  about  to  tear 
me  to  pieces  when  I  have  sat  down,  as  to  his  belief  in  being 
descended  from  an  ape.  Is  it  on  his  grandfather's  or  his  grand- 
mother's side  that  the  ape  ancestry  comes  in  ?  "  And  then  tak- 
ing a  graver  tone,  he  asserted,  in  a  solemn  peroration,  that  Dar- 
win's views  were  contrary  to  the  revelation  of  God  in  the 
Scriptures.     Professor  Huxley  was  unwilling  to  respond:  but 

*  Li/t  of  Darwin,  I.e. 

f  It  appeared  in  the  ensuing  number  for  July. 


202  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 

The  odd  part  of  the  business  is,  that  I  should  not  have  been 
pre^^itt  except  for  Robert  Chambers.  I  had  heard  of  the  Bish- 
op^ intention  to  utilise  the  occasion.  I  knew  he  had  the 
r^utation  of  being  a  first-class  controversialist,  and  I  was  quite 
aware  that  if  he  played  his  cards  properly,  we  should  have  little 
chance,  with  such  an  audience,  of  making  an  efficient  defence. 
Moreover,  I  was  very  tired,  and  wanted  to  join  my  wife  at  her 
brother-in-law's  country  house  near  Reading,  on  the  Saturday. 
On  the  Friday  I  met  Chambers  in  the  street,  and  in  reply  to 
some  remark  of  his,  about  his  going  to  the  meeting,  I  said  that 
I  did  not  mean  to  attend  it — did  not  see  the  good  of  giving  up 
peace  and  quietness  to  be  episcopally  pounded.  Chambers  broke 
out  into  vehement  remonstrances,  and  talked  about  my  deserting 
them.  So  I  said,  "  Oh !  if  you  are  going  to  take  it  that  way, 
I'll  come  and  have  my  share  of  what  is  going  on." 

So  I  came,  and  chanced  to  sit  near  old  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie. 
The  Bishop  began  his  speech,  and  to  my  astonishment  very 
soon  showed  that  he  was  so  ignorant  that  he  did  not  know  how 
to  manage  his  own  case.  My  spirits  rose  proportionately,  and 
when  he  turned  to  me  with  his  insolent  question,  I  said  to  Sir 
Benjamin,  in  an  undertone,  "  The  Lord  hath  delivered  him  into 
mine  hands.'' 

That  sagacious  old  gentleman  stared  at  me  as  if  I  had  lost 
my  senses.  But,  in  fact,  the  Bishop  had  justified  the  severest 
retort  I  could  devise,  and  I  made  up  my  mind  to  let  him  have 
it.  I  was  careful,  fiowever,  not  to  rise  to  reply,  until  the  meet- 
ing called  for  me — then  I  let  myself  go. 

In  justice  to  the  Bishop,  I  am  bound  to  say  he  bore  no 
malice,  but  was  always  courtesy  itself  when  we  occasionally  met 
in  after  years.  Hooker  and  I  walked  away  from  the  meeting 
together,  and  I  remember  saying  to  him  that  this  experience 
had  changed  my  opinion  as  to  the  practical  value  of  the  art  of 
public  speaking,  and  that  from  that  time  forth  I  should  carefully 
cultivate  it,  and  try  to  leave  off  hating  it.  I  did  the  former, 
but  never  quite  succeeded  in  the  latter  effort. 

I  did  not  mean  to  trouble  you  with  such  a  long  scrawl  when 
I  began  about  this  piece  of  ancient  history. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxlev. 

In  the  evening  there  was  a  crowded  conversazione  in 
Dr.  Daubeny's  rooms,  and  here,  continues  the  writer  in 
Macmillan's,  "  everyone  was  eager  to  congratulate  the  hero 
of  the  day.    I  remember  that  some  naive  person  wished  *  it 


204 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xiv 


the  applause  grew  and  widened,  until,  when  he  sat  doWo, 
the  cheering  was  not  very  much  less  than  that  given  to  thev 
Bishop.    To  that  extent  he  carried  an  unwilling  audience  \ 
with  him  by  the  force  of  his  speech.     The  debate  on  the    \ 
ape  question,  however,  was  continued  elsewhere  during  the 
next  two  years,  and  the  evidence  was  completed  by  the      i 
unanswerable  demonstrations  of  Sir  W.  H.  Flower  at  the 
Cambridge  meeting  of  the  Association  in  1862. 

The  importance  of  the  Oxford  meeting  lay  in  the  open 
resistance  that  was  made  to  authority,  at  a  moment  when 
even  a  drawn  battle  was  hardly  less  effectual  than  acknowl- 
edged victory.  Instead  of  being  crushed  under  ridicule, 
the  new  theories  secured  a  hearing,  all  the  wider,  indeed, 
for  the  startling  nature  of  their  defence. 


2o6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

at  the  Royal  Institution  (February  8)  on  "  The  Nature  of 
the  Earliest  Stages  of  Development  of  Animals." 

Meanwhile  the  publication  of  these  researches  led  to 
another  pitched  battle,  in  which  public  interest  was  pro- 
foundly engaged.  The  controversy  which  raged  had  some 
resemblance  to  a  duel  over  a  point  of  honour  and  credit 
Scientific  technicalities  became  the  catchwords  of  society, 
and  the  echoes  of  the  great  Hippocampus  question  linger  in 
the  delightful  pages  of  the  IVatcr-Babics.  Of  this  fight 
Huxley  writes  to  Sir  J.  Hooker  on  April  i8,  1861 : — 

A  controversy  between  Owen  and  myself,  which  I  can  only 
call  absurd  (as  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  about  the  facts),  has 
been  going  on  i;i  the  Athenwum,  and  I  wound  it  up  in  disgust 
last  week. 

And  again  on  April  27 : — 

Owen  occupied  an  entirely  untenable  position — ^but  I  am 
nevertheless  surprised  he  did  not  try  "abusing  plaintiff's  at- 
torney." The  fact  is  he  made  a  prodigious  blunder  in  com- 
mencing the  attack,  and  now  his  only  chance  is  to  be  silent  and 
let  people  forget  the  exposure.  I  do  not  believe  that  in  the 
whole  history  of  science  there  is  a  case  of  any  man  of  reputa- 
tion getting  himself  into  such  a  contemptible  position.  He  will 
be  the  laughing-stock  of  all  the  continental  anatomists. 

Rolleston  has  a  great  deal  of  Oxford  slough  to  shed,  but  on 
that  very  ground  his  testimony  has  been  of  most  especial  service. 
Fancy  that  man telling  Maskelyne  that  Rolleston*s  observa- 
tions were  entirely  confirmatory  of  Owen. 

About  the  same  time  he  writes  to  his  wife : — 

April  16. — People  are  talking  a  good  deal  about  the  "Manand 
the  Apes  "  question,  and  I  hear  that  somebody,  I  suspect  Monck- 
ton  Milnes,  has  set  afloat  a  poetical  squib  on  the  subject.*  .  .  . 

*  The  squib  in  question,  dated  '*the  Zoological  Gardens,'*  and 
signed  *'  Gorilla,"  appeared  in  Punch  for  May  15,  i86r,  under  a  picture 
of  that  animal,  bearing  the  sign,  ^^Am  la  Man  and  a  Brotfurf^* 

The  concluding  verses  run  as  follows  : 

Next  HUXL  E  Y  replies  "  To  twice  slay  the  slain  " 


1\i9XOWEN\it\\n 
And  garbles  hb  Latin  quotation ; 
That  his  facts  are  not  new, 
His  mistakes  not  a  few, 
Detximenul  to  his  reputation. 


By  dint  of  the  Brain 
(Thus  HUXL  E  V  concludes  his  review^ 

Is  but  labour  in  vain, 

Unproductive  of  gain. 
And  so  I  shaU  bid  you  **  Adieo ! " 


2o8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

motions,"  he  steadfastly  refused  to  be  an  advocate  of  the 
theory,  "  if  by  an  advocate  is  meant  one  whose  business  it 
is  to  smooth  over  real  difficulties,  and  to  persuade  when  he 
cannot  convince." 

In  common  fairness  he  warned  his  audience  of  the  one 
missing  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence — ^the  fact  that  selective 
breeding  has  not  yet  produced  species  sterile  to  one  another. 
But  it  is  to  be  adopted  as  a  working  hypothesis  like  other 
scientific  generalisations,  "  subject  to  the  production  of 
proof  that  physiological  species  may  be  produced  by  se- 
lective breeding ;  just  as  a  physical  philosopher  may  accept 
the  undulatory  theory  of  light,  subject  to  the  proof  of  the 
existence  of  the  hypothetical  ether ;  or  as  the  chemist  adopts 
the  atomic  theory,  subject  to  the  proof  of  the  existence  of 
atoms;  and  for  exactly  the  same  reasons,  namely,  that  it 
has  an  immense  amount  of  prima  facie  probability;  that  it 
is  the  only  means  at  present  within  reach  of  reducing  the 
chaos  of  observed  facts  to  order;  and  lastly,  that  it  is  the 
most  powerful  instrument  of  investigation  which  has  been 
presented  to  naturalists  since  the  invention  of  the  natural 
system  of  classification,  and  the  commencement  of  the  sys- 
tematic study  of  embryology." 

As  for  the  repugnance  of  most  men  to  admitting  kin- 
ship with  the  apes,  "  thoughtful  men,"  he  says,  "  once  es- 
caped from  the  blinding  influences  of  traditional  prejudices, 
will  find  in  the  lowly  stock  whence  man  has  sprung  the 
best  evidence  of  the  splendour  of  his  capacities;  and  will 
discern,  in  his  long  progress  through  the  past,  a  reasonable 
ground  of  faith  in  his  attainment  of  a  nobler  future." 

A  simile,  with  which  he  enforced  this  elevating  point  of 
view,  which  has  since  eased  the  passage  of  many  minds  to 
the  acceptance  of  evolution,  seems  to  have  been  much  ap- 
preciated by  his  audience.  It  was  a  comparison  of  man  to 
the  Alps,  which  turn  out  to  be  "  of  one  substance  with  the 
dullest  clay,  but  raised  by  inward  forces  to  that  place  of 
proud  and  seemingly  inaccessible  glory." 

The  lectures  were  met  at  first  with  astonishing  quiet, 
but  it  was  not  long  before  the  stones  began  to  fly.  The 
Witness  of  January  1 1  lashed  itself  into  a  fury  over  the  fact 


2IO  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

Jermyn  Stkwst,  January  i6,  1862. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  wonder  if  we  are  ever  to  meet  again  in 
this  world !  At  anyrate  I  send  to  the  remote  province  of  Kew, 
Greeting,  and  my  best  wishes  for  the  new  year  to  you  and  yours. 
I  also  inclose  a  slip  from  an  Edinburgh  paper  containing  a 
report  of  my  lecture  on  the  "  Relation  of  Man,"  etc.  As  you 
will  see,  I  went  in  for  the  entire  animal  more  strongly,  in  fact, 
than  they  have  reported  me.  I  told  them  in  so  many  words 
that  I  entertained  no  doubt  of  the  origin  of  man  from  die  same 
stock  as  the  apes. 

And  to  my  great  delight,  in  saintly  Edinburgh  itself  the  an- 
nouncement met  with  nothing  but  applause.  For  myself  I  can't 
say  that  the  praise  or  blame  of  my  audience  was  much  matter, 
but  it  is  a  grand  indication  of  the  general  disintegration  of  old 
prejudices  which  is  going  on. 

I  shall  see  if  I  cannot  make  something  more  of  the  lectures 
by  delivering  them  again  in  London,  and  then  I  shall  publish 
them. 

The  report  does  not  put  nearly  strong  enough  what  I  said  in 
favour  of  Darwin's  views.  I  affirmed  it  to  be  the  only  scientific 
hypothesis  of  the  origin  of  species  in  existence,  and  expressed 
my  belief  that  the  one  gap  in  the  evidence  would  be  filled  up,  as 
I  always  do. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Jermyn  Street,  January  20,  1862.     ^ 

My  dear  Darwin — The  inclosed  article,  which  has  been 
followed  up  by  another  more  violent,  more  scurrilously  personal, 
and  more  foolish,  will  prove  to  you  that  my  labour  has  not  been 
in  vain,  and  that  your  views  and  mine  are  likely  to  be  better 
ventilated  in  Scotland  than  they  have  been. 

I  was  quite  uneasy  at  getting  no  attack  from  the  Witness, 
tliinking  I  must  have  overestimated  the  impression  I  had  made, 
and  the  favourableness  of  the  reception  of  what  I  said.  But  the 
raving  of  the  Witness  is  clear  testimony  that  my  notion  was 
correct. 

I  shall  send  a  short  reply  to  the  Scotsman  for  the  purpose  of 
further  advertising  the  question. 

With  regard  to  what  are  especially  your  doctrines,  I  spoke 
much  more  favourably  than  I  am  reported  to  have  done.  I 
expressed  no  doubt  as  to  their  ultimate  establishment,  but  as  I 
particularly  wished  not  to  be  misrepresented  as  an  advocate* 
trying  to  soften  or  explain  away  real  difficulties,  I  did  not  in 
speaking  enter  into  the  details  of  what  is  to  be  said  in  diminish- 


ii2  Life  of  professor  huxl£V  chap,  xv 

ment  of  the  three  objects  of  his  address,  namely,  to  state 
fully  and  fairly  his  conclusions,  to  avoid  giving  unnecessary 
offence,  and  thirdly,  "  while  feeling  assured  of  the  just  and 
reasonable  dealing  of  the  respectable  part  of  the  Scottish 
press,  I  naturally  hoped  for  noisy  injustice  and  unreason 
from  the  rest,  seeing,  as  I  did,  the  best  security  for  the  dis- 
semination of  my  views  through  regions  which  they  might 
not  otherwise  reach,  in  the  certainty  of  a  violent  attack  by 
(the  Witness):' 

The  applause  of  the  audience,  he  says,  afforded  him 
genuine  satisfaction,  "  because  it  bids  me  continue  in  the 
faith  on  which  I  acted,  that  a  man  who  speaks  out  honestly 
and  fearlessly  that  which  he  knows,  and  that  which  he  be- 
lieves, will  always  enlist  the  good-will  and  the  respect,  how- 
ever much  he  may  fail  in  winning  the  assent,  of  his  fel- 
low-men." 

About  this  time  a  new  field  of  interest  was  opened  out 
to  him,  closely  connected  with,  indeed,  and  completing,  the 
ape  question.  Sir  Charles  Lyell  was  engaged  in  writing 
his  Antiquity  of  Man,  and  asked  Huxley  to  supply  him  with 
various  anatomical  data  touching  the  ape  question,  and 
later  to  draw  him  a  diagram  illustrating  the  peculiarities 
of  the  newly  discovered  Neanderthal  skull  as  compared  with 
other  skulls.  He  points  out  in  his  letters  to  Lyell  that  the 
range  of  cranial  capacity  between  the  highest  and  the  low- 
est German — "  one  of  the  mediatised  princes,  I  suppose  "  * 
— or  the  Malayan  or  Peruvian,  is  almost  lOO  per  cent;  in 
absolute  amount  twice  as  much  as  the  difference  between 
that  of  the  largest  simian  and  the  smallest  human  capacity, 
so  that  in  seeking  an  ordinal  difference  between  man  and 
the  apes,  "  it  would  certainly  be  well  to  let  go  the  head, 
though  I  am  afraid  it  does  not  mend  matters  much  to  lay 
hold  of  the  foot." 

And  on  January  25,  1862 : — 

I  have  been  skull-measuring  all  day  at  the  College  of  Sur- 
geons.    The  Neanderthal  skull  may  be  described  as  a  slightly 

♦  The  minor  princes  of  Germany,  whose  territories  were  annexed 
to  larger  states,  and  who  thus  exchanged  a  direct  for  a  mediate  share 
in  the  imperial  government. 


214  ^'^^  ^^  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

an  association  meeting  the  other  day.  We  all  missed  you,  but 
I  think  it  was  as  well  you  did  not  come,  for  though  I  am  pretty 
tough,  as  you  know,  I  found  the  pace  rather  killing.  Nothing 
could  exceed  the  hospitality  and  kindness  of  the  University 
people — and  that,  together  with  a  great  deal  of  speaking  on  the 
top  of  a  very  bad  cold,  which  I  contrived  to  catch  just  before 
going  down,  has  somewhat  used  me  up. 

Owen  came  down  with  the  obvious  intention  of  attacking  me 
on  all  points.  Each  of  his  papers  was  an  attack,  and  he  went  so 
far  as  to  offer  stupid  and  unnecessary  opposition  to  proposals  of 
mine  in  my  own  committee.  However,  he  got  himself  sold  at  all 
points.  .  .  .  The  Polypterus  paper  and  the  Aye-Aye  paper  fell 
flat.  The  latter  was  meant  to  raise  a  discussion  on  your  views, 
but  it  was  all  a  stale  hash,  and  I  only  made  some  half  sarcastic 
remarks  which  stopped  any  further  attempts  at  discussion.  .  .  . 

I  took  my  book  to  Scotland  but  did  nothing.  I  shall  ask 
leave  to  send  you  a  bit  or  two  as  I  get  on. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  "  Society  for  the  propagation  of  common  honesty  in  all 
parts  of  the  world  "  was  established  at  Cambridge.  I  want  you 
to  belong  to  it,  but  I  will  say  more  about  it  by  and  by. 

This  admirable  society,  which  was  also  to  "  search  for 
scientific  truth,  especially  in  biology,"  seems  to  have  been 
but  short  lived.  At  all  events,  I  can  find  only  two  refer- 
ences to  subsequent  meetings,  on  October  7  and  December 
19  in  this  year. 

A  few  days  later  a  final  blow  was  struck  in  the  battle 
over  the  ape  question.  He  writes  on  October  15  how  he 
has  written  a  letter  to  the  Medical  Titnes — his  last  word 
on  the  subject,  summing   up  in  most  emphatic  terms : — 

I  have  written  the  letter  with  the  greatest  care,  and  there  is 
nothing  coarse  or  violent  in  it.  But  it  shall  put  an  end  to  all  the 
humbug  that  has  been  going  on.  .  .  .  Rolleston  will  come  out 
with  his  letter  in  the  same  number,  and  the  smash  will  be  awful, 
but  most  thoroughly  merited. 

These  several  pieces  of  work,  struck  out  at  different 
times  in  response  to  various  impulses,  were  now  combined 
and  re-shaped  into  Man's  Place  in  Nature,  the  first  book 
which  was  published  by  him.  Thus  he  writes  to  Sir  Charles 
Lyell  on  May  5,  1862 : — 


2i6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

win  will,  I  think,  take  his  place  with  such  men  as  Harvey,  and 
even  if  he  is  wrong  his  sobriety  and  accuracy  of  thought  will 
put  him  on  a  far  different  level  from  Lamarck.  I  want  to  make 
this  clear  to  people. 

I  am  disposed  to  agree  with  you  about  the  "emasculate" 
and  **  uncircumcised  " — ^partly  for  your  reasons,  partly  because 
I  believe  it  is  an  excellent  rule  always  to  erase  an3rthing  that 
strikes  one  as  particularly  smart  when  writing  it.  But  it  is  a 
great  piece  of  self-denial  to  abstain  from  expressing  my  peculiar 
antipathy  to  the  people  indicated,  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  rewarded 
for  the  virtue. 

As  to  the  secondary  causes  I  only  wished  to  guard  myself 
from  being  understood  to  imply  that  I  had  any  comprehension 
of  the  meaning  of  the  term.  If  my  phrase  looks  naughty  I  will 
alter  it.  What  I  want  is  to  be  read,  and  therefore  to  give  no 
unnecessary  handle  to  the  enemy.  There  will  be  row  enough 
whatever  I  do. 

Our  Commission  here  ♦  implicates  us  in  an  inquiry  of  some 
difficulty,  and  which  involves  the  interests  of  a  great  many  poor 
people.  I  am  afraid  it  will  not  leave  me  very  much  leisure.  But 
we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  charming  country,  and  the  work  is  not 
unpleasant  or  uninteresting.  If  the  sun  would  only  shine  more 
than  once  a  week  it  would  be  perfect.  —  With  kind  remem- 
brances to  Lady  Lyell,  believe  me,  faithfully  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

We  shall  be  here  for  the  next  ten  days  at  least.  But  my 
wife  will  always  know  my  whereabouts. 

Jermyn  Street,  March  23,  1863. 

My  dear  Sir  Charles — I  suspect  that  the  passage  to  which 
you  refer  must  have  been  taken  from  my  unrevised  proofs,  for  it 
corresponds  very  nearly  with  what  is  written  at  p.  97  of  my 
book. 

Flower  has  recently  discovered  that  the  Siamang's  brain 
affords  an  even  more  curious  exception  to  the  general  rule  than 
that  of  Mycetes,  as  the  cerebral  hemispheres  leave  part  not  only 
of  the  sides  but  of  the  hinder  end  of  the  cerebellum  uncovered. 

As  it  is  one  of  the  Anthropoid  apes  and  yet  differs  in  this 
respect  far  more  widely  from  the  gorilla  than  the  gorilla  differs 
from  man,  it  offers  a  charming  example  of  the  value  of  cerebral 
characters. 

♦  The  Fishery  Commission. 


2i8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

opinion  of  Mansel's  Bampton  Lectures  on  the  Limits  of 
Religious  Thought: — 

A  friend  of  mine,  Huxley,  who  will  soon  take  rank  as  one 
of  the  first  naturalists  we  have  ever  produced,  begged  me  to 
read  these  sermons  as  first  rate,  "  although,  regarding  the  au- 
thor as  a  churchman,  you  will  probably  compare  him,  as  I  did, 
to  the  drunken  fellow  in  Hogarth's  contested  election,  who  is 
sawing  through  the  signpost  at  the  other  party's  public-house, 
forgetting  he  is  sitting  at  the  other  end  of  it.  But  read  them 
as  a  piece  of  clear  and  unanswerable  reasoning." 

In  the  1894  preface  to  the  re-issue  of  Man's  Place  in 
the  Collected  Essays,  Huxley  speaks  as  follows  of  the  warn- 
ings he  received  against  publishing  on  so  dangerous  a  topic, 
of  the  storm  which  broke  upon  his  head,  and  the  small  re- 
sult which,  in  the  long  run,  it  produced  * : 

Magna  est  Veritas  et  prtevalebit!  Truth  is  great,  certainly, 
but  considering  her  greatness,  it  is  curious  what  a  long  time  she 
is  apt  to  take  about  prevailing.  When,  towards  the  end  of  1862, 
I  had  finished  writing  Man's  Place  in  Nature,  I  could  say  with 
a  good  conscience  that  my  conclusions  "  had  not  been  formed 
hastily  or  enunciated  crudely."  I  thought  I  had  earned  the  right 
to  publish  them,  and  even  fancied  I  might  be  thanked  rather 
than  reproved  for  doing  so.  However,  in  my  anxiety  to  publish 
nothing  erroneous,  I  asked  a  highly  competent  anatomist  and 
very  good  friend  of  mine  to  look  through  my  proofs,  and,  if  he 
could,  point  out  any  errors  of  fact.  I  was  well  pleased  when  he 
returned  them  without  criticism  on  that  score;  but  my  satis- 
faction was  speedily  dashed  by  the  very  earnest  warning  as  to 
the  consequences  of  publication,  which  my  friend's  interest  in 
my  welfare  led  him  to  give.  But,  as  I  have  confessed  elsewhere, 
when  I  was  a  young  man,  there  was  just  a  little — a  mere  soupqon 
— in  my  composition  of  that  tenacity  of  purpose  which  has 
another  name ;  and  I  felt  sure  that  all  the  evil  things  prophesied 
would  not  be  so  painful  to  me  as  the  giving  up  that  which  I 
had  resolved  to  do,  upon  grounds  which  I  conceived  to  be  right.* 

•In  September  18S7  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Edward  Clodd — "All  the 
propositions  laid  down  in  the  wicked  book,  which  was  so  well  anath- 
ematised a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  are  now  taught  in  the  text-books. 
What  a  droll  world  it  is  ! " 

f  As  to  this  advice  not  to  publish  MatCs  Place  for  fear  of  misrepre- 
fcntation  on  the  KorQ  of  morals,  he  said,  In  criticisiog  an  attack  of 


220  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

— that  I  picked  up  "  Atavism  "  in  Pritchard  years  ago,  and  as  it 
is  a  much  more  convenient  word  than  "  Hereditary  transmission 
of  variations/'  it  slipped  into  equivalence  in  my  mind,  and  I 
forgot  all  about  the  original  limitation. 

But  if  these  excuses  should  in  your  judgment  tend  to  aggra- 
vate my  offences,  suppress  'em  like  a  friend.  One  may  always 
hope  more  from  a  lady's  tender-heartedness  than  from  her  sense 
of  justice. 

Publisher  has  just  sent  to  say  that  I  must  give  him  any  cor- 
rections for  second  thousand  of  my  booklet  immediately. 

Why  did  not  Miss  Etty  send  any  critical  remarks  on  that 
subject  by  the  same  post?  I  should  be  most  immensely  obliged 
for  them. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

During  this  period  of  special  work  at  the  anthropological 
side  of  the  Evolution  theory,  Huxley  made  two  important 
contributions  to  the  general  question. 

As  secretary  of  the  Geological  Society,  the  duty  of  de- 
livering the  anniversary  address  in  1862  fell  to  him  in  the 
absence  of  the  president,  Leonard  Homer,  who  had  been 
driven  by  ill-health  to  winter  in  Italy. 

The  object  at  which  he  aimed  appears  from  the  post- 
script of  a  brief  note  of  Feb.  19,  1862,  to  Hooker : — 

I  am  writing  the  body  of  the  address,  and  I  am  going  to 
criticise  Palaeontological  doctrines  in  general  in  a  way  that  will 
flutter  their  nerves  considerable. 

Darwin  is  met  everywhere  with  —  Oh  this  is  opposed  to 
palaeontology,  or  that  is  opposed  to  palaeontology — and  I  mean  to 
turn  round  and  ask,  "  Now,  Messieurs  les  Palaeontologues,  what 
the  devil  do  you  really  know  ?  " 

I  have  not  changed  sex,  although  the  postscript  is  longer 
than  the  letter. 

The  delivery  of  the  address  *  itself  on  February  21  is 
thus  described  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell  f  (Life  and  Letters,  ii. 
356)  :— 

Huxley  delivered  a  brilliant  critical  discourse  on  what 
palaeontology  has  and  has  not  done,  and  proved  the  value  of 

♦  On  "Geological  Contemporaneity'*  (Coi/.  Ess.  viii.  292). 

f  To  a  note  of  whose,  proposing  a  talk  over  the  subject,  Huxley 
replies  on  May  5,  *'  I  am  very  glad  you  find  something  to  think  about 
in  my  address.    That  is  the  best  of  all  praise,'* 


222  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xv 

Since  I  saw  you — indeed,  from  the  following  Tuesday  on- 
wards— I  have  amused  myself  by  spending  ten  days  or  so  in  bed. 
I  had  an  unaccountable  prostration  of  strength  which  they  called 
influenza,  but  which,  I  believe,  was  nothing  but  some  obstruction 
in  the  liver. 

Of  course  I  can't  persuade  people  of  this,  and  they  will  have 
it  that  it  is  overwork.  I  have  come  to  the  conviction,  however, 
that  steady  work  hurts  nobody,  the  real  destroyer  of  hardwork- 
ing men  being  not  their  work,  but  dinners,  late  hours,  and  the 
universal  humbug  and  excitement  of  society. 

I  mean  to  get  out  of  all  that  and  keep  out  of  it. — Ever  yours 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  other  contribution  to  the  general  question  was  his 
Working  Men's  Lectures  for  1862.  As  he  writes  to  Dar- 
win on  October  10 — "  I  can't  find  anything  to  talk  to  the 
working  men  about  this  year  but  your  book.  I  mean  to 
give  them  a  commentary  a  la  Coke  upon  Lyttleton." 

The  lectures  to  working  men  here  referred  to,  six  in 

number,  were  duly  delivered  once  a*  week  from  November 

10  onwards,  and  published  in  the  form  of  as  many  little 

pamphlets.     Appearing  under  the  general  title,  "  On  our 

Knowledge  of  the  Causes  of  the  Phenomena  of  Organic 

Nature,"  they  wound  up  with  a  critical  examination  of  the 

portion  of  Mr.  Darwin's  work  On  the  Origin  of  Species,  in 

relation  to  the  complete  theory  of  the  causes  of  organic 

nature. 

Jermyn  Street,  Dtc  2,  1862. 

My  dear  Darwin — I  send  you  by  this  post  three  of  my 
working  men's  lectures  now  in  course  of  delivery.  As  you  will 
see  by  the  prefatory  notice,  I  was  asked  to  allow  them  to  be 
taken  down  in  shorthand  for  the  use  of  the  audience,  but  I  have 
no  interest  in  them,  and  do  not  desire  or  intend  that  they 
should  be  widely  circulated. 

Some  time  hence,  may  be,  I  may  revise  and  illustrate  them, 
and  make  them  into  a  book  as  a  sort  of  popular  exposition  of 
your  views,  or  at  any  rate  of  my  version  of  your  views. 

There  really  is  nothing  new  in  them  nor  anything  worth 
your  attention,  but  if  in  glancing  over  them  at  any  time  you 
should  see  anything  to  object  to,  I  should  like  to  know. 

I  am  very  hard  worked  just  now — six  lectures  a  week,  and 
no  end  of  o^^r  things— but  as  vigorous  $ts  ^  three-year  old. 


224 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xv 


I  do  grudge  Hardwicke  very  much  having  not  only  the  pub- 
lisher's but  the  author's  profits.  It  so  often-happens  that  popular 
lectures  designed  for  a  class  and  inspired  by  an  attentive  audi- 
ence's sympathy  are  better  than  any  writing  in  the  closet  for  the 
purpose  of  educating  the  many  as  readers,  and  of  remunerating 
the  publisher  and  author.  I  would  lose  no  time  in  considering 
well  what  steps  to  take  to  rescue  the  copyright  of  the  diird 
diousand. 

As  for  the  value  of  the  work  thus  done  in  support  of 
Darwin's  theory,  it  is  worth  while  quoting  the  words  of  Lord 
Kelvin,  when,  as  President  of  the  Royal  Society  in  1894,  it 
fell  to  him  to  award  Huxley  the  Darwin  Medsd : — 

To  the  world  at  large,  perhaps,  Mr.  Huxley's  share  in  mould- 
ing the  thesis  of  Natural  Selection  is  less  well  known  than  is 
his  bold  unwearied  exposition  and  defence  of  it  after  it  had 
been  made  public.  And,  indeed,  a  speculative  trifler,  revelling 
in  the  problems  of  the  "  might  have  been,"  would  find  a  con- 
genial theme  in  the  inquiry  how  soon  what  we  now  call  "  Dar- 
winism "  would  have  met  with  the  acceptance  with  which  it  has 
met,  and  gained  the  power  which  it  has  gained,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  brilliant  advocacy  with  which  in  its  early  days  it  was 
expounded  to  all  classes  of  men. 

That  advocacy  had  one  striking  mark:  while  it  made  or 
strove  to  make  clear  how  deep  the  new  view  went  down,  and 
how  far  it  reached,  it  never  shrank  from  trying  to  make  equally 
clear  the  limit  beyond  which  it  could  not  go. 


226  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

you  thought  I  was  going  to  ask  you  next.  But  I  am  not,  for 
rejoiced  as  I  should  be  to  have  you,  I  know  you  have  heaps  of 
better  work  to  do,  and  hate  journalism. 

But  can  you  tell  me  of  any  plastic  young  botanist  who  would 
come  in  all  for  glory  and  no  pay,  though  I  think  pay  may  be  got 
if  the  concern  is  properly  worked.    How  about  Oliver  ? 

And  though  you  can't  and  won't  be  an  editor  yourself,  won't 
you  help  us  and  pat  us  on  the  back  ? 

The  tone  of  the  Review  will  be  mildly  episcopophagous,  and 
you  and  Darwin  and  Lyell  will  have  a  fine  opportunity  if  you 
wish  it  of  slaying  your  adversaries. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Several  of  his  elder  friends  tried  to  dissuade  him  from 
an  undertaking  which  would  inevitably  distract  him  from 
his  proper  work.  Sir  C.  Lyell  prophesied  (see  p.  217)  that 
all  the  work  would  drift  to  the  most  energetic  member 
of  the  staff,  and  Huxley  writes  to  Hooker,  August  2, 
i860:— 

Darwin  wrote  me  a  very  kind  expostulation  about  it,  telling 
me  I  ought  not  to  waste  myself  on  other  than  original  work.  In 
reply,  however,  I  assured  him  that  I  must  waste  myself  willy- 
nilly,  and  that  the  Review  was  only  a  save-all. 

The  more  I  think  of  it  the  more  it  seems  to  me  it  ought  to 
answer  if  properly  conducted,  and  it  ought  to  be  of  great  use. 

The  first  number  appeared  in  January  1861.  Writing 
on  the  6th,  Huxley  says : — 

It  is  pleasant  to  get  such  expressions  of  opinion  as  I  have 
had  from  Lyell  and  Darwin  about  the  Review.  They  make  me 
quite  hopeful  about  its  prosperity,  as  I  am  sure  we  shall  be  able 
to  do  better  than  our  first  number. 

It  was  not  long,  however,  before  Lyell's  prophecy  began 
to  come  true.    In  June  Huxley  writes : — 

It  is  no  use  letting  other  people  look  after  the  journal.  I  find 
unless  I  revise  every  page  of  it,  it  goes  wrong. 

But  in  July  1863  he  definitely  ceased  to  contribute : — 

I  did  not  foresee  all  this  crush  of  work,  (he  writes)  when 
the  Review  was  first  started,  or  I  should  not  have  pledged  myself 
to  any  share  in  supplying  it    (Moreover,  with  the  appointment 


228  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

societies  was  already  being  mooted,  and  a  letter  to  Sir  C. 
Lyell  gives  his  ideas  thus  early  not  only  on  this  point,  but 
on  the  general  question  of  women's  education. 

March  17,  i860. 

Mv  DEAR  Sir  Charles — To  use  the  only  forcible  expression, 
I  "twig"  your  meaning  perfectly,  but  I  venture  to  think  the 
parable  does  not  apply.  For  the  Geological  Society  is  not,  to  my 
mind,  a  place  of  education  for  students,  but  a  place  of  discussion 
for  adepts ;  and  the  more  it  is  applied  to  the  former  purpose  the 
less  competent  it  must  become  to  fulfil  the  latter — its  primary 
and.piost  important  object. 

LI  am  far  from  wishing  to  place  any  obstacle  in  the  way  of 
the  intellectual  advancement  and  development  of  women.  On 
the  contrary,  I  don't  see  how  we  are  to  make  any  permanent 
advancement  while  one-half  of  the  race  is  sunk,  as  nine-tenths 
of  women  are,  in  mere  ignorant  parsonese  superstitions ;  and  to 
show  you  that  my  ideas  are  practical  I  have  fully  made  up  my 
mind,  if  I  can  carry  out  my  own  plans,  to  give  my  daughters 
the  same  training  in  physical  science  as  their  brother  will  get, 
so  long  as  he  is  a  boy.  They,  at  any  rate,  shall  not  be  got  up 
as  man-traps  for  the  matrimonial  market.  If  other  people  would 
do  the  like  the  next  generation  would  see  women  fit  to  be  the 
companions  of  men  in  all  their  pursuits — though  I  don't  think 
that  men  have  anything  to  fear  from  their  competition.  But 
you  know  as  well  as  I  do  that  other  people  won't  do  the  like, 
and  five-sixths  of  women  will  stop  in  the  doll  stage  of  evolution 
to  be  the  stronghold  of  parsondom,  the  drag  on  civilisation,  the 
degradation  of  every  important  pursuit  with  which  they  mix 
themselves — "  intrigues  "  in  politics,  and  "  friponnes  "  in  science. 

If  my  claws  and  beak  are  good  for  anything  they  shall  be 
kept  from  hindering  the  progress  of  any  science  I  have  to  do 
with. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley.    \ 

Three  letters  to  Mr.  Spencer  show  that  he  had  been 
reading  and  criticising  the  proofs  of  the  First  Principles. 
With  regard  to  the  second  letter,  which  gives  reasons  for 
rejecting  Mr.  Spencer's  remarks  about  the  power  of  infla- 
tion in  birds  during  flight,  it  is  curious  to  note  Mr.  Spencer's 
reply : — 

How  oddly  the  antagonism  comes  out  even  when  you  are  not 
conscious  of  it !    My  authority  was  Owen  !    I  heard  him  assign 


230 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 


pose  they  have  troubled  me.  On  the  contrary  they  were  at  times 
the  only  things  I  could  attend  to.  I  agree  in  the  spirit  of  the 
whole  perfectly.  On  some  matters  of  detail  I  had  doubts  which 
I  am  not  at  present  clear-headed  enough  to  think  ouc 

The  only  thing  I  object  to  in  toto  is  the  illustration  which  I 
have  marked  at  p.  24.  It  is  physically  impossible  that  a  bird's 
air-cells  should  be  distended  with  air  during  flight,  unless  the 
structure  of  the  parts  is  in  reality  different  from  anything  which 
anatomists  at  present  know.  Blowing  into  the  trachea  is  not  to 
the  point.  A  bird  cannot  blow  into  its  own  trachea,  and  it  has 
no  mechanism  for  performing  a  corresponding  action. 

A  bird's  chest  is  essentially  a  pair  of  bellows  in  which  the 
sternum  during  rest  and  the  back  during  flight  act  as  movable 
wall.  The  air  cells  may  all  be  represented  as  soft-walled  bags 
opening  freely  into  the  bellows — there  being,  so  far  as  anatomists 
yet  know,  no  valves  or  corresponding  contrivances  anywhere 
except  at  the  glottis,  which  corresponds  with  the  nozzle  and  air 
valve  both,  of  our  bellows.  But  the  glottis  is  always  opened 
when  the  chest  is  dilated  at  each  inspiration.  How  then  can 
the  air  in  any  air-cell  be  kept  at  a  higher  tension  than  the  sur- 
rounding atmosphere? 

Hunter  experimented  on  the  uses  of  the  air  sacs,  I  know, 
but  I  have  not  his  works  at  hand.  It  may  be  that  opening  one 
of  the  air-cells  interferes  with  flight,  but  I  hold  it  very  difficult 
to  conceive  that  the  interference  can  take  place  in  the  way  you 
suppose.  How  on  earth  is  a  lark  to  sing  for  ten  minutes  together 
if  the  air-cells  are  to  be  kept  distended  all  the  while  he  is  up  in 
the  air? 

At  any  rate  twenty  other  illustrations  will  answer  your  pur- 
pose as  well,  so  I  would  not  select  one  which  may  be  assailed 
by  a  carping  fellow  like — Yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Oct.  10,  i860. 

My  dear  Spencer  * — "  A  wilful  man  must  have  his  way," 
and  if  you  won't  let  me  contribute  towards  the  material  guar- 
antees for  the  success  of  your  book,  I  must  be  content  to  add 
twelve  shillings'  worth  of  moral  influence  to  that  I  already  meant 
to  exert  per  annum  in  its  favour. 

I  shall  be  most  glad  henceforth,  as  ever,  to  help  your  great 

*  Mr.  Spencer  had  insisted  that  he  should  be  on  the  free  list,  in- 
stead of  being  a  paying  subscriber  to  the  serial  issue  of  the  *'  Synthetic 
Philosophy." 


232  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

together  for  over  forty  years  without  the  shadow  of  a  mis' 
understanding,  presupposes  an  unusually  strong  friend- 
ship firmly  based  upon  mutual  trust  and  respect  as  well 
as  liking,  the  beginning  of  which  Sir  J.  Hooker  thus  de- 
scribes : — 

My  first  meeting  your  father  was  in  1851,  shortly  after  his 
return  from  the  Rattlesnake  voyage  with  Captain  Stanley. 
Hearing  that  I  had  paid  some  attention  to  marine  zoology  dur- 
ing the  voyage  of  the  Antarctic  Expedition,  he  was  desirous 
of  showing  me  the  results  of  his  studies  of  the  Oceanic  Hy- 
drozoa,  and  he  sought  me  out  in  consequence.  This  and  the 
fact  that  we  had  both  embarked  in  the  Naval  service  in  the 
same  capacity  as  medical  officers  and  with  the  same  object  of 
scientific  research,  naturally  led  to  an  intimacy  which  was  un- 
disturbed by  a  shadow  of  a  misunderstanding  for  nearly  forty- 
five  following  years.  Curiously  enough,  our  intercourse  might 
have  dated  from  an  earlier  period  by  nearly  six  years  had  I 
accepted  an  appointment  to  the  Rattlesnake  offered  me  by  Cap- 
tain Stanley,  which,  but  for  my  having  arranged  for  a  journey 
to  India,  might  have  been  accepted. 

Returning  to  the  purpose  of  our  interview,  the  researches 
Mr.  Huxley  laid  before  me  were  chiefly  those  on  the  Salpx,  a 
much  misunderstood  group  of  marine  Hydrozoa.  Of  these  I 
had  amused  myself  with  making  drawings  during  the  long  and 
often  weary  months  passed  at  sea  on  board  the  Erebus,  but  hav- 
ing other  subjects  to  attend  to,  I  had  made  no  further  study  of 
them  than  as  consumers  of  the  vegetable  life  (Diatoms)  of  the 
Antarctic  Ocean.  Hence  his  observations  on  their  life-history, 
habits,  and  affinities  were  on  almost  all  points  a  revelation  to 
me,  and  I  could  not  fail  to  recognise  in  their  author  all  the 
qualities  possessed  by  a  naturalist  of  commanding  ability,  in- 
dustry, and  power  of  exposition.  Our  interviews,  thus  com- 
menced, soon  ripened  into  a  friendship,  which  led  to  an  arrange- 
ment for  a  monthly  meeting,  and  in  the  informal  establishment 
of  a  club  of  nine,  the  other  members  of  which  were,  Mr.  Busk, 
Dr.  Frankland,  Mr.  Hirst,  Sir  J.  Lubbock,  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer, 
Dr.  Tyndall,  and  Mr.  Spottiswoode. 

Just  a  month  after  this  letter  to  his  friend,  the  same 
year  which  had  first  brought  Huxley  public  recognition 
outside  his  special  sphere  brought  him  also  the  greatest 
sorrow  perhaps  of  his  whole  life.     I  have  already  spoken 


234  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

Your  letter  leads  me  to  think  he  was  right,  though  not  perhaps 
in  the  sense  he  attached  to  his  own  words. 

To  begin  with  the  great  doctrine  you  discuss.  I  neither  deny 
nor  affirm  the  immortality  of  man.  I  see  no  reason  for  believing 
in  it,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  no  means  of  disproving  it. 

Pray  understand  that  I  have  no  a  priori  objections  to  the 
doctrine.  No  man  who  has  to  deal  daily  and  hourly  with  nature 
can  trouble  himself  about  a  priori  difficulties.  Give  me  such 
evidence  as  would  justify  me  in  believing  anything  else,  and  I 
will  believe  that.  Why  should  I  not?  It  is  not  half  so  wonder- 
ful as  the  conservation  of  force,  or  the  indestructibility  of 
matter.  Whoso  clearly  appreciates  all  that  is  implied  in  the 
falling  of  a  stone  can  have  no  difficulty  about  any  doctrine  simply 
on  account  of  its  marvellousncss.  But  the  longer  I  live,  the 
more  obvious  it  is  to  me  that  the  most  sacred  act  of  a  man's 
life  is  to  say  and  to  feel,  "  I  believe  such  and  such  to  be  true." 
All  the  greatest  rewards  and  all  the  heaviest  penalties  of  exist- 
ence cling  about  that  act.  The  universe  is  one  and  the  same 
throughout;  and  if  the  condition  of  my  success  in  unravelling 
some  little  difficulty  of  anatomy  or  physiology  is  that  I  shall 
rigorously  refuse  to  put  faith  in  that  which  does  not  rest  on 
sufficient  evidence,  I  cannot  believe  that  the  great  mysteries 
of  existence  will  be  laid  open  to  me  on  other  terms.  It  is  no  use 
to  talk  to  me  of  analogies  and  probabilities.  I  know  what  I 
mean  when  I  say  I  believe  in  the  law  of  the  inverse  squares, 
and  I  will  not  rest  my  life  and  my  hopes  upon  weaker  convic- 
tions.   I  dare  not  if  I  would. 

Measured  by  this  standard,  what  becomes  of  the  doctrine  of 
immortality  ? 

You  rest  in  your  strong  conviction  of  your  personal  exist- 
ence, and  in  the  instinct  of  the  persistence  of  that  existence 
which  is  so  strong  in  you  as  in  most  men. 

To  me  this  is  as  nothing.  That  my  personality  is  the  surest 
thing  I  know — may  be  true.  But  the  attempt  to  conceive  what 
it  is  leads  me  into  mere  verbal  subtleties.  I  have  champed  up' 
all  that  chaflf  about  the  ego  and  the  non-ego,  about  noumena 
and  phenomena,  and  all  the  rest  of  it,  too  often  not  to  know  that 
in  attempting  even  to  think  of  these  questions,  the  human  intel- 
lect flounders  at  once  out  of  its  depth. 

It  must  be  twenty  years  since,  a  boy,  I  read  Hamilton's  essay 
on  the  unconditioned,  and  from  that  time  to  this,  ontological 
speculation  has  been  a  folly  to  me.  When  Mansel  took  up 
Hamilton's  argument  on  the  side  of  orthodoxy  (!)  I  said  he  re- 


236 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR    HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 


such  a  system  is  indispensable  to  practical  morality.  I  believe 
that  both  these  dogmas  are  very  mischievous  lies. 

With  respect  to  the  first,  I  am  no  optimist,  but  I  have  the 
firmest  belief  that  the  Divine  Government  (if  we  may  use  such 
a  phrase  to  express  the  sum  of  the  "customs  of  matter")  is 
wholly  just.  The  more  I  know  intimately  of  the  lives  of  other 
men  (to  say  nothing  of  my  own),  the  more  obvious  it  is  to  me 
that  the  wicked  does  not  flourish  nor  is  the  righteous  punished. 
But  for  this  to  be  clear  we  must  bear  in  mind  what  almost  all 
forget,  that  the  rewards  of  life  are  contingent  upon  obedience 
to  the  whole  law — physical  as  well  as  moral — and  that  moral 
obedience  will  not  atone  for  physical  sin,  or  vice  versa. 

The  ledger  of  the  Almighty  is  strictly  kept,  and  every  one 
of  us  has  the  balance  of  his  operations  paid  over  to  him  at  the 
end  of  every  minute  of  his  existence. 

Life  cannot  exist  without  a  certain  conformity  to  the  sur- 
rounding universe — that  conformity  involves  a  certain  amount 
of  happiness  in  excess  of  pain.  In  short,  as  we  live  we  are  paid 
for  living. 

And  it  is  to  be  recollected  in  view  of  the  apparent  discrep- 
ancy between  men's  acts  and  their  rewards  that  Nature  is  juster 
than  we.  She  takes  into  account  what  a  man  brings  with  him 
into  the  world,  which  human  justice  cannot  do.  If  I,  born  a 
bloodthirsty  and  savage  brute,  inheriting  these  qualities  from 
others,  kill  you,  my  fellow-men  will  very  justly  hang  me,  but 
I  shall  not  be  visited  with  the  horrible  remorse  which  would 
be  my  real  punishment  if,  my  nature  being  higher,  I  had  done 
the  same  thing. 

The  absolute  justice  of  the  system  of  things  is  as  clear  to  me 
as  any  scientific  fact.  The  gravitation  of  sin  to  sorrow  is  as 
certain  as  that  of  the  earth  to  the  sun,  and  more  so — for  experi- 
mental proof  of  the  fact  is  within  reach  of  us  all — nay,  is  before 
us  all  in  our  own  lives,  if  we  had  but  the  eyes  to  see  it. 

Not  only,. then,  do  I  disbelieve  in  the  need  for  compensation, 
but  I  believe  that  the  seeking  for  rewards  and  punishments  out 
of  this  life  leads  men  to  a  ruinous  ignorance  of  the  fact  that 
their  inevitable  rewards  and  punishments  are  here. 

If  the  expectation  of  hell  hereafter  can  keep  me  from  evil- 
doing,  surely  a  fortiori  the  certainty  of  hell  now  will  do  so?  If 
a  man  could  be  firmly  impressed  with  the  belief  that  stealing 
damaged  him  as  much  as  swallgiwing  arsenic  would  do  (and  it 
does),  would  not  the  dissuasive  force  of  that  belief  be  greater 
than  that  of  any  based  on  mere  future  expectations  ? 


238  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

position  is.  I  may  be  quite  wrong,  and  in  that  case  I  know  I 
shall  have  to  pay  the  penalty  for  being  wrong.  But  I  can  only 
say  with  Luther,  "  Gott  helfe  mir,  Ich  kann  nichts  anders." 

I  know  right  well  that  99  out  of  100  of  my  fellows  would  call 
me  atheist,  infidel,  and  all  the  other  usual  hard  names.  As  our 
laws  stand,  if  the  lowest  thief  steals  my  coat,  my  evidence  (my 
opinions  being  known)  would  not  be  received  against  him.* 

But  I  cannot  help  it.  One  thing  people  shall  not  call  me 
with  justice  and  that  is — a  liar.  As  you  say  of  yourself,  I  too 
feel  that  I  lack  courage;  but  if  ever  the  occasion  arises  when 
I  am  bound  to  speak,  I  will  not  shame  my  boy. 

I  have  spoken  more  openly  and  distinctly  to  you  than  I  ever 
have  to  any  human  being  except  my  wife. 

If  you  can  show  me  that  I  err  in  premises  or  conclusion,  I 
am  ready  to  give  up  these  as  I  would  any  other  theories.  But  at 
any  rate  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  believe  that  I  have  not 
reached  my  conclusions  without  the  care  befitting  the  momentous 
nature  of  the  problems  involved. 

And  I  write  this  the  more  readily  to  you,  because  it  is  clear 
to  me  that  if  that  great  and  powerful  instrument  for  good  or 
evil,  the  Church  of  England,  is  to  be  saved  from  being  shivered 
into  fragments  by  the  advancing  tide  of  science — an  event  I 
should  be  very  sorry  to  witness,  but  which  will  infallibly  occur 
if  men  like  Samuel  of  Oxford  are  to  have  the  guidance  of  her 
destinies — it  must  be  by  the  efforts  of  men  who,  like  yourself, 
see  your  way  to  the  combination  of  the  practice  of  the  Church 
with  the  spirit  of  science.  Understand  that  all  the  younger  men 
of  science  whom  I  know  intimately  are  essentially  of  my  way 
of  thinking.  (I  know  not  a  scoffer  or  an  irreligious  or  an  im- 
moral man  among  them,  but  they  all  regard  orthodoxy  as  you 
do  Brahmanism.)  Understand  that  this  new  school  of  the 
prophets  is  the  only  one  that  can  work  miracles,  the  only  one 
that  can  constantly  appeal  to  nature  for  evidence  that  it  is  right, 
and  you  will  comprehend  that  it  is  of  no  use  to  try  to  barricade 
us  with  shovel  hats  and  aprons,  or  to  talk  about  our  doctrines 
being  "  shocking." 

I  don't  profess  to  understand  the  logic  of  yourself,  Maurice, 
and  the  rest  of  your  school,  but  I  have  always  said  I  would 
swear  by  your  truthfulness  and  sincerity,  and  that  good  must 
come  of  your  efforts.  The  more  plain  this  was  to  me,  however, 
the  more  obvious  the  necessity  to  let  you  see  where  the  men  of 

*  The  law  with  respect  to  oaths  was  reformed  in  1869. 


240 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR    HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 


and  let  the  devil  have  his  own  way.      And  I  will  be  torn  to 
pieces  before  I  am  forty  sooner  than  see  that. 

I  have  been  privately  trading  on  my  misfortunes  in  order  to 
get  a  little  peace  and  quietness  for  a  few  months.  If  I  can  help 
it  I  don't  mean  to  do  any  dining  out  this  winter,  and  I  have  cut 
down  Societies  to  the  minimum  of  the  Geological,  from  which  I 
cannot  get  away. 

But  it  won't  do  to  keep  this  up  too  long.  By  and  by  one  must 
drift  into  the  stream  again,  and  then  there  is  nothing  for  it  but 
to  pull  like  mad  unless  we  want  to  be  run  down  by  every  collier. 

I  am  going  to  do  one  sensible  thing,  however,  viz.  to  rush 
down  to  Llanberis  with  Busk  between  Christmas  Day  and  New 
Year's  Day  and  get  my  lungs  full  of  hill-air  for  the  coming 
session. 

I  was  at  Down  on  Saturday  and  saw  Darwin.  He  seems 
fairly  well,  and  his  daughter  was  up  and  looks  better  than  I 
expected  to  see  her. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Meanwhile,  he  took  the  opportunity  to  make  the  child's 
birth  a  new  link  with  his  old  friend,  and  wrote  as  follows : — 

14  Waverlev  Place,  Jan.  3,  1861. 

My  dear  Hooker — If  I  had  nothing  else  to  write  about  I 
must  wish  you  a  Happy  New  Year  and  many  on  'em;  but,  in 
fact,  my  wife  and  I  have  a  great  favour  to  ask  of  you,  which 
is  neither  more  nor  less  than  to  stand  godfather  for  our  little 
son.  You  know  my  opinions  on  these  matters,  and  I  would  not 
ask  you  to  do  anything  I  would  not  do  myself,  so  if  you  consent, 
the  clerk  shall  tell  all  the  lies  for  you,  and  you  shall  be  asked 
to  do  nothing  else  than  to  help  devour  the  christening  feed,  and 
be  as  good  a  friend  to  the  boy  as  you  have  been  to  his  father. 

My  wife  will  have  the  youngster  christened,  although  I  am 
always  in  a  bad  temper  from  the  time  it  is  talked  about  until  the 
ceremony  is  over.  The  only  way  of  turning  the  farce  into  a 
reality  is  by  making  it  an  extra  bond  with  one's  friends.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  you  have  any  objection  to  say,  "  all  this  I  stead- 
fastly believe,"  even  by  deputy,  I  know  you  will  have  no  hesita- 
tion in  saying  so,  and  in  giving  me  as  frank  a  refusal  as  my 
request.* 

*  As  against  his  dislike  of  consenting  to  a  rite,  to  him  meaningless, 
he  was  moved  by  a  feeling  which  in  part  corresponded  to  Descartes* 
morale  far  provision^ — in  part  was  an  acknowledgment  of  the  possi- 


242  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

into  a  good  many  points  for  myself.    The  results,  when  they  do 
come  out,  will,  I  foresee,  astonish  the  natives. 

I  am  cold-proof,  and  all  the  better  for  the  Welsh  trip.  To 
say  truth,  I  was  just  on  the  edge  of  breaking  down  when  I  went. 
Did  I  ever  send  you  a  letter  of  mine  on  the  teaching  of  Natural 
History?  It  was  published  while  you  were  away,  and  I  forget 
whether  I  sent  it  or  not.  However,  a  copy  accompanies  this 
note.  .  .  . 

Of  course  there  will  be  room  for  your  review  and  welcome. 
I  have  put  it  down  and  reckon  on  it. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Huxley  returned  from  the  trip  to  Wales  in  time  to  be 
with  his  wife  for  the  New  Year.  The  plot  she  had  made 
with  Dr.  Tyndall  had  been  entirely  successful.  The  threat- 
ened breakdown  was  averted.  Wales  in  winter  was  as  good 
as  Switzerland.  Of  the  ascent  of  Snowdon  he  writes  on 
December  28 :  "  Both  Tyndall  and  I  voted  it  under  present 
circumstances  as  good  as  most  things  Alpine." 

His  wife,  however,  continued  in  very  weak  health.  She 
was  prostrated  by  the  loss  of  her  little  boy.  So  in  the 
middle  of  March  he  gladly  accepted  Mr.  Darwin's  invita- 
tion for  her  and  the  three  children  to  spend  a  fortnight 
in  the  quiet  of  his  house  at  Down,  where  he  himself  managed 
to  run  down  for  a  week  end.  "  It  appears  to  me,"  he 
writes  to  his  wife,  "  that  you  are  subjecting  poor  Darwin  to 
a  savage  Tennysonian  persecution.  I  shall  see  him  look- 
ing like  a  martyr  and  have  to  talk  double  science  next 
Sunday." 

In  April  another  good  friend,  Dr.  Bence  Jones,  lent  the 
invalid  his  house  at  Folkestone  for  three  months.  Unable 
even  to  walk  when  she  went  there,  her  recovery  was  a  slow 
business.  Huxley  ran  down  every  week ;  his  brother  George 
and  his  wife  also  were  frequent  visitors.  Meanwhile  he 
resolved  to  move  into  a  new  house,  in  order  that  she  might 
not  return  to  a  place  so  full  of  sorrowful  memories.  On 
May  30  he  effected  the  move  to  a  larger  house  not  half  a 
mile  away  from  Waverley  Place — 26  Abbey  Place  (now 
23  Abercorn  Place).  Here  also  Mrs.  Heathorn  lived  for  the 
next  year,  my  grandfather,  over  seventy  as  he  was,  being 


244 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  XVI 


You  know  all  these  things  as  well  as  I  do,  and  I  know  as  well 
as  you  do  that  such  thoughts  do  not  cure  heartache  or  assuage 
grief.  Such  maladies,  when  men  are  as  old  as  you  and  I  are,  are 
apt  to  hang  about  one  a  long  time,  but  I  find  that  if  they  are 
faced  and  accepted  as  part  of  our  fair  share  of  life,  a  great 
deal  of  good  is  to  be  got  out  of  them.  You  will  find  that  too, 
•but  in  the  meanwhile  don't  go  and  break  yourself  down  with 
over  wear  and  tear.  The  heaviest  pull  comes  after  the  excite- 
ment of  a  catastrophe  of  this  kind  is  over. 

Believe  in  my  affectionate  sympathy  with  you,  and  that  I 
am,  my  dear  old  fellow,  yours  ever,  t   T-l    H 

And  again  on  the  i8th : — 

Many  thanks  for  your  two  letters.  It  would  be  sad  to  hear 
of  life  dragging  itself  out  so  painfully  and  slowly,  if  it  were  not 
for  what  you  tell  me  of  the  calmness  and  wisdom  with  which 
the  poor  sufferer  uses  such  strength  as  is  left  him. 

One  can  express  neither  wish  nor  hope  in  such  a  case.  With 
such  a  man  what  is  will  be  well.  All  I  have  to  repeat  is,  don*t 
knock  yourself  up.  I  wish  to  God  I  could  help  you  in  some  way 
or  other  beyond  repeating  the  parrot  cry.  If  I  can,  of  course 
you  will  let  me  know. 

In  June  1861  a  jotting  in  his  notebook  records  that  he 
is  at  work  on  the  chick's  skull,  part  of  the  embryological 
work  which  he  took  up  vigorously  at  this  time,  and  at  once 
the  continuation  of  his  researches  on  the  Vertebrate  Skull, 
embodied  in  his  Croonian  lecture  of  1858,  and  the  beginning 
of  a  long  series  of  investigations  into  the  structure  of  birds. 
There  is  a  reference  to  this  in  a  very  interesting  letter  deal- 
ing chiefly  with  what  he  conceived  to  be  the  cardinal  point 
of  the  Darwinian  theory : — 

26  Abbey  Place,  Sept.  4,  1861. 

My  dear  Hooker — Yesterday  being  the  first  day  I  went  to 
the  Athenaeum  after  reading  your  note,  I  had  a  look  at,  and  a 
good  laugh  over,  the  Quarterly  article.    Who  can  be  the  writer  ? 

I  have  been  so  busy  studying  chicken  development,  a  difficult 
subject  to  which  I  had  long  ago  made  up  my  mind  to  devote  my 
first  spare  time,  that  I  have  written  you  no  word  about  your 
article  in  the  Gardener's  Chronicle.  I  quite  agree  with  the 
general  tendency  of  your  argument,  though  it  seems  to  me  that 


246  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvi 

being  made  responsible  with  Sabine,  and  indeed  I  think  he  had 
little  enough  to  do  with  it. 

You  will  see  a  letter  from  him  in  this  week's  AthetKBum. — 
Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


affair  was  that  it  absorbed  the  State  aid  which  might  have  been  given 
to  more  valuable  researches. 

The  Council  of  the  Royal  Society  had  been  consulted  as  to  the 
advisability  of  despatching  this  expedition  and  opposed  it,  for  there 
were  in  the  service  of  the  Company  not  a  few  men  admirably  qualified 
for  the  duty,  whose  scientific  services  had  received  scant  appreciation. 
Nevertheless,  the  expedition  started  after  all,  with  the  approval  of 
Colonel  Sabine,  the  president.  In  the  last  months  of  1866,  Huxley 
'drew  up  for  the  Royal  Society  a  report  upon  the  scientific  value  of  the 
results  of  the  expedition. 


CHAPTER   XVII 

1861-1863 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  addition  of  journalistic  work 
in  science  to  the  mass  of  original  research  and  teaching 
work  upon  which  Huxley  was  engaged,  called  forth  a  re- 
monstrance from  both  Lyell  and  Darwin.  To  Hooker  it 
seemed  still  more  serious  that  he  was  dividing  his  allegiance, 
and  going  far  afield  in  philosophy,  instead  of  concentrating 
himself  upon  natural  science.    He  writes : — 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  you  are  so  poorly,  and  wish  I  could 
help  you  to  sit  down  and  work  quietly  at  pure  science.  You  have 
got  into  a  whirlpool,  and  should  strike  out  vigorously  at  the 
proper  angle,  not  attempt  to  breast  the  whole  force  of  the  cur- 
rent, nor  yet  give  in  to  it.  Do  take  the  counsel  of  a  quiet  looker 
on  and  withdraw  to  your  books  and  studies  in  pure  Natural  His- 
tory; let  modes  of  thought  alone.  You  may  make  a  very  good 
naturalist,  or  a  very  good  metaphysician  (of  that  I  know  noth- 
ing, don't  despise  me),  but  you  have  neither  time  nor  place 
for  both. 

However,  it  must  be  remarked  that  this  love  of  philoso- 
phy, not  recently  acquired  either,  was  only  part  of  the  pas- 
sion for  general  principles  underlying  the  facts  of  science 
which  had  always  possessed  him.  And  the  time  expended 
upon  it  was  not  directly  taken  from  the  hours  of  scientific 
work ;  he  would  read  in  bed  through  the  small  hours  of  the 
night,  when  sleep  was  slow  in  coming  to  him.  In  this  way 
he  got  through  an  immense  amount  of  philosophy  in  the 
course  of  several  years.  Not  that  he  could  "  state  the  views 
of  so  and  so  "  upon  any  given  question,  or  desired  such  kind 
of  knowledge ;  he  wished  to  find  out  and  compare  with  his 

247 


248  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

own  the  answers  which  other  thinkers  gave  to  the  problems 
which  interested  himself. 

A  gentler  reproof  of  this  time  touches  his  handwriting, 
which  was  never  of  the  most  legible,  so  that  his  foreign  cor- 
respondents in  particular  sometimes  complained.  Haeckel 
used  to  get  his  difficulties  deciphered  by  his  colleague 
Gegenbaur.  I  cannot  forbear  quoting  the  delicate  remon- 
strance of  Professor  Lacaze  Duthiers,  and  the  flattering 
remedy  he  proposed: — 

March  14.  —  Je  lis  I'Anglais  itnprime,  mais  vos  ecritures 
anglaises  sont  si  rapides,  qu'il  m'est  quelquefois  difficile  de  m'en 
sortir.  On  me  dit  que  vous  ecrivez  si  bien  le  franqais  que  je 
crois  que  je  vous  lirais  bien  mieux  dans  ma  langue ! 

On  his  return  from  examining  at  Dublin,  he  again 
looked  over  proofs  for  Mr.  Spencer. 

Jermyn  Street,  Aug.  3,  1861. 

My  dear  Spencer  —  I  have  been  absent  on  a  journey  to 
Dublin  and  elsewhere  ♦  nearly  all  this  week,  and  hence  your 
note  and  proof  did  not  reach  me  till  yesterday.  I  have  but  just 
had  time  to  glance  through  the  latter,  and  I  need  hardly  say  how 
heartily  I  concur  in  its  general  tenor.  I  have,  however,  marked 
one  or  two  passages  which  I  think  require  some  qualification. 
Then,  at  p.  272,  the  fact  that  the  vital  manifestations  of  plants 
depend  as  entirely  as  those  of  animals  upon  the  fall  towards 
stable  equilibrium  of  the  elements  of  a  complex  protein  com- 
pound is  not  sufficiently  prominent.  It  is  not  so  much  that  plants 
are  deoxidisers  and  animals  oxidisers,  as  that  plants  are  manu- 
facturers and  animals  consumers.  It  is  true  that  plants  manu- 
facture a  good  deal  of  non-nitrogenous  produce  in  proportion 
to  the  nitrogenous,  but  it  is  the  latter  which  is  chiefly  useful  to 
the  animal  consumer  and  not  the  former.  This  point  is  a  very 
important  one,  which  I  have  never  seen  clearly  and  distinctly 
put — the  prettiness  of  Dumas'  circulation  of  the  elements  having 
seduced  everybody. 

Of  course  this  in  no  way  aflFects  the  principle  of  what  you 
say.  The  statements  which  I  have  marked  at  p.  276  and  278 
should  have  their  authorities  given,  I  think.  I  should  hardly 
like  to  commit  myself  to  them  absolutely. 

You  will,  if  my  memory  does  not  mislead  me,  find  authority 
for  my  note  at  p.  283  in  Stephenson's  life.      I  think  old  Geo. 

*  Visiting  Sir  Philip  Egerton  at  Oulton  Park. 


250 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvh 


October  shows  an  unusual  entry  in  his  diary;  the  sac- 
rifice of  a  working  evening  to  hear  Jenny  Lind  sing.  Fond 
though  he  was  of  music,  as  those  may  remember  who  ever 
watched  his  face  at  the  Sunday  evening  gatherings  in  Marl- 
borough Place  in  the  later  seventies,  when  there  was  sure 
to  be  at  least  a  little  good  music  or  singing  either  from 
his  daughters  or  some  of  the  guests,  he  seldom  could  spare 
the  time  for  concert-going  or  theatre-going,  and  the  occa- 
sional notes  of  his  bachelor  days,  "  to  the  opera  with  Spen- 
cer," had  ceased  as  his  necessary  occupations  grew  more 
engrossing. 

This  year  his  friend  Hooker  moved  to  Kew  to  act  as 
second  in  command  to  his  father,  Sir  William  Hooker,  the 
director  of  the  Botanical  Gardens.  This  move  made  meet- 
ings between  the  two  friends,  except  at  clubs  and  societies, 
more  difficult,  and  was  one  of  the  immediate  causes  of  the 
foundation  of  the  x  Club.  It  is  this  move  which  is  referred 
to  in  the  following  letters ;  the  "  poor  client "  being  the 
wife  of  an  old  messmate  of  his  on  the  Rattlesnake : — 

Jermyn  Street,  Nov.  ly. 
My  dear  Hooker — My  wife  wrote  to  yours  yesterday,  the 
enclosed  note  explaining  the  kitchen-revolution  which,  it  seems, 
must  delay  our  meeting.  When  she  had  done,  however,  she  did 
not  know  where  to  direct  it,  and  I  am  no  wiser,  so  I  send  it  to 
you. 

It's  a  horrid  nuisance  and  I  have  sworn  a  few,  but  that  will 
not  cook  the  dinner,  however  much  it  may  prepare  me  for  being 
cooked  elsewhere.  To  complete  my  disgust  at  things  in  general, 
my  wife  is  regularly  knocked  up  with  dining  out  twice  this 
week,  though  it  was  only  in  the  quietest  way.  I  shall  have  to 
lock  her  up  altogether. 

X has  made  a  horrid  mess  of  it,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say, 

from  what  I  know  of  him,  that  I  cannot  doubt  where  the  fault 
lies.  The  worst  of  it  is  that  he  has  a  wife  and  three  children 
over  here,  left  without  a  penny  or  any  means  of  support.  The 
poor  woman  wrote  to  me  the  other  day,  and  when  I  went  to  see 
her  I  found  her  at  the  last  shilling  and  contemplating  the  work- 
house as  her  next  step.  She  has  brothers  in  Australia,  and  it 
appeared  to  me  that  the  only  way  to  do  her  any  good  was  to  get 
her  out    She  cannot  starve  there,  and  there  will  be  more  hope 


252  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvn 

1859,  was  now  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Lintuean 
Society. 

In  the  list  of  work  in  hand  are  four  paleontological  pa- 
pers,* besides  the  slowly  progressing  Manual  of  Comparative 
Anatomy, 

When  he  went  north  to  deliver  his  lectures  at  Edin- 
burgh "  On  the  relation  of  Man  to  the  Lower  Animals," 
he  fook  the  opportunity  of  examining  fossils  at  Forfar, 
and  lectured  also  at  Glasgow;  while  at  Easter  he  went  to 
Ireland;  on  March  15  he  was  at  Dublin,  lecturing  there 
on  the  25th. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  (in  the  letter  to  C. 
Darwin  of  May  6,  1862)  to  the  unsatisfactory  state  of  Hux- 
ley's health.  He  was  further  crippled  by  neuralgic  rheu- 
matism in  his  arm  and  shoulder,  and  to  get  rid  of  this,  went 
on  July  I  to  Switzerland  for  a  month's  holiday.  Reaching 
Grindelwald  on  the  4th,  he  was  joined  on  the  6th  by  Dr. 
Tyndall,  and  with  him  rambled  on  the  glacier  and  made 
an  expedition  to  the  Faulhom.  On  the  13th  they  went 
to  the  Rhone  glacier,  meeting  Sir  J.  Lubbock  on  their  way, 
at  the  other  side  of  the  Grimsel.  Both  here  and  at  the 
Eggischhorn,  where  they  went  a  few  days  later,  Huxley 
confined  himself  to  easy  expeditions,  or,  as  his  notebook 
has  it,  stayed  "  quiet "  or  "  idle,"  while  the  hale  pair  as- 
cended the  Galenstock  and  the  Jungfrau. 

By  July  28  he  was  home  again  in  time  for  an  exam- 
iners' meeting  at  the  London  University  the  next  day,  and 
a  znva  voce  in  physiology  on  the  4th  August,  before  going 
to  Scotland  to  serve  on  the  Fishery  Commission. 

This  was  the  first  of  the  numerous  commissions  on 
which  he  served.  With  his  colleagues,  Dr.  Lyon  Playfair 
(afterwards  Lord  Playfair)  and  Colonel  Maxwell,  he  was 
busy  from  August  8  to  September  16,  chiefly  on  the  west 
coast,  taking  evidence  from  the  trawlers  and  their  oppo- 


•  "On  Indian  Fossils,"  on  "Cephalaspis  and  Pteraspis,"  on  ''Sla- 
gonolepis/*  and  a  **  Memoir  descriptive  of  Labyrinthodont  remains 
from  the  Trias  and  Coal  of  Britain,"  which  he  first  treated  of  in  1858, 
'*  clearly  establishing  for  the  first  time  the  vertebrate  nature  of  these 
remains."— Sir  M.  Foster.  Obit.  Notice,  Free.  R,  S,  lix.  55. 


254 


LIFE.  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvu 


This  autumn  he  gladly  took  on  what  appeared  to  be  an 
additional  piece  of  work.  On  October  12  he  writes  from 
26  Abbey  Place : — 

I  saw  Flower  yesterday,  and  I  find  that  my  present  colleague 
in  the  Hunterian  Professorship  wishes  to  get  rid  of  his  share 
in  the  lectures,  having,  I  suppose,  at  the  eleventh  hour  discov- 
ered his  incompetency.  It  looks  paradoxical  to  say  so,  but  it 
will  really  be  easier  for  me  to  give  eighteen  or  twenty-four  lec- 
tures than  twelve,  so  that  I  have  professed  my  readiness  to  take 
as  much  as  he  likes  off  his  hands. 

This  professorship  had  been  in  existence  for  more  than 
sixty  years,  for  when  the  Museum  of  the  famous  anatomist 
John  Hunter  was  entrusted  to  the  College  of  Surgeons  by 
the  Government,  the  condition  was  made  that  "  one  course 
of  lectures,  not  less  than  twenty-four  in  number,  on  com- 
parative anatomy  and  other  subjects,  illustrated  by  the 
preparations,  shall  be  given  every  year  by  some  member  of 
the  company."  Huxley  arranged  to  publish  from  year  to 
year  the  substance  of  his  lectures  on  the  vertebrates,  "  and 
by  that  process  to  bring  out  eventually  a  comprehensive, 
though  condensed,  systematic  work  on  Comparative  Anat- 
omy,'* * 

Of  the  labour  entailed  in  this  course,  the  late  Sir  W.  H. 
Flower  wrote : — 

When,  in  1862,  he  was  appointed  to  the  Hunterian  Pro- 
fessorship at  the  College  of  Surgeons,  he  took  for  the  subject 
of  several  yearly  courses  of  lectures  the  anatomy  of  the  verte- 
brata,  beginning  with  the  primates,  and  as  the  subject  was  then 
rather  new  to  him,  and  as  it  was  a  rule  with  him  never  to  make 
a  statement  in  a  lecture  which  was  not  founded  upon  his  own 
actual  observation,  he  set  to  work  to  make  a  series  of  original 
dissections  of  all  the  forms  he  treated  of.  These  were  carried 
on  in  the  workroom  at  the  top  of  the  college,  and  mostly  in  the 
evenings,  after  his  daily  occupation  at  Jermyn  Street  (the 
School  of  Mines,  as  it  was  then  called)  was  over,  an  arrange- 
ment which  my  residence  in  the  college  buildings  enabled  me 
to  make  for  him.  These  rooms  contained  a  large  store  of 
material,  entire  or  partially  dissected  animals  preserved  in  spirit, 


*  Cpm^radvc  Anatomy,  ygl,  i,  Prefi^e. 


256  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

The  next  letter  refers  to  the  scientific  examinations  at 
the  University  of  London. 

Dec.  4,  1862. 

My  dear  Hooker — I  look  upon  you  as  art  and  part  of  the 
Natural  History  Review,  though  not  ostensibly  one  of  the  gang, 
so  I  bid  you  to  a  feast,  partly  of  reason  and  partly  of  mutton,  at 
my  house  on  December  11  (being  this  day  week)  at  half-past 
six.  Do  come  if  you  can,  for  we  have  not  seen  your  ugly  old 
phiz  for  ages,  and  should  be  comforted  by  an  inspection  thereof, 
however  brief. 

I  did  my  best  yesterday  to  get  separate  exhibitions  for  Chem- 
istry, Botany,  and  Zoological  Biology,  at  the  committee  yester- 
day,* and  I  suspect  from  your  letter  that  if  you  had  been  there 
you  would  have  backed  me.  However,  it  is  clear  they  only 
mean  to  g^ve  separate  exhibits  for  Chemistry  and  Biology  as  a 
whole. 

Because  Botany  and  Zoology  are,  philosophically  speaking, 
cognate  subjects,  people  are  under  the  delusion  that  it  is  easier 
to  work  both  up  at  the  same  time,  than  it  would  be  to  work  up, 
say,  Chemistry  and  Botany.  Just  fancy  asking  a  young  man 
who  has  heaps  of  other  things  to  work  up  for  the  B.Sc,  to 
qualify  himself  for  honours  both  in  botany,  histological,  sys- 
tematic, and  physiological.  That  is  to  say,  to  get  a  practical 
knowledge  of  both  these  groups  of  subjects. 

I  really  think  the  botanical  and  zoological  examiners  ought 
to  memorialise  the  senate  jointly  on  the  subject.  The  present 
system  leads  to  mere  sham  and  cram. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  year  1863,  notable  for  the  publication  of  Huxley's 
first  book,  found  him  plunged  deep  in  an  immense  quantity 
of  work  of  all  sorts.  He  was  still  examiner  in  Physiology 
and  Comparative  Anatomy  at  the  London  University,  a 
post  he  held  from  1855  to  1863,  and  again  from  1865  to 
1870,  "  making,"  as  Sir  Michael  Foster  says,  "  even  an 
examination  feel  the  influence  of  the  new  spirit  in  biology ; 
and  among  his  examinees  at  that  time  there  was  one  at 
least  who,  knowing  Huxley  by  his  writings,  but  by  his 
writings  only,  looked  forward  to  the  viva  voce  test,  not  as 
a  trial,  but  as  an  occasion  of  delight." 

*  At  the  London  University. 


258  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

expect  an  acknowledgment  of  a  book — it  is  one  of  the  greatest 
nuisances  in  the  world  to  have  that  to  do,  and  I  never  do  it — 
but  as  you  mentioned  the  Lectures  and  not  the  other,  I  thought 
it  might  not  have  reached  you.  If  it  has  not,  pray  let  me  know 
and  a  copy  shall  be  forwarded,  as  I  want  you  very  much  to 
read  Essay  No.  2. 

I  have  a  great  respect  for  all  the  old  bottles,  and  if  the  new 
wine  can  be  got  to  go  into  them  and  not  burst  them  I  shall  be 
very  glad — I  confess  I  do  not  see  my  way  to  it;  on  the  con- 
trary, the  longer  I  live  and  the  more  I  learn  the  more  hopeless 
to  my  mind  becomes  the  contradiction  between  the  theory  of  the 
universe  as  understood  and  expounded  by  Jewish  and  Christian 
theologians,  and  the  theory  of  the  universe  which  is  every  day 
and  every  year  growing  out  of  the  application  of  scientific 
methods  to  its  phenomena. 

Whether  astronomy  and  geology  can  or  cannot  be  made  to 
agree  with  the  statements  as  to  the  matters  of  fact  laid  down 
in  Genesis — whether  the  Gospels  are  historically  true  or  not 
— are  matters  of  comparatively  small  moment  in  the  face  of  the 
impassable  gulf  between  the  anthropomorphism  (however  re- 
fined) of  theology  and  the  passionless  impersonality  of  the  un- 
known and  unknowable  which  science  shows  everywhere  under- 
lying the  thin  veil  of  phenomena. 

Here  seems  to  me  to  be  the  great  gulf  fixed  between  science 
and  theology — ^beside  which  all  Colenso  controversies,  reconcile- 
ments of  Scripture  d  la  Pye  Smith,  etc.,  cut  a  very  small  figure. 

You  must  have  thought  over  all  this  long  ago;  but  steeped 
as  I  am  in  scientific  thought  from  morning  till  night,  the  con- 
trast has  perhaps  a  greater  vividness  to  me.  I  go  into  society, 
and  except  among  two  or  three  of  my  scientific  colleagues  I 
find  myself  alone  on  these  subjects,  and  as  hopelessly  at  variance 
with  the  majority  of  my  fellow-men  as  they  would  be  with  their 
neighbours  if  they  were  set  down  among  the  Ashantees.  I  don't 
like  this  state  of  things  for  myself — ^least  of  all  do  I  see  how 
it  will  work  out  for  my  children.  But  as  my  mind  is  constituted, 
there  is  no  way  out  of  it,  and  I  can  only  envy  you  if  you  can 
see  things  differently. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Jermvn  Street,  May  5,  1863. 
My  dear  Kingsley  —  My  wife  and  children  are  away  at 
Felixstow  on  the  Suffolk  coast,  and  as  I  run  down  on  Saturday 
and  come  back  on  Monday  your  MS.  has  been  kept  longer  than 


26o  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvil 

nature  and  disposition  the  greatest  possible  antipathy  to  all  the 
atheistic  and  infidel  school. 

Nevertheless,  I  know  that  I  am,  in  spite  of  myself,  exactly 
what  the  Christian  world  call,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  are  justi- 
fied in  calling,  atheist  and  infidel.  I  cannot  see  one  shadow  or 
tittle  of  evidence  that  the  great  unknown  underlying  the  phe- 
nomena of  the  universe  stands  to  us  in  the  relation  of  a  Father 
— loves  us  and  cares  for  us  as  Christianity  asserts.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  whole  teaching  of  experience  seems  to  me  to  show 
that  while  the  governance  (if  I  may  use  the  term)  of  the  uni- 
verse is  rigorously  just  and  substantially  kind  and  beneficent, 
there  is  no  more  relation  of  aflfection  between  governor  and 
governed  than  between  me  and  the  twelve  judges.  I  know  the 
administrators  of  the  law  desire  to  do  their  best  for  every- 
body, and  that  they  would  rather  not  hurt  me  than  other- 
wise, but  I  also  know  that  under  certain  circumstances  they 
will  most  assuredly  hang  me;  and  that  in  any  case  it  would 
be  absurd  to  suppose  them  guided  by  any  particular  affection 
for  me. 

This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  relation  which  exists  between  the 
cause  of  the  phenomena  of  this  universe  and  myself.  I  submit 
to  it  with  implicit  obedience  and  perfect  cheerfulness,  and  the 
more  because  my  small  intelligence  does  not  see  how  any  other 
arrangement  could  possibly  be  got  to  work  as  the  world  is  con- 
stituted. 

But  this  is  what  the  Christian  world  calls  atheism,  and  be- 
cause all  my  toil  and  pains  does  not  enable  me  to  see  my  way 
to  any  other  conclusion  than  this,  a  Christian  judge  would  (if 
he  knew  it)  refuse  to  take  my  evidence  in  a  court  of  justice 
against  that  of  a  Christian  ticket-of-leave  man. 

So  with  regard  to  the  other  great  Christian  dogmas,  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul,  and  the  future  state  of  rewards  and  punish- 
ments, what  possible  objection  a  priori  can  I — who  am  com- 
pelled perforce  to  believe  in  the  immortality  of  what  we  call 
Matter  and  Force  and  in  a  very  unmistakable  present  state  of 
rewards  and  punishments  for  all  our  deeds — have  to  these  doc- 
trines ?  Give  me  a  scintilla  of  evidence,  and  I  am  ready  to  jump 
at  them. 

But  read  Butler,  and  see  to  what  drivel  even  his  great  mind 
descends  when  he  has  to  talk  about  the  immortality  of  the  soul ! 
I  have  never  seen  an  argument  on  that  subject  which  from  a 
scientific  point  of  view  is  worth  the  paper  it  is  written  upon. 
All  resolve  themselves  into  this  formula: — The  doctrine  of  the 


262  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvn 

phenomena  at  present  addressing  you  knows  nothing.  In  fact, 
if  I  am  pushed,  metaphysical  speculation  lands  me  exactly  where 
your  friend  Raphael  was  when  his  bitch  pupped.  In  other 
words,  I  believe  in  Hamilton,  Mansell  and  Herbert  Spencer 
so  long  as  they  are  destructive,  and  I  laugh  at  their  beards  as 
soon  as  they  try  to  spin  their  own  cobwebs. 

Is  this  basis  of  ignorance  broad  enough  for  you?  If  you, 
theologian,  can  find  as  firm  footing  as  I,  man  of  science,  do  on 
this  foundation  of  minus  nought — there  will  be  nought  to  fear 
for  our  ever  diverging. 

For  you  see  I  am  quite  as  ready  to  admit  your  doctrine  that 
souls  secrete  bodies  as  I  am  the  opposite  one  that  bodies  secrete 
souls — simply  because  I  deny  the  possibility  of  obtaining  any 
evidence  as  to  the  truth  and  falsehood  of  either  hypothesis.  My 
fundamental  axiom  of  speculative  philosophy  is  that  materialisfn 
and  spiritualism  are  opposite  poles  of  the  same  absurdity — the 
absurdity  of  imagining  that  we  know  anything  about  either 
spirit  or  matter. 

Cabanis  and  Berkeley  (I  speak  of  them  simply  as  types  of 
schools)  are -both  asses,  the  only  difference  being  that  one  is  a 
black  donkey  and  the  other  a  white  one. 

This  universe  is,  I  conceive,  like  to  a  great  game  being 
played  out,  and  we  poor  mortals  are  allowed  to  take  a  hand. 
By  great  good  fortune  the  wiser  among  us  have  made  out  some 
few  of  the  rules  of  the  game,  as  at  present  played.  We  call 
them  "  Laws  of  Nature,"  and  honour  them  because  we  find 
that  if  we  obey  them  we  win  something  for  our  pains.  The 
cards  are  our  theories  and  hypotheses,  the  tricks  our  experi- 
mental verifications.  But  what  sane  man  would  endeavour  to 
solve  this  problem :  given  the  rules  of  a  game  and  the  winnings, 
to  find  whether  the  cards  are  made  of  pasteboard  or  gold- 
leaf?  Yet  the  problem  of  the  metaphysicians  is  to  my  mind 
no  saner. 

If  you  tell  me  that  an  Ape  differs  from  a  Man  because  the 
latter  has  a  soul  and  the  ape  has  not,  I  can  only  say  it  may  be 
so;  but  I  should  uncommonly  like  to  know  how  [you  know] 
either  that  the  ape  has  not  one  or  that  the  man  has. 

And  until  you  satisfy  me  as  to  the  soundness  of  your  method 
of  investigation,  I  must  adhere  to  what  seems  to  my  mind  a 
simpler  form  of  notation — i,e.  to  suppose  that  all  phenomena 
have  the  same  substratum  (if  they  have  any),  and  that  soul 
and  body,  or  mental  and  physical  phenomena,  are  merely  diverse 
manifestations  of  that  hypothetical  substratum.     In  this  way, 


264  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvil 

read  it,  but  I  find  myself  utterly  at  a  loss  to  comprehend  his 
point  of  view. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  letter  is  interesting,  as  showing  his  con- 
tinued interest  in  the  question  of  skull  structure,  as  well  as 
his  relation  to  his  friend  and  fellow-worker,  Dr.  W.  K. 
Parker. 

Jermvn  Street,  March  18,  1863. 

My  dear  Parker — ^Any  conclusion  that  I  have  reached  will 
seem  to  me  all  the  better  based  for  knowing  that  you  have  been 
near  or  at  it,  and  I  am  therefore  right  glad  to  have  your  letter. 
If  I  had  only  time,  nothing  would  delight  me  more  than  to  go 
over  your  preparations,  but  these  Hunterian  Lectures  are  about 
the  hardest  bit  of  work  I  ever  took  in  hand,  and  I  am  obliged  to 
give  every  minute  to  them. 

By  and  by  I  will  gladly  go  with  you  over  your  vast  material. 

Did  you  not  some  time  ago  tell  me  that  you  considered  the 
Y-shaped  bone  (so-called  presphenoid)  in  the  Pike  to  be  the 
true  basisphenoid  ?  If  so,  let  me  know  before  lecture  to-morrow, 
that  I  may  not  commit  theft  unawares. 

I  have  arrived  at  that  conclusion  myself  from  the  anatomical 
relations  of  the  bone  in  question  to  the  brain  and  nerves. 

I  look  upon  the  proposition  opisthotis  ■=■  turtle's  ."  occipital 
externe  "  =  Perch's  Rocher  (Cuvier)  as  the  one  thing  needful 
to  clcc^r  up  the  unity  of  structure  of  the  bony  cranium;  and  it 
shall  be  counted  unto  me  as  a  great  sin  if  I  have  helped  to  keep 
you  back  from  it.  The  thing  has  been  dawning  upon  me  ever 
since  I  read  Kolliker's  book  two  summers  ago,  but  I  have  never 
had  time  to  work  it  out. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  following  extracts  from  a  letter  to  Hooker  and  a 

letter  to  Darwin  describe  the  pressure  of  his  work  at  this 

time. 

1863. 

My  dear  Hooker —  ...  I  would  willingly  send  a  paper  to 
the  Linnaean  this  year  if  I  could,  but  I  do  not  see  how  it  is 
practicable.  I  lecture  five  times  a  week  from  now  till  the  middle 
of  February.  I  then  have  to  give  eighteen  lectures  at  the  Coll. 
Surgeons — six  on  classification,  and  twelve  on  the  vertebrate 
skeleton.  I  must  write  a  paper  on  this  new  Glyptodon,  with 
some  eighteen  to  twenty  plates.  A  preliminary  notice  has 
already  gone  to  the  Royal  Society.     I  have  a  decade  of  fossil 


266  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEV  chap,  xvii 

£.  Getting  heaps  of  remains  of  new  Labyrinthodonts  from 
the  Glasgow  coalfield,  which  have  to  be  described. 

F.  Working  at  a  memoir  on  Glyptodon  based  on  a  new  and 
almost  entire  specimen  at  the  College  of  Surgeons. 

G.  Preparing  a  new  decade  upon  Fossil  fishes  for  this  place. 

H.  Knowing  that  I  ought  to  have  written  long  ago  a  de- 
scription of  a  most  interesting  lot  of  Indian  fossils  sent  to  me 
by  Oldham. 

I.  Being  blown  up  by  Hooker  for  doing  nothing  for  the 
Natural  History  Review, 

K.  Being  bothered  by  sundry  editors  just  to  write  articles 
•*  which  you  know  you  can  knock  off  in  a  moment." 

L.  Consciousness  of  having  left  unwritten  letters  which 
ought  to  have  been  written  long  ago,  especially  to  C.  Darwin. 

M.  General  worry  and  botheration.  Ten  or  twelve  people 
taking  up  my  time  all  day  about  their  own  affairs. 

N.  O.  P.  Q.  R.  S.  T.  U.  V.  W.  X.  Y.  Z. 

Societies. 

Clubs. 

Dinners,  evening  parties,  and  all  the  apparatus  for  wasting 
time  called  "  Society."  Colensoism  and  botheration  about 
Moses.  .  .  .  Finally  pestered  to  death  in  public  and  private  be- 
(iause  I  am  supposed  to  be  what  they  call  a  "  Darwinian." 

If  that  is  not  enough,  I  could  exhaust  the  Greek  alphabet 
for  heads  in  addition. 

I  am  glad  to  hear  that  Wyman  thinks  well  of  my  book,  as 
he  is  very  competent  to  judge.  I  hear  it  is  republished  in 
America,  but  I  suppose  I  shall  get  nothing  out  of  it.* 

An  undated  letter  to  Kingsley,  who  had  suggested  that 
he  should  write  an  article  on  Prayer,  belongs  probably  to 
the  autumn  of  1863 : — 

I  should  like  very  much  to  write  such  an  article  as  you  sug- 
gest, but  I  am  very  doubtful  about  undertaking  it  for  Fraser, 
Anything  I  could  say  would  go  to  the  root  of  praying  altogether, 
for  inasmuch  as  the  whole  universe  is  governed,  so  far  as  I 
can  see,  in  the  same  way,  and  the  moral  world  is  as  much  gov- 
erned by  laws  as  the  physical — whatever  militates  against  asking 
for  one  sort  of  blessing  seems  to  me  to  tell  with  the  same  force 
against  asking  for  any  other. 

*  In  this  expectation,  however,  he  was  agreeably  disappointed  by 
the  action  of  D.  Appleton  and  Company,  as  is  told  on  page  305. 


268  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xvii 

Minister  who  made  the  offer  that  the  man  of  all  others  for 
the  post  would  be  the  late  distinguished  holder  of  it,  Sir  W. 
H.  Flower,  a  suggestion  happily  acted  on. 

Early  in  August  a  severe  loss  befell  him  in  the  sudden 
death  of  his  brother  George,  who  had  been  his  close  friend 
ever  since  he  had  returned  from  Australia,  who  had  given 
him  all  the  help  and  sympathy  in  His  struggles  that  could 
be  given  by  a  man  of  the  world  without  special  interests  in 
science  or  literature.  With  brilliancy  enough  to  have  won 
success  if  he  had  had  patience  to  ensure  it,  he  was  not  only 
a  pleasant  companion,  a  "  clubbable  man "  in  Johnson's 
phrase,  but  a  friend  to  trust.  The  two  households  had  seen 
much  of  one  another;  the  childless  couple  regarded  their 
brother's  children  almost  as  their  own.  Thus  a  real  gap 
was  made  in  the  family  circle,  and  the  trouble  was  not 
lessened  by  the  fact  that  George  Huxley's  affairs  were  left 
in  great  confusion,  and  his  brother  not  only  spent  a  great 
deal  of  time  in  looking  after  the  interests  of  the  widow,  but 
took  upon  himself  certain  obligations  in  order  to  make 
things  straight,  with  the  result  that  he  was  even  compelled 
to  part  with  his  Royal  Medal,  the  gold  of  which  was  worth 

£50. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

1864 

The  year  1864  was  much  like  1863.  The  Huntcrian 
Lectures  were  still  part  of  his  regular  work.  The  Fishery 
Commission  claimed  a  large  portion  of  his  time.  From 
March  28  to  April  2  he  was  in  Cornwall;  on  May  7  at 
Shoreham ;  from  July  .24  to  September  9  visiting  the  coasts 
of  Scotland  and  Ireland.  The  same  pressure  of  work  con- 
tinued. He  published  four  papers  on  paleontological  or 
anatomical  subjects  in  the  Natural  History  Review,*  he 
wrote  "  Further  Remarks  upon  the  Human  Remains  from 
the  Neanderthal,"  and  later  (see  pp.  273  and  288),  dealing 
with  "  Criticisms  on  the  Origin  of  Species  "  (Collected  Essays 
II.  p.  80,  "  Darwiniana  "),  he  gently  but  firmly  dispersed 
several  misconceptions  of  his  old  friend  Kolliker  as  to  the 
plain  meaning  of  the  book;  and  ridiculed  the  pretentious 
ignorance  of  M.  Flourens'  dicta  upon  the  same  subject; 
while  in  the  winter  he  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  to 
workingmen  on  "  The  Various  Races  of  Mankind,"  a  choice 
of  subject  which  shows  that  his  chief  interest  at  that  time 
lay  in  Ethnology. 

Jermyn  Street,  /an.  16,  1864. 

My  dear  Darwin — I  have  had  no  news  of  you  for  a  long 
time,  but  I  earnestly  hope  you  are  better. 

Have  you  any  objection**o  putting  your  name  to  Flower's 
certificate  for  the  Royal   Society  herewith  inclosed?     It  will 

*  On  **  Cetacean  Fossils  termed  Ziphius  by  Cuvier,"  in  the  Trans- 
actions  of  the  Geological  Society ;  in  those  of  the  Zoological^  papers  on 
**Arcto€ebus  Calabarensis  **  and  **the  Structure  of  the  Stomach  in 
Desmodus  Rufus** ;  and  on  the  **  Osteology  of  the  Genus  Glyptodon,** 
in  the  Phil,  Trans, 

369 


270  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

please  him  much  if  you  will ;  and  I  go  bail  for  his  being  a  thor- 
oughly good  man  in  all  senses  of  the  word — which,  as  you  know, 
is  more  than  I  would  say  for  everybody. 

Don*t  write  any  reply;  but  Mrs.  Darwin  perhaps  will  do 
me  the  kindness  to  send  the  thing  on  to  Lyell  as  per  enclosed 
envelope.    I  will  write  him  a  note  about  it. 

We  are  all  well,  barring  customary  colds  and  various  forms 
of  infantile  pip.  As  for  myself,  I  am  flourishing  like  a  green 
bay  tree  (appropriate  comparison.  Soapy  Sam  would  observe), 
in  consequence  of  having  utterly  renounced  societies  and  society 
since  October. 

I  have  been  working  like  a  horse,  however,  and  shall  work 
"  horser  "  as  my  college  lectures  begin  in  February. — Tout  d 
vous,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Royal  School  of  Mines, 
Jermvn  Street,  Afrii  18,  1864. 

My  dear  Darwin — I  was  rejoiced  to  see  your  handwriting 
again,  so  much  so  that  I  shall  not  scold  you  for  undertaking  the 
needless  exertion  (as  it's  my  duty  to  do)  of  writing  to  thank  me 
for  my  book.* 

I  thought  the  last  lecture  would  be  nuts  for  you,  but  it  is 
really  shocking.  There  is  not  the  smallest  question  that  Owen 
wrote  both  the  article  "  Oken  "  and  the  Archetype  Book,  which 
appeared  in  its  second  edition  in  French — why,  I  know  not.  I 
think  that  if  you  will  look  at  what  I  say  again,  there  will  not 
be  much  doubt  left  in  your  mind  as  to  the  identity  of  the  writer 
of  the  two. 

The  news  you  give  of  yourself  is  most  encouraging;  but  pray 
don't  think  of  doing  any  work  again  yet.  Careful  as  I  have  been 
during  this  last  winter  not  to  burn  the  candle  at  both  ends,  I 
have  found  myself,  since  the  pressure  of  my  lectures  ceased,  in 
considerable  need  of  quiet,  and  I  have  been  lazy  accordingly. 

I  don't  know  that  I  fear,  with  you,  caring  too  much  for  sci- 
ence— for  there  are  lots  of  other  things  I  should  like  to  go  into 
as  well,  but  I  do  lament  more  anH  more  as  time  goes  on,  the 
necessity  of  becoming  more  and  more  absorbed  in  one  kind  of 
work,  a  necessity  which  is  created  for  any  one  in  my  position, 
partly  by  one's  reputation,  and  partly  by  one's  children.  P'or 
directly  a  man  gets  the  smallest  repute  in  any  branch  of  science, 
the  world  immediately  credits  him  with  knowing  about  ten 

^  ffunterian  Lectures  an  Anatomy, 


274 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 


mission's  Cruise;  and  though  much  fatter  (indeed  a  regular 
bloater  myself),  I  am  not  up  to  the  mark.  Next  year  I  will 
have  a  real  holiday.* 

I  am  a  bachelor,  my  wife  and  belongings  being  all  at  that 
beautiful  place,  Margate.  When  I  came  back  I  found  them  all 
looking  so  seedy  that  I  took  them  off  bag  and  baggage  to  that, 
as  the  handiest  place,  before  a  week  was  over.  They  are  won- 
derfully improved  already,  my  wife  especially  being  abundantly 
provided  with  her  favourite  east  wind.  Your  godson  is  growing 
a  very  sturdy  fellow,  and  I  begin  to  puzzle  my  head  with  think- 
ing what  he  is  and  what  he  is  not  to  be  taught. 

Please  to  remember  me  very  kindly  to  Mrs.  Darwin,  and 
believe  me,  yours  very  faithfully,  ^  ^  Huxley 

The  following  illustrates  the  value  he  set  upon  public 
examinations  as  to  a  practical  means  for  spreading  scientific 
education,  and  upon  first-rate  examiners  as  a  safeguard  of 
proper  methods  of  teaching. 

Oct.  6,  1864. 

My  dear  Hooker — Donnelly  told  me  to-day  that  you  had 
been  applied  to  by  the  Science  and  Tarts  Department  to  examine 
for  them  in  botany,  and  that  you  had  declined. 

Will  you  reconsider  the  matter  ?  I  have  always  taken  a  very 
g^eat  interest  in  the  science  examinations,  looking  upon  them,  as 
I  do,  as  the  most  important  engine  for  forcing  science  into  ordi- 
nary education. 

The  English  nation  will  not  take  science  from  above,  so  it 
must  get  it  from  below. 

Having  known  these  examinations  from  the  beginning,  I 
can  assure  you  that  they  are  very  genuine  things,  and  are  work- 
ing excellently.  And  what  I  have  regretted  from  the  first  is 
that  the  botanical  business  was  not  taken  in  hand  by  you,  instead 
of  by . 

Now,  like  a  good  fellow,  think  better  of  it.  The  papers  are 
necessarily  very  simple,  and  one  of  Oliver's  pupils  could  look 
them  over  for  you.  Let  us  have  your  co-operation  and  the 
advantage  of  that  reputation  for  honesty  and  earnestness  which 
you  have  contrived  (Heaven  knows  how)  to  get. 

I  have  come  back  fat  and  seedy  for  want  of  exercise.    All 

*  At  the  end  of  the  year,  as  so  often,  he  went  off  for  a  ploy  with 
Tyndall,  this  time  into  Derbyshire,  walking  vigorously  over  the  moors. 


2y6  i-if*^  O^  JPROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

only  part  of  the  address  to  Darwin  written  by  Sabine  himself 
contained  the  following  passage: — 

"  Speaking  generally  and  collectively,  we  have  expressly 
omitted  it  (Darwin's  theory)  from  the  grounds  of  our  award." 

Of  course  this  would  be  interpreted  by  everybody  as  mean- 
ing; that,  after  due  discussion,  the  council  had  formally  resolved 
not  only  to  exclude  Darwin's  theory  from  the  grounds  of  the 
award,  but  to  give  public  notice  through  the  president  that  they 
had  done  so,  and  furthermore,  that  Darwin's  friends  had  been 
base  enough  to  accept  an  honour  for  him  on  the  understanding 
that  in  receiving  it  he  should  be  publicly  insulted ! 

I  felt  that  this  would  never  do,  and  therefore  when  the 
resolution  for  printing  the  address  was  moved,  I  made  a  speech 
which  I  took  care  to  keep  perfectly  cool  and  temperate,  disavow- 
ing all  intention  of  interfering  with  the  liberty  of  the  president 
to  say  what  he  pleased,  but  exercising  my  constitutional  right 
of  requiring  the  minutes  of  council  making  the  award  to  be 
read,  in  order  that  the  Society  might  be  informed  whether  the 
conditions  implied  by  Sabine  had  been  imposed  or  not. 

The  resolution  was  read,  and  of  course  nothing  of  the  kind 
appeared.  Sabine  didn't  exactly  like  it,  I  believe.  Both  Busk 
and  Falconer  remonstrated  against  the  passage  to  him,  and  I 
hope  it  will  be  withdrawn  when  the  address  is  printed.* 

If  not  there  will  be  an  awful  row,  and  I  for  one  will  show 
no  mercy. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  foundation  of  the  x  Club  towards  the  end  of  1864 
was  a  notable  event  for  Huxley  and  his  circle  of  scientific 
friends.  It  was  growing  more  and  more  difficult  for  them 
to  see  one  another  except  now  and  again  at  meetings  of  the 
learned  societies,  and  even  that  was  quite  uncertain.  The 
pressure  of  Huxley's  own  work  may  be  inferred  from  his 
letters  at  this  time  (especially  to  Darwin,  July  2,  1863,  and 
January  16,  1864).  Not  only  society,  but  societies  had  to 
be  almost  entirely  given  up.  Moreover,  the  distance  from 
one  another  at  which  some  of  these  friends  lived,  added 
another  difficulty,  so  that  Huxley  writes  to  Hooker  in  his 
"  remote  province  "  of  Kew :  "  I  wonder  if  we  are  ever  to 
meet  again  in  this  world."    Accordingly  in  January  1864, 

*  The  passage  stands  in  the  published  address,  but  followed  by 
another  passage  which  softens  it  down. 


28o  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xvui 

men  with  such  opportunities  of  mutual  understanding  and 
such  ideals  of  action  could  not  fail  to  have  some  influence 
on  the  progress  of  scientific  organization — it  was  assuredly 
not  sectarian  nor  exerted  for  party  purposes  during  the 
twenty-eight  years  of  the  club's  existence. 

I  believe  that  the  x  (continues  Huxley)  had  the  credit  of 
being  a  sort  of  scientific  caucus,  or  ring,  with  some  people.  In 
fact,  two  distinguished  scientific  colleagues  of  mine  once  car- 
ried on  a  conversation  (which  I  gravely  ignored)  across  me, 
in  the  smoking-room  of  the  Athenaeum,  to  this  effect,  "  I  say, 
A.,  do  you  know  anything  about  the  x  Club  ?  "  "  Oh  yes,  B., 
I  have  heard  of  it.  What  do  they  do  ?  "  "  Well,  they  govern 
scientific  affairs,  and  really,  on  the  whole,  they  don't  do  it  badly." 
If  my  good  friends  could  only  have  been  present  at  a  few  of  our 
meetings,  they  would  have  formed  a  much  less  exalted  idea  of 
us,  and  would,  I  fear,  have  been  much  shocked  at  the  sadly 
frivolous  tone  of  our  ordinary  conversation. 

The  X  club  is  probably  unique  in  the  smallness  of  its 
numbers,  the  intellectual  eminence  of  its  members,  and  the 
length  of  its  unchanged  existence.  The  nearest  parallel  is  to 
be  found  in  "  The  Club."  *  Like  the  x,  "  The  Club  "  began 
with  eight  members  at  its  first  meeting,  and  of  the  original 
members  Johnson  lived  twenty  years,  Reynolds  twenty- 
eight,  Burke  thirty-three,  and  Bennet  Langton  thirty-seven. 
But  the  ranks  were  earlier  broken.  Within  ten  years  Gold- 
smith died,  and  he  was  followed  in  a  twelvemonth  by 
Nugent,  and  five  years  later  by  Beauclerk  and  Chamier. 
Moreover,  the  eight  were  soon  increased  to  twelve ;  then  to 
twenty  and  finally  to  forty,  while  the  gaps  were  filled  up  as 
they  occurred. 

In  the  Xy  on  the  contrary,  nearly  nineteen  years  passed 
before  the  original  circle  was  broken  by  the  death  of  Spottis- 
woode.  From  1864  to  Spottiswoode's  death  in  1883  the 
original  circle  remained  unbroken ;  the  meetings  "  were 
steadily  continued  for  some  twenty  years,  before  our  ranks 
began  to  thin ;  and  one  by  one,  geisfige  Naturen  such  as 

*  Of  which  Huxley  was  elected  a  member  in  1884.     TyndaH  and 
Hooker  were  also  members. 


282  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xviii 

However,  I  am  not  going  to  stand  out  against  the  general 
wish,  and  I  shall  agree  to  anything  that  is  desired. 

Again — 

The  club  has  never  had  any  purpose  except  the  purely  per- 
sonal object  of  bringing  together  a  few  friends  who  did  not 
want  to  drift  apart.  It  has  happened  that  these  cronies  had 
developed  into  big-wigs  of  various  kinds,  and  therefore  the  club 
has  incidentally — I  might  say  accidentally — ^had  a  good  deal 
of  influence  in  the  scientific  world.  But  if  I  had  to  propose  to 
a  man  to  join,  and  he  were  to  say.  Well,  what  is  your  object?  I 
should  have  to  reply  like  the  needy  knife-grinder,  "  Object, 
God  bless  you,  sir,  we've  none  to  show.*' 

As  he  wrote  elsewhere  (Nineteenth  Century,  January  1894, 
see  p.  277) : — 

Later  on,  there  were  attempts  to  add  other  members,  which 
at  last  became  wearisome,  and  had  to  be  arrested  by  the  agree- 
ment that  no  proposition  of  that  kind  should  be  entertained, 
unless  the  name  of  the  new  member  suggested  contained  all 
the  consonants  absent  from  the  names  of  the  old  ones.  In  the 
lack  of  Slavonic  friends  this  decision  put  an  end  to  the  possi- 
bility of  increase. 

After  the  death,  in  February  1892,  of  Hirst,  a  most 
devoted  supporter  of  the  club,  who  "  would,  I  believe,  repre- 
sent it  in  his  sole  person  rather  than  pass  the  day  over," 
only  one  more  meeting  took  place,  in  the  following  month. 
With  five  of  the  six  survivors  domiciled  far  from  town, 
meeting  after  meeting  fell  through,  until  the  treasurer  wrote, 
"  My  idea  is  that  it  is  best  to  let  it  die  out  unobserved,  and 
say  nothing  about  its  decease  to  anyone." 

Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  the  March  meeting  of  the 
club  in  1892  remained  its  last.  No  ceremony  ushered  it 
out  of  existence.  Its  end  exemplified  a  saying  of  Sir  J. 
Hooker's,  "  At  our  ages  clubs  are  an  anachronism."  It  had 
met  240  times,  yet,  curious  to  say,  although  the  average 
attendance  up  to  1883  was  seven  out  of  nine,  the  full 
Strength  of  the  club  only  met  on  twenty-seven  occasions. 


284  ^^^^  ^^  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xix 

1866-67 ;  papers  on  "  Two  Widely  Contrasted  Forms  of 
the  Human  Cranium  "  of  1866  and  1868 ;  the  "  Patagonian 
Skulls "  of  1868 ;  and  "  Some  Fixed  Points  in  British 
Ethnology  "  of  1870 — 

His  published  ethnological  papers  (says  Sir  Michael  Foster) 
are  not  numerous,  nor  can  they  be  taken  as  a  measure  of  his  in- 
fluence on  this  branch  of  study.  In  many  ways  he  has  made 
himself  felt,  not  the  least  by  the  severity  with  which  on  the  one 
hand  he  repressed  the  pretensions  of  shallow  persons  who,  tak- 
ing advantage  of  the  glamour  of  the  Darwinian  doctrine,  talked 
nonsense  in  the  name  of  anthropological  science,  and  on  the 
other  hand,  exposed  those  who  in  the  structure  of  the  brain  or 
of  other  parts,  saw  an  impassable  gulf  between  man  and  the 
monkey.  The  episode  of  the  "  hippocampus  "  stirred  for  a  while 
not  only  science  but  the  general  public.  He  used  his  influence, 
already  year  by  year  growing  more  and  more  powerfifl,  to  keep 
the  study  of  the  natural  history  of  man  within  its  proper  lines, 
and  chiefly  with  this  end  in  view  held  the  Presidential  Chair 
of  the  Ethnological  Society  in  1869-70.  It  was  mainly  through 
his  influence  that  this  older  Ethnological  Society  was,  a  year 
later,  in  1871,  amalgamated  with  a  newer  rival  society,  the 
Anthropological,  under  the  title  of  "  The  Anthropological  In- 
stitute." * 

During  this  time  he  was  constantly  occupied  with 
paleontological  work,  as  the  following  letter  to  Sir  C. 
Lyell  indicates — 

Jermyn  Street,  Nov,  27,  1865. 
My  dear  Sir  Charles — I  returned  last  night  from  a  hasty 
journey  to  Ireland,  whither  I  betook  myself  on  Thursday  night, 
being  attracted  vulture-wise  by  the  scent  of  a  quantity  of  car- 
boniferous corpses.  The  journey  was  as  well  worth  the  trouble 
as  any  I  ever  undertook,  seeing  that  in  a  morning's  work  I 
turned  out  ten  genera  of  vertebrate  animals  of  which  five  are 
certainly  new ;  and  of  these  four  are  Labyrinthodonts,  amphibia 
of  new  types.  These  four  are  baptised  Ophiderpeton,  Lepter- 
peton,  Ichthyerpeton,  Keraterpeton.  They  all  have  ossified 
spinal  columns  and  limbs.  The  special  interest  attaching  to  the 
two  first  is  that  they  represent  a  t)rpeof  Labyrinthodonts  hitherto 
unknown,  and  corresponding  with  Siren  and  Amphiuma  among 
living  Amphibia.  Ophiderpeton,  for  example,  is  like  an  eel, 
about  three  feet  long  with  small  fore  legs  and  rudimentary 
hind  ones. 

*  See  Appendix. 


286  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xix 

half  done  for  more  than  a  twelvemonth,  and  I  hate  \he  sight  of 
them  because  the  subject  no  longer  interests  me,  and  my  head  is 
full  of  other  matters. 

So  I  have  just  done  giving  a.  set  of  lectures  to  working-men 
on  "  The  Various  Races  of  Mankind,"  which  really  would  make 
a  book  in  Miss  Emma's  sense  of  the  word,  and  which  I  have  had 
reported.  But  when  am  I  to  work  them  up  ?  Twenty- four  Hun- 
terian  Lectures  loom  between  me  and  Easter.  I  am  dying  to  get 
out  the  second  volume  of  the  book  that  is  not  a  book,  but  in  vain. 

I  trust  you  are  better,  though  the  last  news  I  had  of  you 
from  Lubbock  was  not  so  encouraging  as  I  could  have  wished. 

With  best  wishes  and  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Darwin — Ever 
yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Thanks  for  "  Fiir  Darwin,"  *  I  had  it. 

26  Abbey  Place,  Jan.  15.  1865. 

My  dear  Darwin — Many  thanks  for  Deslongchamps'  paper 
which  I  do  not  possess. 

I  received  another  important  publication  yesterday  morning 
in  the  shape  of  a  small  but  hearty  son,  who  came  to  light  a  little 
before  six.  The  wife  is  getting  on  capitally,  and  we  are  both 
greatly  rejoiced  at  having  another  boy,  as  your  godson  ran  great 
risks  of  being  spoiled  by  a  harem  of  sisters. 

The  leader  in  the  Reader  is  mine,  and  I  am  glad  you  like  it. 
The  more  so  as  it  has  got  me  into  trouble  with  some  of  my 
friends.  However,  the  revolution  that  is  going  on  is  not  to  be 
made  with  rose-water. 

I  wish  if  anything  occurs  to  you  that  would  improve  the 
scientific  part  of  the  Reader,  you  would  let  me  know  as  I  am  in 
great  measure  responsible  for  it. 

I  am  sorry  not  to  have  a  better  account  of  your  health. 
With  kind  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Darwin  and  the  rest  of  your 
circle — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Jermyn  Street,  May  i,  1865. 
My  dear  Darwin — I  send  you  by  this  post  a  booklet  t  none 
of  which  is  much  worth  your  reading,  while  of  nine-tenths  of  it 
you  may  say  as  the  man  did  who  had  been  trying  to  read  John- 
son's Dictionary,  "that  the  words  were  fine,  but  he  couldn't 
make  much  of  the  story." 


■^^^^^-^■i^^^^ 


*  By  Fritz  MUller.  one  of  Darwin*s  earliest  supporters  in  Germany, 
f  Probably  "  A  Catalogue  pf  ^e  CoUectlpq  of  Foff ill  in  the  MuHum 
of  Practical  Geology,"  etc,         ._. 


290 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xix 


dren,  the  first  time  I  have  had  a  holiday  of  any  extent  with 
them  for  years. 

We  are  all  flourishing — the  babies  particularly  so— and  I 
find  myself  rather  loth  to  begin  grinding  at  the  mill  again. 
There  is  a  vein  of  laziness  in  me  which  crops  out  uncommonly 
strong  in  your  godson,  who  is  about  the  idlest,  j oiliest  young 
four  year  old  I  know. 

You  will  have  been  as  much  grieved  as  I  have  been  about 
dear  old  Hooker.  According  to  the  last  accounts,  however,  he 
is  mending,  and  I  hope  to  see  him  in  the  pristine  vigour  again 
before  long. 

My  wife  is  gone  to  bed  or  she  would  join  me  in  the  kindest 
regards  and  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Darwin  and  your  family. — 
Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  sound  judgment  and  nice  sense  of  honour  for  which 
Huxley  was  known  among  his  friends  often  led  those  who 
were  in  difficulties  to  appeal  to  him  for  advice.  About  this 
time  a  dispute  arose  over  an  alleged  case  of  unacknowledged 
"  conveyance  "  of  information.  Writing  to  Hooker,  he  says 
the  one  party  to  the  quarrel  failed  to  "  set  the  aflFair  straight 
with  half  a  dozen  words  of  frank  explanation  as  he  might 
have  done ; "  as  to  the  other,  "  like  all  quiet  and  mild  men 
who  do  get  a  grievance,  he  became  about  twice  as  *  wud ' 
as  Berserks  like  you  and  me."  Both  came  to  him,  so  that 
he  says,  "  I  have  found  it  very  diflScult  to  deal  honestly  with 
both  sides  without  betraying  the  confidence  of  either  or 
making  matters  worse."  Happily,  with  his  help,  matters 
reached  a  peaceful  solution,  and  his  final  comment  is — 

I  don't  mind  fighting  to  the  death  in  a  good  big  row,  but 
when  A  and  B  are  supplying  themselves  from  C's  orchard,  I 
don't  think  it  is  very  much  worth  while  to  dispute  whether  B 
filled  his  pockets  directly  from  the  trees  or  indirectly  helped 
himself  to  the  contents  of  A's  basket.  If  B  has  so  helped  him- 
self, he  certainly  ought  to  say  so  like  a  man,  but  if  I  were  A, 
I  would  not  much  care  whether  he  did  or  not. 

has  been  horribly  disgusted  about  it,  but  I  am  not  sure 

the  discipline  may  not  have  opened  his  eyes  to  new  and  useful 
aspects  of  nature. 

The  summer  of  1865  saw  the  inception  of  an  educational 
experiment — ^an  International  Education  Society — ^to  which 


292 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xix 


good-fellowship  which  existed  between  them,  as  well  as  the 
interest  he  took  in  the  style  and  success  of  Parker's  work. 
Parker  was  hard  at  work  on  Birds,  a  subject  in  which  his 
friend  and  leader  also  was  deeply  interested,  and  was  in- 
deed preparing  an  important  book  upon  it. 

Referring  to  his  candidature  for  the  Royal  Society,  he 
writes  on  February  21,  1865 :  "  With  reference  to  your 
candidature,  I  am  ready  to  bring  your  name  forward  when- 
ever you  like,  and  to  back  you  with  *  all  my  might,  power, 
amity,  and  authority,'  as  Essex  did  Bacon  (you  need  not 
serve  me  as  Bacon  did  Essex  afterwards),  but  my  impres- 
sion has  been  that  you  did  not  wish  to  come  forward  this 
year." 

And  on  November  2,  1866,  congratulating  him  on  his 
"  well-earned  honour  "  of  the  F.R.S. — "  Go  on  and  prosper. 
These  are  not  the  things  wise  men  work  for;  but  it  is  not 
the  less  proper  of  a  wise  man  to  take  them  when  they  come 
unsought." 

26  Abbey  Place,  Dec,  3,  1865. 

My  dear  I*arker — I  have  been  so  terribly  pressed  by  my 
work  that  I  have  only  just  been  able  to  finish  the  reading  of 
your  paper. 

Very  few  pieces  of  work  which  have  fallen  in  my  way  come 
near  your  account  of  the  Struthious  skull  in  point  of  clearness 
and  completeness.  It  is  a  most  admirable  essay,  and  will  make 
an  epoch  in  this  kind  of  inquiry. 

I  want  you,  however,  to  remodel  the  introduction,  and  to 
make  some  unessential  but  convenient  difference  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  some  of  the  figures. 

Secondly,  full  as  the  appendix  is  of  most  valuable  and  in- 
teresting matter,  I  advise  you  for  the  present  to  keep  it  back. 

My  reason  is  that  you  have  done  justice  neither  to  yourself 
nor  to  your  topics,  and  that  if  the  appendix  is  printed  as  it 
stands,  your  labour  will  be  in  great  measure  lost. 

You  start  subjects  enough  for  half  a  dozen  papers,  and 
partly  from  the  compression  thus  resulting,  and  partly  from  the 

worst  of  the  contest."  He  speaks  too  of  his  **  minute  accuracy  in 
observation  and  boundless  memory  for  details  and  imaj^ination  which 
absolutely  rioted  in  the  scenting  out  of  subtle  and  often  far-fetched 
analogies." 


CHAPTER   XX 
1866 

Besides  his  Fullerian  lectures  on  Ethnology  at  the 
Royal  Institution  this  year,  Huxley  published  in  February 
1866  a  paper  in  the  Natural  History  Review,  on  the  "  Pre- 
historic Remains  of  Caithness,"  based  upon  a  quantity  of 
remains  found  the  previous  autumn  at  Keiss.  This,  and 
the  article  on  the  "  Neanderthal  Skull "  in  the  Natural 
History  Reznew  for  1864,  attracted  some  notice  among  for- 
eign anthropologists.  Dr.  H.  Welcker  writes  about  them ; 
Dr.  A.  Ecker  wants  the  "  Prehistoric  Remains "  for  his 
new  Archiv  fur  Anthropologic;  the  Societe  d' Anthropologic 
de  Paris  electa  him  a  Foreign  Associate. 

He  was  asked  by  Dr.  Fayrer  to  assist  in  a  great  scheme 
he  had  proposed  to  the  Asiatic  Society,*  to  gather  men  of 
every  tribe  from  India,  the  Malayan  Peninsula,  Persia,  Ara- 
bia, the  Indian  Archipelago,  etc.,  for  anthropological  pur- 
poses. It  was  well  received  by  the  Council  of  the  Society 
and  by  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Bengal ;  anything  Hux- 
ley could  say  in  its  favour  would  be  of  great  weight.  Would 
he  come  out  as  Dr.  Fayrer's  guest  ? 

Unable  to  go  to  Calcutta,  he  sent  the  following  letter : — 

Jermyn  Street,  London,  June  14,  1866. 
My  dear  Fayrer — I  lose  no  time  in  replying  to  your  second 
letter,  and  my  first  business  is  to  apologise  for  not  having  an- 
swered the  first,  but  it  reached  me  in  the  thick  of  my  lectures, 
and  like  a  great  many  other  things  which  ought  to  have  been 
done  I  put  off  replying  to  a  more  convenient  season.     I  have 

*  Comp.  Chap.  XXII.  adinit.  and  Appendix  I. 
294 


296  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

your  congress.  I  have  been  lecturing  on  Ethnology  this  year,* 
and  shall  be  again  this  year,  and  I  would  give  a  good  deal  to  be 
able  to  look  at  the  complex  facts  of  Indian  Ethnology  with  my 
own  eyes. 

But  as  the  sage  observed,  "  what's  impossible  can't  be,"  and 
what  with  short  holidays — a  wife  and  seven  children — and  miles 
of  work  in  arrear,  India  is  an  impossibility  for  me. 

You  say  nothing  about  yourself,  so  I  trust  you  are  well  and 
hearty,  and  all  your  belongings  flourishing. — Ever  yours  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

In  paleontology  he  published  this  year  papers  on  the 
"  Vertebrate  Remains  from  the  Jarrow  Colliery,  Kilkenny ;" 
on  a  new  **  Telerpeton  from  Elgin,"  and  on  some  "  Dino- 
saurs from  South  Africa."  The  latter,  and  manv  more  after- 
wards,  were  sent  over  by  a  young  man  named  Alfred  Brown, 
who  had  a  curious  history.  A  Quaker  gentleman  came 
across  him  when  employed  in  cleaning  tools  in  Cirencester 
College,  found  that  he  was  a  good  Greek  and  Latin  scholar, 
and  got  him  a  tutorship  in  a  clergyman's  family  at  the  Cape. 
He  afterwards  entered  the  postal  service,  and  being  inspired 
with  a  vivid  interest  in  geology,  spent  all  the  leave  he  could 
obtain  from  his  office  on  the  Orange  River  in  getting  fossils 
from  the  Stormberg  Rocks.  These,  as  often  as  he  could 
afford  to  send  such  weighty  packages,  he  sent  to  Sir  R. 
Murchison,  to  whom  he  had  received  a  letter  of  introduction 
from  his  official  superior.  Sir  Roderick,  writing  to  Huxley, 
says  "  that  he  was  proud  of  his  new  recruit,"  to  whom  he 
sent  not  only  welcome  words  of  encouragement,  but  the  no 
less  welcome  news  that  the  brother  of  his  **  discoverer,"' 
hearing  of  the  facts  from  Professor  Woodward,  offered  to 
defray  his  expenses  so  that  he  could  collect  regularly. 

On  April  2  Huxley  was  in  Edinburgh  to  receive  the 
first  academic  distinction  conferred  upon  him  in  Britain. 
He  received  the  honorary  degree  of  the  University  in  com- 
pany with  Tyndall  and  Carlyle.  It  was  part  of  the  fitness  of 
things  that  he  should  be  associated  in  this  honour  with  his 
close  friend  Tyndall;  but  though  he  frequently  acknowl- 

*  As  Fullerian  Professor  at  the  Royal  Institution. 


298  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

Some  whales  have  all  the  cerebral  vertebrae  free  now,  and 
every  one  of  them  has  the  full  number,  seven,  whether  they  are 
free  or  fixed.  No  doubt  whales  had  hind  legs  once  upon  a  time. 
If  when  you  come  up  to  town  you  go  to  the  College  of  Surgeons, 
my  friend  Flower  the  Conservator  (a  good  man  whom  you 
should  know),  will  show  you  the  whalebone  whale's  thigh  bones 
in  the  grand  skeleton  they  have  recently  set  up.  The  legs,  to  be 
sure,  and  the  feet  are  gone,  the  battle  of  life  having  left  private 
Cetacea  in  the  condition  of  a  Chelsea  pensioner. — Ever  yours 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  year  the  British  Association  met  at  Nottingham, 
and  Huxley  was  president  of  Section  D.  In  this  capacity 
he  invited  Professor  Haeckel  to  attend  the  meeting,  but  the 
impending  war  with  Austria  prevented  any  Prussian  from 
leaving  his  country  at  the  time,  though  Haeckel  managed  to 
come  over  later. 

Huxley  did  not  deliver  a  regular  opening  address  to  the 
section  on  the  Thursday,  but  on  the  Friday  made  a  speech, 
which  was  followed  by  a  discussion  upon  biology  and  its 
several  branches,  especially  morphology  and  its  relation  to 
physiology  ("  the  facts  concerning  form  are  questions  of 
force,  every  form  is  force  visible.")  He  lamented  that  the 
subdivisions  of  the  section  had  to  meet  separately  as  a  re- 
sult of  specialisation,  the  reason  for  which  he  found  in  the 
want  of  proper  scientific  education  in  schools.  And  this 
was  the  fault  of  the  universities,  for  just  as  in  the  story, 
"  Stick  won't  beat  dog,  dog  won't  bite  pig,  and  so  the  old 
woman  can't  get  home,"  science  would  not  be  taught  in 
the  schools  until  it  is  recognised  by  the  universities. 

This  prepared  the  way  for  Dean  Farrar's  paper  on 
science  teaching  in  the  public  schools.  His  experience  as  a 
master  at  Harrow  made  him  strongly  oppose  the  existing 
plan  of  teaching  all  boys  classical  composition  whether  they 
were  suited  for  it  or  no.  He  wished  to  exchange  a  great 
deal  of  Latin  verse-making  for  elementary  science. 

This  paper  was  doubly  interesting  to  Huxley,  as  coming 
from  a  classical  master  in  a  public  school,  and  he  remarked, 
"  He  felt  sure  that  at  the  present  time,  the  important  ques- 
tion for  England  was  not  the  duration  of  her  coal,  but  the 


300  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

deed  the  last  was  that  you  were  so  rampageous  you  meant  to 
come  to  London  and  have  a  spree  among  its  dissipations.  May 
that  be  true. 

I  am  in  the  thick  of  my  work,  and  have  only  had  time  to 
glance  at  your  Historical  Sketch. 

What  an  unmerciful  basting  you  give  "  our  mutual  friend." 
I  did  not  know  he  had  put  forward  any  claim !  and  even  now 
that  I  read  it  in  black  and  white,  I  can  hardly  believe  it. 

I  am  glad  to  hear  from  Spencer  that  you  are  on  the  right 
(that  is  my)  side  in  the  Jamaica  business.  But  it  is  wonderful 
how  people  who  commonly  act  together  are  divided  about  it. 

My  wife  joins  with  me  in  kindest  wishes  to  Mrs.  Darwin  and 
yourself — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

You  will  receive  an  elementary  physiology  book,  not  for 
your  reading  but  for  Miss  Darwin's.  Were  you  not  charmed 
with  Haeckel? 

The  "  Jamaica  business  "  here  alluded  to  was  Governor 
Eyre's  suppression  of  a  negro  rising,  in  the  course  of  which 
he  had  executed,  under  martial  law,  a  coloured  leader  and 
member  of  the  Assembly,  named  Gordon.  The  question  of 
his  justification  in  so  doing  stirred  England  profoundly.  It 
became  the  touchstone  of  ultimate  political  convictions. 
Men  who  had  little  concern  for  ordinary  politics,  came  for- 
ward to  defend  a  great  constitutional  principle  which  they 
conceived  to  be  endangered.  A  committee  was  formed  to 
prosecute  Governor  Eyre  on  a  charge  of  murder,  in  order  to 
vindicate  the  right  of  a  prisoner  to  trial  by  due  process  of 
law.  Thereupon  a  counter-committee  was  organised  for  the 
defence  of  the  man  who,  like  Cromwell,  judged  that  the 
people  preferred  their  real  security  to  forms,  and  had  pre- 
sumably saved  the  white  population  of  Jamaica  by  striking 
promptly  at  the  focus  of  rebellion. 

The  Pall  Mall  Gazette  of  October  29,  1866,  made  a 
would-be  smart  allusion  to  the  part  taken  in  the  affair  by 
Huxley,  which  evoked,  in  reply,  a  calm  statement  of  his 
reasons  for  joining  the  prosecuting  committee: — 

It  is  amusing  (says  the  Pall  Mall)  to  see  how  the  rival  com- 
mittees, the  one  for  the  prosecution  and  the  other  for  the  defence 
of  Mr.  Eyre,  parade  the  names  of  distinguished  persons  who  are 


302  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 

he  is  an  evil  and  troublesome  person,  an  English  court  of  justice 
will  certainly  find  that  virtuous  person  guilty  of  murder.  Nor 
will  the  verdict  be  affected  by  any  evidence  that  the  defendant 
acted  from  the  best  of  motives,  and,  on  the  whole,  did  the  State 
a  service. 

Now,  it  may  be  that  Mr.  Eyre  was  actuated  by  the  best  of 
motives ;  it  may  be  that  Jamaica  is  all  the  better  for  being  rid  of 
Mr.  Gordon;  but  nevertheless  the  Royal  Commissioners,  who 
were  appointed  to  inquire  into  Mr.  Gordon's  case,  among  other 
matters,  have  declared  that: — 

The  evidence,  oral  and  documentary,  appears  to  us  to  be 
wholly  insufficient  to  establish  the  charge  upon  which  the  pris- 
oner took  his  trial.     (Report,  p.  37.) 

And  again  that  they 

Cannot  see  in  the  evidence  which  has  been  adduced,  any  suf- 
ficient proof,  either  of  his  (Mr.  Gordon's)  complicity  in  the  out- 
break at  Morant  Bay,  or  of  his  having  been  a  party  to  any 
general  conspiracy  against  the  Government.    {Report,  p.  38.) 

Unless  the  Royal  Commissioners  have  greatly  erred,  there- 
fore, the  killing  of  Mr.  Gordon  can  only  be  defended  on  the 
ground  that  he  was  a  bad  and  troublesome  man;  in  short,  that 
although  he  might  not  be  guilty,  it  served  him  right 

I  entertain  so  deeply-rooted  an  objection  to  this  method  of 
killing  people — the  act  itself  appears  to  me  to  be  so  frightful  a 
precedent,  that  I  desire  to  see  it  stigmatised  by  the  highest  au- 
thority as  a  crime.  And  I  have  joined  the  committee  which 
proposes  to  indict  Mr.  Eyre,  in  the  hope  that  I  may  hear  a 
court  of  justice  declare  that  the  only  defence  which  can  be  set 
up  (if  the  Royal  Commissioners  are  right)  is  no  defence,  and 
that  the  killing  of  Mr.  Gordon  was  the  greatest  offence  known 
to  the  law — murder. — I  remain.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

Thomas  H.  Huxley. 
The  ATHENituM  Club,  Oct.  30,  1866. 

Two  letters  to  friends  who  had  taken  the  opposite  side 
in  this  burning  question  show  how  resolutely  he  set  himself 
against  permitting  a  difference  on  matters  of  principle  to 
affect  personal  relations  with  his  warmest  opponents. 

Jermvn  Street,  A^ov.  8,  1866. 
My  dear  Kingsley — The  letter  of  which  you  have  heard, 
containing  my  reasons  for  becoming  a  member  of  the  Jamaica 


304 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xx 


it  will  help  a  great  many  people  to  find  out  what  their  profound- 
est  political  beliefs  are. 

The  hero- worshippers  who  believe  that  the  world  is  to  be 
governed  by  its  great  men,  who  are  to  lead  the  little  ones,  justly 
if  they  can ;  but  if  not,  unjustly  drive  or  kick  them  the  right  way, 
will  sympathise  with  Mr.  Eyre. 

The  other  sect  (to  which  I  belong)  who  look  upon  hero- 
worship  as  no  better  than  any  other  idolatry,  and  upon  the 
attitude  of  mind  of  the  hero-worshipper  as  essentially  immoral ; 
who  diink  it  is  better  for  a  man  to  go  wrong  in  freedom  than 
to  go  right  in  chains ;  who  look  upon  the  observance  of  inflexible 
justice  as  between  man  and  man  as  of  far  greater  importance 
than  even  the  preservation  of  social  order,  will  believe  that  Mr. 
Eyre  has  committed  one  of  the  greatest  crimes  of  which  a 
person  in  authority  can  be  guilty,  and  will  strain  every  nerve  to 
obtain  a  declaration  that  their  belief  is  in  accordance  with  the 
law  of  England.* 

People  who  differ  on  fundamentals  are  not  likely  to  convert 
one  another.  To  you,  as  to  my  dear  friend  Tyndall,  with  whom 
I  almost  always  act,  but  who  in  this  matter  is  as  much  opposed 
to  me  as  you  are,  I  can  only  say,  let  us  be  strong  enough  and 
wise  enough  to  fight  the  question  out  as  a  matter  of  principle 
and  without  bitterness. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

November  9,  1866. 

My  dear  Tyndall — Many  thanks  for  the  kind  note  which 
accompanied  your  letter  to  the  Jamaica  Committee. 

When  I  presented  myself  at  Rogers'  dinner  last  night  I  had 
not  heard  of  the  latter,  and  Gassiot  began  poking  fun  at  me,  and 
declaring  that  your  absence  was  due  to  a  quarrel  between  us  on 
this  unhappy  subject. 

I  replied  to  the  jest  earnestly  enough,  that  I  hoped  and 
believed  our  old  friendship  was  strong  enough  to  stand  any 
strain  that  might  be  put  on  it,  much  as  I  grieved  that  we  should 
be  ranged  in  opposite  camps  in  this  or  any  other  cause. 

That  you  and  I  have  fundamentally  different  political  prin- 
ciples must,  I  think,  have  become  obvious  to  both  of  us  during 
the  progress  of  the  American  War.  The  fact  is  made  still  more 
plain  by  your  printed  letter,  the  tone  and  spirit  of  which  I 
greatly  admired  without  being  able  to  recognise  in  it  any  im- 
portant fact  or  argument  which  had  not  passed  through  my 
mind  before  I  joined  the  Jamaica  Committee. 

*  $ee  Appendix, 


CHAPTER   XXI 

1867 

It  has  already  been  noted  that  Huxley's  ethnological 
work  continued  this  year  with  a  second  series  of  lectures 
at  the  Royal  Institution,  while  he  enlarged  his  paper  on 
"  Two  widely  contrasted  forms  of  Human  Crania,"  and 
published  it  in  the  Journal  of  Anatomy,  One  paleontological 
memoir  of  his  appeared  this  year  on  Acanthopholis,  a  fossil 
from  the  chalk  marl,  an  additional  piece  of  work  for  which 
he  excuses  himself  to  Sir  C.  Lyell  (January  4,  1867)  : — 

The  new  reptile  advertised  in  Geol.  Mag,  has  turned  up  in 
the  way  of  business,  and  I  could  not  help  giving  a  notice  of  it, 
or  I  should  not  have  undertaken  anything  fresh  just  now. 

The  Spitzbergen  things  are  very  different,  and  I  have  taken 
sundry  looks  at  them  and  put  them  by  again  to  let  my  thoughts 
ripen. 

They  are  Ichthyosaurian,  and  I  am  not  sure  they  do  not 
belong  to  two  species.  But  it  is  an  awful  business  to  compare 
all  the  Ichthyosaurians.  I  think  that  one  form  is  new.  Please 
to  tell  Nordenskiold  this  much. 

However,  his  chief  interest  was  in  the  anatomy  of  birds, 
at  which  he  had  been  working  for  some  time,  and  especially 
the  development  of  certain  of  the  cranial  bones  as  a  basis 
of  classification.  On  April  11,  expanding  one  of  his  Hun- 
terian  Lectures,  he  read  a  paper  on  this  subject  at  the 
Zoological  Society,  afterwards  published  in  their  Proceed- 
ings for  1867. 

As  he  had  found  the  works  of  Professor  Comay  of  help 
in  the  preparation  of  this  paper,  he  was  careful  to  send  him 
a  copy  with  an  acknowledgment  of  his  indebtedness,  elicit- 
306 


i867  LETTER  TO  PARKER  307 

ing  the  reply,  "  c^est  si  beau  de  trouver  chez  Vhomme  la  science 
unie  d  la  justice" 

He  followed  this  up  with  another  paper  on  "  The  Classi- 
fication and  Distribution  of  the  Alectoromorphae  and  Hete- 
romorphae  "  in  1868,  and  to  the  work  upon  this  the  fol- 
lowing letter  to  his  ally,  W.  K.  Parker,  refers : — 

Royal  Geolog.  Survey  of  Gt.  Britain, 
Jbrmyn  Street, /«/k  17,  1867. 

My  dear  Parker — Nothing  short  of  the  direct  temptation  of 
the  evil  one  could  lead  you  to  entertain  so  monstrous  a  doctrine, 
as  that  you  propound  about  Cariamidae. 

I  recommend  fasting  for  three  days  and  the  application  of  a 
scourge  thrice  in  the  twenty-four  hours !  Do  this,  and  about  the 
fourth  day  you  will  perceive  that  the  cranial  differences  alone 
are  as  great  as  those  between  Cathartes  and  Serpentarius, 

If  you  want  to  hear  something  new  and  true  it  is  this : — 

1.  That  Memora  is  more  unlike  all  the  other  Passerines  {i,e, 
Coracomorphae)  than  they  are  unlike  one  another,  and  that  it 
will  have  to  stand  in  a  group  by  itself. 

It  is  as  much  like  a  wren  as  you  are — less  so,  in  fact,  if  you 
go  on  maintaining  that  preposterous  fiction  about  Serpentarius. 

2.  Wood-peckers  are  more  like  crows  than  they  are  like 
cuckoos. 

Aegithog^athae 

Coracomorphae 
Cypselomorpliae  G^cinomorphae 

Desmognathae 

'occygomorphae. 

3.  Sundevell  is  the  sharpest  fellow  who  has  written  on  the 
classification  of  birds. 

4.  Nitzsch  and  W.  K.  Parker  *  are  the  sharpest  fellows  who 
have  written  on  their  osteology.  • 

5.  Though  I  do  not  see  how  it  follows  naturally  on  the  above, 
still,  where  can  I  see  a  good  skeleton  of  Glareola  ? 

None  in  college,  B.M.S.  badly  prepared. — Ever  yours  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  Except  in  the  case  of  Serpentarius. 


3o8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEV  chai».  X3C1 

An  incident  which  diversified  one  of  the  Gilchrist  lec- 
tures to  working  men  is  thus  recorded  by  the  Times  of 
January  23,  1867 : — 

A  GOOD  EXAMPLE.  Last  night,  at  the  termination  of  a 
lecture  on  ethnology,  delivered  by  Professor  Huxley  to  an  audi- 
ence which  filled  the  theatre  of  the  London  Mechanics'  Institute 
in  Southampton  Buildings,  Chancery  Lane,  the  lecturer  said 
that  he  had  received  a  letter  as  he  entered  the  building  which  he 
would  not  take  the  responsibility  of  declining  to  read,  although 
it  had  no  reference  to  the  subject  under  consideration.  He  then 
read  the  letter,  which  was  simply  signed  "  A  Regular  Attendant 
at  Your  Lectures,"  and  which  in  a  few  words  drew  attention 
to  the  appalling  distress  existing  among  the  population  out  of 
work  at  the  East  End,  and  suggested  that  all  those  present  at 
the  lecture  that  night  should  be  allowed  the  opportunity  of  con- 
tributing id.  or  2d.  each  towards  a  fund  for  their  relief,  and  that 
the  professor  should  become  the  treasurer  for  the  evening.  This 
suggestion  was  received  by  the  audience  with  marks  of  approval. 
The  professor  said  he  would  not  put  pressure  on  anyone;  he 
would  simply  place  his  own  subscription  in  one  of  the  skulls  on 
the  table.  This  he  did,  and  all  the  audience  coming  on  the  plat- 
form, threw  in  money  in  copper  and  silver  until  the  novel  cash 
box  was  filled  with  coin  which  amounted  to  a  large  sum.  A 
gentleman  present  expressed  a  hope  that  the  example  set  by 
that  audience  might  be  followed  with  good  results  wherever 
large  bodies  assembled  either  for  educational  or  recreative 
purposes. 

At  the  end  of  April  this  year  my  father  spent  a  week  in 
Brittany  with  Dr.  Hooker  and  Sir  J.  Lubbock,  rambling 
about  the  neighbourhood  of  Rennes  and  Vannes,  and  com- 
bining the  examination  of  prehistoric  remains  with  the  re- 
freshment of  holiday  making. 

Few  letters  of  this  period  exist.  The  x  Club  was  doing 
its  work.  Most  of  those  to  whom  he  would  naturally  have 
written  he  met  constantly.  Two  letters  to  Professor 
Haeckel  give  pieces  of  his  experience.  One  suggests  the 
limits  of  aggressive  polemics,  as  to  which  I  remember  his 
once  saying  that  he  himself  had  only  twice  been  the  ag- 
gressor in  controversy,  without  waiting  to  be  personally 
attacked;  once  where  he  found  his  opponent  was  engaged 


3IO 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap.  XXI 


sympathise  entirely  with  you ;  and  I  am  much  inclined  to  think 
that  it  is  a  good  thing  for  a  man,  once  at  any  rate  in  his  life, 
to  perform  a  public  war-dance  against  all  sorts  of  humbug  and 
imposture. 

But  having  satisfied  one's  love  of  freedom  in  this  way,  per- 
haps the  sooner  the  war-paint  is  off  the  better.  It  has  no  virtue 
except  as  a  sign  of  one's  own  frame  of  mind  and  determina- 
tion, and  when  that  is  once  known,  is  little  better  than  a  dis- 
traction. 

I  think  there  are  a  few  patches  of  this  kind,  my  dear  friend, 
which  may  as  well  come  out  in  the  next  edition,  e.g.  that  wonder- 
ful note  about  the  relation  of  God  to  gas,  the  gravity  of  which 
greatly  tickled  my  fancy. 

I  pictured  to  myself  the  effect  which  a  translation  of  this 
would  have  upon  the  minds  of  my  respectable  countrymen ! 

Apropos  of  translation.  Darwin  wrote  to  me  on  that  sub- 
ject, and  with  his  usual  generosity,  would  have  made  a  consider- 
able contribution  towards  the  expense  if  we  could  have  seen 
our  way  to  the  publication  of  a  translation.  But  I  do  not  think 
it  would  be  well  to  translate  the  book  in  fragments,  and,  as  a 
whole,  it  would  be  a  very  costly  undertaking,  with  very  little 
chance  of  finding  readers. 

I  do  not  believe  that  in  the  British  Islands  there  are  fifty 
people  who  are  competent  to  read  the  book,  and  of  the  fifty,  five 
and  twenty  have  read  it  or  will  read  it  in  German. 

What  I  desire  to  do  is  to  write  a  review  of  it,  which  will 
bring  it  into  some  notice  on  this  side  of  the  water,  and  this  I 
hope  to  do  before  long.  If  I  do  not  it  will  be,  you  well  know, 
from  no  want  of  inclination,  but  simply  from  lack  of  time. 

In  any  case,  as  soon  as  I  have  been  able  to  study  the  book 
carefully,  you  shall  have  my  honest  opinion  about  all  points. 

I  am  glad  your  journey  has  yielded  so  good  a  scientific 
harvest,  and  especially  that  you  found  my  Oceanic  Hydrozoa  of 
some  use.  But  I  am  shocked  to  find  you  had  no  copy  of  the 
book  of  your  own,  and  I  shall  take  care  that  one  is  sent  to 
you.  It  is  my  first-born  work,  done  when  I  was  very  raw  and 
inexperienced,  and  had  neither  friends  nor  help.  Perhaps  I  am 
all  the  fonder  of  the  child  on  that  ground. 

A  lively  memory  of  you  remains  in  my  house,  and  wife  and 
children  will  be  very  glad  to  hear  that  I  have  news  of  you  when 
I  go  home  to  dinner. 

Keep  us  in  kindly  recollection,  and  believe  me — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


312  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 

Station  at  Naples,  on  his  first  visit  to  England,  made  my 
father's  acquaintance  by  accepting  his  invitation  to  stay  with 
him  "  for  as  long  as  you  can  make  it  convenient  to  stay  " 
at  Swanage,  "  a  little  country  town  with  no  sort  of  amuse- 
ment except  what  is  to  be  got  by  walking  about  a  rather 
pretty  country.  But  having  warned  you  of  this,  I  repeat 
that  it  will  give  me  much  pleasure  to  see  you  if  you  think 
it  worth  while  to  come  so  far." 

Dr.  Dohm  came,  and  came  into  the  midst  of  the  family 
— seven  children,  ranging  from  ten  years  to  babyhood,  with 
whom  he  made  himself  as  popular  by  his  farmyard  reper- 
tory, as  he  did  with  the  elders  by  other  qualities.  The  im- 
pression left  upon  him  appears  from  a  letter  written  soon 
after — 

"  Ich  habe  heute  mehrere  Capitel  in  Mill's  Utilitarianism 
gelesen  and  das  Wort  happiness  mehr  als  einmal  gefunden: 
hatte  ich  eine  Definition  dieses  vielumworbenen  Wortes  irgend 
Jemand  zu  geben,  ich  wiirde  sagen:*  go  and  see  the  Huxley 
family  at  Swanage;  and  if  you  would  enjoy  the  same  I  enjoyed, 
you  would  feel  what  is  happiness,  and  never  more  ask  for  a 
definition  of  this  sentiment." 

Swanage,  Strpf.  22,  1867. 

My  dear  Dohrn — Thanks  to  my  acquaintance  with  the 
Mikroskopische  Anatomie,  and  to  the  fact  that  you  employ  our 
manuscript  characters,  and  not  the  hieroglyphics  of  what  I  ven- 
ture to  call  the  "  cursed  "  and  not  "  cursiv  "  Schrift,  your  letter 
was  as  easy  as  it  was  pleasant  to  read.  We  are  all  glad  to  have 
news  of  you,  though  it  was  really  very  unnecessary  to  thank 
us  for  trying  to  make  your  brief  visit  a  pleasant  one.  Your 
conscience  must  be  more  "  pungent "  than  your  talk,  if  it  pricks 
you  with  so  little  cause.  My  wife  rejoices  saucily  to  find  that 
phrase  of  hers  has  stuck  so  strongly  in  your  mind,  but  you  must 
remember  her  fondness  for  "  Tusch." 

You  must  certainly  marry.  In  my  bachelor  days,  it  was 
unsafe  for  anyone  to  approach  me  before  mid-day,  and  for  all 
intellectual  purposes  I  was  barren  till  the  evening.  Breakfast 
at  six  would  have  upset  me  for  the  day.  You  and  the  lobster 
noted  the  difference  the  other  day. 

*  I  have  been  reading  several  chapters  of  MilPs  Utilitarianism 
to-day,  and  met  with  the  word  ** happiness"  more  than  once  ;  if  /  had 
to  give  anybody  a  definition  of  this  much  debated  word,  I  should  say — 


314 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxi 


Everything  seems  to  have  gone  well  at  the  meeting,  the  edu- 
cational business  carried  [i.e.  a  recommendation  that  natural 
science  be  made  a  part  of  the  curriculum  in  the  public  schools], 
and  the  anthropologers  making  fools  of  themselves  in  a  most 
effectual  way.  So  that  I  do  not  feel  I  have  anything  to  reproach 
myself  with  for  being  absent. 

I  am  very  pleased  to  hear  of  the  reconciliation  with  Thom- 
son and  Tait.  The  mode  of  it  speaks  well  for  them,  and  the  fact 
will  remove  a  certain  source  of  friction  from  amongst  the  cog^ 
of  your  mental  machinery. 

The  following  gives  the  reason  for  his  resigning  the 
Fullerian  lectureship: — 

ATHENiCUM  Club,  May,  1867. 

My  dear  Tyndall — A  conversation  I  had  with  Bence  Jones 
yesterday  reminded  me  that  I  ought  to  have  communicated  with 
you.  But  we  do  not  meet  so  often  as  we  used  to  do,  being,  I  sup- 
pose, both  very  busy,  and  I  forget  to  write. 

You  recollect  that  the  last  time  we  talked  together,  you 
mentioned  a  notion  of  Bence  Jones's  to  make  the  Fulle- 
rian Professorship  of  Physiology  a  practically  permanent  ap- 
pointment, and  that  I  was  quite  inclined  to  stick  by  that  (if 
such  arrangement  could  be  carried  out),  and  g^ve  up  other 
things. 

But  since  I  have  been  engaged  in  the  present  course  of 
lectures  I  have  found  reason  to  change  my  views.  It  is  very 
hard  work,  and  takes  up  every  atom  of  my  time  to  make  the 
lectures  what  they  should  be ;  and  I  find  that  at  this  time  of  year, 
being  more  or  less  used  up,  I  suppose,  with  the  winter  work,  I 
stand  the  worry  aqd  excitement  of  the  actual  lectures  very 
badly.  Add  to  this  that  it  is  six  weeks  clean  gone  out  of  the 
only  time  I  have  disposable  for  real  scientific  progress,  and  you 
will  understand  how  it  is  that  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to 
resig^. 

I  put  all  this  clearly  before  Bence  Jones  yesterday,  with  the 
proviso  that  I  could  and  would  do  nothing  that  should  embarrass 
the  Institution  or  himself. 

If  there  is  the  least  difficulty  in  supplying  my  place,  or  if  the 
managers  think  I  shall  deal  shadily  with  them  by  resigning 
before  the  expiration  of  my  term,  of  course  I  go  on.  And  I 
hope  you  all  understand  that  I  would  do  anything  rather  than 
put  even  the  appearance  of  a  slight  upon  those  who  were  kind 
enough  to  elect  me. — Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


1867  FULLERIAN   LECTURESHIP  315 

He  found  a  substitute  for  1868,  the  last  year  of  the 

triennial  course,  in  Dr.  (now  Sir)  Michael  Foster.     Of. his 

final  lectures  in  1867  he  used  to  tell  a  story  against  him- 
self. 

In  my  early  period  as  a  lecturer,  I  had  very  little  confidence 
in  my  general  powers,  but  one  thing  I  prided  myself  upon  was 
clearness.  I  was  once  talking  of  the  brain  before  a  large  mixed 
audience,  and  soon  began  to  feel  that  no  one  in  the  room  under- 
stood me.  Finally  I  saw  the  thoroughly  interested  face  of  a 
woman  auditor,  and  took  consolation  in  delivering  the  remainder 
of  the  lecture  directly  to  her.  At  the  close,  my  feeling  as  to  her 
interest  was  confirmed  when  she  came  up  and  asked  if  she  might 
put  one  question  upon  a  single  point  which  she  had  not  quite 
understood.  "  Certainly,"  I  replied.  "  Now,  Professor,"  she 
said,  "is  the  cerebellum  inside  or  outside  the  skull?"  (Remi- 
niscences  of  T.  H,  Huxley,  by  Professor  H.  Fairfield  Osborn). 

Dr.  Foster  used  to  add  maliciously,  that  disgust  at  the 
small  impression  he  seemed  to  have  made  was  the  true 
reason  for  the  transference  of  the  lectures. 


CHAPTER   XXII 
1868 

In  1868  he  published  five  scientific  memoirs,  amongst 
them  his  classification  of  birds  and  "  Remarks  upon  Archae- 
opteryx  Lithographica  "  (Proc,  Roy,  Soc,  xvi.  1868,  pp.  243- 
248).  This  creature,  a  bird  with  reptilian  characters,  was  a 
suggestive  object  from  which  to  popularise  some  of  the  far- 
reaching  results  of  his  many  years'  labour  upon  the  mor- 
phology of  both  birds  and  reptiles.  Thus  it  led  to  a  lecture 
at  the  Royal  Institution,  on  February  7,  "  On  the  Animals 
which  are  most  nearly  intermediate  between  Birds  and 
Reptiles." 

Of  this  branch  of  work  Sir  M.  Foster  says :  (Obit.  Not. 
Proc,  Roy,  Soc.  vol.  lix.) : — 

One  great  consequence  of  these  researches  was  that  science 
was  enriched  by  a  clear  demonstration  of  the  many  and  close 
affinities  between  reptiles  and  birds,  so  that  the  two  hence- 
forward came  to  be  known  under  the  joint  title  of  Sauropsida, 
the  amphibia  being  at  the  same  time  distinctly  more  separated 
from  the  reptiles,  and  their  relations  to  fishes  more  clearly  signi- 
fied by  the  joint  title  of  Ichthyopsida.  At  the  same  time,  proof 
was  brought  forward  that  the  line  of  descent  of  the  Sauropsida 
clearly  diverged  from  that  of  the  Mammalia,  both  starting  from 
some  common  ancestry.  And  besides  this  great  generalisation, 
the  importance  of  which,  both  from  a  classificatory  and  from  an 
evolutional  point  of  view,  needs  no  comment,  there  came  out 
of  the  same  researches  numerous  lesser  contributions  to  the 
advancement  of  morphological  knowledge,  including  among 
others  an  attempt,  in  many  respects  successful,  at  a  classification 
of  birds. 

This  work  in  connection  with  the  reptilian  ancestry  of 
birds  further  appears  in  the  paleontological  papers  published 
916 


3i8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxil 

But  it  must  be  noted  that  the  specimens  examined  by  him 
and  by  Haeckel,  who  two  years  later  published  a  full  and 
detailed  description  of  Bathybius,  were  seen  in  a  preserved 
state.  Neither  of  them  saw  a  fresh  specimen,  though  on 
the  cruise  of  the  Porcupine,  Sir  Wyville  Thomson  and  Dr. 
W.  Carpenter  examined  the  substance  in  a  fresh  state,  and 
found  no  better  explanation  to  give  of  it.  However,  not 
only  were  the  expectations  that  it  was  very  widely  dis- 
tributed over  the  Atlantic  bottom,  falsified  in  1879  by  the 
researches  of  the  Challenger  expedition,  but  the  behaviour 
of  certain  deep-sea  specimens  gave  good  ground  for  sus- 
pecting that  what  had  been  sent  home  before  as  genuine 
deep-sea  mud,  was  a  precipitate  due  to  the  action  on  the 
specimens  of  the  spirit  in  which  they  were  preserved. 
Though  Haeckel,  with  his  special  experience  of  Monera, 
refused  to  desert  Bathybius,  a  close  parallel  to  which  was 
found  off  Greenland  in  1876,  the  rest  of  its  sponsors  gave 
it  up.  Whatever  it  might  be  as  a  matter  of  possibility,  the 
particular  evidence  upon  which  it  had  been  described  was 
tainted.  Once  assured  of  this,  Huxley  characteristically 
took  the  bull  by  the  horns.  Without  waiting  for  any  one 
else  to  come  forward,  he  made  public  renunciation  of  Ba- 
thybius at  the  British  Association  in  1879.*  The  "  eating  of 
the  leek  "  as  recommended  to  his  friend  Dohrn  (July  7, 
1868),  was  not  merely  a  counsel  for  others,  but  was  a  pre- 
scription followed  by  himself  on  occasion : — 

• 

"  As  you  know,  I  did  not  think  you  were  on  the  right  track 
with  the  Arthropoda,  and  I  am  not  going  to  profess  to  be  sorry 
that  you  have  finally  worked  yourself  to  that  conclusion. 

As  to  the  unlucky  publication  in  the  Journal  of  Anatomy  and 
Physiology,  you  have  read  your  Shakespeare  and  know  what  is 
meant  by  "  eating  a  leek."  Well,  every  honest  man  has  to  do 
that  now  and  then,  and  I  assure  you  that  if  eaten  fairly  and 
without  grimaces,  the  devouring  of  that  herb  has  a  very  whole- 
some cooling  eflfect  on  the  blood,  particularly  in  people  of  san- 
guine temperament 

Seriously  you  must  not  mind  a  check  of  this  kind. 


*  Sec  vol.  ii.  p.  $,  s^. 


320  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxu 

divorced,  were  closely  united;  and  literature  owes  him  a 
debt  for  importing  into  it  so  much  of  the  highest  scientific 
habit  of  mind;  for  showing  that  truthfulness  need  not  be 
bald,  and  that  real  power  lies  more  in  exact  accuracy  than 
in  luxuriance  of  diction.  Years  after,  no  less  an  authority 
than  Spedding,  in  a  letter  upon  the  influence  of  Bacon  on 
his  own  style  in  the  matter  of  exactitude,  the  pruning  of  fine 
epithets  and  sweeping  statements,  the  reduction  of  number- 
less superlatives  to  positives,  asserted  that,  if  as  a  young 
man  he  had  fallen  in  with  Huxley's  writings  before  Bacon's, 
they  would  have  produced  the  same  eflfect  upon  him.* 

Of  the  other  two  discourses  referred  to,  one  is  the  open- 
ing address  which  he  delivered  as  Principal  at  the  South 
London  Working  Men's  College  on  January  4,  "  A  Liberal 
Education,  and  Where  to  Find  It."  This  is  not  a  brief  for 
science  to  the  exclusion  of  other  teaching;  no  essay  has 
insisted  more  strenuously  on  the  evils  of  a  one-sided  educa- 
tion, whether  it  be  classical  or  scientific;  but  it  urged  the 
necessity  for  a  strong  tincture  of  science  and  her  method, 
if  the  modem  conception  of  the  world,  created  by  the  spread 
of  natural  knowledge,  is  to  be  fairly  understood.  If  culture 
is  the  "  criticism  of  life,"  it  is  fallacious  if  deprived  of  knowl- 
edge of  the  most  important  factor  which  has  transformed 
the  medieval  into  the  modern  spirit. 

Two  of  his  most  striking  passages  are  to  be  found  in 
this  address;  one  the  simile  of  the  force  behind  nature  as 
the  hidden  chess  player ;  the  other  the  noble  description  of 
the  end  of  a  true  education. 

Well  known  as  it  is,  I  venture  to  quote  the  latter  as  an 
instance  of  his  style : — 

That  man,  I  think,  has  had  a  liberal  education,  who  has  been 
so  trained  in  youth  that  his  body  is  the  ready  servant  of  his  will, 
and  does  with  ease  and  pleasure  all  the  work  that  as  a  mechan- 
ism it  is  capable  of;  whose  intellect  is  a  clear  cold  logic  engine, 
with  all  its  parts  of  equal  strength, .  and  in  smooth  working 
order;  ready,  like  a  steam  engine,  to  be  turned  to  any  kind  of 
work,  and  spin  the  gossamers  as  well  as  forge  the  anchors  of 
the  mind;  whose  mind  is  stored  with  a  knowledge  of  the  great 

^  See  p.  $ao. 


322  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

the  system  of  M.  Comte,  he  launched  his  well-known  defini- 
tion of  Comtism  as  Catholicism  minus  Christianity,  which 
involved  him  in  a  short  controversy  with  Mr.  Congreve  (see 
"  The  Scientific  Aspects  of  Positivism,"  Lay  Sermons,  p. 
162),  and  with  another  leading  Positivist,  who  sent  him  a 
letter  through  Mr.  Darwin.    Huxley  replied: — 

Jermyn  Street,  March  11,  1869. 

My  dear  Darwin — I  know  quite  enough  of  Mr. to  have 

paid  every  attention  to  what  he  has  to  say,  even  if  you  had  not 
been  his  ambassador. 

I  glanced  over  his  letter  when  I  returned  home  last  night 
very  tired  with  my  two  nights'  chairmanship  at  the  Ethnological 
and  the  Geological  Societies. 

Most  of  it  is  fair  enough,  though  I  must  say  not  helping  me 
to  any  novel  considerations. 

Two  paragraphs,  however,  contained  opinions  which  Mr. 

is  at  perfect  liberty  to  entertain,  but  not,   I   think,  to 

express  to  me. 

The  one  is,  that  I  shaped  what  I  had  to  say  at  Edinburgh 
with  a  view  of  stirring  up  the  prejudices  of  the  Scotch  Presby- 
terians (imagine  how  many  Presbyterians  I  had  in  my  audi- 
ences!) against  Comte. 

The  other  is  the  concluding  paragraph,  in  which  Mr.  

recommends  me  to  " read  Comte"  clearly  implying  that  I  have 
criticised  Comte  without  reading  him. 

You  will  know  how  far  I  am  likely  to  have  committed  either 
of  the  immoralities  thus  laid  to  my  charge. 

At  any  rate,  I  do  not  think  I  care  to  enter  into  more  direct 
relations  with  anyone  who  so  heedlessly  and  unjustifiably  as- 
sumes me  to  be  guilty  of  them.      Therefore  I  shall  content 

myself  with   acknowledging  the  receipt   of   Mr.  *s  letter 

through  you. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Jermyn  Street,  March  17,  1869. 

My  dear  Darwin — After  I  had  sent  my  letter  to  you  the 
other  day  I  thought  how  stupid  I  had  been  not  to  put  in  a  slip 
of  paper  to  say  it  was  meant  for *s  edification. 

I  made  sure  you  would  understand  that  I  wished  it  to  be 
sent  on,  and  wrote  it  (standing  on  the  points  of  my  toes  and 
with  my  tail  up  very  stiff)  with  that  end  in  view. 

[Sketch  of  two  dogs  bristling  up.] 

I  am  getting  so  weary  of  people  writing  to  propose  con- 


324  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

Comte  in  his  later  days  was  an  apostate  from  his  own  creed ; 
his  "  nouveau  grand  Etre  supreme  "  being  as  big  a  fetish  as 
ever  nigger  first  made  and  then  worshipped. — Ever  yours  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  how  he  invariably  submitted 
his  writings  to  the  criticism  of  his  wife  before  they  were 
seen  by  any  other  eye.  To  her  judgment  was  due  the 
toning  down  of  many  a  passage  which  erred  by  excess  of 
vigour,  and  the  clearing  up  of  phrases  which  would  be 
obscure  to  the  public.  In  fact,  if  an  essay  met  with  her 
approval,  he  felt  sure  it  would  not  fail  of  its  effect  when 
published.  Writing  to  her  from  Norwich  on  August  23, 
1868,  he  confesses  himself  with  reference  to  the  lecture  "  On 
a  Piece  of  Chalk  "  :— 

I  met  Grove  who  edits  Macmillan,  at  the  soiree.  He  pulled 
the  proof  of  my  lecture  out  of  his  pocket  and  said,  "  Look  here, 
there  is  one  paragraph  in  your  lecture  I  can  make  neither  top 
nor  tail  of.  I  can't  understand  what  it  means.''  I  looked  to 
where  his  finger  pointed,  and  behold  it  was  the  paragraph  you 
objected  to  when  I  read  you  the  lecture  on  the  sea  shore !  I 
told  him,  and  said  I  should  confess,  however  set  up  it  might 
make  you. 

At  the  beginning  of  September,  he  rejoined  his  wife  and 
family  at  Littlehampton,  "  a  grand  place  for  children,  be- 
cause you  go  up  rather  than  doum  into  the  sea,  and  it  is 
quite  impossible  for  them  to  get  into  mischief  by  falling," 
as  he  described  it  to  his  friend  Dr.  Dohm,  who  came  down 
for  ten  days,  eagerly  looking  forward  "  to  stimulating  walks 
over  stock  and  stone,  to  Tennyson,  Herbert  Spencer,  and 
Harry's  ringing  laugh." 

The  latter  half  of  the  month  he  spent  at  or  near  Dublin, 
serving  upon  the  Commission  on  Science  and  Art  In- 
struction : — 

To-day  (he  writes  on  September  16),  we  shall  be  occupied 
in  inspecting  the  School  of  Science  and  the  Glasnevin  botanical 
and  agricultural  gardens,  and  to-morrow  we  begin  the  session 
work  of  examining  all  the  Irishry,  who  want  jobs  perpetrated. 
It  is  weary  work,  and  the  papers  are  already  beginning  to  tell 
lies  about  us  and  attack  us. 


326  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxii 

will  do  for  it  and  at  the  same  time  (2)  for  whom  it  will  do. 
Now  you  fulfil  the  first  condition  admirably,  but  as  to  the  second 
I  have  very  great  doubts. 

In  the  first  place  the  climate  of  Calcutta  is  not  particularly 
good  for  anyone  who  has  a  tendency  to  dysentery,  and  I  doubt 
very  much  if  you  would  stand  it  for  six  months. 

Secondly,  we  have  a  proverb  that  it  is  not  wise  to  use  razors 
to  cut  blocks. 

The  business  of  the  man  who  is  appointed  to  that  museum 
will  be  to  get  it  into  order.  If  he  does  his  duty  he  will  give  his 
time  and  attention  to  museum  work  pure  and  simple,  and  I 
don't  think  that  (especially  in  an  Indian  climate),  he  has  much 
energy  left  for  anything  else  after  the  day's  work  is  done.  Nam- 
ing and  arranging  specimens  is  a  most  admirable  and  useful 
employment,  but  when  you  have  done  it  is  "  cutting  blocks,"  and 
you,  my  friend,  are  a  most  indubitable  razor,  and  I  do  not  wish 
to  have  your  edge  blunted  in  that  fashion. 

If  it  were  necessary  for  you  to. win  your  own  bread,  one's 
advice  might  be  modified.  Under  such  circumstances  one  must 
do  things  which  are  not  entirely  desirable.  But  for  you  who 
are  your  own  master  and  have  a  career  before  you,  to  bind 
yourself  down  to  work  six  hours  a  day  at  things  you  do  not 
care  about  and  which  others  could  do  just  as  well,  while  you 
are  neglecting  the  things  which  you  do  care  for,  and  which 
others  could  not  do  so  well,  would,  I  think,  be  amazingly  unwise. 

Liberavi  animam !  don't  tell  my  Indian  friends  I  have  dis- 
suaded you,  but  on  my  conscience  I  could  g^ve  no  other  advice. 

We  have  to  thank  you  three  times  over.  In  the  first  place 
for  a  portrait  which  has  taken  its  place  among  those  of  our 
other  friends;  secondly  for  the  great  pleasure  you  gave  my 
little  daughter  Jessie,  by  the  books  you  so  kindly  sent;  and 
thirdly,  for  Fanny  Lewald's  autobiography  which  arrived  a  few 
days  ago. 

Jessie  is  meditating  a  letter  of  thanks  (a  serious  undertak- 
ing), and  when  it  is  sent  the  mother  will  have  a  word  to  say 
for  herself. 

In  the  middle  of  October  scarlet  fever  broke  out  among  my 
children,  and  they  have  all  had  it  in  succession,  except  Jessie, 
who  took  it  seven  years  ago.  The  last  convalescent  is  now  well, 
but  we  had  the  disease  in  the  house  nearly  three  months,  and 
have  been  like  lepers,  cut  off  from  all  communication  with  our 
neighbours  for  that  time. 

We  have  had  a  great  deal  of  anxiety,  and  my  wife  has  been 


i868  NOTE  TO  DARWIN 


329 


An  undated  note  to  Darwin  belongs  to  the  very  end  of 
this  year,  or  to  the  beginning  of  the  next : — 

The  two  volumes  of  the  new  book  have  just  reached  me. 
My  best  thanks  for  them;  and  if  you  can  only  send  me  a  little 
time  for  reading  within  the  next  three  months  you  will  heighten 
the  obligation  twenty-fold.  I  wish  I  had  either  two  heads  or  a 
body  that  needed  no  rest ! 

himself  would  come  in  upon  us  at  dinner,  and  patting  him  on  the 
head,  utter  what  has  become  a  household  word  amongst  us,  **  Make 
yourself  at  home,  and  take  large  mouthfuls." 


CHAPTER   XXIII 
1869 

In  1869  Huxley  published  five  paleontological  papers, 
chiefly  upon  the  Dinosaurs  (see  letter  above  to  Haeckel, 
January  21,  1868).  His  physiological  researches  upon  the 
development  of  parts  of  the  skull,  are  represented  by  a  paper 
for  the  Zoological  Society,  while  the  Introduction  to  the 
Classification  of  Animals  was  a  reprint  this  year  of  the  sub- 
stance of  six  lectures  in  the  first  part  of  the  lectures  on 
Elementary  Comparaiive  Anatomy  (1864),  which  were  out  of 
print,  but  still  in  demand  by  students. 

As  President  of  the  Ethnological  Society,  he  delivered 
an  inaugural  address  "  On  the  Ethnology  and  Archaeology 
of  India,"  on  March  9,  and  another  "  On  the  Ethnology  and 
Archaeology  of  North  America,"  on  April  13.  As  president 
of  the  Society,  moreover,  he  urged  upon  the  Government 
the  advisability  of  forming  a  systematic  serfes  of  photo- 
graphs of  the  various  races  comprehended  in  the  British 
Empire,  and  was  officially  called  upon  to  offer  suggestions 
for  carrying  out  the  project  This  appears  to  be  an  ampli- 
fication of  Sir  Joseph  Fayrer's  plan  in  1866,  with  respect 
to  all  the  tribes  of  India  (see  p.  294,  and  Appendix  I.). 

On  April  7  he  delivered  his  "  Scientific  Education : 
Notes  of  an  After-Dinner  Speech  "  before  the  Philomathic 
Society  at  Liverpool  {ColL  Ess.  iii.  3),  one  part  of  which 
deals  with  the  attitude  of  the  clergy  towards  physical  sci- 
ence, and  expresses  the  necessary  antagonism  between  sci- 
ence and  Roman  Catholic  doctrine  which  appears  more 
forcibly  in  one  of  his  speeches  at  the  School  Board  in 
187 1  (see  p.  384). 

330 


332 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiii 


native  lines  of  study  according  to  their  tastes  and  capacities ; 
but  of  the  earlier  part,*  which  was  to  be  obligatory  upon  all, 
the  report  says: — ^These  four  years  study,  if  properly  em- 
ployed by  the  teachers,  will  constitute  a  complete  prepara- 
tory scientific  course.  However  slight  the  knowledge  of 
details  conferred,  a  wise  teacher  of  any  of  these  subjects  will 
be  able  to  make  that  teaching  thorough ;  and  to  give  the 
scholar  a  notion  of  the  methods  and  of  the  ideas  which  he 
will  meet  with  in  his  further  progress  in  all  branches  of 
physical  science. 

In  fact,  the  fundamental  principle  was  to  begin  with 
Observational  Science,  facts  collected ;  to  proceed  to  Classi- 
ficatory  Science,  facts  arranged;  and  to  end  with  Induc- 
tive Science,  facts  reasoned  upon  and  laws  deduced. 

While  he  was  much  occupied  with  the  theoretical  and 
practical  difficulties  of  such  a  scheme  of  science  teaching 
for  general  use,  he  was  asked  by  his  friend,  the  Rev.  W. 
Rogers  of  Bishopsgate,  if  he  would  not  deliver  a  course  of 
lectures  on  elementary  science  to  boys  of  the  schools  in 
which  the  latter  was  interested. 

He  finally  accepted  in  the  following  letter,  and  as  the 
result,  delivered  twelve  lectures  week  by  week  from  April 
to  June  to  a  large  audience  at  the  London  Institution  in 
Finsbury  Circus,  lectures  not  easily  forgotten  by  the  chil- 
dren who  listened  to  them  nor  by  their  elders: — 

Jermyn  Street,  Feb.  5,  1869. 

My  dear  Rogers — Upon  due  reflection  I  am  not  indisposed 
to  undertake  the  course  of  lessons  we  talked  about  the  other 
day,  though  they  will  cost  nie  a  good  deal  of  trouble  in  various 
ways,  and  at  a  time  of  the  year  when  I  am  getting  to  the  end 
of  my  tether  and  don't  much  like  trouble. 

But  the  scheme  is  too  completely  in  harmony  with  what  (in 
conjunction  with  Tyndall  and  others)  I  have  been  trying  to 
bring  about  in  schools  in  general  —  not  to  render  it  a  great 
temptation  to  me  to  try  to  get  it  into  practical  shape. 

All  I  have  to  stipulate  is  that  we  shall  have  a  clear  under- 
standing on  the  part  of  the  boys  and  teachers  that  the  discourses 
are  to  [be]  Lessons  and  not  talkee-talkee  lectures.  I  should 
like  it  to  be  understood  that  the  boys  are  to  take  notes  and  to 
be  examined  at  the  end  of  the  course.     Of  course  I  cannot 


334 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiii 


and  uttered  a  warning  against  the  possible  degradation  of 
"  a  proper  reverence  for  mathematical  certainty  "  into  "  a 
superstitious  respect  for  all  arguments  arrived  at  by  process 
of  mathematics."  * 

At  the  close  of  the  year,  as  his  own  period  of  office 
came  to  an  end,  it  was  necessary  to  select  a  new  presi- 
dent of  the  Geological.  He  strongly  urged  Professor 
(afterwards  Sir  Joseph)  Prestwich  to  stand,  and  when 
the  latter  consented,  a  few  weeks,  by  the  way,  before 
his  marriage  was  to  take  place,  replied: — 

Jermyn  Street,  Dec,  16,  1869. 

My  dear  Prestwich — Many  thanks  for  your  letter.  Your 
consent  to  become  our  President  for  the  next  period  will  give  as 
unfeigned  satisfaction  to  the  whole  body  of  the  Society  as  it  does 
to  me  and  your  other  personal  friends. 

I  have  looked  upon  the  affair  as  settled  since  our  last  talk, 
and  a  very  great  relief  it  has  been  to  my  mind. 

There  is  no  doubt  public-dinner  speaking  (and  indeed  all 
public  speaking)  is  nervous  work.  I  funk  horribly,  though  I 
never  get  the  least  credit  for  it.  But  it  is  like  swimming,  the 
worst  of  it  is  in  the  first  plunge ;  and  after  you  have  taken  your 
"header"  it's  not  so  bad  (just  like  matrimony,  by  the  way; 
only  don't  be  so  mean  as  to  go  and  tell  a  certain  lady  I  said  so, 
because  I  want  to  stand  well  in  her  books). 

Of  course  you  may  command  me  in  all  ways  in  which  I  can 
possibly  be  of  use.  But  as  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Society,  and 
personally  and  scientifically  popular  with  the  whole  body,  you 
start  with  an  immense  advantage  over  me,  and  will  find  no 
difficulties  before  you. 

We  will  consider  this  business  formally  settled,  and  I  shall 
speak  of  it  officially. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  cannot  place  the  following  letter  to  Matthew  Arnold 
with  certainty,  but  it  must  have  been  written  about  this 
period. t     Everyone  will  sympathise  with  the  situation: — 

*  Sec  Coll.  Ess,  viii.  Introd.  p.  8. 

f  The  most  probable  date  being  1869,  for  on  July  i  of  that  year  he 
dined  with  Matthew  Arnold  at  Harrow. 


336  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiii 

Jermyn  Street. /kh^  7,  1869. 
Private,  Confidential,  Particular. 

My  dear  Flower — I  have  written  to  Quain  *  to  tell  him  that 
I  do  not  propose  to  be  put  in  nomination  for  the  Hunterian  Chair 
this  year.  I  really  cannot  stand  it  with  the  British  Association 
hanging  over  my  head.  So  make  thy  shoulders  ready  for  the 
gown,  and  practise  the  goose-step  in  order  to  march  properly 
behind  the  mace,  and  I  will  come  and  hear  your  inaugural. — 
Ever  yours,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  meeting  of  the  Association  to  which  he  refers  took 
place  at  Exeter,  and  he  writes  of  it  to  Darwin  (September 
28):— 

As  usual,  your  abominable  heresies  were  the  means  of  get- 
ting me  into  all  sorts  of  hot  water  at  the  Association.  Three 
parsons  set  upon  you,  and  if  you  were  the  most  malicious  of 
men  you  could  not  have  wished  them  to  have  made  greater  fools 
of  themselves  than  they  did.  They  got  considerably  chaffed, 
and  that  was  all  they  were  worth.f 

And  to  Tyndall,  whom  an  accident  had  kept  in  Switzer- 
land : — 

After  a  sharp  fight  for  Edinburgh,  Liverpool  was  adopted 
as  the  place  of  meeting  for  the  Association  of  1870,  and  I  am 
to  be  President;  although  the  Times  says  that  my  best  friends 
tremble  for  me.  (I  hope  you  are  not  among  that  particular  lot 
of  my  best  friends.) 

I  think  we  shall  have  a  good  meeting,  and  you  know  you  are 
pledged  to  give  a  lecture  even  if  you  come  with  your  leg  in 
a  sling. 

The  foundation  of  the  Metaphysical  Society  in  1869  was 
not  without  interest  as  a  sign  of  the  times.  As  in  the  new 
birth  of  thought  which  put  a  period  to  the  Middle  Ages, 
so  in  the  Victorian  Renaissance,  a  vast  intellectual  ferment 
had  taken  immediate  shape  in  a  fierce  struggle  with  long 

♦  President  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons. 

f  It  is  perhaps  scarcely  worth  while  exhuming  these  long-forgotten 
arguments  in  their  entirety ;  but  anyone  curious  enough  to  consult 
the  report  of  the  meeting  preserved  in  the  files  of  the  Academy^  will 
find,  among  other  things,  an  entirely  novel  theory  as  to  the  relation 
of  the  Cherubim  to  terrestrial  creation. 


346  t-I^E  ^^  J^kOFESSOk   tiUXLEV  CHAP,  xxili 

of  a  teacher  rather  than  an  iconoclast.  The  question  began 
to  be  not  whether  such  opinions  are  wicked,  but  whether 
from  the  point  of  view  of  scientific  method  they  are  irre- 
fragably  true. 

The  net  philosophical  result  of  the  society's  work  was 
to  distinguish  the  essential  and  the  unessential  differences 
between  the  opposite  parties ;  the  latter  were  to  a  great  ex- 
tent cleared  up ;  but  the  former  remained  all  the  more  clearly 
defined  in  logical  nakedness  for  the  removal  of  the  side 
issues  and  the  personal  idiosyncrasies  which  often  obscured 
the  main  issues.  Indeed,  when  this  point  was  reached  by 
both  parties,  when  the  origins  and  consequences  of  the 
fundamental  principles  on  either  side  had  been  fully  dis- 
cussed and  mutual  misunderstandings  removed  to  the  ut- 
most, so  that  only  the  fundamentals  themselves  remained 
in  debate,  there  was  nothing  left  to  be  done.  The  so- 
ciety, in  fact,  as  Huxley  expressed  it,  "  died  of  too  much 
love." 

Indeed,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that,  despite  the  strong  an- 
tagonism of  principle  and  deductions  from  principle  which 
existed  among  the  members,  the  rule  of  mutual  toleration 
was  well  kept.  The  state  of  feeling  after  ten  years*  open 
struggle  seemed  likely  to  produce  active  collision  between 
representatives  of  the  opposing  schools  at  close  quarters. 
"  We  all  thought  it  would  be  a  case  of  Kilkenny  cats,"  said 
Huxley  many  years  afterwards.  "  Hats  and  coats  would  be 
left  in  the  hall,  but  there  would  be  no  owners  left  to  put 
them  on  again."  But  only  one  flash  of  the  sort  was  elicited. 
One  of  the  speakers  at  an  early  meeting  insisted  on  the 
necessity  of  avoiding  anything  like  moral  disapprobation 
in  the  debates.  There  was  a  pause ;  then  W.  G.  Ward  said : 
"  While  acquiescing  in  this  condition  as  a  general  rule,  I 
think  it  cannot  be  expected  that  Christian  thinkers  shall 
give  no  sign  of  the  horror  with  which  they  would  view 
the  spread  of  such  extreme  opinions  as  those  advocated 
by  Mr.  Huxley."  Another  pause ;  then  Huxley,  thus  chal- 
lenged, replied :  "  As  Dr.  Ward  has  spoken,  I  must  in 
fairness  say  that  it  will  be  very  difficult  for  me  to  con- 
ceal my  feeling  as  to  the  intellectual  degradation  which 


342  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiii 

which  can  only  be  called  purposive,  such  as  moving  to 
recover  its  balance  when  the  board  on  which  it  stands  is 
inclined,  or  scratching  where  it  is  made  uncomfortable,  or 
croaking  when  pressed  in  a  particular  spot.  If  its  spinal 
cord  be  severed,  the  lower  limbs,  disconnected  from  the 
brain,  will  also  perform  actions  of  this  kind.  The  question 
arises,  Is  the  frog  entirely  a  soulless  automaton,  performing 
all  its  actions  directly  in  response  to  external  stimuli,  only 
more  perfectly  and  with  more  delicate  adjustment  when  its 
brain  remains  intact,  or  is  its  soul  distributed  along  its 
spinal  marrow,  so  that  it  can  be  divided  into  two  parts  inde- 
pendent of  one  another  ? 

The  professed  metaphysician  might  perhaps  tend  to 
regard  such  consideration  as  irrelevant;  but  if  the  starting- 
point  of  metaphysics  is  to  be  found  in  psychology,  psychol- 
ogy itself  depends  to  no  small  extent  upon  physiology. 
This  question,  however,  Huxley  did  not  pretend  to  solve. 
In  the  existing  state  of  knowledge  he  believed  it  to  be  in- 
soluble. But  he  thought  it  was  not  without  its  bearing 
upon  the  supposed  relations  of  soul  and  body  in  the  human 
subject,  and  should  serve  to  give  pause  to  current  theories 
on  the  matter. 

His  third  paper,  read  January  ii,  1876,  was  on  the 
"  Evidence  of  the  Miracle  of  the  Resurrection,"  in  which  he 
argued  that  there  was  no  valid  evidence  of  actual  death 
having  taken  place.  His  rejection  of  the  miraculous  had 
led  to  an  invitation  from  some  of  his  opponents  in  the 
society  to  write  a  paper  on  a  definite  miracle,  and  explain 
his  reasons  for  not  accepting  it.  His  choice  of  subject  was 
due  to  two  reasons:  firstly,  it  was  a  cardinal  instance; 
secondly,  it  was  a  miracle  not  worked  by  Christ  Himself, 
and  therefore  a  discussion  of  its  genuineness  could  offer  no 
suggestion  of  personal  fraud,  and  hence  would  avoid  in- 
flicting gratuitous  pain  upon  believers  in  it. 

This  certainty  that  there  exist  many  questions  at  present 
insoluble,  upon  which  it  is  intellectually,  and  indeed  morally 
wrong  to  assert  that  we  have  real  knowledge,  had  long  been 
with  him,  but,  although  he  had  earned  abundant  odium  by 
openly  resisting  the  claims  of  dogmatic  authority,  he  had 


344 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxm 


to  be  the  appropriate  title  of  "agnostic"  It  came  into  my 
head  as  suggestively  antithetic  to  the  "  gnostic  "  of  Church  his- 
tory, who  professed  to  know  so  much  about  the  very  things  of 
which  I  was  ignorant;  and  I  took  the  earliest  opportunity  of 
parading  it  at  our  Society,  to  show  that  I,  too,  had  a  tail,  like 
the  other  foxes.  To  my  great  satisfaction,  the  term  took;  and 
when  the  Spectator  had  stood  godfather  to  it,  any  suspicion  in 
the  minds  of  respectable  people  that  a  knowledge  of  its  parent- 
age might  have  awakened  was,  of  course,  completely  lulled. 

As  for  the  dialectical  powers  he  displayed  in  the  de- 
bates, it  was  generally  acknowledged  that  in  this,  as  well 
as  in  the  power  of  conducting  a  debate,  he  shared  the  pre- 
eminence with  W.  G.  Ward.  Indeed,  a  proposal  was  made 
that  the  perpetual  presidency  in  alternate  years  should  be 
vested  in  these  two;  but  time  and  health  forbade. 

His  part  in  the  debates  is  thus  described  in  a  letter  to 
me  from  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick : — 

Dear  Mr.  Huxley — I  became  a  member  of  the  Metaphysical 
Society,  I  think,  at  its  first  meeting  in  1869;  ^"^>  though  my 
engagements  in  Cambridge  did  not  allow  me  to  attend  regularly, 
I  retain  a  very  distinct  recollection  of  the  part  taken  by  your 
father  in  the  debates  at  which  we  were  present  together.  There 
were  several  members  of  the  Society  with  whose  philosophical 
views  I  had,  on  the  whole,  more  sympathy;  but  there  was  cer- 
tainly no  one  to  whom  I  found  it  more  pleasant  and  more  in- 
structive to  listen.  Indeed  I  soon  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  was  only  one  other  member  of  our  Society  who  could 
be  placed  on  a  par  with  him  as  a  debater,  on  the  subjects  dis- 
cussed at  our  meetings;  and  that  was,  curiously  enough,  a  man 
of  the  most  diametrically  opposite  opinions — W.  G.  Ward,  the 
well-known  advocate  of  Ultramontanism.  Ward  was  by  train- 
ing, and  perhaps  by  nature,  more  of  a  dialectician;  but  your 
father  was  unrivalled  in  the  clearness,  precision,  succinctness, 
and  point  of  his  statements,  in  his  complete  and  ready  grasp 
of  his  own  system  of  philosophical  thought,  and  the  quickness 
and  versatility  with  which  his  thought  at  once  assumed  the  right 
attitude  of  defence  against  any  argument  coming  from  any 
quarter.  I  used  to  think  that  while  others  of  us  could  perhaps 
find,  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  an  answer  more  or  less  effective 
to  some  unexpected  attack,  your  father  seemed  always  able  to 
find  the  answer — I  mean  the  atlswer  that  it  was  reasonable  to 


i869  THE  METAPHYSICAL  SOCIETY  345 

give,  consistently  with  his  general  view,  and  much  the  same 
answer  that  he  would  have  given  if  he  had  been  allowed  the 
fullest  time  for  deliberation. 

The  general  tone  of  the  Metaphysical  Society  was  one  of 
extreme  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  opponents,  and  yotu* 
father's  speaking  formed  no  exception  to  the  general  harmony. 
At  the  same  time  I  seem  to  remember  him  as  the  most  com- 
bative of  all  the  speakers  who  took  a  leading  part  in  the  debates. 
His  habit  of  never  wasting  words,  and  the  edge  naturally  given 
to  his  remarks  by  his  genius  for  clear  and  effective  statement, 
partly  account  for  this  impression ;  still  I  used  to  think  that  he 
liked  fighting,  and  occasionally  liked  to  give  play  to  his  sarcastic 
humour — though  always  strictly  within  the  limits  imposed  by 
courtesy.  I  remember  that  on  one  occasion  when  I  had  read  to 
the  Society  an  essay  on  the  "  Incoherence  of  Empiricism,"  I 
looked  forward  with  some  little  anxiety  to  his  criticisms;  and 
when  they  came,  I  felt  that  my  anxiety  had  not  been  superfluous ; 
he  "  went  for  "  the  weak  points  of  my  argument  in  half  a  dozen 
trenchant  sentences,  of  which  I  shall  not  forget  the  impression. 
It  was  hard  hitting,  though  perfectly  courteous  and  fair. 

I  wish  I  could  remember  what  he  said,  but  the  memory  of  all 
the  words  uttered  in  these  debates  has  now  vanished  from  my 
mind,  though  I  recall  vividly  the  general  impression  that  I  have 
tried  briefly  to  put  down. — Believe  me,  yours  very  truly, 

Henry  Sidgwick. 


CHAPTER   XXIV 
1870 

With  the  year  1870  comes  another  turning-point   in 
Huxley's  career.    From  his  return  to  England  in  1850  till 
1854  he  had  endured  four  years  of  hard  struggle,  of  hope 
deferred ;  his  reputation  as  a  zoologist  had  been  established 
before  his  arrival,  and  was  more  than  confirmed  by  his 
personal  energy  and  power.    When  at  length  settled  in  the 
professorship  at  Jermyn  Street,  he  was  so  far  from  thinking^ 
himself  more  than  a  beginner  who  had  learned  to  work  in 
one  comer  of  the  field  of  knowledge,  still  needing  deep 
research  into  all  kindred  subjects  in* order  to  know  the  true 
bearings  of  his  own  little  portion,  that  he  treated  the  next 
six  years  simply  as  years  of  further  apprenticeship.    Under 
the  suggestive  power  of  the  Origin  of  Species  all  these  scat- 
tered studies  fell  suddenly  into  due  rank  and  order;  the 
philosophic  unity  he  had  so  long  been  seeking  inspired  his 
thought  with  tenfold  vigour,  and  the  battle  at  Oxford  in 
defence  of  the  new  hypothesis  first  brought  him  before  the 
public  eye  as  one  who  not  only  had  the  courage  of  his  con- 
victions when  attacked,  but  could,  and  more,  would,  carry 
the  war  effectively  into  the  enemy's  country.    And  for  the 
next  ten  years  he  was  commonly  identified  with  the  cham- 
pionship of  the  most  unpopular  view  of  the  time ;  a  fighter, 
an  assailant  of  long-established  fallacies,  he  was  too  often 
considered  a  mere  iconoclast,  a  subverter  of  every  other 
well-rooted  institution,  theological,  educational,  or  moral. 

It  is  difficult  now  to  realise  with  what  feelings  he  was 
regarded  in  the  average  respectable  household  in  the  sixties 
and  early  seventies.    His  name  was  anathema;  he  was  a 
346 


348  I'lF-F'  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  zzit 

the  popular  mincl  the  leaven  of  new  ideas  upon  nature  and 
ednration  and  the  progress  of  thought,  he  was  still  con- 
stantly at  work  on  biological  researches  of  his  own,  many 
of  which  took  shape  in  the  Hunterian  lectures  at  the  College 
of  Surgeons  from  1863-1870.  But  from  1870  onward,  the 
time  he  would  spare  to  such  research  grew  less  and  less. 
Vnr  eight  years  he  was  continuously  on  one  Royal  Com- 
mission after  another.  His  administrative  work  on  learned 
societies  continued  to  increase;  in  1869-70  he  held  the 
presidency  of  the  Ethnological  Society,  with  a  view  to 
effecting  the  amalgamation  with  the  Anthropological,  "  the 
plan."  as  he  calls  it.  "  for  uniting  the  Societies  which  occupy 
themselves  with  man  (that  excludes  "  Society  "  which  occu- 
pies itself  chiefly  with  woman)."  He  became  president  of 
the  ( Geological  Society  in  1872,  and  for  nearly  ten  years, 
from  1871  to  1880,  he  was  secretary  of  the  Royal  Society, 
an  office  which  occupied  no  small  portion  of  his  time  and 
thought,  "  for  he  had  formed  a  very  high  ideal  of  the  duties 
of  the  Society  as  the  head  of  science  in  this  country,  and 
was  determined  that  it  should  not  at  least  fall  short  through 
anv  lack  of  exertion  on  his  part "  (Sir  M.  Foster  R.  S 
Obit.  Not.).* 

The  year  1870  itself  was  one  of  the  busiest  he  tia^f  ever 
known.  He  published  one  biological  and  four  palcooto- 
logical  memoirs,  and  sat  on  two  Royal  CommissioQSw  one 
on  the  Contacious  Diseases  Acts,  the  other  on  Scieacdk 
Instruction,  which  continued  until  1875. 

TI:e  three  addresses  which  he  gave  in  the  autmim  amj 
his  e!ec::<  -n  to  the  School  Board  will  be  spoken  o€  beer:  m 
:::e  r.r^:  r^rt  .n'  the  year  he  read  two  papers  at 
".:■-:  ::i^  S-oier..  oi  which  he  was  president,  on 
=rrj.z''::.i.  I^iitri'^ution  of  the  Chief  Modificatiot»  of  Mar- 
xir. :.  '  \r^r:r.  •::i — ar.i  on  *'  The  Ethnology  of 
:: — ■;■■. t  vj:*-<T2r:e  :f  which  appeared  in  the  Cd 
?.-%-.  -:r  f -Iv  ur.  :er  rhe  title  of  "  Some 

:r  zr.'t    --^::'':'r:':al  >:«::-i:v  ar.d  of  the 


«  c 


Appeadix  II. 


350 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CHAP,  xxiv 


est  of  which,  a  parody  of  Sydney  Smith's  dictum  on  Dr. 
Whewell,  Huxley  replied : — 

"  A  Devonshire  Man  "  is  good  enough  to  say  of  me  that 
"  cutting  up  monkeys  is  his  forte,  and  cutting  up  men  is  his 
foible."  With  your  permission,  I  propose  to  cut  up  "  A  Devon- 
shire Man  " ;  but  I  leave  it  to  the  public  to  judge  whether,  when 
so  employed,  my  occupation  is  to  be  referred  to  the  former  or 
to  the  latter  category. 

For  this  he  was  roundly  lectured  by  the  Spectator  on 
January  29,  in  an  article  under  the  heading  "  Pope  Huxley." 
Regardless  of  the  rights  or  wrongs  of  the  controversy,  he 
was  chidden  for  the  abusive  language  of  the  above  para- 
graph, and  told  that  he  was  a  very  good  anatomist,  but  had 
better  not  enter  into  discussions  on  other  subjects. 

The  same  question  is  developed  in  the  address  to  the 
Ethnological  Society  later  in  the  year  and  in  "  Some  Fixed 
Points  in  British  Ethnology  "  (Contemporary  Reznew,  1870), 
and  reiterated  in  an  address  from  the  chair  in  Section  D 
at  the  British  Association  in  1878  at  Dublin,  and  in  a  letter 
to  the  Times  for  October  12,  1887,  apropos  of  a  leading 
article  upon  "  British  Race-types  of  To-day."  (See  i.,  284.) 

Letter-writing  was  difficult  under  such  pressure  of  work, 
but  the  claims  of  absent  friends  were  not  wholly  forgotten, 
though  left  on  one  side  for  a  time,  and  the  warm-hearted 
Dohm,  who  could  not  bear  to  think  himself  forgotten,  man- 
aged to  get  a  letter  out  of  him — not  on  scientific  business. 

26  Abbey  Place, /an.  30,  1870. 

My  dear  Dohrn — In  one  sense  I  deserve  all  the  hard  things 
you  may  have  said  and  thought  about  me,  for  it  is  really  scandal- 
ous and  indefensible  that  I  have  not  written  to  you.  But  in 
another  sense,  I  do  not,  for  I  have  very  often  thought  about  you 
and  your  doings,  and  as  I  have  told  you  once  before,  your 
memory  always  remains  green  in  the  "  happy  family." 

But  what  between  the  incessant  pressure  of  work  and  an 
inborn  aversion  to  letter-writing,  I  become  a  worse  and  worse 
correspondent  the  longer  I  live,  and  unless  I  can  find  one  or 
two  friends  who  will  [be]  content  to  bear  with  my  infirmities 
and  believe  that  however  long  before  we  meet,  I  shall  be  ready 
to  take  them  up  agajti  exactly  where  I  }eft  off,  I  shall  be  a 
friendless  old  qi^iQ, 


3S2 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxrr 


If  (he  said)  the  expectation  raised  by  the  splints  of  the 
horses  Uiat,  in  some  ancestor  of  the  horses,  these  splints  would 
be  found  to  be  complete  digits,  has  been  verified,  we  are  fur- 
nished with  very  strong  reasons  for  looking  for  a  no  less  com- 
plete verification  of  the  expectation  that  the  three-toed  Plagio- 
lophusAike  "avus"  of  the  horse  must  have  been  a  five-toed 
"  atavus  "  at  some  early  period. 


Six  years  afterwards,  this  forecast  of  paleontolog^cal  re- 
search was  to  be  fulfilled,  but  at  the  expense  of  the  European 
ancestry  of  the  horse.  A  series  of  ancestors,  similar  to  these 
European  fossils,  but  still  more  equine,  and  extending  in 
unbroken  order  much  farther  back  in  geological  time,  was 
discovered  in  America.  His  use  of  this  in  his  New  York 
lectures  as  demonstrative  evidence  of  evolution,  and  the  im- 
mediate fulfilment  of  a  further  prophecy  of  his  will  be  told 
in  due  course. 

His  address  to  the  Cambridge  Y.M.C.A.,  "  A  Commen- 
tary on  Descartes'  *  Discourse  touching  the  method  of  using 
reason  rightly,  and  of  seeking  scientific  truth,' "  was  deliv- 
ered on  March  24.  This  was  an  attempt  to  give  this  dis- 
tinctively Christian  audience  some  vision  of  the  world  of 
science  and  philosophy,  which  is  neither  Christian  nor  Un- 
christian, but  Extra-christian,  and  to  show  "  by  what  meth- 
ods the  dwellers  therein  try  to  distinguish  truth  from  false- 
hood, in  regard  to  sofne  of  the  deepest  and  most  difficult 
problems  that  beset  humanity,  "  in  order  to  be  clear  about 
their  actions,  and  to  walk  sure-footedly  in  this  life,"  as  Des- 
cartes says.  For  Descartes  had  laid  the  foundation  of  his 
own  guiding  principle  of  "  active  scepticism,  which  strives 
to  conquer  itself." 

Here  again,  as  in  the  Physical  Basis  of  Life,  but  with 
more  detail,  he  explains  how  far  materialism  is  legitimate, 
is,  in  fact,  a  sort  of  shorthand  idealism.  This  essay,  too, 
contains  the  often-quoted  passage,  apropos  of  the  "  intro- 
duction of  Calvinism  into  science." 

I  protest  that  if  some  great  Power  would  agree  to  make  me 
always  think  what  is  true  and  do  what  is  right,  on  condition  of 
being  turned  into  a  sort  of  clock  and  wound  up  every  morning 
before  I  got  out  of  bed,  I  should  instantly  close  with  the  offer. 


354 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 


be  carried  out  before  his  lectures  on  electricity  at  the  end 
of  the  month.    So  he  writes  on  April  6 : — 

Royal  Institution,  6  April. 

My  dear  Huxley — I  was  rendered  drunk  by  the  excess  of 
prospective  pleasure  when  you  mentioned  the  Eifel  yesterday, 
and  took  no  account  of  my  lectures.  They  begin  on  the  28th, 
and  I  have  studiously  to  this  hour  excluded  them  from  my 
thought.  I  have  made  arrangements  to  see  various  experiments 
involving  the  practical  application  of  electricity  before  the  lec- 
tures begin ;  I  find  myself,  in  short,  ciit  off  from  the  expedition. 
My  regret  on  this  score  is  commensurable  with  the  pleasures  I 
promised  myself.    Confound  the  lectures  I 

And  yours  *  on  Friday  is  creating  a  pretty  hubbub  already. 
I  am  torn  to  pieces  by  women  in  search  of  tickets.  Anything 
that  touches  progenitorship  interests  them.  You  will  have  a 
crammed  house  I  doubt  not. — Yours  ever, 

John  Tyndall. 

Huxley  replied : — 

Geological  Survey  of  England  and  Wales, 

April  6,  1870. 
My  dear  Tyndall — 
DAMN 

the 
L 
e 
c 
t 
u 
r 
e 
s.  T.  H.  H. 

That's  a  practical  application  of  electricity  for  you. 

In  June  he  writes  to  his  wife,  who  had  taken  a  sick 
child  to  the  seaside : — 

I  hear  a  curious  rumour  (which  is  not  for  circulation),  that 
Froude  and  I  have  been  proposed  for  D.C.L.'s  at  Commemora- 
tion, and  that  the  proposition  has  been  bitterly  and  strongly 
opposed  by  Pusey.f    They  say  there  has  been  a  regular  row  in 

♦  On  the  Pedigree  of  the  Horse,  April  8,   1870.   which  was   never 
brought  out  in  book  form. 

t  Huxley  ultimately  received  his  D.C.L.  in  1885. 


356  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

ogy  *  led  him  to  carry  on  a  series  of  investigations  lasting 
over  two  years,  which  took  shape  in  a  paper  upon  "  Peni- 
cillium,  Torula,  and  Bacterium,"  f  first  read  in  Section  D 
at  the  British  Association,  1870;  and  in  his  article  on 
**  Yeast "  in  the  Contemporary  Review  for  December  1872. 
He  laboriously  repeated  Pasteur's  experiments,  and  for 
years  a  quantity  of  flasks  and  cultures  used  in  this  work 
remained  at  South  Kensington,  until  they  were  destroyed 
in  the  eighties.  Of  this  work  Sir  J.  Hooker  writes  to 
him: — 

You  have  made  an  immense  leap  in  the  association  of  forms, 
and  I  cannot  but  suppose  you  approach  the  final  solution.  .  .  . 

I  have  always  fancied  that  it  was  rather  brains  and  boldness, 
than  eyes  or  microscopes  that  the  mycologists  wanted,  and  that 
there  was  more  brains  in  Berkeley's  J  crude  discoveries  than  in 
the  very  best  of  the  French  and  German  microscopic  verifica- 
tions of  them,  who  filch  away  the  credit  of  them  from  under 
Berkeley's  nose,  and  pooh-pooh  his  reasoning,  but  for  which 
we  should  be,  as  we  were. 

In  his  Presidential  Address,  "  Biogenesis  and  Abiogene- 
sis  "  (Coll.  Ess,  viii.  p.  229),  he  discussed  the  rival  theories 
of  spontaneous  generation  and  the  universal  derivation  of 
life  from  precedent  life,  and  professed  his  belief,  as  an  act 
of  philosophic  faith,  that  at  some  remote  period,  life  had 
arisen  out  of  inanimate  matter,  though  there  was  no  evi- 
dence that  anything  of  the  sort  had  occurred  recently,  the 
germ  theory  explaining  many  supposed  cases  of  spontaneous 
generation.  The  history  of  the  subject,  indeed,  showed  "  the 
great  tragedy  of  Science — the  slaying  of  a  beautiful  hy- 
pothesis by  an  ugly  fact — which  is  so  constantly  being 
enacted  under  the  eyes  of  philosophers,"  and  recalled  the 
warning  "  that  it  is  one  thing  to  refute  a  proposition,  and 
another  to  prove  the  truth  of  a  doctrine  which,  implicitly 
or  explicitly,  contradicts  that  proposition." 

Two  letters  to  Dr.  Dohm  refer  to  this  address  and  to 
the  meeting  of  the  Association. 

w 

*  See  p.  405,  s^g.       f  Qttart.  Journ.  Micr.  Set,,  1870,  x.  pp.  355-362. 
t  Rev.  W.  F.  Berkeley. 


358  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

Now  I  think  that  the  "best  service  I  can  render  to  all  you 
enterprising  young  men  is  to  turn  devil's  advocate,  and  do  my 
best  to  pick  holes  in  your  work. 

By  the  way  Mikluko-Maclay  ♦  has  been  here ;  I  have  seen  a 
good  deal  of  him,  and  he  strikes  me  as  a  man  of  very  consider- 
able capacity  and  energy.    He  was  to  return  to  Jena  to-day. 

My  friend  Herbert  Spencer  will  be  glad  to  learn  that  you 
appreciate  his  book.  I  have  been  his  devil's  advocate  for  a 
number  of  years,  and  there  is  no  telling  how  many  brilliant 
speculations  I  have  been  the  means  of  choking  in  an  embryonic 
state. 

My  wife  does  not  know  that  I  am  writing  to  you,  or  she 
would  say  apropos  of  your  last  paragraph  that  you  are  an  en- 
tirely unreasonable  creature  in  your  notions  of  how  friendship 
should  be  manifested,  and  that  you  make  no  allowances  for  the 
oppression  and  exhaustion  of  the  work  entailed  by  what  Jean 
Paul  calls  a  "  Tochtervolles  Haus."  I  hope  I  may  live  to  see 
you  with  at  least  ten  children,  and  then  my  wife  and  I  will  be 
avenged.  Our  children  will  be  married  and  settled  by  that  time, 
and  we  shall  have  time  to  write  every  day  and  get  very  wroth 
when  you  do  not  reply  immediately. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

All  are  well,  the  children  so  grown  you  will  not  know  them. 

/ufy  1 8,  1870. 

My  dear  Dohrn — Notwithstanding  the  severe  symptoms  of 
"  Tochterkrankheit "  under  which  I  labour,  I  find  myself  equal 
to  reply  to  your  letter. 

The  British  Association  meets  in  September  on  the  14th  day 
of  that  month,  which  falls  on  a  Wednesday.  Of  course,  if  you 
come  you  shall  be  provided  for  by  the  best  specimen  of  Liver- 
pool hospitality.  We  have  ample  provision  for  the  entertain- 
ment of  the  "  distinguished  foreigner." 

Will  you  be  so  good  as  to  be  my  special  ambassador  with 
Haeckel  and  Gegenbaur,  and  tell  them  the  same  thing?  It  would 
give  me  and  all  of  us  particular  pleasure  to  see  them  and  to  take 
care  of  them. 

But  I  am  afraid  that  this  wretched  war  will  play  the  very 
deuce  with  our  foreign  friends.     H  you  Germans  do  not  give 

♦  Mikluko-Maclay,  a  Russian  naturalist,  and  close  friend  of 
Haeckel's,  who  later  adventured  himself  alone  among  the  cannibals 
of  New  Guinea. 


360  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxr? 

On  the  2 1  St,  after  the  general  meeting  of  the  Association, 
which  wound  up  the  proceedings,  the  Historical  Society 
of  Lancashire  and  Cheshire  presented  a  diploma  of  honorary 
membership  and  a  gift  of  books  to  Huxley,  Sir  G.  Stokes, 
and  Sir  J.  Hooker,  the  last  three  Presidents  of  the  British 
Association,  and  to  Professors  Tyndall  and  Rankine  and 
Sir  J.  Lubbock,  the  lecturers  at  Liverpool.  Then  Huxley 
was  presented  with  a  mazer  bowl  lined  with  silver,  made 
from  part  of  one  of  the  roof  timbers  of  the  cottage  occupied 
as  his  headquarters  by  Prince  Rupert  during  the  siege  of 
Liverpool.  He  was  rather  taken  aback  when  he  found  the 
bowl  was  filled  with  champagne ;  after  a  moment,  however, 
he  drank  **  success  to  the  good  old  town  of  Liverpool,"  and 
with  a  wave  of  his  hand,  threw  the  rest  on  the  floor,  saying, 
"  I  pour  this  as  a  libation  to  the  tutelary  deities  of  the 
town." 

The  same  evening  he  was  the  g^est  of  the  Sphinx  Club 
at  dinner  at  the  Royal  Hotel,  his  friend  Mr.  P.  H.  Rathbone 
being  in  the  chair,  and  in  proposing  the  toast  of  the  town 
and  trade  of  Liverpool,  declared  that  commerce  was  a 
greater  civiliser  than  all  the  religion  and  all  the  science  ever 
put  together  in  the  world,  for  it  taught  men  to  be  truthful 
and  punctual  and  precise  in  the  execution  of  their  engage- 
ments, and  men  who  were  truthful  and  punctual  and  precise 
in  the  execution  of  their  engagements  had  put  their  feet 
upon  the  first  rung  of  the  ladder  which  led  to  moral  and 
intellectual  elevation. 

There  were  the  usual  clerical  attacks  on  the  address, 
among  the  rest  a  particularly  violent  one  from  a  Unitarian 
pulpit.    Writing  to  Mr.  Samuelson  on  October  5  he  says : — 

Be  not  vexed  on  account  of  the  godly.    They  will  have  their 

way.     I  found  Mr.  's  sermon  awaiting  me  on  my  return 

home.  It  is  an  able  paper,  but  like  the  rest  of  his  cloth  he  will 
not  take  the  trouble  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  ideas 
of  the  man  whom  he  opposes.  At  least  that  is  the  case  if  he 
imagines  be  brings  me  under  the  range  of  his  guns. 

On  October  2  he  writes  to  Tyndall : — 

I  have  not  yet  thanked  you  properly  for  your  great  con- 
tribution to  the  success  of  our  meeting  [1.^.  his  lecture  "  On  the 


362  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

poned  his  Lectures  to  Working  Men  in  London  from  Octo- 
ber to  February  187 1.  On  October  3  he  lectured  in  Leices- 
ter on  "  What  is  to  be  Learned  from  a  Piece  of  Coal,"  a 
parallel  lecture  to  that  of  1868  on  "A  Piece  of  Chalk." 
On  the  17th  and  24th  he  lectured  at  Birmingham  on  "  Ex- 
tinct Animals  intermediate  between  Reptiles  and  Birds  " 
— a  subject  which  he  had  made  peculiarly  his  own  by  long 
study;  and  on  December  29  he  was  at  Bradford,  and  lec- 
tured at  the  Philosophical  Institute  upon  "  The  Formation 
of  Coal "  (Coll.  Ess.  viii.). 

He  was  also  busy  with  two  Royal  Commissions ;  still,  at 
whatever  cost  of  the  energy  and  time  due  to  his  own  investi- 
gations and  those  additional  labours  by  which  he  increased 
his  none  too  abundant  income,  he  felt  it  his  duty,  in  the 
interests  of  his  ideal  of  education,  to  come  forward  as  a 
candidate  for  the  newly-instituted  School  Board  for  London. 
This  was  the  practical  outcome  of  the  rising  interest  in 
education  all  over  the  country ;  on  its  working,  he  felt,  de- 
pended momentous  issues — the  fostering  of  the  moral  and 
physical  well-being  of  the  nation ;  the  quickening  of  its  in- 
telligence and  the  maintenance  of  its  commercial  suprem- 
acy. Withal,  he  desired  to  temper  "  book-learning  "  with 
something  of  the  direct  knowledge  of  nature:  on  the  one 
hand,  as  an  admirable  instrument  of  education,  if  properly 
applied ;  on  the  other,  as  preparing  the  way  for  an  attitude 
of  mind  which  could  appreciate  the  reasons  for  the  immense 
changes  already  beginning  to  operate  in  human  thought. 

Moreover,  he  possessed  a  considerable  knowledge  of  the 
working  of  elementary  education  throughout  the  country, 
owing  to  his  experience  as  examiner  under  the  Science  and 
Art  Department,  the  establishment  of  which  he  describes  as 
"  a  measure  which  came  into  existence  unnoticed,  but  which 
will,  I  believe,  turn  out  to  be  of  more  importance  to  the 
welfare  of  the  people  than  many  political  changes  over 
which   the   noise  of   battle   has   rent   the   air"   (Scientific 

Educatiofty  1869;  C^^'-  ^^^-  "'•  P-  ^3^)- 

Accordingly,  though  with  health  uncertain,  and  in  the 
midst  of  exacting  occupations,  he  felt  that  he  ought  not  to 
stand  aside  at  $0  critical  a  moment,  and  offered  himself  for 


364  LII^E  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

the  science,  theology,  with  the  affection,  religion,  and  either 
crying  for  more  theology  under  the  name  of  religion,  or 
demanding  the  abolition  of  "  religious  "  teaching  in  order 
to  get  rid  of  theology,  a  step  which  he  likens  to  "  burning 
your  ship  to  get  rid  of  the'tjockroaches." 

As  regards  his  actual  work  on  the  Board,  I  must  ex- 
press my  thanks  to  Dr.  J.  H.  Gladstone  for  his  kindness 
in  supplementing  my  information  with  an  account  based 
partly  on  his  own  long  experience  of  the  Board,  partly  on 
the  reminiscences  of  members  contemporary  with  my  father. 

The  Board  met  first  on  December  15,  for  the  purpose 
of  electing  a  Chairman.  As  a  preliminary,  Huxley  pro- 
posed and  carried  a  motion  that  no  salary  be  attached  to 
the  post.  He  was  himself  one  of  the  four  members  pro- 
posed for  the  Chairmanship;  but  the  choice  of  the  Board 
fell  upon  Lord  Lawrence.  In  the  words  of  Dr.  Glad- 
stone : — 

Huxley  at  once  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  proceedings, 
and  continued  to  do  so  till  the  beginning  of  the  year  1872,  when 
ill-health  compelled  him  to  retire. 

At  first  there  was  much  curiosity  both  inside  and  outside  the 
Board  as  to  how  Huxley  would  work  with  the  old  educationists, 
the  clergy,  dissenting  ministers,  and  the  miscellaneous  body  of 
eminent  men  that  comprised  the  first  Board.  His  antagonism 
to  many  of  the  methods  employed  in  elementary  schools  was 
well  known  from  his  various  discourses,  which  had  been  recently 
published  together  under  the  title  of  Lay  Sermons,  Addresses, 
and  Reviews,  I  watched  his  course  with  interest  at  the  time; 
but  for  the  purpose  of  this  sketch  I  have  lately  sought  informa- 
tion from  such  of  the  old  members  of  the  Board  as  are  still 
living,  especially  the  Earl  of  Harrowby,  Bishop  Barry,  the  Rev. 
Dr.  Angus,  and  Mr.  Edward  North  Buxton,  together  with  Mr. 
Croad,  the  Clerk  of  the  Board.  They  soon  found  proof  of  his 
great  energy,  and  his  power  of  expressing  his  views  in  clear 
and  forcible  language;  but  they  also  found  that  with  all  his 
strong  convictions  and  lofty  ideals  he  was  able  and  willing  to 
enter  into  the  views  of  others,  and  to  look  at  a  practical  question 
from  its  several  sides.  He  could  construct  as  well  as  criticise. 
Having  entered  a  public  arena  somewhat  late  in  life,  and  being 
of  a  sensitive  nature,  he  had  scarcely  acquired  that  calmness 
and  pachydermatous  quality  which  is  needful  for  one's  personal 


366  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

upon  the  scheme  of  education  to  be  adopted  in  the  Board 
Schools. 

This  motion  came  up  for  consideration  on  February 
15,  1871.  In  introducing  it,  he  said  that  such  a  committee 
ought  to  consider — 

First,  the  general  nature  and  relations  of  the  schools  which 
may  come  under  the  Board.  Secondly,  the  amount  of  time  to 
be  devoted  to  educational  purposes  in  such  schools ;  and  Thirdly, 
the  subject-matter  of  the  instruction  or  education,  or  teaching, 
or  training,  which  is  to  be  given  in  these  schools. 

But  this,  by  itself,  he  continued,  would  be  incomplete. 
At  one  end  of  the  scale  he  advocated  Infant  schools,  and 
urged  a  connection  with  the  excellent  work  of  the  Ragged 
schools.  At  the  other  end  he  desired  to  see  continuation 
.  schools,  and  ultimately  some  scheme  of  technical  education. 
A  comprehensive  scheme,  indeed,  would  involve  an  educa- 
tional ladder  from  the  gutter  to  the  university,  whereby 
children  of  exceptional  ability  might  reach  the  place  for 
which  nature  had  fitted  them. 

The  subject  matter  of  elementary  instruction  must  be 
limited  by  what  was  practicable  and  desirable.  The  revised 
code  had  done  too  little ;  it  had  taught  the  use  of  the  tools 
of  learning,  while  denying  all  sorts  of  knowledge  on  which 
to  exercise  them  afterwards.  And  here  incidentally  he  re- 
pudiated the  notion  that  the  English  child  was  stupid;  on 
the  contrary,  he  thought  the  two  finest  intellects  in  Europe 
at  this  time  were  the  English  and  the  Italian. 

In  particular  he  advocated  the  teaching  of  "  the  first 
elements  of  physical  science  " ;  "  by  which  I  do  not  mean 
teaching  astronomy  and  the  use  of  the  globes,  and  the  rest 
of  the  abominable  trash — but  a  little  instruction  of  the  cTiild 
in  what  is  the  nature  of  common  things  about  him;  what 
their  properties  are,  and  in  what  relation  this  actual  body  of 
man  stands  to  the  universe  outside  of  it."  "  There  is  no 
form  of  knowledge  or  instruction  in  which  children  take 
greater  interest" 

Drawing  and  music,  too,  he  considered,  should  be  taught 
in  every  elementary  school,  not  to  produce  painters  or 


368  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

things,"  which  he  called  the  scientific  aspect,  for  want  of  a 
better  name. 

"  It  had  been  very  justly  said  that  they  had  a  great  mass  of 
low  half-instructed  population  which  owed  what  little  redemp- 
tion from  ignorance  and  barbarism  it  possessed  mainly  to  the 
efforts  of  the  clergy  of  the  different  denominations.  Any  sys- 
tem of  gaining  the  attention  of  these  people  to  these  matters 
must  be  a  system  connected  with,  or  not  too  rudely  divorced 
from  their  own  system  of  belief.  He  wanted  regulations,  not 
in  accordance  with  what  he  himself  thought  was  right,  but  in 
the  direction  in  which  thought  was  moving.''  He  wanted  an 
elastic  system,  that  did  not  oppose  any  obstacle  to  the  free  play 
of  the  public  mind. 

Huxley  voted  against  all  the  proposed  amendments,  and  in 
favour  of  Mr.  Smith's  motion.  There  were  only  three  who 
voted  against  it;  while  the  three  Roman  Catholic  members  re- 
frained from  voting.  This  basis  of  religious  instruction,  prac- 
tically unaltered,  has  remained  the  law  of  the  Board  ever  since. 

There  was  a  controversy  in  the  papers,  between  Prof.  Hux- 
ley and  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Fremantle,  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
explanations  of  the  Bible  lessons.  Huxley  maintained  that  it 
should  be  purely  grammatical,  geographical,  and  historical  in 
its  nature;  Fremantle  that  it  should  include  sortie  species  of 
distinct  religious  teaching,  but  not  of  a  denominational  char- 
acter.* 

In  taking  up  this  position,  Huxley  expressly  disclaimed 
any  desire  for  a  mere  compromise  to  smooth  over  a  diffi- 
culty. He  supported  what  appeared  to  be  the  only  work- 
able plan  under  the  circumstances,  though  it  was  not  his 
ideal ;  for  he  would  not  have  used  the  Bible  as  the  agency 
for  introducing  the  religious  and  ethical  idea  into  education 
if  he  had  been  dealing  with  a  fresh  and  untouched  popu- 
lation. 

His  appreciation  of  the  literary  and  historical  value  of 
the  Bible,  and  the  effect  it  was  likely  to  produce  upon  the 

•  Cp.  extract  from  Lord  Shaftesbury's  journal  about  this  corre- 
spondence (Life  and  Work  of  Lord  Shaftesbury,  iii.  282).  "  Professor 
Huxley  has  this  definition  of  morality  and  religion :  *  Teach  a  child 
what  is  wise,  that  is  morality.  Teach  him  what  is  wise  and  beautiful, 
that  is  religion!^  Let  no  one  henceforth  despair  of  making  things 
dear  and  of  giving  explanations ! " 


370  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

The  second  is  to  a  correspondent  who  wrote  to  ask  him 
whether  adhesion  to  the  compromise  had  not  rendered  non- 
sensical the  teaching  given  in  a  certain  lesson  upon  the 
finding  of  the  youthful  Jesus  in  the  temple,  when,  after  they 
had  read  the  verse,  "  How  is  it  that  ye  sought  me  ?  Wist  ye 
not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business  ?  "  the  teacher 
asked  the  children  the  name  of  Jesus'  father  and  mother, 
and  accepted  the  simple  answer,  Joseph  and  Mary.  Thus 
the  point  of  the  story,  whether  regarded  as  reality  or  myth, 
is  slurred  over,  the  result  is  perplexity,  the  teaching,  in 
short,  is  bad,  apart  from  all  theory  as  to  the  value  of  the 
Bible. 

In  a  letter  to  the  Chronicle,  which  he  forwarded,  this 
correspondent  suggested  a  continuation  of  the  "  incrimi- 
nated lesson  " : — 

Suppose,  then,  that  an  intelligent  child  of  seven,  who  has 
just  heard  it  read  out  that  Jesus  excused  Himself  to  His  parents 
for  disappearing  for  three  days,  on  the  ground  that  He  was  about 
His  Father's  business,  and  has  then  learned  that  His  father's 
name  was  Joseph,  had  said  "  Please,  teacher,  was  this  the  Jesus 
that  gave  us  the  Lord's  Prayer  ?  "  The  teacher  answers  "  Yes." 
And  suppose  the  child  rejoins,  "  And  is  it  to  His  father  Joseph 
that  he  bids  us  pray  when  we  say  Our  Father?"  But  there 
are  boys  of  nine,  ten,  eleven  years  jn  Board  schools,  and  many 
such  boys  are  intelligent  enough  to  take  up  the  subject  of  the 
lesson  where  the  instructor  left  it.  "  Please,  teacher,"  asks  one 
of  these,  "  what  business  was  it  that  Jesus  had  to  do  for  His 
father  Joseph?  Had  he  stopped  behind  to  get  a  few  orders? 
Was  it  true  that  He  had  been  about  Joseph's  business?  And, 
if  it  was  not  true,  did  He  not  deserve  to  be  punished  ?  " 

Huxley  replied  on  October  i6,  1894: — 

Dear  Sir — I  am  one  with  you  in  hating  "  hush  up  "  as  I  do 
all  other  forms  of  lying ;  but  I  venture  to  submit  that  the  compro- 
mise of  1871  was  not  a  "  hush-up."  H  I  had  taken  it  to  be  such 
I  should  have  refused  to  have  anything  to  do  with  it.  And  more 
specifically,  I  said  in  a  letter  to  the  Times  (see  Times,  29th 
April  1893)  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  controversy,  that 
if  I  had  thought  the  compromise  involved  the  obligatory  teach- 
ing of  such  dogmas  as  the  Incarnation  I  should  have  opposed  it. 

There  has  never  been  the  slightest  ambiguity  about  my  posi- 


372 


Life  of  professor  HOxlev        chai*.  ^^iv 


the  Incarnation  as  warmly  as  that  of  the  Trinity),  it  may  be 
well  to  leave  things  as  they  are. 

All  this  is  for  your  own  eye.  There  is  nothing  in  substance 
that  I  have  not  said  publicly,  but  I  do  not  feel  called  upon  to 
say  it  over  again,  or  get  mixed  up  in  an  utterly  wearisome  con- 
troversy.— I  am,  yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

However,  he  was  unsuccessful  in  his  proposal  that  a 
selection  be  made  of  passages  for  reading  from  the  Bible ; 
the  Board  refused  to  become  censors.  On  May  lo  he 
raised  the  question  of  the  diversion  from  the  education  of 
poor  children  of  charitable  bequests,  which  ought  to  be 
applied  to  the  augmentation  of  the  school  fund.  In  speak- 
ing to  this  motion  he  said  that  the  long  account  of  errors 
and  crimes  of  the  Catholic  Church  was  greatly  redeemed 
by  the  fact  that  that  Church  had  always  borne  in  mind  the 
education  of  the  poor,  and  had  carried  out  the  great  demo- 
cratic idea  that  the  soul  of  every  man  was  of  the  same  value 
in  the  eyes  of  his  Maker. 

The  next  matter  of  importance  in  which  he  took  part 
was  on  June  14,  when  the  Committee  on  the  Scheme 
of  Education  presented  its  first  report.  Dr.  Gladstone 
writes : — 

It  was  a  very  voluminous  document.  The  Committee  had 
met  every  week,  and,  in  the  words  of  Huxley,  "  what  it  had 
endeavoured  to  do,  was  to  obtain  some  order  and  system  and 
uniformity  in  important  matters,  whilst  in  comparatively  unim- 
portant matters  they  thought  some  play  should  be  given  for  the 
activity  of  the  bodies  of  men  into  whose  hands  the  management 
of  the  various  schools  should  be  placed."  The  recommendations 
were  considered  on  June  21  and  July  12,  and  passed  without 
any  material  alterations  or  additions.  They  were  very  much 
the  same  as  existed  in  the  best  elementary  schools  of  the  period. 
Huxley's  chief  interest,  it  may  be  surmised,  was  in  the  sub- 
jects of  instruction.  It  was  passed  that,  in  infants*  schools 
there  should  be  the  Bible,  reading,  writing,  arithmetic,  object 
lessons  of  a  simple  character,  with  some  such  exercise  of  the 
hands  and  eyes  as  is  given  in  the  Kindergarten  system,  music, 
and  drill.  In  junior  and  senior  schools  the  subjects  of  instruc- 
tion were  divided  into  two  classes,  essential  and  discretionary, 
the  essentials  being  the  Bible,  and  the  principles  of  religion  and 


374 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxtv 


Further,  although  the  committee  as  a  whole  recom- 
mended that  discretionary  subjects  should  be  extras,  he 
wished  them  to  be  covered  by  the  general  payment,  in  which 
sense  the  report  was  amended. 

This  Education  Committee  (proceeds  Dr.  Gladstone)  con- 
tinued to  sit,  and  on  November  30  brought  up  a  report  in  favour 
of  the  Prussian  system  of  separate  class-rooms,  to  be  tried  in 
one  school  as  an  experiment.  This  reads  curiously  now  that  it 
has  become  the  system  almost  universally  adopted  in  the  London 
Board  Schools. 

In  regard  to  examinations  Huxley  strongly  supported  the 
view  that  the  teaching  in  all  subjects,  secular  or  sacred,  should 
be  periodically  tested. 

On  December  13,  Huxley  raised  the  question  whether  the 
selection  of  books  and  apparatus  should  be  referred  to  his  Com- 
mittee or  to  the  School  Management  Committee,  and  on  Jan- 
uary 10  following,  a  small  sub-committee  for  that  object  was 
formed.  Almost  immediately  after  this  he  retired  from  the 
Board. 

One  more  speech  of  his,  which  created  a  great  stir  at 
the  time,  must  be  referred  to,  namely  his  expression  of 
undisguised  hostility  to  the  system  of  education  maintained 
by  the  Ultramontane  section  of  the  Roman  Catholics.*  In 
October  the  bye-laws  came  up  for  consideration.  One  of 
them  provided  that  the  Board  should  pay  over  direct  to 
denominational  schools  the  fees  for  poor  children.  This 
he  opposed  on  the  ground  that  it  would  lead  to  repeated 
contests  on  the  Board,  and  further,  might  be  used  as  a  tool 
by  the  Ultramontanes  for  their  own  purposes.  Believing" 
that  their  system  as  set  forth  in  the  syllabus,  of  securing 
complete  possession  of  the  minds  of  those  whom  they  taught 
or  controlled,  was  destructive  to  all  that  was  highest  in  the 
nature  of  mankind,  and  inconsistent  with  intellectual  and 
political  liberty,  he  considered  it  his  earnest  duty  to  oppose 
all  measures  which  would  lead  to  assisting  the  Ultramon- 
tanes in  their  purpose. 

Hereupon  he  was  vehemently  attacked,  for  example,  in 
the  Times  for  his  "  injudicious  and  even  reprehensible  tone  " 

*  Cp.  **  Scientific  Education,"  Co//.  Ess,  iii.  p.  ill. 


376  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

lectual  teaching,  but  what  we  principally  want  is  the  moral 
teaching." 

As  to  the  sub-committee  on  books  and  apparatus,  it  did 
little  at  first,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  Board,  1873,  i^ 
became  better  organised  under  the  presidency  of  the  Rev.  Benja- 
min Waugh.  At  the  commencement  of  the  next  triennial  term 
I  became  the  chairman,  and  continued  to  be  such  for  eighteen 
years.  It  was  our  duty  to  put  into  practice  the  scheme  of 
instruction  which  Huxley  was  mainly  instrumental  in  settling. 
We  were  thus  able  indirectly  to  improve  both  the  means  and 
methods  of  teaching.  The  subjects  of  instruction  have  all  been 
retained  in  the  Curriculum  of  the  London  School  Board,  except, 
perhaps,  "  mensuration  "  and  "  social  economy.'*  The  most  im- 
portant developments  and  additions  have  been  in  the  direction 
of  educating  the  hand  and  eye.  Kindergarten  methods  have 
been  promoted.  Drawing,  on  which  Huxley  laid  more  stress 
than  his  colleagues  generally  did,  has  been  enormously  extended 
and  greatly  revolutionised  in  its  methods.  Object  lessons  and 
elementary  science  have  been  introduced  everywhere,  while 
shorthand,  the  use  of  tools  for  boys,  and  cookery  and  domestic 
economy  for  g^rls  are  becoming  essentials  in  our  schools.  Even- 
ing continuation  schools  have  lately  been  widely  extended. 
Thus  the  impulse  given  by  Huxley  in  the  first  months  of  the 
Board's  existence  has  been  carried  forward  by  others,  and  is 
now  affecting  the  minds  of  the  half  million  of  boys  and  girls 
in  the  Board  Schools  of  London,  and  indirectly  the  still  greater 
number  in  other  schools  throughout  the  land. 

I  must  further  express  my  thanks  to  Bishop  Barry  for 
permission  to  make  use  of  the  following  passages  from  the 
notes  contributed  by  him  to  Dr.  Gladstone : — 

I  had  the  privilege  of  being  a  member  of  his  committee  for 
defining  the  curriculum  of  study,  and  here  also — the  religious 
question  being  disposed  of — I  was  able  to  follow  much  the  same 
line  as  his,  and  I  remember  being  struck  not  only  with  his  clear- 
headed ability,  but  with  his  strong  commonsense,  as  to  what  was 
useful  and  practicable,  and  the  utter  absence  in  him  of  doc- 
trinaire aspiration  after  ideal  impossibilities.  There  was  (I 
think)  very  little  under  his  chairmanship  of  strongly  accentu- 
ated difference  of  opinion. 

In  his  action  on  the  Board  generally  I  was  struck  with  these 
three  characteristics: — First,  his  remarkable  power  of  speaking 


378  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

His  contempt  for  the  idea  of  the  world  into  which  we  were 
born  being  either  a  sort  of  clergyhouse  or  a  market-place,  was 
too  complete  to  be  marked  by  any  eagerness.  But  in  view  of  the 
market-place  idea  he  was  the  less  calm. 

Like  many  others  who  had  not  yet  come  to  know  in  what 
high  esteem  he  held  the  moral  and  spiritual  nature  of  children, 
I  had  thought  he  was  the  advocate  of  mere  secular  studies,  alike 
in  the  nation's  schools,  and  in  its  families.  But  by  contact  with 
him,  this  soon  became  an  impossible  idea.  In  very  early  days  on 
the  Board  a  remark  I  had  made  to  a  mutual  friend  which  im- 
plied this  unjust  idea  was  repeated  to  him.  "  Tell  Waugh  that 
he  talks  too  fast,''  was  his  message  to  me.  I  was  not  long  in 
finding  out  that  this  was  a  very  just  reproof.  .  .  . 

The  two  things  in  his  character  of  which  I  became  most 
conscious  by  contact  with  him,  were  his  childlikeness  and  his 
consideration  for  intellectual  inferiors.  His  arguments  were  as 
transparently  honest  as  the  arguments  of  a  child.  They  might 
or  might  not  seem  wrong  to  others,  but  they  were  never  untrue 
to  himself.  Whether  you  agreed  with  them  or  not,  they  always 
added  greatly  to  the  charm  of  his  personality.  Whether  his  face 
was  lighted  by  his  careless  and  playful  humour  or  his  great 
brows  were  shadowed  by  anger,  he  was  alike  expressing  himself 
with  the  honesty  of  a  child.  What  he  counted  iniquity  he  hated, 
and  what  he  counted  righteous  he  loved  with  the  candour  of  a 
child.  .  .  . 

Of  his  consideration  for  intellectual  inferiors  I,  of  course, 
needed  a  large  share,  and  it  was  never  wanting.  Towering  as 
was  his  intellectual  strength  and  keenness  -above  me,  indeed 
above  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  members  of  the  Board,  he 
did  not  condescend  to  me.  The  result  was  never  humiliating. 
It  had  no  pain  of  any  sort  in  it.  He  was  too  spontaneous  and 
liberal  with  his  consideration  to  seem  conscious  that  he  was 
showing  any.  There  were  many  men  of  religious  note  upon  the 
Board,  of  some  of  whom  I  could  not  say  the  same. 

In  his  most  trenchant  attacks  on  what  he  deemed  wrong  in 
principles,  he  never  descended  to  attack  either  the  sects  which 
held  them  or  the  individuals  who  supported  them,  even  though 
occasionally  much  provocation  was  g^ven  him.  He  might  not 
care  for  peace  with  some  of  the  theories  represented  on  the 
Board,  but  he  had  certainly  and  at  all  times  great  good-will  to 
men. 

As  a  speaker  he  was  delightful.  Few,  clear,  definite,  and 
calm  as  stars  were  the  words  he  spoke.    Nobody  talked  whilst 


38o  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

political  career.    To  one  of  those  who  urged  him  to  stand 
for  Parliament,  he  replied  thus: — 

Nov.  i8,  187 1. 

Dear  Sir — It  has  often  been  suggested  to  me  that  I  should 
seek  for  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons ;  indeed  I  have  reason 
to  think  that  many  persons  suppose  that  I  entered  the  London 
School  Board  simply  as  a  road  to  Parliament. 

But  I  assure  you  that  this  supposition  is  entirely  without 
foundation,  and  that  I  have  never  seriously  entertained  any 
notion  of  the  kind. 

The  work  of  the  School  Board  involves  me  in  no  small 
sacrifices  of  various  kinds,  but  I  went  into  it  with  my  eyes  open, 
and  with  the  clear  conviction  that  it  was  worth  while  to  make 
those  sacrifices  for  the  sake  of  helping  the  Education  Act  into 
practical  operation.  A  year's  experience  has  not  altered  that 
conviction;  but  now  that  the  most  difficult,  if  not  the  most  im- 
portant, part  of  our  work  is  done,  I  begin  to  look  forward  with 
some  anxiety  to  the  time  when  I  shall  be  relieved  of  duties 
which  so  seriously  interfere  with  what  I  regard  as  my  proper 
occupation. 

No  one  can  say  what  the  future  has  in  store  for  him,  but  at 
present  I  know  of  no  inducement,  not  even  the  offer  of  a  seat 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  which  would  lead  me,  even  tem- 
porarily and  partially,  to  forsake  that  work  again. — I  am,  dear 
sir,  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  give  here  a  letter  to  me  from  Sir  Mountstuart  Grant 
Duff,  who  also  at  one  period  was  anxious  to  induce  him  to 
enter  Parliament : — 

Lexden  Park,  Colchester, 
4/^  November  1898. 

Dear  Mr.  Huxley — I  have  met  men  who  seemed  to  me  to 
possess  powers  of  mind  even  greater  than  those  of  your  father 
— his  friend  Henry  Smith  for  example;  but  I  never  met  any 
one  who  gave  me  the  impression  so  much  as  he  did,  that  he 
would  have  gone  to  the  front  in  any  pursuit  in  which  he  had 
seen  fit  to  engage.  Henry  Smith  had,  in  addition  to  his  astonish- 
ing mathematical  genius,  and  his  great  talents  as  a  scholar,  a 
rare  faculty  of  persuasiveness.  Your  father  used  to  speak  with 
much  admiration  and  some  amusement  of  the  way  in  which 
he  managed  to  get  people  to  take  his  view  by  appearing  to  take 
theirs;  but  he  never  could  have  been  a  power  in  a  popular  as- 
sembly, nor  have  carried  with  him  by  the  force  of  his  eloquence. 


382  LI^E  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxiv 

traordinary  gifts  would  have  been  indeed  a  rare  piece  of  good 
fortune,  and  I  should  have  been  able  also  to  have  contributed 
to  the  work  upon  which  you  are  engaged  a  great  many  facts 
whjch  would  have  been  of  interest  to  your  readers.  You  will, 
however,  I  am  sure,  take  the  will  for  the  deed,  and  believe  me, 
very  sincerely  yours.  ^^  g_  ^^^^^  ^^^^ 


— .      / 


384  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxv 

schoolmasters — that  important  business  of  teaching  the 
teachers  that  they  might  set  about  scientific  instruction  in 
the  right  way.*  He  attended  the  British  Association  at 
Edinburgh,  and  laid  down  his  Presidency ;  he  brought  out 
his  "  Manual  of  Vertebrate  Anatomy,"  and  wrote  a  review 
of  "  Mr.  Darwin's  Critics  "  (see  p.  391,  sq,),  while  on  Octo- 
ber 9  he  delivered  an  address  at  the  Midland  Institute, 
Birmingham,  on  "  Administrative  Nihilism  "  (Coll.  Ess.  i.). 
This  address,  written  between  September  21  and  28,  and 
remodelled  later,  was  a  pendant  to  his  educational  cam- 
paign on  the  School  Board ;  a  re-statement  and  justification 
of  what  l^e  had  said  and  done  there.  His  text  was  the  vari- 
ous objections  raised  to  State  interference  with  education ; 
he  dealt  first  with  the  upholders  of  a  kind  of  caste  system, 
men  who  were  willing  enough  to  raise  themselves  and  their 
sons  to  a  higher  social  plane,  but  objected  on  semi-theo- 
logical grounds  to  anyone  from  below  doing  likewise — 
neatly  satirising  them  and  their  notions  of  gentility,  and 
quoting  Plato  in  support  of  his  contention  that  what  is 
wanted  even  more  than  means  to  help  capacity  to  rise  is 
"  machinery  by  which  to  facilitate  the  descent  of  incapacity 
from  the  higher  strata  to  the  lower."  He  repeats  in  new 
phrase  his  warning  "  that  every  man  of  high  natural  ability, 
who  is  both  ignorant  and  miserable,  is  as  great  a  danger 
to  society  as  a  rocket  without  a  stick  is  to  people  who  fire 
it.  Misery  is  a  match  that  never  goes  out;  genius,  as  an 
explosive  power,  beats  gunpowder  hollow :  and  if  know- 
ledge, which  should  give  that  power  guidance,  is  wanting, 
the  chances  are  not  small  that  the  rocket  will  simply  run 
a-muck  among  friends  and  foes." 

Another  class  of  objectors  will  have  it  that  government 
should  be  restricted  to  police  functions,  both  domestic  and 
foreign,  that  any  further  interference  must  do  harm. 

Suppose,  however,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  we  accept 
the  proposition  that  the  functions  of  the  State  may  be  properly 
summed  up  in  the  one  great  negative  commandment — "  Thou 
shalt  not  allow  any  man  to  interfere  with  the  liberty  of  any 

*  Sec  pp.  389,  405,  sf. 


386  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxv 

Of  Mr.  Spencer's  comparison  of  the  State  to  a  living 
body  in  the  interests  of  individualism: — 

I  suppose  it  is  universally  agreed  that  it  would  be  useless 
and  absurd  for  the  State  to  attempt  to  promote  friendship  and 
sympathy  between  man  and  man  directly.  But  I  see  no  reason 
why,  if  it  be  otherwise  expedient,  the  State  may  not  do  some- 
thing towards  that  end  indirectly.  For  example,  I  can  conceive 
the  existence  of  an  Established  Church  which  should  be  a  bless- 
ing to  the  community.  A  Church  in  which,  week  by  week, 
services  should  be  devoted,  not  to  the  iteration  of  abstract  propo- 
sitions in  theology,  but  to  the  setting  before  men's  minds  of  an 
ideal  of  true,  just,  and  pure  living;  a  place  in  which  those  who 
are  weary  of  the  burden  of  daily  cares  should  find  a  moment's 
rest  in  the  contemplation  of  the  higher  life  which  is  possible 
for  all,  though  attained  by  so  few ;  a  place  in  which  the  man  of 
strife  and  of  business  should  have  time  to  think  how  small, 
after  all,  are  the  rewards  he  covets  compared  with  peace  and 
charity.  Depend  upon  it,  if  such  a  Church  existed,  no  one 
would  seek  to  disestablish  it. 

The  sole  order  of  nobility  which,  in  my  judgment,  becomes 
a  philosopher,  is  the  rank  which  he  holds  in  the  estimation  of 
his  fellow-workers,  who  are  the  only  competent  judges  in  such 
matters.  Newton  and  Cuvier  lowered  themselves  when  the  one 
accepted  an  idle  knighthood,  and  the  other  became  a  baron  of 
the  empire.  The  great  men  who  went  to  their  graves  as  Michael 
Faraday  and  George  Grote  seem  to  me  to  have  understood  the 
dignity  of  knowledge  better  when  they  declined  all  such  mere- 
tricious trappings.* 

The  usual  note  of  high  pressure  recurs  in  the  following 
letter,  written  to  thank  Darwin  for  his  new  work,  The 
Descent  of  Man,  and  Sexual  Selection. 

Jermvn  Street,  Feb.  20,  1871. 
My  dear  Darwin — Best  thanks  for  your  new  book,  a  copy 
of  which  I  find  awaiting  me  this  morning.  But  I  wish  you 
would  not  bring  your  books  out  when  I  am  so  busy  with  all  sorts 
of  things.  You  know  I  can't  show  my  face  anywhere  in  society 
without  having  read  them — and  I  consider  it  too  bad. 

*  On  the  other  hand,  he  thought  it  right  and  proper  for  officials,  in 
scientific  as  in  other  departments,  to  accept  such  honours,  as  giving 
them  official  power  and  status.     In  his  own  case,  while  refusing  all 


388 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxv 


jects  has,  I  hope,  secured  the  future  of  Elementary  Science  in 
London.  Cannot  you  get  as  much  done  in  Manchester? — Ever 
yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Sir  Charles  Lyell  was  now  nearly  74  years  old,  and 
though  he  lived  four  years  longer,  age  was  beginning  to 
tell  even  upon  his  vigorous  powers.  A  chance  meeting  with 
him  elicited  the  following  letter : — 

26  Abbey  Place,  July  30,  1871. 

My  dear  Darwin — I  met  Lyell  in  Waterloo  Place  to-day 
walking  with  Carrick  Moore — and  although  what  you  said  the 
other  day  had  prepared  me,  I  was  greatly  shocked  at  his  ap- 
pearance, and  still  more  at  his  speech.  There  is  no  doubt  it  is 
affected  in  the  way  you  describe,  and  the  fact  gives  me  very 
sad  forebodings  about  hinL  The  Fates  send  me  a  swift  and 
speedy  end  whenever  my  time  comes.  I  think  there  is  nothing 
so  lamentable  as  the  spectacle  of  the  wreck  of  a  once  clear  and 
vigorous  mind ! 

I  am  glad  Frank  enjoyed  his  visit  to  us.  He  is  a  great 
favourite  here,  and  I  hope  he  will  understand  that  he  is  free 
of  the  house.  It  was  the  greatest  fun  to  see  Jess  and  Mady  * 
on  their  dignity  with  him.  No  more  kissing,  I  can  tell  you. 
Miss  Mady  was  especially  sublime. 

Six  out  of  our  seven  children  have  the  whooping-cough. 
Need  I  say  therefore  that  the  wife  is  enjoying  herself? 

With  best  regards  to  Mrs.  Darwin  and  your  daughter  (and 
affectionate  love  to  Polly)  believe  me. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  purchase  of  the  microscope,  already  referred  to,  was 
the  subject  of  another  letter  to  Dr.  Dohm,  of  which  only 
the  concluding  paragraph  about  the  School  Board,  is  of 
general  interest.  Unfortunately  the  English  microscope  did 
not  turn  out  a  success,  as  compared  to  the  work  of  the 
Jena  opticians :  this  is  the  "  optical  Sadowa  "  of  the  second 
letter. 

I  fancy  from  what  you  wrote  to  my  wife  that  there  has  been 
some  report  of  my  doings  about  the  School  Board  in  Germany. 
So  I  send  you  the  number  of  the  Contemporary  Review  \  for 

*  Aged  13  and  12  respectively. 

t  Containing  his  article  on  "The  School  Boards."  etc. 


390  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxv 

All  our  children  but  Jessie  have  the  whooping-cough — Per- 
tussis— I  don't  know  your  German  name  for  it. — It  is  distress- 
ing enough  for  them,  but,  I  think,  still  worse  for  their  mother. 
However,  there  are  no  serious  symptoms,  and  I  hope  the  change 
of  air  will  set  them  right. 

They  all  join  with  me  in  best  wishes  and  regrets  that  you 

are  not  coming.     Won't  you  change  your  mind?    We  start  on 

July  31st. — Ever  yours  faithfully,  a-    tt    tt 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

The  summer  holiday  of  1871  was  spent  at  St.  Andrews, 
a  place  rather  laborious  of  approach  at  that  time,  with  all 
the  impedimenta  of  a  large  and  young  family,  but  chosen 
on  account  of  its  nearness  to  Edinburgh,  where  the  British 
Association  met  that  year.  I  well  remember  the  night 
journey  of  some  ten  or  eleven  hours,  the  freshness  of  the 
early  morning  at  Edinburgh,  the  hasty  excursion  with  my 
father  up  the  hill  from  the  station  as  far  as  the  old  High 
Street.  The  return  journey,  however,  was  made  easier  by 
the  kindness  of  Dr.  Matthews  Duncan,  who  put  up  the 
whole  family  for  a  night,  so  as  to  break  the  journey. 

We  stayed  at  Castlemount,  now  belonging  to  Miss 
Paton,  just  opposite  the  ruined  castle.  Among  other  vis- 
itors to  St.  Andrews  known  to  my  father  were  Professors 
Tait  and  Crum  Brown,  who  inveigled  him  into  making  trial 
of  the  "  Royal  and  Ancient "  game,  which  then,  as  now, 
was  the  staple  resource  of  the  famous  little  city.  I  have  a 
vivid  recollection  of  his  being  hopelessly  bunkered  three  or 
four  holes  from  home,  and  can  testify  that  he  bore  the  moral 
strain  with  more  than  usual  calm  as  compared  with  the 
generality  of  golfers.  Indeed,  despite  his  naturally  quick 
temper  and  his  four  years  of  naval  service  at  a  time  when, 
perhaps,  the  traditions  of  a  former  generation  had  not 
wholly  died  out,  he  had  a  special  aversion  to  the  use  of 
expletives ;  and  the  occasional  appearance  of  a  strong  word 
in  his  letters  must  be  put  down  to  a  simple  literary  use 
which  he  would  have  studiously  avoided  in  conversation. 
A  curious  physical  result  followed  the  vigour  with  which 
he  threw  himself  into  the  unwonted  recreation.  For  the 
last  twenty  years  his  only  physical  exercise  had  been  walk- 


392 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  zxv 


science.  For  Mr.  Mivart,  while  twitting  the  generality  of 
men  of  science  with  their  ignorance  of  the  real  doctrines  of 
his  church,  gave  a  reference  to  the  Jesuit  theologian  Suarez, 
the  latest  great  representative  of  scholasticism,  as  following 
St.  Augustine  in  asserting,  not  direct,  but  derivative  crea- 
tion, that  is  to  say,  evolution  from  primordial  matter  endued 
with  certain  powers.  Startled  by  this  statement,  Huxley 
investigated  the  works  of  the  learned  Jesuit,  and  found  not 
only  that  Mr.  Mivart's  reference  to  the  Metaphysical  Dis- 
putations was  not  to  the  point,  but  that  in  the  **  Tractatus 
de  opere  sex  Dierum,"  Suarez  expressly  and  emphatically 
rejects  this  doctrine  and  reprehends  Augustine  for  assert- 
ing it. 

By  great  good  luck  (he  writes  to  Darwin  from  St.  Andrews) 
there  is  an  excellent  library  here,  with  a  good  copy  of  Suarez,  in 
a  dozen  big  folios.  Among  these  I  dived,  to  the  great  astonish- 
ment of  the  librarian,  and  looking  into  them  as  ''the  careful 
robin  eyes  the  delver's  toil "  (vide  Idylls),  I  carried  off  the  two 
venerable  clasped  volumes  which  were  most  promising. 

So  I  have  come  out  in  the  new  character  of  a  defender  of 
Catholic  orthodoxy,  and  upset  Mivart  out  of  the  mouth  of  his 
own  prophet. 

Darwin  himself  was  more  than  pleased  with  the  article, 
and  wrote  enthusiastically  (see  Life  and  Letters,  iii.  148-150). 
A  few  of  his  generous  words  may  be  quoted  to  show  the 
rate  at  which  he  valued  his  friend's  championship. 

What  a  wonderful  man  you  are  to  grapple  with  those  old 
metaphysico-divinity  books.  .  .  .  The  pendulum  is  now  swinging 
against  our  side,  but  I  feel  positive  it  will  soon  swing  the  other 
way;  and  no  mortal  man  will  do  half  as  much  as  you  in  giving 
it  a  start  in  the  right  direction,  as  you  did  at  the  first  com- 
mencement. 

And  again,  after  "  mounting  climax  on  climax,"  he  con- 
tinues : — '*  I  must  tell  you  what  Hooker  said  to  me  a  few 
years  ago.  '  When  I  read  Huxley,  I  feel  quite  infantile  in 
intellect.' " 

This  sketch  of  what  constituted  his  holiday — and  it  was 
not  very  much  busier  than  many  another  holiday — may 
possibly  suggest  what  his  busy  time  must  have  been  like. 


i87i  BREAKIX)WN  IN   HEALTH  353 

Till  the  end  of  the  year  the  immense  amount  of  work 
did  not  apparently  tell  upon  him.  He  rejoiced  in  it.  In 
December  he  remarked  to  his  wife  that  with  all  his  different 
irons  in  the  fire,  he  had  never  felt  his  mind  clearer  or  his 
vigour  greater.  Within  a  week  he  broke  down  quite  sud- 
denly, and  could  neither  work  nor  think.  He  refers  to  this 
in  the  following  letter : — 

Jermyn  Street,  Dee.  23,  1871. 

My  dear  Johnny — You  are  certainly  improving.  As  a 
practitioner  in  the  use  of  cold  steel  myself,  I  have  read  your 
letter  in  to-day's  Nature,  "  mit  Ehrfurcht  und  Bewunderung." 
And  the  best  evidence  of  the  greatness  of  your  achievement  is 
that  it  extracts  this  expression  of  admiration  from  a  poor  devil 
whose  brains  and  body  are  in  a  colloid  state,  and  who  is  off  to 
Brighton  for  a  day  or  two  this  afternoon. 

God  be  with  diee,  my  son,  and  strengthen  the  contents  of 
thy  gall-bladder ! — Ever  thine,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

PS, — Seriously,  I  am  glad  that  at  last  a  protest  has  been 
raised  against  the  process  of  anonymous  self-praise  to  which 
our  friend  is  given.  I  spoke  to  Smith  the  other  day  about  that 
dose  of  it  in  the  "  Quarterly  "  article  on  Spirit-rapping. 


CHAPTER   XXVI 

1872 

Dyspepsia,  that  most  distressing  of  maladies,  had  laid 
firm  hold  upon  him.  He  was  compelled  to  take  entire  rest 
for  a  time.  But  his  first  holiday  produced  no  lasting  effect, 
and  in  the  summer  he  was  again  very  ill.  Then  the  worry 
of  a  troublesome  lawsuit  in  connection  with  the  building 
of  his  new  house  intensified  both  bodily  illness  and  mental 
depression.  He  had  great  fears  of  being  saddled  with  heavy 
costs  at  the  moment  when  he  was  least  capable  of  meeting 
any  new  expense — hardly  able  even  to  aflford  another  much- 
needed  spell  of  rest.  But  in  his  case,  as  in  others,  at  this 
critical  moment  the  circle  of  fellow-workers  in  science  to 
whom  he  was  bound  by  ties  of  friendship,  resolved  that  he 
should  at  least  not  lack  the  means  of  recovery.  In  their 
name  Charles  Darwin  wrote  him  the  following  letter,  of 
which  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether  it  does  more  honour  to 
him  who  sent  it  or  to  him  who  received  it : — 

Down,  Beckenham,  Kent,  April  23,  1873. 
My  dear  Huxley  —  I  have  been  asked  by  some  of  your 
friends  (eighteen  in  number)  to  inform  you  that  they  have 
placed  through  Robarts,  Lubbock  &  Company,  the  sum  of  £2100 
to  your  account  at  your  bankers.  We  have  done  this  to  enable 
you  to  get  such  complete  rest  as  you  may  require  for  the  re- 
establishment  of  your  health;  and  in  doing  this  we  are  con- 
vinced that  we  act  for  the  public  interest,  as  well  as  in  accord- 
ance with  our  most  earnest  desires.  Let  me  assure  you  that 
we  are  all  your  warm  personal  friends,  and  that  there  is  not  a 
stranger  or  mere  acquaintance  amongst  us.  If  you  could  have 
heard  what  was  said,  or  could  have  read  what  was,  as  I  believe, 
our  inmost  thoughts,  you  would  know  that  we  all  feel  towards 

394 


3g6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 

last  year.  Doctors  talk  seriously  to  me,  and  declare  that  all 
sorts  of  wonderful  things  will  happen  if  I  do  not  take  some 
more  efficient  rest  than  I  have  had  for  a  long  time.  My  wife 
adds  her  quota  of  persuasion  and  admonition,  until  I  really  beg^n 
to  think  I  must  do  something,  if  only  to  have  peace. 

What  if  I  were  to  come  and  look  you  up  in  Naples,  some- 
where in  February,  as  soon  as  my  lectures  are  over? 

The  "one-plate  system"  might  cure  me  of  my  incessant 
dyspeptic  nausea.  A  detestable  grub — ^larva  of  Ephestia  elatella 
— ^has  been  devouring  Her  Majesty's  stores  of  biscuits  at  Gibral- 
tar. I  have  had  to  look  into  his  origin,  history,  and  best  way 
of  circumventing  him — and  maybe  I  shall  visit  Gibraltar  and 
perhaps  Malta.  In  that  case,  you  will  see  me  turn  up  some -of 
these  days  at  the  Palazzo  Torlonia. 

Herbert  Spencer  has  written  a  friendly  attack  on  "  Adminis- 
trative Nihilism,"  which  I  will  send  you ;  in  the  same  number  of 
the  Fortnightly  there  is  an  absurd  epicene  splutter  on  the  same 
subject  by  Mill's  step-daughter.  Miss  Helen  Taylor.  I  intended 
to  publish  the  paper  separately,  with  a  note  about  Spencer's 
criticism,  but  I  have  had  no  energy  nor  faculty  to  do  anything 
lately. 

Tell  Lankester,  with  best  regards,  that  I  believe  the  teach- 
ing of  teachers  in  1872  is  arranged,  and  that  I  shall  look  for 
his  help  in  due  course. 

The  "  Happy  family  "  have  had  the  measles  since  you  saw 
them,  but  they  are  well  again. 

I  write  in  Jermyn  Street,  so  they  cannot  send  messages; 
otherwise  there  would  be  a  chorus  from  them  and  the  wife  of 
good  wishes  and  kind  remembrances. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  left  Southampton  on  January  11,  in  the  Malta,  On 
the  1 6th,  he  notes  in  his  diary,  "  I  was  up  just  in  time  to 
see  the  great  portal  of  the  Mediterranean  well.  It  was  a 
lovely  morning,  and  nothing  could  be  grander  than  Ape 
Hill  on  one  side  and  the  Rock  on  the  other,  looking  like 
great  lions  or  sphinxes  on  each  side  of  a  gateway." 

The  morning  after  his  arrival  he  breakfasted  with  Ad- 
miral Hornby,  who  sent  him  over  to  Tangier  in  the  Helicon, 
giving  the  Bishop  of  Gibraltar  a  passage  at  the  same  time. 
This  led  him  to  note  down,  "  How  the  naval  men  love 
Baxter  and  all  his  works."    A  letter  from  Dr.  Hooker  to 


398  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 

his  good  pleasure  for  the  last  scraps ;  of  the  natives  working 
at  the  endless  shadoofs;  of  a  group  of  listeners  around  a 
professional  story-teller — unfinished,  for  he  was  observed 
sketching  them. 

Egypt  left  a  profound  impression  upon  him.  His 
artistic  delight  in  it  apart,  the  antiquities  and  geology  of 
the  country  were  a  vivid  illustration  to  his  trained  eye  of  the 
history  of  man  and  the  influence  upon  him  of  the  surround- 
ing country,  the  link  between  geography  and  history. 

He  left  behind  him  for  a  while  a  most  unexpected 
memorial  of  his  visit.  A  friend  not  long  after  going  to  the 
pyramids,  was  delighted  to  find  himself  thus  adjured  by  a 
donkey-boy,  who  tried  to  cut  out  his  rival  with  **  Not  him 
donkey,  sah ;  him  donkey  bad,  sah ;  my  donkey  good ;  my 
donkey  'Fessor-uxley  donkey,  sah."  It  appears  that  the 
Cairo  donkey-boys  have  a  way  of  naming  their  animals  after 
celebrities  whom  they  have  borne  on  their  backs. 

While  at  Thebes,  on  his  way  down  the  river  again,  he 
received  news  of  the  death  of  the  second  son  of  Matthew 
Arnold,  to  whom  he  wrote  the  following  letter : — 

Thebes,  March  lo,  1872. 

My  dear  Arnold — I  cannot  tell  you  how  shocked  I  was  to 
see  in  the  papers  we  received  yesterday  the  announcement  of 
the  terrible  blow  which  has  fallen  upon  Mrs.  Arnold  and  your- 
self. 

Your  poor  boy  looked  such  a  fine  manly  fellow  the  last  time 
I  saw  him,  when  we  dined  at  your  house,  that  I  had  to  read  the 
paragraph  over  and  over  again  before  I  could  bring  myself  to 
believe  what  I  read.  And  it  is  such  a  grievous  opening  of  a 
wound  hardly  yet  healed  that  I  hardly  dare  to  think  of  the 
grief  which  must  have  bowed  down  Mrs.  Arnold  and  yourself. 

I  hardly  know  whether  I  do  well  in  writing  to  you.  If  such 
trouble  befel  me  there  are  very  few  people  in  the  world  from 
whom  I  could  bear  even  sympathy — but  you  would  be  one  of 
them,  and  therefore  I  hope  that  you  will  forgive  a  condolence 
which  will  reach  you  so  late  as  to  disturb  rather  than  soothe, 
for  the  sake  of  the  hearty  aflfection  which  dictates  it. 

My  wife  has  told  me  of  the  very  kind  letter  you  wrote  her. 
I  was  thoroughly  broken  down  when  I  left  England,  and  did 
not  get  much  better  until  I  fell  into  the  utter  and  absolute 


400 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 


enabled  me  to  fulfil  all  the  engagements  I  had  made  before 
starting ;  and  Donnelly  had  given  me  to  understand  that  **  My 
Lords"  would  not  trouble  their  heads  about  my  stretching  my 
official  leave.  Nevertheless  I  was  very  glad  to  find  the  official 
extension  (which  was  the  effect  of  my  wife's  and  your  and 
Bence  Jones's  friendly  conspiracy)  awaiting  me  at  Cairo.  A 
rapid  journey  home  iHa  Brindisi  might  have  rattled  my  brains 
back  into  the  colloid  state  in  which  they  were  when  I  left  Eng- 
land. Looking  back  through  the  past  six  months  I  begin  to  see 
that  I  have  had  a  narrow  escape  from  a  bad  break-down,  and  I 
am  full  of  good  resolutions. 

As  the  first-fruit  of  these  you  see  that  I  have  given  up  the 
school-board,  and  I  mean  to  keep  clear  of  all  that  semi-political 
work  hereafter.  I  see  that  Sandon  (whom  I  met  at  Alexandria) 
and  Miller  have  followed  my  example,  and  that  Lord  Lawrence 
is  likely  to  go.    What  a  skedaddle ! 

It  seems  very  hard  to  escape,  however.  Since  my  arrival 
here,  on  taking  up  the  Times  I  saw  a  paragraph  about  the  Lord 
Rectorship  of  St.  Andrews.  After  enumerating  a  lot  of  candi- 
dates for  that  honour,  the  paragraph  concluded,  "  But  we  under- 
stand that  at  present  Professor  Huxley  has  the  best  chance." 
It  is  really  too  bad  if  anyone  has  been  making  use  of  my  name 
without  my  permission.  But  I  don't  know  what  to  do  about 
it.  I  had  half  a  mind  to  write  to  Tulloch  to  tell  him  that  I 
can't  and  won't  take  any  such  office,  but  I  should  look  rather 
foolish  if  he  replied  that  it  was  a  mere  newspaper  report,  and 
that  nobody  intended  to  put  me  up. 

Egypt  interested  me  profoundly,  but  I  must  reserve  the  tale 
of  all  I  did  and  saw  there  for  word  of  mouth.  From  Alexandria 
I  went  to  Messina,  and  thence  made  an  excursion  along  the 
lovely  Sicilian  coast  to  Catania  and  Etna.  The  old  g^ant  was 
half  covered  with  snow,  and  this  fact,  which  would  have  tempted 
you  to  go  to  the  top,  stopped  me.  But  I  went  to  the  Val  del 
Bove,  whence  all  the  great  lava  streams  have  flowed  for  the 
last  two  centuries,  and  feasted  my  eyes  with  its  rugged  grandeur. 
From  Messina  I  came  on  here,  and  had  the  great  good  fortune 
to  find  Vesuvius  in  eruption.  Before  this  fact  the  vision  of 
good  Bence  Jones  forbidding  much  exertion  vanished  into  thin 
air,  and  on  Thursday  up  I  went  in  company  with  Ray  Lankester 
and  my  friend  Dohrn's  father,  Dohrn  himself  being  unluckily 
away.  We  had  a  glorious  day,  and  did  not  descend  till  late  at 
night.  The  great  crater  was  not  very  active,  and  contented 
itself  with  throwing  out  great  clouds  of  steam  and  volleys  of 


402  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 

as  scon  as  he  began  to  work  again  in  London,  his  old  enemy 
returned.  Early  hours,  the  avoidance  of  society  and  soci- 
eties, an  hour's  riding  before  starting  at  nine  for  South 
Kensington,  were  all  useless ;  the  whole  year  was  poisoned 
until  a  special  diet  prescribed  by  Dr.  (afterwards  Sir)  An- 
drew Clark,  followed  by  another  trip  abroad,  effected  a  cure. 
I  remember  his  saying  once  that  he  learned  by  sad  ex- 
perience that  such  a  holiday  as  that  in  Egypt  was  no  good 
for  him.  What  he  really  required  was  mountain  air  and 
plenty  of  exercise.    The  following  letters  fill  up  the  outline 

of  this  period : — 

26  Abbey  Place,  May  20,  1872. 

My  dear  Dohrn  —  I  suppose  that  you  are  now  back  in 
Naples,  perambulating  the  Chiaja,  and  looking  ruefully  on  the 
accumulation  of  ashes  on  the  foundations  of  the  aquarium! 
The  papers,  at  any  rate,  tell  us  that  the  ashes  of  Vesuvius  have 
fallen  abundantly  at  Naples.  Moreover,  that  abominable 
municipality  is  sure  to  have  made  the  eruption  an  excuse  for 
all  sorts  of  delays.  May  the  gods  give  you  an  extra  share  of 
temper  and  patience ! 

What  an  unlucky  dog  our  poor  Ray  is,  to  go  and  get  fever 
when  of  all  times  in  the  world's  history  he  should  not  have  had 
it.  However,  I  hear  he  is  better  and  on  his  way  home.  I  hope 
he  will  be  well  enough  when  he  returns  not  only  to  get  his 
Fellowship,  but  to  help  me  in  my  schoolmaster  work  in  June 
and  July. 

I  was  greatly  disgusted  to  miss  you  in  Naples,  but  it  was 
something  to  find  your  father  instead.  What  a  vigorous,  genial 
youngster  of  three  score  and  ten  he  is.  I  declare  I  felt  quite 
aged  beside  him.  We  had  a  glorious  day  on  Vesuvius,  and  be- 
haved very  badly  by  leaving  him  at  the  inn  for  I  do  not  know 
how  many  hours,  while  we  wandered  about  the  cone.  But  he 
had  a  very  charming  young  lady  for  companion,  and  possibly 
had  the  best  of  it.  I  am  very  sorry  that  at  the  last  I  went  off 
in  a  hurry  without  saying  "  Good-bye  "  to  him,  but  I  desired 
Lankester  to  explain,  and  I  am  sure  he  will  have  sympathised 
with  my  anxiety  to  see  Rome. 

I  returned,  thinking  myself  very  well,  but  a  bad  fit  of  dys- 
pepsia seized  me,  and  I  found  myself  obliged  to  be  very  idle 
and  very  careful  of  myself — neither  of  which  things  are  to  my 
taste.  But  I  am  right  again  now,  and  hope  to  have  no  more 
backslidings.    However,  I  am  afraid  I  may  not  be  able  to  attend 


464  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap.  xXvi 

I  have  no  doubt  you  will  get  a  letter  from  him  in  three 
weeks  or  so.  His  name  is  Gregory,  and  you  will  find  him  a 
good-humoured  acute  man  of  the  world,  with  a  very  great  gen- 
eral interest  in  scientific  and  artistic  matters.  Indeed  in  art  I 
believe  he  is  a  considerable  connoisseur. 

I  am  very  grieved  to  hear  of  your  father's  serious  illness. 
At  his  age  cerebral  attacks  are  serious,  and  when  we  spent  so 
many  pleasant  hours  together  at  Naples,  he  seemed  to  have  an 
endless  store  of  vigour — very  much  like  his  son  Anton. 

What  put  it  into  your  head  that  I  had  any  doubt  of  your 
power  of  work?  I  am  ready  to  believe  that  you  are  Hydra  in 
the  matter  of  heads  and  Briareus  in  the  matter  of  hands. 

...  If  you  go  to  Ceylon  I  shall  expect  you  to  come  back 
by  way  of  England.  It's  the  shortest  route  anywhere  from 
India,  though  it  may  not  look  so  on  the  map. 

How  am  I  ?  Oh,  getting  along  and  just  keeping  the  devil  of 
dyspepsia  at  arm's  length.  The  wife  and  other  members  of  the 
H.  F.  are  well,  and  would  send  you  greetings  if  they  knew  I 
was  writing  to  you. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  little  later  Von  Willemoes  Suhm  ("  why  the  deuce 
does  he  have  such  a  long  name,  instead  of  a  handy  mono- 
syllable or  dissylable  like  Dohm  or  Huxley  ?  ")  was  recom- 
mended for  the  post.  He  afterwards  was  one  of  the  scien- 
tific staff  of  the  ChaUcngcTy  and  died  during  the  voyage. 

MORTHOE,  NEAR    BARNSTAPLE,   NORTH    DeVON, 

Au^.  5,  1872. 
My  dear  Dohrn — I  trust  you  have  not  been  very  wroth 
with  me  for  my  long  delay  in  answering  your  last  letter.  For 
the  last  six  weeks  I  have  been  very  busy  lecturing  daily  to  a 
batch  of  schoolmasters,  and  looking  after  their  practical  in- 
struction in  the  laboratory  which  the  Government  has,  at  last, 
given  me.  In  the  "  intervals  of  business  "  I  have  been  taking 
my  share  in  a  battle  which  has  been  raging  between  my  friend 
Hooker  of  Kew  and  his  official  chief.  .  .  .  And  moreover  I  have 
just  had  strength  enough  to  get  my  daily  work  done  and  no 
more,  and  everything  that  could  be  put  off  has  gone  to  the 
wall.  Three  days  ago,  the  "  Happy  Family,"  bag  and  baggage, 
came  to  this  remote  corner,  where  I  propose  to  take  a  couple 
of  months'  entire  rest — and  put  myself  in  order  for  next  winter's 
campaign.    It  is  a  little  village  five  miles  from  the  nearest  town 


4o6  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 

content  myself,  for  many  years,  with  what  seemed  the  next  best 
thing,  namely,  as  full  an  exposition  as  I  could  give,  of  the  char- 
acters of  certain  plants  and  animals,  selected  as  types  of  vege- 
table and  animal  organisation,  by  way  of  introduction  to  sys- 
tematic zoology  and  paleontology. 

There  was  no  laboratory  work,  but  he  would  show  an 
experiment  or  a  dissection  during  the  lecture  or  perhaps 
for  a  few  minutes  after,  when  the  audience  crowded  round 
the  lecture  table. 

The  opportunity  came  in  187 1.  As  he  afterwards  im- 
pressed upon  the  great  city  companies  in  regard  to  technical 
education,  the  teaching  of  science  throughout  the  country 
turned  upon  the  supply  of  trained  teachers.  The  part  to  be 
played  by  elementary  science  under  the  Education  Act  of 
1870,  added  urgency  to  the  question  of  proper  teaching. 
With  this  in  view,  he  organised  a  course  of  instruction  for 
those  who  had  been  preparing  pupils  for  the  examinations 
of  the  Science  and  Art  Department,  "  scientific  mission- 
aries," as  he  described  them  to  Dr.  Dohrn. 

In  the  promotion  of  the  practical  teaching  of  biology  (writes 
the  late  Jeffery  Parker,  Nat.  Sci.  viii.  49),  Huxley's  services 
can  hardly  be  overestimated.  Botanists  had  always  been  in  the 
habit  of  distributing  flowers  to  their  students,  which  they  could 
dissect  or  not  as  they  chose;  animal  histology  was  taught  in 
many  colleges  under  the  name  of  practical  physiology;  and  at 
Oxford  an  excellent  system  of  zoological  work  had  been  estab- 
lished by  the  late  Professor  Rolleston.*  But  the  biological 
laboratory,  as  it  is  now  understood,  may  be  said  to  date  from 
about  1870,  when  Huxley,  with  the  co-operation  of  Professors 

*  **  Rolleston  (Professor  Lankester  writes  to  me)  was  the  first  to 
systematically  conduct  the  study  of  Zoology  and  Comparative  Anat- 
omy in  this  country  by  making  use  of  a  carefully  selected  series  of 
animals.  His  *  types'  were  the  Rat,  the  Common  Pigeon,  the  Frog, 
the  Perch,  the  Crayfish,  Blackbeetle,  Anodon,  Snail,  Earthworm, 
Leech,  Tapeworm.  He  had  a  series  of  dissections  of  these  mounted, 
also  loose  dissections  and  elaborate  MS.  descriptions.  The  student 
went  through  this  series,  dissecting  fresh  specimens  for  himself. 
After  some  ten  years'  experience  Rolleston  printed  his  MS.  directions 
and  notes  as  a  book,  called  Forms  of  Animal  Life. 

"This  all  preceded  the  practical  class  at  South  Kensington  in  1871. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  Rolleston  was  influenced  in  his  plan  by  your 


4IO  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 

familiar  type  of  the  rabbit  or  frog.  This  was  RoUeston's 
practice ;  but  it  may  be  noted  that  Professor  Ray  Lankester 
has  always  maintained  and  further  developed  the  **  original 
Huxleian  plan  of  beginning  with  the  same  microscopic 
forms ''  as  being  a  most  important  philosophic  improvement 
on  RoUeston's  plan,  and  giving,  he  considers,  "  the  truer 
'  twist,'  as  it  were,  to  a  student's  mind." 

When  the  book  was  sent  to  Darwin,  he  wrote  back 
(November  12,  1875): — 

My  dear  Huxley — Many  thanks  for  your  biology,  which 
I  have  read.  It  was  a  real  stroke  of  genius  to  think  of  such  a 
plan.  Lord,  how  I  wish  that  I  had  gone  through  such  a  course. 
— Ever  yours,  C  Darwin. 

A  large  portion  of  his  time  and  energy  was  occupied 
in  the  organisation  of  this  course  of  teaching  for  teachers, 
and  its  elaboration  before  being  launched  on  a  larger  scale 
in  October,  when  the  Biological  Department  of  the  Jermyn 
Street  school  was  transferred  to  the  new  buildings  at  South 
Kensington,  fitted  with  laboratories  which  were  to  excite  his 
friend  Dr.  Dohrn's  envy.  But  he  was  also  at  work  upon  his 
share  of  the  Science  Primers,  so  far  as  his  still  uncertain 
health  allowed.  This  and  the  affairs  of  the  British  Associa- 
tion are  the  subject  of  several  letters  to  Sir  Henry  Roscoe 
and  Dr.  Tyndall. 

26  Abbey  Place,  April  8,  1872. 

My  dear  Roscoe — Many  thanks  for  your  kind  letter  of  wel- 
come. My  long  rest  has  completely  restored  me.  As  my  doctor 
told  me,  I  was  sound,  wind  and  limb,  and  had  merely  worn  my- 
self out.  I  am  not  going  to  do  that  again,  and  you  see  that  I 
have  got  rid  of  the  School  Board.    It  was  an  awful  incubus ! 

Oddly  enough  I  met  the  Ashtons  in  the  Vatican,  and  heard 
about  your  perplexities  touching  Oxford.  I  should  have  advised 
you  to  do  as  you  have  done.  I  think  that  you  have  a  great 
piece  of  work  to  do  at  Owens  College,  and  that  you  will  do  it. 
If  you  had  gone  to  Oxford  you  would  have  sacrificed  all  the 
momentum  you  have  gained  in  Manchester ;  and  would  have  had 
to  beg^n  de  novo,  among  conditions  which,  I  imagine,  it  is  very 
hard  for  a  non-University  man  to  appreciate  and  adjust  him- 
self to. 

I  like  the  look  of  the  '* Primers"  (of  which  Macmillan  has 


412  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 

to  become  of  the  association  if is  to  monopolise  it?*  And 

then  there  was  that  scoundrel,  Louis  Napoleon — to  whom  no 
honest  man  ought  to  speak — gracing  the  scene.  I  am  right  glad 
I  was  out  of  it. 

I  am  at  my  wits'  end  to  suggest  a  lecturer  for  you.  I  wish 
I  could  offer  myself,  but  I  have  refused  everything  of  that  sort 
on  the  score  of  health ;  and  moreover,  I  am  afraid  of  my  wife  f 

What  do  you  say  to  Ramsay?  He  lectures  very  well.  I 
have  done  nothing  whatever  to  the  Primer.  Stewart  sent  me 
Geikie's  letter  this  morning,  and  I  have  asked  Macmillan  to 
send  Geikie  the  proofs  of  my  Primer  so  far  as  they  go.  We 
must  not  overlap  more  than  can  be  helped. 

I  have  not  seen  Hooker  yet  since  my  return.  While  all  this 
row  has  been  going  on,  I  could  not  ask  him  to  do  anything  for 
us.  And  until  X.  is  dead  and  d— d  (officially  at  any  rate),  I  am 
afraid  there  will  be  little  peace  for  him. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

Please  remember  me  very  kindly  to  Mrs.  Roscoe. 

In  a  letter  of  September  25  is  a  reference  to  the  way  in 
which  his  increasing  family  had  outgrown  his  house  in 
Abbey  Place.  Early  in  the  preceding  year,  he  had  come  to 
the  decision  to  buy  a  small  house  in  the  same  neighbour- 
hood, and  add  to  it  so  as  to  give  elbow-room  to  each  and 
all  of  the  family.  This  was  against  the  advice  of  his  friend 
and  legal  adviser,  to  whom  he  wrote  announcing  his  de- 
cision, as  follows.  The  letter  was  adorned  with  a  sketch  of 
an  absurd  cottage,  "  Ye  House ! "  perched  like  a  windmill 
on  a  kind  of  pedestal,  and  with  members  of  the  family 
painfully  ascending  a  ladder  to  the  upper  storey,  above  the 
ominous  legend,  "  Staircase  forgotten." 

March  20,  1 871. 

My  dear  Burton — There  is  something  delightfully  refresh- 
ing in  rushing  into  a  piece  of  practical  work  in  the  teeth  of 
one's  legal  adviser. 

\i  the  lease  of  a  piece  of  ground  whereon  I  am  going  to 
build  mine  house  come  to  you,  will  you  see  if  it's  all  right. — 
Yours  wilfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  house,  No.  4  Marlborough  Place,  stands  on  the 
north  side  of  that  quiet  street,  close  to  its  junction  with 
Abbey  Road.    It  is  next  door  to  the  Presbyterian  Church, 


414  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvi 

Happily  the  man  turned  out  to  have  enough  means  to 
pay  the  bulk  of  the  costs;  but  that  was  no  compensation 
for  the  mental  worry  and  consequent  ill-health  entailed  from 
November  to  June. 

The  only  amusing  point  in  the  whole  affair  was  when 
the  plaintiff's  solicitors  had  the  face  to  file  an  affidavit  before 
the  Vice-Chancellor  himself  in  answer  to  his  strictures  upon 
the  case,  "  about  as  regular  a  proceeding,"  reports  Mr. 
Burton,  "  as  for  a  middy  to  reply  upon  the  Post  Captain 
on  his  own  quarter-deck." 

The  move  was  made  in  the  third  week  of  December 
(1872)  amid  endless  rain  and  mud  and  with  workmen  still 
in  the  house.  It  was  attended  by  one  inconvenience.  He 
writes  to  Darwin  on  December  20,  1872 : — 

I  am  utterly  disgusted  at  having  only  just  received  your 
note  of  Tuesday.  But  the  fact  is,  there  is  a  certain  inconven- 
ience about  having  four  addresses  as  has  been  my  case  for  the 
most  part  of  this  week,  in  consequence  of  our  moving — and  as 
I  have  not  been  to  Jermyn  Street  before  to-day,  I  have  missed 
your  note.  I  should  run  round  to  Queen  Anne  St.  now  on  the 
chance  of  catching  you,  but  I  am  bound  here  by  an  appoint- 
ment. 

One  incident  of  the  move,  however,  was  more  agreeable. 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  took  the  opportunity  of  sending  a  New 
Year's  gift  for  the  new  house,  in  the  shape  of  a  handsome 
clock,  wishing,  as  he  said,  "  to  express  in  some  way  more 
emphatic  than  by  words,  my  sense  of  the  many  kindnesses 
I  have  received  at  your  hands  during  the  twenty  years  of 
our  friendship.  Remembrance  of  the  things  you  have  done 
in  furtherance  of  my  aims,  and  of  the  invaluable  critical  aid 
you  have  given  me,  with  so  much  patience  and  at  so  much 
cost  of  time,  has  often  made  me  feel  how  much  I  owe  you." 

After  a  generous  reference  to  occasions  when  the  warmth 
of  debate  might  have  betrayed  him  into  more  vigorous  ex- 
pressions than  he  intended,  he  concludes : — 

But  inadequately  as  I  may  ordinarily  show  it,  you  will 
(knowing  that  I  am  tolerably  candid)  believe  me  when  I  say 
that  there  is  no  one  whose  judgment  on  all  subjects  I  so  much 
respect,  or  whose  friendship  I  so  highly  valu^, 


1872  MIXED  CLASSES  IN  ANATOMY  ^ij 

days*  work — if  the  fact  that  Mr.  H has  already  filled  the 

office  of  anatomical  Demonstrator  (as  I  understand  from  you) 
does  not  satisfy  them  as  to  his  competency. — I  am,  dear  Madam, 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley 

Miss  S.  Jex  Blake. 

The  last  event  of  the  year  was  that  he  was  elected  by 
the  students  Lord  Rector  of  Aberdeen  University — ^a  posi- 
tion, the  duties  of  which  consist  partly  in  attending  certain 
meetings  of  the  University  Court,  but  more  especially  in 
delivering  an  address.  This,  however,  was  not  required  for 
another  twelvemonth,  and  the  address  on  "  Universities, 
Actual  and  Ideal,'*  was  delivered  in  fulfilment  of  this  duty 
on  February  1874. 


CHAPTER   XXVII 

1873 

The  year  opens  with  a  letter  to  Tyndall,  then  on  a 
lecturing  tour  in  America : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Abbey  Road,  N.W., 

January  i,  1872  [1873]. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  cannot  let  this  day  go  by  without 
wishing  you  a  happy  New  Year,  and  lamenting  your  absence 
from  our  customary  dinner.  But  Hirst  and  Spencer  and 
Michael  Foster  are  coming,  and  they  shall  drink  your  health  in 
champagne  while  I  do  the  like  in  cold  water,  making  up  by  the 
strength  of  my  good  wishes  for  the  weakness  of  the  beverage. 

You  see  I  write  from  the  new  house.  Getting  into  it  was  an 
awful  job,  made  worse  than  needful  by  the  infamous  weather  we 
have  had  for  weeks  and  months,  and  by  the  stupid  delays  of  the 
workmen  whom  we  had  fairly  to  shove  out  at  last  as  we  came 
in.  We  are  settling  down  by  degrees,  and  shall  be  very  com- 
fortable by  and  by,  though  I  do  not  suppose  that  we  shall  be 
able  to  use  the  drawing-room  for  two  or  three  months  to  come. 
I  am  very  glad  to  have  made  the  change,  but  there  is  a  draw- 
back to  everything  in  "  this  here  wale,"'  as  Mrs.  Gamp  says, 
and  my  present  thorn  in  the  flesh  is  a  neighbour,  who  says  I 
have  injured  him  by  certain  operations  in  my  garden,  and  is 
trying  to  get  something  out  of  me  by  Chancery  proceedings. 
Fancy  finding  myself  a  defendant  in  Chancery ! 

It  is  particularly  hard  on  me,  as  I  have  been  especially  care- 
ful to  have  nothing  done  without  Burton's  sanction  and  assur- 
ance that  I  was  quite  safe  in  law;  and  I  would  have  given  up 
anything  rather  than  have  got  into  bother  of  this  kind.  But 
"  sich  is  life." 

You  seem  to  have  been  making  a  Royal  Progress  in  Yankee- 
land.     We  have  been  uncommonly  tickled  with  some  of  the 

418 


1873  LETTER   TO  TYNDALL  ^I^ 

reports  of  your  lectures  which  reached  us,  especially  with  that 
which  spoke  of  your  having  "  a  strong  English  accent." 

The  loss  of  your  assistant  seems  to  have  been  the  only  de- 
duction to  be  made  from  your  success.  I  am  afraid  you  must 
have  felt  it  much  in  all  ways. 

"  My  Lord  "  received  your  telegram  only  after  the  business 
of  "  securing  Hirst "  was  done.  That  is  one  of  the  bright  spots 
in  a  bad  year  for  me.  Goschcn  consulted  Spottiswoode  and  me 
independently  about  the  headship  of  the  new  Naval  College, 
and  was  naturally  considerably  surprised  by  the  fact  that  we 
coincided  in  recommending  Hirst.  .  .  .  The  upshot  was  that 
Goschen  asked  me  to  communicate  with  Hirst  and  see  if  he 
would  be  disposed  to  accept  the  offer.  So  I  did,  and  found  to 
my  great  satisfaction  that  Hirst  took  to  the  notion  very  kindly. 
I  am  sure  he  is  the  very  best  man  for  the  post  to  be  met  with 
in  the  three  kingdoms,  having  that  rare  combination  of  qualities 
by  which  he  gets  on  with  all  manner  of  men,  and  singularly 
attracts  young  fellows.  He  will  not  only  do  his  duty,  but  be 
beloved  for  doing  it,  which  is  what  few  people  can  compass. 

I  have  little  news  to  give  you.  The  tail  of  the  X.- Hooker 
storm  is  drifting  over  the  scientific  sky  in  the  shape  of  fresh 
attacks  by  Owen  on  Hooker.  Hooker  answered  the  last 
angelically,  and  I  hope  they  are  at  an  end. 

The  wife  has  just  come  in  and  sends  her  love  (but  is  careful 
to  add  "second-best").  The  chicks  grow  visibly  and  audibly, 
and  Jess  looks  quite  a  woman.  All  are  well  except  myself,  and  I 
am  getting  better  from  a  fresh  breakdown  of  dyspepsia.  I  find 
that  if  I  am  to  exist  at  all  it  must  be  on  strictly  ascetic  prin- 
ciples, so  there  is  hope  of  my  <lying  in  the  odour  of  sanctity 
yet.  If  you  recollect.  Lancelot  dicl  not  know  that  he  should  **  die 
a  holy  man  "  till  rather  late  in  life.  I  have  forgotten  to  tell  you 
about  the  Rectorship  of  Aberdeen.  1  refused  to  stand  at  first, 
on  the  score  of  health,  and  only  consented  on  condition  that  I 
should  not  be  called  upon  to  do  any  public  work  until  after  the 
long  vacation.  It  was  a  very  hard  fight,  and  although  I  had  an 
absolute  majority  of  over  fifty,  the  mode  of  election  is  such  that 
one  vote,  in  one  of  the  four  nations,  would  have  turned  the 
scale  by  giving  my  opponent  the  majority  in  that  nation.  We 
should  then  have  been  ties,  and  as  the  chancellor,  who  has  under 
such  circumstances  a  Ccisting  vote,  would  have  (I  beHeve)  g^ven 
it  against  me,  I  should  have  been  beaten. 

As  it  is,  the  fact  of  anyone,  who  stinketh  in  the  nostrils  of 
orthodoxy,  beating  a  Scotch  peer  at  his  own  gates  in  the  most 


420  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxvii 

orthodox  of  Scotch  cities,  is  a  curious  sign  of  the  times.  The 
reason  why  they  made  such  a  tremendous  fight  for  me,  is  I 
believe,  that  I  may  carry  on  the  reforms  commenced  by  Grant 
Duff,  my  predecessor.  Unlike  other  Lord  Rectors,  he  of  Aber- 
deen is  a  power  and  can  practically  govern  the  action  of  the 
University  during  his  tenure  of  office. 

I  saw  Pollock  yesterday,  and  he  says  that  they  want  you 
back  again.  Curiously  the  same  desire  is  epidemically  prevalent 
among  your  friends,  not  least  here. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

In  spite  of  his  anxieties,  his  health  was  slowly  improving 
under  careful  regimen.  He  published  no  scientific  memoirs 
this  year,  but  in  addition  to  his  regular  lectures,  he  was 
working  to  finish  his  Manual  of  Invertebrate  Anatomy  and 
his  Introductory  Primer,  and  to  write  his  Aberdeen  address ; 
he  was  also  at  work  upon  the  Pedigree  of  the  Horse  and  on 
Bodily  Motion  and  Consciousness.  He  delivered  a  course  to 
teachers  on  Psychology  and  Physiology,  and  was  much 
occupied  by  the  Royal  Commission  on  Science.  As  a  gov- 
ernor of  Owens  College  he  had  various  meetings  to  attend, 
though  his  duties  did  not  extend,  as  some  of  his  friends 
seem  to  have  thought,  to  the  appointment  of  a  Professor 
of  Physiology  there. 

My  life  (he  writes  to  Sir  Henry  Roscoe)  is  becoming  a 

burden  to  me  because  of .     Why  I  do  not  know,  but  for 

some  reason  people  have  taken  it  into  their  heads  that  I  have 
something  to  do  with  appointments  in  Owens  College,  and  no 
fewer  than  three  men  of  whose  opinion  I  think  highly  have 
spoken  or  written  to  me  urging 's  merits  very  strongly. 

This  summer  he  again  took  a  long  holiday,  thanks  to 
the  generosity  of  his  friends  (see  p.  394),  and  with  better 
results.  He  went  with  his  old  friend  Hooker  to  the  Au- 
vergne,  walking,  geologising,  sketching  and  gradually  dis- 
carding doctor's  orders.  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  has  very  kindly 
written  me  a  letter  from  which  I  give  an  account  of  this 
trip : — 

It  was  during  the  many  excursions  we  took  together,  either 
by  ourselves  or  with  one  of  my  boys,  that  I  knew  him  best  at  his 
best;  and  especially  during  one  of  several  weeks'  duration  in 


i373  WITH    IHX^KKR    IN    TIIK   Al'VKKl'.NK  431 

the  summer  of  1873,  ^'hich  we  spent  in  central  l*Vanee  aiul 
Germany.  He  had  been  seriously  ill,  and  was  sutYerini*  frtiui 
severe  mental  depression.  For  this  he  was  i^rdered  ahittad  hy 
his  physician.  Sir  A.  Clark,  to  which  step  he  olTered  a  htuhlHua 
resistance.  With  Mrs.  Huxley's  approval,  ami  beiuK  luyiielf 
quite  in  the  mood  for  a  holiday,  1  volunteeretl  to  wrr^llr  with 
him,  and  succeeded,  holding  out  as  an  inducement  a  vinil  In  the 
volcanic  region  of  the  Auvergne  with  Scrope's  classical  vnliinie, 
which  we  both  knew  and  admired,  as  a  guide  biNik. 

We  started  on  July  2nd,  I  loaded  with  injunctions  frnin  liib 
physician  as  to  what  his  patient  was  to  eat,  drink,  and  avoidi 
how  much  he  was  to  sleep  and  rest,  how  little  to  talk  and  walk, 
etc.,  that  would  have  made  the  expedition  a  pcrprhial  biiiihrM 
to  me  had  I  not  believed  that  I  knew  enough  of  my  frirn'rb  tiia 
position  and  ailments  to  be  convinced  that  not  only  hralih  l#ul 
happiness  would  be  our  companions  throughout.     Sun-  1 -noiigli, 
for  the  first  few  days,  including  a  short  stay  in  l'ari.*i,  ljii»  bpiiilb 
were  low  indeed,  but  this  gave  me  tlur  opportunity  of  appK-oat 
ing  his  remarkable  command  over  himself  ami  hi:)  i-yir  pr<  s^ni 
consideration  for  his  companion.    Not  a  word  or  ^/aiun-  of  iiri 
tation  ever  escaped  him;  he  exerted  himself  lo  oU 7   ili<-  in 
structions  laid  down;  nay,  more,  he  was  instant  in  hj>.  eiid<  avour 
to  save  me  trouble  at  hotels,  railway  stations,  and  tieki  1  '^i^ifAt. 
Still,  some  mental  recreation  was  rerpjired  to  ex|>idit«'  i**^/^ny, 
and  he  found  it  first  by  picking  up  at  a  lM>';k retail,  a  lii^tof}'  <// 
the  Miracles  of  Lourdes,  whi<:h  were  xUvn  4X'  iiing  tin-  i«  li^ivut 
fervour  of  France,  and  the  interejst  of  her  i><  ieijijh«   pui/li* .     Jfe 
entered  with  enthusiasm  into  the  subjt-'i,  geiiitig  t<^«-ih«r  all 
the  treatises  upon  it,  favourable:  or  th*-  revei5><-,  ijjji  w«-m  ji«,Mfc 
siUc,  and  I  need  hardly  add,  y>'/n  arrivid  at   ili«    <.ori«'lusivi>. 
that  the  so-called  miracles  were  iu  pari   illlJ^joh^  ar»d  ioi   the 
rest  ddusions.     Ak  it  may  i»)i«-re^t    v^i»i-  of   youi    na'liir   \*j 
know  what  his  f/[fm'vjri  wa^  in  ibih  iIk-  larly  sUi^<  of  tin   inaiii 
festations.  I  will  give  it  at  lie  '/^m-  i\  10  mh       It  v^:.^  ii  «  am  </ 
two  peasant  childreu  s>ent  in  \\n   hoH.<  bi  iiionili  0I  «ii«   ya*  iiii*^ 
a  hot  valley  to  coll*:'.*!  h\\*-V.y.  i*jr  ftr«-viv/d  w^isln'l  up  l/»  i-  MMaiiJ, 
when  one  of  lh»rTri  afi«-r  y.**r/[/)uy  'iowfi  op;/«/?»»«    i.  \i*iO  ti,«» 
berating  rock.  uat.  ir.  risir,/.  i;»»ii«i.4yl  wnl-  ii  Mi.ti.:«n'   sii*iy^*j 
tmder  ikiiich  she  baw  ij  <(/Mri  ;•.  ^'j,.i|  J,J/;.nl^.1  il.i  i^hv      !  !.•■  U.im 
fact  being  repor*.*:^]  i'^  rf.«  «».'•«' '/f 'f.«   iliii^i    i  i: 'i.i  n  .■  \i»\M*i^it' 

Soon  after  our  amviJ  ;i»  f  li  111^  j!f    !iM.,i4/     ^*„i^    1.ifi»i«   i.;i*: 

so  far  recovwtd  hit  woMri*.  «-'.;.^«;.  n»  #,1  :,|„.i'  ii..,i  i.i  i./«ii. 
akfiCD  mterebt  ii.  ev*:rythni^  atouo^!  Ui«  iiiu:j«  uih:    1111  « .ifi<i.<ifa'. 


422 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxvii 


where  he  enjoyed  the  conclusion  of  the  service  by  a  military 
band  which  gave  selections  from  the  Figlia  del  Regimento,  but 
above  all  he  appreciated  the  walks  and  drives  to  the  geological 
features  of  the  environs.  He  reluctantly  refrained  from  ascend- 
ing the  Puy  de  Dome,  but  managed  the  Pic  Parion,  Gergovia, 
Royat,  and  other  points  of  interest  without  fatigue.  .  .  . 

After  Clermont  they  visited  the  other  four  great  volcanic 
areas  explored  by  Scrope,  Mont  Dore,  the  Cantal,  Le  Puy, 
and  the  valley  of  the  Ardeche.  Under  the  care  of  his 
friend,  and  relieved  from  the  strain  of  work,  my  father's 
health  rapidly  improved.  He  felt  no  bad  effects  from  a 
night  at  Mont  Dore,  when,  owing  to  the  crowd  of  invalids 
in  the  little  town,  no  better  accommodation  could  be  found 
than  a  couple  of  planks  in  a  cupboard.  Next  day  they 
took  up  their  quarters  in  an  unpretentious  cabaret  at  La 
Tour  d'Auvergne,  one  of  the  villages  on  the  slopes  of  the 
mountain,  a  few  miles  away. 

Here  (writes  Sir  J.  Hooker),  and  for  some  time  afterwards, 
on  our  further  travels,  we  had  many  interesting  and  amusing 
experiences  of  rural  life  in  the  wilder  parts  of  central  France, 
its  poverty,  penury,  and  too  often  its  inconceivable  impositions 
and  overcharges  to  foreigners,  quite  consistently  with  good  feel- 
ing, politeness,  and  readiness  to  assist  in  many  ways. 

By  the  loth  of  July,  nine  days  after  setting  out,  I  felt  satis- 
fied (he  continues)  that  your  father  was  equal  to  an  excursion 
upon  which  he  had  set  his  heart,  to  the  top  of  the  Pic  de  Sancy, 
4000  feet  above  La  Tour  and  7  miles  distant. 

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  friends  made  what  they 
thought  a  new  discovery,  namely  evidence  of  glacial  action 
in  central  France.  Besides  striated  stones  in  the  fields  or 
built  into  the  walls,  they  noticed  the  glaciated  appearance 
of  one  of  the  valleys  descending  from  the  peak,  and  espe- 
cially some  isolated  gigantic  masses  of  rock  on  an  open  part 
of  the  valley,  several  miles  away,  as  to  which  they  debated 
whether  they  were  low  buildings  or  transported  blocks.  Sir 
Joseph  visited  them  next  day,  and  found  they  were  the  latter, 
brought  down  from  the  upper  part  of  the  peak.* 

•  He  published  an  account  of  these  blocks  In  Nature^  xiii.  31,  166, 
but  subsequently  found  that  glaciation  had  been  observed  by  von 
Lassaul  in  1872  and  by  Sir  William  Guise  in  1870. 


424 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvii 


The  following  letters  to  Sir  H.  Roscoe  and  Dr.  Tyndall 
were  written  during  this  tour : — 

Le  Puy,  Haute  Loire,  France, 
July  17,  1873. 

My  dear  Roscoe — Your  vei^  kind  letter  reached  me  jtist  as 
I  was  in  the  hurry  of  getting  away  from  England,  and  I  have 
been  carrying  it  about  in  my  pocket  ever  since. 

Hooker  and  I  have  been  having  a  charming  time  of  it 
among  the  volcanoes  of  the  Auvergne,  and  we  are  now  on  our 
way  to  those  of  the  Velay  and  Vivarrais.  The  weather  has  been 
almost  perfect.  Perhaps  a  few  degrees  of  temperature  could 
have  been  spared  now  and  then,  especially  at  Clermont,  of  which 
somebody  once  said  diat  having  stayed  there  the  climate  of  hell 
would  have  no  terrors  for  him. 

It  has  been  warm  in  the  Mont  Dore  country  and  in  the 
Cantal,  as  it  is  here,  but  we  are  very  high  up,  and  there  is  a 
charming  freshness  and  purity  about  the  air. 

I  do  not  expect  to  be  back  before  the  end  of  September,  and 
my  lectures  begin  somewhere  in  the  second  week  of  October. 
After  they  commence  I  shall  not  be  able  to  leave  London  even 
for  a  day,  but  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  come  to  the  inaugura- 
tion of  your  new  buildings  if  the  ceremony  falls  within  my 
possible  time.  And  you  know  I  am  always  glad  to  be  your 
guest. 

I  am  thriving  wonderfully.  Indeed  all  that  plagues  me  now 
is  my  conscience,  for  idling  about  when  I  feel  full  of  vigour. 
But  I  promised  to  be  obedient,  and  I  am  behaving  better  than 
Auld  Clootie  did  when  he  fell  sick. 

I  hope  you  are  routing  out  the  gout.  This  would  be  the 
place  for  you — any  quantity  of  mineral  waters. 

Pray  remember  me  very  kindly  to  Mrs.  Roscoe,  and  believe 
me,  ever  yours  very  faitfifully,  t.  H.  Huxley. 

Hotel  de  France,  Baden-Baden, 
July  30,  1873. 

My  dear  Tyndall — We  find  ourselves  here  after  a  very 
successful  cruise  in  the  Auvergne  and  Ardeche,  successful  at 
least  so  far  as  beauty  and  geological  interest  go.  The  heat  was 
killing,  and  obliged  us  to  give  up  all  notion  of  going  to  Ursines, 
as  we  had  at  first  intended  to  do.  So  we  turned  our  faces  north 
and  made  for  Grenoble,  hoping  for  a  breath  of  cool  air  from  the 
mountains  of  Dauphiny.     But  Grenoble  was  hotter  even  than 


428 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvii 


and  really  only  the  continuation  of  that  movement.  But  there 
is  nothing  new  in  the  ideas  which  lie  at  the  bottom  of  the 
movement,  nor  is  any  reconcilement  possible  between  free 
thought  and  traditional  authority.  One  or  other  will  have  to 
succumb  after  a  struggle  of  unknown  duration,  which  will  have 
as  side  issues  vast  political  and  social  troubles.  I  have  no  more 
doubt  that  free  thought  will  win  in  the  long  run  than  I  have 
that  I  sit  here  writing  to  you,  or  that  this  free  thought  will 
organise  itself  into  a  coherent  system,  embracing  human  life 
and  the  world  as  one  harmonious  whole.  But  this  organisation 
will  be  the  work  of  generations  of  men,  and  those  who  further 
it  most  will  be  those  who  teach  men  to  rest  in  no  lie,  and  to 
rest  in  no  verbal  delusions.  I  may  be  able  to  help  a  little  in 
this  direction — perhaps  I  may  have  helped  already.  For  the 
present,  however,  I  am  disposed  to  draw  myself  back  entirely 
into  my  own  branch  of  physical  science.  There  is  enough  and 
to  spare  for  me  to  do  in  that  line,  and,  for  years  to  come,  I  do 
not  mean  to  be  tempted  out  of  it. 

Strangely  enough,  this  was  the  one  thing  he  was  des- 
tined not  to  do.  Official  work  multiplied  about  him.  From 
1870  to  1884  only  two  years  passed  without  his  serving  on 
one  or  two  Roval  Commissions.  He  was  Secretarv  of  the 
Royal  Society  from  1871  to  1880,  and  President  from  1883 
to  his  retirement,  owing  to  ill-health,  in  1885.  He  became 
Dean  as  well  as  Professor  of  Biology  in  the  College  of 
Science,  and  Inspector  of  Fisheries.  Though  he  still  man- 
aged to  find  some  time  for  anatomical  investigations,  and 
would  steal  a  precious  hour  or  half  hour  by  driving  back 
from  the  Home  Office  to  his  laboratory  at  South  Kensing- 
ton before  returning  home  to  St.  John's  Wood,  the  amount 
of  such  work  as  he  was  able  to  publish  could  not  be  very 
great. 

His  most  important  contributions  during  this  decennium 
(writes  Sir  M.  Foster)  were  in  part  continuations  of  his  former 
labours,  such  as  the  paper  and  subsequent  full  memoir  on 
Stagonolepis,  which  appeared  in  1875  and  1877,  and  papers  on 
the  Skull.  The  facts  that  he  called  a  communication  to  the 
Royal  Society,  in  1875,*  o"  Amphioxus,  a  preliminary  note, 
and  that  a  paper  read  to  the  Zoological  Society  in   1876,  on 

•Written  1874. 


430 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvii 


him  which  made  his  hand,  when  turned  to  anatomical  science, 
so  heavy  that  he  could  not  lift  it.  Not  even  that  which  was  so 
strong  within  him,  the  duty  of  fulfilling  a  promise,  could  bring 
him  to  the  work.  In  his  room  at  South  Kensington,  where  for 
a  quarter  of  a  century  he  had  laboured  with  such  brilliant  effect, 
there  lay  on  his  working  table  for  months,  indeed  for  years, 
partly  dissected  specimens  of  the  rare  and  little  studied  marine 
animal,  Spirula,  of  which  he  had  promised  to  contribute  an 
account  to  the  Reports  of  the  "  Challenger "  Expedition,  and 
hard  by  lay  the  already  engraven  plates;  there  was  still  wanted 
nothing  more  than  some  further  investigation  and  the  working 
out  of  the  results.  But  it  seemed  as  if  some  hidden  hands  were 
always  being  stretched  out  to  keep  him  from  the  task;  and 
eventually  another  labourer  had  to  complete  it.     (Ibid,) 

The  remaining  letters  of  this  year  include  several  to  Dr. 

Dohrn,  which  show  the  continued  interest  my  father  took  in 

the  great  project  of  the  Biological  Station  at  Naples,  which 

was  carried  through  in  spite  of  many  difficulties.     He  had 

various  books  and  proceedings  of  learned  societies  sent  out 

at  Dr.  Dohm's  request  (I  omit  the  details)  and  proposed  a 

scheme  for  raising  funds  towards  completing  the  building 

when  the  contractor  failed.    The  scheme,  however,  was  not 

put  into  execution. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  FfS.  24,  1873. 

My  dear  Dohrn — I  was  very  glad  to  receive  the  fine  sealed 
letter,  and  to  get  some  news  of  you — though  to  be  sure  there  is 
not  much  of  you  in  the  letter,  but  all  is  "  Station,  Station." 

I  congratulate  you  heartily  on  your  success  with  your  under- 
taking, and  I  only  wish  I  could  see  England  represented  among 
the  applicants  for  tables.  But  you  see  England  is  so  poor,  and 
the  present  price  of  coals  obliges  her  to  economise. 

I  envy  you  your  visit  from  "  Pater  Anchises "  Baer,  and 
rejoice  to  hear  that  the  grand  old  man  is  well  and  strong  enough 
to  entertain  such  a  project.  I  wish  I  could  see  my  way  to  doing 
the  like.  I  have  had  a  long  bout  of  illness — ever  since  August 
— but  I  am  now  very  much  better,  indeed,  I  hope  I  may  say  quite 
well.  The  weariness  of  all  this  has  been  complicated  by  the 
trouble  of  getting  into  a  new  house,  and  in  addition  a  law-suit 
brought  by  a  knavish  neighbour,  in  the  hope  of  extracting  money 
out  of  me. 

I  am  happy  to  say,  however,  that  he  has  just  been  thoroughly 
and  effectually  defeated.    It  has  been  a  new  experience  for  me, 


432  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxvii 

There  is  a  rub  for  you.  If  you  write  to  me  in  English  again  I 
will  send  the  letter  back  without  paying  the  postage. 

In  any  case  let  me  have  a  precise  statement  of  your  financial 
position.  I  may  have  a  chance  of  talking  to  some  Croesus,  and 
the  first  question  he  is  sure  to  ask  me  is — How  am  I  to  know 
that  this  is  a  stable  affair,  and  that  I  am  not  throwing  my  money 
into  the  sea?  .  .  . 

(Referring  to  an  unpleasant  step  it  seemed  necessary  to 
take)  .  .  .  you  must  make  up  your  mind  to  act  decidedly  and 
take  the  consequences.  No  good  is  ever  done  in  this  world 
by  hesitation.  ... 

I  hope  you  are  physically  better.  Look  sharply  after  your 
diet,  take  exercise  and  defy  the  blue-devils,  and  you  will  weather 
the  storm. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Tyndall,  who  had  not  attended  the  1873  meeting  of  the 
British  Association,  had  heard  that  some  local  opposition 
had  been  offered  to  his  election  as  President  for  the  Belfast 
meeting  in  1874,  and  had  written: — 

I  wish  to  heaven  you  had  not  persuaded  me  to  accept  that 
Belfast  duty.  They  do  not  want  me.  .  .  .  But  Spottiswoode 
assures  me  that  no  individual  offered  the  slightest  support  to 
the  two  unscientific  persons  who  showed  opposition. 

The  following  was  written  in  reply : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Sept.  25,  1873. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  am  sure  you  are  mistaken  about  the 

Belfast  people.    That  blundering  idiot  of wanted  to  mak^ 

himself  important  and  get  up  a  sort  of  "  Home  Rule  "  agitation 
in  the  Association,  but  nobody  backed  him  and  he  collapsed.  I 
am  at  your  disposition  for  whatever  you  want  me  to  do,  as  you 
know,  and  I  am  sure  Hooker  is  of  the  same  mind.  We  shall  not 
be  ashamed  when  we  meet  our  enemies  in  the  gate. 

The  grace  of  God  cannot  entirely  have  deserted  you  since 
you  are  aware  of  the  temperature  of  that  ferocious  epistle. 
Reeks,*  whom  I  saw  yesterday,  was  luxuriating  in  it,  and  said 
(confound  his  impudence)  that  it  was  quite  my  style.  I  forgot 
to  tell  him,  by  the  bye,  that  I  had  resigned  in  your  favour  ever 
since  the  famous  letter  to  Carpenter.  Well,  so  long  as  you  are 
better  after  it  there  is  no  great  harm  done. 

*  The  laic  Trcnham  Reeks,  Registrar  of  the  School  of  Mines,  and 
Curator  of  the  Museum  of  Practical  {yeology. 


434  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxvii 

hope  of  some  good  coining  out  of  that  Ashantee  row,  if  only 
in  the  shape  of  rare  vocables. 

My  attention  is  quite  turned  away  from  Anthropological 
matters  at  present,  but  I  will  bear  your  question  in  mind  if 
opportunity  offers. 

A  letter  to  Professor  Rolleston  at  Oxford  gives  a  lively 
account  of  his  own  ailments,  which  could  only  have  been 
written  by  one  now  recovering  from  them,  while  the  illness 
of  another  friend  raised  a  delicate  point  of  honour,  which  he 
laid  before  the  judgment  of  Mr.  Darwin,  more  especially  as 
the  latter  had  been  primarily  concerned  in  the  case. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct.  i6,  1873. 

My  dear  Rolleston — A  note  which  came  from  Mrs.  Rolles- 
ton to  my  wife  the  other  day,  kindly  answering  some  inquiries 
of  ours  about  the  Oxford  Middle  Class  Examination,  gave  us' 
but  a  poor  account  of  your  health. 

This  kind  of  thing  won't  do,  you  know.     Here  is ill, 

and  I  doing  all  I  can  to  persuade  him  to  go  away  and  take  care 
of  himself,  and  now  comes  ill  news  of  you. 

Is  it  dyspeps  again  ?  If  so  follow  in  my  steps.  I  mean  to  go 
about  the  country,  with  somebody  who  can  lecture,  as  the 
"  horrid  example  ''-—cured.  Nothing  but  gross  and  disgusting 
intemperance,  Sir,  was  the  cause  of  all  my  evil.  And  now  that 
I  have  been  a  teetotaller  for  nine  months,  and  have  cut  down 
my  food  supply  to  about  half  of  what  I  used  to  eat,  the  enemy 
is  beaten. 

I  have  carried  my  own  permissive  bill,  and  no  canteen  (ex- 
cept for  my  friends  who  still  sit  in  darkness)  is  allowed  on  the 
premises.  And  as  this  is  the  third  letter  I  have  written  before 
breakfast  (a  thing  I  never  could  achieve  in  the  days  when  I 
wallowed  in  the  stye  of  Epicurus),  you  perceive  that  I  am  as 
vigorous  as  ever  I  was  in  my  life. 

Let  me  have  news  of  you,  and  believe  me — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully.  T.  H.  H. 

AxHENiCUM  Club,  Nifv.  3.  1873. 
My  dear  Darwin — ^You  will  have  heard  (in  fact  I  think  I 
mentioned  the  matter  when  I  paid  you  my  pleasant  visit  the 

other  day)  that is  ill  and  obliged  to  go  away  for  six  months 

to  a  warm  climate.     It  is  a  great  grief  to  me,  as  he  is  a  man 
for  whom  I  have  great  esteem  and  affection,  apart  from  his 


i873  IMPROVEMENT   IN   HEALTH  435 

high  scientific  merits,  and  his  symptoms  are  such  as  cause  very 
g^ave  anxiety.  I  shall  be  happily  disappointed  if  that  accursed 
consumption  has  not  got  hold  of  him. 

The  college  authorities  have  behaved  as  well  as  they  possibly 
could  to  him,  and  I  do  not  suppose  that  his  enforced  retirement 
for  a  while  gives  him  the  least  pecui\iary  anxiety  as  his  people 
are  all  well  off,  and  he  himself  has  an  income  apart  from  his 
college  pay.  Nevertheless,  under  such  circumstances,  a  man 
with  half  a  dozen  children  always  wants  all  the  money  he  can 
lay  hands  on;  and  whether  he  does  or  no,  he  ought  not  to  be 
allowed  to  deprive  himself  of  any,  which  leads  me  to  the  gist  of 
my  letter.  His  name  was  on  your  list  as  one  of  those  hearty 
friends  who  came  to  my  rescue  last  year,  and  it  was  the  only 
name  which  made  me  a  little  uneasy,  for  I  doubted  whether  it 
was  right  for  a  man  with  his  responsibilities  to  make  sacrifices 
of  this  sort.  However,  I  stifled  that  feeling,  not  seeing  what 
else  I  could  do  without  wounding  him.  But  now  my  conscience 
won't  let  me  be,  and  I  do  not  think  that  any  consideration  ought 
to  deter  me  from  getting  his  contribution  back  to  him  somehow 
or  other.  There  is  no  one  to  whose  judgment  on  a  point  of 
honour  I  would  defer  more  readily  than  yours,  and  I  am  quite 
sure  you  will  agree  with  me.  I  really  am  quite  unhappy  and 
ashamed  to  think  of  myself  as  vigorous  and  well  at  the  expense 
of  his  denying  himself  any  rich  man's  caprice  he  might  take  a 
fancy  to. 

So,  my  dear,  good  friend,  let  me  know  what  his  contribution 
was,  that  I  may  get  it  back  to  him  somehow  or  other,  even  if  I 
go  like  Nicodemus  privily  and  by  night  to  his  bankers. — Ever 
yours  faithfully,  T.  H.  H. 


CIIAITER    XXVIII 


1874 

Mv  father's  health  continued  fairly  good  in  1874,  and 
while  rarefnl  to  avoid  excessive  strain  he  was  able  to  under- 
take nearly  as  nuirh  as  before  his  illness  outside  his  r^ular 
work  at  Sotith  Kensinj;jton,  the  Royal  Society,  and  on  the 
Koyal  Cowtiussmu.  To  this  year  belong  three  important 
essays,  erhirational  and  philosophical.  From  February  2; 
to  March  3  he  was  at  Aberdeen,  staying  first  with  Professor 
Bain,  afterwards  with  Mr.  Webster,  in  fulfilment  of  his  fint 
duty  as  U^rd  Rector  *  to  deliver  an  address  to  the  students. 
Taking  as  his  siibj<-<t  **  Universities.  Actual  and  Ideal,"  he 
then  prrn-eerled  to  vindicate,  historically  and  philosophically, 
the  claims  of  natural  science  to  take  the  place  from  which 
it  had  so  long  been  ousted  in  the  universal  culture  which 
a  University  professes  to  j^ive.  More  especially  he  de- 
manded an  improv<*d  system  of  education  in  the  medical 
sch(K>l,  a  point  to  which  he  gave  practical  effect  in  the 
Council  of  the  University. 

In  an  ideal  University,  as  I  ccmccive  it,  a  man  should  be  aMe 
to  obtain  instruct  ion  in  all  forms  of  knowledge,  and  discipline  in 
the  use  of  «'ill  tin-  mctliorls  by  which  knowledge  is  obtained.  In 
such  a  University  the  force  c>f  living  example  should  fire  the 
student  with  a  noble  ambit irin  to  emulate  the  learning-  of  learned 
men,  and  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  explorers  of  new  fields 
of  knowledge.    And  the  very  air  he  breathes  should  be  charged 


*  It  may  be  noted  that  l)fiwc'en   i^Cny  and  i8()0  he  and   Professor 
Bain  were  the  only  Lord  Rectors  of  Aberdeen  University  elected  on 
non-political  groundH. 
436 


i874  LORD  RECTOR  OF   ABERDEEN  437 

with  that  enthusiasm  for  truth,  that  fanaticism  of  veracity, 
which  is  a  greater  possession  than  much  learning;  a  nohler  gift 
than  the  power  of  increasing  knowledge;  by  so  much  greater 
and  nobler  than  these,  as  the  moral  nature  of  man  is  greater 
than  the  intellectual;  for  veracity  is  the  heart  of  morality. 
(Coll.  Ess,  iii,  189,  sqq.) 

As  for  the  "  so-called  '  conflict  of  studies/ "  he  ex- 
claims— 

One  might  as  well  inquire  which  of  the  terms  of  a  Rule  of 
Three  sum  one  ought  to  know  in  order  to  get  a  trustworthy 
result.  Practical  life  is  such  a  sum,  in  which  your  duty  multi- 
plied into  your  cap^icity  and  divided  by  your  circumstances  gives 
you  the  fourth  term  in  the  proportion,  which  is  your  deserts, 
with  great  accuracy. 

The  knowledge  on  which  medical  practice  should  be 
based  is  "  the  sort  of  practical,  familiar,  finger-end  know- 
ledge which  a  watchmaker  has  of  a  watch,''  the  knowledge 
gained  in  the  dissecting-room  and  laboratory, 

• 

Until  each  of  the  greater  truths  of  anatomy  and  physiology 
has  become  an  organic  part  of  your  minds — until  you  would 
know  them  if  you  were  roused  and  questioned  in  the  middle  of 
the  night,  as  a  man  knows  the  geography  of  his  native  place  and 
the  daily  life  of  his  home.  That  is  the  sort  of  knowledge  which, 
once  obtained,  is  a  life-long  possession.  Other  occupations  may 
fill  your  minds — it  may  grow  dim  and  seem  to  be  forgotten — 
but  there  it  is,  like  the  inscription  on  a  battered  and  defaced 
coin,  which  comes  out  when  you  warm  it. 

Hence  the  necessity  to  concentrate  the  attention  on 
these  cardinal  truths,  and  to  discard  a  number  of  extraneous 
subjects  commonly  supposed  to  be  requisite  whether  for 
general  culture  of  the  medical  student  or  to  enable  him  to 
correct  the  possible  mistakes  of  druggists.  Against  this 
**  Latin  fetish  **  in  medical  education,  as  he  used  to  call  it, 
he  carried  on  a  lifelong  campaign,  as  may  be  gathered  from 
his  published  essays  on  medical  education,  and  from  letters 
given  in  later  chapters  of  this  book.  But  there  is  another 
side  to  such  limitation  in  professional  training.  Though 
literature  is  an  essential  in  the  preliminary,  general  educa- 
tion, culture  is  not  solely  dependent  upon  classics. 
39 


438  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY        chap,  xxviil 

Moreover,  I  would  urge  that  a  thorough  study  of  Human 
Physiology  is  in  itself  an  education  broader  and  more  compre- 
hensive than  much  that  passes  under  that  name.  There  is  no 
side  of  the  intellect  which  it  does  not  call  into  play,  no  region 
of  human  knowledge  into  which  either  its  roots  or  its  branches 
do  not  extend;  like  the  Atlantic  between  the  Old  and  the  New 
Worlds,  its  waves  wash  the  shores  of  the  two  worlds  of  matter 
and  of  mind ;  its  tributary  streams  flow  from  both ;  through  its 
waters,  as  yet  unfurrowed  by  the  keel  of  any  Columbus,  lies  the 
road,  if  such  there  be,  from  the  one  to  the  other;  far  away 
from  that  North-west  Passage  of  mere  speculation,  in  which 
so  many  brave  souls  have  been  hopelessly  frozen  up. 

Of  the  address  he  writes  to  his  wife,  February  27 : — 

I  have  just  come  back  from  the  hall  in  which  the  address 
was  delivered,  somewhat  tired.  The  hall  was  very  large,  and 
contained,  I  suppose,  a  couple  of  thousand  people,  and  the 
students  made  a  terrific  row  at  intervals,  though  they  were  quiet 
enough  at  times.  As  the  address  took  me  an  hour  and  a  half 
tp  deliver,  and  my  voice  has  been  very  shaky  ever  since  I  have 
been  here,  I  did  not  dare  to  put  too  much  strain  upon  it,  and 
I  suspect  that  the  people  at  the  end  of  the  hall  could  have  heard 
very  little.  However,  on  the  whole,  it  went  oflf  better  than  I 
expected. 

And  to  Professor  Baynes: — 

I  am  very  glad  you  liked  my  address.  The  students  were 
abnormally  quiet  for  the  first  half  hour,  and  then  made  up  for 
their  reticence  by  a  regular  charivari  for  the  rest  of  the  time. 
However,  I  was  consoled  by  hearing  that  they  were  much 
quieter  than  usual. 

Dr.  John  Muir*s  appreciation  is  worth  having.  It  did  not 
occur  to  me  that  what  I  had  to  say  would  interest  people  out  of 
Britain,  but  to  my  surprise  I  had  an  application  from  a  German 
for  permission  to  translate  the  address  the  other  day. 

Again  to  his  wife,  March  i : — 

...  I  was  considerably  tired  after  my  screed  on  Friday,  but 
Bain  and  I  took  a  long  walk,  and  I  was  fresh  again  by  dinner- 
time. I  dined  with  the  Senators  at  a  hotel  in  the  town,  and  of 
course  had  to  make  a  speech  or  two.  However  I  cut  all  that  as 
fast  as  I  could.  They  were  all  very  apologetic  for  the  row  the 
students  made.     After  the  dinner  one  of  the  Professors  came 


440 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY        chap,  xxviii 


asked  by  Professor  Ray  Lankester,  then  a  Fellow  of  Exeter 
College,  if  he  could  not  break  his  journey  there,  and  in- 
spect the  results  of  his  investigations  on  Lymnaeus.  The 
answer  was  as  follows : — 

We  go  to  Birmingham  on  Friday  by  the  three  o'clock  train, 
but  there  is  no  chance  of  stopping  at  Oxford  either  going  or 
coming,  so  that  unless  you  bring  a  Lymnaaus  or  two  (under 
guise  of  periwinkles  for  refreshment)  to  the  carriage  door  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  see  them. 

The  following  letters  refer  both  to  this  address  on 
Priestley,  and  to  the  third  of  the  important  addresses  of  this 
year,  that  "  On  the  Hypothesis  that  Animals  are  Automata, 
and  its  History  "  (CoU,  Ess.  i.  199,  see  also  p.  442  below). 
The  latter  was  delivered  at  Belfast  before  the  British  Asso- 
ciation under  Tyndall's  presidency.  It  appears  that  only 
a  month  before,  he  had  not  so  much  as  decided  upon  his 
subject — indeed,  was  thinking  of  something  quite  diflferent. 

The  first  allusion  in  these  letters  is  to  a  concluding 
phase  of  Tyndall's  controversy  upon  the  claims  of  the  late 
Principal  Forbes  in  the  matter  of  Glacier  theory : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  London,  N.W., 
Juftf  24,  1874. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  quite  agree  with  your  Scotch  friend 
in  his  estimate  of  Forbes,  and  if  he  were  alive  and  the  con- 
troversy beginning  I  should  say  draw  your  picture  in  your  best 
sepia  or  lamp  black.  But  I  have  been  thinking  over  this  matter 
a  good  deal  since  I  received  your  letter,  and  my  verdict  is,  leave 
that  tempting  piece  of  portraiture  alone. 

The  world  is  neither  wise  nor  just,  but  it  makes  up  for  all 
its  folly  and  injustice  by  being  damnably  sentimental,  and  the 
more  severely  true  your  portrait  might  be  the  more  loud  would 
be  the  outcry  against  it.  I  should  say  publish  a  new  edition  of 
your  Glaciers  of  the  Alps,  make  a  clear  historical  statement  of 
all  the  facts  showing  Forbes's  relations  to  Rendu  and  Agassiz, 
and  leave  the  matter  to  the'  judgment  of  your  contemporaries. 
That  will  sink  in  and  remain  when  all  the  hurly-burly  is  over. 

I  wonder  if  that  address  is  begun,  and  if  you  are  going  to 
be  as  wise  and  prudent  as  I  was  at  Liverpool.  When  I  think  of 
the  temptation  I  resisted  on  that  occasion,  like  Clive  when  he  was 
charged  with  peculation,  "  I  marvel  at  my  own  forbearance ! " 


442 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxviii 


and  as  vigorous  as  ever  I  was  in  my  life.  But  a  late  dinner 
wakes  up  my  demoniac  colon  and  gives  me  a  fit  of  blue  devils 
with  physical  precision. 

Don*t  believe  that  I  am  at  all  the  places  in  which  the  news- 
papers put  me.  For  example,  I  was  not  at  the  Lord  Mayor's 
dinner  last  night.  As  for  Lord  Derby's  statue,  I  wanted  to  get 
a  lesson  in  the  art  of  statue  unveiling.  I  help  to  pay  Dizzie's 
salary,  so  I  don't  see  why  I  should  not  get  a  wrinkle  from  that 
artful  dodger. 

I  plead  guilty  to  having  accepted  the  Birmingham  invita- 
tion.* I  thought  they  deserved  to  be  encouraged  for  having 
asked  a  man  of  science  to  do  the  job  instead  of  some  noble  swell ; 
and,  moreover,  Satan  whispered  that  it  would  be  a  good  oppor- 
tunity for  a  little  ventilation  of  wickedness.  I  cannot  say,  how- 
ever, that  I  can  work  myself  up  into  much  enthusiasm  for  the 
dry  old  Unitarian  who  did  not  go  very  deep  into  anything.  But 
I  think  I  may  make  him  a  good  peg  whereon  to  hang  a  discourse 
on  the  tendencies  of  modern  thought. 

I  was  not  at  the  Cambridge  pow-wow — not  out  of  prudence, 
but  because  I  was  not  asked.  I  suppose  that  decent  respect 
towards  a  secretary  of  the  Royal  Society  was  not  strong  enough 
to  outweigh  University  objections  to  the  incumbent  of  that 
office.  It  is  well  for  me  that  I  expect  nothing  from  Oxford 
or  Cambridge,  having  burned  my  ships  so  far  as  they  were  con- 
cerned long  ago. 

I  sent  your  note  on  to  Knowles  as  soon  as  it  arrived,  but  I 
have  heard  nothing  from  him.  I  wrote  to  him  again  to-night 
to  say  that  he  had  better  let  me  see  it  in  proof  if  he  is  going  to 
print  it.  I  am  right  glad  you  find  anything  worth  reading  again 
in  my  old  papers.  I  stand  by  the  view  I  took  of  the  origin  of 
species  now  as  much  as  ever. 

Shall  I  not  see  the  address  ?  It  is  tantalising  to  hear  of  your 
progress,  and  not  to  know  what  is  in  it. 

I  am  thinking  of  taking  Development  for  the  subject  of  my 
evening  lecture,f  the  concrete  facts  made  out  in  the  last  thirty 
years  without  reference  to  Evolution.  If  people  see  that  it  is 
Evolution,  that  is  Nature's  fault,  and  not  mine. 

We  are  all  flourishing,  and  send  our  love. — Ever  yours  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  To  unveil  the  statue  of  Joseph  Priestley.    See  page  439. 
t  i.e.  At  the  British  Association,^  he  actually  took  ''  Animals  as 
Automata." 


444  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxviii 

terialists,  for  I  am  utterly  incapable  of  conceiving  the  existence 
of  matter  if  there  is  no  mind  in  which  to  picture  that  existence ; 
not  among  atheists,  for  the  problem  of  the  ultimate  cause  of 
existence  is  one  which  seems  to  me  to  be  hopelessly  out  of  reach 
of  my  poor  powers.  Of  all  the  senseless  babble  I  have  ever  had 
occasion  to  read,  the  demonstrations  of  these  philosophers  who 
undertake  to  tell  us  all  about  the  nature  of  God  would  be  the 
worst,  if  they  were  not  surpassed  by  the  still  greater  absurdities 
of  the  philosophers  who  try  to  prove  that  there  is  no  God. 

This  essay  was  delivered  as  an  evening  address  on 
August  24,  the  Monday  of  the  Association  week.  A  vast 
stir  had  been  created  by  the  treatment  of  deep  reaching 
problems  in  Professor  Tyndall's  presidential  address;  in- 
terest was  still  further  excited  by  this  unexpected  excursion 
into  metaphysics.  "  I  remember,"  writes  Sir  M.  Foster, 
"  having  a  talk  with  him  about  the  lecture  before  he  gave 
it.  I  think  I  went  to  his  lodgings — and  lie  sketched  out 
what  he  was  going  to  say.  The  question  was  whether,  in 
view  of  the  Tyndall  row,  it  was  wise  in  him  to  take  the  line 
he  had  marked  out.  In  the  end  I  remember  his  saying, 
'  Grasp  your  nettle,  that  is  what  I  have  got  to  do.' "  But 
apart  from  the  subject,  the  manner  of  the  address  struck 
the  audience  as  a  wonderful  tour  de  force.  The  man  who 
at  first  disliked  public  speaking,  and  always  expected  to 
break  down  on  the  platform,  now,  without  note  or  refer- 
ence of  any  kind,  discoursed  for  an  hour  and  a  half  upon 
a  complex  and  difficult  subject,  in  the  very  words  which 
he  had  thought  out  and  afterwards  published. 

This  would  have  been  a  remarkable  achievement  if  he 
had  planned  to  do  so  and  had  learned  up  his  speech;  but 
the  fact  was  that  he  was  compelled  to  speak  ofl-hand  on  the 
spur  of  the  moment.  He  describes  the  situation  in  a  letter 
of  February  6,  1894,  to  Professor  Ray  Lankester: — 

I  knew  that  I  was  treading  on  very  dangerous  ground,  so  I 
wrote  out  uncommonly  full  and  careful  notes,  and  had  them  in 
my  hand  when  I  stepped  on  to  the  platform. 

Then,  I  suddenly  became  aware  of  the  bigness  of  the  audi- 
ence, and  the  conviction  came  upon  me  that,  if  I  looked  at  my 
notes,  not  one  half  would  hear  me.    It  was  a  bad  ten  seconds. 


446  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxviii 

as  still  as  mice.  There  has  been  a  great  row  about  TyndalFs 
address,  and  I  had  some  reason  to  expect  that  I  should  have 
to  meet  a  frantically  warlike  audience.  But  it  was  quite  other- 
wise, and  though  I  spoke  my  mind  with  very  great  plainness 
I  never  had  a  warmer  reception.  And  I  am  not  without  hope 
that  I  have  done  something  to  allay  the  storm,  though,  as  you 
may  be  sure,  I  did  not  sacrifice  plain  speaking  to  that  end.  ...  I 
have  been  most  creditably  quiet  here,  and  have  gone  to  no  din- 
ners or  breakfasts  or  other  such  fandangoes  except  those  I  ac- 
cepted before  leaving  home.  Sunday  I  spent  quietly  here,  think- 
ing over  my  lecture  and  putting  my  peroration,  which  required 
a  good  deal  of  care,  into  shape.  I  wandered  out  into  the  fields 
in  the  afternoon,  and  sat  a  long  time  thinking  of  all  that  had 
happened  since  I  was  here  a  young  beginner,  two  and  twenty, 
and  .  .  .  you  were  largely  in  my  thoughts,  which  were  full  of 
blessings  and  tender  memories. 

I  had  a  good  night's  work  last  night.  I  dined  with  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  College,  then  gave  my  lecture.  After  that  I  smoked 
a  bit  with  Foster  till  eleven  o'clock,  and  then  I  went  to  the 
Northern  Whig  office  to  see  that  the  report  of  my  lecture  was 
all  right.  It  is  the  best  paper  here,  and  the  Editor  had  begged 
me  to  see  to  the  report,  and  I  was  anxious  myself  that  I  should 
be  rightly  represented.  So  I  sat  there  till  a  quarter  past  one 
having  the  report  read  and  correcting  it  when  necessary.  Then 
I  came  home  and  got  to  bed  about  two.  I  have  just  been  to  the 
section  and  read  my  paper  there  to  a  large  audience  who  cannot 
have  understood  ten  words  of  it,  but  who  looked  highly  edified, 
and  now  I  have  done.  Our  lodging  has  turned  out  admirably, 
and  Ball's  company  has  been  very  pleasant.  So  that  the  fiasco 
of  our  arrangements  was  all  for  the  best. 

I  take  the  account  of  this  last  mentioned  paper  in  Sec- 
tion D  from  the  report  in  Nature: — 

Professor  Huxley  opened  the  last  day  of  the  session  with  an 
account  of  his  recent  observations  on  the  development  of  the 
Columella  atiris  in  Amphibia.  (He  described  it  as  an  outgrowth 
of  the  periotic  capsule,  and  therefore  unconnected  with  any 
visceral  arch).  ... 

In  the  absence  of  Mr.  Parker  there  was  no  one  competent 
to  criticise  the  paper  from  personal  knowledge;  but  a  word 
dropped  as  to  the  many  changes  in  the  accepted  homologies' of 
the  ossicula  auditus,  elicited  a  masterly  and  characteristic  ex- 
position of  the  series  of  new  facts,  and  th?  modifications  of  the 


448  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxviii 

violence."  Later,  "  I  am  benevolent  to  all  the  world,  being 
possessed  of  a  dozen  live  axolotls  and  four  or  five  big  dead 
mesobranchs.  Moreover,  I  am  going  to  get  endless  Frogs 
and  Toads  by  judicious  exchange  with  Gunther.  We  will 
work  up  the  Amphibia  as  they  have  not  been  done  since 
they  were  crea — I  mean  evolved."  * 

The  question  of  the  pedicle  comes  up  again  when  he 
simplifies  some  of  Parker's  results  as  to  the  development 
of  the  Columella  auris  in  the  Frog.  "  Your  suprahyoman- 
dibular  is  nothing  but  the  pedicle  of  the  suspensorium  over 
again.  It  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  columella 
auris.  .  .  .  The  whole  thing  will  come  out  as- simply  as 
possible  without  any  of  your  coalescences  and  combothera- 
tions.    How  you  will  hate  me  and  the  pedicle." 

Tracing  the  development  of  the  colutncUa  was  a  long 
business,  but  it  grew  clearer  as  young  frogs^^of  various  ages 
were  examined.  "  Don't  be  aggravated  with  yourself,"  he 
writes  to  Parker  in  July,  **  it's  tough  work,  this  here  Frog." 
And  on  August  5 :  "  I  have  worked  over  Toad  and  I  have 
worked  over  Frog,  and  I  tell  an  obstinate  man  that  s.h.m. 
(suprahyomandibular)  is  a  figment — or  a  vessel,  whichever 
said  obstinate  man  pleases."  The  same  letter  contains  what 
he  calls  his  final  views  on  the  columella,  but  by  the  end  of 
the  year  he  has  gone  further,  and  writes : — 

Be  prepared  to  bust-up  with  all  the  envy  of  which  your 
malignant  nature  is  capable.  The  problem  of  the  vertebrate 
skull  is  solved.  Fourteen  segments  or  thereabouts  in  Am- 
phioxus;  all  but  one  (barring  possibilities  about  the  ear  capsule) 
aborted  in  higher  vertebrata.  Skull  and  brain  of  Amphioxus 
shut  up  like  an  opera-hat  in  higher  vertebrata.  So!  (Sketch 
in  illustration). 

PS. — I  am  sure  you  will  understand  the  whole  affair  from 
this.      Probably  published  it  already  in  Nature! 

A  letter  to  the  Times  of  July  8,  1874,  on  women's  edu- 
cation, was  evoked  by  the  following  circumstances.  Miss 
Jex  Blake's  difficulties  in  obtaining  a  medical  education 

*  Dr.  A.  C.  L.  G.  Gunther,  of  the  British  Museum,  where  he  was 
appointed  Keeper  of  the  Department  of  Zoology  in  1875. 


450  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY        chap,  xxviii 

hardness  of  the  times  being  considered — ^to  be  satisfied  with 
fewer  than  seven  members  thereof. 

I  hear  excellent  accounts  of  the  progress  of  the  Station  from 
Lankester,  and  I  hope  that  it  is  now  set  on  its  legs  permanently. 
As  for  the  English  contribution,  you  must  look  upon  it  simply  as 
the  expression  of  the  hearty  goodwill  of  your  many  friends  in 
the  land  of  fogs,  and  of  our  strong  feeling  that  where  you  had 
sacrificed-  so  much  for  the  cause  of  science,  we  were,  as  a  matter 
of  duty, — quite  apart  from  goodwill  to  you  personally — ^bound  to 
do  what  we  could,  each  according  to  his  ability. 

Darwin  is,  in  all  things,  noble  and  generous-— one  of  those 
people  who  think  it  a  privilege  to  let  him  help.  I  know  he  was 
very  pleased  with  what  you  said  to  him.  He  is  working  away 
at  a  new  edition  of  the  Descent  of  Man,  for  which  I  have  given 
him  some  notes  on  the  brain  question. 

And  apropos  of  that  how  is  your  own  particular  brain?    I 

back  la  belle  M against  all  the  physicians  in  the  world — 

even  against  mine  own  particular  i^sculapius,  Dr.  Clark — to 
find  the  sovereignest  remedy  against  the  blue  devil$. 

Let  me  hear  from  you — most  abominable  of  correspondents 
as  I  am.  And  why  don't  you  send  Madame's  photograph  that 
you  have  promised? — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Pray  give  my  kind  remembrances  to  your  father. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  March  31,  1874. 

My  dear  Darwin — The  brain  business  ♦  is  more  than  half 
done,  and  I  will  soon  polish  it  off  and  send  it  to  you.  We  are 
going  down  to  Folkestone  for  a  week  on  Thursday,  and  I  shall 
take  it  with  me. 

I  do  not  know  what  is  doing  about  Dohm's  business  at  pres- 
ent. Foster  took  it  in  hand,  but  the  last  time  I  heard  he  was 
waiting  for  reports  from  Dew  and  Balfour. 

You  have  been  very  generous  as  always;  and  I  hope  that 
other  folk  may  follow  your  example,  but  like  yourself  I  am  not 
sanguine. 

I  have  had  an  awfully  tempting  offer  to  go  to  Yankee-land 
on  a  lecturing  expedition,  and  I  am  seriously  thinking  of  making 
an  experiment  next  spring. 

*  A  note  on  the  brain  in  man  and  the  apes  for  the  second  edition 
of  the  Descent  of  Man, 


452  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY         chap,  xxviii 

attended  seances  and  met  mediums,  by  whom  he  was  most 
unfavourably  impressed. 

Moreover,  when  invited  to  join  a  committee  of  investi- 
gation into  spiritualistic  manifestations,  he  replied: — 

I  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  accept  the  invitation  of  the 
Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  to  co-operate  with  a  com- 
mittee for  the  investigation  of  "  Spiritualism  " ;  and  for  two 
reasons.  In  the  first  place,  I  have  not  time  for  such  an  inquiry, 
which  would  involve  much  trouble  and  (unless  it  were  unlike 
all  inquiries  of  that  kind  I  have  kliown)  much  annoyance.  In 
the  second  place,  I  take  no  interest  in  the  subject.  The  only 
case  of  "  Spiritualism  "  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  examin- 
ing into  for  myself,  was  as  gross  an  imposture  as  ever  came 
under  my  notice.  But  supposing  the  phenomena  to  be  genuine 
— they  do  not  interest  me.  If  anybody  would  endow  me  with 
the  faculty  of  listening  to  the  chatter  of  old  women  and  curates 
in  the  nearest  cathedral  town,  I  should  decline  the  privilege, 
having  better  things  to  do.  And  if  the  folk  in  the  spiritual  world 
do  not  talk  more  wisely  and  sensibly  than  their  friends  report 
them  to  do,  I  put  them  in  the  same  category.  The  only  good 
that  I  can  see  in  the  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  "  Spiritual- 
ism "  is  to  furnish  an  additional  argument  against  suicide. 
Better  live  a  crossing-sweeper  than  die  and  be  made  to  talk 
twaddle  by  a  "  medium  "  hired  at  a  guinea  a  seance.* 

To  the  report  above  mentioned,  Prof.  G.  Darwin,  who 
also  was  present,  added  one  or  two  notes  and  corrections. 

Report  on  Stance 

Jan.  27.  1874. 

We  met  in  a  small  room  at  the  top  of  the  house  with  a 
window  capable  of  being  completely  darkened  by  a  shutter  and 
curtains  opposite  the  door.  A  small  light  table  with  two  flaps 
and  four  legs,  unsteady  and  easily  moved,  occupied  the  middle 
of  the  room,  leaving  not  much  more  than  enough  space  for  the 
chairs  at  the  sides.  There  was  a  chair  at  each  end,  two  chairs 
on  the  fireplace  side,  and  one  on  the  other.  Mr.  X  (the  medium) 
was  seated  in  the  chair  at  the  door  end,  Mr.  Y  (the  host)  in 

*  Quoted  from  a  review  in  the  Daily  Nfws,  October  17,  1871,  of  the 
Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  Committee  of  the  London  Dialectical 
Society. 


454  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY        chap,  xxviii 

we  are  going  to  have  some  manifestations."  Immediately  fol- 
lowed a  noise  obviously  produced  by  the  tumbling  over  of  the 
accordion  and  some  shifting  of  the  position  of  the  guitar.  Next 
came  a  twanging — very  slight,  but  of  course  very  audible—of 
some  of  the  strings,  during  which  B  was  invisible.  By  and  by 
B  and  A  became  visible  again,  and  Medium's  voice  likewise 
showed  that  he  had  got  back  to  his  first  position.  But  after  he 
had  returned  to  this  position  there  was  a  noise  of  the  guitar 
and  other  things  on  the  table  being  stirred,  and  creeping  noises 
like  something  light  moving  over  the  table.  But  no  more  actual 
twanging. 

To  my  great  disgust  G.  D.  now  began  to  remark  that  he  saw 
two  spots  of  light,  which  I  suppose  must  have  had  the  same 
origin  as  my  rays  A  and  B,  and,  moreover,  that  something  occa- 
sionally occulted  one  or  other  of  them.  ( Note :  No,  not  till  we 
changed  places,  G.  H.  D.)  I  blessed  him  for  spoiling  my  game, 
but  the  effect  was  excellent.  Nothing  more  happened.  By  and 
by,  after  some  talk  about  these  points  of  light,  the  medium  sug- 
gested that  this  light  was  distracting,  and  that  we  had  better 
shut  it  out.  The  suggestion  was  very  dexterously  and  indirectly 
made,  and  was  caught  up  more  strongly  (I  think  by  Mr.  Z). 
Anyhow,  we  agreed  to  stop  out  all  light.  The  circle  was  broken, 
and  the  candle  was  lighted  for  this  pufpose.  I  then  took  occa- 
sion to  observe  that  the  guitar  was  turned  round  into  the  posi- 
tion noted  in  the  margin,  the  end  being  near  my  left  hand.  On 
examining  it  I  found  a  longish  end  of  one  of  the  catgut  strings 
loose,  and  I  found  that  by  sweeping  this  end  over  the  strings 
I  could  make  quite  as  good  twangs  as  we  heard.  I  could  have 
done  this  just  as  well  with  my  mouth  as  with  my  hand — and  I 
could  have  pulled  the  guitar  about  by  the  end  of  the  catgut  in 
my  mouth  and  so  have  disturbed  the  other  things — as  they  were 
disturbed. 

Before  the  candle  was  lighted  some  discussion  arose  as  to 
why  the  spirits  would  not  do  any  better  (started  by  Mr.  Y  and 
Mr.  Z,  I  think),  in  which  the  medium  joined.  It  appeared  that 
(in  the  opinion  of  the  spirits  as  interpreted  by  the  medium)  we 
were  not  quite  rightly  placed.  When  the  discussion  arose  I 
made  a  bet  with  myself  that  the  result  would  be  that  either  I 
or  G.  D.  would  have  to  change  places  with  somebody  else.  And 
I  won  my  wager  (I  have  just  paid  it  with  the  remarkably  good 
cigar  I  am  now  smoking).  G.  D.  had  to  come  round  to  my 
side,  Mr.  Z  went  to  the  end,  and  Mr.  Y  took  G.  D.'s  place. 
"  Good,  Medium,"  said  I  to  myself.    "  Now  we  shall  see  some- 


456  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxviii 

lieved  in  the  evidence  of  anyone  with  such  perfect  bona  fides  as 
Mr.  Y  being  so  worthless. 

On  receiving  this  report  Mr.  Darwin  wrote  (Life,  ii.  p. 
i88) :- 

Though  the  seance  did  tire  you  so  much  it  was,  I  think, 
really  worth  the  exertion,  as  the  same  sort  of  things  are  done 
at  all  the  seances  ....  and  now  to  my  mind  an  enormous 
weight  of  evidence  would  be  requisite  to  make  me  believe  in 
anything  beyond  mere  trickery. 

The  following  letter  to  Mr.  Morley,  then  editor  of  the 
Fortnightly  Review,  shows  that  my  father  was  already  think- 
ing of  writing  upon  Hume,  though  he  did  not  carry  out 
this  intention  till  1878. 

The  article  referred  to  in  the  second  letter  is  that  on 
animals  as  automata. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,y»«^  4.  1874. 

My  dear  Mr.  Morley — I  assure  you  that  it  was  a  great  dis- 
appointment to  me  not  to  be  able  to  visit  you,  but  we  had  an 
engagement  of  some  standing  for  Oxford. 

Hume  is  frightfully  tempting — I  thought  so  only  the  other 
day  when  I  saw  the  new  edition  advertised — and  now  I  would 
gladly  write  about  him  in  the  Fortnightly  if  I  were  only  sure 
of  being  able  to  keep  any  engagement  to  that  effect  I  might 
make. 

But  I  have  yet  a  course  of  lectures  before  me,  and  an  even- 
ing discourse  to  deliver  at  the  British  Association — to  say  noth- 
ing of  opening  the  Manchester  Medical  School  in  October — and 
polishing  off  a  lot  of  scientific  work.  So  you  see  I  have  not  a 
chance  of  writing  about  Hume  for  months  to  come,  and  you 
had  much  better  not  trust  to  such  a  very  questionable  reed  as 
I  am. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  AW.  15,  1874. 

My  dear  Morley — Many  thanks  for  your  abundantly  suffi- 
cient cheque — rather  too  much,  I  think,  for  an  article  which  had 
been  gutted  by  the  newspapers. 

I  am  always  very  glad  to  have  anything  of  mine  in  the  Fort- 
nightly, as  it  is  sure  to  be  in  good  company ;  but  I  am  becoming 
as  spoiled  as  a  maiden  with  many  wooers.  However,  aa  far  as 
the  Fortnightly  which  is  my  old  love,  and  the  Contemporary 


458  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxviii 

• 

Thus  the  skull  of  Petromyson  answers  to  about"  fourteen 
segments  of  the  body  of  Amphioxus,  fused  together  and  indis- 
tinguishable in  even  the  earliest  embryonic  state  of  the  higher 
vertebrata. 

Does  this  take  your  breath  away?  Well,  in  due  time  you 
shall  be  convinced.  I  sent  in  a  brief  notice  to  the  last  meeting 
of  the  Royal  Society,  which  will  soon  be  in  your  hands. 

I  need  not  tell  you  of  the  importance  of  all  this.  It  is  un- 
lucky for  Semper  that  he  has  just  put  Amphioxus  out  of  the 
Vertebrata  altogether — ^because  it  is  demonstrable  that  Am- 
phioxus is  nearer  than  could  have  been  hoped  to  the  condition 
of  the  primitive  vertebrate — a  far  more  regular  and  respectable 
sort  of  ancestor  than  even  you  suspected.  For  you  see 
"  Acrania  "  will  have  to  go.  • 

I  think  we  must  have  an  English  translation  of  the  An- 
thropogenie.  There  is  great  interest  in  these  questions  now,  and 
your  book  is  very  readable,  to  say  nothing  of  its  higher  qualities. 

My  wife  (who  sends  her  kindest  greetings)  and  I  were 
charmed  with  the  photograph.  [As  for  our]  publication  in  that 
direction,  the  seven  volumes  are  growing  into  stately  folios. 
You  would  not  know  them. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

How  will  you  read  this  scrawl  now  that  Gegenbaur  is  gone  ? 

In  the  article  here  referred  to,  a  review  of  a  book  by 
Prof.  G.  H.  Darwin,  a  personal  attack  of  an  unjustifiable 
character  was  made  upon  him,  and  through  him,  upon 
Charles  Darwin.  The  authorship  of  the  review  in  question 
had  come  to  be  known,  and  Huxley  writes  to  his  friend : — 

I  entirely  sympathise  with  your  feeling  about  the  attack  on 
George.  If  anybody  tries  that  on  with  my  boy  L.,  the  old  wolf 
will  show  all  the  fangs  he  has  left  by  that  time,  depend  upon 
it.  .  .  . 

You  ought  to  be  like  one  of  the  blessed  gods  of  Elysium,  and 
let  the  inferior  deities  do  battle  with  the  infernal  powers.  More- 
over, the  severest  and  most  effectual  punishment  for  this  sort  of 
moral  assassination  is  quietly  to  ignore  the  offender  and  give 
him  the  cold  shoulder.  He  knows  why  he  gets  it,  and  society 
comes  to  know  why,  and  though  society  is  more  or  less  of  a 
dunderhead  it  has  honourable  instincts,  and  the  man  in  the  cold 
finds  no  cloak  that  will  cover  him. 


460  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxix 

It  is,  I  hope,  unnecessary  for  me  to  give  a  formal  contradic- 
tion to  the  silly  fiction,  which  is  assiduously  circulated  by  the 
fanatics  who  not  only  ought  to  know,  but  do  know,  that  their 
assertions  are  untrue,  that  I  have  advocated  the  introduction 
of  that  experimental  discipline  which  is  absolutely  indispensable 
to  the  professed  physiologist,  into  elementary  teaching. 

Moreover,  during  the  debates  on  the  Vivisection  Bill  in 
1876,  the  late  Lord  Shaftesbury  made  use  of  this  story. 
Huxley  was  extremely  indignant,  and  wrote  home : — 

Did  you  see  Lord  Shaftesbury's  speech  in  Tuesday's  Times f 
I  saw  it  by  chance,*  and  have  written  a  sharp  letter  to  the 
Times, 

This  letter  appeared  on  May  26,  when  he  wrote  again : — 

You  will  have  had  my  note,  and  know  all  about  Lord 
Shaftesbury  and  his  lies  by  this  time.  Surely  you  could  not 
imagine  on  any  authprity  that  I  was  such  an  idiot  as  to  recom- 
mend boys  and  girls  to  perform  experiments  which  are  difficult 
to  skilled  anatomists,  to  say  nothing  of  other  reasons. 

Letter  to  the  Times 

In  your  account  of  the  late  debate  in  the  House  of  Lords  on 
the  Vivisection  Bill,  Lord  Shaftesbury  is  reported  to  have  said 
that  in  my  Lessons  in  Elementary  Physiology,  it  is  strongly 
insisted  that  such  experiments  as  those  subjoined  shall  not 
merely  be  studied  in  the  manual,  but  actually  repeated,  either 
by  the  boys  and  girls  themselves  or  else  by  the  teachers  in  their 
presence,  as  plainly  appears  from  the  preface  to  the  second 
edition. 

I  beg  leave  to  give  the  most  emphatic  and  unc(ualified  contra- 
diction to  this  assertion,  for  which  there  is  not  a  shadow  of 
justification  either  in  the  preface  to  the  second  edition  of  my 
Lessons  or  in  anything  I  have  ever  said  or  written  elsewhere. 
The  most  important  paragraph  of  the  preface  which  is  the  sub- 
ject of  Lord  Shaftesbury's  misquotation  and  misrepresentation 
stands  as  follows: — 

"  For  the  purpose  of  acquiring  a  practical,  though  ele- 
mentary,  acquaintance   with    physiological    anatomy    and    his- 

*  Bein^  in  Edinburgh,  he  had  been  reading  the  Scotch  papers,  and 
"the  reports  of  the  Scotch  papers  as  to  what  takes  place  in  Parliament 
are  meagre." 


462  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxix 

which  is  attainable  by  mere  reading,  though  infinitely  better 
than  ignorance,  is  knowledge  of  a  very  different  kind  from 
that  which  arises  from  direct  contact  with  fact." 

"  Direct  contact  with  fact ! "  What  can  that  mean  (so,  at 
least,  very  many  ask)  but  a  declaration,  on  high  authority,  to 
•teachers  and  learners  that  vivisection  alone  can  give  them  any 
real  and  effective  instruction? 

But  the  subsequent  passage  is  still  stronger,  for  it  states 
"  that  the  worth  of  the  pursuit  of  science,  as  an  intellectual  dis- 
cipline, is  almost  lost  by  those  who  only  seek  it  in  books." 

Is  not  language  like  this  calculated  to  touch  the  zeal  and 
vanity  of  teachers  and  learners  at  the  very  quick,  and  urge  them 
to  improve  their  own  minds  and  stand  well  in  the  eyes  of  the 
profession  and  the  public  by  positive  progress  in  experimental 
physiology?  Ordinary  readers,  most  people  would  think,  could 
come  to  no  other  conclusion. 

But  a  disclaimer  from  Professor  Huxley  is  enough;  I  am 
sorry  to  have  misunderstood  him ;  and  I  must  ask  his  pardon.  I 
sincerely  rejoice  to  have  received  such  an  assurance  that  his 
great  name  shall  never  be  used  for  such  a  project  as  that  which 
excited  our  fears. 

On  this  he  wrote: — 

You  will  have  seen  Lord  Shaftesbury's  reply  to  my  letter. 
I  thought  it  frank  and  straightforward,  and  I  have  written  a 
private  letter  *  to  the  old  boy  of  a  placable  and  proper  char- 
acter. 

In  1874  he  had  also  had  a  small  passage  of  arms  with  the 
late  Mr.  W.  E.  Forster,  then  Vice-President  of  the  Council, 
upon  the  same  subject.  Mr.  Forster  was  about  to  leave 
office,  and  when  he  gave  his  official  authorisation  for  sum- 
mer courses  of  lectures  at  South  Kensington  on  Biology, 
Chemistry,  Geology,  etc.,  he  did  so  with  the  special  proviso 
that  there  be  no  vivisection  experiments  in  any  of  the 
courses,  and  further,  appended  a  Memorandum,  explaining 
the  reasons  on  which  he  acted. 

Now,  although  Huxley  was  mentioned  by  name  as  hav- 
ing taken  care  to  avoid  inflicting  pain  in  certain  previous 

*  **  Huxley,  the  Professor,  has  written  me  a  very  civil,  nay  kind, 
letter.  I  replied  in  the  same  spirit."  (Lord  Shaftesbury,  Li/e  and 
Work,  iii.  373,  June  3,  1876.) 


464 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxix 


fended  Brown  Sequard,  that  I  might  expect  to  meet  with  every 
description  of  abuse  and  misrepresentation  if  such  demonstra- 
tions were  given. 

It  did  not  appear  to  me,  however,  that  the  latter  considera- 
tion ought  to  weigh  with  me,  and  I  took  such  a  course  as  I 
believe  is  defensible  against  everything  but  misrepresentation. 

I  gave  strict  instructions  to  the  Demonstrators  who  assisted 
me  that  no  such  experiments  were  to  be  performed,  unless  the 
animal  were  previously  rendered  insensible  to  pain  either  by 
destruction  of  the  brain  or  by  the  administration  of  anaesthetics, 
and  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  my  instructions,  were 
carried  out.  I  do  not  see  what  I  can  do  beyond  this,  or  how  I 
can  give  Mr.  Forster  any  better  guarantee  than  is  given  in  my 
assurance  that  my  dislike  to  the  infliction  of  pain  both  as  a 
matter  of  principle  and  of  feeling  is  quite  as  strdng  as  his  own 
can  be. 

If  Mr.  Forster  is  not  satisfied  with  this  assurance,  and  with 
its  practical  result  that  our  experiments  are  made  only  on  non- 
sentient  animals,  then  I  am  afraid  that  my  position  as  teacher 
of  Physiology  must  come  to  an  end. 

If  I  am  to  act  in  that  capacity  I  cannot  consent  to  be  pro- 
hibited from  showing  the  circulation  in  a  frog's  foot  because  the 
frog  is  made  slightly  uncomfortable  by  being  tied  up  for  that 
purpose;  nor  from  showing  the  fundamental  properties  of 
nerves,  because  extirpating  the  brain  of  the  same  animal  inflicts 
one-thousandth  part  of  the  prolonged  suffering  which  it  under- 
goes when  it  makes  its  natural  exit  from  the  world  by  being 
slowly  forced  down  the  throat  of  a  duck,  and  crushed  and 
asphyxiated  in  that  creature's  stomach. 

I  shall  be  very  glad  to  wait  upon  Mr.  Forster  if  he  desires 
to  see  me.  Of  course  I  am  most  anxious  to  meet  his  views  as 
far  as  I  can,  consistently  with  my  position  as  a  person  bound 
to  teach  properly  any  subject  in  which  he  undertakes  to  give 
instruction.  But  I  am  quite  clear  as  to  the  amount  of  freedom 
of  action  which  it  is  necessary  I  should  retain,  and  if  you  will 
kindly  communicate  the  contents  of  this  letter  to  the  Vice-Presi- 
dent of  the  Council,  he  will  be  able  to  judge  for  himself  how 
far  his  sense  of  what  is  right  will  leave  me  that  freedom,  or 
render  it  necessary  for  me  to  withdraw  from  what  I  should 
regard  as  a  false  position. 

But  there  was  a  further  and  more  vital  question.  He 
had  already  declared  through  Major  (now  Sir  John)  Don- 


^66  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOJl   HUXLEY  chap,  xxix 

However,  I  will  not  trouble  your  Lordship  with  any  further 
indication  of  the  difficulties  which,  as  I  imagine,  will  attend  the 
attempt  to  carry  the  Minute  into  operation,  if  instruction  is  to 
be  given  in  Physiology,  or  even  in  general  Biology. 

The  upshot  of  the  matter  was  that  the  Minute  was  al- 
tered so  as  to  refer  solely  to  future  courses,  and  on  February 
20  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Forster : — 

I  cannot  allow  you  to  leave  office  without  troubling  you  with 
the  expression  of  my  thanks  for  the  very  great  kindness  and  con- 
sideration which  I  have  received  from  you  on  all  occasions,  and 
particularly  in  regard  to  the  question  of  vivisection,  on  which  I 
ventured  to  some  extent,  though  I  think  not  very  widely  or 
really,  to  differ  from  you. 

The  modification  which  you  were  good  enough  to  make  in 
your  minute  removed  all  my  objections  to  undertaking  the  Sum- 
mer Course. 

And  I  am  sure  that  if  that  course  had  happened  to  be  a 
physiological  one  I  could  do  all  I  want  to  do  in  the  way  of  ex- 
periment, without  infringing  the  spirit  of  your  minute,  though  I 
confess  that  the  letter  of  it  would  cause  me  more  perplexity. 

As  to  his  general  attitude  to  the  subject,  it  must  be 
noted,  as  said  above  in  the  letter  to  Sir  J.  Donnelly,  that  he 
never  followed  any  line  of  research  involving  experiments 
on  living  and  conscious  animals.  Though,  as  will  be  seen 
from  various  letters,  he  considered  such  experiments  justi- 
fiable, his  personal  feelings  prevented  him  from  performing 
them  himself.  Like  Charles  Darwin,  he  was  very  fond  of 
animals,  and  our  pets  in  London  found  in  him  an  indul- 
gent master. 

But  if  he  did  not  care  to  undertake  such  experiments 
personally,  he  held  it  false  sentiment  to  blame  others  who 
did  disagreeable  work  for  the  good  of  humanity,  and  false 
logic  to  allow  pain  to  be  inflicted  in  the  cause  of  sport  while 
forbidding  it  for  the  cause  of  science.  (See  his  address  on 
"  Instruction  in  Elementary  Physiology,"  Coll,  Essays^  iii. 
300  seq.)  Indeed,  he  declared  that  he  trusted  to  the  fox- 
hunting instincts  of  the  House  of  Commons  rather  than  to 
any  real  interest  in  science  in  that  body,  for  a  moderate 
treatment  of  the  question  of  vivisection. 


468  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap.  XxiX 

and  Pharmacology,  and  therefore  to  the  progress  of  rational 
medicine. 

Another  letter  on  the  subject  may  be  given,  which  was 
written  to  a  student  at  a  theological  college,  in  reply  to  a 
request  for  his  opinion  on  vivisection,  which  was  to  be  dis- 
cussed at  the  college  debating  society. 

Grand  Hotel,  Eastbourne,  S/'/>f.  29,  1890. 

Dear  Sir — I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  practice  of  perform- 
ing experiments  on  living  animals  is  not  only  reconcilable  with 
true  humanity,  but  under  certain  circumstances  is  imperatively 
demanded  by  it. 

Experiments  on  living  animals  are  of  two  kinds.  First, 
those  which  are  made  upon  animals  which,  although  living,  are 
incapable  of  sensation,  in  consequence  of  the  destruction  or  the 
paralysis  of  the  sentient  machinery. 

I  am  not  aware  that  the  propriety  of  performing  experi- 
ments of  this  kind  is  seriously  questioned,  except  in  so  far  as 
they  may  involve  some  antecedent  or  subsequent  suffering.  Of 
course  those  who  deny  that  under  any  circumstances  it  can  be 
right  to  inflict  suffering  on  other  sentient  beings  for  our  own 
good,  must  object  to  even  this  much  of  what  they  call  cruelty. 
And  when  they  prove  their  sincerity  by  leaving  off  animal  food ; 
by  objecting  to  drive  castrated  horses,  or  indeed  to  employ  ani- 
mal labour  at  all;  and  by  refusing  to  destroy  rats,  mice,  fleas, 
bugs  and  other  sentient  vermin,  they  may  expect  sensible  people 
to  listen  to  them,  and  sincere  people  to  think  them  other  than 
sentimental  hypocrites. 

As  to  experiments  of  the  second  kind,  which  do  not  admit  of 
the  paralysis  of  the  sentient  mechanism,  and  the  performance  of 
which  involves  severe  prolonged  suffering  to  the  more  sensitive 
among  the  higher  animals,  I  should  be  sorry  to  make  any  sweep- 
ing assertion.  I  am  aware  of  a  strong  personal  dislike  to  them, 
which  tends  to  warp  my  judgment,  and  I  am  prepared  to  make 
any  allowance  for  those  who,  carried  away  by  still  more  intense 
dislike,  would  utterly  prohibit  these  experiments. 

But  it  has  been  my  duty  to  give  prolonged  and  careful  atten- 
tion to  this  subject,  and  putting  natural  sympathy  aside,  to  try 
and  get  at  the  rights  and  wrongs  of  the  business  from  a  higher 
point  of  view,  namely,  that  of  humanity,  which  is  often  very 
different  from  that  of  emotional  sentiment. 

I  ask  myself — suppose  you  knew  that  by  inflicting  prolonged 


470  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  jlxix 

4  Marlborough  Place, /an.  22,  1875. 

My  dear  Darwin — I  quite  agree  with  your  letter  about  vivi- 
section as  a  matter  of  right  and  justice  in  the  first  place,  and 
secondly  as  the  best  method  of  taking  the  wind  out  of  the 
enemy's  sails.  I  will  communicate  with  Burdon  Sanderson  and 
see  .what  can  be  done. 

My  reliance  as  against and  her  fanatical  following  is 

not  in  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  the  House  of  Commons,  but  in 
the  large  number  of  fox-hunters  therein.  If  physiological  ex- 
perimentation is  put  down  by  law,  hunting,  fishing  and  shooting, 
against  which  a  much  better  case  can  be  made  out,  will  soon 
follow. — Ever  yours,  very  faithfully,  ^r  tt   u 

1.  H.  liUXLEY. 

South  Kensington, \<4/nV  21,  1875. 

My  dear  Darwin — The  day  before  yesterday  I  met  Playfair 
at  the  club,  and  he  told  me  that  he  had  heard  from  Miss  Elliott 
that  /  was  getting  up  what  she  called  a  "  Vivisector's  Bill,"  and 
that  Lord  Cardwell  was  very  anxious  to  talk  with  some  of  us 
about  the  matter. 

So  you  see  that  there  is  no  secret  about  our  proceedings.  I 
gave  him  a  general  idea  of  what  was  doing,  and  he  quite  con- 
firmed what  Lubbock  said  about  the  impossibility  of  any  action 
being  taken  in  Parliament  this  session. 

Playfair  said  he  should  like  very  much  to  know  what  we 
proposed  doing,  and  I  should  think  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to 
take  him  into  consultation. 

On  my  return  I  found  that  Pfluger  had  sent  me  his  memoir 
with  a  note  such  as  he  had  sent  to  you. 

I  read  it  last  night,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  a 
very  important  piece  of  work. 

He  shows  that  frogs  absolutely  deprived  of  oxygen  give  off 
carbonic  acid  for  twenty-five  hours,  and  gives  very  strong 
reasons  for  believing  that  the  evolution  of  carbonic  acid  by 
living  matter  in  general  is  the  result  of  a  process  of  internal 
rearrangement  of  the  molecules  of  the  living  matter,  and  not 
of  direct  oxidation. 

His  speculations  about  the  origin  of  living  matter  are  the 
best  I  have  seen  yet,  so  far  as  I  understand  them.  But  he 
plunges  into  the  depths  of  the  higher  chemistry  in  which  I  am 
by  no  means  at  home.  Only  this  I  can  see,  that  the  paper  is 
worth  careful  study. — Ever  yours  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


472 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxiz 


I  am  very  busy  with  my  lectures,  and  am  nearly  half 
through.  I  shall  not  be  sorry  when  they  are  over,  as  I  have  been 
grinding  away  now  since  last  October. — With  kindest  regards 
to  Mrs.  Darwin,  ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  was  duly  asked  to  serve  on  the  Commission.  Though 
his  lectures  in  Edinburgh  prevented  him  from  attending 
till  the  end  of  July  no  difficulty  was  made  over  this,  as  the 
first  meetings  of  the  Commission,  which  began  on  June  30, 
were  to  be  devoted  to  taking  the  less  controversial  evidence. 
In  accepting  his  nomination  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Cross  (after- 
wards Lord  Cross),  at  that  time  Home  Secretary: — 

If  I  can  be  of  any  service  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  act  on  the 
Commission,  sympathising  as  I  do  on  the  one  hand  with  those 
who  abhor  cruelty  to  animals,  and,  on  the  other,  with  those  who 
abhor  the  still  greater  cruelty  to  man  which  is  involved  in  any 
attempt  to  arrest  the  progress  of  physiology  and  of  rational 
medicine. 

The  other  members  of  the  Commission  were  Lords 
Cardwell  and  Winmarleigh,  Mr.  W.  E.  Forster,  Sir  J.  B. 
Karslake,  Professor  Erichssen,  and  Mr.  R.  H.  Hutton. 

The  evidence  given  before  the  Commission  bore  out  the 
view  that  English  physiologists  inflicted  no  more  pain  upon 
animals  than  could  be  avoided;  but  one  witness,  not  an 
Englishman,  and  not  having  at  that  time  a  perfect  command 
of  the  English  language,  made  statements  which  appeared 
to  the  Commission  at  least  to  indicate  that  the  witness  was 
indifferent  to  animal  suffering.  Of  this  incident  Huxley 
writes  to  Mr.  Darwin  at  the  same  time  as  he  forwarded  a 
formal  invitation  for  him  to  appear  as  a  witness  before  the 
Commission  :— 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct.  30,  1875. 

My  dear  Darwin — The  inclosed  tells  its  own  story.  I  have 
done  my  best  to  prevent  your  being  bothered,  but  for  various 
reasons  which  will  occur  to  you  I  did  not  like  to  appear  too 
obstructive,  and  I  was  asked  to  write  to  you.  The  strong  feeling 
of  my  colleagues  (and  my  own  I  must  say  also)  is  that  we  ought 
to  have  your  opinions  in  our  minutes.  At  the  same  time  there  is  a 
no  less  strong  desire  to  trouble  you  as  little  as  possible,  and  under 
no  circumstances  to  cause  you  any  risk  of  injury  to  health. 


474  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxix 

• 

the  strength  of  which  legislation  was  recommended  went 
beyond  the  facts,  the  report  went  beyond  the  evidence,  the 
recommendations  beyond  the  report,  and  the  bill  can  hardly 
be  said  to  have  gone  beyond  the  recommendations,  but 
rather  to  have  contradicted  them." 

As  to  the  working  of  the  law  Huxley  referred  to  it  the 
following  year  in  the  address,  already  cited,  on  "  Elementary 
Instruction  in  Physiology  "  (CoU.  Essays,  iii.  310). 

But  while  I  should  object  to  any  experimentation  which  can 
justly  be  called  painful,  and  while  as  a  member  of  a  late  Royal 
Commission  I  did  my  best  to  prevent  the  infliction  of  needless 
pain  for  any  purpose,  I  think  it  is  my  duty  to  take  this  oppor- 
tunity of  expressing  my  regret  at  a  condition  of  the  law  which 
permits  a  boy  to  troll  for  pike  or  set  lines  with  live  frog  bait 
for  idle  amusement,  and  at  the  same  lime  lays  the  teacher  of 
that  boy  open  to  the  penalty  of  fine  and  imprisonment  if  he  uses 
the  same  animal  for  the  purpose  of  exhibiting  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  and  instructive  of  physiological  spectacles — the  cir- 
culation in  the  web  of  the  foot.  No  one  could  undertake  to 
afHrm  that  a  frog  is  not  inconvenienced  by  being  wrapped  up 
in  a  wet  rag  and  having  his  toes  tied  out,  and  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  inconvenience  is  a  sort  of  pain.  But  you  must  not  inflict 
the  least  pain  on  a  vertebrated  animal  for  scientific  purposes 
(though  you  may  do  a  good  deal  in  that  way  for  gain  or  for 
sport)  without  due  licence  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the 
Home  Department,  granted  under  the  authority  of  the  Vivi- 
section Act. 

So  it  comes  about  that,  in  this  year  of  grace  1877,  two  per- 
sons may  be  charged  with  cruelty  to  animals.  One  has  impaled 
a  frog,  and  suffered  the  creature  to  writhe  about  in  that  con- 
dition for  hours ;  the  other  has  pained  the  animal  no  more  than 
one  of  us  would  be  pained  by  tying  strings  round  his  fingers 
and  keeping  him  in  the  position  of  a  hydropathic  patient.  The 
first  offender  says,  "  I  did  it  because  I  find  fishing  very  amus- 
ing," and  the  magistrate  bids  him  depart  in  peace — nay,  probably 
wishes  him  good  sport.  The  second  pleads,  "  I  wanted  to  im- 
press a  scientific  truth  with  a  distinctness  attainable  in  no 
other  way  on  the  minds  of  my  scholars,"  and  the  magistrate 
fines  him  five  pounds. 

I  cannot  but  think  that  this  is  an  anomalous  and  not  wholly 
creditable  state  of  things. 


476  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxx 

pointed.  But  he  found  the  work  to  be  unexpectedly  hard,  and 
very  soon  he  had  the  sense  of  panting  to  keep  pace  with  the 
demands  of- the  lecturer.  It  was  not  merely  that  the  texture  of 
scientific  reasoning  in  the  lectures  was  so  closely  knit, — although 
that  was  a  very  palpable  fact, — but  the  character  of  Huxley's , 
terminology  was  entirely  strange  to  him.  It  met  him  on  his 
weakest  side,  for  it  presupposed  a  knowledge  of  Greek  (being 
little  else  than  Greek  compounds  with  English  terminations) 
and  of  Greek  he  had  none. 

Huxley's  usual  lectures,  he  writes,  are  something  awful  to 
listen  to.  One  half  of  the  class,  which  numbers  about  four  hun- 
dred, have  given  up  in  despair  from  sheer  inability  to  follow 
him.  The  strain  on  the  attention  of  each  lecture  is  so  great  as 
to  be  equal  to  any  ordinary  day's  work.  I  feel  quite  exhausted 
after  them.  And  then  to  master  his  language  is  something 
dreadful.  But,  with  all  these  drawbacks,  I  would  not  miss  them, 
even  if  they  were  ten  times  as  difficult.  They  are  something 
glorious,  sublime ! 

Again  he  writes : — 

Huxley  is  still  very  difficult  to  follow,  and  I  have  been  four 
times  in  his  lectures  completely  stuck  and  utterly  helpless.  But 
he  has  given  us  eight  or  nine  beautiful  lectures  on  the  frog.  .  .  . 
If  you  only  heard  a  few  of  the  lectures  you  would  be  surprised 
to  find  that  there  were  so  few  missing  links  in  the  chain  of  life, 
from  the  amoeba  to  the  genus  homo. 

It  was  a  large  class,  ultimately  reaching  353  and  break- 
ing the  record  of  the  Edinburgh  classes  without  having 
recourse  to  the  factitious  assistance  proposed  in  the  letter 
of  May  16. 

His  inaugural  lecture  was  delivered  under  what  ought 
to  have  been  rather  trying  circumstances.  On  the  way 
from  London  he  stopped  a  night  with  his  old  friends,  John 
Bruce  and  his  wife  (one  of  the  Fannings),  at  their  home, 
Barmoor  Castle,  near  Beal.  He  had  to  leave  at  6  next 
morning,  reaching  Edinburgh  at  10,  and  lecturing  at  2. 
"  Nothing,"  he  writes,  "  could  be  much  worse,  but  I  am 
going  through  it  with  all  the  cheerfulness  of  a  Christian 
martyr." 

On  May  3  he  writes  to  his  wife  from  the  Bruces'  Edin- 
burgh house,  which  they  had  lent  him. 


478  ^IFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap. 


To  HIS  Eldest  Daughter 

Edinburgh,  May  i6,  1875. 

My  dearest  Jess — Your  mother's  letter  received  this  morn- 
ing reminds  me  that  I  have  not  written  to  "Cordelia"  (I  sup- 
pose she  means  Goneril)  by  a  message  from  that  young  person 
— so  here  is  reparation. 

I  have  330  students,  and  my  class  is  the  biggest  in  the  Uni- 
versity— but  I  am  quite  cast  down  and  discontented  because  it 
is  not  351, — being  one  more  than  the  Botany  Class  last  year — 
which  was  never  so  big  before  or  since. 

I  am  thinking  of  paying  21  street  boys  to  come  and  take  the 
extra  tickets  so  that  I  may  crow  over  all  my  colleagues. 

Fanny  Bruce  is  going  to  town  next  week  to  her  grand- 
mother's and  I  want  you  girls  to  make  friends  with  her.  It 
seems  to  me  that  she  is  very  nice — but  that  is  only  a  fallible 
man's  judgment,  and  Heaven  forbid  that  I  should  attempt  to 
forestall  Miss  Cudberry's  decision  on  such  a  question.  Anyhow 
she  has  plenty  of  energy  and,  among  other  things,  works  very 
hard  at  German, 

M says  that  the  Rootle-Tootles  have  a  bigger  drawing- 
room  than  ours.  I  should  be  sorry  to  believe  these  young  be- 
ginners guilty  of  so  much  presumption,  and  perhaps  you  will 
tell  them  to  have  it  made  smaller  before  I  visit  them. 

A  Scotch  gentleman  has  just  been  telling  me  that  May  is  the 
worst  month  in  the  year,  here ;  so  pleasant !  but  the  air  is  soft 
and  warm  to-day,  and  I  look  out  over  the  foliage  to  the  castle 
and  don't  care. 

Love  to  all,  and  specially  M .    Mind  you  don't  tell  her 

that  I  dine  out  to-day  and  to-morrow — positively  for  the  first 
and  last  times. — Ever  your  loving  father, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

However,  the  class  grew  without  such  adventitious  aid, 
and  he  writes  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  on  June  15 : — 

...  I  have  a  class  of  353,  and  instruct  them  in  dry  facts — 
particularly  warning  them  to  keep  free  of  the  infidel  specula- 
tions which  are  current  under  the  name  of  evolution. 

I  expect  an  "  examiner's  call "  from  a  Presbytery  before  the 
course  is  over,  but  I  am  afraid  that  the  pay  is  not  enough  to 
induce  me  to  forsake  my  "larger  sphere  of  influence"  in 
London. 


48o  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxx 

How  is  it  that  Dohrn  has  been  and  gone?  I  have  been 
meditating  a  letter  to  him  for  an  age.  He  wanted  to  see  me, 
and  I  did  not  know  how  to  manage  to  bring  about  a  meeting. 

Edinburgh  is  greatly  exercised  in  its  mind  about  the  vivi- 
section business,  and  "  Vagus  "  "  swells  wisibly  "  whenever  the 
subject  is  mentioned.  I  think  there  is  an  inclination  to  regard 
those  who  are  ready  to  consent  to  legislation  of  any  kind  as 
traitors,  or,  at  any  rate,  trimmers.  It  sickens  me  to  reflect  on 
the  quantity  of  time  and  worry  I  shall  have  to  g^ve  to  that  sub- 
ject when  I  get  back. 

I  see  that has  been  blowing  the  trumpet  at  the  Medical 

Association.    He  has  about  as  much  tact  as  a  flyblown  bull. 

I  have  just  had  a  long  letter  from  Wyville  Thomson.  The 
Challenger  inclines  to  think  that  Bathybius  is  a  mineral  precipi- 
tate! in  which  case  some  enemy  will  probably  say  that  it  is  a 
product  of  my  precipitation.  So  mind,  I  was  the  flrst  to  make 
that  "  goak."  Old  Ehrenberg  suggested  something  of  the  kind 
to  me,  but  I  have  not  his  letter  here.  I  shall  eat  my.  leek  hand- 
somely, if  any  eating  has  to  be  done.  They  have  found  pseudo- 
podia  in  Globigerina, 

With  all  good  wishes  from  ours  to  yours — Ever  yours  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

Cragside,  Morpeth,  August  13,  1S75. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  find  that  in  the  midst  of  my  work  in 
Edinburgh  I  omitted  to  write  to  De  Vrij,  so  I  have  just  sent  him 
a  letter  expressing  my  pleasure  in  being  able  to  co-operate  in 
any  plan  for  doing  honour  to  old  Benedict,*  for  whom  I  have 
a  most  especial  respect. 

I  am  not  sure  that  I  won't  write  something  about  him  to 
stir  up  the  Philistines. 

My  work  at  Edinburgh  got  itself  done  very  satisfactorily, 
and  I  cleared  about  £1000  by  the  transaction,  being  one  of  the 
few  examples  known  of  a  Southern  coming  north  and  pillaging 
the  Scots.  However,  I  was  not  sorry  when  it  was  all  over,  as 
I  had  been  hard  at  work  since  October  and  began  to  get  tired. 

The  wife  and  babies  from  the  south,  and  I  from  the  north, 
met  here  a  fortnight  ago  and  we  have  been  idling  very  pleasantly 
ever  since.  The  place  is  very  pretty  and  our  host  kindness 
itself.  Miss  Matthaei  and  five  of  the  bairns  are  at  Carting^on — 
a  moorland  farm-house  three  miles  off — and  in  point  of  rosy 

*  Spinoza,  a  memorial  to  whom  was  being  raised  in  Holland. 


482  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxx 

I  assure  you  I  have  not  forgotten  the  brief  interview  to 
which  you  refer,  and  I  have  often  regretted  that  the  hurry  and 
worry  of  life  (which  increases  with  the  square  of  your  distance 
from  youth)  never  allowed  me  to  take  advantage  of  your  kind 
father's  invitation  to  become  better  acquainted  with  him  and 
his.  I  found  his  card  in  Jermyn  Street  when  I  returned  last 
year,  with  a  pencilled  request  that  I  would  call  on  him  at  West- 
minster. 

I  meant  to  do  so,  but  the  whirl  of  things  delayed  me  until, 
as  I  bitterly  regret,  it  was  too  late. 

I  am  not  sure  that  I  have  any  important  letter  of  your 
father's  but  one,  written  to  me  some  fifteen  years  ago,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  death  of  a  child  who  was  then  my  only  son.  It 
was  in  reply  to  a  letter  of  my  own  written  in  a  humour  of 
savage  grief.  Most  likely  he  burned  the  letter,  and  his  reply 
would  be  hardly  intelligible  without  it.  Moreover,  I  am  not  at 
all  sure  that  I  can  lay  my  hands  upon  your  father's  letter  in  a 
certain  chaos  of  papers  which  I  have  never  had  the  courage  to 
face  for  years.    But  if  you  wish  I  will  try. 

I  am  very  grieved  to  hear  of  Mrs.  Kingsley's  indisposition. 
Pray  make  my  kindest  remembrances  to  her,  and  believe  me 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

PS, — By  the  way,  letters  addressed  to  my  private  residence, 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W., 

are  sure  not  to  be  delayed.  And  I  have  another  reason  for 
giving  the  address — the  hope  that  when  you  come  to  Town 
you  will  let  my  wife  and  daughters  make  your  acquaintance. 

His  continued  interest  in  the  germ -theory  and  the  ques- 
tion of  the  origin  of  life  (Address  at  the  British  Association, 
1870,  see  p.  355,  sq.),  appears  from  the  following: — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Oct.  15,  1875. 
My  dear  Tyndall — Will  you  bring  with  you  to  the  x  to- 
morrow a  little  bottle  full  of  fluid  containing  the  bacteria  you 
have  found  developed  in  your  infusions?  I  mean  a  good  char- 
acteristic specimen.  It  will  be  useful  to  you,  I  think,  if  I  de- 
termine the  forms  with  my  own  microscope,  and  make  drawings 
of  them  which  you  can  use. — Ever  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  can't  tell  you  how  delighted  I  was  with  the  experiments. 


^  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxx 

of  original  work  to  settle  questions  which  have  been  hanging 
vaguely  in  my  mind  for  years.  If  Amphibia  is  done  by  the  end 
of  January  it  is  as  much  as  it  will  be. 

In  February  I  must  give  myself — or  at  any  rate  my  spare 
self — up  to  my  Rectorial  Address,*  which  (tell  it  not  in  Gath) 
I  wish  at  the  bottom  of  the  Red  Sea.  And  I  do  not  suppose 
I  shall  be  able  to  look  seriously  at  either  Animal  Kingdom  or 
Anthropology  before  the  address  is  done  with.  And  all  depends 
on  the  centre  of  my  microcosm — intestinum  colon — ^whicji  plays 
me  a  trick  every  now  and  then. 

I  will  do  what  I  can  if  you  like,  but  if  -you  trust  me  it  is 
at  your  proper  peril. 

Feb,  8,  1874. — How  astonished  folks  will  be  if  eloquent  pas- 
sages out  of  the  address  get  among  the  Amphibia,  and  comments 
on  Frog  anatomy  into  the  address.  As  I  am  working  at  both 
just  now  this  result  is  iiot  improbable. 

Meanwhile  the  address  and  the  ten  days'  stay  at  Aber- 
deen had  been  "  playing  havoc  with  the  Amphibia/*  but  on 
returning  home,  he  went  to  work  upon  the  latter,  and 
writes  on  March  12: — 

I  did  not  care  to  answer  your  last  letter  until  I  had  an  instal- 
ment of  Amphibia  ready.  Said  instalment  was  sent  oflF  to  you, 
care  of  Messrs.  Black,  yesterday,  and  now  I  feel  like  Dick 
Swiveller,  when  happy  circumstances  having  enabled  him  to 
pay  off  an  old  score  he  was  able  to  begin  running  up  another. 

June  8. — I  have  had  sundry  proofs  and  returned  them.  My 
writing  is  lamentable  when  I  am  in  a  hurry,  but  I  never  pro- 
voked a  strike  before !  I  declare  I  think  I  write  as  well  as  the 
editor,  on  ordinary  occasions. 

He  was  pleased  to  find  someone  who  wrote  as  badly  as, 
or  worse  than,  himself,  and  several  times  rallies  Baynes  on 
that  score.  Thus,  when  Mrs.  Baynes  had  acted  as  her 
husband's  amanuensis,  he  writes  (February  11,  1878): — 

My  respectful  compliments  to  the  "  mere  machine,"  whose 
beautiful  caligraphy  (if  that  isn't  a  tautology)  leaves  no  doubt 
in  my  mind  that  whether  the  writing  of  your  letters  by  that 
agency  is  good  for  you  or  not  it  is  admirable  for  your  corre- 
spondents. 

Why  people  can't  write  a  plain  legible  hand  I  can't  imagine.* 

*  His  Rectorial  Address  at  Aberdeen.     (See  p.  436.) 

\N.B. — This  sentence  is  written  purposely  in  a  most  illegible  hand. 


486  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxx 

Cragside,  Morpkth,  AMg^.  24t  1875. 

My  dear  Baynes — I  think  is  like  enough  to  do  the 

'*  Ccelenterata  "  well  if  you  can  make  sure  of  his  doing  it  at  all. 
He  is  a  man  of  really  great  knowledge  of  the  literature  of 
2^1ogy,  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  accident  of  being  a  pro- 
crastinating impracticable  ass,  he  could  have  been  a  distin- 
guished man.  But  he  is  a  sort  of  Balaam-Centaur  with  the 
asinine  stronger  than  the  prophetic  moiety. 

I  should  be  disposed  to  try  him,  nevertheless. 

I  don't  think  I  have  had  final  revise  of  Biology  yet. 

I  do  not  know  that  "  Coelenterata  "  is  Lankester's  specialty. 
However,  he  is  sure  to  do  it  well  if  he  takes  it  up. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W..  Oct.  12.  1875. 

My  dear  Baynes — Do  you  remember  my  telling  you  that  I 
should  before  long  be  publishing  a  book,  of  which  general  con- 
siderations on  Biology  would  form  a  part,  and  that  I  should 
have  to  go  over  the  same  ground  as  in  the  article  for  the  Ency- 
clopaedia ? 

Well,  that  prediction  is  about  to  be  verified,  and  I  want  to 
know  what  I  am  to  do. 

You  see,  as  I  am  neither  dealing  with  Theology,  nor  History, 
nor  Criticism,  I  can't  take  a  fresh  departure  and  say  something 
entirely  different  from  what  I  have  just  written. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  I  republish  what  stands  in  the  article, 
the  Encyclopaedia  very  naturally  growls. 

What  do  the  sweetest  of  Editors  and  the  most  liberal  of 
Proprietors  say  ought  to  be  done  under  the  circumstances? 

I  pause  for  a  reply. 

I  have  carried  about  Stanley's*  note  in  my  pocket-book 
until  I  am  sorry  to  say  the  flyleaf  has  become  hideously 
stained. 

The  wife  and  daughters  could  make  nothing  of  it,  but  I, 
accustomed  to  the  MS.  of  certain  correspondents,  have  no  doubt 
as  to  the  fourth  word  of  the  second  sentence.  It  is  "  Canter- 
bury." f    Nothing  can  be  plainer. 

Hoping  the  solution  is  entirely  satisfactory, — Believe  me, 
ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


♦  The  Dean*s  handwriting  was  proverbial. 

f  The  writing  of  this  word  is  carefully  slurred  until  it  is  almost  as 
illegible  as  the  original. 


488  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  cmap.  xxx 

And  on  June  9 : — 

After  nine  days'  meditation  (directed  exclusively  to  the 
Harvey  and  Hunter  question)  I  am  not  any  "  forrarder,"  as  the 
farmer  said  after  his  third  bottle  of  Gladstone  claret.  So  per- 
haps I  had  better  mention  the  fact.  I  am  very  glad  you  have 
limed  Flower  for  "  Mammalia  "  and  "  Horse  " — nobody  could 
be  better. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,/j//y  i,  1879. 

My  dear  Baynes — On  Thursday  last  I  sought  for  you  at 
the  Athenaeum  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  told  them  to  let  me 
know  if  you  came  in  in  the  evening  when  I  was  there  again. 
But  I  doubt  not  you  were  plunged  in  dissipation. 

My  demonstrator  Parker  showed  me  to-day  a  letter  he  had 
received  from  Black's,  asking  him  to  do  anything  in  the  small 
Zoology  way  between  H  and  L. 

He  is  a  modest  man,  and  so  didn't  ask  what  the  H L  he 

was  to  do,  but  he  looked  it. 

Will  you  enlighten  him  or  me,  and  I  will  convey  the  in- 
formation on  ? 

I  had  another  daughter  married  yesterday.  She  was  a  great 
pet  and  it  is  very  hard  lines  on  father  and  mother.  The  only 
consolation  is  that  she  has  married  a  right  good  fellow,  John 
Collier  the  artist. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

July  19,  1879. — Many  thanks  for  your  and  Mrs.  Baynes' 
congratulations.  I  am  very  well  content  with  my  son-in-law, 
and  have  almost  forgiven  him  for  carrying  off  one  of  my  pets, 
which  shows  a  Christian  spirit  hardly  to  be  expected  of  me. 

South  Kensington,  Jufy  2,  1880. 

My  dear  Baynes — I  have  been  thinking  over  the  matter  of 
Instinct,  and  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  I  dare  not  under- 
take anything  fresh. 

There  is  an  address  at  Birmingham  in  the  autumn  looming 
large,  and  ghosts  of  unfinished  work  flitter  threateningly. — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


490 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxxi 


two  sets  of  facts  flow  from  a  common  cause,  evolution. 
Descent  by  modification  accounts  for  similarity  of  structure  ; 
the  process  of  gradual  adaptation  to  conditions  accounts  for 
the  existing  adaptation  to  purpose.  To  be  a  teleologist 
and  yet  accept  evolution  it  is  only  necessary  "  to  suppose 
that  the  original  plan  was  sketched  out — that  the  purpose 
was  foreshadowed  in  the  molecular  arrangements  out  of 
which  the  animals  have  come." 

This  was  no  new  view  of  his.  While,  ever  since  his 
first  review  of  the  Origin  in  1859  (Coll.  Ess.  ii.  6),  he  had 
declared  the  commoner  and  coarser  forms  of  teleology  to 
find  their  most  formidable  opponent  in  the  theory  of  evo- 
lution, and  in  1869,  addressing  the  Geological  Society,  had 
spoken  of  "  those  final  causes,  which  have  been  named  bar- 
ren virgins,  but  which  might  be  more  fitly  termed  the  hctairte 
of  philosophy,  so  constantly  have  they  led  men  astray  " 
{ib.  viii.  80;  cp.  ii.  21,  36),  he  had,  in  his  Criticism  of  the 
Origin  (1864,  ii.  86),  and  the  Genealogy  of  Animals  (1869, 
ii.  109,  sqq.)y  shown  "  how  perhaps  the  most  remarkable 
service  to  the  philosophy  of  Biology  rendered  by  Mr.  Dar- 
win is  the  reconciliation  of  teleology  and  morphology,  and 
the  explanation  of  the  facts  of  both  which  his  views  offer 
.  .  .  the  wider  teleology,  which  is  actually  based  upon  the 
fundamental  proposition  of  evolution." 

His  note-book  shows  that  he  was  busy  with  Reptilia 
from  Elgin  and  from  India;  and  with  his  Manual  of  In- 
vertebrate Anatomy y  which  was  published  the  next  year ; 
while  he  refused  to  undertake  a  course  of  ten  lectures  at 
the  Royal  Institution,  saying  that  he  had  already  too  much 
other  work  to  do,  and  would  have  no  time  for  original 
work. 

About  this  time,  also,  jn  answer  to  a  request  from  a 
believer  in  miracles,  "  that  those  who  'fail  to  perceive  the 
cogency  of  the  evidence  by  which  the  occurrence  of  miracles 
is  supported,  should  not  confine  themselves  to  the  discussion 
of  general  principles,  but  should  grapple  with  some  par- 
ticular case  of  an  alleged  miracle,"  he  read  before  the  Meta- 
physical Society  a  paper  dealing  with  the  evidence  for  the 
miracle  of  the  resurrection.    (See  p.  342.) 


492 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR    HUXLEY  chap,  xxxi 


birthday  to-morrow.  Luckily  there  will  be  no  more  of  it 
Vanity  of  Vanities !  Saturday  afternoon  I  go  out  to  Lord 
Young's  place  to  spend  Sunday.  I  have  been  in  rather  a  hypo- 
chondriacal state  of  mind,  and  I  will  see  if  this  course  of  medi- 
cine will  drive  the  seven  devils  out. 

One  of  the  chief  friendships  which  sprang  from  this 
residence  in  Edinburgh  was  that  with  Dr.  (afterwards  Sir 
John)  Skelton,  widely  known  under  his  literary  pseudonym 
of  "  Shirley."  A  civil  servant  as  well  as  a  man  of  letters, 
he  united  practical  life  w^ith  literature,  a  combination  that 
appealed  particularly  to  Huxley,  so  that  he  was  a  constant 
visitor  at  Dr.  Skelton's  picturesque  house,  the  Hermitage 
of  Braid,  near  Edinburgh.  A  number  of  letters  addressed 
to  Skelton  from  1875  to  1891  show  that  with  him  Huxley 
felt  the  stimulus  of  an  appreciative  correspondent. 

4  Melville  Street,  Edinburgh,  June  23,  1876. 

My  dear  Skelton — I  do  not  understand  how  it  is  that  your 
note  has  been  so  long  in  reaching  me ;  but  I  hasten  to  repel  the 
libellous  insinuation  that  I  have  vowed  a  vow  against  dining  at 
the  Hermitage. 

I  wish  I  could  support  that  repudiation  by  at  once  accepting 
your  invitation  for  Saturday  or  Sunday,  but  my  Saturdays  and 
Sundays  are  mortgaged  to  one  or  other  of  your  judges  (good 
judges,  obviously). 

Shall  you  be  at  home  on  Monday  or  Tuesday?  If  so,  I 
would  put  on  a  kilt  (to  be  as  little  dressed  as  possible),  and  find 
my  way  out  and  back;  happily  improving  my  mind  on  the 
journey  with  the  tracts  you  mention. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Melville  Street,  Edinburgh,  July  i,  1876. 
My  dear  Skelton — Very  many  thanks,  for  the  copy  of  the 
Comedy  of  the  Nodes,  which  reached  me  two  or  three  days  ago. 
Turning  over  the  pages  I  came  upon  the  Shepherd's  "  Terrible 
Journey  of  Timbuctoo,"  which  I  enjoyed  as  much  as  when  I  first 
read  it  thirty  odd  years  ago. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 
On  June  23  he  writes  home : — 

Did  you  read  Oilman's  note  asking  me  to  give  the  inaugural 
discourse  at  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  and  offering  £100  on 


494 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxxi 


championship  of  the  new  doctrines  had  at  the  same  time 
been  a  championship  of  freedom  and  sincerity  in  thought 
and  word  against  shams  and  self-deceptions  of  every  kind. 
It  was  not  so  much  the  preacher  of  new  doctrines  who  was 
welcomed,  as  the  apostle  of  veracity — not  so  much  the  stu- 
dent of  science  as  the  teacher  of  men. 

Moreover,  another  sentiment  coloured  this  holiday  visit. 
He  was  to  see  again  the  beloved  sister  of  his  boyhood.  She 
had  always  prophesied  his  success,  and  now  after  thirty 
years  her  prophecy  was  fulfilled  by  his  coming,  and,  in- 
deed, exceeded  by  the  manner  of  it. 

Mr.  Smalley,  then  London  correspondent  of  the  New 
York  Tribune,  was  a  fellow  passenger  of  his  on  board  the 
Germanic,  and  tells  an  interesting  anecdote  of  him : — 

Mr.  Huxley  stood  on  the  deck  of  the  Germanic  as  she 
steamed  up  the  harbour  of  New  York,  and  he  enjoyed  to  the 
full  that  marvellous  panorama.  At  all  times  he  was  on  intimate 
terms  with  Nature  and  also  with  the  joint  work  of  Nature 
and  Man ;  Man's  Place  in  Nature  being  to  him  interesting  from 
more  points  of  view  than  one.  As  we  drew  near  the  city — 
this  was  in  1876,  you  will  remember — he  asked  what  were  the 
tall  tower  and  tall  building  with  a  cupola,  then  the  two  most 
conspicuous  objects.  I  told  him  the  Tribune  and  the  Western 
Union  Telegraph  buildings.  "Ah,"  he  said,  "that  is  interest- 
ing ;  that  is  American.  In  the  Old  World  the  first  things  you  see 
as  you  approach  a  great  city  are  steeples;  here  you  see,  first, 
centres  of  intelligence.*'  Next  to  those  the  tug-boats  seemed  to 
attract  him  as  they  tore  fiercely  up  and  down  and  across  the 
bay.  He  looked  long  at  them  and  finally  said,  "  If  I  were  not  a 
man  I  think  I  should  like  to  be  a  tug."  They  seemed  to  him 
the  condensation  and  complete  expression  of  the  energy  and 
force  in  which  he  delighted. 

The  personal  welcome  he  received  from  the  friends  he 
visited  was  of  the  warmest.  On  the  arrival  of  the  Germanic 
the  travellers  were  met  by  Mr.  Appleton  the  publisher,  and 
(Carried  off  to  his  country  house  at  Riverdale.  While  his 
wife  was  taken  to  Saratoga  to  see  what  an  American  summer 
resort  was  like,  he  himself  went  on  the  9th  to  New  Haven, 
to  inspect  the  fossils  at  Yale  College,  collected  from  the 
Tertiary  deposits  of  the  Far  West  by  Professor  Marsh,  with 


496  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxxi 

A  letter  to  his  wife  describes  his  visit  to  Yale : — 

My  excellent  host  met  me  at  the  station,  and  seems  as  if  he 
could  not  make  enough  of  me.  I  am  installed  in  apartments 
which  were  occupied  by  his  uncle,  the  millionaire  Peabody,  and 
am  as  quiet  as  if  I  were  in  my  own  house.  We  have  had  a  pre- 
liminary canter  over  the  fossils,  and  I  have  seen  some  things 
which  were  worth  all  the  journey  across. 

This  is  the  most  charmingly  picturesque  town,  with  the 
streets  lined  by  avenues  of  elm  trees  which  meet  overhead.  I 
have  never  seen  anything  like  it,  and  you  must  come  and  look 
at  it.  There  is  fossil  work  enough  to  occupy  me  till  the  end 
of  the  week,  and  I  have  arranged  to  go  to  Springfield  on  Mon- 
day to  examine  the  famous  footprints  of  the  Connecticut  Valley. 

The  Governor  has  called  upon  me,  and  I  shall  have  to  go 
and  do  pretty-behaved  chez  lui  to-morrow.  An  application  has 
come  for  an  autograph,  but  I  have  not  been  interviewed ! 

This  immunity,  however,  did  not  last  long.  He  appears 
to  have  been  caught  by  the  interviewer  the  next  day,  for  he 
writes  on  the  i  ith : — 

i  I  have  not  seen  the  notice  in  the  World  you  speak  of.  You 
will  be  amused  at  the  article  written  by  the  interviewer.  He  was 
evidently  surprised  to  meet  with  so  little  of  the  "  highfalutin  " 
philosopher  in  me,  and  says  I  am  "  affable  "  and  of  "  the  com- 
mercial or  mercantile  "  type.  That  is  something  I  did  not  know, 
and  I  am  rather  proud  of  it.    We  may  be  rich  yet.  J 

As  to  his  work  at  Yale  Museum,  he  writes  in  the  same 
letter : — 

We  are  hard  at  work  still.  Breakfast  at  8.30 — go  over  to  the 
Museum  with  Marsh  at  9  or  10 — work  till  1.30— dine — go  back 
to  Museum  to  work  till  6.  Then  Marsh  takes  me  for  a  drive  to 
see  the  views  about  the  town,  and  back  to  tea  about  half-past 
eight.  He  is  a  wonderfully  good  fellow,  full  of  fun  and  stories 
about  his  Western  adventures,  and  the  collection  of  fossils  is 
the  most  wonderful  thing  I  ever  saw.  I  wish  I  could  spare 
three  weeks  instead  of  one  to  study  it. 

V  To-morrow  evening  we  are  to  have  a  dinner  by  way  of 
winding  up,  and  he  has  asked  a  lot  of  notables  to  meet  me.  I 
assure  you  I  am  being  "  made  of,"  as  I  thought  nobody  but  the 
little  wife  was  foolish  enough  to  do.] 


498  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  CHAP.  XXXI 

Fiske,  at  their  summer  home.  Among  the  other  visitors 
were  the  eminent  musical  composer  Mr.  Paine,  the  poet 
Cranch,  and  daughters  of  Hawthorne  and  Longfellow,  so 
that  they  found  themselves  in  the  midst  of  a  particularly 
cheerful  and  delightful  party.  From  Petersham  they  pro- 
ceeded to  Buffalo,  the  meeting-place  that  year  of  the  Ameri- 
can Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  which  my 
father  had  promised  to  attend.  Here  they  stayed  with  Mr. 
Marshall,  a  leading  lawyer,  who  afterwards  visited  them  in 
England. 

A  week  was  spent  at  Niagara,  partly  in  making  holiday, 
partly  in  shaping  the  lectures  which  had  to  be  delivered  at 
the  end  of  the  trip.  As  to  the  impression  made  upon  him 
by  the  Falls — an  experience  which,  it  is  generally  presumed, 
every  traveller  is  bound  to  record — I  niay  note  that  after 
the  first  disappointment  at  their  appearance,  inevitable 
wherever  the  height  of  a  waterfall  is  less  than  the  breadth, 
he  found  in  them  an  inexhaustible  charm  and  fascination. 
As  in  duty  bound,  he,  with  my  mother,  completed  his  experi- 
ences by  going  under  the  wall  of  waters  to  the  "  Cave  of  the 
Winds."  But  of  all  things  nothing  pleased  him  more  than 
to  sit  of  an  evening  by  the  edge  of  the  river,  and  through 
the  roar  of  the  cataract  to  listen  for  the  under-sound  of  the 
beaten  stones  grinding  together  at  its  foot. 

Leaving  Niagara  on  September  2,  they  travelled  to  Cin- 
cinnati, a  20-hours'  journey,  where  they  rested  a  day ;  on  the 
4th  another  10  hours  took  them  to  Nashville,  where  they 
were  to  meet  his  sister,  Mrs.  Scott.  Though  1 1  years  his 
senior,  she  maintained  her  vigour  and  brightness  undimmed, 
as  indeed  she  did  to  the  end  of  her  life,  surviving  him  by 
a  few  weeks.  As  she  now  stood  on  the  platform  at  Nash- 
ville, Mrs.  Huxley,  who  had  never  seen  her,  picked  her  out 
from  among  all  the  people  by  her  piercing  black  eyes,  so 
like  those  of  her  mother  as  described  in  the  Autobiograph- 
ical sketch  (Coll.  Ess,  i.). 

Nashville,  her  son's  home,  had  been  chosen  as  the  meet- 
ing-place by  Mrs.  Scott,  because  it  was  not  so  far  south  nor 
so  hot  as  Montgomery,  where  she  was  then  living.  Never- 
theless in  Tennessee  the  heat  of  the  American  summer  was 


500  L1F£  Ot   ?R0F£SS0R   HUXLEY  chap.  x>cxi 

I  cannot  say  that  I  am  in  the  slightest  degree  impressed  by 
your  bigness  or  your  material  resources,  as  such.  Size  is  not 
grandeur,  territory  does  not  make  a  nation.  The  great  issue, 
about  which  hangs  a  true  sublimity,  and  the  terror  of  overhang- 
ing fate,  is,  what  are  you  going  to  do  with  all  these  things  ?  .  .  . 

The  one  condition  of  success,  your  sole  safeguard,  is  the 
moral  worth  and  intellectual  clearness  of  the  individual  citizen. 
Education  cannot  give  these,  but  it  can  cherish  them  and  bring 
them  to  the  front  in  whatever  station  of  society  they  are  to  be 
found,  and  the  universities  ought  to  be  and  may  be,  the  fortresses 
of  the  higher  life  of  the  nation. 

This  address  was  delivered  under  circumstances  of  pecul- 
iar difficulty.  The  day  before,  an  expedition  had  been  made 
to  Washington,  from  which  Huxley  returned  very  tired, 
only  to  be  told  that  he  was  to  attend  a  formal  dinner  and 
reception  the  same  evening.  "  I  don't  know  how  I  shall 
stand  it,"  he  remarked.  Going  to  his  room,  he  snatched  an 
hour  or  two  of  rest,  but  was  then  called  upon  to  finish  his 
address  before  going  out.  It  seems  that  it  had  to  be  ready 
for  simultaneous  publication  in  the  New  York  papers.  Now 
the  lecture  was  not  written  out;  it  was  to  be  given  from 
notes  only.  So  he  had  to  deliver  it  in  extcnso  to  the  re- 
porter, who  took  it  down  in  shorthand,  promising  to  let  him 
have  a  longhand  copy  in  good  time  the  next  morning.  It 
did  not  come  till  the  last  moment.  Glancing  at  it  on  his 
way  to  the  lecture  theatre,  he  discovered  to  his  horror  that 
it  was  written  upon  "  flimsy  "  from  which  he  would  not  be 
able  to  read  it  with  any  success.  He  wisely  gave  up  the 
attempt,  and  made  up  his  mind  to  deliver  the  lecture  as 
best  he  could  from  memory.  The  lecture  as  delivered  was 
very  nearly  the  same  as  that  which  he  had  dictated  the 
night  before,  but  with  some  curious  discrepancies  between 
the  two  accounts,  which,  he  used  to  say,  occurring  as  they 
did  in  versions  both  purporting  to  have  been  taken  down 
from  his  lips,  might  well  lead  the  ingenious  critic  of  the 
future  to  pronounce  them  both  spurious,  and  to  declare  that 
the  pretended  original  was  never  delivered  under  the  cir- 
cumstances alleged.* 

*  Cp.  the  incident  at  Belfast,  p.  444. 


502 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  CHAP,  xxxi 


on  the  front  limb  and  three  on  the  hind  limb.  Judging 
from  the  completeness  of  the  series  or  forms  so  far,  he 
ventured  to  indulge  in  a  prophecy. 

Thus,  thanks  to  these  important  researches,  it  has  become 
evident  that,  so  far  as  our  present  knowledge  extends,  the  his- 
tory of  the  horse-type  is  exactly  and  precisely  that  which  could 
have  been  predicted  from  a  knowledge  of  the  principles  of 
evolution.  And  the  knowledge  we  now  possess  justifies  us  com- 
pletely in  the  anticipation  that  when  the  still  lower  Eocene 
deposits,  and  those  which  belong  to  the  Cretaceous  epoch,  have 
yielded  up  their  remains  of  ancestral  equine  animals,  we  shall 
find,  first,  a  form  with  four  complete  toes  and  a  rudiment  of  the 
innermost  or  first  digit  in  front,  with,  probably,  a  rudiment  of 
the  fifth  digit  in  the  hind  foot;  while,  in  still  older  forms,  the 
series  of  the  digits  will  be  more  and  more  complete,  until  we 
come  to  the  five-toed  animals,  in  which,  if  the  doctrine  of  evo- 
lution is  well  founded,  the  whole  series  must  have  taken  its 
origin. 

Seldom  has  prophecy  been  sooner  fulfilled.  Within  two 
months,  Professor  Marsh  had  discovered  a  new  genus  of 
equine  mammals,  Eohippus,  from  the  lowest  Eocene  de- 
posits of  the  West,  which  corresponds  very  nearly  to  the 
description  given  above. 

He  continues: — 

That  is  what  I  mean  by  demonstrative  evidence  of  evolu- 
tion. An  inductive  hypothesis  is  said  to  be  demonstrated  when 
the  facts  are  shown  to  be  in  entire  accordance  with  it.  If  that  is 
not  scientific  proof,  there  are  no  merely  inductive  conclusions 
which  can  be  said  to  be  proved.  And  the  doctrine  of  evolution, 
at  the  present  time,  rests  upon  exactly  as  secure  a  foundation 
as  the  Copemican  theory  of  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies 
did  at  the  time  of  its  promulgation.  Its  logical  basis  is  of  pre- 
cisely the  same  character — the  coincidence  of  the  observed  facts 
with  theoretical  requirements. 

He  left  New  York  on  September  23.  "  I  had  a  very 
pleasant  trip  in  Yankee-land,"  he  writes  to  Professor  Baynes, 
"  and  did  not  give  utterance  to  a  good  deal  that  I  am  re- 
ported to  have  said  there."  He  reached  England  in  good 
time  for  the  beginning  of  his  autumn  lectures,  and  his 


504 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxxi 


recollect  that  this  is  a  sacrifice,  and  that  you  should  not  be 
surprised  if  it  occasionally  happens  that  you  see  a  biologist 
apparently  trespassing  in  the  region  of  philosophy  or  poli- 
tics; or  meddling  with  human  education;  because,  after  all, 
that  is  a  part  of  his  kingdom  which  he  has  only  volun- 
tarily forsaken  " — how  to  learn  biology,  the  u^e  of  Muse- 
ums, and  above  all,  the  utility  of  biology,  as  helping  to  give 
right  ideas  in  this  world,  which  "  is  after  all,  absolutely  gov- 
erned by  ideas,  and  very  often  by  the  wildest  and  most 
hypothetical  ideas." 

This  lecture  on  Biology  was  first  published  among  the 
American  Addresses  in  1877. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  an  extremely  Broad  Church 
divine  was  endeavouring  to  obtain  the  signatures  of  men 
of  science  to  a  document  he  had  drawn  up  protesting 
against  certain  orthodox  doctrines.  Huxley,  however,  re- 
fused to  sign  the  protest,  and  wrote  the  following  letter  of 
explanation,  a  copy  of  which  he  sent  to  Mr.  Darwin. 

AW.  18,  1876. 

Dear  Sir — I  have  read  the  "  Protest,"  with  a  copy  of  which 
you  have  favoured  me,  and  as  you  wish  that  I  should  do  so,  I 
will  trouble  you  with  a  brief  statement  of  my  reasons  for  my 
inability  to  sign  it. 

I  object  to  clause  2  on  the  ground  long  since  taken  by 
Hume  that  the  order  of  the  universe  such  as  we  observe  it 
to  be,  furnishes  us  with  the  only  data  upon  which  we  can 
base  any  conclusion  as  to  the  character  of  the  originator 
thereof. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  men  sin,  and  the  consequences  of  their 
sins  aflFect  endless  generations  of  their  progeny.  Men  are 
tempted,  men  are  punished  for  the  sins  of  others  without  merit 
or  demerit  of  their  own;  and  they  are  tormented  for  their  evil 
deeds  as  long  as  their  consciousness  lasts. 

The  theological  doctrines  to  which  you  refer,  therefore,  are 
simply  extensions  of  generalisations  as  well  based  as  any  in 
physical  science.  Very  likely  they  are  illegitimate  extensions  of 
these  generalisations,  but  that  does  not  make  them  wrong  in 
principle. 

And  I  should  consider  it  waste  of  time  to  "  protest "  against 
that  which  is. 


5o6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxxi 

the  village  church  when  the  parson  began  to  read  it;  and 
thinking  to  gain  my  father's  assent,  she  turned  to  him  and 
said  graciously^  "  Now,  Mr.  Huxley,  don't  you  think  I  was 
quite  right  to  mark  my  disapproval  ?  " 

"  My  dear  Lady  "  he  replied,  "  I  should  as  soon 

think  of  rising  and  leaving  your  table  because  I  disapproved 
of  one  of  the  entrees." 


CHAPTER   XXXII 

1877 

In  this  year  he  delivered  lectures  and  addresses  on  the 
Geological  History  of  Birds,  at  the*  Zoological  Society's 
Gardens,  June  7 ;  on  "  Starfishes  and  their  Allies,"  at  the 
Royal  Institution,  March  7;  at  the  London  Institution, 
Dec.  17,  on  Belemnites  (a  subject  on  which  he  had  written 
in  1864,  and  which  was  doubtless  suggested  anew  by  his 
autumn  holiday  at  Whitby,  where  the  Lias  cliffs  are  full  of 
these  fossils) ;  at  the  Anthropological  Conference,  May  22, 
on  Elementary  Instruction  in  Physiology  (Coll.  Ess.  iii.  294), 
with  special  reference  to  the  recent  legislation  as  to  experi- 
ments on  living  animals ;  and  on  Technical  Education  to  the 
Working  Men's  Club  and  Institute,  December  i  (Coll.  Ess, 
iii.  404) :  a  perilous  subject,  indeed,  considering,  as  he  re- 
marks, that  "  any  candid  observer  of  the  phenomena  of 
modem  society  will  readily  admit  that  bores  must  be  classed 
among  the  enemies  of  the  human  race;  and  a  little  con- 
sideration will  probably  lead  him  to  the  further  admission, 
that  no  species  of  that  extensive  genus  of  noxious  creatures 
is  more  objectionable  than  the  educational  bore.  ...  In  the 
course  of  the  last  ten  years,  to  go  back  no  farther,  I  am 
afraid  to  say  how  often  I  have  ventured  to  speak  of  edu- 
cation ;  indeed,  the  only  part  of  this  wide  region  into  which, 
as  yet,  I  have  not  adventured,  is  that  into  which  I  propose 
to  intrude  to-day." 

The  choice  of  subject  for  this  address  was  connected 
with  a  larger  campaign  for  the  establishment  of  technical 
education  on  a  proper  footing,  which  began  with  his  work 
on  the  School  Board,  or  was  this  year  brought  prominently 

507 


5o8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxxii 

before  the  public  by  another  address  delivered  at  the  Society 
of  Arts.  The  Clothworkers  Company  had  already  been  as- 
sisting the  Society  of  Arts  in  their  efforts  for  the  spread 
of  technical  education ;  and  in  July  1877  ^  special  committee 
of  the  Guilds  applied  to  him,  amongst  half  a  dozen  others, 
to  furnish  them  with  a  report  as  to  the  objects  and  methods 
of  a  scheme  of  technical  education.  This  paper  fills  sixteen 
pages  in  the  Report  of  the  Livery  Companies'  Committee 
for  1878.  The  fundamental  principles  on  which  he  bases 
his  practical  recommendations  are  contained  in  the  following 
paragraph : — 

It  appears  to  me  that  if  every  person  who  is  engaged  in  an 
industry  had  access  to  instruction  in  the  scientific  principles  on 
which  that  industry  is  based;  in  the  mode  of  applying  these 
principles  to  practice ;  in  the  actual  use  of  the  means  and  appli- 
ances employed;  in  the  language  of  the  people  who  know  as 
much  about  the  matter  as  we  do  ourselves;  and  lastly,  in  the 
art  of  keeping  accounts,  Technical  Education  would  have  done 
all  that  can  be  required  of  it. 

And  his  suggestion  about  buildings  was  at  once  adopted 
by  the  Committee,  namely,  that  they  should  be  erected  at  a 
future  date,  regard  being  had  primarily  rather  to  what  is 
wanted  in  the  inside  than  what  will  look  well  from  the 
outside. 

Now  the  Guilds  formed  a  very  proper  body  to  set  such 
a  scheme  on  foot,  because  only  such  wealthy  and  influential 
members  of  the  first  mercantile  city  in  the  world  could 
afford  to  let  themselves  be  despised  and  jeered  at  for  pro- 
fessing to  teach  English  manufacturers  and  English  mer- 
chants that  they  needed  to  be  taught ;  and  to  spend  £25,000 
a  year  towards  that  end  for  some  time  without  apparent 
result. 

That  they  eventually  succeeded,  is  due  no  little  to  the 
careful  plans  drawn  out  by  Huxley.  He  may  be  described 
as  "  really  the  engineer  of  the  City  and  Guilds  Institute ;  for 
without  his  advice,"  declared  one  of  the  leading  members, 
"  we  should  not  have  known  what  to  have  done." 

At  the  same  time  he  warned  them  against  indiscriminate 
zeal;  "though  under-instruction  is  a  bad  thing,  it  is  not 


5IO  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxxii 

parties  under  way  in  the  matter.  In  the  words  of  Mr.  George 
Howell,  M.P.,*  it  has  an  additional  interest  "  as  indicating 
the  nature  of  his  own  epitaph  '* ;  as  a  man  "  whose  highest 
ambition  ever  was  to  uplift  the  masses  of  the  people  and 
promote  their  welfare  intellectually,  socially,  and  indus- 
trially." 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  /an.  2,  i88o. 

Dear  Mr.  Howell — Your  letter  is  a  welcome  New  Year's 
gift.  There  are  two  things  I  really  care  about — one  is  the 
progress  of  scientific  thought,  and  the  other  is  the  bettering  of 
the  condition  of  the  masses  of  the  people  by  bettering  them  in 
the  way  of  lifting  themselves  out  of  the  misery  which-  has 
hitherto  been  the  lot  of  the  majority  of  them.  Posthumous  fame 
is  not  particularly  attractive  to  me,  but,  if  I  am  to  be  remem- 
bered at  all,  I  would  rather  it  should  be  as  **  a  man  who  did 
his  best  to  help  the  people  "  than  by  other  title.  So  you  see 
it  is  no  small  pleasure  and  encouragement  to  me  to  find  that 
I  have  been,  and  am,  of  any  use  in  this  direction. 

Ever  since  my  experience  on  the  School  Board,  Ihave  been 
convinced  that  I  should  lose  rather  than  gain  by  entering  direct- 
ly into  politics.  ...  But  I  suppose  I  have  some  ten  years  of 
activity  left  in  me,  and  you  may  depend  upon  it  I  shall  lose  no 
chance  of  striking  a  blow  for  the  cause  I  have  at  heart.  I 
thought  the  time  had  come  the  other  day  at  the  Society  of  Arts, 
and  the  event  proves  I  was  not  mistaken.  The  animal  is  mov- 
ing, and  by  a  judicious  exhibition  of  carrots  in  front  and  kicks 
behind,  we  shall  get  him  into  a  fine  trot  presently.  In  the  mean- 
time do  not  let  the  matter  rest.  .  .  .  The  (City)  companies 
should  be  constantly  reminded  that  a  storm  is  brewing.  There 
are  excellent  men  among  them,  who  want  to  do  what  is  right, 
and  need  help  against  the  sluggards  and  reactionaries.  It  will 
be  best  for  me  to  be  quiet  for  a  while,  but  you  will  understand 
that  I  am  watching  for  the  turn  of  events. — I  am,  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

This  summer,  too,  he  delivered  a  course  on  Biology  for 
Teachers  at  South  Kensington,  and  published  not  only  his 
Anvcrican  Addresses,  but  also  the  Physiography,  founded 
upon  the  course  delivered  seven  weeks  before.  The  book, 
of  which  3386  copies  were  sold  in  the  first  six  weeks,  was 
fruitful  in  two  ways ;  it  showed  that  a  geographical  subject 

*  Who  sent  it  to  the  Times  Quiy  3, 1895)  jus^  a^(t?r  Huxley's  death. 


512  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY  chap,  xxxii 

I  am  sorry  to  say  I  shall  have  to  come  here  again  in  Easter 
week.  It  is  Uie  only  time  the  Lord  President  is  free  from  his 
courts,  and  although  we  all  howled  privately,  there  was  no  help 
for  it  Whether  we  finish  then  or  not  will  depend  on  the  decision 
of  the  Government,  as  to  our  taking  up  the  case  of  you  trouble- 
some women,  who  want  admission  into  the  University  (very 
rightly  too  I  think).  If  we  have  to  go  into  this  question  it  will 
involve  the  taking  of  new  evidence  and  no  end  of  bother.  I 
find  my  colleagues  very  reasonable,  and  I  hope  some  good  may 
be  done,  that  is  the  only  consolation. 

I  went  out  with  Blackie  last  evening  to  dine  with  the 
Skeltons,  at  a  pretty  place  called  the  Hermitage,  about  three 
miles  from  here.  .  .  .  Blackie  and  I  walked  home  with  snow  on 
the  ground  and  a  sharp  frost.  I  told  you  it  would  turn  cold 
as  soon  as  I  got  here,  but  I  am  none  the  worse. 

It  was  just  the  same  in  April : — 

It  is  quite  cold  here  as  usual,  and  there  was  ice  on  the  ponds 
we  passed  this  morning.  .  .  .  I  am  much  better  lodged  than  I 
was  last  time,  for  the  same  thanks  to  John  Bruce,  but  I  do 
believe  that  the  Eldinburgh  houses  are  the  coldest  in  the  uni- 
verse. In  spite  of  a  good  breakfast  and  a  good  fire,  the  half 
of  me  that  is  writing  to  you  is  as  cold  as  charity. 

April  4. — We  toil  at  the  Commission  every  day,  and  don't 
make  any  rapid  progress.  An  awful  fear  creeps  over  me  that 
we  shall  not  finish  this  bout. 

While  he  was  in  Edinburgh  for  the  third  time,  his  at- 
tention was  called  to  an  article  in  the  Echo,  the  organ  of  the 
anti-vivisection  party.     He  writes: — 

The  Echo  is  pretty.  It  is  one  of  a  long  series  of  articles 
from  the  same  hand,  but  I  don't  think  they  hurt  anybody  and 
they  evidently  please  the  writer.  For  some  reason  or  other 
they  have  not  attacked  me  yet,  but  I  suppose  my  turn  will  come. 

Again : — 

Thank  you  for  sending  me  John  Bright's  speeches.  They 
are  very  good,  but  hardly  up  to  his  old  mark  of  eloquence.  Some 
parts  are  very  touching. 

His  health  was  improving,  as  he  notes  with  satisfaction : 

Every  day  this  week  we  have  had  about  four  hours  of  the 
Commission,  and  I  have  dined  out  four  days  out  of  the  sii;. 


514 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY  chap,  xxxn 


ceived  an  enthusiastic  account  of  the  proceedings  from  his 
son,  and  wrote  to  thank  Huxley,  who  replied : — 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Nov,  21,  1877. 
My  dear  Darwin — Nothing  ever  gave  me  greater  pleasure 
than  the  using  the  chance  of  speaking  my  mind  about  you  and 
your  work  which  was  afforded  me  at  the  dinner  the  other  night. 
I  said  not  a  word  beyond  what  I  believe  to  be  strictly  accurate : 
and,  please  Sir,  I  didn't  sneer  at  anybody.  There  was  only  a 
little  touch  of  the  whip  at  starting,  and  it  was  so  tied  round  with 
ribbons  that  it  took  them  some  time  to  find  out  where  the  (lick 
had  hit.  T.  H.  Huxley. 

He  writes  to  his  wife : — 

I  will  see  if  I  can  recollect  the  speech.  I  made  a  few  notes 
sitting  in  Dewar*s  room  before  the  dinner.  But  as  usual  I  did 
not  say  some  things  I  meant  to  say,  and  said  others  that  came 
up  on  the  spur  of  the  moment. 

And  again: — 

Please  I  didp't  say  that  Reaumur  was  the  other  greatest 
scientific  man  since  Aristotle.  But  I  said  that  in  a  certain 
character  of  his  work  he  was  the  biggest  man  between  Aristotle 
and  Darwin.  I  really  must  write  out  an  "  authorised  version  " 
of  my  speech.  I  hear  the  Latin  oration  is  to  be  in  Nature  this 
week,  and  Lockyer  wanted  me  to  give  him  the  heads  of  my 
speech,  but  I  did  not  think  it  would  be  proper  to  do  so,  and 
refused.  I  have  written  out  my  speech  as  well  as  I  can  recollect 
it.  I  do  not  mind  any  friend  seeing  it,  but  you  must  not  let  it 
get  about  as  the  dinner  was  a  private  one. 

The  notes  of  his  speech  run  as  follows: — 

Mr.  President — I  rise  with  pleasure  and  with  alacrity  to 
respond  to  the  toast  which  you  have  just  proposed,  and  I  may 
say  that  I  consider  one  of  the  greatest  honours  which  have  be- 
fallen me,  to  be  called  upon  to  represent  my  distinguished  friend 
Mr.  Darwin  upon  this  occasion.  I  say  to  represent  Mr.  Darwin, 
for  I  cannot  hope  to  personate  him,  or  to  say  all  that  would  be 
dictated  by  a  mind  conspicuous  for  its  powerful  humility  and 
strong  gentleness. 

Mr.  Darwin's  work  had  fully  earned  the  distinction  you 
have  to-day  conferred  upon  him  four  and  twenty  years  ago; 
but   I  doubt  not  that  he  would  have  found  in  that  circum- 


5i6  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY         chap,  xxxii 

opinion,  that  from  Aristotle's  great  summary  of  the  Biological 
knowledge  of  his  time  down  to  the  present  day,  there  is  nothing 
comparable  to  the  Origin  of  Species,  as  a  connected  survey  of 
the  phenomena  of  life  permeated  and  vivified  by  a  central  idea. 
In  remote  ages  the  historian  of  science  will  dwell  upon  it  as 
the  starting-point  of  the  Biology  of  his  present  and  our  future. 

My  friend  Dr.  Humphry  has  adverted  to  somebody  about 
whom  I  know  nothing,  who  says  that  the  exact  and  critical 
studies  pursued  in  this  University  are  ill-calculated  to  preserve 
a  high  tone  of  mind. 

I  presume  that  this  saying  must  proceed  from  some  one 
wholly  unacquainted  with  Cambridge.  Whoever  he  may  be,  I 
beg  him,  if  he  can,  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  Charles  Darwin. 

In  Mr.  Darwin's  name  I  beg  leave  to  thank  you  for  the 
honour  you  have  done  him. 

It  happened  that  the  quadrennial  election  of  a  Lord 
Rector  at  St.  Andrews  University  fell  in  this  year,  and  on 
behalf  of  a  number  of  students,  Huxley  received  a  telegram 
from  his  son,  now  newly  entered  at  St.  Andrews,  askings 
him  to  stand.    He  writes  to  his  wife : — 

That  boy  of  yours  has  just  sent  me  a  telegram,  which  I 
enclose.  I  sent  back  message  to  say  that  as  a  Commissioner  on 
the  Scotch  Universities  I  could  not  possibly  stand.  The  cockerel 
is  beginning  to  crow  early.  I  do  believe  that  to  please  the  boy 
I  should  have  assented  to  it  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  R.  Com- 
mission. 

Apropos  of  controversies  (November  23) 

We  had  a  grand  discussion  at  the  Royal  Society  last 
night  between  Tyndall  and  Burdon  Sanderson.  The  place  was 
crammed,  and  we  had  a  late  sitting.  Fm  not  sure,  however, 
that  we  had  got  much  further  at  the  end  than  at  the  beginning, 
which  is  a  way  controversies  have. 

The  following  story  is  worth  recording,  as  an  illustration 
not  only  of  the  way  in  which  Huxley  would  give  what  help 
was  in  his  power  to  another  man  of  science  in  distress,  but 
of  the  ready  aid  proflfered  on  this,  as  on  many  other  occa- 
sions, by  a  wealthy  northern  merchant  who  was  interested 
in  science.  A  German  scientific  worker  in  England,  whom 
we  will  call  H.,  had  fallen  into  distress,  and  applied  to  him 


5i8  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         CHAP,  xxxil 

much  better  for  you,  and  I  believe  for  Mrs.  Morley,  than  the 
atmosphere  of  the  melancholy  main,  the  effects  of  which  on  the 
human  constitution  have  been  so  well  expounded  by  that  emi- 
nent empiric,  Dr.  Dizzy. 

Anyhow,  I  wish  we  could  see  something  of  you  now  and 
then. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Darwin  got  his  degree  with  g^eat  iclat  on  Saturday.  I  had 
to  return  thanks  for  his  health  at  the  dinner  of  the  Philosophical 
Society ;  and  oh  I  I  chaffed  the  dons  so  sweetly. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  Nov.  27,  1877. 

My  dear  Morley — You  shall  have  both  the  articles — if  it  is 
only  that  I  may  enjoy  the  innocent  pleasure  of  Knowles'  face 
when  I  let  him  know  what  has  become  of  them. 

Stormy  ocean,  forsooth  !  I  back  the  storm  and  rain  through 
which  I  came  home  to-night  against  anything  London-super- 
mare  has  to  show. 

I  will  send  the  MS.  to  Virtue  as  soon  as  it  is  in  a  reasonable 
state. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,yaif.  8,  1878. 

My  dear  Morley — Many  thanks  for  the  cheque.  In  my 
humble  judgment  it  is  quite  as  much  as  the  commodity  is  worth. 

It  was  a  great  pleasure  to  us  all  to  have  you  with  us  on  New 
Year's  Day.  My  wife  claims  it  as  her  day,  and  I  am  not  sup- 
posed to  know  anything  about  the  guests  except  Spencer  and 
Tyndall.  None  but  the  very  elect  are  invited  to  the  sacred 
feast — so  you  see  where  you  stand  among  the  predestined  who 
cannot  fall  away  from  the  state  of  grace. 

I  have  not  seen  Spencer  in  such  good  form  and  good  humour 
combined  for  an  age. 

I  am  working  away  at  Harvey,  and  will  send  the  MS.  to 
Virtue's  as  soon  as  I  am  sufficiently  forward. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dtc.  9,  1877. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  am  so  sorry  to  have  been  out  when 
Mrs.  Tyndall  called  to-day.  By  what  we  heard  at  the  x  on 
Thursday,  I  imagined  you  were  practically  all  right  again,  or  I 
should  have  been  able  to  look  after  you  to-day. 

But  what  I  bother  you  with  this  note  for  is  to  beg  you  not  to 
lecture  at  the  London  Institution  to-morrow,  but  to  let  me 


i877  "BOTTLEP   LIFE"  519 

change  days  with  you,  and  so  give  yourself  a  week  to  recover. 
And  if  you  are  seedy,  then  I  am  quite  ready  to  give  them  another 
lecture  on  the  Hokypotamus  or  whatever  else  may  turn  up. 

But  don't  go  and  exert  yourself  in  your  present  condition. 
These  severe  colds  have  often  nothing  very  tangible  about  them, 
but  are  not  to  be  trifled  with  when  folks  are  past  fifty. 

Let  me  have  an  answer  to  say  that  I  may  send  a  telegram  to 
Nicholson  first  thing  to-morrow  morning  to  say  that  I  will  lec- 
ture vice  you.  My  "  bottled  life,"  as  Hutton  calls  it  in  the  Spec- 
tator* this  week,  is  quite  ready  to  go  off. 

Now  be  a  sane  man  and  take  my  advice. — Ever  yours  very 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

• 

*  The  Spectator  for  Dec.  8,  1877,  began  an  article  thus : — **  Pro- 
fessor Huxley  delivered  a  very  arousing  address  last  Saturday  at  the 
Society  of  Arts,  on  the  very  unpromising  subject  of  technical  educa- 
tion ;  but  we  believe  that  if  Professor  Huxley  were  to  become  the 
President  of  the  Social  Science  Association,  or  of  the  International 
Statistical  Congress,  he  would  still  be  amusing,  so  much  bottled  life 
does  he  infuse  into  the  driest  topic  on  which  human  beings  ever  con- 
trived to  prose." 


CHAPTER    XXXIII 

1878 

The  year  1878  was  the  tercentenary  of  Harvey's  birth, 
and  Huxley  was  very  busy  with  the  Hfe  and  work  of  that 
great  physician.  He  spoke  at  the  memorial  meeting  at  the 
College  of  Physicians  (July  18),  he  gave  a  lecture  on  Harvey 
at  the  Royal  Institution  on  January  25,  afterwards  published 
in  Nature  and  the  Fortnightly  Review,  and  intended  to  write 
a  book  on  him  in  a  projected  English  Men  of  Science  series 
(see  p.  536). 

I  am  very  glad  you  like  "  Harvey "  (he  writes  to  Prof. 
Baynes  on  Feb.  11).  He  is  one  of  the  biggest  scientific  minds 
we  have  had.  I  expect  to  get  well  vilipended  not  only  by  the 
anti-vivisection  folk,  for  the  most  of  whom  I  have  a  hearty  con- 
tempt, but  apropos  of  Bacon.  I  have  been  oppressed  by  the 
humbug  of  the  **  Baconian  Induction ''  all  my  life,  and  at  last 
the  worm  has  turned. 

Now  in  this  lecture  he  showed  that  Harvey  employed 
vivisection  to  establish  the  doctrine  of  the  circulation  of  the 
blood,  and  furthermore,  that  he  taught  this  doctrine  before 
the  Novum  Organum  was  published,  and  that  his  subsequent 
Exercitatio  displays  no  trace  of  being  influenced  by  Bacon's 
work.  After  glancing  at  the  superstitious  reverence  for  the 
"  Baconian  Induction,"  he  pointed  out  Bacon's  ignorance  of 
the  progress  of  science  up  to  his  time,  and  his  inability  to 
divine  the  importance  of  what  he  knew  by  hearsay  of  the 
work  of  Copernicus,  or  Kepler,  or  Galileo;  of  Gilbert,  his 
contemporary,  or  of  Galen ;  and  wound  up  by  quoting  Ellis's 
severe  judgment  of  Bacon  in  the  General  Preface  to  the 
Philosophic  Works,  in  Spedding's  classical  edition  (p.  38) : — 
520 


522  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxxiii 

mony  to  the  influence  of  Huxley's  writings  even  on  his  elder 
contemporaries. 

From  James  Spedding 

•'  Feb,  I.  1878. 

.  .  .  When  you  admit  that  you  study  Bacon  with  a  preju- 
dice, you  mean  of  course  an  unfavourable  opinion  previously 
formed  on  sufficient  grounds.  Now  I  am  myself  supposed  to 
have  studied  him  with  a  prejudice  the  other  way:  but  this  I 
cannot  admit,  in  any  sense  of  the  word;  for  when  I  first  made 
his  acquaintance  I  had  no  opinion  or  feeling  about  him  at  all 
— more  than  the  ordinary  expectation  of  a  young  man  to  find 
what  he  is  told  to  look  for.  My  earliest  impression  of  his 
character  came  probably  from  Thomson — ^whose  portrait  of 
him,  except  as  touched  and  softened  by  the  tenderer  hand  of 
"  the  sweet-souled  poet  of  the  Seasons,"  did  not  differ  from  the 
ordinary  one.  It  was  not  long  indeed  before  T  did  begin  to 
form  an  opinion  of  my  own ;  one  of  those  a//^r- judgments  which 
are  liable  to  be  mistaken  for  prejudices  by  those  who  judge 
diflFerently,  and  which,  being  formed,  do,  no  doubt,  tell  upon  the 
balance.  For  it  was  not  long  before  I  found  myself  indebted 
to  him  for  the  greatest  benefit  probably  that  any  man,  living  or 
dead,  can  confer  on  another.  In  my  school  and  college  days  I 
had  been  betrayed  by  an  ambition  to  excel  in  themes  and  decla- 
mations into  the  study,  admiration,  and  imitation  of  the  rheto- 
ricians. In  the  course  of  my  last  long  vacation — the  autumn  of 
1830 — I  was  inspired  with  a  new  ambition,  namely,  to  think 
justly  about  everything  which  I  thought  about  at  all,  and  to  act 
accordingly ;  a  conviction  for  which  I  cannot  cease  to  feel  grate- 
ful, and  which  I  distinctly  trace  to  the  accident  of  having  in 
the  beginning  of  that  same  vacation  given  two  shillings  at 
a  second-hand  bookstall  for  a  little  volume  of  Dove's  classics, 
containing  the  Advancement  of  Learning.  And  if  I  could  tell 
you  how  many  superlatives  I  have  since  that  time  degraded 
into  the  positive;  how  many  innumerables  and  infinites  I  have 
replaced  by  coimted  numbers  and  estimated  quantities;  how 
many  assumptions,  important  to  the  argument  in  hand,  I  have 
withdrawn  because  I  found  on  more  consideration  that  the  fact 
might  be  explained  otherwise;  and  how  many  effective  epithets 
I  have  discarded  when  I  found  that  I  could  not  fully  verify 
them;  you  would  think  it  no  less  than  just  that  I  should  claim 
for  myself  and  concede  to  others  the  right  of  being  judged  by 
the  last  edition  rather  than  the  first.     That  a  persistent  en- 


i878  THE   AFGHAN   WAR  523 

deavour  to  free  myself  from  what  you  regard  as  Bacon*s  charac- 
teristic vice  should  have  been  the  fruit  of  a  desire  to  follow  his 
example,  will  seem  strange  to  you,  but  it  is  fact.  Perhaps  you 
will  think  it  not  less  strange,  but  it  is  my  real  belief,  that  if  your 
own  writings  had  been  in  existence  and  come  in  my  way  at  the 
same  critical  stage  of  my  moral  and  mental  development,  they 
would  have  taught  me  the  same  lesson  and  inspired  me  with  the 
same  ambition;  for  in  that  particular  (if  I  may  say  it  without 
offence)  I  look  upon  you  both  as  eminent  examples  of  the  sanu 
virtue. 

To  the  lecture  he  refers  once  more  in  a  letter  to  Mr. 
John  Morley.  The  political  situation  touched  on  in  this 
and  the  next  letter,  is  that  of  the  end  of  the  Russo-Turkish 
war  and  the  beginning  of  the  Afghan  war. 

SaENCB  Schools,  South  Kensington, 
Fed.  7,  1878. 

My  dear  Morley — Many  thanks  for  the  cheque,  and  still 
more  for  the  good  word  for  the  article.*  I  knew  it  would 
"  draw  "  Hutton,  and  his  ingenuity  has  as  usual  made  the  best 
of  the  possibilities  of  attack.  I  am  glad  to  find,  however,  that 
he  does  not  think  it  expedient  to  reiterate  his  old  story  about 
the  valuelessness  of  vivisection  in  the  establishment  of  the  doc- 
trine of  the  circulation. 

I  hear  that  that  absurd  creature  R goes  about  declar- 
ing that  I  have  made  all  sorts  of  blunders.  Could  not  somebody 
be  got  to  persuade  him  to  put  what  he  has  to  say  in  black  and 
white  ? 

Controversy  is  as  abhorrent  to  me  as  gin  to  a  reclaimed 
drunkard ;  but  oh  dear !  it  would  be  so  nice  to  squelch  that  pomp- 
ous impostor. 

I  hope  you  admire  the  late  aspects  of  the  British  Lion.  His 
tail  goes  up  and  down  from  the  intercrural  to  the  stiffly  erect 
attitude  per  telegram,  while  his  head  is  sunk  in  the  windbag  of 
the  House  of  Commons. 

I  am  beginning  to  think  that  a  war  would  be  a  good  thing 
if  only  for  the  inevitable  clean  sweep  of  all  the  present  govern- 
ing people  which  it  would  bring  about. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

*  On  Harvey. 


524  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxxiii 


To  HIS  Eldest  Daughter 

Science  Schools,  South  Kensington, 
Dec.  7.  1878. 

Dearest  Jess — You  are  a  badly  used  young  person — you 
are;  and  nothing  short  of  that  conviction  would  get  a  letter 
out  of  your  still  worse  used  Pater  the  hete  noire  of  whose  exist- 
ence is  letter-writing. 

Catch  me  discussing  the  Afghan  question  with  you  you  little 
pepper  pot.  No,  not  if  I  know  it.  Read  Fitzjames  Stephen's 
letter  in  the  Times,  also  Bartle  Frere's  memorandum,  also 
Napier  of  Magdala's  memo.    Them's  my  sentiments. 

Also  read  the  speech  of  Lord  Hartington  on  the  address. 
He  is  a  man  of  sense  like  his  father,  and  you  will  observe  that 
he  declares  that  the  Government  were  perfectly  within  their 
right  in  declaring  war  without  calling  Parliament  together.  .  .  . 

If  you  had  lived  as  long  as  I  have  and  seen  as  much  of  men, 
you  would  cease  to  be  surprised  at  the  reputations  men  of  essen- 
tially commonplace  powers — aided  by  circumstances  and  some 
amount  of  cleverness — obtain. 

I  am  as  strong  for  justice  as  any  one  can  be,  but  it  is  real 
justice,  not  sham  conventional  justice  which  the  sentimentalists 
howl  for. 

At  this  present  time  real  justice  requires  that  the  power  of 
England  should  be  used  to  maintain  order  and  introduce  civilisa- 
tion wherever  that  power  extends. 

The  Afghans  are  a  pack  of  disorderly  treacherous  blood- 
thirsty thieves  and  caterans  who  should  never  have  been  allowed 
to  escape  from  the  heavy  hand  we  laid  upon  them,  after  the 
massacre  of  twenty  thousand  of  our  men,  women  (and)  children 
in  the  Khoord  Cabul  Pass  thirty  years  ago. 

We  have  let  them  be,  and  the  consequence  is  they  now  lend 
themselves  to  the  Russians,  and  are  ready  to  stir  up  disorder 
and  undo  all  the  good  we  have  been  doing  in  India  for  the  last 
generation. 

They  are  to  India  exactly  what  the  Highlanders  of  Scotland 
were  to  the  Lowlanders  before  1745 ;  and  we  have  just  as  much 
right  to  deal  with  them  in  the  same  way. 

I  am  of  opinion  that  our  Indian  Empire  is  a  curse  to  us.  But 
so  long  as  we  make  up  our  minds  to  hold  it,  we  must  also  make 
up  our  minds  to  do  those  things  which  are  needful  to  hold  it 
eflfectually,  and  in  the  long-run  it  will  be  found  that  so  doing  is 


526  LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxxiii 

remained  but  to  put  a  few  finishing  touches  and  to  write 
detailed  descriptions  of  the  plates. 

Letters  to  W.  K.  Parker  and  Professor  Haeckel  touch  on 
this  part  of  his  work;  the  former,  indeed,  offering  a  close 
parallel  to  a  story,  obviously  of  the  same  period,  which  the 
younger  Parker  tells  in  his  reminiscences,  to  illustrate  the 
way  in  which  he  would  be  utterly  engrossed  in  a  subject  for 
the  time  being.  Jeffery  Parker,  while  demonstrator  of  biol- 
ogy, came  to  him  with  a  question  about  the  brain  of  the 
codfish  at  a  time  when  he  was  deep  in  the  investigation  of 
some  invertebrate  group.  "  Codfish  ?  "  he  replied,  **  that's 
a  vertebrate,  isn't  it?  Ask  me  a  fortnight  hence,  and  I'll 
consider  it." 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Sept,  25,  1878. 

Mv  DEAR  Parker — As  far  as  I  recollect  Ammocoetes  is  a 
vcrtebrated  animal — and  I  ignore  it. 

The  paper  you  refer  to  was  written  by  my  best  friend — ^a 
carefulish  kind  of  man — and  I  am  sure  that  he  saw  what  he 
says  he  saw,  as  if  I  had  seen  it  myself. 

But  what  the  fact  may  mean  and  whether  it  is  temporary 
or  permanent — is  thy  servant  a  dog  that  he  should  worry  him- 
self about  other  things  with  backbones?    Not  if  I  know  it. 

Churchill  has  got  over  a  whole  batch  of  the  American  edi- 
tion of  the  Vertcbrata,  so  I  have  a  respite.  Mollusks  are  far 
more  interesting — bugs  sweeter — while  the  dinner  crayfish  hath 
no  parallel  for  intense  and  absorbing  interest  in  the  three  king- 
doms of  Nature. 

What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  "  Go  to  the  Ant  thou  sluggard." 
In  other  words,  study  the  Invertebrata. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

[Sketch  of  a  vast  winged  ant  advancing  on  a  midget,  and 
saying,  as  it  looks  through  a  pair  of  eyeglasses,  "  well,  really, 
what  an  absurd  creature ! !  "  ] 

4  Marlborough  Place,  London, 
April  28.  1878. 

My  dear  Haeckel — Since  the  receipt  of  your  letter  three 
months  ago,  I  have  been  making  many  inquiries  about  Medus<B 
for  you,  but  I  could  hear  of  none — and  so  I  have  delayed  my 
reply,  until  I  doubt  not  you  have  been  blaspheming  my  apparent 
neglect. 


528  LIFE   OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxxiii 

give  yourself  any  trouble  about  him,  I  need  not  say  I  shall  be 
very  grateful  for  any  notice  you  may  take  of  him. 

I  am  giving  him  as  much  independence  of  action  as  possible, 
in  order  that  he  may  learn  to  take  care  of  himself. 

Now  that  is  enough  about  my  children.  Yours  must  yet  be 
young — and  you  have  not  yet  got  to  the  marriage  and  university 
stage — which  I  assure  you  is  much  more  troublesome  than  the 
measles  and  chicken-pox  period. 

My  wife  unites  with  me  in  kindest  remembrances  and  good 
wishes. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

An  outbreak  of  diphtheria  among  his  children  made  the 
spring  of  1878  a  time  of  overwhelming  anxiety.  How  it 
told  upon  his  strong  and  self-contained  chief  is  related  by 
T.  J.  Parker — **  I  never  saw  a  man  more  crushed  than  he 
was  during  the  dangerous  illness  of  one  of  his  daughters, 
and  he  told  me  that,  having  then  to  make  an  after-dinner 
speech,  he  broke  down  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  and  for' 
one  painful  moment  forgot  where  he  was  and  what  he  had 
to  say."  This  was  one  of  the  few  occasions  of  his  absence 
from  College  during  the  seventies.  "  When,  after  two  days, 
he  looked  in  at  the  laboratory,"  writes  Professor  Howes, 
'*  his  dejected  countenance  and  tired  expression  beto- 
kened only  too  plainly  the  intense  anxiety  he  had-  under- 
gone." 

The  history  of  the  outbreak  was  very  instructive.  Hux- 
ley took  a  leading  part  in  organising  an  enquiry  and  in 
looking  into  the  matter  with  the  health  officer.  "  As  soon 
as  I  can  get  all  the  facts  together,"  he  writes  on  Dec.  10, 
"  I  am  going  to  make  a  great  turmoil  about  our  outbreak 
of  diphtheria — and  see  whether  I  cannot  get  our  happy-go- 
lucky  local  government  mended."  As  usual,  the  epidemic 
was  due  to  culpable  negligence.  In  the  construction  of 
some  drains,  too  small  a  pipe  was  laid  down.  The  sewage 
could  not  escape,  and  flooded  back  in  a  low-lying  part  of 
Kilburn.  Diphtheria  soon  broke  out  close  by.  While  it 
was  raging  there,  a  St.  John's  Wood  dairyman  running 
short  of  milk,  sent  for  more  to  an  infected  dairy  in  Kilbum. 
Every  house  which  he  supplied  that  day  with  Kilbum  milk 
was  attacked  with  diphtheria. 


530 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY        chap,  xxxiii 


end  at  the  seaside,  Professor  Marsh  was  not  entirely  neg- 
lected.   He  writes  in  his  Recollections  (p.  6) : — 

How  kind  Huxley  was  to  everyone  who  could  claim  his 
friendship,  I  have  good  cause  to  know.  Of  the  many  instances 
which  occur  to  me,  one  will  suffice.  One  evening  in  London  at 
a  grand  annual  reception  of  the  Royal  Academy,  where  celebri- 
,  ties  of  every  rank  were  present,  Huxley  said  to  me,  "  When  I 
was  in  America,  you  showed  me  every  extinct  animal  that  I  had 
read  about,  or  even  dreamt  of.  Now,  if  there  is  a  single  living 
lion  in  all  Great  Britain  that  you  wish  to  see,  I  will  show  him 
to  you  in  five  minutes."  He  kept  his  promise,  and  before  the 
reception  was  over,  I  had  met  many  of  the  most  noted  men  of 
England,  and  from  that  evening,  I  can  date  a  large  number  of 
acquaintances,  who  have  made  my  subsequent  visits  to  that 
country  an  ever-increasing  pleasure. 

As  for  his  summer  occupations,  he  writes  to  his  eldest 
daughter  on  July  2 : — 

No,  young  woman,  you  don't  catch  me  attending  any  con- 
gresses I  can  avoid,  not  even  if  F.  is  an  artful  committee-man. 
I  must  go  to  the  British  Association  at  Dublin — for  my  sins — 
and  after  that  we  have  promised  to  pay  a  visit  in  Ireland  to  Sir 
Victor  Brooke.  After  that  I  must  settle  myself  down  in  Pen- 
maenmawr  and  write  a  little  book  about  David  Hume^before 
the  grindery  of  the  winter  begins. 

The  meeting  of  the  British  Association  took  place  this 
year  in  the  third  week  of  August  at  Dublin.  Huxley  gave 
an  address  in  the  Anthropological  subsection,*  and  on  the 
20th  received  the  honorary  degree  of  LL.D.  from  Dublin 
University,  the  Public  Orator  presenting  him  in  the  follow- 
ing words : — 

Praesento  vobis  Thomam  Henricum  Huxley — hominem  vere 
physicum — hominem  facundum,  lepidum,  venustum— eundem 
autem  nihil  (philosophia  modo  sua  lucem  praeferat)  reformidan- 
tem — ne  illud  quidem  Ennianum, 

Simia  quam  similis,  turpissima  bestia,  nobis. 

*  •*  Informal  Remarks  on  the  Conclusions  of  Anthropology,"  B.  A, 
Report,  1878,  pp.  573-578. 


1878  HIS  BOOK  ON   HUME  531 

The  extract  above  given  contains  the  first  reference  to 
the  book  on  Hume,*  written  this  summer  as  a  holiday 
occupation  at  Penmaenmawr.  The  speed  at  which  it  was 
composed  is  remarkable,  even  allowing  for  his  close  knowl- 
edge of  the  subject,  acquired  many  years  before.  Though 
he  had  been  "  picking  at  it "  earlier  in  the  summer,  the 
whole  of  the  philosophical  part  was  written  during  Sep- 
tember, leaving  the  biographical  part  to  be  done  later. 

The  following  letters  from  Marlborough  Place  show  him 
at  work  upon  the  book : — 

Afarch  31,  1878. 

My  dear  Morley — I  like  the  notion  of  undertaking  your 
Hume  book,  and  I  don't  see  why  I  should  not  get  it  done  this 
autumn.  But  you  must  not  consider  me  pledged  on  that  point, 
as  I  cannot  quite  command  my  time. 

Tulloch  sent  me  his  book  on  Pascal.  It  was  interesting  as 
everything  about  Pascal  must  be,  but  Tulloch  is  not  a  model 
of  style. 

I  have  looked  into  Bruton's  book,  but  I  shall  now  get  it  and 
study  it.  Hume's  correspondence  with  Rousseau  seems  to  me 
typical  of  the  man's  sweet,  easy-going  nature.  Do  you  mean 
to  have  a  portrait  of  each  of  your  men?  I  think  it  is  a  great 
comfort  in  a  biography  to  get  a  notion  of  the  subject  in  the 
flesh. 

I  have  rather  made  it  a  rule  not  to  part  with  my  property 
in  my  books — but  I  daresay  that  can  be  arranged  with  Mac- 
millan.  Anyhow  I  shall  be  content  to  abide  by  the  general 
arrangement  if  you  have  made  one. 

We  have  had  a  bad  evening.  Clifford  has  been  here,  and 
he  is  extremely  ill — in  fact  I  fear  the  worst  for  him. 

It  is  a  thousand  pities,  for  he  has  a  fine  nature  all  round, 
and  time  would  have  ripened  him  into  something  very  consid- 
erable. We  are  all  very  fond  of  him. — Ever  yours  very  faith- 
fully, T.  H.  Huxley. 

July  6,  1878. 
My  dear  Morley — Very  many  thanks  for  Diderot.     I  have 
made  a  plunge  into  the  first  volume  and  found  it  very  interesting. 
I  wish  you  had  put  a  portrait  of  him  as  a  frontispiece.    I  have 
seen  one — a  wonderful  face,  something  like  Goethe's. 

*  In   the   *•  English  Men  of    Letters'*  series,  edited  by   Mr.  John 
Morley. 


532 


LIFE  OF   PROFESSOR   HUXLEY         chap,  xxxiii 


I  am  picking  at  Hume  at  odd  times.  It  seems  to  me  that  I 
.had  better  make  an  analysis  and  criticism  of  the  "  Inquiry,"  the 
backbone  of  the  essay — as  it  touches  all  the  problems  which 
interest  us  most  just  now.  I  have  already  sketched  out  a  chap- 
ter on  Miracles,  which  will,  I  hope,  be  very  edifying  in  conse- 
quence of  its  entire  agreement  with  the  orthodox  arguments 
against  Hume's  a  priori  reasonings  against  miracles. 

Hume  wasn't  half  a  sceptic  after  all.  And  so  long  as  he  got 
deep  enough  to  worry  Orthodoxy,  he  did  not  care  to  go  to  the 
bottom  of  things. 

He  failed  to  see  the  importance  of  suggestions  already  made 
both  by  Locke  and  Berkeley. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Srpf.  30,  1878. 

My  dear  Morley — Praise  me !  I  have  been  hard  at  work  at 
Hume  at  Penmaenmawr,  and  I  have  got  the  hard  part  of  the 
business — the  account  of  his  philosophy — blocked  out  in  the 
bodily  shape  of  about  180  pages  foolscap  MS. 

But  I  find  the  job  as  tough  as  it  is  interesting.  Hume's 
diamonds,  before  the  public  can  see  them  properly,  want  a 
proper  setting  in  a  methodical  and  consistent  shape — and  that 
implies  writing  a  small  psychological  treatise  of  one's  own,  and 
then  cutting  it  down  into  as  unobtrusive  a  form  as  possible. 

So  I  am  working  away  at  my  draught — from  the  point  of 
view  of  an  aesthetic  jeweller. 

As  soon  as  I  get  it  into  such  a  condition  as  will  need  only 
verbal  trimming,  I  should  like  to  have  it  set  up  in  type.  For  it 
is  a  defect  of  mine  that  I  can  never  judge  properly  of  any  com- 
position of  my  own  in  manuscript. 

Moreover  (don't  swear  at  this  wish)  I  should  very  much 
like  to  send  it  to  you  in  that  shape  for  criticism. 

The  Life  will  be  an  easy  business.  I  should  like  to  get  the 
book  out  of  hand  before  Christmas,  and  will  do  so  if  possible. 
But  my  lectures  begin  on  Tuesday,  and  I  cannot  promise. — Ever 
yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Oci.  21,  1878. 

My  dear  Morley — I  have  received  slips  up  to  chap.  ix. 
of  Hume,  and  so  far  I  do  not  think  (saving  your  critical  pre- 
sence) that  there  will  be  much  need  of  much  modification  or  in- 
terpolation. 

I  have  made  all  my  citations  from  a  4-vol.  edition  of  Hume, 


534  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY        chap,  xxxui 

4  Marlborough  Placs,  N.W.,  Nov,  5,  1878. 

My  dear  Morley — "  Davie's  "  philosophy  is  now  all  in  print, 
and  all  but  a  few  final  pages  of  his  biography. 

So  I  think  the  time  has  come  when  that  little  critical  sym- 
posium may  take  place. 

Can  you  come  and  dine  on  Tuesday  next  (12)  at  7,  or  if 
any  day  except  Wednesday  15th,  next  week,  will  suit  you  better, 
it  will  do  just  as  well  for  me.  There  will  be  nobody  but  my  wife 
and  daughters,  so  don't  dress. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

P,S, — Will  you  be  disgusted  if  in  imitation  of  the  "  English 
Men  of  Letters  "  I  set  a-going  an  "  English  Men  of  Science." 
Few  people  have  any  conception  of  the  part  Englishmen  have 
played  in  science,  and  I  think  it  would  be  both  useful  and  in- 
teresting to  bring  the  truth  home  to  the  English  mind. 

I  had  about  three  thousand  people  to  hear  me  on  Saturday 
at  Manchester,  and  it  would  have  done  you  good  to  hear  how 
they  cheered  at  my  allusion  to  personal  rule.  I  had  to  stop  and 
let  them  ease  their  souls. 

Behold  my  P.S.  is  longer  than  my  letter.  It's  the  strong 
feminine  element  in  my  character  oozing  out.  "  Desinit  in 
piscem  "  though,  and  a  mighty  queer  fish  too. 

4  Marlborough  Place, /aif.  12,  1879. 

Dear  Lecky — I  am  very  much  obliged  for  your  suggestion 
about  the  note  at  p.  9.  I  am  ashamed  to  say  that  though  the 
eleven  day  correction  was  familiar  enough  to  me,  I  had  never 
thought  about  the  shifting  of  the  beginning  of  the  year  till  you 
mentioned  it.  It  is  a  law  of  nature,  I  believe,  that  when  a  man 
says  what  he  need  not  say  he  is  sure  to  blunder.  The  note  shall 
go  out. 

All  I  know  about  Sprat  is  as  the  author  of  a  dull  history  of 
the  Royal  Society,  so  I  was  surprised  to  meet  with  Hume's  esti- 
mate of  him. 

No  doubt  about  the  general  hatred  of  the  Scotch,  but  you 
will  observe  that  I  make  Millar  responsible  for  the  peace-making 
assurance. 

What  you  said  to  me  in  conversation  some  time  ago  led  me 
to  look  at  Hume's  position  as  a  moralist  with  some  care,  and 
I  quoted  the  passage  at  p.  206  that  no  doubt  might  be  left  on  the 
matter. 

The  little  book  threatened  to  grow  to  an  undue  length,  and 


536  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY        chap,  xxxiii 

I  forget  whether  I  asked  you  before.  From  all  I  hear  of  him  I 
expect  he  would  do  No.  6  very  welU  I  have  written  to  Adamson 
by  this  post. 

I  shall  get  off  with  Harvey  and  Darwin  to  my  share. — 
Ever  yours  very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 


4  Marlborough  Place,  N.W.,  Dec.  26,  1878. 

My  dear  Roscoe — I  was  very  loth  to  lump  the  chemists 
together,  but  Max  was  very  strong  about  not  having  too  many 
books  in  the  series;  and  on  the  other  hand,  I  had  my  doubts 
how  far  the  chemists  were  capable  of  ''  dissociation  "  without 
making  the  book  too  technical. 

But  I  do  not  regard  the  present  arrangement  as  unalterable, 
and  if  you  think  the  early  chemists  and  the  later  chemists  would 
'  do  better  in  two  separate  groups,  the  matter  is  quite  open  to 
consideration. 

Maxwell  says  he  is  overdone  with  work  already,  and  alto- 
gether declines  to  take  anything  new.  I  shall  have  to  look 
about  me  for  a  man  to  do  the  Physikers. 

Of  course  Adamson  will  have  to  take  in  a  view  of  the  sci- 
ence of  the  middle  ages.  That  will  be  one  of  the  most  interest- 
ing parts  of  the  book,  and  I  hope  he  will  do  it  well.  I  suppose 
he  knows  his  Dante. 

The  final  cause  of  boys  is  to  catch  something  or  other.  I 
trust  that  yours  is  demeasling  himself  properly. — Ever  yours 
very  faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

4  Marlborough  Place,  Dec,  1878. 

My  dear  Tyndall — I  consider  your  saying  the  other  even- 
ing that  you  would  see  "  anyone  else  d -d  first,'*  before  you 

would  assent  to  the  little  proposal  I  made  to  you,  as.  the  most 
distinct  .and  binding  acceptance  you  are  capable  of.  You  have 
nothing  else  to  swear  by,  and  so  you  swear  at  everybody  but  me 
when  you  want  to  pledge  yourself. 

It  will  release  me  of  an  immense  difficulty  if  you  will  under- 
take R.  Boyle  and  the  Royal  Society  (which  oi  course  includes 
Hooke)  ;  and  the  subject  is  a  capital  one. 

The  book  should  not  exceed  about  200  pages,  and  you  need 
not  be  ready  before  this  time  next  year.  There  could  not  be  a 
more  refreshing  piece  of  work  just  to  enliven  the  dolce  far 
niente  of  the  Bel  Alp.  (That  is  quite  d  la  Knowles,  and  I  beg^n 
to  think  I  have  some  faculty  as  an  editor.) 


538  LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY        chap,  xxxni 

is  a  general  prostration — very  sadly  obvious  when  he  was  with 
us  on  Sunday — which,  as  I  understand,  rather  renders  him 
specially  obnoxious  to  a  sudden  and  rapid  development  of  the 
lung  disease  than  is  itself  to  be  feared. 

It  was  agreed  that  they  should  go  at  once  to  Gibraltar  by  the 
P.  and  O.,  and  report  progress  when  he  gets  there.  If  strong 
enough  he  is  to  go  on  a  cruise  round  the  Mediterranean,  and  if 
he  improves  by  this  he  is  to  go  away  for  a  year  to  Bogota  (in 
S.  America)  which  appears  to  be  a  favourable  climate  for  such 
cases  as  his. 

If  he  gets  worse  he  can  but  return.  I  have  done  my  best  to 
impress  upon  him  and  his  wife  the  necessity  of  extreme  care, 
and  I  hope  they  will  be  wise. 

It  is  very  pleasant  to  find  how  good  and  cordial  everybody  is, 
helpful  in  word  and  deed  to  the  poor  young  people.  I  know  it 
will  rejoice  the  cockles  of  your  generous  old  heart  to  hear  it. 

As  for  yourself,  I  trust  you  are  mending  and  allowing  your- 
self to  be  taken  care  of  by  your  household  goddess. 

With  our  united  love  to  her  and  yourself, — Ever  yours 
faithfully,  T.  H.  Huxley. 

I  sent  your  cheque  to  Yeo. 

May^  1878. 

My  dear  Tyndall — You  were  very  much  wanted  on  Satur- 
day, as  your  wife  will  have  told  you,  but  for  all  that  I  would  not 
have  had  you  come  on  any  account.  You  want  a  thorough  long 
rest  and  freedom  from  excitement  of  all  sorts,  and  I  am  rejoiced 
to  hear  that  you  are  going  out  of  the  hurly-burly  of  London  as 
soon  as  possible ;  and,  not  to  be  uncivil,  I  do  hope  you  will  stay 
away  as  long  as  possible,  and  not  be  deluded  into  taking  up  any 
exciting  pursuit  as  soon  as  you  feel  lively  again  among  your 
mountains. 

Pray  give  up  Dublin.  If  you  don't,  I  declare  I  will  try  if 
I  have  enough  influence  with  the  council  to  get  you  turned  out 
of  your  office  of  Lecturer,  and  superseded. 

Do  seriously  consider  this,  as  you  will  be  undoing  the  good 
results  of  your  summer's  rest.  I  believe  your  heart  is  as  sound 
as  your  watch  was  when  you  went  on  your  memorable  slide,"^ 
but  if  you  go  slithering  down  avalanches  of  work  and  worry 
you  can't  always  expect  to  pick  up  "  the  little  creature  "  none 


*  On  the  Piz  Morteratsch :  Hours  of  Exercise  in  the  Alps,  by  J. 
Tyndall,  ch.  six. 


187S  PARENTAL  ADVICE  539 

the  worse.  The  apparatus  is  by  one  of  the  best  makers,  but  it 
has  been  some  years  in  use,  and  can't  be  expected  to  stand  rough 
work. 

You  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  we  had  cheerier  news  of 
Clifford  on  Saturday.  He  was  distinctly  better,  and  setting  out 
on  his  Mediterranean  voyage. — Ever  yours  very  faithfully, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

A  birthday  letter  to  his  son  concludes  the  year : 

4  Marlborough  Placb,  N.  W.,  Dec,  10,  1878. 

Your  mother  reminds  me  that  to-morrow  is  your  eighteenth 
birthday,  and  though  I  know  that  my  "happy  returns"  will 
reach  you  a  few  hours  too  late  I  cannot  but  send  them. 

You  are  touching  manhood  now,  my  dear  laddie,  and  I 
trust  that  as  a  man  your  mother  and  I  may  always  find  reason 
to  regard  you  as  we  have  done  throughout  your  boyhood. 

The  great  thing  in  the  world  is  not  so  much  to  seek  happi- 
ness as  to  earn  peace  and  self-respect.  I  have  not  troubled  you 
much  with  paternal  didactics — but  that  bit  is  ''  ower  true  "  and 
worth  thinking  oven 


542 


LIFE  OF  PROFESSOR  HUXLEY 


(see  pp.  349-530,  and  ii.,  287),  is  the  rejection  of  the  prevalent 
theory  that  community  of  language  implies  community  of  race, 
Schleicher,  indeed,  asserting  that  language  is  a  more  constant 
character  than  cranial  peculiarities.  We  talk  of  Latin  and  Teu- 
tonic races,  of  Celtic  and  English,  dividing  them,  in  fact,  by 
their  language,  with  no  more  accuracy  than  if  an  archaeologist 
of  the  future  were  to  call  the  negroes  of  Hayti  a  European 
stock  because  they  spoke  French.  ''  Community  of  language 
testifies  to  close  contact  between  the  people  who  speak  the  lan- 
guage, but  to  nothing  else." 

In  this  connection  he  writes  to  Professor  Max  MuUer,  on 
June  15,  1865: 

My  dear  Sir — I  beg  your  acceptance  of  the  number  of  the 
Fortnightly  Review  containing  my  article  on  Ethnology,  which 
accompanies  this  note. 

I  lost  no  time,  on  Monday,  in  referring  to  "  Christianity  and 
Mankind,"  and  the  perusal  of  your  chapter  on  Ethnology  vs. 
Phonology  led  me  profoundly  to  regret  that  I  had  not  been  able 
to  avail  myself  of  the  aid  of  so  powerful  an  ally. 

But  if  you  wish  to  continue  to  pull  one  way  and  I  the  other, 
I  have  hopes  we  shall  be  able  to  get  Ethnology  and  Phonology 
apart  in  time. 

Ever,  my  dear  sir,  very  faithfully  yours, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

Page  305. — Governor  Eyre,  however,  though  recalled,  es- 
caped condemnation  on  the  ground  that  he  was  honestly  con- 
vinced of  Gordon's  guilt  and  had  acted  without  legal  "  malice." 
The  Jamaica  Committee  raised  the  question  in  Parliament,  but 
the  Government  refused  to  prosecute  him  for  murder,  though 
ready  to  revise  the  sentences  of  those  he  had  punished  and  to 
give  them  compensation.  In  these  circumstances  the  House  con- 
tented itself  with  a  resolution  deploring  the  excessive  punish- 
ments, and  the  subsequent  efforts  of  the  Jamaica  Committee  to 
obtain  a  conviction  in  a  court  of  law  were  fruitless.  The  magis- 
trates of  Shropshire,  where  Eyre  was  then  living,  refused  to 
issue  a  warrant  against  the  ex-Governor ;  and  in  London,  grand 
juries  ignored  the  bills  against  Colonel  Nelson  and  one  of  the 
"  preposterous  subalterns  "  in  1867,  and  against  Eyre  himself  in 
1868.  The  latter  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  retirement, 
djring  in  November,  1901,  at  the  age  of  eighty-six. 

END  OF  VOL.   I 

m 


A.