Evolution and Ethics, and Other Essays (Thomas Henry Huxley, 1894)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1894 first edition, including the Romanes Lecture (https://archive.org/details/evolutionethicso00huxl). Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895) - the Romanes Lecture and late essays: evolution meets moral philosophy.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

'^:i 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


ARDEN    H.    BRAME,   JR. 

HERPETOLOGICAL  LIBRARY 


COLLECTED    ESSAYS 

By  T.  H.  HUXLEY 
VOLUME    IX 


EVOLUTION  &  ETHICS 


AND   OTHER   ESSAYS 


THOMAS   H.    HUXLEY 


EonJion 

MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 

1894 


Richard  Clay  and  Sons,  Limited, 
london  axd  bungay. 


PREFACE 

The  discourse  on  "Evolution  and  Ethics,"  re- 
printed in  the  first  half  of  the  present  volume,  was 
delivered  before  the  University  of  Oxford,  as  the 
second  of  the  annual  lectures  founded  by  Mr. 
Romanes :  whose  name  I  may  not  write  without 
deploring  the  untimely  death,  in  the  flower  of  his 
age,  of  a  friend  endeared  to  me,  as  to  so  many 
others,  by  his  kindly  nature  ;  and  justly  valued  by 
all  his  colleagues  for  his  powers  of  investigation 
and  his  zeal  for  the  advancement  of  knowledge. 
I  well  remember,  when  Mr.  Romanes'  early  work 
came  into  my  hands,  as  one  of  the  secretaries 
of  the  Royal  Society,  how  much  I  rejoiced  in 
the  accession  to  the  ranks  of  the  little  army  of 
workers  in  science  of  a  recruit  so  well  qualified 
to  take  a  high  place  among  us. 

It  was  at  my  friend's  urgent  request  that  I 
agreed  to  undertake  the  lecture,  should  I  be 
honoured  with  an  official  proposal  to  give  it,  though 
I    confess    not    without    misgivings,    if    only    on 


VI  PREFACE 

account  of  the  serious  fatigue  and  hoarseness 
which  pubhc  speaking  has  for  some  years  caused 
me ;  while  I  knew  that  it  wouki  be  my  fate  to 
follow  the  most  accomplished  and  facile  orator  of 
our  time,  whose  indomitable  youth  is  in  no  matter 
more  manifest  than  in  his  penetrating  and  musi- 
cal voice.  A  certain  sapng  about  comparisons 
intruded  itself  somewhat  importunately. 

And  even  if  I  disregarded  the  weakness  of  my 
body  in  the  matter  of  voice,  and  that  of  my  mind 
in  the  matter  of  vanity,  there  remained  a  third 
difficulty.  For  several  reasons,  my  attention, 
during  a  number  of  years,  has  been  much  directed 
to  the  bearing  of  modern  scientific  thought  on  the 
problems  of  morals  and  of  politics,  and  I  did  not 
care  to  be  diverted  from  that  topic.  Moreover,  I 
thought  it  the  most  important  and  the  worthiest 
which,  at  the  present  time,  could  engage  the  atten- 
tion even  of  an  ancient  and  renowned  University. 

But  it  is  a  condition  of  the  Romanes  foundation 
that  the  lecturer  shall  abstain  from  treating  of 
either  Religion  or  Politics ;  and  it  appeared  to  me 
that,  more  than  most,  perhaps,  I  was  bound  to 
act,  not  merely  up  to  the  letter,  but  in  the  spirit, 
of  that  prohibition.  Yet  Ethical  Science  is,  on 
all  sides,  so  entancrled  with  Relioion  and  Politics, 
that  the  lecturer  who  essays  to  touch  the  former 
without  coming  into  contact  with  either  of  the 
latter,  needs  all  the  dexterity  of  an  egg-dancer ; 
and  may  even  discover  that  his  sense  of  clearness 


PREFACE  vii 

and  his  sense  of  propriety  come  into  conflict,  by 
no  means  to  the  advantage  of  the  former. 

I  had  little  notion  of  the  real  magnitude  of 
these  difficulties  when  I  set  about  my  task ;  but  I 
am  consoled  for  my  pains  and  anxiety  by  observing 
that  none  of  the  multitudinous  criticisms  with 
which  I  have  been  favoured  and,  often,  instructed, 
find  fault  with  me  on  the  score  of  having  strayed 
out  of  bounds. 

Among  my  critics  there  are  not  a  few  to  whom 
I  feel  deeply  indebted  for  the  careful  attention 
which  they  have  given  to  the  exposition  thus 
hampered ;  and  further  weakened,  I  am  afraid,  by 
my  forgetfulness  of  a  maxim  touching  lectures  of 
a  popular  character,  which  has  descended  to  me 
from  that  prince  of  lecturers,  Mr.  Faraday.  He 
was  once  asked  by  a  beginner,  called  upon  to 
address  a  highly  select  and  cultivated  audience, 
what  he  might  suppose  his  hearers  to  know 
already.  Whereupon  the  past  master  of  the  art  of 
exposition  emphatically  replied  "  Nothing  ! " 

To  my  shame  as  a  retired  veteran,  who  has  all 
his  life  profited  by  this  great  precept  of  lec- 
turing strategy,  I  forgot  all  about  it  just  when 
it  would  have  been  most  useful.  I  was  fatuous 
enough  to  imagine  that  a  number  of  propositions, 
which  I  thought  established,  and  which,  in  fact,  I 
had  advanced  without  challenge  on  former  oc- 
casions, needed  no  repetition. 

I   have  'endeavoured   to   repair   my   error    by 


VIU  PREFACE 

prefacing  the  lecture  with  some  matter — chiefly 
elementary  or  recapitulatory — to  which  I  have 
given  the  title  of  "  Prolegomena."  I  wish  I  could 
have  hit  upon  a  heading  of  less  pedantic  aspect 
which  would  have  served  my  purpose  ;  and  if  it 
be  urged  that  the  new  building  looks  over  large 
for  the  edifice  to  which  it  is  added,  I  can  only 
plead  the  precedent  of  the  ancient  architects, 
who  always  made  the  adytum  the  smallest  part 
of  the  temple. 

If  I  had  attempted  to  reply  in  full  to  the 
criticisms  to  which  I  have  referred,  I  know  not 
what  extent  of  ground  would  have  been  covered 
by  my  pronaos.  All  I  have  endeavoured  to  do, 
at  present,  is  to  remove  that  which  seems  to 
have  proved  a  stumbling-block  to  many — namely, 
the  apparent  paradox  that  ethical  nature,  while 
born  of  cosmic  nature,  is  necessarily  at  enmity 
with  its  parent.  Unless  the  arguments  set  forth 
in  the  Prolegomena,  in  the  simplest  language  at 
my  command,  have  some  flaw  which  I  am  unable 
to  discern,  this  seeming  paradox  is  a  truth,  as 
great  as  it  is  plain,  the  recognition  of  which 
is  fundamental  for  the  ethical  philosojDher. 

We  cannot  do  without  our  inheritance  from  the 
forefathers  who  were  the  puppets  of  the  cosmic 
process ;  the  society  which  renounces  it  must 
be  destroyed  from  without.  Still  less  can  we  do 
with  too  much  of  it ;  the  society  in  which  it 
dominates  must  be  destroyed  from  within. 


PREFACE  IX 

The  motive  of  the  drama  of  human  life  is 
the  necessity,  laid  upon  every  man  who  comes 
into  the  world,  of  discovering  the  mean  between 
self-assertion  and  self-restraint  suited  to  his 
character  and  his  circumstances.  And  the  eter- 
nally tragic  asj)ect  of  the  drama  lies  in  this : 
that  the  problem  set  before  us  is  one  the  ele- 
ments of  which  can  be  but  imperfectly  known, 
and  of  which  even  an  approximately  right  solution 
rarely  presents  itself,  until  that  stern  critic,  aged 
experience,  has  been  furnished  with  ample  justifi- 
cation for  venting  his  sarcastic  humour  upon  the 
irreparable  blunders  we  have  already  made. 

I  have  reprinted  the  letters  on  the  "  Darkest 
England  "  scheme,  published  in  the  "  Times  "  of 
December  1890  and  January  1891 ;  and  subse- 
quently issued,with  additions,  as  a  pamphlet,  under 
the  title  of"  Social  Diseases  and  Worse  Remedies; " 
because,  although  the  clever  attempt  to  rush 
the  country  on  behalf  of  that  scheme  has  been 
balked,  Mr.  Booth's  standing  army  remains  afoot, 
retaining  all  the  capacities  for  mischief  which  are 
inherent  in  its  constitution.  I  am  desirous  that 
this  fact  should  be  kept  steadily  in  view ;  and 
that  the  moderation  of  the  clamour  of  the  drums 
and  trumpets  should  not  lead  us  to  forget  the 
existence  of  a  force,  which,  in  bad  hands,  may,  at 
any  time,  be  used  for  bad  purposes. 

In  1892,  a  Committee  was  "  formed  for  the  pur- 


X  PREFACE 

pose  of  investigating  the  manner  in  wliicli  the 
moneys,  subscribed  in  response  to  the  appeal  made 
in  the  book  entitled  '  In  Darkest  England  and  the 
Way  out/  have  been  expended."  The  members  of 
this  body  were  gentlemen  in  whose  competency 
and  equity  every  one  must  have  complete  con- 
fidence ;  and  in  December  1892  they  published 
a  report  in  which  they  declare  that,  "  with  the 
exception  of  the  sums  expended  on  the  '  barracks ' 
at  Hadleigh,"  the  moneys  in  question  have  been 
"  devoted  only  to  the  objects  and  expended  in  the 
methods  set  out  in  that  appeal,  and  to  and  in  no 
others." 

Nevertheless,  their  final  conclusion  runs  as 
follows  :  "  (4)  That  whilst  the  invested  property, 
real  and  personal,  resulting  from  such  Appeal  is 
so  vested  and  controlled  by  the  Trust  of  the  Deed 
of  January  30th,  1891,  that  any  application  of  it 
to  purposes  other  than  those  declared  in  the  deed 
by  any  *  General '  of  the  Salvation  Army  would 
amount  to  a  breach  of  trust,  and  would  subject  him 
to  the  proceedings  of  a  civil  and  criminal  character, 
before  mentioned  in  the  Report,  adcqiiatc  legal 
safeguards  do  not  at  present  exist  to  prevent  the 
niisapptlication  of  such  property." 

The  passage  I  have  italicised  forms  part  of  a 
document  dated  December  19th,  1892.  It  follows, 
that,  even  after  the  Deed  of  January  30th,  1891, 
was  executed,  "  adequate  legal  safeguards "  "  to 
prevent  the  misapplication  of  the  property "  did 


PREFACE  XI 

not  exist.  What  then  was  the  state  of  things, 
up  to  a  week  earlier,  that  is  on  January  22nd, 
1891,  when  my  twelfth  and  last  letter  appeared  in 
the  "  Times  "  ?  A  better  justification  for  what  I 
have  said  about  the  want  of  adequate  security  for 
the  proper  administration  of  the  funds  intrusted 
to  Mr.  Booth  could  not  be  desired,  unless  it  be  that 
which  is  to  be  found  in  the  following  passages  of 
the  Report  (pp.  36  and  37)  :— 

"  It  is  possible  that  a  '  General '  may  be  forget- 
ful of  his  duty,  and  sell  property  and  appropriate 
the  proceeds  to  his  own  use,  or  to  meeting  the 
general  liabilities  of  the  Salvation  Army.  As 
matters  now  stand,  he,  and  he  alone,  would  have 
control  over  such  a  sale.  Against  such  possibilities 
it  appears  to  the  Committee  to  be  reasonable  that 
some  check  should  be  imposed." 

Once  more  let  it  be  remembered  that  this 
opinion,  given  under  the  hand  of  Sir  Henry 
James,  was  expressed  by  the  Committee,  with  the 
Trust  Deed  of  1891,  which  has  been  so  sedulously 
flaunted  before  the  public,  in  full  view. 

The  Committee  made  a  suggestion  for  the 
improvement  of  this  very  unsatisfactory  state  of 
things ;  but  the  exact  value  set  upon  it  by  the 
suggestors  should  be  carefully  considered  (p.  37). 

"  The  Committee  are  fully  aware  that  if  the 
views  thus  expressed  are  carried  out,  the  safe- 
guards and  checks  created  will  not  be  sufficient 
for  all   purposes   absolutely  to   prevent    possible 


XU  PREFACE 

dealing  with  the  property  and  moneys,  inconsistent 
with  the  purposes  to  which  they  are  intended  to 
be  devoted." 

In  fact,  they  are  content  to  express  the  very 
modest  hope  that  "  if  the  suggestion  made  be 
acted  upon,  some  hindrance  will  thereby  be  placed 
in  the  way  of  any  one  acting  dishonestly  in 
respect  of  the  disposal  of  the  property  and 
moneys  referred  to." 

I  do  not  know,  and,  under  the  circumstances,  I 
cannot  say  I  much  care,  whether  the  suggestions 
of  the  Committee  have,  or  have  not,  been  acted 
upon.  Whether  or  not,  the  fact  remains,  that  an 
unscrupulous  "  General "  will  have  a  pretty  free 
hand,  notwithstanding  "  some  "  hindrance. 

Thus,  the  judgment  of  the  highly  authoritative, 
and  certainly  not  hostile.  Committee  of  1892, 
upon  the  issues  with  which  they  concerned  them- 
selves is  hardly  such  as  to  inspire  enthusiastic 
confidence.  And  it  is  further  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  they  carefully  excluded  from  their 
duties  "  any  examination  of  the  principles,  govern- 
ment, teaching,  or  methods  of  the  Salvation 
Army  as  a  religious  organisation,  or  of  its 
affairs"  except  so  far  as  they  related  to  the 
administration  of  the  moneys  collected  by  the 
"  Darkest  England  "  appeal. 

Consequently,  the  most  important  questions 
discussed  in  my  letters  were  not  in  any  way 
touched  by  the  Committee.     Even  if  their  report 


PREFACE  Xlll 

had  been  far  more  favourable  to  the  "  Darkest 
England  "  scheme  than  it  is  ;  if  it  had  really 
assured  the  contributors  that  the  funds  raised 
were  fully  secured  against  malversation ;  the 
objections,  on  social  and  political  grounds,  to  Mr. 
Booth's  despotic  organization,  with  its  thousands 
of  docile  satellites  pledged  to  blind  obedience, 
set  forth  in  the  letters,  would  be  in  no  degree 
weakened.  The  "  sixpennyworth  of  good  "  would 
still  be  outweighed  by  the  "  shilling'sworth  of 
harm  " ;  if  indeed  the  relative  worth,  or  unworth, 
of  the  latter  should  not  be  rated  in  pounds  rather 
than  in  shillings. 

What  would  one  not  give  for  the  opinion  of  the 
financial  members  of  the  Committee  about  the 
famous  Bank  ;  and  that  of  the  legal  experts  about 
the  proposed  "  tribunes  of  the  people  "  ? 

HoDESLEA,  Eastbourne, 
July  1894. 


CONTENTS 

I 

PAGE 
EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS.       PROLEGOMENA  [1894]      ....  1 

n 

EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  [1893] 46 

III 
SCIENCE  AND   MORALS  [1886] 117 

IV 

CAPITAL— THE   MOTHER  OF    LABOUR  [1890] 147 

V 

SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND  WORSE  REMEDIES  [1891] 188 

Preface 188 

The  Struggle  for  Existence  in  Human  Society  ....  195 

Letters  to  the  Times 237 

Legal  Opinions 312 

The  Articles  of  War  of  the  Salvation  Army 321 


I 

EVOLUTION     AND     ETHICS 

PROLEGOMENA 
[1894] 

I 

It  may  be  safely  assumed  that,  two  thousand 
years  ago,  before  Caesar  set  foot  in  southern 
Britain,  the  whole  country-side  visible  from  the 
windows  of  the  room  in  which  I  write,  was  in 
what  is  called  "  the  state  of  nature."  Except,  it  may 
be,  by  raising  a  few  sepulchral  mounds,  such  as 
those  which  still,  here  and  there,  break  the  flowing 
contours  of  the  downs,  man's  hands  had  made  no 
mark  upon  it ;  and  the  thin  veil  of  vegetation 
which  overspread  the  broad-backed  heights  and 
the  shelving  sides  of  the  coombs  was  unaffected 
by  his  industry.  The  native  grasses  and  weeds, 
the  scattered  patches  of  gorse,  contended  with  one 
another  for  the  possession  of  the  scanty  surface 
soil ;  they  fought  against  the  droughts  of  summer, 

VOL.    IX  g£  B 


2  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  I 

the  frosts  of  winter,  and  the  furious  gales  which 
swept,  with  unbroken  force,  now  from  the  Atlantic, 
and  now  from  the  North  Sea,  at  all  times  of  the 
year  ;  they  filled  up,  as  they  best  might,  the  gaps 
made  in  their  ranks  by  all  sorts  of  underground 
and  overground  animal  ravagers.  One  year  with 
another,  an  average  population,  the  floating  balance 
of  the  unceasing  struggle  for  existence  among  the 
indigenous  plants,  maintained  itself.  It  is  as 
little  to  be  doubted,  that  an  essentially  similar 
state  of  nature  prevailed,  in  this  region,  for  many 
thousand  years  before  the  coming  of  Caesar ;  and 
there  is  no  assignable  reason  for  denying  that  it 
might  continue  to  exist  through  an  equally  pro- 
longed futurity,  except  for  the  intervention  of  man. 

Reckoned  by  our  customary  standards  of 
duration,  the  native  vegetation,  like  the  "  ever- 
lasting hills  "  which  it  clothes,  seems  a  type  of 
permanence.  The  little  Amarella  Gentians,  which 
abound  in  some  places  to-day,  are  the  descendants 
of  those  that  were  trodden  underfoot  by  the  pre- 
historic savages  who  have  left  their  flint'  tools  about, 
here  and  there ;  and  they  followed  ancestors 
which,  in  the  climate  of  the  glacial  epoch,  probably 
flourished  better  than  they  do  now.  Compared 
with  the  long  past  of  this  humble  plant,  all  the 
history  of  civilized  men  is  but  an  episode. 

Yet  nothing  is  more  certain  than  that,  measured 
by  the  liberal  scale  of  time-keeping  of  the  universe, 
this  present  state  of  nature,  however  it  may  seem 


I  PKOLEGOMENA  ^ 

to  have  gone  and  to  go  on  for  ever,  is  but  a 
fleeting  phase  of  her  infinite  variety ;  merely  the 
last  of  the  series  of  changes  which  the  earth's  sur- 
face has  undergone  in  the  course  of  the  millions  of 
years  of  its  existence.  Turn  back  a  square  foot  of 
the  thin  turf,  and  the  solid  foundation  of  the  land, 
exposed  in  cHffs  of  chalk  five  hundred  feet  high  on 
the  adjacent  shore,  yields  full  assurance  of  a  time 
when  the  sea  covered  the  site  of  the  "  everlasting 
hills  "  ;  and  when  the  vegetation  of  what  land  lay 
nearest,  was  as  different  from  the  present  Flora  of 
the  Sussex  downs,  as  that  of  Central  Africa  now  is.^ 
No  less  certain  is  it  that,  between  the  time  durino- 
which  the  chalk  was  formed  and  that  at  which  the 
original  turf  came  into  existence,  thousands  of 
centuries  elapsed,  in  the  course  of  which,  the  state 
of  nature  of  the  ages  during  which  the  chalk  was 
deposited,  passed  into  that  which  now  is,  by 
changes  so  slow  that,  in  the  coming  and  going  of 
the  generations  of  men,  had  such  witnessed  them, 
the  contemporary  conditions  would  have  seemed 
to  be  unchanging  and  unchangeable. 

But  it  is  also  certain  that,  before  the  deposition 
of  the  chalk,  a  vastly  longer  period  had  elapsed, 
throughout  which  it  is  easy  to  follow  the  traces 
of  the  same  process  of  ceaseless  modification  and 
of  the  internecine  struggle  for  existence  of  living 
things  ;  and  that  even  when  we  can  get  no  further 

^  See  "On  apiece  of  Chalk"  in  the  preceding  volume  of  these 
Essays  (vol.  viii.  p.  1). 

B   2 


4}  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  t 

back,  it  is  not  because  there  is  any  reason  to  think 
we  have  reached  the  beginning,  but  because  the 
trail  of  tlie  most  ancient  hfe  remains  liidden,  or 
has  become  obhterated. 

Thus  that  state  of  nature  of  the  world  of  plants, 
which  we  began  by  considering,  is  far  from  possess- 
ing the  attribute  of  permanence.  Rather  its  very 
essence  is  impermanence.  It  may  have  lasted 
twenty  or  thirty  thousand  years,  it  may  last  for 
twenty  or  thirty  thousand  years  more,  Avithout 
obvious  change ;  but,  as  surely  as  it  has  followed 
upon  a  very  different  state,  so  it  will  be  followed 
by  an  equally  different  condition.  That  which 
endures  is  not  one  or  another  association  of  living 
forms,  but  the  process  of  which  the  cosmos  is  the 
product,  and  of  which  these  are  among  the  transi- 
tory expressions.  And  in  the  living  world,  one  of 
the  most  characteristic  features  of  this  cosmic  pro- 
cess is  the  struggle  for  existence,  the  competition 
of  each  with  all,  the  result  of  which  is  the  selection, 
that  is  to  say,  the  survival  of  those  forms  which, 
on  the  whole,  are  best  adapted  to  the  conditions 
which  at  any  period  obtain  ;  and  which  are,  there- 
fore, in  that  respect,  and  only  in  that  respect,  the 
fittest.^     The  acme  reached  by  the  cosmic  process 


^  That  every  theory  of  evolution  must  be  consistent  not 
merely  with  progressive  development,  but  with  indefinite 
persistence  in  the  same  condition  and  with  retrogressive  modifi- 
cation, is  a  point  which  I  have  insisted  upon  repeatedly  from 
the  year  1862  till  now.  See  CoUecfcd  Essays,  vol.  ii.  pp.  461-89  ; 
vol.  iii.  11.  33  ;  vol.  viii.  p.  304.     In  the  address  on  "Geological 


I  PROLEGOMENA  5 

in  tlie  vegetation  of  the  downs  is  seen  in  the 
turf,  with  its  weeds  and  gorse.  Under  the  con- 
ditions, they  have  come  out  of  the  struggle 
victorious ;  and,  by  surviving,  have  proved  that 
they  are  the  fittest  to  survive. 

That  the  state  of  nature,  at  any  time,  is  a 
temporary  phase  of  a  process  of  incessant  change, 
wliich  has  been  going  on  for  innumerable  ages, 
appears  to  me  to  be  a  proposition  as  well  estab- 
lished as  any  in  modern  history.  Paleontology 
assures  us,  in  addition,  that  the  ancient  philo- 
sophers who,  with  less  reason,  held  the  same 
doctrine,  erred  in  supposing  that  the  phases 
formed  a  cycle,  exactly  repeating  the  past,  exactly 
foreshadowing  the  future,  in  their  rotations.  On 
the  contrary,  it  furnishes  us  with  conclusive 
reasons  for  thinking  that,  if  every  link  in  the 
ancestry  of  these  humble  indigenous  plants  had 
been  preserved  and  were  accessible  to  us,  the  whole 
would  present  a  converging  series  of  forms  of 
gradually  diminishing  complexity,  until,  at  some 
period  in  the  history  of  the  earth,  far  more  remote 
than  any  of  which  organic  remains  have  yet  been 
discovered,  they  would  merge  in  those  low  groups 
among  which  the  boundaries  between  animal  and 
vegetable  life  become  effaced.^ 

Contemporaneity  and  Persistent  Types"  (1862),  the  paleonto- 
logical  proofs  of  this  proposition  were,  I  lielieve,  first  set 
forth. 

^  '•'On  the  Border  Territory  between   the   Animal  and  the 
Vegetable  Kingdoms,"  Essays,  vol.  viii.  p.  162. 


6  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  i 

The  word  ''  evolution,"  now  generally  applied  to 
the  cosmic  process,  has  had  a  singular  histor} ,  and 
is  used  in  various  senses.^  Taken  in  its  popular 
signification  it  means  progressive  development, 
that  is,  gradual  change  from  a  condition  of 
relative  uniformity  to  one  of  relative  complexity ; 
but  its  connotation  has  been  widened  to  include 
the  phenomena  of  retrogressive  metamorphosis, 
that  is,  of  progress  from  a  condition  of  relative 
complexity  to  one  of  relative  uniformity. 

As  a  natural  process,  of  the  same  character  as 
the  development  of  a  tree  from  its  seed,  or  of  a 
fowl  from  its  egg,  evolution  excludes  creation  and 
all  other  kinds  of  supernatural  intervention.  As 
the  expression  of  a  fixed  order,  every  stage  of 
which  is  the  effect  of  causes  ojDerating  according 
to  definite  rules,  the  conception  of  evolution  no 
less  excludes  that  of  chance.  It  is  very  desirable 
to  remember  that  evolution  is  not  an  explanation 
of  the  cosmic  process,  but  merely  a  generalized 
statement  of  the  method  and  results  of  that  pro- 
cess. And,  further,  that,  if  there  is  proof  that 
the  cosmic  process  was  set  going  by  any  agent, 
then  that  agent  will  be  the  creator  of  it  and  of  all 
its  products,  although  supernatural  intervention 
may  remain  strictly  excluded  from  its  further 
course. 

So  far  as  that  limited  revelation  of  the  nature  of 
things,  which  we  call  scientific  knowledge,  has 
^  See  "Evolution  in  Biology,"  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  187. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  7 

yet  gone,  it  tends,  with  constantly  increasing 
emphasis,  to  the  belief  that,  not  merely  the 
world  of  plants,  but  that  of  animals ;  not  merely 
living  things,  but  the  whole  fabric  of  the  earth  ; 
not  merely  our  planet,  but  the  whole  solar 
system ;  not  merely  our  star  and  its  satellites, 
but  the  millions  of  similar  bodies  which  bear 
witness  to  the  order  which  pervades  boundless 
space,  and  has  endured  through  boundless  time ; 
are  all  working  out  their  predestined  courses  of 
evolution. 

With  none  of  these  have  I  anything  to  do,  at 
present,  except  with  that  exhibited  by  the  forms 
of  life  which  tenant  the  earth.  All  plants  and 
animals  exhibit  the  tendency  to  vary,  the  causes 
of  which  have  yet  to  be  ascertained ;  it  is  the 
tendency  of  the  conditions  of  life,  at  any  given 
time,  while  favouring  the  existence  of  the  varia- 
tions best  adapted  to  them,  to  oppose  that  of  the 
rest  and  thus  to  exercise  selection ;  and  all 
living  things  tend  to  multiply  without  limit, 
while  the  means  of  support  are  limited ;  the 
obvious  cause  of  which  is  the  production  of 
offspring  more  numerous  than  their  progenitors, 
but  with  equal  expectation  of  life  in  the  actuarial 
sense.  Without  the  first  tendency  there  could 
be  no  evolution.  Without  the  second,  there 
would  be  no  good  reason  why  one  variation  should 
disappear  and  another  take  its  place ;  that  is  to 
say,  there  would  be  no  selection.     Without  the 


8  EVOL LOTION    AND   ETHICS  i 

third,  the  struggle  for  existence,  the  agent  of  the 
selective  process  in  the  state  of  nature,  would 
vanish.^ 

Granting  the  existence  of  these  tendencies,  all 
the  known  facts  of  the  history  of  plants  and  of 
animals  may  be  brought  into  rational  correlation. 
And  this  is  more  than  can  be  said  for  any  other 
hypothesis  that  I  know  of  Such  hypotheses,  for 
example,  as  that  of  the  existence  of  a  primitive, 
orderless  chaos ;  of  a  passive  and  sluggish  eternal 
matter  moulded,  with  but  jmrtial  success,  by 
archetypal  ideas ;  of  a  brand-new  world-stuff 
suddenly  created  and  swiftly  shaped  by  a  super- 
natural power;  receive  no  encouragement,  but 
the  contrary,  from  our  present  knowledge.  That 
our  earth  may  once  have  formed  part  of  a  nebu- 
lous cosmic  magma  is  certainly  possible,  indeed 
seems  highly  probable ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  order  reigned  there,  as  completely  as 
amidst  what  we  regard  as  the  most  finished  works 
of  nature  or  of  man.-  The  faith  which  is  born  of 
knowledge,  finds  its  object  in  an  eternal  order, 
bringing  forth  ceaseless  change,  through  end- 
less time,  in  endless  space ;  the  manifesta- 
tions of  the  cosmic  energy  alternating  between 
phases  of  potentiality  and  phases  of  explication. 
It  may  be  that,  as  Kant  suggests,^  every  cosmic 


xssim. 


^  Collected  Essays,  vol.  ii.  paf.. 

-  Ibid.,  vol.  iv,  p.  138  ;  vol,  v.  pp.  71-73. 
3  Ibid.,  vol.  viii.  p.  321. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  9 

magma  predestined  to  evolve  into  a  new  world, 
has  been  the  no  less  predestined  end  of  a  van- 
ished predecessor. 

II 

Three  or  four  years  have  elapsed  since  the  state 
of  nature,  to  which  I  have  referred,  was  brought 
to  an  end,  so  far  as  a  small  patch  of  the  soil  is 
concerned,  by  the  intervention  of  man.  The 
patch  was  cut  off  from  the  rest  by  a  wall ;  within 
the  area  thus  protected,  the  native  vegetation  was, 
as  far  as  possible,  extirpated ;  while  a  colony  of 
strange  plants  was  imported  and  set  down  in  its 
place.  In  short,  it  was  made  into  a  garden.  At 
the  present  time,  this  artificially  treated  area 
presents  an  aspect  extraordinarily  different  from 
that  of  so  much  of  the  land  as  remains  in  the 
state  of  nature,  outside  the  wall.  Trees,  shrubs, 
and  herbs,  many  of  them  appertaining  to  the 
state  of  nature  of  remote  parts  of  the  globe, 
abound  and  flourish.  Moreover,  considerable 
quantities  of  vegetables,  fruits,  and  flowers  are 
produced,  of  kinds  which  neither  now  exist,  nor 
have  ever  existed,  except  under  conditions  such  as 
obtain  in  the  garden ;  and  which,  therefore,  are  as 
much  works  of  the  art  of  man  as  the  frames  and 
glass-houses  in  which  some  of  them  are  raised. 
That  the  "state  of  Art,"  thus  created  in  the 
state  of  nature  by  man,  is  sustained  by 
and   dependent  on  him,  would   at   once  become 


10  EVOLUTIOX   AND   ETHICS  i 

apparent,  if  the  watchful  supervision  of  the  gar- 
dener were  withdrawn,  and  the  antagonistic  influ- 
ences of  the  general  cosmic  process  were  no  longer 
sedulously  warded  off,  or  counteracted.  The  walls 
and  gates  would  decay ;  quadrupedal  and  bipedal 
intruders  would  devour  and  tread  down  the  useful 
and  beautiful  plants;  birds,  insects,  blight,  and 
mildew  would  work  their  will ;  the  seeds  of  the 
native  plants,  carried  by  winds  or  other  agencies, 
would  immigrate,  and  in  virtue  of  their  long- 
earned  special  adaptation  to  the  local  conditions, 
these  despised  native  weeds  would  soon  choke 
their  choice  exotic  rivals.  A  century  or  two 
hence,  little  beyond  the  foundations  of  the  wall 
and  of  the  houses  and  frames  would  be  left,  in 
evidence  of  the  victory  of  the  cosmic  powers  at 
work  in  the  state  of  nature,  over  the  temporary 
obstacles  to  their  suioremacy,  set  up  by  the  art  of 
the  horticulturist. 

It  will  be  admitted  that  the  garden  is  as  much 
a  work  of  art,^  or  artifice,  as  anything  that  can  be 
mentioned.  The  energy  localised  in  certain  human 
bodies,  directed  by  similarly  localised  intellects, 
has  produced  a  collocation  of  other  material  bodies 
which  could  not  be  brought  about  in  the  state  of 
nature.     The  same  proposition  is  true  of  all  the 

1  The  .<?ense  of  the  term  '"Art"  is  liecoming  narrowed; 
"work  of  Art"  to  most  people  means  a  picture,  a  statue,  or  a 
piece  of  hi j  outer  ie  ;  by  way  of  compensation  "artist"  has  in- 
dudod  in  its  wide  embrace  cooks  and  ballet  girls,  no  less  than 
paintei-s  and  sculptors. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  11 

works  of  man's  hands,  from  a  flint  implement  to 
a  catliedral  or  a  chronometer ;  and  it  is  because 
it  is  true,  that  we  call  these  things  artificial, 
term  them  works  of  art,  or  artifice,  by  way  of 
distinguishing  them  from  the  products  of  the  cosmic 
process,  working  outside  man,  which  we  call 
natural,  or  works  of  nature.  The  distinction  thus 
drawn  between  the  works  of  nature  and  those  of 
man,  is  universally  recognised ;  and  it  is,  as  I 
conceive,  both  useful  and  justifiable. 


Ill 

No  doubt,  it  may  be  properly  urged  that 
the  operation  of  human  energy  and  intelligence, 
which  has  brought  into  existence  and  maintains 
the  garden,  by  what  I  have  called  "  the  horticul- 
tural process,"  is,  strictly  speaking,  part  and  parcel 
of  the  cosmic  process.  And  no  one  could  more 
readily  agree  to  that  proposition  than  I.  In  fact, 
I  do  not  know  that  any  one  has  taken  more 
pains  than  I  have,  during  the  last  thirty  years,  to 
insist  upon  the  doctrine,  so  much  reviled  in  the 
early  part  of  that  period,  that  man,  physical, 
intellectual,  and  moral,  is  as  much  a  part  of 
nature,  as  purely  a  product  of  the  cosmic  process, 
as  the  humblest  weed.^ 

But  if,  following  up  this  admission,  it  is  urged 

^  See  "  Man's  Place  in  Nature,"  Collected  Essays,  vol.  vii.,  and 
"On  the  Struggle  for  Existence  in  Human  Society  "(1888),  below. 


12  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  i 

that,  such  being  the  case,  the  cosmic  process  can- 
not be  in  antagonism  with  that  horticultural  pro- 
cess which  is  part  of  itself — I  can  only  reply,  that 
if  the  conclusion  that  the  two  are  antagonistic 
is  logically  absurd,  I  am  sorry  for  logic,  because, 
as  we  have  seen,  the  fact  is  so.  The  garden  is  in 
the  same  position  as  every  other  work  of  man's 
art ;  it  is  a  result  of  the  cosmic  process  working 
through  and  by  human  energy  and  intelligence  ; 
and,  as  is  the  case  with  every  other  artificial 
thing  set  up  in  the  state  of  nature,  the  influ- 
ences of  the  latter  are  constantly  tending  to  break 
it  down  and  destroy  it.  No  doubt,  the  Forth  bridge 
and  an  ironclad  in  the  offing,  are,  in  ultimate  re- 
sort, products  of  the  cosmic  process ;  as  much  so  as 
the  river  which  flows  under  the  one,  or  the  sea- 
water  on  which  the  other  floats.  Nevertheless, 
every  breeze  strains  the  bridge  a  little,  every  tide 
does  something  to  weaken  its  foundations  ;  every 
change  of  temperature  alters  the  adjustment  of 
its  parts,  produces  friction  and  consequent  wear 
and  tear.  From  time  to  time,  the  bridge  must  be 
repaired,  just  as  the  ironclad  must  go  into  dock ; 
simply  because  nature  is  always  tending  to  re- 
claim that  which  her  child,  man,  has  borrowed 
from  her  and  lias  arranged  in  combinations  which 
are  not  those  favoured  by  the  general  cosmic 
process. 

Thus,    it  is    not    only   true    that    the    cosmic 
energy,  working  through  man  upon  a  portion  of  tlie 


I  PROLEGOMENA  13 

plant  world,  opposes  the  same  energy  as  it  works 
through  the  state  of  nature,  but  a  similar  an- 
tagonism is  everywhere  manifest  between  the 
artificial  and  the  natural.  Even  in  the  state  of 
nature  itself,  what  is  the  struggle  for  existence 
but  the  antagonism  of  the  results  of  the  cosmic 
process  in  the  region  of  life,  one  to  another  ?  ^ 


IV 

Not  only  is  the  state  of  nature  hostile  to  the 
state  of  art  of  the  garden ;  but  the  principle  of 
the  horticultural  process,  by  w^hich  the  latter  is 
created  and  maintained,  is  antithetic  to  that  of  the 
cosmic  process.  The  characteristic  feature  of  the 
latter  is  the  intense  and  unceasing  competition  of 
the  struggle  for  existence.  The  characteristic  of 
the  former  is  the  elimination  of  that  struggle,  by 
the  removal  of  the  conditions  which  give  rise  to 
it.  The  tendency  of  the  cosmic  process  is  to  bring 
about  the  adjustment  of  the  forms  of  plant  life 
to  the  current  conditions ;  the  tendency  of  the 
horticultural  process  is  the  adjustment  of  the  con- 
ditions to  the  needs  of  the  forms  of  plant  life 
which  the  gardener  desires  to  raise. 

The  cosmic  process  uses  unrestricted  multiplica- 

^  Or  to  put  the  case  still  more  simply.  When  a  man  lays 
hold  of  the  two  ends  of  a  piece  of  string  and  pulls  them,  with 
intent  to  break  it,  the  right  arm  is  certainly  exerted  in 
antagonism  to  the  left  a-rm  ;  yet  both  arms  derive  their  energy 
from  the  same  original  source. 


14  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  1 

tion  as  the  means  whereby  hundreds  compete  for 
the  place  and  nourishment  adequate  for  one ;  it 
emplo3^s  frost  and  drought  to  cut  off  the  weak 
and  unfortunate ;  to  survive,  there  is  need  not 
only  of  strength,  but  of  flexibility  and  of  good 
fortune. 

The  gardener,  on  the  other  hand,  restricts 
multiplication ;  provides  that  each  plant  shall 
have  sufficient  space  and  nourishment ;  protects 
from  frost  and  drought ;  and,  in  every  other  way, 
attempts  to  modify  the  conditions,  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  bring  about  the  survival  of  those 
forms  which  most  nearly  approach  the  standard 
of  the  useful,  or  the  beautiful,  which  he  has  in 
his  mind. 

If  the  fruits  and  the  tubers,  the  foliage  and 
the  flowers  thus  obtained,  reach,  or  sufficiently 
approach,  that  ideal,  there  is  no  reason  why  the 
status  quo  attained  should  not  be  indefinitely  pro- 
longed. So  long  as  the  state  of  nature  remains 
approximately  the  same,  so  long  will  the  energy 
and  intelligence  which  created  the  garden  suffice  to 
maintain  it.  However,  the  limits  within  which  this 
mastery  of  man  over  nature  can  be  maintained  are 
narrow.  If  the  conditions  of  the  cretaceous  epoch 
returned,  I  fear  the  most  skilful  of  gardeners  would 
have  to  give  up  the  cultivation  of  apples  and 
gooseberries  ;  while,  if  those  of  the  glacial  period 
once  again  obtained,  open  asparagus  beds  would 
be   superfluous,  and  the  training   of  fruit   trees 


I  PROLEGOMENA  15 

against  the  most  favourable  of  south  walls,  a  waste 
of  time  and  trouble. 

But  it  is  extremely  important  to  note  that,  the 
state  of  nature  remaining  the  same,  if  the  pro- 
duce does  not  satisfy  the  gardener,  it  may 
be  made  to  approach  his  ideal  more  closely. 
Although  the  struggle  for  existence  may  be  at 
end,  the  possibility  of  progress  remains.  In  dis- 
cussions on  these  topics,  it  is  often  strangely 
forgotten  that  the  essential  conditions  of  the 
modification,  or  evolution,  of  living  things  are 
variation  and  hereditary  transmission.  Selection 
is  the  means  by  which  certain  variations  are 
favoured  and  their  progeny  preserved.  But  the 
struggle  for  existence  is  only  one  of  the  means 
by  which  selection  may  be  effected.  The  endless 
varieties  of  cultivated  flowers,  fruits,  roots,  tubers, 
and  bulbs  are  not  products  of  selection  by  means 
of  the  struggle  for  existence,  but  of  direct  selec- 
tion, in  view  of  an  ideal  of  utility  or  beauty. 
Amidst  a  multitude  of  plants,  occupying  the  same 
station  and  subjected  to  the  same  conditions,  in 
the  garden,  varieties  arise.  The  varieties  tending 
in  a  given  direction  are  preserved,  and  the  rest 
are  destroyed.  And  the  same  process  takes  place 
among  the  varieties  until,  for  exam^Dle,  the  wild 
kale  becomes  a  cabbage,  or  the  wild  Viola  tricolor 
a  prize  pansy. 


16  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS 


The  process  of  colonization  presents  analogies 
to  the  formation  of  a  garden  which  are  highly 
instructive.  Suppose  a  shipload  of  English 
colonists  sent  to  form  a  settlement,  in  such  a 
country  as  Tasmania  was  in  the  middle  of  the  last 
century.  On  landing,  they  find  themselves  in  the 
midst  of  a  state  of  nature,  widely  different  from 
that  left  behind  them  in  everything  but  the  most 
general  physical  conditions.  The  common  plants, 
the  common  birds  and  quadrupeds,  are  as  totally 
distinct  as  the  men  from  anything  to  be  seen  on 
the  side  of  the  globe  from  which  they  come. 
The  colonists  proceed  to  put  an  end  to  this  state 
of  things  over  as  large  an  area  as  they  desire  to 
occupy.  They  clear  away  the  native  vegetation, 
extirpate  or  drive  out  the  animal  jDopulation,  so 
far  as  may  be  necessary,  and  take  measures  to 
defend  themselves  from  the  re-immigTation  of 
either.  In  their  place,  they  introduce  English 
grain  and  fruit  trees ;  English  dogs,  sheep,  cattle, 
horses ;  and  English  men ;  in  fact,  they  set  up  a 
new  Flora  and  Fauna  and  a  new  variety  of  mankind, 
within  the  old  state  of  nature.  Their  farms  and 
pastures  represent  a  garden  on  a  great  scale,  and 
themselves  the  gardeners  Avho  have  to  keep  it  up, 
in  w^atchful  antagonism  to  the  old  rSgimc.  Con- 
sidered as  a  w^hole,  the  colony  is  a  composite  unit 
introduced   into   the   old    state   of  nature;    and, 


I  PROLEGOMENA  17 

thenceforward,  a  competitor  in   the  struggle   for 
existence,  to  conquer  or  be  vanquished. 

Under  the  conditions  supposed,  there  is  no 
doubt  of  the  result,  if  the  work  of  the  colonists 
be  carried  out  energetically  and  with  intelligent 
combination  of  all  their  forces.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  they  are  slothful,  stupid,  and  careless  ;  or 
if  they  waste  their  energies  in  contests  with  one 
another,  the  chances  are  that  the  old  state  of 
nature  will  have  the  best  of  it.  The  native 
savage  will  destroy  the  immigrant  civilized  man ; 
of  the  English  animals  and  plants  some  will  be 
extirpated  by  their  indigenous  rivals,  others  will 
pass  into  the  feral  state  and  themselves  become 
components  of  the  state  of  nature.  In  a  few 
decades,  all  other  traces  of  the  settlement  will 
have  vanished. 


VI 

Let  us  now  imagine  that  some  administrative 
authority,  as  far  superior  in  power  and  intelligence 
to  men,  as  men  are  to  their  cattle,  is  set  over  the 
colony,  charged  to  deal  with  its  human  elements 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  assure  the  victory  of 
the  settlement  over  the  antagonistic  influences  of 
the  state  of  nature  in  which  it  is  set  down.  He 
would  proceed  in  the  same  fashion  as  that  in 
which  the  gardener  dealt  with  his  garden.  In 
the  first  place,  he  would,  as  far  as  possible,  put  a 

VOL.   IX  c 


18  EVOLUTION    AND    ETHICS  i 

stop  to  the  influence  of  external  competition  by 
thoroughly  extirpating  and  excluding  the  native 
rivals,  whether  men,  beasts,  or  plants.  And 
our  administrator  would  select  his  human  agents, 
with  a  view  to  his  ideal  of  a  successful  colony, 
just  as  the  gardener  selects  his  plants  with  a  view 
to  his  ideal  of  useful  or  beautiful  products. 

In  the  second  place,  in  order  that  no  struggle 
for  the  means  of  existence  between  these  human 
agents  should  weaken  the  efficiency  of  the  cor- 
porate whole  in  the  battle  with  the  state  of 
nature,  he  would  make  arrangements  by  which 
each  would  be  provided  with  those  means ;  and 
would  be  relieved  from  the  fear  of  being  deprived 
of  them  by  his  stronger  or  more  cunning  fellows. 
Laws,  sanctioned  by  the  combined  force  of  the 
colony,  would  restrain  the  self-assertion  of  each 
man  within  the  limits  required  for  the  mainten- 
ance of  peace.  In  other  Avords,  the  cosmic  struggle 
for  existence,  as  between  man  and  man,  would  be 
rigorously  suppressed ;  and  selection,  by  its  means, 
would  be  as  completely  excluded  as  it  is  from 
the  garden. 

At  the  same  time,  the  obstacles  to  the  full 
development  of  the  capacities  of  the  colonists 
by  other  conditions  of  the  state  of  nature 
than  those  already  mentioned,  would  be  re- 
moved by  the  creation  of  artificial  conditions  of 
existence  of  a  more  favourable  character.  Pro- 
tection against  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  would 


I  PROLEGOMENA  19 

be  afforded  by  houses  and  clothing;  drainage 
and  irrigation  works  would  antagonise  the  effects 
of  excessive  rain  and  excessive  drought;  roads, 
bridges,  canals,  carriages,  and  ships  would  over- 
come the  natural  obstacles  to  locomotion  and 
transport;  mechanical  engines  would  supple- 
ment the  natural  strength  of  men  and  of 
their  draught  animals;  hygienic  precautions 
would  check,  or  remove,  the  natural  causes  of 
disease.  With  every  step  of  this  progress  in 
civilization,  the  colonists  would  become  more  and 
more  independent  of  the  state  of  nature;  more 
and  more,  their  lives  would  be  conditioned  by  a 
state  of  art.  In  order  to  attain  his  ends,  the  ad- 
ministrator would  have  to  avail  himself  of  the 
courage,  industry,  and  co-operative  intelligence  of 
the  settlers ;  and  it  is  plain  that  the  interest  of 
the  community  would  be  best  served  by  increas- 
ing the  proportion  of  persons  who  possess  such 
qualities,  and  diminishing  that  of  persons  devoid 
of  them.  In  other  words,  by  selection  directed 
towards  an  ideal. 

Thus  the  administrator  might  look  to  the 
establishment  of  an  earthly  paradise,  a  true 
garden  of  Eden,  in  which  all  things  should 
work  together  towards  the  well-being  of  the 
gardeners :  within  which  the  cosmic  process, 
the  coarse  struggle  for  existence  of  the  state 
of  nature,  should  be  abolished;  in  which  that 
state    should    be    replaced   by   a    state  of    art ; 

C  2 


20  EVOLUTION   AND    ETHICS  I 

where  every  plant  and  every  lower  animal  should 
be  adapted  to  human  wants,  and  would  perish  if 
human  supervision  and  protection  were  with- 
drawn ;  where  men  themselves  should  have  been 
selected,  with  a  view  to  their  efficiency  as 
organs  for  the  performance  of  the  functions  of  a 
perfected  society.  And  this  ideal  polity  would 
have  been  brought  about,  not  by  gradually  adjust- 
ing the  men  to  the  conditions  around  them,  but 
by  creating  artificial  conditions  for  them ;  not  by 
allowing  the  free  play  of  the  struggle  for  existence, 
but  by  excluding  that  struggle ;  and  by  substitut- 
ing selection  directed  towards  the  administrator's 
ideal  for  the  selection  it  exercises. 


VII 

But  the  Eden  would  have  its  serpent,  and  a 
very  subtle  beast  too.  Man  shares  with  the  rest 
of  the  living  world  the  mighty  instinct  of  repro- 
duction and  its  consequence,  the  tendency  to 
multiply  with  great  rapidity.  The  better  the 
measures  of  the  administrator  achieved  their 
object,  the  more  completely  the  destructive 
agencies  of  the  state  of  nature  were  defeated, 
the  less  would  that  multiplication  be  checked. 

On  the  other  hand,  within  the  colony,  the 
enforcement  of  peace,  which  deprives  every  man 
of  the  power  to  take  away  the  means  of  existence 
from  another,  simply  because  he  is  the  stronger, 


I  PROLEGOMENA  21 

would  have  put  an  end  to  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence between  the  colonists,  and  the  competition  for 
the  commodities  of  existence,  which  would  alone 
remain,  is  no  check  upon  population. 

Thus,  as  soon  as  the  colonists  began  to  multiply, 
the  administrator  would  have  to  face  the  tendency 
to  the  reintroduction  of  the  cosmic  struggle  into 
his  artificial  fabric,  in  consequence  of  the  competi- 
tion, not  merely  for  the  commodities,  but  for  the 
means  of  existence.  When  the  colony  reached 
the  limit  of  possible  expansion,  the  surplus  popu- 
lation must  be  disposed  of  somehow ;  or  the  fierce 
struggle  for  existence  must  recommence  and 
destroy  that  peace,  which  is  the  fundamental  con- 
dition of  the  maintenance  of  the  state  of  art 
against  the  state  of  nature. 

Supposing  the  administrator  to  be  guided  by 
purely  scientific  considerations,  he  would,  like  the 
gardener,  meet  this  most  serious  difficulty  by 
systematic  extirpation,  or  exclusion,  of  the  super- 
fluous. The  hopelessly  diseased,  the  infirm  aged, 
the  weak  or  deformed  in  body  or  in  mind,  the 
excess  of  infants  born,  would  be  put  away,  as  the 
gardener  pulls  up  defective  and  superfluous  plants, 
or  the  breeder  destroys  undesirable  cattle.  Only 
the  strong  and  the  healthy,  carefully  matched,  with 
a  view  to  the  progeny  best  adapted  to  the  pur- 
poses of  the  administrator,  would  be  permitted  to 
perpetuate  their  kind. 


22  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS 


VIII 

Of  the  more  thorougligoing  of  the  multitudinous 
attempts  to  apply  the  principles  of  cosmic  evolu- 
tion, or  what  are  supposed  to  be  such,  to  social 
and  political  problems,  which  have  appeared  of  late 
years,  a  considerable  proportion  appear  to  me  to 
be  based  upon  the  notion  that  human  society  is 
competent  to  furnish,  from  its  own  resources,  an 
administrator  of  the  kind  I  have  imagined.  The 
pigeons,  in  short,  are  to  be  their  own  Sir  John 
Sebright.^  A  despotic  government,  whether  indi- 
vidual or  collective,  is  to  be  endowed  w4th  the 
preternatural  intelligence,  and  with  what,  I  am 
afraid,  many  will  consider  the  preternatural  ruth- 
lessness,  required  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out 
the  principle  of  improvement  by  selection,  with  the 
somewhat  drastic  thoroughness  upon  which  the 
success  of  the  method  depends.  Experience  cer- 
tainly does  not  justify  us  in  limiting  the  ruthless- 
ness  of  individual  "saviours  of  society";  and,  on 
the  well-known  grounds  of  the  aphorism  which 
denies  both  body  and  soul  to  corporations,  it  seems 
probable  (indeed  the  belief  is  not  without  support 
in  history)  that  a  collective  despotism,  a  mob  got 
to  believe  in  its  own  divine  right  by  demagogic 
missionaries,  would  be  capable  of  more  thorough 


^  Not  that  the  conception  of  such  a  society  i.s  necessarily  based 
upon  the  idea  of  evohition.  The  Platonic  state  testifies  to  the 
contrary. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  23 

work  in  this  direction  than  any  single  tyrant,  puffed 
up  with  the  same  ilhision,  has  ever  achieved. 
But  intelHgence  is  another  affair.  The  fact  that 
"  saviours  of  society  "  take  to  that  trade  is  evidence 
enough  that  they  have  none  to  spare.  And 
such  as  they  possess  is  generally  sold  to  the 
capitalists  of  physical  force  on  whose  resources 
they  depend.  However,  I  doubt  whether  even 
the  keenest  judge  of  character,  if  he  had  before 
him  a  hundred  boys  and  girls  under  fourteen,  could 
pick  out,  with  the  least  chance  of  success,  those 
who  should  be  kept,  as  certain  to  be  serviceable 
members  of  the  polity,  and  those  who  should  be 
chloroformed,  as  equally  sure  to  be  stupid,  idle,  or 
vicious.  The  "points"  of  a  good  or  of  a  bad  citi- 
zen are  really  far  harder  to  discern  than  those  of 
a  puppy  or  a  short-horn  calf ;  many  do  not  show 
themselves  before  the  practical  difficulties  of  life 
stimulate  manhood  to  full  exertion.  And  by  that 
time  the  mischief  is  done.  The  evil  stock,  if  it  be 
one,  has  had  time  to  multiply,  and  selection  is 
nullified. 


IX 

I  have  other  reasons  for  fearing  that  this 
logical  ideal  of  evolutionary  regimentation — this 
pigeon-fanciers'  polity — is  unattainable.  In  the 
absence  of  any  such  a  severely  scientific  adminis- 
trator as  we  have  been  dreaming  of,  human  society 


24  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  i 

is  kept  together  by  bonds  of  such  a  singular 
character,  that  the  attempt  to  perfect  society  after 
his  fashion  would  run  serious  risk  of  loosening 
them. 

Social  organization  is  not  peculiar  to  men. 
Other  societies,  such  as  those  constituted  by  bees 
and  ants,  have  also  arisen  out  of  the  advantage  of  co- 
operation in  the  struggle  for  existence ;  and  their 
resemblances  to,  and  their  differences  from,  human 
society  are  alike  instructive.  The  society  formed  by 
the  hive  bee  fulfils  the  ideal  of  the  communistic 
ajDhorism  "  to  each  according  to  his  needs,  from  each 
according  to  his  capacity."  Within  it,  the 
struggle  for  existence  is  strictly  limited.  Queen, 
drones,  and  workers  have  each  their  allotted  suffi- 
ciency of  food;  each  performs  the  function 
assigned  to  it  in  the  economy  of  the  hive,  and  all 
contribute  to  the  success  of  the  whole  co-operative 
society  in  its  competition  with  rival  collectors  of 
nectar  and  pollen  and  with  other  enemies,  in  the 
state  of  nature  without.  In  the  same  sense  as 
the  garden,  or  the  colony,  is  a  work  of  human 
art,  the  bee  polity  is  a  work  of  apiarian  art, 
brought  about  by  the  cosmic  process,  working 
through  the  organization  of  the  hymenopterous 
type. 

Now  this  society  is  the  direct  product  of  an 
organic  necessity,  impelling  every  member  of 
it  to  a  course  of  action  which  tends  to  the  good 
of  the  whole.      Each  bee  has  its  duty  and  none 


I  PROLEGOMENA  25 

has  any  rights.  Whether  bees  are  susceptible 
of  feeHng  and  capable  of  thought  is  a  question 
which  cannot  be  dogmatically  answered.  As  a 
pious  opinion,  I  am  disposed  to  deny  them  more 
than  the  merest  rudiments  of  consciousness.^  But 
it  is  curious  to  reflect  that  a  thoughtful  drone 
(workers  and  queens  would  have  no  leisure  for 
speculation)  with  a  turn  for  ethical  philosophy, 
must  needs  profess  himself  an  intuitive  moralist 
of  the  purest  w^ater.  He  would  point  out,  with 
perfect  justice,  that  the  devotion  of  the  workers  to 
a  life  of  ceaseless  toil  for  a  mere  subsistence 
wage,  cannot  be  accounted  for  either  by  enlight- 
ened selfishness,  or  by  any  other  sort  of  utilitarian 
motives ;  since  these  bees  begin  to  work,  without 
experience  or  reflection,  as  they  emerge  from  the 
cell  in  which  they  are  hatched.  Plainly,  an  eter- 
nal and  immutable  principle,  innate  in  each  bee, 
can  alone  account  for  the  phenomena.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  biologist,  who  traces  out  all  the 
extant  stages  of  gradation  between  solitary  and 
hive  bees,  as  clearly  sees  in  the  latter,  simply  the 
perfection  of  an  automatic  mechanism,  hammered 
out  by  the  blows  of  the  struggle  for  existence 
upon  the  progeny  of  the  former,  during  long  ages 
of  constant  variation. 

^  Collected  Essays,   vol.   i.,  "Aniiiial  Automatism";  vol.  v., 
"  Prologue,"  i)p.  45  et  seq. 


26  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS 


X 

I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  at  its  origin, 
human  society  was  as  much  a  product  of  organic 
necessity  as  that  of  the  bees.^  The  human  fomily, 
to  begin  with,  rested  uj^on  exactly  the  same  con- 
ditions as  those  which  gave  rise  to  similar  associ- 
ations among  animals  lower  in  the  scale.  Further, 
it  is  easy  to  see  that  every  increase  in  the  duration 
of  the  family  ties,  with  the  resulting  co-operation 
of  a  larger  and  larger  number  of  descendants  for 
protection  and  defence,  would  give  the  families 
in  which  such  modification  took  place  a  distinct 
advantage  over  the  others.  And,  as  in  the  hive, 
the  progressive  limitation  of  the  struggle  for 
existence  between  the  members  of  the  family 
would  involve  increasing  efficiency  as  regards 
outside  competition. 

But  there  is  this  vast  and  fundamental  difference 
between  bee  society  and  human  society.  In  the 
former,  the  members  of  the  society  are  each  organi- 
cally predestined  to  the  performance  of  one  particu- 
lar class  of  functions  only.  If  they  were  endowed 
with  desires,  each  could  desire  to  perform  none 
but  those  offices  for  which  its  organization  speci- 
ally fits  it ;  and  which,  in  view  of  the  good  of  the 
whole,  it  is  proper  it  should  do.  So  long  as  a  new 
queen  does  not  make  her  appearance,  rivalries  and 
competition  are  absent  from  the  bee  polit}^ 
^  Collected  Ensays,  vol.  v.,  Prologue,  pp.  50-54. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  27 

Among  mankind,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  no 
such  predestination  to  a  sharply  defined  place  in 
th^  social  organism.  However  much  men  may 
differ  in  the  quality  of  their  intellects,  the  in- 
tensity of  their  passions,  and  the  delicacy  of  their 
sensations,  it  cannot  be  said  that  one  is  fitted  by 
his  organization  to  be  an  agricultural  labourer  and 
nothing  else,  and  another  to  be  a  landowner  and 
nothing  else.  Moreover,  with  all  their  enormous 
differences  in  natural  endowment,  men  agree  in 
one  thing,  and  that  is  their  innate  desire  to  enjoy 
the  pleasures  and  to  escape  the  pains  of  life ;  and, 
in  short,  to  do  nothing  but  that  which  it  pleases 
them  to  do,  without  the  least  reference  to  the 
welfare  of  the  society  into  which  they  are  born. 
That  is  their  inheritance  (the  reality  at  the  bottom 
of  the  doctrine  of  original  sin)  from  the  long  series 
of  ancestors,  human  and  semi-human  and  brutal, 
in  whom  the  strength  of  this  innate  tendency  to 
self-assertion  was  the  condition  of  victory  in  the 
struggle  for  existence.  That  is  the  reason  of  the 
aviditas  vitcc ' — the  insatiable  hunger  for  enjoy- 
ment— of  all  mankind,  which  is  one  of  the  essen- 
tial conditions  of  success  in  the  war  with  the  state 
of  nature  outside ;  and  yet  the  sure  agent  of  the 
destruction  of  society  if  allowed  free  play  within. 

The  check  upon  this  free  play  of  self-assertion, 
or  natural  liberty,  which  is  the  necessary  condition 
for  the  origin  of  human  society,  is  the  product 
^  See  below.     Romanes'  Lecture,   note  7. 


28  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  1 

of  organic  necessities  of  a  different  kind  from 
those  upon  which  the  constitution  of  the  hive 
depends.  One  of  these  is  the  mutual  affection 
of  parent  and  offspring,  intensified  by  the  long 
infancy  of  the  human  species.  But  the  most 
important  is  the  tendency,  so  strongly 
developed  in  man,  to  reproduce  in  himself  ac- 
tions and  feelings  similar  to,  or  correlated  with, 
those  of  other  men.  Man  is  the  most  con- 
summate of  all  mimics  in  the  animal  world ; 
none  but  himself  can  draw  or  model ;  none  comes 
near  him  in  the  scope,  variety,  and  exactness  of 
vocal  imitation ;  none  is  such  a  master  of  gesture  ; 
while  he  seems  to  be  impelled  thus  to  imitate 
for  the  pure  pleasure  of  it.  And  there  is 
no  such  another  emotional  chameleon.  By  a 
purely  reflex  operation  of  the  mind,  we  take 
the  hue  of  passion  of  those  who  are  aboitt  us, 
or,  it  may  be,  the  complementary  colour.  It  is 
not  by  any  conscious  "  putting  one's  self  in  the 
place  "  of  a  joyful  or  a  suffering  person  that  the 
state  of  mind  we  call  S}Tnpathy  usually  arises ;  ^ 
indeed,   it   is   often   contrary   to   one's   sense    of 

^  Adam  Smith  makes  the  pithy  observation  that  the  man 
who  sympathises  with  a  woman  in  childbed,  cannot  be  said 
to  put  himself  in  hev  place.  ("The  Theory  of  the  ;Moral  Senti- 
ments," Part  vii.  sec.  iii.  chap,  i.)  Perhaps  there  is  more 
humour  than  force  in  the  example  ;  and,  in  spite  of  this 
and  other  observations  of  the  same  tenor,  I  think  that  the 
one  defect  of  the  remarkable  work  in  which  it  occurs  is  that 
it  lays  too  much  stress  on  conscious  substitution,  too  little 
on  purely  reflex  sympathy. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  29 

right,  and  in  spite  of  one's  will,  that  "  fellow- 
feeling  makes  us  wondrous  kind,"  or  the  reverse. 
However  complete  may  be  the  indifference  to 
public  opinion,  in  a  cool,  intellectual  view,  of  the 
traditional  sage,  it  has  not  yet  been  my  fortune  to 
meet  with  any  actual  sage  who  took  its  hostile 
manifestations  with  entire  equanimity.  Indeed,  I 
doubt  if  the  philosopher  lives,  or  ever  has  lived, 
who  could  know  himself  to  be  heartily  despised  by 
a  street  boy  without  some  irritation.  And,  though 
one  cannot  justify  Haman  for  wishing  to  hang 
Mordecai  on  such  a  very  high  gibbet,  yet,  really, 
the  consciousness  of  the  Vizier  of  Ahasuerus,  as 
he  went  in  and  out  of  the  gate,  that  this  obscure 
Jew  had  no  respect  for  him,  must  have  been  very 
annoying.^ 

It  is  needful  only  to  look  around  us,  to  see  that 
the  greatest  restrainer  of  the  anti-social  tendencies 
of  men  is  fear,  not  of  the  law,  but  of  the  opinion  of 
their  fellows.  The  conventions  of  honour  bind  men 
who  break  legal,  moral,  and  religious  bonds ;  and, 
while  people  endure  the  extremity  of  physical 
pain  rather  than  part  with  life,  shame  drives  the 
weakest  to  suicide. 

Every  forward  step  of  social  progress  brings  men 

^  Esther  V.  9-13.  "...  but  when  Hainan  saw  Mordecai  in  the 
king's  gate,  that  he  stood  not  up,  nor  moved  for  him,  he  was 
full  of  indignation  against  Mordecai.  .  .  .  And  Haman  told 
them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches.  .  .  .  and  all  the  things 
wherein  the  king  had  promoted  him.  .  .  .  Yet  all  this  availeth 
me  nothing,  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the 
king's  gate."  What  a  shrewd  exposure  of  human  weakness  it  is  ! 


30  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  i 

into  closer  relations  with  their  fellows,  and  in- 
creases the  importance  of  the  pleasures  and  pains 
derived  from  sympathy.  We  judge  the  acts  of 
others  by  our  own  s^anpathies,  and  we  judge  our 
own  acts  by  the  s}anpathies  of  others,  every  day 
and  all  day  long,  from  childhood  upwards,  until 
associations,  as  indissoluble  as  those  of  language, 
are  formed  between  certain  acts  and  the  feelings 
of  approbation  or  disapprobation.  It  becomes 
impossible  to  imagine  some  acts  without  dis- 
approbation, or  others  without  approbation  of 
the  actor,  whether  he  be  one's  self,  or  any  one  else. 
We  come  to  think  in  the  acquired  dialect  of  morals. 
An  artificial  personality,  the  "man  within,"  as 
Adam  Smith  ^  calls  conscience,  is  built  up  beside 
the  natural  personality.  He  is  the  watchman  of 
society,  charged  to  restrain  the  anti-social  ten- 
dencies of  the  natural  man  within  the  limits 
required  by  social  welfare. 


XI 

I  have  termed  this  evolution  of  the  feelings 
out  of  which  the  primitive  bonds  of  human 
society  are  so  largely  forged,  into  the  organized 
and  personified  sympathy  we  call  conscience, 
the    ethical    process.-     So    far    as    it     tends   to 

^  "Theory  of  the  Moral  Sentiments,"  Part  iii.  chap.  3. 
On  the  influence  and  authority  of  conscience. 

"  Worked  out,  in  its  essential  features,  chiefly  hy  Hartley  and 
Adam  Smith,  long  before  the  modern  doctrine  of  evolution  was 
thought  of.     See  Note  below,  \).  45. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  31 

make  any  human  society  more  efficient  in 
the  %struggle  for  existence  with  the  state  of 
nature,  or  with  other  societies,  it  works  in  har- 
monious contrast  with  the  cosmic  process.  But 
it  is  none  the  less  true  that,  since  law  and 
morals  are  restraints  upon  the  struggle  for  ex- 
istence between  men  in  society,  the  ethical 
process  is  in  opposition  to  the  principle  of  the 
cosmic  process,  and  tends  to  the  suppression  of  the 
qualities  best  fitted  for  success  in  that  struggle.^ 

It  is  further  to  be  observed  that,  just  as  the  self- 
assertion,  necessary  to  the  maintenance  of  society 
against  the  state  of  nature,  will  destroy  that  society 
if  it  is  allowed  free  operation  within ;  so  the  self- 
restraint,  the  essence  of  the  ethical  process,  which 
is  no  less  an  essential  condition  of  the  existence  of 
every  polity,  may,  by  excess,  become  ruinous  to  it. 

Moralists  of  all  ages  and  of  all  faiths,  attending 
only  to  the  relations  of  men  towards  one  another 
in  an  ideal  society,  have  agreed  upon  the 
"  golden  rule,"  "  Do  as  you  would  be  done  by." 
In  other  words,  let  sympathy  be  your  guide  ; 
put  yourself  in  the  place  of  the  man  towards 
whom  your  action  is  directed  ;  and  do  to  him 
what  you  would  like  to  have  done  to  yourself 
under  the  circumstances.  However  much  one 
may  admire  the  generosity  of  such  a  rule  of  con- 

^  See  the  essay  "On  the  Struggle  for  Existence  in  Human 
Society  "  below  ;  and  Collected Essayp,  vol.  i.  p.  2/6,  for  Kant's 
recognition  of  these  facts. 


32  EVOLrXION   AND   ETHICS  i 

duct ;  however  confident  one  may  be  that  average 
men  may  be  thoroughly  depended  upon  not  to 
carry  it  out  to  its  full  logical  consequences ;  it 
is  nevertheless  desirable  to  recognise  the  fact 
that  these  consequences  are  incompatible  with 
the  existence  of  a  civil  state,  under  any  circum- 
stances of  this  world  which  have  obtained,  or, 
so  far  as  one  can  see,  are,  likely  to  come  to 
pass. 

For  I  imagine  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
great  desire  of  every  wrongdoer  is  to  escape  from 
the  painful  consequences  of  his  actions.  If  I  put 
myself  in  the  jDlace  of  the  man  who  has  robbed  me, 
I  find  that  I  am  possessed  by  an  exceeding  desire 
not  to  be  fined  or  imprisoned  ;  if  in  that  of  the 
man  who  has  smitten  me  on  one  cheek,  I  contem- 
plate with  satisfaction  the  absence  of  any  worse 
result  than  the  turning  of  the  other  cheek  for  like 
treatment.  Strictly  observed,  the  "  golden  rule  " 
involves  the  negation  of  law  by  the  refusal  to  put  it 
in  motion  against  law-breakers;  and,  as  regards 
the  external  relations  of  a  j)olity,  it  is  the  refusal 
to  continue  the  struggle  for  existence.  It  can  be 
obeyed,  even  partially,  only  under  the  protection  of 
a  society  which  repudiates  it.  Without  such 
shelter,  the  followers  of  the  "  golden  rule  "  may  in- 
dulge in  hopes  of  heaven,  but  they  must  reckon 
with  the  certainty  that  other  people  will  be 
masters  of  the  earth. 

What  would  become  of  the  garden  if  the  gar- 


I  PROLEGOMENA  33 

dener  treated  all  the  weeds  and  slugs  and  birds 
and  trespassers  as  he  would  like  to  be  treated,  if 
he  were  in  their  place  ? 


XII 

Under  the  preceding  heads,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  represent  in  broad,  but  I  hope  faithful,  outlines 
the  essential  features  of  the  state  of  nature  and  of 
that  cosmic  process  of  which  it  is  the  outcome,  so 
far  as  Avas  needful  for  my  argument ;  I  have  con- 
trasted with  the  state  of  nature  the  state  of 
art,  produced  by  human  intelligence  and  energy, 
as  it  is  exemplified  by  a  garden  ;  and  I  have  shown 
that  the  state  of  art,  here  and  elsewhere,  can  be 
maintained  only  by  the  constant  counteraction 
of  the  hostile  influences  of  the  state  of  nature. 
Further,  I  have  pointed  out  that  the  "  horticultural 
process  "  which  thus  sets  itself  against  the  "  cosmic 
process  "  is  opposed  to  the  latter  in  principle,  in  so 
far  as  it  tends  to  arrest  the  struf^^sfle  for  existence, 
by  restraining  the  multiplication  which  is  one 
of  the  chief  causes  of  that  struggle,  and  by 
creating  artificial  conditions  of  life,  better  adapted 
to  the  cultivated  plants  than  are  the  conditions  of 
the  state  of  nature.  And  I  have  dwelt  upon  the 
fact  that,  though  the  progressive  modification, 
which  is  the  consequence  of  the  struggle  for 
existence  in  the  state  of  nature,  is  at  an  ^nd, 
such  modification  may   still  be  effected    by  that 

VOL.    IX  D 


34  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  i 

selection,  in  view  of  an  ideal  of  usefulness,  or  of 
pleasantness,  to  man,  of  which  the  state  of  nature 
knows  nothing. 

I  have  proceeded  to  show  that  a  colony,  set  down 
in  a  country  in  the  state  of  nature,  presents  close 
analogies  with  a  garden;  and  I  have  indicated  the 
course  of  action  which  an  administrator,  able  and 
willing  to  carry  out  horticultural  principles,  would 
adopt,  in  order  to  secure  the  success  of  such  a 
newly  formed  polity,  supposing  it  to  be  capable  of 
indefinite  expansion.  In  the  contrary  case,  I  have 
shown  that  difficulties  must  arise  ;  that  the  un- 
limited increase  of  the  population  over  a  limited 
area  must,  sooner  or  later,  reintroduce  into  the 
colony  that  straggle  for  the  means  of  existence 
between  the  colonists,  which  it  was  the  primary 
object  of  the  administrator  to  exclude,  insomuch 
as  it  is  fatal  to  the  mutual  peace  which  is  the 
prime  condition  of  the  union  of  men  in  society. 

I  have  briefly  described  the  nature  of  the  only 
radical  cure,  known  to  me,  for  the  disease  which 
would  thus  threaten  the  existence  of  the  colony  ; 
and,  however  regretfully,  I  have  been  obliged 
to  admit  that  this  rigorously  scientific  method  of 
appl}dng  the  principles  of  evolution  to  human 
society  hardly  comes  within  the  region  of  practical 
politics  ;  not  for  want  of  will  on  the  part  of  a  great 
many  people;  but  because,  for  one  reason,  there  is  no 
hope  that  mere  human  beings  will  ever  possess 
enough  intelligence  to  select  the  fittest.     And  I 


I  PROLEGOMENA  35 

have  adduced  other  grounds  for  arriving  at  the 
same  conclusion. 

I  have  pointed  out  that  human  society  took  its 
rise  in  the  organic  necessities  expressed  by  imita- 
tion and  by  the  sympathetic  emotions ;  and  that, 
in  the  struggle  for  existence  with  the  state  of 
nature  and  with  other  societies,  as  part  of  it,  those 
in  which  men  were  thus  led  to  close  co-operation 
had  a  great  advantage.^  But,  since  each  man 
retained  more  or  less  of  the  faculties  common  to 
all  the  rest,  and  especially  a  full  share  of  the 
desire  for  unlimited  self-gratification,  the  struggle 
for  existence  within  society  could  only  be  gradu- 
ally eliminated.  So  long  as  any  of  it  remained, 
society  continued  to  be  an  imperfect  instrument 
of  the  struggle  for  existence  and,  consequently, 
was  improvable  by  the  selective  influence  of  that 
struggle.  Other  things  being  alike,  the  tribe  of 
savages  in  which  order  was  best  maintained ;  in 
which  there  was  most  security  within  the  tribe 
and  the  most  loyal  mutual  support  outside  it, 
would  be  the  survivors. 

I  have  termed  this  gradual  strengthening  of 
the  social  bond,  which,  though  it  arrests  the 
struggle  for  existence  inside  society,  up  to  a 
certain  point  improves  the  chances  of  society,  as 
a  corporate  whole,  in  the  cosmic  struggle — the 
ethical  process.  I  have  endeavoured  to  show 
that,  when  the  ethical  process  has  advanced  so 
^  Collected  Essays,  vol.  v.,  Prologue,  p.  52. 

D   2 


36  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  i 

far  as  to  secure  every  member  of  the  society  in 
the  possession  of  the  means  of  existence,  the 
struggle  for  existence,  as  between  man  and  man, 
within  that  society  is,  iiiso  facto,  at  an  end.  And, 
as  it  is  undeniable  that  the  most  highly  civilized 
societies  have  substantially  reached  this  position, 
it  follows  that,  so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  the 
struggle  for  existence  can  play  no  important  part 
Avithin  them.^  In  other  words,  the  kind  of  evo- 
lution which  is  brought  about  in  the  state  of 
nature  cannot  take  place. 

I  have  further  shown  cause  for  the  belief  that 
direct  selection,  after  the  fashion  of  the  horticul- 
turist and  the  breeder,  neither  has  played,  nor 
can  play,  any  important  part  in  the  evolution 
of  society ;  apart  from  other  reasons,  because  I 
do  not  see  how  such  selection  could  be  practised 
without  a  serious  weakening,  it  may  be  the  destruc- 
tion, of  the  bonds  which  hold  society  together. 
It  strikes  me  that  men  who  are  accustomed  to 
contemplate  the  active  or  passive  extirpation  of 
the  weak,  the  unfortunate,  and  the  superfluous; 
who  justify  that  conduct  on  the  ground  that  it  has 
the  sanction  of  the  cosmic  process,  and  is  the  only 
way  of  ensuring  the  progress  of  the  race ;  who,  if 

^  "Wlietlier  the  struggle  for  existence  ^vitll  the  state  of  nature 
and  with  other  societies,  so  far  as  they  stand  in  the  relation  of 
the  state  of  nature  with  it,  exerts  a  selective  influence  u^jon  modern 
society,  and  in  what  direction,  are  questions  not  easy  to 
answer.  The  problem  of  the  effect  of  military  and  industrial 
warfare  upon  those  who  wage  it  is  very  complicated. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  37 

they  are  consistent,  must  rank  medicine  among  the 
black  arts  and  count  the  physician  a  mischievous 
preserver  of  the  unfit ;  on  whose  matrimonial  un- 
dertakings the  principles  of  the  stud  have  the  chief 
influence ;  whose  whole  lives,  therefore,  are  an 
education  in  the  noble  art  of  suppressing  natural 
affection  and  sympathy,  are  not  likely  to  have  any 
large  stock  of  these  commodities  left.  But,  with- 
out them,  there  is  no  conscience,  nor  any  restraint 
on  the  conduct  of  men,  except  the  calculation  of 
self-interest,  the  balancing  of  certain  present  grati- 
fications against  doubtful  future  pains;  and  ex- 
perience tells  us  how  much  that  is  worth.  Every 
day,  we  see  firm  believers  in  the  hell  of  the  theo- 
logians commit  acts  by  which,  as  they  believe  when 
cool,  they  risk  eternal  punishment;  while  they 
hold  back  from  those  which  are  opposed  to  the 
s}Tiipathies  of  their  associates. 


XIII 

That  progressive  modification  of  civilization 
which  passes  by  the  name  of  the  "  evolution  of 
society,"  is,  in  ftict,  a  process  of  an  essentially 
different  character,  both  from  that  which  brings 
about  the  evolution  cf  species,  in  the  state  of 
nature,  and  from  that  which  gives  rise  to  the  evo- 
lution of  varieties,  in  the  state  of  art. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  vast  changes  have 
taken  place  in  English  civilization  since  the  reign 


38  EVOLUTION   AXD   ETHICS  i 

of  the  Tudors.  But  I  am  not  aware  of  a  particle 
of  evidence  in  favour  of  the  conckision  that  this 
evolutionary  process  has  been  accompanied  by  any 
modification  of  the  physical,  or  the  mental, 
characters  of  the  men  who  have  been  the  subjects 
of  it.  I  have  not  met  with  any  grounds  for 
suspecting  that  the  average  Englishmen  of  to-day 
are  sensibly  different  from  those  that  Shakspere 
knew  and  drew.  We  look  into  his  magic  mirror 
of  the  Elizabethan  age,  and  behold,  nowise  darkly, 
the  ^presentment  of  ourselves. 

During  these  three  centuries,  from  the  reign  of 
Elizabeth  to  that  of  Victoria,  the  struggle  for 
existence  between  man  and  man  has  been  so 
largely  restrained  among  the  great  mass  of  the 
population  (excej)t  for  one  or  two  short  intervals 
of  civil  war),  that  it  can  have  had  little,  or  no, 
selective  operation.  As  to  anything  comparable 
to  direct  selection,  it  has  been  practised  on  so 
small  a  scale  that  it  may  also  be  neglected. 
The  criminal  law,  in  so  far  as  by  putting  to  death, 
or  by  subjecting  to  long  periods  of  imjmsonment, 
those  who  infringe  its  provisions,  it  prevents  the 
propagation  of  hereditary  criminal  tendencies; 
and  the  poor-law,  in  so  far  as  it  separates  married 
couples,  whose  destitution  arises  from  hereditary 
defects  of  character,  are  doubtless  selective  agents 
operating  in  favour  of  the  non-criminal  and  the 
more  effective  members  of  society.  But  the  pro- 
portion of  the  poj^ulation  which  they   influence 


I  PROLEGOMENA  39 

is  very  small ;  and,  generally,  the  hereditary 
criminal  and  the  hereditary  pauper  have  propa- 
gated their  kind  before  the  law  affects  them. 
In  a  large  proportion  of  cases,  crime  and  pauper- 
ism have  nothing  to  do  with  heredity ;  but 
are  the  consequence,  partly,  of  circumstances 
and,  partly,  of  the  possession  of  qualities,  which, 
under  different  conditions  of  life,  might  have 
excited  esteem  and  even  admiration.  It  was  a 
shrewd  man  of  the  world  who,  in  discussing  sewage 
problems,  remarked  that  dirt  is  riches  in  the 
wrong  place  ;  and  that  sound  aphorism  has  moral 
applications.  The  benevolence  and  open-handed 
generosity  which  adorn  a  rich  man,  may  make  a 
pauper  of  a  poor  one  ;  the  energy  and  courage  to 
which  the  successful  soldier  owes  his  rise,  the  cool 
and  daring  subtlety  to  which  the  great  financier 
owes  his  fortune,  may  very  easily,  under  unfavour- 
able conditions,  lead  their  possessors  to  the 
gallows,  or  to  the  hulks.  Moreover,  it  is  fairly 
probable  that  the  children  of  a  '  failure '  will  re- 
ceive from  their  other  parent  just  that  little 
modification  of  character  which  makes  all  the 
difference.  I  sometimes  wonder  whether  people, 
who  talk  so  freely  about  extirpating  the  unfit, 
ever  dispassionately  consider  their  own  history. 
Surely,  one  must  be  very  '  fit,'  indeed,  not  to  know 
of  an  occasion,  or  perhaps  two,  in  one's  life,  when 
it  would  have  been  only  too  easy  to  qualify  for 
a  place  among  the  '  unfit.' 


40  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  i 

In  my  belief  the  innate  qualities,  physical, 
intellectual,  and  moral,  of  our  nation  have 
remained  substantially  the  same  for  the  last 
four  or  five  centuries.  If  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence has  affected  us  to  any  serious  extent  (and  I 
doubt  it)  it  has  been,  indirectly,  through  our  mili- 
tary and  industrial  wars  with  other  nations. 


XIV 

What  is  often  called  the  struggle  for  existence 
in  society  (I  plead  guilty  to  having  used  the 
term  too  loosely  m3'self),  is  a  contest,  not  for  the 
means  of  existence,  but  for  the  means  of  enjoy- 
ment. Those  who  occupy  the  first  places  in  this 
practical  competitive  examination  are  the  rich 
and  the  influential ;  those  who  fail,  more  or  less, 
occupy  the  lower  places,  do^^^l  to  the  squalid 
obscurity  of  the  j^auper  and  the  criminal.  Upon 
the  most  liberal  estimate,  I  suppose  the  former 
group  will  not  amount  to  two  per  cent,  of  the 
population.  I  doubt  if  the  latter  exceeds  another 
two  jDer  cent. ;  but  let  it  be  supjDosed,  for  the  sake 
of  argument,  that  it  is  as  great  as  five  per  cent.^ 

As  it  is  only  in  the  latter  group  that  any- 
thing comparable  to  the  struggle  for  existence  in 
the  state  of  nature  can  take  place ;  as  it  is  only 

^  Those  who  read  the  last  Essay  in  this  volume  will  not 
accuse  me  of  wishing  to  attenuate  the  evil  of  the  existence  of 
this  group,  whether  great  or  small. 


I  PROLEGOMENA  41 

among  this  twentietli  of  tlie  whole  people  that 
numerous  men,  women,  and  children  die  of  rapid 
or  slow  starvation,  or  of  the  diseases  incidental  to 
permanently  bad  conditions  of  life  ;  and  as  there 
is  nothing  to  prevent  their  multiplication  before 
they  are  killed  off,  while,  in  spite  of  greater 
infant  mortality,  they  increase  faster  than  the 
rich ;  it  seems  clear  that  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence in  this  class  can  have  no  appreciable  se- 
lective influence  upon  the  other  95  per  cent,  of 
the  population. 

What  sort  of  a  sheep  breeder  would  he  be  who 
should  content  himself  with  picking  out  the  worst 
fifty  out  of  a  thousand,  leaving  them  on  a 
barren  common  till  the  weakest  starved,  and  then 
letting  the  survivors  go  back  to  mix  with  the  rest  ? 
And  the  parallel  is  too  favourable ;  since  in  a 
large  number  'of  cases,  the  actual  poor  and  the 
convicted  criminals  are  neither  the  weakest  nor 
the  worst. 

In  the  struggle  for  the  means  of  enjoyment, 
the  qualities  which  ensure  success  are  energy, 
industry,  intellectual  capacity,  tenacity  of  purpose, 
and,  at  least  as  much  sympathy  as  is  necessary 
to  make  a  man  understand  the  feelings  of  his 
fellows.  Were  there  none  of  those  artificial  ar- 
rangements by  which  fools  and  knaves  are  kept  at 
the  top  of  society  instead  of  sinking  to  their  natural 
place  at  the  bottom,^  the  struggle  for  the  means  of 

1  I  have  elsewhere    lamented  the  absence  from   society  of 


42  EVOLUTIOX   AND   ETHICS  i 

enjoyment  would  ensure  a  constant  circulation  of 
the  human  units  of  the  social  compound,  from 
the  bottom  to  the  top  and  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom.  The  survivors  of  the  contest,  those  who 
continued  to  form  the  great  bulk  of  the  polity, 
would  not  be  those  *  fittest '  who  got  to  the  very 
top,  but  the  great  body  of  the  moderately  "  fit," 
whose  numbers  and  superior  propagative  power, 
enable  them  always  to  swamp  the  exceptionally 
endowed  minority. 

I  think  it  must  be  obvious  to  every  one,  that, 
whether  we  consider  the  internal  or  the  external 
interests  of  society,  it  is  desirable  they  should  be 
in  the  hands  of  those  who  are  endowed  with  the 
largest  share  of  energy,  of  industry,  of  intellectual 
capacity,  of  tenacity  of  purpose,  while  they  are  not 
devoid  of  sympathetic  humanity ;  and,  in  so  far  as 
the  struggle  for  the  means  of  enjoyment  tends  to 
place  such  men  in  possession  of  wealth  and  influ- 
ence, it  is  a  process  which  tends  to  the  good  of 
society.  But  the  process,  as  we  have  seen,  has 
no  real  resemblance  to  that  which  adapts  living 
beings  to  current  conditions  in  the  state  of  nature  ; 
nor  any  to  the  artificial  selection  of  the  horti- 
culturist. 

a  machinery  for  facilitating  tlie  descent  of  incapacity,  "Ad- 
miuistrative  Nihilism."     Collected  Essay fi,  vol.  i.  p.  54. 


PROLEGOMENA 


XV 


To  return,  once  more,  to  the  parallel  of  horti- 
culture. In  the  modern  world,  the  gardening  of 
men  by  themselves  is  practically  restricted  to  the 
performance,  not  of  selection,  but  of  that  other 
function  of  the  gardener,  the  creation  of  condi- 
tions more  favourable  than  those  of  the  state  of 
nature  ;  to  the  end  of  facilitating  the  free  ex- 
pansion of  the  innate  faculties  of  the  citizen,  so 
far  as  it  is  consistent  with  the  general  good. 
And  the  business  of  the  moral  and  political 
philosopher  appears  to  me  to  be  the  ascertainment, 
by  the  same  method  of  observation,  experiment, 
and  ratiocination,  as  is  practised  in  other  kinds 
of  scientific  work,  of  the  course  of  conduct  which 
will  best  conduce  to  that  end. 

But,  supposing  this  course  of  conduct  to  be 
scientifically  determined  and  carefully  followed 
out,  it  cannot  put  an  end  to  the  struggle  for 
existence  in  the  state  of  nature  ;  and  it  will  not  so 
much  as  tend,  in  any  way,  to  the  adaptation  of 
man  to  that  state.  Even  should  the  whole  human 
race  be  absorbed  in  one  vast  polity,  within  which 
"  absolute  political  justice "  reigns,  the  struggle 
for  existence  with  the  state  of  nature  outside  it, 
and  the  tendency  to  the  return  of  the  struggle 
within,  in  consequence  of  over-multiplication,  will 
remain  ;  and,  unless  men's  inheritance  from  the 
ancestors  who  fought  a  good  fight  in  the  state  of 


44  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  i 

nature,  their  dose  of  original  sin,  is  rooted  out  by 
some  method  at  present  unrevealed,  at  any  rate 
to  disbelievers  in  supernaturalism,  every  child 
born  into  the  world  will  still  bring  with  him  the 
instinct  of  unlimited  self-assertion.  He  will  have 
to  learn  the  lesson  of  self-restraint  and  renuncia- 
tion. But  the  practice  of  self-restraint  and  re- 
nunciation is  not  happiness,  though  it  may  be 
something  much  better. 

That  man,  as  a  '  political  animal,'  is  sus- 
ceptible of  a  vast  amount  of  improvement,  by  edu- 
cation, by  instruction,  and  by  the  application  of  his 
intelligence  to  the  adaptation  of  the  conditions 
of  life  to  his  higher  needs,  I  entertain  not  the 
slightest  doubt.  But,  so  long  as  he  remains  liable 
to  error,  intellectual  or  moral ;  so  long  as  he  is 
compelled  to  be  perpetually  on  guard  against  the 
cosmic  forces,  whose  ends  are  not  his  ends,  without 
and  within  himself;  so  long  as  he  is  haunted  by 
inexpugnable  memories  and  hopeless  aspirations ; 
so  lonof  as  the  recoo^nition  of  his  intellectual  limita- 
tions  forces  him  to  acknowledge  his  incapacity  to 
penetrate  the  mystery  of  existence  ;  the  prospect 
of  attaining  untroubled  happiness,  or  of  a  state 
which  can,  even  remotely,  deserve  the  title  of 
perfection,  appears  to  me  to  be  as  misleading  an 
illusion  as  ever  was  dangled  before  the  eyes  of  poor 
humanity.     And  there  have  been  many  of  them. 

That  which  lies  before  the  human  race  is  a 
constant   struggle   to  maintain  and   improve,   in 


I  PROLEGOMENA  45 

opposition  to  the  State  of  Nature,  the  State  of  Art 
of  an  organized  poHty ;  in  which,  and  by  which, 
man  may  develop  a  worthy  civiUzation,  capable 
of  maintaining  and  constantly  improving  itself, 
until  the  evolution  of  our  globe  shall  have  entered 
so  far  upon  its  downward  course  that  the  cosmic 
process  resumes  its  sway;  and,  once  more,  the 
State  of  Nature  j^revails  over  the  surface  of  our 
planet. 


Note  (see  p.  30). — It  seems  the  fashion  nowadays  to  ignore 
Hartley  ;  though,  a  century  and  a  half  ago,  he  not  only  laid 
the  foundations  but  built  up  much  of  the  superstructure  of  a 
true  theory  of  the  Evolution  of  the  intellectual  and  moral 
faculties.  He  speaks  of  what  I  have  termed  the  ethical  process 
as  "our  Progress  from  Self-interest  to  Self-annihilation." 
Obsci'vatwns  on  Man  (1749),  vol.  ii.  p.  281. 


II 

EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS 

l^Thc  Bomanes  Lcchtrc,  1893] 

Soleo  enim  et  in  aliena  castra  transire,  nontanqiiam  transfuga 
sed  tanquam  explorator.     (L.  Ann.ei  Seneca  Efist.  II.  4.) 

There  is  a  delightful  child's  story,  known  by 
the  title  of  "  Jack  and  the  Bean-stalk,"  with 
which  my  contemiDoraries  who  are  present  will  be 
familiar.  But  so  many  of  our  grave  and  reverend 
juniors  have  been  brought  up  on  severer  intellec- 
tual diet,  and,  perhaps,  have  become  acquainted 
with  fairyland  only  through  primers  of  comparative 
mythology,  that  it  may  be  needful  to  give  an  out- 
line of  the  tale.  It  is  a  legend  of  a  bean-plant, 
which  grows  and  grows  until  it  reaches  the  high 
heavens  and  there  spreads  out  into  a  vast  canopy 
of  foliage.  The  hero,  being  moved  to  climb  the 
stalk,  discovers  that  the  leafy  expanse  supports  a 
world  composed  of  the  same  elements  as  that 
below,  but  yet  strangely  new ;  and  his  adventures 
there,  on  which  I  may  not  dwell,  must  have  com- 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  47 

pletely  changed  his  views  of  the  nature  of  things ; 
though  the  story,  not  having  been  composed  by, 
or  for,  philosophers,  has  nothing  to  say  about 
views. 

My  present  enterprise  has  a  certain  analogy  to 
that  of  the  daring  adventurer.  I  beg  you  to 
accompany  me  in  an  attempt  to  reach  a  world 
which,  to  many,  is  probably  strange,  by  the  help 
of  a  bean.  It  is,  as  you  know,  a  simple,  inert- 
looking  thing.  Yet,  if  planted  under  proper  con- 
ditions, of  which  sufficient  warmth  is  one  of  the 
most  important,  it  manifests  active  powers  of  a 
very  remarkable  kind.  A  small  green  seedling 
emerges,  rises  to  the  surface  of  the  soil,  rapidly 
increases  in  size  and,  at  the  same  time,  undergoes 
a  series  of  metamorphoses  which  do  not  excite  our 
wonder  as  much  as  those  w^hich  meet  us  in 
legendary  history,  merely  because  they  are  to  be 
seen  every  day  and  all  day  long. 

By  insensible  steps,  the  plant  builds  itself  up 
into  a  large  and  various  fabric  of  root,  stem,  leaves, 
flowers,  and  fruit,  every  one  moulded  within  and 
without  in  accordance  with  an  extremely  complex 
but,  at  the  same  time,  minutely  defined  pattern. 
In  each  of  these  complicated  structures,  as  in  their 
smallest  constituents,  there  is  an  immanent  energy 
which,  in  harmony  with  that  resident  in  all  the 
others,  incessantly  works  towards  the  maintenance 
of  the  whole  and  the  efficient  performance  of  the 
part  which  it  has  to  play  in  the  economy  of  nature. 


48  EVOLUTION    AND    ETHICS  ii 

But  no  sooner  has  the  edifice,  reared  with  such 
exact  elaboration,  attained  completeness,  than  it 
begins  to  crumble.  By  degrees,  the  plant  withers 
and  disappears  from  view,  leaving  behind  more  or 
fewer  apparently  inert  and  simple  bodies,  just  like 
the  bean  from  which  it  sprang ;  and,  like  it,  en- 
dowed with  the  potentiality  of  giving  rise  to  a 
similar  cycle  of  manifestations. 

Neither  the  poetic  nor  the  scientific  imagination 
is  put  to  much  strain  in  the  search  after  analogies 
with  this  process  of  going  forth  and,  as  it  were, 
returning  to  the  starting-point.  It  may  be  likened 
to  the  ascent  and  descent  of  a  slung  stone,  or 
the  course  of  an  arrow  along  its  trajectory.  Or 
Ave  may  say  that  the  living  energy  takes  first  an 
upward  and  then  a  downward  road.  Or  it  may 
seem  preferable  to  compare  the  expansion  of  the 
germ  into  the  full-grown  plant,  to  the  unfolding 
of  a  fan,  or  to  the  rolling  forth  and  widening  of  a 
stream ;  and  thus  to  arrive  at  the  conception  of 
'  development,'  or  '  evolution.'  Here  as  else- 
where, names  are  '  noise  and  smoke  ' ;  the  im- 
portant point  is  to  have  a  clear  and  adequate 
conception  of  the  fact  signified  by  a  name.  And, 
in  this  case,  the  fact  is  the  Sisypha?an  j^rocess,  in 
the  course  of  which,  the  living  and  growing  plant 
passes  from  the  relative  simplicity  and  latent 
potentiality  of  the  seed  to  the  full  epiphany  of  a 
highly  differentiated  t}^e,  thence  to  fall  back  to 
simplicity  and  potentiality. 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  49 

The  value  of  a  strong  intellectual  grasp  of  the 
nature  of  this  process  lies  in  the  circumstance  that 
what  is  true  of  the  bean  is  true  of  living  things  in 
general.  From  very  low  forms  up  to  the  highest 
— in  the  animal  no  less  than  in  the  vegetable 
kingdom — the  process  of  life  presents  the  same 
appearance  ^  of  cyclical  evolution.  Nay,  we  have 
but  to  cast  our  eyes  over  the  rest  of  the  world  and 
cyclical  change  presents  itself  on  all  sides.  It 
meets  us  in  the  water  that  flows  to  the  sea  and 
returns  to  the  springs;  in  the  heavenly  bodies 
that  wax  and  wane,  go  and  return  to  their  places ; 
in  the  inexorable  sequence  of  the  ages  of  man's 
life ;  in  that  successive  rise,  apogee,  and  fall  of 
dynasties  and  of  states  which  is  the  most  pro- 
minent topic  of  civil  history. 

As  no  man  fording  a  swift  stream  can  dip  his 
foot  twice  into  the  same  water,  so  no  man  can, 
with  exactness,  affirm  of  anything  in  the  sensible 
world  that  it  is.'^  As  he  utters  the  words,  nay, 
as  he  thinks  them,  the  predicate  ceases  to  be 
applicable  ;  the  present  has  become  the  past ;  the 
*  is '  should  be  '  was.'  And  the  more  we  learn  of 
the  nature  of  things,  the  more  evident  is  it  that 
what  we  call  rest  is  only  unperceived  activity ; 
that  seeming  peace  is  silent  but  strenuous  battle. 
In  every  part,  at  every  moment,  the  state  of  the 
cosmos  is  the  expression  of  a  transitory  adjust- 
ment of  contending  forces ;  a  scene  of  strife,  in 
which  all  the  combatants  fall  in  turn.     What  is 

VOL.  IX.  B 


50  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

true  of  each  part,  is  true  of  the  whole.  Natural 
knowledge  tends  more  and  more  to  the  conclusion 
that  "  all  the  choir  of  heaven  and  furniture  of  the 
earth  "  aie  the  transitory  forms  of  parcels  of  cosmic 
substance  wending  along  the  road  of  evolution, 
from  nebulous  potentiality,  through  endless 
growths  of  sun  and  planet  and  satellite ;  through 
all  varieties  of  matter ;  through  infinite  diversities 
of  life  and  thought ;  possibly,  through  modes  of 
being  of  which  we  neither  have  a  conception,  nor 
are  competent  to  form  any,  back  to  the  indefin- 
able latency  from  which  they  arose.  Thus  the 
most  obvious  attribute  of  the  cosmos  is  its  imper- 
manence.  It  assumes  the  aspect  not  so  much  of 
a  permanent  entity  as  of  a  changeful  process,  in 
which  naught  endures  save  the  flow  of  energy  and 
the  rational  order  which  pervades  it. 

We  have  climbed  our  bean-stalk  and  have 
reached  a  wonderland  in  which  the  common  and 
the  familiar  become  things  new  and  strange.  In 
the  exploration  of  the  cosmic  process  thus 
typified,  the  highest  intelligence  of  man  finds 
inexhaustible  emplo3anent ;  giants  are  subdued  to 
our  service ;  and  the  spiritual  affections  of  the 
contemplative  philosopher  are  engaged  by  beauties 
worthy  of  eternal  constancy. 

But  there  is  another  aspect  of  the  cosmic  process, 
so  perfect  as  a  mechanism,  so  beautiful  as  a  work 
of  art.      Where   the   cosmopoietic   energy   works 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  51 

through  sentient  beings,  there  arises,  among  its 
other  manifestations,  that  which  we  call  pain  or 
suffering.  This  baleful  product  of  evolution  in- 
creases in  quantity  and  in  intensity,  with  advancing 
grades  of  animal  organization,  until  it  attains  its 
highest  level  in  man.  Further,  the  consumma- 
tion is  not  reached  in  man,  the  mere  animal ;  nor 
in  man,  the  whole  or  half  savage ;  but  only  in 
man,  the  member  of  an  organized  polity.  And 
it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  his  attempt  to  live 
in  this  way ;  that  is,  under  those  conditions  which 
are  essential  to  the  full  development  of  his  noblest 
powers. 

Man,  the  animal,  in  fact,  has  worked  his  way 
to  the  headship  of  the  sentient  world,  and  has 
become  the  superb  animal  which  he  is,  in  virtue 
of  his  success  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  The 
conditions  having  been  of  a  certain  order,  man's 
organization  has  adjusted  itself  to  them  better 
than  that  of  his  competitors  in  the  cosmic  strife. 
In  the  case  of  mankind,  the  self-assertion,  the 
unscrupulous  seizing  upon  all  that  can  be  grasped, 
the  tenacious  holding  of  all  that  can  be  kept, 
Avhich  constitute  the  essence  of  the  struggle  for 
existence,  have  answered.  For  his  successful  pro- 
gress, throughout  the  savage  state,  man  has  been 
largely  indebted  to  those  qualities  which  he  shares 
with  the  ape  and  the  tiger ;  his  exceptional 
physical  organization  ;  his  cunning,  his  sociability, 
his  curiosity,  and  his  imitativeness  ;  his  ruthless 

E  2 


o2  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

and  ferocious  destructiveness  when  his  anger  is 
roused  by  opposition. 

But,  in  proportion  as  men  have  passed  from 
anarchy  to  social  organization,  and  in  proportion 
as  civilization  has  grown  in  worth,  these  deeply 
ingrained  serviceable  qualities  have  become  de- 
fects. After  the  manner  of  successful  persons, 
civilized  man  would  gladly  kick  down  the  ladder 
by  which  he  has  climbed.  He  would  be  only  too 
pleased  to  see  '  the  ape  and  tiger  die.'  But  they 
decline  to  suit  his  convenience ;  and  the  unwel- 
come intrusion  of  these  boon  companions  of  his 
hot  youth  into  the  ranged  existence  of  civil  life 
adds  jiains  and  griefs,  innumerable  and  immeasur- 
ably great,  to  those  which  the  cosmic  process 
necessarily  brings  on  the  mere  animal.  In  fact, 
civilized  man  brands  all  these  ape  and  tiger 
promptings  with  the  name  of  sins ;  he  punishes 
many  of  the  acts  which  flow  from  them  as  crimes  ; 
and,  in  extreme  cases,  he  does  his  best  to  put  an 
end  to  the  survival  of  the  fittest  of  former  days 
by  axe  and  rope. 

I  have  said  that  civilized  man  has  reached  this 
point;  the  assertion  is  perhaps  too  broad  and 
general ;  I  had  better  put  it  that  ethical  man  has 
attained  thereto.  The  science  of  ethics  professes 
to  furnish  us  with  a  reasoned  rule  of  life  ;  to  tell 
us  what  is  right  action  and  why  it  is  so.  What- 
ever differences  of  opinion  may  exist  among  experts, 
there  is  a  general  consensus  that  the  ape  and  tiger 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  53 

methods    of  the   struggle  for   existence    are    not 
reconcilable  with  sound  ethical  principles. 

The  hero  of  our  story  descended  the  bean-stalk, 
and  came  back  to  the  common  world,  where  fare 
and  work  were  alike  hard  ;  where  ugly  competitors 
were  much  commoner  than  beautiful  princesses ; 
and  where  the  everlasting  battle  with  self  was 
much  less  sure  to  be  crowned  with  victory  than  a 
turn-to  with  a  giant.  We  have  done  the  like. 
Thousands  upon  thousands  of  our  fellows,  thou- 
sands of  years  ago,  have  preceded  us  in  finding 
themselves  face  to  face  with  the  same  dread  prob- 
lem of  evil.  They  also  have  seen  that  the  cosmic 
process  is  evolution ;  that  it  is  full  of  wonder,  full 
of  beauty,  and,  at  the  same  time,  full  of  pain. 
They  have  sought  to  discover  the  bearing  of  these 
great  facts  on  ethics ;  to  find  out  whether  there 
is,  or  is  not,  a  sanction  for  morality  in  the  ways  of 
the  cosmos. 

Theories  of  the  universe,  in  which  the  conception 
of  evolution  plays  a  leading  part,  were  extant  at 
least  six  centuries  before  our  era.  Certain  know- 
ledge of  them,  in  the  fifth  century,  reaches  us 
from  localities  as  distant  as  the  valley  of  the 
Ganges  and  the  Asiatic  coasts  of  the  ^gean.  To 
the  early  philosophers  of  Hindostan,  no  less  than 
to  those  of  Ionia,  the  salient  and  characteristic 
feature  of  the  phenomenal  world  was  its  change- 


54  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  II 

fulness  ;  the  unresting  flow  of  all  things,  through 
birth  to  visible  being  and  thence  to  not  being,  in 
which  they  could  discern  no  sign  of  a  beginning 
and  for  which  they  saw  no  prospect  of  an  ending. 
It  was  no  less  plain  to  some  of  these  antique  fore- 
runners of  modern  philosophy  that  suffering  is  the 
badge  of  all  the  tribe  of  sentient  things ;  that  it 
is  no  accidental  accompaniment,  but  an  essential 
constituent  of  the  cosmic  process.  The  energetic 
Greek  might  find  fierce  joys  in  a  world  in  which 
'  strife  is  father  and  king ' ;  but  the  old  Aryan 
spirit  was  subdued  to  quietism  in  the  Indian  sage  ; 
the  mist  of  suffering  which  spread  over  humanity 
hid  everything  else  from  his  view ;  to  him  life 
was  one  with  suffering  and  suffering  with  life. 

In  Hindostan,  as  in  Ionia,  a  period  of  relatively 
high  and  tolerably  stable  civilization  had  succeeded 
long  ages  of  semi-barbarism  and  struggle.  Out  of 
wealth  and  security  had  come  leisure  and  refine- 
ment, and,  close  at  their  heels,  had  followed  the 
malady  of  thought.  To  the  struggle  for  bare 
existence,  which  never  ends,  though  it  may  be 
alleviated  and  partially  disguised  for  a  fortunate 
few,  succeeded  the  struggle  to  make  existence 
intelligible  and  to  bring  the  order  of  things  into 
harmony  with  the  moral  sense  of  man,  which  also 
never  ends,  but,  for  the  thinking  few,  becomes 
keener  with  every  increase  of  knowledge  and  with 
every  step  towards  the  realization  of  a  worthy 
ideal  of  life. 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  55 

Two  thousand  five  hundred  years  ago,  the  value 
of  civilization  was  as  apparent  as  it  is  now ;  then, 
as  now,  it  was  obvious  that  only  in  the  garden  of 
an  orderly  polity  can  the  finest  fruits  humanity 
is  capable  of  bearing  be  produced.  But  it  had 
also  become  evident  that  the  blessings  of  culture 
were  not  unmixed.  The  garden  was  apt  to  turn 
into  a  hothouse.  The  stimulation  of  the  senses, 
the  pampering  of  the  emotions,  endlessly  mul- 
tiplied the  sources  of  pleasure.  The  constant 
widening  of  the  intellectual  field  indefinitely 
extended  the  range  of  that  especially  human 
faculty  of  looking  before  and  after,  which  adds 
to  the  fleeting  present  those  old  and  new  worlds 
of  the  past  and  the  future,  wherein  men  dwell  the 
more  the  higher  their  culture.  But  that  very 
sharpening  of  the  sense  and  that  subtle  refine- 
ment of  emotion,  which  brought  such  a  wealth  of 
pleasures,  were  fatally  attended  by  a  proportional 
enlargement  of  the  capacity  for  suffering ;  and 
the  divine  faculty  of  imagination,  while  it  created 
new  heavens  and  new  earths,  provided  them  with 
the  corresponding  hells  of  futile  regret  for  the 
past  and  morbid  anxiety  for  the  future.^  Finally, 
the  inevitable  penalty  of  over-stimulation,  ex- 
haustion, opened  the  gates  of  civilization  to  its 
great  enemy,  ennui ;  the  stale  and  flat  weariness 
when  man  delights  not,  nor  woman  neither  ;  when 
all  things  are  vanity  and  vexation ;  and  life  seems 
not  worth  living  except  to  escape  the  bore  of  dying. 


56  EVOLUTION   AND  ETHICS  ii 

Even  purely  intellectual  progress  brings  about 
its  revenges.  Problems  settled  in  a  rough  and 
ready  way  by  rude  men,  absorbed  in  action, 
demand  renewed  attention  and  show  themselves 
to  be  still  unread  riddles  when  men  have  time  to 
think.  The  beneficent  demon,  doubt,  whose  name 
is  Legion  and  who  dwells  amongst  the  tombs  of 
old  faiths,  enters  into  mankind  and  thenceforth 
refuses  to  be  cast  out.  Sacred  customs,  venerable 
dooms  of  ancestral  wisdom,  hallowed  by  tradition 
and  professing  to  hold  good  for  all  time,  are  put 
to  the  question.  Cultured  reflection  asks  for  their 
credentials;  judges  them  by  its  own  standards; 
finally,  gathers  those  of  which  it  approves  into 
ethical  systems,  in  which  the  reasoning  is  rarely 
much  more  than  a  decent  pretext  for  the  adoption 
of  foregone  conclusions. 

One  of  the  oldest  and  most  important  elements 
in  such  systems  is  the  conception  of  justice. 
Society  is  impossible  unless  those  who  are  asso- 
ciated agree  to  observe  certain  rules  of  conduct 
towards  one  another ;  its  stability  depends  on  the 
steadiness  with  which  they  abide  by  that  agree- 
ment; and,  so  far  as  they  waver,  that  mutual 
trust  which  is  the  bond  of  society  is  weakened 
or  destroyed.  Wolves  could  not  hunt  in  packs 
except  for  the  real,  though  unexpressed,  under- 
standing that  they  should  not  attack  one  another 
during  the  chase.  The  most  rudimentary  pohty 
is   a   pack  of  men   living   under  the  hke  tacit, 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  5? 

or  expressed,  understanding;  and  having  made 
the  very  important  advance  upon  wolf  society, 
that  they  agree  to  use  the  force  of  the  whole  body 
against  individuals  who  violate  it  and  in  favour  of 
those  who  observe  it.  This  observance  of  a  com- 
mon understanding,  with  the  consequent  distribu- 
tion of  punishments  and  rewards  according  to 
accepted  rules,  received  the  name  of  justice,  while 
the  contrary  was  called  injustice.  Early  ethics 
did  not  take  much  note  of  the  animus  of  the 
violator  of  the  rules.  But  civilization  could  not 
advance  far,  without  the  establishment  of  a 
capital  distinction  between  the  case  of  involun- 
tary and  that  of  wilful  misdeed ;  between  a  merely 
wrong  action  and  a  guilty  one.  And,  with  increas- 
ing refinement  of  moral  appreciation,  the  problem 
of  desert,  which  arises  out  of  this  distinction, 
acquired  more  and  more  theoretical  and  practical 
importance.  If  life  must  be  given  for  life,  yet  it 
was  recognized  that  the  unintentional  slayer  did 
not  altogether  deserve  death;  and,  by  a  sort  of 
compromise  between  the  public  and  the  private 
conception  of  justice,  a  sanctuary  was  provided 
in  which  he  might  take  refuge  from  the  avenger 
of  blood. 

The  idea  of  justice  thus  underwent  a  gradual 
sublimation  from  punishment  and  reward  accord- 
ing to  acts,  to  punishment  and  reward  according  to 
desert ;  or,  in  other  words,  according  to  motive. 
Righteousness,  that  is,  action  from  right  motive, 


58  EVOLUTION   AND    ETHICS  n 

not  only  became  synonymous  with  justice,  but  the 
positive  constituent  of  innocence  and  the  very 
heart  of  goodness. 

Now  when  the  ancient  sage,  whether  Indian  or 
Greek,  who  had  attained  to  this  conception  of 
goodness,  looked  the  world,  and  especially  human 
life,  in  the  face,  he  found  it  as  hard  as  we  do  to 
bring  the  course  of  evolution  into  harmony  with 
even  the  elementary  requirements  of  the  ethical 
ideal  of  the  just  and  the  good. 

If  there  is  one  thing  plainer  than  another,  it  is 
that  neither  the  pleasures  nor  the  pains  of  life, 
in  the  merely  animal  world,  are  distributed  accord- 
ing to  desert ;  for  it  is  admittedly  impossible  for 
the  lower  orders  of  sentient  beings  to  deserve 
either  the  one  or  the  other.  If  there  is  a  gene- 
ralization from  the  facts  of  human  life  which  has 
the  assent  of  thoughtful  men  in  every  age  and 
country,  it  is  that  the  violator  of  ethical  rules 
constantly  escapes  the  punishment  which  he 
deserves ;  that  the  wicked  flourishes  like  a  gi'een 
bay  tree,  while  the  righteous  begs  his  bread ; 
that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  upon  the 
children ;  that,  in  the  realm  of  nature,  ignorance 
is  punished  just  as  severely  as  wilful  wrong ;  and 
that  thousands  upon  thousands  of  innocent  beings 
suffer  for  the  crime,  or  the  unintentional  trespass, 
of  one. 

Greek  and  Semite  and  Indian  are  agreed  upon 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  59 

this  subject.  The  book  of  Job  is  at  one  with  the 
"  Works  and  Da}'s "  and  the  Buddhist  Sutras ; 
the  Psahuist  and  the  Preacher  of  Israel,  with  the 
Tragic  Poets  of  Greece.  What  is  a  more  common 
motive  of  the  ancient  tragedy  in  fact,  than  the 
unfathomable  injustice  of  the  nature  of  things; 
Avhat  is  more  deeply  felt  to  be  true  than  its  pre- 
sentation of  the  destruction  of  the  blameless  by 
the  work  of  his  own  hands,  or  by  the  fatal  opera- 
tion of  the  sins  of  others  ?  Surely  CEdipus  was 
pure  of  heart ;  it  was  the  natural  sequence  of 
events — the  cosmic  process — which  drove  him,  in 
all  innocence,  to  slay  his  father  and  become  the 
husband  of  his  mother,  to  the  desolation  of  his 
people  and  his  own  headlong  ruin.  Or  to  step,  for 
a  moment,  beyond  the  chronological  limits  I  have 
set  myself,  what  constitutes  the  sempiternal  at- 
traction of  Hamlet  but  the  appeal  to  deepest 
experience  of  that  history  of  a  no  less  blameless 
dreamer,  dragged,  in  spite  of  himself,  into  a  world 
out  of  joint ;  involved  in  a  tangle  of  crime  and 
misery,  created  by  one  of  the  prime  agents  of  the 
cosmic  jDrocess  as  it  works  in  and  through  man  ? 

Thus,  brought  before  the  tribunal  of  ethics,  the 
cosmos  might  well  seem  to  stand  condemned. 
The  conscience  of  man  revolted  against  the  moral 
indifference  of  nature,  and  the  microcosmic  atom 
should  have  found  the  illimitable  macrocosm 
guilty.  But  few,  or  none,  ventured  to  record  that 
verdict. 


60  EVOLUTION   AND  ETHICS  ii 

In  the  great  Semitic  trial  of  this  issue,  Job 
takes  refuge  in  silence  and  submission ;  the  Indian 
and  the  Greek,  less  wise  perhaps,  attempt  to  re- 
concile the  irreconcilable  and  plead  for  the  defend- 
ant. To  this  end,  the  Greeks  invented  Theo- 
dicies;  while  the  Indians  devised  what,  in  its 
ultimate  form,  must  rather  be  termed  a  Cos- 
modicy.  For,  though  Buddhism  recognizes  gods 
many  and  lords  many,  they  are  products  of  the 
cosmic  jDrocess ;  and  transitory,  however  long  en- 
during, manifestations  of  its  eternal  activity.  In 
the  doctrine  of  transmigration,  whatever  its  origin, 
Brahminical  and  Buddhist  speculation  found, 
ready  to  hand,*  the  means  of  constructing  a 
plausible  vindication  of  the  ways  of  the  cosmos  to 
man.  If  this  world  is  full  of  pain  and  sorrow ;  if 
grief  and  evil  fall,  like  the  rain,  upon  both  the 
just  and  the  unjust ;  it  is  because,  like  the  rain, 
they  are  Hnks  in  the  endless  chain  of  natural 
causation  by  which  past,  present,  and  future  are 
indissolubly  connected ;  and  there  is  no  more 
injustice  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other.  Every 
sentient  being  is  reaping  as  it  has  sown ;  if  not  in 
this  life,  then  in  one  or  other  of  the  infinite  series 
of  antecedent  existences  of  which  it  is  the  latest 
term.  The  present  distribution  of  good  and  evil 
is,  therefore,  the  algebraical  sum  of  accumulated 
positive  and  negative  deserts;  or,  rather,  it 
depends  on  the  floating  balance  of  the  account. 
For  it  was  not  thought  necessary  that  a  complete 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  61 

settlement  should  ever  take  place.  Arrears  might 
stand  over  as  a  sort  of  '  hanging  gale  ' ;  a  period 
of  celestial  happiness  just  earned  might  be  suc- 
ceeded by  ages  of  torment  in  a  hideous  nether 
world,  the  balance  still  overdue  for  some  remote 
ancestral  error.  ^ 

Whether  the  cosmic  process  looks  any  more 
moral  than  at  first,  after  such  a  vindication,  may 
perhaps  be  questioned.  Yet  this  plea  of  justifica- 
tion is  not  less  plausible  than  others ;  and  none 
but  very  hasty  thinkers  will  reject  it  on  the 
ground  of  inherent  absurdity.  Like  the  doctrine 
of  evolution  itself,  that  of  transmigration  has  its 
roots  in  the  world  of  reality ;  and  it  may  claim 
such  support  as  the  great  argument  from  analogy 
is  capable  of  supplying. 

Everyday  experience  familiarizes  us  with  the 
facts  which  are  grouped  under  the  name  of  here- 
dity. Every  one  of  us  bears  upon  him  obvious 
marks  of  his  parentage,  perhaps  of  remoter  rela- 
tionships. More  particularly,  the  sum  of  tenden- 
cies to  act  in  a  certain  way,  which  we  call 
"  character,"  is  often  to  be  traced  through  a  long- 
series  of  progenitors  and  collaterals.  So  we  may 
justly  say  that  this  '  character ' — this  moral  and 
intellectual  essence  of  a  man — does  veritably  pass 
over  from  one  fleshly  tabernacle  to  another,  and 
does  really  transmigrate  from  generation  to 
generation.  In  the  new-born  infant,  the  character 
of  the  stock  lies  latent,  and  the  Ego  is  little  more 


62  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

than  a  bundle  of  potentialities.  But,  very  early, 
these  become  actualities  ;  from  childhood  to  age 
they  manifest  themselves  in  dulness  or  bright- 
ness, weakness  or  strength,  viciousness  or  up- 
rightness; and  with  each  feature  modified  by 
confluence  with  another  character,  if  by  nothing 
else,  the  character  passes  on  to  its  incarnation  in 
new  bodies. 

The  Indian  philosophers  called  character,  as 
thus  defined,  *  karma.'  ^  It  is  this  karma  which 
passed  from  life  to  life  and  linked  them  in  the 
chain  of  transmigrations ;  and  they  held  that  it  is 
modified  in  each  life,  not  merely  by  confluence  of 
parentage,  but  by  its  own  acts.  They  were,  in 
fact,  strong  believers  in  the  theory,  so  much 
disputed  just  at  present,  of  the  hereditary  trans- 
mission of  acquired  characters.  That  the  mani- 
festation of  the  tendencies  of  a  character  may  be 
greatly  facilitated,  or  impeded,  by  conditions,  of 
which  self-discipline,  or  the  absence  of  it,  are 
among  the  most  important,  is  indubitable;  but 
that  the  character  itself  is  modified  in  this  way  is 
by  no  means  so  certain ;  it  is  not  so  sure  that  the 
transmitted  character  of  an  evil  liver  is  worse,  or 
that  of  a  righteous  man  better,  than  that  which 
he  received.  Indian  philosophy,  however,  did  not 
admit  of  any  doubt  on  this  subject ;  the  belief  in 
the  influence  of  conditions,  notably  of  self-dis- 
cipline, on  the  karma  was  not  merely  a  necessary 
postulate  of  its  theory  of  retribution,  but  it  pre- 


ir  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  03 

sented  the  only  way  of  escape  from  the  endless 
round  of  transmigrations. 

The  earlier  forms  of  Indian  philosophy  agreed 
with  those  prevalent  in  our  own  times,  in  suppos- 
ing the  existence  of  a  permanent  reality,  or  '  sub- 
stance,' beneath  the  shifting  series  of  phenomena, 
whether  of  matter  or  of  mind.  The  substance  of 
the  cosmos  was  '  Brahma,'  that  of  the  individual 
man  '  Atman ' ;  and  the  latter  was  separated  from 
the  former  only,  if  I  may  so  speak,  by  its  pheno- 
menal envelope,  by  the  casing  of  sensations, 
thoughts  and  desires,  pleasures  and  pains,  which 
make  up  the  illusive  phantasmagoria  of  life.  This 
the  ignorant  ■  take  for  reality ;  their  '  Atman ' 
therefore  remains  eternally  imprisoned  in  delu- 
sions, bound  by  the  fetters  of  desire  and  scourged 
by  the  whip  of  misery.  But  the  man  who  has 
attained  enlightenment  sees  that  the  apparent 
reality  is  mere  illusion,  or,  as  was  said  a  couple  of 
thousand  years  later,  that  there  is  nothing  good 
nor  bad  but  thinking  makes  it  so.  If  the  cosmos 
"  is  just  and  of  our  pleasant  vices  makes  instru- 
ments to  scourge  us,"  it  would  seem  that  the  only 
way  to  escape  from  our  heritage  of  evil  is  to 
destroy  that  fountain  of  desire  whence  our  vices 
flow ;  to  refuse  any  longer  to  be  the  instruments 
of  the  evolutionary  process,  and  withdraw  from  the 
struggle  for  existence.  If  the  karma  is  modifiable 
by  self-discipline,  if  its  coarser  desires,  one  after 
another,  can  be  extinguished,  the  ultimate  funda- 


64  EVOLUTION  AND   ETHICS  ii 

mental  desire  of  self-assertion,  or  the  desire  to  be, 
may  also  be  destroyed^  Then  the  bubble  of 
illusion  will  burst,  and  the  freed  individual  '  At- 
man '  will  lose  itself  in  the  universal  '  Brahma.' 

Such  seems  to  have  been  the  pre-Buddhistic 
conception  of  salvation,  and  of  the  way  to  be 
followed  by  those  Avho  would  attain  thereto.  No 
more  thorough  mortification  of  the  flesh  has  ever 
been  attempted  than  that  achieved  by  the  Indian 
ascetic  anchorite;  no  later  monachism  has  so 
nearly  succeeded  in  reducing  the  human  mind  to 
that  condition  of  impassive  quasi-somnambulism, 
which,  but  for  its  acknowledged  holiness,  might 
run  the  risk  of  being  confounded  with  idiocy. 

And  this  salvation,  it  will  be  observed,  was  to 
be  attained  through  knowledge,  and  by  action 
based  on  that  knowledge ;  just  as  the  experi- 
menter, who  would  obtain  a  certain  physical  or 
chemical  result,  must  have  a  knowledge  of  the 
natural  laws  involved  and  the  persistent  disciplined 
will  adequate  to  carry  out  all  the  various  opera- 
tions required.  The  supernatural,  in  our  sense  of 
the  term,  was  entirely  excluded.  There  was  no 
external  power  which  could  affect  the  sequence  of 
cause  and  effect  which  gives  rise  to  karma ;  none 
but  the  will  of  the  subject  of  the  karma  which 
could  put  an  end  to  it. 

Only  one  rule  of  conduct  could  be  based  upon 
the  remarkable  theory  of  which  I  have  endeavoured 
to  give  a  reasoned  outhne.     It  was  folly  to  continue 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  6o 

to  exist  when  an  overplus  of  pain  was  certain ; 
and  the  probabilities  in  fevour  of  the  increase  of 
misery  with  the  prolongation  of  existence,  were 
so  overwhelming.  Slaying  the  body  only  made 
matters  worse ;  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to 
slay  the  soul  by  the  voluntary  arrest  of  all  its 
activities.  Property,  social  ties,  family  affections, 
common  companionship,  must  be  abandoned ;  the 
most  natural  appetites,  even  that  for  food,  must 
be  suppressed,  or  at  least  minimized ;  until  all 
that  remained  of  a  man  was  the  impassive, 
extenuated,  mendicant  monk,  self-hypnotised 
into  cataleptic  trances,  which  the  deluded  mystic 
took  for  foretastes  of  the  final  union  with 
Brahma. 

The  founder  of  Buddhism  accepted  the  chief 
postulates  demanded  by  his  predecessors.  But  he 
was  not  satisfied  with  the  practical  annihilation 
involved  in  merging  the  individual  existence  in 
the  unconditioned — the  Atman  in  Brahma.  It 
would  seem  that  the  admission  of  the  existence  of 
any  substance  whatever — even  of  the  tenuity  of 
that  which  has  neither  quality  nor  energy  and  of 
Avhich  no  predicate  whatever  can  be  asserted — 
appeared  to  him  to  be  a  danger  and  a  snare. 
Though  reduced  to  a  hypostatized  negation, 
Brahma  was  not  to  be  trusted ;  so  long  as  entity 
was  there,  it  might  conceivably  resume  the  weary 
round  of  evolution,  with  all  its  train  of  immeasur- 
able   miseries.     Gautama   got   rid    of  even    that 

VOL.    IX  F 


66  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  ii 

shade  of  a  shadow  of  permanent  existence  by  a 
metaph3'sical  tmtr  deforce  of  great  interest  to  the 
student  of  johilosophy,  seeing  that  it  suppHes  the 
wanting  half  of  Bishop  Berkeley's  well-known 
idealistic  argiiment. 

Granting  the  premises,  I  am  not  aware  of  any 
escape  from  Berkeley's  conclusion,  that  the  '  sub- 
stance' of  matter  is  a  metaphysical  unknown 
quantity,  of  the  existence  of  which  there  is  no 
proof  What  Berkeley  does  not  seem  to  have  so 
clearly  perceived  is  that  the  non-existence  of  a 
substance  of  mind  is  equally  arguable ;  and  that 
the  result  of  the  impartial  applications  of  his 
reasonings  is  the  reduction  of  the  All  to  co- 
existences and  sequences  of  phenomena,  beneath 
and  beyond  which  there  is  nothing  cognoscible. 
It  is  a  remarkable  indication  of  the  subtlety  of 
Indian  speculation  that  Gautama  should  have 
seen  deeper  than  the  gi'eatest  of  modern  idealists ; 
though  it  must  be  admitted  that,  if  some  of 
Berkeley's  reasonings  respecting  the  nature  of 
spirit  are  pushed  home,  they  reach  pretty  much 
the  same  conclusion.^ 

Accepting  the  prevalent  Brahminical  doctrine 
that  the  whole  cosmos,  celestial,  terrestrial,  and 
infernal,  with  its  population  of  gods  and  other 
celestial  beings,  of  sentient  animals,  of  Mara  and 
his  devils,  is  incessantly  shifting  through  recurring 
cycles  of  production  and  destruction,  in  each  of 
which  every  human  being  has  his  transmigratory 


II  EVOLUTION   AND    ETHICS  07 

representative,  Gautama  proceeded  to  eliminate 
substance  altogether;  and  to  reduce  the  cosmos 
to  a  mere  flow  of  sensations,  emotions,  volitions, 
and  thoughts,  devoid  of  any  substratum.  As,  on 
the  surface  of  a  stream  of  water,  we  see  ripples 
and  whirlpools,  which  last  for  a  while  and  then 
vanish  with  the  causes  that  gave  rise  to  them,  so 
what  seem  individual  existences  are  mere  tem- 
porary associations  of  phenomena  circling  round  a 
centre,  "  like  a  dog  tied  to  a  post."  In  the  whole 
universe  there  is  nothing  permanent,  no  eternal 
substance  either  of  mind  or  of  matter.  Person- 
ality is  a  metaphysical  fancy ;  and  in  very  truth, 
not  only  we,  but  all  things,  in  the  worlds  without 
end  of  the  cosmic  phantasmagoria,  are  such  stuff 
as  dreams  are  made  of 

What  then  becomes  of  karma  ?  Karma  re- 
mains untouched.  As  the  peculiar  form  of  energy 
we  call  magnetism  may  be  transmitted  from  a 
loadstone  to  a  piece  of  steel,  from  the  steel  to  a 
piece  of  nickel,  as  it  may  be  strengthened  or 
weakened  by  the  conditions  to  which  it  is  sub- 
jected while  resident  in  each  piece,  so  it  seems  to 
have  been  conceived  that  karma  might  be  trans- 
mitted from  one  phenomenal  association  to  another 
by  a  sort  of  induction.  However  this  may  be, 
Gautama  doubtless  had  a  better  guarantee  for  the 
abolition  of  transmigration,  when  no  wrack  of 
substance,  either  of  Atman  or  of  Brahma,  was 
left  behind  *  when,  in   short,  a  man   had  but  to 

F  2 


68  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  ii 

dream  that  he  willed  not  to  dream,  to  put  an  end 
to  all  dreaming. 

This  end  of  life's  dream  is  Nirvana.  What 
Nirvana  is  the  learned  do  not  agree.  But,  since 
the  best  original  authorities  tell  us  there  is  neither 
desire  nor  activity,  nor  any  possibility  of  phenom- 
enal reappearance  for  the  sage  who  has  entered 
Nirvana,  it  may  be  safely  said  of  this  acme  of 
Buddhistic  philosophy — "  the  rest  is  silence."^ 

Thus  there  is  no  very  great  practical  disagree- 
ment between  Gautama  and  his  predecessors  with 
respect  to  the  end  of  action ;  but  it  is  otherwise 
as  regards  the  means  to  that  end.  With  just 
insight  into  human  nature,  Gautama  declared 
extreme  ascetic  practices  to  be  useless  and  indeed 
harmful.  The  appetites  and  the  passions  are  not 
to  be  abolished  by  mere  mortification  of  the  body ; 
they  must,  in  addition,  be  attacked  on  their  own 
ground  and  conquered  by  steady  cultivation  of 
the  mental  habits  which  oppose  them ;  by  uni- 
versal benevolence ;  by  the  return  of  good  for 
evil ;  by  humility ;  by  abstinence  from  evil 
thought ;  in  short,  by  total  renunciation  of  that 
self-assertion  which  is  the  essence  of  the  cosmic 
process. 

Doubtless,  it  is  to  these  ethical  qualities  that 
Buddhism  owes  its  marvellous  success.^^  A  system 
which  knows  no  God  in  the  western  sense ;  which 
denies  a  soul  to  man ;  which  counts  the  belief  in 
immortality  a  blunder  and  the  hope  of  it  a  sin  ; 


II  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  69 

which  refuses  any  efficacy  to  prayer  and  sacrifice ; 
which  bids  men  look  to  nothing  but  their  own 
efforts  for  salvation ;  which,  in  its  original  purity, 
knew  nothing  of  vows  of  obedience,  abhorred  in- 
tolerance, and  never  sought  the  aid  of  the  secular 
arm ;  yet  spread  over  a  considerable  moiety  of  the 
Old  World  with  marvellous  rapidity,  and  is  still, 
with  whatever  base  admixture  of  foreign  super- 
stitions, the  dominant  creed  of  a  large  fraction  of 
mankind. 

Let  us  now  set  our  faces  westwards,  towards 
Asia  Minor  and  Greece  and  Italy,  to  view  the  rise 
and  progress  of  another  philosophy,  apparently 
independent,  but  no  less  pervaded  by  the  concep- 
tion of  evolution.^^ 

The  sages  of  Miletus  were  pronounced  evolu- 
tionists ;  and,  however  dark  may  be  some  of  the 
sayings  of  Heracleitus  of  Ephesus,  who  was  prob- 
ably a  contemporary  of  Gautama,  no  better  ex- 
pressions of  the  essence  of  the  modern  doctrine 
of  evolution  can  be  found  than  are  presented  by 
some  of  his  pithy  aphorisms  and  striking  meta- 
phors.^2  Indeed,  many  of  my  present  auditors 
must  have  observed  that,  more  than  once,  I  have 
borrowed  from  him  in  the  brief  exposition  of  the 
theory  of  evolution  with  which  this  discourse 
commenced. 

But  when  the  focus  of  Greek  intellectual  activity 
shifted  to  Athens,  the  leading  minds  concentrated 


70  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

their  attention  upon  ethical  problems.  Forsaking 
the  study  of  the  macrocosm  for  that  of  the  micro- 
cosm, they  lost  the  key  to  the  thought  of  the 
great  Ephesian,  which,  I  imagine,  is  more  intelli- 
gible to  us  than  it  ^vas  to  Socrates,  or  to  Plato. 
Socrates,  more  especially,  set  the  fashion  of  a  kind 
of  inverse  agnosticism,  by  teaching  that  the  prob- 
lems of  i^hysics  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
human  intellect ;  that  the  attempt  to  solve  them 
is  essentially  vain ;  that  the  one  worthy  object  of 
investigation  is  the  problem  of  ethical  life ;  and 
his  example  was  followed  by  the  Cynics  and  the 
later  Stoics.  Even  the  comprehensive  knowledge 
and  the  ^penetrating  intellect  of  Aristotle  failed  to 
suggest  to  him  that  in  holding  the  eternity  of  the 
world,  within  its  present  range  of  mutation,  he  was 
making  a  retrogressive  step.  The  scientific  herit- 
age of  Heracleitus  passed  into  the  hands  neither 
of  Plato  nor  of  Aristotle,  but  into  those  of  Demo- 
critus.  But  the  world  was  not  yet  ready  to 
receive  the  great  conceptions  of  the  pliilosojDher  of 
Abdera.  It  was  reserved  for  the  Stoics  to  return 
to  the  track  marked  out  by  the  earlier  philo- 
sophers ;  and,  professing  themselves  disciples  of 
Heracleitus,  to  develop  the  idea  of  evolution 
systematically.  In  doing  this,  they  not  only 
omitted  some  characteristic  features  of  their 
master's  teaching,  but  they  made  additions  al- 
together foreign  to  it.  One  of  the  most  influ- 
ential ol'   these  importations   was    the   transcen- 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  71 

dental  theism  which  had  come  into  vogue.  The 
restless,  fiery  energy,  operating  according  to  law, 
out  of  which  all  things  emerge  and  into  which 
they  return,  in  the  endless  successive  cycles  of 
the  great  year ;  which  creates  and  destroys  worlds 
g,s  a  wanton  child  builds  up,  and  anon  levels,  sand 
castles  on  the  seashore  ;  was  metamorphosed  into 
a  material  world-soul  and  decked  out  with  all  the 
attributes  of  ideal  Divinity ;  not  merely  with  in- 
finite power  and  transcendent  wisdom,  but  Avith 
absolute  goodness. 

The  consequences  of  this  step  were  momentous. 
For  if  the  cosmos  is  the  effect  of  an  immanent, 
omnipotent,  and  infinitely  beneficent  cause,  the  ex- 
istence in  it  of  real  evil,  still  less  of  necessarily 
inherent  evil,  is  plainly  inadmissible.'^  Yet  the 
universal  experience  of  mankind  testified  then,  as 
now,  that,  whether  we  look  within  us  or  without 
us,  evil  stares  us  in  the  face  on  all  sides ;  that  if 
anything  is  real,  pain  and  sorrow  and  Avrong  are 
realities. 

It  would  be  a  new  thing  in  history  if  d  priori 
philosophers  were  daunted  by  the  factious  oppo- 
sition of  experience ;  and  the  Stoics  were  the  last 
men  to  allow  themselves  to  be  beaten  by  mere 
facts.  '  Give  me  a  doctrine  and  I  will  find  the 
reasons  for  it,'  said  Chrysippus.  So  they  per- 
fected, if  they  did  not  invent,  that  ingenious  and 
plausible  form  of  pleading,  the  Theodicy ;  for  the 
purpose  of  showing  firstly,  that  there  is  no  such 


72  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  n 

thing  as  evil ;  secondly,  that  if  there  is,  it  is  the 
necessary  correlate  of  good ;  and,  moreover,  that  it 
is  either  due  to  our  own  fault,  or  inflicted  for  our 
benefit.  Theodicies  have  been  very  popular  in 
their  time,  and  I  believe  that  a  numerous,  though 
somewhat  dwarfed,  progeny  of  them  still  survives. 
So  far  as  I  know,  they  are  all  variations  of  the 
theme  set  forth  in  those  famous  six  lines  of  the 
"  Essay  on  Man,"  in  which  Pope  sums  up  Boling- 
broke's  reminiscences  of  stoical  and  other  specu- 
lations of  this  kind — 

'"AH  nature  is  but  art,  unknown  to  thee  ; 
All  chance,  direction  which  thou  canst  not  see  ; 
All  discord,  harmony  not  understood  ; 
All  partial  evil,  universal  good  ; 
And  spite  of  pride,   in  erring  reason's  spite 
One  truth  is  clear:  whatever  is  is  right." 

Yet,  surely,  if  there  are  few  more  important 
truths  than  those  enunciated  in  the  first  triad,  the 
second  is  open  to  very  grave  objections.  That 
there  is  a  '  soul  of  good  in  things  evil '  is  un- 
questionable ;  nor  will  any  wise  man  deny  the 
disciplinary  value  of  pain  and  sorrow.  But  these 
considerations  do  not  help  us  to  see  why  the  im- 
mense multitude  of  irresponsible  sentient  beings, 
which  cannot  profit  by  such  discipline,  should 
suffer ;  nor  why,  among  the  endless  possibilities 
open  to  omnipotence — that  of  sinless,  happy  exist- 
ence among  the  rest — the  actuality  in  which  sin 
and    misery     abound    should    be   that     selected. 


IT  EVOLUTIOX   AND   ETHICS  73 

Surely  it  is  mere  cheap  rhetoric  to  call  arguments 
which  have  never  yet  been  answered  by  even  the 
meekest  and  the  least  rational  of  Optimists,  sug- 
gestions of  the  pride  of  reason.  As  to  the  con- 
cluding aphorism,  its  fittest  place  would  be  as  an 
inscription  in  letters  of  mud  over  the  portal  of 
some  '  stye  of  Epicurus  ' ;  ^*  for  that  is  where  the 
logical  application  of  it  to  practice  would  land 
men,  with  every  aspiration  stifled  and  every  effort 
paralyzed.  Why  try  to  set  right  what  is  right 
already  ?  Why  strive  to  improve  the  best  of  all 
possible  worlds  ?  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  as  to- 
day all  is  right,  so  to-morrow  all  will  be. 

But  the  attemj^t  of  the  Stoics  to  blind  them- 
selves to  the  reality  of  evil,  as  a  necessary  con- 
comitant of  the  cosmic  process,  had  less  success 
than  that  of  the  Indian  philosophers  to  exclude 
the  reality  of  good  from  their  purview.  Unfor- 
tunately, it  is  much  easier  to  shut  one's  eyes  to 
good  than  to  evil.  Pain  and  sorrow  knock  at  our 
doors  more  loudly  than  pleasure  and  happiness  ; 
and  the  prints  of  their  heavy  footsteps  are  less 
easily  effaced.  Before  the  grim  realities  of 
practical  life  the  pleasant  fictions  of  optimism 
vanished.  If  this  were  the  best  of  all  possible 
worlds,  it  nevertheless  proved  itself  a  very  incon- 
venient habitation  for  the  ideal  sage. 

The  stoical  summary  of  the  whole  duty  of  man, 
'  Live  according  to  nature,'  would  seem  to  imply 
that  the  cosmic  process  is  an  exemplar  for  human 


74  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

conduct.  Ethics  would  thus  become  applied 
Natural  History.  In  fixct,  a  confused  employment 
of  the  maxim,  in  this  sense,  has  done  immeasur- 
able mischief  in  later  times.  It  has  furnished  an 
axiomatic  foundation  for  the  philosophy  of  philo- 
sophasters  and  for  the  moralizing  of  sentimentalists. 
But  the  Stoics  were,  at  bottom,  not  merely  noble, 
but  sane,  men ;  and  if  we  look  closely  into  what 
they  really  meant  by  this  ill-used  phrase,  it  will 
be  found  to  present  no  justification  for  the  mis- 
chievous conclusions  that  have  been  deduced 
from  it. 

In  the  language  of  the  Stoa,  '  Nature '  was  a 
word  of  many  meanings.  There  was  the  '  Nature ' 
of  the  cosmos  and  the  '  Nature '  of  man.  In  the 
latter,  the  animal  'nature,'  which  man  shares 
with  a  moiety  of  the  living  part  of  the  cosmos,  was 
distinguished  from  a  higher  'nature.'  Even  in 
this  higher  nature  there  were  gTades  of  rank. 
The  logical  faculty  is  an  instrument  v/hich  may  be 
turned  to  account  for  any  purpose.  The  passions 
and  the  emotions  are  so  closely  tied  to  the  lower 
nature  that  they  may  be  considered  to  be  patho- 
logical, rather  than  normal,  i^henomena.  The  one 
supreme,  hegemonic,  faculty,  which  constitutes  the 
essential  *  nature '  of  man,  is  most  nearly  repre- 
sented by  that  which,  in  the  language  of  a  later 
philosophy,  has  been  called  the  pure  reason.  It  is 
this  'nature'  which  holds  up  the  ideal  of  the 
supreme  good  and  demands  absolute  submission  of 


II 


EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  75 


the  will  to  its  behests.  It  is  this  which  commands 
all  men  to  love  one  another,  to  return  good  for  evil,  to 
regard  one  another  as  fellow-citizens  of  one  great 
state.  Indeed,  seeing  that  the  progress  towards 
perfection  of  a  civilized  state,  or  polity,  depends 
on  the  obedience  of  its  members  to  these  com- 
mands, the  Stoics  sometimes  termed  the  pure 
reason  the  '  political '  nature.  Unfortunately, 
the  sense  of  the  adjective  has  undergone  so  much 
modification,  that  the  application  of  it  to  that 
which  commands  the  sacrifice  of  self  to  the 
common  good  would  now  sound  almost  grotesque.^^ 

But  what  part  is  played  by  the  theory  of  evolu- 
tion in  this  view  of  ethics  ?  So  far  as  I  can 
discern,  the  ethical  system  of  the  Stoics,  which  is 
essentially  intuitive,  and  reverences  the  categorical 
imperative  as  strongly  as  that  of  any  later 
moralists,  might  have  been  just  what  it  was  if  they 
had  held  any  other  theory  ;  whether  that  of  special 
creation,  on  the  one  side,  or  that  of  the  eternal 
existence  of  the  present  order,  on  the  other.^*^  To 
the  Stoic,  the  cosmos  had  no  importance  for  the 
conscience,  except  in  so  far  as  he  chose  to  think 
it  a  pedagogue  to  virtue.  The  pertinacious  opti- 
mism of  our  philosophers  hid  from  them  the  actual 
state  of  the  case.  It  prevented  them  from  seeing 
that  cosmic  nature  is  no  school  of  virtue,  but  the 
headquarters  of  the  enemy  of  ethical  nature. 
The  logic  of  facts  was  nec'essaiy  to  convince  them 


76  EVOLUTION    AXD    ETHICS  II 

that  the  cosmos  works  through  the  lower  nature 
of  man,  not  for  righteousness,  but  against  it.  And 
it  finally  drove  them  to  confess  that  the  existence 
of  their  ideal  "  wise  man  "  was  incompatible  with 
the  nature  of  things ;  that  even  a  passable  approxi- 
mation to  that  ideal  was  to  be  attained  only  at  the 
cost  of  renunciation  of  the  world  and  mortification, 
not  merely  of  the  flesh,  but  of  all  human  affec- 
tions. The  state  of  perfection  was  that  '  apa- 
theia '  ^^  in  which  desire,  though  it  may  still  be 
felt,  is  powerless  to  move  the  will,  reduced  to  the 
sole  function  of  executing  the  commands  of  pure 
reason.  Even  this  residuum  of  activity  was  to  be 
regarded  as  a  temporary  loan,  as  an  efflux  of  the 
divine  world-pervading  spirit,  chafing  at  its  im- 
prisonment in  the  flesh,  until  such  time  as  death 
enabled  it  to  return  to  its  source  in  the  all- 
pervading  logos. 

I  find  it  difficult  to  discover  any  very  gi'eat 
difference  between  Apatheia  and  Nirvana,  except 
that  stoical  speculation  agi^ees  with  pre-Buddhistic 
philosophy,  rather  than  with  the  teachings  of 
Gautama,  in  so  fjir  as  it  postulates  a  perma- 
nent substance  equivalent  to  '  Brahma '  and 
'Atman';  and  that,  in  stoical  practice,  the 
adoption  of  the  life  of  the  mendicant  cynic  was 
held  to  be  more  a  counsel  of  perfection  than  an 
indispensable  condition  of  the  higher  life. 

Thus  the  extremes  touch.     Greek  thought  and 


H  EVOLUTION   AND    ETHICS  77 

Indian  thought  set  out  from  ground  common  to 
both,  diverge  widely,  develop  under  very  different 
physical  and  moral  conditions,  and  finally  converge 
to  practically  the  same  end. 

The  Vedas  and  the  Homeric  epos  set  before  us 
a  world  of  rich  and  vigorous  life,  full  of  joyous 
fighting  men 

That  ever  with  a  frolic  welcome  took 
The  thunder  and  the  sunshine  .... 

and  who  were  ready  to  brave  the  very  Gods  them- 
selves when  their  blood  was  up.  A  few  centuries 
pass  away,  and  under  the  influence  of  civilization 
the  descendants  of  these  men  are  '  sicklied  o'er 
with  the  pale  cast  of  thought ' — frank  pessimists, 
or,  at  best,  make-believe  optimists.  The  courage 
of  the  warlike  stock  may  be  as  hardly  tried  as 
before,  perhaps  more  hardly,  but  the  enemy  is 
self  The  hero  has  become  a  monk.  The  man  of 
action  is  replaced  by  the  quietist,  whose  highest 
aspiration  is  to  be  the  passive  instrument  of  the 
divine  Keason.  By  the  Tiber,  as  by  the  Ganges, 
ethical  man  admits  that  the  cosmos  is  too  strong 
for  him ;  and,  destroying  every  bond  which  ties 
him  to  it  by  ascetic  discipline,  he  seeks  salvation 
in  absolute  renunciation.^^ 

Modern  thought  is  making  a  fresh  start  from 
the  base  whence  Indian  and  Greek  philosophy  set 
out ;  and,  the  human  mind  being  very  much  what 


78  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

it  was  six-and-tweuty  centuries  ago,  there  is  no 
ground  for  wonder  if  it  presents  indications  of  a 
tendency  to  move  along  the  old  lines  to  the  same 
results. 

We  are  more  than  sufficiently  familiar  with 
modern  pessimism,  at  least  as  a  speculation ;  for  I 
cannot  call  to  mind  that  any  of  its  present  votaries 
have  sealed  their  faith  by  assuming  the  rags  and 
the  bowl  of  the  mendicant  Bhikku,  or  the  cloak 
and  the  wallet  of  the  Cynic.  The  obstacles  placed 
in  the  way  of  sturdy  vagrancy  by  an  unphiloso- 
phical  police  have,  perhaps,  proved  too  formidable 
for  philosophical  consistency.  We  also  know 
modern  speculative  optimism,  with  its  perfectibility 
of  the  species,  reign  of  peace,  and  lion  and  lamb 
transformation  scenes ;  but  one  does  not  hear  so 
much  of  it  as  one  did  forty  years  ago ;  indeed,  I 
imagine  it  is  to  be  met  with  more  commonly  at 
the  tables  of  the  healthy  and  wealthy,  than  in  the 
congregations  of  the  wise.  The  majority  of  us,  I 
apprehend,  profess  neither  pessimism  nor  optimism. 
We  hold  that  the  world  is  neither  so  good,  nor  so 
bad,  as  it  conceivably  might  be ;  and,  as  most  of 
us  have  reason,  now  and  again,  to  discover  that  it 
can  be.  Those  who  have  lailed  to  experience  the 
joys  that  make  life  worth  living  are,  probably,  in 
as  small  a  minority  as  those  who  have  never 
known  the  griefs  that  rob  existence  of  its  savour 
and  turn  its  richest  fruits  into  mere  dust  and 
ashes. 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  79 

Further,  I  think  I  do  not  err  in  assuming  that, 
however  diverse  their  views  on  philosophical  and 
religious  matters,  most  men  are  agreed  that  the 
proportion  of  good  and  evil  in  life  may  be  very 
sensibly  affected  by  human  action.  I  never  heard 
anybody  doubt  that  the  evil  may  be  thus  increased, 
or  diminished ;  and  it  would  seem  to  follow  that 
good  must  be  similarly  susceptible  of  addition  or 
subtraction.  Finally,  to  my  knoAvledge,  nobody 
professes  to  doubt  that,  so  far  forth  as  we  possess 
a  power  of  bettering  things,  it  is  our  paramount 
duty  to  use  it  and  to  train  all  our  intellect  and 
energy  to  this  supreme  service  of  our  kind. 

Hence  the  pressing  interest  of  the  question,  to 
what  extent  modern  progress  in  natural  know- 
ledge, and,  more  especially,  the  general  outcome 
of  that  progress  in  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  is 
competent  to  help  us  in  the  great  work  of  helping 
one  another  ? 

The  propounders  of  what  are  called  the  "  ethics 
of  evolution,"  when  the  '  evolution  of  ethics ' 
would  usually  better  express  the  object  of  their 
speculations,  adduce  a  number  of  more  or  less  in- 
teresting facts  and  more  or  less  sound  arguments, 
in  fjivour  of  the  origin  of  the  moral  sentiments, 
in  the  same  way  as  other  natural  phenomena,  by 
a  process  of  evolution.  I  have  little  doubt,  for  my 
own  part,  that  they  are  on  the  right  track  ;  but  as 
the  immoral  sentiments  have  no  less  been  evolved, 
there  is,  so  far,  as  much  natural  sanction   for  the 


80  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  li 

one  as  the  other.  The  thief  and  the  murderer 
follow  nature  just  as  much  as  the  philanthropist. 
Cosmic  evolution  may  teach  us  how  the  good  and 
the  evil  tendencies  of  man  may  have  come  about ; 
but,  in  itself,  it  is  incompetent  to  furnish  any 
better  reason  why  what  we  call  good  is  preferable 
to  what  we  call  evil  than  we  had  before.  Some 
day,  I  doubt  not,  we  shall  arrive  at  an  understand- 
ing of  the  evolution  of  the  aesthetic  fiiculty ;  but 
all  the  understanding  in  the  world  will  neither 
increase  nor  diminish  the  force  of  the  intuition 
that  this  is  beautiful  and  that  is  ugly. 

There  is  another  fallacy  which  appears  to  me  to 
pervade  the  so-called  "  ethics  of  evolution."  It  is 
the  notion  that  because,  on  the  Avhole,  animals 
and  plants  have  advanced  in  perfection  of  organ- 
ization by  means  of  the  struggle  for  existence  and 
the  consequent  '  survival  of  the  fittest ' ;  therefore 
men  in  society,  men  as  ethical  beings,  must  look 
to  the  same  process  to  help  them  towards  per- 
fection. I  suspect  that  this  fallacy  has  arisen  out 
of  the  unfortunate  ambiguity  of  the  phrase  '  sur- 
vival of  the  fittest.'  '  Fittest '  has  a  connotation  of 
'  best ' ;  and  about  '  best '  there  hangs  a  moral 
flavour.  In  cosmic  nature,  however,  what  is 
*  fittest '  depends  upon  the  conditions.  Long  since,^^ 
I  ventured  to  point  out  that  if  our  hemisphere 
were  to  cool  again,  the  survival  of  the  fittest  might 
bring  about,  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  a  popula- 
tion of  more  and  more  stunted  and  humbler  and 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  81 

humbler  organisms,  until  the  '  fittest '  that  sur- 
vived might  be  nothing  but  lichens,  diatoms,  and 
such  microscopic  organisms  as  those  which  give 
red  snow  its  colour ;  while,  if  it  became  hotter,  the 
pleasant  valleys  of  the  Thames  and  Isis  might  be 
uninhabitable  by  any  animated  beings  save  those 
that  flourish  in  a  tropical  jungle.  They,  as  the 
fittest,  the  best  adapted  to  the  changed  conditions, 
would  survive. 

Men  in  society  are  undoubtedly  subject  to  the 
cosmic  process.  As  among  other  animals,  multi- 
plication goes  on  without  cessation,  and  involves 
severe  competition  for  the  means  of  support.  The 
struggle  for  existence  tends  to  eliminate  those  less 
fitted  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  circumstances 
of  their  existence.  The  strongest,  the  most  self- 
assertive,  tend  to  tread  down  the  weaker.  But 
the  influence  of  the  cosmic  process  on  the  evolu- 
tion of  society  is  the  greater  the  more  rudimentary 
its  civilization.  Social  progress  means  a  checking 
of  the  cosmic  process  at  every  step  and  the  sub- 
stitution for  it  of  another,  which  may  be  called 
the  ethical  process ;  the  end  of  which  is  not  the 
survival  of  those  who  may  happen  to  be  the 
fittest,  in  respect  of  the  whole  of  the  conditions 
which  obtain,  but  of  those  who  are  ethically  the 
best.20 

As  I  have  already  urged,  the  practice  of  that 
which  is  ethically  best — what  we  call  goodness  or 
virtue — involves  a  course  of  conduct  which,  in  all 

VOL.    IX  G 


82  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  il 

respects,  is  opposed  to  tliat  which  leads  to  success 
in  the  cosmic  struggle  for  existence.  In  place  of 
ruthless  self-assertion  it  demands  self-restraint ; 
in  place  of  thrusting  aside,  or  treading  down,  all 
competitors,  it  requires  that  the  individual  shall 
not  merely  resjDect,  but  shall  help  his  fellows ;  its 
influence  is  directed,  not  so  much  to  the  survival 
of  the  fittest,  as  to  the  fitting  of  as  many  as  pos- 
sible to  survive.  It  repudiates  the  gladiatorial 
theory  of  existence.  It  demands  that  each  man 
who  enters  into  the  enjoyment  of  the  advantages 
of  a  polity  shall  be  mindful  of  his  debt  to  those 
who  have  laboriously  constructed  it ;  and  shall 
take  heed  that  no  act  of  his  weakens  the  fabric  in 
which  he  has  been  permitted  to  live.  Laws  and 
moral  precepts  are  directed  to  the  end  of  curbing 
the  cosmic  process  and  reminding  the  individual 
of  his  duty  to  the  community,  to  the  protection 
and  influence  of  which  he  owes,  if  not  existence 
itself,  at  least  the  life  of  something  better  than  a 
brutal  savage. 

It  is  from  neglect  of  these  plain  considerations 
that  the  fanatical  individualism  ^^  of  our  time 
attempts  to  apply  the  analogy  of  cosmic  nature  to 
society.  Once  more  we  have  a  misapplication  of 
the  stoical  injunction  to  follow  nature ;  the  duties 
of  the  individual  to  the  state  are  forgotten,  and  his 
tendencies  to  self-assertion  are  dignified  by  the 
name  of  rights.  It  is  seriously  debated  whether 
the  members   of    a    community  are  justified   in 


II  EVOLUTION   AND    ETHICS  83 

using  their  combined  strength  to  constrain  one  of 
their  number  to  contribute  his  share  to  the  main- 
tenance of  it ;  or  even  to  prevent  him  from  doing 
his  best  to  destroy  it.  The  struggle  for  existence, 
which  has  done  such  admirable  work  in  cosmic 
nature,  must,  it  appears,  be  equally  beneficent  in 
the  ethical  sphere.  Yet  if  that  which  I  have  in- 
sisted upon  is  true ;  if  the  cosmic  process  has  no 
sort  of  relation  to  moral  ends ;  if  the  imitation  of 
it  by  man  is  inconsistent  with  the  first  principles 
of  ethics ;  what  becomes  of  this  surprising  theory  ? 

Let  us  understand,  once  for  all,  that  the  ethical 
progress  of  society  depends,  not  on  imitating  the 
cosmic  process,  still  less  in  running  away  from  it, 
but  in  combating  it.  It  may  seem  an  audacious 
proposal  thus  to  pit  the  microcosm  against  the 
macrocosm  and  to  set  man  to  subdue  nature  to  his 
higher  ends;  but  I  venture  to  think  that  the 
great  intellectual  difference  between  the  ancient 
times  with  which  we  have  been  occupied  and  our 
day,  lies  in  the  solid  foundation  we  have  acquired 
for  the  hope  that  such  an  enterprise  may  meet 
with  a  certain  measure  of  success. 

The  history  of  civilization  details  the  steps  by 
which  men  have  succeeded  in  building  up  an 
artificial  world  within  the  cosmos.  Fragile  reed 
as  he  may  be,  man,  as  Pascal  says,  is  a  thinking 
reed :  ^^  there  lies  within  him  a  fund  of  energy, 
operating  intelligently  and  so  far  akin  to  that 
which  pervades  the  universe,  that  it  is  competent 

G  2 


84  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS 


II 


to  influence  and  modify  the  cosmic  process.  In 
virtue  of  his  inteUigence,  the  dwarf  bends  the 
Titan  to  his  will.  In  every  fomily,  in  every  polity 
that  has  been  established,  the  cosmic  process  in 
man  has  been  restrained  and  otherwise  modified 
by  law  and  custom  ;  in  surrounding  nature,  it  has 
been  similarly  influenced  b}^  the  art  of  the  shep- 
herd, the  agriculturist,  the  artisan.  As  civilization 
has  advanced,  so  has  the  extent  of  this  interfer- 
ence increased ;  until  the  organized  and  highly 
developed  sciences  and  arts  of  the  present  day 
have  endowed  man  with  a  command  over  the 
course  of  non-human  nature  gi^eater  than  that 
once  attributed  to  the  magicians.  The  most  im- 
pressive, I  might  say  startling,  of  these  changes 
have  been  brought  about  in  the  course  of  the  last 
two  centuries ;  while  a  right  comprehension  of  the 
process  of  life  and  of  the  means  of  influencing 
its  manifestations  is  only  just  dawning  upon  us. 
We  do  not  yet  see  our  way  beyond  generalities ; 
and  we  are  befogged  by  the  obtrusion  of  false 
analogies  and  crude  anticipations.  But  Astro- 
nomy, Physics,  Chemistry,  have  all  had  to  pass 
through  similar  phases,  before  they  reached  the 
stage  at  which  their  influence  became  an  imi^ort- 
ant  factor  in  human  affairs.  Physiology,  Psycho- 
logy, Ethics,  Political  Science,  must  submit  to  the 
same  ordeal.  Yet  it  seems  to  me  irrational  to 
doubt  that,  at  no  distant  period,  they  will  work  as 
great  a  revolution  in  the  sphere  of  practice. 


II  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  85 

The  theory  of  evohition  encourages  no  millen- 
nial anticipations.  If,  for  millions  of  years,  our 
globe  has  taken  the  upward  road,  yet,  some  time, 
the  summit  will  be  reached  and  the  downward 
route  will  be  commenced.  The  most  daring 
imagination  will  hardly  venture  upon  the  sugges- 
tion that  the  power  and  the  intelligence  of  man 
can  ever  arrest  the  procession  of  the  great  year. 

Moreover,  the  cosmic  nature  born  with  us  and, 
to  a  large  extent,  necessary  for  our  maintenance, 
is  the  outcome  of  millions  of  years  of  severe  train- 
ing, and  it  would  be  folly  to  imagine  that  a  few 
centuries  will  suffice  to  subdue  its  masterfulness 
to  purely  ethical  ends.  Ethical  nature  may  count 
upon  having  to  reckon  with  a  tenacious  and 
powerful  enemy  as  long  as  the  world  lasts.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  I  see  no  limit  to  the  extent  to 
which  intelligence  and  will,  guided  by  sound  prin- 
ciples of  investigation,  and  organized  in  common 
effort,  may  modify  the  conditions  of  existence,  for 
a  period  longer  than  that  now  covered  by  history. 
And  much  may  be  done  to  change  the  nature  of 
man  himself  ^^  The  intelligence  which  has  con- 
verted the  brother  of  the  wolf  into  the  faithful 
guardian  of  the  flock  ought  to  be  able  to  do  some- 
thing towards  curbing  the  instincts  of  savagery 
in  civilized  men. 

But  if  we  may  permit  ourselves  a  larger  hope 
of  abatement  of  the  essential  evil  of  the  world  than 
was  possible  to  those  who,  in  the  infancy  of  exact 


86  EVOLUTION   AND    ETHICS  li 

knowledge,  faced  the  problem  of  existence  more 
than  a  score  of  centuries  ago,  I  deem  it  an  essen- 
tial condition  of  the  realization  of  that  hope  that 
we  should  cast  aside  the  notion  that  the  escape 
from  pain  and  sorrow  is  the  proper  object  of  life. 

We  have  long  since  emerged  from  the  heroic 
childhood  of  our  race,  when  good  and  evil  could 
be  met  with  the  same  '  frolic  welcome ' ;  the 
attempts  to  escape  from  evil,  whether  Indian  or 
Greek,  have  ended  in  flight  from  the  battle-field ; 
it  remains  to  us  to  throw  aside  the  youthful  over- 
confidence  and  the  no  less  youthful  discourage- 
ment of  nonage.     We  are  grown  men,  and  must 

play  the  man 

strong  in  will 
To  strive,   to  seek,   to  find,   and  not  to  yield, 

cherishing  the  good  that  fells  in  our  way,  and 
bearing  the  evil,  in  and  around  us,  with  stout 
hearts  set  on  diminishing  it.  So  far,  we  all  may 
strive  in  one  faith  towards  one  hope : 

It  may  be  that  the  gulfs  will  wash  ns  down, 
It  may  be  we  shall  touch  the  Happy  Isles, 

....   but  something  ere  the  end, 

Some  work  of  noble  note  may  yet  be  done.     {-■^) 


NOTES 

Note  1  (p.  49). 

I  HAVE  been  careful  to  speak  of  the  "  appearance  " 
of  cyclical  evolution  presented  by  living  things ;  for, 
on  critical  examination,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
course  of  vegetable  and  of  animal  life  is  not  exactly 
represented  by  the  figure  of  a  cycle  which  returns 
into  itself.  What  actually  happens,  in  all  but  the 
lowest  organisms,  is  that  one  part  of  the  growing 
germ  {A)  gives  rise  to  tissues  and  organs ;  while 
another  part  i^B)  remains  in  its  primitive  condition, 
or  is  but  slightly  modified.  The  moiety  A  becomes 
the  body  of  the  adult  and,  sooner  or  later,  perishes, 
while  portions  of  the  moiety  ^  are  detached  and,  as 
offspring,  continue  the  life  of  the  species.  Thus,  if 
we  trace  back  an  organism  along  the  direct  line  of 
descent  from  its  remotest  ancestor,  B,  as  a  whole, 
has  never  suffered  death ;  portions  of  it,  only,  have 
been  cast  off  and  died  in  each  individual  offspring. 

Everybody  is  familiar  with  the  way  in  which  the 
''  suckers "  of  a  strawberry  plant  behave.  A  thin 
cylinder  of  living  tissue  keeps  on  growing  at  its  free 
end,     until    it    attains    a    considerable    length.     At 


88  EVOLUTION    AND    ETHICS  n 

successive  intervals,  it  develops  buds  which  grow  into 
strawberry  plants ;  and  these  become  independent  by 
the  death  of  the  parts  of  the  sucker  which  connect 
them.  The  rest  of  the  sucker,  however,  may  go  on 
living  and  growing  indefinitely,  and,  circumstances 
remaining  favourable,  there  is  no  obvious  reason  why 
it  should  ever  die.  The  living  substance  B,  in  a 
manner,  answ^ers  to  the  sucker.  If  we  could  restore 
the  continuity  which  was  once  possessed  by  the  por- 
tions of  B,  contained  in  all  the  individuals  of  a  direct 
line  of  descent,  they  would  form  a  sucker,  or  stolon,  on 
which  these  individuals  would  be  strung,  and  which 
would  never  have  wholly  died. 

A  species  remains  unchanged  so  long  as  the 
potentiality  of  development  resident  in  B  remains 
unaltered  ;  so  long,  e.g.,  as  the  buds  of  the  strawberry 
sucker  tend  to  become  typical  straw- berry  plants.  In 
the  case  of  the  progressive  evolution  of  a  species,  the 
developmental  potentiality  of  B  becomes  of  a  higher 
and  higher  order.  In  retrogressive  evolution,  the 
contrary  would  be  the  case.  The  phenomena  of 
atavism  seem  to  show  that  retrogressive  evolution, 
that  is,  the  return  of  a  species  to  one  or  other  of  its 
earlier  forms,  is  a  possibility  to  be  reckoned  with. 
The  simplification  of  structure,  which  is  so  common 
in  the  parasitic  members  of  a  group,  however,  does 
not  properly  come  under  this  head.  The  worm-like, 
limbless  Lern<jea  has  no  resemblance  to  any  of  the 
stages  of  development  of  the  many-limbed  active 
animals  of  the  group  to  w'hich  it  belongs. 


II 


NOTES  89 


Note  2  (p.  49) 

Heracleitus  says,  IIoTa/^a)  yap  ovk  ecrrt  8is  i/xfirjvaL 
T(3  avTco ;  but,  to  be  strictly  accurate,  the  river 
remains,  though  the  water  of  which  it  is  composed 
changes — just  as  a  man  retains  his  identity  though 
the  whole  substance  of  his  body  is  constantly 
shifting. 

This  is  put  very  well  by  Seneca  (Ep.  Ivii.  i.  20,  Ed. 
Ruhkopf) :  "  Corpora  nostra  rapiuntur  fluminum 
more,  quidquid  vides  currit  cum  tempore ;  nihil  ex 
his  quae  videmus  manet.  Ego  ipse  dum  loquor  mutari 
ista,  mutatus  sum.  Hoc  est  quod  ait  Heraclitus  '  In 
idem  flumen  bis  non  descendimus.'  Manet  idem 
fluminis  nomen,  aqua  transmissa  est.  Hoc  in  amne 
manifestius  est  quam  in  homine,  sed  nos  quoque  non 
minus  velox  cursus  prsetervehit." 

Note  3  (p.  55). 

"Multa  bona  nostra  nobis  nocent,  timoris  enim 
tormentum  memoria  reducit,  providentia  anticipat. 
Nemo  tantum  prjesentibus  miser  est."  (Seneca,  Ed. 
V.  7.) 

Among  the  many  wise  and  w^eighty  aphorisms  of 
the  Roman  Bacon,  few  sound  the  realities  of  life  more 
deeply  than  "  Multa  bona  nostra  nobis  nocent."  If 
there  is  a  soul  of  good  in  things  evil,  it  is  at  least 
equally  true  that  there  is  a  soul  of  evil  in  things 
good  :  for  things,  like  men,  have  "  les  defauts  de  leurs 
qualites."  It  is  one  of  the  last  lessons  one  learns 
from  experience,  but  not  the  least  important,  that  a 


90  EVOLUTION    AND    ETHICS  ii 

heavy  tax  is  levied  upon  all  forms  of  success ;  and 
that  failure  is  one  of  the  commonest  disguises 
assumed  by  blessings. 

Kote  4  (p.  60). 

"There  is  within  the  body  of  every  man  a  soul 
which,  at  the  death  of  the  body,  flies  away  from  it 
like  a  bird  out  of  a  cage,  and  enters  upon  a  new 
life  .  .  .  either  in  one  of  the  heavens  or  one  of  the 
hells  or  on  this  earth.  The  only  exception  is  the 
rare  case  of  a  man  having  in  this  life  acquired  a 
true  knowledge  of  God.  According  to  the  pre- 
Buddhistic  theory,  the  soul  of  such  a  man  goes  along 
the  path  of  the  Gods  to  God,  and,  being  united  with 
Him,  enters  upon  an  immortal  life  in  which  his 
individuality  is  not  extinguished.  In  the  latter  theory, 
his  soul  is  directly  absorbed  into  the  Great  Soul,  is 
lost  in  it,  and  has  no  longer  any  independent  existence. 
The  souls  of  all  other  men  enter,  after  the  death  of 
the  body,  upon  a  new  existence  in  one  or  other  of 
the  many  different  modes  of  being.  If  in  heaven  or 
hell,  the  soul  itself  becomes  a  god  or  demon  without' 
entering  a  body ;  all  superhuman  beings,  save  the 
great  gods,  being  looked  upon  as  not  eternal,  but 
merely  temporary  creatures.  If  the  soul  returns  to 
earth  it  may  or  may  not  enter  a  new  body ;  and  this 
either  of  a  human  being,  an  animal,  a  plant,  or  even 
a  material  object.  For  all  these  are  possessed  of 
souls,  and  there  is  no  essential  difference  between 
these  souls  and  the  souls  of  men — all  being  alike 
mere  sparks  of  the  Great  Spirit,  who  is  the  only  real 


II  NOTES  91 

existence."      (Rhys  Davids,  Hihhert  Lectures,  1881, 
p.  83.) 

For  what  I  have  said  about  Indian  Philosophy,  I 
am  particularly  indebted  to  the  luminous  exposition 
of  primitive  Buddhism  and  its  relations  to  earlier 
Hindu  thought,  which  is  given  by  Prof.  Phys  Davids 
in  his  remarkable  Hihhert  Lectures  for  1881,  and 
Buddhism  (1890).  The  only  apology  I  can  offer  for 
the  freedom  with  which  I  have  borrowed  from  him 
in  these  notes,  is  my  desire  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to 
my  indebtedness.  I  have  also  found  Dr.  Oldenberg's 
Buddha  (Ed.  2,  1890)  very  helpful.  The  origin  of 
the  theory  of  transmigration  stated  in  the  above 
extract  is  an  unsolved  problem.  That  it  differs 
widely  from  the  Egyptian  metempsychosis  is  clear. 
In  fact,  since  men  usually  people  the  other  world 
with  phantoms  of  this,  the  Egyptian  doctrine  would 
seem  to  presuppose  the  Indian  as  a  more  archaic 
belief. 

Prof.  Phys  Davids  has  fully  insisted  upon  the 
ethical  importance  of  the  transmigration  theory. 
"  One  of  the  latest  speculations  now  being  put  forward 
among  ourselves  would  seek  to  explain  each  man's 
character,  and  even  his  outward  condition  in  life,  by 
the  character  he  inherited  from  his  ancestors,  a 
character  gradually  formed  during  a  practically 
endless  series  of  past  existences,  modified  only  by  the 
conditions  into  which  he  was  born,  those  very  con- 
ditions being  also,  in  like  manner,  the  last  result  of 
a  practically  endless  series  of  past  causes.  Gotama's 
speculation  might  be  stated  in  the  same  words.  But 
it  attempted  also  to  explain,  in  a  way  different  from 


92  EVOLUTION   AND    ETHICS  n 

that  which  woukl  be  adopted  by  the  exponents  of 
the  modern  theory,  that  strange  problem  which  it 
is  also  the  motive  of  the  wonderful  drama  of  the 
book  of  Job  to  explain— the  fact  that  the  actual 
distribution  here  of  good  fortune,  or  misery,  is 
entirely  independent  of  the  moral  qualities  which 
men  call  good  or  bad.  We  cannot  wonder  that  a 
teacher,  whose  whole  system  was  so  essentially  an 
ethical  reformation,  should  have  felt  it  incumbent 
upon  him  to  seek  an  explanation  of  this  apparent 
injustice.  And  all  the  more  so,  since  the  belief  he 
had  inherited,  the  theory  of  the  transmigration  of 
souls,  had  provided  a  solution  perfectly  sufficient  to 
any  one  who  could  accept  that  belief."  {Hihhert 
Lectures,  p.  93.)  I  should  venture  to  suggest  the 
substitution  of  '  largely  '  for  '  entirely '  in  the  fore- 
going passage.  Wliether  a  ship  makes  a  good  or  a 
bad  voyage  is  largely  independent  of  the  conduct  of 
the  captain,  but  it  is  largely  affected  by  that  con- 
duct. Though  powerless  before  a  hurricane  he  may 
weather  many  a  bad  gale. 

Note  5  (p.^61). 

The  outward  condition  of  the  soul  is,  in  each  new 
birth,  determined  by  its  actions  in  a  previous  birth ; 
but  by  each  action  in  succession,  and  not  by  the 
balance  struck  after  the  evil  has  been  reckoned  off 
against  the  good.  A  good  man  who  has  once  uttered 
a  slander  may  spend  a  hundred  thousand  years  as  a 
god,  in  consequence  of  his  goodness,  and  when  the 
power  of  his  good  actions  is  exhausted,  may  be  born 


II 


NOTES  93 


as  a  dumb  man  on  account  of  his  transgression ;  and 
a  robber  who  has  once  done  an  act  of  mercy,  may 
come  to  life  in  a  king's  body  as  the  result  of  his 
virtue,  and  then  suffer  torments  for  ages  in  hell  or 
as  a  ghost  without  a  body,  or  be  re-born  many  times 
as  a  slave  or  an  outcast,  in  consequence  of  his  evil 
life. 

"  There  is  no  escape,  according  to  this  theory,  from 
the  result  of  any  act ;  though  it  is  only  the  conse- 
quences of  its  own  acts  that  each  soul  has  to  endure. 
The  force  has  been  set  in  motion  by  itself  and  can 
never  stop  ;  and  its  effect  can  never  be  foretold.  If  evil, 
it  can  never  be  modified  or  prevented,  for  it  depends 
on  a  cause  already  completed,  that  is  now  for  ever 
beyond  the  soul's  control.  There  is  even  no  continuing 
consciousness,  no  memory  of  the  past  that  could  guide 
the  soul  to  any  knowledge  of  its  fate.  The  only 
advantage  open  to  it  is  to  add  in  this  life  to  the  sum 
of  its  good  actions,  that  it  may  bear  fruit  with  the 
rest.  And  even  this  can  only  happen  in  some  future 
life  under  essentially  the  same  conditions  as  the  pre- 
sent one :  subject,  like  the  present  one,  to  old  age, 
decay,  and  death  ;  and  affording  opportunity,  like  the 
present  one,  for  the  commission  of  errors,  ignorances, 
or  sins,  which  in  their  turn  must  inevitably  produce 
their  due  effect  of  sickness,  disability,  or  woe.  Thus 
is  the  soul  tossed  about  from  life  to  life,  from  billow 
to  billow  in  the  great  ocean  of  transmigration.  And 
there  is  no  escape  save  for  the  very  few,  who,  during 
their  birth  as  men,  attain  to  a  right  knowledge  of  the 
Great  Spirit :  and  thus  enter  into  immortality,  or,  as 
the  later  philosophers  taught,  are  absorbed  into  the 


94  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  n 

Divine  Essence."    (Rhys  Davids,  Hihbert  Lectures,  pp. 
85,  86.) 

The  state  after  death  thus  imagined  by  the  Hindu 
philosophers  has  a  certain  analogy  to  the  purgatory 
of  the  Roman  Church ;  except  that  escape  from  it  is 
dependent,  not  on  a  divine  decree  modified,  it  may  be, 
by  sacerdotal  or  saintly  intercession,  but  by  the  acts 
of  the  individual  himself ;  and  that  while  ultimate 
emergence  into  heavenly  bliss  of  the  good,  or  well- 
prayed  for,  Catholic  is  professedly  assured,  the  chances 
in  favour  of  the  attainment  of  absorption,  or  of 
Nirvana,  by  any  individual  Hindu  are  extremely 
small. 


Note  6  (p.  62). 

"  That  part  of  the  then  prevalent  transmigration 
theory  which  could  not  be  proved  false  seemed  to 
meet  a  deeply  felt  necessity,  seemed  to  supply  a 
moral  cause  which  would  explain  the  unequal  distri- 
bution here  of  happinesss  or  woe,  so  utterly  inconsis- 
tent with  the  present  characters  of  men."  Gautama 
"  still  therefore  talked  of  men's  previous  existence, 
but  by  no  means  in  the  way  that  he  is  generally 
represented  to  have  done."  What  he  taught  was 
"the  transmigration  of  character."  He  held  that 
after  the  death  of  any  being,  whether  human  or 
not,  there  survived  nothing  at  all  but  that  being's 
*  Karma,'  the  result,  that  is,  of  its  mental  and  bodily 
actions.  Every  individual,  whether  human  or  divine, 
was  the  last  inheritor  and  the  last  result  of  the 
Karma  of  a  long  series  of  past  individuals — a  series 


II 


NOTES  95 


so  long  that  its  beginning  is  beyond  the  reach  of 
calculation,  and  its  end  will  be  coincident  with  the 
destruction  of  the  world."  (Rhys  Davids,  Il'thhert 
Lectures,  p.  92.) 

In  the  theory  of  evolution,  the  tendency  of  a  germ 
to  develop  according  to  a  certain  specific  type,  e.g.  of 
the  kidney  bean  seed  to  grow  into  a  plant  having  all 
the  characters  of  Phaseolus  vulgaris,  is  its  '  Karma,' 
It  is  the  "  last  inheritor  and  the  last  result  "  of  all 
the  conditions  that  have  affected  a  line  of  ancestry 
which  goes  back  for  many  millions  of  years  to  the 
time  when  life  first  appeared  on  the  earth.  The 
moiety  B  of  the  substance  of  the  bean  plant  (see 
Note  1)  is  the  last  link  in  a  once  continuous  chain 
extending  from  the  primitive  living  substance :  and 
the  characters  of  the  successive  species  to  which  it 
has  given  rise  are  the  manifestations  of  its  gradually 
modified  Karma.  As  Prof.  Khys  Davids  aptly  says, 
the  snowdrop  "  is  a  snowdrop  and  not  an  oak,  and 
just  that  kind  of  snowdrop,  because  it  is  the  outcome 
of  the  Karma  of  an  endless  series  of  past  existences." 
{Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  114.) 

Note  7  (p.  64). 

"It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  very  point 
which  is  the  weakness  of  the  theory — the  supposed 
concentration  of  the  effect  of  the  Karma  in  one  new 
being — presented  itself  to  the  early  Buddhists  them- 
selves as  a  difficulty.  They  avoided  it,  partly  by 
explaining  that  it  was  a  particular  thirst  in  the 
creature  dying  (a  craving,  Tanha,  which  plays  other- 


96  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

wise  a  great  part  in  the  Buddhist  theory)  which 
actually  caused  the  birth  of  the  new  individual  who 
was  to  inherit  the  Karma  of  the  former  one.  But, 
how  this  took  place,  how  the  craving  desire  produced 
this  effect,  was  acknowledged  to  be  a  mystery  patent 
only  to  a  Buddha."  (-Rhys  Davids,  Hihhert  Lectures, 
p.  95.) 

Among  the  many  parallelisms  of  Stoicism  and 
Buddhism,  it  is  curious  to  find  one  for  this  Tanha, 
'  thirst,'  or  '  craving  desire  '  for  life.  Seneca  writes 
(Epist.  Ixxvi.  18) :  "Si  enim  uUum  aliud  est  bonum 
quam  honestum,  sequetur  nos  aviditas  vitce  aviditas 
rerum  vitam  instruentium :  quod  est  intolerabile 
infinitum,  vagum." 

Note  8  (p.  66). 

"  The  distinguishing  characteristic  of  Buddhism 
was  that  it  started  a  new  line,  that  it  looked  upon 
the  deepest  questions  men  have  to  solve  from  an 
entirely  different  standpoint.  It  swept  away  from 
the  field  of  its  vision  the  whole  of  the  great  soul- 
theory  which  had  hitherto  so  completely  filled  and 
dominated  the  minds  of  the  superstitious  and  the 
thoughtful  alike.  For  the  first  time  in  the  history 
of  the  world,  it  proclaimed  a  salvation  which  each 
man  could  gain  for  himself  and  by  himself,  in  this 
world,  during  this  life,  without  any  the  least  reference 
to  God,  or  to  Gods,  either  great  or  small.  Like  the 
Upanishads,  it  placed  the  first  importance  on  know- 
ledge ;  but  it  was  no  longer  a  knowledge  of  God,  it 
was  a  clear  perception  of  the  real   nature,   as  they 


II  NOTES  97 

supposed  it  to  be,  of  men  and  things.  And  it  added 
to  the  necessity  of  knowledge,  the  necessity  of  purity, 
of  courtesy,  of  uprightness,  of  peace  and  of  a  universal 
love  far  reaching,  grown  great  and  beyond  measure." 
(Rhys  Davids,  llibhert  Lectures,  p.  29.) 

The  contemporary  Greek  philosophy  takes  an 
analogous  direction.  According  to  Heracleitus,  the 
universe  was  made  neither  by  Gods  nor  men ;  but, 
from  all  eternity,  has  been,  and  to  all  eternity, 
will  be,  immortal  fire,  glowing  and  fading  in 
due  measure.  (Mullach,  HeracUti  Fragmeida,  27.) 
And  the  part  assigned  by  his  successors,  the 
Stoics,  to  the  knowledge  and  the  volition  of  the  '  wise 
man'  made  their  Divinity  (for  logical  thinkers)  a 
subject  for  compliments,  rather  than  a  power  to  be 
reckoned  with.  In  Hindu  speculation  the  '  Arahat,' 
still  more  the  '  Buddha,'  becomes  the  superior  of 
Brahma ;  the  stoical  '  wise  man '  is,  at  least,  the 
equal  of  Zeus. 

Berkeley  affirms  over  and  over  again  that  no  idea  can 
be  formed  of  a  soul  or  spirit — "  If  any  man  shall  doubt 
of  the  truth  of  what  is  here  delivered,  let  him  but 
reflect  and  try  if  he  can  form  any  idea  of  power  or 
active  being ;  and  w^hether  he  hath  ideas  of  two 
principal  powers  marked  by  the  names  of  will  and 
understanding  distinct  from  each  other,  as  well  as 
from  a  third  idea  of  substance  or  being  in  general, 
with  a  relative  notion  of  its  supporting  or  being  the 
subject  of  the  aforesaid  power,  which  is  signified  by 
the  name  soid  or  spirit.  This  is  what  some  hold : 
but,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  the  words  will,  soul,  spirit, 

VOL.  IX  H 


98  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

do  not  stand  for  different  ideas  or,  in  truth,  for  any 
idea  at  all,  but  for  something  which  is  very  different 
from  ideas,  and  which,  being  an  agent,  cannot  be  like 
unto  or  represented  by  any  idea  whatever  [though  it 
must  be  owned  at  the  same  time,  that  we  have  some 
notion  of  soul,  spirit,  and  the  operations  of  the  mind, 
such  as  willing,  loving,  hating,  inasmuch  as  we  know 
or  understand  the  meaning  of  these  words  "].  {The 
Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,  Ixxvi.  See  also 
§§  Ixxxix.,  cxxxv.,  cxlv.) 

It  is  open  to  discussion,  I  think,  whether  it  is 
possible  to  have  '  some  notion '  of  that  of  which  we 
can  form  no  '  idea.' 

Berkeley  attaches  several  predicates  to  the 
"  perceiving  active  being  mind,  spirit,  soul  or  myself  " 
(Parts  I.  II.)  It  is  said,  for  example,  to  be  "  indi- 
visible, incorporeal,  unextended,  and  incorruptible." 
The  predicate  indivisible,  though  negative  in  form, 
has  highly  positive  consequences.  For,  if  '  perceiving 
active  being'  is  strictly  indivisible,  man's  soul  must 
be  one  with  the  Divine  spirit :  which  is  good  Hindu 
or  Stoical  doctrine,  but  hardly  orthodox  Christian 
philosophy.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  '  substance ' 
of  active  perceiving  '  being '  is  actually  divided  into 
the  one  Divine  and  innumerable  human  entities, 
how  can  the  predicate  '  indivisible '  be  rigorously 
applicable  to  iti 

Taking  the  words  cited,  as  they  stand,  they  amount 
to  the  denial  of  the  possibility  of  any  knowledge  of 
substance.  '  Matter '  having  been  resolved  into  mere 
affections  of  'spirit,'  'spirit'  melts  away  into  an 
admittedly  inconceivable  and  unknowable  hypostasis 


II  NOTES  90 

of  thought  and  power — consequently  the  existence 
of  anything  in  the  universe  beyond  a  flow  of 
phenomena  is  a  purely  hypothetical  assumption. 
Indeed  a  pyrrhonist  might  raise  the  objection  that  if 
'  esse '  is  '  percipi '  spirit  itself  can  have  no  existence 
except  as  a  perception,  hypostatized  into  a  '  self,'  or 
as  a  perception  of  some  other  spirit.  In  the  former 
case,  objective  reality  vanishes ;  in  the  latter,  there 
would  seem  to  be  the  need  of  an  infinite  series  of 
spirits  each  perceiving  the  others. 

It  is  curious  to  observe  how  very  closely  the 
phraseology  of  Berkeley  sometimes  approaches  that 
of  the  Stoics:  thus  (cxlviii.)  "It  seems  to  be  a 
general  2)retence    of  the    unthinkiiig   herd    that    they 

ccvnnot  see  God But,  alas,  we  need  only  open  our 

eyes  to  see  the  Sovereign  Lord  of  all  things  with  a 
more  full  and   clear   view,   than  we  do  any   of  our 

fellow-creatures we   do   at  all  times  and  in  all 

places  perceive  manifest  tokens  of  the  Divinity: 
everything  we  see,  hear,  feel,  or  any  wise  perceive  by 
sense,  being  a  sign  or   effect  of  the  power  of   God  " 

cxlix.     "It  is  therefore  plain,  that  nothing  can 

be  more  evident  to  any  one  that  is  capable  of  the 
least  reflection,  than  the  existence  of  God,  or  a  spirit 
who  is  intimately  present  to  our  minds,  producing  in 
them  all  that  variety  of  ideas  or  sensations  which 
continually  affect  us,  on  whom  we  have  an  absolute 
and  entire  dependence,  in  short,  in  whom  we  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being.''  cl.  [But  you  will  say  hath 
Kature  no  share  in  the  production  of  natural  things, 
and  must  they  be  all  ascribed  to  the  immediate  and 

sole  operation  of  God  ? if  by  Nature  is  meant  some 

H  2 


100  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  n 

being  distinct  from  God,  as  well  as  from  the  laws  of 
nature  and  things  perceived  by  sense,  I  must  confess 
that  word  is  to  me  an  empty  sound,  without  any 
intelligible  meaning  annexed  to  it.]  Nature  in  this 
acceptation  is  a  vain  CJiimoira  introduced  by  those 
heathens,  who  had  not  just  notions  of  the  omni- 
presence and  infinite  perfection  of  God." 

Compare  Seneca  {De  Benejiciis,  iv.  7)  : 

"  Natura,  inquit,  hcBC  mihi  prtestat.  Non  intelligis 
te,  quum  hoc  dicis,  mutare  Nomen  Deo  1  Quid  enim 
est  aliud  ISTatura  quam  Deus,  et  divina  ratio,  toti 
mundo  et  partibus  ejus  inserta  1  Quoties  voles  tibi 
licet  aliter  hunc  auctorem  rerum  nostrarum  com- 
pellare,  et  Jovem  ilium  optimum  et  maximum  rite 
dices,  et  tonantem,  et  statorem :  qui  non,  ut  historici 
tradiderunt,  ex  eo  quod  post  votum  susceptum  acies 
Romanorum  f  ugientum  stetit,  sed  quod  stant  beneficio 
ejus  omnia,  stator,  stabilitorque  est:  hunc  eundem et 
f[itum  si  dixeris,  non  mentions,  nam  quum  fatum 
nihil  aliud  est,  quam  series  implexa  causarum,  ille  est 
prima  omnium  causa,  ea  qua  creterje  pendent."  It 
would  appear,  therefore,  that  the  good  Bishop  is 
somewhat  hard  upon  the  ^heathen,'  of  whose  words 
his  own  might  be  a  paraphrase. 

There  is  yet  another  direction  in  which  Berkeley's 
philosophy,  I  will  not  say  agrees  with  Gautama's,  but 
at  any  rate  helps  to  make  a  fundamental  dogma  of 
Buddhism  intelligible. 

'*  I  find  I  can  excite  ideas  in  my  mind  at  pleasure, 
and  vary  and  shift  the  scene  as  often  as  I  think  fit. 
It  is  no  more  than  willing,  and  straightway  this  or 
that  idea  arises  in  my  fancy  :  and  by  the  same  power. 


II  NOTES  101 

it  is  obliterated,  and  makes  way  for  another.  This 
making  and  unmaking  of  ideas  doth  very  properly 
denominate  the  mind  active.  This  much  is  certain 
and  grounded  on  experience.  .  .  ."  {Princijolesy 
xxviii.) 

A  good  many  of  us,  I  fancy,  have  reason  to  think 
that  experience  tells  them  very  much  the  contrary ; 
and  are  painfully  familiar  with  the  obsession  of  the 
mind  by  ideas  which  cannot  be  obliterated  by  any 
effort  of  the  will  and  steadily  refuse  to  make  way  for 
others.  But  what  I  desire  to  point  out  is  that  if 
Gautama  was  equally  confident  that  he  could  'make 
and  unmake '  ideas — then,  since  he  had  resolved 
self  into  a  group  of  ideal  phantoms — the  possibility 
of  abolishing  self  by  volition  naturally  followed. 


Note  9  (p.  68). 

According  to  Buddhism,  the  relation  of  one  life  to 
the  next  is  merely  that  borne  by  the  flame  of  one 
lamp  to  the  flame  of  another  lamp  which  is  set  alight 
by  it.  To  the  '  Arahat '  or  adept  "  no  outward  form, 
no  compound  thing,  no  creature,  no  creator,  no 
existence  of  any  kind,  must  appear  to  be  other  than  a 
temporary  collocation  of  its  component  parts,  fated 
inevitably  to  be  dissolved." — (Rhys  Davids,  Ilibhert 
Lectures,  p.  211.) 

The  self  is  nothing  but  a  group  of  phenomena  held 
together  by  the  desire  of  life  ;  when  that  desire  shall 
have  ceased,  "  the  Karma  of  that  particular  chain  of 
lives  will  cease  to  influence  any  longer  any  distinct 
individual,  and   there  will  be   no    more    birth  j   for 


102  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS 


II 


birth,  decay,  and  death,  grief,  lamentation,  and 
despair  will  have  come,  so  far  as  regards  that  chain  of 
lives,  for  ever  to  an  end." 

The  state  of  mind  of  the  Arahat  in  which  the 
desire  of  life  has  ceased  is  Nirvana.  Dr.  Oldenberg 
has  very  acutely  and  patiently  considered  the  various 
interpretations  which  have  been  attached  to 
'  Nirvana '  in  the  work  to  which  I  have  referred  (pp. 
285  et  seq.).  The  result  of  his  and  other  discussions 
of  the  cjuestion  may  I  think  be  briefly  stated  thus  : 

1.  Logical  deduction  from  the  predicates  attached 
to  the  term  '  Nirvana '  strips  it  of  all  reality,  con- 
ceivability,  or  perceivability,  whether  by  Gods  or 
men.  For  all  practical  purposes,  therefore,  it  comes 
to  exactly  the  same  thing  as  annihilation. 

2.  But  it  is  not  annihilation  in  the  ordinary  sense, 
inasmuch  as  it  could  take  place  in  the  living  Arahat 
or  Buddha. 

3.  And,  since,  for  the  faithful  Buddhist,  that  Avhich 
was  abolished  in  the  Arahat  was  the  possibility  of 
further  pain,  sorrow,  or  sin  ;  and  that  which  was 
attained  was  perfect  peace ;  his  mind  directed  itself 
exclusively  to  this  joyful  consummation,  and  personi- 
fied the  negation  of  all  conceivable  existence  and  of 
all  pain  into  a  positive  bliss.  This  was  all  the  more 
easy,  as  Gautama  refused  to  give  any  dogmatic 
definition  of  Nirvana.  There  is  something  analogous 
in  the  way  in  which  people  commonly  talk  of  the 
'  happy  release '  of  a  man  who  has  been  long  suffer- 
ing from  mortal  disease.  According  to  their  own 
views,  it  must  always  be  extremely  doubtful  whether 
the  man  will  be  any  happier  after  the  *  release '  than 


II  NOTES  103 

before.     But    they   do   not    choose    to    look   at    the 
matter  in  this  light. 

The  popular  notion  that,  with  practical,  if  not 
metaphysical,  annihilation  in  view,  Buddhism  must 
needs  be  a  sad  and  gloomy  faith  seems  to  be  incon- 
sistent with  fact ;  on  the  contrary,  the  prospect  of 
Nirvana  fills  the  true  believer,  not  merely  with 
cheerfulness,  but  with  an  ecstatic  desire  to  reach  it. 


Note  10  (p.  68). 

The  influence  of  the  picture  of  the  personal  quali- 
ties of  Gautama,  afforded  by  the  legendary  anecdotes 
which  rapidly  grew  into  a  biography  of  the  Buddha ; 
and  by  the  birth  stories,  which  coalesced  with  the 
current  folk-lore,  and  were  intelligible  to  all  the 
world,  doubtless  played  a  great  part.  Further, 
although  Gautama  appears  not  to  have  meddled  with 
the  caste  system,  he  refused  to  recognize  any  dis- 
tinction, save  that  of  perfection  in  the  way  of  salva- 
tion, among  his  followers ;  and  by  such  teaching,  no 
less  than  by  the  inculcation  of  love  and  benevolence 
to  all  sentient  beings,  he  practically  levelled  every 
social,  political,  and  racial  barrier.  A  third  im- 
portant condition  was  the  organization  of  the 
Buddhists  into  monastic  communities  for  the  stricter 
professors,  while  the  laity  were  permitted  a  wide 
indulgence  in  practice  and  were  allowed  to  hope  for 
accommodation  in  some  of  the  temporary  abodes  of 
bliss.  With  a  few  hundred  thousand  years  of 
immediate  paradise  in  sight,  the  average  man  could 
be  content  to  shut  his  eyes  to  what  might  follow. 


104  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  n 

Note  11  (p.  69). 

In  ancient  times  it  was  the  fashion,  even  among 
the  Greeks  themselves,  to  derive  all  Greek  wisdom 
from  Eastern  sources ;  not  long  ago  it  was  as 
generally  denied  that  Greek  philosophy  had  any 
connection  with  Oriental  speculation ;  it  seems 
probable,  however,  that  the  truth  lies  between  these 
extremes. 

The  Ionian  intellectual  movement  does  not  stand 
alone.  It  is  only  one  of  several  sporadic  indications 
of  the  working  of  some  powerful  mental  ferment  over 
the  whole  of  the  area  comprised  between  the  ^gean 
and  Northern  Hindostan  during  the  eighth,  seventh, 
and  sixth  centuries  before  our  era.  In  these  three 
hundred  years,  prophetism  attained  its  apogee  among 
the  'Semites  of  Palestine ;  Zoroasterism  grew  and 
became  the  creed  of  a  conquering  race,  the  Iranic 
Aryans  ;  Buddhism  rose  and  spread  with  marvellous 
rapidity  among  the  Aryans  of  Hindostan ;  while 
scientific  naturalism  took  its  rise  among  the  Aryans 
of  Ionia,  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  another  three 
centuries  which  have  given  birth  to  four  events  of 
equal  importance.  All  the  principal  existing 
religions  of  mankind  have  grown  out  of  the  first 
three :  while  the  fourth  is  the  little  spring,  now 
swollen  into  the  great  stream  of  positive  science.  So 
far  as  physical  possibilities  go,  the  prophet  Jeremiah 
and  the  oldest  Ionian  philosopher  might  have  met 
and  conversed.  If  they  had  done  so,  they  would 
probably  have  disagreed  a  good  deal ;  and  it  is  in- 
teresting to  reflect  that  their  discussions  might  have 


II  NOTES  105 

embraced  questions  which,  at  the  present  day,  are 
still  hotly  controverted. 

The  old  Ionian  philosophy,  then,  seems  to  be  only 
one  of  many  results  of  a  stirring  of  the  moral  and 
intellectual  life  of  the  Aryan  and  the  Semitic  popu- 
lations of  Western  Asia.  The  conditions  of  this 
general  awakening  were  doubtless  manifold ;  but 
there  is  one  which  modern  research  has  brouofht  into 
great  prominence.  This  is  the  existence  of  extremely 
ancient  and  highly  advanced  societies  in  the  valleys 
of  the  Euphrates  and  of  the  Nile. 

It  is  now  known  that,  more  than  a  thousand  — 
perhaps  more  than  two  thousand — years  before  the 
sixth  century  B.C.,  civilization  had  attained  a  re- 
latively high  pitch  among  the  Babylonians  and  the 
Egyptians.  Not  only  had  painting,  sculpture, 
architecture,  and  the  industrial  arts  reached  a  re- 
markable development ;  but  in  Chald^ea,  at  any  rate, 
a  vast  amount  of  knowledge  had  been  accumulated 
and  methodized,  in  the  departments  of  grammar, 
mathematics,  astronomy,  and  natural  history.  Where 
such  traces  of  the  scientific  spirit  are  visible, 
naturalistic  speculation  is  rarely  far  off,  though,  so 
far  as  I  know,  no  remains  of  an  Accadian,  or 
Egyptian,  philosophy,  properly  so  called,  have  yet 
been  recovered. 

Geographically,  Chaldsea  occupied  a  central  posi- 
tion among  the  oldest  seats  of  civilization.  Com- 
merce, largely  aided  by  the  intervention  of  those 
colossal  pedlars,  the  Phoenicians,  had  brought  Chaldsea 
into  connection  with  all  of  them,  for  a  thousand 
years  before  the  epoch  at  present  under  consideration. 


106  EVOLUTIOX   AND   ETHICS  n 

And  in  the  ninth,  eighth,  and  seventh  centuries,  the 
Assyrian,  the  depositary  of  Chaldaean  civilization,  as 
the  Macedonian  and  the  Koman,  at  a  later  date,  were 
the  depositaries  of  Greek  culture,  had  added  irre- 
sistible force  to  the  other  agencies  for  the  wide  dis- 
tribution of  Chaldsean  literature,  art,  and  science. 

I  confess  that  I  find  it  difficult  to  imagine  that  the 
Greek  immigrants — who  stood  in  somewhat  the  same 
relation  to  the  Babylonians  and  the  Egyptians  as  the 
later  Germanic  barbarians  to  the  Romans  of  the 
Empire — should  not  have  been  immensely  influenced 
by  the  new  life  with  which  they  became  acquainted. 
But  there  is  abundant  direct  evidence  of  the  magni- 
tude of  this  influence  in  certain  spheres.  1  suppose  it 
is  not  doubted  that  the  Greek  went  to  school  with 
the  Oriental  for  his  primary  instruction  in  reading, 
writing,  and  arithmetic ;  and  that  Semitic  theology 
supplied  him  with  some  of  his  mythological  lore. 
Nor  does  there  now  seem  to  be  any  question  about 
the  large  indebtedness  of  Greek  art  to  that  of 
Chaldoea  and  that  of  Egypt. 

But  the  manner  of  that  indebtedness  is  very 
instructive.  The  obligation  is  clear,  but  its  limits 
are  no  less  definite.  Nothing  better  exemplifies  the 
indomitable  originality  of  the  Greeks  than  the 
relations  of  their  art  to  that  of  the  Orientals.  Far 
from  being  subdued  into  mere  imitators  by  the 
technical  excellence  of  their  teachers,  they  lost  no 
time  in  bettering  the  instruction  they  received,  using 
their  models  as  mere  stepping  stones  on  the  way 
to  those  unsurpassed  and  unsurpassable  achievements 
which  are  all  their  own.      The  shibboleth  of  Art  is 


II 


NOTES  107 


the  human  fignre.  The  ancient  Chaldseans  and 
Egyptians,  like  the  modern  Japanese,  did  wonders  in 
the  representation  of  birds  and  quadrupeds ;  they 
even  attained  to  something  more  than  respectability 
in  human  portraiture.  But  their  utmost  efforts  never 
brought  them  within  range  of  the  best  Greek  embodi- 
ments of  the  grace  of  womanhood,  or  of  the  severer 
beauty  of  manhood. 

It  is  worth  while  to  consider  the  probable  effect 
upon  the  acute  and  critical  Greek  mind  of  the  conflict 
of  ideas,  social,  political,  and  theological,  which  arose 
out  of  the  conditions  of  life  in  the  Asiatic  colonies. 
The  Ionian  polities  had  passed  through  the  whole 
gamut  of  social  and  political  changes,  from  patriarchal 
and  occasionally  oppressive  kingship  to  rowdy  and 
still  more  burdensome  mobship — no  doubt  with 
infinitely  eloquent  and  copious  argumentation,  on 
both  sides,  at  every  stage  of  their  progress  towards 
that  arbitrament  of  force  which  settles  most  political 
questions.  The  marvellous  speculative  faculty, 
latent  in  the  Ionian,  had  come  in  contact  with 
Mesopotamian,  Egyptian,  Phcenician  theologies  and 
cosmogonies ;  with  the  illuminati  of  Orphism  and 
the  fanatics  and  dreamers  of  the  Mysteries ;  possibly 
with  Buddhism  and  Zoroasterism ;  possibly  even 
with  Judaism.  And  it  has  been  observed  that  the 
mutual  contradictions  of  antagonistic  supernatural- 
isms  are  apt  to  play  a  largo  part  among  the  genera- 
tive agencies  of  naturalism. 

Thus,  various  external  influences  may  have  con- 
tributed to  the  rise  of  philosophy  among  the  Ionian 
Greeks  of  the  sixth  century.     But  the  assimilative 


108  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  n 

capacity  of  the  Greek  mind — its  power  of  Hellenizing 
whatever  it  touched — has  here  worked  so  effectually, 
that,  so  far  as  I  can  learn,  no  indubitable  traces  of 
such  extraneous  contributions  are  now  allowed  to  exist 
by  the  most  authoritative  historians  of  Philosophy. 
Nevertheless,  I  think  it  must  be  admitted  that  the 
coincidences  between  the  Heracleito-stoical  doctrines 
and  those  of  the  older  Hindu  philosophy  are 
extremely  remarkable.  In  both,  the  cosmos  pursues 
an  eternal  succession  of  cyclical  changes.  The  great 
year,  answering  to  the  Kalpa,  covers  an  entire  cycle 
from  the  origin  of  the  universe  as  a  fluid  to  its 
dissolution  in  fire — "  Humor  initium,  ignis  exitus 
mundi,"  as  Seneca  has  it.  In  both  systems,  there  is 
immanent  in  the  cosmos  a  source  of  energy,  Brahma, 
or  the  Logos,  which  works  according  to  fixed  laws. 
The  individual  soul  is  an  efilux  of  this  world-spirit, 
and  returns  to  it.  Perfection  is  attainable  only  by 
individual  effort,  through  ascetic  discipline,  and  is 
rather  a  state  of  painlessness  than  of  happiness ;  if 
indeed  it  can  be  said  to  be  a  state  of  anything,  save 
the  negation  of  perturbing  emotion.  The  hatchment 
motto  "  In  Coelo  Quies  "  would  serve  both  Hindu  and 
Stoic  ;  and  absolute  quiet  is  not  easily  distinguishable 
from  annihilation. 

Zoroasterism,  which,  geographically,  occupies  a 
position  intermediate  between  Hellenism  and 
Hinduism,  agrees  with  the  latter  in  recognizing  the 
essential  evil  of  the  cosmos  ;  but  differs  from  both  in 
its  intensely  anthropomorphic  personification  of  the 
two  antagonistic  principles,  to  the  one  of  which  it 
ascribes  all  the  good  ;  and,  to  the  other,  all  the  evil. 


11  NOTES  109 

In  fact,  it  assumes  the  existence  of  two  worlds,  one 
good  and  one  bad  ;  the  latter  created  by  the  evil 
power  for  the  purpose  of  damaging  the  former.  The 
existing  cosmos  is  a  mere  mixture  of  the  two,  and  the 
*  last  judgment '  is  a  root-and-branch  extirpation  of 
the  work  of  Ahriman. 

Note  12  (p.  69). 

There  is  no  snare  in  which  the  feet  of  a  modern 
student  of  ancient  lore  are  more  easily  entangled, 
than  that  which  is  spread  by  the  similarity  of  the 
language  of  antiquity  to  modern  modes  of  expression. 
I  do  not  presume  to  interpret  the  obscurest  of  Greek 
philosophers  ;  all  I  wish  is  to  point  out,  that  his 
words,  in  the  sense  accepted  by  competent  inter- 
preters, fit  modern  ideas  singularly  well. 

8o  far  as  the  general  theory  of  evolution  goes  there 
is  no  difficulty.  The  aphorism  abovit  the  river ;  the 
figure  of  the  child  playing  on  the  shore  ;  the  kingship 
and  fatherhood  of  strife,  seem  decisive.  The  68os  aVw 
Kara)  ixir]  expresses,  with  singular  aptness,  the  cyclical 
aspect  of  the  one  process  of  organic  evolution  in 
individual  plants  and  animals :  yet  it  may  be  a 
question  whether  the  Heracleitean  strife  included 
any  distinct  conception  of  the  struggle  for  existence. 
Again,  it  is  tempting  to  compare  the  part  played  by 
the  Heracleitean  '  fire '  with  that  ascribed  by  the 
moderns  to  heat,  or  rather  to  that  cause  of  motion  of 
which  heat  is  one  expression ;  and  a  little  ingenuity 
might  find  a  foreshadowing  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
conservation  of   energy,  in  the  saying  that  all  the 


110  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  n 

things  are  changed  into  fire  and  fire  into  all  things, 
as  gold  into  goods  and  goods  into  gold. 

Note  13  (p.  71). 
Popes  lines  in  the  Essay  on  Man  (Ep.  i.  267-8), 

' '  All  are  but  parts  of  one  stupendous  whole, 
Whose  body  Nature  is,  and  God  the  soul," 

simply  paraphrase  Seneca's  "quern  in  hoc  mimdo 
locum  deus  obtinet,  hunc  in  homine  animus  :  quod 
est  illic  materia,  id  nobis  corpus  est." — (Ep.  Ixv.  21) ; 
which  again  is  a  Latin  version  of  the  old  Stoical 
doctrine,  ets  airav  tov  koct/xov  jxepo^  Sl7]K€l  6  vovs, 
KaOoLTrep  dc}>    rj/xoyv  rj  ^v^rj. 

So  far  as  the  testimony  for  the  universality  of  what 
ordinary  people  call  '  evil '  goes,  there  is  nothing 
better  than  the  writings  of  the  Stoics  themselves. 
They  might  serve  as  a  storehouse  for  the  epigrams  of 
the  ultra-pessimists.  Heracleitus  {circa  500  B.C.) 
says  just  as  hard  things  about  ordinary  humanity 
as  his  disciples  centuries  later ;  and  there  really 
seems  no  need  to  seek  for  the  causes  of  this  dark 
view  of  life  in  the  circumstances  of  the  time  of 
Alexander's  successors  or  of  the  early  Emperors  of 
Home.  To  the  man  with  an  ethical  ideal,  the  world, 
including  himself,  will  always  seem  full  of  evil. 

Note  14  (p.  73). 

I  use  the  well-known  phrase,  but  decline  respon- 
sibility for  the  libel  upon  Epicurus,  whose  doctrines 
were  far  less  compatible  with   existence  in    a    stye 


II  NOTES  111 

than  those  of  the  Cynics.  If  it  were  steadily  borne 
in  mind  that  the  conception  of  the  '  flesh  '  as  tlie 
source  of  evil,  and  the  great  saying  '  Initium  est 
salutis  notitia  peccati,'  are  the  property  of  Epicurus, 
fewer  illusions  about  Epicureanism  would  pass 
muster  for  accepted  truth. 


iVo^e  15  (p.  75). 

The  Stoics  said  that  man  was  a  ^wov  XoyLKov 
ttoXltlkov  (fiiXdWrjXov,  or  a  rational,  a  political,  and 
an  altruistic  or  philanthropic  animal.  In  their 
view,  his  higher  nature  tended  to  develop  in  these 
three  directions^  as  a  plant  tends  to  grow  up  into 
its  typical  form.  Since,  without  the  introduction  of 
any  consideration  of  pleasure  or  pain,  whatever 
thwarted  the  realization  of  its  type  by  the  plant 
might  be  said  to  be  bad,  and  whatever  helped  it  good  ; 
so  virtue,  in  the  Stoical  sense,  as  the  conduct  which 
tended  to  the  attainment  of  the  rational,  political, 
and  philanthropic  ideal,  was  good  in  itself,  and 
irrespectively  of  its  emotional  concomitants. 

Man  is  an  "  animal  sociale  communi  bono  genitum." 
The  safety  of  society  depends  upon  practical  recog- 
nition of  the  fact.  "  Salva  autem  esse  societas  nisi 
custodia  et  amore  partium  non  possit,"  says  Seneca. 
(De.  Ira,  ii.  31.) 

^^ote  16  (p.  75). 

The  importance  of  the  physical  doctrine  of  the 
Stoics  lies  in  its  clear  recognition  of  the  universality 


112  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  n 

of  the  law  of  causation,  with  its  corollary,  the  order 
of  nature  :  the  exact  form  of  that  order  is  an  altogether 
secondary  consideration. 

Many  ingenious  persons  now  appear  to  consider  that 
the  incompatibility  of  pantheism,  of  materialism,  and 
of  any  doubt  about  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  with 
religion  and  morality,  is  to  be  held  as  an  axiomatic 
truth.  I  confess  that  I  have  a  certain  difficulty  in 
accepting  this  dogma.  For  the  Stoics  were  notoriously 
materialists  and  pantheists  of  the  most  extreme 
character ;  and  while  no  strict  Stoic  believed  in  the 
eternal  duration  of  the  individual  soul,  some  even 
denied  its  persistence  after  death.  Yet  it  is  equally 
certain  that  of  all  gentile  philosophies,  Stoicism 
exhibits  the  highest  ethical  development,  is  animated 
by  the  most  religious  spirit,  and  has  exerted  the 
profoundest  influence  upon  the  moral  and  religious 
development  not  merely  of  the  best  men  among 
the  Komans,  but  among  the  moderns  down  to  our 
own  day. 

Seneca  was  claimed  as  a  Christian  and  placed 
among  the  saints  by  the  fathers  of  the  early  Christian 
Church ;  and  the  genuineness  of  a  correspondence 
between  him  and  the  apostle  Paul  has  been  hotly 
maintained  in  our  own  time,  by  orthodox  writers. 
That  the  letters,  as  we  possess  them,  are  worthless 
forgeries  is  obvious ;  and  writers  as  wide  apart  as 
Baur  and  Lightfoot  agree  that  the  whole  story  is 
devoid  of  foundation. 

The  dissertation  of  the  late  Bishop  of  Durham 
{Epistle  to  the  Philippians)  is  particularly  worthy  of 
study,  apart  from  this  question,  on  account  of  the 


II  NOTES  1J3 

evidence  which  it  supplies  of  the  nnmeroiis  similarities 
of  thought  between  Seneca  and  the  writer  of  the 
Pauline  epistles.  When  it  is  remembered  that  the 
writer  of  the  Acts  puts  a  quotation  from  Aratus,  or 
Cleanthes,  into  tlie  mouth  of  the  apostle ;  and  that 
Tarsus  was  a  great  seat  of  philosophical  and  especially 
stoical  learning  (Chrysippus  himself  was  a  native  of 
the  adjacent  town  of  Soli),  there  is  no  difficulty  in 
understanding  the  origin  of  these  resemblances.  See, 
on  this  subject,  Sir  Alexander  Grant's  dissertation 
in  his  edition  of  The  Ethics  of  Aristotle  (where 
there  is  an  interesting  reference  to  the  stoical 
character  of  Bishop  Butler's  ethics),  the  concluding 
pages  of  Dr.  Weygoldt's  instructive  little  work  Die 
Philosophie  der  Stoa,  and  Aubertin's  Seneque  et  Saint 
Paul. 

It  is  surprising  that  a  writer  of  Dr.  Lightfoot's 
stamp  should  speak  of  Stoicism  as  a  philosophy  of 
'  despair.'  Surely,  rather,  it  was  a  philosophy  of 
men  who,  having  cast  oif  all  illusions,  and  the  childish- 
ness of  despair  among  them,  were  minded  to  endure 
in  patience  whatever  conditions  the  cosmic  process 
might  create,  so  long  as  those  conditions  were  com- 
patible with  the  progress  towards  virtue,  which  alone, 
for  them,  conferred  a  worthy  object  on  existence. 
There  is  no  note  of  despair  in  the  stoical  declaration 
that  the  perfected  *  wise  man  '  is  the  equal  of  Zeus 
in  everything  but  the  duration  of  his  existence. 
And,  in  my  judgment,  there  is  as  little  pride  about 
it,  often  as  it  serves  for  the  text  of  discourses  on 
stoical  arrogance.  Grant  the  stoical  postulate  that 
there  is  no  good  except  virtue  ;  grant  that  the  per- 

VOL.  IK  I 


114  EVOLUTION   AND   ETHICS  ii 

fected  wise  man  is  altogether  virtuous,  in  consequence 
of  being  guided  in  all  things  by  the  reason,  which  is 
an  effluence  of  Zeus,  and  there  seems  no  escape  from 
the  stoical  conclusion. 


Note  17  (p.  76). 

Our  "Apathy"  carries  such  a  different  set  of 
connotations  from  its  Greek  original  that  I  have 
ventured  on  using  the  latter  as  a  technical  term. 


Note  18  (p.  77). 

Many  of  the  stoical  philosophers  recommended 
their  disciples  to  take  an  active  share  in  public 
affairs ;  and  in  the  Roman  world,  for  several 
centuries,  the  best  public  men  were  strongly  inclined 
to  Stoicism.  Nevertheless,  the  logical  tendency  of 
Stoicism  seems  to  me  to  be  fulfilled  only  in  such  men 
as  Diogenes  and  Epictetus. 

Note  19  (p.  80). 

"Criticisms  on  the  Origin  of  Species,"  1864. 
Collected  Essays,  vol.  ii.  p.  91.     [1894.] 

Note  20  (p.  81). 

Of  course,  strictly  speaking,  social  life,  and  the 
ethical  process  in  virtue  of  which  it  advances  towards 
perfection,  are  part  and  parcel  of  the  general  process 
of    evolution,    just    as    tlie    gregarious    habit    of    in- 


II 


NOTES  115 


numerable  plants  and  animals,  which  has  been  of 
immense  advantage  to  them,  is  so.  A  hive  of  bees 
is  an  organic  polity,  a  society  in  which  the  part 
played  by  each  member  is  determined  by  organic 
necessities.  Queens,  workers,  and  drones  are,  so  to 
speak,  castes,  divided  from  one  another  by  marked 
physical  barriers.  Among  birds  and  mammals, 
societies  are  formed,  of  which  the  bond  in  many  cases 
seems  to  be  purely  psychological ;  that  is  to  say,  it 
appears  to  depend  upon  the  liking  of  the  individuals 
for  one  another's  company.  The  tendency  of 
individuals  to  over  self-assertion  is  kept  down  by 
fighting.  Even  in  these  rudimentary  forms  of  society, 
love  and  fear  come  into  play,  and  enforce  a  greater 
or  less  renunciation  of  self-will.  To  this  extent  the 
general  cosmic  process  begins  to  be  checked  by  a  rudi- 
mentary ethical  process,  which  is,  strictly  speaking, 
part  of  the  former,  just  as  the  '  governor '  in  a  steam- 
engine  is  part  of  the  mechanism  of  the  engine. 

JVote  21  (p.  82). 

See  "  Government :  Anarchy  or  Regimentation, '* 
Collected  Essays,  vol.  i.  pp.  413 — 418.  It  is  this 
form  of  political  philosophy  to  which  I  conceive 
the  epithet  of  '  reasoned  savagery '  to  be  strictly 
applicable.     [1894.] 

Note  22  (p.  83). 

"  L'homme  n'est  qu'un  roseau,  le  plus  faible  de 
la  nature,  mais  c'est  un  roseau  pensant.     11  ne  faut 

I  2 


116  EVOLUTION    AND   ETHICS  ii 

pas  que  runivers  entier  s'arme  pour  I'ecraser.  Une 
vapeur,  une  goutte  d'eau,  suffit  pour  le  tuer.  Mais 
quand  I'univers  I'ecraserait,  riionime  serait  encore 
plus  noble  que  ce  qui  le  tue,  parce  qu'il  sait  qu'il 
meurt ;  et  I'avantage  que  I'univers  a  sur  lui,  I'univers 
n'en  sait  rien." — Pensees  de  Pascal. 


Note  23  (p.  85). 

The  use  of  the  word  "  Nature  "  here  may  be  criti- 
cised. Yet  the  manifestation  of  the  natural  tendencies 
of  men  is  so  profoundly  modified  by  training  that  it 
is  hardly  too  strong.  Consider  the  suppression  of 
the  sexual  instinct  between  near  relations. 


Note  24  (p.  86). 

A  great  proportion  of  poetry  is  addressed  by  the 
young  to  the  young ;  only  the  great  masters  of  the 
art  are  capable  of  divining,  or  think  it  worth  while 
to  enter  into,  the  feelings  of  retrospective  age.  The 
two  great  poets  whom  we  have  so  lately  lost,  Tennyson 
and  Browning,  have  done  this,  each  in  his  own 
inimitable  way  ;  the  one  in  the  Ulysses,  from  wliich 
I  have  borrowed ;  the  other  in  that  wondei-ful 
fragment '  Childe  Eoland  to  the  dark  Tower  came.' 


Ill 

SCIENCE    AND    MORALS 

[1886] 

In  spite  of  long  and,  perhaps,  not  unjustifiable 
hesitation,  I  begin  to  think  that  there  must  be 
something  in  telepathy.  For  evidence,  which  I 
may  not  disregard,  is  furnished  by  the  last  number 
of  the  "  Fortnightly  Review "  that  among  the 
hitherto  undiscovered  endowments  of  the  human 
species,  there  may  be  a  power  even  more  wonder- 
ful than  the  mystic  faculty  by  which  the  esoteric- 
ally  Buddhistic  sage  "  upon  the  farthest  mountain 
in  Cathay  "  reads  the  inmost  thoughts  of  a  dweller 
within  the  homely  circuit  of  the  London  postal 
district.  Great  indeed  is  the  insight  of  such  a 
seer ;  but  how  much  greater  is  his  who  combines 
the  feat  of  reading,  not  merely  the  thoughts  of 
which  the  thinker  is  aware,  but  those  of  which 
he  knows  nothing ;  who  sees  him  unconsciously 
drawing  the  conclusions  which  he  repudiates  and 


118  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  m 

supporting  the  doctrines  which  he  detests.  To 
reflect  upon  the  confusion  which  the  working  of 
such  a  power  as  this  may  introduce  into  one's 
ideas  of  personahty  and  responsibiUty  is  perilous 
— madness  lies  that  way.  But  truth  is  truth,  and 
I  am  almost  fain  to  believe  in  this  magical  visibi- 
lity of  the  non-existent  when  the  only  alternative 
is  the  supposition  that  the  writer  of  the  article  on 
"  Materialism  and  Morality"  in  vol.  xl.  (1886)  of 
the  "  Fortnightly  Review,"  in  spite  of  his  manifest 
ability  and  honesty,  has  pledged  himself,  so  far  as 
I  am  concerned,  to  what,  if  I  may  trust  my  own 
knowledge  of  my  own  thoughts,  must  be  called  a 
multitude  of  errors  of  the  first  magnitude. 

I  so  much  admire  Mr.  Lilly's  outspokenness,  I 
am  so  completely  satisfied  with  the  uprightness 
of  his  intentions,  that  it  is  repugnant  to  me  to 
quarrel  with  anything  he  may  say ;  and  I  sympa- 
thise so  warmly  with  his  manly  scorn  of  the 
vileness  of  much  that  passes  under  the  name  of 
literature  in  these  times,  that  I  would  willingly  be 
silent  under  his  by  no  means  unkindly  exposition 
of  his  theory  of  my  own  tenets,  if  I  thought  that 
such  j)ersonal  abnegation  would  serve  the  interest 
of  the  cause  we  both  have  at  heart.  But  I  cannot 
think  so.  My  creed  may  be  an  ill-favoured  thing, 
but  it  is  mine  own,  as  Touchstone  says  of  his  lady- 
love ;  and  I  have  so  high  an  opinion  of  the  solid 
virtues  of  the  object  of  my  affections  that  I  cannot 
calmly  see  her  personated  by  a  wench  who  is  much 


Ill 


SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  119 


Uglier  and  has  no  virtue  worth  speaking  of.  I  hope  I 
should  be  ready  to  stand  by  a  falling  cause  if  I  had 
ever  adopted  it ;  but  suffering  for  a  falling  cause, 
which  one  has  done  one's  best  to  bring  to  the  ground, 
is  a  kind  of  martyrdom  for  which  I  have  no  taste. 
In  my  opinion,  the  philosophical  theory  which  Mr. 
Lilly  attributes  to  me — but  which  I  have  over  and 
over  again  disclaimed — is  untenable  and  destined 
to  extinction ;  and  I  not  unreasonably  demur  to 
being  counted  among  its  defenders. 

After  the  manner  of  a  media3val  disputant,  Mr. 
Lilly  posts  up  three  theses,  which,  as  he  con- 
ceives, embody  the  chief  heresies  propagated  by 
the  late  Professor  Clifford,  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer, 
and  myself.  He  says  that  we  agree  "(1)  in 
putting  aside,  as  unverifiable,  everything  which 
the  senses  cannot  verify ;  (2)  everything  beyond 
the  bounds  of  physical  science;  (3)  everything 
which  cannot  be  brought  into  a  laboratory  and 
dealt  with  chemically  "  (p.  578). 

My  lamented  young  friend  Clifford,  sAveetest  of 
natures  though  keenest  of  disputants,  is  out  of 
reach  of  our  little  controversies,  but  his  works 
speak  for  him,  and  those  who  run  may  read  a 
refutation  of  Mr.  Lilly's  assertions  in  them.  Mr. 
Herbert  Spencer,  hitherto,  has  shown  no  lack 
either  of  ability  or  of  inclination  to  speak  for 
himself;  and  it  would  be  a  superfluity,  not  to  say 
an  impertinence,  on  my  part,  to  take  up  the 
cudgels  for  him.     But,  for  myself,  if  my  know- 


120  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  m 

ledge  of  my  own  consciousness  may  be  assumed  to 
be  adequate  (and  I  make  not  the  least  pretension 
to  acquaintance  with  what  goes  on  in  my  "  Un- 
bewusstsein "),  I  may  be  permitted  to  observe 
that  the  first  proposition  appears  to  me  to  be  not 
true ;  that  the  second  is  in  the  same  case ;  and 
that,  if  there  be  gradations  in  untrueness,  the 
third  is  so  monstrously  untrue  that  it  hovers  on 
the  verge  of  absurdity,  even  if  it  does  not  actually 
flounder  in  that  logical  limbo.  Thus,  to  all  three 
theses,  I  reply  in  appropriate  fashion,  Ncgo — I  say 
No ;  and  I  proceed  to  state  the  grounds  of  that 
negation,  which  the  proprieties  do  not  permit  me 
to  make  quite  so  emphatic  as  I  could  desire. 

Let  me  begin  with  the  first  assertion,  that  I 
"  put  aside,  as  unverifiable,  everything  Avhich  the 
senses  cannot  verif}^"  Can  such  a  statement  as 
this  be  seriously  made  in  respect  of  an}'  human 
being  ?  But  I  am  not  appointed  apologist  for 
mankind  in  general ;  and  confining  my  observa- 
tions to  myself,  I  beg  leave  to  point  out  that,  at 
this  present  moment,  I  entertain  an  unshakable 
conviction  that  Mr.  Lilly  is  the  victim  of  a  patent 
and  enormous  misunderstanding,  and  that  I  have 
not  the  slightest  intention  of  putting  that  con- 
viction aside  because  I  cannot  "  verify  "  it  either 
by  touch,  or  taste,  or  smell,  or  hearing,  or  sight, 
which  (in  the  absence  of  any  trace  of  telepathic 
faculty)  make  up  the  totality  of  my  senses. 

Again,  I  may  venture  to  admire  the  clear  and 


Ill 


SCIENCE    AND   MORALS  121 


vigorous  English  in  which  Mr.  Lilly  embodies  his 
views ;  but  the  source  of  that  admiration  does  not 
lie  in  anything  which  my  five  senses  enable  me  to 
discover  in  the  pages  of  his  article,  and  of  which 
an  orang-outang  might  be  just  as  acutely  sensible. 
No,  it  lies  in  an  appreciation  of  literary  form  and 
logical  structure  by  aesthetic  and  intellectual 
feculties  which  are  not  senses,  and  which  are  not 
unfrequently  sadly  wanting  where  the  senses  are 
in  full  vigour.  My  poor  relation  may  beat  me  in 
the  matter  of  sensation ;  but  I  am  quite  confident 
that,  when  style  and  syllogisms  are  to  be  dealt 
with,  he  is  nowhere. 

If  there  is  anything  in  the  world  which  I  do 
firmly  believe  in,  it  is  the  universal  validity  of  the 
law  of  causation ;  but  that  universality  cannot  be 
proved  by  any  amount  of  experience,  let  alone 
that  which  comes  to  us  through  the  senses.  And 
when  an  effort  of  volition  changes  the  current  of 
my  thoughts,  or  when  an  idea  calls  up  another 
associated  idea,  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt 
that  the  process  to  which  the  first  of  the  phe- 
nomena, in  each  case,  is  due  stands  in  the  relation 
of  cause  to  the  second.  Yet  the  attempt  to  verify 
this  belief  by  sensation  would  be  sheer  lunacy. 
Now  I  am  quite  sure  that  Mr.  Lilly  does  not 
doubt  my  sanity ;  and  the  only  alternative  seems 
to  be  the  admission  that  his  first  proposition  is 
erroneous. 

The   second   thesis  charges   me   with   putting 


122  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS 


III 


aside  "as  unverifiable"  "everything  beyond  the 
bounds  of  physical  science."  Again  I  say,  No. 
Nobody,  I  imagine,  will  credit  me  with  a  desire 
to  limit  the  empire  of  physical  science,  but  I  really 
feel  bound  to  confess  that  a  great  many  very 
familiar  and,  at  the  same  time,  extremely  impor- 
tant phenomena  lie  quite  beyond  its  legitimate 
limits.  I  cannot  conceive,  for  examjDle,  how  the 
phenomena  of  consciousness,  as  such  and  apart 
from  the  physical  process  by  which  they  are 
called  into  existence,  are  to  be  brought  within 
the  bounds  of  physical  science.  Take  the  simplest 
possible  example,  the  feeling  of  redness.  Physical 
science  tells  us  that  it  commonly  arises  as  a  con- 
sequence of  molecular  changes  propagated  from 
the  eye  to  a  certain  part  of  the  substance  of  the 
brain,  when  vibrations  of  the  luminiferous  ether 
of  a  certain  character  fall  upon  the  retina.  Let 
us  suppose  the  process  of  physical  analysis  pushed 
so  far  that  one  could  view  the  last  link  of  this 
chain  of  molecules,  watch  their  movements  as  if 
they  were  billiard  balls,  weigh  them,  measure 
them,  and  know  all  that  is  physically  knowable 
about  them.  Well,  even  in  that  case,  we  should 
be  just  as  far  from  being  able  to  include  the 
resulting  phenomenon  of  consciousness,  the  feeling 
of  redness,  within  the  bounds  of  physical  science, 
as  we  are  at  present.  It  would  remain  as  unlike 
the  jihenomena  we  know  under  the  names  of 
matter  and  motion  as  it  is  now.     If  there  is  any 


Ill  SCIENCE   AND  MORALS  123 

plain  truth  upon  which  I  have  made  it  my 
business  to  insist  over  and  over  again  it  is  this — 
and  whether  it  is  a  truth  or  not,  my  insistence 
upon  it  leaves  not  a  shadow  of  justification  for 
Mr.  Lilly's  assertion. 

But  I  ask  in  this  case  also,  how  is  it  conceivable 
that  any  man,  in  possession  of  all  his  natural 
faculties,  should  hold  such  an  opinion  ?  I  do  not 
suppose  that  I  am  exceptionally  endowed  because 
I  have  all  my  life  enjoyed  a  keen  perception  of 
the  beauty  offered  us  by  nature  and  by  art.  Now 
physical  science  may  and  probably  will,  some  day, 
enable  our  posterity  to  set  forth  the  exact  physical 
concomitants  and  conditions  of  the  strange  rapture 
of  beauty.  But  if  ever  that  day  arrives,  the 
rapture  will  remain,  just  as  it  is  now,  outside  and 
beyond  the  physical  world ;  and,  even  in  the 
mental  world,  something  superadded  to  mere  sen- 
sation. I  do  not  wish  to  crow  unduly  over  my 
humble  cousin  the  orang,  but  in  the  iBSthetic 
province,  as  in  that  of  the  intellect,  I  am  afraid 
he  is  nowhere.  I  doubt  not  he  would  detect  a 
fruit  amidst  a  wilderness  of  leaves  where  I  could 
see  nothing ;  but  I  am  tolerably  confident  that  he 
has  never  been  awestruck,  as  I  have  been,  by  the 
dim  religious  gloom,  as  of  a  temple  devoted  to  the 
earthgods,  of  the  tropical  forests  which  he  in- 
habits. Yet  I  doubt  not  that  our  poor  long- 
armed  and  short-legged  friend,  as  he  sits  medita- 
tively munching  his  durian  fruit,  has  something 


124'  SCIENCE  AND  MORALS  III 

behind  that  sacl  Socratic  face  of  his  which  is 
utterly  "  beyond  the  bounds  of  physical  science." 
Physical  science  may  know  all  about  his  clutching 
the  fruit  and  munching  it  and  digesting  it,  and 
how  the  physical  titillation  of  his  palate  is  trans- 
mitted to  some  microscopic  cells  of  the  gray 
matter  of  his  brain.  But  the  feelings  of  sweet- 
ness and  of  satisfaction  which,  for  a  moment,  hang 
out  their  signal  lights  in  his  melancholy  eyes,  are 
as  utterly  outside  the  bounds  of  physics  as  is  the 
"  fine  frenzy  "  of  a  human  rhapsodist. 

Does  Mr.  Lilly  really  believe  that,  putting  me 
aside,  there  is  any  man  with  the  feeling  of  music 
in  him  who  disbelieves  in  the  reality  of  the  delight 
which  he  derives  from  it,  because  that  delight 
lies  outside  the  bounds  of  physical  science,  not 
less  than  outside  the  region  of  the  mere  sense  of 
hearing  ?  But,  it  may  be,  that  he  includes  music, 
painting,  and  sculpture  under  the  head  of  physical 
science,  and  in  that  case  I  can  only  regret  I  am 
unable  to  follow  him  in  his  ennoblement  of  my 
favourite  pursuits. 

The  third  thesis  runs  that  I  put  aside  "  as  un- 
verifiable  "  "  everything  which  cannot  be  brought 
into  a  laboratory  and  dealt  with  chemically " ; 
and,  once  more,  I  say  No.  This  wondrous 
allegation  is  no  novelty;  it  has  not  unfrequently 
reached  me  from  that  region  where  gentle  (or 
ungentle)  dulness  so  often  holds  unchecked 
sway — the  pulpit.     But  I  marvel  to  find  that  a 


Ill  SCIENCE    AND   MORALS  125 

writer  of  Mr.  Lilly's  intelligence  and  good  faith 
is  willing  to  father  such  a  wastrel.  If  I  am  to  deal 
with  the  thing  seriously,  I  find  m3'self  met  by 
one  of  the  two  horns  of  a  dilemma.  Either  some 
meaning,  as  unknown  to  usage  as  to  the  diction- 
aries, attaches  to  "laboratory"  and  "chemical," 
or  the  proposition  is  (what  am  I  to  say  in  my  sore 
need  for  a  gentle  and  yet  appropriate  Avord  ?) — 
well — unhistorical. 

Does  Mr.  Lilly  suppose  that  I  put  aside  "  as 
unverifiable "  all  the  truths  of  mathematics,  of 
philology,  of  history?  And  if  I  do  not,  will  he 
have  the  great  goodness  to  say  how  the  binomial 
theorem  is  to  be  dealt  with  "  chemically,"  even 
in  the  best-appointed  "  laboratory " ;  or  where 
the  balances  and  crucibles  are  kept  by  which  the 
various  theories  of  the  nature  of  the  Basque 
language  may  be  tested ;  or  what  reagents 
will  extract  the  truth  from  any  given  History 
of  Rome,  and  leave  the  errors  behind  as  a 
residual  calx  ? 

I  really  cannot  answer  these  questions,  and 
unless  Mr.  Lilly  can,  I  think  he  would  do  well 
hereafter  to  think  more  than  twice  before 
attributing  such  preposterous  notions  to  his 
fellow-men,  who,  after  all,  as  a  learned  counsel 
said,  are  vertebrated   animals. 

The  whole  thing  perj^lexes  me  much;  and 
I  am  sure  there  must  be  an  explanation  which 
will  leave  Mr.  Lilly's  reputation  for  common  sense 


126  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  m 

and  fair  dealing  untouched.  Can  it  be — I  put 
this  forward  quite  tentatively — that  Mr.  Lilly  is 
the  victim  of  a  confusion,  common  enough  among 
thoughtless  people,  and  into  which  he  has  fallen 
unawares  ?  Obviously,  it  is  one  thing  to  say 
that  the  logical  methods  of  physical  science  are  of 
universal  applicability,  and  quite  another  to  affirm 
that  all  subjects  of  thought  lie  within  the  pro- 
vince of  physical  science.  I  have  often  declared 
my  conviction  that  there  is  only  one  method  by 
which  intellectual  truth  can  be  reached,  whether 
the  subject-matter  of  investigation  belongs  to  the 
world  of  iDhj'sics  or  to  the  world  of  consciousness  ; 
and  one  of  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  use  of 
ph3^sical  science  as  an  instrument  of  education 
v/hich  I  have  oftenest  used  is  that,  in  my  opinion, 
it  exercises  young  minds  in  the  appreciation  of 
inductive  evidence  better  than  any  other  study. 
But  while  I  repeat  my  conviction  that  the  physical 
sciences  probably  furnish  the  best  and  most  easily 
appreciable  illustrations  of  the  one  and  indivisible 
mode  of  ascertaining  truth  by  the  use  of  reason, 
I  beg  leave  to  add  that  I  have  never  thought  of 
suggesting  that  other  branches  of  knowledge  may 
not  afford  the  same  discipline  ;  and  assuredly  I 
have  never  given  the  slightest  ground  for  the 
attribution  to  me  of  the  ridiculous  contention 
that  there  is  nothing  true  outside  the  bounds  of 
physical  science.  Doubtless  j)eople  who  wanted 
to  say  something  damaging,  without  too  nice  a 


Ill 


SCIENCE  AND  MORALS  127 


regard  to  its  truth  or  falsehood,  have  often 
enough  misrepresented  my  plain  meaning.  But 
Mr.  Lilly  is  not  one  of  these  folks  at  whom  one 
looks  and  passes  by,  and  I  can  but  sorrowfully 
wonder  at  finding  him  in  such  company." 

So  much  for  the  three  theses  which  Mr.  Lilly 
has  nailed  on  to  the  page  of  this  Review.  I  think 
I  have  shown  that  the  first  is  inaccurate,  that  the 
second  is  inaccurate,  and  that  the  third  is  in- 
accurate ;  and  that  these  three  inaccurates  con- 
stitute one  prodigious,  though  I  doubt  not  unin- 
tentional, misrepresentation.  If  Mr,  Lilly  and  I 
were  dialectic  gladiators,  fighting  in  the  arena  of 
the  "  Fortnightly,"  under  the  eye  of  an  editorial 
lanista,  for  the  delectation  of  the  public,  my  best 
tactics  would  now  be  to  leave  the  field  of  battle. 
For  the  question  whether  I  do,  or  do  not,  hold 
certain  opinions  is  a  matter  of  fact,  with  regard  to 
which  my  evidence  is  likely  to  be  regarded  as 
conclusive — at  least  until  such  time  as  the  tele- 
pathy of  the  unconscious  is  more  generally  recog- 
nised. 

However,  some  other  assertions  are  made  by 
Mr.  Lilly  which  more  or  less  involve  matters  of 
opinion  whereof  the  rights  and  wrongs  are  less 
easily  settled,  but  in  respect  of  which  he  seems  to 
me  to  err  quite  as  seriously  as  about  the  topics 
we  have  been  hitherto  discussing.  And  the  im- 
portance of  these  subjects  leads  me  to  venture  upon 
saying  something  about  them,  even  though  I  am 


128  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  ni 

thereby  compelled  to  leave  the  safe  ground    of 
personal  knowledge. 

Before  launching  the  three  torpedoes  which 
have  so  sadly  exploded  on  board  his  own  ship, 
Mr.  Lilly  says  that  with  whatever  "  rhetorical 
ornaments  I  may  gild  my  teaching,"  it  is 
"  Materialism."  Let  me  observe,  in  passing,  that 
rhetorical  ornament  is  not  in  my  way,  and  that 
gilding  refined  gold  would,  to  my  mind,  be  less 
objectionable  than  varnishing  the  fair  face  of 
truth  with  that  pestilent  cosmetic,  rhetoric.  If  I 
believed  that  I  had  any  claim  to  the  title  of 
"  Materiahst,"  as  that  term  is  understood  in  the 
language  of  jDhilosojDhy  and  not  in  that  of  abuse,  I 
should  not  attempt  to  hide  it  by  any  sort  of  gild- 
incr.  I  have  not  found  reason  to  care  much  for 
hard  names  in  the  course  of  the  last  thirty  years, 
and  I  am  too  old  to  develop  a  new  sensitiveness. 
But,  to  repeat  what  I  have  more  than  once  taken 
pains  to  say  in  the  most  unadorned  of  plain 
language,  I  repudiate,  as  philosophical  error,  the 
doctrine  of  Materialism  as  I  understand  it,  just  as 
I  repudiate  the  doctrine  of  Spiritualism  as  Mr. 
Lilly  presents  it,  and  my  reason  for  thus  doing  is, 
in  both  cases,  the  same ;  namely,  that,  whatever 
their  differences,  Materialists  and  Spiritualists 
agree  in  making  very  positive  assertions  about 
matters  of  which  I  am  certain  I  know  nothinof, 
and  about  whicli  I  believe  they  are,  in  truth,  just 
as  ignorant.     And  further,  tliat,  even  when  their 


Ill  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  129 

assertions  are  confined  to  topics  which  He  within 
the  range  of  my  faculties,  they  often  appear  to 
me  to  be  in  the  wrong.  And  there  is  yet  another 
reason  for  objecting  to  be  identified  with  either  of 
these  sects;  and  that  is  that  each  is  extremely 
fond  of  attributing  to  the  other,  by  way  of  re- 
proach, conclusions  which  are  the  property  of 
neither,  though  they  infallibly  flow  from  the 
logical  development  of  the  first  principles  of  both. 
Surely  a  prudent  man  is  not  to  be  reproached 
because  he  keeps  clear  of  the  squabbles  of  these 
philosophical  Bianchi  and  Neri,  by  refusing  to 
have  anything  to  do  with  either  ? 

I  understand  the  main  tenet  of  Materialism  to 
be  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  universe  but 
matter  and  force ;  and  that  all  the  phenomena  of 
nature  are  explicable  by  deduction  from  the  pro- 
perties assignable  to  these  two  primitive  factors. 
That  great  champion  of  Materialism  whom  Mr. 
Lilly  appears  to  consider  to  be  an  authority  in 
physical  science,  Dr.  Blichner,  embodies  this 
article  of  faith  on  his  title-page.  Kraft  und  Stoff 
— force  and  matter — are  paraded  as  the  Alpha  and 
Omega  of  existence.  This  I  apprehend  is  the 
fundamental  article  of  the  faith  materialistic; 
and  whosoever  does  not  hold  it  is  condemned  by 
the  more  zealous  of  the  persuasion  (as  I  have 
some  reason  to  know)  to  the  Inferno  appointed 
for  fools  or  hypocrites.  But  all  this  I  heartily 
disbelieve ;  and  at  the  risk  of  being  charged  with 

VOL.  IX  K 


130  SCIENCE  AND  MORALS  m 

wearisome  repetition  of  an  old  story,  I  will  briefly 
give  my  reasons  for  persisting  in  my  infidelity. 
In  the  first  place,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  it 
seems  to  me  pretty  plain  that  there  is  a  third 
thing  in  the  universe,  to  wit,  consciousness,  which, 
in  the  hardness  of  my  heart  or  head,  I  cannot  see 
to  be  matter,  or  force,  or  any  conceivable  modifica- 
tion of  either,  however  intimately  the  manifesta- 
tions of  the  phenomena  of  consciousness  may  be 
connected  with  the  phenomena  known  as  matter 
and  force.  In  the  second  place,  the  arguments 
used  by  Descartes  and  Berkeley  to  show  that  our 
certain  knowledge  does  not  extend  beyond  our 
states  of  consciousness,  appear  to  me  to  be 
as  irrefragable  now  as  they  did  when  I  first 
became  acquainted  with  them  some  half-century 
ago.  All  the  materialistic  writers  I  know  of  who 
have  tried  to  bite  that  file  have  simply  broken 
their  teeth.  But,  if  this  is  true,  our  one  certainty 
is  the  existence  of  the  mental  world,  and  that  of 
Kraft  unci  Stoff  falls  into  the  rank  of,  at  best,  a 
highly  probable  h}^othesis. 

Thirdly,  when  I  was  a  mere  boy,  with  a  per- 
verse tendency  to  think  when  I  ought  to  have 
been  playing,  my  mind  was  gi'eatly  exercised  by 
this  formidable  problem.  What  would  become  of 
things  if  they  lost  their  qualities  ?  As  the  quahties 
had  no  objective  existence,  and  the  thing  without 
qualities  was  nothing,  the  solid  world  seemed 
whittled  away — to  my  great  horror.     As  I  grew 


Ill  SCIENCE  AND  MORALS  131 

older,  and  learned  to  use  the  terms  matter  and 
force,  the  boyish  problem  was  revived,  mutato 
nomine.  On  the  one  hand,  the  notion  of  matter 
without  force  seemed  to  resolve  the  world  into  a 
set  of  geometrical  ghosts,  too  dead  even  to  jabber. 
On  the  other  hand,  Boscovich's  hypothesis,  by 
which  matter  was  resolved  into  centres  of  force, 
was  very  attractive.  But  when  one  tried  to  think 
it  out,  what  in  the  world  became  of  force  con- 
sidered as  an  objective  entity  ?  Force,  even  the 
most  materialistic  of  philosophers  will  agree  with 
the  most  idealistic,  is  nothing  but  a  name  for  the 
cause  of  motion.  And  if,  with  Boscovich,  I 
resolved  things  into  centres  of  force,  then  matter 
vanished  altogether  and  left  immaterial  entities 
in  its  place.  One  might  as  well  frankly  accept 
Idealism  and  have  done  with  it. 

I  must  make  a  confession,  even  if  it  be  humili- 
ating. I  have  never  been  able  to  form  the 
slightest  conception  of  those  "  forces  "  which  the 
Materialists  talk  about,  as  if  they  had  samples  of 
them  many  years  in  bottle.  They  tell  me  that 
matter  consists  of  atoms,  which  are  separated  by 
mere  space  devoid  of  contents ;  and  that,  through 
this  void,  radiate  the  attractive  and  repulsive 
forces  whereby  the  atoms  affect  one  another.  If 
anybody  can  clearly  conceive  the  nature  of  these 
things  which  not  only  exist  in  nothingness,  but 
pull  and  push  there  with  great  vigour,  I  envy 
him  for  the  possession  of  an  intellect  of  larger 
grasp,   not   only   than   mine,   but   than   that   of 

K  2 


132  SCIENCE   AND  MORALS  m 

Leibnitz  or  of  Newton>  To  me  the  "  chimsera, 
bombinans  in  vacuo  quia  comedit  secundas  inten- 
tiones"  of  the  schoohnen  is  a  familiar  and 
domestic  creature  compared  with  such  "  forces." 
Besides,  by  the  h}^othesis,  the  forces  are  not 
matter ;  and  thus  all  that  is  of  any  particular  con- 
sequence in  the  world  turns  out  to  be  not  matter 
on  the  Materialist's  own  showing.  Let  it  not  be 
supposed  that  I  am  casting  a  doubt  upon  the 
propriety  of  the  employment  of  the  terms  "  atom  " 
and  "  force,"  as  they  stand  among  the  working 
hypotheses  of  physical  science.  As  formula3  which 
can  be  applied,  with  perfect  precision  and  great  con- 
venience, in  the  interpretation  of  nature,  their  value 
is  incalculable ;  but,  as  real  entities,  having  an  ob- 
jective existence,  an  indivisible  particle  which  never- 
theless occupies  space  is  surely  inconceivable  ;  and 
with  respect  to  the  operation  of  that  atom,  where 
it  is  not,  by  the  aid  of  a  "  force "  resident  in 
nothingness,  I  am  as  little  able  to  imagine  it  as  I 
fancy  any  one  else  is. 

Unless  and  until  anybody  will  resolve  all  these 
doubts  and  difficulties  for  me,  I  think  I  have  a 
right  to  hold  aloof  from  Materialism.  As  to 
Spiritualism,  it  lands  me  in  even  greater  difficul- 

^  See  the  famous  Collection  of  Papers,  published  by  Clarke  in 
1717,  Leibnitz  says :  "  'Tis  also  a  supernatural  tiling  that 
bodies  should  attract  one  another  at  a  distance  without  any 
intermediate  means."  And  Clarke,  on  behalf  of  Newton,  eaj)S 
this  as  follows  :  "  That  one  body  should  attract  another  without 
any  intermediate  mcaiis  is,  indeed,  not  a  miracle,  but  a  contra- 
diction ;  for  'tis  supposing  something  to  act  where  it  is  not." 


Ill 


SCIENCE   AND  MORALS  133 


ties  when  I  want  to  get  change  for  its  notes-of- 
hand  in  the  solid  coin  of  reality.  For  the  assumed 
substantial  entity,  spirit,  which  is  supposed  to 
underlie  the  phenomena  of  consciousness,  as  matter 
underlies  those  of  physical  nature,  leaves  not  even 
a  geometrical  ghost  when  these  phenomena  are 
abstracted.  And,  even  if  we  suppose  the  existence 
of  such  an  entity  apart  from  qualities — that  is  to 
say,  a  bare  existence — for  mind,  how  does  any- 
body know  that  it  differs  from  that  other  entity, 
apart  from  qualities,  which  is  the  supposed  sub- 
stratum of  matter  ?  Spiritualism  is,  after  all,  little 
better  than  Materialism  turned  upside  down.  And 
if  I  try  to  think  of  the  "  spirit "  which  a  man,  by 
this  hypothesis,  carries  about  under  his  hat,  as 
something  devoid  of  relation  to  space,  and  as 
something  indivisible,  even  in  thought,  while  it  is, 
at  the  same  time,  supposed  to  be  in  that  place  and 
to  be  possessed  of  half  a  dozen  different  faculties,  I 
confess  I  get  quite  lost. 

As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  if  I  were  forced  to 
choose  between  MateriaHsm  and  Idealism,  I  should 
elect  for  the  latter ;  and  I  certainly  would  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  effete  mythology  of 
Spiritualism.  But  I  am  not  aware  that  I  am 
under  any  compulsion  to  choose  either  the  one  or 
the  other.  I  have  always  entertained  a  strong 
suspicion  that  the  sage  who  maintained  that  man 
is  the  measure  of  the  universe  was  sadly  in  the 
wrong ;  and  age  and  experience  have  not  weakened 


134  SCIENCE    AND   MORALS  m 

that  conviction.  In  following  these  Hnes  of  specu- 
lation I  am  reminded  of  the  quarter-deck  walks  of 
my  youth.  In  taking  that  form  of  exercise  you 
may  perambulate  through  all  points  of  the  com- 
pass with  perfect  safety,  so  long  as  you  keep  within 
certain  limits :  forget  those  limits,  in  your  ardour, 
and  mere  smothering  and  spluttering,  if  not  worse, 
await  you.  I  stick  by  the  deck  and  throw  a  life- 
buoy now  and  then  to  the  struggling  folk  who 
have  gone  overboard;  and  all  I  get  for  my 
humanity  is  the  abuse  of  all  whenever  they  leave 
off  abusing  one  another. 

Tolerably  early  in  life  I  discovered  that  one  of 
the  unpardonable  sins,  in  the  eyes  of  most  people, 
is  for  a  man  to  presume  to  go  about  unlabelled. 
The  world  regards  such  a  person  as  the  police  do 
an  unmuzzled  dog,  not  under  proper  control.  I 
could  find  no  label  that  would  suit  me,  so,  in  my 
desire  to  range  myself  and  be  respectable,  I  in- 
vented one ;  and,  as  the  chief  thing  I  was  sure  of 
was  that  I  did  not  knoAV  a  great  many  things  that 
the  — ists  and  the  — ites  about  me  professed  to  be 
familiar  with,  I  called  myself  an  Agnostic.  Surely 
no  denomination  could  be  more  modest  or  more 
appropriate ;  and  I  cannot  imagine  why  I  should 
be  every  now  and  then  haled  out  of  my  refuge 
and  declared  sometimes  to  be  a  Materialist,  some- 
times an  Atheist,  sometimes  a  Positivist ;  and 
sometimes,  alas  and  alack,  a  cowardly  or  reaction- 
ary Obscurantist. 


Ill  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  135 

I  trust  that  I  have,  at  last,  made  my  case  clear, 
and  that  henceforth  I  shall  be  allowed  to  rest  in 
peace — at  least,  after  a  further  explanation  or  two, 
which  Mr.  Lilly  proves  to  me  may  be  necessary. 
It  has  been  seen  that  my  excellent  critic  has 
original  ideas  respecting  the  meaning  of  the 
words  "  laboratory  "  and  "  chemical " ;  and,  as  it 
appears  to  me,  his  definition  of  "  Materialist "  is 
quite  as  much  peculiar  to  himself  For,  unless  I 
misunderstand  him,  and  I  have  taken  pains  not  to 
do  so,  he  puts  me  down  as  a  Materialist  (over  and 
above  the  grounds  which  I  have  shown  to  have 
no  foundation);  firstly,  because  I  have  said  that 
consciousness  is  a  function  of  the  brain ;  and, 
secondly,  because  I  hold  by  determinism.  With 
respect  to  the  first  point,  I  am  not  aware  that 
there  is  any  one  who  doubts  that,  in  the  proper 
physiological  sense  of  the  word  function,  con- 
sciousness, in  certain  forms  at  any  rate,  is  a 
cerebral  function.  In  physiology  we  call  function 
that  effect,  or  series  of  effects,  which  results  from 
the  activity  of  an  organ.  Thus,  it  is  the  function 
of  muscle  to  give  rise  to  motion ;  and  the  muscle 
gives  rise  to  motion  when  the  nerve  which 
supplies  it  is  stimulated.  If  one  of  the  nerve- 
bundles  in  a  man's  arm  is  laid  bare  and  a  stimulus 
is  applied  to  certain  of  the  nervous  filaments,  the 
result  will  be  production  of  motion  in  that  arm. 
If  others  are  stimulated,  the  result  will  be  the 
production   of  the  state  of  consciousness   called 


ISG  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS 


III 


pain.  Now,  if  I  trace  these  last  nerve-filaments, 
I  find  them  to  be  ultimately  connected  with  part 
of  the  substance  of  the  brain,  just  as  the  others 
turn  out  to  be  connected  with  muscular  sub- 
stance. If  the  production  of  motion  in  the  one 
case  is  properly  said  to  be  the  function  of  the 
muscular  substance,  why  is  the  production  of  a 
state  of  consciousness  in  the  other  case  not  to  be 
called  a  function  of  the  cerebral  substance  ?  Once 
upon  a  time,  it  is  true,  it  was  supposed  that  a 
certain  "  animal  spirit "  resided  in  muscle  and  was 
the  real  active  agent.  But  we  have  done  with 
that  wholly  superfluous  fiction  so  far  as  the 
muscular  organs  are  concerned.  Why  are  we  to 
retain  a  corresponding  fiction  for  the  nervous 
organs  ? 

If  it  is  replied  that  no  physiologist,  however 
spiritual  his  leanings,  dreams  of  supposing  that 
simple  sensations  require  a  "  spirit "  for  their 
production,  then  I  must  point  out  that  we  are 
all  agreed  that  consciousness  is  a  function  of 
matter,  and  that  particular  tenet  must  be  given 
up  as  a  mark  of  Materialism.  Any  further  argu- 
ment will  turn  upon  the  question,  not  whether 
consciousness  is  a  function  of  the  brain,  but 
whether  all  forms  of  consciousness  are  so.  Again, 
I  hold  it  would  be  quite  correct  to  say  that 
material  changes  are  the  causes  of  psychical 
phenomena  (and,  as  a  consequence,  that  the 
organs  in  which  these  changes  take  place  have 


Ill  SCIENCE    AND   MORALS  137 

the  production  of  such  phenomena  lor  their 
function),  even  if  the  spirituaHstic  hypothesis  had 
any  foundation.  For  nobody  hesitates  to  say  that 
an  event  A  is  the  cause  of  an  event  Z,  even  if 
there  are  as  many  intermediate  terms,  known  and 
unknown,  in  the  chain  of  causation  as  there  are 
letters  between  A  and  Z.  The  man  who  pulls 
the  trigger  of  a  loaded  pistol  placed  close  to 
another's  head  certainly  is  the  cause  of  that 
other's  death,  though,  in  strictness,  he  "  causes " 
nothing  but  the  movement  of  the  finger  upon  the 
trigger.  And,  in  like  manner,  the  molecular 
change  which  is  brought  about  in  a  certain 
portion  of  the  cerebral  substance  by  the  stimula- 
tion of  a  remote  part  of  the  body  would  be 
properly  said  to  be  the  cause  of  the  consequent 
feeling,  whatever  unknown  terms  were  interposed 
between  the  physical  agent  and  the  actual  psychi- 
cal product.  Therefore,  unless  Materialism  has 
the  monopoly  of  the  right  use  of  language,  I  see 
nothing  materialistic  in  the  phraseology  which  I 
have  employed. 

The  only  remaining  justification  which  Mr.  Lilly 
offers  for  dubbing  me  a  Materialist,  malgrd  moi, 
arises  out  of  a  passage  which  he  quotes,  in  which  I 
say  that  the  progress  of  science  means  the  exten- 
sion of  the  province  of  what  we  call  matter  and 
force,  and  the  concomitant  gradual  banishment 
from  all  regions  of  human  thought  of  what  we  call 
spirit  and  spontaneity.     I  hold  that  opinion  now, 


188  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  m 

if  anything,  more  firmly  tlian  I  did  when  I  gave 
utterance  to  it  a  score  of  years  ago,  for  it  has 
been  justified  by  subsequent  events.  But  what 
that  opinion  has  to  do  with  Materialism  I  fail  to 
discover.  In  my  judgment,  it  is  consistent  Avith 
the  most  thorough-going  Idealism,  and  the 
grounds  of  that  judgment  are  really  very  plain 
and  simple. 

The  growth  of  science,  not  merely  of  physical 
science,  but  of  all  science,  means  the  demonstration 
of  order  and  natural  causation  among  phenomena 
which  had  not  previously  been  brought  under  those 
conceptions.  Nobody  who  is  acquainted  with  the 
progress  of  scientific  thinking  in  every  department 
of  human  knowledge,  in  the  course  of  the  last  two 
centuries,  will  be  disposed  to  deny  that  immense 
provinces  have  been  added  to  the  realm  of  science ; 
or  to  doubt  that  the  next  two  centuries  will  be 
witnesses  of  a  vastly  greater  annexation.  More 
particularly  in  the  region  of  the  physiology  of  the 
nervous  sj^stem  is  it  justifiable  to  conclude  from 
the  progress  that  has  been  made  in  analysing  the 
relations  between  material  and  psj^hical  pheno- 
mena, that  vast  further  advances  will  be  made  ; 
and  that,  sooner  or  later,  all  the  so-called  spon- 
taneous operations  of  the  mind  will  have,  not  only 
their  relations  to  one  another,  but  their  relations 
to  physical  phenomena,  connected  in  natural  series 
of  causes  and  effects,  strictly  defined.  In  other 
words,  while,  at  present,  we  know  only  the  nearer 


Ill 


SCIENCE   AND  MORALS  139 


moiety  of  the  chain  of  causes  and  effects,  by  which 
the  phenomena  we  call  material  give  rise  to  those 
which  we  call  mental ;  hereafter,  we  shall  get  to 
the  further  end  of  the  series. 

In  my  innocence,  I  have  been  in  the  habit  of 
supposing  that  this  is  merely  a  statement  of  facts, 
and  that  the  good  Bishop  Berkeley,  if  he  were 
alive,  would  find  such  facts  fit  into  his  system 
without  the  least  difficulty.  That  Mr.  Lilly 
should  play  into  the  hands  of  his  foes,  by  declaring 
that  unmistakable  facts  make  for  them,  is  an 
exemplification  of  ways  that  are  dark,  quite  un- 
intelligible to  me.  Surely  Mr.  Lilly  does  not  hold 
that  the  disbelief  in  spontaneity — which  term,  if 
it  has  any  meaning  at  all,  means  uncaused  action 
— is  a  mark  of  the  beast  Materialism  ?  If  so,  he 
must  be  prepared  to  tackle  many  of  the  Cartesians 
(if  not  Descartes  himself),  Spinoza  and  Leibnitz 
among  the  philosophers,  Augustine,  Thomas 
Aquinas,  Calvin  and  his  followers  among  theolo- 
gians, as  Materialists — and  that  surely  is  a  suffi- 
cient redudio  ad  absurdtim  of  such  a  classification. 

The  truth  is,  that  in  his  zeal  to  paint  "  Material- 
ism," in  large  letters,  on  everything  he  dislikes, 
Mr.  Lilly  forgets  a  very  important  fact,  which, 
however,  must  be  patent  to  every  one  who  has 
paid  attention  to  the  history  of  human  thought ; 
and  that  fact  is,  that  every  one  of  the  specu- 
lative difficulties  which  beset  Kant's  three  prob- 
lems, the  existence  of  a  Deity,  the  freedom  of  the 


140  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  m 

will,  and  immortality,  existed  ages  before  any- 
thing that  can  be  called  physical  science,  and 
would  continue  to  exist  if  modern  jDhysical  science 
were  swept  away.  All  that  physical  science  has 
done  has  been  to  make,  as  it  were,  visible  and 
tangible  some  difficulties  that  formerly  were  more 
hard  of  apprehension.  Moreover,  these  difficulties 
exist  just  as  much  on  the  hypothesis  of  Idealism 
as  on  that  of  Materialism. 

The  student  of  nature,  who  starts  from  the 
axiom  of  the  universality  of  the  law  of  causation, 
cannot  refuse  to  admit  an  eternal  existence ;  if  he 
admits  the  conservation  of  energy,  he  cannot 
deny  the  possibility  of  an  eternal  energy;  if  he 
admits  the  existence  of  immaterial  phenomena 
in  the  form  of  consciousness,  he  must  admit  the 
possibility,  at  any  rate,  of  an  eternal  series  of 
such  phenomena ;  and,  if  his  studies  have  not  been 
barren  of  the  best  fruit  of  the  investigation  of 
nature,  he  will  have  enough  sense  to  see  that 
when  Spinoza  says,  "  Per  Deum  intelligo  ens 
absolute  infinitum,  hoc  est  substantiam  constantem 
infinitis  attributis,"  the  God  so  conceived  is  one 
that  only  a  very  great  fool  would  deny,  even  in 
his  heart.  Physical  science  is  as  httle  Atheistic 
as  it  is  Materialistic. 

So  with  respect  to  immortaUty.  As  physical 
science  states  this  problem,  it  seems  to  stand  thus  : 
"  Is  there  any  means  of  knowing  whether  the 
series  of  states  of  consciousness,  which  has  been 


Ill  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  141 

casually  associated  for  threescore  years  and  ten 
with  the  arrangement  and  movements  of  in- 
numerable millions  of  successively  different  mate- 
rial molecules,  can  be  continued,  in  like  associ- 
ation, with  some  substance  which  has  not  the 
properties  of  matter  and  force  ?  "  As  Kant  said, 
on  a  like  occasion,  if  anybody  can  answer  that 
question,  he  is  just  the  man  I  want  to  see.  If  he 
says  that  consciousness  cannot  exist,  except  in 
relation  of  cause  and  effect  with  certain  organic 
molecules,  I  must  ask  how  he  knows  that ;  and  if 
he  says  it  can,  I  must  put  the  same  question. 
And  I  am  afraid  that,  like  jesting  Pilate,  I  shall 
not  think  it  worth  while  (having  but  little  time 
before  me)  to  wait  for  an  answer. 

Lastly,  with  respect  to  the  old  riddle  of  the 
freedom  of  the  will.  In  the  only  sense  in  which 
the  word  freedom  is  intelligible  to  me — that  is  to 
say,  the  absence  of  any  restraint  upon  doing  what 
one  likes  within  certain  limits — physical  science 
certainly  gives  no  more  ground  for  doubting  it 
than  the  common  sense  of  mankind  does.  And  if 
physical  science,  in  strengthening  our  belief  in  the 
universality  of  causation  and  abolishing  chance  as 
an  absurdity,  leads  to  the  conclusions  of  deter- 
minism, it  does  no  more  than  follow  the  track  of 
consistent  and  logical  thinkers  in  philosophy  and 
in  theology,  before  it  existed  or  was  thought  of 
Whoever  accepts  the  universality  of  the  law  of 
causation  as  a  dogma  of  philosophy,  denies  the 


142  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS 


III 


existence  of  uncaused  jDhenomena.  And  the 
essence  of  that  which  is  improperly  called  the 
freewill  doctrine  is  that  occasionally,  at  any  rate, 
human  volition  is  self-caused,  that  is  to  say,  not 
caused  at  all ;  for  to  cause  oneself  one  must  have 
anteceded  oneself — which  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it, 
difficult  to  imagine. 

Whoever  accejDts  the  existence  of  an  omniscient 
Deity  as  a  dogma  of  theology,  affirms  that  the 
order  of  things  is  fixed  from  eternity  to  eternity ; 
for  the  fore-knowledge  of  an  occurrence  means 
that  the  occurrence  will  certainly  happen;  and 
the  certainty  of  an  event  happening  is  what  is 
meant  by  its  being  fixed  or  fated.^ 

1  I  may  cite,  in  support  of  this  obvious  conclusion  of  sound 
reasoning,  two  authorities  who  ^Yill  certainly  not  be  regarded 
lightly  by  Mr,  Lilly.  These  are  Augustine  and  Thomas 
Aquinas.  The  former  declares  that  "Fate"  is  only  an  ill- 
chosen  name  for  Providence. 

"Prorsus  divina  providentia  regna  constituuntur  humana. 
Quoe  si  propterea  quisquam  fato  tribuit,  quia  ipsam  Dei  volun- 
tatem  vel  potestatem  fati  nomine  appellat,  sententiaia  tencaty 
linriuam  corrigat"  (Augustinus  Be  Civitate  Dei,  V.  c.  i.) 

The  other  great  doctor  of  the  Catholic  Church,  "  Divus 
Thomas,"  as  Suarez  calls  him,  whose  marvellous  grasp  and 
subtlety  of  intellect  seem  to  me  to  be  almost  without  a  parallel, 
puts  the  whole  case  into  a  nutshell,  when  he  says  that  the 
ground  for  doing  a  thing  in  the  mind  of  the  doer  is  as  it  were 
the  pre-existence  of  the  thing  done  : 

"Ratio  autem  alicujus  fiendi  in  mente  actoris  existens  est 
quredam  prse-existentia  rei  fiendaj  in  eo"  {Summa,  Qu.  xxiii. 
Art.  i.) 

If  this  is  not  enough,  I  may  further  ask  what  "  Materialist" 
has  ever  given  a  better  statement  of  the  case  for  determinism, 
on  theistic  grounds,  than  is  to  be  found  in  the  following  passage 
of  the  Summa,  Qu.  xiv.  Art.  xiii. 

"  Omnia  qua;  sunt  in  tempore,  sunt  Deo  ab  ajterno  pnesentia, 
nou  solum  ea  ex  ratiouo  qua  habet   ratioues   rerum   apud   se 


Ill  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  143 

Whoever  asserts  the  existence  of  an  omnipotent 
Deity,  that  he  made  and  sustains  all  things,  and 
is  the  causa  causarum,  cannot,  without  a  contra- 
diction in  terms,  assert  that  there  is  any  cause 
independent  of  him ;  and  it  is  a  mere  subterfuge 
to  assert  that  the  cause  of  all  things  can  "  permit " 
one  of  these  things  to  be  an  independent  cause. 

Whoever  asserts  the  combination  of  omniscience 
and  omnipotence  as  attributes  of  the  Deity,  does 
implicitly  assert  predestination.  For  he  who 
knowingly  makes  a  thing  and  places  it  in  circum- 
stances the  operation  of  which  on  that  thing  he 
is  perfectly  acquainted  with,  does  predestine  that 
thing  to  whatever  fate  may  befall  it. 

Thus,  to  come,  at  last,  to  the  really  important 
part  of  all  this  discussion,  if  the  belief  in  a  God 
is  essential  to  morality,  physical  science  offers  no 
obstacle  thereto ;  if  the  belief  in  immortality  is 
essential  to  morality,  physical  science  has  no  more 
to  say  against  the  probability  of  that  doctrine  than 
the  most  ordinary  experience  has,  and  it  effectually 
closes  the  mouths  of  those  who  pretend  to  refute 
it   by  objections   deduced    from   merely  physical 


presentes,  ut  quidam  diciint,  sed  quia  ejus  intuitus  fertur  ab 
seterno  supra  omnia,  prout  sunt  in  sua  praesentialitate.  Unde 
manifcstum  est  quod  contingcntia  infallihiliter  a  Deo  cognos- 
cuntur,  in  quantum  subduntur  divino  conspectui  secundum 
suam  prtesentialitatem  ;  et  tamen  sunt  futura  contingentia,  suis 
causis  proximis  comparata." 

[As  I  have  not  said  that  Thomas  Aquinas  is  professedly  a 
determinist,  I  do  not  see  the  bearing  of  citations  from  him  which 
may  be  more  or  less  inconsistent  with  the  foregoing.] 


144  SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  m 

data.  Finally,  if  the  belief  in  the  uncausedness 
of  volition  is  essential  to  morality,  the  student  of 
physical  science  has  no  more  to  say  against  that 
absurdity  than  the  logical  philosopher  or  theo- 
logian. Physical  science,  I  rej^eat,  did  not  invent 
determinism,  and  the  deterministic  doctrine  would 
stand  on  just  as  firm  a  foundation  as  it  does  if 
there  were  no  physical  science.  Let  any  one  who 
doubts  this  read  Jonathan  Edwards,  whose  de- 
monstrations are  derived  wholly  from  j^hilosophy 
and  theology. 

Thus,  when  Mr.  Lilly,  like  another  Solomon 
Eagle,  goes  about  proclaiming  "  Woe  to  this  wicked 
city,"  and  denouncing  j^hysical  science  as  the  evil 
genius  of  modern  days — mother  of  materialism, 
and  fatalism,  and  all  sorts  of  other  condemnable 
isms — I  venture  to  beg  him  to  lay  the  blame  on 
the  right  shoulders  ;  or,  at  least,  to  put  in  the 
dock,  along  Avith  Science,  those  sinful  sisters  of 
hers.  Philosophy  and  Theology,  who,  being  so 
much  older,  should  have  known  better  than  the 
poor  Cinderella  of  the  schools  and  universities 
over  which  they  have  so  long  dominated.  No 
doubt  modern  society  is  diseased  enough ;  but 
then  it  does  not  differ  from  older  civilisations  in 
that  respect.  Societies  of  men  are  fermenting 
masses,  and,  as  beer  has  what  the  Germans  call 
"  Oberhefe  "  and  "  Unterhefe,"  so  every  society  that 
has  existed  has  had  its  scum  at  the  top  and  its 
dregs  at  the  bottom ;  but  I  doubt  if  any  of  the 


Ill 


SCIENCE   AND   MORALS  145 


"  ages  of  faith  "  had  less  scum  or  less  dregs,  or  even 
showed  a  proportionally  gi'eater  quantity  of  sound 
wholesome  stuff  in  the  vat.  I  think  it  would 
puzzle  Mr.  Lilly,  or  any  one  else,  to  adduce  con- 
vincing evidence  that,  at  any  period  of  the  world's 
history,  there  was  a  more  widespread  sense  of 
social  duty,  or  a  greater  sense  of  justice,  or  of  the 
obligation  of  mutual  help,  than  in  this  England  of 
ours.  Ah  !  but,  says  Mr.  Lilly,  these  are  all  pro- 
ducts of  our  Christian  inheritance  ;  when  Christian 
dogmas  vanish  virtue  will  disappear  too,  and  the 
ancestral  ape  and  tiger  will  have  full  play.  But 
there  are  a  good  many  people  who  think  it  obvious 
that  Christianity  also  inherited  a  good  deal  from 
Paganism  and  from  Judaism;  and  that,  if  the 
Stoics  and  the  Jews  revoked  their  bequest,  the 
moral  property  of  Christianity  would  realise  very 
little.  And,  if  morality  has  survived  the  stripping 
off  of  several  sets  of  clothes  which  have  been 
found  to  fit  badly,  why  should  it  not  be  able  to 
get  on  very  well  in  the  light  and  handy  garments 
which  Science  is  ready  to  provide  ? 

But  this  by  the  way.  If  the  diseases  of  society 
consist  in  the  weakness  of  its  faith  in  the  existence 
of  the  God  of  the  theologians,  in  a  future  state, 
and  in  uncaused  volitions,  the  indication,  as  the 
doctors  say,  is  to  suppress  Theology  and  Philo- 
sophy, whose  bickerings  about  things  of  which 
they  know  nothing  have  been  the  prime  cause 
and   continual  sustenance  of  that  evil  scepticism 

VOL.  IX  L 


146  SCIENCE   AND  MORALS 


III 


which  is  the  Nemesis  of  meddling  with  the  un- 
knowable. 

Cinderella  is  modestly  conscious  of  her  ignor- 
ance of  these  high  matters.  She  lights  the  fire, 
sweeps  the  house,  and  provides  the  dinner;  and 
is  rewarded  by  being  told  that  she  is  a  base 
creature,  devoted  to  low  and  material  interests. 
But  in  her  garret  she  has  fairy  visions  out  of  the 
ken  of  the  pair  of  shrews  who  are  quarrelling 
down  stairs.  She  sees  the  order  which  pervades 
the  seeming  disorder  of  the  world ;  the  great 
drama  of  evolution,  with  its  full  share  of  pity 
and  terror,  but  also  with  abundant  goodness  and 
beauty,  unrolls  itself  before  her  eyes ;  and  she 
learns,  in  her  heart  of  hearts,  the  lesson,  that  the 
foundation  of  morality  is  to  have  done,  once  and 
for  all,  with  lying ;  to  give  up  pretending  to 
believe  that  for  which  there  is  no  evidence,  and 
repeating  unintelligible  propositions  about  things 
beyond  the  possibilities  of  knowledge. 

She  knows  that  the  safety  of  morality  lies 
neither  in  the  adoption  of  this  or  that  philo- 
sophical speculation,  or  this  or  that  theological 
creed,  but  in  a  real  and  living  belief  in  that  fixed 
order  of  nature  which  sends  social  disorganisation 
upon  the  track  of  immorality,  as  surely  as  it 
sends  physical  disease  after  physical  trespasses. 
And  of  that  firm  and  lively  faith  it  is  her  high 
mission  to  be  the  priestess. 


IV 

CAPITAL— THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR 

AN   ECONOMICAL   PROBLEM  DISCUSSED   FROM  A 
PHYSIOLOGICAL   POINT  OF   VIEW 

[1890] 

The  first  act  of  a  new-born  child  is  to  draw  a 
deep  breath.  In  fact,  it  will  never  draw  a  deeper, 
inasmuch  as  the  passages  and  chambers  of  the 
lungs,  once  distended  with  air,  do  not  empty 
themselves  again ;  it  is  only  a  fraction  of  their 
contents  which  passes  in  and  out  with  the  flow 
and  the  ebb  of  the  respiratory  tide.  Mechanically, 
this  act  of  drawing  breath,  or  inspiration,  is  of 
the  same  nature  as  that  by  which  the  handles  of 
a  bellows  are  separated,  in  order  to  fill  the  bellows 
with  air ;  and,  in  like  manner,  it  involves  that 
expenditure  of  energy  which  we  call  exertion,  or 
work,  or  labour.  It  is,  therefore,  no  mere  metaphor 
to  say  that  man  is  destined  to  a  life  of  toil :  the 
work  of  respiration  which  began  with  his  first 
breath  ends  only  with  his  last ;  nor  does  one  born 

L  2 


148    CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

in  the  purple  get  off  with  a  lighter  task  than  the 
child  who  first  sees  light  under  a  hedge. 

How  is  it  that  the  new-born  infant  is  enabled 
to  perform  this  first  instalment  of  the  sentence 
of  life-long  labour  which  no  man  may  escape  ? 
Whatever  else  a  child  may  be,  in  resj^ect  of  this 
particular  question,  it  is  a  complicated  piece  of 
mechanism,  built  up  out  of  materials  supplied  by 
its  mother;  and  in  the  course  of  such  building- 
up,  provided  witli  a  set  of  motors — the  muscles. 
Each  of  these  muscles  contains  a  stock  of  sub- 
stance capable  of  yielding  energy  under  certain 
conditions,  one  of  which  is  a  change  of  state  in 
the  nerve  fibres  connected  with  it.  The  powder 
in  a  loaded  gun  is  such  another  stock  of  substance 
capable  of  yielding  energy  in  consequence  of  a 
change  of  state  in  the  mechanism  of  the  lock, 
which  intervenes  between  the  finger  of  the  man 
who  pulls  the  trigger  and  the  cartridge.  If  that 
change  is  brought  about,  the  potential  energy  of 
the  powder  passes  suddenly  into  actual  energy, 
and  does  the  work  of  propelling  the  bullet.  The 
powder,  therefore,  may  be  appropriately  called 
worh-stujf,  not  only  because  it  is  stuff  which  is 
easily  made  to  yield  work  in  the  physical  sense, 
but  because  a  good  deal  of  work  in  the  economical 
sense  has  contributed  to  its  production.  Labour 
was  necessary  to  collect,  transport,  and  purify  the 
raw  sulphur  and  saltpetre ;  to  cut  wood  and  con- 
vert it  into  powdered  charcoal ;  to  mix  these  in- 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    149 

gredients  in  the  right  proportions;  to  give  the 
mixture  the  projDer  grain,  and  so  on.  The  powder 
once  formed  part  of  the  stock,  or  capital,  of  a 
powder-maker :  and  it  is  not  only  certain  natural 
bodies  which  are  collected  and  stored  in  the  gun- 
powder, but  the  labour  bestowed  on  the  operations 
mentioned  may  be  figuratively  said  to  be  incor- 
porated in  it. 

In  principle,  the  work-stuff  stored  in  the 
muscles  of  the  new-born  child  is  comparable  to 
that  stored  in  the  gun-barrel.  The  infant  is 
launched  into  altogether  new  surroundings ;  and 
these  operate  through  the  mechanism  of  the 
nervous  machinery,  with  the  result  that  the 
potential  energy  of  some  of  the  work-stuff  in  the 
muscles  which  bring  about  inspiration  is  suddenly 
converted  into  actual  energy  ;  and  this,  operating 
through  the  mechanism  of  the  respiratory  ap- 
paratus, gives  rise  to  an  act  of  inspiration.  As 
the  bullet  is  propelled  by  the  "going  off"  of 
the  powder,  as  it  might  be  said  that  the  ribs  are 
raised  and  the  midriff  depressed  by  the  "  going  off" 
of  certain  portions  of  muscular  work-stuff.  This 
work-stuff  is  part  of  a  stock  or  capital  of  that 
commodity  stored  up  in  the  child's  organism 
before  birth,  at  the  expense  of  the  mother ;  and 
the  mother  has  made  good  her  expenditure  by 
drawing  upon  the  capital  of  food-stuffs  which 
furnished  her  daily  maintenance. 

Under  these  circumstances,  it  does  not  appear 


150    CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

to  me  to  be  open  to  doubt  that  the  primary  act  of 
outward  labour  in  the  series  which  necessarily 
accomjDany  the  life  of  man  is  dependent  upon  the 
pre-existence  of  a  stock  of  material  which  is  not 
only  of  use  to  him,  but  which  is  disposed  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  be  utili sable  with  facility.  And 
I  further  imagine  that  the  propriety  of  the 
application  of  the  term  '  capital '  to  this  stock  of 
useful  substance  cannot  be  justly  called  in 
question;  inasmuch  as  it  is  easy  to  prove  that 
the  essential  constituents  of  the  work-stuff 
accumulated  in  the  child's  muscles  have  merely 
been  transferred  from  the  store  of  food-stuffs, 
which  everybody  admits  to  be  capital,  by  means 
of  the  maternal  organism  to  that  of  the  child,  in 
which  they  are  again  deposited  to  await  use. 
Every  subsequent  act  of  labour,  in  like  manner, 
involves  an  equivalent  consumj^tion  of  the  child's 
store  of  work-stuff — its  vital  capital ;  and  one  of 
the  main  objects  of  the  process  of  breathing  is  to 
get  rid  of  some  of  the  effects  of  that  consumption. 
It  follows,  then,  that,  even  if  no  other  than  the 
respiratory  work  were  going  on  in  the  organism, 
the  capital  of  work-stuff,  which  the  child  brought 
with  it  into  the  world,  must  sooner  or  later  be  used 
up,  and  the  movements  of  breathing  must  come 
to  an  end ;  just  as  the  see-saw  of  the  piston  of  a 
steam-engine  stops  when  the  coal  in  the  fireplace 
has  burnt  away. 

Milk,  however,  is  a  stock  of  materials  which 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    151 

essentially  consists  of  savings  from  the  food-stuffs 
supplied  to  the  mother.  And  these  savings  are 
in  such  a  j^hysical  and  chemical  condition  that 
the  organism  of  the  child  can  easily  convert  them 
into  work-stuff.  That  is  to  say,  by  borrowing 
directly  from  the  vital  capital  of  the  mother, 
indirectly  from  the  store  in  the  natural  bodies 
accessible  to  her,  it  can  make  good  the  loss  of 
its  own.  The  operation  of  borrowing,  however, 
involves  further  work ;  that  is,  the  labour  of 
sucking,  which  is  a  mechanical  operation  of  much 
the  same  nature  as  breathing.  Tlie  child  thus 
pays  for  the  capital  it  borrows  in  labour ;  but  as 
the  value  in  work-stuff  of  the  milk  obtained  is 
very  far  greater  than  the  value  of  that  labour, 
estimated  by  the  consumption  of  work-stuff  it 
involves,  the  operation  yields  a  large  profit  to  the 
infant.  The  overplus  of  food-stuff  suffices  to  in- 
crease the  child's  capital  of  work-stuff;  and  to 
supply  not  only  the  materials  for  the  enlargement 
of  the  "  buildings  and  machinery "  which  is  ex- 
pressed by  the  child's  growth,  but  also  the  energy 
required  to  put  all  these  materials  together,  and 
to  carry  them  to  their  proper  places.  Thus, 
throughout  the  years  of  infancy,  and  so  long 
thereafter  as  the  youth  or  man  is  not  thrown 
upon  his  own  resources,  he  lives  by  consuming 
the  vital  capital  provided  by  others.  To  use  a 
terminology  which  is  more  common  than  appro- 
priate, whatever  work  he  performs  (and  he  does 


152        CAPITAL — THE   MOTHER   OF   LABOUR  iv 

a  good  deal,  if  only  in  mere  locomotion)  is  un- 
productive. 

Let  us  now  suppose  the  child  come  to  man's 
estate  in  the  condition  of  a  wandering  savage, 
dependent  for  his  food  upon  what  he  can  pick 
up  or  catch,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Australian 
aborigines.     It  is  plain  that  the  place  of  mother, 
as  the  supplier  of  vital  capital,  is  now  taken  by 
the  fruits,  seeds,  and  roots  of  plants  and  by  various 
kinds  of  animals.     It  is  they  alone  which  contain 
stocks  of  those  substances  which  can  be  converted 
within  the  man's  organism  into  work-stuff;  and  of 
the  other  matters,  except  air  and  water,  required 
to  supply  the  constant  consumption  of  his  capital 
and  to  keep  his  organic  machinery  going.     In  no 
way  does  the  savage  contribute  to  the  production 
of  these  substances.     Whatever  labour  he  bestows 
upon  such  vegetable  and  animal  bodies,  on  the 
contrary,  is  devoted  to  their  destruction  ;  and  it  is 
a  mere  matter  of  accident  whether  a  little  labour 
yields   him    a    great    deal — as   in   the    case,    for 
example,  of  a  stranded  whale ;  or  whether  much 
labour   yields   next   to   nothing — as   in  times  of 
long-continued    drought.     The    savage,   like   the 
child,  borrows  the  capital  he  needs,  and,  at  any 
rate,  intentionally,  does  nothing  towards  repay- 
ment ;  it  would  plainly  be  an  improper  use  of  the 
word  "  produce  "  to  say  that  his  labour  in  hunting 
for  the  roots,  or  the   fruits,  or  the  eggs,  or  the 
grubs  and  snakes,  which  he  finds  and  eats,  "  j^ro- 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    153 

duces  "  or  contributes  to  "  produce  "  them.  The 
same  thing  is  true  of  more  advanced  tribes,  who 
are  still  merely  hunters,  such  as  the  Esquimaux. 
They  may  expend  more  labour  and  skill ;  but  it  is 
spent  in  destruction. 

When  we  pass  from  these  to  men  who  lead  a 
purely   pastoral    Hfe,   like    the    South   American 
Gauchos,   or   some   Asiatic   nomads,  there   is  an 
important  change.     Let  us  suppose  the  owner  of 
a  flock  of  sheep  to  Hve  on  the  milk,  cheese,  and 
flesh  which  they  yield.     It  is  obvious  that  the 
flock  stands  to  him  in  the  economic  relation  of 
the  mother  to  the  child,  inasmuch  as  it  suppHes 
him  with  food-stuffs  competent  to  make  good  the 
daily  and   hourly  losses  of  his  capital  of  work- 
stuff.     If  we  imagine   our  sheep-owner  to  have 
access  to  extensive  pastures  and  to  be  troubled 
neither  by  predacious  animals  nor  by  rival  shep- 
herds, the  performance  of  his  pastoral  functions 
will  hardly  involve  the  expenditure  of  any  more 
labour  than  is  needful  to  provide  him  with  the 
exercise  required  to  maintain  health.     And  this 
is  true,  even  if  we  take  into  account  the  trouble 
originally  devoted   to   the   domestication  of  the 
sheep.     It  surely  would  be  a  most  singular  pre- 
tension for  the  shepherd  to  talk  of  the  flock  as 
the  "  produce "  of  his  labour  in  any  but  a  very 
limited  sense.     In  truth,  his  labour  would  have 
been  a  mere  accessory  of  production  of  very  little 
consequence.     Under  the  circumstances  supposed, 


154         CAPITAL — THE    MOTHER   OF   LABOUR  iv 

a  ram  and  some  ewes,  left  to  themselves  for  a  few 
years,  would  probably  generate  as  large  a  flock ; 
and  the  superadded  labour  of  the  shepherd  would 
have  little  more  effect  upon  their  production  than 
upon  that  of  the  blackberries  on  the  bushes  about 
the  pastures.  For  the  most  part  the  increment 
would  be  thoroughly  unearned ;  and,  if  it  is  a  rule 
of  absolute  political  ethics  that  owners  have  no 
claim  upon  "  betterment "  brought  about  inde- 
pendently of  their  own  labour,  then  the  shepherd 
would  have  no  claim  to  at  least  nine-tenths  of 
the  increase  of  the  flock. 

But  if  the  shepherd  has  no  real  claim  to  the 
title  of  "  producer,"  who  has  ?  Are  the  rams  and 
ewes  the  true  "  producers  "  ?  Certainly  their  title 
is  better  if,  borrowing  from  the  old  terminology  of 
chemistry,  they  only  claim  to  be  regarded  as  the 
"  proximate  principles  "  of  production.  And  yet, 
if  strict  justice  is  to  be  dispensed,  even  they  are 
to  be  regarded  rather  as  collectors  and  distri- 
butors than  as  "  producers."  For  all  that  they 
really  do  is  to  collect,  slightly  modify,  and  render 
easily  accessible,  the  vital  capital  which  already 
exists  in  the  green  herbs  on  which  they  feed,  but 
in  such  a  form  as  to  be  practically  out  of  the 
reach  of  man. 

Thus,  from  an  economic  point  of  view,  the 
sheep  are  more  comparable  to  confectioners  than 
to  producers.  The  usefulness  of  biscuit  lies  in 
the  raw  flour  of  which  it  is  made ;  but  raw  flour 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   155 

does  not  answer  as  an  article  of  human  diet,  and 
biscuit  does.  So  the  usefuhiess  of  mutton  hes 
mainly  in  certain  chemical  compounds  which  it 
contains :  the  sheep  gets  them  out  of  grass ;  we 
cannot  live  on  grass,  but  we  can  on  mutton. 

Now,  herbaceous  and  all  other  green  plants 
stand  alone  among  terrestrial  natural  bodies,  in  so 
far  as,  under  the  influence  of  light,  they  possess 
the  power  to  build  up,  out  of  the  carbonic  acid 
gas  in  the  atmosphere,  water  and  certain  nitro- 
genous and  mineral  salts,  those  substances  which 
in  the  animal  organism  are  utilised  as  work-stuff. 
They  are  the  chief  and,  for  practical  purposes,  the 
sole  producers  of  that  vital  capital  which  we  have 
seen  to  be  the  necessary  antecedent  of  every  act 
of  labour.  Every  green  plant  is  a  laboratory  in 
which,  so  long  as  the  sun  shines  upon  it,  materials 
furnished  by  the  mineral  world,  gases,  water, 
saline  compounds,  are  worked  uj)  into  those  food- 
stuffs without  which  animal  life  cannot  be  carried 
on.  And  since,  up  to  the  present  time,  synthetic 
chemistry  has  not  advanced  so  far  as  to  achieve 
this  feat,  the  green  plant  may  be  said  to  be  the 
only  living  worker  whose  labour  directly  results 
in  the  production  of  that  vital  capital  which  is 
the  necessary  antecedent  of  human  labour.^  Nor 
is  this  statement  a  paradox  involving  perpetual 

^  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  plants  which  have  no 
chlorophyll,  and  flourish  in  darkness,  such  as  the  Fungi,  can 
live  upon  purely  mineral  food. 


156   CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

motion,  because  the  energy  by  which  the  plant 
does  its  work  is  supplied  by  the  sun — the  prim- 
ordial capitalist  so  far  as  we  are  concerned.  But 
it  cannot  be  too  strongly  impressed  upon  the 
mind  that  sunshine,  air,  water,  the  best  soil  that 
is  to  be  found  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  might 
co-exist ;  yet  without  plants,  there  is  no  known 
agency  competent  to  generate  the  so-called 
"  jDrotein  compounds,"  by  which  alone  animal  life 
can  be  permanently  supported.  And  not  only 
are  plants  thus  essential ;  but,  in  respect  of  par- 
ticular kinds  of  animals,  they  must  be  plants  of 
a  particular  nature.  If  there  were  no  terrestrial 
green  plants  but,  say,  c}^resses  and  mosses, 
pastoral  and  agricultural  life  would  be  alike 
impossible;  indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  the 
possibility  of  the  existence  of  any  large  animal,  as 
the  labour  required  to  get  at  a  sufficiency  of  the 
store  of  food-stuffs,  contained  in  such  plants  as 
these,  could  hardly  extract  from  them  an  equi- 
valent for  the  waste  involved  in  that  expenditure 
of  work. 

We  are  compact  of  dust  and  air ;  from  that  we 
set  out,  and  to  that  complexion  must  we  come 
at  last.  The  plant  either  directly,  or  by  some 
animal  intermediary,  lends  us  the  capital  which 
enables  us  to  carry  on  the  business  of  life,  as  we 
flit  through  the  upper  world,  from  the  one  term 
of  our  journey  to  the  other.  Popularly,  no  doubt, 
it  is  permissible  to  sjDcak  of  the  soil  as  a  "  pro- 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   157 

ducer,"  just  as  we  may  talk  of  the  daily  movement 
of  the  sun.  But,  as  I  have  elsewhere  remarked, 
propositions  which  are  to  bear  any  deductive 
strain  that  may  be  put  upon  them  must  run  the 
risk  of  seeming  pedantic,  rather  than  that  of  being 
inaccurate.  And  the  statement  that  land,  in  the 
sense  of  cultivable  soil,  is  a  producer,  or  even  one 
of  the  essentials  of  economic  production,  is  any- 
thing but  accurate.  The  process  of  water-culture, 
in  which  a  plant  is  not  "  planted  "  in  any  soil,  but 
is  merely  supported  in  water  containing  in  solution 
the  mineral  ingredients  essential  to  that  plant,  is 
now  thoroughly  understood ;  and,  if  it  were  worth 
while,  a  crop  yielding  abundant  food-stuffs  could 
be  raised  on  an  acre  of  fresh  water,  no  less  than 
on  an  acre  of  dry  land.  In  the  Arctic  regions, 
again,  land  has  nothing  to  do  with  "  production  " 
in  the  social  economy  of  the  Esquimaux,  who  live 
on  seals  and  other  marine  animals;  and  might, 
like  Proteus,  shepherd  the  flocks  of  Poseidon  if 
they  had  a  mind  for  pastoral  life.  But  the  seals 
and  the  bears  are  dependent  on  other  inhabitants 
of  the  sea,  until,  somewhere  in  the  series,  we  come 
to  the  minute  green  plants  which  float  in  the 
ocean,  and  are  the  real  "  producers  "  by  which  the 
whole  of  its  vast  animal  population  is  supported.^ 

1  In  some  remarkable  passages  of  the  Botany  of  Sir  James 
Ross's  Antarctic  voyage,  which  took  place  half  a  century  ago, 
Sir  Josejdi  Hooker  demonstrated  the  dependence  of  the  animal 
life  of  the  sea  upon  the  minute,  indeed  microscopic,  plants 
which  float  in  it :  a  marvellous  example  of  what  may  be  done 


158   CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

Thus,  when  we  find  set.  forth  as  an  "  absolute  " 
truth  the  statement  that  the  essential  factors  in 
economic  production  are  land,  capital  and  labour 
— when  this  is  offered  as  an  axiom  whence  all 
sorts  of  other  important  truths  may  be  deduced — 
it  is  needful  to  remember  that  the  assertion  is 
true  only  with  a  qualification.  Undoubtedly  "  vital 
capital"  is  essential;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  no 
human  work  can  be  done  unless  it  exists,  not  even 
that  internal  work  of  the  body  which  is  necessary 
to  passive  life.  But,  with  respect  to  labour  (that 
is,  human  labour)  I  hope  to  have  left  no  doubt  on 
the  reader's  mind  that,  in  regard  to  production,  the 
importance  of  human  labour  may  be  so  small  as  to 
be  almost  a  vanishing  quantity.  Moreover,  it  is 
certain  that  there  is  no  approximation  to  a  fixed 
ratio  between  the  expenditure  of  labour  and  the 
production  of  that  vital  capital  which  is  the 
foundation  of  all  wealth.  For,  suppose  that  we 
introduce  into  our  suppositious  pastoral  paradise 
beasts  of  prey  and  rival  shepherds,  the  amount  of 
labour  thrown  upon  the  sheep-owner  may  increase 
almost  indefinitely,  and  its  importance  as  a  con- 
dition of  production  may  be  enormously  aug- 
mented, while  the  quantity  of  produce  remains 
stationary.      Compare    for  a  moment  the  unim- 

by  water-culture.  One  might  indulge  in  dreams  of  cultivating 
and  improving  diatoms,  until  the  domesticated  bore  the  same 
relation  to  the  wild  forms,  as  cauliflowers  to  the  primitive 
Brassica  oleracca,  without  passing  beyond  the  limits  of  fair 
gcientific  speculation. 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    159 

portance  of  the  shepherd's  labour,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances first  defined,  with  its  indispensability 
in  countries  in  which  the  water  for  the  sheep  has 
to  be  drawn  from  deep  wells,  or  in  which  the  flock 
has  to  be  defended  from  wolves  or  from  human 
depredators.  As  to  land,  it  has  been  shown 
that,  except  as  affording  mere  room  and  standing 
ground,  the  importance  of  land,  great  as  it  may 
be,  is  secondary.  The  one  thing  needful  for 
economic  production  is  the  green  plant,  as  the 
sole  producer  of  vital  capital  from  natural  inorganic 
bodies.  Men  might  exist  without  labour  (in  the 
ordinary  sense)  and  without  land ;  without  plants 
they  must  inevitably  perish. 

That  which  is  true  of  the  purely  pastoral  con- 
dition  is  a  fortiori  true  of  the  purely  agricultural  ^ 
condition,  in  which  the  existence  of  the  cultivator 
is  directly  dependent  on  the  production  of  vital 
capital  by  the  plants  which  he  cultivates.  Here, 
again,  the  condition  precedent  of  the  work  of  each 
year  is  vital  capital.  Suppose  that  a  man  lives 
exclusively  upon  the  plants  which  he  cultivates. 
It  is  obvious  that  he  must  have  food-stufis  to  live 
upon,  while  he  prepares  the  soil  for  sowing  and 
throughout  the  period  which  elapses  between  this 
and  harvest.  These  food-stuffs  must  be  yielded 
by  the  stock  remaining  over  from  former  crops. 

^  It  is  a  pity  that  we  have  no  word  that  signifies  plant-culture 
exclusively.  But  for  the  present  purpose  I  may  restrict 
agi'iculture  to  that  sense. 


160        CAPITAL — THE   MOTHER   OF   LABOUR  iv 

Tlie  result  is  the  same  as  before — the  pre-existence 
of  vital  capital  is  the  necessary  antecedent  of 
labour.  Moreover,  the  amount  of  labour  which 
contributes,  as  an  accessory  condition,  to  the  pro- 
duction of  the  crop  varies  as  widely  in  the  case  of 
plant-raising  as  in  that  of  cattle-raising.  With 
favourable  soil,  climate  and  other  conditions,  it 
may  be  very  small,  with  unfavourable,  very  great, 
for  the  same  revenue  or  yield  of  food-stuflfs. 

Thus,  I  do  not  think  it  is  possible  to  dispute  the 
following  proposition :  the  existence  of  any  man, 
or  of  any  number  of  men,  whether  organised  into  a 
polity  or  not,  depends  on  the  production  of  food- 
stuffs (that  is,  vital  capital)  readily  accessible  to 
man,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  by  plants.  But 
it  follows  that  the  number  of  men  who  can  exist, 
say  for  one  year,  on  any  given  area  of  land,  taken 
by  itself,  depends  upon  the  quantity  of  food-stuffs 
produced  by  such  plants  growing  on  the  area  in 
one  year.     If  « is  that  quantity,  and  h  the  minimum 

of  food-stuffs  required  for  each  man,   -  =  n,  the 

maximum  number  of  men  who  can  exist  on  the 
area.  Now  the  amount  of  production  (a)  is  limited 
by  the  extent  of  area  occupied  ;  by  the  quantity  of 
sunshine  which  falls  upon  the  area ;  by  the  range 
and  distribution  of  temperature  ;  by  the  force  of 
the  winds ;  by  the  supply  of  water ;  by  the  com- 
position and  the  physical  characters  of  the  soil ; 
by   animal   and   vegetable   competitors    and   de- 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   161 

stroyers.  The  labour  of  man  neither  does,  nor 
can,  produce  vital  capital ;  all  that  it  can  do  is  to 
modify,  favourably  or  unfavourably,  the  conditions 
of  its  production.  The  most  important  of  these — 
namely,  sunshine,  range  of  daily  and  nightly 
temperature,  wind — are  practically  out  of  men's 
reach.  ^  On  the  other  hand,  the  supply  of  water, 
the  physical  and  chemical  qualities  of  the  soil, 
and  the  influences  of  competitors  and  destroyers, 
can  often,  though  by  no  means  always,  be  largely 
affected  by  labour  and  skill.  And  there  is  no 
harm  in  calling  the  effect  of  such  labour  "  pro- 
duction," if  it  is  clearly  understood  that  "  produc- 
tion "  in  this  sense  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
the  "  production  "  of  food-stuffs  by  a  plant. 

We  have  been  dealing  hitherto  with  suppositions 
the  materials  of  which  are  furnished  by  everyday 
experience,  not  with  mere  a  iwiori  assumptions. 
Our  hypothetical  solitary  shepherd  with  his  flock, 
or  the  solitary  farmer  with  his  grain  field,  are 
mere  bits  of  such  experience,  cut  out,  as  it  were, 
for  easy  study.  Still  borrowing  from  daily  ex- 
perience, let  us  suppose  that  either  sheep-owner 
or  farmer,  for  any  reason  that  may  be  imagined, 

*  I  do  not  forget  electric  lighting,  greenhouses  and  hothouses, 
and  the  various  modes  of  alFovding  slielter  against  violent  winds  : 
but  in  regard  to  productiou  of  food-stuffs  on  the  large  scale  tliey 
may  be  neglected.  Even  if  synthetic  chemistry  should  effect 
the  construction  of  proteids,  tlie  Laboratory  will  hardly  enter 
into  competition  with  the  Farm  within  any  time  which  the 
present  generation  need  trouble  itself  about. 

VOL.  IX  M 


162   CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

desires  the  helj^  of  one  or  more  other  men  ;  and 
that,  in  exchange  for  their  labour,  he  offers  so 
many  sheep,  or  quarts  of  milk,  or  pounds  of 
cheese,  or  so  many  measures  of  grain,  for  a  year's 
service.  I  fail  to  discover  any  a  priori  "  rights  of 
labour  "  in  virtue  of  which  these  men  may  insist 
on  being  employed,  if  they  are  not  wanted.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  I  think  it  is  clear  that  there 
is  only  one  condition  upon  which  the  persons  to 
whom  the  offer  of  these  "  wages  "  is  made  can 
accept  it ;  and  that  is  that  the  things  offered  in 
exchange  for  a  year's  work  shall  contain  at  least 
as  much  vital  capital  as  a  man  uses  up  in  doing 
the  year's  work.  For  no  rational  man  could 
knowingly  and  willingly  accept  conditions  which 
necessarily  involve  starvation.  Therefore  there  is 
an  iiTeducible  minimum  of  wages ;  it  is  such  an 
amount  of  vital  capital  as  suffices  to  replace  the 
inevitable  consumption  of  the  person  hired.  Now, 
surely,  it  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  these  wages, 
whether  at  or  above  the  irreducible  minimum,  are 
paid  out  of  the  capital  disposable  after  the  wants 
of  the  owner  of  the  flock  or  of  the  crop  of  grain 
are  satisfied  ;  and,  from  what  has  been  said  already, 
it  follows  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the  number  of 
men,  whether  hired,  or  brought  in  in  any  otlier 
way,  who  can  be  maintained  by  the  sheepowner 
or  landowner  out  of  liis  own  resources.  Since  no 
amount  of  labour  can  produce  an  ounce  of  food- 
stuff beyond  the  maximum  producible  by  a  limited 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   163 

number  of  plants,  under  the  most  favourable 
circumstances  in  regard  to  those  conditions  whicli 
are  not  affected  by  labour,  it  follows  that,  if  the 
number  of  men  to  be  fed  increases  indefinitely,  a 
time  must  come  when  some  will  have  to  starve. 
That  is  the  essence  of  the  so-called  Malthusian 
doctrine ;  and  it  is  a  truth  which,  to  my  mind,  is 
as  plain  as  the  general  proposition  that  a  quan- 
tity which  constantly  increases  will,  some  time  or 
other,  exceed  any  greater  quantity  the  amount  of 
which  is  fixed. 

The  foregoing  considerations  leave  no  doubt 
about  the  fundamental  condition  of  the  existence 
of  any  polity,  or  organised  society  of  men,  either  in 
a  purely  pastoral  or  purely  agricultural  state,  or 
in  any  mixture  of  both  states.  It  must  possess  a 
store  of  vital  capital  to  start  with,  and  the  means 
of  repairing  the  consumption  of  that  capital  which 
takes  place  as  a  consequence  of  the  work  of  the 
members  of  the  society.  And,  if  the  polity  occu- 
pies a  completely  isolated  area  of  the  earth's 
surface,  the  numerical  strength  of  that  polity  can 
never  exceed  the  quotient  of  the  maximum 
quantity  of  food-stuffs  producible  by  the  green 
plants  on  that  area,  in  each  year,  divided  by  the 
quantity  necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  each 
person  during  the  year.  But,  there  is  a  third 
mode  of  existence  possible  to  a  polity ;  it  may, 
conceivably,  be  neither  purely  pastoral  nor  purely 
agricultural,  but  purely   manufacturing.     Let  us 

M  2 


164    CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR 


IV 


suppose  three  islands,  like  Gran  Canaria,  Teneriffe 
and  Lanzerote,  in  the  Canaries,  to  be  quite  cut  off 
from  the  rest  of  the  world.  Let  Gran  Canaria 
be  inhabited  by  grain-raisers,  Teneriffe  by  cattle- 
breeders  ;  while  the  population  of  Lanzerote 
(which  we  may  suppose  to  be  utterly  barren) 
consists  of  carpenters,  woollen  manufacturers,  and 
shoemakers.  Then  the  facts  of  daily  experience 
teach  us  that  the  people  of  Lanzerote  could  never 
have  existed  unless  they  came  to  the  island 
provided  with  a  stock  of  food-stuffs  ;  and  that 
they  could  not  continue  to  exist,  unless  that  stock, 
as  it  was  consumed,  was  made  up  by  contributions 
from  the  vital  capital  of  either  Gran  Canaria,  or 
Teneriffe,  or  both.  Moreover,  the  carpenters  of 
Lanzerote  could  do  nothing,  unless  they  were 
provided  with  wood  from  the  other  islands ;  nor 
could  the  wool  spinners  and  weavers  or  the 
shoemakers  work  without  wool  and  skins  from  the 
same  sources.  The  wood  and  the  wool  and  the 
skins  are,  in  fact,  the  capital  without  which  their 
work  as  manufacturers  in  their  respective  trades 
is  impossible — so  that  the  vital  and  other  capital 
supplied  by  Gran  Canaria  and  Teneriffe  is  most 
indubitably  the  necessary  antecedent  of  the 
industrial  labour  of  Lanzerote.  It  is  perfectly 
true  that  by  the  time  the  wood,  the  wool,  and  the 
skins  reached  Lanzerote  a  good  deal  of  labour  in 
cutting,  shearing,  skinning,  transport,  and  so  on, 
would   have   been   spent   upon  them.     But  this 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    165 

does  not  alter  the  fact  that  the  only  "  production  " 
which  is  essential  to  the  existence  of  the  popula- 
tion of  Teneriffe  and  Gran  Canaria  is  that  effected 
by  the  green  plants  in  both  islands ;  and  that  all 
the  labour  spent  upon  the  raw  produce  useful  in 
manufacture,  directly  or  indirectly  yielded  by 
them — by  the  inhabitants  of  these  islands  and 
by  those  of  Lanzerote  into  the  bargain — will  not 
provide  one  sohtary  Lanzerotian  with  a  dinner, 
unless  the  Teneriffians  and  Canariotes  happen  to 
want  his  goods  and  to  be  willing  to  give  some  of 
their  vital  capital  in  exchange  for  them. 

Under  the  circumstances  defined,  if  Teneriffe 
and  Gran  Canaria  disappeared,  or  if  their  inhabit- 
ants ceased  to  care  for  carpentry,  clothing,  or 
shoes,  the  people  of  Lanzerote  must  starve.  But 
if  they  wish  to  buy,  then  the  Lanzerotians,  by 
"  cultivating "  the  buyers,  indirectly  favour  the 
cultivation  of  the  produce  of  those  buyers. 

Thus,  if  the  question  is  asked  whether  the 
labour  employed  in  manufacture  in  Lanzerote  is 
"  productive  "  or  "  unproductive  "  there  can  be  only 
one  reply.  If  anybody  will  exchange  vital  capital, 
or  that  which  can  be  exchanged  for  vital  capital, 
for  Lanzerote  goods,  it  is  productive  ;  if  not,  it  is 
unproductive. 

In  the  case  of  the  manuftxcturer,  the  dependence 
of  labour  upon  capital  is  still  more  intimate  than 
in  that  of  the  herdsman  or  agriculturist.  When 
the  latter  are  once  started  they  can  go  on,  without 


IGG        CAPITAL — THE    MOTHER    OF   LABOUR  iv 

troubling  themselves  about  the  existence  of  any 
other  people.  But  the  manufacturer  depends  on 
pre-existing  capital,  not  only  at  the  beginning,  but 
at  the  end  of  his  operations.  HoAvever  gi'eat  the 
expenditure  of  his  labour  and  of  his  skill,  the 
result,  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  his  exist- 
ence, is  just  the  same  as  if  he  had  done  nothing, 
unless  there  is  a  customer  able  and  wilHng  to 
exchange  food-stuflfs  for  that  which  his  labour  and 
skill  have  achieved. 

There  is  another  point  concerning  which  it  is 
very  necessary  to  have  clear  ideas.  Suppose  a 
carpenter  in  Lanzerote  to  be  engaged  in  making 
chests  of  drawers.  Let  us  suppose  that  a,  the 
timber,  and  h,  the  grain  and  meat  needful  for  the 
man's  sustenance  until  he  can  finish  a  chest  of 
drawers,  have  to  be  paid  for  by  that  chest. 
Then  the  capital  with  which  he  starts  is  repre- 
sented by  a  +  1).  He  coidd  not  start  at  all  unless 
he  had  it ;  day  by  day,  he  must  destroy  more  or 
less  of  the  substance  and  of  the  general  adapta- 
bility of  a  in  order  to  work  it  up  into  the  special 
forms  needed  to  constitute  the  chest  of  drawers ; 
and,  day  by  day,  he  must  use  up  at  least  so  much 
of  l  as  will  replace  his  loss  of  vital  capital  by  the 
work  of  that  day.  Suppose  it  takes  the  car- 
penter and  his  workmen  ten  days  to  saw  up  the 
timber,  to  plane  the  boards,  and  to  give  them  the 
shape  and  size  proper  for  the  various  parts  of  the 
chest   of  drawers.     And    suppose   that   he   then 


lY     CAPITAL— THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    ICu 

offers  his  heap  of  boards  to  the  advancer  of  a  +  h  as 
an  equivalent  for  the  wood  +  ten  days'  supply  of 
vital  capital  ?  The  latter  will  surely  say :  "  No. 
I  did  not  ask  for  a  heap  of  boards.  I  asked  for  a 
chest  of  drawers.  Up  to  this  time,  so  far  as  I  am 
concerned,  you  have  done  nothing  and  are  as 
much  in  my  debt  as  ever."  And  if  the  carpenter 
maintained  that  he  had  "  virtually  "  created  two- 
thirds  of  a  chest  of  drawers,  inasmuch  as  it  would 
take  only  five  days  more  to  put  together  the  pieces 
of  wood,  and  that  the  heap  of  boards  ought  to 
be  accepted  as  the  equivalent  of  two-thirds  of  his 
debt,  I  am  afraid  the  creditor  would  regard  him 
as  little  better  than  an  impudent  swindler.  It 
obviously  makes  no  sort  of  difference  whether  the 
Canariote  or  Teneriffian  buyer  advanced  the  wood 
and  the  food-stuffs,  on  which  the  carpenter  had  to 
maintain  himself;  or  whether  the  carpenter  had  a 
stock  of  both,  the  consumption  of  which  must  be 
recouped  by  the  exchange  of  a  chest  of  drawers  for 
a  fresh  supply.  In  the  latter  case,  it  is  even  less 
doubtful  that,  if  the  carpenter  offered  his  boards 
to  the  man  who  wanted  a  chest  of  drawers,  the 
latter  would  laugh  in  his  face.  And  if  he  took 
the  chest  of  drawers  for  himself,  then  so  much  of 
his  vital  capital  would  be  sunk  in  it  past  recovery. 
Again,  the  payment  of  goods  in  a  lump,  for  the 
chest  of  drawers,  comes  to  the  same  thing  as  the 
papnent  of  daily  wages  for  the  fifteen  days  that 


168        CAPITAL — THE    MOTHER    OF    LABOUR  iv 

the  carpenter  was  occupied  in  making  it.     If,  at 
the  end  of  each  day,  the  carpenter  chose  to  say  to 
himself  ''  I  have  '  virtually '  created,  by  my  day's 
labour,  a  fifteenth  of  what  I  shall  get  for  the  chest 
of  drawers — therefore  my  wages  are  the  produce  of 
my  day's  labour  "' — there  is  no  great  harm  in  such 
metaphorical  speech,  so  long  as  the  poor  man  does 
not  delude  himself  into  the  supposition  that  it 
represents  the  exact  truth.     "  Virtually  "  is  apt  to 
cover  more  intellectual  sins  than  "  charity  "  does 
moral  delicts.     After  what  has  been  said,  it  surely 
must  be  plain  enough  that  each  day's  work  has 
involved  the  consumption  of  the  carpenter's  vital 
capital,  and  the  fashioning  of  his  timber,  at  the 
expense   of  more   or   less   consumption  of  those 
forms  of  capital.     Whether  the  a  +  &  to  be  ex- 
changed for  the  chest  has  been  advanced  as  a  loan, 
or  is  23aid  daily  or  weekly  as  wages,  or,  at  some 
later  time,  as  the  price  of  a  finished  commodity — 
the  essential  element  of  the  transaction,  and  the 
only  essential  element,  is,  that  it  must,  at  least, 
effect  the  replacement  of  the  vital  capital  con- 
sumed.    Neither  boards  nor  chest  of  drawers  are 
eatable ;    and,  so   far  from  the  carpenter  having 
produced  the  essential  part  of  his  wages  by  each 
day's  labour,  he  has  merely  Avasted  that  labour, 
unless  somebody  who  happens  to  want  a  chest  of 
drawers  offers  to  exchange  vital  capital,  or  some- 
thing  that    can    procure    it,    equivalent    to    the 


IV     CAPITAL— THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   169 

amount  consumed  during  the  process  of  manu- 
facture.^ 

That  it  should  be  necessary,  at  this  time  of  day, 
to  set  forth  such  elementary  truths  as  these  may 
well  seem  strange  ;  but  no  one  who  consults  that  in- 
teresting museum  of  political  delusions,  "  Progress 
and  Poverty,"  some  of  the  treasures  of  which  I 
have  already  brought  to  light,  will  doubt  the 
fact,  if  he  bestows  proper  attention  upon  the 
first  book  of  that  widely-read  work.  At  page  15 
it  is  thus  written  : 

The  proposition  I  shall  endeavour  to  prove  is  :  that  wages, 
instead  of  being  drawn  from  capital,  are,  in  reality,  drawn  from 
the  product  of  the  labour  for  which  they  are  paid. 

Again  at  page  18  : — 

In  every  case  in  which  labour  is  exchanged  for  commodities, 
production  really  precedes  enjoyment  .  .  .  wages  are  the 
earnings — that  is  to  say,  the  makings— of  labour — not  the 
advances  of  capital. 

And  the  proposition  which  the  author  en- 
deavours to  disprove  is  the  hitherto  generally 
accepted  doctrine 

that  labour  is  maintained  and  paid  out  of  existing  capital, 
before  the  product  which  constitutes  the  ultimate  object  is 
secured  (p.  16). 

The  doctrine  respecting  the  relation  of  capital 
and  wages,  which  is  thus  opposed  in  "  Progi'ess  and 

^  See  the  discussion  of  this  subject  further  on. 


170   CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

Poverty,"  is  that  illustrated  in  the  foregoing  pages ; 
the  truth  of  which,  I  conceive,  must  be  plain  to 
any  one  Avho  has  apprehended  the  very  simple 
arguments  by  which  I  have  endeavoured  to 
demonstrate  it.  One  conclusion  or  the  other 
must  be  hopelessly  wrong  ;  and,  even  at  the  cost  of 
going  once  more  over  some  of  the  ground  traversed 
in  this  essay  and  that  on  "  Natural  and  Political 
Rights,"  ^  I  propose  to  show  that  the  en'or  lies  with 
"  Progress  and  Poverty"  ;  in  which  work,  so  far  as 
political  science  is  concerned,  the  poverty  is,  to 
my  eye,  much  more  apparent  than  the  progress. 

To  begin  at  the  beginning.  The  author  pro- 
pounds a  definition  of  wealth  :  "  Nothing  which 
nature  supplies  to  man  without  his  labour  is 
wealth  "  (p.  28).  Wealth  consists  of  "  natural  sub- 
stances or  products  which  have  been  adapted  by 
human  labour  to  human  use  or  gratification,  their 
value  depending  upon  the  amount  of  labour  which, 
upon  the  average,  would  be  required  to  produce 
things  of  like  kind"  (p.  27).  The  following 
examples  of  wealth  are  given  : — 

Buildings,  cattle,  tools,  macliinery,  agricultural  and  mineral 
products,  manufactured  goods,  ships,  waggons,  furniture,  and 
the  like  (p.  27). 

I   take  it  that  native  metals,  coal  and  brick 

clay,  are  "  mineral  products  "  ;  and  I  quite  believe 

that  they   are   properly  termed   "  wealth."     But 

when  a  seam  of  coal  crops  out  at  the  surface,  and 

^  Collected  Essays,  vol.  i.  pp.  359-382. 


IV     CAPITAL— THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   171 

lumps  of  coal  arc  to  be  had  for  the  picking  up ; 
or  when  native  copper  lies  about  in  nuggets,  or 
when  brick  clay  forms  a  superficial  stratum,  it 
appears  to  me  that  these  things  are  supplied  to, 
nay  almost  thrust  upon,  man  without  his  labour. 
According  to  the  definition,  therefore,  they  are  not 
"  wealth."  According  to  the  enumeration,  however, 
they  are  "  wealth  "  :  a  tolerably  fair  specimen  of  a 
contradiction  in  terms.  Or  does  "  Progress  and 
Poverty "  really  suggest  that  a  coal  seam  which 
crops  out  at  the  surface  is  not  wealth ;  but  that  if 
somebody  breaks  off  a  j)iece  and  carries  it  away, 
the  bestowal  of  this  amount  of  labour  upon  that 
particular  lump  makes  it  wealth  ;  while  the  rest 
remains  "  not  wealth "  ?  The  notion  that  the 
value  of  a  thing  bears  any  necessary  relation  to 
the  amount  of  labour  (average  or  otherwise)  be- 
stowed upon  it,  is  a  fallacy  which  needs  no  further 
refutation  than  it  has  already  received.  The  average 
amount  of  labour  bestowed  upon  warming-pans 
confers  no  value  upon  them  in  the  eyes  of  a  Gold- 
Coast  negro  ;  nor  would  an  Esquimaux  give  a  slice 
of  blubber  for  the  most  elaborate  of  ice-machines. 
So  much  for  the  doctrine  of  "  Progress  and 
Poverty"  touching  the  nature  of  wealth.  Let 
us  now  consider  its  teachings  respecting  capital 
as  wealth  or  a  part  of  wealth.  Adam  Smith's 
definition  "  that  part  of  a  man's  stock  which 
he  expects  to  yield  him  a  revenue  is  called  his 
capital"   is  quoted  with   approval  (jx  32);   else- 


172   CAPITAL— THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

where  capital  is  said  to  be  that  part  of  wealth 
"  which  is  devoted  to  the  aid  of  production  "  (p. 
28) ;  and  yet  again  it  is  said  to  be 

wealth  in  course  of  exchange,'^  understanding  exchange  to 
include,  not  merely  the  passing  from  hand  to  hand,  hut  also 
such  transmutations  as  occur  Avhcn  the  reproductive  or  trans- 
forming forces  of  nature  are  utilised  for  the  increase  of  wealth 
(p.  32). 

But  if  too  much  pondering  over  the  possible 
senses  and  scope  of  these  definitions  should  weary 
the  reader,  he  will  be  relieved  by  the  following 
acknowledgment : — 

Nor  is  the   definition  of  capital    I   have   suggested   of  any 
importance  (p.  33). 

The  author  informs  us,  in  fact,  that  he  is  "  not 
writing  a  text-book,"  thereby  intimating  his 
opinion  that  it  is  less  important  to  be  clear  and 
accurate  when  you  are  trying  to  bring  about  a 
political  revolution  than  when  a  merely  academic 
interest  attaches  to  the  subject  treated.  But  he 
is  not  busy  about  anything  so  serious  as  a  text- 
book :  no,  he  "  is  only  attempting  to  discover  the 
laws  which  control  a  great  social  problem" — a 
mode  of  expression  which  indicates  perhaps  the 
high-water  mark  of  intellectual  muddlement.  I 
have  heard,  in  my  time,  of  "  laws  "  which  control 
other  *'  laws " ;  but  this  is  the  first  occasion  on 
which  "  laws  "  which  "  control  a  problem  "  have 
come  under  my  notice.  Even  the  disquisitions  "  of 
^  The  italics  are  the  author's. 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   173 

those  flabby  writers  who  have  burdened  the  press 
and  darkened  counsel  by  numerous  volumes  which 
are  dubbed  political  economy  "  (p.  28)  could  hardly 
furnish  their  critics  with  a  finer  specimen  of  that 
which  a  hero  of  the  "  Dunciad,"  by  the  one  flash  of 
genius  recorded  of  him,  called  "  clotted  nonsense." 
Doubtless  it  is  a  sign  of  grace  that  the  author 
of  these  definitions  should  attach  no  importance 
to  any  of  them;  but  since,  unfortunately,  his 
whole  argument  turns  upon  the  tacit  assumption 
that  they  are  important,  I  may  not  pass  them 
over  so  lightly.  The  third  I  give  up.  Why  any- 
thing should  be  capital  when  it  is  "  in  course  of 
exchange,"  and  not  be  capital  under  other  circum- 
stances, passes  my  understanding.  We  are  told 
that  "  that  part  of  a  farmer's  crop  held  for  sale  or 
for  seed,  or  to  feed  his  help,  in  part  payment  of 
wages,  would  be  accounted  capital ;  that  held  for 
tlie  care  of  his  family  would  not  be  "  (p.  31).  But 
I  fail  to  discover  any  ground  of  reason  or  authority 
for  the  doctrine  that  it  is  only  when  a  crop  is 
about  to  be  sold  or  sown,  or  given  as  wages,  that 
it  may  be  called  capital.  On  the  contrary,  whether 
we  consider  custom  or  reason,  so  much  of  it  as  is 
stored  away  in  ricks  and  barns  during  harvest, 
and  remains  there  to  be  used  in  any  of  these  ways 
montlis  or  years  afterwards,  is  customarily  and 
rightly  termed  capita-l.  Surely,  the  meaning  of  tlie 
clumsy  phrase  that  capital  is  "  wealth  in  the  course 
of  exchange  "  must  be  that  it  is  "  wealth  capable  of 


174    CAPITAL— THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

being  exchanged  "  against  labour  or  anything  else. 
That,  in  fact,  is  the  equivalent  of  tlie  second 
definition,  that  capital  is  "that  part  of  wealth 
which  is  devoted  to  the  aid  of  production." 
Obviously,  if  you  possess  that  for  which  men  will 
give  labour,  you  can  aid  production  by  means  of 
that  labour.  And,  again,  it  agrees  with  the  first 
definition  (borrowed  from  Adam  Smith)  that 
capital  is  "  that  part  of  a  man's  stock  which  he 
expects  to  yield  him  a  revenue."  For  a  revenue 
is  both  etymologically  and  in  sense  a  "return." 
A  man  gives  his  labour  in  sowing  grain,  or  in 
tending  cattle,  because  he  expects  a  "  return  " — a 
"revenue" — in  the  shape  of  the  increase  of  the 
grain  or  of  the  herd ;  and  also,  in  the  latter  case, 
in  the  shape  of  their  labour  and  manure  which 
"  aid  the  production  "  of  such  increase.  The  grain 
and  cattle  of  which  he  is  possessed  immediately 
after  harvest  is  his  capital ;  and  his  revenue  for  the 
twelvemonth,  until  the  next  harvest,  is  the  surplus 
of  grain  and  cattle  over  and  above  the  amount 
with  which  he  started.  This  is  disposable  for 
any  purpose  for  which  he  may  desire  to  use  it, 
leaving  him  just  as  well  off  as  he  was  at  the 
beginning  of  the  year.  Whether  the  man  keeps 
the  surplus  grain  for  sowing  more  land,  and  the 
surplus  cattle  for  occupying  more  pasture  ;  whether 
lie  exchanges  them  for  other  commodities,  such 
as  the  use  of  the  land  (as  rent);  or  labour  (as 
wages);    or   whether   he   feeds   himself  and   his 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   l75 

family,  in  no  way  alters  their  nature  as  revenue, 
or  affects  tlie  ftict  that  this  revenue  is  merely 
disposable  capital. 

That  (even  apart  from  etymology)  cattle  are 
typical  examples  of  capital  cannot  be  denied 
("  Progress  and  Poverty,"  p.  25) ;  and  if  we  seek 
for  that  particular  quality  of  cattle  which  makes 
them  "  capital,"  neither  has  the  author  of  "  Pro- 
gress and  Poverty"  supplied,  nor  is  any  one  else 
very  likely  to  supply,  a  better  account  of  the 
matter  than  Adam  Smith  has  done.  Cattle  are 
"  capital "  because  they  are  "  stock  which  yields 
revenue."  That  is  to  say,  they  afford  to  their 
owner  a  supply  of  that  which  he  desires  to  pos- 
sess. And,  in  this  particular  case,  the  "  revenue  " 
is  not  only  desirable,  but  of  supreme  importance, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  capable  of  maintaining  human 
life.  The  herd  yields  a  revenue  of  food-stuffs  as 
milk  and  meat ;  a  revenue  of  skins ;  a  revenue  of 
manure ;  a  revenue  of  labour ;  a  revenue  of  ex- 
changeable commodities  in  the  shape  of  these 
things,  as  well  as  in  that  of  live  cattle.  In  each 
and  all  of  these  capacities  cattle  are  capital ;  and, 
conversely,  things  which  possess  any  or  all  of 
these  capacities  are  capital. 

Therefore  what  we  find  at  page  25  of  "  Progress 
and  Poverty "  must  be  regarded  as  a  welcome 
lapse  into  clearness  of  apprehension  : — 

A  fertile  field,  a  rich  vein  of  ore,  a  falling  stream  which  sup- 
plies power,  may  give  the  possessor  advantages  equivalent  to  the 


176         CAPITAL — THE    MOTHER   OF    LABOUR  iv 

possession  of  capital  ;  Ijut  to  class  such  thiugs  as  capital  would 
Ise  to  put  an  end  to  the  distinction  between  land  and  capital. 

Just  SO.  But  the  fatal  truth  is  that  these  things 
are  capital;  and  that  there  really  is  no  funda- 
mental distinction  between  land  and  capital.  Is 
it  denied  that  a  fertile  held,  a  rich  vein  of  ore,  or 
a  falling  stream,  may  form  part  of  a  man's  stock, 
and  that,  if  they  do,  they  are  caj^able  of  yielding 
revenue  ?  Will  not  somebody  pay  a  share  of  the 
produce  in  kind,  or  in  money,  for  the  privilege  of 
cultivating  the  first ;  royalties  for  that  of  working 
the  second;  and  a  like  equivalent  for  that  of 
erecting  a  mill  on  the  third  ?  In  what  sense,  then, 
are  these  things  less  "  capital "  than  the  buildings 
and  tools  which  on  page  27  of  "  Progress  and 
Poverty  "  are  admitted  to  be  capital  ?  Is  it  not 
plain  that  if  these  things  confer  "  advantages 
equivalent  to  the  possession  of  capital,"  and  if  the 
"  advantage  "  of  capital  is  nothing  but  the  yielding 
of  revenue,  then  the  denial  that  they  are  capital 
is  merely  a  roundabout  way  of  self-contradiction  ? 
All  this  confused  talk  about  capital,  however, 
is  lucidity  itself  compared  with  the  exposition  of 
the  remarkable  thesis,  "  Wages  not  drawn  from 
capital,  but  produced  by  labour,"  which  occupies 
the  third  chapter  of  "  Progress  and  Poverty." 

If,  for  instance,  I  devote  my  labour  to  gathering  birds'  eggs 
or  picking  wild  berries,  the  eggs  or  berries  I  thus  get  are  my  wages. 
Surely  no  one  will  contend  that,  in  such  a  case,  wages  are 
diawu  from  capital.     There  is  no  capital  in  the  case  (p.  34). 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    177 

Nevertheless,  those  who  have  followed  what  has 
been  said  in  the  first  part  of  this  essay  surely 
neither  will,  nor  can,  have  any  hesitation  about 
substantially  adopting  the  challenged  contention, 
though  they  may  possibly  have  qualms  as  to  the 
propriety  of  the  use  of  the  term  "  wages."  ^  They 
will  have  no  difficulty  in  apprehending  the  fact 
that  birds'  eggs  and  berries  are  stores  of  food- 
stuffs, or  vital  capital ;  that  the  man  who  devotes 
his  labour  to  getting  them  does  so  at  the  expense 
of  his  personal  vital  capital ;  and  that,  if  the  eggs 
and  the  berries  are  "  wages"  for  his  work,  they  are  so 
because  they  enable  him  to  restore  to  his  organism 
the  vital  capital  which  he  has  consumed  in  doing 
the  work  of  collection.  So  that  there  is  really  a 
great  deal  of  "  capital  in  the  case." 
Our  author  j)roceeds  : — 

An  absolutely  naked  man,  thrown  on  an  island  where  no 
human  being  has  before  trod,  may  gather  birds'  eggs  or  pick 
berries  (p.  34). 

No  doubt.  But  those  who  have  followed  my 
argument  thus  far  will  be  aware  that  a  man's 
vital  capital  does  not  reside  in  his  clothes ;  and, 
therefore,  they  will  probably  fail,  as  completely  as 
I  do,  to  discover  the  relevancy  of  the  statement. 


1  Not  merely  on  the  grounds  stated  below,  but  on  the 
strength  of  Mr.  George's  own  definition.  Does  the  gatherer  of 
eggs,  or  berries,  2^i'odiicc  them  by  his  labour  ?  If  so,  what  do 
the  hens  and  the  bushes  do  'i 

VOL.  IX  N 


178   CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

Again : — 

Or,  if  I  t<ake  a  piece  of  leather  and  work  it  up  into  a  pair  of 
shoes,  the  shoes  are  my  wages— the  reward  of  my  exertion. 
Surely  they  are  not  drawn  from  capital— either  my  capital  or 
anybody  else's  capital— but  are  brought  into  existence  by  the 
labour  of  which  they  became  the  wages  ;  and,  in  obtaining  this 
pair  of  shoes  as  the  wages  of  my  labour,  capital  is  not  even 
momentarily  lessened  one  iota.  For  if  we  call  in  the  idea  of 
capital,  my  capital  at  the  beginning  consists  of  the  piece  of 
leather,  the  thread,  &c.  (p.  34). 

It  takes  away  one's  breath  to  have  such  a  con- 
catenation of  fallacies  administered  in  the  space 
of  half  a  paragraph.  It  does  not  seem  to  have 
occurred  to  our  economical  reformer  to  imagine 
whence  his  "  capital  at  the  beginning,"  the  "  leather, 
thread,  &c."  came.  I  venture  to  suppose  that 
leather  to  have  been  originally  cattle-skin ;  and 
since  calves  and  oxen  are  not  flayed  alive,  the 
existence  of  the  leather  implies  the  lessening  of 
that  form  of  capital  by  a  very  considerable  iota. 
It  is,  therefore,  as  sure  as  anything  can  be  that, 
in  the  long  run,  the  shoes  are  drawn  from  that 
which  is  capital  jx«'  excellence ;  to  wit,  cattle.  It 
is  further  beyond  doubt  that  the  operation  of 
tanning  must  involve  loss  of  capital  in  the  shape 
of  bark,  to  say  nothing  of  other  losses ;  and  that 
the  use  of  the  awls  and  knives  of  the  shoemaker 
involves  loss  of  capital  in  the  shajDe  of  the  store  of 
iron ;  further,  the  shoemaker  has  been  enabled  to 
do  his  work  not  only  by  the  vital  capital  expended 
during  the  time  occupied  in  making  the  pair  of 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   179 

shoes,  but  by  that  expended  from  the  time  of  his 
birth,  up  to  the  time  that  he  earned  wages  that 
would  keep  him  aKve. 

"  Progress  and  Poverty  "  continues  : — 

As  my  labour  goes  on,  value  is  steadily  added  until,  when  my 
labour  results  in  the  finished  shoes,  I  have  my  capital  plus  the 
difference  in  value  between  the  material  and  the  shoes.  In 
obtaining  this  additional  value — my  wages — how  is  capital,  at 
any  time,  drawn  upon  ?  (p.  34). 

In  return  we  may  inquire,  how  can  any  one 
propound  sucii  a  question  ?  Capital  is  drawn 
upon  all  the  time.  Not  only  when  the  shoes  are 
commenced,  but  while  they  are  being  made,  and 
until  they  are  either  used  by  the  shoemaker  him- 
self or  are  purchased  by  somebody  else ;  that  is, 
exchanged  for  a  portion  of  another  man's  capital. 
In  fact  (supposing  that  the  shoemaker  does  not 
want  shoes  himself),  it  is  the  existence  of  vital 
capital  in  the  possession  of  another  person  and  the 
willingness  of  that  person  to  part  with  more  or 
less  of  it  in  exchange  for  the  shoes — it  is  these 
two  conditions,  alone,  which  prevent  the  shoe- 
maker from  having  consumed  his  capital  unpro- 
ductively,  just  as  much  as  if  he  had  spent  his 
time  in  chopping  up  the  leather  into  minute 
fragments. 

Thus,  the  examination  of  the  very  case  selected 
by  the  advocate  of  the  doctrine  that  labour  be- 
stowed upon  manufacture,  without  any  interven- 
tion of  capital,  can  produce  wages,  proves  to  be  a 

N  2 


180    CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     iv 

delusion  of  the  first  magnitude ;  even  though  it 
be  supported  by  the  dictum  of  Adam  Smith  which 
is  quoted  in  its  favour  (p.  34) — 

The  produce  of  labour  constitutes  the  natural  recompense  or 
wages  of  labour.  In  that  original  state  of  things  which  precedes 
both  the  appropriation  of  land  and  the  accumulation  of  stock, 
the  whole  produce  of  labour  belongs  to  the  labourer.  He  has 
neither  landlord  nor  master  to  share  with  him  (""Wealth  of 
Nations,"  ch,  viii. ). 

But  the  whole  of  this  passage  exhibits  the  in- 
fluence of  the  French  Physiocrats  by  whom  Adam 
Smith  was  inspired,  at  their  worst ;  that  is  to  say, 
when  they  most  completely  forsook  the  ground  of 
experience  for  a  'priori  speculation.  The  confident 
reference  to  "  that  original  state  of  things "  is 
quite  in  the  manner  of  the  Essai  sur  VInigaliU. 
Now,  the  state  of  men  before  the  "  appropriation 
of  land  "  and  the  "  accumulation  of  stock  "  must 
surely  have  been  that  of  purely  savage  hunters. 
As,  by  the  supposition,  nobody  would  have 
possessed  land,  certainly  no  man  could  have  had 
a  landlord ;  and,  if  there  was  no  accumulation  of 
stock  in  a  transferable  form,  as  surely  there  could 
be  no  master,  in  the  sense  of  hirer.  But  hirer 
and  hire  (that  is,  wages)  are  correlative  terms, 
like  mother  and  child.  As  "child"  implies 
"  mother,"  so  does  "  hire  "  or  "  wages  "  imjDly  a 
•'  hirer  "  or  "  wage-giver."  Therefore,  when  a  man 
in  "  the  original  state  of  things  "  gathered  fruit  or 
killed  game   for  his  own  sustenance,  the  fruit  or 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   181 

the  game  could  be  called  his  "  wages "  only  in  a 
figurative  sense ;  as  one  sees  if  the  term  "  hire," 
which  has  a  more  limited  connotation,  is  substi- 
tuted for  "  wage."  If  not,  it  must  be  assumed 
that  the  savage  hired  himself  to  get  his  own 
dinner;  whereby  we  are  led  to  the  tolerably 
absurd  conclusion  that,  as  in  the  "  state  of  nature  " 
he  was  his  own  employer,  the  "  master  "  and  the 
labourer,  in  that  model  age,  appropriated  the  pro- 
duce in  equal  shares  !  And  if  this  should  be  not 
enough,  it  has  already  been  seen  that,  in  the 
hunting  state,  man  is  not  even  an  accessory  of 
production  of  vital  capital;  he  merely  consumes 
what  nature  produces. 

According  to  the  author  of  "  Progress  and 
Poverty  "  political  economists  have  been  deluded 
by  a  "  fallacy  which  has  entangled  some  of  the 
most  acute  minds  in  a  web  of  their  own  spinning." 

It  is  in  the  use  of  the  term  capital  in  two  senses.  In  the 
primary  proposition  that  capital  is  necessary  to  the  exertion  of 
productive  labour,  the  term  "  capital  "  is  understood  as  including 
all  food,  clothing,  shelter,  &c.  ;  whereas  in  the  deductions 
finally  drawn  from  it,  the  term  is  used  in  its  common  and 
legitimate  meaning  of  wealth  devoted,  not  to  the  immediate 
gratification  of  desire,  but  to  the  procurement  of  more  wealth — 
of  wealth  in  the  hands  of  employers  as  distinguished  from 
labourers  (p.  40). 

I  am  by  no  means  concerned  to  defend  the 
political  economists  who  are  thus  charged  with 
blundering ;  but  I  shall  be  surprised  to  learn  that 
any  have  carried  tlie  art  of  self-entanglement  to 


182        CAPITxVL — THE    MOTHER   OF    LABOUR  iv 

the  degree  of  ^^erfection  exhibited  by  this  passage. 
Who  lias  ever  imagined  that  ^Yealth  Avhich,  in  tlie 
hands  of  an  employer,  is  capital,  ceases  to  be  capital 
if  it  is  in  the  hands  of  a  labom^er?  Suppose 
a  workman  to  be  paid  thirty  shillings  on  Saturday 
evening  for  six  days'  labour,  that  thirty  shillings 
comes  out  of  the  employer's  capital,  and  receives 
the  name  of  "  wages "  simply  because  it  is  ex- 
changed for  labour.  In  the  workman's  pocket, 
as  he  goes  home,  it  is  a  part  of  his  capital,  in 
exactly  the  same  sense  as,  half  an  hour  before,  it 
was  part  of  the  employer's  capital ;  he  is  a 
capitalist  just  as  much  as  if  he  Avere  a  Rothschild. 
Suppose  him  to  be  a  single  man,  whose  cooking 
and  household  matters  are  attended  to  by  the 
people  of  the  house  in  which  he  has  a  room  ; 
then  the  rent  which  he  pays  them  out  of  this 
capital  is,  in  part,  wages  for  their  labour,  and  he 
is,  so  far,  an  employer.  If  he  saves  one  shilling 
out  of  his  thirty,  he  has,  to  that  extent,  added  to 
his  capital  when  the  next  Saturday  comes  round. 
And  if  he  puts  his  saved  shillings  week  by  week 
into  the  Savings  Bank,  the  difference  between  him 
and  the  most  bloated  of  bankers  is  simply  one  of 
degree. 

At  page  42,  we  arc  confidently  told  that 
"  labourers  by  receiving  wages "  cannot  lessen 
"  even  temporarily  "  the  "  capital  of  the  employer," 
while  at  page  44  it  is  admitted  that  in  certain 
cases  the  capitalist  "  pays  out  cajDital   in  wages." 


IV  CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    183 

One  would  think  that  the  "  paying  out "  of 
capital  is  hardly  possible  without  at  least  a 
"  temporary  "  diminution  of  the  capital  from  which 
payment  is  made.  But  "  Progress  and  Poverty  " 
changes  all  that  by  a  little  verbal  legerdemain  : — 

For  where  wages  are  paid  before  the  object  of  the  labour  is 
obtained,  or  is  finished— as  in  agriculture,  where  ploughing  and 
sowing  must  precede  by  several  months  the  harvesting  of  the 
crop  ;  as  in  the  erection  of  buildings,  the  construction  of  ships, 
railroads,  canals,  &c. — it  is  clear  that  the  owners  of  the  capital 
paid  in  wages  cannot  expect  an  immediate  return,  but,  as  the 
phrase  is,  nuist  "outlay  it  "  or  "lie  out  of  it  "  for  a  time  which 
sometimes  amounts  to  many  years.  And  hence,  if  first  princi- 
ples are  not  kept  in  mind,  it  is  easy  to  jump  to  the  conclusion 
that  wages  are  advanced  by  capital  (p.  44). 

Those  who  have  paid  attention  to  the  argument 
of  former  j)arts  of  this  paper  may  not  be  able  to 
understand  how,  if  sound  "  first  princij)les  are 
kept  in  mind,"  any  other  conclusion  can  be 
reached,  whether  by  jumping,  or  by  any  other 
mode  of  logical  progression.  But  the  first  principle 
which  our  author  "  keeps  in  mind  "  2:>ossesses  just 
that  amount  of  ambiguity  which  enables  him  to 
play  hocus-pocus  Avith  it.  It  is  this ;  that  "  the 
creation  of  value  does  not  dej^end  upon  the  fin- 
ishing of  the  product  "  (p.  44). 

There  is  no  doubt  that,  under  certain  limitations, 
this  proposition  is  correct.  It  is  not  true  that 
"  labour  always  adds  to  capital  by  its  exertion 
before   it   takes  from   capital  its  wages"  (p.  44)> 


184        CAPITAL — THE    MOTHER    OF   LABOUR  iv 

but  it  is  true  that  it  may,  and  often  does,  produce 
that  effect. 

To  take  one  of  tlie  examples  given,  the  con- 
struction of  a  ship.  The  shaping  of  the  timbers 
undoubtedly  gives  them  a  value  (for  a  shipbuilder) 
which  they  did  not  possess  before.  When  they 
are  put  together  to  constitute  the  framework  of 
the  ship,  there  is  a  still  further  addition  of  value 
(for  a  shipbuilder) ;  and  when  the  outside  planking 
is  added,  there  is  another  addition  (for  a  ship- 
builder). Suppose  everything  else  about  the  hull 
is  finished,  exce^Dt  the  one  little  item  of  caulking 
the  seams,  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  has  still 
more  value  for  a  shij^builder.  But  for  whom  else 
has  it  any  value,  except  perhaps  for  a  fire-wood 
merchant  ?  What  price  will  any  one  who  wants 
a  shii^ — that  is  to  say,  something  that  will  carry  a 
cargo  from  one  port  to  another — give  for  the  un- 
finished vessel  which  would  take  water  in  at 
every  seam  and  go  down  in  half  an  hour,  if  she 
were  launched  ?  Supjoose  the  shipbuilder  s  capital 
to  fail  before  the  vessel  is  caulked,  and  that  he 
cannot  find  another  shipbuilder  who  cares  to  buy 
and  finish  it,  what  sort  of  proi:>ortion  does  the 
value  created  by  the  labour,  for  which  he  has  paid 
out  of  his  capital,  stand  to  that  of  his  advances  ? 
Surely  no  one  Avill  give  him  one-tenth  of  the 
capital  disbursed  in  wages,  perhaps  not  so  much 
even  as  the  prime  cost  of  the  raw  materials. 
Therefore,  though  the  assertion  that "  the  creation 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR   185 

of  value  does  not  depend  on  the  finishing  of  the 
product"  may  be  strictly  true  under  certain  cir- 
cumstances, it  need  not  be  and  is  not  always  true. 
And,  if  it  is  meant  to  imply  or  suggest  that  the 
creation  of  value  in  a  manufactured  article  does 
not  depend  upon  the  finishing  of  that  article,  a 
more  serious  error  could  hardly  be  propounded. 

Is  there  not  a  prodigious  difference  in  the  value 
of  an  uncaulked  and  in  that  of  a  finished  ship ; 
between  the  value  of  a  house  in  which  only  the 
tiles  of  the  roof  are  wanting  and  a  finished  house  ; 
between  that  of  a  clock  which  only  lacks  the 
escapement  and  a  finished  clock  ? 

As  ships,  house,  and  clock,  the  unfinished 
articles  have  no  value  whatever — that  is  to  say, 
no  person  who  wanted  to  purchase  one  of  these 
things,  for  immediate  use,  would  give  a  farthing 
for  either.  The  only  value  they  can  have,  apart 
from  that  of  the  materials  they  contain,  is 
that  which  they  possess  for  some  one  who  can 
finish  them,  or  for  some  one  who  can  make  use 
of  parts  of  them  for  the  construction  of  other 
things.  A  man  might  buy  an  unfinished  house 
for  the  sake  of  the  bricks ;  or  he  might  buy  an 
incomplete  clock  to  use  the  works  for  some  other 
piece  of  machinery. 

Thus,  though  every  stage  of  the  labour  bestowed 
on  raw  material,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  rise  to  a 
certain  product,  confers  some  additional  value  on 
that  material  in  the  estimation  of  those  who  are 


186   CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR     IV 

engaged  in  manufocturing  that  product,  the 
ratio  of  that  accumulated  vakie,  at  any  stage  of 
the  process,  to  the  vahie  of  the  finished  product 
is  extremely  inconstant,  and  often  small;  while, 
to  other  pei-sons,  the  value  of  the  unfinished  pro- 
duct may  be  nothing,  or  even  a  minus  quantity. 
A  house-timber  merchant,  for  example,  might 
consider  that  wood  which  had  been  worked  into 
the  ribs  of  a  ship  was  spoiled — that  is,  had  less 
value  than  it  had  as  a  log. 

According  to  "  Progress  and  Poverty,"  there  wa.s, 
really,  no  advance  of  capital  while  the  great  St. 
Gothard  tunnel  was  cut.  Suppose  that,  as  the  Swiss 
and  the  Italian  halves  of  the  tunnel  approached 
to  within  half  a  kilometre,  that  half-kilometre  had 
turned  out  to  be  composed  of  practically  impene- 
trable rock — would  anybody  have  given  a  centime 
for  the  unfinished  tunnel  ?  And  if  not,  how  comes 
it  that  "  the  creation  of  value  does  not  depend  on 
the  finishing  of  the  jDroduct '"'  ? 

I  think  it  may  be  not  too  much  to  say  that,  of 
all  the  political  delusions  which  are  current  in  this 
queer  world,  the  very  stupidest  are  those  which 
assume  that  labour  and  capital  are  necessarily 
antagonistic  ;  that  all  capital  is  produced  by  labour 
and  therefore,  by  natural  right,  is  the  property  of 
the  labourer;  that  the  possessor  of  capital  is  a  robber 
who  preys  on  the  workman  and  approi^riates  to  him- 
self that  which  lie  has  had  no  share  in  producing. 


IV     CAPITAL — THE  MOTHER  OF  LABOUR    187 

On  the  contrary,  capital  and  labour  are, 
necessarily,  close  allies ;  capital  is  never  a  product 
of  human  labour  alone ;  it  exists  apart  from 
human  labour;  it  is  the  necessary  antecedent  of 
labour;  and  it  furnishes  the  materials  on  which 
labour  is  employed.  The  only  indispensable  form 
of  capital — vital  capital — cannot  be  produced  by 
human  labour.  All  that  man  can  do  is  to  favour 
its  formation  by  the  real  producers.  There  is  no 
intrinsic  relation  between  the  amount  of  labour 
bestowed  on  an  article  and  its  value  in  exchange. 
The  claim  of  labour  to  the  total  result  of  operations 
which  are  rendered  possible  only  by  capital  is 
simply  an  a  'priori  iniquity. 


SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND   WORSE 
REMEDIES 

LETTERS  TO  THE  "  TIMES "  OX  MR.  BOOTH'S 
SCHEME.  WITH  A  PREFACE  AND  INTRODUCTORY 
ESSAY 

[1891] 

PREFACE 

The  letters  which  are  here  collected  together 
were  published  in  the  "  Times  "  in  the  course  of 
the  months  of  December,  1890,  and  January, 
1891. 

The  circumstances  whicli  led  me  to  write  the 
first  letter  are  sufficiently  set  forth  in  its  oi^ening 
sentences ;  and  the  materials  on  which  I  based  my 
criticisms  of  Mr.  Booth's  scheme,  in  this  and  in 
the  second  letter,  were  wholly  derived  from  Mr. 
Booth's  book.  I  had  some  reason  to  know,  how- 
evei*,  that  when  anybody  allows  his  sense  of  duty 
so  far  to  prevail  over  his  sense  of  the  blessedness 
of  peace  as  to  write  a  letter  to  the  "  Times/'  on 


V         SOCIAL  DISEASES  AND  WORSE  REMEDIES      189 

any  subject  of  public  interest,  his  reflections,  be- 
fore he  has  done  with  the  business,  will  be  very 
like  those  of  Johnny  Gilpin,  "  who  little  thought, 
when  he  set  out,  of  running  such  a  rig."  Such 
undoubtedly  are  mine  when  I  contemj^late  these 
twelve  documents,  and  call  to  mind  the  distinct  ad- 
dition to  the  revenue  of  the  Post  Office  which  must 
have  accrued  from  the  mass  of  letters  and 
pamphlets  which  have  been  delivered  at  my 
door;  to  say  nothing  of  the  unexpected  light 
upon  my  character,  motives,  and  doctrines,  which 
has  been  thrown  by  some  of  the  "  Times'  "  corre- 
spondents, and  by  no  end  of  comments  elsewhere. 
If  self-knowledge  is  the  highest  aim  of  man,  I 
ought  by  this  time  to  have  little  to  learn.  And 
yet,  if  I  am  awake,  some  of  my  teachers — unable, 
perhaps,  to  control  the  divine  fire  of  the  poetic 
imagination  which  is  so  closely  akin  to,  if  not  a 
part  of,  the  mythopoeic  faculty — have  surely 
dreamed  dreams.  So  far  as  my  humbler  and 
essentially  prosaic  faculties  of  observation  and 
comparison  go,  plain  facts  are  against  them.  But, 
as  I  may  be  mistaken,  I  have  thought  it  well  to 
prefix  to  the  letters  (by  way  of  "  Prolegomena  ") 
an  essay  which  appeared  in  the  "  Nineteenth 
Century"  for  January,  1888,  in  which  the  prin- 
ciples that,  to  my  mind,  lie  at  the  bottom  of  the 
"  social  question "  are  stated.  So  far  as  Indi- 
vidualism and  Regimental  Socialism  are  con- 
cerned, this  paper  simply  emphasizes  and  expands 


190  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND  v 

the  opinions  expressed  in  an  address  to  the  members 
of  the  Midland  Institute,  dehvered  seventeen  years 
earher,  and  still  more  fully  developed  in  several 
essays  published  in  the  "  Nineteenth  Century"  in 
1889,  which  I  hope,  before  long,  to  republish.^ 

The  fundamental  proposition  which  runs 
through  the  writings,  which  thus  extend  over  a 
period  of  twenty  years,  is,  that  the  common 
a  'priori  doctrines  and  methods  of  reasoning  about 
political  and  social  questions  are  essentiall}' 
vicious ;  and  that  argumentation  on  this  basis 
leads,  with  equal  logical  force,  to  two  contradictory 
and  extremely  mischievous  systems,  the  one  that 
of  Anarchic  Individualism,  the  other  that  of 
despotic  or  Regimental  Socialism.  Whether  I 
am  right  or  wrong,  I  am  at  least  consistent  in 
opposing  both  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  Mr. 
Booth's  system  aj)pears  to  me,  and,  as  I  have 
shown,  is  regarded  by  Socialists  themselves,  to  be 
mere  autocratic  Socialism,  masked  by  its  theo- 
logical exterior.  That  the  "  fantastic  "  religious 
skin  will  wear  away,  and  the  Socialistic  reality  it 
covers  will  show  its  real  nature,  is  the  expressed 
hope  of  one  candid  Socialist,  and  may  be  fairly 
conceived  to  be  the  unexpressed  belief  of  the 
despotic  leader  of  the  new  Trades  Union,  who 
has  shown  his  zeal,  if  not  his  discretion,  in  cham- 
pioning Mr.  Booth's  projects.     [See  Letter  VIII.] 

1  See  Collected  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  290  to  end  ;  and  this  volume, 
p.  147. 


V  WORSE   REMEDIES  191 

Yet  another  word  to  commentatoi-s  upon  ni}^ 
letters.  There  are  some  wlio  rather  chuckle,  and 
some  who  sneer,  at  what  they  seem  to  consider 
the  dexterity  of  an  "  old  controversial  hand," 
exhibited  by  the  contrast  which  I  have  drawn 
between  the  methods  of  conversion  depicted  in 
the  New  Testament  and  those  pursued  by 
fanatics  of  the  Salvationist  type,  whether  they 
be  such  as  are  now  exploited  by  Mr.  Booth,  or 
such  as  those  who,  from  the  time  of  the  Ana- 
baptists, to  go  no  further  back,  have  worked  upon 
similar  lines. 

Whether  such  observations  were  intended  to 
be  flattering  or  sarcastic,  I  must  respectfully 
decline  to  accept  the  compliment,  or  to  apply  the 
sarcasm  to  myself.  I  object  to  obliquity  of  pro- 
cedure and  ambiguity  of  speech  in  all  shapes. 
And  I  confess  that  I  find  it  difficult  to  understand 
the  state  of  mind  which  leads  any  one  to  suppose, 
that  deep  respect  for  single-minded  devotion  to 
high  aims  is  incompatible  with  the  unhesitating 
conviction  that  those  aims  include  the  jDropagation 
of  doctrines  which  are  devoid  of  foundation — 
perhaps  even  mischievous. 

The  most  degrading  feature  of  the  narrower 
forms  of  Christianity  (of  which  that  professed  by 
Mr.  Booth  is  a  notable  example)  is  their  insistence 
that  the  noblest  virtues,  if  displayed  by  those  who 
reject  their  pitiable  formula3,  are,  as  their  pet 
phrase    goes,    "  splendid    sins."     But    there    is, 


192  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AXD  v 

perhaps,  one  step  lower;  and  that  is  that  men, 
who  profess  freedom  of  thought,  should  fail  to 
see  and  appreciate  that  large  soul  of  goodness 
which  often  animates  even  the  fanatical  adherents 
of  such  tenets.  I  am  sorry  for  any  man  who  can 
read  the  epistles  to  the  Galatians  and  the  Corin- 
thians without  pelding  a  large  meed  of  admiration 
to  the  fervent  humanity  of  Paul  of  Tarsus ;  who 
can  study  the  lives  of  Francis  of  Assisi,  or  of 
Catherine  of  Siena,  without  wishing  that,  for  the 
furtherance  of  his  o^^Tl  ideals,  he  might  be  even 
as  they ;  or  who  can  contemplate  unmoved  the 
steadfast  veracity  and  true  heroism  which  loom 
through  the  fogs  of  mystical  utterance  in  George 
Fox.  In  all  these  gi'eat  men  and  women  there 
lay  the  root  of  the  matter ;  a  burning  desire  to 
amend  the  condition  of  their  fellow-men,  and  to 
put  aside  all  other  things  for  that  end.  If,  in 
spite  of  all  the  dogmatic  helps  or  hindrances  in 
which  they  were  entangled,  these  people  are  not 
to  be  held  in  high  honour,  who  are  ? 

I  have  never  expressed  a  doubt — for  I  have 
none — that,  when  Mr.  Booth  left  the  Methodist 
connection,  and  started  that  organisation  of  the 
Salvation  Army  upon  which,  comparatively  re- 
cently, such  ambitious  schemes  of  social  reform 
have  been  grafted,  he  may  have  deserved  some 
share  of  such  honour.  I  do  not  say  that,  so  far 
as  his  personal  desires  and  intentions  go,  he  may 
not  still  deserve  it. 


V  WORSE   REMEDIES  193 

But  the  correlate  of  despotic  authority  is 
unlimited  responsibility.  If  Mr.  Booth  is  to  take 
credit  for  any  good  that  the  Army  system  has 
effected,  he  must  be  prepared  to  bear  blame  for 
its  inherent  evils.  As  it  seems  to  me,  that  has 
happened  to  him  which  sooner  or  later  happens 
to  all  despots  :  he  has  become  the  slave  of  his 
own  creation — the  prosperity  and  glory  of  the 
soul-saving  machine  have  become  the  end,  instead 
of  a  means,  of  soul-saving ;  and  to  maintain  these 
at  the  proper  pitch,  the  "  General "  is  led  to  do 
things  which  the  Mr.  Booth  of  twenty  years  ago 
would  probably  have  scorned. 

And  those  who  desire,  as  I  most  emphatically 
desire,  to  be  just  to  Mr.  Booth,  however  badly 
they  may  think  of  the  working  of  the  organisation 
he  has  founded,  will  bear  in  mind  that  some 
astute  backers  of  his  probably  care  little  enough 
for  Salvationist  religion ;  and,  perhaps,  are  not 
very  keen  about  many  of  Mr.  Booth's  projects.  I 
have  referred  to  the  rubbing  of  the  hands  of  the 
Socialists  over  Mr.  Booth's  success  ;^  but,  unless  I 
err  greatly,  there  are  politicians  of  a  certain 
school  to  whom  it  affords  still  greater  satisfaction. 
Consider  what  electioneering  agents  the  captains 
of  the  Salvation  Army,  scattered  through  all  our 
towns,  and  directed  from  a  political  "  bureau  "  in 
London,  would  make !  Think  how  political 
adversaries  could  be  harassed  by  our  local 
1  See  Letter  Fill. 

VOL.    IX  O 


194      SOCIAL  DISEASES  AND  WORSE  REMEDIES        v 

attorney — "  tribune  of  the  people,"  I  mean  ;  and 
how  a  troublesome  man,  on  the  other  side,  could 
be  "  hunted  down  "  upon  any  convenient  charge, 
whether  true  or  false,  brought  by  our  Vigilance- 
familiar  !  ^ 

I  entirely  acquit  Mr.  Booth  of  any  complicity 
in  far-reaching  schemes  of  this  kind ;  but  I  did 
not  write  idly  when,  in  my  first  letter,  I  gave  no 
vague  warning  of  what  might  grow  out  of  the 
organised  force,  drilled  in  the  habit  of  unhesitating 
obedience,  which  he  has  created. 

1  See  Utter  II. 


INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY 

THE    STRUGGLE    FOR    EXISTENCE    IN    HUMAN 
SOCIETY 

[1888] 

The  vast  and  varied  procession  of  events, 
which  we  call  Nature,  affords  a  sublime  spectacle 
and  an  inexhaustible  wealth  of  attractive  pro- 
blems to  the  speculative  observer.  If  we  confine 
our  attention  to  that  aspect  which  engages  the 
attention  of  the  intellect,  nature  appears  a  beau- 
tiful and  harmonious  whole,  the  incarnation  of  a 
faultless  logical  process,  from  certain  premisses  in 
the  past  to  an  inevitable  conclusion  in  the  future. 
But  if  it  be  regarded  from  a  less  elevated,  though 
more  human,  point  of  view ;  if  our  moral  sym- 
pathies are  allowed  to  influence  our  judgment, 
and  we  permit  ourselves  to  criticize  our  great 
mother  as  we  criticize  one  another ;  then  our 
verdict,  at  least  so  far  as  sentient  nature  is 
concerned,  can  hardly  be  so  favourable. 

In   sober   truth,  to   those  who   have   made    a 

o  2 


196  THE   STRUGGLE    FOR    EXISTENCE  v 

study  of  the  phenomena  of  hfe  as  they  are 
exhibited  by  the  higher  forms  of  the  animal 
world,  the  optimistic  dogma,  that  this  is  the  best 
of  all  possible  worlds,  will  seem  little  better  than 
a  libel  upon  possibility.  It  is  really  only  another 
instance  to  be  added  to  the  many  extant,  of  the 
audacity  of  a  i^iori  speculators  who,  having 
created  God  in  their  own  image,  find  no  difficulty 
in  assuming  that  the  Almighty  must  have  been 
actuated  by  the  same  motives  as  themselves. 
They  are  quite  sure  that,  had  any  other  course 
been  practicable.  He  would  no  more  have  made 
infinite  suffering  a  necessary  ingredient  of  His 
handiwork  than  a  respectable  philoso23her  Avould 
have  done  the  like. 

But  even  the  modified  optimism  of  the  time- 
honoured  thesis  of  physico-theology,  that  the 
sentient  world  is,  on  the  whole,  regulated  by 
principles  of  benevolence,  does  but  ill  stand  the 
test  of  impartial  confrontation  with  the  facts  of 
the  case.  No  doubt  it  is  quite  true  that  sen- 
tient nature  affords  hosts  of  examples  of  subtle 
contrivances  directed  towards  the  production  of 
pleasure  or  the  avoidance  of  pain ;  and  it  may  be 
proper  to  say  that  these  are  evidences  of  benevo- 
lence. But  if  so,  why  is  it  not  equally  proper  to 
say  of  the  equally  numerous  arrangements,  the  no 
less  necessary  result  of  which  is  the  production 
of  pain,  that  they  are  evidences  of  malevolence  ? 

If  a  vast  amount  of  that  which,  in  a  piece  of 
human    workmanship,    we    should    call    skill,    is 


V  IN  HUMAN   SOCIETY  197 

visible  in  those  parts  of  the  organization  of  a 
deer  to  which  it  owes  its  abiUty  to  escape  from 
beasts  of  prey,  there  is  at  least  equal  skill 
displayed  in  that  bodily  mechanism  of  the  wolf 
which  enables  him  to  track,  and  sooner  or  later 
to  bring  down,  the  deer.  Viewed  under  the  dry 
light  of  science,  deer  and  wolf  are  alike  admirable ; 
and,  if  both  were  non-sentient  automata,  there 
would  be  nothing  to  qualify  our  admiration  of 
the  action  of  the  one  on  the  other.  But  the  fact 
that  the  deer  suffers,  while  the  wolf  inflicts 
suffering,  engages  our  moral  sympathies.  We 
should  call  men  like  the  deer  innocent  and  good, 
men  such  as  the  wolf  malignant  and  bad;  we 
should  call  those  who  defended  the  deer  and 
aided  him  to  escape  brave  and  compassionate, 
and  those  who  helped  the  wolf  in  his  bloody 
work  base  and  cruel.  Surely,  if  we  transfer  these 
judgments  to  nature  outside  the  world  of  man  at 
all,  we  must  do  so  impartially.  In  that  case,  the 
goodness  of  the  right  hand  which  helps  the  deer, 
and  the  wickedness  of  the  left  hand  which  eggs 
on  the  wolf,  will  neutralize  one  another :  and  the 
course  of  nature  will  appear  to  be  neither  moral 
nor  immoral,  but  non-moral. 

This  conclusion  is  thrust  upon  us  by  analogous 
facts  in  every  part  of  the  sentient  world ;  yet,  in- 
asmuch as  it  not  only  jars  upon  prevalent  pre- 
judices, but  arouses  the  natural  dislike  to  that 
which  is  painful,  much  ingenuity  has  been  exercised 
in  devising  an  escape  from  it. 


198  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

From  the  theological  side,  we  are  told  that  this 
is  a  state  of  probation,  and  that  the  seeming- 
injustices  and  immorahties  of  nature  will  be  com- 
pensated by  and  by.  But  how  this  compensation 
is  to  be  effected,  in  the  case  of  the  great  majority 
of  sentient  things,  is  not  clear.  I  apprehend  that 
no  one  is  seriously  prepared  to  maintain  that  the 
ghosts  of  all  the  mjTiads  of  generations  of  her- 
bivorous animals  which  Hved  during  the  millions 
of  years  of  the  earth's  duration,  before  the  appear- 
ance of  man,  and  which  have  all  that  time  been 
tormented  and  devoured  by  carnivores,  are  to  be 
compensated  by  a  perennial  existence  in  clover; 
while  the  ghosts  of  carnivores  are  to  go  to  some 
kennel  where  there  is  neither  a  panof  Avaternor  a 
bone  with  any  meat  on  it.  Besides,  from  the  point 
of  view  of  morality, the  last  stage  of  things  would  be 
worse  than  the  first.  For  the  carnivores,  however 
brutal  and  sanguinary,  have  only  done  that  which, 
if  there  is  any  evidence  of  contrivance  in  the 
world,  they  were  expressly  constructed  to  do. 
Moreover,  carnivores  and  herbivores  alike  have  been 
subject  to  all  the  miseries  incidental  to  old  age, 
disease,  and  over-multiplication,  and  both  might 
well  put  in  a  claim  for  "compensation"  on  this  score. 

On  the  evolutionist  side,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
are  told  to  take  comfort  from  the  reflection  that 
the  terrible  struggle  for  existence  tends  to  final 
good,  and  that  the  suffering  of  the  ancestor  is  paid 
for  by  the  increased  perfection  of  the  progeny. 
There  would  be  something  in  this  argument  if,  in 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  199 

Chinese  fashion,  the  present  generation  could  pay 
its  debts  to  its  ancestors ;  otherwise  it  is  not  clear 
what  compensation  the  Eohipinis  gets  for  his 
sorrows  in  the  fact  that,  some  millions  of  years 
afterwards,  one  of  his  descendants  wins  the  Derby. 
And,  again,  it  is  an  error  to  imagine  that  evolution 
signifies  a  constant  tendency  to  increased  perfec- 
tion. That  process  undoubtedly  involves  a  constant 
re-modelling  of  the  organism  in  adaptation  to  new 
conditions  ;  but  it  depends  on  the  nature  of  those 
conditions  whether  the  direction  of  the  modifi- 
cations effected  shall  be  upward  or  downward. 
Retrogressive  is  as  practicable  as  progressive 
metamorphosis.  If  what  the  physical  philosophers 
tell  us,  that  our  globe  has  been  in  a  state  of  fusion, 
and,  like  the  sun,  is  gradually  cooling  down,  is 
true ;  then  the  time  must  come  when  evolution 
will  mean  adaptation  to  an  universal  winter,  and 
all  forms  of  life  will  die  out,  except  such  low  and 
simple  organisms  as  the  Diatom  of  the  arctic  and 
antarctic  ice  and  the  Protococcus  of  the  red  snow. 
If  our  globe  is  proceeding  from  a  condition  in 
which  it  was  too  hot  to  support  any  but  the  lowest 
living  thing  to  a  condition  in  which  it  will  be  too 
cold  to  permit  of  the  existence  of  any  others,  the 
course  of  life  upon  its  surface  must  describe  a 
trajectory  like  that  of  a  ball  fired  from  a  mortar; 
and  the  sinking  half  of  that  course  is  as  much  a 
part  of  the  general  process  of  evolution  as  the  rising. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  moralist  the 


200  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

animal  world  is  on  about  the  same  level  as  a 
gladiator's  show.  The  creatures  are  fairly  Avell 
treated,  and  set  to  fight — whereby  the  strongest, 
the  swiftest,  and  the  cunningest  live  to  fight 
another  day.  The  spectator  has  no  need  to  turn 
his  thumbs  down,  as  no  quarter  is  given.  He 
must  admit  that  the  skill  and  training  displayed 
are  wonderful.  But  he  must  shut  his  eyes  if  he 
would  not  see  that  more  or  less  enduring  suffering 
is  the  meed  of  both  vanquished  and  victor.  And 
since  the  great  game  is  going  on  in  every  corner 
of  the  world,  thousands  of  times  a  minute  ;  since, 
were  our  ears  sharp  enough,  we  need  not  descend 
to  the  orates  of  hell  to  hear — 

o 

sospiri,  pianti,  ed  alti  giiai. 

Voci  alte  e  fioche,  e  suon  di  man  con  elle 

— it  seems  to  follow  that,  if  this  world  is  governed 
by  benevolence,  it  must  be  a  different  sort  of 
benevolence  from  that  of  John  Howard. 

But  the  old  Babylonians  wisely  symbolized 
Nature  by  their  great  goddess  Istar,  who  combined 
the  attributes  of  Aphrodite  with  those  of  Ares. 
Her  terrible  aspect  is  not  to  be  ignored  or  covered 
up  with  shams ;  but  it  is  not  the  only  one.  If 
the  optimism  of  Leibnitz  is  a  foolish  though 
pleasant  dream,  the  pessimism  of  Schopenhauer  is 
a  nightmare,  the  more  foolish  because  of  its 
hideousness.  Error  which  is  not  pleasant  is 
surely  the  worst  form  of  wrong. 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  201 

This  may  not  be  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds, 
but  to  say  that  it  is  the  worst  is  mere  petulant 
nonsense.  A  worn-out  voluptuary  may  find 
nothing  good  under  the  sun,  or  a  vain  and 
inexperienced  3^outh,  who  cannot  get  the  moon  he 
cries  for,  may  vent  his  irritation  in  pessimistic 
meanings ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  in  the 
mind  of  any  reasonable  person  that  mankind 
could,  would,  and  in  fact  do,  get  on  foirly  well 
with  vastly  less  happiness  and  far  more  misery 
than  find  their  way  into  the  lives  of  nine  people 
out  of  ten.  If  each  and  all  of  us  had  been  visited 
by  an  attack  of  neuralgia,  or  of  extreme  mental 
depression,  for  one  hour  in  every  twenty-four — a 
supposition  which  many  tolerably  vigorous  people 
know,  to  their  cost,  is  not  extravagant — the 
burden  of  life  would  have  been  immensely 
increased  without  much  practical  hindrance  to  its 
general  course.  Men  with  any  manhood  in  them 
find  life  quite  worth  living  under  worse  conditions 
than  these. 

There  is  another  sufficiently  obvious  fact,  which 
renders  the  hypothesis  that  the  course  of  sentient 
nature  is  dictated  by  malevolence  quite  untenable. 
A  vast  multitude  of  pleasures,  and  these  among 
tlie  purest  and  the  best,  are  superfluities,  bits 
of  good  which  are  to  all  appearance  unneces- 
sary as  inducements  to  live,  and  are,  so  to  speak, 
thrown  into  the  bargain  of  life.  To  those  who 
experience    them,    few    delights    can    be    more 


202  THE    STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE  y 

entrancing  than  such  as  are  afforded  by  natural 
beauty,  or  by  the  arts,  and  especially  by  music ; 
but  they  are  products  of,  rather  than  factors  in, 
evolution,  and  it  is  probable  that  they  are  known, 
in  any  considerable  degree,  to  but  a  very  small 
proportion  of  mankind. 

The  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  seems  to 
be  that,  if  Ormuzd  has  not  had  his  way  in 
this  world,  neither  has  Ahriman.  Pessimism  is 
as  little  consonant  with  the  facts  of  sentient 
existence  as  optimism.  If  we  desire  to  represent 
the  course  of  nature  in  terms  of  human  thought, 
and  assume  that  it  was  intended  to  be  that  which 
it  is,  we  must  say  that  its  governing  principle  is 
intellectual  and  not  moral ;  that  it  is  a  material- 
ized logical  process,  accompanied  by  pleasures  and 
pains,  the  incidence  of  which,  in  the  majority  of 
cases,  has  not  the  slightest  reference  to  moral 
desert.  That  the  rain  falls  alike  upon  the  just 
and  the  unjust,  and  that  those  upon  whom  the 
Tower  of  Siloam  fell  were  no  worse  than  their 
neighbours,  seem  to  be  Oriental  modes  of 
expressing  the  same  conclusion. 

In  the  strict  sense  of  the  word  "nature,"  it 
denotes  the  sum  of  the  phenomenal  world,  of  that 
which  has  been,  and  is,  and  will  be ;  and  society, 
like  art,  is  therefore  a  part  of  nature.  But  it  is 
convenient  to  distinguish  those  parts  of  nature  in 
which  man  plays  the  part  of  immediate  cause,  as 


V  IN   HITMAN   SOCIETY  203 

something  apart ;  and,  therefore,  society,  Hke  art, 
is  usefully  to  be  considered  as  distinct  from 
nature.  It  is  the  more  desirable,  and  even 
necessary,  to  make  this  distinction,  since  society 
differs  from  nature  in  having  a  definite  moral 
object ;  whence  it  comes  about  that  the  course 
shaped  by  the  ethical  man — the  member  of 
society  or  citizen — necessarily  runs  counter  to 
that  which  the  non-ethical  man — the  primitive 
savage,  or  man  as  a  mere  member  of  the  animal 
kingdom — tends  to  adopt.  The  latter  fights  out 
the  struggle  for  existence  to  the  bitter  end,  like 
any  other  animal ;  the  former  devotes  his  best 
energies  to  the  object  of  setting  limits  to  the 
struggle.^ 

In  the  cycle  of  phenomena  presented  by  the 
life  of  man,  the  animal,  no  more  moral  end  is 
discernible  than  in  that  presented  by  the  lives  of 
the  wolf  and  of  the  deer.  However  imperfect  the 
relics  of  prehistoric  men  may  be,  the  evidence 
which  they  afford  clearly  tends  to  the  conclusion 
that,  for  thousands  and  thousands  of  years,  before 
the  origin  of  the  oldest  known  civilizations,  men 
were  savages  of  a  very  low  type.  They  strove 
with  their  enemies  and  their  competitors ;  they 
preyed  upon  things  weaker  or  less  cunning  than 
themselves ;  they  were  born,  multiplied  without 
stint,  and  died,  for  thousands  of  generations, 
alongside  the  mammoth,  the  urus,  the  lion,  and 

^  [The  reader  will  observe  that  this  is  the  argument  of  the 
Romanes  Lecture,  in  brief. — 1894.] 


204  THE   STRUGGLE  FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

the  hyaena,  whose  Hves  were  spent  in  the  same 
way;  and  they  were  no  more  to  be  praised  or 
blamed,  on  moral  grounds,  than  their  less  erect 
and  more  hairy  compatriots. 

As  among  these,  so  among  primitive  men,  the 
weakest  and  stupidest  went  to  the  wall,  while 
the  toughest  and  shrewdest,  those  who  were  best 
fitted  to  cojDe  with  their  circvimstances,  but  not 
the  best  in  any  other  sense,  survived.  Life  was  a 
continual  free  fight,  and  beyond  the  limited  and 
temporary  relations  of  the  family,  the  Hobbesian 
war  of  each  against  all  was  the  normal  state 
of  existence.  The  human  species,  like  others, 
plashed  and  floundered  amid  the  general  stream 
of  evolution,  keeping  its  head  above  water  as  it 
best  might,  and  thinking  neither  of  whence  nor 
whither. 

The  history  of  civilization — that  is,  of  society — 
on  the  other  hand,  is  the  record  of  the  attempts 
which  the  human  race  has  made  to  escape  from 
this  position.  The  first  men  who  substituted  the 
state  of  mutual  peace  for  that  of  mutual  war, 
whatever  the  motive  which  impelled  them  to 
take  that  step,  created  society.  But,  in  establish- 
ing peace,  they  obviously  put  a  limit  upon  the 
struggle  for  existence.  Between  the  members  of 
that  society,  at  any  rate,  it  was  not  to  be 
pursued  a  outran ce.  And  of  all  the  successive 
shapes  which  society  has  taken,  that  most  nearly 
approaches  perfection  in  which  the  war  of  indi- 
vidual against  individual  is  most  strictly  limited. 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  205 

The  primitive  savage,  tutored  by  Istar,  appro- 
priated whatever  took  his  fancy,  and  killed 
whomsoever  opposed  him,  if  he  could.  On  the 
contrary,  the  ideal  of  the  ethical  man  is  to  limit 
his  freedom  of  action  to  a  sphere  in  which  he 
does  not  interfere  with  the  freedom  of  others ;  he 
seeks  the  common  weal  as  much  as  his  own  ;  and, 
indeed,  as  an  essential  part  of  his  own  welfare. 
Peace  is  both  end  and  means  with  him ;  and  he 
founds  his  life  on  a  more  or  less  complete  self- 
restraint,  which  is  the  negation  of  the  unlimited 
struggle  for  existence.  He  tries  to  escape  from 
his  place  in  the  animal  kingdom,  founded  on 
the  free  development  of  the  principle  of  non- 
moral  evolution,  and  to  establish  a  kingdom  of 
Man,  governed  upon  the  principle  of  moral 
evolution.  For  society  not  only  has  a  moral 
end,  but  in  its  perfection,  social  life,  is  embodied 
morality. 

But  the  effort  of  ethical  man  to  work  towards 
a  moral  end  by  no  means  abolished,  perhaps  has 
hardly  modified,  the  deep-seated  organic  impulses 
which  impel  the  natural  man  to  follow  his  non- 
moral  course.  One  of  the  most  essential  condi- 
tions, if  not  the  chief  cause,  of  the  struggle  for 
existence,  is  the  tendency  to  multiply  without 
limit,  which  man  shares  with  all  living  things. 
It  is  notable  that  "increase  and  multiply"  is  a 
commandment  traditionally  much  older  than  the 
ten ;  and  that  it  is,  perhaps,  the  only  one  which 


206  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

has  been  spontaneously  and  ex  animo  obeyed  by 
the  gi'eat  majority  of  the  human  race.  But,  in 
civilized  society,  the  inevitable  result  of  such 
obedience  is  the  re-establishment,  in  all  its  inten- 
sity, of  that  struggle  for  existence — the  war  of 
each  against  all — the  mitigation  or  abolition  of 
which  was  the  chief  end  of  social  organisation. 
It  is  conceivable  that,  at  some  period  in  the 
history  of  the  fabled  Atlantis,  the  production  of 
food  should  have  been  exactly  sufficient  to  meet 
the  wants  of  the  population,  that  the  makers 
of  the  commodities  of  the  artificer  should  have 
amounted  to  just  the  number  supportable  by 
the  surplus  food  of  the  agriculturists.  And,  as 
there  is  no  harm  in  adding  another  monstrous 
supposition  to  the  foregoing,  let  it  be  imagined 
that  every  man,  woman,  and  child  was  perfectly 
virtuous,  and  aimed  at  the  good  of  all  as  the 
highest  personal  good.  In  that  happy  land,  the 
natural  man  would  have  been  finally  put  down 
by  the  ethical  man.  There  would  have  been 
no  competition,  but  the  industry  of  each  would 
have  been  serviceable  to  all ;  nobody  being  vain 
and  nobody  avaricious,  there  would  have  been 
no  rivalries ;  the  struggle  for  existence  would 
have  been  abolished,  and  the  millennium  would 
have  finally  set  in.  But  it  is  obvious  that  this 
state  of  things  could  have  been  permanent  only 
with  a  stationary  population.  Add  ten  fresh 
mouths  ;  and   as,  by  the  supposition,  there  was 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  207 

only  exactly  enough  before,  somebody  must  go 
on  short  rations.  The  Atlantis  society  might 
have  been  a  heaven  upon  earth,  the  whole  nation 
might  have  consisted  of  just  men,  needing  no 
repentance,  and  yet  somebody  must  starve.  Eeck- 
less  Istar,  non-moral  Nature,  would  have  riven 
the  ethical  fabric.  I  was  once  talking  Avith  a 
very  eminent  physician^  about  the  vis  mcdicatrix 
natuTcc.  "  Stuff ! "  said  he ;  "  nine  times  out  of 
ten  nature  does  not  want  to  cure  the  man  :  she 
wants  to  put  him  in  his  coffin."  And  Istar- 
Nature  appears  to  have  equally  little  sympathy 
with  the  ends  of  society.  "  Stuff !  she  wants 
nothing  but  a  fair  field  and  free  play  for  her 
darling  the  strongest." 

Our  Atlantis  may  be  an  impossible  figment, 
but  the  antagonistic  tendencies  which  the  fable 
adumbrates  have  existed  in  every  society  which 
was  ever  established,  and,  to  all  appearance,  must 
strive  for  the  victory  in  all  that  will  be.  Histor- 
ians point  to  the  greed  and  ambition  of  rulers, 
to  the  reckless  turbulence  of  the  ruled,  to  the 
debasing  effects  of  wealth  and  luxury,  and  to 
the  devastating  wars  which  have  formed  a  great 
part  of  the  occupation  of  mankind,  as  the  causes 
of  the  decay  of  states  and  the  foundering  of 
old  civilisations,  and  thereby  point  their  story 
with  a  moral.  No  doubt  immoral  motives  of 
all  sorts  have  figured  largely  among  the  minor 
1  The  late  Sir  W.  GuU. 


208  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR   EXISTENCE  y 

causes  of  these  events.  But  beneath  all  this 
superficial  turmoil  lay  the  deep-seated  impulse 
given  by  unlimited  multiplication.  In  the  swarms 
of  colonies  thrown  out  by  Phoenicia  and  by  old 
Greece ;  in  the  vcr  sacrum  of  the  Latin  races ; 
in  the  floods  of  Gauls  and  of  Teutons  which 
burst  over  the  frontiers  of  the  old  civilisation 
of  Europe ;  in  the  swaying  to  and  fro  of  the 
vast  Mongolian  hordes  in  late  times,  the  popula- 
tion problem  comes  to  the  front  in  a  very  visible 
shape.  Nor  is  it  less  plainly  manifest  in  the 
everlasting  agrarian  questions  of  ancient  Rome 
than  in  the  AiTeoi  societies  of  the  Polynesian 
Islands. 

In  the  ancient  world,  and  in  a  large  part 
of  that  in  which  we  live,  the  practice  of  in- 
fanticide was,  or  is,  a  regular  and  legal  custom ; 
famine,  pestilence,  and  war  were  and  are  normal 
factors  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  and  they 
have  served,  in  a  gross  and  brutal  fashion,  to 
mitigate  the  intensity  of  the  effects  of  its  chief 
cause. 

But,  in  the  more  advanced  civilisations,  the 
progress  of  private  and  public  morality  has 
steadily  tended  to  remove  all  these  checks.  We 
declare  infanticide  murder,  and  punish  it  as  such ; 
we  decree,  not  quite  so  successfully,  that  no  one 
shall  die  of  hunger;  we  regard  death  from  pre- 
ventive causes  of  other  kinds  as  a  sort  of  construc- 
tive murder,  and  eliminate  pestilence  to  the  best 


V  IN  HUMAN   SOCIETY  209 

of  our  ability;  we  declaim  against  the  curse  of 
war,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  military  spirit,  and 
we  are  never  weary  of  dilating  on  the  blessedness  of 
peace  and  the  innocent  beneficence  of  Industry. 
In  their  moments  of  expansion,  even  statesmen 
and  men  of  business  go  thus  far.  The  finer 
spirits  look  to  an  ideal  civitas  Dei ;  a  state  when 
every  man,  having  reached  the  point  of  absolute 
self-negation,  and  having  nothing  but  moral  perfec- 
tion to  strive  after,  peace  will  truly  reign,  not  merely 
among  nations,  but  among  men,  and  the  struggle 
for  existence  will  be  at  an  end. 

Whether  human  nature  is  competent,  under 
any  circumstances,  to  reach,  or  even  seriously 
advance  towards,  this  ideal  condition,  is  a  question 
which  need  not  be  discussed.  It  will  be  admitted 
that  mankind  has  not  yet  reached  this  stage  by  a 
very  long  way,  and  my  business  is  with  the  pres- 
ent. And  that  which  I  wish  to  point  out  is  that, 
so  long  as  the  natural  man  increases  and  multi- 
plies without  restraint,  so  long  will  peace  and 
industry  not  only  permit,  but  they  will  necessi- 
tate, a  struggle  for  existence  as  sharp  as  any  that 
ever  went  on  under  the  regime  of  war.  If  Istar 
is  to  reign  on  the  one  hand,  she  will  demand  her 
human  sacrifices  on  the  other. 

Let  us  look  at  home.  For  seventy  years  peace 
and  industry  have  had  their  way  among  us  with 
less  interruption  and  under  more  favourable 
conditions   than    in  any   other    country   on   the 

VOL.  IX  P 


210  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

face  of  the  earth.  The  wealth  of  Croesus  was 
nothing  to  that  which  we  have  accumulated,  and 
our  prosperity  has  filled  the  world  with  envy. 
But  Nemesis  did  not  forget  Croesus :  has  she  for- 
gotten us  ? 

I  think  not.  There  are  now  36,000,000  of 
people  in  our  islands,  and  every  year  considerably 
more  than  300,000  are  added  to  our  numbers.^ 
That  is  to  say,  about  every  hundred  seconds,  or 
so,  a  new  claimant  to  a  share  in  the  common  stock 
of  maintenance  presents  him  or  herself  among  us. 
At  the  present  time,  the  produce  of  the  soil  does 
not  suffice  to  feed  half  its  population.  The  other 
moiety  has  to  be  supplied  with  food  which  must 
be  bought  from  the  people  of  food-producing 
countries.  That  is  to  say,  we  have  to  offer  them 
the  things  which  they  want  in  exchange  for  the 
things  we  want.  And  the  things  they  want  and 
which  we  can  produce  better  than  they  can  are 
mainly  manufactures — industrial  j^roducts. 

The  insolent  reproach  of  the  first  Napoleon  had 
a  very  solid  foundation.  We  not  only  are,  but, 
under  penalty  of  starvation,  we  are  bound  to  be,  a 
nation  of  shopkeepers.  But  other  nations  also  lie 
under  the  same  necessity  of  keeping  shop,  and 
some  of  them  deal  in  the  same  goods  as  ourselves. 

1  These  numbers  are  only  approximately  accurate.  In  1881, 
our  population  amounted  to  35,241,482,  exceeding  the  number 
in  1871  hy  3,396,103.  The  average  annual  increase  in  the 
decennial  period  1871—1881  is  therefore  339,610.  The  number 
of  minutes  in  a  calendar  year  is  525,600. 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  211 

Our  customers  naturally  seek  to  get  the  most  and 
the  best  in  exchange  for  their  produce.  If  our 
goods  are  inferior  to  those  of  our  competitors,  there 
is  no  ground,  compatible  with  the  sanity  of  the 
buyers,  which  can  be  alleged,  why  they  should  not 
prefer  the  latter.  And,  if  that  result  should  ever 
take  place  on  a  large  and  general  scale,  five  or  six 
millions  of  us  would  soon  have  nothing  to  eat. 
We  know  what  the  cotton  famine  was ;  and  we 
can  therefore  form  some  notion  of  what  a  dearth 
of  customers  would  be. 

Judged  by  an  ethical  standard,  nothing  can  be 
less  satisfactory  than  the  position  in  which  we  find 
ourselves.  In  a  real,  though  incomplete,  degree 
we  have  attained  the  condition  of  peace  which  is 
the  main  object  of  social  organization ;  and,  for 
argument's  sake,  it  may  be  assumed  that  we 
desire  nothing  but  that  which  is  in  itself  innocent 
and  praiseworthy — namely,  the  enjoyment  of  the 
fruits  of  honest  industry.  And  lo  1  in  spite  of 
ourselves,  we  are  in  reality  engaged  in  an  inter- 
necine struggle  for  existence  with  our  presumably 
no  less  peaceful  and  well-meaning  neighbours. 
We  seek  peace  and  we  do  not  ensue  it.  The 
moral  nature  in  us  asks  for  no  more  than  is  com- 
jiatible  with  the  general  good;  the  non-moral 
nature  proclaims  and  acts  upon  that  fine  old 
Scottish  family  motto,  "  Thou  shalt  starve  ere  I 
want."  Let  us  be  under  no  illusions,  then.  So 
long  as  unlimited  multiplication  goes  on,  no  social 
organization  which  has  ever  been  devised,  or  is 

p  2 


212  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR    EXISTENCE  v 

likely  to  be  devised,  no  fiddle-faddling  with  the 
distribution  of  wealth,  will  deliver  society  from 
the  tendency  to  be  destroyed  by  the  reproduction 
within  itself,  in  its  intensest  form,  of  that  struggle 
for  existence  the  limitation  of  which  is  the  object 
of  societ}^  And  however  shocking  to  the  moral 
sense  this  eternal  competition  of  man  against  man 
and  of  nation  against  nation  may  be ;  however 
revolting  may  be  the  accumulation  of  misery  at 
the  negative  pole  of  society,  in  contrast  with  that 
of  monstrous  wealth  at  the  positive  pole ;  ^  this 
state  of  things  must  abide,  and  grow  continually 
worse,  so  long  as  Istar  holds  her  way  unchecked. 
It  is  the  true  riddle  of  the  Sphinx;  and  every 
nation  which  does  not  solve  it  will  sooner  or  later 
be  devoured  by  the  monster  itself  has  generated. 

The  practical  and  pressing  question  for  us,  just 
now,  seems  to  me  to  be  how  to  gain  time. 
"  Time  brings  counsel,"  as  the  Teutonic  proverb 
has  it ;  and  wiser  folk  among  our  posterity  may 
see  their  way  out  of  that  which  at  present  looks 
like  an  impasse. 

It  would  be  folly  to  entertain  any  ill-feeling 
towards  those  neighbours  and  rivals  who,  hke 
ourselves,  are  slaves  of  Istar ;  but,  if  somebody  is 
to  be  starved,  the  modem  world  has  no  Oracle  of 
Delphi  to  which  the  nations  can  appeal  for  an 
indication  of  the  victim.     It  is  open  to  us  to  try 

^  [It  is  hard  to  say  whether  the  increase  of  the  imemj)loyed 
poor,  or  that  of  the  unemployed  rich,  is  the  greater  social 
evil.— 1894.] 


V  IN  HUMAN   SOCIETY  213 

our  fortune ;  and,  if  we  avoid  impending  fate, 
there  will  be  a  certain  ground  for  believing  that 
we  are  the  right  people  to  escape.  Securus 
judicat  orhis. 

To  this  end,  it  is  well  to  look  into  the  necessary 
conditions  of  our  salvation  by  works.  They  are 
two,  one  plain  to  all  the  world  and  hardly  needing 
insistence ;  the  other  seemingly  not  so  plain, 
since  too  often  it  has  been  theoretically  and  prac- 
tically left  out  of  sight.  The  obvious  condition 
is  that  our  produce  shall  be  better  than  that  of 
others.  There  is  only  one  reason  why  our  goods 
should  be  preferred  to  those  of  our  rivals — our 
customers  must  find  them  better  at  the  price. 
That  means  that  we  must  use  more  knowledge, 
skill,  and  industry  in  producing  them,  without  a 
proportionate  increase  in  the  cost  of  production ; 
and,  as  the  price  of  labour  constitutes  a  large 
element  in  that  cost,  the  rate  of  wages  must  be 
restricted  within  certain  limits.  It  is  perfectly 
true  that  cheap  production  and  cheap  labour  are 
by  no  means  synonymous ;  but  it  is  also  true  that 
wages  cannot  increase  beyond  a  certain  proportion 
without  destroying  cheapness.  Cheapness,  then, 
with,  as  part  and  parcel  of  cheapness,  a  moderate 
price  of  labour,  is  essential  to  our  success  as 
competitors  in  the  markets  of  the  world. 

The  second  condition  is  really  quite  as  plainly 
indispensable  as  the  first,  if  one  thinks  seriously 
about  the  matter.     It  is  social  stability.     Society 


214  THE  STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

is  stable,  when  the  wants  of  its  members  obtain 
as  much  satisfaction  as,  Hfe  being  what  it  is, 
common  sense  and  experience  show  may  be 
reasonably  expected.  Mankind,  in  general,  care 
very  little  for  forms  of  government  or  ideal 
considerations  of  an}^  sort;  and  nothing  really 
stirs  the  great  multitude  to  break  with  custom 
and  incur  the  manifest  perils  of  revolt  excejDt  the 
belief  that  misery  in  this  world,  or  damnation  in 
the  next,  or  both,  are  threatened  by  the  continu- 
ance of  the  state  of  things  in  which  they  have 
been  brought  up.  But  when  they  do  attain  that 
conviction,  society  becomes  as  unstable  as  a 
package  of  dynamite,  and  a  very  small  matter 
will  produce  the  explosion  which  sends  it  back  to 
the  chaos  of  savager}^ 

It  needs  no  argument  to  prove  that  when  the 
price  of  labour  sinks  below  a  certain  point, 
the  worker  infallibly  falls  into  that  condition 
which  the  French  emphatically  call  la  misere — a 
word  for  which  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  exact 
EngHsh  equivalent.  It  is  a  condition  in  which 
the  food,  warmth,  and  clothing  which  are  necessary 
for  the  mere  maintenance  of  the  functions  of  the 
body  in  their  normal  state  cannot  be  obtained ; 
in  which  men,  women,  and  children  are  forced  to 
crowd  into  dens  wherein  decency  is  abolished  and 
the  most  ordinary  conditions  of  healthful  exist- 
ence are  impossible  of  attainment ;  in  which  the 
pleasures  within  reach  are  reduced  to  bestiality 


V  IN    HUMAN   SOCIETY  215 

and  drunkenness  ;  in  wliich  the  pains  accumulate 
at  compound  interest,  in  the  shape  of  starvation, 
disease,  stunted  development,  and  moral  degrada- 
tion ;  in  which  the  prospect  of  even  steady  and 
honest  industry  is  a  life  of  unsuccessful  battling 
with  hunger,  rounded  by  a  pauper's  grave. 

That  a  certain  proportion  of  the  members  of 
every  great  aggregation  of  mankind  should  con- 
stantly tend  to  establish  and  populate  such  a 
Slough  of  Despond  as  this  is  inevitable,  so  long 
as  some  people  are  by  nature  idle  and  vicious, 
while  others  are  disabled  by  sickness  or  accident, 
or  thrown  upon  the  world  by  the  death  of  their 
bread-winners.  So  long  as  that  proportion  is 
restricted  within  tolerable  limits,  it  can  be  dealt 
with ;  and,  so  far  as  it  arises  only  from  such 
causes,  its  existence  may  and  must  be  patiently 
borne.  But,  when  the  organization  of  society, 
instead  of  mitigating  this  tendency,  tends  to 
continue  and  intensify  it ;  when  a  given  social 
order  plainly  makes  for  evil  and  not  for  good,  men 
naturally  enough  begin  to  think  it  high  time  to 
try  a  fresh  experiment.  The  animal  man,  finding 
that  the  ethical  man  has  landed  him  in  such  a 
slough,  resumes  his  ancient  sovereignty,  and 
preaches  anarchy ;  which  is,  substantially,  a 
proposal  to  reduce  the  social  cosmos  to  chaos,  and 
begin  the  brute  struggle  for  existence  once  again. 

Any  one  who  is   acquainted  with  the  state  of 
the   population    of    all   great   industrial   centres, 


216  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

whether  in  this  or  other  countries,  is  aware  that, 
amidst  a  large  and  increasing  body  of  that  pojm- 
lation,  la  misere  reigns  supreme.  I  have  no 
pretensions  to  the  character  of  a  philanthropist, 
and  I  have  a  special  horror  of  all  sorts  of  senti- 
mental rhetoric  ;  I  am  merely  trying  to  deal  with 
facts,  to  some  extent  within  my  own  knowledge, 
and  further  evidenced  by  abundant  testimony,  as 
a  naturalist ;  and  I  take  it  to  be  a  mere  plain 
truth  that,  throughout  industrial  Europe,  there  is 
not  a  single  large  manufacturing  city  which  is 
free  from  a  vast  mass  of  people  whose  condition 
is  exactly  that  described  ;  and  from  a  still  greater 
mass  who,  living  just  on  the  edge  of  the  social 
swamp,  are  liable  to  be  precipitated  into  it  by  any 
lack  of  demand  for  their  produce.  And,  with 
every  addition  to  the  population,  the  multitude 
already  sunk  in  the  pit  and  the  number  of  the 
host  sliding  towards  it  continually  increase. 

Argumentation  can  hardly  be  needful  to  make 
it  clear  that  no  society  in  which  the  elements  of 
decomposition  are  thus  swiftly  and  surely  accumu- 
lating can  hope  to  win  in  the  race  of  industries. 

Intelligence,  knowledge,  and  skill  are  undoubt- 
edly conditions  of  success ;  but  of  what  avail  are 
they  likely  to  be  unless  they  are  backed  up  by 
honesty,  energy,  goodwill,  and  all  the  physical  and 
moral  faculties  that  go  to  the  making  of  manhood, 
and  unless  they  are  stimulated  by  hope  of  such 
reward  as  men  may  fairly  look  to  ?     And  what 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  217 

dweller  in  the  slough  of  want,  dwarfed  in  hody 
and  soul,  demoralized,  hopeless,  can  reasonably  be 
exjDOcted  to  jDossess  these  qualities  ? 

Any  full  and  permanent  development  of  the 
productive  powers  of  an  industrial  population, 
then,  must  be  compatible  with  and,  indeed,  based 
upon  a  social  organization  which  will  secure  a  fair 
amount  of  physical  and  moral  welfare  to  that  popu- 
lation ;  which  will  make  for  good  and  not  for  evil. 
Natural  science  and  religious  enthusiasm  rarely 
go  hand  in  hand,  but  on  this  matter  their  concord 
is  complete;  and  the  least  sympathetic  of  natural- 
ists can  but  admire  the  insight  and  the  devotion 
of  such  social  reformers  as  the  late  Lord 
Shaftesbury,  whose  recently  i^ublished  "  Life  and 
Letters  "  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  condition  of 
the  working  classes  fifty  years  ago,  and  of  the  pit 
which  our  industry,  ignoring  these  plain  truths, 
was  then  digging  under  its  own  feet. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  more  hopeful  sign  of 
progress  among  us,  in  the  last  half-century,  than 
the  steadily  increasing  devotion  which  has  been 
and  is  directed  to  measures  for  promoting  physical 
and  moral  welfare  among  the  poorer  classes. 
Sanitary  reformers,  like  most  other  reformers 
whom  I  have  had  the  advantage  of  knowing,  seem 
to  need  a  good  dose  of  fanaticism,  as  a  sort  of 
moral  coca,  to  keep  them  up  to  the  mark,  and, 
doubtless,  they  have  made  many  mistakes ;  but 
that  the  endeavour  to  imjjrove  the  condition  under 


218  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

which  our  industrial  population  live,  to  amend  the 
drainage  of  densely  jDeopled  streets,  to  provide 
baths,  washhouses,  and  gymnasia,  to  facilitate 
habits  of  thrift,  to  furnish  some  provision  for 
instruction  and  amusement  in  i^ublic  libraries  and 
the  like,  is  not  only  desirable  from  a  philanthropic 
point  of  view,  but  an  essential  condition  of  safe 
industrial  development,  appears  to  me  to  be  indis- 
putable. It  is  by  such  means  alone,  so  far  as  I 
can  see,  that  we  can  hope  to  check  the  constant 
gravitation  of  industrial  society  towards  la  misere, 
until  the  general  progTess  of  intelligence  and 
morality  leads  men  to  grapple  with  the  sources  of 
that  tendency.  If  it  is  said  that  the  carrying  out 
of  such  arrangements  as  those  indicated  must 
enhance  the  cost  of  production,  and  thus  handicap 
the  producer  in  the  race  of  competition,  I  venture, 
in  the  first  place,  to  doubt  the  fact ;  but  if  it  be 
so,  it  results  that  industrial  society  has  to  face 
a  dilemma,  either  alternative  of  which  threatens 
destruction. 

On  the  one  hand,  a  population  the  labour  of  which 
is  sufficiently  remunerated  may  be  physically  and 
morally  healthy  and  socially  stable,  but  may  fail 
in  industrial  competition  by  reason  of  the  dearness 
of  its  produce.  On  the  other  hand,  a  population 
the  labour  of  which  is  insufficiently  remunerated 
must  become  physically  and  morally  unhealthy,  and 
socially  unstable  ;  and  though  it  may  succeed  for 
a  while  in  industrial  competition,  by  reason  of  the 


V  IN  HUMAN   SOCIETY  219 

cheapness  of  its  produce,  it  must  in  the  end  fall, 
through  hideous  misery  and  degradation,  to  utter 
ruin. 

Well,  if  these  are  the  only  possible  alternatives, 
let  us  for  ourselves  and  our  children  choose  the 
former,  and,  if  need  be,  starve  like  men.  But  I  do 
not  believe  that  a  stable  society  made  up  of 
healthy,  vigorous,  instructed,  and  self-ruling  people 
would  ever  incur  serious  risk  of  that  fate.  They 
are  not  likely  to  be  troubled  with  many  competi- 
tors of  the  same  character,  just  yet;  and  they  may 
be  safely  trusted  to  find  ways  of  holding  their 
own. 

Assuming  that  the  physical  and  moral  well- 
being  and  the  stable  social  order,  which  are  the 
indispensable  conditions  of  permanent  industrial 
development,  are  secured,  there  remains  for 
consideration  the  means  of  attaining  that  know- 
ledge and  skill  without  Avliich,  even  then,  the 
battle  of  competition  cannot  be  successfully 
fought.  Let  us  consider  how  we  stand.  A  vast 
system  of  elementary  education  has  now  been  in 
operation  among  us  for  sixteen  years,  and  has 
reached  all  but  a  very  small  fraction  of  the 
population.  I  do  not  think  that  there  is  any 
room  for  doubt  that,  on  the  whole,  it  has  worked 
well,  and  that  its  indirect  no  less  than  its  direct 
benefits  have  been  immense.  But,  as  might  be 
expected,  it  exhibits  the  defects  of  all  our 
educational  systems — fashioned   as  they  were  to 


220  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

meet  the  wants  of  a  bygone  condition  of  society. 
There  is  a  widespread  and,  I  think,  well-justified 
complaint  that  it  has  too  much  to  do  with  books 
and  too  little  to  do  with  things.  I  am  as  little 
disposed  as  any  one  can  well  be  to  narrow  early 
education  and  to  make  the  primary  school  a  mere 
annexe  of  the  shop.  And  it  is  not  so  much  in 
the  interests  of  industry,  as  in  that  of  breadth  of 
culture,  that  I  echo  the  common  complaint  against 
the  bookish  and  theoretical  character  of  our 
primary  instruction. 

If  there  were  no  such  things  as  industrial 
]3ursuits,  a  system  of  education  which  does 
nothing  for  the  faculties  of  observation,  which 
trains  neither  the  eye  nor  the  hand,  and  is  com- 
patible with  utter  ignorance  of  the  commonest 
natural  truths,  might  still  be  reasonably  regarded 
as  strangely  imperfect.  And  when  we  consider 
that  the  instruction  and  training  which  are 
lacking  are  exactly  those  which  are  of  most 
importance  for  the  great  mass  of  our  population, 
the  fault  becomes  almost  a  crime,  the  more  that 
there  is  no  practical  difficulty  in  making  good 
these  defects.  There  really  is  no  reason  why 
drawing  should  not  be  universally  taught,  and  it 
is  an  admirable  training  for  both  eye  and  hand. 
Artists  are  born,  not  made ;  but  everybody  may 
be  taught  to  draw  elevations,  plans,  and  sections ; 
and  pots  and  pans  are  as  good,  indeed  better, 
models  for  this  purpose  than  the  Apollo  Belvedere. 


V  IN  HUMAN  SOCIETY  221 

The  plant  is  not  expensive ;  and  there  is  this 
excellent  quality  about  drawing  of  the  kind 
indicated,  that  it  can  be  tested  almost  as  easily 
and  severely  as  arithmetic.  Such  drawings  are 
either  right  or  wrong,  and  if  they  are  wrong  the 
pupil  can  be  made  to  see  that  they  are  wrong. 
From  the  industrial  point  of  view,  drawing  has 
the  further  merit  that  there  is  hardly  any  trade 
in  which  the  power  of  drawing  is  not  of  daily  and 
hourly  utility.  In  the  next  place,  no  good  reason, 
except  the  want  of  capable  teachers,  can  be 
assigned  why  elementary  notions  of  science  should 
not  be  an  element  in  general  instruction.  In 
this  case,  again,  no  expensive  or  elaborate  ap- 
paratus is  necessary.  The  commonest  thing — 
a  candle,  a  boy's  squirt,  a  piece  of  chalk — in  the 
hands  of  a  teacher  who  knows  his  business,  may 
be  made  the  starting-points  whence  children  may 
be  led  into  the  regions  of  science  as  far  as  their 
capacity  permits,  with  efficient  exercise  of  their 
observational  and  reasoning  faculties  on  the  road. 
If  object  lessons  often  prove  trivial  failures,  it  is 
not  the  fault  of  object  lessons,  but  that  of  the 
teacher,  who  has  not  found  out  how  much  the 
power  of  teaching  a  little  depends  on  knowing  a 
great  deal,  and  that  thoroughly ;  and  that  he  has 
not  made  that  discovery  is  not  the  fault  of  the 
teachers,  but  of  the  detestable  system  of  training 
them  which  is  widely  prevalent.^ 
^  Training  in  the  use  of  simple  tools  is  no  doubt  very  desir- 


222  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR  EXISTENCE  v 

As  I  have  said,  I  do  not  regard  the  proposal  to 
add  these  to  the  present  subjects  of  universal 
instruction  as  made  merely  in  the  interests  of 
industry.  Elementary  science  and  drawing  are 
just  as  needful  at  Eton  (where  I  am  happy  to  say 
both  are  now  parts  of  the  regular  course)  as  in 
the  lowest  primary  school.  But  their  importance 
in  the  education  of  the  artisan  is  enhanced,  not 
merely  by  the  fact  that  the  knowledge  and  skill 
thus  gained — little  as  they  may  amount  to — will 
still  be  of  practical  utility  to  him ;  but,  further, 
because  they  constitute  an  introduction  to  that 
special  training  which  is  commonly  called  "  tech- 
nical education." 

I  conceive  that  our  wants  in  this  last  direction 
may  be  grouped  under  three  heads :  (1)  In- 
struction in  the  principles  of  those  branches  of 
science  and  of  art  which  are  peculiarly  applicable 
to  industrial  pursuits,  which  may  be  called 
preliminary  scientific  education.  (2)  Instruction 
in  the  special  branches  of  such  applied  science 
and  art,  as  technical  education  proper.  (3) 
Instruction  of  teachers  in  both  these  branches. 
(4)  Capacity-catching  machinery. 

A  great  deal  has  already  been  done  in  each  of 
these  directions,  but  much   remains  to  be  done. 

able,  on  all  grounds.  From  the  ])ointof  view  of  "culture,"  the 
man  whose  "fingers  are  all  thumbs"  is  but  a  stunted  creature. 
But  the  practical  difficulties  in  the  way  of  introducing  handi- 
work of  this  kind  into  elementary  schools  appear  to  me  to  be 
considerable. 


V  IN  HUMAN  SOCIETY  223 

If  elementary  education  is  amended  in  the  way 
that  has  been  suggested,  I  think  that  the  school- 
boards  will  have  quite  as  much  on  their  hands  as 
they  are  capable  of  doing  well.  The  influences 
under  which  the  members  of  these  bodies  are 
elected  do  not  tend  to  secure  fitness  for  dealing 
with  scientific  or  technical  education ;  and  it  is 
the  less  necessary  to  burden  them  with  an  un- 
congenial task,  as  there  are  other  organizations, 
not  only  much  better  fitted  to  do  the  work,  but 
already  actually  doing  it. 

In  the  matter  of  preliminary  scientific  educa- 
tion, the  chief  of  these  is  the  Science  and  Art 
Department,  which  has  done  more  during  the 
last  quarter  of  a  century  for  the  teaching  of  ele- 
mentary science  among  the  masses  of  the  people 
than  any  organization  which  exists  either  in  this 
or  in  any  other  country.  It  has  become  veritably 
a  people's  university,  so  far  as  physical  science  is 
concerned.  At  the  foundation  of  our  old  uni- 
versities they  were  freely  open  to  the  poorest,  but 
the  poorest  must  come  to  them.  In  the  last 
quarter  of  a  century,  the  Science  and  Art  Depart- 
ment, by  means  of  its  classes  spread  all  over  the 
country  and  open  to  all,  has  conveyed  instruction 
to  the  poorest.  The  University  Extension  move- 
ment shows  that  our  older  learned  corporations 
have  discovered  the  propriety  of  following  suit. 

Technical  education,  in  the  strict  sense,  has 
become   a   necessity  for   two   reasons.     The   old 


224  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR  EXISTENCE  v 

apprenticeship  53^stem  has  broken  down,  partly 
by  reason  of  the  changed  conditions  of  industrial 
life,  and  partly  because  trades  have  ceased  to 
be  "crafts,"  the  traditional  secrets  whereof  the 
master  handed  down  to  his  apprentices.  Inven- 
tion is  constantly  changing  the  face  of  our 
industries,  so  that  "  use  and  wont,"  "  rule  of 
thumb,"  and  the  like,  are  gradually  losing  their 
importance,  while  that  knowledge  of  principles 
which  alone  can  deal  successfully  with  changed 
conditions  is  becoming  more  and  more  valuable. 
Socially,  the  "  master  "  of  four  or  five  apprentices 
is  disappearing  in  favour  of  the  "  employer " 
of  forty,  or  four  hundred,  or  four  thousand, 
"  hands,"  and  the  odds  and  ends  of  technical 
knowledge,  formerly  picked  up  in  a  shop,  are 
not,  and  cannot  be,  supplied  in  the  factory.  The 
instruction  formerly  given  by  the  master  must 
therefore  be  more  than  replaced  by  the  systematic 
teaching  of  the  technical  school. 

Institutions  of  this  kind  on  var}4ng  scales  of 
magnitude  and  completeness,  from  the  splendid 
edifice  set  up  by  the  City  and  Guilds  Institute  to 
the  smallest  local  technical  school,  to  say  nothing 
of  classes,  such  as  those  in  technology  instituted 
by  the  Society  of  Arts  (subsequently  taken  over 
by  the  City  Guilds),  have  been  established  in 
various  parts  of  the  country,  and  the  movement 
in  favour  of  their  increase  and  multiplication  is 
rapidly  growing  in  breadth  and  intensity.     But 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  225 

there  is  much  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  best 
way  in  which  the  technical  instruction,  so  generally 
desired,  should  be  given.  Two  courses  appear 
to  be  practicable  :  the  one  is  the  establishment  of 
special  technical  schools  with  a  systematic  and 
lengthened  course  of  instruction  demanding  the 
employment  of  the  whole  time  of  the  pupils.  The 
other  is  the  setting  afoot  of  technical  classes, 
especially  evening  classes,  comprising  a  short 
series  of  lessons  on  some  special  topic,  which  may 
be  attended  by  persons  already  earning  wages  in 
some  branch  of  trade  or  commerce. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  technical  schools,  on 
the  plan  indicated  under  the  first  head,  are 
extremely  costly;  and,  so  far  as  the  teaching  of 
artizans  is  concerned,  it  is  very  commonly  objected 
to  them  that,  as  the  learners  do  not  work  under 
trade  conditions,  they  are  apt  to  fall  into  ama- 
teurish habits,  which  prove  of  more  hindrance 
than  service  in  the  actual  business  of  life.  When 
such  schools  are  attached  to  factories  under  the 
direction  of  an  employer  who  desires  to  train  up 
a  supply  of  intelligent  workmen,  of  course  this 
objection  does  not  apply ;  nor  can  the  usefulness 
of  such  schools  for  the  training  of  future  em- 
ployers and  for  the  higher  grade  of  the  employed 
be  doubtful ;  but  they  are  clearly  out  of  the 
reach  of  the  great  mass  of  the  people,  who  liave 
to  earn  their  bread  as  soon  as  possible.  We  nmst 
therefore    look  to   the  classes,  and  especially  to 

VOL.   IX  Q 


226  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR    EXISTENCE  v 

evening  classes,  as  the  great  instrument  for  the 
technical  education  of  the  artizan.  The  utility  of 
such  classes  has  now  been  placed  beyond  all 
doubt ;  the  only  question  which  remains  is  to 
find  the  ways  and  means  of  extending  them. 

We  are  here,  as  in  all  other  questions  of  social 
organization,  met  by  two  diametrically  opposed 
views.  On  the  one  hand,  the  methods  pursued 
in  foreign  countries  are  held  up  as  our  example. 
The  state  is  exhorted  to  take  the  matter  in  hand, 
and  establish  a  great  sj-stem  of  technical  educa- 
tion. On  the  other  hand,  many  economists  of 
the  individualist  school  exhaust  the  resources  of 
language  in  condemning  and  repudiating,  not 
merely  the  interference  of  the  general  government 
in  such  matters,  but  the  application  of  a  farthing 
of  the  funds  raised  by  local  taxation  to  these 
purposes.  I  entertain  a  strong  conviction  that, 
in  this  country,  at  any  rate,  the  State  had  much 
better  leave  purely  technical  and  trade  instruction 
alone.  But,  although  my  personal  leanings  are 
decidedly  towards  the  individualists,  I  have  ar- 
rived at  that  conclusion  on  merely  practical 
grounds.  In  fact,  my  individualism  is  rather  of  a 
sentimental  sort,  and  I  sometimes  think  I  should 
be  stronger  in  the  faith  if  it  were  less  vehemently 
advocated.^     I  am  unable  to  see  that  civil  society 

'  In  what  follows  I  am  only  repeating  and  emphasizing 
opinions  which  I  expressed  seventeen  years  ago,  in  an  Address 
to  the  members  of  the  Midlan<l  Institute  (republished  in  Critiques 
and  Addresses  in  1873,  and  in  Vol.  i.  of  these  Essays).     I  have 


V  IN    HUMAN   SOCIETY  227 

is  anything  but  a  corporation  established  for  a 
moral  object — namely,  the  good  of  its  members — 
and  therefore  that  it  may  take  such  measures  as 
seem  fitting  for  the  attainment  of  that  which  the 
general  voice  decides  to  be  the  general  good. 
That  the  suffrage  of  the  majority  is  by  no  means 
a  scientific  test  of  social  good  and  evil  is  un- 
fortunately too  true;  but,  in  practice,  it  is  the 
only  test  we  can  apply,  and  the  refusal  to  abide 
by  it  means  anarchy.  The  purest  despotism  that 
ever  existed  is  as  much  based  upon  that  will  of 
the  majority  (which  is  usually  submission  to  the 
will  of  a  small  minority)  as  the  freest  republic. 
Law  is  the  expression  of  the  opinion  of  the 
majority  ;  and  it  is  law,  and  not  mere  opinion, 
because  the  many  are  strong  enough  to  enforce 
it. 

I  am  as  strongly  convinced  as  the  most  pro- 
nounced individualist  can  be,  that  it  is  desirable 
that  every  man  should  be  free  to  act  in  every  way 
which  does  not  limit  the  corresponding  freedom 
of  his  fellow-man.  But  I  fail  to  connect  that 
great  induction  of  political  science  with  the 
practical  corollary  which  is  frequently  drawn  from 
it :  that  the  State — that  is,  the  people  in  their 
corporate  capacity — has  no  business  to  meddle 
with  anything  but  the  administration  of  justice 
and  external  defence.     It  appears  to  me  that  the 

seen  no  reason  to  modify  them,  notwithstanding  high  authority 
on  the  other  side. 

Q  2 


228  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR    EXISTENCE  v 

amount  of  freedom  which  incorjDorate  society  may 
fitly  leave  to  its  members  is  not  a  fixed  quantity, 
to  be  determined  a  'priori  by  deduction  from  the 
fiction  called  "  natural  rights  "  ;  but  that  it  must 
be  determined  by,  and  vary  with,  circumstances. 
I  conceive  it  to  be  demonstrable  that  the  higher 
and  the  more  complex  the  organization  of  the 
social  body,  the  more  closely  is  the  life  of  each 
member  bound  up  with  that  of  the  whole  ;  and 
the  larger  becomes  the  category  of  acts  which 
cease  to  be  merely  self-regarding,  and  which  in- 
terfere with  the  freedom  of  others  more  or  less 
seriously. 

If  a  squatter,  living  ten  miles  away  from  any 
neighbour,  chooses  to  burn  his  house  down  to  get 
rid  of  vermin,  there  may  be  no  necessity  (in  the 
absence  of  insurance  offices)  that  the  law  should 
interfere  with  his  freedom  of  action ;  his  act  can 
hurt  nobody  but  himself  But,  if  the  dweller  in 
a  street  chooses  to  do  the  same  thing,  the  State 
very  j^roperly  makes  such  a  proceeding  a  crime, 
and  punishes  it  as  such.  He  does  meddle  with 
his  neighbour's  freedom,  and  that  seriously.  So 
it  might,  perhaps,  be  a  tenable  doctrine,  that  it 
would  be  needless,  and  even  tyrannous,  to  make 
education  compulsory  in  a  sparse  agricultural 
population,  living  in  abundance  on  the  produce  of 
its  own  soil ;  but,  in  a  densely  populated  manu- 
facturing country,  struggling  for  existence  with 
competitors^     every    ignorant    person    tends    to 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  229 

become  a  burden  upon,  and,  so  far,  an  infringer  of 
the  liberty  of,  his  fellows,  and  an  obstacle  to  their 
success.  Under  such  circumstances  an  education 
rate  is,  in  fact,  a  war  tax,  levied  for  purposes  of 
defence. 

That  State  action  always  has  been  more  or  less 
misdirected,  and  always  will  be  so,  is,  I  believe, 
perfectly  true.  But  I  am  not  aware  that  it  is 
more  true  of  the  action  of  men  in  their  corporate 
capacity  than  it  is  of  the  doings  of  individuals. 
The  wisest  and  most  dispassionate  man  in  exist- 
ence, merely  wishing  to  go  from  one  stile  in  a 
field  to  the  opposite,  will  not  walk  quite  straight 
— he  is  always  going  a  little  wrong,  and  always 
correcting  himself;  and  I  can  only  congratulate 
the  individualist  who  is  able  to  say  that  his 
general  course  of  life  has  been  of  a  less  undula- 
tory  character.  To  abolish  State  action,  because 
its  direction  is  never  more  than  approximately 
correct,  appears  to  me  to  be  much  the  same  thing 
as  abolishing  the  man  at  the  wheel  altogether, 
because,  do  what  he  will,  the  ship  yaws  more  or 
less.  "  Why  should  I  be  robbed  of  my  property 
to  pay  for  teaching  another  man's  children  ? "  is  an 
individualist  question,  which  is  not  unfrequently 
put  as  if  it  settled  the  whole  business.  Perhaps 
it  does,  but  I  find  difficulties  in  seeing  why  it 
should.  The  parish  in  which  I  live  makes  me 
pay  my  share  for  the  paving  and  lighting  of  a 
great  many  streets  that  I  never  pass  through; 


230  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR    EXISTENCE  v 

and  I  might  plead  that  I  am  robbed  to  smooth  the 
way  and  hghten  the  darkness  of  other  people. 
But  I  am  afraid  the  parochial  authorities  would 
not  let  me  off  on  this  plea ;  and  I  must  confess  I 
do  not  see  why  they  should. 

I  cannot  speak  of  my  own  knowledge,  but  I 
have  every  reason  to  believe  that  I  came  into  this 
world  a  small  reddish  person,  certainly  without  a 
gold  spoon  in  my  mouth,  and  in  fact  with  no  dis- 
cernible abstract  or  concrete  "  rights  "  or  propert}^ 
of  any  description.  If  a  foot  was  not  set  upon  me, 
at  once,  as  a  squalling  nuisance,  it  was  either  the 
natural  affection  of  those  about  me,  which  I  cer- 
tainly had  done  nothing  to  deserve,  or  the  fear  of 
the  law  which,  ages  before  my  birth,  was  painfully 
built  up  by  the  society  into  which  I  intruded,  that 
prevented  that  catastrophe.  If  I  was  nourished, 
cared  for,  taught,  saved  from  the  vagabondage  of 
a  wastrel,  I  certainly  am  not  aware  that  I  did 
anything  to  deserve  those  advantages.  And,  if  I 
possess  anything  now,  it  strikes  me  that,  though  I 
may  have  fairly  earned  my  day's  wages  for  my 
day's  work,  and  may  justly  call  them  ni}^  property 
— yet,  without  that  organization  of  society,  created 
out  of  the  toil  and  blood  of  long  generations  before 
my  time,  T  should  probably  have  had  nothing  but 
a  flint  axe  and  an  indifferent  hut  to  call  my  own  ; 
and  even  those  would  be  mine  only  so  long  as  no 
stronger  savage  came  my  way. 

So  that  if  society,  having,  quite  gratuitously, 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  281 

done  all  these  things  for  me,  asks  me  in  turn  to 
do  something  towards  its  preservation — even  if 
that  something  is  to  contribute  to  the  teaching  of 
other  men's  children — I  really,  in  spite  of  all  my 
individualist  leanino-s,  feel  rather  ashamed  to 
say  no.  And  if  I  were  not  ashamed,  I  cannot  say 
that  I  think  that  society  would  be  dealing  un- 
justly with  me  in  converting  the  moral  obligation 
into  a  legal  one.  There  is  a  manifest  unfairness 
in  letting  all  the  burden  be  borne  by  the  willing 
horse. 

It  does  not  appear  to  me,  then,  that  there  is 
any  valid  objection  to  taxation  for  purposes  of 
education ;  but,  in  the  case  of  technical  schools 
and  classes,  I  think  it  is  practically  expedient 
that  such  a  taxation  should  be  local.  Our  in- 
dustrial population  accumulates  in  particular 
towns  and  districts ;  these  districts  are  those 
which  immediately  profit  by  technical  education  ; 
and  it  is  only  in  them  that  we  can  find  the  men 
practically  engaged  in  industries,  among  whom 
some  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  competent 
judges  of  that  which  is  wanted,  and  of  the  best 
means  of  meeting  the  want. 

In  my  belief,  all  methods  of  technical  training 
are  at  present  tentative,  and,  to  be  successful, 
each  must  be  adapted  to  the  special  peculiarities 
of  its  locality.  This  is  a  case  in  which  we  want 
twenty  years,  not  of  "  strong  government,"  but  of 
cheerful  and  hopeful  blundering;  and  we  may  be 


282  THE   STRUGGLE   FOR   EXISTENCE  v 

thankful  if  we  get  things  straight  in  that 
time. 

The  principle  of  the  Bill  introduced,  but  dropped, 
by  the  Government  last  session,  appears  to  me  to 
be  wise,  and  some  of  the  objections  to  it  I  think 
are  due  to  a  misunderstanding.  The  Bill  pro- 
posed in  substance  to  allow  localities  to  tax  them- 
selves for  purposes  of  technical  education — on  the 
condition  that  any  scheme  for  such  purpose  should 
be  submitted  to  the  Science  and  Art  Department, 
and  declared  by  that  department  to  be  in  accord- 
ance with  the  intention  of  the  Legislature. 

A  cry  was  raised  that  the  Bill  proposed  to  throw 
technical  education  into  the  hands  of  the  Science 
and  Art  Department.  But,  in  reality,  no  power 
of  initiation,  nor  even  of  meddling  with  details, 
was  given  to  that  Department — the  sole  function 
of  which  was  to  decide  whether  any  plan  proposed 
did  or  did  not  come  within  the  limits  of  "  tech- 
nical education."  The  necessity  for  such  control, 
somewhere,  is  obvious.  No  legislature,  certainly 
not  ours,  is  likely  to  grant  the  power  of  self-taxa- 
tion without  setting  limits  to  that  power  in  some 
way  ;  and  it  would  neither  have  been  practicable 
to  devise  a  legal  definition  of  technical  education, 
nor  commendable  to  leave  the  question  to  the 
Auditor-General,  to  be  fought  out  in  the  law-courts. 
The  only  alternative  was  to  leave  the  decision  to 
an  appropriate  State  authority.  If  it  is  asked, 
what  is  the  need  of  such  control  if  the  people  of 


V  IN   HUMAN   SOCIETY  283 

the  localities  are  the  best  judges,  the  obvious 
reply  is  that  there  are  localities  and  localities, 
and  that  while  Manchester,  or  Liverpool,  or 
Birmingham,  or  Glasgow  might,  perhaps,  be 
safely  left  to  do  as  they  thought  fit,  smaller  towns, 
in  which  there  is  less  certainty  of  full  discussion 
by  competent  people  of  different  ways  of  thinking, 
might  easily  fall  a  prey  to  crotcheteers. 

Supposing  our  intermediate  science  teaching 
and  our  technical  schools  and  classes  are  estab- 
lished, there  is  yet  a  third  need  to  be  supplied, 
and  that  is  the  want  of  good  teachers.  And  it  is 
necessary  not  only  to  get  them,  but  to  keep  them 
when  you  have  got  them. 

It  is  impossible  to  insist  too  strongly  upon  the 
fact  that  efficient  teachers  of  science  and  of  tech- 
nology are  not  to  be  made  by  the  processes  in 
vogue  at  ordinary  training  colleges.  The  memory 
loaded  with  mere  bookwork  is  not  the  thinof 
wanted — is,  in  fact,  rather  worse  than  useless — in 
the  teacher  of  scientific  subjects.  It  is  absolutely 
essential  that  his  mind  should  be  full  of  know- 
ledge and  not  of  mere  learning,  and  that  what  he 
knows  should  have  been  learned  in  the  laboratory 
rather  than  in  the  library.  There  are  happily 
already,  both  in  London  and  in  the  provinces, 
various  places  in  which  such  training  is  to  be  had, 
and  the  main  thing  at  present  is  to  make  it  in  the 
first  place  accessible,  and  in  the  next  indispensable, 
to  those  who  undertake  the  business  of  teaching. 


234  THE    STRUGGLE    FOR    EXISTENCE  y 

But  when  the  well-trained  men  are  supplied,  it 
must  be  recollected  that  the  profession  of  teacher 
is  not  a  very  lucrative  or  otherwise  temjDting  one, 
and  that  it  may  be  advisable  to  offer  special  in- 
ducements to  good  men  to  remain  in  it.  These, 
however,  are  questions  of  detail  into  which  it  is 
unnecessary  to  enter  further. 

Last,  but  not  least,  comes  the  question  of  pro- 
viding the  machinery  for  enabling  those  who  are 
by  nature  specially  qualified  to  undertake  the 
higher  branches  of  industrial  work,  to  reach  the 
position  in  wdiich  they  may  render  that  service  to 
the  community.  If  all  our  educational  expendi- 
ture did  nothing  but  pick  one  man  of  scientific 
or  inventive  genius,  each  year,  from  amidst  the 
hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  w^ater,  and  give 
him  the  chance  of  making  the  best  of  his  inborn 
faculties,  it  w^ould  be  a  very  good  investment.  If 
there  is  one  such  child  among  the  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  our  annual  increase,  it  would  be 
worth  any  money  to  drag  him  either  from  the 
slough  of  misery,  or  from  the  hotbed  of  wealth, 
and  teach  him  to  devote  himself  to  the  service  of 
his  people.  Here,  again,  we  have  made  a  begin- 
ning with  our  scholarships  and  the  like,  and 
need  only  follow  in  the  tracks  already  worn. 

The  programme  of  industrial  develoiDment 
briefly  set  forth  in  the  preceding  pages  is  not 
what  Kant  calls  a  "  Hirngespinnst,"  a  cobweb 
spun  in  the  brain  of  a  Utopian  philosopher.    More 


V  IN   HUMAN    SOCIETY  285 

or  less  of  it  has  taken  bodily  shape  in  many  parts 
of  the  country,  and  there  are  towns  of  no  great 
size  or  wealth  in  the  manufacturing  districts 
(Keighley,  for  example)  in  which  almost  the  whole 
of  it  has,  for  some  time,  been  carried  out,  so  far  as 
the  means  at  the  disposal  of  the  energetic  and 
public-spirited  men  who  have  taken  the  matter 
in  hand  permitted.  The  thing  can  be  done ; 
I  have  endeavoured  to  show  good  grounds  for  the 
belief  that  it  must  be  done,  and  that  speedily, 
if  we  wish  to  hold  our  own  in  the  w^ar  of  indus- 
try. I  doubt  not  that  it  will  be  done,  whenever 
its  absolute  necessity  becomes  as  apparent  to  all 
those  who  are  absorbed  in  the  actual  business  of 
industrial  life  as  it  is  to  some  of  the  lookers  on. 

[Perhaps  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  add  that 
technical  education  is  not  here  proposed  as  a 
panacea  for  social  diseases,  but  simply  as  a 
medicament  which  will  help  the  patient  to  pass 
through  an  imminent  crisis. 

An  ophthalmic  surgeon  may  recommend  an 
operation  for  cataract  in  a  man  who  is  going  blind, 
without  being  supposed  to  undertake  that  it  will 
cure  him  of  gout.  And  I  may  pursue  the 
metaphor  so  far  as  to  remark,  that  the  surgeon 
is  justified  in  pointing  out  that  a  diet  of  jDork-chops 
and  burgundy  will  probably  kill  his  patient, 
though  he  may  be  quite  unable  to  suggest  a  mode 


236    HUMAN  SOCIETY  STRUGGLE  FOR  EXISTENCE     v 

of  living  which  will  free  him   from   his  constitu- 
tional disorder. 

Mr.  Booth  asks  me,  Why  do  you  not  propose 
some  plan  of  your  own  ?  Really,  that  is  no  answer 
to  my  argument  that  his  treatment  will  make  the 
patient  very  much  worse.  [Note  added  in  Social 
Diseases  and  Worse  Remedies,  January,  1891.] 


LETTERS   TO   THE   'TIMES" 

ox    THE 

"DARKEST  ENGLAND"   SCHEME 

I 

The  "  Tim.cs;'  Dcccmhcr  1st,  1890 

Sir, — A  short  time  ago  a  generous  and  philan- 
thropic friend  wrote  to  me,  placing  at  my  disposal 
a  large  sum  of  money  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
vast  scheme  which  the  "  General  "  of  the  Salvation 
Army  has  propounded,  if  I  thought  it  worthy  of 
support.  The  responsibility  of  advising  my  bene- 
volent correspondent  has  weighed  heavily  upon 
me,  but  I  felt  that  it  would  be  cowardly,  as  well 
as  ungracious,  to  refuse  to  accept  it.  I  have 
therefore  studied  Mr.  Booth's  book  with  some  care, 
for  the  purpose  of  separating  the  essential  from 
the  accessory  features  of  his  project,  and  I  have 
based  my  judgment — I  am  sorry  to  say  an  un- 
favourable one — upon  the  data  thus  obtained. 
Before  communicating  my  conclusions  to  my 
friend,  however,  I  am  desirous  to  know  what 
there  may  be  to  be  said  in  arrest  of  that  judg- 


238  LETTERS   TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

merit ;  and  the  matter  is  of  such  vast  pubhc 
importance  that  I  trust  you  will  aid  me  by  publish- 
ing this  letter,  notwithstanding  its  length. 

There  are  one  or  two  points  upon  Avhich  I 
imagine  all  thinking  men  have  arrived  at  the 
same  convictions  as  those  from  which  Mr.  Booth 
starts.  It  is  certain  that  there  is  an  immense 
amount  of  remediable  misery  among  us ;  that,  in 
addition  to  the  poverty,  disease,  and  degradation 
which  are  the  consequences  of  causes  beyond 
human  control,  there  is  a  vast,  probably  a  very 
much  larger,  quantity  of  misery  which  is  the 
result  of  individual  ignorance,  or  misconduct,  and 
of  faulty  social  arrangements.  Further,  I  think 
it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that,  unless  this  remediable 
misery  is  effectually  dealt  with,  the  hordes  of  vice 
and  pauperism  will  destroy  modern  civilization  as 
effectually  as  uncivilized  tribes  of  another  kind 
destroyed  the  great  social  organization  which 
preceded  ours.  Moreover,  I  think  all  will  agree 
that  no  reforms  and  improvements  will  go  to  the 
root  of  the  evil  unless  they  attack  it  in  its 
ultimate  source — namely,  the  motives  of  the 
individual  man.  Honest,  industrious,  and  self- 
restraining  men  will  make  a  very  bad  social 
organization  prosper ;  while  vicious,  idle,  and 
reckless  citizens  will  bring  to  ruin  the  best  that 
ever  was,  or  ever  will  be,  invented. 

The  leading  propositions  which  are  peculiar  to 
Mr.  Booth  I  take  to  be  these  :  — 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "  SCHEME  239 

(1)  That  the  only  adequate  means  to  such  re- 
formation of  the  individual  man  is  the  adoption 
of  that  form  of  somewhat  corybantic  Christianity 
of  which  the  soldiers  of  the  Salvation  Army  are 
the  militant  missionaries.  This  implies  the 
belief  that  the  excitement  of  the  religious 
emotions  (largely  by  processes  described  by  their 
employers  as  "  rousing "  and  "  convivial ")  is  a 
desirable  and  trustworthy  method  of  permanently 
amending  the  conduct  of  mankind. 

I  demur  to  these  propositions.  I  am  of  opinion 
that  the  testimony  of  history,  no  less  than  the 
cool  observation  of  that  which  lies  within  the 
personal  experience  of  many  of  us,  is  wholly 
adverse  to  it. 

(2)  That  the  appropriate  instrument  for  the 
propagation  and  maintenance  of  this  peculiar 
sacramental  enthusiasm  is  the  Salvation  Army — 
a  body  of  devotees,  drilled  and  disciplined  as  a 
military  organization,  and  provided  with  a  num- 
erous hierarchy  of  officers,  every  one  of  whom  is 
pledged  to  blind  and  unhesitating  obedience  to 
the  "  General,"  who  frankly  tells  us  that  the  first 
condition  of  the  service  is  "  implicit,  unquestion- 
ing obedience."  "  A  telegram  from  me  will  send 
any  of  them  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  "  ; 
every  one  "  has  taken  service  on  the  express 
condition  that  he  or  she  will  obey,  without 
questioning,  or  gainsaying,  the  orders  from  head- 
quarters "  ('■  Darkest  England,"  p.  243). 


240  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

This  proposition  seems  to  me  to  be  indisputable. 
History  confirms  it.  Francis  of  Assisi  and 
Ignatius  Loyola  made  their  great  experiments  on 
the  same  principle.  Nothing  is  more  certain 
than  that  a  body  of  religious  enthusiasts  (perliaps 
we  may  even  say  fanatics)  pledged  to  blind 
obedience  to  their  chief,  is  one  of  the  most 
efficient  instruments  for  effecting  any  purpose 
that  the  wit  of  man  has  yet  succeeded  in  devising. 
And  I  can  but  admire  the  insight  into  human 
nature  which  has  led  Mr.  Booth  to  leave  his 
unquestioning  and  unhesitating  instruments  un- 
bound by  vows.  A  volunteer  slave  is  worth  ten 
sworn  bondsmen. 

(3)  That  the  success  of  the  Salvation  Army, 
with  its  present  force  of  9416  officers  "  wholly 
engaged  in  the  work,"  its  capital  of  three  quarters 
of  a  million,  its  income  of  the  same  amount,  its 
1375  corps  at  home,  and  1499  in  the  colonies  and 
foreign  countries  (Appendix,  pp.  3  and  4),  is  a 
proof  that  Divine  assistance  has  been  vouchsafed 
to  its  efforts. 

Here  I  am  not  able  to  agree  with  the  sanguine 
Commander-in-chief  of  the  new  model,  whose 
labours  in  creating  it  have  probably  interfered 
with  his  acquisition  of  information  respecting 
the  fate  of  previous  enterprises  of  like  kind. 

It  does  not  appear  to  me  that  his  success  is  in 
any  degree  more  remarkable  than  that  of  Francis 
of  Assisi    or  that  of  Ignatius  Loyola,  than  that 


V  "DARKEST   ENGLAND"   SCHEME  241 

of  George  Fox,  or  even  than  that  of  the  Mormons, 
in  our  own  time.  When  I  observe  the  discrep- 
ancies of  the  doctrinal  foundations  from  which 
each  of  these  great  movements  set  out,  I  find  it 
difficult  to  suppose  that  supernatural  aid  has  been 
given  to  all  of  them  ;  still  more,  that  Mr.  Booth's 
smaller  measure  of  success  is  evidence  that  it  has 
been  granted  to  him. 

But  what  became  of  the  Franciscan  experi- 
ment ^  ?  If  there  was  one  rule  rather  than  another 
on  which  the  founder  laid  stress,  it  was  that  his 
army  of  friars  should  be  absolute  mendicants, 
keeping  themselves  sternly  apart  from  all  worldly 
entanglements.  Yet,  even  before  the  death  of 
Francis,  in  1226,  a  strong  party,  headed  by  Elias 
of  Cortona,  the  deputy  of  his  own  appointment, 
began  to  hanker  after  these  very  things;  and, 
within  thirty  years  of  that  time,  the  Franciscans 
had  become  one  of  the  most  powerful,  wealthy,  and 
worldly  corporations  in  Christendom,  with  their 
fingers  in  every  sink  of  political  and  social  corrup- 
tion, if  so  be  profit  for  the  order  could  be  fished  out 
of  it ;  their  principal  interest  being  to  fight  their 
rivals,  the  Dominicans,  and  to  persecute  such  of 
their  own  brethren  as  were  honest  enough  to  try 
to  carry  out  their  founder's  plainest  injunctions. 
We  also  know  what  has  become  of  Loyola's  ex- 
periment. For  two  centuries  the  Jesuits  have 
been  the  hope  of  the  enemies  of  the  Papacy ; 
1  See  note  pp.  245-47. 

VOL.  IX  R 


242  LETTERS   TO    THE    "  TIMES  "  v 

whenever  it  becomes  too  prosperous,  they  are 
sure  to  bring  about  a  catastrophe  by  their  corrupt 
use  of  the  poKtical  and  social  influence  which 
their  organization  and  their  wealth  secure. 

With  these  examples  of  that  which  may  happen 
to  institutions  founded  by  noble  men,  with  high 
aims,  in  the  hands  of  successors  of  a  different 
stamp,  armed  with  despotic  authority,  before  me, 
common  prudence  surely  requires  that,  before  ad- 
vising the  handing  over  of  a  large  sum  of  money 
to  the  general  of  a  new  order  of  mendicants,  I 
should  ask  what  guarantee  there  is  that,  thirty 
years  hence,  the  "  General  "  who  then  autocrati- 
cally controls  the  action,  say,  of  100,000  officers 
pledged  to  blind  obedience,  distributed  through 
the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  poorer 
classes,  and  each  with  his  finger  on  the  trigger  of 
a  mine  charged  with  discontent  and  religious 
fanaticism ;  with  the  absolute  control,  say,  of 
eight  or  ten  millions  sterling  of  capital  and  as 
many  of  income  ;  with  barracks  in  every  town, 
with  estates  scattered  over  the  country,  and  with 
settlements  in  the  colonies — will  exercise  his 
enormous  powers,  not  merely  honestly,  but  wisely  ? 
What  shadow  of  security  is  there  that  the  person 
who  wields  this  uncontrolled  authority  over  many 
thousands  of  men  shall  use  it  solely  for  those 
philanthropic  and  religious  objects  which,  I  do  not 
doubt,  are  alone  in  the  mind  of  Mr.  Booth  ?  Who 
is  to  say  that  the  Salvation  Army,  in   the  year 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "    SCHEME  243 

1920,  shall  not  be  a  replica  of  what  the  Franciscan 
order  had  become  in  the  year  1260  ? 

The  personal  character  and  the  intentions  of 
the  founders  of  such  organizations  as  we  are 
considering  count  for  very  little  in  the  formation 
of  a  forecast  of  their  future  ;  and  if  they  did,  it  is 
no  disrespect  to  Mr.  Booth  to  say  that  he  is  not 
the  peer  of  Francis  of  Assisi.  But  if  Francis's 
judgment  of  men  was  so  imperfect  as  to  permit 
him  to  appoint  an  ambitious  intriguer  of  the 
stamp  of  Brother  Elias  his  deputy,  we  have  no 
right  to  be  sanguine  about  the  perspicacity  of  Mr. 
Booth  in  a  like  matter. 

Adding  to  all  these  considerations  the  fact  that 
Mr.  Llewelyn  Davies,  the  warmth  of  whose 
philanthropy  is  beyond  question,  and  in  whose 
competency  and  fairness  I,  for  one,  place  implicit 
reliance,  flatly  denies  the  boasted  success  of  the 
Salvation  Army  in  its  professed  mission,  I  have 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that,  as  at  present 
advised,  I  cannot  be  the  instrument  of  carrying 
out  my  friend's  proposal. 

Mr.  Booth  has  pithily  characterised  certain 
benevolent  schemes  as  doing  sixpennyworth  of 
good  and  a  shilling's  worth  of  harm.  I  grieve  to 
say  that,  in  my  opinion,  the  definition  exactly  fits 
his  own  project.  Few  social  evils  are  of  greater 
magnitude  than  uninstructed  and  unchastened 
religious  fonaticism ;  no  personal  habit  more 
surely  degrades  the  conscience  and   the   intellect 

R  2 


244  LETTERS    TO    THE    -TIMES"  v 

than  blind  and  unhesitating  obedience  to  un- 
limited authority.  Undoubtedly,  harlotry  and 
intempei*ance  are  sore  evils,  and  starvation  is 
hard  to  bear,  or  even  to  know  of;  but  the 
prostitution  of  the  mind,  the  soddening  of  the 
conscience,  the  dwarfing  of  manhood  are  woi-se 
calamities.  It  is  a  gi-eater  evil  to  have  the 
intellect  of  a  nation  put  down  by  organised 
fanaticism;  to  see  its  poHtical  and  industrial 
aflfairs  at  the  mercy  of  a  despot  whose  chief 
thought  is  to  make  that  fanaticism  prevail ;  to 
watch  the  degradation  of  men,  who  should  feel 
themselves  individually  responsible  for  then-  own 
and  then*  countiy's  fates,  to  mere  brute  instiai- 
ments,  ready  to  the  hand  of  a  master  for  any  use 
to  which  he  may  put  them. 

But  that  is  the  end  to  which,  in  my  opinion, 
all  such  organizations  as  that  to  which  kindly 
people,  who  do  not  look  to  the  consequences  of 
their  acts,  are  now  giving  their  thousands,  in- 
evitably tend.  Unless  clear  proof  that  I  am 
wi'ong  is  furnished,  another  thousand  shall  not 
be  added  by  my  instiiimentality. 

I  am.  Sir.  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  HrxLEY. 


"DARKEST   ENGLAND"    SCHEME  245 


NOTE. 

An  authoritative  contemporary  historian,  Matthew 
Paris,  writes  thus  of  the  Minorite,  or  Franciscan, 
Friars  in  England  in  1235,  just  nine  years  after  the 
death  of  Francis  of  Assisi : — 

"  At  this  time  some  of  the  Minorite  brethren,  as 
well  as  some  of  the  Order  of  Preachers,  unmindful  of 
their  profession  and  the  restrictions  of  their  order, 
impudently  entered  the  territories  of  some  noble 
monasteries,  under  pretence  of  fulfilling  their  duties 
of  preaching,  as  if  intending  to  depart  after  preaching 
the  next  day.  Under  pretence  of  sickness,  or  on 
some  other  pretext,  however,  they  remained,  and, 
constructing  an  altar  of  wood,  they  placed  on  it  a 
consecrated  stone  altar,  which  they  had  brought  with 
them,  and  clandestinely  and  in  a  low  voice  performed 
mass,  and  even  received  the  confessions  of  many  of 
the  parishioners,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  priests,  .  .  . 
And  if  by  chance  they  were  not  satisfied  with  this, 
they  broke  forth  in  insults  and  threats,  reviling  every 
other  order  except  their  own,  and  asserting  that  all 
the  rest  were  doomed  to  damnation,  and  that  they 
would  not  spare  the  soles  of  their  feet  till  they  had 
exhausted  the  wealth  of  their  opposers,  however  great 
it  might  be.  The  religious  men,  therefore,  gave  way 
to  them  in  many  points,  yielding  to  avoid  scandal, 
and  offending  those  in  power.  For  they  were  the 
councillors  and  messengers  of  the  nobles,  and  even 
secretaries  of  the  Pope,  and  therefore  obtained  much 


246  LETTERS   TO   THE   "  TIMES  "  v 

secular  favour.  Some,  however,  finding  themselves 
opposed  at  the  Court  of  Rome,  were  restrained  by- 
obvious  reasons,  and  went  away  in  confusion  ;  for  the 
Supreme  Pontiff,  with  a  scowling  look,  said  to  them, 
'  What  means  this,  my  brethren  ?  To  what  lengths 
are  you  going  ?  Have  you  not  professed  voluntary- 
poverty,  and  that  you  would  traverse  towns  and 
castles  and  distant  places,  as  the  case  required,  bare- 
footed and  unostentatiously  in  order  to  preach  the 
word  of  God  in  all  humility"?  And  do  you  now 
presume  to  usurp  these  estates  to  yourselves  against 
the  will  of  the  lords  of  these  fees?  Your  religion 
appears  to  be  in  a  great  measure  dying  away,  and 
your  doctrines  to  be  confuted.'  " 

Under  date  of  1243,  Matthew  writes  :  — 
"For  three  or  four  hundred  years  or  more  the 
monastic  order  did  not  hasten  to  destruction  so 
quickly  as  their  order  [Minorites  and  Preachers]  of 
whom  now  the  brothers,  twenty-four  years  having 
scarcely  elapsed,  had  first  built  in  England  dwellings 
which  rivalled  regal  palaces  in  height.  These  are 
they  who  daily  expose  to  view  their  inestimable 
treasures,  in  enlarging  their  sumptuous  edifices,  and 
erecting  lofty  walls,  thereby  impudently  transgressing 
the  limits  of  their  original  poverty  and  violating  the 
basis  of  their  religion,  according  to  the  prophecy  of 
German  Hildegarde.  When  noblemen  and  rich  men 
are  at  the  point  of  death,  whom  they  know  to  be 
possessed  of  great  riches,  they,  in  their  love  of  gain, 
diligently  urge  them,  to  the  injury  and  loss  of  the 
ordinary  pastors,  and  extort  confessions  and  hidden 
wills,  lauding  themselves  and  their  own  order  only, 


V  " DARKEST  ENGLAND  "   SCHEME  247 

and  placing  themselves  before  all  others.  So  no 
faithful  man  now  believes  he  can  be  saved,  except  he 
is  directed  by  the  counsels  of  the  Preachers  and 
Minorites."  —  Matthew  Paris's  English  History. 
Translated  by  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Giles,  1889,  Vol.  I. 


II 

The  "  Times;'  Dccciiibcr  dth,  1890 

Sir, — The  purpose  of  my  previous  letter  about 
Mr.  Booth's  scheme  was  to  arouse  the  contributors 
to  the  military  chest  of  the  Salvation  Army  to  a 
clear  sense  of  what  they  are  doing.  I  thought 
it  desirable  that  they  should  be  distinctly  aware 
that  they  are  setting  up  and  endowing  a  sect,  in 
many  ways  analogous  to  the  "  Ranters "  and 
"  Revivalists  "  of  undesirable  notoriety  in  former 
times ;  but  with  this  immensely  important  differ- 
ence, that  it  possesses  a  strong,  far-reaching, 
centralized  organization,  the  disposal  of  the  physi- 
cal, moral,  and  financial  strength  of  which  rests 
with  an  irresponsible  chief,  who,  according  to  his 
own  account,  is  assured  of  the  blind  obedience  of 
nearly  10,000  subordinates.  I  wish  them  to  ask 
themselves,  Ought  prudent  men  and  good  citizens 
to  aid  in  the  establishment  of  an  organization 
which,  under  sundry,  by  no  means  improbable, 
contingencies,   may   easily   become   a  worse  and 


248  LETTERS   TO    THE   "  TIMES  "  v 

more  dangerous  nuisance  than  the  mendicant 
friars  of  the  middle  ages  ?  If  this  is  an  academic 
question,  I  really  do  not  know  what  questions 
deserve  to  be  called  practical.  As  you  divined,  I 
purposely  omitted  any  consideration  of  the  details 
of  the  Salvationist  scheme,  and  of  the  principles 
which  animate  those  who  work  it,  because  I 
desired  that  the  public  appreciation  of  the  evils, 
necessarily  inherent  in  all  such  plans  of  despotic 
social  and  religious  regimentation  should  not  be 
obscured  by  the  raising  of  points  of  less  compara- 
tive, however  great  absolute,  importance. 

But  it  is  now  time  to  undertake  a  more  par- 
ticular criticism  of  "  Darkest  England."  At  the 
outset  of  my  examination  of  that  work,  I  was 
startled  to  find  that  Mr.  Booth  had  put  forward  his 
scheme  with  an  almost  incredibly  imperfect  know- 
ledge of  what  had  been  done  and  is  doing  in  the 
same  direction.  A  simple  reader  might  well  imagine 
that  the  author  of  "  Darkest  England  "  posed  as 
the  Columbus,  or  at  any  rate  the  Cortez,  of  that 
region.  "  Go  to  Mudie's,"  he  tells  us,  and  you 
\vill  be  surprised  to  see  how  few  books  there  are 
upon  the  social  problem.  That  may  or  may  not 
be  correct ;  but  if  Mr.  Booth  had  gone  to  a  cer- 
tain reading-room  not  far  from  Mudie's,  I  under- 
take to  say  that  the  well-informed  and  obliging- 
staff  of  the  national  library  in  Bloomsbury  would 
have  provided  him  with  more  books  on  this  topic, 
in  almost  all  European  languages,  than  he  would 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "   SCHEME  249 

read  in  three  months.  Has  socialism  no  Htera- 
ture  ?  And  what  is  socialism  but  an  incarnation 
of  the  social  question  ?  Moreover,  I  am  per- 
suaded that  even  "  Mudie's  "  resources  could  have 
furnished  Mr.  Booth  with  the  "  Life  of  Lord 
Shaftesbury "  and  Carlyle's  works.  Mr.  Booth 
seems  to  have  undertaken  to  instruct  the  world 
without  having  heard  of  "  Past  and  Present  "  or  of 
"  Latter-Day  Pamphlets  "  ;  though,  somewhat  late 
in  the  day,  a  judicious  friend  calls  his  attention 
to  them.  To  those  of  my  contemporaries  on  whom, 
as  on  myself,  Carlyle's  writings  on  this  topic  made 
an  ineffaceable  imiDression  forty  years  ago,  who 
know  that,  for  all  that  time,  hundreds  of  able 
and  devoted  men,  both  clerical  and  lay,  have 
worked  heart  and  soul  for  the  permanent  amend- 
ment of  the  condition  of  the  poor,  Mr.  Booth's 
"Go  to  Mudie's"  affords  an  apt  measure  of  the  depth 
of  his  preliminary  studies.  However,  I  am  bound 
to  admit  that  these  earlier  labourers  in  the  field 
laboured  in  such  a  different  fashion,  that  the  origin- 
ality of  the  plan  started  by  Mr.  Booth  remains 
largely  unaffected.  For  them  no  drums  have  beat, 
no  trombones  brayed;  no  sanctified  buffoonery,  after 
the  model  of  the  oration  of  the  Friar  in  Wallen- 
stein's  camp  dear  to  the  readers  of  Schiller,  has 
tickled  the  ears  of  the  groundlings  on  their  behalf. 
Sadly  behind  the  great  age  of  rowdy  self-adver- 
tisement in  which  their  lot  has  fallen,  they  seem 
not  to  have  advanced  one  whit  beyond  John  the 


250  LETTERS   TO    THE   "  TIMES  "  y 

Baptist  and  the  Apostles,  1800  years  ago,  in  their 
notions  of  the  way  in  which  the  mctanoia,  the 
change  of  mind  of  the  ill-doer,  is  to  be  brought 
about.  Yet  the  new  model  was  there,  ready  for 
the  imitation  of  those  ancient  savers  of  souls. 
The  ranting  and  roaring  mystagogues  of  some  of 
the  most  venerable  of  Greek  and  Syrian  cults  also 
had  their  processions  and  banners,  their  fifes  and 
cymbals  and  holy  chants,  their  hierarchy  of  officers 
to  wdiom  the  art  of  making  collections  was  not 
wholly  unknown;  and  who,  as  freely  as  their 
modern  imitators,  promised  an  Elysian  future  to 
contributory  converts.  The  success  of  these 
antique  Salvation  armies  was  enormous.  Simon 
MagTis  was  quite  as  notorious  a  personage,  and 
probably  had  as  strong  a  following  as  Mr.  Booth. 
Yet  the  Apostles,  with  their  old-fashioned  ways, 
would  not  accept  such  a  success  as  a  satisfactory 
sign  of  the  Divine  sanction,  nor  depart  from  their 
own  methods  of  leading  the  way  to  the  higher  life. 
I  deem  it  unessential  to  verify  Mr.  Booth's 
statistics.  The  exact  strength  of  the  population 
of  the  realm  of  misery,  be  it  one,  two,  or  three 
millions,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  efficacy  of 
any  means  proposed  for  the  highly  desirable  end 
of  reducing  it  to  a  minwnim.  The  sole  question 
for  consideration  at  present  is  whether  the  scheme, 
keeping  specially  in  view  the  spirit  in  which  it 
is  to  be  worked,  is  likely  to  do  more  good  than 
harm. 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "   SCHEME  251 

Mr.  Booth  tells  us,  with  commendable  frankness, 
that  "  it  is  primarily  and  mainly  for  the  sake  of 
saving  tlie  soul  that  I  seek  the  salvation  of  the 
body  "  (p.  45),  which  language,  being  interpreted, 
means  that  the  propagation  of  the  special 
Salvationist  creed  comes  first,  and  the  promotion 
of  the  physical,  intellectual,  and  purely  moral 
welfare  of  mankind  second  in  his  estimation. 
Men  are  to  be  made  sober  and  industrious, 
mainly,  that,  as  washed,  shorn,  and  docile  sheep, 
they  may  be  driven  into  the  narrow  theological 
fold  which  Mr.  Booth  patronises.  If  they  refuse 
to  enter,  for  all  their  moral  cleanliness,  they  will 
have  to  take  their  place  among  the  goats  as 
sinners,  only  less  dirty  than  the  rest. 

I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  thinking  (and  I 
believe  the  opinion  is  largely  shared  by  reasonable 
men)  that  self-respect  and  thrift  are  the  rungs  of 
the  ladder  by  which  men  may  most  surely  climb 
out  of  the  slough  of  despond  of  want ;  and  I  have 
regarded  them  as  perhaps  the  most  eminent  of 
the  practical  virtues.  That  is  not  Mr.  Booth's 
opinion.  For  him  they  are  mere  varnished  sins 
— nothing  better  than  "  Pride  re-baptised "  (p. 
46).  Shutting  his  eyes  to  the  necessary  con- 
sequences of  the  struggle  for  life,  the  existence  of 
which  he  accepts  as  fully  as  any  Darwinian,^  Mr. 
Booth  tells  men,  whose  evil  case  is  one  of  those 
consequences,  that  envy  is  a  corner-stone  of  our 
1  See  p.  100. 


252  LETTERS   TO    THE   "  TIMES  "  v 

competitive  sj'stem.  With  thrift  and  self-respect 
denounced  as  sin,  with  the  suffering  of  starving 
men  referred  to  the  sins  of  the  capitaUst,  the 
gospel  according  to  Mr.  Booth  may  save  souls, 
but  it  will  hardly  save  society. 

In  estimating  the  social  and  political  influence 
which  the  Salvation  Army  is  likely  to  exert,  it 
is  important  to  reflect  that  the  officers  (pledged 
to  blind  obedience  to  their  "  General ")  are  not 
to  confine  themselves  to  the  functions  of  mere 
deacons  and  catechists  (though,  under  a  "  General  " 
like  C}Til,  Alexandria  knew  to  her  cost  what 
even  they  could  effect) ;  they  are  to  be  "  tribunes 
of  the  people,"  who  are  to  act  as  their  gratuitous 
legal  advisers ;  and,  when  law  is  not  sufficiently 
effective,  the  whole  force  of  the  army  is  to  obtain 
what  the  said  tribunes  may  conceive  to  be  justice, 
by  the  practice  of  ruthless  intimidation.  Society, 
says  Mr.  Booth,  needs  "  mothering  " ;  and  he  sets 
forth,  with  much  complacency,  a  variety  of 
"  cases,"  by  which  we  may  estimate  the  sort  of 
"  mothering "  to  be  expected  at  his  parental 
hands.  Those  who  study  the  materials  thus  set 
before  them  will,  I  think,  be  driven  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  "  mother "  has  already  proved 
herself  a  most  unscrupulous  meddler,  even  if 
she  has  not  fallen  within  reach  of  the  arm  of 
the  law. 

Consider  this  "  case."  A,  asserting  herself  to 
have  been  seduced  twice,  "  applied  to  our  people. 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "   SCHEME  253 

We  hunted  up  the  man,  followed  him  to  the 
country,  threatened  him  with  public  exposure, 
and  forced  from  him  the  payment  to  his  victim 
of  £60  down,  an  allowance  of  £1  a  week,  and  an 
insurance  policy  on  his  life  for  £450  in  her  favour  " 
(p.  222). 

Jedburgh  justice  this.  "  We  "  constitute  our- 
selves prosecutor,  judge,  jury,  sheriff's  officer,  all 
in  one ;  "  we "  practise  intimidation  as  deftly  as 
if  we  were  a  branch  of  another  League ;  and, 
under  threat  of  exposure,  "  we  "  extort  a  tolerably 
heavy  hush-money  in  payment  of  our  silence. 

Well,  really,  my  poor  moral  sense  is  unable  to 
distinguish  these  remarkable  proceedings  of  the 
new  popular  tribunate  from  what,  in  French,  is 
called  chantage  and,  in  plain  English,  blackmail- 
ing And  when  we  consider  that  anybody,  for 
any  reason  of  jealousy,  or  personal  spite,  or  party 
hatred,  might  be  thus  "  hunted,"  "  followed," 
"  threatened,"  and  financially  squeezed  or  ruined, 
without  a  particle  of  legal  investigation,  at  the 
will  of  a  man  whom  the  familiar  charged  with 
the  inquisitorial  business  dare  not  hesitate  to 
obey,  surely  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  ask  how  far 
does  the  Salvation  Army,  in  its  "  tribune  of  the 
people "  aspect,  differ  from  a  Sicilian  Mafia  ?  I 
am  no  apologist  of  men  guilty  of  the  acts  charged 
against  the  person  who  yet,  I  think,  might  be  as 
fairly  called  a  "  victim,"  in  this  case,  as  his  partner 
in  wrong-doing.     It  is  possible  that,  in  so  peculiar 


254  LETTERS   TO   THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

a  case,  Solomon  himself  might  have  been  puzzled 
to  apportion  the  relative  moral  delinquency  of 
the  parties.  However  that  may  be,  the  man  was 
morally  and  legally  bound  to  support  his  child, 
and  any  one  would  have  been  justified  in  helping 
the  woman  to  her  legal  rights,  and  the  man  to 
the  legal  consequences  (in  which  exposure  is 
included)  of  his  fault. 

The  action  of  the  "  General "  of  the  Salvation 
Army  in  extorting  the  heavy  fine  he  chose  to 
impose  as  the  price  of  his  silence,  however 
excellent  his  motives,  appears  to  me  to  be  as 
immoral  as,  I  hope,  it  is  illegal. 

So  much  for  the  Salvation  Army  as  a  teacher 
of  questionable  ethics  and  of  eccentric  economics, 
as  the  legal  adviser  who  recommends  and  practises 
the  extraction  of  money  by  intimidation,  as  the 
fairy  godmother  who  i^roposes  to  "  mother " 
society,  in  a  fashion  which  is  not  to  my  taste, 
however  much  it  may  commend  itself  to  some  of 
Mr.  Booth's  supporters. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "    SCHEME  255 

III 

The  "  Times;'  Decemher  11th,  1890 

Sir, — When  I  first  addressed  you  on  the 
subject  of  the  projected  operations  of  the 
Salvation  Army,  all  that  I  knew  about  that  body 
was  derived  from  the  study  of  Mr.  Booth's  book, 
from  common  repute,  and  from  occasional  atten- 
tion to  the  sayings  and  doings  of  his  noisy 
squadrons,  with  which  my  walks  about  London, 
in  past  years,  have  made  me  familiar.  I  was 
quite  unaware  of  the  existence  of  evidence  re- 
specting the  present  administration  of  the  Salva- 
tion forces,  which  would  have  enabled  me  to  act 
upon  the  sagacious  maxim  of  the  American 
humourist,  "  Don't  prophesy  unless  you  know." 
The  letter  you  were  good  enough  to  publish  has 
brought  upon  me  a  swarm  of  letters  and  pam- 
phlets. Some  favour  me  with  abuse ;  some 
thoughtful  correspondents  warmly  agree  with  me, 
and  then  proceed  to  point  out  how  much  worthier 
certain  schemes  of  their  own  are  of  my  friend's 
support ;  some  send  valuable  encouragement,  for 
which  I  offer  my  hearty  thanks,  and  ask  them  to 
excuse  any  more  special  acknowledgment.  But 
that  which  I  find  most  to  the  purpose,  just  now,  is 
the  revelation  made  by  some  of  the  documents 
which  have  reached  me,  of  a  fact  of  which  I  was 


256  LETTERS   TO    THE    "  TIMES  "  v 

wholly  ignorant — namely,  that  persons  who  have 
faithfully  and  zealously  served  in  the  Salvation 
Army,  who  express  unchanged  attachment  to  its 
original  principles  and  practice,  and  who  have 
been  in  close  official  relations  with  the  "  General," 
have  publicly  declared  that  the  process  of  de- 
gradation of  the  organization  into  a  mere  engine 
of  fanatical  intolerance  and  personal  ambition, 
which  I  declared  was  inevitable,  has  already  set 
in  and  is  making  rapid  progress. 

It  is  out  of  the  question,  Sir,  that  I  should 
occupy  the  columns  of  the  "  Times "  with  a  de- 
tailed exposition  and  criticism  of  these  ^nkes 
justificatives  of  my  forecast.  I  say  criticism,  be- 
cause the  assertions  of  persons  who  have  quitted 
any  society  must,  in  fairness,  be  taken  with  the 
caution  that  is  required  in  the  case  of  all  ex  parte 
statements  of  hostile  witnesses.  But  it  is,  at  any 
rate,  a  notable  fact  that  there  are  parts  of  my 
first  letter,  indicating  the  inherent  and  necessary 
evil  consequences  of  any  such  organization, 
which  might  serve  for  abstracts  of  jDortions  of  this 
evidence,  long  since  printed  and  published  under 
the  public  responsibility  of  the  witnesses. 

Let  us  ask  the  attention  of  your  readers,  in  the 
first  place,  to  "  An  ex-Captain's  Experience  of  the 
Salvation  Army,"  by  J.  J.  R  Redstone,  the 
genuineness  of  which  is  guaranteed  by  the  preface 
(dated  April  5th,  1888)  which  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Cunningham  Geikie  has  supplied.    Mr.  Redstone's 


V  "  DAKKEST   ENGLAND "  SCHEME  257 

story  is  well  worth  reading  on  its  own  account. 
Told  in  simple,  direct  language  such  as  John 
Bunyan  might  have  used,  it  permits  no  doubt 
of  the  single-minded  sincerity  of  the  man,  who 
gave  up  everything  to  become  an  officer  of  the 
Salvation  Army,  but,  exhibiting  a  sad  want  of 
that  capacity  for  unhesitating  and  blind  obedience 
on  which  Mr.  Booth  lays  so  much  stress,  was 
thrown  aside,  penniless — no,  I  am  wrong,  with 
2s.  M.  for  his  last  week's  salary — to  shift,  with  his 
equally  devoted  wife,  as  he  best  might.  I  wish 
I  could  induce  intending  contributors  to  Mr. 
Booth's  army  chest  to  read  Mr.  Redstone's  story. 
I  would  particularly  ask  them  to  contrast  the 
pure  simplicity  of  his  plain  tale  with  the  artificial 
pietism  and  slobbering  unction  of  the  letters 
which  Mr.  Ballington  Booth  addresses  to  his 
"  dear  boy  "  (a  married  man  apparently  older  than 
himself),  so  long  as  the  said  "dear  boy"  is  facing 
brickbats  and  starvation,  as  per  order. 

I  confess  that  my  opinion  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
Salvation  Army  has  been  so  distinctly  modified  by 
the  perusal  of  this  pamphlet  that  I  am  glad  to  be 
relieved  from  the  necessity  of  expressing  it.  It 
will  be  much  better  that  I  should  cite  a  few 
sentences  from  the  preface  written  by  Dr. 
Cunningham  Geikie,  who  expresses  warm  admir- 
ation for  the  early  and  uncorrupted  work  of  the 
Salvation  Army,  and  cannot  possibly  be  accused 
of  prejudice  against  it  on  religious  grounds  : — 

VOL.  IX  fi 


258  LETTERS   TO   THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

(1)  "  The  Salvation  Army  '  is  emphatically  a 
fiimih'  concern.  Mr.  Booth,  senior,  is  General ; 
one  son  is  chief  of  the  staff,  and  the  remaining 
sons  and  daughters  engross  the  other  chief 
positions.  It  is  Booth  all  over ;  indeed,  like  the 
sun  in  your  eyes,  you  can  see  nothing  else 
wherever  3'ou  turn.'  And,  as  Dr.  Geikie  shrewdly 
remarks,  '  to  be  the  head  of  a  widely  spread  sect 
carries  with  it  many  advantages — not  all  exclu- 
sively spiritual.'  " 

(2)  "  Whoever  becomes  a  Salvation  officer  is 
henceforth  a  slave,  helplessly  exposed  to  the 
caprice  of  his  superiors." 

"  Mr.  Redstone  bore  an  excellent  character  both 
before  he  entered  the  army  and  when  he  left  it. 
To  join  it,  though  a  married  man,  he  gave  up  a 
situation  which  he  had  held  for  five  years,  and  he 
served  Mr.  Booth  two  years,  working  hard  in  most 
difficult  posts.  His  one  fault.  Major  Lawley  tells 
us,  was,  that  he  was  '  too  straight ' — that  is,  too 
honest,  truthful,  and  manly — or,  in  other  words,  too 
real  a  Christian.  Yet  without  trial,  without 
formulated  charges,  on  the  strength  of  secret 
complaints  which  were  never,  apjDarently,  tested, 
he  was  dismissed  with  less  courtesy  than  most 
people  would  show  a  beggar — with  2s.  M.  for  his 
last  week's  salary.  If  there  be  any  mistake  in 
this  matter,  I  shall  be  glad  to  learn  it." 

(3)  Dr.  Geikie  confirms,  on  the  ground  of  in- 
formation given  confidentially  by  other  officers, 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  259 

Mr.  Redstone's  assertion  that  they  are  watched 
and  reported  by  spies  from  headquarters. 

(4)  Mr.  Booth  refuses  to  guarantee  his  officers 
any  fixed  amount  of  salary.  While  he  and  his 
family  of  high  officials  live  in  comfort,  if  not  in 
luxury,  the  pledged  slaves  whose  devotion  is  the 
foundation  of  any  true  success  the  Army  has  met 
with  often  have  "  hardly  food  enough  to  sustain 
life.  One  good  fellow  frankly  told  me  that  when 
he  had  nothing  he  just  went  and  begged." 

At  this  point,  it  is  proper  that  I  should  inter- 
pose an  apology  for  having  hastily  spoken  of  such 
men  as  Francis  of  Assisi,  even  for  purposes  of 
warning,  in  connection  with  Mr.  Booth.  What- 
ever may  be  thought  of  the  wisdom  of  the  plans 
of  the  founders  of  the  great  monastic  orders  of 
the  middle  ages,  they  took  their  full  share  of 
suffering  and  privation,  and  never  shirked  in  their 
own  persons  the  sacrifices  they  imposed  on  their 
followers. 

I  have  already  expressed  the  opinion,  that 
whatever  the  ostensible  purpose  of  the  scheme 
under  discussion,  one  of  its  consequences  will  be 
the  setting  up  and  endowment  of  a  new  Banter- 
Socialist  sect.  I  may  now  add  that  another  effect 
will  be — indeed,  has  been — to  set  up  and  endow 
the  Booth  dynasty  with  unlimited  control  of  the 
physical,  moral,  and  financial  resources  of  the  sect. 
Mr.  Booth  is  already  a  printer  and  publisher, 
who,  it  is  plainly  declared,  utilizes  the  officers  of 

s  2 


260  LETTERS    TO   THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

the  Army  as  agents  for  advertising  and  selling  his 
publications ;  and  some  of  them  are  so  strongly 
impressed  with  the  belief  that  active  pushing  of 
Mr.  Booth's  business  is  the  best  road  to  their 
master's  favour,  that  when  the  public  obstinately 
refuse  to  purchase  his  papers  they  buy  them 
themselves  and  send  the  proceeds  to  headquarters. 
Mr.  Booth  is  also  a  retail  trader  on  a  large  scale, 
and  the  Dean  of  Wells  has,  most  seasonably, 
drawn  attention  to  the  very  notable  banking  pro- 
ject which  he  is  trying  to  float.  Any  one  who 
follows  Dean  Plumptre's  clear  exposition  of  the 
principles  of  this  financial  operation  can  have 
little  doubt  that,  whether  they  are,  or  are  not, 
adequate  to  the  attainment  of  the  first  and  second 
of  Mr.  Booth's  ostensible  objects,  they  may  be 
trusted  to  effect  a  wide  extension  of  any  kingdom 
in  which  worldly  possessions  are  of  no  value.  We 
are,  in  fact,  in  sight  of  a  financial  catastrophe  like 
that  of  Law  a  century  ago.  Only  it  is  the  poor 
who  will  suffer. 

I  have  already  occupied  too  much  of  your  space, 
and  yet  I  have  drawn  upon  only  one  of  the 
sources  of  information  about  the  inner  working 
of  the  Salvation  Ai-my  at  my  disposition.  Far 
graver  charges  than  any  here  dealt  with  are 
publicly  brought  in  the  others. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  261 

P.S. — I  have  just  read  Mr.  Buchanan's  letter  in 
the  Times  of  to-day.  Mr.  Buchanan  is,  I  beheve, 
an  imaginative  writer.  I  am  not  acquainted  with 
his  works,  but  nothing  in  the  way  of  fiction  he 
has  yet  achieved  can  well  surpass  his  account  of 
my  opinions  and  of  the  purport  of  my  writings. 


IV 

The  "  Times;'  Deccmler  20th,  1890 

Sir, — In  discussing  Mr.  Booth's  projects  I  have 
hitherto  left  in  the  background  a  distinction 
which  must  be  kept  well  in  sight  by  those  who 
wish  to  form  a  fair  judgment  of  the  influence,  for 
good  or  evil,  of  the  Salvation  Army.  Salvationism, 
the  work  of  "  saving  souls  "  by  revivalist  methods, 
is  one  thing ;  Boothism,  the  utilization  of  the 
workers  for  the  furtherance  of  Mr.  Booth's 
peculiar  projects,  is  another.  Mr.  Booth  has 
captured,  and  harnessed  with  sharp  bits  and 
effectual  blinkers,  a  multitude  of  ultra-Evange- 
lical  missionaries  of  the  revivalist  school  who  were 
wandering  at  large.  It  is  this  skilfully,  if  some- 
what mercilessly,  driven  team  which  has  dragged 
the  "  General's  "  coach-load  of  projects  into  their 
present  position. 


262  LETTERS   TO   THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

Looking,  then,  at  the  host  of  Salvationists 
proper,  from  the  "  captains  "  downwards  (to  whom, 
in  my  judgment,  the  family  hierarchy  stands  in 
the  relation  of  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea  to  Sinbad ), 
as  an  independent  entity,  I  desire  to  say  that  the 
evidence  before  me,  whether  hostile  or  friendly  to 
the  General  and  his  schemes,  is  distinctly  favour- 
able to  them.  It  exhibits  them  as,  in  the  main, 
poor,  uninstructed,  not  unfrequently  fanatical,  en- 
thusiasts, the  purity  of  whose  lives,  the  sincerity  of 
whose  belief,  and  the  cheerfulness  of  whose  en- 
durance of  privation  and  rough  usage,  in  what 
they  consider  a  just  cause,  command  sincere 
respect.  For  my  part,  though  I  conceive  the 
corybantic  method  of  soul-saving  to  be  full  of 
dangers,  and  though  the  theological  specu- 
lations of  these  good  people  are  to  me  Avholly 
unacceptable,  yet  I  believe  that  the  evils  which 
must  follow  in  the  track  of  such  errors,  as  of  all 
other  en'ors,  will  be  largely  outweighed  by  the 
moral  and  social  improvement  of  the  people 
whom  they  convert.  I  would  no  more  raise  my 
voice  against  them  (so  long  as  they  abstain  from 
annoying  their  neighbours)  than  I  would  quarrel 
with  a  man,  vigorously  sweeping  out  a  stye,  on 
account  of  the  shape  of  his  broom,  or  because  he 
made  a  great  noise  over  his  work.  I  have  always 
had  a  strong  faith  in  the  principle  of  the  injunc- 
tion, "  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  that  treadeth 
out  the  corn."     If  a  kingdom  is  worth  a  Mass,  as 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "  SCHEME  263 

a  great  ruler  said,  surely  the  reign  of  clean  living, 
industry,  and  thrift  is  worth  any  quantity  of 
tambourines  and  eccentric  doctrinal  hypotheses. 
All  that  I  have  hitherto  said,  and  propose  further 
to  say,  is  directed  against  Mr.  Booth's  extremely 
clever,  audacious,  and  hitherto  successful  attempt 
to  utilize  the  credit  won  by  all  this  honest  devo- 
tion and  self-sacrifice  for  the  purposes  of  his 
socialistic  autocracy. 

I  now  propose  to  bring  forward  a  little  more 
evidence  as  to  how  things  really  stand  where  Mr. 
Booth's  system  has  had  a  fair  trial.  I  obtain  it, 
mainly,  from  a  curious  pamphlet,  the  title  of 
which  runs :  "  The  New  Papacy.  Behind  the 
Scenes  in  the  Salvation  Army,"  by  an  ex-Staff 
Officer.  "  Make  not  my  Father's  house  a  house  of 
merchandise  "  (John  ii.  16).  1889.  Published 
at  Toronto,  by  A.  Britnell.  On  the  cover  it  is 
stated  that  "  This  is  the  book  which  was  burned 
by  the  authorities  of  the  Salvation  Army."  I 
remind  the  reader,  once  more,  that  the  statements 
which  I  shall  cite  must  be  regarded  as  ex  imrtc  ; 
all  I  can  vouch  for  is  that,  on  grounds  of  internal 
evidence  and  from  other  concurrent  testimony 
respecting  the  ways  of  the  Booth  hierarchy,  I 
feel  justified  in  using  them. 

This  is  the  picture  the  writer  draws  of  the  army 
in  the  early  days  of  its  invasion  of  the  Dominion 
of  Canada  : — 


264  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

"  Then,  it  will  be  remembered,  it  professed  to 
be  the  humble  handmaid  of  the  existing  churches  ; 
its  professed  object  was  the  evangelization  of  the 
masses.  It  repudiated  the  idea  of  building  up  a 
separate  religious  body,  and  it  denounced  the 
practice  of  gathering  together  wealth  and  the 
accumulation  of  property.  Men  and  women  other 
than  its  own  converts  gathered  around  it  and 
threw  themselves  heart  and  soul  into  the  work, 
for  the  simple  reason  that  it  offered,  as  they 
supposed,  a  more  extended  and  widely  open 
field  for  evangelical  effort.  Ministers  ever3rwhere 
were  invited  and  welcomed  to  its  platforms, 
majors  and  colonels  were  few  and  far  between, 
and  the  supremacy  and  power  of  the  General 
were  things  unknown.  .  .  .  Care  was  taken  to 
avoid  anything  like  proselytism  ;  its  converts  were 
never  coerced  into  joining  its  ranks.  ...  In  a 
word,  the  organization  occupied  the  position  of 
an  auxiliary  mission  and  recruiting  agency  for 
the  various  religious  bodies.  .  .  .  The  meetings 
were  crowded,  people  professed  conversion  by  the 
score,  the  public  liberally  supplied  the  means  to 
carry  on  the  work  in  their  respective  commu- 
nities ;  therefore  every  corps  was  Vvdiolly  self- 
supporting,  its  officers  were  projjerly,  if  not 
luxuriously,  cared  for,  the  local  expenditure  was 
amply  provided,  and,  under  the  supervision  of  the 
secretary,  a  local  member,  and  the  officer  in  charge, 
the  funds  were  disbursed  in  the  towns  where  they 


y       "  DARKEST  ENGLAND "  SCHEME      265 

were  collected,  and  the  spirit  of  satisfaction  and 
confidence  was  mutual  all  around"  (pp.  4,  5). 

Such  was  the   army  as  the  green  tree.     Now 
for  the  dry  : — 

"  Those  who  have  been  daily  conversant  with 
the  army's  machinery  are  well  aware  how  entirely 
and  radically  the  whole  system  has  changed,  and 
how,  from  a  band  of  devoted  and  disinterested 
workers,  united  in  the  bonds  of  zeal  and  charity 
for  the  good  of  their  fellows,  it  has  developed  into 
a  colossal  and  aggressive  agency  for  the  building 
up  of  a  system  and  a  sect,  bound  by  rules  and 
regulations  altogether  subversive  of  religious 
liberty  and  antagonistic  to  every  (other  ?)  branch 
of  Christian  endeavour,  and  bound  hand  and  foot 
to  the  will  of  one  supreme  head  and  ruler.  ...  As 
the  work  has  spread  through  the  country,  and  as 
the  area  of  its  endeavours  has  enlarged,  each 
leading  position  has  been  filled,  one  after  the 
other,  by  individuals  strangers  to  the  country, 
totally  ignorant  of  the  sentiments  and  idiosyn- 
crasies of  the  Canadian  people,  trained  in  one 
school  under  the  teachings  and  dominance  of  a 
member  of  the  Booth  family,  and  out  of  whom 
every  idea  has  been  crushed,  except  that  of 
unquestioning  obedience  to  the  General,  and  the 
absolute  necessity  of  going  forward  to  his  bidding 
without  hesitation  or  question  "  (p.  6). 


266  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

"  What  is  the  result  of  all  this  ?  In  the  first 
place,  whilst  material  j^rosperity  has  undoubtedly 
been  attained,  spirituality  has  been  quenched,  and, 
as  an  evangelical  agency,  the  army  has  become 
almost  a  dead  letter.  ...  In  seventj'-five  per  cent, 
of  its  stations  its  officers  suffer  need  and  privation, 
chiefly  on  account  of  the  heavy  taxation  that  is 
placed  upon  them  to  maintain  an  imposing  head- 
quarters and  a  large  ornamental  staff.  The  whole 
financial  arrangements  are  carried  on  by  a  S3-stem 
of  inflation  and  a  hand-to-mouth  extravagance  and 
blindness  as  to  future  contingencies.  Nearly  all  of 
its  original  workers  and  members  have  disappeared" 
(p.  7).  "  In  reference  to  the  religious  bodies  at 
large  the  army  has  become  entirely  antagonistic. 
Soldiers  are  forbidden  by  its  rules  to  attend  other 
places  of  worship  without  the  permission  of  their 
officers.  .  .  .  Officers  or  soldiers  Avho  may  con- 
scientiously leave  the  service  or  the  ranks  are 
looked  upon  and  often  denounced  publicly  as 
backsliders.  .  .  .  Means  of  the  most  despicable 
description  have  been  resorted  to  in  order  to 
starve  them  back  to  the  service  "  (p.  8).  "  In  its 
inner  workings  the  army  system  is  identical  with 
Jesuitism.  .  .  .  That 'the  end  justifies  the  means,' 
if  not  openly  taught,  is  as  tacitly  agreed  as  in  that 
celebrated  order"  (p.  9). 

Surely  a  bitter,  overcharged,  anonymous  libel,  is 
the  reflection  which  will  occur  to  many  who  read 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  267 

these  passages,  especially  the  last.  Well,  I  turn 
to  other  evidence  which,  at  any  rate,  is  not  anony- 
mous. It  is  contained  in  a  pamphlet  entitled 
"  General  Booth,  the  Family,  and  the  Salvation 
Army,  showing  its  Rise,  Progress,  and  Moral  and 
Spiritual  Decline,"  by  S.  H.  Hodges,  LL.B.,  late 
Major  in  the  Army,  and  formerly  private  secretary 
to  General  Booth  (Manchester,  1890).  I  recom- 
mend potential  contributors  to  Mr.  Booth's  wealth 
to  study  this  little  work  also.  I  have  learned  a 
great  deal  from  it.  Among  other  interesting 
novelties,  it  tells  me  that  Mr.  Booth  has  dis- 
covered "  the  necessity  of  a  third  step  or  blessing, 
in  the  work  of  Salvation.  He  said  to  me  one  day, 
'  Hodges,  you  have  only  two  barrels  to  your  gun  ; 
I  have  three ' "  (p.  31).  And  if  Mr.  Hodges's  de- 
scription of  this  third  barrel  is  correct — "  giving  up 
your  conscience  "  and,  "  for  God  and  the  army, 
stooping  to  do  things  which  even  honouiable 
worldly  men  would  not  consent  to  do  "  (p.  32) — it 
is  surely  calculated  to  bring  down  a  good  many 
things,  the  first  principles  of  morality  among 
them. 

Mr.  Hodges  gives  some  remarkable  examples  of 
the  army  practice  with  the  "  General's  "  new  rifle. 
But  I  must  refer  the  curious  to  his  instructive 
pamphlet.  The  position  I  am  about  to  take  up  is 
a  serious  one ;  and  I  prefer  to  fortify  it  by  the  help 
of  evidence  which,  though  some  of  it  may  be 
anonymous,  cannot  be  sneered  away.     And  I  shall 


268  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

be  believed,  when  I  say  that  nothing  but  a  sense 
of  the  great  social  danger  of  the  spread  of 
Boothism  could  induce  me  to  revive  a  scandal, 
even  though  it  is  barely  entitled  to  the  benefit  of 
the  Statute  of  Limitations. 

On  the  7th  of  July,  1883,  you.  Sir,  did  the 
public  a  great  service  by  writing  a  leading  article 
on  the  notorious  "  Eagle  "  case,  from  Avhich  I  take 
the  following  extract : — 

"  Mr.  Justice  Kay  refused  the  application,  but 
he  was  induced  to  refuse  it  by  means  which,  as 
Mr.  Justice  Stephen  justly  remarked,  were  highly 
discreditable  to  Mr.  Booth.  Mr.  Booth  filed  an 
affidavit  which  appears  totally  to  have  misled 
Mr.  Justice  Kay,  as  it  would  have  misled  any  one 
who  regarded  it  as  a  frank  and  honest  statement 
by  a  professed  teacher  of  religion." 

When  I  addressed  my  first  letter  to  you  I  had 
never  so  much  as  heard  of  the  "  Eagle  "  scandal. 
But  I  am  thankful  that  my  perception  of  the 
inevitable  tendency  of  all  religious  autocracies 
towards  evil  was  clear  enough  to  bring  about  a 
provisional  condemnation  of  Mr.  Booth's  schemes 
in  my  mind.  Supposing  that  I  had  decided  the 
other  way,  with  what  sort  of  feeling  should  I  have 
faced  my  friend,  when  I  had  to  confess  that  the 
money  had  passed  into  the  absolute  control  of  a 
person  about  the  character  of  whose  administra- 


V       "  DARKEST  ENGLAND  "  SCHEME      269 

tion  this  concurrence  of  damnatory  evidence  was 
already  extant  ? 

I  have  nothing  to  say  about  Mr.  Booth  person- 
ally, for  I  know  nothing.  On  that  subject,  as  on 
several  others,  I  profess  myself  an  agnostic.  But, 
if  he  is,  a&  he  may  be,  a  saint  actuated  by  the 
purest  of  motives,  he  is  not  the  first  saint  who, 
as  you  have  said,  has  shown  himself  "  in  the 
ardour  of  prosecuting  a  well-meant  object"  to 
be  capable  of  overlooking  "  the  plain  maxims  of 
every-day  morality."  If  I  were  a  Salvationist 
soldier,  I  should  cry  with  Othello,  "  Cassio,  I  love 
thee ;  but  never  more  be  officer  of  mine." 

I  am.  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


V 

The  "  Times;'  Deeemher  2Wi,  1890 

Sir, — If  I  have  any  strong  points,  finance  is 
certainly  not  one  of  them.  But  the  financial,  or 
rather  fiscal,  operations  of  the  General  of  the 
Salvation  Army,  as  they  are  set  forth  and 
exemplified  in  "  The  New  Papacy,"  possess  that 
grand   simplicity  which  is  the  mark  of  genius ; 


270  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  t 

and  even  I  can  comprehend  them — or,  to  be  more 
modest,  I  can  portray  them  in  such  a  manner 
that  every  Uneament,  however  harsh,  and  every 
shade,  however  dark,  can  be  verified  by  pubhshed 
evidence. 

Suppose  there  is  a  thriving,  expanding  colonial 
town,  and  that,  scattered  among  its  artizans  and 
labourers,  there  is  a  sprinkling  of  Methodists,  or 
other  such  ultra-evangelical  good  people,  doing 
their  best,  in  a  quiet  way,  to  "  save  souls." 
Clearly,  this  is  an  outpost  which  it  is  desirable  to 
capture.  "  We,"  therefore,  take  measures  to  get 
up  a  Salvation  "  boom  "  of  the  ordinary  pattern. 
Enthusiasm  is  roused.  A  score  or  two  of  soldiers 
are  enlisted  into  the  ranks  of  the  Salvation  Army. 
*'  We  "  select  the  man  who  promises  to  serve  our 
purposes  best,  make  a  "  cajDtain  "  of  him,  and  put 
him  in  command  of  the  "corps."  He  is  very 
pleased  and  grateful ;  and  indeed  he  ought  to  be. 
All  he  has  done  is  that  he  has  given  up  his  trade  ; 
that  he  has  promised  to  work  at  least  nine  hours 
a  day  in  our  service  (none  of  your  eight-hour 
nonsense  for  us)  as  collector,  bookseller,  general 
agent,  and  anything  else  we  may  order  him  to  be. 
"  We,"  on  the  other  hand,  guarantee  him  nothing 
whatever ;  to  do  so  might  weaken  his  faith  and 
substitute  worldly  for  spiritual  ties  between  us. 
Knowing  that,  if  he  exerts  himself  in  a  right 
spirit,  his  labours  will  surely  be  blessed,  we  con- 
tent ourselves  with  telling  him  that  if,  after  all 


V  "  DARKEST  ENGLAND "  SCHEME  271 

expenses  are  paid  and  our  demands  are  satisfied 
each  week,  25s.  remains,  he  may  take  it.  And,  if 
nothing  remains,  he  may  take  that,  and  stay  his 
stomach  with  what  the  faithful  may  give  him. 
With  a  certain  grim  playfulness,  we  add  that  the 
value  of  these  contributions  will  be  reckoned  as 
so  much  salary.  So  long  as  our  "  captain "  is 
successful,  therefore,  a  beneficent  spring  of  cash 
trickles  unseen  into  our  treasury ;  when  it  begins 
to  dry  up  we  say,  "  God  bless  you,  dear  boy,"  turn 
him  adrift  (with  or  without  2s.  4fd.  in  his  pocket), 
and  put  some  other  willing  horse  in  the  shafts. 

The  "  General,"  I  believe,  proposes,  among  other 
things,  to  do  away  with  "  sweating."  May  he  not 
as  well  set  a  good  example  by  beginning  at 
home  ? 

My  little  sketch,  however,  looks  so  like  a 
monstrous  caricature  that,  after  all,  I  must 
produce  the  original  from  the  pages  of  my 
Canadian  authority.  He  says  that  a  "  captain  " 
"has  to  pay  10  per  cent,  of  all  collections  and 
donations  to  the  divisional  fund  for  the  support  of 
his  divisional  officer,  who  has  also  the  privilege  of 
arranging  for  such  special  meetings  as  he  shall 
think  fit,  the  proceeds  of  which  he  takes  away  for 
the  general  needs  of  the  division.  Headquarters, 
too,  has  the  right  to  hold  such  special  meetings 
at  the  corps  and  send  around  such  special  at- 
tractions as  its  wisdom  sees  fit,  and  to  take  away 
the  proceeds  for  the   purposes  it   decides   upon. 


272  LETTERS   TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

.  .  .  He   has   to   pay  the   rent  of  his    building, 
either  to  headquarters  or  a  private  individual ;  he 
has  to  send  the  whole  collection  of  the  afternoon 
meeting  of  the  first  Sunday  in  the  month  to  the 
'  Extension  Fund '  at  headquarters  ;  he  has  to  pay 
for  the  heating,  lighting,  and  cleaning  of  his  hall, 
together  with  such  necessary  repairs  as  may  be 
needed  ;  he  has  to  provide  the  food,  lodging,  and 
clothing  of  his  cadet,  if  he  has  one ;  headquarters 
taxes  him  with  so  many  copies  of  the  army  papers 
each  week,  for  which  he  has  to  pay,  sold  or  un- 
sold ;  and  when  he  has  done  this,  he  may  take 
$6  (or  $5,  being  a  woman),  or  such  projDortion  of 
it  as  may  be  left,  with  which  to  clothe  and  feed 
himself  and  to  pay  the  rent  and  provide  for  the 
heating  and  lighting  of  his  quarters.     If  he  has  a 
lieutenant  he  has  to  pay  liim   $6  per  week,  or 
such  proportion  of  it  as  he  himself  gets,  and  share 
the  house  expenses  with  him.     Now,  it  will  be 
easily  understood  that  at  least  60  per  cent,  of  the 
stations  in  Canada  the  officer  gets  no  money  at 
all,  and  he  has  to  beg  specially  amongst  his  people 
for  his  house-rent  and  food.     There  are  few  places 
in  the  Dominion  in  which  the  soldiers  do  not  find 
their  officers  in  all   the   food  they  need  ;  but  it 
must  be  remembered  that  the  value  of  the  food 
so  received  has  to  be  accounted  for  at  headquarters 
and  entered  upon  the  books  of  the  corps  as  cash 
received,  the  amount    being  deducted  from    any 
moneys  that  the  officer  is  able  to  take  from  the 


V  "DARKEST   ENGLAND"    SCHEME  273 

week's  collections.  So  that,  no  matter  how  much 
may  be  specially  given,  the  officer  cannot  receive 
more  than  the  value  of  $6  per  week.  The 
officer  cannot  collect  any  arrears  of  salary,  as  each 
week  has  to  pay  its  own  expenses ;  and  if  there 
is  any  surplus  cash  after  all  demands  are  met  it 
must  be  sent  to  the  '  war  chest '  at  headquarters." 
—"  The  New  Papacy  "  (pp.  35,  36). 

Evidently,  Sir,  "  headquarters "  has  taken  to 
heart  the  injunction  about  casting  your  bread 
upon  the  waters.  It  casts  the  crumb  of  a  day  or 
two's  work  of  an  emissary,  and  gets  back  any 
quantity  of  loaves  of  cash,  so  long  as  "  captains  " 
present  themselves  to  be  used  up  and  replaced  by 
new  victims.  What  can  be  said  of  these  devoted 
poor  fellows  except,  0  sanda  simplicitas  ! 

But  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose 
that  the  money-gathering  efficacy  of  Mr.  Booth's 
fiscal  agencies  is  exhausted  by  the  foregoing 
enumeration  of  their  regular  operations.  Con- 
sider the  following  edifying  history  of  the  "  Rescue 
Home  "  in  Toronto  : — 

"  It  is  a  fine  building  in  the  heart  of  the  city ; 
the  lot  cost  $7,000,  and  a  building  was  put  up  at 
a  cost  of  $7,000  more,  and  there  is  a  mortgage  on 
it  amounting  to  half  the  cost  of  the  whole.  The 
land  to-day  would  probably  fetch  double  its 
original  price,  and  every  year  enhances  its  value 
In    the    first    five    months    of    its 

VOL.    IX  T 


'J/ 4-  LETTERS   TO    THE   "TIMES  v 

existence  this  institution  received  from  the  pubhc 
an  income  of  $1,812  70c. ;  out  of  this  $600  was 
paid  to  headquarters  for  rent,  $590  52c.  was 
spent  upon  the  building  in  various  ways,  and  the 
balance  of  §622  18c.  paid  the  salaries  of  the  staff 
and  supported  the  inmates  "  (pp.  24,  25). 

Said  I  not  truly  that  Mr.  Booth's  fisc  bears  the 
stamp  of  genius  ?  Who  else  could  have  got  the 
public  to  buy  him  a  "  corner  lot,"  put  a  building 
upon  it,  pay  all  its  working  expenses :  and  then, 
not  content  with  paying  him  a  heavy  rent  for  the 
use  of  the  handsome  present  they  had  made  him, 
they  say  not  a  word  against  his  mortgaging  it  to 
half  its  value  ?  And,  so  far  as  any  one  knows, 
there  is  nothing  to  stop  headquarters  from  selling 
the  whole  estate  to-morrow,  and  using  the  money 
as  the  "  General "  may  direct. 

Once  more  listen  to  the  author  of  "  The  New 
Papacy,"  who  affirms  that  "  out  of  the  funds 
given  by  the  Dominion  for  the  evangelization  of 
the  people  by  means  of  the  Salvation  Army,  one 
sixth  had  been  spent  in  the  extension  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  and  the  other  five  sixths  had 
been  invested  in  valuable  property,  all  handed 
over  to  Mr.  Booth  and  his  heirs  and  assigns,  as 
we  have  already  stated  "  (p.  26). 

And  this  brings  me  to  the  last  point  upon 
which  I  wish  to  touch.  The  answer  to  all 
inquiries  as  to  what  has  become  of  the  enormous 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "   SCHEME  275 

personal  and  real  estate  which  has  been  given 
over  to  Mr.  Booth  is  that  it  is  held  "  in  trust." 
The  supporters  of  Mr.  Booth  may  feel  justified 
in  taking  that  statement  "  on  trust."  I  do  not. 
Anyhow,  the  more  completely  satisfactory  this 
"  trust "  is,  the  less  can  any  man  who  asks  the 
public  to  put  bhnd  faith  in  his  integrity  and  his 
wisdom  object  to  acquaint  them  exactly  with  its 
provisions.  Is  the  trust  drawn  up  in  favour  of 
the  Salvation  Army?  But  what  is  the  legal 
status  of  the  Salvation  Army  ?  Have  the  soldiers 
any  claim  ?  Certainly  not.  Have  the  officers 
any  legal  interest  in  the  "  trust "  ?  Surely  not. 
The  "  General "  has  taken  good  care  to  insist  on 
their  renouncing  all  claims  as  a  condition  of  their 
appointment.  Thus,  to  all  appearance,  the  army, 
as  a  legal  person,  is  identical  with  Mr.  Booth. 
And,  in  that  case,  any  "  trust "  ostensibly  for  the 
benefit  of  the  army  is — what  shall  we  say  that  is 
at  once  accurate  and  polite  ? 

I  conclude  with  these  plain  questions — Will 
Mr.  Booth  take  counsel's  opinion  as  to  whether 
there  is  anything  in  such  legal  arrangements  as 
he  has  at  present  made  which  prevents  him  from 
disposing  of  the  wealth  he  has  accumulated  at 
his  own  will  and  pleasure  ?  Will  anybody  be  in 
a  position  to  set  either  the  civil  or  the  criminal 
law  in  motion  against  him  or  his  successors  if  he 
or  they  choose  to  spend  every  farthing  in  ways 

T  2 


276  LETTERS    TO    THE   "  TIMES  "  v 

very  diiferent  from   those    couteraplated    by  the 
donors  ? 

I  may  add  that  a  careful  study  of  the  terms 
of  a  "  Declaration  of  Trust  by  William  Booth  in 
favour  of  the  Christian  Mission,"'  made  in  187b), 
has  not  enabled  persons  of  much  greater  com- 
petence tlian  myself  to  answer  these  questions 
satisfactorily.^ 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


On  December  24th  a  letter  appeared  in  the 
"Times"  signed  "J.  S.  Trotter,"  in  which  the 
following  passages  appear  : — 

"  It  seems  a  pity  to  put  a  darnjoer  on  the 
spirits  of  those  who  agree  witli  Professor  Huxley 
in  his  denunciation  of  General  Booth  and  all  his 
works.  May  I  give  a  few  particulars  as  to  the 
'  book '  which  was  published  in  Canada  ?  I  had 
the  pleasure  of  an  interview  with  the  author  of 
a  book  ^vritten  in  Canada.  The  book  was  printed 
at  Toronto,  and  two  copies  only  struck  otf  by  the 
printers ;  one  of  these  copies  was  stolen  from  the 
printer,  and  the  quotation  sent  to  you  by  Professor 
Huxley  was  inserted  in  the  book,  and  is  con- 
^  See  Preface  to  this  volume,  pp.  ix — xiii. 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "    SCHEME  277 

sequently  a  forgery.  The  book  was  published 
without  the  consent  and  against  the  will  of  the 
author. 

''  So  the  quotation  is  not  only  '  a  bitter,  over- 
charged anonymous  libel,'  as  Professor  Huxley 
intimates,  but  a  forgery  as  well.  As  to  Mr. 
Hodges,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  simply  trifling  with 
your  readers  to  bring  him  in  as  an  authority. 
He  was  turned  out  of  the  army,  out  of  kindness 
taken  on  again,  and  again  dismissed.  If  this  had 
happened  to  one  of  your  staff,  would  his  opinion 
of  the  '  Times '  as  a  newspaper  be  taken  for 
gospel ? " 

But  in  the  "  Times  "  of  December  29th  Mr.  J. 
S.  Trotter  writes  : — 

"  I  find  I  was  mistaken  in  saying,  in  my  letter 
of  Wednesday,  to  the  '  Times '  that  Mr.  Hodges 
was  dismissed  from  the  service  of  General  Booth, 
and  regret  any  inconvenience  the  statement  may 
have  caused  to  Mr.  Hodges." 

And  on  December  30th  the  "  Times  "  published 
a  letter  from  Mr.  Hodges  in  which  he  says  that 
Mr.  Trotter's  statements  as  they  regard  himself 
"  are  the  very  reverse  of  truth.  I  was  never 
turned  out  of  the  Salvation  Army.  Nor,  so  far 
as  I  was  made  acquainted  with  General  Booth's 
motives,  was  I  taken  on  again  out  of  kindness. 


278  LETTERS    TO    THE    "  TIMES  "  v 

In  order  to  rejoin  the  Salvation  Army,  I  resigned 
the  position  of  manager  in  a  mill  where  I  was  in 
I'eceipt  of  a  salary  of  £250  per  annum,  with  house- 
rent  and  one  third  of  the  profits.  Instead  of  this 
Mr.  Booth  allowed  me  £2  per  week  and  house- 
rent. 


VI 

The  "Times;'  Dceemhcr  26fJi,  1890 

Sir, — I  am  much  obliged  to  Mr.  J.  S.  Trotter 
for  the  letter  which  you  published  this  morning. 
It  furnishes  evidence,  which  I  much  desired  to 
possess  on  the  following  points  : — 

1.  The  author  of  "  The  New  Papacy "  is  a 
responsible,  trustworthy  person ;  otherwise  Mr. 
Trotter  w^ould  not  sjDeak  of  having  had  "  the 
pleasure  of  an  interview  "  with  him. 

2.  After  this  responsible  person  had  taken  the 
trouble  to  write  a  pamphlet  of  sixty-four  closely 
I^rinted  pages,  some  influence  was  brought  to  bear 
upon  him,  the  effect  of  which  was  that  he  refused 
his  consent  to  its  publication.  Mr.  Trotter's  ex- 
cellent information  will  surely  enable  him  to  tell 
us  what  influence  that  was. 

8.  How  docs  Mr.  Trotter  know  that  any  passage 


V  "DARKEST   ENGLAND"   SCHEME  279 

I  have  quoted  is  an  interpolation  ?  Does  he 
jDossess  that  other  copy  of  the  "  two  "  which  alone, 
as  he  affirms,  were  printed  ? 

4.  If  so,  he  will  be  able  to  say  which  of  the 
passages  I  have  cited  is  genuine  and  which  is  not ; 
and  whether  the  tenor  of  the  whole  uninterpolated 
copy  differs  in  any  important  respect  from  that  of 
the  copy  I  have  quoted. 

It  will  be  interesting  to  hear  what  Mr.  J.  S. 
Trotter  has  to  say  upon  these  points.  But  the 
really  important  thing  which  he  has  done  is  that 
he  has  testified,  of  his  own  knowledge,  that  the 
anonymous  author  of  "The  New  Papacy"  is  no 
mere  irresponsible  libeller,  but  a  person  of  whom 
even  an  ardent  Salvationist  has  to  speak  with 
respect. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

[I  may  add  that  the  unfortunate  Mr.  Trotter 
did  me  the  further  service  of  eliciting  the  letter 
from  Mr.  Hodges  referred  to  on  p.  277 — which 
sufficiently  establishes  that  gentleman's  credit, 
and  leads  me  to  attach  full  weight  to  his  evidence 
about  the  "  third  barrel."] 

January  1891. 


280       LETTERS  TO  THE  "  TIMES  "         v 

YII 

The  ''Times;'  December  27th,  1890 

Sir, — In  making  use  of  the  only  evidence  of 
the  actual  working  of  Mr.  Booth's  autocratic 
government  accessible  to  me,  I  was  fully  aware  of 
the  slippery  nature  of  the  ground  upon  which  I 
was  treading.  For,  as  I  joointed  out  in  my  first 
letter,  "  no  personal  habit  more  surely  degrades 
the  conscience  and  the  intellect  than  blind  and 
unhesitating  obedience  to  unlimited  authority." 
Now  we  have  it,  on  Mr.  Booth's  own  showing, 
that  every  officer  of  his  has  undertaken  to  "  obey 
without  questioning  or  gainsaying  the  orders  from 
headquarters."  And  the  possible  relations  of  such 
orders  to  honour  and  veracity  are  demonstrated 
not  only  by  the  judicial  deliverance  on  Mr.  Booth's 
affidavit  in  the  "  Eagle "  case,  which  I  have 
already  cited  ;  not  only  by  Mr.  Bramwell  Booth's 
admission  before  Mr.  Justice  Lopes  that  he  had 
stated  what  was  "  not  quite  coiTect "  because  he 
had  "  j^romised  Mr.  Stead  not  to  divulge  "  the  facts 
of  the  case  (the  "Times,"  November  4th,  1885); 
but  by  the  following  passage  in  Mr.  Hodges's 
account  of  the  reasons  of  his  withdrawal  from  the 
Salvation  Army  : — 

"  The  General  and  Chief  did  not  and  could  not 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "    SCHEME  281 

deny  doing  these  things  ;  the  only  question  was 
this,  Was  it  right  to  practise  this  deception? 
These  points  of  difference  were  fully  discussed 
between  myself  and  the  Chief  of  the  Staff 
on  my  withdrawal,  especially  the  Leamington 
incident,  which  was  the  one  that  finally  drove 
me  to  decision.  I  had  come  to  the  conclusion, 
from  the  first,  that  they  had  acted  as  they 
supposed  with  a  single  eye  to  the  good  of 
God's  cause,  and  had  persuaded  myself  that 
the  things  were,  as  against  the  devil,  right  to 
be  done,  that  as  in  battle  one  party  captured 
and  turned  the  enemy's  own  guns  upon  them, 
so,  as  they  were  fighting  against  the  devil,  it 
would  be  fair  to  use  against  him  his  weapons. 
And  I  wrote  to  this  effect  to  the  General" 
(p.  63). 

Now,  I  do  not  wish  to  say  anything  needlessly 
harsh,  but  I  ask  any  prudent  man  these  questions. 
Could  I,  under  these  circumstances,  trust  any 
uncorroborated  statement  emanating  from  head- 
quarters, or  made  by  the  General's  order  ?  Had 
I  any  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of  Mr.  Hodges's 
naive  confession  of  the  corrupting  influence  of 
Mr.  Booth's  system  ?  And  did  it  not  behove  me 
to  pick  my  way  carefully  through  the  mass  of 
statements  before  me,  many  of  them  due  to  people 
whose  moral  sense  might,  by  possibility,  have  been 
as  much  blunted  by  the  army  discipline   in   the 


282  LETTERS   TO   THE    "  TIMES  "  v 

use  of  the  weapons   of  the  devil  as  Mr.   Hodges 
affirms  that  his  was  ? 

Therefore,  in  my  third  letter,  I  commenced  my 
illustrations  of  the  practical  working  of  Boothism 
with  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Redstone,  fortified  and 
supplemented  by  that  of  a  non-Salvationist,  Dr. 
Cunningham  Geikie.  That  testimony  has  not 
been  challenged,  and,  until  it  is,  I  shall  assume 
that  it  cannot  be.  In  my  fourth  letter,  I  cited  a 
definite  statement  by  Mr.  Hodges  in  evidence  of 
the  Jesuitical  principles  of  headquarters.  What 
sort  of  answer  is  it  to  tell  us  that  Mr.  Hodges 
was  dismissed  the  army  ?  A  child  might  expect 
that  some  such  red  herring  would  be  drawn 
across  the  trail ;  and,  in  anticipation  of  the  stale 
trick,  I  added  the  strong  primd  facie  evidence  of 
the  trustworthiness  of  my  witness,  in  this  par- 
ticular, which  is  afiforded  by  the  "  Eagle  "  case. 
It  was  not  until  I  wrote  my  fourth  letter  to  you. 
Sir — until  the  exploitation  of  the  "  captains  "  and 
the  Jesuitry  of  headquarters  could  be  proved  up 
to  the  hilt — that  I  ventured  to  have  recourse  to 
"  The  New  Papacy."  So  far  as  the  pamphlet 
itself  goes,  this  is  an  anonymous  work ;  and,  for 
sufficient  reasons,  I  did  not  choose  to  go  beyond 
what  was  to  be  found  between  its  covers.  To 
any  one  accustomed  to  deal  with  the  facts  of 
evolution,  the  Boothism  of"  The  New  Papacy  "  was 
merely  the  natural  and  necessary  development 
of  the  Boothism  of  Mr.  Redstone's  case  and  of  the 


V  "  DARKEST  ENGLAND "   SCHEME  283 

"  Eagle  "  case.  Therefore,  I  felt  fully  justified  in 
using  it,  at  the  same  time  carefully  warning  my 
readers  that  it  must  be  taken  with  due  caution. 

Mr.  Trotter's  useful  letter  admits  that  such  a 
book  was  written  by  a  person  with  whom  he  had 
the  "  pleasure  of  an  interview,"  and  that  a  version 
of  it  (interpolated,  according  to  his  assertion)  was 
published  against  the  will  of  the  author.  Hence 
I  am  justified  in  believing  that  there  is  a  founda- 
tion of  truth  in  certain  statements,  some  of  which 
have  long  been  in  my  possession,  but  which  for 
lack  of  Mr.  Trotter's  valuable  corroboration  I  have 
refrained  from  using.  The  time  is  come  when  I 
can  set  forth  some  of  the  heads  of  this  informa- 
tion, with  the  request  that  Mr.  Trotter,  who 
knows  all  about  the  business,  will  be  so  good  as 
to  point  out  any  eiTor  that  there  may  be  in  them. 
I  am  bound  to  sui:>pose  that  his  sole  object,  like 
mine,  is  the  elucidation  of  the  truth,  and  to 
assume  his  willingness  to  help  me  therein  to  the 
best  of  his  ability. 

1.  "  The  author  of  '  The  New  Papacy '  is  a 
Mr.  Sumner,  a  person  of  perfect  respectability,  and 
greatly  esteemed  in  Toronto,  who  held  a  high 
position  in  the  Army.  When  he  left,  a  large 
public  meeting,  presided  over  by  a  popular 
Methodist  minister,  23assed  a  vote  of  sympathy 
with  him." 


284  LETTERS   TO    THE   "  TIMES  "  y 

Is  this  true  or  false  ? 

2.  "  On  Saturday  last,  about  noon,  Mr.  Sumner, 
the  author  of  the  book,  and  Mr.  Fred  Perry,  the 
Salvation  Army  printer,  accompanied  by  a  law3"er, 
went  down  to  Messrs.  Imrie  and  Graham's  estab- 
lishment, and  asked  for  all  the  manuscript,  stereo- 
t}^e  plates,  &c.,  of  the  book.  Mr.  Sumner  ex- 
plained that  the  book  had  been  sold  to  the  Army, 
and,  on  a  cheque  for  the  amount  due  being  given, 
the  printing  material  was  delivered  up." 

Did  these  paragraphs  appear  in  the  "  Toronto 
Telegi-am"  of  April  24th,  1889,  or  did  they 
not  ?  Are  the  statements  they  contain  true  or 
false  ? 

3.  "  Public  interest  in  the  fate  or  probable  out- 
come of  that  mysterious  book  called  '  The  New 
Papacy ;  or,  Behind  the  Scenes  in  the  Salvation 
Army,'  continues  unabated,  though  the  line  of  pro- 
ceedings by  the  publisher  and  his  solicitor,  Mr. 
Smoke,  of  Watson,  Thome,  Smoke,  and  Masten, 
has  not  been  altered  since  yesterday.  The  book, 
no  doubt,  will  be  issued  in  some  form.  So  far  as 
known,  only  one  complete  copy  remains,  and  the 
whereabouts  of  this  is  a  secret  which  will  be 
profoundly  kept.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  if  the 
Commissioner  kept  on  guessing  imtil  the  next 
anniversary,   he   would   not   strike  the   secluded 


V  "DARKEST  ENGLAND"   SCHEME  285 

location  of  the  one  volume  among  five  thousand 
which  escaped,  when  he  and  his  assistant,  Mr. 
Fred  Perry,  believed  they  had  cast  every  vestige 
of  the  forbidden  work  into  the  fiery  furnace.  On 
Tuesday  last,  when  the  discovery  was  made  that 
a  copy  of  '  The  New  Papacy '  was  in  existence. 
Publisher  Britnell,  of  Yonge  Street,  was  at  once 
the  suspected  holder,  and  in  a  short  time  his 
book-store  was  the  resort  of  army  agents  sent 
to  reconnoitre "  ("  Toronto  News,"  April  28th, 
1889). 

Is  this  a  forgery,  or  is  it  not  ?  Is  it  in  sub- 
stance true  or  false  ? 

When  Mr.  Trotter  has  answered  these  inquiries 
categorically,  we  may  proceed  to  discuss  the  ques- 
tion of  interpolations  in  Mr.  Sumner's  book. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 

[On  the  26th  of  December  a  letter,  signed  J.  T. 
Cunningham,  late  Fellow  of  University  College, 
Oxford,  called  forth  the  following  commentary.] 


286  LETTERS    TO    THE    "  TDIES  '"'  v 

YIII 

The  "  Times;'  Deeemler  29th,  1890 

Sir, — If  Mr.  Ounningham  doubts  the  efficacy 
of  the  struggle  for  existence,  as  a  factor  in  social 
conditions,  he  should  find  fault  mth  Mr.  Booth 
and  not  with  me. 

"  I  am  labouring  under  no  delusion  as  to  the 
possibility  of  inaugurating  the  millennium  by  my 
social  specific.  In  the  struggle  of  life  the  weakest 
will  go  to  the  wall,  and  there  are  so  many  weak. 
The  fittest  in  tooth  and  claw  will  survive.  All 
that  we  can  do  is  to  soften  the  lot  of  the  unfit, 
and  make  their  suffering  less  horrible  than  it  is 
at  present "  ("  In  Darkest  England,"  p.  44). 

That  is  what  Mr.  Cunningham  would  have 
found  if  he  had  read  Mr.  Booth's  book  with 
attention.  And,  if  he  will  bestow  equal  pains  on 
my  second  letter,  he  will  discover  that  he  has 
interpolated  the  word  "  wilfully  "  in  his  statement 
of  my  "  argument,"  which  runs  thus  :  "  Shutting 
his  eyes  to  the  necessary  consequences  of  the 
struggle  for  hfe,  the  existence  of  which  he  admits 
as  fully  as  any  Darwinian,  Mr.  Booth  tells  men 
whose  evil  case  is  one  of  those  consequences  that 
envy  is  a  corner-stone  of  our  competitive  system." 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "    SCHEME  287 

Mr.  Cunningliam's  pliysiological  studies  will  have 
informed  liim  that  the  process  of  "  shutting  the 
eyes,"  in  the  Uteral  sense  of  the  words,  is  not 
always  wilful ;  and  I  propose  to  illustrate,  by  the 
crucial  instance  his  own  letter  furnishes,  that  the 
"  shutting  of  the  eyes  "  of  the  mind  to  the  obvious 
consequences  of  accepted  propositions  may  also  be 
involuntary.     At  least,  I  hope  so. 

1.  "  Sooner  or  later,"  says  Mr.  Cunningham, 
"  the  population  jDroblem  will  block  the  way  once 
more."  What  does  this  mean,  excejDt  that  multi- 
plication, excessive  in  relation  to  the  contem- 
poraneous means  of  support,  will  create  a  severe 
competition  for  those  means  ?  And  this  seems  to 
me  to  be  a  pretty  accurate  "  reflection  of  the  con- 
ceptions of  Malthus  "  and  the  other  poor  benighted 
folks  of  a  past  generation  at  whom  Mr.  Cunning- 
ham sneers. 

2.  By  way  of  leaving  no  doubt  upon  this  sub- 
ject, Mr.  Cunningham  further  tells  us,  "  The 
struggle  for  existence  is  always  going  on,  of 
course ;  let  us  thank  Darwin  for  making  us  realize 
it."  It  is  pleasant  to  meet  with  a  little  gratitude 
to  Darwin  among  the  ejJigoni  who  are  squabbling 
over  the  heritage  he  conquered  for  them,  but  Mr. 
Cunningham's  personal  expression  of  that  feeling 
is  hasty.  For  it  is  obvious  that  he  has  not 
"  realized  "  the  significance  of  Darwin's  teaching 
— indeed,  I  fail  to  discover  in  Mr.  Cunningham's 
letter  any  sign  that  he  has  even  "  realized  "  what 


288  LETTERS    TO    THE    "  TIMES  "  v 

he  would  be  at.  If  the  "  struggle  for  existence  is 
always  going  on "' ;  and  if,  as  I  suppose  will  be 
granted,  industrial  competition  is  one  phase  of 
that  struggle,  I  fail  to  see  how  my  conclusion  that 
it  is  sheer  wickedness  to  tell  ignorant  men  that 
"  envy "  is  a  corner-stone  of  comjoetition  can  be 
disputed. 

Mr.  Cunningham  has  followed  the  lead  of  that 
polished  and  instructed  person,  Mr.  Ben  Tillett, 
in  rebuking  me  for  (as  the  associates  say)  attack- 
ing Mr.  Booth's  personal  character.  Of  course, 
when  I  was  writing,  I  did  not  doubt  that  this 
very  handy,  though  not  too  clean,  weapon  would 
be  used  by  one  or  other  of  Mr.  Booth's  supporters. 
And  my  action  was  finally  decided  by  the  follow- 
ing considerations  :  I  happen  to  be  a  member  of 
one  of  the  largest  life  insurance  societies.  There 
is  a  vacancy  in  the  directory  at  jDresent,  for  which 
half  a  dozen  gentlemen  are  candidates.  Now,  I 
said  to  myself,  supposing  that  one  of  these  gentle- 
men (whose  pardon  I  humbly  beg  for  starting  the 
hypothesis),  say  Mr.  A.,  in  his  administrative 
capacity  and  as  a  man  of  business,  has  been  the 
subject  of  such  observations  as  a  Judge  on  the 
Bench  bestowed  upon  Mr.  Booth,  is  he  a  person  for 
whom  I  can  properly  vote  ?  And,  if  I  find,  when 
I  go  to  the  meeting  of  the  policy-holders,  that 
most  of  them  know  nothing  of  this  and  other 
evidences  of  what,  by  the  mildest  judgment,  must 
be  termed   Mr.  A.'s  unfitness  for  administrative 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  289 

responsibilities,  am  I  to  let  them  remain  in  their 
ignorance  ?  I  leave  the  answer  and  its  applica- 
tion to  men  of  sense  and  integrity. 

The  mention  of  Mr.  Cunningham's  ally  reminds 
me  that  I  have  omitted  to  thank  Mr.  Tillett  for 
his  very  useful  and  instructive  letter;  and  I 
hasten  to  repair  a  neglect  which  I  assure  Mr. 
Tillett  was  more  apparent  than  real.  Mr.  Tillett's 
letter  is  dated  December  20th.  On  the  21st 
the  following  pregnant  (however  unconscious) 
commentary  upon  it  appeared  in  "  Reynolds's 
Newspaper  "  : — 

"  I  have  always  maintained  that  the  Salvation 
Army  is  one  of  the  mightiest  Socialistic  agencies 
in  the  country ;  and  now  Professor  Huxley  comes 
in  to  confirm  that  view.  How  could  it  be  other- 
wise ?  The  fantastic  religious  side  of  Salvationism 
will  disappear  in  the  course  of  time,  and  what 
will  be  left  ?  A  large  number  of  men  and  women 
who  have  been  organized,  disciplined,  and  taught 
to  look  for  something  better  than  their  present 
condition,  and  who  have  become  public  speakers 
and  not  afraid  of  ridicule.  There  you  have  the 
raw  materials  for  a  Socialist  army." 

Mr.  Ben  Tillett  evidently  knows  Latin  enough 
to  construe  proxinius  ardct. 

I  trust  that  the  public  will  not  allow  themselves 
to  be  led  away  by  the   false    issues  which    are 

VOL.  IX  u 


200  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

dangled  before  them.  A  man  really  may  love 
his  fellow-men ;  cherish  any  form  of  Christianity 
he  pleases;  and  hold  not  only  that  Darwinism 
is  "  tottering  to  its  foil,"  but,  if  he  pleases,  the 
equally  sane  belief  that  it  never  existed  ;  and  yet 
may  feel  it  his  duty  to  oppose,  to  the  best  of  his 
capacity,  despotic  Socialism  in  all  its  forms,  and, 
more  particularly,  in  its  Boothian  disguise. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


[Persons  who  have  not  had  the  advantage  of  a 
classical  education  might  fairly  complain  of  my 
use  of  the  Avord  cpigoni.  To  say  truth,  I  had 
been  reading  Droysen's  "  Geschichte  des  Hellen- 
ismus,"  and  the  familiar  historical  title  slipped 
out  unawares.  In  replying  to  me,  however,  the 
late  "Fellow  of  University  College,"  Oxford, 
declares  he  had  to  look  the  w^ord  out  in  a 
Lexicon.  I  commend  the  fact  to  the  notice  of 
the  combatants  over  the  desirability  of  retaining 
the  present  compulsory  modicum  of  Greek  in  our 
Universities.] 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  291 

IX 

The  "  Timrs;'  Beccmhcr  30th,  1890 

Sir, — I  am  niucli  obliged  to  Messrs.  Ranger, 
Burton,  and  Matthews  for  their  prompt  answer  to 
my  questions.  I  presume  it  apphes  to  all  money 
collected  by  the  agency  of  the  Salvation  Army, 
though  not  specifically  given  for  the  purposes 
of  the  "  Christian  Mission "  named  in  the  deed 
of  1878 ;  to  all  sums  raised  by  mortgage  upon 
houses  and  land  so  given ;  and,  further,  to  funds 
subscribed  for  Mr.  Booth's  various  projects,  which 
have  no  apparent  reference  to  the  objects  of 
the  "  Christian  Mission/'  as  defined  in  the  deed. 
Otherwise,  to  use  a  phrase  which  has  become 
classical,  "  it  does  not  assist  us  much."  But  I 
must  leave  these  points  to  persons  learned  in  the 
law. 

And,  indeed,  with  many  thanks  to  you.  Sir,  for 
the  amount  of  valuable  space  which  you  have 
allowed  me  to  occupy,  I  now  propose  to  leave  the 
whole  subject.  My  sole  purjoose  in  embarking 
upon  an  enterprise  which  was  extremely  dis- 
tasteful to  me  was  to  prevent  the  skilful 
"  General,"  or  rather  "  Generals,"  who  devised 
tlie  plan  of  campaign  from  sweeping  all  before 
them  with  a  rush.  I  found  the  pass  already  held 
by  such  stout  defenders  as   Mr.  Loch   and   the 

U  2 


292  LETTERS   TO    THE  ''  TIMES  "  v 

Dean  of  Wells,  and,  with  your  powerful  help,  we 
have  given  time  for  the  reinforcements,  sure  to 
be  sent  by  the  abundant,  though  somewhat  slowly 
acting,  common  sense  of  our  countrymen,  to  come 
up. 

I  can  no  longer  be  useful,  and  I  return  to  more 
congenial  occupations. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


The  following  letter  appeared  in  the  "  Times  " 
of  January  2nd,  1891  :— 

"  Dear  Mr.  Tillett, — I  have  not  had  patience 
to  read  Professor  Huxley's  letters.  The  existence 
of  hunger,  nakedness,  misery,  '  death  from  in- 
sufficient food,'  even  of  starvation,  is  certain,  and 
no  agency  as  yet  reaches  it.  How  can  any  man 
hinder  or  discourage  the  giving  of  food  or  help  ? 
Why  is  the  house  called  a  workhouse  ?  Because 
it  is  for  those  who  cannot  work  ?  No,  because  it 
was  the  house  to  give  work  or  bread.  The  very 
name  is  an  argument.  I  am  very  sure  what  Our 
Lord  and  His  Apostles  would  do  if  they  were  in 
London.  Let  us  be  thankful  even  to  have  a  will 
to  do  the  same. 

"Yours  faithfully, 

"  Henry  E.  Card.  Manning." 


"  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  293 


The  ''Times;'  Jamiary  Srd,  1891 

Sir, — In  my  old  favourite,  "  The  Arabian 
Nights/'  the  motive  of  the  whole  series  of  delight- 
ful narratives  is  that  the  sultan,  who  refuses  to 
attend  to  reason,  can  be  got  to  listen  to  a  story. 
May  I  try  whether  Cardinal  Manning  is  to  be 
reached  in  the  same  way  ?  When  I  was  attend- 
ing the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  in 
Belfast  nearly  forty  years  ago,  I  had  promised  to 
breakfast  with  the  eminent  scholar  Dr.  Hincks. 
Having  been  up  very  late  the  previous  night,  I 
was  behind  time;  so,  hailing  an  outside  car,  I  said 
to  the  driver  as  I  jumped  on,  "  Now  drive  fast,  I 
am  in  a  hurry."  Whereupon  he  whipped  up  his 
horse  and  set  off  at  a  hand-gallop.  Nearly  jerked 
off  my  seat,  I  shouted,  "  My  good  friend,  do  you 
know  where  I  want  to  go  ?  "  "  No,  yer  honner," 
said  the  driver,  "  but,  any  way,  I  am  driving  fast." 
I  have  never  forgotten  this  object-lesson  in  the 
dangers  of  ill-regulated  enthusiasm.  We  are  all  in- 
vited to  jump  on  to  the  Salvation  Army  car,  which 
Mr.  Booth  is  undoubtedly  driving  very  fast.  Some 
of  us  have  a  firm  conviction,  not  only  that  he  is 
taking  a  very  different  direction  from  that  in 
which  we  wish  to  go,  but  that,  before  long,  car 
and  driver  will  come  to  grief     Are  we  to  accept 


294  LETTERS   TO   THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

the  invitation,  even  at  the  bidding  of  the  eminent 
person  who  appears  to  think  himself  entitled  to 
pledge  the  credit  of  "  Our  Lord  and  His  Apostles  " 
in  favour  of  Boothism  ? 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


XI 

The  "  Times,"  January  ISth,  1891 

Sir, — A  letter  from  Mr.  Booth-Clibborn,  dated 
January  3rd,  appeared  in  the  "  Times  "  of  yester- 
day. This  elaborate  document  occupies  three 
columns  of  small  print — space  enough,  assuredly, 
for  an  effectual  reply  to  the  seven  letters  of 
mine  to  which  the  writer  refers,  if  any  such 
were  forthcoming.  Mr.  Booth-Clibborn  signs 
himself  "  Commissioner  of  the  Salvation  Army 
for  France  and  Switzerland,"  but  he  says  that  he 
accepts  my  "  challenge  "  without  the  knowledge 
of  his  chiefs.  Considering  the  self-damaging 
character  of  his  letter,  it  was,  perhaps,  hardly 
necessary  to  make  that  statement. 

Mr.  "  Commissioner  "  Booth-Clibborn  speaks  of 
my  "  challenge."     I  presume  that  he  refers  to  my 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  295 

request  for  information  about  the  authorship  and 
fate  of  "  The  New  Papacy,"  in  the  letter  published 
in  the  "  Times  "  on  December  27th,  1890.  The 
"  Commissioner  "  deals  with  this  matter  in  para- 
graph No.  4  of  his  letter ;  and  I  observe,  with  no 
little  satisfaction,  that  he  does  not  venture  to  con- 
trovert any  one  of  the  statements  of  my  witnesses. 
He  tacitly  admits  that  the  author  of  "  The  New 
Papacy"  was  a  person  "greatly  esteemed  in 
Toronto,"  and  that  he  held  "  a  high  position  in  the 
army  "  ;  further,  that  the  Canadian  "  Commis- 
sioner "  thought  it  worth  while  to  pay  the  printer  s 
bill,  in  order  that  the  copies  already  jDrinted  off 
might  be  destroyed  and  the  pamphlet  effectually 
suppressed.  Thus  the  essential  facts  of  the  case 
are  admitted  and  established  beyond  question. 

How  does  Mr.  Booth -Clibborn  try  to  explain 
them  away  ? 

"  Mr.  Sumner,  who  wrote  the  little  book  in  a 
hot  fit,  soon  regretted  it  (as  any  man  would  do 
whose  conscience  showed  him  in  a  calmer  moment, 
when  his  '  respectability '  returned  with  his  repent- 
ance, that  he  had  grossly  misrepresented),  and  just 
before  it  appeared  offered  to  order  its  suppression 
if  the  army  would  pay  the  costs  already  incurred, 
and  which  he  was  unable  to  bear." 

"  The  New  Papacy  "  fills  sixty  closely  printed 
duodecimo  pages.  It  is  carefully  written,  and  for 
the  most  part  in  studiously  moderate  language ; 


296  LETTERS   TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

moreover,  it  contains  many  precise  details  and 
figures,  the  ascertainment  of  which  must  have 
taken  much  time  and  trouble.  Yet,  forsooth,  it 
was  written  in  "  a  hot  fit." 

I  sincerely  hope,  for  the  sake  of  his  own  credit, 
that  Mr.  "  Commissioner  "  Booth-Clibborn  does 
not  know  as  much  about  this  melancholy  business 
as  I  do.  My  hands  are  unfortunately  tied,  and  I 
am  not  at  liberty  to  use  all  the  information  in  my 
possession.  I  must  content  myself  with  quoting 
the  following  passage  from  the  preface  to  "  The 
New  Papacy  "  : — 

"  It  has  not  been  without  considerable  thought 
and  a  good  deal  of  urging  that  the  following  pages 
have  been  given  to  the  public.  But  though  we 
would  have  shnink  from  a  labour  so  distasteful, 
and  have  gladly  avoided  a  notoriety  anything  but 
pleasant  to  the  feelings,  or  conducive  to  our 
material  welfare,  we  have  felt  that  in  the  interests 
of  the  benevolent  public,  in  the  interests  of  religion, 
in  the  interests  of  a  band  of  devoted  men  and  women 
whose  personal  ends  are  being  defeated,  and  the  fruit 
of  whose  labour  is  being  destroyed,  and,  above  all, 
in  the  interests  of  that  future  which  lies  before  the 
Salvation  Army  itself,  if  purged  and  purified  in  its 
executive  and  returned  to  its  original  position  in 
the  ranks  of  Canadian  Christian  effort,  it  is  no 
more  than  our  duty  to  throw  such  light  as  we 
are  able  upon  its  true  inwardness,  and  with  that 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "  SCHEME  297 

object  and  for  the   furtherance  of  those  ends  we 
offer  our  pages  to  the  public  view." 

The  preface  is  dated  April  1889.  According 
to  the  statement  in  the  "  Toronto  Telegram," 
which  Mr.  "  Commissioner  "  Booth-Clibborn  does 
not  dare  to  dispute,  his  Canadian  fellow-"  Com- 
missioner "  bought  and  destroyed  the  whole  edition 
of  "  The  New  Papacy  "  about  the  end  of  the  third 
week  in  April.  It  is  clear  that  the  writer  of 
the  paragraph  quoted  from  the  preface  was  well 
out  of  a  "  hot  fit,"  if  he  had  ever  been  in  one, 
while  he  had  not  entered  on  the  stage  of  re- 
pentance within  three  weeks  of  that  time.  Mr. 
"  Commissioner  "  Booth-Clibborn's  scandalous  in- 
sinuations that  Mr.  Sumner  was  bribed  by  "  a  few 
sovereigns,"  and  that  he  was  "  bought  off,"  in  the 
face  of  his  own  admission  that  Mr.  Sumner  "  offered 
to  order  its  suppression  if  the  army  would  pay  the 
costs  already  incurred,  and  which  he  was  unable 
to  bear,"  is  a  crucial  example  of  that  Jesuitry  with 
which  the  officials  of  the  army  have  been  so  fre- 
quently charged. 

Mr.  "Commissioner"  Boobh-Clibborn  says  that 
when  "  London  headquarters  heard  of  the  affair, 
it  disapproved  of  the  action  of  the  Commissioner." 
That  circumstance  indicates  that  headquarters  is 
not  wholly  devoid  of  intelligence;  but  it  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  value  of  Mr.  Sumner's 
evidence,  which  is  all  I  am  concerned  about. 
Very  likely  London  headquarters  will  disapprove 


298  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  '*  y 

of  its  French  "  Commissioner's "  j^resent  action. 
But  what  then  ?  The  u^Dshot  of  all  this  is  that 
Mr.  Booth-Chbborn  has  made  as  gi-eat  a  blunder 
as  simple  Mr.  Trotter  did.  The  pair  of  Balaams 
greatly  desired  to  curse,  but  have  been  compelled 
to  bless.  They  have,  between  them,  completely 
justified  my  reliance  on  Mr.  Sumner  as  a  perfectly 
trustworthy  witness  ;  and  neither  of  them  has 
dared  to  challenge  the  accuracy  of  one  solitary 
statement  made  by  that  worthy  gentleman,  whose 
full  story  I  hope  some  day  or  other  to  see  set 
before  the  public.  Then  the  true  causes  of  his 
action  will  be  made  known. 

Paragraph  2  of  the  "  Commissioner's "  letter 
says  many  things,  but  not  much  about  Mr.  Hodges. 
The  columns  of  the  "  Times "  recently  showed 
that  Mr.  Hodges  was  able  to  compel  an  apology 
from  Mr.  Trotter.  I  leave  it  to  him  to  deal  with 
the  "  Commissioner." 

As  to  the  "  Eagle  "  case,  treated  of  in  paragi^aph 
No.  3,  a  gentleman  well  versed  in  the  law,  who 
was  in  court  during  the  hearing  of  the  appeal, 
has  assured  me  that  the  argument  was  purely 
technical ;  that  the  facts  were  very  sliglitly  gone 
into  ;  and  that,  so  far  as  he  knows,  no  dissenting 
comment  was  made  on  the  strictures  of  the  Judge 
before  whom  the  case  first  came.  Moreover,  in 
the  judgment  of  the  Master  of  the  Rolls,  fully  re- 
corded in  the  "Times"  of  February  14th,  1884, 
the  following  passages  occur  : — 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "  SCHEME  299 

"  The  case  had  been  heard  by  a  learned  Judge, 
who  had  exercised  his  discretion  upon  it,  and  the 
Court  would  not  interfere  with  his  discretion  un- 
less they  could  see  that  he  was  wrong.  The  learned 
Judge  had  taken  a  strong  view  of  the  conduct  of  the 
defendant,  but  nevertheless  had  said  that  he  would 
have  given  relief  if  he  could  have  seen  how  far 
protection  and  compensation  could  be  given.  And 
if  this  Court  differed  from  him  in  that  view,  and 
could  give  relief  without  forfeiture,  they  would  be 
acting  on  his  own  principle  in  doing  so.  Certain 
suggestions  had  been  made  Avith  that  view,  and  the 
Court  had  to  consider  the  case  under  all  the  cir- 
cumstances. .  .  .  He  himself  (the  Master  of  the 
Rolls)  considered  that  it  was  probable  the  defend- 
ant, with  his  principles,  had  intended  to  destroy 
the  property  as  a  public-house,  and  that  it  was 
not  right  thus  to  take  property  under  a  covenant 
to  keep  it  up  as  a  public-house,  intending  to 
destroy  it  as  such.  He  did  not,  however,  think 
this  was  enough  to  deprive  him  of  all  relief  .  .  . 
The  defendant  could  only  expect  severe  terms." 

Yet,  Sir,  Mr.  "  Commissioner  "  Booth-Clibborn, 
this  high  official  of  the  Salvation  Army,  has  the 
audacity  to  tell  the  public  that  if  I  had  made 
inquiries  I  should  have  found  that  "  in  the  Court 
of  Appeal  the  Judge  reversed  the  decision  of  his 
predecessor  as  regards  seven  eighths  of  the  pro- 
perty, and  the  General  was  declared  to  have  acted 


300  LETTERS    TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

all  along  with  straightforwardness  and  good 
faith." 

But  the  nature  of  Mr.  "  Commissioner  "  Booth- 
Clibborn's  conceptions  of  straightforwardness  and 
good  faith  is  so  marvellously  illustrated  by  the 
portions  of  his  letter  with  which  I  have  dealt 
that  I  doubt  not  his  statements  are  quite  up  to 
the  level  of  the  "  Army  "  Regulations  and  Instruc- 
tions in  regard  to  those  cardinal  virtues.  As  I 
pointed  out  must  be  the  case,  the  slave  is  subdued 
to  that  he  works  in. 

For  myself,  I  must  confess  that  the  process  of 
wading  through  Mr.  "  Commissioner's "  verbose 
and  clumsy  pleadings  has  given  me  a  "  hot  fit," 
which,  I  undertake  to  say,  will  be  followed  by  not 
so  much  as  a  passing  shiver  of  repentance.  And 
it  is  under  the  influence  of  the  genial  warmth 
diffused  through  the  frame,  on  one  of  those  rare 
occasions  when  one  may  be  "  angry  and  sin  not," 
that  I  infringe  my  resolution  to  ti-ouble  you  with 
no  more  letters.  On  reflection,  I  am  convinced 
that  it  is  undesirable  that  the  public  should  be 
misled,  for  even  a  few  days,  by  misrepresentations 
so  serious. 

I  am  copiously  abused  for  speaking  of  the 
Jesuitical  methods  of  the  superior  officials  of  the 
Salvation  Army.  But  the  following  facts  have 
not  been,  and,  I  believe,  cannot  be,  denied  : — 

1.  Mr.  Booth's  conduct  in  the  "  Eagle  "  case 
has  been  censured  by  two  of  the  Judges. 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  301 

2.  Mr.  Bramwell  Booth  admitted  before  Mr. 
Justice  Lopes  that  he  had  made  an  untrue  state- 
ment because  of  a  promise  he  had  made  to  Mr. 
Stead.i 

And  I  have  just  proved  that  Mr.  "  Commis- 
sioner "  Booth-Clibborn  asserts  the  exact  contrary 
of  that  which  your  report  of  the  judgment  of  the 
Master  of  the  Rolls  tells  us  that  distinguished 
judge  said. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  think  that  my 
politeness  in  applying  no  harder  adjective  than 
"  Jesuitical "  to  these  proceedings  is  not  properly 
appreciated. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


XII 

The  ''  Times;'  January  22nd,  1891 

Sir, — I  think  that  your  readers  will  be  in- 
terested in  the  accompanying  opinion,  written  in 
consultation  with  an  eminent  Chancery  Queen's 
Counsel,  with  which  I  have  been  favoured.  It 
will   be    observed  that  this  important  legal   de- 

1  This  statement  has  been  disputed,  but  not  yet  publicly, 
(Seep.  305. ") 


302  LETTERS    TO    THE"  TIMES "  v 

liverance  justifies  much  stronger  language  tlian 
any  whicli  I  have  apj^Ked  to  the  only  security  (?) 
for  the  proper  administration  of  the  funds  in  Mr. 
Booth's  hands  which  appears  to  be  in  existence. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  Huxley. 


1,  De,  Johnson's  Buildings,  Temple,  E.C, 
January  14,  1891. 

MR.  BOOTHS    DECLARATION  OF   TRUST  DEED,  1878. 

"  I  am  of  opinion,  subject  to  the  question 
whether  there  may  be  any  provision  in  the 
Charitable  Trusts  Acts  which  can  be  made  avail- 
able for  enforcing  some  scheme  for  the  appropria- 
tion of  the  property,  and  with  regard  to  the  real 
and  leasehold  properties  whether  the  conveyances 
and  leases  arc  not  altogether  void,  as  frauds  on 
the  Mortmain  Acts,  that  nothing  can  be  done  to 
control  or  to  interfere  with  Booth  in  the  disposi- 
tion or  application  of  the  properties  or  moneys 
purported  to  be  affected  by  the  deed. 

"  As  to  the  properties  vested  in  Booth  himself, 
it  appears  to  me  that  such  are  placed  absolutely 
under  his  power  and  control  both  as  to  the  dis- 
posal and  application  thereof,  and  that  there  are  no 
trusts  for   any  specific  purposes   declared   which 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "  SCHEME  o03 

could  be  enforced,  and  tliat  there  are  no  defined 
persons  nor  classes  of  persons  who  can  claim  to  be 
entitled  to  the  benefit  of  them,  or  at  whose  in- 
stance they  could  be  enforced  by  any  legal  process. 

"  As  to  the  properties  (if  any)  vested  in  trustees 
appointed  by  Booth,  it  ajDpears  to  me  that  the 
only  person  who  has  a  locus  standi  to  enforce  these 
trusts  is  Booth  himself,  and  that  he  would  have 
absolute  power  over  the  trasts  and  the  property, 
and  might  deal  with  the  property  as  he  pleased, 
and  that,  as  in  the  former  case,  nothing  could  be 
done  in  the  way  of  enforcing  any  trusts  against 
him. 

"  As  to  the  moneys  contributed  or  raised  by 
mortgage  for  the  general  purposes  of  the  mission, 
it  appears  to  me  that  Booth  may  exj^end  them  as 
he  pleases,  without  being  subject  to  any  legal 
control,  and  that  he  cannot  even  be  compelled  to 
publish  any  balance-sheets. 

"  Whether  there  are  any  provisions  in  the 
Charitable  Trusts  Acts  which  could  be  made 
available  for  enforcing  some  scheme  for  the 
application  of  the  property  or  funds  is  a  question 
to  which  I  should  require  to  give  a  closer  con- 
sideration should  it  become  necessary  to  go  into 
it ;  but  at  present,  after  perusing  these  Acts,  and 
especially  16  and  17  Vict.  c.  137  and  18  and  19 
Vict.  c.  124,  I  cannot  see  how  they  could  be 
made  applicable  to  the  trusts  as  declared  in  this 
deed. 


304  LETTERS   TO    THE  "  TIMES  "  v 

"  As  to  the  Mortmain  Acts,  the  matter  is  clearly 
charitable,  and  unless  in  the  conveyances  and 
leases  to  Booth,  or  to  the  trustees  (if  any)  named 
by  him,  all  the  provisions  of  the  Acts  have  been 
compKed  with,  and  the  deeds  have  been  enrolled 
under  the  Acts,  they  would  be  void.  It  is  prob- 
able, however,  that  every  conveyance  and  lease  has 
been  taken  without  disclosing  any  charitable  trust, 
for  the  purpose  of  preventing  it  from  being  void 
on  the  face  of  it.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  deed 
is  a  mere  deed  poll  by  Booth  himself,  without  any 
other  party  to  it,  who,  as  a  contracting  party, 
would  have  a  right  to  enforce  it. 

"  Whether  there  are  any  objects  of  the  trust  I 
cannot  say.  If  there  is,  as  the  recital  indicates,  a 
society  of  enrolled  members  called  '  The  Christian 
Mission,'  those  members  would  be  objects  of  the 
trust,  but  then,  it  appears  to  me,  Booth  has  entire 
control  and  determination  of  the  application. 
And,  as  to  the  trusts  enuring  for  the  benefit  of 
the  *  Salvation  Army,'  I  am  not  aware  what  is  the 
constitution  of  the  '  Salvation  Army,'  but  there  is 
no  reference  whatever  to  any  such  body  in  the 
deed.  I  have  understood  the  army  as  being 
merely  the  missionaries,  and  not  the  society  of 
worshippers. 

"  If  there  is  no  Christian  Mission  Society  of 
enrolled  members,  then  there  are  no  objects  of  the 
trust.  The  trusts  are  purely  religious,  and  trading 
is  entirely  beyond  its  purposes.     Booth  can  '  give 


V  "  DARKEST  ENGLAND "   SCHEME  305 

away  '  the  property,  simply  because  there  is  no  one 
who  has  any  right  to  prevent  his  doing  so. 

"  Ernest  Hatton." 

It  is  probably  my  want  of  legal  knowledge 
which  prevents  me  from  appreciating  the  value  of 
the  professed  corrections  of  Mr.  Hatton's  opinion 
contained  in  the  letters  of  Messrs.  Ranger,  Burton, 
and  Matthews,  "  Times,"  January  28th  and  29th, 
1891. 


The  note  on  page  801  refers  to  a  correspondence, 
incomplete  at  the  time  fixed  for  the  publication  of 
my  pamphlet,  the  nature  of  which  is  sufficiently 
indicated  by  the  subjoined  extracts  from  Mr. 
Stead's  letter  in  the  "  Times  "  of  January  20th, 
and  from  my  reply  in  the  "  Times "  of  January 
24th.  Referring  to  the  paragraphs  numbered  1, 
2,  at  the  end  of  my  letter  XL,  Mr.  Stead  says : — 

*'  On  reading  this,  I  at  once  wrote  to  Professor 
Huxley,  stating  that,  as  he  had  mentioned  my 
name,  I  was  justified  in  intervening  to  explain 
that,  so  far  as  the  second  count  in  his  indictment 
went — for  the  Eagle  dispute  is  no  concern  of 
mine — he  had  been  misled  by  an  error  in  the 
reports  of  the  case  which  appeared  in  the  daily 

VOL.  IX  X. 


306  LETTERS    TO    THE    "  TIMES  "  v 

papers  of  November  4,  1885.  I  have  his  reply 
to-day,  saying  that  I  had  better  write  to  you 
direct.  May  I  ask  you,  then,  seeing  that  my 
name  has  been  brought  into  the  affair,  to  state 
that,  as  I  was  in  the  dock  when  Mr.  Bramweli 
Booth  was  in  the  witness-box,  I  am  in  a  position 
to  give  the  most  unquaHfied  denial  to  the  state- 
ment as  to  the  alleged  admission  on  his  part  of 
falsehood  ?  Nothing  was  heard  in  Court  of  any 
such  admission.  Neither  the  prosecuting  counsel 
nor  the  Judge  who  tried  the  case  ever  referred  to 
it,  although  it  would  obviously  have  had  a  direct 
bearing  on  the  credit  of  the  witness;  and  the 
jury,  by  acquitting  Mr.  Bramweli  Booth,  showed 
that  they  believed  him  to  be  a  witness  of  truth. 
But  fortunately  the  facts  can  be  verified  beyond 
all  gainsaying  by  a  reference  to  the  official  short- 
hand-writer's report  of  the  evidence.  During  the 
hearing  of  the  case  for  the  prosecution.  Inspector 
Bonier  was  interrupted  by  the  Judge,  who 
said  : — 

" '  I  want  to  ask  you  a  question.  During  the 
whole  of  that  conversation,  did  Booth  in  any  way 
suggest  that  that  child  had  been  sold  ? '  Bomer 
repHed  : — 

" '  Not  at  that  interview,  my  Lord.' 

"  It  was  to  this  that  Mr.  Bramweli  Booth 
referred  when,  after  examination,  cross-examina- 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND  "    SCHEME  307 

tion,  and  re-examination,  during  which  no 
suggestion  had  been  made  that  he  had  ever 
made  the  untrue  statement  now  alleged  against 
him,  he  asked  and  received  leave  from  the  Judge 
to  make  the  following  explanation,  which  I  quote 
from  the  official  report  : — 

"  '  Will  you  allow  me  to  explain  a  matter  men- 
tioned yesterday  in  reference  to  a  question  asked 
by  your  Lordship  some  days  ago  with  respect  to 
one  matter  connected  with  my  conduct  ?  Your 
Lordship  asked,  I  think  it  was  Inspector  Borner, 
whether  I  had  said  to  him  at  either  of  our  inter- 
views that  the  child  was  sold  by  her  parents,  and 
he  repKed  "  No."  That  is  quite  correct ;  I  did 
not  say  so  to  him,  and  what  I  wish  to  say  now  is 
that  I  had  been  specially  requested  by  Mr.  Stead, 
and  had  given  him  a  promise,  that  I  would  not 
under  any  circumstances  divulge  the  fact  of  that 
sale  to  any  person  which  would  make  it  at  all 
probable  that  any  trouble  would  be  brought  upon 
the  persons  who  had  taken  part  in  this  investiga- 
tion.' (Central  Criminal  Court  Reports,  Vol.  CIL, 
part  612,  pp.  1,035-6.) 

"  In  the  daily  papers  of  the  following  day  this 
statement  was  misreported  as  follows  : — 

"  '  I  wish  to  explain,  in  regard  to  your  Lord- 
ship's condemnation  of  my  having  said  "  No  "  to 

X  2 


308  LETTERS   TO    THE    "  TIMES  "  v 

Inspector  Bonier  when  he  asked  me  whether  the 
child  had  been  sold  by  her  parents — the  reason 
wdiy  I  stated  what  was  not  correct  was  that  I  had 
promised  Mr.  Stead  not  to  divulge  tlie  fact  of  the 
sale  to  any  person  which  would  make  it  ])robable 
that  any  trouble  should  be  brought  on  persons 
taking  part  in  this  proceeding.' 

"  Hence  the  mistake  into  which  Professor 
Huxley  has  unwittingly  fallen. 

"  I  may  add  that,  so  far  from  the  statement 
never  having  been  challenged  for  five  years,  it 
was  denounced  as  '  a  remarkably  striking  lie '  in 
the  '  War  Cry  '  of  November  14th,  and  again  the 
same  official  organ  of  the  Salvation  Army  of 
November  18th  specifically  adduced  this  mis- 
report  as  an  instance  of  'the  most  disgraceful 
way  '  in  which  the  reports  of  the  trial  were  garbled 
by  some  of  the  papers.  What,  then,  becomes  of 
one  of  the  two  main  pillars  of  Professor  Huxley's 
argument  ? " 

In  my  reply,  I  point  out  that,  on  the  10th  of 
January,  Mr.  Stead  addressed  to  me  a  letter, 
which  commences  thus  :  "  I  see  in  the  '  Times ' 
of  this  morning  that  3^ou  are  about  to  republish 
your  letters  on  Booth's  book." 

I  replied  to  this  letter  on  the  12th  of 
January  : — 


V  "  DARKEST   ENGLAND "    SCHEME  309 

"Dear  Mr.  Stead,— I  charge  Mr.  Bramwell 
Booth  with  nothing.  I  simply  quote  the  '  Times  ' 
report,  the  accuracy  of  which,  so  far  as  I  know, 
has  never  been  challenged  by  Mr.  Booth.  I  say 
I  quote  the  '  Times '  and  not  Mr.  Hodges,^ 
because  I  took  some  pains  about  the  verification 
of  Mr.  Hodges's  citation. 

"  I  should  have  thought  it  rather  appertained 
to  Mr.  Bramwell  Booth  to  contradict  a  statement 
which  refers,  not  to  what  you  heard,  but  to  what 
he  said.  However,  I  am  the  last  person  to  wish 
to  give  circulation  to  a  story  which  may  not  be 
quite  correct ;  and  I  will  take  care,  if  3^ou  have  no 
objection  (your  letter  is  marked  '  private '),  to 
make  public  as  much  of  your  letter  as  relates  to 
the  point  to  which  you  have  called  my  attention. 

"  I  am,  yours  very  faithfully, 

''  T.  H.  Huxley." 

To  this  Mr.  Stead  answered,  under  date  of 
January  13th,  1891  :— 

*'  Dear  Professor  Huxley, — I  thank  you  for 
your  letter  of  the  12fch  inst.  I  am  quite  sure  you 
would  not  wish  to  do  any  injustice  in  this  matter. 
But,  instead  of  publishing  any  extract  from  my 
letter,  might  I  ask  you  to  read  the  passage  as  it 

^  This  is  a  slip  of  the  pen.  Mr.  Hodges  had  nothin^^  to  do 
with  the  citation  of  which  I  made  use. 


310  LETTERS    TO    THE   "  TIMES "  v 

appears  in  the  verbatim  report  of  the  trial  which 
was  printed  day  by  day,  and  used  by .  counsel  on 
both  sides,  and  by  the  Judge  during  the  case  ? 
I  had  hoped  to  have  got  you  a  copy  to-day,  but 
find  that  I  was  too  late.  I  shall  have  it  first 
thing  to-morrow  morning.  You  will  find  that  it 
is  quite  clear,  and  conclusively  disposes  of  the 
alleged  admission  of  untruthfulness.  Again 
thanking  you  for  your  courtesy, 

"  I  am,  yours  faithfully, 

"  W.  T.  Stead." 

Thus  it  appears  that  the  letter  which  Mr.  Stead 
wrote  to  me  on  the  13th  of  January  does  not 
contain  one  word  of  that  which  he  says  it  con- 
tains, in  the  statement  which  appears  in  the 
"  Times  "  to-day.  Moreover,  the  letter  of  mine  to 
which  Mr.  Stead  refers  in  his  first  communication 
to  me  is  not  the  letter  which  appeared  on  the 
13th,  as  he  states,  but  that  which  you  published 
on  December  27th,  1890.  Therefore,  it  is  not 
true  that  Mr.  Stead  wrote  "at  once."  On  the 
contrary,  he  allowed  nearly  a  fortnight  to  elapse 
before  he  addressed  me  on  the  10th  of  January 
1891.  Furthermore,  Mr.  Stead  suppresses  the 
fact  that,  since  the  13th  of  January,  he  has  had 
in  his  possession  my  offer  to  publish  his  version  of 
the  story  ;  and  he  leads  the  reader  to  suppose  that 
my  only  answer  was  that  he  "  had  better  write  to 


V  "DARKEST   ENGLAND"    SCHEME  311 

you  direct."  All  the  while,  Mr.  Stead  knows 
perfectly  well  that  I  was  withheld  from  making 
public  use  of  his  letter  of  the  10th  by  nothing  but 
my  scruples  about  using  a  document  which  was 
marked  "  private  "  ;  and  that  he  did  not  give  me 
leave  to  quote  his  letter  of  the  10th  of  January 
until  after  he  had  written  that  which  appeared 
yesterday. 

And  I  add  : — 

As  to  the  subject-matter  of  Mr.  Stead's  letter, 
the  point  which  he  wishes  to  prove  appears  to  be 
this — that  Mr.  Bramwell  Booth  did  not  make  a 
false  statement,  but  that  he  withheld  from  the 
officers  of  justice,  pursuing  a  most  serious  criminal 
inquiry,  a  fact  of  grave  importance,  which  lay 
within  his  own  knowledge.  And  this  because  he 
had  promised  Mr.  Stead  to  keep  the  fact  secret. 
In  short,  Mr.  Bramwell  Booth  did  not  say  what 
was  wrong ;  but  he  did  what  was  wrong. 

I  will  take  care  to  give  every  weight  to  the 
correction.  Most  people,  I  think,  will  consider 
that  one  of  the  "  main  pillars  of  my  argument," 
as  Mr.  Stead  is  pleased  to  call  them,  has  become 
very  much  strengthened. 


«S12  LEGAL   OPINIONS 


LEGAL   OPINIONS   RESPECTING 
"GENERAL"  BOOTH'S  ACTS. 

In  referring  to  the  course  of  action  adopted  by 
"General"  Booth  and  Mr.  Bramwell  Booth  in 
respect  of  their  legal  obligations  to  other  persons, 
or  to  the  criminal  and  civil  law,  I  have  been  as 
careful  as  I  was  bound  to  be,  to  put  any  diffi- 
culties suggested  by  mere  lay  common-sense  in 
an  interrogative  or  merely  doubtful  form ;  and  to 
confine  myself,  for  any  positive  expressions,  to 
citations  from  published  declarations  of  the 
judges  before  whom  the  acts  of  "General"  Booth 
came ;  from  reports  of  the  Law  Courts ;  and  from 
the  deliberate  opinions  of  legal  experts.  I  have 
now  some  further  remarks  to  make  on  these 
topics. 

I.  The  observations  at  p.  305  express,  with 
due  reserve,  the  impression  which  the  counsel's 
opinions,  quoted  by  "  General "  Booth's  solicitors, 
made  on  my  mind.  They  were  written  and  sent 
to  the  printer  before  I  saw  the  letter  from  a 
"  Barrister  not  Practising  on  the  Common  Law 
Side,"  and  those  from  Messrs.  Clarke  and  Calkin 
and  Mr.  George  Kebbell,  which  appeared  in  the 
"Times"  of  February  3rd  and  4th. 

These  letters  fully  bear  out  the  conclusion 
which  I   had   formed,   but   which   it   would  have 


V  LEGAL   OriNIONS  313 

been  presumptuous  on  my  part  to  express,  that 
the  opinions  cited  by  "  General "  Booth's  soUcitors 
Avere  like  the  famous  broken  tea-cups  "wisely 
ranged  for  show " ;  and  that,  as  Messrs.  Clarke 
and  Calkin  say,  they  "do  not  at  all  meet  the 
main  points  on  which  Mr.  Hatton  advised."  I 
do  not  think  that  any  one  who  reads  attentively 
the  able  letter  of  "  A  Barrister  not  Practising  on 
the  Common  Law  Side  "  will  arrive  at  any  other 
conclusion  ;  or  who  will  not  share  the  very  natural 
desire  of  Mr.  Kebbell  to  be  j^rovided  with  clear 
and  intelligible  answers  to  the  following  in- 
quiries : — 

(1)  Does  the  trust  deed  by  its  operation 
empower  any  one  legally  to  call  upon  Mr.  Booth 
to  account  for  the  application  of  the  funds  ? 

(2)  In  the  event  of  the  funds  not  being  properly 
accounted  for,  is  any  one,  and,  if  so,  who,  in  a 
position  to  institute  civil  or  criminal  proceedings 
against  any  one,  and  whom,  in  respect  of  such 
refusal  or  neglect  to  account  ? 

(3)  In  the  event  of  the  proceedings,  civil  or 
criminal,  failing  to  obtain  restitution  of  misapplied 
funds,  is  or  are  any  other  person  or  persons  liable 
to  make  good  the  loss  ? 

On  December  24th,  1890,  a  letter  of  mine 
appeared  in  the  "  Times  "  (No.  V.  above)  in  which 
I  put  questions  of  the  same  import,  and  asked 
Mr.  Booth  if  he  would  not  be  so  good  as  to  take 
counsel's  opinion  on  the  "  trusts "  of  which   so 


314  LEGAL    OPINIONS  y 

much  has  been  heard  and  so  httle  seen,  not  as 
they  stood  in  1878,  or  in  1888,  but  as  they  stand 
now  ?  Six  weeks  have  elapsed,  and  I  wait  for  a 
reply. 

It  is  true  that  Dr.  Greenwood  has  been  author- 
ized by  Mr.  Booth  to  publish  what  he  calls  a 
"  Rough  outline  of  the  intended  Trust  Deed " 
("  General  Booth  and  His  Critics,"  p.  120),  but 
unfortunately  we  are  especially  told  that  it  "  does 
not  ]jrofess  to  be  an  ahsolutcly  ctcciirate  analysis.'* 
Under  these  circumstances  I  am  afraid  that 
neither  lawyers  nor  laymen  of  moderate  intelli- 
gence will  pay  much  attention  to  the  assertion, 
that  "  it  gives  a  fair  idea  of  the  general  effect  of 
the  draft ^'  even  although  "  the  vjords  in  qicotatioii 
marhs  arc  taJicn  frorn  it  vcrhatira!' 

These  words,  which  I  give  in  itahcs,  (1)  define 
the  purposes  of  the  scheme  to  be  ''for  the  social 
and  niorcd  regencrcdion  ami  iiivprovement  of  persons 
needy,  destitute,  degraded,  or  crimincd,  in  some 
mann^er  indiccded,  implied,  or  suggested  in  the  hook 
called  '  In  Darkest  England^  Whence  I  appre- 
hend that,  if  the  whole  funds  collected  are  applied 
to  "  mothering  society  "  by  the  help  of  speculative 
attorney  "  tribunes  of  the  people,"  the  purposes 
of  the  trust  will  be  unassailably  fulfilled.  (2) 
The  name  is  to  be  "  Darkest  England  Scheme''  (3) 
the  General  of  the  Salvation  Army  is  to  be 
"  Director  of  the  Scheme."  Truly  valuable  inform- 
ation all  this  !    But  taking  it  for  what  it  is  worth, 


V  LEGAL   OPINIONS  315 

the  public  must  not  be  misled  into  supposing 
that  it  has  the  least  bearing  upon  the  questions 
to  which  neither  I,  nor  anybody  else,  has  yet  been 
able  to  obtain  an  intelligible  answer,  and  that 
is,  where  are  the  vast  funds  which  have  been 
obtained,  in  one  way  or  another,  during  the  last 
dozen  years  in  the  name  of  the  Salvation  Army  ? 
Where  is  the  presumably  amended  Trust  Deed  of 
1888  ?  I  ask  once  more  :  Will  Mr.  Booth  submit 
to  competent  and  impartial  legal  scrutiny  the 
arrangements  by  which  he  and  his  successors  are 
prevented  from  dealing  with  the  funds  of  the 
so-called  "  army  chest "  exactly  as  he  or  they  may 
please  ? 

II.  With  respect  to  the  "  Eagle "  case,  I  am 
advised  that  Dr.  Greenwood,  whose  good  faith  I 
do  not  question,  has  been  misled  into  misrepre- 
senting it  in  the  appendix  to  his  pamphlet.  And 
certainly,  the  evidence  of  authoritative  records 
which  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  perusing, 
appears  to  my  non-legal  mind  to  be  utterly  at 
variance  with  the  statement  to  which  Dr.  Green- 
wood stands  committed.  I  may  observe,  further, 
that  the  excuse  alleged  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Booth, 
that  he  signed  the  affidavit  set  before  him  by  his 
solicitors  without  duly  considering  its  contents,  is 
one  which  I  should  not  like  to  have  put  forward 
were  the  case  my  own.  It  may  be,  and  often  is, 
necessary  for  a  person  to  sign  an  affidavit  without 


316  DR.  greenwood's  V 

being  able  fully  to  appreciate  the  technical 
language  in  which  it  is  couclied.  But  his 
solicitor  will  alwa3's  instruct  him  as  to  the  effect 
of  these  terms.  And,  in  this  particular  case, 
where  the  whole  matter  turns  on  Mr.  Booth's 
personal  intentions,  it  was  his  plainest  duty  to 
inquire,  very  seriously,  whether  the  legal  pln-ase- 
ology  employed  would  convey  neither  more  nor 
less  than  such  intentions  to  those  who  would  act 
on  the  affidavit,  before  he  put  his  name  to  it. 

III.  With  respect  to  Mr.  Bramwell  Booth's 
case,  I  refer  the  reader  to  p.  311. 

IV".  As  to  Mr.  Booth-Clibborn's  misrepresenta- 
tions, see  above,  pp.  298,  299. 

This  much  for  the  legal  questions  which  have 
been  raised  by  various  persons  since  the  first 
edition  of  the  pamphlet  was  published. 

DR.  GREENWOOD'S  "GENERAL  BOOTH 
AND  HIS   CRITICS" 

So  far  as  I  am  concerned,  there  is  little  or 
nothing  in  this  hrochurc  beyond  a  reproduction  of 
the  vituperative  stuff  which  has  been  going  the 
round  of  those  newspapers  which  favour  "  General  " 
Booth  for  some  weeks.  Those  who  do  not  want 
to  see  the  real  worth  of  it  all  will  not  read  the 


V  DEFENCE  317 

preceding  pages ;  and  those  who  do  will  need  no 
help  from  me. 

I  fear,  however,  that  in  justice  to  other  people 
I  must  put  one  of  Dr.  Greenwood's  paragraphs  in 
the  pillory.  He  says  that  I  have  "  built  up,  on 
the  flimsy  foundation  of  stories  told  by  three  or 
four  deserters  from  the  Army  "  (p.  114),  a  sweeping 
indictment  against  General  Booth.  This  is  the 
sort  of  thing  to  which  I  am  well  accustomed  at 
the  hands  of  anonymous  newspaper  writers.  But 
in  view  of  the  following  easily  verifiable  state- 
ments, I  do  not  think  that  an  educated  and,  I 
have  no  doubt,  highly  respectable  gentleman  like 
Dr.  Greenwood  can,  in  cold  blood,  contemplate 
that  assertion  with  satisfaction. 

The  persons  here  alluded  to  as  "  three  or  four 
deserters  from  the  army  "  are  : — 

(1)  Mr.  Redstone,  for  whose  character  Dr. 
Cunningham  Geikie  is  guarantee,  and  whom  it 
has  been  left  to  Dr.  Greenwood  to  attempt  to 
besmirch. 

(2)  Mr.  Sumner,  who  is  a  gentleman  quite  as 
worthy  of  respect  as  Dr.  Greenwood,  and  whose 
published  evidence  not  one  of  the  champions  of 
the  Salvation  Army  has  3'et  ventured  to  impugn. 

(3)  Mr.  Hodges,  similarly  libelled  by  that  un- 
happy meddler  Mr.  Trotter,  who  was  compelled 
to  the  prompt  confession  of  his  error  (see  p.  277). 

(4)  Notwithstanding  this  evidence  of  Mr. 
Trotter's    claims    to    attention,    Dr.    Greenwood 


318  DR.  greenwood's  V 

quotes  a  statement  of  his  as  evidence  that  a 
statement  quoted  by  me  from  Mr.  Sumner's 
work  is  a  "  forgery."  But  Dr.  Greenwood  un- 
fortunately forgets  to  mention  that  on  the  27th 
of  December  1890  (Letter  No.  VII.  above)  Mr. 
Trotter  was  publicly  required  to  produce  proof 
of  his  assertion  ;  and  that  he  has  not  thought  fit 
to  produce  that  proof. 

If  I  were  disposed  to  use  to  Dr.  Greenwood 
language  of  the  sort  he  so  freely  employs  to  me, 
I  think  that  he  could  not  complain  of  a  handsome 
scolding.  For  what  is  the  real  state  of  the  case  ? 
Simply  this — that  having  come  to  the  conclusion, 
from  the  perusal  of  "  In  Darkest  England,"  that 
"  General "  Booth's  colossal  scheme  (as  apart  from 
the  local  action  of  Salvationists)  was  bad  in 
principle  and  must  produce  certain  evil  conse- 
quences, and  having  warned  the  public  to  that 
effect,  I  quite  unexpectedly  found  my  hands  full 
of  evidence  that  the  exact  evils  predicted  had,  in 
fact,  already  shown  themselves  on  a  great  scale ; 
and,  carefully  warning  the  public  to  criticise  this 
evidence,  I  produced  a  small  part  of  it.  When 
Dr.  Greenwood  talks  about  my  want  of  "  regard  to 
the  opinion  of  the  nine  thousand  odd  who  still 
remain  among  the  faithful"  (p.  114),  he  commits 
an  imprudence.  He  would  obviously  be  surprised 
to  learn  the  extent  of  the  support,  encouragement, 
and  information  which  I  have  received  from 
active    and    sincere    members   of    the    Salvation 


V  DEFENCE  319 

Army — but  of  which  I  can  make  no  use,  because 
of  the  terroristic  discipHne  and  systematic  es- 
pionage which  my  correspondents  tell  me  is  en- 
forced by  its  chief.  Some  of  these  days,  when 
nobody  can  be  damaged  by  their  use,  a  curious 
light  may  be  thrown  upon  the  inner  workings  of 
the  organization  which  we  are  bidden  to  regard 
as  a  happy  family,  by  these  documents. 


THE    SALVATION    ARMY 

ARTICLES   OF   WAR 

To  he  signed  by  all  who  wish  to  he  entered  on  the  roll  as  soldiers 

Having  received  with  all  my  heart  the  Salvation  offered  to 
me  by  the  tender  mercy  of  Jehovah,  I  do  here  and  now  publicly 
acknowledge  God  to  be  my  Father  and  King,  Jesus  Christ  to  be 
my  Saviour,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  my  Guide,  Comforter, 
and  Strength  ;  and  that  I  will,  by  His  help,  love,  serve,  worship, 
and  obey  this  glorious  God  through  all  time  and  through  all 
eternity. 

Believing  solemnly  that  The  Salvation  Army  has  been  raised 
up  by  God,  and  is  sustained  and  directed  by  Him,  I  do  here 
declare  my  full  determination,  by  God's  help,  to  be  a  true  soldier 
of  the  Army  till  I  die. 

I  am  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  Army's 
teaching. 

I  believe  that  repentance  towards  God,  faith  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  conversion  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  are 
necessary  to  Salvation,  and  that  all  men  may  be  saved. 

I  believe  that  we  are  saved  by  grace,  through  faith  in 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  that  believeth  hath  the 
witness  of  it  in  himself.     I  have  got  it.     Thank  God  ! 

I  believe  that  the  Scriptures  were  given  by  inspiration  of 
God,  and  that  they  teach  that  not  only  does  continu- 
ance in  the  favour  of  God  depend  upon  continued  faith 
in,  and  obedience  to,  Christ,  but  that  it  is  possible  for 
those  who  have  been  truly  converted  to  fall  away  and 
be  eternally  lost. 
VOL.    IX  Y 


322  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND  v 

I  believe  that  it  is  the  privilege  of  all  God's  people  to  be 
"wholly  sanctified,"  aud  that  "their  whole  spirit  and 
soul  and  body  "  may  "  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. "  That  is  to  say,  I 
believe  that  after  conversion  there  remain  in  the  heart 
of  the  believer  inclinations  to  evil,  or  roots  of  bitter- 
ness, which,  unless  overpowered  by  Divine  grace,  pro- 
duce actual  sin  ;  but  these  evil  tendencies  can  be 
entirely  taken  away  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the 
whole  heart  thus  cleansed  from  anything  contrary  to 
the  will  of  God,  or  entirely  sanctified,  will  then  produce 
the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  only.  And  I  believe  that  persons 
thus  entirely  sanctified  may,  by  the  power  of  God,  be 
kept  unblamable  and  unreprovable  before  Him. 

I  believe  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;  in  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body  ;  in  the  general  judgment  at  the 
end  of  the  world  ;  in  the  eternal  happiness  of  the 
righteous  ;  and  in  the  everlasting  punishment  of  the 
wicked. 

ThePwEFORe,  I  do  here,  and  now,  and  for  ever,  renounce  the 
world  with  all  its  sinful  pleasures,  companionships,  treasures, 
and  objects,  and  declare  my  full  determination  boldly  to  show 
myself  a  Soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  in  all  places  and  companies,  no 
matter  what  I  may  have  to  suffer,  do,  or  lose,  by  so  doing. 

I  do  here  and  now  declare  that  I  will  abstain  from  the  use  of 
all  intoxicating  liquors,  and  also  from  the  habitual  use  of  opium, 
laudanum,  morphia,  and  all  other  baneful  drugs,  except  when 
in  illness  such  drugs  shall  be  ordered  for  me  by  a  doctor. 

I  do  here  and  now  declare  that  I  will  abstain  from  the  use  of 
all  low  or  profane  language  ;  from  the  taking  of  the  name  of 
God  in  vain  ;  and  from  all  impurity,  or  from  taking  part  in  any 
unclean  conversation  or  the  reading  of  any  obscene  book  or 
paper  at  any  time,  in  any  company,  or  in  any  place. 

I  do  here  declare  that  I  will  not  allow  myself  in  any  falsehood, 
deceit,  misrepresentation,  or  dishonesty  ;  neither  will  I  practise 
any  fraudulent  conduct,  either  in  my  business,  my  home,  or  in 
any  other  relation  in  which  I  may  stand  to  my  fellow  men,  but 


V  WORSE    REMEDIES  823 

that  I  will  deal  truthfully,  fairly,  honourably,  and  kindly  with 
all  those  who  may  employ  me  or  whom  I  may  myself  employ. 

I  do  here  declare  that  I  will  never  treat  any  woman,  child,  or 
other  person,  whose  life,  comfort,  or  happiness  may  be  placed 
within  my  power,  in  an  oppressive,  cruel,  or  cowardly  manner, 
but  that  I  will  protect  such  from  evil  and  danger  so  far  as  I  can, 
and  promote,  to  the  utmost  of  my  ability,  their  present  welfare 
and  eternal  salvation, 

I  do  here  declare  that  I  will  spend  all  the  time,  strength, 
money,  and  influence  I  can  in  supporting  and  carrying  on  this 
War,  and  that  I  will  endeavour  to  lead  my  fanjily,  friends, 
neighbours,  and  all  others  whom  I  can  influence,  to  do  the 
same,  believing  that  the  sure  and  only  way  to  remedy  all  the 
evils  in  the  world  is  by  bringing  men  to  submit  themselves  to 
the  government  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I  do  here  declare  that  I  will  always  obey  the  lawful  orders  of 
my  Ofiicers,  and  that  I  will  carry  out  to  the  utmost  of  my  power 
all  the  Orders  and  Regulations  of  The  Army  ;  and  further,  that 
I  will  be  an  example  of  faithfulness  to  its  principles,  advance  to 
the  utmost  of  my  ability  its  operations,  and  never  allow,  where 
I  can  prevent  it,  any  injury  to  its  interests  or  hindrance  to  its 
success. 

And  I  do  here  and  now  call  upon  all  present  to  witness  that 
I  enter  into  this  undertaking  and  sign  these  Articles  of  War  of 
my  own  free  will,  feeling  that  the  love  of  Christ  who  died  to 
save  me  requires  from  me  this  devotion  of  my  life  to  His  service 
for  the  Salvation  of  the  whole  world,  and  therefore  wish  now  to 
be  enrolled  as  a  Soldier  of  the  Salvation  Army. 


CORPS 18 

Y   2 


324  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND 


Corps. 

Division. 

18 

(single) 
FORM  OF  APPLICATION 

FOR   AX    APPOINTMENT   AS   AN 

OFFICER  IX  THE  SALYATIOX  ARMY 

Name 

Address 

1 .  What  was  your  AGE  last  birthday  ?  What  is 

the  date  of  your  birthday  ? 

2.  AVhat  is  your  height?  

3.  Are  you  free  from  bodily  defect  or  disease  ? 

4.  What  serious  illnesses  have  you  had,  and  when  ?    

5.  Have  you  ever  had  fits  of  any  kind  ? If  so 

how  long  ago,  and  what  kind  ? 

6.  Do  you  consider  your  health  good,  and  that  you  are  strong 

enough  for  the  work  of  an  Officer  ? If  not, 

or  if  you  are  doubtful,  write  a  letter  and  explain  the 
matter 

7.  Is  your  doctor's  certificate  a  full  and  correct  statement  so 

far  as  you  know  ? 

8.  Are  you,  or  have  you  ever  been  married  / 


V  WORSE   REMEDIES  325 

9.  When  and  where  CONVERTED  ? 

10.  What  other  Religious  Societies  have  you  belonged  to? 

11.  Were  you  ever  a  Junior  Soldier  ? If  so,  how  long  ? 

12.  How  long  have  you  been  enrolled  as  a  SOLDIER  ? 

and  signed  Articles  of  War?  

13.  If  you  hold  any  office  in  your  Corps,   say  what,  and  how 

long  held  ? 

14.  Do  you  intend  to  live  and  die  in  the  ranks  of  the  Salvation 

Army?    


15.  Have  you  ever  been  an  open  BACKSLIDER  ? If 

so,  how  long?    

16.  Why  ? Date  of  your  Restoration  ? 

17.  Are  you  in  DEBT? If  so,  how  much  ? 

Why? 

18.  How  long  owing  ? What  for  ? 

19.  Did  you  ever  use  Intoxicating  Drink  ? If  so,  how 

long  is  it  since  you  entirely  gave  up  its  use  ? 

20.  Did  you  ever  use  Tobacco  or  Snuff  ? If  so,  how 

long  is  it  since  you  gave  up  using  either  ? 


21.  What  UNIFORM  do  you  wear? 

22.  How  long  have  you  worn  it  ?  

23.  Do  you  agree  to  dress  in  accordance  with  the  direction  of 

Headquarters  ?  

24.  Can  you  provide  your  own  uniform  and   "  List  of  Neces- 

saries "  before  enterincc  the  Service  ? 


25.  Are  you  in  a  Situation  ? If  so,  how  long?. 

26.  Nature  of  duties,  and  salary  

27.  Name  and  address  of  employer  ?    


326  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND  v 

28.  If  out,  date  of  leaving  last  situation  ? How 

long  there  ?    

29.  Why  did  you  leave? 

30.  Name  and  address  of  last  employer  ? 


31.  Can  you  start  the  SINGING  ?    

32,  Can  you  play  any  musical  instrument  ? If  so,  what  ?. 


33.  Is  this  form  filled  up  by  you  ? Can  you  read  well 

at  first  sight  ?    

34.  Can  you  write  SHORTHAND?   If  so,  what  speed 

and  system  ?  

35.  Can  you  speak  any  language  other  than  English  ?  If 

so,  what  ?  

36.  Have  you  had  any  experience  and  success  in  the  JUNIOR 

SOLDIERS'  WAR?    

37.  If  so,  what?  


38.  Are  you  willing  to  sell  the  **  WAR  CRY  "  on  Sundays  ?  ... 

39.  Do  you  engage  not  to  publish  any  books,  songs,  or  music 

except  for  the  benefit  of  the  Salvation  Army,  and  then 
only  with  the  consent  of  Headquarters  ?  

40.  Do  you  promise  not  to  engage  in  any  trade,  profession,  or 

other  money-making  occupation,  except  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Salvation  Army,  and  then  only  with  the  consent  of 
Headquarters  ?  

41 .  Would  you  be  willing  to  go  ABROAD  if  required  ? 

42.  Do  you  promise  to  do  your  utmost  to  help  forward  the 

Junior  Soldiers'  work  if  accepted? 

43.  Do  you  pledge  yourself  to  spend  not  less  than  nine  hours 

every  day  in  the  active  service  of  the  Army,  of  which  not 
less  than  three  hours  of  each  week-day  shall  be  spent  in 
VISITATION? 


V  WORSE   REMEDIES  327 

44.  Do  you  pledge  yourself  to  fill  up  and  send  to  Headquarters 
forms  as  to  how  your  day  is  spent  ?    


45.  Have  you  read,  and  do  you  believe,  the  DOCTRINES  printed 

on  the  other  side  ?    

46.  Have  you  read  the  "Orders  and  Regulations  for    Field 

Officers"  of  the  Army?    

If  you  have  not  got  a  copy  of  "Orders  and  Regulations,"  get  one  from 
Candidates'  Department  at  once.  The  price  to  Candidates  is  2s.  6d. 

47.  Do  you  pledge  yourself  to  study  and  carry  out  and  to  endea- 

vour to  train  others  to  carry  out  all  Orders  and  Regulations 
of  the  Army  ? 

48.  Have  you  read  the  Order  on  page  3  of  this  Form  as  to 

PRESENTS  and  TESTIMONIALS,  and  do  you  engage 
to  carry  it  out  ? 

49.  Do  you  pledge  yourself  never  to  receive  any  sum  in  the  form 

of  pay  beyond  the  amount  of  allowances  granted  under  the 
scale  which  follows  ? 

Allowances — From  the  day  of  arrival  at  his  station,  each 
officer  is  entitled  to  draw  the  following  allowances,  pro- 
vided the  amount  remains  in  hand  after  meeting  all  local 
expenses,  namely  : — For  Single  Men  :  Lieutenants,  16s. 
weekly,  and  Captains,  185.  ;  for  Single  Women  :  Lieuten- 
ants, 125.  weekly,  and  Captains,  155.  weekly  ;  Married 
Men,  275.  per  week,  and  Is.  per  week  for  each  child  under 
14  years  of  age;  in  all  cases  without  house-rent. 

50.  Do  you  perfectly  understand  that  no  salary  or  allowance  is 

guaranteed  to  you,  and  that  you  will  have  no  claim 
against  the  Salvation  Army,  or  against  any  one  connected 
therewith,  on  account  of  salary  or  allowances  not  received 
by  you  ? . . 

51.  Have    you    ever    APPLIED    BEFORE? If   so, 

when?    

52.  With  what  result  ?    


328  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND  v 

53.  If  you  have  ever  lieen  in  the  service  of  the  Salvation  Army 

in  any  position,  say  what? 

54.  Why  did  you  leave  ? 

55.  Are  you  willing  to  come  into  TRAINING  that  we  may  see 

whether  you  have  the  necessary  goodness  and  ability  for 
an  Officer  in  the  Salvation  Army,  and  should  we  conclude 
that  you  have  not  the  necessary  qualifications,  do  you 
pledge  yourself  to  return  home  and  work  in  your  Corps 
without  creating  any  dissatisfaction  ?    

56.  Will  you  pay  your  own  travelling  expenses  if  we  decide  to 

receive  you  in  Training? 

57.  How   much   can  you  pay  for  your  maintenance  while  in 

Training  ?  

58.  Can  you  deposit  £1  so  that  we  can  provide  you  with  a  suit 

of  Uniform  when  you  are  Commissioned  ? 

59.  What  is  the  shortest  NOTICE  you  require  should  we  want 

you?  

60.  Are  your  PARENTS  willing  that  you  should  become  an 

Officer?  

61.  Does  any  one  depend  upon  you  for  support  ? If  so, 

who? 

62.  To  whatextent?    

63.  Give  your  parents',  or  nearest  living  relatives',  full  address 


64.  Are  you  COURTING? If  so,  give  name  and 

address  of  the  person  

65.  How  long  have  you  been  engaged? What  is  the 

person's  age  ? 

66.  What  is  the  date  of  Birthday? How  long  enrolled 

as  a  SOLDIER?    

67.  What  Uniform  does  the  person  wear  ? How  long 


Y  WORSE   REMEDIES  329 

68.  What  does  the  person  do  in  the  Corps  ? 

69.  Has  the  person  applied  for  the  work  1   

70.  If  not,  when  does  the  person  intend  doing  so  ?  

71.  Do    the  parents  agree   to  the  person  coming  into  Train- 

ing ?    


72.  Do  you  understand  that  you  may  not  be  allowed  to  marry 

until  three  years  after  your  appointment  as  an  Officer,  and 
do  you  engage  to  abide  by  this  ?    

73.  If  you  are  not  courting,  do  you  pledge  yourself  to  abstain 

from  anything  of  the  kind  during  Training  and  for  at 
least  twelve  months  after  your  appointment  as  a  Com- 
missioned Field  Officer  ? 

74.  Do  you  pledge  yourself  not  to  carry  on  courtship  with  any 

one  at  the  station  to  which  you  are  at  the  time 
appointed  ?     

75.  Do  you  pledge  yourself  never  to  commence,   or  allow  to 

commence,  or  break  off  anything  of  the  sort,  without 
first  informing  your  Divisional  Officer,  or  Headquarters, 
of  your  intention  to  do  so  ? 

76.  Do  you  pledge  yourself  never  to  marry  any  one  marriage 

with  whom  would  take  you  out  of  the  Army  alto- 
gether ?  

77.  Have  you  read,  and  do  you  agree  to  carry  out,  the  following 

Regulations  as  to  Courtship  and  Marriage  ? , 

(a)  *'  Officers  must  inform  their  Divisional  Officer  or  Head- 

quarters of  their  desire  to  enter  into  or  break  off  any 
engagement,  and  no  Officer  is  permitted  to  enter 
into  or  break  off  an  engagement  without  the  consent 
of  his  or  her  D.O. 

(b)  '*  Officers  will  not  be  allowed  to  carry  on  any  courtship 

in  the  Town  in  which  they  are  appointed  ;  nor  until 
twelve  months  after  the  date  of  their  Commission. 


330  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND  v 

(c)  "  Headquarters  cannot  consent  to  the  engagement  of 

Male  Lieutenants,  until  their  Divisional  Officer  is 
prepared  to  recommend  them  for  command  of  a 
Station  as  Captain. 

(d)  ' '  Before  Headquartei-s  can  consent  to  the  marriage  of 

any  Officer,  the  Divisional  Officer  must  be  prepared 
to  give  him  three  stations  as  a  married  man. 

(e)  "No  Officer  accepted  will  be  allowed  to  marry  until 

he  or  she  has  been  at  least  three  years  in  the  field, 
except  in  cases  of  long-standing  engagements  before 
application  for  the  work. 

(/)  "No  Male  Officer  will,  under  any  circumstances,  be 
allowed  to  marry  before  he  is  twenty-two  yeare  of 
age,  unless  required  by  Headquarters  for  special 
service. 

(g)  "  Headquarters  will  not  agree  to  the  Marriage  of  any 
Male  Officer  (except  under  extraordinary  circum- 
stances) until  twelve  months  after  consenting  to  his 
engagement. 

(h)  "  Consent  will  not  be  given  to  the  engagement  of  any 
male  Officer  unless  the  young  woman  is  likely  to 
make  a  suitable  wife  for  an  Officer,  and  (if  not  already 
an  Officer)  is  prepared  to  come  into  Training  at  once. 

(i)  "  Consent  will  be  given  to  engagements  between  Female 
Officers  and  Soldiers,  on  condition  that  the  latter 
are  suitable  for  Officers,  and  are  willing  to  come  into 
Training  if  called  upon. 

(j)  "Consent  Anil  never  be  given  to  any  engagement  or 
marriage  which  would  take  an  Officer  out  of  the 
Army. 

(k)  "  Every  Officer  must  sign  before  marriage  the  Articles 
of  Marriage,  contained  in  the  Orders  and  Regulations 
for  Field  Officers." 


WORSE   REMEDIES  331 


PRESENTS  AND  TESTIMONIALS. 

1,  Officers  are  expected  to  refuse  utterly,  and  to  prevent,  if 
possible,  even  the  i)roposal  of  any  present  or  testimonial  to 
them. 

2.  Of  course,  an  Officer  who  is  receiving  no  salary,  or  only 
part  salary,  may  accept  food  or  other  gifts,  such  as  are  needed 
to  meet  his  wants  ;  but  it  is  dishonourable  for  any  one  who  is 
receiving  their  salaiy  to  accept  gifts  of  food  also. 


THE  DOCTRINES  OF  THE  SALVATION  ARMY. 

The  principal  Doctrines  taught  in  the  Army  are  as  follows  : — 

1.  "We  believe  that  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  were  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  that  they  only 
constitute  the  Divine  rule  of  Christian  faith  and  practice. 

2.  We  believe  there  is  only  one  God,  who  is  infinitely  perfect, 
the  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Governor  of  all  things. 

3.  We  believe  that  there  are  three  persons  in  the  Godhead — 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  undivided  in  essence, 
coequal  in  power  and  glory,  and  the  only  proper  object  of 
religious  worship. 

4.  We  believe  that,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Divine 
and  human  natures  are  united,  so  that  He  is  tnily  and  properly 
God,  and  truly  and  properly  man. 

5.  We  believe  that  our  first  parents  were  created  in  a  state  of 
innocency,  but  by  their  disobedience  they  lost  their  purity  and 
happiness  ;  and  that,  in  consequence  of  their  fall,  all  men  have 
become  sinners,  totally  depraved,  and  as  such  are  justly  exposed 
to  the  wrath  of  God. 

6.  We  believe  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has,  by  His  suffering 
and  death,  made  an  atonement  for  the  whole  world,  so  that 
whosoever  will  may  be  saved. 

7.  We  believe  that  repentance  towards  God,  faith  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  regeneration  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  necessary 
to  Salvation. 


332  SOCIAL   DISEASES   AND  v 

8.  We  believe  that  we  are  justified  by  grace,  through  faith  in 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  he  that  believeth  hath  the 
witness  in  liimself. 

9.  We  believe  the  Scriptures  teach  that  not  only  does  con- 
tinuance in  the  favour  of  God  depend  upon  continued  faith  in, 
and  obedience  to,  Christ,  but  that  it  is  possible  for  those  who 
have  been  truly  converted  to  fall  away  and  be  eternally  lost. 

10.  We  believe  that  it  is  the  privilege  of  all  believers  to  be 
•'  wholly  sanctified,"  and  that  "the  whole  spirit  and  soul  and 
body"  may  "be  presei-ved  blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  That  is  to  say,  we  believe  that  after  con- 
version there  remain  in  the  heart  of  the  believer  inclinations  to 
evil,  or  roots  of  bitterness,  which,  unless  overpowered  by  Divine 
grace,  produce  actual  sin  ;  but  that  these  evil  tendencies  can  be 
entirely  taken  away  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  whole  heart, 
thus  cleansed  from  everything  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  or 
entirel)'  sanctified,  will  then  produce  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  only. 
And  we  believe  that  persons  thus  entirely  sanctified  may,  by 
the  power  of  God,  be  kept  unblamable  and  unreprovable  before 
Him. 

11.  We  believe  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  ;  in  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body  ;  in  the  general  judgment  at  the  end  of  the 
world  ;  in  the  eternal  happiness  of  the  righteous  ;  and  in  the 
everlasting  punishment  of  the  wicked. 


WORSE   REMEDIES  333 


DECLARATION. 

I  HEREBY  DECLARE  that  I  will  never,  on  any  considera- 
tion, do  anything  calculated  to  injure  The  Salvation  Army,  and 
especially,  that  I  will  never,  without  first  having  obtained  the 
consent  of  The  General,  take  any  part  in  any  religious  services 
or  in  carrying  on  services  held  in  opposition  to  the  Army. 

I  PLEDGE  MYSELF  to  make  true  records,  daily,  on  the 
forms  supplied  to  me,  of  what  I  do,  and  to  confess,  as  far  as  I 
am  concerned,  and  to  report,  as  far  as  I  may  see  in  others,  any 
neglect  or  variation  from  the  orders  or  directions  of  The 
General, 

I  FULLY  UNDERSTAND  that  he  does  not  undertake  to 
employ  or  to  retain  in  the  service  of  The  Army  any  one  who 
does  not  appear  to  him  to  be  fitted  for  the  work,  or  faithful  and 
successful  in  it ;  and  I  solemnly  pledge  myself  quietly  to  leave 
any  Army  Station  to  which  I  may  be  sent,  without  making  any 
attempt  to  disturb  or  annoy  The  Army  in  any  way,  should  The 
General  desire  me  to  do  so.  And  I  hereby  discharge  The  Army 
and  The  General  from  all  liability,  and  pledge  myself  to  make 
no  claim  on  account  of  any  situation,  property,  or  interest  I  may 
give  up  in  order  to  secure  an  engagement  in  The  Army. 

I  understand  that  The  General  Avill  not  be  responsible  in  any 
way  for  any  loss  I  may  suffer  in  consequence  of  being  dismissed 
from  Training  ;  as  I  am  aware  that  the  Cadets  are  received  into 
Training  for  the  very  purpose  of  testing  their  suitability  for  the 
work  of  Salvation  Army  Officers. 

I  hereby  declare  that  the  foregoing  answers  appear  to  me  to 
fully  express  the  truth  as  to  the  questions  put  to  me,  and  that 
I  know  of  no  other  facts  which  would  prevent  my  jengagement 
by  The  General,  if  they  were  known  to  him. 


Candidate  to  sign  here 


334        SOCIAL  DISEASES  AND  WORSE  REMEDIES 


NOTICE  TO  CANDIDATES. 

1.  All  Candidates  are  expected  to  fill  up  and  sign  this  form 
themselves,  if  they  can  write  at  all. 

2.  You  are  expected  to  have  obtained  and  read  ' '  Ordei-s  and 
Regulations  for  Field  Officere  "  before  you  make  this  application. 

3.  flaking  this  application  does  NOT  imply  that  we  can 
receive  you  as  an  officer,  and  you  are,  therefore,  NOT  to  leave 
your  home,  or  give  notice  to  leave  your  situation,  until  you  hear 
again  from  us. 

4.  If  you  are  appointed  as  an  Officer,  or  received  into  Training, 
and  it  is  afterwards  discovered  that  any  of  the  questions  in  this 
form  have  not  been  truthfully  answered,  you  will  be  instantly 
dismissed. 

5.  If  you  do  not  understand  any  question  in  this  form,  or  if 
you  do  not  agi-ee  to  any  of  the  requirements  stated  upon  it, 
return  it  to  Headquarters,  and  say  so  in  a  straightforward 
manner. 

6.  Make  the  question  for  this  appointment  a  matter  of  earnest 
prayer,  as  it  is  the  most  important  step  you  have  taken  since 
your  conversion. 

TFe  must  have  your  Photo.  Please  enclose  it  with  your  forms, 
and  address  them  "  Candidate  Department,"  101,  Queen  Victoria 
Street,  London,  E.C 


RU'IIARD    C'l.AY   AND  SONS,    LIMITED,   LONDON   AND   BUNGAY. 


Globe  Zvo.     Cloth,     ^s.  per  volume. 
Essays  by  George  Brimley.     Third  Edition. 
Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales.     Edited  by  A.  W.  Pollard.     2  Vols. 

Dean  Church's  Miscellaneous  Writings.    Collected  Edition.     6  Vols. 

MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS. 

DANTE  :  and  other  Essays. 

ST.  ANSELM. 

SPENSER. 

BACON. 

THE  OXFORD  MOVEMENT.— Twelve  Years,  1833-1845. 
Life  of  Swift.     By  Henry  Craik,  C.B.     2  Vols.     New  Edition. 
Emerson's  Collected  Works.     6  Vols.     With  Introduction  by  John 

INIORLEY. 

MISCELLANIES.     ESSAYS.     POEMS. 

ENGLISH  TRAITS  AND  REPRESENTATIVE  MEN. 

THE  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY  AND  SOLITUDE. 

LETTERS  AND  SOCIAL  AIMS. 

The  Letters  of  Edward  FitzGerald.     Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright. 

2  Vols.     New  PMition. 

Goethe's  Prose  Maxims.    Translated,  with  Introductions,  by  T.  Bailey 

Saunders. 

Thomas  Gray's  Collected  Works  in  Prose  and  Verse.     Edited  by 

Edmund    Gosse.     4  Vols.     Poems,  Journals,  and    Essays. — Letters,    2   Vols. 
— Notes  on  Aristophanes  and  Plato. 

Stray  Studies  from  England  and  Italy.     By  John  Richard  Green. 
The  Choice   of  Books,  and  other  Literary  Pieces.     By  Frederic 

Harrison. 

R.  H.  Button's  Collected  Essays. 

LITERARY  ESSAYS. 

THEOLOGICAL  ESSAYS. 

ESSAYS  ON    SOME    OF    THE    MODERN    GUIDES    OF    ENGLISH 

THOUGHT  IN  MATTERS  OF  FAITH. 
CRITICISMS  ON   CONTEMPORARY  THOUGHT  AND  THINKERS. 

2  vols. 

Thomas  Henry  Huxley's  Collected  Works. 

I.  METHOD  AND  RESULTS. 
II.  DARWINIANA. 

III.  SCIENCE  AND  EDUCATION. 

IV.  SCIENCE  AND  HEI]RE\V  TRADITION. 
V.  SCIENCE  AND  CHRISTIAN  TRADITION. 

VI.   HUME. 
VII.  MAN'S  PLACE  IN  NATURE. 
VIIL  DISCOURSES,  BIOLOGICAL  AND  GEOLOGICAL. 
IX.  EVOLUTION  AND  ETHICS,  AND  OTHER  ESSAYS. 


French  Poets  and  Novelists.     By  Henry  James. 

Letters    of  John   Keats  to  his   Family   and   Friends.     Edited   by 
Sydney  Colvix. 

Charles  Kingsley's  Novels  and  Poems. 

WESTWARD  HO  !     2  Vols.  I  ALTON  LOCKE.     2  Vols. 

HYPATL\.     2  Vols.  TWO  YEARS  AGO.     2  Vols. 

YEAST.     I  Vol.  I  HEREWARD  THE  WAKE.    2  Vols. 

POEMS.  2  Vols. 

Charles  Lamb's  Collected  Works.   Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  the  Rev.  Canon  Ainger,  M.A.     6  Vols. 
THE  ESSAYS  OF  ELL\. 

POEMS,  PLAYS,  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS. 
MRS.  LEICESTER'S    SCHOOL,  and  other  Writings. 
TALES  FROM  SHAKESPEARE.     By  Charles  and  Mary  Lamb. 
THE  LETTERS  OF  CHARLES  LAMB.     2  Vols. 
LIFE  OF  CHARLES  LAMB.     By  Canon  Aingek. 

The  Poetical  Works  of  John  Milton.     Edited,  with  Memoir,  Introduc- 
tion, Notes,  by  David  Masson,  M.A.,  LL.D.    In  3  Vols. 

I.  THE  MINOR  POEMS. 
II.  PARADISE  LOST. 
III.   PARADISE  REGAINED,  AND  SAMSON  AGONISTES. 

John  Morley's  Collected  Works.     In  1 1  Vols. 

VOLTAIRE.     I  Vol. 

ROUSSEAU.     2  Vols. 

DIDEROT  AND  THE  ENCYCLOPEDISTS.     2  Vols. 

ON  COMPROMISE,     i  Vol. 

MISCELLANIES.     2  Vols. 

BURKE.     I  Vol. 

STUDIES  IN  LITERATURE,     i  Vol. 

Science    and   a   Future   Life,    and   other   Essays.     By   F.    W.    H. 
Myers,  M.A. 

Records  of  Tennyson,  Ruskin,  and  Browning.    By  Anne  Thackeray 
Ritchie. 

Works  by  James  Smetham. 

LETTERS.    With  an  Introductory  IMemoir.    Edited  by  Sarah  Smetham  and 

William  Davies.     With  a  Portrait. 
LITERARY  WORKS.     Edited  by  Wiliam  Davies. 

Essays  in  the   History  of  Religious   Thought  in  the   West.     By 

Brooke  Foss  Westcott,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Durham. 

MACMILLAN   AND    CO.,    LONDON. 

10.4.94. 


(^ 


L  005  307  387  0 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 

lyjp!' jrThis  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


MAY  041989 
APR2bm9 


Form  L9-Series  4939 


■.•,,*' M«W.'.      y<.,V(»4,,^P^';
