Psychical Research and the Resurrection (James H. Hyslop, 1908)
===============================================================
James H. Hyslop — Hyslop's psychical-research argument for the resurrection — American psychical research meets theology. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (psychicalresear00hyslgoog) — 1908 first edition.

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http : //books . google . com/

r

y,d'

ARTES SCIENTIA VERITAS

f


1

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND
THE RESURRECTION

OTHER WORKS BY

PROF. JAMES H. HYSLOP

BORDERLAND OF PSYCHICAL

RESEARCH

$1.50 net; by maU $1.69

ENIGMAS OF PSYCHICAL

RF-SEARCH

11.50 net; by maU |1.63

SCIENCE AND A FUTURE LIFE

$1.50 net; by nuul $1.69

SMALL, MAYNARD ft COMPANY

15 BEACON ST.. BOSTON

PSYCHICAL EESEARCH
AND THE EESUKRECTION

BY
JAMES H. HYSLOP, Ph.D., LL.D.

FOBMEBLT PROPB980* OF aTHIGII AMO
LOQIO IN COLOMBIA OIIIVBBSITT

SMALL, MAYNAED AND COMPANY
BOSTON - - - MCMVni

S

Small, AaisnatD Si Compani?

< IMOORPORATBD )

Entered at Stationers' Hall

Published^ Mat, 1906

THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED
TO

WHO WILL SOME DAY SEE THE UGHT

PREFACE

The present volume contains a number of essays
relating to the subjects discussed in three previous
volumes, Borderland of Psychical Research, Enigmas
of Psychical Research, and Science and a Future
Life. The matter is largely new. Two of the es-
says — the first and the last — have not been pub-
lished before. The others have been collected from
various periodicals in which they first received publi-
cation.

The first-named of the volumes previously pub-
lished deals with the phenomena of normal psychology
and its problems and with some of the borderline facts
of abnormal psychology. It includes chapters on
sense perception, memory, illusions, hallucinations,
subconscious action, pseudo-spiritistic phenomena,
hypnotic therapeutics, and reincarnation. The sec-
ond discusses crystal gazing, telepathy, clairvoyance,
premonition and mediumistic phenomena. The third
is a summary of the facts associated with the experi-
ments of Dr. Hodgson and others in connection with
the case of Mrs. Piper. The present volume covers
more or less of the whole field and may be regarded
as a supplement to Science and a Future Life, with
conclusions quite the same. They all deal with a
residual class of phenomena now demanding more and
more attention and suggesting a wider range of

ix

PKEFACS

meaning for human personality than the orthodox
psychology has been disposed to admit. It is hoped
that these essays may help to shed some light on the
problems involved.

There is no class of phenomena that have a greater
interest for many persons at the present day than
those which are attributed to " subliminal conscious-
ness " or " secondary personality." These terms
figure so prominently in all discussions of obscure
problems in psychology, and especially in literature
which objects to spiritistic theories, that it may be
well to make clear what they mean.

To make intelligible what we mean by ** secondary
personality " it may be necessary briefly to indicate
what we mean by ** personality " of any kind. By
^^personality," we mean a group of maital states
which are continuous and coherent, so that they pres-
ent a persistent unity and real or apparent identity of
kind and meaning. In common parlance we might
call it the mental characteristics of a person^ this being
the name for an individual organism and its functions
as a whole. But the mental peculiarities which main-
tain a continuous and persistent unity throughout
the life of this person or individual, or at least for
definite periods of time, are called its *' personality,"
and in the normal man persist through his whole
life. This is called the " primary personality." But
in certain not altogether normal conditions the in-
dividual may exhibit mental actions which simulate
some other " personality," or " person " if we may
so call it, and betray no memory connections with the
primary consciousness. This we call a " secondary

X

PEEFACE

personality." It begins in the ordinary subconscious
action, which in the normal man accompanies the
natural consciousness. Many of our actions are sub-
conscious or carried on unconsciously and without
set purpose. If these actions lose their relation to
our ordinary control and become split off from the
influence of the normal consciousness they become
organized into a consistent imitation of another ^^ per-
son " and are called the ^* secondary " consciousness
or " personality." In such cases there is no connec-
tion by memory between secondary consciousness and
the normal consciousness, any more than there is be-
tween two different individuals. They may show
that they belong to the same group of experiences
by the fact that each " personality " may recall the
same facts, indicating that the secondary conscious-
ness has its own memory, but there is no memory by
each of the other's facts.

In all the phenomena of psychical research there
is good reason to believe that subliminal or subcon-
scious mental action is the medium through which
these phenomena are produced, and it is the task of
the investigator to determine when the phenomena
are, and when they are not, the result of the individ-
ual's normal experience or sense perception. The
place that this has in the production of them has not
yet been clearly indicated and it may take a long
and tedious investigation to determine the point. At
present there are no definitely assigned limits to sub-
liminal action, except those facts which can not be
explained by previous normal sense perception.
There are types of phenomena which clearly indicate

xi

PKEFACE

this subconscious action, such as dreams, deliria,
sleep-walking, and all cases of temporary loss of the
sense of personal identity. But we seem to transcend
this in mediumistic phenomena and telepathy where,
whatever the functions of subliminal action, we ob-
tain information in some ordinarily inexpUcable way
outside the subject in which it occurs, representing
the personality or mental state of some one else.
Secondary personality may be the condition of get-
ting such ^^ messages " and so serve as the matrix
into which they are poured. But whether so or not,
it is not the place in a preface to explain it. All
that it is necessary to do here is to define the inter-
mediate mental conditions affecting the supernormal
and perhaps serving as the medium for its expres-
sion.

Many persons imagine that ^^ secondary personal-
ity " means some extraneous reality or double which
is as independent as a real person. But this is not
its meaning in scientific psychology. In no respect
is it a competitor in the explanation of spiritistic
phenomena having a supernormal character. It
readily explains the simulations of spiritism, but
since it is itself based upon the normal experience of
the individual dissociated from the normal memory,
it does not imply anything foreign to the organism
and explains nothing but the appearances of exter-
nal realities, if it can be said to explain anything at
all. It represents phenomena as much within the sub-
ject as does the primary personality. But it may
nevertheless be the means by which foreign influences

xii

PBEFACE

may be able to intromit " messages '* into the phys-
ical world, whether those influences be telepathic or
spiritual.

The first of the three books before-mentioned deals
with these borderline phenomena; the second shows
a large group of phenomena not amenable to sub-
liminal explanations alone; and the third deals with
information that consistently represents the person-
alities of deceased persons. The present volume adds
to the data which cover all three fields of inquiry.
The chapters detailing the ** communications *' pur-
])orting to come from Dr. Hodgson represent, in
some cases, a series of phenomena that we are in the
habit of calling ^' cross references." This means
"messages" that are repeated through different
psychical subjects. They are a peculiarly effective
evidence of the supernormal, whatever the explana-
tion. The chapter on " Visions of the Dying " rep-
resents another type of phenomena scarcely less
significant, though not so easily determined by ex-
periments as are mediumistic incidents.

The province and limitations of telepathy are ex-
plained in the chapter on that subject and I do not
need to dwell upon it here. Su£Sce it to say that
many persons have most extravagant conceptions of
what it is supposed to be. But for science it is a
very rare phenomenon and has far greater limita-
tions than the public imagines. It is merely a name
for a group of facts, not for any explanatory process
regarding them. If the public exhibited any ra-
tional ideas about this matter, science might be more

•••
xui

PmKFACX

willing to take it up for serious investigation. But
nothing can be done with it until the subject is
looked at reasonably.

The phenomena still accumulate, and increase the
duties of science to investigate and interpret them.
There are growing signs that intelligent men see
that a new world of facts promises to open to human
vision and interest, and only self-complacent dog-
matists any longer ridicule the subject. As these
men die, their places will be taken by a younger gen-
eration that has no prejudices to maintain. We have
only to exercise patience until the victory has been
won, though it is unfortunate that we are not al-
lowed to discuss the issues which are involved while
accumulating the facts which are to decide it. A bet-
ter day will soon arrive for this discussion and the
next generation will treat the intolerance of the pres-
ent as we treat the attacks on Copemican astronomy
and Darwinian evolution. We only await sufficient
intelligence to endow the investigation when it may
be made commensurate with the immensity of the
task.

James H. Hyslop.

New York City, January 80th, 1908.

XIV

CONTENTS

CHAPTKR PAGE

I. HUMOROUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL RE-
SEARCH 1

11. PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND COINCI-
DENCES 24

III. " FROM INDIA TO THE PLANET MARS " . 61

IV. VISIONS OP THE DYING 81

V. EXPERIMENTS WITH MRS. PIPER SINCE

DR. RICEIARD HODGSON'S DEATH ... 109
VL FURTHER EXPERIMENTS RELATING TO

DR. HODGSON SINCE HIS DEATH ... 127
VIL CONCLUSION OF EXPERIMENTS REL-
ATIVE TO DR HODGSON; THEORIES . . 159

VIIL THE SMEAD CASE 222

IX. SOME FEATURES IN MEDIUMISTIC PHE-
NOMENA 268

X. TELEPATHY 305

XI. THE NATURE OF LIFE AFTER DEATH . . 332
XII. PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE RESUR-
RECTION 352

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE
RESURRECTION

CHAPTER I

HUMOBOUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL BESEA&CH

So many fools have been made wise and so many
wise men made fools in the study of phenomena
having an alleged significance for supernormal knowl-
edge and transcendental forces that the subject has
a great many humorous aspects for one who sees
much of human nature. The whole history of the
subject has connected it with promises that perhaps
have more personal interest for the majority of the
race than any other problem. Expectation in regard
to it has not only defied prejudice and scientific dog-
matism but has been enhanced by the marvellous
achievements of discovery and invention. The prog-
ress of the physical sciences with their speculations
on the existence of invisible physical forces has broken
down the old standards of belief and left the average
man with imaginative possibilities that even the an-
tagonism to the supernatural cannot wholly overcome.
The consequence is that we are all in a situation which
prevents us from denying the possibility of anything
or everything and leaves us at the mercy of every
one who asks for no other credentials for belief than
the impossibility of denial. Between credulity and
moral earnestness on the one hand and intelligence

1

FVTCKICAI. BSSBAmCS AWD

and anafcnloted dogmtum an tiie otiitBr we !■■ li an
opportunitj f <nr as much ammemeiit as w ii if - Tlie
cranks who haTe no sense of humor make good Imrigcts
for ridicule whik \be scientists who love to diapinir
this contempt are reduced to the extrenuty ok
ing facts to sare \he reputati on of \bar
Between them lies the every da j practical ^hu of
the world who wants to be on die side of lofcrlKgence
and to indulge his co ntempt for f cdly, hoi does not
know how to (fistinguish intelligeniij tiie oecaskms
for the (fisplay of a discreet knowledge fr
which justify the use of sarcaon. The i
medley of people that is mixed in with all tliese
classes make up a worid that may well offer aa inter-
esting field for Puck or Punch.

Id the study of psychical researdi ihe daas which
perhaps eiKcites tibe most animosity and amu ae m ent
ts the spiritualist. To me the most interesting char-
acterif^tic of the enthusiasts in tiiis creed is their utter
lack of the sense of humor when cfiscussing tiieir phe-
mmi^na and theories. Their (foctrine in tUs respect is
tiro much like a religion to escape being serious.
Whrt^rrer humor or fim has ever attadied itself to
^n^Knts fiiftttcrs has always to hide itself in secrecy
^mf «pp«»iirs only when the priest is off parade. This
« pi^rhnpn inimitable with all matters which most
^ ^nk^n so seriously. But Spiritualism is such an
mcfmnrtMMts mixture of science and religion that a
^^rr fnrn fiiul 4.|astic mental temperament is required
t^^C>^^]y Uf ft<|p,Ht the balance between seriousness and
^rn^-mpf h, Hii, imtiination of it. One has only to

■« >% n"'''«M»liittic meeting to see and feel this.

SVS: HUMOBOUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL BESEASCH

f OTT. An intelligent and well-balanced spectator of its per-
dMm formances must sacrifice his sense of humor if he
wmf tries to be serious and must possess a great deal of
oJRii charity if he succeeds in suppressing his contempt.
innbi Take a performance in which some aUeged " medium "
i/ser: makes wry faces, as if in a trance, and tells some
BOii naive person in the audience that a spirit standing
kid by him predicts that he will succeed in the oyster
^ Jbci business and see this followed by the announcement
'^^t of a hymn sung with the most solemn gravity or
L-fy ecstatic enthusiasm, and if a man of the world re-
r^ strains a smile he has more of divine pity than he is
^i usually accredited with. To witness the conjunction
Hfj: of a prayer with the abnormal deliverances of some
alleged spirit on the intellectual level of the ravings
,^t of Ludovick Muggleton and George Fox arouses
]^ strange emotions in the minds of men accustomed to
^i the more sedate proprieties of religion and sober life.
jjgj; It is true that a healthy cynic can see much that is
iWj ridiculous in any of our solemn performances. It is
^ use and custom that hide the absurd in much that
^ passes for important and serious. The average spir-
^ itualist is not the only person who fails to appreciate
^ the funny side of things supposed to be serious. The
same defect appears in almost every sanctity, so
small is the distance from the sublime to the ridicu-
lous. We would ridicule the habit of bowing when
the name of the president is mentioned, but we expect
to pacify an angry Deity by obeisance to the name
of his son. We can solemnly go through the ritual
and put on long faces as we listen to some sermon
holding before us the menace of eternal damnation

8

r

F

PSYCHICAL &ESEABCH AND TH£ &£SU&&£CTION

for not believing that two and two make five and
then, supposing that our reverent moods have atoned
for our sins, forget all this at a dinner of roast
turkey and a bottle of claret and a drive in Central
Park. There is nothing like a fit of emotional in-
temperance for clarifying the conscience.

There is a curious situation for the scientist in
the pathetic condition of those who are seeking con-
solation in some escape from the stoical faith of scep-
ticism. They have abandoned their belief in ortho-
doxy, whether from choice or necessity, and yet are
determined by hook or by crook to believe in a future
life, and having professed a faith in science must
seek some fact or alleged fact to simulate the method
and credentials of that form of knowledge. If once
they have secured some plausible or apparent fact to
which to cling in their hopes, they abandon all sense
of hiunor and assume an attitude of assurance, with
its accompanying state of consolation, which it is
impossible to move. To them it appears an act of
cruelty to tell them the truth if it tends to suggest
a doubt. Having once cherished doubt as their sal-
vation they turn on it now as an arch enemy, and
the scientist can only quote the maxim of Kant, that
there are stories which human courtesy makes it
impossible to investigate. There is no mental atti-
tude so funny as that which disguises the search for
hope and consolation by the pretensions of science.
It is funny, not because it is illegitimate, but because
it wants too frequently the attribute of courage, and
tries to secure respectability under a garb whose
genuineness it is not willing to test. The only sal-

4

HUMOBOUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL BESEA&CH

vation of this class is the recovery of a sense of
humor. This characteristic was the beginning of
civilization. The monkey and the ape are cases of
arrested development simply because they lacked this
quality. If monkeys could smile when they play
practical jokes on each other there might be some
hope of their becoming intelligent and civilized. The
average spiritualist who gets his faith and consola-
tion in performances like those at Lily Dale and On-
set reminds one of the Darwinian doctrine of the re-
version to primitive types. I am not saying that there
is nothing genuine in such places, as I have no scien-
tific facts to justify dogmatism in this matter. But
I am assured that even truth has its humorous aspects,
and what strikes me as psychologically interesting in
various missionary clcusses of the genus homo is the
inability to appreciate the humorous aspects of the
seriousness and gravity with which certain trivial and
dubious facts are treated. Puns are sometimes very
funny, but a scientific treatise on them would be still
funnier. I understand the claims to seriousness in
these trivial phenomena, but I cannot restrain a
laugh when I measure their character against what
custom has agreed to treat as really important and
when I find myself cornered by scepticism. Of course
spiritualism can be treated seriously, but so can
prestidigitation. But when legerdemain, fraud and
spiritualism show decided resemblances in their phe-
nomena I must be pardoned not only for my doubts,
but also for the retention of my sense of humor.

The class which I have just considered are in search
of hope and consolation. But there is a class which

5

PSYCHICAIi BESEASCH AND THE RESUBRECTIOK

claims to have them but which nevertheless betrays
a curious mental condition regarding psychical re-
search. When it is not afraid of disturbing its
orthodoxy it is chiefly interested in the conditions
of life in a future existence and shows no interest
in the strictly scientific problem, but at once plies
questions regarding the mode of life involved. A
Calvinist who has to depend on grace for hope and
is not sure that he is the favorite of that grace may
well feel anxious about his future if he has Jonathan
Edward's doctrine of eternal punishment to face.
Any other sinner who is afraid that he is actually
going to get his deserts may want some hope of
escape as he generally tries to avoid the consequences
of his crime in this life. Relief from fear and the
hope of happiness, or escape from the just deserts
of one's actions, is the usual incentive to curiosity
on this point, and unfortunately the scientific man
has to show Kant's (not scant) courtesy to this class
because he hopes to get from it an endowment for his
investigations. If only he could safely tell them that
they deserved to be boiled in Milton's marl of burn-
ing sulphur awhile and then be annihilated he might
satisfy both his humor and his malice. But then
in addition to the strange spectacle of asking for un-
verifiable statements as a basis for hope and consola-
tion or immunity from the consequences of folly,
irony and truth-telling may tighten the purse strings
of benevolence and scientific curiosity and we have
to play the tactful part of Mephistopheles in order
to secure any favors at all.

Then there is the large class made up of the aver-
6

HUMO&OUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL BESEAECH

age religious person, the scientific Philistine, and a
goodly portion of the so-called intelligent public,
which thinks that spirits in their high estate would
never interest themselves in such trivial matters as
purport to come from them in our alleged " communi-
cations." But it never occurs to this class to observe
the conversation that goes on at a Columbia College
tea, for instance. I had a colleague who stands high
in the ranks of science and who thinks it absurd that
a spirit would talk about a jack knife, but in a
social reception of dignitaries his share in the bad-
inage and small talk would hardly distinguish him
from a bootblack or street gamin except that his
dialect is not the same as Chimmie Fadden's. Funs,
jokes, trivialities are all very nice if they are not
the speech of spirits. Even scepticism cannot doubt
the solemnity of a transcendental life. The fact is,
however, that we are wont to adjudge that serious
and important which is either of a religious char-
acter or connected with the employments which give
us our bread or fame. We are very sober and sol-
emn when we read our papers on a scientific subject
when all the incidencts are as trivial as anything
ever attributed to an idiotic ghost, and when we
are put at the end of a telegraph or telephone line
to prove our identity we spontaneously select the
trivial to identify ourselves and then wonder and
laugh at the degeneracy of spirits! We should re-
member, however, that we always estimate a thing
by its relation to our pleasures, so that we look
grave and call a fact important when we are talking
science and philosophy and call it trivial when we

7

PSYCHICAL K£:S£AECfi AKD TH£ 1lt£Str]t]l£CtI01^

wish to laugh about it. We have to put conscience
and gravity into some things when our bread and
fame are concerned, but we relax our scientific spirit
when we do not understand a subject sufficiently to
distinguish between its serious and humorous inci-
dents. We expect to prove our sanity by laughing
where we are ignorant. When we do not wish to
be bored we can laugh down the missionary who is
resolved to save our souls at the expense of our sense
of humor. The case resolves itself into this. When
one party determines to be serious the other wants
to be funny, and vice versa. It is a question of
respectability on the one hand and indifference to
the pubhc on the other, and neither party can pool
its issues without attempting an incongruous mix-
ture of a smile and a tear. The trivial of one is
the important of the other, and social respectability
is the primary consideration of the one while Mr.
Vanderbilt's opinion is the maxim of the other. The
cynic can have his fun with both.

Some personal incidents may have an interest for
the reader. Soon after presenting a paper on the
Piper case in which I defended the spiritistic hy-
pothesis I received a letter from a lady in a neigh-
boring state saying that she had recently lost a
little son by death. The doctor had told her that
his heart had stopped beating, and he was buried
in a vault, and as she had heard from the newspapers
that I could raise the dead she wished that I would
be so kind as to restore her son to life. She was
willing to do much for me if I did. But I was too
busy at the time with the more important work of

8

HUMOEOtTS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL BBSEABCH

talking to students to resuscitate anybody's heart-
beat, and I suppose that boy is still dead. The inci-
dent is, of course, more pathetic than it is funny, but
I fear that the poor woman's impression as learned
from the newspapers was quite pardonable. That
craft seems never to get any nearer the truth than
this poor woman. Anything could be believed if
newspaper accounts were reliable. The amusing part
of the editorial profession of the sensational kind is
the assumption of its intelligence. Men whose only
title to recognition is their financial success in pan-
dering to the appetite for divorce scandals and
political lying somehow suppose that they can de-
scribe and discuss all manner of questions. One of
them in reviewing his life is said to have remarked
to a friend that in his earlier career he had tried
morality (Brook Farm) and failed and then tried
the part of Mephistopheles and found that he had
succeeded.

Here are two incidents associated with editors of
a somewhat different type who could be expected to
have an interest which the writer for the secular
journals might not have.

The editor of one of the widely circulated religious
weeklies had apparently been interested in psychical
research for years. He had accepted articles from
me and others on the subject for ten or more years,
and had boasted to me personally that his paper had
stood up for our work. He has actually solicited
papers from me and others on this question, and
hence presuming that he would be willing to help
along the project of securing financial aid for such

9

PfiYCmCAL &ESBA11CH AND THB KBStT&ftBOTtOK

investigations I recently approached him to support
the plan by some editorial suggestions without any
committal to theories of any kind. The man looked
at me in bewilderment as if to say, ^ Psychical re-
search, psychical research, what is that? " Recover-
ing his recollections he suddenly knit his eyebrows
and exclaimed : ^* Oh-, yes ! Wasn't it a Mrs. Piper
who gave some silly stuff that was said to be com-
munications from spirits some time ago? " I replied,
** Yes, and its silliness is the strongest part of our
argument." He was somewhat abashed at this audac-
ity, but the interesting part of it to me, besides my
own plight, was the editor's real and complete indif-
ference to the whole subject in spite of his years of
apparent interest in it. His real concern when his
day's duties are over is Babylonian antiquities ! Here
is a man wham the public would suppose interested in
all matters affecting the fundamentals of religion,
but who in fact simply takes advantage of a popular
appetite for articles on various topics of a religious,
political, literary and scientific character to gain the
facility for retiring to his library where he may
spend his houra on cuneiform inscriptions and prob-
lems bordering on the region of mythology! Prob-
lems connected with the possible question of a future
life were indeed worth a passing notice, especially
if the public demanded an article on them, but they
are nothing compared with those associated with the
" higher criticism " which is taking the underpinning
from the very interest which he was supposed to
support and could only coddle for its remunerative
advantages. Whatever there may be of the serious

10

HtTMOftOlTS ASPECTS Ot PSYCHICAL B&SBA&CR

in this it is certainly quite as amusing, and a psychical
researcher with a sense of humor would have to laugh
at the discomfiture which he meets at the hands of
supposed friends, who in reality are merely interested
in exploiting him for some concealed and collateral
object.

The editor of the rival religious weekly to which
I have just referred was the pastor of a large met-
ropolitan church and resigned from it to devote his
whole time to editorial duties. He has been of the
rationalistic temperament and has accepted the prin-
ciples of the ^^ higher criticism " which effectually
undermines the whole popular system of Christianity
and shows that there is not one iota of rational
evidence for many of the most essential doctrines of
religion. Apparently this editor felt this, for after
I had delivered my address on the Piper case and
the newspapers had given their wonderful version
of the affair, he sent for me to lunch with him and
talk the matter over. I did so and he was much
interested apparently in the problem and the facts
supposed to bear upon it. I was careful to tell him
that he could form no intelligent opinion from what
we had talked about over a lunch and that he should
await a full report. He expressed his desire to see
it when published. As soon as it was out, remember-
ing my promise, I sent him a copy of my Report.
Some months after I called upon him for the same
purpose that moved me in the interview with the
editor previously mentioned. I asked this purveyor
of the world's weekly outlook who had been so anxious
to see my Report if he had received it. He said that

11

he had not. I told him that I had sent it to him, and
on scratching his head his memory vaguely recalled
that something of the kind had come to him. After
a little more scratching he felt quite certain that he
had received it, but remarked that he had not looked
at it ! ! I managed to face the embarrassing situation
and to approach the subject for which I came to ask
assistance, and to anticipate the first objection which
most men raise in the consideration of our problem, I
remarked that he would probably have to meet the
question of triviality in his reading of the Report and
that this was the strongest point in our theory instead
of being an objection. His immediate reply was:
<< Do you think it is worth while continuing the inves-
tigation when the communications are so trivial?"
And this just after I had remarked that this fact was
our strongest point! Of course there was probably
a difference of opinion lurking behind this evasion of
my issue, but what interested me most was the un-
conscious assumption on his part that we ought to
have some important revelation perhaps of the con-
ditions of existence after death, as if he had some
scruples about the future consequences of his aban-
donment of the ministry. What visions of Dante's
Inferno must pass through the minds of men who
want to know whether spirits are happy or not.
The more I see of them the more I think they deserve
all they fear, and I am quite willing to endure all
sorts of embarrassments and humilities if only I can
secure a correct estimate of human nature and life.
One thing is clear. When you find it necessary to
give up orthodoxy it is very important in the struggle

12

for existence and pursuit of the main chance that
we should interest ourselves fanatically in the social
problem, as a most convenient subterfuge under which
we may protect our property against the avarice of
the masses. When we cannot control them by the
hope of a future life and the morality which has
been associated with it we can counteract the influ-
ence of the economical ideal which has taken its place
by diversions of charity and Fabian tactics which
simply postpone the day of judgment and keep us
for awhile in the enjoyment of what we call our
share of the hog's wash.

A publisher who showed great interest in psychical
research from the foundation of the Society and who
has published some volumes of a popular sort on the
subject quite lost his interest in it when a few mem-
bers suspected that spiritism might actually explain
some of the phenomena. He had seen table tipping
himself and witnessed all sorts of miracles, provided
one did not choose to believe it was spirits ! ! My Re-
port had been on his table six months without his
knowing what it was about, and even then I had to
call his attention to its nature. The public will have
to decide whether the joke was on him or myself. It
will probably laugh at both of us.

I went to the editor of one of our leading monthly
magazines to propose an article on an interesting case
of subconscious mental action. It was without any
trace of the supernatural in it and I told him so. But
in spite of this his knowledge of what I had said in
three articles on psychical research in his magazine
kept him from seeing the point and he could not im-

18

PSrCHlCAL tt£SSAftCH AKB THE ft£SUEEfiCTION

agine me as thinking of anything but spirits. He
had himself once been a member of the Society for
Psychical Research and told me that he had abandoned
it because it became too scientific for his contribu-
tions. In the process of time he had become convinced
that his earlier expectations were not destined to im-
mediate realization, and on this occasion of my visit to
talk over an article he undertook to deliver himself of
his newly acquired convictions as a dictum which gov-
erned his editorial work in this field. With great
gravity and dignity, using as slow and deliberate a
manner as he could, he said : ^^ I have studied this
subject a great many years and I have finally come
to tha conclusion that it is all psychological. All
the wonder that is in it is the wonder of the human
mind.^ Here is an editor looking for miracles as a
condition of being interested in facts at all! The
grave proclamation that psychical research was all
^^ psychological " was not to be disputed, but the
condition of impressing the man with any interest
in facts was that I convince him that they were not
" psychological " and that I be a vendor of the
miraculous as the only title to consideration in his
periodical. It is not the wonderful in this problem
that gives it its claim to recognition, but it is the
perfect explicabiUty of its phenomena on a simple
hypothesis that demands the respect of the sane
human mind. Neither philosophy nor science is
founded on the " wonderful," but only superstition
has such a basis, and the wonder-monger in literature
playing the role of a scientist to save his respecta-

14

HUMO&OUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL JUfiSEARCH

bility hardly conceals an intellectual standard that
is any better than that of the savage.

Another instance has much interest. Soon after
I burned my bridges behind me in my speech on
psychic research and the spiritistic hypothesis in
1900 at a meeting in New York, I received a letter
from a prominent clergyman, one of the leading men
in the United States, expressing entire confidence in
my attitude in regard to the investigation. Some
years later, when endeavoring to secure an endow-
ment for this research I wrote to him and explained
my plans to him and he replied with a letter not only
indicating his sympathy but also saying that he would
try to obtain the fund and that, if I did not hear
from him soon, I might infer that he had been unsuc-
cessful. I wrote saying that my plan was a large
one and that he had better not do anything until
he saw me personally and talked over the scheme.
When I returned to the city he asked me by letter
to send him the names and indorsements of two or
three good men of scientific standing. I obtained
the names of fifteen leading scientific men in the coun-
try as indorsers of the plan and sent their letters
to this clergyman with a detailed explanation of the
scheme. The clergyman's reply was that he was great-
ly obliged for the opportunity to read the documents,
but that he did not know any one to whom he could
appeal for assistance ! His own wife was worth many
millions, according to the general beUef, and the
clergyman himself was in contact with all the mil-
lionaires of the eastern part of the country. His

16

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE RESU&BECTION

interest in spiritual matters was manifested in the
organization of model saloons.

In the Ninth Edition of the Encyclopaedia Briton-
nica there is no article on the ^^ Soul," and none on its
Inmiortality. I can understand why these subjects
should not be mentioned in the reports of the Stock
Exchange or in railway time tables. But one would
have thought the Britannica might mention a subject
on which Plato and Christianity said so much. There
are, however, seven pages on ^^ Dogs," a thing that
may not be surprising when we consider that our
aristocratic classes are more interested in breeding
dogs than children. Horse racing takes up seven
pages. On Beer, Whiskey, Wine, and Gin together
there are twenty-three pages, which is at least one
recognition of the "spiritual" side of man. No
wonder a head of the church tried model saloons.
Whist has five pages, and Abracadabra, Anagrams,
Astrology and similar things are not forgotten. An-
atomy has one hundred and nine pages, but not a
line on that which makes anatomy interesting or im-
portant. Angling has twelve pages and Apes have
twenty-one! The study of our simian ancestry is
respectable ; of our spiritual destiny it is a mark of in-
sanity !

But I think it is the Boirdiaant scientist who offers
as much for amusement as any other class. At a
recent symposium on the subject of psychical re-
search and its chief Pythoness one of the participants
thought that the spiritist had to contend with the
hypothesis that Mrs. Piper's " subliminal " might be
the recipient telepathically of all the mental states

16

J

HUMOROUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

of any or all people during her lifetime, so that when
any particular person died she had only in her trance
state to pick out the proper names and incidents
to represent any given case of identity. Another
asserted that ^^ the ether fairly teems with the vibrat-
ing thoughts of the bygone ages and all that is
necessary to become possessed of this store of univer-
sal knowledge is to become sensitive to ether vibra-
tions, and learn how to translate them into ordinary
language."

Far be it from me to deny these claims. I have
no unscientific prejudice against miracles. I do not
wish to put myseljF in a position which may require
me later to ^^ eat crow." I agree that, if there are
any such impressions recorded in the ether, all we
have to do is to become sensitive to them and trans-
late them into ordinary language, only I am waiting
for it to be a fait accompli before I take up the
duties of a missionary for that religion. But what
strikes one as amusing is the gravity of the assertions
thus made and the total absence of evidence for them.
You would think that a man who wanted to be re-
garded as scientific would give at least an iota of
evidence for beliefs of this kind which are not even
put on the plane of possible working hypotheses.
These men too are always shouting from the house-
tops while announcing such large creeds that they do
not believe in the supernatural ! The " supernatural "
is a Medusa head on which they cannot look and
live. To them everything is " natural," except spir-
its. You can believe anything with impunity and
without evidence provided this something is not a

17

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

spirit! They may be perfectly right so far as
I know, but it is certainly a humorous situation to
have the most exacting demands for evidence made
of you in the mere testing of hypotheses which you
do not know whether to believe or not and thus to
find yourself required to refute theories which do
not pretend to have evidence in their support and
which are about as large as anything Jules Verne
ever imagined. So far as I can see, " science '* in
this procedure is simply any large unverified asser-
tion which is not in any way associated with the pos-
sibility of a discamate human consciousness. Any
myth, any tradition, any fancy can be accepted
without a smile of incredulity, if we can succeed
in escaping from responsibility for evidential obliga-
tions, and apparently no one has duties of this kind
but the believer in the possibility of the continuance
of human consciousness. Faith is said to be the
Nemesis of scepticism, and so it seems. But here
it is not religion that has taken refuge in this last
resource. Spiritism pretends to o£Fer some little evi-
dence for itself, even if it be very trivial. But
" science " offers us no other credentials than a simple
act of faith for Mrs. Piper^s telepathic recipience
of all contemporary states of consciousness, or for the
infinite record of human thoughts on the ether. This
may be true, of course, but the situation is one which
is calculated to provoke one's risibilities, not so much
for the magnitude of what we are asked to believe
on either side, as for the gravity with which such
questions are discussed apart from the presentation
of evidence, and with an evident fear that we shall

18

HUMOROUS ASPECTS OT PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

be converted to some belief before our neighbor's
respect will permit. It appears that our denial of
a doctrine is directly proportioned to our wishes that
it be true and to the demand for social respectability.

One man who wants us to take him seriously says:
^^ If telepathy, or thought transference, had even the
slightest microscopic foundation in fact, it would be
instantly commercialized as a rival of telegraphy,
telephony, and even the postal service." One may be
welcome to his opinion of the facts, but if he had only
said that, if there were any " microscopic " evidence
for the existence of ghosts, we would use them for our
locomotives and messenger boys, he might have em-
phasized the irrelevancy of his remark. Another of-
fered $1,000 for an instance of telepathy and simply
sat down in his laboratory to wait for some one to
come along to convince him. He never thought of
trying experiments for himself! He was a "scient-
ist *' of the chair !

The trouble is that science has taken on all the
unction and seriousness of religion without the latter's
ideals, and religion, for the lack of the necessary cre-
dentials has to mourn, like Hecuba, for the loss of her
children.

But just where the situation seems most pathetic
it becomes comical. Man is an animal that wishes
to be taken very seriously. Except among the en-
thusiasts of scientific evolution he systematicaUy tries
to conceal the humility of his origin while he endeavors
to play the role of an aristocrat and a demigod. He
cultivates the manners of a gentleman to purchase
the respect of his neighbors and indulges the illusion

19

PSYCHICAL EESEAECH AND THE SESURBECTION

of self-respect to simulate the possession of virtue
while he has various habits of intemperance which ally
him to the lowliest of his ancestors. If he can fill
his stomach and dress himself well without pushing
others over a precipice, he calls his social order civili-
zation, but he is vociferous in his maledictions against
the cosmos if it is not moral enough to satisfy all
his appetites. But he has a chief end, and he calls
it an ideal and this is just various enough to conceal
its meaning. He invents morality and religion either
to disguise or to redeem his selfishness and hypocrisy.
He loudly proclaims the importance of life and im-
mortality and would have you believe that his exist-
ence in this world has no value without the prospect
of another, if only he can have it his own way. Even
the philosopher Kant thought that a future life was
demanded by the existence of an insatiable duty which
the conditions of the present life made it impossible
to realize or obey in full. Thus the center of aspira-
tion and conduct is placed beyond the grave. But
how are men in fact interested in itP One wants to
know if he can continue his cherished pursuits in
some form and would not be contented unless he could
enjoy music or poetry: another hopes to escape the
duties of work, and, like the Greeks who so hated
^^ toil and pain," expects to ramble unrestrained in
the flowery meads of Paradise. One wants to meet
his wife, but neglects the possibility of meeting his
neighbor whom he has cheated out of his property;
another would appreciate it if he could avoid the
survival of Turks and Chinamen. The Australian
savage, admiring the Englishman's complexion and

HUMOBOUS ASPECTS OF PSTCHICAI^ EESEABCH

the advantages of his pocketbook, hoped that in the
resurrection he should wake up a white man and have
plenty of sixpences. The old Northmen thought that
the heroes of Valhalla were occupied in hewing down
shadows which immediately started up again to renew
their ceaseless and bloodless conflicts. The modem
religious man, though passionately devoted to demo-
cratic and republican institutions with their axiom
of equality, still expresses his ideal in the expectation
of living in a golden city and bowing and worship-
ing before the great white throne. But all of these
expect to treat the future life as a surplus to be
gained over and above success of some sort in the
struggle for existence. The rich man whose enjoy-
ments have been intensified and expanded by his
wealth, and who has no anxieties except those that
are the consequences of his vices, hopes, perhaps more
keenly than the pauper, for the continuance of his
pleasures, but would not care for another life if it
brought him duties toward his fellows. In fact I
find very few people interested in a future life on
moral or religious grounds. These are only terms
that try to transfigure a personal interest as various
as human nature. The primary object of men is
success in some ambition, and this in most cases is
material enjoyment and social standing. If a future
life can come as an additional good to all that can
be won by hook or crook in business it is welcome
provided it imposes no duties of a moral or religious
kind. The successful man wants it as a dividend
on which his transactions did not count and the un-
successful man wants it as a compensation for his

21

PSYCHICAIi SESEA&CH AND THE &ESUBEECTION

failure. Between them is a pessimistic class that
is soured and disappointed by the present, always
telling us that life is not worth living, but that has
not the courage to commit suicide! Then there is a
scientific body of men who are simply dying to believe
in the continuance of consciousness after death but
spend their time in devising imaginary difficulties
and objections to keep their neighbors from calling
names and to insure their respectability. They invent
innumerable phrases and shibboleths to evade the
plainest and most intelligible possibilities. From fear
of social ostracism they cannot even admit that the
case looks Uke a future life and then doubt the proof
of it, but must coin unintelligible terms and ^^ might
he's " to cover up an interest that they have not the
courage to avow and to sustain the pretension that
there is nothing to be said on any other side of the
question than that of words whose meaning is still
undetermined.

This is the complex situation which the psychical
researcher has to meet, and woe unto him if he has
no sense of humor. If in the contemplation of all
this he cannot judiciously mix laughter and tears he
is not to be pitied for any discomfiture he experiences.
He must take his fellows on the estimate which evolu-
tion makes and this involves a measure of contempt
quite equal to the pride and self -appreciation which
they wish to cultivate. If he is sensitive to ridicule
and wants the respect of his kind he must learn to
keep silent, but if any terrible earnestness blinds
him to the bigotry and dogmatism of established opin-
ions, quite equal to the despised doctrines of the dark

S2

HUMOROUS ASPECTS OF PSYCHICAL &E8EAECH

ages, or induces him to recognize a pathos in human
existence which a deeper moral insight does not jus-
tify, he must take the consequences of public med-
dling in any mixture of science and religion. But
some of us like to hear the lion roar and take a
malicious delight in exhibiting human nature and
opinion at their real value, whether found in the
fool, the newspaper editor, the scientist, or the phi-
losopher. There is no use in being a preacher when
you can get a good deal of fun out of meddling with
the self-complacency of those who think they possess
universal knowledge. This class also has to earn
its bread and if it lacks the perception of its own
foibles and follies we must let it alone or get our
pleasures out of judicious modes of tormenting it.
The process of evolution would be pathetic enough
if man were what he thinks himself. But what we call
our ideals are euphemisms for our vices. Life is
not a tragedy. I wish it were. We might then hope
that man would get his deserts. It is merely a comedy
in which idealism has no functions. When the psy-
chical researcher realizes this he will temper his en-
thusiasm, laugh at the humorous helplessness of his
own situation, and seek an enjoyment in disturbing
the complacent equanimity of science and philosophy
by a discreet use of irony and satire.

9S

CHAPTER n

PSYCHICAL RESEAECH AND COINCIDENCES

From time immemorial coincidences have been ob-
jects of uncommon human interest and curiosity.
The discovery of them still leads, as it always has led,
to all sorts of superstitions. They survive to be re-
marked even by those who laugh at them. If a knife
falls on the floor a stranger may be expected. Hun-
dreds of such * signs,' originating from the observa-
tion of chance coincidences, are at the constant com-
mand of the average man or woman, whether believed
or ridiculed. Another class of coincidences which are
more striking appeals to the instinct for special prov-
idences, mysterious meaning or supernatural explana-
tion of some kind. They are often sufficiently strik-
ing and respectably authenticated to puzzle wise heads
for a means to dislodge the impression of their real
or possible causal significance. The collection and
preservation of them by the Society for Psychical
Research, no matter what we may think of them, has
done much to strengthen the interest and belief in
the possible meaning of such phenomena, especially
when they take a certain form. The scientific or
even quasi-scientific investigation of such things in-
vests them with an importance that would not belong
to them naturally, and that would make little impres-
sion upon the organized power of scientific opinion
unless equally organized and sustained. But it 13

S4

l>SirCHlOAL BfiSAA&CH AKD COINCIDENCES

not necessary to warn scientific men against treating
coincidences seriously. They are proof enough
against that temptation.

There is, however, a complaint which I have to
make against them. It is not for remissness in their
allegiance to scientific method, but for an unnecessary
failure to apply it as fully as it might be done in a
field where the term * coincidence * gives rise to very
different illusions. There are ^ coincidences ' and
* coincidences.' Not that I shall here beg any ques-
tions as to the important significance of any of them
for the supernatural or for anything resembling it,
but that some are undoubtedly more suggestive of
the need of a causal explanation than others.

Hence I shall make a distinction between two kinds
of coincidences. The first I shall call formal or un-
suggestive and the second material or suggestive coin-
cidences. I intend no mysterious meaning or distinc-
tion by the terms * formal* and * material.' They
represent only the difference between coincidences that
are mere coincidences and coincidences that also have
some identity of content more or less of a striking
and suggestive character. The distinction is perhaps
the same as that between what we call casual or chance
coincidences and causal or significant coincidences.
An illustration of the former kind is that of an un-
expected meeting of two friends at a great distance
from their usual habitat and without any previous
knowledge of each other's movements. Of the second
kind is perhaps the case of absolutely identical
thoughts under circumstances which do not superfi-
cially explain the identity, but which may be traced

85

PSYCHICAL &ESEAECH AND TH£ EESUEEECTIOK

to association awakened by some object having a
conunon interest or connected with a common ex-
perience. In the first class belong all those conjunc-
tions of things that do not involve the concerted or
purposive action of the subjects experiencing them
and not involving any such identity of content or
adaptive fitness of several events to a single end.
In the latter class belong all those coincidences that
involve either concerted action or common known and
unknown causes. The average scientific man, how-
ever, too often lumps all coincidences together indis-
criminately, making the conception a hard-and-fast
one foid convertible with that of causeless connections.
But there are traces of cowardice and equivocation
in this attitude of mind or a priori method of treating
phenomena that too often prevent the scientific man
from recognizing in some coincidences a causal neanis
of a very interesting kind, though not of the sort
alleged by the supematuralist and coincidence-mong-
ers generally. Not to make the distinction, therefore,
which I have made between the mere fact of coinci-
dence and the coincidence of content, is an error that
leads to an unscientific treatment of such problems
and prevents a search for obscure causes that are quite
within the reach of normal psychology or recognized
agencies.

In remarking this error to which the scientist often
exposes himself I have in mind a defect of Parish's
very able criticism of the Censiis of HaUiicinatiom.
I do not mean, however, to use this defect either as
a defense of psychical research or as an impeachment
of his method of criticism. On the contrary, no one

S6

PSYCHICAL BS8SA&CH AND COINCtDENC£S

can read that book without being convinced of its
cogency and importance, if he did not know it before.
In addition to this concession, the defect which I wish
to remark is the failure to observe facts directly
counter to dissociation and illusions of memory, and
which would immensely have strengthened his verdict
of ^not proven' against the supposition of super-
normal agencies.

The first obvious defect of Parish's work is that
there is no evidence of any inside study of the phe-
nomena the conclusions from which he criticises. The
second objection is that he risks the whole force of
his criticism upon the suspicion of dissociation and
illusions of memory, in which the responsibility for
the defective nature of the cases reported falls upon
the subject of the narrative, and not upon the re-
ceiver of it. But I wish here to contend that not
only may there be cases in which the difSculty is
not what Parish supposes, but that the really serious
difficulties can often be found only by a careful study
of the individual case. I mean here, of course, the
study of the mental habits, beliefs and laws of asso-
ciation in the individual reporting a remarkable ex-
perience. Consequently I desire to show in this chap-
ter that there is a more important source of miscon-
ception than the subject's illusions of memory, and
that it can be discovered often only on the condition
that we accept the deliverances of this faculty. Illu-
sions of memory are of course a vantage ground for
objection, but are neither the only ones nor the best
ones. I shall show this after stating the facts upon
which the conviction rests, and which have been gath-

587

ered from a personal study of an individual case of
some interest. The facts represent an extraordinary
combination of apparitions and apparent premonition
in which a purely objective and superficial view would
suggest a supernormal and perhaps spiritistic inter-
pretation. Before making any comments or expla-
nations I shall narrate the incidents in the order in
which they occurred, and in which I obtained them.
The subject of the experiences is one who has no
prejudices in favor of such phenomena. On the
contrary, the antipathy to anything like a spiritistic
view of them is unyielding and marked by what the
sceptic would regard as a very healthy disgust. The
intelligence is sufficient to make the facts entirely
acceptable, and, though some of them will not strike
a scientific observer as of any serious interest, es-
pecially when thought of as isolated, yet the at least
amusingly cumulative character of them and their
distinct semblance to those experiences which so many
people feel may be significant are striking enough to
justify analysis and explanation, especially when this
explanation exhibits a neglected source of miscon-
ception. The facts, then, are as follows:

The experiences to be here narrated are those of
a lady whom I shall call Mrs. D. She is the same
subject of whom I have reported a number of other
interesting incidents in the Proceedings of the Society
for Psychical Research. This fact will be useful to
know if the reader wishes to study the whole group
of phenomena coming from the same source. But
the present group is wholly independent of the earlier
cases.

S8

Some time in July, 18979 Mrs. D. had a strong im-
pression that some unusual ^ burden ' was going to
fall upon the family. She could describe the feeling
in no other way, and it will be noticed that the expres-
sion is a common one with religious minds, which
often employ the term to denote a providential afflic-
tion. This meaning Mrs. D. gave to the term her-
self. But the feeling was too vague to identify with
any past cause or any incident to be forecasted in
the future. In stating the fact also it must be re-
membered that Mrs. D. was in good health, in fact,
better than usual, as the phrcuse goes, though at no
time does she have to complain of more than the in-
disposition of people who have the personal care of
their children and the domestic work. Hence there
was nothing in her physical condition that would sug-
gest a clear physical cause of such a feeling, nor
any meaning that might deserve attention. I am
not implying that there were no such causes, for
there may have been conditions that a skilled physi-
cian would detect. But to the consciousness of the
subject there was no indication of indisposition of
any kind. In fact, she has answered all my inquiries
on this point to the effect that her peculiar experi-
ences occur most frequently when her health is at its
best, so far as her own judgment can determine.
Throughout the whole period over which the present
narrative extends her health was good. In the month
of August this premonitory feeling repeated itself
very frequently, and became so annoying that Mrs.
D. mentioned it to her husband, who confirms her
statement in regard to both facts, and hence supports

89

PSirCHlCAL ft£8£ARCH AND THfi B£SUBUBCTION

the supposition that the location of the experience
previous to its real or supposed fulfilment is not due
to an illusion of memory. Finally, the feeling became
so intense and persistent that Mrs. D., as is often the
case with religious minds as deeply imbued with piety
as is her own, sought relief in prayer. But though
this resource had in her estimation been effective in
other cases where it had been instigated, as might well
be in a mind so sensitive to automatisms as is her
own, yet the feeling could not be dismissed, and with
a conviction that tiie affliction was not to be evaded
she sought to cultivate the frame of mind suited to
the endurance of the inevitable.

To make the matter clearer it is necessary to antic-
ipate the sequel of the story, to which the incidents
of the narrative are supposed to refer. This is that
the little daughter, whom I shall call Lettie, and who
was just one year and nine months old, died on De-
cember S, 1897, from the burning of her cradle.

At odd times between August and December Mrs.
D., in her thoughts about the child's future and while
planning some little thing for her, would hear a voice
saying, " She'D never need it.'* One of these occa-
sions was the following: The family live in a house
with few accommodations for a clergyman who re-
quires a study, and Mrs. D. planned to give Lettie
a certain room for a bedroom when she grew older,
and was running over how she would furnish it, and
this voice came as described. It was not exactly what
one could describe as an external voice, nor again a
mere thought impression or product of the memory
and imagination, as we usually characterize such

SO

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND COINCIDENCES

things, but one of those internal voices with which
psychical researches have become familiar and which
Mrs. D. herself distinguishes as neither a real voice
nor a memory reproduction, but an impression with
all the characters of a real voice except the sense of
extemfid reality. Psychiatrists will recognize without
remark the nature of such an experience, and as I
am only narrating facts I do not need to make any
comments.

There were many repetitions of this voice in about
the same language. One of them occurred about two
weeks before the child's death. Mrs. D. had resolved
to write a little diary which she could give to the
child when it became older. She wrote down two
separate accounts on different days of certain events
having an interest to the little girl, the day of the
month, unfortunately for the psychical researches,
not being mentioned in them, though this would have
been of no importance for the contents of the diary,
as there is nothing evidential in them regarding the
incidents at hand. But while writing them, this voice
came as before : " She'll never need them.'* The day
before the child died the same voice appeared, and
on the morning of her death she was running
about the house in a rather dilapidated pair of shoes,
when Mrs. D. remarked to the child that her feet
must be cold and thought she must have a new pair
of shoes. In the midst of her thoughts came the
voice again, " She'll never need them." It must be
added also that, previous to the impression of a com-
ing * burden' above described, this voice had been
heard several times.

SI

PSYCHICAL BESEARCH AND THE BE8UBRECTION

About a week before the child's death Mrs. D.
thought she smelled fire at night, and feeling afraid
of it went to the cellar to look after the matches
and to see that there was no danger. She found no
traces of fire and nothing to explain her impression.
But from that time she began to be careful about
matches, seeing that they were in safe places and out
of reach. She even went so far as to look over the
house for the matches, and felt a strong impulse to
bum all parlor matches which were of that kind that
is easily lighted. Once the impulse to do this was
attended with something like a voice warning her to
the same end, and about the danger of fire. Nothing
definite enough having been suggested by the voice
to guide her actions directly, Mrs. D. could only im-
agine the necessary precautions, and finally thought
to hang a dripping pan in front of the range fire,
a thing she had never done before, to prevent
coals from falling out during the night. Nor had
any apprehensions of this kind ever been felt before,
within her recollection, and there were no special
reasons to suppose that any danger of fire in this
way existed. But as there was no other fire in the
house than that in this range and one in the heater,
a sort of closed stove or furnace like the Baltimore
heater, no other definite course was left open to the
imagination for preventive measures except the un-
usual one mentioned.

On the morning of the child's death, and during
family worship, another incident of some interest
occurred. In the midst of the petition for individual
members of the family, when she came to the phrase

S2

FSYCHICAIi SESEASCH AND COINCIDENCES

with which she besought divine care for each one,
and attempted to apply it in behalf of Lettie, though
no difSculty was encountered in the case of the other
children, in this case something seemed to stop Mrs.
D.'s voice, and she could not repeat the usual lan-
guage. She rdcalls no similar previous experience.

On the same morning, about an hour before the
fatal disaster, the propulsion to destroy the matches
that were dangerous became stronger and stronger,
until Mrs. D. turned and reached for the box to de-
stroy it. But as she picked it up she thought. No;
L. (the elder boy) is gone, and she thought that
she might need the matches to light the gas stove.
She then said aloud to herself, ^^ I'll destroy it as
soon as he comes back." She then went on with her
work in the kitchen. When the time came, about
ten o'clock, Lettie W€U9 taken up to her crib for the
morning sleep, and as Mrs. D. was putting her into
the cradle a voice, such as has been described above,
said: " Turn the mattress." This Mrs. D. was ac-
customed to do, though she had never exi>erienced
any voice before in connection with it. But, being
in a great hurry, she simply said in a motherly way
to the child that she would turn the mattress after
the child had taken her nap. She then went down
stairs to her work. After a while she heard the child
cry, and hurrying up to the room, found the crib and
its bedding on fire, and the child so badly burned
that it died in three hours.

The only possible way to account for the accident
was to suppose that the child had found a match,
possibly in the crib or on the mantel piece, which she

33

FSYCHICAIi BESEAECH AND THE KESUBEECTION

could reach, and lighting it, had set its bedclothes
on fire. The other two children were not present.
L. had gone down town on an errand and £., the
younger boy, was at school. No fire was on this
floor of the house, but in the kitchen and the dining
room, both below.

Now, another incident of much interest had oc-
curred many times during the two or three years'
residence of the family in this house. Mrs. D. had
often had a visual appcurition of this very crib on
fire, but as her apparitions or visual automatisms
are very frequent, she had not thought to assign
it any meaning or possible coincidental value until
after the accident.

These were the experiences of Mrs. D. previous
to the event, but there were two other incidents by
other persons than Mrs. D., that lend themselves to
a construction of coincidence in connection with the
accident. The first is exactly like the one narrated
as occurring at family devotions. Mrs. D. has a
sister living in Connecticut, some seventy-five miles
from B., the home of Mrs. D. No correspondence
had passed recently between them, and the sister was
not given to as devotional a life as Mrs. D. It must
also be remembered that the sister had ridiculed Mrs.
D.'s stories of her experiences, and even went so far
as to criticise Mrs. D. half jestingly for her extrav-
agant piety. She discouraged Mrs. D.'s tolerance of
possible significance in many of the coincidences which
I have recorded in the Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research (Vol. 12, p. 269 seq.), when they
were the subject of conversation. But on hearing of

34

PSYCHICAL BJBSEABCH AND COINCIDENCES

the child's death she came to B. and narrated an
exi)erience of her own. It was to the effect that about
a week before the death of the child she had had such
an experience as she had never had before. An over-
whelming impression of some great calamity to occur
in the * family ' (the incidents show that the term
included the whole family connections), and the im-
pulse arose in her to pray for each one, which she
did, feeling, as she expressed it in her narrative, that
this was an unusual procedure for her. She went over
each person among parents and relatives, until she
came to the child, Lettie, when her voice suddenly
stopped and she could not pray for her as for the
others. She finally managed, however, to utter with
struggling voice a petition for ^ our little blossom,'
the name which she was accustomed to apply to Lettie
when speaking of her.

The second incident was an experience of the next
door neighbor to the D.'s. I shall call the lady who
had it Mrs. 6. On the afternoon of the child's death
Mrs. G. came in about three o'clock and apropos of
the accident remarked that on the night before, I
believe it was, she had been wakened by the fear of
fire and had gone down to the cellar to search for it,
and exclaimed while making the search : " Oh ! if
our little baby should bum up ! " Her own child
was about the age of Lettie. The relation of this
incident to the case will be noticed later.

There was also another experience of Mrs. D.'s
which psychical researchers would classify as * sym-
bolical.' Whether it be so or not is a matter of no
concern to us at present, but is recorded for the sake

36

PSTCHICAI. SESEABCH AND THE BESUBEECTION

of the interpretation which the mind is capable of
putting on it either as an afterthought or as a con-
firmatory coincidence of the others. But a night
or two before the accident Mrs. D. had a dream with
the following incidents in it. She had gone with
Mr. D. and the three children to the railway station
at M. to take the train for a visit to a friend. As
they came up to the station the train was coming in.
Mr. D. with the oldest child, L., ran across the track
ahead of the train and reached the platform. Mrs.
D. and the other two children were too late to get
across the track and waited until it stopi>ed. They
then climbed upon the car platform to cross over
and join Mr. D. and L. But, just as they reached
the platform, the train began to back upon a switch,
which was the custom at this place to let a train pass.
Mrs. D. paid no attention to it, but started through
the car expecting to find her husband and other child.
She noticed that the train was empty, but, leaving
the two children in a seat, went on in the search for
Mr. D. and L. Presently she found that the train
kept backing and backing until she noticed that it
was near Toledo, some forty miles from her start-
ing point, when she came upon the conductor, who
told her that the children, E. and Lettie, had been
switched off some time before. Mr. D. and L.
reached their destination safely cmd were joined later
by Mrs. D. Such was the dream. Now, since the
death of Lettie and during the funeral Mrs. D. has
frequently heard a voice say, " The end is not yet."
Mrs. D. also narrates that she often has a feeling
that E., the child here associated with Lettie in the

36

PSTCHICAIi BESEAKCH AND COINCIDENCES

dream, may get killed by the trolley ears, accidents
of this kind being frequent in the city where the fam-
ily lives.

These experiences took place before the death of
the child. There are two others, however, that oc-
curred after it and that may throw some light upon
all the phenomena purporting to suggest coincidence.

The night after the burial of the child Mrs. D.,
as perhaps is true of most persons passing through
a shock of this kind, could picture to herself nothing
but the little coffin and the grave. It was not a
vision or an hallucination, but only a memory picture,
such as any one can recall. The remembered picture
was exceedingly unpleasant, and, evidently, in spite
of her faith, a little tinge of scepticism came to dis-
turb her mind, because she said that she did not like to
think that her Uttle child was not a spirit, but a
corpse with a vanished soul. To remove the unpleas-
ant feeling Mrs. D. prayed to have a realizing sense
and the power to know that the child was a spirit
and did not lie in the grave. At this time she was
at the home of her sister, whither the family had
gone to seek a burial place. One morning, soon after
this prayer, she awakened and lay for an hour think-
ing over family affairs. The sun was shining brightly
in the room, and while thinking about the clothes
she would put on the two boys to prevent their best
ones from being soiled at their play when they got
up, suddenly she saw a form by the bedside, and
turning, saw an apparition of little Lettie with her
hands on the bedside and smiling at Mrs. D. By
her side was the form of a woman, holding her hands

37

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE &ESUBRECTION

about the child, as if to assist it. Mrs, D. sprang up
in bed and unconsciously exclaimed, ^^ Good morning,
Lettie," and both figures immediately vanished. The
forms were transparent and objects could be seen
through them. The grown form was not recogniz-
able as any one that Mrs. D. knew, but it had no
distinct resemblance to the representation of an angel,
such as pictures might suggest. It seemed, there-
fore, not to be an automatism from the memory of
angelic pictures. The dress fitted rather closely,
and the hair was of a decidedly golden hue and the
face one of great beauty. No suggestion of friends
was apparent in it. The experience displaced the
ugly feeling created by the memory of the coffin
and the grave, and though not believing that she
had seen the spirit of her child, or that spiritualism
is a rational doctrine, Mrs. D. retained a strong sense
of satisfaction from the vision. She is disposed to
interpret it as a providential comfort for her sorrow.

At the end of December another incident took place
that will have some interest. This time it was the
experience of the little boy E. It was first told me
by Mr. D., who had called on a business matter. It
seems that the child had climbed up on a couch beside
his mother who lay down for a rest, and in a few
moments asked his mother if his sister Lettie was
smoke. The following letter from Mrs. D. in re-
sponse to my inquiry narrates the details of the
occurrence.

B , January 6th, 1898.

De. Hysl,op:

You requested a note of E's recent experience. It
occurred on Thursday eve, Dec. 80th (1897).

38

PSYCHICAL RESBA&CH AND COINCIDENCES

I lay down on the sofa to rest in the evening, and,
as he often does, he climbed back of me to rest with
me. I do not remember what my thoughts were,
but feel quite confident I was not thinking of my ex-
perience at S V Conn., when E. said: " Mamma,

is little Lettie air now? Is she like smoke? " Why,
darling? " 'Cause I just saw her and put my arms
around her and she was like air." I will endeavor to
keep account of anything further.

Yours respectfully,

E D .

On inquiry about the incident I could find no trace
of any story to the child that might lead to a belief
on its part in such a reaUty as its experience might
be taken to describe. Neither Mr. nor Mrs. D. could
recall any narrative that might suggest it. No imme-
diate thought or statement of Mrs. D., who was
intent on rest, could be recalled that might have in-
spired the child's idea. Moreover, the child was only
four years old. The incident impressed both parents
as very striking, and they were evidently puzzled
by it, having a strong aversion to the apparent mean-
ing of such occurrences.

Such are the facts, or at least alleged facts, in a
case of real or apparent coincidences. I must warn
the reader, however, that I have not narrated them
either for the purpose of proving any hypothesis
or with the demand that any one shall consider them
genuine or significant. I am content if I have pro-
duced an average story of this kind which can at
least pretend to authenticity. I am willing to concede
any amount of scepticism in regard to the importance

89

PSYCHICAL KESEAECH AND THE EESVEEECTIOK

of the alleged experiences, since it is not a part of
my task either to vindicate their authenticity beyond
question or to urge their extraordinary interest. Any
man may have what theory he pleases about these
matters. The plan here is to produce facts in the
same individual exi)erience which science will have
either to question equally with the above in order to
save its consistency or to accept the whole with their
defense of psychological interest for even suspicious
phenomena. Nevertheless, since it is the intention to
show more fruitful sources of difficulty to the super-
normal than illusions of memory, it will be necessary
to recognize the question of authenticity and allied
problems. But the main purpose is to study the
individual case and to iSnd in it the explanation of
what one side may regard as supernormal and what
the other ignores simply for the lack of courage to
study the facts.

I think that every one would frankly admit that
the narrative presents, at least to the ordinary mind,
an extraordinary set of coincidences in favor of
premonition and spiritism. That is the interpreta-
tion which the temperament of many persons would
put upon the incidents, and their apparent relevance
for this purpose is all that I care to sustain. The
impression that such experiences make on the average
man or woman is all that it is necessary to recognize
in order to demand for them the same consideration
which mesmerism and reports about meteors were
finally able to exact, much to the shame of those
who at first insisted upon laughing at them. For
myself I do not wonder that untrained psychologists

40

PSYCHICAL RESEABCH AND COINCIDENCES

feel greatly puzzled at such incidents, when I come to
consider the marvelous fertility and complexity of
mental processes. After all, science is founded on
coincidences of some kind, and it cannot a£Pord to
dismiss them hastily, when a little tolerance and pa-
tience will reveal a rich field of explanation, without
discrediting facts on the one hand, or rushing into
the arms of the supernatural on the other. In the
present case some of the facts certainly simulate the
view of premonition and others equally simulate a
spiritistic interpretation. I think few persons would
question this assertion. But refusing to treat them
conscientiously will neither dispel the illusions so
freely imputed to others nor discover the causes of
their apparent significance.

The first criticism which I imagine the average
psychologist would direct against the supposed value
of the alleged coincidences narrated would be the
vague indefiniteness of the feelings spoken of as pre-
monitory. This I have mentioned for the sake of
conceding it as fatal if the question concerned their
evidential character in behalf of the supernormal.
But, inasmuch as I am less anxious either to prove or
to disprove the extraordinary nature of the phenomena
than I am to discover in this individual case the pos-
sible influence of other agencies quite independent of
both vagueness and distinctness, I may assume that
the case is free from that objection. Besides the
accusation of indefiniteness cannot so easily be brought
against the incidents of the apparition of the burn-
ing cradle and the automatism or voice ^^ She'll never
need them." Nor is there any vagueness about the

41

PSYCHICAL aESEAECH AND THE EESU&RECTION

apparition of the child after death. But I shall
grant, for the sake of the argument, that the facts are
too inconsequential to seduce severe scientific method
from its attitude of scepticism, in so far as the super-
normal is concerned. It will not be so easy, however,
to explam the coincidences as it will be to doubt their
evidential value for occult theories. But, as the more
definite experiences yield to easy normal explanation,
when the mental habits of the subject are known, we
may easily dispose of the less definite incidents.

The spiritistic interpretation, I have said, is a nat-
ural one for these incidents. But the difficulties with
which that hypothesis has to contend are much greater
than the narrative would suggest, and they can be dis-
covered only by a direct investigation of the mind that
had the experiences. To make this evident, I have to
remark many more facts than are even likely to find
their way spontaneously into such a story. They are
all included, however, under the general head of
automatisms. This term I use to denote any resurg-
ence into consciousness of either an apparent reality
or an idea wholly foreign to the contents of the pres-
ent stream of thought and in no way impressible into
it. They may be called by any other name that is de-
sirable. If the reader prefers the term hallucination
I shall not object. But I choose * automatism ' as
less invidious in its implications. I have found these
experiences very frequent with Mrs. D. Many of
them have been closely connected with her religious
life, the automatism taking a form that associated
it at once with an intense devotional piety. For in-
stance, the habit of devotion in moods of religious

42

PSYCHICAL EBSfiAACH AND COINCtBBNCES

want was intimately associated with promptings to
pray at the most unlikely times and in the most un-
likely places. Religious reflection seems to have in-
stigated certain tendencies to a strong and persistent
emotional life that had an associative influence upon
the stream independent of the ideas immediately in the
field of attention. The consequence was a large num-
ber of automatisms, often capricious, but traceable to
the subliminal trend of her emotional life. Pierre
Janet's conception of the * disintegration of person-
ality ' affords a good representation of what went on
in her mind, though not at all so marked as in his
cases. Her religious emotions were either persistent
with all the incidents of everyday life or were sub-
liminally active when they had no natural connection
with the main stream of mental action. As an illus-
tration of this I may mention an instance of crystal
vision which I have already put on record from the
same subject. (* Proceedings of Society for Psychic-
al Research,' Vol. 12, p. 261.) This experience rep-
resented a vision of a room with sunbeams pouring
into it through a recessional window, and into the
stream of sunlight flew a dove. Remembering that
many religious books and pictures have associated
sunlight and the dove, I inquired to know whether
Mrs. D. was familiar with such representations and
found that she was, just such a picture being in
one of the family Bibles. She herself did not recall
any such until her husband first responded to my
question in the affirmative, showing that the associa-
tion was wholly subliminal. Another beautiful in-
stance of purely subliminal association will be found

43

TncmcAh KtftftAmcH A3n tbs BBtrtixcnoK

in the case of Ifiv X. (' Proeeedbig^ of Society
for Psyducal BcMaxdi,' YoL 8^ p. 484.) It quite
TeMexMeB the one bj Mis. D. Nov tbe room into
wludi Ifn. D. saw the sunbeams pouring exactly
icsCTibles a corner in a medieral diorch. This would
naturally appeal to the religioiis emotions and asso-
dations. The tendency of the mind under such con-
ditions r equ ir es no farther connnent for the psychol-
ogist. Nor is it necessary for the subject to be able
to detect the trend of consciousness in the case. Tlie
influences are too subtle to be traced easfly. But
they are there, and have to be reckoned with in the
explanation of all data not properly fusible with the
main stream. Another beautiful series of automa-
tisms with Mrs. D. are connected with the playing
of the piano. She has had no special training for
this, and has picked up mostly what little she knows
by herself. About two years ago, and all at once,
without any practice, a piano having been provided
only a short time before and no regular playing hav-
ing been indulged for a long time, Mrs. D. noticed
herself playing pieces automatically and sent for me
to know what it was. She was wholly unconscious of
intending the movements of the fingers or the pieces
of music played. Some of the pieces played were
wholly unknown to her. Some were familiar hymns
and some were a combination of various familiar
pieces of church music. In listening to the instances
of unknown pieces I noticed that they were of the
same type as the familiar hymns : They were all of
the religious class. I found on inquiry that music
has a strong influence on her religious emotions. This

44

PSYCHICAL BESEAECH AND C01KCD>EKCS8

effect would react on the piano playing, so that any
emotional phase of her mental life in the field of at-
tention or out of it, that is, supraliminal or subliminal,
might either reccdl the past into consciousness or
automatically reproduce music that she might or
might not recognize. That she might not recognize
some pieces is easily rendered probable by the experi-
ence which she narrated to me about the sky, garden
fence, chain pirnip, etc. (see * Proceedings of Society
for Psychical Research,' Vol. 12, p. «68, 868), and
which illustrates very clearly both the fact of autom-
atism and recall without recognition. In the musi-
cal instances we find the infiuence of the main trend
of religious emotion. Not that this is the only emo-
tion that is likely to produce them, but that there is
a unity between this fact in her life and the musical
automatisms observed. That circumstance suffices
to establish a principle to be used here as a basis of
explanation.

We have now a fulcrum to apply in the case of the
incidents connected with the present narrative. Take
first the apparition a few hours after the funeral.
This is one of the decidedly spiritistic incidents of the
case. But if the reader will return to it, he will find
that the state of mind that preceded it was precisely
one that might lead to just such an automatism as the
experience records, if it be an automatism. I hardly
know a better fact to suggest automatism originated
by latent infiuences in the system than this very in-
cident. There was confessedly a strong wish to re-
move what was in reality, though not perceived as
such, a sceptical feeling about spiritual survival from

46

TnaacAL.
the grsve. There vas a doiie and a stmg^ to get

the act of piaycr would tend to lotixe the cdd f aitfa
and its mflnfiKr opoD the nmid. The j^jsical czr
hilaiatioo of the wmHght and f icdi morning air in the
eo untrj wif^ produce a f airoiable condition, sublim-
inal or sopraliniinal, for the l e smg i aice into oonscioas-
ness of a saitabk object of consolation. What more
likety then than that the mind shoold sooeeed in posh-
ing f onraid some experience which would take the
place of the unpleasant sensation that had instigated
the prayer? Haying had many experiences of visions,
aural automatisms and impressions, evidently deter-
mined by those conditions of mind not immediately oc-
cupied with the object of apperoepti<m and closely
associated with religious wants and emotions, we can
here trace a possible influence from the latent expec-
tation of consolation to relieve the disagreeable feel-
ing connected with a half sceptical tone of mind
wholly foreign to her regular life.

The psychical researcher may think this explana-
tion rather far-fetched. This may be true, and I do
not care to urge it as determinately true beyond all
doubt. I am satisfied if it can appear as an alterna-
tive possibility to the spiritistic theory, for that fact
will put limitations upon the theory that claims at
least superficial recognition.

Another interesting incident in the narrative points
in the same direction. This is the case of the appa-
rition of the burning cradle. It is one of the most
striking coincidental features of the whole narrative.
I have mentioned the experience without any of the

46

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND COINCIDENCES

circumstances that personal Inquiry produced, in or-
der to keep the incident in the shape that such facts
usually take where the antecedent circumstances are
not investigated. But now if we inquire into these
we shall find a possible explanation, certainly pref-
erable to anything like premonition until that
hypothesis obtains satisfactory credentials elsewhere.
The fact is that the crib stood within a few feet of a
fire grate. But as there had been no fire in this grate
for a year or more the accident could not have been
caused by this, a circumstance mentioned to sustain
the theory above advanced to account for the acci-
dent. In the first place, Mrs. D. herself had all along
explained the vision of the burning crib by this very
proximity to the fire grate. In the second place, al-
most every one would have such a possibility suggested
to the mind by this situation of the crib. But not
every one is subject to automatisms, and such thoughts
are easily referred to their proper source in associa-
tion. Mrs. D., however, as we have found, is liable to
these occurrences. Besides the associations of others,
whether supraliminal or subliminal, these influences
are liable to provoke an automatism independently of
the main stream of consciousness. Now it is the un-
usual occurrence and character of automatisms that
call special attention to them. They are easily re-
membered as interesting and significant if any coin-
cidence with them is remarked. If the accident of the
child's death had occurred only in connection with an
association of a burning crib, every one would have
dismissed it as a coincidence not worth taking seri-
ously, and no significance would be given it. But

47

PSYCHICAL SE8BA&CH AND THE RESUBEECTIOK

when an accident of this sort occurs in coincidence
with an apparition apparently premonitory in char-
acter, we forget association and are tempted by the
unusual nature of the phenomenon to ascribe to it a
value that it may not deserve. We may concede that
such an experience might have some significance if
not connected with automatisms as frequent or habit-
ual occurrences* But here we have in this very sub-
ject the existence of automatisms which can be traced
directly to emotional influences of various sorts.
There is a frequent connection between past thoughts
and associations and certain sensory automatisms,
and we have only to suppose this case one of them
in order to explain it in a natural way. Mere asso-
ciation in this case would not have suggested signifi-
cance. Hence, as there is a probable connection be-
tween a frequent association and an interesting coinci-
dental automatism, there will be no more reason to
give the latter a significance than the former, which
is never inclined to receive such importance. If the
content of the automatism and its complications are
independent both of habit and hallucinatory sugges-
tion, there might be an excuse for suspecting an im-
portance for it. But there is no more a priori reason
for giving evidential value to an automatism than to
a suggestion from association. Consequently, when
we find an experience in all probability only a more
developed product of association, which does not ob-
tain any transcendental significance, a product in
which central activities effect the work of peripheral
stimtdiy the central action being nothing more than
association or suggestion, as in dreams and hypnotic

48

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND COINCIDENCES

hallucinations, we must not be in haste to attribute to
it other than the normal psychological value, although
it has other than the normal psychological cause.

Another incident is amenable to the same explana-
tion. It is the case of the automatism occurring at
the time the child was put to bed. The aural auto-
matism, " Turn the mattress," can easily be accounted
for by supposing that the natural resistance of mem-
ory and association to the resolution not to turn the
mattress at the time might readily produce the result.
Of course, we should not expect any such occurrence in
the average person, but we have here a case con-
stantly exposed to it, and also the two known facts
that she was accustomed to do the very thing indicated
by the voice and that this very thought was con-
sciously urgent on the mind until the resolution not
to turn the mattress was formed. The automatism,
" Turn the mattress,'* was then probably nothing
more than an hallucinatory resurgence of the thought
that preceded that resolution, the impact of habit and
association against the new course adopted.

The two incidents just considered were of the pre-
monitory type, and could be brought under one gen-
eral explanation. The next is not so easy to explain
in the same way. But it may be made to yield to a
more complicated analysis. The incident is the little
brother's apparition of his sister a month after her
death. This is certainly very interesting, whatever
we may think of its value as evidence for transcenden-
tal existence. It has a more decidedly spiritistic ap-
pearance than the other incidents. Nevertheless, its
cogency is subject to limitations which, though com-

49

FSTCHICAIi RESEARCH AND THE RESUEEECTION

plicated, ought to be carefully considered both pro
and con.

The first objection to its evidential character for
the spiritistic theory is the doubt about the source of
the child's idea of his sister after her death. But as
my object is not to risk the case on the impeachment
of testimony, I wish to deal with the case as if it were
not subject to scepticism at all. Assiuning then that
the apparition was in no way a direct suggestion of
the parents, I have to look for an explanation outside
of spiritism. Now, on inquiry I have found incidents
that may lead the way out of this supposition. I find
that Mrs. D. has noticed a great many times since
the occurrence that, while she happened to be think-
ing of the child or even other matters, E. would speak
up and mention her or the subject of his mother's
thoughts. This has occurred so often and in such
circumstances of a peculiar and unexpected sort that
Mrs. D. herself remarked the possibility of account-
ing for the original phenomenon by telepathy. Un-
fortunately, however, she kept no record of iliese ob-
servations, the contents or circumstances of the alleged
coincidences, and hence there is nothing to go upon
except her own unsupported judgment in regard to
the cases thus mentioned by her, and they can pass
for little worth. But an interesting incident occurred
somewhat later which is more important in favor of a
telepathic explanation, though this hypothesis depends
upon prior proof of its truth for its application here.
The incident suggesting this view of the occurrence
I obtained the next day after its occurrence and with-
out its bearing being anticipated by Mrs. D.

50

FSYCHICAIi RESEABCH AND COINCIDENCES

Mrs. D. had retired early, and, awakening early,
had got up to go to the kitchen about 3 o'clock.
After she had reached the kitchen, and without any
reason from previous habits or thoughts or from any
known circumstances about the house, she suddenly
felt a fear come over her that there might be a burg-
lar in the house. She thought at once that such a
feeling was nonsense, but it clung to her, and she
looked at the window to see that it was secure, and
turned to come back to the bedroom, when she saw a
door open several inches and by which a man could
easily have entered. Just as she started to close it,
E., whom she had left sleeping in the next room and
in no position to know anything about the door, awak-
ened and called to her. Mrs. D. simply went on to
close the door before responding to his call, and he
again called out, impatiently, ^^ Mamma, I was dream-
ing that burglars were in the house." Now, if we
treat this coincidence seriously at all, dismissing the
possibility that the dream was a suggestion from her
own movements in the room, at least for the sake of
considering the other view, we might suppose it due to
telepathy. If then we were to tolerate this hypothesis
to explain the coincidence in this instance, we may ex-
tend it to the case of the apparition, remembering
that advocates of it do not maintain the necessity of
present active thoughts to the result, inasmuch as the
process may be wholly subliminal, as well as supralim-
inal. It will be remembered that Mrs. D. was not
thinking of the deceased child when the little boy's
apparition of his sister took place. But at any rate,
if we consider telepathy in the case that has no sug-

51

P8TCHICAI. KBSSAKCH AND THS UBSUBKECTION

gestion of spiritism in it, the same hypothesis should
be applied to the other coincidence if it pennits of
the application, as I think it does.

But there is another resort that may commend it-
self more favorably to the average scientific mind, if
he does not admit the existence of telepathy. This
supposition is effective against the spiritistic theory
to those who accept telepathy, and hence I have the
advantage of using it for that purpose where there is
any disposition to treat the coincidences seriously at
all. But dismissing the coincidence about the burg-
lars either as a chance case or as a suggested dream,
I was able at the time that the experience of the appa-
rition was told me to ascertain some interesting facts
that suggest a possible explanation for it independ-
ently of both spiritism and telepathy. A careful in-
quiry into a niunber of facts which I shall not take
the space to describe in detail, but which were very
suggestive, led me to believe that both the remaining
children have some hereditary susceptibilities like the
mother. Assuming this as probable at all events, and
remembering that inquiry into the habit of the child
E. showed he had been accustomed to lie on this very
sofa with his little sister before her death with her in
his arms, just as he described her in the apparition,
we have only to suppose that suggestion might give
rise to the apparition itself. This will, no doubt,
appear a complicated and round-about explanation,
but with the indications of hereditary peculiarities in
the child and the wide range of automatism in Mrs.
D. we may well halt before going farther for an ex-
planation.

62

PSTCHICAIi KEgEAECH AND C0IKCIDENCS8

There is also an interesting feature about Mrs.
D.'s impression in regard to a burglar in the house.
She knew no reason for its occurrence, as she had not
been troubled with such feelings before. This also
yielded to inquiry. I asked her whether in going to
the kitchen she had to pass near enough to the open
door to have a current of air come in contact with
her, and the answer was decidedly in the affirmative.
It was dark and she did not see the open door, nor
did she consciously feel any draught of air, but the
door opened into a hall from which a current of air
could easily come, and this is a common fact in apart-
ments of the kind in which the family live. Assum-
ing such a draught of air, and with it, iSrst, Mrs.
D.'s liability to automatisms and, second, the pos-
sibility of subliminal reasoning, such as Professor
Newbold reported (* Proceedings of Society for
Psychical Research,' Vol. 12, pp. 11-21), we get an
explanation of the automatism itself without resort-
ing to the supernormal, even if we disregard the
possibility that it was a chance suggestion of what
may be and is a common thought in the large cities at
that time of night.

We have now disposed of some of the most striking
incidents of the report, and there remains one very
definite case not so easily explained away ; namely, the
automatism of the voice, *• She'll never need them,"
and the precautions about matches. The considera-
tion of the latter incident opens up another aspect of
the problem. It loses its significance at once when
we ascertain, as I did, that Mrs. D. all her life has
been very careful about matches and has often re-

68

FSYCHICAIi KESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

proached her husband for carelessness in this matter.
But there is an aspect in the incident that brings
up the problem of memory, and the method which I
have to criticise in the work of Parish.

From what I have remarked about Mrs. D.'s life-
long habit of care in regard to matches we can easily
see that the coincidence between her similar action just
previous to the child's death and that event itself, or
rather the supposed significance of it, is an after-
thought^ due to the very strength of the suhjecfs
memory rather thorn, its weakness. We may say that
there is dissociation of the habit previous to the time
of the other automatisms, and thus recognize a meas-
ure of defense for the contention of Parish, but with
the ordinary memory not commanding so many of the
smaller details of life the connection between the
caution about matches and the accident to the child
would hardly occur. It was probably the very keen-
ness of Mrs. D.'s memory that enabled her to recall
the circumstance which creates the coincidence. The
illusion I cannot regard as one of memory, but rather
as one of apperception or judgment, which is likely
to occur with persons not accustomed to scientific ob-
servation. Had the subject been antecedently aware
that events and experiences preceding those constitut-
ing the coincidences recorded determined their value
for or against any hypothesis, it is probable that the
apperception would have been different. But in the
absence of any knowledge of such necessary precau-
tions the common mind very naturally seizes upon the
events contiguous in time and apparently relevant to
the one which they seem to portend, and the defect,

64

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND COINCIDENCES

even if complicated with some dissociation, is mainly
one of apperception occasioned by the very keenness
of the memory for the incidents of the past which can
be made to appear significant. Moreover, it is prob-
able that the more striking coincidental automatisms
and the memory of them had much influence upon
the recall of the feelings about fire and apperceptively
distorted their significance, so that much more than
illusions of memory, in fact, phenomena much more
important than they, have to be reckoned with in the
treatment of such reports as the coincidences in my
narrative represent.

To reinforce the view that the defects in such a
narrative are likely to be something else than illusions
of memory, I was careful to keep a watch for sucH
errors. I have watched for them during the several
years of my observations in this particular case, and
have not been able to discover a single one. I have
found cases of obliviscence, and they have been quite
interesting as enabling me to discover, by cross-
questioning the subject, that the source of some of
the automatisms was an associative resurgence into
consciousness of a past experience, taking the form of
an hallucination without recognition. But when
recognition was made I have found no reason to be-
lieve that an illusion of memory had occurred. But at
the same time this pious opinion of mine can go for
very little value to the outside reader. Hence I have
presented nothing here which I did not seek to cor-
roborate by another witness, which in this case is Mr.
D. I had also an indirect opportunity to confirm this
conclusion. The story by Mrs. G., a neighbor of

65

PSYCHICAL &ESBAKCH AKB THIS ftESITSEECTIOK

the D.'s, was the occasion of it* I ascertained the
facts of Mrs. G.'s experiences, as above narrated,
from her own statements, and found that they were
exactly as told me by Mrs. D. This instance afforded
me a good chance to test Mrs. D.'s value as a wit-
ness and the confirmation of my impression about her
in this respect, and serves, at least negatively, as an
injunction to look far more deeply into such narra-
tives of striking experiences than the possibility of
mnemonic illusions suggests.

In the investigation of the neighbor's, Mrs. G.'s,
experience which was told as if it might be taken as
premonitory, I came across an interesting fact that
confirms the whole position here taken. I inquired,
as usual, to know whether similar fears about fire had
been common, and besides a ntunber of instances of
such fear, I was told of one which Mrs. 6. described
as quite a remarkable ^ presentiment.' To make a
long story short, she described the discovery of smoke
in the hall and the suspicion of danger from fire, and
after warning her neighbor of her fear she had
finally to call in an officer of the law to interfere, and
found that her conjecture was correct. Here is a
case where the only difference between the psychologist
and the common mind is the choice of language.
^ Presentiment ' is the term chosen to express an in-
ference, a fact that reveals the frequent need for in-
vestigation into the mental habits of the individual
in order to discover the real explanation of phenomena
that often appear remarkable. This conclusion, how-
ever, is not a new one, but perhaps very trite. Never-
theless, when psychical research presents such an

66

^dlrORlCAL B2S&ABCH AKD COmClDEKCfid

enormous mass of facts as its reports represent, it is
inciunbent on the critic to subject some equally good
cases to the analysis of a personal investigation, and
not to rely exclusively upon general principles in-
ductively obtained from incidents that make his argu-
ment seem a priori. The criticism should be based
upon strictly analogous incidents.

The automatism, " The end is not yet," gets its in-
terpretation from the apparently symbolic dream in
which E. was included with the sister, who died, as
separated from the mother. That it should have any
meaning at all is an afterthought or apperception
created by the coincidental character of instances
more suggestive than it and taken with the remem-
bered fact that Mrs. D. has often felt that E. might
be taken by the trolley cars. There is an aspect to
this incident that makes it like those which I have ex-
plained by suggested automatism, though it should
be remarked that the narrative does not make it any-
thing more than an association which is very common
in the city where the family lives. The only feature
about the impression that seems to give it possible
meaning is the fact that the same feeling of fear did
not and does not occur in reference to the older boy,
L. Hence taking the automatism, ^^ The end is not
yet," and the symbolic dream with this impression
it might be natural for the untrained psychologist,
especially in connection with a large number of coin-
cidental experiences not mentioned in the present nar-
rative, to wonder whether the circumstance might not
have an extraordinary interest. On inquiry again,
however, I found that Mrs. D. had more coniSdence in

67

]PISIYCHICAL EESEA&CH AND THE &£STTBB£CTI0K

the ability of L. to take care of himself than in E.
The older, L., is more independent and self-reliant
than E. and has thus been better able to take care of
himself. E. has always shown a disposition to de-
pend on his mother, and she a solicitude for him that
she has not felt for L. Now, if we put together the
anxiety which every mother in this particular city
feels for her children who are exposed to the dangers
of the trolley cars, Mrs, D.'s special concern for E.,
and more particularly her liability to automatisms,
we have mental conditions that strongly favor the
occurrence of impressions which might be taken for
warnings of a premonitory kind with those who have
felt the touch of sorrow in connection with such a
collection of coincidences as I have here recorded. It
must be remembered, however, that Mrs. D. has never
believed in premonitions or presentiments, so that the
discovery of the coincidences was not wholly a product
of apperception due to a tendency to seek for them
in the afterthoughts. On the contrary, for the first
time in her life, she and Mr. D. were amazed at the
extraordinary character of the incidents in this narra-
tive, in spite of some coincidences of another kind and
interest which I have put on record elsewhere, and
came to me to ascertain whether I had any ordinary
explanation for them. Afterthought and appercep-
tion being shut out as inadequate to the result, even
after allowance is made for their participation in it,
we find, I think, evidence of an extraordinary combi-
nation of emotional interests and a predisposition to
automatisms to simulate supernormal phenomena.
Reference to the narrative, which shows such a cu-
58

PSVCHICAL HBSEAUCfi AND COIKCtDEKCES

mulative mass of incidents at least apparently in fa-
vor of premonition and spiritistic theories, will show
that I have suggested a normal explanation for the
majority of them, and only a few have been omitted
from review. The incident of the sister of Mrs. D.
hardly requires notice, as I have not been able to
apply the method of studying her mental habits, and
it may be too vague to deserve consideration. It was
mentioned because it at least simulated the collective
character of incidents in the psychical research rec-
ords, and in order to give the case all the superficial
cogency of which it was capable. But it must run
the gauntlet of the method applied to the other inci-
dents before any interest of an extraordinary kind is
attached to it. On the other hand, I confess that I
have not found any satisfactory explanation of the
repeated automatism, " She'll never need them." But
if I have broken the cumulative force of the whole
by presenting a possible explanation of the majority
of the most strikingly spiritistic cases, we may well
suspend judgment upon this one unexplained incident.
The main point has been gained if I have shown that
no extraordinary amount of illusion and hallucination
is required to explain such phenomena, but that they
may be made to yield to a critical analysis of the in-
dividual experience and the usual processes of mind.
Consequently, while we may both admit and urge the
importance of the position taken by Parish, we may
reserve to scepticism and scientific method a resource
much more far-reaching and effective than his, and,
when his either breaks down or proves too much by
casting doubts upon the accepted authenticity,

59

flMdbods «id iMills of pRvioB acincse. If tiv lia-
bOitj to mmamac flknioB aad kdfaiciiHtioo be half
§o grett ID sudi fboBumoM, as Fuidi oitirMrK, and
tibej eertainly aic gicat* ve dioald bcic to revise the
rewHs of pr evious psyAoiogy more fliaii the criticg of
pijcfaiesl reaeardi are jnrfinril to do. Moreover, I
am di sp osed to timlr that mncmooic lilmnnw is much
less frequent in exln m rdin ary czperienees than in the
ordinarj, vdiile Pariah prooeedi opm the assumption
that it is more likdy in the former. But we most
remember that iDnsion and halfaicination are a two-
edged sword and cut baUi wa js. Thej wiD discredit
the claims of the ordinary i^ least as much as the
extraordinary, and I think more. Hence, while ad-
mitting their extreme importance in all judgments of
experience, I am inclined to believe that a far pro-
founder source of difficulty to psychical research can
be obtained in the field which I have here endeavored
to explore, and certainly one left open after the other
fails. It is a resource, also, that can be employed
only by abandoning all arrogant pretensions to a
priori knowledge about such phenomena, and by con-
descending to study the individual case at first hand.

eo

CHAPTER in

^^FBOM INDIA TO THE PLANET MAB8 ''

Thb fairies could not have pleased Alice in Won-
derland more than M. Flournoy's book on the medium-
ship of Mile. Smith will please two classes of readers.
Those who are looking for romances dealing with
the interest in another world can read this book with
unabated fascination, if they can manage to shake off
all scientific encumbrances, and if they can escape
the author's explanation of his phenomena. On the
other hand, the sceptic and scientific devotee can read
it with the malicious delight of an iconoclast bent on
demolishing the gods of the spiritualist. ^* From
India to the Planet Mars " is a book that has appeared
just at the psychological moment. The public has
been prepared by the work of the Society for
Psychical Research, and more especially by the Piper
phenomena and Dr. Richard Hodgson's report on
them, to expect some sort of a scientific revelation re-
garding another life, and hence to find a work appear
immediately on a voyage of discovery in a portion of
interstellar space, with the accompaniment of sur-
vival after death, is an incident well calculated to
stimulate the imagination beyond all bounds. In-
deed, the situation in the psychological world, of the
unscientific sort, as met by this book, may be com-
pared in some respects to the age of Columbus, and
M. Floumoy's book to that of Defoe on the adven-

61

PSVOHICAL ftESEAEOH AKD THE BEStJEEECTION

tures of Robinson Crusoe, except that Flournoy care-
fully dispels the illusions which he conjures up in the
name of spiritualism. Both the title and the subject
matter suggest this comparison.

It is always the unknown, accompanied by the con-
viction that there is a reality in it to be reduced to
the known, that offers the most attractive field of in-
terest and exploration to the human mind, and it mat^
ters not whether it is inspected by the philosopher,
the scientist, the religious devotee, the litterateur, or
the common man. All can revel in it with equal im-
punity and delight. The discovery of Columbus
found the human mind in this condition. The ex-
istence of a new world was itself a romance, and truth
could easily compete with fiction in the supplies which
new knowledge and hope offered to an insatiable
curiosity. Homer and his creations were disappearing
in the limbo of mythology, and men were fast becom-
ing accustomed to the prosaic life of facts, made all
the more uninteresting by the increased struggle for
existence due to an increased population. Hence, a
new world dawned upon hope and imagination as a
refuge from the problems of civilization and a stimu-
lus to the unwearied flight which the human mind is
wont to take on the wings of poetry and fiction.

Now, psychical research, even though it may not
have accomplished as much in the way of discovery as
Columbus, certainly holds out definite hopes and
promises to human interest. It has kept the religious
mind on the qui vive for evidence of its most precious
belief, while it has offered to some sceptical convic-
tions a refuge from despair. M. Flournoy has taken

62

advantage of this psychological situation, even though
he expects to disenchant it, and has couched his work
in terms that must tempt the wary and unwary alike
into the labyrinths of a new world. The ordinary
spiritualist, however, is walking into a spider's parlor
when he accepts this invitation. The book is a thor-
ough piece of scientific work in most of its aspects,
especially in its exposure of the spiritistic claims ad-
vanced for his medium. It leaves little to be desired
for the sceptic. The title simply invites you into a
fairy land, while the discussion reduces you relent-
lessly to the commonplaces of ordinary life and illu-
sion. Nothing can rival the painstaking care with
which the author has run down every clue upon which
spiritism might rely for its support.

The case is this. M. Floumoy, Professor of
Psychology in Geneva, Switzerland, heard of one of
the usual marvels in the circles of spiritism ; and, not
having any foolish dignities to respect, was not long
in obtaining an introduction to the little coterie which
was " investigating '* the mediumship of a lady whom
he denominates by the pseudonym *^ Mile. Smith."
She was found to be a lady of considerable intelli-
gence, of irreproachable character, honest and sin-
cere, and ready to submit her phenomena to investiga-
tion. M. Floumoy even says that she is beautiful,
and that she accepts no payment for her experiments.
Both of these qualities ought to attract the attention
of the scientific mind. Mile. Smith goes into a trance
and purports to be controlled by a spirit who calls
himself Leopold, and claims to have been Joseph Bal-
samo, the hero of a book by Alexandre Dumas, but

63

P8TCHICAL KESEAKCH AND THE EESUEEECTlbK

who is better known in history as the famous Caglios-
tro. Besides him, there appear the unfortunate
Queen, Marie Antoinette, a Hindu princess of the fif-
teenth century, and a young man who claims to be
reincarnated on the planet Mars. The last-named
individual gives the language which, he claims, is
spoken on that planet, detailing both the alphabet
from which it is constructed and its interpretation in
French. He describes the manners of life there, and
draws representations of the houses in which its peo-
ple live and specimens of the animal and vegetable or-
ganisms there prevalent. All of this has a most de-
lightful flavor of romance, and it is given in a detail
which cannot be expected here. The reader must go
to the original or to the translation for a satisfactory
account of the facts. The latter is fortunately acces-
sible, and, I must say, has been unusually well done.
The only exception that can be taken to it regards the
abbreviation of the original, which is a misfortune for
the scientific mind that is either unable or has not the
time to examine the fuller account in French. To the
one or the other, however, I must refer the reader for
one of the most extraordinary books of the day, so
well calculated is it to exact attention for the obscure
phenomena of psychical research from those who have
hitherto been content to play the part of scientific
Philistines.

In all its external features, at least, the case is like
the many instances of alleged spirit control. Mile.
Smith is wholly unconscious of what she does and illus-
trates in a remarkable degree what subconscious men-
tation can do to imitate the requirements of reality.

64

The impersonations take the form of alleged reincar-
nations. It seems that spiritualism expresses itself
in France in terms of that doctrine. The author dis-
cusses three types of it, the Martian, the Royal, and
the Hindu cycles. Each represents a very plausible
appearance ; but only one of them, the Hindu instance,
offers any serious difficulty to explanation by the
author along the lines of normal psychology and
psychiatry. The alleged reincarnation on the planet
Mars is a remarkable production; that of Marie An-
toinette is much less interesting. The Hindu rein-
carnation appears the most real, as it contains some
features calculated to satisfy the demands of personal
identity, though explicable by stretching the hypoth-
esis of resurrected memories. In other words, ex-
amination showed that there was not the slightest evi-
dence that spirits had anything to do with the produc-
tion of the phenomena, but that they were the uncon-
scious production of Mile. Smith's own mind in the
trance condition, playing on the obscure recollections
of her own experience and receiving its impulse to
do this from her normal conviction that her case was
spiritistic.

The alleged inhabitant of Mars shows few, if any,
resources in Mile. Smith's memory except the most
general outlines, but the impersonation is exceedingly
rich in the material of spontaneous fabrication. In
fact, this particular case is nothing but '^ the baseless
fabric of a dream." The language, alphabet, repre-
sentations of houses, animals and plants are shown to
be unquestionably nothing but the production of Mile.
Smith's imagination in this unconscious state, worked

65

P9TCHICAI. XEffKABCH AXm THS mSSUXBSCTION

oat with nuurelofHB ariginality and consisteiicy- The
producbB find their exact analogy in ordinary dreams.
The language betrays its spurious character in its
constructive resemblance to the French which is Mile.
Smith's native tongue. Besides, there is not a yestige
of anything leading to the identity of the person who
claims this reincarnation on the planet Mars, and
nothing otherwise that is plausible or probable. It is
simply a pretty creation of the subliminal imagina-
tion, bent on producing something sufficiently unlike
terrestrial realities to deceive the unwary; and it is
one of the most appalling things in nature for the
psychologist and moralist to be thus confronted with
the devilish tendencies of unconscious mental action.
We can hold the normal consciousness responsible, but
the subconsciousness never. It seems constrained to
fool us, but is not iCstute enough to accomplish its
aim. It has, in this instance, however, played a
wonderful game, whose trickery it is the merit of M.
Floumoy to have exposed.

The impersonation of Marie Antoinette is less re-
markable in all its superficial characteristics. It has
no features which are not easily explicable by the
resurrection of Mile. Smith's own knowledge of that
unfortunate queen's history, and the infiuence of idea-
tion upon the histrionic representation of that queen's
manners and character.

M. Floumoy confesses to some inexplicable phe-
nomena in the Hindu impersonation. There are
traces of the Hindu language and some remote his-
torical incidents of a very early period that cannot
be ascribed to the ** medium's " fabricating imagina-

66

tion. The supposition that Mile. Smith had at some
time heard or seen enough of the facts, now wholly
forgotten and unrecognizable when produced, and
cropping up unconsciously as spirit messages, seems
so improbable or difficult of proof that M. Floumoy
admits being puzzled. But the entire success with
which he discredits the alleged Martian phenomena,
lends its support to the probability that the Hindu
impersonation is precisely like it. For me it is not
specially puzzling at all. I think that his theory of
secondary personality is more easily applied to the
Hindu case than the author supposes. Apparently,
it is the improbability that Mile. Smith had seen or
read the book in which the facts are found that ex-
cites M. Floumoy's wonder. But, as the amount of
the Hindu language delivered is very small, and the
historical incidents mentioned in that princess' life are
very few, it is easy to imagine the reading enough of
it in some catalogue, newspaper, or article to account
for their appearance in this pseudo-spiritistic form.
But what is so delightful in M. Floumoy's work is
his scientific appreciation of the psychological prob-
lem before him, and the thorough way in which he
has proceeded to deal with it, at least in all respects
that concern the claims of spiritism. Nothing can
equal the patience and perseverance with which he has
pursued every clue to an explanation of the
phenomena in terms of what we know in normal
psychology. The incidents that would strike the or-
dinary mind as mysterious, or even miraculous, are
easily reduced to simple and well-known phenomena
of mind. Every nook and comer of the case is in-

67

PSYCHICAL KESEAKCH AND THE KS8UKBECTION

vestigated, and no stone is left unturned for vestiges
of subconscious mental action on the part of Mile.
Smith to account for the facts, and the success is as
great as the effort. In so far as the evidence is con-
cerned, the spiritist is left without any support for
his theory. All this is accompanied with a most de-
lightful sense of humor and a keen irony that might
be called malicious, if it were not so just and the
victims of it so deserving of this polite form of ridi-
cule. There is apparent in some of it a suppressed
feeling of ridicule that may be due to the necessity
of being respectful toward the people whose kindness
was instrumental in securing an opportunity to in-
vestigate the case. The style of presentation is most
charming. In fact, the work is an excellent novel in
all but the facts, and, in these, it is science of the best
kind, wherever it applies psychological analysis to
the refutation of spiritism. In this respect, it is be-
yond praise, and should be read by every man who is
tempted to dabble in that subject.

Its chief interest, however, lies in the influence that
it must exert upon the general course of psychical
research. That subject has been so ignored and mis-
understood by the scientific Philistine that he could
not be persuaded by any important fact to touch it.
He passed it by on the other side, holding his nose, or
sneering at its alleged phenomena. But M. Floumoy
has taught this supercilious class a lesson. He has
shown that there are phenomena which have all the
external characteristics of discarnate spirits, and yet
are amenable to explanation without such a resource,
though only on the condition that the most amazing

68

subconscious mental activity be admitted, and ad-
mitted in a form that shows no trace of an automatic
character. The outcome it will be interesting to
watch. I shall expect the scientific Philistine to ac-
cept the book with great applause, as it affords such a
fine text with which to lecture spiritualism. Psychical
research will become at once a very important de-
partment of investigation.

Scepticism, of course, is most welcome in this sub-
ject which leads so close to the madhouse, but what a
comment on the pretended scientific spirit, that it will
give no quarter to a subject until its own precon-
ceived opinions have been substantiated by some one
who has not stood on his dignity in regard to the
facts.

But, in spite of M. Floumoy's emphatic rejection
of spiritism, he believes in telepathy, or thought trans-
ference, telekinesis, or the movement of physical ob-
jects without contact, and lucidity, or clairvoyance!
It is apparent, however, that he does not rely wholly
upon ihe phenomena of Mile. Smith for his convictions
on these subjects. He seems to indorse telepathy on
the collective evidence published by the Society for
Psychical Research, and telekinesis upon personal ex-
periments with Eusapia Palladino. Clairvoyance he
seems to adopt without any evidence that I can dis-
cover, and he combines telepathy and clairvoyance to
explain some of his own facts, which he fears might
otherwise be amenable to the spiritistic theory. But
there is something very strange in this acceptance of
these supernormal phenomena, though M. Floumoy
does not regard them as supernormal at all ! He puts

69

FSTCHICAIi SESEABCH AND THE BESUKEECTION

a very peculiar meaning on this term. He speaks as
if it were convertible with the supernatural. He con-
siders these processes as perfectly natural^ and in the
case of telepathy speaks of it as something rather to
be expected than doubted! You would suppose that
the '^ supernormal " sustained the same relation to the
^' normal " that hypersesthesia sustains to assthesia ;
but no, it is made equivalent to the supernatural, and
this assumption simply annihilates all rational per-
spective in the case. Let us examine his position in
regard to these several remarkable powers, which he
attributes so easily to the human mind without sup-
posing them to be anything more than normal and
natural.

It must be conceded, at the outset, that M. Flour-
noy has investigated and analyzed the facts bearing
upon these hypotheses with something like the same
method and care that he did those claiming to be spir-
itistic; but he is, nevertheless, distinctively less cau-
tious in his convictions. He appears to be so ready
to accept these theories as natural and normal, that he
finds no such reason to be sceptical as he supposes is
obligatory in regard to spiritism. Take, for in-
stance, his indorsement of Eusapia Palladino. He
does not state a single fact in proof of her genuine-
ness. We have only the author's ipse dixit. This is
all the more amazing after Dr. Richard Hodgson's
exposure of that clever fraud. No case of that kind
should be admitted without letting us into the knowl-
edge of the facts. Of course, it can be said that it is
no part of the present work to discuss her phenomena.
But this, taken in connection with her exposure, is all

70

the more reason for silence unless good evidence be-
yond an ipse dixit be produced. A theory based upon
experiments with Eusapia Falladino, and designed to
explain some of the phenomena observed in the case
of MUe. Smith, should come with far better creden-
tials than are here offered. The author's illusion
about the ** natural " betrays him, in this instance,
into a disposition to credit phenomena that are far
more revolutionary in physical science than spirits
can possibly be either in physics or psychology. The
reason for this judgment I shall give again.

Let us examine M. Flournoy's example of telekin-
esis in the case of Mile. Smith. Two oranges were
found removed from their places, under circumstances
involving either the dishonesty or the mal-observation
of the witnesses, as alternatives to explanation by
telekinesis. M. Floumoy offers the choice between
these hypotheses and the subconscious action of Mile.
Smith; though it is evident that he inclines to tele-
kinesis. This is fair enough ; but I am amazed to find
that no such care is taken to examine the facts and
their conditions as was shown when exposing the
claims of Leopold, Marie Antoinette and the myste-
rious Martian. There are two ineradicable defects in
the author's treatment of the case here. First, he is
apparently ready to attach weight to mere testimony,
and that of the parties interested in their theory.
Secondly, he has not applied carefully to the phenom-
ena his own hypothesis of secondary personality, while
that supposition seems to me entirely adequate to its
explanation. M. Floumoy does not give us the full
details, as they should be given in so important a

71

PSYCHICAI. SBSEA&CH AND THE KESURBECTION

matter* We should know the exact amount of time
involved in the occurrence of the phenomena, the occu-
pation of the witnesses, their position in the room and
in relation to Mile. Smith, their capacities for observ-
ing facts of this sort, and every little incident bear-
ing upon a complete record of the observed facts.
But there is not a word of this, and apparently no
conception of the necessity for such details. It is all
the more remarkable, after the author's scepticism of
his witnesses' testimony for spiritism, that he should
be less stringent in his methods when it is only a mat-
ter of telekinesis! Evidently, this is so natural and
normal a process that it does not need careful verifica-
tion. Moreover, after observing, in other connec-
tions, the readiness with which Mile. Smith passes into
and out of a trance without retaining any memory of
it, why does not M. Floumoy refer to this fact as
probably affording a clue to the explication of the
case? Let me mention the instance of his walk with
Mile. Smith, in which she went into a trance, sug-
gested visiting the house of a friend, and awakened to
know nothing of it and feeling very much embarrassed
at her action. A better instance of this is that of
writing a letter. She sat down to write a note to M.
Flournoy, and in the midst of it passed off into a
trance, and finished the letter in the language and in-
cidents of one of the subconscious personalities. She
mailed it, and never knew anything regarding this
latter part of the letter until the fact was called to
her attention by M. Flournoy.

Now, it would be easy to apply the same causes
and conditions to the explanation of the throwing of

78

*^]fftOH tKDiA TO THE PLaKET MAB8 ^^

the oranges, especially in the absence of all adequate
accounts of the circumstances, and it is surprising
that a man of M. Floumoy's usual scientific acuteness
has not seen this. What is to hinder us from suppos-
ing that MUe. Smith suddenly passed into the trance
(a fact which M. Floumoy records over and over
again), and threw the oranges without being noticed
by the other persons in the room, and then awoke
without any knowledge of her actions? M. Flour-
noy makes a few general observations in the direction
of such an hypothesis, but he does not urge it with
the enthusiasm displayed in applying the same theory
against spiritism. He seems to think that telekinesis
does not exact any serious objection from belief. As
for myself, I must say that I do not think there is one
iota of rational evidence for any such phenomena, and
I should regard it as much more exposed to scientific
objections than spiritism, which he is at so much pains
to disprove. The same can be said of clairvoyance.
I have never seen any adequate evidence of such a
power, and I think M. Floumoy is persuaded to ac-
cept it much more because he thinks it a weapon with
which to combat spiritism than on the grounds of
scientific evidence.

I come next to his consideration of telepathy. He
recognizes that this doctrine is not accepted by the
scientific world in any form whatever, but he does
not flinch under this. His attitude, however, toward
scepticism regarding it is very curious. He expresses
surprise that any one should have difficulties regard-
ing it. This process which the scientific world scouts
as absurd, as revolutionary in both physics and

78

TWTCBSCAL

fffduAogj^ md as mpcmonMl in every aenae of tlie
word, IL Fkminoj igjp m fa as werj pnibabk a priori.
Fsydikal icKaxcfa im^Ut to be very easy after sucfa
a TercHct a3 Horn. It aecmi not even neoesBary to
strain at csmds. At any rate» die psychical le-
seaiidber can stand and look on wiUi a nialidoas smiky
iduk die soqitic pnidainis witfaaat evidence that telep-
athy is a Tery prohabk thing and one of the most
natural things in the world. The pfif^ of M. Floiir-
noy's admirers here will be amosingy if they have
langhed at the daims of telepathy, lliey are called
on to be Tery sceptical if the phenomena daim to be
spiritistic, but very credoloas if they are only tele-
pathicy telekinetic, or clairvoyant!

I must say, however, that I do not share If. Floor-
noy's tractable disposition regarding telepathy. I
do not think it intrinsically probable, nor easy to be-
lieve on any evidence but that afforded by tiie most
careful experiments. At its very best, it is nothing
more than a name for coinddences, whose cause and
explanation are yet to be determined. The popular
mind makes it a most extraordinary power. It is
endowed with unlimited access to the person's memory
whose mind is read. But there is no adequate evi-
dence for such a process : in fact, there is not one iota
of respectable evidence for it. The only telepathy
that can lay the slightest claim to recognition on
sdentific grounds, is the transmission of present active
states of consciousness; and, in fact, it is probably
the psychical researchers alone who admit this much.
But such a thing as the selective telepathy necessary
to reproduce personal identity is without any experi-

74

^^FBOM INDIA TO TH£ PlAKBT HAB8 '*

mental support. Consequently, when a man uses tbe
term, he must show that he is able to meet its respon-
sibilities. M. Floumoy does nothing of this kind.
He says enough to discredit telepathy of all kinds in
his treatment of the only facts in his case that could
possibly lay any claim to that explanation, and yet
considers it something that may be taken for granted
apparently without evidence. But that a man can
sit down and gravely assume, without experimental
proof, a sort of infinite access by some subliminal pro-
cess to the memories of any living mind that the tele-
pathic subject chooses to select, and yet claim to be
scientific, is something that transcends my idea of
science. I do not see why a man should ti^e offense
at spiritism after such a leap as that.

It all comes from the baseless assumption that
spirits are supernatural and telepathy natural. I
can conceive the very reverse of this, namely, that
telepathy should be considered supernatural and spirits
natural. M. Floumoy ought to know that modem
idealism makes all taUs: about the natural as useless
as the supernatural. When everything is natural,
the term has no explanatory value whatever. In
Greek thought, when the term was convertible with
the physical and opposed to the immaterial, it had
some importance ; but, the moment that it became con-
vertible with the uniform or invariably constant, it
lost its value as an instrument for supporting a ma-
terialistic and mechanical view of the cosmos. But
to me telepathy, even in the only form that has any
scientific, or alleged scientific, credentials, so far from
being natural in any accepted use of that term as a

76

I»SYCmCAL ltfi8£A&Cfi AKD TH£ &£8lT]L&£CTl02r

name for the constant and uniform, is so exceptional
as simply to throw the reins loose to the maddest sort
of philosophic speculation.

But let us concede with M. Flournoy that telepathy
is " natural " and spirits " supernatural." How can
he oppose telepathy to spiritism, unless he qualifies it
with the power to effect all that might most rationally
be attributed to spirits? I make bold to say that
there are conditions under which a spiritistic theory is
easier to believe than the telepathic. These condi-
tions are that the contents of what purport to be dis-
camate communications be appropriate to the proof
of personal identity. We should, of course, prefer to
know something of the process by which the limita-
tions of our access to a transcendental world can be
overcome. But, as we must inductively form our
hypothesis in any case, all suppositions to bridge
this chasm must stand on the same footing ; and, if the
unity of the phenomena is best represented by infer-
ring the continuance of an individual consciousness
after death, we may consider the process of communi-
cation to be what we please. Besides, even as a con-
ceded process telepathy is not anything that is known
in the usual sense of that term. It is only a name for
certain facts which require a causal explanation. It
is convenient for limiting evidential claims, but it is
not explanatory. But now, if telepathy be once
granted as a fact, no matter what conception we take
of it as a process, we have a phenomenon of the trans-
mission of thought independently of the ordinary im-
pressions of sense, and we should be violating no sci-
entific principles if we supposed that, under favorable

76

**FEOM IKDIA TO THE PLAKBT HAB8 "

conditions, a transcendental consciousness might be
able to intromit a message into a living mind. After
telepathy is admitted, it is but a question of evidence
to settle whether we are probably in communication
with a discarnate spirit. If the phenomena alleged to
be spirit messages represent what the proof of per-
sonal identity demands, a discarnate consciousness is
the most natural supposition in the case. This con-
ception of the matter is strongly reinforced by the
fact that telepathy between the living, so far as we
have any right to assume it at all, is limited to the
present active states of consciousness, and shows no
tendency to select its data with reference to the repro-
duction of personal identity, with its synthetic char-
acter and command of memory. With that limita-
tion, we should have to suppose the continuance of
consciousness after death to explain the facts. With-
out that limitation, we have a theory infinitely larger
than the spiritistic, and wholly without any analogies
in either physics or psychology. Hence, on a priori
grounds, I see no reason for assuming any antagon-
ism between the telepathic and the spiritistic theories.
Once assumed, unless its limits are defined, telepathy
becomes an evidential difficulty against the spiritistic
doctrine; but, when it begins to take on the propor-
tions of infinitude, it plays into the hands of its com-
petitor, which conforms to the demand that a process
shall be finite if it expects scientific recognition.

But it is precisely because his data do not represent
any evidence of personal identity that M. Floumoy is
justified in rejecting the spiritistic theory in his
special case. It is not because telepathy is either

77

nrcmcAi. issbabch Am tkk bx80bsbctiok

a narmal prooesB or a f onctian iDOompatible wiUi the
opemticni of diwanuite souls. Leopold, Marie
Antoinelte, and the Martian inhabitaiit ought to have
given OS some evidence of personal identity, as in the
^ oominanicatorB " of the Piper case, if Mlk. Smith
expects us to believe in spirits, and it is their abso-
hite failure to satisfy this demand that justifies M.
Floumoy's sceptical position. Had he treated telep-
athy, telekinesis and clairvoyance in the same spirit,
no criticism whatever could have been directed against
his conclusions. But his tolerance of these theories
and the possible amenabiliiy of what may be called
the Dandiran, the Vignler, and the Bumier incidents
to a supernormal explanation, as the author appar-
ently squints toward that possibility owing to the
conjectural character of the evidence against it,
might suggest to the spiritist the following hypoth-
esis. Taking what we know of secondary person-
ality and its various forms, we might assume it to
be, as ordinarily known, only a transitional state to
the conditions which might bring the subject into
communication with a transcendental world. But it
would in all cases be most naturally accompanied, on
this supposition, by all sorts of difficulties and con-
fusions in the communications from that world, be-
traying various abilities and inabilities to communi-
cate, and there might be conditions in which the whole
impulse to represent the facts as ^^ communications "
from that source should come from a transcendental
stimulus, while the representations of the facts should
come wholly from the subject's own mental action,
and be distorted, as secondary personality must in-

78

^^ FBOM INDIA TO THE PLANET MAB43 ^'

evitably distort its data. The whole of the modem
theory of hallucination supports this view. Hallu-
cinations are found to be due to what are called
secondary stimuli — that is, stimuli that are not co-
ordinated with the sense in which the hallucination
appears, and so are not representative of the world
that causes them. In such a process, vestiges of
spirit messages might slip through, and the conditions
affecting the possibility of communication present so
many difficulties that the attempt to deliver anything
genuine might have to be given up. To illustrate
from his own case ; if Mile. Smith's secondary person^
ality can secure its stimulus, but not its representa-
tions, from her normal memory and experience, or con-
victions, it is quite conceivable that the same state
should receive its stimulus, but not its representation
of the facts, from the transcendental world, while a
few veridical, though fragmentary, messages of the
genuine sort might slip through in the fluctuation of
the conditions embodied in the secondary state. The
incidents that appear to be supernormal acquisitions
of knowledge, in the absence of satisfactory proof
that they are resurrected memories of Mile. Smith's
childhood, might be instances of this success, obtain-
able only on opportune occasions, while the conditions
remain generally impervious to such communications.
In this way, we might unify the supernormal aspects
of M. Flournoy's case with those that show such re-
markable characteristics of secondary personality.

I am, of course, very far from accepting any such
view of the case. On the contrary, I think it wholly
an instance of secondary personality, and that telep-

79

P8TCHICAI. mBSKAKCH AND THS XXSUULKCTIOK

atbj, tdekinesis, and clairvoyance should have re-
ceived no tolerance in this book wheie the evidence for
them is wholly wanting. But, if M. Floumoy thus
accepts them, he must expect to meet trouble in his
disposal of the Dandiran, Vignier, and Bumier inci-
dents, with which he is evidently impressed, in spite
ot his reference of them to possible memories of his
mediuDL So far as his evidence is concerned, these
tiiecmes should have received less tolerance at his
hands. It is his illusion about their being normal and
natural that leads him into this course. Moreover,
for a man who so heartily rejects the supernatural,
his invocati<m of sympathy from the orthodox by a
confession of faith, when he refuses to accept iliat
criterion in spiritism and applies the most rigid
criteria of scientific proof, is a contradiction as weQ
as an exhibition of pious cant unworthy of a man who
claims to respect science. The only hope of the re-
ligious consciousness, if it is to reconcile itself with
science, is to be tolerant of spiritism rather than telep-
athy, telekinesis, and clairvoyance, and to abandon
the criterion of mere faith for that of scientific proof.
Hence, having accepted the jurisdiction of a scientific
court, the author should have bowed to its canons.

Not to press this criticism, however, the chief im-
portance of the work lies in its tendency to stimulate
investigation of a subject that has been too long neg-
lected. Psychical research has a grim Nemesis and
scepticism a Medusa head in the author's admission
of telepathy, telekinesis, and clairvoyance, but this sin
will not destroy the scientific merits of a work that
ofFers our Philistines their only hope of minimizing the
significance of the Piper phenomena.

80

CHAPTER IV

VISIONS OF THE DYING

There is a group of psychic phenomena which are
well worthy of a most searching investigation. I
refer to the alleged visions which many dying persons
are said to have had of friends who have passed away
before them. In some cases they seem to have a co-
incidental importance that may give them some scien-
tific value, if well enough attested as facts.

It would be natural to suppose that the crisis of
death would often be attended by all sorts of halluci-
nations. We know how disease and accident lead to
deliria in which all sorts of hallucinatory experiences
occur; and narcotics and anaesthetics evoke similar
phenomena in various degrees. They are but illus-
trations of influences which disturb the normal activ-
ity and functions of the organism, so that the non-
coordination of central functions results in the simula-
tion of realities by all sorts of phantasmal forms.
Death is a particularly disintegrating process and
we should expect similar mental disturbances in its
progress. Usually the motor functions are so
paralyzed by it that we should expect little evidences
of sensory phantasms. One way of indicating what
dying experiences are in any clear manner, seems pos-
sible and that is by speech. When this occurs the
subject must retain enough of his normal motor ac-
tivity to give expression to his mental experiences.

81

FSYCHICAI« KESEABCH AND THE BE8U&BECTION

Indistinct indications may be given by motor action
in the eyes. But what we should discover from ocular
movements of a dying person would be doubtful and
possibly capable of various interpretations. It would
be the same with' hearing. But when speech is re-
tained enough may be uttered for us to ascertain the
nature of the experience of the dying person, and
occasionally dying persons utter intelligible sentences
which convey unusual information. It is such that
ought to be the subject of a very careful investiga-
tion. I propose here to suggest that a census of them
might easily be collected and made the subject of
statistical study and psychological analysis.

The interest which such phenomena may have for
science will depend upon a variety of considerations.
The first is that we shall be able to attest their exist-
ence and their nature. The second is that we shall
have some reason to believe that they have a selective
character pertinent to their apparent significance.
The third is that we shall have some means of dis-
tinguishing them from those capricious and kaleido-
scope phenomena that are classifiable as ordinary hal-
lucinations. The fourth is that their characteristics
shall suggest some coincidental incidents not refer-
able to chance and at the same time distinguishable
from others possibly due to subjective causes. It will
not be an easy task to conduct such an investigation,
but it is possible by long efforts and perseverance to
accumulate facts enough for some sort of study and
analysis. The method of effecting this object will
be the subject of discussion later in this article. We

82

VISIONS OF THS PYINO

must first describe the phenomena to which attention
needs to be called.

The phenomena which I have in mind are a type
of apparition. Whatever their explanation they have
one characteristic which distinguishes them from ordi-
nary deliria. They represent the appearance of de-
ceased persons to the vision, imagination, or other
source of sensory representation, of the dying per-
son. If we should find that they bear evidences in
any case of supernormal information they would
become especially significant. But one of the most
important things to study in them would be their rela-
tion to instances of hallucination under the same cir-
cumstances that had no coincidental value. That is,
we need to study their statistical aspects which would
require a comparison of the really or apparently coin-
cidental cases with those which are unmistakably hal-
lucinatory and subjective in their origin. For this a
large collection is necessary and this can be made with-
out any presumptions regarding their explanation.
I shall illustrate the kind which are particularly inter-
esting and suggestive. They are as described above,
instances in which dying persons seem to see previously
deceased friends, claiming in cases to be present for
the purpose of aiding in the passage of death. When
this claim of assistance in the crisis of death is made
it is through mediums and it is sometimes or generally
made when there has been no evidence at the death
scene that such a presence was remarked. I shall
give a few illustrations of both kinds.

The following instance I received from a corres-
88

PSYCHICAL RB8KARCH AND THE UESUSKECTION

pondent whose testimony I have no reason to ques-
tion:

<' I called this afternoon (May 14th, 1906) upon a
lady who buried a nine-year-old boy two weeks ago.
The child had been operated upon for appendicitis
some two or three years ago, and had had peritonitis
at the same time. He recovered, and was apparently
quite well for a time. Again he was taken sick, and
from the first the doctor thinks he did not expect to
get well. He was taken to the hospital, and operated
upon. He was perfectly rationij, recognizing his
parents, the doctor, and the nurse, after coming out
from under the influence of the anaesthetic. Feel-
ing that he was going, he asked his mother to hold his
hands, until he should be gone. He had, I forgot to
say, been given strong stimulants after the operation,
which, I suppose, made his mind very active.

Soon he looked up and said, ^^ Mother, dear, don't
you see little sister over there? "

" No, where is she? "

** Right over there. She is looking at me."

Then the mother, to pacify him, said she saw the
child. In a few minutes, his face lighted up full of
smiles, and he said: —

" There comes Mrs. C (a lady of whom he

was very fond who had died nearly two years before),
and she is smiling just as she used to. She is smiling
and wants me to come.'* In a few moments: —

" There is Roy ! Vm going to them. I don't
want to leave you, but you'll come to me soon, won't
you? Open the door and let them in. They are
waiting for me outside," and he was gone.

" No, I forgot to tell about his grandmother. I
84

VISIONS OF THJB PTINO

gathered the impression that he did not know his
maternal grandmother, but may be wrong.

^^ As his mother held his hands, he said : *^ How
small you are growing. Are you still holding my
hands? Grandma is larger than you, isn't she?
There she is. She is larger, isn't she? Her hand is
larger than yours. She is holding one hand and her
hand is larger than yours.

*^ Remember that the boy was but nine years old.
Did he really see spirits and recognize them? Or
was it the result of the highly sensitive condition of
the brain caused by the medicine? "

The mother confirms this narrative and inquiry
brings out the following facts. The boy had never
known his grandmother who had died twenty years
ago. His sister had died four years before his own
birth. Roy is the name of a friend of the child and
he had died about a year previous.

It will be apparent that the instance is not in any
respect an evidential one. There is no way to displace
the assumption that the phenomena were hallucina-
tions until better indications of their real nature can
be obtained by further investigations, if that can ever
be done. It is natural to suppose that the critical
condition of the mind and body would give rise to
these and similar phantasms, especially in certain kinds
of natures. The natural assumption may not be the
right one, but it is the only one that science can tol-
erate until its credentials are better satisfied by evi-
dences of the supernormal. There is nothing in
this instance that can be verified as not a natural and

85

PSTCHICAIi RESEABCH AND THE BESUBRECTION

subjective effect of the conditions associated with
dissolution, unless it be the systematic group of de-
ceased persons involved. For the physiologist and the
psychologist this goes without saying, and the men-
tion of it herie is only to emphasize for the general
reader the confident opinion which science would en-
tertain regarding such incidents. Science might not
have better evidence that this special case is hallucina-
tion than the believer in its reality has for this
character, but the mass of facts in human experience
connected with abnormal mental and physical condi-
tions associated with disease and death would predis-
pose any cautious person in favor of the scientific
interpretation, as either more probable or more safe an
assumption than that in favor of the other.

Many other cases of a similar nature have come to
my attention, but I have not yet been able to have
a first-hand account made for me. I remember that
my step-mother told me that her mother, while dying,
saw an apparition of her husband who had died many
years before. Such incidents are probably relatively
numerous, but as they are not recorded or examined
carefully they can only be subjects of sceptical con-
sideration.

But I have a group of incidents which are much
more suggestive of something unusual and possibly
quite significant. Some of them involve a record and
confirmatory support that gives them importance.
The first of this group is one dictated to me and taken
down verbatim by the two persons who knew the facts.
They are both intelligent and trustworthy witnesses,
not more liable to errors in such things than all of us.

86

VISIONS OF THB BTINO

It involved circumstances which give peculiar value to
the incident, as the story will vouch for itself. I
quote the narrative as I took it down.

**Four or five weeks before my son's death Mrs.
was with me — she was my friend and a

psychic — and a message was given me that little
Bright Eyes (control) would be with my son who
was then ill with cancer. The night before his death
he complained that there was a little girl about his
bed and asked who it was. This was at Muskoka,
160 miles north of Toronto. He had not known what

Mrs. S had told me. About five minutes before

his death, he roused, called his nurse for a drink
of water, and said clearly : " I think they are
taking me." Afterward seeing the possible signifi-
cance of this I wrote to Miss A and asked her to

see Mrs. S and try to find why the word " they "

was used, underscoring it in the letter, as I al-
ways supposed the boy's father would be with him

at death. Miss A went to see Mrs. S ,

and did not mention the letter. When I saw Mrs.
S more than a week later we were having a sit-
ting and Guthrie, my son, came and told me how he
died. He said he was lying on the bed and felt he
was being lifted out of his body and at that point all
pain left. His first impulse was to get back into his
body, but he was being drawn away. He was taken
up into a cloud and he seemed to be a part of it. His
feeling was that he was being taken by invisible hands
into rarified air that was so delightful. He spoke of
his freedom from pain and said that he saw his father
beyond."

87

PtrcHiCAi. xfiUfiAAcH AVB THE ftnirmmscttoK

The intuDate f rienddiip of Mm. S wiUi Mis.

G f the mother of the boy, makes it jwssibk to
suppose thst hints or soggestioiis may have been un-
consciously oonveyed to the boy before his death, or
that something was said at the experiment which
might deprive the incidents of that importance which
they superficially seem to have. I have, however,
obsenred that the two ladies are as careful in their ac-
count as we should expect, and while I cannot give
the narrative as mudi scientific weight as may be
desirable, I think there is reason to believe that the
main incidents are correct. The boy's experience of
a strange girl at Us bedside, and the allusion to the
plural of the pronoun are quite possibly correct ac-
counts of the facts. A record of the later sitting
would be necessary to be assured that the allusion to
the father was not in response to a suggestion. But
in any case the incident is at least apparently su-
perior evidentially to the first one quoted, and it indi-
cates what may be done to assure ourselves of signifi-
cance in such phenomena.

I quote next a well authenticated instance on the
authority of Dr. Minot J. Savage. He records it in
his Psychic Facts and Theories. He also told me per^
sonally of the facts and gave me the names and ad-
dresses of the persons on whose authority he tells the
incidents. I am not permitted to mention them. But
the story is as follows :

" In a neighboring city were two little girls, Jen-
nie and Edith, one about eight years of age, and the
other but a little older. They were schoolmates and
intimate friends. In June, 1889, both were taken ill

88

VISIONS OF THE DYING

of diphtheria. At noon on Wednesday, Jennie died.
Then the parents of Edith, and her physician as
well, took particular pains to keep from her the fact
that her little playmate was gone. They feared the
effect of the knowledge on her own condition. To
prove that they succeeded and that she did not know,
it may be mentioned that on Saturday, June 8th, at
noon, just before she became unconscious of all that
was passing about her, she selected two of her photo-
graphs to be sent to Jennie, and also told her attend-
ants to bid her goodbye.

" She died at half -past six o'clock on the evening
of Saturday, June 8th. She had roused and bidden
her friends goodbye, and was talking of dying, and
seemed to have no fear. She appeared to see one
and another of the friends she knew were dead. So
far it was like the common cases. But now suddenly,
and with every appearance of surprise, she turned to
her father, and exclaimed, ^ Why, papa, I am going
to take Jennie with me!' Then she added, *Why,
papa ! Why, papa ! You did not tell me that Jen-
nie was here ! ' And immediately she reached out her
arms as if in welcome, and said, ^ O, Jennie, I'm so
glad you are here.' "

As Dr. Savage remarks in connection with the
story, it is not so easy to account for this incident by
the ordinary theory of hallucination. We have to
suppose a casual coincidence at the same time, and
while we might suppose this for any isolated case like
the present one, the multiplication of them, with
proper credentials, would suggest some other expla-
nation, whatever it might be.

I shall turn next to two instances which are asso-
89

PSYCHICAL KESSAltCH AKD THE KESUmSECTION

dated with the experiments and records of Mrs.
Piper. They both represent the allegation of death-
bed apparitions, and statements through Mrs. Piper
purporting to represent conmiunications from the de-
ceased showing a comcidence with what was otherwise
known or aUeged to have taken place at the crisis of
death. The records in these cases are unusually good,
having been made by Dr. Richard Hodgson. I quote
his reports. The first instance is the experience of a
man who gives only initials for his name, but was
well known to Dr. Hodgson. It occurred at a sitting
with Mrs. Piper.

^ About the end of March of last year (1888) I
made her (Mrs. Piper) a visit — having been in
the habit of so doing since early in February, about
once a fortnight. She told me that the death of a
near relative of mine would occur in about six weeks,
from which I should realize some pecuniary advan-
tages. I naturally thought of my father, who was
in advanced years, and whose description Mrs. Piper
had given me very accurately a week or two pre-
viously. She had not spoken of him as my father,
but merely as a person nearly connected with me. I
asked her at this sitting whether this person was the
one who would die, but she declined to state any-
thing more clearly to me. My wife, to whom I was
then engaged, went to see Mrs. Piper a few days
afterward, and she told her (my wife) that my father
would die in a few weeks.

About the middle of May my father died very sud-
denly in London from heart failure, when he was re-
covering from a very slight attack of bronchitis, and
on the very day that his doctor had pronounced him

90

VISIONS OF THB BTIKa

out of danger. Previous to this Mrs. Piper (as Dr.
Phinuit) had told me that she would endeavor to in-
fluence my father about certain matters connected
with his will before he died. Two days after I re-
ceived the cable announcing his death my wife and
I went to see Mrs. Piper, and she (Dr. Phinuit) spoke
of his presence, and his sudden arrival in the spirit
world, and said that he (Dr. Phinuit) had endeav-
ored to persuade him in these matters while my father
was sick. Dr. Phinuit told me the state of the will,
and described the principal executor, and said that
he (the executor) would make a certain disposition
in my favor, subject to the consent of the other two
executors when I got to London, England. Three
weeks afterward I arrived in London and found the
principal executor to be the man Dr. Phinuit had de-
scribed. The will went materially as he (Dr.
Phinuit) had stated. The disposition was made in
my favor, and my sister, who was chiefly at my
father's bedside the last three days of his life, told
me that he had repeatedly complained of the presence
of an old man at the foot of his bed, who annoyed
him by discussing his private affairs."

The reader will remark that the incident is asso-
ciated with a prediction, but it is not the subject of
important observation at present. The chief point
of interest is that the prediction Is connected with a
reference to a will affecting private business matters,
that the sister reported a number of visions or ap-
paritions on the man's death-bed, and that subsequent
to his death, not known apparently to Mrs. Piper,
the statement was made by Dr. Phinuit that he had in-
fluenced or tried to persuade the man in reference to

91

PSYCHICAL 11B8SAECH AKB THS ftSSUEBBCTION

these matters. The coincidence is unmistakable and
the cause is suggested by the very nature of the phe-
nomena and the conditions under which they occurred.
But we should have a large mass of such incidents to
give the hypothesis something like scientific proof.

The next case is a most important one. It is con-
nected with an experiment by Dr. Hodgson with Mrs.
Piper, as was the previous one, and came out as an
accidental feature of the sitting. The account is
associated in his report with incidents quoted by him
in explanation of the difficulty and confusion accom-
panying real or alleged conmiunications from the
dead. It will be useful to quote the Report on that
point before narrating the incident itself, as the cir-
cumstances associated with the facts are important
in the understanding of the case, while they also sug-
gest a view of the phenomena which may explain the
rarity of them.

** That persons * just deceased,' •• says Dr. Hodg-
son, ^ should be extremely confused and unable to
communicate directly, or even at all, seems perfectly
natural after the shock and wrench of death. Thus
in the case of Hart, he was unable to write the second
day after death. In another case a friend of mine,
whom I may call D., wrote, with what appeared to be
much difficulty, his name and the words, * I am all
right now. Adieu,' within two or three days of his
death. In another case, F., a near relative of Mad-
ame Elisa, was unable to write on the morning after
his death. On the second day after, when a stranger
was present with me for a sitting, he wrote two
or three sentences, saying, ^ I am too weak to artic-

9S

VlStOl^S OS' THIS BYlKd

ulate clearly,' and not many days later he wrote fairly
well and clearly, and dictated to Madame Elisa (de-
ceased), as amanuensis, an account of his feelings at
finding himself in his new surroundings."

In a footnote Dr. Hodgson adds an account of
what this Madame Elisa communicated regarding the
man. I quote this in full. Referring to this f^. and
Madame Elisa, he says : —

^^ The notice of his death was in a Boston paper,
and I happened to see it on my way to the sitting.
The first writing of the sitting came from Madame
Elisa, without my expecting it. She wrote clearly
and strongly, explaining that F. was there with her,
but unable to speak directly, that she wished to give
me an account of how she had helped F. to reach
her. She said that she had been present at his death-
bed, and had spoken to him, and she repeated what
she had said, an unusual form of expression^ and indi-
cated that he had heard and recognized her. This was
confirmed in detail in the only way possible at the
time, by a very intimate friend of Madame Elisa and
myself, and also of the nearest surviving relative of
F. I showed my friend the account of the sitting,
and to this friend a day or two later, the relative,
who was present at the death-bed, stated spon-
taneously that F., when dying said that he saw Mad-
ame Elisa, who was speaking to him, and he repeated
what she was saying. The expression so repeated,
which the relative quoted to my friend, was that
which I had received from Madame Elisa through
Mrs. Piper's trance, when the death-bed incident was
of course entirely unknown to me."

The apparent significance of such a coincidence is
93

PSYCHICAL HESEAECH AND THE ftESUEEECTIOK

evident, and though the entire number which I have
quoted are not sufScient to afford alone the proof of
survival after death they are indicative of events
which demand a most careful investigation. If there
be such a thing as a transcendental spiritual world and
if we actually survive in our personality after death
we might naturally expect some connection between
the two sets of cosmic conditions, at least occasionally,
supposing, of course, that the chasm between them
is not too great to be spanned. Hie existence of a
large mass of facts alleging such a connection,
though these facts are relatively few in comparison
with the cases of silence regarding the beyond, is a
circumstance which would suggest searching for inci-
dents during the passage of death that might repre-
sent a rare connection between the two worlds in this
critical period. We could not expect them to be fre-
quent a priori, but we should not expect two worlds,
closely enough related for the individual to retain his
identity, to wholly exclude conmiunications in artictdo
mortis. If anytiiing like it actually appeared to
occur we should endeavor to ascertain how much evi-
dence exists for the credibility of the occurrence in
sufficiently numerous cases to establish the truth of
the actual connection, or to confirm other types of
incident pointing toward the same conclusion. The
phenomena are too suggestive in many ways to leave
their occurrence unnoticed and uninvestigated.

Professor Bozzano, in the Armols of Psychical Sci-
enccy gives twenty-two cases in all, three of which
are found in this discussion. I quote a few of them
to add to the collective force of the evidence in such

94

VISIONS OF THE DYING

cases of supernormal experiences. It would be an
injudicious appropriation of material to reproduce
the entire essay, but its merit and interest offer a
great temptation to do so for readers who may not be
able to see the publication which presents them. I
must content myself, however, with a choice of the
best cases in illustration of a more frequent phenom-
enon than the few instances that I have quoted
might indicate. The most forcible ones are those
which may be called collective instances, that is, ap-
paritions seen by more than one person.

The first instance is taken from the life of the
Rev. Dwight L. Moody, the celebrated evangelical
preacher of the United States, written by his son.
In it his last moments are described as follows : —

^^ Suddenly he murmured: ^ Earth recedes, heaven
opens up before me. I have been beyond the gates.
God is calling. Don't call me back. It is beautiful.
It is like a trance. If this is death it is sweet.'

Then his face lit up and he said in a voice of joy-
ful rapture: * Dwight! Irene! I see the chil-
dren's faces ' (referring to two little grandchildren,
gone before). Turning to his wife he said,
^ Mamma, you have been a good wife to me/ and with
that he became unconscious."

Mr. Alfred Smedley, on pp. 60 and 61 of his book,
SoTne Reminiscences^ gives the following description
of the last moments of his own wife : —

*^ A short time before her decease, her eyes being
fixed on something that seemed to fill her with pleas-
ant surprise, she exclaimed : ^ Why ! there is sister

96

PSYCHICAL BE8EAKCH AND THE RXSUKKECTION

Charlotte here; and mother and father and brother
John and sister Mary ! And now they have brought
Bessie Heap!! They are all here. Oh! how beauti-
ful! Cannot you see them?' she asked. ^No, my
dear ; I very much wish I could,' I answered. * Can-
not you see them? ' she again asked in surprise: * why
they are all here, and they are come to bear me away
with them. Fart of our family have crossed the flood,
and soon the other part will be gathered home, and
then we shall be a family complete in heaven.'

^^ I may explain here that Bessie Heap had been
the trusted family nurse, and my wife had always
been a favorite with her.

^^ After the above ecstatic experience she lingered
for some time. Then fixing her gaze steadily upward
again, and lifting up her hands, she joined the con-
voy of angel friends who had come to usher her into
that brighter spiritual world of which we had learned
so little."

Dr. Paul Edwards wrote as follows in April, 1900,
to the Editor of Light: —

" While living in a country town in California (U.
S. A.) about the year 1887, 1 was called upon to visit
a very dear lady friend who was very low and weak
from consumption. Everyone knew that this pure
and noble wife and mother was doomed to die, and at
last she herself became convinced that immediate death
was inevitable, and accordingly she prepared for the
event. Calling her children to her bedside she kissed
each in turn, sending them away as soon as goodbye
was said. Then came the husband's turn to step up
and bid farewell to a most loving wife, who was per-
fectly dear in her mind. She began by saying:

96

YDIONS OF THE DYING

^ Newton ' (for that was his Christian name) • • •
* do not weep over me, for I am without pain and am
wholly serene. I lore you upon earth, and shall love
you after I have gone. I am fully resolved to come
to you if such a thing is possible, and if it is not
possible I will watch you and the children from
Heaven, where I will be waiting when you all come.
My first desire now is to go. ... I see people
moving — all in white. The music is strangely en-
chanting — Oh! here is Sadie; she is with me — and
— she knows who I am.' Sadie was a little girl she
had lost about ten years before. * Sissy ! ' said the
husband, ^you are out of your mind.' ^Oh, dear!
why did you call me here again?' said the wife;
^ now it will be hard for me to go away again ; I was
so pleased while there — 'it was so delightful — so
soothing.' In about three minutes the dying woman
added : * I am going away again and will not come
back to you even if you call me.'

*^ This scene lasted for about eight minutes, and it
was very plain that the dying wife was in full view of
the two worlds at the same time, for she described how
the moving figures looked in the world beyond, as she
directed her words to mortals in this world. — ,
. . . I think that of all my death scenes this was
the most impressive — the most solemn."

Dr. Wilson, of New York, who chanced to be pres-
ent at the last moments of James Moore, the tenor,
gives the following narrative: —

^^ It was about four o'clock, and the dawn for which
he had been watching was creeping in through the
shutters, when, as I bent over the bed, I noticed that
his face was quite calm and his eyes clear. The poor

97

PSYCHICAL BESEAKCH AND THE &SSUS&ECTION

fellow looked up into my face, and, taking my hand
in both of his, he said : ^ You've been a good friend
to me, doctor. You've stood by me.' Then some-
thing which I shall never forget to my dying day
happened ; something which is utterly indescribable.
While he appeared perfectly rational and as sane as
any man I have ever seen, the only way that I can
express it is that he was transported into another
world and although I cannot satisfactorily explain the
matter to myself, I am fully convinced that he had
entered the Golden City — for he said in a stronger
voice than he had used since I had attended him:
* There is mother! Why, mother, have you come
here to see me? No, no, I'm coming to see you. Just
wait, mother, I am almost over. I can jump it.
Wait, mother.' On his face there was a look of inex-
pressible happiness, and the way in which he said the
words impressed me as I have never been before, and
I am as firmly convinced that he saw and talked with
his mother as I am that I am sitting here.

" In order to preserve what I believed to be his
conversation with his mother, and also to have a rec-
ord of the strangest happening of my life, I imme-
diately wrote down every word he had said. . • •
His was one of the most beautiful deaths I have ever

To the cases above referred to, I will add the fol-
lowing case reported by F. W. H. Myers, which, al-
though substantially different from the preceding
ones, resembles the last one in that a death was an-
nounced by an apparition of a deceased person : —

^^ Mr. Lloyd Ellis had symptoms of lung disease at
the time (of his father's death), but not to a degree

98

VISIONS OF THB DYING

to lead his friends to expect a fatal termination soon.
But his health declined rapidly towards the end of
the year, and in the month of January, 1870, he was
in a dying state.

" Lying in an apparent sleep one night (one Monr
day night, I believe) he woke up suddenly and asked
his mother: ' Where is my father? ' She answered
him tearfully: * Lloyd dear, you know your dear
father is dead. He has been dead for more than a
year now.' * Is he?' — he asked, incredulously —
^ why ! he was in the room just now, and I have an
appointment with him, three o'clock next Wednesday •'
And Lloyd Ellis died at three o*cloch on the follow-
ing Wednesday morning."

The following case was reported by the Rev. C. J.
Taylor, a member of the Society for Psychic Re-
search.

"November Snd, 1886. — On November 2nd and
3rd, 1870, I lost my two eldest boys, David Edward
and Harry, in scarlet fever, they being then three and
four years old, respectively.

"Harry died at Abbot's Langley on November
2nd, fourteen miles from my vicarage at Aspley;
David the following day at Aspley. About an hour
before the death of this latter child he sat up in bed,
and pointing to the bottom of the bed, said distinctly :
* There is little Harry calling to me.' It has been
said that the child said : ^ He has a crown on his
head,' but I do not remember this myself ; but I was
so overcome with grief and weariness from long
watching, that I may have let it escape me. But of
the truth of this first fact I am sure, and it was heard
also by the nurse." (Signed: X. Z., Vicar of H.)

99

FSYCHICAI< SESEAKCH AND THE BESUBSECTION

In letters and conversations with Mr. Fodmore, Mr.
Taylor adds the following details : " Mr. Z. tells me
that care was taken to keep David from knowing that
Harry was dead and that he feels sure that David did
not luiow it. Mr. Z. wcus himself present, and heard
what the boy said. The boy was not delirious at the
time."

The next case was communicated to the Society
for Psychical Research by the Rev. J. A. Macdonald,
who had it at first hand from Miss Ogle, sister of
the percipient.

" Manchester, November 9th, 1884,. — My brother,
John Alkin Ogle, died at Leeds, July 17th, 1879.
About an hour before he expired he saw his
brother, who had died about sixteen years before, and
looking up with fixed interest, said : * Joe ! Joe ! '
and immediately after exclaimed with ardent surprise:
* George Hanley ! ' My mother, who had come from
Melbourne, a distance of about forty miles, where
George Hanley resided, was astonished at this, and
turning to my sister-in-law, asked if anybody had
told John of George Hanley's death. She said, * No
one,' and my mother was the only person present who
was aware of the fact. I was present and witnessed
this." (Signed: Harriet H. Ogle.) In answer to
inquiries. Miss Ogle states : " J. A. Ogle was neither
delirious nor unconscious when he uttered the words
recorded. George Hanley was an acquaintance of
John A. Ogle, not a particularly familiar friend.
The death of Hanley was not mentioned in his hear-
ing."

100

VISIONS OF THE DYING 101

The following three cases are reported in the Pro-
ceedings of the Society for Psychical Research.

** In November, 1864, I was summoned to Brigh-
ton. My aunt Harriet Pearson was then very ill
there. . • . She slept in a large, three-windowed
bedroom over the drawing-room. The room behind
was occupied by Mrs. Coppinger and myself, though
one of us was generally in the patient's room at night.
On the night of December ^2nd, 1864, Mrs. John
Pearson was in the room, Mrs. Coppinger and myself
in the back room; the house was lighted up on the
landings and staircases ; our door wide open. About
one or two on the morning of December SSrd, both
Mrs. Coppinger and myself started up in bed; we
were neither of us sleeping, as we were watching every
sound from the next room. We saw someone pass the
door, short, wrapped up in an old shawl, a wig with
three curls on each side and an old black cap. Mrs.
Coppinger called out : ^ Emma, get up, it is old
Aunt Ann ' (a deceased sister of the sick woman). I
said: * So it is, then Aunt Harriet will die to-day.*
We jumped up, and Mrs. John Pearson came rushing
out of the room and said: ^ That was old Aunt Ann.
Where is she gone to? ' I said to soothe her: * Per-
haps it was Eliza come down to see how her mistress
is.' Mrs. Coppinger ran upstairs and found Eliza
sleeping in the servants' room. She was very awe-
struck but calm, and dressed and came down. Every
room was searched, no one was there. . . . Miss
Harriet died in the evening of that day, but before
that told all of us that she had seen her sister and
knew it was she, and she had come to call her." —
Emma M. Pearson ; confirmed by Eliza Quinton.

^* Mrs. Caroline Rogers, 7S years old, a widow who
101

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE RESURRECTION

had been twice married, and whose first husband, a
Mr. Tisdale, died about thirty-five years ago, has lived
on Ashland Street, in Roslindale, Mass., for the last
twenty-five years; and since the death of her last
child, some years ago, she has lived quite alone.
Early in March of this year she was stricken with
paralysis, and after an illness of nearly six weeks
died on the afternoon of Tuesday, April 16th.

" Mrs. Mary Wilson, a professional nurse, 46 years
old, attended Mrs. Rogers during her iUness, remain*
ing with her almost constantly until she died. She
had never seen Mrs. Rogers before the latter's illness,
and knew nothing of her family or history. Mrs.
Rogers spoke frequently to Mrs. Wilson, and also
to others, as has long been her custom, of her second
husband, Mr. Rogers, and of her children, expressing
a desire to see them again, etc.

^* On the afternoon of Apiil 14tb, Mrs. Rogers be-
came unconscious, and remained so all the time until
her death twenty-four hours later. Mrs. Wilson sat
up with her the whole night, and . . . was pretty
well worn out with her long vigil ; believing that Mrs.
Rogers was dying, she was naturally very nervous
and timid; and having heard Mrs. R. speak fre-
quently of seeing her departed friends, etc., she had
a feeling of expectancy and dread with regard to
supernatural visitations. Between 2 and 3 a. m.,
while her daughter was asleep, and while she was
resting on the settee, but wide awake, she happened to
look toward the door into the adjoining chamber and
saw a man standing exactly in the door-way, the door
being kept open all the time. He was middle-sized,
broad-shouldered, with shoulders thrown back, had a
florid complexion, reddish-brown hair (bareheaded)
and beard, and wore a brown sack overcoat, which was

lOS

VlfilOKS OF THE DYtK6

unbuttoned. His expression was grave, neither stent
nor pleasant, and he seemed to look straight at Mrs.
Wilson, and then at Mrs. Rogers without moving.
Mrs. Wilson supposed, of course, that it was a real
man, and tried to think how he could have got into
the house. Then, as he remained quite motionless,
she began to realize that it was something uncanny,
and becoming frightened, turned her head away and
called her daughter, who was still asleep on the couch,
awakening her. On looking back at the door after
an interval of a minute or two, the apparition had dis-
appeared; both its coming and going were noiseless,
and Mrs. Rogers remained perefectly quiet, and, so
far as could be known, entirely unconscious during
this time. The chamber into which this door leads
being dark, there was no opportunity to observe
whether or not the apparition was transparent. Mrs.
Wilson shortly afterwards went into this chamber and
the living room, but did not examine the lower part
of the house until morning, when the doors were found
properly locked and everything all right.

" In the morning, Mrs. Rogers' niece, Mrs. Hil-
dreth, who lived in the neighborhood, and had known
Mrs. R. and her family life many years, called at the
house. Mrs. Wilson related her experience to her and
asked if the apparition resembled Mr. Rogers and
Mrs. Hildreth replied emphatically that it did not.
(All who knew Mr. Rogers are agreed on this point.)
Their conversation was interrupted then, but when re-
sumed later in the day, Mrs. Hildreth said that Mrs.
Wilson's description agreed exactly with Mr. Tisdale,
Mrs. Rogers' first husband. Mrs. Rogers came to
Roslindale after marrying Mr. Rogers and Mrs. Hil-
dreth is the only person in that vicinity who ever saw
Mr. Tisdale; and in Mrs. Rogers' house there is no

103

nrcHiCAi. mxftKAmCH aitd tke mssirmmscTiOK

portrait of him nor anything saggestiTe of his per-
sonal appearance. Mrs. Wilson is also Tery positiye
that the apparition was unlike anyone she ever knew."
— Mary Wilson.

The following incidents are taken from the same
source as the previous ones. It was communicated by
a Mrs. B., who was known to Mr. Podmore. In re-
lation to the death of her own mother, Mrs. B. nar-
rates the f oUowing, among other particulars.

^^ My youngest sister, since dead, was called to my
mother, and left Devonshire, where she was staying
with friends, to come home. When she arrived at
home she entered the drawing room, but rushed out
terrified, exclaiming that she had seen god-mannna,
who was seated by the fire in my mother's chair. God-
mamma had been dead since 1852. She had been my
mother's governess — almost foster-mother ; had lived
with her during her married life, being god-mother to
her eldest girl, and when my father died had ac-
cepted the duty of taking his place as far as possible
in the family, to shield her from trouble and protect
her — •a duty which she fulfilled nobly.

"My other sister went into the drawing-room to
see what had scared K., and saw the figure of god-
mamma just as K. had. Later in the day, the same
figure stood by, then sat on the edge of my mother's
bed) and was seen by both my sisters and the old serv-
ant, looking just as she had when alive, except that
she wore a gray dress, and, as far as we could remem-
ber, she had always worn black. My mother saw her,
for she turned towards her and said: * Mary ' — her

104

VISIONS OF THB DYING

The next case is reported by Dr. Richard Hodgson
and published in the Proceedings of the same Society.

** Jcmuary jBSth^ 1891. About eleven years ago
I was much distressed owing to the illness of my
wife, who suffered from cancer in the stomach. I
heard about a medium, Miss Susie Nickerson White,
who was said to have given some remarkable tests,
and I called on her as a stranger and requested a sit-
ting. My wife's sister purported to * control,' giv-
ing her name, Maria, and mentioning facts about my
family which were correct. She also called my wife
by her name, Eliza Anne, described her sickness, and
said that she would pass over, but not for some
months. I said: 'What do you call this? Is it
psychology, or mesmerism, or what? ' Maria said,
* I knew you were going to ask that ; I saw it in your
mind.' I said: 'Do you get all things out of my
mind?' She replied: *No. I'll tell you some
things that are not in your mind. Within three days
Eliza Anne will say that she has seen me and mother,
too, if I can get mother to come along.' (My wife's
mother had died about forty-five years previously, and
my wife's sister had been dead from six to eight
years.)

'' I kept these circumstances to myself, but within
three days the nurse who was in attendance upon my
wife came running to me and said that my wife was
worse, and was going out of her mind; that she had
called upon Maria and mother, and had sprung out of
bed and run towards the door, crying: 'Stop,
Maria! Stop, mother! Don't go yet!'

" I soon consulted Miss White again, and Maria
again purported to control. My wife had been un-
able for some days to retain any food in her stomach,

106

PSYCHICAL &ESEABCH AND THE &ESU&KECTION

could not even keep water or milk, and was very weak
and also unable to sleep. Maria told me to give her
some hot, very strong coffee, with plenty of cream
and sugar, and some cream toast. This prescription
amazed me, but it was prepared. My wife ate and
drank with relish, and slept soundly afterwards. She
lived upon this food for some days, but gradually be-
came unable to take even this. I consulted Miss
White again, and Maria told me to get some limes,
and to give my wife some pure juice of the lime sev-
eral times a day ; she said that this would give her an
appetite and enable her to retain food. The prescrip-
tion was a success ; but gradually my wife f ailed, and
I consulted Miss White again and asked Maria how
long my wife would continue to suffer. She said she
could not tell exactly when she would pass away, but
would give me a warning: ^ The next time she says
she has seen me, don't leave her afterwards.'

" Some days after, as I was relieving the nurse
about three or four in the morning, the nurse said:
^Mammie' (meaning my wife) ^ says she has seen
Maria again.' In a few minutes my wife said : ^ I
must go.' And she expired." — E. Paige; Mary A.
Paige, formerly Mary Dockerty, the nurse.

The object, therefore, in calling attention to the
incidents which I think impressive is to urge an or-
ganized effort to certify a larger number of them,
if this be possible. What is urged is that efforts be
made to report for record all the death-bed visions
and utterances that may possibly bear upon the issue
suggested in such as we have quoted. I would pro-
pose that all persons interested in the work of the
Society for Psychical Research report all such

106

VISIONS OF THE DYING

experiences as have come under their notice. In this
way a census of them can at least be initiated. To
this method I hope to add some means of inducing
physicians in their private practice to be on the
watch for them and to report them to the proper per-
sons. We may ultimately induce physicians in the
hospitals to instruct nurses and officers to make ob-
servations and to record all experiences of an hallu-
cinatory character or otherwise. In any case they
will be rare, but on one side or the other of the issue
there is no other way to give our convictions a scien-
tific character.

The cases which I have mentioned show interesting
coincidences and are too suggestive to disregard the
opportunity to coDect similar instances with a view
to their study in detail. We must expect the largest
number of them to be non-evidential, that is, to repre-
sent facts which are not verifiable in respect to the
other side. But if they can be obtained in sufficient
numbers to exclude chance in respect of the persons
said to appear in such apparitions we may have a sci-
entific product. To exclude chance we need to com-
pare them with visions that do not represent the dis-
camate as thus appearing, but that may be treated
as casual hallucinations. Hence we shall want to take
account of all types of dying experiences as ob-
served by the living. It will be especially important
to have records from those who were thought to be
very ill or dying and recovered, who may describe pe-
culiar experiences in conditions bordering on death.
It is therefore hoped that my readers will call atten-
tion to any such cases that may have come within

107

T9T€JHSCAJL MMMKAECB, ABB

iiieir knowledge and to aid in securing a Tcoord of
tfaem* Tlie extension of tbe i a quii y to hospitals and
asjloms win reqmre time and sodi interest as ph jsi'
dans may be inAioed to take in collecting data for
stodj* But a good beginning can be made inde-
pendently of the more organized effort to obtain rec-
ords« The present article is simply an appeal for
assistance in an important investigation. The inter-
esting incidents qnoted seem to be inexplicable by
chance and a large nmnber of simihur cases wonld
more certainljr exdade it from consideration.

108

CHAPTER V

EXPERIMENTS WITH MBS. PIFEB SINCE DB. BICHABD

I summarize here some results of experiments since
the death of Dr. Richard Hodgson. They of course
implicate Mrs. Piper, but I do not mean to confine
the phenomena to what has occurred through her.
The reason for this is apparent. The scientific scep-
tic would not easily be convinced by any alleged mes-
sages from Dr. Hodgson through that source. He
wishes to be assured that Mrs. Piper had no means of
knowing the facts which illustrate the personal iden-
tity of real or alleged communicators before accept-
ing even telepathy as an explanation. I must there-
fore respect this attitude in quoting any facts which
show intelligence of a kind not referable to guessing
or chance coincidence. It is not that any suspicion of
Mrs. Piper's honesty is to be entertained at this late
day, as the past elimination of even the possibility
of fraud as well as the assurance that she has not
been disposed to conmiit it are sufficient to justify
ignoring it. But our troubles have not been wholly
removed when we have merely eliminated the right to
accuse her of fraud. A far more complicated objec-
tion arises and this is the unconscious reproduction of
knowledge acquired in a perfectly legitimate way.
Dr. Hodgson had been so long associated with Mrs.
Piper that we cannot know, without having his own

109

PSYCHICAL &£8£AECfiC AND THA &£STTBR£CTI0K

ante-mortem statement, what he may casually have
told her about himself and his life. It is easy to ex-
clude previous knowledge of total strangers, but a
man who had worked for eighteen years in experiment
with Mrs. Piper is exposed to the suspicion that he
may have told many things to her in a casual man-
ner which may turn up in unconscious simulation of
his personality. I do not here concern myself with
that hypothesis of many unscientific people who think
that Mrs. Piper's mind has drawn telepathically into
it the personality and memories of Dr. Hodgson pre-
vious to his death and can at pleasure afterwards
reproduce them and palm them off as spirits. Any
one who can believe such a thing without an iota of
evidence for it can believe anything. I shall not
treat seriously such an hypothesis until it conde-
scends to produce at least some evidence for itself
commensurate with the magnitude of its claims. I
am not attracted by miracles as long as a perfectly
simple theory will explain the facts, and hence I
should be much more impressed by either fraud or
secondary personality than by any such credulous
acceptance of the supernatural, for supernatural of
a most astonishing kind it would be. Under the
known circumstances it is far easier to suppose that
Mrs. Piper might have casually acquired information
from her conversations with Dr. Hodgson and that
the trance state produces it in spiritistic forms.
That is the real difficulty which the scientific man has
to face.

For this reason I shall have to exercise great cau-
tion in selecting the facts which are probably free

110

EXPERIMENTS WITH MBS. PIPER

from this suspicion. In doing so I shall assume that
the reader knows what has been done to protect Mrs.
Piper's seances from the accusation of conscious fraud
on her part. All this will be taken for granted in the
present narrative, and such facts selected as are
most likely to be representative of supernormal infor-
mation. In the instances implicating other psychics
besides Mrs. Piper we shall have facts which may help
to protect those coming from her. Upon these spe-
cial stress may be laid, but some of those ^^ communi-
cated" through Mrs. Piper are so forceful in illus-
tration of personal identity and so difficult to have
been in any way ascertained by Mrs. Piper, when we
know how cautious and reticent Dr. Hodgson actually
was about his affairs to her, that they will serve to
allay a natural curiosity of the public which demands
such communications, if the theory which Dr. Hodg-
son held before his death is to be considered as true.
I believe that this interest has its rights and that an
organization like the Society for Psychical Research,
receiving the funds of its members, owes something
to them in return, and while it must maintain a cer-
tain reserve in the publication of its facts it is easy
to postpone this duty beyond all rational limits.

I will not attempt to publish the detailed record
of experiments, for we may well abbreviate results to
merely illustrate the type of facts which we have in
our possession.

I repeat that the reader must assume that I have
allowed for the usual and simple objections to the
phenomena which I mean here to summarize. I
should admit frankly that, if I were dealing with

111

PSTCHICAIi BESBARCH AND THE KESURBECTIOK

ordinary professional mediums the facts which I ex-
pect to narrate would have no evidential or scientific
importance. It is because they follow a long history
of accredited facts that they derive at least a sugges-
tive value. The reader may entertain the account as
one of hypothetical importance and await the investi-
gation of cases where the same reservations will not
have to be maintained.

Again before starting on the facts which are to
serve as evidence of something supernormal in the
communications purporting to come from Dr. Hodg-
son, I must remind the reader that we can give only
the most trivial incidents. We are not engaged in
the recording and parading about of great revela-
tions. This must not be expected. We are employed
in a scientific problem which is one of evidence and
only the most trivial circumstances will serve as proof
of the hypothesis which seems to be illustrated in the
phenomena of Mrs. Piper. If we are to believe in
the spiritistic theory to account for her case, or to
explain any other phenomena supposed to be pro-
duced by the discamate, we cannot forget that the
primary problem is the proof of personal identity.
If a spirit claims to communicate or produce phenom-
ena not easily explicable by ordinary methods it
must prove its identity and must communicate little
trivial incidents in its past earthly life which cannot be
guessed and which are not common to the lives of other
people. In other worcb we must have supernormal in-
formation and such a quantity as well as quality of
it as will make the spiritistic theory more probable

lis

EXFEBIMENTS WITH MBS. PIPES

than any other. Ethical or other revelations are
worthless for this problem and have to be discarded,
whatever other interest psychological or philosophical
they may have. Hence readers must not be disap-
pointed if we insist on concentrating their attention
upon the incidents that prove personal identity and
the supernormal character of the information con-
veyed through Mrs. Piper. When we have reason to
accept the supernormal and to believe that its selective
reference to the personality of deceased persons makes
survival after death probable, we may take up the
other problems, but we cannot do more than one thing
at a time.

One of the early incidents in the communications
through Mrs. Piper purporting to come from Dr.
Hodgson implicates another psychic to a slight extent.
Dr. Hodgson and I had made an experiment with a
certain young lady, who had mediumistic powers
and who was not a professional psychic, nearly a year
before his death. A short time after his decease a
friend was having a sitting with Mrs. Piper and in
the course of the communications — to be called this
on any theory of them — the friend asked if he
would communicate with her through any other
" light," the term used by the trance personalities to
denote a medium. The reply substantially was:
" No, I will not, except through the young light.
She is all right." Later in the sitting one of the
trance personalities or controls, referring to this told
the sitter that I (Hyslop) understood to whom this
referred, giving my name. Dr. Hodgson added to

118

FSYCHICAI^ KESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTIOK

his statement that, as soon as he recovered from the
shock of death he had examined the case and found
it all right.

Now Dr. Hodgson and I, with the parents and one
or two relatives, were all that knew anything about
this case. The sitter and others associated with the
experiment in Boston did not know the meaning of
the incident and reference. When I was informed of
it, the matter was made perfectly clear. It is true
that Dr. Hodgson, while living and after our ex-
periment with the young lady, had mentioned the case
without names to the trance personalities so that at
least Mrs. Piper's subliminal can be supposed to have
been aware of the facts sufficiently to deprive the inci-
dent of the evidential value which we would like it to
have. But the most striking incident is one that in-
volves a cross reference with this young lady. The
father carefully kept the knowledge of Dr. Hodg-
son's death from his daughter and very soon after his
death and about the time of the incident just men-
tioned wrote me that they had had a sitting with the
daughter and that the control had said he had seen
Dr. Hodgson. This coincides with his statement
through Mrs. Piper that he had examined the case and
found it all right.

Another incident of some interest is the following.
We had been working together in behalf of the plan
which we are now putting into execution since his
death, namely, the formation of an independent Amer-
ican Society. We had met the second summer before
at Putnam's Camp in the Adirondacks to talk it over
and did so, agreeing there upon the main outlines of

lU

BXPEBIMENTS WITH MES. PIPES

the scheme. It was our intention to talk the matter
over again last summer (1905) at the same place,
more especially with reference to points not touched
on in our first interview which was occupied with the
main outlines. But he was not at the camp when I
called and I missed him. He then wrote me that
he would either return to Boston by way of New York
or make a special trip to New York after his return
to settle matters. He was prevented doing this as
soon as he had expected and at last decided that he
would come after the holidays. Less than two weeks
before this he was in his grave. Hence the reader
will appreciate the following communications.

After alluding to the pleasure of seeing the new
world beyond death, a circumstance wholly worthless
for any rational purposes in this discussion, he
changed the subject. I quote the record, putting
what I said in parentheses and what was written auto-
matically by Mrs. Piper without enclosure of any
kind.

" I will now refer to the meeting I proposed having
before I came over.

(When was the meeting to be?)

" I suggested having a meeting in New York, at
the —

(Yes, that is right.)

*^ No one could know about these plans better than
yourself.

(That is right.)

** Do you remember my desire to publish my report
next season. Yes, extracts.

(About whom were the extracts?)
116

PSYCHICAL KESSARCH AND THE KESUBKECTION

'^ I wish to publish extracts about our telepathic
experiments.

(All right. That was not what I was thinking
about. But go ahead.)

** I also wished to publish extracts about the spirit
side of test experiments and my theory in answer to
some criticism I recall from Mrs. Sidgwick."

Now it was a part of Dr. Hodgson's plan to have
his reply to Mrs. Sidgwick's strictures on his report
in 1899 ready for the first publication of the new
movement. We had agreed upon this. We may
suppose that Mrs. Piper knew of his desire to reply
to Mrs. Sidgwick, but hardly of his plan to meet me
and talk over the matter in New York which had been
quietly arranged. The allusion to '^ telepathic ex-
periments '* is intelligible only in the light of the fact
that Mrs. Sidgwick in her criticism admitted the prob-
ability that in Dr. Hodgson's Report he had a rec-
ord of frequent telepathic or other form of com-
munication from the dead, though through the sub-
liminal mental action of Mrs. Piper. But Mrs. Sidg-
wick could not accept what Dr. Hodgson had
called the ^^ possession " theory of the process. His
probable intention in his reply to her was to quote the
record of telepathic experiments in the Society's Pro-
ceedings to show that the analogies between them and
the Piper phenomena could not be sustained. How-
ever that may be it is a relevant point in the prob-
lem, and his special conversation with me turned upon
the selection of extracts from the records to show
that his theory of the matter was defensible. He had
no occasion to reply to her attitude of the spirit

116

EXPERIMENTS WITH MBS« PIPEE

hypothesis, as she had tacitly conceded this and only
disputed his view of the process. He and I had fre-
quently talked over his reply and I had called his at-
tention to an important point he could make in it
from the failure of one of the Piper Reports to quote
the record in full, actually leaving out a sentence
which was the clue to the whole difficulty in the com-
munication.

On the occasion when we visited the ** young light "
we also had some sittings with a case of alleged in-
dependent voices. I had reached the city a few days
previous to Dr. Hodgson and in order to test the
genuineness of the claims, in accordance with a request
of my host, I used a liquid to put in the psychic's
mouth, as the experiments had to be conducted in pitch
darkness. In the communications through Mrs.
Piper, Dr. Hodgson interrupted some allusions to the
effect of death upon the memory and continued.

** I shall never forget our experiments with a so-
called light when you took a bottle of red liquid.

(Very good. You know what a noise that man
has made.)

" I do. I know all about it.

(I have had some controversy with a friend of his.)

"Recently?

(Yes, recently. Now can you answer a question?
Tell me who it was or all you can recall about it.)

"Yes, which? I remember our meeting there. I
can remember the liquid experiment which was capital.
I also recall an experiment when you tied the handker-
chief.

(I do not recall it at this moment.)

in

FSYCHICAIi BESEABCH AND THE BE8UBSECTION

** What's the matter with you?

(I have tied a handkerchief so often.)

" Remember the voice experiment?

(Yes, I remember that welL That was when the
liquid was used.)

" I am referring to it now. I know it perfectly
well, but no one else does.

(Yes, that's right.)

" I remember how she tried to fool us.

(Yes, it was my first trial at that.)

" I remember it well. Remember one thing and
keep this on your mind. I shall avoid referring to
things of which you are thinking at the time as much
as possible and refer to my own memories. I have
seen too much not to understand my business. I re-
member what our conversation was. She was an
arrant humbug.

(Yes, I remember well.)

" I wish to recall an incident. Do you remember
writing me from the west about an experiment you
tried to make while there?

(Yes, go on please.)

" It was on the whole good.

(Yes, I think it was on the whole good.)

^* After there is some definite arrangement made
here about some one to fill my place, I hope you will
take this up again when I shall help you."

The liquid that I used in the experiment was not
red but purple. A part of the controversy that arose
regarding the case occurred before Dr. Hodgson's
death, but not the part that I had in mind. There
was no handkerchief tied on the occasion, but on the

118

EXPEBIMENTS WITH MES. PIFEE

train coming home Dr. Hodgson told me of a most
interesting experiment with hdmself in which the
handkerchief had been used to bandage his own eyes
and he showed me how almost impossible it is to
wholly exclude vision on the part of a shrewd person
by bandaging the eyes. This, of course, is not indi-
cated in the statements of the communicator, but it
is near enough to remind me of what he had said and
as any allusion to a handkerchief in this connection
is pertinent one must imagine that the incident which
I have mentioned was actually intended, and that
either his own amnesic condition or the misapprehen-
sion of the trance personality in control is responsible
for the mistake.

The opinion expressed of the medium on the occa-
sion is the opinion that he held about the case when
living and so is a point in identity though it cannot
be used to reflect on her character in any respect, as
one may hold that the evidence for fraud was not
satisfactory. But Dr. Hodgson was very fully con-
vinced that there was no reason to believe it genuine.

It is interesting to remark the allusion to not tell-
ing me what I was thinking of at the time. I doubt
if any other conununicator than Dr. Hodgson would
think of this point. He was so familiar with the
objection to the spiritistic hypothesis from telepathy
that he was always on the lookout for the facts that
told against this objection and hiere it turns up as a
habit of thought which few would manifest.

The last incident is quite as important as any of
the others. Nearly two years before I had had an
experiment with a psychic out west, a non-professional

119

PSYCHICAL BESEARCH AKB THE SESUEEECTIOK

case — I would not quote a professional type — and
I not only obtained some important names, but I re-
ceived the Christian name of George Pelham in re-
sponse to the request that my father bring the man
there who had helped him communicate in the Piper
case, and this was not known by the woman. After-
ward George Pelham stated through Mrs. Piper that
he had got his Christian name through in this case.
This is the reason that Dr. Hodgson thought it a
good one on the whole.

The communications quoted were followed by an al-
lusion to the newspaper stories about his ** return-
ing." No mention was made of the papers, but only
of the stories to that eflFect. I then asked him if he
had been anywhere and he replied that he had tried
though not very successfully, and then said he had
tried with the " young girl." The pertinence of this
will be apparent to the reader after noting the inci-
dent narrated earlier in this chapter. I then asked if
he had tried at the case in which I had been inter-
ested so long. I referred to the Smead case not then
published.* The reply was as follows :

^^ I will tell a message I tried to give. I said I had
found things better than I thought I had. I also
spoke of your father. Do you remember this. I am
Hodgson. I have found things better than I hoped."
He then made an allusion to my hypnotic experiment
with a student, but as this had been published in my
Report on the Piper case the mention of it has no
value.

There were a number of allusions to Dr. Hodgson

♦ See Chapter VIII.

120

EXPERIMENTS WITH MBS. FIFEB

in the automatic writing of Mrs. Smead before she
knew of his death which had been carefully concealed
from her by Mr. Smead, and one or two apparitions
of him associated with a frequent apparition of my-
self. At one sitting the name of my father was asso-
ciated with that of Dr. Hodgson, but there was no
statement that he had found things better than he had
hoped. There were many pertinent statements which
have no place in this account further than to men-
tion the fact, and later the very language here stated
as having been given through this case was found in
my record of it, save the reference to the way in which
he found things.

I come now to a set of incidents which are perhaps
as important as any one could wish. I had an ar-
rangement for three sittings beginning March 19th
(1906). Previous to this I arranged to have a sit-
ting with a lady whom I knew well in New York City.^
She was not a professional psychic, but a lady occu-
pying an important position in one of the large cor-
porations in this city. This sitting was on the night
of March 16th, Friday. At this sitting Dr. Hodg-
son purported to be present. His name was written
and some pertinent things said with reference to my-
self, though they were not in any respect evidential.
Nor could r attach evidential value to the giving of
his name as the lady knew well that he had died. I
put away my record of the facts and said nothing
about the result to any one. I went on to Boston to
have my sittings with Mrs. Piper.

Soon after the beginning of the sitting Rector, the
trance personality usually controlling, wrote that he

121

PSYCHICAL BESEARCH AND THE AESUERECTION

had seen me ^^ at another light," that he had brought
Hodgson there, but that they could not make them-
selves clear, and asked me if I had understood them.
I asked when it was and received the reply that it was
two days before Sabbath. The reader will see that
this coincides with the time of the sitting in New
York. Some statements were then made by Rector
about the difficulty of communicating there, owing to
the " intervention of the mind of the light," a fact
coinciding with my knowledge of the case, and stated
that they had tried to send through a certain word,
which in fact I did not get.

When Dr. Hodgson came a few minutes atterwaxd
to communicate he at once asked me, after the usual
form of his greeting, if I had received his message,
and on my reply that I was not certain he asked me to
try the lady some day again. As soon as the sitting
was over I wrote to the lady without saying a word of
what had happened and arranged for another sitting
with her for Saturday evening the 24th.

At this sitting one of the trance personalities of
the Piper case, one who does not often appear there,
appeared, with Miss X. as I shall call her, and wrote
his name. Miss X. had heard of this personality, but
knew that Rector was the usual amanuensis in the
Piper case. Lnmediately following the trance per-
sonality whose name was written Dr. Hodgson pur-
ported to communicate and used almost the identical
phrases with which he begins his communications in
the Piper case — in fact, several words were identical,
and they are not the usual introduction of other com-
municators. After receiving this message I wrote to

122

£XP£aiM£NTS WITH MBS. t>It>£A

Mr. Henry James, Jr., without saying what I had
got and asked him to interrogate Dr. Hodgson
when he got a sitting to know if he had recently
been communicating with me and if he answered in
the affirmative, to ask Dr. Hodgson what he had told
me. About three weeks after Mr. James had his
sitting and carried out my request. Dr. Hodgson re-
plied that he had been trying to communicate with me
several Sabbaths previously and stated with some ap-
proximation to it the message which I had received on
the evening of the S4th.

The reader will perceive that these incidents involve
cross references with another psychic than Mrs. Piper,
and though I am familiar with the methods by which
professional mediums communicate with each other
about certain persons who can be made victims of their
craft it must be remembered that we are not dealing
with a professional medium in Miss X. and that we
can not call Mrs. Piper this in the ordinary use of
the term. I can vouch for the trustworthiness of
Miss X. and think that the ordinary explanation of
the coincidences will not apply in this instance.

The next day after the sitting just mentioned when
Dr. Hodgson came to communicate he asked me if I
remembered anything about the cheese we had at a
lunch in his room. At first I thought of an incident
not connected with a lunch, but with an attempt at
intercommunication between two mediums in which a
reference to cheese coming from Dr. Hodgson was
made, but as soon as the mention of a lunch was made,
which had no relevance to what I was thinking of,
I recalled the interesting circumstance that once, and

128

PSYCHICAL USSSAECH AND THE USSITERSCTIOK

only once, I had had a midnight lunch with Dr.
Hodgson at the Tavern Club when he made a welsh
rarebit and we had a delightful time.

Another incident is still more important as repre-
senting a fact which I did not know and which was
relevant to a mutual friend who was named and who
knew the fact. At this same sitting Dr. Hodgson
sent his love to Prof. Newbold, of the University of
Pennsylvania, and told me to ask him if he remem-
bered being with him near the ocean on the beach.
I inquired of Prof. Newbold if this had any pertinence
to him and he replied that the last time he saw Dr.
Hodgson was in the previous July at the ocean beach.

At the next sitting I had the " young light " pres-
ent for certain experimental purposes. After the
communications relevant to her and after she had left
the room Dr. Hodgson asked me if I remembered the
meeting we had had with her and what he had said
about her hysteria, saying that he explained it as a
partial case of hysteria. The facts were that, after
our meeting with the young lady and while we were
walking to a friend's for dinner. Dr. Hodgson re-
marked to me that he thought there was some hysteria
in the case and that she was a very clever girl, the last
remark being repeated here on tibis occasion through
Mrs. Piper.

At a sitting on April 25th after an allusion to tele}>-
athy in which he said there was none of this in the
process except in what came from his mind to me
through Mrs. Piper, Dr. Hodgson took up another
important message whose truth and importance I

124

£Xl>£]lIM£KTd Wrrfi M&d. PIPBA

learned accidentally some time afterward. He said,
in the automatic writing of Mrs. Piper:

" Do you remember a man we heard of in — No, in
Washington, and what I said about trying to see
him?

(What man was that?)

« A light.

(A real light?)

" Yes, I heard of him just before I came over.
Perhaps I did not write you about this.'*

Now Dr. Hodgson had not written me about any
such discovery and the statements had no meaning to
me. In June I had some business in Washington and
on the 13th I accidentally met a gentleman in charge
of a department in one of the largest business houses
there and in the course of our conversation he casually
mentioned that he had written to Dr. Hodgson a
short time before his death about a man there who
showed signs of mediumistic powers. It happened
that I knew the man and had received from him some
years previously an interesting experience. I had
not heard from him for several years. He is em-
ployed in a very important office. In my conversa-
tion with the first mentioned gentleman I learned that
recently this other man referred to had clearly shown
indications of mediumistic powers. Here then was
the possible explanation of the allusion at this sitting
on April S5th. I had known absolutely nothing of
the facts until thus mentioned at the sitting and after-
ward verified in the way described.

I am not going to enter into any elaborate theo-
126

PSYCHICAL RESEABCH AND THE &ESURRECTION

retical explanation of these incidents. As I have al-
ready said, the scientific man will attach less value
to what purports to come from Dr. Hodgson through
Mrs. Piper than if it came from some one else. Be-
sides I am not anxious to insist upon explanations at
present. The most important point is to have the
facts, and if there were space I would be glad to give
the detailed records, since these are the data which a
really scientific man wishes. But this is obviously out
of the question at the present time. I desire only to
excuse the demand for the investigation of such
phenomena. It will be apparent, I think, to every
man that these statements through Mrs. Piper are
not due to chance, and that, if we have reason to
believe that Mrs. Piper had not previously acquired
by normal means the information conveyed, we have
facts which do not have an ordinary explanation.
What the true explanation is we need not insist upon.
Every one knows what hypothesis I would suggest in
the case, but I wish less to keep in the front any
supernormal explanation of the phenomena than to
present the facts. It is easier to quarrel with theories
than it is with facts and if we have any reason to trust
the phenomena as supernormal I am quite willing to
leave their ultimate cause to the scientific psychologist.
I should do no more than hold him responsible for the
evidence that any other theory than the superficial
one actually applies. But there need be no haste in
the adoption of any special theory; it is the collec-
tion of similar phenomena that is now the most im-
portant task before us.

1S6

CHAPTER VI

TUBTHEK EXPERIMENTS BELATIN6 TO DB. HODGSON
SINCE HIS DEATH

In the previous chapter I mentioned the most strik-
ing incidents affecting the personal identity of Dr.
Richard Hodgson, which were hardly explicable
by the most obstinate sceptic on any ordinary
grounds. There were many incidents which those
who are familiar with the Piper phenomena and Dr.
Hodgson's policy in life could very well believe were
supernormal, but it is hardly advisable to press them
into too confident a service in favor of undoubted
supernormal knowledge, especially when we may call
into use much more striking incidents than such as
made up the previous chapter. The present chapter
will extend the important incidents so as to exclude
more effectively the appeal to ordinary explanations
of all kinds and to implicate other persons than Mrs.
Piper in the results.

One of the first set of incidents in the previous
chapter was of the type to which special reference
will be made in the present collection. I mean inci-
dents which we call cases of " cross reference." These
are incidents and statements obtained through two or
more mediums who do not know the facts so obtained.
Thus, for example, suppose I obtain a " message "
through the mediumship of A and then have an ex-
periment with B who does not know that I have had

127

PSYCHICAL BESEARCH AND THE BESUE&ECTIOK

a sitting with A, and suppose I received the same
** message" through B, I am entitled to conjecture
the same source for both " messages." This will be
true on any theory of them; The importance to be
attached to such results is this : the possibility of es-
tablishing a certain kind of personal identity inde-
pendently of the communication of past memories,
which are the first step in proof of a theory of spirit-
istic sources. What we must demand, as already ex-
plained, is the obtaining of incidents which any living
and surviving consciousness would naturally report
in proof of personal identity when that is questioned.
When this is once done — and it can be done only
through memory of the person " communicating " —
we may resort to all sorts of watch-words given us by
a specific person and communicated through other
mediumistic sources in proof of identity where we can
exclude all other human knowledge of the facts. It
would very natiirally require a larger number of inci-
dents to prove the personal identity of a deceased
person through one source than to prove its identity
in a second case after it has been established in the
first. The reasons for this we need not emphasize,
and they may be apparent to all who have paid any
attention to the difficulties encountered in the study of
an individual case. The primary reason, however, is
that we can most assuredly isolate the medium's possi-
ble knowledge in such cases and render it less probable
that the explanation is due solely to individual idiosyn-
cracies of the person through whom the '^ message "
comes in the first place.

It is these circumstances which make " cross refer-
1«8

KXPKETMKNT8 WITH MB8. FIPBE

ence" incidents especially cogent and important. I
gave but few of them in the previous chapter and
propose to give more of them here, as they have been
obtained since the experiments which were quoted be-
fore. I shall also include some incidents which are
not cases of ^^ cross reference." I shall summarize '

those of cross reference first as they are the stronger ^

type.

I first give some incidents which I obtained through
a psychic who is not in any respect professional. I
have already explained the value of such cases. It is
that of one whose name and identity I am required ab-
solutely to conceal, as the lady has such social stand-
ing as would be affected by the intolerant and un-
charitable attitude of the public. I am sorry, of
course, that I am not able to mention names, but I
recognize the duty of secrecy in this case and for more
reasons than the one which I have indicated. Pri-
marily I must say no one is safe from the modem
curse of newspaper reporters and editors, who have
no respect for any of the courtesies and humanities
of life. I repeat that this lady is not only not a pro-
fessional psychic, but does not privately experiment
outside the innermost circle of her intimate relatives
and friends. I shall Hot give any clue to the part of
the country in which she lives with her husband and
children. I shall call the lady Mrs. Quentin.

I received last spring some samples of her work
which was with the Ouija bocurd and was so pleased
with it that I was permitted to be present at an ex-
periment on the date of October 4th, 1906. There
were five persons present in all; except myself, none

129

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

but intimate relatives, of the same social rank as
Mrs. Quentin. The manner of ^^ conmiunicating " is
as follows.

Mrs. Quentin holds her finger tips on a piece of
glass like the bottom of a tumbler. There is no spe-
cial reason why it should be glass. Under some " in-
fluence " the fingers move the glass to the letters of
the alphabet which are arranged about a o^itral
square. After indicating a letter in the process of
spelling out '^messages" the hand returns to this
central square, and then, often after a pause, goes to
another letter of the word which is in the process of
spelling. Usually a word or sentence is spelled out
before a pause takes place. Various causes of ap-
parent embarrassment occur to determine a pause, but
it is not necessary to remark this fact. The im-
portant circumstance is that the hand moves about
over the Ouija board pointing out letters which spell
out intelligent ^' messages " purporting to come from
deceased persons. With this conception of what goes
on the reader will be prepared to understand the in-
terest that attaches to some of the incidents of the
process duplicated through Mrs. Piper.

At this experiment the " communicator '* purported
to be George Pelham. This is the published name of
a friend of Dr. Hodgson's who succeeded in establish-
ing his personal identity to Dr. Hodgson through
Mrs. Piper and was the main subject of the Report on
that case by Dr. Hodgson in 1898. George Pelham
gave the same initials through Mrs. Quentin that he
had given through Mrs. Piper, though no value can
be attached to that fact since Mrs. Quentin knew it,

130

EZPEKIMENTS WITH MBS. FIPEB

as sbe had read this Report. He had been ^^ com-
municator" some time previous to my experiment.
On this occasion of October 4th he gave some evi-
dence of his own identity in matters pertaining to
^ communications " at my first sitting with Mrs. Piper
in 1898. Mrs. Quentin had not read my Report on
these sittings and so had no knowledge of the facts.
After some incidents had been given that were not
relevant to the matter of '* cross references '* associated
with Dr. Hodgson, the following colloquy took place
in the manner described. I put in parentheses what
was said by myself and the rest is what was spelled
out on the Ouija board.

" (Well, George, have you seen any of my friends
recently?)

No, only Richard H.

(How is H?)

Progressive as ever.

(Is he clear?)

Not very.

(Do you mean when he communicates or in his nor-
mal state?)

Oh, all right normally. Only when he comes into
that wretched atmosphere he goes to pieces. Won-
der how long it will take to overcome this.

(Do you see Hodgson often?)

Yes, our lives run in parallels."

On the 10th of October I had an experiment with
Mrs. Piper, and of course kept absolutely secret both
that I had had this sitting of October 4th and the
contents of it. The following is what occurred in
reference to the sitting of October 4th, as the inci-

181

FSYCHICAI. KESEARCH AND THE BE8UBRECTION

dents will suggest. I shall have to quote the record
at considerable length. I adopt the same form as be-
fore. The square brackets indicate that the matter
enclosed consists of explanatory notes or comments
added after the experiment or at the time and do
not indicate anything that was said on the occasion.
After the preliminaries by the " control," who
claimed to have the assumed name of Rector, the fol-
lowing took place on the appearance of what claimed
to be Dr. Hodgson.

** I am Hodgson.

(Good, Hodgson, how are you?)

Capital. How are you, Hyslop, old chap?

(Fine.)

Good^ glad to hear it. Did you receive my last
message?

(When and where?) [I of course had in mind
the incidents from which the previous quotation is
taken.]

I told George to give it to you.

(Was that recently?)

Yes, very.

(I got something about you from George. May
be he can tell.)

[I was here thinking of George Pelham.]

Oh, yes, well I told him to tell you. I mean George
D [name written in full at the time.]

(No, he did not write to me.)

Too bad. Ask him about it, or better still I will
tell you myself. I said I tried to reach you and an-
other man whom I thought to be Funk.

(No.)

182

EXPEBIMENTS WITH MRS. FIFBE

I heard you say Van.

(I do not recall that word, but I think I know what
place it was.)

You called out Van. I heard it and tried to give
a message through him.

(I was not experimenting with a man, but you
might have seen a ^ light ' in him.) [The man pres-
ent on the occasion was in mind.]

Yes, I did, and I thought I could speak but I
found it too difficult. He did not seem to under-
stand.

(Did G. P. try?)

Yes, George did and said I was with him. Get it?

(I did not get any message of that kind, but he
said some things.)

He said he would help and he did so. You must
bear in mind that I am constantly watching out [for]
an opportunity to speak or get at you. Did I under-
stand the name right? I heard him say something
about light.

(Yes, that's correct.) [Reference had been made
by G. P. at that experiment to the Smead case.]

Do not think I am asleep, Hyslop. Not much. I
may not understand all that goes on, but I hear more
than I explain here.

(Yes, I understand.)

Therefore you must get what I can give here and
try to understand why it seems so fragmentary. I
do not feel your lack of interest, but I do feel great
difficulties in expressing [myself] through lights
[mediums].

(Yes, what * light ' was it that G«orge spoke
138

PSYCHICAL RESEABCH AND THE BESTTBRECTION

about?) [I thought of the Smead case, expecting
something would be said about it.]

He spoke about this [Mrs. Piper] and the woman
you experimented with."

[6. P. did spontaneously speak of the Piper case
at that sitting from which I quoted above, and also
made some pertinent and true statements about the
Smead case agreeing with what he had said about it
through Mrs. Piper some years ago, the facts not
hjftving been published and hence not known by Mrs.
Quentin.]

The thread of the communications was interrupted
at this point by a change of subject not relevant to
the " cross reference " incidents which concern us at
present. Some minutes later the matter was spon-
taneously resumed as follows.

" Did you hear me say George?

(When?)

At the lady's.

(No.)

I said it when I heard you say Van.

(Was that the last time I had an experiment?)

Yes, we do not want to make any mistake or con-
fusion in this, Hyslop.

(Did G. P. communicate with me there?)

He certainly did. Wasn't that FUNK?

(No, Funk was not there.)

Was it his son?

(No, it was not his son.)

It resembled him I thought. I may be mistaken
as I have seen him with a light recently.

(Do you know anything that George said to me?)
134

BXPEBIMEKTS WITH MRS. PIPER

I cannot repeat his exact words, but the idea was
that we were trying to reach you and communicate
there.

(Do you know the method by which the messages
came to us?)

We saw [Mrs. Piper's hand ceased writing

and began to move about the sheet of paper exactly
as did the hand of Mrs. Quentin when she spelled out
the words by the Ouija board. The most striking
feature of this identity was the tendency of Mrs.
Piper's hand to move back to the center of the sheet
as Mrs. Quentin's always did after indicating a let-
ter.]

(That's right.)

You asked the board questions and they came out
in letters.

(That's right.)

I saw the modus operandi well. I was pleased that
George spelled his name. It gave me great delight.
I heard you ask who was with him and he answered
R. Jlx*

(I asked him how you were.)

He said first rate or very well. I am not sure of
the exact words. Do you mind telling me just how
the words were understood. Was it very well or all
right?

(The words were * progressive as ever.')

Oh yesl I do not exactly recall those words, but
I heard your question distinctly, Hyslop. I leave no
stone unturned to reach you and prove my identity.
Was it not near water?

(Yes.)

1S6

PfTCHICAL RESSAECM AND THX KSSITBESCTIOK

And in a light room?

(Yes, that's correct.)

I saw you sitting at a table or near it.

(Yes, right.)

Another man present and the light [medium] was
near you.

(Yes.)

I saw the surroundings very clearly when Greorge
was speaking. I was taking it all in, so to speak."

At this point the subject was spontaneously
dropped and the communicator did not recur to it
again. The reader will easily observe the features of
identity in the two cases. In the case of Mrs. Quen-
tin, 6. P. did mention Mrs. Piper and made some
pointed remarks about Mrs. Smead, ^^ the woman that
I experimented with," and mentioned Dr. Hodgson.
The description here of the method of communicating
through Mrs. Quentin is perfectly accurate, though
wholly unknown to Mrs. Piper. Mrs. Quentin was
opposite me at the table on which the Ouija board
rested, and at my immediate right was a gentleman
aiding in the reading of the messages. He had no
resemblance to Dr. Funk. Two other men, however,
were present sitting farther off. One of them might
be mistaken by obscure perception for Dr. Funk, as
his iron gray beard and hair might suggest the man
named, but only to a mind which did not have clear
perceptions and was prepossessed with the idea of the
person he thought he saw.

It will be as apparent to the reader also that there
is much confusion in the communications and that the
communicator, on any theory of the phenomena, can-

136

EXPBBIMSNTS WITH MBS. PIPEB

not make the ^^ messages " as definite as we desire
them. The recognition of this fact by the com-
municator himself is an interesting circumstance, and
it is noticeable that he says that he knows more than
he can explain. Students of this problem and the
fragmentary nature of many messages will discover
the truth of the statement, as it is evident that far
more is in the mind of communicators than is regis-
tered through the writing and communications gen-
erally, a fact which would be much more natural on
the spiritistic theory than any other, assuming that
there are both mental and other difficulties on the
other side when communicating. But this aspect of
the problem is not the primary one in this paper.

In connection with the passages which I have just
quoted I saw my chance to test another " cross refer-
ence." I had previously made arrangements to have
an experiment with another psychic in Boston, and as
soon as I got the chance I indicated it, and the follow-
ing is the record. I was at the sitting with Mrs.
Piper.

^^(Now, Hodgson, I expect to try another case this
afternoon.)

SMITH. [Pseudonym.]

(Yes, that's right.)

I shall be there, and I will refer to Books and give
my initials R. H. only as a test.

(Good.)

And I will say books."

I was alone at the sitting with Mrs. Piper. She
was in a trance from which she recovers without any
memory of what happens or has been said during it.

187

PSYCHICAL ItBSEAftCfi AKD THE BSSITBRECTIOK

Three hours afterward I went to Mrs. Smith, who
did not know that I had been experimenting that day
with Mrs. Piper. After some general " communica-
tions *' by the control and a reference to some one who
was said to be interested in Dr. Hodgson, came the
following. In this case it was not by automatic writ-
ing as with Mrs. Piper, but by ordinary speech dur-
ing what is apparently a light trance.

^^ Beside him is Dr. Hodgson. It is part of a
promise to come to you to-day as he had just been to
say to you he was trying not to be intense, but he is
intense. I said I would come here. lam. I thought
I might be able to tell different things I already told.
Perhaps I can call up some past interviews and make
things more clear. Several things were scattered
around at different places. [I have several purported
communications from him through four other cases.]
He says he is glad you came and to make the trial
soon after the other.

[I put a pair of Dr. Hodgson's gloves which I had
with me in Mrs. Smith's hands.]

You know I don't think he wanted them to help him
so much as he wanted to know that you had them.
You have got something of his. It looks like a book,
like a note book, with a little writing in it. That is
only to let you know it."

At this point the subject was spontaneously
changed and I permitted things to take their own
course. A little later he returned to the matter and
the following occurred.

^^ There is s(Hnething he said he would do. He
said: * I would like to say a word.' I said I would

138

EXPEKlMlfiNTS WITH M&S. PIPXA

8ay — I know it's a word [last evidently the psychic's
mind.] Your name isn't it? [apparently said by
psychic to the ccnnmunicator.] I said I would say :
— Each time the word slips. [Pause.] I am afraid

I can't get it. It sounds Looks as if it had

about seven or eight letters. It is all shaky and
wriggly, so that I can't see it yet.

Can't you write it down for him so I can see?
[apparently said to the communicator.] C [psy-
chic shakes her head.] [Pause.] [Psychic's fin-
gers then write on the table.] Would it mean any-
thing like ' Comrade ' ? ( No. ) He goes away again.
(AU right. Don't worry.) [Pause.] Let me take
your other hand. [Said to me. I placed my left
hand in the psychic's.] No good. [Pause.] I'm
trying to do it. I know that he has just come from
the other place, and kept his promise to say a word."

The reader will notice that I got the reference to
books, the promise to say a word, and an apparent at-
tempt to give the other promised message which was
not successful. It is noticeable that the word *^ in-
itials " has seven letters in it.

The message is not so clear as the most exacting
critic might demand, but we must remember that we
are not dealing with well established methods of com-
munication involving perfect command over the men-
tal and cosmic machinery for this purpose. The
main point is that there is a coincidence of personality
and message in the case where it was not previously
known that any such reference to books would be rele-
vant. For those of us who are familiar with this
type of phenomena it is perfectly intelligible to find

189

PSTCHICAI« 1LE8EAKCH AND THB KESITBKECTION

a rambling and incoherent manner in referring to the
subject. We assume as a fundamental part of the
hypothesis an abnormal mental condition of the me-
dium through which the communications come and
also of the agent that is instrumental in sending them.
That, if true, may well account for the confused way
in which the message is obtained and its setting of
delirious and irrelevant matter. The reference to a
promise, to its having been made that very day, to
my having been at the other ^^ light," to the correct
name of the party, all but this name being absolutely
unknown to the medium, when associated with the
reference to books, makes a striking coincidence which
hardly seems due to chance or guessing.

I should add in this connection another important
incident which will strengthen the coincidence involved
in the facts just told. I had another experiment the
same evening with another young lady who is not a
professional and with whose mother I had been in
correspondence for some time. I had arranged some
time before to have a sitting for that evening. I did
not give the slightest hint that I was to be in Boston
for any other business and no one of the family was
informed of my arrival two days previously or of my
intentions of having sittings with Mrs. Piper and
Mrs. Smith. When I arranged to go out to the
house with the mother I made it appear that I had
arrived from New York only a half hour before.
Hence it was not known to the mother or to the young
lady that I had had any other experiments that day.

At the experiment with Mrs. Piper I had used a
pair of old gloves which Dr. Hodgson had worn, —

140

SXPXBIMSNTS WITH HBS. PIPBB

the same being used for purposes which experimenters
in this field understand — and I had placed the same
articles in the hands of Mrs. Smith when I got the
reference to books. When I had my experiment with
the young lady mentioned later in the evening of the
same day it was some time before I placed the same
gloves in her hands. When I did she paused a few
minutes, made a general remark, and then said: ^^ I
get books in connection with these."

The coincidence again is apparent and whether it is
to have any causal significance will depend upon the
judgment of each reader who is capable of estimating
the character of such phenomena.

There was another coincidence which involved a
** cross reference.'' At the experiment with Mrs.
Piper that day, Dr. Hodgson referred to a " stylo-
graphic pen " which he said he wished me to have.
The probable object of this reference was to a circum-
stance connected with similar experiments elsewhere,
as it seems to be an important part of these experi-
ments that we should have some article of the com-
municator's to " hold " him, whatever that means.
But this aside, the fact is that Dr. Hodgson had a
special stylographic pen which was necessary when-
ever a certain one of the trance personalities controlled
the writing of Mrs. Piper's hand. He had several
fountain pens which he used for his own purposes,
but his stylographic pen was necessary when Imper-
sonator, the chief of the trance personalities, influ-
enced the automatic writing. But whatever his ob-
ject in alluding to this pen and saying that he
wanted me to have it, at this later sitting on the same

141

nrCHICAl. KBflBAmOH A3n> THS BSSiniBXCTIOK

day an aDiiskm was made to ^ a pen which he car-
ried in his pocket " and the statement was made that
^it had a little ring aroond it." I do not know
whether the stylographic pen had a ring aroond it
or not, as I was not able to obtain the pen, all of these
little trinkets baring been given to his friends as
mementos. But there was the coincidence of this ap-
parent reference to the same thing at both sittings.

Allusion was also made at both sittings to the
Institute and characteristic references with statements
about our co-operation in it which was not known by
either medium. One was to a letter which Dr. Hodg-
son wrote to me a few weeks before his death about an
intended meeting in New Tork to consider the plans
of the Institute. Similar allusions were also made to
the organization of an independent Society and its re-
lations to the English body.

But a more important instance occurred. If the
reader will turn to the February number of the Jour-
nal (p. 106) he will find there an important allusion
to a man in Washington who was said to be a medium
and to a letter which the communicator, Dr. Hodg-
son, said he may not have written to me about the
case. The facts represented by this incident, the
reader will recall, were not known by me and were only
accidentally learned afterward. This aUusion was
made in the spring, but it was locked up in my record
and the lady with whom I was now holding a sitting
knew nothing of this incident. But, after an allusion
to a lady who was closely connected with Dr. Hodgson
in the experiments with Mrs. Piper, there apparently
came from him the following:

14S

EXPERIMENTS WITH MSS. PIPEK

" Have you been to Washington lately? '*

(Not specially.)

" Is there any psychological work there? I see
people who are interested and who will help you in
your work. May not be able all at once, but will do
it in time.'*

There is no absolute assurance that the incidents
are identical in their import, but they are close enough
to suggest their probable meaning. The very men-
tion of Washington in both sets of experiments and
associating it with my experimental work is at least a
suggestion in the same direction, though we should
desire clearer indications of identity.

While referring to this experiment in which the
" cross references " occur I might allude to other inci-
dents which apparently represent supernormal knowl-
edge and purport to come from Dr. Hodgson.
Their value lies in the fact that they are incidents ob-
tained independently of Mrs. Piper.

There was a fair description given of George Pel-
ham, the deceased friend of Dr. Hodgson and who
had, after his death, convinced Dr. Hodgson of his
survival. It was not evidential, but certain state-
ments about his being around at experiments was
made which is confirmed by evidence of his presence at
various other experiments which I have had and which
are not known to any one but myself.

It may be worth remarking also that an allusion
was made to " a little boy four or five years old " and
it was said also: ^^ He is grown up. He wears a
little blouse and little pants like knickerbockers,'' fol-
lowed by a reference to the family circle. I had a

143

F8YCHICAI. KB8XABCH AKB THX XXSUBmSCTIOK

brother who died in 1864 at four and a half years of
age. The clothes that he wore are correctly described
here and we have always kept a picture of him in
this suit. His name and death are mentioned in my
Report published in 1901, but no allusion was made
to his dress there. It was later, in sittings with Mrs.
Piper, that practically the same reference was made to
this dress, and the records of that allusion have not
been published.

Another instance possibly involves a '* cross refer-
ence " and certainly suggests supernormal knowledge
of an interesting kind. Mr. Frederic W. H. Myers
purported to communicate with me at this same meet-
ing. Having in mind his alleged communication with
me through another medium, Mrs. Smead, mentioned
on page 222, I asked a question when he purported
to be present at this sitting held the same day as the
one with Mrs. Piper. The following is what oc-
curred with Mrs. Smith:

"Mr. Myers. (Yes.) You . . . [incom-
plete notes] Myers. He smiles. We are brothers."

(Are you there, Mr. Myers?)

" Yes, right here."

(All right. Have you tried to communicate with
me?)

"Yes, not here. Another place where there is a
younger guide, a man, not Piper, another place in a
city. Don't get name through. What we all want
is unity of expression through different mediums
[un] swayed by their personality, if it helps us to do
this well through two or three. We should do it
many times."

144

EXPEBIMENT8 WITH MBS. PIFEB

(Groody you have done that through one case.)

" Yes I know, but we must do it several times. We
don't have any question but that it can be done. We
must have the key to shut out the personality of the
medium. He says he will do that.''

The kind of experiment here alluded to was a favor-
ite one in the plans of Mr. Myers when living and
some experiments were performed by himself and Dr.
Hodgson in this direction, though the facts were never
made public. The characteristic may have been gen-
erally known and hence I do not refer to it as evi-
dential, but only as suggestive of his identity. The
important points, however, are the correct statements
that he had communicated with me elsewhere and
neither at this case nor at Mrs. Piper's. He never
communicated with me at Mrs. Piper's, a fact which
was not known by any one but myself. He did pur-
port to communicate with me through Mrs. Smead,
where the control was a young man.

I come now to a complicated series of " cross ref-
erences " of which I cannot give the exact details,
as the matter is private and personal, though not so to
myself. At the last sitting with Mrs. Piper, Dr.
Hodgson spontaneously alluded to it and stated that
it was private and advised me against the project.
The facts were known to but three other persons
then living. Dr. Hodgson had not known it when
living. I kept the facts so communicated absolutely
secret, not reporting them to those who keep the Piper
records, but filing the matter in my own iron box.

A few weeks later my wife, who passed away some
years ago, purported to communicate through Mrs.

145

PSYCHICAL SESEAKCH AND THS XBSUBKECTIOK

Smead and spontaneously alluded to the same project,
approving of it. Mrs. Smead knew nothing of the
facts and nothing of allusions to them through Mnu
Piper.

Through another private medium, not a profes-
sional in any respect, in another city, whose psychic
powers suddenly came to her knowledge all unwit-
tingly last spring, my father purported to communi-
cate, and alluding to the same facts approved of the
project in the identical language which he used in
life regarding such matters. As a test of the case,
and thinking of what Dr. Hodgson had communicated
through Mrs. Piper, I asked him what Dr. Hodgson
thought about it. His inunediate reply was that he
was opposed to it and that he had frequently spoken
to him about it. In giving what was alleged to be
Dr. Hodgson's opinion on the matter he used an
expression which was exactly the sentiment that Dr.
Hodgson had expressed to me some years before his
death when we were returning on a boat from Nan-
tasket Beach. Presently Dr. Hodgson purported to
take the place of my father as communicator and
showed an attitude of disapproval, but was argued
by myself at the time into a half-hearted acceptance
of the facts, as a test of the mental attitude of com-
municators. In the process of our communications
he showed exactly the mental attitude which he had
always taken on these matters.

Another instance which is not so complicated and
hence not so strong, is interesting. On November
SSnd, 1906, I had an experiment with Mrs. Quentin
again and the first communicator purported to be Dr.

146

EXPESIMENTS WITH MAS. FIPBB

Hodgson* He did not succeed in getting anything
evidential through. He was followed by my father
who was quite successful in several incidents, and he
by my wife who succeeded in one suggestive message.
The method employed was the Ouija board. On
November 87th I had a sitting with the lady men-
tioned above who resides in another dty five hundred
miles distant from the place in which Mrs. Quentin
lives and who, as said, is a private person. Dr. Hodg-
son purported to communicate and the following col-
loquy occurred, my father purporting to be the con-
trol:

"(Is any one with you?)''

Yes, Hodgson [written * Hodgkins,' though the
lady knew well how to spell the name]."

(Gk)od, will he try?)

I will talk for him at first.

(How are you Hodgson?)
I I am still a little shaky, but have hopes that soon

j I will be as strong as anybody.

(Did you try a few days ago at another place?
How did they try to communicate?)

Yes, but could not work there. By talking with
the planchette.

(Good, who else tried there?)

Your wife. Your father succeeded."

As remarked above the Ouija board was the means
employed on November SSnd, and as this is closely
allied to the planchette the mistake is not an important
one. In all cases except Mrs. Piper, Dr. Hodgson
apparently is very " shaky " and finds it exceedingly
difficult if not impossible to communicate. He shows

X47

PSYCHICAL KESEAB.CH AND THE RESURRECTION

much agitation in the Piper case, and that seems
the only instance but one in which he seems to get
good messages through. The interest attaching to
the way in which he here speaks of my father's suc-
cess can be determined by the reader. As the lady
through whom these messages came was not in a trance
we may assume, from her knowledge of the sittings
of the three previous days, that she might guess
that my father and my wife had tried, so that I
cannot give as much weight to that fact as would
otherwise be the case. The coincidences taken to-
gether, however, have their value, and each reader
may estimate that according to his knowledge of
the subject.

Another brief incident may be worth mentioning.
I went to St. Louis to try a private case, and though
the lady was not a good psychic I got some evidence
of Dr. Hodgson's presence. This was not good
enough to attach any special weight to it, save that
the peculiarly shaky style of writing and the form
of expression were characteristic of what was done
in the Piper case when he purported to communicate.
His name was written in a characteristic manner, and
when I asked how he was I got the reply : " Fine.'*'
This was the word that he had used occasionally in
the Piper sittings some months before. This, of
course, could not have any special weight by itself,
but as a concomitant of manner and phrase that were
characteristic it should have a place in the record
of attempts to get messages from him. The chief
value of this and similar incidents is the light which
they throw upon the difficulties of getting evidential

148

EXPERIMENTS WITH MBS. PIFE&

matter in support of the theory which the phenomena
seem to favor.

To give the fact more weight than it would have
by itself I should call the reader's attention to a cir-
cumstance that occurred in the fall a short time after
my return from this experiment in the west. This
experiment was near the end of September. On
October 10th, at Mrs. Piper's, Dr. Hodgson, pur-
porting to communicate, and after an allusion to an
experiment in the summer, out west, said: "I saw
you experimenting with another lady. I tried to
say Hodgson. Did you get it?" It was his full
name that I got with the word " fine " in answer
to my greeting. The lady, of course, knew that he
had passed away and that I would be experimenting
for him. But this allusion to another lady than the
one in the sunmier, and the name, tends to suggest
that the incident may be one of " cross reference."
Its value, if it be what it seems, consists in the multi-
plication of the references that tend to add strength
to the evidence of the supernormal whose explanation
is obvious when we have excluded fraud and secondary
personahty.*

* I have a still better and much more complicated instance
of "cross reference" incidents. But as it does not affect
Dr. Hodgson or his personality I cannot detail its features
here. It involves the prediction through two different and
private mediums of the death of a specific person indicated
with perfect clearness, relationship to me and another person
being stated. I did not myself know that the person was
dangerously ill at the time. Also, throu^ both mediums I
was told that a certain deceased person was watching over him
and would meet him. Through three mediums who did not
know of his death and only a few weeks after it, two of them
private cases and the other a respectable public medium, this
person was mentioned with the most of his name^ and tl^

149

PSTCHICAIi BESEASCH AND THE BESUB&ECTION

I shall pass now from incidents involving " cross
reference " to those which do not, and confine myself
to what came through Mrs. Piper on October 10th.
They may be more specific than the type which I
have just illustrated, and must be adjudged by the
reader according to his tastes.

Immediately after the description of the incidents
connected with the Ouija board experiment, Dr.
Hodgson, through the automatic writing of Mrs.
Piper, said:

"I saw you recently writing up all I have said
to you.

(That's right, Hodgson.)

And it pleased me very much.

(I am going to print it in the Journal.)

Amen. You have my consent. I wish the world
to know that I was not an idiot.

(All right. That's good.)

Do you remember a joke we had about Gkorge's
putting his feet on the chair and how absurd we
thought it.

(George who?)

Pelham, in his description of his life here.

(No, you must have told that to some one else.)

fact that he met the person who^ I was told, would meet him
as he crossed the boraer.

The value of the inddents depends mainly upon the reli-
ability of the sources through wnich they came, and I shall
urge that less here than I shall its evidential value, if the
trustworthiness of the facts can be accepted. I cannot ex-
plain here why they can be trusted, but shall do so when
the detailed record is published. But their hypothetical im-
portance can be considered from the standpoint of ''cross
reference" while we await the guarantees that normal knowl-
edge of the facts was not possible.

150

£XP£EtMENTS WITH M&S. PtPfiA

Oh, perhaps It was Billy. Ask him."

This, as I said, was on October 10th. During
the summer, some time in August, I had been writing
out the first and the third papers which are being
published in the Journal on Dr. Hodgson's purported
communications. The fact was known only to myself
and one or two other persons. The attitude of Dr.
Hodgson in approval of it was entirely characteristic.
He was anxious, when living, to have his judgment
in the case vindicated, and while he might not have
used the exact language employed in this connection
he would have expressed himself plainly in the matter.
The use of " idiot " is quite characteristic of Greorge
Pelham's ways, and he may have been an intermediary.

The other incident I knew nothing about. But I
knew what " Billy '' referred to. This was the name
by which he had always called Prof. Newbold, and
so I made inquiry of him regarding the pertinence of
the incident. He replied that he and Dr. Hodgson
had laughed heartily at some statements of George
Pelham, when he was trying to communicate after
his death, about the way he did when he was commu-
nicating. He claimed that he was in the medium's
head and his feet on the table while he was trying
to communicate through her hand. The description
is ludicrous enough, but the incident, perhaps, is
good enough to prove identity, and the best part of
its value is that I did not know the facts.

Perhaps a more interesting incident is a frag-
mentary and confused message whose meaning at
the moment I did not detect, but it became apparent
soon afterward when I had investigated the matter

161

PSYCHICAL EESEAECH AND THE EEStJBBBCTION

further. The following wets communicated in the
same manner as previous quotations:

** Do you recall the man I referred to now?

(You did not . . . . ) [My sentence not finished
as writing continued.]

The clergyman whom we saw at Pa. San, whose
wife was anxious about his trances.

(No, you did not mention him.)

I did some time ago. Do you remember him?

(What was his name?)

It was San. . San. . Oh what was it. He was a
young man and had not been married long."

The facts are these: The Rev. Stanley L. Erebs
invited me to take part in some experiments in a
certain town in Pennsylvania (Pa.) in which he was
to have present a certain clergyman, whose name I
must not reveal at present, and who had come thither
to test certain incidents that had been mentioned
through him in a previous trance. He was a young
man and had not been long married. His wife was
opposed to his going into trances. We tried some
experiments at table tipping and one with this clergy-
man's trance. I reported the facts to Dr. Hodgson
and Mr. Erebs had some correspondence with Dr.
Hodgson regarding the case. There was every reason
to believe the phenomena were genuine. But the man's
name has no resemblance to ^^ San," and Dr. Hodg-
son was not present with me at the experiments and
I suspect never saw the clergyman. But he knew
all about the case and its phenomena. Apparently
" San " is a confused and fragmentary attempt to
give the name " Stanley," a part of Mr. Ereb's name,

152

EXPEEIMENTS WITH MRS. PIPEE

this latter part of it having failed to be recalled by
the communicator. It can be safely assumed that
Mrs. Piper never heard of the case, and if she had,
the incidents would never have taken the form which
they did. The confusion and fragmentary character
of the allusions make them interesting and important.

Another brief incident has much interest, as re-
flecting the natural action of an independent mind
rather than that of a telepathic agent. It is a re-
quest that I remember him to a friend whom I did not
know, and most probably never saw. He said to me
near the close of this same sitting : ^^ Do you remem-
ber a friend of mine, George Goddard, at the camp?
Give him my love and tell him I live to send it.''

I have learned from Prof. James that Mr. Goddard
had been a member of Putman's Camp in the Adiron-
dacks where Dr. Hodgson usually spent a part of
his summer vacations. I called twice on Dr. Hodg-
son while he was there, spending a couple of hours
there with him each time. But I do not recall meet-
ing Mr. Goddard there, and it is improbable that
Mrs. Piper ever knew anything of the man or his
relation to Dr. Hodgson at this camp. The main
point of the incident, assuming that it is supernormal,
is that it is too much like the action of a real living
friend to be attributed to a mechanical agency like
telepathy, which, in fact, does not seem to me to be
deserving of serious consideration in such incidents.
A simple and more natural interpretation, if we are
going to be sceptical about the most obvious explana-
tion, is Mrs. Piper's previous knowledge of the fact,
a supposition which it is hardly necessary to make

153

PSYCHICAL &ESEARCH AND THE EESUEEECTION

in the light of the proved supernormal character
of most of her work.

The explanation of these facts takes us beyond
the case of Mrs. Piper as every intelligent reader
must observe. That has been the purpose of group-
ing together the instances of " cross reference " in this
article. Members of the Society for Psychical Re-
search have constantly reproached us for having no
other oracle than Mrs. Piper and for making our
case depend upon her phenomena alone. That re-
proach cannot be cast against the contents of this
chapter. We have involved here five other cases of
similar phenomena. Moreover it should be noticed in
this connection that the reproach made against the
limitation of the case to Mrs. Piper was based upon
an entire misunderstanding of the problem and of
the reason for talking so much about her. It was
not the nature of the phenomena that was the reason
for laying so much weight upon it, but the conditions
under which they were obtained. Genuine phenomena
may be plentiful enough, but scientific credentials
may be very scarce. What the Society has been
searching for so strenuously was scientific proof and
this requires such conditions as exclude the possWUity
of certain well known objections which the sceptic
has the right to have answered, though he too fre-
quently entertains them without making himself re-
sponsible for the evidence that they are in fact ap-
plicable. But we shall never secure our case until it
is made impossible rationally to suggest the common
objections to the genuineness of mediumistic phe-
nomena.

154

BXPB&IMSNT8 WITH H&8. FlPSB

Now it is the scientific security of the Piper case
against all possible objections of fraud that has oc-
casioned the perpetual appeal to it as evidence that
the ordinary objections to the nature of the facts do
not apply. Nevertheless it is important, both for
the further exclusion of the right to suspect fraud
and for the complication of the phenomena, that we
should not only secure other and similar cases, but
also a complex system of ^^ cross references," both
of which this book supplies. Whatever explanation
be proposed it must reckon with these facts. Besides,
I have quoted cases of a private nature only, save
one, Mrs. Smith, who was protected against suspicion
by the small interval of time between the sitting with
her and that of Mrs. Piper, as well as the reservation
of facts which I made in the matter and the limitation
to myself of the knowledge which it was necessary
for her to have in order to simulate the supemonnal.
In all other cases I was dealing with private psychics,
and private also in the sense that they are not prac-
ticing their art even for their friends in any general
way, as well as not receiving any pay for their exper-
iments. The one case which is not private has no
suspicions raised against her, and even if they were
they could not apply to the experiment from which I
quote, for the reasons mentioned. Consequently we
must at least suppose that we are dealing with facts
less exposed than is usually the case to sceptical crit-
icism.

There are just three hypotheses which are capable
of discussion in connection with such facts. They
are (1) Fraud, (8) Telepathy, and (8) Spirits.

166

PSYCHICAL EESEA&CH AND THE RESUREECTION

Secondary personality would not be presented as an
alternative by any one who knows what that phe-
nomenon is. Secondary personality, in respect of
the contents of its mental action, claims to be limited
to the normal action of the senses, and is distinguished
from fraud in that its whole character is unconscious,
while fraud is properly conscious deception by the
normal subject. If fraud in this case be excluded
from view there can be no doubt that such facts as
have been enumerated are supernormal, whatever the
specific explanation. But secondary personality never
assumes the supernormal acquisition of knowledge.
It is limited to what has been obtained in a normal
manner by the subject. Hence it is excluded from
view by virtue of that fact.

As to fraud, that has been excluded from considera-
tion in the Piper case for fifteen or twenty years, and
only unintelligent men would talk about it any longer.
It has come to a pass where any one who insinuates
it must be held responsible for the evidence of his
hypothesis. As far as possible I endeavored to con-
duct the ex]>eriments in most cases in a manner that
would require the critic to implicate myself in any
fraud suspected, and in any case of that possibility
I am hardly competent to investigate myself. But
some of the facts make it necessary to impUcate me
in any theory of fraud. In so far as the mediums
are concerned, I think it cannot even be suspected
without evidence, unless the one case which is pro-
fessional be conceded to the sceptic. For that reason
I think it can be dismissed from the account, especially
«LS the one case which certain types of minds would

156

£XP£&lM£KtS WITH MES. PIF£A

desire to except does not figure in any incidents where
criticism of any kind is possible.

I do not think that telepathy as an explanation will
fare any better. In fact I should be ashamed, as
one who has tried to be scientific, to advance telepathy
as an explanation of any such facts. Any man who
knows what he means by the use of this term would
not venture to suppose it an explanation. As I ex-
pect to discuss the nature of telepathy in a later
chapter I shall not give any special reasons for reject-
ing it in such facts as have been collected here. I
merely say that really scientific men who know what
they are talking about, would not, in the light of the
evidence, have the temerity to propose it as an ade-
quate theory of phenomena involving such a system
of " cross references " illustrative of the personal
identity of deceased persons and nothing else. I
do not think the hypothesis worthy of serious defense.
It is an hypothesis worthy only of intellectual prudes.
I should much prefer fraud as an explanation; for
we have analogies and experiences enough to make
that intelligible, but for the kind of telepathy nec-
essary to cover such facts we have no adequate sci-
entific evidence whatever. It cannot be tolerated as
an hypothesis in such cases until its claims have been
established for such selective work.

As to the third hypothesis, namely, that of spirits,
I shall not undertake any dogmatic defense. It is
obvious to me that it is the most rational hypothesis
after eliminating fraud from such matters, and my
own stand in various publications would indicate what
position I would preferably assume. But it is not

167

MtCiaXCAL BESEA&CH AKD THE ftEStJ&EECTIOK

my desire in this article to argue for this conclusion.
My main purpose has been to present the facts and
to leave the reader to form his own conclusion, but
to do this without concealing the preference which
everyone perhaps knows I would make. I am quite
willing to concede to many who have not spent a long
time in the investigation of this complex subject the
right still to be sceptical, and especially to doubt the
conclusiveness of the facts making for the theory
which seems to me the most plausible. I can only
say to them that I have not made up my mind upon
these facts alone, but upon the whole mass of pub-
lished and unpublished records of psychical research.
What I here publish is but an illustration of some
of the most interesting and perhaps most cogent facts.
But I shall not insist that they should be conclusive
for the sceptic. The utmost that I shall urge upon
him is that they make adequate investigation im-
I>erative, and seeing that the phenomena illustrate
the selective reference to the personal identity of
deceased persons I think almost any one will admit
that, assuming fraud to have been excluded, they
make out a forcible case for the further investigation
of spiritistic theories.

168

CHAPTER Vn

CONCLUSION OF EXPEEIMENTS REIiATiyE TO DB. HODG-
SON; THEORIES.

t

I have hitherto presented matter which may be sup-
posed to have claims for evidential character, that is,
something supernormal whatever the theory intended
for their explanation. It may be interesting to take
up some of the non-evidential matter in illustration
of features which we have to ignore when dealing with
scientific scepticism and which yet represent important
psychological material in the record.

The reader must remember two things in such a
record as that of Mrs. Piper. (1.) There is much .
material that no scientific man would suspect to have
a spiritistic source on its superficial appearance. (S.)
The communications also exhibit usually a certain
kind of confusion and fragmentary nature that per-
plexes scientific men and the public generally. In
dealing with the supernormal phenomena we have
often to ignore these facts and this may as often give
a false impression of the real character of the com-
munications for which we are asking credence as
coming from a transcendental world. It is, therefore,
only fair to all persons and important to science that
we should understand what the matter is upon which
no stress can be laid in the argument for the super-
normal. The facts which impress us as evidence of
the transcendental are scattered about in a matrix

169

FSYCHICAIi BESEABCH AND THE BESUB&ECTION

of alleged communications which we cannot treat evi-
dentially as such at all. But, although many com-
munications are of such a type as not to be conclu-
sive evidence of the supernormal, there are many
which are confirmatory and have great value as il-
lustrating what we should most naturally expect on
some hypothesis of their explanation. For this rea-
son they will have an interest scarcely less important
to science than the actually evidential incidents. I
shall, therefore, devote some space to a brief account
of some of these data in the records just quoted. I
shall only repeat to the reader that I am not quoting
this matter in any respect as evidence of either spirits
or the supernormal. If we have any reasons for be-
lieving it to have the same source as the actually
supernormal facts this conviction must have other
grounds than their superficial claims. After the evi-
dential demands of the supernormal have been satis-
fied, the unity of all the phenomena with this conclu-
sion may be sufficient to make a respectable claim for
that source in the non-evidential statements, but I
shall not urge this view of the communications which
I expect to quote now. Readers may entertain what-
ever view they please. I shall insist only that the
statements are a part of the record making a claim
for the existence of spirits.

One of the first things that the trance personalities
wished to do at the sittings referred to was to talk
to me about my plans. They assumed the role of
superior guides and advisers and undertook to smooth
down my temper which had been considerably ruffled
by the ruthless disregarding of plans which had beeo

160

CONCLUSION OF EXPEBIMENTS ; THEOBIES

formulating for several years to put the work upon
a better basis than it had ever been. There can be
no question of the patience and tact with which these
personalities handled the matter, though I do not
know how much it had been discussed by other sitters
prior to my experiments. It is probable that the
whole mass of advice is attributable to the suggestions
of other sitters. But I am less concerned with this
or any other explanation than with the bare fact of
psychological fitness and reality about it. I will say,
however, that only one or two persons knew my state
of mind and one of these was far distant from Bos-
ton. It was therefore interesting to see how clearly
the trance personalities knew my mental condition.
They wanted to know what I was worrying about,
and the answer on my part to this query led to a
thorough threshing out of the matter in a perfectly
intelligible manner representing all the play of reality
not less interesting to the psychologist than the
phenomena having better cledms to a supernormal
source.

When Dr. Hodgson took his turn to communicate,
I badgered him a little for going before I did when
he had expected to have the pleasure of hearing from
me first. I had broken down in health some years
before and did not expect to recover. After a little
chivalry on his part, as if aware of the mood in which
I was at the time, namely, that of a resolution to
abandon the work forever, he said : " Stick to it,
Hyslop. I hope you will not give up the ghost."
He then broke out with the statement : " I shall not
stop to talk rubbish, but let us get down to facts,"

161

T9TCBICAl» mXSKAKCH AMD

tfaof AarmetaiMtietJlj rrtngamng that it wms evi-
denoe, not mere c oninninimHn D whidi we wanted. At
cnetf tfaeref orey he asked me if I lemembeied Hie
difficiiltiet wbidi we had in ref erenoe to my Beport,
the fact being that we had many long dJamffiians
about it* I asked him piesently if he remembered
the word widdb he said he would ha^e expected me
to oonmranicate in proof of identity. It was a word
that I had osed of tener than he liked, thoogfa he ad-
mitted that it described exactly what the facts needed.
He had said he would neirer beUeve it was I if I did
not oommunicate that word. It was quite to the
pointy tharefore, when his reply was: ^ I do not
at the moment, but I will recall and repeat it for
you. I remember how we joked about it." In fact,
we had joked about it considerably. I have never
mentioned the circumstance or the word to any other
living person, and I shall not mention the word to
any one. In reply I told him to take his time and
then came the following: —

** Surely I am not going to make a botch of any-
thing if I can help it. It is so suffocating here.
I can appreciate their difficulties better than ever
before. Gret my card?" alluding in the question
to the fact that he had prepared his usual Christmas
cards for his friends, but they were not sent out
until after his death. The mention of the difficulties
in communication was quite characteristic, as repre-
senting the problem which we had often discussed
together and which we wished to have presented more
thoroughly before the public.

After some further references to experiments which
16«

CONCLUglON OF EXPERIMENTS; THEORIES

we had wished to carry out while living he interrupted
the communications with an allusion to an unverifiable
experience after death. He said: ^^ It is delightful
to go up through the cool ethereal atmosphere into
this life and shake off the mortal body." He had
himself believed that the spiritual world was ethereal
and we have in this passage one of the many interpola-
tions of communicators which represent possibilities
but not evidence of what these phenomena purport
to be.

I come now to a passage which shows a number
of interesting and important characteristics. The
one to which I wish to call special attention is the
abrupt change of subject that so often occurs in
these phenomena. It is one that serves more or less
as evidence of the theory that the mental condition
necessary for communication, at least in the ^^ pos-
session " type of mediumship, is like a delirious dream
or a wandering and dreaming secondary personaUty.
Besides this abrupt change of topic the reader will
notice also interpolations of various sorts which indi-
cate the same conception of the process. A more
important observation, however, to be made is one that
no reader will realize who did not know Dr. Hodgson
personally and intimately. It is the expression of
thoughts which he would not have expressed while
living in the way they are done here. There is an
emotional color in the communications at times that
would have been inhibited in his natural conversation.
The presence of this in them points to the existence
of a trance condition on the ^^ other side " as neces-
sary for communication with this. I do not say that

163

PSYCHICAL JtESEAUCH AND THE SESUSIIECTION

it proves this, but that it consists with the hypothesis
made on other grounds, though it does not explain all
the perplexities which accompany phenomena of this
kind. The passage which I wish to quote began
with a more or less evidential reference to an incident
connected with my brother in my Report published
in 1901. My brother had taken serious objection to
what I had said there and hence I put on record with
Dr. Hodgson the facts confirmed by the testimony
of three other persons as a check against any possible
criticism of them. Let me note also for the reader
that I never "told" him about it, but I uvote out
the facts and sent the documents to him by mail.
This feature of the communications is one of those
mistakes which are so common and so natural to a
dream-like mental state that the form of the mes-
sages when evidential at all makes them especially
cogent against the unscientific objection of telepathy
in the case. To come then to the passage.

" Do you remember telling me about some objec-
tions your brother made because these good friends
told about him.^

(Yes, I remember that well indeed.)

I cannot forget anything if you give me time to
recall. You must have great patience with me as
I am not what I hope to be later.

(All right, Hodgson. Do you find that we con-
jectured the difficulties fairly well?)

We did surprisingly well. I was surprised enough.
Is my writing more difficult than it used to be.?

(It is about the same.)

Do you remember anything about it?
164

CONCLUSION OF EXPEBIMENTS ; THEOBIES

(Yes, I do.)

I remember your comments about it, and much was
left me to explain.

(Yes, that is true.)

Of course it's true. Think I am less intelligent
because I am in the witness box.''

(No, I understand the di£5culties.)

I hope you do, but this is the happiest moment of
coming over here. I mean in meeting you again.

(All right, Hodgson. I feel that it would have
been better for you to lead on this side.)

Perhaps, but I am satisfied. Do you remember
how I said to you I sometimes longed to get over here.

(Yes, I expect that was true and I have heard
persons say you said it.)

I did often. I longed to see this beautiful country
if I may so express it." Then followed the incident
of our meeting in New York mentioned above.

Now the reader should know that Dr. Hodgson
never once expressed to me the desire to pass to the
other side. But as my statement implies I have heard
others say that he had this wish. It was an intense
wish of Frederic W. H. Myers, and from the pri-
vations which Dr. Hodgson had to suffer in his work
I can well imagine that he may often have wished to
be where " the wicked ceased from troubling and the
weary are at rest." But in asking me if I remem-
bered his saying it, his memory lapsed, as would be
natural in the " suffocating " condition of which com-
plaint is made by more than one communicator.

The reader will remark that he admits the hypothe-
sis which we had applied to the communicator's condi-

166

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

tion while communicating. Then he suddenly changes
to the question of his own handwriting which has
some relation to the point or issue which I had raised
about the difficulties of communicating. But the form
of his question points to a recollection, which, though
explicable by Mrs. Piper's knowledge of the same,
suggests on any theory a wandering consciousness.
His handwriting was a very difficult one for me to
read and others of his friends recognized that it
was very scrawly. The allusion to my conmients on
it is perfectly true. As we wrote to each other on
important matters, and as I could not read his writing
at times, I had on several occasions to return his let-
ters and ask for his interpretation of his own writing,
and I indulged in some humorous observations about
it referring to what a time I would have with it when
he came to be a communicator, if our hypothesis about
the difficulties of communication were true. Then as
if under the excitement of recognition he becomes
perfectly clear and breaks out into a natural tone
of banter for supposing that what he says may not
be true, though the very clearness of his intelligence
at the time indicates a marginal conviction that he is
not always so in the attempt to communicate. Then
that lucid moment runs into an emotional outburst
about his happiness at meeting me, a mood which
might be natural enough for the time and place and
perhaps reflecting in the message the impossibility of
hindering the passage of mental states from beyond
into the automatic consciousness or sub-consciousness
of Mrs. Piper, but certainly also indicating what his

166

CONCLUSION OF £XP£EIM£NTS ; THEORIES

friends would recognize as an interest which he would
not express in words while living.

At the next sitting when he turned up to commu-
nicate he began to reproach me for losing my grit in
this work, as it was known in some way that I meant
to abandon it unless some reasonable spirit of co-
operation was shown by those managing affairs. In
the process of our interview on this matter he became
greatly excited and confused and the hand wrote so
heavily and rapidly that it tore the paper and when
we managed to have it calm down the following came
and was most likely the interpolation of the control
or trance personality.

^^ In leaving the body the shock to the spirit knocks
everything out of one's thoughts for awhile, but if
he has any desire at all to prove his identity he can
in time collect enough evidence to prove his identity
convincingly." Then Dr. Hodgson began with his
reference to our experiment with the voice case. (See
above p. 100.)

In connection with this passage explaining the
effect of death, a view quite consistent with what we
know of physical shocks to the living consciousness,
it might be well to quote what the trance personality
said to me at a sitting nearly a month later. To
try a question which was designed to test the possi-
bility of our getting marginal thoughts of the com-
municator instead of the main ones intended, I asked
at this later sitting if some of the thoughts came
through that he did not intend to send. The answer
and colloquy was as follows :

167

T9TCsacAL> m^msABrw Ajn> xhx mmriLKKCTiDS

'^At times they da mnd iben. again his thou^xts
are somewhat rhangpd. They aze not oiictly what
thej were when in the body.

(Very good, I tmdastand.)

The change called Death whidi is reaUy only tran-
sition is T€rj dilFment from iriiat one thinks before
he experiences it. That in part explains why Myers
nerer took a more actrre part after he came orer
here. He had mncfa on his mind before he came which
he Towed he woold gire oat after he came o?er, but
the ahoA [was sodi] that many of his deteiminatiims
were scattered from his firing memory. This is
a petty excuse bat a firing reafity — a f acL It is
unmistakably so with erery one iriio crosses the border
fine.

(YeSy I can understand how this would take place
from similar shocks among the firing.)

Amen. Well then we need give no further explana-
tions on this point if it is understood by you. How-
ever when expecting the best results the poorest may
be given, unless this is fully understood by those fiv-
ing in the mortal fife. It is only by simple recollec-
tions that real proof of identity can be given."

If I could take any special incident and compare
it with the exact facts as known to the firing there
would be much in them to confirm such an explanation
of the difficulty and confusion connected with the
process of communication, assuming the spiritistic
hypothesis to be a legitimate one. The explanation
here given by the trance personafity is certainly plaus-
ible though we have no direct means of verifjiing it.
But when we find from internal eridence of the super-

168

CONCLUSION OF EXPEBIMENTS ; THEOBDBS

normal incidents that confusion of some kind is pres-
ent we may well entertain the possibility of a semi-
trance on the other side, as a means of studying the
phenomena as a whole, and hence I quote the above
passages as a sample of statement which must engage
the attention and respect of the psychologist, if for
no other purpose than to show its tenability in case
that can be done.

A passage from Dr. Hodgson points in the same
direction as that which I have quoted from the trance
personalities. He says: —

^^ It is, I find, most difficult to use the mechanism
and register clearly one's recollections. I have much
sympathy for Greorge whom we badgered to death,
poor fellow. He gave me all I had to hope for in
spite of my treatment of him. Now just keep your
patience with me and you will have all you could
ask for. Understand?"

" George " refers to the man whom Dr. Hodgson
called " George Pelham " in his Report on the Piper
case and who was instrumental after his death in prov-
ing to Dr. Hodgson the truth of the spiritistic hy-
pothesis. " George " was his Christian name, but
" Pelham " was not his surname. It was after Dr.
Hodgson tried the hypothesis of a dream-like state as
necessary to communicate, that he began to understand
the difficulties in the theory. He then came to the
conclusion that the best course to take in the experi-
ments was to let the communicator have his own way
and not to "badger him to death.*' He often re-
marked to me that we could not get what we wanted
if we kept nagging at the communicator. Here is

169

nrcmcAi. mxmkamcm ajtd thk mssrssscmnr

die rqwtitioo of tins c unoyli oe mi a muM i ail wliidi
tbe detailed reorad dwwB to hafe been one of eonfii-
ffioii and cxdtemaiL

Ai f nrtlier flhslratioo of llie npid unj rf gmenl; of
tiie memory from incident to incident, oocBsioned pos-
cibly partfy by tlie nninhihited prooe» of thinking
on the oUier skJe and by the slaw mechanical process
of the writing compared with this rapid thought in
their world, we may oontbrae the passage whidi I
have jnst quoted. When he asked me to have patioice
with him and I would get all I could ask for, I went
on: —

^ (Yes, I am quite willing to let you haTe your
own way fully.)

I shall take it in spite of you. I am determined
to do what I think best. Do you remember the tussle
I had with you about getting that book in order?

(Yes, we had many tussles.)

Indeed we did. I am wondering if you recall some
lines I wrote you once a year or two before I came
when you were in the mountains for your health?

(I do not now recall them, but it is likely that I
can find out because I have absolutely aU your letters.
Can you mention a few words of the line?)

You remember the lines I used to quote often, run-
ning like this : ^ patience is a blessing,' and your an-
swer, and the subject of the rest. You were pleased
and replied they were apropos of your condition."

Now just as I had said I had kept absolutely
every line Dr. Hodgson ever wrote me from the time
I arranged for my sittings with Mrs. Piper in 1898
tmtil his death at the end of 1905. There was there-

170

CdNCLttSlOil Oi? iiXPERlMElJtS ; tH£:OElJ£S

fore a fine chance to verify what was said here. Con-
sequently I examined every letter written me after I
broke down in June in 1901 until I left the mountains
in April, 1902, and not a trace of any such lines
appear in the correspondence. In fact not a word
of counsel, consolation and spiritual reflection occurs
in it. Nor do I recall any mental attitude of the
kind in any other part of the correspondence. Dr.
Hodgson's habit of indulging in sentiment of this
kind, so far as I knew him, was in his Christmas
cards which he regularly sent out to his friends each
year at the holidays. We have then a promise to
prove his identity as Gkorge Felham had done, and in
fulfillment of it an incident that is wholly false in re-
lation to me, though possibly true in relation to some
one else, as in the instance of the ^^ nigger talk " first
referred to Myers and then corrected to Prof. James
(p. 97). We can well understand why the trance
personality should indicate the shock which death
may occasion to the memory in the attempt to come
back and communicate. The incident here quoted
has the same characteristics which a delirium would
have, reproducing a mosaic of one's past experiences,
telling enough to show that the facts are at least
partly correct, as in the allusion to my being in the
mountains for my health — a fact most probably
known to Mrs. Piper — and another which repre-
sented a probable trait in his character but not ex-
hibited toward me in the manner stated. I have
myself witnessed just such phenomena in the deliria
of the living.

Another passage has a striking interest as showing
171

PSYCHICAL BS8EAKCH AND THB &E8VSKECTI0K

an appreciation of the problem. I have said pre-
viously that he was always on the alert for the type
of fact that could not be explained by telepathy and
that the message with reference to Prof. Newbold
(p. 105) was not explicable by that hypothesis as
applied to my mind. At my last sitting after I had
ascertained from Prof. Newbold that the allusion
was correct, I had also had some correspondence with

a Dr. B j who had had a sitting and to whom

Dr. Hodgson had made a sinular statement with other
incidents of what had happened in the conversation
between Dr. Hodgson and Prof. Newbold on the ocean
beach. At this last sitting Dr. Hodgson brought up
the subject spontaneously and soon showed what re-
lation it had to the telepathic hypothesis by the way
he spoke of it, as the reader will perceive in my quo-
tation.

" Did Dr. B. prove my message?

(Dr. B found that your message to Billy

about some conversation that you and he had the
last time you saw him was exactly correct and he
was delighted with it.)

Amen. (Yes, Hodgson, and you told me the same
thing twice.) What thing? Before I came over?
Do you — ■ — [remember it?]

(Yes, Hodgson.) Oh yes, I remember it well.
(Good.)

There is no telepathy in this except as it comes
from my mind to yours.

(Good. Then telepathy is at least a part of the
process by which you communicate with me.)

178

COKCLtTSION OF £X1>E&1M£KTS ; THEO&DfiS

Most assuredly it is and I had a vague idea before
I came over.

(Yes, you did.)

You remember our talks about the telepathic theory
of our friends' thoughts reaching us from this side
telepathically."

We did have several conversations on this point and
the reader may interpret for himself the psychological
interest and importance of the allusion to telepathy
in this connection, especially when it is related to an
incident not known to myself at the time it was first
mentioned.

As I have already remarked I cannot produce this
as proof of the existence of spirits, though I think
many readers will think it of the type of evidence that
would constitute good proof if it were not complicated
with the personal acquaintance of the communicator
with the medium before his death. I have been care-
ful to quote the incidents which certainly border on
the evidential while they as certainly appear charac-
teristic of the alleged communicator, with such modifi-
cations as might naturally occur both from the un-
natural conditions under which the communications
must be made and from the amnesic and disturbed
mental state of the communicator, as that is supposed
for the sake of explaining the peculiar character of
the phenomena. But leaving this hypothesis aside
for the moment, the incidents are a part of a large
record which contains here and there an incident so
specific and clear in its evidence of intelligence that,
when fraud is eliminated from its explanation, we
have to face an important theory to account for the

173

J^SYCHICAL EESEABCd AKD ThS BESUBSECTION

sporadic facts while we endeavor in some way to make
the non-evidential incidents intelligible at all. What
these partially correct facts show above all else is the
complications under which anything supernormal can
be acquired, and that once admitted there is the chance
to make the whole intelligible and rational. That is
the chief task of the future. I suspect many are
sufficiently puzzled for methods of explaining away
the meaning of the most evidential facts to halt only
at the difficulties of comprehending the circumstance
that, if messages can come through at all from the
transcendental world, they might be more satisfying.
The removal of the scepticism which bases itself on
this conception of the matter is the problem of larger
experiments and the scientific world must undertake
the solution of the problem in a spirit of patience
and not make demands which would not be made in
any other complicated inquiry. I appreciate the feel-
ing that, if messages come at all, they should be
clearer. But the proper attitude to take is that which
frankly recognizes that the collective meaning of
the evidential facts must determine the theory adopted
and we must seek subsidiary explanations for the
associated matter. What people often think an ob-
jection to the spiritistic hypothesis is not this at
all, but a perplexity in it, a subsidiary question which
has to be answered by further inquiry. This may as
well be understood at first €U3 at last, and faced in the
spirit of true scientific investigation.

We must remember, too, that the same perplexity
arises in any theory whatsoever that we may take in
the case. Even the hypothesis of fraud cannot escape

174

CONCLUSION OF EXPESIMENTS ; THEORIES

the duty to account for the peculiarities illustrated,
and much more must telepathy. It is amusing to see
the objector to the spiritistic theory accept telepathy
without raising the question as to how it can account
for the psychological peculiarities of the phenomena
imitative of deliria and dream-like states on the other
side, and yet press this limitation against the only
theory that can give a rational explanation of them.
If the advocate of telepathy really knew anything
about that process or hypoiiiesis at all he would be
ashamed to urge it with so much confidence. He
would find a most imperative duty to investigate it
more carefully to see if, in the real or alleged com-
munications between the living there were traces of
imperfect memories and delirious mental states on
the part of agents. I shall not deny the possibility
of this, but until it is shown to be a scientific fact,
which the present record of alleged telepathic phe-
nomena does not suggest, we are not privileged scien-
tifically to urge such a process in explanation of the
record under discussion. The spiritistic theory may
not be the right one. With that I am not at present
concerned. But it is entitled to such possibilities as
commend it against the inferior claims of other hy-
potheses. That is all that I am urging for the mo-
ment. Hence it is, I think, that the really scientific
man prefers the simple theory of fraud as the more
difficult one of the three to displace. Secondary per-
sonality he sees does not account for the supernormal
part of the phenomena, however it might appear to
account for the non-evidential matter. It would be a
curious theory which limited the explanatory functions

175

PSYCHICAL RESEASCH AND THE BESUB&ECTION

of its process to what was relevant to spirits and
wholly excluded this from matter which, though not
evidential, is characteristic of the conjectured source
supposed in this case. Hence I think we may pre-
sent, at least provisionally, the hypothesis of discar-
nate agency while we press for an investigation
equally thorough with that of the past, and perhaps
even more prolonged and extended in order to under-
stand the limitations of the communications.

I have here merely hinted at the explanations of the
confusion and limitations of the incidents purporting
to be messages from a spirit world. I have been try-
ing to confine the subject and the evidence to what
purports to come from Dr. Richard Hodgson, but
the issue at this point is so important and the mis-
understanding so great that I think it proper in this
last article to diverge somewhat from the material
affecting the personality of Dr. Hodgson and to dis-
cuss what is apparently the most important difficulty
in the problem and in doing so to introduce general
evidence from other communicators and other psy-
chics.

I shall begin this part of the discussion by an allu-
sion to the difficulty which it seems both laymen and
scientific men encounter when asked to believe that
we are communicating with spirits. This difjumlty^
which is ustuiUy stated as an objectiony is due to the
triviality and conftision of the communications. It
occasionally takes the form of complaint that we have
nothing to show regarding the conditions of life in
a spiritual world. I wish to take up these matters

176

CONCLUSION OF EXFEBIMENTS ; THEORIES

and to deal with them as thoroughly as limited space
will permit.

I think I may best take as illustrative of this dif-
ficulty some remarks of the editor of an intelligent
newspaper which were published in reference to my
article in the February Jowmci. They put into
definite shape a number of points such as I constantly
meet when discussing the question, and as the editorial
treatment of the matter, though critical and sceptical,
was entirely friendly to the investigation, it may
conduce to a better understanding of the whole prob-
lem to make it the subject of a careful and friendly
reply.

After alluding to some statements of my own ex-
planatory of what is necessary in proof of personal
identity, which is the primary issue for the scientific
man, namely, trivial incidents of a past earthly life
that are verifiable, the editor of the Providence Jow-
nci went on with the following remarks : —

" It is perhaps best to judge the evidence presented
by Professor Hyslop upon this ground, although to
many persons it will seem that this is fundamentally
an error. To such persons the obvious possibility of
the absorption of such * trivial incidents ' by telepathic
communication with the * spirit ' before his or her de-
parture from the flesh, however impossible might be
any theory of acquaintance with the facts by the
ordinary means of intercourse, will serve as a serious
if not a definite deterrent to the acceptation of the
relation as a proof of anything. But even casting
aside this basic objection and admitting the concef)-

177

psrcHiCAi. mzsEAXCH Aini THK Kmrsmzenov

tion of ProfeMor Hyxlop to be oorrecty it is still im-
possible to see wberein this narrstiTe of experiments
— interesting as it is — establishes the sHgfatest link
in the chains whidi, in all sincerity, the inTcstigators
headed by him are endeaToring to forge. Every por-
tion of it relates solely, in a more cnr less confuse^
manner, to the interests of Dr. Hodgscm on earth.
There is not the faintest indication of * snp^normal
information/ It must be said frankly that neither in
quantity nor qnality does the infomiation presaited
lead even to the suggestion of a ' spiritistic theory.'
If spirits^ who in life poss e ssed the intelligence of Dr.
Hodgson, talk such muddle-headed nonsense the mo-
ment they discard the flesh, then Heaven help the fool-
ish ones of this earth."

I shall first discuss the entire misunderstanding of
the problem which this writer exhibits; a misunder-
standing, however, which is shared by many others.

In the first place the telepathy which this writer
assumes and refers to ** absorption " by the living
of the thoughts of others has absolutely no scientific
evidence whatever for its existence. You cannot quote
the facts purporting to be from spirits in proof of it,
because they bear so definitely on the personal iden-
tity of deceased persons. You will have to get evi-
dence not so related and there is absolutely none such
of a scientific character. The thing you have to
explaiui is not the remarkable nature of the facts, but
their uniform relation to dececused persons. Telep-
athy which can acquire incidents about dead ]>eople
but cannot acquire any about the living is a curious
capacity and perilously near being devilish. It may
be 00, of course, but face that issue when you pro-

178

CONCLUSION OF EXFE&IMENTS ; THEOBIES

pose the assumption. Apropos of this I may ask
also how you are going to account for the trivialities
and confusion on such a remarkable faculty? A
power infinite in everything but access to important
facts is a worse anomaly in human knowledge than
spirits can possibly be. In fact you cannot rationally
account for the limitation to triviality at all on the
telepathic hypothesis, while this is perfectly simple
on the spiritistic.

But no scientific man believes in the kind of telep-
athy here supposed. He will only ask for inde-
pendent evidence that it is a fact before using it as
a substitute for a spiritistic interpretation of facts
related only to the personal identity of deceased per-
sons. We shall simply throw upon the adherent of
it the responsibility for the evidence of his assumption
and if that is forthcoming we shall consider it dis-
passionately.

In the second place, the writer's conception of the
•* supernormal '' is wholly different from that of the
scientific man and he strangely demands as proof of
a future life communications which are absolutely
unverifiable in the present stage of the inquiry. He
c(Hnplains that the evidence is confined solely to Dr.
Hodgson's earthly life. This is precisely where the
cogency of the facts and argument lies. We could
not at present verify scientifically any statement
whatever about the conditions in a transcendental
world. " Supernormal " does not mean knowledge of
things in a spiritual world; nor does it necessarily
imply anything spiritual whatever. Many confuse it
with the " supernatural," but psychic researchers

179

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE EESUSEECTION

adopted it to eliminate all the associations of that
term and to mean something not acquired in a normal
way. It is a purely negative term, implying nothing
definite about either the '^ supernatural " or anything
in a transcendental world. In other words, '* super-
normal " means and only means beyond or transcend-
ing normal sense perception. It does not mean any
special view of what is beyond and it does not in any
respect imply the spiritual, even though this happen
to be included in it after the investigation has gone
far enough to justify that belief. It means nothing
more than the fact that we have gotten something
which cannot be explained as having a sensory origin,
that is, an origin in normal sense perception. All
that is verifiable must either have been acquired by
the sense perception of the subject or must exist in
the memory of living persons. The nature and con-
ditions of a spiritual world and its life are not so
verifiable, and no intelligent man would expect or
demand, as evidence, communications of this kind in
proof of a spiritual world, to say nothing of the im-
possibility of making it intelligible if conmiunication
about it were tried.

It is the last objection which always seems the most
cogent to the sceptic. The writer thinks that intel-
ligent persons like Dr. Hodgson would not or ought
not to talk such " muddle-headed nonsense." I shall
confidently reply at this point that the best part of
our evidence for the spiritistic hypothesis is just this
nonsense. What the critic thinks is a fatal objection
is our best proof. That is a contention which may
surprise many an objector, but it is one that I ad-

180

CONCLUSION OF EXPERIMENTS; THEOBIES

vance and I am certain that it will put the sceptic
to his wits to sustain his assumption that intelligent
men would do much better than the evidence seems
to indicate. I shall boldly challenge any successful
defense of the writer's position.

Now if Dr. Hodgson was so intelligent a person
how would the critic account for the ^^ absorption
by telepathy while in the flesh " of exclusively trivial
incidents? On the critic's assumption we ought to
have had very intelligent messages, intelligent after
the type of his conception. But instead of that we
have what are alleged to be exclusively trivial facts.
On the other hand, if the alleged communicator had
not been an intelligent man, according to the critic's
point of view we might explain the limitations of the
messages. But he concedes that Dr. Hodgson's
earthly life was intelligent and admits the exclusive
limitation of the incidents to that life.

But I shall not dwell on dialectics of this kind as
they are not important. What we have to realize
is two or three fundamental things in this problem,
which I shall have to reiterate again and again in
order to have the point made in the spiritistic hypoth-
esis that is here defended.

I recur again to the conception of the supernormal.
I said and I repeat that it denotes the acquisition of
information by some other means than normal sense
perception. With this view in mind I shall again
define the problem which is before the advocate of
the spiritistic theory.

There are three fundamental conditions of a spirit-
istic hypothesis. (1) The information acquired must

181

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

be supernormal, that is, not explicable by normal per-
ception. (2) The incidents must be verifiable mem-
ories of the deceased persons and so representative
of their personal identity. (S) The incidents must
be trivial and specific — not easily, if at all, dupli-
cated in the common experience of others. Any other
kind of facts will be exposed to sceptical objections
which may be unanswerable.

The point of view which the psychic researcher has
to take is that of the materialist. That is, he must
assume that the materialistic theory has the first claim
to consideration and that the facts must at least be
inconsistent with its claims in order to obtain any
fulcrum for the spiritistic view. Now the material-
istic theory maintains that consciousness is a function
of the brain and so perishable with it. This view is
universally conceded for the various functions of the
bodily organism, such as digestion, circulation, secre-
tion, etc. All these are admittedly organic functions
and so perishable with the body. If consciousness
is a similar function it has the same fate. Now since
we have no evidence, apart from the aUeged phenom-
ena on record by psychic researchers, that conscious-
ness can exist without a bodily organism, we have
to ascertain, if possible, if the phenomena so alleged
point to its survival. If they do, the materialistic
theory cannot be sustained and the case is proved.
Men may differ as to the nature of the facts, but,
their supernormal character once admitted, the issue
is clearly defined and open to discussion. Any facts,
no matter what their character and no matter what
the logical consequences, that supply the three cbar-

18«

acteristics mentioned, supemormality, relevance to
personal identity of deceased persons, and specific
triviality, will be relevant to the conclusion which the
spiritist draws and must be entitled to fair considera-
tion. But we cannot assume that alleged communica-
tions should be anything more than proof of identity,
and we are entitled to assume that they must be this
because it is a primary and essential condition of be-
lieving in the existence of spirits. The messages
may be insane, if you like, but they must be super-
normal, specific and relevant to the identity of de-
ceased persons. What we shall make of such a life
is not our business as scientific men at the outset of
our problem. What use it may be does not enter
into any conception of the matter at first except that
of intellectual snobs and aesthetes. We have to ex-
plain the facts and accept the consequences. We shall
show the use of the conclusion later in the work.
At present the question is, not whether we are beings
of superior intelligence after death, but whether con-
sciousness survives death at all, and once convinced
of that we can take up the problem of the nature of
that survival, its limitations, if any, the perplexities
attending the kind of messages, their confusion and
triviality, and the rarity of the phenomena. But
these characteristics are not objections to the hypoth-
esis ; they are only additional issues within it. They
are questions only after admitting it, not facts op-
posed to it. This I think can be made clear in the
sequel.

Now admitting that fraud has been excluded from
consideration of such facts as this series of articles

183

MTCHICAI. KECEABCH AMD THK KESmimSCTIOlf

reccrd$ I think ererj intelUgeiit reader will admit
that they conform to the three conditioDs of a spirit-
uAie hypothens* I tbaH not here urge that they prove
]t# I iimply fay that these three conditions have
been •atisfied We may have to satisfy other con-
ditions« I leave that matter to those who do not start
with the assumed truth or possibility of the material-
istic theory ot things. I am here testing only the
theory of materialism. I think, therefore, that the
satisfaction of these three conditions at least throws
a doubt upon materialism as an explanation of con-
sciousness, and the next question is to account for
the peculiar character of the facts whidi seem to
refute that theory.

I think every one who reflects a moment will admit
that only trivial facts will prove personal identity,
whether of the living or of the dead. If it be doubted
the experiment has only to be tried, and in a large
syitem of them some years ago with Columbia Uni-
versity students and professors I showed that rational
men would select incidents quite as trivial, or even
more trivial, to prove their identity over a telegraph
wire. This circumstance, I think, removes all force
of the alleged objection to spirit messages on the
ground of mere triviality.

But I am going frankly to concede that it is. not
the bare fact of triviality that gives the trouble. It
is the two facts of (1) penisierU triviality, and (2)
confusion in the incidents, presumably suggesting a
dt^generated personality very different from the living
person we knew in his best estate. This is the per-
plexity which we have to face and which is implied

184

CONCLUSION OF EXPEBIMBNTS ; THEOEIES

in the article which I have quoted from the Providence
Journal.

It is here that I propose to urge the fundamental
feature of a spiritistic theory, one that is an essential
part of that hypothesis for certain types of mediums.
I shall call them the " possession " type as distin-
guished from the subliminal type. The term is
tentative, though it represents a distinction between
the phenomena which I have neither time nor space
here to discuss, and I make it in order not to be taken
as asserting or supposing that the view which I shall
present assumes a universal condition of the phenom-
ena. But I want to emphasize the adjunctive hypoth-
esis which I mean to elaborate somewhat as one
which explains away all the objections and difficulties
that the sceptic has been in the habit of presenting
against the spiritistic theory. Hitherto there has been
no opportunity to present and discuss this aspect of
the problem in a public way. The popular periodicals
want sensational matter, and care little for important
truths. The scientific journals have lived in such
contempt of the whole subject that they would not
permit the discussion of it, and so we have had to
remain silent for lack of means to discuss this funda-
mental feature of the theory before intelligent readers.
Fortunately we have now an opportunity to present
it and to ask consideration of it.

What I refer to is the explanation of the persistent
triviality and confusion of the communications which
purport to come from the discamate. I shall premise,
however, that this accusation that the communications
are always so trivial and confused is in fact not

186

true. Xo dofobl it mfpum m fitoB tis
whidv we pd^iah and liiMiiiifc Or tini
eaii f»p€et the JMfauIlj €» Aepnt of all
mA iMMfe a tptdal rtody of the ptMBOBna. Bol
tike fMt «^ tfMt the nMwmiiBl'Mii ore ml «]«m js
famal M 10 iOppCMd* There oie tiro tWi i ird !
tiom to dm •rmwrtkip The finl k Old Ae
tmi of Irmtlaij dependb whritf upon the point of
TMir OMomed in ttie problem. If the
realize thfli he has h» identitj to proie he will
ememlj hmit iatmdf to tririal leooDectiona, assan^
mg that he can eootrol h» state of oanscioiisneB at
the time of h» c o »mninic atiana> Those who read the
Piper case carefully will diseorer that the phenomeDa
hare all the appearance at least of being organized
efforts on the ^ other side ^ to prove the identity of
those who hare passed away. The triviality thus
becomes so important as to lose all the imputations
implied by that term and so show a rational effcnrt
to solve the problem^ an effort adjusted to the veiy
needs of the issue* This is particularly noticeable
in the communications of Dr. Hodgson. K the
reader will simply study the facts in this series of
articles in a careful and patient way he will find that
there is a characteristic consciousness of this view of
the matter which has not so clearly characterized
any other communicator, unless we except George Pel-
ham. The second limitation to the accusation is the
fact that the statements which are not trivial and
confused, very often, if not generally, lack evidential
character. All communications about the other life,
about the first experiences after death, about the laws

186

COKCLtrSION OF EXPEEIMEKTS ; THEOAmS

of life and action on the " other side " are worthless
as evidence of the supernormal, and the student of
abnormal psychology would consign us to bedlam if
we put this sort of thing forward as evidence of spir-
its. Consequently we have to select the incidents
which have a supernormal character and which cannot
be explained by abnormcd psychology in order to
present any support whatever for the existence of
spirits. The argument is that, having been acquired
from some external source, the information, owing
to its relation to the personality of deceased individ-
uals, can best be attributed to that source. The non-
evidential matter has to be ignored until we are obliged
to recognize its unity with the supernormal incidents.
This non-evidential matter exists in large quantities
in the Piper and similar records, but cannot be used
in discussions affecting the integrity of spiritistic
theories. The assertion, therefore, that the matter
is always trivial is not exactly true, and the circum-
stance gives us a vantage ground when the time comes
to discuss other than evidential problems.

I agree, nevertheless, that it is natural to complain
of the triviality and confusion in the evidential mat-
ter. The want of a satisfactory explanation of them
keeps back the acceptance of the spiritistic hypothe-
sis from many a scientific man, and hence I shall here
state a view of the phenomena which I think com-
pletely removes the perplexity. Whether it is true
or not remains to be shown in the future, but it can
be put forward as a working hypothesis and tested
by the extent of its fitness thereto.

The general supposition which, to the mind of Dr.
187

nrcHiCAi. snsAmcH asb ths KBsumsBcnoK

Hodgson and myself, explains the penislent triviality
and oonf nsion of the messages is that the co mmmni r-
catmg spirit at the time of eammmmcatmg (not meets-
eariy m hie normal state in the spirit worid), is in a
sort of abnormal mental state, perhaps resembling
€mr dream life or somnambniie conditioms. We can-
not determine exactly what this mental oomfiti<m is at
present and may never be able to do so, but it can
be varioosly compared to dream life, somnambnlism,
hypnosis of certain kinds, tianoe^ secondary person-
ality, subliminal mental action, or any of those men-
tal conditions in which there is more or less of disin-
tegration of the normal menuvy. Ordinary delirium
has some analogies with it, but the incidents are too
purposive and too systematic in many cases to press
this analogy to any general extent. But the various
disturbances of the normal consciousness or person-
ality in the living offer dear illustrations of the
psychological phenom^ia which we produce as evi-
dence of spirits when these phenomena are supemor-
mally produced.

But this hypothesis does not explain all the confu-
sion involved. There is the more or less unusual con-
dition of the medium, mental and physical. The me-
dium through which the messages purport to come is
in a trance condition, and when not a trance the con-
dition is one which is not usual, and perhaps in the
broad sense may be called abnormal, though not tech-
nically this in any important sense. This condition
offers many obstacles to perfect transmission of mes-
sages. It is illustrated in many cases of somnam-
bulism in which the stream of consciousness goes on

188

CONCLUSION OF £XP£BIMENTS ; TH£OEI£S

uninhibited, €Uid when this is suppressed, as it is in
deep trances, the difficulty is to get systematic com-
munications through it. Add to this the frequently
similar condition of the communicator, according to
the hypothesis, and we can well imagine what causes
triviality and confusion. The student of abnormal
psychology will recognize the applicability of this
view at once, even though he is not prepared to admit
that it is a true theory.

There are two aspects of such an hjrpothesis which
have to be considered. They are its fitness or explan-
atory character, and its evidential features. They
are quite distinct from each other. The hypothesis
might fit and yet have no evidence that it was a fact.
I think, however, that all who are familiar with ab-
normal mental phenomena will admit without special
contention that the hypothesis will explain the trivial-
ity and confusion of the alleged messages, but they
will want to know what evidence exists for such a
view. It is to this aspect of the theory that we must
turn.

Dr. Hodgson had discussed this supposition in his
Report on the Piper case in 1898. It is therefore
not new, and some incidents in his communications
seem to point to the influence of this view on his mes-
sages. I shall quote one passage from his Report in
illustration of the hypothesis and of some of his evi-
dence for it.

" That persons * just deceased,' " says this Report,
(p. 877), " should be extremely confused and unable
to communicate directly, or even at all, seems per-
fectly natural after the shock and wrench of death.

189

PiTCmCAl. &ESEA&CH AKB THB ftfiSlTUlSCTIOK

Thus in the case of Hart, he was unable to write the
second day after his death. In another case a friend
of mine, whom I may call D., wrote, with what ap-
peared to be much difficulty, his name and the words,
^ I am all right now. Adieu,' within two or three days
after his death. In another case, F., a near relative
of Madame Elisa, was unable to write on the morn-
ing after Ins death. On the second day after, when
a stranger was present with me for a sitting, he
wrote two or three sentences, saying, ^ I am too weak
to articulate clearly,' and not many days later he
wrote fairly well and clearly, and dictated also to
Madame Elisa, as Amanuensis, an account of his
feelings at finding himself in his new surroundings.
Both D. and F. became very clear in a short time.
D. communicated later on frequently, both by writing
and speech, chiefly the latter, and showed always an
impressively marked and characteristic personality.
Hart, on the other hand, did not become so clear till
many months later. I learned long afterwards that
his illness had been much longer and more fundamen-
tal than I had supposed. The continued confusion in
his case seemed explicable if taken in relation with
the circumstances of his prolonged illness, including
f ever, but there was no assignable relation between his .

confusion and the state of my own mind."

The allusion in this passage to the effect of the i

shock of death recaUs the passage quoted above (p. I

189) and representing Rector, the control, as remark- !

ing this effect to me as an apology for the confused
and fragmentary communications from Dr. Hodgson

190

CONCLUSION OF EXPERIMENTS; THEORIES

himself. But as Mrs. Piper at least had the oppor-
tunity to ready and perhaps actually did read the
whole of Dr. Hodgson's Report, we cannot speak of
the incident as evidential. It is merely consistent with
an hypothesis based on other grounds. But the allu-
sion to Mr. Myers in this connection, as the reader
will see by referring to the passage quoted, has some
pertinence. It is true that Mr. Myers never accom-
plished by way of communication what was expected
of him and what he himself expected before his death
to do. The explanation of his failure is perfectly ra-
tional, though not evidential.

But the proper evidence for this dream life or semi-
trance and somnambulic condition will be found in in-
cidents which also contain supernormal facts. I quote
one of remarkable interest. A man who had had sit-
tings with Mrs. Piper before his death, some time
after his decease, which took place in Paris, turned up
as a communicator without Mrs. Piper having known
of his death. He had always been perplexed by the
confusion and fragmentary nature of the messages of
his deceased friend George Pelham. When he him-
self became a communicator it was some time before
he was able to communicate clearly. When he could
communicate he delivered the following message to
Dr. Hodgson:

" What in the world is the reason you never call for
me? I am not sleeping. I wish to help you in iden-
tifying myself. I am a good deal better now.

(You were confused at first.)

Very, but I did not really understand how confused
191

PSYCHICAL HESEAKCH AND THE RESUBIIECTION

I was. I am more so when I try to speak to you.
I understand now why George spelled his words to
me.'» *

The allusion to Gkorge Pelham's spelling out his
words is an evidential incident, as it was verifiable and
recognizes after death the explanation of confusions
which he could not understand while living. A sim-
ilar though not evidential passage came from this
George Pelham himself. It represents the point of
view which I am advancing to account for the curious
nature of the messages, and was perhaps the commu-
nication which suggested the theory to Dr. Hodgson.
I quote it from the latter's Report.

^^ Remember we have and always shall have our
friends in the dream life, t. e.y your life so to speak,
which will attract us for ever and ever, and so long as
we have any friends sleeping in the material world;
— you to us are more like as we understand sleep, you
look shut up as one in prison, and in order for us to
get into communication with you, we have to enter into
your sphere, as one like yourself asleep. This is just
why we make mistakes as you call them, or get con-
fused and muddled, so to put it H.*'

At this point Dr. Hodgson read over the automatic
writing to indicate that he had gotten the message
and how he understood it. The conmiunications then
went on.

"Your thoughts do grasp mine. Well now you
have just what I have been wanting to come and
make clear to you, H., old fellow.

(It is quite clear.)

Yes, you see I am more awake than asleep, yet I

in

CONCLUSION OF EXFESIMBNTS ; THE0&IE8

cannot come just as I am in reality, independently of
the medium's light.

(You come much better than the others.) Yes, be-
cause I am a little nearer and not less intelligent than
some others here."

At one of Dr. Hodgson's later sittings the same
communicator, George Pelham, used the word " pris-
oned " in a passage in which ^^ prisoning " was in
Dr. Hodgson's view the more correct term, and he
suggested the correction. George Felham broke out
with the reply : —

" See here, H., * Don't view me with a critic's eye,
but pass my imperfections by.' Of course I know all
that as well as anybody on your sphere. I tell you,
old fellow, it don't do to pick [out] all these little
errors too much when they amount to nothing in one
way. You have light enough and brain enough I
know to understand my explanations of being shut
up in this body [that of the medium] dreaming as it
were and trying to help on science."

The possibility of all this every reader must ad-
mit, when he has once felt the force of the supernor-
mal matter in favor of the spiritistic theory, though
he will rightly hold that it is not evidence of any con-
clusive kind. But it hangs together well with the
character of the messages in all cases, and Trhen we
recall our own power to tell something of the mental
status of a man who is talking to us or whose book
we are reading we may well admit that the confused
and fragmentary nature of the messages suggest and
confirm the view taken in these communications.

A certain gentleman was a member of the Board
198

0t Tnvteei of the ^mmrmn Inrtitiite for
%e»e»rdx and Dr. Hw%mw kneir bodi ii^ mmm mmi
ttM fMt 0t hm sendbenUp. Thift jj^iart imb re-
mgfted tmm tfae Bdsrd aone ■hOs sAer tiie deidi
<)# Dr, nodfgMm, a fact wiiiA wm sort prafaniify boI
kiMMni to 3fis. Fipo^ b ok of wf ifttBUgii tiie f al-
m0$ifhg octuiira:

^1m IL with 71x1?

fNoy w fcngDcd.)

WlMt for? I tlioiig^ m.

(Wdl^ HodgMio, it k best not to Hty pobfidj.)

I om not pobfic, am I?

(WeO^ it wcnkl stand in my reeoid, Hodgaon.)

Oh, of course. I anderstand."

Now the interert of this incident lies in this simpk
fact* Dr« Hodgson was familiar for ei^^iteen years
with the record of Mrs. Piper's sittings, and for ten
years with the careful record of what was done in
both speech and writing. Here he is apparently
wholly unaware at what is g«mig on in the conunu-
nications* His mental condition has apparently made
him oblivious to the fact of record, or what the trance
personalities or controls call ^^ registering " a mes-
sage. Amnesia had come on as an accident or con-
comitant of the condition necessary for communicat-
ingy at least for all that affected the unnecessary parts
of bis communications. The control of the stream
of consciousness is not so perfect as in the earthly
life. The reasons for this cannot be made clear here,
but the psychiatrist will understand it from his knowl-
edge of uninhibited mental processes.

194

CONCLUSION OF EXPERIMENTS; THE0AIE8

One of the best illustrations of this is Rector's
statements of the reason for the difficulties of commu-
nicating, as the reader may have noticed above (p.
189). The passage, of course, is not evidential, but
when the spiritistic hypothesis has been rendered ra-
tional by evidential matter it is not unreasonable to
examine statements of this kind with patience and to
give them the status of a working hypothesis to
ascertain whether it may not be confirmed by other
characteristics of the phenomena.

I quote some statements communicated at the sitting
of February 27th, 1906. After a question that I
had asked regarding a certain word that would bear
on his identity. Dr. Hodgson alluded to the danger of
^^ making a botch" of his messages and broke out
with the statement : ^^ It is so suffocating here. I
can appreciate their difficulties better than ever be-
fore." Here he was intimating ideas which he held
as to the difficulty of communicating before he him-
self passed away, and he had often compared the in-
fluence of the conditions to that of mephitic gases, and
we know what effect they have on the integrity of
consciousness. A few minutes after the deliverance of
this statement, and with it in mind, I asked if we had
conjectured the difficulties fairly well. The reply
was: "We did surprisingly well. I was surprised
enough," and then at once passed to communications
about his own handwriting which had often been illeg-
ible to me when he was living. The admission here
of suffocation points to the hypothesis which I have
advanced, though in no way proving it, and his man-

196

PSYCHICAL BESEAKCH AND TH£ KESUSRECTION

ner of admitting the correctness of our view regard-
ing the difSculties is a fact consistent with the
hypothesis.

We have only to study dreams and deliria in order
to understand the influences which tend to produce con-
fusion and fragmentary messages. If accidents and
shocks in life which are less violent than death disturb
the memory, as we know they do, the student of ab-
normal psychology, being perfectly familiar with the
phenomena in numerous cases, would expect that so
violent a change as death would disturb memory and
reproduction still more seriously. Add to this the
mind's freedom from the body with all the physiolog-
ical inhibitions cut off, and we might well expect less
control of the processes which recall the past in the
proper way for illustrating one's identity. This dis-
turbance might not last indefinitely. The individual
might fully recover from it in a normal spiritual life,
though the time for this recovery might vary with
individuals and with the circumstances of their death.
But the recovery of a normal mental balance in the
proper ethereal environment on the " other side "
would not of itself be a complete guarantee of its
retention when coming into terrestrial and material
conditions to communicate. We may well suppose it
possible that this " coming back " produces an effect
similar to the amnesia which so often accompanies a
shock or sudden interference with the normal stream
of consciousness. The effect seems to be the same
as that of certain kinds of dissociation which are now
being studied by the student of abnormal psychology,
and this is the disturbance of memory which makes

196

CONCLUSION OF EXPEBIMENTS ; THEORIES

it difficult or impossible to recall in one mental state
the events which have been experienced in another.

For at least superficial indications in the records
that this is the case I shall simply repeat my reference
to the first part of this article in which I quote at
such length the fragmentary and confused messages
purporting to come from Dr. Hodgson. I need not
requote them here. They at least apparently illus-
trate in a clear manner the point I am making.

Nor do I rely upon the Piper case alone for evi-
dence of the conditions here conjectured. I have had
similar statements made through two other private
mediums, whom I have quoted in this series of articles.
In some cases the language is identical with that used
through Mrs. Piper, though its use in Mrs. Piper was
not known by the other person through whom it came.

One good illustration of this abnormal mental con-
dition on the part of communicators is found in an
incident told me by Dr. Hodgson before his death and
which I have mentioned elsewhere in another periodi-
cal. It was the incident of a communicator telling
through Mrs. Piper a circumstance which he said had
represented some act of his life. But inquiry showed
that no such act had been performed by him when
living. But it turned out that he had made the same
statement in the delirium of death. It is especially
noticeable in certain forms of communication of the
** possession " type that the last scenes of the deceased
are acted over again in their first attempts to control
or communicate. The mental confusion relevant to
the death of my father was apparent in his first at-
tempt to communicate through Mrs. Piper, and when

197

PSrCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE IfcESUBKECTION

I recalled this period of his dying experience this con-
fusion was repeated in a remarkable manner with
several evidential features in the messages. Twice
an uncle lost the sense of personal identity in the at-
tempt to communicate. His communications were in
fact so confused that it was two years before he be-
came at all clear in his efforts. He had died as the
result of a sudden accident. Once my father, after
mentioning the illness of my living sister and her
name, lost his personal identity long enough to con-
fuse incidents of himself and his earthly life with
those that applied to my sister and not to himself.
The interesting feature of the incident was that, hav-
ing failed to complete his messages a few minutes pre-
viously, when he came back the second time to try it
again. Rector, the control, warned me that he was a
little confused, but that what he wanted to tell me
certainly referred to my sister Lida. Then came the
message claiming experiences for himself when liv-
ing that were verifiable as my sister's. On any theory
of the facts a confused state of mind is the only ex-
planation of them, and when associated with incidents
of a supernormal and evidential character they afford
reasonable attestation of the hypothesis here sug-
gested.

I shall give one long and complicated instance of
this confusion in an incident having great evidential
value and yet showing remarkable confusion involving
apparently the loss of the sense of personal identity
and the correction of the error in the first allusion
to the incidents.

198

CONCLXTSION OF EXFEBIMENTS ; THEOEIES

At the sitting of June 6th, 1899, {Proceedings,
Vol. XVI, pp. 469-470), I thought I would test the
telepathic theory by asking my father incidents that
had occurred before I was bom and that my two
aunts, then living, would know. I made this request
and was told at once that this would not be so difficult
a thing to do. In a few moments several things were
communicated, one of which was verifiable and one
of which came within my memory as an incident told
me, not as remembered personally. Then one of the
aunts was mentioned by name, Eliza, and an incident
told which I could not verify. Then the communi-
cator at once broke out into the following clear state-
ment, purporting to come from my father: —

" I have something better. Ask her if she recalls
the evening when we broke the wheel to the wagon
and who tried to cover it up so it would not leak out,
so to speak. I remember it as if it happened yester-
day, and she will remember it too."

When interrogated as to the truth of this my aunt
said that no such accident had ever occurred in the
life of my father and herself. The consequence was
that in my Report on the Piper case, published in
1901, I had to say that the incident was wholly false
or unverifiable. No ascertainable meaning was then
to be obtained with reference to its real pertinence.

On February 5th, 1900, at another sitting this aunt
was again spontaneously mentioned by my father pur-
porting to communicate and I made some statement
about my diflSculty in getting verification for some of
the incidents he had told of their early life, telling

199

PSTCHICAI. &E8EA&CH AND THE KESUAEECTIOK

him of her dislike and opposition to the whole sub-
ject. There came the following response through the
automatic writing of Mrs. Piper: —

^^ Oh, I understand. Of course, I see clearly.
Well, tell her I do not intend to say anything which
would be distasteful to her, but if she will only help
me in my recollections of our childhood days it will
be doing nothing but right, and it will help to prove
my true existence to you. James, I am your father,
and there is no gainsaying it.

What I would now ask is that Eliza should recall
the drive home and — let me see a moment — I am
sure • • • but it was one of shafts, but the wagon
broke, some part of it, and we tied it with a cord.
I remember this very well. Do you remember old
Tom?'»

Now Tom was the name of a horse in my time and
long after the childhood of my aunt Eliza, and he died
somewhere about 1880. He had no connection with
any drive that my father could have taken before I
was bom. The reader, however, will remark the
abrupt play of memory in this matter, the exhibition
of uninhibited association which is characteristic of a
dream-like state of consciousness.

But when I asked my aunt Eliza about the accident
it was again denied as never having occurred in her
life with my father, nor with any one else so far as
she knew. I had, therefore, to declare this false.

On June Srd, 1902, 1 had another sitting with Mrs.
Piper, and my uncle, who had been such a confused
communicator in my earlier experiments, turned up,
so to speak. He began some confused messages and

SOO

CONCLUSION OF experiments; theobies

I determined to ask a test question of his identity.
But before continuing the statements of the record
I should detail an incident that occurred with this
uncle and myself the day after my father's death.
He had married this aunt Eliza, my father's sister.

My father died on Saturday. On the Sunday fol-
lowing, while my father was lying a corpse in this
uncle's house, a telegram came from Chicago which
had to be delivered in the country. My uncle and I
took a buggy and went into the country to deliver the
telegram. While passing a negro boy with a goat
and wagon the horse shied, turned the buggy over,
dragged it over both of us — my uncle holding on to
the lines — injured the wheels, broke the shaft and
the harness, and we had to tie them up with straps
and strings. When we got home it was dusk, and
we resolved to say nothing about the accident to
any one in the house. But both of us were so badly
injured that we could not conceal it longer than the
next morning, that of the funeral. I was six months
getting over the effects and my uncle perhaps as long.

When my uncle came to communicate on this occa-
sion of June 3rd, 1902, 1 had these incidents in mind
when I resolved to ask my test question. I now
quote the record.

" (You and I took something together, you remem-
ber, just after father passed out.)

You are thinking of that ride. I guess I do not
forget it. My head is troublesome in thinking. I
hope to be clearer soon. This is my second attempt.

(You can tell what happened in that ride when you
can make it clear.)

201

MYCWLCAL ItESEAECH AKB THE &S8IT&KSCTI0K

I will. Do you remember a stone we put together.
Not quite right. Til see you again. FarewelL He
has gone out to think." [Last remark by Rector in
explanation of the confusion.]

The next day this uncle returned to the task and
began with incidents that were not verifiable in my
experience and that were as confused and erroneous
as that which I have been quoting. I repeated my
question to bring him back to the subject.

^^ (Please to tell me something about that ride just
after father passed out.)

Your father told you about it before, bui had it
on his mind, Eliza.

(If you can tell it, please to do so.)

Do you remember the stone we put there.
(Where?) At the grave.

(Whose grave?) Your father's. You mean this
ride. (No.)

I think we are thinking of different things. You
don't mean that Sunday afternoon, do you?

(Yes, that's right.)

Yes, I remember well the breakdown, etc."

The communicator then went on in the most frag-
mentary way and alluded to breaking the harness, the
wheel, said we had a red horse and that it had been
frightened by a dog [it was a goat], that we tied the
broken harness with a string and got home late in
the evening, remarking: ^^ Oh, I am your uncle all
right."

It would take up too much space to give the de-
tailed account which is very confused. But the com-
municator specified the main events in the incident of

SOS

CONCLITSIOK QF EXPEEIMENTS ; THEOEIBS

our experience at the time mentioned. They were
all substantially correct, except the reference to the
dog, most of them exactly correct.

The most important thing to remember about this
set of incidents is that they correct an error in my
original Report and do it in a way to indicate that
the first attempt was associated with an unusual mental
state on the part of the communicator. Of course,
the whole incident depends for its value on the exclu-
sion of fraud from its character, and as we assume
that this has been done we do not take that hypothesis
into account here in the discussion. Accepting the
exclusion of fraud the incidents represent one of the
best evidential cases that I know for the exclusion of
telepathy from their explanation. The event, too, ex-
plains the meaning of the confused statements by my
father. My uncle, if I may state the matter con-
structively in regard to the " other side," had given
the incident to my father who was a better communi-
cator, thinking that it would identify him to me and
his wife, my father's sister Eliza. But in his mental
confusion my father gave as an incident in his own
life before I was bom one that had occurred with me
and his brother-in-law the day after his own death,
and this error is corrected by my uncle long after^
ward and amidst nearly as much mental confusion as
that in which the original error was committed. There
is here more or less evidence of the loss of the con-
sciousness of personal identity, a condition quite
closely resembling that of delirium, and that certainly
characterizes most of our dreams. Only the relation
of the incidents is wanting in the first mention of it

803

PSYCHICAL KESEABCH AND THE EESU&BECTIOK

to indicate its meaning and that relation is concealed
by the failure to indicate that the experience was that
of someone else than the narrator.

What first strikes one in the incident is the absurd-
ity of explaining it by any form of telepathy, assum-
ing that the facts guarantee the existence of super-
normal information, and with the exclusion of that
hypothesis we have no alternative to the admission of
the spiritistic with its accompaniment, in this instance,
of some other difficulty than mediumistic obstacles to
the transmission of the message. No doubt there are
hindrances to clear communications in the physical and
mental conditions of the medium. But in this in-
stance the claim, implied in the message as I received
it from my father, that the incidents were personal
experiences associated with his life before I was bom
and the abruptness of their introduction in connection
with events with which they were not historically asso-
ciated, indicates a phenomenon exactly like dreams
and deliria, recognizable by any one who has studied
psychology. Assuming then that this instance, with
others, indicates some unnatural mental state as a con-
dition of communicating, at least in ^^ possession "
types of mediumship, we have a perfectly rational ex-
planation of the persistent triviality and confusion in
the messages. In fact the detailed records of such
phenomena have only to be patiently studied in order
to give the phenomena that intelligibility and ration-
ality as spiritistic communications which cannot be ap-
preciated on any other hypothesis, and this because the
nature and limitations of the communications are such
as we might expect from human personality laboring

204

CONCLtTfilON OT £Xl»EftlM£KTS ; THfiOAlES

under di£Sculties which are not so apparent on other
theories, especially as the assumption of telepathy
must face the contradiction between its immense pow-
ers to account for the true facts and its limitations in
the errors.

One incident in the communications by George Pel-
ham about Dr. Hodgson bears on the main point.
There is evidence — too complicated to detail in this
chapter — that the commimicator is less disturbed
mentally (and perhaps not at all after a certain period
of time) in his normal state on the " other side '* than
when communicating. I quoted the instance (p. 128)
in which Gleorge Pelham said regarding Dr. Hodgson,
that ^^ normally he is all right, but when he comes
into our wretched atmosphere he goes all to pieces."
If we take the various records in my possession repre-
senting apparent attempts on Dr. Hodgson's part to
conmiunicate through other mediums than Mrs. Piper
it is clear that this statement of George Pelham is
perfectly true, and that he does better through Mrs.
Piper than elsewhere, though he has more difficulty
even there than many other communicators.

But instead of producing evidence of this sort
which many may question altogether, we may look at
the situation in another way. We may concede for
the sake of argument that all this is not proof, though
some of the incidents containing supernormal infor-
mation and characteristics of mental confusion at
the same time can hardly be refused evidential value
in reference to the claim here made. But not to in-
sist on this way of discussing the hypothesis, there is
one method that the scientific man cannot dispute.

206

PSYCHICAL EfiSEAUCH AKD T^£ EESITSSECTION

This is to present the case in the light of a working
hypothesis. This means that we shall simply ask if
the hypothesis does not actually fit the facts and then
try its application to see if it will remain consistent
with them throughout. That is to say we may say
to ourselves, " Let us see if it will actually explain
the perplexities which are suggested by all this trivial-
ity and confusion." If we find the hypothesis fitting
the facts we recognize that it is the correct one to en-
tertain until we find reason to reject it.

Now if intelligent people — and this means those
who are familiar with secondary personality, with
dream states and deliria, and with abnormal
psychology generally — will only imagine the pos-
sibility of what is here supposed and then study the
detailed records with a view of ascertaining whether
it fits enough of the facts to explain their perplexities
on the points mentioned, I am confident that they
will find that the whole subject clears up, and its per-
plexities yield to a perfectly simple conception of their
cause, though they will find the same difficulties in ex-
plaining certain specific details that any hypothesis
has to meet.

I have occupied attention regarding the conditions
affecting the communicator in the process of sending
messages from a transcendental world. These were
supposed to account for the confusion and triviality
of the messages. I shall say, however, that the dream-
like trance of the communicator is not the only cause
of the characteristics in the messages that have so
long given rise to objections against the spiritistic
hy])othesis. There is another and just as important

206

CONCLUSION OF EXPERIMENTS; THEOEIES

a source of the confusion and possibly of the error in
the communications. This is the mental condition
of the medium. That this should in some way affect
the communications would, perhaps, be admitted with-
out dispute by any one who was familiar with
psychology, especially of the abnormal type. But
the point to be decided would be that which regards
the nature of that influence and in what special respect
the communications are affected by that mental condi-
tion. In general the simple answer to this query
would be that it would most naturally vary with the
condition in which the medium was at the time.

We must r^fnember that the idea of a trance is not
a fixed and clear one. Trance is but a name for an
exceedingly fluctuating condition and that is not ex-
actly the same in different mediums. The effect of
this condition on messages intromitted into the
psychic's mind will vary with the nature of that
trance. If the medium remains normally conscious
the first question to be raised would be whether the
cleavage between the supraliminal or ordinary normal
consciousness and the subliminal or subconscious men-
tal activities is great enough to exclude the normal
interpreting and other processes from modifying the
thoughts introduced into the mind from the outside.
In some cases the messages enter the normal con-
sciousness either as a condition of their delivery or as
an incident of it. In others they are delivered with-
out any apparent knowledge of their coming or of
their nature. On the other hand if the supraliminal
consciousness is suspended the subconscious action of
the mind may reproduce all the influences of the nor-

207

PSYCHICAL &ESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

mal mind except its memory of their occurrence or of
the messages. Only when the trance extends to the
subconscious processes can we expect the removal of
the interpreting action of the mind through which
messages otherwise come. Even then we generally
or always find the existence of limitations determined
by the habits and experience of the medium, such as
the spelling, style of writing, and even the use of
terms. I have often seen the same message through
difi^erent mediums expressed in different terms char-
acterized by the difference of mental habits in the
cases. Thus a medium who is in the habit of using the
word " Sunday *' in her normal life will most likely
employ this term — not always, as much depends on
the depth of the trance — while one used to the term
*' Sabbath " may employ that for the same message.
I know one that was accustomed to spell the word
** coughs " thus, " caughts " in her normal state, and
it was so spelled in the trance, though the communi-
cator would never have so spelled it, and in this case
there were many supernormal incidents accompanying
the language and automatic writing through which
they came. In another the term "agoing," which
was the natural expression of the medium's normal
life for the idea conveyed, was given in the same sen-
tence which had " going " in the case of Mrs. Piper.
In still another the automatic writing would produce
one word and the normal consciousness would think
of another and synonymous or similar word.

AH these when they occur show unmistakable in-
fluences from the mind of the medium upon messages
intromitted into it. All that remains after the ad-
SOS

CONCLUSION OF EXPERIMENTS; THEOBIES

mission of the fact of this influence is the determina-
tion of the extent of it by the study of actual and con-
crete instances. I shall devote a little time to the
study of the phenomena of Mrs. Verrall which were
published in the last Report of the English Society.
It is one of the most important documents in this re-
spect that has been published by the Society, though
it does not give as much of the detailed record as is
desirable.

The important fact to remember is that Mrs. Ver-
rall does not go into a trance, but remains normally
conscious when the automatic writing is done. It is
also just as important to remember that we do not
require to hold any special theory of interpretation
regarding the phenomena occurring in her case. We
may accept telepathy as an adequate explanation if
we so prefer, it will not alter the view which I here
mean to take regarding the influences affecting the
** messages " recorded. It is apparently certain, and
one would hardly be wrong in saying that it was
demonstrated, that supernormal connection between
two minds occurred in the various cases represented in
that report, with important indications of failure, such
as would most naturally occur in instances involving
the modification of extraneously introduced informa-
tion. In what I wish to quote, therefore, from that
report illustrative of subjective influences on mes-
sages, I do not assume the spiritistic interpretation
of the incidents. I need not go farther than telep-
athy between the living to account for the super-
normal in the phenomena. What is undoubted in the
matter is the difficulty of getting messages through

S09

PSYCHICAI< EESEAUCH AND THE EE8UEEECTION

without disturbing their integrity by the various sub-
conscious agencies which affect all mental action, even
of the normal and supraliminal consciousness.

Mrs. Verrall is a teacher of the classical languages
and many of her automatic writings appear in Greek
and Latin, even when the '^ message " is sent in
English. It seems that her mental habits have some-
thing to do, as in the other instances quoted, with the
form in which the ** messages " appear. It matters
not whether we interpret the phenomena as telepathic
or spiritistic, the latter hypothesis not being so plaus-
ible as in the case of Mrs. Piper and others. But
theories aside, it is clear that the form of expression
exhibits the influence of her own mind whatever its
original source.

At a sitting with Mrs. Piper a certain communica-
tor claimed to have been able to impress Mrs. Vorall's
daughter with the phantasm of a hand and a book.
Dr. Hodgson suggested that he get her to see his hand
holding a spear. Mrs. Piper was near Boston and
Mrs. Verrall in England. It seems that the attempts,
however, to impress the daughter were failures. One
day soon after Mrs. Verrall, amid seven Greek words
and six Latin words wrote the Greek word Sphairas
and the Latin word volatile ferrum^ their English
equivalents being " Spheres '* and " Spear." Now
the communicator, when the message in Boston was
given as a spear, at first understood it to be " sphere "
and had to have it corrected. The same mistake is
made, the reader will remark, in the delivery of it in
England. But the English "spear" comes out in
Latin equivalents. Whatever the source of the mes-

«10

CONCLUSION OF XXFEBIMENTS ; THEORIES

sage to Mrs. Verredl it is apparent that her subcon-
scious mental action is involved in the result. The
evidence for the supernormal in the case is consider-
able and the limitations of its delivery are quite ap-
parent. Besides, the partial mistake suggests that
the agent deUvering the message was in a state of
secondary personaUty subject to just the kind of
mental action which that conception implies. That
is, the trance of the communicator, when he commu-
nicates in England, like two separate hypnotic states,
is continuous with that in America. The memory
neanis is with the condition in which the message to be
taken to England was received. Consequently we
have in the incident at least a possible illustration of
abnormal mental conditions in the communicator and
subconscious influences in the medium through whom
the message has to be delivered.

Another interesting illustration of subconscious
agencies in the €dleged messages is an experiment
made between Mrs. Verrall and Mrs. Forbes. The
two ladies agreed to try communications between each
other. They were and are both living. Mrs. Forbes
also does automatic writing.

On a certain date the writing of Mrs. Forbes al-
luded to Mrs. Verrall's reading a book. As Mrs.
YerraU had been reading the Symposium of Plato on
the day mentioned and as some evident allusion to
the Sympositum had been made through her own auto-
matic writing a year previous, she resolved to watch
for further references to it in the automatic writing
of Mrs. Forbes. For some months the automatic
writing of Mrs. Forbes contained distinct allusions

m

F8TCHICAI. mESEASCH AND THS XXSVmmECTION

to this dialogue and the contents of a certain passage.
But the interesting feature of the alhisions is that it
was long before even a Greek letter could be gotten
through Mrs. Foibes, idio did not know the language.
The automatic writing of Mrs. Verrall was rich in its
reproduction, and the appar^it communicator
through Mrs. Forbes was the same person. Once
Mrs. Forbes got the syllable ^ SYMP " and seemed
unable to go any further with it, but finally ended
with " a the tic." llien in later attempts the word
" sympathy " was substituted for this, and very often
that word is found in the messages, showing sublim-
inal association and reproduction, the idea of the
" Symposium " never having occurred to her in the
writing, as it most naturally would not do so, since
she was not acquainted with the Greek language or
literature.

It would be a long story to illustrate the whole
series of communications between Mrs. Verrall and
Mrs. Forbes, and I have chosen only two conspicuous
instances of the influence of the medium's mind on
the messages transmitted, as they suffice to indicate
the contention advanced. We may readily under-
stand how large this influence may be when it is ad-
mitted to exist at all, and the study of detailed records
will exhibit this to any and all who give time and
patience to their study. The facts will fully justify
the hypothesis assumed to account for triviality and
confusion.

In order to understand clearly the influences which
we have been assuming as disturbing the communica-
tions on the spiritistic hypothesis I may summarize

212

CONCLUSION OF EXFEBIMENTS ; THEOBIBS

the situation which I conceive to be the fact in such
cases as I have been discussing. I have stated that
the hypothesis assumes the communicator to be in an
abnormal mental condition and that the medium in-
fluences the messages consciously or unconsciously by
the action of his or her mind. To make this clearer
I shall state briefly the conditions under which experi-
ments are made and the assumptions which are made
and supported by a certain amount of evidence re-
garding the mental agencies at work in disturbing
communications. There are three general conditions
with various subordinate possibilities and circum-
stances affecting the mental action of all concerned.

1. There is the unusual condition of the medium,
whether in a trance or a conscious state. In the
broadest terms it can be described as abnormal, mean-
ing that it is not the usual and normal condition of
most people, but one in which various interrupted and
perhaps dissociated mental activities take place. This
condition varies in all degrees between normal con-
sciousness and the deepest states of unconsciousness.
The name trance is employed, not to describe its known
character, but simply to indicate that the phenomena
occurring in it cannot be classified with those of other
and better known conditions. Communications be-
tween different minds, whatever the theory we adopt
about them, would naturally be affected by the mental
conditions through which they passed.

2. There is then the trance personality which is
named the " control " in mediumistic cases and which
claims to be a discarnate spirit. Assuming, as may
be done in some cases, that this trance personality is

813

PSTCHICAIi KESEASCH AND THE EESUE&ECTION

a spirit, the hypothesis is that the ^^ control " is in a
trance or automatic mental condition as necessary to
manage the medimn through which the messages are
transmitted. It is apparent that, if this hypothesis
be entertained, the communications, coming tiirough
this mind, must be correspondingly modilSed. Of
course, we may treat the trance personality or " con-
trol " as a subconscious self of the medium and not as
a spirit at all. This fact will not affect the hypothe-
sis in so far as it represents psychological conditions
influencing the communications. The cleavage be-
tween a secondary personaJity and the normal con-
sciousness is often quite as great as between two inde-
pendent persons. Indeed often the communication
between one^s subconscious and conscious states is as
difficult as between two different persons. This, in
fact, is the reason that the functions of secondary per-
sonality so clearly imitate spiritistic phenomena and
deceive so many with the belief that they are com-
municating with a spirit world when they are but
dealing with subconscious states simulating it, the
simulation never reaching the stage of supernormal
information. Hence whether we assume the trance
personality to be a spirit or a subconscious self we
are confronted with a similar set of psychological
conditions affecting the connection between either of
these and the normal consciousness or motor action
of the medium.

8. There is the hypothetical condition of the com-
municator, when we assume the spiritistic hypothesis
to account for the supernormal phenomena bearing
upon the personal identity of certain deceased persons,

S14

COKCLUSION OF EXPEBIMBNTS; THEOEIBS

This dream-like state or trance of the discarnate per-
sons represents the third set of abnormal mental con-
ditions affecting the character of the messages.

We have, therefore, the following conception of
the process in communications purporting to come
from deceased persons, at least in one type of medium,
namely the " possession " type. First the communi-
cator is in a dream-like or somnambulic state, and
communicating his thoughts to the trance-personality
or " control.*' Then there is the " control,'' whether
spirit or subconscious state, representing also a trance
condition on any theory and receiving the supernor-
mal information and transmitting it through the men-
tal conditions of the medium. Then there is the
trance condition of the medium involving the suspen-
sion of the normal mental functions with all the dis-
turbances usually affecting such a condition. Some-
times also the communicator purports also to have
another intermediary through whom the messages are
sent to the " control " and subjecting them to still
further modification. This was the case quite fre-
quently in some of my experiments when one of the
communicators had George Pelham to act as this in-
termediary between himself and the " control." It
matters not what theory we hold of the phenomena
this is the psychological form which they took, and it
is this which I am emphasizing rather than the spir-
itistic hypothesis.

In addition to these general conditions there are
various degrees and stages of them, along with inter-
cosmic conditions affecting the transmission of mes-
sages from spirit to medium or personality to person-

216

PSYCHICAL &E8SASCH AND THE EESUBKECTION

ality. For instance, in the possession type of medium
the trance is a deep one and the communicator seems
to be affected very distinctly with some form of fluctu-
ating anmesia or defective memory, and the di£Sculty
is to control one's mental processes sufficiently to com-
municate at all. On the other hand, there is the sub-
liminal type of medium which represaits a less deep
condition of trance, if, indeed there is any of this at
all. In such cases the mind of the medium is less in
rapport with a transcendental world than the posses-
sion type and so naturally modifies the communica-
tions by all sorts of perceptive and interpreting pro-
cesses. Apparently the communicator in such cases
is clearer and less affected by the conditions of commu-
nicating. But what he gains by this situation is lost
by the amnesia when he comes to communicate through
the possession type. When we add to these circum-
stances the fact that all sorts of cerebral complications
in the transmission are involved and may avail to
distuib the integrity of the communications we may
well wonder how any form of ccHnmunication whatever
is possible. The confusion might well be much worse
than it is.

Then again the mode of communication is not what
it conmioi^y seems. In the possession type it is
usually automatic writing that serves as the process
of transmission, in so far as we know it on this side.
What it is on the other is not apparent on the sur-
face, but seems, after a study of a large record, to
involve something like telepathy between the spirit
and the medium. For instance, communicators do not
always refer to it as speaking, but often as thinking.

216

CONCLUSION OF BXFEBIMENTS ; THEOBIES

The distinction is often implied in the phrase " this
way of speaking," and various hints and statements
indicate that the process of communication between
the living has no clear analogies with that necessarily
assumed in these phenomena. Whatever they are,
they indicate on their surface something different
from the familiar, and various circumstances suggest
the existence of analogies with telepathic agencies and
the presence of a dream-like mental state in the real
or alleged communicator. On the other hand, if the
subliminal type of medium is studied we find more
definite evidence of an interesting and unusual condi-
tion affecting the messages. If the communications
take the form of descriptive speech by the medium it
is noticeable that they seem to be describing what they
see, and odd enough are the implications, very often,
of these descriptions. The medium seems to be look-
ing at objects and describing them as in real life.
It is precisely this simulation of the material world
and the real or apparent reproduction of "spirit
clothes " and various material characteristics that we
should naturally suppose were cast off by death that
gives so much offense to the man of intelligence and
common sense, especially if he has any sense of humor.
But it is not at all necessary to take these descrip-
tions as they appear. They may be the result of tele-
pathic messages from the living or dead converted into
phantasms or hallucinations by the subliminal activ-
ities of the medium through whom they come. This
view does not require us to suppose more than a
thought world beyond the grave converted into appar-
ent reality by the process necessary to establish a con-

217

PSYCHICAL EESEAKCH AND THE HESlTiBECTION

nection between the material and the spiritual world.
In the dream, somnambulic, or hypnotic life of all
persons the subconscious processes reproduce ideas or
mental states in the form of hallucinations. They are,
of course, not of that persistent type that indicates
a morbid condition, but they are just as apparently
representative of reality as normal sense perceptions.
Now, if ideas from outside minds can be transmitted
to the living, whether in trance or other unusual con-
dition, as the process is not one of sense perception,
but some supernormal action, it would be most nat-
ural to look in subliminal mental action for the agency
through which the extraneous thought is transmitted
or expressed, and as subliminal action is so closely
associated with hallucinatory functions foreign
thoughts might appear as realities just as hallucina-
tions do, and yet not represent those realities any
more than do hallucinations. Suppose, then, a dream-
like state of the dead when trying to communicate
and a subconscious state of the medium through which
the thought must be transmitted, and we might well
expect all the appearance of realities, as they are de-
scribed in mediumistic phenomena. The incidents of
one's past life may be simply thought on the *^ other
side " and as their telepathic impression on the sub-
liminal mind of the medium results in a phantasm, an
apparent reality to the medium, we ought to expect
descriptions reproducing the features of a material
world, without their characterizing such as a fact.

Let me take as an example the message which I re-
ceived through Mrs. Smith (Cf. p. 137). " Another
person is here from the family circle ; a little boy four

218

CONCLtTSION OF EXPEBIMEKTS ; TH£0&lfiS

or five years old. He Is grown up. He wears a
little blouse and little pants like knickerbockers."
Superficially such a communication, which exactly de-
scribes my brother and his clothes when he died forty
years ago, represents an apparently material world of
an absurd sort. The circumstances enable me to treat
the incident here as not wholly due to chance. But if
I am expected to believe that ghosts have clothes I
should have great difficulty in accepting and defend-
ing such a belief. But suppose that the communica-
tor was simply thinking and that the medium was
getting the message telepathically, — whether from
the living or the dead matters not for our purposes, —
and that the subconscious mind simply converted the
transmitted ideas into hallucinatory phantasms, we
could easily understand in this message a reference to
the boy at the time he died, a recognition of maturity
now — and this seems to be a characteristic of all such
phenomena — and a phantasm of his dress reproduced
from the thoughts of the communicator. In that view
of the matter there would be no difficulty in giving
a rational interpretation of the facts, and one that
most easily consists with the spiritistic theory.

If, then, we suppose that the communicator is in a
dream-like state ; that the trance personality is also in
more or less the same condition, and that the medium
is also In a morbid condition of some kind, if that term
is not too strong to express it, we can well under-
stand how trivial and confused messages would be the
result of communication from an ethereal world, and
much more would the result be affected, if telepathy
be the process of communication, a process that is

219

PSYCHICAL &ESEAECH AND THE EESURRECTIOK

extremely rare and difficult between the living. All of
the influences together which I have mentioned would
explain easily enough the perplexities of those who
cannot make up their minds on such phenomena as we
have been discussing, and ought to show that the ap-
parent inconsistencies in the various hypotheses are in
reality not such, but are caused by the confusion inci-
dent to the operation of the several factors involved
in the process of communication.

In the present chapter it hais been necessary to
speak and think more positively regarding the spirit-
istic theory than in the previous ones. In them I was
primarily interested in giving the facts, and I should
have continued that policy in the present article, if
the triviality and confusion could have been explained
in any rational way without trying the application of
the spiritistic explanation. I have, therefore,
imagined the spiritistic point of view as entitled to a
test in its application to the very facts which give
rise to the sceptics' most trusted objections. I do not
put it forward as anything more than a working
hypothesis, and shall unhesitatingly abandon it if a
better and simpler hypothesis can be obtained and
supported by evidence. I should, of course, not
abandon it to the ipse dixit of any one who can talk
glibly about what " might be." I want to know
whether there is any evidence that a particular " might
be " is in reality a fact. As this is a scientific prob-
lem every hypothesis must have its evidence, and those
that are supported by respectability and scepticism
are quite as much under obligation to produce evi-
dence as any spiritistic interpretation. All that I

9,%0

CONCLUSION OF EXPEBIMENTS ; THS0RIE8

should ask is that any theory advanced must produce
sufficient evidence in its support to render it more
probable than another, and I should not listen to a
priori possibilities in this or any other matter pre-
tending to be a scientific problem. The question here
concerns the best hypothesis in the light of the facts,
and if any better than the spiritistic can be evi-
dentially sustained I shall be the first to accept it. I
am interested only in discovering a clue to the per-
plexities which all admit cannot be explained by the
ordinary theories.

SSI

CEIAPTER Vm

THE nCBAB CASE

This case, which will be of interest to psychical re-
searchers, came under my notice in the following man-
ner. During the holidays in December, 1901, I re-
ceived a letter from a stranger, who turned out to be
a clergyman, saying that he had been experimenting
with his wife, who seemed to exhibit mediumistic pow-
ers, and asking me to investigate the authenticity of
certain statements bearing upon the personal identity
of one of the ^^ commtmicators." He also made the
passing remark that he had a odlection of '* commu-
nications " purporting to come from the planet Mars.
I at once seized the opportunity to investigate the
case and soon received the Martian matter for exami-
nation. I found that the experiments had extended
over several years and that a tolerably omiplete record
had been kept. I at once became sufficiently inter-
ested in the matter to arrange the materials for study
and publication. The following is a summary of the
results obtained, including personal experiments of
my own. In this account the gentleman and his wife
will, for the purpose of conceaHng their identity, be
known as Mr. and Mrs. Smead.

Of course, in spite of the fact that Mr. Smead

was a clergyman, I had to be on the alert for fraud

and deception, as I had no previous acquaintance with

him or any of his connections. But I soon found it

' 222

THE SMEAD CASE

unnecessary to seriously entertain suspicions, as
further acquaintance and investigation entirely re-
lieved me of the duty of testing the evidence from this
point of view, as was done in the Piper case. Mr.
and Mrs. Smead were both honest and conscientious
people, and it is especially pertinent to remark in this
connection that it is the painstaking and conscientious
character of their narratives and records that supplies
the evidence which depreciates the spiritistic claims
of many of the facts. They themselves furnished
nearly all the evidence of secondary personality in
their case, and showed an entire willingness to dis-
credit any theory that did not appear to be war-
ranted by the facts* This fortunate circumstance
limited my task to the work of recording and
analyzing the incidents.

It seems that Mrs. Smead had been familiar with
planchette writing f rcMn her childhood, and had occa-
sionally practiced it. But nothing like systematic
experiments had been made until 1895. In the mean-
time a number of apparitions had occurred of which
a contemporaneous record was made. But as they
have no demonstrably veridical character no further
mention of them need be made here. They simply
exemplify a mental type of which we have more inter-
esting examples. But when systematic experimenting
began, as stated, in 1896, the phenomena assumed a
more suggestive character. In so far as the ^^ com-
municators" were concerned, their names gave the
appearance of a veridical character to their state-
ments. They were three deceased children of Mr. and
Mrs. Smead and a deceased brother of Mr. Smead.

SS3

PSYCHICAL liESEAECH AND THE BESUEBECTION

As far as their identity is concerned they represent
personalities more plausibly spiritistic than those in
M. Floumoy's case, which this one resembles in many
of its features. I shall recur to this later.

THE MAETIAN EOMANCE.

During the early part of the year above mentioned
the alleged communicators referred several times to
two or three of the planets. But in August of that
year, h propos of a question addressed to a deceased
daughter as to where she was, the answer was " every-
where," and then, after denying that she had seen
heaven, she remarked that ^^ some spirits are on the
earth and others are on other worlds." A few weeks
afterwards a brother of this communicator, pur-
porting to write through the planchette, said that the
sister who had made the above statement was away,
and in answer to the question, "Where?" replied
" Mars." In response to a further question he said
that his sister had gone to Mars " with uncle Vester."
[" Vester " was the abbreviated form by which Mr.
Smead had called his brother Sylvester while living,
the fact of course being known to Mrs. Smead.] At
another sitting Mars was mentioned again, and also
the intended visit there with this uncle. In the same
sitting another communicator, Maude (the sister
of the previous communicator), referred spontane-
ously to Jupiter, and drew a crude map of its surface,
saying, in reply to a request to tell something about
its people, "they are different from you." Later,
amid much trivial matter, Jupiter was said to be the

SS4

THE SMEAI) CASE

" babies' heaven," whither they were taken after
death because they were better than grown-up people.
Even secondary personalities cannot stand the theol-
ogy of Calvin and Edwards! There were also sev-
eral statements made in connection with this reference
to the infants' heaven that betrayed the influence of
early teaching in the life of Mrs. Smead, and which
indicated the material upon which the secondary per-
sonality had drawn for its " communicaticms." They
were perhaps the memories of Sunday school teach-
ing supplemented by a childish imagination of what
the stars might be.

It was, however, at the next experiment that the
most interesting ^^ communications " began regarding
the planet Mars. The sitting started with the draw-
ing of a map in considerable detail, giving the names
of the zones which were represented on it. The " com-
municator " was Maude, the deceased child of Mr. and
Mrs. Smead. The names given for the several zones
were "Zentin" (cold), "Zentinen" (very cold),
"Dimstze'' (North Temperate Zone), " Dimst-
zerin " (South Temperate Zone), " Emerincenren ''
( Equator ) , and " Mimtenirimte " ( Continent ) .
After the map was drawn the following dialogue took
place between the " communicator " and Mr. Smead.

" At it we had a fine time. We could go all around
there easy. The people are bigger and there are not
so many as on this earth. The people there could talk
with the people here if they knew their language, but
they do not."

(Do the people in Mars have flesh and blood as we
do?) « Yes." (Do they look Uke us?) " Some."

226

PSYCHICAL SESEAKCH AND THE BESUBRECTION

(Are there big cities there?) "No. The inhabit*
ants are most like Indians." (American Indians?)
"Yes." (Are they highly civilized?) "Yes, some
are, in some things." (What things?) " In fixing
the water." (How in that way?) "Making it so
that it is easy to get around it." (How do they do
that?) " They cut great canals from ocean to ocean
and great bodies of water."

At this point in the sitting the " communications "
stopped, and it should be said that the canals and
bodies of water like lakes were represented on the
map as drawn at the beginning of the experiment.
A curious fact, however, connected with the incidents,
is that an article was published in a paper taken by
the family and dated one day after the date of this
sitting, and in it reference was made to Fercival Low-
ell's articles in the Atlantic Monthly for that year
discussing the question of Martian inhabitants and
canals. Whether Mrs. Smead had seen this article
before the automatic writing by the planchette de-
pends upon whether the paper was printed ahead of
its nominal date, which I could not ascertain, or
whether she had seen any of Lowell's articles in the
Atlantic Monthly ^ both of which Mr. and Mrs. Smead
deny and with some probabilities in their favor.
One need hardly make a point of this, however, as the
resources of imagination are equal to all that was
written by the planchette, especially since the ques-
tion of Martian inhabitants and canals is one of com-
mon interest.

The next recorded " communications " did not refer
to Mars, but consisted of apparent messages from

««6

THE SMEAD CASE

the deceased children of Mr. and Mrs. Smead, in
which there was an evident attempt to have some fun.
Among the tricks played by the subliminal was the
draft of a figure which was said to represent the DeviL
The figure was of a serpentine character with the fea-
tures of a dragon. It was to some extent the con-
ventional devil of the theatrical stage. Two or three
times during the Martian " communications " this sort
of interruption occurred, involving matter that had no
planetary character or connections. But when the
Martian " messages " were resumed after this humor-
ous diversion it was interesting to remark their abrupt-
ness and completed development. It was not until five
years later, however, that any further experiments
were made or recorded, and it is this long interval
that creates the interest in the resumption of Martian
matter.

The last sitting was in December, 1895. The next
was in September, 1900. In this latter the " commu-
nications " present a developed form and devotion to
detail. The planchette began by drawing a figure
which might very easily suggest a ship, and wrote the
two words " Seretrevir " and " Cristririe." The
former was explained to mean a sea vessel and the
latter its name. It seems that the Martians have the
good sense to follow terrestrial usage and to give
names to their ships. But an interesting deviation
from our habits was the statement that the ships were
made of trees and that the inhabitants of Mars did
not have sawmills as we do.

In the next experiment a curious figure was drawn,
unrecognizable in itself but which was explained to be

227

F8TCHICAI. KESEABCH AND THE SESURBECTIOK

a ^^ dog house temple." In the comers of it were
drawn two animals which were explained as being
meant to represent dogs, and which were said to give
the name to the temple. The characters were then
drawn which described the temple by name, and these
were then translated into English characters, " Ti
f emo wahrhibivie timeviol," meaning " the dog house
temple." I

In the same sitting was given the name of a lake
that had been drawn on the map. It was " Emer-
via." Mr. Smead then asked the " communicator "
to give the Martian for " The boy runs," and re-
ceived the answer that people do not run on Mars,
but only walk. What the climate may be that pre-
vents any faster pace was not explained, or whether it
was climate or not. But the sentence written in Mar^
tian characters and translated into English was ^^ Ti
inin amarivim." The form of thought as explained
was ** the boy walking " and not " the boy walks," a
curious deviation from the most natural speech, unless
the subliminal is shrewd enough to introduce just
sufficient variation into a capricious whim of this kind
to give it plausibility.*

A few days later the planchette drew a rough sketch
of a man and then one of a woman, explaining at the
same time what they represented and giving the Mar-
tian words for the two. " Mare " was for " man,"
" Maren " for " men," " Kare " for " woman," and

♦The absence of such variations is a peculiarity of the
Floumoy case; the fact that in it the Martian language fol-
lowed exactly the order and grammar of French made a
strong point in the argument against regarding it as an
indepenaent language. — [Editor's Notb.]

THE SMEAD CASE

Karen " for " women." After this description Mr.
Smead asked the question, " What is peculiar about
that picture of the man you drew? " and received the
following answer with the continued dialogue :

« i

The way they dress." (How?) "The men
wear dresses and pants." (Short dresses?) "Yes.

The women wear bag-like skirts and funny hats.
Their hair is hanging down their shoulders. The
men put theirs up and keep long hair under their hats.
We went all around. The people are different in dif-
ferent places."

In the next experiment a strange figure was drawn
and the word " Wereven " written out, which was said
to mean " serpent." This was followed by the ground
plan of a house in the shape of a double cross, or two

2^9

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBRECTION

crosses with their arms touching, and with the outline
of a mountain range in the background. The lower
part or half of the double cross, however, was ex-
plained to represent the reflection of the house in the
water, thus indicating that it was built on the shore
of some body of water. It was afterwards explained
also that the Martian houses were usually built on the
shore of a lake or body of water. In the present
representation there were drawn circular loops in the
wing sections of the house. They were said to repre-
sent windows. The doors stood on the line dividing
the shadow from the house.

At the next two or three sittings the tendency was
to give some account of the Martian language in
the form of sentences written out in Martian char-
acters, which were hieroglyphic, and explained in
English terms. The sentences were " This man is a
great man," the Martian order being ^^ This man a
great man is," and ^^ The great man addressing his

subjects." Unfortunately Mr. Smead did not pre-
serve the Martian words for these as for later sen-
tences. On October 8rd the planchette drew the pic-
ture of a flower and wrote the sentence : " Flowers
bloom there. Many of the great men plant them " ;
the Martian being, ^^ Moken irin trinen minin am ti
maren inine tine." On the same date a still longer
sentence was written. It was : " Ti maren arivie
warire ti marenensis aru ti Artez feu ti timeviol."
The English of this is: ^^ The men went with the

880

THS SMEAB CASE

subjects of the chief ruler to the temple." In the
course of the same experiment the '* communicator "
stated a fact that might interest the student of poli-
tics. It was that: " The people on Mars choose their
rulers, so that the children of great men do not
count," with the emphasis apparently on " people."
Evidently the aristocrats in that planet do not possess
the franchise ! They may have power, but they can-
not share the privilege of helping in their own elec-
tion.

Chi the next day one of the most remarkable and in-
teresting of the whole series of drawings was made,
especially as it was drawn by the planchette* It was
preceded by the written statement : " You should
see some of their embroideries. The colors are beau-
tiful." Then the planchette drew a representation of
an embroidered dress with flowers scattered over it in
symmetrical order. After the dress was drawn in out-
line the colored portions were described, and these
were variations of pink, white, green, yellow, brown
and lavender. The waist was pink and apparently
draped with lavender lace. The upper portion of the
skirt was white and contained embroidered flowers in
it, the flowers having various colors. Next to this
was a wide pink stripe, which was wider behind than in
front. The lower portion of the skirt was lavender
in color and ornamented with flowers at the margin
of the pink stripe, and at the lower edges. It is ap-

281

PSYCHICAL EESSA&CH AKD TH£ KfiSUftAfiCTlOlT

parently a portion of an overskirt. In connection
with it the dress was described in the following sen-
tence: ^^ Mare arivie ceassin oonei kei ahrue ruinin

aL^A-i.

a

warire ti mare.'* This was interpreted in English
to mean : " Man chief ruler's wife's dress when she
goes riding with the man chief ruler."

On the next day the figure of a wagon with some
animal hitched to it was drawn and described as a
goat-cart." The Martian for it was said to be
Yeoar." Then on the following day a most re-
markable and original drawing of a Martian clock
was made. The whole and its parts were described in
detail. The Martian name for it was " Triveniul."
It consisted of two circular wooden boxes resting side
by side and connected by openings, through which
passed from one to the other the wire that formed the

THE SMEAD CASE

coil springs in each box. The spring begins in the
center of one box and terminates in a coil which is
wound around a circular wire to hold it in its place,
runs through the opening between the boxes and,
winding about another circular wire, terminates as the
first begins, in the center of the other box. The
spring is of brass, and the spiral Dart of it is made

and fastened so that as it unwinds in one of the boxes
it winds up the other in the second box. The clock is
wound once a day, and as the running down of one
of the spiral coils winds up the other the latter serves
to run the clock during the night. Though it was
described with much detail the mechanical working of
it was not made clear, and hence we can only mention
the ingenuity of the subconsciousness in constructing
a plausible piece of machinery.

It seems also that the Martians have overcome the
difficulties of aerial navigation. They have an air-
ship of very peculiar and ingenious construction.

288

MYCHICAI. UB8SAECH AND THIS KEStTRRECTlOK

TTie description of it by the planchette after drawing
it was as follows :

" Made of wire cloth-like stuff — made to go in the
air. It is an air-ship. It is a coil. You see it will
run a long mile (while) when they have to stop and
wind it, or it must be wound while it is in motion.
This coil makes the wings go. Each one (wing) is
connected with this coil and then when the power is
turned on it makes them go like birds' wings. The

power runs it all, only the propeller guides it. Let
me tell you about the wings first.

" They are filled with air so that they are light.
Then the wire-like cloth covers them. There are fif-
teen points or parts of the wings that are filled with
air. These wings go up and down. The coils at
the bottom are used to help the wings open. The
power winds the coil. The power is electricity and
the batteries are where the coils are. There are three
big coils. One is for the wind sails, one is for the
wings, and one is for the propeller. The coil is used
with the sails because it is sometimes needed when the

winds are strong. The propeller goes like a wing.
The wind makes the ship go some."

The sketch of the air-ship drawn by the planchette
shows a curiously shaped mechanism that resembles
roughly a flattened ballon suspended upon a flat boat
with sails. All the parts of it were named and accu-
rately described, including the means of entrance,
which were round window-like holes on the sides.

Two days later the planchette drew a mountain, or
elevation, on which were placed the Martian symbols
of two houses, and the place was described as an ob-
servatory or " place where they look at you." There
were also drawn across the mountain what may be de-
scribed as tunnels dug through it, with a pipe-like
appearance at one end. The Martian name for
house, ** wardhibivie," was written near the symbols
for houses and explained to mean this. Then a com-
plete Martian sentence was written describing the
place, with numerals placed under the words to indi-
cate the order of the Martian thought. In English
it read: ^^ The place in which man chief ruler looks
on your earth from Mars." The Martian order indi-
cated by the numbers was : " The man chief ruler's
place in which looks on your earth from Mars."
The Martian hieroglyphics for this, when put into
English letters and words, were : " Ti rure neu in-
few mare laries en fratuir triuen carmie."

A curious coincidence between this drawing and one
in Floumoy's case is to be noticed. Mile. Helfene
Smith also drew a Martian observatory with a tunnel
in it, and it appears that Mrs. Smead was unaware
of the fact, as, although Floumoy's book was in the

235

PSTCHlCAIi &ESEABCH AND THE BESUBRECTIOK

house, it had been withheld from her reading on pur-
pose to avoid such coincidences, and unless we are to
believe that Mrs. Smead had examined the book in an
unconscious state we have no reason to suppose that
she had seen any of Mile. H^l^ne Smith's drawings.

The subject was not resumed until a month later,
when, on November 14th, the planchette wrote a Mar-
tian sentence representing the statement that the peo-
ple in that planet were eating a meal. The house
to which the statement referred seems, according to the
original record, not to have been drawn until ten days
later, November 24th. But the sentence was:
" Wardhibivie arri prri kau f riuiol taikin sirvuen."
To a question as to what the Martians were eating,
the answer was, in English, ^^ bread, cake, something
like water, fruit, and chicken." The Martian for
these foods was : " Fraiu, kreki, trikuil, caruitz,
fluiniz." The drawing of the house represented
merely the ground plan, and described the furniture
in it, with the position of each piece, including
couches, hassocks, a cushion, table, water vessel, clock,
and doors.

At the next experiment, which was on November
15th, the planchette drew the representation of a Mar-
tian chicken, and said that this fowl was not so large
as the terrestrial chicken. There was apparently an
associative connection of the incident with those of the
previous day. Then on November 16th, with prob-
ably a similar associative connection, a house was
drawn and said to represent the palace of Artez, the
chief ruler. The parts of the palace were described
in great detail after drawing it. It consisted of two

236

divisions, one of white and the other of gray stone.
That of gray stone was by far the larger, and showed
a different style of architecture. It was characterized
by a series of square towers connected together on the
first story. Two of the towers, of which there were
eight in all, were larger than the others. There were
four stairways arranged between the towers, except
between the second and third, and between the fourth
and fifth. The doors were large and of rectangular
shape, and some of the windows round €ind some

square. The roof was made so as to serve as a
promenade, and access to it was gained through doors
in the towers. The white stone house was smaller
than the gray one, and built in the same general style,
except that the towers, if so they may be called, ter-
minated in pyramids, and the windows were all round.
The foreground consisted of lawns, flower-beds, and
ponds or artificial lakes. The background was a
series of lofty mountains, with the blue sky to set
them off. In all the representation was a magnificent
piece of work, and involved conceptions worthy of a
fine artist.

237

MTCHiCAi. mssRAmcH An thk msstrEMMcrnoiS

£]g^ days later the planciiette cbcir the gromid
pkm of tins house or palace, as remarked abore, and
then tiie representatkm of a cortam used in iL Hie
cmtain is an interesting work of art in some respects.
It was apparently embroideredy and was described in
detafl. The fringe at the bottom consisted of repre-
sentations of people, and was of dark gray or brown
color. Immediately above it, of a lighter color
and mixed with yellow, was a sort of serpentine-
shaped decoration, and above this a yellow stripe. On
this was superposed a wide red stripe with four speci-
mens of flowers, as if set in pots. The two middle
flowers were single, and the two outside sets were of
three branches each. Over this belt was a narrow
strip of gray color, apparently representing the
walks and gardens of a palace: for in the center of
the curtain above this belt were the white stone di-
visions of the palace described previously, with green
swards in the background rising into mountains and
sky further back. On the sides of this picture, as a
margin, were rectangles of red and yellow, and at the
top a heavy brown fringe like that at the bottom.
The whole representation is both imique, in its way^
and well conceived.

Nearly a fortnight later another curtain was
drawn. It was somewhat different in style from the
first specimen. The fringe and margins were not of
the same type, and were not described in detail. The
central ornament was a representation of the Martian
air-ship with a background of cloud and sky. Curi-
ously enough the figure of the air-ship is quite identi-
cal with that drawn much earlier, showing the same

SS8

THE SMEAD CASE

Sd9

subliminal memory as is noticeable in the hieroglyphic
symbols of speech and thought, which are correctly
repeated when once the fabrications are made. The

jl^^

sails of the air-ship were white, the curtain generally
of brown, but the embroidery of a light blue.

At various intervals during the next ten days there
were drawn a bridal veil which duplicates our speci-
men of this article in all essential respects, a lady
wearing this veil and a dress with a long train, and
in connection with the latter the Martian sentence:

239

P8YCHICAI« BESKAmCH AKB THE XXSUSKECTION

^^ Mirwerel Wariema Maiquein wardhibme ma-
manie." The order of this in English would have
been, according to the numerals placed under the
words: ^'Marquein Wariema wardhibivie Mirwerel
mamanie." The English interpretation of this was
said to be: ^ The house where the bride Marqudn
Wariema lives with her husband"; or after the
grammatical structure of the Martian, ^Marquein
Wariema's house live together husband." It was also
explained that the Martian bride retains her name
after marriage, which in this case was *^ Wariema,"
as ^^ Marquein " was said to be that of her husband.
There is no record of any drawing of a house on this
occasion to explain the reference of the sentence.

The next drawing represented a large house with
two wings, so to speak. It resembles a large bar-
racks and is plain in architecture. The windows are
again round and very numerous. It was described as
^^the place where the men that get married woik."
Two days later a Martian sentence was written ex-
plaining that ^^ the men work in the fields before they
marry." The Martian of this was: "Ti maren
oreicein ein treviens veren quren mariqim." There
were some indications that the men who had to live
this life before marriage were of the aristocratic
class and even princes of the Crown, a most delightful
way of reducing this class to democratic respectabil-
ity. It is on a par with the Martian limitation of
the franchise!

This was the last of the Martian " communica-
tions." They were suddenly interrupted and termi-
nated by the appearance at the next experiment of a

240

THE SMEAD CASE

new personality who called himself Harrison Clarke
and who shut out all other would-be " communica-
tors.'' He apparently had no interest in inter-
planetary matters and never even alluded to them. I
shall return to him presently. It is only necessary
now to indicate the interruption of the Martian mat-
ter and then to ask the question what it signifies.

The psychologist and psychical researcher will
recognize at once what these phenomena mean.
There is no evidence that they are what they purport
to be. The only hypothesis that recommends itself
under such conditions is that of secondary personal-
ity. There are internal indications in the drawings
of the planchette that suggest this theory, even if
we had no other evidence of it. For instance, the
mechanical impossibility of the air-ship, the evident
confusion of a " propeller " with the helm, the ap-
propriation of forces like electricity, which is the sub-
ject of present terrestrial excitement in expectation
of further discoveries, the general play of this un-
conscious process reproducing phenomena too much
like the terrestrial to escape suspicion, all these are
facts which take the Martian " communications " en-
tirely out of the category of spiritistic revelations,
unless better evidence is forthcoming to show a tran-
scendental significance. But the most interesting
and important feature of the case remains after we
have classified it. It is the psychologicaJ, vcdiie of
such cases for the study of alleged spiritism. We
find in them evidence that we need not attribute fraud
to the normal consciousness, and we discover automatic
processes of mentation that may be equally acquitted

S41

PSYCHICAL KESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

of fraudulent intent, owing to the absence of self-
consciousness, while we are also free from the obliga-
tion to accept the phenomena at their assumed value.
Their most extraordinary characteristic is the extent
to which they imitate the organizing intelligence of
a normal mind and the perfection of their impersona-
tion of spirits, always betraying their limitations,
however, just at the point where we have the right to
expect veridical testimony to their claims. In this
case these claims are more plausible than in Prof.
Floumoy's, His ** spirits •' could do nothing to
prove their identity, and assumed, what I believe is
the prevailing form of spiritism in France, namely
the doctrine of reincarnation. But this feature, as
in' spiritism in this coimtry, is absent from the present
case, which is connected with personalities who might
be expected to prove their identity, and we shall find
in the sequel that some things are done to satisfy this
expectation, at least in its superficial aspects.

THE MYSTIFICATION OF HABBISON CLARKE.

As I have already remarked, the " communica-
tions " exhibiting the Martian characteristics were
not the only ones which occurred during this period
of planchette writing. I have simply grouped the
Martian incidents together for collective examination
and study. They were interspersed at various times
with alleged ** communications " of a very different
sorfc, and partaking of superficial characteristics
similar to those which have made the Piper case so
interesting. Several relatives, and even entire stran-

24S

THE SMEAD CASE

gers whose identity could not be traced, purported
to " communicate," and gave much more plausibility
to the spiritistic explanation than did the Floumoy
phenomena.

One special illustration of this plausible character*
was the personality of Harrison Clarke. He ap-
peared, as already said, without previous announce-
ment and interrupted the Martian ^^ communica-
tions," shutting out all other intruders. One of his
special traits is his cleverness in tricks of writing.
He shows about equal facility at inverted, mirror and
normal writing. The inverted writing is backwards
and upside down, so that it must be read by turning
the sheet over from top to bottom. The mirror writ-
ing can be read only in a mirror. But it was his
autobiography that proved the most interesting of
all his work. At first he relied on his tricks of writ-
ing to prove his spiritistic claims, but when he was
given to understand that these were not sufficient he
condescended to meet our demands for more appro-
priate data to prove his terrestrial identity, and the
result was the following story, which was given at
different times and not in the chronological order in
which I here arrange his statements.

He was bom in a small town, now a part of
Chicago. He did not name the suburb. At the age
of two years he was taken to Albany, New York
State, where he was brought up by an aunt. When
he became old enough he went to New York City
and worked there awhile, but removed to Baltimore,
where he obtained work in a small store. There he
fell in love with a young lady, whom he called " his

S43

YSTcmcAi* wwwra»rH akd

girl/' and hrwuiip cngiged to her. TTiinting tliat
if he was gomg to get maii ic d he ou^bt to haTe a
tiade, he cnne back to New YoA and was cmplojed
as a tjpe-setter in the oAioe of the Xem York Herald.
In the meantime ^ his giil " in Baltimore died, and
the effect upon Hairiaoa Oarke was a braken heart.
He enlisted in the army and was ^ in the last raiment
that left New Yoik GAj for die war." This, he
said, was in 186S. He was m tiie battle of Shiloh.
He mmied the Generals, Grant as in diief oommand
there and Sherman under him, with General Lew
Wallaee, saying that he himsdf was in WaDaoe's di-
Tision and that Wallace had taken Genera] C. F.
Smith's place because of the hitter's sickness. Gen-
eral Bragg was also mentioned as the Confederate
commander. One night Harrison Clarke and his
comrade were out, for reasons not definitely explained,
wandering about through swampy ground, and ap-
peared to be losL Towards morning they were dis-
covered by a rdbel guard and shot. Clarke was shot
through the lungs, but did not die immediately. In
the meantime he was visited by the spirit of his lady
love, who told him that he was coming with her.
He demurred at first, but finally consented on receiv-
ing the promise that he should be permitted to return
some time and tell that he survived the ordeal of
death*

This is an interesting and circumstantial story.
Some of the incidents it was not possible to investi-
gate for verification or disproof, as they were not
accompanied by the details necessary to secure a clue.

244

THE SMEAB CASB

The incident of employment in the Herald office had
its possibilities, but the authorities there refused to
permit the necessary examination of their books to
determine whether or not any such person ever worked
there as claimed. The authorities in the War De-
partment at Washington, D. C, were more kind and
accommodating. In response to enquiries on the
matter they reported to me that there were no New
York Regiments m the battle of ShUoh. This battle
occurred in June, 1862. There was a Harrison
Clarke in the 125th New York Regiment, but he was
still living at the time of these experiments and had
never been in the battle named. There was also a
Harrison Clarke in one of the Illinois regiments in
the battle of Shiloh, but he was mustered out at the
close of the war and did not die until 1895. There
was a Harrison Clarke killed in the battle of Fair
Oaks in April, 1862. This place was situated in a
swampy region, but the incidents narrated do not fit
such a person. My discovery in Washington, how-
ever, put an end to the spiritistic claims of Harrison
Clarke. The mention of the Generals in the battle
of Shiloh was correct, but it is possible that Mrs.
Smead has read somewhere an account of that battle
and does not remember the facts in her normal state.
It is also true that Harrison Clarke did not spon-
taneously say that he enlisted in a New York Regi-
ment, though he seemed to assent to this when it was
suggested. His spontaneous statement was that his
regiment was the last to leave the city before that
battle. But the fact that no trace can be found of

245

PSTCHICAI* mESEAmCH AlVB THE WESUMMECTIOIS

any Harriwm dari^e having been kflled in that battle
indicates quite clearly what disposal had to be made
of his claims.

As soon as I had ascertained that no New Tork
regiments had been in the battle of Shiloh I resolved
to confront this personality with the facts. I sent
them to Mr. Smead, and at the first opportonity he
presented them to Harrison Clarke for explanation.
When this was done Harrison Clarke showed the
natural embarrassment which the contradiction was
bound to produce, but began a battle of inteDectual
sparring and defiance which perhaps has hardly its
equal in the annals of secondary personality. Clarke
admitted the embarrassing nature of the situation,
but at the suggestion of desertion he seized the chance
to say that he had deserted the New York regiment
and had re-enlisted under another name in a regiment
that enabled him to be present in the battle of Shiloh.
But he absolutely refused to give the name under
which he had re-enlisted! He saw a way to escape
being trapped again, and stubbornly refused to suj>-
ply any more data for determining his personal iden-
tity. As a consequence his presence was discouraged,
and he soon disappeared in a fit of anger and did
not reappear again for some time, when he seemed
somewhat chastened and subdued, though he would
not do anything more to establish his identity.

I need not tell a psychical researcher why this per-
sonality cannot be treated as spiritistic. The inter-
est to the psychological student lies in its simulation
of the real in its circumstantial story. The superior-
ity of the personality in this respect to Floumoy's

S46

THE SMEAB CASE

Marie Antoinette, Lipoid, and the Martian Reincar-
nation is perfectly manifest, as the incidents have all
the internal probabilities that the most inveterate
spiritist might desire. The personality is perfectly
natural and satisfies all the criteria for a spirit, except
the truthfulness of the narrative. In this it exhibits a
most interesting illustration of intelligence, and
makes a valuable case of secondary personality for
the student of spiritistic problems in either their
spurious or their genuine manifestations.

There were interesting phenomena, besides those
that I have mentioned, which illustrate a remarkable
secondary personality in this character. For in-
stance, when asked to write the name of Philadelphia
in mirror writing with every other letter omitted,
this was done almost to perfection, with a dash and
promptness that would take one off his feet, so to
speak, with surprise. Again, to test the question of
the supernormal I once placed my arm in a hanging
position so that my body would completely conceal it
from Mrs. Smead's field of vision while she was in a
deep trance with her eyes closed, and moving my
hand backward and forward on the wrist as a hinge,
so as not to move the arm or cause any noise with
the coat sleeve which might affect any supposed hyper-
aesthesic condition of Mrs. Smead, I asked this per-
sonality what I was doing, and received the answer
that I was moving my hand. On my recognition
of the answer's correctness Harrison Clarke asked
me triumphantly whether I did not believe in him
now. I flattered him on his success, but pressed him
with the necessity of proving his identity if he were

247

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE EESUBKECTION

to satisfy me. Similar feats were performed in one
or two other instances, but the psychologist would
want more experiments of this kind and would think
of something else than spirits in all such cases.

As an illustration of how much secondary person-
ality had to do with the claims and character of Har-
rison Clarke I may refer to a most interesting cir-
cumstance. After I had reported to Mr. Smead, and
he to Harrison Clarke, the fact that the person of
that name in the 126th New York Regiment was still
living, this personality had the audacity to cause a
vision to appear to Mrs. Smead, in which he himself
was represented as showing her his regiment march-
ing before her, and when the ninth line was reached
in which he had said originally that he had marched,
he pointed out a vacancy in the line to indicate where
he had been, and that he had really been killed. This
was, of course, the subliminal utilizing my own in-
formation and confusing it.

Another incident which presents a remarkable in-
stance of auto-suggestion is the following, which oc-
curred in one of Mr. Smead's experiments. Mr.
Smead had asked what became of Mrs. Smead's soul
when he, Harrison Clarke, was writing, and the reply
was that she was asleep. On a further question to
know if she was aware of what was going on, Harri-
son Clarke said: " Ask her what she just saw," and
when Mr. Smead asked his wife to tell him what she
saw, she being still in the trance, Harrison Clarke
replied : " Yes, when she wakes." After she awoke,
which was almost immediately, she narrated a most
interesting vision. She had seen a lady dressed in

S48

THE SMEAB CASE

olden style, and had thought it was Harrison darkens
lady-love. There were several other visions with
much interest in them, but it would take too much
time to go into their details. All of them suggest
and some of them prove the influence of secondary
personality, and so aid in this explanation of Harri-
son Clarke in spite of his greater plausibility than
any of the personalities in Floumoy's case.

THE MEDniMSHIF OF MES. SMEAD IN CONNECTION
WITH THAT OF MES. FIFE&.

But the matter does not end here. Incidents with
still greater interest than those of Harrison Clarke
are yet to come. I had obtained some of the Clarke
incidents at sittings which I held in the home of Mr.
and Mrs. Smead, and the case interested me suffi-
ciently to cause me to arrange for a series of experi-
ments in my own house in New York, as I was so
situated that I could not leave the city. My plan
was to try an experiment which Dr. Hodgson had for
many years wished to try in the Piper case, if we
could find another medium of promise to make the
trial. This was to establish communication between
Mrs. Piper and another medium so that we could ex-
change messages at the same time. I made arrange-
ments with Dr. Hodgson to try this experiment
simultaneously with his sittings near Boston. In
pursuance of this I brought Mrs. Smead to New
York. On the appointed day and hour Mrs. Smead
went into trance in New York and at the same time
Dr. Hodgson had his sitting at Arlington Heights,

PdYCHtCAL &£d£A]lCfi AND THE HESXTERfiCTlOK

near Boston. This was on March 12th. Somewhere
about 11 :80 or 18 o'clock Dr. Hodgson told " Rec-
tor," the " control " in the Piper case at the time,
what I was doing in New York and what I wanted
of him, namely, that he should investigate my case
and see if he could communicate through that me-
dium. Rector went on to finish his ^^ conmiunica-
tions" through Mrs. Piper and after he had closed
them with his usual form of statement, as if recollect-
ing an im{)ortant matter, the hand of Mrs. Piper
wrote in good strong script, ^^ Remember • • .
Hyslop.''

I omit between these two words the pass sentence
that my father, acting as supposed communicator,
had spontaneously given me on February 7th, 1900,
at a sitting with Mrs. Piper and intended as a means
of identification in future experiments with mediums
other than Mrs. Piper. On the next day, March ISth,
Rector took up a part of the sitting with Mrs. Piper
at which Dr. Hodgson was present and in the ^^ com-
munications " discussed the case with Mrs. Smead. I
report here the record as made at Arlington Heights,
with the omission of reference to other cases not af-
fecting mine, and of certain confusions in the ^^ com-
munications." Rector's statements were as follows:

" Friends, in looking over the light with friend
Hyslop there is little indeed to be said by us concern-
ing it, or the antecedents therein exercised by the so-
called light. It is really not worth recording, i.e.,
the genuineness of it." (R. H., You mean that there
is a little real light, but not much?) " Yes, have we
not so expressed it, in different words, perhaps? "

250

TH£ 8M£AB CASS

(Is there enough for you to send any message there?)
" No there is not." (Then is it worth our spending
any more time about it here now?) [Mrs. Piper's
hand listens, as it were, to the invisible.] (Have you
any advice to give?) " Yes, and hast thou any arti-
cle of his, Hyslop's, friend? " (No.)

" We will for absolute surety send Prudens there at
once and see precisely what the conditions are while
the meeting is going on. We ask thee to ask him to
be wary. The so-called light as seen by us is not
a light given from our world at all, but the conditions
are hypocritic (deceptive) and fanciful.'^

(Then do you see whether the deception is on the
part of the supraliminal consciousness, or is it due to
the subliminal or understratimi?) ^^ Subliminal and
not supraliminal. And therefore the subject is not
consciously deceiving, but a few suggestions from the
experimenter would soon determine in his mind the
conditions as herein described. It would be infinitely
wiser to suggest to the subject that the statements,
visions, etc., were due to the hidden consciousness, and
were being produced through the condition known as
thoy^ht transference**

(She has, I understand from you, a capacity for re-
ceiving impressions to some extent telepathically from
incarnate persons.)

"Yes, and not discamate. This explains abso-
lutely the conditions there represented." [Hand then
thumps the table once, then points to invisible.]

Prudens. " The statements by the spirit register-
ing are correct." (You mean by Rector?) " Yes,
I do. Prudens."

** We can point out numerous cases similar." (It
is quite frequent do you find?) "Yes, in our long
search for other lights than the one through which we

251

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE EESUSEECTION

now operate we find this unfortunately to be the case."
(Do you in such cases see a light?) " Not in all,
but with an exceptional few.'^ (Do you mean a light
that cannot be used by discamate spirits?) ^^No,
but a light which if rightly developed and understood
could be used at times by discamate spirits."

Some further statements were made by the trance
personality about other cases, comparing them with
my own, and they ended with the sentence : " TTiere
is in the person with Hyslop a light, but not a decep-
tive one."

My sittings with Mrs. Smead in New York on
both of these dates, March ISth and 18th, were entire
failures. Not a line or word was obtained that would
even suggest the supernormal evidentially, and even
secondary personality was not evident except in the
fact of automatic writing. On the second of these
days I received the name of my wife in the automatic
writing. She had died a few months previously and
Mrs. Smead was told the fact after the sitting of the
previous day, and the circiunstances were such that
they do not encourage the belief that there was any-
thing significant in the incident. But it is extremely
interesting to find that my own results coincided with
the judgment of Rector and Prudens at the sittings
with Mrs. Piper. The Martian " communications "
and the incidents of Harrison Clarke were so palpably
complicated with secondary personality, or subliminal
mental action on the part of Mrs. Smead, that the
reader who recognizes this fact must be struck with
the general correctness of Rector's diagnosis. Most
striking was his reference to "visions," since the

TH£ SMEAD CAS£

reader has been informed that subjective apparitions
and visions are a very frequent phenomenon in the
experience of Mrs. Smead, and there are many more
of them than I have mentioned.

INTUODUCTION OP OTHER COMMTJNICATOBS ; SOME IN-
DICATIONS OF SPIRITISTIC MESSAGES.

At the next few sittings some incidents developed
that suggest the correctness of Rector's admission of
supernormal capacity to the extent of thought trans-
ference, as necessary to explain at least one circum-
stance. The sitting on the 14th showed nothing of
importance. On the 16th, early in the experiment, I
got my father's name, but as this was probably known
to Mrs. Smead from my article in Harper^s Maga-
zine I could attach no significance to it, and hence
I asked that the pass sentence be given, to which I
have referred above. My request was followed by
scrawls at first and then in a few minutes the first
word of that sentence and probably the second were
written, the first quite clearly. This was in a lan-
guage which Mrs. Smead does not know and never
has known. The sentence was known to but two
persons. Dr. Hodgson (since deceased) and myself,
and is secured under lock and key against discovery.
At this and the next sitting I also received several
names suggestive of a spiritistic theory, but as the
circumstances made it possible that Mrs. Smead might
have accidently heard them I can attach no import-
ance to the facts, though the probabilities are against
her knowledge of them. The last sitting was an en-

863

P8TCHICAL ftESEAftCH AKD TR£ EESUHlUfiCTlOK

tire failure owing to an attack of influenza which
seized Mrs. Smead. On the whole I was not im-
pressed with the sittings, in spite of the significance
attaching to the delivery of a part of the pass sen-
tence. The evidence for the supernormal of any kind
was too small to deserve much consideration, and it
is only the remarkably correct diagnosis of the trance
personalities in the Piper experiments that demands
attention.

There are incidents, however, that lend much more
support to the spiritistic theory and might confirm
the possibility, recognized by Rector, of communica-
tions from the discamate. They were sporadic oc-
currences during the whole period of these manifesta-
tions. The first important one occurred as far back
as 1896. Besides a large number which are amen-
able to the hypothesis of secondary personality the
following seem to be exempt from suspicion of this
kind.

While Mr. Smead had charge of a small pastorate
in another town than his present residence he and
Mrs. Smead had an intimate friend and parishioner
in the person of a young lady of the name of Maude
L. Janes. Mr. Smead had moved in the meantime
and an occasional letter between Mrs. Smead and this
Miss Janes had passed for a year after the removal
in 1894, and then according to the testimony of Mr.
and Mrs. Smead, all correspondence, ceased. In Au-
gust, 1896, fully a year after the cessation of corre-
spondence, at a sitting of which a record was made
at the time, the planchette wrote that this Miss Maude
L. Janes had died of pneumonia, that she had died

264

THE SMEAD CASE

on March SSth, I8969 and that her attending physi-
cian was a Dr. St. John. This purported to come
direct from Maude L. Janes herself. Mr. Smead
wrote to the mother of the lady to know if Maude was
living or not, and learned in reply that she had died
of pneumonia on April SSth, 1896, and that her
physician was Dr. St. John. She had also mentioned
the place of her burial, but the statement proved on
enquiry to be incorrect.

The circumstances of the case, and the measures
taken by Mr. and Mrs. Smead to ascertain whether
the " communications '* were true or not, seem to in-
dicate that the knowledge thus gained through the
instrumentality of the planchette was in some way
supernormal. It is interesting to observe in this con-
nection that Miss Janes, in a conversation with Mrs.
Smead some years before, had remarked, " I'll come
to you when I die." She did not purport to com-
municate again until February, 1901, when a very
pretty series of " messages *' was delivered, one of
them about a certain little boy with whom she had
gone to school, giving his name, and saying that he
had gone to New Haven. This was unknown to Mr.
and Mrs. Smead and proved on enquiry to be correct.
The other incidents at this sitting, all well calcu-
lated to prove personal Identity, were known to Mr.
and Mrs. Smead. These were the death of several
persons, among them that of Maude Janes' mother,
and a reference to a singular postal card which this
Maude Janes had written to Mrs. Smead, explaining
correctly why it had been written " backwards."
Later she named her teacher previous to the time of

256

PSYCHICAL KESEA&CH AND THE BESUBBECTION

Mr. Smead's pastorate in the place, whom Mr. and
Mrs. Smead had never known and whose name they
did not know. She also mentioned a visit to South
Hadley, Mass., about which Mr. and Mrs. Smead
knew nothing and which, on enquiry, proved to have
been correct. At a later sitting she attempted to
give a geometrical demonstration of bisecting an
angle and some other problems, and though she was
not successful in making it clear, the figures were
rightly drawn. Now, according to their testimony,
Mr. and Mrs. Smead never knew whether Maude
Janes had studied geometry or not. Mrs. Smead
knew that she had studied algebra, which was dur-
ing the last year of Mr. Smead's pastorate in the
place, and the study of geometry followed a year
later after Mr. Smead's removal. In addition Mrs.
Smead never studied geometry and never knew any-
thing about the science, not enough to draw the fig-
ure of bisecting an angle. What might have inci-
dentally come across her knowledge no one knows,
but the testimony in this case is against secondary
personality.

On another occasion the ** communications *' pur-
ported to come from a Mr. George Morse. He
stated, among other incidents given with some con-
fusion, that he had died of pneumonia, that his wife
was still living, and that he himself had been a
master mason. Mrs. Smead had known the man
many years before, but had not seen or heard of him
for seventeen years; never knew that he had been
a master mason, as this was only during the last
two years of his life, and did not know that his wife

256

THE SMEAD CASB

was living. The reference to pneumonia was wrong,
as he died of paralysis. All of these facts had to
be verified by making a special trip to Boston to
make the inquiries. Mrs. Smead had not for many
years been in the part of Boston in which Mr. Morse
lived, except to ride through it on the street cars
once or twice, and never had any communications
with the family since she left the place seventeen
years before.

Another "communicator" mentioned, about the
same time, along with a number of incidents known
to both Mr. and Mrs. Smead, one fact known only
to Mr. Smead. When asked to tell something to
prove his identity in addition to giving his name the
planchette wrote the following:

" I, Burleigh Hoyt, told this brother, when I was
walking with him in the driveway at the back of his
house near the pump, that I could and did have the
power or gift from Gk)d which enabled me to tell
whether the place which was selected was a place in
which the water supply was good and would be last-
ing, and I, Burleigh Hoyt, write this to prove to
anyone who may doubt my good pastor's word that
it is and was B. B. Hoyt." A reference to an insane
son and the troubles of his wife on that account were
characteristic but not evidential.

Another instance is especially interesting for its
mixture of truth and error, in view of the ignorance
of Mr. and Mrs. Smead regarding the facts, and also
because its confusion resembles some cases in the
Piper phenomena. A " communicator," whose name
I could not decipher in the original automatic

257

PSYCHICAL AESEABCH AND THE BESUSBECTION

writing, indicated, nevertheless, enough to lead to
the discovery of her identity. My attempt at de-
ciphering the name, before I ascertained who it might
be, ended in the letters " Celelee." But she finally
gave her name as Mrs. Steams, and in connection
with it mentioned Lowell (Mass.) and then the name
of Robert Russell and said that she was his wife's
sister. She then said that she and her father wanted
Mr. Smead to thank this sister, but did not succeed in
telling why she wanted it done.

Now Mr. and Mrs. Smead had known this Robert
Russell and his wife in connection with some religious
work four or five years previously, fimd learned after
this sitting, through them, that the deceased sister
was a Mrs. Eeliher (possibly the name intended by
'* Celelee ''), whom they had never known. Her name
was not Steams, but inquiry showed that her husband
worked in Steams' Manufacturing Company in Law-
rence, both this fact and his person being entirely
unknown to Mr. and Mrs. Smead. The sister, Mrs.
Robert Russell, had cared for the father during his
last days in Lowell, Mass. It is interesting to re-
mark also that Mrs. Eeliher died in a delirious condi-
tion, having forgotten her name and identity, accord-
ing to the testimony in the case. The circumstance
has its analogies in the Piper record.

Mr. Smead's brother Sylvester, who was killed by
a railway engine, and who purported to participate
in the Martian ^^ communications," made some inter-
esting replies in response to questions. I had asked
Mr. Smead to test him in an appropriate way, and
this was done. He was first asked to give the name

258

THE SMEAD CASE

of his lady-love, as Mr. Smead did not know cer-
tainly who this was, and the reply was " Evelyn,*'
which turned out correct, and was not known to Mrs.
Smead so far as her recollection goes. Then he was
asked to give the name of another lady who had
worked in a certain foundry, and the planchette
wrote, " Grace Cregg,*' Grace Craig being the cor-
rect name, also unknown to Mrs. Smead. He was
then asked to name the station agent at a certain
place, and this was done in the confused forms,
** Hwtt, Hwett, Hewitt." The correct name was
" Hoit." This name was entirely unknown to Mrs.
Smead. At this point Sylvester began to tease his
brother about the ^^ commimications " being the re-
sult of Mrs. Smead's secondary personality, Mr.
Smead having told Harrison Clarke that he was no
veritable spirit but a secondary personality. Then
he was asked for another test, which was that he
should name the man who had once chased the two
brothers when they were playing tick-tack together
as boys. He gave this correctly as Roberts, the
name and incid^its being unknown to Mrs. Smead, so
far as she can recollect. As I had arranged that
Mrs. Smead should come to New York for experi-
mentation, as above indicated, Mr. Smead asked his
brother Sylvester to accompany her thither. He
promised to do so, and said : ^^ You won't be afraid
now, Billy, with me.*' Before Mr. Smead's marriage
his brother used to tease him by exciting his jealousy,
until Mr. Smead would fear that his brother might
marry the present Mrs. Smead. After this episode
Mr. Smead again asked him to give the name of

269

PSYCHICAL SESEABCH AND THE BESUKBECTIOl)^

his lady-love, and received the answer : " Evel jn
Sargent." Mr. Smead did not know what her name
was, but from a poem found in the pocket of his
brother after the latter's death he suspected that it
was " Evelyn," as the poem was dedicated to some-
one of that name. When he asked the question of his
brother he hcul in mind three persons whom he
thought possible candidates. One of them was
named Minnie Sargent. It was thus interesting to
find the name Sargent added to that of Evelyn.
Inquiry, however, showed that the correct name was
" Evelyn Hamel." Mrs. Smead, of course, never
knew any of the facts. The incident is amenable to
the suspicion of being telepathic in part at least, if
we admit the supernormal at all, though the fact that
Mr. Smead generally had his own band also on the
planchette might suggest its origin in his own sec-
ondary personality.

There were some interesting incidents ^' communi-
cated " by a Mr. Miller, who was also a relative of
Mr. Smead, but it would extend this paper to an un-
due length to repeat and explain them. I could also
mention quite a number of others were it not for the
same reason. There were several alleged ^^ com-
municators " whose identity could not be traced,
though they gave their names. There was, however,
too little collateral evidence to enable us to make any
investigation as to identity. One, a Rev. Henry
Smith, who said he had lived in Saco, Maine, and who
gave a number of specific details, well calculated to
establish his identity, was found to have been wholly
wrong in regard to them. In fact, it was noticeable

260

THE SMSAD CA8B

all through the experiments that where the " com-
municators" were unknown to Mrs. Smead at any
time in her life, the ** messages " were exceedingly
meager and confused, so that even the simulation of
spiritistic material was imperfect.

• • •

Some later incidents have occurred which may be
of interest. The experiments have been continued
and the record kept as before. The same mixed fea-
tures exhibit themselves in the case, leaving the stu-
dent without conclusive evidence in favor of any one
interpretation, but it is still a most instructive case on
any theory whatsoever.

In the summer of 1901 Mr. and Mrs. Smead lost
a little son very suddenly, apparently from some sort
of poisoning. About two weeks after his death he
apparently returned as a " communicator " through
his mother. Nearly all the incidents which were
given to establish his identity were known to his
mother, as would be a matter of course. But there
were two that were not so known and which are worth
mentioning.

When Mrs. Smead came to New York for experi-
ments with me Mr. Smead and the little boy kept
house. During this time Mr. Smead and the little
boy went to another city by train. This incident was
mentioned in the ^^ communications," and allusion
made to his having gone on an ^^ express " train on
that trip, and also to his night-dress and to a pair of
mittens worn then. Now there was no express train
on the railroad by which the two went, but it seems
that on the trip the little boy was very much pleased

261

PSTCHICAIi KESEABCH AKD THE BESUSSECTIOK

by the ride and, alluding to his own toy cars at home,
spoke of those by which he was traveling as an
** express train." This fact was not known to his
mother, but only the fact that he had made the trip.
Something, of course, might have been said about it
by the boy in the presence of the mother and then
the incident forgotten by her. But she does not re-
member it.

In one of his " communications " this boy referred
to a little trunk that his brother George had given
him a short time before he died. He indicated that
he had asked his brother for it and that his brother
had gone across the room and got it for him. Mr.
Smead cross-questioned the living brother without
putting leading questions, and foimd that while he
himself and Mrs. Smead were out of the room, the
day before the boy died, this little brother had been
asked to bring the box or tnmk to the sick child and
had done it precisely as described at the sitting.

A feature of the automatic writing bearing on the
identity of the boy is of some interest. It was very
characteristic of the boy that he wrote in capitals
while living. That is, it was a habit of his fre-
quently to do so. In the earlier " communications "
purporting to come from him most of the writing was
in capitals. When he first appeared the writing was
about evenly divided between the ordinary script and
capitals, but it was noticeable that he was often ap-
parently assisted by his deceased sister. But as he
came to be able to act without help the use of capitals
diminished, until they finaUy disappeared and the
ordinary script returned in all his " communications.''

S62

THE SM£AD CASE

Of course this habit was known to both Mr. and Mrs.
Smead.

There have been many other alleged communicators
who have given interesting incidents in proof of iden-
tity. But these incidents are either so well known
to Mrs. Smead or so mixed up with what she certainly
did know, and are so complicated that I cannot ven-
ture in a short summary like this to detail them.
They have a most striking bearing, however, on the
theory of secondary personality, especially as in some
of them there is exhibited something of the dramatic
play of personality which is so impressive a feature
of the Piper phenomena.

THE APPARITION OF AUNT 8ABAH.

I must, however, narrate one experience, and an
experiment connected with it, which has some interest
to the psychical researcher, even though we cannot
consider it as proving anything.

On the evening of September 27th, 1901, Mr. and
Mrs. Smead had a sitting, and the names of George
Lowrey and George Smead were given, and an ap-
parent attempt was made to ^' communicate " some-
thing. The George Lowrey mentioned was deceased,
the fact being known to the Smeads. He was an
uncle of Mrs. Smead. The possible and apparent
significance of the name may be connected with the
following experience, which followed closely upon the
sitting to which I have just referred. The same
night, September 27th, Mrs. Smead had a vision. I
give her account of it.

268

MTCmCAI. BS8BABCH AND THE aSSHSEBCnOK

*^ I had been for a ride Friday afternoon and was
Tery tired, so could not sleep very well during the first
l^rt of the night. About midnight I awoke with my
right arm so painful that I could not move it from
the wrist. I turned over to the left of the room and
thought that it was vei^ lonely without Cecil (the
deceased son), and how much I would like to see him,
if only for a few moments, when there w€is a loud rap
in his room and another near me on the floor. I
looked towards the spot where the rap came from,
when I saw a vision of an elderly lady. This vision
was different from any that I had seen before. It
looked very ghostly. It had snowy white hair and
wore a white gown. The hands and face were very
white, so much so that I looked very steadily at it to
be sure that I was not mistaken. I thought that, per-
haps, the lady we had seen that afternoon had died.
This was not true. This person that I saw was very
old and I was so much surprised at the difference in
her appearance from those that I have seen before
that when morning came I at once told my husband
what I had seen. He told me to write it out at once.
I said that I did not wish to do so, because it was so
ghostly that I did not like to think of it."

Mr. Smead confirms the fact of having been told
the narrative on the morning of the S8th, and the
vision was soon afterwards written down as described.
This was on September SOth.

On the morning of September SOth they received
a letter from a relative dated the same day, saying
that an Aunt Sarah, aunt of Mrs. Smead, and living
in Baltimore, some five hundred miles distant, had
died. Further enquiry showed that she had died on

S64

THS 8MEAB CABS

September 26th, the day before the sitting in which
the name of Greorge Lowrey, who was a nephew of
this aunt, was mentioned. Enquiry also showed that
Mrs. Smead had never seen this aunt. I obtained
the written testimony of another person that this was
the fact, not accepting as conclusive the testimony of
Mrs. Smead. But as soon as I learned this fact I
asked Mr. Smead in a private letter, which Mrs.
Smead was not to see, and which he reports that she
did not see, the letter having been destroyed imme-
diately, according to my request, to obtain a photo-
graph of this deceased aunt and put it with a niun-
ber of others as much like it as possible, and observe
if Mrs. Smead spontaneously discovered the one rep-
resenting this aunt. The following is the result of
the experiment, which took some months to arrange:

^' I put the photo that I got from Baltimore in the
midst of a lot of others, over fifty of them, and after
an hour of so had elapsed I brought the whole lot
downstairs, began to talk of some of her girl friends,
told her I wanted to see if she could find me the pic-
ture of Lottie Dudley that she knew was dead, and
asked her to see if she knew who Annie Hedengran
was in the lot of pictures and named over two or
three others, so that she thought that some of those
that I named were dead, or had died recently, and that
my point was to see if she could find the pictures. I
fooled her completely and threw her off her guard as
to aunt Sarah. So she went along looking at the
photos and talked of this one and that one of her girl
friends. Some she was sure were living, others she
knew were dead, and others she thought might pos-
sibly be dead, thinking all the while that I was driving

S65

I»STCHICAL ftSSBAftCtt AKD THS ftfiSTTElUSCTtOK

at that, to see if she would pick out the photo af ihiB
dead girl friend, when by and by she came at once
upon this photo of aunt Sarah. She was greatly
shocked, looked at me, knew it at once and recognized
the face, said the face she saw (in the vision) had no
glasses, the hair was crimped as in the photo, but
flatter on the forehead* She had a white dress when
Mrs. Smead saw her (in the vision) and was not quite
as fleshy as the photo would indicate. The recogni-
tion was absolute. I then took another tack. I told
her she was too sure, that it was all nonsense for her
to be so positive, that I might have got a picture of
some other woman and put it there to make her think
it was the one she saw and kept back the real picture,
if I had it, and that I was trying to fool her, etc., etc.
It was all no use. She was sure and positive. The
identification was complete. I had to give it up. So
I then told her that it was the photo. She had never
seen a photo of her before. This picture was the last
one taken before her death."

I can only give this for what it is worth. It is not
complex enough in its incidents to prove anything by
itself, but it has a coincidental interest which may be
worthy of record along with other matter.

There are some recent developments of interest in
this case. They are, at least, a simulation of the
Imperator phenomena in the Piper case. As no evi-
dential incidents have occurred to show the presence
and influence of this group of personalities the facts
need not be further mentioned.

Comments on this interesting case, I think, may be
very brief. Enough has been given in my narrative
to show that, on any theory whatsoever of such phe-

S66

TH£ SMEAB CASE

nomena, the present case is intermediate between that
of M. Floumoy's Hfline Smith and Mrs. Piper. In
fact it may be called a case on the border-line be-
tween secondary personality and spiritistic phenom-
ena. Mrs. Piper's phenomena are in many respects
unique. M. Floumoy's case is a most remark-
able instance of secondary personalities masquerad-
ing as spirits.* The case of Mrs. Smead began, as
the record shows, in the most naive secondary person-
ality and ended in the production of phenomena much
like those of Mrs. Piper, showing a gradual devel-
opment from the purely secondary consciousness to
what might possibly be complicated with occasional
spiritistic messages. The difficulty with a spiritistic
theory in this case is (1) that there is obviously so
much secondary personality in it as to create suspi-
cion regarding the remainder, and (S) that the ap-
parently supernormal incidents depend too much
upon the memories of Mr. and Mrs. Smead, while the
Piper case presents conditions in which it is incon-
ceivable or impossible to suppose that she gets her
information in any normal way. But if we can sup-
pose that the Smead case contains a few spiritistic
episodes (and there are some possibilities of this) we
have an interesting illustration of the part which
secondary personality may play in the development
of mediumistic powers.

* Since the ori^nal publication of this paper in the Annals
of Psychical Science some very important experiments have
been xnade with Mrs. Smead and the results show the existence
of genuinely supernormal phenomena beyond any question
whatever. Whatever hesitation the present paper may show
is removed by these later experiments.

267

CHAPTER IX

SOME FEATURES IN MEDIUIOSTIC FHENOMENA

Readers of the JovumaL of the American Society
for Psychical Research may recall some discussion
regarding the nature of the life after death. It may
be useful to give a concrete example of the difficul-
ties with which we have to contend in the solution of
problems connected therewith, and hence I give the
detailed record of a sitting with Mrs. Smead. I
have published also a preliminary Report on the
Smead case which gives evidence of the supernormal
and shows its exemption from the most natural sus-
picions entertained against mediumship. Suffice it
to say here that Mrs. Smead is the wife of an ortho-
dox clergyman and has never received any money for
her work. Her identity has to be concealed under
the name which I have given, and other experiments
than the one I am quoting will have to be relied on
to answer the doubts of the sceptic. I am using the
present record with the assumption that his objec-
tions have already been removed, so that I do not
mean to discuss the genuineness of the phenomena in
this connection. I wish to take this for granted, at
least hypothetically, for the sake of an important
illustration in the perplexities of non-evidential phe-
nomena.

Some years ago in the experiments which Mr.
Smead was conducting under my directions, there

868

I30M£ FEATtJESS IK MfiDlUMlSTIC t*H£KOM£KA

were apparently some attempts on the part of the
Rev. Stainton Moses, who died in 1892 in England,
to communicate through Mrs. Smead. But the fail*
ure seems to have been as conspicuous as in the case
of Mrs. Piper. Occasionally, however, there are
traces of his personality attempting to memif est itself,
and the record below is one of them. Mr. Smead
was not expecting this personality to appear at this
experiment, but rather hoped for one who passes as
the Cardinal. The manifestation of Stainton Moses
was thus unexpected by both Mr. and Mrs. Smead.
I give the record in full, confusions and mistakes ex-
actly as they occurred.

It must be remembered, however, that I am not
quoting the record in illustration of what it actually
purports to be, namely, spirit communications. Any
reader who wishes to so interpret the matter may do
so, but it is not assumed by me to be this in fact. I
concede any interpretation that the sceptic may choose
to make of it, except that of conscious fraud. The
student of abnormal psychology will see nothing more
in it than secondary personality, and in so far as
conclusive evidence is concerned it cannot be claimed
to be anything else. But I mean to quote it and to
consider it as a psychological production which has
to be examined without regard to the security of its
claims to be what it superficially purports to be.
Coming, as it does, in conjunction with matter that
has the same claim to being supernormal as in the
case of numerous similar cases, it becomes a part of
the problem which is associated with the supernor-
mal. For that reason we may examine its nature

269

PSYCHICAL EESBABCH AND THE UEStJE&ECTION

and claims in spite of the natural temptation to
ascribe it the same source as the evidential matter.
The primary interest is to study the problem which
the psychic researcher has before him, when estimat-
ing the claims of strictly non-evidential matter to a
supernormal origin. All that is assured at the out-
set is the fact that the record was automatically pro-
duced and purports to have a spiritistic source.
What its rights are to this claim will have to be ex-
amined, but regardless of these it has considerable
psychological interest in illustration of the large lit-
erature presenting similar superficial credentials.

The record is a recent one, being dated February
6th, 1907. I place in parentheses what Mr. Smead
said or asked during the experiment and as reported
by him. In sqtiare brackets I place such comments
and explantory notes as were necessary afterward to
explain the meaning of the record at specific points.
Asterisks mean that certain words or passages of the
automatic writing are not legible.

EECOBD

February 6th, 1907.

Present Mr. and Mrs. Smead.

(All ready.)

That is right. We are here, coming here.

(AU right.)

coming nearer, yes. it is I be not afraid.

(Very good. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
be with thy spirit.)

[Mr. Smead thought he was addressing Cardinal
L. but this was not accepted by the communicator.]

270

SOME FEATUBES IN MEDIUMIBTIC PHENOMENA

Behold ye him. it is Him of whom and to whom
thou speakest.

(Is Jesus Christ present this morning?)

I am with ye in thy endeavor to do the work of
Him that chooses thee, th [* th ' evidently written to
convert * chooses ' into * chooseth.']

(Who is writing? Is it my Lord and Master,
Jesus Christ?)

He speaks with thee friend, through another.

(I am delighted. What has he to say to me. I
am unworthy to be in his presence.)

were that so, would he come to thee, hast thou not
yet learned that he was not a respector of persons,
that all were equal in His sight that believed.

(I feel as did St. Thomas when he said: ^My
Lord and my God.')

but there are many that do not understand his His
[* His ' superposed on the first to erase it.] teachings
that now he is helping to enlighten the mind of man-
kind through these Earthly channels, its [it] is
right for them to be opened to the earth.

(What has he to say to me?)

Come. . . [pause.] That he is and was the creator
of the new Law, yes, and that all should strive to
come by the natural way into this life here and
do as near the way as he taught when on earth, it
is a sorrowful thing to es. . . [* es ' erased] behold
the souls of those that [are] on the earth singing
praises to Him and then taking the ways of life into
their own hands, it is not as he said to do, and they
are not taught to Honor the Father enough, else they
would value life more, so the error in is in the way
the teachings are set forth to the people of the
earth, they do not understand that if they come here
under a delusion that they are escaping the wrath of

271

PSYCHICAL EESEAACH AND THE RESUBEECTION

(How can I hdp doubting? Whom did he talk
through?)

S. M. is willing to be an interpreter at all times.

(Did Christ talk through Stainton Moses?)

You still doubt.

(Did Christ talk to me through Stainton Moses?)

I told you at the beginning, yes, he did so. We
cannot tell the [thee] when the friend that came yes-
terday can come again, as she exhausts the Light to
its extreme.

(Shall I expect the Cardinal the first day after the
Sabbath?)

yes, no, no one [on] the first.

(ShaUIsitthatday?)

yes, but no one to talk yet.

(All right. We shall hold sittings next week as
usual.)

yes, we cannot tell the [thee] now. Oh Most
Merciful Father we halve [have] try . . . [erased]
tried in our humble way to do t . . . Thy will, grant
us th . . • Th, blessing for thee, f riend, this day.

The sitting at this point came to an end. But
Mrs. Smead, when she recovered consciousness, re-
ported an interesting vision which was described as
follows: —

'* A man tall, features clear cut, as if cut from
stone like a model, dark hair, peculiar color or com-
plexion, full beard and mustache, beard about eight
inches in length, hair long and curly, hanging over
his shoulders, hair parted on left side and fell over
toward the right side. His face was beautiful and
stately. He looked quiet and peaceful with majestic

874

SOME FSATUBES IN BOBDIUMISTIC PHENOMENA

bearing. He wore long white robes. The cross was
not with him, but was seen some distance off."

Mrs. Smead took this apparition to be that of
Christ. The description might very well represent
the historical pictures of him. But Mr. Smead does
not, and did not at the time, in spite of the appear-
ance of the record, believe that he was in communica-
tion with the Savior. He supposed that it was a
sermon to him by Stainton Moses.

There are three ways in which we can explain
such phenomena. (1) We may say that it is con-
scious pretension that a spirit is producing the re-
sult; (2) we may call it secondary personality; (8)
we may say that it is what it claims to be on the
face of it, namely, messages from the deceased Stain-
ton Moses, under the hallucination that he is acting
as an intermediary for the Savior.

I throw the first of these hypotheses out of account,
not because it is always to be ignored, but because
I have reasons independently of this particular rec-
ord to neglect it. The mistakes and confusions, as
well as occasional errors in the spelling which are
not natural to Mrs. Smead in her normal state, and
various mechanical features of the writing tend to
justify our disregarding conscious effort to deceive.
I say nothing of its incompatibility with her whole
previous life and what I know of its earnestness.
Disregarding it we must construct some theory which
rationally explains the phenomena, and we have the
other two hypotheses to reckon with in this attempt.

Secondary personality, or unconscious impersona-
«76

PSYCHICAL SESEASCH AND THE KE8UE&ECT10N

tion, such as is common to dream or somnambulic
states, presents itself as the most likely view, at
least on a priori grounds, and I have no doubt that
the student of psychology would feel perfectly as-
sured of its applicability and validity. There is
certainly no apparent evidence of a spiritistic source,
at least as judged by the standards which such a
theory must adopt in the present status of that doc-
trine. It is precisely this want of supernormal evi-
dence on the face of the phenomena that makes all
attempts at spiritistic explanations seem absurd.
This would leave us with the alternative of secondary
personality as the only explanation which would most
naturally commend itself.

But accept the hypothesis as satisfactory on a
priori ground, have we any more evidence that it is
the true one than we have of the spiritistic? The
phencHnena are undoubtedly similar to many that
present the claim of a spiritistic source and receive
the credence of it. But it is precisely the defect
of proper evidence that makes this view incredible,
and the most natural theory would be that of sub-
conscious impersonation.

A most interesting circumstance in the phenomena
is that which shows a fairly rational view of pun-
ishment for sin. Hie "communications'* purport
to represent the policy of nature or Providence with
l>egard to sin, and this is that true punishment is
the consequence of sin and not some artificial penalty
such as we have been accustomed to believe. The
representation is that of conditions in another life
and of what many wish to know regarding it. More-

276

SOME FEATUBJES IK MEDIUMISTIC PHENOMENA

over it is also important to remark to the man who
advances secondary personality as the explanation
that the type of punishment here defended is not
the one which Mrs. Smead's theology has held. The
idea is comparatively new to her mind. She would
not naturally accept this view from her early teach-
ing. Her theology makes a very different account
of punishment for sin, and if her subliminal action is
producing the results of her previous experience it
would hardly take the course here manifest. Appar-
ently, then, the hypothesis of secondary personality
has difficulty in maintaining itself.

I have no doubt that many will prefer the spirit-
istic theory to account for the phenomena and so
would accept them on their own certificate of non-
relation to Mrs. Smead's usual habits of thought.
But there are two very important facts in the record
itself which the student of psychology will detect
at sight and which afford him a perfectly good ex-
cuse for referring the phenomena to secondary per-
sonality. The first of these facts is the vision at the
end of the experiment. That apparition is the his-
torical representation of Christ and can most easily
be explained by supposing that the general drift
of the thought during the sitting might easily sug-
gest such a thing to Mrs. Smead's mind. The sec-
ond and still more important fact is Mr. Smead's
own unwary statement to the " communicator " ear-
lier in the experiment. When he, assuming that he
was talking to the Cardinal, exclaimed ^^ the grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit," he
gave a mo$t dittinct suggestion to Mrs. Smead's

m

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTIO^f

subliminal mental action, and we may assume that the
whole impersonation of Christ was due entirely to
that suggestion, and that the vision at the terminus
of it was the result of its momentum as she was re-
covering consciousness.

Here the scientific man would say is the advantage
of a verbatim record of all that occurs on such occa-
sions. In all ordinary experiments a memory report
of what was received would be all that we should have
to base our judgment upon, and unless we were
familiar with the delicate influences which suggestion
exercises we should hardly remember our giving rise
to productions like this by some casual remark of
our own. We have, therefore, in this record the
superficial indication at least of a perfectly normal
explanation of the phenomena, especially when we
recognize the dramatic character of some of our
dream life. Our dreams often represent the pres-
ence and conversation with us of various personali-
ties living or dead, and as that state is extremely
susceptible to dramatic play of personality, being
free of the inhibitions or arrests which affect the
judgment in normal consciousness, every suggestion
is liable to take effect, and as Mrs. Smead is a very
religious woman, or has all her life been addicted
to a religious view of things, it would be perfectly
natural that her mind would take this suggestion in
her trance state.

Consequently what the spiritualist might accept
as having an extra mental source, on the ground of
rationality and antagonism to the natural convic-
tions of Mrs. Smead, thus becomes interpretable by

878

SOMS I'BAl'trEES IK HEDIITMISTIC 1>H£K0M£KA

subjective action and all the representation of a
transcendental life would be such " stuff as dreams
are made of," and the case a good example of what
we have to be on our guard against in our desire
to have some definite knowledge of another world.
Any information about a transcendental existence,
coming in this way, has to pass the ordeal of just
such criticism as I have indicated, and students will
have to learn that the task of certifying the extra-
mental source of such communications is an extremely
difficult one. The circumstance which will strike the
average man of intelligence as absurd is the readi-
ness with which certain alleged spirits can be called,
or the apparent ever-presence of any particular per-
son that may attract the fancy of a medium. We
cannot easily be made to believe that great historical
personalities are forever hovering about to make
themselves known to obscure persons all over the
world on all sorts of occasions. It is a suspicious
circumstance that such phenomena should occur, no
matter how attractive it may appear to our preju-
dices or wishes. Hence it would be a stumbling block
to our belief to expect a ready acceptance of such
phenomena on their superficial character. We might
more easily accede to the claim that Stainton Moses
was present, but even this would be feasible only
on the supposition that his appearance had some
purpose and consistency with the general scheme of
the experiments. If he was only a casual visitor,
as so often appears in phenomena of mediumship
in general, we could hardly accept his claims any
more readily than we would those of such a person-

279

ality as Jesus. It happens that the appearance of
Stainton Moses as an alleged communicator in this
case was a natural accompaniment of the alleged
presence of other communicators, as the same group
of personalities have been represented in the Piper
case. On any theory, especially that of secondary
personality, Stainton Moses ought to be represented
as a communicator here. But this sudden and in-
explicable appearance of Christ can only serve to
make us sceptical of any source but that of subliminal
mental action, and this, not because of any prejudices
which either scepticism or religious belief might en-
tertain about its possibility, but because of the casual
and purposeless character of the appearance. When,
therefore, we find such traces of suggestion as Mr.
Smead's exclamation, we may well understand the
represented appearance without having our minds
perplexed by the semblance of spirit communication.
But there are scHne interesting facts which create
difficulties for the hypothesis of secondary person-
ality, preferable as it may seem to the student of
abnormal psychology. While one does not require,
perhaps, to insist too rigidly that the alternatives
are to be drawn between subliminal or subjective
action and spirit influence, and while we may not
feel attracted to a spirit theory, these facts do not
justify an uncritical confidence in that of secondary
personality. If we accept that view we must justify
it in spite of the difficulties and objections which it
has to encounter. I do not conceal from myself
the fact that it has its perplexities as viewed from
a scientific position, and we are bound to recognize

280

80M£ S'EATUEES IK MfiDlUMISttC t>H£NOH£:KA

them. Agnosticism in the matter is better than any
theory which does not apply.

The first important fact which is not easily ex-
plained by secondary personality, as usually man-
ifested in connection with the fact of suggestibility,
is the circumstance that Mrs. Smead does not show
any suggestibiUty whatever in her trance condition.
I have many times tried to apply suggestion to her
In the trance and I have not succeeded in securing
any evidence of it whatever. We might limit the
rapport to Mr. Smead, but I have no evidence for
that fact. She seems as thoroughly proof against
it as a perfectly normal person usually is. In this
respect she quite resembles Mrs. Piper in whom I
have found no proof of suggestibility. Possibly
this may be the necessary condition of the trance
which is associated with alleged spirit communica-
tions. We, of course, do not yet understand that
state. It is called a trance because it does not show
any material traces of a condition like that of hyp-
nosis. That is, the contents of what purports to
be communications do not resemble essentially the
contents of hypnotic states under the suggestion of
an ordinary operator. It is possible for us to obtain
a view regarding this trance which may ally it with
hypnotic or somnambulic states. If we do this, how-
ever, we may be required to interpret the difference
through the idea of rapport. We have found in
the experiments of Dr. Moll (Cf. Rapport m der
Hypnose, Moll), that a subject may not be in rap-
port with any or every one near by. He may be
in suggestible relation only to the operator, or to

281

one or two others, or even only to the person wh<mi
the operator suggests. Rapport is not a fixed or
universal condition. It apparently exists only in
degrees. If, then, we supi)osed that Mrs. Piper's
and similar trances are to be distinguished from
hypnosis and ordinary secondary personality only
by the nature of the rapport, we may find why their
phencHnena take the form of spiritistic communica-
tions. K they are en rapport with dececused persons
and not with the living we can well understand why
they do not respond to suggestion from the living,
though the trance state may be essentially like hyp-
nosis in its other characteristics. I understand that
at one period of her life, the early development of her
mental condition associated with the trance, Mrs.
Piper exhibited phenomena of echolalia, which means
that she echoed whatever she heard uttered in her
presence. Assuming this condition of her mind and
body in the trance, and rapport with deceased per^
sons, we may well comprehend the automatic nature
of her phenomena and their limitation to real or
alleged spirit communications.

Now as we have not found evidence that Mrs.
Smead is in the least suggestible we may well ask
how it fares with the incident which we have here
supposed was due to this action. It is all very
well to note the possibility as suggested by the
coincidence between Mr. Smead's exclamation and
the trend of the communications and the apjiarition
at the end, but if Mrs. Smead is so suggestible
as this we should find frequent indications of its
presence in all other instances. But it is not appar-

882

&0M£ S^fiAttTRlgd IK MSiBltTMlStIC PlIENOMfiKA

ent in anything that I have obseryed, and I have been
wholly unable to prove it or to produce it by ex-
periment. Consequently, what I have pointed out
as conceivable indication of this has its force con-
siderably diminished, or even made doubtful.

The second fact which disturbs the hypothesis of
secondary personality is the circumstance that the
view of eternal punishment taken in Mrs. Smead's
record is not only quite different from the one most
natural to her normal beliefs but shows traces of
identity with the view expressed in the " Spirit
Teachings" of Stainton Moses himself, which there
is every reason to believe Mrs. Smead never saw.
That identity is not of the kind that can be treated
as scientific evidence, but the resemblance is so close
that the advocate of secondary personality might
well seize it as proof of that hypothesis, if there
were any reason to believe that Mrs. Smead had ever
seen the book. But Mrs. Smead affirms that she
has never seen it, and Mr. Smead has not the book
in his library and has purposely refrained from pur-
chasing it, so that knowledge of its contents should
not influence the personality claiming to be Stainton
Moses. They live at least one hundred miles from
any library which might be supposed to contain
the work, and have never consciously had access to
it in any library with which they are familiar, and
this knowledge is limited to small libraries which are
found in country towns. Though Mrs. Smead has
been familiar with the planchette since her childhood,
she has not only not read literature on Spiritualism,
but was brought up in strict orthodoxy and in regions

288

which had few or no library facilities. The only
assumption that can be made regarding the possi-
bility of her having seen the book is that she may
either have seen it casually as a child or have con-
sulted it in some somnambulic state, both of which
suppositions are considerably strained, though con-
ceivably possible. I doubt very much if it is a fact,
especially as it is a book which one would not easily
forget, unless read when too young to remember it.
Her environment and religious habits as a child would
most probably exclude this supposition.

The relation between the thought expressed through
Mrs. Smead and that of the " Spirit Teachings "
through Stainton Moses can be best determined by
a comparison. I shall quote passages from ^ Spirit
Teachings " that the reader may decide for himself.
We must remember that this book of Mr. Moses
purported to be communications from discamate
spirits, personalities who allege through Mrs. Piper
that they are the same spirits who communicated
through Mr. Moses. The contents of his book rep-
resent their teaching with regard to spirit life and
in it they describe the nature of punishment in the
life after deatib.

In one passage, after saying that deceased persons
who have sinned in this life are free to reform in
the next life or to remain in their sinful desires,
the statement of " Spirit Teachings " is as follows : —

^^ This is the unpardcmable sin. Unpardonable,
not because the Supreme will not pardon, but because
the sinner chooses it to be so. Unpardonable, be-
cause pardon is impossible where sin is congenial

«84

and penitence unfelt. Punishment is ever the imme-
diate consequences of sin; it is of its essence, not
arbitrarily meted out, but the inevitable result of
the violation of law."

In another passage, it says : ^^ This mortal exist-
ence is but a fragmmt of Ufe. Its deeds and their
results remain when the body is dead. The ramifica-
tions of wilful sin have to be followed out, and its
results remedied in sorrow and shame."

Again : " To say that we teach a motiveless reli-
gion is surely the strangest misconception. What!
is it nothing that we teach you that each act in this,
the seed-time of your life, will bear its own fruit;
that the results of conscious and deliberate sin must
be remedied in sorrow and shame at the cost of
painful toil in far distant ages; that the erring
spirit must gather up the tangled thread and un-
ravel the evil of which it was long ages ago the
perpetrator? "

This last passage is identical in meaning with the
Smead record, and in another passage the thought
is not less identical in that the communicator indi-
cates that the sin cannot be remedied by another
but only by the sinner himself, and that no happiness
is possible for him until he grows a purer, better,
truer man. And in another passage occurs the fol-
lowing:

'^The spirit which has been slothful or impure
gravitates necessarily to its congenial sphere, and
commences there a period of probation which has
for its object the purification of the spirit from the
accumulated habits of its earth-life; the remedying

886

iPfiTCHtCAL EfiSfiAftOH AND THE EESUEEECTIOir

in remorse and shame of the evil done, and the
gradual rising of itself to a higher state to that
which each process of purification has been a step.'*
There are many long passages with the same im-
port, and though the exact language is not found in
both sets of records the identity of thought is clear
enough. It is not sufficient to justify the belief
or assertion that they have necessarily the same
source, but considering that Mrs. Smead never saw
the work I have been quoting, and that she was an-
nouncing a doctrine more or less at variance with
her natural beliefs, we may at least entertain a sus-
picion that their identity is not due to chance. I
do not claim that the matter has a spirit source in
either case. There is no adequate scientific proof that
it had such an origin in the case of Stainton Moses,
though the teaching was in direct opposition to his
native beUef s. But whatever the source, the identity
of the general thought in both cases is unmistakable,
and as it claims to come from Stainton Moses in the
Smead case where his original writings were not
known, the fact has just as much weight against the
hypothesis of secondary personality as the suppo-
sition of their identity has. This may not be great,
but it is not a negligible quantity. Of course, it is
possible to regard the idea expressed in Mrs. Smead's
automatic writing as the natural reaction of her own
mind against her orthodox belief , a reaction possibly
caused by the growing interest in the real or alleged
evidence of spirit return through her own writing.
But it is not possible to decide this one way or the
other, though the admitted possibiUty of that growth

286

SOME FEATUJUSS IN MEDIUHISTIC PHENOMENA

makes it unnecessary to press the objection to sec-
ondary personality on the basis mentioned. It might
be a casual coincidence that the two should have iden-
tical yiews on a question in which the most natural
tendencies of the mind are to accept the specified
view of punishment. But without denying the expla-
nation of secondary personality it is quite legitimate
to insist that the identity of the teaching in the two
cases is not favorable to the hypothesis of subjective
creation on the part of Mrs. Smead and that it is
consistent with another and more important theory,
even though that theory be neither provable nor sat-
isfactory in this case.

I shsJl not reject the hypothesis of secondary per-
sonality, in spite of the objections to its assured
application. It may be possible on other grounds
than the doubtfulness of the spiritistic view. But
the circumstance that Mrs. Smead has shown no
traces of suggestibility, which had been invoked. to
explain the curious claim that the indirect conmiuni-
cator was Christ, and that the contents of the com-
munications are so identical, or nearly identical, with
those which we might expect Stainton Moses to be-
lieve or to remember, clearly establishes a duty to
as much suspense of judgment on that view as we
may be supposed to feel on other grounds against
the spiritistic doctrine. We are not to feel any
special favor for secondary personality simply be-
cause we feel unimpressed with a less reputable view.
It may be wiser to admit ignorance on both sides of
the subject

But whatever our individual predilections, all must
887

P8TCHICAI. SESEABCH AND THB BESUEEECTIOK

admit that it is fair to discuss one possibility as
much as another. We have presented three alter-
native explanations of the phenomena under review,
and rejected the first one as in fact out of the ques-
tion, namely, that of conscious fabrication. If we
are entitled to admit the possibility of spirit com-
munication it should receive such attention as its
admitted rivalry with subliminal mental action en-
titles it to receive. I do not grant its possibility on
a prion grounds or upon the evidence in the record.
Neither of these reasons would suffice to justify any-
thing. But the mass of the supernormal that is
relevant in many cases to the spiritistic hypothesis,
and the existence in the Smead case of phenomena
that classify it with that of Mrs. Piper make spirit
communications such a possibility that we cannot
easily assign its limits, and hence for the sake of
understanding how it may be invoked to explain
incidents in the record under consideration which are
not so easily explicable by secondary personality, I
shall tolerate the spiritistic hypothesis and see what
it will effect. I shall not assume that it is necessarily
the true view to be taken, but simply as one to be
tested in the same way as its rival alternative.

What I wish to show is that it is possible to sup-
pose the spiritistic theory in the case without accept-
ing the view that the communicator is other than
Stainton Moses. The believer in the spirit theory
is always tempted to take that view on the face of
the returns, so to speak. But in supposing that
spirits have anything to do with the phenomena I

288

SOME FEATUEES IK KEDIUMISTIC PHENOMENA

do not feel compelled to assume that Christ is either
directly or indirectly the communicator as claimed.
We need not go beyond supposing that it is Stainton
Moses. I do not pretend that there is any satisfac-
tory evidence of his presence, but that, with this
theory once justified in other cases, it is rational to
try the hypothesis to see how much may be explicable
by it which does not seem clear on that of secondary
personality.

Let us, then, assume that Stainton Moses deceased
is actually in " control'* and that he is trying to
conmnmicate. We may venture to consider the iden-
tity of view in the case with his past experiences in
life to be evidence of his presence and attempt to
communicate, taking this with other references to
him through Mrs. Smead and more or less evidential
incidents in connection with him. I cannot quote
these, as they would require too much space. Now
if there are peculiar difficulties associated with at-
tempts to communicate with the living, such as are
indicated throughout all or nearly all instances of
^^ possession " mediumship, we may well imagine a
source and explanation for the perplexities involved
in the messages. These difficulties I have siunmed up
as an abnormal mental condition while communicat-
ing, in addition to correlated difficulties in the abnor-
mal condition of the medium. This abnormal men-
tal condition of the communicator may be compared
to a state of secondary personality in its dreamlike
or somnambulic character. It is much more like
somnambulism than chaotic dreaming in many cases,

289

PSYCHICAL lUSSEAECH AND THE EESUBBBCTION

and so shows an active mental condition, though it is
prevented from having that rational control which
characterizes normal consciousness.

Now if we suppose this somnambulic condition of
Stainton Moses we may well understand that he is
suggestible and liable to all the phenomena which
exhibit themselves in suggestible persons. As I have
not been able to find suggestibility in Mrs. Smead
we may transfer the application of the hypothesis
to the communicator and see how it fits the facts.
Assuming, then, that Stainton Moses is somnambulic
and suggestible while communicating, we may well
understand how he should impersonate another, pro-
vided the same hallucinatory tendencies showed them-
selves in his mental action that so often are asso-
ciated with somnambulic, delirious, and dream con-
ditions with the living. It is well known that dreams,
deliria, and hallucinations are more or less closely
related to each other in the functions exercised, and
somnambulism and hypnosis exhibit the same char-
acteristics in many, if not all cases. We know what
a sense of reality accompanies hallucinations, and
how easily a morbid mental condition mistakes them
for real objects, the person experiencing them not
being responsible for his error of judgment and
being incapable of correcting it. If this be the con-
dition of Stainton Moses we may well suppose that
Mr. Smead's reference to Christ created a hallucina-
tion in his mind ; t. e,^ it put a thought into his mind
which immediately took the form of reality, and
was, in his morbid condition, construed as we do
the objects in our dreams. I have already alluded

890

SOME FEATUBBS IN MEDIUMISTIC PHENOMENA

to the dramatic play of our dreams in which we
carry on conversations and discussions as real as in
life with persons whose non-reality we rarely sus-
pect until we awaken and look at the experience from
a normal point of view. There is no reason to deny
this condition in Stainton Moses, in this assumed
condition for communicating, and in fact there is
much to sustain the contention. Impersonation is
a marked feature of such experiences, and every
idea that comes into the mind will naturally take the
form of the " apperception mass," or main thought
of the moment, if it does not arrest it, so that, with
this supposed suggestibility of Stainton Moses, he
would naturally impersonate communication with
Christ, once he became possessed with the notion of
his reality, itself a product of his hallucinatory con-
dition. In the interfusion of his mental condition
with the personality, subliminal personality, of Mrs.
Smead, which is presumably suggestible from the
spiritual and not the material side of her being,
we may well suppose that the idea or hallucination
is transmitted to her mind and emerges as a dream
or hypnogogic product as she comes out of the
trance.

Nor is this supposed interfusion of personalities
an a priori conjecture. It exhibits itself in nearly
all mediumistic phenomena. I cannot undertake here
to prove it. I only assert that I am not making
the assumption arbitrarily and without cumulative
evidence in other cases. That is, the hypothesis is
not constructed for the occasion. It is the common
phenomenon in mediumistic experiences, and all that

g91

PBTCHICAI. &E8EA&CH AND THE USSUBBECTIOK

seems new — and this may not really be new — is
the coincidence between the impersonation on *^ the
other side" and the vision of Mrs. Smead in the
borderland state.

It is noticeable in the contents of Mrs. Smead's
record that the communications purport to represent
the state of things in a transcendental world. It is
said that the system of punishment is only the con-
tinuance of the sinful condition of this life, that
virtue and vice are their own rewards, etc. Appar-
ently we have material which would answer the query
regarding what the after life is. But if we are
to assume this to be onnmimication from the other
world at all, its contents are the memory of Stainton
Moses, or at least mingled with the experiences of
his memory. We have seen that there is more or
less identity between what his " Spirit Teachings "
taught and this purported communication from him
after death, and if we accept this view of the facts
we have no evidence whatever that he is correctly
representing the conditions of a spiritual world. He
is only repeating, in a somnambulic state, the mem-
ories of his earthly life as expressed in his work,
and in that work itself the ** control " recognized
that the commumcations were colored by Stainton
Moses* tyten mind while he was receiving the messages.
** Your state now colors your views,'' says a passage
of " Spirit Teachings.*' " Much we are obliged to
clothe in allegory, and to elucidate by borrowing
your phraseology." In another communication the
same personality, speaking of a demand by Stainton
Moses for a specific type of evidence, said that the

S98

toME FEATURES IN BfEDIUMISTIC PHENOMENA

result would be '^ imperfect and unreliable, from the
admixture of your own mental action and that of
the circle." In still another passage Stainton Moses
was told that the communications are affected by his
own mind, especially when he was not well.

This same modifying influence would be expected
in the mental habits of Mrs. Smead, and hence, given
the somnambulic state of Stainton Moses when com-
municating, we should naturally expect a tendency
to reproduce more or less of his memories associated
with the very subject which had been discussed in
his own automatic writing when living, and such
they seem to be. Accepting them as such we readily
perceive the weakness of supposing that they cor-
rectly report the conditions of the life after death,
even though they suffice to prove the fact of it.
There are no means of testing how much the mind of
Mrs. Smead may have influenced the purity of the
communications.

An interesting incident recently in the Smead case
reinforces the hypothesis here suggested. In a sit-
ting occurring a few days before and reported to
me at once, my father purports to communicate, and
he alludes to this Cardinal which has been mentioned
in connecti(Hi with the record under discussion. He
asks Mrs. Smead if this Cardinal may be permitted
to serve as a helper in the work of communicating.
I quote the record:

^* We would ask that the friend who calls himself
C. L. be granted the permission to help here. Will
it be desirable, friends? He will ofttimes give his
former ideas, hut of course [they] are changed with

29S

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUEBECTION

his experiences, as are all our views in waking in
this life."

The italics are my own. But what the passage
emphasizes is the unconscious evidence which it sup-
plies to the tendency of spirits to reproduce their
memories in some form, not always in incidents, but
often in views, and as often distorted and made un-
intelligible by intermixture with new ideas acquired
in their new experience and uncommunicable in sen-
sory terms that can be clear. While all this does
not prove that Stainton Moses is actually communi-
cating in the Smead case it does explain why the
messages take that form, if we assume for hypothet-
ical purposes that he is communicating. We have
then only to suppose (and there is much evidence
in mediumistic phenomena to warrant our belief)
that communicators are in a highly suggestible con-
dition, some of them at least, and this once assumed
we can well understand the form of impersonation
imagined in this special case.

That such is possible is still further indicated by
the common phenomenon in mediumistic communica-
tions, especially of the subliminal as distinct from
the possession type of psychic, that the messages
seem to describe objects seen, where we have only
to suppose that the things seen are telepathically
transmitted phantasms. They may be hallucinations
of the veridical type in the medium produced tele-
pathically from an extraneous source, and they may
be, in addition, phantasms in the mind of the com-
municator, a phenomenon that seems to be supported
by some cases of telepathy between the hving. That

S94

SOME FEATURES IN MEDIUMI8TIC PHENOMENA

is, in some cases, it seems that a predisposition to
hallucinatory images in connection with thoughts by
the agent is accompanied by similar conditions in
the percipient as at least an aid in the success of
telepathy. Assuming this to be more true of a
spiritual than of a material world, as we may well
do from what we know of subliminal mental action
in the living, we can well imagine that this function
figures in that type of messages which involve appar-
ent description of things and events in the other life.
If we accept it, the whole set of phenomena fall
into easy interpretation on the spiritistic hypothesis,
and we should only have to await adequate evidence
to prove it to be a fact

It hiight be objected that this theory is too com-
plicated. But I should reply that it is either not
complicated at all or that it is less so than the ordi-
nary hypotheses which are advanced to eliminate
the spiritistic. Besides it would not make any differ-
ence about its applicability if it were ajs complicated
as it may be supposed to be. If it explains more
rationaUy than others it would have the preference.
But I must contest the claim that it is especially
complicated, at least that it is any more complicated
than the materialistic theory of subjective hallucina-
tions. All that I am doing is to suppose the same
psychological phenomena in a discamate that we find
in an incarnate mind. We find extreme suggestibil-
ity and somnambulic conditions very frequently asso-
ciated in the living, and it is the only explanation
which normal and abnormal psychology accepts of
certain phenomena in the living. It is no worse

S96

PSYCHICAL &ESEA&CH AND THE REStJBEBCTIOK

to suppose the same laws of action in the discamate.
It is as simple in one as in the other, and if it ex-
plains it is entitled to recogniticm as an hypothesis,
pending the production of evidence for its actual
truth.

Nor will it alter matters to say or suppose that
subjective hallucinations and abnormal phenomena
generally in the living are caused by morbid brain
conditions, as all such phenomena are mental in
nature, no matter what their antecedent cause in
brain action. Of course, on the materialistic theory^
they are purely cerebral as well as the normal mental
states. But if we have evidence in the proper super-
normal phenomena for the existence of a soul and
its survival — and survival is necessary to prove its
existence now — we should have to treat all normal
and abnormal mental phenomena as functions of the
soul, with such interaction between body and soul
as permits at least an efficient causal relation between
them. Hence being mental phenomena in any case
and determined by the nature of the mind rather than
the occasional or exciting cause, we can understand
how hallucinatory functions would characterize a dis-
camate mind in any abnormal conditions of its ex-
ercise. This supposition would do no violence to
any scientific doctrine of a soul and would have the
advantage of as simple an explanation of certain
phenomena having a claim to a spiritistic origin as
any similar phenomena in living minds. In fact, it
would seem that scientific method and the very con-
ception of personal identity would compel us to sujy-
pose the same mental functions as such in a spiritual

»96

SOME FEATURES IN MEDITTMISTIC PHENOMENA

world as a condition of supposing any survival at
all, and with this granted we should have abundant
right to extend hypotheses of mental action which
explain certain facts in the living to explain similar
phenomena in the deceased. We are thus conforming
to the very demand of science that we avoid the
multiplicaticm of hypotheses. In the procedure here
adopted I have only accepted and applied the very
theory which psychologically explains the same type
of facts in the living, and the question of simplicity
and complexity is, for that reason, excluded from
the account.

There is an interesting incident which in some
respects confirms the hypothesis here advanced for
mental conditions on ^' the other side." It finds its
suggestiveness from the general theory of idealism
accepted by the philosophers. This doctrine main-
tains that all our ideas are mental constructs. By
this is meant that our minds have to form their
own conceptions and representations of reality, that
we do not see things as they in reality are, but that
their appearances are the result of mental reaction
upon stimtdi whose natiure we cannot describe in
sense terms or experiences. These forms of reality,
as it appears, are determined by the way the mind
is affected, and in this material world the bodily
senses modify the relation between the outer world
and the inner life. Now there is a distinction be-
tween sensational and inner experience. Sensation
occurs only on the occasion of physical stimuli, but
inner mental action and its conceptions are either
not due to external stimuli or are not related to it

897

PSYCHICAL BESEAKCH AND THE EESUEEECTIOK

in any such way as normal sensations. Now the
subliminal life of the mind, even when it reproduces
the forms of sensory experience, does not represent
external reality as do sensations, and in our dreams,
deliria, and hallucinations, whether systematic or
otherwise, we have functions which do not depend
on correlated physical stimuli of the normal type to
explain their character. That is, inner activity may
simulate a real world, though the physical conditions
which determine a normal experience are not present.
The normal physical functions may be wholly sus-
pended and yet the inner functions of the mind may
completely simulate reality.

Now if a soul exists and survives death it simply
casts off the physical organism which determines its
relation to the physical and sensory world. There
remain, by hypothesis, those inner functions which
may produce all the appearances of reality without
its being other than a thought world. In a life
after death the conditions for a more literal realiza-
tion of idealism may exist than in the bodily life,
and if we could make the normal condition after
death what a philosophic friend once said to me he
wished it were, namely, a rationalized dream life, we
might well understand many of the reported phenom-
ena which perplex the student of psychology and
the man of the world in the investigation of spirit-
istic theories. We would only interpret such phe-
nomena as we are discussing in the light of mental
productions without physical stimuliy productions
under the law of habits which we formed in the body.
But whether determined by these habits or not they

SOME I*£ATtTR£d IK M&DttrMtSTlC l»H£KOM£KA

would be conceived as subjective activities, and if
telepathy be a more general mode of communication
in the spiritual world we could understand many
phenomena occurring in it which seem perplexing
now. Until we became familiar with the processes
of such a world we should take for physical reality
the hallucinatory products of our own mind. The
intermediate state of our development might be
fraught with abnormal conditions until we became
adjusted to the new environment.

Now I come to the incident which I had in mind
when introducing this discussion on the basis of the
orthodox idealism. I obtained a verbal report re-
cently from a purely private source of some real
or alleged communications from a man who died a
few years ago. He was a rising man in his depart-
ment of work and was prematurely cut off by death.
His family has been apparently in communication
with him, and the evidence for this, not through a
professional medium, is of the same type as the
Piper phenomena. In one of his communications,
however, while commenting on the peculiarities of
his. spiritual life he stated that he ** sometimes saWy
far instance, a man reading a hook, hut when he
approached to talk with him he found it was only a
thought:*

This is sufficiently paradoxical at least to strike
our attention, and if we are of the Philistine type
we will summarily reject it as absurd. But as the
report can not be treated as fraudulent and as it
is not a natural view to take of such a world, we have
only to ask how it comports with other phenomena

S99

:^SrCHlCAL BE8EAECH AKD THS ESStTBBSCTIOir

purporting to oome from a transcendental life. I
think that it will be perfectly easy to explain it
on the lines just suggested. Suppose it to be an
hallucination in the spiritual world, if you like, tel-
epathically transmitted from some other spirit, and
we have no difficulty in understanding it. The per-
son who reported the fact to me took it as evidence
of ^^ thought forms," assuming that ^^ thoughts are
things." This may be true for all that I know, but
it is more in accordance with the orthodox idealism
and with the multifarious incidents of mediumistic
communications associated with subliminal processes
of all kinds, to interpret it as a veridical hallucina-
tion in the spiritual life, or even a subjective one,
than to suppose it to represent a reality so at vari-
ance with all that we know. Assuming this view of
the incident, we can well comprehend such phenom-
ena as we have provisionally referred to the suggesti-
bility and somnambulism of a real Stainton Moses
communicating under adverse circumstances. The
same general functions are involved in the explana-
tion of this incident under notice as we assume in
that of Mr. Moses, namely, a liability to hallucina-
tions which are taken for reality, just as we all do
in our ordinary dreams and deliria.

I am not defending the spiritistic theory of the
facts as the true hypothesis in the record under re-
view, but only its capacity to explain the facts.
It may not be true. The evidential criterion has
not been satisfied. But neither is the evidential as-
pect of secondary personality satisfied. All that I
have been trying to do is to ascertain which theory

300

SOME FEATUBES IN MEDIUMIStlC PHENOMENA

explains certain facts and which does not. It seems
to me that the spiritistic hypothesis best applies to
all the phenomena in the case, even though it may not
be true in fact and though we might prefer that of
secondary personality if we had consistent evidence
in its support.

But the most important lesson from the incidents
is that which shows the reservations we have to make
in accepting as evidence of conditions in a spiritual
world, statements that we assume to come from spir-
its. There are few records that offer a better oppor-
tunity than this one for testing the claims to a
revelation of transcendental conditions. The evi-
dence on the whole, taking other incidents into ac-
count than those present, are sufficient to suggest
the possibility and nothing more of spirit communi-
cation, and the facts are just perplexing enough to
raise serious doubts about it, partly from the lim-
itations of the theory of secondary personality on
the part of Mrs. Smead, and partly from the nat-
ural dubiousness that the facts could be all that they
claim to be. But some unity is needed to account for
them when fraud is excluded, and when this can be
sought in a combination of supernormal sources for
the messages and an abnormal condition analogous
to somnambulism and suggestibility in the living,
we remove all the perplexities apparent in the sup-
position of the superficial claims of the matter while
we escape the difficulties incident to the hypothesis
of subliminal action and fabrication on Mrs. Smead's
part. That is to say, we neither accept the com-
munications as correctly representing a spiritual

SOI

PdTOHICAL tt£S£A&OH AND THE EfiSUREECTlON

world, while we €ulinit the possibility of that source
for them, nor admit the sufficiency of secondary per-
sonality as an explanation of them. The analysis
also illustrates the fact that the alternative between
subliminal production by Mrs. Smead and spiritistic
reality as apparent is not so sharply drawn as contro-
versial demands would like to have it, and such a
view illustrates the need of patience and critical
methods in the treatment of these and similar phe-
nomena.

What we need, to make the hypothesis of sec-
ondary personality perfectly applicable to the case,
is more knowledge of its nature and laws of action.
It is all very well to use it to explain phenomena
which we have no reason to believe are consciously
fraudulent and which are not evidential of the super-
normal, but we require to meet the responsibilities
which every man assumes when he presents an hypoth-
esis. We must be able to apply it to details
consistently with the known facts and to give sat-
isfactory evidence that it is true. We have not yet
determined the nature and limits of secondary per-
sonality, and cannot do more than appeal to it as
a precaution against hasty credulity in more difficult
theories until we have subjected it to a more thorough
investigation. From what we know of the work of
Dr. Boris Sidis in Psychopathology and of Dr. Mor-
ton Prince in the same field, especially in the Beau-
champ case, we may weU entertain a large extension
of the capacities of subliminal impersonation. But
in none of these cases of the psychiatrist, have they
reached the kind of realism and dramatic play whidi

802

SOME FEATUBES IN MEDIUMISTIC PHENOMENA

characterizes such instances as we are studying, and
hence whatever value secondary personality may have
for putting limitations on spiritism it will not be a
universal solvent until we know more about it. S^
much we may as well frankly admit and demand
the means and opportunities for studying it ade-
quately. Its weaknesses, however, will be no excuse
for accepting the alternative hypothesis, which may
seem more difficult of belief than the more familiar
phenomena of abnormal psychology. The utmost
that we can do is to test the hypotheses for their
consistency and possibility, and then look for the
evidence which will prove one rather than the other.
Such evidence we do not possess in the record before
us, and it is not pretended that it is the desired evi-
dence. It is only an example of the kind of phe-
nomena which exist in large quantities and which
more and more demand an intelligible explanation.
The case can be summarized in the following man-
ner, assuming that we have two general hypotheses
which will serve as the points of view to be at least
emphasized as the primary factors in the phenomena.

(1) We may hold that the whole product is one of
secondary personality, and this in spite of the real
or apparent difficulties which I have discussed. This
will discredit a transcendental source for the facts.

(2) We may concede that secondary personality is
not adequate and, though accepting the applicability
of the spiritistic theory, we have no reason to suppose
that it rightly represents the alleged source of the
statements made, at least in so far as the assumed
chief communicator is concerned. It has been with

303

PSYCHICAL EESSAKCH AND THE KESUBRECTIOK

a view of indicating this limitation of judgment in
the case that I have discussed the spiritistic possi-
bility at all. The opportunity for sustaining a more
or less conservative and critical method was so im-
portant that it could not be lost, and it must not be
supposed that the hypothesis thus entertained has
anything like the evidence for its being a fact that
it has for its mere conceivability.

804

CHAPTER X

TELEPATHY

Telepathy has been such a solvent of difficulties
in psychic research when people were not willing to
admit what they did not know, that it is time to
" take stock '* of this teruL Hardly a phenomenon
during the last twenty years has appeared that has
not at least suggested to certain kinds of minds the
explanation of it by some sort of " telepathy." In
season and out of season it has played a prominent
part in the attempt to escape some other and perhaps
more simple theory. But the time has come to ascer-
tain with some clearness what we mean by it. We
think that " mind reading " and " thought transfer-
ence '' make good synonyms for it and so they may,
but they are no clearer conceptions when we are
pressed for their exact meaning. The scepticism
which prevails in scientific quarters as to the mere
facts of *^ telepathy" is more than half due to the
circumstance that we can never learn from popular
usage what definite limits it is supposed to have,
or what are the laws and conditions under which
the phenomena denoted by it may happen to occur.
If popular conceptions about it were clear and if the
facts which the untrained mind tries to explain by
it had any simple general characteristics which the
assumed explanation made intelligible we might take
a charitable view of the term. But such a medley

806

FSYCHICAIi BESEABCH AND THE &ESUERECTION

of real or alleged phenomena is referred to it that
the term is like " special providence *' for explana-
tion. It is assumed to explain any coincidence that
may happen to occur in the experiences of two minds,
or any class of supernormal phenomena that are
mental. This overweight of meaning attached to
it is just the circumstance that makes the scientific
man pause at its use and application. We can ex-
plain the distribution of the planets by gravitati<m
but not the distribution of animals. Science has
some respect to relevancy when it classifies effects
under causes, but the extravagant believer in telep-
athy seems to know no bounds to his credulity if
only he can evade something more rational but less
respectable.

In popular parlance ^^ telepathy" is a name for
a process supposed to explain the supernormal ac-
quisition of information without regard to cmy lim-
its whatever. If Mr. Smith happens to learn super-
normally some facts which can be shown to have once
been known by Mr. Jones, " telepathy '* is supposed
to explain them, and they may even be construed
as evidence of this. If Mr. Jones does not happen
to know them, or to have experienced them, and we
learn that some friends of his did know them we
are confronted with " telepathy " d troia. This
means that in some way Smith is put into rapport
with Jones's friend and filches the facts from his
memory telepathically. Or if Jones's friend does
not know them and they happen to be known by his
friend Barlow whom Jones does not know the rapport
with Barlow is established through the relation of

306

TELEPATHY

his friend to Jones and the process is as easy as
before. In this way " telepathy " is made to do
anything and to indicate an ad libitvm access to the
minds and memories of all living persons. That is
a capacious power which it is hard to defeat is an
argument, especially when it is assumed a priori
and without one iota of scientific evidence in its sup-
port. It is so arbitrary in its application that it
takes no account of the fact that the process never
seems to occur except when it is necessary to sim-
ulate some other explanation and it becomes the part
of men who have no sense of humor to beUeve any-
thing rather than confess ignorance or agnosticism.

If those who use " telepathy *' so freely to explain
mysteries would take the trouble to examine the con-
ditions under which it obtained currency and the
facts which required its acceptance they would have
no difficulty in understanding the limits of its use.
Its original meaning was ** a coincidence between two
persons* thoughts which requires a caudal explana-
tion" It is to be noticed in this conception that it
is not a name for a cause of any kind. It but de-
nominates a fact for which we have still to seek and
find the cause. This is a most important circum-
stance to keep in mind, as it assigns a decided limita^
tion to the usage of the term which is so popular.

The phenomena which gave rise to the employment
of the term were just what the definition indicates,
namely, coincidences between the thoughts of persons
which were not due to chance. It is probable that
the performances of Bishop and Cumberland with
their claims of " mind reading " gave the problem of

807

PSYCHICAL BESEAACH AND THE RESUBRECTIOK

investigating and explaining such coincidences its
emphasis and importance. But their performances,
with similar others described in books of magic, were
not all that suggested the idea. There were and are
spontaneous coincidences between people's thoughts
which were not exposed to the suspicion of prestidigi-
tation and so made the question of their explanation
a more serious one. The situation gave rise to the
effort to organize the investigation of such phenom-
ena, and experiment succeeded in reproducing similar
coincidences under test conditions. The phenomena
did not seem explicable by chance, but seemed to
indicate some causal neaus between antecedent and
consequent, and as this was unusual the best thing
to do was to denominate it by a term which did not
carry with it any associations with known normal
agencies.

There are three distinct groups of coincidence to
which the popular and unscientific mind applies the
term "telepathy,** and only one of these to which
the sciaitific mind applies it. The first group of
facts is that which is comprised of the present active
mental states of the agent obtained by a percipient.
The agent is the person whose thoughts are sup-
posedly transmitted: the percipient is the person who
receives the thoughts transferred. The second group
of phenomena consists of those facts which a per-
cipient obtains and which the agent present at the
experiment is not thinking of at the time, but has
them in his memory. They represent experiences or
knowledge which he once had and which he may or
may not recall at the time they are reproduced for

808

TELEPATHY

him by another person or psychic. The third group
of facts consists of those which represent events not
known by the agent or sitter present at an experi-
ment but which can be proved to have been the knowl-
edge of some other living person at the time and at
any distance imaginable from the place of the experi-
ment. This assumes that the percipient can select at
any distance from the memory of any Uving person
such facts as are desirable to use for the impersona-
tion of such persons as may suit the medium's object,
and this consciously or unconsciously. This is the
most comprehensive appUcation which the term ob-
tains and is complicated with various incredible con-
ceptions of rapport.

The first of these conceptions of the term is the
only one that is entitled to any scientific standing.
It derived its significance from several considerations
which associated it as a phenomenon more closely with
what is known regarding the law of cause and effect
than in any case involved in the second and third
group of facts. The first thing was the coincidence
between the agent's present thoughts and those which
the percipient had at the same time. But this was
only one aspect of the case. The suggestive circum-
stance was the fact that in mechanical phenomena
the antecedent is supposed to be the cause of the con-
sequent and it is the activity of the antecedent that
enables us to assume causality in its relation to the
consequent. The fact that the two are associated
closely in time and space is the circumstance that
enables us to prove this causality, though it might
not actually constitute it. But it is the analogy of

^09

PSYCHICAL EESEABCH AND THE RESURBECTION

telepathic with mechanical coincidences in respect of
this activity that makes it plausible at least to sup-
pose a causal nextis when the coincidence is observed.
If it were not for this circumstance it is possible that
we should never think of the direct causal connection
in telepathic phenomena. It is the present active
state of consciousness that we can assume to be a
cause, just as any present active state in a physical
object is presumably the cause of some event in-
variably associated with it. It is probably this fact
which gives telepathy its real or apparent consistency
with the materialistic interpretation of mental
phenomena. But whether this be true or not, it is the
existence of mental coincidences between different per-
sons taken in connection with the assumption that
active conditions of a subject may be causal of in-
variable consequents that makes the idea of a causal
relation of a supernormal type between mind and
mind a reasonable assumption.

Now the evidence of some causal relation is appar-
ent in such records as the Proceedings of the Society
for Psychical Research, and I shall not illustrate
them here. I shall either refer those who are not con-
vinced of the phenomena to those records or take for
granted that the phenomena are numerous enough to
justify the cussumption of a nextbs not due to chance
in such cases, and then proceed to indicate what
^^ telepathy " means when applied to them. All that
" telepathy *' means and meant in reference to these
facts is that they are not due to chance, but that
some causal relation exists between the antecedent
and consequent. It does not explain the phenomena

810

TELEPATHY

in €my respect. It is not a name for a cause of any
kind whatever. It only indicates that the normal
causes are not present or at least not discoverable.
In so far as causality is concerned the term denotes
no positive agency, but is purely negative in its im-
port. It does not name a known cause, but indicates
that the known causes do not explain the facts and
that some as yet unknown cause must account for
what is not due to chance and so they bear the marks
of having some causal agency yet to be found.

This limitation of the meaning of the term should
be emphasized and repeated. It is not the name of
any cause or of any process by which the causal nearas
between persons' thoughts is established. It does
not explain the phenomenon, as is too frequently sup-
posed, but actually leaves it wholly unexplained. It
is merely a convenient expression to denote that we
have gone beyond the normally explicable and are
still seeking the explanatory cause. Hence so far
from explaining thought coincidences it explains
nothing whatever. It only names the facts which re-
quire explanation and any attempt on the part of a
psychic researcher to deceive the reader with the
assiunption that phenomena are explained by it de-
serves the severest scientific reprobation. It may
well indicate that a phenomenon is not explained in
some other way, or at least is not evidence of that ex-
planation, but it is not a name for any positive causal
agency that is known, though it may become known
under further investigation. It only refers a fact
to some cause yet unknown even when it implies that
a certain specific cause is not indicated by the facts.

811

I»SYCH1CAL EESSARCH AND THE ESStTASSCTIOK

The fact that it may exclude the belief in spirit
agency does not make it an explanation of the phe-
nomena concerned. It merely indicates that the
phenomena which had associated themselves with spir-
itistic causes are to be explained by the same causes
which were supposed to extend beyond the normal
action of sense without presenting evidence of these
immaterial agencies.

It is because the term has been constantly used to
denote an alternative to spiritism that its original
meaning has been forgotten or ignored. The con-
ception of spirit is actually explanatory of certain
phenomena and in criticizing the evidence for this
view of them the possibility of telepathy came in to
eliminate certain facts assumed to be evidence of the
former and in this comparison of the two ideas telep-
athy borrowed an explanatory import which it did
not and does not possess. Tlie reason for this is
the simple fact that every problem has two distinct
aspects which we too frequently forget. They are
the explanatory and the evidential. They are often
so closely associated that they may be mistaken for
one another. They should be briefly examined.

The explanatory function of a conception is to
denote a cause that will account for the occurrence of
an event. Thus gravitation is supposed to explain
why objects fall to the ground, sunlight is an agent
in accounting for the growth of vegetation, heat is
an explanation of expansion in bodies, electricity
names a cause in a great variety of phenomena, and
so on with hundreds of terms. Now when any new
phenomenon appears demanding an explanation and

812

TXUSPATHY

we refer it to one of these we already take their exist-
ence for granted and the new phenomenon is not an
evidence of their existence. For instance I find a
group of new phenomena in the behavior of certain
physical bodies, phenomena exhibiting certain re-
semblances to the known action of electricity, and I
at once refer the phenomena to that source. I do so
to avoid the hypothesis of new agencies. If known
causes explain the facts I have no reason to interpret
these facts as evidence of new agencies, and the new
facts are not evidence of the existence of the assumed
causes. They are simply explained by them. If
they were not explained by them we should have a
right to seek new causes to account for their occur-
rence. The possibility of appealing to existing
causes to account for new facts makes it unnecessary
to set up new agents in the cosmos, and, though such
new agents may happen to exist, we have to seek else-
where for evidence of the fact. Some other reality
explains the phenomena equally well and when that is
known to exist on other grounds the new facts do
not appear as evidence of it. They are simply ex-
plained by it.

The evidential aspect of a problem is much nar-
rower than its explanatory. There are fewer situa-
tions in which facts serve as evidence of the existence
of a cause than when they are explicable by it. Facts
will serve to prove the existence of a cause only when
they cannot be explained by known agencies. As
long as alternative causes may exist, the facts ex-
plicable by any one of them are not proof of any,
and especially not proof of a new cause whose exist-

818

1»STCHICAL E£S£AECH AND THE EESUEEECTION

ence may possibly be questioned, or for which the
evidence is less than well known agents. Let me
illustrate the evidential and explanatory aspect of
one problem, namely, the velocity of light. A phe-
nomenon in the eclipse of the moons of Jupiter served
to prove, or render most probable, the fact that light
had velocity. The supposition that it had velocity
might very well have been entertained as a corollary
of certain other facts, but proof may have been w€uit-
ing. Its transmission from the sun to the earth was
an admitted fact and that it had velocity or required
a period of time for this transmission could be eX"
plained by this velocity, if we could show that time
was involved. Consequently when certain phenomena
were observed in the eclipses of the moons of Jupiter,
they seemed to prove that this time element was in-
volved in the transmission of light. For instance it
was noticed that at one period the eclipses of a moon
was earlier than the calculated astronomical time and
at another later than this. This fact coincided with
the fact that at one of these periods the light had
to traverse the distance represented by the diameter
of the earth's orbit greater than at the other period.
Consequently the difference of time was an evidence
of velocity in the transmission of light. In the ordi-
nary phenomena of sunlight and its transmission there
is no situation in which this velocity is indicated, and
until we could bring the phenomena of light under
the law of luminous undulations there would be no
reason to suppose from that circumstance that it re-
quired time for its transmission. But the proof that
it required this time created a presumption, if it was

S14

TEI.EPATHY

not proof 9 that undulations were the cause of the
lapse of time in the transmission, in accordance with
known laws in vibratory phenomena, while the lapse
of time was not an explanation of the facts but an
evidence of their existence. Or to take a much
simpler instance. Sunlight is the cause of vegetable
growth, at least one of its causes, but this growth is
not the evidence of sunlight. Other facts have
proved to us that the sun shines and we have found in
the progress of inquiry that the sunlight is more or
less necessary to the growth of vegetation.

Now when it comes to the phenomena which gave
rise to the idea of telepathy we found a situation in
which we had new facts not explicable by known and
familiar causes, namely, sense perception of the nor-
mal type. The ordinary explanation was excluded,
but a new one was not thereby established. We
simply found a set of facts which required some new.
cause and as we had no known process for rendering
the facts intelligible we had to represent them as in-
volving some causal connection, direct or indirect be-
tween living minds, that still had to be determined.
The facts were evidence of this, but they were not
explained by merely coining a new term, as the pro-
cess or causal agency was not thereby indicated. The
term was not an explanation, nor a name for any ex-
planation, but a name for the facts requiring a new
cause still to be determined.

The point of view of which telepathy is supposed
to be a rival hypothesis is the spiritistic. Both have
their evidential and both their explanatory functions.
The evidence of the spiritistic theory is, not the mere

S16

fact of the supernormal, or facts not explicable by
normal mental action, but in addition to the super-
normal, it ig, incidents bearing upon the personal
identity of deceased persons. If we are to believe in
spirits of any kind we must expect them, if they sur-
vive, to conmiunicate facts which besides being supers
normal must be such as discamate spirits would most
naturally tell in proof of their identity. I shall not
undertake to tell what such facts should be. I leave
this to the reader to determine. But the evidence of
the theory must partake of the character described
in order to invoke an explanation which the theory
supposes. But this evidence must exclude an alter-
native hypothesis, and hence any phenomenon classi-
fiable with telepathy will not be evidence of spirits
whatever we may think of the latter^s capacity for
explaining the facts. Nothing is clearer than the
fact that the spiritistic hypothesis is capable of ex-
plaining a certain type of phenomena, but the funda-
mental question is, whether it is the true explanation,
and this requires us to obtain the evidence for it.
Whether the hypothesis has any evidence in its sup-
port is not the problem here, and I am not concerned
with this issue, but with its relation to telepathy either
as a fact or as an hypothesis. As remarked the evi-
dence of spirit agency must be some type of facts
illustrating personal identity and at the same time
probably supernormal. But if such alleged evidence
can be classified with the phenomena which are termed
telepathic it will lose its character as proof of spirits.
Hence, though telepathy explains nothing, it may
limit or destroy the evidence for spirits, provided it is

S16

comprehensive enough in its application to all that is
explicable by spirit agency. It is therefore not a
rival theory to the spiritistic in regard to explanation,
but only in evidential matters.

We often speak of ** explaining ^ certain facts by
telepathy and, in implying that they are explicable
by the same process, this is legitimate enough way of
speaking. But classification is never a true explana-
tion. It only places things in allied groups and if
the cause is previously known the explanation is im-
plied, but if it is unknown the phenomena so classified
remain really as unexplained as before. Telepathy
is this sort of term. It only classifies and does not
yet imply the process by which phenomena are pro-
duced or made to occur. It is merely a term for plac-
ing limitations on evidence, not a term of explanation.

I have been using the word for the moment in its
widest application to include all three meanings
noticed at the outset. I have done this as a conces-
sion for the time to the popular conception in order
to indicate the extent of its limitations in relation to
a supposedly rival hypothesis. But it is time to show
still further limitation in the use of the term. I deny
the legitimacy of the second and third meanings of
the term. That is, I deny that there is any evidence
of a scientific character for the mind of one person
reading another in any such way as is implied by
selecting incidents either from the memory of the per-
son present or from the memories of distant and un-
known persons. All that we can pretend to have
scientific evidence for is the acquisition supernormally
of the present actwe mental states of the agent by a

817

PSYCHICAL EB8EAECH AND Tfi£ BEStTEBSCTIOK

percipient. There is a large mass of facts on record
which answer to this conception of the matter and
there is as yet in the scientific world no unanimity of
opinion with regard even to this. But such as it is,
it represents the only body of scientific evidence which
can claim to represent some supernormal connection
between one mind and another, and this connection in
all but four or five incidents is synonymous with the
present mental states of agent and percipient, the
person whose mind is read and the person who reads
it. The four or five incidents among the thousands
of facts are not sufficient to justify the supposition
that the memory is read either in these particular in-
stances or in the whole mass of evidence, especially
that they are referable to deferred association which,
as we know, is a very common phenomenon in ordi-
nary life. The overwhelming mass of facts claim-
ing to be evidence represents present active mental
states and whatever we may think of subliminal pro-
cesses as possibly involved in the results it is clear that
there is no such selective access to the mind of the
agent by percipients as would be implied in the con-
struction of an independent personality. The phe-
nomena sustain an analogy with what is known in me-
chanical processes, namely, the fact that the cause and
effect represent present and non-selective action. It
is this characteristic that gives the idea of telepathy
its conceivable import.

But the analogy or resemblance to mechanical coin-
cidences, suggesting or proving a causal nextis, re-
ceives a part of its interest or significance from the
circumstance that, in mechanical phenomena, we

818

TEIiEPATHY

know or suppose something about the nature of the
process involved in producing the effect. Thus, when
we strike an object, the noise produced is supposed
to be the effect of transmitted force from the external
object to the subject of the effect. In many types
of phenomena the cause is supposed to be some mode
of motion, as in the case of sound and light, or the
transmission of motion in mechanical operations. It
is not the mere fact that we have an antecedent and
consequent to contemplate that satisfies us, but we
imagine or believe that some agency in the form of
motion is involved in the total phenomenon as ren-
dering it intelligible and explicable. But in real or
alleged telepathy we have no such supposition to guide
oiur judgments. There is no scientific reason or evi-
dence whatever that thought is connected with vibra-
tions of any kind. The prevailing belief in philo-
sophic circles is that mental phenomena are not modes
of motion and any such assumption must render men-
tal coincidences such as are involved in alleged telep-
athy quite unintelligible in mechanical terms. This
belief of philosophy may be wrong for all that I
know. It may be that consciousness is either consti-
tuted by or associated with vibrations or undulations
of some kind, ethereal or materiaL I do not know,
and I am willing also to say that I do not care one
way or the other. But until there is some reason to
believe that mental states are associated with undula-
tory action of some kind in a way to affect their na-
ture and relations with each other, both in the mind
of their subject and between different minds, there
will be no ground for identifying them closely with

819

PSYCHICAL SESEA&CH AND THE BESTTRBECTIOK

mechanical phenomena, and alleged telepathic coinci-
dences will not be assimilable with physical facts or
events. All that they will indicate is the fact of
some causal relation which has yet to be determined.
That they are associated with present active mental
states of a certain person and the percipiency of an-
other is the only resemblance with mechanical causes
that they offer, and that may suffice to prove phe-
nomena not due to chance, but it does not make them
intelligible to physical science, at least in any such
terms as are usually demanded of coincidences demand-
ing explanation in the usual manner. They ranain
facts to be reckoned with, but not physically ex-
plicable.

In the physical world it is the present active cause
associated with some event directly connected with it
in time and space that gives rise to our conviction of
a causal nexus. That is to say, we must have as evi-
dence of a rational causal connection the coincidence
between a consequent and an antecedent and that ante-
cedent must be some active agency which will com-
mend itself to our minds as the probable or necessary
fact in the phenomena. It is not the association of
an event with any passive set of conditions that we
find in proximity to it, but the presence of an active
agency that gives force to the assumed connection.
Were it not for this fact we should probably never
think of a cause in a particular case of antecedence
and consequence.

Thus a flash of lightning is followed by a clap of
thunder. If this occurs frequently enough I am
assured of the causal nextu. But I would naturally

320

• TEUSPATHY

suspect it on the first occasion if the association in
time and space were close enough, and repetition
would only confirm the conjecture. But if the thun-
der were to occur two or three days after the flash of
lightning I would not suspect a causal nexus between
them, unless I could discover a series of causally re-
lated phenomena between the first and last experience.
We have to get some continuous connection between a
nearer and remoter fact in a series to justify the sup-
position of a causal nexus. Thus when I see and hear
the action of a locomotive whistle near by there is
practical simultaneity or an immediate connection
between the escape of the steam and the occurrence of
the sound. I therefore suppose them causally related.
But would I as easily suppose this connection if I saw
the steam escape a mile distant and heard the sound
some moments later? I think not. But if I have
learned that sound requires time to transmit its vibra-
tions to a distance I might suspect that the difference
in time between the visual and auditory experience is
accounted for by the difference in velocity between
light and sound, and I could then suppose an imme-
diate nexus between them for the point of their occur-
rence and an apparent discrepancy at a distance.
But I still trace the causal connection through the in-
tervening phenomena. The evidence, however, must
begin with spatial and temporal coincidences, and the
causal idea associated with present active agencies.
It is this that makes explanation possible in the
physical world.

It is this analogy of temporal coincidence between
present active thoughts in agent and percipient that

8»1

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE EESURBECTION

suggests a causal neanis, especially when the fact is
related to the absence of such apparent connection
between latent memories. The phenomena which sug-
gest telepathy, or prove it, are coincidences between
present mental states, and these coincidences must rep-
resent likeness of the contents in mind. Otherwise
there will be no reason whatever to suppose a causal
nexibs. This is a truism, but I call attention to the
fact for the purpose of emphasizing a maxim of
scientific procedure in the matter. This is that simi-
larity of content and present active phenomena are
essential to the idea of a causal relation in cases of
alleged telepathy. If we attempt to adopt and fol-
low any other criterion we might trace a causal con-
nection between any of my thoughts and the similar
thoughts of others at any time. We never attempt,
however, to suppose that our thoughts to-day are con-
nected either with the same thoughts others experi-
ence at the same time, under exactly similar condi-
tions, or with the thoughts of others like our experi-
ence at some previous time and explicable by the or-
dinary processes of acquiring knowledge. We have
to exclude the ordinary access to sense perception and
assure ourselves of an identity of thought between two
subjects, imder circumstances to suggest a direct and
not a parallel or coincidental connection, in order to
suspect a relation other than the normal one.

Now the only phenomena which have suggested a
causal Tieocus between mental states in different minds
are those which show identity and temporal coinci-
dence along with evidence that the coincidence is not
due to similar sensory experience. There is no other

3»S

TELEPATHY

evidence of telepathy and until we have secured evi-
dence of some other connection we are not entitled
to apply the term telepathy to any other conception
of the case. We have to define our conceptions by
the phenomena which serve as evidence for the hypoth-
esis concerned. If the phenomena do not show that
likeness of kind which determines their classification
we cannot apply the same causal explanation. Thus
we do not apply gravitation to the phenomena of ad-
hesion and cohesion. Neither do we confuse chemical
affinity with any of these. We limit each of these
causal ideas to the types of phenomena which guar-
antee their existence. It must be the same with telep-
athy. We have no evidence whatever that it occurs
between the memories of an " agent " and the state-
ments of a percipient. It is not sufficient to say or
suppose that the fact told by the psychic is identical
in character with the fact in the memory of the
" agent," or conjectured " agent." There must be
some reason to believe that memories are active causal
agencies, and we have no evidence whatever of this.
We have evidence that active consciousness is a causal
agent and it is this fact which gives force to the idea
of telepathy when identity and coincidence between
two minds occur independently of ordineury sensory
experience.

I may express this perhaps in another way. I have
indicated that telepathy when first applied to mental
coincidences assumed the point of view that the phe-
nomena had their interest in the hypothesis that the
explanation began with the agent and not with the
percipient. I have referred to the analogies with

823

Psychical research and the resurrectiom'

the law of mechanics, that causal explanation started
with the antecedent phenomenon which might be
assumed to represent or to indicate the cause. In
telepathic phenomena the mental state of the agent, if
anything can be supposed to be the cause, might be
represented as such and the percipient is the passive
recipient of what is transmitted to him. The point
of view for explanation in this first conception of
causality was the antecedent thought of the agent,
not any active function of the percipient. Telepathy
had analogies with the ordinary phenomena of the
transmission of force or motion.

But in this wider import of the term it assumes
nothing of the kind. It supposes that the percipient
is the primary factor in the work. The point of view
for explanation is completely reversed. Instead of
supposing that the agent is the primary factor ; that
is, that the mind from which the information is pre-
sumably obtained is the causal agent, the telepathy
which explains phenomena having at least a super-
ficial claim to a spiritistic source assumes that the
percipient is the causal agent in the result: that is,
instead of supposing that the mind from which the
facts are presumably obtained is an influence in the
result it assumes that the mind which obtains it selectg
the facts from the other. Instead of remaining by
the conception of mechanical analogies in which the
agent is the cause and the percipient the passive re-
cipient of the knowledge it supposes that the per-
cipient is the cause and the other mind the passive
giver of the facts. That is, it assumes an intelligent,
not a mechanical process. The relation of agent and

dS4

TELEPATHY

percipient is completely reversed. In the original
and only legitimate application of the term telepathy
the agent was the active and the percipient the passive
factor while the new a priori conception is that the
percipient is the active and the agent the passive
power in the phenomena. In addition to this general
reversion it is noticeable that in the former the per-
cipient is not intelligently selective, while in the lat-
ter it is infinitely intelligent and selective. The whole
mechanical implications of the older meaning are lost
and abandoned. And they are abandoned without
evidence of any kind, other than that it is not respect-
able to accept any other view. The fact is that there
is not a particle of scientific evidence for this wider
meaning of the term. It is not enough to find one
or two incidents which seem neither like what has '
passed for the older meaning of telepathy nor appears
" as evidence of transcendental agencies. Such as ap-

^ pear to be neither thought transference of present

mental states nor evidence of discamate agencies will
^ have to be multiplied in much larger quantities and

^ represent much better quality than any that we have

^ yet seen before we are entitled to suppose a causal

relation between the memories of others and the super-
' normal information which mediums give us relative to

^ the deceased. Before we can admit a selective telep-

r athy of any kind we shaU have to give evidence

• which does not coincide with facts persistently and

^■- uniformly related to deceased persons. We must

f have the limitation of the facts obtained to experiences

^' of living persons and not illustrative of the identity

f of deceased persons. Until that is done there can be

> 326

PSYCHICAL EESEARCH AND THE SESTTBBECTIOK

no scientific evidence whatever for this assumed " se-
lective telepathy." I am not questioning the fact of
it, but denying that there is evidence for it, and no
man can pretend to be scientific who indulges in the
assumption until it can produce satisfactory evidence
for itself. The circumstance that a supernormal fact
may not be evidence of spirits does not require us to
explain it by telepathy. We may better say that
we have not found the explanation than to assiune
the necessity of telepathy because the evidence is not
for spirits. We may well express our agnosticism,
especially that spirits might explain much which is
not evidence of their existence, if once we have found
consistent evidence for them. What I remarked
earlier in this chapter holds here, namely, that the ex-
planatory function of a theory is wider than its evi-
dential, provided that the phenomena exhibit any
reasonable relation to those which admit of a given
explanation.

Briefly, then, this selective telepathy involving in-
telligent action of the percipient as distinct from the
passive recipience of knowledge after mechanical
analogies is an illegitimate extension of the term in
so far as evidence is concerned, and science can take
no steps without evidence. Of course such telepathy
may be a fact, but it has no credentials at present
and must not be permitted to usurp functions which
never attached to the term as scientifically qualified.
It is far better to confess ignorance. We may fool
for a while those who are not intelligent enough to
discover our equivocations, but we shall soon find our-
selves in the company of those self-complacent people

326

TELEPATHY

who have mistaken the nature and progress of clear
thinking.

All this explains why the scientific mind regards
the popular conception of telepathy with contempt.
If the public had limited its conception to the phe-
nomena which claimed to be evidence of it and also
had not assumed that the phenomena were explained
by the term, their convictions might have received
more respect from scientific students. But instead of
this the general conception of telepathy is, not only
that it explains certain facts of mental coincidence,
but that it explains such systematic relations between
different minds as simply subliminal and supernor-
mal conversations of great range and complexity. It
also assumes too readily that some^ process of motion
or undulation is necessarily associated with the con-
nection between mind and mind, or constitutes that
connection. There is not one iota of scientific evi-
dence for the idea. It may be legitimate speculation,
but science is not speculation and it is not primarily
explanation. It is first the collection of facts and
evidence, and it may rest content with this result until
it has reason to accept an intelligible causal agency
after it has accumulated sufficient data to relate its
phenomena to some systematic cause. In the present
status of inquiry into the relation between different
minds, it will not accept the idea that telepathy im-
plies any reason to believe in a transcendental access
to the memories of people at any distance by any par-
ticular person. This is especially true when scientific
minds are called upon to believe that the mind of some
psychic can select as it pleases the person from whom

827

IPSYCHICAL EE8EAECH AND THE EESUEEECTIOK

it shall obtain knowledge of the past and select this
knowledge with reference to the illustration of any
particular person living or dead. There is no scien-
tific evidence whatever that such supernormal inter-
communication is possible. It is an inexcusable abuse
of the term telepathy to apply it in this manner. I
do not believe that there is such a thing. I do not
say that I would not believe it if the evidence were
produced, but I must limit my belief to that for which
I have evidence, and I deny tiiat there is any scientific
evidence for such a fact or process as this unlimited
reading of minds supposes.

Telepathy, I repeat, is acquiring present active
mental states in a supernormal manner, and in thus
defining it I do not imply that it is a proved fact. I
think there is adequate evidence for its occasional oc-
currence. But I respect the scepticism which wishes
to have more evidence before accepting it, and
especially do I respect the scepticism which denies
that telepathy can filch knowledge subliminally and
systematically from living {)eople at pleasure. The
process in one case is so different from that assumed
in the other that there is no rational ground for iden-
tifying their relation under the same term. Super-
normal access to what I am now trying to transmit to
the mind of another person is one thing, and it is a
very different thing, requiring a radically distinct
type of causal action, to systematically read human
minds all over the world, to collect facts illustrative of
the personality of a given person, living or dead. It
will require a great deal of evidence to prove such a
thing, and the evidence will have to be very different

SS8

TEl«£PAl*Hlf

from that which we have in illustration of something
supernormal, if we are to make it intelligible on any
other hypothesis than the most superficial one.

I must blame psychic researchers, even some who
ought to know better, for permitting this illegitimate
use of the term to gain currency. Too many have
used it to blind the vision to its relation to the vari*
ous problems we have to solve. Let me summarize.
There has been a tendency to apply its meaning to
phenomena which are as distant from those which it
legitimately names and classifies as are chance coinci-
dences or clairvoyance. The temptation to do this
arose out of the desire to avoid admitting or tolerating
a less respectable theory. But it must be emphasized
that it is not an explanatory conception of any kind.
It merely classifies a certain type of phenomena hav-
ing some unknown cause. It does not explain any-
thing whatever, much less that group of phenomena
which illustrate the imitation or production in some
supernormal manner of the personality of others, es-
pecially the deceased. There is no longer excuse for
the vague use of the term. It is better to admit
frankly that we have no explanation of certain phe-
nomena than to pretend to knowledge by using a term
of unlimited meaning, equal to any difficulty we meet,
in the attempt to escape a cause that is perfectly
rational and simple. It is time to insist upon the
only legitimate use of the term, and those who insist
upon employing it to explain all the mysteries of men-
tal coincidences and the reproduction supernormally
of independent personalities, must be held responsible
for their action, and evidence exacted of them that

8S9

PSYCHICAL EESEA&CH AND THE EESUftSECXlOK

their assumption has adequate credentials. Until this
is done no tolerance can be given to speculations based
upon assumptions. Any and all extensions of the
term's meaning must be accompanied by the scientific
evidence that justifies it. We are not entitled to
assume the larger meaning of telepathy to be a fad
because we are not sure of its limitations. Here is
where we have been negligent of the maxims of scioi-
tific method and the legitimate formation of convic-
tions. We have felt reasons for accepting a causal
connection between present active mental states and
then, from the desire to be cautious about accepting
some other explanation of proved supernormal phe-
nomena, and from our ignorance of the limitations of
communication between mind and mind, we have asked
the question whether the memory of a subject, regard-
less of spatial and temporal limitations, might be
supemormally ascertained, and then from the habit of
tolerating this as possible have jumped to the belief
that it is a fact, without any adequate scientific evi-
dence for it. There would have been no temptation
to this procedure if it had been as respectable to be-
lieve in something more intelligible.

The mental condition which makes this tendency
feasible and acceptable is one that follows the modem
sceptical method which does not always distinguish be-
tween rationality and the line of least resistance. We
have come to think that any term which excludes, or
supposedly excludes, the supernormal and the " super-
natural *' is a clear explanation of phenomena. The
fact is, however, that they often explain nothing and
are but terms for our ignorance. But the modem

830

TELEPATHY

propensity for the " natural,'* (which does not mean
what it once did) makes us think that any term that
is associated with the ^^ natural," though quite mysti-
fying in its connotation, is a perfectly satisfactory
explanation of facts. When we want to escape some
perfectly clear explanation we have only to appeal to
yibrations, telepathy, clairvoyance, etc., to assure our-
selves a place among the wise!

Denii eben wo BegrifFe f ehlen

Da stellt ein Wort zur rechten Zeit sich ein.

This habit was once the property of theology, but
it seems now to have afflicted the spirit of science at
times. But whatever it is, psychic researchers should
be the first to correct and disillusion the popular judg-
ment in the matter. We gain nothing by the mere
use of words whose meaning is not clear and which
only conceal our ignorance in the guise of a pretended
explanation.

SSI

CHAPTER XI

THE KATUE£ OF LIFE AFTEE DEATH

A most interesting psychological phenomenon ex-
ists in the expectations which many, perhaps nearly
all, people entertain regarding what psychical research
ought to accomplish if it affords any evidence of a
future life. It is the avowal of incredulity regarding
it on the ground that the restdts do not reveal the con-
ditions of that existence^ what it is like, whether it is
one of happiness or not, what its employments, etc. I
have seen many articles demanding information on
these points before the existence of such a world can
be regarded as credible. I have also talked with
many who see the matter in no other light. Because
we cannot tell them some idyllic story of the trans-
cendental world, they are sceptical of the only facts
that can possibly prove it, and virtually concede their
willingness to believe anything impossible if we will
only encourage them. In spite of the most careful
explanation that such a problem as the conditions of
an existence in another world is not the primary ques-
tion, I find this demand for knowledge regarding them
so widespread and so deep-seated that it may be worth
while to examine it carefully and to show its irrational
character from both a scientific and a moral point ot
view.

In the first place, after all the fraud and illusion
on the one hand, and the phenomena of secondary per-

TH£ KATUE£ OF LIFE AFTEA DEATA

sonality on the other, ordinarily intelligent men ought
to recognize, without the necessity of being told it,
that the first problem is one of personal identity after
death, if any transcendental form of existence is to
be admitted at alL The fundamental trouble is that
most people assume another world as a foregone con-
clusion, and they do this without one iota of evidence.
With this taken for granted, they demand to know
the mode of life in it. Moreover, if there be other
conditions of existence than the material world which
we know, there would still remain the open question
whether any independent intelligence either possibly
or actually existed in them. The religious belief in
the existence of spirits counts for nothing in the prob-
lem unless founded on some kind of adequate evidence.
Scepticism in regard to this fundamental matter must
be satisfied, so that materialism, or the conception of
things for which that doctrine stands, must hold the
field of probabilities until the evidence is sufficient to
indicate the continuance of personal identity after
death. That is the primary problem, whose solution
conditions inquiry into all others. I do not say or
imply that any adequate answer can be given to this
question ; for with that secondary personality and its
deceptive, half -fiendish simulation of spiritistic ideas,
and the possibilities of telepathy, whose limits no one
can define at present, to say nothing of the ease with
which the necessary phenomena can be fraudulently
imitated, the task of proving identity, even in pre-
stunably genuine phenomena, is a gigantic one, and
until it is done scepticism regarding both the existence
and the alleged conations of a transcendental life and

88S

PSYCHICAL ft£8£AECH AND THE BESUBEECTIOK

consciousness must be conceded its rights. Nor do
I say that there is any hope of attaining knowledge
of those conditions, even if it be possible to determine
the fact of survival. This is a separate problem.
But it is certain that if we wish to obtain any position
making it rational to inquire as to the mode of life
in another state of existence, we must in some way
establish the veracity of the spirits which claim to re-
veal themselves to us. These aUeged spirits, however,
must prove their veracity by first proving their iden-
tity, their present and previous existence, and we may
then reckon with their statements relative to their
mode of life. There can be no truce with the man
who does not see the priority of personal identity to
all other questions of psychical research.

I understand the disposition to ask for the condi-
tions of another life, but I cannot grant either its in-
telligence or its morality. Religious considerations,
connected with poor morals and a desire for irrespon-
sibility in conduct, have been the chief influence in
determining this demand. Revelation, fortified by
the poetry of Dante and Milton, to say nothing of the
ineradicable instinct for immortality and happiness,
has fixed men's convictions regarding the presumed
fact of a hereafter. But materialistic scepticism and
the progress of science since the Renaissance under-
mined this belief, at least among the intellectual
classes, and either loosened the springs of hope and
morality, or offered sound moral temperaments the
opportunity to display the virtues of stoics. But
amid all this doubt, reluctantly entertained often even
by the scientific in deference to the sovereignty of rea-

I

S34 I

THE NATUUE OF UITE AFTER DEATH

son, human instinct among the generality of men has
been strong enough to subordinate the demand for
evidence of the fact of a future Kf e to the curiosity
regarding its character.

But I must demur to this desire for knowledge
where it is either impossible or unverifiable when as-
sumed to be possible. If any knowledge of the condi-
tions of existence hereafter be possible at all, it will
only be after the most prolonged investigation, involv-
ing inductive material and constructive scientific the-
ories of a high order and complexity far beyond any-
thing seen in Copemican astronomy, Newtonian grav-
itation, or Darwinian evolution. Personally I have
no interest, scientific or moral, in such a question, con-
vinced as I am of the difficulties in the way of any
intelligible conception or evidence of such conditions.
I must even question the morality of any interest in
it. A man must be very conscious of what his deserts
ought to be, or have little faith in the order of nature,
certainly no great strength of character to withstand
the buffets of fortune, if he raises the query regard-
ing the consequences of his present life, or feels curi-
ous about matters that bear no important relation to
his present environment and duties. The limits of
human knowledge on the one hand, and the tempta-
tions to libertinism on the other, are such that it is
easy for the average man to fall into the position of
either a fool or a knave: a fool if he does not know
and appreciate the rights of scepticism regarding
both the fact and the nature of a transcendental world,
and a knave if he would abolish the influences, even if
they are not of an ideal sort, that make for some kind

886

I

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESU&IUBCTIOK

of virtue in a being who craves liberty more than he
respects the monitions of conscience. Of this again,
if we have time, as I must return to the main issue.
This is the dilemma between the impossibility and the
unverifiability of all knowledge about the mode of
existence beyond the grave, even after we have as-
sumed that the fact of it is proved, or the belief in it
justified.

There are two arguments for this contention, which
may be discussed at some length. They are (1) the
impossibility of making any statements regarding an-
other world intelligible to any ordinary human un-
derstanding limited to sensory experience, and (2)
the mental and other conditions under which commu-
nications from such a world must probably take place.

The most elementary training in psychology, or
even the simple observation of every-day life, ought to
teach a man the necessary difficulties in the way of un-
derstanding any statements about another life. If
those statements describe it in terms resembling our
own world, we must naturally set them down as ab-
surd. It would not be another and transcendental
world if so described. On the other hand, if they
describe it as different, we can neither conceive it nor
prove it in terms of what we generally recognize as in-
telligible. In either case accounts of it are perfectly
worthless. We are limited in our knowledge to the ex-
periences of the senses in so far as the data are con-
cerned by which a world becomes intelligible. Our
language represents the experiences of vision, hear-
ing, touch, and the other senses to a minor degree.
When we name a fact it is a phenomenon of these

8S6

'-n

THE NATURE OF LIFE AFTER DEATH

senses that we name, and these experiences cannot be
made interchangeable with each other. They are
only associable or capable of being connected in time
in the same consciousness. In all the higher and ab-
stract conceptions or theoretical constructions of
science the reference is always to data that are purely
sensory. We picture a horse in the form in which
it is seen, unless we are blind, when either the sound
of its neighing or feelings of touch represent the
meaning 'of the term to us. Laura Bridgeman had,
and Helen Keller has, to identify the meaning of
terms in experiences of touch alone. In general, then,
things are intelligible to us only in terms of sensory
experience, no matter how refined our conceptions
become.

Now unless we admit that the transcendental world
exists in space relations like our own, and that the
theosophical doctrine of the " astral body," which is
described as a f ac-simile of the physical body, repre-
sents the nature of the case, and that there is a spir-
itual universe that is the analogue of the physical,
this world can have no sensory resemblance whatever
to our present conditions, and so cannot be described
in our existing language. But there is no adequate
evidence of any ^^ astral body " doctrine, and certainly
the facts and significance of psychical research will
have to be admitted if the doctrine can have even a
plausible possibility assumed in its favor. But apart
from this supposed analogy between the two worlds,
we can no more expect a statement about it to be in-
telligible than we should expect a person who had no
sense of touch and only the sense of vision to make his

837

PSYCHICAL HESEABCH AND THE KESUSUBCTION

visual experiences clear to one who bad the sense of
touch and not that of sight. We know how difficult
it is to establish communication with the deaf and
dumb, even with all the common points of experience
and interest, and how additionally difficult it is to
make certain experiences intelligible to them after the
communication is established. In fact, it is impos-
sible to give them an idea of an auditory world of
sound, and only the most obscure analogies drawn
from the experience of feeling or emotion can suggest
to them a meaning of any kind in that sense, and tins
meaning is not in terms of sensation, but only in those
of the emotional element common to all the senses,
with a difference, too, for each sense. Witness the
cases of Laura Bridgeman and Helen Keller, to whom
I have already referred. It would naturally be the
same with the description of a world beyond the grave.
The ^^ astral body " doctrine would not alter this
statement. Whatever analogies it offers to our
present world, they are too few and too little like ours
in detail to help the case. Its connecting links are
not even as useful as those between the normal man
and the deaf, dumb, and blind. It would fail at every
point except the one of space relations, and these seem
also to desert it in important aspects. But without
this conception, and in all other respects than its own
analogy, it would be impossible to communicate any-
thing sensible to us about the transcendental world,
and hence, if it exists, whatever we can learn about
it must be learned there, and not here.

A discarnate spirit would have some hope of estab-
lishing its identity. This can be accomplished by re-

888

THE NATUEE OF IJFE AFTEB DEATH

ferring to its past, not its present. Memory is the
condition both of our sense of personal identity and of
the proof of this identity, whether in this or any
other life. If, then, personal identity and the sense
of it survived the event of death, and if any possible
conditions for communication with a terrestrial world
occurred, a discamate spirit could hope to prove that
identity by reference to its past. Its language would
be intelligible not by virtue of its present conditions
or its reference to them, but by virtue of our knowl-
edge of the facts on this side. The statements would
be intelligible because they described terrestrial facts.
But we have no assurance that the same language
would be intelligible when applied to the description
of the ** other side " ; on the contrary, the assurance
is against its possibility. Besides, it is noticeable in
the attempts, reported by various persons, to give
such descriptions that the combination of terms is not
that which is most natural to us in either our sensory
or our rational experience. Secondary personality,
of course, illustrates the same phenomenon, and were
it not that this fact nullifies the assumption that we
are ever really dealing with spirit communications, we
might have in the absurd association of conceptions
purporting to be spiritistic very good illustrations of
the impossibility of making a transcendental world
intelligible to our experience. But we do not need
actual communications to prove this. It is a neces-
sary consequence of our psychological nature, and if
mankind were sufficiently acquainted with philosophy
since Locke and Kant, they would take this impossi-
bility as an axiom. We might, after a hundred years'

8S9

PSYCHICAL KESSAKCH AND THS SESUBRECTION

investigation and accumulation of data, form some
highly abstract ideas of such a world, but they would
not be intelligible to mankind in generaL

When it comes to what is called empirical evidence
for this contention it is not easy, if possible at all, to
supply it with assurance. Empirical evidence is that
of facts representing actual communications, but the
extreme difficulty is that of showing them to be what
they clfium to be. Such as we have and to which we
can appeal at all is found in the Piper case, where we
assume that the demands of personal identity are
probably satisfied. In my own experiments with that
case, however, there is practically nothing illustrat-
ing the matter at hand.

There is another very important reason for not ac-
cepting descriptions of the next life as intelligible.
This is the apparent mental confusion connected with
the communications purporting to come from spirits.
It is evident in the content of the messages, and can
be recognized without believing that they have a spir-
itistic origin.

It is worth remarking that this view of the case is
borne out by the direct assertions of the alleged spirits
themselves. They state that they are dazed or con-
fused while communicating. Assuming such a con-
fused state of mind, it would seem only natural that
the subject should be seriously hampered in the at-
tempt to describe its life. A semiconscious state or a
dazed condition in our own lives is not favorable to
an intelligible account of anything whatever that we
have experienced. If, then, a discamate spirit,
assuming that it exists, becomes mentally confused

340

THE NATURE OF XIFE AFTER DEATH

from the influence of the various circumstances under
which it is necessary to communicate with us, it is ap-
parent that there must be great difficulty in telling us
anything at all, and especiaUy anything intelligible
about a transcendental world and its life.

This brings us to the phenomena of double person-
ality, which are now becoming quite familiar to the
scientist, though he has, as yet, no clear explanation
of them. The facts are definite enough. They are
represented in somnambulism, hypnosis, certain forms
of insanity, and cases of the lost sense of personal
identity. They involve the suspension of normal
consciousness or memory, so that when the normal
consciousness returns there is no recollection of what
has transpired during the secondary state. These
cases often represent all the appearances of two dis-
tinct persons, or parallel streams of consciousness in
the same organism, though their manifestation is
rather consecutive than simultaneous. This is the
reason that the phenomena are called those of double
personality, or even multiplex personality, as there
are cases of numerous distinct streams of mental ac-
tion. Grenerally the normal consciousness has no
memory of the abnormal; and sometimes, if not gen-
erally, the abnormal has either no memory of the nor-
mal at all, or no apparently self-conscious recollection
of it. The normal consciousness is called the pri-
mary, and the abnormal the secondary or tertiary con-
sciousness, as the case may be. Now it is the usual
cleavage between these separate streams of activity
that constitutes the main point of interest for us. It
must be emphasized.

841

PSTCmCAIi BSSSABCH AND THE BESITllllECTION

There are all grades and degrees of distinction be-
tween the primary and secondary streams, from an in-
termixture of their data to their absolute separation,
the latter perhaps being the prevalent. We may
then say that we generally find no conscious appro-
priation of the facts of one personality by another.
That is to say, the primary ccmsciousness does not
know what the secondary state experiences. This is
perhaps all but universal, and in cases of the deeper
secondary states the cleavage seems to be absolute.
On the other hand, the secondary personality, if it
appropriates the experiences of the primary ccmscious-
ness and memory at all (and in some cases it does not
seem to do so), shows no conscious knowledge of
their origin in the primary consciousness, but recalls
them in a fragmentary and automatic way, and indi-
cates considerable cleavage between them. There are
exceptions to this statement, but they do not affect
the general rule. To illustrate this rule, a man un-
der hypnosis may forget his own name and most of
the facts of his normal experience and memory. He
may recall only a few capricious incidents in his past
life, and these wholly non-representative of his char-
acter, and he may combine with his narrative all sorts
of dream-Uke utterances, not indicative of anything
but mental confusion. I recently hypnotized a man
who, in this secondary condition, had completely for-
gotten his name and age, but he recalled two facts
which I was able to prove belonged to his normal state.
But he could remember nothing else except the names
of some of his companions, and these had been asso-
ciated with his dazed condition after an accident in

S42

THE NATUBE OF LIFE AFTEB DEATH

which he lost normal consciousness. Yet he could
talk about things that he said took place a thousand
years ago, and which demonstrably did not take place
then, but which possibly had been partly experienced
in his normal condition. The cleavage between the
two personalities in this case was almost as great as
between two different persons whose individual streams
of consciousness never interpenetrate, even when telep-
athy may be supposed to suggest such interpenetra-
tion.

Now if we suppose that a discamate spirit has to
assume an abnormal and secondary condition like
hypnosis, somnambulism, or subliminal mentality, we
may easily understand two probable effects that might
follow, after what has just been said. They are (1)
confusion and triviality in the messages delivered, and
this wholly independent of the disturbing influence of
conditicMis external to the communicating mind and
supposed to exist between the terrestrial and tran-
scendental worlds, and (2) separation from a clear
knowledge of the normal life and consciousness on
the " other side." The condition necessary for com-
munications of any sort may be that rare state be-
tween total unconsciousness in which no messages can
be given, and that normal spiritual state in which
also no messages may be given, so far as we know.
It may be a state in which the subject is wholly un-
conscious of its normal life beyond and conscious only
of its past, and even of this only in the fragmentary
way of secondary personality. Or it may be a state
in which the subject may be partly conscious of its
normal life beyond and also partly conscious of its

S43

past. In one of the cases we should get northing
whatever of the life on the ** other side," and in the
other too little to be intelligible, even if we were quali-
fied to understand it when correctly reported. It is
also not only possible, but it is most natural psycho-
logically considered, that contact with terrestrial con-
ditions should suggest terrestrial memories. This,
however, would be truer at first than afterwards. But
the existence of a secondary state as a condition of
communicating would follow known analogies if it cut
the communicator off more or less from the tran-
scendental life and its ex]>eriences. So much for the
possibilities.

Have we, however, any evidence that a secondary
or confused state of mind exists in the act of conmiu-
nicating? The answer to this question, of course, de-
I)ends on our first having satisfied the demands of per-
sonal identity. If the difficulties proposed in the
Piper phenomena by a combination of telepathy and
secondary personality have been sufficiently overcome,
we may suppose that the identity of deceased persons
has been satisfactorily established. Assuming this
for the purpose of the present argument, I can reply
to the above question with an affirmative. This evi-
dence of a confused state of mind is often not only
clearly indicated by the messages, but is also as often
connected with peculiar traces of important facts in
the midst of much confusion.

There are two kinds of evidence for this confusion.
They are, first, the internal character of the commu-
nications, and second, the direct statements of the
communicators. The most important illustration of

S44

THE KATUEE OF LIFE AFTEE DEATH

the first type is the condition of things which seems
to necessitate an alternation of communicators. A
communicator can stay but a short time. What the
exact cause of this is we do not know. But it is an in-
Tariable fact, and the character of the communication
at the termination of one of these periods often runs
off into great confusion and dreamy nonsense, like the
drivel of secondary personality. This is very prettily
illustrated in one of my own sittings, where the com-
municator twice exclaimed (so to speak, as the mes-
sage came in automatic writing), ^^ Give me my hat,"
just as he left off communicating. This language
had no connection with the rest of the communica-
tions, but, strange enough, my inquiries brought out
accidentally that the communicator in life was accus-
tomed to use this very expression in situations like
this when suddenly called to go out-of-doors. Here
we apparently have a secondary state suddenly ap-
proaching sjmcope, so to speak, and the psychological
situation elicits automatically, by ordinary associa-
tion, the very phrase which the person was accus-
tomed to utter in partly similar circiunstances in life.

On another occasion this same communicator told
me a story about a fire that had once given him a
fright, and described the case so extravagantly that I
considered it false. This was early in my experi-
ments. Much later he recurred to the same incident
spontaneously, and told it in more sober terms, re-
marking that he was often confused when trying to
tell me facts.

In the attempt to get my step-mother's name rightly
a singular incident took place. Her name had been

846

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE EESITEBACTIOK

given wrongly in all communications regarding her
until I discovered what was probably intended, and
asked for the right one. It had been confused with
that of my aunt Nannie, the right name being
Maggie. It was first given Mannie and then Nannie.
In the effort to give it rightly, after I had asked for
it, the communicator recognized very clearly his dif-
ficulties and confusion, and in the attempt to explain
why it had occurred, said: ^ Help me. Oh, help me
to recall what I so longed to say. My own mother
Nannie. I — Wait. I will go for a moment.'*
Now his own mother's name was not Nannie. It was
Margaret, and the same as that of my step-mother.
But Nannie was the name of his sister, and was the
name with which he had confused that of my step-
mother, as indicated above. A little later the com-
municator explained that in this attempt to straighten
out the confusion he thought of his own mother and
sister at the same time. This confusion is a very
pretty illustration and evidence of the mental dif-
ficulties under which discarnate spirits apparently
labor in their attempts to make themselves intelligible*
It is possible, however, that at times the confusion is
due to the rapidity of thought in comparison with
the greater slowness of the writing. We know that
our thoughts flow more rapidly than we can write
them, and that we have to make an effort to control
their movement in the interest of our writing. I have
no doubt that the discrepancy at times is due to this
or an analogous phenomenon. But quite often it is
a different mental condition altogether.

On one occasion, for instance, in illustration of a
846

THE NATUBE OF UF£ AFTBE B2ATB

disturbed consciousness, my uncle in trying to com-
municate lost completely the sense of personal iden-
tity, and had to cease his attempts, when my father
(I use the spiritistic lingo for clearness) suddenly
appeared with the half -humorous remark, ^^ Yes,
Hyslop, I know who I am, and Annie too," the latter
being the name of my deceased sister.

Take another instance. My father said, after ap-
parently mentioning my step-mother: ^^ And yet I
am thinking of F** [asterisks mean that the rest of
the name could not be deciphered in the original
automatic writing] and my visit to him. I mean your
brother • • • [pause] brother • . . Hear
it? Annie . • • I want to help father to re-
member everything, because I came here first and long
ago.''

Now my sister had died in 1864 and my father in
1896. F is the initial of my brother Frank. My
father never paid a visit to him, but he, together with
my step-mother, made a visit to friends in Pennsyl-
vania tvith my brother Frank in 1878.

In the matter of testimony to this confusion the
illustrations are quite as interesting. Apropos of the
possible rapidity of thought as a disturbing influence,
after mentioning the name of an old favorite horse
in the family, my father suddenly changed to some-
thing else to which there is no clew as to what was
intended, and said: ^^I am thinking about it now,
and everything I ever knew, I believe, because my
mind travels so fast, and I try to get away from the
rest as much as possible. I think of twenty things
all at once." After some further confused references

847

he remarked, ^ Ah, James, do not, my son, think I am
degenerating because I am disturbed in thinking over
my earthly life, but if you will wait for me I will
remember all, everything I used to know." Over and
over again he asserts that he is confused when trying
to communicate, and several times remarks that when
he is not communicating his memory is clear. In fa-
vor of this is the fact that often dear messages are
sent just as Mrs. Piper returns to her normal con-
sciousness, as if this could be done at an opportune
moment just before the conditions disappear that
make it possible, and while the communicator is far
enough from the ordinary conditions of the trance to
maintain a better mental equilibrium.

One more illustration. In allusion to some com-
munications at sittings much earUer, my father said:
^^ I am here, and I am thinking over the things I said
when I was confused. Do you remember of my tell- j
ing you I thought it possible that we might live else- I
where? But to speak was doubtful, very. . . .
Ah, yes, we do speak, although vaguely at times.
Ah, but we ... at best • • • we do.
. • . What is on my mind at present is the condi-
tions which help me to return." This is one little in-
cident among a niunber of others more evidential and
connected with several conversations with my father on
the subject of spirit return, and in which I doubted
the possibility of any such thing as communications.
The reader can see for himself both the confusion and
the evident consciousness of the communicator that he
suffers from it.

There is much interesting testimony in Dr. Hodg-
848

son's sittings bearing on the same question. The
reader can determine for himself by reading Dr.
Hodgson's report the numerous instances of this men-
tal confusion as evidenced by the contents of the mes-
sages. I shall here limit myself to a few testimonial
illustrations of the confusion as given by some of the
communicators. Greorge Pelham (pseudonym), who
died in ISQS, and who succeeded in establishing his
identity sufficiently to quote his statements, remarked
on one occasion to Dr. Hodgson, *^ Do not talk too
fast, because I am in a daze, so to speak." On an-
other occasion he explained to Dr. Hodgson at some
length the condition of mind in which he had to get in
order to communicate.

'^Remember we have, and always shall have our
friends, in the dream life — u e., your life, so to
speak — which will attract us forever and forever, and
so long as we have any friends sleeping in the ma-
terial world; you to us are more as we understand
sleep, you look shut up as one in prison, and in order
for us to get into communication with you, we have
to enter into your sphere, as one like yourself asleep.
This is just why we make mistakes, as you call them,
or get confused and muddled, so to put it, H. You
see I am more awake than asleep, yet I cannot come
just as I am in reality, independently of the medium's
Kght."

The reader must remark the use of the word
** sleep " in this passage, apparently indicating that
the commtmicator was at a loss to describe the condi-
tion of his mind when communicating. We know
that hypnosis in some conditions and respects resem-

S49

PSYCHICAL KESEABCH AKB THE KSSUKllECTIOK

bles sleep, and that sleep is a natural analogy of it,
often perhaps more favorable to the establishment of
a connection with the normal consciousness than hy])-
nosis. But aside from all technical comparison be-
tween the two states, we have in this communication
of George Pelham a recognition of a fact which we
might possibly infer from the contents of many com-
munications. Direct testimony in this instance coin-
cides with the inference that we should most naturally
make from the character of the data.

Another communicator remarked to Dr. Hodgson,
^^ I am a Uttle dull, H., in the head " ; and on another
occasion, while saying something about a cigar-case
for the purpose of proving his identity, suddenly said,
^^ Am I dreaming? " as if aware of ihe confused and
dream-like drift of consciousness in the act of com-
munication.

But one of the most interesting testimonies to the
position here advanced is rather indirect, and at the
same time affords some evidence of the spiritistic the-
ory of the phenomena. What I have already quoted
can hardly claim this character. But a friend of
this George Pelham, deceased and purporting to com-
municate with him through Mrs. Piper, was the sitter.
He is called Mr. Hart in the report. This Mr. Hart
was much puzzled with the confusion in the com-
munications and the evidence of an apparently de-
generating personality, if he had to suppose that
he was dealing with his friend George Pelham. But
not long after his sittings this Mr. Hart himself died
in Paris, and soon turned up to communicate, and
found that he could not succeed so well as his friend

S60

THE NATUIIE OF UFE AFTER PEATH

George Felham had done, and on one occasion indi-
cated some aggrievance because he did not have the
opportimity to communicate so often as he wished.
He said: ^^What in the world is the reason you
never call for me? I am not sleeping. I wish to
help you in identifying myself. I am a good deal
better now." (Dr. Hodgson: "You were confused
at first.'*) ^* Very, but I did not really understand
how confused I was. It was more so — I am more
so when I try to speak to you. I understand now
why Greorge spelled his words to me."

Mr. Hart had to learn on the "other side" the
facts which explained the former confusion of Greorge
Felham, and the incident here crops out as an interest-
ing piece of evidence for personal identity, while
it attests the fact of mental confusion in the act of
communication.

Evidence of this sort could be multiplied almost in-
definitely, but this is sufficient to illustrate my point.
Now if the cleavage between the normal consciousness
of a discamate spirit and its condition necessary for
communicating is like the cleavage between primary
and secondary personality, even though it is not al-
ways so great, we can readily understand both the
dearth of material reflecting the conditions of life in
the transcendental world and the return of the per-
son's consciousness to terrestrial memories, and also
the tendency to trivial recollections, as this latter fea-
ture is characteristic of all disturbed consciousness.

861

CHAPTER XII

F8TCHICAL aEfiEA^CH AND THE REBUBEECTIOH

Serious discussions of the resurrection^ as described
in the New Testament, have almost passed out of no-
tice, even in the field of theology* In my early life
and during my college education j it received attention
in apologetics. But since that time the subject has
almost disappeared from intelligent interest. Lecky's
verdict on Miracles seems to apply to this topic, and
indeed includes it. Nothing can he clearer in the
biblical literature of the past, including the New Tes-
tament, than the important and central place occupied
by the story of the resurrectiDn. The whole fabric of
Christianity rested upon its integrity, whatever intei^
pretation was placed upon it, at least for the rational
theory of the system. This is as true for Roman-
ism as for Protestantism- Both made the Christian
system depend on the validity of the incidents com-
prised in the idea of the resurrection, because it is evi-
dent that the immortahty of the soul was the key-note
of the religion which supplanted Paganism and Ma-
terialism. But gradually science undermined this be-
lief as it has many others, and often religion, to save
itself or some of its social and spiritual ideals, palters
with the word and escapes the duty of stating itself
frankly and honestly on the issue which defines its
own authority.

I do not here either assert or deny the important^
35S

PSYCHICAL RESEABCH AND THE EESUREECTION

of the doctrine which so engrossed the human mind
during the centuries preceding the triumph of phy-
sical science. I am not reviving dead controversies,
but stating the facts and tendencies of history. It
may not be important either to believe or to deny the
story of the resurrection. Many will still think it
important to hold and defend that belief. I do not af-
firm or deny this. All that is important here to
remark is the place which it once had in the deter-
minati<m of human allegiance to religion, at least
the Christian religion. That it was the central is-
sue in the validity of Christianity for long cen-
turies will hardly be questioned, and was ap-
parently made so by those who saw no reason to ac-
cept that rdigion, unless the integrity of the belief
in the resurrection could be sustained. But it is as
clear to all intelligent men to-day that the doctrine
either has no such important place or is evanescent,
if not actually dead. What the logical mind has to
ask in the face of such an admitted fact is, what basis
can the system have which made its ideals and hopes
rest upon a belief which is now no longer accepted?
There can be no doubt that the plainest interpre-
tation of the New Testament is that the resurrection
was intended to mean that of the physical body, at
least in the application of it to Christ. The doc-
trine of St. Piaul for the human race at death was
most probably applied to the ^^ spiritual " and not to
the physical body. But the clearest import of the
New Testament teaching regarding Christ was that
his body arose from the dead after the crucifixion
and was seen as in life by his disciples and others.

868

PSYCHICAIi SESSABCH AND THE RESUILBECTION

The most natural inference from this was that the
resurrection of others, at the day of judgment, would
be that of the body. We know how the ages came to
believe in that view, and it does not matter for us
at this day whether the interpretation was correct or
not. In the definition which the belief recdyed
through the process of discussion afterward we have
the issue which thinking minds had to meet, and this
was that the immortality of the soul was conditioned
on the resurrection of the physical body which it had
inhabited during its natural life. The interpretation
of New Testament doctrine which led to this view
did not assume that there was any source of natural
error in the accounts of Christ's resurrection. Va-
rious influences tended to suppress inquiry into the
nature of biblical authority on such matters, or to
prevent revision of the narratives on which it was
founded. That the reporters were honest in their
statements was either taken for granted or made evi-
dent by the accounts themselves, and that they were
honest will be admitted by all who are familiar with
the records, or the evidence, such as it is. But there
was no disposition to reckon with other difficulties
than the honesty of informants. That there should
be mal-observation, illusion, and unconscious distor-
tion of the facts, and imperfections of record, in the
accounts was not sufficiently appreciated by early
students of the narratives, and hence it was supposed
that we had adequate data for accepting the story of
the resurrection in its literal form.

It was more natural until the 17th century to ac-
cept the possibility of a resurrection than since the

864

PSYCHICAIi BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTIOK

revival of science. We must remember that the be-
lief in its possibility was supported by the theistic in-
terpretation of the world. This view of the cosmos
was a definite denial of the fundamental assumption
of Greek philosophy in its later period. This as-
siunption was the eternity of matter. Early Greek
thought admitted the created nature of the world as
we knew it in sense perception. That is, the sensible
universe was believed to have been formed in some way,
whether by an intelligent agency or the fortuitous
combination of elements. Wherever the elements were
assumed they were supposed to be permanent or eter-
nal. The Epicurean school laid great emphasis upon
this and it was the dominant point of view at the time
of the Christian era. In its opposition to this view,
Christian theology had two alternatives before it.
(1) It could rely upon the argument of design to
show that the order of the sensible cosmos was not
due to chance, but to intelligent arrangement. This
was practically the position of Plato and others. The
eternity and uncreated nature of the elements so ar-
ranged was granted. The function of a deity was
not creation but the orderly arrangement of things,
in this view of the world. (2) It could extend the
idea of power to the creation of the very elements
as well as the sensible order of things. It could hold
that all matter, whether sensible or supersensible, was
created. This latter alternative was the one taken,
and it had the advantage of displacing matter by an-
other principle as the eternal basis of things. The
conception that matter was ephemeral or phenomenal,
whether in its sensible or supersensible form, placed

365

PSYCHICAIi 1USSEASCH AND THE KESUBRECTIOK

spirit in the position of the physical as the permanent
background of the world. Spirit, not matter, be-
came the eternal, and as personality or intelligence
was the essential characteristic of spirit, there was no
difficulty in supposing it capable of recreating the
body at the end of the world as it was assumed to
have created it for this life. Every conception which
would endow the new point of view with probability
was found in the doctrine of the theism, namely, intel-
ligence, power, and morality. That the source of
things was personal made it probable that its end
would be, and immortality followed as a natural se-
quence. The respect and worship which the divine
received was a surety that its character could be
trusted to fulfill hope and aspiration. Deity had
to fulfill the hopes it had inspired, as a condition of
retaining the character and reverence which it had
received. Spiritual life was not any longer at the
mercy of the " elements." It had its own basis and
was not dependent on the contingencies of material
embodiment for its existence or destiny. It had a
supposed subject placed on a basis as well guaranteed
as any other fact.

The consequence was that, during all the centuries
until the revival of science, the theistic point of view
had full sway and it was easy to believe in the possi-
bility of a physical resurrection. The reverence for
the past and the exaltation of authority strengthened
this wider view, and men no more questioned, or could
question, the possibility of a bodily survival or resur-
rection than they could the existence of an absolute,
and it was natural to add the fact of it to the concep-

S66

78TCHICAL AESEARCH AND THE EESXJllSECTION

tions which they took of the order of creation. The
plain interpretation of the Bible had nothing offensive
in it, because it did not contradict the fundamental
theory of the universe. The order of things was not
conceived as an inexorable fate without intelligence,
but as an intelligent and ethical order, and such a view
carried with it every possibility which was found in the
basic doctrine of creation and providence.

But all this was changed by the revival of learning
with its reinstatement of Greek ideals and philosophy.
The direct study of nature supplanted the dependence
on authority and reverence for the past. Each indi-
vidual felt the desire and the power to judge of na-
ture for himself. The meager accounts of the world
that came from priestcraft and superstition did not
satisfy, and the emancipated human intellect sprang
with unbounded enthusiasm into the new field of in-
terest. Almost the first step in its inquiry resulted
in the indestructibility of matter and the conservation
of energy. These apparently undermined the funda-
mental position of theism. Theology had enjoyed
perfect immunity in its claims as long as it could
maintain the ephemeral nature of matter and the per-
manent character of spirit. But the moment that
matter became the permanent substratum of things
again there were two claimants for the throne of
the universe, and just to the extent to which the hu-
man mind feels confidence in the ultimate unity of the
cosmos, as against what is called a dualistic interpre-
tation of it, to that extent will belief accept any the-
ory which makes its claims of unity good. Now the
indestructibility of matter and the conservation of

867

FSYCHICAIi RESEARCH AND THE RESURRECTION

energy were accepted as indubitably proved. Tbis
proof came in the determination of certain indubita-
ble facts, and the speculatiye doctrines of theology
were based upon assumptions which were not experi-
mentally supported, and with experiment as the new
test of truth the way was clear for science as op-
posed to theology. Matter again became the eternal
and spirit the ephemeral concomitant of it, a func-
tion of matter, not its director or creator. The
change in the point of view was absolute and the ul-
timate consequences inevitable. Consciousness, in-
stead of being the function of a soul which was not
dependent on matter for its existence, became the ac-
companiment or accident of material ccnnpounds.
Spirit became the phencmienal thing, or at least had
its claims to support upon an entirely different basis.
The body became the first condition of its existence,
that is, of consciousness and hence any doctrine of the
resurrection had to rely upon the assumption that
the bodily organism would be revived in some way,
if personal life were possible beyond the grave.

Everything in the new philosophy tended to dis-
pute the possibility of survival, and especially the
restoration of the bodily organism. The law of the
world was one of constancy, not the action of a free
will. All that observation showed was a succession
of species, not the permanence of the individual, and
physiology added its evidence to the dependence of
consciousness on the body with no hope that the same
basis for consciousness could be reinstated, in the
absence of a divine agency whose existence seemed
not to be required in the new system. The confidence

868

PSYCHICAL KESEA&CH AKB THE BESUE&ECTIOK

in the constancy of nature, which was a fixed and in-
variable order, and the absence of evidence of a posi-
tive kind that consciousness could survive bodily con-
ditions, conspired to give scepticism its triumph. In-
telligent men thought they could not any longer main-
tain the immortality of the soul on the ground that
the story of the physical resurrection was true. The
original attack on Greek materialism had been made on
this alleged fact, and then, when such phenomena
had not been repeated, philosophy had to fall back
upon a system of theism to support the probability
of its hopes. But when the theistic interpretation of
nature lost its main basis, namely, the phenomenal
character of matter, everything depending on this
f imdamental postulate had its integrity attacked to
the same extent. The belief in the original allega-
tions, besides the loss of its basic assumptions about
matter, had to contend with the demands for ordi-
nary scientific evidence. There was no way to save
the story of the resurrection from the antecedent prob-
abilities of the new theory of matter, and whatever
allegiance it retained in spite of the progress of
physical science, it had to meet the criterion which
science imposes on every conviction, namely, that it
supply present evidence for its contention.

I need not dwell on the logical tendencies of the
mind when it has to accept the doubtfulness of the
facts on which its most important ideals and hopes
have been based. The doctrine of immortality had
founded a new civilization and supported all its ethi-
cal and political ideals, and this immortality had been
based upon the theory of the resurrection, which

359

PSYCHICAL EESEABCH AKB THE BESUERECTION

claimed to find its defence in a philosophical scheme
of the universe, but which, traced to its historical
source, depended wholly upon the integrity of the
story of Christ's bodily resurrection, as that had been
interpreted. But science was not in the habit of mak-
ing a large theory of things dependent on an isolated
event. Such phenomena might be a ground for pause
or investigation, but not for a reconstruction of the
cosmos. But when it came to the assertion of human
immortality on the ground that a single instance of
bodily resurrection had been alleged, especially in the
period that marked the dissolution of Greco-Roman
society when ignorance and superstition were so rife,
it was hardly to be expected that the confidence in
scientific method would be shaken by such a story.
It makes no difference what the facts were. The
point we are making is the habit of the human
mind in the use of its established laws of nature. In
all our daily life we have to regulate belief and ac-
tion by the constancy of nature, even though we may
be obliged ultimately to investigate the ground of this
constancy. But having found that this constancy
shut out the occurrence of resurrection as a law of the
natural order, there was nothing left but scepticism
for isolated events not apparently consistent with
human experience. With this went every conclusion
which had rested on the original belief, and the doc-
trine of a physical resurrection easily became a relic
of the past, a belief which science could not sustain.
There would be no special interest in the mere fact
of Christ's resurrection, whether bodily or otherwise.
Science might ask why such an exceptional event

360

PSYCHICAL E£S£ARCH AND THE &ESIT&EECTION

took place. But it would have no other interest in
it. The chief interest attaching to it was the mean-
ing applied to its occurrence. This was its refuta-
tion of the Epicurean materialism and the implica-
tion of survival after death. Hence it was its relation
to the doctrine of immortality, as we well know, that
gave the alleged fact all its interest and importance.
No one would care a penny whether the incident
was true or false, unless certain other interests were
associated with it, and all apologetics had made the
belief in a future life to hinge upon this single in-
stance of resurrection as against the universal obser-
vation that bodies perished. The consequence was
that immortality, in losing its basis, lost the confidence
which had been reposed in it as an ethico-poUtical be-
lief. It became a secondary matter in the construc-
tion of life and its ideals. The economal and materi-
alistic view supplanted it, and we are to-day living
in the atmosphere of that changed point of view.
The reaction has set in and has not yet reached its
full development. It refuses to construct the universe
upon exceptional phenomena unless they can be
shown to have a law of their own. It doubts the oc-
currence of merely isolated events and seeks to find
their repetition, even though they be more or less
sporadic. Hence unless the doctrine of a future life
can secure credentials in the evidence of present oc-
currences proving it, the belief takes an unsupported
place in the system of human convictions, and must
suffer the destiny of all beliefs which cannot claim the
defence of reason and general experience.

I repeat that it does not matter whether New Tes-
861

PSrcmCAl. EESSA&CH AND THS B£8tTEKBCTION

tament facts and statements have been misinterpreted.
The heritage of human belief was a doctrine of the
bodily resurrection, and we have to face that claim
whatever the original belief may have been, or what-
ever the real facts were. Hence clear thinking re-
quires us to clearly affirm or deny the doctrine of a
physical resurrection as a omdition of a future life.
There can be no doubt that in all intellectual minds
scepticism has taken the place of belief and all efforts
to sustain that belief has the whole weight of science
to contend with and can never do more than sophisti-
cate men who are not familiar with the problems of
thought.

But while we cannot accept the proverbial story of
the resurrection from the point of view of science,
there may be a view of it which will bear scrutiny and
which would have all the meaning that history and
tradition have attached to it. But this will not be ap-
parent until we have seen the antecedent concep-
tions which led up to the story. This new interpreta-
tion of the facts is the result of the light which psy-
chic research throws on the past. It would hardly
have been suspected but for this new point of view,
and it has had sufficient influence on the mind of a man
like Mr. Frederick W. H. Myers to induce him to say
in his work on Human Personality and its Surdvai of
Bodily Deatht perhaps with more confidence than
the circumstances permitted, but yet with some in-
sight into the modified tendencies of the present day
interest in the problem, that within a century all
reasonable men would believe in the resurrection of
Christ. Whatever view the future takes of it, how-

362

I^SrCHICAL &ESEAKCH AKTD THE BESVaRECTION

ever, the philofiophic conceptions of the Greco-Roman
period will have to be taken into account when inter-
preting it, and also the phenomena which recent years
have reinstated in human interest but which the period
between the present and primitive Christianity came
to be disregarded for lack of methods and criteria for
determining their value.

If we wish to understand how the idea of the resur-
rection became distorted we have only to look at the
general variation between philosophic and common
minds in regard to the same events at any time. The
uneducated man to-day represents things in a man-
ner which will not bear investigation in the light of
science, though he actually has an important fact or
truth at the basis of his conceptions. We are all too
familiar with this to make more than a cursory men-
tion of it here and I leave the matter to readers for il-
lustration in their own experience. I wish to lay the
stress of this aspect of the matter before us on the
relation between the current philosophic conceptions
at the time of Christ and the story of the resurrec-
tion. To make this clear we must briefly indicate the
general trend of Greek thought which had deter-
mined the conceptions against which Christianity was
a protest, especially the materialism of the Epicu-
reans.

The Greek had a genius for the enjoyment of na-
ture. So much so that all his pessimism, when it dis-
played itself at all, was the reflection of the transitory
character of life or the limitations under which his
coveted joys had to be obtained. This " nature*'
which attracted him so much, aesthetically and other-

368

P8TCHICAI. BESSABCH AHB THS BESUBESCTION

posed in its character to the material elements out of
which it was composed or which in some way managed
to throw up on the surface of its evolution the evanes-
cent forms of things seen. Consciousness in such a
philosophy would be a mere function of compounds
which had none of it in their elements. Conscious-
ness and personality would be accidents of composi-
tion, phenomenal consequences of interaction like di-
gestion, circulation, and if I may take a physical anal-
^gjf comparable to eddies and whirlpools in the con-
fluence of two streams. ' Hence the school dominated
by this philosophy consistently denied the persistence
of personality after death.

The idealists, while they could not combat the ex-
istence or supposition of elements constituting the
transcendental basis of things, were not satisfied with
the explanation of their composition in fortuitious
combinations. They had a strong leaning for some
kind of directing cause, though they seldom reached
the theistic conception of that agency. Plato and
Aristotle affirmed it with Anaxagoras and Socrates,
but they did not escape the sense of transiency in
things, and even Plato's immortality of the soul was
nonpersonal, unless we accept occasional temptations
on his part to recognize facts which ran athwart the
main premises and conclusions of his philosophy.
The fundamental feature of his philosophy obliged
him to conceive his immortality in the same terms as
the modem doctrine of the conservation of energy
and conceive the indestructibility of matter as the per-
manence of motion and substance. He endeavored
wholly to transcend sense perception in his treatment

S66

PSYCHICAL BSSEAECH AND THE BS8USEECTION

of ^^ ideas," but the permanent with him was a re-
currence of the same elements or properties in suc-
cessive types of reality, not the persistence of iden-
tity of the same individual. Similarity, which re-
flected a permanent reality behind it, was the basis of
his idea of the eternal, not the persistence of the
same thing. Hence he would have agreed, at least in
his main philosophy, with the materialists that the
personality which we know in the present form of our
existence was perishable. It was only in moments of
sympathy with abnormal phenomena that he came to
consider the possibilities of survival after death, but
these moods never worked their way into metaphysi-
cal clearness or to a point where they would traverse
his main philosophy. It was his ethical idealism that
kept him in the eyes of the great and sympathetic
minds of subsequent ages, and only his language on
immortality, associated with the general instincts of
the human race, availed to attach Christian philos-
ophy to him and his metaphysics. Besides Flaton-
ism developed into a form which excited no special
interest in that age. Neo-Flatonism was either unin-
telligible or so in conflict with the prevailing ten-
dencies of the age, as well as with the pleasure lov-
ing instincts of the Greeks and the latter day Ro-
mans, that it offered no attractive rallying point for
the ethical minds of the time. It was too ascetic and
too far removed in its conceptions from the view of
nature which the scientific spirit of the day reflected.
Hence in that declining period the materialist easily
won the credence and interest of speculative tempera-
ments.

867

But tlieie was a feature of EpkaFeaniBm and ma-
terialktie ideas that was tte startiiig point of their
nndnng. The main theory of the school, as I have
said, was that aD things were oomposed of atoms whidi
combined in a manner to give rise to Tarioas phenom-
enal manifestations that disappeared with the disso-
lution of the compoonds. When it came to their inter-
pretation of conscioasness they most naturally would
make it an acddent of the organism. But in am-
tnidiction with this view they did nothing of the kind.
It remained for the later materialinn to devdop itself
into a more consistent view. The Epicmcans did not
whdiy escape the natural assumption of Greek
thought that consciousness was so different f rcmi other
functional phenomena that it required a subject of its
own* Hence for various reasons they admitted the
existence of a soul concomitant with the physical or-
ganism and inhabiting it, but denied its immortality.
The Epicureans held that the soiil was an organism
of very fine matter. This fine matter was scxnetimes
called " ether " by them. It was not the ether of
modem science, but a more refined form of matter
than the senses could ;)erceive. But instead of main-
taining that this etherial soul survived death, which
they might well have done from their assumption
of the permanence of substance, they affirmed its
perishable nature. The point of consistency in this
denial of its persistence was in the assumption of its
complex character. The Greeks believed the essen-
tially perishable nature of all compotmds and assum-
ing the compound nature of the soul they would log-
ically make it phenomenal, and so they did. They

968

PSYCHICAL &ESEAECH AND THE EE8UEBECTION

had no evidence of this outcome but their a priori
theory of the very nature of things as complex. All
that they had evidence for was the transient character
of things sensible. As these were supposedly complex
they made complexity convertible with transiency,
when their evidence did not take them beyond sensi-
ble things for this phenomenal conception. They had
asserted the pennanence of transcendental elements,
and there was no reason but an a priori one why they
should make transcendental organisms equally perish-
able. They should have realized that they required
evidence at this point. The law of inertia supports
the permanence of everything, and it is but a form
of the conservation of energy. It is not intrinsically
in the nature of complex things that they shall dis-
solve any more than it is in the nature of an ele-
ment or an atom that it should perish. It is a ques-
tion of fact pure and simple. All that the Epicurean
had de6nite evidence for was the empirical fact that
complex things of sense perished, not that they neces-
sarily perished. And with this evidence went the
fact that there was a cause for this dissolution or tran-
sient appearance. But for the action of that cause
even compound things would not perish. Hence the
materialist should have observed that, if he were go-
ing to assert the phenomenal nature of the soul, it was
his duty to supply the same kind of evidence for this
that he had for that of the body. But he resorted
to a priori assumptions instead of scientific evidence.
He distinguished between the sensible and the super-
sensible world by making one transient and the other
permanent, and then forgot the distinction on which

S69

ktrkMHi tiim

wHh Um, amd vooU hane daw aa hit f ar tfae « j
owMwptiwi aiwut tibe con^et. ItMyliealiMltliift
thtj »ni^VaybMtt,\m*.± mm*. a-wBOBtAj. Bk

Beikkiy it wm a P«n^ « priori aannptioD that
the ioal wtf an orjgMiiim^ a eompka, eompoand of
Hherial elancntv* It mig^ as vdl hare been a
monadf fo far a« the Epkurcans knew. Tliey had no
eridtnee that it was a comidex organum. Hence if it
irere a monadf its imperishable natme was to be placed
on the same basis bm that of the atoms. The inde-
structibility of the atoms was an assomption without
any ipecial proofs a view which all will admit in this
day fince the discussion of the atomic theory and the
new doctrine of ions and electrons. But it was not
necesiary for the believer in immortality to challenge
the eternity of the atoms or the assumption which
afflrmed it^ as he could simply demand evidence for
the complexity of the soul and in lieu of finding it as-
sume with equal propriety its simplicity and affirm
its persistence on the same basis as that of the ele
ments.

On the philosophic side^ Christianity would have
had the alternatives of holding that the soul was sim-
ple and indestructible or that its mere complexity did
not insure its destruction. Tertullian seized upon its
Mimplicity and its material nature as an od Aomtn^iR
urgument which the materialist could not resist But

870

PgTCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESURBECTION

he lacked evidence for the simpKcity of the soul and
other philosophic views had become so infected with
the opposition between matter and spirit that they
could not accept the material nature of the soul, even
if it afforded a vantage ground in the argument.
But we anticipate the real attack of Christianity on
materialism by referring to Tertullian, as he came
long after that reUgion had gained its position. The
real attack on materialism was not philosophical, but
an appeal to a fact, or an alleged fact. This was
the story of the resurrection.

MateriaUsm had saturated thought with the belief
that even if the soul existed it did not survive the
grave. Philosophy had shown itself incapable of
solving the riddle, and left to the gatherer of evidence
the duty or the opportunity to assert what material-
ism denied. It was no philosophic time when the re-
vival of the belief in immortality arose. There was
no disposition to debate the issue on assumptions which
could well demand evidence for their making on both
sides of the the controversy. Hence instead of rely-
ing on the argument that the doctrine of inertia fav-
ored the continuity of the soul, the new movement fell
back on an alleged fact to support its contention
against materiaUsm. It did not challenge the mate-
rialist for evidence that complex organisms perish,
but undertook directly the support of its own con-
tention that the soul did rise from the grave.

Ancient thought would naturally enough suppose
that the fine material organism, which existed as the
soul in association with the body would fare the same
destiny. The very assumption that it was matter, and

871

T9TCBMCAI, XXKBABCH

eomgifex nmtter at Aak^ would iodme A id that diree-
tioo^ ninfe the Tariooi tnMJiHomi of popular idigion
and iU tiMOiy of Hado left Uk aoid to f oBoPir the
eoone of tiie body. But as GredL tlioiig^ had al-
ways taken tlie ww of giavaj idiidi hdd that IigU
sufastanoes rose and heary ones f dl, it was easy to oon-
stmct a theofy of a r es ur rection before any allied
facts occurred to justify its a ss e iti on, and in fact
such a theory existed before it was alleged of CSirist
The controveny between the Pharisefs and Saddncees
is absolute proof of this. It may be doubtful if the
mere philosophic theory had suggested any sudi Tiew,
but when suggested, philosophy mi^t well harbor it
as consistent with its general conceptions. It is far
more probable that the belief in apparitions had sug-
gested the mode of attack on materialism, as even the
Epicureans admitted the existence of such phenomena,
and Epicureans admitted the existence of the gods
on the evidence of dreams. It is hardly possible that
the dispute between the two dominant sects of Pales-
tine grew out of a philosophic controversy based on a
thorough acquaintance with Greek thought. It is
more probable that the intellectual atmosphere was
saturated with its general ideas and certain actual ex-
periences which sought cover in sectarian theories, and
the belief in apparitions in all ages would very natur-
ally suggest that conception of things which the story
of the resurrection illustrates, and especially in the
crisis of ancient materialism, surrounded as it was by
the assumptions which I have explained. Hence we
may suppose that Christianity arose to the challenge
for evidence of survival which the belief in apparitions

378

PSYCHICAIi BESEAECH AND THE BESURBECTION

easily suggested. It was not a philosophy, but an
appeal to alleged facts, which, accepting their appar-
ent character, directly disproved the a priori assertion
of the Epicurean.

The mind of the time was prepared for the recog-
nition of phenomena which would suggest just what
the anti-materialist wanted in his support. We have
only to suppose that an apparition of Christ appeared
to his disciples after his death and we should have all
the conditions which would supply a reply to the
claims of materialism. The appearance of such a per-
sonality would have an unusual influence, more than
any average person, and it would suggest a triumph-
ant answer to scepticism, as we know the story ac-
tually took that character. It would constitute an ex-
ception to the assertions that survival was impossible.
All that the advocate would have to say was that it
was not a question of what was possible or impossible,
but of what the facts were, attested as they apparently
were in this case by collective testimony. Materialism
asserted that a resurrection, the survival of the ethe-
rial organism, the Pauline spiritual body, or the as-
tral of the theosophist, was impossible. The Chris-
tian believer simply pointed to a case of it in fact
and asked the Epicurean to explain it on any other
than the most natural hypothesis. The repetition of
such phenomena would add strength to the influence
of the first one and awakened a new interest which
materialism would not be able to withstand.

I am not claiming that there was an actual appari-
tion of Christ at the time. I am only saying that,
in the sceptical situation about the resurrection of

873

P8TCHICAI. KES1&ABCH AND THB KESUKRECTIOK

the physical body, we can most easily explain the con-
sensus of testimony in the matter by supposing that
an apparition occurred, whatever source we gave to
the apparition. We may treat it as an hallucination^
if we prefer, as Renan actually did, and as physiol-
ogists and psychiatrists now do, where they do not
consider it a myth. I am not concerned at present in
the question whether the apparition was real or hallu-
cinatory. The experience of the human race makes
the phenomenon, whatever its cause, a frequent and
familiar one, and we need not enter into criticism of
the story when estimating its effect on belief, philo-
sophical and otherwise. It is sufficient to believe a
thing to make it a potent factor in intellectual con-
structions, and there can hardly be a doubt that the
early Christians believed in the occurrence of some
appearance, subjective and hallucinatory or real, at
the time of the crucifixion, and that belief was in an
alleged fact which, if real, clearly contradicted the
conceptions of the materialist.

That the phenomena which have characterized the
field of psychic research are not new and that they
were associated with the allegations of the resurrection
of Christ are apparent in other statements of the
New Testament. There is the story of the apparition
of Moses and Elias on the mount. We may not
credit such a story as a fact. But it makes no differ-
ence. The record of it shows that people believed in
such things, at least to some extent. It may have
been, like many other similar incidents, a mere myth,
but its assertion indicates what the mind was accredit-
ing in the field of the apparently superphysicaL

874

PSYCHICAL E£S£AaCH AND THE BESURBECTION

Then again we have the instance of the disciples aware
of Christ's presence with them on the way to Em-
naaus. He was not distinctly recognized at first, but
seemed like one of those instances with which psychic
researchers are now so familiar, namely, the phenom-
ena in which some people seem to be conscious of an
independent presence, though nothing sensible is rec-
ognized. These too may be hallucinations, but they
are experiences, and it would be natural for unscien-
tific times to accept them at their face value and to
base a philosophy or a religion upon them.

St. Paul's vision on the way to Damascus, the
** speaking with tongues " on the day of Pentecost,
the command to " try the spirits and see whether they
were of God or not," were all phenomena with which
we are perfectly familiar to-day, whether of the na-
ture of hallucinations or indicative of transcendental
realities. It would only be natural to expect an ap-
parition of Christ on any theory of the facts, so far
as any such event can be expected at all, and certainly
its occurrence to people of that time would offer the
best of opportunities to challenge materialism. The
phenomenon would, if real, be a clear disproof of the
materialist claim that the etherial organism perished
with the body. That idea once accepted would af-
ford a rallying point for all the forces which mate-
rialism had kept in submission. Such it was at that
time for any one who knows history. The despair
of those who had felt the weight of doubt was at once
turned into joy and a new enthusiasm given to the
ethical and religious consciousness.

The whole movement of Neo-Platonism was deeply
376

PSYCHICAL m£8£ABCH AND THfi ftSSUmASCTlOH

associated with these phenomena. He orthodox his-
torian of philosophy knows well the stories of the
trances of Plotinus, and all are familiar with the
magic and theurgy connected with that philosophy,
and it seems to have escaped the repute attaching to
similar associations in modem times. We have long
since separated philosophic pursuits from dabbling
in magic and prestidigitation, and these may not have
infected Neo-Platonism in its early stages. But
whether they did or not, the work of Plotinus and
his followers is evidence of an attempt to solve the
riddle of the sphinx by other than introspective meth-
ods in spite of an exaggerated use of them. Simon
Magus, of the New Testament, is probably a type
of the frauds which arose during the decline of the
oracles. Bishop Hippolytos, in his Refutatio Hera-
smnif shows what the situation was in some minds,
whether he was correct in his judgment or not. He
seems to have attacked the oracles as unqualifiedly
fraudulent. Plutarch, who was a young man in 66
A. D., wrote on the cessation of the oracles in his time
in a spirit which indicates familiarity with genuine
phenomena of an interesting type, the inexplicable to
him and others. All these show what the materialistic
spirit has challenged and produced by way of refuta-
tion, and this regardless of the merits of the case.
Hence the stories in the New Testament but reflect
the conceptions of the time, namely, phenomena less
exceptional than popular belief in miracles would im-

piy-

With this intellectual atmosphere and the immemo-
876

P6t^CHXCAL &ESEA&CH AND THE ft£SUEE£CTIOK

rial knowledge of apparitions, it would be natural at
any appearance of such a phenomenon in the person
of a teacher like Jesus, that the event would be seized
upon as a triumphant refutation of materialism.
Whether he did so appear or not is another question.
The consensus of testimony would be on that side, even
though we chose to explain the phenomenon as an hal-
lucination. Its influence on men would not depend,
at that time, upon its reality in fact, but upon the
belief in that reality, and there was no antecedent
presumption against such things, as three hundred
years of physical science has predisposed us. It mat-
ters not what theory we adopt of the event character-
ized as the resurrection, its influence as a belief in a
fact was sufficient to revolutionize philosophic thought.
It could do this all the more effectively from the fact
that men's conception of matter and spirit were not
then as clearly distinguished as to-day. The monis-
tic temper of philosophic thought allowed the distinc-
tion between grosser matter and spirit to be lightly
drawn, the latter being only a finer type of the for-
mer. The bodily resurrection might be taken to refer
to the " spiritual " body, which was matter of one
kind, and when the antithesis between matter and
spirit became more clearly defined the very phrase
" bodily " resurrection would naturally imply the
grosser body. This development might easily take
place among the common people who had no philoso-
phic ideas of a monistic sort and who more naturally
distinguished between " matter " and *' spirit," while
they remained by the sensory interpretation of the

877

iU ihm f iMfJ iim
ftMy 4AuU U

But tfae nad
tiemf wt&m to

vntwtwt m A
of Uitofy wcie nol
Ataejf Mid MM

odMf it letl no «ppail to fads tlMt
m mdi A fmibkiiL Sdcnoe if an inlervogatian of tlie
preient for the f acb that enaUe oa to read tlie past
and the f tttare* If I may so express it, adenoe is
an examination of a cross section of evolution and
expects to find there the evidence of what has occurred
and ot what win occur, the indicia of history and
hope. As long as it discredited psychic phenomena
it had no alternative to its materialistic interpretation.
It was natural and legitimate as method that it
should do S0| and hence the stories of apparitions re-
ceived no attention but to be discarded as coincidences
and hallucinations. Whether they can always be so
considered is for each individual to determine on the
evidence.

But one thing the Society for Psychical Research
has proved beyond cavil is the fact that apparitions
do occur. We need not care what explanation offers
itself. They are facte of human experience, whether
products of a disordered brain or of external agencies
of a human type surviving death. In the present
stage of inquiry it is not necessary to insist which.

878

PSYCHICAL ft£S£A]lCH AND THE E£SUE&£CTIOK

They are the continuation of ancient experience which
even Tylor in his Primitive CuLtwre admits betokens
important facts in the lives of savages. Whether
they are more than hallucinations will depend wholly
upon their relation to the events they seem to attest
and the subject's ignorance of those events. When
an apparition of a given person is seen — whether
living or dead makes no difference to our problem
at present — by some one and the fact coincides with
an important event at a distance and not known to
the percipient, and when they occur in sufficient num-
bers and variety to eliminate chance from their in-
terpretation, the phenomena offer science an important
datum for speculation. It is not the mere fact of an
identified apparition that has value, as every man
does know or ought to know, but the relation of it
to the events indicated and coinciding with it as well
as the really or apparently supernormal information
conveyed by it, that invites attention, and any effort
to press hidlucination, which excludes external stimuli
from the case, into service to discredit the phenome-
non as insignificant, is an evasion of the issue. The
man who discards the facts as hallucinations does well
when he is estimating a single case against all real or
supposed human experience on the negative side.
But the multiplication of the phenomena puts them
on the same footing with meteors and comets, and all
other sporadic or residual facts. Their regular oc-
currence after a definite type suggests some other law
than hallucination, extensive as that is. The collec-
tion of a census of such events would satisfy science
of the need of investigation at least, and that indefi-

379

nitely. Ridicule after that would only indicate the
cries of a dying philosophy.

Very early in its history the English Society for
Psychical Research set about this very task. It
planned the collection of a ^^ Census of Hallucina-
tions," as they were called, though distinguishing be-
tween subjectioe and xmidicdl hallucinations. The
former type meant that they were products of ab-
normal and intra-organic stimuli, that is, various dis-
turbances within the organism. The latter meant
that certain types of experience representing an ap-
parition, whatever its form, real or symbolic, were I
related, perhaps causally to certain events independent
of the organism in which the hallucination or appari- I
tion occurred. This last type had to be proved, but j
the coincidnce between certain alleged apparitions |
and the events which they seemed to indicate sug- |
gested such a definition upon which to work for evi- j
dence. All apparitions which occurred in connection !
with knowledge of the events to which they were re- '
lated had to be regarded as subjective, that is, mere
productions of the brain. Abnormal psychology had
been familiar enough with such phenomena to dis-
credit any claims for the reality of such things unless
they could present the credentials of supernormal phe-
nomena. The criterion set up for the determination
of this supernormal nature was that the apparition
should satisfy several evidential demands. (1) They
must coincide with some event at a distance, such as
a death or critical illness. (2) The events which they
seemed to indicate must not be known to the percip-
ient, so that the information really or apparently con-

380

i»slrc£ttCAl ii£:si:A]tcfi akD ta± IttstT&EficTiOir

yeyed should at least seem to be supernormal. (3)
Some record of the experience should be made before
any knowledge of the event coinciding had been ob-
tained. This record may be either a note made at the
time or a statement of the facts made to some friend
previous to other information. (4) Anxiety and ex-
pectation regarding the person concerned must be ab-
sent. In the absence of these standards of evidence,
such others as would guarantee the phenomena against
the objections of ordinary hallucination had to be
presented before any instance could be received as sug-
gesting an external source for its occurrence.

The object of this inquiry was to test the sceptic's
hypothesis of chance coincidence in the occurrence of
apparitions related to the events which they seemed to
identity. Instances were collected over a definite ter-
ritory representing apparitions of dying and deceased
persons. The time limit was arbitrarily fixed at
twelve hours after the moment supposed to mark
physiological death. Within the territory assigned
they obtained 860 cases which seemed worthy of con-
sideration. But 270 of these were rejected from a
scientific account because they failed to satisfy the
rigid criteria which had been considered necessary to
guarantee their integrity against the hypothesis of
subjective hallucination. Then 28 more were elim-
inated for various other reasons. This left 52 which
satisfied the most severe tests of scientific method as to
the probabilities of their truth. By mathematical
methods which it is not necessary to explain here,
these 52 cases were compared with the law of chance
and the conclusion adopted that they were not due to

881

PSYCHICAL &B8BAECH AKB THE BESUEEECTION

chance coincidence. This conclusion was emphasized
by italics and it was stated that the committee re-
garded it as a proved fact.

It is clear that, if 52 cases were beyond chance pro-
duction, 350 cases were much more this. No estimate
was made for this latter number, and many more have
been collected since. Dr. Hodgson told me before his
death that he thought he had a thousand instances on
record in his files, and though all of them may not
have been equally evidential or assured by severe
standards, the fact that veridical apparitions have
been established would make it probable that a very
large proportion of coincidental phenomena of the
kind had the same character.

The scientific acceptability of such facts to-day,
when subjected to the scrutiny of scepticism, woidd
make it entirely credible that Christ may have ap-
peared in a similar way to his disciples, and explain a
perfectly natural source for the story of the resiuxec-
tion, a source too that would carry with it more or less
guarantee for the conclusion which the early Chris-
tians had based upon the one incident. If the exam-
ination of the present finds the phenomena credible as
real and significant, there is no difficulty in accepting
the credibility of it in the past, which we know to be
full of assertions of it. Of course, each instance of
alleged appearance must be submitted to the evidential
test and credited or rejected accordingly. But when
the fact of apparitions has been once established scien-
tifically the ancient allegations of them are less in-
credible than they would otherwise be. This is a tru-
ism. But it is mentioned in order to connect the ac-

38S

PSYCHICAL EESEABCH AND THE BESURRECTION

ceptabiKty of the present with the possibility of the
past and to make the past a part of the present in
the interpretation of its nature and tendencies. This
does not prove the truth of the story of the resurrec-
tion of Christ, but it does remove its supposed con-
tradiction with the law of nature, except in so far as
history and tradition have interpreted it as a physi-
cal resurrection. This must remain incredible as long
as such phenomena are not now frequent and so long
as human experience does not reproduce it as a law
of nature. But the existence of veridical apparitions
would substantiate all that is useful in the story of
the resurrection and make human experience in all
ages akin. The same opposition to the materialistic
view of things comes from these experiences as in an-
tiquity. Thinkers may entertain what view they
please of them. They certainly offer to many minds
an escape from the dogmatism of doubt. It may
take long to assure ourselves generally of the truth
involved, but whether it does or not, it is certain that
we find a new point of view for interpreting the New
Testament. That this is coming is apparent in the
asserted views of leading men like Newman Smyth and
others. It will probably not be through public recog-
nition of psychic research, but by covert admission of
its conclusions and the method of reinterpreting the
record of antiquity under the aegis of authority. But
it matters not to science how men come to its accep-
tance, so that they do come, and if we make the res-
urrection a law of nature, sporadic it is true, we have
done all that is necessary to protect the ethical and re-
ligious view of life.

S88

PSrCHICAI. mXMEAMCSL AMD THB KESUKmXCTIDH

It » in^Kiitaiity howerer, to remiiid tlie leader that
this interpretation and dpfence of the story of the
resurrection is not intended as a protection to any of
the dogmas and authcHrity which have so long kept
men in bondage. It is not so important to say that
the past was right in its ooncepti<»is as it is to es-
tablish its affinity with the present. Hence I am not
vindicating a single one of the dogmas associated with
a bigoted history. It is not the idea of a resurrec-
tion, whether jAysical or otherwise, that is impcnrtant.
There is nothing gained by estaUishing a truth that
merely enables a certain uncritical and intolerant
class of people to say : ^ I told you so." It might
be better to have a bitter scepticism in its place for
a while. But as a reconciliation between science and
religion, it is important to discover the significance of
such phenomena for the beliefs of the one and the
methods of the other. There is no use to revive old
controversies or to vindicate old and false beliefs about
the resurrection. No value of any sort attaches to a
belief in it, except such as would be implied in the re-
ality of similar phenomena now as controverting cer-
tain philosophic theories. We may believe in a res-
urrection as much as we please to satisfy some dogma
or prejudice and be no wiser for the fact. But if
there was any concealed truth in the real facts which
tradition has covered up in the stories of the New
Testament, it will be important as a scientific matter
to have uncovered it, if only for the interpretation of
history which it may afi^ord. But there is nothing
in the vindication of any form of the incident except
the light which it may shed on the question of per-

884

PSTCHICAL RESEA&CH AND THE BESUBBECTIOK

sonality and its survival of death. Whatever im-
portance men may attach to a belief in a future life
attaches to the phenomena which I have discussed here,
whether they are of present or past occurrence, and
that is all that I have had in mind when discussing the
historical view of the resurrection and in the attempted
reconciliation of science and religion through this
mode of approach.

There is nothing clearer to intelligent observers than
the fact that the older orthodox conceptions are fast
dissolving and are boimd to be supplanted by some
others in the near future. Unless a point of view
for the ethical consciousness can be obtained we shall
have nothing in the common mind to which to anchor
except the instincts which are themselves perfectly
modifiable and submissive to environment. If this
be agnostic and irreligious, the morality which has
been the product of association with Christian ideas
of life will go the way of all social customs which
have no vindication in the nature of things. What
the immortality of the soul did for the past was that
it protected certain views of the present life and their
importance, no matter whether these views should have
had their own intrinsic value apart from artificial de-
fence. When this is the fact, we know perfectly well
that the system will perish with the doctrine and con-
ceptions which gave it vitality and cohesion. That
at least is the value which attaches to the proof of a
future life for man. Greco-Roman history shows
this. As soon as ancient religions lost their vitality
as aids to political life the morality which they fos-
tered disintegrated, and they lost their vitality because

985

7STCHICAI* mXMKAMCH, AVB THK MSSUBBBCnOV

they could not sartaiii their tmtti under the hf^ of
inquiry. Fhilosc^hy dasaolved their grounds and
left them no heritage of truth which would enable
them to suiriYe the corronre influence of soeptidnn.
It win be the same with Chrifltianity unless it can ad-
just itself to the scientific point of view and unkss
science can supply data for some form of idealism.

In defending the great importance attaching to the
belief in a future life I am going first to make a con-
cession to certain types of mind. There are many
who think that the belief has been actually harmful to
progress. There are many others who think it a matttf
of indifference to mankind and wholly unnecessary to
ethics or religion. Scnne maintain that ethical ideals
are sufficiently evident of themselves and that no harm
can come to them by complete ignorance or even by
denial of a life beyond the grave. There is a still
larger class that is indifferent intellectually and mor-
ally to the whole question and the implications said to
be based upon it. They are quite content with the
present existence and the risks and fortunes which ac-
company it. It seems that only a few are interested
in the protection of the belief for impersonal reasons,
the majority being emotionally and perhaps often
selfishly concerned in it.

I must, however, remind the sceptic who think ethics
safe without such belief and that moral instincts can
be trusted to take care of themselves, that he neglects
to reckon with the perfectly established fact that mo-
rality is no more stable than the intellectual beliefs
upon which it is founded. History has demonstrated
this beyond a doubt. The only question to be de-

S86

PSYCHICAL B£S£ABCH AND THE RESURRECTION

termined is whether the immortality of the soul has
ever influenced any ethical system. Those who think
ethics safe without it forget that the very ideals which
they accept are the product of the system which ob-
tained its strength from this very belief. It is clear
to all intelligent people that the ancient morality dis-
appeared with the prevalence of materialism. Its
dissolution began with the disintegrating influence of
the Sophists and ended in the debaucheries of the
Roman Empire. It was a matter of slow growth, and
would have been more rapid but for the preservation
among comm(»i people of beliefs long after the gov-
erning classes gave them up. This is apparent in
the epitaphs of ancient tombs. And it was slow then
because the solidarity of communities was not such as
it is now. Religious tolerance was more necessary
then to protect the state than now, and as the politi-
cal classes were the materialists their protection lay
in tolerating religion while they collected the revenues.
But as soon as Paganism lost its hold on the allegiance
of the common people the morality which it fostered
decUned rapidly enough. Its place was taken by the
reconstructive ideas of Christianity. We may say
and think what we please about these ideas, they
moulded a new civilization. There were many things
in the system besides the belief in a future life which
gave it power, but this belief was the primary factor
which protected the influence of what had been asso-
ciated with it. For instance the doctrine of limited
probation and of eternal punishment. Neither of
these could have maintained itself for a moment with-
out the belief in a future life. But they were potent

887

TBTCBMCAI^ mCSEABCH AX9 THE, mmgCMM EM^MMBM

iBtdbofB in dctmmiiiiig the power of tbc
ower the maMcs. Hie monlity wUdi «e rcgud as
mu^simng the prefent family and piditieBl life came
from tin* grovrtli and will diaac^e with tbe beliefs tiiat
detenmoed iL This moraliiy is slower to perish tliaii
the iotellectaal beliefs aifectaig it, becaose men ad-
just themsehres to environment in their adimis when
they do not in their convictions. But in time the en-
vironment is changed and with it the protective agency
for its old morality.

It is true enough that many persons do not need
the belief for its influence on certain specific maxims
ot conduct, because a variety of forces combine to
preserve the integrity of scmie principles. But in the
long run tbe most powerful agents in securing the
cohesiveness of the best principles of conduct are those
which give the greatest tenacity to maxims affected
by time. Environment, example, tradition, personal
affection, heredity, political and social restraints, and
a thousand interests will avail to preserve for a while
certain habits of thought and action without a belief
in a future life. But they do not suffice to create an
ethical system which will make the individual sacrifice
the present to the future, which is always necessary
for the highest ideals, at least in some measure of
their realization. The sceptic who speaks so coi^-
dently of our present moral agencies forgets their
parentage and that they are living on the momentum
of eighteen centuries of the tremendous religious and
political power which did so much to displace Pagan-
ism. That momentum will spend itself unless rein-
forced from time to time with the primary motives

388

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

which gave it impulse. Our ethics to-day are the o£P-
spring of ideals which got their whole impetus and
animation from the enthusiasm of immortality. The
New Testament records the exultant triumph of the
poor in the consciousness of immortality as against
the teaching of materialism. They felt both political
and moral oppression, liut the hope of a future life
dispelled the burdens of political tyranny and enlisted
nature on their side when this life came to an end.
They may have been and may be entitled to better
treatment in the present, but the inequalities of nature
and society are less when nature shows itself in con-
tinued opportunities for life and work, as it does in
the doctrine of a future existence for the soul. It
was hardly an accident that associated hmnan broth-
erhood with the belief. Unfortunately the social sys-
tem of the early period did not favor either voluntary
or compulsory adjustment to this ideal, and it van-
ished, to be practically forgotten by the church alto-
gether, though its teaching preserved the maxims
which made it imperative. In supporting and pre-
serving the value of the individual against the impe-
rialism of politics and the materialism of philosophy
it had, or seemed to have, a sufficient task. Now that
the church makes no effort to realize human brother-
hood, this ideal of its early history survives in the
doctrine of socialism, while the efforts to realize what
human brotherhood might effect are inspired by eco-
n(»mc instead of ethical methods, by materialistic in-
stead of religious conceptions. And religion itself
is fast losing its hold on the first and the last belief
which gave it potency and enthusiasm. The revival

889

PSYCHICAL SEI^LOICH AND THE JiESURSBCTieN

of both its social and ethical functions will fall to
science, unless it quickly assumes the offensive in the
fundamental ideas which gave it birth.

I quite agree that it is not the mare belief in a
future existence that will regenerate either the indi-
vidual or society. This is adequately proved by the
lives of savages, and by other forms of social organi-
zation. It is well enou^ illustrated in the history
of modem spiritualism. But I am not contending
that its value lies merely in its being believed. Nor
do I expect the belief alone to animate every one
at once with the highest ideals of life. I am not de-
fending its importance on the assumption that men
and women have only to be convinced of it to become
angelic. I know too well that it requires much more
to bring about such a change in man individually and
socially. But it nevertheless is the most important
factor in the protection of such virtues as can effect
this result in the long run. The morality of the pres-
ent moment often makes itself felt without incentives
borrowed from the future. But there is a point where
men cannot be induced to sacrifice the present to tiie
future unless the latter be guaranteed.

The principle which I am defending here is per-
fectly apparent in all the morality of the present life
regardless of the immortality of the soul. All that
the idea of a f utujre life does is to say that the line
affecting conduct is not drawn at the grave. It ex-
tends the place of time in thought and action. All
sound ethics recognizes time in the application of its
maxims. It is always teaching the importance of sac-

890

PSYCHICAIi EESEAECH AND THE EESUEEECTIOK

rificing the present moment to a distant one. The
doctrine of " enlightened self-interest " always empha*
sizes the idea of rewards for resisting present impulse
in the expectation of later compensation. The man
who thinks of the consequences to-morrow and gives
up the pleasure of to-day is always regarded the
wiser. We are in no case the besrt for taking the
present moment on the wing and ignoring the next.
It is the same in our economic life. We always re-
gard the future in the rate of profit and interest.
The less the risk the less the rate of • interest. The
surer the investment the less the profit eixpected or
desired. Time is thus a primary factor in both our
ethical and economic conduct. In all maxims of life
this element of timie is one of the most important, and
there is no reason for refusing it the same importance
for a life after death, provided tbeit life can be as-
sured to us. It only extends the time witti which
ethical maxims must reckon in their teaching.

Now the belief in a future life furnishes two things
of importance for all refiective life. The first is the
value of human personality. That is, its permanence
along with that of the indestructibility of matter and
the conservation of energy* The second is the exten-
sion of time in the estimation of ethical maxims. These
two facts may serve as protectives to other rules of
conduct which might not have power enough to sustain
themselves on other grounds. It is the inner spiritual
life that needs protection against the temptations of
the moment, not because we may see its value, but
because the human mind naturally tends to recognize

891

PSYCHICAI. KE8EABCH AND THE KESUREECTIOK

the securities of the present sensory experience
against the claims of the unassured permanence of
any other life.

But the point at which the belief in a future exist-
ence becomes of the most importance is in its relation
to what may be called the intellectual or philosophical
systems which serve as agencies in the sustenance and
propagation of ideals. No doubt many individuals
in all ages, even where a future life may not be
thought of or have any fundamental importance in the
individual and social systems of conduct, have been
able to attain high ideals of life without perpetually
keeping the mind on such a beUef . But a rational
system of thought can hardly ignore its efficiency in
moving communities to some conmion conception of
duty and interest. In all ages it has been the intel-
lectual man, the philosopher in some sense, that has
dominated the thought of the community. In some
sense it is the most intelligent man that governs us.
It may be that he is most intelligent only in the ma-
chinery of bad politics. But all depends on what
the ideal of the community is. The man is always
selected who represents the real or imagined interest
of the largest number of people in the community,
where democracy is the social system. The best man
from other points of view may be excluded from
recognition. But everywhere and always intelligence
of some kind is the dominating agency in private and
political life. If that intelligence is associated with
a religious and ethical view of the cosmos, it inspires
law and custom with its ideals more or less. If it be
materialistic it recognizes unethical ideals in its policy.

892

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

Now the immortality of the soul has always been one
of the main stays of the religious conception of life
and duty. It has rationalized many of the maxims
of conduct which would hardly stand alone. What
the teacher wants always is some premise in nature
and fact for reinforcing the ethical meudms which
he values. Give him an established major premise
that protects the value of the individual and he will
instill a community with its implications wherever he
can get that premise admitted. No unanimous sen-
timent can exist on any other basis.

The intellectual classes constitute the teaching
members of the community and they require as a con-
dition . of effectiveness that some assured fact be
established in order to make it the fulcrum for logical
reasoning. Men have to be influenced either by
force or reason. In the absence of reason the
mediaeval period used persecution to create unanimity
of sentiment and action. The conqueror has always
subdued the intellects of his enemies as well as their
bodies^ at least subdued their influence. No com-
munity can exist without some unanimity of belief
and action. This common sentiment has to be
brought about in some way, and there are only two
ways in which it can be done. The strong may in-
sist by force that the weaker shall submit, or they
may reason them into voluntary agreement regard-
ing the wiser course of action. Reason is the peace-
ful way of obtaining unanimity of thought and ac-
tion, force is the method of war. But the condition
of reasoning is a major premise which no one will dis-
pute. On that may be built a system of minor prem-

S98

lief whidi wOl organise a aeries of co mmwi bdief s
that will determiiie the imrious actioiis of tlie oom-
munity, and this metliod oonsistB willi the largest
amount of freedom for the indiridiial, espeetally re-
garding actions on whidi the sentiment of the com-
munity is not agreed.

Now men have a tendency to adopt some <nie ideal
of action to which all other ends are snbordinated.
It may be wealib to which a man subordinates aB.
other desires; it may be fame and ambition to irfiich
he sacrifices all other impulses; it may be knowledge;
it may be physical appetite; it may be dress; it may
be art; it may be power; it may be religicm. In all
such cases the maxim of a man's life is to make
everything a means to the one chief end. What-
ever sanctity the chief end has, it will carry witii it
that of the subordinate aims, and whatever vicious as-
pect the chief aim has will give its character to tine
others. What is wanted, therefore, in ethics is some
position which will enable the moralist, by rational
methods, to give true perspective to the various pos-
sibilities of human life. If the sensory life is the
only one man is to have, he will naturally subordinate
all to it ; if he is to have a supersensory life it will be
possible to give a permanent and more exalted impor-
tance to his inner and reflective habits, and to urge by
reason the transcendent seriousness of taking time
more carefully into account in the regulation of
thought and action. The proof of a future life would
supply the premise which would enable the intellectual
and rationalizing mind to sustain the importance of
the time element in the maxims of conduct and to asso-

S94>

PSYCHICAI. &SSEABCH AND THB BESUEBECTIOK

ciate with it all the virtues which are necessary for
attaining the one chief end, namely, the culture which
promises permanent interest and value. The various
means to this one end could be more effectively sanc-
tified and human interests unified and directed to one
ideal. At present with the incertitude on this one
center off gravity for human ideals, there is nothing
to do but to leave the mind to its own liberties and
to keep in existence a system of warring interests
which the intelligent man cannot unify or reconcile.
There is no sufficient premise for urging assuredly the
importance which nature attaches to the spiritual
ideal. Many instincts guide us rightly toward the
correct goal, but we require in addition to this the co-
operation of reason, of the systematizing intellect, in
order to create by its unifying processes the unanim-
ity of thought and sentiment that will enable the in-
teDectual classes to rule the world again as against
the brute force of materialism.

It is not that men shall always be consciously look-
ing at a future life as a condition of salvation that
the immortality of the soul shall have its importance
recognized, but that the assurance of it can be made
a protection for the virtues of the present life, vir-
tues that too often are neglected because they are
not seen in the light of the eternal. They are sub-
ordinated or wholly sacrificed to earthly aims alone.
What is needed is a means for giving prominence and
emphasis to lines of thought and action that are
suppressed by a materialistic outlook in things. We
may say all we please that a man's duties are in the
present, a view which I think is entirely true. But

895

PSYCHICAL &ESEA&CH AKB THE KESUBKECTION

as the present carries in its alembic the germs of a far
distant future we can no more neglect that future in
our action than we can the present. Besides, those
duties will get their value recognized only in their
relation to that future, if the philosophy of Immanuel
Kant be true. But true or false, there is no more
effective way to enable the human mind to select
wisely the duties which shall prevail in the present
than to assure it of the relation which they sustain
to a remoter future, just as intelligent men take ac-
count of the distant in their investments. It is not
the interest of the present moment alone that the
rational man estimates most highly. He tries to select
from the various conflicting interests that appear be-
fore lus vision the one that runs like a golden thread
through all the web and woof of past, present and
future. Nor do men in their other studies of nature
confine themselves to the mere past and present.
Even Mr. Herbert Spencer, in spite of his agnosticism
in all matters religious, insists that the fundamental
test of science is prevision, A man who insists that
it concerns itself only with the past and the present,
with present facts and their antecedent causes, either
narrows the functions of his inquiries or disregards
all the human interests that make the pursuit of
knowledge a useful affair. The self -same people
also are always predicting, on the basis established
by fact, the course of the future, and in fact it is the
future in which every man lives in all his daily con-
duct. He plans for the morrow or the next year, and
his present gets half its joys from the hopes of the
future in which the fruition of the present is found.

S96

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUEKECTION

Men no more disregard the future in their lives than
they do the past. In fact, they can well neglect
the past altogether but for its determinative relation
to the permanent in reality. We cannot undo the
past, but we can prevent the future from being what
it would be without previsionary action. The one
important thing is to admit the place which time has
in the determination of the most rational life and
then to accept any fact which shows itself a part of
the cosmic scheme in the determination of progress.
A future life will do as much for ethics as the stabil-
ity of an economic system will do for industrial de-
velopment, and it is as absurd to ignore the one as it
is the other. There is no reason for desiring sta-
bility in economic ideals and forces that does not
apply to ethics and the behef in a future existence
for the soul.

There is no belief which can be so effective in miti-
gating the sufferings of the world as that of a future
life. Those who have accumulated property enough
to defy the rest of the world in their living and those
whose salaries give them social independence may not
see this. They can satisfy their earthly ideals with-
out adjusting their opinions to the demands of their
neighbors. But they have no means of answering
the bitter queries of those who have been less suc-
cessful and who have no circumstances to make them
optimistic. A man with a living and his liberty and
with no sense of obligation to the community may
well think this world is good enough and may resolve
to take things as they come. But in enjoying the
share to which others may be equally entitled in the

897

F8TCHICAI. RESEARCH AND THE EESUSRSCTIOK

struggle for existence he has nothing but the im-
munity of his position to protect him against the
gibes and sarcasm of those who have not won a part
of his honors and freedom. When your policy has
been to escape responsibility for all the aspirations of
the world and to obtain security in the pursuit of your
own ideals, it is but natural that you would eyade the
consideration of all tiiat humankind regards as valu-
able, and the penalty in the end will be the contempt
of those whose interests and ideals yon despise. When
they come into their power they will have their re-
venge. If the intellectual classes who are endowed
with the duties of the worid*s teachers do not assume
to guide them in the great questions iiiat affect their
ethical lives, but sit in aristocratic amtempt of the
hopes and ideals that have dominated history, they |

will find their mission supplanted. If philosophy !

cannot condescend to help the multitudes with a gos-
pel that moves life at its foundations, it must go the
way of all useless doctrines. The practical man
wants assurance as to the meaning of this life for the
individual and unless the academic man can give him
this he will seek his information from those who
can give it. It is not that philosophy needs always
to be harping on the destiny of the soul, but iliat it
needs to buttress up practical ethics by their relation
to a future which makes the present its servant or
which protects the earnest mind in its desire to justify
its ideals.

It was but yesterday that I overheard a man on the
train say, pointing to a sister of charity, " If there

S98

PSYCHICAL &ESEABCH AND THE BESUB&ECTION

is any heaven, she will get there. She sacrifices her
life to that work." The man himself was one of
these eupeptic specimens who evidently like the
physical life and was not disposed to make any sac-
rifices to what he regarded as doubtful. To him the
future life was a risk not worth taking into account.
But he could recognize the merit of virtue and the
deserts which it brought with it. To him, as to all
who feel the strength of scepticism, life had to be
measured in its rules by the risks involved, and a
future life was not so certain ^ were the pleasures
of thifi. In his choice he xaade for the certainties and
shifted on nature or providence the responsibility for
the incertitudes of existence. He felt no duty to
act where there was no assured promise of fruition.
He chose for what he could see, or where the risks
seemed less than for the alternative. What is
needed, therefore, is assurance on a belief so funda-
mental to ethical choice. What it would do in alter-
ing the center of gravity for human endeavor and
patience is evident to all who have read history in-
telligently. The thought has been well expressed
by Mr. Stedman who has so recently passed from us.
He, I happen to know, was interested in the work
which investigation has undertaken in this direction,
but could never bring himself to understand its per-
plexities and method. But both the rational and
emotional needs of many souls were beautifully set
forth in the poem which I quote. The burden of
its cry is for assurance which the idealist might use
for redeeming the wavering mind.

399

PSYCHICAL RESEARCH AND THE RESURRECTION

Could we but know
The land that ends our dark uncertain travel^
Where lie those happier rills and meadows low —
And^ if beyond the spirit's inmost cavil.
Aught of that country could we surely know.

Who would not go?

Might we but hear
The hovering angels' high imagined chorus.
Or catch betimes, with wakeful eyes and clear.
One radiant vista of the realm before us —

Ah, who would fear?

Were we quite sure
To find the peerless friend who left us lonely.
Or, there by some celestial stream as pure.
To gaze in eyes that here were lovely only.
This weary mortal coil, were we quite sure

Who would endure?

Perhaps " We could endure," would either express
the poet's thought or give the Stoical touch to its
strain and indicate the ethics which would dominate
all life when hope would be as effective in its attitude
toward death as it is in its influence on the efforts of
the earthly life where some material end is its aim.
The poet is only reflecting the feelings of all high
souls and those who affect indifference to sentiment
of this kind usually reserve their emotions for a
" smoker " or a beefsteak and a glass of wine. The
hypocrisy or ignorance of the philosopher is mani-
fest when he exhibits a consuming passion for the
social and material pleasures of life and affects a
righteous contempt for emotion when it concerns the
ideals of religion and a future life. Once he wa^
supposed to help the race in guiding its emotions

400

PSYCHICAL RESEAECH AND THE BESUEEECTION

toward a right goal and so saw life in its true per-
spective. But latterly, assuming the unbiased nature
of doubty he prides himself in laughing at inspiration
and hope when they suffer at the loss of all that gave
meaning to life and effort while he labors with all his
might to secure the pleasures of a good table and
social recognition without accepting any responsibil-
ity to share human struggle and suffering. Philos-
ophic idealism is often nothing more than contempt
for those whom it is the business of the more success-
ful to help. It affects to guide man into the truth
and then shies at every form of it which promises to
justify its own vocation, and only because it eschews
religious emotion while it revels in the passion for
an aristocratic life.

It is true enough that emotion and desire do not
and should not determine what is true, and it is the
merit of the philosopher that he keeps a cool eye on
the criteria of facts. But he makes an equal mis-
take when he refuses to recognize the place of emo-
tion in the affairs of life. No ideal is ever formed
under any other influence. Emotion estimates or
determines the values of life, whether they are chosen
in material or spiritual ends. It is quite as legiti-
mate to desire immortality as it is to desire a good
breakfast. Whether we shcJl estimate one above the
other depends on our moral perspective. No doubt
the one can be abused as well as the other, but that
does not prove that it can be ignored. All depends
upon the coloring we give it in the life we wish to
realize. We may not be able to reach all that we
idealize, and emotion may stimulate us toward end^

401

PSTCHICAIi BESEAJICH AND THE SESU&kLECTIOK

which we have no hope of attaining. But it is the
criterion of value, as it is the satisfaction which we
take in what we attain and strive to attain. The in-
tellect can determine no ideal whatever. Its function
is to decide coolly and dispassionately the means to
an end predetermined by emotion. It is passicm, if
we may so call it, that decides the siimmum bontMnf,
the good to which all other aims are subordinated.
All that the intellect, the philosopher, can do is to de-
cide whether it is attainable or not. He cannot pro-
nounce on its value without invoking the emotional
nature which he affects to despise. No doubt the
believer in a future life has too often forgotten the
place which his faith has in sanctifying patience with
the present, in protecting " eternal Uf e " in the pass-
ing moment, whatever the shadows that hover over
it; but in deprecating the abuse of emotion in that
belief, we may easily fall heir to the materialism which
it was the function of philosophy to criticize and
modify.

Nor am I unmindful that we may make materialism
more of a bugbear than it is. The ideaUst thinks
that it is easily refuted, when in fact, the materialism
which has influenced really thinking men is not only
not easily refuted, but is not the " materialism "
which the idealist attacks. The materialism which
serves as a useful punching bag for the idealist, and
as a cover to conceal his indifference to the real prob-
lems of philosophy and life, may be readily attacked,
but that form of it which negatives the ideals of re-
ligion will not yield to the veiled and misty equivo-
cations of Kant and Hegel. But granting its

40S

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBBECTION

strength in its most objectionable form it still carries
with it an important lesson for the development of
man. Its great lesson to the world is a fixed order
of things. Idealism emphasizes freedom and vanity.
Just as man conceives his independence of the physical
order, he assumes to disregard its laws and seeks
emancipation from their limitations. Nowhere was
this more true than for those ages that made the
world carnal while insisting that it was divine. The
reaction against Greco-Roman materialism carried
with it the neglect of present duties, and in the midst
of a certain kind of humility fostered a spiritual
pride that ignored the laws of God quite as much as
the materialist. Man needs freedom, but not the free-
dom from law and order. Obedience is quite as much
a duty as conmianding the services of nature. In
emancipating himself from the tyranny of the world,
he too often assumes an arrogance which can be cor-
rected only by the humiliations of defeat, and ma-
terialism has come to fix for him an order which he
cannot defy. It is the embodiment of the idea of
irrevocable laws, conceding no liberties except such
as come within the limits of its unchangeable order.
This function of its nature we do not yet see. We
shall not see it until we find that a future life is within
its providential scheme. In the meantime we can
only attack its attitude toward the facts which destroy
its denial of immortality while they leave untouched
its real contribution to ethical thought.

A sane philosophy is poetry or it is nothing, just
as poetry is the philosophy of the imaginative mind,
and each needs the other in the determination of

40S

mrcBncAi. mssEAmcH akb thb KEsusmscTioK

Inmiaii troths and wcnrtlis. The story of the resur-
neciioii gave rise to a philosophy which had poetry
enough in it to give it a life of many centuries, with
all its good and eviL Had the early philosophers
had the critical method and the stable civilization
to help them escape the abuses that gathered like
moss about the incidents which gave rise to a new
order, the conflict betweoi science and religion might
have been pacified long ago. Hie waste of passion
and superstition might have been saved its ravages,
and philosophy would have had no reascm to vindi-
cate itself by scepticism. But it has fallen to science
to mediate between the agnosticism of philosophy and
the faith of religion, and if it can find in the passing
moment the facts which reveal the obscured meaning
of the story of the resurrection it will subdue all the
animosities of the ages and reconcile the passions of
truth and hope.

In educating me it was my father's wish that I
should choose the ministry. He would not interfere
with my spontaneous desires, but his disappointment
was keen when his hopes were blasted, but he bowed
quietly and patiently to a decision which his faith
made him believe was providential. He never wholly
knew the influences which determined my develop-
ment. It was impossible to convey them to a nar-
rower experience. The ministry had its attractions,
but its denial of freedom and its irreconcilable atti-
tude toward science made it impossible to stultify my
intellect or my conscience, and destiny found a way
to emancipate me from the priesthood of both the
church and the university, while it kept in me the

404

PSYCHICAL BESEABCH AND THE BESUBEECTION

ideals of both. It was a long and weary struggle.
Taste, aspirations, environment physical and social,
education, all conspired to make the choice desirable.
But every influence which time and circumstances con-
jured up to decide the issue only found its specific
aim defeated, though the fundamental tendencies of
religious ideals did not abate their power and signifi-
cance. Philosophy and literature poured their con-
tents into the lap of fortune and left in their train
the still abiding spiritualism which made life worth
living or kept alive the faith that revelation had ob-
scured. The works of nature appealed to me as they
do to all who have to decide between the fictions of
speculative philosophy and the realities of things.
Every department of nature and human experience
was ransacked for data to aid in the solution of this
momentous question.

It was in the midst of these influences that I found
myself one autumn afternoon on a hill overlooking
a beautiful valley. The little hamlets which were
scattered over the landscape sent their smoke heaven-
ward and contained the domestic peace which pioneer
life may give. A little kirk stood in the village,
where the rural worshippers gathered once a week to
keep alive their faith and hopes. A mountain stream
dashed over the rocks on its hurried course to rest in
the sea. The flocks and herds were grazing peace-
fvdly on the meadows, ignorant of the sorrows that
fleck the little life of unhappy man in other climes.
The sky had uncovered its expanse and opened its im-
measurable depths to a clear vision, cooling and sub-
lime in the reverential moods which it excited. Tht

405

P8YCHICAI. K£S£ABCH AND THE RESUREECTIOK

sun had driven his chariot down the western slopes of
space and pausing on the horizon's bar threw back
u}x>n that autunm valley the melancholy and majestic
gloom of twilight, the ^^ dim religious Ught " of Grod.
The clouds that gathered around his splendid throne
to catch the last benediction of his radiance, linger-
ing for a while in his gorgeous hues of red and gold,
turned to wander down the azure blue of night in end-
less voyage. The forests on the distant hiUs, mel-
lowed by the October frosts, were waving in sad but
beautiful luxuriance. A little cemetery lay on the
right where the mossy dead were supposed to wait for
the happy resurrection and where the cypress and the
pine kept watch over the gates to immortality and
God. Over all this a strange wind was blowing, De
Quincy's Sarsar wind of death that might have swept
the fields of mortality for a thousand centuries, mov-
ing slowly and solemnly in Memnonian strains over
the everlasting Sabbath of the grave. And there, as
the stars broke through the crystal empyrean to
lighten the shades of night with their natural splen-
dor, I found myself dedicated to the work of justify-
ing the ways of God to men.

But scarcely had those feelings shaped themselves
into resolution when the chilling breath of scepticism
came to cool the ardor of my hopes. The first step
in this direction was the discovered need for me of
revised biblical interpretation enforced by a little sec-
tarian controversy about amending the Constitution
of the United States in favor of certain religious
acknowledgments. The fatal chapter, however, fix-
ing doubt beyond recovery was that on the Incama-

406

PSYCHICAL RESEABCH AND THE BESUBEECTION

tion and the Resurrection in Barnes' Evidences of
Christianity. Faith might have had its way had it
not submitted its claims to proof. The very gibes
of religious fanatics and cartoonists against the doc-
trine of Darwin strengthened it in my sight, and
every discovery of geology, of physiology, and of
psychology pointed to only one conclusion, that of
materialism. I accepted it, not because it was a de-
sirable philospphy, but because the evidence of fact
was on its side, and neither the illusions of idealism
nor the interests of religious hope were sufficient to
tempt me into a career of hypocrisy and cowardice.
I had to temporize with many a situation until I could
assure my own mind where it stood. In the pursuit
of some final truth on which to base a life work I
passed through all the labyrinths of philosophy, los-
ing nothing and gaining nothing in its meshes.
After Plato and Aristotle it seemed to lose its moor-
ings in facts and lived on tradition and authority.
New discoveries and reconstruction it despised as it
would the occupation of neophytes and children. At
last I was directed to the idealism of Kant for light
and found there a system as helpless as it was mysti-
fying, though it had been bom in the atmosphere of
Swedenborg's distinction between the transcendental
and the phenomenal and of which it soon became
ashamed. In it the bankruptcy of philosophy was
the opportunity of science, and in a favorable, though
accidental moment my attention was attracted by
psychic research in which the first prospect of crucial
facts presented itself.

However satisfactory philosophy had been in show-
407

PSYCHICAL EESEARCH AND THE EESUK&ECTION

ing that the meaning of the cosmos was to be found
in the supersensible, whether by idealism or atomic
materialism, the more exacting method of science,
which had strengthened the claims of physical law
and causes and which became the standard of truth,
made it necessary to regard the residual phenomena
of human experience, if only to corroborate the in-
ferences which idealism had drawn from the normal.
In fact, whatever the validity of the older views as
possible constructions of the world, their probability
was lost in the face of the certitudes of science which
had multiplied evidence for the extension of physical
explanations, and religion had to turn to the residual
phenomena of life, as it had once done, to vindicate
its aspirations and interpretation of the cosmos. It
does not yet clearly see the direction from which its
light is to come. But in the accumulation of facts
within the field of supernormal phenomena I found
the dawn of another day for an idealism that will last
as long as scientific method can claim respect. All the
mythical and misty past, seen in the light of a slow
and patient evolution, assumed a new meaning, and we
may exclaim with the first lines of Goethe's Faust: —

Ihr naht each wieder schwankende Gestalten!
Die fmh sich einst dem truben Blick gezeigt.

Ye come again ye vanishing forms.
That once had crossed my troubled view.

The darkness which inhuman theories and ethical
indifference brings to disappointment and suffering
promises to lift in the light of those facts which estab-
lish a link between the past and the future, holding

408

PSYCHICAL BESEA&CH AND THE RESURRECTION

out to those who have lost in the struggle of the
present existence the hope and the chance to recover
the pursuit of their ideals in another life. No one
can then censure the philosopher, if, in the hour of
such a triumph, he looks with gratitude at the facts
which renew his power over the world and breaks into
the same passion as Gk)ethe again.

Ihr bringt mit euch die Bilder froher Tage
Und manche liebe Schatten steigen auf ;
Gleich einer alten^ halb verklungen Sage^
Kommt erste Lieb' und Freundschaft mit hierauf .

Ye bring with you the vision pure of happy days^
And many lovely shadows rise upon the lea;
And like an ancient half forgotten song^
Ye bring my love and friendship back to me.

There are signs enough of social and political up-
heaval in the dissolution of the older ethical and re-
ligious ideals and it will devolve on a new philosophy
to aid in the reconstruction of order. The academic
world is blind to the needs of the hour and has iso-
lated itself in aristocratic seclusion from contact with
the life of those who are ruling the tendencies of the
future. It is left, as it apparently has always been,
to the outside world to find a leaven for the regener-
ation, and if any spiritual ideal be discovered it must
be in the little beacon lights that shine out from the
residual and neglected phenomena of mind which
promise as wide an extension in psychological knowl-
edge as the new discoveries in the material world have
produced in physical science. History may repeat
itself and must before the revival of ethical pcission
and religious ideals.

409
