Science and a Future Life (James H. Hyslop, 1905)
=================================================
James H. Hyslop — The founder of the American Society for Psychical Research's case for a future life. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (scienceandfuture00hysluoft) — 1905 first edition.

il 

riFINirF  AND  A 

|,4.f  J.  jL-rii  ^1  ;l^>  JL-j     JL  kl  II  -Ju/     7  \ 

1  - ' .  '  ''••'"' 

;Y^^  *y'  :y'  f  j  A  .T"    T  V"^  ~T" "^  T       -Y 'T^^T"^!' 

FUTURE  LIFE 

JAMES 

: 

iiiiiiiiiiiiiuimmiitiHiiiiitiimimi 

SCIENCE 
AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

SCIENCE  AND  A 
FUTURE   LIFE 

BY 

JAMES  H.  HYSLOP,  Ph.D.,  LL.D. 

FORMERLY  PROFF.SSOR  OF  ETHICS   AND 
LOGIC   IN   COLUMBIA    UNIVERSITY 

Author  of 
"  Problems  of  Philosophy,"  etc. 

HERBERT  B.  TURNER  &  CO. 
BOSTON       ...       19Q5 

Copyright,    1905, 

BY   HERBERT    B.    TURNER   &   Co. 

Entered   at  Stationers'  Hall 

London 

Published  May  1305 
Second  Edition,  August  10,  7905 

George  French    Boston 

DEDICATED    TO 

2>r.  IRtcbarfc  ?Hofc0son 

WHOSE  PATIENT  AND  UNREQUITED  RESEARCHES  FIRST 
BROUGHT   ME   TO   THE   CONCLUSIONS    HERE 
DEFENDED  AND  FOR  WHICH   I   WISH 
TO   HOLD   HIM   IN  GRATEFUL 
MEMORY     AND     AC- 
KNOWLEDGMENT 

PREFACE 

The  elaborate  Reports  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research  seldom  get  beyond  the  shelves  of  its  mem- 
bers, and  it  is  possible  that  few  of  this  class  read 
them  with  any  such  care  and  patience  as  students  are 
made  to  bestow  upon  Aristotle,  Kant,  and  Hegel.  I 
know  one  prominent  member  who  had  my  own  lengthy 
report  on  his  table  for  six  months  without  knowing 
what  it  was  about.  If  those  who  profess  allegiance  to 
the  work  do  no  better  than  this  what  can  we  expect  of 
the  Philistines?  Of  course  it  is  hard  to  blame  any 
one  for  this,  because  this  is  a  busy  world  and  there 
is  too  much  to  read.  But  I  remark  the  fact  to  indi- 
cate the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  interesting  even  the 
best  minds  on  so  intricate  a  subject  as  this. 

I  have  endeavored  in  the  present  volume  to  sum- 
marise the  most  important  of  the  Society's  work, 
more  especially  with  reference  to  such  matter  as  might 
claim  to  bear  upon  the  problem  of  a  future  life.  I 
have  accepted  Mr.  Podmore's  book  on  Apparitions 
and  Thought  Transference  as  sufficiently  illustrative 
of  supernormal  phenomena  not  claiming  to  be  spirit- 
istic and  do  not  duplicate  its  material.  I  have  also 
perhaps  discussed  the  Piper  Case  more  than  does 
M.  Sage  in  his  admirable  summary,  because  I  wished 
to  reach  a  class  of  English  readers  who  may  wish  a 
fuller  resume  of  the  general  work.  The  chief  ques- 
tions which  I  wished'  to  cover  and  which  are  not  fully 

covered  in  M.  Sage's  book  are  found  in  Chapters  III, 

vii 

viii       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

XII,  and  XIII.  I  have  not  intended  that  the  book 
should  satisfy  the  more  exacting  scientific  standards, 
but  serve  the  purpose  of  inducing1  the  scientific  psy- 
chologist to  go  to  the  detailed  records  where  his  de- 
mands may  be  better  satisfied,  and  give  the  general 
reader  some  conception  of  the  complexity  of  the  prob- 
lem with  which  we  have  to  deal.  Hence  I  have  only 
given  samples  of  the  facts  which  are  accessible  for  the 
student,  and  many  of  the  most  important  are  too  intri- 
cate to  justify  using  the  space  necessary  to  make  their 
cogency  perceptible.  I  have,  therefore,  limited  my- 
self to  the  best  and  the  most  easily  intelligible  type, 
and  students  who  wish  to  know  more  must  either  go 
to  other  and  more  detailed  records  or  make  personal 
investigations.  This  work  is  for  the  reader  who  is 
more  interested  in  explanation  than  in  wearisome  de- 
tails. 

The  chapters  summarising  the  Piper  Case  may  seem 
unnecessarily  long  and  tedious.  But  I  could  not  dis- 
cuss so  large  a  theory  as  the  spiritistic  without  afford- 
ing intelligent  people  some  idea  of  the  amount  and 
complexity  of  the  material  with  which  any  explanatory 
theory  has  to  contend. 

The  present  work  is  also  a  part  of  the  sequel  to  a 
work  on  philosophy  which  is  in  the  press  and  will 
appear  some  time  later.  The  remaining  part  of  the 
sequel  is  another  Report  on  mediumistic  phenomena 
which  is  ready  for  press  but  can  be  published  only  as 
a  work  of  scientific  detail.  The  work  of  which  these 
are  the  sequel  discusses  the  general  problems  of  knowl- 
edge and  metaphysics  without  any  attempt  to  solve 
them  by  adducing  scientific  facts  as  proof.  It  con- 

PREFACE  1* 

siders  the  proof  of  a  future  life  as  the  desideratum 
for  making  a  solution  of  metaphysical  problems  pos- 
sible. 'I  mention  it  because  I  think  that  the  question 
of  the  survival  of  personality  is  not  an  isolated  prob- 
lem without  philosophic  associations  or  meaning,  but 
is  most  fundamental  to  the  integrity  and  utility  of  all 
philosophies. 

It  is  high  time  that  investigations  of  this  kind 
should  be  endowed  as  are  many  others  of  less  impor- 
tance. There  is  no  use  to  talk  about  the  follies  of 
human  nature  in  this  field,  as  that  will  be  admitted  and 
urged  as  a  sufficient  reason  for  an  organised  effort  to 
protect  men  from  delusion,  and  if  any  such  truth  as 
the  conservation  of  personal  consciousness  should  be 
added  to  the  indestructibility  of  matter  and  the  con- 
servation of  energy  we  should  have  laid  a  foundation 
for  the  meaning  of  the  cosmos  which  is  not  the  pre- 
vailing one  of  scientific  men.  They  will  spend  mil- 
lions in  North  Pole  expeditions,  in  deep  sea  dredging 
for  a  new  fish,  in  biological  inquiries  to  show  a  pro- 
toplasmic source  of  life,  and  in  astronomic  observa- 
tions that  lead  only  to  speculation  about  planetary 
life,  in  short  anything  to  throw  light  on  man's  origin, 
but  not  a  cent  to  ascertain  with  any  scientific  assur- 
ance a  word  about  his  destiny.  Men  are  quite  will- 
ing under  the  pressure  of  fact  to  admit  their  origin 
from  the  brutes,  but  persist  in  a  pride  that  does  not 
seem  compatible  with  that  ancestry.  I  understand 
that  a  hundred  thousand  dollars  a  year  are  spent  by 
our  colleges  for  athletic  sports,  but  no  boast  is  made 
of  what  is  spent  for  the  solution  of  moral,  social  and 
religious  problems.  We  are  so  infatuated  with  the 

x          SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ramifications  of  materialism  that  a  leading  paper  can 
solemnly  propose  the  need  of  twenty-five  millions  to 
dig  a  well  twelve  miles  deep  merely  to  satisfy  the 
curiosity  of  the  geologist  about  the  earth's  strata! 
Why  an  investigation  which  promises  as  much  protec- 
tion against  illusion  as  it  does  for  beliefs  that  are  the 
only  force  that  is  capable  of  solving  the  social  prob- 
lem, if  soluble  at  all,  cannot  receive  as  much  support 
as  the  more  ridiculous  efforts  of  men,  it  is  hard  for  a 
moralist  to  understand. 

JAMES  H.  HYSLOP. 

New  York. 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.     ORIGIN    OF    PSYCHIC    RESEARCH     ...  1 

II.     GENERAL  PROBLEMS   AND  RESULTS     .      .  21 

III.  THE    PROBLEM   OF   A   FUTURE   LIFE     .      .  73 

IV.  HISTORY  OF  THE   PIPER  CASE     .      .      .      .  113 
V.     INCIDENTS   FROM   THE    ENGLISH   REPORT  134 

VI.     DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT     ....  165 
VII.     DR.    HODGSON'S    SECOND    REPORT     ...  194 
VIII.     PERSONAL    EXPERIMENTS    AND    RESULTS  212 
IX.     THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     ....  245 
X.     THE    SPIRITISTIC    HYPOTHESIS     ....  267 
XI.     DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS          ...  287 
XII.     CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  THE  "COMMUNI- 
CATIONS"       306 

XIII.    ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS  341 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

CHAPTER  I 

ORIGIN    OF    PSYCHIC    RESEARCH 

There  was  a  time  when  it  was  necessary  to  apologize 
for  the  work  of  psychic  research.  It  is  no  longer 
necessary  before  intelligent  people.  The  steady  in- 
fluence of  time  and  progress  has  brought  a  certain 
type  of  facts  in  human  experience  into  respectable 
recognition,  though  the  hopes  and  expectations  of 
many  have  not  been  realised.  It  was,  of  course,  impos- 
sible to  escape  ridicule  at  its  inception.  The  interest 
of  the  average  human  mind  in  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  taken  with  the  influence  of  scepticism  and  ma- 
terialism to  discredit  the  belief,  and  the  allegations 
that  there  were  numerous  facts  proving  a  future  life 
against  belief,  offered  an  opportunity  to  investigate 
the  matter  scientifically.  But  the  same  conditions 
also  offered  the  knave  and  the  adventurer  a  fine  chance 
to  prey  upon  the  dupes  that  lend  a  ready  ear  to  the 
marvelous.  In  all  ages  this  condition  has  produced 
the  same  effect,  until  the  mass  of  fraud  and  delusion 
was  sufficient  to  dispossess  the  probability  that  there 
was  anything  else  of  interest  to  science.  But  in  more 
respectable  quarters  a  residuum  of  facts  survived  in 
spite  of  untoward  circumstances  and  by  patient  and 
courageous  effort  the  movement  to  investigate  them 
has  been  justified,  if  only  it  sufficed  to  expose  the 

1 

2          SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

dangers  of  the  human  mind  in  the  presence  of  illusion. 
Much  of  this  it  has  done  and  it  requires  no  other 
laurels  for  its  pains.  Apparently,  however,  it  has 
opened  a  mine,  which,  if  it  does  not  supply  all  that 
human  nature  hopes,  will  certainly  extend  the  bound- 
aries of  knowledge. 

In  the  inception  of  the  movement  it  was  impossible, 
from  the  nature  of  many  claims  made  by  the  naive 
mind,  to  evade  the  consideration  of  a  future  life  and 
the  alleged  evidence  for  it.  There  were  many  alleged 
phenomena  that  cannot  present  any  relevant  claims  to 
being  evidence  of  such  an  outcome  to  the  present,  and 
hence  the  work  might  have  been  limited  to  the  study 
of  these  obscure  and  perhaps  dubious  facts.  But  both 
relevant  and  irrelevant  phenomena  were  so  articulated 
with  each  other  and  associated  with  the  belief  in  the 
existence  of  spirits  and  their  influence  in  the  physical 
world  that  the  challenge  had  to  be  accepted  and  the 
issue  fought  out  along  scientific  lines,  whether  the 
task  were  reputable  or  not.  Fortunately  it  has  per- 
formed its  work  with  credit  and  commands  such  re- 
spect that  ridicule  is  no  longer  the  temper  of  any 
except  those  who  have  refused  to  investigate.  The 
question  of  immortality,  which  had  been  relegated  to 
the  limbo  of  illusions  and  dreams  can  be  discussed 
again,  at  least  in  the  old  philosophic  manner,  and 
many  look  hopefully  to  scientific  method  to  effect  what 
philosophic  speculation  cannot  do.  This  fact  will 
justify  the  present  book. 

There  are  many  influences  that  create  and  many 
that  modify  man's  interest  in  a  future  life.  It  would 
require  a  long  chapter  to  discuss  them,  and  whatever 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH          3 

the  result  it  would  not  affect  the  problem  before  us 
at  present.  The  one  fact  of  importance  is  the  gen- 
eral tenacity  which  the  belief  in  immortality  has  had 
for  so  many  of  the  human  race  in  all  periods  and 
conditions  of  its  development,  and  especially  during 
the  prevalence  of  Christianity.  But  whatever  the  in- 
fluences that  have  given  rise  to  the  belief;  whatever 
the  agencies  that  modify  it ;  and  whatever  the  con- 
ceptions that  have  incidentally  become  associated  with 
it,  there  have  been  two  main  streams  of  tendency  to 
originate  the  movement  of  psychic  research  whose  fate 
has  inevitably  connected  it  with  the  problem  of  con- 
scious survival  after  death.  The  first  of  these  tend- 
encies has  been  the  destructive  influence  of  materialism 
and  scepticism.  These  have  dominated  the  thinking 
of  the  present  age,  perhaps,  more  than  any  other. 
The  second  has  been  the  existence  of  a  large  body  of 
facts  which,  whether  false  or  genuine,  have  suggested 
to  an  anxious  race  the  occurrence  of  at  least  sporadic 
communications  with  discarnate  spirits.  A  brief  ex- 
amination of  both  these  influences  will  make  quite 
intelligible  the  movement  which  was  organised  to 
investigate  the  claims  of  the  supernormal. 

I  shall  examine  the  first  of  these  tendencies  briefly, 
namely,  the  growth  of  scepticism  and  materialism, 
which  are  the  result  of  criticism  and  investigation 
within  the  territories  of  philosophy,  theology,  and 
physical  science.  Their  effect  is  proportioned  to  the 
expectations  which  had  been  created  by  religion. 

It  was  the  influence  of  Christianity  that  intensified 
the  interest  in  a  future  life,  an  interest  that  was  both 
individual  and  social,  while  its  adoption  of  the  polit^ 

4          SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ical  methods  of  imperialism  in  the  organisation  of 
both  civil  and  ecclesiastical  institutions  availed  to  con- 
vert the  western  world  to  its  way  of  thinking.  The 
doctrine  of  immortality  was  first  proclaimed  by  it  to 
the  poor,  that  class  which  had  been  ground  to  pieces 
by  social  and  political  tyranny  and  left  without  hope 
by  the  materialism  of  Epicurus  and  his  followers. 
The  passion  and  enthusiasm  with  which  this  class 
seized  the  belief  is  evidence  of  the  function  which  it 
might  serve  in  their  lives,  and  its  association  with  the 
idea  of  human  brotherhood  created  a  leaven  which 
has  survived  eighteen  centuries  of  religious  and  polit- 
ical debauchery.  At  its  rise  civilisation  was  on  the 
way  to  the  grave.  The  outlook  which  had  driven 
the  Stoic  from  public  life  and  induced  the  Neo-Platon- 
ists  to  favor  ascetic  habits  made  it  appear  that  the 
great  ideals  of  the  race  were  setting  in  thunder  clouds. 
The  proclamation,  therefore,  of  an  immortal  destiny 
for  all,  beyond  the  touch  of  pain  and  sorrow,  humbling 
the  rich  and  proud  and  exalting  the  poor  and  lowly, 
was  well  calculated  to  instill  new  hope  and  inspiration 
in  personal  and  social  morality.  It  actually  did  so, 
and  the  belief  in  immortality  became  the  central  in- 
fluence in  the  reconstruction  of  later  civilisation. 
Some  of  the  ancients  accepted  the  doctrine,  as  we  find 
in  Pindar,  Socrates,  Cicero,  Seneca,  and  others,  but  it 
was  not  an  idea  which  subordinated,  as  it  did  in  Chris- 
tianity, all  other  conduct  to  itself.  It  took  the  Chris- 
tian doctrine  of  limited  probation  and  eternal  punish- 
ment to  effect  this.  Greco-Roman  civilisation  suffered 
from  the  loss  of  the  belief  in  its  later  periods,  but 
much  less  than  modern  civilisation  will  suffer  from 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH         5 

this  loss,  because  the  belief  had  little  relation  to  social 
morality  in  pagan  antiquity.  In  Christianity,  how- 
ever, the  individual's  interest  in  it  was  heightened  by 
the  character  of  the  happiness  held  in  prospect  for 
faith,  obedience,  and  virtue,  and  by  the  social  im- 
portance ascribed  to  it  by  its  relation  to  human 
brotherhood  and  the  various  moralities  involved  in  that 
conception.  For  various  reasons  the  belief  became 
the  central  one  in  the  Christian  system,  though  after 
the  stories  which  first  occasioned  the  doctrine  had  lost 
their  force  the  existence  of  God  obtained  the  prior 
importance  as  a  condition  of  guaranteeing  or  support- 
ing the  probability  of  a  future  life  on  other  grounds 
than  the  story  of  a  resurrection,  or  for  the  purpose 
of  making  such  a  story  credible.  However  this  may 
be,  political  and  religious  agencies  gave  the  belief  in 
survival  after  death  an  interest  that  apparently  sus- 
tained the  whole  integrity  of  our  moral  system  and 
certainly  affected  the  destinies  of  democracy.  When 
the  belief  thus  became  fixed  and  determinative  of  social 
and  individual  morality,  it  is  easy  to  see  what  the  dis- 
turbance would  be  if  the  belief  were  subjected  to  the 
scrutiny  which  has  dissolved  so  many  convictions  of 
the  past. 

The  sceptical  movement  affecting  the  belief  in  a 
future  life  began  with  the  Renaissance,  the  Greco- 
Roman  revival,  and  was  unconsciously  encouraged  by 
the  Protestant  Reformation  which  was  in  fact  an 
organised  distrust  of  the  authority  of  the  church, 
though  it  did  not  at  first  fully  realise  the  tendencies 
that  it  had  turned  loose.  Various  other  influences, 
especially  the  rise  and  growth  of  physical  science,  gave 

6          SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

a  powerful  impulse  to  scepticism  and  in  a  short  time 
gave  such  an  impetus  to  materialism  that  it  has  ever 
since  governed  the  tendencies  of  nearly  all  scientific 
thought.  The  mechanical  philosophy  of  Descartes 
and  the  pantheistic  philosophy  of  Spinoza  were  either 
the  expression  or  the  originators  of  this  new  tendency, 
and  prevailed  right  in  the  camp  of  the  spiritualists. 
Newtonian  gravitation  substituted  "  natural "  for 
"  supernatural ':  agencies  in  the  movements  of  the 
solar  and  stellar  systems.  Chemistry  revealed  a  plas- 
tic conception  of  matter  not  dreamed  of  before  and 
employed  in  its  explanations  internal  forces  as  myste- 
rious as  miracles  in  their  operation  and  yet  derobed 
of  all  association  with  the  divine.  Darwinian  evolu- 
tion did  for  time  what  Newtonian  gravitation  did  for 
space  and  so  naturalised  the  phenomena  of  cosmic 
change  as  gravitation  did  that  of  collocation.  Inven- 
tion and  discovery,  directed  by  the  triumphs  of  phy- 
sical science,  have  so  increased  man's  mastery  of  na- 
ture and  so  multiplied  the  conveniences  and  pleasures 
of  living  that  even  a  Dantean  or  a  Miltonic  Paradise 
can  offer  only  inferior  attractions  to  our  hopes  and 
expectations.  Men  do  not  seek  salvation  in  a  world 
better  than  the  present,  but  either  feel  satisfied  with 
what  they  have  accomplished  or  expect  to  realise  some- 
thing better  in  the  present  than  any  imaginable  future 
can  offer  them.  The  fascinations  of  a  future  life 
which  had  thrilled  the  hopes  of  those  who  had  to  con- 
sider the  present  as  a  vale  of  tears  and  a  habitation 
only  for  sin  and  sorrow  now  appear  tame  and  unin- 
teresting to  all  of  us  after  the  achievements  of  science 
and  invention.  In  the  religious  world  biblical  criti- 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH          7 

cism  and  historical  studies,  along  with  the  decline  of 
the  belief  in  the  "  supernatural,"  have  almost  driven 
into  oblivion  the  mediaeval  conception  of  life  and 
destiny.  Inspiration  and  authority  have  either 
drifted  into  desuetude  or  survive  only  as  poetic  and 
metaphorical  attempts  to  save  fine  emotion.  The  old 
and  melancholy  seriousness  with  which  life  was  con- 
templated by  our  forefathers  has  been  supplanted  by 
a  cheerful  and  epicurean  temper  with  perhaps  Madame 
de  Maintenon's  maxim  about  the  future  as  a  motto, 
"  after  us  the  deluge." 

But  the  chief  among  the  influences  that  have  in- 
trenched materialism  until  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
dislodge  it  has  been  the  progress  of  physiology  and 
psychiatry.  The  investigations  in  this  field  have 
shown  such  a  relation  between  the  organism  and  the 
phenomena  of  consciousness  that  it  is  difficult  to  con- 
ceive them  as  anything  but  functions  of  the  brain  and 
perishable  with  it.  Accident  and  disease  so  disturb 
the  integrity  of  consciousness  that  we  can  hardly  im- 
agine it  anything  but  one  of  the  activities  of  the  nerv- 
ous system.  A  fall  or  a  blow  or  a  disease  may  reduce 
the  man  to  an  unconscious  condition,  and  some  local 
injury  may  result  in  the  symptoms  of  insanity.  A 
hearty  meal  may  end  in  a  nightmare  and  intemperance 
in  deliria.  So  dependent  is  normal  consciousness  upon 
the  healthy  condition  of  the  organism  that  conscious- 
ness itself  seems  to  be  a  function  like  that  of  digestion 
or  circulation,  and  if  it  be  so  conceived  its  termination 
at  death  is  a  foregone  conclusion.  The  fact  that, 
aside  from  the  claims  of  psychic  research,  there  is  no 
trace  of  consciousness  apart  from  living  organisms 

8          SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

appears  overwhelming  to  the  average  mind.  Could 
we  trust  the  evidence  that  an  occasional  traveler  re- 
turns from  that  undiscovered  country  we  might  feel 
otherwise  about  the  silence  of  the  grave  in  most  cases. 
But  we  are  sceptical  of  anything  that  is  not  the  com- 
mon experience  of  the  race  and  in  the  true  scientific 
spirit  demand  that  we  shall  have  evidence  that  individ- 
ual consciousness  shall  be  found  capable  of  existing 
independently  of  the  organism,  if  we  are  to  abandon 
the  claims  of  materialism.  But  this  is  either  wanting 
or  is  present  in  such  dubious  forms  and  quantities  that 
we  seem  safe  in  questioning  its  real  appearance  at  all, 
and  the  natural  conclusions  of  physiology  and  psy- 
chiatry seem  confirmed  by  the  evidential  situation  of 
general  experience.  Philosophy  is  bankrupt  in  a  con- 
dition of  this  kind.  It  has  always  relied  upon  deter- 
mining the  nature  of  a  thing  in  order  to  support  its 
conclusions,  and  has  not  yet  learned  to  study  the  prob- 
lem in  the  light  of  scientific  facts.  The  older  method 
of  deciding  the  issue  has  thus  been  discredited  and  the 
believer  is  left  either  to  his  instincts  and  irrational 
processes  for  the  maintenance  of  his  convictions  or  to 
scepticism  if  he  cannot  apply  scientific  method  to  his 
problem. 

But  just  as  the  victory  seemed  to  come  within  the 
reach  of  materialism  faith  has  had  her  Nemesis  in  the 
attention  which  a  long  despised  class  of  facts  received. 
The  whole  history  of  human  interest  in  mental  phe- 
nomena had  been  confined  to  their  normal  manifesta- 
tions and  the  abnormal  and  unusual  occurrences  were 
discarded  as  unworthy  of  any  consideration  except 
from  the  medical  student  and  from  him  only  to  be 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH         9 

cured  or  prevented.  But  as  science  will  leave  no  stone 
unturned  in  her  task  of  discovery  and  has  always 
found  her  best  rewards  in  the  investigation  of  residual 
phenomena,  it  was  natural  that  the  junction  of  sci- 
entific curiosity  and  of  religious  hope  should  be  the 
organisation  of  psychic  research. 

The  phenomena  that  invited  it  were  of  long  stand- 
ing. They  were  comparatively  sporadic  and  were  as 
much  despised  as  they  were  sporadic.  But  they  rep- 
resented several  types  of  human  experience  that  chal- 
lenged interest  and  investigation.  They  have  been 
classified  as  apparitions,  telepathy,  and  clairvoyance, 
not  as  explanations  of  the  facts,  but  as  names  for  facts 
demanding  somewhat  separate  explanations.  Per- 
haps other  types  of  unusual  phenomena  are  noticeable 
in  the  accounts  of  them  during  the  history  of  civilisa- 
tion. But  mixed  with  them  were  many  phenomena 
that  could  not  claim  any  more  remarkable  character 
than  the  abnormal  and  it  was  long  before  the  claims 
of  the  supernormal  could  be  distinguished  from  those 
of  the  abnormal.  The  facts,  however,  which  have 
had  a  long  history  and  which  finally  succeeded  in  chal- 
lenging attention  were  numerous. 

The  first  of  these  and  perhaps  the  oldest  is  apparent 
in  the  witchcraft  of  ancient  and  modern  times.  Mixed 
up  with  hysteria  and  insanity  this  was  probably  often 
associated  with  phenomena  of  a  more  important  char- 
acter and  may  have  occasionally  connected  with  what 
is  now  known  as  mediumship.  Much  of  it  was  most 
probably  what  we  should  now  call  secondary  person- 
ality or  double  consciousness,  and  probably  also  much 
of  it  insanity.  But  it  is  possible  also  that  some  of  it 

10         SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

contained  sporadic  instances  of  supernormal  phenom- 
ena. The  history  of  it  does  not  seem  to  show  clearly 
what  the  phenomena  were,  but  only  the  kind  of  treat- 
ment which  its  victims  received  at  the  hands  of  church 
and  state,  and  this  in  both  ancient  and  modern 
times. 

It  is  probable  that  the  ancient  oracles  were  a  class 
which  we  can  easily  recognise  as  a  mixture  of  shrewd 
adventurers  and  genuine  mediumistic  persons.  It  is 
not  now  easy  to  decide  in  any  case  what  they  were. 
What  has  come  down  to  us  about  them  savors  so  much 
of  those  phenomena  that  represent  shrewd  knowledge 
of  weak  human  nature,  guessing,  oracular  and  am- 
biguous utterances  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
suppose  that  anything  supernormal  was  ever  associ- 
ated with  them.  Fraud  and  illusion  are  the  charac- 
teristics which  it  is  most  natural  to  attribute  to  them, 
and  the  evidence  that  any  of  them  were  more  than  this 
is  so  scanty  and  inconclusive  that  only  experts  would 
conjecture  the  possibility  that  occasional  instances 
were  supernormal. 

The  article  on  Witchcraft  in  the  Encyclopaedia 
Britannica  will  give  some  idea  of  what  occurred  in 
this  connection  during  the  middle  ages,  and  it  was  no 
doubt  represented  mainly  by  fraud,  superstition,  de- 
lusion, and  insanity.  The  frequent  laws  enacted 
against  it  even  in  ages  when  the  rulers  themselves  were 
superstitious  attest  that  it  must  have  been  either  fraud 
or  insanity  or  both.  From  what  we  know  in  recent 
times  it  is  probable  that  there  were  more  interesting 
psychological  phenomena  associated  with  it,  but  it  is 
quite  as  probable  that  their  occurrence  in  credible  and 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH        11 

respectable  quarters,  as  is  now  the  fact,  was  concealed 
for  various  reasons  prudential  and  otherwise. 

It  is  in  modern  times,  however,  that  the  evidence  of 
phenomena  that  are  more  perplexing  to  science  has 
been  more  abundant,  and  it  has  not  been  their  super- 
normal character  that  has  perplexed  the  scientist  in 
all  cases.  There  have  been  abundant  phenomena  that 
have  no  other  interest  than  that  of  abnormal  psychol- 
ogy whose  problems  are  associated  with  the  most  im- 
portant issues  of  philanthropy  as  well  as  science.  But 
before  they  were  clearly  understood  they  appeared  to 
many  as  representing  facts  inexplicable  by  any  or- 
dinary hypotheses.  In  the  process  of  time,  however, 
the  claims  of  the  supernormal  have  been  greatly  re- 
duced. The  whole  wide  field  comprises  fraud,  delu- 
sion, jugglery,  hysteria,  hallucinations,  insanity, 
secondary  personality,  somnambulic  and  hypnotic 
phenomena,  chance  coincidence,  alleged  telepathy  and 
clairvoyance,  mediumistic  phenomena,  and  the  alleged 
movement  of  physical  objects  without  contact  or  so- 
called  telekinesis.  The  residual  phenomena  having 
any  significance  for  the  supernormal  in  this  vast  mass 
of"  data  is  perhaps  comparatively  small  in  quantity, 
but  they  have  sufficed  to  invoke  serious  attention  from 
intelligent  men.  They  have  been  such  as  remarkable 
coincidences,  apparitions  of  dying  or  deceased  per- 
sons, such  as  Lord  Brougham's  experience,  apparitions 
of  living  persons,  such  as  those  of  G.  J.  Romanes,  the 
evolutionist  contemporary  and  friend  of  Charles  Dar- 
win, and  that  of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  the  literary  critic. 
Then  there  is  the  larger  class  of  mediumistic  phenom- 
ena of  which  those  of  Mrs.  Piper  are  a  type.  The 

12        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Phantasms  of  the  Living  in  two  volumes  and  the 
Census  of  Hallucinations  in  one  volume  show  hun- 
dreds of  coincidental  experiences  and  apparitions 
which  have  a  scientific  interest  on  any  theory  of  them, 
and  are  certainly  suggestive  of  supernormal  phenom- 
ena whether  they  prove  them  or  not.  They  are  of  the 
type  that  must  have  existed  by  the  thousand  before 
any  attempt  was  made  to  investigate  them,  and  there 
are  evidences  that  they  did  exist  in  such  numbers.  It 
does  not  matter  what  the  explanation  of  them  is. 
They  may  all  be  due  to  hallucination,  chance  coinci- 
dence, malobservation  of  facts,  illusions  of  memory 
or  other  natural  causes.  It  is  not  their  real  or  appar- 
ent significance  for  the  supernormal  that  constitutes 
their  whole  value.  They  have  a  most  important  value 
even  on  the  supposition  that  they  are  none  of  them 
supernormal.  It  is  quite  as  important  to  prevent  our 
being  fooled  in  the  interpretation  of  such  phenomena 
as  it  is  to  prove  the  facts  supernormal.  Protection 
against  illusion  is  as  great  a  service  to  the  race  as  the 
establishment  of  transcendental  truths.  Hence  I  am 
referring  to  the  phenomena  that  have  suggested  in- 
vestigation without  implying  that  they  are  necessarily 
more  than  the  ordinary  coincidences  that  we  explain 
quite  naturally.  But  I  am  also  trying  to  indicate  a 
type  of  facts  that  at  least  appear  to  be  more  and 
which  it  is  quite  natural  for  the  ordinary  mind  to 
interpret  as  it  does  in  favor  of  a  "  supernatural  " 
world. 

I  cannot  give  any  elaborate  account  of  the  real 
or  alleged  mediumistic  cases  that  have  excited  much 
speculation  in  the  past  and  which  have  had  their  in- 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH        13 

fluence  in  stimulating  investigation.  I  must  leave  to 
the  reader  the  task  of  looking  them  up.  Mr.  Pod- 
more's  Modern  Spiritualism,  in  two  volumes,  will  give 
a  sufficient  account  of  very  many  of  them,  good  and 
bad  alike,  to  make  any  discussion  of  them  unnecessary 
in  this  summary  introduction.  But  I  may  refer  to  a 
few  of  the  more  celebrated  of  them  very  briefly. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  was  Andrew  Jackson 
Davis.  There  seems  to  have  been  no  secure  evidence 
of  any  normal  dishonesty  in  the  man,  whatever  we  may 
think  or  conjecture  about  subconscious  delinquencies. 
Much  of  his  work,  or  all  of  it,  was  done  in  a  trance 
and  parts  of  it  were  carefully  recorded  and  published. 
I  do  not  myself  see  adequate  evidence  of  anything 
supernormal  in  any  of  it,  but  there  was  certainly  much 
in  his  experiences  that  challenged  scientific  investiga- 
tion. There  was  then  the  work  of  Judge  Edmunds 
which  represented  some  interesting  experiments  and 
experiences.  No  scientific  man  today  would  accept 
them  as  proof  of  the  hypothesis  which  Mr.  Edmunds 
believed,  though  this  would  not  be  discredited  on  any 
grounds  of  Mr.  Edmunds'  lack  of  intelligence  or  hon- 
esty. We  simply  know  the  phenomenon  of  secondary 
personality  today  where  he  did  not,  and  AVC  exact  more 
stringent  conditions  for  the  proof  of  the  nature  of  our 
phenomena  than  he  apparently  employed  in  what  he 
reports.  But  with  or  without  defects  his  work  was 
such  as  should  have  invited  investigation  sooner  than 
it  came.  Cahagnet's  case  was  also  most  interesting 
and  seems  to  have  received  some  such  attention  and 
detailed  records  for  a  part  of  the  work  as  similar 
instances  should  have  obtained.  His  phenomena  rep- 

14         SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

resent  alleged  communications  with  living  persons  at 
a  distance  and  also  with  the  deceased,  and  perhaps 
alleged  clairvoyance.  Mr.  Podmore  thinks  that  some 
of  the  facts  might  have  been  telepathic,  but  I  am  not 
sure  that  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  more  than  second- 
ary personality  for  the  more  striking  incidents  re- 
corded. But  whatever  we  think  of  his  case,  there  were 
undoubtedly  interesting  phenomena  for  psychology 
there,  and  such  as  certainly  excuse  the  interpretation 
which  less  scientific  ages  gave  to  similar  facts.  I  need 
hardly  mention  Immanuel  Swedenborg,  whose  experi- 
ences aroused  the  attention  of  Immanuel  Kant,  the 
philosopher,  and  influenced  him  to  write  his  Dreams 
of  a  Ghostseer  and  to  defend  the  possibility  of  the 
spiritistic  theory  of  such  phenomena. 

But  probably  the  most  important  of  those  which 
I  wish  to  mention  was  the  Rev.  William  Stainton 
Moses.  He  was  educated  at  Oxford  University  and 
became  a  minister  for  some  years  in  the  Church  of 
England.  His  health  becoming  affected  he  obtained 
a  mastership  at  Universit^y  College  School.  Through 
the  influence  of  his  friend,  Dr.  Speer,  he  became  inter- 
ested in  Spiritualism  and  soon  developed  mediumistic 
powers  himself,  whatever  this  term  may  mean.  He 
was  very  sceptical  of  these  phenomena  at  first,  but 
finally  became  convinced  that  he  was  the  medium  of 
communication  with  a  spirit  world  and  gave  the  rest 
of  his  life  to  the  cause,  being  for  a  long  time  editor  of 
Light,  the  English  representative  of  the  Spiritualistic 
movement.  No  one  has  ever  questioned  the  man's 
normal  integrity  and  probity.  He  was  never  a  pro- 
fessional medium  and  had  scrutinised  his  own  experi- 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH        15 

ences  for  a  long  time  before  he  yielded  to  the  spiritis- 
tic conclusion,  and  this  only  in  response  to  phenomena 
well  calculated  to  tempt  any  mind.  Some  account  of 
his  experiences  that  convinced  him  and  his  friends  was 
published  by  himself  in  a  work  entitled  Spirit  Iden- 
tity, and  in  another  volume  which  he  called  Spirit 
Teachings.  Illustrations  of  what  these  works  repre- 
sented have  been  republished  by  the  Society  for  Psy- 
chical Research  in  its  Proceedings,  and  in  the  work  of 
Mr.  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  entitled  Human  Person- 
ality and  Its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death. 

The  data  which  convinced  Mr.  Moses  of  the  truth 
of  Spiritualism  were  the  result  of  automatic  writing 
through  his  own  hand.  He  kept  a  note  book  always 
present  and  when  he  felt  an  unaccountable  impulse  to 
write  he  took  out  his  ever  ready  j  ournal  and  thus  kept 
a  record  of  his  experiences.  Whatever  we  may  think 
of  them  they  are  of  the  kind  to  demand  the  most 
patient  scientific  inquiry,  and  the  man's  honesty  was 
so  unquestioned  that  intelligent  men,  when  they  knew 
the  facts  and  the  manner  of  his  receiving  them,  could 
not  refuse  them  attention,  though  they  might  not 
agree  with  his  interpretation  of  them.  They  are  of 
remarkable  interest  to  the  psychologist  on  any  theory 
whatever  of  their  origin. 

It  was  the  scandal  of  not  investigating  such  phe- 
nomena, and  especially  the  respectability  of  those  ex- 
perienced by  Mr.  Moses  and  known  to  several  leading 
men  in  England,  that  led  to  the  founding  of  the  So- 
ciety for  Psychical  Research.  This  was  organised  in 
1882  with  Prof.  Henry  Sidgwick,  of  Cambridge  Uni- 
versity, England,  as  the  President.  Among  the  Vice- 

16        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Presidents  were  Mr.  Arthur  J.  Balfour,  now  Prime 
Minister  of  England ;  Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett,  Professor 
of  Experimental  Physics  in  the  Royal  College  of  Sci- 
ence for  Ireland ;  Prof.  Balfour  Stewart,  Professor  of 
Natural  Philosophy,  Owens'  College,  Manchester ;  Mr. 
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Editor  of  The  Spectator;  Mr. 
Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  the  brother-in-law  of  Charles 
Darwin,  and  the  Rev.  Stainton  Moses,  mentioned 
above.  Among  other  co-operators  were  Mr.  Frederic 
W.  H.  Myers,  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney,  and  Mr.  Frank 
Podmore. 

There  soon  followed  in  co-operation  with  these  such 
men  as  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.  R.  S. ;  Sir  William 
Crookes,  F.  R.  S. ;  Prof.  William  James,  of  Harvard 
University ;  Prof.  S.  P.  Langley,  of  the  Smithsonian 
Institution,  Washington,  D.  C. ;  Lord  Raleigh,  the 
Marquis  of  Bute,  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  Dr.  Milne 
Bramwell,  Prof.  J.  J.  Thompson,  F.  R.  S. ;  Prof. 
Charles  Richet,  of  the  Physiological  Institute  in  Paris ; 
Prof.  Max  Dessoir,  of  the  University  of  Berlin,  and 
perhaps  hundreds  of  others  with  similar  standing  in 
the  scientific  world.  I  have  no  space  to  mention  more 
than  those  best  known. 

The  Council  of  the  Society  issued  a  prospectus  in 
which  it  explained  the  object  of  the  organisation  in 
the  following  language: 

"  It  has  been  widely  felt  that  the  present  is  an  op- 
portune time  for  making  an  organised  and  systematic 
attempt  to  investigate  that  large  group  of  debatable 
phenomena  designated  by  such  terms  as  mesmeric, 
psychical,  and  Spiritualistic. 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH        17 

.. 

From  the  recorded  testimony  of  many  competent 
witnesses,  past  and  present,  including  observations  re- 
cently made  by  scientific  men  of  eminence  in  various 
countries,  there  appears  to  be,  amidst  much  illusion 
and  deception,  an  important  body  of  remarkable  phe- 
nomena, which  are  prima  facie  inexplicable  on  any 
recognised  hypothesis,  and  which,  if  incontestably  es- 
tablished, would  be  of  the  highest  value." 

Following  this  was  a  statement  of  the  subjects  en- 
trusted to  special  committees  for  investigation.      They 
define  the  phenomena  that  it  was  intended  to  study : 
"  1.     An  examination  of  the  nature  and  extent  of 
any  influence  which  may  be  exerted  by  one 
mind  upon  another,  apart  from  any  gener- 
ally recognised  mode  of  perception. 
"  2.     The  study  of  hypnotism,  and  the  forms  of 
so-called  mesmeric  trance,  with  its   alleged 
insensibility  to  pain ;  clairvo3rance  and  other 
allied  phenomena. 

"  3.  A  critical  revision  of  Reichenbach's  re- 
searches with  certain  organisations  called 
'  sensitive,'  and  an  inquiry  whether  such  or- 
ganisations possess  any  power  of  perception 
beyond  a  highly  exalted  sensibility  of  the 
recognised  sensory  organs. 

"  4.  A  careful  investigation  of  any  reports,  rest- 
ing on  strong  testimony,  regarding  appari- 
tions at  the  moment  of  death,  or  otherwise, 
or  regarding  disturbances  in  houses  reputed 
to  be  haunted. 
"  5.  An  inquiry  into  the  various  physical  phe- 

18        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

nomena  commonly  called  Spiritualistic ;  with 
an  attempt  to  discover  their  causes  and  gen- 
eral laws. 

"  6.  The  collection  and  collation  of  existing  ma- 
terials bearing  on  the  history  of  these  sub- 
jects." 

In  the  course  of  its  career  the  Society  has  issued 
18  volumes  of  Proceedings,  and  11  volumes  of  a  Jour- 
nal. The  Proceedings  are  occupied  with  reports, 
articles,  and  discussions  on  the  various  topics  indicated 
in  the  prospectus  and  questions  of  allied  importance, 
including  methods  of  fraud  and  jugglery,  coinci- 
dences, guessing,  testimony,  evidence,  etc.  The  first 
attention  seems  to  have  been  given  to  those  phenomena 
which  suggested  "  mind  reading  "  or  telepathy?  as  it 
was  afterward  called  technically.  The  reports  of  ex- 
periments on  this  subject  extended  through  eleven  vol- 
umes of  the  Proceedings  and  represent  a  very  impres- 
sive mass  of  evidence  favorable  to  the  hypothesis. 
There  have  been  various  opinions  in  regard  to  its 
value,  some  accepting  it  as  conclusive  and  others  sus- 
pending judgment  for  further  experimentation.  But 
probably  none  can  deny  that  the  material  at  least 
makes  out  a  case  demanding  serious  attention  from 
scientific  men,  and  that,  if  telepathy  at  least  is  not  ad- 
mitted, much  more  than  this  will  have  to  be  accepted 
to  explain  a  part  of  the  Society's  records. 

The  study  of  apparitions  and  dream  coincidences 
resulted  in  two  large  volumes  by  Messrs.  Gurney, 
Myers,  and  Podmore.  They  comprise  three  general 
types  of  phenomena,  dream  coincidences  and  waking 
coincidences  that  may  reasonably  be  referred  to  tel- 

ORIGIN  OF  PSYCHIC  RESEARCH        19 

epathy  for  an  explanation,  if  explanation  it  be,  and 
apparitions  of  living  and  dying  persons.  Appari- 
tions of  persons  some  time  deceased  were  excluded 
from  the  account,  because  it  was  the  design  of  the 
authors  to  admit  only  those  which  might  be  explicable 
by  telepathy,  while  those  not  so  easily  explicable 
by  telepathy  might  be  referable  to  other  more  natural 
causes.  There  were  elaborate  experiments  on  telep- 
athy published  between  the  same  covers  in  order  to 
render  that  explanation  of  spontaneous  coincidences 
more  probable.  Several  able  essays  on  hallucinations 
were  also  included  in  the  work,  as  necessary  to  throw 
light  upon  the  assumed  telepathic  apparitions.  The 
record  and  discussion  of  phantasms  of  the  dead  were 
taken  up  by  Mr.  Myers  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Society.  In  the  Proceedings  also  the  same  subject 
was  occupied  with  a  Census  of  Hallucinations,  as  it 
was  called,  and  the  conclusion  of  the  authors  was 
that  the  coincidental  apparitions  involved  were  not 
due  to  chance  alone.  No  positive  explanation  was 
offered. 

The  results  of  the  Society's  work  have  been  rep- 
resented in  some  independent  productions  taken  from 
its  recorded  material.  The  first  of  these  were  Ap- 
paritions and  Thought  Transference,  and  Aspects  of 
Psychical  Research  both  by  Mr.  Frank  Podmore  and 
abbreviated  accounts  of  what  is  contained  in  the 
Society's  Proceedings.  The  most  important  work, 
however,  and  representing  the  best  results  in  the 
whole  field  to  which  the  Society  devoted  its  endeav- 
ors, was  the  work  of  Mr.  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers, 
published  after  his  death  and  consisting  of  two  large 

20        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

volumes.  It  is  entitled  Human  Personality  and  its 
Survival  of  Bodily  Death.  Much  of  its  matter  re- 
lates rather  to  abnormal  than  to  supernormal  psy- 
chology, so  that  its  title  conceals  the  width  of  its 
scope.  It  will  probably  prove,  however,  to  be  a  more 
or  less  epoch-making  work  in  its  field,  no  matter  what 
may  become  of  its  conclusions. 

Less  important  productions  have  been  stimulated 
in  all  directions  by  the  work  of  the  Society.  They 
cannot  be  mentioned  here  as  a  part  of  its  immediate 
history,  though  they  are  the  real  result  of  the  in- 
quiry. The  monumental  part  of  its  work  is  in  its 
Proceedings,  a  character  that  it  will  not  lose  even 
though  the  suggested  conclusion  never  mature.  They 
represent  the  first  scientific  attempt  to  introduce  intel- 
ligent investigation  into  what  was  before  no  better 
than  folklore.  It  may  result  in  collating  nothing 
more,  but  even  if  it  effects  nothing  else  it  will  have 
laid  the  basis  for  protecting  the  human  mind  against 
illusions  and  for  educating  it  in  the  habit  of  sus- 
pending judgment  until  the  evidence  for  any  special 
belief  is  adequate,  and  this  function  is  the  chief 
service  of  science  and  its  method. 

CHAPTER  II 

GENERAL    PROBLEMS    AND    RESULTS 

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  discuss  at  any  length 
the  general  problems  and  results  of  psychic  research, 
as  that  is  foreign  to  the  main  object  of  this  book. 
But  in  order  to  show  that  there  has  been  no  pre- 
possession in  the  conduct  of  the  work  to  bias  it  for 
spiritistic  investigations  it  will  be  necessary  to  show 
that  its  interests  extended  far  beyond  the  proof  of 
any  such  a  belief.  Its  original  plan  contemplated 
investigation  into  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  as 
this  was  distinctly  avowed,  but  it  had  no  disposition 
to  accept  a  brief  for  this  doctrine,  though  it  had  the 
true  scientific  willingness  to  consider  its  claims  fairly 
and  impartially.  Spiritism,  however,  was  only  a  part 
of  its  territory,  and  might  even  have  been  rejected  if 
some  of  the  facts  that  came  within  the  purview  of 
its  inquiries  had  not  made  it  imperative  to  admit  the 
possibility  of  survival  after  death.  It  is  probable 
that  the  society  conducted  its  investigations  in  a  man- 
ner and  with  reference  to  phenomena  that  would  not 
excite  any  misapprehensions  in  regard  to  its  intellec- 
tual tendencies.  But  this  was  a  justifiable  prudence 
in  the  face  of  prejudices  which  were  quite  as  con- 
temptible as  were  supposed  to  characterise  a  bias  to- 
ward Spiritualism.  Besides  it  was  a  help  to  bridging 
a  scientific  chasm  that  the  supernormal,  if  it  existed 

at   all,   should   first  be    found  between   living   minds 

21 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

instead  of  between  the  dead  and  the  living.  The 
last  was  by  far  the  more  difficult  of  the  two  problems, 
if  not  impossible.  Consequently  the  wisest  course 
was  to  investigate  first  the  non-spiritistic  phenomena, 
partly  as  a  necessity  of  scientific  method  and  partly 
as  a  judicious  means  for  disarming  criticism. 

1.  Telepathy 

The  first  problem  which  the  Society  attacked  was 
that  of  "  telepathy r  as  it  was  later  called.  This 
term  had  to  be  coined  after  using  the  expression 
"  thought  reading  "  for  a  time  to  indicate  the  super- 
normal acquisition  of  knowledge  by  some  transmis- 
sion of  one  person's  thoughts  to  another.  Evidently 
the  organisers  of  the  Society  had  happened  upon  some 
striking  coincidences,  claimed  by  common  people  to 
represent  spirit  communication,  but  which  were  not 
in  the  least  evidential  of  this  view,  though  they  might 
indicate  something  unusual  to  science.  But  the  very 
suspicion  that  such  a  thing  as  thought  transference 
might  be  possible  was  a  demand  for  experiment  to 
test  the  matter,  as  experiment  is  the  last  resort  of 
science  in  the  answering  of  its  questions.  Experi- 
ment gives  an  opportunity  to  determine  the  conditions 
for  obtaining  the  phenomena,  at  least  such  conditions 
as  would  make  the  facts  more  evidential  than  spon- 
taneous coincidences.  Those  conditions  must  shut 
out  guessing,  inference,  and  suggestion,  to  say  noth- 
ing of  excluding  all  sensory  information  of  the  or- 
dinary kind.  The  evidence  in  favor  of  the  existence 
of  thought  transference,  therefore,  must  be  extraor- 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS    23 

dinarily  protected  against  suspicion  from  the  influ- 
ence of  defective  conditions,  and  in  this  brief  account 
of  the  work  of  the  Society  it  will  have  to  be  taken 
for  granted  that  the  experimenters,  whose  results 
I  shall  quote,  were  careful  enough  to  make  their 
facts  suggestive  at  least,  and  any  doubts  about  it  will 
have  to  seek  relief  in  the  study  of  the  detailed  records. 
The  first  series  of  experiments  to  test  the  claims  of 
telepathy  seem  very  impressive  from  the  illustrations 
given  in  the  Society's  reports.  The  most  striking  of 
their  experiments  consisted  of  various  figures  drawn 
by  the  person  wishing  to  transmit  his  thought  and 
of  their  real  or  attempted  reproduction  by  the  person 
who  did  the  "  thought  reading."  As  in  the  parlance 
of  the  experimenters,  we  shall  call  the  person  sending 
the  thought  the  agent  and  the  person  receiving  it  the 
percipient.  Some  care  was  taken  to  avoid  the  choice 
of  figures  familiar  enough  to  cause  coincidence  from 
the  chances  of  the  guessing  habit.  That  is  to  say, 
if  the  figures  chosen  should  be  ordinary  simple  geo- 
metrical figures,  such  as  a  circle  or  a  triangle,  the 
danger  that  the  percipient  would  think  of  the  same 
figure  as  the  agent  would  be  so  great  as  to  rob  a 
coincidence  of  evidential  significance  in  a  theory  of 
causes.  This  sort  of  precaution  had  to  be  taken 
throughout  the  whole  system  of  experiments  in  the 
history  of  the  Society's  work,  and  there  was  even  an 
experiment  to  show  that  this  "  guessing  habit "  alone 
will  produce  some  interesting  coincidences.  But  in 
the  experiments  first  attempted  to  test  the  existence 
of  telepathy  this  danger  was  fairly  well  avoided  by 
more  or  less  complications  of  figures  and  the  choice 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  unusual  variations  from  familiar  forms.  The 
successes  were  very  favorable  to  the  supposition  of 
telepathy.  Muscle  reading  was  undoubtedly  shut 
out,  and  if  we  could  eliminate  entirely  the  scepticism 
which  can  base  itself  on  the  possibility  of  a  signal 
code  between  the  agents  and  percipients  we  could 
feel  more  confidence  in  the  results.  In  the  experi- 
ments of  the  first  year  this  objection  can  at  least  be 
apparently  made  to  their  conclusiveness,  though  the 
committee  was  convinced  that  the  agent  and  percip- 
ient were  perfectly  honest  and  that  the  conditions 
excluded  the  existence  of  a  signal  code.  In  the  case 
of  two  of  the  subjects,  the  McCreery  sisters,  there  was 
a  later  confession  that  they  had  been  guilty  of  a 
certain  amount  of  signalling.  It  is  important,  how- 
ever, to  remember  that  the  committee  placed  no  value 
on  any  of  the  results  in  which  this  signalling  was 
possible  and  that  the  experiments  which  they  did 
value  were  such  that  this  signalling  was  not  possible. 
But  it  is  important  to  remark  in  view  of  such  cases 
that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  satisf}^  the  scientific 
man  of  evidence  for  telepathy  until  we  have  elim- 
inated all  such  possibilities.  It  is  so  often  found  that 
various  motives  operate  in  apparently  the  most  inno- 
cent persons  to  play  tricks  and  the  conditions  have 
to  be  most  stringent  to  eliminate  all  sorts  of  conscious 
or  even  unconscious  intimations.  It  would  surprise 
the  ordinary  person  to  learn  how  simple  a  code  of 
signals  will  suffice  to  communicate  all  sorts  of  com- 
plicated information. 

I  have  no  reason  whatever  to  believe  that  fraud  of 
any  kind  discredited  the  most  important  of  the  results 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     25 

in  the  cases  which  I  have  been  considering.  But  it 
is  so  important  to  be  on  the  alert  for  its  possibility 
that  we  must  reckon  with  that  contingent  factor  in 
making  up  our  minds  on  such  matters.  I  see  no 
reason  for  believing  in  telepathy  unless  it  can  give 
credentials  as  unassailable  as  any  other  scientific 
truth,  and  the  fact  that  the  earlier  experiments  were 
not  considered  completely  satisfactory  even  by  the 
original  experimenters  is  one  that  admonishes  cau- 
tion as  well  as  it  vindicates  the  sobriety  and  scientific 
spirit  of  the  committee. 

The  next  report  by  Mr.  Malcolm  Guthrie  with 
other  "  subjects "  is  still  more  impressive  than  the 
first  year's  experiments.  Greater  precautions  were 
observed  against  the  possibility  of  collusion.  Not 
that  there  was  any  reason  to  suspect  it,  but  that  the 
important  point  in  the  proof  is  not  the  honesty  of 
the  subjects  but  the  impossibility  of  collusion  between 
agent  and  percipient,  if  they  are  not  the  parties  lay- 
ing claim  to  telepathic  phenomena.  Mr.  Guthrie 
prescribed  satisfactory  conditions  against  signalling 
in  his  experiments  both  as  regards  the  nature  of  the 
things  chosen  to  be  communicated  and  the  variety 
of  ways  by  which  he  excluded  all  ordinary  sources  of 
information.  A  very  careful  study  of  the  whole 
of  his  report  would  show  that,  if  fraud  be  suspected, 
Mr.  Guthrie  himself  would  have  to  bear  the  accusation 
and  not  the  subjects  with  which  he  experimented. 

I  shall  give  two  illustrations  of  one  type  of  experi- 
ment by  Mr.  Guthrie.  They  are  not  designed  to 
prove,  but  only  to  illustrate  the  type  of  phenomena 
which  are  given  to  suggest  telepathy  as  an  explana- 

26         SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

tion.  The  reader  will  have  to  go  to  the  original 
report  to  examine  the  whole  case. 

"  One  evening,"  says  Mr.  Guthrie,  "  I  called  Miss 
E.  and  a  friend  of  mine,  Mr.  Lee,  out  of  the  room, 
and  requested  them  to  assist  me  in  imagining  the 
large  stained  glass  rose-window  in  the  transept  of 
Westminster  Abbey,  opposite  to  which  Miss  E.,  Miss 
R.,  and  I  had  been  sitting  at  the  service  the  same 
afternoon.  I  then  asked  Miss  R.  to  say  what  object 
we  were  thinking  of.  After  a  while  she  said,  *  I 
cannot  tell  what  you  are  looking  at,  but  I  seem  to 
be  sitting  in  Westminster  Abbey,  where  we  were  this 
afternoon.'  After  another  interval  she  said,  '  I  seem 
to  be  looking  at  a  window,'  and  again,  '  I  think  it  is 
the  window  in  the  chancel  with  the  figures.'  When 
afterwards  told  which  window  it  was,  she  said  that 
she  did  not  see  any  window  distinctly,  and  certainly 
not  the  rose-window  thought  of. 

"  I  next  proposed  another  subject,  and  decided  up- 
on something  which  had  struck  our  attention  in  a 
lamp  shop  in  New  Bond  Street,  a  lighted  lamp  with 
a  stuffed  monkey  clinging  to  it  —  the  lamp  at  the 
same  time  revolving,  and  the  monkey  moving  a  cocoa- 
nut,  which  was  suspended  from  its  foot.  This  exper- 
iment took  a  very  long  time  and  was  only  partially 
successful.  First  Miss  R.  said  she  thought  of  a  cat 
or  it  might  be  a  dog.  After  a  while  she  said  it  was 
something  long,  dark,  and  hanging  —  describing  the 
size  and  shape  pretty  well  with  her  hands.  Then 
she  said  that  she  saw  something  hanging  straight 
down,  and  moving  up  and  down.  After  the  removal 
of  the  blindfolding,  she  looked  at  the  gas  chandelier, 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     27 

and  said,  'Was  it  not  that?'  and  then  immediately, 
'  No,  it  was  not  that  —  it  was  a  lamp  and  it  was 
lighted.'  Asked  if  the  cat  she  saw  had  anything  to 
do  with  the  lamp  she  said  *  No.' ': 

The  chief  value  of  this  last  experiment  lies  in  its 
approximation  to  the  real  things  thought  of,  and 
this  sort  of  failure  or  half  success  was  a  very  frequent 
phenomenon  in  these  and  other  trials.  Their  impor- 
tance lies  in  their  evidence  of  subjective  influences  on 
the  transmitted  thought  or  images  and  their  appar- 
ent incompatibility  with  any  form  of  fraud,  even 
though  that  be  conceded  as  possible  in  the  case. 

The  experiments  with  drawn  figures  under  very 
good  test  conditions  showed  remarkable  successes,  and 
failures  with  half  successes.  The  percipients  were 
blindfolded  and  the  drawings  made  in  another  room 
and  not  in  the  presence  of  the  percipient.  The  draw- 
ing was  placed  on  a  stand  behind  the  percipient  and  a 
board  placed  between  the  percipient  and  the  figure 
drawn.  The  agent  sat  gazing  at  the  drawing  until 
the  percipient  had  an  impression.  The  picture  was 
then  taken  away  and  concealed,  the  subject's  blindfold 
removed,  then  a  reproduction  of  the  impression  made 
in  drawing  by  the  percipient.  The  coincidences  in 
many  cases  are  so  accurate  that  one  can  hardly  resist 
the  conviction  that  telepathy  is  proved  by  them. 
Prof.  Barrett  reported  in  the  same  year  some  very 
good  illustrations  of  similar  diagrams  apparently 
transmitted  telepathically  by  other  percipients  alto- 
gether. 

Under  similar  conditions  Mr.  Guthrie  reported  the 
next  year  a  large  and  complicated  series  of  experi- 

28         SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ments  having  much  the  same  results  as  those  which 
I  have  indicated  and  containing  certain  interesting 
characteristics  like  reversion  and  delayed  percipience 
that  tell  decidedly  in  favor  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  phenomena.  No  summary  of  the  facts  will  suf- 
fice to  indicate  their  force  or  value  on  any  theory  of 
them.  The  reader  must  go  to  the  original  records, 
if  he  wish  to  appreciate  either  side  of  the  controversy 
in  the  problem. 

In  the  next  number  of  the  Proceedings  (Vol.  IV) 
Max  Dessoir,  of  the  University  of  Berlin,  reported 
some  interesting  illustrations  of  the  transfer  of  dia- 
grams in  which  he  himself  and  two  friends  were  the 
experimenters  and  without  other  subjects,  so  that  the 
collusion  and  fraud  must  be  attributed  to  them,  if 
any  one  wishes  to  question  the  character  of  the  re- 
sults. With  dishonesty  eliminated  the  results  are 
very  suggestive  and  are  apparently  far  beyond  any- 
thing that  chance  might  produce. 

The  next  year  Prof.  Charles  Richet,  of  the  Physio- 
logical Institute  in  Paris,  published  in  the  Proceed- 
ings (Vol.  V)  a  very  long  memoir  of  experiments, 
not  only  confirming  the  general  conclusion  most  nat- 
ural from  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Guthrie  and  others, 
but  also  contributing  new  evidence  in  support  of 
thought  tranference  and  suggesting  that  the  faculty 
for  this  might  be  denominated  "  lucidite,"  or  what 
we  would  perhaps  call  "  clairvoyance  "  in  its  popular 
significance,  and  representing,  as  he  claimed,  mental 
processes  different  from  our  normal  consciousness.  I 
have  no  judgment  to  pass  on  this  view  of  the  condi- 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     29 

tions  of  the  alleged  telepathy.  The  most  important 
feature  of  his  memoir  is  the  record  of  diagrams  in- 
volved in  the  experiments  and  that  afford  very  impres- 
sive evidence  of  very  unusual  modes  of  obtaining  the 
thoughts  of  others. 

Some  careful  experiments  by  two  Frenchmen,  M. 
A.  Schmoll  and  M.  J.  E.  Mabire,  of  the  diagrammatic 
type  are  recorded  and  tend  to  confirm  the  same  con- 
clusion. Then  the  next  year  a  very  long  and  careful 
set  of  experiments  by  Prof.  Henry  Sidgwick  and 
Mrs.  Sidgwick  in  cooperation  with  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith 
with  four  different  percipients  while  they  were  in  the 
hypnotic  trance.  No  satisfactory  summary  of  these 
experiments  is  possible,  and  we  must  be  content  with 
the  general  conclusion  of  Prof.  Sidgwick  that  chance 
was  not  sufficient  to  account  for  the  successes. 

Baron  Von  Schrenk-Notzing  of  Munich  the  next 
year  reported  a  series  of  experiments  containing  dia- 
grammatic and  other  illustrations  of  thought  trans- 
ference, and  Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw,  of  New  York  City, 
the  following  year  reported  a  no  less  striking  set  of 
experiments,  Mrs.  Thaw  generally  acting  as  the  per- 
cipient, so  that  outside  parties  with  one  exception, 
that  of  a  friend,  were  not  involved  in  the  problem 
of  evidence.  In  one  set  Dr.  Thaw  himself  was  the 
percipient  and  Mrs.  Thaw  the  agent.  I  give  a 
few  illustrations  of  the  results,  but  without  the  in- 
tention that  they  shall  be  considered  as  proving  but 
only  as  confirming  the  natural  interpretation  of  other 
experiments.  The  report  is  abbreviated. 

"  1st  Object.      Silk  pincushion,  in  form  of  Orange- 

30        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Red  Apple,  quite  round.  Percipient:  A  Disc. 
When  asked  what  color,  said  Red  or  Orange.  When 
asked  what  object,  named  Pincushion. 

"  2nd  Object.  A  short  lead  pencil,  nearly  covered 
by  nickel  cover.  Never  seen  by  percipient.  Percipi- 
ent :  Something  white  or  light.  A  Card.  I  thought 
of  Mr.  Wyatt's  silver  pencil." 

Then  some  experiments  with  colors  chosen  at  ran- 
dom were  performed  after  a  number  of  successful 
trials  in  telling  numbers: 

Chosen.  1st  Guess.  2nd  Guess. 

Bright  Red  Bright  Red. 

Light  Green  Light  Green. 

Yellow  Dark  Blue  Yellow. 

Bright  Yellow  Bright   Yellow. 

Dark  Red  Blue  Dark  Red. 

Dark  Blue  Orange  Dark  Blue. 

Orange  Green  Heliotrope. 

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  these,  the  coinci- 
dences are  very  striking  and  suggestive,  especially 
when  taken  collectively. 

In  the  Proceedings  for  the  same  year  (Vol.  VIII) 
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  wife  of  Prof.  Henry  Sidgwick  of 
Cambridge  University,  England,  and  Miss  Alice 
Johnson  continued  the  experiments  which  have  been 
mentioned  above.  These  experiments  are  notable  for 
their  care  and  precautions  against  the  objections  to 
which  earlier  trials  were  exposed,  especial  care  being 
taken  to  choose  images  that  were  not  familiar  to  the 
lives  of  the  percipients,  so  as  to  exclude  the  influence 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     31 

of  natural  guessing  as  much  as  possible.  In  one  set 
of  trials  to  transfer  mental  images  there  are  sum- 
marised 126  experiments.  The  successes  are  more 
than  26%,  the  number  of  wrong  guesses  56%,  and  the 
number  in  which  no  impression  is  felt  more  than  17%. 
But  the  126  cases  are  divided  into  two  classes,  those 
in  which  percipient  and  agent  were  in  the  same  room 
and  those  in  which  they  were  not  in  the  same  room. 
In  the  former  there  were  71  experiments  and  in  the 
latter  55.  Of  the  71,  when  agent  and  percipient 
were  in  the  same  room,  the  successes  were  45.3%,  the 
wrong  impressions  38%,  and  the  instances  in  which 
no  impression  occurred  18%.  Of  the  55,  when  agent 
and  percipient  were  not  in  the  same  room,  only  4% 
were  successes,  just  80%  wrong  impressions,  and 
16%  without  any  impression.  But  this  mathematical 
account  gives  no  adequate  conception  of  the  suggest- 
iveness  of  the  coincidences  because  it  does  not  reckon 
with  the  complexity  of  the  incidents  involved,  a  com- 
plex incident  counting  no  more  than  a  simple  one, 
and  all  of  them  treated  as  if  they  represented  only  a 
single  factor  in  the  mental  image  chosen  when,  in 
fact,  these  factors  were  often  numerous  and  not  nec- 
essarily suggestive  of  each  other.  When  viewed  in 
this  way  the  successes  seem  much  more  striking.  But 
it  is  interesting  to  remark  an  apparent  obstacle  in 
distance  to  the  supposed  telepathic  transmission. 

There  were  also  recorded  107  experiments  at- 
tempting to  produce  anaesthesia  and  rigidity  in  a 
selected  finger  by  mental  suggestion.  Of  these  58.8% 
were  successes,  37. 4%  failures,  and  nearly  4%  partial 
successes.  This  result,  however,  appears  more  im- 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

portant  when  you  remember  that  the  selection  of  the 
finger  was  made  arbitrarily  from  both  hands,  so  that 
there  were  ten  fingers  to  be  counted  in  the  chances 
of  success,  or  failure. 

There  have  been  numerous  other  experiments  at 
thought  transference,  but  I  shall  not  summarise  them. 
In  recent  years  the  Society  has  not  published  many 
results  of  a  labored  kind  and  there  seems  to  be  no 
attempts  anywhere  to  test  the  claims  of  the  hypothe- 
sis any  further.  In  the  Phantasms  of  the  Living 
there  is  a  large  number  of  spontaneous  coincidences 
which  certainly  resemble  what  is  claimed  for  telep- 
athy, at  least  in  many  instances,  and  they  may  have 
their  weight.  But  they  can  never  be  so  evidential  as 
experimental  incidents,  and  we  cannot  easily  deter- 
mine the  mental  setting  in  which  they  occur.  The 
observers  are  not  always  persons  with  a  scientific 
training,  and  in  the  course  of  time  memory  is  likely 
to  play  havoc  with  the  incidents  which  it  is  necessary 
to  know  in  order  to  estimate  the  facts  at  their  right 
value.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  so  many  inci- 
dents well  attested  and  corroborated  by  independent 
testimony  that  they  certainly  seem  to  indicate  a 
causal  nexus  of  some  kind  in  the  coincidences  re- 
corded, whatever  we  may  choose  to  regard  this  causal 
influence. 

This  brief  summary  of  the  data  supposed  to  in- 
dicate the  existence  of  telepathy  can,  of  course,  give 
no  idea  of  its  weight  or  value,  or  whether  it  is  to 
have  any  or  not.  I  have  tried  only  to  give  some 
conception  of  the  care  with  which  the  hypothesis  has 
been  tested,  and  if  the  scientific  man  feels  that  I  have 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     33 

done  this  too  favorably  I  can  only  refer  him  to  the 
original  records  and  their  details  for  the  correction 
of  this  real  or  apparent  overestimation  on  my  part. 
One  thing  can  be  said  of  the  experiments  that  can- 
not be  questioned.  They  were  as  carefully  performed 
as  any  scientific  man  could  have  made  them  at  that 
time.  Many  of  them  were  instrumental  in  the  dis- 
covery of  delicate  influences  on  the  mind  that  were 
not  previously  suggested  to  psychology.  The  proc- 
ess of  protecting  experimentation  against  difficul- 
ties and  objections  to  telepathic  transmission  was  one 
of  gradual  growth,  and  in  spite  of  early  defects  in 
evidential  experiments  there  are  none  which  have  not 
presented  valuable  contributions  to  human  knowl- 
edge. 

It  is  probable  that  men  will  differ  in  regard  to  the 
force  of  the  Society's  evidence  in  favor  of  telepathy. 
Some  will  ridicule  it  without  examination,  perhaps 
more  especially  physicists  who  have  been  accustomed 
to  deal  with  experiments  where,  if  success  is  attained 
at  all,  it  will  be  so  uniform  and  so  easily  confirmed 
by  others  that  there  will  be  no  doubt  of  the  result. 
This  class  of  critics  and  objectors  can  be  neglected. 
Some  after  reading  the  evidence  will  probably  say 
not  proven,  and  concentrate  objections  on  failures 
and  the  mathematical  interpretation  of  the  phenom- 
ena. They  may  be  right,  and  I  shall  not  dogmatise 
against  this  claim,  though  I  think  that  it  would 
not  be  hastily  made  where  there  were  no  prejudices 
to  influence  the  student.  Some  will  admit  the  force  of 
the  evidence  and  suspend  judgment  until  more  facts 
are  forthcoming.  But  T  think  that  the  fairminded 

34        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

reader  of  the  records  who  studies  them  patiently,  as 
he  would  any  other  record  of  scientific  facts,  would 
admit,  with  Prof.  Stout  of  St.  Andrew's  University, 
that  at  least  a  good  case  had  been  made  out 
for  further  investigation,  and  it  is  quite  pos- 
sible that  he  would  also  be  at  a  loss  to  dis- 
credit the  man  who  thinks  telepathy  proved,  by 
anything  except  the  resolution  to  suspend  judg- 
ment for  more  evidence.  As  for  myself,  I  have  had 
very  little  personal  evidence  in  favor  of  telepathy.  In 
one  case  I  obtained  three  successes  with  diagrams  in 
three  experiments,  and  the  diagrams  were  too  compli- 
cated to  be  guessed.  They  by  no  means  proved  any- 
thing telepathic  to  me,  but  they  certainly  induced 
me  to  respect  the  more  elaborate  experiments  of  the 
Society  for  Psychical  Research. 

Considering,  however,  that  telepathy  has  either 
been  proved  or  justified  as  a  possible  hypothesis, 
there  is  one  thing  regarding  it  that  is  certain,  and 
this  is  that  the  conception  has  been  very  much  mis- 
understood, both  by  psychic  researchers  who  have 
used  it  too  freely  and  by  the  general  public  which 
has  never  appreciated  the  limitations  under  which 
it  was  at  first  supposed.  Those  who  adopted  the 
term  as  a  synonym  of  thought  transference  carefully 
defined  it  and  indicated,  implicitly  or  explicitly,  the 
limitations  under  which  the  process  was  supposed.  It 
was  defined  explicitly  as  "  the  communication  of  im- 
pressions of  any  kind  from  one  mind  to  another, 
independently  of  the  recognized  channels  of  sense." 
At  the  same  time  that  it  was  defined  in  this  manner 
the  conception  was  implicitly  limited  to  coincidences 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     35 

between  the  present  active  mental  states  of  the  agent 
and  the  received  impressions  of  the  percipient  at  the 
same  time.  A  few  instances  of  deferred  percipience 
occurred  that  might  suggest  the  supposition  that  the 
telepathic  access  was  a  subliminal  affair  for  both 
agent  and  percipient.  But  as  this  deferred  percip- 
ience was  not  the  rule  and  as  they  might  be  cases  of 
delayed  reproduction,  like  the  difficulty  of  recalling 
a  forgotten  word,  there  is  not  sufficient  evidence  to 
suppose  it  a  subliminal  affair  involving  supernormal 
access  to  the  memory  of  the  agent.  All  but  a  very 
few  instances  of  the  evidence  confine  the  process  to 
coincidences  between  present  active  states  of  con- 
sciousness, and  this  suffices  to  determine  the  limits 
of  the  process  as  a  scientific  hypothesis,  if  it  is  to  be 
tolerated  at  all. 

But  in  spite  of  what  is  implied  in  the  definition  of 
it  and  of  the  facts  that  have  been  collected  as  evidence 
for  it,  the  public  generally  and  many  psychical  re- 
searchers employ  the  term  to  denote  a  process  which 
may  not  involve  the  effect  of  the  present  state  of  an 
agent  upon  a  percipient,  but  which  may  represent 
the  percipient's  own  unstimulated  access  to  anything 
that  has  been  in  the  mind  of  the  agent  in  the  past. 
It  is  even  extended  by  some  persons  to  this  omniscient 
access  of  any  percipient  to  the  mind  and  memory  of 
any  living  person  at  any  time  desired.  It  suffices  to 
say  that  there  is  not  a  particle  of  scientific  or  any 
other  warrant  for  such  a  process.  On  the  evidential 
side  such  an  hypothesis  is  sheer  nonsense,  and  I  do 
not  think  that  any  one  would  be  tempted  by  it  except 
as  a  means  of  giving  trouble  to  those  who  believe 

36        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

in  the  existence  of  discarnate  spirits.     It  should  be 
remembered   that   the   scientific   world    generally    has 
not  yet  accepted  telepathy  of  any  sort,  to  say  noth- 
ing of  this  omniscient  thought  reading  which  is  ap- 
parently without  analogy  of  any  kind  in  physical  and 
mental  phenomena.      It   is    certain   that   there   is   no 
scientific  excuse  for  this  extension  of  the  term,  even 
though  we  do  not  know  the  laws  of  the  assumed  tele- 
pathic action.     We  may  ask  the  question,  if  telep- 
athy of  any  kind  is  possible,  whether  it  might  not 
possibly  extend  to  the  memory  of  agents,  but  asking 
this  question,  in  the  absence  of  known  limits  for  the 
process,  is  not  answering  it,  nor  is  the  legitimacy  of 
such  a  question  a  reason  for  supposing  that  any  such 
telepathy  is  a  fact  supported  by  evidence,  because  all 
the  evidence  that  can   claim   to   prove   telepathy   of 
any  kind  limits  it  to  the  present  active  states  of  the 
mind,  and  the  assumption  of  anything  else  is  either 
gratuitous  and  unsupported  or  can  be  only  assumed 
as  a   precaution  against  hasty  conclusions  in   favor 
of  some  other  theory  that  is  not  so  respectable.     It  is 
not  imperative  that  we   should   deny   the   possibility 
of  such  a  telepathy,  as  we  must  reserve  judgment  for 
any    facts   that   advocates   of   this    extension   of   the 
process  may  bring  forward.     But  there  is  absolutely 
nothing  but   the  imagination  at  present  in  support 
of  such  a  claim  as  this  omniscient  thought  reading. 
When   it  is   so  hard  to  prove  the  occasional  trans- 
mission of  a  present  mental  state  we  are  certainly  not 
justified   in    using   the   telepathic   hypothesis   to   ex- 
plain every  coincidence  of  ideas  that  occurs  between 
a   percipient    and    some    other   living   person    in   the 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS    37 

world,  whether  the  thought  be  a  present  or  a  past  one, 
unless  we  produce  evidence  in  some  proportion  with 
the  claims  made. 

There  is  also  much  misunderstanding  in  regard 
to  the  explanatory  nature  of  telepathy.  There  is  a 
strong  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  layman  to  sup- 
pose that  telepathy  is  an  explanation  of  the  phe- 
nomena which  have  been  adduced  to  prove  it  as  a 
fact,  and  psychic  researchers  have  consciously  or  un- 
consciously lent  their  support  to  this  conception  of 
it.  But  we  should  not  forget  that  the  term  was  em- 
ployed in  the  first  place,  not  to  explain  the  phe- 
nomena really  or  apparently  proving  it,  not  as  a 
name  for  the  cause  of  the  phenomena,  but  only  as  a 
name  for  an  exceptional  type  of  facts  which  require 
a  cause.  In  other  words,  it  was  only  a  name  for 
coincidences  which  were  not  due  to  chance,  but  which 
had  some  cause  for  them,  and  hence  served  only  to 
determine  their  classification  outside  the  well-known 
and  understood  phenomena  of  science.  What  its 
modus  operandi,  mode  of  action,  is  we  do  not  know, 
even  supposing  that  we  have  a  right  to  accept  the 
existence  of  it  as  a  supernormal  fact.  A  certain  class 
of  people  assume  that  it  is  effected  through  the  me- 
diation of  vibrations  of  some  kind,  whether  ethereal 
or  otherwise.  This  may  be  a  fact,  but  I  do  not  know 
a  shred  of  evidence  to  support  such  a  conviction,  ex- 
cept the  habits  of  physicists  in  their  explanation  of 
everything  by  modes  of  motion,  and  that  is,  in  fact, 
not  evidence,  but  is  attempted  explanation,  and  one 
wonders  how  an  appeal  to  modes  of  motion  can  ex- 
plain anything  until  we  can  see  in  the  phenomenon 

38        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

something  of  the  characteristics  which  are  involved 
in  its  relation  to  such  a  supposed  cause.  But,  admit- 
ting the  right  of  such  a  conjecture  and  of  trying 
to  make  the  phenomena  of  telepathy  consistent  with 
the  universal  explication  of  physical  events,  an  ef- 
fort quite  legitimate  in  the  light  of  the  hypothesis 
that  nature  is  uniform  and  representative  of  some 
kind  of  unity,  the  first  thing  to  do  in  supposing  a 
motional  nexus  between  agent  and  percipient  in  the 
process  of  telepathy  is  to  find  evidence  that  con- 
sciousness is  a  mode  of  motion.  Whatever  it  may  be, 
there  is  certainly  no  tangible  evidence  that  mental 
action  is  a  mode  of  motion,  and  until  we  can  render 
this  assumption  of  its  vibratory  nature  probable  Ave 
must  use  the  term  telepathy  only  to  denote  a  coin- 
cidence that  involves  a  causal  nexus  and  without  any 
implication  that  we  know  what  this  nexus  is.  In  prov- 
ing it  we  are  only  establishing  a  fact,  not  explaining 
the  process. 

It  is  true,  however,  that  there  is  something  about 
the  conception  of  telepathy  which  excuses  the  tend- 
ency to  appeal  to  it  as  a  cause.  It  explains  away 
the  previously  alleged  cause  of  certain  phenomena. 
There  has  been  a  long  prevalent  habit  of  appealing 
to  spirits  to  explain  every  unusual  fact  that  came  un- 
der observation,  often  without  any  inquiry  into  the 
simple  and  natural  character  of  the  event,  and  more 
especially  all  instances  in  which  knowledge  was  sup- 
posed to  have  been  acquired  in  an  exceptional  way. 
What  telepathy  has  done  in  such  situations  is  to  ex- 
clude the  application  of  spirits  and  to  imply  that 
the  process,  even  though  it  involves  something  inde- 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     39 

pendent  of  the  percipient's  mind,  does  not  require  us 
to  suppose  that  the  intermediating  agent  is  a  spirit. 
Its  ground  for  this  is  that  the  facts  to  which  telep- 
athy may  apply  are  not  evidence  of  discarnate  ac- 
tion, even  though  they  actually  be  effected  by  them. 
Science  will  not  tolerate  the  assumption  of  spirits 
unless  the  facts  necessitate  that  explanation  in  pref- 
erence to  any  other,  and  the  facts  described  by  telep- 
athy are  not  such  as  prove  the  personal  identity  of 
deceased  persons,  whatever  agency  they  might  be 
supposed  to  have  in  producing  them.  In  thus  ex- 
plaining away  the  supposed  significance  of  the  phe- 
nomena it  is  an  easy  step  to  suppose  that  the  phe- 
nomena are  positively  explained  by  the  process,  when 
in  fact  they  are  not  so  explained,  but  remain  as  a 
problem  for  further  inquiry  as  to  causes.  But  the 
man  who  supposes  that  the  phenomena  are  explained 
when  he  finds  that  there  is  some  causal  nexus  in  te- 
lepathy commits  the  obverse  error  of  the  man  who  ap- 
peals to  spirits  as  the  cause.  It  is  no  proof  that 
we  have  found  a  cause  of  phenomena  when  we  have 
found  what  is  not  their  cause,  and  all  that  telepathy 
does  in  phenomena  to  which  it  is  applicable  at  all  is 
to  indicate  that  the  process  is  a  direct  one  between  two 
living  minds  and  that,  from  the  want  of  a  character 
expected  from  any  other  source,  they  must  originate 
within  and  not  without  the  living.  But  telepathy 
does  not  explain  even  the  phenomena  to  which  it  ap- 
plies as  a  name  describing  their  supernormal  char- 
acter, to  say  nothing  of  the  kind  of  phenomena  to 
which  it  does  not  apply.  As  indicated  above,  the 
evidence  for  it  as  a  supernormal  fact  is  confined  to 

40        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

the  present  active  consciousness  of  an  agent  supposed 
to  affect  a  percipient,  and  there  is  not  the  slightest 
scientific  reason  for  applying  it  to  any  other  phenom- 
ena as  a  mode  of  reducing  them  to  the  intelligible. 
Hence  telepathy  only  limits  our  problem,  and  does 
not  solve  it,  though  it  excludes,  where  it  is  applicable 
at  all,  the  right  to  invoke  transcendental  agencies  of 
a  personal  kind. 

I  have  found  these  remarks  necessary  in  order  to 
explain  the  position  which  science  must  take  in  re- 
gard to  telepathy,  after  it  has  admitted  it,  and  it  is 
to  be  remembered  that  the  scientific  world  generally 
is  not  yet  prepared  to  accept  it  in  any  form.  More- 
over, I  have  wished  to  insist  that  there  is  no  ade- 
quate excuse  for  the  wholesale  application  of  the  idea 
to  explain  every  remarkable  mental  phenomenon  we 
encounter.  There  must  be  as  much  sobriety  and  cau- 
tion in  applying  the  idea  of  telepathy  as  there  has 
been  in  accepting  it  as  a  fact,  while  as  a  fact  there 
has  been  too  little  tendency  to  respect  this  canon  of 
intelligence.  If  telepathy  is  a  fact  we  must  discover 
its  laws  and  conditions  as  a  justification  of  applying 
it  to  phenomena  which  do  not  prove  it.  At  present 
it  can  apply  to  nothing  but  coincidences  of  the  active 
type  between  minds,  and  it  must  not  be  confused  with 
the  cause  of  them  or  the  mode  of  transmission  that 
may  be  conceived  as  possible. 

My  own  personal  attitude,  therefore,  is  that  there 
is  at  present  satisfactory  evidence  in  favor  of  spo- 
radic instances  of  an  unusual  phenomenon  involving 
an  exceptional  causal  nexus  between  the  thoughts  of 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     41 

one  person,  the  agent,  and  another,  the  percipient. 
How  it  is  effected  I  do  not  know ;  nor  do  I  know  any- 
thing about  its  laws  and  conditions.  What  it  means 
is  still  to  me  a  problem  and  it  may  long  remain  a 
problem.  Many  real  or  alleged  facts  which  are 
claimed  to  be  telepathic  I  do  not  believe  are  either 
evidence  for  it  or  to  be  explained  by  it.  Many  of  the 
instances  quoted  in  the  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  it 
seems  to  me,  are  not  adequately  explained  by  telep- 
athy and  are  certainly  not  evidence  of  it.  Telepathic 
phenomena  may  be  involved  in  them  as  a  part  of  the 
process  affecting  them,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  we 
have  still  to  determine  their  true  causes,  while  telep- 
athy must  be  for  me  a  tentative  theory  of  them  in 
lieu  of  anything  better,  and  a  little  understood  theory 
of  more  evidential  coincidences  that  are  the  result  of 
experiment  and  spontaneous  occurrences.  I,  there- 
fore, hold  to  telepathy  as  a  suitable  explanation,  if 
such  we  may  call  it,  of  phenomena  that  cannot  lay 
claim  to  any  transcendental  origin  of  a  spiritual  kind 
and  that  represent  a  supernormal  relation  between 
living  minds.  That  is  as  far  as  I  can  go,  and  I  shall 
revise  that  opinion  when  it  can  be  shown  to  be  un- 
scientific. 

2.     Apparitions 

One  of  the  Society's  professed  objects  was  to  in- 
vestigate the  alleged  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  and 
it  included  in  its  scope  of  them  all  that  the  advocates 
of  that  doctrine  had  claimed.  This  plan,  of  course, 
brought  it  into  contact  with  the  frauds  of  that  sub- 

42        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ject  as  well  as  cases  that  at  least  superficially 
presented  better  credentials.  Much  that  was 
undoubtedly  not  of  the  fraudulent  type  represented 
abnormal  psychology  or  bad  science,  and  was  accord- 
ingly relegated  to  secondary  personality,  unconscious 
muscular  action,  misunderstanding  of  the  phenom- 
ena, illusion,  and  hallucinations  which  science  could 
not  question.  But  there  was  one  class  of  facts  which 
had  an  apparent  significance  for  the  spiritualistic 
theory,  and,  if  they  were  what  they  claimed  to  be  evi- 
dentially, offered  the  most  promising  prospect  of  sup- 
porting the  existence  of  discarnate  spirits,  if  that 
doctrine  could  obtain  any  support  at  all  from  phe- 
nomena that  were  not  the  result  of  experiment.  These 
were  the  phenomena  of  apparitions  of  deceased  per- 
sons. 

Ghost  stories  have  been  from  time  immemorial  the 
delight  and  the  fear  of  the  race ;  the  delight  of  those 
who  would  seek  to  prove  by  supposed  genuine  ones  the 
survival  of  man  after  death  and  of  those  who  love  to 
ridicule  superstition,  and  the  fear  of  those  who  imag- 
ine that  spiritual  agencies  mix  in  the  affairs  of  life  for 
some  form  of  evil.  Illusion  and  hallucination  account 
for  so  much  that  the  more  intelligent,  whether  they 
were  moved  to  ridicule  such  experiences  or  to  accept 
them  as  facts  though  unreal,  have  been  obliged  to  dis- 
credit the  claims  so  often  founded  upon  them.  But 
their  constancy  in  the  experience  of  all  races  in  all 
stages  of  human  culture  has  been  so  prominent  a  fact 
that  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  traces,  not  only  the  belief  in 
a  future  life  to  them,  but  also  the  origin  of  religion. 
He  is  also  so  much  impressed  with  their  influence 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     43 

upon  ideas  and  institutions  i:::-.it  he  gives  them  an  im- 
portant place  among  the  forces  that  determine  the 
data  of  Sociology.  I  shall  not  dwell  upon  that  fact, 
except  to  insist  that,  whatever  we  may  think  of  their 
real  nature,  they  have  a  sciei  tifically  serious  import 
for  the  study  of  man,  and  Mr.  Spencer  will  not  be 
accused  of  superstitious  sympathies  in  recognising 
that  importance.  I  can  only  refer  readers  to  his  So- 
ciology for  some  interesting  information  upon  the 
subject,  and  the  same  will  be  found  in  any  discus- 
sion of  primitive  culture. 

I  remark  this  aspect  of  them  and  their  influence  on 
human  belief  and  action  because  I  wish  to  bespeak 
for  such  phenomena  a  value  wholly  apart  from  their 
supposed  objective  truth  and  reality.  I  do  not  con- 
sider that  the  value  of  scientific  study  is  limited  to 
the  investigation  of  merely  what  can  be  proved  to  be 
real,  and  that  conviction  can  be  doubly  reinforced  by 
all  the  work  of  psychiatry,  the  study  of  folk-lore,  and 
the  study  of  literature  and  philosophy.  Psychiatry 
and  abnormal  psychology  have  ostensibly  occupied 
themselves  with  unrealities,  except  as  they  were  sub- 
jective facts,  and  have  prided  themselves  on  their  su- 
preme value  to  the  knowledge  and  protection  of  man. 
If  apparitions  have  been  so  persistent  a  phenomenon  in 
human  experience  and  if  they  have  actually  influenced 
human  beliefs  and  customs,  even  to  a  small  part  of 
the  extent  asserted  of  them  by  men  like  Mr.  Spencer, 
there  is  no  reason  for  taking  an  attitude  of  contempt 
when  some  one  proposes  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  why 
they  persist;  except  as  a  preservation  of  one's  sense 
of  humor  and  respectability  in  the  estimation  of  per 

44        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

sons  otherwise  intelligent.  If  we  should  happen  in 
the  investigation  to  find  that  they  have  a  wider  and 
deeper  meaning  than  the  scoffer  has  supposed  with- 
out adequate  investigation,  the  existing  body  of  hu- 
man knowledge  will  not  be  disgraced. 

The  fact  is  that  the  contempt  for  the  study  of  ap- 
paritions has  various  motives  that  may  represent  a 
perfectly  healthy  state  of  mind.  Some  of  us  find 
after  investigation  that  the  prevalent  opinion  of  in- 
telligent men  has  so  much  to  support  it  that  it  will 
appear  a  vain  effort  to  revive  any  other  serious  inter- 
est in  them  than  in  illusions  and  hallucinations.  Some 
of  us  cannot  accept  their  attestation  of  a  future  life 
without  fearing  a  revival  of  all  those  intellectual 
crazes  which  have  diverted  human  energies  into  the 
most  maudlin  of  philosophies.  Some  of  us  have  to 
affect  ridicule  of  the  phenomena  to  protect  our  re- 
spectability while  we  secretly  or  publicly  recognise 
the  serious  and  important  side  of  their  investigation. 
I  do  not  know  any  man  who  has  maintained  this  bal- 
ance between  humor  and  seriousness  better  than  Mr. 
Andrew  Lang,  and  he  has  admitted  that  he  thinks 
Mr.  Myers  actually  proved  the  possibility  that  they 
evince  sufficient  evidence  of  a  future  life.  Reviewing 
Mr.  Myers'  work  on  Human  Personality  and  its  Sur- 
vival of  Bodily  Death  and  referring  to  additional 
phenomena  of  the  same  kind  in  Phantasms  of  the  Liv- 
ing, Mr.  Lang  says: 

"  To  myself,  after  reading  the  evidence,  it  appears 
that  a  fairly  strong  presumption  is  raised  in  favor  of 
a  '  phantasmogenetic  agency  '  set  at  work,  in  a  vague 
unconscious  way,  by  the  deceased,  and  I  say  this  after 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     45 

considering  the  adverse  arguments  of  Mr.  Podmore, 
for  example,  in  favor  of  telepathy  from  living  minds, 
and  all  the  hypotheses  of  hoaxing,  exaggerative  mem- 
ory, mal-observation,  and  so  forth  —  not  to  mention 
the  popular  nonsense  that  '  What  is  the  use  of  it?  ' 
'Was  it  permitted?'  What  is  the  use  of  argon? 
Why  are  cockroaches  permitted? 

"  To  end  with  a  confession  of  opinion :  I  entirely 
agree  with  Mr.  Myers  and  Hegel,  that  we,  or  many 
of  us,  are  in  something,  or  that  something  is  in  us, 
which  '  does  not  know  the  bonds  of  time,  or  feel  the 
manacles  of  space.' : 

Personal  interest  in  a  future  life  is  so  intense  and 
the  consequences  of  being  fooled  both  in  our  evidence 
of  it  and  in  our  ideas  of  it  on  any  such  evidence  as 
is  obtainable,  that  we  do  well  to  be  cautious  about 
accepting  it  on  the  testimony  of  apparitions.  The 
neglect  of  them,  therefore,  may  have  its  justi- 
fication for  many  of  us,  but  the  scientific  man 
cannot  plead  any  dangers  to  his  own  temper 
of  mind  as  an  excuse  for  leaving  them  unin- 
vestigated,  as  any  outcome  must  add  to  his 
power  and  usefulness,  whether  they  add  to  the 
triumphs  of  psychiatry  or  prove  the  immortality  of 
the  soul. 

Now  an  apparition  is  the  sensory  appearance  of  a 
reality,  animal  or  human,  which  turns  out  on  exam- 
ination not  to  be  the  physical  being  that  it  seems  to 
be.  To  find  out  what  the  frequency  of  apparitions 
might  be  and  to  ascertain  how  seriously  science  might 
be  required  to  treat  them  as  significant  of  objective 
causes,  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  addressed 

46        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

an  inquiry  to  the  public  for  an  account  of  experiences 
having  psychological  interest  and  importance. 
Among  the  replies  involving  waking  and  dream  coin- 
cidences were  a  large  number  of  coincidental  appari- 
tions. It  was  found  that  these  last  could  be  arranged 
for  convenience  in  three  classes.  (1)  Apparitions  of 
persons  known  or  proved  to  be  living  at  the  time. 
(2)  Apparitions  of  persons  in  or  about  the  crisis  of 
death.  (3)  Apparitions  of  persons  some  time  de- 
ceased. The  obvious  purpose  of  this  division  was  to 
emphasise  the  very  different  conditions  under  which 
a  common  or  similar  phenomenon  occurred.  The  im- 
portance of  this  consideration  will  be  apparent  when 
we  come  to  theories  of  explanation.  But  while  the 
classification  served  as  a  means  of  distinguishing  dif- 
ferent conditions  with  the  same  general  phenomenon, 
it  also  served  to  suggest  explanations  not  consistent 
with  the  spiritistic  interpretation  of  the  phenomena, 
as  they  had  been  viewed  for  ages.  I  shall  give  some 
well  authenticated  instances  of  them  without  regard 
to  the  class  into  which  they  fall.  They  shall  repre- 
sent suggestive  coincidences  at  the  same  time  and  a 
type  that  apparently  cannot  be  classified  with  the  or- 
dinary phenomena  of  illusion  and  hallucination.  Due 
allowance  was  made  by  the  committee  that  collected 
them  for  that  enormously  numerous  class  of  expe- 
riences that  belong  only  to  abnormal  psychology  and 
which  have  a  purely  subjective  origin  without  any 
possible  doubt  of  the  fact.  Its  collection  of  cases 
was  designed  to  represent  the  type  that  at  least 
seemed  to  have  an  objective  source.  I  shall  men- 
tion no  instance  of  an  apparition  that  does  not  come 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     47 

from  an  authority  which  will  carry  weight  at  least 
in  regard  to  the  occurrence  of  the  experience  and  of 
details  that  suggest  a  scientific  interest  beyond  the 
ordinary,  or  that  was  not  authenticated  by  sufficient 
testimony  to  exempt  it  from  the  clear  suspicion  of 
ordinary  illusion,  whatever  the  final  explanation. 

The  first  instance  that  I  shall  quote  is  that  of  Lord 
Brougham,  who,  as  every  one  must  recognise,  was 
thoroughly  a  man  of  the  world.  He  was  travelling 
with  friends  in  Sweden  when  the  experience  occurred: 

"  We  set  out  for  Gothenberg  determined  to  make 
Norway.  About  one  in  the  morning,  arriving  at  a 
decent  inn,  we  decided  to  stop  for  the  night.  Tired 
with  the  cold  of  yesterday,  I  was  glad  to  take  advan- 
tage of  a  hot  bath  before  I  turned  in,  and  here  a 
most  remarkable  thing  happened  to  me  -  -  so  remark- 
able that  I  must  tell  the  story  from  the  beginning. 

"  After  I  left  the  high  school,  I  went  with  G.,  my 
first  intimate  friend,  to  attend  the  classes  in  the  uni- 
versity. There  was  no  divinity  class,  but  we  fre- 
quently in  our  walks  discussed  and  speculated  upon 
many  grave  subjects  —  among  others  on  the  immortal- 
ity of  the  soul,  and  on  a  future  state.  This  question, 
and  the  possibility,  I  will  not  say  of  ghosts  walking, 
but  of  the  dead  appearing  to  the  living,  were  subjects 
of  much  speculation ;  and  we  actually  committed  the 
folly  of  drawing  up  an  agreement,  written  with  our 
own  blood,  to  the  effect  that  whichever  of  us  died  the 
first  should  appear  to  the  other,  and  thus  solve  the 
doubts  we  had  entertained  of  the  '  life  after  death.' 

"  After  we  had  finished  our  classes  at  the  college, 
G.  went  to  India,  having  got  an  appointment  there 

48        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

in  the  civil  service.  He  seldom  wrote  to  me,  and  after 
the  lapse  of  a  few  years  I  had  almost  forgotten  him ; 
moreover  his  family  having  little  connection  with 
Edinburgh,  I  seldom  saw  or  heard  anything  of  them, 
so  that  all  his  schoolboy  intimacy  had  died  out  and  I 
had  nearly  forgotten  his  existence.  I  had  taken,  as  I 
have  said,  a  warm  bath,  and  while  lying  in  it  and  en- 
joying the  comfort  of  the  heat  after  the  late  freezing 
I  had  undergone,  I  turned  my  head  around,  looking 
toward  the  chair  on  which  I  had  deposited  my  clothes, 
as  I  was  about  to  get  out  of  the  bath.  On  the  chair 
sat  G.,  looking  calmly  at  me.  How  I  got  out  of  the 
bath  I  know  not,  but  on  recovering  my  senses  I  found 
myself  sprawling  on  the  floor.  The  apparition,  or 
whatever  it  was  that  had  taken  the  likeness  of  G. 
had  disappeared." 

Lord  Brougham's  account  of  it  afterward  showed 
that  he  had  evidently  made  a  journal  record  of  the 
experience  before  he  learned  that  his  friend  had  died 
in  India  on  the  same  day  as  this  occurrence.  The 
apparition  occurred  on  December  19th,  1799,  and 
soon  after  Lord  Brougham  arrived  in  Edinburgh  on 
his  return  a  letter  arrived  from  India  announcing 
the  death  of  G.  on  the  date  mentioned.  The  ex- 
perience produced  a  profound  impression  upon  Lord 
Brougham's  mind,  but  wisely  for  his  time  and  for  the 
lack  of  similar  instances  at  command  to  suggest  any 
supernormal  significance,  he  treated  it  as  possibly  a 
dream  during  a  little  period  of  unconscious  sleep  or  a 
casual  hallucination.  But  the  case  illustrates  a  fairly 

•J 

well  authenticated  instance   of  a  coincidental   appa- 
rition, no  matter  how  we  explain  it. 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     49 

The  second  instance  is  one  from  Dr.  George  J. 
Romanes,  F.  R.  S.,  the  distinguished  disciple  of  Dar- 
win and  almost  his  peer  in  scientific  reputation.  He 
writes  the  account  of  his  experience  to  Mr.  Myers, 
the  secretary  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Re- 
search : 

"  Toward  the  end  of  March,  1878,  in  the  dead  of 
the  night,  while  believing  myself  to  be  awake,  I 
thought  the  door  at  the  head  of  my  bed  was  opened, 
and  a  white  figure  passed  along  the  side  of  the  bed  to 
the  foot,  where  it  faced  about  and  showed  me  it  was 
covered,  head  and  all,  with  a  shroud.  Then  with  its 
hands  it  suddenly  parted  the  shroud  over  the  face,  re- 
vealing between  its  two  hands  the  face  of  my  sister, 
who  was  ill  in  another  room.  I  exclaimed  her  name, 
whereupon  the  figure  vanished  instantly.  Next  day 
(and  certainly  on  account  of  the  shock  given  me  by 
the  above  experience)  I  called  in  Sir  W.  Jenner,  who 
said  my  sister  had  not  many  days  to  live.  She  died 
in  fact  very  soon  afterwards. 

"  I  was  in  good  health,  without  any  grief  or  anx- 
iety. My  sister  was  being  attended  by  our  family 
doctor,  who  did  not  expect  anything  serious ;  there- 
fore I  had  no  anxiety  at  all  on  her  account,  nor  had 
she  herself.  I  have  never,  either  before  or  after  this, 
had  such  an  experience." 

This  is  what  may  be  called  a  premonitory  incident 
for  the  sake  of  classification  and  its  objective  reality 
in  any  sense  can  be  questioned  on  several  grounds. 
But  it  is  not  mentioned  here  with  any  implication  of 
its  supernormal  significance,  and  even  if  it  were  this 
would  not  represent  the  appearance  of  a  discarnate 

50        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

spirit  in  any  explanation  of  it  based  upon  personal 
identity. 

John  Addington  Symonds,  one  of  the  best  known 
of  the  English  literary  scholars,  was  the  subject  of 
the  following  experience.  He  says,  writing  to  the 
Society  for  Psychical  Research: 

'  I  was  a  boy  in  the  sixth  form  at  Harrow,  and, 
as  head  of  Mr.  Kendall's  house,  had  a  room  to  my- 
self. It  was  in  the  summer  of  1858.  I  woke  about 
dawn,  and  felt  for  my  books  upon  a  chair  between 
the  bed  and  the  window,  when  I  knew  that  I  must 
turn  my  head  the  other  way,  and  there  between  me 
and  the  door  stood  Dr.  Macleane,  dressed  in  a  clergy- 
man's black  clothes.  He  bent  his  sallow  face  a  little 
toward  me  and  said,  '  I  am  going  a  long  way  —  take 
care  of  my  son.'  While  I  was  attending  to  him  I 
suddenly  saw  the  door  in  the  place  where  Dr.  Mac- 
leane had  been.  Dr.  Macleane  died  that  night  (at 
what  hour  I  cannot  precisely  say)  at  Clifton.  My 
father,  who  was  a  great  friend  of  his,  was  with  him. 
I  was  not  aware  that  he  was  more  than  usually  ill. 
He  was  a  chronic  invalid." 

Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  who  will  not  be  accused  of  su- 
perstition, narrates  the  following  experience.  It  is 
found  in  his  article  on  Apparitions  in  the  Encyclo- 
paedia Britannlca: 

"  The  writer  once  met,  as  he  believed,  a  well- 
known  and  learned  member  of  an  English  univer- 
sity, who  was  really  dying  at  a  place  more  than  one 
hundred  miles  distant  from  that  in  which  he  was 
•seen.  Supposing,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that 
the  writer  did  mistake  some  other  individual  for  the 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     51 

extremely  noticeable  person  whom  he  seemed  to  see, 
the  coincidence  between  the  subjective  impression  and 
the  death  of  the  learned  professor,  is,  to  say  the 
least,  curious." 

Dr.  Weir  Mitchell  reports  an  interesting  case  in 
the  experience  of  his  father,  who  was  also  a  phy- 
sician. His  father  had  a  patient  in  an  insane  asylum 
who  occasionally  had  lucid  intervals.  One  morning 
Dr.  Mitchell  went  to  the  asylum  to  inform  the  pa- 
tient of  the  death  of  his  wife  during  the  night.  As 
he  came  in  sight  of  the  patient  the  man  cried  out: 
"  You  need  not  tell  me.  My  wife  is  dead.  I  know 
it.  She  was  here  last  night  and  told  me  herself." 
Supposing  that  there  was  no  foundation  for  this 
story,  Dr.  Mitchell  went  to  the  manager  of  the  in- 
stitution and  told  him  what  had  been  said,  and  that 
gentleman  confirmed  it  by  saying  that  he  had  heard 
the  man  talking  in  the  night  and  went  to  him  to  see 
what  was  the  matter,  when  the  patient  at  once  re- 
proached him  for  the  disturbance  and  for  driving 
away  his  wife,  who,  he  said,  was  there  and  had  told 
him  that  she  had  just  died.  This  case  is  interest- 
ing as  associating  a  veridical  apparition  with  a  patho- 
logical condition  of  mind  when  hallucinations  are 
so  probable  and  suggesting  the  complications  which 
such  phenomena  having  an  apparently  objective  mean- 
ing may  possess. 

Mr.  Keulemans,  who  was  a  draughtsman  in  the 
work  done  for  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  a  man 
of  very  considerable  intelligence  and  free  from  super- 
stition of  any  kind,  according  to  the  testimony  of 
Mr.  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  the  secretary  of  the 

52        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Society,  reports  two  interesting  apparitions  of  his 
own  similar  in  import  to  those  that  I  have  mentioned. 
Mr.  Keulemans  was  living  in  Paris  with  his  family, 
and  on  the  breaking  out  of  an  epidemic  of  smallpox 
sent  his  three  children  to  London  to  escape  it.  He 
tells  his  experience  in  the  following  language : 

"  On  the  24th  of  January,  1881,  at  half  past  seven 
in  the  morning,  I  was  suddenly  awakened  by  hearing 
Isidore's  voice,  as  I  fancied,  very  near  me.  I  saw 
a  bright,  opaque  mass  before  my  eyes,  and  in  the 
center  of  this  light  I  saw  the  face  of  my  little  dar- 
ling, his  eyes  bright,  his  mouth  smiling.  The  appa- 
rition, accompanied  by  the  sound  of  his  voice,  was  too 
short  and  too  sudden  to  be  called  a  dream ;  it  was 
too  clear,  too  decided,  to  be  called  an  effect  of  the  im- 
agination. So  distinctly  did  I  hear  his  voice  that  I 
looked  around  the  room  to  see  whether  he  was  ac- 
tually there.  The  sound  was  of  that  extreme  de- 
light such  as  only  a  happy  child  can  utter.  I  thought 
it  was  the  moment  he  woke  up  in  London,  happy 
and  thinking  of  me.  I  said  to  myself,  '  Thank  God, 
little  Isidore  is  happy  as  always.' : 

Mr.  Keulemans  describes  the  ensuing  day  as  one 
of  peculiar  brightness  and  cheerfulness.  He  took  a 
long  walk  with  a  friend,  with  whom  he  dined,  and 
was  afterwards  playing  a  game  of  billiards,  when 
he  saw  the  apparition  of  the  child.  This  made  him 
seriously  uneasy,  and  in  spite  of  having  received 
within  three  days  the  assurance  of  the  child's  perfect 
health,  he  expressed  to  his  wife  a  conviction  that  he 
was  dead.  Next  day  a  letter  arrived  saying  that 
the  child  was  ill ;  but  the  father  was  convinced  that 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     53 

this  was  only  an  attempt  to  break  the  news;  and,  in 
fact,  the  child  had  died,  after  a  few  hours'  illness, 
at  the  exact  time  of  the  first  apparition. 

Mrs.  Keulemans  confirmed  the  statements  of  her 
husband  and  that  he  had  mentioned  to  her  before  re- 
ceiving news  of  the  child's  illness  his  fears,  and  finally 
told  her  that  he  had  had  an  apparition  of  the  child. 
Mr.  Keulemans  records  a  large  number  of  coincidental 
experiences,  some  of  them  not  apparitional,  and  among 
them  one  intimating  the  death  of  his  father  in  Rot- 
terdam while  he  himself  was  in  London,  and  one  in- 
timating in  much  the  same  way  the  death  of  his 
grandmother,  one  the  sickness  of  his  daughter,  and 
another  the  vision  of  his  little  boy,  living,  falling  out 
of  bed  at  the  sea-side  Worthing,  near  Brighton,  and 
himself  in  London.  The  incident  was  verified  by  the 
mother,  who  was  with  the  child. 

James  Cotter  Morison,  a  name  that  will  be  recog- 
nised by  every  intelligent  man  in  the  English  world, 
narrates  an  auditory  apparition,  as  it  will  have  to  be 
called,  that  is  corroborated  in  a  peculiar  way,  and  is 
too  long  to  be  quoted  here.  Prof.  J.  Estlin  Carpenter 
is  responsible  for  one  which  he  narrates  in  detail,  and 
Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  the  brother-in-law  of 
Charles  Darwin  and  a  savant  himself  well  known  in 
England,  tells  a  most  remarkable  instance  in  which 
his  daughter-in-law  had  a  vision  in  a  waking  or  dream 
state  of  a  man  who  about  the  same  time  had  one  of 
her,  the  details  in  each  case  corresponding  to  the  phys- 
ical facts,  neither  party  knowing  the  other  at  the 
time  and  simultaneously  recognising  each  other  when 
they  afterwards  accidentally  met.  The  Marquis  of 

54        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Bute,  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  and  Dr.  Ferrier  of  London 
are  responsible  for  one  of  the  most  remarkable  ap- 
paritions that  has  been  put  on  record  involving 
something  of  an  experiment  involving  the  phantasm 
of  a  deceased  person  twice  and  not  known  to  the 
percipient  and  described  so  that  the  person  was  quite 
recognisable,  as  we  experience  this  every  day  in  our 
ordinary  conversation.  The  case  is  too  long  even  to 
abbreviate  in  a  work  like  this.  I  can  only  refer  the 
reader  to  the  original  record  (Proceedings  S.  P.  R.> 
Vol.  XI  pp.  547-559).  Dr.  Hack  Tuke,  the  cele- 
brated physician  and  alienist,  reports  a  case  of  the 
apparition  of  a  living  person  that  he  says  is  reliably 
authenticated.  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  (Miss  X),  ed- 
itor of  Borderland  and  author  of  Essays  in  Psy- 
chical Research,  and  well  known  for  her  experiences  in 
crystal  visions  and  herself  rather  sceptical  of  spirit- 
istic theories,  went  to  a  house  which  had  the  reputa- 
tion of  being  haunted  for  the  purpose  of  experi- 
menting in  apparitions.  Though  she  had  not  seen 
any  description  of  the  phantasms  seen  there  before, 
she  had  an  apparition  while  at  the  house  whose  de- 
scription tallied  with  that  given  by  others. 

Dr.  Minot  J.  Savage  vouches  for  the  following 
incident,  which  he  personally  investigated,  though 
he  has  to  reserve  the  names  and  residences  of  the 
parties  concerned.  It  is  interesting  as  exhibiting 
what  may  occur  at  the  point  of  death  and  have  at 
least  an  apparent  evidential  value: 

"  In  a  neighboring  city  were  two  little  girls,  Jennie 
and  Edith,  one  about  eight  years  of  age,  and  the 
other  but  a  little  older.  They  were  schoolmates  and 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     55 

intimate  friends.  In  June,  1889,  both  were  taken  ill 
of  diphtheria.  At  noon  on  Wednesday,  June  5th, 
Jennie  died.  Then  the  parents  of  Edith,  and  her 
physician  as  well,  all  took  pains  to  keep  from  her 
the  fact  that  her  little  playmate  was  gone.  They 
feared  the  effect  of  the  knowledge  on  her  own  condi- 
tion. To  prove  that  they  succeeded  and  that  she 
did  not  know,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  on  Saturday, 
June  8th,  at  noon,  just  before  she  became  uncon- 
scious of  all  that  was  passing  about  her,  she  selected 
two  of  her  photographs  to  be  sent  to  Jennie,  and  also 
told  her  attendants  to  bid  her  good-bye. 

"  She  died  at  half  past  six  o'clock  on  the  evening 
of  Saturday,  June  8th.  She  had  aroused  and  bid- 
den her  friends  good-bye,  and  was  talking  of  dying, 
and  seemed  to  have  no  fear.  She  appeared  to  see 
one  and  another  of  the  friends  she  knew  were  dead. 
So  far  it  was  like  the  common  cases.  But  now,  sud- 
denly, and  with  every  appearance  of  great  surprise, 
she  turned  to  her  father,  and  exclaimed :  '  Why, 
papa,  I  am  going  to  take  Jennie  with  me ! '  Then 
she  added,  '  Why,  papa !  Why,  papa !  You  did  not 
tell  me  that  Jennie  was  here ! '  And  immediately  she 
reached  out  her  arms  as  if  in  welcome,  and  said,  '  O, 
Jennie ;  I  am  so  glad  you  are  here.' : 

Now  I  have  not  narrated  these  experiences  to  prove 
the  existence  of  the  supernormal,  nor  to  prove  any 
interpretation  of  them  whatever.  I  am  quite  aware 
that  it  would  be  folly  to  lay  any  claims  to  the  proof 
of  anything  "  supernatural "  by  them,  and  that  is 
not  my  object  in  quoting  them.  I  have  endeavored 

56        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

only  to  collate  some  instances  of  such  experiences  as 
come  from  authorities  respectable  enough  to  merely 
authenticate  the  fact  that  coincidental  apparitions 
of  the  living  and  dying  or  dead  actually  occur.  What 
they  mean  in  particular  it  may  take  many  years  to 
determine.  It  is  easy  to  discredit  the  testimony  of 
men  and  women  we  do  not  know  and  about  whom  we 
have  to  take  the  authority  of  some  one  else.  But  it 
is  different  with  men  and  women  whose  characters  are 
public  property  like  those  I  have  mentioned,  and  I 
could  have  enumerated  scores  of  others  whose  testi- 
mony is  quite  as  respectable,  and  their  incidents  often 
far  more  interesting  scientifically  than  those  I  have 
mentioned.  But  the  few  that  I  have  quoted  suffice 
to  make  it  very  probable  that  there  are  many  more 
such  experiences,  and  certainly  show  a  type  of  phe- 
nomena which,  if  numerous  enough,  have  significance 
for  some  conclusion  that  either  has  momentous  conse- 
quences of  value  to  the  human  race  or  tendencies  to 
produce  the  most  dangerous  of  intellectual  illusions. 
It  matters  not  for  this  work  which  consequence  is  in- 
volved, nor  would  it  be  of  less  value  to  prove  for 
those  who  may  be  tempted  to  accept  illusions  that 
they  are  drifting  toward  delusion  and  insanity  than 
it  would  be  to  sustain  the  fact  of  a  future  life.  I  am 
concerned  in  this  narrative  only  with  the  necessity  of 
scientific  investigation  and  not  of  a  priori  neglect 
and  ridicule.  Psychology  has  a  duty  to  mankind  be- 
sides proving  the  truth  in  normal  fields  of  experience. 
Its  duty  to  expose  error  and  delusion  and  to  explain 
the  phenomena  that  lead  to  them  is  quite  as  impera- 
tive as  any  other. 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS     57 

Such  instances  as  I  have  indicated  induced  Mr.  Ed- 
mund Gurney  and  other  members  of  the  Society  to 
institute  what  they  called  a  Census  of  Hallucinations 
which  would  be  a  large  collection  of  these  phenom- 
ena. The  results  were  partly  reported  in  the  Phan- 
tasms of  the  Living  and  partly  in  a  later  volume  of 
the  Proceedings.  They  represented  all  types  of  ap- 
paritions. The  inquiries  brought  17,000  answers, 
and  nearly  10%  of  these  affirmed  that  they  had  ex- 
perienced some  form  of  apparition  or  sensory  equiva- 
lent, visual,  auditory  or  tactile.  Of  these  352  were 
apparitions  of  living  persons,  and  163  apparitions 
of  dead  persons,  and  315  were  incompletely  devel- 
oped instances.  There  were  62  death  coincidences  of 
a  striking  evidential  type.  Taking  these  with  the 
apparitions  of  living  persons  and  eliminating  certain 
cases  for  evidential  reasons  there  remained  for  the 
committee  350  instances  on  which  to  calculate  the 
law  of  chances.  The  question  was  whether  these  350 
apparitions  involving  apparently  significant  coin- 
cidences were  due  to  chance  alone.  The  technical 
method  of  calculating  these  I  shall  not  detail,  and  no 
one  seems  to  have  questioned  its  correctness  or  fair- 
ness. But  it  involved  as  a  conclusion  that  142,500 
cases  would  have  had  to  be  collected  in  order  to  have 
30  coincidences  of  the  kind  due  to  chance,  instead  of 
350.  In  its  conclusion  the  committee  announced  its 
conviction  in  the  following  language,  which  it  itali- 
cised : 

''  Between  deaths  and  apparitions  of  the  dying 
person  a  connection  exists  which  is  not  due  to  chance. 
This  we  hold  as  a  proved  fact." 

58        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Farther  than  this  the  committee  would  not  go,  and 
it  certainly  was  not  justified  in  proposing  on  such 
scanty  evidence  any  positive  explanation  of  such  phe- 
nomena. There  was  much  said  in  the  Phantasms  of 
the  Living  to  suggest,  but  the  authors  would  not  de- 
fend, the  application  of  telepathy  to  them.  It  was 
content  in  the  Census  to  eliminate  chance  and  to 
leave  positive  conjectures  to  those  who  care  to  ven- 
ture upon  them.  But  the  general  public  has  come 
to  refer  them  to  telepathy,  and  as  the  committee's 
Avork  ignored  the  apparitions  of  the  dead  when  they 
occurred  more  than  twelve  hours  after  the  decease, 
it  was  natural  on  this  account  and  other  reasons  to 
apply  telepathy  to  such  as  had  been  considered,  es- 
pecially as  some  of  them  could  not  lay  the  slightest 
claim  to  being  spiritistic.  We  must  not  forget,  in  es- 
timating the  application  of  any  explanatory  agency, 
that  the  large  majority  of  the  apparitions  of  an 
interesting  coincidental  character  were  of  living  per- 
sons. However  we  may  choose  to  explain  this  type 
of  phenomena,  we  could  never  adduce  them  as  proof 
of  the  existence  of  discarnate  spirits,  and  hence  in 
lieu  of  this  explanation  it  was  natural,  if  any  posi- 
tive theory  at  all  were  offered,  to  tolerate  telepathy. 

But  I  must  demur  to  any  such  interpretation  of  the 
phenomena.  I  do  not  think  that  they  are  either  evi- 
dential of  telepathy  or  explicable  by  it.  I  think  that 
all  three  classes  of  apparitions  are  to  be  explained 
by  the  same  general  hypothesis.  What  this  is  I  do 
not  know.  It  will  not  do  to  choose  telepathy  because 
some  of  the  phenomena  are  unquestionably  not  ex- 
plicable by  discarnate  spirits.  In  adopting  an  hy- 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS      59 

pothesis  we  must  always  have  respect  to  the  fitness  of 
the  cause  to  the  effect,  and  there  is  neither  the  evi- 
dential situation  for  telepathy  nor  anything  in  the 
phenomenon  to  suggest  such  an  explanation.  As 
the  phenomena  are  all  of  the  same  type  in  spite  of  the 
difference  in  the  conditions  under  which  they  occur,  a 
difference  which  affects  only  evidential  and  not  ex- 
planatory considerations,  we  have  to  find  the  one 
general  cause  of  them.  If  we  make  that  telepathy,  it 
must  most  naturally  be  on  the  ground  that  the  per- 
son appearing  in  the  phantasm  is  the  agent,  and  this 
would  require  us  to  assume  the  spiritistic  theory  to 
account  for  the  apparitions  of  the  dead,  since  we 
would  have  to  make  such  realities  existent  in  order 
to  have  the  proper  agents  for  explaining  the  phe- 
nomena. Otherwise  we  should  have  to  suppose  that 
they  were  telepathically  initiated  by  living  persons, 
thus  vitiating  the  first  supposition  that  the  agents 
in  the  phantasms  of  the  living  were  necessarily  the 
persons  seen.  The  simplest  theory,  of  course,  is  illu- 
sion and  hallucination,  if  we  exclude  chance  and  can 
show  the  causes  for  this  particular  type  of  coinci- 
dence which  apparently  does  not  occur  in  the  annals 
of  pure  psychiatry ;  at  least  psychiatry  does  not  show 
the  evidence  of  it.  The  point  that  psychiatry  recog- 
nises is  the  fact  that  the  same  general  explana- 
tion must  be  applied  to  all  three  classes  of  appari- 
tions, and  I  think  it  is  right  in  this  position.  But 
it  may  be  fairly  contended  that  psychiatry  cannot 
explain  the  coincidences  of  the  apparitions  with  ob- 
jective events  too  remote  from  the  percipient  to  af- 
fect sensory  cognition.  The  exclusion  of  chance  from 

60        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

the  result  and  therefore  the  admission  of  a  causal 
nexus  in  the  coincidences  discredits  the  hypothesis  of 
subjective  hallucination,  and  as  telepathy  cannot 
easily  be  applied  without  admitting  the  spiritistic 
theory  which  it  is  intended  to  nullify,  the  general 
cause  is  still  to  be  sought.  I  do  not  think  that  telep- 
athy has  any  evidential  application  to  them  and  I  do 
not  think  that  we  have  the  data  at  present  to  justify 
confidence  in  any  hypothesis.  It  must  remain  for  fu- 
ture investigation  to  ascertain  how  all  three  types  of 
apparitions  are  to  be  explained,  with  allowances  for 
differences  in  the  circumstances  that  are  not  essential, 
especially  as  the  main  characteristic  of  the  phenomena 
is  identical  in  all  three  types.  What  form  that  ex- 
planation will  take  I  have  no  means  of  predicting,  and 
I  would  have  to  venture  upon  inadequately  supported 
conjectures.  In  brief,  I  think  that  the  evidence  is  en- 
tirely lacking  for  any  satisfactory  theory,  beyond 
the  denial  of  chance,  and  men  may  differ  on  this 
conclusion  of  the  committee. 

3.  Mediumist'ic  Phenomena 

Mediumistic  phenomena  generally  purports  to  rep- 
resent communications  from  discarnate  spirits.  Their 
actual  character  very  often  may  be  nothing  more 
than  secondary  personality,  which  is  unconscious 
mental  action  impersonating  the  dead,  or  in  some 
cases  it  may  involve  mind  reading,  if  the  evidence  be 
sufficient  to  show  the  existence  of  the  supernormal. 
But  in  spite  of  this  broad  scope  of  the  term  it  gen- 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS      61 

erally  assumes  the  spiritistic  type  of  phenomena  as 
representative  of  its  intended  meaning.  I  shall  here 
use  the  term  in  that  sense.  A  "  medium,"  therefore, 
is  a  person  who  claims  to  have  communications  with 
discarnate  spirits  or  recognises  that  his  or  her  phe- 
nomena are  capable  of  that  explanation.  The  man- 
ner of  receiving  alleged  messages  does  not  affect 
the  conception  of  such  persons.  Sometimes  their 
work  is  done  in  a  trance  or  unconscious  state,  some 
times  in  a  normal  and  conscious  state.  In  either  con- 
dition it  may  be  by  what  is  called  automatic  writing  or 
by  automatic  speech.  Or,  again,  in  the  normal  state 
it  may  be  by  conscious  speech  interpreting  impres- 
sions whose  origin  is  not  consciously  known  by  the 
person  acting  as  "  medium."  Sometimes  the  plan- 
chette  may  be  used  instead  of  the  pencil  for  writing, 
and  the  Ouija  board  for  spelling  out  communications 
instead  of  writing  them.  Or  table  tipping  may  be 
supposed  to  spell  out  words  and  sentences.  But  the 
manner  of  receiving  "  communications  "  does  not  de- 
termine the  definition  of  the  "  medium."  It  only  af- 
fects the  evidential  character  of  the  results,  whether 
they  be  supernormal  or  not. 

The  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,  near  Boston,  have 
been  exploited  by  the  Society  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  leave  the  impression  that  hers  are  the  only  me- 
diumistic  phenomena  we  have.  But  this  is  far  from 
being  the  case.  There  are  reasons  to  be  mentioned 
again  why  so  much  emphasis  is  placed  upon  this  one 
case,  and  I  do  not  mean  to  enter  into  them  now.  I 
wish  to  summarise  very  briefly  the  phenomena  of  a 

62        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

few  other  persons  of  this  class,  which  have  not  been 
professional  and  whose  results  certainly  justify  in- 
vestigation. 

It  would  take  too  much  space  to  give  a  satisfac- 
tory resume  of  the  cases  to  which  I  wish  to  refer, 
and  hence  I  must  content  myself  with  little  more  than 
references  and  the  expectation  that  the  reader,  if  he 
is  interested  at  all,  will  examine  them.  I  mention 
only  those  whose  respectability  cannot  be  questioned 
and  who  seem  never  to  have  been  of  the  professional 
type.  In  the  first  stages  of  scientific  inquiry  into 
these  dubious  phenomena  this  limitation  is  an  impor- 
tant one.  I  shall  take  my  instances  from  Mr.  Fred- 
eric W.  H.  Myers'  Human  Personality  and  its  Sur- 
vival of  Bodily  Death  (Vol.  II,  pp.  1-277)  for  con- 
venience, though  most  of  the  same  cases  are  reported 
in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society.  I  must  abbreviate 
the  reports,  so  that  the  reader  who  may  be  interested 
in  the  study  of  the  details  and  evidential  incidents 
affecting  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  must  ex- 
amine the  references. 

Dr.  Liebeault,  the  French  physician,  reports  an 
authentic  case  "  where  a  girl  writes  a  message  an- 
nouncing her  friend's  death  at  the  time  when  that 
friend  is,  in  fact,  dying  in  a  distant  city"  (pp.  169- 
170).  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  who  I  have  said 
above  was  the  brother-in-law  of  Charles  Darwin,  re- 
ports a  most  remarkable  instance  of  his  own  expe- 
rience with  two  friends  whose  integrity  he  could  not 
question.  It  was  in  June,  1889,  and  represented  a 
purported  message  from  a  John  Gurwood,  intimat- 
ing that  he  had  been  in  the  Peninsular  War  in  1810, 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS      63 

and  drawing  a  picture  representing  a  mural  coronet 
with  an  arm  holding  a  scimitar  extending  from  the 
wall.  The  message  also  stated  that  he  had  killed  him- 
self on  Christmas  day.  Inquiry  showed  that  a  Col- 
onel Gurwood  had  been  wounded  in  this  war  in  1812 
and  never  recovered  from  the  effects  of  it,  but  killed 
himself  on  Christmas  day  in  1845.  The  message 
also  mentioned  the  name  of  Gurwood's  friend,  Quen- 
tin,  and  intimated  that  there  was  a  secret  in  regard 
to  this  man  in  connection  with  some  scrape  in  the 
army.  Inquiry  showed  that  this  was  correct,  and 
that  Colonel  Quentin  had  been  court-martialed  in 
1814  (pp.  162-167).  I  do  not  care  what  the  mean- 
ing of  the  incident  is,  but  only  the  form  which  it 
takes.  We  may  explain  it  by  secondary  personality,  if 
we  have  the  evidence  for  this,  but  the  point  for  us  at 
present  is  the  unconscious  manner  in  which  the  sug- 
gestive phenomenon  occurs,  and  the  fact  that  it 
represents  incidents  well  calculated  to  prove  personal 
identity  and  hence  the  existence  of  survival,  if  the  al- 
leged source  of  the  facts  be  true. 

Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  secretary  of  the  American 
Society,  reports  a  very  good  case  which  was  the  re- 
sult of  a  direct  experiment.  It  represents  a  test  mes- 
sage arranged  before  death  to  be  revealed  after  it,  if 
return  were  possible.  The  tests  arranged  were  to  re- 
veal where  a  certain  piece  of  brick  was  placed  before 
death  and  the  contents  of  a  short  letter  which  had 
been  written  and  sealed  before  death.  For  months 
after  the  man's  death  the  survivor  got  nothing  satis- 
factory, until  experiments  were  tried  at  home  by  the 
lady  and  her  mother  themselves  by  table  tipping. 

64        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

The  alphabet  was  said  over  and  the  table  tipped,  evi- 
dently through  unconscious  muscular  action,  at  the 
letters  appropriate  until  the  sentence,  "  You  will  find 
that  piece  of  brick  in  the  cabinet  under  the  toma- 
hawk. Benja."  Its  place  of  concealment  was  not 
known  to  the  parties  present,  but  the  piece  of  brick 
was  found  as  indicated,  under  the  tomahawk  and 
concealed  in  a  shell  at  the  bottom  of  the  cabinet. 
Then  the  letter  was  spelled  out  in  the  same  way,  the 
message  being :  "  Julia,  do  right  and  be  happy. 
Benja."  When  the  letter  was  opened  this  was  found 
to  be  the  sentence  in  it  (pp.  182-185). 

Such  a  story,  of  course,  is  incredible  to  most  of 
us,  and  I  do  not  repeat  it  to  be  believed,  but  to  indi- 
cate that  the  ordinary  objection  to  its  credibility 
cannot  be  raised.  The  lady  and  her  mother  were  not 
likely  to  engage  in  a  trick  to  fool  themselves,  and 
the  experience  was  one  that  Dr.  Hodgson  came  across 
incidentally  in  his  investigations,  and  found  it  hav- 
ing a  respectable  origin.  What  the  explanation  is 
will  have  to  be  determined  by  innumerable  cases  of 
the  kind  adequately  authenticated. 

Mr.  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers  reports  a  case  which 
is  extraordinary  on  any  theory  whatever.  It  came 
to  him  on  the  authority  of  a  physician  with  a  Euro- 
pean reputation  and  his  name  has  to  be  withhheld, 
as  the  incidents  recorded  would  be  out  of  place  in  his 
scientific  surroundings.  Mr.  Myers,  however,  vouches 
for  his  name  and  reputation.  He  is  given  the  pseu- 
donym of  Dr.  X.  The  incident  purports  to  be  a  case 
of  hypnotic  control  from  the  side  of  the  "  spirit 
world,"  and  the  "  control  "  which  directed  the  medi- 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS      65 

cal  treatment  of  a  patient  of  Dr.  X's  was  an  intimate 
friend  of  Dr.  X's  and  a  European  physician  of  much 
repute.  The  story  is  too  long  to  be  quoted  here  and 
should  be  read  (pp.  12-1-130).  The  explanation  is 
not  important.  It  is  the  fact  that  is  interesting. 

Dr.  Ermacora  of  Padua  reports  some  remarkable 
instances  of  real  or  apparent  supernormal  phenomena 
connected  with  automatic  writing  and  apparently  not. 
amenable  to  telepathic  explanation  (pp.  446-447), 
and  the  Countess  of  Radnor  reports  a  large  number 
of  apparently  supernormal  experiences  of  a  Miss  A., 
some  of  which  purport  to  be  spiritistic  and  are  too 
complicated  to  even  abridge  here  (pp.  447-456). 
Mr.  B.  F.  Underwood,  a  man  widely  known  in  the 
United  States  as  a  freethinker,  vouches  for  the  ex- 
periences of  his  wife  in  automatic  writing  which  he 
himself  witnessed  in  most  cases  (pp.  461-466).  M. 
Aksakoff  reports  two  cases  (pp.  466-473). 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  and  interesting  of  me- 
diumistic  incidents  is  one  that  I  take  from  the  ex- 
periences of  Stainton  Moses.  Many  of  his  expe- 
riences rest  upon  his  own  statements  and  authority 
alone,  and  while  his  probity  cannot  be  questioned  the 
scientific  importance  of  all  facts  of  this  kind  depends 
upon  the  confirmation  of  their  occurrence  by  inde- 
pendent testimony  or  such  facts  outside  the  subject's 
knowledge  as  makes  their  credibility  possible.  In 
this  instance  we  have  the  attestation  of  facts  which 
render  the  word  of  Mr.  Moses  credible  independently 
of  his  known  honesty,  and  the  task  of  scepticism 
more  difficult.  It  purports  to  be  a  message  from  a 
lady  whom  Mr.  Moses  had  known  in  life,  but  of  whose 

66        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

death  he  did  not  know.  I  quote  in  full  the  account 
which  Mr.  Myers  gives  of  the  incident : 

"  The  spirit  in  question,"  says  Mr.  Myers,  "  is 
that  of  a  lady  known  to  me,  whom  Mr.  Moses  had 
met,  I  believe,  once  only,  and  whom  I  shall  call 
Blanche  Abercromby.  The  publication  of  the  true 
name  was  forbidden  by  the  spirit  herself,  for  a  reason 
which  was  at  once  obvious  to  me  when  I  read  the 
case,  but  which  was  not,  so  far  as  I  can  tell,  fully 
known  to  Mr.  Moses.  The  lady's  son,  whom  I  have 
since  consulted,  supports  the  prohibition,  and  I  have 
consequently  changed  the  name  and  omitted  the  dates. 

"  The  lady  died  on  a  Sunday  afternoon,  about 
twenty-five  years  ago,  at  a  country  house  about  200 
miles  from  London.  Her  death,  which  was  regarded 
as  an  event  of  public  interest,  was  at  once  telegraphed 
to  London,  and  appeared  in  Monday's  Times;  but, 
of  course,  on  Sunday  evening  no  one  in  London,  save 
the  press  and  perhaps  the  immediate  family,  was  cog- 
nisant of  the  fact.  It  will  be  seen  that  on  that  even- 
ing, near  midnight,  a  communication,  purporting  to 
come  from  her,  was  made  to  Mr.  Moses  at  his  secluded 
lodgings  in  the  north  of  London.  The  identity  was 
some  days  later  corroborated  by  a  few  lines  purport- 
ing to  come  directly  from  her,  and  to  be  in  her  hand- 
writing. There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Mr. 
Moses  had  ever  seen  this  handwriting.  His  one 
known  meeting  with  this  lady  and  her  husband  had 
been  at  a  seance  —  not,  of  course,  of  his  own  — 
where  he  had  been  offended  by  the  strongly  expressed 
disbelief  of  the  husband  in  the  possibility  of  any  such 
phenomena. 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS      67 

"  On  receiving  these  messages  Mr.  Moses  seems  to 
have  mentioned  them  to  no  one,  and  simply  gummed 
down  the  pages  in  his  MS.  book,  marking  the  book 
outside  '  Private  Matter.'  The  book  when  placed 
in  my  hands  was  still  thus  gummed  down,  although 
Mrs.  Speer  was  cognisant  of  the  communication.  I 
opened  the  pages  (as  instructed  by  the  executors), 
and  was  surprised  to  find  a  brief  letter  which,  though 
containing  no  definite  facts,  was  entirely  character- 
istic of  the  Blanche  Abercromby  whom  I  had  known. 
But  although  I  had  received  letters  from  her  in  life, 
I  had  no  recollection  of  her  handwriting.  I  hap- 
pened to  know  a  son  of  hers  sufficiently  well  to  be  able 
to  ask  his  aid  —  aid  which,  I  may  add,  he  would  have 
been  most  unlikely  to  afford  a  stranger.  He  lent  me 
a  letter  for  comparison.  The  strong  resemblance 
was  at  once  obvious,  but  the  A.  of  the  surname  was 
made  in  the  letter  in  a  way  quite  different  from  that 
adopted  in  the  automatic  script.  The  son  then  al- 
lowed me  to  study  a  long  series  of  letters,  reaching 
down  till  almost  the  date  of  her  death.  From  these 
it  appeared  that  during  the  last  year  of  her  life  she 
had  taken  to  writing  the  A  (as  her  husband  had  al- 
ways done)  in  the  way  in  which  it  was  written  in  the 
automatic  script"  (loc.  cit.  pp.  230-231). 

These  are  by  no  means  the  only  instances  which 
might  be  quoted,  but  I  have  given  enough  to  accom- 
plish the  purpose  which  I  have  in  this  chapter.  This 
is  merely  to  mention  some  instances  of  real  or  alleged 
communications  with  discarnate  spirits  that  can 
claim  respectability  of  origin  and  evidential  incidents 

68        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

calculated  to  suggest  their  reliability  as  facts,  how- 
ever we  may  account  for  them.  I  do  not  pretend  for 
a  moment  that  they  prove  what  they  allege.  It  will 
require  much  more  and  much  better  evidence  to  es- 
tablish the  fact  of  survival  of  death,  and  it  is  not  our 
first  duty  to  effect  this  proof,  but  to  see  if  our 
facts  claiming  that  character  are  credible  in  any  sense 
whatever,  and  owing  to  considerations  which  must 
rule  in  scientific  method  we  have  first  to  see  whether 
our  witnesses  are  trustworthy,  and  whether,  whatever 
their  character,  their  testimony  can  in  any  way  be 
corroborated  by  outside  evidence.  I  have,  therefore, 
confined  the  instances  quoted  to  such  persons  as  have 
either  been  accustomed  to  scientific  observation  or 
such  as  can  have  their  statements  rendered  probable 
by  some  form  of  confirmation.  I  think  that  the  cases 
involved  show  the  widespread  existence  of  mediumistic 
phenomena,  however  we  explain  them,  and  that  the 
main  want  at  present  is  a  systematic  reproduction  of 
them  in  numerous  cases  extending  over  a  number  of 
years,  in  order  to  reach  a  scientific  understanding 
of  their  meaning  and  importance.  Such  illustrations 
as  I  have  given  challenge  investigation,  and  this  is 
all  that  I  wish  to  show  by  them.  If  they  contribute 
any  portion  of  the  evidence  bearing  upon  such  a  con- 
clusion as  a  life  after  death  they  are  important,  as 
related  to  one  of  the  most  momentous  problems  that 
science  or  philosophy  ever  approached,  and  if  they 
are  only  instances  in  which  we  are  likely  to  be  led 
astray  in  our  ideas  of  the  cosmos  and  its  tendencies, 
so  much  the  more  dangerous  are  they  to  the  multitude 
and  all  the  more  imperative  is  it  that  scientific  men 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS      69 

should  be  the  responsible  leaders  in  the  investigation 
of  them  and  in  the  dispossession  of  delusion.     The 
complete  breakdown  of  the  old  religious  ideas,  which 
undoubtedly  held  mankind  in  some  of  its  best  moral 
tendencies,  and  the  widespread  development  of  tran- 
scendental philosophies  as  maudlin  as  Neo-Platonism, 
and  the  insanities  of  astrology,  palmistry  and  similar 
vagaries  —  to  say  nothing  of  those  crazes  founded 
on  a  half  truth,  and  which  are  helped  by  the  refusal 
of  science  to  direct  human  convictions  in  this  turbid 
sea  of  abnormal  and  apparently  supernormal  psychol- 
ogy —  are  closely  related  to  each  other.     One  is  the 
consequence   of   scepticism   and   criticism   applied   to 
traditional  beliefs  and  the  other  is  the  consequence 
of  that  resolute  faith  in  the  transcendental  which  the 
older  religion  had  fostered,  but  which  is  now  as  scepti- 
cal of  dogma  as  science  drifting  farther  away  from 
practical  and  ethical  life  than  the  church.     There  is, 
therefore,  a  profound  mission  for  science  in  this  field 
whatever  may  be  the  conclusion  of  its  labors,  and  I 
shall  not  forecast  what  they  might  be.     I  can  only 
say  that,  in  an  age  when  scientific  method  has  be- 
come  the   substitute   for   biblical   authority,   whether 
rightly  or  not  it  is  not  necessary  to  say,  it  is  not  un- 
fair to  ask  of  it  that  it  accept  its  responsibilities  and 
direct  human  convictions  on  the  problem  of  a  future 
life  in  a  manner  to  protect  the  humanities  of  history 
and  to  deserve  the  respect  of  mankind  for  its  interest 
and  guidance. 

70        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

4.     Miscellaneous  Results 

There  were  many  other  subjects  of  psychological 
interest  that  came  under  the  purview  of  the  Society's 
work  besides  those  to  which  I  have  given  prominence 
in  this  summary.  They  were  of  a  various  charac- 
ter and  most  of  them  pertained  to  matters  affecting 
scientific  methods  in  dealing  with  obscure  and  dif- 
ficult phenomena  and  precautions  against  error  in  the 
study  of  them.  I  shall  do  nothing  more  in  this  book 
than  to  call  attention  to  them  and  advise  the  student 
to  examine  them  carefully  if  he  wishes  to  ascertain 
something  of  the  pitfalls  which  await  the  investi- 
gator who  ignores  the  complications  and  difficulties, 
evidential  and  otherwise,  that  haunt  the  path  of  prog- 
ress in  matters  of  this  kind.  The  titles  and  refer- 
ences of  the  articles  will  suffice  for  the  reader,  and 
they  are  taken  from  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society, 
accessible  in  most  good  libraries. 

Report  on  the  Phenomena  of  Theosophy,  or 
Madame  Blavatsky,  by  Richard  Hodgson  and  others, 
Vol.  Ill,  pp.  201-400.  On  some  Physical  Phenomena 
commonly  called  Spiritualistic,  by  Prof.  W.  F.  Bar- 
rett, Vol.  IV,  pp.  25-42.  Results  of  a  Personal  In- 
vestigation of  the  "  Physical  Phenomena  "  of  Spirit- 
ualism, by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Vol.  IV,  pp.  25-74. 
The  Possibilities  of  Mai-Observation  in  relation  to 
Evidence  for  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  Vol.  IV, 
pp.  75-99.  The  Possibilities  of  Mai-Observation  and 
Lapse  of  Memory  from  a  Practical  Point  of  View, 
by  Richard  Hodgson  and  S.  J.  Davey,  Vol.  IV.  pp. 
381-487.  The  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical  Re- 

GENERAL  PROBLEMS  AND  RESULTS      71 

search,  by  Prof.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  1-6. 
Apparitions  of  the  Virgin  in  Dordogne,  by  Leon 
Marillier,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  100-110.  On  Alleged  Move- 
ments of  Objects  Without  Contact,,  by  F.  W.  H.  My- 
ers, Vol.  VII,  pp.  146-198  and  383-394.  A  Case  of 
Double  Consciousness,  by  Richard  Hodgson,  Vol.  VII, 
pp.  221-257.  On  Spirit  Photographs,  by  Mrs. 
Henry  Sidgwick,  Vol.  VII,  pp.  268-289.  Mr.  Da- 
vey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring  of  Phenomena  some- 
times attributed  to  Spirit  Agency,  by  Richard  Hodg- 
son, Vol.  VIII,  pp.  253-310.  The  Defence  of  the 
Theosophists,  by  Richard  Hodgson,  Vol.  VIII,  pp. 
129-159.  Mind-Cure,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles 
of  Lourdes,  by  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  F.  W.  H.  My- 
ers, Vol.  VIII,  pp.  160-209.  Resolute  Credulity,  by 
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Vol.  XI,  pp.  213-234;  Coinci- 
dences, by  Alice  Johnson,  Vol.  XIV,  pp.  151-330. 

There  are  many  important  observations  and  facts 
in  Mr.  Myers'  articles  on  the  Subliminal  Conscious- 
ness which  show  the  dangers  of  the  ordinary  mind 
in  the  presence  of  unusual  phenomena.  They  are 
scattered  throughout  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society 
and  will  have  to  be  searched  for  by  the  interested 
reader.  Dr.  Morton  Prince  has  an  important  case 
affecting  subconscious  mental  action  and  dramatisa- 
tion of  personalities  which  many  in  the  past  would 
have  mistaken  for  spiritistic  phenomena.  The  Census 
of  Hallucinations,  Vol.  X  of  the  Proceedings,  con- 
tains chapters  on  Illusions,  Hallucinations,  and  Ex- 
pectancy and  Suggestion  that  are  most  important,  and 
the  Phantasms  of  the  Living  contain  much  material  on 
the  same  subjects,  affecting  the  common  liability  to 

72        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

mistake  the  supernormal.  One  can  hardly  read  this 
matter  carefully  without  feeling  discouragement  in 
regard  to  the  possibility  and  usefulness  of  investiga- 
tion in  the  subject,  but  he  will  console  himself  by  the 
observation  that  it  is  not  wise  or  helpful  to  accept  any 
transcendental  existence  without  the  cautions  and  limi- 
tations which  any  such  important  belief  must  admit 
as  a  condition  of  being  accepted  at  all. 

CHAPTER  III 

THE    PROBLEM    OF    A    FUTURE    LIFE 

There  have  been  two  great  tendencies  in  human 
thought  and  action,  and  they  divide  mankind,  rough- 
ly speaking,  into  two  classes.  They  may  be  called 
the  scientific  and  the  religious  types  of  mind.  One 
thinks  and  acts  with  reference  to  facts  and  the  other 
with  reference  to  hope.  But  as  all  action  is  in  one 
sense  based  upon  a  hope  of  some  kind,  we  may  per- 
haps express  the  antithesis  better  by  saying  that  the 
hopes  of  the  one  are  based  upon  experience  and  the 
hopes  of  the  other  upon  ideals  that  ignore  experience. 
However  this  may  be,  one  type  will  not  accept  any 
belief  unless  it  can  base  it  upon  present  facts,  veri- 
fiable human  experience ;  the  other  wants  to  believe 
in  some  idyllic  future  and  persists  in  doing  so  if  it 
has  to  evade  the  real  or  apparent  significance  of  the 
present  experience.  One  concentrates  its  attention 
upon  "  nature,"  the  sensible  physical  world,  which 
always  seems  clear  and  intelligible  to  it;  the  other 
concentrates  its  attention  upon  "  supernature,"  a  non- 
sensible  reality  which  is  a  world  of  hopes  and  aspira- 
tions. One  lives  in  the  present;  the  other  lives  for 
the  future.  One  makes  money  and  the  other  makes 
religion.  Of  course,  there  are  natures  plentiful  that 
combine  both  tendencies  and  they  are  perhaps  the 
healthiest  intellectual  and  moral  types,  so  that  I  am 
not  trying  to  represent  the  two  tendencies  as  neces- 

73 

74        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

sarily  in  an  irreconcilable  conflict.  They  have  as- 
sumed an  antagonistic  attitude  toward  each  other 
because  each  is  so  exclusive  about  his  interests.  The 
division  of  labor  in  the  world  tends  to  narrow  our 
affections  and  interests  and  it  does  not  matter  in  what 
field  of  thought  and  activity  this  division  takes  place, 
it  tends  to  produce  differences  of  class  ideas  and  prej- 
udices, and  though  this  conflict  is  not  wholly  excus- 
able by  this  circumstance,  it  appears  to  represent  the 
process  by  which  progress  in  both  directions  has  been 
secured. 

But  the  most  curious  part  of  the  case  is  that  the 
scientific  man,  in  all  his  alleged  reverence  for  fact  and 
emphasis  upon  the  material  phenomena  of  sense  for 
the  formation  of  his  conception  of  tilings  and  the 
regulation  of  his  actions,  is  quite  unconscious  that  the 
basis  of  all  his  work  is  a  supersensible  world  of  amaz- 
ing character,  and  this  is  especially  true  of  the  as- 
sumptions of  modern  science  which  has  postulated 
realities  as  far  beyond  sense  as  any  spirit  could  be 
supposed  to  be.  This  was  quite  manifest  in  both 
schools  of  Greek  philosophy,  the  one  headed  by  Plato 
and  the  other  by  Epicurus,  and  Greek  philosophy 
has  always  been  assumed  to  have  been  predominantly 
actuated  by  regard  for  things  of  sense.  But  I  shall 
return  to  this  general  tendency  of  scientific  thought 
toward  the  supersensible,  after  thus  remarking  that 
it  represents  the  common  characteristic  of  the  op- 
posed schools,  while  I  pause  to  note  the  real  point 
of  difference  between  the  conceptions  of  the  scientific 
mind  ,'vnd  those  of  the  religious  mind.  This  is  the 
distinction  between  the  mind  that  emphasises  law  or 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE     75 

the  uniformity  of  "  nature  "  and  the  mind  that  hunts 
for  liberation  from  the  hard  restraints  of  such  law. 
It  is,  perhaps,  better  to  say,  owing  to  the  claim  of 
"  law  "  on  both  sides,  that  the  difference  represents 
the  opposition  between  the  believer  in  an  impersonal 
and  the  believer  in  a  personal  order  of  the  world,  the 
one  an  absolutely  fixed  and  invariable  order  and  the 
other  a  capricious  and  variable  one  adjustable  to  the 
purposes  of  a  personal  agent.  I  do  not  contend  that 
the  two  are  necessarily  antagonistic,  but  the  con- 
troversies of  the  past  have  so  generally  been  conducted 
with  that  assumption  that  we  are  in  the  habit  of 
conceiving  the  fixed  order  of  events  as  excluding  per- 
sonal agency  in  their  determination.  But,  though  a 
personal  and  an  impersonal  order  may  be  mutually 
exclusive,  a  fixed  and  a  personal  order  are  not  so. 
They  are  quite  consistent  with  each  other.  But  it  is 
much  more  difficult  to  find  evidence  of  a  personal  in- 
terpretation of  "  nature  "  in  an  order  of  the  mechan- 
ically fixed  sort  in  which  individuals  are  sacrificed 
to  a  Juggernautic  process  than  in  one  which  reflects 
a  variability  that  protects  individuals  against  de- 
struction. But  the  evidential  defect  of  the  personal 
view  does  not  indicate  a  conflict  between  the  scientific 
and  religious  conception  of  things  as  they  may  be 
understood  in  the  light  of  all  the  facts,  though  it 
affects  convictions  regarding  it.  We  must  always  re- 
member that  the  personal  view  of  the  world  was  taken 
for  the  purpose  of  supporting  the  probability  of  a 
future  life,  and  that  it  only  followed  the  example 
of  the  prevailing  philosophy,  which  was  wholly 
a  priori,  when  it  was  lax  in  its  demand  and  use  of 

76        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

evidence.  But  when  we  have  come  to  realise  that  the 
religious  conception  is  compatible  with  some  form 
of  fixed  order  and  that  the  problem  of  knowledge 
of  a  safe  and  sane  type  must  be  determined  by  respect 
for  present  facts,  we  shall  not  first  resort  to  a  phil- 
osophic speculation  about  a  personal  order  of  "  na- 
ture "  to  defend  the  probabilities  of  belief,  but  accept 
the  canons  of  science  and  investigate  the  residual 
phenomena  of  human  experience  which  have  been 
hitherto  cast  into  outer  darkness,  and  we  shall  do 
this  without  any  prognosis  of  its  outcome  and  without 
any  despair  or  waste,  if  the  result  is  not  what  we 
may  have  hoped. 

Now  the  scientific  mind  which  confines  its  interpre- 
tation of  "  nature  "  to  the  most  easily  verifiable  facts 
of  experience  has  usually  supposed  itself  justified  in 
denying  the  fact  and  the  possibility  of  a  future  life. 
The  religious  mind  on  various  grounds  usually  be- 
lieves and  affirms  it,  and  it  is  the  differences  of  criteria 
and  canons  between  them  that  determines  the  differ- 
ences of  their  convictions,  the  one  being  much  more 
stringent  in  his  demand  for  evidence  than  the  other. 
One  thing  is  certain,  however,  and  that  is  that  there 
could  be  no  dispute  between  the  two  schools  of 
thought,  if  life  after  death  were  sensibly  provable  as 
are  every  day  experiences,  and  that,  if  it  be  a  fact, 
it  represents  a  supersensible  condition  of  reality. 
The  believer  in  it  must  assume  some  sort  of  super- 
sensible or  transcendental  world  beyond  the  reach  of 
direct  sensory  experience  if  he  is  to  explain  the  ab- 
sence of  the  kind  of  evidence  for  a  future  life  that 
physical  science  demands  for  its  marvels.  The 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      77 

sceptic  who  relies  on  the  uniformities  of  human  ex- 
perience and  upon  his  senses  for  the  evidence  of  his 
beliefs  will,  of  course,  exact  very  severe  credentials 
for  so  extraordinary  a  claim  as  the  survival  of  per- 
sonal consciousness,  after  all  the  triumphs  of  physi- 
ology and  the  silence  of  all  the  ages.  "  Thousands 
of  generations,  all  as  noisy  as  our  own,  have  been 
swallowed  up  of  time,  and  there  remains  no  wreck  of 
them  any  more,  and  Pleiades,  and  Arcturus,  and 
Orion,  and  Serius,  are  still  shining  in  their  courses, 
clear  and  young,  as  when  the  shepherd  first  noted 
them  on  the  plains  of  Shinar." 

The  problem  of  a  future  life,  therefore,  involves 
two  questions  of  evidence:  (1)  Whether  there  is  any 
supersensible  reality  at  all,  with  its  bearing  upon  the 
possibility  of  conceiving  the  survival  of  consciousness 
after  death,  and  (2)  whether  there  is  any  evidence 
that  makes  the  survival  of  personal  consciousness  an 
imperative  hypothesis.  These  questions  define  for  us 
the  method  of  approaching  and  solving  the  problem, 
and  this  requires  us  to  examine  briefly  the  conception 
of  the  problem  as  it  has  been  worked  out  by  the  devel- 
opment of  materialism  and  the  investigations  of 
psychic  research.  I  shall  approach  the  question, 
however,  from  the  standpoint  of  physical  science  for 
the  purpose  of  completely  disarming  the  presumptions 
on  which  it  usually  relies  for  discrediting  psychic  re- 
search. I  mean  to  throw  physical  science  upon  the 
defensive  against  a  spiritualistic  interpretation  of  the 
phenomena  which  are  under  investigation.  The  main 
point,  therefore,  to  be  first  kept  in  mind  is,  that  the 
conclusions  of  physical  science  make  for  the  possi- 

78        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

bility  of  personal  survival  after  death,  though  they  do 
not  in  any  sense  prove  it.  My  first  argument  will  be 
ad  hominem;  that  is,  based  upon  the  physicist's  own 
premises,  and  it  will  devolve  upon  him  to  discredit  the 
case  by  abandoning  the  fundamental  conditions  and 
conclusions  of  his  own  science. 

The  first  question  is  whether  there  is  any  super- 
sensible reality  in  the  world.  I  said  above  that  all 
Greek  thought  was  based  upon  the  assumption  of 
such  a  reality  at  the  basis  of  the  sensible  world.  It 
still  called  this  supersensible  world  "  physical,"  but 
without  any  consciousness  of  the  qualifications  under 
which  this  was  either  possible  or  implicative  of  greatly 
modified  conceptions  of  the  world.  No  one  will  doubt 
that  Plato  made  the  basis  of  things  supersensible. 
His  "  ideas,"  which  ought  to  be  called  "  reals,"  as 
they  denote  the  permanent  realities  of  the  world  as 
over  against  the  transient,  were  entirely  supersensi- 
ble and  in  no  way  accessible  to  the  senses.  It  was 
supposed  that  the  doctrine  of  Epicurus  opposed  that 
of  Plato,  but  in  fact  it  did  so  in  name  only.  What 
Plato  called  "  ideas  *  Epicurus  called  "  atoms." 
There  was  a  great  difference  in  one  respect.  Plato 
was  not  always  clear  in  the  use  of  his  "  ideas."  They 
were  generally  a  name  for  the  essential  qualities  of 
individual  objects,  that  is,  attributes  that  were  com- 
mon to  individuals  in  a  class  and  persisted  through 
the  species  from  parent  to  offspring.  But  he  also 
gave  the  term  a  meaning  to  denote  something  having 
self-motion  which  the  Epicureans  gave  to  their  atoms. 
With  Plato  the  "  idea  "  was  neither  a  state  of  con- 
sciousness nor  a  mere  function  of  something  and  so 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      79 

phenomenal  or  transient,  but  it  was  a  "  reality  "  that 
persisted  like  the  Epicurean  atoms,  and  in  its  super- 
sensible character  is  perfectly  comparable  with  them. 
But  pass  this  by  as  irrelevant.  The  certain  thing  is 
that  the  "idea"  or  "form"  (in  our  parlance, 
"  real ")  of  Plato  was  a  permanent  acting  thing,  and 
the  atom  of  Epicurus  was  a  permanent  passive  thing 
in  motion,  and  both  supersensible.  The  only  point  of 
apparent  difference  was  that  the  materialists  called 
their  supersensible  reality  physical.  But  it  was  su- 
persensible nevertheless.  The  only  thing  that  linked 
their  conception  of  it  with  the  physical  was  the 
attributes  ascribed  to  the  atoms.  They  were  supposed 
to  be  hard,  similar  in  kind,  having  weight  and  shape, 
but  entirely  incapable  of  being  discovered  by  the 
senses.  The  modern  atomic  theory  has  gone  much 
farther  than  this,  after  accepting  the  ancient  doctrine 
as  in  the  main  correct  or  satisfactory  for  its  purpose, 
which  was  to  explain  the  material  complexity  of  or- 
ganic and  inorganic  compounds.  The  modern  theory 
says  nothing  about  the  shape  of  the  atom  and  noth- 
ing about  its  perpetually  falling.  It  has  weight  and 
affinity  and  is  perhaps  in  perpetual  activity.  How  it 
can  be  in  perpetual  activity  consistently  with  the  doc- 
trine of  inertia  is  not  made  clear.  But  the  main 
point  is  that  the  doctrine  places  the  supersensible  at 
the  basis  of  the  sensible  precisely  as  did  Greek  specula- 
tion, and  though  it  still  regards  this  basis  as  physical, 
it  assumes  a  world  transcending  sense  which  opens  the 
way  to  conceiving  it  possible  that  there  might  be 
realities  of  a  supersensible  type  making  possible  the 
survival  of  consciousness.  Once  admit  that  the  basis 

80        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  things  is  supersensible  and  there  is  no  barrier  to 
the  assertion  that  much  is  possible  which  could  not  be 
admitted  where  sense  perception  is  the  canon  of  truth. 
But  modern  science  has  gone  even  further  than  a 
radical  modification  of  the  ancient  atomism.  It  has 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  even  the  atom  which  was 
before  supposed  to  be  a  simple  and  indivisible  reality 
is  complex,  and  in  the  estimation  of  men  like  Sir 
William  Ramsay  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  has  justified 
the  supposition  that  the  atom  or  ultimate  constituent 
of  all  matter  is  composed  of  electricity  or  in  some  way 
a  modification  of  electrical  energy,  a  view  which  sim- 
ply throws  the  reins  free  to  all  sorts  of  speculations 
that  have  been  rife  in  the  class  which  many  of  us  have 
had  to  restrain  because  it  was  not  deemed  respectable ! 
But  this  aside,  we  have  in  this  position  of  physical 
science  the  reducibility  of  the  supersensible  material 
atom  to  something  still  more  supersensible  and  mys- 
terious than  ever,  and  yet  we  are  not  allowed  to  talk 
about  the  possibility  of  spirits  and  survival  after 
death!  With  physical  science  declaring  as  a  proved 
fact  the  impossible  of  the  preceding  ages,  it  is  strange 
to  find  it  so  obstinate  against  the  possibility  of  the 
possible  of  all  ages !  It  is  interesting,  too,  to  remark 
that  this  new  theory  of  matter  abandons  all  the  prop- 
erties that  in  the  ancient  and  the  modern  conception  of 
atomism  had  characterised  the  elements.  Weight,  in- 
ertia, shape,  density,  affinity,  motion  in  space,  etc.,  are 
not  indicated  in  this  new  ultimate,  and  in  fact  its  na- 
ture is  about  as  well  described  as  Herbert  Spencer's 
"  Unknowable."  None  of  the  characteristics  by 
which  we  know  and  call  a  thing  "  matter  "  are  per- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      81 

ceptible  in  its  constitution,  and  yet  it  is  sacrilege  to 
speak  or  think  of  anything  like  "  spirit,"  which  might 
be  some  form  of  this  reality,  simply  because  genera- 
tions of  men  have  come  to  dislike  the  word.  In  the 
same  direction  of  thought  is  the  doctrine  that  the 
elements  are  evolved  from  some  one  ultimate  and  sim- 
ple reality.  It  is  supposed  that  Mendeleyeff's  classi- 
fication of  the  elements  points  to  this  conclusion,  as  it 
shows  a  relation  of  density  between  them  assumed  to 
suggest  that  even  the  elements  are  not  the  ultimate 
reality  in  the  cosmos.  Here  is  a  conception  which 
goes  beyond  "  matter  "  for  its  primal  substance,  or  if 
it  calls  it  "  matter  "  does  not  realise  that  the  term 
has  lost  its  distinction  from  "  spirit,"  and  yet  it  is 
superstition  to  think  it  possible  that  we  might  find 
reason  or  evidence  to  tolerate  the  existence  of  a  soul 
and  to  cast  a  doubt  on  the  doctrine  that  consciousness 
is  a  function  of  the  brain ! 

Then  again  we  have  Roentgen  rays,  radio-active 
forms  of  energy,  and  wireless  telegraphy,  all  of  which 
represent  supersensible  modes  of  reality.  They  are 
based  on  sensible  facts  in  the  physical  universe,  but 
none  of  them  reveal  themselves  directly  to  the  senses. 
All  that  we  have  to  evidence  them  is  some  effect  in 
the  physical  world  which  cannot  be  explained  by  the 
ordinarily  known  modes  of  action.  Their  effects  are 
sensible,  but  they  as  causes  are  wholly  supersensible. 
What  limit,  then,  is  there  to  the  forms  of  energy  in 
the  cosmos?  Why  suppose  that  they  stop  with  these 
elusive  agencies?  What  ground  have  we  to  say  to 
science,  "  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther  "  ? 
Why  is  it  so  insane  to  wonder  whether  the  phenomena 

82        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  apparitions,  which  Mr.  Spencer  regards  as  the  basis 
of  religion  in  all  ages,  and  whether  mediumistic  phe- 
nomena might  not  reveal  something  not  dreamt  of  in 
our  ordinary  philosophy,  and  to  endeavor  to  protect 
the  race  from  illusion  in  such  a  field,  when  it  is  so 
noble  to  find  argon,  Roentgen  rays,  radio-active  agen- 
cies, and  wireless  telegraphy,  which,  if  they  mean  any- 
thing, point  toward  the  very  possibility  for  which  I 
.•un  suggesting  the  respectability? 

Again  the  ether  hypothesis  is  the  most  definite 
abandonment  of  the  old  theory  of  matter  as  the  only 
ultimate  reality  in  the  universe.  There  is  not  a  single 
attribute  in  it,  according  to  the  suppositions  usually 
entertained,  that  justifies  its  description  as  matter,  in 
any  sense  affecting  either  the  common  or  the  scientific 
theory  of  ordinary  matter.  There  is  no  assurance 
that  it  is  atomic,  that  it  is  subject  to  gravity,  that  it 
has  anything  like  density,  that  it  has  color,  sonorous- 
ness, tangibility,  or  other  sensible  qualities,  or  any  of 
the  speculative  qualities  of  the  scientist's  "  matter," 
except  elasticity  and  extension,  its  elasticity  being 
said  to  be  perfect,  wThich  means  nothing  because  per- 
fection is  a  negative  attribute.  But  there  is  every- 
thing in  the  scientist's  account  of  ether  to  suggest 
the  attributes  of  omnipresence,  omnipotence,  indivisi- 
bility, unchangeabilit}7,  etc. ;  these  have  been  the  terms 
in  which  men  in  theological  ages  described  God.  It 
is  scientific  and  sane  to  say  ether,  but  not  to  say 
spirit.  There  is,  of  course,  some  reason  for  this,  but 
it  is  not  one  that  excuses  any  bigoted  opposition  to 
the  possibility  of  spirit.  "  Spirit,"  if  usable  at  all  in 
philosophic  parlance,  ought  to  imply  the  accompani- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      83 

ment  of  consciousness  or  the  possibility  of  conscious- 
ness, whether  it  denote  the  material  or  immaterial 
reality  as  its  ground,  and  that  possibility  of  conscious- 
ness beyond  the  existence  of  the  physical  organism 
that  we  know  is  the  problem.  But  the  existence  of 
ether  takes  the  human  mind  so  far  beyond  the  limita- 
tions of  the  ancient  materialism  that,  while  nothing 
is  proved  in  the  spiritual  field  by  it,  it  is  folly  to 
indulge  in  dogmatic  denials  or  in  ridicule  of  the  pos- 
sibility of  the  spiritual.  There  is  so  much  supersen- 
sible reality  actually  admitted  that  it  ought  not  to  be 
insane  to  wonder  whether  there  may  not  be  more 
of  it  at  the  bottom  of  apparitions  and  mediumistic 
phenomena.  The  physicist  should  remember  the  fate 
of  his  sneering  at  the  alleged  existence  of  meteors,  and 
of  travelling  balls  of  electricity,  asserted  at  first  on  the 
evidence  of  the  common  man.  He  at  first  ridiculed 
the  stories  about  them,  finally  accepted  them  as  facts, 
appropriated  all  the  honors  of  their  discovery,  and 
learned  no  lessons  of  humility  by  the  experience. 
Meteors  even  became  in  his  opinion  the  best  means 
of  explaining  the  production  and  the  conservation  of 
the  sun's  heat!  And  this  after  having  fought  the 
belief  in  their  existence  with  all  his  might !  The  his- 
tory of  hypnotism,  euphemistic  for  Mesmerism,  might 
be  quoted  as  an  illustration  of  the  same  tendency  of 
respectability  wherever  it  has  the  power  and  the  votes, 
and  the  respectability  usually  consists  only  in  this  im- 
munity. Caution  and  deliberation  are  the  duties  of 
the  scientific  man  and  he  is  not  to  be  castigated  too 
severely  for  hesitation  in  the  acceptance  of  every 
claim  presented  to  his  attention,  but  while  he  is  justi-  • 

84        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

fied  in  suspense  of  judgment  at  all  times,  he  is  not  ex- 
cusable for  taking  the  attitude  of  a  man  who  will  not 
entertain  possibilities  for  what  he  does  not  always  be- 
lieve. But  the  old  materialism  has  been  too  severely 
shaken  by  later  speculation  and  discoveries  for  the 
physicist  to  justify  the  kind  of  intolerance  toward 
the  effort  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  soul  that  led  in 
the  middle  ages  to  every  form  of  persecution  against 
science.  Ridicule  may  be  for  a  while  as  effective  an 
instrument  against  progress  as  the  torch  and  stake 
were  against  the  liberty  of  science,  but  neither  agency 
ever  succeeds  finally  in  suppressing  the  truth,  if  the 
phenomena  are  recurrent  enough  to  constantly  enforce 
attention  to  them,  and  this  persistency  seems  to  be  a 
characteristic  of  a  certain  type  of  residual  phenomena 
in  psychology. 

I  might  take  up  several  special  fields  of  physical 
science  and  reinforce  the  argument  from  the  tendency 
to  enlarge  the  territory  of  the  supersensible  at  the 
basis  of  the  sensible  world,  but  I  think  that  the  in- 
stances which  I  have  mentioned  suffice  to  show  that 
the  physicist  must  remain  quiet  if  he  does  not  wish 
to  be  refuted  out  of  his  own  mouth  when  he  under- 
takes to  discredit  the  possibility  of  spiritual  agency 
beyond  the  known  phenomena  of  sense.  The  persons 
to  question  this  are  those  who  limit  all  knowledge  to 
sensory  experience,  and  question  the  existence  of  any- 
thing whatever  supersensible,  including  atoms,  ether, 
and  electrical  energy  of  a  substantial  type.  But  the 
believer  in  these  transcendental  physical  realities  ought 
not  to  stumble  at  the  possibility  of  spirits,  though  he 
*  is  justified  in  hesitation  and  extreme  cautiousness  in 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      85 

regard  to  the  alleged  evidence.  It  is  not  the  absurd- 
ity or  impossibility  of  a  future  life  that  gives  the 
rational  man  his  difficulties  in  the  challenge  to  his 
belief.  It  is  the  comparative  paucity  of  the  alleged 
evidence  that  will  stand  scientific  scrutiny.  So 
meager  is  it  in  comparison  with  the  evidence  on  which 
the  general  affairs  of  life  and  the  discoveries  of  phys- 
ical science  are  based  that  sane  men  may  well  pause 
before  the  demands  made  upon  their  credulity,  espe- 
cially after  the  attempt  to  study  the  alleged  evidence 
for  the  existence  of  discarnate  spirits  has  revealed  in- 
credible sources  and  quantities  of  illusion  and  hal- 
lucination, to  say  nothing  of  fraud  and  mal-observa- 
tion.  These  make  the  problem  a  larger  one  than 
those  which  physical  science  has  to  face. 

It  will  be  necessary  in  the  further  consideration  of 
what  the  problem  of  proving  a  future  life  is  to  ex- 
amine what  the  theory  is  that  stands  in  the  way  of 
accepting  the  existence  of  a  soul  and  its  survival.  I 
refer  to  the  theory  of  materialism  and  the  conception 
of  it  which  has  prevailed  so  long  and  which  is  so 
strong  in  the  estimation  of  physical  science.  To  ex- 
plain what  materialism  means  and  what  the  facts  are 
that  support  it  will  be  to  outline  the  method  by  which 
it  has  to  be  disproved,  if  that  be  possible  at  all.  But 
we  shall  neither  understand  the  problem  before  us  in 
this  book  nor  the  strength  of  the  materialistic  theory 
unless  we  do  thus  approach  the  matter  as  defined  for 
us  by  traditional  controversies. 

The  ancient  materialism  was  identified  with  the 
atomic  theory  of  matter.  This  conceived  all  physical 
objects  as  known  to  the  senses  to  be  compounds  of  the 

86        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

elements  which  were  atomic  in  nature.  This  view  of 
organic  and  inorganic  compounds  was  carried  down 
into  modern  times,  and  it  led  to  the  definition  of  all 
phenomena  as  functions  of  these  compounds.  Mater- 
ialism thus  took  a  position  opposed  to  the  theological 
interpretation  of  nature  and  denied  the  existence  of 
God  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  In  its  broadest 
conception,  where  it  was  conceived  as  a  cosmic  doc- 
trine and  so  defined  as  convertible  with  the  theory  that 
all  phenomena  whatsoever  were  material  phenomena 
and  where  such  a  thing  as  immaterial  or  spiritual  ex- 
istence of  any  kind,  except  as  phenomenal  or  func- 
tional modes  of  matter,  was  deemed  impossible,  it  was 
a  general  philosophy.  With  this  broader  view  of  it 
this  work  has  nothing  to  do.  But  reduced  to  its 
psychological  conception,  it  is  convertible  with  the 
statement  that  consciousness  is  a  function  of  the 
brain.  Now  functions  of  the  physical  organism  or 
body  are  admittedly  perishable  with  it,  and  hence  if 
consciousness  be  regarded  as  a  function  of  the  organ- 
ism as  digestion,  circulation,  perspiration  are,  it  must 
be  conceived  as  having  the  same  destiny. 

Let  me  take  some  facts  in  physical  science  which 
show  how  materialism  can  explain  or  tries  to  explain 
phenomena,  which  have  no  permanent  existence.  A 
gaslight,  for  instance,  is  the  resultant  of  the  com- 
bination of  oxygen  and  carbon.  Water  is  the  result- 
ant of  the  combination  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  In 
each  of  these  instances,  the  resultant  shows  what  is 
not  found  in  the  elements.  Thus  neither  carbon  nor 
oxygen  exhibits  the  phenomenon  of  light  alone.  Their 
properties  are  very  different.  But  in  the  act  of  com- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      87 

bining  to  form  carbonic  acid  they  produce  the  phe- 
nomenon of  light,  a  property  or  functional  activity 
that  neither  element  exhibits  alone.  Again,  neither 
oxygen  nor  hydrogen  will  alone  quench  thirst  or  a 
fire,  but  in  combination  they  show  this  property  which 
they  do  not  show  in  their  elementary  condition.  Now 
this  same  phenomenon  of  producing  properties  not 
apparent  or  real  in  elements  characterises  the  whole 
process  of  organic  and  inorganic  compounds,  and  this 
process  seems  to  determine  the  nature  of  all  cosmic 
phenomena.  Now  we  have  only  to  recognise  the 
proved  fact  that  all  organic  compounds,  and  especial- 
ly the  human  organism  and  brain,  are  exceedingly 
complex  compounds.  The  fact  enables  the  physi- 
ologist to  appeal  to  this  possibility  to  account  for 
the  phenomena  of  consciousness  as  functions  of  the 
brain,  seeing  that  the  brain  is  more  intimately  con- 
nected with  mental  action  than  any  other  part  of 
the  body.  No  one  questions  the  belief  that  digestion, 
inhalation,  circulation,  perspiration  and  all  the  secre- 
tions are  functions  of  the  bodily  organism;  and  only 
the  philosophic  superstition  that,  because  consciousness 
cannot  be  a  mode  of  motion,  as  all  material  functions 
are  supposed  to  be  this,  it  cannot  be  a  function  of 
the  body  or  brain,  prevents  the  psychologist  from 
admitting  that  the  materialistic  position  is  the  proved 
one.  But  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  all  phe- 
nomena of  matter  are  modes  of  motion  by  necessity, 
and  if  we  had  there  is  no  way  of  proving  that  con- 
sciousness is  not  one  of  them.  However  such  contro- 
versy may  be  settled,  the  extent  to  which  phenomena 
can  be  explained  by  the  principle  of  composition  in 

88        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

matter  is  a  presumption  in  the  absence  of  other  evi- 
dence that  consciousness  can  be  classified  in  some  sense 
with  the  other  functions  of  the  organism.  Two 
strong  arguments  in  facts  can  be  given  to  sustain  this 
view,  one  positive  and  the  other  negative. 

We  find  in  physiological  science,  in  the  phenomena 
of  insanity,  brain  and  other  diseases,  accidents  and 
injuries,  and  various  bodily  conditions  that  the  integ- 
rity of  consciousness  is  determined  by  the  integrity 
of  the  organism,  being  healthy  when  the  organism  is 
healthy  and  abnormal  when  the  organism  is  abnormal. 
While  this  may  not  absolutely  prove  that  conscious- 
ness is  a  function  of  the  brain,  it  creates  that  pre- 

'  sumption  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  the  causal  priority 
of  the  disturbed  or  normal  occurrence  of  mental  phe- 
nomena is  the  bodily  condition.  This  dependence  in- 
evitably suggests  the  relation  most  natural  to  scientific 
conceptions  and  that  is  illustrated  in  the  relation  of  all 
the  other  functions  of  the  body  which  vary  in  their 
action  and  integrity  with  the  normal  and  abnormal 
condition  of  the  physical  organism.  When  organism 
explains  so  much  of  the  phenomena  we  observe  it  is 
rational  to  suppose  that  it  also  explains  consciousness. 
That  I  am  correctly  stating  the  materialist's  posi- 

|tion  may  be  indicated  by  what  others  say  of  it. 
"  Throughout  the  animal  kingdom,"  says  John  Fiske,, 
''  we  never  see  sensation,  perception,  instinct,  volition, 

,  reasoning,  or  any  of  the  phenomena  which  we  distin- 
guish as  mental,  manifested  except  in  connection  with 
nerve-matter  arranged  in  systems  of  various  degrees 
of  complexity.  We  can  trace  sundry  relations  of 
general  correspondence  between  the  increasing  mani- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE     89 

festations  of  intelligence  and  the  increasing  compli- 
cations of  the  nervous  system.  Injuries  to  the  nerv- 
ous structure  entail  failures  of  function,  either  in  the 
mental  operations  themselves  or  in  the  control  which 
they  exercise  over  the  actions  of  the  body;  there  is 
either  psychical  aberration,  or  loss  of  consciousness, 
or  muscular  paralysis.  At  the  moment  of  death,  as 
soon  as  the  current  of  arterial  blood  ceases  to  flow 
through  the  cerebral  vessels,  all  signs  of  consciousness 
cease  for  the  lookers-on;  and  after  the  nervous  sys- 
tem has  been  resolved  into  its  elements,  what  reason 
have  we  to  suppose  that  consciousness  survives,  any 
more  than  that  the  wetness  of  water  should  survive  its 
separation  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen  ?  " 

Dr.  William  Osier,  of  Johns  Hopkins  University, 
and  recently  called  to  Oxford,  England,  in  his  Inger- 
soll  Lecture  at  Harvard  University,  indicates  the  po- 
sition of  materialism  very  clearly.  "  Modern  physi- 
ological science,"  he  says,  "  dispenses  altogether  with 
the  soul.  The  old  difficulty  for  which  Socrates  chided 
Cebes,  who  feared  that  — 

The  soul 

Which  now  is  mine  must  re-attain 
Immunity  from  my  control, 
And  wander  round  the  world  again, — 

this  old  dread,  so  hard  to  charm  away,  lest  in  the  vast 
and  wandering  air  the  homeless  Animula  might  lose 
its  identity,  that  eternal  form  would  no  longer  divide 
eternal  soul  from  all  beside, —  this  difficulty  science 
ignores  altogether.  The  association  of  life  in  all  its 
phases  with  organisation,  the  association  of  a  grada- 

90        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

tion  of  intelligence  with  increasing  complexity  of  or- 
ganisation, the  failure  of  the  development  of  intelli- 
gence with  an  arrest  in  cerebral  growth  in  the  child, 
the  slow  decay  of  mind  with  changes  in  the  brain,  the 
absolute  dependence  of  the  higher  mental  attributes 
upon  definite  structures,  the  instantaneous  loss  of  con- 
sciousness when  the  blood  supply  is  cut  off  from  the 
higher  centers  —  these  facts  give  pause  to  the  scien- 
tific student  when  he  tries  to  think  of  intelligence  apart 
from  organisation." 

The  evidential  situation  points  in  the  same  direc- 
tion. By  this  I  mean  that  our  habits  of  thought  in 
forming  convictions  about  anything  whatsoever  neces- 
sitate our  recognition  of  the  view  that  the  facts  of 
general  observation  are  against  the  spiritualist's 
theory  of  the  case.  Let  me  explain  this  by  illustra- 
tion. 

I  observe  that  seed  placed  in  the  ground  will  grow 
when  the  temperature  is  suitable  and  that  when  the 
temperature  is  not  suitable  it  will  not  grow.  I  be- 
come confirmed  in  the  belief  that  the  heat  is  the  cause 
of  this  growth  by  the  uniformity  of  the  relation  be- 
tween it  and  growth,  and  so  consider  growth  to  be 
a  phenomenon  dependent  upon  this  causal  agency  and 
that  it  will  neither  occur  nor  perdure  without  such 
conditions.  In  the  same  way  frequent  observation 
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  rain  is  the  condensation  of 
moisture  in  the  air  and  that  the  clouds  are  the  accom- 
paniment of  it.  Before  we  know  anything  about  the 
uniformity  of  such  a  phenomenon  we  observe  that 
rainfall  is  associated  with  a  certain  type  of  cloud 
and  by  frequent  experience  we  discover  that  rain  does 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      91 

not  fall  unless  this  type  of  cloud  is  present,  and  we 
then  feel  certain  that  the  cloud  is  the  cause  or  a  nec- 
essary condition  of  it  in  some  form.  Again  we  find 
that  fire  is  the  result  of  the  composition  of  carbon 
and  oxygen,  as  indicated  above  and  that  we  cannot 
produce  a  fire  without  this  relation  between  the  two 
substances,  so  that  we  feel  obliged  to  suppose  that  the 
effect  or  phenomenon  cannot  take  place  unless  those 
conditions  exist.  It  is  the  same  throughout  the  whole 
plane  of  nature.  Facts  seem  dependent  upon  the  re- 
sults of  composition,  and  this  truth  can  be  formulated 
in  a  general  way  by  the  illustration  of  A  and  B,  in 
which  B  stands  for  a  phenomenon  and  A  for  a  cause. 
Thus,  if  we  observe  the  fact  B  associated  with  A  we 
may  suspect  that  A  is  its  cause,  but  we  cannot  assure 
ourselves  until  we  have  observed  the  fact  a  large 
number  of  times  and  in  varying  circumstances,  and 
until  we  have  learned  that  B  does  not  occur  when  A  is 
absent.  In  this  manner  we  come  to  accept  as  our  cri- 
terion of  conviction  in  all  matters  whatsoever  the  prin- 
ciple that  B  must  be  present  with  A  and  absent  if  A  is 
absent,  if  we  are  to  suppose  that  there  is  any  necessary 
connection  between  them,  and  if  B  disappears  when 
A  disappears  we  say  that  B  is  a  transient  and  perish- 
able event.  It  has  no  persistence  or  existence  beyond 
the  sensible  conditions  in  which  we  observe  its  uniform 
occurrence. 

Now  let  us  apply  this  mode  of  thought  to  con- 
sciousness to  see  how  scientific  method  and  common 
sense  oblige  us  to  consider  it,  or  at  least  apparently 
oblige  us  to  think  of  it.  We  find  in  our  experience 
that  consciousness  is  associated  with  a  bodily  organ- 

92         SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ism  and,  apart  from  the  phenomena  of  psychical  re- 
search, which  are  refused  recognition  by  most  scien- 
tific men,  there  is  no  evidence  that  this  consciousness 
exists  apart  from  the  bodily  organism.  The  most 
natural  conclusion  under  such  circumstances,  espe- 
cially in  the  light  of  the  manner  in  which  we  form 
all  our  beliefs,  is  that  consciousness  is  a  function  of 
the  organism  and  perishable  with  it  like  digestion  and 
circulation.  In  this  mode  of  interpretation  of  the 
case  science  and  common  sense  alike  are  correct,  in  so 
far  as  the  apparent  facts  are  concerned,  and  the  argu- 
ment stands  in  favor  of  materialism  and  making  it  the 
only  tenable  hypothesis  unless  we  can  show  that  it 
mistakes  the  observed,  or  supposedly  observed,  rela- 
tion of  consciousness  to  the  organism  and  that  there 
are  facts  showing  that  consciousness  can  exist  apart 
from  the  physical  organism.  To  this  question  we 
shall  have  to  devote  ourselves  presently. 

The  most  important  point  to  be  remarked  as  a  con- 
clusion of  this  evidential  way  of  looking  at  the  prob- 
lem is  the  fact  that  materialism  as  a  theory  docs  not 
depend  for  its  real  significance  upon  any  determina- 
tion of  the  "  nature  "  of  matter,  nor  upon  the  denial 
that  any  immaterial  energy  exists.  It  can  consist 
with  any  view  whatever  of  the  "  nature  "  of  reality, 
whether  we  call  it  matter  or  spirit.  The  whole  argu- 
ment for  the  existence  of  the  supersensible  as  a  pre- 
sumption for  the  existence  of  spirit  and  the  persist- 
ence of  consciousness  after  death,  falls  to  the  ground, 
as  the  facts  mentioned  to  show  that  phenomena  are  the 
resultant  of  composition  do  not  require  us  to  deter- 
mine the  nature  of  the  reality  that  enters  into  com- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      93 

position.  It  may  be  any  supersensible  reality  what- 
ever. We  do  not  require  to  insist  that  matter  is  the 
basis  of  things  in  order  to  sustain  the  real  meaning 
of  the  ancient  and  modern  materialism.  The  use  of 
the  word  would  only  deceive  us  into  the  belief  that 
"  matter  "  can  mean  only  what  it  was  commonly  sup- 
posed to  be,  namely,  a  sensible  reality  only.  Besides 
as  shown,  "  matter  "'  has  become  so  abstract  a  con- 
ception, so  refined  into  the  supersensible  when  it  is 
even  applied  to  the  ether  or  other  ultimate  substance 
out  of  which  the  elements  have  presumably  been 
evolved,  that  the  question  is  not  at  all  what  name  we 
shall  apply  to  it,  but  what  is  its  behavior.  We  may 
call  atoms  spirits,  or  we  may  call  the  ether  spirit,  if  we 
like,  and  it  would  not  alter  the  conception  of  the  rela- 
tion of  phenomena  to  composition.  Suppose  we  call 
oxygen  and  hydrogen  spirit  instead  of  matter,  this 
would  not  alter  the  fact  that  the  capacity  of  water  to 
quench  thirst  or  fire  was  dependent  upon  their  compo- 
sition and  dissolvable  with  the  breaking  up  of  the 
composition.  And  so  throughout  the  whole  range  of 
known  phenomena.  There  is  no  help  in  attacking  the 
physicist  for  his  belief  that  there  is  a  supersensible 
reality.  We  may  say  and  think  what  we  please  about 
this,  as  long  as  the  facts  are  what  we  observe  them, 
namely,  the  resultants  of  composition,  all  the  meaning 
of  materialism  that  made  it  a  view  opposed  to  immor- 
tality remains  intact,  and  we  have  to  resort  to  some- 
thing very  different  from  determining  the  "  nature  " 
of  reality  in  order  to  create  a  presumption  in  favor  of 
survival  after  death.  The  old  speculative  method 
of  talking  about  the  "  nature  5:  of  matter  and  the 

94        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

"  nature  "  of  spirit  becomes  folly  when  we  do  it  for 
settling  questions  of  this  kind.  We  have  to  ascer- 
tain what  the  facts  are  and  not  what  the  "  nature  "  of 
things  is.  The  problem  becomes  a  scientific  and  not 
a  philosophic  one. 

Philosophy  is  helpless  and  worthless  for  proving  a 
future  life.  It  may  be  able  to  show  us  what  a  rational 
order  would  be,  but  it  cannot  prove  that  the  existing 
order  is  rational  until  some  form  of  a  future  life 
is  proved.  One  of  the  conditions  of  conceiving  the 
cosmos  rational  is  that  it  shall  give  some  form  of  sur- 
vival, because  it  is  useless  to  ask  men  to  value  a 
personal  life,  with  its  highest  ideals,  above  an  im- 
personal one,  if  nature  does  not  conserve  it  as  well  as 
matter  and  energy.  If  there  were  no  ideals  that  may 
be  valued  so  highly  or  considered  imperative  in  his 
development  the  case  might  be  different.  But  with 
these  ideals  whose  moral  value  he  estimates  above  mere 
material  existence  he  must  pronounce  an  unfavorable 
judgment  on  the  order  that  does  not  preserve  what  it 
makes  imperative.  What  then  will  serve  as  evidence 
that  nature  probably  protects  the  survival  of  personal 
consciousness  ? 

The  answer  to  this  question  is  briefly  that  we  must 
have  present  experiential  facts  which  cannot  be  ex- 
plained by  any  other  hypothesis.  With  philosophic 
and  scientific  speculations  on  the  "  nature  "  of  matter 
or  spirit  disqualified  by  the  facts  which  show  that  con- 
sciousness appears  to  be  a  function  of  the  organism, 
whatever  the  "  nature  "  of  matter  or  spirit,  the  only 
resource  is  to  see  whether  there  are  phenomena  that 
will  render  probable  or  prove  that  consciousness  sur- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      95 

vives  as  a  fact,  not  as  a  consequence  of  some  specula- 
tive theory  about  the  "  nature  "  of  things ;  for  the 
"  nature  "  of  things  has  to  be  determined  scientifically 
by  the  facts  which  show  what  it  actually  does,  not  by 
what  we  can  imagine  to  be  possible.  Can,  therefore, 
any  facts  be  shown  that  at  least  suggest  the  proba- 
bility that  we  survive  death? 

This  question  is  not  easy  to  answer,  and  before  I 
attempt  to  answer  it  I  must  state  the  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  accepting  many  facts  that  are  popularly 
claimed  to  be  such  evidence  of  survival,  and  the  obsta- 
cles to  the  acquisition  of  the  facts  that  might  be 
desirable.  These  difficulties  and  obstacles  to  the  prob- 
lem's solution  are  determined  by  the  nature  of  the 
problem  itself,  which  I  must  state. 

With  the  inability  of  philosophic  or  other  specula- 
tion to  prove  survival  and  with  the  scientific  coinci- 
dences between  consciousness  and  bodily  organisms  as 
its  apparent  ground  and  cause,  we  are  forced,  by  the 
scientific  conception  of  the  case,  to  isolate  an  individ- 
ual consciousness  from  an  organism  in  order  to  prove 
its  capacity  for  independent  existence.  This  is  the 
process  of  discovering  a  new  element,  such  as  argon, 
aluminium,  etc.  In  the  scientific  field  we  isolate  a 
phenomenon  and  its  cause  when  we  want  to  be  sure 
that  the  particular  phenomenon  is  not  due  to  some 
other  accompaniment  than  the  desired  or  conjectured 
one.  Can  this  be  done  for  the  individual  conscious- 
ness? If  it  be  possible  at  all,  and  if  discarnate  con- 
sciousness exist  at  all  after  being  once  connected  with 
the  human  body,  we  must  establish  communication 
•with  it.  We  must  establish  an  intelligent  relation  be- 

96        SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

tween  an  isolated  and  discarnate  soul  and  the  living, 
if  we  are  to  have  any  scientific  evidence  of  survival. 
We  should  remark  also  that  as  long  as  there  is  no  such 
evidence  as  that  which  might  be  supplied  by  communi- 
cation there  will  be  no  conclusive  evidence  that  there 
is  any  soul  at  all.  The  materialistic  theory  accounts 
quite  naturally  and  furnishes  very  forcible  evidence 
that  consciousness  is  a  function  of  the  physical  organ- 
ism, and  that  theory  has  to  be  accepted,  if  all  the  evi- 
dence is  on  its  affirmative  and  none  on  the  negative 
side  that  offsets  it,  no  matter  whether  we  regard  this 
materialistic  theory  as  proved  or  not.  Science  accepts 
its  hypotheses  on  the  balance  of  evidence  and  not 
merely  because  they  are  necessarily  true.  A  theory 
may  actually  be  false  in  nature,  but  if  all  the  evidence 
at  hand  favors  it  the  theory  must  be  held  until  con- 
trary evidence  is  supplied.  Hence  the  materialistic 
theory  having  all  the  normal  and  abnormal  facts  of 
psychology  in  its  favor  and  none  decidedly  offsetting 
these,  must  be  the  only  hypothesis  for  the  rational 
scientific  man  until  evidence  is  forthcoming  that  in- 
dividual consciousness  has  been  isolated  and  communi- 
cation with  it  established.  In  that  way  the  proof  for 
the  existence  of  a  soul  in  the  living  must  be  the  proof 
of  its  survival.  As  long  as  consciousness  is  possibly 
a  function  of  the  physical  organism  there  is  no  need 
for  supposing  a  soul  as  its  subject  cause,  and  if  we 
prove  its  survival,  we  at  the  same  time  prove  that 
consciousness  with  the  living  was  in  fact  not  a  func- 
tion of  the  organism,  although  all  the  ordinary  facts 
of  experience  were  consistent  with  that  supposition. 
It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  what  importance  attaches 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      97 

to  the  isolation  of  personal  human  consciousness  and 
communication  with  it.  Is  this  possible  and  what  are 
the  difficulties  of  securing  evidence  that  it  is  a  fact? 
Let  me  first  look  briefly  at  the  conditions  of  com- 
munication between  the  living,  in  order  to  suggest  how 
much  more  difficult  it  would  be  to  communicate  with 
the  deceased,  if  they  exist  after  death.  The  first  con- 
dition of  communication  between  the  living  is  some 
system  of  accepted  signs,  or  a  language.  This  may 
consists  of  sounds  or  gestures.  Usually  they  are 
sounds  and  these  give  rise  to  language  for  auditory 
communication,  while  written  symbols  may  represent 
these  sounds  and  convert  their  meaning  into  visual 
signs  for  communication.  Now  if  at  any  time  either 
of  two  human  beings  do  not  understand  any  of  these 
signs  or  symbols  communication  between  them  is  al- 
most impossible,  and  when  it  is  possible  can  be  effected 
only  by  a  small  number  of  gestures  or  physical  signs. 
Very  little  can  be  transferred  or  communicated  be- 
tween such  parties  and  that  with  great  difficulty. 
How  much  greater  must  be  the  difficulty  of  communi- 
cating with  the  discarnate,  if  they  exist,  when  the 
condition  of  all  communication  between  one  person 
and  another,  as  we  know  it  in  our  natural  experience, 
is  some  physical  fact  or  sign  in  our  physical  world. 
When  an  incarnate  or  embodied  condition  is  necessary 
to  produce  an  effect  with  any  ease  in  the  physical 
world  we  may  well  imagine  the  difficulties  with  which 
the  discarnate,  supposing  them  existent,  must  contend 
in  the  production  of  physical  effects.  A  good  in- 
stance of  this  difficulty  is  the  phenomenon  of  paraly- 
sis, where  consciousness  may  give  no  evidence  of  its 

98         SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

existence  until  the  individual  recovers  the  control  of 
his  muscles.  Here  the  manifestation  of  consciousness 
may  be  suspended  right  in  the  living,  and  when  the 
individual  is  presumably  still  in  some  sort  of  relation 
with  his  own  organism,  how  much  more  difficult  to 
produce  the  required  phenomena  through  the  organ- 
ism of  another  or  without  it,  when  we  do  not  common- 
ly know  or  suspect  any  influence  of  one  living  organ- 
ism on  another  without  contact.  All  that  we  know  in 
ordinary  experience  of  a  soul's  influence  on  matter,  if 
soul  there  be,  is  that  which  it  produces  through  the 
living  organism.  This  even  has  to  be  slowly  and 
painfully  learned  in  a  long  education.  What  must  be 
the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a  discarnate  soul  when  its 
accustomed  relation  or  rapport  with  a  living  organism 
is  not  that  which  it  possessed  while  incarnate  or  liv- 
ing? 

Take  also  the  case  of  visibility.  We  cannot  while 
living  see  a  soul,  according  to  all  normal  experience. 
We  can  be  conscious  of  ourselves,  but  not  conscious 
even  then  of  the  soul  as  anything  sensibly  perceived 
or  existent  apart  from  the  organism.  We  cannot 
even  in  any  direct  way  be  aware  of  the  soul  of  others. 
We  have  no  direct  means  for  ascertaining  that  others 
are  conscious.  The  conviction  that  consciousness  ex- 
ists in  others  is  based  solely  upon  an  inference  from 
the  physical  movements  of  their  bodies.  We  infer 
that  consciousness  is  present  in  certain  organisms  be- 
cause we  can  best  account  in  that  way  for  certain 
movements  which  appear  to  be  intelligently  initiated, 
as  we  directly  know  of  such  a  cause  in  ourselves.  But 
we  can  see  neither  the  consciousness  nor  the  soul  of 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE        99 

others  even  in  life.  How  much  more  difficult  it  must 
be  to  see  them  or  to  infer  their  existence  when  they 
have  no  immediate  physical  accompaniments  by  which 
to  manifest  themselves  and  their  existence.  Most  of 
us  acquainted  with  science  and  its  methods,  and  with 
the  most  natural  conditions  of  manifestation,  which  in 
life  even  is  not  direct,  would  be  pardoned  for  saying 
that  such  an  appearance  is  impossible. 

But  having  seen  the  difficulties  of  manifesting 
the  supersensible  existence  of  spirit  after  death,  we 
may  examine  the  difficulties  in  connection  with  the 
evidential  side  of  the  problem.  We  have  found  that 
the  difficulties  are  great,  if  not  insuperable,  in  pro- 
ducing the  phenomena  that  are  necessary  for  proving 
survival,  and  now  we  have  to  examine  the  difficulties 
in  accepting  any  alleged  evidence  that  such  phenom- 
ena have  been  produced.  These  seem  to  be  as  numer- 
ous and  more  perplexing  than  any  connected  with  the 
production  of  the  necessary  phenomena. 

The  first  class  of  phenomena  that  claims  to  repre- 
sent evidence  of  departed  spirits  is  that  of  apparitions 
of  the  dead.  If  we  could  assure  ourselves  that  they 
were  plentiful  enough  and  verifiable  in  any  such  form 
as  would  attest  their  real  existence  beyond  the  imag- 
ination of  the  percipient  of  them,  science  might  be 
more  strongly  impressed  than  it  is  with  them.  But 
they  are  first  offset  by  the  real  or  alleged  fact  of  the 
apparition  of  the  living  whose  explanation  does  not 
involve  a  proof  of  the  discarnate.  Then  their  value 
is  impaired  by  the  frequency  of  hallucinations  and 
illusions.  So  many  of  the  alleged  appearances  of  the 
discarnate  are  explicable  by  one  or  the  other  of  these 

100       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

causes  that  few  are  left  to  stand  the  test  of  scientific 
scrutiny.  In  many  of  this  residuum,  if  many  we  can 
call  them,  the  question  of  their  chance  occurrence  from 
unknown  normal  causes  is  so  great  as  to  offer  great 
encouragement  to  scepticism.  Then  often  those  who 
have  such  experiences  add  or  subtract  from  the  ac- 
count of  them,  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously. 
Some  are  defective  observers  of  the  phenomena. 
Some  are  affected  by  illusions  of  memory,  or  fail  to 
make  any  record  of  their  experiences,  or  fail  to  keep 
the  evidence  that  would  protect  their  statements  from 
the  erosive  influence  of  doubt.  Consequently  when 
we  come  to  reckon  up  the  influences  which  make  for 
scepticism  in  regard  to  the  facts  of  apparitions  we 
find  intelligent  men  cautious  and  rightly  cautious 
about  the  acceptance  of  so  large  a  conclusion  as  a 
future  life  upon  the  credentials  of  apparitions. 

The  next  class  of  phenomena  which  claim  a  spiritis- 
tic source  is  the  mediumistic  type.  This  purports  to 
be  some  form  of  communication  with  spirits,  as  ap- 
paritions claim  to  represent  their  visible  appearance. 
Mediumistic  communications  may  be  by  automatic 
writing,  by  automatic  speech,  or  by  either  normal  or 
abnormal  speech  involving  some  sort  of  unconscious 
access  to  alleged  communications  with  the  discarnate. 
I  say  nothing  of  "  materialising  "  seances  and  slate 
writing  phenomena,  as  I  discard  their  consideration 
on  the  ground  of  their  absolute  worthlessness  under 
any  circumstances  but  such  as  are  never  accredited. 
Mediumistic  phenomena  of  the  credible  and  pertinent 
type  are  often  so  suggestive  in  their  production  of 
just  the  facts  which  scientific  proof  of  survival  after 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE     101 

death  demands  that  they  offer  the  best  opportunity 
for  study  and  investigation.  But  they  have  manifold 
difficulties  and  objections  to  encounter  which  must  be 
considered. 

First,  there  is  the  perpetration  of  fraud.  This 
may  take  various  forms.  The  medium  may  employ 
detectives  for  acquiring  information  about  "  sitters  " 
and  experimenters.  This  has  been  a  very  frequent 
method  in  the  past.  Then  they  may  fish  information 
from  the  "  sitters  "  who  are  not  always  aware  of  how 
much  they  may  tell  in  a  casual  way.  Many  may  for- 
get how  much  they  have  told  the  medium  at  various 
times,  and  keeping  no  record  of  their  experiments 
they  have  no  account  of  them  that  can  be  respected 
by  science  even  for  proving  fraud,  to  say  nothing 
of  what  is  necessary  to  prove  the  supernormal.  Then 
the  mediums  may  add  shrewd  guessing  to  their  other 
dubious  accomplishments.  The  "  sitter "  may  give 
all  sorts  of  conscious  and  unconscious  hints  in  various 
emergencies  which  the  shrewd  medium  knows  so  well 
how  to  improve.  Suggestions  by  the  voice,  by  mus- 
cular movements,  by  direct  assent  to  questions  by 
the  medium,  by  acceptance  of  guesses  by  the  medium, 
and  various  indications  which  are  easily  interpreted 
by  this  experienced  class  of  adventurers  who  know 
the  weak  as  soon  as  they  see  them. 

Then  there  is  the  whole  field  of  juggler's  tricks 
which  forms  the  majority's  conception  of  the  whole 
subject,  until  it  is  almost  impossible  to  get  intelligent 
people  to  even  imagine  that  there  is  anything  more 
serious. 

Now  all  these  sources  of  distrust  must  first  be  re- 

102      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

moved  from  any  alleged  mediumistic  phenomena  be- 
fore they  can  receive  the  serious  attention  of  intelli- 
gent and  scientific  men.  It  may  be  easy  or  it  may  be 
difficult  to  remove  them,  but  they  must  be  removed 
before  spiritistic  theories  can  obtain  any  consideration 
but  ridicule.  In  most  cases,  it  requires  the  scientific 
man  to  prescribe  the  conditions  upon  which  phenom- 
ena of  the  kind  can  become  credible-  as  evidence  for  the 
supernormal. 

The  second  difficulty  in  mediumistic  phenomena  is 
the  influence  of  secondary  personality,  as  it  is  called. 
This  is  a  very  much  misunderstood  phenomenon. 
Many  think  that  secondary  personality  means  another 
person  inhabiting  the  human  body,  another  person 
than  the  one  who  consciously  controls  it  in  a  normal 
state.  But  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  expression. 
It  is  a  natural  error  to  commit  when  one  is  not  familiar 
with  the  phraseology  of  scientific  psychology.  But 
secondary  personality  is  not  another  soul  or  person 
acting  in  conjunction  with  the  normal  personality  on 
the  organism.  It  is  nothing  more  than  unconscious 
mental  action  of  the  same  person  that  can  introspect 
his  self-consciousness.  Secondary  personality  is  dis- 
tinguished from  the  primary  personality,  or  normal 
consciousness  and  self-consciousness,  only  by  the  fact 
that  its  action  is  not  perceived  or  remembered  by  the 
normal  consciousness.  But  it  is  a  function  of  the 
same  soul  or  subject.  The  normal  consciousness  is  a 
"  personality  ™  not  a  person.  It  is  the  evidence  and 
activity  of  a  person,  this  last  term  standing  for  the 
soul  or  subject  of  consciousness,  in  physico-legal  par- 
lance, the  body  and  all  its  functions  with  conscious- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      103 

ness  included.  Now  the  secondary  personality  is  only 
an  activity  of  this  same  person  dissociated  from  the 
stream  of  consciousness  which  we  can  introspect  and 
remember.  We  may  call  the  secondary  personality 
"  subliminal  consciousness  "  and  there  can  be  no  ob- 
jection, as  long  as  we  distinguish  it  from  the  ordi- 
nary consciousness  we  know  by  the  absence  of  a  direct 
memory  link  between  the  two.  It  often  behaves  it- 
self like  another  "  person,"  but  this  fact  does  not 
alter  our  conviction  in  regard  to  its  real  nature.  The 
connection  between  it  and  the  experiences  of  the  nor- 
mal or  primary  personality  is  such  as  to  preclude  any 
explanation  of  the  phenomena  but  the  same  general 
explanation  that  applies  to  the  normal  stream  of 
consciousness.  Its  capacities  and  limitations  are  the 
same  as  those  of  the  primary  consciousness  or  person- 
ality. Its  activity  depends  upon  the  attainments  of 
the  normal  self  through  its  ordinary  sensory  action 
and  reactions. 

But  I  shall  not  go  into  any  detailed  account  of  sec- 
ondary personality,  as  there  is  no  space  for  that  in 
this  brief  discussion.  All  that  I  want  to  correct  in 
the  popular  conception  of  the  term  is  that  idea  which 
is  so  prevalent  and  which  represents  it  as  if  it  meant 
quite  as  distinct  a  "  person  "  from  the  conscious  self 
as  a  spirit  would  be.  But  it  is  not  to  be  so  conceived, 
whatever  its  appearance.  What  is  noticeable  in  its 
action  is  the  frequency  with  which  this  secondary 
personality  in  real  or  alleged  mediumistic  cases  rep- 
resents that  it  is  communicating  with  discarnate  spir- 
its. It  can  often  indulge  in  the  loftiest  sentiments 
and  inspirational  teaching,  but  the  fundamental  point 

104      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

in  which  it  always  fails  to  meet  the  demands  of  a 
spiritistic  hypothesis  is  its  inability  to  give  facts 
which  prove  the  personal  identity  of  the  individual 
alleged  to  communicate.  It  may  invent  incidents  to 
simulate  this  effect,  but  it  fails  in  anything  but  guess- 
ing, chance  coincidence,  fishing,  and  response  to  sug- 
gestion, all  of  which  resembles  the  same  processes  in 
the  conscious  frauds,  but  is  not  amenable  to  the 
same  reproach.  Now  in  real  or  alleged  mediumistic 
phenomena  we  have  to  disregard  all  statements  that 
are  explicable  by  secondary  personality,  until  we  have 
first  assured  ourselves  that  supernormal  phenomena 
have  been  produced,  and  even  then  evidential  facts 
must  conform  to  the  criterion  of  the  supernormal 
which  is  the  supersensible  acquisition  of  knowledge. 

Now  there  is  such  an  enormous  mass  of  phenomena 
that  is  undoubtedly  the  result  of  secondary  person- 
ality, and  so  many  more  that  are  explicable  by  it, 
that  the  medium  who  gives  any  evidence  of  the  super- 
normal is  very  rare.  The  layman  is  not  aware  of  the 
tremendous  difficulties  involved  in  the  quantity  and 
quality  of  matter  that  is  produced  and  producible 
by  secondary  personality,  that  can  neither  be  attrib- 
uted to  spirits  nor  demands  explanation  by  fraud. 
Secondary  personality  can  no  more  be  inculpated  with 
ordinary  fraud  than  can  the  somnambulist  or  the 
dreamer.  Whatever  imitation  of  the  normal  it  repre- 
sents, it  is  not  responsible,  and  may  exclude  everything 
but  itself  from  the  results.  But  it  is  a  very  exten- 
sive operator  in  the  simulation  of  non-evidential  spir- 
itistic communications. 

I  shall  not  discuss  telepathy  as  a  difficulty  in  the 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      105 

proof  of  a  discarnate  existence,  because  it  will  come 
up  later  as  an  objection  to  the  spiritistic  theory  in 
the  facts  that  appear  to  sustain  it,  and  because  the 
scientific  man  generally  has  not  yet  fully  convinced 
himself  that  telepathy  is  a  fact.  But  if  it  be  a  fact, 
we  must  certainly  show  that  it  does  not  adequately 
explain  the  phenomena  adduced  to  prove  a  future 
life.  If  the  supernormal  exists  that  cannot  lay  any 
claim  to  spiritistic  origin,  it  certainly  limits  the  evi- 
dence adducible  to  prove  spirits,  and  it  will  no  doubt 
have  to  be  reckoned  with  wherever  it  claims  to  explain 
facts. 

Now  having  considered  the  difficulties  in  the  evi- 
dential problem  as  shown  by  the  necessity  of  eliminat- 
ing the  possibility  of  fraud,  of  chance  coincidence, 
of  fishing  and  guessing,  of  suggestion  and  inference 
from  hints  and  direct  statements,  and  of  secondary 
personality,  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine  briefly 
what  kind  of  evidence  is  necessary  to  prove  a  future 
life.  What  kind  of  facts  will  do  this?  What  kind 
of  phenomena  are  necessary  to  treat  the  subject  of 
spiritism  seriously  after  obtaining  security  against 
the  above  mentioned  difficulties? 

The  answer  to  this  question  will  contain  two  im- 
portant conditions.  (1)  The  facts  given  through 
mediumistic  or  other  sources  must  represent  super- 
normal knowledge.  (2)  The  facts  must  illustrate 
and  prove  the  personal  identity  of  the  particular 
person  represented  as  communicating. 

In  regard  to  the  first  of  these  conditions,  the  ac- 
quisition of  the  knowledge  represented  in  the  phe- 
nomena claiming  a  spiritistic  source  must  exclude 

106      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

first  fraud  and  secondary  personality,  and  secondly 
all  normal  modes  of  acquiring  information  in  an 
honest  way.  That  is,  the  facts  purporting  to  be 
evidence  of  discarnate  spirits  must  be  impossible  on 
any  normal  hypothesis.  Normal  methods  of  obtain- 
ing knowledge  are  sense  perception  and  inference, 
whether  fraudulently  or  honestly  employed.  Any 
specific  facts  transcending  explanation  by  fraud,  sec- 
ondary personality,  chance  coincidence,  guessing,  sug- 
gestion, etc.,  such  as  detailed  incidents,  pass  words, 
trivial  experiences  known  only  to  the  living  and  de- 
ceased person,  or  characteristic  expressions,  will  be 
evidence  of  knowledge  that  has  not  been  obtained  by 
the  ordinary  processes  of  sense  perception,  and  hence 
facts  not  explicable  by  any  theory  of  knowledge 
based  upon  accepted  ideas  of  the  normal.  All  nor- 
mal knowledge  is  through  the  senses  in  some  form 
with  mental  processes  interpreting  the  meaning  and 
connections  of  sensations.  Knowledge  of  the  same 
definite  specific  kind,  though  not  sensory,  must  be 
obtained  from  supersensible  sources  and  the  conditions 
must  make  this  proof  against  scepticism.  All  the 
spontaneous  mental  functions,  as  illusion  and  hal- 
lucination, secondary  personality,  imagination, 
dreams,  etc.,  and  all  external  physical  impressions  of 
the  normal  sensory  type,  must  be  excluded  as  possible 
sources  of  the  real  or  apparent  phenomena. 

As  regards  the  second  condition,  the  facts  must 
be  of  the  kind  that  will  prove  the  personal  identity 
of  the  discarnate.  That  is,  they  must  prove  that 
the  source  of  the  phenomena  is  what  it  claims 
to  be,  and  this  personal  identity  of  the  discar- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      107 

nate  means  that  the  deceased  person  shall  tell 
facts  of  personal  knowledge  in  his  earthly  life 
and  tell  them  in  such  a  quantity  and  with  such  a 
quality  that  we  should  not  doubt  his  existence  any 
more  than  we  would  if  we  received  the  same  incidents 
over  a  telegraph  wire  or  through  a  telephone.  In 
this  way  and  in  this  way  alone,  can  we  show  that 
the  intelligence  involved  is  outside  the  medium  through 
which  the  facts  come.  Besides  being  supernormally 
acquired  the  facts  must  represent  intelligence  and  an 
outside  intelligence.  Given  the  conditions  by  means 
of  which  it  can  communicate  the  proof  of  survival 
after  death  the  facts  must  be  incidents  in  the  earthly 
life,  and  usually,  if  not  absolutely  always,  they  must 
be  very  trivial  and  uncommon.  Any  one  can  conceive 
for  himself  what  such  facts  would  be,  if  he  were 
called  upon  to  prove  his  identity  to  a  friend  who 
doubted  it,  and  hence  I  need  not  illustrate.  The  im- 
portant fact  to  be  considered  here  is  the  exclusion 
of  all  normal  sources  of  knowledge  and  the  admission, 
as  relevant,  of  only  such  information  as  is  unequivocally 
supernormal  and  pertinent  to  the  personal  identity  of 
a  deceased  person,  all  statements  relative  to  tran- 
scendental or  post-mortem  modes  of  life  being  abso- 
lutely worthless  as  evidence,  because  they  are  neither 
verifiable  nor  relevant  to  the  personal  identity  of  de- 
ceased persons. 

I  shall  illustrate  the  situation  in  which  we  are 
placed  for  judging  of  the  evidence  for  the  existence 
of  outside  intelligence  in  any  case,  whether  of  living 
or  deceased  persons,  and  in  any  circumstances  affecting 
the  judgment  of  intelligence.  Let  me  take  first  the 

108      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

case  of  a  machine.  We  associate  intelligence  with  a 
machine,  especially  one  that  is  complicated  in  its 
structure  and  action.  But  we  do  not  place  the  in- 
telligence in  the  machine.  We  place  the  intelligence 
in  its  creator  who  is  outside  its  creation.  The  rea- 
son for  this  is  the  assumption  of  inertia  which  main- 
tains that  matter  can  not  move  itself,  but  must  be 
moved  by  a  force  outside  the  body  moved.  If  it  were 
not  for  this  we  might  interpret  the  motion  of  a  ma- 
chine as  a  force  or  some  action  within  itself,  as  we 
do  in  living  beings.  But  the  doctrine  of  inertia  im- 
plies that  the  motion  of  a  machine  is  initiated  by  a 
force  without  the  machine.  Hence  when  we  suppose 
intelligence  associated  with  a  machine  at  all  we  place 
it  outside  the  machine  in  some  other  agent,  its  maker 
or  its  director,  and  this  conclusion  is  determined  by 
the  general  principle  of  the  limitations  assumed  to 
characterise  all  inert  machines.  The  intelligence  that 
influences  and  controls  them  is  independent  of  them. 

The  case  is  quite  different  with  living  beings. 
Whenever  we  ascribe  intelligence  to  the  action  of  liv- 
ing beings  it  is  placed  within  the  organism,  and  not 
independent  of  it.  This  may  be  false.  I  am  not 
concerned  with  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the  judgment, 
but  only  with  the  fact  of  it  and  its  prevalence.  It 
is  in  any  case  within  the  same  space  limitations,  as  it 
is  not  in  the  case  of  physical  and  inert  machinery. 
The  living  organism  seems,  at  least,  to  be  capable  of 
self-motion,  and  the  consciousness  associated  with 
many  of  its  actions  is  placed  within  the  organism  and 
thus  appears  to  be  a  function  of  it.  When  this  is 
once  assumed  the  explanatory  powers  of  internal  and 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      109 

immanent  mental  functions  will  cover  everything  that 
does  not  originate  from  without.  We  must  remem- 
ber also,  as  remarked  above,  that  the  existence  of  this 
intelligence  in  others  than  ourselves  is  purely  a  mat- 
ter of  inference,  or  the  interpretation  of  their  ac- 
tions, and  not  a  direct  knowledge  of  observation.  We 
explain  certain  adjusted  actions  by  supposing  that 
intelligence  is  their  accompaniment  or  cause,  and  as 
long  as  those  actions  are  the  natural  result  of  the  sub- 
ject's own  sensory  and  intellectual  experience  we  do 
not  think  of  attributing  the  intelligence  initiating 
them  to  any  agent  outside  the  organism.  Hence  the 
force  of  fraud  and  secondary  personality  in  explain- 
ing so  many  phenomena  that  reflect  intelligence,  but 
not  the  facts  that  we  would  ascribe  to  deceased  per- 
sons. 

It  will  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  transcend  the  in- 
telligence and  powers  of  any  human  organism  in  its 
normal  functions,  if  we  are  to  obtain  facts  that  will 
serve  as  evidence  for  the  proof  of  a  future  life.  We 
must  get  facts  that  the  normal  functions  of  that  or- 
ganism cannot  explain  and  that  reflect  an  intelli- 
gence outside  it,  precisely  as  in  the  case  of  a  machine. 
It  matters  not  whether  the  facts  are  acquired  through 
automatic  writing,  or  other  unconscious  means,  or 
whether  they  are  acquired  through  the  medium  of  the 
normal  consciousness,  provided  they  transcend  the 
capacities  of  normal  sensation  and  inferences  based 
on  those  sensations  associated  with  physical  impres- 
sions ordinarily  explicable.  We  must  have  phenom- 
ena in  the  physical  world,  but  with  the  indications 
that  they  are  either  nearly  or  remotely  initiated  from 

110      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

without  the  physical  world  and  pertinent  to  their  in- 
terpretation by  intelligence  beyond  physical  organ- 
isms. The  facts  will  best  present  this  evidence  when 
the  medium  is  automatic  and  unconscious,  as  that 
condition  removes  the  ordinary  explanation  more  eas- 
ily. But  if  the  facts  reflect  an  intelligence  not  ac- 
quired by  normal  sensory  impressions  they  may  still 
pass  through  the  medium  of  the  normal  consciousness, 
though  they  will  be  much  more  open  to  criticism 
than  if  the  organism  resembles  a  machine  in  its  ac- 
tion. But  letting  complications  and  delicate  condi- 
tions alone,  the  clear  fact  is  that  phenomena  claim- 
ing a  spiritistic  origin  must  be  of  the  kind  that  we 
cannot  explain  by  any  normal  process  of  sensation 
and  intelligence  in  the  organism  which  serves  as  a 
means  for  their  production.  That  every  one  will 
admit.  Now  are  there  any  facts  that  have  such  cre- 
dentials ? 

That  they  are  possible,  whether  they  are  actual  or 
not,  might  be  suggested  by  more  than  one  knowrn  in- 
cident in  psychology  and  physiology,  or  even  in  phys- 
ics. First  take  the  fact  of  hyperaesthesia.  This  is 
an  increased  power  of  sensibility  in  certain  cases  of 
abnormal  physical  conditions  when  the  organism  can 
appreciate  impressions  that  the  normal  sensorium  will 
not  perceive.  No  one  knows  exactly  what  the  limits 
of  this  hypersesthesia  are,  and  we  can  imagine  a  condi- 
tion of  it  when,  if  outside  intelligences  of  the  discar- 
nate  type  exist,  they  might  give  rise  to  phenomena  in 
our  world  which  indicate  their  action  and  lead  to  the 
proof  of  their  identity.  The  existence  of  a  group  of 
supersensible  forces  like  Roentgen  rays,  wireless  tel- 

THE  PROBLEM  OF  A  FUTURE  LIFE      111 

egram  vibrations,  radio-active  energies,  and  perhaps 
innumerable  agencies  of  a  similar  supersensible  kind, 
suggest  what  might  be  employed  in  abnormal  and 
hypersesthetic  conditions  for  effecting  communication 
with  a  discarnate  existence.  I  do  not  imply  that  any 
of  these  forces  are  usable  for  effecting  such  a  result, 
but  their  existence  limits  the  right  of  dogmatism  to 
deny  the  possibility.  If  the  possibility  be  once  ad- 
mitted, in  so  far  as  physical  science  is  concerned,  it 
will  only  be  a  question  of  facts  to  decide  whether 
such  a  communication  has  been  effected. 

Again,  if  telepathy  be  an  admitted  fact,  and  I 
appeal  to  this  here,  only  because  many  people  admit 
it  and  appeal  to  it  to  discredit  the  theory  of  spirits 
in  certain  cases,  it  can  be  used  in  the  service  of  the 
spiritistic  theory  instead  of  against  it.  Telepathy 
once  accepted  shows  the  existence  of  the  supernormal 
and  involves  the  conception  that  consciousness  can 
transmit  ideas  independently  of  the  normal  action  of 
the  senses,  so  that  after  this  admission  it  will  only 
be  a  question  of  the  kind  of  facts  obtained  to  deter- 
mine whether  they  have  not  been  telepathically  trans- 
mitted by  the  discarnate.  Though  telepathy  may  be 
a  difficulty  evidentially  considered,  in  certain  phenom- 
ena at  least,  it  may  equally  be  the  means  by  which 
the  discarnate,  if  they  exist,  can  communicate  under 
favorable  conditions  and  prove  their  identity.  What 
then  are  the  facts  to  suggest  that  the  discarnate  have 
actually  communicated  ? 

The  answer  to  this  question  will  occupy  the  rest 
of  this  book.  I  shall  confine  the  statement  and  in- 
terpretation of  them  to  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper.  I 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

have  above  indicated  that  there  are  other  similar 
instances  of  mediumistic  phenomena,  but  not  repre- 
senting the  desirable  quantity  and  complexity  of 
facts  necessary  for  scientific  conclusions. 

CHAPTER  IV 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE 

I  propose  in  this  chapter  to  give  a  brief  history  of 
this  singular  case  of  experiment,  including  a  few 
words  on  Mrs.  Piper's  personal  history.  The  chief  in- 
terest and  importance  of  the  case  consists  in  the  care 
with  which  fraud  was  excluded  from  a  possible  inter- 
pretation of  its  phenomena  and  the  perfection  and 
magnitude  of  the  records  made  in  the  experiments. 
It  is  these  two  facts  which  justify  the  consideration 
of  it  by  itself. 

1.  Exclusion  of  Fraud 

Mrs.  Piper's  connection  with  trance  phenomena  be- 
gan in  1884.  Her  "  husband's  father  and  mother 
had  been  impressed  by  an  experiment  with  a  medium 
in  that  year  and  persuaded  Mrs.  Piper  to  try  con- 
sultation with  a  medium  who  gave  medical  advice. 
She  was  suffering  at  this  time  with  a  tumor."  The 
result  was  that  she  soon  developed  a  trance  state  her- 
self and  began  sittings  with  her  own  friends.  No 
important  record  of  these  sittings  is  accessible.  Cas- 
ual experiments  of  this  sort  were  kept  up  until  1885 
when  Prof.  James,  of  Harvard  University,  made  his 
acquaintance  with  the  case.  His  account  will  be  stated 
in  his  own  language : 

"  I  made  Mrs.  Piper's  acquaintance  in  the  autumn 

113 

114      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  1885.  My  wife's  mother,  Mrs.  Gibbens,  had  been 
told  of  her  by  a  friend,  during  the  previous  summer, 
and  never  having  seen  a  medium  before,  had  paid  her 
a  visit  out  of  curiosity.  She  returned  with  the  state- 
ment that  Mrs.  Piper  had  given  her  a  long  string 
of  names  of  members  of  the  family,  mostly  Christian 
names,  together  with  facts  about  the  persons  men- 
tioned and  their  relations  to  each  other,  the  knowl- 
edge of  which  on  her  part  was  incomprehensible  with- 
out supernormal  powers.  My  sister-in-law  went  the 
next  day,  with  still  better  results,  as  she  related  them. 
Amongst  other  things,  the  medium  had  accurately 
described  the  circumstances  of  a  letter  which  she 
held  against  her  forehead,  after  Miss  G.  had  given 
it  to  her.  The  letter  was  in  Italian,  and  its  writer 
was  known  to  but  two  persons  in  this  country. 

"  I  remember  playing  the  esprit  fort  on  that  occa- 
sion before  my  feminine  relatives,  and  seeking  to  ex- 
plain by  simple  considerations  the  marvellous  charac- 
ter of  the  facts  which  they  brought  back.  This  did 
not,  however,  prevent  me  from  going  myself  a  few 
days  later,  in  company  with  my  wife,  to  get  a  direct 
personal  impression.  The  names  of  none  of  us  up 
to  this  meeting  had  been  announced  to  Mrs.  Piper, 
and  Mrs.  J.  and  I  were,  of  course,  careful  to  make 
no  reference  to  our  relatives  who  had  preceded.  The 
medium,  however,  when  entranced,  repeated  most  of 
the  names  of  '  spirits  '  whom  she  had  announced  on 
the  two  former  occasions  and  added  others.  The 
names  came  with  difficulty,  and  were  only  gradually 
made  perfect.  My  wife's  father's  name  of  Gibbens 
was  announced  first  as  Niblin,  then  as  Giblin.  A 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE       115 

child  Herman  (whom  we  had  lost  the  previous  year) 
had  his  name  spelt  out  as  Herrin.  I  think  that  in 
no  case  were  both  Christian  and  surnames  given  on 
this  visit.  But  the  facts  predicated  of  the  persons 
named  made  it  in  many  instances  impossible  not  to 
recognise  the  particular  individuals  talked  about. 
We  took  particular  pains  on  this  occasion  to  give  the 
Phinuit  control  no  help  over  his  difficulties  and  to 
ask  no  leading  questions.  In  the  light  of  subsequent 
experience  I  believe  this  not  to  be  the  best  policy. 
For  it  often  happens,  if  you  give  this  trance-person- 
age a  name  or  some  small  fact  for  the  lack  of  which 
he  is  brought  to  a  standstill,  that  he  will  then  start 
off  with  a  copious  flow  of  additional  talk,  containing 
in  itself  an  abundance  of  *  tests.' 

"  My  impression  after  this  first  visit  was,  that  Mrs. 
Piper  was  either  possessed  of  supernormal  powers,  or 
knew  the  members  of  my  wife's  family  by  sight  and 
had  by  some  lucky  coincidence  become  acquainted  with 
such  a  multitude  of  their  domestic  circumstances  as 
to  produce  the  startling  impression  which  she  did. 
My  later  knowledge  of  her  sittings  and  personal  ac- 
quaintance with  her  has  led  me  absolutely  to  reject 
the  latter  explanation,  and  to  believe  that  she  has 
supernormal  powers." 

Prof.  James  visited  Mrs.  Piper  a  number  of  times 
that  winter  and  also  sent  strangers  to  her  unan- 
nounced beforehand,  in  all  of  which  about  twenty-five 
reported.  One  half  of  these  reported  nothing  worth 
mentioning.  The  remainder  were  surprised,  accord- 
ing to  the  statement  of  Prof.  James,  at  the  communi- 
cations they  received.  This  Prof.  James  reported  in 

116      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

the  American  Proceedings  for  1886.  He  concluded 
it  with  the  statement : 

"  I  am  persuaded  of  the  medium's  honesty,  and  of 
the  genuineness  of  her  trance;  and  although  at  first 
disposed  to  think  that  the  '  hits '  she  made  were  either 
lucky  coincidences,  or  the  result  of  knowledge  on  her 
part  of  who  the  sitter  was  and  of  his  or  her  family 
affairs,  I  now  believe  her  to  be  in  possession  of  a 
power  as  yet  unexplained." 

Some  attempts  were  made  by  Prof.  James  to  hyp- 
notise Mrs.  Piper,  with  partial  success  only  until  the 
fifth  trial.  But  this  experiment  did  not  result  in 
throwing  any  light  upon  the  trance  state,  as  the  facts 
seemed  to  show  that  the  hypnotic  and  trance  states 
were  different  from  each  other. 

It  was  two  years  later  before  any  further  impor- 
tant experiments  were  undertaken,  and  these  were  by 
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  who  had  been  appointed  Sec- 
retary of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Re- 
search. He  came  from  Cambridge  University  in 
England,  where  he  had  been  a  lecturer  in  its  courses 
before  being  sent  to  India  to  investigate  the  doings 
of  Madame  Blavatsky  on  whom  he  published  an 
elaborate  report  convicting  her  of  fraud.  His  story 
affecting  Mrs.  Piper  may  be  told  in  his  own  language : 

"  My  own  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper,"  says  Dr. 
Hodgson,  "  began  in  May,  1887,  about  a  fortnight 
after  my  arrival  in  Boston,  and  my  first  appointment 
for  a  sitting  was  made  by  Professor  William  James. 
Professor  James  had  visited  her  about  a  dozen  times 
during  the  previous  year  and  half,  and  had  sent  a 
large  number  of  persons  to  her,  making  appoint- 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE      117 

ments  himself  '  for  most  of  these  people,  whose  names 
were  in  no  instance  announced  to  the  medium.'  As 
a  result  of  his  inquiries  he  became  fully  convinced  that 
Mrs.  Piper  had  supernormal  powers. 

"  I  had  several  sittings  myself  with  Mrs.  Piper,  at 
which  much  intimate  knowledge,  some  of  it  personal, 
was  shown  of  deceased  friends  or  relatives  of  mine; 
and  I  made  appointments  for  sittings  for  at  least 
fifty  persons  whom  I  believed  to  be  strangers  to  Mrs. 
Piper,  taking  the  utmost  precautions  to  prevent  her 
obtaining  any  information  beforehand  as  to  who  the 
sitters  were  to  be.  The  general  result  was  the  same 
as  in  my  own  case.  Most  of  these  persons  were  told 
facts  through  the  trance-utterance  which  they  felt 
sure  could  not  have  become  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  by 
ordinary  means.  For  several  weeks,  moreover,  at 
the  suggestion  of  one  of  the  members,  detectives  were 
employed  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether 
there  were  any  indications  that  Mrs.  Piper  or  her 
husband,  or  other  persons  connected  with  her,  tried 
to  ascertain  facts  about  possible  sitters  by  the  help 
of  confederates,  or  other  ordinary  methods  of  inquiry, 
but  not  the  smallest  indication  whatever  of  any  such 
procedure  was  discovered.  My  own  conclusion  was 
that  —  after  allowing  the  widest  possible  margin  for 
information  obtainable  under  the  circumstances  by 
ordinary  means,  for  chance  coincidence  and  remark- 
able guessing,  aided  by  clues  given  consciously  and 
unconsciously  by  the  sitters,  and  helped  out  by  sup- 
posed hyperaesthesia  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper, — 
there  remained  a  large  residuum  of  knowledge  dis- 
played in  her  trance  state,  which  could  not  be  ac- 

118      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

counted  for  except  on  the  hypothesis  that  she  had 
some  supernormal  power;  and  this  conviction  has 
been  strengthened  by  later  investigations." 

The  common  knowledge  that  fraud  of  some  kind 
could  simulate  the  acquisition  of  supernormal  infor- 
mation was  the  justification  as  well  as  the  instigation 
of  this  careful  experimentation  to  exclude  its  possi- 
bility, and  it  seems  that  the  judgment  was  fairly 
uniform  that  fraud  of  no  kind  could  explain  the  best 
part  of  the  results.  The  detective  and  confederate 
methods  of  many  "  spiritualistic "  mediums  can  ac- 
count for  many  a  striking  fact,  but  in  addition  to  the 
exclusion  of  their  possibility  in  this  case  was  the 
fact  that  no  evidence  could  be  found  that  any  attempt 
to  get  information  in  this  or  similar  ways  had  been 
made.  But  the  effort  to  satisfy  themselves  that  some 
resource  for  fraud  was  not  practiced  was  not  abated 
by  these  experiments.  Mrs.  Piper  was  taken  to  Eng- 
land for  experiment  by  the  group  of  investigators 
there,  which  comprised  such  men  as  Prof.  Henry  Sidg- 
wick,  Cambridge  University ;  Prof.,  now  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge ;  Prof.  Barrett ;  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers ;  Dr.  Wal- 
ter Leaf ;  and  a  few  others.  The  design  was  to  intro- 
duce Mrs.  Piper  to  surroundings  about  which  she 
knew  nothing  personally  prior  to  this  visit.  It  served 
as  an  obstacle  to  all  clandestine  knowledge.  Mrs. 
Piper  was  taken  to  England  in  November  1889.  Mr. 
F.  W.  H.  Myers  says  of  the  precautions  taken  against 
fraud : 

"  Professor  Lodge  met  her  on  the  Liverpool  land- 
ing-stage, November  19th,  and  conducted  her  to  a 
hotel,  where  I  joined  her  on  November  20th,  and 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE       119 

escorted  her  and  her  children  to  Cambridge.  She 
stayed  first  in  my  house;  and  I  am  convinced  that 
she  brought  with  her  a  very  slender  knowledge  of 
English  affairs  or  English  people.  The  servant  who 
attended  on  her  and  on  her  two  young  children  was 
chosen  by  myself,  and  was  a  young  woman  from  a 
country  village  whom  I  had  full  reason  to  believe  to 
be  trustworthy  and  also  quite  ignorant  of  my  own 
or  my  friends'  affairs.  For  the  most  part  I  had  my- 
self not  determined  upon  the  persons  whom  I  would 
invite  to  sit  with  her.  I  chose  these  sitters  in  great 
measure  by  chance;  several  of  them  were  not  resident 
in  Cambridge ;  and  (except  in  one  or  two  cases  where 
anonymity  would  have  been  hard  to  preserve)  I 
brought  them  to  her  under  false  names, —  sometimes 
introducing  them  only  when  the  trance  had  already 
begun.  ' 

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  reports  still  further  measures 
against  the  suspicion  of  fraud  by  Mrs.  Piper.  It 
seems  that  every  resource  was  anticipated  and  provid- 
ed against.  I  give  his  statements  of  what  was  done 
to  protect  the  results  of  experiment  against  ordinary 
suspicions. 

"  Mrs.  Piper's  correspondence  was  small,  something 
like  three  letters  a  week,  even  when  the  children  were 
away  from  her.  The  outsides  of  her  letters  nearly 
always  passed  through  my  hands,  and  often  the  in- 
sides,  too,  by  her  permission. 

"  The  servants  were  all,  as  it  happened,  new,  hav- 
ing been  obtained  by  my  wife  through  ordinary  lo- 
cal inquiries  and  registry  offices,  just  about  the  time 
of  Mrs.  Piper's  visit.  Consequently  they  were  en- 

120      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

tirely  ignorant  of  family  connections,  and  could  have 
told  nothing,  however  largely  they  had  been  paid. 

"  The  ingenious  suggestion  has  been  made  that 
they  were  her  spies.  Knowing  the  facts,  I  will  con- 
tent myself  with  asserting  that  they  had  absolutely 
no  connection  with  her  of  any  sort. 

"  The  photograph  albums  and  family  Bibles  were 
hidden  by  me  the  morning  of  the  day  after  she  ar- 
rived at  my  house.  I  had  intended  to  do  it  sooner. 
This  is  manifestly  a  weak  point.  Like  many  such 
things  it  sounds  worse  than  it  is.  The  more  im- 
portant books  were  in  my  study,  and  into  it  she  did 
not  go  till  just  before  the  first  sitting.  One  or  two 
photographs  she  did  look  at,  and  these  are  noted. 
The  safest  thing  is  to  assume  that  she  may  have 
looked  at  everything  about  the  house. 

"  In  order  to  give  better  evidence,  I  obtained  per- 
mission and  immediately  thereafter  personally  over- 
hauled the  whole  of  her  luggage.  Directories,  biog- 
raphies, Men  of  our  Time,  and  such-like  books  were 
entirely  absent.  In  fact  there  were  scarcely  any 
books  at  all. 

"  The  eldest  child  at  home  was  aged  nine,  and  the 
amount  of  information  at  his  disposal  was  fairly 
well  known  to  us.  My  wife  was  sceptically  inclined, 
and  was  guarded  in  her  utterances ;  and  though  a  few 
slips  could  hardly  be  avoided  —  and  one  or  two  of 
these  were  rather  unlucky  ones  —  they  were  noted  and 
recorded. 

"  Strange  sitters  frequently  arrived  at  11  a.  m., 
and  I  admitted  them  myself  straight  into  the  room 
where  we  were  going  to  sit ;  they  were  shortly  after- 

HISTORY   OF  THE  PIPER  CASE 

wards  introduced  to  Mrs.  Piper  under  some  assumed 
name. 

"  The  whole  attitude  of  Mrs.  Piper  was  natural, 
uninquisitive,  ladylike,  and  straightforward.  If  any- 
thing was  noticeable  it  was  a  trace  of  languor  and 
self-absorption,  very  natural  under  the  trying  condi- 
tion of  two  long  trances  a  day. 

"  Her  whole  demeanor  struck  every  one  who  be- 
came intimate  with  her  as  utterly  beyond  and  above 
suspicion." 

These  statements  illustrate  the  kind  of  precautions 
generally  taken  during  the  history  of  the  Piper  ex- 
periments, and  they  are  such  that  any  future  sus- 
picions of  fraud  of  any  kind  must  support  themselves 
by  specific  evidence  to  account  for  specific  facts  and  to 
explain  the  collective  force  of  the  results  where  the 
means  would  have  to  be  so  vast,  when  they  are  known 
to  have  been  very  meager,  to  ascertain  a  small  por- 
tion of  the  information  imparted  by  Mrs.  Piper's 
trances.  The  whole  burden  of  proof  now  rests  upon 
the  man  who  persists  in  irresponsible  talk  and  sus- 
picion of  fraud.  I  say  boldly  that  no  intelligent 
man,  whether  scientific  or  otherwise,  would  any 
longer  advance  such  an  hypothesis  without  giving 
specific  evidence  that  it  is  a  fact  rather  than  an  imag- 
inary possibility. 

There  have  been  several  sitters  during  the  history 
of  the  case  who  thought  they  detected  signs  of  con- 
scious fraud,  but  these  were  mere  impressions  formed 
from  lack  of  acquaintance  with  trance  phenomena 
and  from  first  sittings,  or  from  single  sittings.  But 
it  is  manifest  that  no  man  has  the  right  to  make  up 

122      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

his  mind  from  any  single  or  first  experiments,  nor 
to  trust  to  suspicions  and  impressions  induced  by  a 
vague  knowledge  of  trance  phenomena.  Moreover 
those  who  have  expressed  this  suspicion  have,  in  some 
cases,  admitted  its  weakness  and  in  some  other  cases 
its  error  or  insufficiency  as  evidentially  considered. 
Mr.  Myers  sums  up  the  whole  case  as  follows : 

"  On  the  whole,  I  believe  that  all  observers,  both  in 
America  and  in  England,  who  have  seen  enough  of 
Mrs.  Piper  in  both  states  to  be  able  to  form  a  judg- 
ment, will  agree  in  affirming  (1)  that  many  of  the 
facts  given  could  not  have  been  learnt  even  by  a 
skilled  detective;  (2)  that  to  learn  others  of  them, 
although  possible,  would  have  needed  an  expenditure 
of  money  as  well  as  of  time  which  it  seems  impossible 
to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  have  met;  and  (3) 
that  her  conduct  has  never  given  any  ground  what- 
ever for  supposing  her  capable  of  fraud  or  trickery. 
Few  persons  have  been  so  long  and  so  carefully  ob- 
served ;  and  she  has  left  on  all  observers  the  impres- 
sion of  thorough  uprightness,  candour,  and  honesty." 

2.  Psychological  Incidents  of  the  Case 

The  psychological  interest  in  this  and  similar  cases 
begins  with  wrhat  is  called  the  "  control  "  in  the  par- 
lance of  the  spiritualists.  It  will  be  necessary  to  ex- 
plain briefly  for  the  average  layman  what  this  means. 
The  scientific  man  understands  its  meaning  well 
enough,  and  it  will  only  be  necessary  in  this  work  to 
indicate  clearly  the  use  of  the  term  as  it  must  be  em- 
ployed to  make  the  Piper  and  similar  cases  intelligible 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE       123 

in  their  superficial  characteristics  at  least.  The 
"  control "  claims  to  be  a  discarnate  spirit,  and  is  the 
agency,  whether  a  real  or  alleged  force  outside  the 
living  organism  of  the  medium,  that  exercises  an  in- 
fluence over  this  organism  to  produce  the  effects  re- 
corded. If  it  be  the  secondary  personality  or  sub- 
conscious mental  action  of  the  medium  it  acts  like  a 
real  person  and  controls  the  motor  or  muscular  sys- 
tem precisely  as  does  the  normal  consciousness.  If  it 
be  a  spirit  it  exercises  this  control  of  the  medium's  or- 
ganism in  the  same  manner  as  the  normal  subject, 
whether  this  be  the  primary  or  secondary  personality. 
The  "  control  "  always  gives  itself  another  name  than 
that  of  the  normal  person,  and  in  this  way  repre- 
sents the  appearance  of  something  independent  of  the 
known  person  and  organism.  It  is  a  frequent  phe- 
nomenon in  secondary  personality. 

Apparently  the  first  "  control  "  in  the  experience  of 
Mrs.  Piper,  which  manifested  itself  soon  after  her  first 
visit  to  the  mediumistic  physician  mentioned,  called 
herself  "  Chlorine  "  and  claimed  to  be  an  Indian  girl. 
The  "  control '  of  the  mediumistic  physician,  Mr. 
Cocke,  whom  she  visited,  professed  to  be  a  French 
physician  whose  name  was  pronounced  "  Finny." 
This  of  course  became  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  the 
process  of  her  "  development,"  and  in  some  of  her 
early  trances,  as  reported  by  some  of  the  sitters,  the 
name  of  the  "  control  "  was  pronounced  "  Finny  "  or 
"  Fin-ne,"  and  afterward  became  "  Phinuit,"  pro- 
nounced "  Finwee."  It  is  evident  that  the  assump- 
tion of  this  name  is  complicated  with  suggestion 
either  in  the  normal  consciousness  or  in  the  abnormal 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

condition  of  the  trance.  The  "  evolution  ':  of  this 
personality  is  indicated  in  some  detail  by  Dr.  Hodg- 
son's first  report  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society 
for  Psychical  Research. 

After  this  personality  became  more  definitely  de- 
veloped it  was  induced  to  give  its  personal  history, 
claiming  to  be  the  spirit  of  a  French  physician.  I 
quote  Dr.  Hodgson's  statements  with  quotations  from 
the  record: 

"  In  reply  to  my  inquiries  on  different  occasions, 
Phinuit  stated  that  his  full  name  was  Jean  Phinuit 
Scliville.  '  Phinuit  is  one  of  my  names ;  Scliville  is 
my  other  name;  Dr.  Jean  Phinuit  Scliville;  they  al- 
ways called  me  Dr.  Phinuit.'  He  was  unable  to  tell 
the  year  of  his  birth  or  the  year  of  his  death,  but  by 
putting  together  several  of  his  statements,  it  would 
appear  that  he  was  born  about  1790  and  died  about 
1860.  He  was  born  in  Marseilles,  went  to  school 
and  studied  medicine  at  a  college  called  '  Merciana ' 
(?)  College,  where  he  took  his  degree  when  he  was 
between  twenty-five  and  twenty-eight  years  old.  He 
also  studied  medicine  at '  Metz,  in  Germany.'  At  the 
age  of  thirty-five  he  married  Marie  Latimer,  who  had 
a  sister  named  Josephine.  Marie  was  thirty  years 
of  age  when  he  married  her,  and  died  when  she  was 
about  fifty.  He  had  no  children." 

He  mentioned  the  "  Hospital  of  God,"  or  "  Hospi- 
tal de  Dieu  "  (Hotel  Dieu),  and  referred  to  Dupuy- 
tren  and  Bovier,  the  former  of  whom  is  known  to  have 
been  a  distinguished  French  physician  and  surgeon 
who  was  born  in  1777  and  died  in  1835.  But  there 
were  contradictions  in  Phinuit's  story  of  himself  and  in 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE       125 

addition  to  this  inquiries  as  to  the  existence  of  any  such 
person  in  France  did  not  confirm  the  story  in  a  single 
detail.  The  consequence  was  that  he  has  always  been 
treated  and  must  be  treated  in  the  discussion  of  these 
phenomena  as  a  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper. 
But  on  any  theory  he  is  the  central  psychological 
phenomenon  of  the  case  for  the  apparent  manage- 
ment of  it  in  its  early  history.  It  was  through  the 
intermediation  of  this  personality  that  the  phenomena 
took  on  a  spiritistic  appearance  and  that  many  of 
the  incidents  clearly  referring  to  the  personal  iden- 
tity of  other  deceased  persons  were  produced.  I 
shall  speak  of  the  period  of  his  "  control  "'  as  the 
Phinuit  regime. 

The  demand  was  made  of  Phinuit  that  he  prove 
his  identity  as  a  condition  of  accepting  his  claim  to 
be  a  spirit.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  he  never  succeeded 
in  effecting  this  desired  result.  But  he  acted  as  in- 
termediary for  the  "  communication  "  of  facts  which 
distinctly  suggested  the  survival  and  presence  of 
other  deceased  persons.  Whether  the  incidents  are 
more  than  telepathy  may  explain  is  not  the  ques- 
tion at  present,  but  only  the  circumstance  that  they 
were  what  we  would  expect  a  discarnate  person  to 
tell,  in  part  at  least,  to  prove  its  identity,  and  they 
apparently  took  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena 
beyond  the  scope  of  secondary  personality.  Many 
things  were  done  that  bore  evidence  of  being  super- 
normal without  being  facts  suggesting  a  spiritistic 
source.  They  rather  suggested  clairvoyance  or 
telepathy  or  both,  as  they  were  not  related  to  the 
personal  identity  of  deceased  persons.  Consequently 

126      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

there  was  difficulty  with  any  one  theory  in  attempts 
to  explain  the  phenomena.  The  confusion  and 
fragmentary  character  of  the  "  messages "  were  so 
great  that  a  cautious  scientific  man  had  to  reserve 
opinions  or  venture  upon  the  most  tentative  hypothe- 
ses, until  the  causes  of  the  limitations  in  the  "  commu- 
nications "  could  be  ascertained.  The  prevailing  hy- 
pothesis, with  many,  though  a  tentative  view  to  help 
mental  suspense  while  additional  facts  were  accumu- 
lating, was  that  of  telepathy  and  secondary  person- 
ality combined.  Phinuit  was  the  supposed  secondary 
personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  possessed  with  tele- 
pathic powers.  But  there  was  no  clear  assurance 
that  this  hypothesis  really  explained  the  phenomena. 
The  Phinuit  regime  continued  uninterruptedly 
until  1892,  when  a  very  interesting  modification  of 
the  phenomena  appeared,  though  still  continuing  for 
some  years  the  chief  "  control  "  of  Phinuit.  While 
Dr.  Hodgson  was  carrying  on  his  experiments,  a 
young  man  who  had  been  a  personal  friend  suddenly 
died  in  New  York.  He  is  called  in  the  Reports  by 
the  name  of  George  Pelham.  This  is  a  pseudonym 
adopted  out  of  respect  to  the  feelings  of  his  living 
relatives.  But  he  was  a  graduate  of  Harvard  Uni- 
versity, and  as  indicated  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  "  he  was 
a  lawyer  by  training,  but  had  devoted  himself  chiefly 
to  literature  and  philosophy,  and  had  published  two 
books  which  received  the  highest  praise  from  com- 
petent authorities.  He  had  resided  for  many  years 
in  Boston  or  its  vicinity,  but  for  three  years  preced- 
ing his  death  had  been  living  in  New  York  in  bache- 
lor apartments.  He  was  an  Associate  of  our  So- 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE       127 

ciety,  his  interest  in  which  was  explicable  rather  by 
an  intellectual  openness  and  fearlessness  characteristic 
of  him  than  by  any  tendency  to  believe  in  super- 
normal phenomena.  He  was  in  a  sense  well  known  to 
me  personally,  but  chiefly  on  his  intellectual  side; 
the  bond  between  us  was  not  that  of  an  old,  intimate, 
and  if  I  may  so  speak,  emotional  friendship.  We 
had  several  long  talks  together  on  philosophic  sub- 
jects, and  one  very  long  discussion,  probably  at  least 
two  years  before  his  death,  on  the  possibility  of  a 
*  future  life.'  In  this  he  maintained  that  in  ac- 
cordance with  a  fundamental  philosophic  theory  which 
we  both  accepted,  a  '  future  life  '  was  not  only  in- 
credible, but  inconceivable.  At  the  conclusion  of 
the  discussion  he  admitted  that  a  future  life  was  con- 
ceivable, but  he  did  not  accept  its  credibility,  and 
vowed  that  if  he  should  die  before  I  did,  and  found 
himself  *  still  existing  '  he  would  '  make  things  lively  ' 
in  the  effort  to  reveal  the  fact  of  his  continued  ex- 
istence." 

This  George  Pelham  died  early  in  the  year  of 
1892.  Dr.  Hodgson  heard  of  his  death  a  day  or  two 
after  its  occurrence  and  was  present  several  days  at 
sittings  during  the  following  weeks,  but  no  reference 
was  made  through  Mrs.  Piper  to  George  Pelham. 
Between  four  and  five  weeks  after  his  death  Dr.  Hodg- 
son was  present  at  a  sitting  by  a  friend  of  George 
Pelham's  and  during  it  George  Pelham's  full  name 
was  given  and  many  names  and  incidents  that  sug- 
gested the  personal  identity  of  the  deceased  person  by 
that  name.  Sittings  held  by  friends  of  the  deceased 
man  revealed  more  and  more  evidence  of  his  identity 

128       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

which  Phinuit  could  never  furnish  for  himself,  and 
among  them  was  a  reference  to  his  promise  to  Dr. 
Hodgson  to  "  make  things  lively,"  if  he  lived  after 
death.  The  experiments  were  continued  for  several 
years  before  Dr.  Hodgson  would  commit  himself  to 
the  spiritistic  interpretation  of  the  phenomena.  It 
was  in  the  process  of  these  experiments  that  the  au- 
tomatic writing  of  Mrs.  Piper  was  developed,  ap- 
parently under  the  agency  of  this  George  Pelham, 
Phinuit  having  always  employed  vocal  speech  for  his 
"  communications."  The  resort  to  automatic  writ- 
ing was  a  great  help  in  keeping  the  record  which  has 
been  practically  perfect  ever  since. 

George  Pelham  soon  came  to  exercise  the  func- 
tions of  a  "  control "  and  for  a  time  there  were  "  com- 
munications "  by  speech  and  writing  at  the  same 
time,  Phinuit  "  talking "  and  Pelham  "  writing." 
In  the  course  of  this  work,  however,  a  remarkable  and 
interesting  change  took  place  which  shall  be  de- 
scribed in  the  language  of  Dr.  Hodgson : 

"  In  the  summer  of  1895,  when  a  friend  of  mine 
was  having  a  series  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and 
asking  questions  of  George  Pelham,  certain  state- 
ments were  made  by  George  Pelham  denying  the  so- 
called  '  obsession  by  evil  spirits.'  My  friend  referred 
to  the  alleged  '  Spirit  Teachings '  published  by  W.  S. 
Moses,  and  the  result  of  the  conversation  was  that 
later  on  W.  S.  Moses  purported  to  communicate  at 
my  friend's  request  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  He 
was  confused  and  incoherent  —  and  George  Pelham 
offered  a  warning  to  that  effect.  He  gave  entirely 
wrong  names  in  reply  to  questions  concerning  the 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE       129 

real  identity  of  the  Imperator,  Doctor,  and  Rector 
mentioned  in  his  '  Spirit  Teachings,'  and  failed  later 
in  attempting  to  answer  test  questions  propounded  by 
some  of  his  friends.  Later  still,  however,  he  did  fur- 
nish some  private  information  unknown  to  the  sitters, 
and  afterwards  verified  in  England,  and  well  adapted 
so  far  as  it  went  as  an  indication  of  identity. 

"  I  shall  not  enter  into  detail  concerning  the  pro- 
fessed appearances  of  W.  S.  Moses  at  later  sittings. 
Mrs.  Piper  gave  few  sittings  in  the  winter  of  1895-6, 
and  early  in  1896  underwent  a  second  operation,  re- 
suming her  sittings  in  October  of  that  year.  I 
pointed  out  to  George  Pelham  the  importance  of 
making  W.  S.  Moses  '  clear,'  and  getting  the  answers 
to  my  test  questions.  The  final  result  was  that  W. 
S.  Moses  professed  to  get  the  assistance  of  his  former 
'  controls,'  who,  after  communicating  on  various  oc- 
casions directly  in  November  and  December,  1896, 
and  January,  1897,  demanded  that  the  control  of 
Mrs.  Piper's  '  light '  should  be  placed  in  their  hands. 
In  other  words,  '  Imperator '  claimed  that  the  indis- 
criminate experimenting  with  Mrs.  Piper's  organ- 
ism should  stop,  that  it  was  a  '  battered  and  worn  ' 
machine  and  needed  much  repairing ;  that  '  he '  with 
his  '  assistants,'  '  Doctor,'  etc.,  would  repair  it  as  far 
as  possible,  and  that  in  the  meantime  other  persons 
must  be  kept  away.  I  then  for  the  first  time  ex- 
plained to  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  about  W.  S.  Moses 
and  his  alleged  relation  to  '  Imperator,'  and  she  was 
willing  to  follow  my  advice  and  try  this  new  experi- 
ment —  to  which  I  may  say  I  was  repeatedly  and 
emphatically  urged  by  the  communicating  George 

130      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Pelham.  I  explained  at  the  following  sitting  to 
*  Imperator '  that  the  medium  and  myself  agreed  to 
the  change.  Much  of  what  followed  later  was  per- 
sonal and  non-evidential.  It  was  stated  that  there 
were  many  difficulties  in  the  way  of  clear  communi- 
cation, due  chiefly  to  the  fact  that  so  many  inferior 
and  perturbed  communicators  had  been  using  the  ma- 
chine. Phinuit's  last  appearance  was  on  January 
26th,  1897.  Later  on,  other  alleged  '  communica- 
tors '  were  specified  as  persons  who  would  not  injure 
the  '  light,'  in  addition  to  what  I  might  call  W.  S. 
Moses's  group,  and  various  persons  who  have  had  sit- 
tings in  previous  years  with  Mrs.  Piper  had  opportu- 
nities of  being  present,  and  some  new  sitters  also. 
Those  who  had  sittings  in  previous  years  and  who 
have  been  present  since  the  change  which  I  have  de- 
scribed, were  all  struck  by  the  improvement  in  the 
clearness  and  coherence  of  the  communications  from 
their  '  deceased  '  friends.  Most  remarkable  has  been 
the  change  in  Mrs.  Piper  herself,  in  her  general  feel- 
ing of  well-being,  and  in  her  manner  of  passing  into 
trance.  Instead  of  the  somewhat  violent  contortions 
which  she  was  apt  to  show  in  earlier  years  when 
Phinuit  *  controlled,'  she  passes  into  trance  calmly, 
easily,  gently,  and  whereas  there  used  to  be  fre- 
quently indications  of  dislike  and  shrinking  when  she 
was  losing  consciousness,  the  reverse  is  now  the  case; 
she  seems  rather  to  rejoice  at  her  '  departure,'  and  to 
be  in  the  first  instance  depressed  and  disappointed 
when,  after  the  trance  is  over,  she  '  comes  to  her- 
self '  once  more  in  this  '  dark  world  '  of  ours  and 
realizes  her  physical  surroundings.  Various  at- 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE       131 

tempts  by  these  new  '  controls  '  to  describe  contem- 
poraneous incidents  occurring  elsewhere  in  this  world 
have  been  notable  failures.  On  the  other  hand  there 
have  been  a  few  cases  (said  in  1898)  under  this 
regime  where  opportunity  has  been  given  for  tests 
purporting  to  come  from  recently  '  deceased '  per- 
sons. And  in  these  cases,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  and 
so  far  as  the  incidents  go,  the  results  as  a  whole  have 
been  much  clearer  and  more  coherent  than  they  were 
in  similar  cases  formerly." 

The  reader  must  remember  that  all  this  material 
which  I  have  been  quoting  was  produced  through 
the  automatic  writing  of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  it  is  here 
described  as  if  it  were  actual  conversation  between 
J:he  living.  Mrs.  Piper  goes  into  a  "  trance  "  whose 
nature  we  do  not  know,  except  that  it  involves  the 
suspension  of  her  normal  consciousness  and  in  this 
condition  the  alleged  messages  from  discarnate  spirits 
are  written  visibly  by  her  own  hand.  Her  head  lies 
upon  a  pillow  placed  upon  a  table  and  is  turned  away 
from  the  writing.  The  tests  for  anaesthesia  or  her 
unconscious  state  were  exceptionally  severe  and  such 
as  are  never  employed  by  physicians  to  ascertain  a 
similar  condition.  The  writing  does  not  present  any 
special  mystery  to  the  scientific  mind,  as  it  is  familiar 
with  automatic  work  of  this  kind  where  there  is  no 
pretense  or  evidence  of  discarnate  intervention.  It  is 
the  contents  of  the  "  messages  "  that  suggest  some 
extraordinary  origin,  at  least  simulative  of  spiritistic 
communications.  This  representation  of  it,  whatever 
its  real  character,  whether  merely  subconscious  and 

132      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

dramatic  play  by  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  state,  or  the 
result  of  an  independent  spiritistic  intelligence,  is  the 
only  way  to  indicate  intelligently  its  psychological 
interest,  and  we  have  only  to  dismiss  from  our  imagi- 
nations all  conceptions  of  visible  and  tangible  ap- 
pearances in  order  to  understand  the  nature  of  the 
phenomena  as  facts  for  psychology,  and  to  appre- 
ciate what  they  represent  in  the  development  of  the 
Piper  case. 

What  we  now  call  the  "  Imperator  group,"  repre- 
senting alleged  spirits,  assuming  Latin  names  for 
reasons  that  have  not  been  explained  and  for  which 
we  need  not  care  until  later  discussion,  may  best  be 
described,  for  the  sake  of  clearness  in  understanding, 
as  a  group  of  personalities  purporting  to  take  charge 
of  the  "  communications  "  from  the  "  other  side  r 
precisely  in  the  same  manner  in  which  Mrs.  Piper 
has  been  scientifically  managed  on  this  side.  From 
what  has  been  said  the  reader  can  percieve  that,  on 
any  theory  whatever  of  the  facts,  they  appear  to  be 
intermediaries  for  the  "  communication "  of  super- 
normal facts  and  that  their  work  takes  the  form  of 
supervision  of  the  whole  process.  What  will  be  the 
outcome  is  not  yet  known.  But  they  still  control 
the  experiments  and  represent,  with  the  frequent  as- 
sistance of  George  Pelham,  a  most  interesting  and 
complicated  psychological  problem  for  science. 
What  the  Imperator  group  does  cannot  be  treated  as 
evidence  of  spirits  until  they  prove  their  identity,  but 
what  is  mediated  through  their  action  in  proof  of  the 
identity  of  others  must  receive  serious  consideration 
of  some  kind  and  may  indicate  the  supernormal  ac- 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PIPER  CASE      133 

quisition  of  knowledge,  while  its  analysis  and  expla- 
nation may  suggest  a  theory  beyond  any  form  of  sec- 
ondary personality  that  we  know. 

This  brief  history  of  the  experiments  with  Mrs. 
Piper  will  afford  the  general  reader  some  conception 
of  the  machinery  and  difficulties  attending  the  work 
and  of  the  conditions  through  which  the  facts  still 
to  be  summarised  were  obtained.  I  shall  proceed 
next  to  give  some  account  of  these,  with  this  prelim- 
inary statement  that  the  reader  must  ever  keep  in 
his  mind  that  they  have  been  obtained  under  the  pre- 
cautions against  possible  fraud  as  indicated  in  this 
history  and  with  the  supervision  and  mediation  of  the 
trance  personalities  which  have  been  described. 

CHAPTER  V 

INCIDENTS   FROM   THE   ENGLISH   REPORT 

In  this  chapter  I  propose  to  give  a  summary  of 
the  facts  which  the  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  pro- 
duced while  she  was  in  England.  I  shall  not  select 
them  with  any  reference  to  proving  any  theory  or 
explanation  of  them,  but  only  with  reference  to  their 
supernormal  character  as  facts.  I  mean  in  this  and 
two  or  three  of  the  following  chapters  to  maintain 
an  entire  indifference  to  all  explanations  of  the  facts 
to  be  observed  and  hence  not  to  assume  that  I  am 
illustrating  either  telepathy  or  spirits  in  the  narra- 
tive of  the  records.  All  that  I  shall  admit  into  my 
purposes  is  the  fact  that  the  phenomena  quoted  are 
evidence  of  the  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowl- 
edge, and  this  means  that  the  knowledge  has  not 
been  normally  acquired.  Explanations  will  follow 
a  statement  of  the  facts. 

I  have  to  give  two  types  of  facts,  one  of  them 
wholly  unevidential  of  spiritistic  agencies  and  the 
other  relevant  to  that  supposition.  There  will  prob- 
ably be  a  mixed  class  whose  character  the  reader  may 
determine  for  himself  wherever  it  appears  in  the  nar- 
rative. Sometimes  instances  of  this  mixed  type  may 
appear  in  one  or  the  other  of  the  main  classes,  and 
will  be  placed  there  according  to  the  quantity  of 
matter  pertaining  to  one  or  the  other  of  the  kinds  of 
incidents.  In  the  last  analysis  some  general  theory 

134 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  135 

must  account  for  this  diversity  of  facts,  but  at  the 
present  stage  of  inquiry  their  types  must  be  kept  dis- 
tinct. 

1.     Incidents  in  Experiments  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge 

(a)  Facts  unevidential  of  spirit  agency.  At 
the  first  sitting  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  Mrs.  Piper  re- 
ferred to  a  brother  of  his  and  described  his  character 
with  some  accuracy,  saying  that  he  was  "  a  sort  of 
happy-go-lucky  fellow  —  taking  the  world  as  it  is  — 
wanting  to  see  a  good  deal  of  it.  Rather  positive; 
likes  to  keep  his  own  ideas.  Not  so  deep  in  mind  as 
you  are,  but  deep  in  feeling."  But  the  statement 
that  this  brother  was  in  Australia  was  wrong.  He 
was  in  America.  There  immediately  followed  a  very 
definite  diagnosis  of  a  difficulty  with  Dr.  Lodge's  lit- 
tle boy  which  was  found  to  be  true  a  few  days  later, 
by  the  family  physician. 

For  a  later  sitting  Mr.  Gonner  had  written  to  his 
sister  in  London,  Mrs.  Piper  being  in  Liverpool,  to 
ask  her  mother  to  do  something  unusual  between  the 
hours  of  11  and  12  on  Saturday  morning,  and  to  ob- 
serve what  the  mother  did.  Mr.  Conner's  mother 
was  not  to  know  and  did  not  know  that  it  was  to  be 
done  at  his  request.  The  sitting  began  a  little  be- 
fore 11  in  Liverpool.  Very  soon  Phinuit  broke  out 
with  a  reference  to  Mr.  Conner's  mother  in  response 
to  Prof.  Lodge's  request  to  tell  what  his  mother  was 
doing  at  the  time. 

"  Ha,  Ha !  I'll  tell  you  why  it's  important,  be- 
cause he  don't  know  it  himself.  I  read  your  thoughts 

136      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

then.  I  can't  generally.  Your  mother  is  just  this 
minute  fixing  her  hair,  putting  a  thing  through  her 
hair  (indicating)  and  putting  it  through  her  hair 
in  a  room  with  a  cot  in  it,  up  high.  Did  you  know 
she  had  some  trouble  with  her  head?  (No.)  Long 
distance  between  you  and  your  mother.  She's  in  an- 
other place She's  fixing  something  to  her 

throat  and  putting  on  a  wrap  here,  round  here,  and 
now  she  has  lifted  up  the  lid  of  a  box  on  a  stand. 
I'll  go  back  to  your  mother.* 

"  There's  been  some  news,  some  correspondence 
reached  the  large  building  where  your  mother  is. 
She  has  had  a  cold.  A  young  lady  is  with  her,  and 
I  should  think  it's  a  daughter;  a  very  nice  girl.  She 
draws  somewhat,  and  needlework  and  reads  a  great 
deal.  There's  a  pretty  girl  with  light  hair  and  blu- 
ish eyes.  She's  speaking  to  your  mother  at  this 
minute. 

"(Is  her  hair  long  or  short?)  How  do  you  mean? 
It's  fuzzy  light  hair.  She's  a  little  pale,  sort  of  smil- 
ing; nice  teeth.  Your  mother  is  going  out 

Your  mother  didn't  want  to  go,  but  they  wanted  her 
to  go,  and  she  made  up  her  mind  she  would.  So  she 
went." 

At  the  next  sitting  on  the  same  day  and  in  the 

*  The  reader  should  remark  the  following  explanation  of 
symbols  used  in  the  records  quoted.  Matter  in  parcntlieaes 
represents  statements  or  actions  of  the  sitter  on  the  occasion 
of  an  experiment  with  the  medium.  Matter  in  brackets  rep- 
resents notes  or  comments  made  after  the  sittings  in  explana- 
tion of  their  contents  or  mode  of  production.  Periods  or  dots 
in  succession  represent  that  something  has  been  omitted  by  the 
"  communicators."  Asti r/.v/.-s  mean  that  something  in  the  auto- 
matic writing  is  undecipherable. 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  137 

evening  Phinuit  added  the  following  at  the  very  be- 
ginning of  his  "  communications." 

"  His  mother  just  as  I  left  was  brushing  some- 
thing, and  had  a  little  thing  looking  at  it.  She  had 
a  frame,  a  little  picture,  looking  at  it.  She  took  it 
up  and  looked  steadily  at  it  and  then  brushing  some- 
thing. That's  how  I  left  her.  When  I  first  saw  her 
she  was  fixing  her  hair,  and  had  something  on  the 
top  of  it,  and  was  fixing  something  around  her 
throat,  and  she  took  up  a  pencil  and  wrote  something. 
But  just  as  I  left  she  was  looking  at  a  picture  and 
brushing  something." 

The  report  states  what  actually  occurred  in  Lon- 
don while  the  experiment  was  going  on  simulta- 
neously in  Liverpool,  the  arrangements  having  been 
carried  out  according  to  the  directions  of  Mr.  Gonner 
through  his  sister,  Miss  Gonner.  The  mother  had 
no  trouble  with  her  head,  so  far  as  known.  The  lady 
who  went  out  with  Mrs.  Gonner  in  London  was  cor- 
rectly named  as  Annie  and  rightly  described,  accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Gonner's  statements.  With  this  lady  Mrs. 
Gonner  decided  to  take  a  drive  round  the  park. 
"The  drive  round  the  park  on  a  wet  Saturday  morn- 
ing, though  sufficiently  incongruous  to  astonish  even 
the  cabman,  was  unfortunately  a  passive  kind  of 
performance  to  select;  but  considering  the  absence  of 
every  kind  of  information  or  clue  to  the  reason  for 
doing  anything,  the  wonder  is  that  anything  what- 
ever was  done.  Miss  Ledlie  (the  lady  with  Mrs. 
Gonner)  reports  that  after  Miss  Gonner  left  the 
house  she  and  Mrs.  Gonner  decided  what  to  do,  and  a 
vehicle  was  sent  for.  Just  about  11  she  ran  up 

138      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

stairs  to  see  if  Mrs.  Gonner  was  ready,  and  saw  her 
come  out  of  her  room  to  a  landing  cupboard,  take  a 
box  out  of  it,  put  it  on  a  ledge,  open  it  and  take  out 
a  muff,  very  much  as  described  by  Phinuit  half  an 
hour  later.  She  had  her  cloak  and  things  on  then, 
and  the  cloak  is  troublesome  to  hook,  so  that  there 
would  be  a  good  deal  of  apparently  fixing  things 
round  the  neck.  The  taking  up  and  looking  at  the 
photograph  would  almost  certainly  be  done  before 
going  out,  though  it  was  not  actually  seen."  "  On 
her  dressing  table  there  stands  a  small  photograph 
of  my  (Mr.  Conner's)  father,  which  she  very  fre- 
quently takes  up  and  looks  at  intently.  There  is  a 
wooden  half-tester  in  her  room,  which  might  con- 
ceivably be  called  a  '  cot.' :  Mrs.  Gonner  was  not 
seen  to  take  up  a  pencil  and  write,  nor  to  brush 
anything. 

Prof.  Lodge  tried  a  "  clairvoyant "  experiment 
which  consisted  of  a  little  box  with  some  letters  in  it, 
picked  at  random  and  without  Prof.  Lodge's  knowl- 
edge of  what  they  were.  The  experiment  was  a  fail- 
ure, as  the  two  correctly  named  letters  were  expli- 
cable by  chance.  Another  experiment  to  tell  the  con- 
tents of  a  bottle  was  also  a  failure.  It  was  said  to 
contain  salicylate  of  soda,  but  in  reality  contained 
sulphate  of  iron,  wrapped  up  so  that  it  could  not  be 
seen  and  was  unknown  to  the  sitter. 

There  were  some  curious  allusions  to  Prof.  Lodge's 
Uncle  Robert,  alleging  that  he  was  lying  on  a  couch 
at  the  time  and  describing  two  or  three  articles  in 
the  house.  But  while  it  was  the  uncle's  habit  to  lie 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  139 

on  a  couch  a  great  deal  he  was  not  doing  it  at  the 
time  and  the  articles  named  were  not  as  described. 

At  another  time  Phinuit  said  that  the  wife  of  a  sit- 
ter was  at  that  moment  brushing  her  dress,  a  fact 
which  turned  out  to  be  true,  and  that  his  son  was  ill, 
also  true. 

There  are  many  instances  of  correct  diagnosis  and 
hits  at  physical  troubles  in  various  persons  not  sit- 
ters, but  they  were  incidental  and  made  in  the  midst 
of  other  matter  which  it  would  be  too  perplexing  to 
sift.  Some  idea  of  these  hits  can  be  obtained  from 
those  I  have  narrated,  and  taken  collectively  they 
seem  to  have  some  indication  of  knowledge  acquired 
in  some  way  not  normal. 

(b)  Facts  relevant  to  spirit  agency.  I  do  not 
mean  by  "  relevancy  r'  that  the  facts  prove  such  an 
agency  as  is  mentioned,  but  only  that  the  facts 
might  conceivably  be  told  by  discarnate  spirits,  if 
they  communicated,  as  they  often  represented  what 
might  naturally  be  mentioned  in  proof  of  identity. 
Many  incidents  purporting  to  have  this  origin  seem 
unnatural  for  it,  but  being  associated  with  such  as 
are  appropriate  must  be  narrated  in  that  connection. 
Whatever  the  explanation,  I  shall  give  them  as  they 
are. 

In  Prof.  Lodge's  first  sitting  a  curious  mistake 
was  made  in  referring  to  an  "  Uncle  William,"  taken 
to  refer  to  Prof.  Lodge's  uncle,  which  was  false,  but 
it  was  later  corrected  to  Mrs.  Lodge's  father.  He 
was  correctly  described  at  this  first  sitting,  and  was 
dead.  More  striking  and  correct  was  the  name  and 

14-0      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

relationship  of  an  Aunt  Ann  with  a  description  of  her 
character.  Phinuit  said  that  this  aunt  was  on  the 
mother's  side,  and  that  she  had  cared  for  Prof. 
Lodge  when  a  child  after  his  mother's  death,  and 
asked  if  he  did  not  have  "  a  little  old-fashioned  pic- 
ture of  her,  on  a  small  card,"  referring  to  the  aunt. 
Prof.  Lodge  replied  that  he  had,  and  apparently  the 
aunt  "  communicated  "'  immediately  and  referred  to 
her  care  of  her  nephew  and  the  little  means  that  she 
had.  She  mentioned  as  caring  now  for  a  deceased 
child  of  Prof.  Lodge,  he  having  lost  two  very  young 
children,  and  said  it  was  a  boy,  after  first  saying  that 
it  was  a  girl.  She  then  claimed  to  have  had  trouble 
in  her  chest  and  stomach  and  that  she  died  from  that 
illness,  mentioning  inflammation. 

Prof.  Lodge  remarks  that  all  this  is  true  of  the 
aunt  except  the  immediate  cause  of  her  death  was 
an  operation  for  cancer  of  the  breast. 

At  the  next  sitting,  after  two  names  had  been 
given  correctly,  Mrs.  Lodge  asked  Phinuit  to  tell 
her  about  her  father.  Some  rambling  statements  of 
and  unevidential  character  were  made  and  Phinuit 
broke  out :  "  He  says  you  have  got  something  of 
his.  He  says  if  you  had  this  it  would  help  him.  He 
has  difficulty  in  coming  back.  It's  a  little  ornament 
with  his  hair  in."  (Mrs.  Lodge  here  ran  up  stairs 
to  get  the  locket  referred  to. )  "  He  passed  out  long 
ago;  she  was  but  a  little  thing."  Presently  his 
name,  Alexander,  was  given  and  the  statement  that 
the  father  had  given  the  locket  to  Mrs.  Lodge's 
mother  and  that  she  gave  it  to  Mrs.  Lodge.  All  this 
was  correct,  except  that  it  is  not  known  whose  hair 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  141 

is  in  the  locket.  Mrs.  Lodge  was  only  a  fortnight 
old  when  her  father  died.  There  immediately  fol- 
lowed a  very  striking  "  message "  regarding  his 
death.  Phinuit  said :  "  He  had  an  illness  and 
passed  out  with  it.  He  tried  to  speak  to  Mary,  his 
wife,  and  stretched  out  his  hand  to  her,  but  couldn't 
reach  and  fell  and  passed  away.  That's  the  last 
thing  he  remembers  in  this  mortal  body."  He 
added  a  statement  about  taking  some  medicine,  the  last 
he  took,  and  then  that  something  had  happened  to 
his  right  leg  and  it  was  caused  by  a  fall,  affecting  the 
leg  below  the  knee.  It  was  also  stated  that  it  gave 
him  pain  at  times. 

The  facts  were  that  Mrs.  Lodge's  father  had  his 
health  broken  by  tropical  travel  and  yellow  fever, 
and  his  heart  was  weak.  A  severe  illness  of  his  wife 
was  a  great  strain  on  him.  As  she  was  recuperating 
he  entered  her  room  one  day,  quite  faint,  half- 
dressed  and  holding  a  handkerchief  to  his  mouth, 
which  was  full  of  blood.  "  He  stretched  out  his  hand 
to  her,  removed  the  handkerchief  and  tried  to  speak, 
but  only  gasped  and  fell  on  the  floor.  Very  soon  he 
died."  He  had  broken  his  leg  below  the  knee  once 
by  falling  down  the  hold,  and  in  certain  states  of  the 
weather  it  afterward  pained  him. 

Phinuit  made  the  further  statement  that  he  had 
had  trouble  with  his  teeth ;  that  he  wore  a  sort  of  uni- 
form with  "  big  bright  buttons  " ;  that  he  traveled  a 
good  deal,  and  that  he  got  the  locket  on  one  of  his 
journeys.  A  little  later  it  was  intimated  that  he  was 
a  Captain.  The  facts  were  that  during  his  married 
life  he  had  been  troubled  much  with  toothache,  his 

142      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

position  was  that  of  Captain  in  the  merchant  service ; 
he  traveled  a  great  deal  as  a  consequence,  though  his 
travel  was  mentioned  before  the  statement  was  made 
that  he  was  a  Captain.  The  locket  was  obtained  on 
one  of  his  voyages. 

A  question  in  regard  to  the  "Uncle  William,"  the 
step-father,  brought  out  from  Phinuit :  "  Never  saw 
a  spirit  so  happy  and  contented.  He  was  depressed 
in  life  —  had  the  blues  like  old  Harry,  but  he's  quite 
contented  now.  He  had  trouble  here  (prodding 
himself  in  lower  part  of  stomach  and  me  over  blad- 
der). Trouble  there,  in  bowels  or  something.  Had 
pain  in  head,  right  eye  funny.  Pain  down  here, 
abdomen,  stoppage  urine.  Had  an  operation  and 
after  it  was  worse,  and  with  it  passed  out."  At  a 
later  sitting  his  full  name,  William  Tomkinson,  was 
given,  and  it  was  stated  that  he  was  an  old  man  with 
white  hair  and  beard,  but  without  mustache,  and  that 
he  had  passed  out  with  trouble  with  the  bladder. 

Prof.  Lodge  says  of  the  incidents :  "  The  step- 
father used  to  have  severe  fits  of  depression,  more 
than  ordinary  blues.  His  right  eye  had  a  droop  in 
it.  He  had  stone  in  bladder,  great  trouble  with 
urine,  and  was  operated  on  towards  the  end  by  Sir 
Henry  Thompson." 

On  the  second  day  after  at  a  sitting  in  the  evening 
the  incidents  of  Mrs.  Lodge's  father  were  told,  some 
of  them  a  little  more  definitely,  especially  the  ref- 
erence to  the  hurting  of  his  leg  by  a  fall  "  through 
a  hole  in  the  boat,"  and  his  name  in  full,  as  Alexan- 
der Marshall,  which  was  correct,  was  given.  Then 
mention  was  made  of  "  two  Florences,"  with  the  state- 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  14i3 

inent  that  one  paints  and  that  the  other  does  not; 
that  one  is  married  and  the  other  is  not,  and  that 
the  reference  was  to  the  "  one  doesn't  paint  who  is 
married."  It  happened  that  Prof.  Lodge  had  two 
cousins  by  the  name  of  Florence,  one  married  and 
abroad,  as  indicated  in  the  "  communications  "  and 
who  does  not  paint,  and  one  who  paints  and  is  not  mar- 
ried. In  connection  with  the  former,  Phinuit  had 
said  that  she  had  a  friend,  Whiteman.  This  was  all 
unintelligible  to  Prof.  Lodge,  except  the  names  of 
his  cousins  and  their  relation  to  painting  and  mar- 
riage, and  he  inquired  of  one  of  them  to  find  that  she 
had  a  lady  friend  by  the  name  of  Mrs.  Whytehead, 
recently  married,  and  he  conjectures  that  the  allu- 
sion to  something  as  the  matter  with  her  head  was  a 
confusion  in  Phinuit's  mind  by  the  termination  of 
the  name.  Otherwise  the  allusions  were  all  correct. 

This  incident  was  followed  by  some  pertinent 
"  messages  "  from  a  Mr.  E.,  well  known  to  Prof. 
Lodge,  and  a  man  well  known  in  Europe.  The 
facts  stated  were  private  and  said  to  be  intended  to 
prove  the  "  communicator's ':  identity.  They  were 
absolutely  unknown  to  Prof.  Lodge  and  had  to  be 
verified  through  a  common  friend.  The  chief  inter- 
est in  them  is  the  recognition  of  the  purpose  of 
"  communicating '"  the  facts,  since  the  man  was  one 
who  appreciated  the  problem  before  his  death  and 
was  a  co-worker  in  psychic  research. 

The  next  incident  should  be  told  in  Prof.  Lodge's 
own  language  and  occurred  soon  after  the  sittings 
began. 

"  It  happened,"  says  Prof.  Lodge,  "  that  an  uncle 

144      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  mine  in  London,  now  quite  an  old  man,  and  one  of 
a  surviving  three  out  of  a  very  large  family,  had  a 
twin  brother  who  died  some  twenty  or  more  years  ago. 
I  interested  him  generally  in  the  subject,  and  wrote 
to  ask  if  he  would  lend  me  some  relic  of  this  brother. 
By  morning  post  on  a  certain  day  I  received  a  curious 
old  gold  watch,  which  this  brother  had  worn  and  been 
fond  of;  and  that  same  morning,  no  one  in  the  house 
having  seen  it  or  knowing  anything  about  it,  I 
handed  it  to  Mrs.  Piper  when  in  a  state  of  trance. 

"  I  was  told  almost  immediately  that  it  had  be- 
longed to  one  of  my  uncles  -  -  one  that  had  been  men- 
tioned before  as  having  died  from  the  effects  of  a 
fall  —  one  that  had  been  very  fond  of  Uncle  Robert, 
the  name  of  the  survivor  -  -  that  the  watch  was  now 
in  possession  of  this  same  Uncle  Robert,  with  whom 
he  was  anxious  to  communicate.  After  some  diffi- 
culty, and  many  wrong  attempts,  Dr.  Phinuit  caught 
the  name,  Jerry,  short  for  Jeremiah,  and  said  em- 
phatically, as  if  a  third  person  was  speaking,  '  This 
is  my  watch,  and  Robert  is  my  brother,  and  I  am 
here.  Uncle  Jerry,  my  watch.'  All  this  at  the  first 
sitting  on  the  very  morning  the  watch  had  arrived 
by  post,  no  one  but  myself  and  a  short-hand  clerk 
who  happened  to  have  been  introduced  for  the  first 
time  at  this  sitting  by  me,  and  whose  antecedents  are 
well  known  to  me,  being  present. 

"Having  thus  got  ostensibly  into  communication 
through  some  means  or  other  with  what  purported  to 
be  a  deceased  relative,  whom  I  had,  indeed,  known 
slightly  in  his  later  years  of  blindness,  but  of  whose 
early  life  I  knew  nothing,  I  pointed  out  to  him  that 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  145 

to  make  Uncle  Robert  aware  of  his  presence  it  would 
be  well  to  recall  trivial  details  of  their  boyhood,  all 
of  which  I  would  faithfully  report. 

"  He  quite  caught  the  idea,  and  proceeded  during 
several  successive  sittings  ostensibly  to  instruct  Dr. 
Phinuit  to  mention  a  number  of  little  things  such 
as  would  enable  his  brother  to  recognise  him. 

"  References  to  his  blindness,  illness,  and  main 
facts  of  his  life  were  comparatively  useless  from  my 
point  of  view;  but  these  details  of  boyhood,  two- 
thirds  of  a  century  ago,  were  utterly  and  entirely 
out  of  my  ken.  My  father  was  one  of  the  younger 
members  of  the  family,  and  only  knew  these  brothers 
as  men. 

"  '  Uncle  Jerry '  recalled  episodes  such  as  swim- 
ming the  creek  when  they  were  boys  together,  and 
running  some  risk  of  getting  drowned;  killing  a  cat 
in  Smith's  field ;  the  possession  of  a  small  rifle,  and 
of  a  long  peculiar  skin,  like  a  snake-skin,  which  he 
thought  was  now  in  the  possession  of  Uncle  Robei-t. 

"  All  these  facts  have  been  more  or  less  completely 
verified.  But  the  interesting  thing  is  that  this  twin 
brother,  from  whom  I  got  the  watch,  and  with  whom  I 
was  thus  in  a  sort  of  communication,  could  not  remem- 
ber them  all.  He  recollected  something  about  swim- 
ming the  creek,  though  he  himself  had  merely  looked 
on.  He  had  a  distinct  recollection  of  having  had  the 
snake-skin,  and  of  the  box  in  which  it  was  kept, 
though  he  does  not  know  where  it  is  now.  But  he  al- 
together denied  killing  the  cat,  and  could  not  recall 
Smith's  field. 

"  His  memory,  however,  is  decidedly  failing  him, 

146      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

and  he  was  good  enough  to  write  to  another  brother, 
Frank,  now  living  in  Cornwall,  an  old  sea  captain, 
and  ask  if  he  had  any  better  remembrance  of  certain 
facts  —  of  course  not  giving  any  inexplicable  rea- 
sons for  asking.  The  result  of  this  inquiry  was 
triumphantly  to  vindicate  the  existence  of  Smith's 
field  as  a  place  near  their  home;  where  they  used  to 
play,  in  Barking,  Essex ;  and  the  killing  of  the  cat  by 
another  brother  was  also  recollected ;  while  of  the 
swimming  of  the  creek,  near  a  mill-race,  full  details 
were  given,  Frank  and  Jerry  being  the  heroes  of  that 
foolhardy  episode. 

"  Some  of  the  other  facts  given  I  have  not  been 
able  to  get  verified.  Perhaps  there  are  as  many  un- 
verified as  verified.  And  some  things  appear,  so  far 
as  I  can  make  out,  to  be  false.  One  little  thing  I 
could  verify  myself,  and  it  is  good,  inasmuch  as  no 
one  is  likely  to  have  had  any  recollection,  even  if 
they  had  any  knowledge,  of  it.  Phinuit  told  me  to 
take  the  watch  out  of  its  case  (it  was  the  old-fash- 
ioned turnip  variety)  and  examine  it  in  a  good  light 
afterwards,  and  I  should  see  some  nicks  near  the 
handle  which  Jerry  said  he  had  cut  into  it  with  his 
knife. 

"  Some  faint  nicks  are  there.  I  had  never  had 
the  watch  out  of  its  case  before;  being,  indeed,  care- 
ful neither  to  finger  it  myself  nor  to  let  anyone  else 
finger  it. 

"  I  never  let  Mrs.  Piper  in  her  waking  state  see  the 
watch  till  quite  towards  the  end  of  the  time,  when  I 
purposely  left  it  lying  on  my  desk  while  she  came 
out  of  the  trance.  Before  long  she  noticed  it,  with 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  147 

natural  curiosity,  evidently  becoming  conscious  of 
its  existence  then  for  the  first  time." 

Prof.  Lodge  received  a  number  of  specific  incidents 
well  calculated  in  their  nature  to  prove  supernormal 
knowledge  and  purporting  to  come  from  the  father 
of  a  personal  friend  by  the  name  of  Wilson.  Some 
of  the  facts  Prof.  Lodge  knew  and  some  he  did  not. 
To  test  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  which,  he  thought, 
ought  to  be  correct  in  what  he  knew  and  might  be 
false  in  what  he  did  not  know,  he  wrote  to  Africa 
to  make  inquiries.  The  reply  showed  that  the 
facts  which  he  did  not  know  were  not  true  of  Mr. 
Wilson's  father,  whose  name  was  given  by  Phinuit 
as  James,  when  it  should  have  been  George.  In  a 
footnote,  however,  Prof.  Lodge  says  that  "  James  " 
was  the  name  of  Mr.  Wilson's  grandfather,  and  that 
the  facts  "  would  have  had  a  truer  ring  if  they  had 
purported  to  come  from  the  grandfather." 

At  a  sitting  held  under  the  supervision  of  Prof. 
Lodge  a  gentleman  friend  by  the  name  of  Mr.  G. 
H.  Rendall  was  introduced  as  Roberts,  and  during 
the  course  of  the  experiment  Mr.  Rendall  placed  in 
Mrs.  Piper's  hand  a  locket  containing  "  a  miniature 
head,  faced  by  ring  of  hair,  of  a  first  (step)  cousin, 
named  Agnes,  who  had  died  of  consumption  in  1869. 
The  locket  remained  closed  from  first  to  last."  Im- 
mediately Mrs.  Piper  (Phinuit)  said  that  it  was  con- 
nected with  an  old  friend  and  gave  the  name 
Alice,  pronouncing  it  "  Aleese,"  in  Phinuit's  French. 
When  told  that  the  name  was  not  quite  right  Phin- 
uit said,  "  it  is  the  cough  she  remembers  —  she 
passed  out  with  a  cough,"  and  gave  the  name  "  An- 

148      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

nese."  Mr.  Kendall  at  once  said,  as  if  trying  a  sug- 
gestion, "Agnes.  Can't  you  say  Agnes?"  Phinuit 
replied :  "  That  is  it.  Anyese  -  -  Anyese,"  and 
throughout  the  remainder  of  the  talk  kept  at  the 
French  pronunciation,  and  said  that  he  could  "  not 
say  it  quite  right."  Phinuit  continued  with  much 
unevidential  talk  and  said  in  the  midst  of  it  that 
"  she's  got  greyish  eyes,  and  brown  hair,"  that  "  she 
passed  out  with  a  cough,"  that  "  when  she  passed  out 
she  lost  her  flesh  -  -  but  she  looks  better  now  —  looks 
more  like  the  picture  you  have  in  here  —  rather 
fleshier,"  that  "  there  was  a  book  when  she  was  in 
the  body  connected  with  you  and  her  —  a  little  book 
and  some  verses  in  it,"  that  "  she's  got  a  mother  in 
the  body,"  that  "  she  has  a  sister  in  the  body,"  and 
that  "  that's  her  hair  in  there."  Every  one  of  these 
incidents  were  correct  in  regard  to  the  person 
named.  The  only  thing  that  was  false  was  the  state- 
ment that  she  had  owned  the  locket.  Mr.  Kendall 
had  "  her  Roundell  Palmer's  Book  of  Praise,  as  a 
keepsake."  The  conversation  continued  for  some 
time  with  frequent  correct  incidents  mentioned  by  the 
"  communicator,"  and  among  them  was  the  statement 
that  her  sister  had  been  ill  of  late,  and  that  the  sis- 
ter had  married  since  her  own  death.  Mr.  Kendall 
tried  a  test  for  telepathy,  asking  if  the  "  communi- 
cator "  could  tell  what  little  memento  he  had  of  her. 
There  was  another  reference  to  the  book  in  reply 
and  then  Mr.  Kendall  definitely  indicated  what  was 
in  his  mind  by  asking  if  she  remembered  any  little 
thing  at  table  d'  hote.  She  could  not  remember  and 
he  then  said  what  it  was,  a  little  blue  vase,  but  it  was 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  149 

not  remembered,  and  the  "  communicator  "'  went  on 
through  Phinuit  to  say  that  she  sent  her  "  love  to 
Lu,"  the  name  of  a  friend  of  Mr.  Rendall's  cousin 
and  whom  he  had  not  seen  and  hardly  heard  of  since 
his  cousin's  death,  in  1869.  Amid  much  confusion 
and  error  some  other  true  incidents  occurred,  but  not 
complicated  enough  to  quote. 

In  a  sitting  the  same  evening  a  number  of  names 
and  incidents  were  correctly  given,  but  without  the 
complexity  that  makes  them  especially  interesting  or 
useful  as  evidence,  except  as  unlikely  due  to  chance. 

2.  Incidents  in  Experiments  of  Walter  Leaf 

I  mean  to  group  under  this  head  the  sittings  and 
experiments  that  were  supervised  by  Mr.  Walter 
Leaf,  Litt.  D.,  just  as  I  have  treated  the  previous 
account  as  under  the  care  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Mr. 
Leaf's  introduction  to  his  report  calls  attention  to  a 
number  of  precautions  which  have  to  be  taken  against 
the  misinterpretation  of  real  or  apparent  coincidences 
in  the  sittings,  and  I  have  no  space  to  dwell  upon 
them.  The  reader  must  go  to  the  original  data  for 
evidence  of  the  cautiousness  with  which  he  approached 
the  case  and  adopted  conclusions  favorable  to  some 
supernormal  process  of  acquiring  information. 

(a)  Facts  unevidential  of  spirit  agency.  The 
first  two  sittings  in  this  series  were  for  a  Mr.  Clarke, 
one  of  them  held  in  America  and  the  other  in  Eng- 
land. He  very  carefully  analysed  the  "  communica- 
tions "  and  the  amount  of  error  makes  the  successes 
pale  so  that  the  whole  result  is  dubious.  Even  the 

150      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

facts  in  many  cases  that  were  treated  as  possibly  sig- 
nificant may  be  extremely  doubtful. 

At  the  next  experiment  three  sitters  were  present 
whose  names  were  reserved  from  publication.  The 
first  incident  in  the  "  communications  "  has  its  sig- 
nificance in  the  mistake,  along  with  successes,  that 
represents  what  was  false  in  fact,  but  what  the  sitter 
thought  was  true.  Phinuit  almost  at  once  said: 
"You  have  three  sisters  and  two  brothers  in  the  body ; 
an  elderly  gentleman  in  the  spirit,  your  father. 
(Right.) 

"  One  of  your  brothers  has  a  funny  arm,  the  right 
arm  paralysed;  very  funny  (points  to  place  a  little 
above  the  elbow  on  inside  of  arm).  That  is  sore, 
it  is  lame.  He  can't  use  his  arm,  it  aches.  The  lump 
keeps  growing." 

The  sitter  stated  that  this  was  a  correct  descrip- 
tion of  her  eldest  brother,  who  suffers  from  writer's 
cramp,  which  seriously  hinders  him  in  his  profes- 
sion. There  is  a  lump  on  the  arm  which  gives  him 
pain ;  but  it  is  significant  that  it  is  in  fact  below  the 
elbow,  not  above  it,  and  the  sitter  believed  it  to  be 
above  the  elbow  at  the  time. 

A  second  brother  was  described  with  equal  cor- 
rectness and  his  name,  James,  given.  He  was  said 
to  be  funny  and  hard  to  get  at,  stubborn  and  self- 
willed,  but  manageable  by  quiet  influence. 

At  a  sitting  by  Mrs.  Verrall  Phinuit  referred  to  a 
living  sister  and  advised  care  regarding  her,  as  she 
had  been  ill,  and  made  a  half  successful  attempt  at 
the  name  of  her  physician,  and  then  said :  "  I  don't 
like  his  treatment;  he  gives  her  quinine.  Her  sys- 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  151 

tern  is  full  of  it."  Both  Mrs.  Verrall  and  her  sister 
denied  that  she,  the  sister,  had  taken  quinine,  but  it 
was  subsequently  ascertained  that  she  had  taken  quin- 
ine without  knowing  it.  After  some  further  refer- 
ence to  friends  and  relatives  with  names  given  and 
statements  making  the  incidents  mixed  ones,  Phinuit 
made  a  clear  set  of  statements  in  reference  to  a  child 
of  Mrs.  Verrall's. 

"  There  is  a  child  in  the  body ;  a  little  stiffness 
—  a  boy  —  no,  a  girl.  That  leg  too.  This  leg  is 
the  worst  (indicating  the  left  knee).  The  muscles 
are  strained,  not  lubricated  properly.  A  drawing 
of  the  muscles ;  they  are  too  tight." 

"  It  is  a  fact  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  baby,  a  girl,  suf- 
fered from  want  of  power  in  the  lower  limbs,  and 
that  the  left  knee  was  the  worst.  But  it  is  not  cor- 
rect to  say  that  there  was  straining  or  want  of  lu- 
brication of  the  muscles  of  the  knee,  though  the  ten- 
dons of  the  heels  were  somewhat  contracted." 

This  was  followed  up  by  another  singular  coinci- 
dence, in  which  Phinuit  said  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had 
another  child  quite  bright,  and  that  he  would  be  very 
musical.  Mrs.  Verrall  asked  if  it  was  a  boy  or  girl, 
and  Phinuit  said:  "A  boy.  You  have  had  that 
child's  hair  fixed  peculiarly,  but  after  all  it's  a  girl; 
a  girl  sure  enough,  but  she  looks  like  a  fury."  The 
child  was  a  girl,  and  its  hair  was  badly  cut  at  the 
time,  and  she  looked  like  a  boy. 

(b)  Facts  relevant  to  spirit  agency.  None  of 
the  incidents  in  this  series  of  sittings  are  so  impress- 
ive as  those  of  Prof.  Lodge.  There  are  traces  of 
ordinary  mediumistic  talk  all  through,  but  now  and 

152      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

then  a  complex  incident  occurs  that  cannot  easily 
be  referred  to  chance,  coincidence  or  guessing.  The 
first  sitting  of  the  series  was,  as  indicated  above,  for 
a  Mr.  Clarke.  Until  he  and  Mr.  Leaf  went  out  of 
the  room  and  left  the  "  communications  "  with  Mrs. 
Clarke,  nothing  of  a  suggestive  character  occurred. 
But  as  soon  as  they  had  gone  out  Phinuit  mentioned 
an  uncle  and  said  he  was  "  in  spirit,"  which  was  cor- 
rect, and  remarked  that  some  one  was  with  him,  giv- 
ing the  name  and  relationship  to  Mrs.  Clarke  as  her 
cousin.  He  then  went  on  to  say: 

"  There  was  something  the  matter  with  his  heart, 
and  with  his  head.  He  says  it  was  an  accident.  He 
wants  me  to  tell  you  it  was  an  accident.  He  wants 
you  to  tell  his  sisters.  There's  M.  and  E. ;  they  are 
sisters  of  E.  And  there  is  their  mother.  She  suffers 
here  (pointing  to  abdomen).  E.  told  me.  His 
mother  has  been  very  unhappy  about  his  death.  He 
begs  you,  for  God's  sake,  to  tell  them  that  it  was  an 
accident  -  -  that  it  was  his  head ;  that  he  was  hurt 
there  (makes  motion  of  stabbing  heart)  ;  that  he  had 
inherited  it  from  his  father.  His  father  was  off  his 
mind  —  you  know  what  I  mean  -  -  crazy.  But  the 

others   are   all   right   and   will  be He   and   his 

father  are  just  trying  to  take  comfort  in  each  other. 
They  are  a  little  apart ;  they  are  not  with  the  others 
in  the  spirit."  He  then  sent  his  love  to  "Walter,  his 
friend,  not  this  Walter,"  alluding  evidently  to  Mr. 
Walter  Leaf  in  the  distinction.  But  no  such  friend 
of  the  "  communicator "  was  known.  But  Mrs. 
Clarke  says  in  a  note : 

"  A  striking  account  of  my  uncle's  family  in  Gcr- 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  153 

many.  The  names  and  facts  are  all  correct.  The 
father  was  disturbed  in  his  mind  for  the  last  three 
years  in  his  life,  in  consequence  of  a  fall  from  his 
horse.  The  son  committed  suicide  in  a  fit  of  melan- 
cholia by  stabbing  his  heart,  as  described.  The  sis- 
ter referred  to  as  lame  was  bedridden  for  10  years. 
One  of  the  sisters  (mentioned  by  Phinuit  previous 
to  what  has  been  quoted  as  "one  who  paints")  is  a 
painter  by  profession.  Some  few  of  the  facts  she 
gave  me  were  unknown  to  any  one  out  of  Germany, 
even  to  my  husband.  The  more  important  events 
—  my  uncle's  and  aunt's  death  and  my  cousin's  sui- 
cide, which  happened  respectively  28,  15  and  12 
years  ago  —  were  known  to  only  two  persons  in  Eng- 
land besides  my  husband." 

Further  important  "  communications  "  of  a  coinci- 
dental sort,  immediately  followed  what  I  have  quoted. 
Phinuit  said :  "  Did  you  know  your  mother  had  dread- 
ful headaches?  That's  the  reason  she  is  so  nervous. 
E.  told  me  that  about  his  aunt."  Mrs.  Clarke  adds 
in  a  note  that  her  "  mother  formerly  suffered  from 
severe  headaches."  Then  followed  a  most  interesting 
set  of  episodes,  in  which  Phinuit  seemed  at  his  best. 

"  Here's  M.  —  not  the  M.  who  hurt  her  ankle,  but 
another.  She  is  your  aunt.  (Is  she  in  the  body?) 
No,  she  is  in  the  spirit.  (Did  you  see  her?)  Yes, 
she  is  here,  and  wants  to  speak  to  you.  (What  does 
she  say  about  her  husband?)  She  says  he  has 
changed  his  life  since.  She  does  not  like  it  that  he 
married  again.  (Does  she  like  the  one  whom  he  mar- 
ried ? )  Oh,  she  loves  her  dearly.  But  she  does  not  like 

154      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

him  to  have  married  again  so  soon.  He  married  her 
sister.  Two  brothers  married  sisters.  Her  husband 
has  children  now.  There  are  two  boys.  And  there 
are  Max  and  Richard,  or  Dick,  as  they  call  him ;  they 
are  with  your  uncle's  children. 

"  Now  what  do  you  think  of  this  ?  Don't  you 
think  I  can  tell  you  many  things?  You  just  ask 
about  anybody  you  like  and  I'll  tell  you.  (Tell  me 
about  my  childhood.)  Shall  I  tell  you  how  you  ran 
away  (chuckling)  with  that  man  —  that  boy,  I 
mean.  You  were  a  little  devil  to  do  that.  It  wor- 
ried your  mother  almost  to  death." 

Mrs.  Clarke  says  in  her  notes :  "  This  is  an  accu- 
rate description  of  the  family  of  another  uncle.  His 
wife  died  childless,  and  he  soon  afterward  married 
her  sister,  by  whom  he  has  children.  His  brother 
had  previously  married  a  third  sister. 

"  When  five  years  old  I  rambled  off  with  two  boys, 
staying  hours  away  from  home,  an  event  which  in  my 
family  is  jestingly  referred  to  as  my  running  away. 
I  had  no  thought  of  it  when  I  asked  her  about  my 
childhood." 

When  Mr.  Clarke  and  Mr.  Leaf  returned  into  the 
room  Phinuit  repeated  the  incidents  just  quoted  with 
remarkable  accuracy  and  brevity  in  a  running  talk 
that  is  most  interesting  and  suggestive  on  any  theory. 

The  next  sitting  was  for  Mrs.  A.,  full  name  re- 
served from  publication.  Mr.  Frederic  W.  H.  My- 
ers was  present  taking  notes.  Immediately  follow- 
ing the  incident  quoted  of  the  brother  with  a  "  funny 
arm"  (p.  150)  came  a  reference  to  a  "spirit  Jo- 
seph "  which  was  not  recognised,  and  then :  "  Tim- 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  155 

othy  is  the  nearest  spirit  you  have  got  to  you;  some 
call  him  Tim;  he  is  your  father.  Timothy  was  your 
grandfather  also.  Your  father  tells  me  about  S.  W. 
—  stay,  I  can't  get  that,  I  must  wait.  Your  mother 
had  trouble  in  the  stomach ;  she  is  in  the  spirit  world. 
Your  father  had  trouble  in  heart  and  head.  Myers' 
father  passed  away  from  disease  of  the  heart." 

The  notes  say :  "  Except  the  allusion  to  *  S.  W.,' 
which  is  not  recognisable,  the  above  is  all  true,  if  the 
'  trouble  in  heart  and  head  '  be  taken  to  refer  to  Mr. 
Myers'  father,  as  seems  to  be  intended." 

Then  with  the  reference  to  a  living  brother,  James, 
not  mentioned  before,  Mr.  Myers  asked  what  the 
father,  Timothy,  was  interested  in  and  what  he  did  in 
his  "  earth  life."  The  reply  was : 

"  He  is  interested  in  the  Bible  —  a  clergyman.  He 
used  to  preach.  He  has  a  Bible  with  him,  he  goes  on 
reading  and  advancing.  He  is  living  with  your 
mother  just  the  same  as  on  earth.  He  has  been  in 
the  spirit-world  longer  than  she  has.  Your  mother 
is  a  little  nervous.  I  can't  get  her  to  come  near. 
Your  father  has  a  graceful,  solemn  manner,  as  he 
had  on  earth.  He  had  trouble  with  his  throat  —  ir- 
ritation (points  to  bronchial  tubes).  The  boys  used 
to  call  him  Tim  at  college." 

The  note  states  that  these  statements  are  all  cor- 
rect, so  far  as  they  can  be  verified.  With  a  refer- 
ence to  an  unrecognised  name  and  in  connection  with 
matter  on  which  no  notes  are  given  the  question  was 
asked  by  Phinuit :  "  Do  you  like  that  picture  of  your 
father  in  the  hall?'1  There  was  some  confusion 
as  to  whether  it  was  oil  or  crayon,  but  it  was  said 

156      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

apparently  not  to  be  a  photograph.  His  dress  was 
described  to  fit  more  or  less  the  ecclesiastical  garb 
which  he  wore  in  the  oil  picture  of  him  which  hung 
in  Mrs.  A's  sister's  house.  Some  further  coincidental 
matter  was  given,  but  was  buried  up  in  much  that  it 
would  not  pay  to  quote. 

Mrs.  Yen-all's  sittings  were  full  of  pertinent  mat- 
ter, but  of  a  type  in  many  cases  that  requires  the 
study  of  the  detailed  records.  But  a  few  incidents 
are  especially  interesting  and  suggest  the  super- 
normal very  clearly.  Near  the  first  of  the  second 
experiment  came :  "  Carrie  was  sick  in  the  chest 
when  she  passed  away  —  consumption.  She  says  she 
is  happy,  so  is  her  mother.  Well,  Carrie  and  her 
mother  were  not  congenial  in  the  body,  but  they  un- 
derstand one  another  now.  Carrie  had  a  little  sister 
who  passed  out  as  an  infant."  Mrs.  Verrall  remarks 
of  the  incidents: 

"  The  only  friend  of  the  name  Carrie  who  is  dead, 
the  wife  of  a  cousin,  died  of  inflammation  of  the 
lungs.  Her  mother  died  at  her  birth  and  her  step- 
mother was  by  her  believed  to  be  her  own  mother,  and 
as  a  child  she  used  to  reproach  herself  for  not  loving 
her  as  a  child  ought  to  love  its  mother.  There  was 
an  infant  sister,  the  child  of  the  step-mother,  which 
died  at  two  months  old.  This  I  have  never  known, 
at  least  this  is  my  impression.  The  husband  of  Car- 
rie did  not  know  it,  but  found  the  event  recorded  in 
the  family  Bible.  I  knew  Carrie  very  well,  and  it  is, 
of  course,  possible  that  she  may  have  mentioned  the 
baby  sister  to  me,  but  I  had  so  little  knowledge  of 
the  fact  that  I  thought  the  medium's  statement  a  mis- 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  157 

take,  and  neither  my  mother,  who  was  very  intimate 
with  Carrie,  nor  my  sister  knew  of  the  '  infant  sis- 
ter.' " 

Another  set  of  very  interesting  statements  was 
made  by  Phinuit  a  little  later  in  the  experiment,  and 
after  some  isolated  hits  of  significance.  What  I  wish 
to  quote  is  very  complicated  and  gets  its  importance 
from  that  fact : 

"  Who  was  the  teacher  ?  There  was  a  grandfather 
lame,  very  lame,  rheumatism;  the  father's  father, 
lame,  crutches.  You  know  Henry,  he  sends  his  love. 
There  are  two  Henrys,  one  the  father's  side,  one  on 
the  mother's.  The  two  Henrys  came  to  another  gen- 
tleman by  mistake.  One  belongs  to  the  lame  grand- 
father, his  son;  the  other  to  the  mother;  not  her  son 
nor  brother  —  father,  perhaps,  or  grandfather. 
Your  grandfather  had  a  sister  Susan.  The  other 
Henry  —  there  is  an  old-fashioned  picture  with  a 
collar  turned  down,  hair  old-fashioned  way  —  a 
painting  done  by  one  of  the  family,  not  you.  Ken- 
yon,  what's  her  name?  Your  grandmother's  sister, 
no,  grandmother  was  a  Wilson,  no,  Williams.  Ke- 
lon,  Keley;  that's  it.  What  relation  is  she?"  Mrs. 
Verrall,  replied :  "  My  uncle  married  a  Mrs.  Keeley." 
Phinuit  continued :  "  Oh,  what  a  mixture  —  double 
marriages !  Your  aunt  married  your  uncle ;  I  mean, 
she  was  your  aunt  after  she  married  him.  Mrs.  Kee- 
ley was  the  second  wife  and  had  a  first  husband. 
George,  that's  the  brother  of  the  uncle's  first  wife. 
I  like  the  teacher.  (Who?)  Music  teacher;  your 
aunt,  father's  sister.  She  is  a  lady;  she  is  living." 

Mrs.  Verrall  confirms  the  incidents  in  the  follow- 

158      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ing  manner :  "  Grandfather  lame ;  this  is  true  of 
my  father's  father.  But  he  never  had  rheumatism; 
his  lameness  was  due  to  an  accident.  '  Henry ;'  I  had 
an  Uncle  Henry  whom  I  never  knew,  a  son  of  the 
lame  grandfather.  There  is  a  portrait  of  him  by 
his  mother,  which  she  valued  very  much.  It  shows 
him  as  a  young  man,  a  grown-up  looking  boy.  The 
other  Henry  was  an  uncle  of  my  mother's.  I  have 
written  to  ask  if  my  grandfather  had  a  sister  Su- 
san." Subsequently  Mrs.  Verrall  writes :  "  I  hear 
that  my  grandfather  had  a  sister  Susan.  She  was 
born  in  1791,  and  after  her  marriage  went  out  to 
Canada  and  lived  near  Hamilton,  Ontario.  But  a 
son  remained  in  England.  Members  of  my  grand- 
father's family  have  kept  up  communication  with 
some  of  my  relations,  though  not  with  our  branch, 
notably  with  the  uncle  who  married  a  Mrs.  Keeley. 
The  uncle,  Henry,  whose  portrait  was  described  to 
me  went  out  to  Canada  to  join  the  Susan  branch.  It 
is  certainly  very  astonishing  that  Dr.  Phinuit  should 
know  a  fact  of  which  I  certainly  never  knew.  My 
grandfather  had  entirely  broken  with  all  his  family 
except  a  sister,  Mary,  and  never  mentioned  them  to 
me.  This  information  is  derived  from  papers  in  my 
grandmother's  handwriting.  My  father  knew  noth- 
ing of  this  Susan. 

"  George  was  the  name  of  the  brother  of  my  un- 
cle's first  wife.  I  find  that  he  is  still  alive,  but  is 
now  called  Jasper,  his  other  name.  I  have  lately 
heard  a  great  deal  about  Jasper,  but  had  no  idea  he 
was  the  George  of  whom  I  used  to  hear  from  my 
cousin,  John  Merrifield,  when  we  were  both  children. 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  159 

My  father's  sister  taught  music,  certainly;  possibly 
painting,  too." 

The  extraordinary  character  of  the  incidents  in 
this  case,  I  think,  will  strike  every  reader,  and  it  may 
perhaps  be  too  strong  a  verdict  to  say,  as  intimated 
above,  that  there  were  none  in  this  series  of  experi- 
ments equal  to  some  of  Prof.  Lodge's.  This  set  of 
incidents  certainly  runs  in  very  close  rivalry  to  the 
significance  of  his. 

In  a  long  sitting  at  which  Mrs.  Herbert  Leaf  was 
present,  introduced  as  "Miss  Thompson,"  a  large 
number  of  incidents  were  correct,  but  they  did  not 
have  so  much  psychological  complexity  of  detail  as 
those  I  have  just  quoted,  though  of  that  pertinent 
character  which  makes  them  strongly  evidential  of 
the  supernormal  and  relevant  to  spirit  agency.  It 
would  take  too  much  space  to  indicate  their  impor- 
tance by  quoting  them.  A  similar  experiment  by  a 
Mr.  Pye  exhibits  the  same  type  of  result.  The  rec- 
ord then  shows  two  sittings  which  were  failures  and 
left  a  bad  impression  upon  the  sitters. 

The  general  summary  of  both  series  of  sittings 
from  which  the  quotations  have  been  taken  contains 
abbreviated  accounts  of  experiments  whose  full  de- 
tails were  not  published,  and  there  are  many  impor- 
tant incidents  for  both  types  of  phenomena,  the  un- 
evidential  of  spirit  agency  and  the  relevant.  One 
by  Mr.  Oscar  Browning  contains  incidents  of  a  strik- 
ing character  and  explicable  by  either  hypothesis. 
One  also  by  Miss  X.  (Goodrich-Freer),  author  of 
Essays  in  Psychical  Research,  is  especially  rich  in 
evidence  of  the  supernormal,  some  of  it  relevant  and 

160      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

some  of  it  unevidcntial  of   spirit   agency.     It  is  so 
interesting  that  I  shall  quote  the  whole  record : 

"  Miss  X.  was  introduced,  veiled,  to  the  medium 
in  the  trance  state,  immediately  after  her  arrival  at 
Mr.  Myers'  house.  She  was  at  once  recognized  and 
named.  '  You  are  a  medium ;  you  write  when  you 
don't  want  to.  You  have  got  Mr.  E.'s  influence 
about  you.  This  is  Miss  X.  that  I  told  you  about.' 
She  was  subsequently  addressed  by  her  Christian 
name,  one  of  similar  sound  being  first  used,  but  cor- 
rected immediately." 

"  A  large  part  of  the  statements  made  at  this  and 
the  following  sittings  were  correct,  but  in  nearly  all 
cases  of  so  private  and  personal  a  nature  that  it  is 
impossible  to  publish  them.  Only  fragments,  there- 
fore, can  be  given,  with  proper  names  omitted.  But 
these  sittings  were  perhaps  the  most  successful  and 
convincing  of  the  whole  series. 

"  You  know  that  military-looking  gentleman  with 
the  big  coat  on  and  the  funny  buttons  on  the  pads 
here,  on  the  collar.  It  is  some  one  very  near  you  in 
the  spirit."  This  is  a  correct  description,  so  far  as 
it  goes,  of  a  near  relation. 

"  Howells  speaks ;  he  tells  me  he  knows  the  Mar- 
tins, your  friends;  they  know  one  of  my  books." 
These  names  were  not  recognized. 

"You  see  flowers  sometimes?  (What  is  my  fa- 
vorite flower?  There  is  a  spirit  who  would  know.) 
Pansies.  No,  delicate  pink  roses.  You  have  them 
about  you,  spiritually  as  well  as  physically."  Miss 
X.  has  on  a  certain  day  every  month  a  present  of 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  161 

delicate  pink  roses.  She  frequently  has  hallucina- 
tory visions  of  flowers. 

"  There  is  an  old  lady  in  the  spirit  wearing  a  cap 
who  is  fond  of  you  —  your  grandmother.  She  is 
the  mother  of  the  clergyman's  wife's  mother.  (Not 
correct.)  She  wears  a  lace  collar  and  a  big  brooch, 
bluish-grey  eyes,  dark  hair  turned  greyish,  with  a 
black  ribbon  running  through  it;  rather  prominent 
nose  and  peaked  chin;  named  Anne."  This  is  a  cor- 
rect description  of  a  friend  of  Miss  X.,  whom  she  was 
in  the  habit  of  calling  Granny. 

"Dr.  Phinuit  described  an  entertainment  at  which 
Miss  X.  had  been  present,  her  position  in  the  room, 
the  appearance  of  her  companion,  including  a 
marked  personal  peculiarity,  and  its  cause,  giving 
the  Christian  name  of  the  same  friend,  and  the  sub- 
ject of  their  conversation,  and  the  circumstance  of 
Miss  X.'s  return  home  —  all  with  absolute  correct- 
ness, except  as  to  time,  which  was  said  to  have  been 
'  last  evening,'  whereas  it  was  the  evening  before." 

At  the  next  sitting  "  Prof.  Charles  Richet  and  Mr. 
Walter  Leaf  were  also  present;  the  latter  only  a  few 
minutes  at  the  beginning." 

"Miss  X.  was  told  that  her  mother's  sister  was 
named  Sarah.  It  was  said  that  she  was  in  the  body, 
but  this  was  corrected  to  '  in  the  spirit '  after  a  ques- 
tion. Her  brothers'  names  were  given  as  G  — ,  A  — , 
W  — ,  A  — ,  B  — ,  correctly,  all  but  B  — ,  being  very 
common ;  but  in  the  case  of  A  — ,  and  B  —  only  at 
the  second  attempt,  John  and  Walter  having  been 
first  given  instead.  W  —  was  the  name  of  a  brother 

162      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

who  died  in  infancy,  and  whom  Miss  X.  had  never 
known.  Miss  X.  at  first  denied  that  the  name  was 
correct,  having  usually  heard  of  him  as  H  — ,  but 
afterward  remembered  that  W-— was  correct.  She 
was  further  told  rightly  that  A  —  was  an  artist,  and 
B  -  the  handsomest  of  the  family.  A  medallion 
which  she  showed  was  stated  to  be  given  by  a  friend 
whose  very  rare  Christian  and  surname  were  rightly 
obtained,  the  one  after  hesitation,  but  with  no  false 
shots,  the  other  at  the  second  attempt."  No  record 
of  the  third  sitting  is  given. 

A  curious  fact  is  connected  with  the  reference  to 
"Mr.  E."  and  the  statement  that  Miss  X.  had  been 
mentioned  before.  This  Mr.  E.,  well  known  in  life 
to  both  Prof.  James  and  Dr.  Hodgson,  had  pur- 
ported to  communicate  in  sittings  in  America  and 
had  said  there  that  he  had  communicated  through 
Miss  X.,  giving  the  name  correctly  with  the  excep- 
tion of  one  letter.  On  November  29th,  in  a  sitting 
with  Mr.  Myers,  the  same  statement  that  had  been 

•/ 

made  in  America  was  made  to  Mr.  Myers  and  the 
same  mistake  in  the  name  committed.  It  wras  on 
December  7th  following  that  Miss  X.  had  her  sit- 
ting. The  incident,  which  might  be  interpreted  as 
a  "  communication  "  through  Miss  X.  from  Mr.  E., 
is  unpublished. 

3.     Failures,  Errors,  and  Irrelevant  Incidents 

I  shall  not  summarise  details  of  failures  and  er- 
rors, because  errors  are  not  opposed  to  any  theory 
when  the  correct  facts  are  not  explicable  by  chance 
or  guessing.  All  that  I  need  do  in  this  section  will 

THE  ENGLISH  REPORT  163 

be  to  recognise  that  the  true  incidents  were  often 
given  in  such  a  mass  of  error  as  to  make  it  neces- 
sary to  discount  their  value.  Some  sittings  were 
entire  failures  and  have  all  the  appearance  of  the  or- 
dinary medium's  talk  and  associational  reproduc- 
tions. Names  were  often  given  in  "a  manner  to  sug- 
gest guessing  and  "  fishing,"  and  even  though  they 
were  strikingly  right  their  significance  had  to  be 
sceptically  received  or  wholly  rejected.  The  inci- 
dents that  were  wholly  false  in  many  instances,  as  re- 
lated to  the  sitter,  were  often  as  detailed  and  as 
probable  inherently  as  any  that  were  true,  and  if  the 
contrast  between  them  and  those  that  were  quite  true 
had  been  less,  the  problem  of  their  import  would 
have  been  more  suggestive.  As  it  is,  this  is  inter- 
esting enough.  But  they  do  not,  in  fact,  affect  the 
inexplicability  of  the  complex  true  facts  by  any  ordi- 
nary hypotheses. 

As  illustration  of  dubious  matter  on  a  large  scale, 
the  sittings  with  Mr.  Wilson  seem  to  have  been  full 
of  error,  very  little  comparatively  being  true,  though 
what  was  true  seems  to  have  been  significant.  Mr. 
Clarke's  sittings  also  were  associated  with  much 
that  was  false  or  irrelevant,  especially  in  relation  to 
himself.  Mrs.  Clarke's  incidents,  as  we  have  seen 
above  (p.  152),  were  better.  Professor  Macalis- 
ter's  sitting  was  one  of  the  worst  and  he  spoke  of  the 
failure  in  strong  and  uncomplimentary  language. 
He  thought  it  a  case  of  hystero-epilepsy  and  that 
Mrs.  Piper  was  wide  enough  awake  to  profit  by  sug- 
gestions. He  mentions  several  instances  of  Phinuit's 
statements  that  support  such  an  interpretation.  He 

164      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

thought  Mrs.  Piper  was  not  anaesthetic  in  the  trance, 
a  conclusion  that  is  contradicted  by  the  general  opin- 
ion of  others  and  by  the  severe  tests  to  which  Mrs. 
Piper  has  been  subjected  for  determining  this  very 
matter.  The  anaesthesia  is  not  necessary  for  ex- 
cluding suggestions  and  guessing,  but  these  may  be 
favored  by  its  presence.  The  sitting  also  of  Mr. 
Barkworth  was  practically  a  failure.  He  thought 
the  case  not  more  than  one  "  of  the  ordinary  thought 
reading  kind,"  putting  aside  the  experiments  of  oth- 
ers and  treating  seriously  such  coincidences  as  he 
found  in  his  one  sitting.  Miss  Alice  Johnson's  sit- 
ting, though  associated  with  much  success,  was 
thought  to  be  "  open  to  the  suspicion  of  systematic 
guessing."  Those  of  Prof,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  were 
not  so  strikingly  successful  as  some  others,  though 
there  were  decided  coincidences  in  them  suggesting 
a  telepathic  explanation,  and  only  a  telepathic  ex- 
planation. 

CHAPTER  VI 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT 

Dr.  Hodgson's  first  report  takes  up  several  ques- 
tions which  were  not  discussed  fully  in  the  English 
report.  He  gives  a  lengthy  account  of  some  pecu- 
liarities of  the  trance  and  of  some  tests  to  determine 
the  existence  of  the  trance  and  of  anaesthesia.  The 
history  of  the  Phinuit  "  control "  and  the  hypothesis 
of  fraud  are  discussed  and  the  latter  dismissed  from 
further  consideration  in  the  case.  The  spiritistic 
hypothesis  is  regarded  as  insufficiently  supported  by 
the  evidence  to  assure  its  acceptance.  There  remains, 
then,  for  this  chapter  a  summary  of  the  facts  which 
sustain  the  existence  of  supernormal  powers  in  Mrs. 
Piper.  In  giving  this  summary,  however,  I  shall  not 
distinguish  the  incidents  by  the  class  differences  by 
which  they  have  been  marked  in  the  preceding  chapter. 
I  shall  leave  this  task  to  the  reader,  as  it  will  not  have 
any  further  importance  for  this  book. 

Many  of  the  accounts  in  this  report  do  not  repre- 
sent verbatim  or  stenographic  statements  of  what  oc- 
curred at  the  sittings,  but  depend  upon  the  memories 
of  the  sitters.  They  would  have  been  much  better 
for  the  scientific  treatment  of  the  facts,  if  they  had 
been  more  perfectly  recorded.  But  many  accounts 
were  so  reported  and  the  summary  of  this  report  must 
place  its  stress  upon  the  best  accounts,  though  some 
of  those  not  fully  reported  have  that  kind  of  confirm- 

165 

166     SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ation  that  eliminates  a  too  rigid  scepticism  based  upon 
the  supposition  of  mal-observation  and  defective 
memories.  I  shall  select  cases  also  with  reference  to 
the  difficulty  of  supposing  fraud  to  account  for  them, 
though  I  consider  it  as  excluded  in  fact. 

I  quote  first  the  records  of  a  Miss  W.,  known  to 
Dr.  Hodgson,  who  was  obliged  to  conceal  her  identity 
in  his  report.  She  had  many  sittings  with  Mrs. 
Piper  and  made  careful  and  very  critical  accounts  of 
them.  The  most  complicated  incident  was  the  fol- 
lowing, which  came  in  response  to  a  request  made 
that  the  "  communicator "  write  Miss  W.  a  letter 
through  Phinuit's  dictation  to  another  sitter  and  have 
it  mailed  to  her  by  this  person.  Miss  W.'s  account  is 
as  follows: 

"  On  November  16th,  1886,  Dr.  Phinuit  told  me 
that  T.  (Miss  W.'s  deceased  friend)  was  dictating  a 
letter  to  me.  '  How  will  you  address  it?'  I  asked. 
'  T.  knows  your  address  and  will  give  it  to  the  medi- 
um.' November  29th,  a  friend,  who  had  been  sitting 
with  Mrs.  Piper,  brought  me  word  that  the  promised 
letter  had  been  mailed  to — 

Miss  Nellie  Wilson, 

Care  David  Wilson, 

Reading,  Mass. 

"  By  applying  at  the  post-office  at  Reading  I  was 
able  to  obtain  the  letter.  I  alter  the  names,  but  these 
points  may  be  noted : 

"  1.     My  surname  is  given  correctly. 

"  2.  I  have  a  cousin,  David  Wilson,  of  whose 
relationship  and  friendship  T.  was  well  aware.  His 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       167 

home,    however,    has    always    been    in    New    York. 

"  3.  Reading  was  my  home  during  my  childhood 
and  youth,  but  I  removed  from  it  thirteen  years  ago. 
I  knew  T.  only  subsequent  to  that  removal. 

"  4.  While  living  there  I  wrote  my  name  with  the 
diminutive,  Nellie,  but  since  then  have  preferred  to 
write  my  baptismal  name  Ella,  or  merely  the  initial 
E.  T.  was  wont  to  use  the  initials  merely. 

"At  my  next  sitting,  November  30th,  I  inquired 
about  this  mongrel  address.  '  T.  was  not  strong 
enough,'  said  Phinuit,  '  to  direct  where  the  letter 
should  be  sent,  but  he  thought  your  cousin  David 
would  attend  to  your  getting  it.  Your  other  friends 
here  helped  us  on  the  rest  of  the  address.'  ('  But 
they  would  not  tell  you  to  send  it  to  Reading.') 
'Yes,  they  did.  It  was  Mary  told  us  that.'  '  Non- 
sense,' said  I,  thinking  of  a  sister  of  that  name.  '  Not 
Mary  in  the  body;  Mary  in  the  spirit.'  ('But  I 
have  no  such  friend.')  '  Yes,  you  have.  It  was  Mary 
L. —  Mary  E. —  Mary  E.  Parker  told  us  that.'  I 
then  recalled  a  little  playmate  of  that  name,  a  next 
door  neighbor,  who  moved  away  from  Reading  when 
I  was  ten  years  old,  and  of  whose  death  I  learned  a 
few  years  later.  I  had  scarcely  thought  of  her  for 
twenty  years.  The  E.  in  the  name  I  have  not 
verified." 

The  remarkably  complicated  character  of  these  in- 
cidents is  apparently  inexplicable  on  any  theory  but 
the  most  obvious,  and  illustrates  the  supernormal  very 
clearly.  Miss  W.  adds  another  incident  of  interest. 
"  T.  was  a  western  man,  and  the  localism  of  using  like 
as  a  conjunction  clung  to  him,  despite  my  frequent 

168      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

correction,  all  his  life.  At  my  sitting  on  December 
16th,  1886,  he  remarked,  '  If  you  could  see  it  like 
I  do.'  Forgetful  for  the  instant  of  the  changed  con- 
ditions, I  promptly  repeated,  '  As  I  do.'  'Ah,'  came 
the  response,  '  that  sounds  natural.  That  sounds  like 
old  times.'  " 

"  March  1st,  1888,  he  requested:  '  Throw  off  this 
rug,'  referring  to  a  loose  fur-lined  cloak  which  I  wore. 
I  noted  the  word  as  a  singular  designation  for  such  a 
garment,  and  weeks  after  recalled  that  he  had  once, 
while  living,  spoken  of  it  in  the  same  way  as  I  threw 
it  over  him  on  the  lounge." 

"  March  2nd,  1887,  I  was  asked  by  my  mother  to 
inquire  the  whereabouts  of  two  silver  cups,  heirlooms, 
which  she  had  misplaced.  Said  Dr.  Phinuit,  '  They 
are  in  your  house,  in  a  room  higher  up  than  your 
sleeping  room,  in  what  looks  to  me  the  back  part  of 
the  house,  but  very  likely  I  am  turned  round.  You'll 
find  there  a  large  chest  filled  with  clothing,  and  at 
the  very  bottom  of  the  chest  are  the  cups.  Annie 
(my  mother's  name)  placed  them  there  and  will  re- 
member it.'  Returning  home  I  went  to  a  room  on  the 
third  floor  at  the  front  of  the  house,  but  remotest 
from  the  stairway,  found  the  chest  (of  which  I  knew), 
and  the  contents  (of  which  I  was  ignorant)  both  as 
described,  but  no  silver.  Reporting  the  message  to 
my  mother,  I  learned  that  she  had  at  one  time  kept 
the  cups  in  that  chest,  but  more  recently  had  removed 
them." 

"  February  llth,  1887,  my  sister  L.  wished  me  to 
ask  Phinuit  where  she  should  find  her  missing  card- 
plate.  To  be  thoroughly  explicit,  I  took  her  calling- 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       169 

card  with  me  and  placed  it  in  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  in- 
quiring, '  Where  is  the  plate  from  which  this  is  en- 
graved ?'  Phinuit  replied,  '  You  will  find  it  in  a  box 
with  a  brush  and  a  bottle.  The  box  is  in  the  house 
where  you  live,  in  a  drawer  under  something  that  looks 
like  a  cupboard  or  closet  or  something  of  that  sort. 
There  are  soft  things  cluttered  up  in  the  drawer.'  L. 
and  I  searched  together  all  possible  places,  and  finally 
concluded  that  '  the  cupboard  or  closet '  might  be  the 
stationary  washstand  in  her  bedroom  which  is  set  into 
a  recess  with  shelves  above  and  drawers  below.  The 
second  of  these  drawers,  of  whose  contents  I  knew 
nothing,  we  found  filled  with  loose  pieces  of  woolen 
and  muslin,  and  under  these  pieces  a  small  box.  The 
box  contained  the  specified  box  and  bottle,  but  in- 
stead of  L.'s  card-plate  her  stencil-plate.  We  subse- 
quently wondered  that  the  mention  of  brush  and  bot- 
tle had  not  forewarned  us  of  this  mistake,  but  it  had 
not," 

In  both  these  instances  where  the  sitter  and  other 
living  persons  did  not  know  the  facts  they  were  not 
correctly  given,  and  what  was  known  seems  to  have 
been  correctly  given.  They  strongly  suggest  a  large 
telepathy,  when  that  process  is  once  admitted  to  ex- 
plain any  facts,  conscious  or  subconscious.  Clairvoy- 
ance did  not  answer  the  question,  and  if  clairvoyance 
be  admitted  into  the  case  at  all  it  would  have  been 
natural  to  have  supposed  that  it  would  have  found  the 
articles.  It  failed  just  at  the  point  in  which  living 
minds  were  as  ignorant  of  the  facts  as  Phinuit  seems 
to  have  been. 

"March  15th,"  continues  Miss  W.,  "  T.  observed. 

170      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

'  This  medium  is  good  and  true.  I  am  glad  to  say 
that  because  I  used  to  think  she  was  a  fraud.  Do 
you  remember?'  '  No,  I  didn't  know  you  ever  said 
so,'  thinking  only  of  communications  received  through 
her.  '  Why,  yes,  last  summer,  when  you  sent  her 
a  lock  of  hair.  Don't  you  remember?'  I  then  re- 
called that  during  T.'s  fatal  illness  in  June,  1886,  I 
had  won  his  reluctant  consent  to  send  Mrs.  Piper  a 
lock  of  his  hair.  I  first  heard  of  her  at  that  time, 
and  faintly  hoped  that  a  clairvoyant  might  diagnose 
a  malady  which  physicians  had  failed  to  reach.  The 
diagnosis  proved  worthless,  and  T.  had  freely  charac- 
terised the  whole  thing  as  trickery  and  fraud.  I  have 
never  mentioned  that  correspondence  to  Mrs.  Piper, 
and  since  I  wrote  her  from  a  distant  city  she  is  not 
likely  to  have  associated  it  with  me." 

Even  if  the  correspondence  had  been  so  associated 
this  fact  would  not  account  for  the  mention  of  his 
previous  belief  regarding  Mrs.  Piper.  Her  narrative 
continues : 

"  The  scepticism  of  one  B.,  with  whom  he  had 
much  in  common,  had  seemed  a  matter  of  concern  to 
T.  He  spoke  of  it  November  26th,  1886.  '  I  re- 
member how  we  used  to  talk  about  this  (  spirit  control ) 
and  how  set  against  it  B.  was  —  like  a  wall.  He 
thinks  so  yet.'  December  16th,  1886,  he  again  in- 
troduced the  matter,  saying,  *  I  notice  your  father 
has  a  letter  from  B.  How  strongly  he  holds  his  old 
notions.  He's  determined  not  to  admit  anything,  isn't 
he?'  The  letter,  whose  contents  were  correctly  sum- 
marised, was  received  by  my  father  that  very  morn- 
ing. I  did  not  know  of  its  arrival  until  my  return 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT      171 

home  after  this  sitting.  In  July,  1887,  B.  visited 
my  father  and  the  two  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper. 
At  my  next  visit,  August  5th,  T.  thus  spoke  of  it: 
'  I  have  seen  B.  He  seems  changed  and  so  inquisitive. 
I  do  not  remember  him  so.  But  he  seemed  to  think 
me  different.'  I  learned  afterward  from  my  father 
that  B.'s  conversation  had  been  a  bombardment  of 
questions. 

"  On  one  occasion  my  mother  went  with  my  father 
to  Mrs.  Piper's.  On  my  next  visit,  August  15th, 
1887,  T.  spoke  of  it  with  pleasure,  but  added:  '  This 
seemed  strange.  A  little  while  after  she  was  here  I 
heard  her  say  to  your  father,  '  It  did  not  really  seem 
like  T.'  It  was  on  the  piazza  that  she  said  it.  I 
verified  this  on  reaching  home.  Nothing  of  the  sort 
had  been  said  to  me. 

"  January  5th,  1888,  I  was  told,  *  Here  is  some- 
body who  says  he  is  your  grandfather.  He  is  tall, 
wears  glasses,  and  is  smooth-shaven.'  ('Which 
grandfather?')  'He  gives  his  name  F.'  ('Yes,  it 
must  be  my  grandfather  F.,  if  smooth-shaven'). 
'Well,  it  is.  But  do  you  mean  that  your  grandfather 
E.  wears  a  beard?'  ('  Yes.')  *  I  think  you  must  be 
mistaken.'  ('  No,  I  am  sure  that  he  did.')  '  I  never 
see  him  so,  and  I  see  him  often.'  My  grandfather  E. 
died  before  my  birth,  but  I  felt  sure  that  he  had  been 
described  to  me  as  full-bearded,  like  his  son.  But 
my  father,  when  appealed  to,  disappointed  me.  '  No 
you  are  wrong,'  he  said.  '  I  am  like  him  in  figure  and 
features,  but  not  in  cut  of  beard.  He  was  always 
smooth-shaven.'  " 

There  were  three  prophecies  recorded.     One  was 

172      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

from  a  deceased  friend  giving  her  name  and  saying 
that  another  friend  of  Miss  W.'s,  giving  his  name, 
would  marry  soon.  The  "  communicator  "  was  the 
deceased  wife  of  the  person  named,  her  surviving  hus- 
band. Miss  W.  exclaimed  that  it  was  preposterous, 
and  would  not  believe  that  it  was  her  friend  that  was 
communicating.  But  the  prediction  was  insisted  on 
and  Miss  W.  had  finally  to  admit  that  the  communica- 
tions were  characteristic  of  her  friend,  but  attached  no 
importance  to  the  prediction.  But  the  prophesied 
marriage  occurred  in  a  few  months. 

The  last  prediction  is  very  interesting  and  should 
be  quoted  in  full.  Miss  W.  says :  "  In  the  spring  of 
1888,  an  acquaintance,  S.,  was  suffering  torturing 
disease.  There  was  no  hope  of  relief,  and  only  dis- 
tant prospect  of  release.  A  consultation  of  physicians 
predicted  continued  physical  suffering  and  probably 
mental  decay,  continuing  perhaps  through  a  series  of 
years.  S.'s  daughter,  worn  with  anxiety  and  care, 
was  in  danger  of  breaking  in  health.  '  How  can  I 
get  her  away  for  a  little  rest  ?  '  I  asked  Dr.  Phinuit, 
May  24th,  1888.  '  She  will  not  leave  her  father,'  was 
the  reply,  '  but  his  suffering  is  not  for  long.  The 
doctors  are  wrong  about  that.  There  will  be  a  change 
soon,  and  he  will  pass  out  of  the  body  before  the 
summer  is  over.'  His  death  occurred  in  June,  1888." 

There  have  been  many  such  prophecies  at  various 
sittings,  some  of  them  much  more  complicated  than 
these,  and  whatever  theory  be  adopted  to  explain  them 
it  will  not  be  telepathy. 

I  shall  next  recur  to  some  incidents  in  the  sittings 
of  Dr.  Hodgson.  It  should  be  remembered  that  he 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       17S 

was  a  native  of  Australia,  graduated  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Melbourne,  and  afterwards  came  to  England, 
where  he  had  been  Lecturer  at  Cambridge  University 
before  he  was  sent  to  India  to  investigate  Madame 
Blavatsky.  He  had  come  to  this  country  for  the  first 
time  about  a  fortnight  before  his  first  sitting  with 
Mrs.  Piper.  He  was  introduced,  as  said  above,  by 
Prof.  James. 

At  this  first  sitting,  after  two  or  three  correct  hits 
about  members  of  the  family,  "  Phinuit  mentioned  the 
name  '  Fred.'  I  said  it  might  be  my  cousin.  '  He 
says  you  went  to  school  together.  He  goes  on  jump- 
ing frogs,  and  laughs.  He  says  he  used  to  get  the 
better  of  you.  He  had  convulsive  movements  before 
his  death  struggles.  He  went  off  in  a  sort  of  spasm. 
You  were  not  there.' ; 

Dr.  Hodgson  states  in  a  note :  "  My  cousin  Fred 
far  excelled  any  other  person  that  I  have  seen  in  the 
games  of  leap-frog,  fly  the  garter,  etc.  He  took 
very  long  flying  jumps,  and  whenever  he  played  the 
game  was  lined  by  crowds  of  school-mates  to  watch 
him.  He  injured  his  spine  in  a  gymnasium  in  Mel- 
bourne, Australia,  in  1871,  and  was  carried  to  the 
hospital,  where  he  lingered  for  a  fortnight,  with  oc- 
casional spasmodic  convulsions,  in  one  of  which  he 
died." 

Phinuit  also  described  a  lady  whom  he  said  had 
died,  saying  that  she  had  "  dark  hair,  dark  eyes,  slim 
figure,"  referred  to  two  rings,  and  gave  her  name 
not  quite  correctly.  Dr.  Hodgson  knew  nothing 
of  the  rings,  but  the  lady  died  in  Australia  in 
1879.  Among  a  number  of  names  mentioned  that  of 

174      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

"  Charlie  "  and  "  Marie  "  were  given  and  Dr.  Hodg- 
son afterward  recalled  a  friend  by  this  name  who  had 
died  in  India  in  1885  probably,  and  a  lady  by  the 
name  of  "  Marie "  who  had  been  engaged  to  this 
friend.  Phinuit  also  said  that  Dr.  Hodgson's 
younger  sister  was  married  and  had  three  children  and 
that  another,  a  boy,  would  be  born  soon.  This  was 
May  4th,  and  before  the  end  of  the  month  a  boy  was 
born  to  this  sister.  The  number  of  children  mentioned 
was  also  correct. 

At  the  second  sitting  some  months  later,  Phinuit 
mentioned  the  lady  indicated  in  the  first  sitting  and 
"  referred  to  a  black  lace  collar,  with  a  pin  with  a 
head,  also  a  ring  with  a  stone,"  and  said  she  wanted 
the  pin  and  the  ring  to  be  given  to  him.  He  recalls 
the  collar  distinctly,  and  the  pin  vaguely,  but  not  the 
"  ring  with  a  stone."  Later  in  the  sitting  a  reference 
to  the  beautiful  teeth  of  this  lady  was  made,  which 
was  false,  and  the  statement  that  "  she  wanted  me  to 
keep  the  book  of  poems  always  with  me,  the  book 
which  I  had  sent  her,  and  had  received  back.  I 
should  recollect  the  writing  in  front  of  it,  which  I 
had  written  myself."  Dr.  Hodgson's  note  states :  "  I 
had  lent  '  Q.'  The  Princess  (Tennyson),  which  had 
been  returned.  It  is  the  only  book  in  my  possession, 
and  I  think  the  only  book  of  any  kind,  which  I  ever 
lent  her.  This  book  is  now  (1887)  with  most  of  my 
other  books  in  England.  It  was  my  custom  at  that 
time  to  write  favorite  lines  on  the  fly-leaves  of  special 
books.  I  do  not  recall  with  certainty  what  lines,  if 
any,  I  had  written  in  this  book." 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT      175 

The  third  sitting  was  practically  a  failure  and 
was  an  attempt  at  clairvoyance.  At  the  fourth  sitting 
some  very  interesting  matter  was  obtained.  It  refers 
especially  to  three  complex  sets  of  facts,  with  some 
minor  incidents  of  considerable  evidential  importance. 
The  first  set  refer  to  the  lady  called  "  Q."  in  his  re- 
port. I  quote  it  in  full : 

"  Information    purporting   to   have    been   received 
from  '  Q.'     The  chief  new  matter  was : 
"  (a)      That  I  had  given  her  a  book,  «  Dr.  Phinuit ' 
thinks  of  poems,  and  I  had  written  her  name 
in  it.      [Correct.] 

"  (b)      [Correct.     This  includes  a  reference 

to  circumstances  under  which  I  had  a  very 
special  conversation  with  '  Q.'  I  think  it  im- 
possible that  '  Q.'  could  have  spoken  of  this 
to  any  other  person.  It  occurred  in  Aus- 
tralia in  1875.] 

"  (c)  That  she  left  the  body  in  England,  and  that 
I  was  across  the  country.  [This  is  incor- 
rect. *  Q.'  died  in  Australia.  I  was  in  Eng- 
land.] 

This  was  followed  by  references  again  to  his  cousin 
Fred.  The  chief  new  matter  with  reference  to  him 
was: 

"  (a)  That  I  was  not  there  when  he  swung  on 
the  trapeze  and  fell  and  injured  his  spine, 
finally  dying  in  a  convulsion.  [At  my 
first  sitting  the  accident  was  not  described, 
only  the  death,  at  which  I  was  rightly  said 
not  to  have  been  present.  At  this  sitting 

176      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

the  accident  was  described,  at  which  also 
I  was  rightly  said  not  to  have  been  pres- 
ent.] 

"  (b)  That  he  wanted  to  remind  me  of  Harris  at 
school,  who  was  a  very  able  man,  etc.  [I 
believe  it  was  also  stated  that  Fred  and 
myself  talked  about  Harris,  and  that  Har- 
ris had  a  high  opinion  of  Fred's  ability. 
This  was  all  true;  Harris  was  a  school- 
master who  taught  Fred  and  myself  (Mel- 
bourne, Australia)  about  1868  or  1869. 
I  saw  Harris,  I  think,  a  short  time  after 
my  cousin's  death  (in  1871),  and  he  ex- 
pressed regrets,  etc.  I  do  not  recall  hav- 
ing seen  or  heard  anything  of  Harris 
since.] 
"  (c)  That  his  father  was  my  mother's  brother. 

[True.]" 

At  the  same  sitting  Phinuit  said  that  Dr.  Hodg- 
son had  lost  his  keys  near  some  mountains  and  that 
they  were  lying  near  a  walk  by  some  leaves,  and  that 
"  they  wrere  on  a  ring,  something  different  from  the 
holder  of  the  keys  in  her  (Mrs.  Piper's)  hand.  What 
held  the  keys  was  round."  A  new  set  of  keys  had 
been  put  into  Mrs.  Piper's  hand.  Dr.  Hodgson  adds 
the  note :  "  I  had  lost  my  keys  in  the  Adirondack 
mountains,  and  hunted  vainly  for  them.  They  were 
found  after  my  departure  from  camp  on  a  spot  an- 
swering to  '  Phinuit's  '  description.  Before  their  re- 
covery, however,  I  had  been  compelled  to  obtain  dupli- 
cates of  most  of  my  keys,  and  had  fastened  them  on 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       177 

a  heart-shaped  holder.     The  old  keys  were  fastened 
on  a  common  key-ring" 

At  the  fifth  sitting  further  striking  coincidences 
occurred.  The  record  was :  "  Fred  says  you  came 
from  Australia.  [True.]  Lady  '  Q.'  says  so,  too; 
says  she  was  there  and  knew  you  there,  and  used  to  be 
a  great  friend  of  your  sister.  [True.]  You  heard 
about  her  death  by  letter  from  your  sister.  [True.] 

"  You  went  into  Germany.  Fred  went  with  you  in 
spirit.  You  went  to  Germany  after  father  went  into 
spirit.  (No.)  Got  awfully  provoked  with  a  lady 
in  Germany.  You  said  she  was  deceitful,  called  her 
a  storyteller.  [True.  While  in  Germany,  in  1882, 
I  charged  a  lady  with  falsehood  under  somewhat  pecu- 
liar circumstances.  My  father  died  in  1885.]  ' 

At  the  fourth  sitting  Dr.  Hodgson  had  asked  Phi- 
nuit  to  give  him  a  detailed  description  of  "  Q.'s  "  face. 
The  description  at  the  fifth  sitting  was  wrong  except 
in  general  characteristics.  At  the  sixth  sitting  the 
following  took  place,  and  is  minutely  described  in  the 
report : 

"  Phinuit  referred  to  '  Q.,'  said  she  spoke  of  a  Loo 
—  something.  [Louie  was  the  name  of  a  cousin  of 
'  Q.,'  very  intimate  with  '  Q.'  and  myself  in  child- 
hood.] Said  her  full  name  was  '  Q.'  A—  — .  Is 
that  right?  (No.)  Well,  she  says  '  Q.'  A- 

[A is  the  surname  of  other  cousins  of  '  Q.,' 

who  frequently  stayed  at  her  house,  and  were  well 
known  to  me.] 

"  Phinuit  then  proceeded  to  give  a  general  descrip- 
tion of  '  Q.,'  right  so  far  as  it  went,  and  described  the 

178      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

eyes  as  '  dark.'  She  then  began  to  rub  the  right  eye 
on  the  under  side,  saying,  '  There's  a  spot  here.  This 
eye  (left)  is  brown,  the  other  eye  has  a  spot  in  it  of 
a  light  color,  in  the  iris.  This  spot  is  straggly,  of  a 
bluish  cast.  It  is  a  birthmark.  It  looks  as  if  it 
had  been  thrown  on." 

Phinuit  was  asked  to  describe  its  shape.  His  an- 
swer was :  "  It  is  like  this,  running  in  towards  the 
pupil."  He  then  traced  on  the  little  finger  nail 
an  acute  angled  triangle  with  apex  upward,  and  when 
he  was  asked  to  draw  it  a  representation  of  the  eyes 
was  drawn  with  the  spot  in  the  right  relation  to  the 
pupil  and  with  the  right  shape,  as  indicated  by  Dr. 
Hodgson's  statement  and  reproduction  of  the  spot  as 
he  remembered  it.  He  says  in  his  note :  "  '  Q.'  had  a 
splash  of  what  I  should  call  grey  (rather  than  blue) 
in  the  right  eye,  occupying  the  position  and  having 
very  nearly  the  shape  assigned  by  Phinuit.  It  was 
very  peculiar;  a  little  jagged  in  the  edges,  and  sharp- 
ly and  distinctly  marked  off  from  the  rest  of  the  brown 
iris.  I  asked  Phinuit  how  he  obtained  the  informa- 
tion about  the  eyes.  He  said  that  '  Q.'  was  standing 
close  to  him  and  showing  him  her  right  eye  so  that 
he  could  see  it  clearly,  and  saying  that  that  was  what 
I  wanted.  This  peculiarity  in  the  eye  was  what  I  had 
in  my  mind  when  I  asked  Phinuit  for  a  detailed  de- 
scription of  '  Q.'s  '  face." 

This  is  an  extraordinary  set  of  incidents  and  cer- 
tainly exclude  chance  with  an  emphasis,  and  they  are 
not  all  the  incidents  having  significance.  If  we  con- 
sider fraud  out  of  the  question  we  have  the  super- 
normal of  some  kind  incontestably  evident,  and  it  will 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       179 

be  as  little  questioned  that  the  facts  are  relevant  to 
the  claim  of  spirit  agency. 

An  incident  narrated  by  Prof.  James  is  worth  men- 
tioning. Mrs.  James  and  his  brother  went  to  a  sitting 
and  were  told  that  "  Aunt  Kate,  referred  to  also  as 
Mrs.  Walsh,  had  died  about  2  or  2:30  in  the  morn- 
ing." They  stopped  at  the  office  of  the  Society  on 
the  way  home  and  recorded  the  fact  before  any  veri- 
fication of  it  came,  though  they  were  expecting  her 
death.  "  On  reaching  home,"  says  Prof.  James,  "  an 
hour  later,  I  found  a  telegram  as  follows :  '  Aunt  Kate 
passed  away  a  few  minutes  after  midnight — E.  R. 
Walsh.'  The  telegram  was  sent  from  New  York, 
where  the  aunt  had  died.  Mrs.  James  states  that 
during  the  sitting  the  "  control  "  said  when  mention- 
ing that  Aunt  Kate  had  died,  "  that  I  would  find  a 
'  letter  or  telegram  '  when  I  got  home,  saying  that  she 
had  gone."  Later,  this  Kate  Walsh  purported  to 
"  control  and  communicate." 

Another  very  remarkable  set  of  incidents  is  the 
following  by  a  gentleman  whose  name  is  reserved,  but 
who  gave  the  initials  "  M.  N."  His  wife  corrobo- 
rates the  incidents  as  told  by  him. 

"  About  the  end  of  March  last  year  (1888)  I  made 
her  (Mrs.  Piper)  a  visit  (having  been  in  the  habit  of 
doing  so,  since  early  in  February,  about  once  a  fort- 
night). She  told  me  that  a  death  of  a  near  relative 
of  mine  would  occur  in  about  six  weeks,  from  which 
I  should  realise  some  pecuniary  advantages.  I  natur- 
ally thought  of  my  father,  who  was  advanced  in  years, 
and  whose  description  Mrs.  Piper  had  given  me  very 
accurately  some  week  or  two  previously.  She  had 

180      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

not  spoken  of  him  as  my  father,  but  merely  as  a  per- 
son nearly  connected  with  me.  I  asked  her  at  that 
sitting  whether  this  person  was  the  one  who  would 
die,  but  she  declined  to  state  anything  more  clearly  to 
me.  My  wife,  to  whom  I  was  then  engaged,  went  to 
see  Mrs.  Piper  a  few  days  afterwards,  and  she  told  her 
(my  wife)  that  my  father  would  die  in  a  few  weeks. 

"  About  the  middle  of  May  my  father  died  very 
suddenly  in  London  from  heart  failure,  when  he  was 
recovering  from  a  very  slight  attack  of  bronchitis,  and 
the  very  day  that  his  doctor  had  pronounced  him  out 
of  danger.  Previous  to  this  Mrs.  Piper  (as  Dr.  Phi- 
nuit)  had  told  me  that  she  would  endeavor  to  influence 
my  father  about  certain  matters  connected  with  his 
will  before  he  died.  Two  days  after  I  received  the 
cable  announcing  his  death  my  wife  and  I  went  to 
see  Mrs.  Piper,  and  she  (Phinuit)  spoke  of  his  pres- 
ence, and  his  sudden  arrival  in  the  spirit-world,  and 
said  that  he  (Dr.  Phinuit)  had  endeavored  to  persuade 
him  in  those  matters  while  my  father  was  sick.  Dr. 
Phinuit  told  me  the  state  of  the  will,  and  described 
the  principal  executor,  and  said  that  he  (the  execu- 
tor) would  make  a  certain  disposition  in  my  favor, 
sub j  ect  to  the  consent  of  the  two  other  executors,  when 
I  got  to  London,  England.  Three  weeks  afterwards 
I  arrived  in  London ;  found  the  principal  executor 
to  be  the  man  Dr.  Phinuit  had  described.  The  will 
went  materially  as  he  stated.  The  disposition  was 
made  in  my  favor,  and  my  sister,  who  was  chiefly  at 
my  father's  bedside  the  last  three  days  of  his  life,  told 
me  that  he  had  repeatedly  complained  of  the  presence 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT      181 

of  an  old  man  at  the  foot  of  his  bed,  who  annoyed  him 
by  discussing  his  private  affairs." 

A  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  (full  names  not  given)  from 
Detroit,  Michigan,  and  never  seen  or  known  by  Mrs. 
Piper,  report  a  very  interesting  sitting  with  inci- 
dents of  the  kind  that  are  relevant  to  spirit  agency. 
Mr.  J.  Rogers  Rich  also  reports  similar  incidents 
with  others  of  a  supernormal  type  not  suggestive  of 
spirit  identity.  There  are  many  other  cases  of  the 
same  type  in  this  report  which  it  would  take  too  much 
space  to  quote.  I  shall  close,  however,  with  one  re- 
ported by  Dr.  Minot  J.  Savage  and  his  brother,  Rev. 
W.  H.  Savage.  I  shall  greatly  abbreviate  it. 

Mr.  W.  H.  Savage  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper 
and  after  "  several  remarkable  "'  incidents  she  ( Phi- 
nuit)  said:  "Ah!  Here  is  somebody  from  the  out- 
side —  he  says  his  name  is  Robert  West.  He  wants 
to  send  a  message  to  your  brother."  Apparently  this 
Robert  West  took  control;  for  there  immediately  fol- 
lowed :  "  I  wrote  an  article  against  his  work  in  The 
Advance.  I  thought  he  was  wrong,  but  he  was 
right."  When  asked  to  describe  him  he  was  described 
in  language  which  Mr.  W.  H.  Savage  says  "  was 
photographic  in  its  truth."  Phinuit  said :  "  He  died 
of  hemorrhage  of  the  kidneys."  A  little  more  than 
two  weeks  later  Dr.  Minot  J.  Savage,  the  brother, 
had  a  sitting,  and  this  Robert  West  purported  to  com- 
municate with  him.  He  said  that  he  had  been  buried 
in  Alton,  Illinois,  and  gave  the  epitaph  or  text  on  his 
tombstone,  saying  that  it  was  "  Fervent  in  spirit, 
serving  the  Lord."  On  inquiry  of  an  editor  of  a 
newspaper  in  Alton  it  was  found  that  the  Rev.  Robert 

182      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

West  was  buried  there  and  that  the  text  on  his  tomb- 
stone was  exactly  as  said.  Mr.  W.  H.  Savage  had 
personally  known  this  Robert  West  in  Jacksonville, 
Illinois,  and  he  had  been  editor  of  The  Advance  in 
Chicago,  and  had  written  a  severe  criticism  of  Dr. 
Minot  J.  Savage's  doctrines  and  work,  Dr.  Savage 
being  a  Unitarian  and  Mr.  West  a  Congregationalist. 
Mr.  W.  H.  Savage  had  not  seen  the  criticism  and  Dr. 
Minot  J.  Savage  did  not  know  that  Mr.  West  was 
dead.  Both  Mr.  W.  H.  Savage  and  Dr.  Minot  J. 
Savage  did  not  know  the  cause  of  Mr.  West's  death, 
and  on  inquiry  of  The  Advance  his  death  was  ascer- 
tained, and  in  the  Congregational  Year  Book  it  is 
stated  that  he  died  of  Bright's  disease  on  October  25th, 
1886,  a  little  more  than  two  years  before  the  sitting. 
At  the  same  sitting  of  Dr.  Minot  J.  Savage  the  death 
of  a  Rev.  C.  L.  Goodell  was  correctly  announced,  but 
was  not  known  by  Dr.  Savage  until  verified  after- 
wards. 

The  apparent  character  of  these  facts  is  evident 
to  any  one  and  I  need  not  comment  upon  them.  But 
there  are  many  in  the  report  which  do  not  clearly 
support  the  suggestions  indicated  by  such  as  I  have 
quoted,  and  perhaps  lead  to  serious  scepticism  of  the 
spiritistic  interpretation  of  any  of  them.  I  shall 
quote  the  most  important  cases  at  sufficient  length  to 
make  them  intelligible.  I  quote  Dr.  Hodgson's  sum- 
mary: 

Dr.  Hodgson  secured  a  lock  of  hair  from  a  lady 
by  the  name  of  Mrs.  Holmes  and  took  it  to  Mrs.  Piper 
for  experiment  after  the  usual  manner  with  mediums. 
The  object  was  to  find  out  what  Mrs.  Holmes  was 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       183 

doing  at  that  time.  "  According  to  her  annotations, 
the  following  statements  made  by  Phinuit  were  ap- 
proximately correct  as  regards  her  doings  close  to  and 
during  the  hour  of  the  experiment,  but  Phinuit's  de- 
scription did  not  coincide  exactly  in  time  with  her 
actions,  but  was  given  about  half  an  hour  after. 
Phinuit  stated  that  she  trimmed  some  flowers  and  put 
them  in  a  vase;  that  she  sat  down  at  a  desk  to  write, 
and  that  Charles  was  on  the  paper  in  front  of  her; 
that  she  went  to  the  window  to  speak  to  a  man,  that 
she  pulled  something  down  at  the  window  and  returned 
to  the  desk ;  that  she  '  pawed  over  a  box  of  things.' 
Phinuit  also  stated,  incorrectly,  that  she  had  a  parcel 
like  a  book  in  her  hand  that  she  had  been  reading, 
had  thrown  a  wrap  over  her  head,  had  on  a  dark 
dress  with  little  light  spots  in  it,  was  doing  some- 
thing to  a  picture,  and,  later,  was  doing  something 
with  a  brush." 

Dr.  Hodgson  repeated  the  experiment  with  Mrs. 
Holmes,  after  asking  her  to  take  note  of  her  doings 
at  certain  specified  hours,  and  the  result  was  that 
Phinuit  was  wrong  in  his  account  of  what  she  was 
doing  at  the  times  specified,  but  apparently  correct 
in  many  incidents  of  past  experience,  some  of  them 
occurring  "  as  recently  as  half  an  hour  previously." 
Dr.  Hodgson  states  a  similar  conclusion  in  regard  to 
'  the  attempts  of  Phinuit  to  describe  his  doings  "  on 
a  certain  occasion  when  he  was  far  from  Boston  and 
Miss  Edmunds  holding  the  sitting,  though  "  Phinuit 
seems  to  have  given  more  correct  information  concern- 
ing his  actual  doings  than  can  be  accounted  for  by 
mere  chance,"  apparently  indicating  a  "  supernormal 

184      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

faculty  for  getting  knowledge  beyond  that  of  thought 
transference  from  the  sitter." 

Some  other  experiments  of  a  similar  kind,  an  article 
or  trinket  being  placed  in  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  resulted 
in  similar  supernormal  information,  the  facts  some- 
times not  being  known,  at  least  in  part,  by  the  sitter. 
"  The  '  piece  of  embroidery  '  tried  by  Mr.  Rich  pro- 
duced the  name  of  the  sailor  who  made  it.  More  im- 
portant still,  Mr.  Rich  took  a  box,  of  the  contents  of 
which  he  knew  nothing,  and  Phinuit  described  cor- 
rectly the  person,  X.,  who  gave  Mr.  Rich  the  box,  the 
person  Y.,  who  had  provided  X.  with  the  article  for 
the  experiment,  and  the  person  Q.,  who  had  given  the 
article  to  Y.  The  article  in  the  box  was  described 
by  Phinuit  as  a  '  charm  '  and  '  glittering,'  and  as  hav- 
ing been  brought  from  '  far  off  over  the  sea ' ;  it  was 
a  carved  '  but  not  glittering '  button  brought  from 
Japan,  and  '  latterly  worn  as  a  charm  with  a  gold 
attachment.'  Miss  Edmunds  was  correctly  told  that 
her  locket  brought  her  grandmother's  '  influence,'  and 
that  she  had  had  it  since  she  was  a  little  girl,"  the  fact 
being  known,  of  course,  to  Miss  Edmunds. 

"  Miss  A.  took  with  her  to  the  sitting  three  articles, 
of  the  history  of  which  she  knew  nothing  —  a  locket, 
a  ring,  and  a  watch.  The  locket  she  obtained  the 
evening  before  through  a  lady  friend  whom  she  met 
by  accident  in  the  street.  This  friend,  at  Miss  A.'s 
request  for  a  '  personal  article  of  an  individual  un- 
known to  her,'  called  at  the  office  of  a  gentleman  whom 
Miss  A.  had  never  seen  (she  '  knew  only  his  surname 
in  a  casual  way  ')  and  procured  from  him  the  locket. 
It  was  wrapped  in  a  paper  envelope,  and  Miss  A.  did 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT      185 

not  look  at  it  till  the  sitting  was  over.  Inter  alia,  the 
owner  of  the  locket  was  correctly  described  as  being 
physically  well,  handsome,  of  light  hair  and  com- 
plexion, as  having  a  big  head,  and  as  being  immensely 
extravagant,  as  writing  and  dictating  (letters,  etc.) 
a  great  deal.  Phinuit  stumbled  round  and  about  the 
names  Joseph  and  George  in  his  attempts  to  get  the 
owner's  Christian  name,  mentioning  both  (and  also 
we  must  add  Judson)  without  affirming  either  to  be  the 
name.  Joseph  George  were  the  owner's  first  names. 
After  the  locket  was  opened,  which  contained  a  picture 
of  the  owner's  mother  on  one  side  and  some  hair  of  his 
father  and  mother  on  the  other,  Phinuit  correctly  got 
the  father's  and  mother's  '  influence  '  from  the  hair, 
and  apparently  connected  the  name  Elizabeth  with  the 
hair  and  the  picture,  Elizabeth  being  the  name  of  the 
owner's  mother.  There  seemed,  indeed,  to  be  some 
confusion  between  the  '  influences  '  of  the  owner  and 
those  of  the  mother ;  and  in  connection  with  the  latter, 
apparently,  various  names  were  given,  of  which  the 
owner  knows  nothing.  He  knows,  however,  very  little 
of  the  mother's  family,  and  apparently  is  not  inter- 
ested enough  to  make  the  inquiries  necessary  for  cor- 
roboration. 

"  Miss  A.  knew,  but  not  intimately,  the  owner  of 
the  ring  and  the  watch.  Phinuit  said  that  the  ring 
brought  a  bad  influence  —  that  there  was  an  insane 
lady  connected  with  it  who  began  to  lose  her  mind  at 
an  early  age,  and  that  another  person  connected  with 
it  died  with  cancer.  Concerning  the  watch  Phinuit 
said  that  it  came  across  the  water  many  years  ago, 
had  been  in  Italy ;  that  it  had  the  '  influence '  of  a 

186      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

gentleman  who  had  died ;  that  the  owner  had  a  sister 
named  Annie.  The  name  Elizabeth,  Eliza,  Lizzie  was 
given  in  connection  with  the  watch.  Phinuit  said  that 
he  saw  the  watch  in  a  box  with  other  trinkets  kept  in 
cotton.  The  names  John,  Joseph,  and  Jennie,  were 
finally  given.  All  these  details  proved  to  be  cor- 
rect, except  the  name  Jennie,  the  owner's  mother  being 
named  Jesse  (Jessie?). 

"  The  name  of  a  relative,  Henry,  was  given  as 
having  been  connected  with  some  '  printing '  estab- 
lishment, and  also  the  name  Davis.  It  was  further 
stated  that  a  Henry  gave  the  watch  to  Elizabeth.  I 
presume  that  these  details  were  incorrect,  though  the 
report  is  not  quite  clear  upon  this  point.  The  present 
owner  was  wrongly  called  a  man. 

"  The  ring  and  watch,  it  appears,  were  kept  in  the 
same  box.  John,  a  *  bad  character,'  had  given  the 
ring  to  the  present  owner,  who  suspected  him  of  hav- 
ing stolen  it.  John's  father  had  repudiated  a  debt 
to  the  owner's  mother ;  he  died  of  cancer  in  the  stom- 
ach. The  owner's  sister,  named  Elizabeth,  and  called 
Eliza  and  Lizzie,  suffered  a  great  fright  at  the  age 
of  three  years,  from  being  left  alone  in  a  burning 
house,  and  '  gradually  became  entirely  idiotic.'  She 
was  for  many  years  under  the  sole  charge  of  the 
owner  of  the  ring,  and  as  the  watch  amused  her,  it 
was  frequently  given  to  her  by  the  present  owner's 
mother,  to  whom  it  came  at  the  death  of  the  Uncle 
Joseph.  The  watch,  Geneva  make,  had  been  bought 
abroad  by  Joseph,  who  lived  for  some  time  in  Italy. 
Several  additional  correct  statements  which  were  made 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       187 

in  connection  with  the  articles,  but  not  mentioned  in 
the  report,  were  regarded  as  too  private  for  publi- 
cation. 

"  Miss  A.'s  own  view  appears  to  be  a  form  of  that 
suggested  by  several  previous  reports,  and  particu- 
larly in  connection  with  Mrs.  Blodgett's  experiments, 
that  the  information  given  by  Phinuit  was  obtained 
in  some  way  from  the  objects  themselves,  to  the  ex- 
clusion, that  is,  of  individual  minds  either  of  the 
living  or  the  dead.  Miss  A.  stated,  in  reply  to  my 
inquiry,  that  Phinuit  did  not  profess  to  obtain  his 
information  (concerning  the  objects)  from  '  spirits.' 
'  He  gave  no  intimation  that  he  was  getting  his  facts 
from  any  one,  *  in  '  or  '  out  of  the  body  ' ;  the  im- 
pression conveyed  was  rather  that  he  was  ferreting 
about  for  himself  in  some  obscure  way  for  the  in- 
formation asked.'  It  is  probable,  however,  that  if 
Phinuit  had  been  questioned  on  this  point  he  would 
have  claimed  that  his  information  was  derived  from 
the  deceased. 

"Thus  (March  21st,  1888),  Phinuit:  'Who's 
Margaret  in  your  family?'  (R.  H.  '  Can't  you  tell 
me  that?')  Phinuit:  'It's  your  mother.'  [Correct.] 
(R.  H.:  'Who  told  you  that?')  Phinuit:  'Your 
father.' 

"  Again,  I  placed  in  Phinuit's  hands  a  pencil  case 
with  the  initials  J.  B.  upon  it,  saying  that  I  had 
received  it  from  a  friend  who  wanted  to  be  told  who 
gave  it  to  him.  The  name  of  John  B —  -  was  given 
correctly,  but  he  has  a  middle  name  which  was  not 
given  at  all.  (That  he  had  a  middle  name  was  known 

188      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

to  me  at  the  time,  though  I  cannot  recall  that  I  had 
ever  heard  what  it  was,  beyond  the  initial  letter.) 
Then : 

"  '  George  gave  it  to  him.  I  get  the  influence  of 
Ellinor  and  Palline,  and  a  young  man.  No,  it  wasn't 
George ;  cross  that  out.  It  was  Harry  or  Henry,  and 
Harry's  sister's  influence  was  connected  with  it  before 
he  gave  it  to  him.  That  is  all  I  can  tell  you.  (How 
did  you  get  to  know  this?)  J-  -  B—  -'s  wife  in 
spirit  told  me.  She's  gone  away  now.' 

"  Pauline  is  the  name  of  Mr.  B.'s  eldest  daughter, 
and  Eleanor  is  the  name  of  one  of  her  most  intimate 
friends.  But  Miss  B.  and  two  other  members  of  Mr. 
B.'s  family  (not  himself)  had  previously  had  a  sitting 
each  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the  names  Eleanor  and 
Pauline  had  been  given  at  Miss  B.'s  sitting,  at  which 
her  mother,  deceased,  was  also  referred  to.  All  that 
was  correct  was  in  my  mind,  consciously  or  subcon- 
sciously, but  what  I  desire  specially  to  emphasise  here 
is  that  while  Phinuit's  language  —  about  '  getting  in- 
fluence,' etc. —  did  not  suggest  the  '  spirit '  hypothe- 
sis, but  rather  the  contrary,  he  claimed,  on  being 
questioned,  that  he  received  his  information  from  a 
'  spirit.'  Further,  he  has  recently  expressly  dis- 
claimed any  power  of  obtaining  information  from  ob- 
jects themselves  independently  of  specific  personali- 
ties." 

I  have  myself  in  several  instances  found  that  cases, 
superficially,  presented  no  claims  to  spiritistic  origin, 
but  wThen  careful  inquiries  were  made,  whether  about 
the  "  medium  "  or  directly  of  the  alleged  "  communi- 
cator "  the  invariable  answer  has  been  some  person- 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       189 

ality  not  living.  I  cannot  say  that  the  cases  are 
evidential,  but  they  exhibit  the  form  of  the  phenom- 
enon with  which  we  often  have  to  deal  when  it  has 
no  external  claims  to  a  spiritistic  source. 

But  the  most  interesting  of  all  the  cases  in  Dr. 
Hodgson's  report  which  I  am  summarising  is  probably 
that  which  I  shall  call  the  Hannah  Wild  incident  or 
incidents.  I  shall  abbreviate  it  for  its  essential  points. 

Miss  Hannah  Wild  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  Blodgett, 
had  frequently  talked  over  the  possibility  of  spirit  re- 
turn, and  the  former  promised  to  write  a  letter,  whose 
contents  she  would  reveal  after  death,  if  any  such 
thing  as  communication  from  the  dead  were  possible. 
It  was  sometime,  however,  before  she  was  persuaded 
to  write  the  letter.  "  One  day,  about  a  week  before 
she  died,  she  said:  'Bring  me  pen  and  paper.  If 
spirit  return  is  true,  the  world  should  know.  I  will 
write  the  letter.' :  She  wrote  the  letter  and  inclosed 
it  in  a  tin  box,  and  when  she  handed  it  to  her  sister, 
she  said :  "  If  I  can  come  back,  it  will  be  like  ringing 
the  City  Hall  bell."  "She  spoke  about  the  letter 
often."  Miss  Hannah  Wild  died  July  28th,  1886. 
Toward  the  latter  part  of  the  same  year  Mrs.  Blodgett 
saw  in  a  paper  a  notice  of  the  Society  for  Psychical 
Research  in  which  the  name  of  Prof.  James  was  men- 
tioned, and  it  led  to  correspondence  and  her  telling 
him  what  she  had  for  a  test.  Prof.  James  proposed 
trying  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the  letter  was  sent  to  him 
properly  sealed.  Some  articles  that  had  been  worn 
by  Miss  Wild  were  sent  to  Prof.  James  and  by  him 
to  Mr.  J.  M.  Piper,  where  Mrs.  Piper  was  living  at 
the  time,  and  the  nature  of  the  test  explained  without 

190      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

giving  any  names.  The  letter  remained  in  the  pos- 
session of  Prof.  James. 

At  this  first  experiment,  Mrs.  Blodgett  not  being 
present  and  her  name  not  being  known,  "  Phinuit  ob- 
tained the  name  of  Hannah  Wild,  and  perhaps  some 
perception  of  her  connection  with  the  Woman's  Jour- 
nal, in  which  she  was  interested  and  to  whose  pages 
she  had  contributed,  also  the  name  of  her  sister,  Bessie 
(Mrs.  Blodgett),  to  whom  she  was  to  give  the  test, 
and  some  impression  concerning  the  then  recent  mar- 
riage of  this  sister.  Beyond  these  facts  practically 
nothing  correct  was  obtained.  Mr.  Piper  had  numer- 
ous sittings  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  the  details 
of  what  Phinuit  gave  as  the  death-bed  letter,  and  was 
confident  that  he  had  been  conversing  with  the  spirit 
of  Hannah  Wild ;  yet  the  description  of  her  personal 
appearance  was  almost  entirely  wrong.  Phinuit's  let- 
ter contained  no  hint  of  the  substance  of  the  real 
letter,  which  Mrs.  Blodgett  forwarded  to  Prof.  James 
for  comparison  with  Phinuit's  statements,  and  the 
numerous  circumstances  referred  to  in  Phinuit's  letter 
had  scarcely  any  relation  to  the  life  of  Hannah  Wild. 
They  were  chiefly  a  tissue  of  incorrect  statements. 
The  result  so  far  suggested  that  however  Phinuit  suc- 
ceeded in  obtaining  the  names  and  other  impressions 
which  proved  to  be  more  or  less  correct,  he  at  least 
did  not  get  them  from  the  '  spirit '  of  Hannah  Wild." 

The  next  experiment  was  made  with  Mrs.  Blodgett 
and  Dr.  Hodgson  present,  Dr.  Hodgson  taking  notes. 
The  sitting  had  been  arranged  before  and  no  names 
were  mentioned,  so  that  Mrs.  Piper  apparently  had  no 
normal  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  the  sitter  to  the 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT       191 

letter,  whose  contents  it  was  desirable  to  obtain.  At 
the  first  shot  came  the  following : 

"  You  have  a  sister  here,  and  did  you  ever  find  out 
about  that  letter  ?  Anna.  Hannah.  Hannah  Wild. 
She  calls  you  Bessie  Blodgett.  You  was  in  an  audi- 
ence and  a  message  was  thrown  to  you.  She'll  tell 
you  all  about  that.  How's  the  Society  —  the  women 
you  know.  Moses.  He's  in  the  body.  I  want  to  tell 
you  about  that  letter." 

The  pertinence  of  some  of  the  incidents  here  will  be 
apparent  without  comment.  The  name  Moses  seems 
not  to  have  been  recognisable  by  Mrs.  Blodgett.  She 
had  been  at  Lake  Pleasant,  where  a  "  medium,"  John 
Slater,  had  said,  pointing  to  Mrs.  Blodgett  in  a  large 
audience :  "  Lady  here  who  wants  to  have  you  know 
she  is  here.  Henry,  the  lame  man,  is  with  her.  She 
wants  to  know  about  the  big  silk  handkerchief.  Says 
she  will  tell  you  what  is  in  that  paper  soon."  The 
name  Henry  was  also  alluded  to  at  this  sitting  with 
Mrs.  Piper,  and  Mrs.  Blodgett  says :  "  This  Henry 
was  my  mother's  only  male  cousin,  and  she  had  lived 
with  him  all  her  life  until  she  was  married.  He  was 
lame." 

A  little  later  in  this  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  came 
the  question,  purporting  to  be  from  Hannah  Wild: 
"  Do  you  remember  I  told  you  it  would  be  like  ring- 
ing church  bells?"  With  the  substitution  of  "  church 
bell  "  for  "  City  Hall  bell,"  the  reader  will  recall  that 
this  was  the  statement  made  by  Hannah  Wild,  living, 
when  she  handed  the  letter  in  the  box  to  her  sister, 
but  when  asked  just  after  this  allusion  to  tell  the 
contents  of  the  letter  the  reply  was  irrelevant.  Five 

192      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

attempts  to  obtain  the  contents  of  the  letter  were 
entire  failures,  though  in  the  process  of  the  experi- 
ments a  large  number  of  true  incidents  were  given 
through  Mrs.  Piper,  such  as  those  here  indicated. 
But  most  of  them  at  least  were  known  to  Mrs.  Blod- 
gett  and  little  was  given  that  she  did  not  know,  while 
other  living  persons  knew  what  was  unknown  to  her. 

The  reader  will  note  that  at  the  crucial  point  where 
the  spiritistic  hypothesis  might  most  naturally  be  ex- 
pected to  be  confirmed  was  not  met,  and  telepathy 
from  living  minds  might  appear  to  be  adequate  to 
explain  the  successes,  especially  when  we  observe  the 
remarkably  interesting  fact  that  the  statement  made 
when  the  box  containing  the  letter  was  given  to  Mrs. 
Blodgett  was  substantially  reproduced,  being  known, 
of  course,  to  Mrs.  Blodgett,  but  without  any  of  the 
contents  of  the  letter.  If  any  explanation  of  this 
failure  be  possible  it  is  a  matter  to  be  taken  up  later. 
At  present  I  am  only  concerned  with  the  narration  of 
the  facts  and  the  recognition  of  the  claims  that  the 
anti-spiritist  may  make  for  his  hypothesis  of  telepa- 
thy. 

There  were  a  number  of  other  experiments  with  ar- 
ticles, and  the  summary  of  the  facts  would  only  du- 
plicate such  as  I  have  quoted.  The  reader  who  is  in- 
terested must  go  to  the  detailed  report  for  them. 
Some  of  them  are  very  complicated  and  suggestive 
and  represent  clear  knowledge  of  names  and  incidents 
not  known  to  the  sitters.  But  in  his  conclusions  Dr. 
Hodgson  was  not  prepared  to  claim  that  the  spiritistic 
hypothesis  was  proved.  His  judgment  remained  in 
suspense.  There  were  difficulties  that  made  it  im- 

DR.  HODGSON'S  FIRST  REPORT      193 

perative  to  preserve  an  attitude  of  scientific  scepti- 
cism and  reserve  in  regard  to  a  spiritistic  view  of  the 
phenomena. 

CHAPTER  VII 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT 

Dr.  Hodgson's  first  report  of  which  the  previous 
chapter  gives  an  account  was  published  in  1892. 
His  second  report  was  not  published  until  early  in  the 
year  of  1898.  He  had  been  carefully  experimenting 
during  this  long  period  under  a  change  in  the  condi- 
tions affecting  the  real  or  apparent  nature  of  the 
phenomena.  It  was  about  the  time  of  publishing  his 
first  report  that  this  change  was  effected.  As  nar- 
rated in  the  history  of  the  Piper  case  (p.  127)  a 
friend  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  died  early  in  the  year  1892, 
who  is  called  in  this  second  report  by  the  pseudonym 
of  George  Pelham.  A  few  weeks  after  his  death,  at 
a  sitting  held  by  a  personal  friend  of  the  deceased, 
George  Pelham  purported  to  communicate.  This 
friend's  name  had  not  been  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Piper. 
The  man's  name,  as  given  in  the  report  was  John  Hart 
(pseudonym). 

Near  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  a  locket  was 
placed  in  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  Phinuit's  hand,  if  we 
wish  to  speak  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality  in 
this  way,  and  in  a  moment  the  name  George  was  given 
and  the  statement  made  that  the  locket  contained  the 
hair  of  his  father  and  mother.  This  was  true,  and 
then  a  watch  was  put  into  the  hand  and  at  once 
Phinuit  said,  "  Yes,  George  Hart."  Then  followed 
the  name  "  Lai  .  .  .  Albert,"  and  the  question, 

194 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT     195 

"Is  that  the  way  you  pronounce  it? ';  Mr.  Hart 
states  in  a  note  that  "  the  name  of  his  Uncle  George 
is  in  the  back  of  the  watch,  and  when  he  died,  my 
uncle  Albert  wore  it.  Lai  was  a  pet  name  that  my 
(John  Hart's)  father  called  my  Uncle  Albert."  Mr. 
Hart  did  not  remember  that  "  the  name  was  engraved 
on  the  inner  case  of  the  watch."  There  was  appar- 
ently also  an  attempt  at  the  name  of  the  Howards 
a  little  earlier,  and  a  little  later  came  the  name  Kath- 
erine,  and  the  statement :  "  Tell  her,  she'll  know.  I 
will  solve  the  problems,  Katherine."  Just  before  this 
there  was  also  a  reference  to  the  name  Jim. 

Mr.  Hart  notes :  "  This  had  no  special  signifi- 
cance for  me  at  the  time,  though  I  was  aware  that 
Katherine,  the  daughter  of  Jim  Howard,  was  known 
to  George  (Pelham),  who  used  to  live  with  the  How- 
ards. On  the  day  following  the  sitting  I  gave  Mr. 
Howard  a  detailed  account  of  the  sitting.  The 
words,  *  I  will  solve  the  problems,  Katherine,'  im- 
pressed him  more  than  anything  else,  and  at  the  close 
of  my  account  he  related  that  George,  when  he  had 
last  stayed  with  them,  had  talked  frequently  with 
Katherine  (a  girl  of  fifteen  years  of  age)  upon  such 
subjects  as  Time,  Space,  God,  Eternity,  and  pointed 
out  how  unsatisfactory  the  commonly  accepted  solu- 
tions were.  He  added  that  sometime  he  would  solve 
the  problems,  and  let  her  know,  using  almost  the 
very  words  of  the  communication  made  at  the  sitting." 
Dr.  Hodgson  states :  "  Mr.  Hart  added  that  he  was 
entirely  unaware  of  these  circumstances.  I  was  my- 
self unaware  of  them,  and  was  not  at  that  time  ac- 
quainted with  the  Howards,  and  in  fact  nearly  every 

196      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

statement  made  at  the  sitting,  during  which  I  was  the 
note  taker,  concerned  matters  of  which  I  was  absolute- 
ly ignorant." 

Reference  was  made  to  the  name  Meredith  and  that 
George  Pelham  had  lent  him  a  book ;  a  statement  ap- 
proximately true.  He  also  referred  to  "  Uncle  Will  " 
and  said :  "  I  met  Uncle  William.  Ask  Mother. 
She'll  know."  George  Pelham,  says  a  note,  had  no 
Uncle  William  deceased.  He  had  a  deceased  Great- 
uncle  William,  on  his  mother's  side,  who  was  thus 
the  uncle  of  his  mother  deceased  and  his  stepmother 
living,  who  are  sisters."  Some  further  confused  ref- 
erences to  a  Club  were  made,  having  been  seen  by 
Mr.  Hart  the  last  time  at  the  Players  Club  in  New 
York,  and  then  the  statement,  in  connection  with  an 
unrecognised  reference  to  a  handkerchief,  "  Rogers 
has  got  a  book  of  mine."  Both  Mr.  Hart  and  George 
Pelham  knew  Rogers,  according  to  a  note,  who  at 
that  time  had  a  certain  manuscript  book  of  George 
Pelham's  in  his  possession.  There  was  a  very  pretty 
reference  to  three  Alices,  which  is  too  complex  to  un- 
ravel in  a  summary,  and  George  Pelham's  full  name 
was  written  out. 

All  this  occurred  thus  at  the  first  sitting,  and  it 
was  some  time  before  another  opportunity  came  for 
George  Pelham  to  "  communicate."  But  when  it 
came  a  Mr.  Vance,  known  to  George  Pelham  in  life, 
was  the  sitter.  The  "  communicator  "  asked  for  Mr. 
Vance's  son,  and  on  being  asked  where  he  knew  the 
sitter's  son,  replied  at  college.  Mr.  Vance's  son  and 
George  Pelham  were  classmates  at  college.  When 
asked  where  he,  the  "  communicator  "  had  stayed  with 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT      197 

the  Vances,  the  reply  was  correct  and  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  house  was  given. 

Later  George  Pelham  mentioned  a  tin  box  which  he 
had  had  and  wrongly  said  there  were  some  letters  in  it, 
and  asked  that  his  father  come  to  a  sitting,  saying 
that  he  saw  his  mother  brush  his  clothes  and  put  them 
away,  and  that  he  saw  her  take  his  sleeve  buttons 
from  a  small  box  and  give  them  to  his  father,  and  that 
he  sent  them  to  John  Hart.  The  facts  were  that  his 
clothes  had  been  brushed  and  put  away  after  his 
death,  but  not  by  his  mother,  and  the  "  studs,"  men- 
tioned at  the  first  sitting  of  John  Hart,  were  given 
to  his  friend  by  the  father  of  George  Pelham. 

Dr.  Hodgson  at  a  sitting  made  an  "  arrangement 
with  George  Pelham  that  he  should  watch  his  father 
and  see  him  do  something  that  the  Howards  could  not 
know  about  and  tell  them  at  their  next  sitting.  At 
this  sitting  George  Pelham  wrote :  "  I  saw  father 
and  he  took  my  photograph  and  took  it  to  an  artist's 
to  have  it  copied  for  me."  The  father  recognised  the 
truth  of  the  statement,  and  the  mother  wrote :  "  His 
father  did,  without  my  knowledge,  take  a  photograph 
of  him  to  a  photographer  to  copy,  not  enlarge." 

At  another  sitting  the  same  experiment  was  tried 
again.  George  Pelham  was  asked  to  go  away  and 
watch  the  Howards  and  report.  Before  the  sitting 
ended  George  Pelham  returned  and  through  Phinuit 
said :  "  She's  writing,  and  taken  some  violets  and 
put  them  in  a  book.  And  it  looks  as  if  she's  writing 
that  to  my  mother.  Who's  Tyson  .  .  .  Davis. 
I  saw  her  sitting  before  a  little  desk  or  table.  Took 
little  book,  opened  it,  wrote  letter  he  thinks  to  his 

198      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

mother.  Saw  her  take  a  little  bag  and  put  some 
things  in  it  belonging  to  him,  placed  the  photograph 
beside  her  on  the  desk.  That's  hers.  Sent  a  letter 
to  Tyson.  She  hunted  a  little  while  for  her  picture, 
sketching.  He's  certain  that  the  letter  is  to  his  -moth- 
er. She  took  one  of  George's  books  and  turned  it 
over  and  said :  '  George,  are  you  here  ?  Do  you  see 
that?'  These  were  the  very  words.  Then  she 
turned  and  went  up  a  short  flight  of  stairs.  Took 
some  things  from  a  drawer,  came  back,  sat  down  to 
the  desk,  and  then  finished  the  letter."  Davis  was  the 
name  of  Mrs.  Tyson's  father. 

Of  this  set  of  "  communications "  Dr.  Hodgson 
says :  "  The  statements  made  as  to  what  Mrs.  How- 
ard was  doing  at  the  time  were  not  one  of  them 
correct  as  regards  the  particular  time,  though  they 
seemed  to  indicate  a  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Howard's 
actions  during  the  previous  day  and  a  half,  as  ap- 
pears from  the  following  statements,"  made  in  a  let- 
ter to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Mrs.  Howard. 

"  I  did  none  of  those  things  today  but  all  of  them 
yesterday  afternoon  and  the  evening  before. 

"  Yesterday  afternoon  I  wrote  a  note  to  Mrs.  Ty- 
son declining  an  invitation  to  lunch ;  this  I  did  at  a 
little  table.  Later  I  wrote  to  his  mother  at  a  desk, 
and  seeing  George's  violets  by  me  in  their  envelope, 
gave  them  to  my  daughter  to  put  in  my  drawer,  not 
'  into  a  book.'  This  is  the  only  inaccuracy  of  detail. 
The  day  before  I  also  wrote  to  his  mother,  putting 
his  photograph  before  me  on  the  table  while  I  was 
writing.  Did  '  hunt  for  my  picture,'  my  painting  of 
him.  What  he  says  about  the  book  is  also  true, 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT       199 

though  I  can't  tell  at  precisely  what  time  I  did  it  as 
I  was  alone  at  the  time.  In  all  other  matters  my 
memory  is  corroborated  by  my  daughter  who  took 
the  note  to  Mrs.  T.'s,  and  saw  me  put  photo  before  me 
on  the  desk. 

"  While  writing  to  his  mother  I  did  '  go  and  take 
things  from  a  drawer,  came  back  again,  sat  down  to 
the  desk,  and  then  finished  the  letter.'  This  was  the 
letter  finished  at  the  desk,  not  the  one  written  at  a 
table." 

The  extraordinarily  interesting  feature  of  this  ex- 
periment is  the  disparity  in  time  between  the  facts 
expected  and  the  facts  obtained,  the  past  and  not 
the  present  seeming  to  have  been  cognised.  The  ex- 
periment, however,  was  tried  again  at  a  later  sitting. 
Mrs.  Pelham  was  present  as  the  sitter  and  Dr.  Hodg- 
son taking  notes. 

At  this  sitting,  "  great  anxiety  was  shown  by 
George  Pelham  to  make  some  arrangements  for  giving 
tests  by  describing  at  a  later  sitting  what  his  father 
and  mother  were  doing  at  some  specified  time,  and  it 
was  decided  that  he  should  follow  them  that  after- 
noon, during  which  they  should  do  something  special 
having  relation  to  him,  which  he  should  recount  at 
the  next  sitting.  The  day  was  Saturday,  and  the  next 
sitting  was  held  on  the  following  Monday,  Mrs.  How- 
ard and  myself  only  being  present.  At  this  sitting 
Dr.  Hodgson  asked  what  his  father  did  on  Saturday 
afternoon,  and  the  reply  was :  - 

'  I  saw  him  take  some  notepaper  and  write  an 
explanatory  letter  to  Frank  about  what  I  said  to 
him  when  I  saw  him  in  or  on  that  day.  The  flowers 

200      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

which  I  saw  mother  put  before  my  photo,  she  and 
father  will  understand.  In  connection  with  this  I 
saw  them  open  my  book  and  place  therein  a  picture  of 
X.  Y."  There  was  then  a  long  communication  the 
facts  of  which  Mrs.  Howard  says  are  all  true.  Of 
the  incident  purporting  to  represent  what  the  father 
and  mother  were  doing  in  reference  to  the  son,  Dr. 
Hodgson  says : 

"  It  appeared  that  two  of  the  acts  attributed  to 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pelham  had  been  done  as  described,  nor 
were  there  any  other  test  incidents,  but  the  third, 
viz.,  the  writing  of  a  certain  explanatory  letter  to 
Frank  (brother  of  George  Pelham)  had  not  actually 
been  carried  out.  Mr.  Pelham  had  intended  writing 
such  a  letter  on  the  Saturday  afternoon,  and  had 
consulted  his  wife  about  the  proposed  contents,  but 
had  not  found  time  to  write.  This  experiment  again 
suggests  that  the  supernormal  knowledge  shown  of 
our  physical  world  by  the  communicators  through 
Mrs.  Piper  is  obtained  indirectly  and  telepathically 
through  the  mind  of  living  persons,  rather  than  by  a 
direct  visual  perception  such  as  we  enjoy." 

Many  of  the  facts  which  arc  most  important  evi- 
dence of  supernormal  knowledge  and  which  strongly 
support  the  suggestion  of  spirit  agency  cannot  be 
quoted  because  it  would  take  too  much  space  to  ex- 
plain their  setting.  It  is  the  same  with  many  facts 
which  a  critic  might  wish  to  use  as  evidence  of  some 
other  theory.  Hence  all  who  wish  to  be  critical  must 
go  to  the  original  report  for  data.  But  I  may  allude 
to  the  type  of  incidents,  with  an  illustration  or  two, 
which  represent  important  evidence.  The  reader  will 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT      201 

recall  that  in  an  earlier  chapter  mention  was  made  of 
the  fact  that  George  Pelham  not  believing  in  a  future 
life  had,  when  living,  promised  that  he  would  try  to 
communicate  with  Dr.  Hodgson  if  he  died  first  and 
if  he  survived  in  a  conscious  life.  In  the  conversation 
on  the  subject  while  living  the  discussion  at  one  point 
turned  upon  the  philosophy  of  Plato.  At  the  sittings 
here  after  his  death  he  alluded  to  his  promise  to  make 
himself  known  and  at  one  sitting  said :  "  Plato  was 
a  philosopher  and  a  good  one.  You  know,  Hodgson, 
that  was  our  argument,  our  discussion."  There  were 
perhaps  hundreds  of  such  little  references  that  sug- 
gested the  personality  of  George  Pelham,  as  he  seemed 
to  be  a  clearer  communicator  than  usual,  and  it  would 
take  too  much  time  to  quote  and  discuss  them  in  this 
summary. 

A  most  interesting  incident  occurred  in  connection 
with  another  "  communicator."  A  lady  whom  Dr. 
Hodgson  calls  Madame  Eliza,  a  deceased  acquaintance 
of  Dr.  Hodgson,  stated  through  Mrs.  Piper  that  she 
had  been  present  at  the  deathbed  of  a  certain  gentle- 
man as  he  was  dying,  had  spoken  to  him,  and  indicat- 
ed that  he  had  recognised  her.  She  repeated  what 
she  had  said  to  him  from  the  "  other  side  "  as  he  was 
dying,  and  it  was  an  unusual  form  of  expression. 
That  this  had  actually  occurred  at  the  deathbed  of 
the  person  mentioned  was  confirmed  by  two  near  and 
surviving  relatives  who  were  present  at  the  deathbed. 
The  gentleman  as  he  was  dying  had  recognised  the 
apparition  of  the  deceased  person  and  uttered  the 
words  as  coming  from  her  which  were  afterwards  com- 
municated through  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  same  form. 

202      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

In  connection  with  this  same  "  communicator  "  the 
incidents  may  be  summarised  as  follows,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  Dr.  Hodgson :  "  She  was  known  to  George 
Pelham,  and  her  first  appearance  was  to  her  sister, 
Madame  Frederica,  on  May  17th,  1892,  (about  four 
months  after  the  death  of  George  Pelham).  She 
(Madame  Elisa  Manners)  had  died  the  previous  sum- 
mer. The  cause  of  her  death  was  designated  by  Phin- 
uit,  who  also  described  correctly,  purporting  to  repeat 
what  she  was  telling  him,  some  incidents  which  had  oc- 
curred at  her  deathbed.  The  sitter  inquired  about  a 
watch  which  had  belonged  to  Madame  Elisa,  but  the 
statements  made  at  this  sitting,  and  to  myself  at  sub- 
sequent sittings,  did  not  lead  to  its  recovery.  Some 
Italian  was  written  by  request,  the  lady  being  as  fa- 
miliar with  Italian  as  with  English,  but  only  two  or 
three  common  words  were  decipherable.  The  first 
names  of  sitter  and  communicator  were  given,  and  the 
last  name  was  both  written  and  afterward  given  by 
George  Pelham  to  Phinuit.  Some  of  the  writing  was 
of  a  personal  character,  and  some  about  the  watch,  and 
George  Pelham  stated  correctly,  inter  alia,  that  the 
sitter's  mother  was  present  (in  *  spirit')  with  the 
communicator,  and  that  he  himself  did  not  know  her. 
The  real  names  are  very  uncommon.  The  Italian  for 
'  It  is  well.  Patience,'  was  whispered  at  the  end  of  the 
sitting  as  though  by  direct  control  of  the  voice  by 
Madame  Elisa." 

It  must  be  remembered  that  Mrs.  Piper  does  not 
know  Italian,  and  Dr.  Hodgson  has  shown  in  his 
report  why  the  communication  in  a  language  foreign 
to  Mrs.  Piper  is  difficult  and  in  some  cases  impossible. 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT     203 

But  in  connection  with  this  incident  it  may  be  well 
to  remark  some  facts  accompanying  a  sitting  by  a 
Mr.  Briggs.  The  communication  purported  to  come 
from  a  Honolulu  boy  named  Kalua  who  had  lived  with 
Mr.  Briggs  both  in  Honolulu  and  in  Boston.  "  Ka- 
lua tried  to  write  Hawaiian,  but  the  only  *  ordinary  ' 
words  deciphered  were  '  lei '  (meaning  wreaths,  which 
he  made  daily  for  Mr.  Briggs)  which  was  written 
clearly  and  frequently,  and  an  attempt  at  '  aloha ' 
—  greeting.  Phinuit  tried  to  get  the  answer  to  the 
question  where  Kalua's  father  was,  but  could  only 
succeed  in  getting  '  Hiram.*  But  the  writing  gave 
*  Hawaiian  Islands.'  In  reply  to  the  question  which 
one,  the  answer  in  writing  was  Kawai,  but  Phinuit  said 
Tawai.  The  word  is  spelt  Kawai,  but  is  pronounced 
Tawai  by  the  natives  of  the  island  itself  and  in  the 
island  where  Kalua  was  born.  The  natives  of  the 
other  island  called  it  Kawai."  Mrs.  Piper  does  not 
know  the  languages  of  the  Sandwich  Islands. 

In  connection  with  this,  too,  may  be  briefly  men- 
tioned the  experiment  of  Prof.  Newbold,  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Pennsylvania,  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper, 
published  in  a  later  report  than  Dr.  Hodgson's. 
George  Pelham  was  the  "  communicator."  He  had 
known  Greek  while  living,  and  Mrs.  Piper  does  not. 
Prof.  Newbold  spelled  out  to  him  through  Mrs.  Pi- 
per's organism  a  part  of  the  Lord's  prayer,  and  under 
much  difficulty  it  was  translated  with  approximate 
correctness. 

In  the  sittings  of  another  person  are  a  number  of 
interesting  complex  incidents  deserving  quotation,  as 
throwing  light  upon  the  complications  of  any  theory 

204      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

but  the  most  apparent  one.  The  lady  is  called  in  the 
report  Mrs.  M.  She  had  made  the  appointment  for 
her  first  sitting  from  a  town  in  Georgia  by  a  letter 
through  Dr.  Hodgson,  so  that  Mrs.  Piper,  as  in  all 
other  cases  here  quoted,  did  not  know  the  sitter.  At 
the  first  sitting  the  name  Richard  was  given  and  the 
statement  made  that  he  was  a  brother  of  the  sitter,  and 
when  the  sitter  asked  if  it  was  B — ,  using  a  pet  name 
of  the  supposed  person,  there  was  much  excitement 
in  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  and  the  "  communicator  "  asked 
the  question,  "  Where  is  James?  51  In  a  moment  Mrs. 
Piper's  hand  began  feeling  Mrs.  M.'s  jacket  and 
seemed  to  be  trying  to  reach  something  inside.  Mrs. 
M.  gave  it,  a  small  locket  and  chain  which  she  wore 
around  her  neck  under  her  dress.  In  some  confused 
message  of  an  unevidential  sort  came  the  names  Tom 
and  Pauline. 

Mrs.  M.  adds  in  her  note  explanatory  of  the  perti- 
nence in  the  names :  "  Richard  is  the  name  of  a 
younger  brother  of  mine  who  died  early  in  1891,  and 
James  is  the  name  of  my  elder  brother,  and  he  was 
with  me  when  I  was  taking  care  of  Richard  during 
his  last  illness.  The  locket  contained  some  hair  and  a 
small  picture  of  my  husband,  who  died  in  1892.  Tom 
is  the  name  of  a  person  who  was  well  known  to  my 
husband  and  who,  for  reasons  known  only  to  myself, 
was  very  much  in  my  thoughts  at  that  time.  Pauline 
is  the  name  of  my  eldest  sister." 

At  the  second  sitting  which  was  held  the  next  morn- 
ing, as  soon  as  the  trance  came  on  Phinuit  remarked : 
"  After  I  went  out  I  found  your  brother  and  another 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT      205 

gentleman  with  him.  The  gentleman  is  everything  to 
you.  He  will  come  ...  I  get  the  name  Brown, 
I  get  it  from  your  gentleman.  Richard  says  Susy." 
When  the  writing  began  the  "  message  "  was :  "  Do 
you  know  who  I  am?  "  Then  the  names  Brown  and 
Parker  were  written,  followed  by  the  words :  "  Oh, 
don't  you  know  me?  Don't  you  know  me?  I  am 
Roland  and  I  love  you  always." 

Mrs.  M.  remarks  in  her  note :  "  In  my  first  sitting 
the  name  Susy  had  occurred  a  number  of  times,  but  it 
had  no  special  meaning  for  me  in  connection,  and  I 
was  constantly  thinking  of  Ruth,  the  name  of  a  young 
girl  to  whom  my  brother  had  been  engaged  to  be 
married,  but  on  my  way  home  it  flashed  over  me  that 
Susy  was  the  name  of  a  sister  two  years  older  than  my 
brother  Richard.  She  died  before  he  was  born,  so 
when  Phinuit  said  '  Richard  says  Susy  '  I  asked :  '  Did 
he  mean  Susy,  when  I  suggested  Ruth  to  him  yester- 
day ?  '  '  Yes,  it  is  Susy.  He  told  you  forty  times 
the  last  time,  but  you  wouldn't  understand:  he  said, 
'  If  that's  my  sister  she  must  know  who  Susy  is." 
'  She's  here  with  him ;  she  was  his  sister,  she  passed 
out  many  years  ago;  it  was  sad  for  her  mother,  the 
most  sad  of  any  trouble  she  ever  had.  She  was  very 
bright.  She  would  have  been  very  musical.' ' 

Mrs.  M.  adds  the  note :  "  The  baby  Susy  died  at 
seven  months  old,  was  *  very  bright '  —  and  my  moth- 
er often  told  me  how  fond  of  music  she  was,  and  that 
the  sound  of  the  piano  would  quiet  her  when  she  was 
in  pain.  Her  death  was  a  great  sorrow  to  my  mother. 
The  names  Brown  and  Parker  were  those  of  the  doctor 
and  nurse  who  cared  for  my  husband  during  his  last 

206      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

illness,  and  Roland  was  the  name  by  which  he,  my  hus- 
band, was  usually  called." 

Mrs.  M.  one  day  was  alone  at  her  husband's  grave 
and  planted  some  violets  there,  and  said :  "  Roland, 
if  you  can  see  me  I  wish  you  would  go  and  tell  Dr. 
Hodgson  so."  A  few  days  afterward,  without  any 
one  knowing  what  she  had  done  when  alone  by  the 
grave,  the  message  came  apparently  from  this  hus- 
band :  "  She  told  me  to  tell  you,  sir,  that  she  put 
some  flowers  on  the  tomb,  and  asked  me  if  I  saw  her 
do  it." 

Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw  and  Mrs.  Thaw  had  a  large 
number  of  sittings  which  were  exceedingly  rich  in  evi- 
dential matter.  I  cannot  quote  them  at  length  as  they 
would  occupy  more  space  than  can  be  spared.  A  few 
incidents  of  a  very  important  character  will  suffice  to 
illustrate  their  value.  "At  their  first  sitting  a  very  in- 
timate friend  of  theirs,  who  had  been  dead  about  a  year 
and  a  half,  and  whom  they  have  called  Dr.  H.  in  the 
records,  gave  (through  Phinuit)  a  nickname  by  which 
he  had  been  called.  This  name  was  not  known  to  the 
sitters.  On  inquiry  his  widow  said  it  was  the  name 
used  by  his  mother  and  sisters,  all  dead,  but  not  used 
by  any  one  living.  At  a  later  sitting  a  test  question 
which  was  sent  for  the  purpose  by  the  widow  of  Dr. 
H.,  and  the  answer  to  which  was  unknown  to  the  sit- 
ters, was  correctly  answered  at  the  same  sitting. 

"  At  the  sitting  which  Mr.  G.  Perkins  had  on 
March  18th,  1892,  he  presented  a  chain  which  he 
knew  had  been  worn  by  his  mother,  deceased.  Phinuit 
said  that  both  his  mother  and  sister  recognized  the 
chain,  and  that  both  had  worn  it.  This  was  true, 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT       207 

although  Mr.  Perkins  did  not  know  that  his  sister  had 
also  worn  it.  She  died  when  he  was  a  small  child. 
Again  the  nurse  of  Mrs.  Thaw's  children  presented  a 
parcel  which  she  supposed  contained  her  mother's 
hair.  Phinuit  speaking  of  the  sitter's  mother  said, 
thrusting  his  finger  down  the  neck  of  the  sitter,  '  Put 
it  in  there  and  wear  it,  just  as  she  told  you.'  The 
sitter  insisted  that  Phinuit  was  wrong,  but  he  tore 
open  the  paper  and  showed  that  it  contained  an  Agnus 
Dei,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  sitter's  mother  had 
told  her  to  wear." 

The  reader  may  recall  that  it  was  a  man,  here  called 
John  Hart,  who  was  at  the  first  sitting  when  George 
Pelham  appeared  to  communicate.  Three  years  later 
he  died  suddenly  in  Paris.  Dr.  Hodgson  heard  the 
fact  the  next  day  from  a  cablegram  to  a  friend  and 
arranged  through  his  assistant  for  a  sitting  with  Mrs. 
Piper  the  following  day.  Soon  after  the  sitting  be- 
gan and  after  some  confusion  and  difficulty  the  name 
John  Hart  was  given,  and  in  a  moment  the  statement 
came:  "  I  brought  Ge (George)  here  first,"  evi- 
dently referring  to  the  first  communication  of  George 
Pelham  to  him  three  years  before.  "  There  were  con- 
fused references  to  the  Howards.  He  referred  to  two 
other  friends  in  Europe,"  and  expressed  the  hope  that 
they  would  bring  his  body  to  America,  saying: 
"  They  are  now  talking  about  it."  It  was  learned 
later  that  the  desirability  of  so  doing  was  discussed. 

Mrs.  Katherine  Paine  Sutton,  who  "  had  many  re- 
markable psychical  experiences,  especially  in  seeing 
*  figures  '  of  deceased  persons,  in  1887  published  a 
little  book  giving  an  account  of  these.  It  was  called 

208       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Light  on  the  Hidden  Way,  with  an  introduction  by 
James  Freeman  Clarke.  At  one  of  her  sittings  James 
Freeman  Clarke  purported  to  send  a  message  to  his 
own  daughter  and  at  a  later  sitting  he  appeared 
to  ask  if  the  message  was  delivered,  when  Mrs. 
Sutton  saw  an  apparition  of  him  while  the  mes- 
sage was  being  written.  Mrs.  Sutton  also  saw  an 
apparition  of  her  little  daughter  at  a  sitting  in  the 
act  of  reaching  for  a  spool  of  tangled  red  knitting 
silk,  while  Phinuit  was  indicating  in  the  "  communi- 
cation "  that  this  was  what  she  wanted.  Her  few  sit- 
tings were  remarkably  rich  in  evidential  matter. 

M.  Paul  Bourget,  the  French  writer,  had  two  good 
sittings,  though  he  apparently  refused  to  give  Prof. 
James  any  account  of  one  of  them.  A  sitting  by 
Prof.  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  of  Oxford,  was  very  good, 
and  one  by  Prof.  Herbert  Nichols  had  a  very  fine 
test  in  it.  It  was  the  naming  of  the  first  word  of  a 
proverb  engraved  in  a  ring  which  his  mother  had 
given  him  years  before  and  which  he  had  lost,  though 
he  was  thinking  of  the  word  engraved  in  her  ring 
left  him  at  her  death. 

Many  more  pages  of  this  kind  of  matter  could  be 
quoted,  but  it  will  hardly  be  necessary,  as  it  would 
only  multiply  types  of  incidents  already  mentioned  to 
a  tedious  length.  But  I  have  been  obliged  to  quote 
largely  in  order  to  give  the  general  reader  some  con- 
ception of  the  mass  of  material  pointing  to  the  exist- 
ence of  something  supernormal  and  which  would  justi- 
fy the  consideration  of  some  theory  adequate  to  the 
scope  of  the  facts  themselves,  when  the  discussion 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT      209 

of  a  large  theory  on  the  illustration  of  a  few  facts 
would  not  impress  the  scientific  mind  as  legitimate. 
The  facts  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  second  report  are  much 
better  than  in  his  first,  at  least  in  many  instances, 
especially  in  connection  with  the  George  Pelham  per- 
sonality, as  they  afford  the  opportunity  to  discuss 
certain  questions  which  earlier  trances  had  not  an- 
swered completely.  I  can  hardly  more  than  indicate 
some  of  these  points.  One  of  them  is  the  increased 
tendency,  especially  in  the  case  of  George  Pelham,  to 
recognise  living  friends  and  not  to  recognise  those  who 
were  not  personal  friends  while  living,  or  better  to 
recognise  that  certain  persons  were  not  acquaintances. 
It  seems  that  George  Pelham  never  failed  to  recognise 
his  living  friends  at  sittings,  and  knew  well  enough 
when  sitters  were  not  acquaintances.  Then  again 
there  is  the  dramatic  play  of  personality  in  which 
there  is  the  definite  appearance  of  conversation  be- 
tween the  discarnate  spirits  themselves,  slipping 
through  to  the  sitter  as  automatisms  or  unconsciously 
delivered  messages  that  it  was  intended  to  send.  The 
reader  will  have  to  go  to  the  detailed  reports  for  a 
clear  conception  of  this  and  the  extent  of  its  occur- 
rence. He  will  also  have  to  do  the  same  for  an  ade- 
quate appreciation  of  very  many  incidents  which 
would  exhaust  the  patience  of  all  but  the  critical  scien- 
tist to  consider  here. 

Some  of  the  sitters,  like  a  few  in  the  English  series 
of  experiments,  were  either  not  favorably  impressed 
with  their  results  or  suspended  judgment  on  the 
ground  that  their  personal  sittings  were  too  few  to 
justify  conclusions.  Prof.  Pierce  had  no  striking 

210      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

success  in  his  sitting,  and  discredited  the  supposition 
that  there  was  anything  supernormal  in  it.  Dr.  Weir 
Mitchell,  writing  to  Prof.  James,  after  a  sitting  at 
which  the  latter  took  notes,  said : 

"  If  I  had  never  seen  you  and  heard  your  state- 
ments in  regard  to  Mrs.  Piper,  my  afternoon  sitting 
with  her  would  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  whole  thing  was  a  fraud  and  a  very  stupid  one. 
Of  course  I  do  not  think  this,  because  I  am  bound  to 
consider  all  the  statements  made,  not  merely  the  time 
spent  with  me.  As  to  this  point  I  want  to  make  my- 
self clear,  because  I  should  like  on  another  occasion 
to  repeat  my  sitting." 

Prof.  Charles  Eliot  Norton,  of  Harvard  Univer- 
sity, had  two  sittings.  He  could  not  report  anything 
indubitably  supernormal.  But  he  said  that  "  there 
was  no  question  as  to  Mrs.  Piper's  good  faith,"  while 
he  thought  her  trance  condition  resembled  the  dream- 
ing of  an  ill  person.  Prof.  John  Trowbridge,  of 
Harvard  University,  with  one  sitting  to  judge  from, 
thought  that  the  trance  was  not  simulated,  and  that 
Mrs.  Piper  was  "  in  some  abnormal  condition,"  but  his 
experience  was  without  result  in  the  supernormal  of 
any  kind.  Prof.  James  Mark  Baldwin,  of  Princeton 
University,  with  a  single  sitting,  did  not  feel  sure 
that  the  trance  was  genuine  though  he  "  came  fully 
expecting  to  be  convinced  on  that  point."  There  were 
a  few  incidents  sufficiently  striking  in  his  sitting  to 
suggest  the  need  of  explanation. 

The  sittings  of  some  others  were  practical  failures 
in  many  respects,  and  led  to  occasional  suspicion  of 
the  whole  thing.  But  the  majority  of  the  sitters 

DR.  HODGSON'S  SECOND  REPORT      211 

had  sufficient  success  to  be  impressed  with  the  indubi- 
table evidence  for  something  supernormal,  and  many 
of  them  felt  convinced  that  they  were  in  reality  com- 
municating with  their  departed  friends.  It  was  Dr. 
Hodgson's  opinion  that  this  interpretation  of  the  phe- 
nomena was  correct,  although  in  adopting  it  he  had  to 
surrender  the  sceptical  attitude  which  his  first  report 
maintained.  For  the  grounds  on  which  he  based  this 
change  of  position  the  reader  will  have  to  read  his 
report. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

PERSONAL,  EXPERIMENTS  AND  RESULTS 

Dr.  Hodgson's  reports  were  based  upon  results  ob- 
tained during  the  Phinuit  regime  including  the  work 
of  the  personality  of  George  Pelham.  He  quoted 
nothing  from  his  record  of  the  Imperator  regime. 
He  probably  intended  to  quote  this  in  the  second 
part  of  his  report  which  was  promised  to  follow,  but 
which  has  not  yet  been  published.  The  effect  of  his 
report,  however,  on  my  mind  was  such  as  to  make  it 
imperative  for  me  to  have  some  personal  sittings,  in 
order  to  understand  the  phenomena  much  better  than 
I  did.  I  had  not  the  slightest  doubt  about  the  proof 
for  the  supernormal,  and  felt  the  strength  of  Dr. 
Hodgson's  plea  for  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  as  not 
only  actually  explaining  the  facts  in  a  large  measure, 
especially  the  crucially  evidential  facts,  but  also  as 
being  the  best  hypothesis  at  the  time.  But  there  were 
certain  difficulties  connected  with  the  mistakes  and 
confusions  and  with  the  dramatic  play  of  personal- 
ity, as  I  afterward  called  it,  that  made  me  still  sus- 
pend my  judgment.  But  to  satisfy  myself  it  was 
necessary  to  have  some  sittings,  and  I  so  expressed 
myself  to  Dr.  Hodgson  in  a  letter.  They  were  ar- 
ranged for  in  the  following  manner,  and  come  under 
the  Imperator  regime,  Phinuit  having  disappeared 
a  year  previously.  When  the  Imperator  assumed 
complete  control  of  the  sittings  and  arrangements,  Dr. 

212 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS. 

Hodgson  consulted  these  trance  personalities  in  all 
arrangements  made  for  sitters.  All  the  results  were 
obtained  by  automatic  writing.  The  use  of  the  voice 
was  discontinued,  after  the  departure  of  Phinuit,  ex- 
cept for  work  of  a  less  scientific  kind.  Hence  my  rec- 
ord represents  a  written  account  including  all  that  the 
sitters,  myself  and  Dr.  Hodgson,  said  or  did  on  the 
occasion. 

1.  Incidents  Previously  Published 

Dr.  Hodgson  arranged  for  my  sittings  with  the 
trance  personalities  and  mentioned  no  name,  saying 
only  the  "  four  times  friend,"  and  Mrs.  Piper  not 
knowing,  when  she  recovers  normal  consciousness, 
what  has  been  said  or  done  during  its  loss.  When  I 
went  to  the  sitting,  while  I  was  in  a  closed  coach 
some  hundred  feet  from  the  house  I  put  on  a  mask 
covering  the  whole  face.  When  I  entered  the  house 
with  Dr.  Hodgson  he  introduced  me  as  "  Mr.  Smith." 
I  bowed  in  silence,  did  not  shake  hands,  nor  utter  a 
word,  and  during  the  seventeen  sittings  published  in 
my  report  Mrs.  Piper  did  not  hear  my  voice  in  her 
normal  state,  "  except  twice  when  I  changed  it  into 
an  unnatural  tone  to  utter  a  sentence,  in  one  case  only 
four  words."  My  object  was  to  conceal  my  identity, 
because  I  had  been  present  at  a  sitting  in  1892  for 
fifteen  minutes,  and  met  Mrs.  Piper  after  the  sitting. 
The  present  occasion  was  in  1898,  and  I  had  grown 
a  full  beard  in  the  meantime. 

As  soon  as  Mrs.  Piper  went  into  the  trance,  I  took 
my  place  behind  and  to  the  right  of  her,  where  I  could 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

see  the  automatic  writing,  and  never  touched  her 
even  during  the  seventeen  sittings,  except  a  few  times 
to  place  the  hand  on  the  writing  pad  after  the  pencil 
ran  off  the  edge.  Muscle  reading  was  thus  shut  out, 
and  even  if  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  conscious  her  head 
was  so  placed  on  the  pillow  on  the  table  that  she 
could  not  have  seen  me  had  she  been  normally  con- 
scious. Dr.  Hodgson  read  and  copied  the  automatic 
writing  and  in  its  place  whatever  he  and  I  said  or 
asked  on  the  occasion,  so  that  the  record  is  a  perfect 
account  of  all  that  was  said  or  done,  in  so  far  as 
it  was  decipherable.  The  trance  "  control  "  was  usu- 
ally Rector,  one  of  the  Imperator  group  of  trance 
personalities.  But  occasionally  George  Pelham  act- 
ed as  amanuensis,  if  I  may  so  call  the  "  control," 
especially  at  my  first  sitting,  coming  in  other  cases  for 
special  purposes. 

Under  these  conditions  the  first  part  of  my  first 
sitting  was  full  of  confusion  and  without  incidents 
that  were  conclusive  at  the  time  for  anything  super- 
normal. Several  names  and  relationships  were  cor- 
rectly given,  and  then  a  whole  group  of  names  in  con- 
nection with  a  lady  claiming  to  be  my  mother  were 
given  which  were  wholly  false  to  me  and  had  no 
relation  to  me.  After  the  publication  of  my  report  I 
found  that  they  were  all  correct  and  pertinent  to  an 
acquaintance  of  mine.  But  toward  the  close  of  the 
sitting  the  following  incidents  were  written  out.  The 
name  Charles  was  mentioned  and  the  claim  made  that 
he  was  my  brother;  that  he  had  died  of  a  fever,  say- 
ing that  "  they  said  it  was  typhoid  " ;  that  he  had 
"  had  a  very  bad  throat,  and  it  took  me  over  here,  be- 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  215 

cause  the  membrane  formed  in  my  throat " ;  that  he 
had  seen  mother  and  that  she  had  come  after  him; 
that  he  had  passed  out  in  the  winter  and  remem- 
bered seeing  it  snow,  and  two  days  later,  giving  his 
name  and  relationship,  corrected  spontaneously  the 
allusion  to  typhoid  fever,  and  asked  if  "  scarlet  fever 
was  a  bad  thing  to  have  in  the  body." 

My  brother  Charles  died  at  four  and  a  half  years 
in  1864  of  scarlet  fever  and  measles,  so  diagnosed, 
with  a  very  putrid  sore  throat  of  a  diphtheritic  char- 
acter. It  was  in  March  and  a  heavy  snow  fell  on  the 
day  before  and  on  the  morning  of  his  death,  a  fact 
which  I  remember  because  I  was  sent  on  an  errand  that 
morning.  My  mother  died  five  years  after  my  broth- 
er Charles.  A  little  while  before  this  series  of  inci- 
dents I  had  asked  the  "  communicator  "  if  he  had  seen 
my  brother  George,  thinking  to  trick  the  medium  into 
a  false  statement.  The  answer  was  that  he  had  been 
spoken  of  before,  which  was  not  correct,  but  near  the 
end  of  the  sitting  I  was  asked  what  I  meant  by  asking 
about  George,  the  "  communicator  saying  that  he  was 
not  there '"  and  that  he  could  not  understand  why 
I  asked  him  if  he  was  there,  and  stated  that  he  was 
not  coming  for  a  while  yet.  This  brother  is  still  liv- 
ing. The  names  of  Elizabeth  and  Mary  were  given, 
the  latter  apparently  said  to  be  an  aunt,  and  in  con- 
nection with  it  the  name  Allen  or  Ellen,  which  was 
possibly  an  attempt  at  the  name  McClellan,  which 
was  made  clear  at  a  later  sitting.  This  aunt  Mary 
was  the  mother  of  the  McClellan,  deceased,  and  pos- 
sibly referred  to,  and  Eliza,  not  Elizabeth,  was  the 
name  of  my  aunt  by  my  mother's  side  and  this  McClel- 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

lan's  aunt  by  marriage  of  his  stepmother.  The  name 
'*  Robertson "  had  no  meaning,  but  its  connection 
with  "  Ell—  —el "  and  at  a  later  sitting  with  the 
name  Eliza  clearly  given  where  her  husband  was 
apparently  communicating,  evidently  referring  to  me 
as  "  Robert's  son,"  indicates  a  possible  reference  to 
the  correct  name  of  my  father  and  my  relationship 
to  him. 

At  the  second  sitting  I  was  at  once  addressed  with 
"  James,  James,  speak  to  me,"  and  presently  the 
"  communicator "'  claimed  to  be  my  father,  though 
my  brother  Charles  was  mentioned  again  and  he  re- 
ferred to  the  previous  "  communicator "'  as  father. 
At  the  end  of  the  sitting,  as  Mrs.  Piper  was  coming 
out  of  the  trance,  she  gave  the  surname  "  Hyslop  " 
and  said,  "  Tell  him  I  am  his  father."  My  father 
had  died  a  little  more  than  two  years  previous.  Dur- 
ing the  sitting  the  name  Eliza  was  given,  that  of 
my  aunt  who  had  suddenly  lost  her  husband  about 
three  weeks  before  in  the  west,  and  some  incidents 
mentioned  in  her  life  with  her  husband  that  were 
characteristic,  and  an  allusion,  apparently  made  by 
my  father,  to  a  dream  of  this  aunt,  saying  that  she 
had  seen  him  in  it.  Inquiry  proved  this  to  be  a  fact. 
The  uncle  was  mentioned,  but  the  mistake  in  the  name 
spoiled  its  evidential  force.  At  the  third  sitting  be- 
gan a  series  of  incidents  of  considerable  value.  The 
first  allusion  to  it  was  in  the  statement  that,  "  It  was 
not  an  hallucination  but  a  reality,  but  I  felt  that  it 
would  be  possible  to  reach  you."  A  little  later  in 
the  same  sitting  he  said  that  he  had  promised  to  come 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  217 

back  if  possible  and  let  me  know  that  he  was  not 
annihilated,  adding :  "  I  remember  well  our  talks 
about  this  life  and  its  conditions,  and  there  was  a 
great  question  of  doubt  as  to  the  possibility  of  com- 
munication. That,  if  I  remember  rightly,  was  the 
one  question  which  we  talked  over."  At  the  next  sit- 
ting, recurring  to  the  same  subject,  he  asked  me: 
"  What  do  you  remember,  James,  of  our  talks  about 
Swedenborg?  Do  you  remember  of  our  talking  one 
evening  in  the  library  about  his  description  of  the 
Bible?"  In  a  sitting  held  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  my 
behalf,  while  I  remained  in  New  York,  and  recurring 
to  this  subject  of  our  conversation  again,  he  said: 
"  Shut  out  the  thought  theory  and  do  not  let  it 
trouble  you,"  and  mentioned  Swedenborg  again. 

Later  still  on  the  same  subject  he  said:  "  Do  you 
remember  our  conversations  on  this  subject?  (Yes, 
I  do.  Can  you  tell  me  when  it  was?)  Yes,  do  you 
remember  of  my  last  visit  .  .  .  your  last  visit 
with  me?  (Yes,  I  remember  it  well.)  It  was  more 
particularly  on  this  occasion  than  before.  (Yes,  that 
is  right.  Do  you  know  what  I  was  doing  just  before 
I  made  the  visit?)  Yes,  I  believe  you  had  been  ex- 
perimenting on  the  subject,  and  I  remember  of  your 
telling  me  something  about  hypnotism.  (Yes,  I  re- 
member that  well.)  And  what  did  you  tell  me  about 
some  kind  of  manifestation  which  you  were  in  doubt 
about?  (It  was  about  apparitions  near  the  point  of 
death.)  [Excitement  in  hand.]  Oh,  yes,  indeed,  I 
recall  it  very  well,  and  you  told  me  [about]  a  young 
woman  who  had  had  some  experiments  and  dreams." 
The  next  day  recurring  to  the  topic  again  I  was 

218      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

asked  if  I  remembered  what  he  said  when  I  told  him 
about  dreams. 

The  facts  were  these.  About  a  year  before  my 
father's  death  I  was  lecturing  in  Indianapolis  on  this 
subject  and  surprised  my  father,  and  paid  him  my  last 
visit.  During  the  three  or  four  days  of  that  visit  we 
had  many  hours'  talk  on  the  phenomena  of  psychic 
research  including  thought  transference,  hallucina- 
tions, apparitions,  dreams,  hypnotism  and  an  experi- 
ment that  I  had  performed  in  connection  with  a  coin- 
cidental dream  by  a  lady  with  whom  I  had  also 
performed  some  experiments  in  crystal  vision.  I  ex- 
plained apparitions  on  that  occasion  as  possibly  only 
hallucinations,  and  was  exceedingly  sceptical  about 
them,  though  admitting  that  they  might  be  more. 
This  was  the  only  occasion  on  which  we  had  any  ex- 
tended conversations  on  the  subject.  I  tried  to  hyp- 
notise my  brother  at  the  time,  but  failed.  We  talked 
of  Swedenborg  in  our  conversations,  but  I  had  com- 
pletely forgotten  it,  and  had  to  ascertain  its  truth 
from  my  stepmother,  who  remembered  it  well,  as  she 
had  to  ask  my  father  who  Swedenborg  was  after  I 
left.  My  father  was  not  a  spiritualist,  in  fact,  did 
not  know  enough  to  despise  it  as  most  people  do,  and 
I  supposed  that  he  knew  nothing  of  Swedenborg. 
I  had  explained  the  Piper  case  as  presented  in  the 
first  two  reports  by  thought  transference,  and  hence 
the  pertinence  of  the  exhortation  to  "  shut  out  the 
thought  theory." 

His  mind  recurred  to  the  last  scenes  of  his  deathbed 
and  mentioned  some  of  them  confusedly,  and  said  that 
my  voice  was  the  last  he  heard.  I  was  the  last  to 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  219 

speak  in  that  final  moment.  I  asked  what  medicine 
I  had  gotten  him  in  New  York,  and  with  some  difficul- 
ty I  got  the  word  "  Himi."  In  connection  with  this 
he  also  mentioned  strychnine.  I  had  gotten  Hyomei 
for  him,  the  only  medicine  I  ever  bought  for  him. 
I  did  not  get  any  strychnine  for  him.  But  I  ascer- 
tained from  other  members  of  the  family  that  he  was 
taking  strychnine  with  the  Hyomei.  He  mentioned 
a  black  skull  cap  which  he  finally  said  had  been  made 
for  him  by  "  Hettie's  mother,"  Hettie  being  the  name 
of  my  half-sister.  This  was  correct.  The  names  of 
the  members  of  the  family  were  given  as  they  were 
used  in  life,  and  many  incidents  indicated  in  connec- 
tion with  them.  Thus  my  sister  Lida  was  mentioned 
in  connection  with  the  organ  and  the  statement  made 
that  he,  my  father,  wanted  her  to  sing.  My  father 
had  bought  an  organ  and  wanted  my  sister  by  that 
name  to  learn  to  play  and  sing. 

In  the  five  sittings  held  by  Dr.  Hodgson  on  my  be- 
half there  were  a  number  of  articles  mentioned  which, 
taken  together,  have  some  evidential  value,  but  it  was 
mainly  in  the  last  of  the  five  that  the  most  striking 
incident  occurred.  I  had  asked,  through  Dr.  Hodg- 
son, whether  the  "  communicator  "  remembered  how 
we  used  to  go  to  church,  and  the  reply  was  a  reference 
to  the  rough  roads  and  country,  naming  the  state 
of  Ohio,  in  which  my  home  had  been.  The  roads  were 
very  rough  in  winter  and  there  was  much  difficulty  in 
getting  to  church,  and  when  I  sent  this  question  to 
Dr.  Hodgson  by  letter  I  had  in  mind  the  very  fact  of 
this  roughness,  but  the  manner  of  going  to  church 
was  not  mentioned.  A  moment  after  the  "  communi- 

220      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

cator  "  spontaneously  stated  that  he  had  had  a  talk 
with  the  principal  of  the  school  about  George,  my 
brother,  and  mentioned  some  anxieties  which,  he  said, 
he,  my  aunt  Nannie,  and  myself  had  shared  about 
him.  The  incidents  were  remarkably  correct.  An  al- 
lusion was  made  to  a  hymn,  "  Nearer,  my  God,  to 
Thee,"  with  his  name  attached  which  I  thought  was 
opposed  to  the  supposition  of  its  coming  from  my 
father,  but  inquiry  showed  that  it  was  a  very  pertinent 
allusion.  The  same  is  true  of  a  reference  to  a  cane, 
though  it  was  associated  with  so  much  confusion  that 
I  could  not  treat  it  as  evidential,  though  I  am  now  in- 
clined to  give  it  more  weight  than  I  did  when  I  pub- 
lished my  report. 

The  allusion  was  to  a  "  stick  with  the  turn  in  the 
end,  on  which  I  carved  my  initials."  I  had  given  him 
a  curved  handled  cane  a  short  time  before  his  death, 
but  inquiry  showed  that  he  had  not  carved  his  initials 
on  any  cane.  But  we  children  had  given  him  a 
straight  cane  in  1876  with  his  initials  cut  in  the  top 
on  a  gold  plate.  The  cane  was  lost  soon  afterward 
by  his  brother-in-law,  who  gave  him  a  substitute  for 
it  in  the  form  of  a  stout  curved  handled  hickory  stick. 
This  he  had  broken  in  the  course  of  time  and  a  short 
time  before  his  death  I  gave  him,  at  the  instigation 
of  my  aunt,  a  curved  handled  cane  with  the  represen- 
tation of  a  "  gold  bug  "  on  it.  This  was  during  the 
gold  campaign  in  1896,  near  the  end  of  which  he  died. 
Seeing  that  the  message  about  the  cane  was  confused 
I  resolved  to  test  the  matter  indirectly.  Hence  when 
I  had  some  personal  sittings  later  I  took  the  oppor- 
tunity to  ask  the  "  communicator  "  if  he  remembered 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS. 

shaking  a  walking  stick  at  Robert  McClellan  in  the 
presidential  campaign,  and  the  hand  of  Mrs.  Piper 
showed  considerable  excitement,  and  wrote :  "  Well 
I  do.  I  never  was  more  excited  in  my  life.  I  think 
I  was  right  too."  My  cousin  Robert  McClellan  had 
visited  him  on  his  deathbed  and  on  asking  my  father 
how  he  stood  on  politics,  my  father  simply  reached 
for  the  "  gold  bug  "  cane  that  I  had  given  him  and 
shook  it  in  the  air,  not  being  able  to  speak  above  a 
whisper  owing  to  laryngeal  trouble.  This  much  I 
knew,  but  I  did  not  know  that  the  occasion  was  an 
exciting  one  to  him.  I  learned  from  the  wife  of  my 
cousin,  he  having  died  a  year  later  than  my  father, 
that  my  father  became  so  excited  on  the  occasion  that 
they  left  for  fear  he  would  have  a  spasm  of  the  larynx 
and  die  with  it.  Immediately  after  the  answer  to  rny 
question  I  asked  who  had  given  him  this  walking  stick 
and  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  stopped  writing  and  tapped 
me  on  the  temple  for  some  moments  and  pointing  to 
Dr.  Hodgson,  who  was  taking  notes,  came  back  and 
wrote :  "  You  did,  and  I  told  him  about  it."  I  had 
given  him  the  cane  mentioned,  and  the  reference  to 
the  "  stick  with  the  turn  in  the  end,"  had  been  made 
six  months  before,  though  it  evidently  did  not  mean 
the  one  I  had  given  him  with  the  "  gold  bug  "  on  it. 
I  then  asked  what  was  on  it,  and  the  reply  was  first 
apparently  to  the  gold-headed  cane,  then  to  the  hick- 
ory cane  which  had  been  broken  and  mended  with  a  tin 
ring,  he  said :  "  I  think  it  had  the  little  ring."  This 
was  dissented  to  and  at  once  the  lines  were  drawn 
that  fairly  represented  the  "  gold  bug  "  on  the  cane 
that  I  had  given  him  a  short  time  before  his  death. 

222      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

The  incidents  were  confused,  but  apparently  indicated 
a  reference  to  all  three  canes. 

In  one  question  the  "  communicator,"  purporting 
to  be  my  father,  asked  "  Where  is  George?  '  and  said: 
"  I  often  think  of  him  but  I  do  not  worry  any  more 
about  him,"  and  in  a  moment  came,  as  if  struck  by  a 
sudden  recollection,  "  Do  you  remember  Tom,  and 
what  has  he  done  with  him?  I  mean  the  horse."  My 
father  had  worried  about  this  brother,  George,  in 
connection  with  business  matters,  and  we  had  an  ex- 
citable horse  by  the  name  of  Tom  that  father  would 
not  sell  because  of  this  temperament  and  hence  pen- 
sioned him,  so  to  speak,  on  the  farm,  and  when  the 
horse  died  my  brother  George  buried  him.  This  last 
fact  I  did  not  know. 

At  one  sitting  I  asked  about  Robert  Cooper,  a  liv- 
ing cousin  of  mine,  the  object  being  to  test  some  false 
statements  made  about  another  Cooper  referred  to  by 
myself  at  an  earlier  experiment.  The  answer  came 
that  he  intended  to  mention  him,  and  the  demand, 
"  Tell  me  about  the  mortgage."  This  cousin  at  the 
time  of  my  father's  death  had  a  heavy  mortgage  on 
his  farm  and  my  father  knew  nothing  about  it.  But 
my  cousin,  Robert  McClellan,  helped  Mr.  Cooper  out 
of  his  difficulty,  and  a  year  later  died,  and  was  one 
of  the  "  communicators  "  at  this  series  of  sittings. 

I  also  asked  about  a  Harper  Crawford,  who  was  an 
old  neighbor  of  father's,  and  the  reply  was  a  state- 
ment that  he  had  frequently  tried  to  mention  him, 
and  the  question  whether  "  they  were  doing  any- 
thing about  the  church."  I  asked  what  church 
was  referred  to,  and  the  reply  was  that  "  they  have 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  223 

put  an  organ  in  it."  I  asked  if  he  meant  a  certain 
church,  knowing  that  this  Harper  Crawford  was  a 
member  of  it,  and  the  reply  in  italics  was :  "  Yes, 
I  do." 

I  made  inquiries  in  the  west  and  found  that  an  or- 
gan had  been  put  in  this  church  and  that  Harper 
Crawford,  being  opposed  to  instrumental  music  in 
religious  worship,  had  left  the  church  on  account  of 
this  act.  I  did  not  know  this  latter  fact,  and  do  not 
recall  any  knowledge  that  the  organ  had  been  put  in 
the  church. 

A  most  curious  and  interesting  set  of  incidents  oc- 
curred in  connection  with  the  name  of  my  step- 
mother, which  was  Margaret,  but  always  called  Mag- 
gie when  living.  The  first  time  that  any  reference 
was  made  to  her  apparently  it  was  given  "  Mannie," 
and  afterward  the  name  of  Nannie  came  when  the 
message  was  pertinent  to  my  stepmother.  I  noticed 
that  when  the  reference  was  to  my  Aunt  Nannie,  the 
appendage  "  aunt "  was  always  there  and  when  the 
fact  was  relevant  to  my  stepmother  the  "  aunt "  was 
omitted.  I  resolved  to  have  the  mistake  corrected,  if 
the  interpretation  I  had  placed  upon  the  case  was 
correct.  At  a  later  sitting,  therefore,  I  stated  what 
error  had  been  committed  and  asked  for  the  correct 
name.  After  much  confusion  and  dramatic  play 
during  a  whole  sitting  George  Pelham  took  "  control ' 
and  the  matter  was  explained  to  him  and  he  said  he 
would  get  it.  Near  the  close  of  the  sitting  he  gave 
Margaret  as  the  name.  In  the  meantime  an  attempt 
by  my  father  to  explain  his  confusion  resulted  in  the 
reference  to  his  mother,  whose  name  was  Margaret, 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

and  his  sister,  Nannie,  with  whose  name  my  stepmoth- 
er's was  confused,  and  to  my  own  mother,  whose  name 
was  incorrectly  given  as  Mary  when  it  was  Martha, 
as  if  trying  to  indicate  what  he  had  called  my  step- 
mother to  distinguish  her  from  the  others,  having 
called  her  Maggie,  as  I  have  said,  in  life. 

There  was  a  reference  to  his  taxes,  which  were  un- 
paid at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  which  I  paid  after- 
ward, and  I  said  so  when  the  reference  was  made. 
Immediately  my  father  asked  if  I  remembered  help- 
ing him  once  in  the  matter  of  his  taxes,  and  as  I  did 
not  remember  it  I  had  to  inquire  for  the  possible 
meaning  of  the  allusion,  and  found  that  I  had  prob- 
ably been  instrumental  in  helping  him  at  another  time 
to  have  his  taxes  paid,  as  I  found  that  I  had  a  letter 
of  father's  mentioning  the  taxes  and  my  brother  paid 
them;  my  recollection  that  I  had  written  my  brother 
about  them  not  being  certain. 

There  were  several  "  communications "  from  my 
uncle,  who  had  died  a  few  weeks  before  my  sittings, 
but  his  name  was  not  given  rightly  for  three  years. 
I  identified  the  person  meant  by  the  name  of  his  wife, 
which  was  given  several  times,  and  by  the  relation- 
ships stated  of  him  and  others.  The  "  communica- 
tion r>  was  so  interesting  that  I  shall  quote  it.  The 
name  Lida  was  mentioned  by  this  uncle,  and  I  asked 
what  relation  she  was  to  me.  The  answer  came: 
"  Annie  and  she  are  cousins.  Lida,  aunt.  (Yes, 
which  Annie  is  cousin  of  her?)  There  is  a  sister 
Annie  and  a  cousin  Annie  and  Aunt  Lida.  She  was 
an  aunt  to  James  Hyslop,  if  I  remember  rightly,  and 
there  is  a  sister  in  the  body  by  that  name,"  and  there 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  225 

followed  by  my  father,  seeing  the  confusion  of  my 
uncle,  a  relative  clause,  "  which  is  the  one  I  failed 
to  mention,  and  I  had  to  come  to  straighten  out  Un- 
cle Clarke's  mind,  James." 

The  statement  "  Annie  and  she  are  cousins  "  was 
a  mistake,  though  it  would  have  been  correct  if  it 
had  been  "  Nannie  and  she  are  cousins."  I  had  a 
sister  Annie,  deceased,  an  Aunt  Eliza  and  a  sister 
Eliza,  always  called  Lida  to  distinguish  her  from  this 
Aunt  Eliza,  and  a  cousin,  Nannie,  who  was  very  in- 
timate with  this  Aunt  Eliza,  the  wife  of  the  Uncle 
"  communicating."  This  sister  Lida  was  the  only 
one  up  to  this  time  that  my  father  had  failed  to  men- 
tion. 

A  remarkable  set  of  incidents  came  with  reference 
to  another  uncle.  At  one  sitting  I  was  asked,  in  con- 
nection with  the  statement  "  there  were  two  James," 
if  I  remembered  an  uncle.  I  asked  "  which  uncle 
James?  "  knowing  that  both  uncles  in  mind  had  that 
name,  and  the  answer  was  "  James  Me."  I  recog- 
nised it  and  a  reference  to  a  "  Cousin  John  "  was 
made  that  confused  me,  as  I  recalled  no  cousin  John 
at  the  time,  and  a  reference  was  made  to  the  "  commu- 
nicator's "  sister,  saying  "  my  sister  Ann  is  here." 
The  uncle  in  mind  and  indicated  by  the  name  "  James 
Me."  had  a  sister  Ann,  of  whose  death  I  did  not  know. 
But  at  the  sitting  a  few  days  later  came  the  follow- 
ing :  "  I  am  here  once  more.  I  am  James  McClel- 
lan,  if  you  wish  to  know,  and  you  are  my  namesake. 
(Yes,  I  remember  you  and  that  I  am  your  name- 
sake.) Yes,  all  right.  We  cannot  quarrel  about 
that,  can  we,  James;  but  I  despised  the  name  Jim." 

226      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

Then  a  reference  to  the  names  Frank  and  John  was 
made,  and  I  asked  who  this  "  Cousin  John "  was, 
and  the  reply  came :  "  That  was  a  mistake.  He  is 
a  brother,  and  he  will  be  here  soon."  Then  followed 
the  statement  that  the  "  communicator's  "  father  was 
also  named  John,  the  name  James  added  to  it  in  the 
confusion,  and  the  further  statement  "  and  he  had  a 
brother  David,  who  had  a  sunstroke."  Then  was 
added,  "  I  wanted  to  speak  of  Nancy." 

I  had  an  uncle  James  McClellan,  who  died  in  1876. 
I  was  his  namesake,  as  well  also  of  my  grandfather  and 
the  author  of  the  Meditations,  and  I  did  not  know  that 
he  despised  the  name  of  Jim.     One  of  his  living  daugh- 
ters did  not  remember  that  he  did,  but  the  other,  the 
oldest  in  the   family,   remembered   it   distinctly,   and 
told  incidents  in  which  my  uncle  and  aunt  tried  to 
get  the  neighbors  to  stop  calling  him  "  Jim."     I  had 
always  known  him  as  Uncle  Mack,  and  never  knew 
why,  supposing  that  it  was  to  distinguish  him  from 
another  uncle  whom  we  called  "  Uncle  Jim."     I  my- 
self was  called  "  Jimmie  "  as  a  boy,  and  afterward 
;'  Jim  ':1  in  the  family  until  a  year  after  this  uncle's 
death,  when  I  left  college  and  my  father  began  call- 
ing me  James.      I  knew  this  brother,  John  McClellan, 
as  treasurer  of  the  college  where  I  graduated.     He 
died  about  nine  months  after  this  sitting.     My  Uncle 
James  McClellan's   father  was  named  John,  and  he 
had  a  brother-in-law,  not  a  brother,  by  the  name  of 
David,  who,  I  learned  after  some  months  of  inquiry 
and  from  one  of  his  surviving  sons,  had  had  a  light 
sunstroke  in  1867.     The  "  communicator's  "  mother's 
name  was  Nancy. 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  227 

I  learned  of  the  death  of  this  brother  John  two 
months  after  its  occurrence,  and  without  telling  Dr. 
Hodgson  the  fact,  asked  him  at  a  sitting  that  he  was 
to  have  a  week  or  so  later  to  ask  my  father  "  if  any- 
thing had  happened  recently  that  he  wished  to  tell 
me,"  and  in  a  few  minutes  came  the  reply  that  John 
McClellan  had  come,  and  he  was  said  to  be  the 
brother  of  James  McClellan.  The  fact  was  correct, 
as  the  reader  will  see. 

There  was  a  large  number  of  minor  and  less  com- 
plex incidents  which  cannot  be  detailed.  But  I  may 
mention  a  few  of  them  for  their  importance.  My 
uncle,  James  McClellan,  in  his  "  communications," 
just  after  giving  the  name  of  his  father  as  "  John 
James  McClellan,"  it  being  only  John  McClellan, 
said :  "  I  want  to  tell  you  about  his  going  to  the 
war,  and  about  one  of  his  fingers  being  gone  before 
he  came  here." 

Inquiry  showed  that  John  McClellan,  the  father 
of  James  McClellan,  my  uncle,  had  not  been  in  any 
war  and  had  not  lost  a  finger  before  he  died.  But 
I  found  that  a  John  McClellan,  no  relative  of  mine, 
but  probably  a  distant  relative  of  my  uncle,  from 
another  branch  of  the  McClellans,  and  who  lived  in 
the  same  county,  was  mentioned  in  the  history  of  that 
county  as  having  been  commissioned  as  an  ensign  in 
the  war  of  1812.  Earlier  in  the  sittings  in  connec- 
tion with  the  name  John  and  associated  with  name  of 
my  cousin,  Robert  McClellan,  who  was  a  communi- 
cator, was  the  name  Hathaway  and  three  of  the  Wil- 
liams family.  I  had  great  difficulty  in  running  down 
the  incidents.  But  I  found  finally  that  this  John 

228      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

McClellan,  who  had  been  the  ensign  in  the  war  of 
1812  had  lost  a  finger  there;  that  he  had  died  some 
years  before  I  was  born,  and  that  Hathaway  was  the 
name  of  his  son-in-law's  cousin,  and  this  son-in-law's 
son  remembers  that  the  Williamses  had  been  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  John  McClellan,  who  had 
lost  the  finger.  He  was  known  prior  to  his  death 
as  "  Uncle  John  McClellan."  In  the  earlier  refer- 
ences to  the  name  "  John  "  there  was  one  by  my  father 
in  which  he  was  once  called  "  Uncle  John,"  and  then 
a  mention  of  the  university  where  my  father  had 
sent  me  and  where  I  had  known  the  John  McClellan 
who  was  my  uncle's  brother,  but  who  was  neither 
mine  nor  my  father's  uncle.  The  old  "  Uncle  John 
McClellan  "  had  lived  near  my  mother's  birth  place, 
and  might  have  been  known  to  her  in  her  early 
days. 

My  mother's  name  was  given  as  "  Mary  Ann  Hys- 
lop,"  when  it  should  have  been  "  Martha  Ann  Hys- 
lop,"  my  cousin  Robert  McClellan's  relationship 
was  correctly  given,  and  he  gave  several  correct  rela- 
tionships to  himself  and  myself,  and  the  name  of  his 
wife  was  given  in  full,  and  later  the  wife's  name  as- 
sociated with  the  Christian  name  of  her  sister  in  the 
same  sentence.  The  Christian  name  of  his  Aunt 
Ruth  was  mentioned,  though  I  have  no  assurance  that 
it  was  she  that  was  meant,  and  a  reference  to  a  book 
of  poems  which  apparently  referred  to  a  book  each 
chapter  of  which  ended  with  a  poem  and  that  was 
read  to  him  during  his  last  illness  by  his  sister.  The 
name  of  a  dog  owned  by  his  son  when  a  very  small 
child  was  given  and  stated  to  refer  to  George,  which 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  229 

was  the  name  of  his  oldest  son.  The  dog's  name,  as 
given,  was  Peter. 

An  incident  of  my  brother's  should  be  mentioned. 
He,  Charles,  purporting  to  communicate,  and  in  con- 
nection with  the  mention  of  the  name  John,  which  in 
connection  with  Charles'  name,  had  no  meaning  to  me, 
said :  "  Ask  him  what  happened  to  the  chimney  after 
I  left.  Wasn't  it  taken  down?  I  heard  father  talk- 
ing to  mother  about  it  some  time  ago.  I  mean  the 
chimney,  James." 

There  was  an  especially  tall  and  ungainly  chim- 
ney on  our  kitchen  at  the  old  home  in  Ohio,  and  it 
had  to  be  built  to  prevent  the  wind  from  coming  over 
the  house  to  drive  the  smoke  into  the  kitchen.  The 
chimney  was  built  in  1861,  three  years  before  my 
brother's  death.  It  was  blown  down  by  a  cyclone  in 
1884,  twenty  years  after  his  death,  so  that  his  "  hear- 
ing father  talking  about  it "  is  the  most  natural  ex- 
pression imaginable  as  the  source  of  his  informa- 
tion. The  same  "  communicator  "  remarked  that  he 
did  not  remember  Hettie  and  spoke  of  her  as  half- 
sister,  after  first  speaking  of  her  as  stepsister  and 
then  correcting  it.  He  had  previously  referred  to  her 
as  his  "  new  sister  Hettie."  She  was  born  ten  years 
after  his  death. 

There  are  many  such  interesting  incidents,  but 
these  as  published  in  my  report  are  sufficient  to  show 
the  complexity  of  the  phenomena  and  their  signifi- 
cance for  the  existence  of  the  supernormal.  I  must 
take  up  incidents  that  have  not  been  published,  and 
which,  in  some  respect,  are  better  than  any  I  have 
mentioned. 

230      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

2.  Incidents  Not  Previously  Published 

At  my  first  sitting  after  that  of  June  8th,  1899, 
and  held  February  5th,  1900,  I  alluded  to  some 
things  which  had  been  said  in  previous  sittings  and 
which  I  could  not  verify.  The  name  Baker  had 
wrongly  been  connected  with  my  aunt  in  connection 
with  an  incident  which  was  substantially  true  on  her 
own  admission,  and  I  resolved  to  test  my  father  on 
this  occasion  by  mentioning  the  name  of  the  young 
man  concerned.  I  did  so,  and  asked  my  father  if  he 
remembered  Steele  Perry,  and  he  recognised  the  name 
and  said  the  family  had  moved  west,  a  fact  which  I 
did  not  know  and  had  to  ascertain  from  an  aunt.  It 
occurred  probably  earlier  than  I860. 

I  had  put  a  question  at  an  earlier  sitting  to  know 
of  what  my  uncle  had  died,  and  did  not  get  any 
correct  reply.  Here  at  this  sitting  there  was  the 
question  asked  me  by  the  "  communicator  " :  "  What 
was  the  trouble  with  the  foot,  and  was  it  the  foot 
or  ankle?'  I  asked  if  my  uncle's  foot  was  meant, 
and  the  reply  was  an  assent.  The  uncle  in  question 
had  died  from  the  effects  of  an  operation  made  nec- 
essary by  being  run  over  at  the  ankle  by  a  car,  and 
this  intimation  of  the  "  trouble  with  the  foot  or  an- 
kle "  here  was  associated  with  my  statement  to  the 
"  communicator  "  that  he  might  take  the  organ  inci- 
dent (p.  222)  off  his  mind.  Now  this  uncle  had  left 
the  same  church  for  the  same  reason  that  Harper 
Crawford  had  left  it,  namely,  because  he  was  opposed 
to  instrumental  music  in  religious  worship.  There 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  231 

was,  during  these  three  sittings,  a  great  effort  to  get 
this  uncle's  name  correctly,  but  it  failed. 

There  was  apparently  an  allusion  to  a  picture  of 
my  brother,  Charles,  which  I  have  and  very  clearly  a 
mention  of  the  sword  which  my  father  had  as  Quar- 
termaster somewhere  about  1845  and  which  he  said 
was  kept  at  a  certain  place  in  the  house,  specifying 
this  almost  correctly.  The  sword  disappeared  be- 
fore I  was  old  enough  to  remember  it.  He  mentioned 
my  stepmother  and  said  she  had  rheumatism  at  the 
time,  and  inquiry  showed  she  was  suffering  from  neu- 
ralgia. I  did  not  know  the  fact.  I  also  got  the  full 
name  of  the  man  who  was  called  David  in  connection 
with  the  sunstroke  incident  (p.  226).  It  was  David 
Elder.  At  another  time  he  referred  to  disturbances 
in  my  stepmother's  home  with  some  specificness  and 
inquiry  showed  that  the  statements  were  correct. 
Later  again  he  said  my  stepmother  had  had  a  fall, 
and  on  inquiry  I  found  this  to  have  been  true  and  did 
not  know  the  fact  until  thus  told  of  it  through  Mrs. 
Piper.  Again  he  said  she  had  trouble  with  her  back 
and  was  quite  lame  a  few  days.  This  turned  out  to  be 
true  and  unknown  to  me.  An  allusion  to  hearing  me 
talk  with  my  brother  George  about  his  moving  was 
true  and  known  only  to  me  and  my  brother. 

A  most  interesting  incident  occurred  at  a  sitting 
when  I  was  not  present.  Dr.  Hodgson  received  a 
message  purporting  to  come  from  my  father  in  which 
he  said:  "What  do  they  say  about  Maggie?  "  and 
Dr.  Hodgson  replied :  "  I  do  not  know."  My 
father  then  went  on  to  say :  "  She  has  been  upsetting 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

things  a  good  deal  at  home,  getting  ready,  I  think, 
for  Hettie's  return." 

A  letter  written  by  my  mother  on  the  same  date 
of  the  sitting  and  in  Indiana  said  that  they  were  busy 
getting  ready  to  leave  Portland  for  the  summer,  my 
stepmother  going  to  Iowa  and  my  sister  Hettie 
to  Ohio.  It  was  the  intention  to  return  in  the  fall  in 
time  for  the  school  which  my  sister  was  teaching. 

One  of  the  most  important  and  most  interesting  set 
of  incidents  is  connected  with  the  "  communications  " 
of  my  father  and  my  uncle,  his  brother-in-law.  In 
my  published  record  this  uncle  never  got  his  name 
through  correctly  and  n^  father  was  no  more  success- 
ful in  giving  it.  My  uncle  was  so  confused  in  his 
"communications  "  that  apparently  he  gave  up  fur- 
ther attempts,  and  as  the  sequel  shows,  apparently 
delegated  my  father  to  mention  an  important  inci- 
dent for  him,  which  he  knew  would  prove  his  identity 
to  me  and  his  living  wife.  At  my  sitting  of  June 
6th,  1899,  (published  report)  I  had  asked  my  father 
to  tell  me  some  incidents  which  had  happened  before 
I  was  born  and  that  my  two  aunts  would  know.  He 
went  away  to  think  them  over  and  on  his  return  men- 
tioned several  which  were  all  unverifiable,  except  the 
allusion  to  Jerry,  the  orphan  boy  who  had  been  in 
the  family,  and  in  connection  with  one  of  the  inci- 
dents connected  with  my  Aunt  Eliza,  said :  "  I  have 
something  better.  Ask  her  if  she  recalls  the  evening 
when  we  broke  the  wheel  to  our  wagon,  and  who  tried 
to  cover  it  up,  so  it  would  not  leak  out,  so  to  speak. 
I  remember  it  as  if  it  happened  yesterday."  I  in- 
quired of  this  aunt  and  she  emphatically  denied  that 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  233 

any  such  incident  had  ever  occurred  in  her  life  in  con- 
nection with  my  father  or  any  one  else. 

On  February  5th,  1900,  after  a  spontaneous  ref- 
erence to  my  Aunt  Eliza  and  some  pertinent  conver- 
sation about  her,  my  father  said  again  sponta- 
neously :  "  What  I  would  now  ask  is  that  Eliza 

should  recall  the  drive  home  and let  me  see  a 

moment 1  am  sure,  but  it  was  one  of  the  shafts, 

but  the  wagon  broke,  some  part  of  it,  and  we  tied  it 
with  a  cord.  I  remember  this  very  well."  Inquiry 
showed  the  incident  false  in  relation  to  my  aunt  men- 
tioned in  the  message.  She  said  that  no  such  inci- 
dent had  ever  occurred  in  their  lives. 

My  uncle  did  not  try  to  communicate  personally 
after  this  date  until  June  2nd,  1902.  I  then  asked 
him  if  he  remembered  what  we  did  just  after  father 
passed  out,  and  the  reply  came :  "  You  are  thinking 
of  that  ride.  I  guess  I  do  not  forget  it."  But  he 
became  too  confused  to  continue,  and  the  next  day 
when  he  appeared  I  put  the  question  about  the  ride 
just  after  father  passed  out.  After  saying: 
"  Your  father  told  you  before  but  had  it  on  his  mind 
Eliza,"  he  referred  immediately  to  a  ride  that  we 
had  taken  to  father's  grave  to  see  a  grave-stone  that 
I  had  ordered  placed  there.  This  was  correct,  but 
was  not  the  incident  that  I  had  in  mind.  From  my 
attitude  on  one  of  the  incidents  mentioned  in  this 
connection  he  apparently  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
we  were  not  thinking  of  the  same  things,  and  said : 
"  I  think  we  are  thinking  of  different  things. 
Let  me  think.  You  don't  mean  the  Sunday  after- 
noon, do  you  ?  "  I  replied  that  I  did.  Immediately 

234      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

he  mentioned  that  we  had  a  breakdown ;  that  we  broke 
the  shaft;  that  we  mended  it  with  a  piece  of  harness; 
that  the  horse  was  a  red  one ;  that  Ave  got  home  late 
in  the  evening,  and  that  it  was  a  dog  that  frightened 
the  horse.  There  were  a  number  of  slight  errors  in 
the  messages.  The  thing  that  frightened  the  horse 
was  a  negro  boy  with  a  goat  and  wagon. 

The  facts  were  these:  My  father  died  on  Satur- 
day at  my  uncle's  home.  The  next  morning,  Sun- 
day, a  telegram  arrived  which  we  had  to  deliver  at 
once  and  we  hastened  to  deliver  it  in  the  country  with 
a  buggy  and  horse.  On  the  road  side  we  met  a  negro 
boy  with  a  goat  and  wagon  which  frightened  the 
horse  and  it  shied,  overturning  the  buggy,  dragging 
it  over  us  and  injuring  both  of  us  rather  badly,  broke 
the  shaft,  which  we  had  to  mend  with  a  string  or 
piece  of  the  harness,  and  we  arrived  home  late  in  the 
evening,  having  promised  each  other  that  we  should 
say  nothing  about  it  so  that  it  would  "  not  leak  out, 
so  to  speak."  But  we  were  so  badly  hurt  that  we 
could  not  conceal  it  longer  than  the  next  morning. 

But  the  most  interesting  incident  of  the  whole 
series  of  "  communications  "  is  the  spontaneous  cor- 
rection of  what  my  father  had  said,  and  the  supposi- 
tion on  his  part  that  I  was  asking  for  an  incident 
of  which  I  was,  in  fact,  not  thinking  at  all  and  which 
I  would  not  have  recalled  but  for  his  reference  to  it, 
namely,  the  drive  to  father's  grave-stone.  The 
reader  will  see  that  my  father  had  confused  the  inci- 
dent with  my  aunt  Eliza,  to  whom  it  was  indeed  rele- 
vant, but  not  as  an  experience  of  hers  with  my  father. 

But  the  most  important  incidents  of  an  evidential 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  235 

character  are  several  connected  with  Mrs.  Piper's 
trances  and  two  other  mediums  with  whom  I  have  ex- 
perimented. This  relation  of  the  facts  makes  it  nec- 
essary to  mention  them  in  connection  with  a  summary 
of  the  Piper  experiments.  They  involve  obtaining 
the  same  messages  through  two  other  mediums  and 
Mrs.  Piper. 

At  the  sitting  of  February  7th,  1900,  after  an  al- 
lusion by  my  father  to  some  attempts  which  I  had 
made,  not  mentioned  at  any  of  my  sittings,  to  have 
"  communications '"  through  other  mediums,  and  es- 
pecially one  that  was  fraudulent,  my  father  gave  me 
a  pass  sentence  in  a  language  which  Mrs.  Piper  does 
not  know  and  by  which  I  was  to  recognize  my  father 
in  future  experiments  with  other  mediums.  This 
pass  sentence  is  known  only  to  Dr.  Hodgson  and  my- 
self and  would  have  been  unknown  to  him  if  he  had 
not  been  the  note-taker  on  the  occasion.  Early  in 
1901  I  discovered  a  lady,  the  wife  of  an  orthodox 
clergyman,  who  seemed  to  have  some  mediumistic 
power,  and  I  resolved  to  test  the  case.  I  had  her 
come  to  New  York  for  sittings  to  be  held  simulta- 
neously with  some  of  Mrs.  Piper's,  with  a  view  of  com- 
municating between  New  York  and  Boston,  if  that 
were  possible.  They  began  on  March  12th,  1901. 
The  attempts  to  communicate  with  Boston  were  fail- 
ures, but  on  March  15th  my  father's  name  was  given 
and  the  first  word  of  his  pass  sentence  was  given, 
probably  the  second  word,  but  certainly  not  the  rest 
of  it.  His  name,  of  course,  was  known  to  the  lady, 
but  the  pass  sentence  was  not. 

Through  the  husband  of  this  lady  I  had  learned 

236      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  another  lady  who  appeared  to  have  mediumistic 
powers.  She  was  not  a  professional  medium,  never 
had  been,  took  no  pay  for  what  she  did,  sat  only  for 
a  few  friends  occasionally,  earned  her  own  living,  and 
had  no  theories  of  her  powers.  I  wrote  to  the  clergy- 
man to  arrange  with  this  lady,  whom  I  shall  call  Miss 
X.,  a  sitting  at  which  I  was  to  be  known  under  an 
assumed  name.  He  arranged  it  for  May  31st,  1902, 
under  the  pseudonym  of  Robert  Brown,  of  Nebraska. 
I  have  to  assume,  of  course,  that  she  might  have  seen 
my  picture  in  the  papers  and  could  have  recognized 
me  on  my  admission  to  the  house.  The  fact  was 
that  she  did  not  know  me  until  my  name  and  title 
were  given  in  the  automatic  writing,  and  she  would 
not  have  known  it  then  had  it  not  been  for  the  fact 
that  she  did  not  go  into  a  trance,  but  did  the  auto- 
matic writing  in  her  normally  conscious  state.  I  had 
evidence  of  her  irreproachable  character  before  I 
sought  the  sitting,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  results 
I  would  not  have  cared  what  her  character  was. 
Some  of  the  facts  were  be}'ond  the  possibility  of 
fraud,  as  the  reader  will  see  from  my  remarks  on 
them.  Their  articulation  with  what  occurred  thirty- 
six  hours  later  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  will  con- 
firm the  case's  exemption  from  suspicion.  But  I  am 
less  interested  in  proving  this  exemption  than  I  am 
the  fact  that  I  have  been  alert  to  the  kind  of  objection 
which  has  to  be  considered  in  first  experiments  of  this 
kind.  The  reader  will  simply  have  to  take  for 
granted  that  I  was  careful  on  this  point. 

On    my    introduction   under   the   name    of   Robert 
Brown  we  sat  down  to  experiment,  I  supplying  the 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  237 

pad  and  pencil.  Miss  X.,  as  said  above,  did  not  go 
into  a  trance.  The  first  words  written  were: 
"  Why,  James."  Astonished  at  the  promptness  with 
which  this  correct  hit  at  my  name  occurred,  I  asked, 
"  Who  says  that?  '"  and  received  the  two  Christian 
names  and  initial  of  the  surname  of  my  wife  who  had 
died  eight  months  before,  the  middle  Christian  name 
being  very  unusual.  This  was  given  with  a  little  diffi- 
culty and  confusion,  as  in  the  Piper  case,  and  imme- 
diately afterward  I  was  spontaneously  greeted  with 
the  statement :  "  Well,  now,  my  dear,  there  is  a  Rob- 
ert himself,  but  not  your  new  self,  your  father."  I  at 
once  asked  that  his  full  name  be  given,  and  received 
the  reply :  "  I  doubt  if  he  can  write.  The  last  name 
begins  with  H.,  as  my  and  yours  do." 

This  discovery  of  my  pseudonym  and  the  indica- 
tion of  the  correct  Christian  name  and  initial  of  the 
surname  of  my  father  was  certainly  interesting,  and 
the  fact  that  the  lady  was  not  in  a  trance,  as  Mrs. 
Piper  is,  suggests  why  he  did  not  write  in  this  case. 
Almost  immediately  after  this  and  apparently  with 
the  feeling  that  nothing  more  evidential  was  required 
came  the  statements : 

"  I  wish  to  talk.  You  have  the  proof  now  and  I 
want  to  speak  of  your  health.  I  am  somewhat  re- 
lieved regarding  an  anxiety  which  held  me  during 
the  past  four  months.  You  are  improved.  That 
constant  irritation  of  the  throat  is  becoming  less  and 
less." 

Nearly  a  year  previous  I  had  broken  down  with 
nervous  prostration  and  tuberculosis,  with  stomach 
complications,  and  during  the  previous  nine  months 

238      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

I  had  recovered  from  the  trouble,  with  a  gain  of  fifty 
pounds,  to  the  extent  that  I  was  pronounced  cured. 
But  three  months,  not  four,  previously  I  had  been 
seized  with  an  irritation  in  the  throat  which  I  feared 
was  a  threat  of  laryngeal  attack,  but  by  the  date  of 
this  sitting  the  irritation  had  disappeared.  Only  one 
other  person  in  the  world,  my  wife's  cousin,  who  spent 
a  month  with  me  in  the  mountains,  had  been  told  of 
the  fact  at  the  time,  and  even  this  cousin  had  not 
been  told  of  the  improvement  three  months  later,  so 
that  the  fact  was  known  only  to  myself.  The  state- 
ments are  not  evidence  of  spirit  agency,  but  they  are 
evidence,  so  far  as  they  go,  of  the  supernormal  and 
are  distinctly  against  fraud.  Then  followed  this  pas- 
sage: 

"  Your  name  is  not  Robert.  It  is  James.  Isn't  it 
James  H.  ?  Well,  wait  a  little.  We  don't  want  too 
much  flutter  here. 

"  (You  know  why  I  want  full  details.)  Ah,  but 
you  have  had  these,  now  let  me  talk.  Don't  ask  for 
more  proof.  (I  have  not  had  them  from  you.)  I 
doubt  if  I  can  give  you  the  one  thing  you  most  desire 
this  moment.  (What  do  I  desire  this  moment?) 
[I  was  not  conscious  of  any  particular  desire  at  the 
time.  I  was  certainly  not  thinking  of  what  was  re- 
ferred to  in  the  reply.]  The  sign,  well  not  exactly 
pass  word,  but  the  test.  If  you  will  keep  motionless 
I  can  be  able  to  give  even  that." 

[Here  Miss  X.  remarked  that  she  felt  as  if  she 
were  going  to  sleep  and  that  she  was  afraid  she  might 
go  into  some  state  which  she  did  not  like.  She  went 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS.  239 

to  the  window  to  throw  off  the  tendency,  and  resumed 
the  writing  on  her  return.] 

"  Well,  we  are  doing  well.  Let  us  go  on.  I  shall 
not  be  able  to  give  that  and  much  else  without  the  co- 
operation of  the  messenger.  Let  us  not  ask  too 
much,  James.  You  have  had  other  cases  when  you 
least  expected  it.  (Is  this  father  talking?)  No, 
Mary." 

Mary  was  the  first  Christian  name  of  my  wife. 
The  denial  that  my  name  was  "  Robert "  and  the 
affirmation  that  it  was  "  James  H."  were  correct,  as 
the  reader  will  see.  My  wife  knew  that  I  had  re- 
ceived detailed  evidence  at  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 
before  her  death.  In  fact  my  report  was  written  at 
the  time  of  her  death.  The  reference  to  the  "  sign, 
well  not  exactly  pass  word,  but  the  test  "  is  surpris- 
ingly accurate.  It  is  not  a  pass  word,  but  a  pass 
sentence,  and  hence  a  "  sign  "  or  "  test."  The  ap- 
parent tendency  of  Miss  X.  here  to  go  into  a  trance 
in  this  connection  is  a  most  suggestive  incident,  as 
that  is  the  condition  in  which  I  would  most  naturally 
expect  the  pass  sentence  to  be  given.  Still  more  sug- 
gestive is  the  reference  to  the  "  co-operation  of  the 
messenger,"  as  the  "  controls  "  in  the  Piper  case  call 
themselves  the  "  messengers "  and  claim  that  they 
have  to  "  co-operate "  with  communicators  in  that 
case  in  order  to  effect  the  delivery  of  messages.  Miss 
X.  did  not  know  this  fact,  and,  of  course,  knew  noth- 
ing of  my  expectation  of  a  pass  sentence. 

In  one  message  I  was  referred  to  as  "  Prof."  and 
in  response  to  the  question  where  we  had  met,  the  an- 

240      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

swer  was  "  not  where  we  lived,"  which  was  correct, 
though  perhaps  not  significant,  and  in  reply  to  the 
question  where  we  had  lived  I  got  the  answer :  "  The 
river  of  the  beautiful  scenery,  H.  river,"  and  then 
came  the  last  letter  of  the  name,  "  n  "  and  then  "  d 
and  s,"  said  to  be  the  middle  letters.  It  was  apparent 
that  the  "  Hudson  River  "  was  meant,  and  this  was 
correct,  my  wife  being  very  fond  of  its  scenery. 

I  asked  the  "  communicator  "  "  What  did  you  like 
most  in  life?  "  and  received  the  reply:  "  I  was  fond 
of  music  for  one  thing,  but  you  have  in  mind  some 
other  recreation  or  amusement."  My  wife  was  very 
fond  of  music,  studied  it  for  five  years,  and  taught  it 
in  a  western  college.  I  was  thinking  of  music  when 
I  asked  the  question,  but  not  of  what  was  apparently 
meant  in  the  next  statement.  My  wife  was  as  fond 
of  neat  housekeeping  as  she  was  of  music,  and  I  used 
to  tease  her  in  life  by  saying  that  when  she  would 
get  to  heaven  her  occupation  would  be  to  play  the 
piano  and  scrub  the  floor. 

Apparently  prompted  by  the  "  subliminal v  con- 
sciousness of  Miss  X.,  through  which  I  had  to  get 
the  "  communications,"  I  asked  the  "  communicator  " 
what  had  been  the  color  of  her  eyes.  With  a  little 
confusion  I  got  the  answer  "  They  were  grey  on 
blue."  This  was  correct,  as  my  wife  had  greyish 
blue  eyes  and  I  asked  what  she  used  to  say  was  the 
color  of  mine.  The  reply  was  "  I  can't  tell.  I  know 
though,"  and  a  correct  statement  about  her  hair  and 
disposition  immediately  followed. 

A  number  of  other  quite  pertinent  "  communica- 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS. 

tions  "  came,  which  I  shall  not  mention,  but  the  one 
which  was  the  most  important  for  later  incidents  was 
this  about  the  color  of  my  wife's  eyes.  I  have  placed 
it  last  for  the  sake  of  this  emphasis.  As  I  have  said 
above,  this  was  on  Saturday  night,  May  31st,  and 
I  was  to  have  sittings  the  next  Monday  and  the  two 
following  days,  June  2nd,  3rd,  and  4th,  with  Mrs. 
Piper.  I  locked  up  my  report  of  Miss  X.'s  sitting, 
said  nothing  about  it  to  any  one,  and  went  to  Mrs. 
Piper  the  next  Monday  without  any  one  knowing 
what  I  had  been  doing. 

Near  the  close  of  this  first  sitting  and  without 
any  previous  allusion  to  her  presence  her  name  was 
given  as  "  Mamie  Hyslop  " ;  as  soon  as  given  I  recog- 
nised it,  and  the  following  colloquy  through  Mrs. 
Piper's  hand  took  place: 

"(Have  you  tried  to  communicate  with  me  before?) 
Again  and  again.  (Did  you  get  anything  through 
to  me?)  I  tried  to  say  I  am  still  with  you.  (Well, 
when  was  it  that  you  tried?)  Only  a  day  ago. 
(That  is  right.  Do  you  remember  any  question  that 
I  asked  you?)  Not  at  the  moment,  only  that  you 
asked  me  to  meet  you  here.  (All  right.)  I  heard 
you  ask  this  but  not  as  you  speak  now.  (Do  you  re- 
member saying  anything  about  your  eyes?)  Oh, 
Yes.  (Well?)  I  said  they  were  open  and  I  could 

see  clearly  now.      (Well,  I  meant  the  color  of ) 

Yes,  I Do  not  say  anything  more.  I  will  re- 
call. I  tried  to  say  it  -  Do  not  say  anything 
more.  I  found  the  light  open.  Oh,  I  hear.  I  said 
B Grey.  ( Right.  One  word  more. )  Blue 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

I  started  to  say  blue  first,  then  I  happened 
to  think  that  the  first  word  was  grey  and  the  second 
blue.  You  said  something  about  hair." 

I  have  two  other  records  besides  that  of  Miss  X.  in 
which  there  is  fair  reason  to  suppose  that  my  wife 
had  tried  to  "  communicate."  The  rest  of  the  story 
is  apparent  to  the  reader  of  the  sitting  with  Miss  X., 
as  here  described,  except  the  statement  that  I  had 
asked  her  to  meet  me  at  the  Piper  case  and  that  I  did 
not  "  speak "  it  as  I  did  here.  This  last  is  true, 
however,  but  does  not  stand  in  my  written  record. 
I  wrote  down  only  what  I  had  spoken  orally.  But  I 
had  over  and  over  again  said  mentally,  or  made  the 
mental  suggestion,  "  meet  me  at  the  Piper  case." 
Here  the  fact  is  indicated,  and  the  distinction  drawn 
between  my  modes  of  "  communicating  "  with  her  in 
the  two  cases.  In  the  Piper  case  we  always  speak 
aloud  to  the  hand.  I  had  spoken  aloud  in  the  case 
of  the  sitting  with  Miss  X.  except  in  this  mental  sug- 
gestion. All  the  other  statements  in  the  passage 
quoted  from  the  record  of  Mrs.  Piper  explain  them- 
selves as  true,  and  it  was  interesting  to  remark  the 
correction  of  the  order  in  which  "  grey  "  and  "  blue  " 
had  been  given. 

I  followed  up  the  "  communication  "  just  quoted 
with  the  same  question  that  I  had  asked  on  Saturday 
night  previous  after  receiving  the  message  "  grey  on 
blue,"  as  follows:  ("  What  did  you  use  to  say  about 
the  color  of  my  eyes?)  your  eyes.  (Yes.)  like - 
do  you  remember  the  joke  about  them?  (Yes.)" 
What  she  used  to  say  about  the  color  of  my  eyes  was 
her  joke  about  them,  but  with  this  reference  to  the 

PERSONAL  EXPERIMENTS. 

matter  the  sitting  came  to  an  end  and  the  "  communi- 
cator "  could  not  complete  the  answer  to  my  question 
until  the  next  day  when  she  returned  to  it  at  once 
on  Mrs.  Piper's  going  into  the  trance,  and  succeeded 
after  much  difficulty  and  confusion  in  getting  "  green- 
ish grey  green."  My  wife  used  to  say  that  the  color 
of  my  eyes  was  "  grizzly  gray  green"  resorting  to 
this  alliteration  to  indulge  teasing. 

My  wife  mentioned  a  picture  of  herself  with  a  wide 
collar  and  "clasp,"  a  name  she  had  always  given 
to  a  certain  type  of  breastpin,  saying  that  the  picture 
was  in  a  little  frame ;  I  found  this  picture  in  Philadel- 
phia in  a  closet  drawer,  the  only  one  with  a 
"clasp"  among  many  taken  each  year  since  her 
childhood.  The  statement  that  it  was  in  a  frame  was 
false,  as  it  was  in  an  album.  I  was  asked  by  her  if  I 
remembered  "  Scott,"  which  was  the  name  of  a  ladv 

*i 

friend  she  and  I  met  in  Germany  and  with  whom  we 
had  many  walks,  but  who  went  to  India  and  we  after- 

•/ 

ward  had  no  communications  with  her.  But  one  of 
the  most  interesting  incidents  was  her  statement  that 
we  had  paid  my  father  a  visit  in  the  west;  that  we 
had  taken  a  drive  in  the  country  on  that  occasion ;  that 
it  rained,  and  that  I  had  pulled  my  coat  collar  up 
over  my  neck,  and  that  I  had  taken  her  "  to  the  school 
house."  Every  incident  of  this  is  true.  A  year  after 
our  marriage  we  visited  my  father  in  the  west  and  he 
took  us  out  for  a  drive  in  the  Wabash  valley,  and  a 
thunderstorm  came  up  and  as  I  was  in  the  front  of 
the  carriage  and  driving  I  had  to  pull  up  my  coat 
collar  to  save  my  shirt  and  collar,  which  I  failed 
to  do  and  was  laughed  at  for  it. 

JJ44       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

There  were  a  number  of  other  incidents  of  equal 
evidential  value,  but  I  have  given  an  adequate  account 
of  the  record  and  shall  turn  from  it  to  the  discussion 
of  theories.  The  less  complex  incidents,  although 
evidential  to  a  high  degree,  would  take  more  time  to 
explain  than  it  is  prudent  to  take  here.  The  sum- 
maries which  I  have  given  at  such  length  suffice  to 
indicate  the  problem  before  the  scientific  man  in  pre- 
senting an  explanation. 

CHAPTER  IX 

THE  TELEPATHIC   HYPOTHESIS 

I  have  carefully  refrained  from  the  explanation  of 
the  facts  which  have  been  summarised  in  the  previous 
three  chapters,  as  I  was  not  there  interested  in  any- 
thing more  than  the  supernormal  character  of  the 
phenomena,  which  will  be  admitted  by  every  intelli- 
gent person  who  admits  that  fraud  of  any  and  all 
kinds  has  been  excluded  from  the  case.  What  the 
specific  explanation  is  or  may  be  is  now  to  be  the 
subject  of  consideration.  The  theories  which  the  psy- 
chologist has  to  keep  in  mind  when  trying  to  explain 
all  such  phenomena  purporting  to  be  supernormal, 
and  some  of  them  claiming  a  source  in  the  agency  of 
discarnate  spirits,  are  chance  coincidence,  guessing, 
suggestion  by  experimenters,  fraud,  telepathy,  and 
discarnate  spirits.  Every  intelligent  reader  of  the 
records,  of  which  I  have  given  samples,  will  perceive 
without  my  intimation  that  chance  coincidence,  guess- 
ing, and  suggestion  by  experimenters  will  not  account 
for  such  facts,  collectively  considered,  as  I  have 
quoted.  Some  occasional  incidents  in  the  records  can 
probably  be  so  accounted  for,  and  these  have  not  been 
given  any  important  place  in  the  problem  or  in  this 
discussion.  But  since  these  assumed  explanations  can- 
not apply  to  the  whole  system  of  facts  we  are  forced 
to  some  other  theory  to  account  for  them,  and  hence 
we  are  reduced  to  the  last  three  hypotheses  for  our 

245 

246      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

alternatives.  The  reason  that  there  can  be  no  more 
alternatives  is  the  fact  that  the  current  conception 
and  use  of  the  term  "  telepathy  "  is  so  comprehensive 
in  its  scope  of  supposed  action  that  it  can  mean  any 
supernormal  act  whatever  that  is  not  spirits  and  not 
ordinary  conscious  fraud.  Otherwise  we  might  say 
that  some  way  of  escaping  the  choice  between  the 
three  theories  mentioned  might  be  discovered.  But 
the  fact  that  some  critics  of  the  spiritistic  theory,  who 
have  given  up  fraud,  assume  that  "  telepathy  "  is 
convertible  with  supernormal  information  represent- 
ing the  knowledge  of  any  living  person  whatever, 
shutting  out  all  evidence  of  spirits  except  what  living 
persons  do  not  know  (!)  is  indication  that  we  are 
limited  to  the  three  alternatives  in  the  explanation  of 
the  phenomena.  These  I  may  state  for  clearness  to  be 
(1)  Fraud;  (2)  Telepathy;  and  (3)  Spirits.  I  ex- 
clude secondary  personality  from  consideration  be- 
cause it  does  not,  in  any  recognized  form  of  it,  include 
any  supernormal  phenomena. 

I  shall  not  underestimate  the  importance  of  elimi- 
nating fraud  from  the  consideration  of  such  phenom- 
ena as  I  am  discussing.  Indeed,  taking  the  subject 
of  psychic  research  generally  and  especially  medium- 
istic  phenomena  in  general,  as  they  are  popularly 
known,  I  think  that  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  is  a 
stronger  competitor  of  spiritism  than  telepathy.  The 
reasons  for  this  judgment  will  be  seen  a  little  later. 
For  the  present  I  must  only  say  that  I  think  fraud  is 
a  much  more  relevant  supposition  than  telepathy  when 
we  consider  the  type  of  facts  purporting  to  represent 
spirits.  Throwing  aside  "  materialisation  "  and  slate 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     247 

writing  performances,  as  wholly  worthless  in  any 
such  conditions  as  they  are  usually  described,  and 
taking  the  detective  type  of  fraud,  it  always  has  this 
merit  and  intelligibility,  that  it  represents  a  fairly 
clear  conception  of  personal  identity.  That  is,  the 
person  to  whom  the  facts  are  relevant  is  recognisable 
from  the  nature  of  those  facts,  and  without  regard 
to  the  process  by  which  they  are  obtained  they  sug- 
gest the  person  concerned.  Names,  scars  on  the  per- 
son, familiar  expressions,  and  the  thousand  little  in- 
cidents which  we  should  rely  upon  in  normal  and 
honest  conditions  for  testing  the  truthfulness  of  the 
incidents  and  their  pertinence  are  what  frauds  em- 
ploy, and  there  is  usually  no  mistaking  the  persons 
to  whom  they  refer,  and  hence  they  prove  personal 
identity.  But  it  requires  much  more  to  prove  the 
supernormal  acquisition  of  the  information.  There  is 
nothing  in  telepathy,  so  far  as  we  at  present  know 
it  scientifically,  to  show  that  its  acquisition  of  knowl- 
edge simulates  the  personal  identity  of  any  one,  living 
or  dead.  But  fraud  can  do  this  to  great  perfection, 
and  hence  fraud  is  the  most  natural  competitor  of 
the  spiritistic  hypothesis. 

In  the  phenomena,  however,  which  I  have  sum- 
marised in  this  book  and  in  the  cases  concerned,  I  do 
not  propose  to  discuss  the  hypothesis  of  fraud.  I 
consider  that  it  has  been  excluded  from  consideration 
as  long  ago  as  1889,  and  I  think  that  every  intelli- 
gent person  who  examines  the  facts  carefully  and  in 
their  details  will  not  be  willing  to  accept  the  respon- 
sibility which  his  theory  of  fraud  will  impose  upon 
him  for  its  assertion.  Enough  has  been  said  upon 

248       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

this  to  make  it  unnecessary  to  discuss  it  here,  and 
hence  I  shall  refuse  to  say  anything  more  about  it.  I 
therefore  limit  the  consideration  of  the  problem  to  the 
hypotheses  of  telepathy  and  spiritism. 

To  state  the  issue  clearly  as  I  understand  it,  I  do 
not  yet  admit  that  telepathy  applies  to  the  Piper  and 
similar  cases.  Whatever  theory  is  true,  I  do  not  yet 
accept  the  telepathic  explanation  of  the  phenomena. 
The  objections  to  telepathy  in  general  are  the  fol- 
lowing : 

First,  telepathy  is  not  yet  so  assured  an  explanation 
of  any  facts  in  the  scientific  world  as  is  desirable  for 
making  it  a  solvent  for  such  facts  as  I  have  quoted 
in  previous  chapters.  The  scientific  world  generally 
has  not  accepted  it  with  any  assurance  as  yet,  and 
even  where  it  is  accepted  there  is  no  knowledge  what- 
ever of  its  laws  and  conditions.  The  scientific  man 
will  insist  that  these  laws  and  conditions  must  be 
definitely  ascertained  before  applying  the  hypothesis 
upon  any  large  scale.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is 
possibly  evidence  for  sporadic  telepathy,  and  hence 
I  am  in  a  position  to  admit  the  possibility  of  objec- 
tions to  the  spiritistic  interpretation  of  the  phenom- 
ena. But  the  man  who  does  not  admit  telepathy  at 
least  has  no  way  of  evading  the  spiritistic  hypothesis. 
If  he  accepts  it,  he  must  have  some  clear  idea  of  its 
laws  and  conditions  before  he  is  even  then  permitted 
to  apply  it  to  phenomena  like  those  of  Mrs.  Piper. 
He  may  do  it  for  the  sake  of  suspending  his  judg- 
ment until  he  can  understand  and  remove  objections 
to  alternative  hypotheses,  but  as  anything  more  than 
a  politic  device  for  exercising  caution  it  cannot  be 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     249 

justified  in  so  wide  an  application  as  is  generally 
made,  until  its  laws  and  conditions  have  been  deter- 
mined, and  there  is  not  even  an  approximation  to  this 
at  present. 

But  suppose  that  telepathy  has  been  proved  to  be 
a  fact,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  conditions 
under  which  it  has  any  claim  at  all  to  scientific  rec- 
ognition represent  the  agent  as  thinking  of  the  fact 
transmitted  at  the  time  that  the  percipient  obtains  it. 
That  is,  telepathy  as  a  necessary  supposition,  if  neces- 
sary at  all,  is  limited  to  the  present  active  mental 
states  of  the  communicator.  To  put  it  plainly,  telep- 
athy, so  far  as  it  is  scientifically  supported,  represents 
what  the  person  communicating  is  thinking  about  at 
the  time  that  the  thought  is  received  by  another,  and 
any  other  form  of  telepathy  has  not  yet  received  suf- 
ficient scientific  credentials  to  be  assured  of  its  ex- 
tension beyond  what  I  have  said.  It  may  be  capable 
of  doing  all  that  is  claimed  for  it,  but  this  claim  has 
not  yet  been  adequately  proved.  There  are  facts  that 
suggest  this  larger  telepathy,  but  the  scientific  man 
will  be  as  cautious  in  accepting  this  extension  of  it 
as  he  is  in  accepting  it  in  any  form.  Until  he  obtains 
evidence  of  its  extension  beyond  the  present  active 
mental  states  of  the  agent  or  communicator,  he  will 
not  readily  admit  its  application  to  such  phenomena 
as  a  whole,  as  I  have  mentioned  in  previous  chapters. 

Another  limitation  of  it  is  important.  It  has  been 
referred  to  before.  I  mean  its  meaning  as  a  con- 
ception. This  is  that  the  term  means,  in  the  light 
of  the  experiments  that  are  supposed  to  justify  it  at 
least  as  a  working  hypothesis,  nothing  more  than  the 

250      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

existence  of  some  cause  for  coincidences  in  the 
thoughts  of  two  persons  that  cannot  be  due  to  chance. 
It  is  not  an  explanation  of  anything.  It  is  not  a 
name  for  a  cause  of  the  coincidence,  but  a  name  for 
a  nexus  that  demands  a  cause.  We  often  speak  and 
think  of  it  as  meaning  or  implying  a  direct  trans- 
mission of  thought  from  one  living  person  to  another 
in  some  supernormal  manner,  and  we  are  led  to  this 
conception  of  it  by  the  perpetual  assumption  that  it 
excludes  a  spiritistic  influence.  But  the  fact  is  that 
we  know  nothing  whatever  about  the  process  of  super- 
normal communication  from  mind  to  mind.  It  may  be 
a  direct  transmission  of  thought  by  some  process  not 
yet  known  and  not  involving  the  intermediation  of 
spirits.  It  may  be  by  some  process  of  vibration  set 
up  in  the  ether  between  mind  and  mind,  that  is  living 
minds.  It  may  be  by  spiritistic  mediation  in  which 
a  spirit  gets  the  thought  in  some  unknown  way  from 
one  living  person  and  carries  it  to  another.  It  may 
be  by  ethereal  vibrations  set  a-going  by  a  thinker  and 
perceived  and  interpreted  by  a  spirit  and  then  com- 
municated by  a  similar  process  through  the  ether  to 
another  living  mind.  I  do  not  know  which  of  these 
it  may  be,  or  whether  it  is  any  other.  I  know  of  no 
i  reasons  to  justify  the  supposition  that  our  thoughts 
affect  the  ether  in  any  way,  or  produce  vibrations 
anywhere  in  the  material  universe.  But  all  these  may 
be  possible,  so  far  as  I  know.  But  there  are  none 
of  them  sufficiently  known  to  assure  ourselves  that 
telepathy  excludes  the  operation  of  spirits  in  all  cases. 
If  we  assume  that  it  is  some  direct  process  between 
living  minds  without  the  intermediation  of  outside 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     251 

agencies  it  of  course  limits  the  nature  of  the  evidence 
that  may  be  accepted  as  proof  of  spiritistic  influence, 
but  it  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  that  agency. 
And  if  telepathy  be  limited,  as  the  scientific  evidence 
at  its  best  does  limit  it,  to  the  present  active  states  of 
the  agent's  mind  living,  we  still  have  no  adequate 
reasons  for  supposing  that  it  can  explain  facts  not  so 
thought  of  at  the  time.  If  we  knew  the  process 
involved,  we  might  employ  the  hypothesis  more  con- 
fidently to  qualify  or  deny  spiritistic  reality.  But 
not  knowing  this  process  we  can  only  maintain  our 
suspense  of  judgment,  not  disqualify  the  spiritistic 
theory  when  we  are  dealing  with  personal  identity  and 
the  memories  of  sitters  at  such  experiments  as  have 
been  quoted. 

But  a  still  more  important  limitation  of  the  telep- 
athic hypothesis  is  to  be  found  in  its  entire  consistency 
with  that  of  spirits.  No  matter  what  the  process 
involved  in  the  transmission  of  thought  from  one  liv- 
ing mind  to  another,  the  fact  does  not  exclude  the 
possibility  that  telepathy  may  be  the  very  process  by 
which  the  discarnate,  if  it  exists,  communicates  with 
the  living.  If  thought  produces  vibration  in  the 
ether  or  other  media  between  mind  and  mind,  whether 
living  or  deceased,  it  will  only  be  a  question  of  the 
kind  of  facts  supernormally  obtained  to  settle  wheth- 
er the  telepathy  is  between  living  minds  only  or  be- 
tween the  living  and  the  dead.  But  suppose  that 
we  do  not  know  whether  there  is  any  undulatory  ac- 
tion in  media  involved  in  the  process,  or  that  we  know 
that  no  such  process  exists,  still  the  fact  that  telepa- 
thy, when  accepted  as  a  fact,  means  that  mind  can 

252      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

communicate  to  other  minds  in  supernormal  ways,  it  is 
again  only  a  question  of  the  kind  of  evidence  to 
determine  whether  a  discarnate  consciousness  may 
not  also,  if  it  exists,  communicate  by  this  telepa- 
thy to  living  minds,  and  prove  its  identity.  If  a 
living  mind  can  transfer  its  thoughts  to  another 
living  mind  without  the  use  of  physical  means  or 
of  sensory  impressions  a  discarnate  mind  might  do 
the  same,  and  it  is  only  a  question  of  the  evidence  and 
the  kind  of  facts  obtained  to  decide  whether  this 
source  is  not  the  real  one.  Thus  it  appears  that 
telepathy,  so  far  from  being  an  objection  to  the  spirit- 
istic hypothesis,  might  represent  the  means  by  which 
spirit  communication  should  be  effected.  Of  course 
the  existence  of  telepathy  as  a  mode  of  communica- 
tion between  living  minds  would  increase  the  need  of 
caution  in  accepting  the  real  or  alleged  fact  of  dis- 
carnate spirits  as  communicating  with  the  living,  sup- 
posing them  to  exist,  and  so  would  serve  as  an  evi- 
dential difficulty  in  the  credibility  of  the  existence  of 
spirits,  and  would  thus  make  it  harder  to  prove  the 
existence  of  the  discarnate,  but  it  would  not  imply 
either  the  impossibility  or  incredibility  of  such  com- 
munication. On  the  contrary,  it  would  rather 
strengthen  the  possibility  of  it.  It  might  be  the  very 
means  of  proving  the  condition  of  securing  the  evi- 
dence. I  do  not  say  that  it  is  such  a  condition,  as  we 
know  too  little  about  it  to  justify  any  assurance  on 
that  point.  But  if  supersensible  communications  can 
take  place  between  the  living,  the  fact  shows  that  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge  is  not  always  an  ordinary 
physical  affair,  and  it  would  be  only  a  question  of 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     258 

evidence  to  determine  whether  the  supersensible  phe- 
nomena were  from  supersensible  beings  that  once  ex- 
isted in  bodily  form.  If  the  evidence  is  of  that  kind 
which  unmistakably  points  to  the  person  represented, 
and  if  telepathy  does  not  in  any  of  its  ordinary  mani- 
festations show  that  it  represents  the  personal  identity 
of  living  persons,  we  cannot  well  escape  belief  in 
spirits,  unless  we  suppose  that  subconscious  actions  are 
rather  fiendish  in  their  simulation  of  spirits  after 
acquiring  the  information  that  so  evidently  points  to 
the  persons  represented.  The  psychological  compli- 
cations involved  in  a  telepathic  hypothesis  that  com- 
pletely simulates  spirits  must  make  any  man  pause 
when  trying  to  estimate  the  nature  of  unconscious 
mental  action.  It  would  have  to  be  regarded  as  su- 
premely devilish  in  its  character,  as  we  shall  see  a  little 
later  when  the  range  of  such  telepathy  is  examined. 

It  will  be  important  to  see  just  what  we  have  to 
conceive  in  the  kind  of  telepathy  that  it  is  necessary 
to  assume  when  we  are  discrediting  the  explanation 
by  spirits  of  such  phenomena  as  I  have  summarised. 
Telepathy  as  we  know  it,  if  we  know  it  scientifically 
at  all,  is  generally  and  perhaps  always  limited,  in  its 
access  to  other  men's  minds,  to  the  present  mental 
states.  This  is  all  that  we  have  even  ostensibly  as- 
sured evidence  for.  But  such  telepathy  does  not  even 
approximate  an  explanation  of  the  Piper  and  similar 
cases.  Prof.  Stout,  of  St.  Andrew's  University,  Scot- 
land, speaking  of  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers'  work  on 
Human  Personality  and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death, 
says :  "  I  agree  with  Mr.  Myers  that  there  is  no  suffi- 
cient reason  for  being  peculiarly  sceptical  concerning 

254-      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

communications  from  departed  spirits.  I  also  agree 
with  him  that  the  alleged  cases  of  such  communication 
cannot  be  with  any  approach  to  a  probability  ex- 
plained away  as  mere  instances  of  telepathy."  There 
is  no  sort  of  coincidental  relation  in  most  of  the  inci- 
dents between  what  the  sitter  is  consciously  thinking 
of  in  the  Piper  and  similar  cases,  and  what  is  said  or 
written  by  the  medium.  The  most  of  the  incidents 
told  are  not  in  the  sitter's  conscious  thought  and  many 
have  never  been  there  at  all,  and  I  have  purposely 
narrated  a  number  of  incidents  that  prove  this. 
Hence  telepathy  as  represented  by  such  phenomena  as 
are  supposed  to  prove  it  is  not  at  all  adequate  to 
explain  such  incidents  as  are  not  in  the  conscious  men- 
tal action  of  the  sitter.  The  conception  of  telepathy 
will  have  to  be  made  to  include  the  capacity  of  the 
medium  to  acquire  facts  from  the  memory  of 
the  sitter,  or  what  some  call  the  subliminal  con- 
dition of  the  mind.  Some  would  say  the  "  sub- 
jective mind,"  but  this  is  a  misnomer,  as  it  im- 
plies things  not  implied  by  the  terms  memory  and 
subliminal.  But  no  explanation  of  the  Piper  and 
similar  cases  is  possible  which  does  not  at  least  suppose 
the  acquisition  of  knowledge  from  the  memory  of 
sitters,  if  the  spiritistic  theory  is  to  be  rejected.  Per- 
haps the  majority  of  the  facts  represent  incidents 
known  to  the  sitter  at  some  time,  but  not  in  his  con- 
scious state  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  But  there  is 
as  yet  no  adequate  scientific  evidence  of  any  such 
telepathy.  It  is  true  that,  in  the  Piper  case,  and 
perhaps  others,  there  are  incidents  that  suggest  such 
a  possibility,  but  they  are  far  from  proving  it.  They 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS  255 

are  such  incidents  as  occurred  at  Dr.  Hodgson's  sit- 
tings in  which  the  memories  instead  of  the  present 
mental  states  of  the  Howards  were  obtained  (p.  197), 
and  the  same  with  Mrs.  Holmes  (p.  182).  They  are 
types  of  occasional  phenomena.  But  it  should  be  re- 
membered that  in  the  former  case  George  Pelham  had 
already  done  much  to  prove  his  personal  identity 
before  he  attempted  to  ascertain  the  thoughts  and 
actions  of  persons  living,  so  that  this  supposed  ex- 
tension of  telepathy  involves  a  relation  to  a  possible 
spirit  agency  as  its  means.  The  only  thing  that 
suggests  an  explanation  other  than  spirits  is  the  fact 
that  the  incidents  are  not  relevant  to  the  personal 
identity  of  deceased  persons,  while  they  might  be 
relevant  to  the  proof  of  their  powers  if  their  existence 
is  once  proved  or  assumed.  But  no  telepathy  that 
does  not  go  as  far  as  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  from 
the  memories  of  sitters  will  explain  the  phenomena, 
and  there  is  no  such  scientific  evidence  for  this  kind 
of  telepathy  as  there  is  for  the  transmission  of  present 
mental  states. 

But  let  us  grant  that  telepathy  can  reach  the  mem- 
ories of  sitters,  that  it  can  have  access  to  the  sub- 
liminal states  of  the  mind  as  well  as  the  present 
active  states  of  consciousness  of  sitters.  Yet  even 
this  telepathy  will  not  approximate  an  explanation  of 
the  phenomena.  No  telepathy  which  does  not  extend 
in  some  way  to  all  living  minds  and  memories  can 
even  approach  an  explanation  of  such  cases.  So  far 
as  I  know  such  a  telepathy  may  be  possible,  but  there 
is  no  adequate  scientific  evidence  for  it.  I  do  not 
know  even  one  iota  of  evidence  for  it  that  can  be 

256      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

scientifically  accepted.  Moreover  it  represents  a 
process  far  more  incredible  than  spirits,  and  no  intel- 
ligent man  will  resort  to  the  belief  of  it  in  any  haste. 
Only  a  superstitious  prejudice  against  the  possibility 
of  spirits  will  induce  a  man  to  betray  such  credulity 
as  the  acceptance  of  such  a  universal  telepathy.  A 
man  that  can  believe  it  in  the  present  state  of  human 
knowledge  can  believe  anything,  and  ought  to  be 
tolerant  of  those  who  have  a  lurking  suspicion  that 
there  might  be  such  a  thing  as  a  discarnate  spirit.  I 
do  not  yet  believe  there  is  any  such  telepathy,  and  I 
am  certain  that  there  is  no  adequate  scientific  evidence 
for  it.  But  I  shall  treat  any  evidence  for  it  respect- 
fully, and  when  it  is  proved  I  will  frankly  admit 
the  difficulties  which  it  would  propose  for  a  spiritistic 
theory.  I  shall  exact,  however,  of  its  claimants  as 
much  specific  evidence  as  now  exists  for  the  possibility 
of  discarnate  spirits. 

I  have  seen  the  hypothesis  proposed  that  Mrs. 
Piper's  subliminal  condition  is  the  recipient  of  all  the 
mental  states  of  living  people  and  their  memories, 
these  being  acquired  by  telepathy  going  on  all  the 
time,  but  not  revealed  in  her  normal  life,  and  that  she 
has  only  to  go  into  a  trance  that  her  subliminal  action 
may  select  the  proper  facts  and  palm  them  off  for 
communication  with  spirits.  This  hypothesis  is  at 
least  as  large  as  the  spiritistic,  and  it  is  so  wholly 
lacking  in  evidence  and  conceivability  that  I  shall  not 
treat  it  seriously  in  the  light  of  the  mistakes  occurring 
in  mediumistic  phenomena  until  it  presents  some  cre- 
dentials that  will  save  it  from  ridicule.  I  shall  not 
make  any  assertions  about  impossibilities,  but  I  may 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     257 

preserve  my  sanity  if  I  am  not  more  credulous  in  re- 
gard to  this  than  I  might  be  about  discarnate  spirits, 
who  would  be  as  respectable  realities  as  this  kind  of 
telepathy  and  fiendish  representation. 

I  come  now  to  more  specific  objections  to  the  telep- 
athic hypothesis  as  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena 
under  discussion.  The  general  difficulties  of  it  show 
that  it  has  at  least  to  be  as  large  as  the  spiritistic,  or 
even  larger,  in  order  to  be  a  competitor,  and  also  in 
every  form  as  incapable  of  denying  the  applicability 
of  spirits  to  the  phenomena  as  equally  relevant  to 
the  facts,  if  they  are  not  proved  by  them.  But  there 
are  certain  specific  objections  drawn  from  the  records 
of  such  phenomena  that  are  very  important  to  keep  in 
mind. 

The  first  of  these  is  the  selectiveness  of  the  process 
involved  in  the  phenomena  presented.  If  telepathy 
between  the  living  is  the  explanation  of  them  it  has 
to  possess  the  same  selectiveness,  and  in  fact  a  far 
larger  selectiveness  in  securing  the  facts  than  any 
selectiveness  supposed  of  discarnate  spirits.  What  is 
noticeable  in  the  facts  presented  is  their  definite  relev- 
ancy to  the  proof  of  the  personal  identity  of  the  de- 
ceased. Whether  the  deceased  continue  to  exist  or 
not,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  who  is  meant  by  the 
facts,  and  if  telepathy  acquires  them  it  certainly  has 
an  amazing  power  to  select  the  right  ones  from  the 
memories  of  sitters  and  other  living  persons  at  a 
distance.  Experimental  and  spontaneous  telepathy 
show  no  trace  of  any  such  power.  Their  sole  analogy 
is  in  the  phenomena  of  mechanics,  which  represents  an 

258      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

action  as  producing  its  immediate  effect  in  definite 
coincidence  or  sequence.  Mechanical  agents  do  not 
select  facts  with  reference  to  chooseable  or  rejectable 
ends.  They  act  with  reference  to  prearranged  condi- 
tions. Wireless  telegraphy  does  not  represent  the 
coherer  as  selecting  messages  from  the  multitude  of 
vibrations  about  it,  but  as  attuned  to  a  specific  type  of 
them  at  any  point  of  space  in  which  it  may  be  placed. 
The  messages  sent  out  from  the  originating  station 
ramify  through  all  space  and  wherever  the  coherer 
is  placed  it  gets  them  when  it  is  properly  adjusted  to 
that  form  of  vibration,  and  does  not  select  from  the 
multitude.  It  is  not  a  self-adjusting  instrument,  but 
a  passive  instrument  subject  to  great  limitations. 

But  a  still  more  important  limitation  to  the  anal- 
ogy exists.  The  coherer  does  not  respond  to  messages 
sent  out  last  week,  the  last  year,  or  the  last  half  cen- 
tury. It  is  sensitive  only  to  messages  that  are  prac- 
tically simultaneous  with  its  own  recipiency,  allowing 
only  for  the  velocity  of  the  transmission.  Nor  will 
the  analogy  of  light  from  distant  stars  be  reasonably 
accessible  here  to  illustrate  the  assumed  selectiveness 
of  telepathy,  as  the  reader  may  determine  for  himself 
by  a  careful  study  of  the  facts  as  a  whole.  Hence 
in  two  respects  the  analogy  of  wireless  telegraphy 
wholly  fails  to  make  the  phenomena  intelligible  by 
telepathy.  They  are  first  the  elasticity  of  attunement 
assumed  in  mediumistic  phenomena  and  the  absence  of 
selectiveness  in  wireless  telegraphy.  The  only  point 
in  which  the  two  processes  resemble  each  other  is  in  the 
absence  of  ordinary  physical  media  for  their  trans- 
mission. 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     259 

The  incidents  quoted  in  the  reports  show,  super- 
ficially at  least,  just  that  selectiveness  which  we  should 
expect  of  memory  and  association  trying  to  prove 
personal  identity,  even  though  they  are  forced  to  act 
in  an  abnormal  mental  condition  on  the  part  of  both 
the  medium  and  the  discarnate  communicator.  The 
phenomena  look  like  mental  phenomena  and  represent 
them  in  a  selective  form  quite  at  variance  with  any- 
thing that  we  know  in  telepathy  as  proved  or  sup- 
posed. 

A  second  objection  to  telepathy  in  the  case  is  the 
inconsistency  between  the  mistakes  and  errors  of  fact 
in  the  "  communications  "  and  the  enormous  powers 
which  have  to  be  attributed  to  it  in  order  to  explain 
the  correct  facts.  Any  process  which  is  supposed  to 
have  ready  access  to  all  living  memories  and  distin- 
guishes with  apparent  infallibility  between  the  rele- 
vant and  the  irrelevant  facts  for  illustrating  the  per- 
sonal identity  of  the  dead ;  any  process  which  ignores 
the  personalities  of  the  living  and  confines  its  acquisi- 
tions to  the  facts  which  represent  only  the  personali- 
ties of  the  dead,  is  a  process  which  is  not  lightly  to  be 
treated  as  telepathy,  and  it  ought  not  naturally  to  be 
supposed  guilty  of  the  absurd  mistakes  and  confusions 
which  the  record  shows.  Apparently  omniscient  dis- 
crimination between  the  facts  pertinent  to  living  per- 
sonalities and  those  pertinent  to  deceased  personali- 
ties, with  evidence  of  the  most  amazing  limitations  and 
ignorance  within  the  territory  of  facts  pertaining  to 
the  dead  and  circumscribed  for  selection  from  them, 
is  not  easily  explicable  by  telepathy.  The  assump- 
tion simultaneously  of  limited  and  unlimited  powers 

260      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

is  not  to  be  made  hastily.  We  would  expect  such 
limitations  of  discarnate  spirits,  but  hardly  of  a  telep- 
athy which  is  apparently  omniscient  and  unlimited  in 
its  powers. 

A  third  objection  to  the  telepathic  explanation  is 
its  limitation  to  trivial  matters.  This  is  usually  the 
great  objection  to  the  spiritistic  theory,  and  I  shall 
not  defend  its  consistency  with  that  hypothesis.  But 
I  must  insist  that  the  triviality  of  the  facts  is  abso- 
lutely incompatible  with  the  assumption  of  the  enor- 
mous powers  of  access  to  living  memories  which  the 
advocate  of  telepathy  makes  and  must  make.  If  the 
medium  can  reach  out  into  the  whole  world  of  living 
consciousness  and  memory  and  select  from  this  infinite 
mass  of  experiences  just  the  right  ones  to  represent 
the  personality  of  the  deceased  it  ought  to  get  with 
ease  all  the  important  and  elevated  features  of  those 
personalities,  and  not  limit  its  access  to  the  trivial. 
Personal  characteristics  ought  to  be  produced  in  their 
perfection,  and  the  moral,  religious,  or  irreligious, 
political,  literary,  philosophical  characteristics  of  any 
one  ought  to  be  producible  at  will,  instead  of  this  dis- 
torted and  confused  mass  of  trivial  incidents  which  we 
find.  The  objection  from  triviality  may  be  fatal  to 
spiritistic  theories,  if  you  like,  but  it  is  far  more  fatal 
to  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  because  it  has  to  be 
assumed  to  be  so  large  to  explain  the  facts  we  get 
and  to  discriminate  between  the  relevant  and  the  irrel- 
evant, that  there  is  no  excuse  of  a  rational  sort  for  its 
limitations  to  trivial  matters,  while  we  might  well 
imagine  the  discarnate  as  so  limited  when  we  have  to 
start  with  their  finitude  at  the  outset  and  especially  if 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     261 

they  have  to  communicate  under  all  sorts  of  difficul- 
ties, mental  and  cosmic.  But  this  enlarged  universal 
telepathy  has  no  excuse  for  its  limitation  to  trivial 
matters,  when  it  can  discriminate  so  infallibly  appar- 
ently between  the  facts  pertaining  to  living  person- 
alities and  facts  pertaining  to  deceased  personalities. 
A  fourth  objection  to  the  telepathic  theory  is  the 
change  of  "  communicators."  Readers  of  the  record 
will  find  that  the  "  communicators  "  do  not  appear 
always  to  remain  long,  but  give  place  to  other  "  com- 
municators "  who  are  better  able  to  endure  the  condi- 
tions affecting  clear  "  communications."  The  record 
often  shows  that  a  "  communicator  "  can  apparently 
remain  to  send  messages  only  for  a  short  time,  and 
his  or  her  place  will  be  taken  by  another.  The  conse- 
quence is  that  the  telepathic  hypothesis  has  to  appear 
to  be  able  to  represent  itself  as  implying  the  capacity 
of  telepathy  to  obtain  information  from  the  sitter  or 
other  parties  at  a  distance  all  the  time,  but  cannot 
obtain  such  information  about  the  same  person  all  the 
time.  It  must  thus  simulate  difficulties  of  "  communi- 
cation "  as  would  be  most  natural  for  spirits  when  in 
fact  there  are  none  for  telepathy !  We  might  natu- 
rally suppose  that  spirits  would  encounter  difficulty 
and  feel  it  necessary  to  interrupt  "  communications  " 
to  enable  them  to  recover  power  to  meet  the  extraor- 
dinary emergency ;  but  if  telepathy  encountered  diffi- 
culties it  would  be  interrupted  in  its  process  of  acquir- 
ing the  facts,  and  the  change  of  "  communicators  '' 
does  not  always  show  such  a  characteristic,  and  may 
even  on  the  contrary  involve  an  improvement  in  its 
access  to  information. 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

A  fifth  objection  is  the  differences  in  the  personal 
equation  of  the  "  communicators."  Some  "  communi- 
cators "  are  "  clear  "  and  others  are  not  so.  That  is 
some  "  communicators  "  seem  able  to  send  good  mes- 
sages and  others  can  either  not  send  evidential  inci- 
dents at  all,  or  send  them  in  a  very  confused  form. 
This  simulation  of  what  we  should  most  naturally 
expect  of  spirits  ought  not  to  characterise  telepathy. 
There  is  apparently  nothing  in  the  memory  of  the 
sitters  or  other  living  persons  to  make  the  incidents 
remembered  of  one  person  easily  accessible  and  those 
of  another  impossible.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  my 
record  I  received  practically  nothing  about  my  mother 
except  her  name,  and  even  that  was  given  by  another 
than  herself!  My  uncle,  James  McClellan,  was  a 
very  clear  "  communicator  "  in  most  incidents,  and  his 
son  was  almost  a  failure,  though  I  remembered  far 
more  about  the  son  than  I  did  about  his  father.  An- 
other uncle  was  very  confused  for  two  years  but 
much  clearer  after  that,  while  my  father  became  more 
confused  with  time.  Now,  I  see  no  reason  for  con- 
sidering that  time  should  affect  the  "  communica- 
tions "  of  telepathy  in  reference  to  one  person  more 
than  another.  The  differences  in  the  phenomena  cor- 
respond to  what  we  should  expect  in  the  personal 
equation  of  real  "  communicators,"  and  not  to  any- 
thing in  the  minds  of  living  persons  and  the  assumed 
process  of  telepathy  acquiring  its  information. 

A  sixth  objection  is  the  fact  that  the  one  cue  to  the 
assumed  access  of  telepathy  to  information  is  appar- 
ently the  association  in  the  living  person's  memory 
of  a  given  name  with  the  incidents  related  to  his  per- 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     263 

sonality,  while  the  "  communications  "  often  represent 
the  intermediation  of  one  "  spirit "  to  send  messages 
proving  the  identity  of  another,  a  process  most  natural 
on  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  and  without  excuse  on  the 
telepathic,  except  it  is  conceived  as  equal  in  all  cases 
to  the  simulation  of  what  we  should  expect  on  the 
opposing  theory.  Thus  my  brother  Charles  men- 
tioned incidents  which  he  did  not  know  in  life,  and  so 
not  associated  in  my  memory  with  him,  and  gome  of 
them  occurring  after  his  death,  but  quite  adapted  to 
prove  the  identity  of  others.  My  father  confused 
a  most  important  incident  of  my  uncle's  experience 
with  me,  just  after  his  —  my  father's  —  death,  with 
his  sister,  the  uncle's  wife,  and  had  to  be  spontaneously 
corrected  afterward  and  the  incident  told  correctly  by 
my  uncle.  My  wife  acted  as  intermediary  for  my 
father  in  some  instances.  All  this  conflicts  with  the 
only  possible  cue  that  telepathy  might  be  expected  to 
use  for  the  discrimination  of  personalities  in  the  ac- 
quisition and  reference  of  its  information. 

The  seventh  objection  is  the  dramatic  play  of  per- 
sonality in  the  "  communications."  This  takes  the 
form  of  alleged  conversation  and  intercourse  on  "  the 
other  side  "  between  discarnate  spirits,  which  would  be 
quite  natural  on  the  spiritistic  hypothesis,  but  un- 
natural and  unnecessary  in  telepathy,  unless  we  as- 
sume again  that  it  does  only  what  we  would  expect 
spirits  to  do,  and  nothing  else.  Thus  the  "  control  " 
says  something  to  the  "  communicator  "  and  his  an- 
swer is  made  to  the  "  control,"  the  conversation  slip- 
ping through  as  an  automatism  or  unintended  mes- 
sage. There  is  no  reason  for  this  on  the  telepathic 

264      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

hypothesis  as  we  know  it.  This  feature  of  the  process 
can  be  appreciated  only  by  a  study  of  the  detailed 
record,  and  has  not  been  illustrated  in  the  summary 
of  the  facts  to  give  the  reader  any  conception  either 
of  its  nature  or  amount  in  the  "  communications." 
But  it  is  a  very  frequent  phenomenon  in  the  record 
and  represents  what  we  should  expect  to  be  an  accom- 
paniment of  spiritistic  agency  and  influence,  but  not 
of  telepathy  as  known. 

The  eighth  objection  is  the  fact  that  telepathy  is 
only  a  part  of  the  process  necessary  to  explain  the 
records.  Telepathy  does  not  explain  dramatic  play 
of  personality,  the  mistakes  and  confusions,  or  the 
vast  mass  of  unevidential  matter  involved  in  the  rec- 
ords. Secondary  personality  of  a  most  remarkable 
character  has  to  be  added  to  the  process  to  give  it 
even  the  appearance  of  rationality,  while  the  spiritistic 
hypothesis,  with  such  adjunctive  suppositions  as  ab- 
normal psychology  supplies  us,  gives  unity  and  ration- 
ality to  the  whole  result. 

The  ninth  objection  is  the  fact  that  persons  who  did 
not  know  Dr.  Hodgson  when  they  were  living  often 
indicate  that  fact  when  he  is  present  at  the  sittings  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  Dr.  Hodgson  has  been  known 
for  years  by  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  and  presumably 
known  by  her  at  least  telepathically  in  the  trance  con- 
dition. For  persons  having  knoAvn  him  in  their  lives 
recognise  him  after  their  death.  This  peculiarity  of 
the  case  is  not  natural  to  telepathy,  unless  we  as- 
sume, as  is  done  without  evidence,  that  there  is  no 
resource  in  the  simulation  of  the  spiritistic  which  it  is 
not  capable  of  using. 

THE  TELEPATHIC  HYPOTHESIS     265 

The  tenth  objection  is  the  difference  between  Rec- 
tor's and  George  Pelham's  ability  to  get  proper 
names,  or  certain  difficult  and  unfamiliar  messages, 
while  they  are  otherwise  about  equal  in  their  abilities. 
There  is  no  reason  of  an  ordinary  kind  that  can  be 
adduced  for  their  equality  in  all  but  proper  names  and 
the  like.  George  Pelham  is  better  than  Rector  in 
this  respect,  though  the  telepathic  hypothesis  has  to 
assume  them,  merely  secondary  personalities  of  Mrs. 
Piper.  We  can  conceive  them  different  in  their  gen- 
eral ability  or  wholly  different  throughout,  but  it  is 
not  natural  to  expect  them  on  any  telepathic  theory 
to  differ  in  one  type  of  incident  alone. 

Whatever  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena  I  can- 
not see  that,  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge,  telep- 
athy can  escape  the  fatality  of  these  objections.  One 
difficulty  might  be  overcome,  but  there  is  an  accumu- 
lation of  them,  and  applicable  to  every  form  in  which 
telepathy  can  be  conceived,  whether  concerned  with  the 
active  consciousness  or  the  memory  of  the  sitter,  or 
with  the  consciousness  and  memory  of  distant  living 
persons.  If  telepathy  were  anything  about  which  we 
knew  the  laws  and  conditions,  we  might  discover  its 
real  capacities  and  limitations.  But  in  any  knowl- 
edge of  the  facts  proving  it,  as  a  theory  opposed 
to  the  hypothesis  of  spirits  in  such  facts  as  are  here 
on  record,  we  should  not  expect  such  a  complex  sim- 
ulation of  spirits  as  has  to  be  supposed  in  order  to 
supplant  their  agency.  In  its  powers  and  limitations, 
one  of  them  extending  to  infinity  and  the  other  in- 
dicating amazing  finitude,  it  has  to  be  conceived 
as  far  larger  on  the  one  hand  than  the  spiritistic 

266      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

and  taxing  our  credulity  to  a  much  greater  extent, 
and  on  the  other  as  absurdly  more  limited  than 
we  should  either  suppose  it  to  be  from  its  otherwise 
attested  capacity  or  expect  spirits  to  be.  It  may  be 
the  true  theory.  I  cannot  be  dogmatic  about  that. 
I  simply  do  not  wish  to  embarrass  my  mental  attitude 
by  accepting  miracles  where  a  natural  explanation 
is  possible,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  spirits  are  the 
more  natural  and  the  less  miraculous  agency  in  the 
case,  though  telepathy  certainly  has  the  claim  of 
social  respectability. 

CHAPTER  X 

THE  SPIRITISTIC   HYPOTHESIS 

The  first  thing  which  I  wish  to  say  in  taking  up  the 
spiritistic  hypothesis  and  in  stating  my  preference 
for  it,  at  present  at  least,  is  that  I  wish  to  empha- 
sise the  conditions  upon  which  I  accept  it.  I  take  it 
to  be  the  best  working  hypothesis  in  the  field  to  ex- 
plain the  phenomena  concerned.  Others  may  think 
it  absolutely  proved,  but  I  shall  not  claim  so  much 
nor  place  myself  where  further  inquiry  and  knowl- 
edge might  embarrass  a  retreat,  though  I  think  that 
most  intelligent  men  will  agree  that  no  other  hypoth- 
esis presents  half  the  credentials  of  rationality  that 
can  be  claimed  for  spiritistic  agency.  We  may  hesi- 
tate to  adopt  it  in  the  face  of  perplexities  which  are 
certainly  striking  and  apparently  incompatible  with 
what  we  find  many  people  expecting  from  spirits. 
We  may  wish  to  know  more  before  committing  our- 
selves finally  to  so  important  a  belief,  but  this  cau- 
tiousness and  hesitation  is  not  in  conflict  with  the 
admission  that  the  most  rational  explanation  at  pres- 
ent is  the  spiritistic.  Our  primary  duty  is  to  accept 
the  hypothesis  that  best  explains  the  fact  and  then 
to  abandon  it  when  facts  are  discovered  that  disprove 
or  discredit  it.  I  shall  certainly  not  cling  to  the 
spiritistic  theory  any  longer  than  the  facts  justify, 
but  I  shall  not  eschew  it  because  it  is  not  respectable 
when  it  is  the  most  rational  conception  in  the  field. 

267 

268      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

The  difficulties  and  objections  to  telepathy  as  an 
explanation  of  such  phenomena  as  are  here  discussed 
are  negative  arguments  for  the  spiritistic  theory.  In- 
asmuch as  I  have  practically  limited  the  choice  of 
explanation  to  telepathy  and  spirits,  any  facts  dis- 
crediting telepathy  must  be  so  much  in  favor  of  the 
alternative  hypothesis.  If  they  disprove  the  ration- 
ality of  telepathy  they  make  spiritism  necessary  for 
any  man  who  chooses  to  have  an  explanation  at  all, 
even  though  they  may  not  be  construed  as  positive 
evidence  for  it.  Some  of  the  objections  which  I 
have  mentioned  as  telling  against  telepathy  represent 
psychological  facts  that  are  consistent  only  with  the 
supposition  of  spirits,  so  far  as  we  now  know  telepathy 
and  its  assumed  nature,  and  they  have  been  mentioned 
in  the  previous  chapter  in  order  to  indicate  clearly 
the  cumulative  character  of  the  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  that  explanation.  The  reader  has  only  to  think 
of  them  in  relation  to  the  psychological  activity  of 
minds  as  we  know  them  to  see  that  thev  would  char- 

mf 

acterise  properly  the  identical  mental  action  which 
we  would  expect  to  find  in  the  discarnate.  But  I 
shall  add  three  positive  arguments  for  the  spiritistic 
hypothesis  which  I  may  discuss  briefly.  They  are 

(1)  the   selective   unity    of   consciousness    exhibited; 

(2)  the  dramatic  play  of  personality,  and   (3)   the 
character  of  the  mistakes  and  confusions. 

1.  The  Unity  of  Consciousness 

Many  phenomena  that  are  popularly  regarded  as 
spiritistic  have  no  value  for  a  spiritistic  theory, 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      269 

even   if   supposed   to  be   genuine.     The   mere   move- 
ments  of  physical   objects  without  contact,   if  they 
are  even  possible  or  credible,  would  have  no  evidential 
value   in   favor  of   spirits,   as  they   do   not   indicate 
the  personal  identity  which  is  essential  to  that  proof. 
What  we  must  have  is  psychological  phenomena,  and 
psychological  phenomena  of  that  kind  which  repre- 
sents  the    systematic    mental   action    natural   to   the 
person  whose  existence  is  in  question.     Isolated  super- 
normal phenomena  will  not  do,  such  as  can  be  ex- 
plained  by  telepathy.     We  must  have   a   group   of 
facts  whose  unity  and  consistency  suggest  a  real  per- 
son more  easily  than  anything  else.     This  class  of 
facts  is  represented  in  those  which  show  what  I  have 
called  the  unity  of  consciousness.     By  this  unity  of 
consciousness  I  mean  the  selection  of  facts  with  refer- 
ence to  the  proof  of  personal  identity.     If  a  man  be 
called  upon  to  prove  his  identity  across  a  telegraph 
line  he  would  choose  those  incidents  in  his  life  recog- 
nisable by  the  receiver  as  the  sender's  own  experiences, 
and  they  would  be  chosen  with  reference  to  their  per- 
tinence for  both  sender  and  receiver.     The  unity  is 
then  that  characteristic  which  we  find  in  any  memory 
recalling  past  experiences.     The  facts  so  recalled  are 
associated  together.     In  the  Piper  and  similar  cases 
this  unity  is  perfectly  evident,  and  if  it  is  not  found 
in  minds  outside  the  mediums  we  have  to  attribute  to 
Mrs.  Piper's  mind  the  power  to  select  from  living 
memories  the  facts  which  will  appear  to  represent  a 
given   person,   the   selection   and  unity   being  deter- 
mined by  some  other  mind  than  the  one  that  purports 
to  be  communicating. 

270      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

I  may  illustrate  briefly  what  I  mean.     If  the  reader 
will  recur  to  the  incidents  which  I  have  narrated  as 
purporting  to   come    from   my   father,   deceased,   he 
will  observe  that  group  of  them  (p.  217)  relating  to 
our  conversations  on  the  subject  of  psychic  research 
before  his  death.     Here  were  a  number  of  incidents 
belonging  to  that  conversation,  the  reference  to  hal- 
lucination, my  doubts,  thought  transference,  Sweden- 
borg,  hypnotism,  apparitions,  and  dreams  with  some 
experiments  of  my  own.     They  are  incidents  which 
a  personal  consciousness  might  naturally  be  expected 
to  recall  and  tell,  but  which  we  should  not  expect  any 
telepathic  process  to  do.     Take  also  the  simple  fact 
that  all  the  names  of  the  members  of  the  family  were 
correctly  given  in  the  form  in  which  the  "  communica- 
tor "  was  accustomed  in  life  to  name  them,  and  in 
addition   to  this,   incidents  were   correctly  associated 
with  those  names.     For  instance,  as  indicated  above 
(p.  219),  I  was  reminded  of  the  organ  and  my  sister 
Lida  and  the  desire  of  the  "  communicator  "  that  this 
sister  should  learn  to   sing.     All  this  was  true  and 
represented  the  association  of  incidents  in  my  father's 
memory  as  well  as  mine.     It  is  quite  as  easy  to  sup- 
pose  that  the  association   is  spiritistic  as  that  it  is 
telepathic,  especially  when  we  observe  that  v,*e  have 
not  the  slightest  evidence  that  telepathy  is  associative 
in  its  acquisitions.     We  have  found  telepathy,  if  it  be 
admitted   at  all,  to  represent  association  within  the 
experiences  of  the  percipient,  but  not  to  select  and 
organise  associations  in  the  mind  of  the  agent.     Such 
a  process  is  without  any  scientific  support  whatever. 
The  reader  of  the  records  will  also  remark  another 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      271 

fact  of  interest.  It  is  the  connection  of  incidents 
from  sitting  to  sitting.  The  "  communicator  "  will 
fail  at  one  time  to  get  his  incident  rightly  and  come 
back  to  it  at  a  later  time  and  correct  it.  Or  he  may 
get  it  right  at  the  first  attempt  and  return  to  it  later 
for  giving  additional  matter  or  ascertaining  whether 
his  message  has  been  received  or  not.  Throughout 
the  experiments  there  is  this  natural  psychological 
connection  between  the  incidents,  and  perhaps  as  in- 
teresting a  psychological  fact  as  any  is  that  which 
indicates  this  connection  consistently  carried  out 
through  all  the  distinctions  of  personality  in  different 
"  communicators."  There  is  no  confusion  of  these, 
except  apparently  when  some  one  acts  as  an  inter- 
mediary for  another,  and  this  is  very  often  accom- 
panied by  the  statement  that  the  incidents  belong  to 
another  than  the  intermediary,  so  that  the  distinction 
of  personalities  is  kept  up.  I  have  called  attention 
to  the  changes  of  "  communicators  "  and  it  is  in  con- 
nection with  this  phenomenon  that  the  characteristic 
occurs  which  I  am  intimating.  The  cleavage  of  per- 
sonalities in  the  "  communications "  is  effected  in 
entire  consistency  with  the  difference  between  real 
personalities,  and  no  confusion  occurs  except  that 
which  is  involved  in  the  attempt  now  and  then  to  act 
as  intermediary  for  some  one  else,  and  this  confusion 
incident  to  such  attempts  indicates  evidence  of  mental 
confusion  on  "  the  other  side."  But  this  confusion 
is  not  frequent  in  this  form.  There  is  often  trace 
enough  of  the  real  form  and  intention  of  the  "  com- 
munication "  to  discover  that  another  personality  than 
the  "  communicator  "  is  meant  by  it.  As  illustration 

272      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  this  I  may  take  the  incident  of  the  chimney  nar- 
rated above  (p.  229).  Here  it  was  clearly  indicated 
that  the  event  referred  to  had  occurred  after  the 
death  of  the  "  communicator  "  and  that  it  had  been 
learned  from  hearing  my  father  and  mother  talking 
about  it,  they  being  the  two  deceased  persons  and 
perhaps  the  only  two  deceased  persons  whom  I  would 
expect  to  mention  the  chimney  naturally  in  evidence 
of  identity.  Both  the  cleavage  of  personalities  and 
the  unity  of  consciousness  are  illustrated  by  such 
incidents. 

As  a  general  instance  of  this  unity  let  me  take  the 
incidents  associated  with  the  sitting  with  Miss  X.  and 
thirty-six  hours  later  with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  allusion 
to  the  pass  sentence  or  "  test,"  the  reference  to  "  mes- 
senger "  and  to  a  trance  along  with  the  giving  my 
father's  Christian  name  and  relationship  we  definitely 
associate  with  the  phenomena  that  had  been  given 
me  through  Mrs.  Piper  two  or  three  years  before,  and 
involved  the  use  of  ideas  that  were  more  natural  to 
the  operations  in  another  world  than  to  this  one. 
Then  the  reference  to  the  color  of  my  wife's  eyes, 
repeated  thirty-six  hours  afterward  through  Mrs. 
Piper  and  the  completion  of  the  story  in  the  latter  as 
it  was  not  completed  in  the  former.  All  this  repre- 
sents a  natural  unity  for  a  surviving  consciousness  and 
would  not  be  anything  expected  of  telepathy. 

The  detailed  record  alone  will  supply  a  clear  idea 
of  what  this  unity  of  consciousness  means,  as  the  frag- 
mentary summary  which  has  here  been  given  does 
not  illustrate  the  complications  and  the  confusions 
in  the  midst  of  which  the  supernormal  facts  lie  buried, 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      273 

and  hence  I  must  refer  those  who  are  interested  in 
a  complete  conception  of  this  argument  to  the  re- 
ports. But  one  can  appreciate  what  is  meant  by  it 
in  general  in  any  of  the  incidents  that  represent  a 
complex  set  of  details  belonging  together  and  asso- 
ciated with  some  other  incident  of  similar  complexity. 
In  this  characteristic  they  show  an  intelligent  asso- 
ciation of  acts  that  first  recovers  chance  from  the 
explanation  and  equally  eliminates  telepathy  unless  we 
ascribe  it  nothing  but  the  power  to  imitate  discarnate 
spirits ;  a  curious  conception  for  those  who  wish  to  use 
it  as  an  opposing  explanation,  when  the  requirement 
should  be  that  it  should  explain  phenomena  to  which 
spirits  are  not  applicable  at  all  and,  in  explaining 
them,  show  capacities  making  it  rational  and  prob- 
able that  they  extend  to  what  can  be  explained  by 
spirits  without  doubt.  In  other  words,  telepathy  must 
be  the  broader  theory  while  it  actually  applies  to  the 
facts  involving  its  extension,  and  this  involution  of 
such  phenomena  as  I  have  summarised  is  not  sup- 
ported by  anything  known  of  telepathy  between  the 
living,  a  telepathy  which,  when  it  exists  at  all,  ex- 
hibits not  the  slightest  trace  of  this  selective  access 
to  one's  mind  and  synthetising  of  the  facts  acquired 
in  a  devilish  simulation  of  personalities  which  do  not 
exist  on  the  supposition  of  telepathy. 

2.  The  Dramatic  Play  of  Personality 

In  order  to  understand  what  I  have  called  the 
dramatic  play  of  personality  it  will  be  necessary  to 
explain  somewhat  briefly  the  purported  machinery 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

by  which  the  results  are  obtained.  We  must  remem- 
ber that  in  most  mediums  there  is  what  is  called  a 
"  control,"  and  this  "  control  "  purports  to  be  a  dis- 
carnate  spirit.  Whether  it  is  this  or  not  is  imma- 
terial to  the  issue  now  concerned.  The  superficial 
character  of  the  phenomena  is  the  same  on  any  theory. 
In  the  Piper  case  the  "  controls  "'  are  a  group  of 
alleged  discarnate  spirits,  most  of  whom  have  never 
even  attempted  to  prove  their  personal  identity.  One 
of  them,  Dr.  Phinuit  Scliville,  tried  it  and  failed. 
George  Pelham,  who  had  died  only  a  short  time  be- 
fore, succeeded  in  proving  his  identity.  The  rest  of 
the  group  calling  themselves  Imperator,  Rector,  Doc- 
tor, Mentor,  and  Prudens,  and  who  had  been  the 
"  guides "  or  "  controls "  in  the  case  of  Stainton 
Moses,  a  medium  in  England  and  who  died  in  1892, 
have  never  attempted  to  prove  their  identity  through 
Mrs.  Piper,  though  they  gave  their  real  names 
through  Stainton  Moses  before  his  death.  They 
claim  to  supervise  the  work  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  the 
;'  other  side."  George  Pelham  acts  as  an  assistant 
in  their  work.  Now  it  must  be  conceivable  that,  if 
this  is  true,  we  should  expect  that  any  difficulties 
associated  with  the  "  communications  "  would  be  ac- 
companied by  various  intrusions  of  conversation  and 
remarks  on  the  "  other  side "  not  intended  to  be 
;'  communicated,"  but  which  would  slip  through  nev- 
ertheless, just  as  irrelevancies  often  occur  in  the  tele- 
phone when  lines  are  crossed  or  conditions  favor  a 
confusion  and  interruption  of  messages.  The  same 
thing  is  familiar  in  a  medical  consultation  about  a 
patient.  Much  is  said  that  is  not  the  work  of  the 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      275 

patient.  Similarly  in  the  confusion  of  "  communi- 
cations "  incidents  of  what  goes  on  among  the  group 
of  intermediaries  slip  through  and  sometimes  state- 
ments meant  to  indicate  explanation  of  difficulties, 

etc. 

There  are  two  types  of  phenomena  connected  with 
the  dramatic  play  of  personality.  They  are  what 
may  be  called  the  evidential  and  the  non-evidential 
matters  of  such  interferences.  The  evidential  in- 
stances consist  of  matter,  such  as  names  and  incidents 
which  may  be  given  by  other  personalities  than  the 
usual  "  control."  The  non-evidential  instances  con- 
sist of  statements  representing  conversation  of  the 
"  control  "  either  with  the  alleged  discarnate  spirit 
and  not  intended  as  a  part  of  the  regular  "  com- 
munications," or  with  the  sitter  in  explanation  of 
conditions  and  difficulties  on  the  "  other  side."  I  shall 
give  a  few  illustrations  of  both  so  that  the  reader  may 
understand  the  phenomenon  which  I  represent  by  this 
dramatic  play.  The  unevidential  incidents  are  not 
necessarily  supernormal  and  might  be  explicable  by 
secondary  personality.  The  evidential  incidents  and 
illustrations  of  it  are  not  explicable  by  secondary  per- 
sonality alone  and  must  be  explained  by  the  same 
process  that  explains  all  other  supernormal  matter. 

Just  at  the  beginning  of  a  sitting  Rector,  acting  as 
"  control "  at  the  time,  apparently  said  to  the  "  com- 
municator "  who  purported  to  be  my  father,  "  Speak 
clearly,  sir.  Come  over  here."  The  reply  was 
"  Yes,"  as  if  intending  to  obey  Rector's  injunction, 
and  then  Dr.  Hodgson  was  accosted  with  the  question : 
"  Are  you  with  James  ?  "  On  Dr.  Hodgson's  affirma- 

276      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

tive  reply  my  father  responds  with  an  evident  under- 
standing that  he  was  to  "  communicate  "  with  Dr. 
Hodgson  in  my  absence,  and  the  sitting  went  on.  An- 
other instance  was  the  response  to  a  question  of  mine 
addressed  to  the  "  communicator  "  with  the  purpose 
of  calling  up  his  old  religious  associations  and  it  led 
to  an  interesting  recognition  of  my  identity  expressed 
to  Rector  but  not  to  me,  and  yet  it  came  as  an  ap- 
parent message.  A  passage  which  I  had  written  out 
was  read  to  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  with  explanation  by  Rec- 
tor that  it  would  be  gotten  only  in  fragments,  this 
being  the  mode  of  communicating  with  the  intelligence 
claiming  to  be  a  spirit,  and  the  immediate  reply  was : 
"Perfectly.  Yes,  that  is  surely  James."  The 
"  perfectly  "  was  the  "  communicator's  "  indication  to 
Rector  that  he  had  gotten  the  message  from  me 
clearly,  and  the  rest  was  an  acknowledgment  of  my 
identity  in  finding  the  sentiment  like  me.  On  an- 
other occasion  my  uncle  asked  through  Mrs.  Piper  if 
Dr.  Hodgson  was  "  Robert's  son  "  and  then  asked  if 
he  was  "  George,"  the  name  of  my  brother,  Robert  be- 
ing that  of  my  father.  When  Dr.  Hodgson  dis- 
avowed the  relationship  and  I  said  I  was  not  George 
the  reply  came :  "  No,  James,  I  know  you  very  well, 
but  this  other  one,  did  you  know  the  boys?  Do  you 
know  me?  ': 

The  interesting  part  of  this  play  of  personality  is 
the  fact  that  telepathy  should  not  have  had  any  diffi- 
culty in  recognising  Dr.  Hodgson  in  the  case ;  neither 
should  secondary  personality  have  had  any  such  ap- 
parent difficulty.  Dr.  Hodgson  had  known  Mrs.  Pi- 
per for  twelve  years  and  he  was  familiar  with  both 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      277 

her  normal  and  her  trance  state,  so  that  it  is  singular 
that  a  telepathic  agent  of  such  alleged  powers  should 
fail  to  recognise  him  at  once  and  his  relation  to  me 
and  my  father  and  uncle.  It  has  to  be  inexpressibly 
fiendish  to  counterfeit  the  reality  in  this  manner. 

There  were  a  number  of  these  interferences  by 
George  Pelham.  He  is  generally  better  at  getting 
proper  names  than  Rector  and  on  occasions  when  these 
give  difficulty  George  Pelham  is  likely  to  be  called  in 
to  assist.  Let  me  take  some  illustrations  of  this. 

There  had  been  some  difficulty  and  confusion  from 
the  start  in  getting  the  name  of  my  cousin,  Robert 
McClellan,  calling  it  "Allen,"  "  McCollum,"  "  Mc- 
Allen,"  etc.  On  one  occasion  when  this  cousin  was 
trying  to  "  communicate "  he  gave  the  name  of 
George  Pelham  in  full  and  said  that  he,  George  Pel- 
ham,  was  assisting  him  to  "  communicate."  A  mo- 
ment later,  right  in  the  midst  of  a  "  communication  " 
which  was  greatly  confused,  George  Pelham  suddenly 
interjects  the  exclamation:  "Look  out,  Hodgson,  I 
am  here,  George  Pelham.  Imperator  sent  me  some 
moments  ago."  Then  in  a  few  minutes,  while  Rector 
was  struggling  to  get  the  name  McClellan  clear,  and 
could  only  get  "  McAllen,"  George  Pelham  breaks  in 
and  says :  "  Sounds  like  McLellen,  George  Pelham," 
and  my  cousin  acknowledges  its  correctness  by  saying : 
"  Yes,  I  am  he." 

On  another  occasion  there  had  been  great  difficulty 
in  getting  my  half-sister's  name,  and  suddenly  there 
was  the  interference :  "  Hettie,  George  Pelham."  I 
give  another  complex  instance  of  it. 

There    was    great    difficulty    in    getting   my    uncle 

278      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

James  Carruthcrs'  name.  I  had  asked  that  it  be 
spelled  out.  This  was  repeated  to  my  father  by 
Rector  and  his  act  was  rewritten  as  if  a  message  to 
me,  this  being  an  automatic  act  of  Mrs.  Piper's  hand 
which  Rector  apparently  could  not  prevent.  The 
attempt  to  get  my  uncle's  name  clearly  then  began, 
and  failing  in  the  first  effort  Rector  said  to  the 
"  communicator,"  "  What  is  it?  Go  on,"  and  paused 
a  moment,  as  it  were,  and  apparently  said  to  me,  the 
sitter,  "  That  certainly  sounds  like  Clark."  He  then 
said  to  the  "  communicator,"  "  Do  not  worry  about 
it,  but  keep  to  it,  my  friend."  The  struggle  contin- 
ued a  little  longer  with  much  confusion  in  my  father's 
direct  effort  to  give  it,  and  when  I  indicated  that  it 
was  hardly  right,  Rector  said  that  he  had  not  spelled 
it  rightly.  The  next  day  the  attempt  to  give  it  was 
repeated  with  the  same  result,  and  suddenly  George 
Pelham  broke  in :  "  How  are  you,  Hodgson,"  and 
on  recognition  he  went  on  to  say,  "  He  (Imperator) 
sent  me  in  for  a  moment  to  say  I  told  it  to  the  spirit 
of  the  light  as  she  went  out."  Pelham  then  explained 
that  he  would  return  and  give  it  later.  It  was  given 
later  as  Mrs.  Piper  came  out  of  the  trance.  My  step- 
mother's name  was  also  given  in  as  dramatic  a  manner 
as  this  uncle's  name  and  by  this  same  George  Pel- 
ham. 

This  cleavage  of  personalities  and  interference  and 
interruption  of  the  messages  in  the  manner  described 
represents  a  dramatic  action  quite  natural  in  the 
situation,  and  there  is  no  need  of  it  on  the  telepathic 
hypothesis.  In  fact  telepathy  is  no  explanation  of  it 
whatever.  The  material  is  not  drawn  from  the  sitter's 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      279 

mind,  as  it  is  not  engaged  in  any  such  dramatic  play. 
In  fact  the  data  lie  perfectly  simple  in  the  sitter's 
mind  and  there  ought  not  to  be  any  more  difficulty 
for  telepathy  in  getting  these  data  in  one  case  than 
another.  The  dramatic  play  is,  therefore,  an  en- 
tirely supererogatory  affair  considered  from  the  point 
of  view  of  telepathy,  but  a  most  natural  thing  from 
the  point  of  view  of  spirits  and  their  confessed  diffi- 
culty in  communicating.  We  may  consider  it  as  sec- 
ondary personality  and  seek  the  analogy  in  some  of 
our  dreams,  which  certainly  exhibit  the  dramatic  play 
of  personality  in  a  remarkable  manner.  But  this 
resource  for  explanation  is  wanting  in  the  dramatic 
play  which  is  accompanied  by  evidential  incidents 
such  as  the  giving  of  proper  names.  Here  we  have 
the  supernormal  that  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  sec- 
ondary personality  and  a  dramatic  play  not  neces- 
sary to  telepathy.  The  only  rationality  and  consist- 
ency in  the  interpretation  of  the  phenomenon  is  in  the 
spiritistic  theory. 

The  argument,  however,  from  the  dramatic  play 
of  personality  is  not  of  a  primary  character.  It  con- 
firms, and  does  not  primarily  prove  the  spiristic  the- 
ory. We  should  expect  it  on  the  spiritistic  theory, 
where  difficulty  and  confusion  occur  and  we  should 
not  expect  it  on  any  application  of  telepathy,  even 
though  it  were  accompanied  by  difficulties.  The  pri- 
mary argument  must  always  be  the  supernormally 
acquired  facts  and  their  illustration  of  the  unity  of 
consciousness  involved.  The  dramatic  play  of  person- 
ality comes  in  to  confirm  that  argument  and  to  make 
a  greater  degree  of  complexity  in  the  phenomena 

280      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

consistent  with  a  single  hypothesis.  If  the  dramatic 
play  of  personality  were  a  feature  of  all  subliminal 
work  and  of  all  supernormal  phenomena  the  case 
might  be  different,  but  it  is  not  an  essential  charac- 
teristic of  either  of  these,  and  so  comes  most  naturally 
as  an  accompaniment  of  spiritistic  phenomena. 

3.  Character  of  the  Mistakes  and  Confusions 

In  the  experiments  for  testing  the  existence  of  te- 
lepathy we  found  certain  types  of  half  successes  and 
failures,  which  were  evidence  of  the  influence  of  the 
percipient's  mind  upon  the  message  received.  In  some 
cases  this  result  amounted  to  almost  an  entire  failure, 
so  great  was  the  influence  of  the  percipient's  mind. 
Here  there  was  confusion.  But  in  the  "  communica- 
tions "  of  the  Piper  case  no  such  confusion  is  recog- 
nisable. The  mistakes  are  of  a  wholly  different  type. 
They  are  due  to  a  possible  variety  of  causes  still  to 
be  considered,  and  in  this  later  consideration  of  mis- 
takes will  be  found  a  confirmation  of  what  is  to  be 
said  here.  But  there  are  certain  mistakes  which  are 
inconsistent  with  telepathy  and  which  can  be  appre- 
ciated without  any  large  assumptions  in  regard  to 
their  causes. 

A  most  natural  phenomenon  on  the  spiritistic  the- 
ory would  be  a  defect  of  memory  on  the  part  of  the 
discarnate  spirit.  If  the  physiological  theory  of 
memory  be  correct  no  memory  whatever  could  survive 
the  shock  of  death,  and  personal  identity  would  be 
impossible  even  though  the  substance  of  the  soul 
perished.  But  on  any  theory  of  consciousness  that 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      281 

admitted  a  soul  other  than  the  brain,  memory  might  be 
affected  by  death,  as  we  find  it  affected  in  life  by 
physical  accidents,  even  though  not  lost.  But  on  the 
telepathic  hypothesis  there  is  no  reason  for  expecting 
any  characteristics  in  the  "  communications ':  that 
suggest  defects  of  memory,  especially  when  the  actual 
mistakes  are  committed  in  the  face  of  a  clear  memory 
and  often  of  a  clear  consciousness  of  the  facts  at  the 
time  of  the  sitting.  Let  me  give  some  illustrations. 

I  had  asked  about  an  old  neighbor  by  the  name  of 
Samuel  Cooper  with  the  hope  that  a  certain  incident 
in  the  life  of  my  father  in  connection  with  that  man 
would  be  recalled.  But  instead  I  received  for  answer 
a  number  of  statements  wholly  false  regarding  this 
Samuel  Cooper,  but  which  I  later  discovered  to  be 
true  of  a  Dr.  Joseph  Cooper,  and  not  in  my  mind  or 
memory  at  all.  At  one  of  the  sittings  a  reference 
was  made  by  my  father  to  "  the  Cooper  School  and 
his  interest  there."  He  was  said  to  be  present  and  my 
father  continued :  "  And  perhaps  you  will  recall  a 
journey  we  took  together." 

Now  the  interest  in  this  message  is  this :  A  memo- 
rial school  had  been  built  to  this  Dr.  Joseph  Cooper 
after  his  death  in  1886,  and  was  mentioned  in  a  paper 
which  my  father  took  in  1887.  But  my  father  and 
my  stepmother  took  a  journey  in  1884  to  the  west 
and  were  in  the  town  in  Kansas  where  this  memorial 
college  was  built.  The  evident  reading  of  the  "  com- 
munication "  is  that  this  Dr.  Cooper  and  my  father 
took  the  journey,  which  was  not  true,  as  my  father 
seems  never  to  have  seen  the  man  after  1860.  I  had 
no  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  no  living  person  had 

282      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

it  of  the   facts  as  told,   so  that  there   is  no  excuse 
for  the  mistake  on  the  telepathic  hypothesis. 

On  one  occasion  I  had  asked  what  my  uncle  had 
died  with  and  it  was  two  years  before  I  received  the 
correct  answer.  But  the  immediate  answer  involved 
the  statement  first  that  Robert  had  gotten  his  foot 
injured  on  the  railroad,  and  then  it  was  afterward 
ascribed  to  Frank,  both  Robert  and  Frank  being 
names  of  my  brothers.  With  reference  to  them,  how- 
ever, the  statements  were  false.  My  brother  Frank 
had  had  an  injured  leg,  but  it  was  not  caused  in  any 
connection  with  a  railway.  My  brother  Robert  never 
had  any  such  injury.  But  my  uncle  about  whom  I 
had  asked  the  question  had  had  his  leg  cut  off  or 
nearly  off  at  the  ankle  by  a  railway  car  and  died  from 
the  effects  of  the  operation  a  few  hours  later.  No 
living  memory  had  the  facts  as  they  were  told,  while 
their  correct  form  was  not  given.  This  is  not  a  nat- 
ural phenomenon  of  telepathy,  but  something  that 
would  be  the  natural  result  of  either  a  disturbed  mem- 
ory or  disturbances  in  the  "  communications." 

I  might  also  mention  the  mistake  made  in  reference 
to  my  stepmother's  name.  The  first  attempt  to  give 
it  was  "  Mannie,"  she  having  always  been  called  Mag- 
gie by  my  father.  But  it  became  "  Nannie  "  after 
one  or  two  attempts,  and  I  discovered  the  possible 
mistake  by  the  fact  that  when  my  aunt  by  the  name 
of  Nannie  was  mentioned  in  the  "  communications  " 
the  prefix  "  aunt  "  was  always  found,  and  when  facts 
were  mentioned  that  referred  to  my  stepmother  and 
not  to  my  aunt  Nannie,  this  prefix  "  aunt  "  was  omit- 
ted. I  resolved  to  have  the  name  given  correctly 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      283 

and  said  at  a  later  sitting  that  my  stepmother's  name 
had  been  confused  with  that  of  my  aunt  Nannie.  The 
resulting  attempt  to  give  it  correctly,  along  with  some 
remarkable  dramatic  play  of  personality,  was  the 
name  Margaret,  which  was  of  course  correct,  but  not 
the  form  customary  to  my  father  in  life,  though  quite 
natural  here  after  my  explanation  of  his  error.  In 
all  this  process  the  matter  was  of  course  perfectly 
clear  in  my  mind  and  the  mistake  without  excuse  from 
telepathy. 

Again,  if  Mrs.  Piper  has  such  wonderful  powers 
of  clairvoyance  and  telepathic  access  to  information 
why  did  she  not  tell  what  was  in  the  spectacle  case 
which  I  had  left  with  Dr.  Hodgson  to  be  placed  on 
the  table?  Why  also  could  she  not  tell  what  was 
in  the  little  piece  of  paper  in  this  spectacle  case  when 
it  was  opened  ?  She  failed  in  this  last  though  the  pa- 
per was  in  her  fingers ! 

There  are  many  such  mistakes  which  are  easily  at- 
tributable to  the  limitations  under  which  spirits  must 
communicate,  but  which  are  not  compatible  with  the 
telepathic  powers  that  have  to  be  assumed  to  explain 
the  successes.  The  reader  will  have  to  go  to  the  de- 
tailed records  for  the  study  of  cases  more  complicated 
than  any  that  I  have  quoted,  and  that  also  contain 
much  evidence  at  the  same  time  of  supernormal  phe- 
nomena in  the  midst  of  which  the  mistake  and  con- 
fusion occur. 

284      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

4.  Facts  Making  it  a  Possibility 

A  fourth  consideration  in  favor  of  the  spiritistic 
hypothesis  should  be  mentioned.  It  was  omitted  from 
the  list  given  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  be- 
cause it  represents  facts  which  cannot  in  any  way 
be  treated  as  evidence  of  spirits  as  facts,  but  only 
as  possible  "  communicators."  I  alluded  to  the  gen- 
eral possibility  of  "  communication  "  when  stating  the 
problem,  and  I  merely  repeat  the  points  here  with  ad- 
ditions. The  starting  point  is  the  fact  of  hyperaes- 
thesia.  This  means  acute  sensibility  in  various  condi- 
tions of  the  physical  organism,  and  acute  sensibility 
sometimes  enables  the  subject  to  perceive  what  cannot 
be  normally  perceived  at  all.  This  is  then  a  condition 
in  which  the  power  of  the  mind  to  receive  impressions 
from  without  is  heightened  and  information  may  be 
obtained  that  the  normal  person  cannot  appreciate. 
But  this  hyperassthesia  may  take  a  still  more  interest- 
ing form.  It  has  been  noticed  in  recent  years,  and 
exploited  to  some  extent  by  Dr.  Boris  Sidis,  that  there 
are  cases  where  ordinary  anaesthesia  has  been  produced 
and  in  which  a  kind  of  sensibility  continues  which  may 
be  called  subliminal  hyperassthesia  in  contradistinction 
to  ordinary  anaesthesia,  which  is  known  as  insensi- 
bility to  impressions.  Some  cases  of  abnormal  condi- 
tions show  that  they  are  wholly  insensible  to  external 
impressions,  say  of  touch,  sound,  or  vision,  but  yet  in 
their  secondary  states  can  give  as  full  an  account 
of  sensory  stimuli  as  if  they  had  felt  them.  This 
means  that  subliminal  sensibility  is  perfectly  compat- 
ible with  supraliminal  insensibility,  and  it  is  often 

THE  SPIRITISTIC  HYPOTHESIS      285 

remarked  that  this  subliminal  sensibility  is  very  acute 
making  its  proper  description  as  hyperaesthesia.  We 
find,  too,  that  in  suggestion  the  subject  is  extraor- 
dinarily acute  and  alert,  and  that  its  mental  activities 
often  surpass  its  ordinary  capabilities. 

Now,  if  the  mind  can  obtain  information  without 
the  ordinary  use  of  its  physical  sensibilities  we  have 
only  to  raise  the  question  of  its  limitations  in  this  re- 
spect in  order  to  appreciate  the  claim  that  impressions 
come  from  a  transcendental  world.  It  is  a  condition 
that  makes  telepathy  quite  possible  and  conceivable 
within  the  limits  of  proved  knowledge,  and  telepathy 
once  admitted  certainly  involves  either  a  hyperaesthe- 
sia far  beyond  any  that  is  known  in  abnormal  psychol- 
ogy or  some  sensibility  of  a  wholly  different  type.  It 
does  not  matter  whether  it  is  an  extended  hypersesthe- 
sia  or  sensibility  of  a  different  kind.  In  either  case 
the  limits  of  knowledge  received  from  without  are 
greatly  extended.  Hence  once  accept  telepathy  in- 
volving this  heightened  sensibility  to  external  influ- 
ences and  the  possible  means  of  spirit  communication 
are  at  hand,  so  far  as  any  objection  to  its  possibility 
can  be  urged,  and  it  will  only  be  a  question  of  the  kind 
of  facts  obtained  whether  we  have  been  en  rapport 
with  the  discarnate. 

The  process  involved  in  the  "  communications " 
through  Mrs.  Piper  is  not  yet  known.  It  is  popular- 
ly conceived  as  if  it  were  direct  speech,  but  the  care- 
ful student  of  the  detailed  records  will  discover  that 
the  language  employed  does  not  consistently  imply 
any  such  methods.  It  is  often  described  as  "  this  way 
of  speaking,"  and  still  more  frequently  as  "  think- 

286      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ing,"  precisely  the  description  of  the  telepathic  meth- 
od. There  are  probably  associated  agencies  involved. 
But  I  cannot  here  enter  into  any  adequate  account 
of  how  the  communications  are  effected.  I  can  only 
suggest  that  a  study  of  the  facts  will  show  some  right 
to  approach  the  problem  with  the  conceptions  of  hy- 
persesthesia  and  telepathic  sensibility  in  view. 

CHAPTER  XI 

DIFFICULTIES    AND    OBJECTIONS. 

I  have  already  considered  the  primary  objection  to 
the  spiritistic  hypothesis  and  this  is  the  telepathic  the- 
ory. I  do  not  require  to  mention  or  discuss  it  in  this 
return  to  some  minor  difficulties  which  offer  perplex- 
ity to  the  believer,  without  necessarily  setting  aside 
the  cogency  of  the  facts  for  some  remarkable  theory. 
I  have  also  said  all  that  I  need  say  of  chance  coinci- 
dence and  suggestion.  These  cannot  pretend  to  ac- 
count for  all  the  facts,  and  at  most  can  only  discredit 
occasional  incidents  which  might  be  hastily  assumed 
to  have  weight  by  those  unfamiliar  with  phenomena 
of  this  kind.  If  they  offered  the  slightest  possibility 
of  explaining  all  the  facts  we  should  feel  bound  to 
examine  their  claims  at  length.  But  after  admitting 
their  utmost  claims  they  lamentably  fail  to  make  out 
any  general  explanation  of  the  phenomena  and  we 
are  obliged  to  resort  to  other  objections  if  any  hold 
good  at  all  in  the  case.  Such  as  I  wish  to  notice  here 
are  not  objections  to  the  whole  mass  of  phenomena  as 
evidence  of  the  supernormal,  but  only  such  as  offer 
perplexities  which  must  be  explained  in  order  to  re- 
move doubt.  They  are  difficulties  in  the  theory  of 
spiritism  rather  than  objections  to  it.  They  repre- 
sent what  the  layman  especially  has  to  produce  against 
conviction  in  so  important  a  matter,  and  it  must  be 
admitted  that  they  are  also  perplexities  for  the  scien- 

287 

288       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

tific  inquirer  until  he  becomes  familiar  with  the  pecul- 
iarities of  the  problem. 

1.  Failures  of  Various  Sitters 

The  reader  of  the  detailed  records  will  be  struck 
with  the  fact  that  some  experimenters  were  wholly 
without  results  in  favor  of  anything  supernormal, 
and  in  a  few  cases  were  so  impressed  with  the  ques- 
tionableness  of  the  phenomena  as  to  suspect  fraud. 
Others  who  were  convinced  that  there  was  no  fraud 
were  disappointed  in  their  results.  Now  why  this 
failure  of  some  people  to  get  "  communications " 
from  their  deceased  friends?  Why  not  something, 
even  if  the  messages  are  not  overwhelming? 

I  think  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  answering  this 
objection.  It  is  presumption  for  us  to  suppose  that, 
if  spirits  exist,  they  ought  to  communicate  easily  and 
uniformly.  But  it  is  important  to  remark  that  most 
of  the  failures  on  record  are  connected  with  persons 
who  had  only  one  experiment.  But  it  is  absurd  to 
judge  a  case  like  this  by  any  single  experiment,  and 
some  of  those  who  had  failures  recognised  this  fact, 
and  too  much  is  made  out  of  the  failure  by  those  who 
do  not  stop  to  think  of  the  conditions  involved  or  of 
the  fact  that  the  best  successes  represent  whole  scries 
of  sittings.  If  I  had  passed  final  judgment  on  the 
phenomena  as  a  result  of  my  first  sitting,  I  should 
have  had  a  less  favorable  verdict  to  pronounce,  as  the 
first  experiment,  though  by  no  means  a  failure  in 
regard  to  the  supernormal,  did  not  supply  enough  for 
any  scientific  man  bent  on  proving  a  vast  theory.  In 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS.    289 

this  subject  we  must  not  expect  the  supernormal  to 
be  on  tap  always  and  everywhere  and  for  every  one. 
If  it  were  so  we  should  have  more  of  the  phenomena 
in  history  than  we  now  have.  The  phenomena  are 
comparatively  sporadic,  and  we  must  expect  failures 
in  many  experiments.  The  personal  equation  must 
figure  in  this  work  as  in  other  investigations.  All 
that  failures  indicate  is  that  there  are  difficulties  as- 
sociated with  the  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowl- 
edge, and  we  should  recognise  that,  perhaps,  these 
difficulties  are  as  great  and  numerous  on  the  "  other 
side  "  as  on  this.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  from 
the  nature  of  things  that  spirits,  if  they  exist,  could 
all  communicate  with  equal  ease.  On  the  contrary  we 
should  more  naturally  wonder  how  any  communica- 
tion was  possible,  and  probably  it  is  the  tacit  and 
unconscious  recognition  of  this  doubt  that  inclines  so 
many  to  non-spiritistic  theories  to  account  for  the 
facts.  But  there  is  certainly  no  fatality  in  the  re- 
corded failures  where  there  have  been  any  manifest 
successes.  The  case  must  rest  on  the  fact  of  the 
supernormal,  and  negative  cases  do  not  affect  the 
question.  They  diminish  the  quantity  of  evidence, 
but  they  do  not  vitiate  the  positive  evidence  actually 
obtained. 

2.  Failures  in  the  "  Communications  " 

It  is  often  noticed  that  "  communicators  "  fail  to 
give  just  what  is  most  expected  of  them,  and  often 
what  they  do  give  so  coincides  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  sitter  and  fails  to  produce  what  the  sitter 

290      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

does    not    know,    that    the    query    is    raised    whether 
telepathy  may  not  most  easily  account  for  the  phe- 
nomena.    But  the  reader  of  the  records  will  find  so 
many  things  given  that  were  not  known  by  the  ex- 
perimenter but  were  known  by  other  living  persons 
that  the  temptation  arises  to  extend  the  process  of 
telepathy  sufficiently  to  account  for  the  phenomena 
and  to  exclude  the  necessity  of  supposing  spirits  to  be 
the  cause.     The  records  also  show  cases  where  state- 
ments of  fact  were  made  which  were  once  true  and 
known  to  the  sitter  or  other  living  person,  but  not  true 
at  the  time  of  the  statement.     This  suggests  telepa- 
thy again.     But  such   facts,  important  as  they  are 
as    matters    to   be   explained,    do   not   suffice   to   dis- 
credit spiritism.     There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
spirits  are  omniscient,  and  there  is  no  sufficient  reason 
to    necessitate    the    supposition    that   they    must    ac- 
quire information  of  events  and  things,  of  which  we 
would  like  to  know,  after  their  death.     Thus  some  one 
is  asked  to  tell  where  a  certain  trinket  is  to  be  found 
and  the  place  is  told  by  the  medium.     It  turns  out 
that  the  object  had  been  there,  the  fact  being  known 
by  some  one  living,  but  is  not  there  now  (p.  169). 
This  is  certainly  a  curious  limitation  of  knowledge. 
But  it  is  not  an  objection  to  the  spiritistic  interpre- 
tation of  the  correct  facts.     There  is   no  reason  to 
suppose  a  spirit  knows  everything,  especially  if  much 
or  all  of  its  information  obtained  after  death  has  to 
be  telepathically  obtained  from  the  living,  which  is 
certainly  a  plausible  possibility.     But  failures  of  the 
kind  mentioned  are  too  few  to  make  them  so  impor- 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS.    291 

tant.  Their  curious  coincidence  in  some  cases  with 
the  limitations  of  telepathy  is  the  only  fact  that  ex- 
cites an  interest  in  them,  while  they  are  often  ex- 
plicable on  grounds  quite  compatible  with  the  assump- 
tion of  spirits. 

But  the  one  type  of  failure  which  exercises,  and 
rightly,  a  powerful  influence  in  favor  of  scepticism 
and  so  of  telepathy  is  the  Hannah  Wild  incident 
(p.  189).  The  reader  will  recall  that  in  this  case 
a  posthumous  letter  was  not  given  while  the  words 
that  were  uttered  when  the  letter  was  handed  to  the 
surviving  sister  were  given  almost  correctly.  Five 
attempts  to  give  the  contents  of  the  letter  failed. 
Here  we  have  a  case  where  the  limitations  of  existing 
human  knowledge  were  the  limitations  of  telepathy 
when  presumably  a  spirit  ought  to  have  succeeded. 
There  is  no  denying  the  interest  of  this  phenomenon, 
and  if  it  is  fatal  to  the  spiritistic  theory  the  fact 
has  to  be  frankly  admitted. 

But  whatever  the  force  of  the  objection  in  this 
incident,  we  must  not  forget  that  it  is  the  only  pub- 
lished incident  of  the  kind,  except  one  (p.  63)  which 
succeeded.  There  might  be  many  reasons  for  fail- 
ure in  this  case  which  might  not  apply  in  others.  If 
the  failures  of  this  kind  were  numerous  and  uniform 
the  objection  would  have  great  weight.  But  a  sin- 
gle incident  like  this,  important  as  it  may  be,  is  not 
by  any  means  a  conclusive  objection  to  the  spiritistic 
theory  to  account  for  the  supernormal  facts.  There 
may  be  many  important  reasons  for  such  a  failure, 
and  when  we  come  to  examine  in  the  next  chapter 

292      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

the  conditions  affecting  the  "  communications "  we 
shall  discover  abundant  reasons  for  understanding 
even  frequent  failures  in  matters  of  this  kind. 

But  telepathy  cannot  boast  of  any  special  triumph 
in  the  Hannah  Wild  incident.  The  contents  of  that 
letter  have  been  known  to  Professor  James  for  fifteen 
or  sixteen  years,  and  Mrs.  Piper  knows  the  fact,  but 
the  letter  has  never  yet  been  given,  when,  if  telepathy 
can  command  all  living  memories  and  can  carry  on 
such  a  selective  and  fiendish  process  of  deception  it 
should  long  since  have  obtained  the  desired  informa- 
tion. Telepathy  has  failed  quite  as  much  as  spirits  to 
give  the  contents. 

Another  important  fact  may  explain  the  failure  of 
the  supposed  spirit  to  tell  the  contents  of  the  letter. 
It  is  conceivable  that  death  may  give  rise  to  defective 
memory,  or  that  if  death  does  not  in  reality  cause 
amnesia  generally  that  the  conditions  for  "  communi- 
cating "  may  rise  to  disturbances  in  reproduction. 
Nothing  is  more  probable  on  the  physiological  theory 
of  memory.  But,  granting  that  even  these  are  not 
true,  we  are  perfectly  familiar  with  defective  mem- 
ories among  the  living  in  just  such  emergencies. 
Much  depends  upon  the  time  and  circumstances  in 
which  such  things  first  occurred,  and  as  much  depends 
upon  the  kind  of  interest  and  emphasis  which  the 
facts  of  record  had  when  written  down.  We  do  not 
remember  all  we  say  or  think,  and  we  do  not  remember 
all  that  we  try  to  remember.  Hence  there  are  many 
possible  causes  for  failure  in  this  case. 

I  shall  give  an  instance  of  my  own.  I  wrote  out 
several  posthumous  letters  containing  very  frequently 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS     293 

recalled  incidents  of  my  childhood  with  the  intention 
of  having  them  as  tests  after  my  death.  I  inclosed 
them  in  several  envelopes  so  that  the  giving  of  one 
would  not  involve  any  knowledge  by  the  living  of 
other  records  before  attempts  were  made  to  deliver 
the  rest.  Put  this  aside  as  unimportant.  A  year 
and  a  half  after  putting  them  on  record  I  had  for- 
gotten absolutely  every  one  of  the  incidents  that  I  had 
recorded.  They  were  incidents  purposely  chosen  be- 
cause I  so  often  recalled  them  in  thinking  of  my 
childhood,  as  I  well  knew  the  dangers  of  amnesia  or 
failure  of  memory.  Consequently  I  had  to  put  on 
record  the  fact  that  I  had  forgotten  them.  Some  six 
months  afterward,  while  writing  an  account  of  my 
childhood,  I  recalled  nearly  all  the  incidents  and  now 
I  have  to  put  that  circumstance  on  record.  Since 
then,  however,  I  have  again  forgotten  some  of  them. 
The  incidents  are  no  doubt  perfectly  recallable,  and 
the  only  difficulty  is  that  their  association  with  my  in- 
tention to  communicate  them  after  death,  if  possible, 
is  not  strong  enough  to  make  their  reproduction  easy. 
But  in  the  fact  we  have  precisely  what  may  have  hap- 
pened with  Miss  Wild.  She  probably  took  no  ac- 
count of  the  laws  of  memory  when  she  wrote  her 
posthumous  letter,  and  wrote  just  what  came  into  her 
mind  at  the  time,  something  that  seemed  important 
and  memorable  then,  but  easily  forgotten  and  hard  to 
recall  when  the  associative  clues  were  dim. 

It  was  perhaps  quite  natural  to  have  recalled  the 
words  uttered  when  handing  the  letter  to  her  sister, 
as  that  was  the  critical  moment  and  the  evident  emo- 
tional interest  which  her  words  showed  indicate  how 

294      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

the  impression  could  have  been  made  on  the  memory. 
Significant  is  the  fact  that  the  words  were  not  exactly 
as  stated  on  that  occasion.  The  general  thought  was 
the  same  and  suggests  that  the  process  involved  more 
than  a  passive  production  of  living  memory.  There 
was  nothing  in  a  spontaneous  remark  on  such  an 
occasion  to  necessarily  connect  it  with  the  contents 
of  the  letter,  which  might  have  been  a  very  common- 
place affair  and  the  outcome  of  a  capricious  thought 
at  the  time  it  was  written.  Such  things  are  easily 
forgotten. 

Add  to  these  considerations  the  fact  that  the  condi- 
tions for  communicating  are  supposed  to  affect  the 
power  of  memory  at  the  time  and  in  some  cases  to 
throw  it  into  entire  confusion,  and  we  have  a  situation 
where  much  besides  posthumous  letters  will  be  forgot- 
ten. I  shall  devote  the  next  chapter  to  the  discussion 
of  this  question  alone,  and  allude  to  it  only  as  a  possi- 
bility or  as  a  part  of  the  spiritistic  theory  to  be  care- 
fully considered,  not  to  be  repudiated  without  a  hear- 
ing. But  careful  readers  and  students  of  the 
detailed  records  will  probably  find  more  abundant  evi- 
dence, psychologically  considered,  for  this  part  of  the 
theory  than  for  the  supernormal,  and  once  accepted  as 
a  factor  in  the  problem  we  would  not  attach  very 
much  negative  value  to  the  Hannah  Wild  incident 
standing  alone. 

3.  Telepathy  and  Secondary  Personality  Combined 

There  are  two  kinds  of  matter  in  the  records,  the 
evidential  and  the  non-evidential,  the  one  proving  the 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS     295 

existence  of  supernormal  knowledge  and  the  other 
not  proving  anything.  The  objection  which  I  have 
just  formulated  means  that  the  evidential  part  shall 
be  explained  by  telepathy  from  other  minds  than  the 
medium's  and  that  the  non-evidential  matter  shall  be 
explained  by  unconscious  mental  action  of  the  me- 
dium, as  in  dreaming  or  other  similar  mental  action. 
This  supposes  that  the  medium's  mind  is  in  an  active 
state  of  secondary  personality  and  that  outside  mes- 
sages from  other  minds  are  spasmodically  and  capri- 
ciously intromitted  into  hers  at  favorable  moments  for 
their  reception.  But  the  trouble  with  this  theory  is 
the  fact  that  it  encounters  all  the  difficulties  of  the 
unity  of  consciousness  in  favor  of  spirits  and  the  pro- 
duction of  matter  representing  the  personal  identity  of 
deceased  persons.  It  is  the  selectiveness  of  the  process 
that  makes  telepathy  absurd  in  the  case,  no  matter 
how  much  secondary  personality  may  be  involved  in 
the  non-evidential  material.  Telepathy  is  thus  dis- 
qualified without  impeaching  the  assumption  of  sec- 
ondary personality. 

But  the  admission  of  secondary  personality  in  the 
case  is  not  so  easy  or  to  be  made  without  evidence 
any  more  than  spirits  or  telepathy.  What  we  mean 
by  secondary  personality  is  mental  action  not  intro- 
spected by  the  normal  consciousness  and  hence  either 
the  product  of  memory  or  the  result  of  a  dream-like 
action  creating  systematic  ideas  as  in  reflection.  Now 
there  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  this  sort  of  thing 
in  the  Piper  records.  The  dramatic  play  of  per- 
sonality, though  possibly  accountable  by  secondary 
personality,  is  so  intricately  interwoven  with  the  evi- 

296      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

dential  matter  as  to  be  in  reality  a  part  of  it,  and  in 
fact  the  unity   of  the  evidential  and  non-evidential 
matter  is  the  desirable  conception  of  science  in  any 
theory  which  it  adopts  in  explanation  of  the  phenom- 
ena.    But  the  important  point  to  be  made  is  the  fact 
that  there  are  no  traces  in  the  non-evidential  matter  of 
the  influence  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mind  or  memory  on  the 
material  recorded,  except  in  what  is  called  "  Sublim- 
inal I  "  as  she  is  coming  out  of  the  trance.     In  "  Sub- 
liminal II,"  which  is  a  deeper  state  and  next  to  the 
trance  itself  there  is  no  trace  of  her  own  mental  action 
on  the  data.     In  this  state  she  does  not  distinguish 
her  own  personality   from  the   incidents  "  communi- 
cated," but  reports  automatically  what  she  "  hears  " 
or  "  sees  "  and  does  not  appear  to  be  a  spectator  or 
auditor   of  it.     In   "  Subliminal   I '     she  apparently 
recognises  that  what  she  "  hears  "  or  "  sees  "   is  ob- 
jective to  her,  and  at  times  an  occasional  memory  or 
secondary  personality  element  will  be  intromitted  into 
messages  coming  from  the  "  other  side."     When  she 
awakens  from  the  trance,  or  emerges  from  "  Sublimi- 
nal I,"  she  has  no  recollection  of  what  has  occurred 
either  in  the  trance  or  in  either  of  the  "  Subliminals." 
But  at  no  point  is  there  a  trace  of  an  influence  from 
either  the  normal  or  the  secondary  consciousness  on 
the  data  of  the  record  until  we  reach  the  state  of 
"  Subliminal  I."     All  this  indicates  that  the  assump- 
tion of  secondary  personality  to  account  for  the  non- 
evidential  matter  is  gratuitous.     It  may  be  true;  it 
may  be  rational,  if  not  true,  to  suppose  it.     But  when 
it  is  so  interwoven  with  evidential   matter  and  is  a 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS     297 

natural  part  of  the  result  on  the  spiritistic  hypothesis, 
the  assumption  cannot  be  made  with  impunity,  but 
must  be  required  to  sustain  itself  evidentially.  It  is 
not  enough  to  say  that  secondary  personality  explains 
the  non-evidential  matter ;  for  this  may  be  granted. 
But  we  must  know  what  definite  evidence  there  is 
that  it  is  a  fact,  if  the  phenomena  are  not  to  have 
the  unity  that  they  ought  to  have  on  the  spiritistic 
theory.  It  is  all  very  correct  to  discard  non-evi- 
dential matter  as  secondary  personality  when  we  are 
studying  the  evidential  side  of  the  question,  but  when 
this  is  once  satisfied  in  favor  of  the  supernormal  the 
next  problem  is  to  see  if  there  is  evidence  for  the 
secondary  personality  assumed  to  disqualify  a  part 
of  the  matter  in  the  spiritistic  problem,  and  every 
attempt  to  prove  that  the  non-evidential  matter  in 
the  Piper  records  is  subconscious  memories  and  fabri- 
cations wholly  fails. 

We  must  remember  also  that,  if  the  spiritistic 
theory  be  true  at  all,  there  would  be  non-evidential 
matter  associated  with  the  evidential  as  a  necessary 
part  of  the  whole.  This  would  be  the  case  in  es- 
tablishing personal  identity  across  a  telegraph  line, 
and  would  also  follow  in  any  communications  of  the 
kind  we  are  considering.  While  we  are  justified  in 
disregarding  this  material  in  the  evidential  problem 
we  should  not  forget  that  this  fact  does  not  in  the 
least  eliminate  it  from  consideration  as  a  spiritistic 
phenomenon.  The  unity  of  the  phenomena  which 
must  finally  be  the  conception  of  them  in  any  simple 
and  true  theory  makes  the  non-evidential  matter  com- 

298      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

patible  with  the  spiritistic  theory,  so  that  it  can  in  nc 
way  be  used  as  an  objection  to  it. 

4.   Triviality  of  the  Incidents 

The  one  objection  to  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  that 
possesses  the  sceptic  most  tenaciously  and  that  per- 
plexes the  layman  is  the  triviality  of  the  communi- 
cations. Most  people  feel  this  characteristic  very 
keenly,  especially  because  they  assume  that  it  indi- 
cates the  grade  of  mental  development  on  the  part 
of  the  so-called  discarnate.  What  seems  unintelli- 
gible is  the  almost  entire  limitation  of  the  "  commu- 
nications "  to  the  most  trivial  affairs  of  life,  such  as 
jackknives,  skull  caps,  penholders,  and  references  to 
small  incidents  of  their  lives.  This  appearance  of  a 
degenerated  mental  condition  is  interpreted  as  repre- 
senting an  undesirable  mode  of  existence,  if  the  spirit- 
istic theory  is  to  be  adopted,  and  as  in  conflict  with 
the  personality  of  the  persons  as  remembered  by  the 
living.  We  perhaps  naturally  expect  some  clear  and 
elevating  "  communications "  representative  of  the 
characters  so  well  known  to  us  when  living,  but  in- 
stead of  this  we  have  inane  and  drivelling  confusion 
and  triviality,  that  we  might  expect  of  persons  of  a 
low  intellectual  order,  or  of  persons  out  of  their 
minds.  Such  a  conception  leaves  nothing  desirable  in 
a  post-mortem  existence,  and  the  majority  of  intelli- 
gent men  and  women  wonder  why  we  attach  so  much 
importance  to  the  facts  and  why  we  treat  the  problem 
with  such  solemn  seriousness  and  enthusiasm. 

This  difficulty  so  universally  felt  and  urged  I  mean 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS      299 

to  face  without  equivocation.  I  do  not  consider  it 
an  objection  to  the  spiritistic  hypothesis,  but  a  per- 
plexity in  the  conception  of  it  which  we  would  per- 
haps most  naturally  form.  It  is  not  an  objection 
because  we  have  the  facts  to  explain  by  some  theory, 
and  it  is  manifestly  most  absurd  to  suppose  that  telep- 
athy with  its  enormous  powers  should  so  uniformly 
limit  itself  to  trivial  matters,  especially  as  it  has  to  be 
conceived  as  satisfying  the  conceptions  of  the  general 
public  in  simulating  spirits  in  respect  of  their  iden- 
tity. It  ought  to  give  not  only  what  is  wanted,  if  it 
is  a  Zeitgeist  (Time  spirit),  but  also  the  important 
and  elevated  facts,  as  easily  gotten  by  the  process  pre- 
sumably, as  the  trivial  incidents.  There  is  no  excuse 
whatever  for  the  limitation  to  trivial  incidents  on  the 
telepathic  hypothesis. 

But  there  is  another  reason  why  triviality  cannot 
be  treated  as  an  objection  to  spiritistic  theories.  If 
the  facts  make  the  spiritistic  theory  the  only  rational 
supposition  possible  to  explain  them  it  has  to  be  ac- 
cepted whether  desirable  or  not.  Our  business  as 
scientists  is  not  with  the  desirability  of  the  next  life, 
but  with  the  fact  of  it.  We  have  to  accept  the  life 
to  come,  if  it  be  a  fact,  without  any  ability  to  escape 
it,  and  its  degenerated  nature  would  not  affect  the 
evidence  for  the  fact  of  it.  Its  being  a  madhouse  or 
an  asylum  for  idiots  would  not  weaken  the  evidence 
for  its  existence.  We  should  have  to  bear  with  it  sto- 
ically, and  perhaps  if  our  moral  lives  were  what  they 
ought  to  be,  that  degenerate  condition,  if  it  be  the 
natural  consequence  of  action  when  living,  might  not 
follow.  In  any  case,  however,  the  desirability  or  un- 

300       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

desirability  of  a  future  existence  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  scientific  question  whether  it  is  a  fact.  This 
view  of  the  matter  cannot  be  evaded  and  it  is  irrefut- 
able. 

But  there  is  another  reply  to  the  alleged  objection. 
Nothing  but  trivial  incidents  will  prove  personal  iden- 
tity. If  any  one  will  stop  long  enough  to  think  and 
to  ask  what  incidents  he  would  choose  to  prove  his 
own  identity  over  a  telephone  or  telegraph  wire  he  will 
readily  discover  that  his  spontaneous  choice  would  be 
the  most  trivial  incidents  possible.  With  this  in  view, 
and  knowing  that  human  nature  would  select  such  in- 
cidents, I  arranged  a  series  of  experiments  over  a 
telegraph  line  between  two  of  the  buildings  at  Co- 
lumbia University.  I  had  my  operators  there  and 
brought  two  acquaintances,  one  to  one  end  of  the  wire 
and  the  other  to  the  opposite  end.  A.,  of  course,  was 
to  know  that  B.  was  present  at  the  other  end,  but  B. 
did  not  know  that  A.  was  present.  A.  was  to  send 
messages  to  B.  without  giving  his  name  until  B.  dis- 
covered his  presence  and  identity,  or  gave  it  up.  I 
said  nothing  to  any  one  about  the  primary  object 
of  my  experiments,  which  was  to  ascertain  experi- 
mental evidence  on  the  question  whether  men  would 
choose  trivial  incidents  to  prove  their  identity.  The 
sequel  was  that  these  persons,  students  and  professors 
in  the  university,  uniformly  chose  even  more  trivial 
incidents  than  we  generally  get  through  Mrs.  Piper 
for  the  same  apparent  purpose.  In  fact,  if  we 
judged  from  the  intellectual  character  of  the  commu- 
nications over  the  wire,  we  could  not  distinguish 
Columbia  University  professors  and  students  from 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS      301 

bootblacks  or  street  gamins.  The  record  of  my  ex- 
periments was  published  with  my  report  on  the  Piper 
case,  and  shows  a  very  similar  appearance. 

We  must  not  forget  that  the  ostensible  character 
of  the  experiments  is  the  proof  of  personal  identity. 
The  Imperator  group  of  trance  personalities,  claim- 
ing to  be  spirits,  manage  their  side  of  the  work  Avith 
definite  reference  to  this  proof  of  personal  identity, 
and  exhibit  the  same  understanding  of  the  problem 
that  we  insist  upon.  We  cannot  interest  ourselves 
in  any  side  issues  of  intelligence  and  spirit  life  until 
we  have  proved  the  personal  identity  of  deceased  per- 
sons, and  as  nothing  but  trivial  incidents  in  sufficient 
quantity  will  prove  this  we  must  recognize  that  the 
data  professing  to  be  spiritistic  in  their  origin  repre- 
sent the  most  rational  and  scientific  conception  of  the 
problem. 

But  the  fact  is  that  these  are  not  the  real  and  fun- 
damental reasons  for  the  persistent  triviality  of  the 
"  communications."  The  reason  lies  far  deeper  in 
the  nature  of  the  conditions  affecting  them,  which 
will  be  especially  the  subject  of  the  next  chapter. 
I  cannot  enter  into  any  elaboration  of  this  reason  at 
present,  but  must  postpone  the  reader's  interest  in  it 
until  the  whole  subject  can  be  more  exhaustively 
discussed.  All  that  I  want  recognized  for  the  pres- 
ent is  the  fact  that  I  consider  the  reason  for  triviality 
to  lie  much  deeper  than  the  arguments  which  I  have 
presented  above. 

We  must  also  remember  that  there  has  been  a  great 
deal  of  matter  in  the  "  communications  "  that  is  not 
trivial  in  any  sense  of  the  term,  but  owing  to  the 

302      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

nature  of  the  problem,  which  demands  evidential  phe- 
nomena, we  have  been  obliged  to  publish  those  records 
which  contain  the  largest  amount  of  detailed  and 
trivial  incidents,  as  necessary  to  the  proof  of  the  su- 
pernormal and  then  of  the  identity  of  discarnate 
spirits.  No  stress  has  been  placed  on  matter  and 
sentiments  that  are  not  trivial,  as  they  are  often  non- 
evidential.  Besides  a  fact  associated  with  an  impor- 
tant event  in  one's  life  loses  much  of  its  triviality  by 
that  connection  and  becomes  an  indication  of  high  in- 
telligence, possibly,  if  chosen  to  prove  identity. 

Let  me,  then,  summarise  the  reply  to  the  "  objec- 
tion "  of  triviality,  (a)  The  facts  are  not  all  trivial. 
Many  of  them  are  quite  worthy  of  the  best  intelli- 
gence, and  the  predominance  of  the  trivial  is  due  to 
the  persistence  of  the  attempt  to  prove  personal  iden- 
tity under  the  abnormal  conditions  in  which  the 
;c  communications  "  are  affected,  (b)  Many  of  the 
trivial  incidents  are  in  response  to  the  sitter's  ques- 
tions and  involve  the  satisfaction  of  his  demands. 
The  irrationality  must  be  shared  with  the  living. 
(c)  Many  of  the  incidents  follow  upon  the  explana- 
tion to  the  "  commurucator  "  of  what  he  is  expected 
to  do,  he  being  reminded  that  he  is  to  tell  of  little 
incidents  in  his  earthly  life,  (d)  The  probable  ab- 
normal condition  of  the  "  communicator's  "  mind  in 
the  act  of  "  communicating." 

The  last  consideration  is  the  most  important  one 
in  the  list  and  will  be  examined  at  length  in  the  next 
chapter.  It  is  in  fact  the  true  explanation  of  the 
general  limitation  of  the  messages  to  trivial  facts, 
and  I  have  mentioned  other  considerations  because 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS     303 

they  would  hold  true  if  this  one  did  not.  But  the 
most  general  cause  of  triviality  and  confusion  and 
error  is  the  probable  abnormal  mental  condition  of 
the  "  communicator  "  at  the  time  of  his  "  communi- 
cating." I  shall  here  summarise  the  evidence  on 
which  the  supposition  is  based  and  reserve  the  elab- 
orate proof  and  discussion  of  it  until  the  next  chap- 
ter. The  facts  suggesting  mental  difficulty  in  "  com- 
municating "  are  as  follows:  (a)  The  alteration  of 
"communicators,"  which  ought  not  to  occur  on  the 
telepathic  hypothesis  (b)  The  character  of  the 
"  communications  "  oftentimes  at  the  point  of  change 
from  one  "communicator"  to  another,  (c)  The 
frequently  confused  and  fragmentary  nature  of  many 
messages,  (d)  The  absolute  failure  of  some  "  com- 
municators "  to  communicate,  although  it  would  be  as 
natural  to  expect  them  as  any  one.  (e)  The  state- 
ments of  the  "  communicators  "  themselves,  both  in 
regard  to  their  confused  state  of  mind  when  "  com- 
municating "  and  their  clearer  consciousness  when  not 
"  communicating."  (f )  The  analogies  of  hypnosis 
and  secondary  personality,  and  of  abnormal  mental 
states  which  are  indicated  by  the  character  of  the  sub- 
ject's statements. 

5.  The  Absence  of  Information  about  the 
Transcendental  Life 

I  often  meet  this  objection,  but  I  refuse  to  rec- 
ognise its  seriousness.  In  the  first  place  it  is  not  al- 
together true.  Many  statements  are  made  in  regard 
to  the  transcendental  world,  but  being  unverifiable 

304      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

are  wholly  worthless.  Many  statements  also  taken 
to  represent  the  life  beyond  are  not  such  at  all,  but 
delirious  reflections  caused  by  the  disturbing  condi- 
tions affecting  the  "  communications."  But  even  if 
these  facts  were  not  so,  there  is  the  main  reason  that 
the  supposed  abnormal  condition  necessary  for  "  com- 
municating '"  would  prevent  any  rational  account  of 
such  a  world.  That  is  clear  to  every  one,  and  all 
that  we  should  have  to  do  to  enforce  its  recognition 
would  be  to  give  the  evidence  of  that  condition. 

But  suppose  the  "  communicator  "  to  be  perfectly 
clear  in  his  mind  when  "  communicating,"  there  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  could  give  us  any  ra- 
tional account  of  such  a  life.  All  intelligent  inter- 
course between  living  minds  is  based  upon  a  com- 
mon sensory  experience.  Things  are  intelligible  to  us 
in  terms  of  our  sense  experience  and  intelligible  only 
in  this  in  so  far  as  it  is  communicable  from  one  per- 
son to  another.  But  the  transcendental  world  is  su- 
persensible and  without  distinct  analogies  with  our 
physical  world  could  not  be  described  to  us  from  the 
;'  other  side."  A  supersensible  experience  cannot  be 
expressed  in  sensible  terms.  A  man  born  blind  but 
retaining  his  hearing  could  not  make  his  auditory  ex- 
periences intelligible  to  a  man  born  deaf,  but  retain- 
ing his  sight,  and  vice  versa.  Visual  experience  can- 
not be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  auditory,  or  either 
of  them  in  terms  of  the  tactual.  This,  it  is  to  be 
noticed,  holds  true  right  in  our  present  physical  life, 
and  the  same  or  greater  difficulties  must  attend  at- 
tempts to  convey  notions  of  a  supersensible  existence 
through  sensory  channels.  Of  course,  if  they  were 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  OBJECTIONS     305 

conveyed  they  could  not  be  verified  and  would  have 
no  value  either  scientifically  or  ethically.  Their  un- 
verifiability  makes  them  useless  for  scientific  purposes 
and  their  unintelligibility  makes  them  useless  for  eth- 
ical purposes. 

The  whole  problem  for  science  is  the  explanation  of 
the  facts  at  any  cost,  and  it  will  not  halt  at  their 
triviality  when  seeking  an  explanation,  though  it  may 
recognise  that  there  is  an  interesting  perplexity  to 
resolve  in  addition  to  the  proof  of  personal  identity. 

CHAPTER  XII 

CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  THE  "  COMMUNICATIONS  " 

I  explained  in  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter 
that  it  was  the  mental  condition  of  the  "  communica- 
tor ':  while  communicating  that  explained  the  triv- 
iality of  the  messages,  and  I  might  have  added  that 
the  same  fact  explains  the  fragmentary  and  confused 
character  of  many  of  the  messages,  whether  they  be 
trivial  or  not.  I  wish  here  to  take  up  and  discuss 
at  some  length  the  conditions  that  give  rise  to  those 
phenomena  which  have  appeared  to  be  such  formid- 
able objections  to  the  claim  that  the  messages  come 
from  spirits.  I  regard  the  contention  to  be  main- 
tained in  this  discussion  to  be  the  crux  of  the  whole 
problem  after  satisfying  the  question  of  personal 
identity.  As  the  perplexity  occasioned  by  triviality 
and  confusion  is  so  great  the  issue  depends  in  the 
same  proportion  upon  the  validity  of  the  claim  that 
is  here  to  be  advanced.  But  I  shall  not  assume  that 
all  the  perplexities  are  solved  by  one  cause.  I  shall 
have  many  reasons  to  assign  for  the  variety  of  diffi- 
culties and  objections  that  are  based  upon  triviality 
and  confusion,  as  they  are  not  all  of  them  due  to  the 
same  cause.  But  I  wish  here  to  group  together  a 
series  of  influences  which  make  the  spiritistic  hypothe- 
sis perfectly  intelligible  and  remove  the  objections 
of  those  who  forget  the  complex  and  abnormal  con- 
ditions under  which  experiments  of  this  kind  must  be 

306 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING    307 

conducted.  They  will  be  designed,  some  of  them,  to 
explain  the  confusion  and  fragmentary  character  of 
the  messages,  and  some  of  them  their  triviality,  but 
altogether  they  give  rise  to  the  features  of  the  record 
that  excite  hesitation  in  accepting  the  spiritistic  in- 
terpretation of  the  phenomena.  They  are  (1)  the 
intramediumistic  conditions  through  which  the  mes- 
sages have  to  come,  or  the  physical  and  mental  con- 
ditions of  the  medium;  (2)  the  intercosmic  conditions 
existing  between  the  "  communicator "  and  those  of 
the  medium,  and  (3)  the  mental  condition  of  the 
"  communicators."  The  second  of  these  divides  into 
three  classes,  those  affecting  the  transmission  of  a 
message  from  the  ordinary  "communicator "  to  the 
"  control,"  those  affecting  the  "  control's  ':'  interpre- 
tation of  the  messages  received,  and  those  affecting 
the  "  control's "  ability  to  send  them  through  the 
medium's  organism. 

1.  Conditions  Within  the  Medium  Affecting 
'  Communications  ' 

That  there  would  be  difficulties  of  some  kind  in 
"  communicating  '*  with  discarnate  spirits,  accepting 
their  existence  as  possible  or  a  fact,  would  be  a  most 
natural  admission  to  make.  It  would  hardly  require 
any  proof  to  an  intelligent  man  who  understood  the 
nature  of  the  organism  physical  and  mental  through 
which  messages  had  to  be  sent.  The  silence  of  all 
the  ages  would  be  proof  of  it,  if  they  were  known  to 
exist,  and  the  paucity  of  the  evidence  in  cases  where 
they  claim  to  "  communicate  "  is  also  conclusive  proof 

308      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  it.  But  the  fact  would  not  require  proof  to  any 
one.  Only  the  kind  of  difficulty  would  be  the  sub- 
ject of  dispute  in  any  case.  But  if  any  one  will  re- 
flect for  a  moment  on  the  difficulties  of  communicat- 
ing between  two  living  persons  he  can  imagine  how 
much  greater  they  must  be  between  the  living  and 
the  dead.  First,  they,  the  living,  must  be  able  to 
produce  sensory  impressions  upon  each  other  to  carry 
on  any  intercourse  whatever,  except  we  suppose  telep- 
athy be  a  vehicle  for  this,  and  we  know  how  occa- 
sional this  resource  is.  The  normal  method,  how- 
ever, involves  sense  impressions  of  some  kind,  either  of 
vision  in  a  sign  language  written  or  gestural,  or 
of  hearing  by  sound.  In  some  way  the  senses  have 
to  be  affected.  But  even  then  little  could  be  com- 
municated from  mind  to  mind  were  it  not  for  some 
previous  agreement  that  certain  vocal  or  visual  signs 
should  have  a  given  meaning.  Take  two  persons 
who  have  not  the  same  language  and  the  amount 
of  communicable  knowledge  between  them  will  be  very 
small  and  that  only  by  gestures  of  some  kind. 

Now,  if  the  difficulties  of  communicating  normally 
between  living  people  be  so  great  as  these  when  they 
have  a  definite  and  mutual  knowledge  of  each  other's 
existence,  what  must  be  the  difficulties  of  communicat- 
ing between  a  supersensible  and  a  sensible  world 
where  it  would  naturally  be  supposed  that  physical 
effects  could  not  be  produced  from  the  material  upon 
the  immaterial  world,  granting  the  latter  to  exist,  of 
course.  Indeed,  one  might  be  pardoned  for  saying 
a  priori  that  the  phenomenon  is  impossible.  Of 
course  we  cannot  actually  deny  the  possibility  of 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING    309 

some  way  of  intercommunication  between  a  supersen- 
sible and  a  sensible  world,  but  the  absence  of  it  as  a 
generally  and  clearly  established  fact  makes  it  neces- 
sary to  admit  that  the  difficulty  is  evidently  great. 
But  the  acceptance  of  telepathy  between  living  minds 
establishes  a  possibility  where  all  other  analogies 
might  fail,  and  hence  the  telepathist  is  precisely  the 
man  to  admit  the  possibility  of  spirit  communication 
with  the  living. 

If  it  be  true  that  our  minds  are  so  insulated  in  nor- 
mal life  from  each  other  that  they  can  carry  on  inter- 
course and  communication  with  each  other  only  by 
artificial  and  conventional  means,  except  in  sporadic 
instances  of  telepathy,  it  would  be  natural  to  sup- 
pose that  discarnate  minds  are  insulated  from  each 
other  in  some  similar  way  as  a  means  of  preventing 
the  occurrence  of  omniscient  telepathic  communica- 
tion between  themselves.  If  telepathy  were  conceived 
as  the  common  mode  of  communication  either  between 
the  living  or  between  the  discarnate,  it  would  repre- 
sent a  complete  reciprocity  of  interchange  of  thoughts 
which  would  have  no  limitations  except  the  will  of 
the  parties  concerned,  if  that  could  do  it.  But  there 
is  certainly  no  such  reciprocity  of  intercourse  between 
the  living  and  the  dead,  if  any  communication  even  be 
possible.  Hence  on  any  assumption  of  modes  of  in- 
tercourse there  are  evidently  difficulties  in  the  way  of 
its  easy  accomplishment. 

But  suppose  that  in  normal  conditions  of  exist- 
ence the  communication  be  easy,  there  is  no  guarantee 
that  in  abnormal  conditions  it  would  be  the  same,  and 
from  what  we  know  of  abnormal  conditions  in  actual 

310      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

life  the  communication  might  still  be  difficult,  especial- 
ly if  the  messages,  when  they  come  to  us,  must  repre- 
sent something  of  the  abnormal  in  them.  But  all  this 
sparring  aside,  it  is  clear  that  communication  with  a 
discarnate  world  in  our  normal  life  is  not  a  common 
thing  and  that  in  nearly  all  cases  claiming  to  repre- 
sent it  we  have  abnormal  mental  and  physical  con- 
ditions to  contend  with  in  obtaining  any  alleged  in- 
tercourse. These  abnormal  conditions  represent 
often  some  measure  of  inactivity  of  the  normal  con- 
sciousness or  the  suspense  of  its  action  on  the  mus- 
cular system,  as  in  automatic  writing,  so  that  the 
messages  when  they  have  to  penetrate  to  the  physical 
world  without  direct  mediation  of  the  normal  con- 
sciousness must  rely  upon  either  the  subconscious 
function  of  the  mind  or  upon  the  mechanical  and 
automatic  functions  of  the  nervous  system,  respond- 
ing to  outside  mental  influence  much  as  it  does  to  that 
of  the  incarnate  mind,  which  in  its  suspension  of 
control  simply  makes  way  for  transcendental  agency. 
Now,  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  the  medium,  Mrs.  Piper 
herself,  is  in  a  trance,  a  normally  insensible  and  un- 
conscious state.  Her  mind  is  entirely  passive  and  ap- 
parently exercises  no  influence  whatever  upon  the 
physical  organism,  so  that  the  messages  apparently 
do  not  come  through  her  mind.  They  certainly  do 
not  seem  to  be  modified  by  any  of  its  recognisable 
activity  except  in  the  last  stages  of  her  emergence 
from  the  trance.  Consequently  we  have  a  condi- 
tion of  things  which  is  certainly  infrequent  for  the 
communication  of  intelligent  messages,  and  we  should 
expect  all  sorts  of  difficulties  in  getting  them  through. 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   311 

They  must  be  affected  by  the  limitations  of  the  me- 
dium through  which  they  have  to  be  sent.  There  is 
fairly  good  evidence  that  unfamiliar  words  and  ex- 
pressions give  great  difficulty  in  the  transmission. 
Though  the  process  is  apparently  an  automatic  one 
a  foreign  language  is  almost  impossible  to  it,  and 
at  one  period  in  the  development  of  the  case  the 
use  of  the  left  hand  for  writing  messages  had  to  be 
abandoned  because  Mrs.  Piper  had  never  used  it  for 
the  purpose  of  writing,  and  apparently  its  organic 
habits  did  not  suit  it  to  the  ready  delivery  of  mes- 
sages in  a  supernormal  way.  Possibly  the  education 
of  the  medium  operates  as  a  condition  and  determi- 
nation of  the  limits  of  communication,  at  least  to 
some  extent.  But  in  any  view  it  is  certain  that  the 
general  limitations  of  the  medium  must  represent 
those  of  the  messages,  and  her  condition  being  ab- 
normal these  limitations  are  greatly  increased.  The 
effect  might  be  to  confuse  messages,  if  it  did  not 
make  them  trivial. 

2.  Intermediate  Obstacles 

I  include  in  intermediate  obstacles  to  "  communica- 
tion "  the  difficulties  intervening  between  the  "  con- 
trol "  and  the  medium's  physical  organisation,  the 
modifying  influence  of  the  "  control's  "  nature  upon 
the  messages  received,  and  the  intercosmic  difficul- 
ties in  sending  the  message  from  the  "  communi- 
cator '!  to  the  "  control."  These  difficulties  can  be 
stated  thus  even  though  the  "  control r  be  consid- 
ered the  secondary  personality  of  the  medium,  as 

SCIENCE  AND  A  1'UTURE  LIFE 

secondary  personality  often  shows  incomplete  con- 
trol of  the  organism,  and  often  modifies  what  the 
normal  consciousness  knows.  But  I  shall  discuss  the 
case  as  if  the  trance  personalities  were  as  real  spirits 
as  those  personalities  may  be  assumed  to  be  who  prove 
their  identity. 

That  the  first  of  these  difficulties  would  exist  might 
be  inferred  from  what  we  know  of  the  original  diffi- 
culty in  the  child  of  controlling  its  muscles.  It  only 
gradually  learns  to  co-ordinate  them,  as  they  have  a 
tendency  to  act  in  capricious  and  impulsive  modes. 
But  gradually  it  learns  to  subject  them  to  its  com- 
mand. Others  than  the  person  possessing  the  or- 
ganism have  no  influence  or  control  whatever,  ex- 
cept by  physical  compulsion.  Imagine,  then,  the 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  a  discarnate  spirit  attempting 
to  use  the  muscles  of  a  living  organism  for  speech 
or  writing.  The  owner  had  a  long  course  of  educa- 
tion and  habit  in  the  use  of  it  when  in  closer  rela- 
tion to  it  than  any  discarnate  person  can  be  supposed 
to  obtain.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  a  similar  course 
of  experience  is  necessary  on  the  other  side  to  ex- 
ercise any  influence  either  on  the  organism  directly 
or  indirectly  through  the  mind  of  the  medium  in  a 
passive  state  to  effect  communication.  In  this  we 
should  expect  all  sorts  of  confusions  and  fragmentary 
messages,  especially  if  the  conditions  for  successful 
communication  fluctuated  in  any  manner. 

An  influence  that  may  affect  the  messages  is  also 
the  mind  of  the  "  control."  When  the  "  commu- 
nicator "'  does  not  himself  "  control  r'  the  medium's 
organism  all  messages  have  to  pass  through  the 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING    313 

mind  of  the  regular  "  control,"  and  we  know  enough 
of  the  effect  of  a  second  mind  on  a  story  to  recog- 
nise that  modifications  of  messages  are  bound  to  take 
place  in  this  way,  and  with  no  blameworthy  fault  of 
the  mind  through  which  they  pass.  If  the  "  control  " 
has  to  encounter  any  serious  difficulties,  as  he  prob- 
ably does,  in  receiving  the  messages  for  delivery  to 
the  sitter,  he  must  use  his  interpreting  judgment  on 
their  meaning  and  would  inevitably  implicate  them 
in  modifications,  even  to  the  extent  of  error.  This 
statement  is  made  on  the  assumption  of  analogies 
with  our  mode  of  communication  with  each  other 
among  the  living.  But  we  cannot  assume  this.  On 
the  contrary,  we  must  suppose  the  mode  of  commu- 
nication there  to  be  different,  and  if  it  is  anything 
like  telepathy,  if  the  process  of  getting  the  mes- 
sage to  the  "  control  "  is  or  resembles  one  of  telep- 
athy, or  invokes  the  "  control's ':  interpretation  of 
signs  and  fragmentary  thoughts,  we  should  have 
large  measures  of  intromitted  matter  or  at  least  forms 
of  statement  characteristic  of  the  "  control." 

There  are  interesting  evidences  of  this  modifying 
influence  of  the  "  control '  on  the  messages  trans- 
mitted to  it.  In  general  they  represent  forms  of 
expression  provably  not  characteristic  of  the  discar- 
nate  spirit  from  whom  the  messages  purport  to  come, 
and  present  in  the  "  communications  "  of  the  "  con- 
trols "  both  when  others  are  purporting  to  communi- 
cate and  when  they  themselves  are  the  sole  "  com- 
municators." That  is,  certain  uniform  modes  of  ex- 
pression are  noticeable  which  are  not  characteristic  of 
any  particular  "  communicator  "  and  so  indicate  the 

314       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

modifying  influence  of  the  "  control's  "  mind  upon  the 
message.  One  instance  is  the  word  "  Messengers.*' 
This  is  the  term  which  the  Imperator  group  in  the  Pi- 
per case  applies  to  themselves,  as  agents  sent  to  prove 
the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Now  this  word  was  sev- 
eral times  put  into  the  mouth  of  my  father  in  his 
"  communications,"  when  it  was  wholly  uncharacteris- 
tic of  him.  He  knew  nothing  about  this  subject  in 
general  except  what  he  got  in  a  few  conversations  I 
had  with  him  on  it,  and  nothing  whatever  about  this 
group  of  trance  personalities  in  particular,  nor  did  I 
at  the  time  of  our  conversations.  Here  his  allusion  to 
them  is  clothed  in  their  own  language  about  them- 
selves. 

Again  the  word  "  Sunday  "  was  twice  put  into  the 
mouth  of  my  father,  when  I  suppose  he  never  once 
used  the  word  in  his  life.  He  always  insisted  on  sa}'- 
ing  "  Sabbath  "  instead  and  rebuked  us  children  if 
he  heard  us  use  the  word  "  Sunday,"  which  I  can 
assure  you  we  rarely  did  under  the  discipline  and 
habits  of  early  life.  It  is  important,  too,  to  re- 
mark that  the  trance  personalities  themselves,  those 
of  the  Imperator  group  proper,  always  employ  the 
term  "  Sabbath ':  in  their  spontaneous  "  communi- 
cations," and  use  "  Sunday '  only  when  they  are 
faithfully  transmitting  the  messages  of  others.  But 
on  the  occasions  when  the  word  "  Sunday  "  was  put 
into  my  father's  mouth  George  Pelham  was  an  inter- 
mediary between  my  father  and  Rector,  the  "  con- 
trol "  at  the  time,  and  George  Pelham  had  prob- 
ably never  used  the  word  "  Sabbath  "  in  his  life,  as 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING  315 

he  was  a  resident  of  an  eastern  city  where  all  re- 
ligious refinements  about  these  terms  were  lost. 

A  very  striking  instance  of  this  modifying  in- 
fluence is  the  adoption  by  the  "  controls  "  of  the  ab- 
breviation "  U.  D."  for  the  word  "  understand,"  and 
the  uniform  practice  of  putting  it  into  the  mouths  of 
various  communicators,  who  cannot  be  supposed  to  use 
it  at  all. 

The  trance  personalities  of  the  Imperator  group 
often  use  the  phrase  "  as  I  would  have  it,"  in  their 
spontaneous  "  communications "  and  as  often  put 
it  into  the  mouths  of  "  communicators  "'  who  would 
not  naturally  use  the  expression,  and  who  would  be 
less  imperious  in  their  manners.  It  is  the  same  with 
the  term  "  light "  by  which  they  describe  Mrs.  Piper 
as  a  means  of  "  communication."  For  instance,  on 
one  occasion  in  which  my  father  wished  to  say  that 
I  could  not  communicate  with  him  in  certain  experi- 
ments, he  was  made  to  say,  speaking  of  the  young 
men  with  whom  I  had  been  experimenting,  "  They 
are  not  light  and  I  cannot  reach  you  there." 

These  are  only  a  few  instances  of  the  phenomena 
which  might  be  quoted,  but  they  are  decidedly  evi- 
dential of  the  modifying  influence  which  has  been 
supposed  or  asserted,  and  they  suffice  to  show  its  ex- 
istence. I  have  not  the  space  to  mention  further 
proof,  and  it  is  not  necessary  here,  as  when  once 
proved  to  exist  to  any  extent  at  all,  we  can  readily 
admit  that  it  may  have  a  larger  influence  than  in 
the  mere  instances  which  prove  its  presence.  The 
fact  is  that  the  reader  of  the  detailed  records  will  find 

316      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

an  immense  amount  of  evidence  for  its  influence,  and 
to  these  he  must  go  if  he  is  not  satisfied  with  the  evi- 
dence given. 

The  important  point  to  be  observed  as  a  conse- 
quence of  proving  this  modifying  influence  of  the 
"  control  "  is  the  fact  that  it  explains  the  general 
absence  of  the  personal  characteristics  of  the  "  com- 
municator "  which  sitters  are  so  on  the  alert  to  dis- 
cover, and  without  which  they  hesitate  to  accept  the 
spiritistic  origin.  This  modifying  influence  does  not 
explain  the  triviality  of  the  messages,  but  it  does 
explain  the  disappearance  of  the  personal  character- 
istics which  are  so  often  sought,  and  it  indicates 
that  the  mode  of  communication  on  the  "  other  side  ': 
involves  its  difficulties  and  may  be  compared  to  those 
of  the  telephone,  though  much  more  complicated  and 
disturbing  than  any  in  the  telephone. 

There  are  probably  certain  intercosmic  obstacles 
intervening  between  the  "  communicator "  and  the 
"  control '  which  cause  confusion  in  the  messages. 
We  have  no  way,  of  course,  to  prove  their  existence, 
and  it  does  not  affect  the  case  whether  we  can  or 
not.  The  probability  of  them  is  based  upon  cer- 
tain features  of  the  dramatic  play  of  personality 
which  represents  the  trance  personalities  as  laboring 
under  difficulties  in  getting  the  messages  clearly, 
which  they  can  deliver  clearly  usually  when  they  get 
them.  The  interposition  of  George  Pelham  to  get 
proper  names  illustrates  the  supposition,  and  occa- 
sional allusions  to  the  process  of  "  communicating," 
not  apparent  in  my  published  report,  indicate  the 
same  fact.  But  these  obstacles  need  not  be  urged, 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   317 

as  the  utmost  that  can  be  implied  by  them  is  an  in- 
crease of  the  difficulties  in  "  communicating  "  and  not 
merely  the  existence  of  them.  But  they  explain  cer- 
tain kinds  of  interruptions  in  the  "  communica- 
tions "  and  the  occurrence  of  various  confusions  in 
them. 

3.  Mental  Condition  of  the  "  Communicator  ' 

I  come  now  to  the  most  important  of  all  the  ques- 
tions in  favor  of  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  after  we 
have  disqualified  telepathy  and  satisfied  ourselves  with 
the  evidence  for  personal  identity.  The  existence 
of  the  supernormal  and  the  satisfaction  of  the  cri- 
terion for  personal  identity  are  the  primary  problems 
to  be  solved,  and  we  should  have  to  accept  the  spirit- 
istic hypothesis  with  any  and  all  consequences  what- 
ever, if  the  facts  required  it  and  if  telepathy  with 
its  adjuncts  were  inadequate  to  effect  a  counter  ex- 
planation. But  we  have  the  trivialities  to  explain 
also  at  any  cost,  and  it  is  these  that  the  supposi- 
tion of  an  abnormal  mental  condition  of  the  "  com- 
municator "  is  meant  to  explain.  The  crucial  issue  in 
the  whole  problem  thus  rests  upon  this  question,  in 
so  far  as  it  appeals  to  the  personal  interest  of  man- 
kind when  called  to  recognise  a  future  life  as  a  fac- 
tor in  the  regulation  of  conduct  or  the  cultivation 
of  desire.  We  must  give  an  intelligible  answer  to 
the  scepticism  based  upon  the  persistent  triviality  of 
the  messages  as  well  as  their  fragmentary  and  con- 
fused character.  The  spiritistic  hypothesis  cannot 
shirk  this  responsibility  in  the  least. 

318      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

It  will  be  readily  admitted  that  an  abnormal  mental 
condition  of  the  "  communicator,"  if  it  exists,  would 
affect  the  messages  very  seriously,  but  the  question 
of  both  the  layman  and  the  scientific  man  would  be: 
'  What  evidence  have  you  that  this  abnormal  mental 
condition  is  a  fact?  '  The  answer  to  this  question 
must  be  made  clear  and  emphatic,  and  I  think  it  can 
be  made  so  clear  that  the  supposition  can  be  made 
to  appear  quite  the  most  rational  part  of  the  general 
hypothesis. 

I  am  not  prepared  to  define  accurately  the  condi- 
tion of  the  "  communicator  "  while  sending  messages, 
but  it  may  be  compared  sometimes  to  certain  types 
of  secondary  personality,  sometimes  to  the  hypnotic 
trance,  and  sometimes  to  delirium  or  dreaming. 
Whatever  it  is,  the  condition  affects  the  current  of 
thought  and  association,  and  the  control  of  memory, 
so  that  amnesic  tendencies  are  noticeable  along  with 
confusion  and  error  in  the  "  communications  "  and 
the  limitation  of  the  messages  to  trivialities,  as  we 
observe  such  conditions  in  normal  life  affecting  them. 
We  have  only  to  be  familiar  with  the  abnormal 
mental  phenomena  of  living  persons  to  appreciate 
what  would  follow  the  existence  of  such  mental  states 
on  the  "  other  side."  The  only  question  for  us,  then, 
is  the  evidence  that  some  abnormal  condition  prevails 
during  the  "  communications,"  at  least  in  most  of  the 
"  communicators." 

The  sceptic  will  ask,  "  How  is  any  evidence  possi- 
ble on  such  a  matter?  "  "  How  can  we  determine  con- 
ditions on  the  '  other  side '  until  we  get  there,  if  we 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   319 

ever  do?"      The  answer  to  these  questions  is  cumu- 
lative and  I  shall  give  the  answers  in  that  form. 

In  the  first  place  I  may  say  that  we  can  tell  the 
abnormal  mental  condition  of  the  discarnate  "  com- 
municator "  in  the  same  way  that  we  can  tell  it  in 
living  persons  with  whom  we  communicate.  The  dif- 
ficulty with  the  sceptic  is  that  he  does  not  seem  to 
be  able  to  realize  that  the  question  of  triviality  in 
the  messages  does  not  arise  until  the  spiritistic  hy- 
pothesis is  forced  upon  us  to  explain  the  supernor- 
mal facts  in  the  records;  and  that  we  have  then  the 
same  right  to  postulate  the  origin  of  the  fragmen- 
tary and  confused  messages,  as  well  as  the  persistence 
of  triviality,  in  the  discarnate  spirits,  and  then  ex- 
plain why  they  naturally  take  that  form.  Hence 
we  simply  suppose  the  mental  condition  of  the  "  com- 
municator "  from  the  very  character  of  the  messages. 
We  tell  when  a  man  is  insane,  when  he  is  delirious, 
when  he  is  drunk,  when  his  mind  is  not  acting  right- 
ly, by  what  we  hear  him  say.  We  can  tell  when  a 
writer  is  a  crank  or  insane  simply  by  what  he  says. 
The  distortion  of  one's  sentences,  the  disconnected  re- 
lation of  one's  sentences,  the  fragmentary  nature  of 
one's  conversations,  the  halting  character  of  speech 
often  in  hypnosis,  and  various  signs  of  the  kind  are 
unmistakable  indications  of  abnormal  mental  condi- 
tions in  the  living,  and  the  same  characteristics  ought 
to  evidence  the  same  facts  in  discarnate  spirits.  We 
might  thus  appeal  to  the  persistent  triviality  of  the 
incidents  themselves  for  proof,  were  it  not  that  it 
is  this  that  excites  sceptical  curiosity.  Confusion 

320      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

and  error  of  a  certain  kind,  simulative  of  dream-like 
and  delirious  consciousness  in  the  living,  will  be  un- 
mistakable evidence  of  it,  when  the  force  of  triviality 
might  be  questioned. 

But  there  is  a  consideration  that  will  certainly 
justify  the  supposition  on  the  superficial  character 
of  the  messages  themselves.  It  is  the  fact  that 
the  spiritistic  hypothesis  rests  primarily  upon  the 
supernormal  incidents  requiring  an  explanation,  and 
that  when  the  hypothesis  is  once  assumed  it  must  be 
made  to  include  the  non-evidential  matter  within  its 
general  application.  It  is  not  the  intellectual  char- 
acter or  rationality  of  the  messages  that  determines 
the  necessity  of  supposing  their  origin  in  discarnate 
spirits,  but  it  is  the  assumed  impossibility  of  account- 
ing for  them  by  chance,  guessing,  or  by  telepathy. 
They  may  be  as  irrational  and  insane  in  their  form 
of  presentation  as  you  please,  if  only  they  show  the 
activity  of  an  intelligence  independent  of  the  me- 
dium's organism.  In  the  study  of  the  phenomena 
we  simply  select  that  part  of  the  material  purporting 
to  come  from  spirits,  which  is  evidential,  and  set  aside 
the  non-evidential  matter  as  possibly  due  to  second- 
ary personality  or  anything  else.  But  once  find  that 
we  are  forced  to  explain  the  evidential  matter  by 
spirits  and  we  are  obliged  cither  to  explain  the  non- 
evidential  matter  by  the  same  hypothesis  or  to  show 
good  reasons  why  the  non-evidential  matter  is  due  to 
some  other  agency,  and  how  the  discrimination  can  be 
made.  If  the  cleavage  between  the  evidential  and 
non-evidential  matter  is  such  that  a  difference  of 
source  is  perfectly  apparent,  then  there  will  be  no 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   321 

reason  for  unifying  our  explanation.  But  readers 
of  the  Piper  records  will  see  very  distinctly  that 
there  is  no  clear  line  of  mental  discrimination  be- 
tween evidential  and  non-evidential  matter,  and  hence 
we  are  required  to  extend  the  same  hypothesis  over 
the  whole  mass  of  phenomena,  with  only  such  ad- 
junctive  hypotheses  as  are  necessary  to  explain  anom- 
alies perfectly  consistent  with  the  general  theory  but 
not  naturally  expected  of  normal  conditions  of  con- 
sciousness. 

With  this  conception  of  the  case  in  mind,  with  the 
necessity  of  first  accepting  the  spiritistic  theory  at 
any  cost  of  consequences,  we  can  see  very  readily 
why  the  superficial  character  of  the  messages,  as  tes- 
timony to  the  condition  of  mind  in  which  they  origi- 
nate, may  also  be  accepted,  and  this  once  done  the 
reader  has  only  to  study  the  records  to  see  the  evi- 
dential cogency  of  that  superficial  character.  But 
this  cogency  is  of  very  different  degrees  in  different 
cases.  As  I  have  remarked,  the  line  of  discrimina- 
tion between  evidential  and  non-evidential  matter 
bearing  upon  the  supernormal  cannot  be  drawn  with 
absolute  accuracy.  Some  messages  are  clear  and 
true  all  the  way  through.  Some  are  wholly  false 
and  worthless.  Some  are  half  true  and  half  false. 
Some,  while  they  are  wholly  false  as  they  stand,  are 
so  near  the  truth  in  a  few  or  many  details  as  to  leave 
the  sitter  without  any  doubt  whatever  as  to  what  was 
meant,  and  these  reflect  with  much  force  the  mental 
conditions  in  which  the  messages  originate.  I  shall 
select  instances  of  this  which  will  show  a  mixed  evi- 
dential and  non-evidential  character,  as  they  cannot 

322      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

be  explained  either  by  chance  of  any  kind  or  by 
any  accepted  view  of  telepathy.  They  are,  in  fact, 
the  strongest  evidence  of  a  spiritistic  hypothesis  as 
well  as  evidence  of  an  abnormal  mental  condition  in 
the  "  communicator  "  while  sending  messages. 

The  first  incident  which  I  shall  mention  is  the 
one  in  which  my  father  and  my  uncle  were  involved 
about  the  drive  and  accident  to  the  buggy  (p.  233). 
I  shall  simply  outline  the  facts  briefly  and  without 
quoting  the  exact  statements  of  the  "  communica- 
tors," as  these  are  accessible  to  readers  who  wish  to 
examine  the  facts  in  detail. 

My  father  mentions  an  accident  which  he  indicates 
was  associated  with  his  sister.  This  sister  denies  that 
any  such  accident  ever  occurred  in  her  experience. 
The  accident  is  mentioned  again  by  my  father  with 
new  details,  and  these  turn  out  to  be  false  on  inquiry. 
I  ask  a  question  of  my  uncle  when  he  comes  to  "  com- 
municate "  and  he  thinks  that  I  am  referring  to  some 
other  incident  than  the  one  that  had  occurred  with 
him  and  myself  the  day  after  my  father's  death,  and 
tells  me  of  another  drive;  then  he  discovers  we  are 
"  thinking  of  different  things." 

When  he  inquires  if  I  "  mean  on  that  Sunday  " 
and  on  an  affirmative  reply  from  me  he  proceeds  to 
tell  accurately  the  main  incidents  of  the  breakdown 
after  saying  that  my  father  had  mentioned  it  before, 
but  confused  it  in  connecting  it  with  my  aunt,  my 
father's  sister  and  the  uncle's  wife. 

Now  I  had  asked  for  incidents  previous  to  my 
birth  and  which  the  two  living  aunts  would  know. 
But  the  response  brought  an  incident  which  had  oc- 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING 

curred  after  my  father's  death  and  which  ought  to 
have  been  related  to  me  and  my  uncle,  deceased  at  the 
time  of  the  message,  and  not  to  my  father's  sister. 
It  was  well  calculated  to  prove  my  uncle's  identity  to 
this  aunt,  because  he  and  I  had  tried  to  conceal  the 
accident  from  her  when  we  returned,  and  this  was 
mentioned  in  the  first  reference  by  my  father  to  the 
accident.  But  the  incident  had  neither  a  bearing 
upon  the  personal  identity  of  my  father  nor  any  rel- 
evancy to  the  request  which  I  had  made  for  incidents 
occurring  before  my  birth.  Then  just  before  clear- 
ing up  the  matter  my  uncle  indicates  the  confusion 
of  my  father,  which  the  mistaken  time  relations  in 
his  statements  and  the  misapplication  of  the  reference 
for  the  facts  clearly  showed.  When  we  see  in  the 
sequel  what  was  meant  the  mental  confusion  is  per- 
fectly apparent. 

Another  incident  shows  this  confusion  very  clearly. 
My  father  had  referred  to  an  illness  which  my  sister 
had  had  three  months  before  the  sitting,  he  having 
died  six  years  previously.  But  he  could  not  continue 
what  he  wished  to  say,  and  later  he  returned  with 
the  help  of  my  wife,  who  had  died  two  years  before; 
calling  her  his  wife  —  a  statement  corrected  by  her 
spontaneously  the  next  day  —  he  showed  some  con- 
fusion again  about  my  sister,  and  Rector,  the  "  con- 
trol "  said  (wrote)  to  me:  "  He  seems  a  little  dazed 
in  thought.  It  is  most  certainly  connected  with  Lida 
in  the  body."  Then  my  father  went  on  to  mention 
a  disease  and  physical  difficulties  that  he  claimed  had 
been  his  own,  the  main  one  of  which  I  knew  to  be  false 
with  regard  to  him.  But  inquiry  showed  that  exami- 

324      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

nation  had  been  made  for  this  one  in  my  sister's 
case  and  that  the  other  two  incidents  were  especially 
relevant  to  my  sister,  and  were  relevant  to  my  father's 
condition  just  before  death.  The  interesting  circum- 
stance, however,  is  that  Rector  was  aware  of  the  ir- 
relevance of  the  facts  as  he  was  going  to  state  them, 
and  forewarned  me  as  to  their  reference,  while  my 
father  went  on  with  a  confused  sense  of  personal  iden- 
tity, claiming  as  his  own  what  was  in  fact  intended 
as  true  for  my  sister. 

My  father  made  some  statements  about  a  fire 
which  had  given  him  a  fright,  and  in  alluding  to  it 
again  and  a  third  time  showed  that  he  had  confused 
three  different  fire  incidents  in  his  life,  any  one  of 
which  would  have  been  good  evidence  of  identity.  A 
story  was  told  about  a  cherry  tree  which  was  quite 
relevant  to  a  willow  tree  and  not  true  about  the 
cherry  tree.  The  confusion  about  the  canes  is  per- 
haps another  illustration.  I  was  asked  by  my  father 
if  I  remembered  a  curved  handled  cane  with  his 
initials  carved  in  the  end.  The  "  communicator r 
had  no  such  cane.  But  he  had  had  a  straight  gold- 
headed  cane  with  his  initials  carved  in  the  end,  and 
it  was  soon  afterward  lost  and  a  curved  handled  cane 
was  given  him  in  its  stead,  and  certain  incidents  in 
his  life  associated  them  very  closely  together. 

There  is  a  very  fine  evidential  instance  of  the 
mental  confusion  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  report  on  the 
Piper  case.  After  the  death  of  George  Pclham  a 
friend  of  the  deceased  by  the  name  of  Mr.  Hart 
had  some  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  and  was  very  much 
annoyed  by  the  way  in  which  the  messages  were 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   325 

spelled  out  in  confusion,  this  process  extending  often 
to  very  ordinary  words.  Some  time  later  Mr.  Hart 
himself  suddenly  died  and  soon  afterwards  became  a 
"  communicator,"  but  at  first  a  very  confused  one. 
Dr.  Hodgson  had  known  him  in  life  and  was  present 
at  his  sittings.  One  day  this  Mr.  Hart  turned  up 
at  one  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  sittings  and  engaged  in  the 
following  "  communications,"  whose  significance  is  ap- 
parent at  a  glance. 

"  What  in  the  world  is  the  reason  you  never  call 
for  me?  I  am  not  sleeping.  I  wish  to  help  you  in 
identifying  myself.  ...  I  am  a  good  deal  better 
now.  (You  were  confused  at  first.)  Very,  but  I 
did  not  really  understand  how  confused  I  was.  It 
is  more  so,  I  am  more  so  when  I  try  to  speak  to  you. 
I  understand  now  why  George  spelled  his  words  to 

me." 

The  strikingly  evidential  incident  and  allusion  to 
his  difficulty  when  living  in  understanding  why  there 
was  confusion  and  the  confession  that  he  was  now 
confused  is  an  important  indication  of  the  phenom- 
enon which  explains  so  much  in  the  record.  There 
is,  of  course,  more  than  the  mental  confusion  of  the 
"  communicator  "  involved  in  the  explanation  of  the 
record,  but  this  one  circumstance  suggests  clearly 
the  source  of  triviality. 

Quite  as  important  a  piece  of  evidence  in  this  di- 
rection comes  from  this  George  Pelham.  In  explain- 
ing the  conditions  for  "  communicating "  he  once 
said,  after  having  satisfied  Dr.  Hodgson  of  his  iden- 
tity: 

"  Remember,  we  share  and  always  shall  have  our 

326      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

friends  in  the  dream-life,  i.  e.,  your  life,  so  to  speak, 
which  will  attract  us  forever  and  ever,  and  so  long  as 
we  have  any  friends  sleeping  in  the  material  world; 
you  to  us  are  more  like  as  we  understand  sleep,  you 
look  shut  up  as  one  in  prison,  and  in  order  for  us 
to  get  into  communication  with  you,  we  have  to  enter 
into  your  sphere,  as  one  like  yourself  asleep.  This 
is  just  why  we  make  mistakes  as  you  call  them,  or 
get  confused  and  muddled,  so  to  put  it,  Hodgson. 
(Dr.  Hodgson  repeats  in  his  own  language.)  Your 
thoughts  do  grasp  mine.  Well,  now  you  have  just 
what  I  have  been  wanting  to  come  and  make  clear  to 
you,  Hodgson,  old  fellow.  (It  is  quite  clear.)  Yes, 
you  see  I  am  more  awake  than  asleep,  yet  I  cannot 
come  just  as  I  am  in  reality,  independently  of  the 
medium's  light." 

The  reader  will  not  only  find  this  account  of  the 
matter  entirely  rational,  whatever  he  may  think  of  its 
truth,  but  he  will  also  remark  the  reason  for  its  ra- 
tionality, and  this  is  the  confessed  clearer  condition 
of  this  "  communicator "  who  is  clearer  than  we 
usually  find  others,  as  the  records  show. 

I  shall  take  up  some  minor  evidences  of  this  same 
mental  confusion  and  many  of  them  will  be  found 
in  my  own  records.  On  one  occasion  my  father  dis- 
covered his  condition  and  the  way  that  it  might  be 
viewed  by  me  and  broke  out  into  the  following  mes- 
sage :  "  Ah,  James,  do  not,  my  son,  think  I  am  de- 
generating because  I  am  disturbed  in  thinking  over 
my  earthly  life,  but  if  you  will  wait  for  me  I  will 
remember  all."  Here  is  that  borderland  condition 
of  consciousness  in  which  we  can  sometimes  detect 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   327 

ourselves  when  we  are  aware  of  delirium  and  cannot 
prevent  it,  but  can  introspect  it  enough  to  tell  its  na- 
ture. In  another  "  communication  "  the  same  person 
said :  "  I  am  working  to  keep  my  thoughts  clear," 
and  soon  afterward  asked  for  an  article  with  the 
statement :  "  It  will  help  to  keep  my  thoughts  from 
rambling."  In  reference  to  something  he  could  not 
recall  he  said :  "  Strange  I  cannot  think  of  the 
word  I  want."  Again  he  said :  "  I  felt  very  much 
confused  when  I  first  came  here."  In  another  an 
interesting  confession  of  amnesia  dissociating  the  nor- 
mal life  beyond  from  the  condition  for  "  communi- 
cating "  occurs :  "  I  seem  to  lose  a  part  of  my  recol- 
lections between  my  absence  and  return."  Again: 
"  I  intended  to  refer  to  Uncle  John,  but  I  was  some- 
what dazed." 

Illustrations  of  this  sort  could  be  multiplied  into 
the  hundreds,  and  they  all  point  to  the  same  con- 
clusion and  represent  a  consensus  of  opinion  in  va- 
rious "  communicators."  But  there  is  one  charac- 
teristic more  of  the  "  communications '"  which  is  an 
unconscious  testimony  to  this  delirious  dream-like 
state  of  the  "  communicator."  Their  own  definite 
statements  are  conscious  and  subject  to  discredit  for 
various  reasons,  although  if  numerous  enough  and 
representative  of  a  general  law  may  be  relieved  of 
suspicion  by  that  fact.  But  the  characteristic  which 
I  wish  to  mark  is  not  exposed  to  such  an  objection. 
It  is  the  uniformly  rapid  movement  of  tliouglit  from, 
incident  to  incident  in  the  "  communications."  This 
is  one  of  the  most  noticeable  features  of  them  and 
the  rapidity  and  abruptness  of  change  from  idea 

328      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

to  idea  not  naturally  associated  in  life  is  a  distinctive 
mark  of  what  we  know  in  delirium  and  dreams.  I 
could  give  many  and  long  illustrations  of  the  phe- 
nomenon in  the  records.  But  I  shall  satisfy  the 
reader  with  the  mention  of  the  fact,  especially  as  it 
is  unconscious  attestation  of  the  statements  made  in 
confession  of  the  dream-like  state  when  "  communi- 
cating." Illustrations  in  proof  of  it  would  take  up 
too  much  space  and  explanation. 

I  have  endeavored  by  these  lengthy  quotations  to 
answer  the  question  how  we  knew  that  there  was  any 
disturbed  mental  conditions  associated  with  the  mes- 
sages. In  the  nature  of  the  case  I  could  not  make 
the  supposition  arbitrarily.  I  had  to  support  it  by 
evidence.  The  habit  of  paying  no  attention  to  the 
confusion,  nonsense,  and  non-evidential  matter  pre- 
vents us  from  discovering  the  cause  of  it,  and  we  nat- 
urally ask  why  the  supposition  is  made  when  it  is 
used  to  explain  certain  characteristics  of  the  "  com- 
munications. For  these  reasons  I  have  given  as  much 
evidence  as  I  can  well  quote  in  this  book  to  show  that 
the  hypothesis  is  not  arbitrary,  but  is  one  quite  sub- 
stantiated by  the  facts.  We  are  thus  prepared  to  ex- 
amine what  it  explains. 

But  I  must  remind  the  reader  that  the  hypothesis 
of  abnormal  mental  conditions  as  affecting  the  mes- 
sages is  not  a  theory  of  my  own  concocting.  It  was 
first  proposed  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  perhaps  after  being 
prompted  to  it  by  the  statements  to  that  effect  by 
George  Pelham  and  the  unquestionable  evidence  of  the 
"  communications  "  themselves.  I  am  only  defending 
what  another  has  suggested.  It  is  not  a  novelty  of 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   329 

my  own  at  all.  It  was  almost  anticipated  by  Mr. 
Myers ;  for  he  was  aware  that  some  of  the  "  communi- 
cations "  looked  so  inane  as  to  be  intelligible  only  on 
the  supposition  of  some  abnormal  condition,  whether 
terrestrial  or  transcendental.  But  there  has  not  been 
the  opportunity  on  the  part  of  Dr.  Hodgson  to  ex- 
press fully  his  conception  of  the  case  or  to  present 
adequate  proof  of  it.  It  is,  however,  so  crucial  to 
the  spiritistic  hypothesis  that  it  must  receive  as  much 
attestation  as  it  is  possible  to  give  it  in  a  brief  work 
like  this. 

Assuming,  then,  that  the  hypothesis  has  sufficient 
evidence  to  justify  its  application  we  may  next  ask 
what  it  explains.  What  does  this  dream-like  condi- 
tion, or  delirious  half  consciousness  explain?  The 
first  answer  to  the  question  and  the  one  intended  from 
the  very  conception  of  the  perplexity  felt  by  most 
people  is  that  it  adequately  explains  the  triviality  of 
the  messages.  We  are  familiar  enough  with  the  inci- 
dents of  dreams  to  appreciate  this  assertion,  and  de- 
lirium exhibits  still  more  analogies  in  the  type  of  in- 
cidents that  constitute  the  stream  of  its  reproductions. 
Both  conditions  show  the  mind  in  a  more  or  less  auto- 
matic state  and  incapable  of  controlling  the  drift  of 
association  and  memory,  as  it  is  done  by  attention 
in  normal  consciousness ;  and  this  feature  of  the  phe- 
nomena is  noticeable  in  the  "  communications,"  and 
with  the  stress  and  strain  of  attention  withdrawn  the 
events  of  memory  will  naturally  flow  on  and  up  in 
miscellaneous  confusion  and  also  represent  the  most 
trivial  recollections  of  life.  When  we  consider  that 
the  "  communicator  "  in  his  normal  state  on  the  other 

330       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

side  is  aware  of  his  problem  and  would,  in  his  rational 
condition,  select  trivial  facts  to  prove  his  identity ;  and 
that  the  condition  for  "  communicating  "  interrupts 
this  rational  state  with  more  or  less  amnesia  and  yet 
enough  of  automatic  memory  retained  often  to  take 
up  the  incidents,  we  can  understand  both  the  triviality 
of  the  facts  and  the  confusion  attending  the  attempt 
to  tell  them  in  the  abnormal  state.  Then  the  ab- 
normal state  once  assumed  tends  to  keep  the  mind  on 
the  less  interesting  episodes  of  one's  life  and  bring  on 
something  like  delirium.  Secondary  personality  in  its 
undeveloped  forms  often  imitates  this  same  phenom- 
enon in  respect  to  confusion  and  triviality,  but  does 
not  involve  anything  supernormal.  Some  hypnotic 
states  exhibit  the  same  phenomenon.  The  triviality 
of  its  incidents  is  the  striking  fact,  and  is  apparently 
the  rule  in  most  abnormal  personalities  or  mental 
states,  especially  where  this  state  is  non-systematic. 

But  more  than  triviality  is  explained  by  the  mental 
confusion  of  the  "  communicator."  Certain  other 
features  of  the  messages  are  probably  due  to  it.  But 
as  obstacles  within  the  organism  of  the  medium  and 
intercosmic  difficulties  may  intervene  to  pervert  mes- 
sages on  the  way  to  the  "  controls  "  it  is  possible  that 
we  cannot  determine  very  accurately  what  confusions 
are  due  to  the  mental  condition  of  the  "  communi- 
cator "  and  what  to  other  obstacles.  There  is  evi- 
dence in  some  instances,  notably  in  false  messages, 
that  the  mental  action  of  the  "  communicator "  is 
clear  enough,  but  is  without  the  power  to  compare  its 
contents  with  the  facts  to  assure  itself  of  correctness. 
The  confusion  here  is  one  of  error  and  represents  what 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   331 

we  find  in  systematic  dreaming.  But  it  is  not  neces- 
sary to  distinguish  the  confusion  due  to  the  various 
causes,  as  so  much  of  it  is  the  result  of  the  dream- 
like state  of  the  "  communicator  "  under  the  impelling 
force  of  association  and  rapid  delirious  thinking; 
we  may  rest  satisfied  with  the  one  general  removal  of 
the  primary  difficulty  of  the  spiritistic  theory,  as  it 
has  appeared  to  most  persons  interested  in  the  phe- 
nomena. 

Readers  of  the  records  will  observe  that  not  all 
"  communicators  "  are  equally  affected  by  the  condi- 
tions influencing  messages.  Some  are  clearer  than 
others,  and  some  are  clearer  at  one  time  than  at  an- 
other. The  condition,  like  many  abnormal  mental 
conditions  in  the  living,  is  a  fluctuating  one  and  the 
results  vary  with  it.  Some  of  the  "  communications  " 
by  my  father  were  clearly  related  to  the  deepest  inter- 
est of  his  life  and  showed  a  clearly  changed  point  of 
view.  His  religious  beliefs  were  what  every  one  in  the 
present  day  would  call  very  narrow.  He  would  not 
have  denied  this,  though  he  would  have  insisted  that 
they  were  true,  whatever  other  characteristic  they  had. 
But  in  some  very  far  reaching  intimations  he  indicated 
a  change  of  view  that  touched  upon  the  vital  questions 
of  both  his  family  and  his  religious  life.  But  most 
that  he  "  communicated  "  was  the  consequence  of  an 
explanation  that  little  incidents  were  desirable  for  the 
proof  of  his  identity,  and  he  rationally  clung  to  that 
policy  with  its  inevitable  accompaniment  of  triviality. 
Almost  as  soon  as  he  came  to  "  communicate "  he 
began  most  naturally  to  refer  to  our  conversations  on 
this  subject  before  his  death,  an  incident  not  at  all 

332      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

trivial  when  it  is  considered  in  relation  to  the  modi- 
fication of  his  view  of  things  necessitated  by  a  wider 
outlook  into  cosmic  law  and  evolution.  But  the  mo- 
ment that  it  was  intimated  that  little  incidents  were 
necessary  to  prove  his  identity  and  to  establish  the 
conclusion  involved  in  this  investigation,  the  mind  of 
the  "  communicator  "  thenceforth  concentrated  most 
naturally  on  the  trivial  incidents  that  would  effect 
the  object  and  has  ever  since  stood  by  this  conception 
with  a  firm  persistence.  He  has  not  always  been  able 
to  maintain  a  clear  state  of  mind  for  his  purpose,  but 
it  shows  the  effect  of  a  rational  understanding  and 
will  in  the  work,  a  position  that  probably  reflects  the 
normal  consciousness  on  the  "  other  side  "  imperfectly 
carried  over  into  the  abnormal  condition  necessary  to 
"  communicate."  For  there  is  apparently  a  good  deal 
of  evidence  that  more  or  less  amnesia  of  both  the  nor- 
mal life  beyond  and  of  past  earthly  life  arises  from 
the  condition  necessary  to  "  communicate,"  though  it 
is  only  the  amnesia  of  our  natural  dream  life.  Let 
me  indulge  a  speculative  analogy  for  a  moment. 

In  the  experiments  to  prove  telepathy  it  was  no- 
ticeable that  the  agent  had  to  think  as  intently  as 
possible,  and  apparently  in  many  cases  the  mental 
abstraction  necessary  to  effect  the  transmission  had  to 
amount  almost  to  the  extent  of  visualisation.  The 
percipient  in  many  cases  received  the  impression  in 
the  form  of  an  hallucination.  This  was  specially  ob- 
servable in  the  only  successes  that  I  ever  obtained  in 
telepathic  transmission.  Now  add  to  this  the  fact 
that  in  our  dreams  we  perceive  things  as  if  they  were 
real.  We  seem  to  see  actual  things,  to  hear  actual 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   333 

sounds,  to  touch  actual  objects.  The  process  is  really 
one  of  hallucination,  and  not  imagination  as  we  know 
it  in  our  normal  state.  Those  who  awaken  in  a  dream 
realise  this  very  distinctly,  and  hypnogogic  illusions 
represent  the  same  phenomenon.  The  mind  acts  from 
central  processes  as  if  it  was  responding  to  peripheral 
stimuli  and  the  dream  world  has  all  the  reality  of  the 
real  world  but  its  persistence  and  probability. 

Now  suppose  the  mode  of  "  communication  "  with 
the  discarnate  is  telepathic  or  involves  telepathic  proc- 
esses; that  intensity  of  mental  action  which  is  neces- 
sary to  impress  a  delicate  mechanism  with  the  mes- 
sage to  be  sent  may  involve  something  like  the  mental 
action  that  creates  the  sensory  imagery  of  dreams, 
the  suppression  of  external  stimuli  and  the  releasing 
of  central  agencies.  If  this  be  true  we  can  under- 
stand why  a  state  like  our  sleep  should  be  necessary 
to  effect  certain  kind  of  "  communication." 

I  do  not  pretend  that  this  conjecture  is  either  prov- 
able or  a  complete  explanation  of  the  phenomena  if  it 
were  provable.  All  that  I  contend  for  is  that  it  is 
possible  and  that  the  indulgence  of  it  in  the  light  of 
known  facts  of  normal  experience  helps  us  to  under- 
stand the  characteristic  of  the  alleged  communications 
through  Mrs.  Piper,  and  to  modify  their  apparently 
anomalous  character. 

The  clear  "  communications  "  on  the  nature  of  the 
life  beyond  by  George  Pelham,  in  so  far  as  analogies 
can  be  "  clear,"  illustrate  again  that  some  "  communi- 
cators "  may  possess  a  better  balanced  consciousness 
and  when  they  do  the  messages  betray  less  triviality 
of  incident.  I  cannot  detail  any  of  his  "  revelations," 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

as  they  are  outside  the  evidential  problem  which  must 
be  the  first  one  to  solve,  and  I  allude  to  them  only 
to  refute  the  accusation  that  all  the  material  is  trivial, 
while  admitting  that  most  of  it  is  such  and  ought  to  be 
such  in  a  scientific  question  of  this  kind. 

I  shall  simply  remark  a  fact  that  is  incompatible 
with  the  telepathic  hypothesis  and  that  is  probably 
connected  with  the  abnormal  mental  conditions  neces- 
sary for  "  communication."  It  is  the  fact  that  "  com- 
municators "  gradually  lose  the  power  of  "  communi- 
cating ';  incidents  of  terrestrial  experience  as  time 
elapses,  and  can  only  engage  in  non-evidential  "  com- 
munications "  though  retaining  certain  personal 
characteristics  of  identity.  This  is  quite  a  natural 
phenomenon  for  anyone  who  has  observed  human  de- 
velopment in  this  life.  The  past  vanishes  in  propor- 
tion to  its  inutility  in  our  growth.  The  adult  wholly 
forgets  his  childhood,  and  the  child  at  a  certain  stage 
forgets  the  events  of  infancy,  as  its  personality 
changes.  A  crisis  in  our  lives  may  involve  such  an 
alteration  of  interests  as  to  reduce  to  more  or  less 
complete  amnesia  the  incidents  important  to  a  previous 
system  of  habits  and  interests.  Now,  after  death,  as- 
suming that  we  continue  to  exist,  we  have  no  need  of 
our  past  sensory  experience  except  as  an  accident  of 
the  retention  of  our  personal  identity,  and  as  soon 
as  this  has  been  established  by  new  experiences  in  a 
transcendental  environment,  whether  we  call  this  ethe- 
real or  spiritual,  we  may  allow  sensory  memories  to 
atrophy  and  to  be  irrevocable,  at  least  with  that  in- 
tensity and  in  that  form  that  may  be  necessary  to 
make  them  communicable  with  a  physical  world.  I  do 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING    335 

not  say  or  imply  that  the  past  is  not  clearly  recallable 
in  the  normal  state  beyond,  but  that  as  time  elapses 
it  seems  that  it  cannot  be  recalled  for  "  communica- 
tion." We  can  well  understand,  therefore,  why  its 
recall  involves  a  dream-like  and  delirious  stream  of 
trivial  incidents  which  usually  characterise  the  auto- 
matic action  of  our  own  minds  when  the  stress  of  at- 
tention is  removed  and  the  current  of  thought  has  its 
own  spontaneous  course. 

Let  me  carry  this  analogy  a  little  farther  and  apply 
it  all  along  the  line  of  our  evolution,  beginning  with 
infancy  and  illustrating  the  possible  course  of  devel- 
opment that  may  make  survival  after  death  a  reason- 
able contingency  and  communication  with  the  discar- 
nate  an  equal  contingency.  The  prenatal  existence 
of  the  infant  is  dependent  upon  the  possession  of  two 
bodies,  its  mother's  and  its  own.  Its  nutrition  comes 
to  it  from  an  external  source  already  digested  and 
prepared  for  assimilation,  and  its  circulation,  the 
agency  transmitting  this  nutrition,  also  comes  from 
without.  Its  organic  actions  are  not  its  own  spon- 
taneous functions,  but  the  contribution  of  its  environ- 
ment, its  mother's  organism.  But  it  possesses  a  latent 
system  of  senses  and  organs  which  have  no  relation 
to  this  environment  and  whose  activities  would  proba- 
bly not  represent  this  environment  rightly  if  they 
occurred.  Vision  and  hearing  in  this  prenatal  state, 
if  possible,  would  not  represent  much  of  that  world 
and  touch  may  be  as  inactive  as  the  other  senses  most 
naturally  are.  But  they  are  functions  unadapted  to 
the  prenatal  environment,  and  waiting  for  use  in  an- 
other world  after  birth.  This  birth  is  only  a  depart- 

336      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ure  from  its  mother's  organism  and  its  awakening  in 
a  different  physical  world  in  which  its  new  activities 
are  elicited.     For  its  normal  life  through  childhood 
to  maturity  these  activities  constitute  its  natural  and 
adapted  functions  until  death.     But  there  are  latent 
functions   which   we   have   to   call   subconscious,   and 
which  in  secondary  personality  of  certain  forms  rep- 
resent no  useful  character  in  the  struggle  for  exist- 
ence.    They   are   not   necessary    for   survival   in   the 
present  physical  world  and  show  as  much  inadaptation 
as  the  normal  senses  before  birth.     They  are  possible 
latent  functions  awaiting  the  stimulus  of  another  en- 
vironment, functions  capable  of  reacting  to  a  spiritual 
or  mental  stimulus  and  of  occasionally  acting  on  the 
physical    organism,    indirectly    at    least    through    its 
automatic  machinery,   when  the  control  or  influence 
of  the  normal  consciousness  is  relaxed  or  withdrawn. 
Now  if  death  is  merely  a  departure  of  the  soul  from  its 
own  body,  as  birth  is  a  departure  from  the  mother's 
body,  it  may  simply  release  for  functional  activity 
agencies  that  were  latent  in  its  physical  existence  and 
the  functions  related  to  the  physical  world  may  gradu- 
ally atrophy  from  disuse  and  inadaptation  to  a  new 
environment.     The  subliminal  functions  of  the  phys- 
ical world  may  become  the  supraliminal  of  the  ethereal 
and    spiritual   world.     The    resuscitation    of   earthly 
memories  and  their  transmission  to  the  physical  world 
may  require  that  co-operation  of  subliminal  functions 
which  betrayed  themselves  in  dreams  and  hallucinations 
in  normal  life,  and  consequently  the  recurrence  of  ab- 
normal mental  conditions  beyond  to  effect  the  result. 
The  natural  inadaptation  of  these  perfectly  to  either 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING  337 

world  may  necessarily  involve  the  production  of 
dream-like  trivialities  and  confusion. 

I  have  no  evidence  that  any  such  possibilities  are  a 
fact  and  hence  I  do  not  pretend  that  they  represent 
even  a  plausible  theory.  They  only  accord  with  the 
analogies  of  known  experience  in  normal  life,  and 
may  be  proposed  for  what  they  are  worth,  not  as  a 
serious  hypothesis  of  fact.  They  simply  indicate  the 
possible  reason  why  the  confusion  and  trivialities  of 
communications  may  partake  of  the  abnormal  condi- 
tions that  perhaps  necessarily  accompany  the  process 
by  which  nature  tries  to  bridge  the  chasm  between 
two  different  worlds  while  it  carries  personal  identity 
over  from  one  to  the  other.  Nature  has  to  observe 
the  law  of  continuity  in  some  form,  and  if  it  cannot 
do  it  any  other  way  it  will  adopt  temporary  functions 
in  an  organism  for  the  purpose.  Subliminal  mental 
functions  may  serve  this  purpose  and  connect  the 
physical  and  spiritual  worlds  in  this  way  without 
making  them  too  close  to  each  other  in  reality. 

The  current  and  Kanto-Hegelian  idealism  cannot 
object  to  any  such  view  of  the  case  as  can  be  shown 
by  the  place  which  is  assigned  to  internal  activities  or 
functions  of  the  mind.  Idealism  represents  the  mean- 
ing of  things  from  the  point  of  view  of  consciousness 
as  distinguished  from  the  physical  world  or  external 
stimuli.  It  emphasises  inner  activity  and  in  some 
cases  goes  so  far  as  to  describe  the  process  as  one  of 
"  creating  our  own  world."  Whatever  place  external 
stimulus  may  have,  it  is  certain  that  the  functions  of 
consciousness  are  not  always  representative  of  the 
reality  which  gives  rise  to  them.  "  Sound  "  seems  to 

338      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

have  no  resemblance  to  the  vibrations  which  occasion 
it.  The  sensations  of  color  seem  to  have  no  resem- 
blance to  the  undulations  of  light  supposed  to  cause 
them.  Hence  the  reactions  of  the  mind  upon  things 
from  without  seem  wholly  unlike  the  phenomena  of  the 
transmission  of  motion  in  the  mechanical  world  and 
so  to  characterise  a  world  of  creation.  Determinative 
action  from  within  begins  in  conscious  organisms,  and 
if  there  is  anything  in  the  survival  of  this  conscious- 
ness it  may  represent  a  process  of  evolution  toward  the 
perpetuity  of  this  creative  action.  The  infant  is 
purely  passive  in  its  prenatal  existence.  It  requires 
no  conscious  struggle,  and  obtains  nutrition  and  pro- 
tection from  without.  But  when  it  becomes  conscious 
on  birth  it  assumes  a  life  in  which  it  starts  toward  a 
career  of  creation  and  construction.  It  is  still  related 
to  a  physical  world  in  which  its  consciousness  re- 
quires a  stimulus  to  initiate  its  constructive  activity. 
The  growth  of  all  the  higher  intellectual  activities 
represents  a  growth  in  this  creative  or  constructive 
agency.  Scientific,  philosophic,  and  poetic  creations 
are  the  play  of  these  higher  functions  on  the  appar- 
ently disordered  material  of  sensory  experience  and 
are  a  discipline  in  the  exercise  of  this  sort  of  function 
which  may  be  of  continued  service  as  function  in  an- 
other mode  of  existence.  But  they  give  no  apparent 
reality  apart  from  the  presence  of  an  external  stimu- 
lus. In  our  subliminal  activities,  however,  as  in 
dreams  and  hallucinations,  this  apparent  reality  is 
present.  We  actually  create  our  apparent  physical 
universe  in  them  and  the  stimulation  of  normal  sense 
activity  is  complete.  What  if  these  subliminal  func- 

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATING   339 

tions  are  only  foresights  of  spontaneous  activities  in 
a  new  environment,  creating  their  world  there,  while 
other  functions  are  receptive  of  impression  from  it, 
and  carrying  along  with  them  the  best  or  the  worst 
of  our  sensory  life  in  the  physical  world.  Why  could 
not  a  rationalised  dream  life,  such  as  poetry  actually 
is,  represent  a  true  spiritual  life,  or  at  least  the  means 
of  bridging  the  chasm  between  a  material  and  a  spirit- 
ual world  and  opening  the  way  to  a  larger  life  of 
creative  activity  than  the  physical  world  will  permit, 
a  creative  activity  that  may  be  wholly  spiritual? 

I  am  not  advancing  any  such  possibility  as  true  in 
fact,  but  only  as  a  natural  expectation  on  the  basis 
of  idealism  on  the  one  hand  and  the  proof  of  a  future 
life  on  the  other.  All  that  I  am  contending  for  is 
that  idealism  is  deprived  of  objections  to  such  a  con- 
ception of  things,  as  it  apparently  conforms  to  evo- 
lution as  we  observe  it  from  the  earliest  stages  of 
organic  existence  to  its  close;  in  which  apparently  we 
have  a  progress  from  the  purely  passive  toward  the 
purely  active  life  in  which  consciousness  and  its 
development  toward  creative  activity  for  making  the 
wource  of  its  enjoyments  is  apparently  the  law  of  the 
cosmos.  But  such  a  speculation  is  not  necessary  to 
the  proof  of  a  future  life.  Its  indulgence  can  only 
serve  to  throw  light  upon  those  intermediate  mental 
conditions  which  do  not  seem  to  represent  a  perfect 
adaptation  to  either  mode  of  existence,  and  so  to  be 
abnormal  to  both  while  all  the  higher  functions  are 
reserved  for  their  proper  action  in  their  appropriate 
place.  The  creative  functions  as  we  know  them  serve 
for  progress  in  the  present  life ;  and  their  continuance 

310      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

in  the  next  will  only  be  their  exaltation  in  an  environ- 
ment better  adapted  to  them  while  the  latent  func- 
tions of  the  present,  receiving  their  stimulus  from  the 
active  functions  of  sense  and  intellect,  may  carry  over 
into  the  new  ethereal  world  the  capacity  to  make 
ideals  real  in  the  same  sense  in  which  dreams  and 
hallucinations  create  reality,  and  will  not  require 
adaptation  to  that  reality  for  survival  as  in  the  pres- 
ent. In  the  intermediate  stages  we  may  have  the 
abnormal  and  unadapted  of  both  worlds.  Confusion 
and  triviality  would  thus  be  a  natural  and  perhaps 
a  necessary  accompaniment  of  communication  between 
them. 

That  this  view  is  possible  is  supported  even  by  Dr. 
Osier.  Immediately  following  the  passage  in  his  In- 
gersoll  Lecture  on  immortality,  which  I  have  quoted 
above,  he  adds :  "  There  is  much  to  suggest,  and  it  is 
a  pleasing  fancy,  that  outside  our  consciousness  lie 
fields  of  psychical  activity  analogous  to  the  invisible 
yet  powerful  rays  of  the  spectrum.  The  thousand 
activities  of  the  bodily  machine,  some  of  them  noisy 
enough  at  times,  do  not  in  health  obtrude  themselves 
upon  our  consciousness,  and  just  as  there  is  this  enor- 
mous subconscious  field  of  vegetative  life,  so  there 
may  be  a  vast  supraconscious  sphere  of  astral  life,  the 
manifestations  of  which  are  only  now  and  then  in 
evidence." 

CHAPTER  XIII 

ETHICAL   MEANING  AND   RESULTS 

In  the  scientific  discussion  of  a  future  life  a  man 
can  make  no  promises.  He  must  adjudge  the  whole 
question  by  the  evidence  and  must  abide  by  the  ver- 
dict. He  must  accept  the  disproof  of  it,  if  that  be 
presented,  as  calmly  as  he  pretends  to  accept  its  proof. 
He  must  have  no  personal  preferences  one  way  or  the 
other,  if  he  claims  to  decide  the  question  by  scientific 
criteria.  Science  is  disinterested  and  accepts  the  truth 
whether  it  hurts  or  heals.  Philosophy  and  poetry 
may  indulge  their  empyrean  flights,  the  one  of  reason 
and  the  other  of  imagination,  and  religion  may  utter 
its  passionate  cry  for  a  happy  meeting  in  the  Elysian 
fields,  but  science  with  its  stern  unbending  will,  even 
if  it  has  to  leave  Hecuba  mourning  for  her  children, 
must  weigh  the  truth  in  the  scales  of  justice  without 
a  tear  and  without  any  wincing  at  the  bitterness  of 
fate. 

The  intelligent  public's  state  of  mind  on  this  ques- 
tion in  the  present  age  is  one  of  comparative  indif- 
ference. There  are  several  reasons  for  this  connected 
with  the  whole  development  of  the  relation  between 
science  and  religion  and  the  development  of  economic 
industries.  They  are  worth  a  brief  notice  as  they 
partly  excuse  this  indifference  and  partly  condemn  it. 

The  Greeks  before  the  rise  of  philosophic  scepticism 
and  of  intellectual  culture  accepted  the  immortality 

341 

342       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  the  soul,  though  there  is  evidence  that  it  not  only 
exercised  little  influence  on  moral  and  social  life,  but 
also  that  their  conception  of  it  seems  to  have  been 
drawn  from  phenomena  resembling  mcdiumistic  com- 
munications.    These  represented  it  as  a  meager  and 
undesirable  mode  of  existence.     When  scepticism  and 
culture  arose  they  drove  away  the  gods  and  the  belief 
in   immortality.     Thenceforth   the   Greeks   lived    for 
science   and   art.     They    were   by   nature   passionate 
worshippers   of  the  beauties  of  nature,   and  having 
come  to  the  conviction  that  another  life  after  death 
involved  an  existence  inferior  to  the  present  they  gave 
themselves  up  to  the  delirium  of  terrestrial  pleasures, 
the  "  carnal  life  of  sense,"  and  not  having  the  brother- 
hood of  man  to  steady  their  social  and  political  life 
ended  in  the  debaucheries  of  Epicureanism.     There 
were  redeeming  features  in  their  civilisation  which  I 
shall  not  discuss  here,  as  I  am  emphasising  only  the 
influences  that  center  about  the  idea  of  a  future  life, 
and  the  denial   of  it.      Some  of  the  best  minds   of 
Greece  believed  it,  though  not  in  a  personal  immortal- 
ity as  usually  understood.     But  it  had  a  very  slight 
hold  on  either  individual  or  social  morality  and  was 
never  associated  with  any  clear  ideas  on  the  brother- 
hood of  man.     Aristocratic  and  imperialistic  concep- 
tions of  society  were  too  prevalent  for  anything  like 
equality    to    secure    respect.     Philosophy,   when    not 
grossly   materialistic,  was  an   impersonal   pantheism, 
and  all  social  and  political  ideals  were  conceived  in 
harmony  with  it. 

When  Christianity  came  it  was  a  revolt  against  both 
the  philosophy  and  the  politics  of  Greece.     Its  phi- 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     343 

losophy  was  theistic  and  its  politics  were  democratic. 
It  asserted  the  created  nature  of  the  material  world 
and  placed  an  infinite  spirit  behind  the  phenomenal 
world,  and  in  man  it  placed  a  finite  spirit  which  sur- 
vived death,  and  associated  this  belief  with  a  morality 
that  involved  the  brotherhood  of  man.  But  in  this  re- 
volt, like  all  reactions,  Christianity  laid  such  stress 
upon  a  future  life  and  upon  an  ascetic  morality  for 
the  present  existence  that  its  whole  history  has  been 
infected  with  an  unnatural  disease.  It  even  forgot 
the  brotherhood  of  man  with  which  it  started  and 
concentrated  all  its  interest  in  the  life  beyond  the 
grave,  and  subordinated  all  its  social,  moral,  ecclesias- 
tical, and  political  machinery  to  the  end  of  personal 
salvation  in  another  world.  The  importance  of  this 
was  intensified  by  its  doctrine  of  rewards  and  punish- 
ments and  the  denial  of  probation  after  death,  the  last 
being  modified  by  the  Catholic  doctrine  of  purgatory. 
But  its  theory  of  rewards  and  punishments  gave  a 
perfunctory  character  to  secular  and  social  virtues, 
while  the  supremacy  of  the  interest  in  the  discarnate 
life  led  to  the  neglect  of  the  most  important  duties  in 
the  present.  The  selfish  instincts  of  ancient  individ- 
ual life  became  an  absorbing  and  passionate  personal 
interest  in  individual  salvation;  and  the  social  life 
of  the  community,  whose  regeneration  it  started  to 
effect  by  the  moral  reformation  of  the  individual, 
was  abandoned  for  personal  happiness  beyond  the 
grave.  To  purchase  this  the  earthly  life  had  to 
be  made  ascetic  and  external  social  duties  were 
the  price  of  this  trans-mortal  salvation.  The  out- 
come of  this  movement  was  the  social,  political,  and 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

moral  orgies  of  the  middle  ages  when  every  principle 
of  Christianity  was  sacrificed  to  persecution,  bad  gov- 
ernment, hypocrisy,  superstition,  barbarism,  and  such 
debaucheries  as  a  low  economic  development  would 
permit.  Among  the  lower  strata  of  society  the  orig- 
inal conceptions  prevailed  sufficiently  to  preserve  the 
social  system;  but  for  this  the  anarchy  of  Greco- 
Roman  civilisation  at  its  end  would  have  repeated  his- 
tory. But  it  maintained  itself  in  poverty,  ignorance, 
and  superstition,  while  the  intellectuals  played  the 
game  of  tyranny  and  hypocrisy. 

The  Renaissance  put  an  end  to  this.  It  released 
from  bondage  the  three  most  potent  forces  in  modern 
civilisation,  political  liberty,  industrial  development, 
and  scientific  method.  They  only  slowly  followed  the 
reformation,  but  their  efficiency  was  sure  and  irre- 
sistible. They  revived  culture  after  ancient  models 
while  they  preserved  some  of  the  humanitarian  enthu- 
siasm which  had  been  the  teaching  but  not  the  prac- 
tice of  so  many  centuries.  The  consequence  has  been 
the  application  of  morals  to  the  improvement  of  the 
present  life.  The  movement  was  accompanied  by  the 
growth  of  scepticism  and  materialism,  which  have 
permeated  all  the  strata  of  cultivated  and  intellectual 
society.  The  whole  theistic  system  and  its  belief  in  a 
future  life  was  slowly  sapped  by  it,  and  as  all  the 
ideals  of  the  mediaeval  period,  including  its  view  of 
immortality  and  personal  salvation,  were  the  property 
of  the  less  cultivated,  the  natural  distinctions  which 
arise  from  the  differences  of  culture  and  their  aristo- 
cratic associations  have  implicated  an  indifference  to 
the  question  of  a  personal  survival  after  death  with 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     345 

the  marks  of  intelligence  and  unselfishness.  After  a 
passionate  longing  for  a  future  life  the  human  race, 
brought  by  materialism  to  think  that  it  is  not  possible, 
consoles  itself  with  the  fable  of  the  fox  and  the  grapes 
and  prides  itself  in  a  stoical  philosophy,  forgetting 
that  such  an  attitude  is  a  confession  of  the  ideality  of 
that  which  it  has  to  scorn  and  to  abandon.  The  per- 
sonal interest  in  immortality  had  become  so  neglectful 
of  the  social  duties  of  the  present  and  the  necessity 
of  making  peace  with  the  inevitable  so  imperative,  that 
the  intelligent  man  had  to  make  a  virtue  of  this 
necessity,  and  however  much  he  may  have  liked  to 
retain  his  hopes  he  accepts  his  fate  and  will  not  bewail 
his  loss,  though  he  affects  a  stoical  virtue  in  his  pro- 
fession of  indifference.  "  Thus,"  says  John  Fiskc, 
"  there  has  grown  up  a  kind  of  Puritanism  in  the 
scientific  temper  which,  while  announcing  its  unalter- 
able purpose  to  follow  Truth  though  she  lead  us  to 
Hades,  takes  a  kind  of  grim  satisfaction  in  emphasiz- 
ing the  place  of  destination." 

This  temper,  of  course,  has  its  healthy  implications, 
as  it  is  the  Nemesis  of  that  faith  which  neglected  its 
present  social  duties  for  an  imaginary  and  unattested 
world  where,  if  it  were  rational,  virtue  would  count  for 
nothing  unless  it  had  been  properly  performed  in  this. 
Secularism  is  the  rationalist's  protest  against  an  ab- 
surd "  other  worldliness ;  "  and  it  seems  forced  by  the 
very  law  of  human  progress  to  gain  its  own  end  by  a 
neglect  of  the  spiritual,  similar  to  that  which  charac- 
terised the  religious  mind's  attitude  toward  the  earth- 
ly. But  there  is  no  reason,  save  the  lack  of  intelli- 
gence and  high  moral  development,  why  both  tenden- 

346       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

cies  should  not  act  together.  There  is  no  reason  why 
a  belief  in  a  future  life  should  be  a  necessary  evil  and 
there  is  no  reason  why  a  reference  to  present  duties 
alone  should  be  the  world's  only  virtue.  Both  ought 
to  be  articulated  in  the  highest  character,  if  there  is 
any  reason  to  accept  a  future  life  at  all.  Of  course, 
a  reference  to  a  future  life  in  our  daily  conduct  will 
get  its  rationality  from  the  conviction  that  it  is  a  fact, 
while  ignorance  of  such  a  destiny  is  certainly  an  ex- 
cuse for  the  neglect  of  it.  No  duties  can  have  any 
force  or  motive  power  if  they  are  based  upon  a  mere 
possibility  of  another  life  when  they  are  confronted 
with  an  equal  possibility  that  it  is  not  a  fact.  Moral- 
ity to  be  effective  must  have  some  certainties  in  the 
causal  series  of  events  or  it  will  be  largely  inopera- 
tive. Hence  if  we  are  to  use  a  future  life  as  a  motive 
power  in  conduct  at  all  we  must  assure  ourselves  that 
it  is  a  fact  and  that  it  represents  some  degree  of 
progress  as  the  result  of  effort  in  the  present  life. 

In  spite  of  all  the  evils  that  have  been  associated 
with  the  abuses  of  Christian  thought  the  belief  in 
immortality  has  had  an  important  influence  and  it  is 
worth  remarking.  In  a  discussion  elsewhere  of  an- 
cient political  institutions  and  their  sacrifice  of  the 
individual,  I  said :  "  Christianity  created  a  revolution 
in  this  respect.  It  was  a  direct  assault  upon  ancient 
morality  and  an  indirect  assault  upon  its  politics. 
This  was  effected  by  changing  the  content  and  the 
direction,  but  not  the  point  of  view  of  the  individual- 
ism that  regulated  ancient  private  life.  I  have  said 
that  ancient  morality  was  confined  to  civic  ends.  But 
private  conduct  was  under  the  dominion  of  personal 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS 

interest,  and  this  was  materialistic,  being  sensuous 
satisfaction  and  wealth  based  upon  slavery.  Christian 
civilisation  was  spiritualistic  and  its  individualism  was 
not  only  concentrated  upon  immaterial  ideas,  but  also 
required  the  sacrifice  of  the  present  to  the  future  and 
the  subordination  of  self  to  the  welfare  of  others. 
This  change  in  content  and  direction  of  conduct  was 
accomplished  by  its  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the 
soul.  Usually  this  belief  is  assumed  to  represent  a 
purely  religious  conception  with  no  political  impor- 
tance whatever.  But  it  was  in  fact  the  profoundest 
political  force  in  history,  and  with  its  associated  social 
and  moral  conceptions  was  both  a  revolutionising  and 
a  regenerating  influence  for  higher  civilisation.  The 
more  we  examine  into  the  nature  of  this  doctrine,  the 
motives  to  which  it  appealed,  the  moral  equality  which 
it  proclaimed  even  between  master  and  slave,  the 
promises  and  hopes  which  it  held  out  to  the  poor,  its 
contempt  for  riches  and  abandonment  of  ancient  po- 
litical ideals  and  ends,  the  more  we  must  recognise  the 
natural  antagonism  which  it  aroused  in  pagan  Rome 
with  the  prevailing  devotion  to  the  secular  and  military 
ideal.  Patriotism  and  the  virtues  of  soldiers  and  citi- 
zens directed  only  toward  material  happiness  and  na- 
tional glory  were  not  likely  to  characterise  men  whose 
aspirations  were  occupied  with  a  spiritual  world  be- 
yond the  grave.  Hence  antiquity  showed  a  perfectly 
natural  and  logical  instinct  when  it  endeavored  by  all 
the  means  in  its  power  to  crush  the  new  society ;  for  its 
conception  of  the  brotherhood  of  man,  of  human 
rights,  its  indifference  to  politics,  and  the  firmness  and 
austerity  of  its  conscience  were  moral  forces  that 

348       SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

sounded  the  death-knell  of  a  civilisation  which  was 
based  upon  mere  power. 

"  The  revolutionary  influence  which  was  exerted  by 
the  doctrine  of  immortality  was  caused  by  the  value 
which  it  put  upon  the  individual.  In  Greek  thought 
all  moral  values  were  placed  in  abstract  institutions. 
The  only  approach  to  spiritual  ideals  that  Greco-Ro- 
man civilisation  produced  was  found  in  the  welfare  of 
the  state  and  the  sacrifice  of  individual  life  and  con- 
duct to  it.  But  Christianity  put  this  value  in  the 
concrete  individual  for  whom  institutions  existed,  and 
not  he  for  institutions.  The  new  movement  withdrew 
from  politics  at  the  outset,  seeking  the  '  kingdom  of 
God,'  partly  in  the  voluntary  association  of  its  votaries 
and  partly  in  the  purification  and  hopes  of  the  soul. 
The  mental  and  moral  attitude  of  ancient  thought, 
which  had  subordinated  the  individual  to  the  whole 
was  here  completely  reversed,  and  man  was  conceived 
as  a  being  to  whose  interests  and  perfection  both  na- 
ture and  government  were  to  be  contributory.  In  this 
conception  of  the  world  and  man  all  rights  and  values 
belonged  to  the  individual,  and  not  to  political  and 
physical  powers  above  him.  Thus  a  new  center  of 
interest,  social  and  moral,  arose,  making  the  subject 
and  not  the  sovereign  the  ultimate  reference  of  con- 
duct. Hence  it  is  no  wonder  that  Christianity  was  so 
violently  attacked  by  Paganism.  This  inversion  of 
the  ancient  political  ideal,  the  substitution  of  the 
spiritual  kingdom  of  God  for  the  material  splendor 
of  civic  grandeur,  and  the  installation  of  the  rights 
of  the  individual  against  the  absolute  rights  of  the 
sovereign  were  revolutionary  forces  of  Incomparable 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     349 

magnitude,  and  made  modern  democracy  inevitable. 
Imperialism  and  its  military  ideals  were  impossible 
where  citizens  sought  peace  on  earth,  good  will  toward 
men,  and  supernal  bliss  in  a  transcendental  world  after 
death." 

That  this  view  of  its  importance  is  not  without  good 
authority  is  apparent  in  what  historians  admit. 
Every  one  knows  what  Gibbon  says  of  its  function  in 
the  conquest  of  the  world  by  Christianity.  He  re- 
garded it  as  one  of  the  five  causes  that  accounted  for 
its  complete  triumph  over  paganism.  But  Mr.  Gold- 
win  Smith  recently  proclaimed  himself  quite  em- 
phatically on  the  social  and  ethical  value  of  the 
belief  in  immortality.  After  defending  the  agnos- 
tic's position  of  doubt  or  disbelief,  and  showing  that 
religion  and  philosophy  have  totally  failed  to  sub- 
stantiate the  belief  with  convincing  evidence,  he  goes 
on  with  clear  moral  insight  and  something  of  despair 
to  admit  frankly  the  importance  of  the  belief  for  civil- 
isation : 

"  The  Founder  of  Christendom  taught  the  universal 
fatherhood  of  God  and  the  universal  brotherhood  of 
man.  On  what  does  the  universal  brotherhood  of  man 
rest,  if  not  on  the  universal  fatherhood  of  God?  Is 
there  among  all  the  different  tribes  of  man  any  bond 
of  unity,  or  even  of  common  origin,  so  assured  as  to 
constitute  a  fraternal  relation?  Certain  it  is  that  a 
failure  of  practical  belief  in  the  fatherhood  of  God 
has  been  accompanied  by  a  burst  of  disregard,  even 
of  contempt,  for  the  brotherhood  of  man.  Jingoism, 
which  seems  everywhere  to  be  spreading,  is  in  open 
defiance  of  humanity.  It  tramples  under  foot,  in 

350      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

its  thirst  of  expansion,  the  restraints  of  the  Christian 
code.  It  is  accompanied  and  partly  fed  by  a  thirst 
of  gain,  turning  the  commercial  world  into  a  battle- 
field, which  had  hitherto  been  in  some  measure  bal- 
anced and  repressed  by  spiritual  interests  and  aspira- 
tions. 

"  Take  away  the  religious  conscience,  and  what  re- 
mains? Enough  remains,  no  doubt,  to  hold  society 
together.  There  will  still  be  the  rules  which  the  com- 
munity makes  for  self-preservation  and  embodies  in 
municipal  law.  There  will  still  be  the  policeman  and 
the  judge.  There  will  still  be  social  influences  and 
restrictions  of  all  kinds,  which  may  hereafter  take  the 
more  definite  and  impressive  form  of  Social  Science. 
Besides  these,  there  will  be  affection,  conjugal,  paren- 
tal, and  general.  There  will  be  friendship;  there 
will  be  the  need  and  desire  of  the  good  opinion  of 
fellowmen.  In  the  character  and  minds  of  men  of 
the  higher  class  there  will  be  general  benevolence  and 
love  of  their  kind.  But  what  will  there  be  to  restrain 
evil  natures,  such  as  will  probably  continue  to  exist, 
from  gratifying  their  propensities,  if  they  can  evade 
or  overcome  human  law  during  their  lives  and  there 
is  nothing  to  fear  beyond  —  if  at  the  end  of  life  there 
is  to  be  no  difference  between  the  condition  of  the  best 
man  and  that  of  the  worst?  That  is  a  question  which 
not  only  may  present  itself,  but  perhaps  is  presenting 
itself,  though  in  forms  less  antisocial  than  that  here 
supposed,  to  men  who  have  cast  off  belief  in  future 
retribution.  Social  science  may  be  able  to  fill  the 
void  left  by  religion.  If  it  is,  let  it  do  this  with  all 
speed. 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     351 

"  A  general  contraction  of  views  to  the  man's  own 
life  must  apparently  be  the  consequence  of  the  con- 
viction that  this  life  is  all.  A  man  of  sense  will 
probably  be  inclined  to  let  reforms  alone,  and  to  con- 
sider how  he  may  best  go  through  the  brief  journey 
of  life  with  comfort,  if  possible  with  enjoyment  to 
himself,  and  in  pleasant  intercourse  with  his  fellow- 
men.  High  social  or  political  aspirations  of  any 
kind,  will  hardly  survive  the  disillusion. 

"  We  have  an  interest  in  our  own  children.  But 
otherwise  what  interest  have  we  in  the  generations 
that  are  to  come  after  us  on  which  a  religion  of 
Humanity  can  be  founded?  It  is  not  a  very  lively  in- 
terest that  we  feel  even  in  the  remoter  members  of 
the  human  race,  to  say  nothing  of  those  in  the  next 
street.  Yet  these  exist ;  and  of  their  existence  we  are 
conscious,  and  are  reminded  by  the  electric  cable.  Of 
the  existence  of  future  generations,  supposing  there 
is  no  future  life,  we  shall  not  be  conscious,  and  there- 
fore for  us  they  will  not  exist.  We  cannot  even  say 
with  absolute  certainty  that  they  will  exist  at  all. 
The  end  of  man's  dwelling-place  and  therefore  of  all 
human  progress,  science  tells  us,  will  be  a  physical 
catastrophe;  and  there  are  even  those  who  seem  to 
think  that  this  catastrophe  may  be  forestalled  by  a 
recurrence  of  the  glacial  era.  Natural  law,  which 
science  bids  us  venerate,  departs,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, with  the  Lawgiver.  Nothing  remains  but  phys- 
ical forces  without  a  guiding  mind,  the  play  of  which 
it  is  impossible  to  forecast.  As  to  posthumous  fame, 
it  would  be  an  arrant  delusion,  even  if  one  man  in  a 
million  could  hope  to  obtain  it. 

.'352      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

"  Whatever  conduces  to  the  enjoyment  and  pro- 
longation of  this  life  will  probably  be  sought  more 
energetically  than  before.  Material  progress,  there- 
fore, may  quicken  its  pace.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  men 
will  be  quite  so  ready  as  they  are  now  to  throw  away 
their  lives  in  war.  At  present  the  soldier  in  facing 
death  is  probably  sustained  by  a  notion,  however  dim 
and  vague,  of  a  reward  for  the  performance  of  his 
duty. 

"  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  hope  of  compensa- 
tion in  a  future  state,  for  a  short  measure  of  happi- 
ness here,  though  it  may  have  been  somewhat  dim, 
has  materially  helped  to  reconcile  the  less  favored 
members  of  the  community  to  the  inequalities  of  the 
existing  order  of  things.  The  vanishing  of  that  hope 
can  scarcely  fail  to  be  followed  in  the  future  by  an 
increased  impatience  of  inequality,  and  a  growing 
determination  not  to  be  put  off  the  indemnity  to 
another  world.  In  fact,  this  is  already  visible  in 
the  spirit  and  language  of  labor  agitation.  Serious 
problems  of  this  kind  seem  to  await  the  coming  gener- 
ation." 

I  do  not  think  "  Social  Science  "  can  supply  the 
lack  of  religion.  No  science  can  produce  the  motives 
that  regulate  human  action.  It  can  only  reinforce 
or  justify  them  by  establishing  the  truths  on  which 
those  motives  feed.  The  great  forces  of  civilisation 
are  certain  ineradicable  instincts,  and  the  desire  for 
survival  is  one  of  them  in  the  properly  social  and 
moral  man.  It  is  not  noticeable  in  the  man  who 
has  no  real  social  impulses  of  the  high  moral  order. 
It  is  the  "  religion  of  sorrow,"  the  passionate  pity  for 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     353 

pain  where  it  seems  undeserved,  the  altruistic  sym- 
pathy for  the  weak  and  helpless,  that  feels  most  the 
need  of  a  continued  existence  after  death  to  balance 
the  inequalities  of  the  present,  though  such  natures 
do  not  themselves  feel  the  personal  need  of  it.  But  no 
science  will  create  this  demand  for  it  as  the  one  con- 
dition for  considering  the  world  morally  rational. 
Science  can  only  prove  or  disprove  the  legitimacy  of 
hope  and  desire,  while  those  primary  instincts  will  do 
their  work  with  or  without  science,  unless  we  have  first 
resolved  that  no  instincts  shall  have  any  play  in  life 
until  they  have  obtained  the  permission  of  science. 

It  is  probable  that  the  motives  that  actuate  the 
soldier  may  be  underestimated  in  the  passage  quoted, 
as  there  are  races  whose  soldierly  qualities  do  not  de- 
pend upon  any  belief  in  a  future  life.  But  where 
this  does  not  operate  as  a  stimulus  to  bravery  its 
place  is  taken  by  the  influence  of  public  opinion 
against  the  coward.  This  can  be  made  quite  as  ef- 
fective as  a  deterrent  as  a  future  life  can  be  made  a 
stimulant.  But  the  community  in  making  this  de- 
mand on  the  individual  can  be  no  less  selfish  in  it  than 
the  man  who  acts  from  a  personal  interest  in  immor- 
tality. But  the  belief  in  a  future  life  may  effect 
all  that  is  accomplished  by  a  social  and  public  opin- 
ion and  at  the  same  time  do  much  more  by  satisfying 
the  law  of  desert  in  human  conduct,  namely,  that  the 
individual  who  performs  the  duty  shall  have  the 
consequences  of  it. 

But  it  is  the  relation  of  the  belief  to  the  social 
question  that  is  its  greatest  importance,  and  here  Mr. 
Goldwin  Smith  has  touched  the  key  to  the  future  of 

354      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

politics.  The  ideals  of  democracy  will  live  or  die  with 
the  belief  in  immortality.  Christianity  boasted  of  its 
freight  of  hope  to  the  poor  and  of  its  placing  men 
on  an  equality  before  the  world.  It  taught  us  that 
man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  and  that  riches 
were  not  the  pathway  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  It 
was  Lazarus  and  not  the  rich  man  that  found  happi- 
ness in  the  next  world,  and  I  believe  it  was  Dean 
Swift  who  said  that  God  shows  what  estimate  he 
places  on  money  by  the  kind  of  men  to  whom  he  gives 
it.  Wealth  brings  what  is  called  refinement  and  cul- 
ture based  upon  the  exploitation  of  the  unfavored 
classes ;  but  the  milk  of  human  kindness  is  not  so 
warm  and  healthy  as  in  the  spontaneous  helpfulness 
of  the  poor.  It  makes  a  virtue  of  charity,  but  this 
is  quite  as  often  a  sop  thrown  to  Cerberus  to  prevent 
him  from  swallowing  us,  as  it  is  a  wise  philanthropy. 
It  is  all  very  well  for  the  rich  and  cultured  to  tell 
us  we  should  have  no  personal  interest  in  a  future 
life  and  thus  appear  to  be  very  disinterested  in  their 
views  of  life,  when  the  fact  is  that  this  is  only  a 
subterfuge  to  escape  the  duty  to  share  with  labor  and 
suffering  the  fruits  of  a  selfish  exploitation  of  them. 
The  truth  is  that  men  never  became  stoical  and  pre- 
tentiously virtuous  about  immortality  until  they  be- 
came convinced  that  it  was  not  to  be  had ;  and  then 
to  placate  the  poor  they  begin  teaching  them  the 
duty  of  sacrifice  in  this  respect  while  they  make  none 
themselves  in  the  field  of  wealth  until  they  have  satis- 
fied all  their  Epicurean  desires.  But  they  will  learn 
in  the  dangers  of  a  social  revolution  that  the  poor  will 
not  sacrifice  both  wealth  and  immortality.  These  will 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     355 

insist  on  sharing  one  or  the  other.  They  were  prom- 
ised immortality  by  Christianity  and  they  were  told  at 
the  same  time  that  all  men  were  brothers  and  that 
society  should  be  constructed  on  the  basis  of  this 
moral  relationship.  The  church  has  succeeded  in 
allying  itself  with  riches  and  abandoned  the  brother- 
hood which  was  the  raison  d'etre  of  its  existence; 
scepticism,  in  which  the  church  is  fast  coming  to 
share,  has  robbed  them  of  hope;  and  they  are  not 
likely  to  contemplate  with  complacency  or  composure 
admonitions  of  stoicism  in  the  loss  of  a  boon  more 
priceless  than  wealth,  and  at  the  same  time  display 
no  envy  when  fortune  distributes  her  rewards  without 
regard  to  the  share  of  labor  in  producing  its  bounties. 
I  shall  agree  with  the  secularist  with  some  quali- 
fications. I  accept  the  ethical  maxim  that  my  duties 
are  found  right  in  the  environment  in  which  I  am 
placed.  I  cannot  regulate  my  concrete  duties  by  ends 
of  which  I  know  nothing  definite.  The  absorption  of 
the  middle  ages  in  the  other  world  which  they  could 
only  imagine  was  fraught  with  untold  errors  and 
disastrous  consequences.  But  this  neither  excludes  a 
legitimate  place  for  such  a  world  in  our  ideals,  if 
we  rationalise  its  relation  to  the  present,  nor  forbids 
a  place  for  it  in  the  actual  qualification  of  morality. 
All  that  a  future  life  does  in  ethical  conduct  is  to 
lengthen  the  time  considerations  for  duty  and  multi- 
ply the  conditions  under  which  moral  law  is  impera- 
tive. Our  duties  may  lie,  as  I  think  they  do,  right 
in  the  present  environment,  but  this  does  not  prevent 
them  from  being  as  much  determined  by  the  future 
life,  if  it  be  a  fact,  as  they  are  determined  by  to- 

356      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

morrow  or  next  year.  We  cannot  draw  an  absolute 
line  of  distinction  to  indicate  when  morality  ceases  to 
command,  if  we  continue  to  exist  and  to  retain  our 
identity  beyond  the  limits  of  bodily  existence.  Our 
physical  duties  may  lapse  but  our  moral  never,  except 
with  annihilation.  The  very  essence  of  moral  law  in 
our  physical  life  is  that  which  looks  farthest  ahead. 
The  man  who  lives  only  for  today  is  irrational  and 
may  be  a  criminal.  He  who  does  not  look  to  the 
morrow  is  at  least  imprudent ;  and  yet  the  talk  about 
our  morality  being  determined  by  the  present  may  as 
well  apply  to  the  present  hour  or  minute  as  to  the 
whole  of  the  present  life.  Indeed  it  is  in  a  measure 
true  that  we  have  duties  referring  only  to  the  present 
moment  or  hour  and  that  do  not  extend  beyond  the 
moment.  But  there  are  also  duties  that  have  to  keep 
an  outlook  on  the  future  of  the  present  life  and  to 
reckon  with  the  lapse  of  time  while  conditions  remain 
the  same.  The  highest  prudence  and  the  highest  vir- 
tues are  connected  with  this  previsional  spirit  and 
motive.  It  therefore  only  awaits  the  proof  of  a  fu- 
ture life  to  make  it  actually  imperative  to  take  it 
into  the  scope  of  our  moral  law.  The  retention  of 
personal  identity  after  death  implies  the  same  moral 
nature  and  would  carry  with  it  the  same  connection 
of  virtue  and  vice  with  such  a  being  as  we  should 
find  in  its  intellectual  qualities.  We  are,  of  course, 
not  to  live  only  for  that  future,  but  to  apply  the 
moral  law  in  the  present  so  that  its  effects  will  not 
conflict  with  the  larger  outlook  that  the  cosmos  may 
provide.  But  we  cannot  limit  morality  and  its  mean- 
ing to  the  present  unless  we  deny  the  fact  of  survival 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     357 

after  death.  We  should  have  to  deny  the  validity  of 
the  moral  law  altogether  and  to  consider  only  the  in- 
terest of  the  present  moment  in  all  our  action,  neglect- 
ful of  the  permanent  facts  in  nature  which  determine 
duties  of  an  equally  permanent  sort. 

But  I  may  be  told  correctly  enough  that  I  have  no 
duties  where  I  have  no  knowledge,  and  perhaps  in- 
correctly that  I  have  no  knowledge  of  the  life  which 
is  here  supposed  to  affect  morality.  The  appeal  will 
be  made  to  the  silence  of  nature  on  the  existence  of 
a  future  world  and  life.  But  this  silence  is  an  imag- 
inary fact,  if  the  work  of  psychic  research  is  to  be 
accredited  with  any  evidential  value,  and  it  is  ap- 
parently only  a  small  modicum  of  phenomena  better 
attested  than  the  immense  quantities  of  it  pervading 
history.  I  must  wholly  deny  from  my  standpoint 
the  absolute  silence  of  nature  on  the  matter.  The 
silence  is  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  wilfully  ignor- 
ant of  the  facts  in  the  case.  The  residual  phenomena 
of  human  experience  have  been  neglected  and  their 
significance  ignored.  The  blame  must  not  be  shift- 
ed upon  nature,  but  upon  the  pride  and  stupidity  of 
the  respectable  classes.  They  fought  Copernican 
astronomy,  Newtonian  gravitation,  Darwinism,  the 
existence  of  meteors,  and  hypnotism.  Then  when 
they  were  proved  they  appropriated  them  as  their  own 
and  made  it  the  mark  of  intelligence  to  believe 
them.  The  more  the  respectable  change  the  more 
they  remain  the  same.  They  will  pass  through  the 
same  development  in  psychic  research  and  when  sur- 
vival after  death  is  proved  in  spite  of  social  ostracism 
it  will  be  the  respectable  thing  to  believe  and  to 

358      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

teach.  But  the  plea  of  nature's  silence  on  the  matter 
cannot  be  made  beyond  the  point  that  its  revela- 
tion on  the  subject  is  not  so  clear  as  that  of  the  bodily 
life.  Moreover  it  is  true  that  knowledge  is  excluded 
to  that  extent  which  makes  any  definite  conception 
of  a  transcendental  life  at  present  impossible  or  im- 
probable, and  just  to  that  extent  the  obligations  of 
morality  are  unrelated  to  it.  But  ethics  can  well 
admit  that  the  whole  of  our  morality  as  based  upon 
a  physical  environment  is  limited  to  the  present,  and 
yet  contend  that  there  is  an  inner  life  of  the  "  spirit " 
or  mind  that  has  its  value  for  the  present  and  for  the 
future  as  well,  if  that  future  can  even  be  conjectured. 
But  after  all  this  is  not  the  point  at  which  the 
belief  in  a  future  life  touches  the  problem  of  ethics. 
Its  relation  to  morality  depends  upon  very  different 
considerations.  The  question  is  not  always  what  con- 
stitutes the  moral  law,  but  what  means  have  we  for 
making  it  effective.  What  motives  have  we  for  in- 
ducing men  to  act  according  to  this  law  or  ideal?  All 
action  is  based  upon  some  end  to  be  attained,  and  the 
more  consonant  it  is  with  the  more  permanent  laws 
of  the  world  the  more  imperative  it  usually  is.  We 
always  work  for  rewards,  be  they  good  or  bad.  We 
may  not  call  them  rewards,  but  if  we  do  not  it  is 
because  we  limit  the  meaning  of  the  term.  But  as 
every  act  has  consequences  we  have  to  take  them  into 
account,  and  it  will  be  only  a  question  whether  we  are 
aiming  at  those  consequences  consciously  to  decide  the 
matter  of  calling  them  rewards.  These  consequences 
aimed  at  are  ideals  of  some  kind.  The  most  impor- 
tant of  these  ideals  are  those  which  look  to  remote 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS    359 

ends.  There  are  occasions  when  a  nearer  end  is  so 
imperative  that  it  cannot  be  sacrificed,  but  this  will 
not  interfere  with  the  constant  pursuit  of  the  remoter 
end,  which  may  only  be  temporarily  sacrificed.  But 
aside  from  explanations  and  qualifications  our  ideals 
are  not  only  or  always  of  merely  present  rewards 
but  also  remotely  future  rewards.  Or  if  rewards  is 
an  invidious  term,  as  the  mediaeval  theory  of  respon- 
sibility has  made  it,  consequences  may  be  substituted 
in  its  stead.  That  is,  we  work  for  remote  future  ends 
quite  as  necessarily  as  for  the  present,  and  those  ends 
will  be  rational  precisely  in  proportion  to  their  moral 
ideality  on  the  one  hand  and  to  the  measure  of  our 
knowledge  on  the  other.  This  is  as  true  in  the  eco- 
nomic as  it  is  in  the  ethical  world. 

The  one  question  to  answer  after  this  is  that  which 
asks  for  the  relative  value  of  consciousness  in  the 
world  of  existence.  There  are  always  two  things  that 
interest  us.  They  are  external  reality  and  our  inner 
life,  matter  and  consciousness.  When  pressed  to  its 
ultimate  meaning  even  matter  interests  us  for  its  ef- 
fect on  consciousness.  We  do  not  value  the  ma- 
terial world  for  itself,  but  for  its  relation  to  our  ideals. 
Every  use  we  make  of  it  is  in  the  interest  of  some 
pleasure  or  perfection.  It  is  a  means  to  our  ends, 
instead  of  our  ideals  being  means  to  matter  as  an  end. 
We  assign  our  states  of  consciousness  a  superior 
value  in  comparison  with  mere  matter.  Consequent- 
ly we  very  naturally  raise  the  question  whether  the 
order  of  nature  accepts  that  estimate  of  the  case. 
When  theology  made  matter  a  created  and  phenome- 
'nal  substance,  an  ephemeral  reality  coming  into  exist- 

360      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

ence   and   passing  away   at  the  will  of  the   creator, 
and  made  spirit  the  permanent  eternal  reality,  it  pro- 
vided a  perfectly  natural  and  rational  solution  of  the 
question  proposed.     But  its  fundamental  difficulty  is 
that  its  evidential  support  was  too  weak  to  enable  it 
to  stand  as  defended  in  earlier  times.     But  its  concep- 
tion of  the   cosmos   was  a  rational   one  in   its  main 
outlines,  though  terribly  distorted  and  abused  in  its 
applications.     It    conformed    to    the    estimate   which 
every  man  and  woman  must  place  upon  the  life  of 
consciousness,  if  he  acts  according  to  his  ineradicable 
instincts  at  all.     These  may  be  summed  up  in  the  law 
of   self-preservation,   which   is  only   a  name   for  the 
preference  of  a  life  of  consciousness  against  an  inani- 
mate existence.     Expanded  into  the  higher  ideals  this 
law  becomes  the  recognition  of  superior  value  of  the 
intellectual,  the  emotional,  and  volitional  functions  of 
human   nature   in   science,   philosophy,   art,  religion, 
morality,  and  politics,  as  against  the  vegetative  life 
of   an    animal.      Culture,    refinement,    humanity    and 
sympathy,  intelligence,  high  moral  aims  and  enthu- 
siasm, rational  religious  emotion  with  its  accompani- 
ment of  moral  passion  for  the  true,  the  beautiful,  and 
the  good  are  all  the  forms  of  consciousness  that  sane, 
rational  men  exalt  beyond  the  swinish  life  of    '  na- 
ture "  and  mere  material  comfort.     This  is  assigning 
a  value  to  states  of  consciousness  which  is  not  naturally 
assigned  to  dead  matter,  and  it  is  as  natural  as  it  is 
rational    for   ethical    natures   which    so   estimate   the 
higher  ideals  of  life  that  they  should  measure  the  cos- 
mic order  by  the  standard  which  their  morality  im- 
poses upon  themselves.     They  may  not  be  convinced 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS 

that  the  cosmic  order  respects  the  moral  ideals  which 
they  are  compelled  to  recognise,  but  they  will  ap- 
prove or  condemn  it  according  as  it  does  or  does  not 
tend  toward  the  realisation  of  the  moral  law,  by  which 
they  feel  obliged  to  regulate  their  lives. 

The  older  philosophical  and  theological  views  of  the 
world  gave  a  metaphysical  basis  in  conformity  with 
this  interpretation  of  things.  This  was  based  upon 
the  permanence  of  spirit  and  the  transient  or  phe- 
nomenal nature  of  matter,  the  passing  away  of  the 
material  universe  and  the  survival  of  the  spiritual. 
But  the  discovery  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter 
and  the  conservation  of  energy  disturbed  the  com- 
placency of  this  view,  and  in  fact  apparently  or  really 
reversed  our  way  of  looking  at  things.  They  showed 
the  permanence  of  the  dead  material  world  and  its 
mechanical  activities,  while  they  showed  the  apparent 
phenomenal,  dependent,  and  ephemeral  nature  of  the 
world  of  consciousness.  In  modern  conceptions  mat- 
ter and  its  phenomena  of  motion,  heat,  light,  and 
electricity,  if  the  latter  are  material  phenomena,  are 
permanent  and  indestructible,  while  consciousness 
seems  to  be  a  transient  incident  of  composition  in  mat- 
ter. The  situation  which  this  creates  for  the  older 
morality  is  perfectly  clear.  Materialistic  science  at 
least  apparently  shows  us  that  nature  appreciates 
dead  matter  more  than  it  does  the  permanence  and 
superiority  of  consciousness.  All  our  morality  com- 
pels us  to  estimate  consciousness  at  a  higher  value 
than  dead  matter.  Have  we  any  obligations  to  rise 
higher  than  nature  intends  we  should?  Our  morality 
says  we  must  regulate  even  our  present  lives  on  the 

362      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

basis  of  the  superior  excellence  of  consciousness  and 
its  ideals,  and  we  must  naturally  ask  whether  nature 
intends  to  give  the  same  permanence  to  personality 
that  it  gives  to  matter.  If  it  does  not  it  shows  that  its 
estimate  is  in  favor  of  the  permanence  of  the  less 
important  as  necessarily  conceived  in  our  practical 
morality,  and  we  can  hardly  expect  intelligent  men, 
when  they  discover  that  nature  does  not  encourage 
the  realisation  of  remoter  ideals,  to  persist  in  their 
cultivation.  They  will  accept  the  sensuous  view  of 
life  when  they  find  that  the  spiritual  is  not  favored  by 
the  cosmic  order.  If  the  materialistic  theory  be  true 
man  is  not  above  nature,  but  its  creature,  and  has 
no  obligations  which  the  order  of  the  cosmos  does  not 
favor.  If  it  makes  dead  matter  the  permanent  thing 
and  consciousness  phenomenal  and  transient  we  must 
expect  human  nature  not  to  take  any  higher  concep- 
tion of  its  duties  and  ideals.  It  will  not  sacrifice  its 
present  pleasures  to  an  ideal  which  it  is  sure  will  never 
be  realised.  If  morality  requires  respect  for  the 
permanent,  as  we  are  always  told  that  it  does,  we  must 
expect  man  to  idealise  the  mechanical  world  and  to 
eschew  as  inferior  the  transient  world  of  the  spiritual. 
But  if  he  has  reason  to  believe  that,  after  all,  nature 
intends  to  preserve  personality  quite  as  fully  as  it  does 
matter  and  energy  it  will  discover  a  perfect  conform- 
ity between  its  ethical  ideals  and  the  cosmic  order. 
Morality  will  thus  be  encouraged  by  the  scientific  fact 
that  nature  respects  what  our  ideals  oblige  us  to  re- 
spect in  our  conduct,  namely,  the  superiority  and 
deserts  of  personality.  If  personality  is  a  mere  bub- 
ble on  the  surface  of  existence  we  cannot  expect  to 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     363 

get  men  to  estimate  it  as  if  it  were  permanent.  If  it 
is  the  primary  object  of  the  world  to  develop  per- 
sonality and  to  give  it  permanence  we  have  a  leverage 
on  the  minds  of  men  to  respect  it  at  the  estimate 
placed  upon  it  by  nature.  Otherwise  not.  They  will 
take  the  good  that  the  material  life  offers  and  make 
no  sacrifices  for  a  spiritual  culture  that  depends  upon 
a  future  world  for  its  full  fruition  while  the  exist- 
ence of  that  world  is  denied.  The  shortcomings  and 
failures  of  our  actions  to  realise  our  ideals  in  the 
present  will  be  perfectly  tolerable  if  we  can  feel  that 
nature  will  still  give  us  a  chance  to  pursue  them,  but 
if  we  are  assured  that  the  highest  developments  of 
consciousness  and  personality  are  not  to  be  respected 
by  the  cosmos  we  are  not  likely  to  go  on  any  fool's 
errands.  The  poor  man  cannot  be  expected  to  cul- 
tivate any  high  spiritual  ideals  when  he  has  no  prom- 
ise that  the  next  world  will  give  him  what  the  present 
refuses.  We  can  expect  nothing  but  the  Epicurean- 
ism in  which  Greco-Roman  civilisation  terminated,  if 
the  higher  spiritual  ideals  of  aspiration  are  to  have 
no  fruition.  But  if  we  can  promise  that  the  intel- 
lectual and  emotional  life  of  man,  as  exhibited  in  its 
best  literature  and  moral  activity,  can  continue  its 
pursuits  in  a  spiritual  world  where  we  are  not  tram- 
melled by  the  limitations  and  hindrances  of  sense  and 
our  physical  wants  the  poor  may  well  be  repaid  for 
what  little  indulgence  they  can  give  to  reflection  and 
high  aspiration  in  the  present,  and  the  more  fortunate 
can  have  a  justification  for  their  ideals  which  can- 
not be  defended  as  a  part  of  the  ultimate  end  of  the 
cosmos  on  the  materialistic  philosophy. 

SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

I  am  well  aware  of  the  follies  which  might  easily  be 
aroused  by  the  reinstatement  of  a  belief  in  a  future 
life,  if  that  belief  should  become  as  badly  abused  as 
it  has  been  in  the  past.  But  the  dangers  of  abuse 
are  no  reason  for  trying  to  suppress  facts.  We  can- 
not shy  at  the  truth  because  some  unwise  people  lose 
their  heads  about  it.  On  the  contrary  our  supreme 
duty  is  to  appropriate  that  truth  and  to  prevent  its 
abuse.  We  only  double  our  task  when  we  ridicule 
facts  until  they  get  beyond  our  control.  Our  busi- 
ness is  not  to  follow  in  the  wake  of  movements  we 
cannot  control,  but  to  give  their  truths  sobriety  and 
sanity.  If  a  future  life  is  a  fact  we  cannot  disprove 
it  by  laughing  at  phenomena  that  we  do  not  like. 
Our  esthetics  have  no  more  to  do  with  the  fact  than 
they  have  with  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  with  the  exist- 
ence of  disease.  Emotional  contempt  of  the  facts  is 
no  more  legitimate  than  the  condemned  emotional  in- 
terest in  a  future  life,  and  if  it  be  a  fact  we  shall 
not  escape  it  by  cultivating  indifference  to  its  truth. 
It  is  the  business  of  the  intelligent  and  scientific 
man  to  command  the  subject,  not  to  despise  it  be- 
cause it  is  not  respectable.  If  nature  has  thrown 
in  our  way  indubitable  evidence  of  a  future  life,  no 
matter  what  its  character,  if  there  is  no  escape  from 
the  admission  of  the  significance  of  the  facts  for  some 
large  theory  of  the  world,  it  is  not  only  the  scandal 
of  science  that  the  facts  are  not  incorporated  in  its 
work,  but  it  is  also  a  reproach  to  our  morals  that  we 
do  not  appropriate  the  facts  in  some  rational  and 
useful  way.  If  we  cannot  deny  them  we  must  ar- 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     365 

ticulate  them  with  our  rational  life  and  see  that  they 
get  sober  instead  of  insane  appreciation. 

There  is  in  the  very  nature  of  the  facts  as  recorded 
and  the  theory  necessary  to  explain  them  the  correc- 
tive of  their  dangerous  use.  The  conditions  under 
which  "  communications  "  purport  to  come  from  dis- 
carnate  souls  help  to  regulate  the  application  of  them 
to  practical  life.  The  difficulties  of  "  communicat- 
ing "  and  especially  the  abnormal  mental  conditions 
supposed  to  affect  the  "  communications  "  show  us  the 
limits  which  must  be  placed  upon  any  revelation  of 
the  life  beyond,  to  say  nothing  of  the  impossibility 
of  communicating  supersensible  experiences  in  sen- 
sible forms.  The  probable  amnesia  affecting  the 
"  communicator  "  in  regard  to  both  his  normal  life  in 
a  supersensible  world  and  in  regard  to  his  past  earthly 
life  shut  us  out  of  clear  "  communications  "  about  the 
past  and  a  rational  account  of  the  spiritual  world 
until  "  communications "  may  become  clearer,  and 
even  then  they  must  always  be  expressed  in  analogies. 
We  thus  seem  shut  off  from  the  kind  of  knowledge 
which  a  morbid  curiosity  inclines  to  desire  and  seek, 
while  we  have  the  advantage  of  proving  the  fact  of 
survival  with  the  probability  that  the  normal  condi- 
tion in  a  supersensible  world  represents  spiritual 
progress  of  some  kind.  We  do  not  need  to  laugh  at 
the  trivialities,  but  to  use  them  for  curbing  the 
insane  curiosity  and  passions  of  men  to  peer  into  se- 
crets which  our  earthly  morality  may  not  require.  If 
we  can  infect  life  with  the  belief  that  consciousness 
survives  and  that  we  cannot  form  an  intelligible  idea 

366      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

of  that  survival  without  many  centuries  of  scientific 
study  we  may  get  the  combined  advantages  of  the 
Greco-Roman  devotion  to  science  and  art  while  we 
sustain  Christian  hopes  and  ideals.  The  mediation 
between  the  material  and  the  spiritual  life  may  be 
effected  in  this  union.  We  do  not  need  assurance  of 
anything  but  the  fact  of  a  future  life  if  we  can  accept 
and  trust  the  lesson  of  evolution,  namely,  that  prog- 
ress is  the  law  of  the  cosmos. 

One  thing  in  any  view  of  it  would  be  subserved  by 
the  proof  of  survival  of  personality.  Nature  would 
have  been  shown  to  be  consistent  with  the  estimation 
which  our  every  day  morality  has  to  place  on  con- 
sciousness and  its  development  in  scientific,  philo- 
sophic, ethical,  political,  and  religious  life.  There 
would  be  no  disparity  between  our  moral  ideals  in  our 
present  life  and  the  possible  realisation  of  the  same 
in  a  higher  degree  in  another  existence.  It  was  this 
apparent  disparity  which  led  Immanuel  Kant  to  de- 
mand both  immortality  and  the  existence  of  God  to 
satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  moral  law.  He  found 
duty  demanding  of  men  what  it  was  impossible  for 
them  to  realise  in  their  earthly  life  and  recognising 
the  validity  of  that  law  he  thought  nature  must  give 
immortality  or  abandon  the  law.  The  existence  of 
God  was  to  him  necessitated  by  the  demand  for  a 
power  to  adjust  the  relation  between  virtue  and  hap- 
piness which  he  did  not  find  adjusted  in  the  present. 
I  shall  not  defend  the  accuracy  of  Kant's  doctrine, 
as  I  am  not  quoting  it  for  its  truth,  but  for  its 
philosophic  respectability,  and  if  this  school  can  ap- 
preciate and  respect  the  demands  of  the  moral  law  on 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     367 

the  consistency  of  the  cosmos  there  should  be  no  hesi- 
tation on  the  part  of  intelligent  men  in  an  investiga- 
tion which  might  lead  to  the  establishment  of  that 
consistency  in  fact.  A  doctrine  which  "  Hegel  be- 
lieved, which  Kant  half  believed,  and  about  which  Sir 
William  Hamilton  was  curious,"  according  to  the  au- 
thority of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  namely,  spirit  communi- 
cation, ought  not  to  tax  the  patience  of  their  admirers 
and  followers. 

But  I  must  close  somewhere,  and  I  know  no  more 
fitting  language  with  which  to  terminate  this  brief 
discussion  than  that  with  which  Mr.  Frederic  W.  H. 
Myers  ends  his  great  work  on  Human  Personality. 
He  says : 

"  I  need  not  here  describe  at  length  the  deep  dis- 
quiet of  our  time.  Never,  perhaps,  did  man's  spir- 
itual satisfaction  bear  a  smaller  proportion  to  his 
needs.  The  old-world  sustenance,  however  earnestly 
administered,  is  too  unsubstantial  for  the  modern 
cravings.  And  thus  through  our  civilised  societies 
two  conflicting  currents  run.  On  the  one  hand  health, 
intelligence,  morality, —  all  such  boons  as  the  steady 
progress  of  planetary  evolution  can  win  for  man, — 
are  being  achieved  in  increasing  measure.  On  the 
other  hand  this  very  sanity,  this  very  prosperity,  do 
but  bring  out  in  stronger  relief  the  underlying  Welt- 
Schmerz,  the  decline  of  any  real  belief  in  the  dignity, 
the  meaning,  the  endlessness  of  life. 

"  There  are  many,  of  course,  who  readily  accept 
this  limitation  of  view;  who  are  willing  to  let  earthly 
activities  and  pleasures  gradually  dissipate  and  ob- 
scure the  larger  hope.  But  others  cannot  thus  be 

368      SCIENCE  AND  A  FUTURE  LIFE 

easily  satisfied.  They  rather  resemble  children  who 
are  growing  too  old  for  their  games ;  —  whose  amuse- 
ment sinks  into  indifference  and  discontent  for  which 
the  fitting  remedy  is  an  initiation  into  the  serious 
work  of  men. 

"  A  similar  crisis  has  passed  over  Europe  once  be- 
fore. There  came  a  time  when  the  joyful  naivete, 
the  unquestioning  impulse  of  the  early  world  had 
passed  away ;  when  the  worship  of  Greeks  no  more 
was  beauty,  nor  the  religion  of  Romans  Rome.  Alex- 
andrian decadence,  Byzantine  despair,  found  utter- 
ance in  many  an  epigram  which  might  have  been 
written  today.  Then  came  a  great  uprush  or  incur- 
sion from  the  spiritual  world,  and  with  new  races 
and  new  ideals  Europe  regained  its  youth. 

"  The  unique  effect  of  that  great  Christian  impulse 
begins,  perhaps,  to  wear  away.  But  more  grace  may 
yet  be  attainable  from  the  region  whence  that  grace 
came.  Our  age's  restlessness,  as  I  believe,  is  the  rest- 
lessness not  of  senility  but  of  adolescence. 

'  What  the  age  needs  is  not  an  abandonment  of 
effort,  but  an  increase ;  the  time  is  ripe  for  a  study  of 
unseen  things  as  strenuous  and  sincere  as  that  which 
Science  has  made  familiar  for  the  problems  of  earth. 
For  now  the  scientific  instinct, —  so  newly  developed 
in  mankind, —  seems  likely  to  spread  until  it  becomes 
as  dominant  as  was  in  time  past  the  religious;  and  if 
there  be  the  narrowest  chink  through  which  man  can 
look  forth  from  his  planetary  cage,  our  descendants 
will  not  leave  that  chink  neglected  or  unwidened. 
The  scheme  of  knowledge  which  can  commend  itself 
to  such  seekers  must  be  a  scheme  which,  while  it 

ETHICAL  MEANING  AND  RESULTS     369 

transcends  our  present  knowledge,  steadily  continues 
it ;  a  scheme  not  catastrophic,  but  evolutionary ;  not 
promulgated  and  closed  in  a  moment,  but  gradually 
unfolding  itself  to  progressive  inquiry. 

"  It  may  be  that  for  some  generations  to  come 
the  truest  faith  will  lie  in  the  patient  attempt  to 
unravel  from  confused  phenomena  some  trace  of  the 
supernal  Avorld ;  —  to  find  thus  at  last  '  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen.'  ; 

If  the  ideal  is  worth  tolerating  in  philosophic  re- 
flection at  all  the  possibility  of  proving  it  by  facts 
ought  to  be  respected  when  any  phenomena  offer  the 
opportunity  or  the  hope  of  it,  and  the  age  which  has 
exhausted  its  resources  to  study  the  origin  of  man 
might  find  it  quite  as  respectable  to  examine  into  his 
destiny.  Even  our  aristocracy  has  become  recon- 
ciled to  a  simian  ancestry,  and  why  does  it  take  such 
offense  when  we  hint  that  evolution  may  not  termi- 
nate in  a  fiasco,  unless  it  is  afraid  of  the  humility 
which  the  cosmic  order  may  visit  upon  it  for  its  pride 
and  arrogance. 

INDEX 

Abercromby,  Blanche,  67. 
Aksakof,  65. 
Apparitions,    41-65,    99. 
Aristotle,   VII. 

Balfour,   Arthur  J.,   16. 

Baldwin,    Prof.    James   Mark,    210. 

Barrett,    Prof.    W.    F.,   16,   27,   70, 

118. 

Blavatsky,    Madame,    70,    116. 
Blodgett,   Mrs.,   187,    189-193. 
Bourget,     Paul,     208. 
Bramwell,   Dr.   Milne,   16. 
Briggs,    Mr.,   203. 
Brougham,   Lord,   11,   47,  48. 
Bute,    Marquis    of,    16,    54. 

Cahagnet,    13. 

Carpenter,     Prof.     T.     Estlin,     53, 

208. 

Christianity,    3-5,    342,   346. 
Cicero,    4. 

Clarke,  James   Freeman,  208. 
Consciousness,    Unity   of,   268. 
Cooper,    Dr.    Joseph,   281. 
Crawford,   Harper,    222,   230. 
Crookes,    Sir    William,    16. 

Dante,    6. 

Darwin,    6,    11,    53. 

Davey,    S.    J.,    70. 

Davis,    Andrew    Jackson,    13. 

Descartes,    6. 

Dessoir,    Max,    11,    28. 

Doctor,    129,    274. 

Dramatic  play  of  personality,  273. 

Edmunds,    Judge,    13. 
Edmunds,    Miss,    183,    184. 
Epicurus,    4,    74,    78. 
Ermacora,    Dr.,    65. 
Ether,    82. 

Ferrier,   Dr.,   54. 

Fiske,   John,    88. 
Fraud,     101,     246-248. 
Future    Life,    77. 

Gibbon,    349. 

Conner,    Mr.,    135,    137. 

Goodrich-Freer      (Miss      X.),      54, 

159-162. 

Greek   Philosophy,    74,   78,   341. 
Gurner,   Mr.,    18,   57. 
Guthrie,   Malcom,   25,    26,   28. 

Hart,   John,    194-197,    207,    324. 

Hegel,  VII,  45,  367. 

Hodgson,     Dr.     Richard,     16,     03, 

70,  71,    116,    124,    126-128,    162, 
165,     166,     172-178,     1S2,     190, 
194-204,     207,     211,     212,     214, 
231,  264,   275,   276,   324,   328. 

Hutton,    Richard,    16. 
Hyslop,    Robert,    216-225. 

Imperator,     129,     130,     214,     274, 
278,    301,   315. 

James,     Prof.     William,     113-116, 

162,  179,  189,  190,  208,  292. 
Jenner,    Sir    William,    49. 
Johnson,   Miss   Alice,    30,   71,   164. 

Kant,    VIII,    14,    366,    367. 
Keulemans,  Mr.,  52,  53. 

Lang,    Andrew,    11,    44,    50,    64, 

367. 

Langley,  Prof.   S.   P.,  16. 
Leaf,    Mr.    Walter,    118,    149,    151. 
Liebeault,    Dr.,    62. 
Lodge,     Sir    Oliver,    16,     80,     118, 

119,   135,  138-149,   151. 

Mabire,   M.   J.    E.,   29. 
Macalister,   Prof.,  163. 
Machines,    108. 
Marillier,    Leon,    71. 
Materialism,    78,   85-94. 
McClellan,   James,   226. 
McClellan,   John,    227. 
McCreery    sisters,    24. 
Mediumistic    phenomena,    60,    100. 
Mendeleyeff,   81. 
Milton,   6. 

Mistakes    and   Confusions,   280. 
Mitchell,   Dr.    Weir,   51,   210. 
Morison,    James    Cotter,    53. 
Moses,    Rev.    Stainton,   14,   15,   16, 

65,   66,   67.   128,   129,   274. 
Myers,    Frederic    W.    H.,    15,    16, 

18,    19,    44,    45,    51,    62,    63,    66, 

71,  118,  122,  154,  162,  253,  329, 
367. 

Neo-Platonists,   4. 

Newbold,    Prof.,    203. 

Newton,  C. 

Nichols,   Prof.    Herbert,   208. 

Norton,    Prof.    Charles    Eliot,    210. 

371 

INDEX 

Osier,    Dr.    William,   89,   340. 

Pelham,  George,  127-128,  130, 
132,  26o,  274-278,  314,  3^5, 
333. 

Personality,  Dramatic  play  of,  273. 

Personality,     Secondary,     102—104. 

Pierce,   Prof.,   2oy. 

Pindar,    4. 

Piper,    Mrs.,    113-133. 

Plato,    78,    79. 

Podmore,  Mr.  Frank,  13,  14,  18, 
19,  45. 

Prince,    Dr.    Morton,    71. 

Rayleigb,    Lord,    16. 

Rector,    129,    214,    274,    275,    276, 

278,    323. 
Reformation,  5. 
Reichenbach,    17. 
Religion,    73. 
Renaissance,    5,    344. 
Richet,   Prof.   Charles,  16,  28,  161. 
Ripon,  Bishop  of,  16. 
Roentgen   Rays,   81. 
Romanes,    G.    J.,    11,   49. 

Sage,   M.,   VII. 

Savage,    Dr.    Minot    J.,    54,    181, 

182. 

Savage,   W.   H.,   181,   182. 
Schmoll,  M.   A.,  29. 
Secondary    personality,    102-104. 
Seneca,  4. 
Sidgwick,    Mrs.    Henry,    70,    71. 

Sidgwick,     Prof.     Henry,     15,     29, 

30,    71,    118,    164. 
Sidis,    Dr.    Boris,    284. 
Smith,   Mr.    Goldwin,   349,  353. 
Socrates,    4,    8,    9. 
Speer,    Dr.,    14,    07. 
Spinoza,    6. 

Spencer,   Mr.    Herbert,   42,   43,   83. 
Spiritualism,    41. 
Stewart,    Prof.    Balfour,    16. 
Stoics,    4. 

Stout,  Prof.,  34,  253. 
Supersensible   world,   78—85. 
Sutton,  Mrs.  Catherine  Paine,  207. 

208. 
Symonds,  John  Addington,  50. 

Telepathy,    22,    33-41,    104,     111, 

245-166,   294. 

Thaw,  Dr.  A.   Blair,  29,  206. 
Thompson,   Prof.  J.  J.,   16. 
Triviality,   260,   298-303. 
Trowbridge,  Prof.  J.  T.,  210. 
Tuke,  Dr.  Hack,  54. 

Underwood,  Mr.   B.   F.,  65. 
Unity  of  Consciousness,  268. 

Vance,  Mr.,  196. 

Verrall,   Mrs.,   150,   151,  156. 

W- 

-,  Miss,  166-172. 

Wedgewood,     Mr.     Hensleigh,     16, 

53,    62. 

Wild,    Miss    Hannah,    189-193. 
Witchcraft,   10. 

0  Cft 

>»  gj 

01  O5 

3 
I 

5 

(D 

35 

03 
0) 

Oi 
H 
01 

0 

X 

0> 

r+-* 

•H 
H 

0) 

1 

g 

A 

0) 
•H 

O 
CO 

Slip     U10JJ 

3AOUI9J 
}OU      OQ 

iimwn 

01HOH01  JO
