Christian Mysticism (W.R. Inge, 1899)
==========================================================
Inge's 1899 Bampton Lectures on Christian mysticism — the Dean of St. Paul's landmark history from the Fathers to the moderns. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

ets


ees


sy
y.


.
a


iS &
irre,


err
rere


Ot
Meese 7
or re rs
iatats


oat
we


ae
7


ore

eee?

Pee ee


SS.


vay,


y
aay
aaa


CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


THE BAMPTON LECTURES, 1899


CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


CONSIDERED IN EIGHT LECTURES
DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


BY
WILLIAM RALPH INGE
C.V.O., D.D.


DEAN OF ST, PAUL'S; HON. D.D., ABERDEEN
HON. D.LITT., DURHAM AND SHEFFIELD; HON. LL.D., EDINBURGH
HON. FELLOW OF KING’S AND JESUS COLLEGES, CAMBRIDGE
AND OF HERTFORD COLLEGE, OXFORD


SIXTH EDITION


METHUEN & CO. LTD.
36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
LONDON


First Published (Demy 8v0) 1. »- + «+ + «
Second and Cheaper Edition (Crown Svo) .
Third Edition (Crown 8vo) . .- 1» - « +
Fourth Edition (Crown vo). .» » « « «
Fifth Edition (Crown 8vo) . . « « « +
Stxth Edition (Crown Svo). . « « « «


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


November 1899

February 1012

April IQI3

Octoler 1918

May 192i
1925


EA RACH
FROM THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT
OF THE LATE


REV. JOHN BAMPTON


CANON OF SALISBURY


“IT give and bequeath my Lands and Estates to the
Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Oxford
for ever, to have and to hold all and singular the said Lands
and Estates upon trust, and to the intents and purposes here
inafter mentioned ; that is to say, I will and appoint that the
Vice-Chancellor of the University of Oxford for the time being
shall take and receive all the rents, issues, and profits thereof,
and (after all taxes, reparations, and necessary deductions
made) that he pay all the remainder to the endowment of
eight Divinity Lecture Sermons, to be established for ever in
the said University, and to be performed in the manner
following :


“T direct and appoint that upon the first Tuesday in Easter
Term, a Lecturer be yearly chosen by the Heads of Colleges
only, and by no others, in the room adjoining to the Printing-
House, between the hours of ten in the morning and two in
the afternoon, to preach eight Divinity Lecture Sermons, the
year following, at St. Mary’s in Oxford, between the com-
mencement of the last month in Lent Term, and the end of
the third week in Act Term.


Vv


vi CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM _

“ Also I direct and appoint, that the eight Divinity Lecture
Sermons shall be preached upon either of the following
Subjects—to confirm and establish the Christian Faith, and
to confute all heretics and schismatics—upon the Divine
authority of the Holy Scriptures—upon the authority of the
writings of the primitive Fathers, as to the faith and practice
of the primitive Church—-upon the Divinity of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ—upon the Divinity of the Holy Ghost—
upon the Articles of the Christian Faith, as comprehended in
the Apostles’ and Nicene Creeds.

“Also I direct that thirty copies of the eight Divinity
Lecture Sermons shall be always printed within two months
after they are preached; and one copy shall be given to the
Chancellor of the University, and one copy to the head of
every College, and one copy to the Mayor of the City of Oxford,
and one copy to be put into the Bodleian Library; and the
expense of printing them shall be paid out of the revenue of
the Land or Estates given for establishing the Divinity Lecture
Sermons ; and the Preacher shall not be paid, nor entitled to
the revenue, before they are printed.

“ Also I direct and appoint, that no person shall be qualified
to preach the Divinity Lecture Sermons, unless he hath taken
the degree of Master of Arts at least, in one of the two Uni-
versities of Oxford or Cambridge ; and that the same person
shall never preach the Divinity Lecture Sermons twice.”


PREFACE


THE first of the subjects which, according to the will of
Canon Bampton, are prescribed for the Lecturers upon
his foundation, is the confirmation and establishment of
the Christian faith. This is the aim which I have
kept in view in preparing this volume; and I should
wish my book to be judged as a contribution to apolo-
getics, rather than as a historical sketch of Christian
Mysticism. I say this because I decided, after some
hesitation, to adopt a historical framework for the
Lectures, and this arrangement may cause my object
to be misunderstood. It seemed to me that the
instructiveness of tracing the development and opera-
tion of mystical ideas, in the forms which they have
assumed as active forces in history, outweighed the
disadvantage of appearing to waver between apology
and narrative. A series of historical essays would, of
course, have been quite unsuitable in the University
pulpit, and, moreover, I did not approach the subject
from that side. Until I began to prepare the Lectures,
about a year and a half before they were delivered, my
study of the mystical writers had been directed solely
by my own intellectual and spiritual needs. I was
attracted to them in the hope of finding in their
writings a philosophy and a rule of life which would


vil


viii CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


satisfy my mind and conscience. In this I was not
disappointed ; and thinking that others might perhaps
profit by following the same path, I wished to put
together and publish the results of my thought and
reading. In such a scheme historical details are either
out of place or of secondary value; and I hope this
will be remembered by any historians who may take
the trouble to read my book.

The philosophical side of the subject is from my
point of view of much greater importance. I have
done my best to acquire an adequate knowledge of
those philosophies, both ancient and modern, which
are most akin to speculative Mysticism, and also to
think out my own position. I hope that I have
succeeded in indicating my general standpoint, and
that what I have written may prove fairly consistent
and intelligible; but I have felt keenly the disad-
vantage of having missed the systematic training in
metaphysics given by the Oxford school of Lztere
Humaniores, and also the difficulty (perhaps I should
say the presumption) of addressing metaphysical
arguments to an audience which included several
eminent philosophers. I wish also that I had had
time for a more thorough study of Fechner’s works;
for his system, so far as I understand it, seems to me
to have a great interest and value as a scheme of
philosophical Mysticism which does not clash with
modern science.

I have spoken with a plainness which will probably
give offence of the debased supernaturalism which
usurps the name of Mysticism in Roman Catholic
countries. I desire to insult no man’s convictions ;


PREFACE ix


and it is for this reason that I have decided not to
print my analysis of Ribet’s work (La Mystique Divine,
distinguée des Contrefacons diaboliques. Nouvelle
Edition, Paris, 1895, 3 vols.), which I intended to
form an Appendix. It would have opened the eyes
of some of my readers to the irreconcilable antagon-
ism between the Roman Church and science; but
though I translated and summarised my author faith-
fully, the result had all the appearance of a malicious
travesty. I have therefore suppressed this Appendix ;
but with regard to Roman Catholic “Mysticism”
there is no use in mincing matters. Those who find
edification in signs and wonders of this kind, and
think that such “supernatural phenomena,” even if
they were well authenticated instead of being ridiculous
fables, could possibly establish spiritual truths, will
find little or nothing to please or interest them in
these pages. But those who reverence Nature and
Reason, and have no wish to hear of either of them
being “overruled” or “suspended,” will, I hope, agree
with me in valuing highly the later developments of
mystical thought in Northern Europe.

There is another class of “ mystics” with whom I
have but little sympathy—the dabblers in occultism.
“ Psychical research” is, no doubt, a perfectly legitimate
science; but when its professors invite us to watch the
breaking down of the middle wall of partition between
matter and spirit, they have, in my opinion, ceased to
be scientific, and are in reality hankering after the
beggarly elements of the later Neoplatonism.

The charge of “pantheistic tendency” will not, I
hope, be brought against me without due considera-


x CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


tion. I have tried to show how the Johannine Logos-
doctrine, which is the basis of Christian Mysticism,
differs from Asiatic Pantheism, from Acosmism, and
from (one kind of) evolutionary Idealism. Of course,
speculative Mysticism is nearer to Pantheism than to
Deism; but I think it is possible heartily to eschew
Deism without falling into the opposite error.

I have received much help from many kind friends ;
and though some of them would not wish to be as-
sociated with all of my opinions, I cannot deny myself
the pleasure of thanking them by name. From my
mother and other members of my family, and relations,
especially Mr. W. W. How, Fellow of Merton, I
have received many useful suggestions. Three past
or present colleagues have read and criticised parts of
my work—the Rev. H. Rashdall, now Fellow of New
College; Mr. H. A. Prichard, now Fellow of Trinity ;
and Mr. H. H. Williams, Fellow of Hertford. Mr.
G. L. Dickinson, Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge,


- lent me an unpublished dissertation on Plotinus. The


é


- Rev. C. Bigg, D.D., whose Bampton Lectures on the


Christian Platonists are known all over Europe, did me
the kindness to read the whole of the eight Lectures,
and so added to the great debt which I owe to him
for his books. The Rev. J, M. Heald, formerly
Scholar of Trinity, Cambridge, lent me many books
from his fine library, and by inquiring for me at
Louvain enabled me to procure the books on Mysti-
cism which are now studied in Roman Catholic
Universities. The Rev. Dr. Lindsay, who has made


. a special study of the German mystics, read my


Lectures on that period, and wrote me a very useful


PREFACE xi


letter upon them. Miss G. H. Warrack of Edinburgh
kindly allowed me to use her modernised version of
Julian of Norwich.

I have ventured to say in my last Lecture—and it is
my earnest conviction—that a more general acquaint-
ance with mystical theology and philosophy is very
desirable in the interests of the English Church at the
present time. I am not one of those who think that
the points at issue between Anglo-Catholics and Anglo-
Protestants are trivial: history has always confirmed
Aristotle’s famous dictum about parties—ryiyvovta: ai
oTdoels ov Tept piKpav GAN ex puKpdv, oTacidbovar Sé
mepl jeyakov—but I do not so far despair of our
Church, or of Christianity, as to doubt that a recon-
ciling principle must and will be found. Those who
do me the honour to read these Lectures will see
to what quarter I look for a mediator. A very short
study would be sufficient to dispel some of the pre-
judices which still hang round the name of Mysticism
—eg., that its professors are unpractical dreamers, and
that this type of religion is antagonistic to the English
mind. Asa matter of fact, all the great mystics have
been energetic and influential, and their business capa-
city is specially noted in a curiously large number of
cases. For instance, Plotinus was often in request as
a guardian and trustee; St. Bernard showed great
gifts as an organiser; St. Teresa, as a founder of
convents and administrator, gave evidence of extra-
ordinary practical ability; even St. Juan of the Cross
displayed the same qualities ; John Smith was an excel-
lent bursar of his college; Fénelon ruled his diocese
extremely well; and Madame Guyon surprised those


xii CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


who had dealings with her by her great aptitude for
affairs. Henry More was offered posts of high re-
sponsibility and dignity, but declined them. The
mystic is not as a rule ambitious, but I do not think
he often shows incapacity for practical life, if he con-
sents to mingle in it. And so far is it from being
true that Great Britain has produced but few mystics,
that I am inclined to think the subject might be ade-
quately studied from English writers alone. On the
more intellectual side we have (without going back to
Scotus Erigena) the Cambridge Platonists, Law and
Coleridge; of devotional mystics we have attractive
examples in Hilton and Julian of Norwich; while in
verse the lofty idealism + and strong religious bent of
our race have produced a series of poet-mystics such as
no other country can rival. It has not been possible
in these Lectures to do justice to George Herbert,
Vaughan “the Silurist,’ Quarles, Crashaw, and others,
who have all drunk of the same well. Let it suffice to
say that the student who desires to master the history
of Mysticism in Britain will find plenty to occupy his
time. But for the religious public in general the most
useful thing would be a judicious selection from the
mystical writers of different times and countries. Those
who are more interested in the practical and devo-
tional than the speculative side may study with great

It is really time that we took to burning that travesty of the British
character—the John Bull whom our comic papers represent ‘‘ guarding his
pudding”—instead of Guy Fawkes. Even in the nineteenth century,
amid all the sordid materialism bred of commercial ascendancy, this
country has produced a richer crop of imaginative literature than any
other ; and it is significant that, while in Germany philosophy is falling


more and more into the hands of the empirical school, our own thinkers
are nearly all staunch idealists.


PREFACE xiii


profit some parts of St. Augustine, the sermons of
Tauler, the Theologia Germanica, Hilton’s Scale of
Perfection, the Life of Henry Suso, St. Francis de
Sales and Fénelon, the Sermons of John Smith and
Whichcote’s Aphorisms, and the later works of William
Law, not forgetting the poets who have been men-
tioned. I can think of no course of study more fitting
for those who wish to revive in themselves and others
the practical idealism of the primitive Church, which
gained for it its greatest triumphs.

I conclude this Preface with a quotation from
William Law on the value of the mystical writers.
“Writers like those I have mentioned,” he says in a
letter to Dr. Trapp, “there have been in all ages of
the Church, but as they served not the ends of popular
learning, as they helped no people to figure or pre-
ferment in the world, and were useless to scholastic
controversial writers, so they dropt out of public uses,
and were only known, or rather unknown, under the
name of mystical writers, till at last some people have
hardly heard of that very name: though, if a man
were to be told what is meant by a mystical divine,
he must be told of something as heavenly, as great, as
desirable, as if he was told what is meant by a real,
regenerate, living member of the mystical body of
Christ; for they were thus called for no other reason
than as Moses and the prophets, and the saints of
the Old Testament, may be called the spiritual Israel,
or the true mystical Jews. These writers began their
office of teaching as John the Baptist did, after they
had passed through every kind of mortification and
self-denial, every kind of trial and purification, both


xiv CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


inward and outward. They were deeply learned in
the mysteries of the kingdom of God, not through the
use of lexicons, or meditating upon critics, but because
they had passed from death unto life. They highly
reverence and excellently direct the true use of every-
thing that is outward in religion ; but, like the Psalmist’s
king’s daughter, they are all glorious within. They
are truly sons of thunder, and sons of consolation ;
they break open the whited sepulchres; they awaken
the heart, and show it its filth and rottenness of death:
but they leave it not till the kingdom of heaven is
raised up within it. Ifa man has no desire but to be
of the spirit of the gospel, to obtain all that renova-
tion of life and spirit which alone can make him to be
in Christ a new creature, it is a great unhappiness to
him to be unacquainted with these writers, or to pass
a day without reading something of what they wrote.’


CONTENTS


LECTURE
I. General Characteristics of Mysticism . a 5 E .


II. The Mystical Element in the Bible


II. Christian Platonism and Speculative Mysticism—(1) In the
East


IV. Christian Platonism and Speculative Mysticism—(2) In the
West. : , : c : . .


V. Practical and Devotional Mysticism
VI. Practical and Devotional Mysticism—continued .
VII. Nature-Mysticism and Symbolism


VIII. Nature-Mysticism—continued


APPENDIX A. Definitions of ‘‘ Mysticism” and ‘* Mystical
Theology ”


APPENDIX B, The Greek Mysteries and Christian Mysticism
APPENDIX C. The Doctrine of Deification


APPENDIX D, The Mystical Interpretation of the Song of Solomon


INDEX . - : - j 5 ‘ ; f ; 3 =


FAGE


213
249
299


335
349
356
369


373


©"Huiv 58 drodexréov ws éx’ evruxla TH peylory mapa Oedy 7 Toatry
pavia Sliorat % 6&8 Sh dwrddeks eorar Sewots péev Amioros, cogpots dé


PLATO, Phedrus, p. 245.


Es spricht kein Gott; es spricht dein eignes Herz.


Zphigenia, Sie reden nur durch unser Herz zu uns.”


GOETHE, /phigenze.


“Si notre vie est moins qu’une journée
En léternel; si Pan qui fait le tour
Chasse nos jours sans espoir de retour $
Si périssable est toute chose née;

Que songes-tu, mon 4me emprisonnée?
Pourquci te plait Pobscur de notre jour,
Si, pour voler en un plus clair séjour,
Tu as au dos Vaile bien empennée !

La est le bien que tout esprit désire,
La, le repos o tout le monde aspire,
La est amour, 14 le plaisir encore !
La, 6 mon Ame, au plus haut ciel guidée,
Tu y pourras reconnaitre l’idée

De la beauté qu’en ce monde j’adore !”


OLD Port,


CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


LECTURE I


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM


** Beloved, now are we children of God, and it is not yet made manifest
what we shall be. We know that, if He shall be manifested, we shall be
like Him ; for we shall see Him even as He is.”—1 JOHN iii. 2, 3.


No word in our language—not even “Socialism ”—
has been employed more loosely than “ Mysticism.”
Sometimes it is used as an equivalent for symbolism or
allegorism, sometimes for theosophy or occult science;
and sometimes it merely suggests the mental state of
a dreamer, or vague and fantastic opinions about God
and the world. In Roman Catholic writers, “ mystical
phenomena” mean supernatural suspensions of phys-
ical law. Even those writers who have made a special
study of the subject, show by their definitions of the
word how uncertain is its connotation! It is therefore
necessary that I should make clear at the outset what I
understand by the term, and what aspects of religious
life and thought I intend to deal with in these


Lectures.
The history of the word begins in close connexion


1See Appendix A for definitions of Mysticism and Mystical Theo-


logy.
8


4 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


. with the Greek mysteries.1 A mystic (wwoTns) is one
' who has been, or is being, initiated into some esoteric
knowledge of Divine things, about which he must keep
his mouth shut (ev); or, possibly, he is one whose
eyes are still shut, one who is not yet an éromrns2 The
word was taken over, with other technical terms of
the mysteries, by the Neoplatonists, who found in the
existing mysteriosophy a discipline, worship, and rule
of life congenial to their speculative views. But as the
tendency towards quietism and introspection increased
among them, another derivation for “ Mysticism” was
found—it was explained to mean deliberately shutting
the eyes to all external things We shall see in the
sequel how this later Neoplatonism passed almost entire
into Christianity, and, while forming the basis of
medizval Mysticism, caused a false association to cling
to the word even down to the Reformation.+*

The phase of thought or feeling which we call


1 See Appendix B for a discussion of the influence of the Greek mysteries
upon Christian Mysticism.

? Tholuck accepts the former derivation (cf. Suidas, wvoripia éxAhOnoavy
mapa Td Tods dkotovras phew 7d orbua Kal pndéu radra éfnyetoOar) ;
Petersen, the latter. There is no doubt that swyots was opposed to
émomrela, and in this sense denoted zxcompleze initiation ; but it was also
made to include the whole process. The prevailing use of the adjective
puorixés is of something seen ‘‘through a glass darkly,” some knowledge
purposely wrapped up in symbols.

8 So Hesychius says, Micra, dard utw, pbovres yap ras alcOjces Kal ew
Tov capKikdy ppovridwy -yevduevor, ofrw ras Oelas dvaddupes edéxorro.
Plotinus and Proclus both use ww of the ‘closed eye” of rapt con-
templation.

“I cannot agree with Lasson (in his book on Meister Eckhart) that ‘the
connexion with the Greek mysteries throws no light on the subject.” No
_ writer had more influence upon the growth of Mysticism in the Church

than Dionysius the Areopagite, whose main object is to present Chris-
tianity in the light of a Platonic mysteriosophy. The same purpose is


evident in Clement, and in other Christian Platonists between Clement and
Dionysius. See Appendix B,


ey


-


‘


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 5


Mysticism has its origin in that which is the raw
material of all religion, and perhaps of all philosophy
and art as well, namely, that dim consciousness of the
beyond, which is part of our nature as human beings.
Men have given different names to these “ obstinate ques-
tionings of sense and outward things.” We may call them,
if we will, a sort of higher instinct, perhaps an anticipa-
tion of the evolutionary process; or an extension of
the frontier of consciousness ; or, in religious language,
the voice of God speaking to us. Mysticism arises
when we try to bring this higher consciousness into
relation with the other contents of our minds. Religious


_ Mysticism may be defined as the attempt to realise the


presence of the living God in the soul and in nature,
or, more generally, as the attempt to realise, in thought
and feeling, the 1mmanence of the temporal in the eternal,
and of the eternal in the temporal. Our consciousness
of the beyond is, I say, the raw material of all religion.
But, being itself formless, it cannot be brought directly
into relation with the forms of our thought. Accordingly,
it has to express itself by symbols, which are as it were
the flesh and bones of ideas. It is the tendency of all
symbols to petrify or evaporate, and either process is
fatal to them. They soon repudiate their mystical
origin, and forthwith lose their religious content. Then
comes a return to the fresh springs of the inner life—
a revival of spirituality in the midst of formalism or
unbelief. This is the historical function of Mysticism
—it appears as an independent active principle, the
spirit of reformations and revivals, But since every
active principle must find for itself appropriate instru-
ments, Mysticism has developed a speculative and


6 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


practical system of its own. As Goethe says, it is
“the scholastic of the heart, the dialectic of the
feelings.” In this way it becomes possible to con-
sider it as a type of religion, though it must always
be remembered that in becoming such it has incorpor-
ated elements which do not belong to its inmost being."
As a type of religion, then, Mysticism seems to rest on
the following propositions or articles of faith :—
First, the soul (as well as the body) can see and
perceive—tort 8é uyfs aic@nais tis, as Proclus says.
We have an organ or faculty for the discernment of
spiritual truth, which, in its proper sphere, is as much
to be trusted as the organs of sensation in theirs.

The second proposition is that, since we can only
know what is akin to ourselves,? man, in order to know
God, must be a partaker of the Divine nature. “What


1 It should also be borne in mind that every historical example of a
mystical movement may be expected to exhibit characteristics which are
determined by the particular forms of religious deadness in opposition
to which it arises. I think that it is generally easy to separate these
secondary, accidental characteristics from those which are primary and
integral, and that we shall then find that the underlying substance, which
may be regarded as the essence of Mysticism as a type of religion, is
strikingly uniform.

* The analogy used by Plotinus (Znmead i. 6. 9) was often quoted and
imitated: ‘‘Even as the eye could not behold the sun unless it were itself
sunlike, so neither could the soul behold God if it were not Godlike.”
Lotze (AMicrocosmus, and cf. Metaphysics, ist ed., p. 109) falls foul of
Plotinus for this argument. ‘‘ The reality of the external world is utterly
severed from our senses. It is vain to call the eye sunlike, as if it needed
a special occult power to copy what it has itself produced : fruitless are all
mystic efforts to restore to the intuitions of sense, by means of a secret
identity of mind with things, a reality outside ourselves.” Whether the
subjective idealism of this sentence is consistent with the subsequent
dogmatic assertion that ‘‘nature is animated throughout,” it is not my
province to determine. The latter doctrine is held by a large school of


mystics: the acosmistic tendency of the former has had only too much
attraction for mystics of another school.


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 7


we are, that we behold; and what we behold, that we
are,” says Ruysbroek. The curious doctrine which we
find in the mystics of the Middle Ages, that there is at
“the apex of the mind” a spark which is consub-
stantial with the uncreated ground of the Deity, is thus
accounted for. We could not even begin to work out
our own salvation if God were not already working in
us. It is always “in His light” that “we see light.”
The doctrine has been felt to be a necessary postulate
by most philosophers who hold that knowledge of God
is possible to man. For instance, Krause says, “ From
finite reason as finite we might possibly explain the
thought of itself, but not the thought of something that
is outside finite reasonable beings, far less the absolute
idea, in its contents infinite, of God. To become aware
of God in knowledge we require certainly to make a
freer use of our finite power of thought, but the
thought of God itself is primarily and essentially an
eternal operation of the eternal revelation of God to the
finite mind.” But though we are made in the image of
God, our /zkeness to Him only exists potentially... The
Divine spark already shines within us, but it has to be
searched for in the innermost depths of our personality,
and its light diffused over our whole being.

This brings us to the third proposition—“ Wathout
holiness no man may see the Lord”; or, as it is ex-
pressed positively in the Sermon on the Mount,
“ Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.”
Sensuality and selfishness are absolute disqualifications
for knowing “the things of the Spirit of God.”


1 This distinction is drawn by Origen, and accepted by all the mystical
writers,


8 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


These fundamental doctrines are very clearly laid
down in the passage from St. John which I read as
the text of this Lecture. The filial relation to God is
already claimed, but the vision is inseparable from
likeness to Him, which is a hope, not a possession, and
is only to be won by “ purifying ourselves, even as He
is pure.”

_ There is one more fundamental doctrine which we
must not omit. Purification removes the obstacles to
our union with God, but our guide on the upward path,
the true hierophant of the mysteries of God, ts love Love
has been defined as “interest in its highest power ” ;?
while others have said that “it is of the essence of love
to be disinterested.” The contradiction is merely a verbal
one. The two definitions mark different starting-points,
but the two “ways of love” should bring us to the
same goal. The possibility of disinterested love, in the
ordinary sense, ought never to have been called in
question, “Love is not love” when it asks for a
reward. Nor is the love of man to God any exception.
He who tries to be holy in order to be happy will
assuredly be neither. In the words of the Theologia
Germanica, “ So long as a man seeketh his own highest
good because it is his, he will never find it” The


1 Faith goes so closely hand in hand with love that the mystics seldom
try to separate them, and indeed they need not be separated. William
Law’s account of their operation is characteristic. ‘* When the seed of th
new birth, called the inward man, has faith awakened in it, its faith is n :
a notion, but a real strong essential hunger, an attracting or ma ti
desire of Christ, which as it proceeds from a seed of the Divine n; ic
us, so it attracts and unites with its like: it lays hold on Christ < sh a
the Divine nature, and in a living and real manner grows eS si


all our sins, and effectually works out our salvation”
nd ation
Reasons of Christian Regeneration), Pie a


2R. L. Nettleship, Remazns.


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 9


mystics here are unanimous, though some, like St.
Bernard, doubt whether perfect love of God can ever
be attained, pure and without alloy, while we are in
this life? The controversy between Fénelon and
Bossuet on this subject is well known, and few will
deny that Fénelon was mainly in the right. Certainly
he had an easy task in justifying his statements from
the writings of the saints. But we need not trouble
ourselves with the “mystic paradox,” that it would be
better to be with Christ in hell than without Him in
heaven—a statement which Thomas a Kempis once
wrote and then erased in his manuscript. For wherever
Christ is, there is heaven: nor should we regard eternal
happiness as anything distinct from “a true conjunc-
tion of the mind with God.”2 “God is not without or
above law: He could not make men either sinful or
miserable.” To believe otherwise is to suppose an
irrational universe, the one thing which a rational man
cannot believe in.

The mystic, as we have seen, makes it his life’s aim
to be transformed into the likeness of Him in whose
image he was created* He loves to figure his path
as a ladder reaching from earth to heaven, which must
be climbed step by step. This scala perfectionis is
generally divided into three stages. The first is called


1“ Nescio si a quoquam homine quartus (gradus) in hac vita perfecte
apprehenditur, ut se scilicet diligat homo tantum propter Deum. Asserant
hoc si qui experti sunt: mihi (fateor) impossibile videtur” (De deligendo
Deo, xv.; Epist. xi. 8).

2 From a sermon by Smith, the Cambridge Platonist. Plotinus, too,
says well, ef rus &dAo eldos Hdovijs mepl Tov orovdatoy Blov fnret, od rdv
orovdatoy Blov <nret (Hnnead i. 4. 12).

3 From Smith’s sermons.

4 Pindar’s yévo.o olds door paddy isa fine mystical maxim. (Pyth, 2. 131.)


10 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


the purgative life, the second the illuminative, while
the third, which is really the goal rather than a part
of the journey, is called the unitive life, or state of
perfect contemplation! We find, as we should expect,
some differences in the classification, but this tripartite
scheme is generally accepted.

The steps of the upward path constitute the ethical
system, the rule of life, of the mystics. The first stage,


‘the purgative life, we read in the Theologia Germanica,


is brought about by contrition, by confession, by hearty
amendment; and this is the usual language in treatises
intended for monks. But it is really intended to
include the civic and social virtues in this stage.”
They occupy the lowest place, it is true; but this only
means that they must be acquired by all, though all
are not called to the higher flights of contemplation.
Their chief value, according to Plotinus, is to teach us
the meaning of order and Limitation (rakis and wépas),
which are qualities belonging to the Divine nature.
This is a very valuable thought, for it contradicts that
aberration of Mysticism which calls God the Infinite,
and thinks of Him as the Indefinite, dissolving all
distinctions in the abyss of bare indetermination,
When Ewald says, “the true mystic never withdraws


? Strictly, the unitive road (va) leads to the contemplative life (vita),
Cf. Benedict, xiv., De Servorum Dei beatific., iii. 26, ‘* Perfecta heec
mystica unio reperitur regulariter in perfecto contemplativo qui in vita
ourgativa et illuminativa, id est meditativa, et contemplativa diu versatus
ex speciali Dei favore ad infusam contemplativam evectus est.” On he
three ways, Suarez says, ‘‘ Distinguere solent mystici tres vias, purgativam
illuminativam, et unitivam.” Molinos was quite a heterodox mystic in
teaching that there is but a ‘‘unica via, scilicet interna,” and this pro-
position was condemned by a Bull of Innocent XI,

2 In Plotinus the civic virtues Arecede the cathartic; but they are not, as
with some perverse mystics, considered to lie oudside the path of scouts


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 11


himself wilfully from the business of life, no, not even
from the smallest business,” he is, at any rate, saying
nothing which conflicts with the principles of Mysticism

The purgative life necessarily includes self-discipline :
does it necessarily include what is commonly known
as asceticism? It would be easy to answer that
asceticism means nothing but ¢razming, as men train
for a race, or more broadly still, that it means simply
“the acquisition of some greater power by practice.” ?
But when people speak of “asceticism,” they have in
their minds such severe “ buffeting” of the body as
was practised by many ancient hermits and medieval
monks. Is this an integral part of the mystic’s
“upward path”? We shall find reason to conclude
that, while a certain degree of austere simplicity
characterises the outward life of nearly all the mystics,
and while an almost morbid desire to suffer is found
in many of them, there is nothing in the system itself
to encourage men to maltreat their bodies. Mysticism
enjoins a dying life, not a living death. Moreover,
asceticism, when regarded as a virtue or duty in itself,
tends to isolate us, and concentrates our attention on
our separate individuality. This is contrary to the
spirit of Mysticism, which aims at realising unity and
solidarity everywhere. Monkish asceticism (so far as
it goes beyond the struggle to live unstained under


1Tauler is careful to put social service on its true basis. ‘‘One can
spin,” he says, ‘‘another can make shoes; and all these are gifts of the
Holy Ghost. I tell you, if I were not a priest, I should esteem it a great
gift that I was able to make shoes, and would try to make them so well
as to be a pattern to all.” Ina later Lecture I shall revert to the charge
of indolent neglect of duties, so often preferred against the mystics.

2k. L. Nettleship, Remains.


12 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


unnatural conditions) rests on a dualistic view of the
world which does not belong to the essence of Mysticism.
It infected all the religious life of the Middle Ages, not
Mysticism only.1

The second stage, the illuminative life, is the con-
centration of all the faculties, will, intellect, and feeling,
upon God. It differs from the purgative life, not in
having discarded good works, but in having come to
perform them, as Fénelon says, “no longer as virtues,”
that is to say, willingly and almost spontaneously. The
struggle is now transferred to the inner life.

The last stage of the journey, in which the soul
presses towards the mark, and gains the prize of its
high calling, is the unitive or contemplative life, in
which man beholds God face to face, and is joined to
Him. Complete union with God is the ideal limit of
religion, the attainment of which would be at once its
consummation and annihilation. It is in the continual
but unending approximation to it that the life of
religion subsists.2 We must therefore beware of re-
garding the union as anything more than an infinite
process, though, as its end is part of the eternal
counsel of God, there is a sense in which it is already
a fact, and not merely a thing desired. But the word


1In a Roman Catholic manual I find: ‘‘Non raro sub nomine
theologize mysticze intelligitur etiam ascesis, sed immerito. Nam ascesis
consuetas tantum et tritas perfectionis semitas ostendit, mystica autem
adhuc excellentiorem viam demonstrat.” This is to identify ‘‘ mystical
theology” with the higher rungs of the ladder. It has been used in this
curious manner from the Middle Ages. Ribet says, ‘‘La mystique,
comme science spéciale, fait partie de la théologie ascétique” ; that part,
namely, ‘‘dans lequel homme est réduit 4 la passivité par action
souveraine de Dieu.” ‘‘L’ascése” is defined as ‘‘l’ascension de l’Ame
vers Dieu.”

4Cf Professor W, Wallace’s collected Lectures and Essays, p. 276.


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 13


deification holds a very large place in the writings of
the Fathers, and not only among those who have been
called mystics. We find it in Irenzus as well as in
Clement, in Athanasius as well as in Gregory of Nyssa.
St. Augustine is no more afraid of “ deificari” in Latin
than Origen of Geomroveio Gas in Greek. The subject is
one of primary importance to anyone who wishes to
understand mystical theology ;. but it is difficult for us
to enter into the minds of the ancients who used these
expressions, both because Oeds was a very fluid concept
in the early centuries, and because our notions of
personality are very different from those which were
prevalent in antiquity. On this latter point I shall
have more to say presently; but the evidence for the
belief in “ deification,” and its continuance through the
Middle Ages, is too voluminous to be given in the
body of these Lectures Let it suffice to say here
that though such bold phrases as “God became man,
that we might become God,” were commonplaces of
doctrinal theology at least till after Augustine, even
Clement and Origen protest strongly against the
“very impious” heresy that man is “a part of God,”
or “consubstantial with God.” The attribute of
Divinity which was chiefly in the minds of the Greek
Fathers when they made these statements, was that of
imperishableness.

As to the means by which this union is manifested
to the consciousness, there is no doubt that very many

1 See Appendix C on the Doctrine of Deification.

2So Fénelon, after asserting the truth of mystical ‘‘ transformation,”


adds: ‘It is false to say that transformation is a deification of the real
and natural soul, or a hypostatic union, or an unalterable conformity with


God.”


14 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


mystics believed in, and looked for, ecstatic revelations,
trances, or visions. ‘This, again, is one of the crucial
questions of Mysticism.

Ecstasy or vision begins when thought ceases, to our
consciousness, to proceed from ourselves. It differs
from dreaming, because the subject is awake. It
differs from hallucination, because there is no organic
disturbance: it is, or claims to be, a temporary en-
hancement, not a partial disintegration, of the mental
faculties. Lastly, it differs from poetical inspiration,
because the imagination is passive.

That perfectly sane people often experience such
visions there is no manner of doubt. St. Paul fell
into a trance at his conversion, and again at a later
period, when he seemed to be caught up into the third
heaven. The most sober and practical of the medizval
mystics speak of them as common phenomena. And
in modern times two of the sanest of our poets have
recorded their experiences in words which may be worth
quoting.

Wordsworth, in his well-known “Lines composed
above Tintern Abbey,” speaks of—


“That serene and blessed mood,
In which ... the breath of this corporeal frame,
And even the motion of our human blood,
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
In body, and become a living soul:
While with an eye made quiet by the power
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,
We see into the life of things.”


And Tennyson says, “A kind of waking trance I


1 Life of Tennyson, vol. i. p. 320. The curious experience, that the
repetition of his own name induced a kind of trance, is used by the poet


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 15


have often had, quite from boyhood, when I have been
all alone. This has generally come upon me through
repeating my own name two or three times to myself
silently, till all at once, out of the intensity of the
consciousness of individuality, the individual itself
seemed to dissolve and fade away into boundless being :
and this not a confused state, but the clearest of the
clearest, and the surest of the surest, the weirdest of
the weirdest, utterly beyond words, where death was
an almost laughable impossibility, the loss of personality
(if so it were) seeming no extinction, but the only true
life.”

Admitting, then, that these psychical phenomena
actually occur, we have to consider whether ecstasy and
kindred states are an integral part of Mysticism. In
attempting to answer this question, we shall ‘find it
convenient to distinguish between the Neoplatonic
vision of the super-essential One, the Absolute, which
Plotinus enjoyed several times, and Porphyry only
once, and the visions and “locutions” which are
reported in all times and places, especially where
people have not been trained in scientific habits of
thought and observation. The former was held to be
an exceedingly rare privilege, the culminating point of
the contemplative life. I shall speak of it in my third
Lecture; and shall there show that it belongs, not to
the essence of Mysticism, and still less to Christianity,
but to the Asiatic leaven which was mixed with
Alexandrian thought, and thence passed into Catholic-


in his beautiful mystical poem, ‘‘ The Ancient Sage.” It would, indeed,
have been equally easy to illustrate this topic from Wordsworth’s prose
and Tennyson’s poetry.


16 ' CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


ism. As regards visions in general, they were no
invention of the mystics. They played a much more
important part in the life of the early Church than
many ecclesiastical historians are willing to admit.
Tertullian, for instance, says calmly, “The majority,
almost, of men learn God from visions.” + Such implicit
reliance was placed on the Divine authority of visions,
that on one occasion an ignorant peasant and a married
man was made Patriarch of Alexandria against his
will, because his dying predecessor had a vision that
the man who should bring him a present of grapes
on the next day should be his successor! In course
of time visions became rarer among the laity, but
continued frequent among the monks and clergy.
And so the class which furnished most of the shining
lights of Mysticism was that in which these experiences
were most common.

But we do not find that the masters of the spiritual
life attached very much importance to them, or often
appealed to them as aids to faith2 As a rule, visions
were regarded as special rewards bestowed by the
goodness of God on the struggling saint, and especially
on the beginner, to refresh him and strengthen him in
the hour of need. Very earnest cautions were issued
that no efforts must be made to induce them artificially,
and aspirants were exhorted neither to desire them,
nor to feel pride in having seen them. The spiritual


1 See the veryinteresting note in Harnack, History of Dogma, vol. i. p. 53.

2 The Abbé Migne says truly, ‘‘Ceux qui traitent les mystiques de
visionnaires seraient fort étonnés de voir quel peu de cas ils font des visions
en elles-mémes.” And St. Bonaventura says of visions, ‘‘ Nec faciunt
sanctum nec ostendunt: alioquin Balaam sanctus esset, e¢ asina, que
vidit Angelum.”


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 17


guides of the Middle Ages were well aware that such
experiences often come of disordered nerves and
weakened digestion; they believed also that they are
sometimes delusions of Satan. Richard of St. Victor
says, “As Christ attested His transfiguration by the
presence of Moses and Elias, so visions should not be
believed unless they have the authority of Scripture.”
Albertus Magnus tries to classify them, and says that
those which contain a sensuous element are always
dangerous. Eckhart is still more cautious, and Tauler
attaches little value to them. Avila, the Spanish
mystic, says that only those visions which minister to
our spiritual necessities, and make us more humble, are
genuine. Self-induced visions inflate us with pride,
and do irreparable injury to health of mind and body.!
It hardly falls within my task to attempt to deter-
mine what these visions really are. The subject is
one upon which psychological and medical science may
some day throw more light. But this much I must
say, to make my own position clear: I regard these
- experiences as neither more nor less “supernatural ”
than other mental phenomena. Many of them are cer-
- tainly pathological ;? about others we may feel doubts;
1 The following passage from St. Francis de Sales is much to the same
effect as those referred to in the text: ‘‘Les philosophes mesmes ont
recogneu certaines espéces d’extases naturelles faictes par la véhémente
application de l’esprit 4 la considération des choses relevées, Une marque
de la bonne et saincte extase est qu’elle ne se prend ny attache jamais
tant 4 Pentendement qu’A la volonté, laquelle elle esmeut, eschauffe, et
remplit d’une puissante affection envers Dieu ; de maniére que si l’extase


est plus belle que bonne, plus lumineuse qu’affective, elle est grandement
douteuse et digne de soupgon.”

2 Some of my readers may find satisfaction in the following passage of
Jeremy Taylor: ‘‘ Indeed, when persons have long been softened with
the continual droppings of religion, and their spirits made timorous and


2


18 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


but some have every right to be considered as real
irradiations of the soul from the light that “for ever
shines,” real notes of the harmony that “is in immortal
souls.” In illustration of this, we may appeal to three
places in the Bible where revelations of the profoundest
truths concerning the nature and counsels of God are
recorded to have been made during ecstatic visions.
Moses at Mount Horeb heard, during the vision of
the burning bush, a proclamation of God as the “I
am ”—the Eternal who is exalted above time. Isaiah,
in the words “Holy, Holy, Holy,” perceived dimly
the mystery of the Trinity. And St. Peter, in the
vision of the sheet, learned that God is no respecter of
persons or of nationalities. In such cases the highest
intuitions or revelations, which the soul can in its best
moments just receive, but cannot yet grasp or account
for, make a language for themselves, as it were, and
claim the sanction of external authority, until the
mind is elevated so far as to feel the authority not
less Divine, but no longer external. We may find
fairly close analogies in other forms of that “ Divine
madness,” which Plato says is “the source of the
chiefest blessings granted to men ”—-such as the rapture


apt for impression by the assiduity of prayer, and the continual dyings of
mortification—the fancy, which is a very great instrument of devotion, is
kept continually warm, and in a disposition and aptitude to take fire, and
to flame out in great ascents; and when they suffer transportations beyond
_ the burdens and support of reason, they suffer they know not what, and
call it what they please.” Henry More, too, says that those who would
‘‘make their whole nature desolate of all animal figurations whatever,”
find only ‘‘a waste, silent solitude, and one uniform parchedness and
vacuity. And yet, while a man fancies himself thus wholly Divine, he is
not aware how he is even then held down by his animal nature ; and that
it is nothing but the stillness and fixedness of melancholy that thus abuses
him, instead of the true Divine principle.”


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 19


of the poet, or (as Plato adds) of the lover! And
even the philosopher or man of science may be sur-
prised into some such state by a sudden realisation of
the sublimity of his subject. So at least Lacordaire
believed when he wrote, “ All at once, as if by chance,
the hair stands up, the breath is caught, the skin
contracts, and a cold sword pierces to the very soul.
It is the sublime which has manifested itself!” ?
Even in cases where there is evident hallucination, e.g.
when the visionary sees an angel or devil sitting on
his book, or feels an arrow thrust into his heart, there
need be no insanity. In periods when it is commonly
believed that such things may and do happen, the
imagination, instead of being corrected by experience,
is misled by it. Those who honestly expect to see
miracles will generally see them, without detriment
either to their truthfulness or sanity in other matters.

The mystic, then, is not, as such, a visionary; nor
has he any interest in appealing to a faculty “above
reason,” if reason is used in its proper sense, as the
logic of the whole personality. The desire to find
for our highest intuitions an authority wholly external
to reason and independent of it,—a “purely super-
natural” revelation,—has, as Récéjac says, “ been the
cause of the longest and the most dangerous of the
aberrations from which Mysticism has suffered.” This
kind of supernaturalism is destructive of wmzty in our
ideas of God, the world, and ourselves; and it casts a
slur on the faculties which are the appointed organs
of communication between God and man. A revela-


1 Plato, Phedrus, 244, 2453 Ion, 534.
2 Lacordaire, Conférences, xxxvil.


20 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


tion absolutely transcending reason is an absurdity:
no such revelation could ever be made. In the
striking phrase of Macarius, “the human mind is the
throne of the Godhead.” The supremacy of the reason
is the favourite theme of the Cambridge Platonists,
two of whom, Whichcote and Culverwel, are never
tired of quoting the text, “ The spirit of man is the
candle of the Lord.” “Sir, I oppose not rational to
spiritual,” writes Whichcote to Tuckney, “for spiritual
is most rational.” And again, “Reason is the Divine
governor of man’s life: it is the very voice of God.”?
What we can and must transcend, if we would make
any progress in Divine knowledge, is not reason, but
that shallow rationalism which regards the data on
which we can reason as a fixed quantity, known to
all, and which bases itself on a formal logic, utterly
unsuited to a spiritual view of things. Language can
only furnish us with poor, misleading, and wholly
inadequate images of spiritual facts; it supplies us
with abstractions and metaphors, which do not really
represent what we know or believe about God and
human personality. St. Paul calls attention to this
inadequacy by a series of formal contradictions: “I
live, yet not I”; “dying, and behold we live”; “when
I am weak, then I am strong,” and so forth; and we


1 Compare, too, the vigorous words of Henry More, the most mystical
of the group: ‘‘He that misbelieves and lays aside clear and cautious
reason in things that fall under the discussion of reason, upon the pretence
of hankering after some higher principle (which, a thousand to one, proves
but the infatuation of melancholy, and a superstitious hallucination), is as
ridiculous as if he would not use his natural eyes about their proper
object till the presence of some supernatural light, or till he had gota
pair of spectacles made of the crystalline heaven, or of the celum empyreum,
to hang upon his nose for him to look through.”


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM a1


find exactly the same expedient in Plotinus, who is
very fond of thus showing his contempt for the logic
of identity. When, therefore, Harnack says that
“Mysticism is nothing else than rationalism applied
to a sphere above reason,” he would have done better
to say that it is “reason applied to a sphere above
rationalism,” }

For Reason is still “king.”? Religion must not be
a matter of feeleng only. St. John’s command to “try
every spirit” condemns all attempts to make emotion
or inspiration independent of reason. Those who thus
blindly follow the inner light find it no “candle of
the Lord,” but an zgnzs fatuus; and the great mystics
are well aware of this. The fact is that the tendency
to separate and half personify the different faculties
—intellect, will, feeling—is a mischievous one. Our
object should be so to wzz/y our personality, that our
eye may be single, and our whole body full of light.

We have considered briefly the three stages of the
mystic’s upward path. The scheme of life therein
set forth was no doubt determined empirically, and
there is nothing to prevent the simplest and most
unlettered saint from framing his conduct on these
principles. Many of the medieval mystics had no
taste for speculation or philosophy ;? they accepted on
authority the entire body of Church dogma, and


1 There is, of course, a sense In which any strong feeling lifts us ‘‘ above
reason.” But this is using ‘‘ reason” in a loose manner.

2 § vos Baowdevs, says Plotinus.

3 Roman Catholic writers can assert that ‘‘la plupart des contemplatifs
étaient dépourvus de toute culture littéraire.” But their notion of “con-
templation”’ is the passive reception of ‘supernatural favours,” —on which
subject more will be said in Lectures IV, and VII.


22 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


devoted their whole attention to the perfecting of the
spiritual life in the knowledge and love of God. But
this cannot be said of the leaders. Christian Mysticism
appears in history largely as an intellectual movement,
the foster-child of Platonic idealism; and if ever, for a.
time, it forgot its early history, men were soon found
to bring it back to “its old loving nurse the Platonic
philosophy.” It will be my task, in the third and
fourth Lectures of this course, to show how speculative
Christian Mysticism grew out of Neoplatonism ; but we
shall not be allowed to forget the Platonists even in
the later Lectures. “The fire still burns on the altars
of Plotinus,” as Eunapius said.

Mysticism is not itself a philosophy, any more than
it is itself a religion. On its intellectual side it has
been called “ formless speculation.”* But until specula-
tions or intuitions have entered into the forms of our
thought, they are not current coin even for the thinker.
The part played by Mysticism in philosophy is parallel
to the part played by it in religion. As in religion it
appears in revolt against dry formalism and cold
rationalism, so in philosophy it takes the field against
materialism and scepticism.2 It is thus possible to
speak of speculative Mysticism, and even to indicate
certain idealistic lines of thought, which may without
entire falsity be called the philosophy of Mysticism.
In this introductory Lecture I can, of course, only hint
at these in the barest and most summary manner.
And it must be remembered that I have undertaken


1 “Die Mystik ist formlose Speculation,” Noack, Christliche Mystik,
p. 18.


? The Atomists, from Epicurus downwards, have been especially odious
to the mystics.


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 23


to-day to delineate the general characteristics of
§ Mysticism, not of Christian Mysticism. I am trying,
- moreover, in this, Lecture to confine myself to those
_ developments which I consider normal and genuine,
excluding the numerous aberrant types which we
shall encounter in the course of our survey.

The real world, according to thinkers of this school,
is created by the thought and will of God, and exists
in His mind. It is therefore spiritual, and above
space and time, which are only the forms under which
reality is set out as a process,

When we try to represent to our minds the highest
reality, the spiritual world, as distinguished from the
world of appearance, we are obliged to form images;
and we can hardly avoid choosing one of the following
three images. We may regard the spiritual world as
endless duration opposed to transitoriness, as infinite
extension opposed to limitation in space, or as sub-
stance opposed to shadow. All these are, strictly
» speaking, symbols or metaphors," for we cannot regard

any of them as literally true statements about the

nature of reality; but they are as near the truth as
we can get in words. But when we think of time as

a piece cut off from the beginning of eternity, so that
. eternity is only in the future and not in the present ;

when we think of heaven as a place somewhere else,


1 The theory that time is real, but not space, leads us into grave diffi-
culties. It is the root of the least satisfactory kind of evolutionary
optimism, which forgets, in the first place, that the idea of perpetual
progress in time is hopelessly at variance with what we know of the
destiny of the world ; and, in the second place, that a mere progressus is
meaningless. Every created thing has its fixed goal in the realisation of

/ the idea which was immanent in it from the first.


24 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


and therefore not here; when we think of an upper
ideal world which has sucked all the life out of this, so
that we now walk in a vain shadow,—then we are
paying the penalty for our symbolical representative
methods of thought, and must go to philosophy to help
us out of the doubts and difficulties in which our error
has involved us. One test is infallible. | Whatever
view of reality deepens our sense of the tremendous


issues of life in the world wherein we move, is for us


nearer the truth than any view which diminishes that
sense. The truth is revealed to us that we may have
life, and have it more abundantly.

The world as it is, is the world as God sees it, not
as we see it. Our vision is distorted, not so much by
the limitations of finitude, as by sin and ignorance.
The more we can raise ourselves in the scale of being,
the more will our ideas about God and the world
correspond to the reality. “Such as men themselves
are, such will God Himself seem to them to be,” says
John Smith, the English Platonist. Origen, too, says
that those whom Judas led to seize Jesus did not
know who He was, for the darkness of their own souls
was projected on His features1_ And Dante, in a very
beautiful passage, says that he felt that he was rising
into a higher circle, because he saw Beatrice’s face
becoming more beautiful?


This view of reality, as a vista which is opened


1 Origen in Matth., Com. Series, 100; Contra Celsum, ii. 64. Referred
to by Bigg, Christian Platonists of Alexandria, p. 191.
2 Paradiso viii. 13—
**To non m/’accorsi del salire in ella;
Ma d’esserv’ entro mi fece assai fede
La donna mia ch’io vidi far pit bella.”


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 2s


gradually to the eyes of the climber up the holy mount,
is very near to the heart of Mysticism. It rests on
the faith that the ideal not only ought to be, but zs the
teal. It has been applied by some, notably by that
earnest but fantastic thinker, James Hinton, as offering
a solution of the problem of evil. We shall encounter
attempts to deal with this great difficulty in several of
the Christian mystics. The problem among the specu-
lative writers was how to reconcile the Absolute of
philosophy, who is above all distinctions,’ with the God
of religion, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.
They could not allow that evil has a substantial exist-
ence apart from God, for fear of being entangled in an
insoluble Dualism. But if evil is derived from God,
how can God be good? We shall find that the pre-
vailing view was that “Evil has no_ substance.”
* There is nothing,” says Gregory of Nyssa, “which
falls outside of the Divine nature, except moral evil
alone. And this, we may say paradoxically, has its
being in not-being. For the genesis of moral evil is
simply the privation of being.” That which, properly
speaking, exists, is the nature of the good.” The
Divine nature, in other words, is that which excludes
nothing, and contradicts nothing, except those attri-
butes which are contrary to the nature of reality; it is
that which harmonises everything except discord, which
loves everything except hatred, verifies everything
except falsehood, and beautifies everything except
ugliness. Thus that which falls outside the notion


1 66 Deo nihil opponitur,” says Erigena.
2 Compare Bradley, Appearance and Reality, where it is shown that the


essential attributes of Reality are harmony and inclusiveness,


*?
ee


26 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


of God, proves on examination to be not merely
unreal, but unreality as such. But the relation of
evil to the Absolute is not a religious problem. To
our experience, evil exists as a positive force not
subject to the law of God, though constantly overruled
and made an instrument of good. On this subject we
must say more later. Here I need only add that a
sunny confidence in the ultimate triumph of good


_shines from the writings of most of the mystics,


especially, I think, in our own countrymen. The
Cambridge Platonists are all optimistic; and in the
beautiful but little known Revelations of Juliana of
Norwich, we find in page after page the refrain of
“All shall be well.” “Sin is behovable, but all shall
be well, and all manner of thing shall be well.”

Since the universe is the thought and will of God
expressed under the forms of time and space, every-
thing in it reflects the nature of its Creator, though in
different degrees. Erigena says finely, “ Every visible
and invisible creature is a theophany or appearance of
God.” The purest mirror in the world is the highest
of created things—the human soul unclouded by sin.
And this brings us to a point at which Mysticism
falls asunder into two classes.

The question which divides them is this—In the
higher stages of the spiritual life, shall we learn most
of the nature of God by close, sympathetic, reverent
observation of the world around us, including our
fellow-men, or by sinking into the depths of our inner
consciousness, and aspiring after direct and constant
communion with God? Each method may claim the


1 Ze. “necessary” or “ expedient.”


:


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 27


support of weighty names. The former, which will
form the subject of my seventh and eighth Lectures,
is very happily described by Charles Kingsley in an
early letter! “The great Mysticism,” he says, “is the
belief which is becoming every day stronger with me,
that all symmetrical natural objects . . . are types of
some spiritual truth or existence. . . . Everything
seems to be full of God’s reflex if we could but see it.
. .. Oh, to see, if but for a moment, the whole harmony
of the great system! to hear once the music which the
whole universe makes as it performs His bidding!
When I feel that sense of the mystery that is around
me, I feel a gush of enthusiasm towards God, which
seems its inseparable effect.”

On the other side stand the majority of the earlier
mystics. Believing that God is “closer to us than
breathing, and nearer than hands and feet,” they are
impatient of any intermediaries. “We need not search
for His footprints in Nature, when we can behold His
face in ourselves,”? is their answer to St. Augustine’s
fine expression that all things bright and beautiful in
the world are “footprints of the uncreated Wisdom.” ®
Coleridge has expressed their feeling in his “ Ode to
Dejection ”—

“It were a vain endeavour,
Though I should gaze for ever
On that green light that lingers in the West ;


I may not hope from outward forms to win
The passion and the life whose fountains are within.”


“ Grace works from within outwards,” says Ruysbroek,


1 Tzfe, vol. i. p. 55.

2]. Smith, Select Discourses, v. So Bernard says (De Consid. v. 1),
“quid opus est scalis tenenti iam solium ?”

8 Aug. De Libero Arbitrio, ii. 16, 17


28 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


for God is nearer to us than our own faculties. Hence
it cannot come from images and sensible forms.” “If
thou wishest to search out the deep things of God,”
says Richard of St. Victor, “search out the depths of
thine own spirit.”

The truth is that there are two movements,—a
systole and diastole of the spiritual life,—an expansion
and a concentration. The tendency has generally been
to emphasise ‘one at the expense of the other; but they
must work together, for each is helpless without the
other. As Shakespeare says '-—

“Nor doth the eye itself,

That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself,

Not going from itself, but eye to eye opposed,

Salutes each other with each other’s form ;

For speculation turns not to itself

Till it hath travelled, and is mirrored there,

Where it may see itself.”
Nature is dumb, and our own hearts are dumb, until
they are allowed to speak to each other. Then both
will speak to us of God.

Speculative Mysticism has occupied itself largely
with these two great subjects—the immanence of God
in nature, and the relation of human personality to
Divine. A few words must be said, before I conclude,
on both these matters.

The Unity of all existence is a fundamental doctrine
of Mysticism. God is in all, and all is in God. “ His
centre is everywhere, and His circumference nowhere,”
as St. Bonaventura puts it. It is often argued that
this doctrine leads direct to Pantheism, and that specu-
lative Mysticism is always and necessarily pantheistic


1 Troilus and Cressida, Act 111. Scene 3.


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 29


This is, of course, a question of primary importance.
It is in the hope of dealing with it adequately that I
have selected three writers who have been frequently
called pantheists, for discussion in these Lectures. I
mean Dionysius the Areopagite, Scotus Erigena, and
Eckhart. But it would be impossible even to indicate
my line of argument in the few minutes left me this
morning.

The mystics are much inclined to adopt, in a
modified form, the old notion of an anima mundi.
When Erigena says, “ Be well assured that the Word—
the second Person of the Trinity—is the Nature of all
» things,” he means that the Logos is a cosmic principle,
the Personality of which the universe is the external
expression or appearance.’

We are not now concerned with cosmological specu-
lations, but the bearing of this theory on human
personality is obvious. If the Son of God is regarded
as an all-embracing and all-pervading cosmic principle,
the “ mystic union” of the believer with Christ becomes
something much closer than an ethical harmony of
two mutually exclusive wills. The question which


1 This idea of the world as a living being is found in Plotinus: and
Origen definitely teaches that ‘‘as our body, while consisting of many
members, is yet an organism which is held together by one soul, so the
universe is to be thought of as an immense living being which is upheld by
the power and the Word of God.” He also holds that the sun and stars
are spiritual beings. St. Augustine, too (De Czvitate Dei, iv. 12, vii. 5),
regards the universe as a living organism ; and the doctrine reappears much
later in Giordano Bruno. According to this theory, we are subsidiary
members of an all-embracing organism, and there may be intermediate
will-centres between our own and that of the universal Ego. Among
modern systems, that of Fechner is the one which seems to be most in
accordance with these speculations. He views life under the figure of a
number of concentric circles of consciousness, within an all-embracing
circle which represents the consciousness of God.


30 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


exercises the mystics is not whether such a thing as
fusion of personalities is possible, but whether, when
the soul has attained union with its Lord, it is any
longer conscious of a life distinct from that of the
Word. We shall find that some of the best mystics
went astray on this point. They teach a real sudstztu-
tion of the Divine for human nature, thus depersonalising
man, and running into great danger of a perilous
arrogance. The mistake is a fatal one even from the
speculative side, for it is only on the analogy of human
personality that we can conceive of the perfect person-
ality of God; and without personality the universe
falls to pieces. Personality is not only the strictest
unity of which we have any experience; it is the fact
which creates the postulate of unity on which all
philosophy is based.

But it is possible to save personality without re-
garding the human spirit as a monad, independent
and sharply separated from other spirits. Distinction,
not separation, is the mark of personality; but it is
separation, not distinction, that forbids union. The
error, according to the mystic’s psychology, is in
regarding consciousness of self as the measure of
personality. The depths of personality are unfathom-
able, as Heraclitus already knew;1 the light of
consciousness only plays on the surface of the waters.
Jean Paul Richter is a true exponent of this character-
istic doctrine when he says, “ We attribute far too small
dimensions to the rich empire of ourself, if we omit
from it the unconscious region which resembles a


lwuxfs melpara otk ay étevporo racap émimopevduevos Oddy" otrw Babdy
Noyor exer, Prag. 71.


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 31


great dark continent. The world which our memory


_ peoples only reveals, in its revolution, a few luminous


points at a time, while its immense and teeming mass
remains in shade. ... We daily see the conscious
passing into unconsciousness; and take no notice of
the bass accompaniment which our fingers continue to
play, while our attention is directed to fresh musical
effects.”' So far is it from being true that the self of
our immediate consciousness is our true personality,
that we can only attain personality, as spiritual and
rational beings, by passing beyond the limits which
mark us off as separate individuals. Separate indi-
viduality, we may say, is the bar which prevents us
from realising our true privileges as persons.2, And so
the mystic interprets very literally that maxim of our
Lord, in which many have found the fundamental
secret of Christianity: “He that will save his life—
his soul, his personality——shall lose it; and he that will
lose his life for My sake shall find it.” The false self
must die—nay, must “die daily,” for the process is
gradual, and there is no limit to it. It is a process of
infinite expanszon—of realising new correspondences,
new sympathies and affinities with the not-ourselves,
which affinities condition, and in conditioning consti-
tute, our true life as persons. The paradox is offensive


1, P. Richter, Sed/éna. Compare, too, Lotze, Mzcrocosmus: ‘* Within
us lurks a world whose form we imperfectly apprehend, and whose working,
when in particular phases it comes under our notice, surprises us with fore-
shadowings of unknown depths in our being.”

2 As Lotze says, ‘‘ The finite being does not contain in itself the condi-
tions of its own existence.” It must struggle to attain to complete per-
sonality ; or rather, since personality belongs unconditionally only to God,
to such a measure of personality as is allotted tous. Eternal life is nothing
else than the attainment of full personality, a conscious existence in God.


32 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


only to formal logic. As a matter of experience, no
one, I imagine, would maintain that the man who has
practically realised, to the fullest possible extent, the
common life which he draws from his Creator, and
shares with all other created beings,—so realised it, I
mean, as to draw from that consciousness all the
influences which can play upon him from outside,—
has thereby dissipated and lost his personality, and
become less of a person than another who has built a
wall round his individuality, and lived, as Plato says,
the life of a shell-fish.’

We may arrive at the same conclusion by analysing
that unconditioned sense of duty which we call con-
science. This moral sense cannot be a fixed code
implanted in our consciousness, for then we could not
explain either the variations of moral opinion, or the
feeling of obligation (as distinguished from necessity)
which impels us to obey it. It cannot be the product
of the existing moral code of society, for then we could
not explain either the genesis of that public opinion or


1J. A. Picton (Zhe Mystery of Matter, p. 356) puts the matter well:
‘* Mysticism consists in the spiritual realisation of a grander and a boundless
unity, that humbles all self-assertion by dissolving it in a wider glory. It
does not follow that the sense of individuality is necessarily weakened.
But habitual contemplation of the Divine unity impresses men with the
feeling that individuality is phenomenal only. Hence the paradox of
Mysticism. For apart from this phenomenal individuality, we should not
know our own nothingness, and personal life is good only through the
bliss. of being lost in God. [Rather, I should say, through the bliss of
finding our true life, which is hid with Christ in God,] True religious
worship doth not consist in the acknowledgment of a greatness which is
estimated by comparison, but rather in the sense of a Being who surpasses
all comparison, because He gives to phenomenal existences the only reality
they can know. Hence the deepest religious feeling necessarily shrinks
from thinking of God as a kind of gigantic Self amidst a host of minor
selves. The very thought of such a thing is a mockery of the profoundest
devotion.”


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 33


the persistent revolt against its limitations which we
find in the greatest minds. The only hypothesis
which explains the facts is that in conscience we feel
the motions of the universal Reason which strives to
convert the human organism into an organ of itself,
a belief which is expressed in religious language by
saying that it is God who worketh in us both to will
and to do of His good pleasure.

If it be further asked, Which is our personality, the
shifting oz (as Fénelon calls it), or the ideal self, the
end or the developing states ? we must answer that it is
both and neither, and that the root of mystical religion
is in the conviction that it is at once both and neither.
The moi strives to realise its end, but the end being an
infinite one, no process can reach it. Those who have
“counted themselves to have apprehended” have
thereby left the mystical faith; and those who from
the notion of a progressus ad infinitum come to the
pessimistic conclusion, are equally false to the mystical
creed, which teaches us that we are already potenti-
ally what God intends us to become. The command,
“Be ye perfect,” is, like all Divine commands, at the
same time a promise.

It is stating the same paradox in another form to
say that we can only achieve inner wazty by transcend-
ing mere individuality. The independent, impervious
self shows its unreality by being inwardly discordant.
It is of no use to enlarge the circumference of our life,
if the fixed centre is always the ego. There are, if
I may press the metaphor, other circles with other
centres, in which we are vitally involved. And thus


1 See, further, Appendix C, pp. 366-7.


34 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


sympathy, or love, which is sympathy in its highest
power, is the great atoner, within as well as without.
The old Pythagorean maxim, that “a man must be
one,” is echoed by all the mystics. He must be one
as God is one, and the world is one; for man is a
microcosm, a living mirror of the universe. Here,
once more, we have a characteristic mystical doctrine,
which is perhaps worked out most fully in the “ Hous
Vite” of Avicebron (Ibn Gebirol), a work which had
' great influence in the Middle Ages. The doctrine
justifies the use of analogy in matters of religion, and
is of great importance. One might almost dare to
say that all conclusions about the world above us
which are mot based on the analogy of our own
mental experiences, are either false or meaningless.
The idea of man as a microcosm was developed in
two ways. Plotinus said that “every man is double,”
meaning that one side of his soul is in contact with the
intelligible, the other with the sensible world. He is
careful to explain that the doctrine of Divine Im-
manence does not mean that God dzvides Himself
among the many individuals, but that they partake of
Him according to their degrees of receptivity, so that
each one is potentially in possession of all the fulness
of God. Proclus tries to explain how this can be,
“ There are three sorts of Wholes—the first, anterior to
the parts; the second, composed of the parts; the
third, knitting into one stuff the parts and the whole,.”?
1a yevéoOar Tov AvOpwrov Set: Pythagoras quoted by Clement. Cf,


Plotinus, Zum. vi. 9. 1, kal dylea dé, dray els ev cwraxOG 7d cua, Kad


Kdddos ray 7 Tod évds TA dpa Kardoxy Piors, Kal dpery dé Wuxfs bray els
éy kal els play duoroylay évw67.
2 Proclus, 7 Tim, 83. 265,


CHARACTERISTICS OF MYSTICISM 35


In this third sense the whole resides in the parts, as
well as the parts in the whole. St. Augustine states


the same doctrine in clearer language It will be


seen at once how this doctrine encourages that class of


| Mysticism which bids us “sink into the depths of our


~
J


own souls” in order to find God.

The other development of the theory that man is a
microcosm is not less important and interesting. It is
a favourite doctrine of the mystics that man, in his
individual life, recapitulates the spiritual history of the
race, in much the same way in which embryologists
tell us that the unborn infant recapitulates the whole
process of physical evolution. It follows that the
Incarnation, the central fact of human history, must
have its analogue in the experience of the individual.
We shall find that this doctrine of the birth of an
infant Christ in the soul is one of immense importance
in the systems of Eckhart, Tauler, and our Cambridge
Platonists. It is a somewhat perilous doctrine, as we
shall see; but it is one which, I venture to think, has a
future as well as_a past, for the progress of modern
science has greatly strengthened the analogies on
which it rests. I shall show in my next Lecture how
strongly St. Paul felt its value.

This brief introduction will, 1 hope, have indicated
the main characteristics of mystical theology and
religion. It is a type which is as repulsive to some


1 Aug. Eg. 187. 19: ‘Deus totus adesse rebus omnibus potest, ef
singulis totus, quamvis in quibus habitat habeant eum pro sue capacitatis
diversitate, alii amplius, alii minus.” More clearly still, Bonaventura,
Itin. ment. ad Deum, 5: ‘‘Totum intra omnia, et totum extra: ac per
hoc est sphzea intellivibilis, cuius centrum est ubique, et circumferentia


nusquam.”


36 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM .


minds as it is attractive to others. Coleridge has said
that everyone is born a Platonist or an Aristotelian,
and one might perhaps adapt the epigram by saying
that everyone is naturally either a mystic or a
legalist. The classification does, indeed, seem to
correspond to a deep difference in human characters ;
it is doubtful whether a man could be found anywhere
whom one could trust to hold the scales evenly between
—let us say—Feénelon and Bossuet. The cleavage is
“much the same as that which causes the eternal strife
between tradition and illumination, between priest and
prophet, which has produced the deepest tragedies in
human history, and will probably continue to do so
while the world lasts. The legalist—with his con-
ception of God as the righteous Judge dispensing
rewards and punishments, the “ Great Taskmaster” in
whose vineyard we are ordered to labour; of the
Gospel as “the new law,” and of the sanction of duty
as a “categorical imperative ”—-will never find it easy to
sympathise with those whose favourite words are St.
John’s triad—light, life, and love, and who find these
the most suitable names to express what they know of
the nature of God. But those to whom the Fourth
Gospel is the brightest jewel in the Bible, and who can
enter into the real spirit of St. Paul’s teaching, will, I
hope, be able to take some interest in the historical
development of ideas which in their Christian form are
certainly built upon those parts of the New Testament,


‘AY
A)


a ‘ |
a


‘i


NS ef (Rv edldatev emiavels ds SiddoKados, Wa 7d del Shy Borepov as
Geds xopyyiop.” CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA.


“But souls that of His own good life partake
He loves as His own self: dear as His eye
They are to Him; He'll never them forsake:
When they shall die, then God Himself shall die:
They live, they live in blest eternity.”
HENRY Morg,


‘Amor Patris Filiique,
Par amborum, et utrique
Compar et consimilis:
Cuncta reples, cuncta foves,
Astra regis, coelum moves,
Permanens immobilis


Te docente nil obscurum,
Te presente nil impurum;
Sub tua przesentia
Gloriatur mens iucunda ;
Per te leta, per te munda
Gaudet conscientia.


Consolator et fundator,

Habitator et amator
Cordium humilium ;

Pelle mala, terge sordes,

Et discordes fac concordes,
Et atfer presidium.”


ADAM OF ST. VICTOR


LECTURE «tT!


THE MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE


“That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; to the end that ye,
being rooted and grounded in love, may be strong to apprehend with all
the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth, and to
know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled
with all the fulness of God.””—EPu. iii. 17-19.


THE task which now lies before me is to consider how
far that type of religion and religious philosophy, which
I tried in my last Lecture to depict in outline, is re-
presented in and sanctioned by Holy Scripture. I
shall devote most of my time to the New Testament,
for we shall not find very much to help us in the Old.
The Jewish mind and character, in spite of its deeply
religious bent, was alien to Mysticism. In the first
place, the religion of Israel, passing from what has
been called Henotheism—the worship of a national
God—to true Monotheism, always maintained a rigid
notion of individuality, both human and Divine. Even
prophecy, which is mystical in its essence, was in the
early period conceived as unmystically as possible.
Balaam is merely a mouthpiece of God; his message is
external to his personality, which remains antagonistic
to it. And, secondly, the Jewish doctrine of ideas was
different from the Platonic. The Jew believed that


the world, and the whole course of history, existed
89


40 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


from all eternity in the mind of God, but as an un-
realised purpose, which was actualised by degrees as
the scroll of events was unfurled. There was no
notion that the visible was in any way inferior to the
invisible, or lacking in reality. Even in its later
phases, after it had been partially Hellenised, Jewish
idealism tended to crystallise as Chiliasm, or in “ Apo-
calypses,” and not, like Platonism, in the dream of a
perfect world existing “yonder.” In fact, the Jewish
view of the external world was mainly that of naive
realism, but strongly pervaded by belief in an Almighty
King and Judge. Moreover, the Jew had little sense
of the Divine zz nature: it was the power of God over
nature which he was jealous to maintain. The majesty
of the elemental forces was extolled in order to magnify
the greater power of Him. who made and could
unmake them, and whom the heaven of heavens can-
not contain. The weakness and insignificance of man,
as contrasted with the tremendous power of God, is
the reflection which the contemplation of nature gener-
ally produced in his mind. “How can a man be just
with God?” asks Job; “ which removeth the mountains,
and they know it not; when He overturneth them in
His anger; which shaketh the earth out of her place,
and the pillars thereof tremble; which commandeth
the sun, and it riseth not, and sealeth up the stars. . . .
He is not a man, as I am, that I should answer Him,
that we should come together in judgment. There is
no daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon
us both.” Nor does the answer that came to Job
out of the whirlwind give any hint of a “daysman”
betwixt man and God, but only enlarges on the pre-


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 41


sumption of man’s wishing to understand the counsels
of the Almighty. Absolute submission to a law which
is entirely outside of us and beyond our comprehen-
sion, is the final.lesson of the book The nation
exhibited the merits and defects of this type. On the
one hand, it showed a deep sense of the supremacy of
the moral law, and of personal responsibility; a stub-
_ born independence and faith in its mission; and a
strong national spirit, combined with vigorous indi-
viduality ; but with these virtues went a tendency to
externalise both religion and the ideal of well-being:
the former became a matter of forms and ceremonies ;
the latter, of worldly possessions. It was only after
the collapse of the national polity that these ideals
became transmuted and spiritualised. Those disasters,
which at first seemed to indicate a hopeless estrange-
ment between God and His people, were the means of
a deeper reconciliation. We can trace the process,
from the old proverb that “to see God is death,” down
to that remarkable passage in Jeremiah where the
approaching advent, or rather restoration, of spiritual
religion, is announced with all the solemnity due to so
glorious a message. “ Behold, the days come, saith the
Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house
of Israel, and with the house of Judah. . . . After those
days, saith the Lord, I will put My law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts; and I will be their
God, and they shall be My people. And they shall teach

1 In referring thus to the Book of Job, I rest nothing on any theory as
to its date. Whenever it was written, it illustrates that view of the rela-
tion of man to God with which Mysticism can never be content. But, of


course, the antagonism between our personal claims and the laws of the
universe must be done justice to before it can be surmounted.


42 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


no more every man his neighbour, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know
Me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them,
saith the Lord.” That this knowledge of God, and the
assurance of blessedriess which it brings, is the reward
of righteousness and purity, is the chief message of the
great prophets and psalmists. “Who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? He that walketh
righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth
the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from
holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing
of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil, he
shall dwell on high; his place of defence shall be the
munitions of rocks: bread shall be given unto him; his
waters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see the King in His
beauty ; they shall behold the land that is very far off.” *

This passage of Isaiah bears a very close resem-
blance to the 15th and 24th Psalms; and there are
many other psalms which have been dear to Christian
mystics. In some of them we find the “amoris desi-
derium”—the thirst of the soul for God—which is the
characteristic note of mystical devotion ; in others, that
longing for a safe refuge from the provoking of all men
and the strife of tongues, which drove so many saints
into the cloister. Many a solitary ascetic has prayed
in the words of the 73rd Psalm: “Whom have I in
heaven but Thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire beside Thee. My flesh and my heart faileth:
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever.” And verses like, “I will hearken what the


1 Jer, xxxi. 31-34. 2 Isa, xxxili, 14-17.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 43


Lord God will say concerning me,” have been only too
attractive to quietists. Other familiar verses will occur
to most of us. I will only add that the warm faith
and love which inspired these psalms is made more
precious by the reverence for /aw which is part of the
older inheritance of the Israelites,

There are many, I fear, to whom “the mystical
element in the Old Testament” will suggest only the
Cabbalistic lore of types and allegories which has been
applied to all the canonical books, and with especial
persistency and boldness to the Song of Solomon. I
shall give my opinion upon this class of allegorism in
the seventh Lecture of this course, which will deal with
symbolism as a branch of Mysticism. It would be
impossible to treat of it here without anticipating my
discussion of a principle which has a much wider
bearing than as a method of biblical exegesis. As to
the Song of Solomon, its influence upon Christian
Mysticism has been simply deplorable. A graceful
romance in honour of true love was distorted into a
precedent and sanction for giving way to hysterical
emotions, in which sexual imagery was freely used to
symbolise the relation between the soul and its Lord.
Such aberrations are as alien to sane Mysticism as
they are to sane exegesis.

In Jewish writings of a later period, composed under
Greek influence, we find plenty of Platonism ready to
pass into Mysticism. But the Wisdom of Solomon
does not fall within our subject, and what is necessary
to be said about Philo and Alexandria will be said in
the next Lecture.

1 See Appendix D, on the devotional use of the Song of Solomon.


44 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


In the New Testament, it will be convenient to say
a very few words on the Synoptic Gospels first, and
afterwards to consider St. John and St. Paul, where we
shall find most of our material.

The first three Gospels are not written in the
religious dialect of Mysticism. It is all the more
important to notice that the fundamental doctrines on
which the system (if we may call it a system) rests,
are all found in them. The vision of God is promised
in the Sermon on the Mount, and promised only to
those who are pure in heart. The indwelling presence
of Christ, or of the Holy Spirit, is taught in several
places; for instance—*“ The kingdom of God is within
you”; “Where two or three are gathered together in
My name, there am I in the midst of them”; “Lo, I
am with you alway, even to the end of the world.”
The unity of Christ and His members is implied by the
words, “Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the
least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me.”
Lastly, the great law of the moral world;—the law of
gain through loss, of life through death,—-which is the
corner-stone of mystical (and, many have said, of
Christian) ethics, is found in the Synoptists as well as
in St. John. “Whosoever shall seek to gain his life
(or soul) shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life
(or soul) shall preserve it,”

The Gospel of St. John—the “ spiritual Gospel,” as
Clement already calls it—is the charter of Christian
Mysticism. Indeed, Christian Mysticism, as I under-
stand it, might almost be called Johannine Christianity;
if it were not better to say that a Johannine Christianity
is the ideal which the Christian mystic sets before


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 45


himself. For we cannot but feel that there are deeper
_ truths in this wonderful Gospel than have yet become
_ part of the religious consciousness of mankind. Per-
_ haps, as Origen says, no one can fully understand it
who has not, like its author, lain upon the breast of
Jesus. We are on holy ground when we are dealing
with St. John’s Gospel, and must step in fear and
reverence. But though the breadth and depth and
height of those sublime discourses are for those only
who can mount up with wings as eagles to the summits
of the spiritual life, so simple is the language and so
large its scope, that even the wayfaring men, though
fools, can hardly altogether err therein.

Let us consider briefly, first, what we learn from
this Gospel about the nature of God, and then its
teaching upon human salvation.

There are three notable expressions about God the
Father in the Gospel and First Epistle of St. John:
“God is Love”; “God is Light”; and “God is
Spirit.” The form of the sentences teaches us that
these three qualities belong so intimately to the nature
of God that they usher us into His immediate presence.
We need not try to get behind them, or to rise above
them into some more nebulous region in our search
for the Absolute. Love, Light, and Spirit are for us
names of God Himself. And observe that St. John
does not, in applying these semi-abstract words to


~


God, attenuate in the slightest degree His personality. «


God zs Love, but He also exercises love. “God so
loved the world.” And He is not only the “white
radiance” that “ for ever shines”; He can “draw” us to
Himself, and “send” His Son to bring us back to Him.


46 _ CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


The word “Logos” does not occur in any of the
discourses. The identification of Christ with the
“Word” or “Reason” of the philosophers is St.
John’s own. But the statements in the prologue are
all confirmed by our Lord’s own words as. reported
by the evangelist. These fall under two heads, those
which deal with the relation of Christ to the Father,
and those which deal with His relation to the world.
The pre-existence of Christ in glory at the right hand
of God is proved by several declarations: “ What if ye
shall see the Son of Man ascending where He was
before?” “And now, O Father, glorify Me with
Thine own self, with the glory which I had with Thee
before the world was.” His exaltation above time is
shown by the solemn statement, “Before Abraham
was, 1 am.” And with regard to the world, we find in
St. John the very important doctrine, which has never
made its way into pcpular theology, that the Word is
not merely the Instrument in the original creation —
“by (or through) Him all things were made,’—but the
central Life, the Being in whom life existed and exists
as an indestructible attribute, an underived prerogat-
ive, the Mind or Wisdom who upholds and animates
the universe without being lost in it. This doctrine,
which is implied in other parts of St. John, seems to be
stated explicitly in the prologue, though the words
have been otherwise interpreted. “That which has
come into existence,” says St. John, “was in Him life”
(5 yéyovev, év ad’t@ wi) Hv). That is to say, the Word
is the timeless Life, of which the temporal world is a
manifestation. This doctrine was taught by many of

1 Leathes, The Witness of St. John to Christ, Pp. 244.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 47


the Greek Fathers, as well as by Scotus Erigena and

other speculative mystics. Even if, with the school of
Antioch and most of the later commentators, we
transfer the words 6 yéyovev to the preceding sentence,
the doctrine that Christ is the life as well as the light
of the world can be proved from St. John. The
world is the poem of the Word to the glory of the
Father: in it, and by means of it, He displays in time
all the riches which God has eternally put within


eee
Se


‘In St. John, as in mystical theology generally, the
Incarnation, rather than the Cross, is the central fact of
Christianity. “The Word was made flesh, and taber-


1 The punctuation now generally adopted was invented (probably) by the
Antiochenes, who were afraid that the words ‘‘ without Him was not any-
thing made” might, if unqualified, be taken to include the Holy Spirit.
Cyril of Alexandria comments on the older punctuation, but explains the
verse wrongly. ‘‘The Word, as Life by nature, was in the things which
have become, mingling Himself by participation in the things that are.”
Bp. Westcott objects to this, that ‘‘the one life is regarded as dispersed.”
Cyril, however, guards against this misconception (0% xara mepicudy rwa Kal
dddolwowv). He says that created things share in ‘‘ the one life as they are
able.” But some of his expressions are objectionable, as they seem to
assume a material substratum, animated ad extra by an infusion of the
Logos. Augustine’s commentary on the verse is based on the well-known
passage of Plato’s Republic about the ‘ideal bed.” ‘‘ Arca in opere non
est vita; arca in arte vita est. Sic Sapientia Dei, per quam facta sunt
omnia, secundum artem continet omnia antequam fabricat omnia. Quz
fiunt . . . foris corpora sunt, in arte vita sunt.” Those who accept the
common authorship of the Gospel and the Apocalypse will find a confirma-
tion of the view that #v refers to ideal, extra-temporal existence, in Rev.
iv. 11: ‘*Thou hast created all things, and for Thy pleasure they were
(fcav is the true reading) and were created,” There is also a very
interesting passage in Eusebius (Prep. Zv. xi. 19): Kal obros dpa aw 6
Abyos Kad” dv del SyTa TA yryvopeva eyévero, Womep “Hpdxderos dy akidoee,
This is so near to the words of St. John’s prologue as to suggest that the
apostle, writing at Ephesus, is here referring deliberately to the lofty
doctrine of the great Ephesian idealist, whom Justin claims as a Christian
before Christ, and whom Clement quotes several times with respect.


48 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


nacled among us,” is for him the supreme dogma.
And it follows necessarily from the Logos doctrine,
that the Incarnation, and all that followed it, is re-
garded primarily as a revelation of life and light and
truth. “That eternal life, which was with the Father,
has been manifested unto us,” is part of the opening
sentence of the first Epistle’ “This is the message
which we have heard of Him and announce unto you,
that God is Light, and in Him is no darkness at all.”
In coming into the world, Christ “came unto His
own.” He had, in a sense, only to show to them what
was there already: Esaias, long before, had “seen His
glory, and spoken of Him.” The mysterious estrange-
ment, which had laid the world under the dominion of
the Prince of darkness, had obscured but not quenched
the light which lighteth every man—the inalienable
prerogative of all who derive their being from the Sun
of Righteousness. This central Light is Christ, and
Christ only. He alone is the Way, the Truth, the
Life, the Door, the Living Bread, and the True Vine.
He is at once the Revealer and the Revealed, the
Guide and the Way, the Enlightener and the Light.
No man cometh unto the Father but by Him.

The teaching of this Gospel on the office of the
Holy Spirit claims special attention in our present
inquiry. The revelation of God in Christ was com-
plete: there can be no question that St. John claims
for Christianity the position of the one eternally true
revelation. But without the gradual illumination of
the Spirit it is partly unintelligible and partly unob-


1 It will be seen that I assume that the first Epistle is the work of the
evangelist.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 49


served.| The purpose of the Incarnation was to reveal
God the Father : “ He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father.” In these momentous words (it has been
_ said) “the idea of God receives an abiding embodi-
ment, and the Father is brought for ever within the
reach of intelligent devotion.”* The purpose of the
mission of the Comforter is to reveal the Son. He
takes the place of the ascended Christ on earth as a
living and active principle in the hearts of Christians.
His office it is to bring to remembrance the teachings of
Christ, and to help mankind gradually to understand
them. There were also many things, our Lord said,
which could not be said at the time to His disciples,
who were unable to bear them. These were left to be
communicated to future generations by the Holy
Spirit. The doctrine of development had never before
received so clear an expression; and few could venture
to record it so clearly as St. John, who could not be
suspected of contemplating a time when the teachings
of the human Christ might be superseded.

Let us now turn to the human side of salvation, and
trace the upward path of the Christian life as presented
to us in this Gospel. First, then, we have the doctrine
of the new birth: “ Except a man be born anew (or,
from above), he cannot see the kingdom of God.”
This is further explained as a being born “ of water
and of the Spirit”—-words which are probably meant
to remind us of the birth of the world-order out of
chaos as described in Genesis, and also to suggest the
two ideas of purification and life. (Baptism, as a
symbol of purification, was, of course, already familiar

1 Westcott on John xiv. 26, 2 Westcott,


4


50 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


to those who first heard the words.) Then we have a
doctrine of faith which is deeper than that of the
Synoptists. The very expression ‘riotevew eis, “to
believe on,” common in St. John and rare elsewhere,
shows that the word is taking a new meaning. Faith,
in St. John, is no longer regarded chiefly as a condition
of supernatural favours; or, rather, the mountains
which it can remove are no material obstructions.
It is an act of the whole personality, a self-dedication
to Christ. It must precede knowledge: “If any
man willeth to do His will, he shall know of the
teaching,” is the promise. It is the “credo ut intelligam”
of later theology. The objection has been raised that
St. John’s teaching about faith moves in a vicious
circle. His appeal is to the inward witness; and
those who cannot hear this inward witness are informed
that they must first believe, which is just what they can
find no reason for doing. But this criticism misses
altogether the drift of St. John’s teaching. Faith, for
him, is not the acceptance of a proposition upon
evidence ; still less is it the acceptance of a proposi-
tion in the teeth of evidence. It is, in the first
instance, the resolution “to stand or fall by the noblest
- hypothesis”; that is (may we not say?), to follow

Christ wherever He may lead us. Faith begins with

an experiment, and ends with an experience “He

that believeth in Him hath the witness in himself”;

that is the verification which follows the venture. That
» even the power to make the experiment is given from


1Cf. Theologia Germanica, chap. 48: ‘‘He who would know before he
believeth cometh never to true knowledge. . . . I speak of a certain truth
which it is possible to know by experience, but which ye must believe in

~ before ye know it by experience, else ye will never come to know it truly.”


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 51


above; and that the experience is not merely subject-
ive, but an universal law which has had its supreme
vindication in history,—these are two facts which
we learn afterwards. The converse process, which
begins with a critical examination of documents, can-
not establish what we really want to know, however
strong the evidence may be. In this sense, and in this
only, are Tennyson’s words true, that “nothing worthy
proving can be proven, nor yet disproven.”

Faith, thus defined, is hardly distinguishable from
that mixture of admiration, hope, and love by which
Wordsworth says that we live. Love especially is
intimately connected with faith. And as the Christian
life is to be considered as, above all things, a state of
union with Christ, and of His members with one
another, love of the brethren is inseparable from
love of God. So intimate is this union, that hatred
towards any human being cannot exist in the same
heart as love to God. The mystical union is indeed
rather a bond between Christ and the Church, and
between man and man as members of Christ, than
between Christ and individual souls. Our Lord’s
prayer is “that they all may be one, even as Thou,
Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may
be one ir us.” The personal relation between the soul
and Christ is not to be denied; but it can only be
enjoyed when the person has “come to himself” as a
member of a body. This involves an inward transit
from the false isolated self to the larger life of
sympathy and love which alone makes us persons.
Those who are thus living according to their true
nature are rewarded with an intense unshakeable con-


See neds


52 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


viction which makes them independent of external
evidences. Like the blind man who was healed, they
can say, “One thing I know, that whereas I was
blind, nowI see.” The words “we know” are repeated
again and again in the first Epistle, with an emphasis
which leaves no room for doubt that the evangelist
was willing to throw the main weight of his belief on
this inner assurance, and to attribute it without hesita-
tion to the promised presence of the Comforter. We
must observe, however, that this knowledge or illumina-
tion is progressive. This is proved by the passages
already quoted about the work of the Holy Spirit. It
is also implied by the words, “ This is life eternal, that
they should know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom Thou hast sent.” Eternal life is not
yvoots, knowledge as a possession, but the state of
acquiring knowledge (iva yryvécnwow). It is significant,
1 think, that St. John, who is so fond of the verb “to
know,” never uses the substantive yveous.

The state of progressive unification, in which we
receive “grace upon grace,’ as we learn more and
more of the “fulness” of Christ, is called by the
evangelist, in the verse just quoted and elsewhere,
eternal life. ‘This life is generally spoken of as a
present possession rather than a future hope. “He
that. believeth on the Son hath everlasting life”; “he
ts passed from death unto life”; “we ave in Him that
is true, even Jesus Christ. This zs the true God, and
eternal life.” The evangelist is constantly trying to
transport us into that timeless region in which one


day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 53


St. John’s Mysticism is thus patent to all; it is
stamped upon his very style, and pervades all his
teaching. Commentators who are in sympathy with
this mode of thought have, as we might expect, made
the most of this element in the Fourth Gospel. Indeed,
some of them, I cannot but think, have interpreted it
so completely in the terms of their own idealism, that
they have disregarded or explained away the very
important qualifications which distinguish the Johannine
theology from some later mystical systems. Fichte,
for example, claims St. John as a supporter of his
system of subjective idealism (if that is a correct
description of it), and is driven to some curious bits
of exegesis in his attempt to justify this claim. And
Reuss (to give one example of his method) says that
St. John cannot have used “the last day” in the
ordinary sense, “ because mystical theology has nothing
to do with such a notion.”4 He means, I suppose,
that the mystic, who likes to speak of heaven as a
state, and of eternal life as a present possession, has
no business to talk about future judgment. I cannot
help thinking that this is a very grave mistake, There
is no doubt that those who believe space and time
to be only forms of our thought, must regard the
traditional eschatology as symbolical. We are not
concerned to maintain that there will be, literally, a
great assize, holden at a date and place which could
be announced if we knew it. If that is all that Reuss
means, perhaps he is right in saying that “ mystical
theology has nothing to do with such a notion.” But


1 On the second coming of Christ, cf. John v. 25, xxi. 23; 1 John ii. 28,
iii. 2. Scholten goes so far as to expunge v. 25 and 28, 29 as spurious.


54 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


if he means that such expressions as those referred ta
in St. John, about eternal life as something here and
now, imply that judgment is now, and therefore not in
the future, he is attributing to the evangelist, and to
the whole array of religious thinkers who have used
similar expressions, a view which is easy enough to
understand, but which is destitute of any value, for it
entirely fails to satisfy the religious consciousness.


The feeling of the contrast between what ought to be


and what is, is one of the deepest springs of faith in
the unseen. It can only be ignored by shutting our
eyes to half the facts of life. It is easy to say with
Browning, “God’s in His heaven: all’s right with the
world,” or with Emerson, that justice is not deferred,
and that everyone gets exactly his deserts in this
life; but it would require a robust confidence or a
hard heart to maintain these propositions while stand-
ing among the ruins of an Armenian village, or by the
deathbed of innocence betrayed. There is no doubt
a sense in which it may be said that the ideal is the
actual; but only when we have risen in thought to
a region above the antitheses of past, present, and
future, where “zs” denotes, not the moment which
passes as we speak, but the everlasting Now in the
mind of God. This is not a region in which human
thought can live; and the symbolical eschatology of
religion supplies us with forms in which it is possible
to think, The basis of the belief in future judgment
is that deep conviction of the rationality of the world-
order, or, in religious language, of the wisdom and
justice of God, which we cannot and will not surrender.
It is authenticated by an instinctive assurance which


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 55


is strongest in the strongest minds, and which has
nothing to do with any desire for spurious “consola-
tions” ;! it is a conviction, not merely a hope, and we
-have every reason to believe that it is part of the
Divine element in our nature. This conviction, like
other mystical intuitions, is formless: the forms or
symbols under which we represent it are the best that
we can get. They are, as Plato says, “a raft” on
which we may navigate strange seas of thought far
out of our depth. We may use them freely, as if they
were literally true, only remembering their symbolical
character when they bring us into conflict with natural
science, or when they tempt us to regard the world of
experience as something undivine or unreal.

It is important to insist on this point, because the
extreme difficulty (or rather impossibility) of deter-
mining the true relations of becoming and being, of
time and eternity, is constantly tempting us to adopt
some facile solution which really destroys one of the
two terms. The danger which besets us if we follow
the line of thought natural to speculative Mysticism, is
that we may think we have solved the problem in
one of two ways, neither of which is a solution at all.
Either we may sublimate our notion of spirit to such
an extent that our idealism becomes merely a senti-
mental way of looking at the actual; or, by paring
down the other term in the relation, we may fall into


1 The allegation that the Christian persuades himself of a future life
because it is the most comfortable belief to hold, seems to me utterly
contemptible. Certain views about heaven and hell are no doubt traceable
to shallow optimism ; but the belief in immortality is in itself rather awful
than consoling. Besides, what sane man would wish to be deceived in


such a matter?


56 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


that spurious idealism which reduces this world to a
vain shadow having no relation to reality. We shall
come across a good deal of “acosmistic” philosophy
in our survey of Christian Platonism; and the senti-
mental rationalist is with us in the nineteenth century ;
but neither of the two has any right to appeal to St.
John. Fond as he is of the present tense, he will not
allow us to blot from the page either “unborn to-
morrow or dead yesterday.” We have seen that he
records the use by our Lord of the traditional language
about future judgment. What is even more important,
he asserts in the strongest possible manner, at the
outset both of his Gospel and Epistle, the necessity
of remembering that the Christian revelation was
conveyed by certain historical events. “The Word
was made flesh, and tabernacled among us, and we
have seen His glory.” “That which was from the
beginning, that which we have heard, that which we
have seen with our eyes, that which we beheld, and
our hands handled, concerning the Word of Life ...
that which we have seen and heard declare we unto
you.” And again in striking words he lays it down as
the test whereby we may distinguish the spirit of
truth from Antichrist or the spirit of error, that the
latter “confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh.” The later history of Mysticism shows that this
warning was very much needed, The tendency of the
mystic is to regard the Gospel history as only one
striking manifestation of an universal law. He believes
that every Christian who is in the way of salvation
recapitulates “the whole process of Christ” (as William
Law calls it)—that he has his miraculous birth, inward


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 57


death, and resurrection; and so the Gospel history
‘becomes for the Gnostic (as Clement calls the Christian
philosopher) little more than a dramatisation of the
-normal psychological experience “Christ crucified
is teaching for babes,” says Origen, with startling
audacity ; and heretical mystics have often fancied
that they can rise above the Son to the Father. The
Gospel and Epistle of St. John stand like a rock
against this fatal error, and in this feature some German
critics have rightly discerned their supreme value to
mystical theology. “In all life,” says Grau, “there is
not an abstract unity, but an unity in plurality, an
outward and inward, a bodily and spiritual; and life,
like love, unites what science and philosophy separate.”
This co-operation of the sensible and spiritual, of the
material and ideal, of the historical and eternal, is
maintained throughout by St. John. “His view is
mystical,” says Grau, “ because all life is mystical.” It
is true that the historical facts hold, for St. John, a
subordinate place as evidences. His main proof is, as
I have said, experimental. But a spiritual revelation
of God without its physical counterpart, an Incarna-
tion, is for him an impossibility, and a Christianity
which has cut itself adrift from the Galilean ministry
is in his eyes an imposture. In no other writer, I
think, do we find so firm a grasp of the “ psycho-


1 Henry More brings this charge against the Quakers. There are, he
says, many good and wholesome things in their teaching, but they
mingle with them a “‘slighting of the history of Christ, and making a mere
allegory of it—tending to the utter overthrow of that warrantable, though
more external frame of Christianity, which Scripture itself points out to
us” (Mastix, his letter to a Friend, p. 306).

2 #.g, Strauss and Grau, quoted in Lilienfeld’s Thoughts on the Soctal


Science of the Future.


58 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


physical” view of life which we all feel to be the true
one, if only we could put it in an intelligible form.
There is another feature in St. John’s Gospel which
shows his affinity to Mysticism, though of a different
kind from that which we have been considering. I
mean his fondness for using visible things and events
as symbols. This objective kind of Mysticism will
form the subject of my last two Lectures, and I will
here only anticipate so far as to say that the belief
which underlies it is that “everything, in being what
it is, is symbolic of something more.” The Fourth
Gospel is steeped in symbolism of this kind. The
eight miracles which St. John selects are obviously
chosen for their symbolic value; indeed, he seems to
regard them mainly as acted parables. His favourite
word for miracles is onueta, “signs” or “symbols.”


1 The intense moral dualism of St. John has been felt by many as a
discordant note; and though it is not closely connected with his Mysticism,
a few words should perhaps be added about it. It has been thought
strange that the Logos, who is the life of all things that are, should have
to invade His own kingdom to rescue it from its de facto ruler, the Prince
of darkness; and stranger yet, that the bulk of mankind should seemingly
be ‘‘children of the devil,” born of the flesh, and incapable of salvation.
The difficulty exists, but it has been exaggerated. St. John does not
touch either the metaphysical problem of the origin of evil, or predestina-
tion in the Calvinistic sense. The vivid contrasts of light and shade in
his picture express his judgment on the tragic fate of the Jewish people.
The Gospel is not a polemical treatise, but it bears traces of recent con-
flicts. St. John wishes to show that the rejection of Christ by the Jews
was morally inevitable; that their blindness and their ruin followed
naturally from their characters and principles. Looking back on the
memories of a long life, he desires to trace the operation of uniform laws
in dividing the wheat of humanity from the chaff. He is content to
observe how 70s dv@pdémrw Saluwy, without speculating on the reason why
characters differ. In offering these remarks, I am assuming, what seems to
me quite certain, that St. John selected from our Lord’s discourses those
which suited his particular object, and that in the setting and arrangement
he allowed himself a certain amount of liberty.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 59


It is true that he also calls them “works,” but this is
not to distinguish them as supernatural. All Christ’s
actions are “works,” as parts of His one “work.” As
evidences of His Divinity, such “works” are inferior
to His “words,” being symbolic and external. Only
those who cannot believe on the evidence of the words
and their echo in the heart, may strengthen their weak
faith by the miracles. But “blessed are they who
have not seen, and yet have believed.” And besides
these “signs,” we have, in place of the Synoptic parables,
a wealth of allegories, in which Christ is symbolised as
the Bread of Life, the Light of the World, the Door
of the Sheep, the good Shepherd, the Way, and the
true Vine. Wind and water are also made to play
their part. Moreover, there is much unobtrusive
symbolism in descriptive phrases, as when he says that
Nicodemus came by night, that Judas went out into
the night, and that blood and water flowed from our
Lord’s side; and the washing of the disciples’ feet was
a symbolic act which the disciples were to understand
hereafter. Thus all things in the world may remind us
of Him who made them, and who is their sustaining life.

In treating of St. John, it was necessary to protest
against the tendency of some commentators to inter-
pret him simply as a speculative mystic of the
Alexandrian type. But when we turn to St. Paul,
we find reason to think that this side of his theology
has been very much underestimated, and that the
distinctive features of Mysticism are even more marked
in him than in St. John. This is not surprising, for
our blessed Lord’s discourses, in which nearly all the
doctrinal teaching of St. John is contained, are for all


60 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Christians; they rise above the oppositions which
must always divide human thought and human thinkers.
In St. Paul, large-minded as he was, and inspired as we
believe him to be, we may be allowed to see an example
of that particular type which we are considering.

St. Paul states in the clearest manner that Christ
appeared to him, and that this revelation was the
foundation of his Christianity and apostolic com-
mission. “Neither did I receive the Gospel from
'man,”! he says, “nor was I taught it, but it came to
me through revelation of Jesus Christ.” It appears
that he did not at first? think it necessary to “confer
with flesh and blood”—to collect evidence about our
Lord’s ministry, His death and resurrection; he had
“seen” and felt Him, and that was enough. “It was
the good pleasure of God to reveal His Son in me,” ® he
says simply, using the favourite mystical phraseology.
The study of “ evidences,” in the usual sense of the term
in apologetics, he rejects with distrust and contempt4
External revelation cannot make a man religious. It
can put nothing new into him. If there is nothing
answering to it in his mind, it will profit him nothing,
Nor can philosophy make a man religious. “ Man’s
wisdom,” “the wisdom of the world,” is of no avail
to find spiritual truth. “God chose the foolish things
of the world, to put to shame them that are wise,”
“ The word of the Cross is, to them that are perishing,
foolishness.” By this language he, of course, does not
mean that Christianity is irrational, and therefore to


1 Gal. i. 12.


2 1 Cor. xv. shows that he subsequently satisfied himself of the truth of
the other Christophanies,


8 Gal. i. 15, 16. “1 Cor, i. and ii.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 61


be believed on authority. That would be to lay its
foundation upon external evidences, and nothing could
be further from the whole bent of his teaching. What
he does mean, and say very clearly, is that the carnal
mind is disqualified from understanding Divine truths;
“it cannot know them, because they are spiritually
discerned.” He who has not raised himself above “ the
world,” that is, the interests and ideals of human
society as it organises itself apart from God, and above
“the flesh,” that is, the things which seem desirable to
the “average sensual man,” does not possess in himself
that element which can be assimilated by Divine
grace. The “mystery” of the wisdom of God is
necessarily hidden from him. St. Paul uses the word
“mystery” in very much the same sense which St.
Chrysostom * gives to it in the following careful defini-
tion: “A mystery is that which is everywhere pro-
claimed, but which is not understood by those who
have not right judgment. It is revealed, not by
cleverness, but by the Holy Ghost, as we are able to
receive it. And so we may call a mystery a secret
(améppntov), for even to the faithful it is not committed
in all its fulness and clearness.” In St. Paul the word
is nearly always found in connexion with words
denoting revelation or publication? The preacher of
the Gospel is a hierophant, but the Christian mysteries
are freely communicated to all who can receive them.
For many ages these truths were “hid in God,”? but
now all men may be “illuminated,”* if they will fulfil


1 Chrysostom 77 1 Cor., Hom, vii. 2.
2 See Lightfoot on Col. i, 26. 8 Eph. iii. 9.
49 Tim. i. 10 (¢wrlfev); cf. Eph. i. 9,


62 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


the necessary conditions of initiation. These are
to “cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and
spirit,”! and to have love, without which all else will
be unavailing. But there are degrees of initiation.
“We speak wisdom among the perfect,” he says (the
rédrevoe are the fully initiated); but the carnal must still
be fed with milk. Growth in knowledge, growth in
grace, and growth in love, are so frequently mentioned
together, that we must understand the apostle to mean
that they are almost inseparable. But this knowiedge,
grace, and love is itself the work of the indwelling God,
who is thus in a sense the organ as well as the object
of the spiritual life. “The Spirit searcheth all things,”
he says, “yea, the deep things of God.” The man
who has the Spirit dwelling in him “has the mind of
Christ.” “He that is spiritual judgeth all things,” and
is himself “ judged of no man.” It is, we must admit
frankly, a dangerous claim, and one which may easily
be subversive of all discipline. ‘“ Where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty”; but such liberty may
become a cloak of maliciousness. The fact is that
St. Paul had himself trusted in “the Law,” and it
had led him into grievous error. As usually happens
in such cases, his recoil from it was almost violent.
He exalts the inner light into an absolute criterion of
right and wrong, that no corner of the moral life may
remain in bondage to Pharisaism. The crucifixion
of the Lord Jesus and the stoning of Stephen were
a crushing condemnation of legal and ceremonial
righteousness ; the law written in the heart of man,
or rather spoken there by the living voice of the Holy


12 Cor. vil. I.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 63


Spirit, could never so mislead men as to make them
think that they were doing God service by condemning
and killing the just. Such memories might well lead St.
Paul to use language capable of giving encouragement
even to fanatical Anabaptists. But it is significant
that the boldest claims on behalf of liberty all occur in
the earlier Epistles,

The subject of St. Paul’s visions and revelations is
one of great difficulty. In the Acts we have full
accounts of the appearance in the sky which caused, or
immediately preceded, his conversion. It is quite
clear that St. Paul himself regarded this as an appear-
ance of the same kind as the other Christophanies
granted to apostles and “ brethren,” and of a different
kind from such visions as might be seen by any
Christian. It was an unique favour, conferring upon
him the apostolic prerogatives of an eye-witness. Other
passages in the Acts show that during his missionary
journeys St. Paul saw visions and heard voices, and
that he believed himself to be guided by the “ Spirit
of Jesus.” Lastly, in the Second Epistle to the
Corinthians he records that “more than fourteen years
ago” he was in an ecstasy, in which he was “caught
up into the third heaven,” and saw things unutterable.
The form in which this experience is narrated suggests
a recollection of Rabbinical pseudo-science; the sub-
stance of the vision St. Paul will not reveal, nor will
he claim its authority for any of his teaching1 These
recorded experiences are of great psychological interest ;


1 In spite of this, he is attacked for this passage in the Psexdo-Clementine
Homilies (xvii. 19), where ‘‘Simon Magus” is asked, ‘‘Can anyone be
made wise to teach through a vision?”


64 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


but, as I said in my last Lecture, they do not seem to
me to belong to the essence of Mysticism. =

Another mystical idea, which is never absent from
the mind of St. Paul, is that the individual Christian
must live through, and experience personally, the
redemptive process of Christ. The life, death, and
resurrection of Christ were for him the revelation of
a law, the law of redemption through suffering. The
victory over sin and death was won for us; but it
must also be won zz us. ‘The process is an universal
law, not a mere event in the past It has been
exemplified in history, which is a progressive unfurling
or revelation of a great mystery, the meaning of which
is now at last made plain in Christ? And it must
also appear in each human life. “We were buried
with Him,” says St. Paul to the Romans,’ “ through
baptism into death,” “that like as Christ was raised
from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we
also might walk in newness of life.” And again,*
“Tf the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwell in you, He that raised up Christ Jesus from the
dead shall quicken also your mortal bodies through His
Spirit that dwelleth in you.” And, “If ye were raised
together with Christ, seek the things that are above.”®


1 Compare a beautiful passage in R. L. Nettleship’s Remains: “To live
is to die into something more perfect. . . . God can only make His work
to be sruly His work, by eternally dying, sacrificing what is dearest to
Him.

7 Col. i. 26, ii. 2, iv. 3; Eph. iii, 2-9. I have allowed myself to quote
from these Epistles because I am myself a believer in their genuineness,
The Mysticism of St. Paul might be proved from the undisputed Epistles
only, but we should then lose some of the most striking illustrations of it,

3 Rom. vi. 4. 4 Rom, viii. 11.

® St. Paul’s mystical language about death and resurrection has given rise
to much controversy. On the one hand, we have writers like Matthew


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 6s


The law of redemption, which St. Paul considers to
have been triumphantly summed up by the death and
resurrection of Christ,! would hardly be proved to be
an universal law if the Pauline Christ were only the
“heavenly man,” as some critics have asserted. St.
Paul’s teaching about the Person of Christ was really


almost identical with the Logos doctrine as we find it


|


in St. John’s prologue, and as it was developed by the
mystical philosophy of a later period. Not only is His
pre-existence “ in the form of God” clearly taught,? but
He is the agent in the creation of the universe, the
vital principle upholding and pervading all that exists.
“The Son,” we read in the Epistle to the Colossians
“is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all


Arnold, who tell us that St. Paul unconsciously substitutes an ethical for
3 physical resurrection—an eternal life here and now for a future reward.
On the other, we have writers like Kabisch (Zschatologie des Paulus), who
argue that the apostle’s whole conception was materialistic, his idea of a
“spiritual body” being that of a body composed of very fine atoms (like
those of Lucretius’ ‘‘azzma”), which inhabits the earthly body of the
Christian like a kernel within its husk, and will one day (at the resurrec-
tion) slough off its muddy vesture of decay, and thenceforth exist in a
form which can defy the ravages of time. Of the two views, Matthew
Arnold’s is much the truer, even though it should be proved that St. Paul
sometimes pictures the ‘‘spiritual body” in the way described. But the
key to the problem, in St. Paul as in St. John, is that pyscho-physical
theory which demands that the laws of the spiritual world shall have their
analogous manifestations in the world of phenomena. Death must, some-
how or other, be conquered in the visible as well as in the invisible sphere.
The law of life through death must be deemed to pervade every phase of
existence. And as a mere prolongation of physical life under the same
conditions is impossible, and, moreover, would not fulfil the law in ques-
tion, we are bound to have recourse to some such symbol as “spiritual
body.” It will hardly be disputed that the Christian doctrine of the
resurrection of the whole man has taken a far stronger hold of the religious
consciousness of mankind than the Greek doctrine of the immortality of the
soul, or that this doctrine is plainly taught by St. Paul. All attempts to
turn his eschatology into a rationalistic (Arnold) or a materialistic (Kabisch)
theory must therefore be decisively rejected. ;
1 Col, iii, 1. 2 Phil. ii. 6, 3 Col, i. 15-17.


5 Cc


66 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM |


creation; for in Him were all things created, in th
heavens and upon the earth; all things have been
created through Him, and unto Him; and He is before
all things, and in Him all things consist” (that is,
“hold together,” as the margin of the Revised Version
explains it), “All things are summed up in Christ,”
he says to the Ephesians “Christ is a/ and in all,”
we read again in the Colossians.2 And in that bold
and difficult passage of the 15th chapter of the First
Epistle to the Corinthians he speaks of the “reign” of
Christ as coextensive with the world’s history. When
time shall end, and all evil shall be subdued to good,
Christ “ will deliver up the kingdom to God, even the
Father,” “that God may be all in all.”® Very im-
portant, too, is the verse in which he says that the
Israelites in the wilderness “drank of that spiritual
rock which followed them, and that rock was Christ.” 4
It reminds us of Clement’s language about the Son as
the Light which broods over all history.

The passage from the Colossians, which I quoted
just now, contains another mystical idea besides that
of Christ as the universal source and centre of life.
He is, we are told, “the Image of the invisible God,”
and all created beings are, in their several capacities,
images of Him. Man is essentially “the image and
glory of God”;® the “perfect man” is he who has
come “to the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ.”® This is our nature, in the Aristotelian sense
of completed normal development; but to reach it we
have to slay the false self, the old man, which is


1 Eph. i. 10. A Col miliohts 51 Cor, xv. 24-28,
41 Cor. x. 4. S'r Corexiuhgs 6 Eph. iv. 13.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 67


informed by an actively maleficent agency, “flesh”
which is hostile to “spirit.” This latter conception
does not at present concern us; what we have to
notice is the description of the upward path as an
inner transit from the false isolation of the natural
man into a state in which it is possible to say, “I live;
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.”1 In the Epistle
to the Galatians he uses the favourite mystical phrase,
“until Christ be formed in you”;? and in the Second
Epistle to the Corinthians ® he employs a most beautiful
expression in describing the process, reverting to the
figure of the “mirror,” dear to Mysticism, which he
had already used in the First Epistle: “We all with
unveiled face reflecting as a mirror the glory of the
Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory
to glory.” Other passages, which refer primarily to
the future state, are valuable as showing that St. Paul
lends no countenance to that abstract idea of eternal life
as freedom from all earthly conditions, which has misled
so many mystics. Our hope, when the earthly house
of our tabernacle is dissolved, is not that we may be
unclothed, but that we may be clothed upon with our
heavenly habitation. The body of our humiliation is
to be changed and glorified, according to the mighty
working whereby God is able to subdue all things unto
Himself. And therefore our whole spirit and soul
and body must be preserved blameless; for the body
is the temple of the Holy Ghost, not the prison-house
of a soul which will one day escape out of its cage and
fly away.

St. Paul’s conception of Christ as the Life as well


1 Gal. ii. 20. 2 Gal. iv. 19. 3 2 Cor. iii. 18,


68 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


as the Light of the world has two consequences besides
those which have been already mentioned. In the first
place, it is fatal to religious individualism. The close
unity which joins us to Christ is not so much a unity
of the individual soul with the heavenly Christ, as an
organic unity of all men, or, since many refuse their
privileges, of all Christians, with their Lord. “We,
being many, are one body in Christ, and severally
members one of another.”! There must be “no


‘schism in the body,”2 but each member must perform


its allotted function. St. Augustine is thoroughly in
agreement with St. Paul when he speaks of Christ and
the Church as “unus Christus.” Not that Christ is
“ divided,” so that He cannot be fully present to any
individual—that is an error which St. Paul, St. Augus-
tine, and the later mystics all condemn; but as the
individual cannot reach his real personality as an
isolated unit, he cannot, as an isolated unit, attain to
full communion with Christ.

The second point is one which may seem to be of
subordinate importance, but it will, I think, awaken
more interest in the future than it has done in the
past. In the 8th chapter of the Epistle to the Romans,
St. Paul clearly teaches that the victory of Christ over
sin and death is of import, not only to humanity, but
to the whole of creation, which now groans and
travails in pain together, but which shall one day
be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God. This recognition
of the spirituality of matter, and of the unity of all
nature in Christ, is one which we ought to be thankful


1 Rom, xii. 5. 71 Cor, xii, 25,


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 69


to find in the New Testament. It will be my pleasant
task, in the last two Lectures of this course, to show
how the later school of mystics prized it.

The foregoing analysis of St. Paul’s teaching has, I
hope, justified the statement that all the essentials of
Mysticism are to be found in his Epistles. But there
are also two points in which his authority has been
claimed for false and mischievous developments of
Mysticism. These two points it will be well to con-
sider before leaving the subject.

The first is a contempt for the historical framework
of Christianity. We have already seen how strongly
St. John warns us against this perversion of spiritual
religion. But those numerous sects and _ individual
thinkers who have disregarded this warning, have often
appealed to the authority of St. Paul, who in the
Second Epistle to the Corinthians says, “Even though
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we
know Him so no more.” Here, they say, is a distinct
admission that the worship of the historical Christ,
“the man Christ Jesus,” is a stage to be passed through
and then left behind. There is just this substratum of
truth in a very mischievous error, that St. Paul does
tell us! that he degan to teach the Corinthians by
giving them in the simplest possible form the story of
“Jesus Christ and Him crucified.” The “mysteries”
of the faith, the “wisdom” which only the “ perfect ”
can understand, were deferred till the converts had
learned their first lessons. But if we look at the
passage in question, which has shocked and perplexed
many good Christians, we shall find that St. Paul is


11 Cor. ii, 1, 2.


70 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


not drawing a contrast between the earthly and the
heavenly Christ, bidding us worship the Second Person
of the Trinity, the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever,
and to cease to contemplate the Cross on Calvary.
‘He is distinguishing rather between the sensuous pre-
sentation ot the facts of Christ’s life, and a deeper
realisation of their import. It should be our aim to
“know no man after the flesh”; that is to say, we
should try to think of human beings as what they are,
immortal spirits, sharers with us of a common life and
a common hope, not as what they appear to our eyes.
And the same principle applies to our thoughts about
Christ. To know Christ after the flesh is to know
Him, not as man, but as a man. St. Paul in this
verse condemns all religious materialism, whether it
take the form of hysterical meditation upon the
physical details of the passion, or of an over-curious
interest in the manner of the resurrection. There is
no trace whatever in St. Paul of any aspiration to rise
above Christ to the contemplation of the Absolute—to
treat Him as only a step in the ladder. This is an
error of false Mysticism; the true mystic follows St.
Paul in choosing as his ultimate goal the fulness of
Christ, and not the emptiness of the undifferentiated
Godhead.

The second point in which St. Paul has been sup-
posed to sanction an exaggerated form of Mysticism,
is his extreme disparagement of external religion—of
forms and ceremonies and holy days and the like,
“One man hath faith to eat all things; but he that
is weak eateth herbs.”1_ “One man esteemeth one


1 Rom. xiv.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 71


day above another, another esteemeth every day
alike.” “He that eateth, eateth unto the Lord, and
giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not, to the
Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks.” “Why
turn ye back to the weak and beggarly rudiments,
whereunto ye desire to be in bondage again? Ye
observe days, and months, and seasons, and years. I
am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed labour upon
you in vain.”1 “Why do ye subject yourselves to
ordinances, handle not, nor taste, nor touch, after
the precepts and doctrines of men?”2 These are
strongly-worded passages, and I have no wish to
attenuate their significance. Any Christian priest
who puts the observance of human ordinances—fast-
days, for example—at all on the same level as such
duties as charity, generosity, or purity, is teaching,
not Christianity, but that debased Judaism against
which St. Paul waged an unceasing polemic, and
which is one of those dead religions which has to be
killed again in almost every generation? But we
must not forget that these vigorous denunciations
do occur in a polemic against Judaism. They bear
the stamp of the time at which they were written
perhaps more than any other part of St. Paul’s
Epistles, except those thoughts which were connected
with his belief in the approaching end of the world.
St. Paul certainly did not intend his Christian con-
verts to be anarchists in religious matters. There
1 Gal. iv. 9-11. 2 Col. ii. 20-22.

8 I have been reminded that great tenderness is due to the ‘‘sancta
simplicitas” of the ‘‘anicula Christiana,” whose religion is generally of


this type. I should agree, if the ‘‘anicula” were not always so ready with
~ her faggot when a John Huss is to be burnt.


72 - CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


is evidence, in the First Epistle to the Corinthians,
that his spiritual presentation of Christianity had
already been made an excuse for disorderly licence.
The usual symptoms of degenerate Mysticism had
appeared at Corinth. There were men there who
called themselves “spiritual persons”! or prophets,
and showed an arrogant independence; there were
others who wished to start sects of their own; others
who carried antinomianism into the sphere of morals;
others who prided themselves on various “ spiritual
gifts.” As regards the last class, we are rather sur-
prised at the half-sanction which the apostle gives
to what reads like primitive Irvingism;* but he was
evidently prepared to enforce discipline with a strong
hand. Still, it may be fairly said that he trusts
mainly to his personal ascendancy, and to his teach-
ing about the organic unity of the Christian body, to
preserve or restore due discipline and cohesion. There
have been hardly any religious leaders, if we except
George Fox, the founder of Quakerism, who have
valued ceremonies so little. In this, again, he is a
genuine mystic.

Of the other books of the New Testament it is
not necessary to say much. The Epistle to the
Hebrews cannot be the work of St. Paul. It shows
strong traces of Jewish Alexandrianism; indeed, the


1x Cor. xiv. 37.


2 There seem to have been two conceptions of the operations of the
Spirit in St. Paul’s time: (2) He comes fitfully, with visible signs, and
puts men beside themselves ; (4) He is an abiding presence, enlightening,
guiding, and strengthening. St. Paul lays weight on the latter view,
without repudiating the former. See H. Gunkel, Die Wirkungen des


HT, Geistes nach der popul. Anschauung d. apostol. Zeit und d. Lehre des
Paulus.


MYSTICAL ELEMENT IN THE BIBLE 73


writer seems to have been well acquainted with the
Book of Wisdom and with Philo. Alexandrian ideal-
ism is always ready to pass into speculative Mysti-
cism, but the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
can hardly be called mystical in the sense in which
St. Paul was a mystic. The most interesting side
of his theology, from our present point of view, is
the way in which he combines his view of religious
ordinances as types and adumbrations of higher
spiritual truths, with a comprehensive view of history
as a progressive realisation of a Divine scheme.
The keynote of the book is that mankind has been
educated partly by ceremonial laws and partly by
“promises.” Systems of laws and ordinances, of which
the Jewish Law is the chief example, have their place
in history. They rightly claim obedience until the
practical lessons which they can teach have been
learned, and until the higher truths which they con-
ceal under the protecting husk of symbolism can be
apprehended without disguise. Then their task is
done, and mankind is no longer bound by them. In
the same way, the “promises” which were made under
the old dispensation proved to be only symbols of
deeper and more spiritual blessings, which in the
moral childhood of humanity would not have appeared
desirable; they were (not delusions, but) d/uszons,
“God having prepared some better thing” to take
their place. The doctrine is one of profound and
far-reaching importance. In this Epistle it is cer-
tainly connected with the idealistic thought that all
visible things are symbols, and that every truth appre-
hended by finite intelligences must be only the husk


74 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


of a deeper truth. We may therefore claim the
Epistle to the Hebrews as containing in outline a
Christian philosophy of history, based upon a doctrine
of symbols which has much in common with some
later developments of Mysticism.

In the Apocalypse, whoever the author may be, we
find little or nothing of the characteristic Johannine
Mysticism, and the influence of its vivid allegorical
pictures has been less potent in this branch of theo-
logy than might perhaps have been expected.


Py irae See 2


a ee oe


Sait v eo a ee a stent 4 Aa
pach hint Ss sid Qy wis Hae ansidh Sewn gata, sys eb trwierl:


a Pe rr


‘
-
oe)


shi tote pe


+S uh wee.


9 a) aaa oe 3 = -


~«
4
v
:
bat


a on Santer as


Awd dh Sikalws ubvn wrepodrar 7 Tod gpirocdpov didvora: mpds yap
exelvas del éore pin Kara Stivayv, wpds olomep Oeds dy Oeids EoTt. Tots dé
5} rovovras dvip Srourjpact dp0Gs xpwpevos, Tedéous del TedeTAs TEhOUMEVOS ,
réeos byTws pdvos ylyvera.” PLaTo, Phedrus, p. 249.


LICHT UND FARBE


**Wohne, du ewiglich Eines, dort bei dem ewiglich Einen !
Farbe, du wechselnde, komm’ freundlich zum Menschen herab !”
SCHILLER.


“*Nel suo profondo vidi che s’interna,
Legato con amore in un volume,
Cid che per Puniverso si squaderna ;
Sustanzia ed accidente, e lor costume,
Tutti conflati insieme par tal modo,
Che cid ch’io dico é un semplice lume.”
DANTE, Paradiso, c. 33.


VENA NSN


LECTURE III


CHRISTIAN PLATONISM AND SPECULATIVE
MYSTICISM


I. IN THE EAST


‘*That was the true Light, which lighteth every man coming into the
world.”—JOHN i. 9.

‘* He made darkness His hiding place, His pavilion round about Him;
darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.””—Ps. xviii. 11.


I HAVE called this Lecture “ Christian Platonism and
Speculative Mysticism.” Admirers of Plato are likely
to protest that Plato himself can hardly be called a
mystic, and that in any case there is very little re-
semblance between the philosophy of his dialogues
and the semi-Oriental Mysticism of Pseudo-Dionysius
the Areopagite. I do not dispute either of these
statements; and yet I wish to keep the name of Plato
in the title of this Lecture. The affinity between
Christianity and Platonism was very strongly felt
throughout the period which we are now to consider.
Justin Martyr claims Plato {with Heraclitus’ and
Socrates) as a Christian before Christ; Athenagoras

1The mention of Heraclitus is very interesting. It shows that the
Christians had already recognised their affinity with the great speculative
mystic of Ephesus, whose fragments supply many mottoes for essays on


Mysticism. The identification of the Heraclitean vods-Adyos with the


Johannine Logos appears also in Euseb. Prep. Zv. xi. 19, quoted above.
7


Pare ve Cn


78 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


calls him the best of the forerunners of Christianity,
and Clement regards the Gospel as perfected Platon-
ism! The Pagans repeated so persistently the charge
that Christ borrowed from Plato what was true in His
teaching, that Ambrose wrote a treatise to confute
them. As a rule, the Christians did not deny the
resemblance, but explained it by saying that Plato
had plagiarised from Moses—a curious notion which
we find first in Philo. In the Middle Ages the
mystics almost canonised Plato: Eckhart speaks of
him, quaintly enough, as “the great priest” (der grosse
Pfaffe); and even in Spain, Louis of Granada calls
him “ divine,’ and finds in him “the most excellent
parts of Christian wisdom.” Lastly, in the seventeenth
century the English Platonists avowed their intention
of bringing back the Church to “her old loving nurse
the Platonic philosophy.” These English Platonists
knew what they were talking of; but for the medizval
mystics Platonism meant the philosophy of Plotinus
adapted by Augustine, or that of Proclus adapted by
Dionysius, or the curious blend of Platonic, Aris-


‘totelian, and Jewish philosophy which filtered through


into the Church by means of the Arabs. Still, there
was justice underlying this superficial ignorance. Plato
is, after all, the father of European Mysticism? Both
the great types of mystics may appeal to him—those
who try to rise through the visible to the invisible,
through Nature to God, who find in earthly beauty
the truest symbol of the heavenly, and in the imagina-
tion——the image- making faculty—a raft whereon we


1-6 mdvra dpirros IIhdrwy—olov Pcopopodpevos, he calls him.
~ %€ Mysticism finds in Plato all its texts,” says Emerson truly.


we


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 79


may navigate the shoreless ocean of the Infinite; and
those who distrust all sensuous representations as
tending “to nourish appetites which we ought to
starve,” who look upon this earth as a place of banish-
ment, upon material things as a veil which hides
God’s face from us, and who bid us “flee away from
hence as quickly as may be,” to seek “yonder,” in
the realm of the ideas, the heart’s true home. Both
may find in the real Plato much congenial teaching—
that the highest good is the greatest likeness to God


‘ —that the greatest happiness is the vision of God—


that we should seek holiness not for the sake of
external reward, but because it is the health of the
soul, while vice is its disease—that goodness is unity
and harmony, while evil is discord and disintegration
—that it is our duty and happiness to rise above the
visible and transitory to the invisible and permanent.
It may also be a pleasure to some to trace the fortunes
of the positive and negative elements in Plato’s teach-
ing—of the humanist and the ascetic who dwelt to-
gether in that large mind; to observe how the world-
renouncing element had to grow at the expense of
the other, until full justice had been done to its
claims; and then how the brighter, more truly Hel-
lenic side was able to assert itself under due safe-
guards, as a precious thing dearly purchased, a treasure
reserved for the pure and humble, and still only to be
tasted carefully, with reverence and godly fear. There
is, of course, no necessity for connecting this develop-
ment with the name of Plato. The way towards a
reconciliation of this and other differences is more
clearly indicated in the New Testament; indeed,


80 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


nothing can strengthen our belief in inspiration so much
as to observe how the whole history of thought only
helps us to understand St. Paul and St. John better,
never to pass beyond their teaching. Still, the tra-
ditional connexion between Plato and Mysticism is
so close that we may, I think, be pardoned for keep-
ing, like Ficinus, a lamp burning in his honour
throughout our present task.

_ It is not my purpose in these Lectures to attempt a
historical survey of Christian Mysticism. To attempt
this, within the narrow limits of eight Lectures, would
oblige me to give a mere skeleton of the subject,
which would be of no value, and of very little interest.
The aim which I have set before myself is to give a
clear presentation of an important type of Christian
life and thought, in the hope that it may suggest to
us a way towards the solution of some difficulties
which at present agitate and divide us. The path is
beset with pitfalls on either side, as will be abundantly
clear when we consider the startling expressions which
Mysticism has often found for itself. But though I
have not attempted to give even an outline of the
history of Mysticism, I feel that the best and safest
way of studying this or any type of religion is to con-
sider it in the light of its historical development, and
of the forms which it has actually assumed. And so
I have tried to set these Lectures in a historical frame-
work, and, in choosing prominent figures as represent-
atives of the chief kinds of Mysticism, to observe, so
far as possible, the chronological order. The present
Lecture will carry us down to the Pseudo-Dionysius,
the influence of whose writings during the next thou-


opt nyse


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 81


sand years can hardly be overestimated. But if we
are to understand how a system of speculative Mys-
ticism, of an Asiatic rather than European type, came
to be accepted as the work of a convert of St. Paul,
and invested with semi-apostolic authority, we must
pause for a few minutes to let our eyes rest on the
phenomenon called Alexandrianism, which fills a large
place in the history of the early Church.

We have seen how St. Paul speaks of a Gnosis or
higher knowledge, which can be taught with safety
only to the “perfect” or “fully initiated”;1 and he
by no means rejects such expressions as the Pleroma
(the totality of the Divine attributes), which were
technical terms of speculative theism. St. John, too,
in his prologue and other places, brings the Gospel
into relation with current speculation, and interprets it
in philosophical language. The movement known as
Gnosticism, both within and without the Church, was
an attempt to complete this reconciliation between
speculative and revealed religion, by systematising the
symbols of transcendental mystical theosophy.2 The
movement can only be understood as a premature and
unsuccessful attempt to achieve what the school of
Alexandria afterwards partially succeeded in doing.
The anticipations of Neoplatonism among the Gnostics
would probably be found to be very numerous, if the
victorious party had thought their writings worth pre-


1 The doctrine of reserve in religious teaching, which some have thought
dishonest, rests on the self-evident proposition that it takes two to tell the
truth—one to speak, and one to hear.

2 ¢¢ Man kann den Gnosticismus des zweiten Jahrhunderts als theologisch-
transcendente Mystik, und die eigentliche Mystik als substantiell-immanente
Gnosis bezeichnen ”’ (Noack).


6


82 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


serving. But Gnosticism was rotten before it was ripe.
Dogma was still in such a fluid state, that there was
nothing to keep speculation within bounds; and the
Oriental element, with its insoluble dualism, its fan-
tastic mythology and spiritualism, was too strong for
the Hellenic. Gnosticism presents all the features
which we shall find to be characteristic of degenerate
Mysticism. Not to speak of its oscillations between
fanatical austerities and scandalous licence, and its belief
in magic and other absurdities, we seem, when we read
Irenzus’ description of a Valentinian heretic, to hear
the voice of Luther venting his contempt upon some
“ Geisterer” of the sixteenth century, such as Carl-
stadt or Sebastian Frank. “The fellow is so puffed
up,” says Irenzus, “that he believes himself to be
neither in heaven nor on earth, but to have entered
within the Divine Pleroma, and to have embraced his
guardian angel. On the strength of which he struts
about as proud asa cock. These are the self-styled
‘spiritual persons,’ who say they have already reached
perfection.” The later Platonism could not even graft
itself upon any of these Gnostic systems, and Plotinus
rejects them as decisively as Origen.

Still closer is the approximation to later speculation
which we find in Philo, who was a contemporary of St.
Paul. Philo and his Therapeute were genuine mystics
of the monastic type. Many of them, however, had
not been monks all their life, but were retired men of
business, who wished to spend their old age in con-
templation, as many still do in India. They were, of
course, not Christians, but Hellenised Jews, though
Eusebius, Jerome, and the Middle Ages generally


~_


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 83


thought that they were Christians, and were well
pleased to find monks in the first century.)

Philo’s object is to reconcile religion and philosophy
—in other words, Moses and Plato. His method? is
to make Platonism a development of Mosaism, and
Mosaism an implicit Platonism. The claims of ortho-
doxy are satisfied by saying, rather audaciously, “ All
this is Moses’ doctrine, not mine.” His chief instru-
ment in this difficult task is allegorism, which in his
hands is a bad specimen of that pseudo-science which
has done so much to darken counsel in biblical exe-
gesis. His speculative system, however, is exceedingly
interesting.

God, according to Philo, is unqualified and pure
Being, but ot superessential. He is emphatically o dv,
the “I am,” and the most general (16 yevixotatov) of
existences. At the same time He is without qualities
(drovos), and ineffable (@ppnros). In His inmost nature
He is inaccessible; as it was said to Moses, “ Thou
shalt see what is behind Me, but My face shall not be
seen.” It is best to contemplate God in silence, since
we can compare Him to nothing that we know. All
our knowledge of God is really God dwelling in us.
He has breathed into us something of His nature, and
is thus the archetype of what is highest in ourselves.
He who is truly inspired “may with good reason be


1 See Conybeare’s interesting account of the Therapeutz in his edition
of Philo, On the Contemplative Life, and his refutation of the theory of
Lucius, Zeller, etc., that the Therapeutz belong to the end of the third
century.

2 Stoical influence is also strong in Philo.

8 The Jewish writer Aristobulus (about 160 B.C.) is said to have used the
same argument in an exposition of the Pentateuch addressed to Ptolemy


Philometor.


84 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


called God.” This blessed state may, however, be
prepared for by such mediating agencies as the study
of God’s laws in nature; and it is only the highest
class of saints—the souls “born of God”—that are
exalted above the need of symbols. It would be easy
to show how Philo wavers between two conceptions
of the Divine nature—God as simply transcendent,
and God as immanent. But this is one of the things
that make him most interesting. His Judaism will
not allow him really to believe in a God “without
qualities.”

The Logos dwells with God as His Wisdom (or
sometimes he calls Wisdom, figuratively, the mother of
the Logos). He is the “second God,” the “Idea of
Ideas”; the other Ideas or Powers are the forces
which he controls—“the Angels,” as he adds, sud-
denly remembering his Judaism. The Logos is also
the mind of God expressing itself in act: the Ideas,
therefore, are the content of the mind of God. Here
he anticipates Plotinus; but he does not reduce God
to a logical point. His God is self-conscious, and
reasons. By the agency of the Logos the worlds were
made: the intelligible world, the xdapos vontds, is the
Logos acting as Creator. Indeed, Philo calls the in-
telligible universe “the only and beloved Son of God”;
just as Erigena says, “ Be assured that the Word is the
Nature of all things.” The Son represents the world
before God as High Priest, Intercessor, and Paraclete.
He is the “divine Angel” that guides us; He is the
“bread of God,” the “ dew of the soul,” the “ convincer
of sin”: no evil can touch the soul in which He dwells:
He is the eternal image of the Father, and we, who are


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 85


‘not yet fit to be called sons of God, may call ourselves
His sons.

Philo’s ethical system is that of the later con-
_templative Mysticism. Knowledge and virtue can be
obtained only by renunciation of self. Contemplation
is a higher state than activity. “The soul should cut
off its right hand.” “It should shun the whirlpool of
life, and not even touch it with the tip of a finger.”
The highest stage is when a man leaves behind his
finite self-consciousness, and sees God face to face,
standing in Him from henceforward, and knowing Him
not by reason, but by clear certainty. Philo makes no
attempt to identify the Logos with the Jewish Messiah,
and leaves no room for an Incarnation.

This remarkable system anticipates the greater
part of Christian and Pagan Neoplatonism. The
astonishing thing is that Philo’s work exercised so little
influence on the philosophy of the second century. It
was probably regarded as an attempt to evolve Platon-
ism out of the Pentateuch, and, as such, interesting
only to the Jews, who were at this period becoming
more and more unpopular. The same prejudice may
possibly have impaired the influence of Numenius,
another semi-mystical thinker, who in the age of the
Antonines evolved a kind of Trinity, consisting of God,
whom he also calls Mind; the Son, the maker of the
world, whom he does zo¢ call the Logos; and the
world, the “grandson,” as he calls it. His Jewish
affinities are shown by his calling Plato “an Atticising
Moses.”


1 Compare Philo’s own account (2 F/accum) of the anti-Semitic outrages
at Alexandria,


86 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


It was about one hundred and fifty years after Philo
that St. Clement of Alexandria tried to do for Christi- —
anity what Philo had tried to do for Judaism. His aim is
nothing less than to construct a philosophy of religion—a
Gnosis, “ knowledge,” he calls it—-which shall “ initiate”
the educated Christian into the higher “mysteries” of
his creed. The Logos doctrine, according to which
Christ is the universal Reason,! the Light that lighteth
every man, here asserts its full rights. _Reasoned belief
is the superstructure of which faith? is the foundation.

“Knowledge,” says Clement, “is more than faith.”
“Faith is a summary knowledge of urgent truths,
suitable for people who are in a hurry; but knowledge
is scientific faith.” “If the Gnostic (the philosophical
Christian) had to choose between the knowledge of
God and eternal salvation, and it were possible to
separate two things so inseparably connected, he would
choose without the slightest hesitation the knowledge
of God.” On the wings of this “knowledge” the soul
rises above all earthly passions and desires, filled with
a calm disinterested love of God. In this state a man
can distinguish truth from falsehood, pure gold from
base metal, in matters of belief; he can see the con-
nexion of the various dogmas, and their harmony with
reason; and in reading Scripture he can penetrate
beneath the literal to the spiritual meaning. But when
Clement speaks of reason or knowledge, he does not
mean merely intellectual training. “He who would
enter the shrine must be pure,” he says, “and purity


1 There is a very explicit identification of Christ with No#s in the second
book of the A/7scel/anies : ‘‘He says, Whoso hath ears to hear, let him
hear. And who is ‘He’? Let Epicharmus answer: Nois 6pa,” etc.

* See Bigg, Christian Platonists of Alexandria, especially pp. 92, 93.


i PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 87


is to think holy things.” And again, “The more a
man loves, the more deeply does he penetrate into
God.” Purity and love, to which he adds diligent
_ study of the Scriptures, are all that is mecessary to the

highest life, though mental cultivation may be and

ought to be a great help.!

History exhibits a progressive training of mankind
by the Logos. “There is one river of truth,” he says,
“which receives tributaries from every side.”

All moral evil is caused either by ignorance or
by weakness of will. The cure for the one is know-
ledge, the cure for the other is discipline?

In his doctrine of God we find that he has fallen
a victim | to the unfortunate negative method, which he

4 calls “ analysis,” ‘It is is the method which starts with


the assertion that since God is exalted above. Being,
we cannot say what He is, but only what He is not.
Clement ‘apparently objects to saying that God is
above Being, but he strips Him of all attributes and
qualities till nothing is left but a nameless point; and
this, too, he would eliminate, for a point is a numerical
unit, and God is above the idea of the Monad. We
shall encounter this argument far too often in our
survey of Mysticism, and in writers more logical than
Clement, who allowed it to dominate their whole
theology and ethics.

The Son is the Consciousness of God. The Father
only sees the world as reflected in the Son. This bold


1 I[fgris is here used in the familiar sense (which falls far short of the
Johannine) of assent to particular dogmas, T'véois welds these together
into a consistent whole, and at the same time confers a more immediate
apprehension of truth.

2 doxnows or pags.


88 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


and perhaps dangerous doctrine seems to be Clement's
own.

Clement was not a deep or consistent thinker, and
the task which he has set himself is clearly beyond his
strength. But he gathers up most of the religious and
philosophical ideas of his time, and weaves them
together into a system which is permeated by his
cultivated, humane, and genial personality.

Especially interesting from the point of view of our
present task is the use of mystery-language which we
find everywhere in Clement. The Christian revelation is
“the Divine (or holy) mysteries,” “the Divine secrets,”
“the secret Word,” “the mysteries of the Word”;
Jesus Christ is “the Teacher of the Divine mysteries” ;
the ordinary teaching of the Church is “the lesser
mysteries”; the higher knowledge of the Gnostic, lead-
ing to full initiation (éwomrteia), “ the great mysteries,”
He borrows verbatim from a Neopythagorean docu-
ment a whole sentence, to the effect that “it is not
lawful to reveal to profane persons the mysteries of the
Word”—-the “Logos” taking the place of “the
Eleusinian goddesses.” This evident wish to claim the
Greek mystery-worship, with its technical language,
for Christianity, is very interesting, and the attempt
was by no means unfruitful. Among other ideas
which seem to come direct from the mysteries is the
notion of deification by the gift of immortality. Clement!
says categorically, To pu POeipecPar OevdtnTos peréyew
éott. This is, historically, the way in which the
doctrine of “ deification” found its way into the scheme
of Christian Mysticism. The idea of immortality as


1 Strom. Vv. 10. 63.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 89


the attribute constituting Godhead was, of course, as
familiar to the Greeks as it was strange to the Jews.

Origen supplies some valuable links in the history
of speculative Mysticism, but his mind was less inclined
to mystical modes of thought than was Clement's.
I can here only touch upon a few points which bear
directly upon our subject.

Origen follows Clement in his division of the
religious life into two classes or stages, those of faith
and knowledge. He draws too hard a line between
them, and speaks with a professorial arrogance of the
“popular, irrational faith” which leads to “somatic
Christianity,” as opposed to the “ spiritual Christianity ”
conferred by Gnosis or Wisdom. He makes it only
too clear that by “somatic Christianity” he means
that faith which is based on the gospel history. Of
teaching founded upon the historical narrative, he says,
“What better method could be devised to assist the
masses?” The Gnostic or Sage no longer needs the
crucified Christ. The “eternal” or “spiritual” Gospel,
which is his possession, “shows clearly all things
concerning the Son of God Himself, both the mysteries
shown by His words, and the things of which His acts
were the symbols.”® It is not that he denies or
doubts the truth of the Gospel history, but he feels
that events which only happened once can be of no
importance, and regards the life, death, and resurrection
of Christ as only one manifestation of an universal
law, which was really enacted, not in this fleeting world


1 See, further, Appendices B and C.
2 In Origen, codla is a higher term than ywGors.
8The Greek word is alvlypara, ‘‘riddles.” On the whole subject see


Harack, History of Dogma, vol. ti. p. 342.


90 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


of shadows, but in the eternal counsels of the Most
High. He considers that those who are thoroughly
convinced of the universal truths revealed by the
Incarnation and Atonement, need trouble themselves
no more about their particular manifestations in
time.

Origen, like the Neoplatonists, says that God is
above or beyond Being; but he is sounder than
Clement on this point, for he attributes self-conscious-
ness! and reason to God, who therefore does not
require the Second Person in order to come to Himself.
Also, since God is not wholly above reason, He can
be approached by reason, and not only by ecstatic
vision.

The Second Person of the Trinity is called by
Origen, as by Clement, “the Idea of Ideas.” He is
the spiritual activity of God, the World-Principle, the
One who is the basis of the manifold. Human souls
have fallen through sin from their union with the
Logos, who became incarnate in order to restore them
to the state which they have lost.

Everything spiritual is indestructible; and therefore
every spirit must at last return to the Good. For the
Good alone exists; evil has no existence, no substance.
This is a doctrine which we shall meet with again.
Man, he expressly asserts, cannot be consubstantial
with God, for man can change, while God is immutable.
He does not see, apparently, that, from the point of
view of the Platonist, his universalism makes man’s


* God, he says (Tom. in Matth, xiii. 569), is not the absolutely un-
limited ; for then He could not have self-consciousness: His omnipotence
is limited by His goodness and wisdom (cf. Ce/s. iii. 493).


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM gI


freedom to change an illusion, as belonging to time
only and not to eternity.

While Origen was working out his great system
of ecclesiastical dogmatic, his younger contemporary
Plotinus, outside the Christian pale, was laying the +
coping-stone on the edifice of Greek philosophy by a
scheme of idealism which must always remain one of ;
the greatest achievements of the human mind In
the history of Mysticism he holds a more undisputed
place than Plato; for some of the most characteristic
doctrines of Mysticism, which in Plato are only thrown
out tentatively, are in Plotinus welded into a compact
whole. Among the doctrines which first receive a
clear exposition in his writings are, his theory of the
Absolute, whom he calls the One, or the Good; and
his theory of the Ideas, which differs from Plato’s;
for Plato represents the mind of the World-Artist as
immanent in the Idea of the Good, while Plotinus
makes the Ideas immanent in the universal mind; in
other words, the real world (which he calls the
“intelligible world,” the sphere of the Ideas) is in the
mind of God. He also, in his doctrine of Vision,
attaches an importance to revelation which was new in
Greek philosophy. But his psychology is really the
centre of his system, and it is here that the Christian
Church and Christian Mysticism, in particular, is most
indebted to him.

The soul is with him the meeting-point of the

1T hope it is not necessary to apologise for devoting a few pages to
Plotinus in a work on Christian Mysticism. Every treatise on religious
thought in the early centuries of our era must take account of the parallel


developments of religious philosophy in the old and the new religions,
which illustrate and explain each other.


92 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


intelligible and the phenomenal. It is diffused every-
where Animals and vegetables participate in it;?
and the earth has a soul which sees and hears. The
soul is immaterial and immortal, for it belongs to the
world of real existence, and nothing that zs can cease
to be.4 The body is in the soul, rather than the soul
in the body. The soul creates the body by imposing
form on matter, which in itself is No-thing, pure in-
determination, and next door to absolute non-existence?
Space and time are only forms of our thought. The
concepts formed by the soul, by classifying the things
of sense, are said to be “Ideas unrolled and separate,”
that is, they are conceived as separate in space and
time, instead of existing all together in eternity.
The nature of the soul is triple; it is presented under
three forms, which are at the same time the three
stages of perfection which it can reach. There is first
and lowest the animal and sensual soul, which is closely
bound up with the body; then there is the logical,
reasoning soul, the distinctively uwman part; and,
lastly, there is the superhuman stage or part, in which
a man “thinks himself according to the higher intelli-
gence, with which he has become identified, knowing
himself no longer as a man, but as one who has become
altogether changed, and has transferred himself into the
higher region.” The soul is thus “made one with


1 Enn. i. 8. 14, obdév éorw 5 buoupdy éore Wuxfs.

VE nn i229 )5 1.7.4 3 Eun. iv. 4. 26. 4 Enn. iv. 1. 1.

5 Matter is ddoyos, oxud Adyou Kal Exmrwos, Hunn. vi. 3. 7 3 elSwrov car
gdvracua wyKouv Kal vrocrdcews pects, Enn. iii. 6. 7. If matter were
nothing, it could not desire to be something; it is only no-thing —
dmretpla, dopirrla.

° These three stages correspond to the three stages in the mystical laddes
which appear in nearly all the Christian mystics.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 93


Intelligence without losing herself; so that they two
are both one and two.” This is exactly Eckhart’s
doctrine of the funkelein, if we identify Plotinus’ Nods
with Eckhart’s “God,” as we may fairly do. The
soul is not altogether incarnate in the body; part of
it remains above, in the intelligible world, whither it
desires to return in its entirety.

The world is an image of the Divine Mind, which is
itself a reflection of the One. It is therefore not bad
or evil. ‘What more beautiful image of the Divine
could there be,” he asks, “than this world, except the
world yonder?” And so it is a great mistake to shut
our eyes to the world around us, “and all beautiful
things.”! The love of beauty will lead us up a long
way—up to the point when the love of the Good is
ready to receive us. Only we must not let ourselves
be entangled by sensuous beauty. Those who do not
quickly rise beyond this first stage, to contemplate
“ideal form, the universal mould,” share the fate of
Hylas; they are engulfed in a swamp, from which
they never emerge.

The universe resembles a vast chain, of which every
being is a link. It may also be compared to rays of
light shed abroad from one centre. Everything flowed
from this centre, and everything desires to flow back
towards it. God draws all men and all things towards


1The passages in which Plotinus (following Plato) bids us mount by
means of the beauty of the external world, do not contradict those other
passages in which he bids us ‘‘turn from things without to look within”
(Enn, iv. 8. 1). Remembering that postulate of all Mysticism, that we
can only know a thing by Jecoming it, we see that we can only know the
world by finding it in ourselves, that is, by cherishing those ‘‘ best hours of
the mind” (as Bacon says) when we are lifted above ourselves into union


with the world-spirit.


——


———


94 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Himself as a magnet draws iron, with a constant
unvarying attraction. This theory of emanation is
often sharply contrasted with that of evolution, and
is supposed to be discredited by modern science; but
that is only true if the emanation is regarded as a
process in time, which for the Neoplatonist it is not.*
In fact, Plotinus uses the word “evolution” to explain
the process of nature.”

The whole universe is one vast organism,® and if


one member suffer, all the members suffer with it.4


This is why a “faint movement of sympathy ”® stirs
within us at the sight of any living creature. So
Origen says, “ As our body, while consisting of many
members, is yet held together by one soul, so the
universe is to be thought of as an immense living
being, which is held together by one soul—the power
and the Logos of God.” All existence is drawn
upwards towards God by a kind of centripetal attrac-
tion, which is unconscious in the lower, half conscious
in the higher organisms.

Christian Neoplatonism tended to identify the Logos,
as the Second Person of the Trinity, with the Nods,
“Mind” or “Intelligence,” of Plotinus, and rightly;
but in Plotinus the word Logos has a less exalted
position, being practically what we call “law,” regarded
as a vital force.

1 Plotinus guards against this misconception of his meaning, Ann. v,
1. 6, éxroday 5é hutv gorw yéveots h ev xpbvy.

2 toh ekedurrouévn, Enn, i. 4. 1.

8 See especially Hm. iv. 4. 32, 45.


4 Enn. iv. 5. 3, cupmabes 7d Sov rb5e 7d way éavrw; iv. 9. 1, bare €uod
waddvros cwaicbdvecOar Td Tay.


5 Eun. iv. 5. 2, cupmddeva duvopd.
6 See Bigg, Meoplatontsm, pp. 203, 204. He shows that with the Stoics,


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 95


Plotinus’ Trinity are the One or the Good, who is
above existence, God as the Absolute; the Intelligence,
who occupies the sphere of real existence, organic unity
comprehending multiplicity —the One-Many, as he
calls it, or, as we might call it, God as thought, God
existing in and for Himself; and the Soul, the One
and Many, occupying the sphere of appearance or
imperfect reality—-God as action. Soulless matter,
which only exists as a logical abstraction, is arrived at
by looking at things “in disconnexion, dull and spirit-
less.” It is the sphere of the “merely many,” and is
zero, as “the One who is not” is Infinity.

The Intelligible World is timeless and spaceless, and
contains the archetypes of the Sensible World. The
Sensible World is our view of the Intelligible World.
When we say it does not exist, we mean that we shall
not always see it in this form. The “Ideas” are the
ultimate form in which things are regarded by Intelli-
gence, or by God. Nods is described as at once ordous
and «ivnows, that is, it is unchanging itself, but the
whole cosmic process, which is ever in flux, is eternally
present to it as a process.

Evil is disintegration In its essence it is not
merely unreal, but unreality as such. It can only
appear in conjunction with some low degree of good-
ness, which suggests to Plotinus the fine saying that


who were Pantheists, the Logos was regarded asa first cause; while with
the Neoplatonists, who were Theists and Transcendentalists, it was a
secondary cause. In Plotinus, the Intelligence (Nods) is “‘ King” (Zzz.
v. 3. 3), and ‘‘the law of Being” (Zz. v. 9. 5). But the Johannine
Logos is both immanent and transcendent, When Erigena says, ‘‘ Certius
cognoscas verbum Naturam omnium esse,” he gives a true but incomplete
account of the Nature of the Second Person of the Trinity.
1 See especially the interesting passage, Zvz. i. 8. 3.


96 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


“vice at its worst is still human, being mixed with
something opposite to itself.” 1

The “lower virtues,” as he calls the duties of the
average citizen, are not only purgative, but teach us
the principles of measure and rule, which are Divine
characteristics. This is immensely important, for it
is the point where Platonism and Asiatic Mysticism
finally part company.®

But in Plotinus, as in his Christian imitators, they
do ot part company. The “marching orders” of the
true mystic are those given by God to Moses on
Sinai, “See that thou make all things according to
the pattern showed thee in the mount.”* But
Plotinus teaches that, as the sensible world is a
shadow of the intelligible, so is action a shadow of
contemplation, suited to weak-minded persons. This
is turning the tables on the “man of action” in
good earnest; but it is false Platonism and false
Mysticism. It leads to the heartless doctrine, quite
unworthy of the man, that public calamities are to
the wise man only stage tragedies—or even stage


1 Enn. i. 8. 13, rt dvOpwrikdv } kaxla, peueypevn Tue évayrly.

2 The ‘‘ civil virtues” are the four cardinal virtues. Plotinus says that
justice is mainly ‘‘ minding one’s business” (olketorpayla). ‘‘The purify-
ing virtues” deliver us from sin; but 4 orovdh ov tw duaprias elvar, dd\rd
Gedv elvat.

® Compare Hegel’s criticism of Schelling, in the latter’s Asiatic period,
‘This so-called wisdom, instead of being yielded up to the influence of
Divinity dy its contempt of all proportion and definiteness, does really
nothing but give full play to accident and caprice. Nothing was ever
produced by such a process better than mere dreams” (Vorrede zur
Phinomenologie, p. 6).

4 Heb. viii. 5.

5 Enn. iii. 8. 4, 8rav dobevqowow els rd Oewpelv, oxdv Oewplas Kat dbyou


Thy wpakww mowotvras. Cf. Amiel’s Journal, p. 4, ‘‘action is coarsened
thought.”


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 97


comedies.| The moral results of this self-centred
individualism are exemplified by the medieval saint
and visionary, Angela of Foligno, who congratulates
herself on the deaths of her mother, husband, and
children, “ who were great obstacles in the way of God.”

A few words must be said about the doctrine of
ecstasy in Plotinus. He describes the conditions
under which the vision is granted in exactly the same
manner as some of the Christian mystics, eg. St. Juan
of the Cross. “The soul when possessed by intense
love of Him divests herself of all form which she has,
even of that which is derived from Intelligence; for it
is impossible, when in conscious possession of any other
attribute, either to behold or to be harmonised with
Him. Thus the soul must be neither good nor bad
nor aught else, that she may receive Him only, Him
alone, she alone.” While she is in this state, the One
suddenly appears, “with nothing between,” “and they
are no more two but one; and the soul is no more
conscious of the body or of the mind, but knows that
she has what she desired, that she is where no decep-
tion can come, and that she would not exchange her
bliss for all the heaven of heavens.”

What is the source of this strange aspiration to rise
above Reason and Intelligence, which is for Plotinus
the highest category of Being, and to come out “on the
other side of Being” (éméxewa ths ovcias)? Plotinus
says himself elsewhere that “he who would rise above
Reason, falls outside it”; and yet he regards it as the


1 Byun, iii. 2. 15, vroxploes and walyov; and see iv. 3. 32, on love
of family and country.
2 Enn. vi. 7. 34>
7


98 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


highest reward of the philosopher-saint to converse
with the hypostatised Abstraction who transcends all
distinctions. The vision of the One is no part of
his philosophy, but is a mischievous accretion. For
though the “superessential Absolute” may be a logical
necessity, we cannot make it, even in the most
transcendental manner, an object of sense, without
depriving it of its Absoluteness, What is really
apprehended is not the Absolute, but a kind of
“form of formlessness,” an idea not of the Infinite,
but of the Indefinite! It is then impossible to
distinguish “the One,’ who is said to be above all
distinctions, from undifferentiated matter, the form-
less No-thing, which Plotinus puts at the lowest end
of the scale.

I believe that the Neoplatonic “vision” owes its
place in the system to two very different causes.
First, there was the direct influence of Oriental philo-
sophy of the Indian type, which tries to reach the
universal by wiping out all the boundary-lines of the
particular, and to gain infinity by reducing self and
the world to zero. Of this we shall say more when


1Tt would be an easy and rather amusing task to illustrate these
and other aberrations of speculative Mysticism from Herbert Spencer’s
philosophy. £#.g., he says that, though we cannot know the Absolute, we
may have ‘‘an indefinite consciousness of it.” ‘‘It is impossible to give
to this consciousness any qualitative or quantitative expression whatever,”
and yet it is quite certain that we have it. Herbert Spencer’s Absolute is,
in fact, matter without form. This would seem to identify it rather with
the all but non-existing ‘‘matter” of Plotinus (see Bigg, Weoplatonism,
p. 199), than with the superessential ‘‘One’’; but the later Neoplatonists
found themselves compelled to call dof extremes 7d wh dv.  Plotinus
struggles hard against this conclusion, which threatens to make shipwreck
of his Platonism. ‘‘ Hierotheus,” whose sympathies are really with Indian
nihilism, welcomes it.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 99


we come to Dionysius. And, secondly, the blank
trance was a real psychical experience, quite
different from the “visions” which we have already
mentioned. Evidence is abundant; but I will content
myself with one quotation." In Amiel’s /ournal* we
have the following record of such a trance: “Like a
dream which trembles and dies at the first glimmer of
dawn, all my past, all my present, dissolve in me, and
fall away from my consciousness at the moment when
it returns upon myself. I feel myself then stripped
and empty, like a convalescent who remembers nothing.
My travels, my reading, my studies, my projects, my
hopes, have faded from my mind. All my faculties
drop away from me like a cloak that one takes off,
like the chrysalis case of a larva. I feel myself return-
ing into a more elementary form.” But Amiel, instead
of expecting the advent of “the One” while in this
state, feels that “the pleasure of it is deadly, inferior
in all respects to the joys of action, to the sweetness
of love, to the beauty of enthusiasm, or to the sacred
savour of accomplished duty.” ?

We may now return to the Christian Platonists.
We find in Methodius the interesting doctrine that
the indwelling Christ constantly repeats His passion

1 The following advice to directors, quoted by Ribet, may be added:
‘‘ Director valde attendat ad personas languidze valetudinis. Si tales per-
sone a Deo in quamdam quietis orationem eleventur, contingit ut in omni-
bus exterioribus sensibus certum defectum ac speciem quamdam deliquii
experiantur cum magna interna suavitate, quod extasim aut raptum esse
facillime putant. Cum Dei Spiritui resistere nolint, deliquio illi totas se
tradunt, et per multas horas, cum gravissimo valetudinis preeiudicio in tali
mentis stupiditate persistunt.” Genuine ecstasy, according to these
authorities, seldom lasted more than half an hour, though one Spanish


writer speaks of an hour.
2 Mrs, Humphry Ward’s translation, p. 72.


100 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


in remembrance, “for not otherwise could the Church
continually conceive believers, and bear them anew
through the bath of regeneration, unless Christ were
repeatedly to die, emptying Himself for the sake of
each individual.” “Christ must be born mentally
(vontés) in every individual,” and each individual saint,
by participating in Christ, “is born as a Christ.” This
is exactly the language of Eckhart and Tauler, and
it is first clearly heard in the mouth of Methodius.
The new features are the great prominence given to
immanence—the mystical union as an opus operatum,
and the individualistic conception of the relation of
Christ to the soul.

Of the Greek Fathers whe followed Athanasius, I
have only room to mention Gregory of Nyssa, who
defends the historical incarnation in true mystical
fashion by an appeal to spiritual experience. “We
all believe that the Divine is in everything, pervading
and embracing it, and dwelling in it. Why then do
men take offence at the dispensation of the mystery
taught by the Incarnation of God, who is not, even
now, outside of mankind? ... If the form of the
Divine presence is not now the same, we are as much
agreed that God is among us to-day, as that He was
in the world then.” He argues in another place that
all other species of spiritual beings must have had
their Incarnations of Christ; a doctrine which was


1 But we should not forget that the author of the Epistle to Diognetus
speaks of the Logos as mdvrore véos év ayiwy kapdlats yevymuevos, In St.
Augustine we find it in a rather surprisingly bold form; cf. 7 Joh. tract.
21,n. 8: ‘*Gratulemur et grates agamus non solum nos Christianos factos
esse, sed Christum . .. Admiramini, gaudete: Christus facti sumus.”
But this is really quite different from saying, ‘‘ Ego Christus factus sum.”


8


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM IOI


afterwards condemned, but which seems to follow
necessarily from the Logos doctrine. These argu-
ments show very clearly that for the Greek theologians
Christ is a cosmic principle, immanent in the world,
though not confined by it; and that the scheme of
salvation is regarded as part of the constitution of the
universe, which is animated and sustained by the same
Power who was fully manifested in the Incarnation.
The question has been much debated, whether the
influence of Persian and Indian thought can be traced
in Neoplatonism, or whether that system was purely
Greek It is a quite hopeless task to try to disen-
tangle the various strands of thought which make up
the web of Alexandrianism. But there is no doubt
that the philosophers of Asia were held in reverence at
this period. Origen, in justifying an esoteric mystery-
religion for the educated, and a mythical religion for
the vulgar, appeals to the example of the “ Persians
and Indians.” And Philostratus, in his life of Apol-
lonius of Tyana, says, or makes his hero say, that
while all wish to live in the presence of God, “the
Indians alone succeed in doing so.” And certainly
there are parts of Plotinus, and still more of his
successors, which strongly suggest Asiatic influences.?
When we turn from Alexandria to Syria, we find
Orientalism more rampant. Speculation among the
Syrian monks of the third, fourth, and fifth centuries


1 Greek”? must here be taken to include the Hellenised Jews. Those
who are best qualified to speak on Jewish philosophy believe that it
exercised a strong influence at Alexandria.

2 Proclus used to say that a philosopher ought to show no exclusiveness
in his worship, but to be the hierophant of the whole world. This
eclecticism was not confined to cultus.


102 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


was perhaps more unfettered and more audacious than
in any other branch of Christendom at any period.
Our knowledge of their theories is very limited, but
one strange specimen has survived in the book of
Hierotheus, which the canonised Dionysius praises in
glowing terms as an inspired oracle—indeed, he pro-
fesses that his own object in writing was merely to
popularise the teaching of his master. The book
purports to be the work of Hierotheus, a holy man
converted by St. Paul, and an instructor of the real
Dionysius the Areopagite. A strong case has been
made out for believing the real author to be a Syrian
mystic, named Stephen bar Sudaili, who lived late in
the fifth century. If this theory is correct, the date of
Dionysius will have to be moved somewhat later than
it has been the custom to fix it. The book of the
holy Hierotheus on “the hidden mysteries of the
Divinity ” has been but recently discovered, and only a
summary of it has as yet been made public. But it is
of great interest and importance for our subject,
because the author has no fear of being accused of
Pantheism or any other heresy, but develops his
particular form of Mysticism to its logical conclusions
with unexampled boldness. He will show us better
even than his pupil Dionysius whither the method of
“analysis” really leads us.

The system of Hierotheus is not exactly Pantheism,
but Pan-Nihilism. Everything is an emanation from
the Chaos of bare indetermination which he calls God,
and everything will return thither. There are three


? This account of ‘‘ Hierotheus” is, of course, taken from Frothingham’s
most interesting monograph,


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 103


periods of existence—(1) the present world, which is evil,
and is characterised by motion ; (2) the progressive union
with Christ, who is all and in all—this is the period of
rest; (3) the period of fusion of all things in the
Absolute. The three Persons of the Trinity, he dares
to say, will then be swailowed up, and even the devils
are thrown into the same melting-pot. Consistently
with mystical principles, these three world-periods are
also phases in the development of individual souls. In
the first stage the mind aspires towards its first prin-
ciples; in the second it becomes Christ, the universal
Mind; in the third its personality is wholly merged.
The greater part of the book is taken up with the
adventures of the Mind in climbing the ladder of
perfection; it is a kind of theosophical romance, much
more elaborate and fantastic than the “ revelations” of
medizval mystics. The author professes to have him-
self enjoyed the ecstatic union more than once, and his
method of preparing for it is that of the Quietists:
“To me it seems right to speak without words, and
understand without knowledge, that which is above
words and knowledge; this I apprehend to be nothing
but the mysterious silence and mystical quiet which
destroys consciousness and dissolves forms, Seek,
therefore, silently and mystically, that perfect and
primitive union with the Arch-Good.”

We cannot follow the “ascent of the Mind” through
its various transmutations. At one stage it is crucified,
“with the soul on the right and the body on the left” ;
it is buried for three days; it descends into Hades ;!


1So Ruysbroek says, ‘‘We must not remain on the top of the ladder,
but must descend.”


104 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


then it ascends again, till it reaches Paradise, and is
united to the tree of life: then it descends below all
essences, and sees a formless luminous essence, and
marvels that it is the same essence that it has seen on
high. Now it comprehends the truth, that God is-
consubstantial with the Universe, and that there are
no real distinctions anywhere. So it ceases to wander.
“ All these doctrines,” concludes the seer, “ which are
unknown even to angels, have I disclosed to thee, my
son” (Dionysius, probably). “Know, then, that all
nature will be confused with the Father—that nothing
will perish or be destroyed, but all will return, be
sanctified, united, and confused. Thus God will be all
in all,”

There can be no difficulty in classifying this Syrian
philosophy of religion. It is the ancient religion of
the Brahmins, masquerading in clothes borrowed from
Jewish allegorists, half-Christian Gnostics, Manicheans,
Platonising Christians, and pagan Neoplatonists. We
will now see what St. Dionysius makes of this system,
which he accepts as from the hand of one who has
“not only learned, but felt the things of God.” 2

The date and nationality of Dionysius are still
matters of dispute. Mysticism changes so little that


1 Another description of the process of drAwois may be found in the
curious work of Ibn Tophail, translated by Ockley, and much valued by
the Quakers, Zhe Improvement of Human Reason, exhibited in the Life
of Hai Ein Tophail, newly traslated by Simon Ockley, 1708.

2 ob udvov paddy addra Kal rabdv Te Oeia.

8 See Harnack, vol. iv. pp. 282, 283. Frothingham’s theory necessitates
a later date for Dionysius than that which Harnack believes to be most
probable ; the latter is in favour of placing him in the second half of the


fourth century. The writings of Dionysius are quoted not much later than
500.


SO a


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 10s


it is impossible to determine the question by internal
evidence, and for our purposes it is not of great import-
ance. The author was a monk, perhaps a Syrian
monk: he probably perpetrated a deliberate fraud—
a pious fraud, in his own opinion—by suppressing his
own individuality, and fathering his books on St. Paul’s
Athenian convert. The success of the imposture is
amazing, even in that uncritical age, and gives much
food for reflection. The sixth century saw nothing
impossible in a book full of the later Neoplatonic
theories—those of Proclus rather than Plotinus 1—
having been written in the first century. And the
mediaeval Church was ready to believe that this strange
semi-pantheistic Mysticism dropped from the lips of
St. Paul?

Dionysius is a theologian, not a visionary like his
master Hierotheus. His main object is to present
Christianity in the guise of a Platonic mysteriosophy,
and he uses the technical terms of the mysteries when-
ever he can’ His philosophy is that of his day—the
later Neoplatonism, with its strong Oriental affinities.

Beginning with the Trinity, he identifies God the
Father with the Neoplatonic Monad, and describes Him
as “superessential Indetermination,” “ super - rational
Unity,” “the Unity which unifies every unity,” “super-
essential Essence,” “irrational Mind,” “unspoken


1 #.g., he agrees with Iamblichus and Proclus (in opposition to Plotinus)
that ‘the One” is exalted above ‘‘ Goodness.”

2 At the present time the more pious opinion among Romanists seems to be
that the writings are genuine ; but Schram admits that ‘‘ there isa dispute”
about their date, and some Roman Catholic writers frankly give them up.

8 F.g., kdbapors, pwtiopss, piyors, éromrela, Oéwots ; leporeheoral and
pvoraryoryol (of the bishops), ¢wrierixol (of the priests), kaOaprixol (of the
deacons).


106 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Word,” “the absolute No-thing which is above all
_existence.”! Even now he is not satisfied with the
tortures to which he has subjected the Greek language.
«No monad or triad,” he says, “can express the all-
transcending hiddenness of the all-transcending super-
essentially super-existing super-Deity.”? But even in
the midst of this barbarous jargon he does not quite
forget his Plato. “The Good and Beautiful,” he says,
“are the cause of all things that are; and all things
love and aspire to the Good and Beautiful, which are,
indeed, the sole objects of their desire.” “Since, then,
the Absolute Good and Beautiful is honoured by
eliminating all qualities from it, the non-existent also (ré
#7) Ov) must participate in the Good and Beautiful.”
This pathetic absurdity shows what we are driven to if
we try to graft Indian nihilism upon the Platonic doctrine
of ideas. Plotinus tried hard to show that his First
Person was very different from his lowest category—
non-existent “matter”; but if we once allow our-
selves to define the Infinite as the Indefinite, the
conclusion which he deprecated cannot long be
averted.

“God is the Being of all that is.” Since, then,
Being is identical with God or Goodness, evil, as such,
does not exist; it only exists by its participation in
good. Evil, he says, is not in things which exist; a
good tree cannot bear evil fruit; it must, therefore,
have another origin. But this is dualism, and must be

1 bmepovotos dopisrla—imép vody évirns—évas évorords drdons évddos—


Umepovotos ovcla Kat vods dvbnros Kal Adyos Appyros—ddoyla Kal dvonola Kar
dvevupla—atrd 5é uh dv ws wdons ovolas éréxewa.


7 ovdeula } wovds #) rpids ed-yer hy bmép dvra Kpugibryra Ths vrép ThyTE
irepovolws bmepovons WrepOedbrnros.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 107


rejected Nor is evil in God, nor of God; nor in the
angels ; nor in the human soul; nor in the brutes; nor
in inanimate nature; nor in matter. Having thus
hunted evil out of every corner of the universe, he asks
—Is evil, then, simply privation of good? But priva-
tion is not evil in itself. No; evil must arise from
“disorderly and inharmonious motion.” As dirt has
been defined as matter in the wrong place, so evil is
good in the wrong place. It arises by a kind of
accident ; “all evil is done with the object of gaining
some good; no one does evil as evil.” Evil in itself is
that which is “ nohow, nowhere, and no thing”; “God
sees evil as good.” Students of modern philosophy
will recognise a theory which has found influential
advocates in our own day: that evil needs only to be
supplemented, rearranged, and transmuted, in order to
take its place in the universal harmony.?

All things flow out from God, and all will ultimately
return to Him. The first emanation is the Thing in
itself (avTd 76 elvav), which corresponds to the Plotinian
Novs, and to the Johannine Logos. He also calls it
“Life in itself” and “Wisdom in itself” (atdtofwm7,
avtocodia). Of this he says, “So then the Divine
Wisdom in knowing itself will know all things. It
will know the material immaterially, and the divided
inseparably, and the many as one (éaiws), knowing
all things by the standard of absolute unity.” These


1 yovas éorar dons Suddos dpx7 is stated by Dionysius as an axiom.

2 See especially Bradley’s Appearance and Reality, some chapters of
which show a certain sympathy with Oriental speculative Mysticism. The
theory set forth in the text must not be confounded with true pantheism, to
which every phenomenon is equally Divine as it stands. See below, at the
end of this Lecture.


108 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


important speculations are left undeveloped by Dio-
nysius, who merely states them dogmatically. The
universe is evolved from the Son, whom he identifies
with the “Thing in itself,’ “Wisdom,” or “Life in
itself.” In creation “the One is said to become multi-
form.” The world is a necessary process of God’s
being. He created it “as the sun shines,” “without
premeditation or purpose.” The Father is simply
One; the Son has also plurality, namely, the words
(or reasons) which make existence (rods ovcvotrovods
Aéyous), which theology calls fore-ordinations (mpoopic-
povs). But he does not teach that all separate exist-
ences will ultimately be merged in the One. The
highest Unity gives to all the power of striving, on
the one hand, to share in the One; on the other, to
persist in their own individuality. And in more than
one passage he speaks of God as a Unity comprehend-
ing, not abolishing differences. “God is before all
things”; “Being is in Him, and He is not in Being.”
Thus Dionysius tries to safeguard the transcendence of
God, and to escape Pantheism. The outflowing process
is appropriated by the mind by the posztzve method—
the downward path through finite existences: its con-
clusion is, “God is All.” The return journey is by the
negative road, that of ascent to God by abstraction and
analysis: its conclusion is, “All is not God.”2 The


1See De Div. Nom. iv. 8; xi. 3.

2 Dionysius distinguishes ¢hvee movements of the human mind—the
circular, wherein the soul returns in upon itself; the obligue, which
includes all knowledge acquired by reasoning, research, etc.; and the
direct, in which we rise to higher truths by using outward things as
symbols. The last two he regards as inferior to the ‘‘ circular” movement,
which he also calls ‘‘ simplification ” (da)uwvts).


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 109


negative path is the high road of a large school of
mystics; I will say more about it presently. The
mystic, says Dionysius, “must leave behind all things
both in the sensible and in the intelligible worlds, till
he enters into the darkness of nescience that is truly
mystical.” This “ Divine darkness,” he says elsewhere,
“is the light unapproachable” mentioned by St. Paul,
“a deep but dazzling darkness,” as Henry Vaughan
calls it. It is dark through excess of light This
doctrine really renders nugatory what he has said about
the persistence of distinctions after the restitution of all
things; for as “all colours agree in the dark,” so, for
us, in proportion as we attain to true knowledge, all
distinctions are lost in the absolute.

The soul is bipartite. The higher portion sees the
“Divine images” directly, the lower by means of
symbols, The latter are not to be despised, for they
are “true impressions of the Divine characters,” and
necessary steps, which enable us to “mount to the one
undivided truth by analogy.” This is the way in
which we should use the Scriptures. They have a
symbolic truth and beauty, which is intelligible only
to those who can free themselves from the “ puerile
myths”? (the language is startling in a saint of the
Church !) in which they are sometimes embedded.

Dionysius has much to say about love,’ but he uses


1 The highest stage (he says) is to reach rdv bméppwrov yrdpov Kal 3
aPreplas kal d-yrwolas ety Kal yrovat,

2 roduGoa Oeordacla and madapiwdhs gaytacla are phrases which he
applies to Old Testament narratives.

3 As a specimen of his language, we may quote gor 5é éxararixds 4
Ocios pws, ovx é&v éaurGy elvas rods épacras, GAd Tov épwudvev (De Div.


Nom. iv. 13).


1 ® fe) CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


the word épws, which is carefully avoided in the New
Testament. He admits that the Scriptures “often
use” dydan, but justifies his preference for the other
word by quoting St. Ignatius, who says of Christ, “ My
Love (épws) is crucified.”! Divine Love, he finely
says, is “an eternal circle, from goodness, through
goodness, and to goodness.”

The medieval mystics were steeped in Dionysius,
though his system received from them certain modifica-
tions under the influence of Aristotelianism. He is
therefore, for us, a very important figure; and there
are two parts of his scheme which, I think, require
fuller consideration than has been given them in this
very slight sketch. I mean the “negative road” to
God, and the pantheistic tendency.

The theory that we can approach God only by
analysis or abstraction has already been briefly com-
mented on. It is no invention of Dionysius. Plotinus
uses similar language, though his view of God as the
fulness of all fe prevented him from following the
negative path with thoroughness. But in Proclus we
find the phrases, afterwards so common, about “ sinking
into the Divine Ground,” “forsaking the manifold for
the One,” and so forth. Basilides, long before, evi-
dently carried the doctrine to its extremity: “We must
not even call God ineffable,” he says, “since this is to


1 I am inclined to agree with Dr. Bigg (Bampton Lectures, Introduction,
pp. viii, ix), that Dionysius and the later mystics are right in their interpre-
tation of this passage. Bishop Lightfoot and some other good scholars take
it to mean, ‘‘ My earthly affections are crucified.” See the discussion in
Lightfoot’s edition of Ignatius, and in Bigg’s Introduction. I am not
aware how the vindicators of ‘‘ Dionysius” explain the curious fact that
he had read Ignatius !


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 111


make an assertion about Him; He is above every
name that is named.”! It was a commonplace of
Christian instruction to say that “in Divine matters
there is great wisdom in confessing our ignorance”
—this phrase occurs in Cyril’s catechism? But con-
fessing our ignorance is a very different thing from
refusing to make any positive statements about God.
It is true that all our language about God must be
inadequate and symbolic; but that is no reason for
discarding all symbols, as if we could in that way know
God as He knows Himself. At the bottom, the
doctrine that God can be described only by negatives
is neither Christian nor Greek, but belongs to the old
religion of India. Let me try to state the argument
and its consequence in a clear form. Since God is
the Infinite, and the Infinite is the antithesis of the
finite, every attribute which can be affirmed of a finite
being may be safely denied of God. Hence God can
only be described by negatives; He can only be as-
covered by stripping off all the qualities and attributes
which veil Him; He can only be reached by divesting
ourselves of all the distinctions of personality, and sink-
ing or rising into our “uncreated nothingness”; and
He can only be imitated by aiming at an abstract
spirituality, the passionless “apathy” of an universal
which is nothing in particular. Thus we see that the
whole of those developments of Mysticism which despise
symbols, and hope to see God by shutting the eye of

1 See Harnack, vol. iii. pp. 242, 243. St. Augustine accepts this state-
ment, which he repeats word for word.

2 Compare also Hooker: ‘‘ Of Thee our fittest eloquence is silence, while


we confess without confessing that Thy glory is unsearchable and beyond
our reach,”


{12 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


sense, hang together. They all follow from the false
notion of God as the abstract Unity transcending, or
rather excluding, all distinctions. Of course, it is not
intended to exclude distinctions, but to rise above them ;
but the process of abstraction, or subtraction, as it
really is, can never lead us to “the One.”! The only
possible unification with such an Infinite is the aréppwv
viypetos Umves of Nirvana? Nearly all that repels us
in medieval religious life—its “ other-worldliness” and
passive hostility to civilisation—the emptiness of its
ideal life—its maltreatment of the body— its dispar-
agement of family life—the respect which it paid to in-
dolent contemplation—-springs from this one root. But
since no one who remains a Christian can exhibit the
results of this theory in their purest form, I shall take the
liberty of quoting a few sentences from a pamphlet written
by a native Indian judge who I believe is still living.
His object is to explain and commend to Western
readers the mystical philosophy of his own country :8’—

“He who in perfect rest rises from the body and
attains the highest light, comes forth in his own proper
form. This is the immortal soul. The ascent is by


1 Unity is a characteristic or simple condition of real being, but it is not
in itself a principle of being, so that ‘‘the One” could exist substantially
by itself. To personify the barest of abstractions, call it God, and then
try to imitate it, would seem too absurd a fallacy to have misled any one,
if history did not show that it has had a long and vigorous life.

?Cf. Sir W. Hamilton (Déscussions, p. 21): ‘ By abstraction we an-
nihilate the object, and by abstraction we annihilate the subject of con-
sciousness. But what remains? Nothing. When we attempt to conceive
it as reality, we hypostatise the zero;”

* The Hon. P. Ramanathan, C.M.G., Attorney-General of Ceylon,
The Mystery of Godliness. This interesting essay was brought to my


notice by the kindness of the Rev. G. U. Pope, D.D., University Teacher
in Tamil and Telugu at Oxford,


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 113


the ladder of one’s thoughts. To know God, one must
first know one’s own spirit in its purity, unspotted
by thought. The soul is hidden behind the veil of
thought, and only when thought is worn off, becomes
visible to itself. This stage is called knowledge of the
soul. Next is realised knowledge of God, who rises
from the bosom of the soul. This is the end of
progress; differentiation between self and others has
ceased, All the world of thought and senses is melted
into an ocean without waves or current. This dis-
solution of the world is also known as the death of the
sinful or worldly ‘I, which veils the true Ego. Then
the formless Being of the Deity is seen in the regions
of pure consciousness beyond the veil of thought.
Consciousness is wholly distinct from thought and
senses; it knows them; they do not know it. The
only proof is an appeal to spiritual experience.” In
the highest stage one is absolutely inert, “knowing
nothing in particular.” }

Most of this would have been accepted as precious
truth by the medizval Church mystics? The words


1 Hunt’s summary of the philosophy of the Vedanta Sara (Pantheism and
Christianity, p. 19) may help to illustrate further this type of thought.
“‘ Brahma is called the universal soul, of which all human souls are a part.
These are likened to a succession of sheaths, which envelop each other
like the coats of an onion. The human soul frees itself by knowledge from
the sheath. But what is this knowledge? To know that the human
intellect and all its faculties are ignorance and delusion, This is to
take away the sheath, and to find that God is all. Whatever is not
Brahma is nothing. So long as a man perceives himself to be any-
thing, he is nothing. When he discovers that his supposed individuality
is no individuality, then he has knowledge. Man must strive to
rid himself of himself as an object of thought. He must be only a
subject. As subject he is Brahma, while the objective world is mere


phenomenon.” 5
2 We may compare with them the following maxims, which, enclosed in


8


114 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


nakedness, darkness, nothingness, passivity, apathy,
and the like, fill their pages. We shall find that this
time-honoured phraseology was adhered to long after
the grave moral dangers which beset this type of
Mysticism had been recognised. Tauler, for instance,
who lays the axe to the root of the tree by saying,
“Christ never arrived at the emptiness of which these
men talk,” repeats the old jargon for pages together.
German Mysticism really rested on another basis, and
when Luther had the courage to break with ecclesi-
astical tradition, the via negativa rapidly disappeared
within the sphere of his influence.

But it held sway for a long time—so long that we
cannot complain if many have said, “This is the
essence of Mysticism.” Mysticism is such a vague
word, that one must not quarrel with any “private
interpretation” of it; but we must point out that this
limitation excludes the whole army of symbolists, a
school which, in Europe at least, has shown more
vitality than introspective Mysticism. I regard the
via negativa in metaphysics, religion, and ethics as the


an outline of Mount Carmel, form the frontispiece to an early edition of
St. Juan of the Cross :—

** To enjoy Infinity, do not desire to taste of finite things.

‘*To arrive at the knowledge of Infinity, do not desire the knowledge of
finite things.

**To reach to the possession of Infinity, desire to possess nothing.

**To be included in the being of Infinity, desire to be thyself nothing
whatever.

‘‘The moment that thou art resting in a creature, thou art ceasing to
advance towards Infinity.

‘*TIn order to unite thyself to Infinity, thou must surrender finite things
without reserve.”

After reading such maxims, we shall probably be inclined to think that
“‘the Infinite” as a name for God might be given up with advantage.
There is nothing Divine about a ¢adula rasa.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 115


great accident of Christian Mysticism. The break-up
of the ancient civilisation, with the losses and miseries
which it brought upon humanity, and the chaos of
brutal barbarism in which Europe weltered for some
centuries, caused a widespread pessimism and world-
weariness which is foreign to the temper of Europe,
and which gave way to energetic and full-blooded
activity in the Renaissance and Reformation. Asiatic
Mysticism is the natural refuge of men who have lost
faith in civilisation, but will not give up faith in God.
“Let us fly hence to our dear country!” We hear
the words already in Plotinus—nay, even in Plato,
The sun still shone in heaven, but on earth he was
eclipsed. Mysticism cuts too deep to allow us to live
comfortably on the surface of life; and so all “the
heavy and the weary weight of all this unintelligible
world” pressed upon men and women till they were fain
to throw it off, and seek peace in an invisible world of
which they could not see even a shadow round about them.

But I do not think that the negative road is a pure
error. There is a negative side in religion, both in
thought and practice. We are first impelled to seek
the Infinite by the limitations of the finite, which
appear to the soul as bonds and prison walls. It is
natural first to think of the Infinite as that in which
these barriers are done away. And in practice we
must die daily, if our inward man is to be daily
renewed. We must die to our lower self, not once
only but continually, so that we may rise on stepping
stones of many dead selves to higher things... We


1 Cf. Richard of St. Victor, de Prep, Anim. 83, ‘“‘ascendat per seme-
tipsum super semetipsum.”


116 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


must die to our first superficial views of the world
around us, nay, even to our first views of God and
religion, unless the childlike in our faith is by arrest
of growth to become the childish. All the good things
of life have first to be renounced, and then given back
to us, before they can be really ours. It was neces-
sary that these truths should be not only taught, but
lived through. The individual has generally to pass
through the quagmire of the “everlasting No,” before
he can set his feet on firm ground; and the Christian
races, it seems, were obliged to go through the same
experience. Moreover, there is a sense in which all
moral effort aims at destroying the conditions of its
own existence, and so ends logically in self-negation.
Our highest aim as regards ourselves is to eradicate,
not only sin, but temptation. We do not feel that we
have won the victory until we no longer wish to
offend. But a being who was entirely free from temp-
tation would be either more or less than a man—
“either a beast or a God,” as Aristotle says. There
is, therefore, a half truth in the theory that the goal of
earthly striving is negation and absorption. But it at
once becomes false if we forget that it is a goal which
cannot be reached in time, and which is achieved, not
by good and evil neutralising each other, but by death
being swallowed up in victory. If morality ceases to
be moral when it has achieved its goal, it must pass


1 The same is true of our attitude towards external nature. We are
always trying to rise from the shadow to the substance, from the symbol
to the thing symbolised, and so far the followers of the negative road are
right ; but the life of Mysticism (on this side) consists in the process of
spiritualising our impressions ; and to regard the process as completed is to
lose shadow and substance together,


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 117


into something which includes as well as transcends it
—a condition which is certainly not fulfilled by con
templative passivity.

These thoughts should save us from regarding the
saints of the cloister with impatience or contempt.
The limitations incidental to their place in history do
not prevent them from being glorious pioneers among
the high passes of the spiritual life, who have scaled
heights which those who talk glibly about “the mistake
of asceticism” have seldom even seen afar off.

We must next consider briefly the charge of Pan-
theism, which has been flung rather indiscriminately
at nearly all speculative mystics, from Plotinus to
Emerson. Dionysius, naturally enough, has been
freely charged with it. The word is so loosely and
thoughtlessly used, even by writers of repute, that I
hope I may be pardoned if I try to distinguish (so
far as can be done in a few words) between the various
systems which have been called pantheistic.

True Pantheism must mean the identification of
God with the totality of existence, the doctrine that
the universe is the complete and only expression of
the nature and life of God, who on this theory is
only immanent and not transcendent. On this view,
everything in the world belongs to the Being of God,
who is manifested equally in everything. Whatever
is real is perfect; reality and perfection are the same


1 It may be objected that I have misused the term v7a negativa, which
is merely the line of argument which establishes the transcendence of God,
as the ‘‘affirmative road” establishes His immanence, I am far from
wishing to depreciate a method which when rightly used is a safeguard
against Pantheism, but the whole history of medizeval Mysticism shows
how mischievous it is when followed exclusively.


118 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


thing. Here again we must go to India for a perfect
example. “The learned behold God alike in the
reverend Brahmin, in the ox and in the elephant,
in the dog and in him who eateth the flesh of dogs.” ?
So Pope says that God is “as full, as perfect, in a hair
as heart.” The Persian Sufis were deeply involved in
this error, which leads to all manner of absurdities and
even immoralities. It is inconsistent with any belief
in purpose, either in the whole or in the parts. Evil,
therefore, cannot exist for the sake of a higher good:
it must be itself good. It is easy to see how this view
of the world may pass_into pessimism or nihilism ; for
if everything is equally real and equally Divine, it
makes no difference, except to our tempers, whether
we call it everything or nothing, good or bad.

None of the writers with whom we have to deal can
fairly be charged with this error, which is subversive of
the very foundations of true religion. Eckhart, carried
away by his love of paradox, allows himself occasionally
to make statements which, if logically developed, would
come perilously near to it; and Emerson’s philosophy
is more seriously compromised in this direction. Dio-
nysius is in no such danger, for the simple reason that
he stands too near to Plato. The pantheistic tendency
of medizval Realism requires a few words of explana-
tion, especially as I have placed the name of Plato at
the head of this Lecture. Plato’s doctrine of ideas
aimed at establishing the transcendence of the highest
Idea—that of God. But the medieval doctrine of ideas,
as held by the extreme Realists, sought to find room in
the summum genus for a harmonious coexistence of all

See Vaughan, Hours with the Mystics, vol. i. p. 58.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 119


things. It thus tended towards Pantheism ;! while the
Aristotelian Realists maintained the substantial char-
acter of individuals outside the Being of God. “This
view,” says Eicken, “which quite inverted the historical
and logical relation of the Platonic and Aristotelian
philosophies, was maintained till the close of the Middle
Ages.”

We may also call pantheistic any system which
regards the cosmic process as a real becoming of God.
According to this theory, God comes to Himself, attains
full self-consciousness, in the highest of His creatures,
which are, as it were, the organs of His self-unfolding
Personality. This is not a philosophy which commends
itself specially to speculative mystics, because it in-
volves the belief that zzme is an ultimate reality. If
in the cosmic process, which takes place in time, God
becomes something which He was not before, it cannot
be said that He is exalted above time, or that a thou-
sand years are to Him as one day. I shall say in my
fourth Lecture that this view cannot justly be attributed
to Eckhart. Students of Hegel are not agreed whether
it is or is not part of their master’s teaching”

The idea of wz/J as a world-principle — not in
Schopenhauer’s sense of a blind force impelling from


1Seth, Hegelianism and Personality, states this more strongly. Ile
argues that ‘‘ the ultimate goal of Realism is a thorough-going Pantheism.”
God is regarded as the swsmum genus, the ultimate Substance of which all
existing things are accidents. The genus inheres in the species, and the
species in individuals, as an entity common to all and 7den/ical in each,
an entity to which individual differences adhere as accidents.

2M‘Taggart, Studies in Hegelian Dialectic, p. 159 sq., argues that
Hegel means that the Absolute Idea exists eternally in its full perfection.
There can be no vea/ development in time. ‘Infinite time is a false
infinite of endless aggregation.” The whole discussion is very instructive
and interesting.


120 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


within, but as the determination of a conscious Mind— _
lifts us at once out of Pantheism.’ It sets up the dis-
tinction between what is and what ought to be, which
Pantheism cannot find room for, and at the same time
implies that the cosmic process is already complete in
the consciousness of God, which cannot be held if He
is subordinated to the category of time.

God is more than the All, as being the perfect
Personality, whose Will is manifested in creation under
necessarily imperfect conditions. He is also in a sense
less than the All, since pain, weakness, and sin, though
known to Him as infinite Mind, can hardly be felt by
Him as infinite Perfection. The function of evil in the
economy of the universe is an inscrutable mystery,
about which speculative Mysticism merely asserts that
the solution cannot be that of the Manicheans. It is
only the Agnostic * who will here offer the dilemma of
Dualism or Pantheism, and try to force the mystic to
accept the second alternative.

There are two other views of the universe which
have been called pantheistic, but incorrectly.

The first is that properly called Acosmism, which we
have encountered as Orientalised Platonism. Plato’s
theory of ideas was popularised into a doctrine of two
separate worlds, related to each other as shadow and
substance, The intelligible world, which is in the
mind of God, alone exists; and thus, by denying
reality to the visible world, we get a kind of idealistic
Pantheism. But the notion of God as abstract Unity,


* So Lasson says well, in his book on Meister Eckhart, ‘ Mysticism


views everything from the standpoint of teleology, while Pantheism
generally stops at causality.”


* As, for instance, Leslie Stephen tries to do in his Agnostic's Apology.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 121


which, as we have seen, was held by the later Neo-
platonists and their Christian followers, seems to make
a real world impossible; for bare Unity cannot create,
and the metaphor of the sun shedding his rays explains
nothing. Accordingly the “intelligible world,’ the
sphere of reality, drops out, and we are left with only
the infra-real world and the supra-real One. So we
are landed in nihilism or Asiatic Mysticism.?

The second is the belief in the camanence of a
God who is also transcendent. This should be called
Panentheism, a useful word coined by Krause, and not
Pantheism. In its true form it is an integral part of
Christian philosophy, and, indeed, of all rational theo-
logy. But in proportion as the indwelling of God, or
of Christ, or the Holy Spirit in the heart of man, is
regarded as an opus operatum, or as complete sudstitu-
tion of the Divine for the human, we are in danger of
a self-deification which resembles the maddest phase
of Pantheism.?

Pantheism, as I understand the word, is a pitfall for
Mysticism to avoid, not an error involved in its first


1 The system of Spinoza, based on the canon, ‘‘ Omnis determinatio est
negatio,” proceeds by wiping out all dividing lines, which he regards as
illusions, in order to reach the ultimate truth of things. This, as Hegel
showed, is acosmism rather than Pantheism, and certainly not “‘ atheism.”
The method of Spinoza should have led him, as the same method led
Dionysius, to define God as bepovoros dopiorla. He only escapes this
conclusion by an inconsistency. See E. Caird, Evolution of Religion,
vol. i. pp. 104, 105.

2 There is a third system which is called pantheistic; but as it has
nothing to do with Mysticism, I need not try to determine whether it
deserves the name or not. It is that which deifies physical law. Some-
times it is ‘‘ materialism grown sentimental,” as it has been lately de-
scribed ; sometimes it issues in stern Fatalism. This is Stoicism; and
high Calvinism is simply Christian Stoicism. It has been called pan.
theistic, because it admits only one Will in the universe.


122 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


principles. But we need not quarrel with those who
have said that speculative Mysticism is the Christian
form of Pantheism. For there is much truth in
Amiel’s dictum, that “Christianity, if it is to triumph
over Pantheism, must absorb it.’ Those are no true
friends to the cause of religion who would base it en-
tirely upon dogmatic supernaturalism. The passion
for facts which are objective, isolated, and past, often
_ prevents us from seeing facts which are eternal and
spiritual. We cry, “Lo here,” and “Lo there,” and
forget that the kingdom of God is within us and
amongst us. The great service rendered by the
speculative mystics to the Christian Church lies in
their recognition of those truths which Pantheism
grasps only to destroy.


ORSitnodunv éuewvroy.”
HERACLITUS,


‘‘La philosophie n’est pas philosophie si elle ne touche 4 ’abime; mais
elle cesse d’étre philosophie si elle y tombe.”
CouSIN.


‘Denn Alles muss in Nichts zerfallen,
Wenn es im Sein beharren will.”
GOETHE.


‘Seek no more abroad, say I,
House and Home, but tur thine eye
Inward, and observe thy breast ;
There alone dwells solid Rest.

Say not that this House is small,
Girt up in a narrow wall:

In a cleanly sober mind

Heaven itself full room doth find.
Here content make thine abode
With thyself and with thy God.
Here in this sweet privacy

May’st thou with thyself agree,
And keep House in peace, tho’ all
Th’ Universe’s fabric fall.”


JosEPH BEAUMONT,


‘©The One remains, the many change and pass:
Heaven’s light for ever shines ; earth’s shadows fly:
Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,
Stains the white radiance of Eternity.”
SHELLEY.


LECTURE IV


CHRISTIAN PLATONISM AND SPECULATIVE
MYSTICISM


2. IN THE WEST


* Know ye not that ye are a temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you?”—1 Cor. iii. 16.


WE have seen that Mysticism, like most other types
of religion, had its cradle in the East. The Christian
Platonists, whom we considered in the last Lecture,
wrote in Greek, and we had no occasion to mention
the Western Churches. But after the Pseudo-
Dionysius, the East had little more to contribute to
Christian thought. John of Damascus, in the eighth
century, half mystic and half scholastic, need not
detain us. The Eastern Churches rapidly sank into a
deplorably barbarous condition, from which they have
never emerged. We may therefore turn away from
the Greek-speaking countries, and trace the course of
Mysticism in the Latin and Teutonic races,
Scientific Mysticism in the West did not all pass
through Dionysius. Victorinus, a Neoplatonic philo-
sopher, was converted to Christianity in his old age,
about 360 A.D. The story of his conversion, and the


joy which it caused in the Christian community, is told
126


126 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


by St. Augustine? He was a deep thinker of


the speculative mystical type, but a clumsy and ob- .


scure writer, in spite of his rhetorical training. His
importance lies in his position as the first Christian
Neoplatonist who wrote in Latin.

The Trinitarian doctrine of Victorinus anticipates in
a remarkable manner that of the later philosophical
mystics. The Father, he says, eternally knows Him-
self in the Son. The Son is the self-objectification of
God, the “forma” of God,’ the utterance of the
Absolute. The Father is “cessatio,’ “ silentium,”
“guies”; but He is also “motus,’ while the Son is
“motto.” There is no contradiction between “ motus”
and “cessatio,’ since “motus” is not the same as
“ mutatio.” “Movement” belongs to the “being” of
God; and this eternal “movement” is the generation
of the Son. This eternal generation is exalted above
time. All life is zow: we live always in the present,
not in the past or future; and thus our life is a symbol
of eternity, to which all things are for ever present.’
The generation of the Son is at the same time the
creation of the archetypal world; for the Son is the
cosmic principle,* through whom all that potentially zs
is actualised. He even says that the Father is to the
Son as 6 py oy to 6 oy, thus taking the step which
Plotinus wished to avoid, and applying the same


1 Cony. viii. 2-5. The best account of the theology of Victorinus is
Gore’s article in the Dictionary of Christian Biography.

2 So Synesius calls the Son rarpds poppy.

*<*Non enim vivimus preeteritum aut vivimus futurum, sed semper
presenti utimur.” ‘‘ Aternitas semper per presentiam habet omnia et
hzec semper.”

4 « Effectus est omnia,” Victorinus says plainly.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 127


expression to the superessential God as to infra-
essential matter.!

This actualisation is a self-limitation of God, but
involves no degradation. Victorinus uses language
implying the subordination of the Son, but is strongly
opposed to Arianism.

The Holy Ghost is the “bond” (copula) of the
Trinity, joining in perfect love the Father and the Son,
Victorinus is the first to use this idea, which afterwards
became common. It is based on the Neoplatonic
triad of status, progressio, regressus (movn, mpdodos,
émeotpopy). In another place he symbolises the Holy
Ghost as the female principle, the “ Mother of Christ”
in His eternal life. This metaphor is a relic of
Gnosticism, which the Church wisely rejected.

The second Person of the Trinity contains in Him-
self the archetypes of everything. He is the “ eée-
mentum,’ “ habttaculum,’ “ habitator;’ “locus” of the
universe. The material world was created for man’s
probation. All spirits pre-existed, and their partial
immersion in an impure material environment is a
degradation from which they must aspire to be
delivered. But the whole mundane history of a soul
is only the realisation of the idea which had existed
from all eternity in the mind of God. These doctrines
show that Victorinus is involved in a dualistic view of
matter, and in a form of predestinarianism; but he has


1 Victorinus must have got this phrase from some Greek Neoplatonist.
It was explained that rd wi) dv may be used in four senses, and that it is not
intended to identify the two extremes. But the very remarkable passage
in Hierotheus (referred to in Lecture III.) shows that the two categories
of dopicrla cannot be kept apart.

2 *Tpse se ipsum circumterminavit.”


128 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


no definite teaching on the relation of sin to the ideal
world.

His language about Christ and the Church is
mystical in tone. “The Church is Christ,” he says;
“ The resurrection of Christ is our resurrection”; and
of the Eucharist, “ The body of Christ is life.”

We now come to St. Augustine himself, who at one
period of his life was a diligent student of Plotinus.
_ It would be hardly justifiable to claim St. Augustine
as a mystic, since there are important parts of his
teaching which have no affinity to Mysticism; but it
touched him on one side, and he remained half a
Platonist. His natural sympathy with Mysticism was
not destroyed by the vulgar and perverted forms of it
with which he was first brought in contact. The
Manicheans and Gnostics only taught him to dis-
tinguish true Mysticism from false: he soon saw
through the pretensions of these sectaries, while he
was not ashamed to learn from Plotinus. The
mystical or Neoplatonic element in his theology will
be clearly shown in the following extracts. In a few
places he comes dangerously near to some of the
errors which we found in Dionysius. |

God is above all that can be said of Him. We
must not even call Him ineffable;+ He is best adored
in silence,” best known by nescience,? best described
by negatives. God is absolutely immutable; this is a
doctrine on which he often insists, and which pervades
all his teaching about predestination. The world


1 De Trin. vii. 4.7; de Doctr. Christ. i. 5. 5; Serm. 52. 16; De Civ,
Det, ix. 16.


2 Contr. Adim, Man. 11. 3 De Ord, ii. 16. 44, 18. 47.
* Enarrat, in Ps, 85, 12,


(Bs) ie


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 129


pre-existed from all eternity in the mind of God; in
the Word of God, by whom all things were made, and
who is immutable Truth, all things and events are
stored up together unchangeably, and all are one.
God sees the time-process not as a process, but
gathered up into one harmonious whole. This seems
very near to acosmism, but there are other passages
which are intended to guard against this error. For
instance, in the Confessions’ he says that “ things
above are better than things below; but all creation
together is better than things above”; that is to say, true
reality is something higher than an abstract spirituality?

He is fond of speaking of the Beauty of God; and
as he identifies beauty with symmetry,’ it is plain that
the formless “Infinite” is for him, as for every true
Platonist, the bottom and not the top of the scale of
being. Plotinus had perhaps been the first to speak
of the Divine nature as the meeting-point of the Good,
the True, and the Beautiful; and this conception,
which is of great value, appears also in Augustine.
There are three grades of beauty, they both say,
corporeal, spiritual, and divine,‘ the first being an
image of the second, and the second of the third.
“ Righteousness is the truest beauty,”® Augustine says

1 Conf. vii. 13 ad jin.


2 Compare with this sentence of the Confessions the statement of
Erigena quoted below, that ‘‘ the things which are not are far better than
those which are.”

3 7. 120. 20. St. Augustine wrote in early life an essay ‘‘On the
Beautiful and Fit,” which he unhappily took no pains to preserve.

4 De Ord. ii. 16. 42, 59; Plot. Znm. i. 6. 4.

5 De Lib. Arb. ii. 16. 41; Plot. Lun. i. 6. 8, iti. 8. 11.

6 Znarr. in Ps. xliv. 3; Zp. 120. 20. Plot. Lun. i. 6 4, says with
more picturesqueness than usual, xahdv 70 rijs Sixatootyns Kal cwppootyys
mpbawrov, kal otre Eomepos obre egos obrw kahd. (From Aristotle, Zt. v.


ey ay


9 E


130 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


more than once. “All that is beautiful comes from —
the highest Beauty, which is God.” This is true —
Platonism, and points to Mysticism of the symbolic
kind, which we must consider later. St. Augustine is
on less secure ground when he says that evil is simply
the splash of dark colour which gives relief to the
picture; and when in other places he speaks of it as
simple privation of good. But here again he closely
follows Plotinus.'

St. Augustine was not hostile to the idea of a
World - Soul; he regards the universe as a living
organism ;* but he often warns his readers against
identifying God and the world, or supposing that God
is merely immanent in creation. The Neoplatonic
teaching about the relation of individual souls to the
World-Soul may have helped him to formulate his own
teaching about the mystical union of Christians with
Christ. His phrase is that Christ and the Church are
“yuna persona.”

St. Augustine arranges the ascent of the soul in
seven stages.2 But the higher steps are, as usual,
purgation, illumination, and union. This last, which
he calls “the vision and contemplation of truth,” is
“not a step, but the goal of the journey.” When we
have reached it, we shall understand the wholesomeness
of the doctrines with which we were fed, as children


1 Ench. iii, ‘etiam illud quod malum dicitur bene ordinatum est loco
suo positum; eminentius commendat bona.” © St. Augustine also says
(Zunch. xi.), ‘‘cum omnino mali nomen non sit nisi privationis boni”;
cf, Plot. Av. ili. 2. 5, Sdws d¢ 7d Kaxdv Adeww Tod dyabod Oeréov.
St. Augustine praises Plotinus for his teaching on the universality of
Providence,


9 De Civ. Dei, iv. 12, vii. 5. ® De Quanittate Anime, xxx.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 131


with milk; the meaning of such “hard sayings” as the
resurrection of the body will become plain to us.
Of the blessedness which attends this state he says
elsewhere,’ “I entered, and beheld with the mysterious
eye of my soul the light that never changes, above the
eye of my soul, above my intelligence. It was some-
thing altogether different from any earthly illumination.
It was higher than my intelligence because it made
me, and I was lower because made by it. He who
knows the truth knows that light, and he who knows
that light knows eternity. Love knows that light.”
And again he says,? “What is this which flashes in
upon me, and thrills my heart without wounding it?
I tremble and I burn; I tremble, feeling that I
am unlike Him; I burn, feeling that I am like
Him.”

One more point must be mentioned before we leave
St. Augustine. In spite of, or rather because of, his
Platonism, he had nothing but contempt for the later
Neoplatonism, the theurgic and theosophic apparatus
of Iamblichus and his friends. I have said nothing yet
about the extraordinary development of magic in all
its branches, astrology, necromancy, table-rapping, and
other kinds of divination, charms and amulets and
witchcraft, which brought. ridicule upon the last
struggles of paganism. These aberrations of Nature-
Mysticism will be dealt with in their later develop-
ments in my seventh Lecture. St. Augustine, after
mentioning some nonsensical incantations of the
“ abracadabra” kind, says, “ A Christian old woman is
wiser than these philosophers.” In truth, the spirit of


1 Conf. vii. 10. I have quoted Bigg’s translation, 2 Conf. xi. 9.


132 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Plato lived in, and not outside Christianity, even in the
time of Porphyry. And on the cultus of angels and
spirits, which was closely connected with theurgic
superstition, St. Augustine’s judgment is very instruct-
ive. “Whom should I find,” he asks, “to reconcile
me to Thee? Should I approach the angels? With
what prayers, with what rites? Many, as I hear,
have tried this method, and have come to crave


for curious visions, and have been deceived, as they


deserved.”

In spite of St. Augustine’s Platonism and the
immense influence which he exercised, the Western
Church was slow in developing a mystical theology.
The Greek Mysticism, based on emanation, was not
congenial to the Western mind, and the time of the
German, with its philosophy of immanence, was not
yet. The tendency of Eastern thinkers is to try to
gain a view of reality as a whole, complete and entire:
the form under which it most readily pictures it is
that of space. The West seeks rather to discover the
universal laws which in every part of the universe are
working out their fulfilment. The form under which it
most readily pictures reality is that of zzme2 Thus
Neoplatonism had to undergo certain modifications


1 5t. Augustine does not reject the belief that visions are granted by the
mediation of angels, but he expresses himself with great caution on the
subject. Cf. De Gen. ad litt. xii. 30, ‘Sunt quedam excellentia et
merito divina, quee demonstrant angeli miris modis: utrum visa sua facili
quadam et przpotenti iunctione vel commixtione etiam nostra esse
facientes, an scientes nescio quo modo nostram in spiritu nostro informar
visionem, difficilis perceptu et difficilior dictu res est.”

2 See Lotze, Mecrocosmus, bk. viii. chap. 4, and other places. We may
perhaps compare the Johannine xécyos with the Synoptic aldéy as examples
of the two modes of envisaging reality.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 133


before it could enter deeply into the religious con-
sciousness of the West.

The next great name is that of John Scotus
Erigena,! an English or Irish monk, who in the ninth
century translated Dionysius into Latin. Erigena is
unquestionably one of the most remarkable figures of
the Middle Ages. A bold and independent thinker,
he made it his aim to elucidate the vague theories of
Dionysius, and to present them as a consistent philo-
sophical system worked out by the help of Aristotle
and perhaps Boethius.2_ He intends, of course, to keep
within the limits permitted to Christian speculation ;
but in reality ne does not allow dogma to fetter him.
The Christian Alexandrians were, on the whole, more
orthodox than their language ; Erigena’s language
partially veils the real audacity of his speculation. He
is a mystic only by his intellectual affinities ;? the
warmth of pious aspiration and love which makes
Dionysius, amid all his extravagance, still a religious
writer, has cooled entirely in Erigena. He can pray
with fervour and eloquence for intellectual enlighten-
ment; but there was nothing of the prophet or saint
about him, to judge from his writings. Still, though
one might dispute his title to be called either a

1 Eriugena is, no doubt, the more correct spelling, but I have preferred
to keep the name by which he is best known.


2 Erigena quotes also Origen, the two Gregorys, Basil, Maximus,
Ambrose, and Augustine. Of pagan philosophers he puts Plato first, but
holds Aristotle in high honour.

3 Stdéckl calls him ‘‘ein falscher Mystiker,” because the Neoplatonic
(“‘ gnostic-rationalistic ”) element takes, for him, the place of super-
naturalism. This, as will be shown later, isin accordance with the Roman
Catholic view of Mysticism, which is not that adopted in these Lectures.
For us, Erigena’s defect as a mystic is rather to be sought in his
extreme intellectualism.


134 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Christian or a mystic, we must spare a few minutes to
this last flower of Neoplatonism, which bloomed so late
on our northern islands.

God, says Erigena, is called Essence or Being; but,
strictly speaking, He is not “ Being” ;1 for Being arises
in opposition to not-Being, and there is no opposition
to the Absolute, or God. Eternity, the abode or
nature of God, is homogeneous and without parts, one,
simple, and indivisible. “God is the totality of all
things which are and are not, which can and cannot be.
He is the similarity of the similar, the dissimilarity of
the dissimilar, the opposition of opposites, and the con-
trariety of contraries. All discords are resolved when
they are considered as parts of the universal harmony.”
All things begin from unity and end in unity: the
Absolute can contain nothing self-contradictory. And
so God cannot be called Goodness, for Goodness is
opposed to Badness, and God is above this distinction.
Goodness, however is a more comprehensive term than
Being. There may be Goodness without Being, but
not Being without Goodness ; for Evil is the negation
of Being. “The Scripture openly pronounces this,”
says Erigena; “for we read, God saw all things; and
not, lo, they were, but, lo, they were very good.” All
things are, in so far as they are good. “ But the things
that are not are also called good, and are far better
than those which are.” Being, in fact, is a defect,
“since it separates from the superessential Good,”
The feeling which prompts this strange expression is
that since time and space are themselves onesided


1 «<Dum vero (divina bonitas) incomprehensibilis intelligitur, per excel-
lentiam non immerito #zhz/um vocitatur.”


Pee ee


| PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 135


appearances, a fixed limit must be set to the amount of
goodness and reality which can be represented under
these conditions. Erigena therefore thinks that to
enter the time-process must be to contract a certain
admixture of unreality or evil. In so far as life
involves separateness (not distinction), this must be
true; but the manifold is only evil when it is dis-
cordant and antagonistic to unity. That the many-in-
one should appear as the one-in-many, is the effect of
the forms of time and space in which it appears; the
statement that “the things which are not are far
better than those which are,” is only true in the sense
that the world of appearance is permeated by evil as
yet unsubdued, which in the Godhead exists only as
something overcome or transmuted.

Erigena says that God is above all the categories
including that of relation. It follows that the Persons
of the Trinity, which are only “relative names,” are
fused in the Absolute. We may make statements
about God, if we remember that they are only
metaphors ; but whatever we deny about Him, we
deny truly.2 This is the “ negative road” of Dionysius,


1 This is really a revival of ‘‘ modalism.” The unorthodoxy of the
doctrine becomes very apparent in some of Erigena’s successors.

2 De Div, Nat. i. 36: ‘‘lamdudum inter nos est confectum omnia que
vel sensu corporeo vel intellectu vel ratione cognoscuntur de Deo merito
creatore omnium, posse preedicari, dum nihil eorum que de se predi-
cantur pura veritatis contemplatio eum approbat esse.” All affirmations
about God are made ‘‘non proprie sed translative” ; all negations ‘‘ non
translative sed proprie.” Cf. also zd¢d. i, 1. 66, ‘‘ verius fideliusque negatur
in omnibus quam affirmatur”; and especially z¢d. i. 5. 26, “ theophanias
autem dico visibilium et invisibilium species, quarum ordine et pulcritudine
cognoscitur Deus esse et invenitur on guid est, sed guia solummodo est,”
Erigena tries to say (in his atrocious Latin) that the external world can
teach us nothing about God, except the bare fact of His existence. No


136 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


from whom Erigena borrows a number of uncouth
compounds. But we can see that he valued this
method mainly as safeguarding the transcendence of
God against pantheistic theories of immanence. The
religious and practical aspects of the doctrine had little
interest for him.

The destiny of all things is to “ rest and be quiet”
in God. But he tries to escape the conclusion that
all distinctions must disappear; rather, he says, the
return to God raises creatures into a higher state, in
which they first attain their true being. All individual
types will be preserved in the universal. He borrows
an illustration, not a very happy one, from Plotinus.
“ As iron, when it becomes red-hot, seems to be turned
into pure fire, but remains no less iron than before;
so when body passes into soul, and rational substances
into God, they do not lose their identity, but preserve
it in a higher state of being.”

Creation he regards as a necessary self-realisation of
. God. “God was not,” he says, “before He made the
universe.” The Son is the Idea of the World; “be
assured,” he says, “that the Word is the nature of all
things.” The primordial causes or ideas—Goodness,
Being, Life, etc., zz themselves, which the Father made
in the Son—are in a sense the creators of the world,
for the order of all things is established according to
them. God created the world, not out of nothing, nor
out of something, but out of Himself. The creatures
passage could be found to illustrate more clearly the real tendencies of the
negative road, and the purely subjective Mysticism connected with it.


Erigena will not allow us to infer, from the order and beauty of the world,
that order and beauty are Divine attributes.


1 But it must be remembered that Erigena calls God ‘‘nihilum.” His


ey


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 137


have always pre-existed “yonder” in the Word; God
has only caused them to be realised in time and
space.

“Thought and Action are identical in God.” “He
sees by working and works by seeing.”

Man is a microcosm. The fivefold division of nature
—corporeal, vital, sensitive, rational, intellectual—is
all represented in his organisation. The corruptible
body is an “accident,” the consequence of sin. The
original body was immortal and incorruptible. This
body will one day be restored.

Evil has no substance, and is destined to disappear.
“Nothing contrary to the Divine goodness and life
and blessedness can be coeternal with them.” The
world must reach perfection, when all will ultimately
be God. “The loss and absence of Christ is the
torment of the whole creation, nor do I think that
there is any other.” There is no “place of punish-
ment” anywhere.

Erigena is an admirable interpreter of the Alex-
andrians and of Dionysius, but he emphasises their
most dangerous tendencies. We cannot be surprised
that his books were condemned; it is more strange
that the audacious theories which they repeat from
Dionysius should have been allowed to pass without
censure for so long. Indeed, the freedom of specula-
tion accorded to the mystics forms a remarkable
exception to the zeal for exact orthodoxy which
characterised the general policy of the early Church.


words about creation are, ‘‘ Ac sic de nihilo facit omnia, de sua videlicet
superessentialitate producit essentias, de supervitalitate vitas, de super-
intellectualitate intellectus, de negatione omnium que sunt et que non
sunt, affirmationes omnium qu sunt et que non sunt.”


138 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


The explanation is that in the East Mysticism has
seldom been revolutionary, and has compensated for
its speculative audacity by the readiness of its outward
conformity. Moreover, the theories of Dionysius about
the earthly and heavenly hierarchies were by no means
unwelcome to sacerdotalism. In the West things were
different. Mysticism there has always been a spirit of
reform, generally of revolt. There is much even in
Erigena, whose main affinities were with the East,
which forecasts the Reformation. He is the father,
not only of Western Mysticism and scholasticism, but
of rationalism as well But the danger which lurked
in his speculations was not at first recognised. His
book on predestination was condemned in 855 and 859
for its universalist doctrine,2 and two hundred years
later his Eucharistic doctrine, revived by Berengar, was
censured? But it was not till the thirteenth century
that a general condemnation was passed upon him.
This judgment followed the appearance of a strongly
pantheistic or acosmistic school of mystics, chief
among whom was Amalric of Bena, a master of
theology at Paris about 1200. Amalric is a very
interesting figure, for his teaching exhibits all the
features which are most characteristic of extravagant


1So Kaulich shows in his monograph on the speculative system of
Erigena,

2 Erigena was roused by a work on predestination, written by Gottes-
chalk, and advocating Calvinistic views, to protest against the doctrine
that God, who is life, can possibly predestine anyone to eternal death.

8 Berengar objected to the crudely materialistic theories of the real
presence which were then prevalent. He protested against the statement
that the transmutation of the elements takes place “vere et sensualiter,”
and that ‘‘ portiunculz ” of the body of Christ lie upon the altar, ‘The
mouth,” he said, ‘‘ receives the sacrament, the inner man the true body of
Christ.”


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 139


Mysticism in the West—its strong belief in Divine
immanence, not only in the Church, but in the in-
dividual; its uncompromising rationalism, contempt for
ecclesiastical forms, and tendency to evolutionary
optimism. Among the doctrines attributed to Amalric
and his followers are a pantheistic identification of man
with God, and a negation of matter; they were said
to teach that unconsecrated bread was the body of
Christ, and that God spoke through Ovid (a curious
choice !), as well as through St. Augustine. They
denied the resurrection of the body, and the traditional
eschatology, saying that “he who has the knowledge
of God in himself has paradise within him.” They
insisted on a progressive historical revelation—the
reign of the Father began with Abraham, that of the
Son with Christ, that of the Spirit with themselves.
They despised sacraments, believing that the Spirit
works without means. They taught that he who lives
in love can do no wrong, and were suspected, probably
truly, of the licentious conduct which naturally follows
from such a doctrine. This antinomianism is no part
of true Mysticism ; but it is often found in conjunction
with mystical speculation among the half-educated.
It is the vulgar perversion of Plotinus’ doctrine that
matter is nothing, and that the highest part of our
nature can take no stain! We find evidence of
immorality practised “in nomine caritatis” among the
Gnostics and Manicheans of the first centuries, and
these heresies never really became extinct. The sects
of the “Free Spirit,” who flourished later in the


1 Similar teaching from the sacred books of the East is quoted by E.
Caird, Evolution of Religion, vol. i. p. 355-


140 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


thirteenth century, had an even worse reputation than
the Amalricians. They combined with their Pantheism
a Determinism which destroyed all sense of responsi-
bility. On the other hand, the followers of Ortlieb of
Strassburg, about the same period, advocated an
extreme asceticism based on a dualistic or Manichean
view of the world; and they combined with this error
an extreme rationalism, teaching that the historical


Christ was a mere man; that the Gospel history has


only a symbolical truth ; that the soul only, without the
body, is immortal; and that the Pope and his priests
are servants of Satan.

The problem for the Church was how to encourage
the warm love and faith of the mystics without giving
the rein to these mischievous errors. The twelfth and
thirteenth centuries produced several famous writers,
who attempted to combine scholasticism and Mysticism.;
The leaders in this attempt were Bernard,? Hugo and
Richard of St. Victor, Bonaventura, Albertus Magnus,


1 This is the accepted phrase for the work of the twelfth and thirteenth
century theologians. We might also say that they modified uncom-
promising Platonic Realism by Aristotelian science. Cf. Harnack, Wistory
of Dogma, vol. vi. p. 43 (English translation): ‘‘ Under what other
auspices could this great structure be erected than under those of that
Aristotelian Realism, which was at bottom a dialectic between the Platonic
Realism and Nominalism; and which was represented as capable of
uniting immanence and transcendence, history and miracle, the immut-
ability of God and mutability, Idealism and Realism, reason and authority.”

? The great importance of Bernard in the history of Mysticism does not
lie in the speculative side of his teaching, in which he depends almost
entirely upon Augustine. His great achievement was to recall devout and
loving contemplation to the image of the crucified Christ, and to found
that worship of our Saviour as the ‘‘ Bridegroom of the Soul,” which in
the next centuries inspired so much fervid devotion and lyrical sacred
poetry. The romantic side of Mysticism, for good and for evil, received
its greatest stimulus in Bernard’s Poems and in his Sermons on the
Canticles. This subject is dealt with in Appendix E.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 141


and (later) Gerson. Their works are not of great value
as contributions to religious philosophy, for the School-
men were too much afraid of their authorities—Catholic
tradition and Aristotle—to probe difficulties to the
bottom ; and the mystics, who, by making the renewed
life of the soul their starting-point, were more inde-
pendent, were debarred, by their ignorance of Greek,
from a first-hand knowledge of their intellectual ances-
tors. But in the history of Mysticism they hold an
important place.! Speculation being for them restricted
within the limits of Church-dogma, they were obliged
to be more psychological and less metaphysical than
Dionysius or Erigena. The Victorines insist often on
self-knowledge as the way to the knowledge of God
and on self-purification as more important than philo-
sophy. “The way to ascend to God,” says Hugo,
“is to descend into oneself.”2 “The ascent is through
self above self,” says Richard; we are to rise on
stepping-stones of our dead selves to higher things.
“Let him that thirsts to see God clean his mirror, let
him make his own spirit bright,” says Richard again.
The Victorines do not disparage reason, which is the
organ by which mankind in general apprehend the
things of God; but they regard ecstatic contemplation
as a supra-rational state or faculty, which can only be


1 Stéckl says of Hugo that the course of development of medizval
Mysticism cannot be understood without a knowledge of his writings.
Stdckl’s own account is very full and clear.

2 The “eye of contemplation” was given us ‘‘to see God within our-
selves”; this eye has been blinded by sin. The ‘‘eye of reason” was
given us ‘to see ourselves” ; this has been injured by sin. Only the “‘eye
of flesh” remains in its pristine clearness. In things ‘‘above reason” we
must trust to faith, “‘que non adiuvatur ratione ulla, quoniam non capit


ea ratio.”


142 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


reached per mentis excessum, and in which the naked
truth is seen, no longer in a glass darkly.?

This highest state, in which “Reason dies in giving
birth to Ecstasy, as Rachel died in giving birth to
Benjamin,” is not on the high road of the spiritual life. It
is a rare gift, bestowed by supernatural grace. Richard
says that the first stage of contemplation is an ex-
pansion of the soul, the second an exaltation, the third
an alienation. The first arises from human effort, the


‘second from human effort assisted by Divine grace, the


third from Divine grace alone. The predisposing con-
ditions for the third state are devotion (devotio), admira-
tion (admiratio), and joy (eraltatio); but these cannot
produce ecstasy, which is a purely supernatural infusion.

This sharp opposition between the natural and the
supernatural, which is fully developed first by Richard
of St. Victor, is the distinguishing feature of Catholic
Mysticism. It is an abandonment of the great aim
which the earlier Christian idealists had set before
themselves, namely, to find spiritual law in the normal
course of nature, and the motions of the Divine Word
in the normal processes of mind. St. John’s great
doctrine of the Logos as a cosmic principle is now
dropped. Roman Catholic apologists? claim that


1 Richard, who is more ecstatic than Hugo, gives the following account
of this.state : ‘Per mentis excessum extra semetipsum ductus homo...
lumen non per speculum in zenigmate sed in simplici veritate contemplatur.”
In this state ‘‘we forget all that is without and all that is within us.”
Reason and all other faculties are obscured. What then is our security
against delusions? ‘‘The transfigured Christ,” he says, “must be
accompanied by Moses and Elias”; that is to say, visions must not be
believed which conflict with the authority of Scripture.

* See, especially, Stéckl, Geschéchte der Philosophie des Mittelalters,
vol. i. pp. 382-384.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 143


Mysticism was thus set free from the “idealistic
pantheism” of the Neoplatonist, and from the “ Gnostic-
Manichean dualism” which accompanies it. The world
of space and time (they say) is no longer regarded, as
it was by the Neoplatonist, as a fainter effluence from
an ideal world, nor is human individuality endangered
by theories of immanence. Both nature and man
regain a sort of independence. We once more tread
as free men on solid ground, while occasional “ super-
natural phenomena” are not wanting to testify to the
existence of higher powers.

We have seen that the Logos-doctrine (as understood
by St. Clement) is exceptionally liable to perversion ;
but the remedy of discarding it is worse than the
disease. The unscriptural+ and unphilosophical cleft
between natural and supernatural introduces a more
intractable dualism than that of Origen. The faculty
which, according to this theory, possesses immediate
intuition into the things of God is not only irrespon-
sible to reason, but stands in no relation to it. It
ushers us into an entirely new world, where the familiar
criteria of truth and falsehood are inapplicable. And
what it reveals to us is not a truer and deeper view ot
the actual, but a wholly independent cosmic principle
which invades the world of experience as a disturbing
force, spasmodically subverting the laws of nature in
order to show its power over them.2. For as soon as


1 Tt is hardly necessary to point out that St. Paul’s distinction between
natural and spiritual (see esp. 1 Cor. ii.) is wholly different.

2 Contrast the Plotinian doctrine of ecstasy with the following: ‘‘ Dieu
éléve A son gré aux plus hauts sommets, sans aucun mérite préalable.
Osanne de Mantoue recoit le don de la contemplation 4 peine agée de six
ans. Christine est fiancée 4 dix ans, pendant une extase de trois jours ;


144 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


the formless intuition of contemplation begins to ex-
press itself in symbols, these symbols, when untested
by reason, are transformed into hallucinations. The
warning of Plotinus, that “he who tries to rise above
reason falls outside of it,” receives a painful corrobora-
tion in such legends as that of St. Christina, who by
reason of her extreme saintliness frequently soared
over the tops of trees. The consideration of these
alleged “mystical phenomena” belongs to objective


Mysticism, which I hope to deal with in a later


Lecture. Here I will only say that the scholastic-
mystical doctrine of “supernatural” interventions,
which at first sight seems so attractive, has led
in practice to the most barbarous and ridiculous
superstitions.!

Another good specimen of scholastic Mysticism is
the short treatise, De adherendo Deo, of Albertus
Magnus. It shows very clearly how the “negative


Marie d’Agréda recut des illuminations dés sa premiére enfance ”’ (Ribet).
Since Divine favours are believed to be bestowed in a purely arbitrary
manner, the fancies of a child left alone in the dark are as good as the
deepest intuitions of saint, poet, or philosopher. Moreover, God some-
times “‘asserts His liberty” by ‘‘elevating souls suddenly and without
transition from the abyss of sin to the highest summits of perfection, just as
in nature He asserts it by miracles” (Ribet). Such teaching is interesting
as showing how the admission of caprice in the world of phenomena reacts
upon the moral sense and depraves our conception of God and salvation.
The faculty of contemplation, according to Roman Catholic teaching, is
acquired ‘‘ ether by virtue or by gratuitous favour.” The dualism of
natural and supernatural thus allows men to claim independent merit, while
the interventions of God are arbitrary and unaccountable.

} Those who are interested to see how utterly defenceless this theory
leaves us against the silliest delusions, may consult with advantage the
Dictionary of Mysticism, by the Abbé Migne (Zassém), or, if they wish to
ascend nearer to the fountain-head of these legends, there are the sixty folio
volumes of Acta Sanctorum, compiled by the Bollandists. Géorres and
Ribet are also very full of these stories,


sie
hi


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 145


road ” had become the highway of medizval Catholicism,
and how little could be hoped for civilisation and
progress from the continuance of such teaching.
“When St. John says that God is a Spirit,” says Albert
in the first paragraph of his treatise, “and that He
must be worshipped in spirit, he means that the mind
must be cleared of all images. When thou prayest,
shut thy door—that is, the doors of thy senses...
keep them barred and bolted against all phantasms and
images. . . . Nothing pleases God more than a mind
free from all occupations and distractions. . . . Sucha
mind is in a manner transformed into God, for it can
think of nothing, and understand nothing, and love
nothing, except God: other creatures and itself it only
sees in God. . . . He who penetrates into himself, and
so transcends himself, ascends truly to God. ... He
whom I love and desire is above all that is sensible and
all that is intelligible; sense and imagination cannot
bring us to Him, but only the desire of a pure heart.
This brings us into the darkness of the mind, whereby
we can ascend to the contemplation even of the
mystery of the Trinity. .. . Do not think about the
world, nor about thy friends, nor about the past,
present, or future; but consider thyself to be outside
the world and alone with God, as if thy soul were
already separated from the body, and had no longer
any interest in peace or war, or the state of the world.
Leave thy body, and fix thy gaze on the uncreated
light. . . . Let nothing come between thee and God.
. .. The soul in contemplation views the world from
afar off, just as, when we proceed to God by the way of
abstraction, we deny Him, first all bodily and sensible
10


146 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


attributes, then intelligible qualities, and, lastly, that
being (esse) which keeps Him among created things.
This, according to Dionysius, is the best mode of union
with God.”

Bonaventura resembles Albertus in reverting more
decidedly than the Victorines to the Dionysian tradi-
tion. He expatiates on the passivity and’ nakedness
of the soul which is necessary in order to enter into
the Divine darkness, and elaborates with tiresome
pedantry his arbitrary schemes of faculties and stages.
However, he gains something by his knowledge of
Aristotle, which he uses to correct the Neoplatonic
doctrine of God as abstract Unity. “God is ‘ideo
omnimodum,” he says finely, “quia summe unum.”
He is “totum intra omnia et totum extra ”—a succinct
statement that God is both immanent and tran-
scendent. His proof of the Trinity is original and
profound. It is the nature of the Good to impart
itself, and so the highest Good must be “summe
diffusivum sui,’ which can only be in hypostatic
union.

The last great scholastic mystic is Gerson, who lived
from 1363 to 1429. He attempts to reduce Mystic-
ism to an exact science, tabulating and classifying all
the teaching of his predecessors. A very brief summary
of his system is here given.

Gerson distinguishes symbolical, natural, and myst-
ical theology, confining the last to the method which
rests on inner experiences, and proceeds by the
negative road. The experiences of the mystic have


a greater certainty than any external revelations can
possess,


th he ey


a a CR i


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 147


Gerson’s psychology may be given in outline as fol-
lows: The cognitive power has three faculties: (1)
simple intelligence or natural light, an outflow from the
highest intelligence, God Himself ; (2) the understand-
ing, which is on the frontier between the two worlds;
(3) sense-consciousness. To each of these three
faculties answers one of the affective faculties: (1)
synteresis ; (2) understanding, rational desire; (3)
sense-affections. To these again correspond three
activities: (1) contemplation; (2) meditation ;? (3)
thought.

Mystical theology differs from speculative (ze. scho-
lastic), in that mystical theology belongs to the
affective faculties, not the cognitive; that it does not
depend on logic, and is therefore open even to the
ignorant ; that it is mot open to the unbelieving, since
it rests upon faith and love; and that it brings peace,
whereas speculation breeds unrest.

The “means of mystical theology” are seven: (i.)
the call of God; (ii.) certainty that one is called to the
contemplative life—all are not so; (iii) freedom from
encumbrances; (iv.) concentration of interests upon
God ; (v.) perseverance ; (vi.) asceticism ; but the body
must not be maltreated if it is to be a good servant;
(vii.) shutting the eye to all sense perceptions?


1 See Appendix C.

2 The difference between contemplation and meditation is explained by
all the medizeval mystics. Meditation is ‘‘ discursive,” contemplation is
‘“‘mentis in Deum suspense elevatio.” Richard of St. Victor states the
distinction epigrammatically—‘“‘ per meditationem rimamur, per contempla-
tionem miramur.” (‘‘ Admiratio est actus consequens contemplationem
sublimis veritatis.” —Thomas Aquinas. )

8 This arbitrary schematism is very characteristic of this type of
Mysticism, and shows its affinity to Indian philosophy. Compare ‘‘the


148 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Such teaching as this is of small value or interest.
Mysticism itself becomes arid and formal in the hands ©
of Gerson. The whole movement was doomed to
failure, inasmuch as scholasticism was philosophy in


. chains, and the negative road was Mysticism blind-


ee


folded. No fruitful reconciliation between philosophy
and piety could be thus achieved. The decay of
scholasticism put an end to these attempts at com-


promise. Henceforward the mystics either discard


metaphysics, and develop their theology on the devo-
tional and ascetic side—the course which was followed
by the later Catholic mystics; or they copy Erigena in
his independent attitude towards tradition.

In this Lecture we are following the line of specu-
lative Mysticism, and we have now to consider the
greatest of all speculative mystics, Meister Eckhart,
who was born soon after the middle of the thirteenth
century.| He was a Dominican monk, prior of Erfurt
and vicar of Thuringen, and afterwards vicar-general
for Bohemia. He preached a great deal at Cologne
about 1325; and before this period had come into close
relations with the Beghards and Brethren of the Free
Spirit—societies of men and women who, by their
implicit faith in the inner light, resembled the Quakers,
though many of them, as has been said, were accused
of immoral theories and practices. His teaching soon
attracted the attention of the Inquisition, and some of
his doctrines were formally condemned by the Pope in
1329, immediately after his death.


eightfold path of Buddha,” and a hundred other similar classifications in
the sacred books of the East.


1 The date usually given, 1260, is probably too late; but the exact year
cannot be determined.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 149


The aim of Eckhart’s religious philosophy is to find
a speculative basis for the doctrines of the Church,
which shall at the same time satisfy the claims of
spiritual religion. His aims are purely constructive,
and he shows a distaste for polemical controversy.
The writers whom he chiefly cites by name are Dio-
nysius, Augustine, Gregory, and Boethius; but he
must have read Erigena, and probably Averroes,
writers to whom a Catholic could hardly confess his
obligations! He also frequently introduces quotations
with the words, “ A master saith.” The “master” is
nearly always Thomas Aquinas, to whom Eckhart
was no doubt greatly indebted, though it would be
a great mistake to say, as some have done, that all
Eckhart can be found in the Summa. For instance,
he sets himself in opposition to Thomas about the
“spark,” which Thomas regarded as a faculty of the
soul, while Eckhart, in his later writings, says that
it is uncreated.2 His double object leads him into


1 Prof. Karl Pearson (J/iza, 1886) says, ‘‘ The Mysticism of Eckhart


%& owes its leading ideas to Averroes.” He traces the doctrine of the Nods


~


mountixos from Aristotle, de Axzma, through the Arabs to Eckhart, and finds
a close resemblance between the ‘‘ prototypes” or ‘‘ideas” of Eckhart
and the ‘‘ Dinge an sich” of Kant. But Eckhart’s affinities with Plotinus
and Hegel seem to me to be closer than those which he shows with Aris-
totle and Kant. On the connexion with Averroes, Lasson says that while
there is a close resemblance between the Eckhartian doctrine of the
“ Seelengrund” and Averroes’ Jxtellectus Agens as the universal principle
of reason in all men (monopsychism), they differ in this—that with Aver-
roes personality is a phase or accident, but with Eckhart the eternal is
immanent in the personality in such a way that the personality itself has
a part in eternity (Jedster Eckhart der Mystiker, pp. 348, 349). Person-
ality is for Eckhart the eternal ground-form of all true being, and the
notion of Person is the centre-point of his system. He says, ‘‘ The word
Iam none can truly speak but God alone.” The individual must try to
become a person, as the Son of God is a Person.

2 Denifle has devoted great pains to proving that Eckhart in his Latin


150 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


some inconsistencies. Intellectually, he is drawn to-
wards a semi-pantheistic idealism; his heart makes
him an Evangelical Christian. But though it is
possible to find contradictions in his writings, his
transparent intellectual honesty and his great powers
of thought, combined with deep devoutness and child-
like purity of soul, make him one of the most interest-
ing figures in the history of Christian philosophy.
Eckhart wrote in German; that is to say, he wrote
for the public, and not for the learned only. His
desire to be intelligible to the general reader led him
to adopt an epigrammatic antithetic style, and to omit
qualifying phrases. This is one reason why he laid
himself open to so many accusations of heresy.?
Eckhart distinguishes between “the Godhead” and
“God.” The Godhead is the abiding potentiality of
Being, containing within Himself all distinctions, as
yet undeveloped. He therefore cannot be the object
of knowledge, nor of worship, being “ Darkness” and
“Formlessness.”2 The Triune God is evolved from the


works is very largely dependent upon Aquinas. His conclusions are wel- +
comed and gladly adopted by Harnack, who, like Ritschl, has little sym-
pathy with the German mystics, and considers that Christian Mysticism is
really ‘‘ Catholic piety.” ‘It will never be possible,” he says, ‘‘ to make
Mysticism Protestant without flying in the face of history and Catholicism.”
No one certainly would be guilty of the absurdity of ‘‘ making Mysticism
Protestant” ; but it is, I think, even more absurd to ‘‘ make it (Roman)
Catholic,” though such a view may unite the suffrages of Romanists and
Neo-Kantians. See Appendix A, p. 346.

1 Preger (vol. iii. p. 140) says that Eckhart did mo¢ try to be popular.
But it is clear, I think, that he did try to make his philosophy intelligible
to the average educated man, though his teaching is less ethical and more
speculative than that of Tauler.

* Sometimes he speaks of the Godhead as above the opposition of being
and not being ; but at other times he regards the Godhead as the universal
Ground or Substance of the ideal world. ‘* All things in God are one
thing.” ‘‘God is neither this nor that.” Compare, too, the following


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM I51


Godhead. The Son is the Word of the Father, His
uttered thought; and the Holy Ghost is “the Flower


- of the Divine Tree,” the mutual love which unites the


}


d


Father and the Son. Eckhart quotes the words
which St. Augustine makes Christ say of Himself: “I
am come as a Word from the heart, as a ray from the
sun, as heat from the fire, as fragrance from the flower,


as a stream from a perennial fountain.” He insists


that the generation of the Son is a continual process.
The universe is the expression of the whole thought
of the Father; it is the language of the Word. Eck-
hart loves startling phrases, and says boldly, “ Nature
is the lower part of the Godhead,” and “ Before crea-
tion, God was not God.” These statements are not
so crudely pantheistic as they sound. He argues that
without the Son the Father would not be God, but
only undeveloped potentiality of being. The three
Persons are not merely accidents and modes of the
Divine Substance, but are inherent in the Godhead.
And so there can never have been a time when the
Son was not. But the generation of the Son neces-
sarily involves the creation of an ideal world; for the
Son is Reason, and Reason is constituted by a cosmos
of ideas. When Eckhart speaks of creation and of the
world which had no beginning, he means, not the world
of phenomena, but the world of ideas, in the Platonic


passage : ‘‘(Gottes) einfeltige natur ist von formen formlos, von werden
werdelos, von wesen wesenlos, und von sachen sachelos, und darum entgeht
sie in allen werdenden dingen, und die endliche dinge miissen da enden.”

1] here agree with Preger against Lasson. It seems to me to be one of
the most important and characteristic parts of Eckhart’s system, that the
Trinity is ot for him (as it was for Hierotheus) an emanation or appear-
ance of the Absolute. But it is not to be denied that there are passages in
Eckhart which support the other view.


ase CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


sense. _ The ideal world is the complete expression of ’


the thought of God, and is above space and time. He
calls it “non-natured nature,” as opposed to “ diu gena-
tdrte natire,” the world of phenomena! Eckhart’s
doctrine here differs from that of Plotinus in a very im-
portant particular. The Neoplatonists always thought
of emanation as a diffusion of rays from a sun, which
necessarily decrease in heat and brightness as they
‘recede from the central focus. It follows that the
second Person of the Trinity, the Novs or Intelligence,
is subordinate to the First, and the Third to the
Second. But with Eckhart there is no subordination.
The Son is the pure brightness of the Father’s glory,
and the express image of His Person. “The eternal
fountain of things is the Father; the image of things
in Him is the Son, and love for this Image is the
Holy Ghost.” All created things abide “formless”
(as possibilities) in the ground of the Godhead, and
all are realised in the Son. The Alexandrian Fathers,
in identifying the Logos with the Platonic Nods, the
bearer of the World-Idea, had found it difficult to
avoid subordinating Him to the Father. Eckhart
escapes this heresy, but in consequence his view of
the world is more pantheistic. For his intelligible
world is really God—it is the whole content of the
Divine mind.? The question has been much debated,


1 Compare Spinoza’s ‘‘ natura naturata,”

2 The ideas are ‘‘uncreated creatures ” ; they are “‘ creatures in God but
not in themselves.” Preger states Eckhart’s doctrine thus: “Gott denkt
sein Wesen in untergeordnete Weise nachahmbar, und der Reflex dieses
Denkens in dem gottlichen Bewusstsein, die Vorstellungen hievon, sind
die Ideen.” But in what sense is the ideal world ‘‘subordinate”? The
Son in Eckhart holds quite a different relation to the Father from that


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 153


> whether Eckhart really falls into pantheism or not.
The answer seems to me to depend on what is the
obscurest part of his whole system—the relation of
the phenomenal world to the world of ideas, He
offers the Christian dogma of the Incarnation of the
Logos as a kind of explanation of the passage of the
“prototypes” into “externality.” When God “speaks”
His ideas, the phenomenal world arises. This is an
incarnation. But the process by which the soul eman-
cipates itself from the phenomenal and returns to the
intelligible world, is also called a “begetting of the
Son.” Thus the whole process is a circular one—from
God and back to God again. Time and space, he
/ says, were created with the world. Material things
are outside each other, spiritual things in each other.
But these statements do not make it clear how Eckhart
accounts for the imperfections of the phenomenal world,
which he is precluded from explaining, as the Neo-
platonists did, by a theory of emanation. Nor can
we solve the difficulty by importing modern theories
of evolution into his system. The idea of the world-


which the No@s holds to ‘‘ the One” in Plotinus, as the following sentence
will show: ‘‘God is for ever working in one eternal Now ; this working
of His is giving birth to His Son; He bears Him at every moment. From
this birth proceed all things. God has such delight therein that He uses up
all His power in the process. He bears Himself out of Himself into Him-
self. He bears Himself continually in the Son; in Him He speaks all
things.” The following passage from Ruysbroek is an attempt to define
more precisely the nature of the Eckhartian Ideas: Before the temporal
creation God saw the creatures, ‘‘et agnovit distincte in seipso in alteri-
tate quadam—non tamen omnimoda alteritate ; quidquid enim in Deo est
Deus est.” Our eternal life remains ‘‘perpetuo in divina essentia sine
discretione,” but continually flows out ‘‘per zternam Verbi genera-
tionem.” Ruysbroek also says clearly that creation is the embodiment
of the whole mind of God: ‘‘ Whatever lives in the Father hidden in
the unity, lives in the Son ‘in emanatione manifesta.’”


154 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


history as a gradual realisation of the Divine Person-
ality was foreign to Eckhart’s thought. Stéckl, indeed,
tries to father upon him the doctrine that the human
mind is a necessary organ of the self-development of
God. But this theory cannot be found in Eckhart.
The “necessity” which impels God to “beget His
Son” is not a physical but a moral necessity. “ The
good must needs impart itself,” he says.1 The fact


is that his view of the world is much nearer to acosm-_
ism than to pantheism. “Nothing hinders us so


much from the knowledge of God as time and place,”
he says. He sees in phenomena only the negation
of being, and it is not clear how he can also regard
them as the abode of the immanent God. It would
probably be true to say that, like most medizval
thinkers, he did not feel himself obliged to give a
permanent value to the transitory, and that the world,
except as the temporary abode of immortal spirits,
interested him but little. His neglect of history, includ-
ing the earthly life of Christ, is not at all the result of
scepticism about the miraculous. It is simply due to
the feeling that the Divine process in the “ everlasting
Now” is a fact of immeasurably greater importance
than any occurrence in the external world can be.


1 It is true that Eckhart was censured for teaching ‘‘Deum sine ipso
nihil facere posse” ; but the notion of a real decoming of God in the human
mind, and the attempt to solve the problem of evil on the theory of
evolutionary optimism, are, I am convinced, alien to his philosophy. See,
however, on the other side, Carriére, Die philosophische Weltanschauung
der Reformationszeit, pp. 152-157.

*See Lasson, Meister Eckhart, p. 351. Eckhart protests vigorously
against the misrepresentation that he made the phenomenal world the
Wesen of God, and uses strongly acosmistic language in self-defence. But
there seems to be a real inconsistency in this side of his philosophy.


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 155


When a religious writer is suspected of pantheism,
_ we naturally turn to his treatment of the problem of
evil. To the true pantheist all is equally divine, and
everything for the best or for the worst, it does not
much matter which! Eckhart certainly does not mean
to countenance this absurd theory, but there are pas-
sages in his writings which logically imply it; and we
look in vain for any elucidation, in his doctrine of sin,
of the dark places in his doctrine of God2 In fact, he
adds very little to the Neoplatonic doctrine of the
nature of evil. Like Dionysius, he identifies Being with
Good, and evil, as such, with not-being. Moral evil is
self-will: it is the attempt, on the part of the creature,
to be a particular This or That outside of God.

But what is most distinctive in Eckhart’s ethics is
the new importance which is given to the doctrine of
immanence. The human soul is a microcosm, which in
a manner contains all things in itself. At the “apex
of the mind” there is a Divine “spark,” which is so
closely akin to God that it is one with Him, and not


1] mean that a pantheist may with equal consistency call himself an
optimist or a pessimist, or both alternately.

2 As when he says, ‘‘In God all things are one, from angel to spider.”
The inquisitors were not slow to lay hold of this error. Among the twenty-
six articles of the gravamen against Eckhart we find, ‘‘Item, in omni
opere, etiam malo, manifestatur et relucet egualiter gloria Dei.” The
_ word egualiter is the stamp of true pantheism. Eckhart, however, whether
' consistently or not, frequently asserts the transcendence of God. ‘‘ God is
in the creatures, but above them.” ‘‘He is above all nature, and is not
Himself nature,” etc. In dealing with szz, he is confronted with the
obvious difficulty that if it is the nature of al] phenomenal things to return
to God, from whom they proceeded, the process which he calls the birth of
' the Son ought logically to occur in every conscious individual, for all have
a like phenomenal existence. He attempts to solve this puzzle by the
_ hypothesis of a double aspect of the new birth (see below). But I fear
| there is some justice in Protessor Pearson’s comment, ‘* Thus his pheno:
' menology is shattered upon his practical theology.”


156 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


merely united to Him! In his teaching about this
“ground of the soul” Eckhart wavers. His earlier
view is that it is created, and only the medium by which
God transforms us to Himself. But his later doctrine
is that it is uncreated, the immanence of the Being and
Nature of God Himself. “ Diess Fiinkelein, das ist Gott,”
he says once. This view was adopted by Ruysbroek,
Suso, and (with modifications by) Tauler, and became
one of their chief tenets.2 This spark is the organ by
which our personality holds communion with God and
knows Him. It is with reference to it that Eckhart
uses the phrase which has so often been quoted to
convict him of blasphemous self-deification—“ the eye


1 Other scholastics and mystics had taught that there is a res¢due of the
Godlike in man. The idea of a central point of the soul appears in
Plotinus and Augustine, and the word sczztzl/a had been used of this
faculty before Eckhart. The ‘‘synteresis” of Alexander of Hales, Bona-
ventura, Albertus Magnus, and Thomas Aquinas, was substantially the
same, But there is this difference, that while the earlier writers regard
this resemblance to God as only a residue, Eckhart regards it as the true
Wesen of the soul, into which all its faculties may be transformed.

2 The following passage from Amiel (p. 44 of English edition) is an
admirable commentary on the mystical doctrine of immanence :—‘‘ The
centre of life is neither in thought nor in feeling nor in will, nor even in
consciousness, so far as it thinks, feels, or wishes. For moral truth may
have been penetrated and possessed in all these ways, and escape us still.
Deeper even than consciousness, there is our being itself, our very sub-
stance, our nature. Only those truths which have entered into this last
region, which have become ourselves, become spontaneous and involuntary,
instinctive and unconscious, are really our life—that is to say, something
more than our property. So long as we are able to distinguish any space
whatever between the truth and us, we remain outside it. The thought,
the feeling, the desire, the consciousness of life, are not yet quite life. But
peace and repose can nowhere be found except in life and in eternal life,
and the eternal life is the Divine life, is God. To become Divine is, then,
the aim of life: then only can truth be said to be ours beyond the possi-
bility of loss, because it is no longer outside of us, nor even in us, but we
are it, and it is we; we ourselves are a truth, a will, a work of God.
Liberty has become nature; the creature is one with its Creator—one
through love.”


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 157


with which I see God is the same as that with which
He sees me.”! The “uncreated spark” is really the
same as the grace of God, which raises us into a God-
like state. But this grace, according to Eckhart (at
least in his later period), is God Himself acting like a
human faculty in the soul, and transforming it so that
“man himself becomes grace.”

The following is perhaps the most instructive pas-
sage: “There is in the soul something which is above
the soul, Divine, simple, a pure nothing; rather name-
less than named, rather unknown than known. Of this
I am accustomed to speak in my discourses. Some-
times I have called it a power, sometimes an uncreated
light, and sometimes a Divine spark. It is absolute
and free from all names and all forms, just as God is
free and absolute in Himself. It is higher than know-
ledge, higher than love, higher than grace. For in all
these there is still dzstznction. In this power God doth
blossom and flourish with all His Godhead, and the

1 No better exposition of the religious aspect of Eckhart’s doctrine of


immanence can be found than in Principal Caird’s /troduction to the
Philosophy of Religion, pp. 244, 245, as the following extract will show:
‘© There is therefore a sense in which we can say that the world of finite
intelligence, though distinct from God, is still, in its ideal nature, one with
Him. That which God creates, and by which He reveals the hidden
treasures of His wisdom and love, is still not foreign to His own infinite
life, but one with it. In the knowledge of the minds that know Him, in
the self-surrender of the hearts that love Him, it is no paradox to affirm
that He knows and loves Himself. As He is the origin and inspiration of
every true thought and pure affection, of every experience in which we
forget and rise above ourselves, so is He also of all these the end. If in
one point of view religion is the work of man, in another it is the work of
God. Its true significance is not apprehended till we pass beyond its
origin in time and in the experience of a finite spirit, to see in it the revela-
tion of the mind of God Himself. In the language of Scripture, ‘It is
God that worketh in us to will and to do of His good pleasure: all things
are of God, who hath reconciled us to Himself.’ ”


158 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Spirit flourisheth in God. In this power the Father
bringeth forth His only-begotten Son, as essentially as
in Himself; and in this light ariseth the Holy Ghost.
This spark rejecteth all creatures, and will have only
God, simply as He is in Himself. It rests satisfied
neither with the Father, nor with the Son, nor with the
Holy Ghost, nor with the three Persons, so far as each
_existeth in its particular attribute. It is satisfied only
with the superessential essence. It is determined to
enter into the simple Ground, the still Waste, the
Unity where no man dwelleth. Then it is satisfied in
the light; then it is one: it is one in itself, as this
Ground is a simple stillness, and in itself immovable;
and yet by this immobility are all things moved.”

It is God that worketh in us both to will and to do
of His good pleasure; but our own nature and person-
ality remain intact. It is plain that we could not see
God unless our personality remained distinct from the
personality of God. Complete fusion is as destructive
of the possibility of love and knowledge as complete
separation.

Eckhart gives to “ the highest reason”? the primacy


1 Eckhart sees this (cf. Preger, vol. i. p. 421): ‘‘ Personality in Eckhart
is neither the faculties, nor the form (4z/d), nor the essence, nor the nature
of the Godhead, but it is rather the spirit which rises out of the essence,
and is born by the irradiation of the form in the essence, which mingles
itself with our nature and works by its means.” The obscurity of this con-
ception is not made any less by the distinction which Eckhart draws between
the outer and inner consciousness in the personality. The outer conscious-
ness is bound up with the earthly life; to it all images must come
through sense; but in this way it can have no image of itself. But the
higher consciousness is supra-temporal. The potential ground of the soul
is and remains sinless ; but the personality is also united to the bodily
nature ; its guilt is that it inclines to its sinful nature instead of to God.

* Eckhart distinguishes the zyéellectus agens (diu wirkende Vernunft)
from the passive (/édende) intellect. The office of the former is to present


ape ee


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 159


among our faculties, and in his earlier period identifies
it with “the spark.” He asserts the absolute supremacy
of reason more strongly than anyone since Erigena.
His language on this subject resembles that of the
Cambridge Platonists. “Reasonable knowledge is
eternal life,” he says. “How can any external revela-
tion help me,” he asks, “unless it be verified by inner
experience? The last appeal must always be to the
deepest part of my own being, and that is my reason.”
“ The reason,” he says, “presses ever upwards. It cannot
rest content with goodness or wisdom, nor even with
God Himself; it must penetrate to the Ground from
whence all goodness and wisdom spring.”

Thus Eckhart is not content with the knowledge of
God which is mediated by Christ, but aspires to pene-
trate into the “ Divine darkness” which underlies the
manifestation of the Trinity. In fact, when he speaks
of the imitation of Christ, he distinguishes between
“the way of the manhood,” which has to be followed
by all, and “the way of the Godhead,” which is for the
mystic only. In this overbold aspiration to rise “ from
the Three to the One,” he falls into the error which we
have already noticed, and several passages in his
writings advocate the quietistic self-simplification which
belongs to this scheme of perfection, There are sen-
tences in which he exhorts us to strip off all that comes


perceptions to the latter, set out under the forms of time and space. In his
Strassburg period, the spark or Ganster, the cntellectus agens, diu oberste
Vernunft, and synteresis, seem to be identical ; but later he says, ‘‘ The
active intellect cannot give what it has not got. It cannot see two ideas
together, but only one after another. But if God works in the place of
the active intellect, He begets (in the mind) many ideas in one point.”
Thus the ‘“‘spark” becomes supra-rational and uncreated—the Divine


essence itself.


160 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


to us from the senses, and to throw ourselves upon the
heart of God, there to rest for ever, “hidden from all
creatures.”! But there are many other passages of an
opposite tendency. He tells us that “the way of the
manhood,” which, of course, includes imitation of the
active life of Christ, must be trodden first by all; he
insists that in the state of union the faculties of the
soul will act in a new and higher way, so that the
‘personality is restored, not destroyed; and, lastly, he
teaches that contemplation is only the means to a
higher activity, and that this is, in fact, its object;
“what a man has taken in by contemplation, that he
pours out in love.” There is no contradiction in the
desire for rest combined with the desire for active
service; for rest can only be defined as unimpeded
activity; but in Eckhart there is, I think, a real incon-
sistency. The traditions of his philosophy pointed
towards withdrawal from the world and from outward
occupations—towards the monkish ideal, in a word;
but the modern spirit was already astir within him.
He preached in German to the general public, and his
favourite themes are the present living operation of
the Spirit, and the consecration of life in the world.
There is, he shows, no contradiction between the active


1 The following sentence, for instance, is in the worst manner of Dio-
nysius: ‘‘Thou shalt love God as He is, a non-God, a non-Spirit, a non-
Person, a non-Form: He is absolute bare Unity.” This is Eckhart’s
theory of the Absolute (‘‘the Godhead”) as distinguished from God. In
these moods he wishes, like the Asiatic mystics, to sink in the bottomless
sea of the Infinite. He also aspires to absolute drdOeva ( Abgeschiedenheit).
“Is he sick? He is as fain to be sick as well. If a friend should die—in
the name of God. If an eye should be knocked out—in the name of God.”
The soul has returned to its pre-natal condition, having rid itself of all
** creatureliness.”


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 161


and the contemplative life; the former belongs to the
faculties of the soul, the latter to its essence. In com-
menting on the story of Martha and Mary, those
favourite types of activity and contemplation,! he sur-
prises us by putting Martha first. “Mary hath chosen
the good part; that is,” he says, “she is striving to be
as holy as her sister. Mary is still at school: Martha
has learnt her lesson. It is better to feed the hungry
than to see even such visions as St. Paul saw.” “ Besser
ein Lebemeister als tausend Lesemeister.” He dis-
courages monkish religiosity and external badges of
saintliness—“ avoid everything peculiar,” he says, “in
dress, food, and language.” “ You need not go into a
desert and fast; a crowd is often more lonely than a
wilderness, and small things harder to do than great.”
“What is the good of the dead bones of saints?” he
asks, in the spirit of a sixteenth century reformer; “the
dead can neither give nor take.” This double aspect


1 Many passages might be quoted. The ordinary conclusion is that Mary
chose the better part, because activity is confined to this life, while con-
templation lasts for ever. Augustine treats the story of Leah and Rachel
in the same way (Contra Faust. Manich. xxii. 52): ‘‘ Lia interpretatur
Laborans, Rachel autem Visum principium, sive Verbum ex quo videtur
principium. Actio ergo humanz mortalisque vite . . . ipsa est Lia prior
uxor Jacob; ac per hoc et infirmis oculis fuisse commemoratur. Spes
vero zternz contemplationis Dei, habens certam et delectabilem intelli-
gentiam veritatis, ipsa est Rachel, unde etiam dicitur bona facie et pulcra
specie,” etc.

2 Moreover, he is never tired of insisting that the W2// is everything.
‘If your will is right, you cannot go wrong,” he says. ‘* With the will I
can do everything.” ‘‘ Love resides in the will—the more will, the more
love.” ‘‘ There is nothing evil but the evil will, of which sin is the
appearance.” ‘‘The value of human life depends entirely on the aim
which it sets before itself.* This over-insistence on purity of intention as
the end, as well as the beginning, of virtue, is no doubt connected with
Eckhart’s denial of reality and importance to the world of time ; he tries
to show that it does not logically lead to Antinomianism. His doctrine
that good works have no value in themselves differs from those of Abelard


II :


bed


162 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


of Eckhart’s teaching makes him particularly interest-
ing; he seems to stand on the dividing-line between
medizyal and modern Christianity.

Like other mystics, he insists that love, when per-
fect, is independent of the hope of reward, and he
shows great freedom in handling Purgatory, Hell, and
Heaven. They are states, not places; separation
from God is the misery of hell, and each man is his


own judge.» “We would spiritualise everything,’ he


says, with especial reference to Holy Scripture."

In comparing the Mysticism of Eckhart with that of
his predecessors, from Dionysius downwards, and of the
scholastics down to Gerson, we find an obvious change
in the disappearance of the long ladders of ascent, the
graduated scales of virtues, faculties, and states of
mind, which fill so large a place in those systems.
These lists are the natural product of the imagination,
when it plays upon the theory of emanation. But
with Eckhart, as we have seen, the fundamental truth
is the zmmanence of God Himself, not in the faculties,
but in the ground of the soul. The “spark of the
soul” is for him really “divine particula aure.” “God
begets His Son in me,” he is fond of saying: and there


and Bernard, which have a superficial resemblance to it. Eckhart really
regards the Catholic doctrine of good works much as St. Paul treated the
Pharisaic legalism ; but he is as unconscious of the widening gulf which had
already opened between Teutonic and Latin Christianity, as of the discredit
which his own writings were to help to bring upon the monkish view of
life.

2 As an example of his free handling of the Old Testament, I may quote,
**Do not suppose that when God made heaven and earth and all things,
He made one thing to-day and another to-morrow. Moses says so, of
course, but he knew better ; he only wrote that for the sake of the populace,
who could not have understood otherwise. God merely weJ/ed, and the
world was.”


PLATONISM AND MYSTICISM 163


is no doubt that, relying on a verse in the seventeenth
chapter of St. John, he regards this “begetting” as

~ analogous to the eternal generation of the Son.’ This
birth of the Son in the soul has a double aspect—the
“eternal birth,” which is unconscious and inalienable?
but which does not confer blessedness, being common

to good and bad alike; and the assimilation of the
faculties of the soul by the pervading presence of

1 Christ, or in other words by grace, “ que lux quedam
deiformis est,” as Ruysbroek says. The deification of
our nature is therefore a thing to be striven for, and
not given complete to start with; but it is important

- to observe that Eckhart places no intermediaries
between man and God. “The Word is very nigh
thee,” nearer than any object of sense, and any human

- institutions; sink into thyself, and thou wilt find Him.
The heavenly and earthly hierarchies of Dionysius,
with the reverence for the priesthood which was built
upon them, have no significance for Eckhart. In this
as in other ways, he is a precursor of the Reformation.

~ With Eckhart I end this Lecture on the speculative
Mysticism of the Middle Ages. His successors, Ruys-
broek, Suso, and Tauler, much as they resemble him
in their general teaching, differ from him in this, that
with none of them is the intellectual, philosophical


1 #.g. ‘Da der vatter seynen sun in mir gebirt, da byn ich der selb sun
und nitt eyn ander.”

2 So Hermann of Fritslar says that the soul has two faces, the one turned
towards this world, the other immediately to God. In the latter God
flows and shines eternally, whether man is conscious of it or not. It is
therefore according to man’s nature as possessed of this Divine ground, to
seek God, his original ; and even in hell the suffering there has its source
in the hopeless contradiction of this indestructible tendency. See Vaughan,
vol. i. p. 256; and the same teaching in Tauler, p. 185.


164 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


side of primary importance. They added nothing of
value to the speculative system of Eckhart ;_ their
Mysticism was primarily a religion of the heart or a
rule of life. It is this side of Mysticism to which I
shall next invite your attention. It should bring us
near to the centre of our subject: for a speculative
religious system is best known by its fruits,


eae
=f
Ps


°Q Opbvos ris Betbrnros 5 vobs Eorw judy.” es


Macarius,
**‘ Thou comest not, thou goest not ;
a Thou wert not, wilt not be;
Eternity is but a thought _ Sa
3 E By which we think of Thee.”
; FABER.


*¢ Werd als ein Kind, werd taub und blind,
Dein eignes Icht muss werden nicht:

All Icht, all Nicht treib ferne nur ;
Lass Statt, lass Zeit, auch Bild lass weit,
Geh ohne Weg den schmalen Steg,

So kommst du auf der Wiiste Spur.

O Seele mein, aus Gott geh ein,
Sink als ein Icht in Gottes Nicht,

Sink in die ungegriindte Fluth.

Flich ich von Dir, du kommst zu mir,
Verlass ich mich, so find ich Dich,

O iiberwesentliches Gut !”

Medieval German Hymn.


*© Quid czlo dabimus? quantum est quo veneat omne?
Impendendus homo est, Deus esse ut possit in ipso.” —
MANILIUs,


LECTURE -¥


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL MYSTICISM


“We all, with unveiled face reflecting as a mirror the glory of the Lord, are
transformed into the same image, from glory to glory.”—z Cor. iii. 18.


THE school of Eckhart! in the fourteenth century pro-
duced the brightest cluster of names in the history of
Mysticism. In Ruysbroek, Suso, Tauler, and the
author of the 7eologia Germanica we see introspective
Mysticism at its best. This must not be understood
to mean that they improved upon the philosophical
system of Eckhart, or that they are entirely free from
the dangerous tendencies which have been found in his
works. On the speculative side they added nothing of
value, and none of them rivals Eckhart in clearness of
intellect. But we find in them an unfaltering con-
viction that our communion with God must be a fact
of experience, and not only a philosophical theory.
With the most intense earnestness they set themselves
to live through the mysteries of the spiritual life, as the
only way to understand and prove them. Suso and


1 The indebtedness of the fourteenth century mystics to Eckhart is now
generally recognised, at any rate in Germany; but before Pfeiffer’s work
his name had been allowed to fall into most undeserved obscurity. This
was not the fault of his scholars, who, in spite of the Papal condemnation
of his writings, speak of Eckhart with the utmost reverence, as the


‘* great,” * sublime,” or “ holy”’ master.
167


168 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Tauler both passed through deep waters; the history
of their inner lives is a record of heroic struggle and
suffering. The personality of the men is part of their
message, a statement which could hardly be made
of Dionysius or Erigena, perhaps not of Eckhart
himself.

John of Ruysbroek, “doctor ecstaticus,” as the
'Church allowed him to be called, was born in 1293,
and died in 1381. He was prior of the convent of
Griinthal, in the forest of Soignies, where he wrote
most of his mystical treatises, under the direct
guidance, as he believed, of the Holy Spirit. He was
the object of great veneration in the later part of his
life. Ruysbroek was not a learned man, or a clear
thinker. He knew Dionysius, St. Augustine, and
Eckhart, and was no doubt acquainted with some of
the other mystical writers; but he does not write like
a scholar or a man of letters. He resembles Suso in
being more emotional and less speculative than most
of the German school.

Ruysbroek reverts to the mystical tradition, par-
tially broken by Eckhart, of arranging almost all his
topics in three or seven divisions, often forming a
progressive scale, or instance, in the treatise “On
the Seven Grades of Love,” we have the following series,
which he calls the “Ladder of Love”: (1) goodwill;
(2) voluntary poverty; (3) chastity; (4) humility;
(5) desire for the glory of God; (6) Divine contempla-
tion, which has three properties—intuition, purity of


1 “Vir ut ferunt devotus sed parum litteratus,” says the Abbé Trithéme
(ap. Gessner, Bzblzoth.). ‘‘ Rusbrochius cum idiota esset” (Dyon. Carth.
Serm. i.). Compare Rousselot, Les Mystigues Espagnols, p. 493.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 169


spirit, and nudity of mind; (7) the ineffable, unname-
able transcendence of all knowledge and thought.
This arbitrary schematism is the weakest part ot
Ruysbroek’s writings, which contain many deep
thoughts. His chief work, Ordo spiritualium nup-
tiarum, is one of the most complete charts of the
mystic’s progress which exist. The three stages
are here the active life (wta actuosa), the internal,
elevated, or affective life, to which all are not called,
and the contemplative life, to which only a few can
attain. The three parts of the soul, sensitive, rational,
and spiritual, correspond to these three stages. The
motto of the active life is the text,“ Ecce sponsus venit ;
exite obviam et.” The Bridegroom “comes” three
times: He came in the flesh; He comes into us by
grace; and He will come-to judgment. We must “go
out to meet Him,” by the three virtues of humility,
love, and justice: these are the three virtues which
support the fabric of the active life. The ground of
all the virtues is humility; thence proceed, in order,
obedience, renunciation of our own will, patience,
gentleness, piety, sympathy, bountifulness, strength
and impulse for all virtues, soberness and temperance,
chastity. “This is the active life, which is necessary
for us all, if we wish to follow Christ, and to reign
with Him in His everlasting kingdom.”

Above the active rises the inner life. This has three
parts. Our intellect must be enlightened with super-
natural clearness; we must behold the inner coming of
the Bridegroom, that is, the eternal truth ; we must “ go
out” from the exterior to the inner life; we must go
to meet the Bridegroom, to enjoy union with His Divinity.


170 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Finally, the spirit rises from the inner to the con-
templative life. “When we rise above ourselves, and
in our ascent to God are made so simple that the love
which embraces us is occupied only with itself, above
the practice of all the virtues, then we are transformed
and die in God to ourselves and to all separate in-
dividuality.”. God unites us with Himself in eternal
love, which is Himself. “In this embrace and essential
unity with God all devout and inward spirits are one
with God by living immersion and melting away into
Him; they are by grace one and the same thing with
Him, because the same essence is in both.” “ For

what we are, that we intently contemplate; and what
we contemplate, that we are; for our mind, our life,
and our essence are simply lifted up and united to the
very truth, which is God. Wherefore in this simple
and intent contemplation we are one life and one
spirit with God. And this I call the contemplative
life. In this highest stage the soul is united to God
without means; it sinks into the vast darkness of
the Godhead.” In this abyss, he says, following his
authorities, “the Persons of the Trinity transcend
themselves” ; “there is only the eternal essence, which
is the substance of the Divine Persons, where we are
all one and uncreated, according to our prototypes.”
Here, “so far as distinction of persons goes, there is no
more God nor creature”; “we have lost ourselves and
been melted away into the unknown darkness.” And
yet we remain eternally distinct from God. The
creature remains a creature, and loses not its creature-
liness. We must be conscious of ourselves in God,
and conscious of ourselves in ourselves. For eternal


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 171


life consists in the knowledge of God, and there can be
no knowledge without self-consciousness. If we could
be blessed without knowing it, a stone, which has
no consciousness, might be blessed.

Ruysbroek, it is plain, had no qualms in using the
old mystical language without qualification. This is
the more remarkable, because he was fully aware of the
disastrous consequences which follow from the method
of negation and self-deification. For Ruysbroek was
an earnest reformer of abuses. He spares no one—
popes, bishops, monks, and the laity are lashed in
vigorous language for their secularity, covetousness,
and other faults; but perhaps his sharpest castigation
is reserved for the false mystics. There are some, he
says, who mistake mere laziness for holy abstraction ;
others give the rein to “spiritual self-indulgence”;
others neglect all religious exercises; others fall into
antinomianism, and “think that nothing is forbidden
to them ”—‘“they will gratify any appetite which in-
terrupts their contemplation”: these are “by far the
worst of all.” “There is another error,” he proceeds,
“of those who like to call themselves ‘theopaths.’
They take every impulse to be Divine, and repudiate
all responsibility. Most of them live in inert sloth.”
As a corrective to these errors, he very rightly says,
“ Christ must be the rule and pattern of all our lives” ;
but he does not see that there is a deep inconsistency
between the imitation of Christ as the living way to
the Father, and the “negative road” which leads to


vacancy.


1 Maeterlinck, Ruysbroek’s latest interpreter, is far too complimentary
to the intellectual endowments of his fellow-countryman. ‘Ce moine


172 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Henry Suso, whose autobiography is a document of
unique importance for the psychology of Mysticism,
was born in 12952  Intellectually he is a disciple
of Eckhart, whom he understands better than Ruys-
broek ; but his life and character are more like those
of the Spanish mystics, especially St. Juan of the
Cross. The text which is most often in his mouth
is, “Where I am, there shall also My servant be”;
which he interprets to mean that only those who
have embraced to the full the fellowship of Christ’s
sufferings, can hope to be united to Him in glory.
“No cross, no crown,” is the law of life which Suso
accepts in all the severity of its literal meaning.
The story of the terrible penances which he inflicted
on himself for part of his life is painful and almost
repulsive to read; but they have nothing in common
with the ostentatious self-torture of the fakir.
Suso’s deeply affectionate and poetical temperament,
with its strong human loves and sympathies, made
the life of the cloister very difficult for him. He
accepted it as the highest life, and strove to conform
himself to its ideals; and when, after sixteen years
of cruel austerities, he felt that his “refractory body”
was finally tamed, he discontinued his mortifications,


possedait un des plus sages, des plus exacts, et des plus subtils organes
philosophiques qui aient jamais existé.” He thinks it marvellous that
‘‘i] sait, 4 son insu, le platonisme de Ja Gréce, le soufisme de la Perse, le
brahmanisme de I’Inde et le bouddhisme de Thibet,” etc. In reality,
Ruysbroek gets all his philosophy from Eckhart, and his manner of
expounding it shows no abnormal acuteness. But Maeterlinck’s essay in
Le Trésor des Humbles contains some good things—e.g. ‘‘Les verités
mystiques ne peuvent ni vieillir ni mourir. . . . Une ceuvre ne vieillit
qu’en proportion de son antimysticisme.”

1So Preger, probably rightly. Noack places his birth five years later,
The chronology of the Z2fe is very loose.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 173


and entered upon a career of active usefulness. In
this he had still heavier crosses to carry, for he
was persecuted and falsely accused, while the spiritual
consolations which had cheered him in his early
struggles were often withdrawn. In his old age,
shortly before his death in 1365, he published the
history of his life, which is one of the most interesting
and charming of all autobiographies. Suso’s literary
gift is very remarkable. Unlike most ecstatic mystics,
who declare on each occasion that “tongue cannot
utter” their experiences, Suso’s store of glowing and
vivid language never fails. The hunger and thirst of
the soul for God, and the answering love of Christ
manifested in the inner man, have never found a more
pure and beautiful expression. In the hope of in-
ducing more readers to become acquainted with this
gem of medizval literature, I will give a few extracts
from its pages.

“The servitor of the eternal Wisdom,” as he calls
himself throughout the book, made the first beginning
of his perfect conversion to God in his eighteenth
year. Before that, he had lived as others live, content
to avoid deadly sin; but all the time he had felt a
gnawing reproach within him. Then came the tempta-
tion to be content with gradual progress, and to “treat
himself well.” But “the eternal Wisdom” said to
him, “ He who seeks with tender treatment to conquer
a refractory body, wants common sense. If thou art
minded to forsake all, do so to good purpose.” The
stern command was obeyed.’ Very soon—it is the


1 The extreme asceticism which was practised by Suso, and (though to
a less degree) by Tauler, is not enjoined by them as a necessary part of a


174 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


usual experience of ascetic mystics—he was encour-
aged by rapturous visions. One such, which came to
him on St. Agnes’ Day, he thus describes :—* It was
without form or mode, but contained within itself the
most entrancing delight. His heart was athirst and
yet satisfied. It was a breaking forth of the sweetness
of eternal life, felt as present in the stillness of con-
templation. Whether he was in the body or out of
the body, he knew not.” It lasted about an hour and
a half; but gleams of its light continued to visit him
at intervals for some time after.

Suso’s loving nature, like Augustine’s, needed an
object of affection. His imagination concentrated
itself upon the eternal Wisdom, personified in the
Book of Proverbs in female form as a loving mistress,
and the thought came often to him, “Truly thou
shouldest make trial of thy fortune, whether this high
mistress, of whom thou hast heard so much, will
become thy love; for in truth thy wild young heart
will not remain without a love.” Then in a vision he
saw her, radiant in form, rich in wisdom, and overflow-
ing with love; it is she who touches the summit of the
heavens, and the depths of the abyss, who spreads
herself from end to end, mightily and sweetly dispos-
ing all things. And she drew nigh to him lovingly,
and said to him sweetly, “My son, give me thy
heart.”

At this season there came into his soul a flame of
intense fire, which made his heart burn with Divine
love. And as a “love token,” he cut deep in his


holy life. ‘*We are to kill our passions, not our flesh and blood,” as
Tauler says.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL § 175


breast the name of Jesus, so that the marks of the
letters remained all his life, “about the length of a
finger-joint.”

Another time he saw a vision of angels, and be-
sought one of them to show him the manner of God’s
secret dwelling in the soul. An angel answered,
“Cast then a joyous glance into thyself, and see how
God plays His play of love with thy loving soul.” He
looked immediately, and saw that his body over his
heart was as clear as crystal, and that in the centre
was sitting tranquiily, in lovely form, the eternal
Wisdom, beside whom sat, full of heavenly longing,
the servitor’s own soul, which leaning lovingly towards
God’s side, and encircled by His arms, lay pressed
close to His heart.

In another vision he saw “the blessed master Eck-
hart,” who had lately died in disfavour with the rulers
of the Church. “He signified to the servitor that he
was in exceeding glory, and that his soul was quite
transformed, and made Godlike in God.” In answer
to questions, “the blessed Master” told him that
“words cannot tell the manner in which those persons
dwell in God who have really detached themselves
from the world, and that the way to attain this detach-
ment is to die to self, and to maintain unruffled
patience with all men.”

Very touching is the vision of the Holy Child
which came to him in church on Candlemas Day.
Kneeling down in front of the Virgin, who appeared
to him, “he prayed her to show him the Child, and to
suffer him also to kiss it. When she kindly offered it to
him, he spread out his arms and received the beloved


176 - CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


One. He contemplated its beautiful little eyes, he


kissed its tender little mouth, and he gazed again and
again at all the infant members of the heavenly trea-
sure. Then, lifting up his eyes, he uttered a cry of
amazement that He who bears up the heavens is
so great, and yet so small, so beautiful in heaven
and so childlike on earth. And as the Divine Infant
moved him, so did he act toward it, now singing
now weeping, till at last he gave it back to its
mother.”

When at last he was warned by an angel, he says,
to discontinue his austerities, “he spent several weeks
very pleasantly,” often weeping for joy at the thought
of the grievous sufferings which he had undergone.
But his repose was soon disturbed. One day, as he
sat meditating on “life as a warfare,” he saw a vision
of a comely youth, who vested him in the attire of a
knight,! saying to him, “ Hearken, sir knight! Hitherto
thou hast been a squire; now God wills thee to be
a knight. And thou shalt have fighting enough!”
Suso cried, “ Alas, my God! what art Thou about to
do unto me? I thought that I had had enough by
this time. Show me how much suffering I have before
me.” The Lord said, “It is better for thee not to
know. Nevertheless I will tell thee of three things.
Hitherto thou hast stricken thyself. Now I will strike


1Tt would be very interesting to trace the influence of the chivalric idea
on religious Mysticism. Chivalry, the worship of idealised womanhood,
is itself a mystical cult, and its relation to religious Mysticism appears
throughout the ‘‘ Divine Comedy” and ‘‘ Vita Nuova” (see especially
the incomparable paragraph which concludes this latter), and in the sonnet
of M. Angelo translated by Wordsworth, ‘‘ No mortal object did these eyes
behold,” etc.


Pp ey Sra Ee.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 177


thee, and thou shalt suffer publicly the loss of thy
good name. Secondly, where thou shalt look for love
and faithfulness, there shalt thou find treachery and
suffering. Thirdly, hitherto thou hast floated in Divine
sweetness, like a fish in the sea; this will I now with-
draw from thee, and thou shalt starve and wither.
Thou shalt be forsaken both by God and the world,
and whatever thou shalt take in hand to comfort thee
shall come to nought.” The servitor threw himself on
the ground, with arms outstretched to form a cross,
and prayed in agony that this great misery might not
fall upon him. Then a voice said to him, “Be of
good cheer, I will be with thee and aid thee to
overcome.”

The next chapters show how this vision or pre-
sentiment was verified. The journeys which he now
took exposed him to frequent dangers, both from
robbers and from lawless men who hated the monks.
One adventure with a murderer is told with delightful
simplicity and vividness. Suso remains throughout
his life thoroughly human, and, hard as his lot had
been, he is in an agony of fear at the prospect of a
violent death. The story of the outlaw confessing to
the trembling monk how, besides other crimes, he had
once pushed into the Rhine a priest who had just
heard his confession, and how the wife of the assassin
comforted Suso when he was about to drop down from
sheer fright, forms a quaint interlude in the saint’s
memoirs, But a more grievous trial awaited him.
Among other pastoral work, he laboured much to
reclaim fallen women; and a pretended penitent, whose
insincerity he had detected, revenged herself by a

12


*


178 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


slander which almost ruined him! Happily, the chiefs
of his order, whose verdict he had greatly dreaded,
completely exonerated him, after a full investigation,
and his last years seem to have been peaceful and
happy. The closing chapters of the Life are taken
up by some very interesting conversations with his
spiritual “daughter,” Elizabeth Staglin, who wished to
understand the obscurer doctrines of Mysticism. She


‘asks him about the doctrine of the Trinity, which he


expounds on the general lines of Eckhart’s theology.
She, however, remembers some of the bolder phrases
in Eckhart, and says, “But there are some who say
that, in order to attain to perfect union, we must divest
ourselves of God, and turn only to the inwardly-
shining light.” “That is false,” replies Suso, “if the
words are taken in their ordinary sense. But the
common belief about God, that He is a great Task-
master, whose function is to reward and punish, zs cast
out by perfect love; and in this sense the spiritual
man does divest himself of God, as conceived of by the
vulgar. Again, in the highest state of union, the soul
takes no note of the Persons separately ; for it is not the
Divine Persons taken singly that confer bliss, but the
Three in One.” Suso here gives a really valuable turn
to one of Eckhart’s rashest theses. “ Where is heaven?”
asks his pupil next. “The intellectual where,” is the


1 Nothing in the book is more touching than the scene when the baby,
deserted by its mother, Suso’s false accuser, is brought to him. Suso takes
the child in his arms, and weeps over it with affectionate words, while the
infant smiles up at him. In spite of the calumny which he knew was
being spread wherever it would most injure him, he insists on paying for
the child’s maintenance, rather than leave it to die from neglect. The
Italian mystic Scupoli, the author of a beautiful devotional work called
the Spzritual Combat, was calumniated in a similar manner.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 179


reply, “is the essentially-existing unnameable nothing-
ness. So we must call it, because we can discover no
mode of being, under which to conceive of it. But
though it seems to us to be no-thing, it deserves to be
called something rather than nothing.” Suso, we see,
~follows Dionysius, but with this proviso. The maiden
now asks him to give her a figure or image of the self-
evolution of the Trinity, and he gives her the figure of
concentric circles, such as appear when we throw a
stone into a pond. “ But,” he adds, “this is as unlike
the formless truth as a black Moor is unlike the
beautiful sun.” Soon after, the holy maiden died, and
Suso saw her in a vision, radiant and full of heavenly
joy, showing him how, guided by his counsels, she had
found everlasting bliss. When he came to himself, he
said, “Ah, God! blessed is the man who strives after
Thee alone! He may well be content to suffer, whose
pains Thou rewardest thus. God help us to rejoice in
this maiden, and in all His dear friends, and to enjoy
His Divine countenance eternally!” So ends Suso’s
autobiography. His other chief work, a Dialogue
between the eternal Wisdom and the Servitor, is a
prose poem of great beauty, the tenor of which may
be inferred from the above extracts from the Life.
Suso believed that the Divine Wisdom had indeed
spoken through his pen; and few, I think, will accuse
him of arrogance for the words which conclude the
Dialogue. “Whosoever will read these writings of
mine in a right spirit, can hardly fail to be stirred
— in his heart’s depths, either to fervent love, or to new
— light, or to longing and thirsting for God, or to
detestation and loathing of his sins, or to that


180 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM ~*


&


spiritual aspiration by which the soul is renewed in
grace.”

John Tauler was born at Strassburg about 1300,
and entered a Dominican convent in 1315. After
studying at Cologne and Paris, he returned to Strass-
burg, where, as a Dominican, he was allowed to officiate
as a priest, although the town was involved in the great
interdict of 1324. In 1339, however, he had to fly
to Basel, which was the headquarters of the revivalist
society who called themselves “the Friends of God.”
About 1346 he returned to Strassburg, and was
devoted in his ministrations during the “black death”
in 1348. He appears to have been strongly influenced
by one of the Friends of God, a mysterious layman,
who has been identified, probably wrongly, with
Nicholas of Basel,! and, according to some, dated his
“conversion” from his acquaintance with this saintly
man. Tauler continued to preach to crowded con-
gregations till his death in 1361.

Tauler is a thinker as well as a preacher. Though
in most points his teaching is identical with that of
Eckhart,? he treats all questions in an independent
manner, and sometimes, as for instance in his doctrine
about the uncreated ground of the soul,’ he differs from


1 By Schmidt, whose researches formed the basis of several popular
accounts of Tauler’s life. Preger and Denifle both reject the identification
of the mysterious stranger with Nicholas; Denifle doubts his existence
altogether. The subject is very fully discussed by Preger.

?Tauler was well read in the earlier mystics. He cites Proclus,
Augustine (frequently), Dionysius, Bernard, and the Victorines; also
Aristotle and Aquinas.

8 Tauler adheres to the doctrine of an ‘‘uncreated ground,” but he holds
that it must always act upon us through the medium of the ‘created
ground.” He evidently considered Eckhart’s later doctrine as too
pantheistic. See below, p. 183.


.


. PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 181


?


his master. There is also a perceptible change in the
stress laid upon certain parts of the system, which
brings Tauler nearer than Eckhart to the divines of
the Reformation, In particular, his sense of sin is
too deep for him to be satisfied with the Neoplatonic
doctrine of its negativity, which led Eckhart into
difficulties.}

The little book called the German Theology, by an
unknown author, also belongs to the school of Eckhart.
It is one of the most precious treasures of devotional
literature, and deserves to be better known than it is
in this country. In some ways it is superior to the
famous treatise of 4 Kempis, On the Imitation of Christ,
since the self-centred individualism is less prominent.
The author thoroughly understands Eckhart, but his
object is not to view everything sub specie cternitatis,
but to give a practical religious turn to his master’s
speculations. His teaching is closely in accordance
with that of Tauler, whom he quotes as an authority,
and whom he joins in denouncing the followers of
the “ false light,” the erratic mystics of the fourteenth
century.

The practical theology of these four German mystics
of the fourteenth century—Ruysbroek, Suso, Tauler,
and the writer of the German Theology, is so similar
that it is possible to consider it in detail without
taking each author separately. It is the crowning
achievement of Christian Mysticism before the Reforma-
tion; and, except in the English Platonists of the


1See p. 155. In my estimate of Tauler’s doctrine, I have made no use of
the treatise on Zhe Imitation of the Poverty of Christ, which Noack calls his
masterpiece, and the kernel of his Mysticism, The work is not by Tauler


iB2 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM .


seventeenth century, we shall not find anywhere a
sounder and more complete scheme of doctrine built
upon this foundation.

The distinction drawn by Eckhart between the God-
head and God is maintained in the German Theology,
and by Ruysbroek. The latter, as we have seen,
does not shrink from following the path of analysis
to the end, and says plainly that in the Abyss there
' is no distinction of Divine and human persons, but
only the eternal essence. Tauler also bids us “put
out into the deep, and let down our nets”; but
his “deep” is in the heart, not in the intellect.
“My children, you should not ask about these great
high problems,” he says; and he prefers not to
talk much about them, “for no teacher can teach
what he has not lived through himself.” Still he
speaks, like Dionysius and Eckhart, of the “ Divine
darkness,” “the nameless, formless nothing,” “ the
wild waste,” and so forth; and says of God that
He is “the Unity in which all multiplicity is tran-
scended,” and that in Him are gathered up both
becoming and being, eternal rest and eternal motion.
In this deepest ground, he says, the Three Persons are
implicit, not explicit. The Son is the Form of all
forms, to which the “eternal, reasonable form created
after God’s image” (the Idea of mankind) longs to be
conformed.

The creation of the world, according to Tauler, is
rather consonant with than necessary to the nature of
God. The world, before it became actual, existed in
its Idea in God, and this ideal world was set forth by


1 See above, p. 170,


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 183


means of the Trinity. It is in the Son that the Ideas
exist “from all eternity.” The Ideas are said to be
“living,” that is, they work as forms, and after the
creation of matter act as universals above and in things,
Tauler is careful to show that he is not a pantheist.
“God is the Being of all beings,” he says; “but He is
none of all things.” God is all, but all is not God;
He far transcends the universe in which He is
immanent.

We look in vain to Tauler for an explanation of the
obscurest point in Eckhart’s philosophy, as to the
relations of the phenomenal to the real. We want
clearer evidence that temporal existence is not regarded
as something illusory or accidental, an error which may
be inconsistent with the theory of immanence as taught
by the school of Eckhart, but which is too closely allied
with other parts of their scheme.

The indwelling of God in the soul is the real centre
of Tauler’s doctrine, but his psychology is rather
intricate and difficult. He speaks of three phases of
personal life, the sensuous nature, the reason, and the
“third man”—the spiritual life or pure substance of
the soul. He speaks also of an “uncreated ground,”
which is the abyss of the Godhead, but yet “in us,”
and of a “created ground,” which he uses in a double
sense, now of the empirical self, which is imperfect and
must be purified, and now of the ideal man, as God
intended him to be. This latter is “the third man,”
and is also represented by the “spark” at the “apex
of the soul,” which is to transform the rest of the soul
into its own likeness. The “uncreated ground,” in
Tauler, works upon us through the medium of the


184 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


“created ground,” and not as in Eckhart, immediately. —
The “created ground,” in this sense, he calls “the
Image,” which is identical with Eckhart’s “spark.” It
is a creative principle as well as created, like the
“Ideas” of Erigena.

The German Theology says that “the soul has two
eyes,” one of which, the right eye, sees into eternity,
the other sees time and the creatures. The “ right
eye” is practically the same as Eckhart’s “spark” and
Tauler’s “image.” It is significant that the author
tells us that we cannot see with both eyes together; the
left eye must be shut before we can use the right.?
The passage where this precept is given shows very
plainly that the author, like the other fourteenth century
mystics,’ was still under the influence of medizval
dualism—the belief that the Divine begins where the
earthly leaves off. It is almost the only point in this
“golden little treatise,” as Henry More calls it, to which
exception must be taken.*

1 This expression is found first, I think, in Richard of St. Victor; but
St. Augustine speaks of ‘‘oculus interior atque intelligibilis” (De div,
guest. 46),

2 But Christ, he says, could see with both eyes at once; the left in
no way hindered the right.

’ Tauler often uses similar language; as, for instance, when he says,


‘‘The natural light of the reason must be entirely brought to nothing, if
God is to enter with His light.”

4 Stdckl criticises the Theologia Germanica in a very hostile spirit. He
finds it in ‘‘ pantheism,” by which he means acosmism, and also ‘* Gnostic-
Manichean dualism,” the latter being his favourite charge against the
Lutherans and their forerunners. He considers that this latter tendency
is more strongly marked in the German Theology than in the other works
of the Eckhartian school, in that the writer identifies ‘‘the false light”
with the light of nature, and selfhood with sin; ‘devil, sin, Adam, old
man, disobedience, selfhood, individuality, mine, me, nature, self-will,
are all the same ; they all represent what is against God and without God.”
Accordingly, salvation consists in annihilation of the self, and substitution


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 185


The essence of sin is self-assertion or self-will, and
consequent separation from God. Tauler has, perhaps,
a deeper sense of sin than any of his predecessors, and
he revives the Augustinian (anti-Pelagian) teaching on
the miserable state of fallen humanity. Sensuality and
pride, the two chief manifestations of self-will, have
invaded the whole of our nature. Pride is a sin of the
spirit, and the poison has invaded “even the ground ”
—the “created ground,” that is, as the unity of all the
faculties. It will be remembered that the Neoplatonic
doctrine was that the spiritual part of our nature can
take no defilement. Tauler seems to believe that under
one aspect the “created ground” is the transparent
medium of the Divine light, but in this sense it is only
potentially the light of our whole body. He will not
allow the sinless apex mentis to be identified with the
personality. Separation from God is the source of all
misery. Therein lies the pain of hell. The human
soul can never cease to yearn and thirst after God;
“and the greatest pain” of the lost “is that this
longing can never be satisfied.” In the German
Theology, the necessity of rising above the “I” and
“mine” is treated as the great saving truth. “ When
the creature claimeth for its own anything good, it


of God for it. There is no doubt that the writer of this treatise is deeply
impressed with the belief that the root of sin is self-will, and that the new
birth must be a complete transformation ; but it must be remembered that
the language of piety is less guarded than that of dogmatic disputation,
and that the theology of such a book must be judged by its whole tendency.
My own judgment is that, taken as a whole, it is safer than Tauler or
Ruysbroek, and much safer than Eckhart. The strongly-marked ‘‘ ethical
dualism” is of very much the same kind as that which we find in St.
John’s Gospel. Taken as a theory of the origin and nature of evil, it no
doubt does hold out a hand to Manicheism; but I do not think that the
writer meant it to be so taken, any more than St. John did,


186 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


goeth astray.” “The more of self and me, the more of
sin and wickedness. Be simply and wholly bereft of
self.” “So long as a man seeketh his own highest
good decause it is his, he will never find it. For so
long as he doeth this, he seeketh himself, and deemeth
that he himself is the highest good.” (These last
sentences are almost verbally repeated in a sermon
by John Smith, the Cambridge Platonist.)

_ The three stages of the mystic’s ascent appear in
Tauler’s sermons. We have first to practise self-
control, till all our lower powers are governed by our
highest reason. “ Jesus cannot speak in the temple of
thy soul till those that sold and bought therein are cast
out of it.” In this stage we must be under strict rule
and discipline. “The old man must be subject to the
old law, till Christ be born in him of a truth.” Of the
second stage he says, “ Wilt thou with St. John rest on
the loving breast of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou must be
transformed into His beauteous image by a constant,
earnest contemplation thereof.” It is possible that God
may will to call thee higher still; then let go all forms
and images, and suffer Him to work with thee as His
instrument. To some the very door of heaven has
been opened—* this happens to some with a convulsion
of the mind, to others calmly and gradually.” “It is
not the work of a day nor of a year.” “ Before it can
come to pass, nature must endure many a death, out-
ward and inward.”

In the first stage of the “dying life,” he says else-
where, we are much oppressed by the sense of our in-
firmities, and by the fear of hell. But in the third, “all
our griefs and joys are a sympathy with Christ, whose


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 187


earthly life was a mingled web of grief and joy, and this
life He has left as a sacred testament to His followers.”

These last extracts show that the Cross of Christ,
and the imitation of His life on earth, have their due
prominence in Tauler’s teaching. It is, of course, true
that for him, as for all mystics, Christ zz us is more
than Christ for us. But it is unfair to put it in this
way, as if the German mystics wished to contrast the
two views of redemption, and to exalt one at the
expense of the other. Tauler’s wish is to give the
historical redemption its true significance, by showing
that it is an universal as well as a particular fact.
When he says, “ We should worship Christ’s humanity
only in union with this divinity,” he is giving exactly
the same caution which St. Paul expresses in the verse
about “knowing Christ after the flesh.”

In speaking of the highest of the three stages,
passages were quoted which advocate a purely passive
state of the will and intellect This quietistic tendency
cannot be denied in the fourteenth century mystics,
though it is largely counteracted by maxims of an
opposite kind. “God draws us,” says Tauler, “in three
ways, first, by His creatures; secondly, by His voice in
the soul, when an eternal truth mysteriously suggests


2 Throughout the fourteenth century, and still more in the fifteenth, we
can trace an increasing prominence given to subjugation of the w2// in
mystical theology. This change is to be attributed partly to the influence
of the Nominalist science of Duns Scotus, which gradually gained (at least
in this point) the ascendancy over the school of Aquinas. It may be
described as a transition from the more speculative Mysticism towards
quietism. In the fourteenth century writings, such as the Zheologia Ger-
manica, we merely welcome a new and valuable aspect of the religious life ;
but since the change is connected with a distrust of reason, and a return to
the standpoint of harsh legalism, we cannot regard it as an improvement,


188 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


itself, as happens not infrequently in morning sleep.” —
(This is interesting, being evidently the record of
personal experience.) “ Thirdly, without resistance or
means, when the will is quite subdued.” “What is
given through means is tasteless; it is seen through a
veil, and split up into fragments, and bears with it a
certain sting of bitterness.” There are other passages
in which he is obviously under the influence of Dio-
nysius ; as when he speaks of “ dying to all distinctions”;
in fact, he at times preaches “simplification” in an
unqualified form. But, on the other hand, no Christian
teachers have made more of the active will than these
pupils of Eckhart.’ “Ye are as holy as ye truly will to
be holy,” says Ruysbroek. “ With the will one may do
everything,” we read in Tauler. And against the per-
version of the “ negative road” he says, “ we must lop
and prune vices, not nature, which is in itself good and
noble.” And “Christ Himself never arrived at the
‘emptiness’ of which these men (the false mystics)
talk.” Of contemplation he says, “Spiritual enjoy-
ments are the food of the soul, and are only to be
taken for nourishment and support to help us in our
active work.” “Sloth often makes men fain to be
excused from their work and set to contemplation.
Never trust in a virtue that has not been put into
practice.” These pupils of Eckhart all led strenuous
lives themselves, and were no advocates of pious
indolence. Tauler says, “Works of love are more
acceptable to God than lofty contemplation”: and
“ All kinds of skill are gifts of the Holy Ghost.” 2


1 Compare p. 161, for similar teaching in Eckhart himself,
2 See the quotation on p. II, note,


>


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 189


The process of deification is thus described by Ruys-
broek and by Tauler. Ruysbroek writes: “ All men who
are exalted above their creatureliness into a contem-
plative life are one with this Divine glory—yea, ave that
glory. And they see and feel and find in themselves,
by means of this Divine light, that they are the same
simple Ground as to their uncreated nature, since the
glory shineth forth without measure, after the Divine
manner, and abideth within them simply and without
mode, according to the simplicity of the essence.
Wherefore contemplative men should rise above reason
and distinction, beyond their created substance, and
gaze perpetually by the aid of their inborn light, and so
they become transformed, and one with the same light,
by means of which they see, and which they see.
Thus they arrive at that eternal image after which they
were created, and contemplate God and all things
without distinction, in a simple beholding, in Divine
glory. This is the loftiest and most profitable con-
templation to which men attain in this life” Tauler,
in his sermon for the Fifteenth Sunday after Trinity,
says: “ The kingdom is seated in the inmost recesses of
the spirit. When, through all manner of exercises, the
outward man has been converted into the inward
reasonable man, and thus the two, that is to say, the
powers of the senses and the powers of the reason, are
gathered up into the very centre of the man’s being,—
the unseen depths of his spirit, wherein lies the image
of God,—and thus he flings himself into the Divine
Abyss, in which he dwelt eternally before he was
created; then when God finds the man thus firmly
down and turned towards Him, the Godhead bends


190 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


and nakedly descends into the depths of the pure
waiting soul, and transforms the created soul, drawing
it up into the uncreated essence, so that the spirit
becomes one with Him. Could such a man behold
himself, he would see himself so noble that he would
fancy himself God, and see himself a thousand
times nobler than he is in himself, and would per-
ceive all the thoughts and purposes, words and works,
‘and have all the knowledge of all men that ever
were.” Suso and the German Theology use similar
language.

The idea of deification startles and shocks the
modern reader. It astonishes us to find that these
earnest and humble saints at times express themselves
in language which surpasses the arrogance even of the
Stoics. We feel that there must be something wrong
with a system which ends in obliterating the distinction
between the Creator and His creatures. We desire in
vain to hear some echo of Job’s experience, so different
in tone: “Ihave heard Thee by the hearing of the ear,
but now mine eye seeth Thee; ¢herefore I abhor myself,
and repent in dust and ashes.” The proper effect
of the vision of God is surely that which Augustine
describes in words already quoted: “I tremble, and
I burn, I tremble, in that I am unlike Him; I burn,
in that I am like Him.” Nor is this only the
beginner’s experience: St. Paul had almost. “ finished
his course” when he called himself the chief of sinners,
The joy which uplifts the soul, when it feels the motions
of the Holy Spirit, arises from the fact that in such
moments “the spirit’s true endowments stand out
plainly from its false ones”; we thensee the “counten-


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL tor


ance of our genesis,” as St. James calls it—the man or
woman that God meant us to be, and know that we
could woz so see it if we were wholly cut off from its
realisation. But the clearer the vision of the ideal, the
deeper must be our self-abasement when we turn our
eyes to the actual. We must not escape from this
sharp and humiliating contrast by mentally annihilating
the self, so as to make it impossible to say, “ Look
on this picture, and on ¢hzs.” Such false humility
leads straight to its opposite——extreme arrogance.
Moreover, to regard deification as an accomplished
fact, involves, as I have said (p. 33), a contradiction.
The process of unification with the Infinite must be
a progressus ad infinitum. The pessimistic conclusion
is escaped by remembering that the highest reality
is supra-temporal, and that the destiny which God
has designed for us has not merely a contingent
realisation, but is in a sense already accomplished.
There are, in fact, two ways in which we may
abdicate our birthright, and surrender the prize of
our high calling: we may count ourselves already to
have apprehended, which must be a grievous delusion,
or we may resign it as unattainable, which is also a
delusion.

These truths were well known to Tauler and his
brother-mystics, who were saints as well as_philo-
sophers. If they retained language which appears to
us so objectionable, it must have been because they
felt that the doctrine of union with God enshrined a
truth of great value. And if we remember the great
mystical paradox, “ He that will lose his life shall save
it,” we shall partly understand how they arrived at it.


192 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


It is quite true that the nearer we approach to God, the
wider seems to yawn the gulf that separates us from
Him, till at last we feel it to be infinite. But does not
this conviction itself bring with it unspeakable com-
fort? How could we be aware of that infinite distance,
if there were not something within us which can span
the infinite? How could we feel that God and man
are incommensurable, if we had not the witness of
-a higher self immeasurably above our lower selves?
And how blessed is the assurance that this higher self
gives us access to a region where we may leave behind
not only external troubles and “the provoking of all
men,” but “ the strife of tongues ” in our own hearts, the
chattering and growling of the “ape and tiger” within
us, the recurring smart of old sins repented of, and the
dragging weight of innate propensities! In this state
the will, desiring nothing save to be conformed to the
will of God, and separating itself entirely from all lower
aims and wishes, claims the right of an immortal spirit
to attach itself to eternal truth alone, having nothing in
itself, and yet possessing all things in God. So Tauler
says, “ Let a man lovingly cast all his thoughts and
cares, and his sins too, as it were, on that unknown
Will. O dear child! in the midst of all these enmities
and dangers, sink thou into thy ground and nothing-
ness. Let the tower with all its bells fall on thee; yea,
let all the devils in hell storm out upon thee; let
heaven and earth and all the creatures assail thee, all
shall but marvellously serve thee; sink thou into thy
nothingness, and the better part shall be thine.” This
. hope of a real transformation of our nature by the free
gift of God’s grace is the only message of comfort


0 Lie


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 193


for those who are tied and bound by the chain of
’ their sins.

The error comes in, as I have said before, when we
set before ourselves the idea of God the Father, or of
the Absolute, instead of Christ, as the object of imita-
tion. Whenever we find such language as that quoted
from Ruysbroek, about “ rising above all distinctions,”
we may be sure that this error has been committed.
Mystics of all times would have done well to keep in
their minds a very happy phrase which Irenzeus quotes
from some unknown author, “ He spoke well who said
that the infinite (¢a#mensum) Father is measured (men-
suratum) in the Son: mensura enim Patris Filius.)
It is to this “ measure,” not to the immeasureable, that
we are bidden to aspire.

Eternity is, for Tauler, “the everlasting Now”; but
in his popular discourses he uses the ordinary expres-
sions about future reward and punishment, even about
hell fire; though his deeper thought is that the hope-
less estrangement of the soul from God is the source
of all the torments of the lost.

Love, says Tauler, is the “beginning, middle, and
end of virtue.” Its essence is complete self-surrender.
We must lose ourselves in the love of God as a drop
* of water is lost in the ocean.

It only remains to show how Tauler combats the
fantastic errors into which some of the German mystics
had fallen in his day. The author of the German
Theology is equally emphatic in his warnings against
the “false light” ; and Ruysbroek’s denunciation of the
Brethren of the Free Spirit has already been quoted.

1 Trenzeus, Contra Her. iv. 6.
13 G


194 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Tauler, in an interesting sermon,! describes the heady
arrogance, disorderly conduct, and futile idleness of these
fanatics, and then gives the following maxims, by which
we may distinguish the false Mysticism from the true.
“ Now let us know how we may escape these snares of
the enemy. No one can be free from the observance
of the laws of God and the: practice of virtue. No one
can unite himself to God in emptiness without true love
and desire for God. No one can be holy without becom-
ing holy, without good works. No one may leave off
doing good works. Noone may rest in God without love
for God. No one can be exalted to a stage which he has
not longed for or felt.” Finally,he shows how the example
of Christ forbids all the errors which he is combating.
The /mitation of Christ has been so often spoken
of as the finest flower of Christian Mysticism, that it is
impossible to omit all reference to it in these Lectures.
' And yet it is not, properly speaking, a mystical treatise.
It is the ripe fruit of medieval Christianity as concen-
trated in the life of the cloister, the last and best
legacy, in this kind, of a system which was already
decaying ; but we find in it hardly a trace of that
independence which made Eckhart a pioneer of modern
philosophy, and the fourteenth century mystics fore-
runners of the Reformation. Thomas a Kempis
preaches a Christianity of the heart; but he does not
exhibit the distinguishing characteristics of Mysticism.
The title by which the book is known is really the title
of the first section only, and it does not quite accurately
describe the contents of the book. Throughout the
treatise we feel that we are reading a defence of the
1 No, 31, on Psalm xci. 13.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 195


* recluse and his scheme of life. Self-denial, renunciation
of the world, prayer and meditation, utter humility and
purity, are the road to a higher joy, a deeper peace,
than anything which the world can give us. There are
many sentences which remind us of the Roman Stoics,

* whose main object was by detachment from the world
to render themselves invulnerable. Not that Thomas
a Kempis shrinks from bearing the Cross. The Cross
of Christ is always before him, and herein he is superior

~ to those mystics who speak only of the Incarnation.
But the monk of the fifteenth century was perhaps
more thrown back upon himself than his predecessors
in the fourteenth. The monasteries were no longer
such homes of learning and centres of activity as they
had been. It was no longer evident that the religious
orders were a benefit to civilisation. That indifference
to human interests, which we feel to be a weak spot in
medizval thought generally, and in the Neoplatonists
to whom medizval thought was so much indebted,
reaches its climax in Thomas a Kempis. Not only
~ does he distrust and disparage all philosophy, from
Plato to Thomas Aquinas, but he shuns society and
conversation as occasions of sin, and quotes with
approval the pitiful epigram of Seneca, “ Whenever I
have gone among men, I have returned home less of a
man.” It is, after all, the life of the “shell-fish,” as
Plato calls it, which he considers the best. The book
cannot safely be taken as a guide to the Christian life
as a whole. What we do find in it, set forth with
incomparable beauty and unstudied dignity, are the
— Christian graces of humility, simplicity, and purity of
_ heart.


196 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


It is very significant that the mystics, who had
undermined sacerdotalism, and in many other ways
prepared the Reformation, were shouldered aside when
the secession from Rome had to be organised. The
Lutheran Church was built by other hands. And yet
the mystics of Luther’s generation, Carlstadt and
Sebastian Frank, are far from deserving the con-
temptuous epithets which Luther showered upon them.
Carlstadt endeavoured to deepen the Lutheran notion
of faith by bringing it into closer connexion with the
love of God to man and of man to God; Sebastian
Frank developed the speculative system of Eckhart
and Tauler in an original and interesting manner.
But speculative Mysticism is a powerful solvent, and
Protestant Churches are too ready to fall to pieces
even without it. “I will not even answer such men
as Frank,” said Luther in 1545; “I despise them too
much. If my nose does not deceive me, he is an
enthusiast or spiritualist, who is content with nothing
~ but Spirit, spirit, spirit, and cares not at all for Bible,
Sacrament, or Preaching.” The teaching which the
sixteenth century spurned so contemptuously was
almost identical with that of Eckhart and Tauler,
whose names were still revered. But it was not wanted
just then. It was not till the next generation, when
superstitious veneration for the letter of Scripture was
bringing back some of the evils of the unreformed
¥. faith, that Mysticism in the person of Valentine Weigel
was able to resume its true task in the deepening
and spiritualising of religion in Germany.

But instead of following any further the course of
mystical theology in Germany, I wish to turn fora


oS


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 197 .


few minutes to our own country. I am the more
ready to do so, because I have come across the state-
ment, repeated in many books, that England has been
a barren field for mystics. It is assumed that the
English character is alien to Mysticism—that we have


' no sympathy, as a nation, for this kind of religion.


Some writers hint that it is because we are too
practical, and have too much common sense. The
facts do not bear out this view. There is no race,
I think, in which there is a richer vein of idealism,
and a deeper sense of the mystery of life, than our
own. In a later Lecture I hope to illustrate this
statement from our national poetry. Here I wish
to insist that even the Mysticism of the cloister, which
is the least satisfying to the energetic and independent
spirit of our countrymen, might be thoroughly and
adequately studied from the works of English mystics
alone. I will give two examples of this medizval
type. Both of them lived before the Reformation,
near the end of the fourteenth century; but in them,


- as in Tauler, we find very few traces of Romish error.


Walter Hilton or Hylton, a canon of Thurgarton,
was the author of a mystical treatise, called Zhe Scale
(or Ladder) of Perfection, The following extracts,
which are given as far as possible in his own words,
will show in what manner he used the traditional
mystical theology.


1 Hilton’s book has been reprinted from the edition of 1659, with an
introduction by the Rev. J. B. Dalgairns. Very little is known about the
author’s life, but his book was widely read, and was ‘‘chosen to be the
guide of good Christians in the courts of kings and in the world.” The
mother of Henry VII, valued it very highly. I have also used Mr, Guy’s
edition in my quotations from 7he Scale of Perfection.


198 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


There are two lives, the active and the contemplat-
ive, but in the latter there are many stages. The
highest state of contemplation a man cannot enjoy
always, “but only by times, when he is visited”;
“and, as I gather from the writings of holy men, the
time of it is very short.” “This part of contemplation
God giveth where He will.” Visions and revelations,
of whatever kind, “are not true contemplation, but
merely secondary. The devil may counterfeit them”;
and the only safeguard against these impostures is to
consider whether the visions have helped or hindered
us in devotion to God, humility, and other virtues.

“Tn the third stage of contemplation,” he says finely,
“reason is turned into light, and will into love.”

“ Spiritual prayer,’ by which he means vocal prayer
not in set words, belongs to the second part of con-
templation. “It is very wasting to the body of him
who uses it much, wounding the soul with the blessed
sword of love.” “The most vicious or carnal man on
earth, were he once strongly touched with this sharp
sword, would be right sober and grave for a great
while after.” The highest kind of prayer of all is the
prayer of quiet, of which St. Paul speaks, “I will pray
with the understanding also.”! But this is not for
all; “a pure heart, indeed, it behoveth him to have
who would pray in this manner.”

We must fix our affections first on the humanity of
Christ. Since our eyes cannot bear the unclouded
light of the Godhead, “we must live under the shadow
of His manhood as long as we are here below.” St.


11 Cor. xiv. 15. This text was also appealed to by the Quietists of the
post-Reformation period.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 199


Paul tells his converts that he first preached to them of
the humanity and passion of Christ, but afterwards of
the Godhead, how that Christ is the power and wisdom
of God.t

“Christ is lost, like the piece of money in the
parable; but where? In thy house, that is, in thy
soul. Thou needest not run to Rome or Jerusalem to
seek Him. He sleepeth in thy heart, as He did in the
ship; awaken Him with the loud cry of thy desire.
Howbeit, I believe that thou sleepest oftener to Him
than He to thee.” Put away “distracting noises,” and °
thou wilt hear Him. First, however, find the image
of sin, which thou bearest about with thee. It is no
bodily thing, no real thing—only a lack of light and
love. It is a false, inordinate love of thyself, from
whence flow all the deadly sins.

“Fair and foul is a man’s soul—foul without like a


beast, fair within like an angel.” “But the sensual
man doth not bear about the image of sin, but is borne
by it.”


The true light is love of God, the false light is love
of the world. But we must pass through darkness to
go from one to the other. “The darker the night is,
the nearer is the true day.” This is the “darkness”
and “nothing” spoken of by the mystics, “a rich
nothing,” when the soul is “at rest as to thoughts of
any earthly thing, but very busy about thinking of
God.” “But the night passeth away; the day
dawneth.” “Flashes of light shine through the chinks
of the walls of Jerusalem ; but thou art not there yet.”


1 The texts to which he refers are those which Origen uses in the same
manner. Compare I Cor, i. 23, ii. 2, Gal. vi. 14, with 1 Cor. 1. 24.


q


200 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


“But now beware of the midday fiend, that feigneth
light as if it came from Jerusalem. This light appears
between two black rainy clouds, whereof the upper one
is presumption and self-exaltation, and the lower a
disdaining of one’s neighbour. This is not the light of
the true sun.” This darkness, through which we must
pass, is simply the death of self-will and all carnal
affections; it is that dying to the world which is the
only gate of life.

The way in which Hilton conceives the “truly
mystical darkness” of Dionysius is very interesting.
As a psychical experience, it has its place in the history
of the inner life. The soul does enter into darkness,
and the darkness is not fully dispelled in this world;
“thou art not there yet,” as he says. But the
psychical experience is in Hilton entirely dissociated
from the metaphysical idea of absorption into the
Infinite. The chains of Asiatic nihilism are now
at last shaken off, easily and, it would seem, uncon-
sciously. The “darkness” is felt to be only the herald
of a brighter dawn: “the darker the night, the nearer
is the true day.” It is, I think, gratifying to observe
how our countryman strikes off the fetters of the time-
honoured Dionysian tradition, the paralysing creed
which blurs all distinctions, and the “negative road”
which leads to darkness and not light; and how in


* consequence his Mysticism is sounder and saner than


even that of Eckhart or Tauler. Before leaving Hilton,
it may be worth while to quote two or three isolated
maxims of his, as examples of his wise and pure
doctrine.

“There are two ways of knowing God—one chiefly


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 201


by the imagination, the other by the understanding.
The understanding is the mistress, and the imagination
is the maid.”

“What is heaven to a reasonable soul? Nought
else but Jesus God.”

“Ask of God nothing but this gift of love, which
is the Holy Ghost. For there is no gift of God that
is both the giver and the gift, but this gift of love.”

My other example of English Mysticism in the
Middle Ages is Julian or Juliana of Norwich,! to whom
were granted a series of “revelations” in the year
1373, she being then about thirty years old. She
describes with evident truthfulness the manner in which
the visions came to her. She ardently desired to have
a “bodily sight” of her Lord upon the Cross, “like
other that were Christ’s lovers”; and she prayed that
she might have “a grievous sickness almost unto death,”
to wean her from the world and quicken her spiritual
sense. The sickness came, and the vision; for they
thought her dying, and held the crucifix before her, till
the figure on the Cross changed into the semblance of
the living Christ. “All this was showed by three
parts—that is to say, by bodily sight, and by words
formed in my understanding, and by ghostly sight.”2


1 Julian (born 1343) was probably a Benedictine nun of Carrow, near ~
Norwich, but lived for the greater part of her life in an anchorage in the
churchyard of St. Julian at Norwich. There is a copy of her Revelations
in the British Museum. Editions by Cressy, 1670; reprint issued 1843 ;
by Collins, 1877. See, further, in the Dictionary of National Biography.
In my quotations from her, I have used an unpublished version kindly
lent me by Miss G. H. Warrack. It is just so far modernised as to be in-
telligible to those who are not familiar with fourteenth century English.

2This was a recognised classification. Scaramelli says, ‘‘ Le visioni
corporee sono favori propri dei principianti, che incomminciano a cam-
minare nella via dello spirito. . . . Le visioni immaginari sono proprie


202 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


“But the ghostly sight I cannot nor may not show it
as openly nor as fully as I would.” Her later visions
came to her sometimes during sleep, but most often
when she was awake. The most pure and certain
were wrought by a “ Divine illapse” into the spiritual
part of the soul, the mind and understanding, for these
the devil cannot counterfeit. Juliana was certainly per-
fectly honest and perfectly sane. The great charm of
her little book is the sunny hopefulness and happiness
which shines from every page, and the tender affection
for her suffering Lord which mingles with her devotion
without ever becoming morbid or irreverent. It is
also interesting to see how this untaught maiden (for
she shows no traces of book learning) is led by the
logic of the heart straight to some of the speculative
doctrines which we have found in the philosophical
mystics. The brief extracts which follow will illustrate
all these statements.

The crucified Christ is the one object of her devo-
tion. She refused to listen to “a proffer in my
reason, which said, “Look up to heaven to His
Father.” “Nay, I may not,” she replied, “for Thou
art my heaven. For I would liever have been in that
pain till Doomsday than to come to heaven otherwise
than by Him.” “Me liked none other heaven than


dei principianti e dei proficienti, che non sono ancor bene purgati. .

Le visioni intellectuali sono proprie di quelli che si trovano gia in istato
di perfezione.” It comes originally from St. Augustine (De Gen. ad litt.
xil. 7, mn. 16): ‘‘Heec sunt tria genera visionum. ... Primum ergo
appellemus corporale, quia per corpus percipitur, et corporis sensibus ex-
hibetur. Secundum spirituale: quidquid enim corpus non est, et tamen
aliquid est, iam recte dicitur spiritus ; et utique non est corpus, quamvis
corpori similis sit, imago absentis corporis, nec ille ipse obtutus quo
cernitur. Tertium vero intellectuale, ab intellectu,”


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 203


Jesus, which shall be my bliss when I come there.”
And after describing a vision of the crucifixion, she
says, “ How might any pain be more than to see Him
that is all my life and all my bliss suffer?”

Her estimate of the value of means of grace is very
clear and sound. “In that time the custom of our
praying was brought to mind, how we use, for lack
of understanding and knowing of love, to make [use
of] many means. Then saw I truly that it is more
worship to God and more very delight that we faith-
fully pray to Himself of His goodness, and cleave
thereto by His grace, with true understanding and
steadfast by love, than if we made [use of] all the
means that heart can think. For if we made [use of]
all these means, it is too little, and not full worship
to God; but in His goodness is all the whole, and
there faileth right nought. For this, as I shall say,
came into my mind. In the same time we pray to
God for [the sake of] His holy flesh and precious
blood, His holy passion, His dearworthy death and
wounds: and all the blessed kinship, the endless life
that we have of all this, is His goodness. And we
pray Him for [the sake of] His sweet mother’s love,
that Him bare; and all the help that we have of her
is of His goodness.” And yet “God of His goodness
hath advanced means to help us, full fair and many;
of which the chief and principal mean is the blessed
nature that He took of the maid, with all the means
that go afore and come after which belong to our
redemption and to endless salvation. Wherefore it
pleaseth Him that we seek Him and worship Him
through means, understanding and knowing that He is


204 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


the goodness of all. For the goodness of God is the
highest prayer, and it cometh down to the lowest part
of our need. It quickeneth our soul, and bringeth it
on life, and maketh it for to wax in grace and virtue.
It is nearest in nature and readiest in grace; for it is
the same grace that the soul seeketh, and ever shall
seek till we know verily that He hath us all in Himself
beclosed.”

“After this our Lord showed concerning Prayers.
In which showing I see two conditions signified by our
Lord; one is rightfulness, another is assured trust.
But oftentimes our trust is not full; for we are not
sure that God heareth us, as we think because of our
unworthiness, and because we feel right nought ; for we
are as barren and dry oftentimes after our prayers as
we were before. . . . But our Lord said to me,‘I am
the ground of thy beseechings: first, it is My will that
thou have it; and then I make thee to wish for it;
and then I make thee to beseech it, and thou be-
seechest it. How then should it be that thou shouldest
not have thy beseeching?’ . . . For it is most impos-
sible that we should beseech mercy and grace and not
have it. For all things that our good Lord maketh us
to beseech, Himself hath ordained them to us from
without beginning. Here may we see that our be-
seeching is not the cause of God’s goodness; and that
showed He soothfastly in all these sweet words which
He saith: ‘I am the ground” And our good Lord
willeth that this be known of His lovers in earth; and
the more that we know it the more should we beseech,
if it be wisely taken; and so is our Lord’s meaning.
Merry and joyous is our Lord of our prayer, and He


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL ~ 205


looketh for it; and He willeth to have it; because
with His grace He would have us like to Himself in
condition as we are in kind. Therefore saith He to
us, ‘Pray inwardly, although thou think it has no
savour to thee: for it is profitable, though thou feel
not, though thou see not, yea, though thou think thou
canst not.”

“ And also to prayer belongeth thanksgiving. Thanks-
giving is a true inward knowing, with great reverence
and lovely dread turning ourselves with all our mights
unto the working that our good Lord stirreth us to,
rejoicing and thanking inwardly. And sometimes for
plenteousness it breaketh out with voice and saith:
Good Lord! great thanks be to Thee: blessed mote
Thou be.”

“Prayer is a right understanding of that fulness ot
joy that is to come, with great longing and certain
trust. . . . Then belongeth it to us to do our diligence,
and when we have done it, then shall we yet think
that it is nought; and in sooth it is. But if we do as
we can, and truly ask for mercy and grace, all that
faileth us we shall find in Him. And thus meaneth
He where He saith: ‘I am the ground of thy beseech-
ing. And thus in this blessed word, with the Showing,
I saw a full overcoming against all our weakness and
all our doubtful dreads.”

Juliana’s view of human personality is remarkable,
as it reminds us of the Neoplatonic doctrine that there
is a higher and a lower self, of which the former is
untainted by the sins of the latter. “I saw and
understood full surely,” she says, “that in every soul
that shall be saved there is a godly will that never


206 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


assented to sin, nor ever shall; which will is so good
that it may never work evil, but evermore continually _
it willeth good, and worketh good in the sight of
God. ... We all have this blessed will whole and
safe in our Lord Jesus Christ.” This “ godly will” or
“substance” corresponds to the spark of the German
mystics.

“T saw no difference,” she says, “between God and
our substance, but, as it were, all God. And yet my
understanding took, that our substance is zz God—
that is to say, that God is God, and our substance a
creature in God. Highly ought we to enjoy that God
dwelleth in our soul, and much more highly, that our
soul dwelleth in God. ... Thus was my understanding
led to know, that our soul is made Trinity, like to the
unmade Blessed Trinity, known and loved from with-
out beginning, and in the making oned to the Maker.
This sight was full sweet and marvellous to behold,
peaceable and restful, sure and delectable.”

“As anent our substance and our sense-part, both
together may rightly be called our soul; and that is
because of the oneing that they have in God. The
worshipful City that our Lord Jesus sitteth in, it is
our sense-soul, in which He is enclosed. and our natural
substance is beclosed in Jesus, sitting with the blessed
soul of Christ at rest in the Godhead.” Our soul can-
not reach its full powers until our sense-nature by the
virtue of Christ’s passion be “brought up to the sub-
stance.” This fulfilment of the soul “is grounded in
nature. That is to say, our reason is grounded in
God, which is substantial Naturehood; out of this
substantial Nature mercy and grace spring and spread


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 207


into us, working all things in fulfilling of our joy:
these are our ground, in which we have our increase
and our fulfilling. For in nature we have our life and
our being, and in mercy and grace we have our increase
and our fulfilling.”

In one of her visions she was shown our Lord
“scorning the fiend’s malice, and noughting his un-
might.” “For this sight I laught mightily, and that
made them to laugh that were about me. But I saw
not Christ laugh. After this I fell into graveness,
and said, ‘I see three things: I see game, scorn, and
earnest. I see game, that the fiend is overcome; I see
scorn, in that God scorneth him, and he shall be
scorned; and I see earnest, in that he is overcome by
the blissful passion and death of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that was done in full earnest and with sober
travail.”

Alternations of mirth and sadness followed each
other many times, “to learn me that it is speedful to
some souls to feel on this wise.” Once especially she
was left to herself, “in heaviness and weariness of my
life, and irksomeness of myself, that scarcely I could -
have pleasure to live. . . . For profit of a man’s soul
he is sometimes left to himself; although sin is not
always the cause; for in that time I sinned not, where-
fore I should be so left to myself; for it was so sudden.
Also, I deserved not to have this blessed feeling. But
freely our Lord giveth when He will, and suffereth us
to be in woe sometime. And both is one love.”

Her treatment of the problem of evil is very char-
acteristic. “In my folly, often I wondered why the
beginning of sin was not letted; but Jesus, in this


208 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


vision, answered and said, ‘Sin is behovable,’ but all
shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of
thing shall be well. In this naked word sim our Lord
brought to my mind generally all that is not good... .
But I saw not sin; for I believe it had no manner of sub-
stance, nor any part of being, nor might it be known
but by the pain that is caused thereof; and this pain .. .
purgeth and maketh us to know ourself, and ask mercy.
In these same words (‘all shall be well’) I saw an high
and marvellous privity hid in God.” She wondered
how “all shall be well,” when Holy Church teacheth
us to believe that many shall be lost. But “I had
no other answer but this, ‘I shall save my word in all
things, and I shall make all thing well.’” “This is
the great deed that our Lord God shall do; but what
the deed shall be, and how it shall be done, there is
no creature beneath Christ that knoweth it, ne shall
wit it till it is done.”

“I saw no wrath but on man’s party,” she says,
“and that forgiveth He in us. It is the most impos-
sible that may be, that God should be wroth. . . . Our
life is all grounded and rooted in love. . . . Suddenly
is the soul oned to God, when it is truly peaced in
itself; for in Him is found no wrath. And thus I
saw, when we be all in peace and love, we find no
contrariousness, nor no manner of letting, through that
contrariousness which is now in us; nay, our Lord God
of His goodness maketh it to us full profitable.” No
visions of hell were ever showed to her. In place
of the hideous details of torture which some of the
Romish visionaries describe almost with relish, Juliana


1 That is, ‘‘ necessary” or “ profitable.”


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL = 209


merely reports, “To me was showed none harder hell
than sin.”

Again and again she rings the changes on the
words which the Lord said to her, “I love thee and
thou lovest Me, and our love shall never be disparted
in two.” “The love wherein He made us was in Him
from without beginning ; in which love,” she concludes,
“we have our beginning, and all this shall be seen in
God without end.”


nA


‘© heart, the equal poise of Love’s both parts,
Big alike with wounds and darts,
Live in these conquering leaves, live still the same,
And walk through all tongues one triumphant flame!
Live here, great heart, and love and die and kill,
And bleed, and wound, and yield, and conquer still.
Let this immortal life, where’er it comes,
Walk in a crowd of loves and martyrdoms.
Let mystic deaths wait on it, and wise souls be
The love-slain witnesses of this life of thee.
O sweet incendiary ! show here thy art
Upon this carcase of a hard, cold heart ;
Let all thy scattered shafts of light, that play
Among the leaves of thy large books of day,
Combined against this breast at once break in,
And take away from me myself and sin;
This glorious robbery shall thy bounty be,
And my best fortunes such fair spoils of me.
O thou undaunted daughter of desires !
By all thy dower of lights and fires,
By all the eagle in thee, all the dove,
By all thy lives and deaths of love,
By thy large draughts of intellectual day,
And by thy thirsts of love more large than they ;
By all thy brim-fill’d bowls of fierce desire,
By thy last morning’s draught of liquid fire,
By the full kingdom of that final kiss
That seized thy parting soul and seal’d thee His ;
By all the heavens thou hast in Him,
Fair sister of the seraphim !
By all of Him we have in Thee,
Leave nothing of myself in me:
Let me so read thy life, that I
Unto all life of mine may die.”
CRASHAW, On St. Teresa.


‘“In a dark night,
Burning with ecstasies wherein I fell,
Oh happy plight,
Unheard I left the house wherein I dwell,
The inmates sleeping peacefully and well.


Secure from sight;

By unknown ways, in unknown robes concealed,
Oh happy plight ;

And to no eye revealed,

My home in sleep as in the tomb was sealed.


Sweet night, in whose blessed fold

No human eye beheld me, and mine eye
None could behold.

Only for Guide had I

His Face whom I desired so ardently.”


St. JUAN OF THE Cross (translated by Hutchings).


212


of agai


LECEURE NVI


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL MyYsTICISM—continued


““Whom have I in heaven but Thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire beside Thee. My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.”—Ps. Ixxiii. 25, 26.

WE have seen that the leaders of the Reformation in
Germany thrust aside speculative Mysticism with im-
patience. Nor did Christian Platonism fare much
better in the Latin countries. There were students of
Plotinus in Italy in the sixteenth century, who fancied
that a revival of humane letters, and a better acquaint-
ance with philosophy, were the best means of combating
the barbaric enthusiasms of the North. But these
Italian Neoplatonists had, for the most part, no deep
religious feelings, and they did not exhibit in their lives
that severity which the Alexandrian philosophers had
practised. And so, when Rome had need of a Catholic
mystical revival to stem the tide of Protestantism, she
could not find what she required among the scholars
and philosophers of the Papal court. The Mysticism
of the counter-Reformation had its centre in Spain.

It has been said that “ Mysticism is the philosophy of
Spain.”! This does not mean that idealistic philosophy
flourished in the Peninsula, for the Spanish race has
never shown any taste for metaphysics. The Mysticism

1 Rousselot, Les Alystigues Espagnols, p. 3.
218


214 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


of Spain is psychological ; its point of departure is not ~
the notion of Being or of Unity, but the human soul
seeking reconcilation with God. We need not be on
our guard against pantheism in reading the Spanish
mystics ; they show no tendency to obliterate the divid-
ing lines of personality, or to deify sinful humanity. The
cause of this peculiarity is to be sought partly in the
- strong individualism of the Spanish character, and partly
- in external circumstances Free thought in Spain was
so sternly repressed, that those tendencies of mystical
religion which are antagonistic to Catholic discipline
were never allowed to display themselves. The Spanish
mystics remained orthodox Romanists, subservient to
their “directors” and “superiors,” and indefatigable in
making recruits for the cloister. Even so, they did not
escape the attention of the Inquisition; and though
two among them, St. Teresa and St. Juan of the Cross,
were awarded the badge of sanctity, the fate of Molinos
~ showed how Rome had come to dread even the most
submissive mystics.

The early part of the sixteenth century was a period
of high culture in Spain. The universities of Salamanca
and Alcala were famous throughout Europe ; the former
is said (doubtless with great exaggeration) to have
contained at one time fourteen thousand students. But
the Inquisition, which had been founded to suppress
Jews and Mahometans, was roused to a more baneful
activity by the appearance of Protestantism in Spain.
Before the end of the sixteenth century, the Spanish


2 Among the latter must be mentioned the growth of Scotist Nominalism,
on which see a note on p. 187. Ritschl was the first to point out how
strongly Nominalism influenced the later Mysticism, by giving it its quiet-
istic character. See Harnack, History of Dogma (Eng. tr.), vol. vi. p- 107


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 215


people, who up to that time had been second to none
in love of liberty and many-sided energy, had been
changed into sombre fanatics, sunk in ignorance and
superstition, and retaining hardly a trace of their former
buoyancy and healthy independence.1 The first Index
Expurgatorius was published in 1546; the burning of
Protestants began in 1559. Till then, Eckhart, Tauler,
Suso, and Ruysbroek had circulated freely in Spain.
But the Inquisition condemned them all, except
Ruysbroek. The same rigour was extended to the
Arabian philosophers, and so their speculations in-
fluenced Spanish theology much less than might have
been expected from the long sojourn of the Moors
in the Peninsula. Averroism was known in Spain
chiefly through the medium of the Fons Vite of Ibn
Gebirol (Avicebron). Dionysius and the scholastic
mystics of the Middle Ages were, of course, allowed
to be read. But besides these, the works of Plato
and Plotinus were accessible in Latin translations, and
were highly valued by some of the Spanish mystics.
This statement may surprise those who have identified
Spanish Mysticism with Teresa and Juan of the Cross,
and who know how little Platonism is to be found in
their theology. But these two militant champions of
the counter-Reformation numbered among their con-
temporaries mystics of a different type, whose writings,
little known in this country, entitle them to an honour-
able place in the roll of Christian Platonists.

1 Cf, the beginning of the Vida de Lazarillo de Tormes, corregida y emen-
dada por Juan de Luna (Paris, 1620). ‘The ignorance of the Spaniards
is excusable. The Inquisitors are the cause. They are dreaded, not only by


the people, but by the great lords, to such an extent that the mere mention
of the Inquisition makes every head tremble like a leaf in the wind.”


U


216 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


We find in them most of the characteristic doctrines —
of Christian Neoplatonism: the radiation of all things
from God and their return to God; the immanence of
God in all things;! the notion of man as a microcosm,
vitally connected with all the different orders of creation ;?
the Augustinian doctrine of Christ and His members as
“one Christ ” ;8 insistence upon disinterested love ;* and
admonitions to close the eye of sense.’ This last precept,
which, as I have maintained, is neither true Platonism
nor true Mysticism, must be set against others in which
the universe is said to be a copy of the Divine Ideas,
“of which Plotinus has spoken divinely,” the creation of
Love, which has given form to chaos, and stamped it
with the image of the Divine beauty; and in which
we are exhorted to rise through the contemplation of
nature to God® Juan de Angelis, in his treatise on


1 Pedro Malon de Chaide: ‘‘ Las cosas en Dios son mismo Dios.”

2 Alejo Venegas in Rousselot, p. 78: Louis de Leon, who is indebted to
the Fons Vite.

8 Louis de Leon: ‘*‘ The members and the head are one Christ.”

4 Diego de Stella affirms the mystic paradox, that it is better to be in


* hell with Christ than in glory without Him (A/ediz. iii.).


5 Juan d’Avila: ‘‘Let us put a veil between ourselves and all created
things.”
® This side of Platonism appears in Pedro Malon, and especially in
Louis de Granada. Compare also the beautiful ode of Louis de Leon,
entitled ‘“‘Noche Serena,” where the eternal peace of the starry heavens is
contrasted with the turmoil of the world—
‘Quien es el que esto mira,
Y precia la bajeza de la tierra,
Y no gime y suspira
Y rompe lo que encierra
El alma, y destos bienes la destierra?
Aqui vive al contento,
Aqui reina la paz, aqui asentado
En rico y alto asiento
Esta el amor sagrado
De glorias y deleites rodeado.”


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 217


the spiritual nuptials, quotes freely, not only from
Plato, Plotinus, and Virgil, but from Lucretius, Ovid,
Tibullus, and Martial.

But this kind of humanism was frowned upon by the
Church, in Spain as elsewhere. These were not the
weapons with which Lutheranism could be fought
successfully. Juan d’Avila was accused before the
Inquisition in 1534, and one of his books was placed
on the Index of 1559; Louis de Granada had to take
refuge in Portugal; Louis de Leon, who had the
courage to say that the Song of Solomon is only a


pastoral idyll, was sent to a dungeon for five years} -


Even St. Teresa narrowly escaped imprisonment at
Seville; and St. Juan of the Cross passed nine months
in a black hole at Toledo.

Persecution, when applied with sufficient ruthlessness,
seldom fails of its immediate object. It took only
about twelve years to destroy Protestantism in Spain;
and the Holy Office was equally successful in binding
Mysticism hand and foot2 And so we must not
expect to find in St. Teresa or St. Juan any of the
characteristic independence of Mysticism. The inner
light which they sought was not an illumination of the
intellect in its search for truth, but a consuming fire to

1 After his release he was suffered to resume his lectures. A crowd of
sympathisers assembled to hear his first utterance ; but he began quietly
with his usual formula, ‘‘ Deciamos ahora,” ‘‘ We were saying just now.”

2 The heresy of the ‘‘ Alombrados ” (Illuminati), which appeared in the
sixteenth century, and was ruthlessly crushed by the Inquisition, belonged
to the familiar type of degenerate Mysticism. Its adherents taught that
the prayers of the Church were worthless, the only true prayer being a
kind of ecstasy, without words or mental images. The ‘“‘ illuminated” need
no sacraments, and can commit no sins. The mystical union once achieved


is an abiding possession. There was another outbreak of the same errors
in 1623, and a corresponding sect of Z//wmindés in Southern France.


g


218 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


burn up all earthly passions and desires. Faith pre- :
sented them with no problems; all such questions had
been settled once for all by Holy Church. They were
ascetics first and Church Reformers next; neither of
them was a typical mystic.

The life of St. Teresa? is more interesting than her
teaching. She had all the best qualities of her noble
Castilian ancestors— simplicity, straightforwardness,
and dauntless courage; and the record of her self-
denying life is enlivened by numerous flashes of
humour, which make her character more lovable. - She
is best known as a visionary, and it is mainly through
her visions that she is often regarded as one of the
most representative mystics. But these visions do not
occupy a very large space in the story of her life. They
were frequent during the first two or three years of het
convent life, and again between the ages of forty and
fifty: there was a long gap between the two periods,
and during the last twenty years of her life, when she
was actively engaged in founding and visiting religious
houses, she saw them no more. This experience was
that of many other saints of the cloister. Spiritual
consolations seem to be frequently granted to encourage
young beginners ;* then they are withdrawn, and only
recovered after a long period of dryness and darkness;


1 The real founder of Spanish quietistic Mysticism was Pedro of Alcantara
(d. 1562). He was confessor to Teresa. Teresa is also indebted to Fran-
cisco de Osuna, in whose writings the principles of quietism are clearly
taught. Cf. Heppe, Geschichte der guietistichen Mystik, p. 9.

* The fullest and best account of St. Teresa is in Mrs. Cunninghame
Graham’s Life and Times of Santa Teresa (2 vols.).

3 “«Hee imaginariz visiones regulariter eveniunt vel incipientibus vel
proficientibus nondum bene purgatis, ut communiter tenent myste”
(Lucern. Myst. Tract, v. 3).


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL - 219


but in later life, when the character is fixed, and the
imagination less active, the vision fades into the light
of common day. In considering St. Teresa’s visions,
we must remember that she was transparently honest
and sincere; that her superiors strongly disliked and
suspected, and her enemies ridiculed, her spiritual
privileges; that at the same time they brought her
great fame and influence; that she was at times
haunted by doubts whether she ever really saw them;
and, lastly, that her biographers have given them a
more grotesque and materialistic character than is
justified by her own descriptions.

She tells us herself that her reading of St. Augustine’s
Confessions, at the age of forty-one, was a turning-point in
her life. “When I came to his conversion,” she says,
“and read how he heard the voice in the garden, it
was just as if the Lord called me.” It was after this
that she began again to see visions—or rather to have
a sudden sense of the presence of God, with a suspen-
sion of all the faculties. In these trances she generally
heard Divine “locutions.” She says that “the words
were very clearly formed, and unmistakable, though not
heard by the bodily ear. They are quite unlike the
words framed by the imagination, which are muffled”
(cosa sorvda). She describes her visions of Christ very
carefully. First He stood beside her while she was
in prayer, and she heard and saw Him, “though not
with the eyes of the body, nor of the soul.” Then
oy degrees “His sacred humanity was completely
manifested to me, as it is painted after the Resur-
ection.” (This last sentence suggests that sacred
sictures, lovingly gazed at, may have been the source


220 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


of some of her visions.) Her superiors tried to per-—
suade her that they were delusions; but she replied,
“1f they who said this told me that a person who had
just finished speaking to me, whom I knew well, was
not that person, but they knew that I fancied it, doubt-
less I should believe them, rather than what I had
seen; but if this person left behind him some jewels
as pledges of his great love, and I found myself rich
having been poor, I could not believe it if I wished.
And these jewels I could show them. For all who
knew me saw clearly that my soul was changed; the
difference was great and palpable.” The answer shows
that for Teresa the question was not whether the
manifestations were “subjective” or “objective,” but
whether they were sent by God or Satan.

One of the best chapters in her autobiography, and
perhaps the most interesting from our present point
of view, is the allegory under which she describes the
different kinds of prayer. The simile is not original—it
appears in St. Augustine and others ; but it is more fully
worked out by St. Teresa, who tells us “it has always
been a great delight to me to think of my soul asa
garden, and of the Lord as walking in it.” So here she
says, “Our soul is like a garden, rough and unfruitful,
out of which God plucks the weeds, and plants flowers,
which we have to water by prayer. There are four
ways of doing this—First, by drawing the water from a
well; this is the earliest and most laborious process.
Secondly, by a water-wheel which has its rim hung
round with little buckets. Third, by causing a stream
to flow through it. Fourth, by rain from heaven.
The first is ordinary prayer, which is often attended


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 221


by great sweetness and comfort. But sometimes the
well is dry. What then? The love of God does not
consist in being able to weep, nor yet in delights
and tenderness, but in serving with justice, courage,
and humility. The other seems to me rather to
receive than to give. The second is the prayer of
quiet, when the soul understands that God is so near
to her that she need not talk aloud to Him.” Jn this
stage the Will is absorbed, but the Understanding and
Memory are still active. (Teresa, following the scho-
lastic mystics, makes these the three faculties of the
soul.) In the third stage God becomes, as it were,
the Gardener. “It is a sleep of the faculties, which
are not entirely suspended, nor yet do they understand
how they work.” In the fourth stage, the soul labours
not at all; all the faculties are quiescent. As she
pondered how she might describe this state, “the
Lord said these words to me: She (the soul) unmakes
herself, my daughter, to bring herself closer to Me.
It is no more she that lives, but I. As she cannot
comprehend what she sees, understanding she ceases to
understand.” Years after she had attained this fourth
stage, Teresa experienced what the mystics call “the
great dereliction,” a sense of ineffable loneliness and
desolation, which nevertheless is the path to incomparable
happiness. It was accompanied by a kind of catalepsy,
with muscular rigidity and cessation of the pulses.
These intense joys and sorrows of the spirit are the
chief events of Teresa’s life for eight or ten years.
They are followed by a period of extreme practical
activity, when she devoted herself to organising com-
munities of bare-footed Carmelites, whose austerity


222 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


and devotion were to revive the glories of primitive
Christianity. In this work she showed not only
energy, but worldly wisdom and tact in no common
degree. Her visions had certainly not impaired her
powers as an organiser and ruler of men and women.
Her labours continued without intermission till, at the
age of sixty-seven, she was struck down by her last
illness. “This sazz¢t will be no longer wanted,” she
said, with a sparkle of her old vivacity, when she knew
that she was to die.

It is not worth while to give a detailed account ot
St. Teresa’s mystical theology. Its cardinal points.are
that the religious life consists in complete conformity
to the will of God, so that at last the human will
becomes purely “passive” and “at rest”; and the
belief in Christ as the sole ground of salvation, on
which subject she uses language which is curiously like
that of the Lutheran Reformers. Her teaching about
passivity and the “prayer of quiet” is identical with
that which the Pope afterwards condemned in Molinos ;
but it is only fair to remember that Teresa was not
canonised for her theology, but for her life, and that
the Roman Church is not committed to every doctrine
which can be found in the writings of her saints. The
real character of St. Teresa’s piety may be seen best
in some of her prayers, such as this which follows :—

“OQ Lord, how utterly different are Thy thoughts
from our thoughts! From a soul which is firmly
resolved to love Thee alone, and which has surrendered
her whole will into Thy hands, Thou demandest only
that she should hearken, strive earnestly to serve Thee,
and desire only to promote Thine honour. She need


Prey,


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 223


seek and choose no path, for Thou doest that for her,
and her will follows Thine; while Thou, O Lord, takest
care to bring her to fuller perfection.”

In theory, it may not be easy to reconcile “earnest


_ striving” with complete surrender and abrogation of


the will, but the logic of the heart does not find them
incompatible. Perhaps no one has spoken better on
this matter than the Rabbi Gamaliel, of whom it is
reported that he prayed, “O Lord, grant that I may
do Thy will as if it were my will, that Thou mayest do
my will as if it were Thy will.” But quietistic Mysti-
cism often puts the matter on a wrong basis. Self-
will is to be annihilated, not (as St. Teresa sometimes
implies) because our thoughts are so utterly different
from God’s thoughts that they cannot exist in the
same mind, but because self-interest sets up an
unnatural antagonism between them. The will, like
the other faculties, only realises itself in its fulness
when God worketh in us both to will and to do of
His good pleasure.

St. Juan of the Cross, the fellow-workman of St.
Teresa in the reform of monasteries, is a still more
perfect example of the Spanish type of Mysticism.
His fame has never been so great as hers; for while
Teresa’s character remained human and lovable in the


. midst of all her austerities, Juan carried self-abnegation


to a fanatical extreme, and presents the life of holiness
in a grim and repellent aspect. In his disdain of all
compromise between the claims of God and the world,
he welcomes every kind of suffering, and bids us choose


- always that which is most painful, difficult, and humili-


ating. His own life was divided between terrible


224 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


mortifications and strenuous labour in the foundation —
of monasteries. Though his books show a tendency to ;
Quietism, his character was one of fiery energy and
unresting industry. Houses of “ discalced” Carmelites
sprang up all over Spain as the result of his labours.
These monks and nuns slept upon bare boards, fasted
eight months in the year, never ate meat, and wore the
same serge dress in winter and summer. In some of
these new foundations the Brethren even vied with
each other in adding voluntary austerities to this severe
rule. It was all part of the campaign against Protest-
antism. The worldliness and luxury of the Renaissance
period were to be atoned for by a return to the purity
and devotion of earlier centuries. The older Catholic
ideal—the medizval type of Christianity—-was to be
restored in all its completeness in the seventeenth
century. This essentially militant character of the
movement among the Carmelites must not be lost
sight of: the two great Spanish mystics were before
all things champions of the counter-Reformation.

The two chief works of St. Juan are The Ascent of
Mount Carmel,and The Obscure Night of the Soul.
Both are treatises on quietistic Mysticism of a peculiar
type. At the beginning of La Subida de Monte
Carmelo he says, “The journey of the soul to the
Divine union is called xzght for three reasons: the
point of departure is privation of all desire, and com-
plete detachment from the world; the road is by faith,
which is like night to the intellect; the goal, which is
God, is incomprehensible while we are in this life.”

The soul in its ascent passes from one realm of
darkness to another. First there is the “night of


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 225


sense,” in which the things of earth become dark to
her. This must needs be traversed, for “the creatures
are only the crumbs that fall from God’s table, and
none but dogs will turn to pick them up.” “One
desire only doth God allow—that of obeying Him,
and carrying the Cross.” All other desires weaken,
torment, blind, and pollute the soul. Until we are
completely detached from all such, we cannot love
God. “When thou dwellest upon anything, thou hast
ceased to cast thyself upon the All.” “If thou wilt
keep anything with the All, thou hast not thy treasure
. simply in God.” “Empty thy spirit of all created
things, and thou wilt walk in the Divine light, for God
resembles no created thing.” Such is the method of
traversing the “night of sense.” Even at this early
stage the forms and symbols of eternity, which others
have found in the visible works of God, are discarded
as useless. “God has no resemblance to any creature.”
The dualism or acosmism of medieval thought has
seldom found a harsher expression.

In the night of sense, the understanding and reason
are not blind; but in the second night, the night of
faith, “all is darkness.” “ Faith is midnight”; it is
the deepest darkness that we have to pass; for in the
“third night, the night of memory and will,” the dawn
is at hand. “Faith” he defines as “the assent of the
soul to what we have heard ”—as a blind man would
receive a statement about the colour of an object. We
must be totally blind, “for a partially blind man will
not commit himself wholly to his guide.” Thus for
St. Juan the whole content of revelation is removed --
from the scope of the reason, and is treated as some-

15 H


226 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


thing communicated from outside. We have, indeed,
travelled far from St. Clement’s happy confidence in —
the guidance of reason, and Eckhart’s independence
of tradition. The soul has three faculties—intellect,
memory, and will, The imagination (fantasia) is a
link between the sensitive and reasoning powers, and
comes between the intellect and memory. Of these
faculties, “ faith (he says) blinds the intellect, hope the
memory, and love the will.” He adds, “to all that is
not God”; but “God in this life is like night.” He
blames those who think it enough to deny themselves
“without annihilating themselves,” and those who
“seek for satisfaction in God.” This last is “spiritual
gluttony.” ‘“ We ought to seek for bitterness rather
’ than sweetness in God,” and “to choose what is most
disagreeable, whether proceeding from God or the
world.” “The way of God consisteth not in ways of
devotion or sweetness, though these may be necessary
to beginners, but in giving ourselves up to suffer.”
And so we must fly from all “mystical phenomena”
(supernatural manifestations to the sight, hearing, and
the other senses) “ without examining whether they be
good or evil.” “ For bodily sensations bear no propor-
tion to spiritual things”; since the distance “ between
God and the creature is infinite,” “there is no essential
likeness or communion between them.” Visions are at
best “childish toys”; “the fly that touches honey
cannot fly,” he says; and the probability is that they
come from the devil. For “neither the creatures, nor
intellectual perceptions, natural or supernatural, can


1 So in Plotinus ¢avracta comes between gvors (the lower soul) and the
perfect apprehension of vods,


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL = 227


bring us to God, there being no proportion between
them. Created things cannot serve as a ladder; they
are only a hindrance and a snare.”

There is something heroic in this sombre interpreta-
tion of the maxim of our Lord, “Whosoever he be of
you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be
My disciple.” All that he hath—* yea, and his own
life also”—intellect, reason, and memory—all that is
most Divine in our nature—are cast down in absolute


~ surrender at the feet of Him who “made darkness His


secret place, His pavilion round about Him with dark
water, and thick clouds to cover Him.” !

In the “third night”—that of memory and will—
the soul sinks into a holy inertia and oblivion (santa
octosidad y olvido), in which the flight of time is unfelt,
and the mind is unconscious of all particular thoughts.
St. Juan seems here to have brought us to something
- like the torpor of the Indian Yogi or of the hesychasts
of Mount Athos. But he does not intend us to regard
this state of trance as permanent or final. It is the last
watch of the night before the dawn of the supernatural
state, in which the human faculties are turned into
Divine attributes, and by a complete transformation the
soul, which was “at the opposite extreme” to God,
“becomes, by participation, God.” In this beatific
state “one might say, in a sense, that the soul gives
God to God, for she gives to God all that she receives
of God; and He gives Himself to her. This is the

1St. Juan follows the medizval mystics in distinguishing between
‘meditation ” and ‘‘contemplation.” ‘‘ Meditation,” from which external


images are not excluded, is for him an early and imperfect stage ; he who
is destined to higher things will soon discover signs which indicate that it


- is time to abandon it,


228 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


mystical love-gift, wherewith the soul repayeth all her
debt.” This is the infinite reward of the soul who has
refused to be content with anything short of infinity
(no se llenan menos que con lo Infinito). With what
yearning this blessed hope inspired St. Juan, is shown in
the following beautiful prayer, which is a good example
of the eloquence, born of intense emotion, which we
find here and there in his pages: “O sweetest love of
God, too little known; he who has found Thee is at
-rest; let everything be changed, O God, that we may
rest in Thee. Everywhere with Thee, O my God,
everywhere all things with Thee; as I wish,O my Love,
all for Thee, nothing for me—nothing for ma, every-
thing for Thee. All sweetness and delight for Thee,
none for me—all bitterness and trouble for me, none
for Thee. O my God, how sweet to me Thy presence,
who art the supreme Good! I will draw near to Thee
in silence, and will uncover Thy feet,! that it may please
Thee to unite me to Thyself, making my soul Thy
bride; I will rejoice in nothing till Iam in Thine arms.
O Lord, I beseech Thee, leave me net for a moment,
because I know not the value of mine own soul.”

Such faith, hope, and love were suffered to cast
gleams of light upon the saint’s gloomy and _ thorn-
strewn path. But nevertheless the text of which we
are most often reminded in reading his pages is the verse
of Amos: “Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness
and not light ? even very dark, and no brightness in it ?”
It is a terrible view of life and duty—that we are to
denude ourselves of everything that makes us citizens
of the world—that nothing which is natural is capable


1 The reference is to Ruth iii. 7.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL = 229


of entering into relations with God—that all which is
human must die, and have its place taken by super-
natural infusion. St. Juan follows to the end the
“negative road” of Dionysius, without troubling him-
self at all with the transcendental metaphysics of
Neoplatonism. His nihilism or acosmism is not the
result of abstracting from the notion of Being or of
unity ; its basis is psychological. It is “subjective”
religion carried a/mos¢t to its logical conclusion. The
Neoplatonists were led on by the hope of finding a
reconciliation between philosophy and positive religion ;
but no such problems ever presented themselves to the
Spaniards. We hear nothing of the relation of the
creation to God, or why the contemplation of it should
only hinder instead of helping us to know its Maker.
The world simply does not exist for St. Juan; nothing
exists save God and human souls. The great human
society has no interest for him; he would have us cut
ourselves completely adrift from the aims and aspira-
tions of civilised humanity, and, “ since nothing but the
Infinite can satisfy us,’ to accept nothing until our
nothingness is filled with the Infinite. He does not
escape from the quietistic attitude of passive expectancy
which belongs to this view of life; and it is only by a
glaring inconsistency that he attaches any value to the
ecclesiastical symbolism, which rests on a very different
basis from that of his teaching. But St. Juan’s
Mysticism brought him no intellectual emancipation,
either for good or evil. Faith with him was the
antithesis, not to sig#z, as in the Bible, but to reason.
- The sacrifice of reason was part of the crucifixion of
the old man. And so he remained in an attitude of


f


230 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


complete subservience to Church tradition and author-
ity, and even to his “director,” an intermediary who
is constantly mentioned by these post-Reformation
mystics. Even this unqualified submissiveness did not
preserve him from persecution during his lifetime, and
suspicion afterwards. His books were only authorised
twenty-seven years after his death, which occurred in
1591; and his beatification was delayed till 1674.
His orthodoxy was defended largely by references to
St. Teresa, who had already been canonised. But it
could not be denied that the quietists of the next
century might find much support for their contro-
verted doctrines in both writers.

St. Juan’s ideal of saintliness was as much of an
anachronism as his scheme of Church reform. But no
one ever climbed the rugged peaks of Mount Carmel
with more heroic courage and patience. His life shows
what tremendous moral force is generated by complete


- self-surrender to God. And happily neither his failure


to read the signs of the times, nor his one-sided and
defective grasp of Christian truth, could deprive him of
the reward of his life of sacrifice—the reward, I mean,
of feeling his fellowship with Christ in suffering. He
sold “all that he had” to gain the pearl of great price,
and the surrender was not made in vain.

The later Roman Catholic mystics, though they
include some beautiful and lovable characters, do not
develop any further the type which we have found in
St. Teresa and St. Juan. St. Francis de Sales has
been a favourite devotional writer with thousands in
this country. He presents the Spanish Mysticism
softened and polished into a graceful and winning


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 231


pietism, such as might refine and elevate the lives of
the “honourable women” who consulted him. The
errors of the quietists certainly receive some counten-
ance from parts of his writings, but they are neutralised
by maxims of a different tendency, borrowed eclectically
from other sources.

A more consistent and less fortunate follower of St.
Teresa was Miguel de Molinos, a Spanish priest, who
came to Rome about 1670. His piety and learning
won him the favour of Pope Innocent XI., who, accord-
ing to Bishop Burnet, “ lodged him in an apartment of
the palace, and put many singular marks of his esteem
upon him.” In 1675 he published in Italian his
Spiritual Guide, a mystical treatise of great interest.

Molinos begins by saying that there are two ways
to the knowledge of God—meditation or discursive
thought, and “ pure faith” or contemplation. Contem-
plation has two stages, active and passive, the latter
being the higher Meditation he also calls the
“exterior road”; it is good for beginners, he says, but
can never lead to perfection. The “interior road,” the
goal of which is union with God, consists in complete
resignation to the will of God, annihilation of all self-


1The somewhat feminine temper of Francis leads him to attach more
value to fanciful symbolism than would have been approved by St. Juan, or
even by St. Teresa, And we miss in him that steady devotion to the
_ Person of Christ, and to Him alone, which gives the Spaniards, in spite of
themselves, a sort of kinship with evangelical Christianity. St. Juan could
never have written, ‘‘ Honorez, reverez, et respectez d’un amour special la
sacrée et glorieuse Vierge Marie. Elle est mére de nostre souverain pére et
par consequent nostre grand’mére ” (!).

2 The three parts into which the book is divided deal respectively with
the ‘‘ darkness and dryness” by which God purifies the heart ; the second
stage, in which he insists, complete obedience to a spiritual director is
essential ; and the stage of higher illumination,


232 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


will, and an unruffled tranquillity or passivity of soul,
until the mystical grace is supernaturally “infused.”
Then “we shall sink and lose ourselves in the
immeasurable sea of God’s infinite goodness, and rest
there steadfast and immovable.”! He gives a list of
tokens by which we may know that we are called from
meditation to contemplation; and enumerates four
means, which lead to perfection and inward peace—
prayer, obedience, frequent communions, and inner
mortification. The best kind of prayer is the prayer of
silence; and there are three silences, that of words,
that of desires, and that of thought. In the last and
highest the mind is a blank, and God alone speaks to
the soul. With the curious passion for subdivision
which we find in nearly all Romish mystics, he
distinguishes three kinds of “infusa contemplazione ”"—
(1) satiety, when the soul is filled with God and
conceives a hatred for all worldly things; (2) “un
mentale eccesso” or elevation of the soul, born of Divine
love and its satiety; (3) “security.” In this state the
soul would willingly even go to hell, if it were God’s
will. “ Happy is the state of that soul which has slain
and annihilated itself” It lives no longer in itself, for God
lives in it. “With all truth we may say that it is deified,”


1 “ Cola c’ ingolfiano e ci perdiamo nel mare immenso dell’ infinita sua
bonta in cui restiamo stabili ed immobili.”

? It is interesting to find the “prayer of quiet” even in Plotinus. Cf
Enn. v. 1.6: ‘ Let us call upon God Himself before we thus answer—not
~ with uttered words, but reaching forth our souls in prayer to Him; for thus

alone can we pray, alone to Him who is alone.”

* He speaks, too, of ‘inner recollection” (il raccoglimento interiore),
‘‘mirandolo dentro te medesima nel pid intimo del’ anima tua, senza
forma, specie, modo 6 figura, in vista e generale notitia di fede amorosa ed
oscura, senza veruna distinzione di perfezione 8 attributo.”


ep = eee
etal
| hee TICAL AND DEVOTIONAL = 233


Molinos follows St. Juan of the Cross in disparaging
~ visions, which he says are often snares of the devil.
And, like him, he says much of the “horrible tempta-
tions and torments, worse than any which the martyrs
of the early Church underwent,” which form part of
“purgative contemplation.” He resembles the Spanish
mystics also in his insistence on outward observances,
especially “daily communion, when possible,’ but
.- thinks frequent confession unnecessary, except for
beginners.
“The book was no sooner printed,’ says Bishop
Burnet, “than it was much read and highly esteemed,
both in Italy and Spain. The acquaintance of the
author came to be much desired. Those who seemed
in the greatest credit at Rome seemed to value them-
selves upon his friendship. Letters were writ to him
from all places, so that a correspondence was settled
between him and those who approved of his method, in
many different places of Europe.” “It grew so much
to be the vogue in Rome, that all the nuns, except
those who had Jesuits to their confessors, began to lay
aside their rosaries and other devotions, and to give
- themselves much to the practice of mental prayer.”

Molinos had written with the object of “breaking
the fetters” which hindered souls in their upward
course. Unfortunately for himself, he also loosened
some of the fetters in which the Roman priesthood
desires to keep the laity." And so, instead of the

1Cf. Bp. Burnet: ‘‘In short, everybody that was thought either sincerely
devout, or that at least affected the reputation of it, came to be reckoned
among the Quietists ; and if these persons were observed to become more


. strict in their lives, more retired and serious in their mental devotions,
yet there appeared less zeal in their whole deportment as to the exterior


234 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


honours which had been grudgingly and suspiciously
bestowed on his predecessors, Molinos ended his days
in a dungeon! His condemnation was followed by a
sharp persecution of his followers in Italy, who had
become very numerous; and, in France, Bossuet pro-
cured the condemnation and imprisonment of Madame
Guyon, a lady of high character and abilities, who was
the centre of a group of quietists. Madame de Guyon
need not detain us here. Her Mysticism is identical
with that of Saint Teresa, except that she was no
visionary, and that her character was softer and less
masculine. Her attractive personality, and the cruel
and unjust treatment which she experienced during
the greater part of her life, arouse the sympathy of
all who read her story; but since my present object is
not to exhibit a portrait gallery of eminent mystics,
but to investigate the chief types of mystical thought,
it will not be necessary for me to describe her life
or make extracts from her writings. The character of
her quietism may be illustrated by one example—the


parts of the religion of that Church. They were not so assiduous at Mass,
nor so earnest to procure Masses to be said for their friends; nor were they
so frequently either at confession or in processions, so that the trade of
those that live by these things was terribly sunk.”

1 The Spiritual Guide was well received at first in high quarters; but in
1681 a Jesuit preacher published a book on ‘‘the prayer of quiet,” which
raised a storm. The first commission of inquiry exonerated Molinos; but
in 1685 the Jesuits and Louis XIV. brought strong pressure to bear on the
Pope, and Molinos was accused of heresy. Sixty-eight false propositions
were extracted from his writings, and formally condemned. They include
a justification of disgraceful vices, which Molinos, who was a man of
saintly character, could never have taught. But though the whole process
against the author of the Sfivitual Guide was shamefully unfair, the book
contains some highly dangerous teaching, which might easily be pressed
into the service ofimmorality. Molinos saved his life by recanting all his
errors, but was imprisoned till his death, about 1696. In 1687 the In-
quisition arrested 200 persons for ‘‘quietist” opinions,


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 235


hymn on “ The Acquiescence of Pure Love,” translated
¥% by Cowper :—
“Love ! if Thy destined sacrifice am I,
Come, slay thy victim, and prepare Thy fires ;


Plunged in Thy depths of mercy, let me die
The death which every soul that loves desires !


I watch my hours, and see them fleet away ;
The time is long that I have languished here;
Yet all my thoughts Thy purposes obey,
With no reluctance, cheerful and sincere.


To me ’tis equal, whether Love ordain

My life or death, appoint me pain or ease
My soul perceives no real ill in pain;

In ease or health no real good she sees.


One Good she covets, and that Good alone;
To choose Thy will, from selfish bias free
And to prefer a cottage to a throne,
And grief to comfort, if it pleases Thee.


That we should bear the cross is Thy command
Die to the world, and live to self no more;
Suffer unmoved beneath the rudest hand,
As pleased when shipwrecked as when safe on shore.”


Fénelon was also a victim of the campaign against
the quietists, though he was no follower of Molinos,
He was drawn into the controversy against his will by
Bossuet, who requested him to endorse an _ unscru-
pulous attack upon Madame Guyon. This made it
necessary for Fénelon to define his position, which he
did in his famous Maxims of the Saints. The treatise
is important for our purposes, since it is an elaborate
attempt to determine the limits of true and false
Mysticism concerning two great doctrines —“ dis-
interested love” and “ passive contemplation.”


236 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


On the former, Fénelon’s teaching may be sum-
marised as follows: Self-interest must be excluded
from our love of God, for self-love is the root of all ;
evil. This predominant desire for God’s glory need
not be always explicit—it need only become so on
extraordinary occasions; but it must always be
implicit. There are five kinds of love for God:
(i.) purely servile—the love of God’s gifts apart from
Himself; (ii.) the love of mere covetousness, which
regards the love of God only as the condition of
happiness ; (iii.) that of hope, in which the desire for
our own welfare is still predominant; (iv.) interested
love, which is still mixed with self-regarding motives ;
(v.) disinterested love. He mentions here the “ three
lives” of the mystics, and says that in the purgative
life love is mixed with the fear of hell ; in the illuminat-
ive, with the hope of heaven; while in the highest
stage “ we are united to God in the peaceable exercise
of pure love.” “If God were to will to send the souls
of the just to hell—so Chrysostom and Clement
suggest—souls in the third state would not love Him
less.” “Mixed love,” however, is not a sin: “the
greater part of holy souls never reach perfect dis-
interestedness in this life.” We ought to wish for our
salvation, because it is God’s will that we should do so.
Interested love coincides with resignation, disinterested


1 This ‘‘ mystic paradox ” has been mentioned already. It is developed
at length in the Medztatzons of Diego de Stella. Fénelon says that it is
found in Cassian, Gregory of Nazianzus, Augustine, Anselm, ‘‘ and a great
number of saints.” It is an unfortunate attempt to improve upon Job’s
fine saying, ‘‘Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him,” or the line
in Homer which has been often quoted—éev 5¢ pdex kal bdreacor, eel vt
ro. edadey otrws. But unless we form a very unworthy idea of heaven and
hell, the proposition is not so much extravagant as self-contradictory.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL = 237


with holy indifference. “St. Francis de Sales says
that the disinterested heart is like wax in the hands of
its God.”

We must continue to co-operate with God’s grace,
even in the highest stage, and not cease to resist our
impulses, as if all came from God. “To speak other-
wise is to speak the language of the tempter.” (This
is, of course, directed against the immoral apathy
attributed to Molinos.) The only difference between the
vigilance of pure and that of interested love, is that
the former is simple and peaceable, while the latter
has not yet cast out fear. It is false teaching to say
- that we should hate ourselves; we should be in charity
wth ourselves as with others. 4

Spontaneous, unreflecting good acts proceed from
what the mystics call the apex of the soul. “In such
acts St. Antony places the most perfect prayer—
unconscious prayer.”

Of prayer he says, “ We pray as much as we desire,
and we desire as much as we love.” Vocal prayer
cannot be (as the extreme quietists pretend) useless to
contemplative souls; “for Christ has taught us a vocal
prayer.”

He then proceeds to deal with “passive contempla-
tion,” and refers again to the “unconscious prayer”
of St. Antony. But “pure contemplation is never


unintermittent in this life.’ “Bernard, Teresa, and
John say that their periods of pure contemplation
lasted not more than half an hour.’ “Pure con-


templation,” he proceeds, “is negative, being occupied
with no sensible image, no distinct and nameable idea ;


1 The doctrine here condemned is Manichean, says Fénelon rightly.


| 238 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


it stops only at. the purely intellectual and abstract
idea of being.” Yet this idea includes, “as distinct
objects,” all the attributes of God——“as the Trinity,
the humanity of Christ, and all His mysteries.” “To
deny this is to annihilate Christianity under pretence
of purifying it,and to confound God with néant. It is
to form a kind of deism which at once falls into
atheism, wherein all real idea of God as distinguished
from His creatures is rejected.” Lastly, it is to
advance two impieties—(i.) To suppose that there is or
may be on the earth a contemplative who is no longer
a traveller, and who no longer needs the way, since he
has reached his destination. (ii.) To ignore that
Jesus Christ is the way as well as the truth and
the life, the finisher as well as the author of our
faith.

This criticism of the formless vision is excellent, but
there is a palpable inconsistency between the definition
of “negative contemplation” and the inclusion in it of
“all the attributes of God as distinct objects.” Contra-
dictions of this sort abound in Fénelon, and destroy
the value of his writings as contributions to religious
philosophy, though in his case, as in many others, we
may speak of “noble inconsistencies” which do more
credit to his heart than discredit to his intellect. We
may perhaps see here the dying spasm of the “ negative
method,” which has crossed our path so often in this
survey.

The image of Jesus Christ, Fénelon continues, is not
clearly seen by contemplatives at first, and may be
withdrawn while the soul passes through the last
furnace of trial; but we can never cease to need Him,


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL = 239


“though it is true that the most eminent saints are
accustomed to regard Him less as an exterior object
than as the interior principle of their lives.” They are
in error who speak of possessing God in His. supreme
simplicity, and of no more knowing Christ after the
flesh. Contemplation is called passive because it
excludes the zzterested activity of the soul, not because
- it excludes real action. (Here again Fénelon is rather
explaining away than explaining his authorities.) The
culmination of the “ passive state” is “ transformation,”
in which love is the life of the soul, as it is its being
and substance. “Catherine of Genoa said, I find no
more me; there is no longer any other 7 but God.”
“But it is false to say that transformation is a deifica-
tion of the real and natural soul, or a hypostatic union,
or an unalterable conformity with God.”! In the
passive state we are still liable to mortal sin. (It is
characteristic of Fénelon that he contradicts, without
rejecting, the substitution-doctrine plainly stated in the
sentence from Catherine of Genoa.)

In his letter to the Pope, which accompanies the
“ Explanation of the Maxims,” Fénelon thus sums up
his distinctions between true and false Mysticism :—

I. The “ permanent act” (ze. an indefectible state of
union with God) is to be condemned as “a poisoned
source of idleness and internal lethargy.”

2. There is an indispensable necessity of the distinct
exercise of each virtue.

3. “Perpetual contemplation,” making venial sins


1 St. Bernard (De diligendo Deo, x. 28) gives a careful statement of the
deification-doctrine as he understands it: ‘‘ Quomodo omnia in omnibus
erit Deus, si in homine de homine quicquam supererit? A/anebit substantia
sed in alia forma.” See Appendix C,


240 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


impossible, and abolishing the distinction of virtues, is
impossible. |

4. “Passive prayer,” if it excludes the co-operation
of free-will, is impossible.

5. There can be no “ quietude” except the peace of
the Holy Ghost, which acts in a manner so uniform
that these acts seem, ¢o umscientific persons, not distinct
acts, but a single and permanent unity with God.

6. That the doctrine of pure love may not serve as
an asylum for the errors of the Quietists, we assert that
hope must always abide, as saith St. Paul.

7, The state of pure love is very rare, and it is
intermittent.

In reply to this manifesto, the “Three Prelates”}
rejoin that Fénelon keeps the name of hope but takes
away the thing; that he really preaches indifference to
salvation ; that he is in danger of regarding contempla-
tion of Christ as a descent from the heights of pure
contemplation; that he unaccountably says nothing of
the “love of gratitude” to God and our Redeemer ;
that he “erects the rare and transient experiences of a
few saints into a rule of faith.”

In this controversy about disinterested love, our
sympathies are chiefly, but not entirely, with Fénelon.
The standpoint of Bossuet is not religious at all.
“ Pure love,” he says almost coarsely, “is opposed to the
essence of love, which always desires the enjoyment of
its object, as well as to the nature of man, who neces-
sarily desires happiness.” Most of us will rather agree
with St, Bernard, that love, as such, desires nothing but


}The Archbishop of Paris, the Bishop of Meaux (Bossuet), and the
Bishop of Chartres,


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL — 241


~ reciprocation—“ verus amor se ipso contentus est:
habet premium, sed id quod amatur.” If the question
had been simply whether religion is.or is not in its
nature mercenary, we should have felt no doubt on
which side the truth lay. Self-regarding hopes and
schemes may be schoolmasters to bring us to Christ;
it seems, indeed, to be part of our education to form
them, and then see them shattered one after another,
that better and deeper hopes may be constructed out
of the fragments ; but a selfish Christianity is a contra-
diction in terms. But Feénelon, in his teaching about
disinterested love, goes further than this. “A man’s
self,” he says, “is his own greatest cross.” “We must
therefore become strangers to this self, this oz.’
Resignation is not a remedy ; for “resignation suffers
in suffering ; one is as two persons in resignation ; it ig
only pure love that loves to suffer.” This is the thought
with which many of us are familiar in James Hinton’s
Mystery of Pain. It is at bottom Stoical or Buddhistic,
in spite of the emotional turn given to it by Fénelon.
Logically, it should lead to the destruction of love; for
love requires two living factors,| and the person who
has attained a “holy indifference,’ who has passed
wholly out of self, is as incapable of love as of any
other emotion. The attempt “to wind ourselves too
high for mortal man” has resulted, as usual, in two
opposite errors. We find, on the one hand, some who


1 If two beings are separate, they cannot influence each other inwardly.
If they are not distinct, there can be no relations between them. Man is
at once organ and organism, and this is why love between man and God
is possible. The importance of maintaining that action between man and
God must be reciprocal, is well shown by Lilienfeld, Gedanken wber die
Soctalwissenschaft der Zukunft, vol. v. p. 472 8q.

16


242 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


try to escape the daily sacrifices which life demands,
by declaring themselves bankrupt to start with. And,
on the other hand, we find men like Fénelon, who are
too good Christians to wish to shift their crosses in
this way; but who allow their doctrines of “holy
indifference” and “pure love” to impart an excessive
sternness to their teaching, and demand from us an
impossible degree of detachment and renunciation.
The importance attached to the “prayer of quiet”


‘can only be understood. when we remember how much


mechanical recitation of forms of prayer was enjoined
by Romish “directors.” It is, of course, possible for
the soul to commune with God without words, perhaps


> even without thoughts ;1 but the recorded prayers of


our Blessed Lord will not allow us to regard these
ecstatic states as better than vocal prayer, when the
latter is offered “with the spirit, and with the under-
standing also.”

The quietistic controversy in France was carried on
in an atmosphere of political intrigues and private
jealousies, which in no way concern us. But the great
fact which stands out above the turmoil of calumny and
misrepresentation is that the Roman Church, which in
sore straits had called in the help of quietistic Mysti-
cism to stem the flood of Protestantism, at length found
the alliance too dangerous, and disbanded her irregular
troops in spite of their promises to submit to discipline.
In Fénelon, Mysticism had a champion eloquent and
learned, and not too logical to repudiate with honest
conviction consequences which some of his authorities


‘Thought was not,” says Wordsworth of one in a state of rapture;
and again, ‘‘ All his thoughts were steeped in feeling.”


‘


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL 243


had found it necessary to accept. He remained a


~ loyal and submissive son of the Church, as did Molinos;


and was, in fact, more guarded in his statements than
Bossuet, who in his ignorance of mystical theology
often blundered into dangerous admissions. But the
Jesuits saw with their usual acumen that Mysticism,
even in the most submissive guise, is an independent
and turbulent spirit; and by condemning Fénelon as
well as Molinos, they crushed it out as a religious
movement in the Latin countries.

To us it seems that the Mysticism of the counter-
Reformation was bound to fail, because it was the
revival of a perverted, or at best a one-sided type. The
most consistent quietists were perhaps those who
brought the doctrine of quietism into most discredit,
such as the hesychasts of Mount Athos. For at bottom
it rests upon that dualistic or rather acosmistic view
of life which prevailed from the decay of the Roman
Empire till the Renaissance and Reformation. Its
cosmology is one which Jeaves this world out of account
except as a training ground for souls; its theory of
knowledge draws a hard and fast line between natural
and supernatural truths, and then tries to bring them
together by intercalating “supernatural phenomena” in
the order of nature; and in ethics it paralyses morality
by teaching with St. Thomas Aquinas that “to love
God secundum se is more meritorious than to love our


1 £.g., he writes to Madame Guyon, ‘‘Jen’ai jamais hesité un seul moment
sur les états de Sainte Thérése, parceque je n’y ai rien trouvé, que je ne
trouvasse aussi dans l’écriture.” It is doubtful whether Bossuet had really
read much of St. Teresa. Fénelon says much more cautiously, ‘‘ Quelque
respect et quelque admiration que j’aie pour Sainte Thérése, je n’aurais
jamais voulu donner au public tout ce qu’elle a écrit.”


‘


244 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


neighbour.”! All this is not of the essence of Mysti-
- cism, but belongs to medizval Catholicism. It was
probably a necessary stage through which Christianity,
and Mysticism with it, had to pass. The vain quest
of an abstract spirituality at any rate liberated the
religious life from many base associations; the “ negat-
ive road” is after all the holy path of self-sacrifice;
and the maltreatment of the body, which began among
the hermits of the Thebaid, was largely based on an
instinctive recoil against the poison of sensuality, which
had helped to destroy the old civilisation. But the
resuscitation of medizeval Mysticism after the Renais-
satice was an anachronism; and except in the fighting
days of the sixteenth century, it was not likely to
appeal to the manliest or most intelligent spirits. The
world-ruling papal polity, with its incomparable army
of officials, bound to poverty and celibacy, and therefore
invulnerable, was a veductio ad absurdum of its world-
renouncing doctrines, which Europe was not likely to
forget. Introspective Mysticism had done its work—
a work of great service to the human race. It had


’’ explored all the recesses of the lonely heart, and had


wrestled with the angel of God through the terrors of
the spiritual night even till the morning. “Tell me now
Thy name”... “I will not let Thee go until Thou
bless me.” These had been the two demands of the
contemplative mystic—the only rewards which his soul
craved in return for the sacrifice of every earthly delight.
The reward was worth the sacrifice; but “God reveals
Himself in many ways,” and the spiritual Christianity


1 Of course there is a sense in which this is true; but I am speaking of
the way in which it was understood by medizyal Catholicism.


PRACTICAL AND DEVOTIONAL) 245


of the modern epoch is called rather to the consecration
of art, science, and social life than to lonely contempla-
tion. In my last two Lectures I hope to show how an
important school of mystics, chiefly between the Renais-
sance and our own day, have turned to the religious
study of nature, and have found there the same illumi-
nation which the medizeval ascetics drew from the deep
wells of their inner consciousness,


fi
(


i


We


"Ey wéot rots puctkots everrl re Oavuaorby: xabdamep ‘Hpdxderros héyerau
elrety+ elvat kal évtai@a Oeovs.


ARISTOTLE, de Partibus Animalium, i. 5.


‘* What if earth
= Be but the shadow of heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more than on earth is thought?”


MILTON,


“* God is not dumb, that He should speak no more.
If thou hast wanderings in the wilderness,
And find’st not Sinai, ’tis thy soul is poor;
There towers the mountain of the voice no less,
Which whoso seeks shall find; but he who bends,
Intent on manna still and mortal ends,
Sees it not, neither hears its thundered lore.”


LOWELL.


‘*Of the Absolute in the theoretical sense I do not venture to speak ;
but this I maintain, that if a man recognises it in its manifestations, and
always keeps his eye fixed upon it, he will reap a very great reward.”


GOETHE.


248


LECTURE ‘VII


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM


* The creation itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.”—Rom. viii. 21.


IT would be possible to maintain that all our happiness
consists in finding sympathies and affinities underlying
apparent antagonisms, in bringing harmony out of
discord, and order out of chaos. Even the lowest
pleasures owe their attractiveness to a certain tem-
porary correspondence between our desires and the
nature of things. Selfishness itself, the prime source
of sin, misery, and ignorance, cannot sever the ties
which bind us to each other and to nature; or if it
succeeds in doing so, it passes into madness, of which
an experienced alienist has said, that its essence is
‘concentrated egoism.” Incidentally 1 may say that
the peculiar happiness which accompanies every glimpse
of insight into truth and reality, whether in the scien-
fic, esthetic, or emotional sphere, seems to me to
have a greater apologetic value than has been generally
recognised. It is the clearest possible indication that
the true is for us the good, and forms the ground of a
-easonable faith that all things, if we could see them as
hey are, would be found to work together for good to


‘those who love God.
249


250 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


“The true Mysticism,” it has been lately said with
much truth, “is the belief that everything, in being
what it is, is symbolic of something more.”? All
Nature (and there are few more pernicious errors than —
that which separates man from Nature) is the language
in which God expresses His thoughts; but the thoughts
are far more than the language2 Thus it is that the
invisible things of God from the creation of the world
may be clearly seen and understood from the things
that are made; while at the same time it is equally
true that here we see through a glass darkly, and
know only in part. Nature half conceals and half
reveals the Deity; and it is in this sense that it may
be called a symbol of Him.

The word “symbol,” like several other words which
the student of Mysticism has to use, has an ill-defined
connotation, which produces confusion and contradict-
ory statements. For instance, a French writer gives
as his definition of Mysticism “the tendency to ap-
proach the Absolute, morally, by means of symbols.” 3
On the other hand, an English essayist denies that
Mysticism is symbolic. Mysticism, he says, differs
from symbolism in that, while symbolism treats the
connexion between symbol and substance as some-


1In R. L. Nettleship’s Remazns.


* In addition to passages quoted elsewhere, the following sentence from
Luthardt is a good statement of the symbolic theory: ‘‘ Nature is a world
of symbolism, a rich hieroglyphic book: everything visible conceals an
invisible mystery, and the last mystery of all is God.” Goethe’s “ Alles
vergangliche ist nur ein Gleichniss” would be better without the “ nur,”
from our point of view.

*. Récéjac, Essai sur les Fondements dz la Connaissance Mystique.

‘In the Edinburgh Review, October 1896. The article referred to, on
““The Catholic Mystics of the Middle Ages,” is beautifully written, and
should be read by all who are interested in the subject.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 251


thing accidental or subjective, Mysticism is based on
a positive belief in the existence of life within life, of
deep correspondences and affinities, not less real than
those to which the common superficial consciousness
of mankind bears witness. I agree with this state-
ment about the basis of Mysticism, but I prefer to
use the word symbol of that which has a real, and
not merely a conventional affinity to the thing sym-
bolised.1 The line is by no means easy to draw.
An aureole is not, properly speaking, a symbol of
saintliness,? nor a crown of royal authority, because
in these instances the connexion of sign with sig-
nificance is conventional. A circle is perhaps not a
symbol of eternity, because the comparison appeals
only to the intellect. But falling leaves are a symbol
of human mortality, a flowing river of the “stream”
of life, and a vine and its branches of the unity of
Christ and the Church, because they are examples
of the same law which operates through all that God
has made. And when the Anglian noble, in a well-
_ known passage of Bede, compares the life of man
to the flight of a bird which darts quickly through
a lighted hall out of darkness, and into darkness
again, he has found a symbol which is none the less


1 This is Kant’s use of the word. See Bosanquet, History of Asthetic,
| p. 273: “‘ A symbol is for Kant a perception or presentation which repre-
sents a conception neither conventionally as a mere sign, nor directly, but
in the abstract, as a scheme, but indirectly though appropriately through a
' similarity between the rules which govern our reflection in the symbol and
| in the thing (or idea) symbolised.” ‘‘In this sense beauty is a symbol of
' the moral order.” Goethe’s definition is also valuable: ‘‘ That is true
symbolism where the more particular represents the more general, not as a
dream or shade, but as a vivid, instantaneous revelation of the inscrutable.”
2 Or rather of power and dignity; for in some early Byzantine works
even Satan is represented with a nimbus.


252 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


valid, because light and darkness are themselves only
symbolically connected with life and death. The
writer who denies that Mysticism is symbolic, means
that the discovery of arbitrary and fanciful resemblances
or types is no part of healthy Mysticism.* In this he
is quite right; and the importance of the distinction
which he wishes to emphasise will, I hope, become
clear as we proceed. It is not possible always to say
dogmatically, “ Z/zs is genuine Symbolism, and that
is morbid or fantastic”; but we do assert that there
is a true and a false Symbolism, of which the true
is not merely a legitimate, but a necessary mode of
intuition; while the latter.is at best a frivolous amuse-
ment, and at worst a degrading superstition.’

But we shall handle our subject very inadequately
if we consider only the symbolical value which may
be attached to external objects. Our thoughts and
beliefs about the spiritual world, so far as they are
conceived under forms, or expressed in language,
which belong properly only to things of time and


1 Emerson says rightly, ‘* Mysticism (in a bad sense) consists in the
mistake of an accidental and individual symbol for an universal one.”

2The distinction which Ruskin draws between the fancy and the
imagination may help us to discern the true and the false in Symbolism.
“* Fancy has to do with the outsides of things, and is content therewith.
She can never fée/, but is one of the most purely and simply intellectual of
the faculties. She cannot be made serious; no edge-tool, but she will
play with: whereas the imagination is in all things the reverse. She
cannot but be serious; she sees too far, too darkly, too solemnly, too
earnestly, ever to smile. . . . There is reciprocal action between the
intensity of moral feeling and the power of imagination. Hence the
powers of the imagination may always be tested by accompanying tender-
ness of emotion. . . . Imagination is quiet, fancy restless ; fancy details,
imagination suggests. . . . All egotism is destructive of imagination,
whose play and power depend altogether on our being able to forget
ourselves, , . . Imagination has no respect for sayings or opinions: it
is independent ” (Modern Painters, vol. ii. chap. iii.)


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 253


space, are of the nature of symbols. In this sense
it has been said that the greater part of dogmatic
theology is the dialectical development of mystical
symbols. For instance, the paternal relation of the
First Person of the Trinity to the Second is a symbol;
and the representation of eternity as an endless period
of time stretching into futurity, is a symbol, We
believe that the forms under which it is natural and
necessary for us to conceive of transcendental truths
have a real and vital relation to the ideas which they
attempt to express; but their inadequacy is manifest
if we treat them as facts of the same order as natural
phenomena, and try to intercalate them, as is too
often done, among the materials with which an abstract
science has to deal.

The two great sacraments are typical symbols, if
we use the word in the sense which I give to it, as
something which, in being what it is, is a sign and
vehicle of something higher and better. This is what
the early Church meant when it called the sacra-
ments symbols," A “symbol” at that period implied
a mystery, and a “mystery” implied a revelation.
The need of sacraments is one of the deepest con-


1Cf. Harnack, History of Dogma, vol. ii. p. 144: ‘‘ What we nowadays
understand by ‘symbols’ is a thing which is not that which it represents ;
at that time (in the second century) ‘symbol’ denoted a thing which, in
some kind of way, is that which it signifies; but, on the other hand,
according to the ideas of that period, the really heavenly element lay
either in or behind the visible form without being identical with it.
Accordingly, the distinction of a symbolic and realistic conception of the
Lord’s Supper is altogether to be rejected.” And vol. iv. p. 289: ‘‘ The
‘symbol’ was never a mere type or sign, but always embodied a mystery.”
So Justin Martyr uses cuuBodtxds elwety and elmety év yvornply as inter-
changeable terms; and Tertullian says that the name of Joshua was
nominis futurt sacrameninm.


254 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


victions of the religious consciousness. It rests ulti-
mately on the instinctive reluctance to allow any
spiritual fact to remain without an external expres-
sion. It is obvious that all morality depends on the
application of this principle to conduct. All voluntary
external acts are symbolic of (that is, vitally connected
with) internal states, and cannot be divested of this
their essential character. It may be impossible to
show how an act of the material body can purify or
defile the immaterial spirit; but the correspondence
- between the outward and inward life cannot be denied
without divesting morality of all meaning. The
maxim of Plotinus, that “the mind can do no wrong,”
when transferred from his transcendental philosophy
to matters of conduct, is a sophism no more respect-
able than that which Euripides puts into the mouth
of one of his characters: “The tongue hath sworn;
the heart remains unsworn.” Every act of the will
is the expression of a state of the soul; and every
state of the soul must seek to find expression in an
act of the will. Love, as we should all admit, is not
love, so long as it is content to be only in thought,
or “in word and in tongue”; it is only when it is
love “in deed” that it is love “in truth”! And it
is the same with all other virtues, which are in this
sense symbolic, as implying something beyond the


1 So some thinkers have felt that ‘‘the Word” is not the best expression
for the creative activity of God. The passage of Goethe where Faust
rejects ‘‘ Word,” “‘ Thought,” and ‘ Power,” and finally translates, “In
the beginning was the Act,” is well known. And Philo, in a very
interesting passage, says that Nature is the language in which God speaks ;
‘but there is this difference, that while the human voice is made to be
heard, the voice of God is made to be seen: what God says consists of acts,
not of words” (De Decem Orac. 11).


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 255


external act. Nearly all the states or motions of
the soul can find their appropriate expression in
action. Charity in its manifold forms need not seek
long for an object; and thankfulness and penitence,
though they drive us first to silent prayer, are not
satisfied till they have borne fruit in some act ot
gratitude or humility. But that deepest sense of
communion with God, which is the very heart of
religion, is in danger of being shut up in thought
and word, which are inadequate expressions of any
spiritual state. No doubt this highest state of the
soul may find indirect expression in good works; but
these fail to express the zmmediacy of the communion
which the soul has felt. The want of symbols to
express these highest states of the soul is supplied
by sacraments. A sacrament is a symbolic act, not
arbitrarily chosen, but resting, to the mind of the
recipient, on Divine authority, which has no ulterior
object except to give expression to, and in so doing
to effectuate,! a relation which is too purely spiritual
to find utterance in the customary activities of life.
There are three requisites (on the human side) for the
validity of a sacramental act. The symbol must be
appropriate ; the thing symbolised must be a spiritual
truth; and there must be the intention to perform
the act as a sacrament.

The sacraments of Baptism and the Lord’s Supper


1 Aquinas says of the sacraments, ‘‘efficiunt quod figurant.” The
Thomists held that the sacraments are ‘‘cause” of grace; the Scotists
(Nominalists), that grace is their inseparable concomitant. The mainten-
ance of a real correspondence between sign and significance seems to be
essential to the idea of a sacrament, but then the danger of degrading it
into magic lies close at hand,


256 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


fulfil these conditions. Both are symbols of the mystical
union between the Christian and his ascended Lord.
Baptism symbolises that union in its inception, the
Eucharist in its organic life. Baptism is received but
once, because the death unto sin and the new birth
unto righteousness is a definite entrance into the
spiritual life, rather than a gradual process. The fact
that in Christian countries Baptism in most cases
precedes conversion does not alter the character of
the sacrament; indeed, infant Baptism is by far the
most appropriate symbol of our adoption into the
Divine Sonship, to which we only consent after the
event. It is only because we are already sons that we
can say, “I will arise, and go unto my Father.” The
Holy Communion is the symbol of the maintenance
of the mystical union, and of the “strengthening and
refreshing of our souls,’ which we derive from the
indwelling presence of our Lord. The Church claims
an absolute prerogative for its duly ordained ministers
in the case of this sacrament, because the common
meal is the symbol of the organic unity of Christ and
the Church as “unus Christus,’ a doctrine which the
schismatic, as such, denies! The communicant who
believes only in an individual relation betwen Christ and
separate persons, or in an “invisible Church,” does not
understand the meaning of the sacrament of the Lord’s
Supper, and can hardly be said to participate in it.
There are two views of this sacrament which the
“plain man” has always found much easier to under-


1'In the case of irregular Baptism, the maxim holds: “ Fieri non debuit ;
factum valet.” Cf. Bp. Churton, Zhe Misstonary’s Foundation of Doctrine,
p. 129. The reason for this difference between the two sacraments is
quite clear.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 257


stand than the symbolic view which is that of our Church.
One is that it is a miracle or magical performance,
the other is that it is a mere commemoration. Both
are absolutely destructive of the idea of a sacrament.
The latter view, that of some Protestant sects, was
quite foreign to the early Church, so far as our
evidence goes; the former, it is only just to say, is
found in many of the Fathers, not in the grossly
materialistic form which it afterwards assumed, but
in such phrases as “the medicine of immortality ”
applied to the consecrated elements, where we are
meant to understand that the elements have a mys-
terious power of preserving the receiver from the
natural consequences of death But when we find
that the same writers who use compromising phrases
about the change that comes over the elements,? also
use the language of symbolism, and remember, too,


1 Tt is, of course, difficult to decide how far such statements were meant
to be taken literally. But there is no doubt that both Baptism and the
Eucharist were supposed to confer immortality. Cf. Tert. de Bapt. 2 (621,
Oehl.), ‘“‘nonne mirandum est lavacro dilui mortem?” ; Gregory of Nyssa,
Or. cat. magn. 35, uh Sivacbat 5é dyye dlya rijs Kard Td Nourpdy dvayer-
phoews ev dvacrdce yevéoOar tov dvOpwrov. Basil, too, calls Baptism
divams els Thy dvdoracw. Of the Eucharist, Ignatius uses the phrase
quoted, ¢dpyaxoy rhs abavaclas, and dyrldoros rod ah amobave ; and
Gregory of Nyssa uses the same language as about Baptism. See, further,
in Appendices B and C,

2 Bg. werddrdaéts (Theodoret), weraBora (Cyril), meramolnows (Gregory
Naz.), weraororxetwors (Theophylact). The last-named goes on to say that
“we are in the same way ¢ranselementated into Christ.” The Christian
Neoplatonists naturally regard the sacrament as symbolic. Origen is
inclined to hold that every action should be sacramental, and that material
symbols, such as bread and wine, and participation in a ceremonial, cannot
be necessary vehicles of spiritual grace; this is in accordance with the
excessive idealism and intellectualism of his system. Dionysius calls the
elements cipBora, elxdves, avtirura, alcOnrd twa dvrl vonrGy perahap-
Bavéueva; and Maximus, his commentator, defines a symbol as ala@yrév ri
ayrl vonTod weradapBayduevov.


17


J


258 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


that a “miracle” was a very different thing to those
who knew of no inflexible laws in the natural world
from what it is to us, we shall not be ready to
agree with those who have accused the third and
fourth century Fathers of degrading the Lord’s Supper
into a magical ceremony.

Most of the errors which have so grievously obscured
the true nature of this sacrament have proceeded from
attempts to answer the question, “How does the
reception of the consecrated elements affect the inner
state of the receiver?” To those who hold the
symbolic view, as I understand it, it seems clear that
the question of cause and effect must be resolutely
cast aside. The reciprocal action of spirit and matter
is the one great mystery which, to all appearance,
must remain impenetrable to the finite intelligence,
We do not ask whether the soul is the cause of the
body, or the body of the soul; we only know that the
two are found, in experience, always united. In the
same way we should abstain, I think, from speculating
on the effect of the sacraments, and train ourselves
instead to consider them as divinely-ordered symbols,
by which the Church, as an organic whole, and we as
members of it, realise the highest and deepest of our
spiritual privileges.

There are other religious forms for which no Divine
institution is claimed, but which have a quasi-sacra-
mental value. And those who, “whether they eat, or
drink, or whatever they do,” do all to the glory of God,
may be said to turn the commonest acts into sacra-
ments. To the true mystic, life itself is a sacrament,
It is natural, but unfortunate, that some of those who


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 259


have felt this most strongly have shown a tendency to
disparage observances which are simply acts of devo-
tion, “mere forms,” as they call them. The attempt
to distinguish between conventional ceremonies, which
have no essential connexion with the truth symbolised,
and actions which are in themselves moral or immoral,
is no doubt justifiable, but it should be remembered
that this is the way in which antinomianism takes its
rise. Many have begun by saying, “The heart, the
motive, is all, the external act nothing; the spirit is
all, the letter nothing. What can it matter whether I
say my prayers in church or at home, on my knees or
in bed, in words or in thought only? What can it
matter whether the Eucharistic bread and wine are
consecrated or not? whether I actually eat and drink
or not?” And so on. The descent to Avernus is
easy by this road. Perhaps no sect that has pro-
fessed contempt for all ceremonial forms has escaped
at least the imputation of scandalous licentiousness,
with the honourable exception of the Quakers. The
truth is that the need of symbols to express or repre-
sent our highest emotions is inwoven with human
nature, and indifference to them is not, as many have
supposed, a sign of enlightenment or of spirituality. It
is, in fact, an unhealthy symptom. We do not credit
a man with a warm heart who does not care to show
his love in word and act; nor should we commend the
common sense of a soldier who saw in his regimental
colours only a rag at the end of a pole. It is one of
the points in which we must be content to be children,
and should be thankful that we may remain children
with a clear conscience.


260 | CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


I do not shrink from expressing my conviction that
the true meaning of our sacramental system, which in
its external forms is so strangely anticipated by the
Greek mysteries, and in its inward significance strikes
down to the fundamental principles of mystical
Christianity, can only be understood by those who are
in some sympathy with Mysticism. But it has not
been possible to say much about the sacraments sooner
than this late stage of our inquiry. We have hitherto
been dealing with the subjective or introspective type
of Mysticism, and it is plain that this form, when
carried to its logical conclusion, is inconsistent with
sacramental religion. Those who seek to ascend to
God by the way of abstraction, the negative road,
must regard all symbols as veils between our eyes and
reality, and must wish to get rid of them as soon as
possible. From this point of view, sacraments, like
other ceremonial forms, can only be useful at a very
early stage in the upward path, which leads us
ultimately into a Divine darkness, where no forms
can be distinguished. It is true that some devout
mystics of this type have both observed and exacted a
punctilious strictness in using all the appointed means
of grace; but this inconsistency is easily accounted
for. The pressure of authority, loyalty to the estab-


1 Harnack (History of Dogma, vol. vi. p. 102, English edition) Says }
“In the centuries before the Reformation, a growing value was attached
not only to the sacraments, but to crosses, amulets, relics, holy places, etc.
As long as what the soul seeks is not the rock of assurance, but means for
inciting to piety, it will create for itself a thousand holy things. It is
therefore an extremely superficial view that regards the most inward
Mysticism and the service of idols as contradictory. The opposite view,
rather, is correct.” I have seldom found myself able to agree with this
writer’s judgments upon Mysticism; and this one is no exception. The


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 261


lished order, and human nature, which is stronger than
either, has prevented them from casting away the
time-honoured symbols and vehicles of Divine love.
But a true appreciation of sacraments belongs only
to those who can sympathise with the other branch of
Mysticism—that which rests on belief in symbolism. To
this branch of my subject I now invite your attention.

If we expect to find ourselves at once in a larger
air when we have taken leave of the monkish
mystics, we shall be disappointed. The objective or
symbolical type of Mysticism is liable to quite as
many perversions as the subjective. If in the latter
we found a tendency to revert to the apathy of the
Indian Yogi, we shall observe in the former too many
survivals of still more barbarous creeds. Indeed, I
feel that it is almost necessary, as an introduction to
this part of my subject, to consider very briefly the
stages through which the religious consciousness of
mankind has passed in its attempts to realise Divine
immanence in Nature, for this is, of course, the founda-
tion of all religious symbolism.


‘‘most inward Mysticism” does not occupy itself much with external
“‘incitements to piety,” nor is this the motive with which a mystic could
ever (¢.g.) receive the Eucharist. The use of amulets, etc., which Harnack
finds to have been spreading before the Reformation, and which was
certainly very prevalent in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
had very little to do with ‘‘the most inward Mysticism.” My
view as to the place of magic in the history of Mysticism is given in
this Lecture ; I protest against identifying it with the essence of Mysticism.
Symbolic Mysticism soon outgrew it ; introspective Mysticism never valued
it. The use of visible things as stimulants to piety is another matter;
it has its place in the systems of the Catholic mystics, but as a very
early stage in the spiritual ascent. What I have said as to the inconsistency
of a high sacramental doctrine with the favourite injunctions to “‘ cast
away all images,” which we find in the medizval mystics, is, I think,


indisputable.


262 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


The earliest belief seems to be that which has been
called Animism, the belief that all natural forces are
conscious living beings like ourselves. This is the
primitive form of natural religion; and though it leads
to some deplorable customs, it is not a morbid type, but
a very early effort on the lines of true development.*

The perverted form of primitive Animism is called
Fetishism, which is the belief that supernatural powers
reside in some visible object, which is the home or
most treasured possession of a god or demon. The
object may be a building, a tree, an animal, a particu-
lar kind of food, or indeed anything. Unfortunately
this belief is not peculiar to savages. A degraded
form of it is exhibited by the so-called neo-mystical
school of modern France, and in the baser types of
Roman Catholicism everywhere.”

Primitive Animism believes in no natural laws. The
next stage is to believe in laws which are frequently
suspended by the intervention of an independent and
superior power. Medieval dualism regarded every
breach of natural law as a vindication of the power


1 The most recent developments of German idealistic philosophy, as set
forth in the cosmology of Lotze, and still more of Fechner, may perhaps be
described as an attempt to preserve the truth of Animism on a much higher
plane, without repudiating the universality of law.

2 T refer especially to Huysmans’ two ‘‘ mystical” novels, Ax Route and
La Cathédrale. The naked Fetishism of the latter book almost passes
belief. We have a Madonna who is good-natured at Lourdes and cross-
grained at La Salette ; who likes ‘‘ pretty speeches and little coaxing ways”
in ‘‘paying court” to her, and who at the end is apostrophised as ‘our
Lady of the Pillar,” “‘our Lady of the Crypt.” It may perhaps be
excusable to resort to such expedients as these in the conversion of savages ;
but there is something singularly repulsive in the picture (drawn apparently
from life) of a profligate man of ljetters seeking salvation in a Christianity
which has lowered itself far beneath educated paganism. At any rate, let
not the name of Mysticism be given to such methods,


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 263


of spirit over matter—not always, however, of Divine
power, for evil spirits could produce very similar dis-
turbances of the physical order. Thus arose that
persistent tendency to “seek after a sign,” in which
the religion of the vulgar, even in our own day, is
deeply involved. Miracle, in some form or other, is
regarded as the real basis of belief in God. At this
stage people never ask themselves whether any spiritual
truth, or indeed anything worth knowing, could possibly
be communicated or authenticated by thaumaturgic
exhibitions. What attracts them at first is the evi-
dence which these beliefs furnish, that the world in which
they live is not entirely under the dominion of an uncon-
scious or inflexible power, but that behind the iron
mechanism of cause and effect is a will more like their
own in its irregularity and arbitrariness. Afterwards,
as the majesty of law dawns upon them, miracles are
no longer regarded as capricious exercises of power,
but as the operation of higher physical laws, which are
only active on rare occasions. A truer view sees in
them a materialisation of mystical symbols, the proper
function of which is to act as interpreters between the
real and the apparent, between the spiritual and
material worlds. When they crystallise as portents,
they lose all their usefulness. Moreover, the belief in
celestial visitations has its dark counterpart in super-
stitious dread of the powers of evil, which is capable of
turning life into a long nightmare, and has led to
dreadful cruelties.1. The error has still enough vitality


1 I refer especially to the horrors connected with the belief in witchcraft,
on which see Lecky, Rationalism in Europe, vol. i. ‘ Remy, a judge of
Nancy, boasted that he had put to death eight hundred witches in sixteen


264 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


to create a prejudice against natural science, which
appears in the light of an invading enemy wresting
province after province from the empire of the super-
natural.

But we are concerned with thaumaturgy only so far
as it has affected Mysticism. At first sight the con-
nexion may seem very slight; and slight indeed it is.
But just as Mysticism of the subjective type is often
entangled in theories which sublimate matter till only
a vain shadow remains, so objective Mysticism has
been often pervaded by another kind of false spiritual-
ism—that which finds edification in palpable super-
natural manifestations. These so-called “ mystical
phenomena” are so much identified with “ Mysticism ”
in the Roman Catholic Church of to-day, that the
standard treatises on the subject, now studied in
continental universities, largely consist of grotesque
legends of “levitation,” “bilocation,” “incandescence,”
“radiation,” and other miraculous tokens of Divine
favour The great work of Gorres, in five volumes, is
years.” ‘‘In the bishopric of Wartzburg, nine hundred were burnt in one
year.” As late as 1850, some French peasants burt alive a woman
named Bedouret, whom they supposed to be a witch.

1 The degradation of Mysticism in the Roman Church since the Reforma-
tion may be estimated by comparing the definitions of Mysticism and
Mystical Theology current in the Middle Ages with the following from
Ribet, who is recognised as a standard authority on the subject: “La
Theologie mystique, au point de vue subjectif et experimental, nous
semble pouvoir étre définie; une attraction surnaturelle et passive de
Yame vers Dieu, provenant d’une illumination et d’un embrasement
intérieurs, qui préviennent la réflexion, surpassent effort humain, e¢
peuvent avoir sur le corps un retentissement mervetlleux et irresistible.”
“Au point de vue doctrinal et objectif, la mystique peut se définir: la
science qui traite des phénoménes surnaturels, soit intimes, soct extérieurs,
qui preparent, accompagnent, et suivent la contemplation divine.” The


time is past, if it ever existed, when such superstitions could be believed
without grave injury to mental and moral health.


——,


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 265


divided into D :
The first contains stories of the miraculous enhance-
ment of sight, hearing, smell, and so forth, which results
from extreme holiness; and tells us how one saint had
the power of becoming invisible, another of walking
through closed doors, and a third of flying through
the air. “Natural Mysticism” deals with divination,
lycanthropy, vampires, second sight, and other barbar-
ous superstitions. “ Diabolical Mysticism” includes
witchcraft, diabolical possession, and the hideous stories
of incubi and succube. It is not my intention to say
any more about these savage survivals, as I do not wish
to bring my subject into undeserved contempt.!. “ These
terrors, and this darkness of the mind,” as Lucretius
says, “must be dispelled, not by the bright shafts of
the sun’s light, but by the study of Nature’s laws,” 2


1 This language about the teaching of the Roman Church may be con-
sidered unseemly by those who have not studied the subject. Those who
have done so will think it hardly strong enough. In self-defence, I will
quote one sentence from Schram, whose work on ‘‘ Mysticism” is con-
sidered autnoritative, and is studied in the great Catholic university of
Louvain: ‘‘Quzeri potest utrum dzemon per turpem concubitum possit
violenter opprimere marem vel feminam cuius obsessio permissa sit ob
finem perfectionis et contemplationis acquirendz.” The answer is in the
affirmative, and the evidence is such as could hardly be transcribed, even
in Latin. Schram’s book is mainly intended for the direction of confessing
priests, and the evidence shows, as might have been expected, that the
subjects of these ‘‘ phenomena” are generally poor nuns suffering from
hysteriae

2 At a time when many are hoping to find in the study of the obscurer
psychical phenomena a breach in the “‘ middle wall of partition” between
the spiritual and material worlds, I may seem to have brushed aside too
contemptuously the floating mass of popular beliefs which ‘‘spiritualists”
think worthy of serious investigation. I must therefore be allowed to say
that in my opinion psychical research has already established results of
great value, especially in helping to break down that view of the zmpervt-
ousness of the ego which is fatal to Mysticism, and (I venture to think) to
any consistent philosophy. Monadism, we may hope, is doomed. But


266 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Some of these fablec 2-5 ai vuviously due to a
materialisation of conventional symbols. These sym-
bols are the picture language into which the imagination
translates what the soul has felt. A typical case is
that of the miniature image of Christ, which is said to
have been found embedded in the heart of a deceased
saint. The supposed miracle was, of course, the work
of imagination; but this does not mean that those who
reported it were deliberate liars. We know now that
we must distinguish between observation and imagina-
tion, between the language of science and that of
poetical metaphor; but in an age which abhorred
rationalism this was not so clear. Rationalism has
its function in proving that such mystical symbols are
not physical facts. But when it goes on to say that
they are related to physical facts as morbid hallucina-
tions to realities, it has stepped outside its province.
Proceeding a little further as we trace the develop-
ment of natural or objective religion, we come to the
belief in magic, which in primitive peoples is closely
associated with their first attempts at experimental —
science. What gives magic its peculiar character is
that it is based on fanciful, and not on real corre-
spondences. The uneducated mind cannot distinguish
between associations of ideas which are purely arbitrary


the more popular kind of spiritualism is simply the old hankering after
supernatural manifestations, which are always dear to semi-regenerate
minds.

It is, I think, significant that the word ‘‘imagination” was slow in
making its way into psychology. avracla is defined by Aristotle (de
Anima, ili. 3) as klvnots brd rijs alcOjoews THs Kar’ évépyevay yeyvouevn, but
it is not till Philostratus that the creative imagination is opposed to plunors.


Cf. Vit. Apoll. vi. 19, wlunois pev Snucoupyhoer 8 eldev, paytacia dé kat b
ph elder.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 267


and subjective, and those which have a more universal
validity. Not, of course, that all the affinities seized
upon by primitive man proved illusory; but those
which were not so ceased to be magical, and became
scientific. The savage draws no distinction between
the process by which he makes fire and that by which
his priest calls down rain, except that the latter is a
professional secret; drugs and spells are used indiffer-
ently to cure the sick; astronomy and astrology are
parts of the same science. There is, however, a
difference between the magic which is purely natural-
istic and that which makes mystical claims. The
magician sometimes claims that the spirits are subject
to him, not because he has learned how to wield the
forces which they must obey, but because he has so
purged his higher faculties that the occult sympathies
of nature have become apparent to him. His theosophy
claims to be a spiritual illumination, not a scientific
discovery. The error here is the application of
spiritual clairvoyance to physical relations. The
insight into reality, which is unquestionably the reward
of the pure heart and the single eye, does not reveal to
us in detail how nature should be subdued to our needs.
No spirits from the vasty deep will obey our call, to
show us where lies the road to fortune or to ruin.
Physical science is an abstract inquiry, which, while
it keeps to its proper subject—the investigation of the
relations which prevail in the phenomenal world—is self-
sufficient, and can receive nothing on external authority.
Still less can the adept usurp Divine powers, and bend
the eternal laws of the universe to his puny will.

The turbid streams of theurgy and magic flowed


268 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


into the broad river of Christian thought by two
channels—the later Neoplatonism, and Jewish Cabbal-
ism. Of the former something has been said already.
The root-idea of the system was that all life may be
arranged in a descending scale of potencies, forming a
kind of chain from heaven to earth. Man, as a
microcosm, is in contact with every link in the chain,
and can establish relations with all spiritual powers,
from the superessential One to the lower spirits or
“demons.” The philosopher-saint, who had explored
the highest regions of the intelligence, might hope to
dominate the spirits of the air, and compel them to do
his bidding. Thus the door was thrown wide open
for every kind of superstition. The Cabbalists followed
much the same path. The word Cabbala means “oral
tradition,” and is defined by Reuchlin as “the symbolic
reception of a Divine revelation handed down for the
saving contemplation of God and separate forms.” !
In another place he says, “The Cabbala is nothing else
than symbolic theology, in which not only are letters
and words symbols of things, but things are symbols of
other things.” This method of symbolic interpretation
was held to have been originally communicated by
revelation,? in order that persons of holy life might


1 Reuchlin, De arte cabbalistica: ‘‘Est enim Cabbala divine revelationis
ad salutiferam Dei et formarum separatarum contemplationem traditee
symbolica receptio, quam qui ccelesti sortiuntur afflatu recto nomine
Cabbalici dicuntur, eorum vero discipulos cognomento Cabbalzos
appellabimus, et qui alioquin eos imitari conantur, Cabbalistee nominandi
sunt.”

* The mystical Rabbis ascribe the Cabbala to the angel Razael, the
reputed teacher of Adam in Paradise, and say that this angel gave Adam
the Cabbala as his lesson-book. There is a clear and succinct account of
the main Cabbalistic docrines in Hunt, Pantheism and Christianity,
pp. 84-88.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 269


by it attain to a mystical communion with God, or
deification. The Cabbalists thus held much the same
relation to the Talmudists as the mystics to the
scholastics in the twelfth century. But, as Jews, they
remained faithful to the two doctrines of an inspired
tradition and an inspired book, which distinguish them
from Platonic mystics.1

Pico de Mirandola (born 1463) was the first to bring
the Cabbala into Christian philosophy, and to unite it
with his Neoplatonism. Very characteristic of his age
is the declaration that “there is no natural science
which makes us so certain of the Divinity of Christ as
Magic and the Cabbala.”* For there was at that


1 But the notion that the deepest mysteries should not be entrusted to
writing is found in Clement and Origen ; cf. Origen, Against Celsus, vi. 26:
ob dklyduvoy Thy Tay Toobrwy capjveray mioredoat ypapy. And-Clement
says: Ta dardppyta, Kabdmep 6 Oeds, Nbywy micTeveTat od ypdupart. The curi-
ous legend of an oral tradition also appears in Clement (yotyp. Fragm.
in Eusebius, H. Z. ii. 1. 4): IaxwBwr@ dixaty xal’Iwdyy kal Ilérppy pera
Tip dvdoracw mapédwKe Thy yvGow 6 Kiptos, obroL Tots AouTrots dmogréd\oLs
mapédwxay, of d¢ Novrol darbaororo Tots EBdoujKovTa, Gy els Fv kal BapyaBas.
Origen, too, speaks of ‘‘ things spoken in private to the disciples.”

2 The following extract from Pico’s Apology may be interesting, as illus-
trating the close connexion between magic and science at this period:
© One of the chief charges against me is that I ama magician. Have I not
myself distinguished two kinds of magic? One, which the Greeks call
yyonrela, depends entirely on alliance with evil spirits, and deserves to be
regarded with horror, and to be punished ; the other is magic in the proper
sense of the word. The former subjects man to the evil spirits, the latter
makes them serve him. The former is neither an art nor a science ; the
latter embraces the deepest mysteries, and the knowledge of the whole of
Nature with her powers. While it connects and combines the forces
scattered by God through the whole world, it does not so much work
miracles as come to the help of working nature. Its researches into the
sympathies of things enable it to bring to light hidden marvels from the
secret treasure-houses of the world, just asif it created them itself. As the
countryman trains the vine upon the elm, so the magician marries the
earthly objects to heavenly bodies. His art is beneficial and Godlike, for
it brings men to wonder at the works of (sod, than which nothing conduces
more to true religion.”


270 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


period a curious alliance of Mysticism and natural
science against scholasticism, which had kept both in
galling chains; and both mystics and physicists invoked
the aid of Jewish theosophy. Just as Pythagoras, Plato,
and Proclus were set up against Aristotle, so the occult
philosophy of the Jews, which on its speculative side
was mere Neoplatonism, was set up against the divinity
of the Schoolmen. In Germany, Reuchlin (1455-1522)
wrote a treatise, On the Cabbalistic Art, in which a
theological scheme resembling those of the Neoplaton-
ists and speculative mystics was based on occult
‘revelation. The book captivated Pope Leo X. and the
early Reformers alike.

The influence of Cabbalism at this period was felt
not only in the growth of magic, but in the revival of
the science of al/egorism, which resembles magic in its
doctrine of occult sympathies, though without the
theurgic element. According to this view of nature,
everything in the visible world has an emblematic
meaning. Everything that a man saw, heard, or did
—colours, numbers, birds, beasts, and flowers, the
various actions of life—was to remind him of some-
thing else _ The world was supposed to be full of sacred
cryptograms, and every part of the natural order testi-
fied in hieroglyphics* to the truths of Christianity.
Thus the shamrock bears witness to the Trinity, the


This was a very old theory. Cf. Lecky, Rationalism in Europe, vol. i.
p- 264. ‘‘The C/avis of St. Melito, who was bishop of Sardis, it is said,
in the beginning of the second century, consists of a catalogue of many
hundreds of birds, beasts, plants, and minerals that were symbolical of
Christian virtues, doctrines, and personages.”

* The analogy between allegorism in religion and the hieroglyphic writ-
ing is drawn out by Clement, Strom. v. 4 and 7.


|


~


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 271


spider is an emblem of the devil, and so forth. This
kind of symbolism was and is extensively used merely
as a picture-language, in which there is no pretence
that the signs are other than artificial or conventional.
The language of signs may be used either to instruct
those who cannot understand words, or to baffle those
who can. Thus, a crucifix may be as good as a sermon
to an illiterate peasant; while the sign of a fish was
used by the early Christians because it was unintelli-
gible to their enemies. This is not symbolism in the
sense which I have given to the word in this Lecture.
But it is otherwise when the type is used as a proof
of the antitype. This latter method had long been in
use in biblical exegesis. Pious persons found a curious
satisfaction in turning the most matter of fact state-
ments into enigmatic prophecies. Every verse must
have its “mystical” as well as its natural meaning, and
the search for “types” was a recognised branch of
apologetics. Allegorism became authoritative and
dogmatic, which it has no right to be. It would be
rash to say that this pseudo-science, which has proved
so attractive to many minds, is entirely valueless. The
very absurdity of the arguments used by its votaries
should make us suspect that there is a dumb logic
of a more respectable sort behind them. There is,
underlying this love of types and emblems, a strong


1 The distinction, however, would be unintelligible to the savage mind.
To primitive man a same is a symbol in the strictest sense. Hence, “the
knowledge, invocation, and vain repetition of a deity’s name constitutes in
itself an actual, if mystic, union with the deity named” (Jevons, Lxtroduc-
tion to the History of Religion, p. 245). This was one of the chief reasons
for making a secret of the cultus, and even of the name of a patron-deity.
To reveal it was to admit strangers into the tutelage of the national god,


en)


272 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


conviction that if “one eternal purpose runs” through
the ages, it must be discernible in small things as well
as in great. Everything in the world, if we could see
things as they are, must be symbolic of the Divine
Power which made it and maintains it in being. We
cannot believe that anything in life is meaningless,
or has no significance beyond the fleeting moment.
Whatever method helps us to realise this is useful,
and inasensetrue. So far as this we may go with the
allegorists, while at the same time we may be thankful
that the cobwebs which they spun over the sacred


‘texts have now been cleared away, so that we can at


last read our Bible as its authors intended it to be read}


1T do not find it possible to give a more honourable place than this to a
system of biblical exegesis which has still a few defenders. It was first
developed in Christian times by the Gnostics, and was eagerly adopted by
Origen, who fearlessly applied it to the Gospels, teaching that ‘‘ Christ’s
actions on earth were enigmas(alvlyyara), to be interpreted by Gnosis.”
The method was often found useful in dealing with moral and scientific
difficulties in the-Old Testament; it enabled Dionysius to use very bold
language about the literal meaning, as I showed in Lecture III. The
Christian Platonists of Alexandria meant it to be an esoteric method:
Clement calls it cupBodikGs gidocopety. It was held that ra pvorhpa
uvoTiks mapadldorac; and even that Divine truths are honoured by
enigmatic treatment (7 kpdyus 4 wvoTiKh ceuvorroet 7d Oetov). But the main
use of allegorism was pietistic; and to this there can be no objection,
unless the piety is morbid, as is the case in many commentaries on the Song
of Solomon. Still, it can hardly be disputed that the countless books
written to elaborate the principles of allegorism contain a mass of futility
such as it would be difficult to match in any other class of literature. The
best defence of the method is perhaps to be found in Keble’s Tract (No. 89)
on the ‘‘ Mysticism” of the early Fathers. Keble’s own poetry contains
many beautiful examples of the true use of symbolism ; but as an apologist
of allegorism he does not distinguish between its use and abuse. Yet
surely there is a vast difference between seeing in the ‘glorious sky
embracing all” a type of ‘‘our Maker’s love,” and analysing the 153 fish
caught in the Sea of Galilee into the square of the 12 Apostles +the square
of the 3 Persons of the Trinity.

The history of the doctrine of “signatures,” which is the cryptogram


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 273


Theosophical and magical Mysticism culminated in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Just as the
idealism of Plotinus lost itself in the theurgic system
of Iamblichus, so the doctrine of Divine immanence
preached by Eckhart and his school was followed by the
Nature-Mysticism of Cornelius Agrippa} and Paracel-
sus.2 The “negative road” had been discredited by
Luther’s invective, and Mysticism, instead of shutting
her eyes to the world of phenomena, stretched forth her
hands to conquer and annex it. The old theory of a
World-Spirit, the pulsations of whose heart are felt in
all the life of the universe, came once more into favour.
Through all phenomena, it was believed, runs an
“ intricate network of sympathies and antipathies, the
- threads of which, could they be disentangled, would


theory applied to medicine, is very curious and interesting, ‘‘Citrons,
according to Paracelsus, are good for heart affections, because they are
heart-shaped ; the saphena rifarum is to be applied to fresh wounds,
because its leaves are spotted as with flecks of blood. A species of dentaria,
whose roots resemble teeth, is a cure for toothache and scurvy.”—Vaughan,

* Hours with the Mystics, vol. ii. p. 77. It is said that some traces of this
quaint superstition survive even in the modern materia medica. The

alliance between medicine and Mysticism subsisted for a long time, and
forms a curious chapter of history.

1 Cornelius Agrippa of Nettesheim, a contemporary of Reuchlin, studied
Cabbalism mainly as a magical science. He was nominally a Catholic, but

. attacked Rome and scholasticism quite in the spirit of Luther. His three
chief works are, On the Threefold Way of Knowing God, On the Vanity of
Arts and Sciences (a ferocious attack on most of the professions), and Oz
Occult Philosophy (treating of natural, celestial, and religious magic). The
‘* magician,” he says, ‘‘must study three sciences—physics, mathematics,
and theology.” Agrippa’s adventurous life ended in 1533.

2 Theophrastus Paracelsus (Philippus Bombastus von Hohenheim) was
born in 1493, and died in 1541. His writings are a curious mixture of
theosophy and medical science: ‘‘ medicine,” he taught, ‘‘has four pues
—philosophy, astronomy (or rather astrology), alchemy, and religion.” He
lays great stress on the doctrine that man is a microcosm, and on the law of


Divine manifestation 4y contraries—the Tatter is a new feature which was


further developed 1 by Bohme. a


18


274 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


furnish us with a clue through all the labyrinths of
natural and supernatural science. The age was im-
patient to enter on the inheritance from which —
humanity had long been debarred; the methods of —
experimental science seemed tame and slow; and so
we find, especially in Germany, an extraordinary
outburst of Nature-Mysticism—astrology, white magic,
alchemy, necromancy, and what not—such as Chris-
tianity had not witnessed before. These pseudo-
sciences (with which was mingled much real progress
_ in medicine, natural history, and kindred sciences)
were divided under three provinces or “ vincula ”—
those of the Spiritual World, which were mainly
magical invocations, diagrams, and signs; those of the
Celestial World, which were taught by astrology; and
those of the Elemental World, which consisted in the
sympathetic influence of material objects upon each
other. These secrets (it was held) are all discoverable
by man; for man is a microcosm, or epitome of the
universe, and there is nothing in it with which he can-
not claim an affinity. In knowing himself, he knows
both God and all the other works that God has made.
The subject of Nature-Mysticism is a fascinating
one; but I must here confine myself to its religious
aspects. An attempt was soon made, by Valentine
Weigel (1533-1588), Lutheran pastor at Tschopau, to
bring together the new objective Mysticism—freed from
its superstitious elements—and the traditional subject-
ive Mysticism which the Middle Ages had handed
down from Dionysius and the Neoplatonists.> Weigel’s
cosmology is based on that of Paracelsus; and his
psychology also reminds us of him. Man is a micro-


_-NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 275


cosm, and his nature has three parts—the outward
material body, the astral spirit, and the immortal soul,
which bears the image of God. The three faculties of
the soul correspond to these three parts; they are
sense, reason (Vernunft), and understanding (Ver-
stand). These are the “three eyes” by which we get
knowledge. The sense perceives material things; the
reason, natural science and art; the understanding,
which he also calls the spark, sees the invisible and
Divine. He follows the scholastic mystics in distin-
guishing between natural and supernatural knowledge,
but his method of distinguishing them is, I think,
original. Natural knowledge, he says, is not conveyed
by the object; it is the percipient subject which creates
knowledge out of itself. The object merely provokes
the consciousness into activity. In natural knowledge
the subject is “active, not passive”; all that appears
to come from without is really evolved from within.
In supernatural knowledge the opposite is the case.
The eye of the “ understanding,” which sees the Divine,
is the spark in the centre of the soul where lies the
Divine image. In this kind of cognition the subject
must be absolutely passive ; its thoughts must be as still


“as if it were dead. Just as in natural knowledge the


P.)


object does not co-operate, so in supernatural know-
ledge the subject does not co-operate. Yet this
supernatural knowledge does not come from without.
The Spirit and Word of God are within us. God is
Himself the eye and the light in the soul, as well as
the object which the eye sees by this light. Super-
natural knowledge flows from within outwards, and in
this way resembles natural knowledge. But since God


276 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


is both the eye that sees and the object which it sees,
it is not we who know God, so much as God who
knows Himself in us. Our inner man is a mere -
instrument of God. |

Thus Weigel, who begins with Paracelsus, leaves off
somewhere near Eckhart—and Eckhart in his boldest
mood. But his chief concern is to attack the Biblio-
laters (Buchstabentheologen) in the Lutheran Church,
and to protest against the unethical dogma of imputed
righteousness. We need not follow him into either of
these controversies, which give a kind of accidental
colouring to his theology. Speculative Mysticism,
which is always the foe of formalism and dryness in
religion, attacks them in whatever forms it finds them ;
and so, when we try to penetrate the essence of
Mysticism by investigating its historical manifestations,
we must always consider what was the system which in
each case it was trying to purify and spiritualise.
Weigel’s Mysticism moves in the atmosphere of Lutheran
dogmatics. But it also marks a stage in the general
development of Christian Mysticism, by giving a posit-
ive value to scientific and natural knowledge as part of
the self-evolution of the human soul. “Study nature,”
he says, “ physics, alchemy, magic, etc.; for z¢ zs all in
you, and you become what you have learnt.’ It is true
that his religious attitude is rigidly quietistic ; but this
position is so inconsistent with the activity which he
enjoins on the “reason,” that he may claim the credit of
having exhibited the contradiction between the positive
and negative methods in a clear light; and-to prove a
contradiction is always the first step towards solving it.

A more notable effort in the same direction was


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 277


that of Jacob Béhme, who, though he had _ studied
Weigel, brought to his task a philosophical genius
which was all his own.

Bohme was born in 1575 near Gorlitz, where he after-
wards settled as a shoemaker and glover. He began to
write in 1612, and in spite of clerical opposition, which
silenced him for five years, he produced a number of
treatises between that date and his death in 1624.

Bohme professed to write only what he had “seen”
by Divine illumination. His visions are not (with
insignificant exceptions) authenticated by any mar-
vellous signs; he simply asserts that he has been
allowed to see into the heart of things, and that the
very Being of God has been laid open to his spiritual
sight.1 His was that type of mind to which every
thought becomes an image, and a logical process is
like an animated photograph. “I am myself my own
book,” he says; and in writing, he tries to transcribe
on paper the images which float before his mind’s eye.
If he fails, it is because he cannot find words to
describe what he is seeing. Bohme was an unlearned
man; but when he is content to describe his visions in


1“«T saw,” he says, ‘“‘the Being of all Beings, the Ground and the
Abyss ; also, the birth of the Holy Trinity ; the origin and first state of the
world and of all creatures. I saw in myself the three worlds—the Divine
or angelic world; the dark world, the original of Nature; and the
external world, as a substance spoken forth out of the two spiritual worlds.

. In my inward man I saw it well, as in a great deep; for I saw right
through as into a chaos where everything lay wrapped, but I could not
unfold it. Yet from time to time it opened itself within me, like a growing
plant. For twelve years I carried it about within me, before I could bring
it forth in any external form ; till afterwards it fell upon me, like a bursting
shower that killeth wheresoever it lighteth, as it will. Whatever I could
bring into outwardness, that I wrote down. The work is none of mine; I
am but the Lord’s instrument, wherewith He doeth what He will.”


t


;
t


278 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


homely German, he is lucid enough. Unfortunately,
the scholars who soon gathered round him supplied
him with philosophical terms, which he forthwith
either personified —for instance the word “Idea”
called forth the image of a beautiful maiden—or used —
in a sense of his own. The study of Paracelsus ob-
scured his style still more, filling his treatises with a
bewildering mixture of theosophy and chemistry. The
result is certainly that much of his work is almost
unreadable; the nuggets of gold have to be dug out
from a bed of rugged stone; and we cannot be sur-
prised that the unmystical eighteenth century declared
that “Behmen’s works would disgrace Bedlam at full
moon.”! But German philosophers have spoken with
reverence of “the father of Protestant Mysticism,” who
“perhaps only wanted learning and the gift of clear
expression to become a German Plato”; and Sir


Isaac Newton shut himself up for three months to


study Bohme, whose teaching on attraction and the
laws of motion seemed to him to have great value”

For us, he is most interesting as marking the transi-
tion from the purely subjective type of Mysticism to
Symbolism, or rather as the author of a brilliant
attempt to fuse the two into one system. In my
brief sketch of Bohme’s doctrines I shall illustrate his
teaching from the later works of William Law, who is
by far its best exponent. Law was an enthusiastic
admirer of Bohme, and being, unlike his master, a man
of learning and a practised writer, was able to bring


1 This is from Bp. Warburton. ‘Sublime nonsense, inimitable bom-
bast, fustian not to be paralleled,” is John Wesley’s verdict.
2 See Overton, Life of William Law, p. 188,


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 279


order out of the chaos in which Bohme left his specula-
tions. In strength of intellect Law was Bohme’s
equal, and as a writer of clear and forcible English he
has few superiors,

Bohme’s doctrine of God and the world resembles
that of other speculative mystics, but he contributes a
new element in the great stress which he lays on
antithesis as a law of being. “In Yes and No all
things consist,’ he says. No philosopher since
Heraclitus and Empedocles had asserted so strongly
kat “Strife is the father of all things.” Even in the
hidden life of the unmanifested Godhead he finds the
play of Attraction and Diffusion, the resultant of which
is a Desire for manifestation felt in the Godhead. As
feeling this desire, the Godhead becomes “ Darkness ” ;
the light which illumines the darkness is the Son.
The resultant is the Holy Spirit, in whom arise the
archetypes of creation. So he explains Body, Soul,
and Spirit as thesis, antithesis, and synthesis; and the
same formula serves to explain Good, Evil, and Free
Will; Angels, Devils, and the World. His view of
Evil is not very consistent; but his final doctrine is
that the object of the cosmic process is to exhibit the
victory of Good over Evil, of Love over Hatred. He
at least has the merit of showing that strife is so
inwoven with our lives here that we cannot possibly
soar above the conflict between Good and Evil. It
must be observed that Bohme repudiated the doctrine
that there is any evolution of God in time. “I say


1] have omitted Bohme’s gnostical theories as to the seven Quedlgetster
as belonging rather to theosophy than to Mysticism. The resemblance to
Basilides is here rather striking, but it must be a pure coincidence.


~ 286_ 8 CHRISTIAN-MYSTICISM |


not that Nature is God,” he says: “He Himself is all,
and communicates His power to all His works.” But
the creation of the archetypes was not a temporal
act.

Like other Protestant mystics, he lays great stress
on the indwelling presence of Christ. And, con-
sistently with this belief, he revolts against the
Calvinistic doctrine of imputed righteousness, very
much as did the Cambridge Platonists a little later.
“That man is no Christian,” he says, “who doth
merely comfort himself with the suffering, death, and
satisfaction of Christ, and doth impute it to himself as
a gift of favour, remaining himself still a wild beast and
unregenerate. . . . If this said sacrifice is to avail for
me, it must be wrought zz me. The Father must
beget His Son in my desire of faith, that my faith’s
hunger may apprehend Him in His word of promise.
Then I put Him on, in His entire process of justifica-
tion, in my inward ground; and straightway there
begins in me the killing of the wrath of the devil,
death, and hell, from the inward power of Christ’s
death. I am inwardly dead, and He is my life; I live
in Him, and not in my selfhood. I am an instrument
of God, wherewith He doeth what He will.” To the
same effect William Law says, “Christ given for us is
neither more nor less than Christ given zmto us. He
is in no other sense our full, perfect, and sufficient
Atonement, than as His nature and spirit are born and
formed in us.” Law also insists that the Atonement
was the effect, not of the wrath, but of the love of God.
“ Neither reason nor scripture,” he says, “will allow us
to bring wrath into God Himself, as a temper of His


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 281


mind, who is only infinite, unalterable, overflowing
Love.” “Wrath is atoned when sin is extinguished.”
This revolt against the forensic theory of the Atone-
ment is very characteristic of Protestant Mysticism.
The disparagement of external rites and ordinances,
which we have found in so many mystics, appears in
William Law, though he was himself precise in ob-
serving all the rules of the English Church. “ This
pearl of eternity is the Church, a temple of God
within thee, the consecrated place of Divine worship,
where alone thou canst worship God in spirit and in
truth. In sf#zrit, because thy spirit is that alone in
thee which can unite and cleave unto God, and receive
the working of the Divine Spirit upon thee. In ¢rutzh,
because this adoration in spirit is that truth and reality
of which all outward forms and rites, though in-
stituted by God, are only the figure for a time; but
this worship is eternal. Accustom thyself to the holy
service of this inward temple. In the midst of it is
the fountain of living water, of which thou mayst
drink and live for ever. There the mysteries of thy
redemption are celebrated, or rather opened in life and
power. There the supper of the Lamb is kept; the
bread that came down from heaven, that giveth life to
the world, is thy true nourishment: all is done, and
known in real experience, in a living sensibility o1 the
work of God on the soul. There the birth, the life, the
sufferings, the death, the resurrection and ascension of
Christ, are not merely remembered, but inwardly found
and enjoyed as the real states of thy soul, which has
followed Christ in the regeneration. When once thou
1 And of English Mysticism berore the Reformation ; cf. p. 208,


282 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


val aay


art well grounded in this inward worship, thou wilt


have learnt to live unto God above time and place.


For every day will be Sunday to thee, and wherever


thou goest thou wilt have a priest, a church, and an
altar along with thee.”

In his teaching about faith and love, Law follows
the best mystical writers; but none before him, I
think, attained to such strong and growing eloquence
in setting it forth. “There is but one salvation for
all mankind, and the way to it is one; and that is, the
desire of the soul turned to God. This desire brings
the soul to God, and God into the soul; it unites with
God, it co-operates with God, and is one life with God.
O my God, just and true, how great is Thy love and
mercy to mankind, that heaven is thus everywhere
open, and Christ thus the common Saviour to all that
turn the desire of their hearts to Thee!” And of love
he says: “No creature can have any union or com-
munion with the goodness of the Deity till its life is a
spirit of love. This is the one only bond of union
betwixt God and His creature.” “Love has no by-
ends, wills nothing but its own increase: everything is
as oil to its flame. The spirit of love does not want
to be rewarded, honoured, or esteemed ; its only desire
is to propagate itself, and become the blessing and
happiness of everything that wants it.”

The doctrine of the Divine spark (synteresis) is held
by Law, but in a more definitely Christian form than
by Eckhart. “If Christ was to raise a new life like


1 From the Spiret of Prayer. The sect of Behmenists in Germany,
~ unlike Law, attended no church, and took no part in the Lord’s Supper.
—Overton, Life of Wiliam Law, p. 214.


a
‘3


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 283


His own in every man, then every man must have had
originally in the inmost spirit of his life a seed of
Christ, or Christ as a seed of heaven, lying there in a
state of insensibility, out of which it could not arise
but by the mediatorial power of Christ. . . . For
what could begin to deny self, if there were not some-
thing in man different from self? . . . The Word of
God is the hidden treasure of every human soul,
immured under flesh and blood, till as a day-star it
arises in our hearts, and changes the son of an earthly
Adam into a son of God.” Is not this the Platonic
doctrine of axammnesis, Christianised in a most beautiful
manner ?

Very characteristic ot the later Mysticism is the
language which both Bohme and Law use about the
future state. “The soul, when it departs from the
body,” Bohme writes, “needeth not to go far; for
where the body dies, there is heaven and hell. God is
there, and the devil; yea, each in his own kingdom.
There also is Paradise; and the soul needeth only to
snter through the deep door in the centre.” Law is
very emphatic in asserting that heaven and hell are
states, not places, and that they are “ no foreign,
separate, and imposed’ states, adjudged to us by the
will of God.” “Damnation,” he says, “is the natural,
essential state of our own disordered nature, which is
impossible, in the nature of the thing, to be anything


else but our own hell, both here and _ hereafter.” °


‘There is nothing that is supernatural,’ he says very
inely, “in the whole system of our redemption.
“very part of it has its ground in the workings and
»owers of nature, and all our redemption is only nature


t


284 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM Ss


set right, or made to be that which it ought to be.’
There is nothing that is supernatural but God alone.

. Right and wrong, good and evil, true and false,
happiness and misery, are as unchangeable in nature
as time and space. Nothing, therefore, can be done to
any creature supernaturally, or in a way that is without
or contrary to the powers of nature; but every thing
or creature that is to be helped, that is, to have any
good done to it, or any evil taken out of it, can only
have it done so far as the powers of nature are able,
and rightly directed to effect it.”?

It is difficult to abstain from quoting more passages
like this, in which Faith, which had been so long directed
only to the unseen and unknown, sheds her bright
beams over this earth of ours, and claims all nature for
her own. The laws of nature are now recognised as
the laws of God, and for that very reason they carrot
be broken or arbitrarily suspended. Redemption is a


1 This stimulating doctrine, that the soul, when freed from impediments,
ascends naturally and inevitably to its ‘‘own place,” is put into the mouth
of Beatrice by Dante (Paradiso, i. 136)—

** Non dei pitt ammirar, se bene stimo,
Lo tuo salir, se non come d’un rivo
Se d’alto monte scende giuso ad imo,
Maraviglia sarebbe in te, se prive
D’impedimento giu ti fossi assiso,
Com’ a terra quieto fuoco vivo.
Quinci rivolce inver lo cielo il viso.”

* It may be interesting to compare the following passage from George
Fox, which dramatises the irruption of natural science, with its faith iz
‘fixed laws, into the sphere of the religious consciousness :—‘‘ One morning
while I was sitting by the fire, a great cloud came over me, a temptatior
beset me; and I sat still. It was said, Al/ things come by Nature ; anc
the elements and stars came over me, so that I was in a manner quit
clouded by it. And as I sat still under it and let it alone, a living hop
and a true voice arose in me, which said, There zs a living God who mad
all things. Immediately the cloud and temptation vanished away, and lif
rose over it all; my heart was glad, and I praised the living God.”


J
s
}


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 285


law of life. There will come a time} “the time of the -
lilies,” as Béhme calls it, when all nature will be
delivered from bondage. “All the design of Christian
redemption,” says Law, “is to remove everything that
is unheavenly, gross, dark, wrathful, and disordered
from every part of this fallen world.” No text is
oftener in his mouth than the words of St. Paul which
I read as the text of this Lecture. That “dim sym-
pathy” of the human spirit with the life of nature
which Plotinus felt, but which medizval dualism had
almost quenched, has now become an intense and happy
consciousness of community with all living things, as
subjects of one all-embracing and unchanging law, the
law of perfect love. Magic and portents, apparitions
and visions, the raptures of “infused contemplation”
and their dark Nemesis of Satanic delusions, can no
mote trouble the serenity of him who has learnt to see
the same God in nature whom he has found in the
holy place of his own heart.

It was impossible to separate Law from the “ blessed
Behmen,” whose disciple he was proud to profess ~
himself. But in putting them together I have been
obliged to depart from the chronological order, for
the Cambridge Platonists, as they are usually called,
come between. This, however, need cause no confu-
sion, for the Platonists had no direct influence upon
Law. Law, Nonjuror as well as mystic, remained a
High Churchman by sympathy, and hated Rational-
ism; while the Platonists sprang from an Evangelical


1So we may fairly say, if we remember that we are speaking of what
transcends time. Neither Bohme nor Law looks forward to a golden age »


on this earth.


286 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


school, were never tired of extolling Reason, and


regarded Bohme as a fanciful “enthusiast.”* And yet,


we find so very much in common between the Platon-


ists and William Law, that these party differences =
seem merely superficial The same exalted type of —


Mysticism appears in both.

The group of philosophical divines, who had their
centre in some of the Cambridge colleges towards the
middle of the seventeenth century, furnishes one of the
most interesting and important chapters in the history
of our Church. Never since the time of the early
Greek Fathers had any orthodox communion produced
thinkers so independent and yet so thoroughly loyal
to the Church. And seldom has the Christian temper
found a nobler expression than in the lives and writ-
ings of such men as Whichcote and John Smith?


1 Henry More’s judgment is as follows: ‘‘ Jacob Behmen, I conceive, is
to be reckoned in the number of those whose imaginative faculty has the
pre-eminence above the rational; and though he was a good and holy
man, his natural complexion, notwithstanding, was not destroyed, but re-
tained its property still; and, therefore, his imagination being very busy
about Divine things, he could not without a miracle fail of becoming an
enthusiast, and of receiving Divine truths upon the account of the strength
and vigour of his fancy; which, being so well qualified with holiness and
sanctity, proved not unsuccessful in sundry apprehensions, but in others it
fared with him after the manner of men, the sagacity of his imagination
failing him, as well as the anxiety of reason does others of like integrity
with himself.”

* Canon G. G. Perry, in his Students’ English Church History, disposes
of this noble group of men in one contemptuous paragraph, as a ‘‘ class ot
divines who were neither Puritans nor High Churchmen,” and makes the
astounding statement that ‘‘to the school thus commenced, the deadness,
carelessness, and indifference prevalent in the eighteenth century are in
large measure to be attributed.” It is of these very same men that Bishop
Burnet writes, that if they had not appeared to combat the “laziness
and negligence,” the ‘‘ease and sloth” of the Restoration clergy, ‘‘ the
Church had quite lost her esteem over the nation.” Alexander Knox
( Works, vol. iii. p. 199) speaks of the rise of this school as a great instance
of the design of Providence to supply to the Church what had never before


id


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 287


These men made no secret of their homage to Plato.
And let it be noticed that they were students of Plato
and Plotinus more than of Dionysius and his succes-
sors. Their Platonism is not of the debased Oriental


_ type, and is entirely free from self-absorbed quietism.


'


The via negativa has disappeared as completely in
their writings as in those of Bohme; the world is for
them as for him the mirror of the Deity; but, being
philosophers and not physicists, they are most inter-
ested in claiming for religion the whole field of zuzel-
lectual life. They are fully convinced that there can
be no ultimate contradiction between philosophy or
science and Christian faith; and this accounts not
only for their praise of “reason,” but for the happy
optimism which appears everywhere in their writings.
The luxurious and indolent Restoration clergy, whose
lives were shamed by the simplicity and spirituality of
the Platonists, invented the word “ Latitudinarian”
to throw at them, “a long nickname which they have
taught their tongues to pronounce as roundly as if it
were shorter than it is by four or five syllables”; but
they could not deny that their enemies were loyal sons
of the Church of England.!./ What the Platonists meant


been produced, writers who do ‘‘ full honour at once to the elevation and
the rationality of Christian piety. . . . In their writings we are invited to
ascend, by having a prospect opened before us as luminous as it is sub-
lime. . . . They are such writers as had never before existed. . . . No
Church but the English Church could have produced them.” Of John
Smith he says, ‘“‘My value for him is beyond what words can do justice
to.” The works of Whichcote, Smith, Cudworth, and Culverwel are
happily accessible enough, and I beg my readers to study them at first
hand. I do not believe that any Christian couid rise from the perusal of
the two first-named without having gained a lasting benefit in the deepen-
ing of his spiritual life and heightening of his faith.

«1 4 writer who signs himself S. P, (probably Simon Patrick, bishop of


>


~~


288 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


by making reason the seat of authority may be seen
by a few quotations from Whichcote and Smith, who
for our purpose are, I think, the best representatives of
the school. Whichcote answers Tuckney, who had
remonstrated with him for “a vein of doctrine, in
which reason hath too much given to it in the mys-
teries of faith” ;—“ Too much” and “too often” on
these points! “The Scripture is full of such truths,
and I discourse on them too much and too often! Sir,
I oppose not rational to spiritual, for spiritual is most
rational.” Elsewhere he writes, “He that gives reason
for what he has said, has done what is fit to be done,
and the most that can be done.” “Reason is the
Divine Governor of man’s life; it is the very voice of
God.” “When the doctrine of the Gospel becomes
the reason of our mind, it will be the principle of our
life.” “It ill becomes us to make our intellectual
faculties Gibeonites.”! How far this teaching differs
from the frigid “common-sense” morality prevalent
in the eighteenth century, may be judged from the
following, which stamps Whichcote as a _ genuine
mystic. “Though liberty of judgment be everyone’s
right, yet how few there are that make use of this
right! For the use of this right doth depend upon
self-improvement by meditation, consideration, examina-
tion, prayer, and the like. These are things antece-


Ely), in a pamphlet called 4 Brief Account of the new Sect of Latitude
Men (1662), vindicates their attachment to the ‘‘ virtuous mediocrity” of
the Church of England, as distinguished from the ‘‘ meretricious gaudiness
of the Church of Rome, and the squalid sluttery of fanatic conventicles.”

* Compare with these extracts the words of Leibnitz: ‘To despise
reason in matters of religion is to my eyes certain proof either of an
obstinacy that borders on fanaticism, or, what is worse, of hypocrisy.”


_NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 289


dent and prerequisite.” John Smith, in a fine passage
too long to quote in full, says: “Reason in man being
lumen de lumine, a light flowing from the Fountain and
Father of lights . . . was to enable man to work out
_ of himself all those notions of God which are the true
groundwork of love and obedience to God, and con-
formity to Him. . . . But since man’s fall from God,
the inward virtue and vigour of reason is much abated,
the soul having suffered a wrepoppuvnots, as Plato speaks,
a defluvium pennarum. . .. And therefore, besides the
truth of natural inscription, God hath provided the
truth of Divine revelation. . . . But besides this out-
ward revelation, there is also an inward impression of
it. . . . which is in a more special manner attributed
to God. . . . God only can so shine upon our glassy
understandings, as to beget in them a picture of Him-
self, and turn the soul like wax or clay to the seal of
His own light and love. He that made our souls in
His own image and likeness can easily find a way
into them. The Word that God speaks, having found
a way into the soul, imprints itself there as with the
point of a diamond. . . . It is God alone that acquaints
the soul with the truths of revelation, and also
strengthens and raises the soul to better apprehen-
sions even of natural truth, God being that in the
intellectual world which the sun is in the sensible, as
some of the ancient Fathers love to speak, and the
ancient philosophers too, who meant God by their
Intellectus Agens whose proper work they supposed
to be not so much to enlighten the object as the
faculty.”
3 See Appendix C.
19


290 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


The Platonists thus lay great stress on the inner
light, and identify it with the purified reason. The best
exposition of their teaching on this head is in Smith’s
beautiful sermon on “The True Way or Method
of attaining to Divine Knowledge.” “ Divinity,” he
says, “is a Divine life rather than a Divine science, to
be understood rather by a spiritual sensation than by
any verbal description. A good life is the prolepszs
of Divine science—the fear of the Lord is the be-
ginning of wisdom. Divinity is a true efflux from the
eternal light, which, like the sunbeams, does not only
enlighten, but also heat and enliven; and therefore our
Saviour hath in His beatitudes connext purity of heart
to the beatific vision.” “Systems and models furnish
but a poor wan light,” compared with that which
shines in purified souls. “To seek our divinity merely
in books and writings is to seek the living among the
dead”; in these, “truth is often not so much enshrined
as entombed.” “That which enables us to know and
understand aright the things of God, must be a living
principle. of holiness within us. The sun of truth
never shines into any unpurged souls. . . . Such as
men themselves are, such will God Himself seem to
be. . . . Some men have too bad hearts to have good
heads. . . . He that will find truth must seek it with a
free judgment and a sanctified mind.”

Smith was well read in mystical theology, and was
aware how much his ideal differed from that of
Dionysian Mysticism. His criticism of the via negativa
is so admirable that I must quote part of it. “Good
men... are content and ready to deny themselves
for God. I mean not that they should deny their own


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 201


reason, as some would have it, for that were to deny a
beam of Divine light, and so to deny God, instead of
denying ourselves for Him. . . . By self-denial, I mean
the soul’s quitting all its own interest in itself, and an
entire resignation of itself to Him as to all points of
service and duty; and thus the soul loses itself in God,
and lives in the possession not so much of its own
being as of the Divinity, desiring only to be great in
God, to glory in His light, and spread itself in His
fulness; to be filled always by Him, and to empty
itself again into Him; to receive all from Him, and to
expend all for Him; and so to live, not as its own,
but as God’s.” Wicked men “maintain a meum and
tuum between God and themselves,” but the good man
is able to make a full surrender of himself, “ triumph-
ing in nothing more than in his own nothingness, and
in the allness of the Divinity. But, indeed, this his
being nothing is the only way to be all things; this his
having nothing the truest way of possessing all things.
... The spirit of religion is always ascending up-
wards; and, spreading itself through the whole essence
of the soul, loosens it from a self-confinement and
narrowness, and so renders it more capacious of Divine
enjoyment. ... The spirit of a good man is always
drinking in fountain-goodness, and fills itself more and
more, till it be filled with all the fulness of God.” “It
is not a melancholy kind of sitting still, and slothful
waiting, that speaks men enlivened by the Spirit and
power of God. It is not religion to stifle and smother
those active powers and principles which are within us.
. . . Good men do not walk up and down the world
merely like ghosts and shadows; but they are indeed


292 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


living men, by a real participation from Him who is
indeed a quickening Spirit.”

“Neither were it an happiness worth the having for
a mind, like an hermit sequestered from all things else,
to spend an eternity in self-converse and the enjoy-
ment of such a diminutive superficial nothing as itself
is... . We read in the Gospel of such a question of
our Saviour’s, What went ye out into the wilderness to
see? We may invert it, What do you return within
to see? A soul confined within the private and
narrow cell of its own particular being? Such a soul
deprives itself of all that almighty and essential glory
and goodness which shines round about it, which
spreads itself throughout the whole universe; I say, it
deprives itself of all this, for the enjoying of such a
poor, petty, and diminutive thing as itself is, which yet
it can never enjoy truly in such retiredness.”

The English Platonists are equally sound on the
subject of ecstasy. Whichcote says: “He doth not
know God at all as He is, nor is he in a good state
of religion, who doth not find in himself at times
ravishings with sweet and lovely considerations of
the Divine perfections.”. And Smith: “ Who can tell
the delights of those mysterious converses with the
Deity, when reason is turned into sense, and faith
becomes vision? The fruit of this knowledge is
sweeter than honey and the honeycomb, .. . By the
Platonists’ leave, this life and knowledge (that of the
‘contemplative man’) peculiarly belongs to the true
and sober Christian. This life is nothing else but an
infant-Christ formed in his soul. But we must not
mistake: this knowledge is here but in its infancy.”


z|
7


~


|


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 293


While we are here, “our own imaginative powers,
which are perpetually attending the best acts of our
souls, will be breathing a gross dew upon the pure
glass of our understandings.”

“ Heaven is first a temper, then a place,” says Which-
cote, and Smith says the same about hell. “ Heaven


~is not a thing without us, nor is happiness anything


distinct from a true conjunction of the mind with
God.” “Though we could suppose ourselves to be at
truce with heaven, and all Divine displeasure laid
asleep ; yet would our own sins, if they continue unmorti-
fied, make an A2tna or Vesuvius within us.”? This
view of the indissoluble connexion between holiness
and blessedness, as between sin and damnation, leads


Smith to reject strenuously the doctrine of imputed, >


as opposed to imparted, righteousness. “God does
not bid us be warmed and filled,” he says, “and deny
us those necessities which our starving and hungry
souls call for. ... I doubt sometimes, some of our
dogmata and notions about justification may puff us
up in far higher and goodlier conceits of ourselves than
God hath of us, and that we profanely make the
unspotted righteousness of Christ to serve only as a
covering wherein to wrap our foul deformities and
filthy vices, and when we have done, think ourselves
in as good credit and repute with God as we are with
ourselves, and that we are become Heaven’s darlings as


much as we are our own.” ?


1 The classical reader will be reminded of Lucretius, iii. 979-1036.
Smith, however, would not have relished this comparison. He devotes
part of one sermon to a refutation of the Epicurean poet, in whom he sees


+ a precursor of his béte notre, Hobbes !


2 Compare with this the following passage of Jean de Labadie (1610-


2904 ‘CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


These extracts will show that the English Platonists
breathe a larger air than the later Romish mystics, and
teach a religion more definitely Christian than Erigena
and Eckhart. I shall now show how this happy result
was connected with a more truly spiritual view of the
external world than we have met with in the earlier
part of our survey. That the laws of nature are the
laws of God, that “man, as man, is averse to what is
evil and wicked,” that “evil is unnatural,” and a “ con-
-tradiction of the law of our being,” which is only found
in “wicked men and devils,” is one of Whichcote’s
“gallant themes.” And Smith sets forth the true
principles of Nature-Mysticism in a splendid passage,
with which I will conclude this Lecture :—

“God made the universe and all the creatures con-
tained therein as so many glasses wherein He might
reflect His own glory. He hath copied forth Himself
in the creation; and in this outward world we may
read the lovely characters of the Divine goodness,
power, and wisdom. . . . But howto find God here, and
feelingly to converse with Him, and being affected
with the sense of the Divine glory shining out upon
the creation, how to pass out of the sensible world into
the intellectual, is not so effectually taught by that


1674), the founder of a mystical school on the Continent: ‘‘ Plusieurs sont
bien aises d’ouyr dire qu’ils sont justifiés par Jesus-Christ, lavés de leurs
péchés en son sang par la foi, par la repentance et par le baptéme chrestien,
et volontiers ils l’embrasent comme Justificateur, comme crucifié et mort
pour eux; mais peu prennent part 4 sa croix, & sa mort, pour se faire
spirituellement mourir avec Luy, crucifier leur chair avec la sienne, et
porter en eux-mémes les vives marques de sa croix et de sa mort. Peu le
goutent comme Justificateur au dedans par |’Esprit consacrant et immolant


le vieil homme 4 Dieu et par une pratique vraiment sainte, laquelle dompte
le péché.”


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 295


philosophy which professed it most, as by true religion.
That which knits and unites God and the soul together
can best teach it how to ascend and descend upon
those golden links that unite, as it were, the world to
God. That Divine Wisdom, that contrived and beauti-
fied this glorious structure, can best explain her own
art, and carry up the soul back again in these reflected
beams to Him who is the Fountain of them. . . . Good
men may easily find every creature pointing out to
that Being whose image and superscription it bears,
and climb up from those darker resemblances of the
Divine wisdom and goodness, shining out in different
degrees upon several creatures, till they sweetly repose
themselves in the bosom of the Divinity ; and while they
are thus conversing with this lower world . . . they find
God many times secretly flowing into their souls, and
leading them silently out of the court of the temple
into the Holy Place. . . . Thus religion, where it is in
truth and power, renews the very spirit of our minds,
and doth in a manner spiritualise this outward creation
to us.... It is nothing but a thick mist of pride and
self-love that hinders men’s eyes from beholding that
sun which enlightens them and all things else.... A
good man is no more solicitous whether this or that
good thing be mine, or whether my perfections exceed
the measure of this or that particular creature; for
whatsoever good he beholds anywhere, he enjoys and
delights in it as much as if it were his own, and what-
ever he beholds in himself, he looks not upon it as his
property, but as a common good; for all these beams
come from one and the same Fountain and Ocean of
light in whom he loves them all with an universal


296 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


love. . . . Thus may a man walk up and down the


. world as in a garden of spices, and suck a Divine


sweetness out of every flower. There is a twofold
meaning in every creature, a literal and a mystical,
and the one is but the ground of the other; and as the
Jews say of their law, so a good man says of every-
thing that his senses offer to him—it speaks to his
lower part, but it points out something above to his
mind and spirit. It is the drowsy and muddy spirit of


superstition which is fain to set some idol at its elbow,


something that may jog it and put it in mind of God.
Whereas true religion never finds itself out of the
infinite sphere of the Divinity ... it beholds itself
everywhere in the midst of that glorious unbounded
Being who is indivisibly everywhere. A good man
finds every place he treads upon holy ground; to him
the world is God’s temple; he is ready to say with
Jacob, “ How dreadful is this place! this is none other
than the house of God, this is the gate of heaven.”


ete, wry


SANA ;
my r
” { j
|
\ \
:
5
} %
\ A : ,
\ ‘ {


LECTURE


‘For nothing worthy proving can be proven,
Nor yet disproven ; wherefore thou be wise,
Cleave ever to the sunnier side of doubt,
And cling to Faith beyond the forms of Faith!
She reels not in the storm of warring words,
She brightens at the clash of Yes and No,
She sees the Best that glimmers through the Worst,
She feels the sun is hid but for a night,
She spies the summer thro’ the winter bud,
She tastes the fruit before the blossom falls,
She hears the lark within the songless egg,
She finds the fountain where they wail’d ‘ Mirage !’”
TENNYSON, Zhe Ancient Sage.


‘Of true religions there are only two: one of them recognises and
worships the Holy that without form or shape dwells in and around us;
and the other recognises and worships it in its fairest form. Everything
that lies between these two is idolatry.”

GOETHE.


‘My wish is that I may perceive the God whom I find everywhere
in the external world, in like manner within and inside me.”
KEPLER.


§*Getrost, das Leben schreitet

Zum ew’gen Leben hin;

Von innrer Gluth geweitet
Verklart sich unser Sinn.

Die Sternwelt wird zerfliessen
Zum goldnen Lebenswein,

Wir werden sie geniessen
Und lichte Sterne sein.


Die Lieb’ ist freigegeben
Und keine Trennung mehr
Es wogt das volle Leben
Wie ein unendlich Meer.
Nur eine Nacht der Wonne,
Ein ewiges Gedicht !
Und unser Aller Sonne
Ist Gottes Angesicht.”
NovALis,


LECTURE..VHI


NATURE-MYSTICISM—continued


*€The invisible things of Him since the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood through the things that are made, even His ever-
lasting power and Divinity.”—-Rom. i. 20.


IN my last Lecture I showed how the later Mysticism
emancipated itself from the mischievous doctrine that
the spiritual eye can only see when the eye of sense is
closed. After the Reformation period the mystic tries
to look with both eyes; his aim is to see God in all
things, as well as all things in God. He returns with
better resources to the task of the primitive religions,
and tries to find spiritual law in the natural world. It
is true that a strange crop of superstitions, the seeds
of which had been sown long before, sprang up to
mock his hopes. In necromancy, astrology, alchemy,
palmistry, table-turning, and other delusions, we have
what some count the essence, and others the reproach,
of Mysticism. But these are, strictly speaking, scien-
tific and not religious errors. From the standpoint of
religion and philosophy, the important change is that, in
the belief of these later mystics, the natural and the
~ spiritual are, somehow or other, to be reconciled; the
/ external world is no longer regarded as a place of exile


/ from God, or as a delusive appearance; it is the living
299


300 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


vesture of the Deity; and its “discordant harmony,”!
though “for the many it needs interpreters,” * yet “has
a voice for the wise” which speaks of things behind the
veil. The glory of God is no longer figured as a
blinding white light in which all colours are combined
and lost; but is seen as a “many-coloured wisdom ”®
which shines everywhere, its varied hues appearing not
only in the sanctuary of the lonely soul, but in all the
wonders that science can discover, and all the beauties
‘that art can interpret. Dualism, with the harsh
asceticism which belongs to it, has given way to a
brighter and more hopeful philosophy ; men’s outlook
upon the world is more intelligent, more trustful, and
more genial; only for those who perversely seek to
impose the ethics of selfish individualism upon a world
which obeys no such law, science has in reserve a
blacker pessimism than ever brooded over the ascetic
of the cloister.

We shall not meet, in this chapter, any finer
examples of the Christian mystic than John Smith
and William Law. But these men, and their intel-
lectual kinsmen, were far from exhausting the treasure
of Nature-Mysticism. The Cambridge Platonists,
indeed, somewhat undervalued the religious lessons
of Nature. They were scholars and divines, and what
lay nearest their heart was the consecration of the
reason—that is, of the whole personality under the
guidance of its highest faculty—to the service of truth
and goodness. And Law, in his later years, was too
~ much under the influence of Bohme’s fantastic theosophy


1 Horace, Zp, i. 12. 19. ? Pindar, Olymfp. ii. 154.
. *®aodvrolxidos copla, Eph. iii. 10.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 301


to bring to Nature that childlike spirit which can best
learn her lessons.

The Divine in Nature has hitherto been discerned
more fully by the poet than by the theologian or the
naturalist; and in this concluding Lecture I must deal
chiefly with Christian poetry. The attitude towards
Nature which we have now to consider is more con-
templative than practical; it studies analogies in order
to know the unseen powers which surround us, and has
no desire to bend them or make them its instruments.

Our Lord’s precept, “Consider the lilies,’ sanctions
this religious use of Nature ; and many of His parables,
such as that of the Sower, show us how much we may
learn from such analogies. And be it observed that it
is the normal and regular in Nature which in these
parables is presented for our study; the yearly harvest,
not the three years’ famine; the constant care and
justice of God, not the “special providence” or the
“special judgment.” We need not wait for catastrophes
to trace the finger of God. As for Christian poetry
and art, we do not expect to find any theory of zsthetic
in the New Testament; but we may perhaps extract
from the precept quoted above the canon that the
highest beauty that we can discern resides in the real
and natural, and only demands the seeing eye to find it.

In the Greek Fathers we find great stress laid on the
glories of Nature as a revelation of God. Cyril says,
“ The wider our contemplation of creation, the grander
will be our conception of God.” And Basil uses the
same language. We find, indeed, in these writers a
marked tendency to exalt the religious value of natural
beauty, and to disparage the function of art—a pre-


302 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


monition, perhaps, of iconoclasm. Pagan art, which
was decaying before the advent of Christ, could not,
it appears, be quietly Christianised and carried on
without a break. .
The true Nature- Mysticism is prominent in St.
Francis of Assisi. He loves to see in all around him
the pulsations of one life, which sleeps in the stones,
dreams in the plants, and wakens in man. “ He would
remain in contemplation before a flower, an insect, or a
‘bird, and regarded them with no dilettante or egoistic
pleasure; he was interested that the plant should have
its sun, the bird its nest; that the humblest manifesta-
tions of creative force should have the happiness to
which they are entitled.”+ So strong was his conviction
that all living things are children of God, that he would
preach to “my little sisters the birds,” and even under-
took the conversion of “the ferocious wolf of Agobio.”
This tender reverence for Nature, which is a mark
of all true Platonism, is found, as we have seen, in
Plotinus. It is also prominent in the Platonists of the
Renaissance, such as Bruno and Campanella, and in
Petrarch, who loved to offer his evening prayers among
the moonlit mountains. Suso.has at least one beauti-
ful passage on the sights and sounds of spring, and
exclaims, “O tender God, if Thou art so loving in Thy
creatures, how fair and lovely must Thou be in Thy-
self!” The Reformers, especially Luther and Zwingli,


1 Barine in Revue des Deux Mondes, April 1891.

2 The latter, like Fechner in our own century, holds that the stars are
living organisms, whose ‘‘ sensibility is full of pleasure.”

5 See Illingworth’s Divine /mmanence, where this and other interesting
passages are quoted. But Suso was, of course, of a ‘‘ Protestant mystic.”
And I cannot agree with the author when he says that Lucretius found no


sen ca Ai


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 303


are more alive than might have been expected to the
value of Nature’s lessons; and the French mystics,
Francis de Sales and Fénelon, write gracefully about
the footprints of the Divine wisdom and beauty which
may be traced everywhere in the world around us.

But natural religion is not to be identified with
Mysticism, and it would not further our present inquiry
to collect passages, in prose or poetry, which illustrate
the aids to faith which the book of Nature may supply.
Nor need we dwell on such pure Platonism as we find
in Spenser’s “ Hymn of Heavenly Beauty,” or some of
Shelley’s poems, in which we are bidden to gaze upon
the world as a mirror of the Divine Beauty, since our
mortal sight cannot endure the “white radiance” of ~
the eternal archetypes.1 We have seen how this view


religious inspiration in Nature. The poet of the Mature of Things shows
himself to have been a lonely man, who had pondered much among the
hills and by the sea, and who loved to taste the pure delights of the
spring. Thence came to him the ‘‘holy joyand dread” (‘quzedam divina
yoluptas atque horror”) which pulsates through his great poem as he
shatters the barbarous mythology of paganism, and then, in the spirit of
a priest rather than of a philosopher, turns the ‘‘bright shafts of day”
upon the folly and madness of those who are slaves to the world or the
flesh. The spirit of Lucretius is the spirit of modern science, which tends
neither to materialism nor to atheism, whatever its friends and enemies may
sa Christian Platonism has never been more beautifully set forth than in
the poem of Spenser named above. Compare, especially, the following
stanzas :—
‘‘ The means, therefore, which unto us is lent

Him to behold, is on His works to look,

Which He hath made in beauty excellent,

And in the same, as in a brazen book

To read enregistered in every nooke

His goodness, which His beauty doth declare:

For all that’s good is beautiful and fair.


Thence gathering plumes of perfect speculation,
To imp the wings of thy high-flying mind,


304 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


of the world as a pale reflection of the Ideas leads in
practice to a contempt for visible things; as, indeed, it
does in Spenser’s beautiful poem. He invites us, after
learning Nature’s lessons, to


“Look at last up to that sovereign light,
From whose pure beams all perfect beauty springs ;
That kindleth love in every godly spright,
Even the love of God; which loathing brings
Of this vile world and these gay-seeming things ;
With whose sweet pleasures being so possessed,
Thy straying thoughts henceforth for ever rest.”


This is not the keynote of the later Nature-Mysticism.
We now expect that every new insight into the truth
of things, every enlightenment of the eyes of our under-
standing, which may be granted us as the reward of
faith, love, and purity of heart, will make the world
around us appear, not viler and baser, but more glorious
and more Divine. It is not a proof of spirituality, but
of its opposite, if God’s world seems to us a poor place.
If we could see it as God sees it, it would be still, as
as on the morning of creation, “very good.” The
hymn which is ever ascending from the earth to the


throne of God is to be listened for, that we may join in °


it. The laws by which all creation lives are to be


Mount up aloft through heavenly contemplation,
From this dark world, whose damps the soul do blind,
On that bright Sun of glory fix thine eyes,
Cleared from gross mists of frail infirmities,”
Shelley sums up a great deal of Plotinus in the following stanza of
** Adonais ” :—
“The One remains; the many change and pass;
Heaven’s light for ever shines ; earth’s shadows fly ;
Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,
Stains the white radiance of eternity.”
Compare, too, the opening lines of ‘* Alastor.”


¥


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 30s


studied, that we too may obey them. As for the
beauty which is everywhere diffused so lavishly, it
seems to be a gift of God’s pure bounty, to bring
happiness to the unworldly souls who alone are able to
see and enjoy it.

The greatest prophet of this branch of contemplative
Mysticism is unquestionably the poet Wordsworth, It
was the object of his life to be a religious teacher, and
I think there is no incongruity in placing him at the
end of the roll of mystical divines who have been dealt
with in these Lectures. His intellectual kinship with
the acknowledged representatives of Nature-Mysticism
will, I hope, appear very plainly.

Wordsworth was an eminently sane and manly spirit.
He found his philosophy of life early, and not only
preached but lived it consistently. A Platonist by
nature rather than by study, he is thoroughly Greek in
his distrust of strong emotions and in his love of all
which the Greeks included under cw¢poovvn. He was
a loyal Churchman, but his religion was really almost
independent of any ecclesiastical system. His ecclesi-
astical sonnets reflect rather the dignity of the Anglican
Church than the ardent piety with which our other poet- ,
mystics, such as Herbert, Vaughan, and Crashaw, adorn
the offices of worship. His cast of faith, intellectual
and contemplative rather than fervid, and the solitari-
ness of his thought, forbade him to find much satisfac-
tion in public ceremonial. He would probably agree
with Galen, who in a very remarkable passage says
that the study of nature, if prosecuted with the same
earnestness and intensity which men bring to the con-
templation of the “ Mysteries,” is even more fitted than

20


306 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


they to reveal the power and wisdom of God; for “ the


symbolism of the mysteries is more obscure than that of


nature.”
He shows his affinity with the modern spirit in his


firm grasp of natural Jew. Like George Fox and


William Law, he had to face the shock of giving up his
belief in arbitrary interferences. There was a period
when he lost his young faculty of generalisation ; when
he bowed before the inexorable dooms of an unknown
- Lawgiver—“the categorical imperative,” till the gift
of intuition was restored to him in fuller measure.
This experience explains his attitude towards natural
science. His reverence for facts never failed him; “the
sanctity and truth of nature,’ he says, “must not be
tricked out with accidental ornaments”; but he looked
askance at the science which tries to erect itself into a’
philosophy. Physics, he saw plainly, is an abstract
study: its view of the world is an abstraction for cer-
tain purposes, and possesses less truth than the view of
the poet.1 And yet he looked forward to a time when
science, too, shall be touched with fire from the altar ;—
“Then her heart shall kindle; her dull eye,


Dull and inanimate, no more shall hang
Chained to its object in brute slavery.”


And in a remarkable passage of the “ Prefaces” he says
“If the time should ever come when that which is now


? Compare the following sentences in Bradley’s Appearance and Reality:
“Nature viewed materialistically is only an abstraction for certain pur-
poses, and has not a high degree of truth or reality. The poet’s nature
has much more. . . . Our principle, that the abstract is the unreal, moves
us steadily upward, . . . It compels us in the end to credit nature with
our higher emotions, That process can only cease when nature is quite


absorbed into spirit, and at every stage of the process we find increase in
reality.”


“te ge


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 307


called science shall be ready to put on as it were a
form of flesh and blood, the poet will lend his Divine
spirit to aid the transformation, and will welcome the
Being thus produced as a dear and genuine inmate of
the household of man.” He feels that the loving and
disinterested study of nature’s laws must at last issue,
not in materialism, but in some high and spiritual
faith, inspired by the Word of God, who is Himself, as
Erigena said, “the Nature of all things.”

In aloofness and loneliness of mind he is exceeded
by no mystic of the cloister. It may be said far more
truly of him than of Milton, that “his soul was like
a star, and dwelt apart.” In his youth he confesses
that human beings had only a secondary interest for
him ;1 and though he says that Nature soon led him
to man, it was to man as a “unity,” as “one spirit,”
that he was drawn, not to men as individuals? Herein
he resembled many other contemplative mystics; but
it has been said truly that “it is easier to know man in
general than a man in particular.”? The sage who
“sits in the centre” of his being, and there “ enjoys
bright day,’* does not really know human beings as
persons.

It will be interesting to compare the steps in the
ladder of perfection, as described by Wordsworth, with
the schemes of Neoplatonism and introspective Mystic-
ism. The three stages of the mystical ascent have
been already explained. We find that Wordsworth,
too, had his purgative, disciplinary stage. He began


1 « Prelude,” viii. 340 sq- 2“ Prelude,” viii. 668.

8 La Rochefoucauld. '

4 These words, from Milton’s “‘Comus,” are applied to Wordsworth by
Hazlitt.


308 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


by deliberately crushing, not only the ardent passions
to which he tells us that he was naturally prone, but
all ambition and love of money, determining to confine
himself to “such objects as excite no morbid passions,
no disquietude, no vengeance, and no hatred,” and
found his reward in a settled state of calm serenity, in
which all the thoughts flow like a clear fountain, and
have forgotten how to hate and how to despise.'
Wordsworth is careful to inculcate several safe-
guards for those who would proceed to the contem-
plative life. First, there must be strenuous aspiration
to reach that infinitude which is our being’s heart and
home; we must press forward, urged by “hope that
can never die, effort, and expectation, and desire, and
something evermore about to be.”* The mind which
is set upon the unchanging will not “ praise a cloud,” 4
but will “crave objects that endure.” In the spirit of
true Platonism, as contrasted with its later aberra-
tions, Wordsworth will have no blurred outlines. He
tries always to see in Nature distinction without
separation; his principle is the exact antithesis of
Hume’s atheistic dictum, that “things are conjoined,
but not connected.”4 The importance of this caution


1 <¢ Prelude,” iv. 1207-1229. The ascetic element in Wordsworth’s ethics
should by no means be forgotten by those who envy his brave and unruffled
outlook upon life. As Hutton says excellently (Zssays, p. 81), ‘‘ there is
volition and self-government in every line of his poetry, and his best
thoughts come from the steady resistance he opposes to the ebb and flow of
ordinary desires and regrets. He contests the ground inch by inch with
all despondent and indolent humours, and often, too, with movements of
inconsiderate and wasteful joy—turning defeat into victory, and victory
into defeat.” See the whole passage.

2 « Prelude,” vi. 604-608, 5 «« Miscell. Sonnets,” xii.

“ See the Essay in which he deals with Macpherson: ‘In nature every-
thing is distinct, yet nothing defined into absolute independent singleness.


Na
a
3

=
=
i.
=


st


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 309


has been fully demonstrated in the course of our
inquiry. Then, too, he knows that to imperfect man
reason is a crown “still to be courted, never to be won.”
Delusions may affect “even the very faculty of sight,”
whether a man “look forth,” or “dive into himself,” 1
Again, he bids us seek for real, and not fanciful
analogies; no “loose types of things through all
degrees”; no mythology; and no arbitrary symbolism.
The symbolic value of natural objects is not that they
remind us of something that they are not, but that
they help us to understand something that they in
part are. They are not intended to transport us away
from this earth into the clouds. “This earth is the
world of all of us,” he says boldly, “in which we find
our happiness or not at all.”* Lastly, and this is
perhaps the most important of all, he recognises that
the still small voice of God breathes not out of nature
alone, nor out of the soul alone, but from the contact
of the soul with nature. It is the marriage of the
intellect of man to “this goodly universe, in love and
holy passion,” which produces these raptures. “ Intel-
lect” includes Imagination, which is but another name
for Reason in her most exalted mood; these must
assist the eye of sense.


In Macpherson’s work it is exactly the reverse—everything is defined,
insulated, dislocated, deadened—yet nothing distinct.”

1 «¢ Excursion,” v. 500-514.

2 This seemed flat blasphemy to Shelley, whose idealism was mixed with
Byronic misanthropy. ‘‘Nor was there aught the world contained of
which he could approve.”

3 ‘< Prelude,” xiv. 192. Wordsworth’s psychology is very interesting.
“Imagination” is for him (‘‘ Miscellaneous Sonnets,” xxxv.) a ‘‘ glorious
faculty,” whose function it is to elevate the more-than-reasoning mind ;
‘tis hers to pluck the amaranthine flower of Faith,” and ‘‘colour life’s
dark cloud with orient rays.” This faculty is at once ‘‘ more than reason,” -


310 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM : :
q


.
Such is the discipline, and such are the counsels, bya
which the priest of Nature must prepare himself to
approach her mysteries. And what are the truths |

which contemplation revealed to him?

The first step on the way that leads to God was the
sense of the doundless, growing out of musings on the
finite; and with it the conviction that the Infinite and
Eternal alone can be our being’s heart and home—“ we
feel that we are greater than we know.”1 Then came
to him—

“The sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man;
A motion and a spirit, that impels


All thinking things, all objects of all thoughts,
And rolls through all things.” ?


The worldliness and artificiality which set us out of
tune with all this is worse than paganism Then this
“higher Pantheism” developed into the sense of an
all-pervading Personality, “a soul that is the eternity
of thought.” And with this heightened consciousness
of the nature of God came also a deeper knowledge of
his own personality, a knowledge which he describes in
true mystical language as a “sinking into self from
thought to thought.” This may continue till man can
at last “breathe in worlds to which the heaven of


and identical with ‘‘ Reason in her most exalted mood.” I have said (p.
21) that ‘‘ Mysticism is reason applied to a sphere above rationalism”
and this appears to be exactly Wordsworth’s doctrine.

1 <¢ Sonnets on the River Duddon,” xxxiv.

* «Lines composed above Tintern Abbey,” 95-102,

8 * Miscell. Sonnets,”*xxxiii.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 311


heavens is but a veil,” and perceive “the forms whose
kingdom is where time and space are not.” These
last lines describe a state analogous to the dws of the
Neoplatonists, and the excessus mentis of the Catholic
mystics. At this advanced stage the priest of Nature
may surrender himself to ecstasy without mistrust.
Of such minds he says—


“The highest bliss
That flesh can know is theirs—the consciousness
Of whom they are, habitually infused
Through every image and through every thought,
And all affections by communion raised
From earth to heaven, from human to divine;
Thence cheerfulness for acts of daily life,
Emo ‘ons which best foresight need not fear,
Most worthy then of trust when most intense.” !


There are many other places where he describes
this “bliss ineffable,” when “all his thoughts were
steeped in feeling,” as he listened to the song which
every form of creature sings “as it looks towards the
uncreated with a countenance of adoration and an eye
of love,’? that blessed mood—


‘In which the affections gently lead us on,—
Until, the breath of this corporeal frame,
And even the motion of our human blood
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
In body, and become a living soul:

While with an eye made quiet by the power
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,
~ We see into the life of things.” ®


Is it not plain that the poet of Nature amid the
Cumberland hills, the Spanish ascetic in his cell, and
the Platonic philosopher in his library or lecture-room,
have been climbing the same mountain from different


1 ¢* Prelude,” xiv. 112-129. 2“ Prelude,” ii. 396-418,
% «* Lines composed above Tintern Abbey,” 35-48.


312 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


sides? The paths are different, but the prospect from
the summit is the same. It is idle to speak of collusion S
or insanity in the face of so great a cloud of witnesses,
divided by every circumstance of date, nationality,
creed, education, and environment. The Carmelite
friar had no interest in confirming the testimony of
the Alexandrian professor; and no one has yet had
the temerity to question the sanity of Wordsworth, or
of Tennyson, whose description of the Vision in his
“ Ancient Sage” is now known to be a record of per-
sonal experience. These explorers of the high places
of the spiritual life have only one thing in common
—they have observed the conditions laid down once
for all for the mystic in the 24th Psalm, “ Who shall
ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in
His holy place? He that hath clean hands and a
pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the
God of his salvation.” The “land which is very far
off” is always visible to those who have climbed the
holy mountain. It may be scaled by the path of
prayer and mortification, or by the path of devout
study of God’s handiwork in Nature (and under this
head I would wish to include not only the way traced
out by Wordsworth, but that hitherto less trodden
road which should lead the physicist to God); and,
lastly, by the path of consecrated life in the great
world, which, as it is the most exposed to temptations, is
perhaps on that account the most blessed of the three.


1 Wordsworth’s Mysticism contains a few subordinate elements which
are of more questionable value. The ‘echoes from beyond the grave,”


7


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 313


It has been said of Wordsworth, as it has been
said of other mystics, that he averts his eyes
“from half of human fate.” Religious writers have
explained that the neglected half is that which lies
beneath the shadow of the Cross. The existence of
positive evil in the world, as a great fact, and the
consequent need of redemption, is, in the opinion of
many, too little recognised by Wordsworth, and by
Mysticism in general. This objection has been urged
both from the scientific and from the religious side.
It is held by many students of Nature that her laws
affirm a Pessimism and not an Optimism. “Red in
tooth and claw with ravine,’ she shrieks against the
creed that her Maker is a God of love. The only
morality which she inculcates is that of a tiger in the
jungle, or at best that of a wolf-pack. “It is not


which ‘‘the inward ear” sometimes catches, are dear to most of us; but
we must not be too confident that they always come from God. Still less


can we be sure that presentiments are ‘‘heaven-born instincts.” Again,


when the lonely thinker feels himself surrounded by “‘huge and mighty
forms, that do not move like living men,” it is a sign that the ‘‘dim and
undetermined sense of unknown modes of being” has begun to work not
quite healthily upon his imagination. And the doctrine of pre-existence,
which appears in the famous Ode, is one which it has been hitherto im-
possible to admit into the scheme of Christian beliefs, though many
Christian thinkers have dallied with it. Perhaps the true lesson of the Ode
is that the childish love of nature, beautiful and innocent as it is, has to die
and be born again in the consciousness of the grown man. That Wordsworth
himself passed through this experience, we know from other passages in
his writings. In his case, at any rate, the “‘light of common day” was,
for a time at least, more splendid than the roseate hues of his childish
imagination can possibly have been ; and there seems to be no reason for
holding the gloomy view that spiritual insight necessarily becomes dimmer
as we travel farther from our cradles, and nearer to our graves. What
fails us as we get older is only that kind of vision which is analogous to the
consolations” often spoken of by monkish mystics as the privilege of
beginners. Amiel expresses exactly the same regret as Wordsworth:
‘¢Shall I ever enjoy again those marvellous reveries of past days? . See
See the whole paragraph on p. 32 of Mrs. Humphry Ward’s translation,


314 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


3
strange (says Lotze) that no nature-religions have 2
raised their adherents to any high pitch of morality or —
culture.”1 The answer to this is that Nature includes
man as well as the brutes, and the merciful and moral


man as well as the savage. Physical science, at any
rate, can exclude nothing from the domain of Nature. —
And the Christian may say with all reverence that
Nature includes, or rather is included by, Christ, the
Word of God, by whom it was made. And the Word
was made flesh to teach us that vicarious suffering,
which we see to be the law of Nature, is a law of God,
a thing not foreign to His own life, and therefore for
all alike a condition of perfection, not a veductio ad
absurdum of existence. The vreductio ad absurdum is
not of Nature, but of selfish individualism, which
suffers shipwreck alike in objective and in subjective
religion. It is precisely because the shadow of the
Cross lies across the world, that we can watch Nature
at work with “admiration, hope, and love,” instead of
with horror and disgust.

The religious objection amounts to little more than
that Mysticism has not succeeded in solving the
problem of evil, which no philosophy has ever attacked
with even apparent success. It is, however, with some
reason that this difficulty has been pressed against
the mystics; for they are bound by their principles to
attempt some solution, and their tendency has been to
attenuate the positive character of evil to a somewhat

1 These objections are pressed by Lotze, and not only by avowed
Pessimists. Lotze abhors what he calls ‘‘ sentimental symbolism” because
it interferes with his monadistic doctrines. I venture to say that any philo-


sophy which divides man, as a being sud generis, from the rest of Nature,
is inevitably landed either in Acosmism or in Manichean Dualism.


-NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 315


dangerous degree. But if we sift the charges often
brought by religious writers against Mysticism, we shall
generally find that there lies at the bottom of their
disapproval a residuum of medizval dualism, which
wishes to see in Christ the conquering invader of a
hostile kingdom. In practice, at any rate, the great
mystics have not taken lightly the struggle with the
law of sin in our members, or tried to “heal slightly ”
the wounds of the soul.!

It is quite true that the later mystics have been
cheerful and optimistic. But those who have found a
kingdom in their own minds, and who have enough
strength of character “to live by reason and not by
opinion,” as Whichcote says (in a maxim which was
anticipated by that arch-enemy of Mysticism—


1 This is perhaps the best place to notice the mystical treatise of James
Hinton, entitled Man and his Dwelling-place, which is chiefly remarkable
«for its attempt to solve the problem of evil. This writer pushes to an
extremity the favourite mystical doctrine that we surround ourselves with a
world after our own likeness, and considers that all the evil which we see
in Nature is the ‘‘ projection of our own deadness.” Apart from the
unlikelihood of a theory which makes man—‘‘the roof and crown of
things ”—the only diseased and discordant element in the universe, the
writer lays himself open to the fatal rejoinder, ‘‘ Did Christ, then, see no
sin or evil in the world?”” The doctrines of sacrifice (vicarious suffering)
as a blessed law of Nature (‘the secret of the universe is learnt on
Calvary”), and of the necessity of annihilating “the self” as the principle
of evil, are pressed with a harsh and unnatural rigour. Our blessed Lord
laid no such yoke upon us, nor will human nature consent to bear it. The
“atonement” of the world by love is much better delineated by R. L.
Nettleship, in a passage which seems to me to exhibit the very kernel of
Christian Mysticism in its social aspect. ‘‘ Suppose that all human beings
felt permanently to each other as they now do occasionally to those they
love best. All the pain of the world would be swallowed up in doing
good. So far as we can conceive of such a state, it would be one in which
there would be no ‘individuals’ at all, but an universal being in and for
another; where being took the form of consciousness, it would be the
consciousness of ‘another’ which was also ‘oneself’—a common con-
sciousness. Such would be the ‘atonement’ of the world,”


316 + CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM 3


Epicurus), are likely to be happier than other men. :
And, moreover, Wordsworth teaches us that almost, if not ‘
quite, every evil may be so transmuted by the “ faculty
which abides within the soul,” that those “interpositions —
which would hide and darken” may “become contin-
gencies of pomp, and serve to exalt her native bright-
ness”; even as the moon, “rising behind a thick and
lofty grove, turns the dusky veil into a substance
glorious as her own.” So the happy warrior is made
“more compassionate” by the scenes of horror which
he is compelled to witness. Whether this healing and
purifying effect of sorrow points the way to a solution
of the problem of evil or not, it is a high and noble
faith, the one and only consolation which we feel not —
to be a mockery when we are in great trouble.

These charges, then, do not seem to form a grave
indictment against the type of Mysticism of which
Wordsworth is the best representative. But he does
fall short of the ideal held up by St. John for the
Christian mystic, in that his love and sympathy for

» inanimate Nature were (at any rate in his poetry)
deeper than for humanity. And if there is any ac-
cusation which may justly be brought against the
higher order of mystics (as opposed to representatives
of aberrant types), I think it is this: that they have
sought and found God in their own souls and in
Nature, but not so often in the souls of other men and

~ women: theirs has been a lonely religion. The grand
old maxim, “ Vides fratrem, vides Dominum tuum,” has
been remembered by them only in acts of charity.
But in reality the love of human beings must be the
’ shortest road to the vision of God. Love, as St. John


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 317


teaches us, is the great hierophant of the Christian
mysteries. It gives wings to contemplation and lightens
the darkness which hides the face of God. When our
emotions are deeply stirred, even Nature speaks to us
with voices unheard before; while the man who is
without human affection is either quite unmoved by
her influences, or misreads all her lessons.

The spiritualising power of human love is the re-
deeming principle in many sordid lives. Teutonic
civilisation, which derives half of its restless energy
from ideals which are essentially anti-Christian, and
tastes which are radically barbarous, is prevented from
sinking into moral materialism by its high standard of
domestic life. The sweet influences of the home deprive
even mammon-worship of half its grossness and of some
fraction of its evil. As a schoolmaster to bring men
and women to Christ, natural affection is without a
rival. It is in the truest sense a symbol of our union
with Him from whom every family in heaven and earth
is named. It is needless to labour a thesis on which
nearly all are agreed; but it may be worth pointing
out that, though St. Paul felt the unique value of
Christian marriage as a symbol of the mystical union
of Christ and the Church, this truth was for the most
part lost sight of by the medizval mystics, who as
monks and priests were, of course, cut off from domestic
life. The romances of true love which the Old Testa-
ment contains were treated as prophecies wrapped up ©
in riddling language, or as models for ecstatic contem- ,
plation. Wordsworth, though his own home was a
happy one, does not supply this link in the mystical
chain. The most noteworthy attempt to do so is to


318 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM ’
be found in the poetry of Robert Browning, whose 3
Mysticism is in this way complementary to that of —
Wordsworth He resembles Wordsworth in always
trying “to see the infinite in things,” but considers
that “little else (than the development of a soul) is
worth study.” This is not exactly a return to subject-
ive Mysticism, for Browning is as well aware as Goethe
that if “a talent grows best in solitude,” a character is
perfected only “in the stream of the world.” With
him the friction of active life, and especially the ex-
perience of human love, are necessary to realise the
Divine in man. Quite in the spirit of St. John he
asks, “ How can that course be safe, which from the
first produces carelessness to human love?” “Do not
cut yourself from human weal .. . there are strange
punishments for such” as doso Solitude is the death
of all but the strongest virtue, and in Browning’s view
it also deprives us of the strongest inner witness to the
existence of a loving Father in heaven. For he who
“finds love full in his nature” cannot doubt that in
this, as in all else, the Creator must far surpass the
creature Since, then, in knowing love we learn to
know God, and since the object of life is to know God
(this, the mystic’s minor premiss, is taken for granted
by Browning), it follows that love is the meaning of
life; and he who finds it not “loses what he lived for,
and eternally must lose it.”* “The mightiness of love is
curled” inextricably round all power aud beauty in the
world. The worst fate that can befall us is to lead “a


1 Charles Kingsley is another mystic of the same school.
2 Browning, Paracelsus, Act i. 3 Browning, “‘ Saul,” xvii.
* Browning, ‘‘ Cristina.”


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 319


ghastly smooth life, dead at heart.”!_ Especially inter-
esting is the passage where he chooses or chances upon
Eckhart’s image of the “spark” in the centre of the
soul, and gives it a new turn in accordance with his
own Mysticism—
“It would not be because my eye grew dim

Thou could’st not find the love there, thanks to Him

Who never is dishonoured in the spark

He gave us from His fire of fires, and bade

Remember whence it sprang, nor be afraid

While that burns on, though all the rest grow dark.” ?
Our language has no separate words to distinguish
Christian love (@ya4mn—caritas) from sexual love (épws
—amor); “charity” has not established itself in its
wider meaning. Perhaps this is not to be regretted—
at any rate Browning’s poems could hardly be trans-
lated into any language in which this distinction exists.
But let us not forget that the ascetic element is as
strong in Browning as in Wordsworth. Love, he
seems to indicate, is no exception to the rule that
our joys may be “three parts pain,” for “ where pain
ends gain ends too.” 3


“Not yet on thee
Shall burst the future, as successive zones
Of several wonder open on some spirit
Flying secure and glad from heaven to heaven ;
But thou shalt painfully attain to joy,
While hope and fear and love shall keep thee man.” 4


He even carries this law into the future life, and will
have none of a “joy which is crystallised for ever.”


1 Browning, “‘ Christmas Eve and Easter Day,” xxx., xxxiii.

2 Browning, ‘‘ Any Wife to any Husband.”

3 Compare Plato’s well-known sentence: 6’ ddynddvev Kal dduvdy
ylyverar 4 wpédeva, ob yap olév Te dANws ddiKlas dwadddrrecOm.

4 Browning, Paracelsus.


320 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Felt imperfection is a proof of a higher birthright: lif


we have arrived at the completion of our nature as


men, then “begins anew a tendency to God.” This


ito pide ihe


18
~_


faith in unending progress as the law of life is very —


characteristic of our own age.? It assumes a question-
able shape sometimes; but Browning’s trust in real
success through apparent disappointments—a trust
even dased on the consciousness of present failure—
is certainly one of the noblest parts of his religious
philosophy.

I have decided to end my survey of Christian
Mysticism with these two English poets. It would
hardly be appropriate, in this place, to discuss
Carlyle’s doctrine of symbols, as the “clothing” of
religious and other kinds of truth. His philosophy
is wanting in some of the essential features of
Mysticism, and can hardly be called Christian with-
out stretching the word too far. And Emerson,
when he deals with religion, is a very unsafe guide.
The great American mystic, whose beautiful char-
acter was as noble a gift to humanity as his writings,
is more liable than any of those whom we have
described to the reproach of having turned his back
on the dark side of life. Partly from a fastidious-
ness which could not bear even to hear of bodily
ailments, partly from the natural optimism of the
dweller in a new country, and partly because he
made a principle of maintaining an unruffled cheer-
fulness and serenity, he shut his eyes to pain, death,


' Compare Pascal: ‘‘ No one is discontented at not being a king, except
a discrowned king.”

*It is almost as prominent in Tennyson as in Browning: “ Give her the
wages of going on, and not to die,” is his wish for the human soul.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 321


and sin, even more resolutely than did Goethe. The
optimism which is built on this foundation has no
message of comfort for the stricken heart. To say
that “evil is only good in the making,” is to repeat
_an ancient and discredited attempt to solve the great
enigma. And to assert that perfect justice is meted
out to individuals in this world, is surely mere
dreaming. Moreover, we can hardly acquit him of
playing with pantheistic Mysticism of the Oriental
type, without seeing, or without caring, whither such
speculations logically lead. ‘“ Within man,” he tells
us, “is the soul of the whole, the wise silence, the
universal beauty, to which every part and particle
is equally related—the eternal One.” This is genuine
Pantheism, and should carry with it the doctrine that
all actions are equally good, bad, or indifferent.
Emerson says that his wife kept him from anti-
nomianism; but this is giving up the defence of his
philosophy. He also differs from Christianity, and
agrees with many Hegelians, in teaching that God,
“the Over-Soul,” only attains to self-consciousness in
man; and this, combined with his denial of degrees
in Divine immanence, leads him to a self-deification
of an arrogant and shocking kind, such as we find
in the Persian Sufis, and in some heretical mystics
of the Middle Ages. “I, the imperfect, adore my
own Perfect. I am receptive of the great soul. I
become a transparent eyeball. I am nothing. I
see all. The currents of the universal Being circulate
through me. I am part of God”; and much more
to the same effect. This is not the language of those
who have travelled up the mystical ladder, instead of


21 L


as if 1h gy


B22 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


only writing about it. It is far more objectionable than
the bold phrases about deification which I quoted in-
my fifth Lecture from the fourteenth century mystics =
because with them the passage into the Divine glory
is the final reward, only to be attained “by all
manner of exercises”; while for Emerson it seems to
be a state already existing, which we can realise
by a mere act of intellectual apprehension. And the
phrase, “Man is a part of God,’—as if the Divine
Spirit were divzded among the organs which express
its various activities,—has been condemned by all the
great speculative mystics, from Plotinus downwards.
Emerson is perhaps at his best when he applies his
idealism to love and friendship. The spiritualising
and illuminating influence of pure comradeship has
never been better or more religiously set forth. And
though it is necessary to be on our guard against
the very dangerous tendency of some of his teaching,
we shall find much to learn from the brave and serene
philosopher whose first maxim was, “Come out into
the azure; love the day,” and who during his whole
life fixed his thoughts steadily on whatsoever things
are pure, lovely, noble, and of good report.

The constructive task which lies before the next
century is, if I may say so without presumption, to
spiritualise science, as morality and art have already
been spiritualised. The vision of God should appear
to us as a triple star of truth, beauty, and goodness,?

1 TI had written these words before the publication of Principal Caird’s
Sermons, which contain, in my judgment, the most powerful defence of
what I have called Christian Mysticism that has appeared since William


Law. On p. 14he says: ‘Of all things good and fair and holy there is a
spiritual cognisance which precedes and is independent of that knowledge


’


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 323


These are the three objects of all human aspiration;
and our hearts will never be at peace till all three
alike rest in God. Beauty is the chief mediator
between the good and the true;’ and this is why the
great poets have been also prophets. But Science
at present lags behind; she has not found her God;
and to this is largely due the “unrest of the age.”
Much has already been done in the right direction
by divines, philosophers, and physicists, and more
still, perhaps, by the great poets, who have striven
earnestly to see the spiritual background which lies
behind the abstractions of materialistic science. But
much yet remains to be done. We may agree with
Hinton that “ Positivism bears a new Platonism in
its bosom”; but the child has not yet come to the
birth.


which the understanding conveys.” He shows how in the contemplation
of nature it is ‘‘ by an organ deeper than intellectual thought” that ‘the
revelation of material beauty flows in upon the soul.” ‘‘And in like
manner there is an apprehension of God and Divine things which comes
upon the spirit as a living reality which it immediately and intuitively
perceives.” . . . ‘There is a capacity of the soul, by which the truths of
religion may be apprehended and appropriated.” See the whole sermon,
entitled, What is Religion ? and many other parts of the book.

1Cf. Hegel (Philosophy of Religion, vol. ii. p. 8): ‘‘The Beautiful is
essentially the Spiritual making itself known sensuously, presenting itself
in sensuous concrete existence, but in such a manner that that existence is
wholly and entirely permeated by the Spiritual, so that the sensuous is not
independent, but has its meaning solely and exclusively in the Spiritual
and through the Spiritual, and exhibits not itself, but the Spiritual.”

2 Some reference ought perhaps to be made to Drummond’s Watural
Law in the Spiritual World, But Mysticism seeks rather to find spiritual
law in the natural world—and some better law than Drummond’s Calvin-
ism. (And I cannot help thinking that, though Evolution explains much
and contradicts nothing in Christianity, it is in danger of proving an zgmis
fatuus to many, especially to those who are inclined to idealistic pantheism.
There can be no progress or development in God, and the cosmic process
as we know it cannot have a higher degree of reality than the categories of
time and place under which it appears. As for the millennium of per-


324 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Meanwhile, the special work assigned to the Church
of England would seem to be the development of a


i ie


‘s.
“we


Johannine Christianity, which shall be both Catholic


and Evangelical without being either Roman or Pro- —


testant. It has been abundantly proved that neither


Romanism nor Protestantism, regarded as alternatives, —


possesses enough of the truth to satisfy the religious
needs of the present day. But is it not probable
that, as the theology of the Fourth Gospel acted as
a reconciling principle between the opposing sections
in the early Church, so it may be found to contain
the teaching which is most needed by both parties
in our own communion? In St. John and St. Paul
we find all the principles of a sound and sober
Christian Mysticism; and it is to these “fresh
springs” of the spiritual life that we must turn, if
the Church is to renew her youth.

I attempted in my second Lecture to analyse the
main elements of Christian Mysticism as found in St.
Paul and St. John. But since in the later Lectures I
have been obliged to draw from less pure sources, and
since, moreover, I am most anxious not to leave the
impression that I have been advocating a vague spiritu-
ality tempered by rationalism, I will try in a few words
to define my position apologetically, though I am well
aware that it is a hazardous and difficult task.

The principle, “Cuique in sua arte credendum est,”
applies to those who have been eminent for personal
holiness as much as to the leaders in any other branch


fected humanity on this earth, which some Positivists and others dream
of, Christianity has nothing to say against it, but science has a great deal.)
See below, p. 328.


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 325


of excellence. Even in dealing with arts which are
akin to each other, we do not invite poets to judge of
music, or sculptors of architecture. We need not then
be disturbed if we occasionally find men illustrious
in other: fields, who are as insensible to religion as to
poetry. Our reverence for the character and genius of
Charles Darwin need not induce us to lay aside either
our Shakespeare or our New Testament. The men
to whom we naturally turn as our best authorities in
spiritual matters, are those who seem to have been
endowed with an “anima naturaliter Christiana,” and
who have devoted their whole lives to the service of
God and the imitation of Christ.

Now it will be found that these men of acknowledged
and pre-eminent saintliness agree very closely in what
they tell us about God. They tell us that they have
arrived gradually at an unshakable conviction, not
based on inference but on immediate experience, that
God is a Spirit with whom the human spirit can hold
intercourse; that in Him meet all that they can
imagine of goodness, truth, and beauty; that they can
see His footprints everywhere in nature, and feel His
presence within them as the very life of their life, so
that in proportion as they come to themselves they
come to Him. They tell us that what separates us


1 In the Life of Charles Darwin there is an interesting letter, in which he
laments the gradual decay of his taste for poetry, as his mind became a
mere ‘‘ machine for grinding out general laws ” from a mass of observations.
The decay of religious feeling in many men of high character may be
accounted for in the same way. The really great man is conscious of the
sacrifice which he is making. ‘‘It is an accursed evil to a man,” Darwin
wrote to Hooker, ‘‘to become so absorbed in any subject as I am in mine.”
The common-place man is of conscious of it: he obtains his heart’s desire,
if he works hard enough, and God sends leanness withal into his soul.


’


326 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


from Him and from happiness is, first, self-seeking in all


Gul


Pe
elt ee


pt


? its forms; and, secondly, sensuality in all its forms; that —


these are the ways of darkness and death, which hide


from us the face of God; while the path of the just is —


like a shining light, which shineth more and more unto


the perfect day. As they have toiled up the narrow ©


way, the Spirit has spoken to them of Christ, and has
enlightened the eyes of their understandings, till they
have at least degun to know the love of Christ which
passeth knowledge, and to be filled with all the fulness
of God.

So far, the position is unassailable. But the scope
of the argument has, of course, its fixed limits. The
inner light can only testify to spiritual truths. It
always speaks in the present tense; it cannot guarantee
any historical event, past or future. It cannot guaran-
tee either the Gospel history or a future judgment. It
can tell us that Christ is risen, and that He is alive for
evermore, but not that He rose again the third day.
It can tell us that the gate of everlasting life is open,
but not that the dead shall be raised incorruptible.
We have otaer faculties for investigating the evidence
for past events; the inner light cannot certify them
immediately, though it can give a powerful support to
the external evidence. For though we are in no
position to dogmatise about the relations of the
temporal to the eternal, one fact does seem to stand
out,—that the two are, for us, bound together. If,
when we read the Gospels, “the Spirit itself beareth
witness with our spirit” that here are the words of
eternal life, and the character which alone in history is


absolutely flawless, then it is natural for us to believe .


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 327


that there has been, at that point of time, an Incarna-
tion of the Word of God Himself. That the revelation
of Christ is an absolute revelation, is a dogmatic state-
ment which, strictly speaking, only the Absolute could
make. What we mean by it is that after two thousand
years we are unable to conceive of its being ever super-
seded in any particular. And if anyone finds this
inadequate, he may be invited to explain what higher
degree of certainty is within our reach. With regard to
the future life, the same consideration may help us to
understand why the Church has clung to the belief in a
literal second coming of Christ to pronounce the dooms
of all mankind. But our Lord Himself has taught us
that in “that day and that hour” lies hidden a more
inscrutable mystery than even He Himself, as man,
could reveal.

There is one other point on which I wish to make
my position clear. The fact that human love or
sympathy is the guide who conducts us to the heart
of life, revealing to us God and Nature and ourselves, is
proof that part of our life is bound up with the life of
the world, and that if we live in these our true relations
we shall not entirely die so long as human _ beings
remain alive upon this earth. The progress of the
race, the diminution of sin and misery, the advancing
kingdom of Christ on earth,—these are matters in
which we have a personal interest. The strong desire
that we feel—and the best of us feel it most strongly
—that the human race may be better, wiser, and
happier in the future than they are now or have been
in the past, is neither due to a false association of
ideas, nor to pure unselfishness, There is a sense in


328 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


which death would not be the end of everything for us,
even though in this life only we had hope in Christ. -
But when this comforting and inspiring thought is
made to form the basis of a new Chiliasm—a belief in
a millennium of perfected humanity on this earth, and
when this belief is substituted for the Christian belief
in an eternal life beyond our bourne of time and place,
it is necessary to protest that this belief entirely fails
to satisfy the legitimate hopes of the human race, that
it is bad philosophy, and that it is flatly contrary to
what science tells us of the destiny of the world and of
mankind. The human spirit beats against the bars of
space and time themselves, and could never be satisfied
with any earthly utopia. Our true home must be in
some higher sphere of existence, above the contradic-
tions which make it impossible for us to believe that
time and space are ultimate realities, and out of reach
of the inevitable catastrophe which the next glacial age
must bring upon the human race.’ This world of
space and time is to resemble heaven as far as it can;
but a fixed limit is set to the amount of the Divine
plan which can be realised under these conditions,
Our hearts tell us of a higher form of existence, in
which the doom of death is not merely deferred but
abolished. This eternal world we here see through a
glass darkly: at best we can apprehend but the out-


1 The metaphysical problem about the reality of time in relation to
evolution is so closely bound up with speculative Mysticism, that I have
been obliged to state my own opinion upon it. It is, of course, one of the
vexed questions of philosophy at the present time; and I could not afford
the space, even if I had the requisite knowledge and ability, to argue it.
The best discussion of it that I know is in M‘Taggart’s Studies in Hegelian
Dialectic, pp. 159-202. _ Cf. note on p. 23.


is


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 329


skirts of God’s ways, and hear a small whisper of His
voice; but our conviction is that, though our earthly
house be dissolved (as dissolved it must be), we have a
home not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. In
- this hope we may include ali creation; and trust that
in some way neither more nor less incomprehensible
than the deliverance which we expect for ourselves, all
God’s creatures, according to their several capacities,
. may be set free from the bondage of corruption and
participate in the final triumph over death and sin.
Most firmly do I believe that this faith in immortality,
though formless and inpalpable as the air we breathe,
and incapable of definite presentation except under
inadequate and self-contradictory symbols, is neverthe-

less enthroned in the centre of our being, and that
_ those who have steadily set their affections on things
above, and lived the risen life even on earth, receive in
themselves an assurance which robs death of its sting,
_ and is an earnest of a final victory over the grave.

It is not claimed that Mysticism, even in its widest
sense, is, or can ever be, the whole of Christianity.
Every religion must have an institutional as well as a
mystical element. Just as, if the feeling of immediate
communion with God has faded, we shall have a dead
Church worshipping “a dead Christ,” as Fox the
Quaker said of the Anglican Church in his day; so,
if the seer and prophet expel the priest, there will be
no discipline and no cohesion. Still, at the present
time, the greatest need seems to be that we should
return to the fundamentals of spiritual religion. We
cannot shut our eyes to the fact that both the old seats
of authority, the infallible Church and the infallible


330 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


book, are fiercely assailed, and that our faith needs


reinforcements. These can only come from the depths —


of the religious consciousness itself; and if summoned


my tli (if


i ge he


from thence, they will not be found wanting. The —


“impregnable rock” is neither an institution nor a book,
but a life or experience. Faith, which is an affirmation
of the basal personality, is its own evidence and justi-
fication. Under normal conditions, it will always be
strongest in the healthiest minds. There is and can
' be no appeal from it. If, then, our hearts, duly pre-
pared for the reception of the Divine Guest, at length
say to us, “This I know, that whereas I was blind,
now I see,” we may, in St. John’s words, “have con-
fidence towards God.”

The objection may be raised—‘“ But these beliefs
change, and merely reflect the degree of enlightenment
or its opposite, which every man has reached.” The
conscience of the savage tells him emphatically that
there are some things which he must not do ; and blind
obedience to this “ categorical imperative” has produced
not only all the complex absurdities of “taboo,” but
crimes like human sacrifice, and faith in a great
many things that are not. “Perhaps we are leaving
behind the theological stage, as we have already left
behind those superstitions of savagery.” Now the
study of primitive religions does seem to me to
prove the danger of resting religion and morality on
unreasoning obedience to a supposed revelation; but
that is not my position. The two forces which kill
mischievous superstitions are the knowledge of nature,
and the moral sense; and we are quite ready to give
both free play, confident that both come from the


NATURE-MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 331


living Word of God. The fact that a revelation is
progressive is no argument that it is not Divine: it is,
in fact, only when the free current of the religious life
is dammed up that it turns into a swamp, and poisons
human society. Of course we must be ready to admit
with all humility, that ovr notions of God are probably
unworthy and distorted enough; but that is no reason
why we should not follow the light which we have,
or mistrust it on the ground that it is “too good to
be true.”

Nor would it be fair to say that this argument
makes religion depend merely on feeling. A theology
based on mere feeling is (as Hegel said) as much con-
trary to revealed religion as to rational knowledge.
The fact that God is present to our feeling is no proof
that He exists; our feelings include imaginations
which have no reality corresponding to them. No, it
is not feeling, but the eart or reason (whichever term we
prefer), which speaks with authority. By the heart or
reason I mean the whole personality acting in concord,
an abiding mood of thinking, willing, and feeling. The
life of the spirit perhaps begins with mere feeling, and
perhaps will be consummated in mere feeling, when
“that which is in part shall be done away”; but
during its struggles to enter into its full inheritance,
it gathers up into itself the activities of all the faculties,
which act harmoniously together in proportion as the
organism to which they belong is in a healthy state.

Once more, this reliance on the inner light does not
mean that every man must be his own prophet, his
own priest, and his own saviour. The individual is not _
independent of the Church, nor the Church of the


oe
os


3
332 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM :


historical Christ. But the Church is a ving body, 3
and the Incarnation and Atonement are /zving facts, =
stillin operation. They are part of the eternal counsels ,
of God; and whether they are enacted in the Abyss of — rs
the Divine Nature, or once for all in their fulness on
the stage of history, or in miniature, as it were, in your —
soul and mine, the process is the same, and the tre- —
mendous importance of those historical facts which our
creeds affirm is due precisely to the fact that they are
not unique and isolated portents, but the supreme
manifestation of the grandest and most universal
laws.

These considerations may well have a calming
and reassuring influence upon those who, from what-
ever cause, are troubled by religious doubts. The
foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal,
The Lord knoweth, and is known by, them that are
His. But we must not expect that “religious diffi-
culties” will ever cease. Every truth that we know is
but the husk of a deeper truth; and it may be that
the Holy Spirit has still many things to say to us,
which we cannot bear now. Each generation and
each individual has his own problem, which has never
been set in exactly the same form before: we must all
work out our own salvation, for it is God who worketh
in us. If we have realised the meaning of these words
of St. Paul, which I have had occasion to quote so
often in these Lectures, we cannot doubt that, though
we now see through a glass darkly, and know only in
part, we shall one day behold our Eternal Father face
to face, and know Him even as we are known.


APPENDIX A


DEFINITIONS oF “Mysticism” AND “MystTIcaL THEOLOGY


THE following definitions are given only as specimens. The
list might be made much longer by quoting from other
Roman Catholic theologians, but their definitions for the most
part agree closely enough with those which I have transcribed
from Corderius, John a Jesu Maria, and Gerson.

1. Corderius. ‘‘Theologia mystica est sapientia experi-
mentalis, Dei affectiva, divinitus infusa, que mentem ab omni
inordinatione puram per actus supernaturales fidei spei et
caritatis cum Deo intime coniungit. . . . Mystica theologia, si
vim nominis attendas, designat quandam sacram et arcanam de
Deo divinisque rebus notitiam.”

2. John a Jesu Maria. ‘|Theologia mystica] est czlestis
quedam Dei notitia per unionem voluntatis Deo inherentis
elicita vel lumine czelitus immisso producta.”

3. Bonaventura (adopted also by Gerson). ‘Est animi
extensio in Deum per amoris desiderium.”

4. Gerson. ‘Theologia mystica est motio anagogica in Deum
per amorem fervidum et purum. Aliter sic: Theologia mystica
est experimentalis cognitio habita de Deo per amoris unitivi
complexum. Aliter sic: est sapientia, id est sapida notio
habita de Deo, dum ei supremus apex affective potentize
rationalis per amorem iungitur et unitur.”

5. Scaramellt, “La theologia mistica esperimentale, secondo
il suo atto principale e pil proprio, é una notizia pura di Dio
che I’ anima d’ordinario riceve nella caligine luminosa, o per
di meglio nel chiaro oscuro d’ un’ alta contemplazione, insieme
con un amore esperimentale si intimo, che la fa perdere tutta


a se stessa per unirla e transformarla in Dio.”
835


336 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


6. Ribet. “La théologie mystique, au point de vue subjectif
et expérimental, nous semble pouvoir étre définie: une
attraction surnaturelle et passive de lame vers Dieu, prove-
nant d’une illumination et d’un embrasement intérieurs, qui
préviennent la réflexion, surpassent l’effort humain, et pouvent
avoir sur le corps un retentissement merveilleux et irrésistible.
. . . Au point de vue doctrinal objectif, la mystique peut se
définir: la science qui traite des phénoménes surnaturels, qui
préparent, accompagnent, et suivent l’attraction passive des
Ames vers Dieu et par Dieu, c’est 4 dire la contemplation divine ;
qui les coordonne et les justifie par l’autorité de VEcriture,

des docteurs et de la raison; les distingue des phénoménes

paralléles dus a l’action de Satan, et des faits analogues
purement naturels ; enfin, qui trace des régles pratiques pour
la conduite des Ames dans ces ascensions sublimes mais
périlleuses.”

7. L’ Abbé Migne. “La mystique est la science d’état sur-
naturel de l’4me humaine manifesté dans le corps et dans l’ordre
des choses visibles par des effets également surnaturels.”

In these scholastic and modern Roman Catholic definitions
we may observe (a) that the earlier definitions supplement
without contradicting each other, representing different aspects
of Mysticism, as an experimental science, as a living sacrifice of
the will, as an illumination from above, and as an exercise ot
ardent devotion ; (6) that symbolic or objective Mysticism is
not recognised ; (c) that the sharp distinction between natural
and supernatural, which is set up by the scholastic mystics,
carries with it a craving for physical “mystical phenomena”
to support the belief in supernatural interventions. These
miracles, though not mentioned in the earlier definitions, have
come to be considered an integral part of Mysticism, so that
Migne and Ribet include them in their definitions ; (@) lastly,
that those who take this view of “la mystique divine” are
constrained to admit by the side of true mystical facts a parallel
class of “contrefacons diaboliques.”

8. Von Hartmann. “Mysticism is the filling of the con-
sciousness with a content (feeling, thought, desire), by an
involuntary emergence of the same out of the unconscious.”

Von Hartmann’s hypostasis of the Unconscious has been


blk Ae pee aa! ee


APPENDIX A 337


often and justly criticised. But his chapter on Mysticism is of
great value. He begins by asking, “What is the Wesen of
Mysticism ?” and shows that it is not quietism (disproved by
mystics like Béhme, and by many y active reformers), nor ecstasy
(which is generally pathological), nor asceticism, nor allegorism,
nor fantastic symbolism, nor obscurity of expréssion, nor
religion generally, nor superstition, nor the sum of these things.
It is healthy in itself, and has been of high value to individuals
and tothe race. It prepared for the Gospel of St. John, for the
revolt against arid scholasticism in the Middle Ages, for the
Reformation, and for modern German philosophy. He shows
the mystical element in Hamann, Jacobi, Fichte, and Schelling ;
and quotes with approval the description of “intellectual
intuition” given by the last named. We must not speak of
thought as an antithesis to experience, “for thought (includ-
ing immediate or mystical knowledge) is itself experience.”
This knowledge is not derived from sense-perception,—the
conscious will has nothing to do with it,—“‘it can only have
arisen through inspiration from the Unconscious.” He would
extend the name of mystic to “eminent art-geniuses who owe
their productions to inspirations of genius, and not to the work
of their consciousness (e.g. Phidias, A¢schylus, Raphael, Beeth-
oven”), and even to every “truly original” philosopher, for
every high thought has been first apprehended by the glance
of genius. Moreover, the relation of the individual to the
Absolute, an essential theme of philosophy, can only be
mystically apprehended. “This feeling is the content of
Mysticism kar’ é£oxyjv, because it finds its existence ov/y in it.”
He then shows with great force how religious and philosophical
systems have full probative force only for the few who are able
to reproduce mystically in themselves their underlying supposi-
tions, the truth of which can only be mystically apprehended.
“‘ Hence it is that those systems which rejoice in most adherents
are just the poorest of all and most unphilosophical (e.g.
materialism and rationalistic Theism).”

9. Du Prel. “Tf the self is not wholly contained in self-
consciousness, if man is a being dualised by the threshold of
sensibility, then is Mysticism possible ; and if the threshold of
sensibility is movable, then Mysticism is necessary.” “The

22


338 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


mystical phenomena of the soul-life are anticipations of the
biological process.” “Soul is our spirit within the self-
consciousness, spirit is the soul beyond the self-consciousness.”

This definition, with which should be compared the passage
from J. P. Ritcher, quoted in Lecture I., assumes that Mysticism
may be treated as a branch of experimental psychology. Du Prel
attaches great importance to somnambulism and other kindred
psychical phenomena, which (he thinks) give us glimpses of
the inner world of our £go, in many ways different from our
waking consciousness. ‘As the moon turns to us only half
its orb, so our Ego.” He distinguishes between the Ego and
the subject. The former will perish at death. It arises from
the free act of the subject, which enters the time-process as a
discipline. ‘The self-conscious Ego is a projection of the
transcendental subject, and resembles it.” ‘‘ We should regard
this earthly existence as a transitory phenomenal form in
correspondence with our transcendental interest.” ‘Con-
science is transcendental nature.” (This last sentence suggests
thoughts of great interest.) Du Prel shows how Schopenhauer’s
pessimism may be made the basis of a higher optimism.
“The path of biological advance leads to the merging of the
Ego in the subject.” “The biological aim for the race
coincides with the transcendental-aim for the individual.”
“The whole content of Ethics is that the Ego must subserve
the Subject.” The disillusions of experience show that earthly
life has no value for its own sake, and is only a means to an
end ; it follows that to make pleasure our end is the one fatal
mistake in life. These thoughts are mixed with speculations of
much less value; for I cannot agree with Du Prel that we shall
learn much about higher and deeper modes of life by studying
abnormal and pathological states of the consciousness.

10. Goethe. ‘Mysticism is the scholastic of the heart, the
dialectic of the feelings.”

11. Noack, “ Mysticism is formless speculation.”

Noack’s definition is, perhaps, not very happily phrased, for
the essence of Mysticism is not speculation but intuition ;
and when it begins to speculate, it is obliged at once to
take to itself “forms.” Even the ultimate goal of the va
negativa is apprehended as ‘“‘a kind of form of formlessness.”


deed i.


—


ee,


APPENDIX A 339


Goethe’s definition regards Mysticism as a system of religion or
PEereDys and from this point of view describes it accurately.

. Ewald. “ Mystical theology begins by maintaining that
man #8 fallen away from God, and craves to be again united
with Him.”

13. Canon Overton. “That we bear the image of God is
the starting-point, one might almost say the postulate, of all
Mysticism. The complete union of the soul with God is the

oal of all Mysticism.” ~~~ PE roa Egor

14. Pfleiderer. “ Mysticism is the immediate feeling of the
unity of the self with God; it is nothing, therefore, but the
fundamental feeling of religion, the religious life at its very
heart and centre. But what makes the mystical a special
tendency inside religion, is the endeavour to fix the immediate-
hess of t the life in God as such, as abstracted from all inter-
vening helps and channels whatever, and find a permanent
abode in the abstract inwardness of the life of pious feeling.
In this God-intoxication, in which self and the world are alike
forgotten, the subject knows himself to be in possession of the
highest and fullest truth ; but this truth is only possessed in the
quite undeveloped, simple, and bare form of monotonous feel-
ing; what truth the subject possesses is not filled up by any
determination in which the simple unity might unfold itself,
and it lacks therefore the clearness of knowledge, which is only
attained when thought harmonises differences with unity.”

15. Professor A. Seth. ‘“ Mysticism is a phase of thought,
or rather, perhaps, of feeling, which from its very nature is
hardly susceptible of exact definition. It appears in connexion
with the endeavour of the human mind to grasp the Divine
essence or the ultimate reality of things, and to enjoy the
blessedness of actual communion with the highest. The first
is the philosophic side of Mysticism ; the second, its religious
side. The thought that is most intensely present with the
mystic i is that of a supreme, all-pervading, and_ indwelling


Power, in whom all things are one. Hence the ‘speculative
utterances of Mysticism are always more or less pantheistic in
character. On the practical side, Mysticism maintains the
possibility of direct intercourse with this Being of peloeys


God ceases to be an object, and becomes an experience.”


340 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


This carefully-worded statement of the essence of Mysticism
is followed by a hostile criticism. Professor Seth considers
. quietism the true conclusion from the mystic’s premisses. “It


Cee ee On ae ye


is characteristic of Mysticism, that it does not distinguish


between what is metaphorical and what is susceptible of a
literal interpretation. Hence it is prone to treat a relation of
ethical harmony as if it were one of substantial identity or
chemical fusion ; and, taking the sensuous language of religious
feeling literally, it bids the individual aim at nothing less than
an interpenetration of essence. And as this goal is unattainable


while reason and a consciousness of self remain, the a


union with the abject of of oP aa, a ae in which the con-


sciousness of self has as_disappeared, : and in 1 which, t ich, therefore,


su bj ect ct and object_ar t are one.’ To this, I think, the mystic


are words Sak belong to the category of space, and are only
metaphors or symbols of the relation of the soul to God ; but
separateness, impenetrability, and isolation, which you affirm of
the ego, belong to the same category, and are no whit less
metaphorical. The question is, which of the two sets of words
best expresses the relation of the ransomed soul to its Redeemer?
In my opinion, your phrase ‘ethical harmony’ is altogether


_ inadequate, while the New Testament expressions, ‘member-


ship,’ ‘union,’ ‘indwelling,’ are as adequate as words can be.”
The rest of the criticism is directed against the ‘“ negative
road,” which I have no wish to defend, since I cannot admit
that it follows logically from the first principles of Mysticism.

16, ARécéjac. “Mysticism is the tendency to approach the
Absolute morally, and by means of symbols.”

Récéjac’s very interesting Zssai sur les Fondements de la
Connatssance mystique has the great merit of emphasising the
symbolic character of all mystical phenomena, and of putting
all such experiences in their true place, as neither hallucina-
tions nor invasions of the natural order, but symbols of a
higher reality. ‘‘Les apparitions et autres phénoménes mys-
tiques n’existent que dans l’esprit du voyant, et ne perdent rien


APPENDIX A 341


pour cela de leur prix ni de leur vérité. . . . Et alors n’y a-t-il
pas au fond des symboles autant d’é¢re que sous les phéno-
ménes? Bien plus encore: car l’étre phénoménal, le réel, se
pose dans la conscience par un enchainement de faits tellement
successif que nous ne tenons jamais ‘le méme’; tandis que
sous les symboles, si nous tenons quelque chose, c’est l’identique
et le permanent.” Récéjac also insists with great force that
the motive power of Mysticism is neither curiosity nor self-

~ interest, but love: the intrusion of alien motives is at once
fatal to it. “Its logic consists in having confidence in the
rationality of the moral consciousness and its desires.” This
agrees with what I have said—that Reason is, or should be, the
logic of our entire personality, and that if Reason is so defined,
it does not come into conflict with Mysticism. Récéjac also has
much to say upon Free Will and Determinism. He says that
Mysticism is an alliance between the Practical Reason (which
he identifies with ‘‘la Liberté”) and Imagination. “ Deter-
minism is the opposite, not of ‘ Liberty,’ but of ‘indifference.’
Liberty, as Fouillée says, is only a higher form of Deter-
minism.” ‘The modern idea of liberty, and the mystical con-
ception of Divine will, may be reconciled in the same way as
inspiration and reason, on condition that both are discovered in
the same fact interior to us, and that, far from being opposed
to each other, they are fused and distinguished together dans
quelque implicite réellement présent a la conscience.”  Récéjac
throughout appeals to Kant instead of to Hegel as his chief
philosophical authority, in this differing from the majority of
those who are in sympathy with Mysticism.

17. Bonchitté. ‘Mysticism consists in giving to the spon-
taneity of the intelligence a larger part than to the other
faculties.”

18. Charles Kingsley. ‘The great Mysticism is the belief
which is becoming every day stronger with me, that all sym-
metrical natural objects are types of some spiritual truth or
existence. When I walk the fields, I am oppressed now and

~ then with an innate feeling that everything I see has a meaning,
if I could but understand it. And this feeling of being sur-
rounded with truths which I cannot grasp, amounts to inde-
~ scribable awe sometimes. Everything seems to be full of God’s


.


342 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


reflex, if we could but see it. Oh, how I have prayed to have
the mystery unfolded, at least hereafter! To see, if but for a
moment, the whole harmony of the great system! To hear
once the music which the whole universe makes as it performs
His bidding! Oh, that heaven! The thought of the first
glance of creation from thence, when we know even as we are
known. And He, the glorious, the beautiful, the incarnate
Ideal shall be justified in all His doings, and in all, and through
all, and over all. . . . All day, glimpses from the other world,
floating motes from that inner transcendental life, have been
floating across me. . . . Have you not felt that your real soul
was imperceptible to your mental vision, except at a few
hallowed moments? That in everyday life the mind, looking
at itself, sees only the brute intellect, grinding and working,
not the Divine particle, which is life and immortality, and on
which the Spirit of God most probably works, as being most
cognate to Deity” (Zzfe, vol. i. p. 55). Again he says: “This
earth is the next greatest fact to that of God’s existence.”

Kingsley’s review of Vaughan’s Hours with the Mystics
shows that he retained his sympathy with Mysticism at a later
period of his life. It would be impossible to find any consistent
idealistic philosophy in Kingsley’s writings ; but the sentences
above quoted are interesting as a profession of faith in Mysti-
cism of the odjective type.

19. &. L. Wettleship. ‘The cure for a wrong Mysticism is
to realise the facts, not particular facts or aspects of facts, but
the whole fact: true Mysticism is the consciousness that
everything that we experience is an element, and only an
element, in fact ; ze. that in being what it is, it is symbolic of
something more.”

The oditer dicta on Mysticism in Nettleship’s Remains are
of great value.

20. Lasson. “The essence of Mysticism is the assertion of
an intuition which transcends the temporal categories of the
understanding, relying on speculative reason. Rationalism
cannot conduct us to the essence of things ; we therefore need
intellectual vision. But Mysticism is not content with sym-
bolic knowledge, and aspires to see the Absolute by pure
spiritual apprehension. . . . There is acontradiction in regard-


x


APPENDIX A 343


ing God as the immanent Essence of all things, and yet as an
abstraction transcending all things. But it is inevitable. Pure
immanence is unthinkable, if we are to maintain distinctions
in things. . . . Strict ‘immanence’ doctrine tends towards
the monopsychism of Averroes. . . . Mysticism is often asso-
ciated with pantheism, but the religious character of Mysticism
views everything from the standpoint of teleology, while pan-
theism generally stops at causality. . . . Mysticism, again, is
often allied with rationalism, but their ground-principles are
different, for rationalism is deistic, and rests on this earth,
being based on the understanding [as opposed to the higher
faculty, the reason], . . . Nothing can be more perverse than
to accuse Mysticism of vagueness. Its danger is rather an
overvaluing of reason and knowledge. . . . Mysticism is only
religious so long as it remembers that we can here only see
through a glass darkly ; when it tries to represent the eternal
adequately, it falls into a new and dangerous retranslation of
thought into images, or into bare negation. . . . Religion is a
relation of person to person, a life, which in its form is an
analogy to the earthly, while its content is pure relation to the
eternal. Dogmatic is the skeleton, Mysticism the life-blood,
of the Christian body. . . . Since the Reformation, philosophy
has taken over most of the work which the speculative mystics
performed in the Middle Ages” (Zssay on the Essence and
Value of Mysticism).

21. Vordau. ‘The word Mysticism describes a state of
mind in which the subject imagines that he perceives or
divines unknown and inexplicable relations among phenomena,
discerns in things hints at mysteries, and regards them as
symbols by which a dark power seeks to unveil, or at least to
indicate, all sorts of marvels. . . . It is always connected
with strong emotional excitement. . . . Nearly all our per-
ceptions, ideas, and conceptions are connected more or less
closely through the association of ideas. But to make the
association of ideas fulfil its function, one more thing must be
added—attention, which is the faculty to suppress one part of
the memory-images and maintain another part.” We must
select the strongest and most direct images, those directly
connected with the afferent nerves; ‘this Ribot calls adapta-


344 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


tion of the whole organism to a predominant idea... .


Attention presupposes strength of will. Unrestricted play of —


association, the result of an exhausted or degenerate brain,
gives rise to Mysticism. Since the mystic cannot express his
cloudy thoughts in ordinary language, he loves mutually ex-
clusive expressions. Mysticism blurs outlines, and makes the
transparent opaque.”

The Germans have two words for what we call Mysticism—
. Mystik and Mysticismus, the latter being generally dyslogistic.
The long chapter in Nordau’s Degeneration, entitled “ Mys-
_ ticism,” treats it throughout as a morbid state. It will be
observed that the last sentence quoted flatly contradicts one
of the statements copied from Lasson’s essay. But Nordau is
not attacking religious Mysticism, so much as that unwholesome
development of symbolic “science, falsely so called,” which
has usurped the name in modern France. Those who are
interested in Mysticism should certainly study the pathological
symptoms which counterfeit mystical states, and from this
point of view the essay in Degeneration is valuable. The
observations of Nordau and other alienists must lead us to
suspect ‘very strongly the following kinds of symbolical
representation, whether the symbols are borrowed from the
external world, or created by the imagination :—(a) All those
which include images of a sexual character. It is unnecessary
to illustrate this. ‘The visions of monks and nuns are often,
as we might expect, unconsciously tinged with a morbid
element of this kind. (4) Those which depend on mere
verbal resemblances or other fortuitous correspondences.
Nordau shows that the diseased brain is very ready to follow
these false trains of association. (c) Those which are con-
nected with the sense of smell, which seems to be morbidly
developed in this kind of degeneracy. (d@) Those which in
any way minister to pride or self-sufficiency.

22. Harnack. ‘Mysticism is rationalism applied to a
sphere above reason.”

I have criticised this definition in my first Lecture, and have
suggested that the words “rationalism” and “reason” ought
to be transposed. Elsewhere Harnack says that the dis-
tinctions between “Scholastic, Roman, German, Catholic,


Le LP mee 1 i pa


APPENDIX A 345


Evangelical, and Pantheistic Mysticism” are at best super-
ficial, and in particular that it is a mistake to contrast
“Scholasticism and Mysticism” as opposing forces in the

Middle Ages. ‘‘ Mysticism,” he proceeds, “is Catholic piety
in general, so far as this piety is not merely ecclesiastical
obedience, that is, fides implicita. The Reformation element
which is ascribed to it lies simply in this, that Mysticism, when
developed in a particular direction, is led to discern the
inherent responsibility of the soul, of which no authority can
again deprive it.” The conflicts between Mysticism and
Church authority, he thinks, in no way militate against doth
being Catholic ideals, just as asceticism and world-supremacy
are both Catholic ideals, though contradictory. The German
mystics he disparages. “I give no extracts from their
writings,” he says, “because I do not wish even to seem to
countenance the error that they expressed anything that one
cannot read in Origen, Plotinus, the Areopagite, Augustine,
Erigena, Bernard, and Thomas, or that they represented
religious progress.” ‘It will never be possible to make
Mysticism Protestant without flying in the face of history and
Catholicism.” ‘A mystic who does not become a Catholic is
a dilettante.”

Before considering these statements, I will quote from
another attack upon Mysticism by a writer whose general
views are very similar to those of Harnack.

23. Herrmann (Verkehr des Christen mit Gott). “The
most conspicuous features of the Roman Catholic rule of life
are obedience to the laws of cultus and of doctrine on the one
side, and Neoplatonic Mysticism on the other. . . The
essence of Mysticism lies in this: when the influence of God
upon the soul is sought and found solely in an inward ex-
perience of the individual; when certain excitements of the
emotions are taken, with no further question, as evidence that
the soul is possessed by God: when at the same time nothing
external to the soul is consciously and clearly perceived and
firmly grasped; when no thoughts that elevate the spiritual
life are aroused by the positive contents of an idea that rules
the soul,—then that is the piety of Mysticism. . . . Mysticism
is not that which is common to all religion, but a particular


346 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM |


species of religion, namely a piety which feels that which is


_ historical in the positive religion to be burdensome, and so —


rejects it.”

These extracts from Harnack and Herrmann represent the
attitude towards Mysticism of the Ritschlian school in Ger-
many, of which Kaftan is another well-known exponent. They
are neo-Kantians, whose religion is an austere moralism, and
who seem to regard Christianity as a primitive Puritanism,
spoiled by the Greeks, who brought into it their intellectualism
and their sacramental mysteries. True Christianity, they say,
is faith in the historic Christ. ‘In the human Jesus,” says
- Herrmann, “we have met with a fact, the content of which is
incomparably richer than that of any feelings which arise
within ourselves,—a fact, moreover, which makes us so certain
of God that, our reason and conscience being judges, our con-
viction is only confirmed that we are in communion with Him.”
“The mystic’s experience of God is a delusion. If the
Christian has learnt how Christ alone has lifted him above all
that he had even been before, he cannot believe that another
man might reach the same end by simply turning inward upon
himself.” ‘‘The piety of the mystic is such that at the highest
point to which it leads Christ must vanish from the soul along
with all else that is external.” This curious view of Christianity
quite fails to explain how “ our reason and conscience” can
detect the “incomparable richness” of a revelation altogether
unlike ‘“‘the feelings which arise within ourselves.” It en-
tirely ignores the Pauline and Johannine doctrine of the
mystical union, according to which Christ is zof “external”
to the redeemed soul, and most assuredly can never “vanish”
from it. Instead of the “Lo I am with you alway” of our
blessed Lord, we are referred to ‘history ”—that is, primarily,
the four Gospels confirmed by “‘a fifth,” “the united testimony
of the first Christian community” (Harnack, Christianity and
ffistory). We are presented with a Christianity without
knowledge (Gnosis), without discipline, without sacraments,
resting partly on a narrative which these very historical critics
tear in pieces, each in his own fashion, and partly on a cate-
gorical imperative which is really the voice of “irreligious
moralism,’ as Pfleiderer calls it. The words are justified by


APPENDIX A | 347


such a sentence as this from Herrmann: “ Religious faith in
God is, rightly understood, just the medium by which the
universal law becomes individualised for the particular man in
his particular place in the world’s life, so as to enable him to
recognise its absoluteness as the ground of his self-certainty,
and the ideal drawn in it as his own personal end.” Thus the
school which has shown the greatest animus against Mysticism
unconsciously approaches very near to the atheism of Feuer-
bach. Indeed, what worse atheism can there be, than such
disbelief in the rationality of our highest thoughts as is ex-
pressed in this sentence: “Metaphysics is an impassioned
endeavour to obtain recognition for thoughts, the contents of
which have no other title to be recognised than their value
for us”? As if faith in God had any other meaning than a
confidence that what is of “value for us” is the eternally and
universally good and true! MHerrmann’s attitude towards
reason can only escape atheism by accepting in preference the
crudest dualism, ‘‘ behind which” (to quote Pfleiderer again)
lies concealed simply ‘the scepticism of a disintegrating
Nominalism.”

24. Victor Cousin. “Mysticism is the pretension to know
God without intermediary, and, so to speak, face to face.
For Mysticism, whatever is between God and us hides Him
from us.” ‘Mysticism consists in substituting direct inspira-

tion for indirect, ecstasy for reason, rapture for philosophy.”
~ 2c, R. A. Vaughan. “Mysticism is that form of érror
which mistakes for a Divine manifestation the operations of a
merely human faculty.”

This poor definition is the only one (except “ Mysticism is
the romance of religion”) to be found in Hours with the
Mystics, the solitary work in English which attempts to give a
history of Christian Mysticism. The book has several con-
spicuous merits. The range of the author’s reading is
remarkable, and he has a wonderful gift of illustration. But
he was not content to trust to the interest of the subject to
make his book popular, and tried to attract readers by placing
it in a most incongruous setting. There is something almost
offensive in telling the story of men like Tauler, Suso, and
Juan of the Cross, in the form of smart conversations at a


348 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


house-party, and the jokes cracked at the expense of the
benighted “mystics” are not always in the best taste.


Vaughan does not take his subject quite seriously enough. —


There is an irritating air of superiority in all his discussions of
the lives and doctrines of the mystics, and his hatred and
contempt for the Roman Church often warp his judgment.
His own philosophical standpoint is by no means clear, and
this makes his treatment of speculative Mysticism less satis-
factory than the more popular parts of the book. It is also a
pity that he has neglected the English representatives of
_ Mysticism; they are quite as interesting in their way as
Madame Guyon, whose story he tells at disproportionate
length. At the same time, I wish to acknowledge con-
siderable obligations to Vaughan, whose early death probably
deprived us of even better work than the book which made
his reputation.

26. James Hinton. “Mysticism is an assertion of a means
of knowing that must not be tried by ordinary rules of
evidence—the claiming authority for our own impressions.”

Another poor and question-begging definition, on the same
lines as the last.


APPENDIX B
THE GREEK MySsTERIES AND CHRISTAIN MysTICISM


THE connexion between the Greek Mysteries and Christian
Mysticism is marked not only by the name which the world has
agreed to give to that type of religion (though it must be said
that pvorjpia is not the commonest name for the Mysteries—
Opyta, TeAerai, TéA7 are all, I think, more frequent), but by the
evident desire on the part of such founders of mystical Christi-
. anity as Clement and Dionysius the Areopagite, to emphasise
the resemblance. It is not without a purpose that these
writers, and other Platonising theologians from the third to the
fifth century, transfer to the faith and practice of the Church
almost every term which was associated with the Eleusinian
Mysteries and others like them. For instance, the sacraments
are regularly wvorypia ; baptism is puorixov Aovrpdv (Gregory of
Nyssa) ; unction, xpécwa pvorixdv (Athanasius) ; the elements,
pvoris édwdy (Gregory Naz.); and participation in them is
pruorixy petddyyrs. Baptism, again, is “initiation” (uvyous) ; a
baptized person is pepunpévos, porns, or ovpptorns (Gregory
Ny. and Chrysostom), an unbaptized person is dpinros. The
celebrant is pvorynpiwv AavOavdvtwv protaywyss (Gregory Ny.) ;
the administration is zapddoots, as at Eleusis. The sacraments
are also reAery or TeAn, regular Mystery-words ; as are TeAciwors,
reAciodvaGat, TeAeorowds, which are used in the same con-
nexion. Secret formulas (the notion of secret formulas itself
comes from the Mysteries) were améppyra. (Whether the words
doricpds and cppayis in their sacramental meaning come from
the Mysteries seems doubtful, in spite of Hatch, /iddert
Lectures, p. 295.) Nor is the language of the Mysteries
applied only to the sacraments. Clement calls purgative disci-
pline r& xafdpova, and 74 pixpd pvorypia, and the highest stage
849


350 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


x
5


in the spiritual life érowrefa. He also uses such language as ©


the following: “O truly sacred mysteries! O stainless light!


My way is lighted with torches, and I survey the heavens and ~


God! I am become holy while I am being initiated. The —


Lord is my hierophant,” etc. (Profr. xii. 120). Dionysius, as I
have shown in a note on Lecture III., uses the Mystery words
frequently, and gives to the orders of the Christian ministry


the names which distinguished the officiating priests at the —


Mysteries. The aim of these writers was to prove that the
Church offers a mysteriosophy which includes all the good
elements of the old Mysteries without their corruptions. The
alliance between a Mystery-religion and speculative Mysticism
within the Church was at this time as close as that between
the Neoplatonic philosophy and the revived pagan Mystery-
cults. But when we try to determine the amount of direct
influence exercised by the later paganism on Christian usages
and thought, we are baffled both by the loss of documents,
and by the extreme difficulty of tracing the pedigree of religious
ideas and customs. I shall here content myself with calling
attention to certain features which were common to the Greek
Mysteries and to Alexandrian Christianity, and which may
perhaps claim to be in part a legacy of the old religion to the
new. My object is not at all to throw discredit upon modes
of thought which may have been unfamiliar to Palestinian
Jews. A doctrine or custom is not necessarily un-Christian
because it is “Greek” or “pagan.” I know of no stranger
perversity than for men who rest the whole weight of their
religion upon “history,” to suppose that our Lord meant to
raise an universal religion on a purely Jewish basis.

The Greek Mysteries were perhaps survivals of an old-
world ritual, based on a primitive kind of Nature-Mysticism.
The “public Mysteries,” of which the festival at Eleusis was
the most important, were so called because the State ad-
mitted strangers by initiation to what was originally a national
cult. (There were also private Mysteries, conducted for profit
by itinerant priests (dyvpra:) from the East, who as a class
bore no good reputation.) The main features of the ritual
at Eleusis are known. The festival began at Athens, where
the myste collected, and, after a fast of several days, were


APPENDIX B 351


“driven” to the sea, or to two salt lakes on the road to
Eleusis, for a purifying bath. This kind of baptism washed
away the stains of their former sins, the worst of which they
were obliged to confess before being admitted to the Mysteries.
Then, after sacrifices had been offered, the company went in
procession to Eleusis, where Mystery-plays were performed in
a great hall, large enough to hold thousands of people, and
the votaries were allowed to handie certain sacred relics. A
sacramental meal, in which a mixture of mint, barley-meal, and
water was administered to the initiated, was an integral part
of the festival. The most secret part of the ceremonies was
reserved for the ééarra, who had passed through the ordinary
initiation in a previous year. It probably culminated in the
solemn exhibition of a corn-ear, the symbol of Demeter. The
obligation of silence was imposed not so much because there
were any secrets to reveal, but that the holiest sacraments of
the Greek religion might not be profaned by being brought
into contact with common life. This feeling was strengthened
by the belief that words are more than conventional symbols
of things. A sacred formula must not be taken in vain, or
divulged to persons who might misuse it.

The evidence is strong that the Mysteries had a real
spiritualising and moralising influence on large numbers of
those who were initiated, and that this influence was increasing
under the early empire. The ceremonies may have been trivial,
and even at times ludicrous ; but the discovery had been made
that the performance of solemn acts of devotion in common,
after ascetical preparation, and with the aid of an impressive
ritual, is one of the strongest incentives to piety. Diodorus is
not alone in saying (he is speaking of the Samothracian Mys-
teries) that “those who have taken part in them are said to
become more pious, more upright, and in every way better
than their former selves.”

The chief motive force which led to the increased im-
portance of Mystery-religion in the first centuries of our era,
was the desire for “salvation” (cwrnpia), which both with
pagans and Christians was very closely connected with the
hope of everlasting life. Happiness after death was the great
promise held out in the Mysteries. The initiated were secure of


352 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


blessedness in the next world, while the uninitiated must expect


“to lie in darkness and mire after their death” (cf. Plato,


Phedrus, 69).
How was this “salvation” attained or conferred? We find
that several conflicting views were held, which it is impossible


to keep rigidly separate, since the human mind at one time


inclines to one of them, at another time to another.

(a) Salvation is imparted by vevelation. ‘This makes it to
depend upon knowledge ; but this knowledge was in the Mys-
teries conveyed by the spectacle or drama, not by any intel-
lectual process. Plutarch (de Defect. Orac. 22) says that those
' who had been initiated could produce no demonstration or
proof of the beliefs which they had acquired. And Synesius
quotes Aristotle as saying that the initiated do not dearn
anything, but rather receive impressions (od pabeiv tu Seiv GAXA
maeiv). The old notion that monotheism was taught as a
secret dogma rests on no evidence, and is very unlikely.
There was a good deal of @coxpacia, as the ancients called it,
and some departures from the current theogonies, but such
doctrine as there was, was much nearer to pantheism than to
monotheism. Certain truths about nature and the facts of
life were communicated in the “greatest mysteries,” according
to Clement, and Cicero says the same thing. And sometimes
the yvéo1s cwrnpias includes knowledge about the whence and
whither of man (tives éopev cal tl yeydvapev, Clem. Exc. ex
Theod. 78). Some of the mystical formule were no doubt
susceptible of deep and edifying interpretations, especially in
the direction of an elevated nature-worship.

(4) Salvation was regarded, as in the Oriental religions, as
emancipation from the fetters of human existence. Doctrines
of this kind were taught especially in the Orphic Mysteries,
where it was a secret doctrine (aaréppyrtos déyos, Plat. Phedr.
62) that ‘“‘we men are here in a kind of prison,” or in a tomb
(ohpd tives TO cGpa elvar THs Wuxijs, ds TOappevys ev Td wapdvri,
Plat. Cvrat. 400). They also believed in transmigration of
souls, and in a KvKAos tis yevéoews (rota fati et generationis).
The ‘Orphic life,” or rules of conduct enjoined upon these
mystics, comprised asceticism, and, in particular, abstinence
from flesh; and laid great stress on “following of God”


APPENDIX B 353


(reo Oau or dxoAovbeivy 7G Ged) as the goal of moral endeavour.
This cult, however, was tinged with Thracian barbarism sats
heaven was a kind of Valhalla (ué67 aidvios, Plat. Rep. ii. 36 3).
_ Very similar was the rule of life prescribed by the Pythagorean
brotherhood, who were also vegetarians, and advocates of vir-
ginity. Their system of purgation, followed by_ initiation,
liberated men “from the grievous woeful circle” («xAov &
éférrav BapurévOeos dpyadéo.o on a tombstone), and entitled
them “to a happy life with the gods.” (For the conception of
salvation as deification, see Appendix C.) Whether these sects
taught that our separate individuality must be merged is un-
certain; but among the Gnostics, who had much in common
with the Orphic mys¢z, the formula, “I am thou, and thou art
I,” was common (f%stis Sophia ; formule of the Marcosians ;
also in an invocation of Hermes: 7d ody dvoya éuov Kal 7d
éuov cov. eyo ydp eis Td cldwAdv gov. Rohde, Psyche, vol.
il. p. 61). A foretaste of this deliverance was given by initia-
tion, which conducts the mystic to ecstasy, an éAvyoxpévios
pavia (Galen), in which “animus ita solutus est et vacuus ut
ei plane nihil sit cum corpore” (Cic. De Divin. i. 1. 113);
which was otherwise conceived as évovovacpds (évOovorwans
Kal ovKére ovens év éavT@ Svavoias, Philo).

(c) The imperishable Divine nature is infused by mechanical
means. Sacraments and the like have a magical or miraculous
potency. The Homeric hymn to Demeter insists only on
ritual purity as the condition of salvation, and we hear that
people trusted to the mystic baptism to wash out all their
previous sins. Similarly the baptism of blood, the /aurobolium,
was supposed to secure eternal happiness, at any rate if death
occurred within twenty years after the ceremony ; when that
interval had elapsed, it was common to renew the rite. (We
find on inscriptions such phrases as “ arcanis perfusionibus in
zeternum renatus.”) So mechanical was the operation of the
Mysteries supposed to be, that rites were performed for the
dead (Plat. Rep. 364. St. Paul seems to refer to a similar
custom in 1 Cor, xv. 29), and infants were appointed
priests,” and thoroughly initiated, that they might be clean
from their “original sin.” Among the Gnostics, a favourite
phrase was that initiation releases men ‘from the gets of

23


354 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Sikri fell


fate and necessity”; the gods of the intelligible world (Bet
vontol), with whom we hold communion in the Mysteries,
being above ‘‘fate.”

(d) Salvation consists of moral regeneration. The eftcacyl é
of initiation without moral reformation naturally appeared —
doubtful to serious thinkers. Diogenes is reported to have —
asked, “What say you? Will Patzcion the thief be happier —
in the next world than Epaminondas, because he has been —
initiated?” And Philo says, ‘“‘It often happens that good
men are not initiated, but that robbers, and murderers, and
lewd women are, if they pay money to the initiators and hiero-
phants.” Ovid protests against the immoral doctrine of
mechanical purgation with more than his usual earnestness
(Fastt, ii. 35) —

**Omne nefas omnemque mali purgamina causam
Credebant nostri tollere posse senes.
Grecia principium moris fuit; illa nocentes
Impia lustratos ponere facta putat.
A! nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina cedis
Fluminea tolli posse putetis aqua !”
Such passages show that abuses existed, but also that it was
felt to be a scandal if the initiated person failed to exhibit any
moral improvement.

These different conceptions of the office of the Mysteries
cannot, as I have said, be separated historically. They all
reappear in the history of the Christian sacraments. The
main features of the Mystery-system which passed into
Catholicism are the notions of secrecy, of symbolism, of
mystical brotherhood, of sacramental grace, and, above all, of
the three stages in the spiritual life, ascetic purification,
illumination, and éomreia as the crown.

The secrecy observed about creeds and liturgical forms had
not much to do with the development of Mysticism, except by
associating sacredness with obscurity (cf. Strabo, x. 467, 4 kpwyus
1) PoOTLKH TEeuvoTrOLEL TS Oelov, prpwovpern tHV iow abrod éxev-
youvrav tiv aicbyow), a tendency which also showed itself in
the love of symbolism. This certainly had a great influence,
both in the form of allegorism (cf. Clem. Strom. i. 1. 15, éore


sa \ 2 Y, 4 € a
de & Kal aivigerai por 4 ypady reipdoerar St Kal AavOdvovca


APPENDIX B anc


cimetv Kai émikpurtopévy expivar Kai Seifar cwmdca), which
Philo calls “the method of the Greek Mysteries,” and in the
various kinds of Nature-Mysticism. The great value of the
Mysteries lay in the facilities which they offered for free
symbolical interpretation.

The idea of mystical union by means of a common meal
was, as we have seen, familiar to the Greeks. For instance,
Plutarch says (Von posse suav. vivi sec. Epic. 21), “It is not
the wine or the cookery that delights us at these feasts, but
good hope, and the belief that God is present with us, and
that He accepts our service graciously.” There have always
been two ideas of sacrifice, alike in savage and civilised cults
—the mystical, in which it is a communion, the victim who is
slain and eaten being himself the god, or a symbol of the god ;
and the commercial, in which something valuable is offered to
the god in the hope of receiving some benefit in exchange.
The Mysteries certainly encouraged the idea of communion,
and made it easier for the Christian rite to gather up into itself
all the religious elements which can be contained in a sacra-
ment of this kind.

But the scheme of ascent from kd@apots to pvyots, and from
poynors to éorreia, is the great contribution of the Mysteries to
Christian Mysticism. Purification began, as we have seen,
with confession of sin; it proceeded by means of fasting (with
which was combined dyveia dr ovvovoias) and meditation,
till the second stage, that of illumination, was reached. The
majority were content with the partial illumination which
belonged to this stage, just as in books of Roman Catholic
divinity “mystical theology” is a summit of perfection to
which “‘all are not called.” The elect advanced, after a year’s
interval at least, to the full contemplation (érorreia). This
highest truth was conveyed in various ways—by visible sym-
bols dramatically displayed, by solemn words of mysterious
import; by explanations of enigmas and allegories and dark
speeches (cf. Orig. Ce/s. vii. 10), and perhaps by “visions
and revelations.” It is plain that this is one of the cases in
which Christianity conquered Hellenism by borrowing from it
all its best elements; and I do not see that a Christian need
feel any reluctance to make this admission.


APPENDIX C


Tue DoctTRINE OF DEIFICATION


THE conception of salvation as the acquisition by man of
Divine attributes is common to many forms of religious
thought. It was widely diffused in the Roman Empire at
the time of the Christian revelation, and was steadily growing
in importance during the first centuries of our era. The
Orphic Mysteries had long taught the doctrine. On tomb-
stones erected by members of the Orphic brotherhoods we
find such inscriptions.as these: ‘‘ Happy and blessed one!
Thou shalt be a god instead of a mortal” (dABte Kat paxdp-
uote, Oeds 8 Eon dvti Bporoto); “Thou art a god instead of a
wretched man” (Oeds eZ éAcewod e€ avOpdmrov). It has indeed
been said that “deification was the idea of salvation taught in
the Mysteries ” (Harnack).

To modern ears the word “deification” sounds not only
strange, but arrogant and shocking. The Western conscious-
ness has always tended to emphasise the distinctness of indi-
viduality, and has been suspicious of anything that looks like
juggling with the rights of persons, human or Divine. This is
especially true of thought in the Latin countries. Deus has
never been a fluid concept like eds. St. Augustine no doubt
gives us the current Alexandrian philosophy in a Latin dress ;
but this part of his Platonism never became acclimatised in
the Latin-speaking countries. The Teutonic genius is in this
matter more in sympathy with the Greek ; but we are Westerns,
while the later “Greeks” were half Orientals, and there is
much in their habits of thought which is strange and unin-
telligible to us. Take, for instance, the apotheosis of the


emperors. This was a genuinely Eastern mode of homage,
856


APPENDIX C 357


which to the true European remained either profane or
ridiculous. But Vespasian’s last joke, ‘“ Vz/ puto Deus fio!”
would not sound comic in Greek. The associations of the
word eds were not sufficiently venerable to make the idea of
deification (Georoinois) grotesque. We find, as we should
expect, that this vulgarisation of the word affected even
Christians in the Greek-speaking countries. Not only were
the “barbarous people” of Galatia and Malta ready to find
“‘theophanies” in the visits of apostles, or any other strangers
who seemed to have unusual powers, but the philosophers
(except the “godless Epicureans”) agreed in calling the
highest faculty of the soul Divine, and in speaking of “the
God who dwells within us.” There is a remarkable passage of
Origen (quoted by Harnack) which shows how elastic the word
§eds was in the current dialect of the educated. ‘In another
sense God is said to be an immortal, rational, moral Being.
In this sense every gentle (doreia) soul is God. But God is
otherwise defined as the self-existing immortal Being. In this
sense the souls that are enclosed in wise men are not gods.”
Clement, too, speaks of the soul as “training itself to be
God.” Even more remarkable than such language (of which
many other examples might be given) is the frequently
recurring accusation that bishops, teachers, martyrs, philo-
sophers, etc., are venerated with Divine or semi-Divine honours.
These charges are brought by Christians against pagans, by
pagans against Christians, and by rival Christians against each
other. Even the Epicureans habitually spoke of their founder
Epicurus as “a god.” If we try to analyse the concept of
6eés, thus loosely and widely used, we find that the prominent
idea was that exemption from the doom of death was the
prerogative of a Divine Being (cf. 1 Tim. vi. 16, “Who only
hath immortality”), and that therefore the gift of immortality
is itself a deification. This notion is distinctly adopted by
several Christian writers. ‘Theophilus says (ad Av/ol. ii. 27)
‘‘that man, by keeping the commandments of God, may
receive from him immortality as a reward (y100dv), and become
God.” And Clement (Strom. y. 10. 63) says, “To be im-
perishable (7d px $O«/peoGa) is to share in Divinity.” To
the same effect Hippolytus (P2z/os. x. 34) says, ““Thy body


358 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


shall be immortal and incorruptible as well as thy soul. For


thou hast become God. All the things that follow upon the_


Divine nature God has promised to supply to thee, for shou
wast deified in being born to immortality.” With regard to
later times, Harnack says that “after Theophilus, Irenzus,
Hippolytus, and Origen, the idea of deification is found in all
the Fathers of the ancient Church, and that in a primary
position. We have it in Athanasius, the Cappadocians,
Apollinaris, Ephraem Syrus, Epiphanius, and others, as also in
Cyril, Sophronius, and late Greek and Russian theologians.
In proof of it, Ps. Ixxxii. 6 (‘I said, Ye are gods’) is very
often quoted.” He quotes from Athanasius, ‘‘He became
man that we might be deified” ; and from Pseudo-Hippolytus,
“Tf, then, man has become immortal, he will be God.”

This notion grew within the Church as chiliastic and
apocalyptic Christianity faded away. A favourite phrase was
that the Incarnation, etc., “abolished death,” and brought
mankind into a state of “incorruption” (ad¢@apoia). This
transformation of human nature, which is also spoken of as
Geomoinots, is the highest work of the Logos. Athanasius
makes it clear that what he contemplates is no pantheistic
merging of the personality in the Deity, but rather a renovation
after the original type.

But the process of deification may be conceived of in two
ways: (a) as essentialisation, (4) as substitution. The former
may perhaps be called the more philosophical conception, the
latter the more religious. The former lays stress on the high
calling of man, and his potential greatness as the image of
God ; the latter, on his present misery and alienation, and his
need of redemption. The former was the teaching of the
_ Neoplatonic philosophy, in which the human mind was the
| throne of the Godhead; the latter was the doctrine of the
Mysteries, in which salvation was conceived of realistically as
something imparted or infused.

The notion that salvation or deification consists in realising
our true nature, was supported by the favourite doctrine that
like only can know like. “If the soul were not essentially
Godlike (Geoed%s), it could never know God.” This doctrine
might seem to lead to the heretical conclusion that man is


me


APPENDIX C 359


dpoovctos 7G Tarpé in the same sense as Christ. This conclusion,
however, was strongly repudiated both by Clement and Origen.
The former (Strom. xvi. 74) says that men are not pépos Oeod
kal TO eS dpoovorr; and Origen (in Joh. xiii. 25) says it is
very impious to assert that we are éuoovo.xr with “the un-
begotten nature.” But for those who thought of Christ
mainly as the Divine Logos or universal Reason, the line was
not very easy to draw. Methodius says that every believer
must, through participation in Christ, be born as a Christ,—a
view which, if pressed logically (as it ought not to be), implies
either that our nature is at bottom identical with that of Christ,
or that the life of Christ is substituted for our own. The
difficulty as to whether the human soul is, strictly speaking,
“divine particula aurz,” is met by Proclus in the ingenious
and interesting passage quoted p. 34; “There are,” he says,
“three sorts of woles, (1) in which the whole is anterior to
the parts, (2) in which the whole is composed of the parts,
(3) which knits into one stuff the parts and the whole (4 rois
dAos Ta péepy cuvvvdaivovca).” This is also the doctrine of
Plotinus, and of Augustine. God is not split up among His
creatures, nor are they essential to Him in the same way as He
is to them. Erigena’s doctrine of deification is expressed (not
very clearly) in the following sentence (De Div. (Vat. iii. 9): “ Est
igitur participatio divinz essentize assumptio. Assumptio vero
eius divine sapientiz fusio que est omnium substantia et
essentia, et queecumque in eis naturaliter intelliguntur.” Accord-
ing to Eckhart, the Wesen of God transforms the soul into itself
by means of the “spark” or “apex of the soul” (equivalent to
Plotinus’ xévrpov Wuxns, Lun. vi. 9. 8), which is “so akin to
God that it is one with God, and not merely united to Him.”
The history of this doctrine of the spark, and of the closely-
connected word synferests, is interesting. The word “spark”
occurs in this connexion as early as Tatian, who says (Or. 13):
“In the beginning the spirit was a constant companion of the
soul, but forsook it because the soul would not follow it
yet it retained, as it were, a spark of its power,” etc. See alsa
Tertullian, De Anima, 41. The curious word synteresis (often
misspelt sénderesis), which plays a considerable part in
medizeval mystical treatises, occurs first in Jerome (on Zzech. i.):


360 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


“Quartamque ponunt quam Greaci vocant ovwripyow, que
scintilla conscientiz in Cain quoque pectore non exstinguitur,
et qua victi voluptatibus vel furore nos peccare sentimus. ...


In Scripturis [eam] interdum vocari legimus Spiritum.” Cf.
Rom. viii. 26; 2 Cor. ii. 11. Then we find it in Alexander of
Hales, and in Bonaventura, who (/tinerare, c. 1) defines it as
“‘ apex mentis seu scintilla” ; and more precisely (Breviloguium,
Pars 2, c. 11): “Benignissimus Deus quadruplex contulit ei
adiutorium, scilicet duplex nature et duplex gratiz. Duplicem
enim indidit rectitudinem ipsi nature, videlicet unam ad recte
iudicandum, et hec est rectitudo conscientiz, aliam ad recte
' volendum, et hzc est synteresis, cuius est remurmurare contra
malum et stimulare ad bonum.” Hermann of Fritslar speaks
of it as a power or faculty in the soul, wherein God works
immediately, ‘without means and without intermission.”
: Ruysbroek defines it as the natural will towards good im-
‘ planted in us all, but weakened by sin. Giseler says: “‘ This
spark was created with the soul in all men, and is a clear light
in them, and strives in every way against sin, and impels steadily
to virtue, and presses ever back to the source from which it
sprang.” It has, says Lasson, a double meaning in mystical
theology, (2) the ground of the soul; (4) the highest ethical


faculty. In Thomas Aquinas it is SESS from “intel-
lectus principiorum,” the former being the highest activity of
the moral sense, the latter of the intellect. In Gerson,
“synteresis” is the highest of the affective faculties, the organ
of which is the intelligence (an emanation from the highest
intelligence, which is God Himself), and the activity of which
is contemplation. Speaking generally, the earlier scholastic
mystics regard it as a remnant of the sinless state before the
fall, while for Eckhart and his school it is the core of the soul.

There is another expression which must be considered in
connexion with the medizeval doctrine of deification. This is
the itellectus agens, Or vovds mountixds, which began its long
history in Aristotle (De Anima, iii. 5). Aristotle there dis-
tinguishes two forms of Reason, which are related to each
other as form and matter. Reason decomes all things, for the
matter of anything is potentially the whole class to which it
belongs; but Reason also makes all things, that is to say, it


APPENDIX C 361


communicates to things those categories by which they become
objects of thought. This higher Reason is separate and
impassible (xwpurrés Kal dpryijs al draOys); it is eternal and
immortal ; while the passive reason perishes with the body.
The creative Reason is immanent both in the human mind
and in the external world ; and thus only is it possible for the
mind to know things. Unfortunately, Aristotle says very
little more about his vods zowptixds, and does not explain how
the two Reasons are related to each other, thereby leaving the
problem for his successors to work out. The most fruitful
attempt to form a consistent theory, on an idealistic basis, out
of the ambiguous and perhaps irreconcilable statements in the
De Anima, was made by Alexander of Aphrodisias (about
200 A.D.), who taught that the Active Reason “is not a part
or faculty of our soul, but comes to us from without ”—it is, in
fact, identified with the Spirit of God working in us. Whether
Aristotle would have accepted this interpretation of his theory
may be doubted; but the commentary of Alexander of
Aphrodisias was translated into Arabic, and this view of the
Active Reason became the basis of the philosophy of Averroes.
Averroes teaches that it is possible for the passive reason to
unite itself with the Active Reason, and that this union may
be attained or prepared for by ascetic purification and study.
But he denies that the passive reason is perishable, not wishing
entirely to depersonalise man. Herein he follows, he says,
Themistius, whose views he tries to combine with those of
Alexander. Avicenna introduces a celestial hierarchy, in
which the higher intelligences shed their light upon the lower,
till they reach the Active Reason, which lies nearest to man,
“a quo, ut ipse dicit, effluunt species intelligibiles in animas
nostras” (Aquinas). The doctrine of “ monopsychism ” was, of
course, condemned by the Church. Aquinas makes both
the Active and Passive Reason parts of the human soul.
Eckhart, as I have said in the fourth Lecture, at one period
of his teaching expressly identifies the “intellectus agens”
with the “spark,” in reference to which he says that “here
God’s ground is my ground, and my ground God’s ground.”
This doctrine of the Divinity of the ground of the soul is very
like the Cabbalistic doctrine of the Neschamah, and the


362 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Neoplatonic doctrine of Nois (cf. Stockl, vol. ii. p. 1007). Eck-


hart was condemned for saying, “aliquid est in anima quod


est increatum et increabile; si tota anima esset talis, esset


increata et increabilis. Hoc est intellectus.” Eckhart cer-—


_ tainly says explicitly that ‘as fire turns all that it touches into
' itself, so the birth of the Son of God in the soul turns us into
God, so that God no longer knows anything in us but His
Son.” Man thus becomes “ filius naturalis Dei,” instead of.
only “ filius adoptivus.” We have seen that Eckhart, towards
the end of his life, inclined more and more to separate the


spark, the organ of Divine contemplation, from the reason. —


This is, of course, an approximation to the other view of
deification—that of substitution or miraculous infusion from
without, unless we see in it a tendency to divorce the per-
sonality from the reason. Ruysbroek states his doctrine of the
Divine spark very clearly: “The unity of our spirit in God
exists in two ways, essentially and actively. The essential
existence of the soul, gue secundum eternam ideam in Deo nos
sumus, ttemque quam in nobis habemus, medit ac discriminis
expers est. Spiritus Deum in nuda natura essentialiter
possidet, et spiritum Deus. Vivit namque in Deo et Deus
in ipso; et secundum supremam sui partem Dei claritatem
suscipere absque medio idoneus est; quin etiam per eterni
exemplaris sui claritudinem essentialiter ac personaliter in ipso
lucentis, secundum supremam vivacitatis sue portionem, in
divinam sese demittit ac demergit essentiam, ibidemque _per-
severanter secundum ideam manendo zternam suam possidet
beatitudinem ; rursusque cum creaturis omnibus per eternam
Verbi generationem inde emanans, in esse suo creato con-
stituitur.” The “natural union,” though it is the first cause of
all holiness and blessedness, does not make us holy and
blessed, being common to good and bad alike. “Similitude”
to God is the work of grace, “ quae lux queedam deiformis est.”
We cannot lose the “‘unitas,” but we can lose the “similitudo
que. est gratia.” The highest part of the soul is capable of
receiving a perfect and immediate impression of the Divine
essence ; by this “apex mentis” we may “sink into the Divine
essence, and by a new (continuous) creation return to our
created being according to the idea of God.” The question


APPENDIX C 363


whether the “ground of the soul” is created or not is obviously
a form of the question which we are now discussing. Giseler,
as I have said, holds that it was created with the soul. Stern-
gassen says: “That which God has in eternity in uncreated
wise, that has the soul in time in created wise.” But the
author of the Zreatise on Love, which belongs to this period,
speaks of the spark as “the Active Reason, which is God.”
And again, “This is the Uncreated in the soul of which Master
Eckhart speaks.” Suso seems to imply that he believed the
ground of the soul to be uncreated, an emanation of the
Divine nature ; and Tauler uses similar language. Ruysbroek,
in the last chapter of the Spiritual Nuptials, says that con-
templative men “‘see that they are the same simple ground as to
their uncreated nature, and are one with the same light by
which they see, and which they see.” The later German
mystics taught that the Divine essence is the material sub-
stratum of the world, the creative will of God having, so to
speak, alienated for the purpose a portion of His own essence.
If, then, the created form is broken through, God Himself
becomes the ground of the soul. Even Augustine countenances
some such notion when he says, “ From a good man, or from
a good angel, take away ‘man’ or ‘angel,’ and you find God.”
But one of the chief differences between the older and later


| Mysticism is that the former regarded union with God as


eae


achieved through the faculties of the soul, the latter as inherent
in its essence. ‘The doctrine of zmmanence, more and more
emphasised, tended to encourage the belief that the Divine
element in the soul is not merely something potential, some-
thing which the faculties may acquire, but is immanent and
basal. Tauler mentions both views, and prefers the latter.
Some hesitation may be traced in the Theologia Germanica on
this point (p. 109, “Golden Treasury” edition) : “The true
light is that eternal Light which is God; or else it is a
created light, but yet Divine, which is called grace.” Our
Cambridge Platonists naturally revived this Platonic doctrine
of deification, much to the dissatisfaction of some of their
contemporaries. Tuckney speaks of their teaching as “a
kind of moral divinity minted only with a little tincture
of Christ added Nay, @ Platonic faith unites to God/”


-


364 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Notwithstanding such protests, the Platonists persisted that
all true happiness consists in a participation of God; and
that ““we cannot enjoy God by any external conjunction with
Him.”

The question was naturally raised, “If man by putting on
Christ’s life can get nothing more than he has already, what
good will it do him?” The answer in the TZheologia
Germanica is as follows: “This life is not chosen in order


to serve any end, or to get anything by it, but for love of its


nobleness, and because God loveth and esteemeth it so
greatly.” %It is plain that any view which regards man as
essentially Divine has to face great difficulties when it comes
to deal with theodicy.

The other view of deification, that of a substitution of the
Divine Will, or Life, or Spirit, for the human, cannot in history
be sharply distinguished from the theories which have just been
mentioned. But the idea of substitution is naturally most
congenial to those who feel strongly ‘the corruption of man’s
heart,” and the need of deliverance, not only from our ghostly
enemies, but from the tyranny of self. Such men feel that
there must be a veal change, affecting the very depths of our
personality. Righteousness must be imparted, not merely


imputed. And there is a death to be died as well as a life to
be lived. The old man must die before the new man, which
is “not I but Christ,” can be born in us. The “birth of God
(or Christ) in the soul” is a favourite doctrine of the later
German ‘mystics. ~ Passages from the fourteenth century writers
have been quoted in my fourth and fifth Lectures. The
following from Giseler may be added: ‘God will be born,
not in the Reason, not in the Will, but in the most inward
part of the essence, and all the faculties of the soul become
aware thereof. Thereby the soul passes into mere passivity,
and lets God work.” They all insist on an immediate, sub-
stantial, personal indwelling, which is beyond what Aquinas
and the Schoolmen taught. The Lutheran Church condemns
those who teach that only the gifts of God, and not God
Himself, dwell in the believer; and the English Platonists, as
we.have scen, insist that “an infant Christ” is really born in
the soul. The German mystics are equally emphatic about


bh vet Bs ; 1 alts) ty it ie
TPIT ae. wis A Ee TR RR OSS.


APPENDIX C 365


the annihilation of the old man, which is the condition of this
indwelling Divine life. In quietistic (Nominalist) Mysticism
the usual phrase was that the will (or, better, “‘self-will”) must


be utterly destroyed, so that the Divine Will may take its


place. But Crashaw’s _ “leave nothing of of myself in me, gs
generally. St. Juan of the Cross says, “The soul must lose
entirely its human knowledge and human feelings, in order to
receive Divine knowledge and Divine feelings” ; it will then
live ‘‘as it were outside itself,” in a state “more proper to the
future than to the present life.” It is easy to see how
dangerous such teaching may be to weak heads. A typical
example, at a much earlier date, is that of Mechthild of
Hackeborn (about 1240). It was she who said, ‘My soul
swims in the Godhead like a fish in water!” and who
believed that, in answer to her prayers, God had so
united Himself with her that she saw with His eyes, and
heard with His ears, and spoke with His mouth. Many
similar examples might be found among the medicval
mystics.

Between the two ideas of essentialisation and of substitution
comes that of gradual transformation, which, again, cannot in
history be separated from the other two. It has the obvious
advantage of not regarding deification as an opus operatum, but
as a process, as a hope rather than a fact. A favourite maxim
with mystics who thought thus, was that “love changes the
lover into the beloved.” Louis of Granada often recurs to
this ‘thought.

The best mystics rightly see in the doctrine of the Divinity
of Christ the best safeguard against the extravagances to which
the notion of deification easily leads. Particularly instructive
here are the warnings which are repeated again and again in the
Theologia Germanica. “The false light dreameth itself to be
God, and taketh to itself what belongeth to God as God is in
eternity without the creature. Now, God in eternity is without
contradiction, suffering, and grief, and nothing can hurt or
vex Him. But with God when He is made man it is otherwise.”
“Therefore the false light thinketh and declareth itself to be
above all works, words, customs, laws, and order, and above


fi,


\
366 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


that life which Christ led in the body which He possessed in
His holy human nature. So likewise it professeth to remain
unmoved by any of the creature’s works ; whether they be good
or evil, against God or not, is all alike to it; and it keepeth
itself apart from all things, like God in eternity; and all that
belongeth to God and to no creature it taketh to itself, and
vainly dreameth that this belongeth to it.” ‘It doth not set
up to be Christ, but the eternal God. And this is because
Christ’s life is distasteful and burdensome to nature, therefore
it will have nothing to do with it; but to be God in eternity
and not man, or to be Christ as He was aftgr His resurrection,


is all easy and pleasant and comfortable to nature, and so it


holdeth it to be best.”

These three views of the manner in which we may hope to
become ‘“‘ partakers of the Divine nature,” are all aspects of the
truth. If we believe that we were made in the image of
God, then in becoming like Him we are realising our true idea,
and entering upon the heritage which is ours already by the
will of God. On the other hand, if we believe that we have
fallen very far from original righteousness, and have no power
of ourselves to help ourselves, then we must believe in a
deliverance from outside, an acquisition of a righteousness not
our own, which is either imparted or imputed to us. And,
thirdly, if we are to hope for a real change in our relations to
God, there must be a real change 7” our personality,—a pro-
gressive transmutation, which without breach of continuity will
bring us to be something different from what we were. The
three views are not mutually exclusive. As Vatke says, “The
influence of Divine grace does not differ from the immanent
development of the deepest Divine germ of life in man, only
that it here stands over-against man regarded as a finite and
separate being—as something external to himself. If the
Divine image is the true nature of man, and if it only possesses
reality in virtue of its identity with its type or with the Logos,
then there can be no true self-determination in man which is
not at the same time a self-determination of the type in its
image.” We cannot draw a sharp line between the operations
of our own personality and those of God in us. Personality
escapes from all attempts to limit and define it. It is a


. .groftivhens


APPENDIX C 367


concept which stretches into the infinite, and therefore can
only be represented to thought symbolically. The personality
must not be identified with the “spark,” the “ Active Reason,”
or whatever we like to call the highest part of our nature.
Nor must we identify it with the changing JZo7 (as Fénelon
calls it). The personality, as I have said in Lecture I.
(p. 33), is both the end—the ideal self, and the changing
Mot, and yet neither. If either thesis is held divorced from
its antithesis, the thought ceases to be mystical. The two
ideals of self-assertion and self-sacrifice are both true and
right, and both, separately, unattainable. They are opposites
which are really necessary to each other. I have quoted from
Vatke’s attempt to reconcile grace and free-will: another
extract from a writer of the same school may perhaps be
helpful. ‘In the growth of our experience,” says Green, “an
animal organism, which has its history in time, gradually
becomes the vehicle of an eternally complete consciousness.
What we call our mental history is not a history of this con-
sciousness, which in itself can have no history, but a history of
the process by which the animal organism becomes its vehicle.
‘Our consciousness’ may mean either of two things: either a
function of the animal organism, which is being made, gradually
and with interruptions, a vehicle of the eternal consciousness ;
or that eternal consciousness itself, as making the animal
organism its vehicle and subject to certain limitations in so
doing, but retaining its essential characteristic as independent
of time, as the determinant of becoming, which has not and
does not itself become. The consciousness which varies from
moment to moment . . . is consciousness in the former sense.
It consists in what may properly be called phenomena... .
The latter consciousness . . . constitutes our knowledge”
(Prolegomena to Ethics, pp. 72, 73). Analogous is our moral
history. But no Christian can believe that our life, mental
or moral, is or ever can be necessary to God in the same sense
in which He is necessary to our existence. For practical
religion, the symbol which we shall find most helpful is that of a
progressive transformation of our nature after the pattern of
God revealed in Christ; a process which has as its end a real
union with God, though this end is, from the nature of things,


APPENDIX D


Tue MysticaL INTERPRETATION OF THE SONG oF SOLOMON


Tue headings to the chapters in the Authorised Version
give a sort of authority to the “mystical” interpretation of
Solomon’s Song, a poem which was no doubt intended by its
author to be simply a romance of true love. According to our
translators, the Lover of the story is meant for Christ, and
the Maiden for the Church. But the tendency of Catholic
Mysticism has been to make the individual soul the bride of
Christ, and to treat the Song of Solomon as symbolic of
“spiritual nuptials” between Him and the individual ‘‘ contem-
plative.” It is this latter notion, the growth of which I wish
to trace.

Erotic Mysticism is no part of Platonism. ‘That “sensuous
love of the unseen” (as Pater calls it), which the Platonist
often seems to aim at, has more of admiration and less of
tenderness than the emotion which we have now to consider.
The notion of a spiritual marriage between God and the soul
seems to have come from the Greek Mysteries, through the
Alexandrian Jews and Gnostics. Representations of ‘marriages
of gods” were common at the Mysteries, especially at those of
the least reputable kind (cf. Lucian, Alexander, 38). In other
instances the ceremony of initiation was made to resemble a
marriage, and the pvorys was greeted with the words xaipe,
vipdue. Andamong the Jews of the first century there existed
a system of Mysteries, probably copied from Eleusis. They
had their greater and their lesser Mysteries, and we hear that
among their secret doctrines was “marriage with God.” In
Philo we find strange and fantastic speculations on this subject.
For instance, he argues that as the Bible does not mention


24


370 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


Abraham, Jacob, and Moses as yvwpifovtas ras yuvatkas, We —
are meant to believe that their children were not born naturally.


But he allegorises the women of the Pentateuch in such a way
(Ady pév cio yuvaikes, épy S& dperai) that it is difficult to
say what he wishes us to believe in a literal sense. The
Valentinian Gnostics seem to have talked much of “spiritual
marriage,” and it was from them that Origen got the idea
of elaborating the conception. But, curiously enough, it is
Tertullian who first argues that the body as well as the soul
is the bride of Christ. ‘‘If the soul is the bride,’ he says, “the
flesh is the dowry” (de Resurr. 63). Origen, however, really
began the mischief in his homilies and commentary on the
Song ofSolomon. The prologue of the commentary in Rufinus
commences as follows: ‘Epithalamium libellus hic, id est
nuptiale carmen, dramatis in modum mihi videtur a Salomone
conscriptus, quem cecinit instar nubentis sponse, et erga
sponsum suum qui est sermo Dei czlesti amore flagrantis.
Adamavit enim eum sive anima, que ad imaginem eius facta
est, sive ecclesia.” Harnack says that Gregory of Nyssa exhibits
the conception in its purest and most attractive form in the
East, and adds, ‘We can point to very few Greek Fathers in
whom the figure does not occur.” (There is a learned note
on the subject by Louis de Leon, which corroborates this
statement of Harnack. He refers to Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Irenzeus, Hilary, Cyprian, Augustine, Tertullian, Ignatius,
Gregory of Nyssa, Cyril, Leo, Photius, and Theophylact as
calling Christ the bridegroom of souls.) In the West, we
find it in Ambrose, less prominently in Augustine and Jerome.
Dionysius seizes on the phrase of Ignatius, ‘‘ My love has been
crucified,” to justify erotic imagery in devotional writing.
Bernard’s homilies on the Song of Solomon gave a great
impetus to this mode of symbolism ; but even he says that the
Church and not the individual is the bride of Christ. There
is no doubt that the enforced celibacy and virginity of the
monks and nuns led them, consciously or unconsciously, to
transfer to the human person of Christ (and to a much slighter
extent, to the Virgin Mary) a measure of those feelings which
could find no vent in their external lives. We can trace this,
in a wholesome and innocuous form, in the visions of Juliana


APPENDIX D 371


) of Norwich. Quotations from Ruysbroek’s Spiritual Nuptials,


,
}


and from Suso, bearing on the same point, are given in the
body of the Lectures. Good specimens of devotional poetry
of this type might be selected from Crashaw and Quarles. (A
few specimens are included in Palgrave’s Golden Treasury of
Sacred Song.) Fénelon’s language on the subject is not quite so
pleasing ; it breathes more of sentimentality than of reverence.
The contemplative, he says, desires ‘une simple présence de
Dieu purement amoureuse,” and speaks to Christ always
“comme |’épouse a |’époux.”

The Sufis or Mohammedan mystics use erotic language very
freely, and appear, like true Asiatics, to have attempted to give
a sacramental or symbolic character to the indulgence of their
passions. From this degradation the mystics of the cloister
were happily free ; but a morbid element is painfully prominent
in the records of many medizeval saints, whose experiences are
classified by Ribet. He enumerates—(r1) “ Divine touches,”
which Scaramelli defines as ‘‘real but purely spiritual sensa-
tions, by which the soul feels the intimate presence of God,
and tastes Him with great delight”; (2) ‘‘ The wound of love,”
of which one of his authorities says, ““heec poena tam suavis
est quod nulla sit in hac vita delectatio quz magis satisfaciat.”
It is to this experience that Cant. ii. 5 refers: ‘‘Fulcite me
floribus, stipate me malis, quia amore langueo.” Sometimes
the wound is not purely spiritual: St. Teresa, as was shown
by a post-mortem examination, had undergone a miraculous
‘““transverberation of the heart ”: “et pourtant elle survécut
pres de vingt ans a cette blessure mortelle”! (3) Catherine of
Siena was betrothed to Christ with a ring, which remained
always on her fingers, though visible to herself alone. Lastly,
in the revelations of St. Gertrude we read: ‘‘ Feria tertia Paschz
dum communicatura desideraret a Domino ut per idem sacra-
mentum vivificum renovare dignaretur in anima eius matri-
monium spirituale quod ipsi in spiritu erat desponsata per
fidem et religionem, necnon per virginalis pudicitiz integritatem,
Dominus blanda serenitate respondit: hoc, inquiens, indubi-
tanter faciam. Sic inclinatus ad eam blandissimo affectu eam
ad se stringens osculum preedulce anime eius infixit,” etc.

The employment of erotic imagery to express the individual


372 CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM


_ relation between Christ and the soul is always dangerous; 7
but this objection does not apply to the statement that “the —
Church is the bride of Christ.” Even in the Old Testament —
we find the chosen people so spoken of (cf. Isa. liv. 5 ; Jer. ii,
14). Professor Cheyne thinks that the Canticles were inter-
preted in this sense, and that this is why the book gained
admission into the Canon. In the New Testament, St. Paul
uses the symbol of marriage in Rom. vii. 1-4; 1 Cor. xi. 3;
_ Eph. v. 23-33. On the last passage Canon Gore says: “‘The
love of Christ—the removal of obstacles to His love by atoning
sacrifice—the act of spiritual purification—the gradual sancti-
- fication—the consummated union in glory; these are the
moments of the Divine process of redemption, viewed from
the side of Christ, which St. Paul specifies.” This use of the
“sacrament” of marriage (as a symbol of the mystical union
between Christ and the Church), which alone has the sanction
of the New Testament, is one which, we hope, the Church will
always treasure. The more personal relation also exists, and
the fervent devotion which it elicits must not be condemned ;
though we are forced to remember that in our mysteriously
constituted minds the highest and lowest emotions lie very
near together, and that those who have chosen a life of detach-
ment from earthly ties must be especially on their guard against
the “occasional revenges” which the lower nature, when
thwarted, is always plotting against the higher.


INDEX


A


Acosmism, distinguished from Pan-
theism, 120-21 ; in Eckhart, 154;
in Juan of the Cross, 243.

Adam of St. Victor, 38.

Agrippa, Cornelius, 273.

Albertus Magnus, 17, 140-46.

Alejo Venegas, 216.

Alexander of Aphrodisias, 361.

Alexander of Hales, 360.

Alexandrianism, 81sq. See Platon-
zsm and Neoplatonism.

Allegorism, 3, 43; in Dionysius,
109 ; 270-72, 369.

Alombrados, The, 217.

Amalric of Bena, 138-9.

Amiel’s Journal Intime, 96, 99,
122, 156, 313.

‘¢ Analysis,” method of, 87. See
Negative Road.

Angela of Foligno, 97.

Anima Mundi, 29, 273, 321.

Animism, 262.

Antinomianism, at Corinth, 72; of
Amalricians, etc., 139, 140; cen-
sured by Ruysbroek, 171 ; 259.

Antithesis as a law of being, in
Bohme, 279.

Antony, St., 237.

Apocalypse, 74.

Aquinas, Thomas, 147, 149, 243,
255, 300-61.

Aristobulus, 83.

Aristotle, 116, 141, 149, 248, 266,
360-61.

Arnold, Matthew, on St. Paul, 65.

Asceticism, its connexion with Mys-
ticism, 11; of Suso, 173; of
Juan of the Cross, 226; 244, 308,
319. ;
ssociation of ideas, 343-4.

Athanasius, 358.


878


Atomists, 22.

Augustine, 27, 29, 35, 100, 128-32,
202, 219, 363.

Authority in Religion, Seat of, 329,
330-

Averroes, 149, 361.

Avicebron, 34, 215.

Avicenna, 361.

Avila, Juan d’, 17, 216-7.


B


Basilides, 110, 279.

Beaumont, Joseph, 124.

Beauty, Augustine on, 129; 322.

Bede, 251.

Beghards, 148.

Benedict, Io.

Berengar, 138.

Bernard, 9, 140-41, 239, 240, 370.

Bigg, C., 86, 94, 98, 110, 131.

Birth of Christ in the Soul, 35, 280,
364. See Lmmanence.

Bohme, Jacob, 277-86.

Bonaventura, 16, 28, 35, 140-42,
146, 335, 360.

Bonchitte, 341.

Bosanquet, B., 251.

Bossuet, 9, 234-42.

Bradley, F. H., 25, 107, 306.

Browning, Robert, 54, 318-20.

Bruno, Giordano, 29, 302.

Burnet, Bp., 231-3.


Cc


Cabbalism, 268, 361.

Caird, 5, 1:39:

Caird, J., 157, 322-3.

Cambridge Platonists. See Platon-
asts.


374


Campanella, 302,

Carlstadt, 196.

Carlyle, Thomas, 320.
Carmelites, 224.

Catherine of Genoa, 239.
Catherine of Siena, 371.
Cheyne, 372.

Chivalry and Mysticism, 176.
Christina, 144.

Chrysostom, 61.


Church, Mystical Union of Christ |


and the, 68, 256, 370-72.

Clement of Alexandria, 38, 86-9,
349; 350, 354, 357, 359.

Coleridge, ey eer

Contemplation, the highest stage,
10, 12, 21; in the medieval
mystics, 141-2; in Ruysbroek,
170, 227; ‘‘infused contempla-
tion,” 232; in Fénelon, 237 ; in
Wordsworth, 311.

Conybeare, F. C., on Philo, 83.

Corderius, 335.

Cousin, V., 124, 347.

Cowper, W., 235.

Crashaw, 212, 365.

Creation of the World, in Erigena,
136; in Eckhart, 151-2; 182-3.

Cunninghame Graham, Mrs., on
Teresa, 218,

Cyril of Alexandria, 47, 301.


D


Dante, 24, 76, 176, 284.

‘* Darkness,” 109, 199, 200, 228.

Darwin, C., 325.

Degeneration, 344.

Deification, 13; in Philo, 83; by
gift of immortality, in Clement,
88; in Eckhart, 155-9, 163; in
fourteenth century mystics, 189-
93;,° 2323. dn Emerson, 2320 ;
soe of the doctrine, 356-

Denifle, 149, 180.

‘* Dereliction,” 207, 221,

Destiny of the world, 328.

Diego de Stella, 216.

Diodorus, 351.

Diognetus, Epistle to, 100.

Dionysius the Areopagite, 104-22 ;
257.

Disinterested love, 8, 234-42.


INDEX


Drummond, H., 323.

Dualism, ascribed to St. John, 58;
rejected by Dionysius, 106; 0
Ortlieb, etc., 140; of ;
Mysticism, 143, 184 ; of Spanish
mystics, 225, 262; of Herrmann,


347.
Du Prel, 337-8.


E


Eckhart, 148-64, 175, 359, 362.

Ecstasy, 14-19 ; in Plotinus, 97-9 ;
in Richard of St. Victor, 142;
the Cambridge Platonists on, 292 ;
in Wordsworth, 292; in
Greek mysteries, 353.

Edinburgh Review,
mystics of the Middle Ages, 250.

Emanation, in Plotinus, 94; in
Hierotheus, 102; in Dionysius,
107; in Erigena, 136; con-
trasted with immanence, 152.

Emerson, R. W., 54, 78, 252,
320-22.

English Mysticism, characteristics
of, 197, 294.

Erigena, John Scotus, 26, 133-8,
259.

Erotic imagery, in Dionysius, 110 ;
in Suso, 174; based on Song of
Solomon, 369-72.

Eschatology, of St. John, 53; of
St. Paul, 64, 65 ; of Bohme and
Law, 283.; of the Cambridge
Platonists, 293; in relation to
the reality of time, 327-9.

Eternity, in St. John, 53-5; in
Tauler, 193.

Eunapius, 22.

Eusebius, 47.

‘* Evidences,” 60, 324-7.

Evil, problem of, 25; in Plotinus,
95-6; in Dionysius, 106-7; in
Augustine, 130; in Erigena,
134-5, 137; in Tauler, 185; in
Juliana of Norwich, 207-8 ;
alleged optimism of the mystics,
314; Emerson on, 321.

Evolution, in Plotinus, 94 ; modern
evolutionary pantheism, not in
Eckhart, 153; no development
in the Divine nature, 323.

Ewald, 10, 339.


scholastic


the |


on Catholic —


INDEX :


Externals of religion, disparagement
of, attributed to St. Paul, 70-72 ;
in Amalric, etc., 139; in Sebas-
tian Frank, etc., 196 ; in Bohme,
281; necessity of maintaining,
320.


F


Faber, 166.

Faith, love and, 8; in St. John,
50; in St. Paul, 60-61; defined
as blind assent, by Juan of the
Cross, 225; in W. Law, 282.

“False Light,” The, 193, 199, 365.

Fechner, G. T., 29, 302.

Fénelon, 9, 13, 33, 235-42, 371.

Fetishism, 262.

Fichte, 53.

Ficinus, 80.

‘* Fons Vita,” 34, 215.

Fox, George, 72, 284, 329.

Francis de Sales, 17, 230-31, 237.

Francis of Assisi, 302.

Frank, Sebastian, 196.

Free Spirit, sects of, 139, 148.

‘¢ Friends of God,” 180.

Frothingham, on Hierotheus, 102.

“ Fiinklein” in Eckhart. See
Spark.


G


Galen, 305, 353-

Gamaliel, 223.

German Theology.
Germanica.

Gerson, 146-8, 335, 360.

Gertrude, 371.

Giseler, 360, 364.

‘* Gnosis,” 52, 81; in Clement,
86-7 ; in Origen, 89.

Gnosticism, $1-2, 353-

Goethe, 2, 6, 76, 124, 248, 250,
251, 254, 298, 338.

Gore, C., 372.

Gorres, 264.

Grau, 57.

Green, T. H., 367.

Gregory of Nyssa, 25, 100, 257,


See Theologia


370.
Gunkel, 72.
Guyon, Madame, 234-5.


375


Hamilton, Sir W., 112.

Harnack, 16, 21, 104, 140, 253,
260, 344-5.

Hartmann, Von, 336-7.

Hatch, 349.

Hebrews, Epistle to the, 72-3.

Hegel, 96, 119, 323, 331.

Henotheism, 39.

Heppe, 218.

Heraclitus, 30, 77, 124, 279.

Hermann of Fritslar, 163, 360.

Herrmann, 345-6.

Hesychasts, 227, 243.

Hierotheus, 102-4.

Hilton or Hylton, Walter, 197-201.

Hinton, James, 25, 241, 315, 348.

Hippolytus, 357.

Historical facts of Christianity,
alleged neglect of, in St. Paul,
69, 70; in Origen, 95; in Eck-
hart, 154; not proved by the
‘inner light,” 326; Ritschlian
school on, 345-7.

Holy Spirit. See Spzrit.

Hooker, 111.

Hugo of St. Victor, 140-42.

Hume, 308.

Hunt’s Pantheism and Christian-
zty, 113, 268.

Hutton, R. H., 308.

Huysmans, 262,


I


Iamblichus, 105, 13%.

Ibn Tophail, 104.

Ideas, Jewish and Platonic doctrines
of, 40-41; idealism of Plotinus,
91; of Eckhart, 152, 183.

Ignatius, 110, 257.

Illumination as the second stage of
the mystic’s ascent, 10, 12.

“* Tluminés,” in France, 217.

Illusions, education by means of,


73:

Imagination, Plotinus on, 226;
Juan of the Cross on, 226;
defined by Aristotle and Philo-
stratus, 266; Wordsworth on,


309.
Imitation of Christ, The, 194-5.
Immanence: Mysticism is the


376


attempt to realise it, 5; the im-
manent Deity is not divided, 34 ;
in Philo, 84; in Methodius, 100,
121; in Amalric, 139; in
Eckhart, 155-8, 162, 183; in
Weigel, 275; in Béhme, 280 ; in
the Cambridge Platonists, 290 sq. ;
its nature, 340, 343, 363.
Immortality, considered to be con-
ferred by sacraments, 257.
Incarnation, the central fact in
history, 35; St. John on, 47, 49,


Iniian philosophy of religion, i
influence on Christian Mysticism,
IOI, 112, 118, 147.

Infinite, The, as a name of God,
10, 98, 113-4, 129.

Inquisition, The, 148, 214.

‘* Tntellectus Agens,” 149, 158-09,
289, 360-61.

Irenzeus, 193.


J


Jerome, 359.

Jevons, /ntroduction to the History
of Religion, 271.

Johannine Christianity, 44, 324.

John, St., the mystical element in
his Gospel, 44-59.

John a Jesu Maria, 335.

Juan d’Avila, 17, 216-7.

Juan of the Cross, 114, 212, 223-
30, 365.

Julian or Juliana of Norwich, 201-9.

Justin Martyy, 253.


K


Kabisch, 65.

Kant, 149, 251.

Keble, on allegorism, 272.
Kempis, Thomas a, 9, 194-5.
Kepler, 298.

Kingsley, C., 27, 341-2.
Knox, Alexander, 286.
Krause, 7, 121.


Labadie, 293.
Lacordaire, 19.


INDEX


Lasson, 120, 149 sq. 3 342-3, 360.
Law, W., 8, 278-86. =
Leathes, S., 46.

Lecky, W. ¥. H., 263, 270.

Legalism, 36.

Leibnitz, 288.

Lilienfeld, 57, 241.

Logos, the, as cosmic principle,
29; in St. John, 46-7; in St. —
Paul, 65-6; in Clement, 36; in ©
Origen, 90; identified with ¥
Platonic Nods, 94; in the later
Greek Fathers, 101; in Dionysius, —
107; in Erigena, 136; in Eck- —
hart, 151; in J. Smith, 289.

Lotze, 6, 31, 132, 314.

Louis de Granada, 216-7.

Louis de Leon, 216-7 ; 370. :

Love, the pe of the Christian —
mysteries, 8 3; in St. John, 455
in Dionysius, 110; in Augustine,
131; in Law, 2823 316-7 5
Browning on, 318-9, 365. See
also Dzsinterested.

Lowell, J. R., 248.

Lucretius, 265, 302.

Luthardt, 250.

Luther, 196.


M


Macarius, 20.

M ‘Taggart, 119.

Maeterlinck, 171-2,

Magic, 131, 261, 266, 269,

Manilius, 166.

Maximus, 257.

Mechthild of Hackeborn, 365.

Meditation distinguished from con-
templation, 227, 231. ;

Methodius, 99, 100, 359.

Microcosm, man as, 34-5; in
Erigena, 137; in the later
Neoplatonists, 268 ; in Paracelsus,
etc., 274.

Migne, Abbé, 144, 336.

Milton, 248.

Miracle. See Supernaturalism,

Modalism in Erigena, 135.

Molinos, 10, 231-4.

Monopsychism, 361.

More, Henry, 18, 20, 38, 57, 286.

Mysteries, the Greek, 2; technical
terms of, in Clement, 88, in
Dionysius, 105; their "influence


INDEX


z Christian Mysticism, 349-55,

309.

** Mystery,” in St. Paul, 86.

‘* Mystical” interpretation of the
Bible, 43. See Allegorism.

“Mystical phenomena,” 3, 364-5.
See also Supernaturalism.

Mystical union, in St. John, 51; in
St. Paul, 67-8; in Augustine,
130; sacraments are symbols of,


255-6, 340, 346, 372.


N


Nature, God in, 26, 27, 40, 249 sq.,
276, 283, 294, 299 sq.; Nature-
Worship in the Mysteries, 350.

‘Negative Road,” The, 87; in
Hierotheus, 103; in Dionysius,
108; discussion of, 110-173; in
Augustine, 128; in Erigena,
135; in Albertus Magnus, 144-6 ;
in Bonaventura, 146, in Eck-
hart, 160 ; 200, 244, 260, 290-92.

Neo-Kantians, 346.

Neoplatonism, its connexion with
the mysteries, 4; of Plotinus,
91-9; of his successors, 131.
See also Platonism.

Neschamah, 2

Nettleship, R. L., 8, 11, 64, 250,
315, 342.

Newton, Sir Isaac, 278.

Nicholas of Basel, 180.

Nihilism, in Hierotheus, 102; in
Dionysius, 105-6.

Nirvana, 112.

Noack, 22, 81, 338.

Nominalism, 214, 347, 365.

Nordau, Max, 343-4.

Novalis, 298.

Numenius, 85.


O


Old ee mystical element in,
39 9-4.

Sieg 7, 24, 89-91, 357, 359,
379.

Orphic mysteries, 352, 356.

Ortlieb of Strassburg, 140.

‘€Over-Soul” in Emerson, 321.

Overton, on Law, 278 sq., 339

Ovid, 139, 354-


377


P


Pantheism; speculative Mysticism
and, 117-22; of Amalricians,
1393 tendency to, in Eckhart,
152, 155-8; in Emerson, 321,
339, 343.

Paracelsus, Theophrastus, 273.

Pascal, 320.

Pater, W., 360.

Patrick, Bp. Simon, 287.

Paul, St., mystical element in, 59-
72.


-


Pearson, K., 14

Pedro Malon at "Ghaide, 216.

Pedro of Alcantara, 218.

Perry, G. G., 286.

Personality, 29-35, 205, 340, 361,
366-7


Pfleiderer, 339, 346-7.

Philo, 82-5, 254, 354, 369-70.

Philostratus, 101, 266,

Pico of Mirandola, 269.

Picton, J. A., 32.

Pindar, 9.

‘* Pistzs Sophia,” 353.

Plato, 2, 18, 19, 55, 76, 77-9, 285,
319; 352.

Platonism, 22, 77-80; in Italy,
213 ; in Spain, 215-7; in Eng-
land, 285-96, 303.

Platonists, the Cambridge, 20, 285-
96, 363.
Plotinus, 6, 9, 10, 21, 34; his
philosophy, 91-9 ; 129, 130, 136,

226, 232, 359.

Plutarch, 352, 355.

Porphyry, 15.

Prayer, Juliana on, 204-5; Teresa
on, 220-21; ‘‘the prayer of
quiet,” 222.

Preger, 150 sq.

Proclus, 6, 34, 105, IIo.

Pseudo-Clementine Homilies, 63.

Psychical research, 265.

Purgation or purification, 10,


355:
Pythagoreans, 34, 353.


Q


Quakers, 72, 259.
Quietism, 43, 103, 187, 222, 231-
45, 305.


378


R


Ramanathan, P., 112.

Rationalism, its limitations, 20, 21,
266, 343; 344.

Reason, the logic of the whole
personality, 18-21 ; Platonists on,
287-90; Wordsworth on, 309;
its office, 33I, 341, 360-61. See
also Jutellectus Agens.

Récéjac, 19, 250, 340-41.

Reuchlin, 268, 270.

Reuss, 53.

Ribet, 12, 99, 143, 264, 336, 371

Richard of St. Victor, 17, 28, 115,
140-42, 147.

Richter, J. P., 30.

Ritschl, 214, 346.

Rohde, 353.

Rousselot, 168, 215 sq.

Ruskin, J., 252.

Ruysbroek, 7, 153, 168-71, 181 sq.,
362-3.


Ss


Sacraments as symbols of mystical
union, 253-8; in the mysteries,


353:

‘ Scale of Perfection,’ The, 197.

Scaramelli, 201, 335, 371.

Schelling, 96.

Schiller, 76.

Scholastic mystics, 140 sq.

Schopenhauer, I19, 338.

Schram, 265.

Science, Wordsworth on,
spiritualisation of, 322-3.

Scotus, Duns, 187.

Scotus, John. See Zrigena.

Scupoli, 178.

Seneca, 195.

Seth, A., 119, 339-40.

Shakespeare, 28.

Shelley, 303-4.

‘‘Signatures,” doctrine of, 272.

Smith, John, of Cambridge, 9, 285-
96.

Song of Solomon, mystical inter-
pretation of, 43, 369-72.

Spain, Mysticism in, 213 sq.

‘*Spark” (Pinklein— Apex menits,
etc. ), 7, 93, 155-7.

Spencer, Herbert, 98.


306 ;


INDEX


| Thomas 4 Kempis.


Spenser, Edmund, 303.

Spinoza, 121. <a

Spirit, the Holy, St. John on, 48-93
St. Paul on, 62-4; two concep-
tions of His operations, 72;
Victorinus on, 127,

Stages, the three, in the mystical
life, 9 sq.; in Plotinus, 93; in
Augustine, 130; in Ruysbroek,
168-9; in Tauler,
Wordsworth, 307.

Staiglin, Elizabeth, 178.

Sterngassen, 363.

Stéckl, 133, 141-2, 184-5.

Stoicism, 121, 195.

Strabo, 354.

Suarez, 10. ~

‘* Substance” = the higher self, 206.

Sudaili, Stephen bar, 102-4.

Sufism, 118, 321, 371.

Suidas, 4.

Supernaturalism, in the medizeval
Catholic mystics, 142-4, 2433
craving for miracles, 262-4 ; Law —
on, 283-4. :

Suso, 172-80, 181 sq., 302.

Symbols, the flesh and blood o1
ideas, 5; symbolism in St, John,


=
186; in


58-9; in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, 73; in Origen, 89;
religious symbolism discussed,
250 sq.

Sympathies and antipathies in


nature, 273.

Synesius, 126.

“ Synteresis,” 147, 156, 159, 282,
359, 360.

Syrian Mysticism, 101 sq.


T


Tatian, 359.

Tauler, 11, 180 sq.

Taurobolium, 353.

Taylor, Bp. Jeremy, 17.

Tennyson, 14, 51, 298, 320.

Teresa, 218-23, 371.

Tertullian, 16, 253, 270.

Themistius, 361.

Theologia Germanica, 8, 10, 50,
181 sq., 363-5.

Theophilus, 357.

Therapeutee, 82.

Theurgy, 131, 267 sq.

See Kempis,


INDEX


Thomas Aquinas. See Aguinas,

Time, question as to reality of, 23,
327-9.

Transubstantiation, 257.

Trinity, the Neoplatonic, 94-5;
the Christian, in Dionysius, 108 ;
in Victorinus, 127; in Eckhart,
150 sq.; in Ruysbroek, 170; in
Suso, 178, 182; in Bohme, 279.

Tuckney, 288, 363.


U


Unitive stage, the highest, ro.

Unity of existence, 28.

Universalism, in Origen, 90; in
Erigena, 137.


v


Valentinian Gnostics, 82, 370.
Vatke, 366.


379


Vaughan, Henry, ‘109.

Vaughan, R. A., 163, 273, 347-8.

Victorinus, 125-8.

Visions, 14-19; St. Paul’s, 63-4;
Neoplatonic, 98, 99; Augustine
on, 132; inSuso, 175; of Teresa,
218; rejected by Juan of the
Cross, 226.


Ww


Wallace, Prof. W., 12.

Weigel, 274-6.

Westcott, Bp., 47, 49.

Whichcote, B., 285-96, 315.

Will, in Eckhart, 161 ; prominence
given to, in fifteenth century
and later, 187-8.

‘Wisdom, the Eternal,” in Suso,
174 sq.

Word, See Logos.

Wordsworth, W., 305-18.


3


MORRISON & GIBB LOOTED


Printed by


ron


Badinbu


“=


METHUEN’S GENERAL LITERATURE


A SELECTION OF


MESSRS.


METHUEN’S


PUBLICATIONS


' This Catalogue contains only a selection of the more important


books published by Messrs. Methuen.


A complete catalogue of


their publications may be obtained on application.


PART I.


Armstrong (Anthony) (“‘A.A.”)
Warriors AT EASE. WARRIORS STILL
AT EASE. PERCIVAL AND I. How TO
Do It. PrErRcivAL aT PLay. Each
3s. 6d. net,

Ashby (Thomas).

Some ITALIAN SCENES AND FESTIVALS.
With 24 Illustrations Crown 8vo.
6s. net.

Bain (F. W.)

A Dicit oF tHE Moon. ‘THE DESCENT
OF THE SUN. A HEIFER OF THE DAWN.
IN THE GreaT Gop’s Hair. A
DRAUGHT OF THE BLUE. AN ESSENCE
OF THE Dusk..AN INCARNATION OF
THE SNow. A MINE OF FAULTS. THE
ASHES OF A Gop. BUBBLES OF THE
Foam. A Syrup OF THE BEES. THE
Livery OF Eve. THE SUBSTANCE OF A
Dream. All Feap. 8vo. ss. net. AN
EcHo OF THE SPHERES. Wide Demy
8vo. 10s. 6d. net.

Balfour (Sir Graham)

Tue Lire oF RoBERT Louis STEVENSON.
Twentieth Edition, ‘7s. 6d. net.
Barker (Ernest)


NATIONAL CHARACTER. tos. 6d. met.

GREEK POLITICAL THEORY: Plato and

his Predecessors. 14s. met. ESSAYS

ON THE PAST AND PRESENT. 75. 6d. net,
Belloc (Hilaire)

Paris. THE PYRENEES. Each 8s. 6d.


net. ON NOTHING. HILLS AND THE SEA.
On SOMETHING ‘THIS AND THAT AND


GENERAL LITERATURE


THE OTHER. ON. Each 6s. net, FIRST
AND Last. ON EVERYTHING. ON
ANYTHING. EMMANUEL BURDEN. A
PICKED COMPANY. Each 3s. 6d. net.
Mariz ANTOINETTE. 18s. net. A His-
TORY OF ENGLAND. In 5 vols. Vols.
I, II, {Land IV. 15s. net each. HILs
AND THE SEA. Illustrated in Colour by
Donald Maxwell. 15s. net.
Birmingham (George A.)

A WAYFARER IN HUNGARY. Illustrated.
8s. 6d. net. SPILLIKINS. SHIPS AND
SEALING-Wax. ‘Two Books of Essays.
Each 3s. 6d. net.


Budge (Sir E. A. Wallis)


A History OF ETHIOPIA:
ABYSSINIA. Illustrated.
£3 135. 6d. net.

Chandler (Arthur), D.D.
ARA CLI. 5s. net. FAITH AND EXPERI-
ENCE. 55. met. ‘THE CULT OF THE Passe
ING MoMENT. 6s. net, THE ENGLISH
CHURCH AND REUNION. 55. net. SCALA
MUNDI. 4s. 6d. net.


Chesterton (G. K.)
THE BALLAD OF THE WHITE Horse.


NuBIA AND
In 2 vols.


3s. 6d. net. Also illustrated by ROBERT
AUSTIN. 12s. 6d. -net. CHARLES
DICKENS. 35. 6d. net. GENERALLY
SPEAKING. ALL THINGS CONSIDERED.


TREMENDOUS TRIFLES. FANCIES VERSUS
Faps. ALARMS AND DIscuRSIONS. A
MISCELLANY OF MEN. ‘THE USES OF
Diversity. THE OUTLINE OF SANITY.


MEssrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS ~ 3


Each Feap. 8vo. 6s. net, m GLEAM-
ING CoHorT. Feap. 8vo. as. 6d. net.


Wine, WATER, AND SONG. Feap. 8vo.
Is. 6d. net,


Clutton-Brock (A.)

WHAT Is THE KINGDOM oF HEAVEN?
Essays ON ART. SHAKESPEARE’s HAM-
LET. Each 5s, net. Essays ON Books.
More Essays ON Books. ESSAYS ON
Lire. EssaysoN RELIGION. ESSAYS ON
LITERATURE AND LiFE, More ESSAyYs
ON RELIGION. Each 6s. net. SHELLEY,
THE MAN AND THE PoET. 7s. 6d. net.


Crawley (Ernest)

THE Mystic Rose. Revised and
Enlarged by THEODORE BESTERMAN.
Two Vols. Demy 8vo0. £1 10s. net.
STUDIES OF SAVAGES AND SEx. Edited
by THEODORE BESTERMAN. Demy 8vo.
tos. 6d. net.


Dickle (E. P.)
PSAMMYFORSHORT, REX:
trated by FRANK ADAMS.


Imp. Illus-
5s. net.


Dolls’ House (The Queen’s)

THE BOOK OF THE QUEEN’S DOLLS’
House. Vol. I. THE House, Edited
by A. C. BENSON, C.V.O., and Sir
LAWRENCE WEAVER, K.B.E. Vol. II.
THE Lisrary, Edited by E. V. Lucas.
Profusely Illustrated. A Limited Edi-
tion. Crown 4to. £6 6s. net.
EVERYBODY’s BOOK OF THE QUEEN’S
Dottis’ House. An abridged edition
of the above. Illustrated. Crown 4to.
55. net,


Dugdale (E. T. S.)

GERMAN DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTS,
1871-1914. Selected from the Docu-
ments published by the German For-
eign Office. In 4 vols. Vol. I, 1871-
go. Vol. II, 1891-8. Demy 8vo.
Each £1 1s. net.


Edwardes (Tickner)

THE LORE OF THE HONEYBEE. Thir-
teenth Edition. 7s.6d.net. BEEKEEPING
FOR ALL. 35S. 6d. met. ‘THE BEE-
MASTER OF WaRRILOW. Third Edition.
ys, 6d. net. All illustrated, BEE-
KEEPING Do’s AND Don’Ts. 2s. 6d. net.


Einstein (Albert)

RELATIVITY : THE SPECIAL AND GEN-
ERAL ‘THEORY. 55. met. SIDELIGHTS
ON RELATIVITY. 35. 6d. net. THE
MEANING OF RELATIVITY. 5s. net.
Tue BROWNIAN MOVEMENT. 55. net.


Erman (Adolph)
THE LITERATURE OF THE ANCIENT
EGYPTIANS : POEMS, NARRATIVES, AND
MANUALS OF INSTRUCTION FROM THB
THIRD AND SECOND MILENNIA B.C.
Translated by Dr. A. M. BLACKMAN.
Demy 8vo. £1 1s. net.

Fouquet (Jean)

THE LIFE oF CHRIST AND His MOTHER.
From Fouquet’s “ Book of Hours.”
Edited by FLoRENCE HEywoop, B.A.
With 24 Plates in Colours. In a box.

Crown 4to. £3 35. net. '


Fyleman (Rose) ’
FAIRIES AND CHIMNEYs. THE FAIRY
GREEN. THE Fairy FLuTe, THR
RAINBOW CaT. EIGHT LITTLE PLays
FOR CHILDREN. FORTY GOOD-NIGHT
TALES. FAIRIES AND FRIENDS. 'THE
ADVENTURE CLUB. ForTY GooD-Morn-
ING TALES. SEVEN LITTLE PLAYS FOR
CHILDREN. Each 3s. 6d. net. OLD-
FASHIONED GIRLS. Illustrated by
ETHEL EVERETT. 7s. 6d. net. A SMALL
CRUSE, 45. 6d. net. "THE ROSE FYLEMAN
Farry Book. Illustrated by HILDA
MILLER. tos. 6d. net. A GARLAND OF
Rosk’s : COLLECTED POEMS. Illustrated
by RENE BuLL. 8s. 6d. net. LETTY.
Illustrated. 6s. net. A PRINCESS COMES


TOOUR TOWN. Illustrated. ss. net. A
LITTLE CHRISTMAS Book. Illustrated.
2s. net.


Gibbon (Edward)
THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN
Empire. With Notes, Appendixes, and
Maps, by J. B. Bury. Illustrated.
Seven volumes. Demy 8vo. 155. neé
each volume. Also, unillustrated.
Crown 8vo. 75s. 6d. net each volume.


Glover (T. R.)
THE CONFLICT OF RELIGIONS IN THB


EaRLY ROMAN EMPIRE. POETS AND
PurRITANS. VIRGIL. Each tos. 6d. net.
FROM PERICLES TO PHILIP. 125. 6d. met.


Graham (Harry)


Tue WoRLD we LAUGH IN: More
Deportmental Ditties. Illustrated by
“Piso.” Seventh Edition. 5s. net.
STRAINED RELATIONS. Illustrated by
H.Sruart Menziss and HENDY. 6s. net.
THe WorLpD’s WorKERS. Illustrated
by “‘ FouGAssE.” 55. net.


Grahame (Kenneth)


THE WIND IN THE WILLOWS. WNine-
teenth Edition. Crown 8vo. ‘7s. 6d.
net. Also, illustrated by WYNDHAM


4 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS


PAYNE. Small 4to. 7s. 6d. net. Also
unillustrated. Fcap. 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.
» See also Milne (A.A.).


Hadfield (J. A.)
PsycHOLOGy AND Moras, Seventh
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s. net.


Hall (H. R.)
THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE NEAR
East. £1 1s, net. THE CIVILIZATION
OF GREECE IN THE BRONZE AGE. _ Illus-
trated. £110s.net. A SEASON’S WORK
AT UR OF THE CHALDEES. 155. met.

Herbert (A. P.)
HONEYBUBBLE & Co. 6s. net. MIS-
LEADING CASES IN THE COMMON
Law. With an Introduction by LorpD
-HEWART. 55. met. ‘THE BOMBER
Gipsy. 3s. 6d. net. LicHT ARTICLES
ONLY. Illustrated. 6s. met. THE
WHEREFORE AND THE WHY. ‘“‘ TINKER,
TaiLor ...” Eachillustrated. 3s. 6d.
net, THE SECRET BATTLE. 35. 6d. net.


Hind (A. M.)
A CATALOGUE OF REMBRANDT’S ETCH-
INGS. Two Vols. Profusely  Illus-
trated. Wide Royal 8vo. £1 15s. net.
Holdsworth (W. S.)
A History oF ENGLIisH Law. Nine
Volumes. Demy 8vo. £1 5s. net each.
Hudson (W. H.)
ASHEPHERD’S Livg. Illustrated. Demy
8vo. ros. 6d. net. Also, unillustrated,
Feap.8vo. 3s. 6d. net.


Hutton (Edward)
Cities oF SicrLy. Illustrated. ros. 6d.
net, MILAN AND LOMBARDY. 'THE
CITIES OF ROMAGNA AND _ THE
MarcHEs. SIENA AND SOUTHERN TUS-
CANY. VENICE AND VENETIA. ‘THE
CITIES OF SPAIN. NAPLES AND
SOUTHERN ITALY. Illustrated. Each,
8s. 6d, net. A WAYFARER IN UNKNOWN
Tuscany. THE CITIES OF UMBRIA.
CouNTRY WALKS ABOUT FLORENCE.
ROME. FLORENCE AND NORTHERN TUS-
cANY. Each illustrated. 7s. 6d. net.


Inge (W. R.), D.D., Dean of St. Paul’s,
CHRISTIAN Mysticism. (The Bampton
Lectures of 18099.) Sixth Edition.
Grown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

Kipling (Rudyard)

BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS. 246th Thou-
sand.

‘THE SEVEN SEAS. 180th Thousand.
THE Five NATIONS. 143rd Thousand
DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES. 111th Thou-
sand.


Tue YEARS BETWEEN. 95th Thousand.
Four Editions of these famous volumes
of poems are now published, viz. :—


Crown 8vo. Buckram, 7s. 6d. net. Feap. —


8vo. Cloth, 6s. net. Leather, 7s. 6d. net.
Service Edition. Two volumes each
book. Square Fcap. 8vo. 35. net each
volume.

A KipLinc ANTHOLOGY—Verse. Feap.
8vo. <Cloth, 6s. net and 3s. 6d. net.
Leather, 7s. 6d. net. TWENTY POEMS
FROM RUDYARD KIPLING. 458th
Thousand. Feap. 8vo. 1s. net. A
CHOICE OF SoNnGs. Second Edition.
Feap. 8vo. 2s. net.


Lamb (Charles and Mary)


THE COMPLETE Works. Edited by
E. V. Lucas. A New and Revised
Edition in Six Volumes. With Frontis-
pieces. Feap. 8vo. 6s. net each.

The volumes are: I. MISCELLANEOUS
Prose. II. ELIA AND THE LAST Essays
OF ELIA. III. Books FOR CHILDREN.
IV. PLays AND Poems. V. and VI.
LETTERS.

SELECTED LETTERS. Chosen and Edited
by G. T. CLAPTON. Feap. 8vo. 3s. 6d.
net. THE CHARLES LAMB Day Book,
Compiled by E. V. Lucas. Feap. 8vo.
6s. net.


Lankester (Sir Ray)


SCIENCE FROM AN EASY CHAIR. SCIENCE
FROM AN Easy CHAIR: Second Series.
DIVERSIONS OF A NATURALIST. GREAT
AND. SMALL ‘THINGS. Illustrated.
Crown 8vo. ‘7s. 6d. net. SECRETS OF
EARTH AND SEA. Illustrated. Crown
8vo. 8s. 6d. net.


Lodge (Sir Oliver)


MAN AND THE UNIVERSE (Twentieth Edi-
tion). 7s. 6d. net and3s. 6d. net. THRE
SURVIVAL OF MAN (Seventh Edition),
7s. 6d. net. RAYMOND. (Thirteenth
Edition). tos. 6d. net. -RAYMOND
REVISED. 6s.net. MODERN PROBLEMS.
REASON AND BELIEF. (Eleventh Edition).
Each 3s. 6d. net. THE SUSSTANCE OF
FaitH (Fifteenth Edition). 2s. net.
RELATIVITY (Fourth Edition). 1s. net.


Lucas (E. V.)


THE LirE OF CHARLES LAMB. 2 Vols,
£1 1s. met. EDWIN AUSTIN ABBEY,
RA. 2 Vols. £6 ° 6s. met. Tur
COLVINS AND THEIR FRIENDS. {1 1s.
net. VERMEER THE MAGICAL. 55s, net.
A WANDERER IN Rome. A WANDERER
IN HOLLAND. A WANDERER IN LON-
DON. LONDON REVISITED (Revised).


oo) heed


~~


Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS 5


A WANDERER IN Paris. A WANDERER
IN FLORENCE. A WANDERER IN VENICE.
Each tos. 6d. net. A WANDERER AMONG
PICTURES. 8s. 6d. net. E. V. Lucas’s
Lonpon. £1 net. InTRODUCING LON-
DON. INTRODUCING Paris, Each 2s. 6d.
net. 'THE OPEN RoaD. 6s. net. Also,
illustrated by CLAUDE A. SHEPPERSON,


A.R.W.S. 10s. 6d. net. Also, India
Paper. Leather, 7s. 6d. net. THE
Joy oF LiFe. 6s. net. Leather Edi-


tion. 7s. 6d. net. Also India Paper.
Leather. 7s. 6d net. FIRESIDE AND
SUNSHINE. CHARACTER AND COMEDY.
Each 6s. net. THE GENTLEST ART. 6s. 6d.
net. And THE SECOND Post. 6s. net. Also,
together in one volume. 7s. 6d. net. HER
INFINITE VARIETY. GooD COMPANY.
ONE Day AND ANOTHER. OLD LAMPS
FOR NEw. LOITERER’S HARVEST.
CLoup AND SILver. A BOSWELL OF
BacuoaD. "T'wixt EAGLE AND DOVE.
THE PHANTOM JOURNAL. GIVING AND
RECEIVING. LucK OF THE YEAR. EN-
COUNTERS AND DIVERSIONS. ZIGZAGS
IN FRANCE. EVENTS AND EMBROIDERIES.
365 Days (AND ONE More). A FRONDED
Istze. A RoveR I WouLpD Be. 'TuRN-
ING THINGS OveR. Each 6s. net.
URBANITIES. Illustrated by G. L.
STAMPA. 55s. net. YOU KNOW WHAT
PEOPLE ARE. Illustrated by GEORGE
Morrow. 5s. net. THE SAME STAR:
A Comedy in Three Acts. 3s. 6d. net.
LITTLE Books ON GREAT MASTERS.
Each 5s. net. ROVING EAST AND Rov-
ING WEST. 5s. met. PLAYTIME &
CoMPANY. 7s. 6d. net. Mr. Punch’s
CounTy Sones.’ Illustrated by E. H.
SHEPARD. Ios. 6d. net. ‘“‘ THE MORE
I SEE OF MEN .. .” OUT OF A CLEAR
Sky. IF Docs CouLD Write. Each
3s. 6d. net. See also Dolls’ House
(The Queen’s) and Lamb (Charles),


Lynd (Robert)
THE GREEN MAN. OLD FRIENDS IN
FICTION. ‘THE PLEASURES OF IGNOR-


ANCE. Each 5s. net. ‘THE GOLDFISH.
Tue LITTLE ANGEL, THE BLUE LION,
THE PEAL OF BELLS. THE Money-Box.


THe ORANGE TREE. Each 3s. 6d. net.


McDougall (William)

AN INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL PsycHO-
Locy (Twenty-first Edition), 0s. 6d.
net, NATIONAL WELFARE AND NaAe
TIONAL Decay. 6s. net. AN OUTLINE
oF PsycHoLoGy (Fourth Edition)
10s. 6d. net. AN OUTLINE OF ABNOR-
MAL Ps¥CHOLOGY. 15s. met. Bopy


AND MIND (Sixth Edition). 12s. 6d.
net. CHARACTER AND THE CONDUCT OF
Lire (Third Edition). tos. 6d. net.
MoprErRN MATERIALISM AND EMERGENT
EVOLUTION. 7s. 6d. net. ETHICS AND
SOME MopERN WoRLD PROBLEMS
(Second Edition). ‘7s. 6d. net.


Mackenzie (W. Mackay)


THE MEDIAEVAL CASTLE IN SCOTLAND.
(The Rhind Lectures on Archeology.
1925-6.) Illustrated. Demy 8vo. 15s. net.


Mallet (Sir C. E.)


A HIsToRY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
OxrorD. In 3 vols. Illustrated. Demy
8vo. Each £1 1s. net.


Maeterlinck (Maurice)


THE BLUE BirD. 6s. net. Also, illus-
trated by F. CAYLEY ROBINSON. 10s. 6d.


net. DEATH. 35. 6d. net. OUR ETER-
NITY. 6s, net. ‘THE UNKNOWN GUEST.
6s. net. POEMS, 5s. net. ‘THE WRACK


OF THE STORM. 6s. net. THE MIRACLE
oF St. ANTHONY. 3s. 6d. net. THB
BURGOMASTER OF STILEMONDE. 55S. net.
THE BETROTHAL. 6s. net. MOUNTAIN
PaTHs, 6s. net. THE STORY OF TYLTYL.
£1 1s. net. 'THE GREAT SECRET. 7s. 6d.
net. 'THE CLOUD THAT LIFTED and THE
POWER OF THE DEAD. 75. 6d. net. MARY
MAGDALENE. 2S. net.


Masefield (John)
ON THE SPANISH MAIN. 8s. 6d. net. A
SAILor’s GARLAND. 6s. net and 3s. 6d.
net. SEA LIFE IN NELSON’S TIME. 55. net.


Methuen (Sir A.)
AN ANTHOLOGY OF MODERN VERSE
162nd Thousand.
SHAKESPEARE TO Harpy: An Anthol-
ogy of English Lyrics. 19th Thousand.
Each Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, 6s. net.
Leather, 7s. 6d. net.
Milne (A. A.)
Toap or ToaD HALL.
on Kenneth Grahame’s
in the Willows.” 5s. met.
WERE THE Days. 7s. 6d. net. Now
THAT IT MATTERS. Ir I May.
THE SUNNY SIDE, THE RED Housg
Mystery. ONCE A WEEK. THE HOLI-


A Play founded
“The Wind
THOSE


pay RounD. 'THE Day’s PLay. Each
3s. 6d. net. WHEN WE WERE VERY
Younc. Eighteenth Edition. 189th


Thousand. WINNIE-THE-PooH. Eighth
Edition. 106th Thousand. Now Wer
ARE SIx. Fourth Edition. 109th Thou-
sand. THE Housk AT POOH CORNER,
Third Edition, 105th Thousand, Each
illustrated by E. H. SHEPARD. 78. Gd.


-
'


By STANLEY LANE POOLE. 4th


6 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS
net. Leather, ros. 6d. net. FOR THE
LUNCHEON INTERVAL. Is. 6d. net.


Milne (A. A.) and Fraser-Simson (H.)
FouRTEEN SONGS FROM “‘ WHEN WE
WERE VERY YOUNG.” Twelfth Edition.
4s. 6d. net. TEDDY BEAR AND OTHER
SONGS FROM ‘‘ WHEN WE WERE VERY
Younc.” 7s. 6d. net. THE KING’s BREAK-
FAST. Third Edition. 3s. 6d. net.
Soncs FRoM ‘“ Now WE ARE SIX.”
‘Second Edition. 7s. 6d. net. MORE
““VerRY YOUNG” SONGS. 7s. 6d. net.
Words by A. A. Mitng. Music by
H. FRASER-SIMSON. Decorations by
E. H. SHEPARD.

Montague (C. E.)

DRamatTIc VALUES. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

Morton (H. V.)

THE HEART OF LONDON. 35. 6d. met.
(Also illustrated, 7s. 6d. net.) THE
SPELL OF LONDON. THE NIGHTS OF
LONDON. Each 3s. 6d. met. THE
LONDON YEAR. IN SEARCH OF ENGLAND.
THE CALL OF ENGLAND. IN SEARCH
OF SCOTLAND Each illustrated.
7s. 6d. net.

Oman (Sir Charles)

A HIstTorY OF THE ART OF WAR IN THE
MIDDLE AGES, A.D. 378-1485. 2 Vols.
Illustrated. Demy 8vo. £1 16s. net.
STUDIES IN THE NAPOLEONIC Wars.
Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d. net.

Oxenham (John)

BEES IN AMBER. Small Pott 8vo. 2s.
met, ALL’s WELL. THE KING’s HIGH-
way. THE VISION SPLENDID. THE
Fiery Cross. HiGH ALTars. HEARTS
CouraGEous. ALL CLEAR! Each Small
Pott 8vo. Paper, 1s. 3d. net. Cloth,
2s.net, WINDS OFTHE DAWN. 2s. net.

Perry (W. J.)

THE ORIGIN OF MAGIC AND RELIGION.
THE GROWTH OF CIVILIZATION. Each
6s. net. THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN.
£1 Is. net.

Petrie (Sir Flinders)

A History oF EcypT. In 6 Volumes.
Vol. I. FROM THE IST TO THE XVITH
DynasTY. 11th Edition, Revised. 12s. net.
Vol. Il. THE XVIITH AND XVIIITH
DynastIes. 7th Edition, Revised. gs. net.
Vol. III. XIXTH TO XXXtTH Dynas-
ries. 3rd Edition. 12s. net.

Vol. IV. EGYPT UNDER THE PTOLEMAIC
Dynasty. By EDWYNBEVAN. 15s. net.
Vol. V. EGYPT UNDER ROMAN RULE.
By J. G. MILNE. 3rd Edition, Revised.
12s. net.


Vol. VI. EGypt IN THE MIDDLE Ags.


Edition. tos. net.
Ponsonby (Arthur), M.P.


ENGLISH D1artes. £1 1s. net. Mors
ENGLISH DIARIES. 125. 6d. net. ScOT-
TISH AND IRISH DIARIES. 105. 6d. net.


Raleigh (Sir Walter)
Tue LETTERS OF SIR WALTER RALEIGH.
Edited by Lapy RALEIGH. ‘Two Vols.
Illustrated. Second Edition. Demy 8vo.
18s. net. SELECTED LeTTERs. Edited
by Lapy RALEIGH. 7s. 6d. net.
Smith (C. Fox)
SaILor Town Days. SEA SONGS AND
BALLADS. A Book OF FAMOUS SHIPS.
Suip ALLEY. ANCIENT MARINERS.


Each, illustrated, 6s. net. FULL SAIL.
Illustrated. 5s. met. TALES OF THE
CLIPPER SHIPS. A SEA CHEST. Each


ss. net, "THE RETURN OF THE ‘‘ CUTTY

Sark.” Illustrated. 35. 6d. net. A

Book OF SHANTIES. 6s. net.
Stevenson (R. L.)

THE LETTERS. Edited by Sir SIDNEY


CoLvIN. 4 Vols. Feap. 8vo. Each
6s net.
Surtees (R. S.)
HANDLEY CROSS, Mr. SPONGE’S
SPORTING Tour. ASK MAMMA. Mr.
Facey ROMFORD’S HOUNDS. PLAIN OR
RINGLETS ? HILLINGDON HALL. Each
illustrated, 7s. 6d. net. _JORROCKS’S
JAUNTS AND JOLLITIES. HAWBUCK
GraNcE. Each, illustrated, 6s. net.
Taylor (A. E.)
PLaTto: THE MAN AND His Work.


Demy 8vo. £1 1s. met. PLATO: TIM-
ZEUS AND CRITIAS. Crown8vo. 6s.nets
ELEMENTS OF MetTaPHysics. Demy
8vo. 125. 6d. net.
Tilden (William T.)
THE ART OF LAWN TENNIS. SINGLES
AND DousLes. Each, illustrated, 6s.
net. ‘THE COMMON SENSE OF LAWN
TENNIS. MatcH PLAY AND THE SPIN
OF THE BALL. Illustrated. 5s. met.
MeE—THE HANDICAP. 55. net.
Tileston (Mary W.)
DaILy STRENGTH FOR DaILy Ngegps.
33rd Edition, 3s.6d.net. India Paper.
Leather, 6s. net.
Trapp (Oswald Graf)
‘THE ARMOURY OF THE CASTLE OF CHUR=
BURG. Translated by J. G. MANN.
Richly illustrated. Royal 4to. Limited
to 400 copies. £4 145. 6d. net.
Underhill (Evelyn)
Mysticism (Eleventh Edition). 15s. net.
THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT AND THE LIFE
oF 'To-pDAy (Sixth. Edition).


7s. Gd...


ine


rite ahi sl


Messrs. METHUEN’s PUBLICATIONS y)


met. MAN AND THE SUPERNATURAL.
ys. 6d. net. CONCERNING THE INNER
LiFE (Fourth Edition). 2s. net.
Vardon (Harry)
How To Pray Gor.
19th Edition. Crown 8vo.
Wand (J. W. CG.)
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SACRAMENTAL-
IsM. Fcap. 8vo. 6s. net. A History
OF THE MODERN CHURCH. Crown 8vo.
8s. 6d. net.
Wilde (Oscar)
THE Works.
net.
I. LorD ARTHUR SAVILE’s CRIME AND
THE PorTRAIT oF Mr. W. H. II. Tue
DucuHEss oF Papua. III. Poems. IV.


Illustrated.
5s. net.


In 17 Vols. Each 6s. 6d.


LaDy 'WINDERMERE’S FAN. Vv. A
Woman or No Importance. VI. AN
IpEAL HusBaNnD. VII. THe Impor-
TANCE OF BEING EARNEST. VIII. A
HovusE OF POMEGRANATES. IX. IN-
TENTIONS. X. Dz PROFUNDIS AND
PrRIsON LETTERS. XI. Essays. XII.
SALOME, A FLORENTINE TRAGEDY, and
La SAINTE COURTISANE. XIII. A
CRITICIN PALL MALL. XIV. SELECTED
PROSE OF OSCAR WILDE. XV. ART AND
DEcoRATION. XVI. For LOVE OF THR
KING. (5s. net.) XVII. VERA, OR THE
NIHILISTs,


Williamson (G. C.)


THE BOOK OF FAMILLE Rosz. Richly
Illustrated. Demy 4to. £8 8s, net.


PART II.


The Antiquary’s Books
Each, illustrated, Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d. net.
The Arden Shakespeare
Edited by W. J. Craic and R. H. Case.
Each, wide Demy 8vo. 6s. net.
The Ideal Library Edition, in single
plays, each edited with a full Introduc-
tion, Textual Notes and a Commentary
at the foot of the page. Now complete
in 39 Vols.


Classics of Art
Edited by J. H. W. Lainc. Each, pro-
fusely illustrated, wide Royal 8vo. 155.
net to £3 35. net.
A Library of Art dealing with Great
Artists and with branches of Art.


The Connoisseur’s Library
With numerous Illustrations. Wide
Royal 8vo. £1 11s. 6d. net each vol.
EUROPEAN ENAMELS. FINE BOOKs.
Gass. GOLDSMITHS’ AND SILVER-
SMITHS’ WORK. IVORIES. JEWELLERY.
MINIATURES. MEZZOTINTS. PORCE-
LAIN. SEALS. MUSSULMAN PAINTING.
(£3 38. net.) WATCHES. (£3 35. net.)
WATCHMAKERS AND CLOCKMAKERS OF
THE WORLD. (£2 2s. net.)

English Life in English Literature
General Editors: EILEEN POWER,
M.A., D.Lit., and A. W. REED, M.A.,
D.Lit. Each, Crown 8vo, 6s. net.

A series of source-books for students of
history and of literature.

The Faiths: VARIETIES OF CHRISTIAN
EXPRESSION. Edited by L. P. Jacks,
M.A., D.D., LL.D. Each, Crown 8vo,
ss. net each volume. ‘The first volumes
sre: ‘THE ANGLO-CATHOLIC FAITH
(T. A. Lacey) ; MODERNISM IN THE


A SELECTION OF SERIES


ENGLISH CHURCH (P. GARDNER); THE
FAITH AND PRACTICE OF THE QUAKERS
(R. M. JoNes) ; CONGREGATIONALISM
(W. B. SELBIE); THE FAITH OF THB
ROMAN CHURCH (C. C. MARTINDALE) ;
THE LIFE AND FAITH OF THE BAPTISTS
(H. WHEELER ROBINSON) ; THE PRES-
BYTERIAN CHURCHES (JAMES MOFFATT) ;
METHODISM (W. BARDSLEY BRASH) ;
THE EVANGELICAL MOVEMENT IN THE
ENGLISH CHURCH (L. ELLIOTT BINNS) ;
THE UNITARIANS (HENRY Gow); THE
FAITH OF THE FUTURE (J. H. TUCK-
WELL).


The Gateway Library
Feap. 8vo. 35. 6d. each volume,
Pocketable Editions of Works by
HILAIRE BELLOC, ARNOLD BENNETT,
E. F. BENSON, GEORGE A. BIRMINGHAM,
MarjJORIE BOWEN, G. K. CHESTERTON,
A. CLUTTON-BROcK, JOSEPH CONRAD,
J. H. Cure, GEORGE GISSING, GERALD
GOULD, KENNETH GRAHAME, A. P.
HERBERT, W. H. Hupson, RUDYARD
Kip.ine, E. V. KNox, JAcK LONDON,
E. V. Lucas, ROBERT LyYND, Rosg
Macaulay, JOHN MASEFIELD, A. A.
Ming, C. E. MOontTaGcuge, ARTHUR
Morrison, EDEN PHILLPOTTS, MARMA-
DUKE PICKTHALL, J. B. PRIESTLEY,
CHARLES G. D. ROBERTS, R. L, STEVEN=
SON, and OscaR WILDE.


AHistory of Englandin Seven Volumes
Edited by Sir CHARLES OMAN, K.B.E.,
M.P., M.A., F.S.A. With Maps,
Demy 8vo. 125. 6d. net each volume,
ENGLAND BEFORE THE NORMAN CON-
QUEST (Sir C. OMAN) ; ENGLAND UNDER
THE NORMANS AND ANGEVINS (H. W. C:


8 Messrs. METHUEN’S PUBLICATIONS


Davies); ENGLAND IN THE LATER
Muppte Aces (K. H. VICKERS); ENG-
LAND UNDER THE Tupors (A. D. INNES) ;
ENGLAND UNDER THE STuARTS (G. M.
'TREVELYAN); ENGLAND UNDER THE
HANoveERIANS (Sir C. GRANT ROBERT-
SON) ; ENGLAND SINCE WATERLOO (Sir
J. A. R. MarrioTT).

The Library of Devotion
Handy editions of the great Devotional
books, well edited. Small Pott 8vo.
3s. net and 3s. 6d. net.

Methuen’s Half-Crown Library
Crown 8vo and Fcap. 8vo.

Methuen’s Two-Shilling Library
Feap. 8vo.


Two series of cheap editions of popular
books.


Write for complete lists.


The Wayfarer Series of Books fof

Travellers
Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net each. Well
illustrated and with maps. The vol-
umes are :—Alsace, Austria, Bavaria,
Czecho-Slovakia, The Dolomites,Egypt,
French Vineyards, Hungary, The Lake
Country, The Loire, Morocco, Por-
tugal, Provence, Pyrenees, The Rhine,
The Seine, Spain, Sweden, Switzer-
land, Unfamiliar Japan, Unknown
Tuscany, The West Indies.

The Westminster Commentaries

Demy 8vo. 8s. 6d. net to 18s. net.
Edited by W. Lock, D.D., and D. C.
Simpson, D.D.
The object of these commentaries is
primarily to interpret the author’s mean-
ing to the present generation, taking
the English text in the Revised Version
as their basis.


THE LITTLE GUIDES


Small Pott 8vo.


Illustrated and with Maps


THE 66 VOLUMES IN THE SERIES ARE >=


BEDFORDSHIRE AND. HUNTINGDONSHIRE
4s. net.

BERKSHIRE 45, net.

BRITTANY 5s. net.

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 5S. net.

CAMBRIDGE AND COLLEGES 45. net.

CAMBRIDGESHIRE 45. net.

CATHEDRAL CITIES OF ENGLAND AND
WALES 6s. net.

CHANNEL ISLANDS 55. net,

CHESHIRE 55. net.

CORNWALL 4s. net.

CUMBERLAND AND WESTMORLAND 63s. net.

DERBYSHIRE 4S. net.

DEVON 4s. net.

DORSET 6s. net.

DuRHAM 6s. net.

ENGLISH LAKEs 6s. net.

ESSEX 5s. net,

FLORENCE 6s. net.

FRENCH RIVIERA 6s, net.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE 55. net.

Gray’s INN AND LINCOLN’s INN 6s. net.

HAMPSHIRE 45. net,

HEREFORDSHIRE 4s. 6d. net,

HERTFORDSHIRE 55. net,

IsLE OF MAN 6s, net.

IsLE OF WIGHT 4s. net.

KENT 6s. net.

LANCASHIRE 6s. net.

LEICESTERSHIRE AND RUTLAND 55. net.

LINCOLNSHIRE 6s. net.

LONDON 5s. net.

MALVERN COUNTRY 45. net.


MIDDLESEX 45. net.
MONMOUTHSHIRE 6s. net
NORFOLK 5s. net.

NORMANDY 5s. net.
NNORTHAMPTONSHIRE 45. net.
NORTHUMBERLAND 7s. 6d. net.
NorTH WALES 6s. net.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE 6s. net.
OXFORD AND COLLEGES 45. net
OXFORDSHIRE 45. net.

PARIS 55. net.

POMPEII 6s. net.

ROME 55. net.

St. PAUL’s CATHEDRAL 45. net.
SHAKESPEARE’S COUNTRY 45. net.
SHROPSHIRE 55. net.

SICILY 4s. net.

SNOWDONIA 6s. net,

SOMERSET 45S. net,

SouTH WALES 4s. net.
STAFFORDSHIRE 55, net.

SUFFOLK 4s. net,

SURREY 5s. net.

SUSSEX 5s. net.

TEMPLE 45. net.

VENICE 6s. net,

WARWICKSHIRE 55. net,
WESTMINSTER ABBEY 55. net,
WILTSHIRE 6s. net.
‘WORCESTERSHIRE 6s. net.
YORKSHIRE EasT RIDING 5s. net.
YORKSHIRE NortH RIDING 4s. net.
YORKSHIRE WEST RIDING 7s. 6d. net.
York 6s. net.


METHUEN & Co. Ltp., 36 EssEx STREET, Lonpon, W.C.2


529


ba


“ft aart iy


. .
” 7 Ske a “Hos 3s* NY, 7
. S
miethen tan ODL PR DAS DSRS D Be REDE RCE REDE DD Mae a a Pa Nh OO DS
Ea eee E NN Da
aa La3y . Bn aes
yay Ne aaa a ta SD De EE Ne A Dh Dh De
Pa Dh Ds DANN Ba bs RED ASLO De De ee DD ea an Na Bah 2D
SPP Aa) ae a2 yO BA DORA DOD DE DERE Renna ta a MD
baie DARA Di ia ACE NDS Ds RES BE DAD aD DN
SSS SPL Pate DRED he ht hepa MIS
DN aN MN RRS RD RS
atateta aes os Tees ty asa
‘ APS DOA DC EDS AD OE REAR NDS NOTE IGS GET LY ee S
pe Pb Ds De ha DE REA DD Eh hath De a BS Se Ren RDN nN
Pap aint a Den Re he be REDD MAA AAA RN DS
Pp tate Mam Behe DS De DS RAT Re Re Deena Ne Na Ne BN De
See ae ee eae a as a ea ta tate eta ately
~ REAP en AD Na DS hate TKN REED NODA SA i Rh Db DD
a aN NT he Da Ds a eS Ra DEN ha ne ANS DD ts
mate Ma testa BOs Da te Te Ree Tha he eh RDA ea Dh eM DM DS Dh
a Te Dna DD Dt AEDS DENS DNR NRE Nn tap Pe i
Saas OTT te are Er aa aa aa atta aes
De TeOnDDeD NP DD RPA DONS MA DDD Dh th ta RRND NS ERED RED ERR SnD AERA RE DA MT RD BD DS Da be RDP
Det Sa tata Maha Re hee be bh nn aah ate Nah NNR NSE N DS DA Re Rha he aa aE DAP AANA Ma DARA REM DAS AEE
SS a, Pa ay Rats dah hh Oe To, DENSE REN EDC R DDE RED RPDE RTE AS NTS MP 2h Nh
sa pa afin th DS Ba 8 Ba De EPC DS? bat D ER RRND Bh SN DN a OO
~ aA ea tas Rass Me tie Rashes hehe honen ip Nain NS 2 Bas be
betas te ta Nh BRE DORE DA REDE nn Rn aah MaDe Bi a DS Te
. pote Rate DONDE DDE RRR D AMPA PANN AA Be DRS
Fontan a MAS a eB NS DRED NP EN NNN DD Da Da
. Sy eee eee a aaa a eae ala aa eee
DETAR RAPA AAPA ae AN A DERE REPRE
SERN AM NN NN a DDN A
Se aa alas teas
Sa PPh a RDS DOR De hen aa a
De a he the ne hth Me tate te Dee Re ES el SOOO,
BAAR Ds iT DDS De DE Ds Baa EME Re en nS BA Rh Dh .
RONAN tat Ta by het RD DEN Da Dh Reh Reh
brat haa tata Dip a bes Da he aeRO DS TS DAD DDE DE eh ata DD te AN
tana arta aaa tea ade ae: tate aa ays
Seta A SDA ai haa Mh Ph Be DD BEN AUN ARERR path Nadie 2 De Rohs Na watata teas
Sora he tate ene haat M Dh Ny RADDA ORDERED. Ne De he nen na RPA Rh Ra MPS DN Bh Seats
DicDs De Ree ha hea ase Mh Ne hh Bh De Ne RARE De Ne Nene ARR Se aS Na Pa RA DD NN stata ay
DRAM EPR De he har a ta ae NS NERD AED  R RRA DA DNS NMDSN DE
De hain te ta ant a Pa he Re NAS Re he Ra Re RAR he Rha eR RANA NS Na Mati BO DS DD NDE Waals
Data tah nh NENA My aha th Rh Sh DNS DRED Ren ED AEE aa. MD DN DS DS DD De DN SRS,
he eae at hia a a RN AN A AM A at ADDS RRNA A A AE A a RAR BN
a ag a ae ee eee ee tatelete tebe See aS
pats ta tate Bh aD DE EDN A AD Ma a NDNA DN RE DR AMR EAR NDS NID
Se Ta aay i pata ta DD DDD ane Mh aS DD ha De
a ST aa eee eee aaa tele tate gy etetetee
Ax ReaD RB Bah Ds the Det hh aS RDU Reh Deen Naha ett BA A Ra he hs
Ww math Nh Dat De Di TT De Re eh ne a Ph Sas
Sos, eae a PD ath bh De DD ROD eee ERR MD AM DAD DB ta OD Waa aS
oa S nmin han Taa Dat DDS Dato NS DOE Ds eee a a BO TR Satay
Soe Maas iy ha he a RS DD) Ts DD DRONE RS OR Na ay says
a! DED ADEN nPaEh anna ehh Saath hah Re RAN RADARS De hs Dy NERD R PRR MA Na Bh BD DE NRO
. iD Mae Pant PDO TAA A A hs RE RDA Tbe ehh a Ne FB a SASS TY:
wh be REDE AE tnt BP Di Dh he REDS NE Re RNR EDP ath eth Bh Be 2 DA Way
at TEC Bet a a Dinh hs DD hs he RED DA TNA DD Stata ass
RA Pay bet be De nea nN PRPS B MNS NN ta De NOE NEED RES aM At NS poate he hehe
Dae tiby by Dh babe heh beh aha hth Pah RA NAPA MOS DO bahe RENAE AA A MN M2 A RS NS staat tess
ist tf De oh Rpt a DD eR a RR EA nasa MB Ra BPs Ne A De Teas
been ip op nln hh bats be hate Seen BP RTS UI es SS
aaa Bh Sy See Nh nea Mth a a ha hh RSNA NA DDE A RD RD Pa MD Dh DS DD Ds DD Aiatatatsts
Darth dh tench thea aM MD NN te DED DD REDE DEE Ren hE A aN Me Raa NS Be DD Batetatats
iat tasty Da et he RR ha Pa Oh RA NM te Re AEE REED RANA NASA RA RA RS RAM ta RS Saas
AS SR as Re ae tale Stake hn
~ natalie Bh DB BS DSS De DEAS Re RRA Da NS BS a Sata tetas
S Aaa SS ass stata Saty ss
Re Le Wists sh
mph a Sah De aN DS Ra Raha iM Rh BS ATateie ats
Piptann da eh a BB as Da RS ROS Dh Nh Satya.
Tact DDS Ds Das DO NODS A ARE an Sy tatataty
eee OT aay eae aa taal sta
: Sa eee yaaa a etaletete wtaiatatets
b seN lp Te Bip Pa Pin Da, Din Das Dip Tn Tah DS Din The Dis The De The Tee a a he ee * SN WN Ny
ea tenn * ba Si Bib 7b Pt Th Th Din Dn De Th Th Oh hs The he Be OREN WES) Bee WG? Ue ba, ha "Ds
pate Te a Tat ~ BN eae Ya ty ty tata te tae Ny
Dashed tach hh eh SNe eas SRS DERE DE DER Sa a th eh NTs Novaya dss)
Stina Raby hehe hn RPA aM Ma ta _ RASS Seta Sets
SI ‘ . esas stata seats
S Sate asa tate
a OS, stay ahy,
a ta ais Soa hea eh)
Seas eee ata tea
SORA NS RRR ee tats Saas
AS a stat ytataty
pes hatha he te RRR Sass
Aes tate ey
Stata ise ss state tesa tats
Asa Sea wy
Aaa ea es Sh
SANA satay
beatae he Nhe hehe Ay Ts
asa aa as STatatetats
Mesa atatatatet sta
SADA Rata te Rhee Sates
Aa as a eesate tay
peta a Net Ds Ba OREN Soa ham he hn)
Seas aaa te Seas
Satay aaa ais
Nee eats Sy, Seta a Tatas
Nielateta ay is Seat Sites ly
eels ta ta ae aca sss, states as
SIS eee
SeV AS ee ay ate yay
Swe eS ayeee sea Sneath
RO Saas aSeiatata ss
Dataset hate hehehe Aiea ata sss
eet Se teiyiats
SD da di Rh Ne ta RR en aS ia te ie ty
Ree typa teases aaah statate Tats
SONI as tea Res:
eae oye ea ess wea tets tats
RR aN Seas
bapa te Ma. OS Ds a Sass Say eee
