Inter Caetera (papal bull)
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Wikisource <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/European_Treaties_bearing_on_the_History_of_the_United_States_and_its_Dependencies_to_1648/Document_07>. Public domain.

INTRODUCTION.


Like the bull Eximiae devotionis of May 3,[1] the bull Inter caetera of May 4 is a restatement of part of the bull Inter caetera of May 3.[2] Taken together the two later bulls cover the same ground as the bull Inter caetera of May 3, for which they form a substitute. The changes introduced into the bull Inter caetera of May 4, are, however, of great importance, and highly favorable to Spain. Instead of merely granting to Castile the lands discovered by her envoys, and not under Christian rule, the revised bull draws a line of demarcation one hundred leagues west of any of the Azores or Cape Verde Islands, and assigns to Castile the exclusive right to acquire territorial pos­ sessions and to trade in all the lands west of that line, which at Christmas, 1492, were not in the possession of any Christian prince. The general safe­ guard to the possible conflicting rights of Portugal is lacking. All persons are forbidden to approach the lands west of the line without special license from the rulers of Castile.


It is not probable that by this bull Alexander VI. intended to secure to Portugal an eastern route to the Indies, as some writers have maintained. In the bulls of May 3, the earlier papal grants to Portugal are said to have given her rights in the region of Guinea and the Gold Mine, but the Indies are not mentioned. The bull of May 4 does not name Portugal and refers to her only in the clause which excepts from the donation any lands west of the demarcation line, which at Christmas, 1492, might be in the possession of any Christian prince.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Text: MS. and facsimile. The original manuscript of the promulgated bull is in the Archives of the Indies at Seville, Patronato, 1-1-1, no. 3. A photograph of this manuscript is reproduced in the Boletín del Centro de Estudios Americanistas de Sevilla, año III., núm. 7 ( March-April, 1915). A facsimile of the text found in the Vatican registers is in J. C. Heywood , Documenta Selecta e Tabulario Secreto Vat
Text: Printed. The Vatican text is in Heywood, op. cit.; Thacher, op. cit., II. 140-153; G. Berchet, Fonti Italiane ( 1892- 1893), I. 8-11 (pt. III. of the Raccolta di Documenti published by the Reale Commissione Colom­ biana) ; S. E. Dawson, "Line of Demarcation of Pope Alexander VI.", etc. ( 1899), pp. 529-531, in the Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, 2d ser., 1899, vol. V., § 2, pp. 467 ff. The text of the promulgated bull, preserved in the Archives of the Indies, is printed in J. de Solorzano Pereira , De Indiarum Jure ( 1629- 1639), I. 608-610, and in Navarrete, Coleccion de Viages ( 1825- 1837), II. 28-34. The text in J. Ramos- Coelho , Alguns Documentos ( 1892), pp. 66-68, is from a manuscript in the National Archives at Lisbon. One or another of the above- mentioned texts will be found in various bullaria and other printed works.


Translations: English. The earliest English rendering is doubtless that published in 1555 in R. Eden translation of Peter Martyr (Pietro Martire d'Anghiera) , Decades of the Newe Worlde or West India.
This version (together with the Latin text) is in J. Fiske, Discovery of America ( 1892), II. 580-593, and in A. B. Hart, American History told by Contemporaries ( 1897- 1901), I. 40-43. Other translations are in the Memorials of Columbus ( 1823), pp. 172-183, a translation of G. B. Spotorno, Codice Diplomatico Colombo-Americano ( 1823) ; B. F. Stevens , Christopher Columbus; his Own Book of Privileges, 1502 ( 1893), pp. 182-197; Dawson, op. cit., pp. 532-534; Thacher, op. cit., II. 141-153; and in Blair and Robertson, Philippine Islands ( 1903- 1909), I. 105-111. Spanish. Boletín del Centro de Estudios Ameri­ canistas de Sevilla,, año III., núm. 7 ( March-April, 1915) ; Navarrete, op. cit., II. 29-35.


References. Same as for Doc. 5.


TEXT.[3]


Alexander episcopus, servus servorum Dei: carissimo in Christo filio Fernando regi, et carissime in Christo filie Elisabeth regine Castelle, Legionis, Aragonum, Sicilie, et Granate, illustribus, salutem et apostolicam benedic­ tionem.


Inter cetera Divine Majestati beneplacita opera et cordis nostri[4] desidera­ bilia, illud profecto potissimum existit, ut fides Catholica et Christiana religio[5] nostris presertim temporibus exaltetur, ac ubilibet amplietur et dilatetur, animarumque salus


Jun[io]. Pro r[eferenda]rio, Pro Jo. BUF[OLINUS],[21]
A. DE MUCCIARELLIS.
A. SANTOSEVERINO.[21]
L. PODOCATHARUS.


Translation.[22]


Alexander, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to the illustrious sovereigns, our very dear son in Christ, Ferdinand, king, and our very dear daughter in Christ, Isabella, queen of Castile, Leon, Aragon, Sicily, and Granada, health and apostolic benediction. Among other works well pleasing to the Divine Majesty and cherished of our heart, this assuredly ranks highest, that in our times especially the Catholic faith and the Christian religion be exalted and be everywhere increased and spread, that the health of souls be
cared for and that barbarous nations be overthrown and brought to the faith itself. Wherefore inasmuch as by the favor of divine clemency, we, though of insufficient merits, have been called to this Holy See of Peter, recognizing that as true Catholic kings and princes, such as we have known you always to be, and as your illustrious deeds already known to almost the whole world declare, you not only eagerly desire but with every effort, zeal, and diligence, without regard to hardships, expenses, dangers, with the shed­ ding even of your blood, are laboring to that end; recognizing also that you have long since dedicated to this purpose your whole soul and all your en­ deavors--as witnessed in these times with so much glory to the Divine Name in your recovery of the kingdom of Granada from the yoke of the Saracens-- we therefore are rightly led, and hold it as our duty, to grant you even of our own accord and in your favor those things whereby with effort each day more hearty you may be enabled for the honor of God himself and the spread of the Christian rule to carry forward your holy and praiseworthy purpose so pleasing to immortal God. We have indeed learned that you, who for a long time had intended to seek out and discover certain islands and main­ lands remote and unknown and not hitherto discovered by others, to the end that you might bring to the worship of our Redeemer and the profession of the Catholic faith their residents and inhabitants, having been up to the present time greatly engaged in the siege and recovery of the kingdom itself of Granada were unable to accomplish this holy and praiseworthy purpose; but the said kingdom having at length been regained, as was pleasing to the Lord, you, with the wish to fulfill your desire, chose our beloved son, Christo­ pher Columbus, a man assuredly worthy and of the highest recommendations and fitted for so great all undertaking, whom you furnished with ships and men equipped for like designs, not without the greatest hardships, dangers, and expenses, to make diligent quest for these remote and unknown main­ lands and islands through the sea, where hitherto no one had sailed; and they at length, with divine aid and with the utmost diligence sailing in the ocean sea, discovered certain very remote islands and even mainlands that hitherto had not been discovered by others; wherein dwell very many peoples living in peace, and, as reported, going unclothed, and not eating flesh. Moreover, as your aforesaid envoys are of opinion, these very peoples living in the said islands and countries believe in one God, the Creator in heaven, and seem sufficiently disposed to embrace the Catholic faith and be trained in good morals. And it is hoped that, were they instructed, the name of the Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ, would easily be introduced into the said countries and islands. Also, on one of the chief of these aforesaid islands the said Christo­ pher has already caused to be put together and built a fortress fairly equipped, wherein he has stationed as garrison certain Christians, companions of his, who are to make search for other remote and unknown islands and mainlands. In the islands and countries already discovered are found gold, spices, and very many other precious things of divers kinds and qualities. Wherefore, as becomes Catholic kings and princes, after earnest consideration of all matters, especially of the rise and spread of the Catholic faith, as was the fashion of your ancestors, kings of renowned memory, you have purposed with the favor of divine clemency to bring under your sway the said main­ lands and islands with their residents and inhabitants and to bring them to the Catholic faith. Hence, heartily commending in the Lord this your holy and praiseworthy purpose, and desirous that it be duly accomplished, and that the

June.
For the referendary, For J. BUFOLINUS,
A. DE MUCCIARELLIS.
A. SANTOSEVERINO.
L. PODOCATHARUS.


↑ Doc. 6.


↑ Doc. 5. For some unknown reason the bull of May 4 was antedated by several weeks. It was expedited in June, and thus is actually to the bull, Eximiae devo­ tionis, which, also antedated, was expedited in July. Vander Linden, "Alexander VI. and the Demarcation". American Historical Review, XXII. 3-8.


↑ The following text is from the original manuscript of the promulgated bull, pre­ served in the Archives of the Indies at Seville, Patronato, 1-1-1, no. 3. Variant readings are given from the text of the Vatican register, reproduced in facsimile in Heywood, Documeta Selecta. Words in this bull, not in the bull Inter caetera of May 3, 1493, are printed in italics.


↑ The Vatican text reads vestri.


↑ The Vatican text reads lex.


↑ The Vatican text reads deducantur.


↑ The Vatican text reads tam.


↑ Cf. Doc. 5, note 7.


↑ The Vatican text reads duximus.


↑ Note the several intances of the introduction of this adjective.


↑ Cf. Doc. 5, note 8.


↑ Cf. ibid., note 9.


↑ The Vatican text reads quibusdam.


↑ The Vatican text reads et.


↑ Cf. Doc. 1, note 38.


↑ Of the many commentaries on the phrase, "versus occidentem et meridiem", the best appears to be that of Vander Linden, in his article on "Alexander VI. and the Demarcation" in the American Historical Review, XXII. 1-20.


↑ It is highly probable that this line was suggested by Columbus. Cf. Dawson, Lines of Demarcation, pp. 491-493; and Vander Linden, op cit.


↑ A discussion of ancient and medieval measures of length, including the marine league, is in Dawson, Lines of Demarcation, pp. 502-517, 545, 546. Kretschmer calcu­ lates that, reckoning a league as equal to four Roman or Italian miles, each equal to about 1480 metres, and counting from San Antonio, the most westerly of the Cape Verde Islands, the longitude of the first demarcation line was 31° west. Entdeckung, p. 303.


↑ The Vatican text reads in.


↑ The Vatican text omits Domino.


↑ 21.0 21.1 The reading of these names is due to Professor Vander Linden, whose article in the American Historical Review, XXII. 1-20, contains information concerning the signa­ tories of this bull.


↑ See Doc. 5, note 19.
