National Intelligence Estimate: Iraq's Continuing Programs for Weapons of Mass Destruction (declassified excerpts)
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Federation of American Scientists <https://irp.fas.org/congress/2003_cr/h072103.html> (Congressional Record). Public domain.

Declassified Excerpts from the October 2002 National Intelligence Estimate on Iraq


Congressional Record: July 21, 2003 (Extensions)
Page E1545-E1546


 KEY JUDGMENTS

 ______


 HON. PETER T. KING

 of new york

 in the house of representatives

 Monday, July 21, 2003

 Mr. KING of New York. Mr. Speaker, in light of the incessant barrage
of attacks of inaccurate and baseless charges being made against
President Bush by his political opponents and their allies in the
media, I thought it important to include in the Record the declassified
portions of the National Intelligence Estimate released by the White
House this past Friday. This NIE clearly states the consensus view of
our intelligence agencies that Saddam Hussein was attempting to
reconstitute his nuclear capacity. The first half of these documents
are being submitted today and the second half tomorrow. I commend these
documents to all willing to approach this vital issue with an open
mind.

 [From October 2002 NIE]

 Iraq's Continuing Programs for Weapons of Mass Destruction

 We judge that Iraq has continued its weapons of mass
 destruction (WMD) programs in defiance of UN resolutions and
 restrictions. Baghdad has chemical and biological weapons as
 well as missiles with ranges in excess of UN restrictions; if
 left unchecked, it probably will have a nuclear weapon during
 this decade. (See INR alternative view at the end of these
 Key Judgments.)
 We judge that we are seeing only a portion of Iraq's WMD
 efforts, owing to Baghdad's vigorous denial and deception
 efforts. Revelations after the Gulf war starkly demonstrate
 the extensive efforts undertaken by Iraq to deny information.
 We lack specific information on many key aspects of Iraq's
 WJMD programs.
 Since inspections ended in 1998, Iraq has maintained its
 chemical weapons effort, energized its missile program, and
 invested more heavily in biological weapons; in the view of
 most agencies, Baghdad is reconstituting its nuclear weapons
 program.
 Iraq's growing ability to sell oil illicitly increases
 Baghdad's capabilities to finance WMD programs; annual
 earnings in cash and goods have more than quadrupled, from
 $580 million in 1998 to about $3 billion this year.
 Iraq has largely rebuilt missile and biological weapons
 facilities damaged during

[[Page E1546]]

 Operation Desert Fox and has expanded its chemical and
 biological infrastructure under the cover of civilian
 production.
 Baghdad has exceeded UN range limits of 150 km with its
 ballistic missiles and is working with unmanned aerial
 vehicles (UAVs), which allow for a more lethal means to
 deliver biological and, less likely, chemical warfare agents.
 Although we assess that Saddam does not yet have nuclear
 weapons or sufficient material to make any, he remains intent
 on acquiring them. Most agencies assess that Baghdad started
 reconstituting its nuclear program about the time that UNSCOM
 inspectors departed--December 1998.
 How quickly Iraq will obtain its first nuclear weapon
 depends on when it acquires sufficient weapons-grade fissile
 material.
 If Baghdad acquires sufficient fissile material from abroad
 it could make a nuclear weapon within several months to a
 year.
 Without such material from abroad, Iraq probably would not
 be able to make a weapon until 2007 to 2009, owing to
 inexperience in building and operating centrifuge facilities
 to produce highly enriched uranium and challenges in
 procuring the necessary equipment and expertise.
 Most agencies believe that Saddam's personal interest in
 and Iraq's aggressive attempts to obtain high-strength
 aluminum tubes for centrifuge rotors--as well as Iraq's
 attempts to acquire magnets, high-speed balancing machines,
 and machine tools--provide compelling evidence that Saddam is
 reconstituting a uranium enrichment effort for Baghdad's
 nuclear weapons program. (DOE agrees that reconstitution of
 the nuclear program is underway but assesses that the tubes
 probably are not part of the program.)
 Iraq's efforts to re-establish and enhance its cadre of
 weapons personnel as well as activities at several suspect
 nuclear sites further indicate that reconstitution is
 underway.
 All agencies agree that about 25,000 centrifuges based on
 tubes of the size Iraq is trying to acquire would be capable
 of producing approximately two weapons' worth of highly
 enriched uranium per year.
 In a much less likely scenario, Bagbdad could make enough
 fissile material for a nuclear weapon by 2005 to 2007 if it
 obtains suitable centrifuge tubes this year and has all the
 other materials and technological expertise necessary to
 build production-scale uranium enrichment facilities.
 We assess that Baghdad has begun renewed production of
 mustard, sarin, GF (cyclosari), and VX; its capability
 probably is more limited now than it was at the time of the
 Gulf war, although VX production and agent storage life
 probably have been improved.
 An array of clandestine reporting reveals that Baghdad has
 procured covertly the types and quantities of chemicals and
 equipment sufficient to allow limited CW agent production
 hidden within Iraq's legitimate chemical industry.
 Although we have little specific information on Iraq's CW
 stockpile, Saddam probably has stocked at least 100 metric
 tons (MT) and possibly as much as 500 MT of CW agents--much
 of it added in the last year.
 The Iraqis have experience in manufacturing CW bombs,
 artillery rockets, and projectiles. We assess that they
 possess CW bulk fills for SRBM warheads, including for a
 limited number of covertly stored Scuds, possibly a few with
 extended ranges.
 We judge that all key aspects--R&D, production, and
 weaponization--of Iraq's offensive BW program are active and
 that most elements are larger and more advanced than they
 were before the Gulf war.
 We judge Iraq has some lethal and incapacitating BW agents
 and is capable of quickly producing and weaponizing a variety
 of such agents, including anthrax, for delivery by bombs,
 missiles, aerial sprayers, and covert operatives.
 Chances are even that smallpox is part of Iraq's offensive
 BW program.
 Baghdad probably has developed genetically engineered BW
 agents.
 Bagbdad has established a large-scale, redundant, and
 concealed BW agent production capability.
 Baghdad has mobile facilities for producing bacterial and
 toxin BW agents; these facilities can evade detection and are
 highly survivable. Within three to six months* these units
 probably could produce an amount of agent equal to the total
 that Iraq produced in the years prior to the Gulf war.
 Iraq maintains a small missile force and several
 development programs, including for a UAV probably intended
 to deliver biological warfare agent.
 Gaps in Iraqi accounting to UNSCOM suggest that Saddam
 retains a covert force of up to a few dozen Scud-variant
 SRBMs with ranges of 650 to 900 km.
 lraq is deploying its new al-Samoud and Ababi-100 SRBMs,
 which are capable of flying beyond the UN-authorized 150-km
 range limit; Iraq has tested an al-Samoud variant beyond 150
 km--perhaps as far as 300 km,
 Baghdad's UAVs could threaten Iraq's neighbors, U.S. forces
 in the Persian Gulf, and if brought close to, or into, the
 United States, the U.S. Homeland.
 An Iraqi UAV procurement network attempted to procure
 commercially available route planning software and an
 associated topographic database that would be able to support
 targeting of the United States, according to analysis of
 special intelligence.
 The Director, Intelligence, Surveillance, and
 Reconnaissance, U.S. Air Force, does not agree that Iraq is
 developing UAVs primarily intended to be delivery platforms
 for chemical and biological warfare (CBW) agents. The small
 size of Iraq's new UAV strongly suggests a primary role of
 reconnaissance, although CBW delivery is an inherent
 capability.
 Iraq is developing medium-range ballistic missile
 capabilities, largely through foreign assistance in building
 specialized facilities, including a test stand for engines
 more powerful than those in its current missile force.
 We have low confidence in our ability to assess when Saddam
 would use WMD.
 Saddam could decide to use chemical and biological warfare
 (CBW) preemptively against U.S. forces, friends, and allies
 in the region in an attempt to disrupt U.S. war preparations
 and undermine the political will of the Coalition.
 [Corrected per Errata sheet issued in October 2002]
 Saddam might use CBW after an initial advance into Iraqi
 territory, but early use of WMD could foreclose diplomatic
 options for stalling the US advance.
 He probably would use CBW when be perceived he
 irretrievably had lost control of the military and security
 situation, but we are unlikely to know when Saddam reaches
 that point.
 We judge that Saddam would be more likely to use chemical
 weapons than biological weapons on the battlefield.
 Saddam historically has maintained tight control over the
 use of WMD; however, he probably has provided contingency
 instructions to his commanders to use CBW in specific
 circumstances.
 Baghdad for now appears to be drawing a line short of
 conducting terrorist attacks with conventional or CBW against
 the United States, fearing that exposure of Iraqi involvement
 would provide Washington a stronger cause for making war.
 Iraq probably would attempt clandestine attacks against the
 U.S. Homeland if Baghdad feared an attack that threatened the
 survival of the regime were imminent or unavoidable, or
 possibly for revenge. Such attacks--more likely with
 biological than chemical agents--probably would be carried
 out by special forces or intelligence operatives.
 The Iraqi Intelligence Service (IIS) probably has been
 directed to conduct clandestine attacks against US and Allied
 interests in the Middle East in the event the United States
 takes action against Iraq. The US probably would be the
 primary means by which Iraq would attempt to conduct any CBW
 attacks on the US Homeland, although we have no specific
 intelligence information that Saddam's regime has directed
 attacks against US territory.
 Saddam, if sufficiently desperate, might decide that only
 an organization such as al-Qaida--with worldwide reach and
 extensive terrorist infrastructure, and already engaged in a
 life-or-death struggle against the United States--could
 perpetrate the type of terrorist attack that be would hope to
 conduct.
 In such circumstances, he might decide that the extreme
 step of assisting the Islamist terrorists in conducting a CBW
 attack against the United States would be his last chance to
 exact vengeance by taking a large number of victims with him.

 ____________________


Congressional Record: July 23, 2003 (Extensions)
Page E1567


 DECLASSIFIED PORTIONS OF THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

 ______


 HON. PETER T. KING

 of new york

 in the house of representatives

 Tuesday, July 22, 2003

 Mr. KING of New York. Mr. Speaker, as I stated yesterday, President
Bush's adversaries--both in the political arena and the media--have
chosen to ignore or distort the facts regarding Iraq's pursuit of a
nuclear weapons program. To counter the numerous inaccuracies created
by too many people who should know better, I am including in the Record
the second half of the declassified portions of the National
Intelligence Estimate released by the White House this past Friday.

 State/INR Alternative View

 . . . acquire nuclear weapons. Iraq may be doing so, but
 INR considers the available evidence inadequate to support
 such a judgment. Lacking persuasive evidence that Baghdad has
 launched a coherent effort to reconstitute its nuclear
 weapons program, INR is unwilling to speculate that such an
 effort began soon after the departure of UN inspectors or to
 project a timeline for the completion of activities it does
 not now see happening. As a result, INR is unable to predict
 when Iraq could acquire a nuclear device or weapon.
 In INR's view Iraq's efforts to acquire aluminum tubes is
 central to the argument that Baghdad is reconstituting its
 nuclear weapons program, but INR is not persuaded that the
 tubes in question are intended for use as centrifuge rotors.
 INR accepts the judgment of technical experts at the U.S.
 Department of Energy (DOE) who have concluded that the tubes
 lraq seeks to acquire are poorly suited for use in gas
 centrifuges to be used for uranium enrichment and finds
 unpersuasive the arguments advanced by others to make the
 case that they are intended for that purpose. INR considers
 it far more likely that the tubes are intended for another
 purpose, most likely the production of artillery rockets. The
 very large quantities being sought, the way the tubes were
 tested by the Iraqis, and the atypical lack of attention to
 operational security in the procurement efforts are among the
 factors, in addition to the DOE assessment, that lead INR to
 conclude that the tubes are not intended for use in Iraq's
 nuclear weapon program.

 Confidence Levels for Selected Key Judgments in This Estimate


 High Confidence

 Iraq is continuing, and in some areas expanding its
 chemical, biological, nuclear and missile programs contrary
 to UN resolutions.
 We are not detecting portions of these weapons programs.
 Iraq possesses proscribed chemical and biological weapons
 and missiles.
 Iraq could make a nuclear weapon in months to a year once
 it acquires sufficient weapons grade fissile material.


 moderate confidence

 Iraq does not yet have a nuclear weapon or sufficient
 material to make one but is likely to have a weapon by 2007
 to 2009.


 Low Confidence

 When Saddam would use weapons of mass-destruction.
 Whether Saddam would engage in clandestine attacks against
 the U.S. Homeland.
 Whether in desperation Saddam would share chemical or
 biological weapons with al-Qa'ida.
 ______

 Uranium Acquisition. Iraq retains approximately two-and-a-
 half tons of 2.5 percent enriched uranium oxide, which the
 IAEA permits. This low-enriched material could be used as
 feed material to produce enough HEU for about two nuclear
 weapons. The use of enriched feed material also would reduce
 the initial number of centrifuges that Baghdad would need by
 about half, Iraq could divert this material--the IAEA
 inspects it only once a year--and enrich it to weapons grade
 before a subsequent inspection discovered it was missing. The
 IAEA last inspected this material in late January 2002.
 Iraq has about 550 metric tons of yellowcake and low-
 enriched uranium at Tuwaitha, which is inspected annually by
 the IAEA, Iraq also began vigorously trying to procure
 uranium ore and yellowcake; acquiring either would shorten
 the time Baghdad needs to produce nuclear weapons.
 A foreign government service reported that as of early
 2001, Niger planned to send several tons of ``pure uranium''
 (probably yellowcake) to Iraq. As of early 2001, Niger and
 Iraq reportedly were still working out arrangements for this
 deal, which could be for up to 500 tons of yellowcake. We do
 not know the status of this arrangement.
 Reports indicate Iraq also has sought uranium ore from
 Somalia and possibly the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
 We cannot confirm whether Iraq succeeded in acquiring
 uranium ore and/or yellowcake from these sources. Reports
 suggest Iraq is shifting from domestic mining and milling of
 uranium to foreign acquisition. Iraq possesses significant
 phosphate deposits, from which uranium had been chemically
 extracted before Operation Desert Storm. Intelligence
 information on whether nuclear-related phosphate mining and/
 or processing has been reestablished is inconclusive,
 however.

 Annex A--Iraq's Attempts To Acquire Aluminum Tubes

 Some of the specialized but dual-use items being sought
 are, by all indications, bound for Iraq's missile program.
 Other cases are ambiguous, such as that of a planned magnet-
 production line whose suitability for centrifuge operations
 remains unknown. Some efforts involve noncontrolled
 industrial material and equipment--including a variety of
 machine tools--and are troubling because they would help
 establish the infrastructure for a renewed nuclear program.
 But such efforts (which began well before the inspectors
 departed) are not clearly linked to a nuclear end-use.
 Finally, the claims of Iraqi pursuit of natural uranium in
 Africa are, in INR's assessment, highly dubious.-

 ____________________
