The wonderfull and true relation of the bewitching a young girle in Ireland, what way she was tormented, and a receipt of the ointment that she was cured with.

[Transcribed from the EEBO-TCP keyboarded edition (CC0 1.0, textcreationpartnership). Original spelling retained.]

[page 2]

[page 3]

The true and wonderfull Relation of the Bewitching of a young Girle in Ireland; What Way She was tormented, and a receipt of the Ointment She was cured with.

IT ſeemeth hard to unruly Minds, that GOD ſhould keep intellectual Souls ſo ſtrange to the unſeen World of Spirits; that We know ſo little of them, that our Knowledge of them is no more by the Way of Senſe; But there is in it much of GOD's Arbitrarie Soveraign Power, and much of His Wiſedom, and much of His Juſtice, and alſo of His Love.

But to ſee the Devils and other Spirits ordinarly would not be enough to bring our Atheiſts to the ſaving knowledge of GOD, without which al other knowledge is vain. They that doubt of GOD, the moſt perfect, eternal, and infinite Beeing, while they ſee the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Sea, and Land, would not know Him by ſeing created Spirits, and finding that almoſt

[page 4]

all the Atheiſts, Sadducees, and Infidels, did ſeem to profeſs that were they but ſure of the Reality of the Apparitions and Operations of Spirits, it would cure Them; I thought this the moſt ſuitable Help for them.

I confeſs it is very difficult to expound the Cauſes of all mentioned in theſe Hiſtories of Witches and Spirits: But proved Maters of Fact muſt not be denied, but improved as well as well as We can, and And I confeſs very manie cheats of pretended Poſſeſſions have been diſcovered which have made ſome weak injudicious Men think that all are ſuch. Two ſorts of perſons have oft been found Deceavers,

1. Perſons prepared and trained up purpoſely by Papiſt Priests, to honour their Exorciſms, You may find in Print of the Boy of Bilſon, Petrius who afterwards I heard turned Quaker at Bristol, many ſuch like are recorded in Hiſtory.

2. Luſtfull, rank Girls and young Widows, that plot for ſome amorous procacious Deſign, or have Imaginations conquered by Luſt, tho' I think when they

[page 5]

come to a Furor terinus, Sathan oft ſetts in.

The Inſtances tell Us, 1. that the ſtate Converſe, Policy, Laws of the Aerial World or Regions, are much, tho' not wholly, unknown to Us here. 2. And ſo is the natural State of the departed Souls of wicked Men, as to their having Bodies or no Bodies, their Power, their Witts, their Motions, and Paſſions. 3. and alſo, whether they be proper Devils when joined with, or of another Species. 4. And 'tis hard to know by their Words or Signs, when it is a Devil, & when is an Humane Soul that appeareth. 5. and it is unſearchable to us, how far God leaveth inviſible, intellectual Powrs to free will about inferiour things, ſuſpending his predetermining motion tho not his generall motion and concourſs & whether thoſe called Fairies and Goblins are not ſuch.

But as all theſe, and more ſuch, are unknowen to us, ſo GOD ſeeth it meet for us that it ſhould be ſo, and we ſhould not ſo much as deſire or indeavor that it might be otherwiſe.

[page 6]

But we may know (which muſt ſuffice us) That no Spirits can doe any thing, but by GOD's will or permiſſion

But now to come to this true relation which my eyes did ſee all along and many Hundereds did ſee which they can ateſt to this day ſay Atheiſts what they will I was not blinded in it.

At Antrim in Ireland a litle girle in the ninth year of hir age, for beauty, education, or birth inferior to none where ſhe lived, having inocently put into hir mouth a Sorrel leaf, which was given her by a Witch that begged at the door, to whom ſhe had firſt given a peice of bread, and then ſome Beer, it was ſcarce ſwallowed by her, when ſhe began to be tortured in her bowels, to tremble all over, and then to be convulſt, and in fine, to ſwon away & fall as one dead. Severall Doctors being caled (for at the forſaid place wher theſe things happned in May 1698. it is cuſtomary for to practiſe phyſick) tho' they ſo· manie Days experimented the Remedie uſual in this Caſe; The Child found no relief, but was ſtill aflicted with very freqent

[page 7]

and moſt terrible Paroxiſms; whereupon, as the cuſtom of the Country is, they conſult the Miniſters of that place, but they had ſcarce laid their Hands on Her when the child was transformed by the Daemon in to ſuch ſhaps as a man that hath not beheld it with his eyes, would hardly be brought to imagine. It began firſt to rowl it ſelf about, and nixt to Vomit Horſe Dung, Needles, Pins, Hairs, Feathers, bottoms of Threed, Fieces of Glaſs Window Nails draven out of a Cart or Coach wheels, an iron knife above a ſpan long, Egg and Fiſh ſhells in the mean while, hir parents and thoſe of the neighbourhood, obſerve that whenſoever the Witch came near the Houſe, or ſo much as turned her eye towards it, even at the diſtance of two hundreth paces, the poor Child was in much greater torment then befor, inſomuch that ſhe could by no means be eaſie of her fitt, or ſhew one ſign of life until ſhe was at a very great [...] •… nce from Her. This Witch was ſoon [...] 〈…〉 pprehended, and confeſt both this, [...] 〈…〉 ite other the like Feats, for when [...] 〈…〉 ngled and burnt, being deſired

[page 8]

by the Minister who aſſiſted Her in Her laſt Agony, and at that Moment on which depends Eternity; when the Executioner had now fitted the Rope to her Neck, that ſhe would diſſolve the Spell, and eaſe the Child, ſhe ſaid it was not in her Power becauſe the Ember-Weeks were paſt ſince ſhe had bewitched Her; adding, that ſhould ſhe undo the Villanies ſhe had perpetarted, the child would not ſo quickly recover, for the two other Witches, whom ſhe named, had alſo given her mortal Infections, from the Effects whereof ſhe could not without Difficulty, and much time, be delivered, the Mother as in a deſpicable caſe, brought her Daughter to me about the middle of September, and I had her with Me ſome weeks What I then ſaw, heard, and handled, becauſe I know many Phyſicians, thoſe eſpecially that are averſe that there can be Witchas, will hardly believe it upon my Narrative; So may GOD help Me, as I ſhall moſt truly relate what I ſaw. The Day after this unfortunat child came to my houſe I took care to ſend for a Miniſter who ſtill lives here, while he was yet 50 paces from

[page 9]

my Chamber, the Girle fell down as one deprived of Life; I took her for dead, For ſhe had not ſo much as the leaſt breath: her Fingers and Toes, (which if I had not ſeen it my ſelf, I could not have believed it,) were ſo writhen and convulſt, that the exterior or third Joint, ſttuck ſo hard unto the ſecond, a thing which is ſcarce poſſible narurallie, that they might ſeem to have been faſtned together with the ſtiffeſt Glue: I endeavoured to thruſt a Golden Bodkin betwixt them, and after an Iron Nail, a Wooden Spindle, &c. but all in vain; the Mother ſeing the Child fall, For ſhe would never go one ſtep from her, ſaid, the Miniſters were comeing, ſhe had no ſooner ſaid this, but they knocked at the Door: when they were come in and lighted a Candle, as ſoon as ever they had read the firſt Words of a Chapter of the Goſpel of S. Matthew, the Girle which hitherto had lain more immovable than any dead Corps, fell a ſhaking all over, Her Fingers and Toes continuing as they were, with that Violence that ſhe could not be held ſtill by ſix of us, by no means We could uſe; my ſelf

[page 10]

who with all my ſtrength eſſayed to hold her Head, obſerved it both by my ſight and feeling, to be writhen as by an Ophisthonick Convulſion, together with Her Neck towards her ſhoulders; in the mean time, her belly was ra [...] • ed up to a prodigious bigneſs and was nearer her Throat, than Her Thighs: and that with ſo great a Noiſe & Grumbling of Her Bowels, that all preſent could hear it at above ten Paces diſtance. The Sound was the neareſt to that which is cauſed by tempeſtuous Waves under the Prow of a ſhip; all this while the child vomited ſevral of the abovementioned things I begg'd the Miniſter, out of Compaſſion to Her, to forbear his reading, he had ſcarce pronounced the laſt ſillable, when in an inſtant ſhe lay as quiet as poſſible, and after He had quited the Houſe, and was at a conſiderable diſtance off, ſhe undid her fingers and Toes, and open her Eyes, & ſtraight way ſtood up, and when ſhe had weept a little, and chid her mother for ſending for the Minister, tho' ſhe never ſaw them, nor as ſhe ſaid, heard them, ſhe preſently began to eat, drink, and play with her equals

[page 11]

juſt as if nothing had ailed her, but upon the Miniſter's returning to do his office, ſhe was as formerly, I ſaw her this while caſt up Feathers, Bundles of Straw, above the bigneſs of my thumb, with pins ſtuck acroſs the ſtraws, Points woven of Threed of ſeveral Colours, and a row of Pins ſtuck in a blue paper, as freſh and new as any ſold in the Pedlar's ſtall: In fine, every thing as the innocent child affirmed, which ſhe had ſeen in the Witches basket when ſhe begg'd, which favours plainly of Devilſm, & which all the Philoſophers in the World, are not able to ſolve; for by what Operation could every thing ſhe had ſeen in the basket, be conveyed in the ſame kind and tale into the Bowels of the child, except the Devil himſelf was not aſſiſting? But when I ſaw all ſhe had caſt up, was perfectly dry, and without the leaſt wet, I told the Miniſters and ſeveral learned men preſent (for I cal'd many out of deſire of being the better informed) that ſurely our Eyes were inchanted; for that theſe things could not poſſibly come out of her Body, For how could it be that the pricking of ſo many Pins,

[page 12]

ſhould bring up no Blood? How could a ſharp knife come up the narrow throat of a young child without cutting the paſſage I added that it was my Opinion that theſe things muſt be convyed privatly ſome way from ſome other Place, and then by the malicious Demon that took pleaſure to deceave us, drop from the Childs Lips into our hands and that I was brought to mind of a Verſe in Ovid, which I never underſtood, but now leſs than ever, it is this,

Devovet abſentes ſimulacraque cerea ſingit,
Et miſerum tenues in jecur urget Acus.
Curſes the abſent, then forms waxen ſhapes
Runs into th' Liver Needles—
The words are ſpoken of Maedea a Witch, but the child herſelf being immixt with us in our debates and of a capacity above her years, ſoon reſolved this difficulty, for we doubt not ſaid ſhe, but that thes things com out of me, and with that ſhe caught my Hand, and put it to her Throat; feel, ſaid ſhe, a Pin without an head comeing up, and which will come up preſently, I felt and immediatly when I thought verily I

[page 13]

held it faſt betwixt the fingers of my left Hand within her Throat, I perceaved it to be forced violently from me, and preſently ſeeing the child about to ſpit, I receaved in my right Hand, and I have ſhewed ſince to ſeveral incredulous perſons, and ſtill keep it by me to ſhew to the Curious, with Parots Feathers, Threed, Straw and other like Materials. In like maner I have frequently at other times felt the ends of Points, while they were yet in the very orifice of her ſtomach, and while they were comeing up, and ready to come out of her Mouth, all who were curious to make experiments imagined they could hold the end of the Point in the middle of her Throat, but the crafty Demon defeated all their Attempts.

After ſhe had exorted for ſome weeks to no Purpoſe, her mother had great deſire to carry her to a Doctor near to Dublin who was belived by the vulgar, to be verie famous in the curing of theſe but ſtaying ſeverall dayes without any effect they bring the child back to my houſe, not on Jot the better but the worſe by a Hydrophobia or as I would rather call it a Stygrophobia

[page 14]

or fearfullneſs of moiſt things, ſo called; very ſad and diſconſolat, and diſparing of her life, Yea, praying for her death ſhe came back to me, about the midſt of Autum refuſing not only wine, beer, meed, and all water; but alſo boiled meat, and bread ſteept in broath or wine, and att laſt wheat & wheaten bread I belive becauſe the one was made with milk, and the other with water, as is uſuall with us, for which reaſon for forty dayes time, ſhe lived on nothing but Apples, Raiſins, Nuts, Almonds & other fruits proper to the ſeaſon yet for all this-the roſie bluſh in her cheeks was not diminiſhed, nor the milky ſnow of her forehead, at laſt for fifteen dayes and nights together, ſhe took neither meat nor drink how ſhe could Paſs ſo many dayes without eaither meat or drink: I confeſs my ſelfe ignorant; but that ſo it was, I doe avow, and all my family are ready moſt ſolemnly to depoſe upon Oath; on the ſexteenth day when ſhe had of her own accord, asked for ſome drink, and taken it ſhe no longer refuſed food. I thought then ſeaſon to have recourſe to naturall means,

[page 15]

not omitting divne exerciſe and I prepared the decoction ex fuga Daemonum of ſoutheren wood, Mugwort, Vervene &c. and after I had uſed her a while to that drink, I ſent her home: in the Intrim tumbling over all the books, I could find, at laſt I light on Bartholemew Carrichters, ſecret [...] • who in XII. Chap. of his 2 book deſcribs a certain medicine proper to this malady finding this mightly recomended in Horſtius his medicinall epiſtles, Epist. I. Sect. VII. in Hector Schlands letter to Grigory Hoſtrus dated in the year 1612. I write to the Apothecary in Dublin in whoſe ſhops I thought it was ſold promiſing any rate for the unguent and preſcription but receving no advice from them, and being day and night ſolicitus for the Childs recoverie I took Carrichter again into my hands, and having much adoe to underſtand him by reaſon of a miſtack of the printers who had printed in one word Hoter bletter beer which ſhould have been in three, I at laſt a long time after for want of neceſſarie materials, cauſed the folowing unguent to be made. Take of Dogs Greaſe well diſſolved

[page 16]

and cleanſed, four Ounces; Of Bears Greaſe eight Ounce; Of Capons Greaſe, four and twenty Ounces; three trunks of the Miſletoe of the Hazle while green, cut in pieces & pound it ſmal, till it become moiſt; bruiſe together the wood, leaves and Berries, mix all in a Vial, after You have expoſed it to the Sun for nine weeks; You ſhall extract a green Balſom, wherewith if you anoint the Bodies of the Bewitched, eſpecially the parts moſt effected and the joynts, they will certainly be cured, as hath been proved by the child, who hath been now perfectly well ſince only an the dayes of the Ember-weeks do what ſhe can ſhe is ſeized with a certain tranſient melancholy.

And this is the reaſon why I have ingenouſly communicated to the world, the above-mentioned Preſcription, concealed by others, and ordered it to be printed for the Good of others that may have the like; So Farewell.

Daniel Higgs.

FINIS.
