The Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching (Irenaeus of Lyons, 1920)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (demonstrationofa00iren).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

_ EUSEBIUS in his Ecclesiastical History tells us
that in addition to his great work Agazust Heresies
St Irenzeus wrote A Dzscourse in Demonstration of
the Apostolic Preaching. This work was entirely
lost sight of: no one seems ever to have quoted
a word of it. But it has quite recently reappeared
in an Armenian manuscript together with Books
IV and V of the greater work. The Armenian
translation proves to be a fairly close rendering
of the original Greek.

What Irenzus meant by the Apostolic Preach-
ing can be seen from his larger work. Although the
exact expression does not seem to occur there, we
have its equivalent, “the Preaching of the Apostles ”
(III, iii. 2), and also the parallel phrases, “the
Tradition of the Apostles” (III, iii. 4) and “the
Preaching of the Truth” (I, iii. 1; III, iii. 4).
Moreover, in I, i. 20 we read that “he who holds
the canon (or rule) of the truth without deviation,
which he received through his baptism,” will be
able to escape all the snares of heresy: and in the
Demonstration (c. 3.) we have closely'parallel words
which also refer to the baptismal faith. Although
it was not until much later that the baptismal


confession came to be called the Apostles’ Creed,
Vv


vi PREFACE


it was already regarded as a summary of the
essential elements of the Apostolic message. Its
form varied in some details in different Churches,
but its structure was everywhere the same, for it
had grown up on the basis of the baptismal
formula.

What Irenzeus undertakes in the present work
is to set out the main points of this Apostolic
message, which, as he has explained in his greater
work (III, iii. 1 ff.), has been handed down in the
Church by the successions of the bishops and is
the same in substance in all parts of the world,
and to demonstrate its truth more especially from
the sacred scriptures of the Old Testament. This
argument from prophecy was the earliest form of
Christian evidence ; and though it does not appeal
to us with equal force to-day, and we find it hard
to be patient with some of the proofs which
seemed to be convincing in the earliest times, we
must yet recognize that it was a true instinct
which claimed the Jewish scriptures as the heri-
tage of the Christian Church, and surmounted by
means of allegorical interpretations those serious
difficulties which led many Christians to wish to
cast them aside altogether.

The words of Bishop Westcott in reference to
the methods of the schoolmen of the Middle
Ages, are applicable also to these earlier teachers :
“Many of the arguments which they use appear
to us frivolous and pointless. It requires a serious
effort to enter into them with a sympathetic in-
telligence. But the effort is worth making. Con-
clusions which rest upon arbitrary assumptions


—" -. ——-—


PREFACE vii


as to the symmetries of things witness in an
imperfect fashion to a deep sense of a divine order
in creation ; and we do injustice to those who draw
them if we allow even the greatest errors of
expression and form to blind us to the nobility
of the conception which they embody most in-
adequately” (Epp. of St John, “The Gospel of
Creation,” pp. 276 f.).

The wonder of Irenzus is the largeness of his
outlook. No theologian had arisen since St Paul
and St John who had grasped so much of the
purpose of God for His world. “The Making of
Man,” to borrow Tennyson’s great phrase, is his
constant theme. Even though he was forced to
be controversial, he was never merely negative ;
and the last of his books Against Heresies ends
on the keynote of the whole—that man shall at
length be made “after the image and likeness of
God.” This is to him the meaning of all history ;
and for that reason the centre point of history is
the Incarnation. So Christ came “to link up the
end with the beginning,” or in St Paul’s words,
which Irenzus never tires of repeating, “to gather
up into one all things” in Himself.


I have retained the chapter divisions of the first
editors and translators of the Armenian text. The
references to the work Against Heresies are to
Harvey’s edition (Cambridge, 1857). Though I
have not everywhere reproduced the double render-
ings which are so frequent in the Armenian, I
have made the translation sufficiently literal to
serve the general needs of the patristic student,


Vili PREFACE


even at the cost of some clumsiness of expression.
In the Introduction and Notes I have been at some
pains to bring out the indebtedness of Irenzeus to
Justin Martyr; and in pursuance of the same end
I have devoted a section of the Introduction to
the teaching of both these writers in regard to the
Holy Spirit.
J. ARMITAGE ROBINSON.


The Deanery,
Wells, Somerset, Oct. 1919.


CONTENTS
au r PAGE
i : = 0 . . . . 7 . ν
ὍΟΤΙΟΝ :
I. THE DOCUMENT AND ITS VALUE . - I
‘Il, THE DEBT OF IRENZUS TO JUSTIN MARTYR 6
Il. THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN
|‘ JUSTIN AND IRENZUS. : Piva, 4


JNSTRATION OF THE APOSTOLIC PREACHING 69


or Scriprure Quorations . =. -. 152


ΝΡ“ -- - ᾿ τς ᾿ς τῶ


,
ν᾿
>
ty, 1x
: '
A, “s
ay
ee! ar.
r a +


v .
‘ ᾿
"Ἢ
‘
'
͵
'
.
!
͵
‘
τὶ
~
ἃ
bY
4
γ
vy
?
5 ba * ΦῪ
a,
LY


ST IRENAUS


THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE
' APOSTOLIC PREACHING


INTRODUCTION


I
THE DOCUMENT AND ITS VALUE


ν Pir is a remarkable fact, and much to be
regretted, that none of the works of St Irenzus, the


were written. Of his chief work, the five books
Against Herestes, we have a very early Latin
anslation, and a few fragments of the original
Greek preserved through quotation by other
writers.1 The work now before us, The Demon-
stration of the Apostolie Preaching, has recently
been found in an Armenian translation, and no
on of it seems to have survived in any other


as a surprise ; for Eusebius? had mentioned its
t tle, Εἰς ἐπίδειξιν τοῦ ἀποστολικοῦ κηρύγματος, and
had said that it was addressed to “ a brother named


4 t The Armenian translation of Bks. IV and V, found in the
same MS. with our treatise, is a valuable aid for the criticism


2 Eccl. Hist., ν. 26.


2 INTRODUCTION


Marcianus.” This is all he tells us; but we can
now add from the book itself that it was written
after the completion of the greater work, and
therefore somewhere about A.D. 190; and that
Marcianus was on intimate terms with the writer,
but absent from him at the time of writing The
work Against Heresies is, of course, controversial


from first to last: but the present treatise isa sort j)


of Vade mecum for an intelligent Christian,
explaining his faith, placing it in its historical
setting in relation to Judaism, and confirming it
by the citation and exposition of a great number
of Old Testament passages. It is in no sense
a manual for catechumens: it is a handbook of
Christian Evidence, though its form is not
controversial.

A tract of this kind from the pen of a great
teacher in any age must needs be of interest.
How was Christianity presented as a whole to an
educated believer? What were the main points
of doctrine and of life on which stress was laid ?
What were the grounds of belief which appeared
to be most convincing then? These are the things
which the historian of religious development wants
to know in eachof the Christiancenturies, and which
he finds it exceptionally difficult to get at. The
great events and the leading personalities have
left their mark on the records of the time: the
development of doctrine and the growth of
ecclesiastical institutions can be traced with
increasing clearness as the documents are tested
and studied and compared : but the religious sense

1 See chapters i and 99.


THE DOCUMENT AND ITS VALUE 3


of an age, the beliefs which affected life, and the
rounds of those beliefs, the ruling motives
of conduct, the things that to the best minds
seemed to matter most—these escape us unless
_ we are insistent in our search for them ; and often,
search as we will, we find little to reward our
pains. We have special reason to be grateful for
a plain statement of the Christian religion as
_ it presented itself to a master mind at the end of
the second century. A long and varied experience
_ had qualified Irenzus for such a task. As a boy
he had listened to St Polycarp at Smyrna, and he
_may have conversed with others—the Elders, as he
_ calls them—who had seen the Apostles. He had
_ visited Rome on business of ecclesiastical moment,
_ and as Bishop of Lyons he had long presided over
_ the churches of Southern Gaul. Moreover he had
_ explored every maze of heresy, and had confronted
_ what we now call “ Gnosticism,” in all its divergent
_ forms, with the Christian truth as he had come to
conceive it in a long life of patient study and
practical ministry. He had given to the Church
his five books of The Exposure and Overthrow of
_ Knowledge (Gnosis) falsely so called. ‘When such
ra man lays controversy aside and takes up his pen
_ to talk, as he says, to his absent friend, and furnish
him with a summary statement of the Apostolic
_ message and the reasons for believing it in terms of

his own day, he deserves our close attention. We
_ shall make little of him if we insist on judging him
_ by modern standards: we shall miss the definite-
mess of post-Nicene doctrine; we shall be
4 disappointed at finding nothing about ecclesiastical


Ζ
ὡς
Γι
*
κι


4 INTRODUCTION


organization; we shall be distressed at the quaint
conceits of his exposition of Old Testament
prophecies. But if we come to him fresh from the
study of Justin Martyr’s First Apology, written
some thirty-five years before, we shall appreciate
the atmosphere in which he had grown up and
shall recognize the advance which he had made in
the thoughtful interpretation of the Faith.

The manuscript which contains our treatise was ©
found in December 1904, in the Church of the
Blessed Virgin at Eriwan in Armenia, by Dr
Karapet Ter-Mekerttshian, one of the most learned
of the Armenian clergy. It was edited by him
with a translation into German, in conjunction with
Dr Erwand Ter-Minassiantz, in 1907, in the Texte
und Untersuchungen (xxxi. 1); and Dr Harnack
added a brief dissertation and some notes. Then
in 1912 Dr Simon Weber, of the Faculty of Catholic
Theology in the University of Freiburg in Breisgau, —
being dissatisfied with this presentation of the work,
published a fresh translation with the help of some
Armenian scholars. Neither of these translations
satisfies the needs of English patristic students.
The second, though it corrects some errors of the
first, is far less close to the original text. And
both are vitiated by a want of acquaintance with
the textual criticism of the Septuagint and the
Greek New Testament, and also with the larger
work of St Irenzus himself. The present trans-
lation is an attempt to remedy these defects, and —
at the same time to bring the treatise to the know-
ledge of those,who have hitherto been debarred ©
by linguistic difficulties from reading it. My own


THE DOCUMENT AND ITS VALUE 5


acquaintance with the Armenian language and
literature is so limited that I cannot hope to have
altogether avoided mistakes, and I shall be grateful
‘to those who will point them out. I owe very much
to the first of the translations into German, and

something also to the second: if I am sometimes
right where they were wrong, it is mainly because
I have sought to read the text in the light of what
Irenzus has said elsewhere.

The same manuscript contains an Armenian
version of Books IV and V of the great work
Against Heresies These come immediately before
our treatise, and are embraced with them under
the single title, Te Demonstration of the Apostolic
Preaching. We cannot say whether this error of
title goes back beyond the date of the manuscript,
which was probably written between 1270-1280,
that is in the time of the learned Archbishop John,
the brother of King Hetum of Cilicia. A note at
the end states that it was written for this arch-
bishop. The Armenian editors believe that the
same translator is responsible for the two books of
the larger work and for our treatise, and that the
translation was made at some date between 650
and 750. The version of Books IV and V is
of high value, as enabling us to check the Latin
version, the MSS. of which differ considerably
among themselves. It is useful also as illustrating
the fondness of the Armenian translator for a
double rendering of a single word of the original.
When we read the Armenian and the Latin side


1 Published with a translation by the same editors in Zexte τι.
Untersuchungen, xxxv. 2.


ita


a


6 INTRODUCTION


by side, we gain the impression that the Greek
text has been very closely followed ; and thus we
are assured that for our present treatise also the
Armenian version is a faithful representative of
the lost original.


II


Tur DEBT OF IRENZUS TO JUSTIN MARTYR


IF we are to proceed with safety in forming a
judgment as to the relation between Justin and
Irenzeus in respect of the matter which they have
in common, it will be necessary not merely to
consider a number of selected parallels, but also
to examine the treatment of a particular theme in
the two writers. Let us set side by side, for
example, c. 32 of Justin’s First Apology with
c. 57 of the Demonstration. Justin has been ex-
plaining to his Roman readers who the Jewish
prophets were, and then giving a list of the chief
things which they expressly foretold concerning
the coming of Christ. Then he proceeds thus:

Moses then, who was the first of the prophets, speaks
expressly as follows: There shall not fail a prince from
Judah, nor a leader from his loins, until he shall come for


whom it ts reserved: and he shall be the expectation of the
Gentiles ; binding his colt to the vine; washing his robe in.


the blood of the grape. \t is your part then to make careful jj;


enquiry and to learn up to what point the Jews had a prince
and king of theirown. It was up to the appearing of Jesus
Christ, our teacher and the expounder of the prophecies
which were not understood, namely how it was foretold by
the divine holy prophetic Spirit through Moses that there
should not fail a prince from the Jews, until he should come
for whom is reserved the kingdom. For Judah is the —
ancestor of the Jews, from whom also they obtained that
they should be called Jews. And you, after His appearance


g THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 7
0 place, both ruled over the Jews and mastered their


Now the words He shall be the expectation of the Gentiles

_ were meant to indicate that from among all the Gentiles men

shall expect Him to come again—which you yourselves can

_ see with your eyes and believe as a fact : for men of all races

are expecting Him who was crucified in Judzea, immediately

after whose time the land of the Jews was conquered and
given over to you.

And the words Binding his colt to the vine and Washing
his robe in the blood of the grape were a sign to show what
was to happen to Christ, and what was to be done by Him.
For the colt of an ass was standing at the entrance to a
village, tied to a vine ; and this He commanded His disciples
at that time to bring to Him ; and when it was brought He
mounted and sat on it, and entered into Jerusalem, where
was that very great temple of the Jews, which afterwards
was destroyed by you. And after these things He was
crucified, that the remainder of the prophecy might be
accomplished. For Washing his robe in the blood of the
grape was the announcement beforehand of the passion
which He was to suffer, cleansing by blood those who be-
lieve on Him. For what is called by the divine Spirit through
the prophet (His) ~ode means the men who believe in Him,
those in whom dwells the seed from God, (that is) the Word.
And that which is spoken of as dood of the grape signifies
‘that He who is to appear has blood indeed, yet not from
human seed, but from a divine power. Now the first power
after God, the Father and Lord of all, is the Son, the Word :
of whom we shall presently tell after what manner He was
made flesh and became man. For even as the blood of the
vine not man hath made, but God ; soalso is-it signified that

this blood shall not be of human seed, but of the power of
God, as we have said before.

Moreover Isaiah, another prophet, prophesying the same
things in other words said thus: Zhere shall rise a star out
of Jacob, and a flower shall spring up from the root of
Jesse,and on his arm shall the Gentiles hope.


The points that strike us at once in this passage
are these :


(1) The well-known Blessing of Jacob is cited
‘as the prophecy of. Moses, who is called the “ first
of the prophets.”
| B


7


8 INTRODUCTION


(2) The quotation is abbreviated, and Justin
comments on it in its abbreviated form.

(3) The statement that Judah was the ancestor
of the Jews, and that from him they got their
name, is on a par with many such explanations
which Justin makes for the sake of his Roman
readers.

(4) That the Jews had no prince or king of their
own after the time of Christ, and that their land
was conquered and ruled by the Romans, was a


good point of apologetic and one which his readers —


would fully appreciate.

(5) We are somewhat surprised that “the ex-
pectation of the Gentiles” should be referred to
the second coming of Christ.

(6) The statement that the ass’s colt was tied
to a vine is not found in our Gospels.

(7) Washing his robe in the blood of the grape
easily suggested our Lord’s passion; but that His


robe should be those who believe on Him seems J


to us far-fetched.

(8) Equally far-fetched is the explanation of the
blood of the grape as pointing to blood made not
by man, but by God.

(9) The combination of Balaam’s prophecy with


words of Isaiah, and the attribution of the whole τ


to Isaiah, strikes us as a strange piece of
carelessness.


Now let us read c. 57 of the Demonstratzon.
After a few prefatory sentences in which he notes


certain points regarding Christ which are the |


subject of prophecy, Irenzeus goes on:


eile


THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 9


_ Moses in Genesis says thus: There shall not fail a prince
_ from Judah, nor a leader from his loins, until he shall come
_ for whom it remaineth: and he shall be the expectation of the
_ Gentiles: washing his robe in wine, and his garment in the
_ blood of the grape. Now Judah was the ancestor of the Jews,
the son of Jacob ; from whom also they obtained the name.
And there failed not a prince among them and a leader,
until the coming of Christ. But from the time of His coming
the might of the quiver was captured, the land of the Jews
Was given over into subjection to the Romans, and they had
no longer a prince or king of their own. For He was come,
for whom remaineth in heaven the kingdom; who also
washed his robe in wine, and his garment in the blood of the
grape: His robe as also His garment are those who believe
on Him, whom also He cleansed, redeeming us by His
blood. And His blood is said to be blood of the grape:
for even as the blood of the grape no man maketh, but
God produceth, and maketh glad them that drink thereof,
so also His flesh and blood no man wrought, but God made.
The Lord Himself gave the sign of the virgin, even that
Emmanuel which was from the virgin; who also maketh
glad them that drink of Him, that is to say, who receive
His Spirit, (even) everlasting gladness. Wherefore also He
is the expectation of the Gentiles, of those who hope in him;
for we expect of Him that He will establish again the
kingdom.


ΝΕ may now take our nine points one by one:

(1) Here again the Blessing of Jacob is cited as
the prophecy of Moses; and a little earlier (§ 43)
we find the words: “ Moses, who was the first that

_ prophesied.”

(2) The text of the quotation is the same as in
Justin: but the words about binding the colt to the
vine are omitted, and the remainder of the passage
is given without abbreviation, as in the LXX.

(3) That Judah is the ancestor of the Jews, who

_ got their name from him, is found in Irenzeus ; and
_the actual words would seem to have been taken
over from Justin. The statement is somewhat

superfluous in a book written for a fairly well


é


10 INTRODUCTION


instructed Christian, whereas it comes quite
naturally in Justin's Apology. Though several
parallels between Justin and ireneus might be
explained by the hypothesis of their both having
used a book of “ Testimonies against the Jews,” such
a solution could hardly be advanced in this case;
for the statement in question would not be likely
to occur in such a book.

(4) Justin’s words are: μεθ᾽ ὃν εὐθὺς δοριάλωτος
ὑμῖν 4 γῆ ᾿]ουδαίων παρεδόθη. The translation of
the first part of the parallel in Irenzeus is obscure:
but it is possible that the phrase “the might of the
quiver was captured” is no more than the transla-
tor’s attempt to make something of δοοιάλωτος.
If so, it would appear certain that here also
Irenzeus was practically writing out a sentence of
Justin, only changing ὑμῖν into τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις.

(5) Zhe expectation of the Gentiles is here also
explained of the Second Advent; and the word
“kingdom” is offered, as in Justin, as the unex-
pressed subject of ᾧ ἀπόκειται.

(6) The passage about the ass’s colt is omitted
both from the quotation and from the interpreta-
tion. Irenzeus has it in IV, xx. 2, where he quotes,
again as from Moses, the whole section (Gen. xlix.
10-12), ending with: J/etzict oculi ejus a vino, et
candidi dentes ejus quam lac. Ue then goes on:
“Let these persons who are said to investigate all
things search out the time at which there fazled
prince and leader from Judah, and who is the ex-
pectation of the Gentiles, and what the vine, and
what Azs co/t, and what the vobe, and what are eyes
and /eeth and wine; and search out every point ;


THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR II


and they shall find that none other is foretold,
* our Lord Jesus Christ.” Here again Irenzeus
5 very close to the passage in Justin, so far as the
general method of putting the argument goes.

(7) and (8) reappear in Irenzus, and it is most
_ natural to suppose that he took them over from
Justin. He has a point of his own when he goes
on to add to the interpretation of the blood of
the grape the gladness produced by the wine. It
seems to be introduced without any obvious
‘reason, until we observe that the words which
follow in the passage in Genesis tell of the gladness
of the eyes produced by wine (ἀξίζει oculz, etc.
ed above).

(9) In c. 58 Irenzus proceeds at once to the
quotation of Balaam’s prophecy, as follows: “And
n Moses says: There shall rise a star out of
b, and a leader shall be raised up out of Israel.”
He does not make the combination with Isaiah
ὃ hic h we find in Justin; nor does he attribute
alaam’s words to Isaiah. It is however to be
te ted that in III, ix. 2, where he quotes the passage
here, he does attribute it to Isaiah: “ Cujus et
am Ysaias quidem sic prophetavit: Orietur
Wa ex Jacob, et surget dux in Israel.” On this
cidence in error Dr Rendel Harris remarks
Testimonies, 1. Ὁ. 11): “Justin shews us the
age of Isaiah following the one from Numbers,
and the error lies in the covering of two passages
with a single reference. It is clear, then, that
Justi in’s mistake was made in a collection of
Testimonies from the prophets, and that the same
ole ion, or one that closely agreed with it, was


i
wa
πιὰ

“


τ ποτ πεῖ τιν τε EE TE I αν τον st tale τ .τ τττν΄υ.-  ---.


> °


εἶ i.


12 INTRODUCTION


in the hands of Irenzus.” In view, however, of
the intimate connexion which appears to exist
between Irenzeus and Justin we must not exclude
the alternative possibility that the mistake began
with Justin, and was at first reproduced by Irenzeus,
but was afterwards corrected by him in his later
work.

Another example of a whole section drawn from
Justin Martyr will be found in ce. 44f. Here it
is the Dialogue with Trypho the Jew to which
Ireneus is indebted. The whole of these two
chapters should be read consecutively: but the
chief parts must be given here. Irenzus cites
Gen. xviii. 1 ff., to show that it was the Son of God
who spake with Abraham. This is Justin’s view
also, but the nearest parallels come after the
quotation of Gen. xix. 24. At this point Irenzeus
says:

And then the Scripture says: Aud the Lord rained upon
Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out
of heaven: that is to say, the Son, who spake with Abraham,
being Lord, received power to punish the men of Sodom
Jrom the Lord out of heaven, even from the Father who
rules (07. is Lord) over all. So Abraham was a prophet and
saw things to come, which were to take place in human
form: even the Son of God, that He should speak with
men and eat with them, and then should bring in the


judgment from the Father, having received from Him who
rules over all the power to punish the men of Sodom.


Justin had said (Dza/. 56 ad fin.): “And He
is the Lord, who from the Lord who is in heaven,
that is, from the Maker of all things, received
(power) to bring these things on Sodom and
Gomorrah, which the narrative recounts, saying:
The Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brim-


THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 13


stone and fire from the Lord out of heaven (καὶ
κύριός ἔστι παρὰ κυρίου τοῦ ἔν τῷ οὐρανῷ, τουτέστι
τοῦ ποιητοῦ τῶν ὅλων, λαβὼν τὸ ταῦτα ἀπενεγκεῖν
Σοδόμοις x. τ. λ.). And he then goes on to dis
cuss the question of the eating and drinking with
Abraham, but does not treat it as Irenaeus does
here.

_ The interpretation of the passage may already
_ have been common Christian apologetic: it is the
pression “received power (or authority)” to
nish the Sodomites that suggests a direct literary
connexion; and this expression is found again in
me renzeus III, vi. 1, quoted below in the note on
_ this passage.

After this Irenzus goes on at once as follows
(Dem. c. 45):


And Jacob, when he went into Mesopotamia, saw Him in
dream, standing upon the ladder, that is, the tree, which
is set up from earth to heaven; for thereby they that
lieve on Him go up tothe heavens. For His sufferings
: our ascension on high. And all such visions point to
Son of God, speaking with men and being in their
midst. For it was not the Father ofall, etc. (See below.)
ss 34 - a ᾽ ”
᾿ This idea that Jacob’s Ladder was “the tree
ξύλον), that is to say, the cross, is found in Justin
(Dial. 86), among a number of other types equally
range to us: “It says that a ladder was seen by
him ; and the Scripture has declared that God was
supported upon it; and that this was not the
father we have proved from the Scriptures.”
Irenzeus again expands the comment in his own
way, but he recurs to the theme “It was not the
Be ther.”


or it was not the Father of all, who is not seen by the


Ν,


rt


rT al leat at 5 aa iE ᾿Ξ


CO RES OST


14 INTRODUCTION


world, the Maker of all who said: Heaven is my throne,
and earth is my footstool: what house will ye build me, or
what is the place of my rest? and who comprehendeth the
earth with his hand, and with his span the heaven—it was
not He that came and stood in a very small space and
spake with Abraham ; but the Word of God, etc.

Now the words “in a very small space” are
clearly reminiscent of Justin. For in Deal. 127 he
says: “Think not that the unbegotten God Him-
self came down or went up from anywhere. For
the unutterable Father and Lord of all has never
come any whither,” etc. “How then should He
either speak to any one, or be seen by any, or
appear in some very small portion of earth (ἐν
ἐλαχίστῳ μέρει ys)?” Cf. Dial. 60: ἕν ὀλίγῳ γῆς
μορίῳ πεφάνθαι.

These repeated coincidences, in large matters
and in small, make us feel that Irenzeus was very
familiar with Justin’s writings. Everywhere he
goes beyond him: but again and again he starts
from him.

The advantage to be gained by the recognition
of the dependence of Irenzeus upon Justin may be
illustrated from ο, 53 of our Treatise. The
Armenian text here presents several difficulties,
probably from corrupt transcription. The original
cannot have been very easy to understand; but
when we read with it c. 6 of Justin’s Second
Apology some points at any rate are cleared up.
Irenzus has just quoted Isa. vii. 14 ff., following
the LXX with slight variations:


Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign: behold,
the virgin shall conceive and shall bring forth a son, and ye
shall call him Emmanuel: butter and honey shall he eat ;
before he knoweth or selecteth the evil, he chooseth the good:


oe ee ΡΝ


THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 15


/ mr, before the child knoweth good or evil, he rejecteth wickea-
ess to choose the good. So he proclaimed His birth from a
rgin; and that He was truly man he declared beforehand
by His eating; and also because he called Him the child:
and further by giving Him a name; for this is the custom
also for one that is born.
_ We must pause here for a moment to quote
parallel words from Irenzus himself (III,
. 2). He has quoted the same Scripture, and
: commenting upon it he says: “Et manifestat
‘quoniam homo, in eo quod dicit: Butyrum et mel
»ὔ manducabit ; et in eo quod zzfantem nominat eum ;
et priusquam cognoscat bonum et malum: hac
Bain omnia signa sunt hominis infantis.”

_ In my translation I have written: “this is the
custom also for one that is born.” But the Ar-
lenian text has: “this is the error also of one.
hat is born.” I have accepted Mr F. C. Conybeare’s
mple and attractive emendation sovoruthitun,
“custom,” for moloruthiun, “ error.” 1


LE OLE EOL τ τ------


_ We now return to our passage:


And His name is two-fold: in the Hebrew tongue
M [essiah Jesus, and in ours Christ Saviour. And the two
Tames are names of works actually wrought. For He was
amed Christ, because through Him the Father anointed
d adorned all things ; and because on His coming as man
6 was anointed with the Spirit of God and His Father.
As also by Isaiah He says of Himself: The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me: wherefore he hath anointed me to preach
od tidings to the poor. And (He was named) Saviour for
S, that He became the cause of salvation to those who at


κε I had at first thought that a comparison of the passage quoted
fr from III, xxv. 2 pointed to the loss of some words from our text,
an¢ that we might emend thus: ‘‘[and in that he said: Before he
knoweth good or evil ;\ for this is the uncertainty also of one that
i τᾷ » But I doubt whether moloruthiun could be toned down
tO a “uncertainty.” Moreover in what follows it is the name
which stress is laid.


ae INTRODUCTION


that time were delivered by Him from all sicknesses and
from death, and to those who afterwards believed on Him
the author of salvation in the future and for evermore.

The Armenian text reads: “in the Hebrew
tongue Messiah Christ, and in the Armenian Jesus
Saviour.” I have adopted the emendation proposed
by the Armenian scholars who made the first
translation into German. No doubt Χριστὸς Σωτήρ
was what Irenzus wrote as the rendering of
“Messiah Jesus”: compare Just... M.cAge hy 33;
“Now the name Jesus in the Hebrew speech
signifies Saviour in the Greek language.”

Having disposed of these preliminary difficulties,
we note some curious matters that remain for
consideration. What is the point of saying,
“names of works actually wrought”? Is there
any parallel to the explanation of “ Christ” as “ He
through whom the Father anointed”? And why
does our author lay stress on the cure of the sick
as the explanation of the name “ Jesus”?

Let us now look at the passage of Justin to
which we referred at the outset (42. II, 6):

Now a name imposed on the Father of all, unbegotten as
He is, is an impossibility. For he to whom a name is
applied must have one older than himself who has imposed
on him the name. Father and God and Creator and Lord
and Master are not names: they are appellations derived
from benefits and works (ἐκ τῶν εὐποιϊῶν καὶ τῶν ἔργων).

Here we see the force of what Irenzeus had said
about the naming spoken of by Isaiah, as indicating
the manhood of the promised Child of the Virgin.
The Unbegotten has no name, in the strict sense:
there was none before Him to impose a name on
Him. The Begotten, when begotten as man, has


THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 17


a mame, though before that He has what is at
once an appellation and a name. Justin goes on:


_ But His Son, who alone is called Son in the full sense,
_ the Word who before all created things both was with Him
and was generated, when at the beginning He created and
_ ordered (or adorned) all things through Him, is called on
γιὸς one hand Christ, in respect of His being anointed and
of God’s ordering (or adorning) all things through Him—
a name which also in itself contains a signification beyond
ξ our knowledge, just as the title God is not a name, but a
conception, innate in human nature, of a thing (or work)
too hard to be declared (πράγματος δυσεξηγήτου).
Here Justin is explaining that “Christ” is a
“name indeed, but more than a name. It is a
Biicsignation derived from a work, just as the
_ designation God is derived from a work (cf. ἔργων
above, and zodyyatoc). What then is this work ?
The anointing which made Him the Christ is
something which to Justin’s mind occurred before
Btiis coming as man. He was anointed that
posh Him God might order (or adorn) the
_ universe. The sense of the words is fairly plain,
if it be somewhat surprising.
_ But the construction of the Greek at the crucial
point is at leastawkward. The words are: Χριστὸς
᾿ μὲν κατὰ τὸ πεχρῖσθαι καὶ κοσμῆσαι τὰ πάντα δι
αὐτοῦ τὸν θεὸν λέγεται. Long ago Scaliger proposed
to read χαὶ χρῖσαι, instead of κεχρῖσθαι. This
ἢ ΜΟΙ] mean: “in respect of God’s both anointing
and ordering all things through Him.” The
emendation found little favour with the editors of
— υ. until the discovery of the Demonstration.
[ Below it seems likely to find a wider acceptance in
view of these words of Irenzus: “For He was
} named Christ because through Him the Father


18 INTRODUCTION


anointed and adorned all things.” At any rate it
will not be doubted that Irenzeus so understood
the passage, whatever he may have actually read
in his copy of Justin. I have not myself ventured
to correct Justin’s text: for it is intelligible as it
stands; whereas to say “He was called Christ,”
not because He was anointed, but “because the
Father anointed all things through Him,” is not
very intelligible, even though Irenzeus has said it. —
Justin continues :


Jesus, on the other hand, offers both the name of a man
and the significance of Saviour. For, as we have already
said, He has become man, born in accordance with the
counsel of God the Father on behalf of the men that believe ©
on Him and for the overthrow of the demons : and this you
can learn at the present time from what takes place under ~
your eyes. For many possessed of demons, in the world
generally and in your own city, have been healed and are
still being healed by many of our men, the Christians, who
exorcise them by the name of Jesus Christ, crucified under
Pontius Pilate, though they could not be healed by all the
rest of the exorcists.


Jesus is a man’s name, familiar enough to Greek
readers of the Bible from having been given by
Moses to his successor whom we call Joshua. It
also has a significance: for it means Saviour.
As Σωτήρ to the Greeks suggested specially the
giving of health (σωτηρία), Justin finds a connexion
between ᾽]ησοῦς and ἴασις, “healing.” You can
see this to-day, he says: for the Christians who
use the name of Jesus Christ, crucified under
Pontius Pilate, can heal when no one else can
(μὴ ἰαθέντας idoarto καὶ ἔτι νῦν ἰῶνται).

Turning back to the last words of the passage
quoted above from Irenzus, we note that the
same interpretation of “ Jesus” is in his mind, even


THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 19


if he does not play on the word ἴασις. For owrnoia
“its elf includes “healing” among its meanings : and
| Trenzeus refers to our Lord’s own acts of healing,
hough he does not at this point follow Justin in
-instancing the healing of the π΄ by Christians
in the name of Jesus.
a We have now to consider a passage in which the
help to be gained from Justin is not so clear. In
c.43 we read: “This Jeremiah the prophet also
testified, saying thus: Before the morning-star I


a e familiar to us in the form “ ue dew 88 thy
Ἢ uth is of the womb of the morning,” were under-


the morning-star I begat thee” (ἐκ γαστρὸς πρὸ
ἑωσφόρου ἐγέννησά σε). In our passage the phrase


n be the more easily applied to the pre-existent
5on of God. We feel the difficulty of combining
the two phrases when we find Tertullian (Adv.
( V. 9), who applies the passage to our
Lord’s human birth, constrained to interpret
“before the morning-star” as meaning while it
‘was yet dark, and offering various proofs from the

Gospels that Christ was born in the night.
_ The ‘second half of our quotation is a modifica-


2 He does so in the notable passage II, xlix. 3, of which
Busebius has preserved the original Greek.


20 NEUTRON
Ϊ

tion of Ps. ᾿ἰχχὶϊ. 17. “Before the sun his name
remaineth” (πρὸ τοῦ ἀπ λγδὴ διαμένει τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ),
or “shall remain ” (διαμενεῖ).

It is obvious that the two texts have been drawn
. together by a recollection of the parallel phrases
“before the morning-star” and “before the sun.”
But again, in the neighbourhood of the latter, we
find “before the moon,” in the difficult verse (Ps.
Ixxii. 5): καὶ συνπαραμεγεῖ τῷ ἡλίῳ, καὶ πρὸ τῆς
σελήνης γεγεὰς γενεῶν. We shall see that in other
writers this phrase also is drawn in.

We may now consider the use made of these
texts by Justin Martyr. In his Dialogue with —
the Jew Trypho (c. 45) hespeaks of Christ, as “ the
Son of God, who was before the morning-star and
the moon,’ and was incarnate and born of the
Virgin. This is not exactly a mixed quotation,
but we see how readily phrases from the two
Psalms are combined. Then in c, 63 he quotes |
“that which was spoken by David: Jn the bright-
ness of thy holy ones, from the womb before the
morning-star I begat thee :” and he comments thus :
“ Does this not show you that from of old (ἄνωθεν)
and through a human womb the God and Father
of all was to beget Him?” Here there is no com-
bination of texts: but in c. 76 we have the three
texts brought together, though “ the morning-star ”
is not mentioned: “And David proclaimed that
before sun (Ps. \xxii. 17) and moon (Ps. |xxii. 5) ©
He should be degotten from the womb (Ps. cx. 3),
according to the counsel of the Father.”

If, as we may well believe, these passages of
Justin were familiar to Irenzeus, it is not difficult


THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 21


to understand that by a trick of memory he
“should produce the quotation: “Before the
pmorning-star I begat thee and before the sun is
thy name.” It was ἃ more serious lapse to assign
the quotation to Jeremiah.
In a book of Testimonies against the Jews,
attributed to Gregory of Nyssa,’ we have the
following quotation which combines all three texts :
_“From the womb before the morning-star I begat
thee: and before the sun is his name, and before
the moon.” This is not assigned to any Regt ead
_ author ; and as we have “ his name,” not “ thy name,’
it may be intended for two separate quotations.”
It is possible that by this date the words “and
before the moon” had got into some MSS. of the
-LXX. The Old Latin Psalter has: “ Ante solem
‘permanebit nomen -ejus in secula, et ante
-lunam sedes ejus ;” and some cursive MSS, of the
ΤΙ ΧΧ have a Greek text which corresponds with
this.
- Dr Rendel Harris also quotes from the Syriac
writer Bar Salibi:* “ David said : Before the day-star
δ] begat thee. And before the sun is his name,
-and before the moon.” From these and other
‘parallels he concludes that Irenzeus made use of a
common body of proof texts contained in a very
ot book of “Testimonies against the Jews.”


Ε: Printed by Zacagni, Monumenta, p. 292 (Rome, 1698).

ΟΞ We have, “thy name” in Clem. Alex. Exc. ex Theodoto 20:
Td γὰρ mpd ἑωσφόρου ἐγέννησά σε οὕτως ἐξακούομεν ἐπὶ τοῦ πρωτοκτί-
του θεοῦ λόγου, καὶ πρὸ ἡλίου καὶ σελήνης καὶ πρὸ πάσης κτίσεως τὸ


σου.


4 Harris, 7Zestimonies, p. 15. See also on p. 45 a quotation


an anti-Mohammedan tract: ‘‘ “His name endures before the
‘sun and moon throughout all ages.”


ἕ


22 INTRODUCTION


The existence of such a work has been suggested —


more than once. Dr Rendel Harris has pro-
pounded it in a fresh and attractive form in a book
entitled “Testimonies,” of which as yet only the
introductory portion has appeared (Cambridge,


1916). The body of evidence on which it


rests is promised us in a second volume;
and judgment must necessarily be suspended
until this is available. So far as the Demon-
stration of Irenzus is concerned, this is the only
passage in which there might conceivably be a
gain in calling in such a hypothesis. Direct
dependence on Justin, on the other hand, can be
demonstrated in various portions of our treatise ;
and this may be the true explanation here.


Irenzus goes on to attribute to Jeremiah a yet ©


more strange quotation: “ Blessed is he who was,
before he became man.” The German translations
render the last words differently: one of them has:
“before the coming into being of man (vor dem
Werden des Menschen):” the other has: “ before
through him man was made (bevor durch ihn der
Mensch warde).” We have however an exact
parallel to the construction in the Armenian
rendering of the words “before he knoweth” in


c. 53. The Greek there is πρὸὲν ἢ γνῶναι αὐτόν (Isa.


vii. 15); and we may suppose that here it was
πρὶν ἢ γενηθῆναι αὐτὸν ἄνθρωπον. ;

No such text is to be found in any book now
known to us which is attributed to Jeremiah. Dr
Rendel Harris has been the first to point to its
occurrence in a slightly different form, and again


ea ae Wes Sw ed


ent haa Palio


as quoted from Jeremiah, in Lactantius (Dzvin. ust.


| THE DEBT TO JUSTIN MARTYR 23


iv. 8). The whole passage must be given: “First
f all we affirm that He was twice born, first in
rit, afterwards in flesh. Wherefore in Jeremiah
it is thus spoken: Lefore I formed thee in the
womb, I knew thee. Also: Blessed is he who
as, before he was born: which happened unto
16 save Christ; who, being from the beginning
Son of God, was re-born anew according to the
flesh.” The Latin, “Beatus qui erat antequam
a eretur,” may represent a Greek reading, πρὶν
ἢ γεννηθῆναι.
_ The words which follow in Lactantius: “qui,
um esset a principio filius dei, regeneratus est
110 secundum carnem,” appear to be taken from
Cyprian’s TZestimonia (II, 8), where a section is
ded: “Quod, cum a principio filius dei fuisset,
nerari denuo haberet secundum carnem;” but
only O.T. quotation that there ieee is
Ps, pa. 7 f.

3 So far, then, we have no clue to the source from
which either Irenzeus or Lactantius derived this
nge quotation. It is not likely that Lactantius
it, directly at any rate, from the Demonstration
f Irenzeus, which does not appear to have had
a wide circulation. It is possible that this and
certain other passages which are attributed to
Jeremiah may be derived from some apocryphal
york bearing that prophet’s name.


24 - INTRODUCTION


III


THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
IN JUSTIN AND IRENAUS


ΙΕ we are to do justice to the teaching of
Irenezus as to the Holy Spirit, it is imperative
that we should pay some attention first of all to
the view of Justin Martyr, whose First and Second
Apologies, as well as the Dialogue with Trypho
the Jew, were in his hands, and indeed must have —
been very familiar to him. |

1. The Holy Spirit in relation to Prophecy. ©
Justin first mentions the Holy Spirit under the
designation of ‘the prophetic Spirit” (42. 1, 6);
and this designation frequently recurs.- It is
noteworthy that prophecy itself is first introduced
in answer to the supposed objection, why should τ
not Christ have been a mere man, who by magic
performed the miracles attributed to him and so
was considered a Son of God? No Christian
writer of that day would have been prepared to
answer this by denying the power of magic.
Justin’s answer is on quite a different line. Many
generations before the coming of Christ the main 9
events of His life on earth, including the wonders
of healing which He should perform, had been
foretold by the Jewish prophets. The verification
of these prophecies in the story contained in the
Gospels was the surest testimony to the truth of
what Christians claimed for Christ.

The expression “the prophetic Spirit,” occurs


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 25


frequently both in the First Apology and in the
- Dialogue with Trypho the Jew. Sometimes Justin
“says “the holy prophetic Spirit,” and once (42.
32) “the divine holy prophetic Spirit.” Now
“the prophetic Spirit,’ means the Spirit of the
prophets. So Athenagoras, who follows Justin,
interpreting and sometimes correcting him, says
that it is the Spirit “which works in those who
_make prophetic utterances,” and he adds that it is
“an effluence of God,” as the ray is of the sun.!
The prophets in question are the Jewish prophets :
and Justin’s insistence on “the prophetic Spirit”
is understood when we remember the attempt that
was then being made to distinguish the God of the
Old Testament (“the Just God”) from the God
of the New Testament (“the Good God”). This
was to cut off Christianity from the past, and to
‘destroy its historical background and its function
as the fulfilment of the age-long purpose of God.
_ There was, however, a further reason for emphasiz-
‘ing “the prophetic Spirit,” a reason of even
greater importance from the standpoint of Christian
evidence. The correspondence between the Gospel
facts and the prophetic utterances proved two
things: namely, that the claim of Jesus to be the
Christ was valid, and that the Spirit of the
prophets was of God.

_ We do not in our apologetic today make this
“use of the exact correspondence of Old Testament
texts with facts recorded in the Gospels. But the
Riceper meaning of the argument—deeper than
‘those who used it knew—the preparation in Jewish
= 1 Suppl. το.


26 INTRODUCTION


history for the coming of the Christ, and the con-.
tinuity of the self-revelation of God—that is of the
essence of the Christian argument still. And
we must not forget how great a debt we owe to
those who, with a narrow and tiresome literalness
of exposition, claimed the Old Testament as the
sacred book of the early Christian Church. “Who
spake by the prophets” represents the primary
conception of the Holy Spirit in the writers of the
second century: just as the great sentence which
precedes it in the Creed—“ Who with the Father
and the Son together is worshipped and glorified”— —
goes beyond what they were able to say, and
represents the final pronouncement of the Church —
after two more centuries of uncertainty and debate.

2. The Holy Spirit in relation to the Father and
the Son. The passage above alluded to as the first
in which Justin mentions the Holy Spirit will show
us how great a distance the Church had to travel
before the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity could
find adequate expression. Justin has been saying
to his Roman readers: You call us atheists and put


us to death, being urged thereto by the demons ~


who have contrived to get themselves called gods. |
Socrates long ago by true Reason (λόγος) exposed


them, and they got him slain, just as they get us


slain today. For today not only Greeks like
Socrates, but mere barbarians have cast them off,
being enlightened by the Reason Himself, who has
taken form and become man and is called Jesus
Christ. Yes, we are atheists—in respect of your
pagan gods: but not in respect of the most true
God, the Father of justice and temperance and the


“ — Bn a


<


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 27


other virtues. “But”—and here we must quote
the exact words—“ Him, and the Son who came
from Him and taught us these things, and the host
of the other good angels that attend Him and are
made like unto Him, and the prophetic Spirit, we
worship and adore, honouring them with reason
and with truth.” It would not be fair to say that
here Justin ranks the Holy Spirit after the angels:
other passages, to be quoted later, show that this is
not his meaning. It is rather that the angels are
brought into prominence as the escort of the Son,
to whom Justin again and again insists on applying


the title “ Angel” in the sense of divine messenger,”


especially when he is explaining various passages
in Genesis as manifestations of the divine Son to
the patriarchs. Justin’s immediate purpose was to
show what a wealth of spiritual powers Christianity


could set out in contrast to the “many gods”—


the demons—of the heathen world: how absurd


é therefore it was to call Christians atheists. The


same argument is handled thirty years later by
Athenagoras with Justin’s language in mind, but


with more caution. Father, Son. and Spirit he


mentions in due order: but he adds: Not that


_ our theology stops here, for it includes a multitude


of angels and ministrants to whom the heavenly


1°*AAN’ ἐκεῖνόν τε, καὶ τὸν παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ υἱὸν ἐλθόντα καὶ διδάξαντα
ἡμᾶς ταῦτα, καὶ τὸν τῶν ἄλλων ἑπομένων καὶ ἐξομοιουμένων ἀγαθῶν
ἀγγέλων στρατόν, πνεῦμά τε τὸ προφητικὸν σεβόμεθα καὶ πῤοσκυ-
γνοῦμεν, λόγῳ καὶ ἀληθείᾳ τιμῶντες, K.T.A. (Just. M. 42. τ, 6).

5 E.g. Ap. 1, 63: Ὃ λόγος δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐστιν ὁ υἱὸς αὐτοῦ, ὡς
προέφημεν " καὶ ἄγγελος δὲ καλεῖται καὶ ἀπόστολος - αὐτὸς γὰρ
ἀπαγγέλλει κιτ.λ. ; Dial. 93: (He who fulfils the First and Great
Commandment) οὐδένα ἄλλον τιμήσει θεόν * καὶ ἄγγελον ἐκεῖνον ἂν


2 τιμήσει, θεοῦ βουλομένου, τὸν ἀγαπώμενον ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦ κυρίου καὶ
᾿ θεοῦ.
4


28 INTRODUCTION


bodies, the heavens themselves, and our world have
been entrusted by the Creator.1 He has retained
Justin’s argument, but he has carefully avoided the
imperfections of its expression.

A little later Justin returns to the charge of
atheism, and, having described the kind of worship
which Christians offer to the Creator of the universe,
he goes on to speak of Him who has taught them
this, even Jesus Christ, who was crucified under
Pontius Pilate, and whom they had learned to
know as the Son of the true God; “having Him
in the second place, and the prophetic Spirit in
the third rank.” 2 Such language would have been
challenged in later times as unduly subordinating
the Son to the Father and the Holy Spirit to the ~
Son; but it is of value as correcting the impression |
which might have heen derived from the earlier
passage in which the Holy Spirit was mentioned —
after the angelic host.

Towards the end of the Apology Justin touches
again on this order of the three divine Powers.
He finds it in ‘Plato, and gives it as one of several
proofs that Plato had read but not understood
Moses. Plato had read of the Brazen Serpent
which Moses set up “on a sign” (ἐν σημείῳ), but
had not understood that the sign was the cross:
he had taken it as the form of the Greek letter X,
a χίασμα (z.e. “St. Andrew’s cross,” or a saltire, as"


1 Kal οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτοις τὸ θεολογικὸν ἡμῶν ἵσταται μέρος, ἀλλὰ καὶ
πλῆθος ἀγγέλων καὶ λειτουργῶν φαμεν, obs ὃ ποιητὴς καὶ δημιουργὸς
κόσμου θεὸς διὰ τοῦ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ λόγου διένειμε καὶ διέταξεν περί τε τὰ
στοιχεῖα εἶναι καὶ τοὺς οὐρανοὺς καὶ τὸν κόσμον καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ τὴν
τούτων εὐταξίαν (Athenag. Swpp/ic. 10).

2 Ap. 1, 13: (υἱὸν θεοῦ) ἐν δευτέρα χώρυ ἔχοντες πνεῦμά TE
προφητικὸν ἐν τρίτῃ τάξει,


ee rt


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 29


we say in heraldry). Moreover he had read in the
first chapter. of Genesis that the Spirit of God
moved upon the waters. Accordingly, says Justin,


_ “he gives the second place to the Word that is


from God, whom he declared to have been extended
saltire-wise (κεχιάσθαι) in the universe; and the


third to the Spirit who was said to move on the


water,” 1

In the closing chapters of his First Apology
Justin describes, in language such as his heathen
readers might understand, the Christian sacraments


of Baptism and Holy Communion. He gives a


paraphrase only of the baptismal formula, perhaps
with a view to lucidity, but possibly also through
unwillingness to give the actual words.” He does
not even use the terms “baptism” and “ baptise,”


_ but only speaks of “ making the washing ” or “ bath.”


“For in the name of the Father ofall and Lord God,
and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy
Spirit, they then make the washing in the water.” ὃ
He uses similar words a little lower down, with
some additions: “ There isnamed on him the name
of the Father of all, etc. . . . And in the name of
Jesus Christ, who was crucified under Pontius
Pilate, and in the name of the Holy Spirit, who by


1 42. τ, 60, Athenagoras (5 2224. 23) treats the matter more
elaborately as usual. We shall find that Irenzeus has been influenced
by Justin’s words about the χίασμα : see below, c. 34.

2 On the other hand he shows no unwillingness to give the Words
of Institution in describing the Last Supper. But there is no ground
for supposing that he attached to them a consecrating effect, nor
indeed is it known whether in his day they formed a part of the
Eucharistic Prayer.

3 Ἐπ᾿ ὀνόματος γὰρ τοῦ πατρὸς τῶν ὅλων καὶ δεσπότου θεοῦ, καὶ τοῦ
σωτῆρος ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, καὶ πνεύματος ἁγίου, τὸ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι
τότε λουτρὸν ποιοῦνται (42. 1, 61).


30 INTRODUCTION


the prophets announced beforehand all the things
concerning Jesus.”! This last addition is of special
interest in view of the ultimate inclusion of “Who
spake by the prophets” in the Creed.

In describing the Eucharist which followed after
Baptism Justin speaks first of the people’s prayers :
“ We make prayers in common, for ourselves, for
the person baptized (422. enlightened), and for all
men everywhere.” These “common prayers” are
followed by the kiss of peace. Then he who pre-
sides over the brethren (Justin avoids any technical
term such as“ bishop”) receives the Bread and the
Cup, and “he sends up praise and glory to the
Father of all through the name of the Son and the
Holy Spirit, and makes thanksgiving (‘ eucharist’)
for being accounted worthy of these gifts from
Him;” and this he does “at some length.”
“When he has completed the prayers and the
thanksgiving, all the people present respond
saying Amen.” 2

We note that the Holy Spirit is only mentioned
in reference to the offering of praise to the Father
“through the name of the Son and the Holy Spirit.”
When he goes on to describe the character of “this
food, which we call Eucharist,” there is no reference
to the Holy Spirit, but only to the Word of God:
so far are we from that Invocation of the Holy
Spirit for the purpose of consecration which came
into the liturgies two hundred years later.

Presently Justin says: “And over all our food

1 καὶ ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματος πνεύματος ἁγίου, ὃ διὰ τῶν ” FRE mpoexnpute


τὰ κατὰ τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν πάντα (ἰδ14.).
4 AS, ΝΣ


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 31


we bless the Maker of all things through His Son
_ Jesus Christ and through the Holy Spirit.”4 Once
again we observe that praise is directed /o the
Father ¢hrough the Son and Holy Spirit.
3. The Holy Spirit and the Incarnation of the
_ Word. Weare so familiar with the part assigned
in our Creeds to the Holy Spirit in connexion with
_ our Lord’s birth, that the passage now to be quoted
from Justin may at first sight seem very surprising.
It may be well to approach it by citing some words
_ from the learned and orthodox Waterland, who in
_ 1734,in his book on The Trinzty (c. vi: Works, ILI,
571: Oxford, 1843), wrote as follows in reference
to a passage of St Ireneus: “I may remark by
the way, that Irenzus here [V, c. 1] seems to
understand Spirit of God, and Holy Spirit before,
_ of the second Person, of the Logos himself coming
down upon the Virgin. So the earliest Fathers
commonly do, interpreting Luke i. 35, to that
_ sense: which I the rather note, because so their
asserting Christ’s birth of a wzrgin, and his pre-
existing as Sfirzt of God, and God, amounted to
M the same thing.” Waterland appends in a note a
_ catena of eight passages, the texts of which he cites
in full. Our passage from Justin is among them.
_ Justin mentions the subject in his First Apology
when he is interpreting Jacob’s Blessing in
_ Gen, xlix. The passage is given in full above on
_p.7. “The blood of the grape,” he says, “signifies
_ that He who is to appear has blood indeed, but not
_of human seed, but of divine power. Now the
et power after the Father of all and Lord God
᾿ 1 Ap. i, 67.


ἐπ ee a ἢ δον.


32 INTRODUCTION


. is the Word.”1 Later he says: “The power
of God came upon the Virgin and overshadowed
her.” Then he quotes the angel’s message in a
composite form: “Behold, thou shall conceive in
the womb, of (the) Holy Spirit, and shalt bear a
son, and he shall be called Son of the Most High,”
etc. (Luke i. 31, Matt. i. 20). These things, he
adds, have been taught us by those who recorded
them ; and we believe them because “the prophetic
Spirit” declared through Isaiah that so it should ©
be. Then he says: “ But the Spirit and the Power
that is from God, it is not allowable to regard as
any other than the Word (the Lagos), who also is ~
the first-begotten unto God. ... It was this
(Spirit) that came upon the Virgin and over-
shadowed her,” etc.”

This interpretation of the words “ Holy Spirit” i
Matt. i. 20and Luke i. 35 is all the more striking
because it follows immediately upon the reference |
to the “ prophetic Spirit,’ whose function it was to
announce the birth from the Virgin beforehand. ο
No further comment is necessary here on this
passage; but it may. be worth while to note that ©
the belief that the Word was Himself the agent
of His own Incarnation finds its natural place side
by side with the belief that it is through His direct
agency, and not through that of the Holy Spirit
that the bread and wine of the Eucharist are made ἢ
the Body and Blood of the Incarnate Word: see ἢ


5


1 Ap. 52.
2 Τὸ πνεῦμα οὖν καὶ τὴν δύναμιν Thy παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐδὲν BA
νοῆσαι θέμις ἢ τὸν λόγον, ds καὶ πρωτότοκος τῷ θεῷ ἐστι. . . καὶ TOUT


ἐλθὺν ἐπὶ τὴν παρθένον καὶ ἐπισκιάσαν ov διὰ συνουσίας ἀλλὰ ὃ
δυνάμεως ἔγκύμονα κατέστησε (AZ. 1, 33) : οἵ, Dial, 100 ad fin.


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 33


the well-known passage in AZ. 1, 66, where however
Justin’s intricate constructions make the exact
‘meaning of his words difficult to determine.
_ While “the prophetic Spirit” is thus expressly
| excluded from the part in the mystery of the
_ Incarnation which a later interpretation of the
_ words of the Gospels assigned to Him, it is to be
_ noted that Justin makes much of His descent upon
_ Christ at the Baptism. In Dvzal. 87 the Jew
_ Trypho is made to quote Isa. xi. 1-3 : “ The Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of
ae wisdom and understanding,” etc. Conceding that
_ it is Christ on whom the Spirit is to rest in His
sevenfold power, Trypho proceeds to ask how, if
_ Christ be God, He should be in need of this gift.
_ Justin’s answer is that He is in no such need:
_ that, when the prophet says that the Spirit shall
_ “rest” upon Him, he means that He will go no
further, that He will have reached a termination
_so far as His prophetic work among the Jewish
_ people is concerned. This, he says, you yourselves
see to be true: you have had no prophet since.
The gifts enumerated were divided among your
| prophets, some had one, some had another. But
they all met on Christ. “When He was come,
the Spirit rested, paused” (ἀνεπαύσατο οὖν,
τουτέστιν ἐπαύσατο, ἐλθόντος ἐκείνου). A new
1 Itis interesting to compare with this the passage quoted from
_ the Gospel according to the Hebrews by St Jerome in his Commen-
tary on Isaiah (lib. iv. cap. 12): ‘* Now it came to pass, when the
Lord had come up from the water, the whole fount of the Holy
_ Spirit came down and rested upon him, and said to him: My
| Son, in all the prophets was I waiting for thee, that thou mightest


come and I might rest in thee. For thou art my rest; thou art
_ my Son, (my) first-born, which reignest for ever.”


LE τ λεγο;


24 INTRODUCTION


era then began, in which Christ “having received
gifts,’ as was prophesied, “gives them, from the
grace of the power of that Spirit, to those who
believe on Him, according as He knows each to
be worthy.” To-day “you can see among us both
women and men who have gifts of grace (χαρίσί-
pata) from the Spirit of God” (c. 88). In an earlier ~
chapter he had said (c. 82: cf. also c. 39): “ Among
us at the present time there are gifts of prophecy
(prophetic charismata);” and he had just before
referred to the prophecies of St John’s Apocalypse.

While Justin thus recognises the existence of
special gifts of the Holy Spirit in the Church, ~
he does not expressly connect Him with the
ordinary graces of the Christian life. Even when
he is dealing with the interpretation of the prophe-
cies inspired by the Holy Spirit, he does not say,
as Jater writers do, that we need the enlightenment
of the same Holy Spirit to explain their meaning:
he says, again and again, that we need “the grace
of God” for this purpose. And just as he stops
short of saying that this “grace” is, or proceeds
from, the Holy Spirit, so also he stops short of
saying that “the living water” given by Christ,
the true Rock, is the Holy Spirit (Dza/. 114).


We pass now from Justin’s teaching about the
Holy Spirit to that of Irenzeus in-the Demounstra-
tion, to which we shall add illustrations taken from
his larger work Agazust Heresies. It will be
convenient at first at any rate to consider it under
the same headings as before.

1. Lhe Holy Spirit im relation to Prophecy.


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 35


Ζ

ΐ Justin’s favourite term “the prophetic Spirit” does
[ not occur in the Demonstration: but the work of
_ the Holy Spirit in the ancient prophets is fre-
ΐ quently mentioned. Thus for Moses in Genesis
_ we have in c. 24: “ God bare witness unto [Abraham]
_ by the Holy Spirit, saying in the Scripture: And
_ Abraham believed God,’ etc. So in c. 26, with
regard to the Tables written with the finger of
_ God, we have the curious explanation: “Now the
_ finger of God is that which is stretched forth from
_the Father in the Holy Spirit.” We shall see
_ presently that Irenzus elsewhere regards the Holy
_ Spirit as one of the hands of God in the work
of creation. Here no doubt he is influenced
by the words of our Lord in St Luke, “If I by
the finger of God cast out devils,” where in St
_ Matthew’s Gospel the expression is changed to
Ξε the Spirit οἵ God.”1 Then, again, in c. 30 we
are told more generally that the prophets were
_ “sent by God through the Holy Spirit.”

8 A fuller treatment is found in several passages.
| Thus in c. 49 we read: “For it is not a man who
speaks the prophecies; but the Spirit of God,
assimilating and likening Himself to the persons
_ represented, speaks in the prophets and utters the
_ words sometimes from Christ and sometimes from
the Father.” The thought is found in Justin (42.
“1, 36 ff.), where it is fully dealt with and illustrated
_ by examples. |

_ Again, inc. 67: “ He took our infirmities,” etc. :
“that is to say, He shall take, etc. For there are
_ passages in which the Spirit of God through the


1 See note on p. 53.


36 INTRODUCTION


prophets recounts things that are to be as having
taken place ...and the Spirit, regarding and
seeing the time in which the issues of the ©
prophecy are fulfilled, utters the words (accord-
ingly).” This again is found in Justin (Dza/. 114).

In his description of the third point of the Rule
of Faith (c. 6) he begins with the prophetic
function: “The Holy Spirit, through whom the
prophets prophesied, and the fathers learned the τ
things of God, and the righteous were led forth 4


into the way of righteousness; and who in the |


end of the times was poured out in a new way —
upon mankind in all the earth, renewing man unto
God.” Here we see the wider conception of the
Spirit’s work, which marks the advance upon
Justin to which we shall refer presently.

So far all has been plain: but, in view of the
fact that “the Word of God” is so frequently
mentioned in Holy Scripture as coming to the
prophets, it was inevitable that difficulty should be
felt in distinguishing the functions of the Word
and the Spirit in this connexion. Inc. 5 we read;
“ Now the Spirit shows forth the Word, and there-
fore the prophets announced the Son of God;
and the Word utters the Spirit, and therefore is
Himself the announcer of the prophets.” A
passage in c. 73 illustrates this yet further:
“David said not this of himself... but the
Spirit of Christ, who (spake) also in other prophets
concerning Him, says here by David: J /azd me

‘down and slept: I awoke, for the Lord received me.”

A few illustrations may be appended from the

five books of the great treatise Against Heresies,


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 37


II, xli. 1: Some Scriptures are too hard for us:
“but we know that the Scriptures are perfect,
_ seeing that they are spoken by the Word of God
and His Spirit; whereas we are minores et
_ novissimi a verbo dei et spiritu ejus.’ We are at
a great remove from the Word and the Spirit who
_ inspired them. He adds in striking words (δ 3)
_ that “the Scriptures are spiritual: some things we
can interpret, others are left with God, and that
~ not only in this world but in that which is to come ;
_ that God may for ever be teacher, and man for
_ ever a learner.”

_ Next we may note that Irenzus extends the
' work of the Holy Spirit to the evangelists : “The
Holy Spirit says by Matthew: Mow the birth of
| Christ was on this wise” (III, xvii. 1). And a
curious collocation is found in III, vi. 1: “ Neither
the Lord nor the Holy Spirit nor the apostles
would have definitely called any God, unless He
_ were truly God; nor any Lord save the Ruler of
all, the Father, and His Son who received rule
from Him.” Here perhaps the Holy Spirit is
referred to for the Old Testament, the Lord and
_ the apostles for the New. In III, vii. 2, however,
he recognizes the “impetus” of the Spirit in St
_ Paul’s Epistle to the Galatians, especially in his
peri questions and answers: “as though man
asked the ΠΡΈΞΕΙΟΙ, and the Spirit gave the
answer.”

_ Enough has been said to show that Irenzus
"goes beyond Justin’s expressions, and widens the
: function of the Holy Spirit in relation to Scripture.
But before we leave the topic we may note that


38 INTRODUCTION


the designation “prophetic Spirit” does occur
in Irenzus, enly with another or a modified
connotation. In III, xi. 12 we are told that certain
heretics, “in order to frustrate the gift of the
Spirit,’ which in the last days has been poured ~
forth, reject St John’s Gospel with its account of
the Paraclete: “they reject at once the Gospel and
the prophetic Spirit”! ; and, as he says again, “they
reject from the Church the grace of prophecy.”
So also in IV, xxxiv.6: “Some of the prophets
beheld the prophetic Spirit and His operations in
all manner of charismata” or gifts of grace. The
context shows that it is the working of the Spirit
in the Christian Church which was foreseen by
some of the prophets. We may compare two —
passages from the end of the Demonstration
(cc. 99 f.). “Others receive not the gifts of the ©
Holy Spirit, and cast away from themselves the
prophetic grace, watered whereby man bears the
fruit of life unto God:” and again: “Or else
they receive not the Spirit, that is, they reject
prophecy.”

2. The Holy Spirit in relation to the Father and
the Son. Under this heading we began by con-
sidering Justin’s remarkable words, in which he
declares that “ we worship and adore the Father, and —
the Son who came from Him and taught us these
things, and the host of the other good angels that
attend Him and are made like unto Him, and the
prophetic Spirit.” Hardly less remarkable, though
in a very different way, is the following passage
from the Demonstration (c. 10) ; and it has a special

1 Cf. also IIT, xi. m1.


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 39


interest from the fact that here also we have a
reference to the functions of angels.

“Now this God is glorified by His Word who is

His Son continually, and by the Holy Spirit who
. is the Wisdom of the Father of all : and the powers
of these, (namely) of the Word and Wisdom, which
_ are called Cherubim and Seraphim, with unceasing
_ voices glorify God ; and every created thing that
_ is in the heavens offers glory to God the Father of
7 He by His Word has created the whole world,
_ and in the world are the angels ;” etc.
_ The liturgical ring of this passage is unmis-
_ takable. We saw that Justin spoke of Eucharistic
_ praise as being offered to the Father “through the
name of the Son and the Holy Spirit.” But this
hardly prepares us for such a passage as we have
“just read. Two interesting parallels, however, may
_ prove suggestive. The first is from the Eucharistic
Prayer of Bishop Serapion (c. A.D. 350) :

“May the Lord Jesus speak in us, and (the)
Holy Spirit, and hymn thee through us. For
thou art far above ail rule and authority and power
and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world but also in that which is
οἰ come. Beside thee stand thousand thousands
% nd myriad myriads of angels, archangels, thrones,
dominions, principalities, powers : beside thee stand
e two most Bonourable six-winged Seraphim,
‘with two wings covering,” etc., leading up to the
is er Sanctus.+


1 Wobbermin’s edition, Zex/e τι. Untersuch. xvii, 3 ὁ, p. 5: Aa-
᾿ησάτω ἐν ἡμῖν ὅ κύριος Ἰησοῦς καὶ ἅγιον πυεῦμα, καὶ ὑμνησάτω σὲ δὶ
pov. ...

D


40 INTRODUCTION


This Prayer comes to us from Egypt. When
we look at the Liturgy of Alexandria, known as
that of St Mark, we find that the reference to the
praise offered to the Father by the Son and the
Spirit is absent. And in the place of “the two
most honourable Seraphim” we read: “the two
most honourable living creatures (=Hab. iii. 2,


LXX), the many-eyed Cherubim, and the six-_


winged Seraphim.”? In the other Greek Liturgies
“the two living creatures” are not found, but
Cherubim and Seraphim remain; and we in the
West are familiar with this combination in the
words of the Ze Deum: “Tibi Cherubim et Seraphim
incessabili voce proclamant: Sanctus, sanctus,
sanctus,” etc. 2

The second parallel is not less remarkable. It
comes from the Eucharistic Preface of the so-called
Clementine Liturgy contained in the Ajostolic
Constitutions (viii. 12). But it does not appear in
the ordinary texts. Mr C. H. Turner has recently
called attention toa MS. in the Vatican (Vat. Gr.
1506), as offering a more original text of this work
and presenting Arian features no longer to be found
in the current recension. This early text contains
the following words towards the close of the
Preface :

“Thee every incorporeal and holy order (of


beings) worshippeth ; [thee the Paraclete worship- 3


1 It is curious to notice that each of these pairs (Living Creatures,
Cherubim, Seraphim) is in turn interpreted by the Alexandrian
Origen as signifying the Son and the Holy Spirit: see the note
to c. 10 below.

2 In the Slavonic Secrets of Enoch (cc. xix f.), in both recensions,
Cherubim and Seraphim are mentioned, by themselves and in this
order, Where did the combination first arise?


a AONE AE I i 2a bpp op


ici = ae ee ge ὡς


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 41


pe 7 and, before all, thy holy Servant Jesus the
‘Christ, our Lord and God and thy angel and
captain of the host and eternal and unending high
‘priest: thee the well-ordered hosts of angels and
archangels worship,” etc.

_ When now we look back to the passage in the
Demonstration, with its reference to Cherubim and
‘Seraphim who “ with unceasing voices” glorify God,
we feel that there is matter here which deserves
‘the attention of students of the earliest forms of
the Liturgy.

| Buta yet earlier witness must be called before
_ we leave this passage. There are several places in
the Demonstration which suggest that Irenzeus was
acquainted with the splendid vision of the Ascension


Of Isaiah, a Christian apocryphal writing which
_ probably belongs to the first half of the second
century. A brief outline of that vision must be


- given here.?


Ἵ
t
ἢ
"
t
i
{


Ε Isaiah is taken (c. 7) by an angel, whose name he may
not know, because he is to return to his mortal body, first
ΠΡ into the firmament, where he finds perpetual warfare
᾿ between Satanic powers. Next he ascends into the first
| heaven, where he sees a throne with angels on either side ;


be. ¢ »


| 1 Journal of Theological Studies, Oct. 1914, p. 59: Σὲ προσκυνεῖ
πᾶν ἀσώματον καὶ ἅγιον τάγμα, [σὲ προσκυνεῖ 6 παράκλητος-,] mpd δὲ
ἔντων ὅ ἅγιός σου παῖς ᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ Χριστός, ὁ κύριος καὶ θεὸς ἡμῶν,
τοῦ δὲ ἄγγελος καὶ τῆς δυνάμεως ἀρχιστρατηγὺς- καὶ ἀρχιερεὺς αἰώνιος
αἱ ἀτελεύτητος, σὲ προσκυνοῦσι εὔρυθμοι στρατιαὶ ἀγγέλων, K.T.A.
Mr Turner says: ““ΤῊς bracketed words are by the second hand
ver an erasure according to Funk: but I do not doubt that it was
ome close connexion in the original of the Holy Spirit with angelic
“Spirits which was the motive of the erasure.”
#1 may be allowed to refer to my article (Isaiah, Ascension of)
1 Hastings’ Dictionary of the Bible for an account of this document.


have borrowed from it the outline here given. The book has since


zen edited with much care by Dr Charles.


42 INTRODUCTION


they chant a hymn of praise, which he learns is addressd to
the Glory of the seventh heaven and to His Beloved. In the
second heaven he finds also a throne with angels, but more
glorious ; he would fain fall down and worship, but is not
permitted. In the third heaven he finds the like; there is
there no mention of the deeds of the vain world from which
he has come, but he is assured that nothing escapes
observation. In the fourth heaven he again sees angels on
either side of a throne, the glory of those on the right being,
as before, greater than of those on the left ; and all are more
glorious than those below. The same in yet greater degree
is true of the fifth heaven. But in the sixth heaven (c. 8)
there is no throne, and no left hand, but all are alike in
splendour : it is in close connexion with the seventh heaven,
and its glory makes the glory of the five heavens below
seem but darkness. At length he comes (c. 9) to the
seventh heaven, where his entry is challenged, but per-
mitted. Here he sees the just clothed in their heavenly
robes, but not yet having received their thrones and crowns.
These they cannot have until the descent and the return of
the Beloved has been accomplished. He is shown also the
books which contain the transactions of the world below,
and learns that all is known in the seventh heaven. He
beholds the Lord of Glory, and is bidden to worship Him.
He then beholds a second most glorious one, like unto Him,
and again is bidden to worship; and then again a third,
who is the angel of the Holy Spirit, the inspirer of the pro-
phets. These two latter worship the ineffable Glory ; and
the chant of praise (c. 10) sounds up from the sixth heaven.
Then the voice of the Most High is heard speaking to the
Lord the Son, bidding Him descend through the heavens to
the firmament, and to the world, and even to the ange! of
the infernal regions ; He is to assimilate Himself to those


who dwell in each region in turn, so that He may not be ©


recognized as He passes down. He will ascend at length
with glory and worship from 411. The prophet now beholds


the descent of the Beloved. In the sixth heaven there is —


no change of His appearance, and the angels glorify Him.
But in the fifth He is changed, and not recognized, and so in
each of the lower heavens, down to the firmament, where
He passes through the strife that rages there, still unrecog-
nized. At this point the angel calls the prophet’s special
attention to what follows (c. 11).

Here follows a description of the Birth from a Virgin, and
a notice of the life, death, and resurrection of the Lord,
and the sending forth of the Twelve (11?-?*).


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 43


Then the prophet beholds the ascent through the firma-
ment and the six heavens: the Lord is recognized and
glorified as He ascends: at length He reaches the seventh
heaven, and takes His seat on the right hand of the great
Glory ; and the angel of the Holy Spirit sits on the left
hand. The prophet is then sent back to his mortal clothing.
On his return he warns Hezekiah that these things will come
to pass, but that they may not be communicated to the
people of Israel.

Now it is to be observed that in c. 9 of the
Demonstration \renzus gives us an account of the
Seven Heavens; in c. 10 he speaks of God as
being glorified by His Word and by the Holy
Spirit ; and in c. 84 he says that the Lord in His
descent was not recognized by any created beings,
and he thus explains the dialogue with the
heavenly powers in Ps. xxiv: “ Lift up your gates,
ye rulers .. . Who is the King of Glory?” and so
forth. We cannot therefore reasonably doubt that
Irenzus was acquainted with the vision in the
Ascension of Isaiah.

The words which immediately concern us here
are at the end of the ninth chapter of that book :
“1 saw that my Lord worshipped, and the angel of
the Spirit, and that both of them together glorified
God. And immediately all the saints approached
and worshipped: and all the saints and angels
approached and worshipped, and all the angels
glorified.”

We see then that Irenzeus by no means stands
alone in his statement that the God and Father of
all is glorified by the Son and by the Holy Spirit.
Strange as the conception is to us it was not
strange to the religious mind of the second
Christian century. It would appear to have found


44 INTRODUCTION


a place in an early form of the Liturgy, and to
have been retained by the Arian compiler of
the so-called Clementine Liturgy of the Apostolic —
Constitutions: for the Arians not infrequently —
could claim to be conservative in points of detail.
Possibly we may even trace it, in a form modified
into harmony with a later orthodoxy, in the
Liturgy of Serapion; but it is cast out altogether
in the Greek Liturgies of the subsequent period,
and bythe orthodox reviser of the Apostolic
Constitutions.

As the Demonstration starts from the Rule
of Faith—the “three points” of the Creed—it
necessarily has something to say of the relation —
of the Spirit to the Father and the Son: but ©
at once we feel that Irenzus finds difficulty
in drawing a clear distinction between the
functions of the Word and the Spirit. Inc. 5 he
says: God is rational (λογικός); therefore He
creates by the Word (λόγος) : God is Spirit;
therefore He orders all by the Spirit. Here
Ps. xxxiii. 6 comes to his aid: “ By the word of the
Lord were the heavens established, and by his
spirit all their power.” Then, having identified the
Word with the Son, he identifies the Spirit with
the Wisdom of God. After this he takes refuge
in St Paul: “ One God, the Father,’ etc. But the
passage must be given in full. :

“ Since God is rational, therefore by (the) Word —
for Reason] He created the things that were
made ; and God is Spirit, and by (the) Spirit He —
adorned all things: as also the prophet says: By
the word of the Lord were the heavens established,


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 45


and by his spirit all their power. Since then the


Word establishes, that is to say, gives body and
grants the reality of being, and the Spirit gives
order and form to the diversity of the powers ;
rightly and fittingly is the Word called the Son,
and the Spirit the Wisdom of God. Well also
does Paul His apostle say: One God, the Father,
who ts over all and through all andin us all, For
over all is the Father ; and through all is the Son,
for by means of Him all things were made by the
Father ; and zz us all is the Spirit, who cries Adda
Father, and fashions man into the likeness of God.
Now the Spirit shows forth the Word,” etc.?

Here we have moved a long way from Justin, who
does not connect the Holy Spirit with the work of
creation, nor quote Ps. xxxiii. 6; and who


expressly tells us more than once that it is the


Son who is called Wisdom by Solomon (Dial. 62
and 126). It is to other writings of Irenzus
himself that we must look for illustration of these
words of the Demonstration.

We begin with IV, xxxiv. 1 ff., a passage which


_ contains so many illustrations of the language of


the Demonstration that we must quote it at some
length. The translation is made from a compari-
son of the Latin and Armenian versions: where


_ it does not accord with the Latin, it is to be


assumed that the Armenian is followed.


1InV, xviii. 1 he gives a like interpretation, though in a different
connexion : ‘‘ Over αἰ is the Father, and He is the head of Christ ;
and through all the Word, and He is the head of the Church; and


_ in us ail the Spirit, and He is the living water which the Lord


hestows,”’ etc.
2 As quoted above, p. 36:


46 INTRODUCTION


(1) “Sothen according to His greatness it is not
possible to know God; for it is impossible that
the Father should be measured. But according
to His love—for love it is which leads us to God
through His Word—as we obey Him we ever
learn that He is so great a God, and that it is
He who by Himself created and made and adorned
and contains all things. Now in a// things are both
we and this world of ours :1 therefore we also were
made together with those things that are contained
by Him. And it is this concerning which the
Scripture says: And the Lord God formed man,
dust of the earth ; and breathed in his face the breath
of 427 (Gen. ii. 7). Angels therefore made us not,
nor formed us: for neither could angels make the
image of God, nor could any other except the true
God, nor any power standing remote from the
Father of all. For of none of these was God in
need to make whatsoever He of Himself had fore-
ordained should be made: as though He Himself
had not His own Hands. For ever with Him is
the Word and Wisdom—the Son and the Spirit—
through whom and in whom freely and of His
own power He made all things; unto whom also
the Father speaks,? saying: Let us make man after
our tmage and likeness: taking from Himself the
substance of the things created, and the pattern
of those made, and the form of those adorned.

(2) “Well then spake the Scripture which
says: first of all believe that there ts one God, who


1 Cf. c. 4: ‘‘ Now among αἱ things is this world of ours,’’ etc.,
and the note there.

* Cf.c. 55: ‘*The Father speaking to the Son” (the same
quotation, Gen. i. 26).


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 47


created and fashioned all things, and made all things
to be from that which was not; and containeth
all things, and alone is uncontained*+ Well also in
the prophets says the Angel:* Hath not one God
created us? Is there not one Father of us all
(Mal. ii. 10)? And agreeably with this the Apostle
"says: One God and Father, above all and through
all and in us all (Eph. iv. 6). In like manner also
_ the Lord says: A// things have been delivered unto
ξ me by my Father (Matt. xi. 27); plainly by Him who
Ὶ made all things: for He gave Him not the things
Bot another, but His own.?

“And im all things there is nothing excepted.
_ And for this cause He is Judge of quick and dead ;

_ having the key of David, opening and none shall


ῃ * Cf. c. 4: “ And therefore it is right first of all to believe that
there is One God, the Father, who created what was not that it
should be, and who, containing all things, alone is uncontained.”’
“See note ‘there, where the Greek is given from the Shepherd of
Hermas.
Ma 2 The Latin has ‘‘ Malachias,’”’ both here and in IV, xxix. 5, where
_ again the Armenian has ‘“‘the Angel’’: these are the only places
_ where Irenzeus quotes the prophet by name. The name Malachi
ἔν" occurs as the heading of the prophecy, and in the first verse
of it, where the LXX however give ἀγγέλου αὐτοῦ instead. There
was ‘uncertainty about the authorship, which was sometimes attri-
buted to Ezra. In 4 Esdras i. 40 a list of the twelve prophets ends
- with ὁ Malachiz, qui et angelus Domini vocatus est.’ Hippolytus
(de Antichr. 46) writes: καθὼς διὰ Μαλαχίου τοῦ ἀγγέλου φησίν.
ΟΕ Clem. Al. Strom. I, §§ 122, 127, 129, 135 (6 ἐν τοῖς δώδεκα
᾿ ἄγγελο»). In the Latin fragment of the Dzdascalia (Hauler, p. 68)
we find; ‘‘per Malachiam loqiens, qui nuncupatur et angelus ;”’ so
again in the Syriac (ed. Achelis-Flemming, p. 129): ‘‘ Malachi
the Angel.” Jerome says that Origen regarded the writer actually
_asanangel. Twice Justin assigns quotations from him to Zachariah
Dial. 29 and 49). I have adopted ‘ the Angel ” in the translation
ere to call attention to the reading. I think it not unlikely to be
_ what Irenzeus wrote : but it is right to add that the Armenian Bible
ate the LXX in reading ‘‘ his angel ” in Mal. i. 1.
eee c. 3: “For God is not ruler and Lord over the things of
ther, but over His own.’


48 INTRODUCTION


shut, and He shall shut and none shall open (Rev.
iii. 7). For none other was able, nezther in heaven
nor on earth nor beneath the earth to open the —
Father’s ook, nor to look thereon, save the Lamb
that was slain and redeemed us by his blood (Rev. —
v. 2); having received all power from Him, who
by the Word made and by Wisdom adorhed all
things, when zhe Word was made flesh (John i. 14):
that as in heaven He had the preeminence, because
He was the Word of God, so also on earth He should
have the preeminence, because He was a just man,?
who dtd no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth
(1 Pet. 11. 22); and that He should have the
preeminence also over those who are beneath the
earth, being made ¢he first-begotten from the dead —
(Rev. i. 5): and that all things should behold, as
we have said, their King: and that the Father's
light should come upon the flesh of our Lord,
and from His flesh sparkling and flashing back
should come to us, and so man should be drawn >
and caught into the incorruption of the Father’s
light.

(3) “Now that the Word, that is, the Son, was
always with the Father,’ we have shown by many
proofs, And that Wisdom, which is the Spirit,
was with Him before all creation, He says by
Solomon, thus: God by wisdom founded the earth,
and he prepared the heaven by understanding: by


snennanemntnemeinminaseaes Sueniar niente ee a NE ae en


1 Cf. c. 40: ‘Thus then the Word of God ἐπ αὐ things hath the
preeminence,” and note there.

= a c. 39: “Α just and holy man. . . che first begotten of the
dea


- “Ce Ὁ. 527 “ Chest being Son of God before all the world, is
always with the Father,”’ etc.


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 49


is knowledge the depths were broken up, and the
ad dropped down the dew (Prov. iii. 19 f.). And
again: The Lord created me (in Arm.) the beginning
| of his ways, for his works,’ etc. (Prov. viii. 22-25).

_ (4) “There is therefore one God, who by the
ord and Wisdom made and fashioned all


2)
-:.


80 the great passage runs on: later portions
of it describe the work of the Holy Spirit among
men, The footnotes have shown how much of
Ὶ “ repeated in almost the same words in the
Demonstration, apart from the particular section
‘which we have called it in to illustrate. To
that section we must return; for we are now
“concerned with the Spirit’s work in connexion
᾿ with Creation.
᾿ς First we must deal with the quotation, By che
_ word of the Lord were the heavens established, and by
his spirit all their power. This is quoted more cor-
rectly—“ by the spirit (or ‘ breath’) of his mouth”
_ —in I, xv and also in III, viii. 3. In the latter


| made all things by His Word, he presently adds a
_ reference to the Spirit: “ By His Word and Spirit


them, and granting existence to them all.” Here
pe Word and the Spirit seem to be brought
together merely because they have occurred in the
: 3 otation, and there is no further reference to the
€ Holy Spirit in the context. It might therefore
pepe that they are no more distinguished from


50 INTRODUCTION


the Hebrew poet, to whom “the word” and “ the
breath of his mouth” are but one and the same.
But Irenzeus has no eye for such parallelisms, and
the dropping of the phrase “of his mouth” in our
present passage makes this only too plain.

Next we note the expression “by the Spirit
He adorned them.’ This word “adorned” (Lat.
adornavit) recurs several times in the passage we
have quoted from Bk. IV: “created and made and


adorned and contains all things;” “the form of ©


the things adorned,” “ who by the Word made and
by Wisdom adorned all things.” The Armenian
word is the same throughout, and probably repre- —
sents the Greek ἐκόσμησεν and τῶν κεκοσμημένων."
At the end of the passage we have a similar ἢ
phrase: “who by the Word and Wisdom made ἢ
and fashioned all things (Lat. adaptavit).”* ἢ

The passage in the Demonstration goes on ἴο ὦ
say that “rightly and fittingly is the Word called τ
the Son, and the Spirit the Wisdom of God.” The
proof texts for this latter statement are not given :
but we have had them in the long passage from
the fourth book Against Heresies. For the pur-
pose of asserting the part of the Holy Spirit in
Creation, Irenzeus has boldly taken over the texts
which speak of Wisdom in this connexion—texts —


1 In Justin (42. II, 6) we have ἔκτισε καὶ ἐκόσμησε, and in
Athenagoras (Szppl. 8) ἐποίησε καὶ ἐκόσμησε.

2 The Arm. also has here a different word—one which is used
to translate καταρτίσας in the quotation from Hermas. Other
parallels are II, xlvii. 2: ‘‘condens et faciens omnia... Verbo
virtutis suze ; et omnia aptavit et disposuit Sapientia sua... qui
fecit ea per semetipsum, hoc est per Verbum et per Sapientiam —
suam:” III, xxxvili. 2: ‘*Verbo suo confirmans et Sapientia
compingens omnia,”


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 51


which Justin before him and Origen! after him
would have referred to the Son,

This equivalence in creative function of the
Son and the Spirit, as the Word and the Wisdom
of God, is strangely expressed in Bks. IV and
V, by calling them the Hands of God. In IV,
“pref. 3 we read: “Man isa mingling of soul and
flesh,? fashioned after the likeness of God and
formed (f/asmatus) by His Hands, that is, by the
Son and the Spirit, to whom also He said: Let
us make man.” ‘The conception is developed in IV,
xiv. 1 : “ The Father had no need of angels to make
the world and to form man for whose sake the
world was made; nor again was He in want of
ministration for the making of created things and
the dispensation of the work that concerned man:
but He had abundant and unbounded ministration ;
because there ministers unto Him His own Off-
spring for all purposes, and His own Hands,? that
is, the Son and the Spirit, the Word and Wisdom
to whom all the angels render service and are in
subjection.” The next occurrence of the metaphor
is in the great passage we have quoted above
(IV, xxxiv. I, “as though He had not His own
Hands”), where he practically repeats what he
has said before.

Then in V, i. 3 we have: “ For never at any time
has Adam escaped the Hands of God, to whom


1 Origen found the Spirit in Gen. i. 2 and in Ps. xxxiii. 6: but
he is quite clear that Wisdom is the Son.
Cf, c. 2: ‘*Man is a living being compounded of soul and
flesh,”’ and note there.
.- ®* For ‘‘ His own Hands” (Arm.) the Latin has ‘‘figuratio sua,”
which has troubled the commentators: the Armenian version
restores the meaning of the passage.


52 INTRODUCTION


the Father spake, saying: Let us make man after
our tmage and dikeness. And for this cause in the ©
end (of the times), 2ot of the will of flesh nor of —
the will of man (John i. 13), but of the good ©
pleasure of the Father, His Hands made the Living
Man, that Adam might become after the tmage —
and likeness of God.” Here we see the conception ~
carried on from the Creation to the Incarnation. 4

In V, v. 1, speaking of Enoch and Elijah, he
says: “By those Hands by which they were
formed (ἐπλάσθησαν) at the beginning they were ~
translated and taken up: for in Adam the Hands ©
of God were habituated to order and hold and ~
carry their own formation (πλάσμα), and to bear it —
and set it where they themselves would.” He goes ©
on to say that “the Hand of God was present” —
with the Three Children in the Furnace—namely ῦ
“the Son of God.”

Then in V, vi. 1 the continual moulding of man ~
is indicated: “God shall be glorified in His own
formation (p/asmate), conforming and conjoining it
to His Son. For by the Hands of the Father, that
is, the Son and the Spirit, man is made after the —
image and likeness of God—but not part of man.”
He is arguing for the resurrection of the flesh, not
of the soul alone.

In V, xv. 2f. our Lord’s cures in the Gospels are
said to show the Hand of God, which formed man
at the beginning: cf. also xvi. 1. This is not at
variance with the conception, for the Son is one of
the Hands of God.

Lastly, in V, xxviii. 3, he returns to the two_
Hands: “Wherefore in all this time (viz. the


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 53


000 years) man, formed at the beginning by the
Hands of God, that is, the Son and the Spirit, is
being made after the image and likeness of God.”
In the Demonstration the same thought is
ggested by the phrase inc. 11: “But man He
formed with His own Hands ;” but it is not further
dwelt upon.

The identification of the Spirit with Wisdom
was made after a fashion by some of the “ Gnostics,”
but not in a way that is likely to have influenced


Ὁ


Ἰτεπειιβ.: Nor do I know where else to find it at
this date except in Theophilus of Antioch. But


on his name we must pause for a brief digression.
I enzus, who is generally admitted to have had


RS ee ee


i "τ


e seems to have written a little earlier than
ome acquaintance with his works.


In approaching what Theophilus of Antioch has
‘to say concerning the Holy Spirit, it is of the first


importance to bear in mind that his three books
addressed to Autolycus represent a systematic
attempt to convert a heathen from the worship of
a plurality of Gods. A higher faith is set before


him, but it is not what we today should speak of


7


Sh OTE


1 In the Clementine Homilies, however, the doctrine of which
has much in common with the Helchesaite teachings of the second
century, there are some curious parallels to the language of Irenzeus
m this subject. In Hom. xvi. 12 we read: ‘‘ There is one God
who said to His Wisdom, Let us make man. Now Wisdom, with
which, as with His own Spirit, He Himself ever rejoiced (cf. Prov.
Vili. 30), is united as Soul with God, and stretched out from Him as
Hand, creating the universe (ἐκτείνεται δὲ ὧς χεὶρ δημιουργοῦσα τὸ
rav).” So in Hom. xi. 22, ‘‘of the Spirit of God moving on the
yater,” we are told: ‘‘ The Spirit has the beginning of extension
(τὴν ἀρχὴν τῆς éxtdcews) from God who made all things ;’’ and,
“when God spake, the Spirit as His Hand created all things.”
With this ἔκτασις cf. Dem. c. 26: ‘‘ Now the finger of God is
that which is stretched forth from the Father in the Holy Spirit.”


a Io πνπτ
_— ee


στ I MT, I ECE AE ee


54 INTRODUCTION


as distinctively Christian. There is no Christian
theology, properly so called, propounded: the
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection of our Lord are
not mentioned; the very names Christ and Jesus
are absent:1 the Gospels are referred to only in ©
passing for certain moral precepts. Much of the
work is directly controversial and negative: his
positive arguments are concerned with the process —
of Creation as revealed to Moses and with prophe- ~
cies of the Old Testament. In these Scriptures
and in the Gospels, so far as he touches on them, ~
he finds the inspiring activity of the Spirit of God:
but Creation, not less than Inspiration, is for him a ~
function of God’s Wisdom as well as of God’s Word ; —
and, though he does not explicitly identify Wisdom —
with the Holy Spirit, his language certainly implies —
that this was his meaning. ὲ

Theophilus leads off with a general statement
which is perhaps to be explained by his anxiety to —
keep the Unity of God in the front of his exposition.
The form of God, he says, is ineffable: “if I call —
Him Light, I speak of His handiwork; if Word, —
of His rule”—for he explains later that ἀρχὴ means
“rule” (ὅτι Goyet) as well as “ beginning” ; “if I call —
Him Mind, I speak of His understanding ; if Spirit, —
of His breath; if Wisdom, of His offspring; if ©
Strength, of His might; if Power, of His working ; —
if Providence, of His goodness,” and so on.?

Here we have “ Word,” “ Spirit,’ “Wisdom ”—as

1 Even when explaining the word ‘‘ Christian” he does not
mention Christ, but plays with the word εὔχρηστος, and then says,
‘* We are called Christians because we are anointed (χριόμεθα) with


the oil of God ” (i. I and 12),
Basie.


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 55


it were Names of God: a sort of warning that, if
these are hereafter mentioned as active powers,
they are not to be thought of as infringing on the
‘Unity of the Deity.

Next, in i. 5, we read: “the whole creation is
embraced by the Spirit of God, and the Spirit that
embraces it is together with the creation embraced
by the hand of God.” This does not encourage us
_ to expect a very clear definition of terms.

_ Ini. 7 we get what is more to our purpose. He
is speaking of God as the Physician who can open
_ the eyes of the soul: “God, who heals and quickens
by the Word and Wisdom.’ For God by His
Word and Wisdom made all things. For dy his
word were the heavens established, and by his spirit
_ all their power. Most excellent is His Wisdom:
‘God by wisdom founded the earth, and prepared the
heavens by understanding: by (his) knowledge the
depths were broken up, and the clouds dropped down
the dew.”

_ This might be Irenzus himself There is the
“same inexact quotation of Ps. xxxiii. 6, with “his
“spirit,” instead of “the spirit (or ‘breath’) of his
mouth”; and the same full quotation of Prov. iii.


Ἵ In ii. 9 Wisdom and Holy Spirit are found in
close conjunction. The prophets being “ spirit-
1 See above, pp. 44, 48f.


56 INTRODUCTION


bearers of holy Spirit” (πνευματοφόροι πνεύματος
ayiov) were able to take in the Wisdom that is from


Him (2. 6. from God) and by this Wisdom spoke of J


creation and of other things, future as well as past.
Wisdom is here connected with the Holy Spirit,
yet not expressly identified with Him.

We go on (ii. 10) to what the prophets have
told us about the creation. Out of what did not
exist God made all things. For God has no


coeval. Thoughin need of nought in His existence |


before the ages, yet He willed to make man, by
whom He might be known. So He made the
world in preparation for man. And this is how
He did it: “God having His own Word existent
within His own heart (ἐνδιάθετον), begat Him,
together with His own Wisdom, uttering Him
forth before all things This Word He used as
minister for the things brought into being by Him,
and through Him He made all things. This
(Word) is also called Rule (ἀρχή, ὅτι ἄρχει), because
He rules and dominates all that has been created τ
through Him. This (Word) therefore, being |


Spirit of God and Rule and Wisdom and Power ἢ


of the Highest, came down upon the prophets and
through them spoke of the world’s creation and
all other things. For the prophets were not there
when the world was made, but (only) the Wisdom ἢ


of God which is in Him, and His holy Word who Ϊ


is ever present with Him. So Solomon ϑᾶύϑ:
When he prepared the heaven I was present with


1 Ἔχων οὖν ὁ θεὸς τὸν ἑαυτοῦ λόγον ἐνδιάθετον ἐν τοῖς ἰδίοις ἢ


σπλάγχνοις, ἐγέννησεν αὐτὸν μετὰ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ σοφίας ekepevtdmevos —


πρὸ τῶν ὕλων. The language is moulded on Ps. xlv. 1: ᾿Εξερεύξατο ἢ


ἢ καρδία μου λόγον ἀγαθόν.


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 57


him,’ and so on. “And long before Solomon
Moses, or rather the Word of God through him as
an instrument, says: /z the beginning God made
the heaven and the earth.” Then follows a mention
of “the Divine Wisdom ” as foreknowing the foolish
idolatries of men, and as saying Ju the beginning
God made, that it might be understood that “in
His Word God made the heaven and the earth.”

_ It may be that Theophilus thus passes from the

Word of God to the Wisdom of God, and back
again, and even calls the Word both Spirit of God
and Wisdom, in order to maintain the ruling
conception of the Unity of the Deity. He speaks
of God as begetting His own Word together with
His own Wisdom—and we remember that in an
earlier place he spoke of Wisdom as the offspring
(γέννημα) of God—but he has not used the word
“Son,” though this he will have to do later. He
writes so clearly when he chooses, that we are
almost forced to conclude that he is withholding
the fuller doctrine with intentional reserve from
one who still persists in his heathen beliefs.

He now quotes (ii. 11) the whole of the first
hapter of Genesis, and begins to comment on it,
rst noting “the exceeding greatness and riches
f the Wisdom of God” displayed in it. Presently
ii. 13) he says that, unlike man, God can begin
is building from the roof. Therefore “Jz the
eginning God made the heaven, that is, through
e Beginning (διὰ τῆς ἀρχῆς) the heaven was
ade, as we have explained.” He has already
alled the Word doy, though in the sense of
Rule. The Spirit appears as the vivifying power


58 INTRODUCTION


in connexion with the water. Then “the Command —
(4 διάταξις) of God, that is, His Word,” introduces
light. Then the Word of God gathers the waters ©
“into one assembly” (εἰς συναγωγήν), a phrase ξ
which presently is ΔΙ] εσογίϑεα. ἢ

When he comes to the fourth day, on which ᾿
the luminaries were created, he offers some alle- —
gorical interpretations. Man, though not yet
created, is in a way anticipated and prefigured.
The sun, never waning, is a type of God in His
eternal fulness: the moon with her changes is 8
type of man, his re-birth and resurrection. “In ;
like manner also,” he proceeds, “the three days —
before the luminaries were made are types of the
triad—God and His Word and His Wisdom ;?_
and to the fourth type (what corresponds) is man,
who needs the light: so that there may be God,
Word, Wisdom, Man. This is why the luminaries
were made on the fourth day.” And he goes on
to interpret the stars, bright and less bright, as”
the prophets and other just men, and the planet
as wanderers from God.

Here for a moment we seem to have got the
doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and the identification
of Wisdom with the Spirit. And we have ς


ν᾿.


᾿ς" a τ τὶ


St Spe <2


earlier example of the use of the word Tpia¢
in this sense. But we are instantly warned off
from such a view by his introduction of Man 85.
a fourth member of the series. If he has com

too near enunciating the Trinity, he certainly


1 ii, 14: Tas ovvaywyas, λεγομεν δὲ ἐκκλησίας ἁγίας.
2 ii. 15: τύποι εἰσὶ τῆς τριάδος, τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τοῦ λόγου αὐτοῦ καὶ
τῆΞ σοφίας αὐτοῦ. Β΄


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 59


‘escapes, covering his tracks. Is it possible that
‘these were “words to the wise”? At any rate he
_ has said nothing that could raise in the mind of
_ Autolycus any thought of plurality of Gods.
_ Inii. 18 he comes on to the creation of man. First
_ the high dignity of man is indicated in the words,
_ Let us make man after our image and likeness.
ΠΟ “For when God had made all things by word,
i and counted them all as subsidiary (πάρεργα), the
‘making of man He alone counted work of His
'_ own hands. Yea more, as though needing
assistance, God is found saying, Let us make...
_ But to none other did He say it, save to His own
_ Word and His own Wisdom.”
_ Here again we almost seem to be listening to
_Irenzus. Is it possible that it is in view of the
 indistinctness of this very teaching that Irenzus
_ so often reiterates that the Word and the Wisdom
_ are the Son and the Spirit, and that these are the
f Hands of God? Theophilus has almost said it
himself: but he has stopped short of saying it.
_ And in a later chapter (ii. 22) he will return to
_ the old vagueness, and tell us that it was “not the
_ God and Father of all . . . but His Word, through
whom He made all things, who, being His Power
and His Wisdom, represented the Father of all,”


60 INTRODUCTION


anything was made He had Him to His Counsellor,
as being His own mind and understanding. But
when He willed to make what He had counselled,
He begat this Word into outwardness (προφορικόν),
as first-begotten of all creation: not being Him-
self emptied of the Word, but having begotten
the Word, and for ever conversing with His Word.”
He then quotes the first verses of St John’s
Gospel; but he does not go on to “the Word
made flesh.”

In all this we have much that reminds us of
Irenzeus, and there are yet closer parallels to be
found in later chapters. We cannot but regret
that we have none of those works of Theophilus
which would have given us his more distinctively
Christian teaching, such as Autolycus might have
received had he been willing to become a catechu-
men. We have enough at any rate to make us
feel that Irenzeus was not on wholly new ground
in this particular matter, even if he trod it much
more firmly than his predecessor.

We now return to the Demonstration and read a
passage in which Irenzus sums up a portion of
his argument (c. 47). “So then the Father is Lord
and the Son is Lord, and the Father is God and
the Son is God: for that which is begotten of God
is God.” This surprises us alike by its anticipation
of a later formula, and by its silence in regard
to the Holy Spirit. It is only at a later point
after a quotation from Ps. xlv, that the Spirit
is mentioned : “The Son, as being God, receives
from the Father, that is, from God, the throne of
the everlasting kingdom, and the oil of anointing


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 61


above His fellows. The oil of anointing is the
Spirit, wherewith He has been anointed.” This
statement is also found in III, xix. 3: and in
Ill, vi. 1 we read: “Since therefore the Father is
truly Lord and the Son is truly Lord, the Holy
Spirit duly indicated them by the title of Lord ;”
and, after certain texts have been quoted: “For
the Holy Spirit indicated both by the title of
Lord—Him who is anointed, even the Son, and
Him who anoints, that is, the Father.”

The concern of Irenzus, as of Justin before him,
is with the Father and the Son; and he writes
always with the heresy of Marcion in the back of
| his mind. It would seem as though no question of
the Deity of the Holy Spirit occurred to him.
‘The Spirit was the Spirit of God and the Spirit of
Christ. It was necessary to insist that “that
which is begotten of God is God :” the Godhead
_ ofthe Son required proof, But to say that “the
_ Spirit of God” is truly God would have been
to him a tautology. The thought of the Spirit as
4 God did not as yet involve any such distinction as
could seem to conflict with the Unity of the Deity.
_ To do justice to the teaching of Irenzus so far
as it regards the relation of the Holy Spirit to the
Father and the Son, it would be necessary to
examine what he has to tell us of the Spirit’s work
in the process of man’s restoration. An adequate


1 The earlier part of this chapter has been quoted above (p. 37).
‘In insisting that no other save the Father and the Son is called God
or Lord in the full sense, Irenzus is following Justin (Dial. 56).
Justin has quoted Ps. xlv. 7, and asks: Ei οὖν καὶ ἄλλον τινὰ θεολο-
“γεῖν καὶ κυριολογεῖν τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιόν φατε ὑμεῖς παρὰ τὸν πατέρα τῶν
Γ ὅλων καὶ τὸν χριστὸν αὐτοῦ. Equally strong are the statements in
) Dial. 65 and 68.


fi


62 INTRODUCTION


consideration of this would correct the one-sided
view which is all that we gain from treating of
the points on which his conceptions are farthest
removed from those with which we ourselves are
familiar. It has been necessary to consider these
points with some fulness, because it is important to
observe how much still remained unsettled, and
how great a task still lay before the leaders of
Christian thought before such definitions could be
reached as should adequately guard the Catholic
doctrine of the Holy Trinity. It is not possible
however to do more within our present limits, and
it is fortunate for us that the gap may be filled by
a reference to the careful and sympathetic
exposition of Dr. Swete in his valuable work on
The Holy Spirit in the Ancient Church (1912, pp.
89-94). ‘“Irenzus,” he tells us, “enters into the —
details of the Holy Spirit’s work on the hearts and
lives of men with a fulness which is far in advance
of other Christian writers of the second century.”
And he sums up by saying: “On the whole, the
pneumatology of Irenzus is a great advance on all
earlier Christian teaching outside the Canon.”
With this apology for incompleteness we must pass
on to the third and last point of our subject.

3. The Holy Spirit and the Incarnation of the
Word. We have seen how Justin declared that it
was not permissible to regard “the Spirit” and
“the Power” that came upon the Virgin as any
other than the Word of God Himself. And we
also noted: in passing that Theophilus of Antioch
spoke of the Word as being “Spirit of God” and
“Power of the Highest,’ the second of which ©


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 63


designations comes from Luke i. 35. We have
now to ask whether the language of Irenzus
corresponds with this interpretation and makes
the Word Himself to be the agent of His own
Incarnation.

We begin with a strange passage of the
Demonstration (c. 71) in which he expounds Lam.
iv. 20: The Spirit of our face, the Lord Christ, was
taken in their snares ; of whom we said, Under his
shadow we shall live among the Gentiles. Ue has
used part of this text in III, xi. 2, a passage which
must be cited here. Christ, he says, is Salus,
Salvator, and Salutarein various Scriptures. “He
is Salvator (Saviour), because He is Sonand Word
of God: Salutare (perhaps as saving-principle),
because He is Spirit; for the Spirit of our face, it
says, Christ the Lord: and He is Salus (Salvation),
because He is flesh.” He has in his mind some
“ Gnostic” error which he is refuting ; but we are
only concerned with his use of the text to prove
that Christ is Spirit. In the passage in the
Demonstration he makes the same use of it. This
Scripture, he says, declares “that Christ being
(the) Spirit of God was to become a suffering
man.” Then he adds: “ And by shadow he means
His body. For just as a shadow is made by a
body, so also Christ’s body was made by His
Spirit.” Here again we are not concerned with the
general argument, but only with these two state-
ments: Christ was Spirit of God, and Christ’s body
was made by His Spirit. This is as much as
to say that the Word of God was the agent of His
own Incarnation,


64 INTRODUCTION


In c. 59 we read: “By flower [of the root of
Jesse| he means His flesh (or “ body”): for from
spirit it budded forth, as we have said before.”
The reference would appear to be to c. 51: “ that
the same God forms Him from the womb, that is,
that of the Spirit of God He should be born.”

In V, i. 2, controverting Docetic views, he says :
“ If He were not man and yet appeared to be man,
then neither did He remain what He was in truth,
(viz.) Spirit of God, since the Spirit is invisible ; nor
was any truth in Him, since He was not what He
appeared to be.”

In c. 97, after quoting from Baruch iii. 38,
Afterward did he appear upon earth, and was
conversant with men, he says: “mingling and
mixing the Spirit of God the Father with the
plasma (‘formation’) of God, that man might be
after the image and likeness of God.” There is
a close parallel in IV, xxxiv. 4, a continuation of
the great passage cited at length above: ‘ His
advent according to flesh, whereby a mingling and
communion of God and man was made, according
to the good-pleasure of the Father: the Word of
God having foretold from the beginning that God
should be seen of men and should be conversant with
them on the earth ... that man being intermingled +
with the Spirit of God should be brought to the
glory of the Father.”

The general thought here is that the restoration
“οὗ man takes place after the pattern of the Incar-
nation—the intermingling of human flesh with


1 Latin : complexus homo Spiritum Dei. Arm.: “ intertwined
and mingled with.” Perhaps the Greek was συμπλεκόμενος,


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 65


the Spirit of God. If the Spirit of God in the
Incarnation is thought of primarily as Christ
Himself, yet there is no sharp distinction drawn
between Christ as Spirit and the Spirit that works
in believers. The indistinctness is not greater
than in St Paul: “if the Spirit of God be in you
. . . but if any man have not the Spirit of Christ
-.. but if Christ be in you... if the Spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth
in you ”—all in consecutive verses in Rom. viii. 9 ff.

We have left to the last a phrase, which taken
alone might have suggested a later view. If we
are not to misinterpret Irenzus, we must bear
in mind that the clause “ Conceived of the Holy
Ghost” does not appear in any credal confession
before the Council of Ariminum in 359, and it
- was not until some years later that it found final
acceptance. It belongs to a period of definition
long subsequent to the age of Irenzus.

The words in question are these (c. 40): “ He
from whom all things are, He who spake with
Moses, came into Judza, generated from God
by (the) Holy Spirit, and born of the Virgin Mary.”
I have been compelled to use the word “ generated,”
at the risk of misunderstanding: but the Armenian
word means simply “sown.” And we shall do
well at once to compare III, xvii. 6: “The Word,

. united and sown together with that which He
Himself had formed (or, as the Latin has it, uwnztus
et consparsus suo plasmatz) according to the good-
pleasure of the Father, and made flesh.” It is the
Word that the Father “sows” by His Spirit. And
to show the wide scope of the metaphor, we may


66 INTRODUCTION


compare IV,xx.1: “The Son of God is sown every-
where in the Scriptures ; at one time speaking with
Abraham and eating with him,” and so forth. And,
again, in IV, xlviii. 2 we have: “the seed of the
Father of all, that is, the Spirit of God, through
whom all things were made, mingled and united
with flesh, that is, His plasma (‘formation’).”
This is said of the Holy Spirit in His work
amongst men. :

The whole topic is further illustrated by V, i. 3:
“The Ebionites .. . not willing to understand
that the Holy Spirit came upon Mary, and the power
of the Highest overshadowed her; wherefore also
that which was born was holy, and Son of the
Most High God, the Father of all, who wrought
His incarnation, and manifested a new birth ; that,
as by the former birth we inherited death, so by
this birth we should inherit life.” Presently he
adds: “and not considering that, just as at the
beginning of our formation (f/asmatio) in Adam
that breath of life which was from God, being
united to; the thing formed (f/asmatz), animated
man and manifested a rational animal, so at the
end the Word of the Father and the Spirit of God,
being united (adunztus, singular) to the original
substance of the formation (f/asmatio) of Adam,
made man living and perfect, capable of receiving
the perfect Father; that, as in the animal we all
died, so in the spiritual we should all be made
alive.” 1

It results from this examination that the teaching


1 The words which follow have been quoted above, p. 51: ‘‘ For
never at any time hath Adam escaped the Hands of God,” εἰς,


DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 67


of Irenzeus as to the relation of the Holy Spirit to
the Incarnation is vague, perhaps even transitional.
He does not, like Justin, plainly assert that the
Spirit of God who came down upon the Virgin
was the Word of God Himself; nor, on the other
hand, does he definitely preclude that view. He
seems to prefer to think of a cooperation of the
Word of God and the Wisdom of God—the Two
Hands of God to whom the creation of the first-
formed man was due.


We may conclude by quoting a striking passage
from the Demonstration,\ the earlier part of which
will recall the noble lines of Newman’s hymn:

O wisest love! that flesh and blood,
Which did in Adam fail,


Should strive afresh against the foe,
Should strive and should prevail.


And that a higher gift than grace
Should flesh and blood refine,

God’s presence and his very Self,
And Essence all-divine.

“So the Word was made flesh, that, through that
very flesh which sin had ruled and dominated,
it should lose its force and be no longer in us.
And therefore our Lord took that same original
formation as (His) entry into flesh, so that He
might draw near and contend on behalf of the
fathers, and conquer by Adam that which by
Adam had stricken us down. Whence then is
the substance of the first-formed (man)? From
the Will and the Wisdom of God, and from the
virgin earth. For God had not sent rain, the


1 Dem. cc. 31 f.


68 INTRODUCTION


Scripture says, upon the earth, before man was
made; and there was no man to tll the earth,
From this, then, whilst it was still virgin, God
took dust of the earth and formed the man, the
beginning of mankind. So then the Lord, sum-
ming up afresh this man, took the same dispensa-
tion of entry into flesh, being born from the Virgin
by the Will and the Wisdom of God; that He
also should show forth the likeness of Adam’s entry
into flesh, and there should be that which was
written in the beginning, man after the tmage and
likeness of God.”


ἢ


i
i


THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE
APOSTOLIC PREACHING


1. Knowing, my beloved Marcianus, your desire
to walk in godliness, which alone leads man to
life eternal, I rejoice with you and make my prayer
that you may preserve your faith entire and so be
pleasing to God who made you. Would that it
were possible for us to be always together, to help
each other and to lighten the labour of our earthly
life by continual discourse together on the things
that profit But, since at this present time we
are parted from one another in the body, yet
according to our power we will not fail to speak
with you a little by writing, and to show forth in
brief the preaching of the truth for the confirmation
of your faith.2 We send you as it were a manual
of essentials, that by little you may attain to much,
learning in short space all the members of the


body of the truth, and receiving in brief the


1 This opening section is in the manner of the introductions to
each of the five books Agazust Heresies: in the first of these, of


which the Greek is preserved, we have parallels to language used
here: καθὼς δύναμις ἡμῖν, and ἐπὶ πολὺ καρποφορήσεις τὰ δι᾽ ὀλίγων


bg’ ἡμῶν εἰρημένα.
2 “Τὸ shew forth the preaching.” This corresponds to the


_ wording of the title: the ἐπίδειξις, ostensto, or ‘‘ demonstration”


of the Apostolic Preaching.
3 Lit. ‘‘a more essential remembrancer.”
4 Cf. I, i. 20: ἕν ἕκαστον δὲ τῶν εἰρημένων ἀποδοὺς τῇ ἰδίᾳ τάξει,


᾿ καὶ προσαρμόσας τῷ τῆς ἀληθείας σωματίῳ.


69


70 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


demonstration of the things of God. So shall it
be fruitful to your own salvation, and you shall put
to shame all who inculcate falsehood, and bring
with all confidence our sound and pure teaching to
everyone who desires to understand it. For one
is the way leading upwards for all who see, lightened
with heavenly light: but many and dark and
contrary are the ways of them that see not. This
way leads to the kingdom of heaven, uniting man
to God: but those ways bring down to death,
separating man from God. Wherefore it is needful
for you and for all who care for their own salvation
to make your course unswerving, firm and sure by
means of faith, that you falter not, nor be retarded


and detained in material desires, nor turn aside and ~


wander from the right.

2. Now, since man is a living being compounded
of soul and flesh, he must needs exist by both of
these: and, whereas from both of them offences
come, purity of the flesh is the restraining abstinence
from all shameful things and all unrighteous deeds,
and purity of the soul is the keeping faith towards
God entire, neither adding thereto nor diminishing
therefrom. For godliness is obscured and dulled


by the soiling and the staining of the flesh, and is ©
broken and polluted and no more entire, if false- —


hood enter into the soul: but it will keep itself in


its beauty and its measure, when truth is constant —
in the soul? and purity in the flesh. For what —


a AOE EM pref, 3: “‘Homo est autem temperatio anime et —


carnis:” V, vi. I, viii. I, ix. I.


2 Or, ‘‘spirit.”” The Armenian word for “spirit” (πνεῦμα) is —
sometimes used also for ‘‘ soul ” (ψυχή) : the context shows that it is ἱ


so used here.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 2, 3 71


profit is it to know the truth in words, and to
pollute the flesh and perform the works of evil?
Or what profit can purity of the flesh bring, if truth
be not in the soul? For these rejoice with one
another, and are united and allied to bring man
face to face with God. Wherefore the Holy Spirit
says by David: Blessed ἐς the man who hath not Ps. i. τ.
walked in the counsel of the ungodly: that is, the
counsel of the nations which know not God: for
those are ungodly who worship not the God that
_ truly is. And therefore the Word says to Moses:
lam He thatis:+ but they that worship not the Ex. iii.
od that is, these are the ungodly. And hath not ‘*
_ stood in the way of sinners: but sinners are those
who have the knowledge of God and keep not His
commandments ; that is, di8dainful scorners. And
hath not sat in the seat of the pestilential:* now the
pestilential are those who by wicked and perverse
doctrines corrupt not themselves only, but others
also. For the seat isa symbol of teaching. Such
then are all heretics: they sit in the seats of the
Ὶ estilential, and those are corrupted who receive
the venom of their doctrine.
_ 3. Now, that we may not suffer ought of this
kind, we must needs hold the rule of the faith with-


loving Him as Father. Now this doing is produced
7 Lit. “1 am the Existing One,” asin LXX’Eyd εἶμι ὁ Sv. In III,
i. 2 the words are quoted as spoken by the Father.
3 Here, as usual, the LXX is followed (λοιμῶν).
ΝΟ ΟΕῚ,1, 20: 6 why cavévn THs ἀληθείας ἀκλινῆ ἐν ἑαυτῷ κατέχων,
ὃν διὰ τοῦ ee εἴληφε. The Arm. has taken over the


Isa. vii. 9


72 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


by faith: for Isaiah says: 77. ye believe not, necther —
shall ye understand. And faith is produced by the
truth ; for faith rests on things that truly are. For —
in things that are, as they are, we believe; and
believing in things that are, as they ever are, we
keep firm our confidence inthem. Since then faith —
is the perpetuation of our salvation, we must needs —
bestow much pains on the maintenance thereof, in
order that we may have a true comprehension οὗ
the things that are. Now faith occasions this for
us; even as the Elders, the disciples of the
Apostles,! have handed down to us. First of all —
it bids us bear in mind that we have received —
baptism for the remission of sins, in the name of
God the Father, and in the name of Jesus Christ,


the Son of God, who was incarnate and died and —


rose again, and in the Holy Spirit of God. And —
that this, baptism is the seal of eternal life, and is ©
the new birth unto God, that we should no longer
be the sons of mortal men, but of the eternal and
perpetual God; and that what is everlasting and —
continuing is made God ;? and is over all things ~
that are made, and all things are put under Him; ~


1 Cf. V, xxxvi. i: ‘* presbyteri apostolorum discipuli.” .

* This passage is obscure, and I cannot feel any confidence in my —
rendering of it. The Armenian translator has probably misunder-
stood the construction of the Greek: his verbs are all in the
infinitive, which suggests that Irenzeus is recording what the faith
teaches. The words ‘“‘made God”’ represent θεοποιεῖσθαι. This
word, if not traceable elsewhere in Irenzeus, is found in other early
writers : ὁ. ge Hippolytus, Philos. x. 34: γέγονας γὰρ θεός eae
ἐθεοποιήθης ἀθάνατος γεννηθείς " οὐ γὰρ πτωχεύει θεὸς καὶ σὲ θεὸν
ποιήσας εἰς δόξαν αὐτοῦ. It is frequent in Athanasius; e.g. De
Incarn. 54: αὐτὸς yap ἐνηνθρώπησεν, ἵνα ἡμεῖς θεοποιηθῶμεν. In
Irenzeus the thought finds expression in various forms: see IV, xiii.”
3: ‘‘quoniam non ab initio dii_facti sumus, sed primo quidem
homines, tunc demum dii:” also III, vi. i.


and. all the things that are put under Him are
4 made His own; for God is not ruler and Lord over
_ the things of another, but over His own ;? and all
things are God’s; and therefore God is Almighty,
and all things are of God.

4. For it is necessary that things that are made
should have the beginning of their making from
some great cause ; and the beginning of all things
is God. For He Himself was not made by any,
and by Him all things were made. And therefore
it is right first of all to believe that there is One
_ God, the Father, who made and fashioned all
_ things, and made what was not that it should be,

and who, containing all things, alone is uncon-
_ tained.2 Now among all things is this world of
ours,? and in the world is man: so then this world
_also was formed by God.

_ δ. Thus then there is shown forth 4 One God, the

Father, not made, invisible, creator of all things;
_ above whom there is no other God, and after whom
there is no other God. And, since God is rational,


| APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 4, 5 73


ΓῊ
‘me


1 This is a reminiscence of controversy with the heretics who
denied that the Good God of the New Testament was the Creator
God of the Old Testament : see IV, xxxiv. 2: ‘‘ non enim aliena sed
sua tradidit ei” (of the Father committing all things to the Son) ;

V, ii. 1: “ vani autem qui in aliena dicunt Dominum venisse, velut
_aliena concupiscentem ” (where the Arm. enables us to correct the
Latin, which has ‘“‘ Deum ”).

2 In IV, xxxiv. 2 he quotes, as ‘‘Scripture,” the Shepherd of
Hermas, Mand. 1: Up@rov πάντων πίστευσον ὅτι εἷς ἐστὶν ὁ θεός, ὅ τὰ
πάντα κτίσας καὶ καταρτίσας, καὶ ποιήσας ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς τὸ εἶναι
χὰ πάντα, καὶ πάντα χωρῶν, μόνος δὲ ἀχώρητος dy. Cf. also I,
“ἄν. τ.

_ * IV, xxxiv. 1: ‘‘in omnibus autem et nos, et hunc mundum qui
_ estsecundum nos:” I, xv. 1: ‘‘ etenim mundus ex omnibus: ” III, xi.
7: “in omnibus ergo est et hzec que secundum nos est conditio.”’

_ * Or “shown to be”: cf. V, xviii. 1: “ Et sic unus Deus Pater
_ ostenditur (=delxvutat).”


κε > eee


τ

4
4
Ma


Cf. Isa.
xliii. 10.


Ps. xxxill,


Eph. ἐν. 6.


Cf. Gal.
iv. 6.


74 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


therefore by (the) Word He created the things
that were made ;! and God is Spirit, and by (the)-
Spirit He adorned all things: as also the prophet
says: By the word of the Lord were the heavens
established,-and by his spirit all their power. —
Since then the Word establishes, that is to say,
gives body? and grants the reality of being, and
the Spirit gives order and form to the diversity οὗ
the powers; rightly and fittingly is the Word —
called the Son, and the Spirit the Wisdom of God.? ©
Well also does Paul His apostle say: One God,
the Father, who ἐς over all and through all and in us ᾿
all, For over allis the Father; and through all 5.
the Son, for through Him all things were made by ~
the Father ; and zz us all is the Spirit, who cries —
Abba Father, and fashions man into the likeness of —
God.4 Now the Spirit shows forth the Word, and
therefore the prophets announced the Son of God;
and the Word utters the Spirit, and therefore is
Himself the announcer of the prophets, and leads —
and draws man to the Father.

6. This then is the order of the rule of our faith, —
and the foundation of the building, and the ©


1 God is λογικός, therefore by λόγος He created the world. —
The play on the words is given by the Armenian, but cannot ©
be given by the English translation. δ

2 “Gives body :” apparently representing σωματοποιεῖ: cf, 1.
1 9 of the Demiurge of Valentinus: ἐξ ἀσωμάτων σωματοποιήσαντα.

Ὁ ΤΠ ΧΧΣΙΙΝ 2% ‘*Verbo suo confirmans et Sapientia compingens —
omnia ;” me xxxiv. 2: ‘*qui omnia Verbo fecit et Sapientia ei
adornavit ; : ‘qui Verbo et Sapientia fecit et adaptavit omnia.’
On this ἜΝ oe see Introd. pp. 44 ff.

ΑΨ, xviii. 1: ‘‘Super omnia quidem Pater, et ipse est caput 6
Christi ; per omnia autem Verbum, et ipse est caput ecclesice ; 2
omnibus autem nobis Spiritus, et ipse est aqua viva quam proestat
Dominus,” etc. Cf. Hippol. ως. Moet. 14: ὃ ὧν πατὴρ ἐπὶ πάντων,
SoBe vibe Bred πάντων, τὺ δὲ ἅγιον πνεῦμα ἐν πᾶσιν.


- APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 6, 7 75


stability of our conversation: God, the Father, not
made, not material, invisible ; one God, the creator
of all things: this is the first point? of our faith.
The second point is: The Word of God, Son of
God, Christ Jesus our Lord, who was manifested to
the prophets according to the form of their
_ prophesying and according to the method of the
Ἷ dispensation of the Father:* through whom all
_ things were made; who also at the end of the
times, to complete and gather up? all things, was
4 made man among men, visible and tangible,* in
ἢ order to abolish death and show forth life and
᾿


_ produce a community of union® between God and
man. And the third point is: The Holy Spirit,
Η through whom the prophets prophesied, and the
: fathers learned the things of God, and the right-
᾿ς eous were led forth into the way of righteousness ;
and who in the end of the times was poured out
in a new way® upon mankind in all the earth,
_ renewing man unto God.

7. And for this reason the baptism of our


1 Lit. **head:” cf. cc. 7, 100.

2 This is fully worked out in IV, lv. 1-6: the prophets were
‘*members of Christ,” and so each, according to the ‘‘ member”
that he was, declared his portion of prophecy, all together
_ announcing the whole.

3 The same double rendering of ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι (Eph. i. 10)
is found in the Arm. version of V, i. 2.

» ‘IV, xi. 4: ‘‘visibilem et palpabilem ;” cf. IV, xiii. 1, where
_ the Arm. shows that the Latin “ passibilis” should be corrected to
_ “ palpabilis.”

5 This double rendering occurs in the Arm. of IV, xxxiv. 4 and
V, i. 1, where the Latin has simply ‘‘communio.” With the whole
of this passage compare IV, xxxiv. 4: “‘ qui novissimis temporibus
_ homo in hominibus factus est, ut finem conjungeret principio, id est,
_ hominem Deo.”

_ δ We have the same words in IV, lv. 6: ‘‘in novissimis tem-
_ poribus nove effusus est in nos.”


76 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


regeneration proceeds through these three points :
God the Father bestowing on us regeneration
through His Son by the Holy Spirit. For as
many as carry (in them) the Spirit of God?! are
led to the Word, that is to the Son; and the Son
brings them to the Father ; and the Father causes
them to possess incorruption.” Without the Spirit
it is not possible to behold the Word of God, nor
without the Son can any draw near to the Father:
for the knowledge of the Father is the Son,’ and the
knowledge of the Son of God is through the Holy
Spirit; and, according to the good pleasure of the
Father, the Son ministers and dispenses * the Spirit
to whomsoever the Father wills and as He wills.

8. And by the Spirit the Father is called Most
High and Almighty and Lord of hosts; that we
may learn concerning God that He it is who is
creator of heaven and earth and all the world, and
maker of angels and men, and Lord of all, through
whom all things exist and by whom all things are
sustained ; merciful, compassionate and very tender,
good, just, the God of all, both of Jews and
of Gentiles, and of them that believe. To them
that believe He is as Father, for in the end of the
times He opened up the covenant® of adoption ;

1 IV, xxv. 2: ‘‘assuescens hominem portare ejus Spiritum "Ὡς
xxxiv. 6: ‘‘qui portant Spiritum ejus.”

2 IV, xxxiv. 5: ‘‘Spiritu quidem preeparante hominem in Filium
Dei, Filio autem adducente ad Patrem, Patre autem incorruptelam
donante;” V, xxxvi. 2: ‘‘per Spiritum quidem ad Filium, per
Filium autem ascendere ad Patrem.”

3 IV, xi. 5: ‘‘ Agnitio enim Patris Filius.”

4 Lit. ‘‘ministerially dispenses.” Cf. V, xviii. 1: ‘‘ Verbum
. .. preestat Spiritum omnibus quemadmodum vult Pater.”

5 Cf. c. 91; and III, xi. 5: ‘‘ testamentum hominibus aperiens ;”


V, ix. 4: ‘*testamentum evangelii apertum et universo mundo
lectum ;” xxxiii. 1: ‘‘apertionem hereditatis ;” cf, III, xviii. 1.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 8,9 77


_ but to the Jews as Lord and Lawgiver, for in the
intermediate times, when man forgat God and
departed and revolted from Him, He brought them
into subjection by the Law, that they might learn
that they had for Lord the maker and creator, who
also gives the breath of life, and whom we ought to
worship day and night: and to the Gentiles as
maker and creator and almighty: and to all alike
sustainer and nourisher and king and judge; for
none shall escape and be delivered from His judg-
ment, neither Jew nor Gentile, nor believer that has
sinned, nor angel: but they who now reject His
_ goodness shall know His power in judgment, ac-
cording to that which the blessed apostle says:
Not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to Rom. ii.
repentance; but according to thy hardness and im-4-
d _ penitent heart thou treasurest up for thyself wrath in
the day of wrath and of the revelation of the righteous
_ gudgment of God, who shall render to every man
_ according to his works. This is He who is called
in the Law the God of Abraham and the God of


4
Isaac and the God of Jacob, the God of the living;
_ although the sublimity and greatness of this God is
unspeakable.
, 9. Now this world is encompassed by seven
; heavens,! in which dwell powers and angels and
ἢ 1 An account of the late Jewish teaching as to the Seven Heavens
is given in Mr. H. St John Thackeray’s valuable book St Paul and
_ Contemporary Jewish Thought, pp. 172-179, where three parallel
_ tables of their descriptions will be found. References to them in
__ Christian apocryphal literature are collected in Dr Charles’s Book of
the Secrets of Enoch (from the Sclavonic), pp. xliv-xlvii. Hippolytus
in his Commentary on Daniel (ed. Achelis, p. 96), referring to
᾿ς εὐλογεῖτε οὐρανοί in the Benedicite, says: τοὺς ἑπτὰ οὐρανοὺς . .
᾿ς προσκαλούμενοι. Clement of Alexandria (Strom. iv. 25) says: εἴτε
᾿ς ἕπτὰ οὐρανοί, οὕς τινες ἀριθμοῦσιν κατ᾽ ἐπανάβασιν. Origen (¢. (οἷς,


Isa. xi 2f.


~


78 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


archangels, doing service to God, the Almighty
and Maker of all things: not as though He was in
need, but that they may not be idle and unprofit-
able and ineffectual. Wherefore also the Spirit of
God is manifold in (His) indwelling,” and in seven
forms of service? is He reckoned by the prophet
Isaiah, as resting on the Son of God, that is the
Word, in His coming as man. The Spirit of God,
he says, shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom
and of understanding, the Spirit of counsel and of
might, (the Spirit of knowledge) * and of godliness ;
the Spirit of the fear of God shall fill him. Now
the heaven which is first from above,® and en-
compasses the rest, is (that of) wisdom; and the


vi. 21) likewise mentions the, Seven Heavens, but without com-
mitting himself to the exact number.

Irenzeus in I, i. 9 refers to the Valentinian teaching which identi-
fied the Seven Heavens with angels of varying degrees of power.
In our passage he strangely connects the Seven Heavens with the
Seven Gifts of the Spirit. We observe two peculiarities in his
description. First, that, numbering from above downwards, he
reckons the highest as the First Heaven: secondly, that his Seventh,
or lowest, is the firmament. Evil is wholly excluded from these
heavens: soit isin the Ascension of Isaiah (for which see Introd.
Pp: 41), where however it is found in the firmament, which is not
reckoned as one of the heavens. -

The belief in the Seven Heavens soon came to be discredited ;
and it is curious to find a survival of it, due apparently to Irish
influences, in the invocation of the sep/em ce/os in a book of
prayers of the seventh or eighth century (Brit. Mus. Reg. 2.
A. xx, f. 47 a. ):

1 Compare the reason given by Justin Martyr (Déa/. 22) for the
worship in the Temple: οὐχ ὡς ἐνδεὴς dy . . . ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως κἂν κατὰ
τοῦτο πρυσέχοντες αὐτῷ μὴ εἰδωλολατρῆτε.

* Perhaps the text should be emended so as to give ‘‘ operation ”
(ἐνέργεια).

3. Or ‘‘ministrations ” (= διακονιῶν in Arm. version of 1 Cor. xii. 5).

4 Omitted by oversight: cf. c. 59, and III, x. 1, xviii. 2, where
the words are correctly given.

5 The heavens are enumerated from above, in order to correspond
with the prophet’s words and put Wisdom first and Fear of God last.


i se eng NG ie OES ρον A τ inane Neel


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, τὸ 70


second from it, of understanding ; and the third,
of counsel; and the fourth, reckoned from above,
(is that) of might; and the fifth, of knowledge ;
and the sixth, of godliness ; and the seventh, this
firmament of ours, is full of the fear of that Spirit
which gives light to the heavens, For, as the
pattern (of this), Moses received the seven-branched
candlestick,! that shined continually in the holy
place ; for as a pattern of the heavens he received
this service, according to that which the Word


spake unto him: Thou shalt make (it) according Ex. xxv.


to all the pattern of the things which thou hast seen *°-
in the mount,*

10. Now this God is glorified by His Word ὃ
who is His Son continually,t and by the Holy
Spirit who is the Wisdom of the Father of all:


and the power(s) of these, (namely) of the Word


and Wisdom, which are called Cherubim and
Seraphim,® with unceasing voices glorify God ; and


1 V, xx. 2: ‘ecclesia . . . ἑπτάμυχος lucerna.”

2 IV, xxv. 3: ‘‘Quoniam facies omnia juxta typum eorum que
vidisti in monte:” LXX, τὸν δεδειγμένον σοι: the variation may be
due to a reminiscence of Acts vii. 44, ὃν ἑωράκει.

3 On the glorification of the Father by the Son and the Holy
Spirit, see Introd. p. 39.

4 The meaning is uncertain: the word means “‘ daily, continual,
perpetual” ; but it is also used as an adverb. The German trans-
lations take it in the sense of ‘‘eternal’”’ (sein ewiger Sohn). It
renders διὰ παντὸς in Lev. xxiv. 2; and that may have been the
original Greek in this passage. But even so it is not clear whether
it is to be taken with ‘‘ who is His Son,” or with “is glorified ”—
For the Eternal Sonship we may compare III, xix. 1: ‘‘ existens
semper apud Patrem ;” and IV, xxxiy. 3 : ‘‘ semper cum Patre erat.”

5 Origen in his Commentary on Xomans (III, § 8) interprets
the two Cherubim over the mercy-seat as the Son and the Holy
Spirit. In De Principiis (I, iii. 4, 1V, iii. 26) he gives the same
interpretation of the two Seraphim of Isa. vi. 3, saying that he
received it from his Hebrew teacher : he adds that the same applies


_ to the two living creatures of Hab. iii. 2(LXX). Philo (Vit. Mos.


Cf. Rev.
ν. 13.


80 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


every created thing that is in the heavens offers
glory to God the Father of all. He by His Word
has created the whole world, and in the world are
the angels; and toall the world He has given laws
wherein each several thing should abide, and
according to that which is determined by God
should not pass their bounds, each fulfilling his
appointed task.

11. But man He formed with His own hands,!
taking from the earth that which was purest and
finest, and mingling in measure His own power
with the earth. For He traced His own form on
the formation,? that that which should be seen
should be of divine form: for (as) the image of
God was man formed and set on the earth, And
that he might become living, He breathed on his
face the breath of life; that both for the breath
and for the formation man should be like unto
God. Moreover he was free and self-controlled,
being made by God for this end, that he might
rule all those things that were upon the earth.
And this great created world, prepared by God
before the formation of man, was given to man as
his place, containing all things within itself* And
there werc in this place also with (their) tasks the


iii. 8) had interpreted the two Cherubim as τὰς πρεσβυτάτας καὶ
ἀνωτάτω δύο τοῦ ὕντος δυνάμεις, THY TE ποιητικὴν καὶ βασιλικήν :
the former ὀνομάζεται θεός, the latter κύριος. This probably paved
the way for Origen’s interpretation.

1 Elsewhere Irenzeus constantly speaks of the Son and the Spirit
as the Hands of God: see Introd. p. 51.

2 Equivalent to plasma or plasmatio,

8 So both the German translations: but they transfer the words
so as to link them with ‘‘ this great created world.”” What we seem
to want is, ‘‘to have all as his own,” if the words can bear that
meaning.


hile aa


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 11, 12 81


servants of that God who formed all things; and
the steward, who was set over all his fellow-
servants received this place. Now the servants
were angels, and the steward was the archangel.!
12. Now, having made man lord of the earth
and all things in it, He secretly appointed him
lord also of those who were servants in it. They
however were in their perfection; but the lord,
that is, man, was (but) small; for he was a child ;?
and it was necessary that he should grow, and so
come to (his) perfection. And, that he might have
his nourishment and growth with festive and dainty
meats, He prepared him a place better than this
world,’ excelling in air, beauty, light, food, plants,
1 For this function of angels cf. Papias, as quoted by Andreas


in Apocal. c. 34, serm. 12: Ἐνίοις δὲ αὐτῶν (δηλαδὴ τῶν πάλαι
θείων ἀγγέλων) καὶ τῆς περὶ τὴν γῆν διακοσμήσεως ἔδωκεν ἄρχειν,


- καὶ καλῶς ἄρχειν παρηγγύησε.


2 LV, lxii. 1: νήπιος γὰρ ἦν.

3 That Paradise was in a region outside this world is not quite
distinctly stated here, but the opening words of c. 17 seem to
support this view. The view of Irenzus, however, is clearly given


~ in V, v. 1: Ποῦ οὖν ἐτέθη 6 πρῶτος ἄνθρωπος ; ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ


all


δηλονότι, καθὼς γέγραπται (Gen. ii. 8). . . καὶ ἐκεῖθεν ἐξεβλήθη εἰς
τόνδε τὸν κόσμον παρακούσας. He goes on to speak of this as the
Paradise into which St Paul was caught up (2 Cor. xii. 4. More-
over he identifies it with the resting-place of just men, such as
Enoch and Elijah. So in the Apocalypse of Peter the just are
dwelling in a μέγιστον χῶρον ἐκτὸς τούτου τοῦ κόσμου. Irenzus is
silent as to whether Paradise is in the third heaven. But the
Slavonic Secrets of Enoch, referred to above, places it there. In
the shorter and apparently more original recension we read as


‘ follows (c. 8): ‘* And the men removed me from that place, and


brought me to the third heaven, and placed me in the midst of a
garden ; a place such as was never seen for the goodliness of its
appearance. And every tree is beautiful, and every fruit ripe ; all
kinds of agreeable food springing up with every kind of fragrance.
And (there are) four rivers flowing with a soft course; and every
kind of thing good, that grows for food,” etc. The Valentinians,
according to Irenzeus (I, i. 9), placed Paradise ὑπὲρ τρίτον οὐρανόν.
Comp. the Anaphora in the Liturgy of St Basil (Swainson,
Ρ. 80): ἐξώρισας αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ δικαιοκρισίᾳ σοῦ, 6 θεός, ἐκ τοῦ παραδείσου


εἰς τόνδε τὸν κόσμον.
\


Gen. ii.
19.


Gen. ii.


18.


Gen. ii.


21 ff.


82 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


fruit, water, and all other necessaries of life: and
its name is Paradise. And so fair and good was
this Paradise, that the Word of God continually
resorted thither, and walked and talked with the
man, figuring beforehand the things that should be
in the future, (namely) that He should dwell with
him and talk with him, and should be with men,
teaching them righteousness. But man was a
child, not yet having his understanding perfected ;
wherefore also he was easily led astray by the
deceiver.

13. And, whilst man dwelt in Paradise, God
brought before him all living things and com-


manded him to give names to them all; aud τ


whatsoever Adam called a living soul, that was tts
name. And He determined also to make a helper —
for the man: for thus God said, 72 zs not good for —
the man to be alone: let us make for him a helper
meet for him. For among all the other living
things there was not found a helper equal and
comparable and like to Adam. But God Himself
cast a trance upon Adam and made him sleep ; and,
that work might be accomplished from work, since
there was no sleep in Paradise, this was brought
upon Adam by the will of God ; and God Zook one
of Adam’s ribs and filled up the flesh in its place,
and the rib which He took He builded into a woman ; *
and so He brought her to Adam ; and he seeing (her)
said: This 7s now bone of my bone, flesh of my
flesh: she shall be called woman, because she was
taken from her husband.


1 As LXX, κατ᾽ αὐτόν.
2 As LXX, φκοδόμησεν. . . εἰς γυναῖκα,


,
APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 13-15 83
A


14. And Adam and Eve—for that is the name
of the woman—were naked, and were not ashamed ;' Gen. ii.
for there was in them an innocent and childlike ἦ
_ mind, and it was not possible for them to conceive
and understand anything of that which by wicked-
ness through lusts and shameful desires is born
in the soul. For they were at that time entire,
preserving their own nature; since they had
the breath of life which was breathed on their
creation: and, while this breath remains in its
place and power, it has no comprehension and
_ understanding of things that are base. And
therefore they were not ashamed, kissing and em-
bracing each other in purity after the manner of
children.
15. But, lest man should conceive thoughts too
_ high, and be exalted and uplifted, as though he
had no lord, because of the authority and freedom
granted to him, and so should transgress against
his maker God, overpassing his measure, and enter-
tain selfish imaginings of pride in opposition to
God; a law was given to him by God, in order
that he might perceive that he had as lord the
Lord of all. And He set him certain limitations,
so that, if he should keep the commandment of
God, he should ever remain such as he was, that is
to say, immortal ; but, if he should not keep it, he
should become mortal and be dissolved to earth
from whence his formation had been taken.
Now the commandment was this: Of every tree Gen. ii.
that ts in the Paradise thou shalt freely eat; but of a
that tree alone from which ts the knowledge of good |
1 Cf. III, xxxii. 1.


84 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


and evil, of tt thou shalt not eat; for in the day thou
eatest, thou shalt surely deve.

16. This commandment the man kept not, but
was disobedient to God, being led astray by the
angel who, for the great gifts of God which He
had given to man, was envious and jealous of him,*
and both brought himself to nought and made
man sinful, persuading him to disobey the com-
mandment of God. So the angel, becoming by
his falsehood the author and originator of sin,
himself was struck down, having offended against
God, and man he caused to be cast out from
Paradise. And, because through the guidance of his
disposition he apostatized and departed from God,
he was called Satan, according to the Hebrew word ;
that is, Apostate :? but he is also called Slanderer,
Now God cursed the serpent which carried and con-
veyed the Slanderer ; and this malediction came
on the beast himself and on the angel hidden and
concealed in him, even on Satan; and man He put
away from His presence, removing him and making
him to dwell on the way to Paradise? at that time ;
because Paradise receiveth not the sinful.

17. And when they were put out of Paradise,
Adam and his wife Eve fell into many troubles of
anxious grief, going about with sorrow and toil


1 IV, Ixvi. 2; ἔκτοτε γὰρ ἀποστάτης ὁ ἄγγελος οὗτος καὶ ἐχθρός.
ap’ ὅτε ἐζήλωσε τὸ πλάσματοῦ ϑεοῦ : V, xxiv. 4: ‘‘Invidens homini,
apostata a divina factus est lege : invidia enim aliena esta Deo.” Cf.
Wisd. ii. 24 : φθόνῳ δὲ διαβόλου θάνατος εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸν κόσμον.

2 V, xxi. 2: ‘‘Satana enim verbum Hebraicum apostatam signifi-
cat.” Cf. Just. Mart. Dza/. 103.

3 Cf. Gen. iii. 24: κατῴκισεν αὐτὸν ἀπέναντι τοῦ παραδείσου τῆς
τρυφῆς. Perhaps ‘‘the way” comes from ‘‘the way of the tree οἵ"
life” in the same verse.


λέ... ἃ


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 16-18 85


and lamentation in this world. For under the
beams of this sun man tilled the earth, and it put
forth thorns and thistles, the punishment of sin.
Then was fulfilled that which was written: ddam Gen. iv.
knew his wife, and she conceived and tare Cain ;* :
and after him she bare Abel. Now the apostate
angel, who led man into disobedience and made
him sinful and caused his expulsion from Paradise,
not content with the first evil, wrought a second on
the brothers; for filling Cain with his spirit he
made him a fratricide. And so Abel died, slain by
his brother; signifying thenceforth that certain
should be persecuted and oppressed and slain, the
unrighteous slaying and persecuting the righteous.
And upon this God was angered yet more, and
cursed Cain ; and it came to pass that everyone of
that race in successive generations was made like
_to the begetter. And God vazsed up another son Gen. iv
to Adam, znstead of Abel who was slain. ἼΩΝ
18. And for ἃ very long while wickedness ex-
tended and spread, and reached and laid hold
upon the whole race of mankind, until a very
small seed of righteousness remained among them :
and illicit unions took place upon the earth, since
angels were united with the daughters of the race
of mankind ; and they bore to them sons who for
their exceeding greatness were called giants. And
the angels brought as presents to their wives
teachings of wickedness, in that they brought


1 This is from the Book of Enoch, to which Irenzus also refers in
IV, xxvii. 2. Enoch vii.1: καὶ ἐδίδαξαν αὐτὰς φαρμακείας καὶ ἐπαοιδὰς
καὶ ῥιζοτομίας, καὶ τὰς βοτάνας ἐδήλωσαν αὐταῖς : viii. 1: ψέλια καὶ
κόσμους καὶ στίβεις καὶ τὺ καλλιβλέφαρον καὶ παντοίους λίθους
ἐκλεκτοὺς καὶ τὰ βαφικά. Tertullian makes use of the same passage :
De cultu Jem. i. 2, ii. 10 (ut Enoch refert),


86 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


them the virtues of roots and herbs, dyeing in
colours and cosmetics, the discovery of rare sub-
stances, love-potions, aversions, amours, concupis-
cence, constraints of love, spells of bewitchment,
and all sorcery and idolatry hateful to God; by
the entry of which things into the world evil
extended and spread, while righteousness was
diminished and enfeebled :

19. Until judgment came upon the world. from
God by means of a flood, in the tenth generation from
the first-formed (man); Noah alone being found
righteous. And he for his righteousness was him-
self delivered, and his wife and his three sons, and
the three wives of his sons, being shut up in the ark.
And when destruction came upon all, both man
and also animals, that were upon the earth, that
which was preserved in the ark escaped. Now the
three sons of Noah were Shem, Ham and Japheth,
from whom again the race was multiplied: for these
were the beginning of mankind after the flood.

20. Now of these one fell under a curse, and the
two (others) inherited a blessing by reason of their
works. For the younger of them, who was called
Ham, having mocked his father, and having been

1 The Armenian corresponds to the Greek 6 νεώτερος (Gen. ix. 24).
As there were three sons of Noah, the comparative causes difficulty.
Origen took it as a superlative: for in later Greek (as in French)
the comparative with the article is used as a superlative. He went
on to argue that as Ham was not the youngest son of Noah, the
word ‘‘son”’ was used for grandson, and that ‘* Noah knew what his
grandson (Canaan) had done to him’: hence the curse falls on
Canaan. This accorded with a tradition given him by his Hebrew
teacher (Comm. in Gen. ix. 18; Lomm, viii, p. 65). The trouble
arose from the fact that ‘‘ the curse of Ham” was not pronounced on
Ham, but on his son Canaan. Justin Martyr (Dial. 139) says that


Noah cursed his son’s son ; ‘‘ for the prophetic Spirit would not curse
his son, who had been blessed together with the other sons by God.”


ity i cher ον; τα δ,


Ω — , > —_
Se Ot ards FY


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 19-21 87


‘condemned of the sin of impiety because of his
outrage and unrighteousness against his father,
received a curse ; and all the posterity that came
of him he involved in the curse; whence it came
about that his whole race after him were accursed,
‘and in sins they increased and multiplied. But
| ‘Shem and Japheth, his brothers, because of their
piety towards their father obtained a blessing.
Now the curse of Ham, wherewith his father Noah
cursed him, is this: Cursed be Ham the child ;} a Gen. ix.
_ servant shall-he be unto his brethren, This having 55
_ come upon his race, he begat many descendants upon
the earth, (even) for fourteen generations, growing
_ up ina wild condition; and then his race was cut
_ off by God, being delivered up to judgment. For
the Canaanites and Hittites and Peresites and
_Hivites and Amorites and Jebusites and Gergasites
q and Sodomites, the Arabians also and the dwellers in
‘Pheenicia, all the Egyptians and the Libyans,? are
of the posterity of Ham, who have fallen under the
curse; for the curse is of long duration over the
ungodly.
21. And even as the curse passed on, so also the
blessing passed on to the race of him who was


_ # Trenzeus makes no difficulty about speaking of ‘‘the curse of
Ham.” It is clear that he had a text of the LXX, which enabled him
todoso. The Hebrew of Gen. ix. 25 givesus: “ Cursed be Canaan :

a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.” The LXX
has: Ἐπικατάρατος Xavday " παῖς οἰκέτης ἔσται τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς αὐτοῦ.
But some MSS (E and some cursives) read Χάμ for Χανάαν. When
παῖς was taken with the preceding word, Χὰμ mais was no doubt
‘intended to mean ‘‘ the child of Ham,” z.e. Canaan: it might how-
ever be understood as “‘ Ham the child.” So here the Armenian
tra aslator does not give the genitive case of Ham, but the nomina-
tive: and it would seem that he rightly interprets the meaning of
Trenzeus.

_ 8 Jrenzeus seems to have drawn on Acts ii. 9-11 to amplily his list.


Gen. ix.
26.
Gen. ix.
27.
ΠΕΡ dbs
4.


88 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


blessed, to each in his own order. For first of
them was Shem blessed in these words: Blessed

be the Lord, the God of Shem; and Ham?* shall be
his servant. The power of the blessing lies in this,
that the God and Lord of all should be to Shem a
peculiar possession of worship. And the blessing
extended and reached unto Abraham, who was
reckoned as descended in the tenth generation
from the race of Shem: and therefore the Father
and God of all was pleased to be called the God of
Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of
Jacob ; because the blessing of Shem reached out
and attached itself to Abraham. Now the blessing
of Japheth is on this wise: God shall enlarge unto
Japheth, and he shall dwell in the house of Shem, —
and Ham? shall be his servant. That is to say: —
In the end of the ages he blossomed forth, at the
appearing of the Lord, through the calling of the
Gentiles, when God enlarged unto them the calling ;
and ¢heir sound went out into all the earth, and
their words to the end of the world. The enlarging,
then, is the calling from among the Gentiles, that
is to say, the Church. And he dwells in the house

1 The LXX reads Canaan, but one cursive has Ham.

* Here again the LXX reads Canaan, though E and other MSS. —
have Ham. The Arm. here has “the shall bless” for ‘‘he shall —
dwell” ; but this is a slip, as appears from below.

3 «<The calling of the Gentiles,” or, as we have it also here,
“the calling from among the Gentiles,” recurs in cc. 28, 41 6zs,
42, 89, 91. I have noted it in the Armenian version of IV, xxxiv. —
12, where however we find in the Greek 4 ἐξ ἐθνῶν ἐκκλησία, and in —
the Latin ea gue ex gentibus est ecclesia. I do not remember to
have met with it elsewhere in the writings of Irenzeus, or in any
earlier writer. In the fragments of Hippolytus on Gen. xlix (ed. —
Achelis, pp. 59 ff.) ἢ ἐξ ἐθνῶν κλῆσις is found several times, and more


than once ἐκκλησία occurs asa various reading. It is not found, —


however, in the corresponding comments in Zhe Blessings of Jacob
(Texte u. Unters. xxxviii. 1). ;


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 22 89


of Shem; that is, in the inheritance of the fathers,
receiving in Christ Jesus the right of the firstborn.
So in the rank in which each was blessed, in that
same order through his posterity he received the
fruit of the blessing.+
22. Now after the Flood God made a covenant
with all the world, even with every living thing of
animals and of men, that He would no more destroy
with a flood all that grew upon the carth. And
He set them a sign (saying): When the sky shall Gen. ix.
be covered with a cloud, the bow shall be seen in the **
cloud ; and I will remember my covenant, and will
no more destroy by water every moving thing upon
the earth. And He changed the food of men,
_ giving them leave to eat flesh: for from Adam
the first-formed until the Flood men ate only of
seeds and the fruit of trees, and to eat flesh was
not permitted to them. But since the three sons
of Noah were the beginning of a race of men, God
blessed them for multiplication and increase, say- .
ing: Jucrease and multiply, and replentsh the earth and Gen. ix.
_ruleit; and the fear and dread of you shall be upon *
every living thing of animals and upon all the fowls
of the air ; and they shall be to you for meat, even
ας the green herb: but the flesh with the blood of life
ye shall not eat: for your blood also will I require
at the hand of all beasts and at the hand of man.
Whoso sheddeth a man’s blood, in return for his
blood shall tt be shed.” For He made man the


1 With all the above cf. Just. M. Dial. 139.

2 These last words are so quoted in V, xiv. 1. The LX X continues:
ὅτι ἐν εἰκόνι θεοῦ ἐποίησα τὸν ἄνθρωπον. This Irenzeus paraphrases ;
οὗ c. 11: ‘‘ for (as) the image of God was man formed and set
on the earth.” That ‘‘the image of God is the Son” may be a
reminiscence of Col. i. 15.


λ


Gen. xi.
I.


go THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


image of God ; and the image of God is the Son,
after whose image man was made: and for this
cause He appeared in the end of the times that
He might show the image (to be) like unto Him-
5611 According to this covenant the race of ©
man multiplied, springing up from the seed of the
three. And upon the earth was one lp, that is to —
say one language.

23. And they arose and came from the land οὐ
the east; and, as they went through the land, they
chanced upon the land of Shinar, which was ©
exceeding broad; where they took in hand to
build a tower. They sought means thereby to
go up to heaven, and be able to leave their work
as a memorial to those men who should come after —
them. And the building was made with burnt —
bricks and bitumen: and the boldness of their
audacity went forward, as they were all of one —
mind and consent, and by means of one speech
they served the purpose of their desires. But
that the work should advance no further, God
divided their tongues, that they should no longer
be able to understand one another. And so they
were scattered and planted out, and took possession
of the world, and dwelt in groups and companies
each according to his language: whence came
the diverse tribes and various languages upon
the earth. So then, whereas three races of men
took possession of the earth, and one of them
was under the curse, and two under the blessing, ©
the blessing first of all came to Shem, whose


1 V, xvi. 1: tKhveidva ἔδειξεν ἀληθῶς, αὐτὸς τοῦτο γενόμενος ὅπερ
ἣν ἢ εἰκὼν αὐτοῦ : where see the context.


race dwelt in the east and held the land of the
Chaldeans,

24. In process of time, that is to say, in the
- tenth generation after the Flood, Abraham appeared,}
seeking for the God who by the blessing of his
ancestor was due and proper to him.2,_ And when,
urged by the eagerness of his spirit, he went all
about the world, searching where God is, and failed
to find out ; God tcok pity on him who alone was
silently seeking Him; and He appeared unto
_ Abraham, making Himself known by the Word,
as by a beam of light. For He spake with him
_ from heaven, and said unto him: Get thee out of Gen. xii.
thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy! Acs
father's house; and come into the land that I will ha
show thee,and there dwell. And he believed the
heavenly voice, being then of ripe age, even
seventy® years old, and having a wife; and to-
gether with her he went forth from Mesopotamia,
taking with him Lot, the son of his brother who
was dead. And when he came into the land which
now is called Judza, in which at that time dwelt
seven tribes descended from Ham, God appeared
unto him in a vision and said: 70 thee will I give Gen. xvii.
this land, and to thy seed after thee, for an ever-*
lasting possession, and (He said) that his seed
should be a stranger in a land not their own, and
should be evil-entreated there, being afflicted and


| APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 23, 24 gI
.
4


E
i
t
}


Ύ


1 Lit. ‘‘ was found ”’ (= εὑρέθη).

2 This is explained by the comment above (c. 21) on the blessing
_ of Shem, which did not say ‘‘ Blessed be Shem,” but ‘‘ Blessed
be the Lord, the God of Shem”; meaning that God ‘‘ should be
__ to Shem a peculiar possession of worship.”
ἢ 3 Heb. and LXX: “seventy and five.”


Gen. xv.


92 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


in bondage four hundred years; and in the fourth
generation should return unto the place that was
promised to Abraham ; and that God would judge
that race which had brought his seed into bondage.
And, that Abraham might know as well the
multitude as the glory of his seed, God brought
him forth abroad by night, and said: Look upon
the heaven, and behold the stars of the heaven, tf
thou be able to number them: so shall thy seed be.
And when God saw the undoubting and unwaver-
ing certainty of his spirit, He bare witness unto
him by the Iloly Spirit, saying in the Scripture:


. And Abraham believed, and tt was counted unto
‘him for righteousness. And he was uncircum-


cised when this witness was borne; and, that the
excellency of his faith should be made known by


.a sign, He gave him circumcision, a seal of the


righteousness 1 of that faith which he had in un-
circumciston. And after this there was born to
him a son, Isaac, from Sarah who was barren,
according to the promise of God; and him he cir-
cumcised, according to that which God had coven-
anted with him. And of Isaac was Jacob born ; and
on this wise the original blessing of Shem reached
to Abraham, and from Abraham to Isaac, and
from Isaac to Jacob, the inheritance of the Spirit
being imparted to them: for He was called the
God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the
God of Jacob. And Jacob begat twelve sons, from
whom the twelve tribes of Israel were named.

25. And when famine had come upon all the


1 The Arm, has “uncircumcision”’ for ‘‘ righteousness” by an
oversight,


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 25, 26 93


earth, it chanced that in Egypt alone there was food ;
and Jacob with all his seed removed and dwelt
in Egypt: and the number of all that migrated
was ¢hreescore and fifteen souls: and in four hun- Acts vii.
dred years, as the oracle had declared before- 14
hand, they became six hundred and sixty thousand.
And, because they were grievously afflicted and
oppressed through: evil bondage, and_ sighed and
groaned unto God, the God of their fathers,
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob; He brought them
out of Egypt by the hand of Moses and Aaron,
smiting the Egyptians with ten plagues, and in
the last plague sending a destroying angel and
slaying their first-born, both of man and of beast:
wherefrom He saved the children of Israel, reveal-
ing in a mystery the sufferings of Christ by the
sacrifice of a lamb without spot, and giving its
blood to be smeared on the houses of the Hebrews
as a sure precaution. And the name of this
mystery is Passion,! the source of deliverance,
And dividing the Red Sea, He brought the chil-
dren of Israel with all security to the wilderness ;
and as to the pursuing Egyptians, who followed
them and entered into the sea, they were all over-
whelmed; this judgment of God coming upon
those who had iniquitously oppressed the seed
of Abraham.

26. And in the wilderness Moses received the
Law from God, the Ten Words on tables of stone, Ex xxxi.
written with the finger of God (now the finger of > ue ail


1 The same interpretation of Pascha, as if from πάσχειν, is
found in IV, xx. 1: ‘‘cujus et diem passionis non ignoravit, sed
figuratim preenuntiavit eum, Pascha nominans.” .


94 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


God is that which is stretched forth from the
Father in the Holy Spirit) ; 1 and the command-
- ments and ordinances which he delivered to the
children of Israel to observe. And the tabernacle
of witness he constructed by the command of
God, the visible form on earth of those things —
which are spiritual and invisible in the heavens,
and a figure of the form of the Church, and a
prophecy of things to come: in which also were
the vessels and the altars of sacrifice and the ark
in which he placed the tables (of the Law). And
he appointed as priests Aaron and his sons, assign-
ing the priesthood to all their tribe: and they were
of the seed of Levi. Moreover this whole tribe he
summoned by the word of God to accomplish the
work of service in the temple of God, and gave
them the Levitical law, (to shew) what and what
manner of men they ought to be who are continually
employed in performing the service of the temple
of God.

27. And when they were near to the land, which
God had promised to Abraham and his seed,
Moses chose a man from every tribe, and sent
them to search out the land and the cities therein
and the dwellers in the cities. At that time God
revealed to him the Name which alone is able to
save them that believe thereon ; and Moses changed
the name of Oshea the son of Nun, one of them
that weré sent, and named him Jesus:? and so he


1 “The finger of God” (Luke xi. 20) appears as ‘the Spirit of
God” in Matt. xii. 28. Cf. Barn. xiv. 3; and Clem. Hom. xi. 22,
xvi, 12, quoted in Introd. p. 53 ἢ. 1.

2 Num. xiii, 16: καὶ ἐπωνόμασεν Μωυσῆς τὸν Αὑσὴ υἱὸν Ναυὴ
Ἰησοῦν. Justin Martyr (Dza/. 75, 113) has much to say on this
change ofname. Cf. Barn. xii. 8f. :


Ὁ ὙΠ Κανᾶ ae en οὐσννυες


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 27 95


sent them forth with the power of the Name,
believing that he should receive them back safe
and sound through the guidance of the Name:
which came to pass.1 Now when they had gone
and searched and enquired, they returned bringing
with them a bunch of grapes; and some of the
twelve who were sent cast the whole multitude
into fear and dismay, saying that the cities were
exceeding great and walled, and the sons of the
giants dwelt therein, so that it was (not) possible
for them to take the land. And thereupon it fell
out that all the multitude wept, failing to believe
that it was God who should grant them power
and subjugate all to them. And they spake evil
also of the land, as not being good, and as though
it were not worth while to undergo the danger for
the sake of such aland. But two of the twelve,
Jesus the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of
Jephunneh, rent their clothes for the evil that was
done, and besought the people not to be dis-
heartened nor lose their courage; for God had
given all into their hands, and the land was ex-
ceeding good. And when they believed not, but
the people still continued in the same unbelief,
God changed and altered their way, that they
should wander desolate and sore smitten in the
desert. And according to the days that they were
in going and returning who had spied out the
land—and these were forty in number—setting a

1 Probably this represents ὃ ἐγένετο. Compare the brief clauses :
*fand this came to pass” (c. 67), and ‘‘as indeed they have be-
come” (c. 72); III, vi. 4: ‘‘quod et erat.” But it might be


rendered, in conjunction with the Name, ‘‘ which was (given them) ” :
so the German translations take it.


96 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


year for a day, He kept them in the wilderness for
the space of forty years; and none of those who
were fullgrown and had understanding counted
He worthy to enter into the land because of their
unbelief, save only the two who had testified of
the inheritance, Jesus the son of Nun and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh, and those who were quite
young and knew not the right hand and the left.
So all the unbelieving multitude perished and were
consumed in the wilderness, receiving one by one
‘the due reward of their want of faith: but the
children, growing up in the course of forty years,
filled up the number of the dead.

28. When the forty years were fulfilled, the
people drew near to the Jordan, and were assembled ~
and arrayed over against Jericho, Here Moses
gathered the people together, and summed up
all afresh, proclaiming the mighty works of God
even unto that day, fashioning and preparing those
that had grown up in the wilderness to fear God
and keep His commandments, imposing on them
as it were a new legislation, adding to that
which was made before, And this was called
Deuteronomy:! and in it were written many
prophecies concerning our Lord Jesus Christ and
concerning the people, and also concerning the
calling of the Gentiles and concerning the kingdom.

29. And, when Moses had finished his course,


1 Cf. the Greek fragment attributed to Irenzus, Harvey II,
p. 487, where we have ἀνακεφαλαιούμενος : this fragment, however,
is now shown to be from Hippolytus On the Blessings of Moses
(Texte u. Unters. N. F. XI; 1a, p. 49). Ch also LV
“ Moyses igitur recapitulationem universe legis . . . in Deuteronomio
aciens.”’


~


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 28-31 97


it was said to him by God: Get thee up into the Deut.
mountain, and die: for thou shalt not bring in my a= ἀ, -
people into the land. ὅ0ο ἢς ded according to the Deut.
word of the Lord; and Jesus the son of Nun***”5
succeeded him. He divided the Jordan and made

the people to pass over into the land; and, when

he had overthrown and destroyed the seven races

that dwelt therein, he assigned to the people the
temporal Jerusalem,! wherein David was king, and
Solomon his son, who builded the temple to the

name of God, according to the likeness of the
tabernacle which had been made by Moses after

the pattern of the heavenly and spiritual things.

30. Hither were the prophets sent by God
through the Holy Spirit ; and they instructed the
people and turned them to the God of their fathers,
the Almighty; and they became heralds of the
revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of
God, declaring that from the posterity of David
His flesh should blossom forth ; that after the flesh
He might be the son of David, who was the son
of Abraham by a long succession; but according
to the spirit Son of God, pre-existing” with the
Father, begotten before all the creation of the
world, and at the end of the times appearing to
all the world as man, the Word of God gathering Eph. i. το.
up in Himself αὐ things that aré tn heaven and that
are on earth.

31. So then He united man with God, and
established a community of union® between God


1 Or ‘‘this present Jerusalem”: perhaps representing τὴν νῦν
‘Te ῥουσαλήμ ΜΕ iv. 25).
= CE οἱ
3 For thes double rendering see above c. 6.


98 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


and man; since we could not in any other αν ἢ
participate in incorruption, save by His coming
among us. For so long as incorruption was —
invisible and unrevealed, it helped us not at all:
therefore it became visible,? that in all respects we
might participate in the reception of incorruption,
And, because in the original formation® of Adam —
all of us were tied and bound up with death through —
his disobedience, it was right that through the
obedience of Him who was made man for us we
should be released from death: and because death
reigned over the flesh, it was right that through ~
the flesh it should lose its force and let man
John i. 14. go free from its oppression. So the Word was
made flesh, that, through that very flesh which ~
sin had ruled and dominated, it should lose its
force and be no longer in us. And therefore our
Lord took that same original formation as (His)
entry into flesh, so that He might draw near —
and contend on behalf of the fathers,4 and con- —
quer by Adam that which by Adam had stricken


us down.
32. Whence then is the substance of the first-


formed (man)? From the Will and the Wisdom


1 1ΠΙ|, xx.1: ‘*Quemadmodum autem adunari possemus incor-
ruptele et immortalitati, nisi prius incorruptela et immortalitas
facta fuisset id quod et nos?” Cf. III, xix. 6: καὶ εἰ wm συνηνώθη
ὃ ἄνθρωπος τῷ θεῷ, οὐκ ἂν ἠδυνήθη μετασχεῖν TIS ἀφθαρσίας.

2 Cf. 2 Tim. i. 10: φωτίσαντος ζωὴν καὶ ἀφθαρσίαν διὰ τοῦ
εὐαγγελίου. ἥ ᾿

3. V,i.2: τὴν ἀρχαίαν πλάσιν τοῦ Addu εἰς ἑαυτὸν ἀνεκεφαλαιώσατο. —

4 1Π|Ι, xix. 5: ‘‘erat enim homo pro patribus certans:”
V, xxi. 1: “Omnia ergo recapitulans, recapitulatus est et adversus —
inimicum nostrum bellum, provocans et elidens eum qui in initio in —
Adam captivos duxerat nos” (the Arm. version of this passage
suggests the true punctuation). With ‘‘ pro patribus” comp. Barz. —
V.7: ἵνα καὶ τοῖς πατράσιν τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν ἀποδῷ, ᾿


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 32, 33 99


of God, and from. the virgin earth1 For God had Gen. ii. 5.


not sent rain, the Scripture says, upon the earth,
before man was made; and there was no man to
till the earth. From this, then, whilst it was still
virgin, God took dust of the earth and formed
the man, the beginning of mankind. So then
the Lord, summing up afresh this man, took
the same dispensation of entry into flesh, being
born from the Virgin by the Will and the
Wisdom of God; that He also should show
forth the likeness of Adam’s entry into flesh,?
and there should be that which was written in


the beginning,® man after the image and likeness Gen. i. 26.


of God.


33. And ἀπ as through a disobedient virgin
man was stricken down and fell into death, so
through the Virgin who was obedient to the Word
of God man was reanimated and received life.*
For the Lord came to seek again the sheep that


1 Almost the same words are here used as in III, xxx. 1.: ‘‘ Et
quemadmodum protoplastus ille Adam de rudi terra et de adhuc
virgine—nondum enim pluerat Deus, et homo non erat operatus terram
—habuit substantiam et plasmatus est manu Dei, id est, Verbo
Dei—omnia enim per ipsum facta sunt—et sumpsit Dominus limum
a terra et plasmavit hominem: ita recapitulans in se Adam ipse
Verbum existens ex Maria, que adhuc erat virgo, recte accipiebat
generationem Adz recapitulationis.” Cf. III, xix. 6: also
Ephraim’s Commentary on the Diatessaron (Mcesinger, js 21}:
Tn Virginis conceptione disce quod qui sine conjugio Adamum
ex virginea terra protulit, is etiam Adamum secundum in utero
virginis formaverit.”” Cf. also Tertullian, De carne Christi, 17;
Firmicus Maternus, De errore prof. relig., 25.

? Il, XXxXi. I: Thy αὐτὴν ἐκείνῳ τῆς γεννήσεως ἔχειν ὁμοιότητα.᾽

8 V, ii. 1: ‘‘restaurans suo plasmati quod dictum est in principio,
factum esse hominem secundum i imaginem et similitudinem Dei:”
and below, c. 97.

4 The same parallel is worked out in III, xxxii. 1, and V, xix. I.
It is found earlier in Justin Martyr (Déa/. 100), and later in
Tertullian (De carne Chr. 17).


Cf. 1 Cor.


XV. 53.


100 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


was lost;1 and man it was that was lost: and for
this cause there was not made some other forma-
tion,? but in that same which had its descent from -
Adam He preserved the likeness of the (first)
formation.2 For it was necessary that Adam
should be summed up in Christ, that mortality
might be swallowed up and overwhelmed by im-
mortality ; and Eve summed up in Mary, that a
virgin should be a virgin’s intercessor,* and by a
virgin’s obedience undo and μ᾿ away the dis-
obedience of a virgin.

34. And the trespass which came by the tree was
undone by the tree of obedience,° when, hearkening
unto God, the Son of man was nailed to the tree;
thereby putting away the knowledge of evil and
bringing in and establishing the knowledge of
good: now evil it is to disobey God, even as
hearkening unto God is good. And for this cause
the Word spake by Isaiah the prophet, announcing
beforehand that which was to come—for therefore
are they prophets, because they proclaim what is
to come®: by him ag spake the Word thus:


1 Trenzeus is fond of referring to the sheep that was lost: see III,
XX; 3; ἘΧΧῚΙ, 2, ΧΕ, 15 Ὑ ἘΠῚ 22 ees

πὰς, xiv. Ὁ: ““Nime autem quod fuit qui perierat homo, hoc
salutare factum est Verbum .. . non alteram quandam, sed illam
principalem Patris plasmationem in se recapitulans, exquirens id
quod perierat.”

3 See above, c. 32.

4 III, xxxii. 1: ‘‘eam que est a Maria in Evam recirculationem
significans;”” V, xix. 1: ‘‘uti virginis Ev virgo Maria fieret
advocata.” Cf. Just. M. Dzad. 100.

5 V, xvi. 2: ‘* Dissolvens enim eam que in initio in ligno facta
fuerat ‘hominis inobedientiam, odediens factus est usgue ad mortem,
mortem autem crucis, eam que in ligno facta fuerat inobedientiam
per eam que in ligno fuerat obedientiam sanans,”

6 IV, xxxiv. 5: ‘‘ Nam prophetia est przedicatio futurorum.”


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 34 ΙΟΙ


7 refuse not, nor gainsay : I gave my back to scourg-
ing, and my cheeks to smiting ; 1 and my face 7
turned not away from the shame of spitting. So
then by the obedience wherewith He obeyed even
unto death, hanging on the tree, He put away the
old disobedience which was wrought in the tree.
Now seeing that He isthe Word of God Almighty,
who in unseen wise in our midst is universally
extended in all the world, and encompasses
its length and breadth and height and depth ?—
for by the Word of God the whole universe is
ordered and disposed—in it is crucified the Son of
God, inscribed crosswise upon it all :3 for it is right
that He being made visible, should set upon all
things visible the sharing of His cross, that He
might show His operation on visible things through
a visible form. For He it is who illuminates the
height, that is the heavens; and encompasses the
deep which is beneath the earth; and stretches
and spreads out the length from east to west; and
steers across the breadth of north and south;


PGi... cr.68;

2 V, xvii. 4: Ἐπεὶ yap διὰ ξύλου ἀπεβάλομεν αὐτόν (sc. τὸν λόγον
Κυρίου), διὰ ξύλου πάλιν φανερὸς τοῖς πᾶσιν ἐγένετο, ἐπιδεικνύων τὸ
ὕψος καὶ μῆκος καὶ πλάτος ἐν ἑαυτῷ " καὶ, ὡς ἔφη τις τῶν προβεβηκό-
των πρεσβυτέρων, διὰ τῆς ἐκτάσεως τῶν χειρῶν τοὺς δύο λαοὺς εἰς
ἕνα θεὸν συνάγων. The Greek, preserved ina Catena, is here
emended from the Latin and Armenian versions, both of which
omit καὶ βάθος.

3 V, xviii. 2 : ‘‘ in hoc mundo existens, et secundum invisibilitatem
continet quz facta sunt’omnia, et in universa conditione infixus
(Arm. “and in all this world in-crucified”), quoniam Verbum Dei
gubernans et disponens omnia.” The thought is taken from Justin
(Ap. τ. 60), who attributes to Plato the words: Ἐχίασεν αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ
παντί (cf. Timaeus 36 B.C.). See above, Introd. p. 29. Justin says
that Plato misunderstanding the story of the Brazen Serpent,
μηδὲ νοήσας τύπον εἶναι σταυροῦ, ἀλλὰ χίασμα νοήσας, THY μετὰ τὸν
πρῶτον θεὺν δύναμιν κεχίασθαι ἐν τῷ παντὶ εἶπε.


158. Ὁ 5.0.


Phil. ii. 8.


Ebi, i.
18:

Gen. Xv.
beret
Rom. iv.
ἐν:


Rom.
ἂν. 13.


1 Tim. i.


9.


11.


102 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


summoning all that are scattered in every quarter
to the knowledge of the Father.

35. Moreover He fulfilled the promise made to
Abraham, which God had promised him, to make
his seed as the stars of heaven. For this Christ
did, who was born of the Virgin who was of
Abraham’s seed, and constituted those who have
faith in Him “zghts zn the world, and by the same
faith with Abraham justified the Gentiles. For
Abraham believed God, and tt was counted unto him
Jor righteousness. In like manner we also are


Gal iii. rr; Justified by faith in God: for the just shall live by


faith. Now not by the law is the promise to
Abraham, but by faith: for Abraham was justified
by faith: and for a righteous man the law is not
made, In like manner we also are justified not by
the law, but by faith, which is witnessed to in the
law and in the prophets, whom the Word of God
presents to us.


36. And He fulfilled the promise to David ; for |
> Ps, exxxii, to him God had promised that of the fruzt of his body —


He would raise up an eternal King,? whose king-


dom should have noend. And this King is Christ,


the Son of God, who became the Son of man;
that is, who became the fruit of that Virgin who
had her descent from David. And for this cause


1 IV, x. 1: ὅτι ποιήσει τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ ὡς τὰ ἄστρα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ.
τουτέστι τὸ ὑπὸ Παύλου εἰρημένον Ὡς φωστῆρες ἐν κόσμῳ: cf. IV,
54. 0 on ἐς

2 III, xxvi. 1: ἐκ καρποῦ τῆς κοιλίας αὐτοῦ αἰώνιον ἀναστήσειν
βασιλέα: III, xi. 4, xvii. 1, Xxix. 1. In all these places the phrase
‘‘eternal king” is used in connexion with this particular promise.
‘The phrase also occurs in III, xx. 2, and below in cc. 56, 66, 95.
Justin uses it several times (Déa/. 34, 36, 118, 135), but not in
this connexion.


x
r
Ἶ


4


ἂν Sr Ty 04 ee


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 35-38 103


the promise was, Of the frutt of thy body \—that He
_ might declare the peculiar uniqueness of Him, who
was the fruit of the virgin body that was of David,
(even of Him) who was King over the house of
David, (and) of whose kingdom there shall be no
end.

_ 37. Thus then He gloriously achieved our
redemption, and fulfilled the promise of the
fathers, and abolished the old disobedience. The
Son of God became Son of David and Son
of Abraham; perfecting and summing up this
in Himself, that He might make us to possess
life. The Word of God was made flesh by the
dispensation of the Virgin, to abolish death and
make man live. For we were imprisoned by
‘sin, being born in sinfulness and living under
death.

_ 38. But God the Father was very merciful: He
_ sent His creative Word, who in coming to deliver
@ us came to the very place and spot in which we
had lost life, and brake the bonds of our fetters.
And His light appeared and made the darkness of
_ the prison disappear, and hallowed our birth and
destroyed death, loosing those same fetters in
which we were enchained. And He manifested


_ 1 Here and above I have used ‘‘ body” as in A. V. for κοιλία:
_but the strange argument is thus somewhat obscured. The words
which immediately follow in the Armenian text may be more
_ easily rendered in Latin: “ de fructu ventris tui, quod est proprium
feminz pregnantis: non de fructu lumborum, nec de fructu
renum, quod est proprium viri generantis: ut declararet, mete.
Almost the same words are found in III, xxvi. 1: cf. also III,
ix. 2: ‘‘ex fructu ventris David, id est, ex David virgine.” The
‘argument is used by Tertullian, Adv. Marcion, Ul, 20.

2 The same word corresponds to “‘artifex »’ in the Arm. version
of V, xv. 2, xxiv. 4: cf. III, xi. 11: ὁ τῶν ἁπάντων τεχνίτης Adyos.


Rev. i. 5. the resurrection! Himself becoming ¢he 3 γεί- —


Amos ix.
II,


104 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


begotten of the dead, and in Himself raising up man
that was fallen, lifting him up far above the heaven ©
to the right hand of the glory of the Father: even
as God promised by the prophet, saying: And J —
will raise up the tabernacle of David that ts fallen ;
that is, the flesh? that was from David. And this —
our Lord Jesus Christ truly fulfilled, when He ~
gloriously achieved our redemption, that He might —
truly raise us up, setting us free unto the Father, —
And if any man will not receive His birth froma —
virgin, how shall he receive His resurrection from —
the dead? For it is nothing wonderful and aston-
ishing and extraordinary, if one who was not born ©
rose from the dead: nay indeed we cannot speak of
a resurrection of him who came unto being with- ὦ
out birth. For one who is unborn and immortal,
and has not undergone birth, will also not undergo ~
death. For he who took not the beginning of man,
how could he receive his end? s

39. Now, if He was not born, neither did He
die; and, if He died not, neither did He rise
from the dead ; and, if He rose not from the dead,
neither did He vanquish death and bring its reign ©
to nought; and if death be not vanquished, how can
we ascend to life, who from the beginning have fallen —
under death? So then those who take away ~
redemption from man, and believe not in God that —
He will raise them from the dead, these also despise —


1 Cf. c. 39: Barn. V. 6: ἵνα καταργήσῃ τὸν θάνατον καὶ τὴν ἐκ
νεκρῶν ἀνάστασιν δείξῃ : and Hippolytus, Apostolic Tradition, in ἴῃ 6
Eucharistic Prayer: ‘‘ut resurrectionem manifestet” ; and Phz/os,
x. 33 (Connolly, Zexts and Studies, VIII, 4. 166).

2 Or ‘body’: ef. ¢, :62,


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 39, 40 105


the birth of our Lord, which He underwent on our
behalf, that the Word of God should be made
_ flesh in order that He might manifest the resur-
rection of the flesh, and might have pre-eminence
over all things in the heavens, as the first-born and
eldest offspring of the thought of the Father, the
_ Word, fulfilling all things, and Himself guiding
and ruling upon earth. For He was the Virgin’s
first-born, a just and holy man,? godfearing, good,
well-pleasing to God, perfect in all ways, and
delivering from hell all who follow after Him: for
He Himself was the first-begotten of the dead, the Rev. i. s.
Prince and Author of life unto God.
40. Thus then the Word of God zx all things Col. i. 18.
hath the pre-eminence ;? for that He is true man
and Wonderful Counsellor and Mighty God, 3 Isa. ix. 6.
calling men anew to fellowship with God, that by
2 fellowship with Him we may partake of incorrup-
tion. So then He who was proclaimed by the law

_ through Moses, and by the prophets of the Most
.4 _ ‘High and Almighty God, as Son of the Father of
all; He from whom all things are, He who spake
4 Brith Moses—He came into Judza, generated from
God by the Holy Spirit,® and born of the Virgin
_ Mary, even of her who was of the seed of David
_ and of Abraham, Jesus the Anointed of God, show-


ἵν, xix. 2: ‘‘ Aliiautem manifestum adventum Domini contem-
nunt, incarnationem ejus non recipientes. a

V, xxxiv. 2: ‘‘homo justus :” the whole context is parallel to
our passage: cf. also III, xvii. 6,
«SIV, xxxiv. 2, Ixiii. 2.
mer. ce, 54 ἢ
® The Arm. seems to be a rendering ot ἐκ θεοῦ omapels διὰ
πνεύματος ἁγίου. Cf. III, xvii. 6: ‘ unitus et ,consparsus suo plas-
_ mati secundum placitum Patris, et caro factus.” See Introd. p. 65.


106 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


ing Himself to be the One who was proclaimed
beforehand by the prophets.

41. And His forerunner was John the Baptist,
who prepared and made ready the people before-
hand for the reception of the Word of life;
declaring that He was the Christ, on whom the
Spirit of God rested, mingling with His flesh.+
His disciples, the witnesses of all His good deeds,
and of His teachings and His sufferings and death
and resurrection, and of His ascension into heaven __
after His bodily? resurrection—these were the
apostles, who after (receiving) the power of the
Holy Spirit were sent forth by Him into all
the world, and wrought the calling of the Gentiles, 4
showing to mankind the way of life, to turn them ~
from idols and fornication and covetousness,
cleansing their souls and bodies by the baptism of
water and of the Holy Spirit ; which Holy Spirit
they had received of the Lord, and they distributed
and imparted It to them that believed ; and thus
they ordered and established the Churches. By
faith and love and hope they established that
which was foretold by the prophets, the calling of the
Gentiles, according to the mercy of God which was
extended to them ; bringing it to light through the
ministration of their service, and admitting them
to the promise of the fathers: to wit, that to those
who thus believed in and loved the Lord, and con- —
tinued in holiness and righteouSness and patient
endurance, the God of all had promised to grant


1 Cf. c. 97 (where however the Incarnation is in question), and
the references there given.

2 Or ‘‘fleshly”?: cf. I, ii. 1: καὶ τὴν ἔγερσιν ἐκ νεκρῶν καὶ Thy
ἔνσαρκον εἰς τοὺς οὐρανοὺς ἀνάληψιν. :


-- Sa


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 41, 42 107


eternal life by the resurrection of the dead ; through
Him who died and rose again, Jesus Christ, to
whom He has delivered over the kingdom of all
existing things, and the rule of quick and dead,
and also the judgment. And they counselled them
by the word of truth to keep their flesh undefiled
unto the resurrection and their soul unstained.

42. For such is the state! of those who have
believed, since in them continually abides the Holy
Spirit, who was given by Him in baptism, and
is retained by the receiver, if he walks in truth
and holiness and righteousness and _ patient
endurance. For this soul has a resurrection in
them that believe, the body receiving the soul
again, and along with it, by the power of the Holy
Spirit, being raised up and entering into the


_ kingdom of God. This is the fruit of the blessing
of Japheth, in the calling of the Gentiles, made


manifest through the Church, standing in readi-
ness * to receive its dwelling in the house of Shem
according to the promise of God. That all these
things would so come to pass, the Spirit of God
declared beforehand by the prophets; that in
respect of them the faith of those who worship God
in truth should be confirmed. For what was
an impossibility to our nature, and therefore ready
to cause incredibility to mankind, this God caused
to be made known beforehand by the prophets ;
in order that, through its having been foretold
in times long before, and then at last finding


1 The Arm. is a literal rendering of οὕτως ἔχειν, as in the Arm.


_ version of IV, xi. 2 (‘‘sic se habere’’).


2 Cf. c. 21. The Arm. is obscure, perhaps corrupt.


Gen. i. I.


lee ἢ;
ἔχχι, 17.


108 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


effect in this way, even as it was foretold, we
might know that it was God who (thus) proclaimed
to us beforehand our redemption.

43. So then we must believe God in all things,
for in all things God is true. Now that there was
a Son of God, and that He existed not only before
He appeared in the world, but also before the
world was made, Moses, who was the first that
prophesied says in Hebrew: Sarestth bara
Elowin basan benuam samenthares. And this,
translated into our language,” is: “The Son
in the beginning : God established then the heaven
and the earth.” This Jeremiah the prophet also
testified, saying thus: Before the morning-star I
begat thee: and before the sun (15) thy name ;* and
that is, before the creation of the world; for
together with the world the stars were made. And
again the same says: Dilessed ts he who was, before
he became man. Because, for God, the Son was
(as) the beginning before the creation of the
world ;® but for us (He was) then, when He

1 Cf. Just. M. “42. 1. 32: Μωυσῆς. .. πρῶτος τῶν προφητῶν
γενόμενος.

2 Lit. ‘‘the Armenian language.”

3 The Hebrew text has been corrupted in transmission: but it is
plain that Irenzeus interpreted the first two words (“In the
beginning created”) as ‘‘ In the beginning the Son.” St Hilary, on
Ps. il. ὃ 2, says that dvestth has three meanings, ‘‘in principio
in capite, in filio” ; but he prefers the first as the interpretation
given by the LXX. See the note of the learned Dom Coustant, the
Benedictine editor of St Hilary. See also Dr Harnack’s notes in
Texte u. Unters., I, 1. 117 ff. and xxxi, 1. 60. In Clem. Alex. £c/,
Proph. 4 we find as a comment on Gen. i. I, ὅτι ἀρχὴ 6 vids.

4 For this composite quotation from the Psalms, here attributed
to Jeremiah, see Introd. p. 10 ff.

® For this quotation also see Introd. p. 22f.


ὁ This is probably a reference to Prov, viii, 22 : 6 κύριος ἔκτισέ
με ἀρχὴν τῶν ὁδῶν αὐτοῦ,


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 43, 44 109


appeared ; and before that He was not for us, who é
knew Him not Wherefore also His disciple
John, in teaching us who is the Son of God, who
was with the Father before the world was made, and
that all the things that were made were made by
_ Him,saysthus: /x the beginning was the Word,and ἐλ μὸν
the Word was with God, and the Word was God,"
The same was in the beginning with God. All
things were made by Him, and without Him was not
anything made: showing with certainty that the
Word, who was in the beginning with the Father,
and by whom all things were made, this is His Son.
44. And again Moses tells how the Son of God
drew near to hold converse with Abraham: And bes xviii.
God appeared unto him by the oak of Mamre in the *
middle of the day. And looking up with his eyes
he beheld, and, lo, three men stood over against him.
And he bowed himself down to the earth, and said:
| Lord, if indeed I have found favour in thy sight.
And all that which follows he spake with the Lord,
and the Lord spake with him. Now two of the
_ three were angels; but one was the Son of God,
with whom also Abraham spake, pleading on
behalf of the men of Sodom, that they should not
perish if at least ten righteous should be found
there. And, whilst these were speaking, the two
angels entered into Sodom, and Lot received them.
_ And then the Scripture says: And the Lord rained Gen. xix.
upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from 24:
1 Justin (Déa/. 88) quotes the Voice at the Baptism in the form
** Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee ” (Ps. ii. 7, and
Luke i iii. 22 in Codex Bezz, etc.). Then he says : τότε γένεσιν


αὐτοῦ λέγων γίνεσθαι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, ἐξ ὅτου 7 γνῶσις αὐτοῦ ἔμελλε
᾿ γίνεσθαι.


Gen.
XXViil.
12 f.


Acts vii.


49 (Isa.
Ixvi. 1).


Isa, xl. 12.


110 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


the Lord out of heaven: that is to say, the Son, who
spake with Abraham, being Lord, received power
to punish the men of Sodom from the Lord out of
heaven, even from the Father who rules over all.
So Abraham was a prophet and saw things to
come, which were to take place in human form:
even the Son of God, that He should speak with
men and eat with them, and then should bring
in the judgment from the Father, having received
from Him who rules over all the power to punish
the men of Sodom.

45. And Jacob, when he went into Mesopotamia,
saw Him in a cream, standing upon the ladder, that
is, the tree, which was set up from earth to
heaven;? for thereby they that believe on Him
go up to the heavens. For His sufferings are our
ascension on high, And all such visions point to
the Son of God, speaking with men and being in
their midst. For it was not the Father of all, who
is not seen by the world, the Maker of all who
said: Heaven zs my throne, and earth ts my footstool:
what house will ye build me, or what ts the place of
my vest ? and who comprehendeth the earth with his
hand, and with his span the heaven *—it was not He
that came and stood in a very small space and
spake with Abraham ; but the Word of God, who
was ever with mankind, and made known before-


1 III, vi.1: ‘‘ Filium enim hic significat, qui et Abrahz collocutus
sit, a Patre accepisse potestatem judicandi Sodomitas propter ini-
quitatem eorum.” For the indebtedness of irenzeus to Justin in this
and the next chapter, see Introd. p. 12.

* The Arm. text has ‘‘from heaven to heaven” by oversight.
That Jacob’s Ladder signified the Cross was said by Justin (D/a/. 86).

3 IV, xxxiii. 1: ‘* Audistis mensos esse cxlos in palma... qui
comprehendit terram pugillo.”


”


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 45, 46 III


hand what should come to pass in the future, and
taught men the things of God.

46. He it is who spake with Moses in the bush,
and said: Seeing have I seen the affliction of my ¥x. iii. 7.
people that is in Egypt; and I am come down to
deliver them. He it is who came forth and came
down for the deliverance of the oppressed, bringing
us out from the power of the Egyptians, that is, from
all idolatry and impiety ; and delivering us from
the Red Sea, that is, delivering us from the deadly
confusion of the Gentiles and the grievous vexation
of their blasphemy. For in them the Word of
God prepared and rehearsed beforehand the things
concerning us. Then Heset forth in types before-
hand that which was to be; now in very truth
He has brought us out from the cruel service of the -
Gentiles, and a stream of water in the desert has He
made to flow forth in abundance from a rock; and
that rock is Himself; and has given twelve fount- Cf. 1 Cor.
ains, that is, the teaching of the twelve apostles. &,4..
And the obstinate unbelievers He brought to an xy. 27.
end and consumed in the wilderness; but those
who believed on Him, and zz malice were children,} 1 Cor.
He made to enter into the inheritance of the “” *”
fathers ; whom not Moses, but Jesus puts in pos-
session of the heritage : 5 who also delivers us from
Amalek by the expansion of His hands,? and Cf. Ex.
brings us to the kingdom of the Father. oe


1 IV, xliv. 3: ‘* Malitia parvuli”: cf. c. 95.

2 IV, xlvii. 1: “‘ecclesize ... quam non Moyses quidem famulus
Dei, sed Jesus filius Dei in hzereditatem dabit.”

3 V, xvil. 4: διὰ τῆς ἐκτάσεως τῶν χειρῶν (where neither Lat. nor
Arm. supports the inserted θείας) : cf. c. 79. For this ἔκτασις cf,
Barn. Xif. 2; Just. Μ, Dial. 91, 112, 131.


Heb. i.
of. (PRs.
xlv. 6 f.).


PSs.Ox:
ΔΒ


112 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


47. So then the Father is Lord and the Son is
Lord,! and the Father is God and the Son is God ;
for that which is begotten of God is God.2 And
so in the substance and power of His being there
is shown forth one God ; but there is also according
to the economy of our redemption both Son and


Father. Because to created things the Father of.


all is invisible and unapproachable,’ therefore those
who are to draw near to God must have their access
to the Father through the Son. And yet more
plainly and evidently does David speak concerning
the Father and the Son as follows: Thy throne, O
God, ts for ever and ever: thou hast loved righteous-
ness and hated unrighteousness :* therefore God hath
anointed thee with the owl of gladness above thy


fellows. For the Son, as being God, receives from


the Father, that is, fom God,> the throne of the
everlasting kingdom, and the oil of anointing
above His fellows. The oil of anointing is the
Spirit,> wherewith He has been anointed ; and His
fellows are prophets and righteous men and
apostles, and all who receive the fellowship of His
kingdom, that is to say, His disciples.

48. And again David says: The Lord said unto
my Lord: Sit on my right hand, until I make thy


1 [II, vi. 1: ‘‘ Vere igitur cum Pater sit Dominus et Filius vere sit
Dominus, merito Spiritus Sanctus Domini appellatione signavit eos.”

2 7, 1. 18: τὸ yap ἐκ θεοῦ γεννηθὲν θεός ἐστιν.

3. Cf. Athan. Orat. i. 64: καὶ ἔστιν 6 θεὺς ἀόρατος καὶ ἀπρόσιτος
τοῖς γεννητοῖϑ5.

4 Apparently reading ἀδικίαν. The omission of ‘‘thy God” after
‘© God” may be an oversight.

5 III, vi. 1: ‘‘ Utrosque enim Dei appellatione signavit Spiritus :
et eum qui ungitur Filium, et eum qui ungit, id est, Patrem.”

6. III, xix. 3: “ Et unxit quidem Pater, unctus est vero Filius, in
Spiritu qui est unctio,” etc, For this chapter, see Introd. p. 60,


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 47-49 113


enemtes thy footstool, The rod of thy strength shall
the Lord send forth from Sion; and rule thou in
the midst of thy enemies. With thee in the begin-
ning* in the day of thy power, in the brightness of
the holy ones: from the womb before the morning-
star I begat thee. The Lord sware and will not
repent: Thou art a priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedec. And the Lord on thy right hand
hath broken in pieces kings in the day of wrath:
he shall judge among the Gentiles, he shall fill up the
ruins, and shall break in pieces the heads of many
on the earth He shall drink of the brook in the
way: therefore shall he lift up the head. Now here-
by he proclaimed that He came into being before
all, and that He rules over the Gentiles and judges
all mankind and the kings who now hate Him
and persecute His name; for these are His ene-
mies: and in calling Him God’s priest for ever, he
declared His immortality. And therefore he said:
He shall drink of the brook in the way ; therefore
shall he lift up the head ; proclaiming the exaltation
with glory that followed on His humanity and
humiliation and ingloriousness.®
49. And again Isaiah the prophet says: Thus Isa. xlv.

saith the Lord God to my Anointed the Lord whose *
right hand I have held, that the Gentiles should
hearken before him. And how the Christ is called
Son of God and King of the Gentiles, that is, of all


1 As though reading ἐν ἀρχῇ for ἀρχή.

2 As though reading πληρώσει πτώματα and ἐπὶ γῆς πολλῶν, with
some MSS. of LXX.

3 This is Justin’s interpretaton of the words: see Déa/. 33: καὶ
ὅτι ταπεινὺς ἔσται πρῶτον ἄνθρωπος, εἶτα ὑψωθήσεται.

* Reading κυρίῳ for Κύρῳ: cf. Barn. XII. 11: so also many
later writers.


114 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


mankind ; and that He not only is called but is
Son of God and King of all, David declares thus:
Ps. ii. 7£ The Lord said unto me: Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. Ask of me and 7 will give thee
the Gentiles for thy inheritance, and for a possession
the utmost parts of the earth. These things were
not said of David; for neither over the Gentiles
nor over the utmost parts did he rule, but only
over the Jews. So then it is plain that the promise
to the Anointed to reign over the utmost parts of
the earth is to the Son of God, whom David
himself acknowledges as his Lord, saying thus:
Ps. cx. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on my right hand,
and so forth, as we have said above. For he
means that the Father speaks with the Son; as
we showed a little before as to Isaiah, that he said
Isa. xlv. 1. thus: God sazth to my Anointed the Lord, that the
Gentiles should hearken before him. For the
promise is the same by the two prophets, that He ©
should be King: so that the speech of God is ”
addressed to one and the same, I mean, to Christ
Ps. ii. 7. the Son of God. Forasmuch as David says: The
Lord said unto me, it is necessary to say that it is
not David who speaks, nor any one of the prophets,
in his own person: for it is not a man who speaks ζ
the prophecies ; but the Spirit of God, assimilating
and likening Himself to the persons represented,
speaks in the prophets, and utters the words
sometimes from Christ and sometimes from the
Father. ~—il


1 The subject is fully treated by Justin (42. 1, 36 ff): cf. ;
especially: πότε δὲ ὡς arb προσώπου τοῦ δεσπότου πάντων καὶ -
πατρὸς θεοῦ φθέγγεται, πότε δὲ ὡς ἀπὸ προσώπου τοῦ χριστοῦ.


ema aaa a likin la aN i tae a i Nil ita eile


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 50, 51 τις


50. So then right fitly Christ says through
David that He converses with the Father ; and
right worthily does He say the other things
concerning Himself through the prophets; as in
other instances, so also after this manner by
Isaiah: And now thus satth the Lord, who formed \sa. xlix.
me as his servant from the womb, to gather 7αεοῦ δ"
and to gather Israel unto him: and I shall be
glorified before the Lord, and my God shall be a
strength unto me. And he said; A great thing
shall it be to thee to be called my servant, to stablish
and confirm the tribe of Jacob, and to turn again the
dispersion of Israel: and I have set thee for a light
of the Gentiles, that thou shouldst be for salvation
unto the end of the earth.

51. Here, first of all, is seen that the Son of God
pre-existed, from the fact that the Father spake
with Him,” and before He was born revealed Him
to men: and, next, that He must needs be born a
man among men ; and that the same God forms
Him from the womb, that is, that of the Spirit of
God He should be born; and that He is Lord of
all men, and Saviour of them that believe on Him,
both Jews and others. For the people of the Jews
is called Israel in the Hebrew language, from
Jacob their father, who was the first to be called
Israel: and Gentiles He calls the whole of man-
kind. And that the Son of the Father calls
Himself servant, (this is) on account of His sub-

1 Here the quotation corresponds with Acts xiii. 47, as in Just.
M. Dial. 121.

2 Cf. c. 30. Justin says (Dial. 62): ᾿Αλλὰ τοῦτο τὸ τῷ ὄντι ἀπὸ


τοῦ πατρὸς προβληθὲν γέννημα πρὸ πάντων τῶν ποιημάτων συνῆν τῷ
πατρί, καὶ τούτῳ 6 πατὴρ προσομιλεῖ.


Isa. vii,
14 ff.


116 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


jection to the Father: for among men also every
son is the servant of his father.

52. That Christ, then, being Son of God before
all the world, is with the Father ; and being with the
Father! is also nigh and close and joined unto
mankind ; and is King of all, because the Father
has subjected all things unto Him; and Saviour of
them that believe on Him—such things do the
Scriptures declare. For it is not feasible and
possible to enumerate every scripture in order;
and from these you may understand the others
also which have been spoken in like manner,
believing in Christ, and seeking understanding
and comprehension from God, so as to understand
what has been spoken by the prophets.

53. And that this Christ, who was with the
Father, being the Word of the Father, was there-
after to be made flesh and become man and under-
go the process of birth and be born of a virgin and
dwell among men, the Father of all bringing about
His incarnation ?—Isaiah says thus: Therefore the
Lord himself shall give you a sign: behold, the
virgin shall conceive and shall bring forth a son, and
ye shall call him Emmanuel: butter and honey shall
he eat; before he knoweth or selecteth the evil, he
chooseth the good: for, before the child knoweth good
or evil, he rejecteth wickedness to choose the good.
So he proclaimed His birth from a virgin ; and
that He was truly man he declared beforehand by
His eateng ; and also because he called Him the


1 The construction of the Arm. is uncertain, but the general
sense is plain. The preposition ‘‘ with” in the first place seems to
represent σύν, in the second place πρός.

ἘΝ, i. 3: “* Patris omnium, qui operatus est incarnationem ejus.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 52-54 117


child; and further by giving Him a name; for
this is the custom also for one that is born.t And
His name is two-fold: in the Hebrew tongue
Messiah Jesus, and in ours Christ Saviour. And
_ the two names are names of works actually
wrought. For He was named Christ, because
‘through Him the Father anointed and adorned all
things ; and because on His coming as man He
was anointed with the Spirit of God and His
Father. As also by Isaiah He says of Himself:
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me: wherefore he 15. \xi. 1.
hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor.
And (He was named) Saviour for this, that He
became the cause of salvation to those who at that
time were delivered by Him from all sicknesses
and from death,? and to those who afterwards
believed on Him the author of salvation in the
future and for evermore.

54. For this cause then is He Saviour. Now
Emmanuel is, being interpreted, W2th you God ,;* or Cf. Matt.
as a yearning cry ἡ uttered by the prophet, such as “ 75
this: With us shall be God ; according to which it
_ is the explanation and manifestation of the good
tidings proclaimed. For Behold, He saith, the virgin Isa. vii.
_ shall conceive and shall bring forth a son; and He, a
being God, is to be with us. And, as if altogether
astonished ὅ at these things, he proclaims in regard
to these future events that Wzth us shall be God.

1 For comments on the rest of this chapter, see Introd. pp. 15 f.

2 After the word ‘‘death ” the Arm. has again ‘‘at that time.”

3 The translator has read μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν for μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν : there is no
distinction in sound in the later Greek pronunciation.

4 Or, perhaps, ‘‘ a cry of augury.”


5 Cf. c. 71; and Just. M. “42. 1, 47: θαυμαζόντων τὰ γεγενημένα :
— Dial. 118: τοῦτο θαυμάζων ᾿Ησαιὰς ἔφη.


Isa. xvi.


7.


Isa. ix. 6.


Gen. i.
26.


118 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


And yet again concerning His birth the same
prophet says in another place: Lefore she that
travailed gave birth, and before the pains of travail
came on, she escaped and was delivered of a man-
child. Thus he showed that His birth from the
virgin was unforescen and unexpected. And again
the same prophet says: Unto us a son ts born, and
unto us a child ts given :* and his name ts called
Wonderful Counsellor, Mighty God#

55. He calls Him Wonderful Counsellor, meaning
of the Father: whereby it is declared that the
Father works all things together with Him; as is
contained in the first book of Moses which is
entitled Genesis: And God said, Let us make man
after vur image and likeness. For there is seen in
this place the Father speaking to the Son,’ the
Wonderful Counsellor of the Father. Moreover
He is also our Counsellor, giving advice; not
compelling as God,> even though He is Mighty
God, (as) he says ; but giving advice that we should
forsake ignorance and acquire knowledge, and


1 ΤΙ], xxvi. 2: ‘‘In eo autem quod dixerit: Jpse Dominus dabit
stgnum, id quod erat inopinatum generationis ejus significavit. . . .
Sed quoniam inopinata salus hominibus inciperet fieri, Deo
adjuvante, inopinatus et partus virginis fiebat,” etc.

* The transposition of ‘‘son” and “" child” would seem to be an
oversight : see however Just. M. AZ. 1, 35 (παιδίον .. . veavioxos]:
and note that the whole passage is quoted differently in c. 56 below.

δ So in IV, Iv. 2: cf. III, xx. 2. So above,c. 40. Butinc. 56 we
have ‘‘ Angel of great counsel,” as in III, xvii. 3: cf. Just. M.
Dial. 76.

ΑΨ, xv. 4: **Cum quo et loquebatur Pater: Factamus,’
cf. DV, cxxxiviet. (Ch Burne ves.

5 V,i. 1: “‘noncumvi.. . sed secundum suadelam. .. suadentem,
non vim inferentem : ” cf. IV, lix. 1 : Bia θεῷ ob πρόσεστιν " ἀγαθὴ δὲ
γνώμη πάντοτε συμπάρεστιν avT@:1x. 1 : ἀλλὰ μὴ βιαζομένον. Compare
Ep. ad Diognetum 7 : ὡς πείθων, οὐ βιαζόμενος - βία γὰρ ov πρόσεστι
τῷ θεῷ.


ete.


oe


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 55,-56 119


_ depart from error and come to the truth, and put
_ away corruption and receive incorruption.
_ 56, And again Isaiah says: And they shall wish 15... ix.
that they had been burned with fire: for unto us α ᾿
child ἐς born, and unto us a son is given; whose
| government ts upon his shoulders, and his name ts
called Angel of great counsel. For I will bring
peace upon the rulers, again peace and health unto
him. Great ts his rule, and of his peace there ts no
bound, upon the throne of David and upon his king-
dom, to prosper and complete, to atid and undertake,
in righteousness and judgment from this time forth
and for evermore. For hereby the Son of God is
proclaimed both as being born and also as eternal
King. But they shall wish that they had been
burned with fire (is said) of those who believe not
on Him, and who have done to Him all that they
_ have done: for they shall say in the judgment,
How much better that we had been burned with
_ fire before the Son of God was born, than that,
_ when He was born, we should not have believed
on Him. Because for those who died before Christ
appeared there is hope that in the judgment of
_ the risen? they may obtain salvation, even such as
feared God and died in righteousness and had in
them the Spirit of God, as the patriarchs and
prophets and righteous men. But for those who
after Christ’s appearing believed not on Him, there
is a vengeance without pardon in the judgment.
1 The Arm. offers double renderings both of κατορθῶσαι and of
᾿ ἀντιλαβέσθαι.
2 Cf. cc. 36, 66, 95.


_ # The Arm. appears to mean “" of the Risen One”: but the text
may be corrupt.
I


Gen. xlix.


10 ἢ,


120 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


Now inthis: Whose government is upon his shoulder,
the cross is in a figure declared, on which He was
nailed back.1 For that which was and is a reproach
to Him, and for His sake to us,? even the cross,
this same is, says he, His government, being a sign
of His kingdom. And, Angel of great counsel, he
says; that is, of the Father? whom He hath
declared unto us,

57. That the Son of God should be born, and in
what way He was to be born, and that He should
be shown to be Christ—from what has been said
it is plain how this was made known beforehand
by the prophets. And in addition to this, in what
land and among whom of mankind He was to be
born4 and to appear, this also was proclaimed
beforehand with words such as these. Moses in
Genesis says thus: There shall not fail a prince
Srom Judah, nor a leader from his loins, until he
shall come for whom tt remaineth ;*° and he shall be
the expectation of the Gentiles: washing his robe in
wine, and his garment in the blood of the grape,
Now Judah was the ancestor of the Jews, the son
of Jacob ; from whom also they obtained the name.®

1 This is Justin’ 5 interpretation in AZ. I, 35: οὗ ἡ ἀρχὴ ἐπὶ τῶν
ὥμων᾽ μηνυτικὸν τῆς δυνάμεως τοῦ σταυροῦ, ᾧ προσέθηκε τοὺς ὥμους
σταυρωθείς.

2 Cf. Just. M. Deal. 101: Ὄνειδος μὲν γὰρ ἡμῖν τοῖς εἰς αὐτὸν
πιστεύουσιν ἀνθρώποις πανταχοῦ ἐστιν. Justin is interpreting ὄνειδος
ἀνθρώπων (Ps. xxii. 7).

3 ILI, xvii. 3: ‘‘ magni consilit patris nuntius:” see note to c. 54.

4 Cf. Just. M. “42. 1, 34: Οπου δὲ καὶ τῆς γῆς γεννᾶσθαι ἔμελλεν,
κιτ.λ., quoting Mic. v. 2, which Irenzeus quotes below, c. 63.

5 So in IV, xx. 2: ‘‘cui repositum est,” corresponding to
ᾧ ἀπόκειται, the reading which Justia defends in Déa/. 120.

6 Cf. Just. M. AZ. 1, 32: Ἰούδας yap προπάτωρ ᾿Ιουδαίων, ἀφ᾽ οὗ


καὶ τὸ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι ica oferta ἐσχήκασι. See on this whole chapter
Introd. pp. 6 ff.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 57, 58 121


And there failed not a prince among them and a
leader, until the coming of Christ. But from the
time of His coming the might of the quiver was
captured,! the land of the Jews was given over into
subjection to the Romans, and they had no longer
a prince or king of their own. For He was come,
Jor whom remaineth in heaven the kingdom ;# who
also washed his robe in wine, and his garment in
the blood of the grape. Wis robe as also His gar-
ment are those who believe on Him,? whom also
He cleansed, redeeming us by His blood. And
His blood is said to be blood of the grape: for even
as the blood of the grape no man maketh, but God
produceth, and maketh glad them that drink thereof, Cf. Ps.
so also His flesh and blood no man wrought, but “%: 15:
God made. The Lord Himself gave the sign of the Isa. vii.
virgin, even that Emmanuel which was from the '*
virgin ; who also maketh glad them that drink of
Him, that is to say, who receive His Spirit, (even)
everlasting gladness. Wherefore also He is the ὑπὸ χχχν.
_ expectation of the Gentiles, of those who hope ἔργον pies ©
_ Him, because we expect of Him that He will
establish again the kingdom.

58. And again Moses says: There shall rise a star Num.
out of Jacob; and a leader* shall be raised up out of **'* 17:
Israel ; showing yet more plainly that the dispen-


1 The translation is uncertain. Cf. Justin, zdid.: μεθ ὕν εὐθὺς
δοριάλωτος ὑ ὑμῖν ἡ γῆ ᾿Ιοὐδαίων παρεδόθη.
2. Cf. Justin, 262“. : ὦ ἀπόκειται τὸ βασίλειον.
F Ὁ Cf. Justin, zbid.: 4 yap KexAnuevn . . . στολὴ of πιστεύοντες
| αὐτῷ εἰσιν ἄνθρωποι. And for what follows: ὃν τρόπον γὰρ τὸ τῆς
᾿ ἀμπέλου αἷμα οὐκ ἄνθρωπος πεποίηκεν ἀλλ᾽ ὁ θεός, k.7.A. and the similar
_ passage in Dial. 54.
‘So in III, ix. 2 (‘‘dux”’), The only other evidence for this
_ seems to be Just. M. Dial. 106 (ἡγούμενοΞ) : LXX, ἄνθρωπος.


Cf. Matt.
ii. I-9.


Isa. xi.
I ff.


122 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


sation of His coming in flesh should be among the
Jews. And from Jacob and from the tribe of
Judah He who was born, coming down from
heaven, took upon Him this economy of dispensa-
tion: for the star appeared in heaven. And by
leader he means king, because He ig the King of
all the redeemed. And at His birth the star
appeared to the Magi who dwelt in the east; and
thereby they learned that Christ was born; and
they came to Judza, led by the star ; until the star
came to Bethlehem where Christ was born, and
entered the house wherein was laid the child,
wrapped in swaddling-clothes; and it stood over ~
His head,! declaring to the Magi the Son of God,
the Christ. .

59. Moreover Isaiah himself yet further says:
And there shall come forth a rod out of the roots of
Jesse,and a flower from his root shall come forth. And —
the spirit of God shall rest upon him; the spirit of y
wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of counsel —
and of might, the spirit of knowledge and of godlt-
ness: the spirit of the fear of God shall fill him.
Not according to opinion shall he judge, and not


according to speech shall he reprove: but he shall —


judge judgment for the humble, and shew mercy
to® the humble of the earth. And he shall smite
the earth with the word of his mouth, and with the


1 Cf. Protevang. Jacobi (cod. D): ἕως οὗ εἰσῆλθεν... καὶ ἔστη ἐπὶ
τὴν κεφαλὴν τοῦ παιδίου : Ofus Imperf. in Matth. p. 30: ‘‘venit —
et stetit super caput pueri.” Codex Bezze has ἐπάνω τοῦ παιδίου —
and supra puerum (with vet. lat).

2 This passage was quoted in c. 9.

3 As though reading ἐλεήσει for ἐλέγξει. But in III, x. 1 we


find ‘‘arguet gloriosos terre.” The confusion between ἐλέγχειν |


and ἐλεεῖν is found in the text of Jude 22.


RDO Er ΟΥ ees ee eee


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 59, 60 123


breath of his lips shall he slay the impious man.
And he shall be girt about his loins with righteous-
ness, and with truth encompassed about his reins.
And the wolf shall feed with the lamb, and the
leopard” with the kid, and the calf and the lion
shall pasture together. And a sucking child shall
put his hand on the hole of the asps, and on the lair
of the offspring of the asps, and they shall not hurt
him. And in that day there shall be a root of
Jesse, and he that riseth up to rule the Gentiles: in
kim shall the Gentiles hope: and his rising up*
Shall be honour. By these words he states that He
was born from her who was of the race of David
and of Abraham. For Jesse was the descendant


_of Abraham, and the father of David; (and


David’s) descendant the virgin was who conceived
Christ. Now (as to) the vod: for this causé also
Moses with* a rod showed the mighty works to
Pharaoh: and with other men also the rod is a
sign of rule. And by flower he means His flesh ;°
for from spirit it budded forth, as we have said
before.

60. Now, Wot according to opinion shall he judge,
and not according to speech shall he reprove: but he
shall judge judgment for the humble, and shall show
mercy to the humble on the earth—(by this) he the


1 Lit. ‘‘ with spirit through the lips,” as in LXX.

2 Omitting ‘‘shall lie down”: but this is found in V, xxxiii. 4
(Jat. and arm.): so too are the other words which are wanting in
what follows here.

® As though reading ἀνάστασις instead of ἀνάπαυσις.

4 The Arm. means “with,” not ‘‘ by means of.’’ Cf. Just. M.
Dial. 86: Μωυσῆς μετὰ ῥάβδου ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ λαοῦ ἀπολύτρωσιν
ἐπέμφθη : the Rod from Jesse’s root is there said to be Christ.

+ ® Or * body.”


124 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


more establishes and declares His godhead.1 For
to judge without respect of persons and partiality,
and not as favouring the illustrious, but affording
to the humble worthy and like and equal treatment,
accords with the height and summit of the right-
eousness of God: for God is influenced and moved
by. none, save only the righteous. And to show
mercy is the peculiar attribute of God, who by
mercy is able to save. And He shall smite the
earth with a word, and slay the impious with a word
only: this belongs to God who worketh all things
with a word. And in saying: He shall be girt
about his loins with righteousness, and with truth
encompassed about his reins, he declares His human
form and aspect, and His own surpassing righteous-
ness,

61. Now as to the unfon and concord and peace
of the animals of different kinds,? which by nature
are opposed and hostile to each other, the Elders
say that so it will be in truth at the coming of
Christ, when He is to reign over all. For already
in a symbol he announces the gathering together
in peace and concord, through the name of Christ,
of men of unlike races and (yet) of like dispositions.
For, when thus united, on the righteous, who are
likened to calves and lambs and kids and sucking

1 III, x. 1: ‘fsecundum autem quod Deus erat mon secundum
gloriam judicabat neque secundum loguelam arguebat.”’

* In V, xxxiii. 4 he discusses the same question and, while recog-
nizing that some persons give a symbolical interpretation, he
inclines to look for a literal fulfilment. Here also he finds room
for both interpretations. The passage of Papias there quoted, as
to the marvellous productivity of the millennial period, ends with
the statement that the animals will live in peace and concord and


in subjection to man. This explains the reference to the Elders in
our text.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 61, 62 125


children, those inflict no hurt at all who in the
former time were, through their rapacity, like wild
beasts in manners and disposition, both men and
women ; so much so that some of them were like
wolves and lions, ravaging the weaker and warring
on their equals; while the women (were like)
leopards or asps, who slew, it may be, even their
loved ones with deadly poisons, or by reason of
lustful desire. (But now) coming together in one
name! they have acquired righteous habits by the
grace of God, changing their wild and untamed
nature. And this has come to pass already. For
those who were before exceeding wicked, so that
they left no work of ungodliness undone, learning
of Christ and believing on Him, have at once
believed and been changed, so as to leave no
excellency of righteousness undone; so great is
the transformation which faith in Christ the Son
of God effects for those who believe on Him. And
he says: Rising up to rule the Gentzles, because He
is to die and rise again, and be confessed and
believed as the Son of God (and) King. On this
account he says: And His rising up shall be honour :
that is, glory; for then was He glorified as God,
when He rose.

62. Wherefore again the prophet says:? Jz that Amos ix.
day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is **
fallen : that body 3 of Christ, which, as we have said
before, is born of David, he plainly declares as after
death rising from the dead. For the body is called a


μιν eT ey


μας tee δ ee ee ae Ἐν


“σι


1 The Arm. text as printed gives ‘‘in my name”; but by a
different division of the letters we get ‘‘ in one name.”

ΑΕ 38.

3 Or “‘ flesh”; and so throughout the passage.


Ἵ
3
δ
a
ᾷ
J
|


126 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


tabernacle! For by these words he says that He
who according to the flesh is of the race of David
will be Christ the Son of God; and that He will
die and rise again, and that He is in aspect a man,
but in power God ; and that He Himself will be
as judge of all the world and as the only worker
of righteousness and redeemer—all this the
Scripture declared.
63. And again the prophet Micah speaks of the
place where Christ should be born, that it should
Matt. ii. be in Bethlehem of Judza, saying thus: And
? es thou, Bethlehem of Judaa, art thou the least among
the princes of Judah? for out of thee shall come a
prince who shall feed my people Israel But Beth-
Jehem is the native place 3 of David: so that not
only in respect of the Virgin who bore Him is He
of David’s race, but also in respect of His birth in
Bethlehem the native place of David.
64. And again David says that of his race Christ
Ps. cxxxii, is to be born, (speaking) after this manner: For
ἐν David my* servant's sake turn not away the face of
thy Christ. The Lord sware truth unto David, and
he will not disappoint him: Of the fruit of thy body


1 Cf. Wisd. ix. 15 (R. v.): ‘‘ For a corruptible body weighs

down the soul, and the earthly frame (τὸ γεῶδες oxjjvos) lieth heavy
on a mind that is full of cares:” 2 Cor. v. I: 7 ἐπίγειος ἡμῶν οἰκία
τοῦ σκήνους : and cf. σκήνωμα in 2 Pet. i. 13f. For the use of
σκῆνος in the sense of ‘‘body’’ in Greek literature, see Field,
Notes on N. 7. Translation, p. 183; and Stephanus, 7hesaurus Gr.
Ling., ad vocen.
_ 2 Trenzeus quotes the prophecy in the Matthzan form, which
differs much from the LXX rendering. Moreover he agrees with
Codex Bezze in reading τῆς Ἰουδαίας for γῆ ᾿Ιούδα, and μή for οὐδαμῶς.
Justin quotes the words twice in the Matthzean form, but with the
usual γῇ Ἰούδα and οὐδαμῶς (AP. 1, 34, Dial. 78).

3 The Arm. word renders πάτρις in Matt. xili. 54, 57.

ὁ “My” for “thy” (LXX σου) by oversight. Part of the text is ,
quoted in III, ix. 2. See also above, c. 36.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 63-66 127


will 7 set on thy throne: tf thy children shall keep
_ my covenant and my testimonies, which I covenanted
with them, thetr sons for evermore (shall sit upon
thy throne). But none of the sons of David reigned
for evermore, nor was their kingdom for evermore ;
for it was brought to noughi. But the king that
was born of David, He is Christ. All these testi-
monies declare in plain terms His descent accord-
ing to the flesh, and the race and place where He
was to be born; so that no man should seek among
the Gentiles or elsewhere for the birth of the Son
of God, but in Bethlehem of Judza from Abraham
and from David’s race.

65. And the manner of His entry into Jerusalem,
which was the capital of Judza, where also was
His royal seat and the temple of God, the prophet
Isaiah declares: Say ye to the daughter of Sion, ger xxi,
Behold a king cometh unto thee, meek and sitting? 5 At ig
upon an ass, a colt the foal of an ass. For, sitting PEE
on an ass’s colt, so He entered into Jerusalem, the 9:
multitudes strewing and putting down for Him
their garments. And by ¢he daughter of Sion he
means Jerusalem.

66. So then, that the Son of God should be born,
and in what manner born, and where He was to be
born, and that Christ is the one eternal King,? the
prophets thus declared. And again they told
beforehand concerning Him how, sprung from
mankind, He should heal those whom He healed,


1 The Arm, has “‘and their son for evermore,’’ and nothing further.
* The passage is quoted in the Matthzean form, and ascribed to
Isaiah from whom the first words come. In St Matthew’s Gospel
it is ascribed to ‘‘the prophet,’’ though some codices insert
**Zachariah.” Justin quotes it differently, 4. 1, 35, Dial. 53.
PACE ἐδ." 30, 56, 95.


Matt. viii.
17 (Isa.
lili. 4).


Isa, XXix.
18.


Isa. XXXvV.


3 ff.


Isa. XXvi,


19.


128 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


and raise the dead whom He raised, and be hated
and despised and undergo sufferings and be put to
death and crucified, even as He was hated and
despised and put to death.

67. At this point let us speak of His healings.
Isaiah says thus: He took our infirmities and bare
our sicknesses: that is to say, He shall take, and
shall bear. For there are passages in which the
Spirit of God through the prophets recounts things
that are to be as having taken place.1 For that
which with God is essayed and conceived of as
determined to take place, is reckoned as having
already taken place: and the Spirit, regarding and
seeing the time in which the issues of the prophecy
are fulfilled, utters the words (accordingly). And
concerning the kind of healing, thus will He make
mention, saying: /u that day shall the deaf hear
the words of the book, and in darkness and in mist
the eyes of the blind shall see. And the same says
again: Be strong, ye weak hands and feeble and
trembling knees: be comforted, ye that are of a fear-
ful mind. Be strong, fear not. Behold, our God
will recompense judgment: He will come and save
us. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and
the ears of the deaf shall hear: then shall the lame
man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the stam-
merers shall be plain. And concerning the dead,
that they shall be raised, he says thus: The
dead shall be raised, and they that are in the tombs


1 Cf. Just. M. Dial. 114: ἔσθ᾽ ὅτε yap τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα...
λόγους ἐφθέγξατο περὶ τῶν ἀποβαίνειν μελλόντων, φθεγγόμενον αὐτοὺς
ὡς τότε γινομένων ἢ καὶ γεγενημένων. It is interesting to see that in
IV. lv. 2, Irenzeus actually had given the future in this passage.
‘*Ipse infirmitates nostras accipiet et languores portabit.”


pape: he I aie S| 5. Ἄν RY


ip ero


|
i
ἢ
i


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 67, 68 129


shall b@ raised. And in bringing these things to
pass He shall be believed to be the Son of God.
68. And that He shall be despised and tormented
and in the end put to death, Isaiah says thus:
Behold, my son shall understand; and shall be isa. ii.
exalted and glorified greatly. Even as many shall *3 5
be astonished at thee, so without glory shall thy form
be from men. And many races shall be astonished,
and kings shall shut their mouths: for they to whom
zt was not declared concerning him shall see, and they
who have not heard shall consider. Lord, who hath
believed our report ? and to whom hath the arm of the
Lord been revealed? We declared before him as a
child, asa root in a dry ground: and there is to him
no form nor glory: and we saw him, and he had no
Jorm nor beauty: and his form was without honour,
meaner than that of other men: a man in chastise-
ment, and acquainted with the bearing of pain ; for
his face was turned away, he was dishonoured and
made of no account. He beareth our sins, and for
our sakes endureth pain: and we accounted him to
be in pain and chastisement and affliction. But he
was wounded for our iniquities, and was tormented
for our sins. The discipline of our peace (was) upon
lum; by his stripes we were healed. By these
_words it is declared that He was tormented; as
also David says: And 7 was tormented.” Now


1 The Arm. text gives the passive (‘‘ be understood ”); but doubt-
less the LXX συνήσει was read: the difference is only in the final
letter.

2 The repetition in the Arm. of the word here rendered ‘‘tor-
mented” suggests that the same Greek verb would underlie the
words of the prophet (‘‘ was tormented for our sins”) and of the
psalmist (“‘ And I was tormented”). But in the former case we
and μεμαλάκισται, and this verb does not occur in the LXX of the


Isa. J. 6.


Lam. iii.


30.


Isa. 1Π|.


of.


Isa. liii. 7.


Isa, 111], 8.


130 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


David was never tormented, but Christ (was), when
the command was given that He should be cruci-
fied. And again by Isaiah His Word says: 7 gave
my back to scourging,and my cheeks to smiting: and
my face 7 turned not away from the shame of spit-
ting And Jeremiah the prophet says the same,
thus: He shall give his cheek to the smuter: he
shall be filled with reproaches. All these things
Christ suffered.

69. Now what follows in Isaiah is this: By
his stripes we were healed. All we like sheep
went astray: a man in lis way went astray: and
the Lord delivered him up to our sins. It is mani-
fest therefore that by the will of the Father


these things occurred to Him for the sake of ©


our salvation. Then he says: And he by reason
of his suffering opened not (his) mouth: as a sheep to
the slaughter was he brought, as a lamb* dumb before
the shearer. Behold how he declares His voluntary
coming to death. And when the prophet says: Jz
the humiliation his zudgment was taken away, he
signifies the appearance of His humiliation : accord-
ing to the form of the abasement was the taking
away of judgment. And the taking away of
judgment is for some unto salvation, and to some
unto the torments of perdition. For there is a
taking away for a person, and also from a person.


Psalms. Probably the reference is to Ps. xxxviii. 8 (9), ἐκακώθην,
taking up ἐν κακώσει and κεκακῶσθαι of Isa. lili. 4, 7. For the
argument cf. Just. M. AZ. 1, 35: ὁ μὲν Aaveld . . . οὐδὲν τούτων
ἔπαθεν, K.T.A.

ΘΕΟΣ

2 The Arm. word for ‘‘lamb” in this place (amar) seems to be
a Syriac loan-word: see the note in Dr. Weber’s translation. -


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 69-71 131


So also with the judgment—those for whom it is
taken away have it unto the torments of their
perdition : but those from whom it is taken away
are saved by it. Now those took away to them-
selves the judgment who crucified Him, and when
they had done this to Him believed not on Him : for
through that judgment which was taken away by
them they shall be destroyed with torments. And
from them that believe on Him the judgment is
taken away, and they are no longer under it. And
the judgment is that which by fire will be the
‘destruction of the unbelievers at the end of the
world.

70. Then he says: Ais generation who shall \sa. 111]. 8.
declare? This was said to warn us, lest on account
of His enemies and the outrage of His sufferings
we should despise Him as a mean and contemptible
man. For He who endured all this has an un-
declarable generation;1 for by generation He
means descent; (for) He who is His Father is
undeclarable and unspeakable. Know therefore
that such descent was His who endured these
sufferings ; and despise Him not because of the
_ sufferings which for thy sake He of purpose endured,

but fear Him because of His descent.

71. Andin another place Jeremiah says: The Lam, iv.
Spirit of our face, the Lord Christ ;* and how He Ὁ
was taken in their snares, of whom we said, Under
his shadow we shall live among the Gentiles. That,
being (the) Spirit of God, Christ was to become a


1 TV, lv. 2:.‘‘et inenarrabile habet genus.” Cf. Just. M. 42. 1,
51: 6 ταῦτα πάσχων ἀνεκδιήγητον ἔχει τὸ γένος : Dial. 43 and 76.

5 ΔΙ, xi. 2: “Spreritus enim inquit facied nostre Christus
Dominus.” See for this whole passage Introd. p. 63.


Isa. vii.


132 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


suffering man the Scripture declares; and is, as
it were, amazed and astonished at, His sufferings,
that in such manner He was to endure sufferings,
under whose shadow we said that we should live.
And by shadow he means His body. For just
as a shadow is made by a body, so also Christ’s
body was made by His Spirit.2 But, further, the
humiliation and contemptibility of His body he
indicates by the shadow. For, as the shadow of
bodies standing upright is upon the ground and
is trodden upon, so also the body of Christ fell
upon the ground by His sufferings and was
trodden on indeed. And he named Christ’s body
a shadow, because the Spirit overshadowed it,
as it were, with glory and covered it. Moreover
oftentimes when the Lord passed by, they laid
those who were held by divers diseases in the
way, and on whomsoever His shadow fell, they
were healed.’

72. And again the same prophet (says) thus
concerning the sufferings of Christ: Behold how
the righteous is destroyed, and no man layeth tt to
heart ; and righteous men are taken away, and no
man understandeth. For from the face of iniquity
ἧς the taking away of the righteous: peace shall be
his burial, he hath been taken away from the midst.
And who else is perfectly righteous, but the Son of
God, who makes righteous and perfects them that
believe on Him, who like unto Him are persecuted

1 Or “‘ flesh,” as elsewhere.

2 Cf. c. 50, ad jin. ΄

3 The words appear to mean literally: ‘‘the Spirit becoming as


it were a shadow with glory and covering it (or him).”
4 This is said of St Peter in Acts v. 15.


ee ἰδοτὰ  ορες τ,


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 72, 73 133


and put to death?! But in saying: Peace shall be
his burial, he declares how on account of our
redemption He died: for it is in the peace of
redemption: and (also he declares) that by His
death those who aforetime were enemies and
opposed to one another, believing with one accord
upon Him, should have peace with one another,
becoming friends and beloved on account of their
common faith in Him; as indeed they have be-
come. But in saying: He hath been taken away
Jrom the midst, he signifies His resurrection from
the dead. Moreover because He appeared no
more after His death and burial, the prophet
declares that after dying and rising again He was
to remain immortal, (saying) thus: He asked life, Ps, xxi.
and thou gavest (it) him, and length of days for*
_ ever and ever, Now what is this that he says,
_ He asked life, since He was about to die? He
proclaims His resurrection from the dead, and that
‘being raised from the dead He is immortal. For
He received both //, that He should rise, and
length of days for ever and ever, that He should
be incorruptible.

73. And again David says thus concerning the
death and resurrection of Christ: J /atd me down Ps. iii. 5.
and slept: I awaked, for the Lord received me.
David said not this of himself, for he was not
raised after death: but the Spirit of Christ, who
(spake) also in other prophets concerning Him,
says here by David: 7 lazd me down and slept: I


1 The same point about ‘‘the Just” and “just men” is made
bY, og (42. 1, 48; Deal. 110).
f. IV, xlviii. 2; ἵν. 4.


PS; abd the


Cf, Acts
iv. 25 ff.


IPS
|xxxXix,


39 ff.


134 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


awaked, for the Lord received me. By sleep he
means death ; for He arose again.

74. And again David (says) thus concerning the
sufferings of Christ: Why did the Gentiles rage,
and the people tmagine vain things? Kings rose
up on the earth, and princes were gathered together,
against the Lord and his Anointed. For Herod
the king of the Jews and Pontius Pilate, the
governor of Claudius Cesar,} came together and
condemned Him to be crucified. For Herod
feared, as though He were to be an earthly king,
lest he should be expelled by Him from the
kingdom, But Pilate was constrained by Herod
and the Jews that were with him against his will
to deliver Him to death: (for they threatened
him) if he should not rather do this? than act
contrary to Cesar, by letting go a man who was
called a king.

75. And further concerning the sufferings of


Christ the same prophet says: Thou hast repelled


and despised us ; and hast cast away thine Anointed.
Thou hast broken the covenant of my* servant;
thou hast cast his holiness to the ground. Thou
hast overthrown all his hedges ; thou hast made his


1 Pilate was procurator of Judzea for ten years (27-37). Claudius
did not become emperor until A.D. 42. The statement here made
is therefore inconsistent with the chronology of history: but it
agrees with the view, expressed in II, xxxiili. 2 ff., that our Lord
reached @/atem sentorem, that is, an age between 40 and 50: a
view which is largely based on John viii. 57: ‘‘ Thou art not yet
fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?” For these words
seemed to Irenzeus to show that He could not have been much less —
than fifty at the time when they were spoken. See C. H. Turner’s
art. ‘* Chronology” in Hastings’ Dict. of the Bible.

* The Armenian is here uncertain.

3 Cf. c. 64 for a similar oversight.


ΟΠ APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 74-77 135


strongholds to tremble1 They that pass on the way
have ravaged him, he is become a reproach to his
neighbours. Thou hast exalted the right hand of his
oppressors ; thou hast made his enemies to rezotice
over him. Thou hast turned away the help of his
sword, and gavest him not a hand in the battle. Thou
hast removed and thrown him down from purifica-
tion ; thou hast overturned his throne upon the ground.
Thou hast shortened the days of hts time, and hast
poured forth shame upon him. That He should
endure these things, and that too by the will of
the Father, he manifestly declared: for by the will
οὔ the Father He was to endure sufferings.
_ 76. And Zechariah says thus: Sword, awake Zech. xiii.
against my shepherd, and against the man (that is)”
my companion. Smite* the shepherd, and the sheep

of the flock shall be scattered. And this came to
pass when He was taken by the Jews: for all the
disciples forsook Him, fearing lest they should die
with Him. For not yet did they stedfastly believe
on Him, until they had seen Him risen from the
dead.

77. Again He says in the Twelve Prophets:
And they bound him and brought him as a present Hos. x. 6. ᾿
to the king. For Pontius Pilate was governor of
_Judzea, and he had at that time resentful enmity
against Herod the king of the Jews.* But then,
when Christ was brought to him bound, Pilate sent


1 Lit. ‘for trembling.”
2 “Smite” is in the singular, as in cod. A of the LXX, which
is here followed.
3 Cf. c. 93, and IV, xxix. 5; ‘‘in duodecim prophetis Malachias.”
Often in Justin.
4 The same interpretation is given by Justin (Dza/. 103).

K


Ps, Xxii.
16.


Ps. XXii.
TA, 17:


136 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


Him to Herod, giving command to enquire of him,
that he might know of a certainty what he should
desire concerning Him; making Christ a con-
venient occasion of reconciliation with the king.

78. And in Jeremiah He thus declares His
death and descent into hell, saying: And the Lord
the Holy One of Israel, remembered his dead, which
aforetime fell asleep in the dust of the earth; and he
went down unto them, to bring the tidings of his
salvation, to deliver them.4 In this place He also
renders the cause of His death: for His descent
into hell was the salvation of them that had passed
away.

79. And, again, concerning His cross Isaiah says


_ thus: 7 have stretched out my hands all the day long


to a disobedient and gainsaying people. For this is
an indication of the cross.2 And yet more mani-
festly David says: Hunting-dogs encompassed me :*
the assembly of evil-doers came about me. They
pierced my hands and my feet. And again he says:
My heart became even as wax melting in the midst


1 This is one of the prophecies which Justin declared the Jews
had erased from their Scriptures (Dza/. 72). It is quoted several
times by Irenzeus: III, xxii. 1 (as from Isaiah); IV, xxxvi. 1 (as
from Jeremiah, to whom Justin had attributed it) ; 1. 1 (an allusion
only); Iv. 3 (‘‘alii autem dicentes: Rememoratus . . . causam
reddiderunt propter quam passus est hzec omnia’); V, xxxi. I
(with variations, and no name of author).

2 Cf. c. 46: Barn, XII. 4: Just. M. ‘Ap. 1, 35;

3 Justin (Dza/. 104) quotes the passage with κύνες πολλοί (as .
LXX), but in his comment says: obs καὶ κύνας καλεῖ καὶ κυνηγούς.
Jerome, in his Psalter translated from the Hebrew, has ‘‘ venatores,”
apparently after Symmachus or Theodotion (see Field, Orégenzs
Hexapla, ad. loc.). The Arm. is literally ‘‘dogs hunter”; but —
‘‘hunter” is used adjectivally, and the two words signify ‘‘ hounds.”
Why πολλοί should have disappeared and ‘‘ hunter” have taken its
place does not seem to be explained by these curious parallels.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 78-81 137


of my body , 1 and they put asunder*® my bones, and

again he says: Spare my soul from the sword and Ps. xxii.
nail my flesh: for the assembly of evil-doers hath τῆς . eh
risen up against me.® In these words with mani- 16.

fest clearness he signifies that He should be
crucified. And Moses says this same thing to the

people, thus: And thy life shall be hanged up before Deut.
thine eyes, and thou shalt fear by day and by night, **¥*\ 66.
and thou shalt not believe tn thy life.

80. And again David says: They looked upon me, Ps. xxii.
they parted my garments among them, and upon my 17 i
vesture they cast lots. For at His crucifixion the
soldiers parted His garments as they were wont ;
and the garments they parted by tearing ; but for Cf. John
the vesture, because it was woven from the top and *™ 53:
was not sewn, they cast lots, that to whomsoever it
should fall he should take it.

_ $81. And again Jeremiah the prophet says: Amd Matt.
they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him (Zech. ae ;
that was sold, whom they bought from the children 13).

of Israel; and they gave them for the potter's field,

as the Lord commanded me. For Judas, being one

of Christ’s disciples, agreed with the Jews and
‘covenanted with them, when he saw they desired

to kill Him, because he had been reproved by Him :

and he took the thirty staters* of the province, and cf, Matt,
betrayed Christ unto them: and then, repenting of **¥i- 15.


1 Lit. κοιλίας.

2 Or ‘they sent far” : apparently for ἐξηρίθμησαν of Ps. xxii. 17.

3 ** Nail my flesh” comes from the LXX. of Ps. cxix. 120, where
A. V. has ‘‘ My flesh trembleth for fear of thee.” Cf. Barn. V, 13:
Φεῖσαί pov τῆς ψυχῆς amd ῥομφαίας καὶ καθήλωσόν μου Tas σάρκας,
‘Ort πονηρευομένων συναγωγαὶ ἐπανέστησάν μοι.

4 In Matt. xxvi. 15 Cod. Bezae and some other authorities have
στατῆρας for ἀργύρια.


Cf. Matt.
XXvil. 34.
Joh. xix.
29.

Ps. Ixix
21.

Ps. Ixviii.
17 f.

Eph. iv. 8.


18. THE+DEMONSTRATION OF THE


what he had done, he gave the silver back again to
the rulers of the Jews, and hanged himself. But
they, thinking it not right to cast it into their


treasury, because it was the price of blood, bought —


with it the ground that was a certain potter’s for
the burial of strangers.

82. And at His crucifixion, when He asked a
drink, they gave Him to drink vinegar mingled
with gall. And this was declared through David:
They gave gall to my meat, and tn my thirst they


gave me vinegar to drink.


83. And that, being raised from the dead, He
was to ascend into heaven, David says thus: The
chariot of God (15) ten-thousandfold, thousands are
the drivers :* the Lord (ts) among them in Sinai in


(his) sanctuary. He ascended up on high, he led


captivity captive: he received, he gave gifts to men.
And by captivity he means the destruction of the
rule of the apostate angels.? He declares also the
place where He was to ascend into heaven from
the earth. For the Lord, he says, from Sion
ascended up on high’ For over against Jerusalem,

1 The Arm. probably represents Ἐν δὲ τῷ σταυρωθῆναι αὐτόν.
The ὄξος μετὰ χολῆς μεμιγμένον in Matt. xxvii. 34 (dtos A etc. ;
οἶνον SBD etc.) was before crucifixion, when ‘‘ He would not
drink.” ‘* When He asked a drink” on the cross (Joh. xix. 29),


they gave Him ὄξος : but some MSS. add μετὰ χολῆς. Cf. Barn.
ΝΙΙ, 35°53 2v. Peres


2 As though reading εὐθυνόντων (as some MSS. of LXX) for ©
εὐθηνούντων : so too in the Arm. Psalter, which in the next verse


has after ‘‘ captive” : ‘‘ He received booty, he distributed gifts, and
gave to the sons of men.” It is possible therefore that here ‘‘he


received, he gave ”’ is a reminiscence of his own Psalter on the part —


of the translator.
3 Just. M. Dal. 39: προεφητεύθη αἰχμαλωτεῦσαι αὐτὸν ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ
τῆς πλάνης καὶ δοῦναι ἡμῖν δόματα.


* This is not a fresh quotation, but part of the comment on the ἢ


passage before quoted : ‘‘ The Lord . . . in Sinai in his sanctuary :


“


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 82-85 139


on the mount which is called (the Mount) of
Olives, after He was risen from the dead, He
assembled His disciples, and expounded to them
‘the things concerning the kingdom of heaven ;
and they saw that He ascended, and they saw how
the heavens were opened and received Him.


your gates, ye rulers ; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting 7
gates, and the King of glory shallcome in. For the
everlasting gates are the heavens. But because
the Word descended invisible to created things, He
‘was not made known in His descent to them.
Because the Word was made flesh, He was visible
‘in His ascension ; and, when the powers saw Him,
he angels below cried out to those who were on
he firmament: 1.272 upyour gates; and be ye lift up,
ye everlasting gates, that the King of glory may come


second time: The Lord strong and mighty, he ἐς the
King of glory
_ 85. And being raised from the dead and exalted
at the Father’s right hand, He awaits the time
a ppointed by the Father for the judgment, when
“all enemies shall be put under Him. Now the
enemies are all those who were found in apostasy,
angels and archangels and powers and thrones,
who despised the truth. And the prophet David


1e ascended upon high.” Irenzeus seems to have taken it as
though it were ‘‘in Sion in his sanctuary.”

1 Justin’s interpretation (Dia/. 36) makes the humble form of
our Lord’s humanity (ἀειδὴς καὶ ἄτιμος) the reason why He is not at
once recognized. The interpretation given by Irenzeus corresponds
to that of the Ascension of Isaiah: see Introd. p. 43.


84. And the same says David again: Lift up Ps. xxiv.


im. And when they marvelled and said: Who 7s Ps. xxiv.
this ? those who had already seen Him testified a ὃ ἴ'


Ps; cx, 1


Ps. xix. 6.


Rom. x.


15 (Isa.
lil. 7).


Nisei 11.. ;


. himself says thus: Zhe Lord satd unto my Lord, Sit


140 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE .


on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
footstool. And that He ascended thither, whence ~
He had come down, David says: From the end
of heaven ts his going forth, and his cessation even at
the end of heaven. Then he signifies his judgment :
And there is none that shall be hid from his heat+

86. If then the prophets prophesied that the Son
of God was to appear upon the earth, and
prophesied also where on the earth and how andin —
what manner He should make known His appear-
ance, and all these prophecies the Lord took upon —
Himself; our faith in Him was well-founded, and
the tradition of the preaching (is) true: that is to —
say, the testimony of the apostles, who being sent
forth by the Lord preached in all the world the ©
Son of God, who came to suffer, and endured
to the destruction of death and the quickening of
the flesh: that by the putting away of the enmity
towards God, which is unrighteousness, we should
obtain peace with Him, doing that which is ©
pleasing to Him. And this was declared by the ©
prophets in the words: How beautiful are the feet
of them that bring tidings of peace, and of them that
bring tidings of wane things2 And that these were —
to go forth from Judza and from Jerusalem, ‘
to aed to us the word of God, which is the law > ©
for us, Isaiah says thus: For from Szon shall come


“παι.


est unde et descendit, et non est qui justum judicium ejus effugiat.”

> Quoted with a small difference in III, xiii. 1.

* See the comment on the same text in IV, lvi. 3f. : ““ 51 autem ~
libertatis lex, id est, verbum Dei ab apostolis qui ab Hierusalem —
exierunt annuntiatum,” etc. μὴ


=


ἢ
1 The same interpretation in IV, lv. 4: ‘‘ quoniam illuc assumptus |


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 86-88 141


forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, And that in all the earth they were to
preach, David says: Jnto all the earth went forth Ps. xix. 4.
their speech, and their words to the ends of the
world.

87. And that not by the much-speaking of the Cf. Matt.
law, but by the brevity of faith and love, men were *" Τ᾽
to be saved, Isaiah says thus: A word brief and Rom. ix.
Short in righteousness: for a short word will God x eo
make in the whole world. And therefore the
apostle Paul says: Love zs the fulfilling of the law : Rom. xiii.
for he who loves God has fulfilled the law. More- *
over the Lord, when He was asked which is the
first commandment, said: Thou shalt love the Lord Matt.
thy God with all thy heart and with all thy par bled
strength." And the second ἐς like unto it: Thou 30 1.
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two
commandments, He says, all the law hangeth and
the prophets. So then by our faith in Him He
has made our love to God and our neighbour to
grow, making us godly and righteous and good.
And therefore a short word has God made on the
earth 271 the world.

88. And that after His ascension He was to be
exalted above all, and that there shall be none
to be compared and equalled unto Him, Isaiah
says thus:* Who ἐς he that entereth into judgment 158. 1. 8 f.;
(with me)? Let him stand up against (me). And’ *"


1 For the abbreviation of the ‘‘ First Commandment ” cf. Just. M.
Dial, 93.
2 Almost the same comment is found in IV, lv. 4, where the
same combination of texts is made: ‘‘ Quisquis jndicatur, ex adverso
adstet ; et quisquis justificatur, appropinquet puero Dei (Arm.
Domini) ; et vez vobis . . . in altissimis.”


Tsa. Ixv.


15 f.


Isa, Ixiil.


9.


Isa. xliii.
18 ff.


142 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


whois he who ts justified ? Let him draw near to
the Lord’s Son. Woeunto you, for ye shall grow old
as a garment, and the moth shall devour you. And
all flesh shall be humbled and abased, and the Lord
alone shall be exalted in the highest. And that
in the end by His name they should be saved who
served God, Isaiah says: And on those who serve me
a new name shall be called, which shall be blessed
upon-the earth: and they shall bless the true God.
And that this blessing He Himself should bring
about, and Himself should redeem us by His
own blood, Isaiah declared, saying: Vo medzator,
no angel, but the Lord himself saved them ; because
he loved them and spared them: he himself redeemed
them.+ :

89. That He would not send back the redeemed
to the legislation of Moses—for the law was fulfilled
in Christ—but would have them live ? in newness
by the Word, through faith in the Son of God
and love, Isaiah declared, saying : Remember not the
Jormer things, nor bring to mind the things that
were in the beginning. Behold I make new (things),
which shall now spring up, and ye shall know
(them). And I will make in the wilderness a way,
and in the waterless place streams, to give drink to
my chosen race, and to my people whom I have
purchased to declare my virtues.2 Now a wilderness
and a waterless place was at first the calling of the


Gentiles: for the Word had not passed through


1 Cf. c.94. In III, xxii. r we have; ‘‘ Neque senior (πρέσβυς
LX X) neque angelus.”’

2 The word means more especially ‘‘ to live in freedom,”

5 Quoted in IV, lv. 5, with a brief comment.


ems table


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 89, 90 τ143


_ them,! nor given them the Holy Spirit to drink ; 5
who fashioned the new way of godliness and
_ righteousness, and made copious streams to spring
forth, disseminating over the earth the Holy
_ Spirit; even as it had been promised through the

_ prophets, that in the end of the days He should
_ pour out the Spirit upon the face of the earth.

go. Therefore dy newness of the spirit is our Cf. Rom.
calling, and not in the oldness of the letter ; 3 even Y¥ ©
as Jeremiah prophesied: Behold the days come, Jer. xxxi.
saith the Lord, that 1 will accomplish for the house ae
| of Israel and for the house of Judah the covenant 8 f.
of the testament* which I covenanted with their
| fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand to
lead them out of the land of Egypt: because they
continued not in the covenant, and I regarded them
not, saith the Lord. For this ἐς the covenant of the
testament that I will covenant with the house of
Israel after those days, saith the Lord: I will put
my laws® into their minds, and write them tn thetr
hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a people: and they shall not teach any
more every man his neighbour, and every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall


1 TV, xxv. 2.: “‘ per omnes illos transiens Verbum,” in connexion
with “the voice of many waters.’

2 The Greek doubtless was : οὐδὲ πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἐπότισεν αὐτούς :
and the context shows that πνεῦμα must be taken as accusative.
For the general thought of the passage cf. III, xviii. 1 f.

51 have followed the simple emendation suggested by the
editors: the printed text has “ not in our oldness.”

4 After διαθήκην the words καινήν, οὐ κατὰ τὴν διαθήκην must
have been missed by the scribe or translator. ‘‘ The covenant
of the testament” is only a double rendering of διαθήκην : such
double renderings occur several times in this quotation, but I have
not retained them in every case.

5 Lit. “‘ giving my laws”; cf. Heb, viii. 10,


Isa. xvii.


γι ὃ


Isa. lxv.
I.


Rom. ix.
25 f. (Hos.
11. 23, ie
10).


144 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


know me, from the least to the greatest of them.
For I will pardon and be merciful unto the sins
of their iniquities, and their sins will I remember
no more.

g1. And that these promises the calling from
among the Gentiles should inherit, to whom also
the new testament was opened up,! Isaiah says
thus: These things saith the God of Israel: In that
day a man shall trust? in his Maker, and his eyes
shall look to the Holy One of Israel: and they shall
not trust in altars, nor in the work of their own
hands, which their fingers have made. Yor very
plainly this was said of such as have forsaken idols
and believed in God our Maker through the
Holy One of Israel. And the Holy One of
Israel is Christ: and He became visible to men,
and to Him we look eagerly and behold Him ;
and we trust not in altars, nor in the works of
our hands.

92. And that Heshould become visible ὃ amongst
us—for the Son of God became Son of man—and
be found of us who before had no knowledge (of
Him), the Word Himself says thus in Isaiah: 7
became mantfest to them that sought me not ; I was
found of them that asked not for me. I said,
Behold, here am TI, to a race that called not on my
name.

93. And that this race was to become an holy
people was declared in the Twelve Prophets* by
Hosea, thus: J wll call that which was not (my)

1 Cf. c. 8, and note there.

2 Or ‘‘hope” : and so twice below.


3 Or ‘* manifest,” as in the quotation below. ἢ
4 Cf. c. 77. For the quotation cf. I, iv. 1; IV, xxxiv. 12.


i= ee


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 91-94 145


people, my people; and her that was not beloved,
beloved. lt shall come to pass that in the place
where tt was called not my people, there shall they be
called sons of the Living God. This also is that
which was said by John the Baptist: That God Matt. iii.
is able of these stones to raise up sons to Abraham.”
For our hearts being withdrawn and taken away
from the stony worship! by means of faith behold
God, and become sons of Abraham, who was
justified by faith. And therefore God says by
Ezekiel the prophet: And 7 will give them another Ezek. xi.
heart, anda néw spirit will I give them: and I will 19"
withdraw and take away the stony heart from their
flesh, and I will give them another heart of flesh:
so that they shall walk in my precepts, and shall
keep my ordinances and do them. And they shall
be to me for a people,and I will be to them for a God,

94. So then by the new calling a change of
hearts in the Gentiles came to pass through the
Word of God, when He was made flesh and taber-
nacled with men; as also His disciple John says:
And his Word was made flesh and dwelt ainong John i. 14
us. Wherefore the Church beareth much fruit of
the redeemed: because no longer Moses (as)
mediator nor Elijah (as) messenger,? but the Lord
Himself has redeemed us, granting many more
children to the Church than to the first Synagogue ;3


1 TV, xiii. : “a lapidum religione extrahens nos.”

2 Rendering the Greek ἄγγελος. Cf. c. 88

3 Both the German translations take the passage to mean:
**eranting many children to the Church, the assembly of the first-
born.” But it is hard to get this out of the Armenian text, which
has ‘‘first” and not “first-born.” It seems certain that there
is a contrast between “the Church” and ‘‘the first Synagogue”
(whose husband was the Law, as is said below). The text can


146 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


Τὶ Bets as Isaiah declared, saying: Rejozce thou barren,

oy, that didst not bear. The barren is the Church,

which never at all in former times presented sons

to God. Cry out and call, thou that didst not

travail: for the children of the desolate are more than

of her which hath an husband. Now the first
Synagogue had as husband the Law.

95. Moreover Moses in Deuteronomy says that

Cf. Deut. the Gentiles should be ¢he head, and the unbelieving

Deut, “ people ¢he zazl, And again he says: Ve provoked

Aine 21; me to jealousy with those that are no gods, and

ae * angered me with your tdols : and I will provoke you

to jealousy with that which ts no nation, and with

a foolish nation will I anger you. Because they

forsook the God who is, and worshipped and served

the gods who are not ; and they slew the prophets

of. Jer. ii; of God, and prophesied for Baal, who was the idol

: of the Canaanites. And the Son of God, who

is,! they despised and condemned, but they chose

Barabbas the robber who had been taken for

murder: and the eternal King? they disavowed,

and they acknowledged as their king the temporal

Cesar. (So) it pleased God to grant their

inheritance to the foolish Gentiles, even to those

who were not of the polity of God and knew not

what God is. Since, then, by this calling life has

been given (us), and God has summed up again

for Himself in us the faith of Abraham, we ought


easily be amended so as to give the meaning required. Cf. IV,
xviii. 1. {τ ‘‘ duz synagogz...fructificantes...filios vivos vivo Deo” ;
1Π1|, vi. 1: ‘‘ Ecclesia, hac enim est synagoga Dei.” For the
quotation and its interpretation cf. Just. M. “2.1, 53.

1 In the Arm. ‘‘ who is”’ refers to *‘ the Son.”


2 CE. 36, 56, 66.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 95, 96 147


not to turn back any more—I mean, to the first
legislation. For we have received the Lord of the
Law, the Son of God; and by faith in Him we
learn to love God with all our heart, and our
neighbour as ourselves. Now the love of God is
far from all sin,1 and love to the neighbour worketh Cr. Rom.
no ill to the neighbour. at ae
96. Wherefore also we need not the Lawas a
tutor. Behold, with the Father we speak, and in
His presence we stand, being children in malice,? | con:
and grown strong in all righteousness and sober- xiv. 20.
ness. For no longer shall the Law say, Do not
commit adultery, to him who has no desire at all 13 δι:
for another’s wife; and Zhou shalt not kill, to him wie mt
who has put away from himself all anger and
enmity ; (and) Zhou shalt not covet thy neighbour's
field or 0x or ass, to those who have no care at all
for earthly things, but store up the heavenly fruits :
nor Am eye for an eye, and a tooth fora tooth, to Ex. xxi.
him who counts no man his enemy, but all men 24-
his neighbours, and therefore cannot stretch out
his hand at all for vengeance. It will not require
tithes of him who consecrates all his possessions to
God,? leaving father and mother and all his kindred,
and following the Word of God. And there will
be no command to remain idle for one day of rest,
to him who perpetually keeps sabbath,’ that is to
1 Dr Rendel Harris ( Testimonies I, 66) has pointed out that this
is a reminiscence of Polycarp, Zp. ad Phil. 3; Ὁ yap ἔχων ἀγάπην
μακράν ἐστιν πάσης ἁμαρτίας. 2 Cf. c. 46.
3 TV, xxxi. 1: ‘‘ illi quidem decimas suorum habebant consecratas :
qui autem perceperunt libertatem, omnia que sunt ipsorum ad
_ dominicos decernunt usus.”


4 Just. M. Dial. 12: σαββατίζειν ὑμᾶς ὃ καινὸς νόμος διὰ παντὸς
εθέλει, καὶ ὑμεῖς μίαν ἀργοῦντες ἡμέραν εὐσεβεῖν δοκεῖτε.


Hos, vi.


Isa. Ixvi.


3


148 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


say, who in the temple of God, which is man’s body,
does service to God, and in every hour works
righteousness. or I desire mercy, He saith, and
not sacrifice ; and the knowledge of God more than
burnt offerings. But the wicked that sacrificeth to me
a calf ts as tf he should kill a dog; and that offereth


Joelii. fine flour, as though (he offered) swine’s blood. But


32.


Cf. Acts
lv. 12.


Luke
Xviii. 27.


Bar. iii.
20--ἶν. I.


whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall
be saved. And there is none other name of the
Lord gzven under heaven whereby men are saved,
save that of God, which is Jesus Christ the Son of
God, to which also the demons are subject and
evil spirits and all apostate energies.

97. By the invocation of the name of Jesus
Christ, crucified under Pontius Pilate, there is a
separation and division among mankind; and
wheresoever any of those who believe on Him
shall invoke and call upon Him and do His will,
He is near and present, fulfilling the requests of
those who with pure hearts call upon Him.
Whereby receiving salvation, we continually give
thanks to God, who by His great, inscrutable and
unsearchable wisdom delivered us, and proclaimed
the salvation from heaven—to wit, the visible
coming of our Lord, that is, His living as man 2—
to which we by ourselves could not attain: for the
things which are impossible with men are possible
with God.2 \Nherefore also Jeremiah saith con-
cerning her (z.e. wisdom): Who hath gone up into

1 TI, xlix. 3: Ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ, τοῦ σταυρωθέντος ἐπὶ
Ποντίου MetAdrov. Cf. Just. M. 42. ii.,6, Dial. 30, 76, 85. These
words should be taken with c. 96: see Add. Note on p. I51.


2 Suggesting the Greek τὴν ἀνθρωπινὴν αὐτοῦ πολιτείαν.
3 So quoted in IV, xxxiv. 5.


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 97 149


heaven, and taken her, and brought her down from
the clouds ? Who hath gone over the sea, found her,
and will bring her for choice gold? There is none
that hath found her way, nor any that comprehendeth
her path. But he that knoweth all things knoweth her
by his understanding: he that prepareth the earth
for evermore, hath filled it with four-footed beasts :
he that sendeth forth the light and it goeth ; he called
zt, and it obeyed him with fear: and the stars shined
in their watches, and were glad: he called them, and
they said Here we be; they shined with gladness
unto him that made them. This ts our God: there
shall none other be accounted of in comparison with
him. He hath found out every way by knowledge,
and hath given it unto Jacob his servant, and to
Israel that ts beloved of him. Afterward did he
appear upon earth, and was conversant with men.
This ts the book of the commandments of God, and
of the law which endureth for ever. All they that
hold τὲ fast (are appointed) to life: but such as leave
tt shall die. Now by Jacob and Jsrael he means
the Son of God, who received power from the
Father over our life, and after having received this
brought it down to us who were far off from Him,
when He appeared on earth and was conversant with
men, mingling and mixing? the Spirit of God the


1 The Arm. for ‘‘ beasts ” (κτηνῶν) is here ‘‘ fat (things).”

2 With the whole of this passage compare IV, xxxiv. 4 ff.,
especially the words ‘‘ preedicaverunt ejus secundum carnem adven-
tum, per quem commixtio et communio Dei et hominis secundum
placitum Patris facta est ; ab initio preenuntiante Verbo Dei quoniam
videbitur Deus ab hominzbus et conversabitur cum ets super terram
et colloqueretur et adfuturus esset suo plasmati” ; and “‘ preesignifi-
cabant igitur prophetze quoniam widebztur Deus ab homentbus,’’ words
which come again a little further on.


150 THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE


Father with the creature formed by God, that
man might be after the image and likeness of God.?

98. This, beloved, is the preaching of the truth,
and this is the manner of our redemption, and this
is the way of life, which the prophets proclaimed,
and Christ established, and the apostles delivered,
and the Church in all the world hands on to her
children. This must we keep with all certainty,
with a sound will and pleasing to God, with good
works and right-willed disposition.

99. So that none should imagine God the Father
to be other than our Creator, as the heretics
imagine; (for) they despise the God who is, and
make gods of that which is not ; and they fashion a
Father of their own above our Creator, and imagine
that they have found out for themselves something
greater than the truth. For all these are impious
and blasphemers against their Creator and against
the Father, as we have shown in the Laposure
and Overthrow of Knowledge falsely so-called. And
others again reject the coming of the Son of God
and the dispensation of His incarnation, which
the apostles delivered and the prophets declared
beforehand, even such as should be the summing
up of mankind, as we have shown you in brief:
and such also are reckoned amongst those who
are lacking in faith. And others receive not the
sifts of the Holy Spirit, and cast away from them-


1 Lit. ‘‘ with the formation (J/asma) of God.”

2 Cf. c. 32: V,i. 3, il. I, xxxvi. 1, and elsewhere.

3 The same language is found in the preface to Bk. V: ‘‘ quod
prophetz quidem preeconaverunt . . . perfecit autem Christus,
apostoli vero tradiderunt, a quibus ecclesia accipiens, per universum
mundum sola bene custodiens, tradidit filiis suis:” and similar
language in II. xlvii. 2.


nr et δὶ


[te a


APOSTOLIC PREACHING, 98-100 Ist


selves the prophetic grace,} watered whereby man
bears the fruit of life unto God : and these are they


of whom Isaiah speaks: For they shall be, saith he, Isa. i. 30.


as an oak that is stripped of leaves, and as a garden
that hath no water. And such are in no wise
serviceable to God, seeing that they cannot bear
any fruit.

100. So then in respect of the three points? of
our seal error has strayed widely from the truth.
For either they reject the Father, or they accept
not the Son and speak against the dispensation of
His incarnation; or else they receive not the
Spirit, that is, they reject prophecy. And of all
such must we beware, and shun their ways, if in
very truth we desire to be well-pleasing to God
and to attain the redemption that is from Him.


1 ΤΙ, xi. 12: ‘‘ propheticam vero gratiam repellunt ab ecclesia.”
2 Lit. ‘“‘heads”: cf. cc. 6 f.


ADDITIONAL NoTe.—A new instalment has now appeared of the

Patrologia Orientalis (XII. 5: Paris, 1919), containing a reprint of
the Armenian text, witha translation into English by the discoverer,
Ter-Mekerttschian, and Dr 5. G. Wilson. This is followed by a
much more accurate translation into French by the late Peére
Barthoulout, S.J., formerly a missionary in Armenia. Among
other valuable notes he points out that the opening words of c. 97
have been wrongly separated from the preceding chapter. The next
sentence would then appear to mean: ‘‘ He is separated and with-
drawn from among men, and (yet) wheresoever,” etc.
On p. 78, n. 5. Compare the fragment attributed to Victorinus
of Pettau, printed by Routh, Ae//> III, 458: ‘‘Summum ergo
coelum sapientiz,” etc. The common source may be “ the Elders”
or Papias.


INDEX LOCORUM


An asterisk (*) signifies an allusion only. References within brackets are to
Harvey’s edition of Irenzeus.


Gen. 1, Tece, 43. 1 1, 2.1 11. APS ene 2


5,2

i, 26: cc. 32, 55 [often]

ii, 5: c. 52 [III, 30, 1]

My 1Of. 2 C15 [V5 23 500]

ii, 18f.: Ὁ: 13

᾿ σα ΡΟ 2

11, 5.: Ὁ. 14 {Π11. 32..1]

Ve 1.5. Ὁ Ly

ἐν ΣΟΙ

1X, Lhe C, ΖΝ, 14, 1]

ΠΣ ALA Tiss) Ceyee

ix, 2013 C20 [LII, (5, 3)

Mir SAG, 22

Ἐν his δ; MeO, tes Vey
is Ben nea

KV, VOTECE T2452 25 ΠΝ; 10) ἃ;
15,1


xvii, 8: c. “


xvili, I ff. : ο. 44
XI, Sea isc. YY [III, 6, 1; IV,
20, 1; 58, 3f.]


XXVIil, 12f.:¢. 45

xlix, 10f.: c. 57[1V, 20, 2]

Ἔχ. πὶ γι το A Olt Vis τὰν
23, 1]

iii, 14: c. 2 [III, 6, 2]

XV 27.5.6: 20.
xvii, 9 ff. :
50, 1]
xx, 13 ff. : c. 96
xxl, 24: c. 96


οἱ 46" [LV 4 38, 1;


χχν» 20,» ὁ. ΟΠ Εν 3
32,1

xxxl, 18; c. ai

xXxxiv, 28:


. 26
Num. xxiv, fon c. 58 [III, 9, 2]
Deut. v, 17 ff. : c. 96
xxviii, 44: Cc. ost
xxviii, 66: c. 79 [IV, 20, 2;
V, 18, 2]
ΧΧΧΙΙ, 21: 6. 95
xxxli, 49f.: c. 29
XXXiv, 5: C. 29


152


ΠΣ fecal
ii, 78 το. 49 ΠΥ, 35, 3]
111, ;; c. 73 ΠΝ, 48, 2; 55:


xix, 4: cc. 21, 86
xix, 6: c. 85 [IV, 55, 4]
xxii, 14-20: cc. 79 f.
xxiv, 7-10: c. 84[IV, 55, 4]
XXX; 6 2 δ᾽ 5 (Loewe wipe
8, 3
xlv, 6f.: c. 47 [III, 6,1; IV,
55,1

Ixviii, 17. 5c. 83) (Ll, 12; 2]

Ixix, 21: αὶ 82) [ΠῚ ΣΟ ὩΣ
IV, 55, 3]

1χσχῖῖ, 172 eae

Ixxxix, 39-46: c. 75

civ, 15 5se. eye

cx, i: c. 85 [often]

CX, 2: cage

cx, I-7: cc. 48f.

Cxix, 120: c. 79

cxxxii, 10 ff. : c. 64 [III, 9, 2]

cxxxii, 11: c. 36 [ΠῚ 11, 4;
17,1; 26, 1]


Isa. i, 30: ¢.


99
ii, 3: c. 86 [IV, 56, 3]
ii, 17: c. 88 [IV, 55, 4]
vii, 9: c. 3
vii, 14 ff. : cc. 53f., 57 [often]
Ix, Sih το ΠΗ:
ix, ὁ: c. ΟΠ ΠΥ ΚΣ ΤΟΙ
2. ἢ 55, 2]


7
xi, I-10: cc. 59 ff. cur, 10,
τ 1Vip Qi ἀν 50} πὸ δ:
.33: 3
xi, 2f.:
1f.]
xvil, 7 f.: c. OI
ΧΧΌΪ, τ CuO 7a νη τ ἘΣ:


V, 15) 13 34, 1]
xxix, 18: c. 67


c. 9 [III, 10, 1; 18,


INDEX


Isa. xxxv, 3-6: c. 67 [III, 21, 2;
IV, 55, 2
xxxv, 10: 0.475}
xl, 12: c. 45 [IV, 33, 1]
wa ΣΟ τ οἱ 5* (IV; 5; 3]
xliii, 18-21: cz 89 [IV, 55, 5]
xlv, I: c. 49
xlix, 5f.: c. 50
I, 5f.: cc. 34, 68 [IV, 55, 3]
1, 8f..c. 88 [IV, 55, 4]
Mis 7s δ, 50 11}. 12, 1]
lii, 13-53, 8: cc. 67 ff. [often]
hive acc. 62. 1,4, 1]
lvii, rf. : c. 72 [IV, 56, 4]
ποτ τ ἘΠΕ tO, 1°18,
I; 19, a IV, 37, 1
lxii, ΣΤ.»
Ixiii, 9: “38 [III, 22, 1]
lavjazie, O2 (ILI, 6, 1; 10, 1]
Ixv, 2: ©. 79 ΠΝ, 55, 2]
Ixv, 15f.
xvi, 1: c. ye AAV. 4, 1]
Invi gee. ΘΟ (LV, 31, 2]
xvi, τ Ὁ. 54
Fern, ΒΞ δ. -95*
xxxi, 31-34:
13 55, 5
Lam. iii, 30: c. 68
ΕἾ 26 ΘΛ PLL, 11, 2]
Ezek. xi, 19 f. : c. 93
Hos. i, 10: Ὁ. 93
ii, 23: c. 93 [I, 4,1; IV, 24,
12


vi, 6: c. 96 [IV, 29, 5]
Se δ. 77
Joel ii, 32: c. 96
Amos ix, II: cc. 38, 62
Wiery,. 2, 63
Zech, ix, 9: c. 65
ce de Se δ, ἰδὲ
xiii, 7: c. 76
Bar, τ 29-iv, 1:c. 97 [IV, 34,


4f.
Matt. i, 23: c. 54*
ii, I-11: c. 58* [III, το, 1]
ii, 6: c. 63
ili, 9: c. 93 [often]


c. go [IV, 18,


153


Matt. viii, 17: c. 67
xxi, 5: Cc. 65
Sxl, 47. ὃ) 87
xxvi, 15: c. 81
xxvii, 9f.: c. 81
XXVii; 34: c. 82
Mark xii, 30f.: c. 87
Luke xviii, 27: c. 97 [IV, 13, 5]
John i, 1 ff. : c. 43 [often]
i, 14: cc. 31, a [often]
xix, 23 f.: ο. 80*
ΧΙΧ, 29: c. ‘So
Acts iv, 12: c. 96* [III, 12, 4]
iv, 25 ff.:.c. 74 [III, 12, 5]
v, 15: 6.71
ΤΩΣ, "5.5. Coed.
vii, 14: c. 25
vii, 49: c. 45
Rom, ii, 4ff.: c. 8 ΠΝ, 59, 1]
IV 9) $5 CC 24,35
iv, II: c. 24 [IV, 39, 1]
1...1.3.5. Ὁ. 35
vii, 6: c. 90
1X5. 6. ὁ 6.03
ix, 28: c. 87
x, 15: c. 86 [III, 13, 1]
X, 19: Ὁ. 95
xili, 10: cc. 87, 95 ΤΙΝ, 22, 2]
1 Cor. x, 4: c. 46* [IV, 25, 3]
xiv, 20: cc. 46, 96 [IV, 44, 3]
Galli, i100: 35
iv, 6: ς. 5 τὶ 19, 1]
iv, 27: c.
Eph. i, 10: a ae [often]
iv, 6: ce. 5 (II, 2, 5; IV, 34,
2; 49, 2 5 V, 18, τ]
iv, 8: 3
Phil. i 8. Ὁ: 24 Ὑ{ΕΠῚ 12.) 11}
V,-36,.25, V5 10), 2]
ii, ae 35 (IV, 10, 1; 13, 1]
Col. i, 18: c. 40 [IV, 34, 2]
Y Timid, 6s & 35 [1V.)27;. 3)
Heb. i, 8f.: c. 47
viii, 8 ff: c. 90
Rev./i, 5: c. 38f. [{01I, 32,1;
IV, 3, 2; 34 2]


GENERAL INDEX


Angel: applied to Christ, 27,
119: for Malachi, 47
Animals, concord among: 124 f.
Apocryphal quotations from
‘*Jeremiah’’: 22f., 108, 136
Apostolic Constitutions: 4of.,


44
Athenagoras: 25, 27 ff., 50


Barnabas, Epistle of: 94, 98,
104, III, 113, 118, 136 ff.


Cherubim and Seraphim : 39 ff.,


79
Christ: meaning of, 16 ff.; Name
of, 124 f.
Claudius Czesar: 134
Clementine Homilies: 53, 94
Cross, prefigurations of the: 28f.,
1oof., 120, 136f.


Deuteronomy, meaning of: 96
Diognetus, Epistle to: 118


Elders, the : disciples of apostles,
72, IOI, 124, 151

Enoch, Book of: 85
Secrets of: 40, 77


God: Two Hands of, 51 ff., 80;
Finger of, 93 f.


Heavens, Seven: 41 ff., 77 f.,151

Hebrews, Gospel acc. to: 33

Hermas, Shepherd of: 73

Hippolytus: 72, 74, 77, 88, 96,
104


154


Isaiah, Ascension of: 41 ff., 78,
139


Jacobi, Protevangelium : 122

Jesus : meaning of, 16 ff. ; power
of the Name, 94f., 148

Justin Martyr: parallels in, 6-
23. 78, 84, 86, 89, 94, 99ff.,
108 ff., 113 ff., 117f., 120f.,
123, 126ff., 130f., 133, 135f.,
138f., 141, 146ff.: on the
Holy Spirit, 24-34


Lactantius: 23
Liturgy of St Basil: 81; of St
Mark, 40; of Serapion, 39


Malachi: see Angel


Papias: 81, 124, 151

Paradise: 81 ff.

Pascha, as Passion: 93

Peter, Apocalypse of: 81 ; Gos-
pel of: 138

Plato: 28f., 101

Polycarp, Epistle of: 147


Satan, meaning of: 84


_ Serapion, Liturgy of: 39


Spirit, the Holy: glorifies the
Father, 39 ff., 79: as Wisdom
of God, 44 ff., 55 ff.


“Testimonies against the Jews”:
τοῦ 21f.
Theophilus of Antioch: 53 ff.


Waterland: 31


PUBLICATIONS


OF THE


“τ ( κ.


BOOKS FOR
STUDENTS


AND
OTHERS


SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING


CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
| LONDON : Central Offices: 6 St. Martin’s Piace, W.C.2
Book Shops: 64 NEw Bonp STREET, W.1
43 QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E,.C, 4
, And of all Booksellers.


New York: Tue MacmiLttan Company


BOOKS FOR STUDENTS 7


Translations of Early Documents


A Series of texts important for the study of Christian
origins. Under the Joint Editorship of the Rev.
W. O. E. OrsTERLEY, D.D., and the Rev. Canon ~
G. H. Box, M.A. )


The object of this Series is to provide short, cheap, and handy
textbooks for students, either working by themselves or in.
classes. The aim is to furnish in translations important
texts unencumbered by lai aahis or elaborate notes, which
can be had in larger works.


SAS ey


EXTRACTS FROM PRESS NOTICES.


The Times Literary Supplement says: ‘‘ These Jewish Apocalypses _ δ
have a direct relation to the thought and religious ideals which con-
fronted primitive Christianity in Palestine, and not only for their own |
sakes, but for their influence on the New Testament. and Apostolic
Christianity they deserve careful attention. Handbooks at once 50.


Christian origins.” ; ξ


The Church Quarterly Review says: ‘‘ To the theological student _
who is anxious to know something of the circumstances and thought |
of the time during which Christianity grew up, and of the Jewish —
environment of the teaching of our Lord and the Apostles, there is
no class of books more valuable than the later Jewish Apocrypha.”


The Church Times says: ‘“‘The names of the Editors are Ἔ |
guarantee of trustworthy and expert scholarship, and their work
has been admirably performed.”


The Tablet says: ‘‘A valuable series . . . well brought out aaa Ἵ
should prove useful to students.” a


Catholic Book Notes says: *‘ The S.P.C.K. is to be congratulated
on its various series of cheap and useful books for students.” i


The Journal of the Society of Oriental Research (U.S.A.) says:
“The S.P.C.K. have again made the whole body of students,
interested in things Jewish and Early Christian, their debtors...
their splendid work in this series.”


The Living Church (U.S.A.) says: “Τὸ praise this project too —
highly is an impossibility. Everyone has felt the need of such a
series of handy and inexpensive translations of these documents and
- . « we are assured of excellent results.”

2


Translations of Early Documents


FIRST SERIES—Palestinian-Jewish and
Cognate Texts (Pre-Rabbinic)


1. Jewish Documents in the Time of Ezra
Translated from the Aramaic by A. E, Cow.ey, Litt.D.,
Sub-Librarian of the Bodleian Library, Oxford,
4s. 6d, net.


‘2. The Wisdom of Ben-Sira (Ecclesiasticus)
By the Rev. W. O. E. OEsTERLEY, D.D., Vicar of
St. Alban’s, Bedford Park, W.; Examining Chaplain to
the Bishop of London. 425. 6d. net.


“3, The Book of Enoch
By the Rev. R. H. Cuar.es, D.D., Canon of West-
minster, 25. 6d. net.


4. The Book of Jubilees


By the Rev. Canon CHARLES, 4s. net.


5. The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs
By the Rev. Canon CuHar.es. 25. 6d. net. %


6. The Odes and Psalms of Solomon
By the Rev. G. H. Box, M.A., Rector of Sutton,
Beds., Hon. Canon of St. Albans,


7. The Ascension of Isaiah
By the Rev. Canon Cuar.es, Together with No, 10
in one volume. 45. 6d. net.


8. The Apocalypse of Ezra (ii. Esdras)
By the Rev. Canon Box. 25. 6d. net.


9. The Apocalypse of Baruch
By the Rev. Canon Cuaruxs. Together with No, 12
in one volume. 2s. 6d. net.
3


Translations of Early Documents (continued) '


10. The Apocalypse of Abraham
By the Rev. Canon Box. Together with No. 7 in
one volume. 4s. 6d. net.


11. The Testaments of Abraham, Isaac


and Jacob
By the Rev. Canon Box and S. GAZELEE.


12. The Assumption of Moses
By Rev. W. J. Ferrar, M.A., Vicar of Holy Trinity,
East Finchley. With No.9 in one volume. 25. 6d. net.


13. The Biblical Antiquities of Philo
By M. R. James, Litt.D., F.B.A., Hon. Litt.D.,
Dublin, Hon. LL.D., St. Auden Provost of King’s
College, Cambridge. 8s, 6d. net.


14. The Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament
By M. R. James, Litt.D. 55. 6d. net.


SECOND SERIES—Hellenistic-Jewish Texts


1. The Wisdom of Solomon
By W. Ο. E. OEsTERLEY, D.D. 25. 6d. net.


2. The Sibylline Oracles (Books ui-v)
By the Rey. H. N. Bate, M.A., Vicar of Christ
Church, Lancaster Gate, W. ; : Examen Chaplet to
the Bishop of London. 545. ‘6d. net.


3. The Letter of Aristeas }
By H. St. Joun TuHackeray, M.A., King’s sa Σ
Cambridge. 25. 6d. net.


4. Selections from Philo


(π


. Selections from Josephus
By H. Sr. J. THackeray, M.A, 55. net.
:


Translations of Early Documents (continued)


6. The Third and Fourth Books


of Maccabees
By the Rev. C. W. Emmet, B.D., Vicar of West
Hendred, Berks. 45. 6d. net.


- 7. The Book of Joseph and Asenath


Translated from the Greek text by E. W. Brooks,
25. 6d. net.


THIRD SERIES—Palestinian-Jewish and
Cognate Texts (Rabbinic)


The Sayings of the Jewish Fathers (Pirke
Aboth). ‘Translated from the Hebrew by W. O. E.

_ OESTERLEY, D.D. 55. net.

*2. Berakhoth. By the Rev. A. Luxyn Witurams, D,D,

*3. Yoma. By the Rev. Canon Box.

*4, Shabbath. By W. O. E. Ozsrertey, D.D.


#5, Tractate Sanhedrin. Mishnah and Tosefta.
- The Judicial procedure of the Jews as codified towards
the end of the second century a.p. Translated from
the Hebrew, with brief Annotations, by the Rev.
HERBERT Dansy, M.A., Sub-Warden of St. Deiniol’s
Library, Hawarden. 6s. net.


[The special importance of this consists in the light
thrown by it on the trial of our Lord.]


ἘΣ


ΞΡ, Kimhi’s Commentary on the Psalms
΄ (Book I, Selections). By the Rev. R. 6. Fincu,
B.D, - 7s. 64. net.


7. Tamid 11. Megilla


8. Aboda Zara 12. Sukka
9. Middoth 13. Taanith
10. Sopherim 14. Megillath Taanith


* It is proposed to publish these texts first by way of experiment. If
the Series should so far prove successful the others will follow. Nos. 1,
5 and 6 are now ready.


5


Translations of Early Documents (continued)


Jewish Literature and Christian Origins :


Vol. I. The Apocalyptic Literature.
» Il. A Short Survey of the Literature of
Rabbinical and Medizval Judaism.
By W. O. E. OgsTERLEY, M.A., D.D., and 6. H.
Box, Μ.Α., D.D.


The Uncanonical Jewish Books
A Short Introduction to the Apocrypha and the Jewish
Writings 200 B.c.-A.D. 100,. By WILLIAM JOHN FERRAR,
M.A., Vicar of East Finchley, 45. net.


A aeration of the work of specialists upon these books, which
have attracted so much attention.


Translations of Christian Literature


General Editors :
W. J. SPARROW SIMPSON, D.D.; W. K. LOWTHER CLARKE, BD.


A NUMBER of translations from the Fathers have already
been published by the S.P.C.K. under the title “ Early

Church Classics.” It is now proposed to enlarge this series
to include texts which are neither “early” nor necessarily
“classics.” ‘The divisions at present proposed are given below.
Volumes belonging to the original series are marked with an
asterisk.

The Month says: ‘‘ The cheap and useful aoa 2

The Church Times says: ‘‘ The splendid series.’


Studies says: ‘‘ For the intelligent student of Church history whe
cannot afford to be a specialist . . . such books abound in informa-
tion and suggestion.”


SERIES I.—GREEK TEXTS.

Dionysius the Areopagite: The Divine Names and
the Mystical aie, 5 By the late C, E. Rout
4s. 6d. net. :

The Library of Photius, By J. H. Freese. In 6 Vols.


Vol. 1. ros. net.
6


ree Bellen Oates γεν


ant pte ed


Translations of Christian Literature (continued)


SERIES I.—GREEK TEXTS (continued).


The Apocriticus of Macarius Magnes. By T. W.


CraFErR, D.D. 7s. 6d. net.


*The Epistle of St. Clement, Bishop of Rome. By the
Rt. Rev. J. A. F. Grecc, D.D. 15. 3d. net.

*Clement of Alexandria: Who is the Rich Man that
is being saved? By P. Μ, Barnarp, B.D. 15. 3d. net.

*St. Chrysostom: On the Priesthood. By T. A. Moxon.
25. net.

*The Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles. By (Ὁ. Bice,
D.D. 1s. 3d. net.

*The Epistle to Diognetus. By the Rt. Rev. L. B.
Raprorp, D.D. τς. 6d. net.

St. Dionysius of Alexandria. By C. L. Fetrtor, D.D.
35. 6d. net.

*The Epistle of the Gallican Churches: Lugdunum
and Vienna. With an Appendix containing Tertullian’s
Address to Martyrs and the Passion of St. Perpetua. By
T. H. Binney, D.D. ts. 3d. net.

*St. Gregory of Nyssa: The Catechetical Oration.
By the Ven. J. H. Sraw.ey, D.D. 25. net.

*St. Gregory of Nyssa: The Life of St. Macrina. By
W. K. LowTHEeR CiarkE, B.D. 15. 3d. net.

Gregory Thaumaturgus (Origen the Teacher): the
Address of Gregory to Origen, with Origen’s
Letter to Gregory. By W. Metcatrz, B.D.

*The Shepherd of Hermas. By C. Taytor, D.D. 2 vols.
2s. each net.

Eusebius: The Proof of the Gospel. By W. J. Ferrar,
2 vols.


Hippolytus: Philosophumena. By F. Lecce. 2 vols.


The Epistles of St. Ignatius. By the Ven. J. H.
SRAWLEY, D.D. 4s. net.
7


Translations of Christian Literature (continued)


SERIES I.—GREEK TEXTS (continued).
*St. Irenaeus: Against the Heresies. By F. R. M.
Hitcucock, D.D. 2 vols. 25. each net.
Palladius: The Lausiac History. By W. K. LowTHER
CLARKE, B.D. 55. net.
Palladius: The Life of St. Chrysostom. By H. Moore.
*St. Polycarp. By B. Jackson. 15. 3d. net.


SERIES II.—LATIN TEXTS.

Tertullian’s Treatises concerning Prayer, concerning
Baptism. By A. Souter, D.Litt. 45. net.

Tertullian against Praxeas. By A. Souter, D.Litt.
5s. net.

Novatian on the Trinity. By H. Moore. 6s. net.

*St. Augustine: The City of God. By F. R. M. Hitcx-
cock, D.D. 1s. 6d. net.

*St. Cyprian: The Lord’s Prayer. By T. H. BinpDLey,

D.D. ts. 6d. net.

Minucius Felix: The Octavius. By J. H. FREEsE,
35. 6d, net.


*Tertullian: On the Testimony of the Soul and On
the Prescription of Heretics. By T. H. BinpLeEy,
D.D. 2s. net.

*St. Vincent of Lerins: The Commonitory. By T. H.
BINDLEY, D.D. 2s. net.

St. Bernard: On Grace and Free Will. By W. Warxin
WILLIAMS.


SERIES III.—LITURGICAL TEXTS.
EDITED By C. L. FELTOE, D.D.


St. Ambrose: On the Mysteries and on the Sacra-
ments. By T.THompson, B.D., and J. H. SRaw_ey,


D.D. 4s. 6d. net.
8


»


,


Translations of Christian Literature (continued)


SERIES III.—LITURGICAL TEXTS (continued).


*The Apostolic Constitution and Cognate Documents,
with special reference to their Liturgical elements.
By De Lacy O'Leary, D.D. 15. 3d. net.


*The Liturgy of the Eighth Book of the Apostolic
Constitution, commonly called the Clementine
Liturgy. By R. H. CressweE.Lt. 15. 6d. net.


The Pilgrimage of Etheria. By M.L. McCuure. 6s. net.


*Bishop Sarapion’s Prayer-Book. By the Rt. Rev. J.
WorpswortTH, D.D. ts. 6d. net.


SERIES IV.—ORIENTAL TEXTS.
The Ethiopic Didascalia. By J. M. Harpen, B.D., LL.D.


The Apostolic Preaching of Irenaeus (Armenian). By
J. A. Rogsinson, D.D.


SERIES V.—LIVES OF THE CELTIC SAINTS.
‘ EDITED BY ELEANOR HULL.


St. Malachy of Armagh (St. Bernard). By H. J.
Law_or, D.D.


St. Ciaran of Clonmacnois. By R. A. S. Maca.istTeEr.
St. Patrick: Life and Works. By N. Ὁ. J. Wuire, D.D.


SERIES IX.—SELECT PASSAGES.


Documents Illustrative of the History of the Church.
wee Τὸ A.D. 313. Edited by B, J, Kipp, D,D.
7s. 6d. net.


Handbooks of Christian Literature


The Letters of St. Augustine. By W. J. Sparrow
Simpson, D.D. Cloth boards, ros. net.


The Early Christian Books: A Short Introduction
to Christian Literature to the Middle of the Second
Century. By W. Joun Ferrar, M.A., Vicar of East
Finchley. Cloth boards, 35. 6¢. net.


The Inspiration and Authority of Holy Scripture:
A Study in the Literature of the First Five
Centuries. By Grorce Duncan Barry, B.D. Cloth
boards, 45. 6d. net.


The Eucharistic Office of the Book of Common Prayer.
By the Rev. LesLtiz— WricuT, M.A., B.D. Cloth boards,
35. 6d. net.


Helps for Students of History
Edited by
C. JOHNSON, M.A., H. W. V. TEMPERLEY, M.A.
and J. Ρ. WHITNEY, D.D., D.C.L.


The Times Educational Supplement says: ‘‘ These little volumes
by well-known specialists should be in the hands of serious students
of history.”


The Guardian says: ‘‘ This is a remarkable series. . . A number
of excellent little handbooks for the most part by acknowledged
experts.”

1. Episcopal Registers of England and Wales. By

R. C. Fowter, B.A., F.S.A. 6d. net. :


2. Municipal Records. By F. J. C. Hearnsuaw, M.A.
6d, net.


3. Medieval Reckonings of Time. By Recinatp L.
Poo.e, LL.D., Litt.D. 6d. net.


4. The Public Record Office, By C. JouNson, M.A. 6d. net.


5. The Care of Documents. By C. Jounson, M.A. 6d. net.
6. The Logic of History. By C.G. Crump. 8d. net.


Io


<n ἀωδαβωνὶ


Abbe ORY


Io.


11.


12.


13.
14.
15.
16.


17.


18.


Helps for Students of History (continued).


. Documents in the Public Record Office, Dublin.


By R. H. Murray, Litt.D. 8d. net.


. The French Wars of Religion. By ArtHur A. TILLEY,


M.A. 6d. net.


By Sr A. W. WARD, Litt.D., F.B.A.


. The Period of Congresses—I. Introductory. 84. net.


The Period of Congresses—Il. Vienna and the
Second Peace of Paris. 1s. net.


The Period of Congresses—III. Aix-la-Chapelle
to Verona. ts. net.


Nos, 9, 10, and 11 in one volume, cloth, 35. 6d. net.


Securities of Peace: A Retrospect (1848-1914).
Paper, 2s. net; cloth, 3s. net.


The French Renaissance. By A. A. Tittey, M.A,
8d. net.


Hints on the Study of English Economic History.
By W. Cunnincuay, D.D., F.B.A., F.S.A., 84. net.


Parish History and Records. By A. HamiLton
Tuompson, M.A., F.S.A. 8d. net.


A Short Introduction to the Study of Colonial
History. By A. P. Newron, M.A., D.Litt. 6d. net.


The Wanderings and Homes of Manuscripts. By
M. R. James, Litt.D., F.B.A. Paper cover, 25. ; cloth
boards, 3s. net.


Ecclesiastical Records. By the Rev. CLAUDE JENKINS,
M.A., Librarian of Lambeth Palace.


Il


Helps for Students of History (contineads


1g. An Introduction to the History of American
Diplomacy. By Cari RussELL Fisu, Ph.D., Pro-
fessor of American History in the University of
Wisconsin. 15. net.


20. Hints on Translation from Latin into English.
By ALEXANDER Souter, D.Litt. 6d. net.


21. Hints on the Study of Latin (A.D... 125-750). By
ALEXANDER SOUTER, D.Litt. 8d. net.


22. Report of the Historical MSS. Commission. By
ΒΕ. A. Roperts, F.R.Hist.S., sometime Secretary of
the Commission.


23. A Guide to Franciscan Studies. By A. G. LITTLE.


24. A Guide to the History of Education. By Joxun
WiLL1AM Apamson, Professor of Education in the
University of London. 8d. net.


25. Introduction to the Study of Russian History.
By W. F. Reppaway. δα. net.


26. Monuments of English Municipal Life. By W.
CuNNINGHAM, D.D., F.B.A.


The Story of the English Towns


A Series of Popular but Scholarly Histories of English
Towns, designed primarily for the general reader, but suitable
also for use in schools. With Maps, Plans, and Illustrations.
Cloth boards. 35. 6d. net.


The Yorkshire Post says: “‘ A picturesque history of Yorkshire's
two leading cities.”


The Times Literary Supplement says: ‘‘ This well-planned series.”


Leeds. By J. S. FLeTcHER, Member of the Yorkshire
Archeological Society.


Peterborough. By K. and R. E. Roserts.


12


wae


wy?


The Story of the English Towns (continued).
Sheffield. By J. S. FLercuer.


Westminster. By H. F. Westtaxe, M.A., F.S.A., Cus-
todian and Minor Canon of Westminster Abbey.


In the Press—
Harrogate Birmingham Nottingham
Pontefract Halifax Plymouth
St. Albans, etc.


Studies in Church History


The Venerable Bede: His Life and Writings. By the
Right Rev. G. F. Browne, D.D., formerly Bishop of
Stepney and of Bristol. With Illustrations. Cloth
boards, 10s. net.

The Morning Post says: ‘‘ The final and complete history of the
scholar-saint.”

The Reformation in Ireland: A Study of Ecclesiastical
Legislation. By Henry Hotioway, M.A., B.D.
Cloth boards, 75. 6d. net.


[Study of the Irish Reformation is essential, if English
veaders ave to understand present-day Irish problems,
which hinge largely on religious questions. The author
discusses his difficult subject with complete impartiality.]
The Universe says: ‘‘The standpoint from which he writes is
that of the detached and unbiassed historian. His book is refreshingly
satisfactory.”
The Emperor Julian: An Essay on His Relations with
the Christian Religion. By Epwarp J. Martin,
B.D., formerly Scholar of Oriel College, Oxford. Cloth
boards, 3s. 6d. net.


The Importance of Women in Anglo-Saxon Times ;
The Cultus of St. Peter and St. Paul, and other
Addresses. By the Right Rev. G. F. Browne, D.D.
With two Illustrations. Cloth boards, 75. 6d. net.


The Guardian says: ‘‘ Deserves to be widely read both for the
excellent choice of its matter and the equally admirable presentation
of it.”


13


Studies in Church History (continued).


Essays Liturgical and Historical. By J. WickHam Lzcc,
D.Litt., F.S.A. Cloth boards, 5s. net. Ἦν


The English Historical Review says: ‘‘ Scholars and antiquaries
will thank Dr. Legg for the service he has done by making these
studies more widely known.”

French Catholics in the Nineteenth Century. By the
Rev. W. J. Sparrow Simpson, D.D, Cloth boards,
5s. net.

The Expository Times says: ‘“‘The book has the merits of good
history and good biography, both in manifest excellence.”

An Abbot of Vézelay. By Rosz Granuam, F.R.Hist.S,
With eight Illustrations. Cloth boards, 3s. 6d. net.


The Westminster Gazette says: ‘‘His career bristles with inter-
dicts, excommunications, appeals to Rome, and struggles in which
he showed himself to be very distinctly a member of the Church
Militant.”


Texts for Students


General Editors: CAROLINE A. J. SKEEL, D.Lit.; H. J. WHITE, D.D.;
J. P. WHITNEY, D.D., D.C.L.


The English Historical Review says: ‘‘ A new series which deserves
mention . . . every number is the work of a scholar of acknowledged
competence.”


Catholic Book Notes says: ‘‘ The S.P.C.K. has rendered a service
to Education . .. It is to be hoped that these texts will find their
way into our colleges: they will give a new meaning to Latin and
history.”


The Saturday Review says: ‘‘ We have often called attention to
the value of these most useful tracts.”


1. Select Passages from Josephus, Tacitus, Suetonius,
Dio Cassius, illustrative of Christianity in the First


Century. Arranged by H. J. Wuitge, D.D. Paper ~


cover, 3d. net.


2. Selections from Matthew Paris. By (Ὁ. A. J. SKEEL,
D.Lit. Paper cover, gd. net.


3. Selections from Giraldus Cambrensis. By C. A. J.
SKEEL, D.Lit. Paper cover, 9d. net.
14


PN


“© rere nating πρσψιδυ.,.ν ς ws


Texts for Students (continued).


4. Libri Sancti Patricii. The Latin Writings of St.
Patrick, etc. Edited by Newrort J. D. Wuirr, D.D.
Paper cover, 6d. net.

5. A Translation of the Latin Writings of St. Patrick.
By Newport J. D. WuitTE, D.D. Paper cover, 6d. net.


6. Selections from the Vulgate. Paper cover, 9d. net.


7. The Epistle of St. Clement of Rome. Paper cover,
6d. net.

8. Select Extracts from Chronicles and Records re=
lating to English Towns in the Middle Ages.
Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and Glossary, by
F, J.C. Hearnsuaw, M.A., LL.D. Paper cover, 9d. net.

9. The Inscription on the Stele of MéSa, Commonly
called the Moabite Stone. The text in Moabite and
Hebrew, with translation by the Rev. H. F. B. Compston
M.A. Paper cover, 6d. net.

10. The Epistles of St. Ignatius. Edited by T. W.
CRAFER, D.D. 15. net.

11. Christian Inscriptions, By H. P. V. Nunn, M.A.
With two Illustrations. 15. net.

12 Selections from the ‘‘ Historia Rerum Anglicarum”
of William of Newburgh. ts. 3d. net.

13. The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles. By T. W.
; CraFrer, D.D. 4d. net.


“14. The Epistle of Barnabas. Edited by T. W. Crarer,
D.D. 6d. net.


15. The Code of Hammurabi. By Percy Hanncock, M.A.


16, Selections from the Tell El-Amarna Letters, By
Percy Hanpcock, M.A. 4d. net.


Select Passages Illustrating Commercial and Diplo-
matic Relations between England and Russia.
By A. Weiner, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. τς. 64. net

Itinerarium Regis Ricardi. By M. T. Sreap.

Select Extracts [Illustrating Florentine Life in the
Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries. By E.G.
ROPER.

Slavonic Settlements in Dalmatia. By J. B. Bury.

15


Pioneers of Progress


MEN OF SCIENCE : Edited by S. CHapman, M.A., D.Sc.
Each with a Portrait. Paper cover, Is. ; cloth, 2s, net.


The Medical Times says: ‘‘ Extremely well written and should do
much to stimulate interest in science ... especially suitable to place
in the hands of senior school-boys and junior students.”


The Manchester Guardian says: ‘‘ An admirable series.”


The Scotsman says: ‘‘ These studies have many recommendations
from the point of view of the amateur scientist.”


Galileo. By W. W. Bryant, F.R.A.S., Royal Observatory,
Greenwich.


Michael Faraday. By J. A. CrowTHer, D.Sc.


Alfred Russel Wallace: The Story of a Great Dis-
cover. By Lance.Lot T. Hocsen, B.A., B.Sc.


Joseph Priestley. By ἢ. H. Peacock, B.A., M.Sc., F.1LC.


Joseph Dalton Hooker, O.M., G.C.S.I., C.B., F.R.S.,
M.D., etc. By Professor F. O. Bower, Sc.D., F.R.S.


Herschel. By the Rev. Hercror MacpHerson, M.A.,
F RAS. ERS,


Archimedes. By Sir THomas L. Heatu, K.C.B., F.R.S.


Aristarchus of Samos. By Sir THomas L. Herat,
KCB. ERS:


WOMEN : Edited by Ετηει. M. Barton.
With Illustrations.
Florence Nightingale. By E. F. Hatt.


Dorothea Beale. By Exizasetu H. SHILuiTo, B.A.
Elsie Inglis.


[12.2.20.


Printed in Great Britain by R. Clay & Sons, Ltd., London and Bungay.


We


= Γ
͵
»
”
ὁ.
—


A ae ee Ὁ


νι “Ὁ


“ΑΞ


.- ων, αν αν νυ πὲ...»


BINDING sect. ὡ, 500


ἘΣ


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


Irenaeus, Saint

The demonstration of the
Apostolic preaching ; tr.
from the Armenian by Robin-
son, with notes


: : aie ΐ oO
aye i ---------

: : , Lu

ees ͵ Η---- τ |—
Ι iF epi υ ᾿ ————a


NSVIEW


”
Oo
a.
μ-
-


ΡΟ ΤΩΣ ΞΞ =
beyiet abate ΟΞΞΞΞΞΞΟ

; μὰ mints Q >

EP ΤΉ ΉΜΗΙ « a
' ve : ‘oa =

} ; εν ἘΞ. <x
΄ . = or

ἣ ; ᾿ ‘a


vue ‘ . :
εν ΠῚ ‘ . ἢ
” sete ‘ 5 ‘ pista ἢ
᾿ ν .
ve . rs .
4 ‘ ‘ es 1
. ῃ '
ἢ ΔΊ νῦξ ἢ ἢ
᾿ via Sel 4 νὰ 4.1


10 012 7


12 05


39 10
